The Works of William Robertson, Vol. 4 (William Robertson, 1759)
==========================================================
Robertson's Works (1824, 9 vols.) - History of Scotland, Charles V, America, and the Historical Disquisition on India; Enlightenment historiography's great practitioner entire. Vol. 4 of 9.

WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D.

WITH  AN  ACCOUNT  OF

HIS  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.

IN NINE  VOLUMES.

VOL.  IV.

LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  WHITMORE  AND  FENN,  CHARING  CROSS;  J.  HEARNE,  STRAND:

SMITH  AND  ELDER,  FENCHURCH  STREET; H.  MOZLEY,  DERBY;

AND  M.  KEENE,  DUBLIN.

MDCCCXXIV.

THE

STANDARD  EDITION  OF  THE  HISTORIANS,

ROBERTSON'S  WORKS  :

IN NINE VOLUMES.  VOL. IV,

CHARLES  V.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF  THE

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

BOOK  II.

1520. JVJ.ANY concurring circumstances not only
Charles's cane(j  Charles's  thoughts  towards  the  affairs

presence  in

Germany of  Germany,  but  rendered  his  presence  in  that

necessary.  mi  ,  .

country  necessary.  I  he  electors  grew  impa-
tient of  so  long  an  interregnum  ;  his  hereditary  domi-
nions were  disturbed  by  intestine  commotions ;  and  the
new  opinions  concerning  religion  made  such  rapid
progress  as  required  the  most  serious  consideration.
But,  above  all,  the  motions  of  the  French  king  drew
his  attention,  and  convinced  him  that  it  was  necessary
to  take  measures  for  his  own  defence  with  no  less  speed
than  vigour.

When  Charles  and  Francis  entered  the  lists
progress  of  as  candidates  for  the  imperial  dignity,  they  con-
shipnbe-  ducted  their  rivalship  with  many  professions
tween  of  reprard  for  each  other,  and  with  repeated

Charles  *=> .

and  Fran-  declarations  that  they  would  not  sutler  any
tincture  of  enmity  to  mingle  itself  with  this
honourable  emulation.  "  We  both  court  the  same  mis-
tress,"  said  Francis,  with  his  usual  vivacity;  "  each
ought  to  urge  his  suit  with  all  the  address  of  which  he
is  master  ;  the  most  fortunate  will  prevail,  and  the  other

VOL. IV.  B

2  CHARLES V.  [1520.

must  rest  contented."3 But  though  two  young  and  high
spirited  princes,  and  each  of  them  animated  with  the
hope  of  success,  might  be  capable  of  forming  such  a
generous  resolution,  it  was  soon  found  that  they  pro-
mised upon  a  moderation  too  refined  and  disinterested
for  human  nature. The  preference  given  to  Charles  in
the  sight  of  all  Europe  mortified  Francis  extremely,
and  inspired  him  with  all  the  passions  natural  to  dis-
appointed ambition. To  this  was  owing  the  personal
jealousy  and  rivalship  which  subsisted  between  the  two
monarchs  during  their  whole  reign  ;  and  the  rancour
of  these,  augmented  by  a  real  opposition  of  interest,
which  gave  rise  to  many  unavoidable  causes  of  discord,
involved  them  in  almost  perpetual  hostilities. Charles
had  paid  no  regard  to  the  principal  article  in  the  treaty
of  Noyon,  by  refusing,  oftener  than  once,  to  do  justice
to  John  d'Albert,  the  excluded  monarch  of  Navarre,
whom  Francis  was  bound  in  honour,  and  prompted  by
interest,  to  restore  to  his  throne.  The  French  king  had
pretensions  to  the  crown  of  Naples,  of  which  Ferdinand
had  deprived  his  predecessor  by  a  most  unjustifiable
breach  of  faith.  "^Jie  emperor  might  reclaim  the  duchy
of  Milan  as  a  fief  of  the  empire,  which  Francis  had
seized,  and  still  kept  in  possession,  without  having
received  investiture  of  it  from  the  emperor. Charles
considered  the  duchy  of  Burgundy  as  the  patrimonial
domain  of  his  ancestors,  wrested  from  them  by  the
unjust  policy  of  Louis  XL,  and  observed  with  the  great-
est jealousy  the  strict  connexions  which  Francis  had
formed  with the duke of  Gueldres,  the  hereditary
enemy  of  his  family.

Their  deli-  When  the  sources  of  discord  were  so  many
previo°uS8to  an^  so  various,  peace  could  be  of  no  long  con-
^nuance>  e^en  between  princes  the  most  exempt

5Lhostai"  ^r°m  amkiti°n  °r  emulation. But  as  the  shock
between  two  such  mighty  antagonists  could

a  Guic.  lib.  xiii.  p.  159.

1520.]  BOOK II.  3

not  fail  of  being  extremely  violent,  they  both  disco-
vered no  small  solicitude  about  its  consequences,  and
took  time  not  only  to  collect  and  to  ponder  their  own
strength,  and  to  compare  it  with  that  of  their  adversary,
but  to  secure  the  friendship  or  assistance  of  the  other
European  powers.

The  ne-  ^e  P°Pe  na^  equal  reason  to  dread  the  two
gotiate  with  rivals,  and  saw  that  he  who  prevailed  would
become  absolute  master  in  Italy.  If  it  had  been
in  his  power  to  engage  them  in  hostilities,  without
rendering  Lombardy  the  theatre  of  war,  nothing  would
have  been  more  agreeable  to  him  than  to  see  them
waste  each  other's  strength  in  endless  quarrels.  But
this  was  impossible.  Leo  foresaw,  that  on  the  first  rup-
ture between  the  two  monarchs,  the  armies  of  France
and  Spain  would  take  the  field  in  the  Milanese ;  and
while  the  scene  of  their  operations  was  so  near,  and
the  subject  for  which  they  contended  so  interesting  to
him,  he  could  not  long  remain  neuter.  He  was  obliged,
therefore,  to  adapt  his  plan  of  conduct  to  his  political
situation.  He  courted  and  soothed  the  emperor  and
king  of  France  with  equal  industry  and  address.  Though
warmly  solicited  by  each  of  them  to  espouse  his  cause,
he  assumed  all  the  appearances  qf  entire  impartiality,
and  attempted  to  conceal  his  real  sentiments  under  that
profound  dissimulation  which  seems  to  have  been
affected  by  most  of  the  Italian  politicians  in  that  age.
with  the  The  views  and  interest  of  the  Venetians  were
Venetians.  not  different  from  those  of  the  pope ;  nor  were
they  less  solicitous  to  prevent  Italy  from  becoming  the
seat  of  war,  and  their  own  republic  from  being  involved
in  the  quarrel.  But  through  all  Leo's  artifices,  and
notwithstanding  his  high  pretensions  to  a  perfect  neu-
trality, it  was  visible  that  he  leaned  towards  the  empe-
ror, from  whom  he  had  both  more  to  fear  and  more  to
hope  than  from  Francis ;  and  it  was  equally  manifest,
that  if  it  became  necessary  to  take  a  side,  the  Venetians

B  2

4  CHARLES V.  [1520.

would,  from  motives  of  the  same  nature,  declare  for
the  king  of  France.  No  considerable  assistance,  how-
ever, was  to  be  expected  from  the  Italian  states,  who
were  jealous  to  an  extreme  of  the  Transalpine  powers,
and  careful  to  preserve  the  balance  even  between  them,
unless  when  they  were  seduced  to  violate  this  favourite
maxim  of  their  policy,  by  the  certain  prospect  of  some
great  advantage  to  themselves.

With  Hen-  But  the  chief  attention  both  of  Charles  and
ry  vin.  of  Francis,  was  employed  in  order  to  gain  the
king  of  England,  from  whom  each  of  them  expected
assistance  more  effectual,  and  afforded  with  less  politi-
cal caution.  Henry  VIII.  had  ascended  the  throne  of
that  kingdom  in  the  year  1509,  with  such  circumstances
of  advantage  as  promised  a  reign  of  distinguished  feli-
The  great  city  an^  splendour.  The  union  in  his  person
power  of  Of  the  two  contending  titles  of  York  and  Lan-

that  mo-  &

narch.  caster,  the  alacrity  and  emulation  with  which
both  factions  obeyed  his  commands,  not  only  enabled
him  to  exert  a  degree  of  vigour  and  authority  in  his
domestic  government,  which  none  of  his  predecessors
could  have  safely  assumed ;  but  permitted  him  to  take
a  share  in  the  affairs  of  the  continent,  from  which  the
attention  of  the  English  had  long  been  diverted  by  their
unhappy  intestine  divisions.  The  great  sums  of  money
which  his  father  had  amassed,  rendered  him  the  most
wealthy  prince  in  Europe.  The  peace  which  had  sub-
sisted under  the  cautious  administration  of  that  mo-
narch, had  been  of  sufficient  length  to  recruit  the
population  of  the  kingdom  after  the  desolation  of  the
civil  wars,  but  not  so  long  as  to  enervate  its  spirit ;  and
the  English,  ashamed  of  having  rendered  their  own
country  so  long  a  scene  of  discord  and  bloodshed,  were
eager  to  display  their  valour  in  some  foreign  war,  and
to  revive  the  memory  of  the  victories  gained  on  the
Character  continent  by  their  ancestors.  Henry's  own  tem-
Of  Henry,  per  perfectjy  suited  the  state  of  his  kingdom,

1520.]  BOOK II.  5

and  the  disposition  of  his  subjects.  Ambitious,  active,
enterprising,  and  accomplished  in  all  the  martial  exer-
cises which  in  that  age  formed  a  chief  part  in  the
education  of  persons  of  noble  birth,  and  inspired  them
with  an  early  love  of  war,  he  longed  to  engage  in  action,
and  to  signalize  the  beginning  of  his  reign  by
some  remarkable  exploit.  An  opportunity  soon
presented  itself;  and -the  victory  at  Guinegate,  together
with  the  successful  sieges  of  Teroiienne  and  Tournay,
though  of  little  utility  to  England,  reflected  great  lustre
on  its  monarch,  and  confirmed  the  idea  which  foreign
princes  entertained  of  his  power  and  consequence.  So
many  concurring  causes,  added  to  the  happy  situation
of  his  own  dominions,  which  secured  them  from  foreign
invasion ;  and  to  the  fortunate  circumstance  of  his  being
in  possession  of  Calais,  which  served  not  only  as  a
key  to  France,  but  opened  an  easy  passage  into  the
Netherlands,  rendered  the  king  of  England  the  natural
guardian  of  the  liberties  of  Europe,  and  the  arbiter  be-
tween the  emperor  and  French  monarch.  Henry  him-
self was  sensible  of  this  singular  advantage,  and  con-
vinced, that,  in  order  to  preserve  the  balance  even,  it
was  his  office  to  prevent  either  of  the  rivals  from  ac-
quiring such  superiority  of  power  as  might  be  fatal  to
the  other,  or  formidable  to  the  rest  of  Christendom.
But  he  was  destitute  of  the  penetration,  and  still  more
of  the  temper,  which  such  a  delicate  function  required.
Influenced  by  caprice,  by  vanity,  by  resentment,  by
affection,,  he  was  incapable  of  forming  any  regular  and
extensive  system  of  policy,  or  of  adhering  to  it  with
steadiness.  His  measures  seldom  resulted  from  atten-
tion to  the  general  welfare,  or  from  a  deliberate  regard
to  his  own  interest,  but  were  dictated  by  passions  which
rendered  him  blind  to  both,  and  prevented  his  gaining
that  ascendant  in  the  affairs  of  Europe,  or  from  reaping
such  advantages  to  himself,  as  a  prince  of  greater  art,
though  with  inferior  talents,  might  have  easily  secured.

6  CHARLES  V.  [1520.

And  of  his All  the  impolitic  steps  in  Henry's  administra-
SS2 ti°n  must  not?  h°wever>  ke  imPuted  to  defects
Woisey ; in  his  own  character ;  many  of  them  were  owing
to  the  violent  passions  and  insatiable  ambition  of  his
prime  minister  and  favourite,  cardinal  Woisey. This
man,  from  one  of  the  lowest  ranks  in  life,  had  risen  to
a  height  of  power  and  dignity,  to  which  no  English  sub-
ject ever  arrived  ;  and  governed  the  haughty,  presump-
tuous, and  intractable  spirit  of  Henry  with  absolute
authority. Great  talents,  and  of  very  different  kinds,
fitted  him  for  the  two  opposite  stations  of  minister,  and
of  favourite.  His  profound  judgment,  his  unwearied  in-
dustry, his  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  state  of  the
kingdom,  his  extensive  knowledge  of  the  views  and  in-
terest of  foreign  courts,  qualified  him  for  that  uncon-
trolled direction  of  affairs  with  which  he  was-  intrusted.
The  elegance  of  his  manners,  the  gaiety  of  his  conver-
sation, his  insinuating  address,  his  love  of  magnificence,
and  his  proficiency  in  those  parts  of  literature  of  which
Henry  was  fond,  gained  him  the  affection  and  confi-
dence of  the  young  monarch. Woisey  was  far  from
employing  this  vast  and  almost  royal  power,  to  promote
either  the  true  interest  of  the  nation,  or  the  real  gran-
deur of  his  master. Rapacious  at  the  same  time,  and
profuse,  he  was  insatiable  in  desiring  wealth.  Of  bound-
less ambition,  he  aspired  after  new  honours  with  an
eagerness  unabated  by  his  former  success  ;  and  being
rendered  presumptuous  by  his  uncommon  elevation,  as
well  as  by  the  ascendant  which  he  had  gained  over  a
prince,  who  scarcely  brooked  advice  from  any  other  per-
son, he  discovered  in  his  whole  demeanour  the  most
overbearing  haughtiness  and  pride. To  these  passions
he  himself  sacrificed  every  consideration ;  and  whoever
endeavoured  to  obtain  his  favour,  or  that  of  his  master,
found  it  necessary  to  soothe  and  to  gratify  them.

As  all  the  states  of  Europe  sought  Henry's  friend-
ship at  that  time,  all  courted  his  minister  with  incre-

1520.]  BOOK II.  7

The  court dible  attention  and  obsequiousnes,  and  strove
Woisey  by  by  presents,  by  promises,  or  by  flattery,  to  work
Francis. UpOn  his  avarice,  his  ambition,  or  his  pride.b
Francis  had,  in  the  year  1518,  employed  Bonnivet,
admiral  of  France,  one  of  his  most  accomplished  and
artful  courtiers,  to  gain  this  haughty  prelate. He  him-
self bestowed  on  him  every  mark  of  respect  and  confi-
dence. He  consulted  him  with  regard  to  his  most  im-
portant affairs,  and  received  his  responses  with  implicit
deference. By  these  arts,  together  with  the  grant  of  a
large  pension,  Francis  attached  the  cardinal  to  his  in-
terest, who  persuaded  his  master  to  surrender  Tournay
to  France,  to  conclude  a  treaty  of  marriage  between  his
daughter  the  princess  Mary  and  the  dauphin^  and  to
consent  to  a  personal  interview  with  the  French  king.0
From  that  time,  the  most  familiar  intercourse  subsisted
between  the  two  courts ;  Francis,  sensible  of  the  great
value  of  Wolsey's  friendship,  laboured  to  secure  the
continuance  of  it  by  every  possible  expression  of  regard,
bestowing  on  him,  in  all  his  letters,  the  honourable  ap-
pellations of  father,  tutor,  and  governor.
And  by Charles  observed  the  progress  of  this  union
Charles. w't|1  faQ  utmost  jealousy  and  concern. His  near
affinity  to  the  king  of  England  gave  him  some  title  to  his
friendship  ; and  soon  after  his  accession  to  the  throne
of  Castile,  he  had  attempted  to^ingratiate  himself  with
Woisey,  by  settling  on  him  a  pension  of  three  thousand
livres. His  chief  solicitude  at  present  was  to  prevent
the  intended  interview  with  Francis,  the  effects  of  which
upon  two  young  princes,  whose  hearts  were  no  less  sus-
ceptible of  friendship,  than  their  manners  were  capable
of  inspiring  it,  he  extremely  dreaded. But  after  many
delays,  occasioned  by  difficulties  with  respect  to  the
ceremonial,  and  by  the  anxious  precautions  of  both
courts  for  the  safety  of  their  respective  sovereigns,  the

b  Fiddes's  Life  of  Woisey,  166. Ryraer's  Fosdera,  xiii.  718.
c  Herbert's  Hist,  of  Henry  -VIII.  30. Bymer,  xiii.  624.

8  CHARLES V.  [1520-

time  and  place  of  meeting  were  at  last  fixed. Messen-
gers had  been  sent  to  different  courts,  inviting  all  comers,
who  were  gentlemen,  to  enter  the  lists,  at  tilt  and  tour-
nament, against  the  two  monarchs  and  their  knights.
Both  Francis  and  Henry  loved  the  splendour  of  these
spectacles  too  well,  and  were  too  much  delighted  with
the  graceful  figure  which  they  made  on  such  occasions,
to  forego  the  pleasure  or  glory  which  they  expected
from  such  a  singular  and  brilliant  assembly.  Nor  was  the
cardinal  less  fond  of  displaying  his  own  magnificence
in  the  presence  of  two  courts,  and  of  discovering  to  the
two  nations  the  extent  of  his  influence  over  both  their
monarchs. Charles,  finding  it  impossible  to  prevent  the
interview,  endeavoured  to  disappoint  its  effects,  and  to
pre-occupy  the  favour  of  the  English  monarch  and  his
minister  by  an  act  of  complaisance  still  more- flattering
Charles and  more  uncommon. Having  sailed  from  Co-
Engfand,  runna,  as  has  already  been  related,  he  steered
May  se. his  course  directly  towards  England,  and  rely-
ing wholly  on  Henry's  generosity  for  his  own  safety,
landed  at  Dover. This  unexpected  visit  surprised  the
nation. Wolsey,  however,  was  well  acquainted  with
the  emperor's  intention. A  negotiation,  unknown  to
the  historians  of  that  age,  had  been  carried  on  between
him  and  the  court  of  Spain ;  this  visit  had  been  con-
certed ;  and  Charles  granted  the  cardinal,  ,whom  he
calls  his  most  dear  friend,  an  additional  pension  of  seven
thousand  ducats.d  Henry,  who  was  then  at  Canterbury,
in  his  way  to  France,  immediately  dispatched  Wolsey  to
Dover,  in  order  to  welcome  the  emperor ;  and  being
highly  pleased  with  an  event  so  soothing  to  his  vanity,
hastened  to  receive,  with  suitable  respect,  a  guest  who
h?±?bto  hadPlaced  ^  him  such  unbounded  confidence.
favour  both  Charles,  to  whom  time  was  precious,  staid  only
kiuglnd four  days  in  England  ; but  during  that  short
space,  he  had  the  address  not  only  to  give

d  Rymer,  xiii.  714.

1520.]  BOOK II.  9

Henry  favourable  impressions  of  his  character  and  in-
tentions, but  to  detach  Wolsey  entirely  from  the  interest
of  the  French  king.  All  the  grandeur,  the  wealth,  and
the  power,  which  the  cardinal  possessed,  did  not  satisfy
his  ambitious  mind,  while  there  was  one  step  higher  to
which  an  ecclesiastic  could  ascend.  The  papal  dignity
had  for  some  time  been  the  object  of  his  wishes,  and
Francis,  as  the  most  effectual  method  of  securing  his
friendship,  had  promised  to  favour  his  pretensions,
on  the  first  vacancy,  with  all  his  interest.  But  as
the  emperor's  influence  in  the  college  of  cardinals  was
greatly  superior  to  that  of  the  French  king,  Wolsey
grasped  eagerly  at  the  offer  which  that  artful  prince  had
made  him,  of  exerting  it  vigorously  in  his  behalf;  and
allured  by  this  prospect,  which,  under  the  pontificate  of
Leo,  still  in  the  prime  of  his  life,  was  a  very  distant  one,
he  entered  with  warmth  into  all  the  emperor's  schemes.
No  treaty,  however,  was  concluded  at  that  time  between
the  two  monarchs  ;  but  Henry,  in  return  for  the  honour
which  Charles  had  done  him,  promised  to  visit  him  in
some  place  of  the  Low  Countries,  immediately  after
taking  leave  of  the  French  king.

junerth.  His  interview  with  that  prince  was  in  an
between*  °Pen  plai*1  between  Guisnes  and  Ardres,  where
the  two  kings  and  their  attendants  displayed

their  magnificence  with  such  emulation,  and
profuse  expense,  as  procured  it  the  name  of  the  Field
of  the  Cloth  of  Gold.  Feats  of  chivalry,  parties  of  gal-
lantry, together  with  such  exercises  and  pastimes  as
were  in  that  age  reckoned  manly  or  elegant,  rather  than
serious  business,  occupied  both  courts,  during  eighteen
days  that  they  continued  together.6  Whatever  impres-

e  The  French  and  English  historians  describe  the  pcmp  of  this  interview,  and  the
various  spectacles,  with  great  minuteness.  One  circumstance,  mentioned  bv  the
Mareschal  de  Fleuranges,  who  was  present,  and  which  must  appear  singular  fn  the
present  age,  is  commonly  omitted.  "  After  the  tournament,"  says  he,  "  the  French
and  English  wrestlers  made  their  appearance,  and  wrestled  in  presence  of  the  kings,
and  the  ladies  ;  and  as  there  were  many  stout  wrestlers  there,  it  afforded  excellent
pastime  ;  but  as  the  king  of  France  had  neglected  to  bring  any  wrestlers  out  of  Bre-
tague,  the  English  gained  the  prize.  —  After  this,  the  kings  of  France  and  England

10  CHARLES V.  [1520.

sion  the  engaging  manners  of  Francis,  or  the  liberal  and
unsuspicious  confidence  with  which  he  treated  Henry,
made  on  the  mind  of  that  monarch,  was  soon  effaced  by
Wolsey's  artifices,  or  by  an  interview  he  had  with  the
emperor  at  Gravelines ;  which  was  conducted
with  less  pomp  than  that  near  Guisnes,  but  with
greater  attention  to  what  might  be  of  political  utility.
Henry's  This  assiduity,  with  which  the  two  greatest
cwnta-1"8  monarchs  in  Europe  paid  court  to  Henry,  ap-
portance.  peared  to  him  a  plain  acknowledgment  that  he
held  the  balance  in  his  hands,  and  convinced  him  of  the
justness  of  the  motto  which  he  had  chosen,  "  That  who-
ever he  favoured  would  prevail."  In  this  opinion  he
was  confirmed  by  an  offer  which  Charles  made,  of  sub-
mitting any  difference  that  might  arise  between  him  and
Francis  to  his  sole  arbitration.  Nothing  could  have  the
appearance  of  greater  candour  and  moderation,  than
the  choice  of  a  judge,  who  was  reckoned  the  common
friend  of  both.  But  as  the  emperor  had  now  attached
Wolsey  entirely  to  his  interest,  no  proposal  could  be
more  insidious,  nor,  as  appeared  by  the  sequel,  more
fatal  to  the  French  king/

Corona-  Charles,  notwithstanding  his  partial  fondness
*OT  ^Q  Netherlands,  the  place  of  his  nativity,
made  no  long  stay  there;  and,  after  receiving
the  homage  and  congratulations  of  his  countrymen,
hastened  to  Aix-la-Chapelle,  the  place  appointed  by
Oct.  23.  ^e  g°lden  bull  for  the  coronation  of  the  empe-
ror. There,  in  presence  of  an  assembly  more
numerous  and  splendid  than  had  appeared  on  any  for-
mer occasion,  the  crown  of  Charlemagne  was  placed  on
his  head,  with  all  the  pompous  solemnity  which  the

retired  to  a  tent,  where  they  drank  together,  and  the  king  of  England,  seizing  the
France  by  the  collar,  said,  '  My  brotlier,  I  must  wrestle  with  you,'  and  en-
ivoured  once  or  twice  to  trip  up  his  heels  ;  but  the  king  of  France,"  who  is  a  dex-
ous  wrestler,  twisted  him  round,  and  threw  him  on  the  earth  with  prodigious  vio-
lence. I  he  king  of  England  wanted  to  renew  the  combat,  but  was  prevented."
Meraoires  de  Fleuranges,  12mo. Paris,  1753,  p.  329.
f  Herbert,  37.

1520.]  BOOK II.  11

ermans  affect  in  their  public  ceremonies,  and  which
they  deem  essential  to  the  dignity  of  their  empire.8

Almost  at  the  same  time  Solyman  the  Mag-
nificent, one  of  the  most  accomplished,  enter-
prising, and  victorious  of  the  Turkish  sultans,
throne.  a  constant  and  formidable  rival  to  the  emperor,
ascended  the  Ottoman  throne.  It  was  the  peculiar
glory  of  that  period  to  produce  the  most  illustrious
monarchs,  who  have  at  any  one  time  appeared  in  Eu-
rope. Leo,  Charles,  Francis,  Henry,  and  Solyman,  were
each  of  them  possessed  of  talents  which  might  have
rendered  any  age  wherein  they  happened  to  flourish
conspicuous.  But  such  a  constellation  of  great  princes
shed  uncommon  lustre  on  the  sixteenth  century.  In
every  contest,  great  power  as  well  as  great  abilities  were
set  In  opposition ;  the  efforts  of  valour  and  conduct  on
one  side,  counterbalanced  by  an  equal  exertion  of  the
same  qualities  on  the  other,  not  onl^  occasioned  such  a
variety  of  events  as  renders  the  history  of  that  period
interesting,  but  served  to  check  the  exorbitant  progress
of  any  of  those  princes,  and  to  prevent  their  attaining
such  pre-eminence  in  power  as  would  have  been  fatal
to  the  liberty  and  happiness  of  mankind.
Diet  called  The  ^rst  act  °^ tne  emperor's  administration
Worms at  was  to  aPP°int  a  diet  °f  tf16  empire  to  be  held
at  Worms  on  the  6th  of  January,  1521.  In  his
circular  letters  to  the  different  princes,  he  informed
them  that  he  had  called  this  assembly  in  order  to  con-
cert with  them  the  most  proper  measures  for  checking
the  progress  of  those  new  and  dangerous  opinions,
which  threatened  to  disturb  the  peace  of  Germany,  and
to  overturn  the  religion  of  their  ancestors.
Rise  of  the  Charles  had  in  view  the  opinions  which  had
tion°rma~  been  propagated  by  Luther  and  his  disciples
since  the  year  1517.  As  these  led  to  that  happy

s  Hartman.  Mauri  Relatio  Coronat.  Car.  V.  ap.  Goldast.  Polit.  Imperial.  Franc.
1614,  fol.  p.  264.

12  CHARLES V.  [1520.

reformation  in  religion  which  rescued  one  part  of  Eu-
rope from  the  papal  yoke,  mitigated  its  rigour  in  the
other,  and  produced  a  revolution  in  the  sentiments  of
mankind,  the  greatest,  as  well  as  the  most  beneficial,
that  has  happened  since  the  publication  of  Christianity,
not  only  the  events  which  at  first  gave  birth  to  such
opinions,  but  the  causes  which  rendered  their  progress
so  rapid  and  successful,  deserve  to  be  considered  with
minute  attention.

To  overturn  a  system  of  religious  belief,  founded
on  ancient  and  deep-rooted  prejudices,  supported  by
power,  and  defended  with  no  less  art  than  industry;
to  establish  in  its  room  doctrines  of  the  most  contrary
genius  and  tendency ;  and  to  accomplish  all  this,  not  by
external  violence  or  the  force  of  arms,  are  operations
which  historians,  the  least  prone  to  credulity  and  su-
perstition, ascribe  to  that  Pivine  Providence,  which,
with  infinite  ease,  can  bring  about  events  which  to
human  sagacity  appear  impossible.  The  interposition
of  Heaven  in  favour  of  the  Christian  religion,  at  its
first  publication,  was  manifested  by  miracles  and  pro-
phecies wrought  and  uttered  in  confirmation  of  it.
Though  none  of  the  reformers  possessed,  or  pretended
to  possess,  these  supernatural  gifts ;  yet  that  wonderful
preparation  of  circumstances,  which  disposed  the  minds
of  men  for  receiving  their  doctrines,  that  singular  com-
bination of  causes,  which  secured  their  success,  and
enabled  men  destitute  of  power  and  of  policy  to  tri-
umph over  those  who  employed  against  them  extraor-
dinary efforts  of  both,  may  be  considered  as  no  slight
proof,  that  the  same  hand  which  planted  the  Christian
religion,  protected  the  reformed  faith,  and  reared  it
from  beginnings  extremely  feeble,  to  an  amazing  de-
gree of  vigour  and  maturity.

From  in-  It  was  from  causes  seemingly  fortuitous,  and
able  be-  from  a  source  very  inconsiderable,  that  all  the
ginning*  mighty  effects  of  the  Reformation  flowed.  Leo  X.

1520.]  BOOK II.  13

when  raised  to  the  papal  throne,  found  the  revenues
of  the  church  exhausted  by  the  vast  projects  of  his  two
ambitious  predecessors,  Alexander  VI.  and  Julius  II.
His  own  temper,  naturally  liberal  and  enterprising,
rendered  him  incapable  of  that  severe  and  patient  eco-
nomy which  the  situation  of  his  finances  required.  On
the  contrary,  his  schemes  for  aggrandizing  the  family
of  Medici,  his  love  of  splendour,  his  taste  for  pleasure,
and  his  magnificence  in  rewarding  men  of  genius,  in-
volved him  daily  in  new  expenses ;  in  order  to  provide
a  fund  for  which,  he  tried  every  device,  that  the  fertile
invention  of  priests  had  fallen  upon,  to  drain  the  credu-
lous multitude  of  their  wealth.  Among  others,  he  had
A  sale  of  recourse  to  a  sale  of  indulgences.  According
published68  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Romish  church,  all  the
by  LeoX.  gOOC[  WOrks  of  the  saints,  over  and  above  those
which  were  necessary  towards  their  own  justification,
are  deposited,  together  with  the  infinite  merits  of  Jesus
Christ,  in  one  inexhaustible  treasury.  The  keys  of  this
were  committed  to  St.  Peter,  and  to  his  successors,  the
popes,  who  may  open  it  at  pleasure,  and  by  transferring
a  portion  of  this  superabundant  merit  to  any  particular
person  for  a  sum  of  money,  may  convey  to  him  either
the  pardon  of  his  own  sins,  or  a  release  for  any  one  in
whose  happiness  he  is  interested,  from  the  pains  of
purgatory.  Such  indulgences  were  first  invented  in  the
eleventh  century  by  Urban  II.  as  a  recompense  for
those  who  went  in  person  upon  the  meritorious  enter-
prise of  conquering  the  Holy  Land.  They  were  after-
ward granted  to  those  who  hired  a  soldier  for  that
purpose;  and  in  process  of  time  were  bestowed  on  such
as  gave  money  for  accomplishing  any  pious  work  en-
joined by  the  pope.h  Julius  II.  had  bestowed  indul-
gences on  all  who  contributed  towards  building  the
church  of  St.  Peter  at  Rome;  and  as  Leo  was  carrying

11  History  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  by  F.  Paul,  p.  4.

!4  CHARLES V.  [1520.

on  that  magnificent  and  expensive  fabric,  his  grant  was
founded  on  the  same  pretence/

so  con-  The  right  of  promulgating  these  indulgences
toCive  as  *n  Germany>  together  with  a  share  in  the  pro-
general  fits  arising  from  the  sale  of  them,  was  granted
to  Albert,  elector  of  Metz  and  archbishop  of
Magdeburg,  who,  as  his  chief  agent  for  retailing  them  in
Saxony,  employed  Tetzel,  a  Dominican  friar,  of  licen-
tious morals,  but  of  an  active  spirit,  and  remarkable  for
his  noisy  and  popular  eloquence.  He,  assisted  by  the
monks  of  his  order,  executed  the  commission  with  great
zeal  and  success,  but  with  little  discretion  or  decency;
and  though,  by  magnifying  excessively  the  benefit  of
their  indulgences^  and  by  disposing  of  them  at  a  very

1  Palavic.  Hist.  Cone.  Trident,  p.  4.

k  As  the  form  of  these  indulgences,  and  the  benefits  which  they  were  supposed  to
convey,  are  unknown  in  Protestant  countries,  and  little  understood,*  at  present,  in
several  places  where  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  is  established,  I  have,  for  the  in-
formation of  my  readers,  translated  the  form  of  absolution  used  by  Tetzel :  "  May
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  have  mercy  upon  thee,  and  absolve  thee  by  the  merits  of  his
most  holy  passion.  And  I,  by  his  authority,  that  of  his  blessed  apostles  Peter  and
Paul,  and  of  the  most  holy  pope,  granted  and  committed  to  me  in  these  parts,  do
absolve  thee,  first  from  all  ecclesiastical  censures  in  whatever  manner  they  have  been
incurred,  and  then  from  all  thy  sins,  transgressions,  and  excesses,  how  enormous
soever  they  may  be,  even  from  such  as  are  reserved  for  the  cognizance  of  the  holy
see;  and  as  far  as  the  keys  of  the  holy  church  extend,  I  remit  to  you  all  punish-
ment which  you  deserve  in  purgatory  on  their  account;  and  I  restore  you  to  the  holy
sacvaments  of  the  church,  to  the  unity  of  the  faithful,  and  to  that  innocence  and
purity  which  you  possessed  at  baptism ;  so  that  when  you  die,  the  gates  of  punish-
ment shall  be  shut,  and  the  gates  of  the  paradise  of  delight  shall  be  opened  ;  and  if
you  shall  not  die  at  present,  this  grace  shall  remain  in  full  force  when  you  are  at  the
point  of  death.  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."
Seckend.  Comment,  lib.  i.  p.  14.

The  terms  in  which  Tetzel  and  his  associates  described  the  benefits  of  indulgences,
and  the  necessity  of  purchasing  them  are  so  extravagant,  that  they  appear  to  be  al-
most incredible.  If  any  man  (said  they)  purchase  letters  of  indulgence,  his  soul  may
rest  secure  with  respect  to  its  salvation.  The  souls  confined  in  purgatory,  for  whose  re-
demption indulgences  are  purchased,  as  soon  as  the  money  tinkles  in  the  chest,  instant-
ly escape  from  that  place  of  torment,  and  ascend  into  heaven.  That  the  efficacy  of  in-
dulgences was  so  great,  that  the  most  heinous  sins,  even  if  one  should  violate  (which
was  impossible)  the  mother  of  God,  would  be  remitted  and  expiated  by  them,  and
the  person  be  freed  both  from  punishment  and  guilt.  That  this  was  the  unspeakable
gift  of  God,  in  order  to  reconcile  men  to  himself.  That  the  cross  erected  by  the
preachers  of  indulgences,  was  as  efficacious  as  the  cross  of  Christ  itself.  Lo !  the  hea-
vens are  open  ;  if  you  enter  not  now,  when  will  you  enter?  For  twelve  pence  you
may  redeem  the  soul  of  your  father  out  of  purgatory ;  and  are  you  so  ungrateful,
that  you  will  not  rescue  your  parent  from  torment?  If  you  had  but  one  coat,  you
ought  to  strip  yourself  instantly,  and  sell  it,  in  order  to  purchase  such  benefits,  &c.
These,  and  many  such  extravagant  expressions,  are  selected  out  of  Luther's  works
by  Chemnitius  in  his  Examen  Concilii  Tridentini,  apud  Herm.  Vonder  Hardt.  Hist.
Liter.  Reform,  pars  iv.  p.  6.  The  same  author  has  published  several  of  Tctzel's  dis-
e8'  wh'ch  pr°ve  tliat  these  exPressions  were  neither  singular  nor  exaggerated.

1520.]  BOOK II.  15

low  price,  they  carried  on  for  some  time  an  extensive
and  lucrative  traffic  among  the  credulous  and  the  igno-
rant; the  extravagance  of  their  assertions,  as  well  as
the  irregularities  in  their  conduct,  came  at  last  to  give
general  offence.  The  princes  and  nobles  were  irritated
at  seeing  their  vassals  drained  of  so  much  wealth,  in
order  to  replenish  the  treasury  of  a  profuse  pontiff.
Men  of  piety  regretted  the  delusion  of  the  people,  who
being  taught  to  rely  for  the  pardon  of  their  sins  on  the
indulgences  which  they  purchased,  did  not  think  it
incumbent  on  them  either  to  study  the  doctrines  taught
by  genuine  Christianity,  or  to  practise  the  duties  which
it  enjoins.  Even  the  most  unthinking  were  shocked  at
the  scandalous  behaviour  of  Tetzel  and  his  associates,
who  often  squandered  in  drunkenness,  gaming,  and  low
debauchery,  those  sums  which  were  piously  bestowed
in  hopes  of  obtaining  eternal  happinsss ;  and  all  began
to  wish  that  some  check  were  given  to  this  commerce,
no  less  detrimental  to  society  than  destructive  to  religion.
First  ap-  Such  was  the  favourable  juncture,  and  so
pearance  of  disposed  were  the  minds  of  his  countrymen  to

Luther  and  *  t  •  "  a  •  TI/T-TI

hischarac-  listen  to  his  discourses,  when  Martin  Luther
first  began  to  call  in  question  the  efficacy  of
indulgences,  and  to  declaim  against  the  vicious  lives
and  false  doctrines  of  the  persons  employed  in  promul-
gating them.  Luther  was  a  native  of  Eisleben  in  Sax-
ony, and  though  born  of  poor  parents,  had  received  a
learned  education,  during  the  progress  of  which  he  gave
many  indications  of  uncommon  vigour  and  acuteness  of
genius.  His  mind  was  naturally  susceptible  of  serious
sentiments,  and  tinctured  with  somewhat  of  that  reli-
gious melancholy  which  delights  in  the  solitude  and
devotion  of  a  monastic  life.  The  death  of  a  companion
killed  by  lightning  at  his  side  in  a  violent  thunder-storm,
made  such  an  impression  on  his  mind,  as  co-operated
with  his  natural  temper,  in  inducing  him  to  retire  into
a  convent  of  Augustinian  friars,  where,  without  suffering

16  CHARLES V.  [1520.

the  entreaties  of  his  parents  to  divert  him  from  what  he
thought  his  duty  to  God,  he  assumed  the  habit  of  that
order.  He  soon  acquired  great  reputation,  not  only  for
piety,  but  for  his  love  of  knowledge,  and  his  unwearied
application  to  study.  He  had  been  taught  the  scho-
lastic philosophy  and  theology,  which  were  then  in
vogue,  by  very  able  masters ;  and  wanted  not  penetra-
tion to  comprehend  all  the  niceties  and  distinctions  with
which  they  abound;  but  his  understanding,  naturally
sound,  and  superior  to  every  thing  frivolous,  soon  be-
came disgusted  with  those  subtile  and  uninstructive
sciences,  and  sought  for  some  more  solid  foundation  of
knowledge  and  of  piety  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Having
found  a  copy  of  the  Bible,  which  lay  neglected  in  the
library  of  the  monastery,  he  abandoned  all  other  pur-
suits, and  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  it  with  such
eagerness  and  assiduity,  as  astonished  the  monks,  who
were  little  accustomed  to  derive  their  theological  no-
tions from  that  source.  The  great  progress  which  he
made  in  this  uncommon  course  of  study,  augmented  so
much  the  fame  both  of  his  sanctity  and  of  his  learning,
that  Frederic,  elector  of  Saxony,  having  founded  a
university  at  Wittemberg  on  the  Elbe,  the  place  of  his
residence,  Luther  was  chosen  first  to  teach  philosophy,
and  afterward  theology  there;  and  discharged  both
offices  in  such  a  manner,  that  he  was  deemed  the  chief
ornament  of  that  society.

He  opposes  While  Luther  was  at  the  height  of  his  repu-
induuec  tation  and  authority,  Tetzel  began  to  publish
gences.  indulgences  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Wittem-
berg, and  to  ascribe  to  them  the  same  imaginary  virtues,
which  had,  in  other  places,  imposed  on  the  credulity  of
the  people.  As  Saxony  was  not  more  enlightened  than
the  other  provinces  of  Germany,  Tetzel  met  with  pro-
digious success  there.  It  was  with  tl^e  utmost  concern,
that  Luther  beheld  the  artifices  of  those  who  sold,  and
the  simplicity  of  those  who  bought  indulgences.  The

VOL. IV.

i8  CHARLES V.  [1520.

thority.  No  opponent  appeared  at  the  time  prefixed ;
the  theses  spread  over  Germany  with  astonishing  rapi-
dity ;  they  were  read  with  the  greatest  eagerness ;  and
all  admired  the  boldness  of  the  man,  who  had  ventured
not  only  to  call  in  question  the  plenitude  of  papal  power,
but  to  attack  the  Dominicans,  armed  with  all  the  ter-
rors of  inquisitorial  authority.1

The  friars  of  St.  Augustine,  Luther's  own  or-

Supported
by  his
order.

by  his  own  der,  though  addicted  with  no  less  obsequious-
ness than  the  other  monastic  fraternities  to  the
papal  see,  gave  no  check  to  the  publication  of  these
uncommon  opinions.  Luther  had,  by  his  piety  and
learning,  acquired  extraordinary  authority  among  his
brethren  ;  he  professed  the  highest  regard  for  the  autho-
rity of  the  pope  ;  his  professions  were  at  that  time  sin-
cere; and  as  a  secret  enmity  excited  by  interest  or  emu-
lation, subsists  among  all  the  monastic  orders  in  the
Romish  church,  the  Augustinians  were  highly  pleased
with  his  invectives  against  the  Dominicans,  and  hoped
to  see  them  exposed  to  the  hatred  and  scorn  of  the  peo-
ple. Nor  was  his  sovereign,  the  elector  of  Saxony,  the
wisest  prince  at  that  time  in  Germany,  dissatisfied  with
this  obstruction  which  Luther  threw  in  the  way  of  the
publication  of  indulgences.  He  secretly  encouraged
the  attempt,  and  flattered  himself  that  this  dispute
among  the  ecclesiastics  themselves,  might  give  some
check  to  the  exactions  of  the  court  of  Rome,  which  the
secular  princes  had  long,  though  without  success,  been
endeavouring  'to  oppose.

Many  en-  Many  zealous  champions  immediately  arose
confute'  to  to  defend  opinions  on  which  the  wealth  and
him-  power  of  the  church  were  founded,  against
Luther's  attacks.  In  opposition  to  his  theses,  Tetzel
published  counter-theses  at  Francfort  on  the  Oder;
Eccius,  a  celebrated  divine  of  Augsburg,  endeavoured

bvF  1'  h  frafat-  3*  P'  2'  66' Hist  of  C°™<  of

,  by  F,  Paul.  p.  4. Seckend.  Cora.  Apol.  p.  16.

1520.]  BOOK.  II.  19

to  refute  Luther's  notions ;  and  Prierias,  a  Dominican
friar,  master  of  the  sacred  palace  and  inquisitor-general,
wrote  against  him  with  all  the  virulence  of  a  scholastic
disputant.  But  the  manner  in  which  they  conducted
the  controversy  did  little  service  to  their  cause.  Luther
attempted  to  combat  indulgences  by  arguments  founded
in  reason,  or  derived  from  Scripture ;  they  produced  no-
thing in  support  of  them  but  the  sentiments  of  school-
men, the  conclusions  of  the  canon  law,  and  the  decrees
of  popes.m  The  decision  of  judges  so  partial  and  in-
terested, did  not  satisfy  the  people,  who  began  to  call
in  question  the  authority  even  of  these  venerable  guides,
when  they  found  them  standing  in  direct  opposition  to
the  dictates  of  reason,  and  the  determinations  of  the
Divine  law.n*

ta  F.  Paul,  p.  6. Seckend.  p.  40. Palavic.  p.  3.  »  Seckend.  p.  30.

*  Guicciardini  has  asserted  two  things  with  regard  to  the  promulgation  of  indul-
gences :  1.  That  Leo  bestowed  a  gift  of  the  profits  arising  from  the  sale  of  indulgences
in  Saxony,  and  the  adjacent  provinces  of  Germany,  upon  his  sister  Magdalen,  the
wife  of  Francescetto  Cibo.  Guic.  lib.  xiii.  168.  2.  That  Arcemboldo,  a  Genoese
ecclesiastic,  who  had  been  bred  a  merchant,  and  still  retained  all  the  activity  and
address  of  that  profession,  was  appointed  by  her  to  collect  the  money  which  should
be  raised.  F.  Paul  has  followed  him  in  both  these  particulars,  and  adds,  that  the
Augustinians  in  Saxony  had  been  irnmernorially  employed  in  preaching  indulgences;
but  that  Arcemboldo  and  his  deputies  hoping  to  gain  more  by  committing  this  trust
to  the  Dominicans,  had  made  their  bargain  with  Tetzel,  and  that  Luther  was  prompted
at  first  to  oppose  Tetzel  and  his  associates,  by  a  desire  of  taking  revenge  for  this  in-
jury offered  to  his  order.  F.  Paul,  p.  5.  Almost  all  historians  since  their  time,
Popish  as  well  as  Protestant,  have,  without  examination,  admitted  these  assertions
to  be  true  upon  their  authority.  But  notwithstanding  the  concurring  testimony  of
two  authors,  so  eminent  both  for  exactness  arid  veracity,  we  may  observe,

1 .  That  Felix  Contolori,  who  searched  the  pontifical  archives  for  the  purpose,
could  not  find  this  pretended  grant  to  Leo's  sister  in  any  of  those  registers  where  it
must  necessarily  have  been  recorded.  Palav.  p.  5.  2.  That  the  profits  arising  from
indulgences  in  Saxony  and  the  adjacent  countries,  had  been  granted  not  to  Magda-
len, but  to  Albert  archbishop  of  Mentz,  who  had  the  right  of  nominating  those  who
published  them.  Seek.  p.  12.  Luth.  Oper.  i.  praef.  p.  i.  Palav.  p.  6.  3.  That
Arcemboldo  never  had  concern  in  the  publication  of  indulgences  in  Saxony  ;  his
district  was  Flanders  and  the  Upper  and  Lower  Rhine.  Seek.  p.  14.  Palav.  p.  6.
4.  That  Luther  and  his-adherents  never  mentioned  this  grant  of  Leo's  to  his  sister,
though  a  circumstance  of  which  they  could  hardly  have  been  ignorant,  and  which
they  would  have  been  careful  not  to  suppress.  5.  The  publication  of  indulgences  in
Germany  was  not  usually  committed  to  the  Augustinians.  The  promulgation  of
them,  at  three  different  periods  under  Julius  II.,  was  granted  to  the  Franciscans;
the  Dominicans  had  been  employed  in  the  same  office  a  short  time  before  the  present
period.  Palav.  p.  46.  6.  The'promulgation  of  those  indulgences,  which  first  ex-
cited Luther's  indignation,  was  intrusted  to  the  archbishop  of  Mentz,  in  conjunction
with  the  guardian  of  the  Franciscans ;  but  the  latter  having  declined  accepting  of
that  trust,  the  sole  right  became  vested  in  the  archbishop.  Palav.  6.  Seek.  16,
17.  7.  Luther  was  not  instigated  by  his  superiors  among  the  Angustinians  to  attack
the  Dominicans  their  rivals,  or  to  depreciate  indulgences  because  they  were  promul-
gated by  them ;  his  opposition  to  their  opinions  and  vices  proceeded  from  more

c  2

20  CHARLES V.  [1520.

The  ourt  Meanwhile,  these  novelties  in  Luther's  doc-
Of  Rome  trines  which  interested  all  Germany,  excited  little
attention  and  no  alarm  in  the  court  of  Rome.

Luther. j^e(^  £on(^  Q£  ejegant  anc[  refined  pleasures,  intent

upon  great  schemes  of  policy,  a  stranger  to  theological

controversies,  and  apt  to  despise  them,  regarded  with

the  utmost  indifference  the  operations  of  an  obscure

friar,  who,  in  the  heart  of  Germany,  carried  on  a  scho-

lastic disputation  in  a  barbarous style. Little  did  he

apprehend,  or  Luther  himself  dream,  that  the  effects  of

this  quarrel  would  be  so  fatal  to  the  papal  see. Leo

imputed  the  whole  to  monastic  enmity  and  emulation,

and  seemed  inclined  not  to  interpose  in  the  contest,

but to allow the  Augustinians  and Dominicans to

wrangle  about  the  matter  with  their  usual  animosity.

The  pro- The  solicitations,  however,  of  Luther's  adver-

Luther's saries,  who  were  exasperated  to  a  high  degree

opinions,  ^y  the  boldness  with  which  he  animadverted

on  their  writings,  together  with  the  surprising  progress

which  his  opinions  made  in  different  parts  of  Germany,

roused  at  last  the  attention  of  the  court  of  Rome,  and

obliged  Leo  to  take  measures  for  the  security  of  the

church  against  an  attack  that  now  appeared  too  serious

He  is to  be  despised. For  this  end,  he  summoned

ts^moenaerd  Luther  to  appear  at  Rome,  within  sixty  days,

at  Rome,  before  the  auditor  of  the chamber,  and  the

July,l5l8.  .  ...  , -p. . .  ITT

inquisitor-general  Fnerias,  who  had  written
against  him,  whom  he  empowered  jointly  to  examine
his  doctrines,  and  to  decide  concerning  them.  He
wrote,  at  the  same  time,  to  the  elector  of  Saxony,  be-
seeching him  not  to  protect  a  man  whose  heretical  and
profane  tenets  were  so  shocking  to  pious  ears  ;  and

laudable  motives.  Seek.  p.  15.  32.  Lutheri  Opera,  i.  p.  64.  6.  3.  A  diploma  of
indulgences  is  published  by  Herin.  Vender  Hardt,  from  which  it  appears,  that  the
name  of  the  guardian  of  the  Franciscans  is  retained  together  with  that  of  the  arch-
bishop, although  the  former  did  not  act.  The  limits  of  the  country  to  which  their
commissions  extended,  viz.  the  diocese  of  Mentz,  Magdeburg,  Halberstadt,  and  the
territories  of  the  marquis  of  Brandenburg,  are  mentioned  in  that  diploma.  Hist.
Uterana  Reformat,  pars  iv.  p.  14.

1520.]  BOOK II.  21

enjoined  the  provincial  of  the  Augustinians  to  check,  by
his  authority,  the  rashness  of  an  arrogant  monk,  which
brought  disgrace  upon  the  order  of  St.  Augustine,  and
gave  offence  and  disturbance  to  the  whole  church.
The  pope  From  the  strain  of  these  letters,  as  well  as
hiKgate  froiii  the  nomination  of  a  judge  so  prejudiced
in  Gerhim  ^u^  partial  as  Prierias,  Luther  easily  saw  what
many.  sentence  he  might  expect  at  Rome.  He  dis-
covered, for  that  reason,  the  utmost  solicitude  to  have
his  cause  tried  in  Germany,  and  before  a  less  suspected
tribunal.  The  professors  in  the  university  of  Wittem-
berg,  anxious  for  the  safety  of  a  man  who  did  so  much
honour  to  their  society,  wrote  to  the  pope ;  and  after
employing  several  pretexts  to  excuse  Luther  from  ap-
pearing at  Rome,  entreated  Leo  to  commit  the  exami-
nation of  his  doctrines  to  some  persons  of  learning  and
authority  in  Germany.  The  elector  requested  the  same
thing  of  the  pope's  legate  at  the  diet  of  Augsburg ;  and
as  Luther  himself,  who,  at  that  time,  was  so  far  from
having  any  intention  to  disclaim  the  papal  authority,
that  he  did  not  even  entertain  the  smallest  suspicion
concerning  its  divine  original,  had  written  to  Leo  a
most  submissive  letter,  promising  an  unreserved  com-
pliance with  his  will ;  the  pope  gratified  them  so  far  as
to  empower  his  legate  in  Germany,  cardinal  Cajetan,
a  Dominican,  eminent  for  scholastic  learning,  and  pas-
sionately devoted  to  the  Roman  see,  to  hear  and  de-
termine the  cause.

Luther  Luther,  though  he  had  good  reason  to  decline
iffie  the  a  Judge  chosen  among  his  avowed  adversaries,
legate,  (j^  no^-  hesitate  about  appearing  before  Cajetan ;
and  having  obtained  the  emperor's  safe-conduct,  im-
mediately repaired  to  Augsburg.  The  cardinal,  received
him  with  decent  respect,  and  endeavoured  at  first  to
gain  upon  him  by  gentle  treatment.  The  cardinal,  rely-
ing on  the  superiority  of  his  own  talents  as  a  theolo-
gian, entered  into  a  formal  dispute  with  Luther  con-

22  CHARLES V.  [1520.

cerning  the  doctrine  contained  in  his  theses.11  But  the
weapons  which  they  employed  were  so  different,  Ca-
jetan  appealing  to  papal  decrees,  and  the  opinions  of
schoolmen,  and  Luther  resting  entirely  on  the  authority
of  Scripture,  that  the  contest  was  altogether  fruitless.
The  cardinal  relinquished  the  character  of  a  disputant,
and  assuming  that  of  judge,  enjoined  Luther,  by  virtue
of  the  apostolical  powers  with  which  he  was  clothed,
to  retract  the  errors  which  he  had  uttered  with  regard
to  indulgences,  and  the  nature  of  faith  ;  and  to  abstain,
for  the  future,  from  the  publication  of  new  and  danger-
ous opinions.  Luther,  fully  persuaded  of  the  truth  of
his  own  tenets,  and  confirmed  in  the  belief  of  them  by
the  approbation  which  they  had  met  with  among  per-
sons conspicuous  both  for  learning  and  piety,  was  sur-
prised at  this  abrupt  mention  of  a  recantation,  before
any  endeavours  were  used  to  convince  him  that  he  was
mistaken.  He  had  flattered  himself,  that  in  a  confer-
ence concerning  the  points  in  dispute  with  a  prelate  of
such  distinguished  abilities,  he  should  be  able  to  remove
many  of  those  imputations  with  which  the  ignorance
or  malice  of  his  antagonists  had  loaded  him ;  but  the
high  tone  of  authority  that  the  cardinal  assumed,  ex-
tinguished at  once  all  hopes  of  this  kind,  and  cut  off
His  intre-  every  prospect  of  advantage  from  the  interview.
hatiour  ^s  nat*ve  intrepidity  of  mind,  however,  did
not  desert  him.  He  declared  with  the  utmost
firmness,  that  he  could  not,  with  a  safe  conscience,
renounce  opinions  which  he  believed  to  be  true ;  nor
should  any  consideration  ever  induce  him  to  do  what
would  be  so  base  in  itself,  and  so  offensive  to  God.
At  the  same  time,  he  continued  to  express  no  less  re-
verence than  formerly  for  the  authority  of  the  apostolic
see  ;°  he  signified  his  willingness  to  submit  the  whole

n  In  the  former  editions  I  asserted,  upon  the  authority  of  Father  Paul,  that  Ca-
jetan  thought  it  beneath  his  dignity  to  enter  into  any  dispute  with  Luther ;  but
M.  Beausobre,  in  his  Histoire  de  la  Reformation,  vol.  i.  p.  121,  &c.  has  satisfied
me  that  I  was  mistaken. See  also  Seckend.  lib.  i.  p.  46,  &c.
0  Luth.  Oper.  vol.  i.  p.  164.

1520.]  BOOK II.  23

controversy  to  certain  universities  which  he  named,
and  promised  neither  to  write  nor  to  preach  concerning
indulgences  for  the  future,  provided  his  adversaries
were  likewise  enjoined  to  be  silent  with  respect  to
them.p  All  these  offers  Cajetan  disregarded  or  rejected,
and  still  insisted  peremptorily  on  a  simple  recantation,
threatening  him  with  ecclesiastical  censures,  and  for-
bidding him  to  appear  again  in  his  presence,  unless  he
resolved  instantly  to  comply  with  what  he  had  required.
This  haughty  and  violent  manner  of  proceeding,  as
well  as  other  circumstances,  gave  Luther's  friends  such
strong  reasons  to  suspect,  that  even  the  imperial  safe-
conduct  would  not  be  able  to  protect  him  from  the
legate's  power  and  resentment,  that  they  prevailed  on
him  to  withdraw  secretly  from  Augsburg,  and  to  return
to  his  own  country.  But  before  his  departure,  accord-
His  appeal,  ing  to  a  ^orm  °^  which  there  had  been  some
Oct.  is.  examples,  he  prepared  a  solemn  appeal  from
the  pope  ill-informed  at  that  time  concerning  his  cause,
to  the  pope  when  he  should  receive  more  full  infor-
mation with  respect  to  it.q

He  is  sup-  Cajetan,  enraged  at  Luther's  abrupt  retreat,
Kiector an^  at  the  publication  of  his  appeal,  wrote  to
of  Saxony,  the  elector  of  Saxony,  complaining  of  both ;  and
requiring  him,  as  he  regarded  the  peace  of  the  church,
or  the  authority  of  its  head,  either  to  send  that  seditious
monk  a  prisoner  to  Rome,  or  to  banish  him  out  of  his
territories.  It  was  not  from  theological  considerations
that  Frederic  had  hitherto  countenanced  Luther ;  he
seems  to  have  been  much  a  stranger  to  controversies  of
that  kind,  and  to  have  been  little  interested  in  them.
His  protection  flowed  almost  entirely,  as  hath  been
already  observed,  from  political  motives,  and  was  af-
forded with  great  secrecy  and  caution.  He  had  neither
heard  any  of  Luther's  discourses,  nor  read  any  of  his

P  Luth.  Oper.  vol.  i.  p.  160.
i  Sleid.  Hist,  of  Reform,  p.  7. Seckend.  p.  45. Luth.  Oper.  i.  163.

•24  CHARLES V.  [1520.

books ;  and  though  all  Germany  resounded  with  his
fame,  he  had  never  once  admitted  him  into  his  pre-
sence/ But  upon  this  demand  which  the  cardinal
made,  it  became  necessary  to  throw  off  somewhat  of
his  former  reserve.  He  had  been  at  great  expense,
and  had  bestowed  much  attention  on  founding  a  new
university,  an  object  of  considerable  importance  to  every
German  prince ;  and  foreseeing  how  fatal  a  blow  the
removal  of  Luther  would  be  to  its  reputation,8  he,  under
various  pretexts,  and  with  many  professions  of  esteem
for  the  cardinal,  as  well  as  of  reverence  for  the  pope,
not  only  declined  complying  with  either  of  his  requests,
but  openly  discovered  great  concern  for  Luther's  safety.4
Motives  of  ^ne  inflexible  rigour  with  which  Cajetan
the  legate's  insisted  on  a  simple  recantation,  gave  great

conduct.  ~  T , ,  * „  .

onence  to  Luther  s  followers  in  that  age,  and
hath  since  been  censured  as  imprudent  by  several  Po-
pish writers.  But  it  was  impossible  for  the  legate  to
act  another  part.  The  judges  before  whom  Luther  had
been  required  to  appear  at  Rome,  were  so  eager  to  dis-
play their  zeal  against  his  errors,  that  without  waiting
for  the  expiration  of  the  sixty  days  allowed  him  in  the
citation,  they  had  already  condemned  him  as  a  heretic."
Leo  had,  in  several  of  his  briefs  and  letters,  stigmatized
him  as  a  child  of  iniquity,  and  a  man  given  up  to  a  re-
probate sense.  Nothing  less,  therefore,  than  a  recanta-
tion could  save  the  honour  of  the  church,  whose  maxim
it  is,  never  to  abandon  the  smallest  point  that  it  has
established,  and  which  is  even  precluded,  by  its  preten-
sions to  infallibility,  from  having  it  in  its  power  to  do  so.
Luther's  Luther's  situation,  at  this  time,  was  such  as

Si  W0uld  have  filled  any  other  Pergon  with  the  most

disquieting  apprehensions. He  could  not  expect

that  a  prince so  prudent and  cautious as  Frederic

would,  on  his  account,  set  at  defiance  the  thunders  of

'  P-  27< Sleid-  Hist'  P-  12«  *  Seckend  n  59

Hlst.  p.  10. Luth.  Oper.  i.  172.  «  IbTd.T  lei*.

1520.]  BOOK II.  25

ie  church,  and  brave  the  papal  power,  which  had
crushed  some  of  the  most  powerful  of  the  German  em-
perors. He  knew  what  veneration  was  paid  in  that
age,  to  ecclesiastical  decisions ;  what  terrors  ecclesias-
tical censures  carried  along  with  them,  and  how  easily
these  might  intimidate  and  shake  a  prince,  who  was
rather  his  protector  from  policy,  than  his  disciple  from
conviction.  If  he  should  be  obliged  to  quit  Saxony,  he
had  no  prospect  of  any  other  asylum,  and  must  stand
exposed  to  whatever  punishment  the  rage  or  bigotry  of
his  enemies  could  inflict.  Though  sensible  of  his  dan-
ger, he  discovered  no  symptoms  of  timidity  or  remiss-
ness,  but  continued  to  vindicate  his  own  conduct  and
opinions,  and  to  inveigh  against  those  of  his  adversaries
with  more  vehemence  than  ever.x

H  a  eais  ^u^  as  everv  s^eP  taken  by  the  court  of
to  a  general  Rome,  particularly  the  irregular  sentence  by
which  he  had  been  so  precipitately  declared  a
heretic,  convinced  Luther  that  Leo  would  soon  proceed
to  the  most  violent  measures  against  him,  he  had  re-
course to  the  only  expedient  in  his  power,  in  order  to
prevent  the  effect  of  the  papal  censures.  He  appealed
to  a  general  council,  which  he  affirmed  to  be  the  repre-
sentative of  the  Catholic  church,  and  superior  in  power
to  the  pope,  who  being  a  fallible  man  might  err,  as  St.
Peter,  the  most  perfect  of  his  predecessors,  had  erred. y
A  new  bull  It  soon  appeared,  that  Luther  had  not  formed
of  hidui-  rash  conjectures  concerning  the  intentions  of
gences.  faQ  Romish  church.  A  bull  of  a  date  prior  to
his  appeal  was  issued  by  the  pope,  in  which  he  magnifies
the  virtue  and  efficacy  of  indulgences,  in  terms  as  ex-
travagant as  any  of  his  predecessors  had  ventured  to  use
in  the  darkest  ages  ;  and  without  applying  such  pallia-
tives, or  mentioning  such  concessions,  as  a  more  en-
lightened period,  and  the  disposition  in  the  minds  of
many  men  at  that  juncture,  seemed  to  call  for,  he  re-

x  Seckend,  p.  59.  y  Sleid.  Hist.  12. Luth.  Oper.  i.  179.

26  CHARLES  V.  [1520.

quired  all  Christians  to  assent  to  what  he  delivered  as
the  doctrine  of  the  Catholic  church,  and  subjected  those
who  should  hold  or  teach  any  contrary  opinion,  to  the
heaviest  ecclesiastical  censures.

Maximi-  Among  Luther's  followers,  this  bull,  which
lian's  death  they  considered  as  an  unjustifiable  effort  of  the

ofadvan-  . •  i  ,  i  • i i  i r»

tage  to  pope,  in  order  to  preserve  that  rich  branch  ot
ier*  his  revenue  which  arose  from  indulgences,  pro-
duced little  effect.  But,  among  the  rest  of  his  country-
men, such  a  clear  decision  of  the  sovereign  pontiff
against  him,  and  enforced  by  such  dreadful  penalties,
must  have  been  attended  with  consequences  very  fatal
to  his  cause  ;  if  these  had  not  been  prevented  in  a  great
Jan.  17,  measure  by  the  death  of  the  emperor  Maximi-
lo19'  lian,  whom  both  his  principles  and  his  interest
prompted  to  support  the  authority  of  the  holy  see.  In
consequence  of  this  event,  the  vicariat  of  that  part  of
Germany  which  is  governed  by  the  Saxon  laws,  devolved
to  the  elector  of  Saxony ;  and  under  the  shelter  of  his
friendly  administration,  Luther  not  only  enjoyed  tran-
quillity, but  his  opinions  were  suffered,  during  the  inter-
regnum which  preceded  Charles's  election,  to  take  root
in  different  places,  and  to  grow  up  to  some  degree  of
strength  and  firmness.  At  the  same  time,  as  the  election
of  an  emperor  was  a  point  more  interesting  to  Leo  than
a  theological  controversy,  which  he  did  not  under-
stand, and  of  which  he  could  not  foresee  the  conse-
quences, he  was  so  extremely  solicitous  not  to  irritate  a
prince  of  such  considerable  influence  in  the  electoral
college  as  Frederic,  that  he  discovered  a  great  unwill-
ingness to  pronounce  the  sentence  of  excommunication
against  Luther,  which  his  adversaries  continually  de-
manded with  the  most  clamorous  importunity.

To  these  political  views  of  the  pope,  as  well
"  as  to  k*s  natural  aversion  from  severe  measures,
WaS  owm£  ^ie  suspension  of  any  farther  pro-
ceedings.against  Luther  for  eighteen  months.

1520.]  BOOK  II.  27

Perpetual  negotiations,  however,  in  order  to  bring  the
matter  to  some  amicable  issue,  were  carried  on  during
that  space.  The  manner  in  which  these  were  conducted
having  given  Luther  many  opportunities  of  observing
the  corruption  of  the  court  of  Rome ;  its  obstinacy  in
adhering  to  established  errors ;  and  its  indifference  about
truth,  however  clearly  proposed,  or  strongly  proved,  he
He  begins  began  to  utter  some  doubts  with  regard  to  the

to  call  in divine  original  of  the  papal  authority. A  pub-
question . .  111  i  • •
the  papal lie  disputation  was  held  upon  this  important

3nty*  question  at  Leipsic,  between  Luther  and  Eccius,
one  of  his  most  learned  and  formidable  antagonists ;  but
it  was  as  fruitless  and  indecisive  as  such  scholastic  com-
bats usually  prove.  Both  parties  boasted  of  having  ob-
tained the  victory;  both  were  confirmed  in  their  own
opinions ;  and  no  progress  was  made  towards  deciding
the  point  in  controversy.2

Reforma-  Nor  did  this  spirit  of  opposition  to  the  doc-
trines and  usurpations  of  the  Romish  church
break  out  in  Saxony  alone ;  an  attack  no  less
violent,  and  occasioned  by  the  same  causes,  was  made
upon  them  about  this  time  in  Switzerland.  The  Fran-
ciscans being  intrusted  with  the  promulgation  of  indul-
gences in  that  country,  executed  their  commission  with
the  same  indiscretion  and  rapaciousness,  which  had  ren-
dered the  Dominicans  so  odious  in  Germany.  They
proceeded,  nevertheless,  with  uninterrupted  success  till
they  arrived  at  Zurich.  There  Zuinglius,  a  man  not  in-
ferior to  Luther  himself  in  zeal  and  intrepidity,  ventured
to  oppose  them ;  and  being  animated  with  a  republican
boldness,  and  free  from  those  restraints  which  subjec-
tion to  the  will  of  a  prince  imposed  on  the  German
reformer,  he  advanced  with  more  daring  and  rapid
steps  to  overturn  the  whole  fabric  of  the  established  re-
ligion.3 The  appearance  of  such  a  vigorous  auxiliary,
and  the  progress  which  he  made,  was,  at  first,  matter  of

*  Luth.  Oper.  i.  199.  a  Sleid.  Hist.  22. Seckend.  59.

tion  in
Switzer-
land. -

28  CHARLES V.  [1520.

great  joy  to  Luther.  On  the  other  hand,  the  decrees  of
the  universities  of  Cologne  and  Lou  vain,  which  pro-
nounced his  opinions  to  be  erroneous,  afforded  great
cause  of  triumph  to  his  adversaries.
Luther's  But  the  undaunted  spirit  of  Luther  acquired
ancfpro-  additional  fortitude  from  every  instance  of  op-
gress.  position,  and  pushing  on  his  inquiries  and  at-
tacks from  one  doctrine  to  another,  he  began  to  shake
the  firmest  foundations  on  which  the  wealth  or  power
of  the  church  were  established.  Leo  came  at  last  to  be
convinced,  that  all  hopes  of  reclaiming  him  by  for-
bearance were  vain ;  several  prelates  of  great  wisdom
exclaimed  no  less  than  Luther's  personal  adversaries,
against  the  pope's  unprecedented  lenity  in  permitting
an  incorrigible  heretic,  who  during  three  years  had  been
endeavouring  to  subvert  every  thing  sacred  -and  vener-
able, still  to  remain  within  the  bosom  of  the  church ;
the  dignity  of  the  papal  see  rendered  the  most  vigorous
proceedings  necessary ;  the  new  emperor,  it  was  hoped,
would  support  its  authority;  nor  did  it  seem  probable
that  the  elector  of  Saxony  would  so  far  forget  his  usual
caution,  as  to  set  himself  in  opposition  to  their  united
power.  The  college  of  cardinals  was  often  assembled,
in  order  to  prepare  the  sentence  with  due  deliberation,
and  the  ablest  canonists  were  consulted  how  it  might  be
Bull  of  expressed  with  unexceptionable  formality.  At
last,  on  the  15th  of  June,  1520,  the  bull  so  fatal
to  the  church  of  Rome,  was  issued .  Forty-one
propositions,  extracted  out  of  Luther's  works,
are  therein  condemned  as  heretical,  scandalous,  and
offensive  to  pious  ears;  all  persons  are  forbidden  to
read  his  writings,  upon  pain  of  excommunication;  such
as  had  any  of  them  in  their  custody  were  commanded
to  commit  them  to  the  flames  ;  he  himself,  if  he  did  not
within  sixty  days,  publicly  recant  his  errors,  and  burn
his  books,  is  pronounced  an  obstinate  heretic ;  is  ex-
communicated, and  delivered  unto  Satan  for  the  de-

1520.]  BOOK II.  29

struction  of  his  flesh ;  and  all  secular  princes  are  re-
quired, under  pain  of  incurring  the  same  censure,  to
seize  his  person,  that  he  might  be  punished  as  his
crimes  deserved.5

The  publication  of  this  bull  in  Germany  ex-

The  effects  r  .  .  J  T

of  this  in  cited  various  passions  in  different  places.  Lu-
iany'  ther's  adversaries  exulted,  as  if  his  party  and
opinions  had  been  crushed  at  once  by  such  a  decisive
blow.  His  followers,  whose  reverence  for  the  papal
authority  daily  diminished,  read  Leo's  anathemas  with
more  indignation  than  terror.  In  some  cities,  the  peo-
ple violently  obstructed  the  promulgation  of  the  bull ;
in  others,  the  persons  who  attempted  to  publish  it  were
insulted,  and  the  bull  itself  was  torn  in  pieces,  and
trodden  under  foot.0

This  sentence,  which  he  had  for  some  time

And  upon  . . .  , T

Luther,  expected,  did  not  disconcert  or  intimidate  Lu-
ther. After  renewing  his  appeal  to  the  general
council,  he  published  remarks  upon  the  bull  of  excom-
munication ;  and  being  now  persuaded  that  Leo  had
been  guilty  both  of  impiety  and  injustice  in  his  pro-
ceedings against  him,  he  boldly  declared  the  pope  to
be  that  man  of  sin,  or  Antichrist,  whose  appearance  is
foretold  in  the  New  Testament ;  he  declaimed  against
his  tyranny  and  usurpations  with  greater  violence  than
ever ;  he  exhorted  all  Christian  princes  to  shake  off
such  an  ignominious  yoke ;  and  boasted  of  his  own
happiness  in  being  marked  out  as  the  object  of  eccle-
siastical indignation,  because  he  had  ventured  to  assert
the  liberty  of  mankind.  Nor  did  he  confine  his  expres-
sions of  contempt  for  the  papal  power  to  words  alone ;
Leo  having,  in  execution  of  the  bull,  appointed  Luther's
books  to  be  burnt  at  Rome,  he,  by  way  of  retaliation,
assembled  all  the  professors  and  students  in  the  uni-
versity of  Wittemberg,  and  with  great  pomp,  in  pre-
sence of  avast  multitude  of  spectators,  cast  the  volumes

b  Palavic.  27. Luth.  Oper.  i.  423.  c  Seckend.  p.  116>

30  CHARLES V.  [1/520.

of  the  canon  law,  together  with  the  bull  of  excommu-
nication, into  the  flames ;  and  his  example  was  imitated
in  several  cities  of  Germany.  The  manner  in  which
he  justified  this  action  was  still  more  offensive  than  the
action  itself.  Having  collected  from  the  canon  law  some
of  the  most  extravagant  propositions  with  regard  to
the  plenitude  and  omnipotence  of  the  papal  power,  as
well  as  the  subordination  of  all  secular  jurisdiction  to
the  authority  of  the  holy  see,  he  published  these  with  a
commentary;  pointing  out  the  impiety  of  such  tenets,  and
their  evident  tendency  to  subvert  all  civil  government/1
state  of  the  Such  was  the  progress  which  Luther  had
ti0en°when  made,  and  such  the  state  of  his  party,  when
Charles  Charles  arrived  in  Germany.  No  secular  prince

arrived  in  »  •*•

Germany,  had  hitherto  embraced  Luther's  opinions ;  no
change  in  the  established  forms  of  worship  had  been
introduced;  and  no  encroachments  had  been  made
upon  the  possessions  or  jurisdiction  of  the  clergy;
neither  party  had  yet  proceeded  to  action ;  and  the
controversy,  though  conducted  with  great  heat  and  pas-
sion on  both  sides,  was  still  carried  on  with  its  proper
weapons,  with  theses,  disputations,  and  replies.  A  deep
impression,  however,  was  made  upon  the  minds  of  the
people;  their  reverence  for  ancient  institutions  and
doctrines  was  shaken  ;  and  the  materials  were  already
scattered,  which  kindled  into  the  combustion  that  soon
spread  over  all  Germany.  Students  crowded  from
every  province  of  the  empire  to  Wittemberg  ;  and  un-
der Luther  himself,  Melancthon,  Carlos tadius,  and  other
masters  then  reckoned  eminent,  imbibed  opinions,  which,
on  their  return,  they  propagated  among  their  country-
men, who  listened  to  them  with  that  fond  attention,
which  truth,  when  accompanied  with  novelty,  naturally
commands.6

During  the  course  of  these  transactions,  the  court
of  Rome,  though under  the  direction  of  one of  its

d  Luth-  Oper.  ii.  316.  e  Seckend.  59.

1520.]  BOOK II.  31

Reflections  ablest  pontiffs,  neither  formed  its  schemes  with
conSucTof  *^at  Profolind  sagacity,  nor  executed  them
Rome  j  with  that  steady  perseverance,  which  had  long
rendered  it  the  most  perfect  model  of  political  wisdom
to  the  rest  of  Europe.  When  Luther  began  to  declaim
against  indulgences,  two  different  methods  of  treating
him  lay  before  the  pope ;  by  adopting  one  of  which,
the  attempt,  it  is  probable,  might  have  been  crushed,
and  by  the  other  it  might  have  been  rendered  innocent.
If  Luther's  first  departure  from  the  doctrines  of  the
church  had  instantly  drawn  upon  him  the  weight  of  its
censures,  the  dread  of  these  might  have  restrained  the
elector  of  Saxony  from  protecting  him,  might  have  de-
terred the  people  from  listening  to  his  discourses,  or
even  might  have  overawed  Luther  himself;  and  his
name,  like  that  of  many  good  men  before  his  time,
would  now  have  been  known  to  the  world  only  for  his
honest  but  ill-timed  effort  to  correct  the  corruptions  of
the  Romish  church.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  pope
had  early  testified  some  displeasure  with  the  vices  and
excesses  of  the  friars  who  had  been  employed  in  pub-
lishing indulgences ;  if  he  had  forbidden  the  mentioning
of  controverted  points  in  discourses  addressed  to  the
people  ;  if  he  had  enjoined  the  disputants  on  both  sides
to  be  silent ;  if  he  had  been  careful  not  to  risk  the
credit  of  the  church  by  defining  articles  which  had  hi-
therto been  left  undetermined ;  Luther  would,  probably,
have  stopt  short  at  his  first  discoveries  ;  he  would  not
have  been  forced,  in  self-defence,  to  venture  upon  new
ground,  and  the  whole  controversy  might  possibly  have
died  away  insensibly ;  or  being  confined  entirely  to
the  schools,  might  have  been  carried  on  with  as  little
detriment  to  the  peace  and  unity  of  the  Romish  church
as  that  which  the  Franciscans  maintained  with  the
Dominicans  concerning  the  immaculate  conception,  or
that  between  the  Jansenists  and  Jesuits  concerning  the
operations  of  grace.  But  Leo,  by  fluctuating  between

32  CHARLES V.  [1520.

these  opposite  systems,  and  by  embracing  them  alter-
nately, defeated  the  effects  of  both.  By  an  improper
exertion  of  authority,  Luther  was  exasperated,  but  not
restrained.  By  a  mistaken  exercise  of  lenity,  time'was
given  for  his  opinions  to  spread,  but  no  progress  was
made  towards  reconciling  him  to  the  church  ;  and  even
the  sentence  of  excommunication,  which  at  another
juncture  might  have  been  decisive,  was  delayed  so  long,
that  it  became  at  last  scarcely  an  object  of  terror.
And  u  on  Such  a  series  of  errors  in  the  measures  of  a
the  con-  court  seldom  chargeable  with  mistaking  its  own

duct  of  .  •i'ii

Luther,  true  interest,  is  not  more  astonishing  than  the
wisdom  which  appeared  in  Luther's  conduct.  Though
a  perfect  stranger  to  the  maxims  of  worldjy  wisdom,
and  incapable,  from  the  impetuosity  of  his  temper,  of
observing  them,  he  was  led  naturally  by  the  method  in
which  he  made  his  discoveries  to  carry  on  his  opera-
tions in  a  manner  which  contributed  more  to  their  suc-
cess, than  if  every  step  he  took  had  been  prescribed  by
the  most  artful  policy.  At  the  time  when  he  set  him-
self to  oppose  Tetzel,  he  was  far  from  intending  that
reformation  which  he  afterward  effected;  and  would
have  trembled  with  horror  at  the  thoughts  of  what  at
last  he  gloried  in  accomplishing.  The  knowledge  of
truth  was  not  poured  into  his  mind  all  at  once,  by  any
special  revelation ;  he  acquired  it  by  industry  and  me-
ditation, and  his  progress,  of  consequence,  was  gradual.
The  doctrines  of  Popery  are  so  closely  connected,  that
the  exposing  of  one  error  conducted  him  naturally  to
the  detection  of  others ;  and  all  the  parts  of  that  ar-
tificial fabric  were  so  united  together,  that  the  pulling
down  of  one  loosened  the  foundation  of  the  rest,  and
rendered  it  more  easy  to  overturn  them.  In  confuting
the  extravagant  tenets  concerning  indulgences,  he  was
obliged  to  inquire  into  the  true  cause  of  our  justifica-
tion and  acceptance  with  God.  The  knowledge  of  that
discovered  to  him,  by  degrees,  the  inutility  of  pil-

1520.]  BOOK  II.  33

grimages  and  penances ;  the  vanity  of  relying  on  the
intercession  of  saints;  the  impiety  of  worshipping  them ;
the  abuses  of  auricular  confession ;  and  the  imaginary
existence  of  purgatory.  The  detection  of  so  many
errors,  led  him,  of  course,  to  consider  the  character  of
the  clergy  who  taught  them ;  and  their  exorbitant
wealth,  the  severe  injunction  of  celibacy,  together  with
the  intolerable  rigour  of  monastic  vows,  appeared  to
him  the  great  sources  of  their  corruption.  From  thence,
it  was  but  one  step  to  call  in  question  the  divine  ori-
ginal of  the  papal  power,  which  authorized  and  sup-
ported such  a  system  of  errors.  As  the  unavoidable
result  of  the  whole,  he  disclaimed  the  infallibility  of
the  pope,  the  decisions  of  schoolmen,  or  any  other
human  authority,  and  appealed  to  the  word  of  God  as
the  only  standard  of  theological  truth.  To  this  gradual
progress  Luther  owed  his  success.  His  hearers  were
not  shocked  at  first  by  any  proposition  too  repugnant
to  their  ancient  prejudices,  or  too  remote  from  esta-
blished opinions.  They  were  conducted  insensibly
from  one  doctrine  to  another.  Their  faith  and  convic-
tion were  able  to  keep  pace  with  his  discoveries.  To
the  same  cause  was  owing  the  inattention,  and  even
indifference,  with  which  Leo  viewed  Luther's  first  pro-
ceedings. A  direct  or  violent  attack  upon  the  authority
of  the  church  would  at  once  have  drawn  upon  Luther
the  whole  weight  of  its  vengeance ;  but  as  this  was  far
from  his  thoughts,  as  he  continued  long  to  profess
great  respect  for  the  pope,  and  made  repeated  offers  of
submission  to  his  decisions,  there  seemed  to  be  no  rea-
son for  apprehending  that  he  would  prove  the  author
of  any  desperate  revolt;  and  he  was  suffered  to  proceed
step  by  step  in  undermining  the  constitution  of  the
church,  until  the  remedy  applied  at  last  came  too  late
to  produce  any  effect.
An  inquiry  But  whatever  advantages  Luther's  cause  de-

into  the  .  "

causes rived,  either  from  the  mistakes  of  his  adversa-

VOL.  IV.  D

34  CHARLES V.  [1520.

which  con-  ries,  or  from  his  own  good  conduct,  the  sudden
the  p^- 1°  progress  and  firm  establishment  of  his  doctrines
?heSRef  must  not  be  ascribed  to  these  alone.  The  same
formation,  corruptions  in  the  church  of  Rome  which  he
condemned,  had  been  attacked  long  before  his  time.
The  same  opinions  which  he  now  propagated,  had
been  published  in  different  places,  and  were  supported
by  the  same  arguments.  Waldus  in  the  twelfth  century,
Wickliffe  in  the  fourteenth,  and  Huss  in  the  fifteenth,
had  inveighed  against  the  errors  of  Popery  with  great
boldness,  and  confuted  them  with  more  ingenuity  and
learning  than  could  have  been  expected  in  those  illite-
rate ages  in  which  they  flourished.  But  all  these  pre-
mature attempts  towards  a  reformation  proved  abortive.
Such  feeble  lights,  incapable  of  dispelling  the  ^darkness
which  then  covered  the  church,  were  soon  extinguish-
ed; and  though  the  doctrines  of  these  pious  men  pro-
duced some  effects,  and  left  some  traces  in  the  countries
where  they  taught,  they  were  neither  extensive  nor
considerable.  Many  powerful  causes  contributed  to
facilitate  Luther's  progress,  which  either  did  not  exist,
or  did  not  operate  with  full  force  in  their  days;  and  at
that  critical  and  mature  juncture  when  he  appeared,
circumstances  of  every  kind  concurred  in  rendering
each  step  that  he  took  successful.
The  long  The  long  and  scandalous  schism  which  di-
the  fo™r-n  vided  tte  church  during  the  latter  part  of  the
ctn^y.  fourteentn>  and  &e  beginning  of  the  fifteenth
centuries,  had  a  great  effect  in  diminishing  the
veneration  with  which  the  world  had  been  accustomed
to  view  the  papal  dignity.  Two  or  three  contending
pontiffs  roaming  about  Europe  at  a  time ;  fawning  on
the  princes  whom  they  wanted  to  gain ;  extorting  large
sums  of  money  from  the  countries  which  acknowledged
their  authority ;  excommunicating  their  rivals,  and  curs-
ing those  who  adhered  to  them,  discredited  their  pre-
tensions to  infallibility,  and  exposed  both  their  persons

1520.]  BOOK II.  35

and  their  office  to  contempt.  The  laity,  to  whom  all
parties  appealed,  came  to  learn  that  some  right  of  pri-
vate judgment  belonged  to  them,  and  acquired  the  ex-
ercise of  it  so  far  as  to  choose,  among  these  infallible
guides,  whom  they  would  please  to  follow.  The  pro-
ceedings of  the  councils  of  Constance  and  Basil  spread
this  disrespect  for  the  Romish  see  still  wider,  and  by
their  bold  exertion  of  authority  in  deposing  and  elect-
ing popes,  taught  men  that  there  was  in  the  church  a
jurisdiction  superior  even  to  the  papal  power,  which
they  had  long  believed  to  be  supreme.
Thepontia-  The  wound  given  on  that  occasion  to  the
Alexander  PaPa^  authority  was  scarcely  healed  up,  when
vi.  and  of  the  pontificates  of  Alexander  VI.  and  Julius  II.,
both  able  princes,  but  detestable  ecclesiastics,
raised  new  scandal  in  Christendom.  The  profligate
morals  of  the  former  in  private  life;  the  fraud,  the  in-
justice, and  the  cruelty  of  his  public  administration,
placed  him  on  a  level  with  those  tyrants,  whose  deeds
are  the  greatest  reproach  to  human  nature.  The  latter,
though  a  stranger  to  the  odious  passions  which  prompt-
ed his  predecessor  to  commit  so  many  unnatural  crimes,
was  under  the  dominion  of  a  restless  and  ungovernable
ambition,  that  scorned  all  considerations  of  gratitude,
of  decency,  or  of  justice,  when  they  obstructed  the
execution  of  his  schemes.  It  was  hardly  possible  to  be
firmly  persuaded  that  the  infallible  knowledge  of  a
religion  whose  chief  precepts  are  purity  and  humility,
was  deposited  in  the  breasts  of  the  profligate  Alexan-
der, or  the  overbearing  Julius.  The  opinion  of  those
who  exalted  the  authority  of  a  council  above  that  of  the
pope,  spread  wonderfully  under  their  pontificates:  and
as  the  emperor  and  French  kings,  who  were  alternately
engaged  in  hostilities  with  those  active  pontiffs,  per-
mitted and  even  encouraged  their  subjects  to  expose
their  vices  with  all  the  violence  of  invective  and  all  the
petulance  of  ridicule,  men's  ears  being  accustomed  to

D2

3(5  CHARLES V.  [1520.

these,  were  not  shocked  with  the  bold  or  ludicrous
discourses  of  Luther  and  his  followers  concerning  the
papal  dignity.

The  im-  Nor  were  such  excesses  confined  to  the  head
morai  lives  Q{  the  clmrcn  alOne.  Many  of  the  dignified
clergy-  clergy,  secular  as  well  as  regular,  being  the
younger  sons  of  noble  families,  who  had  assumed  the
ecclesiastical  character  for  no  other  reason  but  that
they  found  in  the  church  stations  of  great  dignity  and
affluence,  were  accustomed  totally  to  neglect  the  duties
of  their  office,  and  indulged  themselves  without  reserve
in  all  the  vices  to  which  great  wealth  and  idleness  na-
turally give  birth.  Though  the  inferior  clergy  were  pre-
vented by  their  poverty  from  imitating  the  expensive
luxury  of  their  superiors,  yet  gross  ignorance  and  low
debauchery  rendered  them  as  contemptible  as  the
others  were  odious/  The  severe  and  unnatural  law  of
celibacy,  to  which  both  were  equally  subject,  occasioned
such  irregularities,  that  in  several  parts  of  Europe  the*
concubinage  of  priests  was  not  only  permitted,  but  en-
joined. The  employing  of  a  remedy  so  contrary  to  the
precepts  of  the  Christian  religion,  is  the  strongest  proof
that  the  crimes  it  was  intended  to  prevent  were  both
numerous  and  flagrant.  Long  before  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, many  authors  of  great  name  and  authority  give
such  descriptions  of  the  dissolute  morals  of  the  clergy,
as  seem  almost  incredible  in  the  present  age.g  The  vo-

f  The  corrupt  state  of  the  church  prior  to  the  Reformation,  is  acknowledged  by
an  author,  who  was  both  abundantly  able  to  judge  concerning  this  matter,  and  who
was  not  over-forward  to  confess  it.  "  For  some  years  (says  Bellarmine)  before  the
Lutheran  and  Calvinistic  heresies  were  published,  there  was  not  (as  contem-
porary authors  testify)  any  severity  in  ecclesiastical  judicatories,  any  discipline  with
regard  to  morals,  any  knowledge  of  sacred  literature,  any  reverence  for  divine
things  ;  there  was  not  almost  any  religion  remaining."  Bellanninus  Concio  xxviii.
Oper.^  torn.  vi.  col.  296.  edit.  Colon.  1617.  apud  Gerdesii  Hist.  Evan.  Renovati,
vol.  i.  p.  25.

e  Centum  Gravamina  Nation.  German,  in  Fascicule,  Rer.  expetend.  et  fugienda-
rum,  per  Ortuinum  Gratium,  vol.  i.  361.  See  innumerable  passages  to  the  same  pur-

Ejse  in  the  appendix,  or  second  volume,  published  by  Edward  Brown. See  also
erm.  Vender  Hardt.  Hist.  Lit.  Reform,  pars  iii.  and the  vast  collections  of  Wal-
chius  in  his  four  volumes  of  Monumenta  Medii  ^Evi.  Gotting.  1757.

The  authors  I  have  quoted  enumerate  the  vices  of  the  clergy.  When  they  ven-
tured upon  actions  manifestly  criminal,  we  may  conclude  that  they  would  be  less
scrupulous  with  respect  to  the  decorum  of  behaviour.  Accordingly  their  neglect  of  the

1520.]  BOOK II.  37

luptuous  lives  of  ecclesiastics  occasioned  great  scandal,
not  only  because  their  manners  were  inconsistent  with
their  sacred  character;  but  the  laity  being  accustomed
to  see  several  of  them  raised  from  the  lowest  stations
to  the  greatest  affluence,  did  not  shew  the  same  indul-
gence to  their  excesses,  as  to  those  of  persons  possessed
of  hereditary  wealth  or  grandeur;  and  viewing  their
condition  with  more  envy,  they  censured  their  crimes
with  greater  severity.  Nothing,  therefore,  could  be
more  acceptable  to  Luther's  hearers,  than  the  violence
with  which  he  exclaimed  against  the  immoralities  of
churchmen,  and  every  person  in  his  audience  could,
from  his  own  observation,  confirm  the  truth  of  his
invectives.

The  facility  The  scandal  of  these  crimes  was  greatly  in-
theselm-ch  creased  by  the  facility  with  which  such  as  com-

mitted  tuem  obtained  pardon.  In  all  the  Eu-
ropean  kingdoms,  the  impotence  of  the  civil
magistrate,  under  forms  of  government  extremely  irre-
gular and  turbulent,  made  it  necessary  to  relax  the
rigour  of  justice,  and  upon  payment  of  a  certain  fine  or
composition  prescribed  by  law,  judges  were  accustomed
to  remit  farther  punishment,  even  of  the  most  atrocious
crimes.  The  court  of  Rome,  always  attentive  to  the
means  of  augmenting  its  revenues,  imitated  this  prac-
tice ;  and,  by  a  preposterous  accommodation  of  it  to
religious  concerns,  granted  its  pardons  to  such  trans-
gressors as  gave  a  sum  of  money  in  order  to  purchase
them.  As  the  idea  of  a  composition  for  crimes  was  then

decent  conduct  suitable  to  their  profession,  seems  to  have  given  great  offence.  In
order  to  illustrate  this,  I  shall  transcribe  one  passage,  because  it  is  taken  not  from
any  author  whose  professed  purpose  it  "was  to  describe  the  improper  conduct  of  the
clergy  ;  and  who,  from  prejudice  or  artifice,  may  be  supposed  to  aggravate  the
charge  against  them.  The  emperor  Charles  IV.,  in  a  letter  to  the  archbishop  of
Mentz,  A.  D.  1359,  exhorting  him  to  reform  the  disorders  of  the  clergy,  thus  ex-
presses himself:  "  De  Christi  patrimonio,  ludos,  hastiludia  et  torneamenta  exercent  ;
habitum  militarem  cum  praetextis  aureis  et  argenteis  gestant,  et  calceos  militares;
comam  et  barbam  nutriunt,  etnihil  quod  ad  vitam  etordinem  ecclesiasticum  spectat,
.  ostendunt.  Militaribus  se  duntaxat  et  secularibus  actibus,  vita  et  moribus,  in  suae
salutis  dispendium,  et  generale  populi  scandalum,  immiscent."  Codex  Diplomaticus
Anecdotorum,  per  Val.  Ferd.  Gudenum,  4to.  vol.  iii.  p.  '1-38.

38  CHARLES  V.  [1520.

familiar,  this  strange  traffic  was  so  far  from  shocking
mankind,  that  it  soon  became  general ;  and  in  order  to
prevent  any  imposition  in  carrying  it  on,  the  officers  of
the  Roman  chancery  published  a  book,  containing  the
precise  sum  to  be  exacted  for  the  pardon  of  every  par-
ticular sin. A  deacon,  guilty  of  murder,  was  absolved
for  twenty  crowns. A  bishop,  or  abbot,  might  assassi-
nate for  three  hundred  livres. Any  ecclesiastic  might
violate  his  vows  of  chastity,  even  with  the  most  aggra-
vating circumstances,  for  the  third  part  of  that  sum.
Even  such  shocking  crimes  as  occur  seldom  in  human
life,  and  perhaps  exist  only  in  the  impure  imagination
of  a  casuist,  were  taxed  at  a  very  moderate  rate.  When
a  more  regular  and  perfect  mode  of  dispensing  justice
came  to  be  introduced  into  civil  courts,  the  practice  of
paying  a  composition  for  crimes  went  gradually  into
disuse ;  and  mankind  having  acquired  more  accurate
notions  concerning  religion  and  morality,  the  condi-
tions on  which  the  court  of  Rome  bestowed  its  par-
dons appeared  impious,  and  were  considered  as  one
great  source  of  ecclesiastical  corruption.11
The  exorbi- This  degeneracy  of  manners  among  the  clergy
laftiieeaUh  mignt  have  been  tolerated,  perhaps,  with  greater
church ; indulgence,  if  their  exorbitant  riches  and  power
had  not  enabled  them,  at  the  same  time,  to  encroach  on
the  rights  of  every  other  order  of  men. It  is  the  genius
of  superstition,  fond  of  whatever  is  pompous  or  grand,
to  set  no  bounds  to  its  liberality  towards  persons  whom
it  esteems  sacred,  and  to  think  its  expressions  of  regard
defective,  unless  it  nath  raised  them  to  the  height  of
wealth  and  authority. Hence  flowed  the  extensive  re-
venues and  jurisdiction  possessed  by  the  church  in  every
country  in  Europe,  and  which  were  become  intolerable
to  the  laity,  from  whose  undiscerning  bounty  they  were
at  first  derived.

*  Fascicul.  Rer.  expet.  et  fug.  i.  355.  J.  G.  Schelhornii  Amsenit.  Literar.  Fran-
cof.  1725,  vol.  n.  369.  Diction,  de  Bayle,  Artie.  Banck  et  Tuppius.  Taxa  Can-
cellar.  Roman*,  edit.  Francof.  1651,  passim.

1520.]  BOOK II.  39

The  burden,  however,  of  ecclesiastical  op-

Particu-

pression,  had  fallen  with  such  peculiar  weight
iany  '  on  the  Germans,  as  rendered  them,  though  na-
turally exempt  from  levity,  and  tenacious  of  their  an-
cient customs,  more  inclinable  than  any  people  in
Europe  to  listen  to  those  who  called  on  them  to  assert
their  liberty.  During  the  long  contests  between  the
popes  and  emperors  concerning  the  right  of  investiture,
and  the  wars  which  these  occasioned,  most  of  the  con-
siderable German  ecclesiastics  joined  the  papal  faction;
and  while  engaged  in  rebellion  against  the  head  of  the
empire,  they  seized  the  imperial  domains  and  revenues,
and  usurped  the  imperial  jurisdiction  within  their  own
dioceses.  Upon  the  re-establishment  of  tranquillity,
they  still  retained  these  usurpations,  as  if  by  the  length
of  an  unjust  possession  they  had  acquired  a  legal  right
to  them.  The  emperors,  too  feeble  to  wrest  them  out
of  their  hands,  were  obliged  to  grant  the  clergy  fiefs  of
those  ample  territories,  and  they  enjoyed  all  the  immu-
nities, as  well  as  honours,  which  belonged  to  feudal
barons.  By  means  of  these,  many  bishops  and  abbots
in  Germany,  were  not  only  ecclesiastics,  but  princes,
and  their  character  and  manners  partook  more  of  the
licence  too  frequent  among  the  latter,  than  of  the  sanc-
tity which  became  the  former.1

Where  the  The  unsettled  state  of  government  in  Germany,
umrped  a  an^  the  frequent  wars  to  which  that  country  was
ofthepart  exPosed>  contributed  in  another  manner  towards
property,  aggrandizing  ecclesiastics.  The  only  property,
during  those  times  of  anarchy,  which  enjoyed  security
from  the  oppression  of  the  great,  or  the  ravages  of  war,
was  that  which  belonged  to  the  church.  This  was
owing  not  only  to  the  great  reverence  for  the  sacred
character  prevalent  in  those  ages,  but  to  a  superstitious
dread  of  the  sentence  of  excommunication,  which  the
clergy  were  ready  to  denounce  against  all  who  invaded

*  F.  Paul/History  of  Ecclesiast.  Benefices,  p.  107.

40  CHARLES V.  [1520.

their  possessions.  Many  observing  this,  made  a  sur-
render of  their  lands  to  ecclesiastics,  and  consenting  to
hold  them  in  fee  of  the  church,  obtained  as  its  vassals  a
degree  of  safety,  which  without  this  device  they  were
unable  to  procure.  By  such  an  increase  of  the  num-
ber of  their  vassals,  the  power  of  ecclesiastics  received
a  real  and  permanent  augmentation ;  and  as  lands  held
in  fee  by  the  limited  tenures  common  in  those  ages,
often  returned  to  the  persons  on  whom  the  fief  depended,
considerable  additions  were  made  in  this  way  to  the
property  of  the  clergy.k

The  reat  The  solicitude  of  the  clergy  in  providing  for
personal  the  safety  of  their  own  persons,  was  still  greater

immunities  •  «  • i i  i» i  •  •  i •

of  ecciesi-  than  that  which  they  displayed  in  securing  their
possessions ;  and  their  efforts  to  attain  k  were
still  more  successful.  As  they  were  consecrated  to  the
priestly  office  with  much  outward  solemnity  ;  were  dis-
tinguished from  the  rest  of  mankind  by  a  peculiar  garb
and  manner  of  life ;  and  arrogated  to  their  order  many
privileges  which  do  not  belong  to  other  Christians,  they
naturally  became  the  objects  of  excessive  veneration.
As  a  superstitious  spirit  spread,  they  were  regarded  as
beings  of  a  superior  species  to  the  profane  laity,  whom
it  would  be  impious  to  try  by  the  same  laws,  or  to  sub-
ject to  the  same  punishments.  This  exemption  from
civil  jurisdiction,  granted  at  first  to  ecclesiastics  as  a
mark  of  respect,  they  soon  claimed  as  a  point  of  right.
This  valuable  immunity  of  the  priesthood  is  asserted,
not  only  in  the  decrees  of  popes  and  councils,  but  was
confirmed  in  the  most  ample  form  by  many  of  the
greatest  emperors.1  As  long  as  the  clerical  character
remained,  the  person  of  an  ecclesiastic,  was  in  some
degree  sacred ;  and  unless  he  were  degraded  from  his
office,  the  unhallowed  hand  of  the  civil  judge  durst  not

k  F.  Paul,  Hist,  of  Eccles.  Benef.  p.  66. Boulainvillers,  Etat  de  France,  torn,  u
169.  Lond.  1737.

1  Goldasti  Constitut.  Imperial.  Francof.  1673,  vol.  ii.  92. 107.

1520.]  BOOK II.  41

touch  him.  But  as  the  power  of  degradation  was  lodged
in  the  spiritual  courts,  the  difficulty  and  expense  of  ob-
taining such  a  sentence  too  often  secured  absolute  im-
punity to  offenders.  Many  assumed  the  clerical  cha-
racter, for  no  other  reason  than  that  it  might  screen
them  from  the  punishment  which  their  actions  de-
served.™ The  German  nobles  complained  loudly,  that
these  anointed  malefactors,  as  they  called  them,n  seldom
suffered  capitally,  even  for  the  most  atrocious  crimes ;
and  their  independence  of  the  civil  magistrate  is  often
mentioned  in  the  remonstrances  of  the  diets,  as  a  privi-
lege equally  pernicious  to  society,  and  to  the  morals  of
the  clergy.

Their  en-  While  the  clergy  asserted  the  privileges  of
mention  their  own  order  with  so  much  zeal,  they  made
Sction  of  continual  encroachments  upon  those  of  the  laity,
the  laity.  All  causes  relative  to  matrimony,  to  testaments,
to  usury,  to  legitimacy  of  birth,  as  well  as  those  which
concerned  ecclesiastical  revenues,  were  thought  to  be
so  connected  with  religion,  that  they  could  be  tried
only  in  the  spiritual  courts.  Not  satisfied  with  this
ample  jurisdiction,  which  extended  to  one  half  of  the
subjects  that  give  rise  to  litigation  among  men,  the
clergy,  with  wonderful  industry,  and  by  a  thousand
inventions,  endeavoured  to  draw  all  other  causes  into
their  own  courts.0  As  they  had  engrossed  almost  the
whole  learning  known  in  the  dark  ages,  the  spiritual
judges  were  commonly  so  far  superior  in  knowledge
and  abilities  to  those  employed  in  the  secular  courts,
that  the  people  at  first  favoured  any  stretch  that  was
made  to  bring  their  affairs  under  the  cognizance  of  a
judicature,  on  the  decisions  of  which  they  could  rely
with  more  perfect  confidence  than  on  those  of  the  civil
courts.  Thus  the  interest  of  the  church,  and  the  in-
clination of  the  people,  concurring  to  elude  the  juris-

ra  Rymer's  Foedera,  vol.  xiii.  532.  n  Centum  Gravara.  £  31.

0  Gianaone  Hist,  of  Naples,  book  xix.  $  3.

42  CHARLES  V.  [1520.

diction  of  the  lay-magistrate,  soon  reduced  it  almost  to
nothing.p  By  means  of  this,  vast  power  accrued  to
ecclesiastics,  and  no  inconsiderable  addition  was  made
to  their  revenue  by  the  sums  paid  in  those  ages  to  the
persons  who  administered  justice.
The  dread-  The  penalty  by  which  the  spiritual  courts
rf«p&  enforced  their  sentences,  added  great  weight
censures.  an(j  terror  to  their  jurisdiction.  The  censure
of  excommunication  was  instituted  originally  for  pre-
serving the  purity  of  the  church  ;  that  obstinate  offen-
ders, whose  impious  tenets  or  profane  lives  were  a  re-
proach to  Christianity,  might  be  cut  off  from  the  society
of  the  faithful;  this,  ecclesiastics  did  not  scruple  to
convert  into  an  engine  for  promoting  their  own  power,
and  they  inflicted  it  on  the  most  frivolous  occasions.
Whoever  despised  any  of  their  decisions,  even  concern-
ing civil  matters,  immediately  incurred  this  dreadful
censure,  which  not  only  excluded  them  from  all  the
privileges  of  a  Christian,  but  deprived  them  of  their
rights  as  men  and  citizens  ;q  and  the  dread  of  this  ren-
dered even  the  most  fierce  and  turbulent  spirits  obse-
quious to  the  authority  of  the  church.
The  devices  Nor  did  the  clergy  neglect  the  proper  me-
thods  of  preserving  the  wealth  and  power  which
*key  had  acquired  with  such  industry  and  ad-
dress.  The  possessions  of  the  church,  being
consecrated  to  God,  were  declared  unalienable ;  so  that
the  funds  of  a  society  which  was  daily  gaining,  and
could  never  lose,  grew  to  be  immense.  In  Germany,
it  was  computed  that  the  ecclesiastics  had  got  into  their
hands  more  than  one  half  of  the  national  property/  In
other  countries,  the  proportion  varied ;  but  the  share
belonging  to  the  church  was  every  where  prodigious.
These  vast  possessions  were  not  subject  to  the  burdens
imposed  on  the  lands  of  the  laity.  The  German  clergy
were  exempted  by  law  from  all  taxes ;  and  if,  on  any

P  Centura  Gravam.  §  9.  56.  64.  1  Ibid.  §  31.  r  Ibid. §  28.

1520.]  BOOK  II.  43

extraordinary  emergence,  ecclesiastics  were  pleased  to
grant  some  aid  towards  supplying  the  public  exigencies,
this  was  considered  as  a  free  gift  flow-ing  from  their  own
generosity,  which  the  civil  magistrate  had  no  title  to
demand,  far  less  to  exact.8  In  consequence  of  this
strange  solecism  in  government,  the  kity  in  Germany
had  the  mortification  to  find  themselves  loaded  with  ex-
cessive impositions,  because  such  as  possessed  the
greatest  property  were  freed  from  any  obligation  to
support  or  to  defend  the  state.

The  Ger-  Grievous,  however,  as  the  exorbitant  wealth
man  eccie-  and  numerous  privileges  of  the  clerical  order

siastics  A  °

mostly  were  to  the  other  members  01  the  Germanic
body,  they  would  have  reckoned  it  some  miti-
gation of  the  evil,  if  these  had  been  possessed  only  by
ecclesiastics  residing  among  themselves,  who  would
have  been  less  apt  to  make  an  improper  use  of  their
riches,  or  to  exercise  their  rights  with  unbecoming
rigour.  But  the  bishops  of  Rome  having  early  put  in  a
claim,  the  boldest  that  ever  human  ambition  suggested,
of  being  supreme  and  infallible  heads  of  the  Christian
church ;  they,  by  their  profound  policy  and  unwearied
perseverance,  by  their  address  in  availing  themselves
of  every  circumstance  which  occurred,  by  taking  advan-
tage of  the  superstition  of  some  princes,  of  the  neces-
sities of  others,  and  of  the  credulity  of  the  people,  at
length  established  their  pretensions  in  opposition  both
to  the  interest  and  common  sense  of  mankind.  Germany
was  the  country  which  these  ecclesiastical  sovereigns
governed  with  most  absolute  authority.  They  excom-
municated and  deposed  some  of  its  most  illustrious
emperors,  and  excited  their  subjects,  their  ministers,
and  even  their  children,  to  take  arms  against  them.
Amidst  these  contests,  the  popes  continually  extended
their  own  immunities,  spoiling  the  secular  princes  gra-

•  Centum  Gravara.  §  28. Goldasti  Const.  Imper.  ii.  79.  108. Pfeffel  Hist,  du
Droit  Publ  350.  374.

44  CHARLES V.  [1520.

dually  of  their  most  valuable  prerogatives,  and  the
German  church  felt  all  the  rigour  of  that  oppression
which  flows  from  subjection  to  foreign  dominions,  and
foreign  exactions.

Noml  The  right  of  conferring  benefices,-  which  the

nated  by  popes  usurped  during;  that  period  of  confusion.

the  pope. ^ ^  - ..-  r-  , •

was  an  acquisition  01  great  importance,  and
exalted  the  ecclesiastical  power  upon  the  ruins  of  the
tempbral.  The  emperors  and  other  princes  of  Germany
had  long  been  in  possession  of  this  right,  which  served
to  increase  both  their  authority  and  their  revenue.  But
by  wresting  it  out  of  their  hands,  the  popes  were  en-
abled to  fill  the  empire  with  their  own  creatures ;  they
accustomed  a  great  body  of  every  prince's  subjects  to
depend,  not  upon  him  but  upon  the  Roman  see  ;  they
bestowed  upon  strangers  the  richest  benefices  in  every
country,  and  drained  their  wealth  to  supply  the  luxury
of  a  foreign  court.  Even  the  patience  of  the  most  super-
stitious ages  could  no  longer  bear  such  oppression  ;  and
so  loud  and  frequent  were  the  complaints  and  murmurs
of  the  Germans,  that  the  popes,  afraid  of  irritating  them
too  far,  consented,  contrary  to  their  usual  practice,  to
abate  somewhat  of  their  pretensions,  and  to  rest  satisfied
with  the  right  of  nomination  to  such  benefices  as  hap-
pened to  fall  vacant  during  six  months  in  the  year,  leav-
ing the  disposal  of  the  remainder  to  the  princes  and
other  legal  patrons.*

The  expe-  But  the  court  of  Rome  easily  found  expe-
restrainin'g  dients  for  eluding  an  agreement  which  put  such
of  the^pes  restl>aints  on  its  power.  The  practice  of  reserv-
ineffectuai.  ing  certain  benefices  in  every  country  to  the
pope's  immediate  nomination,  which  had  been  long
known,  and  often  complained  of,  was  extended  far  be-
yond its  ancient  bounds.  All  the  benefices  possessed
by  cardinals,  or  any  of  the  numerous  officers  in  the  Ro-
man court ;  those  held  by  persons  who  happened  to  die

1  F.  Paul,  Hist,  of  Eccles.  Beneft  2<M. Gold,  ConstU.  Impcr..  i.  408.

1520.]  BOOK II.  45

at  Rome,  or  within  forty  miles  of  that  city  on  their
journey  to  or  from  it ;  such  as  became  vacant  by  trans-
lation, with  many  others,  were  included  in  the  number
of  reserved  benefices ;  Julius  II.  and  Leo  X.  stretching
the  matter  to  the  utmost,  often  collated  to  benefices
where  the  right  of  reservation  had  not  been  declared,
on  pretence  of  having  mentally  reserved  this  privilege
to  themselves.  The  right  of  reservation,  however,  even
with  this  extension,  had  certain  limits,  as  it  could  be
exercised  only  where  the  benefice  was  actually  vacant ;
and  therefore,  in  order  to  render  the  exertion  of  papal
power  unbounded,  expectative  graces,  or  mandates  nomi-
nating a  person  to  succeed  to  a  benefice  upon  the  first
vacancy  that  should  happen,  were  brought  into  use.
By  means  of  these,  Germany  was  filled  with  persons
who  were  servilely  dependent  on  the  court  of  Rome,
from  which  they  had  received  such  reversionary  grants  ;
princes  were. defrauded,  in  a  great  degree,  of  their  pre-
rogatives ;  the  rights  of  lay-patrons  were  preoccupied,
and  rendered  almost  entirely  vain.u
Venaiit  of  The  manner  in  which  these  extraordinary
the  court  powers  were  exercised,  rendered  them  still
more  odious  and  intolerable.  The  avarice  and
extortion  of  the  court  of  Rome,  were  become  excessive
almost  to  a  proverb.  The  practice  of  selling  benefices
was  so  notorious,  that  no  pains  were  taken  to  conceal
or  to  disguise  it.  Companies  of  merchants  openly  pur-
chased the  benefices  of  different  districts  in  Germany
from  the  pope's  ministers,  and  retailed  them  at  an  ad-
vanced price. x  Pious  men  beheld  with  deep  regret  these
simoniacal  transactions,  so  unworthy  the  ministers  of  a
Christian  church  ;  while  politicians  complained  of  the
loss  sustained  by  the  exportation  of  so  much  wealth  in
that  irreligious  traffic.

u  Centum  Gravam. §  21. Fascic.  Rer.  expet.  &c.  334. Gold.  Const.  Ira  per.  i.
391.  404,  405. F.  Paul,  Hist,  of  Eccl.  Benef.  167.  199.
x  Fascic.  Rer.  expet.  i.  359.

_JO  CHARLES V.  [1520.

it  drained  ^he  sums>  indeed,  which  the  court  of  Rome
other  drew  by  its  stated  and  legal  impositions  from
ofuSr  all  the  countries  acknowledging  its  authority,
wealth.  were  go  conquerable,  that  it  is  not  strange  that
princes,  as  well  as  their  subjects,  murmured  at  the
smallest  addition  made  to  them  by  unnecessary  or  illicit
means.  Every  ecclesiastical  person,  upon  his  admis-
sion to  his  benefice,  paid  annats>  or  one  year's  produce
of  his  living,  to  the  pope ;  and  as  the  tax  was  exacted
with  great  rigour,  its  amount  was  very  great  To  this
must  be  added,  the  frequent  demands  made  by  the  popes
of  free  gifts  from  the  clergy,  together  with  the  extraor-
dinary levies  of  tenths  upon  ecclesiastical  benefices,  on
pretence  of  expeditions  against  the  Turks,  seldom  in-
tended, or  carried  into  execution ;  and  from  the  whole,
the  vast  proportion  of  the  revenues  of  the  church,  which
flowed  continually  to  Rome,  may  be  estimated.
The  united  Such  were  the  dissolute  manners,  the  exorbi-
aShthew  tant  wealth,  the  enormous  power  and  privileges
causes.  of  ^  clergy  before  the  Reformation ;  such  the
oppressive  rigour  of  that  dominion  which  the  popes  had
established  over  the  Christian  world;  and  such  the
sentiments  concerning  them  that  prevailed  in  Germany
at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Nor  has  this
sketch  been  copied  from  the  controversial  writers  of
that  age,  who,  in  the  heat  of  disputation,  may  be  sus-
pected of  having  exaggerated  the  errors,  or  of  having
misrepresented  the  conduct,  of  that  church  which  they
laboured  to  overturn ;  it  is  formed  upon  more  authentic
evidence,  upon  the  memorials  and  remonstrances  of
the  imperial  diets,  enumerating  the  grievances  under
which  the  empire  groaned,  in  order  to  obtain  the  re-
dress of  them.  Dissatisfaction  must  have  arisen  to  a
great  height  among  the  people,  when  these  grave  as-
semblies expressed  themselves  with  that  degree  of  acri-
mony which  abounds  in  their  remonstrances ;  and  if
they  demanded  the  abolition  of  these  enormities  with

1520.]  BOOK II.  47

so  much  vehemence,  the  people,  we  may  be  assured,
uttered  their  sentiments  and  desires  in  bolder  and  more
virulent  language.

Menpre-  To  men  thus  prepared  for  shaking  off  the
embrace  Y0^6'  Luther  addressed  himself  with  certainty
Luther's  of  success.  As  they  had  long  felt  its  weight,
and  had  borne  it  with  impatience,  they  listened
with  joy  to  the  first  offer  of  procuring  them  deliverance.
Hence  proceeded  the  fond  and  eager  reception  that  his
doctrines  met  with,  and  the  rapidity  with  which  they
And  to  to-  sPrea(i  °ver  all the  provinces  of  Germany.  Even
lerate  his  the  impetuosity  and  fierceness  of  Luther's  spirit,

defects.  .  r  V  .  . \

his  confidence  in  asserting  his  own  opinions,
and  the  arrogance  as  well  as  contempt  wherewith  he
treated  all  who  differed  from  him,  which,  in  ages  of
greater  moderation  and  refinement,  have  been  reckoned
defects  in  the  character  of  that  reformer,  did  not  appear
excessive  to  his  contemporaries,  whose  minds  were
strongly  agitated  by  those  interesting  controversies
which  he  carried  on,  and  who  had  themselves  endured
the  rigour  of  papal  tyranny,  and  seen  the  corruptions
in  the  church  against  which  he  exclaimed.

Nor  were  they  offended  at  that  gross  scurrility  with
which  his  polemical  writings  are  filled,  or  at  the  low
buffoonery  which  he  sometimes  introduces  into  his
gravest  discourses.  No  dispute  was  managed  in  those
rude  times  without  a  large  portion  of  the  former ;  and
the  latter  was  common,  even  on  the  most  solemn  occa-
sions, and  in  treating  the  most  sacred  subjects.  So  far
were  either  of  these  from  doing  hurt  to  his  cause,  that
invective  and  ridicule  had  some  effect,  as  well  as  more
laudable  arguments,  in  exposing  the  errors  of  Popery,
and  in  determining  mankind  to  abandon  them.
The  effect  Besides  all  these  causes  of  Luther's  rapid
progress,  arising  from  the  nature  of  his  enter-
Prise>  and  the  juncture  at  which  he  undertook
gress  of  the  it?  he  reaped  advantage  from  some  foreign
tionj  and  adventitious  circumstances,  the  beneficial

48  CHARLES V.  [1520.

influence  of  which  none  of  his  forerunners  in  the
same  course  had  enjoyed.  Among  these  may  be  rec-
koned the  invention  of  the  art  of  printing,  about  half
a  century  before  his  time.  By  this  fortunate  discovery,
the  facility  of  acquiring  and  of  propagating  knowledge
was  wonderfully  increased,  and  Luther's  books,  which
must  otherwise  have  made  their  way  slowly  and  with
uncertainty  into  distant  countries,  spread  at  once  all
over  Europe.  Nor  were  they  read  only  by  the  rich  and
the  learned,  who  alone  had  access  to  books  before  that
invention ;  they  got  into  the  hands  of  the  people,  who,
upon  this  appeal  to  them  as  judges,  ventured  to  ex-
amine and  to  reject  many  doctrines  which  they  had
formerly  been  required  to  believe,  without  being  taught
to  understand  them.

And  of  the  The  revival  of  learning  at  the  same  period
revival  of  was  a  circumstance  extremely  friendly  to  the
Reformation.  The  study  of  the  ancient  Greek
and  Roman  authors,  by  enlightening  the  human  mind
with  liberal  and  sound  knowledge,  roused  it  from  that
profound  lethargy  in  which  it  had  been  sunk  during
several  centuries.  Mankind  seem,  at  that  period,  to
have  recovered  the  powers  of  inquiring  and  of  thinking
for  themselves,  faculties  of  which  they  had  long  lost
the  use;  and  fond  of  the  acquisition,  they  exercised
them  with  great  boldness  upon  all  subjects.  They  were
not  now  afraid  of  entering  an  uncommon  path,  or  of
embracing  a  new  opinion.  Novelty  appears  rather  to
have  been  a  recommendation  of  a  doctrine;  and  in-
stead of  being  startled  when  the  daring  hand  of  Luther
drew  aside  or  tore  the  veil  which  covered  and  esta-
blished errors,  the  genius  of  the  age  applauded  and
aided  the  attempt.  Luther,  though  a  stranger  to  ele-
gance in  taste  or  composition,  zealously  promoted  the
cultivation  of  ancient  literature;  and  sensible  of  its
being  necessary  to  the  right  understanding  of  the
Scriptures,  he  himself  had  acquired  considerable  know-
ledge both  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  tongues.  Me-

1520.]  BOOK IT.  49

lancthon,  and  some  other  of  his  disciples,  were  eminent
proficients  in  the  polite  arts;  and  as  the  same  ignorant
monks  who  opposed  the  introduction  of  learning  into
Germany,  set  themselves  with  equal  fierceness  against
Luther's  opinions,  and  declared  the  good  reception  of
the  latter  to  be  the  effect  of  the  progress  which  the
former  had  made,  the  cause  of  learning  and  of  the  Re-
formation came  to  be  considered  as  closely  connected
with  each  other,  and,  in  every  country,  had  the  same
friends  and  the  same  enemies. This  enabled  the  refor-
mers to  carry  on  the  contest  at  first  with  great  supe-
riority. Erudition,  industry,  accuracy  of  sentiment,
purity  of  composition,  even  wit  and  raillery,  were  al-
most wholly  on  their  side,  and  triumphed  with  ease
over  illiterate  monks,  whose  rude  arguments,  expressed
in  a  perplexed  and  barbarous  style,  were  found  insuf-
ficient for  the  defence  of  a  system,  the  errors  of  which,
all  the  art  and  ingenuity  of  its  later  and  more  learned
advocates  have  not  been  able  to  palliate.
Luther  That  bold  spirit  of  inquiry,  which  the  revival

of  learning  excited  in  Europe,  was  so  favoura-

noht°w1sh  ble  to  tlie  Reformation,  that  Luther  was  aided
his  success.  jn  his  progress,  and  mankind  were  prepared  to
embrace  his  doctrines,  by  persons  who  did  not  wish
success  to  his  undertaking.  The  greater  part  of  the
ingenious  men  who  applied  to  the  study  of  ancient  li-
terature towards  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and
the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth,  though  they  had  no
intention,  and  perhaps  no  wish,  to  overturn  the  esta-
blished system  of  religion,  had  discovered  the  absurdity
of  many  tenets  and  practices  authorized  by  the  church,
and  perceived  the  futility  of  those  arguments  by  which
illiterate  monks  endeavoured  to  defend  them.  Their
contempt  of  these  advocates  for  the  received  errors,  led
them  frequently  to  expose  the  opinions  which  they
supported,  and  to  ridicule  their  ignorance  with  great
freedom  and  severity.  By  this,  men  were  prepared  for

VOL.  IV.  E

50  CHARLES  V.  [1520.

the  more  serious  attacks  made  upon  them  by  Luther,
and  their  reverence  both  for  the  doctrines  and  persons
against  whom  he  inveighed,  was  considerably  abated.
This  was  particularly  the  case  in  Germany.  When  the
first  attempts  were  made  to  revive  a  taste  for  ancient
learning  in  that  country,  the  ecclesiastics  there,  who
were  still  more  ignorant  than  their  brethren  on  the  other
side  of  the  Alps,  set  themselves  to  oppose  its  progress
with  more  active  zeal;  and  the  patrons  of  the  new
studies,  in  return,  attacked  them  with  greater  violence.
In  the  writings  of  Reuchl^n,  Hutten,  and  the  other  re-
vivers of  learning  in  Germany,  the  corruptions  of  the
church  of  Rome  are  censured  with  an  acrimony  of  style
little  inferior  to  that  of  Luther  himself/

From  the  same  cause  proceeded  the  frequent
strictures  of  Erasmus  upon  the  errors  of  the
church,  as  well  as  upon  the  ignorance  and  vices
of  the  clergy.  His  reputation  and  authority  were  so
high  in  Europe  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, and  his  works  were  read  with  such  universal  ad-
miration, that  the  effect  of  these  deserves  to  be  men-
tioned as  one  of  the  circumstances  which  contributed
considerably  towards  Luther's  success.  Erasmus,  hav-
ing been  destined  for  the  church,  and  trained  up  in
the  knowledge  of  ecclesiastical  literature,  applied  him-
self more  to  theological  inquiries  than  any  of  the  revivers
of  learning  in  that  age.  His  acute  judgment  and  ex-
tensive erudition  enabled  him  to  discover  many  errors,
both  in  the  doctrine  and  worship  of  the  Romish  church.
Some  of  these  he  confuted  with  great  solidity  of  reason-
ing and  force  of  eloquence.  Others  he  treated  as  ob-
jects of  ridicule,  and  turned  against  them  that  irresist-
ible torrent  of  popular  and  satirical  wit,  of  which  he
had  the  command.  There  was  hardly  any  opinion  or
practice  of  the  Romish  church  which  Luther  endea-

T  Gerdesius  Hist.  Evan.  Itenov.  vol.  j.  p.  141.  157. Seckend.  lib.  i.  p.  103.
Yonder  Hardt,  Hist.  Literar.  Reform,  pars  ii.

1520.]  BOOK  II.  51

voured  to  reform,  but  what  had  been  previously  ani-
madverted upon  by  Erasmus,  and  had  afforded  him
subject  either  of  censure  or  of  raillery.  Accordingly,
when  Luther  first  began  his  attack  upon  the  church,
Erasmus  seemed  to  applaud  his  conduct ;  he  courted
the  friendship  of  several  of  his  disciples  and  patrons,
and  condemned  the  behaviour  and  spirit  of  his  adver-
saries.2 He  concurred  openly  with  him  in  inveighing
against  the  school  divines,  as  the  teachers  of  a  system
equally  unedifying  and  obscure.  He  joined  him  in
endeavouring  to  turn  the  attention  of  men  to  the  study
of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  as  the  only  standard  of  religious
truth.a

Various  circumstances,  however,  prevented  Erasmus
from  holding  the  same  course  with  Luther.  The  na-
tural timidity  of  his  temper ;  his  want  of  that  strength
of  mind  which  alone  can  prompt  a  man  to  assume  the
character  of  a  reformer  ;b  his  excessive  deference  for
persons  in  high  station ;  his  dread  of  losing  the  pen-
sions and  other  emoluments,  which  their  liberality  had
conferred  upon  him ;  his  extreme  love  of  peace,  and
hopes  of  reforming  abuses  gradually,  and  by  gentle
methods,  all  concurred  in  determining  him  not  only  to
repress  and  to  moderate  the  zeal  with  which  he  ha'd
once  been  animated  against  the  errors  of  the  church,0
but  to  assume  the  character  of  a  mediator  between  Lu-
ther and  his  opponents.  But  though  Erasmus  soon
began  to  censure  Luther  as  too  daring  an(}  impetuous,
and  was  at  last  prevailed  upon  to  write  against  him,
he  must,  nevertheless,  be  considered  as  his  forerunner

*  Seckend.  lib.  i.  p.  40.  96.

*  Vender  Hardt,  Histor.  Literar.  Reform,  pars  i.  Gerdes.  Hist.  Evang.  Renov.
i.  147.

b  Erasmus  himself  is  candid  enough  to  acknowledge  this :  "  Luther,"  says  he,
"has  given  us  many  wholesome  doctrines,  and  many  a  good  counsel.  I  wish  he
had  not  defeated  the  effect  of  them  by  intolerable  faults.  But  if  he  had  written,
every  thing  in  the  most  unexceptionable  manner,  I  had  no  inclination,  to  die  for  the
sake  of  truth.  Every  man  hath  not  the  courage  requisite  to  make  a  martyr :  and  I
am  afraid,  that  if  I  were  put  to  the  trial,  I  should  imitate  St.  Peter,"  Epist,  Erasnri
in  Jortin's  Life  of  Erasm.  vol.  i.  p.  273.

c  Jortin's  Life  of  Erasmus,  vol.  i.  p.  258.

E2

.32  CHARLES  V.  [1520

and  auxiliary  in  this  war  upon  the  church.  He  first
scattered  the  seeds,  which  Luther  cherished  and  brought
to  maturity.  His  raillery  and  oblique  censures  pre-
pared the  way  for  Luther's  invectives  and  more  direct
attacks.  In  this  light  Erasmus  appeared  to  the  zealous
defenders  of  the  Romish  church  in  his  own  times.d  In
this  light  he  must  be  considered  by  every  person  con-
versant in  the  history  of  that  period.

In  this  long  enumeration  of  the  circumstances  which
combined  in  favouring  the  progress  of  Luther's  opinions,
or  in  weakening  the  resistance  of  his  adversaries,  I
have  avoided  entering  into  any  discussion  of  the  theo-
logical doctrines  of  Popery,  and  have  not  attempted  to
shew  how  repugnant  they  are  to  the  spirit  of  Chris-
tianity, and  how  destitute  of  any  foundation  in  reason,
in  the  word  of  God,  or  in  the  practice  of  the.  primitive
church,  leaving  those  topics  entirely  to  ecclesiastical
historians,  to  whose  province  they  peculiarly  belong.
But  when  we  add  the  effect  of  these  religious  consi-
derations to  the  influence  of  political  causes,  it  is  ob-
vious that  the  united  operation  of  both  on  the  human
mind  must  have  been  sudden  and  irresistible.  Though,
to  Luther's  contemporaries,  who  were  too  near  perhaps
to  the  scene,  or  too  deeply  interested  in  it,  to  trace
causes  with  accuracy,  or  to  examine  them  with  cool-
ness, the  rapidity  with  which  his  opinions  spread,
appeared  to  be  so  unaccountable,  that  some  of  them
imputed  it  to  a  certain  uncommon  and  malignant  po-
sition of  the  stars,  which  scattered  the  spirit  of  giddi-
ness and  innovation  over  the  world  ;e  it  is  evident,  that
the  success  of  the  Reformation  was  the  natural  effect
of  many  powerful  causes  prepared  by  peculiar  Provi-
dence, and  happily  conspiring  to  that  end.  This  at-
tempt to  investigate  these  causes,  and  to  throw  light  on
an  event,  so  singular  and  important,  will  not,  perhaps,

d  Vondes  Hardt,  Hist.  Literar.  Reform,  pars.  i.  p.  2.
«  Jovii  Historia,  Lot.  1553,  fol.  p.  134.

1521.]  BOOK  II.  53

be  deemed  an  unnecessary  digression. 1  return  from

it  to  the  course  of  the  history.

Proceed-  The  diet  at  Worms  conducted  its  delibera-
ings  of  the  tions  with  that  slow  formality  peculiar  to  such
Worms,  assemblies.  Much  time  was  spent  in  establish-
ing some  regulations  with  regard  to  the  internal
police  of  the  empire.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  imperial
chamber  was  confirmed,  and  the  forms  of  its  proceeding
rendered  more  fixed  and  regular.  A  council  of  re-
gency was  appointed  to  assist  Ferdinand  in  the  govern-
ment of  the  empire  during  any  occasional  absence  of
the  emperor ;  which,  from  the  extent  of  the  emperor's
dominions,  as  well  as  the  multiplicity  of  fyis  affairs,
was  an  event  that  might  be  frequently  expected/  The
The  em-  s^te  of  religion  was  then  taken  into  consider-
P.eer^swith  ation.  There  were  not  wanting  some  plausible
regard  to  reasons  which  might  ha ve  induced  Charles  to
have  declared  himself  the  protector  of  Luther's
cause,  or  at  least  to  have  connived  at  its  progress.  If
he  had  possessed  no  other  dominions  but  those  which
belonged  to  him  in  Germany,  and  no  other  crown
besides  the  imperial,  he  might  have  been  disposed,
perhaps,  to  favour  a  man,  who  asserted  so  boldly  the
privileges  and  immunities  for  which  the  empire  had
struggled  so  long  with  the  popes.  But  the  vast  and
dangerous  schemes  which  Francis  I.  was  forming  against
Charles,  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  regulate  his  con-
duct by  views  more  extensive  than  those  which  would
have  suited  a  German  prince ;  and  it  being  of  the  ut-
most importance  to  secure  the  pope's  friendship,  this
determined  him  to  treat  Luther  with  great  severity,  as
the  most  effectual  method  of  soothing  Leo  into  a  con-
currence with  his  measures.  His  eagerness  to  accom-
plish this,  rendered  him  not  unwilling  to  gratify  the
papal  legates  in  Germany,  who  insisted  that,  without
any  delay  or  formal  deliberation,  the  diet  ought  to

f  Pont.  Heuter.  Rer.  Auslr.  lib.  viii.  ch.  11.  p.  195.  Pfeffel  Abrege  Chron.p.  598.

54  CHARLES V.  [1521.

condemn  a  man  whom  the  pope  had  already  excommu-
nicated as  an  incorrigible  heretic. Such  an  abrupt
manrler  of  proceeding,  however,  being  deemed  unpre-
cedented and  unjust  by  the  members  of  the

He  is  sura-  .

moned  to diet,  they  made  a  point  of  Luther's  appearing

in  person,  and  declaring  whether  he  adhered  or

not  to  those  opinions  which  had  him  drawn  upon  the

censures  of  the  church.g Not  only  the  emperor,  but  all

the  princes  through  whose  territories  he  had  to  pass,

granted  him  a  safe- conduct ;  and  Charles  wrote

March  6. « .  . .  . .

to  him  at  the  same  time,  requiring  his  imme-
diate attendance  on  the  diet,  and  renewing  his  promises
of  protection  from  any  injury  or  violence.11  Luther  did
not  hesitate  one  moment  about  yielding  obedience,  and
set  out  for  Worms,  attended  by  the  herald  who  had
brought  the  emperor's  letter  and  safe-conduct.  While
on  his  journey,  many  of  his  friends,  whom  the  fate  of
Huss  under  similar  circumstances,  and  notwithstanding
the  same  security  of  an  imperial  safe-conduct,  filled
His  un-  w*tn  solicitude,  advised  him  not  to  rush  wan-
tonty  *nto  ^e  midst  of  danger.  But  Luther,
superior  to  such  terrors,  silenced  them  with  this
reply;  "  I  am  lawfully  called,"  said  he,  "to  appear  in
that  city,  and  thither  will  I  go  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,
though  as  many  devils  as  there  are  tiles  on  the  houses
were  there  combined  against  me."1
His  -  The  reception  which  he  met  with  at  Worms,

Wo  m  Was  SUCk  as  **e  nught  have  reckoned  a  full  re-
ward of  all  his  labours,  if  vanity  and  the  love
of  applause  had  been  the  principles  by  which  he  was
influenced.  Greater  crowds  assembled  to  behold  him,
than  had  appeared  at  the  emperor's  public  entry;  his
apartments  were  daily  filled  with  princes  and  person-
ages of  the  highest  rank,k  and  he  was  treated  with  all
the  respect  paid  to  those  who  possess  the  power  of  di-

*  P.  Mart.  Ep.  722.  h  Luth.  Oper.  ii.  411.  *  Ibid.  412.

k  Seekend.  156. Luth.  Oper.  ii.  414.

The  man-
ner of  his
appear-
ance.

1521.]  BOOK II.  55

recting  the  understanding  and  sentiments  of  other  men;
an  homage,  more  sincere,  as  well  as  more  flattering,
than  any  which  pre-eminence  in  birth  or  condition  can
command.  At  his  appearance  before  the  diet,
^e  behaved  With  great  decency,  and  with  equal
firmness.  He  readily  acknowledged  an  excess
of  vehemence  and  acrimony  in  his  controversial  writ-
ings, but  refused  to  retract  his  opinions,  unless  he  were
convinced  of  their  falsehood ;  or  to  consent  to  their
being  tried  by  any  other  rule  than  the  word  of  God.
When  neither  threats  nor  entreaties  could  prevail  on
him  to  depart  from  this  resolution,  some  of  the  ecclesi-
astics proposed  to  imitate  the  example  of  the  council  of
Constance,  and  by  punishing  the  author  of  this  pestilent
heresy,  who  was  now  in  their  power,  to  deliver  the
church  at  once  from  such  an  evil.  But  the  members
of  the  diet  refusing  to  expose  the  German  integrity  to
fresh  reproach  by  a  second  violation  of  public  faith ;
and  Charles  being  no  less  unwilling  to  bring  a  stain
upon  the  beginning  of  his  administration  by  such  an
ignominious  action,  Luther  was  permitted  to  depart  in
April  26.  safety.1  A  few  days  after  he  left  the  city,  a  severe
edict  was  published  in  the  emperor's  name,  and
by  authority  of  the  diet,  depriving  him,  as  an
obstinate  and  excommunicated  criminal,  of  all  the  pri-
vileges which  he  enjoyed  as  a  subject  of  the  empire,
forbidding  any  prince  to  harbour  or  protect  him,  and
requiring  all  to  concur  in  seizing  his  person  as  soon  as
the  term  specified  in  his  safe-conduct  was  expired."1
He  is  seized  But  this  rigorous  decree  had  no  considerable
ceaied°at  effect,  the  execution  of  it  being  prevented,
Wartburg.  partly  by  the  multiplicity  of  occupations  which
the  commotions  in  Spain,  together  with  the  wars  in
Italy  and  the  Low  Countries,  created  to  the  emperor ;
and  partly  by  a  prudent  precaution  employed  by  the
elector  of  Saxony,  Luther's  faithful  and  discerning  pa-

»  Paul,  Hist,  of  Counc.  p.  13. Seek.  160.  »  Gold.  Const.  Imper.  ii.  401.

Edict

against

him.

50  CHARLES V.  [1521.

tron.  As  Luther,  on  his  return  from  Worms,  was  pass-
ing near  Altenstein  in  Thuringia,  a  number  of  horsemen
in  masks  rushed  suddenly  out  of  a  wood,  where  the
elector  had  appointed  them  to  lie  in  wait  for  him,  and
surrounding  his  company,  carried  him,  after  dismissing
all  his  attendants,  to  Wartburg,  a  strong  castle  not  far
distant.  There  the  elector  ordered  him  to  be  supplied
with  every  thing  necessary  or  agreeable ;  but  the  place
of  his  retreat  was  carefully  concealed,  until  the  fury  of
the  present  storm  against  him  began  to  abate,  upon  a
change  in  the  political  situation  of  Europe.  In  this
solitude,  where  he  remained  nine  months,  and  which
he  frequently  called  his  Patmos,  after  the  name  of  that
island  to  which  the  apostle  John  was  banished,  he  ex-
erted his  usual  vigour  and  industry  in  defence  of  his
doctrines,  or  in  confutation  of  his  adversaries,  publish-
ing several  treatises,  which  revived  the  spirit  of  his  fol-
lowers, astonished  to  a  great  degree,  and  disheartened,
at  the  sudden  disappearance  of  their  leader.

During  his  confinement,  his  opinions  conti-

Progress  & .  _  . . r,

of  his  nued  to  gam  ground,  acquiring  the  ascendant
in  almost  every  city  in  Saxony.  At  this  time,
the  Augustinians  of  Wittemberg,  with  the  approbation
of  the  university,  and  the  connivance  of  the  elector,
ventured  upon  the  first  step  towards  an  alteration  in
the  established  forms  of  public  worship,  by  abolishing
the  celebration  of  private  masses,  and  by  giving  the  cup
as  well  as  the  bread  to  the  laity,  in  administering  the
sacrament  of  the  Lprd's  supper.

Decree  of  Whatever  consolation  the  courage  and  suc-
verstyof  cess  of  his  disciples,  or  the  progress  of  his  doc-
de^ning11  trines  ^  his  own  country,  afforded  Luther  in  his
them.  retreat,  he  there  received  information  of  two
events  which  considerably  damped  his  joy,  as  they
seemed  to  lay  insuperable  obstacles  in  the  way  of  pro-
pagating his  principles  in  the  two  most  powerful  king-
doms of  Europe.  One  was  a  solemn  decree,  condemn-

1521.]  BOOK II.  57

ing  his  opinions,  published  by  the  university  of  Paris,
the  most  ancient,  and,  at  that  time,  the  most  respecta-
ble, of  the  learned  societies  in  Europe.  The  other  was
Henry  ^ie  answer  written  to  his  book  concerning  the
Babylonish  captivity  by  Henry  VIII.  of  England,
against  That  monarch,  having  been  educated  under  the
eye  of  a  suspicious  father,  who,  in  order  to
prevent  his  attending  to  business,  kept  him  occupied  in
the  study  of  literature,  still  retained  a  greater  love  of
learning,  and  stronger  habits  of  application  to  it,  than
are  common  among  princes  of  so  active  a  disposition,
and  such  violent  passions.  Being  ambitious  of  acquir-
ing glory  of  every  kind,  as  well  as  zealously  attached
to  the  Romish  church,  and  highly  exasperated  against
Luther,  who  had  treated  Thomas  Aquinas,  his  favourite
author,  with  great  contempt,  Henry  did  not  think  it
enough  to  exert  his  royal  authority  in  opposing  the
opinions  of  the  reformer,  but  resolved  likewise  to
combat  them  with  scholastic  weapons.  With  this  view
*he  published  his  treatise  on  the  Seven  Sacraments,
which,  though  forgotten  at  present,  as  books  of  contro-
versy always  are,  when  the  occasion  that  produced
them  is  past,  is  not  destitute  of  polemical  ingenuity
and  acuteness,  and  was  represented  by  the  flattery  of
his  courtiers  to  be  a  work  of  such  wonderful  science
and  learning,  as  exalted  him  no  less  above  other  authors
in  merit,  than  he  was  distinguished  among  them  by  his
rank.  The  pope,  to  whom  it  was  presented  with  the
greatest  formality  in  full  consistory,  spoke  of  it  in  such
terms,  as  if  it  had  been  dictated  by  immediate  inspira-
tion; and,  as  a  testimony  of  the  gratitude  of  the  church
for  his  extraordinary  zeal,  conferred  on  him  the  title  of
Defender  of  the  Faith,  an  appellation  which  Henry  soon
forfeited  in  the  opinion  of  those  from  whom  he  derived
it,  and  which  is  still  retained  by  his  successors,  though
the  avowed  enemies  of  those  opinions,  by  contending
for  which  he  merited  that  honourable  distinction.

58  CHARLES V.  [1521.

Luther's Luther,  who  was  not  overawed,  either  by  the
reply  to authority  of  the  university,  or  the  dignity  of

the  monarch,  soon  published  his  animadversions
on  both,  in  a  style  no  less  vehement  and  severe,  than  he
would  have  used  in  confuting  his  meanest  antagonist.
This  indecent  boldness,  instead  of  shocking  his  contem-
poraries, was  considered  by  them  as  a  new  proof  of  his
undaunted  spirit.  A  controversy  managed  by  disputants
so  illustrious,  drew  universal  attention ;  and  such  was
the  contagion  of  the  spirit  of  innovation,  diffused  through
Europe  in  that  age,  and  so  powerful  the  evidence  which
accompanied  the  doctrines  of  the  reformers  on  their  first
publication,  that,  in  spite  both  of  the  civil  and  ecclesi-
astical powers  combined  against  them,  they  daily  gained
converts  both  in  France  and  in  England,
state  of  How  desirous  soever  the  emperor  .might  be
bSen  to  Put  a  st°P  to  Luther's  progress,  he  was  often
Charles  and  obliged,  during  the  diet  at  Worms,  to  turn  his

thoughts  to  matters  still  more  interesting,  and
which  demanded  more  immediate  attention.  A  war
was  ready  to  break  out  between  him  and  the  French
king,  in  Navarre,  in  the  Low  Countries,  and  in  Italy ;
and  it  required  either  great  address  to  avert  the  danger,
or  timely  and  wise  precautions  to  resist  it.  Every  cir-
cumstance, at  that  juncture,  inclined  Charles  to  prefer
the  former  measure.  Spain  was  torn  with  intestine
commotions.  In  Italy  he  had  not  hitherto  secured  the
assistance  of  any  one  ally.  In  the  Low  Countries,  his
subjects  trembled  at  the  thoughts  of  a  rupture  with
France,  the  fatal  effects  of  which  on  their  commerce
they  had  often  experienced.  From  these  considera-
tions, as  well  as  from  the  solicitude  of  Chievres,  during
his  whole  administration,  to  maintain  peace  between
the  two  monarchs,  proceeded  the  emperor's  backward-
ness to  commence  hostilities.  But  Francis  and  his
ministers  did  not  breathe  the  same  pacific  spirit.  He
easily  foresaw  that  concord  could  not  long  subsist,

1521.]  BOOK II.  59

where  interest,  emulation,  and  ambition,  conspired  to
dissolve  it;  and  he  possessed  several  advantages  which
flattered  him  with  the  hopes  of  surprising  his  rival,  and
of  overpowering  him  before  he  could  put  himself  in  a
posture  of  defence.  The  French  king's  dominions,  from
their  compact  situation,  from  their  subjection  to  the
royal  authority,  from  the  genius  of  the  people,  fond  of
war,  and  attached  to  their  sovereign  by  every  tie  of
duty  and  affection,  were  more  capable  of  a  great  or
sudden  effort,  than  the  larger  but  disunited  territories
of  the  emperor,  in  one  part  of  which  the  people  were
in  arms  against  his  ministers,  and  in  all  his  prerogative
was  more  limited  than  that  of  his  rival.
Henry  The  only  princes,  in  whose  power  it  was  to
^urathe  have  kept  down,  or  to  have  extinguished  this
emperor,  flame  on  its  first  appearance,  either  neglected  to
exert  themselves,  or  were  active  in  kindling  and  spread-
ing it.  Henry  VIII.,  though  he  affected  to  assume  the
name  of  mediator,  and  both  parties  made  frequent  ap-
peals to  him,  had  laid  aside  the  impartiality  which  suited
that  character.  Wolsey,  by  his  artifices,  had  estranged
him  so  entirely  from  the  French  king,  that  he  secretly
fomented  the  discord  which  he  ought  to  have  composed,
and  waited  only  for  some  decent  pretext  to  join  his  arms
to  those  of  the  emperor."

Leo  hesi-  Leo's  endeavours  to  excite  discord  between
tweeiuhe  ^e  emPeror  and  Francis  were  more  avowed,  and
rivals.  nad  greater  influence.  Not  only  his  duty,  as  the
common  father  of  Christendom,  but  his  interest  as  an
Italian  potentate,  called  upon  the  pope  to  act  as  the
guardian  of  the  public  tranquillity,  and  to  avoid  any
measure  that  might  overturn  the  system,  which,  after
much  bloodshed,  and  many  negotiations,  was  now  esta-
blished in  Italy.  Accordingly  Leo,  who  instantly  dis-
cerned the  propriety  of  this  conduct,  had  formed  a
scheme,  upon  Charles's  promotion  to  the  imperial  dig-

"  Herbert. Fiddes's  Life  of  Wolsey,  258.

60  CHARLES V.  [1521.

nity,  of  rendering himself  the umpire  between  the
rivals,  by  soothing  them  alternately,  while  he  entered
into  no  close  confederacy  with  either ;  and  a  pontiff
less  ambitious  and  enterprising  might  have  saved  Eu-
rope from  many  calamities  by  adhering  to  this  plan.
But  this  high-spirited  prelate,  who  was  still  in  the  prime
of  life,  longed  passionately  to  distinguish  his  pontificate
by  some  splendid  action. He  was  impatient  to  wash
away  the  infamy  of  having  lost  Parma  and  Placentia,
the  acquisition  of  which  reflected  so  much  lustre  on  the
administration  of  his  predecessor  Julius. He  beheld,
with  the  indignation  natural  to  Italians  in  that  age,  the
dominion  which  the  Transalpine,  or,  as  they,  in  imita-
tion of  the  Roman  arrogance,  denominated  them,  the
barbarous  nations,  had  attained  in  Italy. He  flattered
himself  that,  after  assisting  the  one  monarch  .to  strip  the
other  of  his  possessions  in  that  country,  he  might  find
means  of  driving  out  the  victor  in  his  turn,  and  acquire
the  glory  of  restoring  Italy  to  the  liberty  and  happiness
which  it  had  enjoyed  before  the  invasion  of  Charles
VIII.,  when  every  state  was  governed  by  its  native
princes,  or  its  own  laws,  and  unacquainted  with  a  fo-
reign yoke. Extravagant  and  chimerical  as  this  pro-
ject may  seem,  it  was  the  favourite  object  of  almost
every  Italian  eminent  for  genius  or  enterprise  during
great  part  of  the  sixteenth  century.  They  vainly  hoped
that,  by  superior  skill  in  the  artifices  and  refinements
of  negotiation,  they  should  be  able  to  baffle  the  efforts
of  nations,  less  polished,  indeed,  than  themselves,  but
much  more  powerful  and  warlike. So  alluring  was  the
prospect  of  this  to  Leo,  that,  notwithstanding  the  gen-
tleness of  his  disposition,  and  his  fondness  for  the  plea-
sures of  a  refined  and  luxurious  ease,  he  hastened  to
disturb  the  peace  of  Europe,  and  to* plunge  himself
into  a  dangerous  war,  with  an  impetuosity  scarcely  in-
ferior to  that  of  the  turbulent  and  martial  Julius.0

0  Guic.  lib.  xiv.  p.  173.

1521.]  BOOK If.  61

It  was  in  Leo's  power,  however,  to  choose  which  of
the  monarchs  he  would  take  for  his  confederate  against
the  other. Both  of  them  courted  his  friendship ;  he
wavered  for  some  time  between  them,  and  at  first  con-
cluded an  alliance  with  Francis. The  object  of  this
treaty  was  the  conquest  of  Naples,  which  the  confede-
rates agreed  to  divide  between  them. The  pope,  it  is
probable,  flattered  himself,  that  the  brisk  and  active
spirit  of  Francis,  seconded  by  the  same  qualities  in  his
subjects,  would  get  the start  of  the  slow  and  wary
councils  of  the  emperor,  and  that  they  might  overrun
with  ease  this  detached  portion  of  his  dominions,  ill
provided  for  defence,  and  always  the  prey  of  every
invader.  Bat  whether  the  French  king,  by  discovering
too  openly  his  suspicion  of  Leo's  sincerity,  disappointed
these  hopes ;  whether  the  treaty  was  only  an  artifice  of
the pope's,  to cover the  more serious  negotiations
which  he  was  carrying  on  with  Charles;  whether  he
was  enticed  by  the  prospect  of  reaping  greater  advan-
tages from  a  union  with  that  prince;  or  whether  he  was
soothed  by  the  zeal  which  Charles  had  manifested  for
the honour of  the church in condemning  Luther;
Concludes  certain  it  is,  that  he  soon  deserted  his  new  ally,
iftP** and  made  overtures  of  friendship,  though  with
Charles. great  secrecy,  to  the  emperor.p Don  John  Ma-
nuel, the  same  man  who  had  been  the  favourite  of  Phi-
lip, and  whose  address  had  disconcerted  all  Ferdinand's
schemes,  having  been  delivered,  upon  the  death  of  that
monarch,  from  the  prison  to  which  he  had  been  con-
fined, was  now  the  imperial  ambassador  at  Rome,  and
fully  capable  of  improving  this  favourable  disposition
of  the  pope  to  his  master's  advantaged To  him  the
conduct  of  this  negotiation  was  entirely  committed;
and  being  carefully  concealed from  Chievres,  whose
aversion  to  a  war  with  France  would  have  prompted

P  Guic.  lib.  xiv.  p.  175. Mem.  deBellay,  Par.  1573,  p.  24.
i  Jovii  Vita  Leonis,  lib,  iv.  p.  89.

(J2  CHARLES V.  [1521.

him  to  retard  or  to  defeat  it,  an  alliance  between  the
pope  and  emperor  was  quickly  concluded/  The
chief  articles  in  this  treaty,  which  proved  the
foundation  of  Charles's  grandeur  in  Italy,  were,  that
the  pope  and  emperor  should  join  their  forces  to  expel
the  French  out  of  the  Milanese,  the  possession  of  which
should  be  granted  to  Francis  Sforza,  a  son  of  Ludovico
the  Moor,  who  had  resided  at  Trent  since  the  time  that
his  brother  Maximilian  had  been  dispossessed  of  his
dominions  by  the  French  king ;  that  Parma  and  Placen-
tia  should  be  restored  to  the  church ;  that  the  emperor
should  assist  the  pope  in  conquering  Ferrara;  that  the
annual  tribute  paid  by  the  kingdom  of  Naples  to  the
holy  see  should  be  increased ;  that  the  emperor  should
take  the  family  of  Medici  under  his  protection ;  that  he
should  grant  to  the  cardinal  of  that  name  a  pension  of
ten  thousand  ducats  upon  the  archbishopric  of  Toledo;
and  should  settle  lands  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples  to  the
same  value  upon  Alexander  the  natural  son  of  Lorenzo
de  Medici.

Death  of  The  transacting  an  affair  of  such  moment
the'empe-  without  his  participation,  appeared  to  Chievres
vourite  and  so  decisive  a  proof  of  his  having  lost  the  as-
minister.  cendant  which  he  had  hitherto  maintained  over
the  mind  of  his  pupil,  that  his  chagrin  on  this  account,
added  to  the  melancholy  with  which  he  was  over-
whelmed on  taking  a  view  of  the  many  and  unavoidable
calamities  attending  a  war  against  France,  is  said  to
have  shortened  his  days.3  But  though  this,  perhaps,
may  be  only  the  conjecture  of  historians,  fond  of  attri-
buting every  thing  that  befalls  illustrious  personages  to
extraordinary  causes,  and  of  ascribing  even  their  dis-
eases and  death  to  the  effect  of  political  passions  which
are  more  apt  to  disturb  the  enjoyment  than  to  abridge
the  period  of  life,  it  is  certain  that  his  death,  at  this

r  Guic.  1.  xiv.  181. Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  24. Du  Mont.  Corps  Diplom.  torn.  iv.
suppl.  p.  96.  *  Belcarii  Comment,  de  Reb.  Gallic.  483.

1521.]  BOOK II.  (33

critical  juncture,  extinguished  all  hopes  of  avoiding  a
rupture  with  France.1  This  event,  too,  delivered  Charles
from  a  minister,  to  whose  authority  he  had  been  accus-
tomed from  his  infancy  to  submit  with  such  implicit
deference,  as  checked  and  depressed  his  genius,  and
retained  him  in  a  state  of  pupillage,  unbecoming  his
years  as  well  as  his  rank.  But  this  restraint  being  re-
moved, the  native  powers  of  his  mind  were  permitted
to  unfold  themselves,  and  he  began  to  display  such
great  talents,  both  in  council  and  in  action,  as  exceeded
the  hopes  of  his  contemporaries,11  and  command  the
admiration  of  posterity.

Commence-  While  the  pope  and  emperor  were  prepar-
tuitiefin08  ing?  in  consequence  of  their  secret  alliance,  to
Navarre,  attack  Milan,  hostilities  commenced  in  another
quarter.  The  children  of  John  d'Albret,  king  of  Na-
varre, having  often  demanded  the  restitution  of  their  he-
reditary dominions,  in  terms  of  the  treaty  of  Noyon,  and
Charles  having  as  often  eluded  their  requests  upon
very  frivolous  pretexts,  Francis  thought  himself  au-
thorized by  that  treaty  to  assist  the  exiled  family.  The
juncture  appeared  extremely  favourable  for  such  an  en-
terprise. Charles  was  at  a  distance  from  that  part  of
his  dominions ;  the  troops  usually  stationed  there,  had
been  called  away  to  quell  the  commotions  in  Spain ;  the
Spanish  malecontents  warmly  solicited  him  to  invade
Navarre,x  in  which  a  considerable  faction  was  ready  to
declare  for  the  descendants  of  their  ancient  monarchs.
But  in  order  to  avoid,  as  much  as  possible,  giving  of-
fence to  the  emperor,  or  king  of  England,  Francis  di-
rected forces  to  be  levied,  and  the  war  to  be  carried
on,  not  in  his  own  name,  but  in  that  of  Henry  d'Albret.
The  conduct  of  these  troops  was  committed  to  Andrew
de  Foix  de  1'Esparre,  a  young  nobleman,  whom  his
near  alliance  to  the  unfortunate  king  whose  battles  he

4  P.  Heuter.  Rer.  Austr.  lib.  viii.  c.  11.  p.  197.
u  P.  Mart.  Ep.  735.  *  Ibid. 721.

64  CHARLES V.  [1521.

was  to  fight,  and  what  was  still  more  powerful,  the  in-
terest of  his  sister,  madame  de  Chateaubriand,  Francis's
favourite  mistress,  recommended  to  that  important
trust,  for  which  he  had  neither  talents  nor  experience.

n°  arm m  tne  ^e^  to

Pro  ress

of  the  him,  he  became  master,  in  a  few  days,  of  the
whole  kingdom  of  Navarre,  without  meeting
with  any  obstruction  but  from  the  citadel  of  Pampeluna.
The  additional  works  to  this  fortress,  begun  by  Ximenes,
were  still  unfinished;  nor  would  its  slight  resistance
have  deserved  notice,  if  Ignatio  Loyola,  a  Biscayan
gentleman,  had  not  been  dangerously  wounded  in  its
defence.  During  the  progress  of  a  lingering  cure,
Loyola  happened  to  have  no  other  amusement  than
what  he  found  in  reading  the  lives  of  the  saints  :  the
effect  of  this  on  his  mind,  naturally  enthusiastic  but
ambitious  and  daring,  was  to  inspire  him  with  such  a
desire  of  emulating  the  glory  of  these  fabulous  worthies
of  the  Romish  church,  as  led  him  into  the  wildest  and
most  extravagant  adventures,  which  terminated  at  last
in  instituting  the  '  society  of  Jesuits,  the  most  political
and  best  regulated  of  all  the  monastic  orders,  and  from
which  mankind  have  derived  more  advantages,  and
received  greater  injury,  than  from  any  other  of  those
religious  fraternities.

They  enter  If,  upon  the  reduction  of  Pampeluna,  L'Es-
parre  had  been  satisfied  with  taking  proper  pre-
cautions for  securing  his  conquest,  the  kingdom  of  Na-
varre might  still  have  remained  annexed  to  the  crown
of  France,  in  reality,  as  well  as  in  title.  But,  pushed  on
by  youthful  ardour,  and  encouraged  by  Francis,  who
was  too  apt  to  be  dazzled  with  success,  he  ventured
to  pass  the  confines  of  Navarre,  and  to  lay  siege  to  Lo-
grogno,  a  small  town  in  Castile.  This  roused  the  Cas-
tilians,  who  had  hitherto  beheld  the  rapid  progress  of
his  arms  with  great  unconcern,  and  the  dissensions  in
that  kingdom  (of  which  a  full  account  shall  be  given)

1521.]  BOOK II.  05

being  almost  composed,  both  parties  exerted  themselves
with  emulation  in  defence  of  their  country ;  the  one,
that  it  might  efface  the  memory  of  past  misconduct  by
its  present  zeal ;  the  other,  that  it  might  add  to  the  merit
of  having  subdued  the  emperor's  rebellious  subjects,
that  of  repulsing  his  foreign  enemies.  The  sudden
advance  of  their  troops,  together  with  the  gallant  de-
fence made  by  the  inhabitants  of  Logrogno,  obliged
the  French  general  to  abandon  his  rash  enterprise.
They  are  The  Spanish  army  which  increased  every  day,
^driven  harassing  him  during  his  retreat,  he,  instead  of
out  °f  taking  shelter  under  the  cannon  of  Pampeluna,

Navarre.  °. .  -  . , „  i  - i

or  waiting  the  arrival  of  some  troops  which
were  marching  to  join  him,  attacked  the  Spaniards,
though  far  superior  to  him  in  number,  with  great  im-
petuosity, but  with  so  little  conduct,  that  his  forces  were
totally  routed,  he  himself,  together  with  his  principal
officers,  was  taken  prisoner,  and  Spain  recovered  pos-
session of  Navarre  in  still  shorter  time  than  the  French
had  spent  in  the  conquest  of  it.y

Hostilities  While  Francis  endeavoured  to  justify  his  in-
thf  LOW  vasi°n  °f  Navarre,  by  carrying  it  on  in  the  name
Countries.  of  Henry  d'Albret,  he  had  recourse  to  an  arti-
fice much  of  the  same  kind,  in  attacking  another  part
of  the  emperor's  territories.  Robert  de  la  Mark,  lord
of  the  small  but  independent  territory  of  Bouillon,  situ-
ated on  the  frontiers  of  Luxembourg  and  Champagne,
having  abandoned  Charles's  service  on  account  of  an
encroachment  which  the  Aulic  council  had  made  on  his
jurisdiction,  and  having  thrown  himself  upon  France
for  protection,  was  easily  persuaded,  in  the  heat  of  his
resentment,  to  send  a  herald  to  Worms,  and  to  declare
war  against  the  emperor  in  form.  Such  extravagant
insolence  in  a  petty  prince  surprised  Charles,  and  ap-
peared to  him  a  certain  proof  of  his  having  received
promises  of  powerful  support  from  the  French  king.

y  Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  21. P.  Mart.  Ep.  726.
VOL.  IV.  F

(jO  CHARLES V.  [1521.

The  justness  of  this  conclusion  soon  became  evident.
Robert  entered  the  duchy  of  Luxembourg  with  troops
levied  in  France,  by  the  king's  connivance,  though
seemingly  in  contradiction  to  his  orders,  and  after
ravaging  the  open  country,  laid  siege  to  Vireton.  Of
this  Charles  complained  loudly,  as  a  direct  violation  of
the  peace  subsisting  between  the  two  crowns,  and  sum-
moned Henry  VIII.,  in  terms  of  the  treaty  concluded  at
London  in  the  year  1518,  to  turn  his  arms  against  Fran-
cis as  the  first  aggressor.  Francis  pretended  that  he
was  not  answerable  for  Robert's  conduct,  whose  army
fought  under  his  own  standards  and  in  his  own  quarrel ;
and  affirmed,  that,  contrary  to  an  express  prohibition,
he  had  seduced  some  subjects  of  France  into  his  ser-
vice ;  but  Henry  paid  so  little  regard  to  this  evasion,
that  the  French  king,  rather  than  irritate  a  prince  whom
he  still  hoped  to  gain,  commanded  De  la  Mark  to  dis-
band his  troops.2

The  emperor,  meanwhile,  was  assembling  an  army
to  chastise  Robert's  insolence.  Twenty  thousand  men,
under  the  count  of  Nassau,  invaded  his  little  territories,
and  in  a  few  days  became  masters  of  every  place  in
them  but  Sedan.  After  making  him  feel  so  sensibly  the
weight  of  his  master's  indignation,  Nassau  advanced
towards  the  frontiers  of  France  ;  and  Charles  knowing
that  he  might  presume  so  far  on  Henry's  partiality  in
his  favour,  as  not  to  be  overawed  by  the  same  fears
which  had  restrained  Francis,  ordered  his  general  to
besiege  Mouson.  The  cowardice  of  the  garrison  hav-
ing obliged  the  governor  to  surrender  almost  without
siege  of  resistance,  Nassau  invested  Mezieres,  a  place
by^hTTm-  at  that  time  of  no  considerable  strength,  but  so
penaiists ;  advantageously  situated,  that  by  getting  pos-
session of  it,  the  imperial  army  might  have  penetrated
into  the  heart  of  Champagne,  in  which  there  was  hardly
any  other  town  capable  of  obstructing  its  progress.

1  Mem.  de  Bcllay,  p.  22,  &c. Mem.  de  Fleuranges,  p.  335,  &r.

1521.]  BOOK II.  67

Happily  for  France,  its  monarch,  sensible  of  the  im-
portance of  this  fortress,  and  of  the  danger  to  which  it
was  exposed,  committed  the  defence  of  it  to  the  cheva-
lier Bayard,  distinguished  among  his  contemporaries
by  the  appellation  of  The  knight  without  fear,  and  with-
out reproach.3'  This  man,  whose  prowess  in  combat,
whose  punctilious  honour  and  formal  gallantry,  bear  a
nearer  resemblance,  than  any  thing  recorded  in  history,
to  the  character  ascribed  to  the  heroes  of  chivalry,  pos-
sessed all  the  talents  which  form  a  great  general.  These
he  had  many  occasions  of  exerting  in  the  defence  of
Mezieres  ;  partly  by  his  valour,  partly  by  his  conduct,
he  protracted  the  siege  to  a  great  length,  and  in  the  end
obliged  the  Imperialists  to  raise  it,  with  disgrace  and
loss.b  Francis,  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army.

Raised.  _ '  . _ J '

soon  retook  Mouson,  and  entering  the  Low
Countries,  made  several  conquests  of  small  importance.
In  the  neighbourhood  of  Valenciennes,  through  an  ex-
cess of  caution,  an  error  with  which  he  cannot  be  often
charged,  he  lost  an  opportunity  of  cutting  off  the  whole
imperial  army  ;c  and  what  was  still  more  unfortunate,
he  disgusted  Charles  duke  of  Bourbon,  high  constable
of  France,  by  giving  the  command  of  the  van  to  the
duke  d'Alen^on,  though  this  post  of  honour  belonged
to  Bourbon,  as  a  prerogative  of  his  office.
August.  During  these  operations  in  the  field,  a  con-
^  gress  was  held  at  Calais  under  the  mediation
™f6"  °f  Henry  VIII.  in  order  to  bring  all  differences
England  j  to  an  amicable  issue ;  and  if  the  intentions  of
the  mediator  had  corresponded  in  any  degree  to  his
professions,  it  could  hardly  have  failed  of  producing
some  good  effect.  But  Henry  committed  the  sole
management  of  the  negotiation,  with  unlimited  powers,
to  Wolsey  ;  and  this  choice  alone  was  sufficient  to  have
rendered  it  abortive.  That  prelate,  bent  on  attaining

a  Oeuvres  de  Brantome,  torn.  vi.  114.  b  Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  25, &c.

c  P.  Mart.  Ep.  747. Mem.  de  Bellay,  35.

F  2

68  CHARLES V.  [1521.

the  papal  crown,  the  great  object  of  his  ambition,  and
ready  to  sacrifice  every  thing  in  order  to  gain  the  em-
peror's interest,  was  so  little  able  to  conceal  his  partia-
lity, that,  if  Francis  had  not  been  well  acquainted  with
his  haughty  and  vindictive  temper,  he  would  have  de-
clined his  mediation. Much  time  was  spent  in  inquir-
ing who  had  begun  hostilities,  which  Wolsey  affected
.to  represent  as  the  principal  point ;  and  by  throwing
the  blame  of  that  on  Francis,  he  hoped  to  justify,  by
the  treaty  of  London,  any  alliance  into  which  his  mas-
Without ter  should  enter  with  Charles. The  conditions
any  effect.  Qn  w}1jc}]  hostilities  might  be  terminated  came
next  to  be  considered ;  but  with  regard  to  these,  the
emperor's  proposals  were  such,  as  discovered  either  that
he  was  utterly  averse  to  peace,  or  that  he  knew  Wolsey
would  approve  of  whatever  terms  should  be*  offered  in
his  name. He  demanded  the  restitution  of  the  duchy
of  Burgundy,  a  province,  the  possession  of  which  would
have  given  him  access  into  the  heart  of  France ;  and
required  to  be  released  from  the  homage  due  to  the
crown  of  France  for  the  counties  of  Flanders  and  Ar-
tois,  which  none  of  his  ancestors  had  ever  refused,  and
which  he  had  bound  himself  by  the  treaty  of  Noyon  to
renew. These  terms,  to  which  a  high-spirited  prince
would  scarcely  have  listened,  after  the  disasters  of  an
unfortunate  war,  Francis  rejected  with  great  disdain  ;
and  Charles  shewing  no  inclination  to  comply  with  the
more  equal  and  moderate  propositions  of  the  French
monarch,  that  he  should  restore  Navarre  to  its  lawful
prince,  and  withdraw  his  troops  from  the  siege  of  Tour-
nay,  the  congress  broke  up  without  any  other  effect
than  that  which  attends  unsuccessful  negotiations,  the
exasperating  of  the  parties  whom  it  was  intended  to
reconciled
League  During the continuance of  the congress,

against  -*-rj- -.  .  _  _

France  be- Wolsey,  on  pretence  that  the  emperor  himselt

•i  P.  Mart.  Ep.  739 Herbert.

1521.]  BOOK II.  69

tween  the  would  be  more  willing  to  make  reasonable  coii-
a™d  Henry  cessions  than  his  ministers,  made  an  excursion
to  Bruges,  to  meet  that  monarch.  He  was  re-
ceived by  Charles,  who  knew  his  vanity,  with  as  much
respect  and  magnificence,  as  if  he  had  been  king  of
England.  But  instead  of  advancing  the  treaty  of  peace
by  this  interview,  Wolsey,  in  his  master's  name,  con-
cluded a  league  with  the  emperor  against  Francis  ;  in
which  it  was  stipulated,  that  Charles  should  invade
France  on  the  side  of  Spain,  and  Henry  in  Picardy,
each  with  an  army  of  forty  thousand  men  ;  and  that,  in
order  to  strengthen  their  union,  Charles  should  espouse
the  princess  Mary,  Henry's  only  child,  and  the  apparent
heir  of  his  dominions.6  Henry  produced  no  better  rea-
sons for  this  measure,  equally  unjust  and  impolitic,  than
the  article  in  the  treaty  of  London,  by  which  he  pre-
tended that  he  was  bound  to  take  arms  against  the
French  king  as  the  first  aggressor ;  and  the  injury  which
he  alleged  Francis  had  done  him,  in  permitting  the  duke
of  Albany,  the  head  of  a  faction  in  Scotland,  which  op-
posed the  interest  of  England,  to  return  into  that  king-
dom. He  was  influenced,  however,  by  other  considera-
tions. The  advantages  which  accrued  to  his  subjects
from  maintaining  an  exact  neutrality,  or  the  honour  that
resulted  to  himself  from  acting  as  the  arbiter  between
the  contending  princes,  appeared  to  his  youthful  ima-
gination so  inconsiderable,  when  compared  with  the
glory  which  might  be  reaped  from  leading  armies  or
conquering  provinces,  that  he  determined  to  remain  no
longer  in  a  state  of  inactivity.  Having  once  taken  this
resolution,  his  inducements  to  prefer  an  alliance  with
Charles  were  obvious.  He  had  no  claim  upon  any  part
of  that  prince's  dominions,  most  of  which  were  so  situ-
ated, that  he  could  not  attack  them  without  great  diffi-
culty and  disadvantage  ;  whereas  several  maritime  pro-
vinces of  France  had  been  long  in  the  hands  of  the  Eng-

e  Rymer,  Feeder,  xiii. Herbert.

70  CHARLES V.  [1521.

lish  monarchs,  whose  pretensions,  even  to  the  crown  of
that  kingdom,  were  not  as  yet  altogether  forgotten ;  and
the  possession  of  Calais  not  only, gave  him  easy  access
into  some  of  those  provinces,  but  in  case  of  any  disaster,
afforded  him  a  secure  retreat. While  Charles  attacked
France  on  one  frontier,  Henry  flattered  himself  that  he
should  find  little  resistance  on  the  other,  and  that  the
glory  of  re-annexing  to  the  crown  of  England  the  an-
cient inheritance  of  its  monarchs  on  the  continent,  was
reserved  for  his  reign.  Wolsey  artfully  encouraged  these
vain  hopes,  which  led  his  master  into  such  measures  as
were  most  subservient  to  his  own  secret  schemes  ;  and
the  English,  whose  hereditary  animosity  against  the
French  was  apt  to  rekindle  on  every  occasion,  did  not
disapprove  of  the  martial  spirit  of  their  sovereign.
Hostilities Meanwhile  the  league  between  the  pope  and
in  Italy. the  emperor  produced  great  effects  in  Italy,  and
rendered  Lombardy  the  chief  theatre  of  war. There
was,  at  that  time,  such  contrariety  between  the  cha-
racter of  the  French  and  the  Italians,  that  the  latter
submitted  to  the  government  of  the  former  with  greater
impatience  than  they  expressed  under  the  dominion  of
other  foreigners. The  phlegm  of  the  Germans  and
gravity  of  the  Spaniards  suited  their  jealous  temper
and  ceremonious  manners  better  than  the  French  gaiety,
too  prone  to  gallantry,  and  too  little  attentive  to  deco-
rum. Louis  XII.,  however,  by  the  equity  and  gentle-
ness of  his  administration,  and  by  granting  the  Milanese
more  extensive  privileges  than  those  they  had  enjoyed
under  their  native  princes,  had  overcome,  in  a  great
measure,  their  prejudices,  and  reconciled  them  to  the
French  government.  Francis,  on  recovering  that  duchy,
did  not  imitate  the  example  of  his  predecessor.  Though
too  generous  himself  to  oppress  his  people,  his  bound-
less confidence  in  his  favourites,  and  his  negligence  in
examining  into  the  conduct  of  those  whom  he  intrusted
with  power, imboldened  them  to  venture  upon  many  acts

1521.]  BOOK  II.  71

of  oppression.  The  government  of  Milan  was  com-
mitted by  him  to  Odet  de  Foix,  marechal  de  Lautrec,
another  brother  of  madame  de  Chateaubriand,  an
officer  of  great  experience  and  reputation,  but  haughty,
imperious,  rapacious,  and  incapable  either  of  listening
The  Milan-  *°  advice,  or  of  bearing  contradiction.  His
edT  with  the  ^nso^ence  an(^  exactions  totally  alienated  the
French  go-  affections  of  the  Milanese  from  France,  drove
many  of  the  considerable  citizens  into  banish-
ment, and  forced  others  to  retire  for  their  own  safety.
Among  the  last  was  Jerome  Morone,  vice-chancellor  of
Milan,  a  man  whose  genius  for  intrigue  and  enterprise
distinguished  him  in  an  age  and  country,  where  violent
factions,  as  well  as  frequent  revolutions,  affording  great
scope  for  such  talents,  produced  or  called  them  forth  in
great  abundance.  He  repaired  to  Francis  Sforza,  whose
brother  Maximilian  he  had  betrayed ;  and  suspecting
the  pope's  intention  of  attacking  the  Milanese,  although
his  treaty  with  the  emperor  was  not  yet  made  public,
he  proposed  to  Leo,  in  the  name  of  Sforza,  a  scheme
for  surprising  several  places  in  that  duchy  by  means  of
the  exiles,  who,  from  hatred  to  the  French,  and  from
attachment  to  their  former  masters,  were  ready  for  any
desperate  enterprise.  Leo  not  only  encouraged  the  at-
tempt, but  advanced  a  considerable  sum  towards  the
execution  of  it;  and  when,  through  unforeseen  acci-
dents, it  failed  of  success  in  every  part,  he  allowed  the
exiles,  who  had  assembled  in  a  body,  to  retire  to  Reggio,
which  belonged  at  that  time  to  the  church.  The  mare-
chal de  Foix,  who  commanded  at  Milan  in  absence  of
his  brother  Lautrec,  who  was  then  in  France,  tempted
with  the  hopes  of  catching,  at  once,  as  in  a  snare,  all
the  avowed  enemies  of  his  master's  government
in  that  country,  ventured  to  march  into  the  ec-
clesiastical territories,  and  to  invest  Reggio.  But  the
vigilance  and  good  conduct  of  Guicciardini,  the  histo-
rian, governor  of  that  place,  obliged  the  French  general

June  24.

72  CHARLES V.  [1521

The  pope  to  abandon  the  enterprise  with  disgrace/  Leo,

declares

inst  on  receiving  this  intelligence,  with  which  he
Francis.  was  highly  pleased,  as  it  furnished  him  a  decent
pretence  for  a  rupture  with  France,  immediately  assem-
bled the  consistory  of  cardinals.  After  complaining
bitterly  of  the  hostile  intentions  of  the  French  king,
and  magnifying  the  emperor's  zeal  for  the  church,  of
which  he  had  given  a  recent  proof  by  his  proceedings
against  Luther,  he  declared  that  he  was  constrained  in
self-defence,  and  as  the  only  expedient  for  the  security
of  the  ecclesiastical  state,  to  join  his  arms  to  those  of
that  prince.  For  this  purpose,  he  now  pretended  to
conclude  a  treaty  with  Don  John  Manuel,  although  it
had  really  been  signed  some  months  before  this  time ;
and  he  publicly  excommunicated  De  Foix,  as  an  im-
pious invader  of  St.  Peter's  patrimony.
War  in  the  Leo  had  already  begun  preparations  for  war
Milanese,  ^y  taking  into  pay  a  considerable  body  of  Swiss ;
but  the  imperial  troops  advanced  so  slowly  from  Naples
and  Germany,  that  it  was  the  middle  of  autumn  before
the  army  took  the  field  under  the  command  of  Prosper
Colonna,the  most  eminent  of  the  Italian  generals,  whose
extreme  caution,  the  effect  of  long  experience  in  the
art  of  war,  was  opposed  with  great  propriety  to  the
impetuosity  of  the  French.  In  the  mean  time,  De  Foix
dispatched  courier  after  courier  to  inform  the  king  of
the  danger  which  was  approaching.  Francis,  whose
forces  were  either  employed  in  the  Low  Countries,  or
assembling  on  the  frontiers  of  Spain,  and  who  did  not
expect  so  sudden  an  attack  in  that  quarter,  sent  am-
bassadors to  his  allies  the  Swiss,  to  procure  from  them
the  immediate  levy  of  an  additional  body  of  troops  ;
and  commanded  Lautrec  to  repair  forthwith  to  his  go-
vernment. That  general,  who  was  well  acquainted
with  the  great  neglect  of  economy  in  the  administra-
tion of  the  king's  finances,  and  who  knew  how  much

f  Guic.  Jib.  xiv.  183. Mem.  de  Bel/ay,  p.  38,  &c.

1621,]  BOOK  II. .  73

the  troops  in  the  Milanese  had  already  suffered  from
the  want  of  their  pay,  refused  to  set  out,  unless  the
sum  of  three  hundred  thousand  crowns  was  immediately
put  into  his  hands.  But  the  king,  Louise  of  Savoy
his  mother,  and  Semblancy  the  superintendent  of
finances,  having  promised,  even  with  an  oath,  that  on
his  arrival  at  Milan,  he  should  find  remittances  for  the
sum  which  he  demanded ;  upon  the  faith  of  this,  he
departed.  Unhappily  for  France,  Louise,  a  woman
deceitful,  vindictive,  rapacious,  and  capable  of  sacri-
ficing any  thing  to  the  gratification  of  her  passions,  but
who  had  acquired  an  absolute  ascendant  over  her  son
by  her  maternal  tenderness,  her  care  of  his  education,
and  her  great  abilities,  was  resolved  not  to  perform
this  promise.  Lautrec  having  incurred  her  displeasure
by  his  haughtiness  in  neglecting  to  pay  court  to  her,
and  by  the  freedom  with  which  he  had  talked  concern-
ing some  of  her  adventures  in  gallantry,  she,  in  order
to  deprive  him  of  the  honour  which  he  might  have
gained  by  a  successful  defence  of  the  Milanese,  seized
the  three  hundred  thousand  crowns  destined  for  that
service,  and  detained  them  for  her  own  use.
Progress  of  Lautrec,  notwithstanding  this  cruel  disap-
rlaHstTpe  P°intment>  found  means  to  assemble  a  consi-
derable army,  though  far  inferior  in  number  to
that  of  the  confederation.  He  adopted  the  plan  of
defence  most  suitable  to  his  situation,  avoiding  a  pitched
battle  with  the  greatest  care,  while  he  harassed  the
enemy  continually  with  his  light  troops,  beat  up  their
quarters,  intercepted  their  convoys,  and  covered  or
relieved  every  place  which  they  attempted  to  attack.
By  this  prudent  conduct,  he  not  only  retarded  their
progress,  but  would  have  soon  wearied  out  the  pope,
who  had  hitherto  defrayed  almost  the  whole  expense
of  the  war,  as  the  emperor,  whose  revenues  in  Spain
were  dissipated  during  the  commotions  in  that  coun-
try, and  who  was  obliged  to  support  a  numerous  army

74  CHARLES  V.  [1521.

in  the  Netherlands,  could  not  make  any  considerable
remittances  into  Italy.  But  an  unforeseen  accident
disconcerted  all  his  measures,  and  occasioned  a  fatal
reverse  in  the  French  affairs.  A  body  of  twelve  thou-
sand Swiss  served  in  Lautrec's  army  under  the  banners
of  the  republic,  with  which  France  was  in  alliance.  In
consequence  of  a  law,  no  less  political  than  humane,
established  among  the  cantons,  their  troops  were  never
hired  out  by  public  authority  to  both  the  contending
parties  in  any  war.  This  law,  however,  the  love  of
gain  had  sometimes  eluded,  and  private  persons  had
been  allowed  to  enlist  in  what  service  they  pleased,
though  not  under  the  public  banners,  but  under  those
of  their  particular  officers.  The  cardinal  of  Sion,  who
still  preserved  his  interest  among  his  countrymen,  and
his  enmity  to  France,  having  prevailed  on  them  to  con-
nive at  a  levy  of  this  kind,  twelve  thousand  Swiss,  in-
stigated by  him,  joined  the  army  of  the  confederates.
But  the  leaders  in  the  cantons,  when  they  saw  so  many
of  their  countrymen  marching  under  the  hostile  stan-
dards, and  ready  to  turn  their  arms  against  each  other,
became  so  sensible  of  the  infamy  to  which  they  would
be  exposed,  by  permitting  this,  as  well  as  the  loss  they
might  suffer,  that  they  dispatched  couriers,  command-
ing their  people  to  leave  both  armies,  and  to  return
forthwith  into  their  own  country.  The  cardinal  of
Sion,  however,  had  the  address,  by  corrupting  the  mes-
sengers appointed  to  carry  this  order,  to  prevent  it
from  being  delivered  to  the  Swiss  in  the  service  of  the
confederates ;  but  being  intimated  in  due  form  to  those
in  the  French  army,  they,  fatigued  with  the  length  of
the  campaign,  and  murmuring  for  want  of  pay,  instantly
yielded  obedience,  in  spite  of  Lautrec's  remonstrances
and  entreaties.

After  the  desertion  of  a  body  which  formed  the
strength  of  his  army,  Lautrec  durst  no  longer  face  the
confederates.  He  retired  towards  Milan,  encamped  on

1521.]  BOOK II.  75

the  banks  of  the  Adda,  and  placed  his  chief  hopes  of
safety  in  preventing  the  enemy  from  passing  that  river;
an  expedient  for  defending  a  country  so  precarious,
that  there  are  few  instances  of  its  being  employed  with
success  against  any  general  of  experience  or  abilities.
Become Accordingly Colonna, notwithstanding Lau-
masters  of  tree's  vigilance  and  activity,  passed  the  Adda
with  little  loss,  and  obliged  him  to  shut  himself
up  within  the  walls  of  Milan,  which  the  confederates
were  preparing  to  besiege,  when  an  unknown  person,
who  never  afterward  appeared  either  to  boast  of  this
service,  or  to  claim  a  reward  for  it,  came  from  the  city,
and  acquainted  Morone  that  if  the  army  would  advance
that  night,  the  Ghibelline  or  imperial  faction  would  put
them  in  possession  of  one  of  the  gates.  Colonna,  though
no  friend  to  rash  enterprises,  allowed  the  marquis  de
Pescara  to  advance  with  the  Spanish  infantry,  and  he
himself  followed  with  the  rest  of  his  troops.  About  the
beginning  of  night,  Pescara  arriving  at  the  Roman  gate
in  the  suburbs,  surprised  the  soldiers  whom  he  found
there;  those  posted  in  the  fortifications  adjoining  to  it,
immediately  fled;  the  marquis  seizing  the  works  which
they  had  abandoned,  and  pushing  forward  incessantly,
though  with  no  less  caution  than  vigour,  became  master
of  the  city  with  little  bloodshed,  and  almost  without
resistance ;  the  victors  being  as  much  astonished  as  the
vanquished  at  the  facility  and  success  of  the  attempt.
Lautrec  retired  precipitately  towards  the  Venetian  ter-
ritories with  the  remains  of  his  shattered  army;  the
cities  of  the  Milanese,  following  the  fate  of  the  capital,
surrendered  to  the  confederates;  Parma  and  Placentia
were  united  to  the  ecclesiastical  state,  and  of  all  their
conquests  in  Lombardy  only  the  town  of  Cremona,  the
castle  of  Milan,  and  a  few  inconsiderable  forts,  re-
mained in  the  hands  of  the  French.8

«  Guic.  1.  xiv.  190,  &c.  Mem.  de  Bellay,  42,  &c.  Galeacii  Capella  de  reb.  gest.
pro  restitut, Fran.  Sfortiae  Comment,  ap.  Scardium,  voJ.ii.  180,  &c.

76  CHARLES V.  [1521.

Death  of  Leo  received  the  accounts  of  this  rapid  suc-
Leo  x*  cession  of  prosperous  events  with  such  transports
of  joy,  as  brought  on  (if  we  may  believe  the  French
historians)  a  slight  fever,  which  being  neglected,  occa-
sioned his  death  on  the  2d  of  December,  while  he  was
still  of  a  vigorous  age  and  at  the  height  of  his  glory.
By  this  unexpected  accident,  the  spirit  of  the  confede-
racy was  broken,  and  its  operations  suspended.  The
cardinals  of  Sion  and  Medici  left  the  army  that  they
might  be  present  in  the  conclave ;  the  Swiss  were  re-
called by  their  superiors;  some  other  mercenaries  dis-
banded for  want  of  pay;  and  only  the  Spaniards,  and
a  few  Germans  in  the  emperor's  service,  remained  to
defend  the  Milanese.  But  Lautrec,  destitute  both  of
men  and  of  money,  was  unable  to  improve  this  favour-
able opportunity  in  the  manner  which  he  would  have
wished.  The  vigilance  of  Morone.  and  the
good  conduct  of  Colonna,  disappointed  his
feeble  attempts  on  the  Milanese.  Guicciardini,  by  his
address  and  valour,  repulsed  a  bolder  and  more  dan-
gerous attack  which  he  made  on  Parma.h
Adrian  Great  discord  prevailed  in  the  conclave,
elected  which  followed  upon  Leo's  death,  and  all  the

pope.

arts  natural  to  men  grown  old  in  intrigue,  when
contending  for  the  highest  prize  an  ecclesiastic  can
obtain,  were  practised.  Wolsey's  name,  notwithstand-
ing all  the  emperor's  magnificent  promises  to  favour
his  pretensions,  of  which  that  prelate  did  not  fail  to
remind  him,  was  hardly  mentioned  in  the  conclave.
Julio  cardinal  de  Medici,  Leo's  nephew,  who  was  more
eminent  than  any  other  member  of  the  sacred  college
for  his  abilities,  his  wealth,  and  his  experience  in  trans-
acting great  affairs,  had  already  secured  fifteen  voices,
a  number  sufficient,  according  to  the  forms  of  the  con-
clave, to  exclude  any  other  candidate,  though  not  to
carry  his  own  election.  As  he  was  still  in  the  prime  of

h  Guic.  I.  xiv.  214.

1522.]  BOOK  IT.  77

life,  all  the  aged  cardinals  combined  against  him,  with-
out being  united  in  favour  of  any  other  person.  While
these  factions  were  endeavouring  to  gain,  to  corrupt,
or  to  weary  out  each  other,  Medici  and  his  adherents
voted  one  morning  at  the  scrutiny,  which  according
to  form  was  made  every  day,  for  cardinal  Adrian  of
Utrecht,  who  at  that  time  governed  Spain  in  the  empe-
ror's name.  This  they  did  merely  to  protract  time.  But
the  adverse  party  instantly  closing  with  them,  to  their
own  amazement  and  that  of  all  Europe,  a  stranger  to
Italy,  unknown  to  the  persons  who  gave  their  suffrages
in  his  favour,  and  unacquainted  with  the  manners  of  the
people,  or  the  interest  of  the  state,  the  government  of
which  they  conferred  upon  him,  was  unani-

Jan.  9.  -  : •  .  AT ,

mously  raised  to  the  papal  throne,  at  a  juncture
so  delicate  and  critical,  as  would  have  demanded  all
the  sagacity  and  experience  of  one  of  the  most  able
prelates  in  the  sacred  college.  The  cardinals  them-
selves, unable  to  give  a  reason  for  this  strange  choice,
on  account  of  which,  as  they  marched  in  procession
from  the  conclave,  they  were  loaded  with  insults  and
curses  by  the  Roman  people,  ascribed  it  to  an  imme-
diate impulse  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  may  be  imputed
with  greater  certainty  to  the  influence  of  Don  John
Manuel,  the  imperial  ambassador,  who  by  his  address
and  intrigues  facilitated  the  election  of  a  person  devoted
to  his  master's  service,  from  gratitude,  from  interest,
and  from  inclination.1

War  re-  Beside  the  influence  which  Charles  acquired
by  Adrian's  promotion,  it  threw  great  lustre  on
his  administration.  To  bestow  on  his  preceptor
such  a  noble  recompense,  and  to  place  on  the  papal
throne  one  whom  he  had  raised  from  obscurity,  were
acts  of  uncommon  magnificence  and  power.  Francis
observed,  with  the  sensibility  of  a  rival,  the  pre-emi-

1  Herm.  Moringi  Vita  Hadrian!,  ap.  Gasp.  Barman,  in  Analect.  de  Hadr.  p.  62.
Conclave  Hadr.  Ibid.  p.  144,  &c.

78  CHARLES V.  [1522.

nence  which  the  emperor  was  gaining,  and  resolved  to
exert  himself  with  fresh  vigour,  in  order  to  wrest  from
him  his  late  conquests  in  Italy.  The  Swiss,  that  they
might  make  some  reparation  to  the  French  king,  for
having  withdrawn  their  troops  from  his  army  so  unsea-
sonably, as  to  occasion  the  loss  of  the  Milanese,  per-
mitted him  to  levy  ten  thousand  men  in  the  republic.
Together  with  this  reinforcement,  Lautrec  received  from
the  king  a  small  sum  of  money,  which  enabled  him
once  more  to  take  the  field ;  and  after  seizing  by  sur-
prise, or  force,  several  places  in  the  Milanese,  to  ad-
vance within  a  few  miles  of  the  capital.  The  confede-
rate army  was  in  no  condition  to  obstruct  his  progress;
for  though  the  inhabitants  of  Milan,  by  the  artifices  of
Morone,  and  by  the  popular  declamations  of  a  monk
whom  he  employed,  were  inflamed  with  such  enthusias-
tic zeal  against  the  French  government,  that  they  consent-
ed to  raise  extraordinary  contributions,  Colonna  must
soon  have  abandoned  the  advantageous  camp  which  he
had  chosen  at  Bicocca,  and  have  dismissed  his  troops
for  want  of  pay,  if  the  Swiss  in  the  French  service  had
not  once  more  extricated  him  out  of  his  difficulties.
The  The  insolence  or  caprice  of  those  mercena-

feTtedhine~  ™es  were  °ften  no  less  fatal  to  their  friends,
the  battle than  their  valour  and  discipline  were  formida-

of  Bicocca. _  .  .  TT •

ble  to  their  enemies.  Having  now  served  some
months  without  pay,  of  which  they  complained  loudly,
a  sum  destined  for  their  use  was  sent  from  France  under
a  convoy  of  horse ;  but  Morone,  whose  vigilant  eye  no-
thing escaped,  posted  a  body  of  troops  in  their  way,  so
that  the  party  which  escorted  the  money  durst  not  ad-
vance. On  receiving  intelligence  of  this,  the  Swiss
lost  all  patience,  and  officers  as  well  as  soldiers,  crowd-
ing around  Lautrec,  threatened  with  one  voice  instantly
to  retire,  if  he  did  not  either  advance  the  pay  which
was  due,  or  promise  to  lead  them  next  morning  to.  bat-
tle. In  vain  did  Lautrec  remonstrate  against  these

1522.]  BOOK II.  79

demands,  representing  to  them  the  impossibility  of  the
former,  and  the  rashness  of  the  latter,  which  must  be
attended  with  certain  destruction,  as  the  enemy  occu-
pied a  camp  naturally  of  great  strength,  and  which  by
art  they  had  rendered  almost  inaccessible. The  Swiss,
deaf  to  reason,  and  persuaded  that  their  valour  wa
capable  of  surmounting  every  obstacle,  renewed  their
demand  with  great  fierceness,  offering  themselves  to
form  the  vanguard,  and  to  begin  the  attack. Lautrec,
unable  to  overcome  their  obstinacy,  complied  with  their
request,  hoping,  perhaps,  that  some  of  those  unforeseen
accidents  which  so  often  determine  the  fate  of  battles
might  crown  this  rash  enterprise  with  undeserved  suc-
cess ;  and,  convinced  that  the  effects  of  a  defeat  could
not  be  more  fatal  than  those  which  would  certainly
follow  upon  the  retreat  of  a  body  which  composed  one
half  of  his  army. Next  morning  the  Swiss  were
early  in  the  field,  and  marched  with  the  great-
est intrepidity  against  an  enemy  deeply  intrenched  on
every  side,  surrounded  with  artillery,  and  prepared  to
receive  them. As  they  advanced, they  sustained  a
furious  cannonade  with  great  firmness;  and,  without
waiting for  their  own  artillery,  rushed impetuously
upon  the  intrenchments. But  after  incredible  efforts
of  valour,  which  were  seconded  with  great  spirit  by
the  French,  having  lost  their  bravest  officers  and  best
soldiers,  and  finding  that  they  could  make  no  impres-
sion on  the  enemy's  works,  they  sounded  a  retreat;
leaving  the  field  of  battle,  however,  like  men  repulsed,
but  not  vanquished,  in  close  array,  and  without  receiv-
ing any  molestation  from  the  enemy.
Driven  out Next  day,  such  as  survived  set  out  for  their
of  the own  country;  and  Lautrec,  despairing  of  being
able  to  make  any  farther  resistance,  retired  into
France,  after  throwing  garrisons  into  Cremona  and  a
few  other  places;  all  which,  except  the  citadel  of  Cre-
mona, Colonna  soon  obliged  to  surrender.

80  CHARLES V.  [1522.

Lose  Gc-  Genoa,  however,  and  its  territories,  remaining
noa-  subject  to  France,  still  gave  Francis  considerable
footing  in  Italy,  and  made  it  easy  for  him  to  execute
any  scheme  for  the  recovery  of  the  Milanese.  But
Colonna,  rendered  enterprising  by  continual  success,
and  excited  by  the  solicitations  of  the  faction  of  the
Adorni,  the  hereditary  enemies  of  the  Fregosi,  who,
under  the  protection  of  France,  possessed  the  chief  au-
thority in  Genoa,  determined  to  attempt  the  reduction
of  that  state  ;  and  accomplished  it  with  amazing  faci-
lity. He  became  master  of  Genoa  by  an  accident  as
unexpected  as  that  which  had  given  him  possession  of
Milan;  and,  almost  without  opposition  or  bloodshed,
the  power  of  the  Adorni,  and  the  authority  of  the  em-
peror, were  established  in  Genoa. k
Henry  Such  a  cruel  succession  of  misfortunes  affected
dares  war  Francis  with  deep  concern,  which  was  not  a
Srance  ^tle  augmented,  by  the  unexpected  arrival  of
May  29.  an  English  herald,  who,  in  the  name  of  his  so-
vereign, declared  war  in  form  against  France.  This
step  was  taken  in  consequence  of  the  treaty  which
Wolsey  had  concluded  with  the  emperor  at  Bruges,  and
which  had  hitherto  been  kept  secret.  Francis,  though
he  had  reason  to  be  surprised  with  this  denunciation,
after  having  been  at  such  pains  to  soothe  Henry  and  to
gain  his  minister,  received  the  herald  with  great  com-
posure and  dignity  ;l  and,  without  abandoning  any  of
the  schemes  which  he  was  forming  against  the  emperor,
began  vigorous  preparations  for  resisting  this  new
enemy.  His  treasury,  however,  being  exhausted  by
the  efforts  which  he  had  already  made,  as  well  as  by
the  sums  he  expended  on  his  pleasures,  he  had  recourse
to  extraordinary  expedients  for  supplying  it.  Several
new  offices  were  created  and  exposed  to  sale ;  the  royal
demesnes  were  alienated  ;  unusual  taxes  were  imposed;

*  Jovii  Vita  Ferdin.  Davali,  p.  344. Gnic.  1.  xiv.  233.
1  Journal  de  Louise  de  Savoie,  p.  119.

Charles

visits

England

1522.]  BOOR II.  81

and  the  tomb  of  St.  Martin  was  stripped  of  a  rail  of
massive  silver,  with  which  Louis  XL,  in  one  of  his  fits
of  devotion,  had  encircled  it.  By  means  of  these  expe-
dients he  was  enabled  to  levy  a  considerable  army,  and
to  put  the  frontier  towns  in  a  good  posture  of  defence.
The  emperor,  meanwhile,  was  no  less  soli-
citous to  draw  as  much  advantage  as  possible
from  the  accession  of  such  a  powerful  ally ;  and
the  prosperous  situation  of  his  affairs,  at  this  time,  per-
mitting him  to  set  out  for  Spain,  where  his  presence
was  extremely  necessary,  he  visited  the  court  of  Eng-
land in  his  way  to  that  country.  He  proposed  by  this
interview  not  only  to  strengthen  the  bonds  of  friendship
which  united  him  with  Henry,  and  to  excite  him  to  push
the  war  against  France  with  vigour,  but  hoped  to  re-
move any  disgust  or  resentment  that  Wolsey  might  have
conceived  on  account  of  the  mortifying  disappointment
which  he  had  met  with  in  the  late  conclave.  His  suc-
cess exceeded  his  most  sanguine  expectations ;  and,  by
his  artful  address,  during  a  residence  of  six  weeks  in
England,  he  gained  not  only  the  king  and  the  minister,
but  the  nation  itself.  Henry,  whose  vanity  was  sensi-
bly flattered  by  such  a  visit,  as  well  as  by.  the  studied
respect  with  which  the  emperor  treated  him  on  every
occasion,  entered  warmly  into  all  his  schemes.  The
cardinal  foreseeing,  from  Adrian's  age  and  infirmities,
a  sudden  vacancy  in  the  papal  see,  dissembled  or  forgot
his  resentment;  and  as  Charles,  besides  augmenting
the  pensions  which  he  had  already  settled  on  him,  re-
newed his  promise  of  favouring  his  pretensions  to  the
papacy,  with  all  his  interest,  he  endeavoured  to  merit
the  former,  and  to  secure  the  accomplishment  of  the
latter  by  fresh  services/  The  nation,  sharing  in  the
glory  of  its  monarch,  and  pleased  with  the  confidence
which  the  emperor  placed  in  the  English,  by  creating
the  earl  of  Surrey  his  high  admiral,  discovered  no  less
inclination  to  commence  hostilities  than  Henry  himself,
VOL.  iv,  e

#2  CHARLES V.  [1522.

The  En  ^n  or<^er  to  &VQ  Charles,  before  he  left  Eng-
jish  invade  land,  a  proof  of  this  general  ardour,  Surrey
sailed  with  such  forces  as  were  ready,  and  ra-
vaged the  coasts  of  Normandy.  He  then  made  a  de-
scent on  Bretagne,  where  he  plundered  and  burnt  Mor-
laix,  and  some  other  places  of  less  consequence.  After
these  slight  excursions,  attended  with  greater  dishonour
than  damage  to  France,  he  repaired  to  Calais,  and  took
the  command  of  the  principal  army,  consisting  of  six-
teen thousand  men ;  with  which,  having  joined  the
Flemish  troops  under  the  count  de  Buren,  he  advanced
With  little  into  Picardy.  The  army  which  Francis  had
success,  assembled  was  far  inferior  in  number  to  these
united  bodies.  But  during  the  long  wars  between  the
two  nations,  the  French  had  discovered  the  proper
method  of  defending  their  country  against  the  English.
They  had  been  taught  by  their  misfortunes  to  avoid  a
pitched  battle  with  the  utmost  care,  and  to  endeavour,
by  throwing  garrisons  into  every  place  capable  of  re-
sistance, by  watching  all  the  enemy's  motions,  by  inter-
cepting their  convoys,  attacking  their  advanced  posts,
and  harassing  them  continually  with  their  numerous
cavalry,  to  ruin  them  with  the  length  of  the  war,  or  to
beat  them  by  piece-meal.  This  plan  the  duke  of  Ven-
dome,  the  French  general  in  Picardy,  pursued  with  no
less  prudence  than  success ;  and  not  only  prevented
Surrey  from  taking  any  town  of  importance,  but  obliged
him  to  retire  with  his  army  greatly  reduced  by  fatigue,
by  want  of  provisions,  and  by  the  loss  which  it  had  sus-
tained in  several  unsuccessful  skirmishes.

Thus  ended  the  second  campaign,  in  a  war  the  most
general  that  had  hitherto  been  kindled  in  Europe ;  and
though  Francis,  by  his  mother's  ill-timed  resentment,  by
the  disgusting  insolence  of  his  general,  and  the  caprice
of  the  mercenary  troops  which  he  employed,  had  lost  his
conquests  in  Italy,  yet  all  the  powers  combined  against
him  had  not  been  able  to  make  any  impression  on  his

1522.]  BOOK II.  83

hereditary  dominions;  and  wherever  they  either  in-
tended or  attempted  an  attack,  he  was  well  prepared  to
receive  them.

Sol  man's  While  the  Christian  princes  were  thus  wast-
*fi?UoSt  *n&  eac^  ot^er's  strength,  Solyman  the  Magni-
ficent entered  Hungary  with  a  numerous  army,
and  investing  Belgrade,  which  was  deemed  the  chief
barrier  of  that  kingdom  against  the  Turkish  arms,  soon
forced  it  to  surrender.  Encouraged  by  this  success,  he
turned  his  victorious  arms  against  the  island  of  Rhodes,
the  seat,  at  that  time,  of  the  knights  of  St.  John  of
Jerusalem.  This  small  state  he  attacked  with  such  a
numerous  army,  as  the  lords  of  Asia  have  been  accus-
tomed, in  every  age,  to  bring  into  the  field.  Two  hun-
dred thousand  men,  and  a  fleet  of  four  hundred  sail,
appeared  against  a  town  defended  by  a  garrison  con-
sisting of  five  thousand  soldiers,  and  six  hundred
knights,  under  the  command  of  Villiers  de  L'Isle  Adam,
the  grand-master,  whose  wisdom  and  valour  rendered
him  worthy  of  that  station  at  such  a  dangerous  juncture.
No  sooner  did  he  begin  to  suspect  the  destination  of
Solyman's  vast  armaments,  than  he  dispatched  messen-
gers to  all  the  Christian  courts,  imploring  their  aid
against  the  common  enemy.  But  though  every  prince
in  that  age,  acknowledged  Rhodes  to  be  the  great  bul-
wark of  Christendom  in  the  east,  and  trusted  to  the
gallantry  of  its  knights  as  the  best  security  against  the
progress  of  the  Ottoman  arms  ;  though  Adrian,  with  a
zeal  which  became  the  head  and  father  of  the  church,
exhorted  the  contending  powers  to  forget  their  private
quarrels,  and,  by  uniting  their  arms,  to  prevent  the  in-
fidels from  destroying  a  society  which  did  honour  to  the
Christian  name  ;  yet  so  violent  and  implacable  was  the
animosity  of  both  parties,  that,  regardless  of  the  danger
to  which  they  exposed  all  Europe,  and  unmoved  by  the
entreaties  of  the  grand-master,  or  the  admonitions  of  the
pope,  they  suffered  Solyman  to  carry  on  his  operations

o  2

84  CHARLES V.  [1522.

against  Rhodes  without  disturbance.  The  grand-mas-
ter, after  incredible  efforts  of  courage,  of  patience,  and
of  military  conduct,  during  a  siege  of  six  months ;  after
sustaining  many  assaults,  and  disputing  every  post  with
amazing  obstinacy,  was  obliged  at  last  to  yield  to  num-
bers ;  and,  having  obtained  an  honourable  capitulation
from  the  sultan,  who  admired  and  respected  his  virtue,
he  surrendered  the  town,  which  was  reduced  to  a  heap
of  rubbish,  and  destitute  of  every  resource."1  Charles
and  Francis,  ashamed  of  having  occasioned  such  a  loss
to  Christendom  by  their  ambitious  contests,  endeavoured
to  throw  the  blame  of  it  on  each  other,  while  all  Europe,
with  greater  justice,  imputed  it  equally  to  both.  The
emperor,  by  way  of  reparation,  granted  the  knights  of
St.  John  the  small  island  of  Malta,  in  which  they  fixed
their  residence,  retaining,  though  with  less  power  and
splendour,  their  ancient  spirit,  and  implacable  enmity
to  the  infidels.

m  Pontanus  de  Bello  Rhodio,  ap.  Scard.  Script.  Rer.  German,  vol.  ii.  p.  88. P.
Barre.  Hist.  d'Allem,  tome  viii.  57.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF THB

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V

BOOK  III.

1520 CHARLES,  having  had  the  satisfaction  of  see-
r  jng  hostilities  begun  between  France  and  Eng-

in  Castile. »  &  . ^

land,  took  leave  ot  Henry,  and  arrived  in  Spam
on  the  17th  of  June.  He  found  that  country  just
beginning  to  recover  order  and  strength  after  the
miseries  of  a  civil  war,  to  which  it  had  been  exposed
during  his  absence ;  an  account  of  the  rise  and  pro-
gress of  which,  as  it  was  but  little  connected  with  the
other  events  which  happened  in  Europe,  hath  been
reserved  to  this  place.

No  sooner  was  it  known  that  the  cortes  as-

Insurrec-

tion  of  sembled  in  Galicia  had  voted  the  emperor  a
free  gift,  without  obtaining  the  redress  of  any

grievance,  than  it  excited  universal  indignation.  The
citizens  of  Toledo,  who  considered  themselves

May,1520.  • •  .  .  '

on  account  ot  the  great  privileges  which  they
enjoyed,  as  guardians  of  the  liberties  of  the  Castilian
commons,  finding  that  no  regard  was  paid  to  the  re-
monstrances of  their  deputies  against  that  unconstitu-
tional grant,  took  arms  with  tumultuary  violence,  and,
seizing  the  gates  of  the  city,  which  were  fortified,
attacked  the  Al-cazar,  or  castle,  which  they  soon
obliged  the  governor  to  surrender.  Imboldened  by
this  success,  they  deprived  of  all  authority  every  person

86  CHARLES  V.  [1520.

whom  they  suspected  of  any  attachment  to  the  court,
established  a  popular  form  of  government,  composed
of  deputies  from  the  several  parishes  in  the  city,  and
levied  troops  in  their  own  defence.  The  chief  leader
of  the  people,  in  these  insurrections,  was  Don  John  de
Padilla,  the  eldest  son  of  the  commendator  of  Castile,
a  young  nobleman  of  a  generous  temper,  of  undaunted
courage,  and  possessed  of  the  talents,  as  well  as  the
ambition,  which,  in  times  of  civil  discord,  raise  men  to
power  and  eminence/

The  resentment  of  the  citizens  of  Segovia
a'  produced  effects  still  more  fatal. Tordesillas,
one  of  their  representatives  in  the  late  cortes,  had  voted
for  the  donative,  and  being  a  bold  and  haughty  man,
ventured,  upon  his  return,  to  call  together  his  fellow-
citizens  in  the  great  church,  that  he  might  give  them,
according  to  custom,  an  account  of  his  conduct  in  that
assembly. But  the  multitude,  unable  to  bear  his  inso-
lence, in  attempting  to  justify  what  they  thought  inex-
cusable, burst  open  the  gates  of  the  church  with  the
utmost fury, and seizing  the unhappy  Tordesillas,
dragged  him  through  the  streets,  with  a  thousand  curses
and  insults,  towards  the  place  of  public  execution. In
vain  did  the  dean  and  canons  come  forth  in  procession
with  the  holy  sacrament  in  order  to  appease  their  rage.
In  vain  did  the  monks  of  those  monasteries  by  which
they  passed,  conjure  them  on  their  knees  to  spare  his
life,  or  at  least  to  allow  him  time  to  confess,  and  to
receive  absolution  of  his  sins. Without  listening  to  the
dictates  either  of  humanity  or  religion,  they  cried  out,
:<That  the  hangman  alone  could  absolve  such  a  traitor
to  his  country;"  they  then  hurried  him  along  with
greater  violence  ;  and  perceiving  that  he  had  expired
under  their  hands,  they  hung  him  up  with  his  head
downwards  on  the  common  gibbet.b The  same  spirit
seized  the  inhabitants  of  Burgos,  Zamora,  and  several

a  Sandov.  p.  77. .  b  p.  Martyr,  Ep.  671.

1520.]

BOOK  III.

87

other  cities ;  and  though  their  representatives,  taking
warning  from  the  fate  of  Tordesillas,  had  been  so  wise
as  to  save  themselves  by  a  timely  flight,  they  were  burnt
in  effigy,  their  houses  rased  to  the  ground,  and  their
effects  consumed  with  fire ;  and  such  was  the  horror,
which  the  people  had  conceived  against  them,  as  be-
trayers of  the  public  liberty,  that  not  one  in  those  licen-
tious multitudes  would  touch  any  thing,  however  va-
luable, which  had  belonged  to  them.0
Measures  Adrian,  at  that  time  regent  of  Spain,  had
In  order"  scarcely  fixed  the  seat  of  his  government  at  Val-
the^,msh  ladolid,  when  he  was  alarmed  with  an  account
June  5.  of  these  insurrections.  He  immediately  assem-
bled the  privy-council  to  deliberate  concerning  the
proper  method  of  suppressing  them.  The  counsellors
differed  in  opinion  ;  some  insisting  that  it  was  neces-
sary to  check  this  audacious  spirit  in  its  infancy  by  a
severe  execution  of  justice ;  others  advising  to  treat
with  lenity  a  people  who  had  some  reason  to  be  in-
censed, and  not  to  drive  them  beyond  all  the  bounds
of  duty  by  an  ill-timed  rigour.  The  sentiments  of  the
former  being  warmly  supported  by  the  archbishop  of
Granada,  president  of  the  council,  a  person  of  great
authority,  but  choleric  and  impetuous,  were  approved
by  Adrian,  whose  zeal  to  support  his  master's  authority,
hurried  him  into  a  measure,  to  which,  from  his  natural
caution  and  timidity,  he  would  otherwise  have  been
averse.  He  commanded  Ronquillo,  one  of  the  king's
judges,  to  repair  instantly  to  Segovia,  which  had  set
the  first  example  of  mutiny,  and  to  proceed  against  the
delinquents  according  to  law ;  and  lest  the  people
should  be  so  outrageous  as  to  resist  his  authority,  a
considerable  body  of  troops  was  appointed  to  attend
him.  The  Segovians,  foreseeing  what  they  might  ex-
pect from  a  judge  so  well  known  for  his  austere  and
unforgiving  temper,  took  arms  with  one  consent,  and

c  Sandov.  103. P,  Mart  Ep,  674.

8H  CHARLES  V.  [1520.

having  mustered  twelve  thousand  men,  shut

His.troops  .  .  -

repulsed  their  gates  against  him.  Ronqumo,  enraged
a'  at  this  insult,  denounced  them  rebels  and  out-
laws, and  his  troops  seizing  all  the  avenues  to  the  town,
hoped  that  it  would  soon  be  obliged  to  surrender  for
want  of  pro  visions.  The  inhabitants,  however,  defended
themselves  with  vigour,  and  having  received  a  consi-
derable reinforcement  from  Toledo,  under  the  com-
mand of  Padilla,  attacked  Ronquillo,  and  forced  him
to  retire  with  the  loss  of  his  baggage  and  military
chest.d

And  at  Me- Upon  this,  Adrian  ordered  Antonio  de  Fon-
dina  del seca,  whom  the  emperor  had  appointed  com-

mander-in-chief  of  the  forces  in  Castile,  to  as-
semble an  army,  and  to  besiege  Segovia  in  form.  But
the  inhabitants  of  Medina  del  Campo,  where  cardinal
Ximenes  had  established  a  vast  magazine  of  military
stores,  would  not  suffer  him  to  draw  from  it  a  train  of
battering  cannon,  or  to  destroy  their  countrymen  with
those  arms  which  had  been  prepared  against  the  ene-
mies of  the  kingdom.  Fonseca,  who  could  not  execute
his  orders  without  artillery,  determined  to  seize  the
magazine  by  force ;  and  the  citizens  standing  on  their
defence,  he  assaulted  the  town  with  great  briskness  ;
but  his  troops  were  so  warmly  received,  that,  despairing
Au  of  carrying  the  place,  he  set  fire  to  some  of  the

houses,  in  hopes  that  the  citizens  would  aban-
don the  walls,  in  order  to  save  their  families  and  effects.
Instead  of  that,  the  expedient  to  which  he  had  recourse
served  only  to  increase  their  fury,  and  he  was  repulsed
with  great  disgrace,  while  the  flames,  spreading  from
street  to  street,  reduced  to  ashes  almost  the  whole  town,
one  of  the  most  considerable  at  that  time  in  Spain,  and
the  great  mart  for  the  manufactories  of  Segovia  and
several  other  cities.  As  the  warehouses  were  then
filled  with  goods  for  the  approaching  fair,  the  loss  was

*  Sandov.  112. P.  Mart.  Ep.  679. Miniana,  Con  tin.  p.  15.

1520.]  BOOK III.  89

immense,  and  was  felt  universally.  This,  added  to  the
impression  which  such  a  cruel  action  made  on  a  people
long-  unaccustomed  to  the  horrors  of  civil  war,  enraged
the  Gastilians  almost  to  madness.  Fonseca  became  the
object  of  general  hatred,  and  was  branded  with  the
name  of  incendiary,  and  enemy  to  his  country.  Even
the  citizens  of  Valladolid,  whom  the  presence  of  the
cardinal  had  hitherto  restrained,  declared  that  they
could  no  longer  remain  inactive  spectators  of  the  suf-
ferings of  their  countrymen.  Taking  arms  with  no  less
fury  than  the  other  cities,  they  burnt  Fonseca's  house
to  the  ground,  elected  new  magistrates,  raised  soldiers,
appointed  officers  to  command  them,  and  guarded  their
walls  with  as  much  diligence  as  if  an  enemy  had  been
ready  to  attack  them.

The  cardinal,  though  virtuous  and  disinte-

Adnan  dis-  °

bands  his  rested,  and  capable  of  governing  the  kingdom
with  honour  in  times  of  tranquillity,  possessed
neither  the  courage  nor  the  sagacity  necessary  at  such
a  dangerous  juncture.  Finding  himself  unable  to  check
these  outrages  committed  under  his  own  eye,  he  at-
tempted to  appease  the  people,  by  protesting  that  Fon-
seca had  exceeded  his  orders,  and  had  by  his  rash  con-
duct offended  him,  as  much  as  he  <  had  injured  them.
This  condescension,  the  effect  of  irresolution  and  timi-
dity, rendered  the  maleconteuts  bolder  and  more  inso-
lent; and  the  cardinal  having  soon  after  recalled  Fon-
seca, and  dismissed  his  troops,  which  he  could  no  longer
afford  to  pay,  as  the  treasury,  drained  by  the  rapacious-
ness  of  the  Flemish  ministers,  had  received  no  supply
from  the  great  cities,  which  were  all  in  arms,  the  peo-
ple were  left  at  full  liberty  to  act  without  control,  and
scarcely  any  shadow  of  power  remained  in  his  hands.
The  views  Norwere  the  proceedings  of  the  commons
and  preten-  the  effects  merely  of  popular  and  tumultuary

sions  of  the  i  • i  i • •

commons rage ;  they  aimed  at  obtaining  redress  of  their
political  grievances,  and  an  establishment  of

90  CHARLES V.  [1520.

public  liberty  on  a  secure  basis,  objects  worthy  of  all
the  zeal  which  they  discovered  in  contending  for  them.
The  feudal  government  in  Spain  was  at  that  time  in  a
state  more  favourable  to  liberty  than  in  any  other  of  the
great  European  kingdoms.  This  was  owing  chiefly  to
the  number  of  great  cities  in  that  country,  a  circumstance
I  have  already  taken  notice  of,  and  which  contributes
more  than  any  other  to  mitigate  the  rigour  of  the  feudal
institutions,  and  to  introduce  a  more  liberal  and  equal
form  of  government.  The  inhabitants  of  every  city
formed  a  great  corporation,  with  valuable  immunities
and  privileges ;  they  were  delivered  from  a  state  of  sub-
jection and  vassalage ;  they  were  admitted  to  a  consi-
derable share  in  the  legislature ;  they  had  acquired  the
arts  of  industry,  without  which  cities  cannot  subsist;
they  had  accumulated  wealth,  by  engaging  in  com-
merce; and  being  free  and  independent  themselves,
were  ever  ready  to  act  as  the  guardians  of  the  public
freedom  and  independence.  The. genius  of  the  internal
government  established  among  the  inhabitants  of  cities,
which,  even  in  countries  where  despotic  power  prevails
most,  is  democratical  and  republican,  rendered  the  idea
of  liberty  familiar  and  dear  to  them.  Their  representa-
tives in  the  cortes  were  accustomed,  with  equal  spirit,
to  check  the  encroachments  of  the  king  and  the  oppres-
sion of  the  nobles.  They  endeavoured  to  extend  the
privileges  of  their  own  order;  they  laboured  to  shake
off  the  remaining  incumbrances  with  which  the  spirit  of
feudal  policy,  favourable  only  to  the  nobles,  had  bur-
dened them;  and  conscious  of  being  one  of  the  most
considerable  orders  in  the  state,  were  ambitious  of  be-
coming the  most  powerful.

Their  con-  The  present  juncture  appeared  favourable
theenSboyf  for  Pushing  any  new  claim.  Their  sovereign
•unta°ly  Was  a^sent  fr°m  h*s  dominions;  by  the  ill  con-
duet  of  his  ministers  he  had  losf  the  esteem
and  affection  of  his  subjects;  the  people,  exasperated  by

1520.]  BOOK  III.  91

many  injuries,  had  taken  arms,  though  without  concert,
almost  by  general  consent;  they  were  animated  with
rage  capable  of  carrying  them  to  the  most  violent  ex-
tremes; the  royal  treasury  was  exhausted;  the  kingdom
destitute  of  troops ;  and  the  government  committed  to
a  stranger,  of  great  virtue  indeed,  but  of  abilities  un-
equal to  such  a  trust.  The  first  care  of  Padilla,  and  the
other  popular  leaders,  who  observed  and  determined  to
improve  these  circumstances,  was  to  establish  some  form
of  union  or  association  among  the  malecontents,  that
they  might  act  with  greater  regularity,  and  pursue  one
common  end; and  as  the  different  cities  had  been
prompted  to  take  arms  by  the  same  motives,  and  were
accustomed  to  consider  themselves  as  a  distinct  body
from  the  rest  of  the  subjects,  they  did  not  find  this  dif-
ficult.  A  general  convention  was  appointed  to  be  held
at  Avila. Deputies  appeared  there  in  name  of  almost
all  the  cities  entitled  to  have  representatives  in  the
cortes. They  all  bound  themselves,  by  solemn  oath,
to  live  and  die  in  the  service  of  the  king,  and  in  de-
fejice  of  the  privileges  of  their  order ;  and  assuming
the  name  of  the  holy  junta,  or  association,  proceeded
to  deliberate  concerning  the  state  of  the  nation,  and
the  proper  method  of  redressing  its  grievances. The
They  dis-  first  that  naturally  presented  itself  was  the  no-
AdrL's mination  of  a  foreigner  to  be  regent ;  this  they
authority,  declared  with  one  voice  to  be  a  violation  of  the
fundamental  laws  of  the  kingdom,  and  resolved  to  send
a  deputation  of  their  members  to  Adrian,  requiring  him
in  their  name  to  lay  aside  all  the  ensigns  of  his  office,
and  to  abstain  for  the  future  from  the  exercise  of  a  ju-
risdiction which  they  had  pronounced  illegal.6
Getpos- While  they  were  preparing  to  execute  this
^etn1  °f  k°ld  resolution,  Padilla  accomplished  an  enter-
Joanna. prise  of  the  greatest  advantage  to  the  cause.
After  relieving  Segovia,  he  marched  suddenly

•  P.  Mart.  Ep.  691.

fj-2  CHARLES V.  .[1520.

to  Tordesillas,  the  place  where  the  unhappy  queen
Joanna  had  resided  since  the  death  of  her  husband,
and  being  favoured  by  the  inhabitants,  was  admitted
into  the  town,  and  became  master  of  her  person,  for  the
security  of  which  Adrian  had  neglected  to  take  proper
precautions/  Padilla  waited  immediately  upon  the
queen,  and  accosting  her  with  that  profound  respect
which  she  exacted  from  the  few  persons  whom  she
deigned  to  admit  into  her  presence,  acquainted  her  at
large  with  the  miserable  condition  of  her  Castilian
subjects  under  the  government  of  her  son,  who  being
destitute  of  experience  himself,  permitted  his  foreign
ministers  to  treat  them  with  such  rigour  as  had  obliged
them  to  take  arms  in  defence  of  the  liberties  of  their
country.  The  queen,  as  if  she  had  been  awakened  out
of  a  lethargy,  expressed  great  astonishment  at  what  he
said,  and  told  him,  that  as  she  had  never  heard,  until
that  moment,  of  the  death  of  her  father,  or  known  the
sufferings  of  her  people,  no  blame  could  be  imputed  to
her,  but  that  now  she  would  take  care  to  provide  a  suf-
ficient remedy ;  and  in  the  mean  time,  added  she,  let
it  be  your  concern  to  do  what  is  necessary  for  the
public  welfare.  Padilla,  too  eager  in  forming  a  con-
clusion agreeable  to  his  wishes,  mistook  this  lucid  in-
terval of  reason  for  a  perfect  return  of  that  faculty;  and
acquainting  the  junta  with  what  had  happened,  advised
them  to  remove  to  Tordesillas,  and  to  hold  their  meet-
ings in  that  place.  This  was  instantly  done ;  but  though
Joanna  received  very  graciously  an  address  of  the  junta,
beseeching  her  to  take  upon  herself  the  government  of
the  kingdom,  and  in  token  of  her  compliance,  admitted
all  the  deputies  to  kiss  her  hand ;  though  she  was  pre-
sent at  a  tournament  held  on  that  occasion,  and  seemed
highly  satisfied  with  both  these  ceremonies,  which  were
conducted  with  greater  magnificence  in  order  to  please

(  Vita  delP  Imper. Car. V.  dell'  Alf.  Ulloa,  Ven. 1509,  p.  67. Miniana,
Contin.  p.  17.

1520.]  BOOK  III.  93

her,  she  soon  relapsed  into  her  former  melancholy  arid
sullenness,  and  could  never  be  brought,  by  any  argu-
ments or  entreaties,  to  sign  any  one  paper  necessary  for
the  dispatch  of  business.8

Carry  on  The  junta,  concealing  as  much  as  possible
this  last  circumstance,  carried  on  all  their  deli-
berations in  the  name  of  Joanna ;  and  as  the
Castilians,  who  idolized  the  memory  of  Isabella,  re-
tained a  wonderful  attachment  to  her  daughter,  no
sooner  was  it  known  that  she  had  consented  to  assume
the  reins  of  government,  than  the  people  expressed  the
most  universal  and  immoderate  joy  ;  and  believing  her
recovery  to  be  complete,  ascribed  it  to  a  miraculous
interposition  of  Heaven,  in  order  to  rescue  their  country
And  de-  from  the  oppression  of  foreigners.  The  junta,
Adrian  of  conscious  of  the  reputation  and  power  which
ail  power.  faey  jia(j  acquired  by  seeming  to  act  under  the
royal  authority,  were  no  longer  satisfied  with  requiring
Adrian  to  resign  the  office  of  regent ;  they  detached
Padilla  to  Valladolid  with  a  considerable  body  of  troops,
ordering  him  to  seize  such  members  of  the  council  as
were  still  in  that  city,  to  conduct  them  to  Tordesillas,
and  to  bring  away  the  seals  of  the  kingdom,  the  public
archives,  and  treasury  books.  Padilla,  who  was  received
by  the  citizens  as  the  deliverer  of  his  country,  executed
his  commission  with  great  exactness ;  permitting  Adrian,
however,  still  to  reside  in  Valladolid,  though  only  as  a
private  person,  and  without  any  shadow  of  power.h;,:  ;
The  emperor,  to  whom  frequent  accounts  of
these  transactions  were  transmitted  while  he  was
still  in  Flanders,  was  sensible  of  his  own  impru-
dence and  that  of  his  ministers,  in  having  despised  too
long  the  murmurs  and  remonstrances  of  the  Castilians.
He  beheld,  with  deep  concern,  a  kingdom,  the  most
valuable  of  any  he  possessed,  and  in  which  lay  the
strength  and  sinews  of  his  power,  just  ready  to  disown

*  Sandov.  164. P.  Mart.  Ep.  685,  686. •  *  Sandov.  174. P.  Mart.  Ep.  791.

The  em-

alarmed.

94  CHARLES  V.  [1520.

his  authority,  and  on  the  point  of  being  plunged  in  all
the  miseries  of  civil  war.  But  though  his  presence
might  have  averted  this  calamity,  he  could  not,  at  that
time,  visit  Spain  without  endangering  the  imperial
crown,  and  allowing  the  French  king  full  leisure  to
Hismea  execute  his  ambitious  schemes.  The  only  point
sures  with  now  to  be  deliberated  upon,  was,  whether  he

respect  to , ,  _  • i  i  i-

the  male-  should  attempt  to  gam  the  malecontents  by  in-
dulgence and  concessions,  or  prepare  directly  to
suppress  them  by  force ;  and  he  resolved  to  make  trial
of  the  former,  while,  at  the  same  time,  if  that  should
fail  of  success,  he  prepared  for  the  latter.  For  this  pur-
pose, he  issued  circular  letters  to  all  the  cities  of  Cas-
tile, exhorting  them  in  most  gentle  terms,  and  with
assurances  of  full  pardon,  to  lay  down  their  arms ;  he
promised  such  cities  as  had  continued  faithful,  not  to
exact  from  them  the  subsidy  granted  in  the  late  cortes,
and  oifered  the  same  favour  to  such  as  returned  to  their
duty ;  he  engaged  that  no  office  should  be  conferred  for
the  future  upon  any  but  native  Castilians.  On  the  other
hand,  he  wrote  to  the  nobles,  exciting  them  to  appear
with  vigour  in  defence  of  their  own  rights,  and  those  of
the  crown,  against  the  exorbitant  claims  of  the  commons;
he  appointed  the  high  admiral  Don  Fadrique  Enriquez,
and  the  high  constable  of  Castile,  Don  Inigo  de  Velasco,
two  noblemen  of  great  abilities  as  well  as  influence,
regents  of  the  kingdom  in  conjunction  with  Adrian ;
and  he  gave  them  full  power  and  instructions,  if  the
obstinacy  of  the  malecontents  should  render  it  neces-
sary, to  vindicate  the  royal  authority  by  force  of  arms.1
The  large  These  concessions,  which,  at  the  time  of  his
Itonce  of  leavmg  Spain,  would  have  fully  satisfied  the
the  junta  people,  came  now  too  late  to  produce  any  ef-

concerning 7, ' mi .  , .  . A  . .  .  ,

their  griev-  lect. 1  he  junta,  relying  on  the  unanimity  with

which  the  nation  submitted  to  their  authority,

elated  with  the  success  which  hitherto  had  accompanied

1  P.  Heuter,  Ber.  Austr.  lib.  viii.  c.  6.  p.  188.

1520.]  BOOK III.  95

all  their  undertakings,  and  seeing  no  military  force
collected  to  defeat  or  obstruct  their  designs,  aimed  at
a  more  thorough  reformation  of  political  abuses.  They
had  been  employed  for  some  time  in  preparing  a  re-
monstrance, containing  a  large  enumeration,  not  only
of  the  grievances  of  which  they  craved  redress,  but  of
such  new  regulations  as  they  thought  necessary  for  the
security  of  their  liberties.  This  remonstrance,  which
is  divided  into  many  articles,  relating  to  all  the  different
members  of  which  the  constitution  was  composed,  as
well  as  the  various  departments  in  the  administration
of  government,  furnishes  us  with  more  authentic  evi-
dence concerning  the  intentions  of  the  junta,  than  can
be  drawn  from  the  testimony  of  the  later  Spanish  his-
torians, who  lived  in  times  when  it  became  fashionable,
and  even  necessary,  to  represent  the  conduct  of  the
malecontents  in  the  worst  light,  and  as  flowing  from
the  worst  motives.  After  a  long  preamble  concerning
the  various  calamities  under  which  the  nation  groaned,
and  the  errors  and  corruption  in  government  to  which
these  were  to  be  imputed,  they  take  notice  of  the  ex-
emplary patience  wherewith  the  people  had  endured
them,  until  self-preservation,  and  the  duty  which  they
owed  to  their  country,  had  obliged  them  to  assemble,
in  order  to  provide  in  a  legal  manner  for  their  own
safety,  and  that  of  the  constitution :  for  this  purpose
they  demanded  that  the  king  would  be  pleased  to  return
to  his  Spanish  dominions,  and  reside  there,  as  all  their
former  monarchs  had  done ;  that  he  would  not  marry
but  with  consent  of  the  cortes ;  that  if  he  should  be
obliged  at  any  time  to  leave  the  kingdom,  it  shall  not
be  lawful  to  appoint  any  foreigner  to  be  regent ;  that
the  present  nomination  of  cardinal  Adrian  to  that  office
shall  instantly  be  declared  void ;  that  he  would  not,  at
his  return,  bring  along  with  him  any  Flemings  or  other
strangers ;  that  no  foreign  troops  shall,  on  any  pretence
whatever,  be  introduced  into  the  kingdom ;  that  none

36  CHARLES V.  [1520.

but  natives  shall  be  capable  of  holding  any  office  or
benefice,  either  in  church  or  state;  that  no  foreigner
shall  be  naturalized ;  that  free  quarters  shall  not  be
granted  to  soldiers,  nor  to  the  members  of  the  king's
household,  for  any  longer  time  than  six  days,  and  that
only  when  the  court  is  in  a  progress ;  that  all  the  taxes
shall  be  reduced  to  the  same  state  they  were  in  at  the
death  of  queen  Isabella ;  that  all  alienations  of  the  royal
demesnes  or  revenues  since  the  queen's  death  shall  be
resumed;  that  all  new  offices  created  since  that  period
shall  be  abolished ;  that  the  subsidy  granted  by  the
late  cortes  in  Galicia  shall  not  be  exacted;  that  in  all
future  cortes  each  city  shall  send  one  representative  of
the  clergy,  one  of  the  gentry,  and  one  of  the  commons,
each  to  be  elected  by  his  own  order ;  that  the  crown
shall  not  influence  or  direct  any  city  with  regard  to  the
choice  of  its  representatives ;  that  no  member  of  the
cortes  shall  receive  an  office  or  pension  from  the  king,
either  for  himself  or  for  any  of  his  family,  under  pain  of
death,  and  confiscation  of  his  goods ;  that  each  city  or
community  shall  pay  a  competent  salary  to  its  repre-
sentative for  his  maintenance  during  his  *  attendance  on
the  cortes ;  that  the  cortes  shall  assemble  once  in  three
years  at  least,  whether  summoned  by  the  king  or  not,
and  shall  then  inquire  into  the  observation  of  the  arti-
cles now  agreed  upon,  and  deliberate  concerning  public
affairs ;  that  the  rewards  which  have  been  given  or
promised  to  any  of  "the  members  of  the  cortes  held  in
Galicia,  shall  be  revoked ;  that  it  shall  be  declared  a
capital  crime  to  send  gold,  silver,  or  jewels  out  of  the
kingdom ;  that  judges  shall  have  fixed  salaries  assigned
them,  and  shall  not  receive  any  share  of  the  fines  and
forfeitures  of  persons  condemned  by  them ;  that  no
grant  of  the  goods  of  persons  accused  shall  be  valid,  if
given  before  sentence  was  pronounced  against  them  ;
that  all  privileges  which  the  nobles  have  at  any  time
obtained,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  commons,  shall  be

1520.]  BOOK III.  97

revoked ;  that  the  government  of  cities  or  towns  shall
not  be  put  into  the  hands  of  noblemen ;  that  the  pos-
sessions of  the  nobility  shall  be  subject  to  all  public
taxes  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  the  commons ;
that  an  inquiry  be  made  into  the  conduct  of  such  as
have  been  intrusted  with  the  management  of  the  royal
patrimony  since  the  accession  of  Ferdinand ;  and  if  the
king  do  not  within  thirty  days  appoint  persons  pro-
perly qualified  for  that  service,  it  shall  be  lawful  for
the  cortes  to  nominate  them ;  that  indulgences  shall
not  be  preached  or  dispersed  in  the  kingdom  until  the
cause  of  publishing  them  be  examined  and  approved  of
by  the  cortes ;  that  all  the  money  arising  from  the  sale
of  indulgences  shall  be  faithfully  employed  in  carrying
on  war  against  the  infidels  ;  that  such  prelates  as  do
not  reside  in  their  dioceses  six  months  in  the  year,  shall
forfeit  their  revenues  during  the  time  they  are  absent ;
that  the  ecclesiastical  judges  and  their  officers  shall  not
exact  greater  fees  than  those  which  are  paid  in  the
secular  courts ;  that  the  present  archbishop  of  Toledo,
being  a  foreigner,  be  compelled  to  resign  that  dignity,
which  shall  be  conferred  upon  a  Castilian ;  that  the
king  shall  ratify  and  hold,  as  good  service  done  to  him
and  to  the  kingdom,  all  the  proceedings  of  the  junta,
and  pardon  any  irregularities  which  the  cities  may  have
committed  from  an  excess  of  zeal  in  a  good  cause  :  that
he  shall  promise  and  swear  in  the  most  solemn  manner
to  observe  all  these  articles,  and  on  no  occasion  attempt
either  to  elude,  or  to  repeal  them ;  and  that  he  shall
never  solicit  the  pope  or  any  other  prelate  to  grant
him  a  dispensation  or  absolution  from  this  oath  and
promised

The  spirit  Such  were  the  chief  articles  presented  by  the
whfcTif  Junta  to  their  sovereign.  As  the  feudal  institu-
breathed,  tions  in  the  several  kingdoms  of  Europe  were
originally  the  same,  the  genius  of  those  governments

k  Sandov.  206. P.  Mart.  Ep.  686.
VOL. IV.  H

98  CHARLES  V.  [1520.

which  arose  from  them  bore  a  strong  resemblance  to
each  other,  and  the  regulations  which  the  Castilians
attempted  to  establish  on  this  occasion,  differ  little  from
those  which  other  nations  have  laboured  to  procure  in
their  struggles  with  their  monarchs  for  liberty.  The
grievances  complained  of,  and  the  remedies  proposed
by  the  English  commons  in  their  contests  with  the
princes  of  the  house  of  Stewart,  particularly  resemble
those  upon  which  the  junta  now  insisted.  But  the  prin-
ciples of  liberty  seem  to  have  been  better  understood,
at  this  period,  by  the  Castilians,  than  by  any  other
people  in  Europe;  they  had  acquired  more  liberal
ideas  with  respect  to  their  own  rights  and  privileges ;
they  had  formed  more  bold  and  generous  sentiments
concerning  government;  and  discovered  an  extent  of
political  knowledge  to  which  the  English  themselves
did  not  attain  until  more  than  a  century  afterward.

It  is  not  improbable,  however,  that  the  spirit  of  re-
formation among  the  Castilians,  hitherto  unrestrained
by  authority,  and  imboldened  by  success,  became  too
impetuous,  and  prompted  the  junta  to  propose  inno-
vations which,  by  alarming  the  other  members  of  the
constitution,  proved  fatal  to  their  cause.  The  nobles,
who,  instead  of  obstructing,  had  favoured  or  connived
at  their  proceedings,  while  they  confined  their  demands
of  redress  to  such  grievances  as  had  been  occasioned
by  the  king's  want  of  experience,  and  by  the  imprudence
irritates  and  rapaciousness  of  his  foreign  ministers,  were
the  nobles.  fi|je(j  ^^  indignation  when  the  junta  began  to
touch  the  privileges  of  their  order,  and  plainly  saw
that  the  measures  of  the  commons  tended  no  less  to
break  the  power  of  the  aristocracy  than  to  limit  the
prerogatives  of  the  crown.  The  resentment  which
they  had  conceived  on  account  of  Adrian's  promotion
to  the  regency,  abated  considerably  upon  the  emperor's
raising  the  constable  and  admiral  to  joint  power  with
him  in  that  office ;  and  as  their  pride  and  dignity  were

1520.]  BOOK III.  99

less  hurt  by  suffering  the  prince  to  possess  an  extensive
prerogative,  than  by  admitting  the  high  pretensions  of
the  people,  they  determined  to  give  their  sovereign  the
assistance  which  he  had  demanded  of  them,  and  began
to  assemble  their  vassals  for  that  purpose.
The  depu-  The  junta,  meanwhile,  expected  with  impa-

ties  of  the .  ^  ,  , , .

junta  dare  tience  the  emperor  s  answer  to  their  remon-
"e°mPthe~ir  strance,  which  they  had  appointed  some  of  their
remon-  number  to  present.  The  members  intrusted

strances.

Oct.  20.  with  this  commission  set  out  immediately  for
Germany ;  but  having  received  at  different  places  cer-
tain intelligence  from  court,  that  they  could  not  venture
to  appear  there  without  endangering  their  lives,  they
stopt  short  in  their  journey,  and  acquainted  the  junta
of  the  information  which  had  been  given  them.1  This
excited  such  violent  passions  as  transported  the  whole
party  beyond  all  bounds  of  prudence  or  of  moderation.
That  a  king  of  Castile  should  deny  his  subjects  access
into  his  presence,  or  refuse  to  listen  to  their  humble
petitions,  was  represented  as  an  act  of  tyranny  so
unprecedented  and  intolerable,  that  nothing  now  re*
mained  but  with  arms  in  their  hands  to  drive  away  that
ravenous  band  of  foreigners  which  encompassed  the
throne,  who,  after  having  devoured  the  wealth  of  the
kingdom,  found  it  necessary  to  prevent  the  cries  of  an
Violent  injured  people  from  reaching  the  ears  of  their
SanTof"  sovereign.  Many  insisted  warmly  on  approving
the  junta.  a  motion  which  had  formerly  been  made,  for
depriving  Charles,  during  the  life  of  his  mother,  of  the
regal  titles  and  authority  which  had  been  too  rashly
conferred  upon  him,  from  a  false  supposition  of  her
total  inability  for  government.  Some  proposed  to  pro-
vide a  proper  person  to  assist  her  in  the  administration
of  public  affairs,  by  marrying  the  queen  to  the  prince
of  Calabria,  the  heir  of  the  Aragonese  kings  of  Naples,
who  had  been  detained  in  prison  since  the  time  that

i  Sandov.  145.
H  2

100  CHARLES V.  [1520.

Ferdinand  had  dispossessed  his  ancestors  of  their  crown.
All  agreed  that,  as  the  hopes  of  obtaining  redress  and
security,  merely  by  presenting  their  requests  to  their
sovereign,  had  kept  them  too  long  in  a  state  of  inaction,
and  prevented  them  from  taking  advantage  of  the  una-
nimity with  which  the  nation  declared  in  their  favour,
it  was  now  necessary  to  collect  their  whole  force,  and
to  exert  themselves  with  vigour,  in  opposing  this  fatal
combination  of  the  king  and  the  nobility  against  their
liberties.™

Take  the  They  soon  took  the  field  with  twenty  thou-
eld*  sand  men.  Violent  disputes  arose  concerning
the  command  of  this  army.  Padilla,  the  darling  of  the
people  and  soldiers,  was  the  only  person  whom  they
thought  worthy  of  this  honour.  But  Don  Pedro  de
Giron,  the  eldest  son  of  the  cond£  de  Uruena-,  a  young
nobleman  of  the  first  order,  having  lately  joined  the
commons  out  of  private  resentment  against  the  emperor,
the  respect  due  to  his  birth,  together  with  a  secret
desire  of  disappointing  Padilla,  of  whose  popularity
many  members  of  the  junta  had  become  jealous,
procured  him  the  office  of 'general ;  though  he
soon  gave  them  a  fatal  proof  that  he  possessed  neither
the  experience,  the  abilities,  nor  the  steadiness  which
that  important  station  required.

There  ents  ^e  regents>  meanwhile,  appointed  Rioseco
and  nobles  as  the  place  of  rendezvous  for  their  troops,
which,  though  far  inferior  to  those  of  the  com-
mons in  number,  excelled  them  greatly  in  discipline
and  in  valour.  They  had  drawn  a  considerable  body
of  regular  and  veteran  infantry  out  of  Navarre.  Their
cavalry,  which  formed  the  chief  strength  of  their  army,
consisted  mostly  of  gentlemen  accustomed  to  the  mili-
tary life,  and  animated  with  the  martial  spirit  peculiar
to  their  order  in  that  age.  The  infantry  of  the  junta
was  formed  entirely  of  citizens  and  mechanics,  little

»  P.  Mart.  Ep.  688.

neraTo

1520.]  BOOK III.  101

acquainted  with  the  use  of  arms.  The  small  body  of
cavalry  which  they  had  been  able  to  raise,  was  com-
posed of  persons  of  ignoble  birth,  and  perfect  strangers
to  the  service  into  which  they  entered.  The  cha-
racter of  the  generals  differed  no  less  than  that  of  their
troops.  The  royalists  were  commanded  by  the  conde
de  Haro,  the  constable's  eldest  son,  an  officer  of  great
experience  and  of  distinguished  abilities.
Impru-  Giron  marched  with  his  army  directly  to
Rioseco,  and  seizing  the  villages  and  passes
f"  around  it,  hoped  that  the  royalists  would  be
the  junta,  obliged  either  to  surrender  for  want  of  provi-
sions, or  to  fight  with  disadvantage  before  all  their  troops
were  assembled.  But  he  had  not  the  abilities,  nor  his
troops  the  patience  and  discipline,  necessary  for  the
execution  of  such  a  scheme.  The  conde  de  Haro
found  little  difficulty  in  conducting  a  considerable  re-
inforcement through  all  his  posts  into  the  town  ;  and
Giron,  despairing  of  being  able  to  reduce  it,  advanced
suddenly  to  Villapanda,  a  place  belonging  to  the  con-
stable, in  which  the  enemy  had  their  chief  magazine
of  provisions.  By  this  ill-judged  motion,  he  left  Tor-
desillas  open  to  the  royalists,  whom  the  conde  de  Haro
led  thither  in  the  night  with  the  utmost  secrecy
and  dispatch  ;  and  attacking  the  town,  in  which
Giron  had  left  no  other  garrison  than  a  regiment  of
priests,  raised  by  the1  bishop  of  Zamora,  he,  by  break
of  day,  forced  his  way  into  it  after  a  desperate  resist-
ance, became  master  of  the  queen's  person,  took  pri-
soners many  members  of  the  junta,  and  recovered  the
great  seal,  with  the  other  ensigns  of  government.

By  this  fatal  blow,  the  junta  lost  all  the  reputation
and  authority  which  they  had  derived  from  seeming  to
act  by  the  queen's  commands  ;  such  of  the  nobles  as
had  hitherto  been  wavering  or  undetermined  in  their
choice,  now  joined  the  regents  with  all  their  forces  ;
and  a  universal  consternation  seized  the  partisans  of

102  CHARLES  V.  [1520

the  commons.  This  was  much  increased  by  the  sus-
picions they  began  to  entertain  of  Giron,  whom  they
loudly  accused  of  having  betrayed  Tordesillas  to  the
enemy ;  and  though  that  charge  seems  to  have  been
destitute  of  foundation,  the  success  of  the  royalists
being  owing  to  Giron's  ill  conduct,  rather  than  to  his
treachery,,  he  so  entirely  lost  credit  with  his  party,  that
he  resigned  his  commission,  and  retired  to  one  of  his
castles. n

The  junta  Such  members  of  the  junta  as  had  escaped
t\dehirrsVs°.  the  enemy's  hands  at  Tordesillas,  fled  to  Valla-
tem*  dolid ;  and  as  it  would  have  required  long  time
to  supply  the  places  of  those  who  were  prisoners  by  a
new  election,  they  made  choice  among  themselves  of  a
small  number  of  persons,  to  whom  they  committed  the
supreme  direction  of  affairs.  Their  army,  which  grew
stronger  every  day  by  the  arrival  of  troops  from  diffe-
rent parts  of  the  kingdom,  marched  likewise  to  Valla-
dolid ;  and  Padilla being  appointed  commander-in-chief,
the  spirits  of  the  soldiery  revived,  and  the  whole  party,
forgetting  the  late  misfortune,  continued  to  express  the
same  ardent  zeal  for  the  liberties  of  their  country,  and
the  same  implacable  animosity  against  their  oppressors.
Their  ex-  What  they  stood  most  in  need  of  was  money
&erdraiasing  to  Pav  their  troops.  A  great  part  of  the  current
money.  ^^  ha(j  been  carried  out  of  the  kingdom  by
the  Flemings ;  the  stated  taxes  levied  in  times  of  peace
were  inconsiderable ;  commerce  of  every  kind  being
interrupted  by  the  war,  the  sum  which  it  yielded  de-
creased daily ;  and  the  junta  were  afraid  of  disgusting
the  people  by  burdening  them  with  new  impositions,
to  which,  in  that  age,  they  were  little  accustomed.  But
from  this  difficulty  they  were  extricated  by  Donna
Maria  Pacheco,  Padilla's  wife,  a  woman  of  noble  birth,
of  great  abilities,  of  boundless  ambition,  and  animated
with  the  most  ardent  zeal  in  support  of  the  cause  of

"  Miscellaneous  Tracts  by  Dr.  Mich.  Geddes,  vol.  i.  p.  278.

1520.]  BOOK III.  103

the  junta.  She,  with  a  boldness  superior  to  those
superstitious  fears  which  often  influence  her  sex,  pro-
posed to  seize  all  the  rich  and  magnificent  ornaments
in  the  cathedral  of  Toledo ;  but,  lest  that  action,  by
its  appearance  of  impiety,  might  offend  the  people,  she
and  her  retinue  marched  to  the  church  in  solemn  pro-
cession, in  mourning  habits,  with  tears  in  their  eyes,
beating  their  breasts,  and  falling  on  their  knees,  im-
plored the  pardon  of  the  saints  whose  shrines  she  was
about  to  violate.  By  this  artifice,  which  screened  her
from  the  imputation  of  sacrilege,  and  persuaded  the
people  that  necessity  and  zeal  for  a  good  cause  had
constrained  her,  though  with  reluctance,  to  venture
upon  this  action,  she  stripped  the  cathedral  of  whatever
was  valuable,  and  procured  a  considerable  sum  of
money  for  the  junta.0  The  regents,  no  less  at  a  loss
how  to  maintain  their  troops,  the  revenues  of  the  crown
having  been  either  dissipated  by  the  Flemings  or  seized
by  the  commons,  were  obliged  to  take  the  queen's
jewels,  together  with  the  plate  belonging  to  the  nobility,
and  apply  them  to  that  purpose ;  and,  when  those  failed,
they  obtained  a  small  sum  by  way  of  loan  from  the
king  of  Portugal.9

Lose  time  The  noMity  discovered  great  unwillingness
in  negotia-  to  proceed  to  extremities  with  the  junta.  They

tions  with  .  » ' •  i  11

the  nobility,  were  animated  with  no  less  hatred  than  the
commons  against  the  Flemings ;  they  approved  much
of  several  articles  in  the  remonstrance  ;  they  thought
the  juncture  favourable,  not  only  for  redressing  past
grievances,  but  for  rendering  the  constitution  more
perfect  and  secure  by  new  regulations ;  they  were  afraid,
that  while  the  two  orders,  of  which  the  legislature  was
composed,  wasted  each  other's  strength  by  mutual  hos-
tilities, the  crown  would  rise  to  power  on  the  ruin  or
weakness  of  both,  and  encroach  no  less  on  the  inde-

0  P.  Mart.  Ep.  718.
P  Sandov.  308. Diet,  de  Bayle,  art,  Padilla.

104  CHARLES V.  [1520.

pendence  of  the  nobles,  than  on  the  privileges  of  the
commons. To  this  disposition  were  owing  the  frequent
overtures  of  peace  which  the  regents  made  to  the  junta,
and  the  continual  negotiations  they  carried  on  during
the  progress  of  their  military  operations. Nor  were  the
terms  which  they  offered  unreasonable ;  for,  on  condi-
tion that  the  junta  would  pass  from  a  few  articles  most
subversive  of  the  royal  authority,  or  inconsistent  with
the  rights  of  the  nobility,  they  engaged  to  procure  the
emperor's  consent  to  their  other  demands,  which,  if  he,
through  the  influence  of  evil  counsellors,  should  refuse,
several  of  the  nobles  promised  to  join  with  the  commons
in  their  endeavours  to  extort  it.q Such  divisions,  how-
ever, prevailed  among  the  members  of  the  junta,  as
prevented  their  deliberating  calmly,  or  judging  with
prudence. Some  of  the  cities  which  had  entered  into
the  confederacy,  were  filled  with  that  mean  jealousy
and  distrust  of  each  other,  which  rivalship  in  commerce
or  in  grandeur  is  apt  to  inspire  ;  the  constable,  by  his
influence  and  promises,  had  prevailed  on  the  inhabi-
tants of  Burgos  to  abandon  the  junta,  and  other  noble-
men had  shaken  the  fidelity  of  some  of  the  lesser  cities;
no  person  had  arisen  among  the  commons  of  such
superior  abilities  or  elevation  of  mind  as  to  acquire  the
direction,  of  their  affairs  ;  Padilla,  their  general,  was  a
man  of  popular  qualities,  but  distrusted  for  that  reason
by  those  of  highest  rank  who  adhered  to  the  junta ;
the  conduct  of  Giron  led  the  people  to  view  with  sus-
picion every  person of  noble  birth  who  joined  their
party ; so that  the strongest  marks  of  irresolution,
mutual  distrust,  and  mediocrity  of  genius,  appeared  in
all  their  proceedings  at  this  time. After  many  con-
sultations held  concerning  the  terms  proposed  by  the
regents,  they  suffered  themselves  to  be  so  carried  away
by  resentment  against  the  nobility,  that,  rejecting  all
thoughts  of  accommodation,  they  threatened  to  strip

i  P.  Mart.  Ep.  695.  713. Geddes's  Tracts,  i.  261.

1521.]  BOOK III.  105

them  of  the  crown  lands,  which  they  or  their  ancestors
had  usurped,  and  to  reannex  these  to  the  royal  domain.
Upon  this  preposterous  scheme,  which  would  at  once
have  annihilated  all  the  liberties  for  which  they  had
been  struggling,  by  rendering  the  kings  of  Castile  ab-
solute and  independent  on  their  subjects,  they  were  so
intent,  that  they  now  exclaimed  with  less  vehemence
against  the  exactions  of  the  foreign  ministers,  than
against  the  exorbitant  power  and  wealth  of  the  nobles,
and  seemed  to  hope  that  they  might  make  peace  with
Charles,  by  offering  to  enrich  him  with  their  spoils.
Elated  The  success  which  Padilla  had  met  with  in

several  small  encounters,  and  in  reducing  some
inconsiderable  towns,  helped  to  precipitate  the
members  of  the  junta  into  this  measure,  filling
them  with  such  confidence  in  the  valour  of  their  troops,
that  they  hoped  for  an  easy  victory  over  the  royalists.
Padilla,  that  his  army  might  not  remain  inactive  while
flushed  with  good  fortune,  laid  siege  to  Torrelobaton,
a  place  of  greater  strength  and  importance  than  any
that  he  had  hitherto  ventured  to  attack,  and  which  was
defended  by  a  sufficient  garrison  ;  and  though  the  be-
sieged made  a  desperate  resistance,  and  the  admiral
March  i,  attempted  to  relieve  them,  he  took  the  town  by
1521  •  storm,  and  gave  it  up  to  be  plundered  by  his
soldiers.  If  he  had  marched  instantly  with  his  victo-
rious army  to  Tordesillas,  the  head-quarters  of  the
royalists,  he  could  hardly  have  failed  of  making  an
effectual  impression  on  their  troops,  whom  he  would
have  found  in  astonishment  at  the  briskness  of  his  ope-
rations, and  far  from  being  of  sufficient  strength  to
impru-  give  him  battle.  But  the  fickleness  and  impru-
theirecon-  dence  of  the  junta  prevented  his  taking  this
duct>  step.  Incapable,  like  all  popular  associations,
either  of  carrying  on  war  or  of  making  peace,  they
listened  again  to  overtures  of  accommodation,  and  even
agreed  to  a  short  suspension  of  arms.  This  negotiation

106  CHARLES  V.  [1521.

terminated  in  nothing ;  but  while  it  was  carrying  on,
many  of  Padilla's  soldiers,  unacquainted  with  the  re-
straints of  discipline,  went  off  with  the  booty  which
they  had  got  at  Torrelobaton ;  and  others,  wearied  out
by  the  unusual  length  of  the  campaign,  deserted/  The
constable  too  had  leisure  to  assemble  his  forces  at
Burgos,  and  to  prepare  every  thing  for  taking  the
field ;  and  as  soon  as  the  truce  expired,  he  effected  a
junction  with  the  conde  de  Haro,  in  spite  of  all  Padilla's
efforts  to  prevent  it.  They  advanced  immediately  to-
wards Torrelobaton ;  and  Padilla,  finding  the  number
of  his  troops  so  diminished  that  he  durst  not  risk  a
battle,  attempted  to  retreat  to  Toro,  which,  if  he  could
have  accomplished,  the  invasion  of  Navarre  at  that
juncture  by  the  French,  and  the  necessity  which  the
regents  must  have  been  under  of  detaching  men  to  that
The  nobles  kingdom,  might  have  saved  him  from  danger.
aim°kof  the  ^ut  ^aro>  sensiWe  how  fatal  the  consequences
junta,  ^  would  be  of  suffering  him  to  escape,  marched
with  such  rapidity  at  the  head  of  his  cavalry,
that  he  came  up  with  him  near  Villalar,  and,  without
waiting  for  his  infantry,  advanced  to  the  attack.  Pa-
dilla's army,  fatigued  and  disheartened  by  their  preci-
pitant retreat,  which  they  could  not  distinguish  from
a  flight,  happened  at  that  time  to  be  passing  over  a
ploughed  field,  on  which  such  a  violent  rain  had  fallen,
that  the  soldiers  sunk  almost  to  the  knees  at  every  step,
and  remained  exposed  to  the  fire  of  some  field-pieces,
which  the  royalists  had  brought  along  with  them.  All
these  circumstances  so  disconcerted  and  intimidated
And  de-  raw  soldiers,  that,  without  facing  the  enemy,  or
feat  it.  making  any  resistance,  they  fled  in  the  utmost
confusion.  Padilla  exerted  himself  with  extraordinary
courage  and  activity  in  order  to  rally  them,  though  in
vain,  fear  rendering  them  deaf  both  to  his  threats  and
entreaties  :  upon  which,  finding  matters  irretrievable,

*  Sandov.  336.

1521.]  BOOK III.  107

and  resolving  not  to  survive  the  disgrace  of  that  day,
and  the  ruin  of  his  party,  he  rushed  into  the  thickest  of
the  enemy  ;  but  being  wounded  and  dismounted,  he
was  taken  prisoner.  His  principal  officers  shared  the
same  fate ;  the  common  soldiers  were  allowed  to  depart
unhurt,  the  nobles  being  too  generous  to  kill  men  who
threw  down  their  arms.a

The  resentment  of  his  enemies  did  not  suffer  Padilla
to  linger  long  in  expectation  of  what  should  befall  him.
Next  day  he  was  condemned  to  lose  his  head,  though
without  any  regular  trial,  the  notoriety  of  the  crime
being  supposed  sufficient  to  supersede  the  formality  of
Padiiia,  a  legal  process.  He  was  led  instantly  to  exe-
raf  P8uetnto"  cution,  together  with  Don  John  Bravo,  and  Don
death.  Francis  Maldonada,  the  former  commander  of
the  Segovians,  and  the  latter  of  the  troops  of  Salamanca.
Padilla  viewed  the  approach  of  death  with  calm  but
undaunted  fortitude ;  and  when  Bravo,  his  fellow-suf-
ferer, expressed  some  indignation  at  hearing  himself
proclaimed  a  traitor,  he  checked  him,  by  observing,
"  That  yesterday  was  the  time  to  have  displayed  the
spirit  of  gentlemen,  this  day  to  die  with  the  meekness
of  Christians."  Being  permitted  to  write  to  his  wife,
and  to  the  community  of  Toledo,  the  place  of  his  nati-
vity, he  addressed  the  former  with  a  manly  and  virtu-
ous tenderness,  and  the  latter  with  the  exultation  natural
to  one  who  considered  himself  as  a  martyr  for  the  liber-
ties of  his  country/  After  this,  he  submitted  quietly

8  Sandov.  345,  &c.  P.  Mart.  Ep.  720.  Miniana,  Contin.  p.  26.  Epitome  de  la
Vide  y  Hechos  del  Emper.  Carlos  V.  por  D.  Juan  Anton,  de  Vera  y  Zuniga.  4to.
Madr.  1627.  p.  19.

1  The  strain  of  these  letters  is  so  eloquent  and  high-spirited,  that  I  have  translated
them  for  the  entertainment  of  my  readers  :• —

The  Letter  of  Don  John  Padilla  to  his  Wife.

"  SENORA, — If  your  grief  did  not  afflict  me  more  than  my  own  death,  1  should
deem  myself  perfectly  happy.  For  the  end  of  life  being  certain  to  all  men,  the
Almighty  confers  a  mark  of  distinguishing  favour  upon  that  person  for  whom  he
appoints  a  death  such  as  mine,  which,  though  lamented  by  many,  is  nevertheless  ac-
ceptable unto  him.  It  would  require  more  time  than  I  now  have,  to  write  any  thing
that  could  afford  you  consolation.  That  my  enemies  will  not  grant  me,  nor  do  I
wish  to  delay  the  reception  of  that  crown  which  I  hope  to  enjoy.  You  may  bewail
your  own  loss,  but  not  my  death,  which,  being  so  honourable,  ought  not  to  be

108  CHARLES V.  [1521.

to  his  fate.  Most  of  the  Spanish  historians,  accustomed
to  ideas  of  government  and  of  regal  power  very  dif-
ferent from  those  upon  which  he  acted,  have  been  so
eager  to  testify  their  disapprobation  of  the  cause  in
which  he  was  engaged,  that  they  have  neglected,  or
have  been  afraid  to  do  justice  to  his  virtues  ;  and,  by
blackening  his  memory,  have  endeavoured  to  deprive
him  of  that  pity  which  is  seldom  denied  to  illustrious
sufferers.

Ruin  of  The  victory  at  Villalar  proved  as  decisive  as
the  party.  ^  was  comp]ef-ei  Valladolid,  the  most  zealous
of  all  the  associated  cities,  opened  its  gates  immediately
to  the  conquerors,  and  being  treated  with  great  cle-
mency by  the  regents,  Medina  del  Campo,  Segovia,
and  many  other  towns,  followed  its  example.  This  sud-
den dissolution  of  a  confederacy,  formed  not  upon
slight  disgusts,  or  upon  trifling  motives,  into  which  the
whole  body  of  the  people  had  entered,  and  which  had
been  allowed  time  to  acquire  a  considerable  degree  of

lamented  by  any.  My  soul,  for  nothing  else  is  left  to  me,  I  bequeath  to  you.  You
will  receive  it,  as  the  thing  in  this  world  which  you  value  most.  I  do  not  write  to
my  father,  Pero  Lopez,  because  I  dare  not ;  for,  though  I  have  shewn  myself  to  be
his  son  in  daring  to  lose  my  life,  I  have  not  been  the  heir  of  his  good  fortune.  I
will  not  attempt  to  say  any  thing  more,  that  I  may  not  tire  the  executioner,  who
waits  for  me ;  and  that  I  may  not  excite  a  suspicion,  that,  in  order  to  prolong  my
life,  I  lengthen  out  my  letter.  My  servant  Sosia,  an  eye-witness,  and  to  whom  I
have  communicated  my  most  secret  thoughts,  will  inform  you  of  what  I  cannot  now
write  ;  and  thus  I  rest,  expecting  the  instrument  of  your  grief,  and  of  my  deliver-
ance."

His  Letter  to  the  City  of  Toledo.

"  To  thee,  the  crown  of  Spain,  and  the  light  of  the  whole  world,  free  from  the
time  of  the  mighty  Goths  :  to  thee,  who,  by  shedding  the  blood  of  strangers,  as  well
as  thy  own  blood,  hast  recovered  liberty  for  thyself  and  thy  neighbouring  cities,  thy
legitimate  son,  Juan  de  Padilla,  gives  information,  how  by  the  blood  of  his  body,
thy  ancient  victories  are  to  be  refreshed.  If  fate  hath  not  permitted  my  actions  to
be  placed  among  your  successful  and  celebrated  exploits,  the  fault  has  been  in  my
ill  fortune,  not  in  my  good  will.  This  1  request  of  thee,  as  of  a  mother,  to  accept,
since  God  hath  given  me  nothing  more  to  lose  for  thy  sake,  than  that  which  I  am
now  to  relinquish.  I  am  more  solicitous  about  thy  good  opinion  than  about  my  own
life.  The  shiftings  of  fortune,  which  never  stands  still,  are  many.  But  this  I  see
with  infinite  consolation,  that  I,  the  least  of  thy  children,  suffer  death  for  thee  ;  and
that  thou  hast  nursed  at  thy  breasts  such  as  may  take  vengeance  for  my  wjrongs.
Many  tongues  will  relate  the  manner  of  my  death,  of  which  I  am  still  ignorant,
though  I  know  it  to  be  near.  My  end  will  testify  what  was  my  desire.  My  soul  I
recommend  to  thee  as  the  patroness  of  Christianity.  Of  my  body  I  say  nothing,
for  it  is  not  mine.  I  can  write  nothing  more,  for  at  this  very  moment  I  feel  the
knife  at  my  throat,  with  greater  dread  of  thy  displeasure  than  apprehension  of  my
own  pain."  Sandov.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  478.

1521.]  BOOK III.  109

order  and  consistence  by  establishing  a  regular  plan  of
government,  is  the  strongest  proof  either  of  the  inabi-
lity of  its  leaders,  or  of  some  secret  discord  reigning
among  its  members.  Though  part  of  that  army  by
which  they  had  been  subdued  was  obliged,  a  few  days
after  the  battle,  to  march  towards  Navarre,  in  order  to
check  the  progress  of  the  French  in  that  kingdom,
nothing  could  prevail  on  the  dejected  commons  of  Cas-
tile to  take  arms  again,  and  to  embrace  such  a  favour-
able opportunity  of  acquiring  those  rights  and  pri-
vileges for  which  they  had  appeared  so  zealous.
The  city  of  Toledo  alone,  animated  by  Donna

fends  TO-  Maria  Pacheco,  Padiiia's  widow,  who,  instead
lertatWlth  °^  bewailing  her  husband  with  a  womanish
spirit.  sorrow,  prepared  to  revenge  his  death,  and  to
prosecute  that  cause  in  defence  of  which  he  had  suf-
fered, must  be  excepted.  Respect?  for  her  sex,  or  ad-
miration for  her  courage  and  abilities,  as  well  as  sym-
pathy with  her  misfortunes,  and  veneration  for  the  me-
mory of  her  husband,  secured  her  the  same  ascendant
over  the  people  which  he  had  possessed.  The  pru-
dence and  vigour  with  which  she  acted,  justified  that
confidence  they  placed  in  her.  She  wrote  to  the  French
general  in  Navarre,  encouraging  him  to  invade  Castile
by  the  offer  of  powerful  assistance.  She  endeavoured,
by  her  letters  and  emissaries,  to  revive  the  spirit  and
hopes  of  the  other  cities.  She  raised  soldiers,  and
exacted  a  great  sum  from  the  clergy  belonging  to  the
cathedral,  in  order  to  defray  the  expense  of  keeping
them  on  foot."  She  employed  every  artifice  that  could
interest  or  inflame  the  populace.  For  thi^  purpose  she
ordered  crucifixes  to  be  used  by  her  troops  instead  of
colours,  as  if  they  had  been  at  war  with  the  infidels
and  enemies  of  religion;  she  marched  through  the
streets  of  Toledo  with  her  son,  a  young  child,  clad  in
deep  mourning,  seated  on  a  mule,  having  a  standard

"  P.  Mart.  Ep.  727.

110  CHARLES V.  [1521

carried  before  him,  representing  the  manner  of  his
father's  execution.3"  By  all  these  means  she  kept  the
minds  of  the  people  in  such  perpetual  agitation  as
prevented  their  passions  from  subsiding,  and  rendered
them  insensible  of  the  dangers  to  which  they  were
exposed  by  standing  alone  in  opposition  to  the  royal
authority.  While  the  army  was  employed  in  Navarre,
the  regents  were  unable  to  attempt  the  reduction  of
Toledo  by  force;  and  all  their  endeavours,  either  to
diminish  Donna  Maria's  credit  with  the  people,  or  to
gain  her  by  large  promises,  and  the  solicitations  of  her
brother  the  marquis  de  Mondeiar,  proved  ineffectual.
Upon  the  expulsion  of  the  French  out  of  Navarre,  part
of  the  army  returned  into  Castile,  and  invested  Toledo.
Even  this  made  no  impression  on  the  intrepid  and  ob-
stinate courage  of  Donna  Maria.  She  defended  the
town  with  vigour,  her  troops  in  several  sallies  beat  the
royalists,  and  no  progress  was  made  towards  reducing
the  place,  until  the  clergy,  whom  she  had  highly  of-
fended by  invading  their  property,  ceased  to  support
her.  As  soon  as  they  received  information  of  the  death
of  William  de  Croy,  archbishop  of  Toledo,  whose  pos-
session of  that  see  was  their  chief  grievance,  and  that
the  emperor  had  named  a  Castilian  to  succeed  him,
they  openly  turned  against  her,  and  persuaded  the  peo-
ple that  she  had  acquired  such  influence  over  them  by
the  force  of  enchantments ;  that  she  was  assisted  by  a
familiar  demon,  which  attended  her  in  the  form  of  a
negro-maid ;  and  that  by  its  suggestions  she  regulated
every  part  of  her  conduct/  The  credulous  multitude,
whom  their  impatience  of  a  long  blockade,  and  despair
of  obtaining  sucQpijrs  either  from  the  cities  formerly  in
confederacy  with  them,  or  from  the  French,  rendered
desirous  of  peace,  took  arms  against  her,  and,  driving
her  out  of  the  city,  surrendered  it  to  the  royal-
ists. She  retired  to  the  citadel,  which  she  de-

Sandov.  375.  y  p.  Mart.  Ep.  737.

Feb.  10.
1522.

1522.]  BOOK III.  Ill

fended  with  amazing  fortitude  four  months  longer  ;  and
when  reduced  to  the  last  extremities,  she  made
her  escape  in  disguise,  and  fled  to  Portugal,
where  she  had  many  relations.2

Fatal  ef-  Upon  her  flight  the  citadel  surrendered.
thHhfii  Tranquillity  was  re-established  in  Castile;  and
war>  this  bold  attempt  of  the  commons,  like  all  unsuc-
cessful insurrections,  contributed  to  confirm  and  extend
the  power  of  the  crown,  which  it  was  intended  to  mode-
rate and  abridge.  The  cortes  still  continued  to  make  a
part  of  the  Castilian  constitution,  and  was  summoned  to
meet  whenever  the  king  stood  in  need  of  money;  but
instead  of  adhering  to  their  ancient  and  cautious  form
of  examining  and  redressing  public  grievances,  before
they  proceeded  to  grant  any  supply,  the  more  courtly
custom  of  voting  a  donative  in  the  first  place  was  in-
troduced; and  the  sovereign,  having  obtained  all  that  he
wanted,  never  allowed  them  to  enter  into  any  inquiry,
or  to  attempt  any  reformation  injurious  to  his  authority.
The  privileges  which  the  cities  had  enjoyed  were  gra-
dually circumscribed  or  abolished;  their  commerce
began  from  this  period  to  decline;  and  becoming  less
wealthy  and  less  populous,  they  lost  that  power  and
influence  which  they  had  acquired  in  the  cortes.
The  pro-  While  Castile  was  exposed  to  the  calamities
of  the  of  c[v{\  war  the  kingdom  of  Valencia  was  torn

-  7  ~ .

by  intestine  commotions  still  more  violent.

The  association  which  had  been  formed  in  the
city  of  Valencia  in  the  year  1520,  and  which  was  dis-
tinguished by  the  name  of  the  Germanada,  continued
to  subsist  after  the  emperor's  departure  from  Spain.
The  members  of  it,  upon  pretext  of  defending  the  coasts
against  the  descents  of  the  corsairs  of  Barbary,  and
under  sanction  of  that  permission  which  Charles  had
rashly  granted  them,  refused  to  lay  down  their  arms.
But  as  the  grievances  which  the  Valencians  aimed  at

2  Sandov.  375, P.  Mart.  Ep.  754, Ferrer,  viii.  563.

msurrec-

112  CHARLES V.  [1522.

redressing  proceeded  from  the  arrogance  and  exactions
of  the  nobility,  rather  than  from  any  unwarrantable  exer-
cise of  the  royal  prerogative,  their  resentment  turned
chiefly  against  the  former.  As  soon  as  they  were  al-
lowed the  use  of  arms,  and  became  conscious  of  their
own  strength,  they  grew  impatient  to  take  vengeance  of
their  oppressors.  They  drove  the  nobles  out  of  most
of  the  cities,  plundered  their  houses,  wasted  their  lands,
and  assaulted  their  castles.  They  then  proceeded  to
elect  thirteen  persons,  one  from  each  company  of  trades-
men established  at  Valencia,  and  committed  the  admi-
nistration of  government  to  them,  under  pretext  that
they  would  reform  the  laws,  establish  one  uniform  mode
of  dispensing  justice  without  partiality  or  regard  to  the
distinction  of  ranks,  and  thus  restore  men  to  some  de-
gree of  their  original  equality.

The  nobles  were  obliged  to  take  arms  in  self-defence.
Hostilities  began,  and  were  carried  on  with  all  the  ran-
cour with  which  resentment  at  oppression  inspired  the
one  party,  and  the  idea  of  insulted  dignity  animated  the
other.  As  no  person  of  honourable  birth,  or  of  liberal
education,  joined  the  Germanada,  the  councils  as  well
as  troops  of  the  confederacy  were  conducted  by  low  me-
chanics, who  acquired  the  confidence  of  an  enraged  mul-
titude, chiefly  by  the  fierceness  of  their  zeal  and  the  ex-
travagance of  their  proceedings.  Among  such  men,  the
laws  introduced  in  civilized  nations,  in  order  to  restrain
or  moderate  the  violence  of  war,  were  unknown  or  de-
spised ;  and  they  run  into  the  wildest  excesses  of  cruelty
and  outrage.

The  emperor,  occupied  with  suppressing  the  insur-
rection in  Castile,  which  more  immediately  threatened
the  subversion  of  his  power  and  prerogative,  was  un-
able to  give  much  attention  to  the  tumults  in  Valencia,
and  left  the  nobility  of  that  kingdom  to  fight  their  own
battles.  His  viceroy,  the  conde  de  Melito,  had  the  su-
preme command  of  the  forces  which  the  nobles  raised

1522.]  BOOK III.  113

among  the  vassals.  The  Germanada  carried  on  the
war  during  the  years  1520  and  21,  with  a  more  per-
severing courage  than  could  have  been  expected  from
a  body  so  tumultuary,  under  the  conduct  of  such  leaders.
They  defeated  the  nobility  in  several  actions,  whichj
though  not  considerable,  were  extremely  sharp.  They
repulsed  them  in  their  attempts  to  reduce  different
towns.  But  the  nobles,  by  their  superior  skill  in  war,
and  at  the  head  of  troops  more  accustomed  to  service,
gained  the  advantage  in  most  of  the  rencounters.  At
length  they  were  joined  by  a  body  of  Castilian  cavalry,
which  the  regents  dispatched  towards  Valencia,  soon
after  their  victory  over  Padilla  at  Villalar,  and  by  their
assistance  the  Valencian  nobles  acquired  such  superio-
rity, that  they  entirely  broke  and  ruined  the  Germanada.
The  leaders  of  the  party  were  put  to  death,  almost  with-
out any  formality  of  legal  trial,  and  suffered  such  cruel
punishments,  as  the  sense  of  recent  injuries  prompted
their  adversaries  to  inflict.  The  government  of  Valencia
was  re-established  in  its  ancient  form.a
Appear-  ^n  Aragon,  violent  symptoms  of  the  same  spi-
ances  of  rit  of  disaffection  and  sedition,  which  reigned  in

disaffec-

tion  in the  other  kingdoms  of  Spain,  began  to  appear,
but  by  the  prudent  conduct  of  the  viceroy,  Don
John  de  Lanusa,  they  were  so  far  composed,  as  to  pre-
vent their  breaking  out  into  any  open  insurrection.
- But  in  the  island  of  Majorca,  annexed  to  the

rectiorTin  crown  of  Aragon,  the  same  causes  which  had
Majorca.  excited  the  commotions  in  Valencia,  produced
effects  no  less  violent.  The  people,  impatient  of  the
hardships  which  they  had  endured  under  the  rigid  juris-
March  19.  diction  of  the  nobility,  took  arms  in  a  tumultuary
manner ;  deposed  their  viceroy ;  drove  him  out
of  the  island ;  and  massacred  every  gentleman  who  was
so  unfortunate  as  to  fall  into  their  hands.  The  obstinacy

*  Argensola  Annales  de  Aragon,  cap.  75.  90.  99.  118.  Sayas  Annales  de  Ara-
gon, cap.  5.  12,  &c.  P.  Mart,  Ep.  lib.  xxxiii.  et  xxxiv.  passim.  Ferrer.  Hist
d'Espagne,  via.  542.  564,  &c.

VOL.  IV.  I

114  CHARLES V.  [1522.

with  which  the  people  of  Majorca  persisted  in  their  re-
bellion, was  equal  to  the  rage  with  which  they  began  it.
Many  and  vigorous  efforts  were  requisite  in  order  to  re-
duce them  to  obedience  ;  and  tranquillity  was  re-estab-
lished in  every  part  of  Spain,  before  the  Majorcans  could
be  brought  to  submit  to  their  sovereign.5
Causes  While  the  spirit  of  disaffection  was  so  general
TentedPthe  among  the  Spaniards,  and  so  many  causes  con-
the°raaie-  curre(^  *n  precipitating  them  into  such  violent
contents,  measures,  in  order  to  obtain  the  redress  of  their
grievances,  it  may  appear  strange,  that  the  malecon-
tents  in  the  different  kingdoms  should  have  carried  on
their  operations  without  any  mutual  concert,  or  even
any  intercourse  with  each  other.  By  uniting  their  coun-
cils and  arms,  they  might  have  acted  both  with  greater
force  and  with  more  effect.  The  appearance  of  a  na-
tional confederacy  would  have  rendered  it  no  less  re-
spectable among  the  people  than  formidable  to  the
crown ;  and  the  emperor,  unable  to  resist  such  a  combi-
nation, must  have  complied  with  any  terms  which  the
members  of  it  should  have  thought  fit  to  prescribe.
Many  things,  however,  prevented  the  Spaniards  from
forming  themselves  into  one  body,  and  pursuing  com-
mon measures.  The  people  of  the  different  kingdoms
in  Spain,  though  they  were  become  the  subjects  of  the
same  sovereign,  retained,  in  full  force,  their  national
antipathy  to  each  other.  The  remembrance  of  their
ancient  rivalship  and  hostilities  was  still  lively,  and  the
sense  of  reciprocal  injuries  so  strong  as  to  prevent  them
from  acting  with  confidence  and  concert.  Each  nation
chose  rather  to  depend  on  its  own  efforts,  and  to  main-
tain the  struggle  alone,  than  to  implore  the  aid  of  neigh-
bours, whom  they  distrusted  and  hated.  At  the  same
time,  the  forms  of  government  in  the  several  kingdoms
of  Spain  were  so  different,  and  the  grievances  of  which

b  Argensola  Annalesde  Aragon,  c.  113. Ferrer.  Hist.  viii.  542. Sayas  Annales
de  Aragon,  cap.  7.  11.  14.  76.  81. Ferreras  Hist.  d'Kspagne,  viii.  579,  &c.  609,

1522.]  BOOK III.  115

they  complained,  as  well  as  the  alterations  and  amend-
ments in  policy  which  they  attempted  to  introduce,  so
various,  that  it  was  not  easy  to  bring  them  to  unite  in
any  common  plan.  To  this  disunion  Charles  was  in-
debted for  the  preservation  of  the  Spanish  crowns ;  and
while  each  of  the  kingdoms  followed  separate  measures,
they  were  all  obliged  at  last  to  conform  to  the  will  of
their  sovereign.

The  em-  The  arrival  of  the  emperor  in  Spain  filled  his
denTand™"  subjects  who  had  been  in  arms  against  him  with
behavbur  ^eeP  apprehensions,  from  which  he  soon  deli-
towards  vered  them  by  an  act  of  clemency,  no  less  pru-

the  male-  *  in-

contents,  dent  than  generous.  After  a  rebellion  so  gene-
ral, scarcely  twenty  persons,  among  so  many  criminals
obnoxious  to  the  law,  had  been  punished  capitally  in
Castile.  Though  strongly  solicited  by  his  council,
Charles  refused  to  shed  any  more  blood  by  the  hands  of
the  executioner ;  and  published  a  general  par-
don, extending  to  all  crimes  committed  since  the
commencement  of  the  insurrections,  from  which  only
fourscore  persons  were  excepted.  Even  these  he  seems
to  have  named,  rather  with  an  intention  to  intimidate
others,  than  from  any  inclination  to  seize  them ;  for  when
an  officious  courtier  offered  to  inform  him  where  one  of
the  most  considerable  among  them  was  concealed,  he
avoided  it  by  a  good-natured  pleasantry  : — "  Go,"  says
he,  "I  have  now  no  reason  to  be  afraid  of  that  man,  but
he  has  some  cause  to  keep  at  a  distance  from  me,  and
you  would  be  better  employed  in  telling  him  that  I  am
here,  than  in  acquainting  me  with  the  place  pf  his  re-
treat."0 By  his  appearance  of  magnanimity,  as  well  as
by  his  care  to  avoid  every  thing  which  had  disgusted
the  Castilians  during  his  former  residence  among  them  ;
by  his  address  in  assuming  their  manners,  in  speaking
their  language,  and  in  complying  with  all  their  humours

c  Sandov.  377,  &c.  Vida  del  Emper.  Carlos,  por  Don  Juan  Anton,  de  Vera -y
Zuniga,  p.  30.

i2

116  CHARLES V.  [1522.

and  customs,  he  acquired  an  ascendant  over  them  which
hardly  any  of  their  native  monarchs  had  ever  attained,
and  brought  them  to  support  him  in  all  his  enterprises
with  a  zeal  and  valour  to  which  he  owed  much  of  his
success  and  grandeur.d

Adrian  sets  About  the  time  that  Charles  landed  in  Spain,
*  and  Adrian  set  out  for  Italy  to  take  possession  of
his  new  dignity.  But  though  the  Roman  peo-
there.  p}e  longed  extremely  for  his  arrival,  they  could
not,  on  his  first  appearance,  conceal  their  surprise  and
disappointment.  After  being  accustomed  to  the  princely
magnificence  of  Julius,  and  the  elegant  splendour  of
Leo,  they  beheld  with  contempt  an  old  man  of  an  hum-
ble deportment,  of  austere  manners,  an  enemy  to  pomp,
destitute  of  taste  in  the  arts,  and  unadorned  with  any
of  the  external  accomplishments  which  the  vulgar  ex-
pect in  those  raised  to  eminent  stations.6  Nor  did  his
political  views  and  maxims  seem  less  strange  and  as-
tonishing to  the  pontifical  ministers.  He  acknowledged
and  bewailed  the  corruptions  which  abounded  in  the
church,  as  well  as  in  the  court  of  Rome,  and  prepared
to  reform  both ;  he  discovered  no  intention  of  aggrandiz-
ing his  family ;  he  even  scrupled  at  retaining  such
territories  as  some  of  his  predecessors  had  acquired  by
violence  or  fraud,  rather  than  by  any  legal  title ;  and
for  that  reason  he  invested  Francesco  Maria  de  Rovere
anew  in  the  duchy  of  Urbino,  of  which  Leo  had  stripped
him,  and  surrendered  to  the  duke  of  Ferrara  several
places  wrested  from  him  by  the  church/  To  men  little
habituated  to  see  princes  regulate  their  conduct  by  the
maxims  of  morality  and  the  principles  of  justice,  these
actions  of  the  new  pope  appeared  incontestable  proofs
of  his  weakness  or  inexperience.  Adrian,  who  was  a
perfect  stranger  to  the  complex  and  intricate  system  of
Italian  politics,  and  who  could  place  no  confidence  in

d  Ulloa  Vita  de  Carlo  V.  p.  85.

•  Guic.  1.  xv.  238. Jovii  Vita  Adriani,  lir. Bellefor.  Epitr.  des  Princ.  84.
f  Guic.  lib.  xv.  240.

1522.]  BOOK III.  117

persons  whose  subtle  refinements  in  business  suited  so
ill  with  the  natural  simplicity  and  candour  of  his  own
character,  being  often  embarrassed  and  irresolute  in  his
deliberations,  the  opinion  of  his  incapacity  daily  in-
creased, until  both  his  person  and  government  became
objects  of  ridicule  among  his  subjects/
He  endea-  Adrian,  though  devoted  to  the  emperor,  en-
store8  t(eace  deavoured  to  assume  the  impartiality  which
in  Europe,  became  the  common  father  of  Christendom,  and
laboured  to  reconcile  the  contending  princes,  in  order
that  they  might  unite  in  a  league  against  Solyman,
whose  conquest  of  Rhodes  rendered  him  more  formid-
able than  ever  to  Europe.11  But  this  was  an  undertak-
ing far  beyond  his  abilities.  To  examine  such  a  variety
of  pretensions,  to  adjust  such  a  number  of  interfering
interests,  to  extinguish  the  passions  which  ambition,
emulation,  and  mutual  injuries  had  kindled,  to  bring  so
many  hostile  powers  to  pursue  the  same  scheme  with
unanimity  and  vigour,  required  not  only  uprightness  of
intention,  but  great  superiority  both  of  understanding
and  address.

The  Italian  states  were  no  less  desirous  of  peace  than
the  pope.  The  imperial  army  under  Colonna  was  still
kept  on  foot ;  but  as  the  emperor's  revenues  in  Spain,
in  Naples,  and  in  the  Low  Countries,  were  either  ex-
hausted or  applied  to  some  other  purpose,  it  depended
entirely  for  pay  and  subsistence  on  the  Italians.  A  great
part  of  it  was  quartered  in  the  ecclesiastical  state,  and
monthly  contributions  were  levied  upon  the  Floren-
tines, the  Milanese,  the  Genoese,  and  Lucchese,  by  the
viceroy  of  Naples ;  and  though  all  exclaimed  against
such  oppression,  and  were  impatient  to  be  delivered
from  it,  the  dread  of  worse  consequences  from  the  rage
of  the  army,  or  the  resentment  of  the  emperor,  obliged
them  to  submit.1

s  Jov.  Vita  Adr.  118.  P.  Mart.  Ep.  774.  Ruscelli  Lettrea  de  Princ.  vol.  i.  87.
96. 101.  h  Bellefor.  Epitr.  p.  86.  *  Guic.  1.  xv.  238.

118  CHARLES V.  [1523.

1523.  So  much  regard,  however,  was  paid  to  the
itaguT  pope's  exhortations,  and  to  a  bull  which  he  is-
Jg*™! the  sued,  requiring  all  Christian  princes  to  consent
king.  to  a  truce  for  three  years,  that  the  imperial,  the
French,  and  English  ambassadors  at  Rome  were  em-
powered by  their  respective  courts  to  treat  of  that
matter ;  but  while  they  wasted  their  time  in  fruitless
negotiation,  their  masters  continued  their  preparations
for  war.  The  Venetians,  who  had  hitherto  adhered
with  great  firmness  to  their  alliance  with  Francis,  being
now  convinced  that  his  affairs  in  Italy  were  in  a  des-
perate situation,  entered  into  a  league  against
him  with  the  emperor;  to  which  Adrian,  at  the
instigation  of  his  countryman  and  friend  Charles  de
Lannoy,  viceroy  of  Naples,  who  persuaded  him  that  the
only  obstacles  to  peace  arose  from  the  ambition  of  the
French  king,  soon  after  acceded.  The  other  Italian
states  followed  their  example ;  and  Francis  was  left
without  a  single  ally  to  resist  the  efforts  of  so  many
enemies,  whose  armies  threatened,  and  whose  territo-
ries encompassed,  his  dominions  on  every  side.k
Francis's  ^e  dread  of  this  powerful  confederacy,  it  was
vigorous  thought,  would  have  obliged  Francis  to  keep

measures -, ,-f  i i r« •  i

in  opposi-  wholly  on  the  defensive,  or  at  least  have  pre-
}  ll>  vented  his  entertaining  any  thoughts  of  march-
ing into  Italy.  But  it  was  the  character  of  that  prince,
too  apt  to  become  remiss,  and  even  negligent  on  ordi-
nary occasions,  to  rouse  at  the  approach  of  danger,  and
not  only  to  encounter  it  with  spirit  and  intrepidity,
qualities  which  never  forsook  him,  but  to  provide
against  it  with  diligence  and  industry.  Before  his  ene-
mies were  ready  to  execute  any  of  their  schemes,  Fran-
cis had  assembled  a  numerous  army.  His  authority  over
his  own  subjects  was  far  greater  than  that  which  Charles
or  Henry  possessed  over  theirs.  They  depended  on
their  diets,  their  cortes,  and  their  parliaments  for  money,

k  Guic.  1,  XT.  241.  248.

1523.]  BOOK III.  119

which  was  usually  granted  them  in  small  sums,  very
slowly,  and  with  much  reluctance.  The  taxes  he  could
impose  were  more  considerable,  and  levied  with  greater
dispatch ;  so  that  on  this,  as  well  as  on  other  occasions^
he  brought  his  armies  into  the  field  while  they  were
only  devising  ways  and  means  for  raising  theirs.  Sen-
sible of  this  advantage,  Francis  hoped  to  disconcert  all
the  emperor's  schemes  by  marching  in  person  into  the
Milanese ;  and  this  bold  measure,  the  more  formidable
because  unexpected,  could  scarcely  have  failed  of  pro-
Suspended  ducing  that  effect.  But  when  the  vanguard  of
dfscovery  n^s  army  had  already  reached  Lyons,  and  he
of  the  himself  was  hastening  after  it  with  a  second  di-

constable .  e

Bourbon's  vision  of  his  troops,  the  discovery  of  a  domes-
>nspiracy'tic  conspiracy,  which  threatened  the  ruin  of  the
kingdom,  obliged  him  to  stop  short,  and  to  alter  his
measures.

His  charac-  The  author  of  this  dangerous  plot  was  Charles
tcr*  duke  of  Bourbon,  lord  high  constable,  whose
noble  birth,  vast  fortune,  and  high  office,  raised  him  to
be  the  most  powerful  subject  in  France,  asihis  great
talents,  equally  suited  to  the  field  or  the  council,  and
his  signal  services  to  the  crown,  rendered  him  the  most
illustrious  and  deserving.  The  near  resemblance  be-
tvveen  the  king  and  him  in  many  of  their  qualities,  both
being  fond  of  war,  and  ambitious  to  excel  in  manly
exercises,  as  well  as  their  equality  in  age,  and  their
proximity  of  blood,  ought  naturally  to  have  secured  to
Th  him  a  considerable  share  in  that  monarch's  fa-

ofhisdis-  vour.  But  unhappily  Louise,  the  king's  mother,
had  contracted  a  violent  aversion  to  the  house
of  Bourbon,  for  no  better  reason  than  because  Anne  of
Bretagne,  the  queen  of  Louis  the  Twelfth,  with  whom
she  lived  in  perpetual  enmity,  had  discovered  a  parti-
cular attachment  to  that  branch  of  the  royal  family ;
and  had  taught  her  son,  who  was  too  susceptible  of
any  impression  which  his  mother  gave  him,  to  view  all

120  CHARLES  Y.  [1523,

the  constable's  actions  with  a  mean  and  unbecoming1
jealousy.  His  distinguished  merit  at  the  battle  of  Ma-
rignano  had  not  been  sufficiently  rewarded ;  he  had
been  recalled  from  the  government  of  Milan  upon  very
frivolous  pretences,  and  had  met  with  a  cold  reception,
which  his  prudent  conduct  in  that  difficult  station  did
not  deserve ;  the  payment  of  his  pensions  had  been
suspended  without  any  good  cause  ;  and,  during  the
campaign  of  1521,  the  king,  as  has  already  been  re-
lated, had  affronted  him  in  presence  of  the  whole  army,
by  giving  the  command  of  the  van  to  the  duke  of
Alen^on.  The  constable,  at  first,  bore  these  indignities
with  greater  moderation  than  could  have  been  expected
from  a  high-spirited  prince,  conscious  of  what  was
due  to  his  rank  and  to  his  services.  Such  a  multipli-
city of  injuries,  however,  exhausted  his  patience ;  and
inspiring  him  with  thoughts  of  revenge,  he  retired  from
court,  and  began  to  hold  a  secret  correspondence  with
some  of  the  emperor's  ministers.

About  that  time  the  duchess  of  Bourbon  happened  to
die  without  leaving  any  children.  Louise,  of  a  dispo-
sition ho  less  amorous  than  vindictive,  and  still  suscep-
tible of  the  tender  passions  at  the  age  of  forty-six,  be-
gan to  view  the  constable,  a  prince  as  amiable  as  he
was  accomplished,  with  other  eyes ;  and  notwithstand-
ing the  great  disparity  of  their  years,  she  formed  the
scheme  of  marrying  him.  Bourbon,  who  might  have
expected  every  thing  to  which  an  ambitious  mind  can
aspire,  from  the  doating  fondness  of  a  woman  who
governed  her  son  and  the  kingdom,  being  incapable
either  of  imitating  the  queen  in  her  sudden  transition
from  hatred  to  love,  or  of  dissembling  so  meanly  as  to
pretend  affection  for  one  who  had  persecuted  him  so
long  with  unprovoked  malice,  not  only  rejected  the
match,  but  imbittered  his  refusal  by  some  severe  rail-
lery on  Louise's  person  and  character.  She  finding
herself  not  only  contemned,  but  insulted,  her  disap-

1523.]  BOOK III.  121

pointed  love  turned  into  hatred,  and  since  she  could
not  marry,  she  resolved  to  ruin  Bourbon.

For  this  purpose  she  consulted  with  the  chancellor
du  Prat,  a  man  who,  by  a  base  prostitution  of  great
talents  and  of  superior  skill  in  his  profession,  had  risen
to  that  high  office.  By  his  advice  a  lawsuit  was  com-
menced against  the  constable,  for  the  whole  estate
belonging  to  the  house  of  Bourbon.  Part  of  it  was
claimed  in  the  king's  name,  as  having  fallen  to  the
crown;  part  in  that  of  Louise,  as  the  nearest  heir  in
blood  of  the  deceased  duchess.  Both  these  claims  were
equally  destitute  of  any  foundation  in  justice;  but
Louise,  by  her  solicitations  and  authority,  and  du  Prat,
by  employing  all  the  artifices  and  chicanery  of  law,
prevailed  on  the  judges  to  order  the  estates  to  be  se-
questered. This  unjust  decision  drove  the  constable
to  despair,  and  to  measures  which  despair  alone  could
His  secret  have  dictated.  He  renewed  his  intrigues  in
Sfwith  tne  imperial  court,  and  flattering  himself  that
the  em-  the  injuries  which  he  had  suffered  would  justify

peror.  J .  J

his  having  recourse  to  any  means  m  order  to
obtain  revenge,  he  offered  to  transfer  his  allegiance
from  his  natural  sovereign  to  the  emperor,  and  to  assist
him  in  the  conquest  of  France.  Charles,  as  well  as  the
king  of  England,  to  whom  the  secret  was  communi-
cated,11 expecting  prodigious  advantages  from  his  re-
volt, were  ready  to  receive  him  with  open  arms,  and
spared  neither  promises  nor  allurements  which  might
help  to  confirm  him  in  his  resolution.  The  emperor
offered  him  in  marriage  his  sister  Eleanor,  the  widow
of  the  king  of  Portugal,  with  an  ample  portion.  He
was  included  as  a  principal  in  the  treaty  between
Charles  and  Henry.  The  counties  of  Provence  and
Dauphine  were  to  be  settled  on  him,  with  the  title  of
king.  The  emperor  engaged  to  enter  France  by  the
Pyrenees,  and  Henry,  supported  by  the  Flemings,  to

n  Eymer's  Faeder.  xiii.  794.

122  CHARLES V.  [1523.

invade  Picardy ;  while  twelve  thousand  Germans,  levied
at  their  common  charge,  were  to  penetrate  into  Bur-
gundy, and  to  act  in  concert  with  Bourbon,  who  un-
dertook to  raise  six  thousand  men  among  his  friends
and  vassals  in  the  heart  of  the  kingdom.  The  execu-
tion of  this  deep-laid  and  dangerous  plot  was  suspend-
ed, until  the  king  should  cross  the  Alps  with  the  only
,  army  capable  of  defending  his  dominions;  and  as  he
was  far  advanced  in  his  march  for  that  purpose,  France
was  on  the  brink  of  destruction.™

Happily  for  that  kingdom, a negotiation

Discovered.  . ^ *  6

which  had  now  been  carrying  on  for  several
months,  though  conducted  with  the  most  profound
secrecy,  and  communicated  only  to  a  few  chosen  con-
fidants, could  not  altogether  escape  the  observation  of
the  rest  of  the  constable's  numerous  retainers,- rendered
more  inquisitive  by  finding  that  they  were  distrusted.
Two  of  these  gave  the  king  some  intimation  of  a  mys-
terious correspondence  between  their  master  and  the
count  de  Roeux,  a  Flemish  nobleman  of  great  confi-
dence with  the  emperor.  Francis,  who  could  not  bring
himself  to  suspect  that  the  first  prince  of  the  blood
would  be  so  base  as  to  betray  the  kingdom  to  its  ene-
mies, immediately  repaired  to  Moulins,  where  the  con-
stable was  in  bed,  feigning  indisposition,  that  he  might
not  be  obliged  to  accompany  the  king  into  Italy,  and
acquainted  him  of  the  intelligence  which  he  had
received.  Bourbon  with  great  solemnity,  and  the
most  imposing  affectation  of  ingenuity  and  candour,
asserted  his  own  innocence ;  and  as  his  health,  he  said,
was  now  more  confirmed,  he  promised  to  join  the  army
within  a  few  days.  Francis,  open  and  candid  himself,
and  too  apt  to  be  deceived  by  the  appearance  of  those
virtues  in  others,  gave  such  credit  to  what  he  said,  that
he  refused  to  arrest  him,  although  advised  to  take  that
precaution  by  his  wisest  counsellors;  and,  as  if  .the

»  Thuani  Hist.  Jib.  i.  c.  10. Heuter.  Her.  Austr,  lib.  viii.  c.  18.  p.  207.

1523.]  BOOK III.  123

danger  had  been  over,  he  continued  his  march  towards
ge  t  Lyons.  The  constable  set  out  soon  after,  seem-
ingly with  an  intention  to  follow  him ;  but  turn-
Flies  to  mg  suddenly  to  the  left  he  crossed  the  Rhone,
Ita'y-  and  after  infinite  fatigue  and  peril,  escaped  all
the  parties  which  the  king,  who  became  sensible  too
late  of  his  own  credulity,  sent  out  to  intercept  him,  and
reached  Italy  in  safety."

Francis  took  every  possible  precaution  to  prevent  the
bad  effects  of  the  irreparable  error  which  he  had  com-
mitted. He  put  garrisons  in  all  the  places  of  strength
in  the  constable's  territories.  He  seized  all  the  gentle-
men whom  he  could  suspect  of  being  his  associates;
and  as  he  had  not  hitherto  discovered  the  whole  extent
of  the  conspirators'  schemes,  nor  knew  how  far  the  in-
fection had  spread  among  his  subjects,  he  was  afraid
that  his  absence  might  encourage  them  to  make  some
desperate  attempt,  and  for  that  reason  relinquished  his
intention  of  leading  his  army  in  person  into  Italy.
French  in  ^e  ^  not>  ^owever?  abandon  his  design  on
vadethe  the  Milanese;  but  appointed  admiral  Bonnivet
to  take  the  supreme  command  in  his  stead,  and
to  march  into  that  country  with  an  army  thirty  thousand
strong.  Bonnivet  did  not  owe  this  preferment  to  his
abilities  as  a  general;  for  of  all  the  talents  requisite  to
form  a  great  commander,  he  possessed  only  personal
courage,  the  lowest  and  the  most  common.  But  he
was  the  most  accomplished  gentleman  in  the  French
court,  of  agreeable  manners,  and  insinuating  address,
and  a  sprightly  conversation;  and  Francis,  who  lived
in  great  familiarity  with  his  courtiers,  was  so  charmed
with  these  qualities,  that  he*  honoured  him,  on  all
occasions,  with  the  most  partial  and  distinguished
marks  of  his  favour.  He  was,  besides,  the  implacable
enemy  of  Bourbon;  and  as  the  king  hardly  knew
whom  to  trust  at  that  juncture,  he  thought  the  chief

D  Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  64,  &c.  Pasquier  Recherchcs  de  la  France,  p.  481.

124  CHARLES V.  [1.523.

command  could  be  lodged  no  where  so  safely  as  in  his

hands.

Their  in Colonna,  who  was  intrusted  with  the  defence

conduct. o£  ^  jy[jianesej  his  own  conquest,  was  in  no

condition  to  resist  such  a  formidable  army. He  was
destitute  of  money  sufficient  to  pay  his  troops,  which
were  reduced  to  a  small  number  by  sickness  or  deser-
tion, and  had,  for  that  reason,  been  obliged  to  neglect
every  precaution  necessary  for  the  security  of  the  coun-
try. The  only  plan  which  he  formed  was  to  defend  the
passage  of  the  river  Tessino  against  the  French ;  and  as
if  he  had  forgotten  how  easily  he  himself  had  discon-
certed a  similar  scheme  formed  by  Lautrec,  he  promised
with  great  confidence  on  its  being  effectual.  But  in  spite
of  all  his  caution,  it  succeeded  no  better  with  him  than
with  Lautrec. Bonnivet  passed  the  river  without  loss,
at  a  ford  which  had  been  neglected,  and  the  Imperial-
ists retired  to  Milan,  preparing  to  abandon  the  town
as  soon  as  the  French  should  appear  before  it. By  an
unaccountable  negligence,  which  Guicciardini  imputes
to  infatuation,0  Bonnivet  did  not  advance  for  three  or
four  days,  and  lost  the  opportunity  with  which  his
good  fortune  presented  him. The  citizens  recovered
from  their  consternation;  Colonna,  still  active  at  the
age  of  fourscore,  and  Morone,  whose  enmity  to  France
rendered  him  indefatigable,  were  employed  night  and
day  in  repairing  the  fortifications,  in  amassing  provi-
sions, in  collecting  troops  from  every  quarter;  and  by
the  time  the  French  approached,  had  put  the  city  in  a
condition  to  stand  a  siege. Bonnivet,  after  some  fruit-
less  attempts  on  the  town,  which  harassed  his  own
troops  more  than  the  enemy,  was  obliged,  by  the  incle-
mency of  the  season,  to  retire  into  winter- quarters.
Death  of During  these  transactions,  pope  Adrian  died ;
Adrian  vi.  an  eyent  so  mu(h  to  faQ  satisfaction  of  the  Ro-
man people,  whose  hatred  or  contempt  of  him  augmented

0  Guic.  lib.  xv.  254,

1523.]  BOOK III.  125

every  day,  that  the  night  after  his  decease  they  adorned
the  door  of  his  chief  physician's  house  with  garlands,
adding  this  inscription  :  TO  THE  DELIVERER  OF  HIS
COUNTRY.P  The  cardinal  de  Medici  instantly  renewed
his  pretensions  to  the  papal  dignity,  and  entered  the
conclave  with  high  expectations  on  his  own  part,  and
a  general  opinion  of  the  people  that  they  would  be
successful.  But  though  supported  by  the  imperial
faction,  possessed  of  great  personal  interest,  and  capa-
ble of  all  the  artifices,  refinements,  and  corruption,
which  reign  in  those  assemblies,  the  obstinacy  and  in-
Eiectionof  trigues  of  his  rivals  protracted  the  conclave  to
^mt  the  unusual  length  of  fifty  days.  The  address
NOV.  se.  and  perseverance  of  the  cardinal  at  last  sur-
mounted every  obstacle.  He  was  raised  to  the  head  of
the  church,  and  resumed  the  government  of  it  by  the
name  of  Clement  VII.  The  choice  was  highly  approved
of.  High  expectations  were  conceived  of  a  pope,  whose
great  talents  and  long  experience  in  business  seemed  to
qualify  him  no  less  for  defending  the  spiritual  interests
of  the  church,  exposed  to  imminent  danger  by  the  pro-
gress of  Luther's  opinions,  than  for  conducting  its  poli-
tical operations  with  the  prudence  requisite  at  such  a
difficult  juncture  ;  and  who,  besides  these  advantages,
rendered  the  ecclesiastical  state  more  respectable,  by
having  in  his  hands  the  government  of  Florence,  toge-
ther with  the  wealth  of  the  family  of  Medici.q

Cardinal  Wolsey,  not  disheartened  by  the

appointed disappointment  of  his  ambitious  views  at  the

and  filled  i  •

with  resent-  lormer  election,  had  entertained  more  sanguine
hopes  of  success  on  this  occasion.  Henry  wrote
to  the  emperor,  reminding  him  of  his  engagements  to
second  the  pretensions  of  his  minister.  Wolsey  bestir-
red himself  with  activity  suitable  to  the  importance  of
the  prize  for  which  he  contended,  and  instructed  his
agents  at  Rome  to  spare  neither  promises  nor  bribes  in

P  Jovii  Vit,  Adr.  127.  1  Guic.  1.  xv.  263.

120  CHARLES V.  [1523.

order  to  gain  his  end.  But  Charles  had  either  amused
him  with  vain  hopes  which  he  never  intended  to  gratify,
or  he  judged  it  impolitic  to  oppose  a  candidate  who  had
such  a  prospect  of  succeeding,  as  Medici ;  or  perhaps
the  cardinals  durst  not  venture  to  provoke  the  people
of  Rome,  while  their  indignation  against  Adrian's  me-
mory was  still  fresh,  by  placing  another  Ultra-montane
on  the  papal  throne.  Wolsey,  after  all  his  expectations
and  endeavours,  had  the  mortification  to  see  a  pope
elected  of  such  an  age,  and  of  so  vigorous  a  constitu-
tion, that  he  could  not  derive  much  comfort  to  himself
from  the  chance  of  surviving  him.  This  second  proof
fully  convinced  Wolsey  of  the  emperor's  insincerity,  and
it  excited  in  him  all  the  resentment  which  a  haughty
mind  feels  on  being  at  once  disappointed  and  deceived ;
and  though  Clement  endeavoured  to  soothe  -his  vindic-
tive nature  by  granting  him  a  commission  to  be  legate
in  England  during  life,  with  such  ample  powers  as
vested  in  him  almost  the  whole  papal  jurisdiction  in
that  kingdom,  the  injury  he  had  now  received  made
such  an  impression,  as  entirely  dissolved  the  tie  which
had  united  him  to  Charles,  and  from  that  moment  he
meditated  revenge.  It  was  necessary,  however,  to  con-
ceal his  intention  from  his  master,  and  to  suspend  the
execution  of  it,  until,  by  a  dexterous  improvement  of
the  incidents  which  might  occur,  he  should  be  able
gradually  to  alienate  the  king's  affections  from  the  em-
peror. For  this  reason,  he  was  so  far  from  expressing
any  uneasiness  on  account  of  the  repulse  which  he  had
met  with,  that  he  abounded  on  every  occasion,  private
as  well  as  public,  in  declarations  of  his  high  satisfaction
with  Clement's  promotion/

Henry's Henry  had,  during  the -campaign,  fulfilled,

?n  FralTce!  w^  &reat  sincerity,  whatever  he  was  bound  to

perform  by  the  league  against  France,  though

more  slowly  than  he  could  have  wished. His  thought-

r  Fiddes's  Life  of  Wolsey,  294,  &c. Herbert.

1523.]  BOOK  III.  127

less  profusion,  and  total  neglect  of  economy,  reduced
him  often  to  great  straits  for  money.  The  operations
of  war  were  now  carried  on  in  Europe  in  a  manner
very  different  from  that  which  had  long  prevailed.  In-
stead of  armies  suddenly  assembled,  which  under  dis-
tinct chieftains  followed  their  prince  into  the  field  for
a  short  space,  and  served  at  their  own  costs,  troops
were  now  levied  at  great  charge,  and  received  regu-
larly considerable  pay.  Instead  of  impatience  on  both
sides  to  bring  every  quarrel  to  the  issue  of  a  battle,
which  commonly  decided  the  fate  of  open  countries,
and  allowed  the  barons,  together  with  their  vassals,  to
return  to  their  ordinary  occupations ;  towns  were  for-
tified with  great  art,  and  defended  with  much  obsti-
nacy ;  war,  from  a  very  simple,  became  a  very  intricate
science ;  and  campaigns  grew  of  course  to  be  more
tedious  and  less  decisive.  The  expense  which  these
alterations  in  the  military  system  necessarily  created,
appeared  intolerable  to  nations  hitherto  unaccustomed
to  the  burden  of  heavy  taxes.  Hence  proceeded  the
frugal  and  even  parsimonious  spirit  of  the  English  par-
liaments in  that  age,  which  Henry,  with  all  his  autho-
rity, was  seldom  able  to  overcome.  The  commons,
having  refused  at  this  time  to  grant  him  the  supplies
which  he  demanded,  he  had  recourse  to  the  ample  and
almost  unlimited  prerogative  which  the  kings  of  Eng-
land then  possessed,  and  by  a  violent  and  unusual  ex-
ertion of  it,  raised  the  money  he  wanted.  This.

Sept.  20.  /

however,  wasted  so  much  time,  that  it  was  late
in  the  season  before  his  army,  under  the  duke  of  Suf-
folk, could  take  the  field.  Being  joined  by  a  consi-
derable body  of  Flemings,  Suffolk  marched  into  Pi-
cardy ;  and  Francis,  from  his  extravagant  eagerness  to
recover  the  Milanese,  having  left  that  frontier  almost
unguarded,  he  penetrated  as  far  as  the  banks  of  the
river  Oyse,  within  eleven  leagues  of  Paris,  filling  that
capital  with  consternation.  But  the  arrival  of  some

128  CHARLES V.  [1523.

troops  detached  by  the  king,  who  was  still  at  Lyons  ;
the  active  gallantry  of  the  French  officers,  who  allowed
the  allies  no  respite  night  or  day ;  the  rigour  of  a  most
unnatural  season,  together  with  scarcity  of  provisions,
compelled  Suffolk  to  retire ;  and  La  Tramou'ille,
who  commanded  in  those  parts,  had  the  glory
not  only  of  having  checked  the  progress  of  a  formidable
army  with  a  handful  of  men,  but  of  driving  them  with
ignominy  out  of  the  French  territories.8
And  those  The  emperor's  attempts  upon  Burgundy  and
mansand'"  Guienne  were ' not  more  fortunate,  though  in
Spaniards.  fc^  ^Q^Q  provinces  Francis  was  equally  ill
prepared  to  resist  them.  The  conduct  and  valour  of
his  generals  supplied  his  want  of  foresight ;  the  Ger-
mans, who  made  an  irruption  into  one  of  these  pro-
vinces, and  the  Spaniards,  who  attacked  the  other,
were  repulsed  with  great  disgrace.
End  of  the  Thus  ended  the  year  1523,  during  which
campaign.  Francis's  good  fortune  and  success  had  been
such  as  gave  all  Europe  a  high  idea  of  his  power  and
resources.  He  had  discovered  and  disconcerted  a  dan-
gerous conspiracy,  the  author  of  which  he  had  driven
into  exile  almost  without  an  attendant;  he  had  rendered
abortive  all  the  schemes  of  the  powerful  confederacy
formed  against  him;  he  had  protected  his  dominions
when  attacked  on  three  different  sides ;  and  though  his
army  in  the  Milanese  had  not  made  such  progress  as
might  have  been  expected  from  its  superiority  to  the
enemy  in  number,  he  had  recovered,  and  still  kept
possession  of  one  half  of  that  duchy.

1524.  The  ensuing  year  opened  with  events  more
mints  of  disastrous  to  France.  Fontarabia  was  lost  by
pop"ew  the  cowardice  or  treachery  of  its  governor.  In
Feb.  27.  Italy,  the  allies  resolved  oil  an  early  and  vigor-
ous effort  in  order  to  dispossess  Bonnivet  of  that  part
of  the  Milanese  which  lies  beyond  the  Tessino,  Cle-

»  Herbert  Mem.  de  Bellay,  73,  &c.

1524.]  BOOK  III.  129

ment,  who,  under  the  pontificates  of  Leo  and  Adrian,
had  discovered  an  implacable  enmity  to  France,  began
now  to  view  the  power  which  the  emperor  was  daily
acquiring  in  Italy  with  so  much  jealousy,  that  he  re-
fused to  accede,  as  his  predecessors  had  done,  to  the
league  against  Francis,  and,  forgetting  private  passions
and  animosities,  laboured  with  the  zeal  which  became
his  character,  to  bring  about  a  reconciliation  among
the  contending  parties.  But  all  his  endeavours  were
ineffectual ;  a  numerous  army,  to  which  each  of  the
allies  furnished  their  contingent  of  troops,  was  assem-
bled at  Milan  by  the  beginning  of  March.  Lannoy,
imperial  viceroy  of  Naples,  took  the  command  of  it  upon
army  Colonna's  death,  though  the  chief  direction  of

ready  to  '

take  the  military  operations  was  committed  to  Bourbon
ary'and  the  marquis  de  Pescara, — the  latter  the
ablest  and  most  enterprising  of  the  imperial  generals;
the  former  inspired  by  his  resentment  with  new  activity
and  invention,  and  acquainted  so  thoroughly  with  the
characters  of  the  French  commanders,  the  genius  of
their  troops,  and  the  strength  as  well  as  weakness  of
their  armies,  as  to  be  of  infinite  service  to  the  party
which  he  had  joined.  But  all  these  advantages  were
nearly  lost  through  the  emperor's  inability  to  raise
Retarded  money  sufficient  for  executing  the  various  and
Snyofthe  extensive  plans  which  he  had  formed.  When
troops,  kjg  troops  were  commanded  to  march,  they  mu-
tinied against  their  leaders,  demanding  the  pay  which
was  due  to  them  for  some  months ;  and  disregarding
both  the  menaces  and  entreaties  of  their  officers,  threat-
ened to  pillage  the  city  of  Milan,  if  they  did  not  in-
stantly receive  satisfaction.  Out  of  this  difficulty  the
generals  of  the  allies  were  extricated  by  Morone,  who
prevailing  on  his  countrymen,  over  whom  his  influence
was  prodigious,  to  advance  the  sum  that  was  requisite,
the  army  took  the  field/

•  Guic.  1.  xv.  267. Capella,  190.
VOL. IV.  K

130  CHARLES  V.  [1524.

The  French Bonnivet  was  destitute  of  troops  to  oppose
obliged  to  this  army  and  still  more  of  the  talents  which

abandon  V i  • I  i  i /• • i i

the  Milan-  could  render  him  an  equal  match  tor  its  leaders.
After  various  movements  and  encounters,  de-
scribed with  great  accuracy  by  the  contemporary  his-
torians, a  detail  of  which  would  now  be  equally  unin-
teresting and  uninstructive,  he  was  forced  to  abandon
the  strong  camp  in  which  he  had  intrenched  himself
at  Biagrassa. Soon  after,  partly  by  his  own  miscon-
duct, partly  by  the  activity  of  the  enemy,  who  harassed
and  ruined  his  army  by  continual  skirmishes,  while  they
carefully  declined  a  battle,  which  he  often  offered  them ;
and  partly  by  the  caprice  of  six  thousand  Swiss  who
refused  to  join  his  army,  though  within  a  day's  march
of  it ;  he  was  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  attempting  a
retreat  into  France  through  the  valley  of  Aost. Just
as  he  arrived  on  the  banks  of  the  Sessia,  and  began  to
pass  that  river,  Bourbon  and  Pescara  appeared  with
the  vanguard  of  the  allies,  and  attacked  his  rear  with
great  fury. At  the  beginning  of  the  charge,  Bonnivet,
while  exerting  himself  with  much  valour,  was  wounded
so  dangerously,  that  he  was  obliged  to  quit  the  field;
and  the  conduct  of  the  rear  was  committed  to  the  che-
valier Bayard,  who,  though  so  much  a  stranger  to  the
arts  of  a  court  that  he  never  rose  to  the  chief  command,
was  always  called,  in  times  of  real  danger,  to  the  post
of  greatest  difficulty  and  importance. He  put  himself
at  the  head  of  the  men  at  arms,  and  animating  them  by
his  presence  and  example  to  sustain  the  whole  shock  of
the  enemy's  troops,  he  gained  time  for  the  rest  of  his
Death  of countrymen  to  make  good  their  retreat. But
itrBaywd, in  *****  service  he  received  a  wound  which  he
of  th£"n *mmediately  perceived  to  be  mortal,  and  being
French unable  to  continue  any  longer  on  horseback,  he
ordered  one  of  his  attendants  to  place  him  under
a  tree,  with  his  face  towards  the  enemy ;  then  fixing
his  eyes  on  the  guard  of  his  sword,  which  he  held  up

1524.]  BOOK III.  131

instead  of  a  cross,  he  addressed  his  prayers  to  God,
and  in  this  posture,  which  became  his  character  both
as  a  soldier  and  as  a  Christian,  he  calmly  awaited  the
approach  of  death.  Bourbon,  who  led  the  foremost  of
the  enemy's  troops,  found  him  in  this  situation,  and
expressed  regret  and  pity  at  the  sight.  "  Pity  not  me,"
cried  the  high-spirited  chevalier,  I  die  as  a  man  of
honour  ought,  in  the  discharge  of  my  duty  :  they,  in-
deed, are  objects  of  pity,  who  fight  against  their  king,
their  country,  and  their  oath."  The  marquis  de  Pes-
cara,  passing  soon  after,  manifested  his  admiration  of
Bayard's  virtues,  as  well  as  his  sorrow  for  his  fate,  with
the  generosity  of  a  gallant  enemy ;  and  finding  that  he
could  not  be  removed  with  safety  from  that  spot,  or-
dered a  tent  to  be  pitched  there,  and  appointed  proper
persons  to  attend  him.  He  died,  notwithstanding  their
care,  as  his  ancestors  for  several  generations  had  done,
in  the  field  of  battle.  Pescara  ordered  his  body  to  be
embalmed,  and  sent  to  his  relations  ;  and  such  was  the
respect  paid  to  military  merit  in  that  age,  that  the  duke
of  Savoy  commanded  it  to  be  received  with  royal  ho-
nours in  all  the  cities  of  his  dominions ;  in  Dauphin^,
Bayard's  native  country,  the  people  of  all  ranks  came
out  in  a  solemn  procession  to  meet  it.u

Bonnivet  led  back  the  shattered  remains  of  his  army
into  France ;  and  in  one  short  campaign  Francis  was
stripped  of  all  he  had  possessed  in  Italy,  and  left  with-
out one  ally  in  that  country.

Progress  While  the  war,  kindled  by  the  emulation  of
f<!rma\Sn~  Charles  an(^  Francis,  spread  over  so  many  coun-
in  Ger-  tries  of  Europe,  Germany  enjoyed  a  profound
tranquillity,  extremely  favourable  to  the  Refor-
mation, which  continued  to  make  progress  daily.  Dur-
ing Luther's  confinement  in  his  retreat  at  Wartburg,
Carlostadius,  one  of  his  disciples,  animated  with  the

u  Bellifor.  Epitr.  p.  73. Mem.  de  Beliay,  75. CEuv.  de  Brant,  tonr.  vi.  108,
&c. Pasquier  Recherches,  p.  526.

K2

132  CHARLES V.  [1524.

same  zeal,  but  possessed  of  less  prudence  and  mode-
ration than  his  master,  began  to  propagate  wild  and
dangerous  opinions,  chiefly  among  the  lower  people.
Encouraged  by  his  exhortations,  they  rose  in  several
villages  of  Saxony,  broke  into  the  churches  with  tu-
multuary violence,  and  threw  down  and  destroyed  the
images  with  which  they  were  adorned.  Those  irre-
gular and  outrageous  proceedings  were  so  repugnant
to  all  the  elector's  cautious  maxims,  that  if  they  had  not
received  a  timely  check,  they  could  hardly  have  failed
of  alienating  from  the  reformers  a  prince,  no  less  jea-
lous of  his  own  authority,  than  afraid  of  giving  offence
to  the  emperor,  and  other  patrons  of  the  ancient  opinions.
Luther,  sensible  of  the  danger,  immediately  quitted  his
retreat,  without  waiting  for  Frederic's  permission,  and
returned  to  Wittemberg.  Happily  for  the  Reformation,
March  6,  the  veneration  for  his  person  and  authority  was
1522>  still  so  great,  that  his  appearance  alone  sup-
pressed that  spirit  of  extravagance  which  "began  to  seize
his  party.  Carlostadius  and  his  fanatical  followers,
struck  dumb  by  his  rebukes,  submitted  at  once,  and
declared  that  they  heard  the  voice  of  an  angel,  not  of
a  man.z

Tkuher  Before  Luther  left  his  retreat,  he  had  begun
to  trans^ate  ti16  Bible  into  the  German  tongue,
an  undertaking  of  no  less  difficulty  than  im-
portance, of  which  he  was  extremely  fond,  and  for
which  he  was  well  qualified :  he  had  a  competent
knowledge  of  the  original  languages ;  a  thorough  ac-
quaintance with  the  style  and  sentiments  of  the  inspired
writers ;  and  though  his  compositions  in  Latin  were
rude  and  barbarous,  he  was  reckoned  a  great  master
of  the  purity  of  his  mother  tongue,  and  could  express
himself  with  all  the  elegance  of  which  it  is  capable.
By  his  own  assiduous  application,  together  with  the
assistance  of  Melancthon  and  several  other  of  his  dis-

*  Sleid.  Hist.  51. Seckend.  195.

1524.]  BOOK III.  133

ciples,  he  finished  part  of  the  New  Testament  in  the
year  1522  ;  and  the  publication  of  it  proved  more  fatal
to  the  church  of  Rome,  than  that  of  all  his  own  works.
It  was  read  with  wonderful  avidity  and  attention  by
persons  of  every  rank.  They  were  astonished  at  dis-
covering how  contrary  the  precepts  of  the  Author  of
our  religion  are,  to  the  inventions  of  those  priests  who
pretended  to  be  his  vicegerents ;  and  having  now  in
their  hand  the  rule  of  faith,  they  thought  themselves
qualified,  by  applying  it,  to  judge  of  the  established
opinions,  and  to  pronounce  when  they  were  conform-
able to  the  standard,  or  when  they  departed  from  it.
The  great  advantages  arising  from  Luther's  translation
of  the  Bible,  encouraged  the  advocates  for  reformation,
in  the  other  countries  of  Europe,  to  imitate  his  example,
and  to  publish  versions  of  the  Scriptures  in  their  re-
spective languages.

Several  About  this  time  Nuremberg,  Frankfort,  Ham-
UsiTthe  °  burgh,  and  several  other  free  cities  in  Germany,
Popish the  °f tne  first  rank,  openly  embraced  the  reformed
church,  religion,  and  by  the  authority  of  their  magis-
trates abolished  the  mass,  and  the  other  superstitious
rites  of  Popery.y  The  elector  of  Brandenburgh,  the
dukes  of  Brunswick  and  Lunenburgh,  and  prince  of
Anhalt,  became  avowed  patrons  of  Luther's  opinions,
and  countenanced  the  preaching  of  them  among  their
subjects.

Measures  The  court  of  Rome  beheld  this  growing  de-
fection  with  great  concern ;  and  Adrian's  first
care>  a^ter  *"s  arrival  in  Italy,  had  been  to  de-
progress  of  liberate  with  the  cardinals  concerning:  the  pro-

the  Refor-  .  TT&

mation.  per  means  ot  putting  a  stop  to  it.  He  was  pro-
foundly skilled  in  scholastic  theology,  and  having  been
early  celebrated  on  that  account,  he  still  retained  such
an  excessive  admiration  of  the  science  to  which  he  was
first  indebted  for  his  reputation  and  success  in  life,  that  he

v  Seckeud.  241. Cl^trsi  Contin. Krantzii,  203.

134  CHARLES V.  [1524.

considered  Luther's  invectives  against  the  schoolmen,
particularly  Thomas  Aquinas,  as  little  less  than  blas-
phemy. All  the  tenets  of  that  doctor  appeared  to  him
so  clear  and  irrefragable,  that  he  supposed  every  person
who  called  in  question  or  contradicted  them,  to  be
either  blinded  by  ignorance,  or  to  be  acting  in  opposi-
tion to  the  conviction  of  his  own  mind  :  of  course,  no
pope  was  ever  more  bigotted  or  inflexible  with  regard  to
points  of  doctrine  than  Adrian ;  he  riot  only  maintained
them  as  Leo  had  done,  because  they  were  ancient,  or
because  it  was  dangerous  for  the  church  to  allow  of
innovations,  but  he  adhered  to  them  with  the  zeal  of  a
theologian,  and  with  the  tenaciousness  of  a  disputant.
At  the  same  time  his  own  manners  being  extremely
simple,  and  uninfected  with  any  of  the  vices  which
reigned  in  the  court  of  Rome,  he  was  as  sensible  of  its
corruptions  as  the  reformers  themselves,  and  viewed
November,  them  with  no  less  indignation.  The  brief  which
1822'  -he  addressed  to  the  diet  of  the  empire  assem-
bled at  Nuremberg,  and  the  instructions  which  he  gave
Gheregato,  the  nuncio  whom  he  sent  thither,  were
framed  agreeably  to  these  views.  On  the  one  hand,  he
condemned  Luther's  opinions  with  more  asperity  and
rancour  of  expression  than  Leo  had  ever  used ;  he
severely  censured  the  princes  of  Germany  for  suffering
him  to  spread  his  pernicious  tenets,  by  their  neglecting
to  execute  the  edict  of  the  diet  at  Worms  ;  and  required
them,  if  Luther  did  not  instantly  retract  his  errors,  to  de-
stroy him  with  fire  as  a  gangrened  and  incurable  mem-
ber, in  like  manner  as  Dathan  and  Abiram  had  been  cut
off  by  Moses,  Ananias  and  Sapphira  by  the  apostles,
and  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague  by  their  ances-
tors.2 On  the  other  hand,  he,  with  great  candour,  and
in  the  most  explicit  terms,  acknowledged  the  corrup-
tions of  the  Roman  court  to  be  the  source  from  which
had  flowed  most  of  the  evils  that  the  church  now  felt  or

1  Fascic.  Rer.  expet.  et  fugiend.  342.

1524.]  BOOK III.  135

dreaded  ;  he  promised  to  exert  all  his  authority  towards
reforming  these  abuses,  with  as  much  dispatch  as  the
nature  and  inveteracy  of  the  disorders  would  admit ;
and  he  requested  of  them  to  give  advice  with  regard  to
the  most  effectual  means  of  suppressing  that  new  heresy
which  had  sprung  up  among  them.a
Diet  of  The  members  of  the  diet,  after  praising  the
Nror<oTe  arg  P°Pe's  pi°us  al*d  laudable  intentions,  excused
general  themselves  for  not  executing  the  edict  of
the  p^ope*  Worms,  by  alleging  that  the  prodigious  in-
iedy*  crease  of  Luther's  followers,  as  well  as  the  aver-
sion to  the  court  of  Rome  among  their  other  subjects  on
account  of  its  innumerable  exactions,  rendered  such
an  attempt  not  only  dangerous,  but  impossible.  They
affirmed  that  the  grievances  of  Germany,  which  did  not
arise  from  imaginary  injuries,  but  from  impositions  no
less  real  than  intolerable,  as  his  holiness  would  learn
from  a  catalogue  of  them  which  they  intended  to  lay
before  him,  called  now  for  some  new  and  efficacious
remedy;  and,  in  their  opinion,  the  only  remedy  ade-
quate to  the  disease,  or  which  afforded  them  any  hopes
of  seeing  the  church  restored  to  soundness  and  vigour,
was  a  general  council.  Such  a  council,  therefore,  they
advised  him,  after  obtaining  the  emperor's  consent,  to
assemble,  without  delay,  in  one  of  the  great  cities  of
Germany,  that  all  who  had  right  to  be  present  might
deliberate  with  freedom,  and  propose  their  opinions
with  such  boldness,  as  the  dangerous  situation  of  reli-
gion at  this  juncture  required.5

Artifices  The  nuncio,  more  artful  than  his  master,  and
cioio  nun"  better  acquainted  with  the  political  views  and
elude  it.  interests  of  the  Roman  court,  was  startled  at  the
proposition  of  a  council,  and  easily  foresaw  how  dan-
gerous such  an  assembly  might  prove,  at  a  time  when
many  openly  denied  the  papal  authority,  and  the  rever-

a  Fascic.  Rer.  expet.  ct  fugiend.  p.  345.  . »>  Ibid.  p.  346.

136  CHARLES V.  [1524.

ence  and  submission  yielded  to  it  visibly  declined  among
all.  For  that  reason  he  employed  his  utmost  address  in
order  to  prevail  on  the  members  of  the  diet  to  proceed
themselves  with  greater  severity  against  the  Lutheran
heresy,  and  to  relinquish  their  proposal  concerning  a
general  council  to  be  held  in  Germany.  They,  per-
ceiving the  nuncio  to  be  more  solicitous  about  the  in-
terests of  the  Roman  court,  than  the  tranquillity  of  the
empire,  or  purity  of  the  church,  remained  inflexible,  and
continued  to  prepare  the  catalogue  of  their  grievances
to  be  presented  to  the  pope.0  The  nuncio,  that  he  might
not  be  the  bearer  of  a  remonstrance  so  disagreeable  to
his  court,  left  Nuremberg  abruptly,  without  taking  leave
of  the  diet.d

The  diet The  secular  princes  accordingly,  for  the  ec-
clesiastics,  although  they  gave  no  opposition,

grievances dld  nOt  think  {t  deC6nt  tO  JOm  with  tliem>

to  the  pope.  Up  the  list  (so  famous  in  the  German  annals)  of
a  hundred  grievances,  which  the  empire  imputed  to
the  iniquitous  dominion  of  the  papal  see.  The  list  con-
tained grievances  much  of  the  same  nature  with  that
prepared  under  the  reign  of  Maximilian.  It  would  be
tedious  to  enumerate  each  of  them  ;  they  complained  of
the  sums  exacted  for  dispensations,  absolutions,  and  in-
dulgences ;  of  the  expense  arising  from  the  lawsuits
carried  by  appeal  to  Rome  ;  of  the  innumerable  abuses
occasioned  by  reservations,  commendams,  and  annates  ;
of  the  exemption  from  civil  jurisdiction  which  the  clergy
had  obtained  ;  of  the  arts  by  which  they  brought  all
secular  causes  under  the  cognizance  of  the  ecclesiastical
judges;  of  the  indecent  and  profligate  lives  which  not
a  few  of  the  clergy  led  ;  and  of  various  other  particulars,
many  of  which  have  already  been  mentioned  among  the
circumstances  that  contributed  to  the  favourable  recep-
tion, or  to  the  quick  progress,  of  Luther's  doctrines.  In

Rer,  expet.  et  fugiend.  349.  *  Ibid.  376.

1524.]  BOOK IIL  137

the  end  they  concluded,  that  if  the  holy  see  did  not
speedily  deliver  them  from  those  intolerable  burdens,
they  had  determined  to  endure  them  no  longer,  and
would  employ  the  power  and  authority  with  which  God
had  intrusted  them,  in  order  to  procure  relief.6
The  recess Instead  of  such  severities  against  Luther  and
March  IT'  n*s  f°U°wers  as  tne  nuncio  had  recommended,
1523. the  recess  or  edict  of  the  diet  contained  only  a
general  injunction  to  all  ranks  of  men  to  wait  with
patience  for  the  determinations  of  the  council  which
was  to  be  assembled,  and  in  the  mean  time  not  to  pub-
lish any  new  opinions  contrary  to  the  established  doc-
trines of  the  church  •  together  with  an  admonition  to
all  preachers  to  abstain  from  matters  of  controversy  in
their  discourses  to  the  people,  and  to  confine  themselves
to  the  plain  and  instructive  truths  of  religion/
This  diet ^e  ref°rmers  derived  great  advantage  from
of  great the  transactions  of  this  diet,  as  they  afforded
thieRefor- them  the  fullest  and  most  authentic  evidence
that  gross  corruptions  prevailed  in  the  court  of
Rome,  and  that  the  empire  was  loaded  by  the  clergy
with  insupportable  burdens. With  regard  to  the  for-
mer, they  had  now  the  testimony  of  the  pope  himself,
that  their  invectives  and  accusations  were  not  malicious
or  ill-founded. As  to  the  latter,  the  representatives  of
the  Germanic  body,  in  an  assembly  where  the  patrons
of  the  new  opinions  were  far  from  being  the  most  nu-
merous or  powerful,  had  pointed  out  as  the  chief  griev-
ances of  the  empire,  those  very  practices  of  the  Romish
church  against  which  Luther  and  his  disciples  were  ac-
customed to  declaim. Accordingly,  in  all  their  contro-
versial writings  after  this  period,  they  often  appealed  to
Adrian's  declaration,  and  to  the  hundred  grievances,  in
confirmation  of  whatever  they  advanced  concerning  the
dissolute  manners,  or  insatiable  ambition  and  rapaci-
ousness,  of  the  papal  court.

«  Fascici  Rer.  expet.  ct  fugieud.  354.  f  Ibid.  348.

138  CHARLES V.  [1524.

Adrian's  At  Rome,  Adrian's  conduct  was  considered
censed  as  a  Pro°f  °^  tne  most  childish  simplicity  and
at  Rome,  imprudence.  Men  trained  up  amidst  the  arti-
fices and  corruptions  of  the  papal  court,  and  accustomed
to  judge  of  actions  not  by  what  was  just,  but  by  what
was  useful,  were  astonished  at  a  pontiff,  who,  departing
from  the  wise  maxims  of  his  predecessors,  acknowledged
disorders  which  he  ought  to  have  concealed ;  and  for-
getting his  own  dignity,  asked  advice  of  those  to  whom
he  was  entitled  to  prescribe.  By  such  an  excess  of
impolitic  sincerity,  they  were  afraid  that,  instead  of
reclaiming  the  enemies  of  the  church,  he  would  render
them  more  presumptuous,  and  instead  of  extinguish-
ing heresy,  would  weaken  the  foundations  of  the  papal
power,  or  stop  the  chief  sources  from  which  wealth
flowed  into  the  church.8  For  this  reason  the  cardinals
and  other  ecclesiastics  of  greatest  eminence  in  the
papal  court  industriously  opposed  all  his  schemes  of
reformation,  and  by  throwing  objections  and  difficul-
ties in  his  way,  endeavoured  to  retard  or  to  defeat  the
execution  of  them.  Adrian,  amazed,  on  the  one  hand,
at  the  obstinacy  of  the  Lutherans,  disgusted,  on  the
other,  with  the  manners  and  maxims  of  the  Italians,
and  finding  himself  unable  to  correct  either  the  one  or
the  other,  often  lamented  his  own  situation,  and  often
looked  back  with  pleasure  on  that  period  of  his  life
when  he  was  only  dean  of  Louvain,  a  more  humble
but  happier  station,  in  which  little  was  expected  from
him,  and  there  was  nothing  to  frustrate  his  good  in-
tentions.11

Clement  VIL,  his  successor,  excelled  Adrian

Clement's

measures  as  much  in  the  arts  of  government,  as  he  was
Lather,  inferior  to  him  in  purity  of  life  or  uprightness
d?eld  of  °f  intention.  He  was  animated  not  only  with
council™1  ^e  aversi°n  which  all  popes  naturally  bear  to
a  council,  but  having  gained  his  own  election

*  F.  Paul,  Hist,  of  Counc.  p,  28. Pallavic.  Hist.  58. h  Jovii  Vit.  Adr.  p.  118.

1524.]  BOOK III.  139

by  means  very  uncanonical,  he  was  afraid  of  an  assem-
bly that  might  subject  it  to  a  scrutiny  which  it  could
not  stand.  He  determined,  therefore,  by  every  possible
means,  to  elude  the  demands  of  the  Germans,  both  with
respect  to  the  calling  of  a  council,  and  reforming  abuses
in  the  papal  court,  which  the  rashness  and  incapacity
of  his  predecessor  had  brought  upon  him.  For  this
purpose,  he  made  choice  of  cardinal  Campeggio,  an
artful  man,  often  intrusted  by  his  predecessors  with
negotiations  of  importance,  as  his  nuncio  to  the  diet
of  the  empire  assembled  again  at  Nuremberg.
February.  Campeggio,  without  taking  any  notice  of
Tbenego-  what  had  passed  in  the  last  meeting,  exhorted

tiations  of  L

his  nuncio the  diet,  in  a  long  discourse,  to  execute  the
diet  JUNU-  edict  of  Worms  with  vigour,  as  the  only  effec-

means  of  suppressing  Luther's  doctrines.
The  diet  in  return,  desired  to  know  the  pope's  inten-
tions concerning  the  council,  and  the  redress  of  the
hundred  grievances.  The  former  the  nuncio  endea-
voured to  elude  by  general  and  unmeaning  declara-
tions of  the  pope's  resolution  to  pursue  such  measures
as  would  be  for  the  greatest  good  of  the  church.  With
regard  to  the  latter,  as  Adrian  was  dead  before  the
catalogue  of  grievances  reached  Rome,  and  of  conse-
quence it  had  not  been  regularly  laid  before  the  present
pope,  Campeggio  took  advantage  of  this  circumstance
to  decline  making  any  definitive  answer  to  them  in
Clement's  name;  though,  at  the  same  time,  he  ob-
served, that  their  catalogue  of  grievances  contained
many  particulars  extremely  indecent  and  undutiful,
and  that  the  publishing  it  by  their  own  authority  was
highly  disrespectful  to  the  Roman  see.  In  the  end,  he
renewed  his  demand,  of  their  proceeding  writh  vigour
Attended  agamstLuther  and  his  adherents.  But  though  an
with  little  ambassador  from  the  emperor,  who  was  at  that

effect.  .  .  . i

time  very  solicitous  to  gam  the  pope,  warmly
seconded  the  nuncio,  with  many  professions  of  his  mas-

140  CHARLES V.  [1524.

ter's  zeal  for  the  honour  and  dignity  of  the  papal  see,
the  recess  of  the  diet  was  conceived  in  terms  of  almost
the  same  import  with  the  former,  without  enjoining  any
additional  severity  against  Luther  and  his  party.1

Before  he  left  Germany,  Campeggio,  in  order  to
amuse  and  soothe  the  people,  published  certain  articles
for  the  amendment  of  some  disorders  and  abuses  which
prevailed  among  the  inferior  clergy;  but  this  partial
reformation,  which  fell  so  far  short  of  the  expectations
of  the  Lutherans,  and  of  the  demands  of  the  diet,  gave
no  satisfaction,  and  produced  little  effect.  The  nuncio,
with  a  cautious  hand,  tenderly  lopped  a  few  branches ;
the  Germans  aimed  a  deeper  blow,  and  by  striking  at
the  root  wished  to  exterminate  the  evil.k

*  Scckend.  286. Sleid.  Hist.  66.  *  Seckend.  292.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF  THE

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V,

BOOK  IV.

1524.  THE  expulsion  of  the  French,  both  out  of  the
th*  Italian  Milanese  and  the  republic  of  Genoa,  was  con-
ref eecttoh  sidered  by  the  Italians  as  the  termination  of  the
Charles  and  war  between  Charles  and  Francis;  and  as  they
began  immediately  to  be  apprehensive  of  the
emperor,  when  they  saw  no  power  remaining  in  Italy
capable  either  to  control  or  oppose  him,  they  longed
ardently  for  the  re- establishment  of  peace.  Having
procured  the  restoration  of  Sforza  to  his  paternal  do-
minions, which  had  been  their  chief  motive  for  entering
into  confederacy  with  Charles,  they  plainly  discovered
their  intention  to  contribute  no  longer  towards  increas-
ing the  emperor's  superiority  over  his  rival,  which  was
already  become  the  object  of  their  jealousy.  The  pope
especially,  whose  natural  timidity  increased  his  suspi-
cions of  Charles's  designs,  endeavoured  by  his  remon-
strances to  inspire  him  with  moderation,  and  incline
him  to  peace.

Charles  But  the  emperor,  intoxicated  with  success,
Invade* t0  anc^  urged  on  by  his  own  ambition,  no  less  than
France,  by  Bourbon's  desire  of  revenge,  contemned  Cle-
ment's admonitions,  and  declared  his  resolution  of  or-
dering his  army  to  pass  the  Alps,  and  to  invade  Pro-
vence, a  part  of  his  rival's  dominions,  where,  as  he  least
dreaded  an  attack,  he  was  least  prepared  to  resist  it.

142  CHARLES V.  [1524.

His  most  experienced  ministers  dissuaded  him  from
undertaking  such  an  enterprise  with  a  feeble  army,  and
an  exhausted  treasury ;  but  he  relied  so  much  on  having
obtained  the  concurrence  of  the  king  of  England,  and
on  the  hopes  which  Bourbon,  with  the  confidence  and
credulity  natural  to  exiles,  entertained  of  being  joined
by  a  numerous  body  of  his  partisans  as  soon  as  the
imperial  troops  should  enter  France,  that  he  persisted
obstinately  in  the  measure.  Henry  undertook  to  fur-
nish a  hundred  thousand  ducats  towards  defraying  the
expense  of  the  expedition  during  the  first  month,  and
had  it  in  his  choice  either  to  continue  the  payment  of
that  sum  monthly,  or  to  invade  Picardy  before  the  end
of  July  with  an  army  capable  of  acting  with  vigour.
The  emperor  engaged  to  attack  Guienne  at  the  same
time  with  a  considerable  body  of  men ;  and  if  these
enterprises  proved  successful,  they  agreed,  that  Bour-
bon, besides  the  territories  which  he  had  lost,  should
be  put  in  possession  of  Provence,  with  the  title  of  king,
and  should  do  homage  to  Henry,  as  the  lawful  king  of
France,  for  his  new  dominions.  Of  all  the  parts  of  this
extensive  but  extravagant  project,  "the  invasion  of  Pro-
vence was  the  only  one  that  was  executed.  For  al-
though Bourbon,  with  a  scrupulous  delicacy,  altogether
unexpected  after  the  part  which  he  had  acted,  positively
refused  to  acknowledge  Henry's  title  to  the  crown  of
France,  and  thereby  absolved  him  from  any  obligation
to  promote  the  enterprise,  Charles's  eagerness  to  carry
his  own  plan  into  execution  did  not  in  any  degree  abate.
The  army  which  he  employed  for  that  purpose  amounted
only  to  eighteen  thousand  men;  the  command  of  which
was  given  to  the  marquis  de  Pescara,  with  instructions
to  pay  the  greatest  deference  to  Bourbon's  advice  in  all
Theimpe-  ^is  operations.  Pescara  passed  the  Alps  with-
out  ^position,  and  entering  Provence,  laid
siege  to  Marseilles.  Bourbon  had  advised  him
rather  to  march  towards  Lyons,  in  the  neigh-

1524.]  BOOK IV,  143

bourhood  of  which  city  his  territories  were  situated,
and  where  of  course  his  influence  was  most  extensive ;
but  the  emperor  was  so  desirous  to  get  possession  of  a
port,  which  would,  at  all  times,  secure  him  an  easy
entrance  into  France,  that  by  his  authority  he  overruled
the  constable's  opinion,  and  directed  Pescara  to  make
the  reduction  of  Marseilles  his  chief  object.51
Prudent  Francis,  who  foresaw,  but  was  unable  to
measures  prevent,  this  attempt,  took  the  most  proper
precautions  to  defeat  it.  He  laid  waste  the
adjacent  country,  in  order  to  render  it  more  difficult
for  the  enemy  to  subsist  their  army;  he  raised  the
suburbs  of  the  city,  strengthened  its  fortifications,  and
threw  into  it  a  numerous  garrison  under  the  command
of  brave  and  experienced  officers.  To  these,  nine  thou-
sand of  the  citizens,  whom  their  dread  of  the  Spanish
yoke  inspired  with  contempt  of  danger,  joined  them-
selves ;  by  their  united  courage  and  industry,  all  the
efforts  of  Pescara's  military  skill,  and  of  Bourbon's  ac-
tivity and  revenge,  were  rendered  abortive.  Francis,
meanwhile,  had  leisure  to  assemble  a  powerful  army
under  the  walls  of  Avignon,  and  no  sooner  began  to
advance  towards  Marseilles,  than  the  imperial  troops,
exhausted  by  the  fatigues  of  a  siege  which  had  lasted
forty  days,  weakened  by  diseases,  and  almost  destitute
of  provisions,  retired  with  precipitation  towards  Italy.b
imperial-  If,  during  these  operations  of  the  army  in
lores  Provence,  either  Charles  or  Henry  had  attacked
Sept.  19.  France  m  the  manner  which  they  had  projected,
that  kingdom  must  have  been  exposed  to  the  most  im-
minent danger.  But  on  this,  as  well  as  on  many  other
occasions,  the  emperor  found  that  the  extent  of  his
revenues  was  not  adequate  to  the  greatness  of  his
schemes,  or  the  ardour  of  his  ambition,  and  the  want  of
money  obliged  him,  though  with  much  reluctance,  to

a  Guic.  1.  xv.  273,  &c. Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  80.
b  Guic.  1.  xv.  277. Ulloa  Vita  dell  Carlo  V.  p.  93.

144  CHARLES  V.  [1524.

circumscribe  his  plan,  and  to  leave  part  of  it  unexecuted.
Henry,  disgusted  at  Bourbon's  refusing  to  recognise
his  right  to  the  crown  of  France ;  alarmed  at  the  mo-
tions of  the  Scots,  whom  the  solicitations  of  the  French
king  had  persuaded  to  march  towards  the  borders  of
England;  and  no  longer  incited  by  his  minister,  who
was  become  extremely  cool  with  regard  to  all  the  em-
peror's interests,  took  no  measures  to  support  an  enter-
prise of  which,  as  of  all  new  undertakings,  he  had  been
at  first  excessively  fond.c

Francis  ^  ^e  king  of  France  had  been  satisfied

elated  with  with  having  delivered  his  subjects  from  this
formidable  invasion,  if  he  had  thought  it
enough  to  shew  all  Europe  the  facility  with  which  the
internal  strength  of  his  dominions  enabled  him  to  resist
the  invasion  of  a  foreign  enemy,  even  when  seconded
by  the  abilities  and  powerful  efforts  of  a  rebellious
subject,  the  campaign,  notwithstanding  the  loss  of  the
Milanese,  would  have  been  far  from  ending  ingloriously.
But  Francis,  animated  with  courage  more  becoming  a
soldier  than  a  general;  pushed  on  by  ambition,  en-
terprising rather  than  considerate ;  and  too  apt  to  be
elated  with  success;  was  fond  of  every  undertaking  that
seemed  bold  and  adventurous.  Such  an  undertaking,  the
situation  of  his  aifairs,  at  that  juncture,  naturally  pre-
sented  to  his  view.  He  had  under  his  command
one  °^  *^e  m°st  powerful  and  best  appointed
armies  France  had  ever  brought  into  the  field,
which  he  could  not  think  of  disbanding  without  having
employed  it  in  any  active  service.  The  imperial  troops
had  been  obliged  to  retire,  almost  ruined  by  hard  duty,
and  disheartened  with  ill  success;  the  Milanese  had
been  left  altogether  without  defence ;  it  was  not  impos-
sible to  reach  that  country  before  Pescara,  with  his
shattered  forces,  could  arrive  there ;  or  if  fear  should
add  speed  to  their  retreat,  they  were  in  no  condition  to

c  Fiddes's  Life  of  Wolsey,  Append.  No.  70,71,  72.

1524.]

BOOK IV.

145

make  head  against  his  fresh  and  numerous  troops;  and
Milan  would  now,  as  in  former  instances,  submit  with-
out resistance  to  a  bold  invader.  These  considerations,
which  were  not  destitute  of  plausibility,  appeared  to
his  sanguine  temper  to  be  of  the  utmost  weight.  In
vain  did  his  wisest  ministers  and  generals  represent  to
him  the  danger  of  taking  the  field  at  a  season  so  far
advanced,  with  an  army  composed  chiefly  of  Swiss  and
Germans,  to  whose  caprices  he  would  be  subject  in  all
his  operations,  and  in  whose  fidelity  his  safety  must
absolutely  depend.  In  vain  did  Louise  of  Savoy  ad-
vance by  hasty  journeys  towards  Provence,  that  she
might  exert  all  her  authority  in  dissuading  her  son
from  such  a  rash  enterprise.  Francis  disregarded  the
remonstrances  of  his  subjects;  and  that  he  might  save
himself  the  pain  of  an  interview  with  his  mother,  whose
counsels  he  had  determined  to  reject,  he  began  his
Appoints  march  before  her  arrival;  appointing  her,  how-
regen°tther  ever>  ^7  wav  °f  atonement  for  that  neglect,  to
during  his  be  regent  of  the  kingdom  during  his  absence.

aHsfMipp

Bonnivet,  by  his  persuasions,  contributed  not  a
little  to  confirm  F(rancis  in  this  resolution.  That  fa-
vourite, who  strongly  resembled  his  master  in  all  the
defective  parts  of  his  character,  was  led,  by  his  natural
impetuosity,  warmly  to  approve  of  such  an  enterprise;
and  being  prompted,  besides,  by  his  impatience  to  re-
visit a  Milanese  lady,  of  whom  he  had  been  deeply  en-
amoured during  his  late  expedition,  he  is  said,  by  his
flattering  descriptions  of  her  beauty  and  accomplish-
ments, to  have  inspired  Francis,  who  was  extremely
susceptible  of  such  passions,  with  an  equal  desire  of
seeing  her.*

o  erations  ^ne  French-passed  the  Alps  at  Mount  Cenis ;
in  the  Mi-  and  as  their  success  depended  on  dispatch,  they

advanced  with  the  greatest  diligence.  Pescara,
who  had  been  obliged  to  take  a  longer  and  more  diffi-

e  (Euv.  de  Brant,  torn.  vi.  253.

VOL. IV.

146  CHARLES  V.  [1524.

cult  route  by  Monaco  and  Final,  was  soon  informed  of
their  intention ;  and  being  sensible  that  nothing  but  the
presence  of  his  troops  could  save  the  Milanese,  march-
ed with  such  rapidity,  that  he  reached  Alva  on  the
same  day  that  the  French  army  arrived  at  Vercelli.
Francis,  instructed  by  Bonnivet's  error  in  the  former
campaign,  advanced  directly  towards  Milan,  where  the
unexpected  approach  of  an  enemy  so  powerful,  occa-
sioned such  consternation  and  disorder,  that  although
Pescara  entered  the  city  with  some  of  his  best  troops,
he  found  that  the  defence  of  it  could  not  be  undertaken
with  any  probability  of  success ;  and  having  thrown  a
garrison  into  the  citadel,  retired  through  one  gate,
while  the  French  were  admitted  at  another/
Embar-  These  brisk  motions  of  the  French  monarch

ofSth°gira-e  disconcerted  all  the  schemes  of  defence  which
periaiists.  the  Imperialists  had  formed.  Never,  indeed,
did  generals  attempt  to  oppose  a  formidable  invasion
under  such  circumstances  of  disadvantage.  Though
Charles  possessed  dominions  more  extensive  than  any
other  prince  in  Europe,  and  had,  at  this  time,  no  other
army  but  that  which  was  employed  in  Lombardy,  which
did  not  amount  to  sixteen  thousand  men,  his  preroga-
tive in  all  his  different  states  was  so  limited,  and  his
subjects,  without  whose  consent  he  could  raise  no  taxes,
discovered  such  unwillingness  to  burden  themselves
with  new  or  extraordinary  impositions,  that  even  this
small  body  of  troops  was  in  want  of  pay,  of  ammuni-
tion, of  provisions,  and  of  clothing.  In  such  a  situa-
tion, it  required  all  the  wisdom  of  Lannoy,  the  intre-
pidity of  Pescara,  and  the  implacable  resentment  of
Bourbon,  to  preserve  them  from  sinking  under  despair,
and  to  inspire  them  with  resolution  to  attempt,  or  saga-
city to  discover,  what  was  essential  to  their  safety.  To
the  efforts  of  their  genius,  and  the  activity  of  their  zeal,
the  emperor  was  more  indebted  for  the  preservation  of

f  Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  81. Guic.  1.  xv.  278.

1524.]  BOOK IV.  147

his  Italian  dominions  than  to  his  own  power.  Lannoy,
by  mortgaging  the  revenues  of  Naples,  procured  some
money  which  was  immediately  applied  towards  provid-
ing the  army  with  whatever  was  most  necessary. g  Pes-
cara,  who  was  beloved  and  almost  adored  by  the  Spa-
nish troops,  exhorted  them  to  shew  the  world  by  their
engaging  to  serve  the  emperor  in  that  dangerous  exi-
gency, without  making  any  immediate  demand  of  pay,
that  they  were  animated  with  sentiments  of  honour  very
different  from  those  of  mercenary  soldiers;  to  which
proposition  that  gallant  body  of  men,  with  an  unexam-
pled generosity,  gave  their  consent.11  Bourbon  having
raised  a  considerable  sum,  by  pawning  his  jewels,  set
out  for  Germany,  where  his  influence  was  great,  that
by  his  presence  he  might  hasten  the  levying  of  troops
for  the  imperial  service.1

Francis  Francis,  by  a  fatal  error,  allowed  the  empe-
besieges  rOr's  generals  time  to  derive  advantage  from  all
these  operations.  Instead  of  pursuing  the  ene-
my, who  retired  to  Lodi  on  the  Adda,  an  untenable
post  which  Pescara  had  resolved  to  abandon  on  the
approach  of  the  French,  he,  in  compliance  with  the
opinion  of  Bonnivet,  though  contrary  to  that  of  his
other  generals,  laid  siege  to  Pavia  on  the  Te-
sino;  a  town,  indeed,  of  great  importance,  the
possession  of  which  would  have  opened  to  him  all  the
fertile  country  lying  on  the  banks  of  that  river.  But
the  fortifications  of  the  place  were  strong ;  it  was  dan-
gerous to  undertake  a  difficult  siege  at  so  late  a  sea-
son ;  and  the  imperial  generals,  sensible  of  its  conse-
quence, had  thrown  into  the  town  a  garrison  composed
of  six  thousand  veterans,  under  the  command  of  An-
tonio de  Ley  va,  an  officer  of  high  rank ;  of  great  expe-
rience; of  a  patient,  but  enterprising  courage;  fertile  in

s  Guic.  l.xv.  280.

h  Jovii  Vit.  Davali,  lib.  xv.  p.  386. Sandov.  vol.  i.  621. Ulloa  Vita  dell  Carlo
V.  p.  94,  &c. Vita  dell  Emperor  Carlos  V.  per  Vera  y  Zuniga,  p.  36.
i  Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  83.

L2

J48  CHARLES  V.  [1524.

resources;  ambitious  of  distinguishing  himself;  and
capable,  for  that  reason,  as  well  as  from  his  having
been  long  accustomed  both  to  obey  and  to  command,
of  suffering  or  performing  any  thing  in  order  to  pro-
cure success.

His  vigor-  Francis  prosecuted  the  siege  with  obstinacy
cms  efforts.  equaj  to  tne  rashness  with  which  he  had  under-
taken it.  During  three  months,  every  thing  known  to
the  engineers  of  that  age,  or  that  could  be  effected  by
the  valour  of  his  troops,  was  attempted,  in  order  to
reduce  the  place ;  while  Lannoy  and  Pescara,  unable  to
obstruct  his  operations,  were  obliged  to  remain  in  such
an  ignominious  state  of  inaction,  that  a  pasquinade  was
published  at  Rome,  offering  a  reward  to  any  person
who  could  find  the  imperial  army,  lost  in  the  month  of
October  in  the  mountains  between  France .  and  Lom-
bardy,  and  which  had  not  been  heard  of  since  that  time.k
The  town  Leyva,  well  acquainted  with  the  difficulties
gallantly  under  which  his  countrymen  laboured,  and  the
impossibility  of  their  facing,  in  the  field,  such  a
powerful  army  as  formed  the  siege  of  Pavia,  placed  his
only  hopes  of  safety  in  his  own  vigilance  and  valour.
The  efforts  of  both  were  extraordinary,  and  in  propor-
tion to  the  importance  of  the  place,  with  the  defence  of
which  he  was  intrusted.  He  interrupted  the  approaches
of  the  French  by  frequent  and  furious  sallies.  Behind
the  breaches  made  by  their  artillery,  he  erected  new
works,  which  appeared  to  be  scarcely  inferior  in  strength
to  the  original  fortifications.  He  repulsed  the  besiegers
in  all  their  assaults;  and  by  his  own  example,  brought
not  only  the  garrison,  but  the  inhabitants,  to  bear  the
most  severe  fatigues,  and  to  encounter  the  greatest
dangers  without  murmuring.  The  rigour  of  the  season
conspired  with  his  endeavours  in  retarding  the  progress
of  the  French.  Francis  attempting  to  become  master  of
the  town,  by  diverting  the  course  of  the  Tesino,  which

k  Sandor:  i.  608.

1524.]  BOOK  IV.  149

is  its  chief  defence  on  one  side,  a  sudden  inundation  of
the  river  destroyed,  in  one  day,  the  labour  of  many
\veeks,  and  swept  away  all  the  mounds  which  his  army
had  raised  with  infinite  toil,  as  well  as  at  great  expense.1
The  pope  Notwithstanding  the  slow  progress  of  the  be-
siegers,  and  the  glory  which  Leyva  acquired  by

neutrality.  ^  ga]jant  defence,  it  was  not  doubted  but  that
the  town  would  at  last  be  obliged  to  surrender.  The  pope,
who  already  considered  the  French  arms  as  superior  in
Italy,  became  impatient  to  disengage  himself  from  his
connexions  with  the  emperor,  of  whose  designs  he  was
extremely  jealous,  and  to  enter  into  terms  of  friendship
with  Francis.  As  Clement's  timid  and  cautious  temper
rendered  him  incapable  of  following  the  bold  plan  which
Leo  had  formed,  of  delivering  Italy  from  the  yoke  of
both  the  rivals,  he  returned  to  the  more  obvious  and
practicable  scheme  of  employing  the  power  of  the  one
to  balance  and  to  restrain  that  of  the  other.  For  this
reason,  he  did  not  dissemble  his  satisfaction  at  seeing
the  French  king  recover  Milan,  as  he  hoped  that  the
dread  of  such  a  neighbour  would  be  some  check  upon
the  emperor's  ambition,  which  no  power  in  Italy  was
now  able  to  control.  He  laboured  hard  to  bring
about  a  peace  that  would  secure  Francis  in  the  posses-
sion of  his  new  conquests;  and  as  Charles,  who  was
always  inflexible  in  the  prosecution  of  his  schemes,
rejected  the  proposition  with  disdain,  and  with  bitter
exclamations  against  the  pope,  by  whose  persuasions,
while  cardinal  di  Medici,  he  had  been  induced  to  in-
vade the  Milanese,  Clement  immediately  concluded  a
treaty  of  neutrality  with  the  king  of  France,  in  which
the  republic  of  Florence  was  included.™
Francis  Francis  having,  by  this  transaction,  deprived
invades  the  emperor  of  his  two  most  powerful  allies,  and

Naples.  i  *  "'•  •  T

at  the  same  time  having  secured  a  passage  for
his  own  troops through their  territories, formed a

1  Guic.  1.  xv.  280.  Ulloa  Vita  dell  Carlo  V.  p.  95.  m  Guic.  1.  xv.  282.  285.

150  CHARLES  V.  [1524.

scheme  of  attacking  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  hoping
either  to  overrun  that  country,  which  was  left  altogether
without  defence,  or  that  at  least  such  an  unexpected
invasion  would  oblige  the  viceroy  to  recall  part  of  the
imperial  army  out  of  the  Milanese.  For  this  purpose
he  ordered  six  thousand  men  to  march  under  the  com-
mand of  John  Stuart  duke  of  Albany.  But  Pescara,
foreseeing  that  the  effect  of  this  diversion  would  de-
pend entirely  upon  the  operations  of  the  armies  in  the
Milanese,  persuaded  Lannoy  to  disregard  Albany's
motions,"  and  to  bend  his  whole  force  against  the  king
himself;  so  that  Francis  not  only  weakened  his  army
very  unseasonably  by  this  great  detachment,  but  incur-
red the  reproach  of  engaging  too  rashly  in  chimerical
and  extravagant  projects.

Efforts  of By  this  time  the  garrison  of  Pa-via  was  re-
andCBour-  duced  to  extremity ;  their  ammunition  and  pro-
bon- visions  began  to  fail ;  the  Germans,  of  whom  it
was  chiefly  composed,  having  received  no  pay  for  seven
months,0  threatened  to  deliver  the  town  into  the  ene-
my's hands,  and  could  hardly  be  restrained  from  mutiny
by  all  Leyva's  address  and  authority. The  imperial
generals,  who  were  no  strangers  to  his  situation,  saw
the  necessity  of  marching  without  loss  of  time  to  his  re-
lief.  This  they  had  now  in  their  power. Twelve
thousand  Germans,  whom  the  zeal  and  activity
of  Bourbon  taught  to  move  with  unusual  rapidity,  had
entered  Lombardy  under  his  command,  and  rendered  the
imperial  army  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  French,  greatly
diminished  by  the  absence  of  the  body  under  Albany,
as  well  as  by  the  fatigues  of  the  siege  and  the  rigour  of
the  season. But  the  more  their  troops  increased  in
number,  the  more  sensibly  did  the  Imperialists  feel
the  distress  arising  from  want  of  money. Far  from
having  funds  for  paying  a  powerful  army,  they  had
scarcely  what  was  sufficient  for  defraying  the  charges

»  Guic.  1,  xv.  285.  o  Gold.  Polit.  Imperial.  875.

1525.]  BOOK  IV.  151

of  conducting  their  artillery,  and  of  carrying  their  am-
munition and  provisions.  The  abilities  of  the  generals,
however,  supplied  every  defect.  By  their  own  exam-
ple, as  well  as  by  magnificent  promises  in  the  name  of
the  emperor,  they  prevailed  on  the  troops  of  all  the
different  nations  which  composed  their  army  to  take
the  field  without  pay;  they  engaged  to  lead  them  di-
rectly towards  the  enemy ;  and  flattered  them  with  the
certain  prospect  of  victory,  which  would  at  once  enrich
them  with  such  royal  spoils  as  would  be  an  ample  re-
ward for  all  their  services.  The  soldiers,  sensible  that,
by  quitting  the  army,  they  would  forfeit  the  great  ar-
rears due  to  them,  and  eager  to  get  possession  of  the
promised  treasures,  demanded  a  battle  with  all  the  im-
patience of  adventurers  who  fight  only  for  plunder.p
They  march  The  imperial  generals  without  suffering  the
to  attack  ardour  of  their  troops  to  cool,  advanced  imme-

the  French.  *.  ,  ^

Feb.  s.  diately  towards  the  French  camp.  On  the  first
intelligence  of  their  approach,  Francis  called  a  council
of  war,  to  deliberate  what  course  he  ought  to  take.  All
his  officers  of  greatest  experience  were  unanimous  in
advising  him  to  retire,  and  to  decline  a  battle  with  an
enemy  who  courted  it  from  despair.  The  Imperialists,
they  observed,  would  either  be  obliged  in  a  few  weeks
to  disband  an  army,  which  they  were  unable  to  pay,  and
which  they  kept  together  only  by  the  hope  of  plunder ;
or  the  soldiers,  enraged  at  the  non-performance  of  the
promises  to  which  they  had  trusted,  would  rise  in  some
furious  mutiny,  which  would  allow  their  generals  to
think  of  nothing  but  their  own  safety  :  that  meanwhile,
he  might  encamp  in  some  strong  post ;  and  waiting  in
safety  the  arrival  of  fresh  troops  from  France  and  Swit-
zerland, might,  before  the  end  of  spring,  take  possession
.of  all  the  Milanese  without  danger  or  bloodshed.  But
in  opposition  to  them,  Bonnivet,  whose  destiny  it  was
to  give  counsels  fatal  to  France  during  the  whole  cam-

P  Eryci  Peuteani  Hist.  Cisalpina,  ap.  Grwvii  Thes.  Antiquit.  Ital.  iii.  p.  1170. 1179.

lf>2  CHARLES V.  [1525.

paign,  represented  the  ignominy  that  it  would  reflect
on  their  sovereign,  if  he  should  abandon  a  siege  which
he  had  prosecuted  so  long,  or  turn  his  back  before  an
enemy  to  whom  he  was  still  superior  in  number ;  and
insisted  on  the  necessity  of  fighting  the  Imperialists
rather  than  relinquish  an  undertaking,  on  the  success
of  which  the  king's  future  fame  depended.  Unfortu-
nately, Francis's  notions  of  honour  were  delicate  to  an
excess  that  bordered  on  what  was  romantic.  Having
often  said  that  he  would  take  Pavia,  or  perish  in  the
attempt,  he  thought  himself  bound  not  to  depart  from
that  resolution  ;  and  rather  than  expose  himself  to  the
slightest  imputation,  he  chose  to  forego  all  the  advan-
tages which  were  the  certain  consequences  of  a  retreat,
and  determined  to  wait  for  the  Imperialists  before  the
walls  of  Pavia.p

Battle  of  The  imperial  generals  found  the  French  so
Pavia.  strongly  intrenched,  that,  notwithstanding  the
powerful  motives  which  urged  them  on,  they  hesitated
long  before  they  ventured  to  attack  them ;  but  at  last
the  necessities  of  the  besieged,  and  the  murmurs  of
their  own  soldiers,  obliged  them  to  put  erery  thing  to
hazard.  Never  did  armies  engage  with  greater
ardour,  or  with  a  higher  opinion  of  the  import-
ance of  the  battle  which  they  were  going  to  fight;
never  were  troops  more  strongly  animated  with  emula-
tion, national  antipathy,  mutual  resentment,  and  all  the
passions  which  inspire  obstinate  bravery.  On  the  one
hand,  a  gallant  young  monarch,  seconded  by  a  gene-
rous nobility,  and  followed  by  subjects  to  whose  natural
impetuosity  indignation  at  the  opposition  which  they
had  encountered  added  new  force,  contended  for  vic-
tory and  honour.  On  the  other  side,  troops  more  com-
pletely disciplined,  and  conducted  by  generals  of
greater  abilities,  fought  from  necessity,  with  courage
heightened  by  despair.  The  Imperialists,  however,  were

P  Guic.  1.  xv.  291.

1525.]  BOOK IV.  153

unable  to  resist  the  first  efforts  of  the  French  valour,
and  their  firmest  battalions  began  to  give  way.  But
the  fortune  of  the  day  was  quickly  changed.  The  Swiss
in  the  service  of  France,  unmindful  of  the  reputation  of
their  country  for  fidelity  and  martial  glory,  abandoned
their  post  in  a  cowardly  manner.  Leyva,  with  his  gar-
rison, sallied  out  and  attacked  the  rear  of  the  French,
during  the  heat  of  the  action,  with  such  fury  as  threw
it  into  confusion  ;  and  Pescara  falling  on  their  cavalry
with  the  imperial  horse,  among  whom  he  had  prudently
intermingled  a  considerable  number  of  Spanish  foot,
armed  with  the  heavy  muskets  then  in  use,  broke  this
formidable  body  by  an  unusual  method  of  attack,  against
The  French  w^^c^  ^e7  wei%e  wholly  unprovided.  The  rout
army  rout-  became  universal;  and  resistance  ceased  in  al-
most every  part,  but  where  the  king  was ,  in
person,  who  fought  now,  not  for  fame  or  victory,  but
for  safety.  Though  wounded  in  several  places,  and
thrown  from  his  horse,  which  was  killed  under  him,
Francis  defended  himself  on  foot  with  an  heroic  cou-
rage. Many  of  his  bravest  officers  gathering  round  him,
and  endeavouring  to  save  his  life  at  the  expense  of
their  own,  fell  at  his  feet.  Among  these  was  Bonnivet,
the  author  of  this  great  calamity,  who  alone  died  un-
lam  en  ted.  The  king,  exhausted  with  fatigue,  and
scarcely  capable  of  farther  resistance,  was  left  almost
alone,  exposed  to  the  fury  of  some  Spanish  soldiers,
strangers  to  his  rank,  and  enraged  at  his  obstinacy.  At
that  moment  came  up  Pomperant,  a  French  gentleman,
who  had  entered  together  with  Bourbon  into  the  em-
peror's service,  and  placing  himself  by  the  side  of  the
monarch  against  whom  he  had  rebelled,  assisted  in
protecting  him  from  the  violence  of  the  soldiers ;  at  the
same  time  beseeching  him  to  surrender  to  Bourbon,
who  was  not  far  distant.  Imminent  as  the  danger  was
which  now  surrounded  Francis,  he  rejected  with  indig-
nation the  thoughts  of  an  action  which  would  have  af-

154  CHARLES V.  [1525.

forded  such  matter  of  triumph  to  his  traitorous  subject;

and  calling  for  Lannoy,  who  happened  likewise  to  be

near  at  hand,  gave  up  his  sword  to  him  ;  which

Francis  is  > . r  . ,  .

taken pri-  he,  kneeling  to  kiss  the  kings  hand,  received
with  profound  respect;  and  taking  his  own
sword  from  his  side,  presented  it  to  him,  saying.  That
it  did  not  become  so  great  a  monarch  to  remain  dis-
armed in  the  presence  of  one  of  the  emperor's  subjects.*1
Ten  thousand  men  fell  on  this  day,  one  of  the  most
fatal  France  had  ever  seen.  Among  these  were  many
noblemen  of  the  highest  distinction,  who  chose  rather
to  perish  than  to  turn  their  backs  with  dishonour.  Not
a  few  were  taken  prisoners,  of  whom  the  most  illustrious
was  Henry  d'Albret,  the  unfortunate  king  of  Navarre.
A  small  body  of  the  rear-guard  made  its  escape  under
the  command  of  the  duke  of  Alen^on ;  the-  feeble  gar-
rison of  Milan,  on  the  first  news  of  the  defeat,  retired
without  being  pursued,  by  another  road  ;  and  in  two
weeks  after  the  brattle,  not  a  Frenchman  remained  in
Italy.

Lannoy,  though  he  treated  Francis  with  all  the  out-
ward marks  of  honour  due  to  his  rank  and  character,
guarded  him  with  the  utmost  attention.  He  was  soli-
citous not  only  to  prevent  any  possibility  of  his  escap-
ing, but  afraid  that  his  own  troops  might  seize  his
person,  and  detain  it  as  the  best  security  for  the  pay-
ment of  their  arrears.  In  order  to  provide  against  both
these  dangers,  he  conducted  Francis,  the  day  after  the
battle,  to  the  strong  castle  of  Pizzichitone  near  Cremona,
committing  him  to  the  custody  of  Don  Ferdinand  Alar-
con,  general  of  the  Spanish  infantry,  an  officer  of  great
bravery  and  of  strict  honour,  but  remarkable  for  that
severe  and  scrupulous  vigilance  which  such  a  trust
required.

Francis,  who  formed  a  judgment  of  the  emperor's

n  Guic.  1.  xv.  292.  (Euv.  de  Brant,  vi.  355.  Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  90.  Sandov.
Hist.  i.  638,  &c.  P.  Mart.  Ep.  805.  810.  Ruscelli  Lettere  de  Principi,  ii.  p.  70.
UJloa  Vita  dell  Carlo  V.  p.  98.

1525.]  BOOK IV.  155

disposition  by  his  own,  was  extremely  desirous  that
Charles  should  be  informed  of  his  situation,  fondly
hoping  that  from  his  generosity  or  sympathy  he  should
obtain  speedy  relief.  The  imperial  generals  were  no
less  impatient  to  give  their  sovereign  an  early  account
of  the  decisive  victory  which  they  had  gained,  and  to
receive  his  instructions  with  regard  to  their  future  con-
duct. As  the  most  certain  and  expeditious  method  of
conveying  intelligence  to  Spain,  at  that  season  of  the
year,  was  by  land,  Francis  gave  the  commendador
Pennalosa,  who  was  charged  with  Lannoy's  dispatches,
a  passport  to  travel  through  France.
Effects  of  Charles  received  the  account  of  this  signal
thisvicto-  anc[  unexpected  success  that  had  crowned  his

ry  upon

Charles,  arms,  with  a  moderation,  which,  if  it  had  been
'  real,  would  have  done  him  more  honour  than
the  greatest  victory.  Without  uttering  one  word  ex-
pressive of  exultation,  or  of  intemperate  joy,  he  retired
immediately  into  his  chapel,  and  having  spent  an  hour
in  offering  up  his  thanksgivings  to  heaven,  returned  to
the  presence-chamber,  which  by  that  time  was  filled
with  grandees  and  foreign  ambassadors,  assembled  in
order  to  congratulate  him.  He  accepted  of  their  com-
pliments with  a  modest  deportment ;  he  lamented  the
misfortune  of  the  captive  king,  as  a  striking  example
of  the  sad  reverse  of  fortune,  to  which  the  most  power-
ful monarchs  are  subject ;  he  forbade  any  public  rejoic-
ings, as  indecent  in  a  war  carried  on  among  Christians,
reserving  them  until  he  should  obtain  a  victory  equally
illustrious  over  the  infidels;  and  seemed  to  take  plea-
sure in  the  advantage  which  he  had  gained,  only  as  it
would  prove  the  occasion  of  restoring  peace  to  Chris-
tendom/

The  Charles,  however,  had  already  begun  to  form

he  b™gasn schemes  in  his  own  mind,  which  little  suited
to  form. sucn  external  appearances. Ambition,  not  ge-

r  Sandov.  Hist.  i.  641. Ulloa  Vita  dell  Carlo  V.  p.  110*

156  CHARLES V.  [1525.

nerosity,  was  the  ruling  passion  in  his  mind  ;  and  the
victory  of  Pavia  opened  such  new  and  unbounded
prospects  of  gratifying  it,  as  allured  him  with  irresist-
ible force  :  but  it  being  no  easy  matter  to  execute  the
vast  designs  which  he  meditated,  he  thought  it  neces-
sary, while  proper  measures  were  taking  for  that  pur-
pose, to  affect  the  greatest  moderation,  hoping  under
that  veil  to  conceal  his  real  intentions  from  the  other
princes  of  Europe.

The  ge-  Meanwhile  France  was  filled  with  consterna-
stemationn  tion-  Tne  kin£  ^imself  had  early  transmitted
in  France.  an  account  of  the  rout  at  Pavia,  in  a  letter  to
his  mother,  delivered  by  Pennalosa,  which  contained
only  these  words  : — "  Madam,  all  is  lost,  except  our
honour."  The  officers  who  made  their  escape,  when
they  arrived  from  Italy,  brought  such  a  melancholy
detail  of  particulars  as  made  all  ranks  of  men  sensibly
feel  the  greatness  and  extent  of  the  calamity.  France,
without  its  sovereign,  without  money  in  her  treasury,
without  an  army,  without  generals  to  command  it,  and
encompassed  on  all  sides  by  a  victorious  and  active
The  pru-  enemy,  seemed  to  be  on  the  very  brink  of  de-
duct onie  structi°n-  But  on  that  occasion  the  great  abi-
regent.  Hties  of  Louise  the  regent  saved  the  kingdom,
which  the  violence  of  her  passions  had  more  than  once
exposed  to  the  greatest  danger.  Instead  of  giving
herself  up  to  such  lamentations  as  were  natural  to  a
woman  so  remarkable  for  her  maternal  tenderness,  she
discovered  all  the  foresight,  and  exerted  all  the  activity,
of  a  consummate  politician.  She  assembled  the  nobles
at  Lyons,  and  animated  them  by  her  example  no  less  '
than  by  her  words,  with  such  zeal  in  defence  of  their
country,  as  its  present  situation  required.  She  col-
lected the  remains  of  the  army  which  had  served  in
Italy,  ransomed  the  prisoners,  paid  the  arrears,  and  put
them  in  a  condition  to  take  the  field.  She  levied  new
troops,  provided  for  the  security  of  the  frontiers,  and

1525.]  BOOK IV.  157

raised  sums  sufficient  for  defraying  these  extraordinary
expenses.  Her  chief  care,  however,  was  to  appease
the  resentment,  or  to  gain  the  friendship,  of  the  king  of
England  ;  and  from  that  quarter  the  first  ray  of  comfort
broke  in  upon  the  French.

Effects  of  Though  Henry,  in  entering  into  alliances  with
*ep^£ry  Charles  or  Francis,  seldom  followed  any  regular
on  Henry  or  concerted  plan  of  policy,  but  was  influenced
chiefly  by  the  caprice  of  temporary  passions,
such  occurrences  often  happened  as  recalled  his  atten-
tion towards  that  equal  balance  of  power  which  it  was
necessary  to  keep  between  the  two  contending  poten-
tates, the  preservation  of  which  he  always  boasted  to
be  his  peculiar  office.  He  had  expected  that  his  union
with  the  emperor  might  afford  him  an  opportunity  of
recovering  some  part  of  those  territories  in  France  which
had  belonged  to  his  ancestors,  and  for  the  sake  of  such
an  acquisition  he  did  not  scruple  to  give  his  assistance
towards  raising  Charles  to  a  considerable  pre-eminence
above  Francis.  He  had  never  dreamt,  however,  of  any
event  so  decisive  and  so  fatal  as  the  victory  at  Pavia,
which  seemed  not  only  to  have  broken,  but  to  have
annihilated  the  power  of  one  of  the  rivals  ;  so  that  the
prospect  of  the  sudden  and  entire  revolution  which  this
would  occasion  in  the  political  system,  filled  him  with
the  most  disquieting  apprehensions.  He  saw  all  Europe
in  danger  of  being  overrun  by  an  ambitious  prince,  to
whose  power  there  now  remained  no  counterpoise  ;  and
though  he  himself  might  at  first  be  admitted,  in  quality
of  an  ally,  to  some  share  in  the  spoils  of  the  captive
monarch,  it  was  easy  to  discern,  that  with  regard  to  the
manner  of  making  the  partition,  as  well  as  his  security
for  keeping  possession  of  what  should  be  allotted  him,
he  must  absolutely  depend  upon  the  will  of  a  confe-
derate, to  whose  forces  his  own  bore  no  proportion.
He  was  sensible,  that  if  Charles  were  permitted  to  add
any  considerable  part  of  France  to  the  vast  dominions

158  CHARLES V.  [1525.

of  which  he  was  already  master,  his  neighbourhood
would  be  much  more  formidable  to  England  than  that
of  the  ancient  French  kings ;  while,  at  the  same  time,
the  proper  balance  on  the  continent,  to  which  England
owed  both  its  safety  and  importance,  would  be  entirely
lost.  Concern  for  the  situation  of  the  unhappy  mo-
narch co-operated  with  these  political  considerations ;
his  gallant  behaviour  in  the  battle  of  Pavia  had  excited
a  high  .degree  of  admiration,  which  never  fails  of
augmenting  sympathy ;  and  Henry,  naturally  suscep-
tible of  generous  sentiments,  was  fond  of  appearing  as
the  deliverer  of  a  vanquished  enemy  from  a  state  of
captivity.  The  passions  of  the  English  minister  se-
conded the  inclinations  of  the  monarch.  Wolsey,  who
had  not  forgotten  the  disappointment  of  his  hopes  in
two  successive  conclaves,  which  he  imputed  chiefly  to
the  emperor,  thought  this  a  proper  opportunity  of  taking
revenge ;  and  Louise,  courting  the  friendship  of  Eng-
land with  such  flattering  submissions  as  were  no  less
agreeable  to  the  king  than  to  the  cardinal,  Henry  gave
her  secret  assurances  that  he  would  not  lend  his  aid
towards  oppressing  France  in  its  present  helpless  state,
and  obliged  her  to  promise  that  she  would  not  consent
to  dismember  the  kingdom  even  in  order  to  procure  her
son's  liberty.8

But  as  Henry's  connexions  with  the  emperor  made
it  necessary  to  act  in  such  a  manner  as  to  save  appear-
ances, he  ordered  public  rejoicings  to  be  made  in  his
dominions  for  the  success  of  the  imperial  arms ;  and  as
if  he  had  been  eager  to  seize  the  present  opportunity
of  ruining  the  French  monarchy,  he  sent  ambassadors
to  Madrid,  to  congratulate  with  Charles  upon  his  vic-
tory ;  to  put  him  in  mind,  that  he,  as  his  ally,  engaged
in  one  common  cause,  was  entitled  to  partake  in  the
fruits  of  it ;  and  to  require  that,  in  compliance  with  the
terms  of  their  confederacy,  he  would  invade  Guienne

•  Mem.  de  Beilay,  94. Guic.  1.  xvi.  318. Herbert.

1525.]  BOOK IV.  159

with  a  powerful  army,  in  order  to  give  him  possession
of  that  province.  At  the  same  time,  he  offered  to  send
the  princess  Mary  into  Spain,  or  the  Low  Countries,
that  she  might  be  educated  under  the  emperor's  direc-
tion, until  the  conclusion  of  the  marriage  agreed  on
between  them ;  and  in  return  for  that  mark  of  his  con-
fidence, he  insisted  that  Francis  should  be  delivered  to
him  in  consequence  of  that  article  in  the  treaty  of
Bruges,  whereby  each  of  the  contracting  parties  was
bound  to  surrender  all  usurpers  to  him  whose  rights
they  had  invaded.  It  was  impossible  that  Henry  could
expect  that  the  emperor  would  listen  to  these  extra-
vagant demands,  which  it  was  neither  his  interest  nor
in  his  power  to  grant.  They  appear  evidently  to  have
been  made  with  no  other  intention  than  to  furnish  him
with  a  decent  pretext  for  entering  into  such  engage-
ments with  France  as  the  juncture  required.*
On  the  ft  was  among  tne  Italian  states,  however,  that
Italian  the  victory  at  Pavia  occasioned  the  greatest
alarm  and  terror.  That  balance  of  power  on
which  they  relied  for  their  security,  and  which  it  had
been  the  constant  object  of  all  their  negotiations  and
refinements  to  maintain,  was  destroyed  in  a  moment.
They  were  exposed,  by  their  situation  to  feel  the  first
effects  of  the  uncontrolled  authority  which  Charles  had
acquired.  They  observed  many  symptoms  of  a  bound-
less ambition  in  that  young  prince,  and  were  sensible
that,  as  emperor,  or  king  of  Naples,  he  might  not  only
form  dangerous  pretensions  upon  each  of  their  terri-
tories, but  might  invade  them  with  great  advantage.
They  deliberated,  therefore,  with  much  solicitude  con-
cerning the  means  of  raising  such  a  force  as  might
obstruct  his  progress."  But  their  consultations,  con-
ducted with  little  union,  and  executed  with  less  vigour,
had  no  effect.  Clement,  instead  of  pursuing  the  mea-

1  Herbert,  p.  64.
u  Guic.l.  xvi.  300. RusceHi  Lettere  de  Prlnc.  ii.  74.  76,  &c. Thuani  Hist.  lib.

i.e.  11.

160  CHARLES V.  [1525.

sures  which  he  had  concerted  with  the  Venetians  for
securing  the  liberty  of  Italy,  was  so  intimidated  by
Lannoy's  threats,  or  overcome  by  his  promises,  that  he
entered  into  a  separate  treaty,  binding  himself  to  ad-
vance a  considerable  sum  to  the  emperor,  in

-April  1.  .  ..  i'ii

return  for  certain  emoluments  which  he  was  to
receive  from  him.  The  money  was  instantly  paid;
but  Charles  afterward  refused  to  ratify  the  treaty  ;  and
the  pope  remained  exposed  at  once  to  infamy  and  to
ridicule  :  to  the  former,  because  he  had  deserted  the
public  cause  for  his  private  interest;  to  the  latter,  be-
cause he  had  been  a  loser  by  that  unworthy  action.x

How  dishonourable  soever  the  artifice  might
the  impe?  be  which  was  employed  in  order  to  defraud  the
rial  arra.  of  fa  fe  sum^  •  t  came  very  seasonably  into

the  viceroy's  hands,  and  put  it  in  his  power  to  extricate
himself  out  of  an  imminent  danger.  Soon  after  the  de-
feat of  the  French  army,  the  German  troops,  which  had
defended  Pavia  with  such  meritorious  courage  and  per-
severance, growing  insolent  upon  the  fame  that  they
had  acquired,  and  impatient  of  relying  any  longer  on
fruitless  promises,  with  which  they  had  been  so  often
amused,  rendered  themselves  masters  of  the  town,  with
a  resolution  to  keep  possession  of  it  as  a  security  for  the
payment  of  their  arrears  ;  and  the  rest  of  the  army  dis-
covered a  much  stronger  inclination  to  assist,  than  to
punish,  the  mutineers.  By  dividing  among  them  the
money  exacted  from  the  pope,  Lannoy  quieted  the
tumultuous  Germans;  but  though  this  satisfied  their
present  demands,  he  had  so  little  prospect  of  being  able
to  pay  them  or  his  other  forces  regularly  for  the  future,
and  was  under  such  continual  apprehensions  of  their
seizing  the  person  of  the  captive  king,  that,  not  long
after,  he  was  obliged  to  dismiss  all  the  Germans  and
Italians  in  the  imperial  service/  Thus,  from  a  circum-

*  Guic.  lib.  xvi.  505. Mauroceni  Histor.  Venet.  ap.  Islorichi  dell  cose  Venez
V.  131.  136.  y  Guic.  1.  xvi.  p.  302.

1525.]  BOOK IV.  161

stance  that  now  appears  very  singular,  but  arising  na-
turally from  the  constitution  of  most  European  govern-
ments in  the  sixteenth  century,  while  Charles  was  sus-
pected by  all  his  neighbours  of  aiming  at  universal
monarchy ;  and  while  he  was  really  forming  vast  pro-
jects of  this  kind,  his  revenues  were  so  limited,  that  he
could  not  keep  on  foot  his  victorious  army,  though  it
did  not  exceed  twenty- four  thousand  men.
The  em-  During  these  transactions,  Charles,  whose
pretensions  to  moderation  and  disinterested-
ness  were  soon  forgotten,  deliberated,  with  the
utmost  solicitude,  how  he  might  derive  the

ing  his  B°

victory.  greatest  advantages  from  the  misfortunes  of  his
adversary.  Some  of  his  counsellors  advised  him  to  treat
Francis  with  the  magnanimity  that  became  a  victorious
prince,  and,  instead  of  taking  advantage  of  his  situation
to  impose  rigorous  conditions,  to  dismiss  him  on  such
equal  terms  as  would  bind  him  for  ever  to  his  interest
by  the  ties  of  gratitude  and  affection,  more  forcible  as
well  as  more  permanent  than  any  which  could  be  formed
by  extorted  oaths  and  involuntary  stipulations.  Such
an  exertion  of  generosity  is  not,  perhaps,  to  be  expected
in  the  conduct  of  political  affairs,  and  it  was  far  too  re-
fined for  that  prince  to  whom  it  was  proposed.  The
more  obvious,  but  less  splendid  scheme,  of  endeavour-
ing to  make  the  utmost  of  Francis's  calamity,  had  a
greater  number  in  the  council  to  recommend  it,  and
suited  better  with  the  emperor's  genius.  But  though
Charles  adopted  this  plan,  he  seems  not  to  have  exe-
cuted it  in  the  most  proper  manner.  Instead  of  making
one  great  effort  to  penetrate  into  France,  with  all  the
forces  of  Spain  and  the  Low  Countries ;  instead  of
crushing  the  Italian  states  before  they  recovered  from
the  consternation  which  the  success  of  his  arms  had  oc-
casioned, he  had  recourse  to  the  artifices  of  intrigue  and
negotiation.  This  proceeded  partly  from  necessity,
partly  from  the  natural  disposition  of  his  mind.  The

VOL.  IV.  M

162  CHARLES V.  [1525.

situation  of  his  finances  at  that  time  rendered  it  ex-
tremely difficult  to  carry  on  any  extraordinary  arma-
ment ;  and  he  himself  having  never  appeared  at  the  head
of  his  armies,  the  command  of  which  he  had  hitherto
committed  to  his  generals,  was  averse  to  bold  and  mar-
tial counsels,  and  trusted  more  to  the  arts  with  which
he  was  acquainted.  He  laid,  besides,  too  much  stress
upon  the  victory  of  Pavia,  as  if  by  that  event  the
strength  of  France  had  been  annihilated,  its  resources
exhausted,  and  the  kingdom  itself,  no  less  than  the  per-
son of  its  monarch,  had  been  subjected  to  his  power.
The  rigor-  Full  of  this  opinion,  he  determined  to  set  the
ous  terms  highest priceuponFrancis's freedom;  andhaving
poses  to  ordered  the  count  de  Roeux  to  visit  the  captive

Francis. -,  . • i  •  i  11*

king  in  his  name,  he  instructed  him  to  propose
the  following  articles,  as  the  conditions  on  which  he
would  grant  him  his  liberty :  That  he  should  restore
Burgundy  to  the  emperor,  from  whose  ancestors  it  had
been  unjustly  wrested ;  that  he  should  surrender  Pro-
vence and  Dauphine,  that  they  might  be  erected  into  an
independent  kingdom  for  the  constable  Bourbon ;  that
he  should  make  full  satisfaction  to  the  king  of  England
for  all  his  claims,  and  finally  renounce  the  pretensions
of  France  to  Naples,  Milan,  or  any  other  territory  in
Italy.  When  Francis,  who  had  hitherto  flattered  him-
self that  he  should  be  treated  by  the  emperor  with  the
generosity  becoming  one  great  prince  towards  another,
heard  these  rigorous  conditions,  he  was  so  transported
with  indignation,  that,  drawing  his  dagger  hastily,  he
cried  out,  "  Twere  better  that  a  king  should  die  thus."
Alarcon,  alarmed  at  his  vehemence,  laid  hold  on  his
hand ;  but  though  he  soon  recovered  greater  composure,
he  still  declared,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  that  he
would  rather  remain  a  prisoner  during  life,  than  pur-
chase liberty  by  such  ignominious  concessions.2

This  mortifying  discovery  of  the  emperor's  inten-

z  Mem.  de  Bellay,  94. Ferreras  Hist.  ix.  43.

1525.]  BOOK IV.  163

Francis  tions  greatly  augmented  Francis's  chagrin  and
°rison(er  impatience  under  his  confinement,  and  musthave
to  Spain,  driven  him  to  absolute  despair,  if  he  had  not  laid
hold  of  the  only  thing  which  could  still  administer  any
comfort  to  him.  He  persuaded  himself,  that  the  con-
ditions which  Roeux  had  proposed  did  not  flow  origi-
nally from  Charles  himself,  but  were  dictated  by  the
rigorous  policy  of  his  Spanish  council ;  and  that  there-
fore he  might  hope,  in  one  personal  interview  with  him,
to  do  more  towards  hastening  his  own  deliverance,  than
could  be  effected  by  long  negotiations  passing  through
the  subordinate  hands  of  his  ministers.  Relying  on  this
supposition,  which  proceeded  from  too  favourable  an
opinion  of  the  emperor's  character,  he  offered  to  visit
him  in  Spain,  and  was  willing  to  be  carried  thither  as
a  spectacle  to  that  haughty  nation.  Lannoy  employed
all  his  address  to  confirm  him  in  these  sentiments,  and
concerted  with  him  in  secret  the  manner  of  executing
this  resolution.  Francis  was  so  eager  on  a  scheme
which  seemed  to  open  some  prospect  of  liberty,  that  he
furnished  the  galleys  necessary  for  conveying  him  to
Spain,  Charles  being  at  this  time  unable  to  fit  out  a
squadron  for  that  purpose.  The  viceroy,  without  com-
municating his  intentions  either  to  Bourbon  or  Pescara,
conducted  his  prisoner  towards  Genoa,  under  pretence
of  transporting  him  by  sea  to  Naples ;  though  soon  after
they  set  sail,  he  ordered  the  pilots  to  steer  directly  for
Spain ;  but  the  wind  happening  to  carry  them  near  the
French  coast,  the  unfortunate  monarch  had  a  full  pros-
pect of  his  own  dominions,  towards  which  he  cast  many
a  sorrowful  and  desiring  look.  They  landed,
however,  in  a  few  days,  at  Barcelona,  and  soon
after  Francis  was  lodged,  by  the  emperor's  command,
in  the  Alcazar  of  Madrid,  under  the  care  of  the  vigilant
Alarcon,  who  guarded  him  with  as  much  circumspec-
tion as  ever.a

*  Mem.  de  Beilay,  95. P.  Mart.  Ep.  ult.  Guic.  Jib.  xiv.  323.
M  2

164  CHARLES V.  [1525.

Hen.  viii.  A  few  ^aYs  a^ter  Francis's  arrival  at  Madrid,
trea^with*  an(^  wnen  Qe  began  to  be  sensible  of  his  having
France,  in  relied,  without  foundation,  on  the  emperor's
procurers  generosity,  Henry  VIII.  concluded  a  treaty
release.  wjt^  ^  regent  of  prance,  which  afforded  him
some  hope  of  liberty  from  another  quarter.  Henry's
extravagant  demands  had  been  received  at  Madrid  with
that  neglect  which  they  deserved,  and  which  he  pro-
bably expected.  Charles,  intoxicated  with  prosperity,
no  longer  courted  him  in  that  respectful  and  submissive
manner  which  pleased  his  haughty  temper.  Wolsey,
no  less  haughty  than  his  master,  was  highly  irritated  at
the  emperor's  discontinuing  his  wonted  caresses  and
professions  of  friendship  to  himself.  These  slight  of-
fences, added  to  the  weighty  considerations  formerly
mentioned,  induced  Henry  to  enter  into  a  defensive
alliance  with  Louise,  in  which  all  the  differences  be-
tween him  and  her  son  were  adjusted ;  at  the  same  time
he  engaged  that  he  would  employ  his  best  offices  in
order  to  procure  the  deliverance  of  his  new  ally  from  a
state  of  captivity.5

While  the  open  defection  of  such  a  power-
intrigues ful  confederate  affected  Charles  with  deep  con-

in  order  to  •  '  ' * •  «

overturn  cern,  a  secret  conspiracy  was  carrying  on  in
peror™  Itaty>  which  threatened,  him  with  consequences
power  in  still  more  fatal.  The  restless  and  intriguing
genius  of  Morone,  chancellor  of  Milan,  gave
rise  to  this.  His  revenge  had  been  amply  gratified  by
the  expulsion  of  the  French  out  of  Italy,  and  his  vanity
no  less  soothed  by  the  re- establishment  of  Sforza,  to
whose  interest  he  had  attached  himself,  in  the  duchy
of  Milan.  The  delays,  however,  and  evasions  of  the
imperial  court,  in  granting  Sforza  the  investiture  of  his
new-acquired  territories,  had  long  alarmed  Morone;
these  were  repeated  so  often,  and  with  such  apparent
artifice,  as  became  a  full  proof  to  his  suspicious  mind,

•>  Herbert.  Fiddes's  Life  of  Wolsey,  337.

1525.]  BOOK IV.  165

that  the  emperor  intended  to  strip  his  master  of  that
rich  country  which  he  had conquered  in  his  name.
Though  Charles,  in  order  to  quiet  the  pope  and  Vene-
tians, no  less  jealous  of  his  designs  than  Morone,  gave
Sforza,  at  last,  the  investiture  which  had  been  so  long
desired ;  the  charter  was  clogged  with  so  many  reserva-
tions, and  subjected  him  to  such  grievous  burdens,  as
rendered  the  duke  of  Milan  a  dependant  on  the  em-
peror, rather  than  a  vassal  of  the  empire,  and  afforded
him  hardly  any  other  security  for  his  possessions  than
the  good  pleasure  of  an  ambitious  superior. Such  an
accession  of  power  as  would  have  accrued  from  the
addition  of  the  Milanese  to  the  kingdom  of  Naples,
was  considered  by  Morone  as  fatal  to  the  liberties  of
Italy,  no  less  than  to  his  own  importance. Full  of  this
idea,  he  began  to  revolve  in  his  mind  the  possibility  of
rescuing  Italy  from  the  yoke  of  foreigners ;  the  darling
scheme,  as  has  been  already  observed,  of  the  Italian
politicians  in  that  age,  and  which  it  was  the  great  ob-
ject of  their  ambition  to  accomplish. If  to  the  glory  of
having  been  the  chief  instrument  of  driving  the  French
out  of  Milan,  he  could  add  that  of  delivering  Naples
from  the  dominion  of  the  Spaniards,  he  thought  that
nothing  would  be  wanting  to  complete  his  fame. His
fertile  genius  soon  suggested  to  him  a  project  for  that
purpose ;  a  difficult,  indeed,  and  daring  one,  but  for
that  very  reason  more  agreeable  to  his  bold  and  enter-
prising temper.

His  nego-  Bourbon  and  Pescara  were  equally  enraged
withPes-  at  Lannoy's  carrying  the  French  king  into  Spain
cam.  without  their  knowledge.  The  former,  being
afraid  that  the  two  monarchs  might,  in  his  absence,
conclude  some  treaty  in  which  his  interests  would  be
entirely  sacrificed,  hastened  to  Madrid,  in  order  to
guard  against  that  danger.  The  latter,  on  whom  the
command  of  the  army  now  devolved,  was  obliged  to
remain  in  Italy ;  but,  in  every  company,  he  gave  vent  to

166  CHARLES  V.  [1525.

his  indignation  against  the  viceroy,  in  expressions  full
of  rancour  and  contempt ;  he  accused  him,  in  a  letter
to  the  emperor,  of  cowardice  in  the  time  of  danger,  and
of  insolence  after  a  victory,  towards  the  obtaining  of
which  he  had  contributed  nothing  either  by  his  valour
or  his  conduct;  nor  did  he  abstain  from  bitter  com-
plaints against  the  emperor  himself,  who  had  not  dis-
covered, as  he  imagined,  a  sufficient  sense  of  his  merit,
nor  bestowed  any  adequate  reward  on  his  services.  It
was  on  this  disgust  of  Pescara  that  Morone  founded
his  whole  system.  He  knew  the  boundless  ambition  of
his  nature,  the  great  extent  of  his  abilities,  in  peace  as
well  as  war,  and  the  intrepidity  of  his  mind,  capable
alike  of  undertaking  and  of  executing  the  most  despe-
rate designs.  The  cantonment  of  the  Spanish  troops
on  the  frontier  of  the  Milanese,  gave  occasion  to  many
interviews  between  him  and  Morone,  in  which  the  lat-
ter took  care  frequently  to  turn  the  conversation  to  the
transactions  subsequent  to  the  battle  of  Pavia,  a  subject
upon  which  the  marquis  always  entered  willingly  and
with  passion ;  and  Morone  observing  his  resentment  to
be  uniformly  violent,  artfully  pointed  out  and  aggra-
vated every  circumstance  that  could  increase  its  fury.
He  painted,  in  the  strongest  colours,  the  emperor's  want
of  discernment,  as  well  as  of  gratitude,  in  preferring
Lannoy  to  him,  and  in  allowing  that  presumptuous
Fleming  to  dispose  of  the  captive  king,  without  con-
sulting the  man  to  whose  bravery  and  wisdom  Charles
was  indebted  for  the  glory  of  having  a  formidable  rival
in  his  power.  Having  warmed  him  by  such  discourses,
he  then  began  to  insinuate  that  now  was  the  time  to  be
avenged  for  these  insults,  and  to  acquire  immortal  re-
nown as  the  deliverer  of  his  country  from  the  oppression
of  strangers ;  that  the  states  of  Italy,  weary  of  the  igno-
minious and  intolerable  dominion  of  barbarians,  were
at  last  ready  to  combine  in  order  to  vindicate  their  own
independence  •;  that  their  eyes  were  fixed  on  him  as  the

1525.]  BOOK  IV.  16T

only  leader  whose  genius  and  good  fortune  could  en-
sure the  happy  success  of  that  noble  enterprise ;  that
the  attempt  was  no  less  practicable  than  glorious,  it
being  in  his  power  so  to  disperse  the  Spanish  infantry,
the  only  body  of  the  emperor's  troops  that  remained  in
Italy,  through  the  villages  of  the  Milanese,  that  in  one
night  they  might  be  destroyed  by  the  people,  who,
having  suffered  much  from  their  exactions  and  inso-
lence, would  gladly  undertake  -  this  service;  that  he
might  then,  without  opposition,  take  possession  of  the
throne  of  Naples,  the  station  destined  for  him,  and  a
reward  not  unworthy  the  restorer  of  liberty  to  Italy ;
that  the  pope,  of  whom  that  kingdom  held,  and  whose
predecessors  had  disposed  of  it  on  many  former  occa-
sions, would  willingly  grant  him  the  right  of  investi-
ture ;  that  the  Venetians,  the  Florentines,  the  duke  of
Milan,  to  whom  he  had  communicated  the  scheme,  to-
gether with  the  French,  would  be  the  guarantees  of  his
right ;  that  the  Neapolitans  would  naturally  prefer  the
government  of  one  of  their  countrymen,  whom  they
loved  and  admired,  to  that  odious  dominion  of  strangers,
to  which  they  had  been  so  long  subjected;  and  that  the
emperor,  astonished  at  a  blow  so  unexpected,  would
find,  that  he  had  neither  troops  nor  money  to  resist
such  a  powerful  confederacy.0

Betrayed  Pescara,  amazed  at  the  boldness  and  extent
Pfsonereby  °^  ^  scheme,  listened  attentively  to  Morone,
Pescara.  kut  with  the  countenance  of  a  man  lost  in  pro-
found and  anxious  thought.  On  the  one  hand,  the  in-
famy of  betraying  his  sovereign,  under  whom  he  bore
such  high  command,  deterred  him  from  the  attempt ;
on  the  other,  the  prospect  of  obtaining  a  crown  allured
him  to  venture  upon  it.  After  continuing  a  short  space
in  suspense,  the  least  commendable  motives,  as  is  usual

«  Guic.  1.  xvi.  325.  Jovii  Vita  Davali,  p.  417.  CEuv.  de  Brantome,  iv.  171.
Euscelli  Lettre  de  Princ.  ii.  91.  Thuani  Hist.  lib.  i.  c.  11.  P.  Heuter.  Rer.  Austr.
lib.  ix.  c.  3.  p.  207.

168  CHARLES V.  [1525.

after  such  deliberations,  prevailed,  and  ambition  tri-
umphed over  honour.  In  order,  however,  to  throw  a
colour  of  decency  on  his  conduct,  he  insisted  that  some
learned  casuists  should  give  their  opinion,  "  Whether
it  was  lawful  for  a  subject  to  take  arms  against  his  im-
mediate sovereign,  in  obedience  to  the  lord  paramount
of  whom  the  kingdom  itself  was  held  ? "  Such  a  reso-
lution of  the  case  as  he  expected  was  soon  obtained
from  the  divines  and  civilians  both  of  Rome  and
Milan ;  the  negotiation  went  forward ;  and  measures
seemed  to  be  taking  with  great  spirit  for  the  speedy
execution  of  the  design.

During  this  interval,  Pescara,  either  shocked  at  the
treachery  of  the  action  that  he  was  going  to  commit,  or
despairing  of  its  success,  began  to  entertain  thoughts
of  abandoning  the  engagements  which  he  .had  come
under.  The  indisposition  of  Sforza,  who  happened  at
that  time  to  be  taken  ill  of  a  distemper  which  was
thought  mortal,  confirmed  his  resolution,  and  deter-
mined him  to  make  known  the  whole  conspiracy  to  the
emperor,  deeming  it  more  prudent  to  expect  the  duchy
of  Milan  from  him  as  the  reward  of  this  discovery,
than  to  aim  at  a  kingdom  to  be  purchased  by  a  series
of  crimes.  This  resolution,  however,  proved  the  source
of  actions  hardly  less  criminal  and  ignominious.  The
emperor,  who  had  already  received  full  information
concerning  the  conspiracy  from  other  hands,  seemed
to  be  highly  pleased  with  Pescara's  fidelity,  and  com-
manded him  to  continue  his  intrigues  for  some  time
with  the  pope  and  Sforza,  both  that  he  might  discover
their  intentions  more  fully,  and  that  he  might  be  able
to  convict  them  of  the  crime  with  greater  certainty.
Pescara,  conscious  of  guilt,  as  well  as  sensible  how
suspicious  his  long  silence  must  have  appeared  at  Ma-
drid, durst  not  decline  that  dishonourable  office ;  and
was  obliged  to  act  the  meanest  and  most  disgraceful  of
all  parts,  that  of  seducing  with  a  purpose  to  betray.

1525.]  BOOK IV.  169

Considering  the  abilities  of  the  persons  with  whom  he
had  to  deal,  the  part  was  scarcely  less  difficult  than
base ;  but  he  acted  it  with  such  address,  as  to  deceive
even  the  penetrating  eye  of  Morone,  who,  relying  with
full  confidence  on  his  sincerity,  visited  him  at  Navara,
in  order  to  put  the  last  hand  to  their  machinations.
Pescara  received  him  in  an  apartment  where  Antonio
de  Leyva  was  placed  behind  the  tapestry,  that  he  might
overhear  and  bear  witness  to  their  conversation;  as
Morone  was  about  to  take  leave,  that  officer  suddenly
appeared,  and  to  his  astonishment  arrested  him  prisoner
in  the  emperor's  name.  He  was  conducted  to  the  castle
of  Pavia ;  and  Pescara,  who  had  so  lately  been  his  ac-
complice, had  now  the  assurance  to  interrogate  him  as
his  judge.  At  the  same  time,  the  emperor  declared
Sforza  to  have  forfeited  all  right  to  the  duchy  of  Mi-
lan, by  his  engaging  in  a  conspiracy  against  the  sove-
reign of  whom  he  held;  Pescara,  by  his  command,
seized  on  every  place  in  the  Milanese,  except  the  cas-
tles of  Cremona  and  Milan,  which  the  unfortunate  duke
attempting  to  defend,  were  closely  blockaded  by  the
imperial  troops.d

The  rigor-  But  though  this  unsuccessful  conspiracy,  in-
cus treat-  stead  of  stripping:  the  emperor  of  what  he  al-

ment°f  1  1 • T 1  -1  1  1

Francis  in  ready  possessed  in  Italy,  contributed  to  extend
his  dominions  in  that  country,  it  shewed  him
the  necessity  of  coming  to  some  agreement  with  the
French  king,  unless  he  chose  to  draw  on  himself  a  con-
federacy of  all  Europe,  which  the  progress  of  his  arms
and  his  ambition,  now  as  undisguised  as  it  was  bound-
less, filled  with  general  alarm.  He  had  not  hitherto
treated  Francis  with  the  generosity  which  that  monarch
expected,  and  hardly  with  the  decency  due  to  his  sta-
tion. Instead  of  displaying  the  sentiments  becoming
a  great  prince,  Charles,  by  his  mode  of  treating  Francis,
seems  to  have  acted  with  the  mercenary  art  of  a  cor-

d  Guic.  1.  xvi.  329. Jovii  Hist.  319. Capeila,  lib.  *.  p.  200.

170 •  CHARLES V.  [1525.

sair,  who,  by  the  rigorous  usage  of  his  prisoners,  en-
deavours to  draw  from  them  a  higher  price  for  their
ransom.  The  captive  king  was  confined  in  an  old  cas-
tle, under  a  keeper  whose  formal  austerity  of  manners
rendered  his  vigilance  still  more  disgusting.  He  was
allowed  no  exercise  but  that  of  riding  on  a  mule,  sur-
rounded with  armed  guards  on  horseback.  Charles,  on
pretence  of  its  being  necessary  to  attend  the  cortes,
assembled  in  Toledo,  had  gone  to  reside  in  that  city,
and  suffered  several  weeks  to  elapse  without  visiting
Francis,  though  he  solicited  an  interview  with  the  most
Endangers  pressing  and  submissive  importunity.  So  many
his  life,  indignities  made  a  deep  impression  on  a  high-
spirited  prince ;  he  began  to  lose  all  relish  for  his  usual
amusements ;  his  natural  gaiety  of  temper  forsook  him ;
and  after  languishing  for  some  time,  he  was  seized  with
a  dangerous  fever,  during  the  violence  of  which  he
complained  constantly  of  the  unexpected  and  unprincely
rigour  with  which  he  had  been  treated,  often  exclaim-
ing, that  now  the  emperor  would  have  the  satisfaction
of  his  dying  a  prisoner  in  his  hands,  without  having
once  deigned  to  see  his  face.  The  physicians,  at  last,
despaired  of  his  life,  and  informed  the  emperor  that
they  saw  no  hope  of  his  recovery,  unless  he  were  gra-
tified with  regard  to  that  point  on  which  he  seemed  to
be  so  strongly  bent.  Charles,  solicitous  to  preserve  a
life  with  which  all  his  prospects  of  farther  advantage
from  the  victory  of  Pavia  must  have  terminated,  imme-
diately consulted  his  ministers  concerning  the  course
to  be  taken.  In  vain  did  the  chancellor  Gattinara,  the
most  able  among  them,  represent  the  indecency  of  his
visiting  Francis,  if  he  did  not  intend  to  set  him  at
liberty  immediately  upon  equal  terms ;  in  vain  did  he
point  out  the  infamy  to  which  he  would  be  exposed,  if
avarice  or  ambition  should  prevail  on  him  to  give  the
captive  monarch  this  mark  of  attention  and  sympathy,
for  which  humanity  and  generosity  had  pleaded  so  long

1525.]  BOOK  IV.  171

without  effect.  The  emperor,  less  delicate,  or  less  soli-
Sept.  ss.  citous  about  reputation  than  his  minister,  set
The  erape-  out  £or  M^rid  to  visit  his  prisoner .  The  in-

ror  visits  A

him.  terview  was  short :  Francis  being  too  weak  to
bear  a  long  conversation,  Charles  accosted  him  in  terms
full  of  affection  and  respect,  and  gave  him  such  pro-
mises of  speedy  deliverance  and  princely  treatment,  as
would  have  reflected  the  greatest  honour  upon  him  if
they  had  flowed  from  another  source.  Francis  grasped
at  them  with  the  eagerness  natural  in  his  situation ;
and,  cheered  with  this  gleam  of  hope,  began  to  revive
from  that  moment,  recovering  rapidly  his  wonted  health.6
The  con-  He  had  soon  the  mortification  to  find,  that
Bourbon  kis  confidence  in  the  emperor  was  not  better
arrives  at  founded  than  formerly.  Charles  returned  in-
stantly to  Toledo ;  all  negotiations  were  carried
on  by  his  ministers ;  and  Francis  was  kept  in  as  strict
custody  as  ever.  A  new  indignity,  and  that  very  gall-
ing, was  added  to  those  he  had  already  suffered.
Bourbon  arriving  in  Spain  about  this  time,  Charles,
who  had  so  long  refused  to  visit  the  king  of
France,  received  his  rebellious  subject  with  the
most  studied  respect.  He  met  him  without  the  gates
of  Toledo,  embraced  him  with  the  greatest  affection,
and,  placing  him  on  his  left  hand,  conducted  him  to
his  apartment.  These  marks  of  honour  to  him  were
so  many  insults  to  the  unfortunate  monarch,  which  he
felt  in  a  very  sensible  manner.  It  afforded  him  some
consolation,  however,  to  observe,  that  the  sentiments  of
the  Spaniards  differed  widely  from  those  of  their  sove-
reign. That  generous  people  detested  Bourbon's  crime*
Notwithstanding  his  great  talents  and  important  ser-
vices, they  shunned  all  intercourse  with  him,  to  such  a
degree,  that  Charles  having  desired  the  marquis  de
Villena  to  permit  Bourbon  to  reside  in  his  palace  while
the  court  remained  at  Toledo,  he  politely  replied,
"  That  he  could  not  refuse  gratifying  his  sovereign  in

e  Guic.  1.  xvi.  339. Sandov.  Hist.  i.  665.

Nov.  15.

172  CHARLES V.  C1525.

that  request;"  but  added,  with  a  Castilian  dignity  of
mind,  that  the  emperor  must  not  be  surprised,  if,  the
moment  the  constable  departed,  he  should  burn  to  the
ground  a  house  which,  having  been  polluted  by  the
presence  of  a  traitor,  became  an  unfit  habitation  for  a
man  of  honour/

A  ointed  Charles  himself,  nevertheless,  seemed  to  have
general  of  ft  much  at  heart  to  reward  Bourbon's  services

the  irape- .  .  _.  i • • i • i

rial  array  in  a  signal  manner.  But  as  he  insisted,  in  the
tajr*  first  place,  on  the  accomplishment  of  the  em-
peror's promise  of  giving  him  in  marriage  his  sister
Eleanora,  queen-dowager  of  Portugal,  the  honour  of
which  alliance  had  been  one  of  the  chief  inducements
to  rebel  against  his  lawful  sovereign ;  as  Francis,  in
order  to  prevent  such  a  dangerous  union,  had  offered,
before  he  left  Italy,  to  marry  that  princess;  and  as
Eleanora  herself  discovered  an  inclination  rather  to
match  with  a  powerful  monarch,  than  with  his  exiled
subject ;  all  these  interfering  circumstances  created
great  embarrassment  to  Charles,  and  left  him  hardly
any  hope  of  extricating  himself  with  decency.
But  the  death  of  Pescara,  who,  at  the  age  of
thirty-six,  left  behind  him  the  reputation  of  being  one
of  the  greatest  generals  and  ablest  politicians  of  that
century,  happened  opportunely  at  this  juncture  for  his
relief.  By  that  event,  the  command  of  the  army  in  Italy
became  vacant,  and  Charles,  always  fertile  in  resources,
persuaded  Bourbon,  who  was  in  no  condition  to  dis-
pute his  will,  to  accept  the  office  of  general-in-chief
there,  together  with  a  grant  of  the  duchy  of  Milan  for-
feited by  Sforza ;  and  in  return  for  these  to  relinquish
all  hopes  of  marrying  the  queen  of  Portugal.5
Negotia-  The  chief  obstacle  that  stood  in  the  way  of
Paring  Francis's  liberty,  was  the  emperor's  continuing
Francis's  to  insist  so  peremptorily  on  the  restitution  of
Burgundy,  as  a  preliminary  to  that  event.
Francis  often  declared  that  he  would  never  consent  to

f  Guic.  1.  xvi.  335.  s  Sandov.  Hist.  i.  676. (Eur.  de  Brant,  iv.  249.

1525.]  BOOK IV.  173

dismember  his  kingdom ;  and  that,  even  if  he  should
so  far  forget  the  duties  of  a  monarch,  as  to  come  to  such
a  resolution,  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  nation  would
prevent  its  taking  effect.  On  his  part  he  was  willing
to  make  an  absolute  cession  to  the  emperor  of  all  his
pretensions  in  Italy  and  the  Low  Countries ;  he  promised
to  restore  to  Bourbon  all  his  lands  which  had  been  con-
fiscated ;  he  renewed  his  proposal  of  marrying  the  em-
peror's sister,  the  queen-dowager  of  Portugal;  and  en-
gaged to  pay  a  great  sum  by  way  of  ransom  for  his
own  person.  But  all  mutual  esteem  and  confidence  be-
tween the  two  monarchs  were  now  entirely  lost;  there
appeared,  on  the  one  hand,  a  rapacious  ambition,  la-
bouring to  avail  itself  of  every  favourable  circumstance ;
on  the  other,  suspicion  and  resentment,  standing  per-
petually on  their  guard;  so  that  the  prospect  of  bring-
ing their  negotiations  to  an  issue  seemed  to  be  far  dis-
tant. The  duchess  of  Alen^on,  the  French  king's  sister,
whom  Charles  permitted  to  visit  her  brother  in  his  con-
finement, employed  all  her  address  in  order  to  procure
his  liberty  on  more  reasonable  terms.  Henry  of  Eng-
land interposed  his  good  offices  to  the  same  purpose ;

Francis  in  but  ^otn  w^h  so  ^*^e  success> that  Francis,  in
despair  re-  despair,  took  suddenly  the  resolution  of  resign-
resign  his  ing  his  crown,  with  all  its  rights  and  preroga-
tives, to  his  son,  the  dauphin,  determining  ra-
ther to  end  his  days  in  prison,  than  to  purchase  his  free-
dom by  concessions  unworthy  of  a  king.  The  deed  for
this  purpose  he  signed  with  legal  formality  in  Madrid,
empowering  his  sister  to  carry  it  into  France,  that  it
might  be  registered  in  all  the  parliaments  of  the  king-
dom ;  and  at  the  same  time  intimating  his  intention  to
the  emperor,  he  desired  him  to  name  the  place  of  his
confinement,  and  to  assign  him  a  proper  number  of  at-
tendants during  the  remainder  of  his  days.h

11  This  paper  is  published  in  Memoires  Historiques,  &c.  par  M.  1'Abbe"  Raynal,
torn.  ii.  p.  151.

174  CHARLES  V.  [1525.

Charles  This  resolution  of  the  French  king  had  great
alarmed.  effect  •  Charles  began  to  be  sensible,  that  by
pushing  rigour  to  excess  he  might  defeat  his  own  mea-
sures ;  and  instead  of  the  vast  advantages  which  he
hoped  to  draw  from  ransoming  a  powerful  monarch,
he  might  at  last  find  in  his  hands  a  prince  without
dominions  or  revenues.  About  the  same  time,  one  of
the  king  of  Navarre's  domestics  happened,  by  an  ex-
traordinary exertion  of  fidelity,  courage,  and  address,
to  procure  his  master  an  opportunity  of  escaping  from
the  prison  in  which  he  had  been  confined  ever  since
the  battle  of  Pavia.  This  convinced  the  emperor  that
the  most  vigilant  attention  of  his  officers  might  be
eluded  by  the  ingenuity  or  boldness  of  Francis  or  his
attendants,  and  one  unlucky  hour  might  deprive  him
of  all  the  advantages  which  he  had  been  so  solicitous
to  obtain.  By  these  considerations,  he  was  induced
to  abate  somewhat  of  his  former  demands.  On  the
other  hand,  Francis's  impatience  under  confinement
daily  increased;  and  having  received  certain  intelli-
gence of  a  powerful  league  forming  against  his  rival
in  Italy,  he  grew  more  compliant  with  regard  to  his
concessions,  trusting  that,  if  he  could  once  obtain  his
liberty,  he  would  soon  be  in  a  condition  to  resume
whatever  he  had  yielded.

1526  Such  being  the  views  and  sentiments  of  the
Treaty  of  two  monarchs,  the  treaty  which  procured  Francis
his  liberty  was  signed  at  Madrid,  on  the  14th
of  January,  1526.  The  article  with  regard  to  Bur-
gundy, which  had  hitherto  created  the  greatest  diffi-
culty, was  compromised,  Francis  engaging  to  restore
that  duchy  with  all  its  dependencies  in  full  sovereignty
to  the  emperor;  and  Charles  consenting,  that  this
restitution  should  not  be  made  until  the  king  was  set
at  liberty :  in  order  to  secure  the  performance  of  this,
as  well  as  the  other  conditions  in  the  treaty,  Francis
agreed  that,  at  the  same  instant  when  he  himself  should

1526.]  BOOK IV.  175

be  released,  he  would  deliver  as  hostages  to  the  em-
peror, his  eldest  son  the  dauphin,  his  second  son  the
duke  of  Orleans,  or,  in  lieu  of  the  latter,  twelve  of  his
principal  nobility,  to  be  named  by  Charles.  The  other
articles  swelled  to  a  great  number,  and,  though  not  of
such  importance,  were  extremely  rigorous.  Among
these  the  most  remarkable  were,  that  Francis  should
renounce  all  his  pretensions  in  Italy ;  that  he  should
disclaim  any  title  which  he  had  to  the  sovereignty  of
Flanders  and  Artois ;  that,  within  six  weeks  after  his
release  he  should  restore  to  Bourbon,  and  his  adhe-
rents, all  their  goods,  moveable  and  immoveable,  and
make  them  full  reparation  for  the  damages  which  they
had  sustained  by  the  confiscation  of  them ;  that  he
should  use  his  interest  with  Henry  d'Albret  to  relin-
quish his  pretensions  to  the  crown  of  Navarre,  and
should  not,  for  the  future,  assist  him  in  any  attempt  to
recover  it ;  that  there  should  be  established  between
the  emperor  and  Francis  a  league  of  perpetual  friend-
ship and  confederacy,  with  a  promise  of  mutual  assist-
ance in  every  case  of  necessity ;  that,  in  corroboration
of  this  union,  Francis  should  marry  the  emperor's  sister,
the  queen-dowager  of  Portugal;  that  Francis  should
cause  all  the  articles  of  this  treaty  to  be  ratified  by  the
states,  and  registered  in  the  parliaments  of  his  king-
dom; that,  upon  the  emperor's  receiving  this  ratifica-
tion, the  hostages  should  be  set  at  liberty ;  but,  in  their
place,  the  duke  of  Angouleme,  the  king's  third  son,
should  be  delivered  to  Charles ;  that,  in  order  to  mani-
fest, as  well  as  to  strengthen  the  amity  between  the
two  monarchs,  he  might  be  educated  at  the  imperial
court;  and  that  if  Francis  did  not,  within  the  time
limited,  fulfil  the  stipulations  in  the  treaty,  he  should
promise,  upon  his  honour  and  oath,  to  return  to  Spain,
and  to  surrender  himself  again  a  prisoner  to  the  em-
peror.1

1  Recueil  des  Trait,  torn,  ii.  112. Ulloa  Vita  del  Carlo  V.  p.  102,  &c.

176  CHARLES  V.  [1526.

Sentiment?  By  this  treaty,  Charles  flattered  himself  that
wkhTe*86  ^e  ^a(^  not  om1y  effectually  humbled  his  rival,
spect  to  it.  but  that  he  had  taken  such  precautions  as  would
for  ever  prevent  his  reattaining  any  formidable  degree
of  power.  The  opinion  which  the  wisest  politicians
formed  concerning  it  was  very  different;  they  could
not  persuade  themselves  that  Francis,  after  obtaining
his  liberty,  would  execute  articles  against  which  he
had  struggled  so  long,  and  to  which,  notwithstanding
all  that  he  felt  during  a  long  and  rigorous  confinement,
he  had  consented  with  the  utmost  reluctance.  Am-
bition and  resentment,  they  knew,  would  conspire  in
prompting  him  to  violate  the  hard  conditions  to  which
he  had  been  constrained  to  submit;  nor  would  argu-
ments and  casuistry  be  wanting  to  represent  that  which
was  so  manifestly  advantageous,  to  be  necessary  and
just.  If  one  part  of  Francis's  conduct  had  been  known
at  that  time,  this  opinion  might  have  been  founded,
Francis  se-  not  *n  conjecture,  but  in  certainty.  A  few  hours
cretiy  pro-  before  he  signed  the  treaty,  he  assembled  such

tests  against „..  &  J  \

the  validity  ot  his  counsellors  as  were  then  at  Madrid,  and
having  exacted  from  them  a  solemn  oath  of
secrecy,  he  made  a  long  enumeration,  in  their  pre-
sence, of  the  dishonourable  arts,  as  well  as  unprincely
rigour,  which  the  emperor  had  employed  in  order  to
insnare  or  intimidate  him.  For  that  reason,  he  took
a  formal  protest  in  the  hands  of  notaries,  that  his  con-
sent  to  the  treaty  should  be  considered  as  an  involun-
tary deed,  and  be  deemed  null  and  void.k  By  this
disingenuous  artifice,  for  which  even  the  treatment  that
he  had  met  with  was  no  apology,  Francis  endeavoured
to  satisfy  his  honour  and  conscience  in  signing  the
treaty,  and  to  provide,  at  the  same  time,  a  pretext  on
which  to  break  it.

Great,  meanwhile,  were  the  outward  demonstrations
of  love  and  confidence  between  the  two  monarchs ;

k  Rccueil  des  Trait,  torn.  ii.  p.  107.

1526.]

BOOK  IV.

177

they  appeared  often  together  in  public ;  they  frequently
had  long  conferences  in  private ;  they  travelled  in  the
same  litter,  and  joined  in  the  same  amusements.  But,
amidst  these  signs  of  peace  and  friendship,  the  empe-
ror still  harboured  suspicion  in  his  mind.  Though  the
ceremonies  of  the  marriage  between  Francis  and  the
queen  of  Portugal  were  performed  soon  after  the  con-
clusion of  the  treaty,  Charles  would  not  permit  him  to
consummate  it  until  the  return  of  the  ratification  from
France.  Even  then  Francis  was  not  allowed  to  be  at
full  liberty ;  his  guards  were  still  continued ;  though
caressed  as  a  brother-in-law,  he  was  still  watched  like
a  prisoner ;  and  it  was  obvious  to  attentive  observers,
that  a  union,  in  the  very  beginning  of  which  there
might  be  discerned  such  symptoms  of  jealousy  and  dis-
trust, could  not  be  cordial,  or  of  long  continuance.1
Ratified  in  About  a  month  after  the  signing  of  the  treaty,
France.  faQ  regent's  ratification  of  it  was  brought  from
France ;  and  that  wise  princess,  preferring,  on  this  oc-
casion, the  public  good  to  domestic  affection,  informed
her  son,  that,  instead  of  the  twelve  noblemen  named  in
the  treaty,  she  had  sent  the  duke  of  Orleans  along  with
his  brother  the  dauphin,  to  the  frontier,  as  the  king-
dom could  suffer  nothing  by  the  absence  of  a  child,
but  must  be  left  almost  incapable  of  defence,  if  de-
prived of  its  ablest  statesmen,  and  most  experienced
generals,  whom  Charles  had  artfully  included  in  his
Francis  set  nomination.  At  last  Francis  took  leave  of  the
at  liberty,  emperor,  whose  suspicion  of  the  king's  sin-
cerity increasing,  as  the  time  of  putting  it  to  the  proof
approached,  he  endeavoured  to  bind  him  still  faster  by
exacting  new  promises,  which  after  those  he  had  al-
ready made,  the  French  monarch  was  not  slow  to
grant.  He  set  out  from  Madrid,  a  place  which  the
remembrance  of  many  afflicting  circumstances  ren-
dered peculiarly  odious  to  him,  with  the  joy  natural

1  Guic.  1.  XT!.  353.

VOL.  IV.

178  CHARLES  V.  [1526.

on  such  an  occasion,  and  began  the  long-wished-for
journey  towards  his  own  dominions.  He  was  escorted
by  a  body  of  horse  under  the  command  of  Alarcon,
who,  as  the  king  drew  near  the  frontiers  of  France,
guarded  him  with  more  scrupulous  exactness  than
ever.  When  he  arrived  at  the  river  Andaye,  which
separates  the  two  kingdoms,  Lautrec  appeared  on  the
opposite  bank  with  a  guard  of  horse  equal  in  number
to  Alarcon's.  An  empty  bark  was  moored  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  stream ;  the  attendants  drew  up  in  order  on
the  opposite  banks ;  at  the  same  instant,  Lannoy,  with
eight  gentlemen,  put  off  from  the  Spanish,  and  Lautrec
with  the  same  number  from  the  French  side  of  the
river ;  the  former  had  the  king  in  his  boat ;  the  latter,
the  dauphin  and  duke  of  Orleans ;  they  met  in  the
empty  vessel;  the  exchange  was  made  in  a. moment:
Francis,  after  a  short  embrace  of  his  children,  leaped
into  Lau tree's  boat,  and  reached  the  French  shore.  He
mounted  at  that  instant  a  Turkish  horse,  waved  his  hand
over  his  head,  and  with  a  joyful  voice  crying  aloud  se-
veral times,  "  I  am  yet  a  king,"  galloped  full  speed  to  St.
John  de  Luz,  and  from  thence  to  Bayonne,  This  event,
no  less  impatiently  desired  by  the  French  nation  than
by  their  monarch,  happened  on  the  18th  of  March,  a
year  and  twenty-two  days  after  the  fatal  battle  of  Paria.m
The  cm-  Soon  after  the  emperor  had  taken  leave  of
marriage  Francis,  and  permitted  him  to  begin  his  journey
beiiaof8"  towards  his  own  dominions,  he  set  out  for  Se-
Portugai.  yille,  in  order  to  solemnize  his  marriage  with
Isabella,  the  daughter  of  Emanuel,  the  late  king  of
Portugal,  and  the  sister  of  John  III.  who  had  suc-
ceeded him  in  the  throne  of  that  kingdom.  Isabella
was  a  princess  of  uncommon  beauty  and  accomplish-
ments ;  and  as  the  cortes,  both  in  Castile  and  Aragon,
had  warmly  solicited  their  sovereign  to  marry,  the
choice  of  a  wife,  so  nearly  allied  to  the  royal  blood  of

»  Sandov.  Hist.  i.  735. Guvc.  1.  xvi.  355*

1526.]  BOOK IV.  179

both  kingdoms,  was  extremely  acceptable  to  his  sub-
jects. The  Portuguese,  fond  of  this  new  connexion
with  the  first  monarch  in  Christendom,  granted  him
an  extraordinary  dowry  with  Isabella,  amounting  to
nine  hundred  thousand  crowns,  a  sum  which,  from  the
situation  of  aifairs  at  that  juncture,  was  of  no

March  12.  J

small  consequence  to  the  emperor.  The  mar-
riage was  celebrated  with  that  splendour  and  gaiety
which  became  a  great  and  youthful  prince.  Charles
lived  with  Isabella  in  perfect  harmony,  and  treated  her
on  all  occasions  with  much  distinction  and  regard.11
Affairs  of  During  these  transactions,  Charles  could
Germany,  jj^jjy  gjve  anv  attention  to  the  affairs  of  Ger-
many, though  it  was  torn  in  pieces  by  commotions,
which  threatened  the  most  dangerous  consequences.
By  the  feudal  institutions  which  still  subsisted  almost
unimpaired  in  the  empire,  the  property  of  lands  was
Griev-  vested  in  the  princes  and  free  barons.  Their
thepea-  vassals  held  of  them  by  the  strictest  and  most
sants.  limited  tenures;  while  the  great  body  of  the
people  was  kept  in  a  state  but  little  removed  from
absolute  servitude.  In  some  places  of  Germany,  peo-
ple of  the  lowest  class  were  so  entirely  in  the  power  of
their  masters,  as  to  be  subject  to  personal  and  domestic
slavery,  the  most  rigorous  form  of  that  wretched  state.
In  other  provinces,  particularly  in  Bohemia  and  Lusatia,
the  peasants  were  bound  to  remain  on  the  lands  to
which  they  belonged,  and  making  part  of  the  estate,
were  transferred  like  any  other  property,  from  one  hand
to  another.  Even  in  Suabia,  and  the  countries  on  the
banks  of  the  Rhine,  where  their  condition  was  most
tolerable,  the  peasants  not  only  paid  the  full  rent  of
their  farms  to  the  landlord,  but  if  they  chose  either  to
change  the  place  of  their  abode,  or  to  follow  a  new
profession,  before  they  could  accomplish  what  they

n  Ulloa  Vita  di  Carlo  V.  p.  106. Belearius  Com.  Rer.  Gallic,  p.  565. Spa-
Jatinus  ap.  Strur.  Corp.  Hist.  Germ.  ii.  1081.

N 2

180  CHARLES V.  [1526.

desired,  they  were  obliged  to  purchase  this  privilege
at  a  certain  price.  Besides  this,  all  grants  of  lands  to
peasants  expired  at  their  death,  without  descending  to
their  posterity.  Upon  that  event,  the  landlord  had  a
right  to  the  best  of  their  cattle,  as  well  as  of  their  fur-
niture ;  and  their  heirs,  in  order  to  obtain  a  renewal  of
the  grant,  were  obliged  to  pay  large  sums  by  way  of
fine.  These  exactions,  though  grievous,  were  borne
with  patience,  because  they  were  customary  and  ancient :
but  when  the  progress  of  elegance  and  luxury,  as  well
as  the  changes  introduced  into  the  art  of  war,  came  to
increase  the  expense  of  government,  and  made  it  ne-
cessary for  princes  to  levy  occasional  or  stated  taxes  on
their  subjects,  such  impositions  being  new,  appeared
intolerable ;  and  in  Germany,  these  duties  being  laid
chiefly  upon  beer,  wine,  and  other  necessaries  of  life,
affected  the  common  people  in  the  most  sensible  man-
ner. The  addition  of  such  a  load  to  their  former  'bur-
dens drove  them  to  despair.  It  was  to  the  valour  in-
spired by  resentment  against  impositions  of  this  kind,
that  the  Swiss  owed  the  acquisition  of  their  liberty  in
the  fourteenth  century.  The  same  cause  had  excited
the  peasants  in  several  other  provinces  of  Germany  to
rebel  against  their  superiors  towards  the  end  of  the  fif-
teenth and  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  centuries;  and
though  these  insurrections  were  not  attended  with  like
success,  they  could  not,  however,  be  quelled  without
much  difficulty  and  bloodshed.0

Their  in-  ^7  these  checks,  the  spirit  of  the  peasants
inrsuaWan,  was  overawed  rather  than  subdued ;  and  their
'  grievances  multiplying  continually,  they  ran  to
arms,  in  the  year  1526,  with  the  most  frantic  rage.  Their
first  appearance  was  near  Ulm,  in  Suabia.  The  pea-
sants in  the  adjacent  country  flocked  to  their  standard
with  the  ardour  and  impatience  natural  to  men  who,
having  groaned  long  under  oppression,  beheld  at  last

0  Seckend.  lib.  ii.  p.  2.  6.

1526.]  BOOK IV.  181

some  prospect  of  deliverance;  and  the  contagion  spread-
ing from  province  to  province,  reached  almost  every
part  of  Germany.  Wherever  they  came,  they  plun-
dered the  monasteries ;  wasted  the  lands  of  their  su-
periors; rased  their  castles,  and  massacred,  without
mercy,  all  persons  of  noble  birth,  who  were  so  unhappy
as  to  fall  into  their  hands. p  Having  intimidated  their
oppressors,  as  they  imagined,  by  the  violence  of  these
proceedings,  they  began  to  consider  what  would  be  the
most  proper  and  effectual  method  of  securing  themselves
for  the  future  from  their  tyrannical  exactions.  With
this  view,  they  drew  up  and  published  a  memorial,
containing  all  their  demands,  and  declared,  that  while
arms  were  in  their  hands,  they  would  either  persuade
or  oblige  the  nobles  to  give  them  full  satisfaction  with
regard  to  these.  The  chief  articles  were,  that  they
might  have  liberty  to  choose  their  own  pastors ;  that
they  might  be  freed  from  the  payment  of  all  tithes,
except  those  of  corn ;  that  they  might  no  longer  be
considered  as  the  slaves  or  bondmen  of  their  superiors ;
that  the  liberty  of  hunting  and  fishing  might  be  com-
mon ;  that  the  great  forests  might  not  be  regarded  as
private  property,  but  be  open  for  the  use  of  all ;  that
they  might  be  delivered  from  the  unusual  burden  of
taxes  under  which  they  laboured ;  that  the  adminis-
tration of  justice  might  be  rendered  less  rigorous  and
more  impartial ;  that  the  encroachments  of  the  nobles
upon  meadows  and  commons  might  be  restrained.*1

Many  of  these  demands  were  extremely  rea-
sonable ;  and  being  urged  by  such  formidable
numbers,  should  have  met  with  some  redress.  But
those  unwieldy  bodies,  assembled  in  different  places,
had  neither  union,  nor  conduct,  nor  vigour.  Being
led  by  persons  of  the  lowest  rank,  without  skill  in  war,

P  Petr.  Crinitus  de  Bello  Rusticano,  ap.  Freher.  Script.  Rer.  Germ.  Argent
1717,  vol.  Hi,  p.  243.  «  Sleid.  Hist.  p.  90.

182  CHARLES V.  [1526.

or  knowledge  of  what  was  necessary  for  accomplishing
their  designs  ;  all  their  exploits  were  distinguished  only
by  a  brutal  and  unmeaning  fury.  To  oppose  this,  the
princes  and  nobles  of  Suabia  and  the  Lower  Rhine
raised  such  of  their  vassals  as  still  continued  faithful,
and  attacking  some  of  the  mutineers  with  open  force,
and  others  by  surprise,  cut  to  pieces  or  dispersed  all
who  infested  those  provinces;  so  that  the  peasants,
after  ruining  the  open  country,  and  losing  upwards  of
twenty  thousand  of  their  associates  in  the  field,  were
obliged  to  return  to  their  habitations  with  less  hope
than  ever  of  relief  from  their  grievances/
Their  These  commotions  happened  at  first  in  pro-

tionsTn  vinces  of  Germany  where  Luther's  opinions  had
Thuringia,  made  little  progress ;  and  being  excited  wholly
by  political  causes,  had  no  connexion  with  the  disputed
points  in  religion.  But  the  frenzy  reaching  at  last
those  countries  in  which  the  Reformation  was  esta-
blished, derived  new  strength  from  circumstances  pecu-
liar to  them,  and  rose  to  a  still  greater  pitch  of  extra-
vagance. The  Reformation,  wherever  it  was  received,
increased  that  bold  and  innovating  spirit  to  which  it
owed  its  birth.  Men  who  had  the  courage  to  overturn
a  system  supported  by 'every  thing  which  can  command
respect  or  reverence,  were  not  to  be  overawed  by  any
authority,  how  great  or  venerable  soever.  After  having
been  accustomed  to  consider  themselves  as  judges  of
the  most  important  doctrines  in  religion,  to  examine
these  freely,  and  to  reject,  without  scruple,  what  ap-
peared to  them  erroneous,  it  was  natural  for  them  to
turn  the  same  daring  and  inquisitive  eye  towards  go-
vernment, and  to  think  of  rectifying  whatever  disorders
or  imperfections  were  discovered  there.  As  religious
abuses  had  been  reformed  in  several  places  without  the
permission  of  the  magistrate,  it  was  an  easy  transition

'  Seckend.  lib.  ii.  p.  10. Petr.  Gnodalius  de  Rusticanorum Tumultu  in  Ger-
mama,  ap.  Scard.  Script,  vol.  ii.  p.  131,  &c.

1526.]  BOOK IV.  183

to  attempt  the  redress  of  political  grievances  in  the
same  manner.

More  for-  No  sooner,  then,  did  the  spirit  of  revolt  break
midabie.  Out  jn  Thuringia,  a  province  subject  to  the  elec-
tor of  Saxony,  the  inhabitants  of  which  were  mostly
converts  to  Lutheranism,  than  it  assumed  a  new  and
more  dangerous  form.  Thomas  Muncer,  one  of  Lu-
ther's disciples,  having  established  himself  in  that  coun-
try, had  acquired  a  wonderful  ascendant  over  the  minds
of  the  people.  He  propagated  among  them  the  wildest
and  most  enthusiastic  notions,  but  such  as  tended  mani-
festly to  inspire  them  with  boldness,  and  lead  them  to
Their  sedition.  "  Luther,  he  told  them,  had  done
fanatical  more  hurt  than  service  to  religion.  He  had,
indeed,  rescued  the  church  from  the  yoke  of
Popery,  but  his  doctrines  encouraged,  and  his  life  set
an  example  of,  the  utmost  licentiousness  of  manners.
In  order  to  avoid  vice  (says  he),  men  must  practise  per-
petual mortification.  They  must  put  on  a  grave  coun-
tenance, speak  little,  wear  a  plain  garb,  and  be  serious
in  their  whole  deportment.  Such  as  prepare  their  hearts
in  this  manner,  may  expect  that  the  Supreme  Being  will
direct  all  their  steps,  and  by  some  visible  sign  discover
his  will  to  them ;  if  that  illumination  be  at  any  time
withheld,  we  may  expostulate  with  the  Almighty,  who
deals  with  us  so  harshly,  and  remind  him  of  his  pro-
mises. This  expostulation  and  anger  will  be  highly
acceptable  to  God,  and  will  at  last  prevail  on  him  to
guide  us  with  the  same  unerring  hand  which  conducted
the  patriarchs  of  old.  Let  us  beware,  however,  of  of-
fending him  by  our  arrogance ;  but  as  all  men  are  equal
in  his  eye,  let  them  return  to  that  condition  of  equality
in  which  he  formed  them,  and  having  all  things  in  com-
mon, let  them  live  together  like  brethren,  without  any
marks  of  subordination  or  pre-eminence."8

8  Seckend.  lib.  ii.  p.  13. Sleid.  Hist.  p.  83.

CHARLES  V.  [1526.

Extravagant  as  these  tenets  were,  they  flattered  so
many  passions  in  the  human  heart,  as  to  make  a  deep
impression.  To  aim  at  nothing  more  than  abridging
the  power  of  the  nobility,  was  now  considered  as  a
trifling  and  partial  reformation,  not  worth  the  contend-
ing for;  it  was  proposed  to  level  every  distinction  among
mankind,  and  by  abolishing  property,  to  reduce  them
to  their  natural  state  of  equality,  in  which  all  should
receive  their  subsistence  from  one  common  stock.  Mun-
cer  assured  them,  that  the  design  was  approved  of  by
Heaven,  and  that  the  Almighty  had  in  a  dream  ascer-
tained him  of  its  success.  The  peasants  set  about  the
execution  of  it,  not  only  with  the  rage  which  animated
those  of  their  order  in  other  parts  of  Germany,  but  with
the  ardour  which  enthusiasm  inspires.  They  deposed
the  magistrates  in  all  the  cities  of  which  they  were  mas-
ters ;  seized  the  lands  of  the  nobles,  and  obliged  such
of  them  as  they  got  into  their  hands,  to  put  on  the  dress
commonly  worn  by  peasants,  and,  instead  of  their  for-
mer titles,  to  be  satisfied  with  the  appellation  given  to
people  in  the  lowest  class  of  life.  Great  numbers  en-
gaged in  this  wild  undertaking;  but  Muncer,  their
leader  and  their  prophet,  was  destitute  of  the  abilities
necessary  for  conducting  it.  He  had  all  the  extrava-
gance, but  not  the  courage,  which  enthusiasts  usually
possess.  It  was  with  difficulty  he  could  be  persuaded
to  take  the  field ;  and  though  he  soon  drew  together  eight
thousand  men,  he  suffered  himself  to  be  surrounded  by
a  body  of  cavalry  under  the  command  of  the  elector  of
Saxony,  the  landgrave  of  Hesse,  and  duke  of  Brunswick.
These  princes,  unwilling  to  shed  the  blood  of  their  de-
luded subjects,  sent  a  young  nobleman  to  their  camp,
with  the  offer  of  a  general  pardon,  if  they  would  imme-
diately lay  down  their  arms,  and  deliver  up  the  authors
of  the  sedition.  Muncer,  alarmed  at  this,  began  to
harangue  his  followers  with  his  usual  vehemence,  ex-

1526,]  BOOK IV.  185

horted  them  not  to  trust  Ithese  deceitful  promises  of
their  oppressors,  nor  to  desert  the  cause  of  God  and  of
Christian  liberty.

Peasants  But  the  sense  of  present  danger  making  a
tedt  deeper  impression  on  the  peasants  than  his  elo-
quence, confusion  and  terror  were  visible  in  every  face,
when  a  rainbow,  which  was  the  emblem  that  the  muti-
neers had  painted  on  their  colours,  happening  to  appear
in  the  clouds,  Muncer,  with  admirable  presence  of  mind,
laid  old  of  that  incident,  and  suddenly  raising  his  eyes
and  hands  towards  heaven, — "  Behold,"  cries  he,  with
an  elevated  voice,  "  the  sign  which  God  has  given.
There  is  the  pledge  of  your  safety,  and  a  token  that  the
wicked  shall  be  destroyed."  The  fanatical  multitude
set  up  instantly  a  great  shout,  as  if  victory  had  been
certain ;  and  passing  in  a  moment  from  one  extreme  to
another, -massacred  the  unfortunate  nobleman  who  had
come  with  the  offer  of  pardon,  and  demanded  to  be  led
towards  the  enemy.  The  princes,  enraged  at  this  shock-
ing violation  of  the  laws  of  war,  advanced  with  no  less
impetuosity,  and  began  the  attack ;  but  the  be-
haviour of  the  peasants  in  the  combat  was  not
such  as  might  have  been  expected  either  from  their  fero-
city or  confidence  of  success  ;  an  undisciplined  rabble
was  no  equal  match  for  well- trained  troops  ;  above  five
thousand  were  slain  in  the  field,  almost  without  making-
resistance  ;  the  rest  fled,  and  among  the  foremost  Mun-
cer their  general.  He  was  taken  next  day,  and  being
condemned  to  such  punishments  as  his  crimes  had  de-
served, he  suffered  them  with  a  poor  and  dastardly  spi-
rit. His  death  put  an  end  to  the  insurrections  of  the
peasants,  which  had  filled  Germany  with  such  terror  ;*
but  the  enthusiastic  notions  which  he  had  scattered  were
not  extirpated,  and  produced,  not  long  after,  effects
more  memorable,  as  well  as  more  extravagant.

During  these  commotions,  Luther  acted  with  exem-

1  Slcid.  Hist.  p.  B'i. Seckend.  lib.ii.  p.  12. Guodalius  Tumult,  llusticun.  155.

13(j  CHARLES V.  [1526.

Luther's  P^ary  pnidence  and  moderation ;  like  a  common
moderate  parent,  solicitous  about  the  welfare  of  both  par-
dentPcon-  ties,  without  sparing  the  faults  or  errors  of  either.
On  the  one  hand,  he  addressed  a  monitory
discourse  to  the  nobles,  exhorting  them  to  treat  their
dependants  with  greater  humanity  and  indulgence.  On
the  other,  he  severely  censured  the  seditious  spirit  of
the  peasants,  advising  them  not  to  murmur  at  hardships
inseparable  from  their  condition,  nor  to  seek  for  redress
by  any  but  legal  means."

His  mar-  Luther's  famous  marriage  with  Catherine  a
"age.  Boria,  a  nun  of  a  noble  family,  who,  having
thrown  off  the  veil,  and  fled  from  the  cloister,  happened
this  year,  and  was  far  from  meeting  with  the  same  ap-
probation. Even  his  most  devoted  followers  thought
this  step  indecent,  at  a  time  when  his  country  was  in-
volved in  so  many  calamities  ;  while  his  enemies  never
mentioned  it  with  any  softer  appellation  than  that  of
incestuous  or  profane.  Luther  himself  was  sensible  of
the  impression  which  it  had  made  to  his  disadvantage ;
but  being  satisfied  with  his  own  conduct,  he  bore  the
censure  of  his  friends,  and  the  reproaches  of  his  adver-
saries, with  his  usual  fortitude/

Ma  5  This  year  the  Reformation  lost  its  first  pro-
tector, Frederic  elector  of  Saxony;  but  the
blow  was  the  less  sensibly  felt,  as  lie  was  succeeded  by
his  brother  John,  a  more  avowed  and  zealous,  though
less  able  patron  of  Luther  and  his  doctrines.
Prussia  Another  event  happened  about  the  same  time,
fonfthe  which  as  it  occasioned  a  considerable  change
Teutonic  in  the  state  of  Germany,  must  be  traced  back  to
its  source.  While  the  frenzy  of  the  crusades
possessed  all  Europe  during  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth
centuries,  several  orders  of  religious  knighthood  were
founded  in  defence  of  the  Christian  faith  against  hea-
thens and  infidels.  Among  these,  the  Teutonic  order

u  Sleid.  Hist.  p.  87.  *  Seckend.  lib.  ii.  p.  15.

1526.]  ,  BOOK  IV.  187

in  Germany  was  one  of  the  most  illustrious,  the  knights
of  which  distinguished  themselves  greatly  in  all  the
enterprises  carried  on  in  the  Holy  Land.  Being  driven
at  last  from  their  settlements  in  the  east,  they  were
obliged  to  return  to  their  native  country.  Their  zeal
and  valour  were  too  impetuous  to  remain  long  inac-
tive. They  invaded,  on  very  slight  pretences,  the  pro-
vince of  Prussia,  the  inhabitants  of  which  were  still
idolaters;  and  having  completed  the  conquest  of  it
about  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  held  it  many
years  as  a  fief  depending  on  the  crown  of  Poland.
Fierce  contests  arose,  during  this  period  between  the
grand-masters  of  the  order  and  the  kings  of  Poland  ;
the  former  struggling  for  independence,  while  the  lat-
ter asserted  their  right  of  sovereignty  with  great  firm-
ness. Albert,  a  prince  of  the  house  of  Brandenburgh,
who  was  elected  grand- master  in  the  year  1511,  en-
gaging keenly  in  this  quarrel,  maintained  a  long
war  with  Sigismund  king  of  Poland ;  but  having
become  an  early  convert  to  Luther's  doctrines,  this
gradually  lessened  his  zeal  for  the  interests  of  his
fraternity,  so  that  he  took  the  opportunity  of  the
confusions  in  the  empire,  and  the  absence  of  the
emperor,  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  Sigismund,  greatly
to  his  own  private  emolument.  By  it,  that  part  of
Prussia,  which  belonged  to  the  Teutonic  order,  was
erected  into  a  secular  and  hereditary  duchy,  and  the
investiture  of  it  granted  to  Albert,  who,  in  return,  bound
himself  to  do  homage  for  it  to  the  kings  of  Poland  as
their  vassal.  Immediately  after  this,  he  made  public
profession  of  the  reformed  religion,  and  married  a  prin-
cess of  Denmark.  The  Teutonic  knights  exclaimed  so
loudly  against  the  treachery  of  their  grand-master,  that
he  was  put  under  the  ban  of  the  empire  ;  but  he  still
kept  possession  of  the  province  which  he  had  usurped,
and  transmitted  it  to  his  posterity.  In  process  of  time,
this  rich  inheritance  fell  to  the  electoral  branch  of  the

188  CHARLES  V.  [1526.

family,  all  dependence  on  the  crown  of  Poland  was
shaken  off,  and  the  margraves  of  Brandenburgh,  having
assumed  the  title  of  kings  of  Prussia,  have  not  only
risen  to  an  equality  with  the  princes  in  Germany,  but
take  their  rank  among  the  great  monarchs  of  Europe/
First  raea- Upon  the  return  of  the  French  king  to  his  do-
theeFr°ench  minions,  the  eyes  of  all  the  powers  in  Europe
hisKu  were  fixe(*  uPon  h"11?  tnat>  by  observing  his  first
to  France,  motions,  they  might  form  a  judgment  concern-
ing his  subsequent  conduct. They  were  not  held  long
in  suspicion.  Francis,  as  soon  as  he  arrived  at  Bayonne,
wrote  to  the  king  of  England,  thanking  him  for  the
zeal  and  affection  wherewith  he  had  interposed  in  his
favour,  to  which  he  acknowledged  that  he  owed  the
recovery  of  his  liberty. Next  day,  the  emperor's  am-
bassadors demanded  audience,  and,  in  their  master's
name,  required  him  to  issue  such  orders  as  were  ne-
cessary for  carrying  the  treaty  of  Madrid  into  imme-
diate and  full  execution ; he  coldly  answered,  that
though,  for  his  own  part,  he  determined  religiously  to
perform all that  he  had  promised,  the treaty con-
tained so  many  articles  relative  not  to  himself  alone,
but  affecting  the  interests  of  the  French  monarchy,  that
he  could  not  take  any  farther  step  without  consulting
the  states  of  his  kingdom,  and  that  some  time  would  be
necessary,  in  order  to  reconcile  their  minds  to  the  hard
conditions  which  he  had  consented  to  ratify.2 This  re-
ply was  considered  as  no  obscure  discovery  of  his  being
resolved  to  elude  the  treaty ;  and  the  compliment  paid
to  Henry  appeared  a  very  proper  step  towards  securing
the  assistance  of  that  monarch  in  the  war  with  the  em-
peror, to  which  such  a  resolution  would  certainly  give
rise. These  circumstances,  added  to  the  explicit  de-
clarations which  Francis  made  in  secret  to  the  ambas-
sadors from  several  of  the  Italian  powers,  fully  satis-

y  Sleid.  Hist.  p.  98. Pfeffel  Abreg6  de  1'Hist.  de  Droit  Publ.  p.  605,  &c.
z  Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  97.

1526.]  BOOK IV.  189

fied  them  that  their  conjectures  with  regard  to  his  con-
duct had  been  just ;  and  that,  instead  of  intending  to
execute  an  unreasonable  treaty,  he  was  eager  to  seize
the  first  opportunity  of  revenging  those  injuries  which
had  compelled  him  to  feign  an  approbation  of  it.  Even
the  doubts,  and  fears,  and  scruples,  which  used,  on
other  occasions,  to  hold  Clement  in  a  state  of  uncer-
tainty, were  dissipated  by  Francis's  seeming  impatience
to  break  through  all  his  engagements  with  the  emperor.
The  situation,  indeed,  of  affairs  in  Italy  at  that  time  did
not  allow  the  pope  to  hesitate  long.  Sforza  was  still
besieged  by  the  Imperialists  in  the  castle  of  Milan.  That
feeble  prince,  deprived  now  of  Morone's  advice,  and
unprovided  with  every  thing  necessary  for  defence,
found  means  to  inform  Clement  and  the  Venetians,  that
he  must  soon  surrender  if  they  did  not  come  to  his  re-
lief. The  imperial  troops,  as  they  had  received  no
pay  since  the  battle  of  Pavia,  lived  at  discretion  in  the
Milanese,  levying  such  exorbitant  contributions  in  that
duchy,  as  amounted,  if  we  may  rely  on  Guicciardini's
calculation,  to  no  less  a  sum  than  five  thousand  ducats
a  day  ;a  nor  was  it  to  be  doubted,  but  that  the  soldiers,
as  soon  as  the  castle  should  submit,  would  choose  to
leave  a  ruined  country  which  hardly  afforded  them  sub-
sistence, that  they  might  take  possession  of  more  com-
fortable quarters  in  the  fertile  and  untouched  territories
of  the  pope  and  Venetians.  The  assistance  of  the
French  king  was  the  only  thing  which  could  either  save
Sforza,  or  enable  them  to  protect  their  own  dominions
from  the  insults  of  the  imperial  troops.
A  league  For  these  reasons,  the  pope,  the  Venetians,
gainst  the  an(l  duke  of  Milan,  were  equally  impatient  to
emperor.  come  to  an  agreement  with  Francis,  who,  on
his  part,  was  no  less  desirous  of  acquiring  such  a  con-
siderable accession  both  of  strength  and  reputation  as
such  a  confederacy  would  bring  along  with  it.  The

»  Gnic.  1.  xvii.  360.

190  CHARLES V.  [1526.

chief  objects  of  this  alliance,  which  was  concluded  at
Cognac  on  the  22d  of  May,  though  kept  secret  for
some  time,  were  to  oblige  the  emperor  to  set  at  liberty
the  French  king's  sons,  upon  payment  of  a  reasonable
ransom ;  and  to  re-establish  Sforza  in  the  quiet  posses-
sion of  the  Milanese.  If  Charles  should  refuse  either
of  these,  the  contracting  parties  bound  themselves  to
bring  into  the  field  an  army  of  thirty-five  thousand  men,
with  which,  after  driving  the  Spaniards  out  of  the  Mi-
lanese, they  would  attack  the  kingdom  of  Naples.  The
king  of  England  was  declared  protector  of  this  league,
which  they  dignified  with  the  name  of  Holy,  because
the  pope  was  at  the  head  of  it ;  and  in  order  to  allure
Henry  more  effectually,  a  principality  in  the  kingdom
of  Naples,  of  thirty  thousand  ducats  yearly  revenue,
was  to  be  settled  on  him ;  and  lands  to  the  value  of
ten  thousand  ducats  on  Wolsey  his  favourite.5
The  pope  No  sooner  was  this  league  concluded,  than
Francis  Clement,  by  the  plenitude  of  his  papal  power,
oath  to'ob-  absolved  Francis  from  the  oath  which  he  had

t^tyoV  ^^  to  observe  tne  treaty  of  Madrid.0  This
Madrid,  right,  how  pernicious  soever  in  its  effects,  and
destructive  of  that  integrity  which  is  the  basis  of  all
transactions  among  men,  was  the  natural  consequence  of
the  powers  which  the  popes  arrogated  as  the  infallible
vicegerents  of  Christ  upon  earth.  But,  as  in  virtue  of
this  pretended  prerogative,  they  had  often  dispensed
with  obligations  which  were  held  sacred,  the  interest
of  some  men,  and  the  credulity  of  others,  led  them  to
imagine,  that  the  decisions  of  a  sovereign  pontiff  au-
thorized "or  justified  actions  which  would,  otherwise,
have  been  criminal  and  impious.
The  em-  The  discovery  of  Francis's  intention  to  elude
tlie  treaty  °f  Madrid,  filled  the  emperor  with  a
variety  of  disquieting  thoughts.  He  had  treated

b  P.  Heuter.  Rer.  Austr.  lib.  ix.  c.  3.  p.  217. Recueil  des Trait,  ii.  124.
*  Goldast.  Polit.  Imperial,  p.  1002. Pallav.  Hist.  p.  70.

1526.]  BOOK IV.  191

an  unfortunate  prince  in  the  most  ungenerous  man-
ner ;  he  had  displayed  an  insatiable  ambition  in  all  his
negotiations  with  his  prisoner ;  he  knew  what  censures
the  former  had  drawn  upon  him,  and  what  apprehen-
sions the  latter  had  excited  in  every  court  of  Europe  ;
nor  had  he  reaped  from  the  measures  which  he  pur-
sued, any  of  those  advantages  which  politicians  are
apt  to  consider  as  an  excuse  for  the  most  criminal  con-
duct, and  a  compensation  for  the  severest  reproaches.
Francis  was  now  out  of  his  hands,  and  not  one  of  all
the  mighty  consequences,  which  he  had  expected  from
the  treaty  that  set  him  at  liberty,  was  likely  to  take
place.  His  rashness  in  relying  so  far  on  his  own  judg-
ment as  to  trust  to  the  sincerity  of  the  French  king,  in
opposition  to  the  sentiments  of  his  wisest  ministers,
was  now  apparent ;  and  he  easily  conjectured,  that  the
same  confederacy,  the  dread  of  which  had  induced  him
to  set  Francis  at  liberty,  would  now  be  formed  against
him  with  that  gallant  and  incensed  monarch  at  its  head.
Self-condemnation  and  shame,  on  account  of  what  was
past,  with  anxious  apprehensions  concerning  what
might  happen,  were  the  necessary  result  of  these  re-
flections on  his  own  conduct  and  situation.  Charles,
however,  was  naturally  firm  and  inflexible  in  all  his
measures.  To  have  receded  suddenly  from  any  article
in  the  treaty  of  Madrid,  would  have  been  a  plain  con-
fession of  imprudence,  and  a  palpable  symptom  of  fear ;
he  determined,  therefore,  that  it  was  most  suitable  to
his  dignity,  to  insist,  whatever  might  be  the  conse-
quences, on  the  strict  execution  of  the  treaty,  and  par-
ticularly not  to  accept  of  any  thing  which  might  be
offered  as  an  equivalent  for  the  restitution  of  Burgundy  .d
Requires  In  consequence  of  this  resolution,  he  ap-
perfoim*0  pointed  Lannoy  and  Alarcon  to  repair,  as  his
hadsUpu-  ambassadors,  to  the  court  of  France,  and  for-
lated.  mally  to  summon  the  king,  either  to  execute  the

d  Guic.  1.  xvii.  366.

192  CHARLES  V.  [1526.

treaty  with  the  sincerity  that  became  him,  or  to  return,
according  to  his  oath,  a  prisoner  to  Madrid.  Instead
of  giving  them  an  immediate  answer,  Francis  admitted
the  deputies  of  the  states  of  Burgundy  to  an  audience
in  their  presence.  They  humbly  represented  to  him,
that  he  had,  exceeded  the  powers  vested  in  a  king  of
France,  when  he  consented  to  alienate  their  country
from  the  .crown,  the  domains  of  which  he  was  bound
by  his  coronation- oath  to  preserve  entire  and  unim-
paired. Francis,  in  return,  thanked  them  for  their  at-
tachment to  his  crown,  and  entreated  them,  though
very  faintly,  to  remember  the  obligations  which  he  lay
under  to  fulfil  his  engagements  with  the  emperor.  The
deputies,  assuming  a  higher  tone,  declared,  that  they
would  not  obey  commands  which  they  considered  as
illegal ;  and,  if  he  should  abandon  them  to  the  enemies
of  France,  they  had  resolved  to  defend  themselves  to
the  best  of  their  power,  with  a  firm  purpose  rather  to
perish  than  submit  to  a  foreign  dominion.  Upon  which
His  an-  Francis,  turning  towards  the  imperial  ambas-
swer-  sadors,  represented  to  them  the  impossibility  of
performing  what  he  had  undertaken,  and  offered,  in
lieu  of  Burgundy,  to  pay  the  emperor  two  millions  of
crowns.  The  viceroy  and  Alarcon,  who  easily  per-
ceived, that  the  scene  to  which  they  had  been  witnesses,
was  concerted  between  the  king  and  his  subjects  in
order  to  impose  upon  them,  signified  to  him  their  mas-
ter's fixed  resolution  not  to  depart  in  the  smallest  point
from  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  and  withdrew.6  Before
they  left  the  kingdom,  they  had  the  mortification  to  hear
June  11  t^ie  k°ty  leag^e  against  the  emperor  published

with  great  solemnity.

The  em  ^narles  no  sooner  received  an  account  of  this
confederacy,  than  he  exclaimed,  in  the  most
public  manner,  and  in  the  harshest  terms,  against
Francis,  as  a  prince  void  of  faith  and  of  honour.

Belcar.  Comment,  de  Reb.  Gal,  573. Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  97.

1526.]  BOOK IV.  193

He  complained  no  less  of  Clement,  whom  he  solicited
in  vain  to  abandon  his  new  allies ;  he  accused  him  of
ingratitude  ;  he  taxed  him  with  an  ambition  unbecom-
ing his  character  ;  he  threatened  him  not  only  with  all
the  vengeance  which  the  power  of  an  emperor  can
inflict,  but,  by  appealing  to  a  general  council,  called
up  before  his  eyes  all  the  terrors  arising  from  the  au-
thority of  those  assemblies  so  formidable  to  the  papal
see.  It  was  necessary,  however,  to  oppose  something
else  than  reproaches  and  threats  to  the  powerful  com-
bination formed  against  him  ;  and  the  emperor,  prompt-
ed by  so  many  passions,  did  not  fail  to  exert  himself
with  unusual  vigour,  in  order  to  send  supplies,  not  only
of  men,  but  of  money,  which  was  still  more  needed,
into  Italy.

Feeble  ^n  tne  other  hand,  the  efforts  of  the  confe-

of  thVcon  derates  bore  no  proportion  to  that  animosity
federates,  against  the  emperor,  with  which  they  seemed
to  enter  into  the  holy  league.  Francis,  it  was  thought,
would  have  infused  spirit  and  vigour  into  the  whole
body.  He  had  his  lost  honour  to  repair,  many  injuries
to  revenge,  and  the  station  among  the  princes  of  Eu-
rope, from  which  he  had  fallen,  to  recover.  From  all
these  powerful  incitements,  added  to  the  natural  impe-
tuosity of  his  temper,  a  war  more  fierce  and  bloody
than  any  that  he  had  hitherto  made  upon  his  rival,  was
expected.  But  Francis  had  gone  through  such  a  scene
of  distress,  and  the  impression  it  had  made  was  still  so
fresh  in  his  memory,  that  he  was  become  diffident  of
himself,  distrustful  of  fortune,  and  desirous  of  tranquil-
lity. To  procure  the  release  of  his  sons,  and  to  avoid
the  restitution  of  Burgundy  by  paying  some  reasonable
equivalent,  were  his  chief  objects;  and  for  the  sake  of
these,  he  would  willingly  have  sacrificed  Sforza,  and
the  liberties  of  Italy,  to  the  emperor.  He  flattered
himself,  that  the  dread  of  the  confederacy  which  he
VOL.  iv.  o

194  CHARLES  V.  [1526.

had  formed  would  of  itself  induce  Charles  to  listen  to
what  was  equitable  ;  and  was  afraid  of  employing  any
considerable  force  for  the  relief  of  the  Milanese,  lest  his
allies,  whom  he  had  often  found  to  be  more  attentive
to  their  own  interest,  than  punctual  in  fulfilling  their
engagements,  should  abandon  him  as  soon  as  the  Im-
perialists were  driven  out  of  that  country,  and  deprive
his  negotiations  with  the  emperor  of  that  weight  which
they  derived  from  his  being  at  the  head  of  a  powerful
league. In  the  mean  time  the  castle  of  Milan  was
pressed  more  closely  than  ever,  and  Sforza  was  now
reduced  to  the  last  extremity. The  pope  and  Vene-
tians, trusting  to  Francis's concurrence,  commanded
their  troops  to  take  the  field,  in  order  to  relieve  him ;
and  an  army  more  than  sufficient  for  that  service  was
soon  formed. The  Milanese,  passionately  attached  to
their  unfortunate  duke,  and  no  less  exasperated  against
the  Imperialists,  who  had  oppressed  them  so  cruelly,
were  ready  to  aid  the  confederates  in  all  their  enter-
prises. But  the  duke  d'Urbino,  their  general,  natu-
rally slow  and  indecisive,  and  restrained,  besides,  by
his  ancient  enmity  to  the  family  of  Medici,  from  taking
any  step  that  might  aggrandize  or  add  reputation  to
the  pope/  lost  some  opportunities  of  attacking  the  Im-
perialists, and  raising  the  siege,  and  refused  to  improve
others. These  delays  gave  Bourbon  time  to  bring  up
a  reinforcement  of  fresh  troops,  and  a  supply  of  money.
He  immediately  took  the  command  of  the  army,

July  24.  J  .  .  J '

and  pushed  on  the  siege  with  such  vigour,  as
quickly  obliged  Sforza  to  surrender,  who,  retiring  to
Lodi,  which  the  confederates  had  surprised,  left  Bour-
bon in  full  possession  of  the  rest  of  the  duchy,  the  in-
vestiture of  which  the  emperor  had  promised  to  grant
him.8

The  Italians  began  now  to  perceive  the  game  which

f  Guic.  1.  xvii.  382.  e  Ibid.  1.  xvii.  376,  &c.

1526.]

BOOK IV.

195

Francis  had played, and  to  be  sensible  that,
J£|ja°fthe  notwithstanding  all  their  address  and refine-

ments  in  negotiation,  which  they  boasted  of  as
talents  peculiarly  their  own,  they  had  for  once  been
overreached  in  those  very  arts  by  a  tramontane,  prince.
He  had  hitherto  thrown  almost  the  whole  burden  of  the
war  upon  them,  taking  advantage  of  their  efforts,  in
order  to  enforce  the  proposals  which  he  often  renewed
at  the  court  of  Madrid  for  obtaining  the  liberty  of  his
sons.  The  pope  and  Venetians  expostulated  and  com-
plained:11 but  as  they  were  not  able  to  rouse  Francis
from  his  inactivity,  their  own  zeal  and  vigour  gradually
abated  ;  and  Clement,  having  already  gone  farther  than
his  timidity  usually  permitted  him,  began  to  accuse
himself  of  rashness,  and  to  relapse  into  his  natural  state
of  doubt  and  uncertainty.

Measures ^  ^e  emperor's  motions  depending  on  him-
of  the  ira-  self  alone,  were  more  brisk  and  better  concerted.

The  narrowness  of  his  revenues,  indeed,  did
not  allow  him  to  make  any  sudden  or  great  effort  in  the
field,  but  he  abundantly  supplied  that  defect  by  his
intrigues  and  negotiations.  The  family  of  Colonna,  the
most  powerful  of  all  the  Roman  barons,  had  adhered
uniformly  to  the  Ghibeline  or  imperial  faction,  during
those  fierce  contentions  between  the  popes  and  empe-
rors, which,  for  several  ages,  filled  Italy  and  Germany
with  discord  and  bloodshed.  Though  the  causes  which
at  first  gave  birth  to  these  destructive  factions  existed
no  longer,  and  the  rage  with  which  they  had  been  ani-
mated was  in  a  great  measure  spent,  the  Colonnas  still
retained  their  attachment  to  the  imperial  interest,  and
by  placing  themselves  under  the  protection  of  the  em-
perors, secured  the  quiet  possession  of  their  own  terri-
tories and  privileges.  The  cardinal  Pompeo  Colonna,
a  man  of  a  turbulent  and  ambitious  temper,  at  that  time

*  Ruscelli  Lettere  de  Principi,  ii.  157,  &c.  159,  160—166.

o2

196  CHARLES V.  [1526,

the  head  of  the  family,  had  long  been  Clement's  rival,
to  whose  influence  in  the  last  conclave  he  imputed  the
disappointment  of  all  his  schemes  for  attaining  the
papal  dignity,  of  which,  from  his  known  connexion
with  the  emperor,  he  thought  himself  secure.  To  an
aspiring  mind,  this  was  an  injury  too  great  to  be  for-
given; and  though  he  had  dissembled  his  resentment
so  far  as  to  vote  for  Clement  at  his  election,  and  to
accept  of  great  offices  in  his  court,  he  waited  with  the
utmost  impatience  for  an  opportunity  of  being  revenged.
Don  Hugo  de  Moncada,  the  imperial  ambassador  at
Rome,  who  was  no  stranger  to  these  sentiments,  easily
persuaded  him  that  now  was  the  time,  while  all  the
papal  troops  were  employed  in  Lombardy,  to  attempt
something,  which  would  at  once  avenge  his  own
wrongs,  and  be  of  essential  service  to  the  emperor  his
patron.  The  pope,  however,  whose  timidity  rendered
him  quick-sighted,  was  so  attentive  to  their  operations,
and  began  to  be  alarmed  so  early,  that  he  might  have
drawn  together  troops  sufficient  to  have  disconcerted
all  Colonna's  measures.  But  Moncada  amused  him  so
artfully  with  negotiations,  promises,  and  false  intelli-
gence, that  he  lulled  asleep  all  his  suspicions,,  and  pre-
vented his  taking  any  of  the  precautions  necessary  for
his  safety;  and  to  the  disgrace  of  a  prince  possessed  of
great  power,  as  well  as  renowned  for  political  wisdom,

The'cf'  Colonna>  at  the  ftead  °f  tnree  thousand  men,
lonnas  be-  seized  one  of  the  gates  of  his  capital,  while  he,
come  mas-  imagining  himself  to  be  in  perfect  security,  was
Ro">e.  altogether  unprepared  for  resisting  such  a  feeble
enemy.  The  inhabitants  of  Rome  permitted  Colonna's
troops,  from  whom  they  apprehended  no  injury,  to  ad-
vance without  opposition;  the  pope's  guards  were  dis-
persed in  a  moment;  and  Clement  himself,  terrified  at
the  danger,  ashamed  of  his  own  credulity,  and  deserted
by  almost  every  person,  fled  with  precipitation  into  the

1526.]

BOOK IV.

197

castle  of  St.  Angelo,  which  was  immediately  invested.
The  palace  of  the  Vatican,  the  church  of  St.  Peter,  and
the  houses  of  the  pope's  ministers  and  servants,  were
plundered  in  the  most  licentious  manner.  The  rest  of
the  city  was  left  unmolested.  Clement,  destitute  of
every  thing  necessary  either  for  subsistence  or  defence,
was  soon  obliged  to  demand  a  capitulation;  and
Accom-  Moncada  being  admitted  into  the  castle,  pre-
between0  scribed  to  him,  with  all  the  haughtiness  of  a
and  'em6  conclueror>  conditions  which  it  was  not  in  his
peror.  power  to  reject.  The  chief  of  these  was,  that
Clement  should  not  only  grant  a  full  pardon  to  the  Co-
lonnas,  but  receive  them  into  favour,  and  immediately
withdraw  all  the  troops  in  his  pay  from  the  army  of  the
confederates  in  Lombardy.1

The  Colonnas,  who  talked  of  nothing  less  than  of
deposing  Clement,  and  of  placing  Pompeo,  their  kins-
man, in  the  vacant  chair  of  St.  Peter,  exclaimed  loudly
against  a  treaty  which  left  them  at  the  mercy  of  a  pon-
tiff justly  incensed  against  them.  But  Moncada,  atten-
tive only  to  his  master's  interest,  paid  little  regard  to
their  complaints,  and,  by  this  fortunate  measure,  broke
entirely  the  power  of  the  confederates.

While  the  army  of  the  confederates  suffered

rial  army  sac\1  a  considerable  diminution,  the  Imperialists

reinforced.  .  .

received  two  great  reinforcements;  one  from
Spain,  under  the  command  of  Lanrioy  and  Alarcon,
which  amounted  to  six  thousand  men  ;  the  other  was
raised  in  the  empire  by  George  Fronsperg,  a  German
nobleman,  who,  having  served  in  Italy  with  great  repu-
tation, had  acquired  such  influence  and  popularity,
that  multitudes  of  his  (countrymen,  fond  on  every  occa-
sion of  engaging  in  military  enterprises,  and  impatient
at  that  juncture  to  escape  from  the  oppression  which

'  Jovii  Vita  Pomp.  Colon. Guic.  1.  xvii.  407. Ruscelii  Lettere  de Principi,
i.  p.  104.

198  CHARLES V.  [1526.

they  felt  in  religious  as  well  as  civil  matters,  crowded
to  his  standard ;  so  that,  without  any  other  gratuity  than
the  payment  of  a  crown  to  each  man,  fourteen  thousand
enlisted  in  his  service.  To  these  the  archduke  Ferdi-
nand added  two  thousand  horse,  levied  in  the  Austrian
dominions.  But  although  the  emperor  had  raised
troops,  he  could  not  remit  the  sums  necessary  for  their
support.  His  ordinary  revenues  were  exhausted;  the
credit  of  princes,  during  the  infancy  of  commerce,  was
not  extensive;  and  the  cortes  of  Castile,  though  every
art  had  been  tried  to  gain  them,  and  some  innovations
had  been  made  in  the  constitution,  in  order  to  secure
their  concurrence,  peremptorily  refused  to  grant  Charles
any  extraordinary  supply  ;k  so  that  the  more  his  army
increased  in  number,  the  more  were  his  generals  em-
barrassed and  distressed.  Bourbon,  in  particular,  was
involved  in  such  difficulties,  that  he  stood  in  need  of
all  his  address  and  courage  in  order  to  extricate  him-
self. Large  sums  were  due  to  the  Spanish  troops  al-
ready in  the  Milanese,  when  Fronsperg  arrived  with
sixteen  thousand  hungry  Germans  destitute  of  every
The  em-  thing.  Both  made  their  demands  with  equal
Sees de- fierceness;  the  former  claiming  their  arrears,
ficient'  and  the  latter,  the  pay  which  had  been  pro-
mised them  on  their  entering  Lombardy.  Bourbon  was
altogether  incapable  of  giving  satisfaction  to  either.  In
this  situation  he  was  constrained  to  commit  acts  of  vio-
lence extremely  shocking  to  his  own  nature,  which  was
generous  and  humane.  He  seized  the  principal  citizens
of  Milan,  and  by  threats,  and  even  by  torture,  forced
from  them  a  considerable  sum;  he  rifled  the  churches
of  all  their  plate  and  ornaments ;  the  inadequate  sup-
ply which  these  afforded,  he  distributed  among  the
soldiers,  with  so  many  soothing  expressions  of  his
sympathy  and  affection,  that,  though  it  fell  far  short

k  Sandor.  i.  814.

1526.]  BOOK IV.  199

of  the  sums  due  to  them,  it  appeased  their  present

murmurs.1

Bourbon  Among  other  expedients  for  raising  money,
Bourbon  granted  his  life  and  liberty  to  Morone
W]1O  naving  been  kept  in  prison  since  his  in-

liberty.

trigue  with  Pescara,  had  been  condemned  to  die  by  the
Spanish  judges  empowered  to  try  him.  For  this  re-
mission he  paid  twenty  thousand  ducats;  and  such
were  his  singular  talents,  and  the  wonderful  ascendant
which  he  always  acquired  over  the  minds  of  those  to
whom  he  had  access,  that,  in  a  few  days,  from  being
Bourbon's  prisoner,  he  became  his  prime  confidant,
with  whom  he  consulted  on  all  affairs  of  importance.
To  his  insinuations  must  be  imputed  the  suspicions
which  Bourbon  began  to  entertain,  that  the  emperor
had  never  intended  to  grant  him  the  investiture  of
Milan,  but  had  appointed  Leyva,  and  the  other  Spanish
generals,  rather  to  be  spies  on  his  conduct,  than  to  co-
operate heartily  towards  the  execution  of  his  schemes.
To  him  likewise,  as  he  still  retained,  at  the  age  of  four-
score, all  the  enterprising  spirit  of  youth,  may  be  attri-
buted the  bold  and  unexpected  measure  on  which
Bourbon  soon  after  ventured.1"

His  deli- Such, indeed,  were  the  exigencies  of  the
berations imperial  troops  in  the  Milanese,  that  it  became

with  re-  *.

sped  to  his  indispensably  necessary  to  take  some  imme-
diate step  for  their  relief.  The  arrears  of  the
soldiers  increased  daily  ;  the  emperor  made  no  remit-
tances to  his  generals  ;  and  the  utmost  rigour  of  mili-
tary extortion  could  draw  nothing  more  from  a  coun-
try entirely  drained  and  ruined.  In  this  situation  there
was  no  choice  left,  but  either  to  disband.  the  army,  or
to  march  for  subsistence  into  the  enemy's  country.  The
territories  of  the  Venetians  lay  nearest  at  hand  ;  but
they,  with  their  usual  foresight  and  prudence,  had  taken
such  precautions  as  secured  them  from  any  insult.

Ripamond.  Hist.  Mediol.  lib.  ix.  p.  717.

m  Guic.l.  xvii  419.

200  CHARLES V.  [1526.

Nothing  therefore,  remained  but  to  invade  the  domi-
nions of  the  church,  or  of  the  Florentines ;  and  Cle-
ment had  of  late  acted  such  a  part  as  merited  the  se-
verest vengeance  from  the  emperor.  No  sooner  did
the  papal  troops  return  to  Rome  after  the  insurrection
of  the  Colonnas,  than,  without  paying  any  regard  to
the  treaty  with  Moncada,  he  degraded  the  cardinal  Co-
lonna,  excommunicated  the  rest  of  the  family,  seized
their  places  of  strength,  and  wasted  their  lands  with  all
the  cruelty  which  the  smart  of  a  recent  injury  naturally
excites.  After  this  he  turned  his  arms  against  Naples,
and  as  his  operations  were  seconded  by  the  French
fleet,  he  made  some  progress  towards  the  conquest  of
that  kingdom ;  the  viceroy  being  no  less  destitute  than
the  other  imperial  generals  of  the  money  requisite  for
a  vigorous  defence."

1527 These  proceedings  of  the  pope  justified,  in
Marches  to  appearance, the  measures which Bourbon's

invade  the .r  r .  7

pope's  situation  rendered  necessary  ;  and  he  set  about
executing  them  under  such  disadvantages,  as
furnish  the  strongest  proof  both  of  the  despair  to  which
he  was  reduced,  and  of  the  greatness  of  his  abilities
which  were  able  to  surmount  so  many  obstacles.  Hav-
ing committed  the  government  of  Milan  to  Ley  va,  whom
Jan  so  ^e  was  not  unwiMing to  leave  behind,  he  began
his  march  in  the  depth  of  winter,  at  the  head  of
twenty-five  thousand  men,  composed  of  nations  differ-
ing from  each  other  in  language  and  manners ;  without
money,  without  magazines,  without  artillery,  without
carriages;  in  short,  without  any  of  those  things  which
are  necessary  to  the  smallest  party,  and  which  seem
essential  to  the  existence  and  motions  of  a  great  army.
His  route  lay  through  a  country  cut  by  rivers  and  moun-
tains, in  which  the  roads  were  almost  impracticable;
as  an  addition  to  his  difficulties,  the  enemy's  army,  su-
perior to  his  own  in  number,  was  at  hand  to  watch  all

n  Jovii  Vita  Pomp.  Colon. Guic.  I,  xviii.  424.

1527.]  BOOK IV.  201

his  motions,  and  to  improve  every  advantage.  But  his
troops,  impatient  of  their  present  hardships,  and  allured
by  the  hopes  of  immense  booty,  without  considering
how  ill-provided  they  were  for  a  march,  followed  him
with  great  cheerfulness.  His  first  scheme  was  to  have
made  himself  master  of  Placentia,  and  to  have  gratified
his  soldiers  by  the  plunder  of  that  city ;  but  the  vigi-
lance of  the  confederate  generals  rendered  the  design
abortive;  nor  had  he  better  success  in  his  project  for  the
reduction  of  Bologna,  which  was  as  seasonably  sup-
plied with  as  many  troops  as  secured  it  from  the  in-
sults of  an  army  which  had  neither  artillery  nor  ammu-
nition. Having  failed  in  both  these  attempts  to  be-
come master  of  some  great  city,  he  was  under  a  neces-
sity of  advancing.  But  he  had  now  been  two  months
in  the  field ;  his  troops  had  suffered  every  calamity  that
a  long  march,  together  with  the  uncommon  rigour  of
the  season,  could  bring  upon  men  destitute  of  all  ne-
cessary accommodations  in  an  enemy's  country ;  the
magnificent  promises  to  which  they  trusted,  had  hitherto
proved  altogether  vain ;  they  saw  no  prospect  of  relief;
their  patience,  tried  to  the  utmost,  failed  at  last,  and
Mutiny  of  tnev  broke  out  into  open  mutiny.  Some  ofB-
his  troops.  cers,  who  rashly  attempted  to  restrain  them,
fell  victims  to  their  fury;  Bourbon  himself,  not  daring
to  appear  during  the  first  transports  of  their  rage,  was
obliged  to  fly  secretly  from  his  quarters.0  But  this
sudden  ebullition  of  wrath  began  at  last  to  subside;
when  Bourbon,  who  possessed,  in  a  wonderful  degree,
the  art  of  governing  the  minds  of  soldiers,  renewed  his
promises  with  more  confidence  than  formerly,  and  as-
sured them  that  they  would  be  soon  accomplished.  He
endeavoured  to  render  their  hardships  more  tolerable,
by  partaking  of  them  himself;  he  fared  no  better  than
the  meanest  sentinel;  he  marched  along  with  them  on
foot;  he  joined  them  in  singing  their  camp-ballads,  in

0  Guic.  I.  xviii  431. Jovii  Vit.  Colon.  163.

202  CHARLES V.  [1527-

which,  with  high  praises  of  his  valour,  they  mingled
many  strokes  of  military  raillery  on  his  poverty;  and
wherever  they  came,  he  allowed  them,  as  a  foretaste  of
what  he  had  promised,  to  plunder  the  adjacent  villages
at  discretion.  Encouraged  by  all  these  soothing  arts,
they  entirely  forgot  their  sufferings  and  complaints,  and
followed  him  with  the  same  implicit  confidence  as
formerly.p

The  pope's  Bourbon,  meanwhile,  carefully  concealed  his
lndsimpr°un-  intentions.  Rome  and  Florence,  not  knowing
dence.  on  which  the  blow  would  fall,  were  held  in  the
most  disquieting  state  of  suspense.  Clement,  equally
solicitous  for  the  safety  of  both,  fluctuated  in  more  than
his  usual  uncertainty;  and  while  the  rapid  approach  of
danger  called  for  prompt  and  decisive  measures,  he
spent  the  time  in  deliberations  which  came  to  no  issue,
or  in  taking  resolutions,  which,  next  day,  his  restless
mind,  more  sagacious  in  discerning  than  in  obviating
difficulties,  overturned,  without  being  able  to  fix  on
what  should  be  substituted  in  their  place.  At  one  time
he  determined  to  unite  himself  more  closely  than  ever
with  his  allies,  and  to  push  on  the  war  with  vigour;  at
another,  he  inclined  to  bring  all  differences  to  a  final
accommodation  by  a  treaty  with  Lannoy,  who,  knowing
his  passion  for  negotiation,  solicited  him  incessantly
March  15.  with  proposals  for  that  purpose.  His  timidity

Concludes 4.1,1  -i n  1111.  i -,

a  treaty at  length  prevailed,  and  led  him  to  conclude  an

of  agreement  with  Lannoy,  of  which  the  following
Naples;  were  the  chief  articles:  That  a  suspension  of
arms  should  take  place  between  the  pontifical  and  im-
perial troops  for  eight  months:  that  Clement  should
advance  sixty  thousand  crowns  towards  satisfying  the
demands  of  the  imperial  army  :  that  the  Colonnas  should
be  absolved  from  censure,  and  their  former  dignities
and  possessions  be  restored  to  them  :  that  the  viceroy
should  come  to  Rome,  and  prevent  Bourbon  from  ap-

P  (Euvres  de  Brant,  vol.  iv.  p.  '246,  &c.

1527.]  BOOK IV.  203

preaching  nearer  to  that  city,  or  to  Florence.**  On  this
hasty  treaty,  which  deprived  him  of  all  hopes  of  assist-
ance from  his  allies,  without  affording  him  any  solid
foundation  of  security,  Clement  relied  so  firmly,  that,
like  a  man  extricated  at  once  out  of  all  difficulties,  he
was  at  perfect  ease,  and  in  the  fulness  of  his  confi-
dence disbanded  all  his  troops  except  as  many  as  were
sufficient  to  guard  his  own  person.  This  amazing  con-
fidence of  Clement's,  who,  on  every  other  occasion,  was
fearful  and  suspicious  to  excess,  appeared  so  unaccount-
able to  Guicciardini,  who,  being  at  that  time  the  pontifi-
cal commissary-general  and  resident  in  the  confederate
army,  had  great  opportunities,  as  well  as  great  abilities,
for  observing  how  chimerical  all  his  hopes  were,  that
he  imputes  the  pope's  conduct,  at  this  juncture,  wholly
to  infatuation,  which  those  who  are  doomed  to  ruin
cannot  avoid/

.  Lannoy,  it  would  seem,  intended  to  have  exe-

Bourbon  cuted  the  treaty  with  great  sincerity ;  and  having
s'  detached  Clement  from  the  confederacy,  wished
to  turn  Bourbon's  arms  against  the  Venetians,  who,  of
all  the  powers  at  war  with  the  emperor,  had  exerted  the
greatest  vigour.  With  this  view  he  dispatched  a  courier
to  Bourbon,  informing  him  of  the  suspension  of  arms,
which,  in  the  name  of  their  common  master,  he  had  con-
cluded with  the  pope.  Bourbon  had  other  schemes,
and  he  had  prosecuted  them  now  too  far  to  think  of  re-
treating. To  have  mentioned  a  retreat  to  his  soldiers
would  have  been  dangerous ;  his  command  was  inde-
pendent of  Lannoy  ;  he  was  fond  of  mortifying  a  man
whom  he  had  many  reasons  to  hate ;  for  these  reasons,
without  paying  the  least  regard  to  the  message,  he  con-
tinued to  ravage  the  ecclesiastical  territories,  and  to
advance  towards  Florence.  Upon  this,  all  Clement's
terror  and  anxiety  returning  with  new  force,  he  had  re-

i  Guic.  I.  xviii.  436.  r  Ibid.  J.  xviii.  446.

204  CHARLES V.  [1527.

course  to  Lannoy,  and  entreated  and  conjured  him  to
put  a  stop  to  Bourbon's  progress.  Lannoy  accordingly
set  out  for  his  camp,  but  durst  not  approach  it;  Bour-
bon's soldiers  having  got  notice  of  the  truce,  raged  and
threatened,  demanding  the  accomplishment  of  the  pro-
mises to  which  they  had  trusted  ;  their  general  himself
could  hardly  restrain  them ;  every  person  in  Rome  per-
ceived that  nothing  remained  but  to  prepare  for  resist-
ing a  storm  which  it  was  now  impossible  to  dispel.
Clement  alone,  relying  on  some  ambiguous  and  deceit-
ful professions,  which  Bourbon  made  of  his  inclination
towards  peace,  sunk  back  into  his  former  security.5
Advances  Bourbon,  on  his  part,  was  far  from  being  free
towards  from  solicitude.  All  his  attempts  on  any  place

Rome.  .  .  r.  . i

oi  importance  had  hitherto  miscarried ;  and
Florence,  towards  which  he  had  been  approaching  for
some  time,  was,  by  the  arrival  of  the  duke  d'Urbino's
army,  put  in  a  condition  to  set  his  power  at  defiance.
As  it  now  became  necessary  to  change  his  route,  and
to  take  instantly  some  new  resolution,  he  fixed,  without
hesitation,  on  one  which  was  no  less  daring  in  itself
than  it  was  impious  according  to  the  opinion  of  that  age.
This  was  to  assault  and  plunder  Rome.  Many  reasons,
however,  prompted  him  to  it.  He  was  fond  of  thwarting
Lannoy,  who  had  undertaken  for  the  safety  of  that  city ;
he  imagined  that  the  emperor  would  be  highly  pleased
to  see  Clement,  the  chief  author  of  the  league  against
him,  humbled ;  he  flattered  himself,  that  by  gratifying
the  rapacity  of  his  soldiers  with  such  immense  booty,
he  would  attach  them  for  ever  to  his  interest ;  or  (which
is  still  more  probable  than  any  of  these)  he  hoped,  that
by  means  of  the  power  and  fame  which  he  would  ac-
quire from  the  conquest  of  the  first  city  in  Christendom,
that  he  might  lay  the  foundation  of  an  independent
power ;  and  that,  after  shaking  off  all  connexion  with

«  Guic.  1.  xviii.  437,  &c. Mem.  de  Bellay,  p.  100.

1527.]

BOOK IV.

•205

the  emperor,  he  might  take  possession  of  Naples,  or  of
some  of  the  Italian  states,  in  his  own  name.*
The  Whatever  his  motives  were,  he  executed  his

pope's  resolution  with  a  rapidity  equal  to  the  boldness
tions  for  with  which  he  had  formed  it.  His  soldiers,  now
that  they  had  their  prey  full  in  view,  complained
neither  of  fatigue,  nor  famine,  nor  want  of  pay.  No
sooner  did  they  begin  to  move  from  Tuscany  towards
Rome,  than  the  pope,  sensible  at  last  how  fallacious
the  hopes  had  been  on  which  he  reposed,  started  from
his  security.  But  no  time  now  remained,  even  for  a
bold  and  decisive  pontiff,  to  have  taken  proper  measures,
or  to  have  formed  any  effectual  plan  of  defence.  Under
Clement's  feeble  conduct,  all  was  consternation,  dis-
order, and  irresolution.  He  collected,  however,  such
of  his  disbanded  soldiers  as  still  remained  in  the  city ;
he  armed  the  artificers  of  Rome,  and  the  footmen  and
train-bearers  of  the  cardinals  ;  he  repaired  the  breaches
in  the  walls  ;  he  began  to  erect  new  works ;  he  excom-
municated Bourbon  and  all  his  troops,  branding  the
Germans  with  the  name  of  Lutherans,  and  the  Spaniards
with  that  of  Moors.u  Trusting  to  these  ineffectual  mi-
litary preparations,  or  to  his  spiritual  arms,  which  were
still  more  despised  by  rapacious  soldiers,  he  seems  to
have  laid  aside  his  natural  timidity,  and,  contrary  to
the  advice  of  all  his  counsellors,  determined  to  wait  the
approach  of  an  enemy  whom  he  might  easily  have
avoided.

Assault  of  Bourbon,  who  saw  the  necessity  of  dispatch,
Rome.  now  that  his  intentions  were  known,  advanced
with  such  speed,  that  he  gained  several  marches  on  the
duke  d'Urbino's  army,  and  encamped  in  the  plains  of
Rome  on  the  evening  of  the  5th  of  May.  From  thence
he  shewed  his  soldiers  the  palaces  and  churches  of  that

Brant,  iv.  271.  vi.  189. Belcarii  Comment.  594.
»  Seckend.  lib.  ii.  68.

206  CHARLES V.  [1527.

city,  into  which,  as  the  capital  of  the  Christian  com-
monwealth, the  riches  of  all  Europe  had  flowed  during
many  centuries,  without  having  been  once  violated  by
any  hostile  hand ;  and,  commanding  them  to  refresh
themselves  that  night,  as  a  preparation  for  the  assault
next  day,  promised  them,  in  reward  of  their  toils  and
valour,  the  possession  of  all  the  treasures  accumulated
there.

Early  in  the  morning,  Bourbon,  who  had  determined
to  distinguish  that  day  either  by  his  death  or  the  suc-
cess of  his  enterprise,  appeared  at  the  head  of  his  troops
clad  in  complete  armour,  above  which  he  wore  a  vest
of  white  tissue,  that  he  might  be  more  conspicuous
both  to  his  friends  and  to  his  enemies  ;  and  as  all  de-
pended on  one  bold  impression,  he  led  them  instantly
to  scale  the  walls. Three  distinct  bodies,  one  of  Ger-
mans, another  of-  Spaniards,  and  the  last  of  Italians,
the  three  different  nations  of  whom  the  army  was  com-
posed, were  appointed  to  this  service ;  a  separate  at-
tack was  assigned  to  each ;  and  the  whole  army  ad-
vanced to  support  them,  as  occasion  should  require. A
thick  mist  concealed  their  approach  until  they  reached
almost  the  brink  of,  the  ditch  which  surrounded the
suburbs  :  having  planted  their  ladders  in  a  moment,
each  brigade  rushed  on  to  the  assault  with  an  impetuo-
sity heightened  by  national  emulation. They  were  re-
ceived at  first  with  fortitude  equal  to  their  own ;  the
Swiss  in  the  pope's  guards,  and  the  veteran  soldiers
who  had  been  assembled,  fought  with  a  courage  be-
coming men  to  whom  the  defence  of  the  noblest  city  in
the  world  was  intrusted. Bourbon's  troops,  notwith-
standing all  their  valour,  gained  no  ground,  and  even
began  to  give  way ;  when  their  leader  perceiving,  that
on  this  critical  moment  the  fate  of  the  day  depended,
leaped  from  his  horse,  pressed  to  the  front,  snatched  a
scaling-ladder  from  a  soldier,  planted  it  against  the  wall,

1527.]  BOOK IV.  207

and  began  to  mount  it,  encouraging  his  men  with  his
Bourbon  voice  and  hand  to  follow  him.  But  at  that
slain.  veiy  instant,  a  musket-bullet  from  the  ramparts
pierced  his  groin  with  a  wound,  which  he  immediately
felt  to  be  mortal ;  but  he  retained  so  much  presence  of
mind  as  to  desire  those  who  were  near  him  to  cover  his
body  with  a  cloak,  that  his  death  might  not  dishearten
his  troops ;  and  soon  after  he  expired  with  a  courage
worthy  of  a  better  cause,  and  which  would  have  en-
titled him  to  the  highest  praise,  if  he  had  thus  fallen
in  defence  of  his  country,  and  not  at  the  head  of  its
enemies/

The  city  This  fatal  event  could  not  be  concealed  from
taken.  foe  armv  .  the  soldiers  soon  missed  their  gene-
ral, whom  they  were  accustomed  to  see  in  every  time
of  danger ;  but  instead  of  being  disheartened  by  their
loss,  it  animated  them  with  new  valour ;  the  name  of
Bourbon  resounded  along  the  line,  accompanied  with
the  cry  of  blood  and  revenge.  The  veterans  who  de-
fended the  walls  were  soon  overpowered  by  numbers ;
the  untrained  body  of  city-recruits  fled  at  the  sight  of
danger,  and  the  enemy,  with  irresistible  violence,
rushed  into  the  town.

During  the  combat,  Clement  was  employed  at  the
high  altar  of  St.  Peter's  church  in  offering  up  to  Heaven
unavailing  prayers  for  victory.  No  sooner  was  he  in-
formed that  his  troops  began  to  give  way,  than  he  fled
with  precipitation ;  and  with  an  infatuation  still  more
amazing  than  any  thing  already  mentioned,  instead  of
making  his  escape  by  the  opposite  gate,  where  there
was  no  enemy  to  oppose  it,  he  shut  himself  up,  together
with  thirteen  cardinals,  the  foreign  ambassadors,  and
many  persons  of  distinction,  in  the  castle  of  St.  Angelo,
which,  from  his  late  misfortune,  he  might  have  known
to  be  an  insecure  retreat.  In  his  way  from  the  Vatican
to  that  fortress,  he  saw  his  troops  flying  before  an  enemy,

*  Mem.  de  Bellay,  101.  Gnic.  I.  x\'ii.  p.  445,  &c.  CEuv.  de  Brant,  iv.  257,  &c.

208  CHARLES V.  [1527.

who  pursued  without  giving  quarter ;  he  heard  the  cries
and  lamentations  of  the  Roman  citizens,  and  beheld  the
beginning  of  those  calamities  which  his  own  credulity
and  ill-conduct  had  brought  upon  his  subjects/

It  is  impossible  to  describe,  or  even  to  ima-
gine, the  misery  and  horror  of  that  scene  which
followed.  Whatever  a  city  taken  by  storm  can  dread
from  military  rage,  unrestrained  by  discipline ;  what-
ever excesses  the  ferocity  of  the  Germans,  the  avarice
of  the  Spaniards,  or  the  licentiousness  of  the  Italians
could  commit,  these  the  wretched  inhabitants  were
obliged  to  suffer.  Churches,  palaces,  and  the  houses  of
private  persons  were  plundered  without  distinction.
No  age,  or  character,  or  sex,  was  exempt  from  injury.
Cardinals,  nobles,  priests,  matrons,  virgins,  were  all  the
prey  of  soldiers,  and  at  the  mercy  of  men  deaf  to  the
voice  of  humanity.  Nor  did  these  outrages  cease,  as  is
usual  in  towns  which  are  carried  by  assault,  when  the
first  fury  of  the  storm  was  over ;  the  Imperialists  kept
possession  of  Rome  several  months ;  and,  during  all
that  time,  the  insolence  and  brutality  of  the  soldiers
hardly  abated.  Their  booty  in  ready  money  alone
amounted  to  a  million  of  ducats ;  what  they  raised  by
ransoms  and  exactions  far  exceeded  that  sum.  Rome,
though  taken  several  different  times  by  the  northern
nations,  who  overran  the  empire  in  the  fifth  and  sixth
centuries,  was  never  treated  with  so  much  cruelty  by
the  barbarous  and  heathen  Huns,  Vandals,  or  Goths,  a
now  by  the  bigotted  subjects  of  a  Catholic  monarch.2
The  pope  After  Bourbon's  death,  the  command  of  the
the'cfsUe'11  imPerial  army  devolved  on  Philibert  de  Chalons
of  st.  An-  prince  of  Orange,  who  with  difficulty  prevailed
on  as  many  of  his  soldiers  to  desist  from  the
pillage  as  were  necessary  to  invest  the  castle  of  St.  An-

y  Jov.  Vit.  Colon.  165.

1  Jov.  Vit.  Colon.  166.  Guic.  I.  xviii.  440,  &c.  Comment,  de  Capta  Urbe
Romae,  ap.  Scardium,  ii.  230.  Ulloa  Vita  del  Carlo  V.  p.  110,  &c.  Gianonne
Hist,  of  Nap.  B.  xxxi.  c.  3.  p.  507.

1527.]  BOOK IV.  209

gelo.  Clement  was  immediately  sensible  of  his  error
in  having  retired  into  that  ill-provided  and  untenable
fort.  But  as  the  Imperialists,  scorning  discipline,  and
intent  only  on  plunder,  pushed  the  siege  with  little
vigour,  he  did  not  despair  of  holding  out  until  the  duke
d'Urbino  could  come  to  his  relief.  That  general  ad-
vanced at  the  head  of  an  army  composed  of  Venetians,
Florentines,  and  Swiss,  in  the  pay  of  France,  of  suffi-
cient strength  to  have  delivered  Clement  from  the  pre-
sent danger.  But  d'Urbino,  preferring  the  indulgence
of  his  hatred  against  the  family  of  Medici  to  the  glory
of  delivering  the  capital  of  Christendom,  and  the  head
of  the  church,  pronounced  the  enterprise  to  be  too  ha-
zardous ;  and,  from  an  exquisite  refinement  in  revenge,
having  marched  forward  so  far,  that  his  army  being  seen
from  the  ramparts  of  St.  Angelo,  flattered  the  pope  with
the  prospect  of  certain  relief,  he  immediately  wheeled
about,  and  retired.a  Clement,  deprived  of  every  re-
source, and  reduced  to  such  extremity  of  famine  as  to
feed  on  asses'  flesh,b  was  obliged  to  capitulate  on  such
conditions  as  the  conquerors  were  pleased  to  prescribe.
June  6.  He  agreed  to  pay  four  hundred  thousand
himself  a™  ducats  to  tne  army ;  to  surrender  to  the  em-
prisoner.  peror  all  the  places  of  strength  belonging  to
the  church ;  and,  besides  giving  hostages,  to  remain  a
prisoner  himself  until  the  chief  articles  were  performed.
He  was  committed  to  the  care  of  Alarcon,  who,  by  his
severe  vigilance  in  guarding  Francis,  had  given  full
proof  of  his  being  qualified  for  that  office ;  and  thus,
by  a  singular  accident,  the  same  man  had  the  custody
of  the  two  most  illustrious  personages  who  had  been
made  prisoners  in  Europe  during  several  ages.

The  account  of  this  extraordinary  and  unex-

The  em-
peror's be-  pected  event  was  no  less  surprising  than  agree-

haviour  at j  _  T» , •  i  i

this  junc- able  to  the  emperor. But  m  order  to  conceal
his  joy  from  his  subjects,  who  were  filled  with

»  Guic.  1.  xviii.  450,  b  Jov.  Vit.  Colon.  167.

VOL.  IV.  P

ture.

210  CHARLES  V.  [1527.

horror  at  the  success  and  crimes  of  their  countrymen,
and  to  lessen  the  indignation  of  the  rest  of  Europe,  he
declared  that  Rome  had  been  assaulted  without  any
order  from  him.  He  wrote  to  all  the^princes  with  whom
he  was  in  alliance,  disclaiming  his  having  had  any
knowledge  of  Bourbon's  intention.0  He  put  himself
and  court  into  mourning ;  commanded  the  rejoicings
which  had  been  ordered  for  the  birth  of  his  son  Philip
to  be  stopped  ;  and  employing  an  artifice  no  less  hypo-
critical than  gross,  he  appointed  prayers  and  proces-
sions throughout  all  Spain  for  the  recovery  of  the  pope's
liberty,  which,  by  an  order  to  his  generals,  he  could  have
immediately  granted  him.d

The  good  fortune  of  the  house  of  Austria  was
invades" no  less  conspicuous  in  another  part  of  Europe.
sary'  Solyman  having  invaded  Hungary  with  an  army
of  three  hundred  thousand  men,  Lewis  II.  king  of  that
country,  and  of  Bohemia,  a  weak  and  unexperienced
prince,  advanced  rashly  to  meet  him  with  a  body  of
men  which  did  not  amount  to  thirty  thousand. With
an  imprudence  still  more  unpardonable,  he  gave  the
command  of  these  troops  to  Paul  Tomorri,  a  Franciscan
monk,  archbishop  of  Golocza. This  awkward  general,
in  the  dress  of  his  order,  girt  with  its  cord,  marched  at
the  head  of  his  troops ;  and,  hurried  on  by  his  own  pre-
sumption, as  well  as  by  the  impetuosity  of  nobles  who
despised  danger,  but  were  impatient  of  long  service,
he  fought  the  fatal  battle  of  Mohacz,  in  which
1526. the  king,  the  flower  of  the  Hungarian  nobility,

-  an(i  upwards  of  twenty  thousand  men,  fell  the

icti"18  °f  his  f°%  an<l  ill-conduct. Solyman,
of  their after  his  victory,  seized  and  kept  possession  of
several  towns  of  the  greatest  strength  in the
southern  provinces  of  Hungary,  and  overrunning  the
rest  of  the  country,  carried  near  two  hundred  thousand

c  Ruscelli  Lettere  di  Principi,  ii.  234.

*  Sleid.  109. Sandov.  i.  82?. Mauroc.  Hist.  Veneta,  lib.  iii.  220.

1527.]  BOOK IV.  211

persons  into  captivity.  As  Lewis  was  the  last  male  of
the  royal  family  of  Jagellon,  the  archduke  Ferdinand
claimed  both  his  crowns.  This  claim  was  founded  on
a  double  title ;  the  one  derived  from  the  ancient  pre-
tensions of  the  house  of  Austria  to  both  kingdoms  ;  the
other  from  the  right  of  his  wife,  the  only  sister  of  the
deceased  monarch.  The  feudal  institutions,  however,
subsisted  both  in  Hungary  and  Bohemia  in  such  vigour,
and  the  nobles  possessed  such  extensive  power,  that  the
crowns  were  still  elective,  and  Ferdinand's  rights,  if
they  had  not  been  powerfully  supported,  would  have
met  with  little  regard.  But  his  own  personal  merit ;
the  respect  due  to  the  brother  of  the  greatest  monarch
in  Christendom :  the  necessity  of  choosing  a

Ferdinand  _  _  , .  .  ,  /

elected  prince  able  to  afford  his  subjects  some  addi-
tional protection  against  the  Turkish  arms,
which,  as  they  had  recently  felt  their  power,  they
greatly  dreaded ;  together  with  the  intrigues  of  his  sis-
ter, who  had  been  married  to  the  late  king,  overcame
the  prejudices  which  the  Hungarians  had  conceived
against  the  archduke  as  a  foreigner  ;  and  though  a  con-
siderable party  voted  for  the  vay  wode  of  Transylvania,
at  length  secured  Ferdinand  the  throne  of  that  kingdom.
The  states  of  Bohemia  imitated  the  example  of  their
neighbour  kingdom ;  but  in  order  to  ascertain  and  se-
cure their  own  privileges,  they  obliged  Ferdinand,  be-
fore his  coronation,  to  subscribe  a  deed  which  they  term
a  Reverse,  declaring  that  he  held  that  crown  not  by  any
previous  right,  but  by  their  gratuitous  and  voluntary
election.  By  such  a  vast  accession  of  territories,  the
hereditary  possession  of  which  they  secured  in  process
of  time  to  their  family,  the  princes  of  the  house  of  Aus-
tria attained  that  pre-eminence  in  power  which  hath
rendered  them  so  formidable  to  the  rest  of  Germany.6

"  Steph.  Broderick  Procancelarii  Hungar. Clades  in  Carapo  Mohacz,  ap.  Scar-
dium,  ii.  218. P.  Barre  Hist.  d'Alleraagne,  torn.  viii.  part.  i.  p,  198.

p  2

212  CHARLES V.  [1527.

The  dissensions  between  the  pope  and  em-

Progress  ,  f

of  the  Re-  peror  proved  extremely  iavourable  to  the  pro-
*'  gress  of  Lutheranism.  Charles,  exasperated  by
Clement's  conduct,  and  fully  employed  in  opposing  the
league  which  he  had  formed  against  him,  had  little
inclination,  and  less  leisure,  to  take  any  measures  for
June  25,  suppressing  the  new  opinions  in  Germany.  In
1526.  a  diet  Of  the  empire  held  at  Spires,  the  state  of
religion  came  to  be  considered,  and  all  that  the  emperor
required  of  the  princes  was,  that  they  would  wait  pa-
tiently, and  without  encouraging  innovations,  for  the
meeting  of  a  general  council  which  he  had  demanded
of  the  pope.  They,  in  return,  acknowledged  the  con-
vocation of  a  council  to  be  the  proper  and  regular  step
towards  reforming  abuses  in  the  church;  but  contended,
that  a  national  council  held  in  Germany  would  be  more
effectual  for  that  purpose  than  what  he  had  proposed.
To  his  advice,  concerning  the  discouragement  of  inno-
vations, they  paid  so  little  regard,  that  even  during  the
meeting  of  the  diet  at  Spires,  the  divines  who  attended
the  elector  of  Saxony  and  landgrave  of  Hesse-Cassel
thither,  preached  publicly,  and  administered  the  sacra-
ments according  to  the  rites  of  the  reformed  church.f
The  emperor's  own  example  imboldened  the  Germans
to  treat  the  papal  authority  with  little  reverence.  Dur-
ing the  heat  of  his  resentment  against  Clement,  he  had
published  a  long  reply  to  an  angry  brief  which  the
pope  had  intended  as  an  apology  for  his  own  conduct.
In  this  manifesto,  the  emperor,  after  having  enume-
rated many  instances  of  that  pontiff's  ingratitude,
deceit,  and  ambition,  all  which  he  painted  in  the
strongest  and  most  aggravated  colours,  appealed  from
him  to  a  general  council.  At  the  same  time  he  wrote
to  the  college  of  cardinals,  complaining  of  Clement's
partiality  and  injustice ;  and  requiring  them,  if  he  re-

f  Sleid.  103.

1527.]

BOOK  IV.

213

fused  or  delayed  to  call  a  council,  to  shew  their  concern
for  the  peace  of  the  Christian  church,  so  shamefully
neglected  by  its  chief  pastor,  by  summoning  that  as-
sembly in  their  own  name.g  This  manifesto,  little
inferior  in  virulence  to  the  invectives  of  Luther  himself,
was  dispersed  over  Germany  with  great  industry,  and
being  eagerly  read  by  persons  of  every  rank,  did  much
more  than  counterbalance  the  effect  of  all  Charles's
declarations  against  the  new  opinions.

*  Goldst.  Polit.  Iroper.  p.  984.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF  THE

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

BOOK  V.

1527. THE  account  of  the  cruel  manner  in  which  the
indignation  pope  had  been  treated,  filled  all  Europe  with
astonishment  or  horror. To  see  a-  Christian

emperor. emperorj  who,  by  possessing  that  dignity,  ought
to  have  been  the  protector  and  advocate  of  the  holy
see,  lay  violent  hands  'on  him  who  represented  Christ
on  earth,  and  detain  his  sacred  person  in  a  rigorous
captivity,  was  considered  as  an  impiety  that  merited
the  severest  vengeance,  and  which  called  for  the  im-
mediate  interposition of every  dutiful son of  the
church. Francis  and  Henry,  alarmed  at  the  progress
of  the  imperial  arms  in  Italy,  had,  even  before  the  tak-
ing of  Rome,  entered  into  a  closer  alliance  ;  and,  in
order  to  give  some  check  to  the  emperor's  ambition,
had  agreed  to  make  a  vigorous  diversion  in  the  Low
Countries. The  force  of  every  motive,  which  had  in-
fluenced them  at  that  time,  was  now  increased  ;  and  to
these  was  added  the  desire  of  rescuing  the  pope  out  of
the  emperor's  hands,  a  measure  no  less  politic,  than  it
appeared  to  be  pious. This,  however,  rendered  it
necessary  to  abandon  their  hostile  intentions  against
the  Low  Countries,  and  to  make  Italy  the  seat  of  war,
as  it  was  by  vigorous  operations  there  they  might  con-
tribute most  effectually  towards  delivering  Rome,  and

1527.]  BOOK V.  215

setting  Clement  at  liberty.  Francis  being  now  sen-
sible, that,  in  his  system  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of
Italy,  the  spirit  of  refinement  had  carried  him  too  far ;
and  that,  by  an  excess  of  remissness,  he  had  allowed
Charles  to  attain  advantages  which  he  might  easily
have  prevented,  was  eager  to  make  reparation  for  an
error  of  which  he  was  not  often  guilty,  by  an  activity
more  suitable  to  his  temper.  Henry  thought  his  in-
terposition necessary,  in  order  to  hinder  the  emperor
from  becoming  master  of  all  Italy,  and  acquiring  by
that  means  such  superiority  of  power,  as  would  enable
him,  for  the  future,  to  dictate  without  control  to  the  other
princes  of  Europe.  Wolsey,  whom  Francis  had  taken
care  to  secure  by  flattery  and  presents,  the  certain  methods
of  gaining  his  favour,  neglected  nothing  that  could  in-
cense his  master  against  the  emperor.  Besides  all
these  public  considerations,  Henry  was  influenced  by
one  of  a  more  private  nature ;  having  begun,  about  this
time,  to  form  his  great  scheme  of  divorcing  Catharine
of  Aragon,  towards  the  execution  of  which  he  knew
that  the  sanction  of  papal  authority  would  be  neces-
sary, he  was  desirous  to  acquire  as  much  merit  as  pos-
sible with  Clement,  by  appearing  to  be  the  chief  in-
strument of  his  deliverance.

Confede-  The  negotiation,  between  princes  thus  dis-
racy  agamst  posed,  was  not  tedious.  Wolsey  himself  con-
July  u.  ducted  it,  on  the  part  of  his  sovereign,  with
unbounded  powers.  Francis  treated  with  him  in  per-
son at  Amiens,  where  the  cardinal  appeared,  and  was
received  with  royal  magnificence.  A  marriage  between
the  duke  of  Orleans  and  the  princess  Mary  was  agreed
to  as  the  basis  of  the  confederacy ;  it  was  resolved  that
Italy  should  be  the  theatre  of  war ;  the  strength  of  the  army
which  should  take  the  field,  as  well  as  the  contingent  of
troops  or  of  money,  which  each  prince  should  furnish,
were  settled ;  and  if  the  emperor  did  not  accept  of  the
proposals  which  they  were  jointly  to  make  him,  they

216*  CHARLES V.  [1527.

bound  themselves  immediately  to  declare  war,  and  to
begin  hostilities.  Henry,  who  took  every  reso-
lution with  impetuosity,  entered  so  eagerly  into
this  new  alliance,  that,  in  order  to  give  Francis  the
strongest  proof  of  his  friendship  and  respect,  he  for-
mally renounced  the  ancient  claim  of  the  English  mo-
narchs  to  the  crown  of  France,  which  had  long  been
the  pride  and  ruin  of  the  nation ;  as  a  full  compensation
for  which  he  accepted  a  pension  of  fifty  thousand  crowns,
to  be  paid  annually  to  himself  and  his  successors.*
The  Flo-  The  P°Pe  being  unable  to  fulfil  the  conditions
rentines  of  nis  capitulation,  still  remained  a  prisoner

recover

their  free-  under  the  severe  custody  of  Alarcon.  The  Flo-
rentines no  sooner  heard  of  what  had  happened
at  Rome,  than  they  ran  to  arms  in  a  tumultuous  man-
ner ;  expelled  the  cardinal  di  Cortona,  who  .governed
their  city  in  the  pope's  name ;  defaced  the  arms  of  the
Medici ;  broke  in  pieces  the  statues  of  Leo  and  Cle-
ment; and  declaring  themselves  a  free  state,  re-esta-
blished their  ancient  popular  government.  The  Vene-
tians, taking  advantage  of  the  calamity  of  their  ally  the
pope,  seized  Ravenna,  and  other  places  belonging  to
the  church,  under  pretext  of  keeping  them  in  deposit.
The  dukes  of  Urbino  and  Ferrara  laid  hold  likewise  on
part  of  the  spoils  of  the  unfortunate  pontiff,  whom  they
considered  as  irretrievably  ruined  .b
The  impe-  Lannoy,  on  the  other  hand,  laboured  to  de-
iriaclive.ps  rive  some  solid  benent  from  that  unforeseen
event,  which  gave  such  splendour  and  superi-
ority to  his  master's  arms.  For  this  purpose  he  marched
to  Rome,  together  with  Moncada,  and  the  marquis  del
Guasto,  at  the  head  of  all  the  troops  which  they  could
assemble  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples.  The  arrival  of
this  reinforcement  brought  new  calamities  on  the  un-
happy citizens  of  Rome ;  for  the  soldiers,  envying  the
wealth  of  their  companions,  imitated  their  licence,  and

*  Herbert,  83,  &c. Rym.  Feed.  xir.  203.  b  Guic.  1.  xviii.  453.

1527-]  BOOK  V.  217

with  the  utmost  rapacity  gathered  the  gleanings,  which
had  escaped  the  avarice  of  the  Spaniards  and  Germans.
There  was  not  now  any  army  in  Italy  capable  of  mak-
ing head  against  the  Imperialists ;  and  nothing  more
was  requisite  to  reduce  Bologna,  and  the  other  towns
in  the  ecclesiastical  state,  than  to  have  appeared  before
them.  But  the  soldiers  having  been  so  long  accus-
tomed, under  Bourbon,  to  an  entire  relaxation  of  dis-
cipline, and  having  tasted  the  sweets  of  living  at  dis-
cretion in  a  great  city,  almost  without  the  control  of  a
superior,  were  become  so  impatient  of  military  subor-
dination, and  so  averse  to  service,  that  they  refused  to
leave  Rome,  unless  all  their  arrears  were  paid ;  a  con-
dition which  they  knew  to  be  impossible.  At  the  same
time,  they  declared,  that  they  would  not  obey  any  other
person  than  the  prince  of  Orange,  whom  the  army  had
chosen  general.  Lannoy,  finding  that  it  was  no  longer
safe  for  him  to  remain  among  licentious  troops,  who
despised  his  dignity,  and  hated  his  person,  returned  to
Naples ;  soon  after  the  marquis  del  Guasto  and  Mon-
cada  thought  it  prudent  to  quit  Rome  for  the  same
reason.  The  prince  of  Orange,  a  general  only  in  name,
and  by  the  most  precarious  of  all  tenures,  the  good-
"will  of  soldiers,  whom  success  and  licence  had  rendered
capricious,  was  obliged  to  pay  more  attention  to  their
humours,  than  they  did  to  his  commands.  Thus  the
emperor,  instead  of  reaping  any  of  the  advantages
which  he  might  have  expected  from  the  reduction  of
Rome,  had  the  mortification  to  see  the  most  formidable
body  of  troops  that  he  had  ever  brought  into  the  field,
continue  in  a  state  of  inactivity  from  which  it  was  im-
possible to  rouse  them.c

The  French  This  gave  the  king  of  France  and  the  Vene-
roTrches  ^ans  leisure  to  f°rm  new  schemes,  and  to  enter
into  Italy.  into  new  engagements  for  delivering  the  pope,
and  preserving  the  liberties  of  Italy.  The  newly  re-

e  Guic.  1.  xviii.  454.

9£8  CHARLES  V.  [1527.

stored  republic  of  Florence  very  imprudently  joined
with  them,  and  Lautrec,  of  whose  abilities  the  Italians
entertained  a  much  more  favourable  opinion  than  his
own  master,  was,  in  order  to  gratify  them,  appointed
generalissimo  of  the  league.  It  was  with  the  utmost
reluctance  he  accepted  that  office,  being  unwilling  to
expose  himself  a  second  time  to  the  difficulties  and  dis-
graces, which  the  negligence  of  the  king,  or  the  malice
of  his  favourites,  might  bring  upon  him.  The  best
troops  in  France  marched  under  his  command ;  and
the  king  of  England,  though  he  had  not  yet  declared
war  against  the  emperor,  advanced  a  considerable  sum
towards  carrying  on  the  expedition.  Lautrec's  first
operations  were  prudent,  vigorous,  and  successful.  By
H«  opera-  tne  assistance  of  Andrew  Doria,  the  ablest  sea-
tions.  officer  of  that  age,  he  rendered  himself  master
of  Genoa,  and  re-established  in  that  republic  the  faction
of  the  Fregosi,  together  with  the  dominion  of  France.
He  obliged  Alexandria  to  surrender  after  a  short  siege,
and  reduced  all  the  country  on  that  side  of  the  Tesino.
He  took  Pavia,  which  had  so  long  resisted  the  arms  of
his  sovereign,  by  assault,  and  plundered  it  with  that
cruelty,  which  the  memory  of  the  fatal  disaster  that  had
befallen  the  French  nation  before  its  walls  naturally
inspired.  All  the  Milanese,  which  Antonio  de  Leyva
defended  with  a  small  body  of  troops,  kept  together,
and  supported  by  his  own  address  and  industry,  must
have  soon  submitted  to  his  power,  if  he  had  continued
to  bend  the  force  of  his  arms  against  that  country.  But  .
Lautrec  durst  not  complete  a  conquest  which  would
have  been  so  honourable  to  himself,  and  of  such  ad-
vantage to  the  league.  Francis  knew  his  confederates
to  be  more  desirous  of  circumscribing  the  imperial
power  in  Italy,  than  of  acquiring  new  territories  for
him ;  and  was  afraid,  that  if  Sforza  were  once  re-esta-
blished in  Milan,  they  would  second  but  coldly  the
attack  which  he  intended  to  make  on  the  kingdom  of

1527.]  BOOK V.  219

Naples. For  this  reason  he  instructed  Lautrec  not  to
push  his  operations  with  too  much  vigour  in  Lombardy ;
and  happily  the  importunities  of  the  pope,  and  the  so-
licitations of  the  Florentines,  the  one  for  relief,  and  the
other  for  protection,  were  so  urgent  as  to  furnish  him
with  a  decent  pretext  for  marching  forward,  without
yielding  to  the  entreaties  of  the  Venetians  and  Sforza,
who  insisted  on  his  laying  siege  to  Milan.d
The  em- While Lautrec  advanced slowly  towards
?he°p0SpeS  R°me>  tne  emperor  had  time  to  deliberate  con-
at  liberty,  cerning  the  disposal  of  the  pope's  person,  who
still  remained  a  prisoner  in  the  castle  of  St.  Angelo.
Notwithstanding  the  specious  veil of  religion,  with
which  he  usually  endeavoured  to  cover  his  actions,
Charles,  in  many  instances,  appears  to  have  been  but
little  under  the  influence  of  religious considerations,
and  had,  frequently,  on  this  occasion,  expressed  an  in-
clination to  transport  the  pope  into  Spain,  that  he  might
indulge  his  ambition  with  the  spectacle  of  the  two  most
illustrious  personages  in  Europe  successively  prisoners
in  his  court. But  the  fear  of  giving  offence  to  all
Christendom,  and  of  filling  his  own  subjects  with  hor-
ror, obliged  him  to  forego  that  satisfaction.6 The  pro-
gress of  the  confederates  made  it  now  necessary,  either
to  set  the  pope  at  liberty,  or  to  remove  him  to  some
place  of  confinement  more  secure  than  the  castle  of  St.
Angelo. Many  considerations  induced  him  to  prefer
the  former,  particularly  his  want  of  the  money,  requi-
site as  well  for  recruiting  his  army,  as  for  paying  off  the
vast  arrears  due  to  it. In  order  to  obtain  this,  he  had
assembled  the  cortes  of  Castile  at  Valladolid  about  the
beginning  of  the  year,  and  having  laid  before
them  the  state  of  his  affairs,  and  represented  the
necessity  of  making  great  preparations  to  resist  the
enemies,  whom  envy  at  the  success  which  had  crowned

d  Guic.  1.  xviik  461. Bellay,  107,  &c. Mauroc.  Hist.  Venct.  lib,  iii.  238.
«  Guic.  1.  xviii.  457".

220  CHARLES V.  [1527,

his  arms  would  unite  against  him,  he  demanded  a  large
supply  in  the  most  pressing  terms ;  but  the  cortes,  as
the  nation  was  already  exhausted  by  extraordinary  do-
natives, refused  to  load  it  with  any  new  burden,  and  in
spite  of  all  his  endeavours  to  gain  or  to  intimidate  the
members,  persisted  in  this  resolution/  No  resource,
therefore,  remained,  but  the  extorting  from  Clement,
by  way  of  ransom,  a  sum  sufficient  for  discharging  what
was  due  to  his  troops,  without  which  it  was  vain  to
mention  to  them  their  leaving  Rome.

Nor  was  the  pope  inactive  on  his  part,  or  his  intrigues
unsuccessful  towards  hastening  such  a  treaty. By  flat-
tery, and  the  appearance  of  unbounded  confidence,  he
disarmed the resentment  of  cardinal Colonna,  and
wrought  upon  his  vanity,  which  made  him  desirous
of  shewing  the  world,  that  as  his  power  h.ad  at  first
depressed  the  pope,  it  could  now  raise  him  to  his  for-
mer dignity. By  favours  and  promises  he  gained  Mo-
rone,  who,  by  one  of  those  whimsical  revolutions  which
occur  so  often  in  his  life,  and  which  so  strongly  display
his  character,  had  now  recovered  his  credit  and  autho-
rity with  the  Imperialists. The  address  and  influence
of  two  such  men  easily  removed  all  the  obstacles  which
retarded  an  accommodation,  and  brought  the  treaty  for
Clemenfs  liberty  to  a  conclusion,  upon  conditions  hard
indeed,  but  not  more  severe  than  a  prince  in  his  situa-
tion had  reason  to  expect  He  was  obliged  to  advance,
in  ready  money,  a  hundred  thousand  crowns  for  the
use  of  the  army ;  to  pay  the  same  sum  at  the  distance
of  a  fortnight;  and,  at  the  end  of  three  months,  a  hun-
dred and  fifty  thousand  more.  He  engaged  not  to  take
part  in  the  war  against  France,  either  in  Lombardy  or
in  Naples ;  he  granted  him  a  bull  of  cruzado,  and  the
tenth  of  ecclesiastical  revenues  in  Spain ;  and  he  not
only  gave  hostages,  but  put  the  emperor  in  possession
of  several  towns,  as  a  security  for  the  performance  of

f  Sandov.  i.  p.  814.

1527.]  BOOK V.  221

these  articles.5  Having  raised  the  first  moiety  by  a  sale
of  ecclesiastical  dignities  and  benefices,  and  other  ex-
pedients  equally  uncanonical,  a  day  was  fixed
for  delivering  him  from  imprisonment.  But
Clement,  impatient  to  be  free,  after  a  tedious  confine-
ment of  six  months,  as  well  as  full  of  the  suspicion  and
distrust  natural  to  the  unfortunate,  was  so  much  afraid
that  the  Imperialists  might  still  throw  in  obstacles  to
put  off  his  deliverance,  that  he  disguised  himself,  on
the  night  preceding  the  day  when  he  was  to  be  set  free,
in  the  habit  of  a  merchant,  and  Alarcon  having  remit-
ted somewhat  of  his  vigilance  upon  the  conclusion  of
the  treaty,  he  made  his  escape  undiscovered.  He  ar-
rived before  next  morning  at  Orvietto,  without  any  at-
tendants but  a  single  officer ;  and  from  thence  wrote  a
letter  of  thanks  to  Lautrec,  as  the  chief  instrument  of
procuring  him  liberty.1'

Overtures  During  these  transactions,  the  ambassadors
of  the  em-  of  France  and  England  repaired  to  Spain,  in
Francis  consequence  of  the  treaty  which  Wolsey  had
enry'concluded  with  the  French  king.  The  emperor
unwilling  to  draw  on  himself  the  united  forces  of  the
two  monarchs,  discovered  an  inclination  to  relax  some-
what the  rigour  of  the  treaty  of  Madrid,  to  which  hi-
therto, he  had  adhered  inflexibly.  He  offered  to  ac-
cept of  the  two  millions  of  crowns,  which  Francis  had
proposed  to  pay  as  an  equivalent  for  the  duchy  of
Burgundy,  and  to  set  his  sons  at  liberty,  on  condition
that  he  would  recall  his  army  out  of  Italy,  and  restore
Genoa,  together  with  the  other  conquests  which  he  had
made  in  that  country.  With  regard  to  Sforza,  he  in-
sisted that  his  fate  should  be  determined  by  the  judges
appointed  to  inquire  into  his  crimes.  These  proposi-
tions being  made  to  Henry,  he  transmitted  them  to  his
ally  the  French  king,  whom  it  more  nearly  concerned

S  Guic.  1.  xviii.  467,  &c.
h  Guic.  1.  xviii. 497,  &c. Jov.  Vit.  Colon.  169, Mauroc.  Hist.  Venet.  lib.  iii.  2;*>2.

222  CHARLES V.  [1527.

to  examine  and  to  answer  them ; and  if  Francis  had
been  sincerely  solicitous,  either  to  conclude  peace  or
preserve  consistency  in  his  own  conduct,  he  ought  in-
stantly to  have  closed  with  overtures  which  differed  but
little  from  the  propositions  which  he  himself  had  for-
merly made/ But  his  views  were  now  much  changed  ;
his  alliance  with  Henry,  Lautrec's  progress  in  Italy,  and
the  superiority  of  his  army  there  above  that  of  the  em-
peror, hardly  left  him  room  to  doubt  of  the  success  of
his  enterprise  against  Naples. Full  of  those  sanguine
hopes,  he  was  at  no  loss  to  find  pretexts  for  rejecting
or  evading  what  the  emperor  had  proposed. Under
the  appearance  of  sympathy  with  Sforza,  for  whose  in-
terests he  had  not  hitherto  discovered  much  solicitude,
he  again  demanded  the  full  and  unconditional  re-esta-
blishment of  that  unfortunate  prince  in  his  dominions.
Under  colour  of  its  being  imprudent  to  rely  on  the  em-
peror's sincerity,  he  insisted  that  his  sons  should  be  set
at  liberty  before  the  French  troops  left  Italy,  or  sur-
rendered Genoa. The  unreasonableness  of  these  de-
mands, as  well  as  the  reproachful  insinuation  with  which
they  were  accompanied, irritated  Charles  to  such  a  degree
that  he  could  hardly  listen  to  them  with  patience ;  and
repenting  of  his  moderation,  which  had  made  so  little
impression  on  his  enemies,  declared  that  he  would  not
depart  in  the  smallest  article  from  the  conditions  which
he  had  now  offered. Upon  this  the  French  and  Eng-
lish ambassadors  (for  Henry  had  been  drawn  unaccount-
ably to  concur  with  Francis  in  these  strange  proposi-
tions) demanded  and  obtained  their  audience  of  leave.k
1528. Next  day,  two  heralds,  who  had  accompanied
Jan.  22. ^e  ambassadors  on  purpose,  though  they  had
hitherto  concealed  their  character,  having  assumed  the
ensigns  of  their  office,  appeared  in  the  emperor's  court,
and  being  admitted  into  his  presence,  they,  in  the  name

1  Recueil  des  Traitez,  ii.  249.
*  Ryra.  xiy.  200.  Herbert,  85. Guic.l.  xviii.  471.

1527.]  BOOK  V.  223

of  their  respective  masters,  and  with  all  the  solemnities
customary  on  such  occasions,  denounced  war,  against
They  de-  him.  Charles  received  both  with  a  dignity  suit-
able  to  hisown  rank,  but  spoke  to  each  in  atone

emperor.  a(japtedto  the  sentiments  which  he  entertained  of
their  sovereigns.  He  accepted  the  defiance  of  the  Eng-
lish monarch  with  a  firmness  tempered  by  some  degree
of  decency  and  respect.  His  reply  to  the  French  king
abounded  with  that  acrimony  of  expression,  which  per-
sonal rivalship,  exasperated  by  the  memory  of  many  inju-
ries inflicted  as  well  as  suffered,  naturally  suggests.  He
desired  the  French  herald  to  acquaint  his  sovereign,  that
he  would  henceforth  consider  him  not  only  as  a  base
violator  of  public  faith,  but  as  a  stranger  to  the  honour
and  integrity  becoming  a  gentleman.  Francis,  too  high-
spirited  to  bear  such  an  imputation,  had  recourse  to  an
uncommon  expedient  in  order  to  vindicate  his  character.
Francis  He  instantly  sent  back  the  herald  with  a  cartel
^  defiance,  in  which  he  gave  the  emperor  the
sin-  lie  in  form,  challenged  him  to  single  combat,
lt'  requiring  him  to  name  the  time  and  place  of  the
encounter,  and  the  weapons  with  which  he  chose  to  fight.
Charles,  as  he  was  not  inferior  to  his  rival  in  spirit  or
bravery,  readily  accepted  the  challenge  ;  but,  after  seve-
ral messages  concerning  the  arrangement  of  all  the  cir-
cumstances relative  to  the  combat,  accompanied  with
mutual  reproaches,  bordering  on  the  most  indecent
scurrility,  all  thoughts  of  this  duel,  more  becoming  the
heroes  of  romance  than  the  two  greatest  monarchs  of
their  age,  were  entirely  laid  aside.1
The  effect  The  example  of  two  personages  so  illustrious
of  this  in  drew  such  general  attention,  and  carried  with  it

promoting .  »  . i -i  •

the  custom  so  much  authority,  that  it  had  considerable  in-

g'  fluence  in  producing  an  important  change  in

manners  all  over  Europe. Duels,  as  has  already  been

observed,  had  long  been  permitted  by  the  laws  of  all

»  Recueil  desTraitez,  2.  Mem.  de  Bellay,  103,  &c.  Sandov.  Hist.  i.  837.

224  CHARLES V,  [1527,

the  European  nations,  and  forming  apart  of  their  juris-
prudence, were  authorized  by  the  magistrate,  on  many
occasions,  as  the  most  proper  method  of  terminating
questions  with  regard  to  property,  or  of  deciding  those
which  respected  crimes.  But  single  combats  being  con-
sidered as  solemn  appeals  to  the  omniscience  and  jus-
tice of  the  Supreme  Being,  they  were  allowed  only  in
public  causes,  according  to  the  prescription  of  law,  and
carried  on  in  a  judicial  form.  Men  accustomed  to  this
manner  of  decisions  in  courts  of  justice,  were  naturally
led  to  apply  it  to  personal  and  private  quarrels.  Duels
which  at  first  could  be  appointed  by  the  civil  judge
alone,  were  fought  without  the  interposition  of  his  au-
thority, and  in  cases  to  which  the  laws  did  not  extend.
The  transaction  between  Charles  and  Francis  strongly
countenanced  this  practice.  Upon  every  affront,  or  in-
jury, which  seemed  to  touch  his  honour,  a  gentleman
thought  himself  entitled  to  draw  his  sword,  and  to  call
on  his  adversary  to  give  him  satisfaction.  Such  an
opinion  becoming  prevalent  among  men  of  fierce  cou-
rage, of  high  spirit,  and  of  rude  manners,  when  offence
was  often  given,  and  revenge  was  always  prompt,  pro-
duced most  fatal  consequences.  Much  of  the  best  blood
in  Christendom  was  shed ;  many  useful  lives  were  sa-
crificed ;  and,  at  some  periods,  war  itself  hath  hardly
been  more  destructive  than  these  private  contests  of  ho-
nour. So  powerful,  however,  is  the  dominion  of  fashion,
that  neither  the  terror  of  penal  laws,  nor  reverence  for
religion,  have  been  able  entirely  to  abolish  a  practice  un-
known among  the  ancients,  and  not  justifiable  by  any
principle  of  reason ;  though  at  the  same  time  it  must  be
admitted,  that,  to  this  absurd  custom,  we  must  ascribe
in  some  degree  the  extraordinary  gentleness  and  com-
plaisance of  modern  manners,  and  that  respectful  atten-
tion of  one  man  to  another,  which  at  present,  render  the
social  intercourses  of  life  far  more  agreeable  and  decent,
than  among  the  most  civilized  nations  of  antiquity.

J528.]

BOOK V.

225

Retreat  of While  the  two  monarchs  seemed  so  eager  to
the  impe- terminate  their  quarrel  by  a  personal  combat,

rialists  from  *  J  .  .

Rome.  Lautrec  continued  his  operations,  which  pro-
uary*  mised  to  be  more  decisive.  His  army,  which
was  now  increased  to  thirty-five  thousand  men,  advanced
by  great  marches  towards  Naples.  The  terror  of  their
approach,  as  well  as  the  remonstrances  and  the  entrea-
ties of  the  prince  of  Orange,  prevailed  at  last  on  the  im-
perial troops,  though  with  difficulty,  to  quit  Rome,  of
which,  they  had  kept  possession  during  ten  months.
But  of  that  flourishing  army  which  had  entered  the  city,
scarcely  one  half  remained ;  the  rest,  cut  off  by  the
plague,  or  wasted  by  disease,  the  effects  of  their  inac-
tivity, intemperance,  and  debauchery,  fell  victims  to  their
crimes."1  Lautrec  made  the  greatest  efforts  to  attack
them  in  their  retreat  towards  the  Neapolitan  territories,
which  would  have  finished  the  war  at  one  blow.  But
the  prudence  of  their  leaders  disappointed  all  his  mea-
sures, and  conducted  them  with  little  loss  to  Naples.
The  people  'of  that  kingdom,  extremely  impatient  to
shake  off  the  Spanish  yoke,  received  the  French  with
open  arms,  wherever  they  appeared  to  take  possession ;
and,  Gaeta  and  Naples  excepted,  hardly  any  place  of
importance  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Imperialists.
The  preservation  of  the  former  was  owing  to  the  strength
of  its  fortifications,  that  of  the  latter  to  the  presence  of
the  imperial  army.  Lautrec,  however,  sat  down
before  Naples ;  but  finding  it  vain  to  think  of
reducing  a  city  by  force  while  defended  by  a
whole  army,  he  was  obliged  to  employ  the  slower,  but
less  dangerous  method  of  blockade ;  and  having  taken
measures  which  appeared  to  him  effectual,  he  confidently
assured  his  master,  that  famine  would  soon  compel  the
besieged  to  capitulate.  These  hopes  were  strongly  con-
firmed by  the  defeat  of  a  vigorous  attempt  made  by  the
enemy  in  order  to  recover  the  command  of  the  sea,  The

French
besiege
Naples.

»  Guie.  1.  xviii.  478.

VOL. IV.

22(>  CHARLES V.  [1528.

galleys  of  Andrew  Doria,  under  the  command  of  his
nephew  Philippine,  guarded  the  mouth  of  the  harbour.
Moncada,  who  had  succeeded  Lannoy  in  the  vice-royal-
ty, rigged  out  a  number  of  galleys  superior  to  Doria's,
manned  them  with  a  chosen  body  of  Spanish  veterans,
and  going  on  board  himself,  together  with  the  marquis
del  Guasto,  attacked  Philippine  before  the  arrival  of  the
Venetian  and  French  fleets.  But  the  Genoese  admiral,
by  his  superior  skill  in  naval  operations,  easily  triumphed
over  the  valour  and  number  of  the  Spaniards .  The  vice-
roy was  killed,  most  of  his  fleet  destroyed,  and  Guasto,
with  many  officers  of  distinction,  being  taken  prisoners,
were  put  on  board  the  captive  galleys,  and  sent  by
Philippine  as  trophies  of  his  victory  to  his  uncle.n
Circum-  Notwithstanding  this  flattering  prospect  of
which  Sre-  success,  many  circumstances  concurred  to  frus-
trate  Lau  tree's  expectations.  Clement,  though
he  always  acknowledged  his  being  indebted  to
Francis  for  the  recovery  of  his  liberty,  and  often  com-
plained of  the  cruel  treatment  which  he  had  met  with
from  the  emperor,  was  not  influenced  at  this  juncture  by
principles  of  gratitude,  nor,  which  is  more  extraordi-
nary, was  he  swayed  by  the  desire  of  revenge.  His  past
misfortunes  rendered  him  more  cautious  than  ever,  and
his  recollection  of  the  errors  which  he  had  committed,
increased  the  natural  irresolution  of  his  mind.  While
he  amused  Francis  with  promises,  he  secretly  negotiated
with  Charles ;  and  being  solicitous,  above  all  things,  to
re-establish  his  family  in  Florence  with  their  ancient
authority,  which  he  could  not  expect  from  Francis,  who
had  entered  into  strict  alliance  with  the  new  republic,
he  leaned  rather  to  the  side  of  his  enemy  than  to  that
of  his  benefactor,  and  gave  Lautrec  no  assistance  to-
wards carrying  on  his  operations.  The  Venetians
viewing  with  jealousy  the  progress  of  the  French  arms,
were  intent  only  upon  recovering  such  maritime  towns

»  Guic.  1.  xix.  487. P.  Heuter.  lib.  x.  c.  2.  p.  231.

1528.]  BOOK V.  227

in  the  Neapolitan  dominions  as  were  to  be  possessed  by
their  republic,  while  they  were  altogether  careless  about
the  reduction  of  Naples,  on  which  the  success  of  the
common  cause  depended.0  The  king  of  England,  in-
stead of  being  able,  as  had  been  projected,  to  embarrass
the  emperor  by  attacking  his  territories  in  the  Low
Countries,  found  his  subjects  so  averse  to  an  unnecessary
war,  which  would  have  ruined  the  trade  of  the  nation,
that  in  order  to  silence  their  clamours  and  put  a  stop  to
the  insurrections  ready  to  break  out  among  them,  he
was  compelled  to  conclude  a  truce  for  eight  months
with  the  governess  of  the  Netherlands^  Francis,  him-
self, with  the  same  unpardonable  inattention  of  which
he  had  formerly  been  guilty,  and  for  which  he  had  suf-
fered so  severely,  neglected  to  make  proper  remittances
to  Lautrec  for  the  support  of  his  army.q
Revolt  of  These  unexpected  events  retarded  the  pro-
Dor^fVom  gress  °f  tne  French,  discouraging  both  the
France.  general  and  his  troops ;  but  the  revolt  of  An-
drew Doria  proved  a  fatal  blow  to  all  their  measures.
That  gallant  officer,  the  citizen  of  a  republic,  and  trained
up  from  his  infancy  in  the  sea-service,  retained  the  spi-
rit of  independence  natural  to  the  former,  together  with
the  plain  liberal  manners  peculiar  to  the  latter.  A
stranger  to  the  arts  of  submission  or  flattery  necessary
in  courts,  but  conscious  at  the  same  time  of  his  own
merit  and  importance,  he  always  offered  his  advice  with
freedom,  and  often  preferred  his  complaints  and  remon-
strances with  boldness.  The  French  ministers,  unac-
customed to  such  liberties,  determined  to  ruin  a  man
who  treated  them  with  so  little  deference  ;  and  though
Francis  himself  had  a  just  sense  of  Doria's  services,  as
well  as  a  high  esteem  for  his  character,  the  courtiers,
by  continually  representing  him  as  a  man  haughty,  in-
tractable, and  more  solicitous  to  aggrandize  himself  than
to  promote  the  interest  of  France,  gradually  undermined

°.Guic.  1.  xix.  491. P  Herbert,  90. Rymer,  14.  258. 1  Guic.  1.  x via.  478.

< 2

228  CHARLES V.  [1528.

the  foundations  of  his  credit,  and  filled  the  king's  mind
with  suspicion  and  distrust.  From  thence  proceeded
several  affronts  and  indignities  put  upon  Doria.  His
appointments  were  not  regularly  paid ;  his  advice,  even
in  naval  affairs,  was  often  slighted ;  an  attempt  was
made  to  seize  the  prisoners  taken  by  his  nephew  in  the
sea-fight  off  Naples;  all  which  he  bore  with  abundance
of  ill  humour.  But  an  injury  offered  to  his  country,
transported  him  beyond  all  bounds  of  patience.  The
French  began  to  fortify  Savona,  to  clear  its  harbour,
and,  removing  thither  some  branches  of  trade  carried
on  at  Genoa,  plainly  shewed  that  they  intended  to  ren-
der that  town,  which  had  been  long  the  object  of  jea-
lousy and  hatred  to  the  Genoese,  their  rival  in  wealth
and  commerce.  Doria,  animated  with  a  patriotic  zeal
for  the  honour  and  interest  of  his  country,  remonstrated
against  this  in  the  highest  tone,  not  without  threats,  if
the  measure  were  not  instantly  abandoned.  This  bold
action,  aggravated  by  the  malice  of  the  courtiers,  and
placed  in  the  most  odious  light,  irritated  Francis  to  such
a  degree  that  he  commanded  Barbesieux,  whom  he  ap-
pointed admiral  of  the  Levant,  to  sail  directly  to  Genoa
with  the  French  fleet,  to  arrest  Doria,  and  to  seize  his
galleys.  This  rash  order,  the  execution  of  which  could
have  been  secured  only  by  the  most  profound  secrecy,
was  concealed  with  so  little  care,  that  Doria  got  timely
intelligence  of  it,  and  retired  with  all  his  galleys  to  a
place  of  safety.  Guasto,  his  prisoner,  who  had  long
observed  and  fomented  his  growing  discontent,  and  had
often  allured  him  by  magnificent  promises  to  enter  into
the  emperor's  service,  laid  hold  on  this  favourable  op-
portunity. While  his  indignation  and  resentment  were
at  their  height,  he  prevailed  on  him  to  dispatch  one  of
his  officers  to  the  imperial  court  with  his  overtures  and
demands.  The  negotiation  was  not  long;  Charles,  fully
sensible  of  the  importance  of  such  an  acquisition,  granted
him  whatever  terms  he  required.  Doria  sent  back  his

1528.]  BOOK V.  229

commission,  together  with  the  collar  of  St.  Michael,  to
Francis,  and  hoisting  the  imperial  colours,  sailed  with
all  his  galleys  towards  Naples,  not  to  block  up  the  har-
bour of  that  unhappy  city,  as  he  had  formerly  engaged,
but  to  bring  them  protection  and  deliverance.
Wretched  His  arrival  opened  the  communication  with
iheFrench  tne  sea,  and  restored  plenty  in  Naples,  which
fore  Na-~  was  now  reduced  to  the  last  extremity ;  and
p|es-  the  French,  having  lost  their  superiority  at  sea,
were  soon  reduced  to  great  straits  for  want  of  provi-
sions. The  prince  of  Orange,  who  succeeded  the  vice-
roy in  the  command  of  the  imperial  army,  shewed  him-
self by  his  prudent  conduct  worthy  of  that  honour  which
his  good  fortune  and  the  death  of  his  generals  had  twice
acquired  him.  Beloved  by  the  troops,  who  remember-
ing the  prosperity  which  they  had  enjoyed  under  his
command,  served  him  with  the  utmost  alacrity,  he  let
slip  no  opportunity  of  harassing  the  enemy,  and  by
continual  alarms  or  sallies  fatigued  and  weakened  them/
As  an  addition  to  all  these  misfortunes,  the  diseases
common  in  that  country  during  the  sultry  months,  be-
gan to  break  out  among  the  French  troops.  The  pri-
soners comrmmicated  to  them  the  pestilence  which  the
imperial  army  had  brought  to  Naples  from  Rome,  and
it  raged  with  such  violence,  that  few,  either  officers  or
soldiers,  escaped  the  infection.  Of  the  whole  army,
not  four  thousand  men,  a  number  hardly  sufficient  to
defend  the  camp,  were  capable  of  doing  duty ; s  and
being  now  besieged  in  their  turn,  they  suffered  all  the
miseries  from  which  the  Imperialists  were  delivered.
Lautrec,  after  struggling  long  with  so  many  disappoint-
ments and  calamities,  which  preyed  on  his  mind  at  the
same  time  that  the  pestilence  wasted  his  body,
died,  lamenting  the  negligence  of  his  sovereign,
and  the  infidelity  of  his  allies,  to  which  so  many  brave

r  Jovii  Hist.  lib.  xxxvi.  p.  31,  &c. Sigonii  Vita  Doriae,  p.  1139. Bellay,  114,  &c.
•  Bellay,  117,  &c.

230  CHARLES V.  [1528.

men  had  fallen  victims.1  By  his  death,  and  the  indis-
position of  the  other  generals,  the  command  devolved
on  the  marquis  de  Saluces,  an  officer  altogether  unequal
to  such  a  trust.  He,  with  troops  no  less  dispirited  than
Raises  the  reduced,  retreated  in  disorder  to  Aversa ;  which
siege'  town  being  invested  by  the  prince  of  Orange,
Saluces  was  under  the  necessity  of  consenting,  that  he
himself  should  remain  a  prisoner  of  war,  that  his  troops
should  lay  down  their  arms  and  colours,  give  up  their
baggage,  and  march  under  a  guard  to  the  frontiers  of
France.  By  this  ignominious  capitulation,  the  wretched
remains  of  the  French  army  were  saved ;  and  the  em-
peror, by  his  own  perseverance,  and  the  good  conduct
of  his  generals,  acquired  once  more  the  superiority  in
Italy."

Genoa  re-  ^6  ^oss  °^  ^enoa  followed  immediately  upon
covers  its  the  ruin  of  the  army  in  Naples.  To  deliver  his
country  from  the  dominion  of  foreigners  was
Doria's  highest  ambition,  and  had  been  his  principal
inducement  to  quit  the  service  of  France,  and  enter  into
that  of  the  emperor.  A  most  favourable  opportunity
for  executing  this  honourable  enterprise  now  presented
itself.  The  city  of  Genoa,  afflicted  by  the  pestilence,
was  almost  deserted  by  its  inhabitants ;  the  French  gar-
rison, being  neither  regularly  paid  nor  recruited,  was
reduced  to  an  inconsiderable  number;  Doria's  emissa-
ries found  that  such  of  the  citizens  as  remained,  being
weary  alike  of  the  French  and  imperial  yoke,  the  rigour
of  which  they  had  alternately  felt,  were  ready  to  wel-
come him  as  their  deliverer,  and  to  second  all  his  mea-
sures. Things  wearing  this  promising  aspect,  he  sailed
towards  the  coast  of  Genoa;  on  his  approach  the  French
galleys  retired  ;  a  small  body  of  men  which  he  landed,
surprised  one  of  the  gates  of  Genoa  in  the  night-time ;
Trivulci,  the  French  governor,  with  his  feeble  garrison,

I  P.  Heater.  Keruiu  Austr.  lib.  x.  c.  2.  p.  231.

II  Bellay,  117,  &c. Jovii  Hist.  lib.  xxv.  xxvi.

1528.]  BOOK V.  231

Se  t  ig  shut  himself  up  in  the  citadel,  and  Doria  took
possession  of  the  town  without  bloodshed  or
resistance.  Want  of  provisions  quickly  obliged  Tri-
vulci  to  capitulate ;  the  people,  eager  to  abolish  such
an  odious  monument  of  their  servitude,  ran  together
with  a  tumultuous  violence,  and  levelled  the  citadel
with  the  ground.

It  was  now  in  Doria's  power  to  have  rendered
himself  the  sovereign  of  his  country,  which  he
had  so  happily  delivered  from  oppression.  The
fame  of  his  former  actions,  the  success  of  his  present
attempt,  the  attachment  of  his  friends,  the  gratitude  of
his  countrymen,  together  with  the  support  of  the  em-
peror, all  conspired  to  facilitate  his  attaining  the  su-
preme authority,  and  invited  him  to  lay  hold  of  it.
But  with  a  magnanimity  of  which  there  are  few  exam-
ples, he  sacrificed  all  thoughts  of  aggrandizing  himself
to  the  virtuous  satisfaction  of  establishing  liberty  in  his
country,  the  highest  object  at  which  ambition  can  aim,
Having  assembled  the  whole  body  of  the  people  in  the
court  before  his  palace,  he  assured  them  that  the  hap-
piness of  seeing  them  once  more  in  possession  of  free-
dom, was  to  him  a  full  reward  for  all  his  services;  that,
more  delighted  with  the  name  of  citizen  than  of  sove-
reign, he  claimed  no  pre-eminence  or  power  above  his
equals;  but  remitted  entirely  to  them  the  right  of  set-
tling what  form  of  government  they  would  now  choose
to  be  established  among  them.  The  people  listened  to
him  with  tears  of  admiration  and  of  joy.  Twelve  per-
sons were  elected  to  new-model  the  constitution  of  the
republic.  /The  influence  of  Doria's  virtue  and  example
communicated  itself  to  his  countrymen ;  the  factions
which  had  long  torn  and  ruined  the  state,  seemed  to
be  forgotten ;  prudent  precautions  were  taken  to  pre-
vent their  reviving ;  and  the  same  form  of  government
which  has  subsisted  with  little  variation  since  that  time
in  Genoa,  was  established  with  universal  applause.

232  CHARLES V.  [1528.

Doria  lived  to  a  great  age,  beloved,  respected,  and
honoured  by  his  countrymen;  and  adhering  uniformly
to  his  professions  of  moderation,  without  arrogating
any  thing  unbecoming  a  private  citizen,  he  preserved  a
great  ascendant  over  the  councils  of  the  republic,  which
owed  its  being  to  his  generosity.  The  authority  which
he  possessed  was  more  flattering,  as  well  as  more  satis-
factory, than  that  derived  from  sovereignty;  a  domi-
nion founded  in  love  and  in  gratitude  ;  and  upheld  by
veneration  for  his  virtues,  not  by  the  dread  of  his  power.
His  memory  is  still  reverenced  by  the  Genoese,  and  he
is  distinguished  in  their  public  monuments,  and  cele-
brated in  the  works  of  their  historians,  by  the  most
honourable  of  all  appellations,  THE  FATHER  OF  HIS

COUNTRY  AND  THE  RESTORER  OF  ITS  LIBERTY.*

1529.  Francis,  in  order  to  recover  the  reputation
?ptehr^tlons  of  his  arms,  discredited  by  so  many  losses,
Milanese,  made  new  efforts  in  the  Milanese.  But  the
count  of  St.  Pol,  a  rash  and  unexperienced  officer,  to
whom  he  gave  the  command,  was  no  match  for  Anto-
nio de  Leyva,  the  ablest  of  the  imperial  generals.  He,
by  his  superior  skill  in  war,  checked,  with  a  handful
of  men,  the  brisk,  but  ill-concerted  motions  of  the
French ;  and  though  so  infirm  himself  that  he  was  car-
ried constantly  in  a  litter,  he  surpassed  them,  when
occasion  required,  no  less  in  activity  than  in  prudence.
By  an  unexpected  march  he  surprised,  defeated,  and
took  prisoner  the  count  of  St.  Pol,  ruining  the  French
army  in  the  Milanese  as  entirely  as  the  prince  of  Orange
had  ruined  that  which  besieged  Naples/
Negotia-  Amidst  these  vigorous  operations  in  the  field,

!weesnbe" each  Party  discovered  an  impatient  desire  of

Charles  and  peace,  and  continual  negotiations  were  carried

on  for  that  purpose. The  French  king,  dis-

*  Guic.  1.  xix.  p.  498. Sigonii  Vita  Doris,  p.  1146. Jov.  Hist.  lib. xxvi.
p.  3b,  &c.

y  Guic.  I.  xix.  520. P.  Heuter.  Rer.  Austr.  lib.  x.  e.  3.  p.  233. Mem.  de  Bel-

1529.]  BOOK  V.  233

couraged,  and  almost  exhausted  by  so  many  unsuccess-
ful enterprises,  was  reduced  now  to  think  of  obtaining
the  release  of  his  sons  by  concessions,  not  by  the  terror
of  his  arms.  The  pope  hoped  to  recover  by  a  treaty
whatever  he  had  lost  in  the  war.  The  emperor,  not-
withstanding the  advantages  which  he  had  gained,  had
many  reasons  to  make  him  wish  for  an  accommodation,
Solyman,  having  overrun  Hungary,  was  ready  to  break
in  upon  the  Austrian  territories  with  the  whole  force  of
the  East.  The  Reformation  gaining  ground  daily  in
Germany,  the  princes,  who  favoured  it  had  entered
into  a  confederacy  which  Charles  thought  dangerous
to  the  tranquillity  of  the  empire.  The  Spaniards  mur-
mured at  a  war  of  such  unusual  length,  the  weight  of
which  rested  chiefly  on  them.  The  variety  and  extent
of  the  emperor's  operations  far  exceeded  what  his  re-
venues could  support:  his  success  hitherto  had  been
owing  chiefly  to  his  own  good  fortune  and  to  the  abi-
lities of  his  generals  ;  nor  could  he  flatter  himself  that
they,  with  troops  destitute  of  every  thing  necessary,
would  always  triumph  over  enemies  still  in  a  condition
to  renew  their  attacks.  All  *parties,  however,  were  at
equal  pains  to  conceal  or  to  dissemble  their  real  senti-
ments. The  emperor,  that  his  inability  to  carry  on  the
war  might  not  be  suspected,  insisted  on  high  terms  in
the  tone  of  a  conqueror.  The  pope,  solicitous  not  to
lose  his  present  allies  before  he  came  to  any  agree-
ment with  Charles,  continued  to  make  a  thousand  pro-
testations of  fidelity  to  the  former,  while  he  privately
negotiated  with  the  latter.  Francis,  afraid  that  his  con-
federates might  prevent  him  by  treating  for  themselves
with  the  emperor,  had  recourse  to  many  dishonourable
artifices,  in  order  to  turn  their  attention  from  the  mea-
sures which  he  was  taking  to  adjust  all  differences  with
his  rival.

In  this  situation  of  affairs,  when  all  the  contending
powers  wished  for  peace,  but  durst  not  venture  too

234  CHARLES V.  [1529.

hastily  on  the  steps  necessary  for  attaining  it,  two
ladies  undertook  to  procure  this  blessing  so  much  de-
sired by  all  Europe.  These  were  Margaret  of
Austria,  duchess  dowager  of  Savoy,  the  empe-
ror's auntj  and  Louise,  Francis's  mother.  They  agreed
on  an  interview  at  Cambray,  and  being  lodged  in  two
adjoining  houses,  between  which  a  communication
was  opened,  met  together  without  ceremony  or  obser-
vation, and  held  daily  conferences,  to  which  no  person
whatever  was  admitted.  As  both  were  profoundly
skilled  in  business,  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the
secrets  of  their  respective  courts,  and  possessed  with
perfect  confidence  in  each  other,  they  soon  made  great
progress  towards  a  final  accommodation ;  and  the  am-
bassadors of  all  the  confederates  waited  in  anxious
suspense  to  know  their  fate,  the  determination  of
which  was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  those  illustrious
negotiators.21

Separate  But  whatever  diligence  they  used  to  hasten
tween  the  forward  a  general  peace,  the  pope  had  the  ad-
Charies^  ^ress  an^  industry  to  get  the  start  of  his  allies,
June  so.  by  concluding  at  Barcelona  a  particular  treaty
for  himself.  The  emperor,  impatient  to  visit  Italy  in
his  way  to  Germany;  and  desirous  of  re-establishing
tranquillity  in  the  one  country,  before  he  attempted  to
compose  the  disorders  which  abounded  in  the  other,
found  it  necessary  to  secure  at  least  one  alliance  among
the  Italian  states,  on  which  he  might  depend.  That
with  Clement,  who  courted  it  with  unwearied  impor-
tunity, seemed  more  proper  than  any  other.  Charles,
being  extremely  solicitous  to  make  some  reparation  for
the  insults  which  he  had  offered  to  the  sacred  character
of  the  pope,  and  to  redeem  past  offences  by  new  merit,
granted  Clement,  notwithstanding  all  his  misfortunes,
terms  more  favourable  than  he  could  have  expected
after  a  continued  series  of  success.  Among  other

«  P.  licutcr.  Rer.  Austr.  lib,  x.  c.  .3.  133. Mem.  de  BelJay,  p.  m.

1529.]  BOOK V.  235

articles  he  engaged  to  restore  all  the  territories  be-
longing to  the  ecclesiastical  state ;  to  re-establish  the
dominion  of  the  Medici  in  Florence ;  to  give  his  na-
tural daughter  in  marriage  to  Alexander  the  head  of
that  family  ;  and  to  put  it  in  the  pope's  power  to  decide
concerning  the  fate  of  Sforza,  and  the  possession  of  the
Milanese.  In  return  for  these  ample  concessions,  Cle-
ment gave  the  emperor  the  investiture  of  Naples  with-
out the  reserve  of  any  tribute,  but  the  present  of  a
white  steed,  in  acknowledgment  of  his  sovereignty ;
absolved  all  who  had  been  concerned  in  assaulting
and  plundering  Rome,  and  permitted  Charles  and  his
brother  Ferdinand  to  levy  the  fourth  of  the  ecclesi-
astical revenues,  throughout  their  dominions.8
August  5.  The  account  of  this  transaction  quickened  the
Cambrf  neg°tiati°ns  at  Cambray,  and  brought  Margaret
between  and  Louise  to  an  immediate  agreement.  The

Charles  /» ii/r i •  i  i  i •  i  t*

and  Fran-  treaty  ot  Madrid  served  as  the  basis  of  that
which  they  concluded ;  the  latter  being  intend-
ed to  mitigate  the  rigour  of  the  former.  The  chief
articles  were,  That  the  emperor  should  not,  for  the
present,  demand  the  restitution  of  Burgundy,  reserv-
ing, however,  in  full  force,  his  rights  and  pretensions
to  that  duchy ;  That  Francis  should  pay  two  millions
of  crowns  as  the  ransom  of  his  sons,  and,  before  they
were  set  at  liberty,  should  restore  such  towns  as  he
still  held  in  the  Milanese ;  That  he  should  resign  his
pretensions  to  the  sovereignty  of  Flanders  and  of  Ar-
tois ;  That  he  should  renounce  all  his  pretensions  to
Naples,  Milan,  Genoa,  and  every  other  place  beyond
the  Alps;  That  he  should  immediately  consummate
the  marriage  concluded  between  him  and  the  empe-
ror's sister  Eleanora.b

»  Guic.  1.  xix.  522.

b  P.  Heuter.  Rer.  Austr.  lib.  x.  c.  3.  p.  234. Sandov.  Hist,  dell  Emper.  Car.  V.
ii.  28.

236  CHARLES V.  [1529.

Advanta- Thus  Francis,  chiefly  from  his  impatience  to
Procure liberty  to  his sons, sacrificed  every
thing  which  had  at  first  prompted  him  to  take
arms,  or  which  had  induced  him,  by  continuing  hos-
tilities during  nine  successive  campaigns,  to  protract
the  war  to  a  length  hardly  known  in  Europe  before
the  establishment  of  standing  armies,  and  the  imposi-
tion of  exorbitant  taxes,  became  universal. The  em-
peror, by  this  treaty,  was  rendered  sole  arbiter  of  the
fate  of  Italy ;  he  delivered  his  territories  in  the  Nether-
lands from  an  unpleasant  badge  of  subjection;  and
after  having  baffled  his  rival  in  the  field,  he  prescribed
to  him  the  conditions  of  peace. The  different  conduct
and  spirit  with  which  the  two  monarchs  carried  on  the
operations  of  war,  led  naturally  to  such  an  issue  of  it.
Charles,  inclined  by  temper,  as  well  as  obliged  by  his
situation,  concerted  all  his  schemes  with  caution,  pur-
sued them  with  perseverance,  and  observing  circum-
stances and  events  with  attention,  let  none  escape  that
could  be  improved  to  advantage. Francis  more  enter-
prising than steady, undertook great designs  with
warmth,  but  often  executed  them  with  remissness ;  and
diverted  by  his  pleasures,  or  deceived  by  his  favourites,
he  lost  on  several  occasions  the  most  promising  oppor-
tunities of  success. Nor  had  the  character  of  the  two
rivals  themselves  greater  influence  on  the  operations
of  war,  than  the  opposite qualities  of  the  generals
whom  they  employed. Among  the  Imperialists,  valour
tempered  with  prudence ;  fertility  of  invention  aided
by  experience;  discernment  to  penetrate  the  designs
of  their  enemies ;  a  provident  sagacity  in  conducting
their  own  measures ;  in  a  word,  all  the  talents,  which
form  great  commanders  and  ensure  victory,  were  con-
spicuous. Among  the  French,  these  qualities  were
either  wanting,  or  the  very  reverse  of  them  abounded ;
nor  could  they  boast  of  one  man  (unless  we  except

1529.]  BOOK V.  237

Lautrec,  who  was  always  unfortunate)  that  equalled
the  merit  of  Pescara,  Leyva,  Guasto,  the  prince  of
Orange,  and  other  leaders,  whom  Charles  had  to  set
in  opposition  to  them.  Bourbon,  Morone,  Doria,  who
by  their  abilities  and  conduct  might  have  been  capable
of  balancing  the  superiority  which  the  Imperialists  had
acquired,  were  induced  to  abandon  the  service  of
France,  by  the  carelessness  of  the  king,  and  the  malice
or  injustice  of  his  counsellors;  and  the  most  fatal
blows  given  to  France  during  the  progress  of  the  war,
proceeded  from  the  despair  and  resentment  of  these
three  persons.

The  hard  conditions  to  which  Francis  was

Dishonour- ...

able  to  obliged  to  submit  were  not  the  most  afflicting
circumstances  to  him  in  the  treaty  of  Cambray.
He  lost  his  reputation  and  the  confidence  of  all  Europe,
by  abandoning  his  allies  to  his  rival.  Unwilling  to
enter  into  the  details  necessary  for  adjusting  their  in-
terests, or  afraid  that  whatever  he  claimed  for  them
must  have  been  purchased  by  farther  concessions  on
his  own  part,  he  gave  them  up  in  a  body ;  and  without
the  least  provision  in  their  behalf,  left  the  Venetians,
the  Florentines,  the  duke  of  Ferrara,  together  with
such  of  the  Neapolitan  barons  as  had  joined  his  army,
to  the  mercy  of  the  emperor.  They  exclaimed  loudly
against  this  base  and  perfidious  action,  of  which  Francis
himself  was  so  much  ashamed,  that,  in  order  to  avoid
the  pain  of  hearing  from  their  ambassadors  the  re-
proaches which  he  justly  merited,  it  was  some  time
before  he  would  consent  to  allow  them  an  audience.
Charles,  on  the  other  hand,  was  attentive  to  the  interest
of  every  person  who  had  adhered  to  him  :  the  rights  of
some  of  his  Flemish  subjects,  who  had  estates  or  pre-
tensions in  France,  were  secured ;  one  article  was  in-
serted, obliging  Francis  to  restore  the  blood  and  memory
of  the  constable  Bourbon ;  and  to  grant  his  heirs  the
possession  of  his  lands  which  had  been  forfeited ;  ano-

238  CHARLES V.  [1529.

ther,  by  which  indemnification  was  stipulated  for  those
French  gentlemen  who  had  accompanied  Bourbon  in
his  exiled  This  conduct,  laudable  in  itself,  and  placed
in  the  most  striking  light  by  a  comparison  with  that  of
Francis,  gained  Charles  as  much  esteem  as  the  success
of  his  arms  had  acquired  him  glory.

Francis  did  not  treat  the  king  of  England
with  the  same  neglect  as  his  other  allies. He
lt0  communicated  to  him  all  the  steps  of  his  nego-

tiation at  Cambray,  and  luckily  found  that  monarch  in
a  situation  which  left  him  no  choice,  but  to  approve  im-
plicitly of  his  measures,  and  to  concur  with  them.
His  scheme  Henry  had  been  soliciting  the  pope  for  some
of  being  di-  ^me  in  order  to  obtain  a  divorce  from  Catha-

vorced  irom

his  queen.  rine  of  Aragon  his  queen.  Several  motives
combined  in  prompting  the  king  to  urge  his  suit.  As
he  was  powerfully  influenced  at  some  seasons  by  reli-
gious considerations,  he  entertained  many  scruples  con-
cerning the  legitimacy  of  his  marriage  with  his  brother's
widow ;  his  affections  had  long  been  estranged  from  the
queen,  who  was  older  than  himself,  and  had  lost  all  the
charms  which  she  possessed  in  the  earlier  part  of  her
life  ;  he  was  passionately  desirous  of  having  male  issue ;
Wolsey  artfully  fortified  his  scruples,  and  encouraged
his  hopes,  that  he  might  widen  the  breach  between  him
and  the  emperor,  Catharine's  nephew ;  and,  what  was
more  forcible  perhaps  in  its  operation  than  all  these
united,  the  king  had  conceived  a  violent  love  for  the
celebrated  Anne  Boleyn,  a  young  lady  of  great  beauty,
and  of  greater  accomplishments,  whom,  as  he  found  it
impossible  to  gain  her  on  other  terms,  he  determined  to
raise  to  the  throne.  The  papal  authority  had  often  been
interposed  to  grant  divorces  for  reasons  less  specious
than  those  which  Henry  produced.  When  the  matter
was  first  proposed  to  Clement,  during  his  imprisonment
in  the  castle  of  St.  Angelo,  as  his  hopes  of  recovering

c  Guic.  1.  xix.  p.  525. P.  Heuter.  Rer.  Austr.  lib.  x.  c.  4.  p.  235.

1529.]  BOOK V.  239

liberty  depended  entirely  on  the  king  of  England,  and
his  ally  of  France,  he  expressed  the  warmest  inclination
to  gratify  him.  But  no  sooner  was  he  set  free,  than  he
discovered  other  sentiments.  Charles,  who  espoused
the  protection  of  his  aunt  with  zeal  inflamed  by  resent-
ment, alarmed  the  pope  on  the  one  hand  with  threats,
which  made  a  deep  impression  on  his  timid  mind;  and
allured  him  on  the  other  with  those  promises  in  favour
of  his  family,  which  he  afterward  accomplished.  Upon
the  prospect  of  these,  Clement  not  only  forgot  all  his
obligations  to  Henry,  but  ventured  to  endanger  the  in-
terest of  the  Romish  religion  in  England,  and  to  run  the
risk  of  alienating  that  kingdom  for  ever  from  the  obe-
dience of  the  papal  see.  After  amusing  Henry  during
two  years,  with  all  the  subtleties  and  chicane  which  the
court  of  Rome  can  so  dexterously  employ  to  protract  or
defeat  any  cause ;  after  displaying  the  whole  extent  of
his  ambiguous  and  deceitful  policy,  the  intricacies  of
which  the  English  historians,  to  whom  it  properly  be-
longs, have  found  it  no  easy  matter  to  trace  and  unravel ;
he,  at  last,  recalled  the  powers  of  the  delegates,  whom
he  had  appointed  to  judge  in  the  point,  advocated  the
cause  to  Rome,  leaving  the  king  no  other  hope  of  ob-
taining a  divorce,  but  from  the  personal  decision  of  the
pope  himself.  As  Clement  was  now  in  strict  alliance
with  the  emperor,  who  had  purchased  his  friendship
by  the  exorbitant  concessions  which  have  been  men-
tioned, Henry  despaired  of  procuring  any  sentence  from
the  former  but  what  was  dictated  by  the  latter.  His
honour,  however,  and  passions  concurred  in  preventing
him  from  relinquishing  his  scheme  of  a  divorce,  which
he  determined  to  accomplish  by  other  means,  and  at  any
rate ;  and  the  continuance  of  Francis's  friendship  being
necessary  to  counterbalance  the  emperor's  power,  he,  in
order  to  secure  that,  not  only  offered  no  remonstrances
against  the  total  neglect  of  their  allies,  in  the  treaty  of
Cambray,  but  made  Francis  the  present  of  a  large  sum,

240  CHARLES V.  [1529.

as  a  brotherly  contribution  towards  the  payment  of  the
ransom  for  his  sons.d

Aug.  12.  Soon  after  the  treaty  of  peace  was  concluded,
TworeiJisits  t^ie  emPeror  landed  in  Italy  with  a  numerous
Italy.  train  of  the  Spanish  nobility,  and  a  consider-
able body  of  troops.  He  left  the  government  of  Spain
during  his  absence,  to  the  empress  Isabella.  By  his
long  residence  in  that  country,  he  had  acquired  such
thorough  knowledge  of  the  character  of  the  people,  that
he  could  perfectly  accommodate  the  maxims  of  his  go-
vernment to  their  genius.  He  could  even  assume,  upon
some  occasions,  such  popular  manners  as  gained  won-
derfully upon  the  Spaniards.  A  striking  instance  of
his  disposition  to  gratify  them  had  occurred  a  few  days
before  he  embarked  for  Italy  :  he  was  to  make  his  pub-
lic entry  into  the  city  of  Barcelona ;  and  some  doubts
having  arisen  among  the  inhabitants,  whether  they
should  receive  him  as  emperor,  or  as  count  of  Barce-
lona ;  Charles  instantly  decided  in  favour  of  the  latter,
declaring  that  he  was  more  proud  of  that  ancient  title,
than  of  his  imperial  crown.  Soothed  with  this  flatter-
ing expression  of  his  regard,  the  citizens  welcomed
him  with  acclamations  of  joy,  and  the  states  of  the  pro-
vince swore  allegiance  to  his  son  Philip,  as  heir  of  the
county  of  Barcelona.  A  similar  oath  had  been  taken .
in  all  the  'kingdoms  of  Spain  with  equal  satisfaction.*

The  emperor  appeared  in  Italy  with  the  pomp  and
power  of  a  conqueror.  Ambassadors  from  all  the  prin-
ces and  states  of  that  country  attended  his  court,  wait-
ing to  receive  his  decision  with  regard  to  their  fate.  At
Genoa,  where  he  first  landed,  he  was  received  with  the
acclamations  due  to  the  protector  of  their  liberties.
Having  honoured  Doria  with  many  marks  of  distinction,
and  bestowed  on  the  republic  several  new  privileges,
he  proceeded  to  Bologna,  the  place  fixed  upon  for  his

d  Herbert.  Mem.  de  Bellay,  122.
e  Sandov.  ii.  p.  50. Ferrer,  ix,  116,

1529.]  BOOK V.  241

Noy  5  interview  with  the  pope.  He  affected  to  unite
in  his  public  entry  into  that  city  the  state  and
majesty  that  suited  an  emperor,  with  the  humility  be-
coming an  obedient  son  of  the  church ;  and  while  at
the  head  of  twenty  thousand  veteran  soldiers,  able  to
give  law  to  all  Italy,  he  kneeled  down  to  kiss  the  feet  of
that  very  pope  whom  he  had  so  lately  detained  a  pri-
soner. The  Italians,  after  suffering  so  much  from  the
ferocity  and  licentiousness  of  his  armies,  and  after  hav-
ing been  long  accustomed  to  form  in  their  imagination
a  picture  of  Charles,  which  bore  some  resemblance  to
that  of  the  barbarous  monarchs  of  the  Goths  or  Huns,
who  had  formerly  afflicted  their  country  with  like  cala-
mities, were  surprised  to  see  a  prince  of  a  graceful  ap-
pearance, affable  and  courteous  in  his  deportment,  of
regular  manners,  and  of  exemplary  attention  to  all  the
offices  of  religion/  They  were  still  more  astonished
when  he  settled  all  the  concerns  of  the  princes  and
states  which  now  depended  on  him,  with  a  degree  of
moderation  and  equity  much  beyond  what  they  had  ex-
pected.

His  mode-  Charles  himself,  when  he  set  out  from  Spain,
the°motinves  ^ar  ^rom  intending  to  give  any  such  extraordi-
of  it-  nary  proof  of  his  self-denial,  seems  to  have  been
resolved  to  avail  himself  to  the  utmost  of  the  superiority
which  he  had  acquired  in  Italy.  But  various  circum-
stances concurred  in  pointing  out  the  necessity  of  pur-
suing a  very  different  course.  The  progress  of  the
Turkish  sultan,  who,  after  over-running  Hungary,  had
penetrated  into  x^ustria,  and  laid  siege  to  Vienna,
with  an  army  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand
men,  loudly  called  upon  him  to  collect  his  whole  force
to  oppose  that  torrent ;  and  though  the  valour  of  the
0  t  Germans,  the  prudent  conduct  of  Ferdinand,  to-
gether with  the  treachery  of  the  Vizier,  soon
obliged  Solyman  to  abandon  that  enterprise  with  dis-

f  Sandov.  Hist,  del  Erap.  Carl.  V.  ii.  50,  53,  &c.
VOL.  IV.  R

242  CHARLES  V.  [1529.

grace  and  loss,  the  religious  disorders  still  growing  in
Germany,  rendered  the  presence  of  the  emperor  highly
necessary  there.8  The  Florentines,  instead  of  giving
their  consent  to  the  re-establishment  of  the  Medici,
which,  by  the  treaty  of  Barcelona,  the  emperor  had
bound  himself  to  procure,  were  preparing  to  defend  their
liberty  by  force  of  arms ;  the  preparations  for  his  jour-
ney had  involved  him  in  unusual  expenses ;  and  on
this,  as  well  as  many  other  occasions,  the  multiplicity
of  his  affairs,  together  with  the  narrowness  of  his  reve-
nues, obliged  him  to  contract  the  schemes  which  his
boundless  ambition  was  apt  to  form,  and  to  forego  pre-
sent and  certain  advantages,  that  he  might  guard  against
more  remote  but  unavoidable  dangers.  Charles,  from
all  these  considerations,  finding  it  necessary  to  assume
an  air  of  moderation,  acted  his  part  with  a  good  grace.
He  admitted  Sforza  into  his  presence,  and  not  only  gave
him  a  full  pardon  of  all  past  offences,  but  granted  him
the  investiture  of  the  duchy,  together  with  his  niece,
the  king  of  Denmark's  daughter,  in  marriage.  He  al-
lowed the  duke  of  Ferrara  to  keep  possession  of  all  his
dominions,  adjusting  the  points  in  dispute  between  him
and  the  pope,  with  an  impartiality  not  very  agreeable
to  the  latter.  He  came  to  a  final  accommodation  with
the  Venetians,  upon  the  reasonable  condition  of  their
restoring  whatever  they  had  usurped  during  the  late
war,  either  in  the  Neapolitan  or  Papal  territories.  In
return  for  so  many  concessions,  he  exacted  considerable
sums  from  each  of  the  powers  with  whom  he  treated,
which  they  paid  without  reluctance,  and  which  afforded
him  the  means  of  proceeding  on  his  journey  towards
Germany  with  a  magnificence  suitable  to  his  dignity.11
Re-estT-'  These  treaties,  which  restored  tranquillity  to
airily e  Italy  after  a  tedious  war,  the  calamities  of  which
edici  ^ad  chieflv  affected  tnat  country,  were  publish-
."  e(*  at  Bologna  with  great  solemnity  on  the

Sleidan,  121. Guic.  1.  xx.  5.50.  fc  Srmdov.  ii.  55,  &c.

1530.]  BOOK V.  243

1st  day  of  the  year  1530,  amidst  the  universal  accla-
mations of  the  people,  applauding  the  emperor,  to
whose  moderation  and  generosity  they  ascribed  the
blessings  of  peace  which  they  had  so  long  desired.  The
Florentines  alone  did  not  partake  of  this  general  joy.
Animated  with  a  zeal  for  liberty  more  laudable  than
prudent,  they  determined  to  oppose  the  restoration  of
the  Medici.  The  imperial  army  had  already  entered
their  territories,  and  formed  the  siege  of  their  capital.
But  though  deserted  by  all  their  allies,  and  left  without
any  hope  of  succour,  they  defended  themselves  many
months  with  an  obstinate  v&iour  worthy  of  better  suc-
cess ;  and  even  when  they  surrendered,  they  obtained  a
capitulation  which  gave  them  hopes  of  securing  some
remains  of  their  liberty.  But  the  emperor,  from  his
desire  to  gratify  the  pope,  frustrated  all  their  expec-
tations, and  abolishing  their  ancient  form  of  govern-
ment, raised  Alexander  de  Medici  to  the  same  absolute
dominion  over  that  state,  which  his  family  have  retained
to  the  present  times.  Philibert  de  Chalons,  prince  of
Orange,  the  imperial  general,  was  killed  during  this
siege.  His  estate  and  titles  descended  to  his  sister
Claude  de  Chalons,  who  was  married  to  Rene,  Count
of  Nassau,  and  she  transmitted  to  her  posterity  of  the
house  of  Nassau  the  title  of  princess  of  Orange,  which,
by  their  superior  talents  and  valour,  they  have  rendered
$o  illustrious.1

state  of  af-  After  the  publication  of  the  peace  at  Bo-
fairs,  civil  logna,  and  the  ceremony  of  his  coronation  as
gious,  in  king  of  Lombardy  and  emperor  of  the  Romans,
Feb"1^ '  which  the  pope  performed  with  the  accustomed
and  24.  formalities,  nothing  detained  Charles  in  Italy ,k
and  he  began  to  prepare  for  his  journey  to  Germany.
His  presence  became  every  day  more  necessary  in  that
country,  and  was  solicited  with  equal  importunity  by

1  Guic.  1.  xx.  p.  341,  &c. P.  Heuter.  Rcr.  Austr.  lib.  ii.  c.  4.  p.  236.
k  H.  Cornel.  Agrippa  de  duplica  corronationc  Car.  V.  ap.  Scard.  ii.  266.

R 2

244  CHARLES V.  [1530.

the  Catholics  and  by  the  favourers  of  the  new  doctrines.
During  that  long  interval  of  tranquillity,  which  the  ab-
sence of  the  emperor,  the  contest  between  him  and  the
pope,  and  his  attention  to  the  war  with  France,  afforded
them,  the  latter  gained  much  ground.  Most  of  the
princes  who  had  embraced  Luther's  opinions,  had  not
only  established  in  their  territories  that  form  of  worship
which  he  approved,  but  had  entirely  suppressed  the
rites  of  the  Romish  church.  Many  of  the  free  cities
had  imitated  their  conduct.  Almost  one  half  the  Ger-
manic body  revolted  from  the  Papal  see,  and  its  au-
thority, even  in  those  provinces  which  had  not  hitherto
shaken  off  the  yoke,  was  considerably  weakened,  partly
by  the  example  of  revolt  in  the  neighbouring  states,
partly  by  the  secret  progress  of  the  reformed  doctrine
even  in  those  countries  where  it  was  not  openly  em-
braced. Whatever  satisfaction  the  emperor,  while  he
was  at  open  enmity  with  the  see  of  Rome,  might  have
felt  in  those  events  which  tended  to  mortify  and  em-
barrass the  pope,  he  could  not  help  perceiving  now,
that  the  religious  divisions  in  Germany  would,  in  the
end,  prove  extremely  hurtful  to  the  imperial  authority.
The  weakness  of  former  emperors  had  suffered  the  great
vassals  of  the  empire  to  make  such  successful  encroach-
ments upon  their  power  and  prerogative,  that  during
the  whole  course  of  a  war,  which  had  often  required
the  exertion  of  his  utmost  strength,  Charles  hardly  drew
any  effectual  aid  from  Germany,  and  found  that  mag-
nificent titles  or  obsolete  pretensions  were  almost  the
only  advantages  which  he  had  gained  by  swaying  the
imperial  sceptre.  He  became  fully  sensible,  that  if  he
did  not  recover  in  some  degree  the  prerogatives  which
his  predecessors  had  lost,  and  acquire  the  authority,  as
well  as  possess  the  name,  of  head  of  the  empire,  his
high  dignity  would  contribute  more  to  obstruct  than  to
promote  his  ambitious  schemes.  Nothing  he  saw,  was
more  essential  towards  attaining  this,  than  to  suppress

1530.]  BOOK  V.  245

opinions  which  might  form  new  Bonds  of  confederacy
among  the  princes  of  the  empire,  and  unite  them  by  ties
stronger  and  more  sacred  than  any  political  connexion.
Nothing  seemed  to  lead  more  certainly  to  the  accom-
plishment of  his  design,  than  to  employ  zeal  for  the  esta-
blished religion,  of  which  he  was  the  natural  protector,
as  the  instrument  of  extending  his  civil  authority.
Proceed-  Accordingly,  a  prospect  no  sooner  opened  of
D?et°aVhe  coming  to  an  accommodation  with  the  pope,

Spires,  ^  than  by  the  emperor's  appointment,  a  diet  of
1529.  the  empire  was  held  at  Spires,  in  order  to  take
into  consideration  the  state  of  religion.  The  decree  of
the  diet  assembled  there  in  the  year  1  526,  which  was
almost  equivalent  to  a  toleration  of  Luther's,  opinions
had  given  great  offence  to  the  rest  of  Christendom.  The
greatest  delicacy  of  address,  however,  was  requisite  in
proceeding  to  any  decision  more  rigorous.  The  minds
of  men  kept  in  perpetual  agitation  by  a  controversy  car-
ried on,  during  twelve  years,  without  intermission  of  de-
bate, or  abatement  of  zeal,  were  now  inflamed  to  a  high
degree.  They  were  accustomed  to  innovations,  and  saw
the  boldest  of  them  successful  .  Having  not  only  abolished
old  rites,  but  substituted  new  forms  in  their  place,  they
were  influenced  as  much  by  attachment  to  the  system
which  they  had  embraced,  as  by  aversion  to  that  which
they  had  abandoned.  Luther  himself,  of  a  spirit  not
to  be  worn  out  by  the  length  and  obstinacy  of  the  com-
bat, or  to  become  remiss  upon  success,  continued  the
attack  with  as  much  vigour  as  he  had  begun  it.  His
disciples,  of  whom  many  equalled  him  in  zeal,  and
some  surpassed  him  in  learning,  were  no  less  capable
than  their  master  to  conduct  the  controversy  in  the
properest  manner.  Many  of  the  laity,  some  even  of
the  princes,  trained  up  amidst  these  incessant  disputa-
tions, and  in  the  habit  of  listening  to  the  arguments  of
the  contending  parties,  who  alternately  appealed  to

246  CHARLES V.  [1530.

them  as  judges,  came  to  be  profoundly  skilled  in  all  the
questions  which  were  agitated,  and,  upon  occasion,
could  shew  themselves  not  inexpert  in  any  of  the  arts
with  which  these  theological  encounters  were  managed.
It  was  obvious  from  all  these  circumstances,  that  any
violent  decision  of  the  diet  must  have  immediately  pre-
cipitated matters  into  confusion,  and  have  kindled  in
Germany  the  flames  of  a  religious  war.  All,  therefore,
that  the  archduke,  and  the  other  commissioners  ap-
pointed by  the  emperor,  demanded  of  the  diet,  was,  to
enjoin  those  states  of  the  empire  which  had  hitherto
obeyed  the  decree  issued  against  Luther  at  Worms,  in
1524,  to  persevere  in  the  observation  of  it,  and  to  pro-
hibit the  other  states  from  attempting  any  farther  inno-
vation in  religion,  particularly  from  abolishing  the  mass,
before  the  meeting  of  a  general  council.  After  much
dispute  a  decree  to  that  effect  was  approved  of  by  a  ma-
jority of  voices.1

The  foi-  The  elector  of  Saxony,  the  marquis  of  Bran-
LiTth"^  denburg,  the  landgrave  of  Hesse,  the  dukes  of
protest  Lunenburg,  the  prince  of  Anhalt,  together  with
them,8  the  deputies  of  fourteen  imperial  or  free  cities,1"
Apni  19.  entere(j  a  solemn  protest  against  this  decree,  as
unjust  and  impious.  On  that  account  they  were  dis-
tinguished by  the  name  of  PROTESTANTS^  an  appella-
tion which  hath  since  become  better  known,  and  more
honourable,  by  its  being  applied  indiscriminately  to  all
the  sects,  of  whatever  denomination,  which  have  re-
volted from  the  Roman  see.  Not  satisfied  with  this
declaration  of  their  dissent  from  the  decree  of  the  diet,
the  Protestants  sent  ambassadors  into  Italy,  to  lay  their
grievances  before  the  emperor,  from  whom  they  met

1  Sleid.  Hist.  117.

1  The  fourteen  cities  were  Strasburgh,  Nuremburgh,  Ulm,  Constance,  Reutlingen,
Windsheim,  Meinengen,  Lindaw,  Kempten,  Hailbron,  Isna,  Weissemburgh,  Nord-
lingen,  and  St.  Gal.

n  Sleid.  Hist.  119. F.  Paul.  Hist.  p.  45. Seckend.  ii.  1 27.

1530.]  BOOK  V.  247

with  the  most  discouraging  reception. Charles  was  at
Deiibera-  tnat  tuile  m  close  union  with  the  pope,  and  so-
!he1Sofe ^C^tous  to  attach  him  inviolably  to  his  interest,
and  em During  their  long  residence  at  Bologna,  they
held  many  consultations  concerning  the  most
effectual  means  of  extirpating  the  heresies  which  had
sprung  up  in  Germany. Clement,  whose  cautious  and
timid  mind  the  proposal  of  a  general  council  filled  with
horror,  even  beyond  what  popes,  the  constant  enemies
of  such  assemblies,  usually  feel,  employed  every  argu-
ment to  dissuade  the  emperor  from  consenting  to  that
measure. He  represented  general  councils  of  factions,
ungovernable,  presumptuous,  formidable  to  civil  au-
thority, and  too  slow  in  their  operations  to  remedy  dis-
orders which  required  an  immediate  cure. Experience,
he  said,  had  now  taught  both  the  emperor  and  himself,
that  forbearance  and  lenity,  instead  of  soothing  the
spirit  of  innovation,  had  rendered  it  more  enterprising
and  presumptuous  ;  it  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  have
recourse  to  the  rigorous  methods  which  such  a  despe-
rate case  required ;  Leo's  sentence  of  excommunication,
together  with  the  decree  of  the  diet  at  Worms,  should
be  carried  into  execution,  and  it  was  incumbent  on  the
emperor  to  employ  his  whole  power,  in  order  to  over-
awe those  on  whom  the  reverence  due  either  to  eccle-
siastical or  civil  authority  had  no  longer  any  influence.
Charles,  whose  views  were  very  different  from  the  pope's,
and  who  became  daily  more  sensible  how  obstinate  and
deep-rooted  the  evil  was,  thought  of  reconciling  the  Pro-
testants by  means  less  violent,  and  considered  the  con-
vocation of  a  council  as  no  improper  expedient  for  that
purpose ;  but  promised,  if  gentler  arts  failed  of  success,
that  then  he  would  exert  himself  with  rigour  to  reduce
to  the  obedience  of  the  holy  see  these  stubborn  enemies
of  the  Catholic  faith0.

0  F.  Paul,  xlvii.  Seek.  1.  ii.  142 Hist,  de  Confess.  d'Atubourgh,  par  D.  Chy-
treus,  4to. Antw.  1572,  p.  6.

248  CHARLES  V.  [1530.

Emperor  Such  were  the  sentiments  with  which  the
present  at  emperor  set  out  for  Germany,  having  already
Augsburg,  appointed  a  diet  of  the  empire  to  be  held  at  Augs-
burg. In  his  journey  to  wards  that  city,  he  had
many  opportunities  of  observing  the  disposition  of  the
Germans  with  regard  to  the  points  in  controversy,  and
found  their  minds  every  where  so  much  irritated  and  in-
flamed, as  convinced  him,  that  nothing  tending  to  severity
or  rigour  ought  to  be  attempted,  until  all  other  measures
proved  ineffectual.  He  made  his  public  entry

June  15. \  ..,  ,.  j

into  Augsburg  with  extraordinary  pomp ;  and
found  there  such  a  full  assembly  of  the  members  of  the
diet,  as  was  suitable  both  to  the  importance  of  the  af-
fairs which  were  to  come  under  their  consideration,  and
to  the  honour  of  an  emperor,  who,  after  a  long  absence,
returned  to  them  crowned  with  reputation  and  success.
His  presence  seems  to  have  communicated  to  all  parties
an  unusual  spirit  of  moderation  and  desire  of  peace.
The  elector  of  Saxony  would  not  permit  Luther  to  ac-
company him  to  the  diet,  lest  he  should  offend  the  em-
peror by  bringing  into  his  presence  a  person  excommu-
nicated by  the  pope,  and  who  had  been  the  author  of
all  those  dissensions  which  it  now  appeared  so  difficult
to  compose.  At  the  emperor's  desire,  all  the  Protestant
princes  forbade  the  divines  who  accompanied  them,  to
preach  in  public  during  their  residence  at  Augsburg.
For  the  same  reason  they  employed  Melancthon,  the
man  of  the  greatest  learning,  as  well  as  of  the  most
pacific  and  gentle  spirit  among  the  reformers,  to  draw
up  a  confession  of  their  faith,  expressed  in  terms  as  lit-
tle offensive  to  the  Roman  Catholics,  as  a  regard  for
The  con-  trutn  would  permit.  Melancthon,  who  seldom
uffered  tne  rancour  of  controversy  to  envenom

his  style,  even  in  writings  purely  polemical,
executed  a  task  so  agreeable  to  his  natural  disposition
with  great  moderation  and  address.  The  creed  which
he  composed,  known  by  the  name  of  the  Confession  of

1530.]

BOOK  V.

249

Augsburg,  from  the  place  where  it  was  presented,  was
read  publicly  in  the  diet.  Some  Popish  divines  were
appointed  to  examine  it;  they  brought  in  their  animad-
versions ;  a  dispute  ensued  between  them  and  Melanc-
thon,  seconded  by  some  of  his  brethren;  but  though
Melancthon  softened  some  articles,  made  concessions
with  regard  to  others,  and  put  the  least  exceptionable
sense  upon  all ;  though  the  emperor  himself  laboured
with  great  earnestness  to  reconcile  the  contending  par-
ties ;  so  many  marks  of  distinction  were  now  establish-
ed, and  such  insuperable  barriers  placed  between  the
two  churches,  that  all  hopes  of  bringing  about  a  coali-
tion seemed  utterly  desperated

From  the  divines,  among  whom  his  endeavours  had
been  so  unsuccessful,  Charles  turned  to  the  princes
their  patrons.  Nor  did  he  find  them,  how  desirous
soever  of  accommodation,  or  willing  to  oblige  the  em-
peror, more  disposed  than  the  former  to  renounce  their
opinions.  At  that  time  zeal  for  religion  took  possession
of  the  minds  of  men,  to  a  degree  which  can  scarcely
be  conceived  by  those  who  live  in  an  age  when  the
passions  excited  by  the  first  manifestations  of  truth,  and
the  first  recovery  of  liberty,  have  in  a  great  measure
ceased  to  operate.  This  zeal  was  then  of  such  strength
as  to  overcome  attachment  to  their  political  interests,
which  is  commonly  the  predominant  motive  among
princes.  The  elector  of  Saxony,  the  landgrave  of  Hesse,
and  other  chiefs  of  the  Protestants,  though  solicited
separately  by  the  emperor,  and  allured  by  the  promise
or  prospect  of  those  advantages  which  it  was  known
they  were  more  solicitous  to  attain,  refused,  with  a  for-
titude highly  worthy  of  imitation,  to  abandon  what
they  deemed  the  cause  of  God,  for  the  sake  of  any
earthly  acquisition.9

Every  scheme  in  order  to  gain  or  disunite  the  Pro-

P  Seckend.  lib.  ii.  159,  &c.  Abr.  Sculteti  Annales  Evangelici  ap.  Herm.  Von  der
Hard.  Hist.  Liter.  Reform.  Lips.  1717,  fol.  p.  159.

i  Sleid  132. ,  Scultet,  Annal.  158.

250  CHARLES V.  [1530.

severe  de-  testant  party  proving  abortive,  nothing  now  re-
^epar^ainst  mained  for  the  emperor  but  to  take  some  vigo-
testants. rous  measures  towards  asserting  the  doctrines
and  authority  of  the  established  church. These,  Cam-
peggio,  the  papal  nuncio,  had  always  recommended  as
the  only  proper  and  effectual  course  of  dealing  with  such
obstinate  heretics. In  compliance  with  his  opi-
nions and  remonstrances,  the  diet  issued  a  decree,
condemning  most  of  the  peculiar  tenets  held  by  the  Pro-
testants; forbidding  any  person  to  protect  or  tolerate
such  as  taught  them;  enjoining  a  strict  observance  of
the  established  rites ;  and  prohibiting  any  farther  inno-
vation under  severe  penalties. All  orders  of  men  were
required  to  assist  with  their  persons  and  fortunes  in
carrying  this  decree  into  execution;  and  such  as  re-
fused to  obey  it  were  declared  incapable  of  acting  as
judges,  or  of  appearing  as  parties  in  the  imperial  cham-
ber, the  supreme  court  of  judicature  in  the  empire.
To  all  which  was  subjoined  a  promise,  that  an  appli-
cation should  be  made  to  the  pope,  requiring  him  to
call  a  general  council  within  six  months,  in  order  to
terminate  all  controversies  by  its  sovereign  decisions/
They  enter The  severity  of  this  decree,  which  was  con-
league  at sidered  as  a  prelude  to  the  most  violent  perse-
Smaikaide,  cution,  alarmed  the  Protestants,  and  convinced
them  that  the  emperor  was  resolved  on  their  destruc-
tion. The  dread  of  those  calamities  which  were  ready
to  fall  on  the  church,  oppressed  the  feeble  spirit  of  Me-
lancthon;  and,  as  if  the  cause  had  already  been  despe-
rate, he  gave  himself  up  to  melancholy  and  lamentation.
But  Luther,  who  during  the  meeting  of  the  diet  had
endeavoured  to  confirm  and  animate  his  party  by  seve-
ral treatises  which  he  addressed  to  them,  was  not  dis-
concerted or  dismayed  at  the  prospect  of  this  new  dan-
ger. He  comforted  Melancthon  and  his  other  despond-
ing disciples,  and  exhorted  the  princes  not  to  abandon

«•  Sleid.  139.

1530.]  BOOK V.  251

those  truths  which  they  had  lately  asserted  with  such
laudable  boldness.8  His  exhortations  made  the  deeper
impression  upon  them,  as  they  were  greatly  alarmed  at
that  time  by  the  account  of  a  combination  among  the
Popish  princes  of  the  empire  for  the  maintenance  of
the  established  religion,  to  which  Charles  himself  had
acceded.*  This  convinced  them  that  it  was  necessary
to  stand  on  their  guard ;  and  that  their  own  safety,  as
well  as  the  success  of  their  cause,  depended  on  union.
Filled  with  this  dread  of  the  adverse  party,  and  with
these  sentiments  concerning  the  conduct  proper  for
themselves,  they  assembled  at  Smalkalde.  There
they  concluded  a  league  of  mutual  defence
against  all  aggressors,"  by  which  they  formed  the  Pro-
testant states  of  the  empire  into  one  regular  body,  and
beginning  already  to  consider  themselves  as  such,  they
resolved  to  apply  to  the  kings  of  France  and  England,
and  to  implore  them  to  patronise  and  assist  their  new
confederacy.

The  empe-  An  affair  not  connected  with  religion  fur-
poses°to  nished  them  with  a  pretence  for  courting  the
broThet  a*d  °f  f°reign  princes.  Charles,  whose  ambi-
eiected  tious  views  enlarged  in  proportion  to  the  in-
king of  the  i  i  i  r  j
Romans,  crease  of  his  power  and  grandeur,  had  formed

a  scheme  of  continuing  the  imperial  crown  in  his
family,  by  procuring  his  brother  Ferdinand  to  be  elected
king  of  the  Romans.  The  present  juncture  was  favour-
able for  the  execution  of  that  design.  The  emperor's
arms  had  been  every  where  victorious ;  he  had  given
law  to  all  Europe  at  the  late  peace ;  no  rival  now  re-
mained in  a  condition  to  balance  or  to  control  him ;  and
the  electors,  dazzled  with  the  splendour  of  his  success,
or  overawed  by  the  greatness  of  his  power,  durst
scarcely  dispute  the  will  of  a  prince,  whose  solicitations
carried  with  them  the  authority  of  commands.  Nor
did  he  want  plausible  reasons  to  enforce  the  measure.

•  Seek,  ii.  180.  Sleid,  140.  t  Ibid.  200.  iii.  11.  u  Sleid.  Hist.  142.

252  CHARLES  V.  [1530.

The  affairs  of  his  other  kingdoms,  he  said,  obliged  him
to  be  often  absent  from  Germany ;  the  growing  disor-
ders, occasioned  by  the  controversies  about  religion,  as
well  as  the  formidable  neighbourhood  of  the  Turks,
who  continually  threatened  to  break  in  with  their  de-
solating armies  into  the  heart  of  the  empire,  required
the  constant  presence  of  a  prince  endowed  with  pru-
dence, capable  of  composing  the  former,  and  with
power  as  well  as  valour  sufficient  to  repel  the  latter.
His  brother  Ferdinand  possessed  these  qualities  in  an
eminent  degree ;  by  residing  long  in  Germany,  he  had
acquired  a  thorough  knowledge  of  its  constitution  and
manners ;  having  been  present  almost  from  the  first  rise
of  the  religious  dissensions,  he  knew  what  remedies
were  most  proper,  what  the  Germans  could  bear,  and
how  to  apply  them;  as  his  own  dominions  lay  on
the  Turkish  frontier,  he  was  the  natural  defender  of
Germany  against  the  invasions  of  the  infidels,  being
prompted  by  interest  no  less  than  he  would  be  bound
in  duty  to  oppose  them.

The  Pro-  These  arguments  made  little  impression  on
3to  the  Protestants.  Experience  taught  them,  that
nothing  had  contributed  more  to  the  undisturbed
progress  of  their  opinions,  than  the  interregnum  after
Maximilian's  death,  the  long  absence  of  Charles,  and
the  slackness  of  the  reins  of  government  which  these
occasioned.  Conscious  of  the  advantages  which  their
cause  had  derived  from  this  relaxation  of  government,
they  were  unwilling  to  render  it  more  vigorous,  by
giving  themselves  a  new  and  a  fixed  master.  They
perceived  clearly  the  extent  of  Charles's  ambition,  that
he  aimed  at  rendering  the  imperial  crown  hereditary
in  his  family,  and  would  of  course  establish  in  the  em-
pire an  absolute  dominion,  to  which  elective  princes
could  not  have  aspired  with  equal  facility.  They  de-
termined therefore  to  oppose  the  election  of  Ferdinand
with  the  utmost  vigour,  and  to  rouse  their  countrymen,

testants

averse

it.

1531.]  BOOK.  V.  253

by  their  example  and  exhortation,  to  withstand  this
i53i.  encroachment  on  their  liberties.  The  elector
January  *•  Of  Saxony,  accordingly,  not  only  refused  to  be
present  at  the  electoral  college,  which  the  emperor  sum-
moned to  meet  at  Cologne,  but  instructed  his  eldest
son  to  appear  there,  and  to  protest  against  the  election
as  informal,  illegal,  contrary  to  the  articles  of  the  golden
bull,  and  subversive  of  the  liberties  of  the  empire.
But  the  electors  whom  Charles  had  been  at  great  pains
He  is  cho-  to  gain,  without  regarding  either  his  absence
or  protest,  chose  Ferdinand  king  of  the  Ro-
mans ;  who,  a  few  days  after,  was  crowned  at  Aix-la-
Chapelle.x

Negotia-  When  the  Protestants,  who  were  assembled  a
p?otSest-the  second  time  at  Smalkalde,  received  an  account
ants  with  of  this  transaction,  and  heard,  at  the  same  time,

France;  .  •• • i

that  prosecutions  were  commenced,  in  the
imperial  chamber,  against  some  of  their  number,  on
account  of  their  religious  principles,  they  thought  it
necessary,  not  only  to  renew  their  former  confederacy,
but  immediately  to  dispatch  their  ambassadors
into  France  and  England.  Francis  had  observ-
ed, with  all  the  jealousy  of  a  rival,  the  reputation  which
the  emperor  had  acquired  by  his  seeming  disinterest-
edness and  moderation  in  settling  the  affairs  in  Italy;
and  beheld  with  great  concern  the  successful  step  which
he  had  taken  towards  perpetuating  and  extending  his
authority  in  Germany  by  the  election  of  a  king  of  the
Romans.  Nothing,  however,  would  have  been  more
impolitic  than  to  precipitate  his  kingdom  into  a  new
war,  when  exhausted  by  extraordinary  efforts,  and  dis-
couraged by  ill  success,  before  it  had  got  time  to  recruit
its  strength,  or  to  forget  past  misfortunes.  As  no  pfo-
vocation  had  been  given  by  the  emperor,  and  hardly  a
pretext  for  a  rupture  had  been  afforded  him,  he  could
not  violate  a  treaty  of  peace  which  he  himself  had  so

*  Sleid.  142. Seek.  iii.  1. P.  Heater.  Rer.  Austr.  lib.  x.  c.  6.  p.  240.

254  CHARLES  V.  [1531.

lately  solicited,  without  forfeiting  the  esteem  of  all
Europe,  and  being  detested  as  a  prince  void  of  probity
and  honour.  He  observed,  with  great  joy,  powerful
factions  beginning  to  form  in  the  empire ;  he  listened
with  the  utmost  eagerness  to  the  complaints  of  the
Protestant  princes ;  and  without  seeming  to  counte-
nance their  religious  opinions,  determined  secretly  to
cherish  those  sparks  of  political  discord  which  might
be  afterward  kindled  into  a  flame.  For  this  purpose,
he  sent  William  de  Bellay,  one  of  the  ablest  negotiators
in  France,  into  Germany,  who,  visiting  the  courts  of
the  malecontent  princes,  and  heightening  their  ill  hu-
mour by  various  arts,  concluded  an  alliance  between
them  and  his  master/  which,  though  concealed  at  that
time,  and  productive  of  no  immediate  effects,  laid  the
foundation  of  a  union  fatal  on  many  occasions  to
Charles's  ambitious  projects ;  and  shewed  the  discon-
tented princes  of  Germany,  where,  for  the  future,  they
might  find  a  protector  no  less  able  than  willing  to  un-
dertake their  defence  against  the  encroachments  of  the
emperor.

with  Eng-  The  king  of  England,  highly  incensed  against
land,  Charles,  in  complaisance  to  whom,  the  pope
had  long  retarded,  and  now  openly  opposed  his  di-
vorce, was  no  less  disposed  than  Francis  to  strengthen
a  league  which  might  be  rendered  so  formidable  to  the
emperor.  But  his  favourite  project  of  the  divorce  led
him  into  such  a  labyrinth  of  schemes  and  negotiations,
and  he  was,  at  the  same  time,  so  intent  on  abolishing
the  papal  jurisdiction  in  England,  that  he  had  no  leisure
for  foreign  affairs.  This  obliged  him  to  rest  satisfied
with  giving  general  promises,  together  with  a  small
supply  of  money  to  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde.2
Charles  Meanwhile,  many  circumstances  convinced
p°rotest-he  Charles  that  this  was  not  a  juncture  when  the
ants-  extirpation  of  heresy  was  to  be  attempted  by

y  Bellay,  129.  a.  130.  b.  Sec.  iii.  14.  *  Herbert,  152.  164.

1531.]  BOOK V.  255

violence  and  rigour;  that,  in  compliance  with  the  pope's
inclinations,  he  had  already  proceeded  with  impru-
dent precipitation ;  and  that  it  was  more  his  interest
to  consolidate  Germany  into  one  united  and  vigorous
body,  than  to  divide  and  enfeeble  it  by  a  civil  war.
The  Protestants,  who  were  considerable  as  well  by
their  numbers  as  by  their  zeal,  had  acquired  additional
weight  and  importance  by  their  joining  in  that  con-
federacy into  which  the  rash  steps  taken  at  Augsburg
had  forced  them.  Having  now  discovered  their  own
strength,  they  despised  the  decisions  of  the  imperial
chamber ;  and  being  secure  of  foreign  protection,  were
ready  to  set  the  head  of  the  empire  at  defiance.  At  the
same  time  the  peace  with  France  was  precarious,  the
friendship  of  an  irresolute  and  interested  pontiff  was
not  to  be  relied  on ;  and  Solyman,  in  order  to  repair
the  discredit  and  loss  which  his  arms  had  sustained  in
the  former  campaign,  was  preparing  to  enter  Austria
with  more  numerous  forces.  On  all  these  accounts,
especially  the  last,  a  speedy  accommodation  with  the
malecontent  princes  became  necessary,  not  only  for  the
accomplishment  of  his  future  schemes,  but  for  ensuring
his  present  safety.  Negotiations  were,  accordingly
carried  on  by  his  direction  with  the  elector  of  Saxony
and  his  associates ;  after  many  delays,  occasioned  by
their  jealousy  of  the  emperor,  and  of  each  other ;  after
innumerable  difficulties  arising  from  the  inflexible  na-
ture of  religious  tenets,  which  cannot  admit  of  being
altered,  modified,  or  relinquished  in  the  same

Grants  . « p , . , . , .  _

them  fa-  manner  as  points  ot  political  interest,  terms  of
pacification  were  agreed  upon  at  Nuremberg,
an(*  rat^ec^  solemnly  in  the  diet  at  Ratisbon.
In  this  treaty  it  was  stipulated,  That  universal
peace  be  established  in  Germany,  until  the  meeting  of
a  general  council,  the  convocation  of  which  within  six
months  the  emperor  shall  endeavour  to  procure  ;  that
no  person  shall  be  molested  on  account  of  religion ;

256  CHARLES V.  [1531.

that  a  stop  shall  be  put  to  all  processes  begun  by  the
imperial  chamber  against  Protestants,  and  the  sentences
already  passed  to  their  detriment  shall  be  declared
void.  On  their  part,  the  Protestants  engaged  to  assist
the  emperor  with  all  their  forces  in  resisting  the  inva-
sion of  the  Turks .a  Thus  by  their  firmness  in  adher-
ing to  their  principles,  by  the  unanimity  with  which
they  urged  all  their  claims,  and  by  their  dexterity  in
availing  themselves  of  the  emperor's  situation,  the  Pro-
testants obtained  terms  which  amounted  almost  to  a
toleration  of  their  religion  ;  all  the  concessions  were
made  by  Charles,"  none  by  them;  even  the  favourite
point  of  their  approving  his  brother's  election  was  not
mentioned ;  and  the  Protestants  of  Germany,  who  had
hitherto  been  viewed  only  as  a  religious  sect,  came
henceforth  to  be  considered  as  a  political  body  of  no
small  consequence.5

Campaign  The  intelligence  which  Charles  received  of
in  Hun-  Solyman's  having  entered  Hungary  at  the  head
of  three  hundred  thousand  men,  brought  the
deliberations  of  the  diet  at  Ratisbon  to  a  period ;  the
contingent  both  of  troops  and  money,  which  each
prince  was  to  furnish  towards  the  defence  of  the  empire,
having  been  already  settled.  The  Protestants,  as  a
testimony  of  their  gratitude  to  the  emperor,  exerted
themselves  with  extraordinary  zeal,  and  brought  into
the  field  forces  which  exceeded  in  number  the  quota
imposed  on  them ;  the  Catholics  imitating  their  example,
one  of  the  greatest  and  best  appointed  armies  that  had
ever  been  levied  in  Germany,  assembled  near  Vienna.
Being  joined  by  a  body  of  Spanish  and  Italian  veterans
under  the  marquis  del  Guasto ;  by  some  heavy-armed
cavalry  from  the  Low-Countries ;  and  by  the  troops
which  Ferdinand  had  raised  in  Bohemia,  Austria,  and
his  other  territories,  it  amounted  in  all  to  ninety  thou-

*  Du  Mont  Corps  Diplomatique,  torn.  iv.  part  ii.  87.  89.
b  Sleid.  149,  &c. Seek,  iii,  19.

1532.]  BOOK V.  257

sand  disciplined  foot,  and  thirty  thousand  horse,  besides
a  prodigious  swarm  of  irregulars.  Of  this  vast  army,
worthy  the  first  prince  in  Christendom,  the  emperor
took  the  command  in  person ;  and  mankind  waited  in
suspense  the  issue  of  a  decisive  battle  between  the  two
greatest  monarchs  in  the  world.  But  each  of  them
dreading  the  other's  power  and  good  fortune,  they  both
conducted  their  operations  with  such  excessive  caution,
that  a  campaign,  for  which  such  immense  preparations
had  been  made,  ended  without  any  memorable  event.
September  Solyman,  finding  it  impossible  to  gain  ground
and  Octo-  upon  an  enemy  always  attentive  and  on  his

guard,  marched  back  to  Constantinople  towards
the  end  of  autumn.c  It  is  remarkable,  that  in  such  a
martial  age,  when  every  gentleman  was  a  soldier,  and
every  prince  a  general,  this  was  the  first  time  that
Charles,  who  had  already  carried  on  such  extensive
wars,  and  gained  so  many  victories,  appeared  at  the
head  of  his  troops.  In  this  first  essay  of  his  arms,  to
have  opposed  such  a  leader  as  Solyman,  was  no  small
honour ;  to  have  obliged  him  to  retreat,  merited  very
considerable  praise.

About  the  beginning  of  this  campaign,  the

elector  of  Saxony  died,  and  was  succeeded  by
his  son  John  Frederic.  The  Reformation  rather  gained
than  lost  by  that  event ;  the  new  elector,  no  less  attached
than  his  predecessors  to  the  opinions  of  Luther,  occu-
pied the  station  which  they  had  held  at  the  head  of  the
Protestant  party,  and  defended,  with  the  boldness  and
zeal  of  youth,  that  cause  which  they  had  fostered  and
reared  with  the  caution  of  more  advanced  age.
Theempe-  Immediately  after  the  retreat  of  the  Turks,
"  Charles,  impatient  to  revisit  Spain,  set  out  on
is  way  thither,  for  Italy.  As  he  was  extremely
to  Spain,  desirous  of  an  interview  with  the  pope,  they  met
a  second  time  at  Bologna,  with  the  same  external  de-

c  Jovii  Hist.  lib.  xxx.  p.  100,  &c. Barre  Hist,  de  1'Empire,  i.  8.  347.
VOL.  IV.  S

258  CHARLES V.  [1532.

monstrations  of  respect  and  friendship,  but  with  little
of  that  confidence  which  had  subsisted  between  them
during  their  late  negotiations  there.  Clement  was  much
dissatisfied  with  the  emperor's  proceedings  at  Augs-
burg :  his  concessions  with  regard  to  the  speedy  convo-
cation of  a  council,  having  more  than  cancelled  all  the
merit  of  the  severe  decree  against  the  doctrines  of  the
reformers*  The  toleration  granted  to  the  Protestants
at  Ratisbon,  and  the  more  explicit  promise  concerning
a  council,  with  which  it  was  accompanied,  had  irritated
Ne  otia-  kim  S^  farther.  Charles,  however,  partly  from
tions  con-  conviction  that  the  meeting  of  a  council  would

earning  a  11-11  /r*

general  be  attended  with  salutary  effects,  and  partly
from  his  desire  to  please  the  Germans,  having
solicited  the  pope  by  his  ambassadors  to  call  that  assem-
bly without  delay,  and  now  urging  the*  same  thing  in
person,  Clement  was  greatly  embarrassed  what  reply  he
should  make  to  a  request  which  it  was  indecent  to  re-
fuse, and  dangerous  to  grant.  He  endeavoured  at  first
to  divert  Charles  from  the  measure;  but,  finding  him
inflexible,  he  had  recourse  to  artifices  which  he  knew
would  delay,  if  not  entirely  defeat,  the  calling  of  that
assembly.  After  the  plausible  pretext  of  its  being  pre-
viously necessary  to  settle,  with  all  parties  concerned,
the  place  of  the  council's  meeting ;  the  manner  of  its
proceedings ;  the  right  of  the  persons  who  should  be
admitted  to  vote ;  and  the  authority  of  their  decisions  ;
he  dispatched  a  nuncio,  accompanied  by  an  ambassador
from  the  emperor,  to  the  elector  of  Saxony  as  head  of
the  Protestants.  With  regard  to  each  of  these  articles,
inextricable  difficulties  and  contests  arose.  The  Pro-
testants demanded  a  council  to  be  held  in  Germany ;
the  pope  insisted  that  it  should  meet  in  Italy ;  they  con-
teiided,  that  all  points  in  dispute  should  be  determined
by  the  words  of  Holy  Scripture  alone ;  he  considered
not  only  the  decrees  of  the  church,  but  the  opinions  of
fathers  and  doctors,  as  of  equal  authority ;  they  re-

1532.]  BOOK V.  259

quired  a  free  council,  in  which  the  divines,  commis-
sioned by  different  churches,  should  be  allowed  a  voice ;
he  aimed  at  modelling  the  council  in  such  a  manner  as
would  render  it  entirely  dependent  on  his  pleasure.
Above  all,  the  Protestants  thought  it  unreasonable,  that
they  should  bind  themselves  to  submit  to  the  decrees
of  a  council,  before  they  knew  on  what  principles  these
decrees  were  to  be  founded,  by  what  persons  they  were
to  be  pronounced,  and  what  forms  of  proceedings  they
would  observe.  The  pope  maintained  it  to  be  altogether
unnecessary  to  call  a  council,  if  those  who  demanded
it  did  not  previously  declare  their  resolution  to  acqui-
esce in  its  decrees^  In  order  to  adjust  such  a  variety
of  points,  many  expedients  were  proposed,  and  the  ne-
gotiations spun  out  to  such  a  length,  as  effectually
answered  Clement's  purpose  of  putting  off  the  meeting
of  a  council,  without  drawing  on  himself  the  whole  in-
famy of  obstructing  a  measure  which  all  Europe  deemed
so  essential  to  the  good  of  the  church/
And  for  Together  with  this  negotiation  about  calling
preserving  a  council,  the  emperor  carried  on  another,  which
mTtttty  «c  he  had  still  more  at  heart,  for  securing  the  peace
Italy'  established  in  Italy.  As  Francis  had  renounced
his  pretensions  in  that  country  with  great  reluctance,
Charles  made  no  doubt  but  that  he  would  lay  hold  on
the  first  pretext  afforded  him,  or  embrace  the  first  oppor-
tunity which  presented  itself,  of  recovering  what  he  had
lost.  It  became  necessary,  on  this  account,  to  take  mea-
sures for  assembling  an  army  able  to  oppose  him.  As
his  treasury,  drained  by  a  long  war,  could  not  supply  the
sums  requisite  for  keeping  such  a  body  constantly  on
foot,  he  attempted  to  throw  that  burden  on  his  allies,
and  to  provide  for  the  safety  of  his  own  dominions  at
their  expense,  by  proposing  that  the  Italian  states  should
enter  into  a  league  of  defence  against  all  invaders  ;  that,
on  the  first  appearance  of  danger,  an  army  should  be

d  F.  Paul,  Hist.  61. Seckend.  iii.  73.

s.  2

260  CHARLES V.  [1532.

raised  and  maintained  at  the  common  charge ;  and  that
Antonio  de  Leyva  should  be  appointed  the  generalis-
simo. Nor  was  the  proposal  unacceptable  to  Clement,
though  for  a  reason  very  different  from  that  which  in-
duced the  emperor  to  make  it. He  hoped,  by
this  expedient,  to  deliver  Italy  from  the  German
and  Spanish  veterans,  which  had  so  long  filled  all  the
powers  in  that  country  with  terror,  and  still  kept  them
in  subjection  to  the  imperial  yoke. A  league
was accordingly concluded ; all the Italian
states,  the  Venetians  excepted,  acceded  to  it ;  the  sum
which  each  of  the  contracting  parties  should  furnish
towards  maintaining  the  army  was  fixed ;  the  emperor
agreed  to  withdraw  the  troops  which  gave  so  much
umbrage  to  his  allies,  and  which  he  was  unable  any
longer  to  support. Having  disbanded  part  of  them,
and  removed  the  rest  to  Sicily  and  Spain,  he  em-
barked on  board  Doria's  galleys,  and  arrived  at

April  21  B J '

Barcelona/

Designs  Notwithstanding  all  the  precautions  for  se-
and  nego-  curing  the  peace  of  Germany,  and  maintaining

tiations  of  &  " .  i  i  T i  •  i

the  French  that  system  which  he  had  established  m  Italy,
the8en?pe"St  the  emperor  became  every  day  more  and  more
ror '  apprehensive  that  both  would  be  soon  disturbed
by  the  intrigues  or  arms  of  the  French  king.  His  ap-
prehensions were  well  founded,  as  nothing  but  the  des-
perate situation  of  his  affairs  could  have  brought  Francis
to  give  his  consent  to  a  treaty  so  dishonourable  and  dis-
advantageous as  that  of  Cambray  :  he,  at  the  very  time
of  ratifying  it,  had  formed  a  resolution  to  observe  it  no
longer  than  necessity  compelled  him,  and  took  a  solemn
protest,  though  with  the  most  profound  secrecy,  against
several  articles  in  the  treaty,  particularly  that  whereby
he  renounced  all  pretensions  to  the  duchy  of  Milan,  as
unjust,  injurious  to  his  heirs,  and  invalid.  One  of  the
crown  lawyers,  by  his  command,  entered  a  protest  to

«  Guic.  1.  xx.  551. Ferreras,  ix.  149.

1533.]  BOOK  V.  261

the  same  purpose,  and  with  the  like  secrecy,  when  the
ratification  of  the  treaty  was  registered  in  the  parlia-
ment of  Paris/  Francis  seems  to  have  thought  that,  by
employing  an  artifice  unworthy  of  a  king,  destructive  of
public  faith,  and  of  the  mutual  confidence  on  which  all
transactions  between  nations  are  founded,  he  was  re-
leased from  any  obligation  to  perform  the  most  solemn
promises,  or  to  adhere  to  the  most  sacred  engagements.
From  the  moment  he  concluded  the  peace  of  Cambray,
he  wished  and  watched  for  an  opportunity  of  violating
it  with  safety.  He  endeavoured  for  that  reason  to
strengthen  his  alliance  with  the  king  of  England,  whose
friendship  he  cultivated  with  the  greatest  assiduity.  He
put  the  military  force  of  his  own  kingdom  on  a  better
and  more  respectable  footing  than  ever.  He  artfully
fomented  the  jealousy  and  discontent  of  the  German
princes.

But  above  all,  Francis  laboured  to  break  the
lariy  with  strict  confederacy  which  subsisted  between
the  pope.  Charles  and  Clement ;  and  had  soon  the  satis-
faction to  observe  appearances  of  disgust  and  aliena-
tion arising  in  the  mind  of  that  suspicious  and  inte-
rested pontiff,  which  gave  him  hopes  that  their  union
would  not  be  lasting.  As  the  emperor's  decision  in
favour  of  the  duke  of  Ferrara  had  greatly  irritated  the
pope,  Francis  aggravated  the  injustice  of  that  proceed-
ing, and  flattered  Clement  that  the  papal  see  would  find
in  him  a  more  impartial  and  no  less  powerful  protector.
As  the  importunity  with  which  Charles  demanded  a
council  was  extremely  offensive  to  the  pope,  Francis
artfully  created  obstacles  to  prevent  it,  and  attempted
to  divert  the  German  princes,  his  allies,  from  insisting
so  obstinately  on  that  point.g  As  the  emperor  had
gained  such  an  ascendant  over  Clement  by  contributing
to  aggrandize  his  family,  Francis  endeavoured  to  allure

£• f  Du  Mont  Corps  Diplora.  toni.  iv.  part  ii.  p.  52.  .
*  Bellay,  141,  &c. Seek.  iii.  48. P.  Paul,  43.

-2(J2  CHARLES V.  [1533.

him  by  the  same  irresistible  bait,  proposing  a  mar-
riage between  his  second  son,  Henry  duke  of  Orleans,
and  Catharine,  the  daughter  of  the  pope's  cousin,  Lau-
rence di  Medici.  On  the  first  overture  of  this  match,
the  emperor  could  not  persuade  himself  that  Francis
really  intended  to  debase  the  royal  blood  of  France  by
an  alliance  with  Catharine,  whose  ancestors  had  been
so  lately  private  citizens  and  merchants  in  Florence,
and  believed  that  he  meant  only  to  flatter  or  amuse  the
ambitious  pontiff.  He  thought  it  necessary,  however,
to  efface  the  impression  which  such  a  dazzling  offer
might  have  made,  by  promising  to  break  off  the  mar-
riage which  had  been  agreed  on  between  his  own  niece
the  king  of  Denmark's  daughter,  and  the  duke  of  Milan,
and  to  substitute  Catharine  in  her  place.  But  the
French  ambassador  producing  unexpectedly  full  powers
to  conclude  the  marriage-treaty  with  the  duke  of  Or-
leans, this  expedient  had  no  effect.  Clement  was  so
highly  pleased  with  an  honour  which  added  such  lustre
and  dignity  to  the  house  of  Medici,  that  he  offered  to
grant  Catharine  the  investiture  of  considerable  territo-
ries in  Italy,  by  way  of  portion;  he  seemed  ready  to
support  Francis  in  prosecuting  his  ancient  claims  in
that  country,  and  consented  to  a  personal  interview
with  that  monarch.8

Charles  was  at  the  utmost  pains  to  prevent  a

nterview  %  t  A  *

between  meeting,  in  which  nothing  was  likely  to  pass
ltdPFran-  but  what  would  be  of  detriment  to  him ;  nor
could  he  bear,  after  he  had  twice  condescended
to  visit  the  pope  in  his  own  territories,  that  Clement
should  bestow  such  a  mark  of  distinction  on  his  rival,
as  to  venture  on  a  voyage  by  sea,  at  an  unfavourable
season,  in  order  to  pay  court  to  Francis  in  the  French
dominions.  But  the  pope's  eagerness  to  accomplish
the  match  overcame  all  the  scruples  of  pride,  or  fear,
or  jealousy,  which  would  probably  have  influenced  him

*  Guic.  I.  xx.  551.  553. Bellay,  138.

1533.]  BOOK V.  263

on  any  other  occasion.  The  interview,  not-
withstanding several  artifices  of  the  emperor  to
prevent  it,  took  place  at  Marseilles,  with  extraordinary
pomp,  and  demonstrations  of  confidence  on  both  sides  ;
and  the  marriage,  which  the  ambition  and  abilities  of
Catharine  rendered  in  the  sequel  as  pernicious  to
France,  as  it  was  then  thought  dishonourable,  was  con-
summated. But  whatever  schemes  may  have  been  se-
cretly concerted  by  the  pope  and  Francis  in  favour  of
the  duke  of  Orleans,  to  whom  his  father  proposed  to
make  over  all  his  rights  in  Italy,  so  careful  were  they
to  avoid  giving  any  cause  of  offence  to  .the  emperor,
that  no  treaty  was  concluded  between  them  ;b  and  even
in  the  marriage-articles,  Catharine  renounced  all  claims
and  pretensions  in  Italy,  except  to  the  duchy  of  Ur-
bino.*

Pope,8  But  at  the  very  time  when  he  was  carrying  on
coquet  these  negotiations,  and  forming  this  connexion
gardtothe  with  Francis,  which  gave  so  great  umbrage
England's  to  the  emperor,  such  was  the  artifice  and  dupli-
dkorce.  citv  Q£  Clement's  character,  that  he  suffered  the
latter  to  direct  all  his  proceedings  with  regard  to  the
king  of  England,  and  was  no  less  attentive  to  gratify  him
in  that  particular,  than  if  the  most  cordial  union  had
still  subsisted  between  them.  Henry's  suit  for  a  divorce
had  now  continued  near  six  years ;  during  all  which
period  the  pope  negotiated,  promised,  retracted,  and
concluded  nothing.  After  bearing  repeated  delays  and
disappointments  longer  than  could  have  been  expected
from  a  prince  of  such  a  choleric  and  impetuous  temper,
the  patience  of  Henry  was  at  last  so  much  exhausted,
that  he  applied  to  another  tribunal  for  that  decree
which  he  had  solicited  in  vain  at  Rome.  Cranmer,
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  by  a  sentence  founded  on
the  authority  of  universities,  doctors,  and  rabbies,
who  had  been  consulted  with  respect  to  the  point,  an-

b  Guic.  1.  xx.  555.  *  Du  Mont  Corps  Diplom.  iv.  part  ii.  101.

264  CHARLES V.  [1533.

nulled  the  king's  marriage  with  Catharine  ;  her  daugh-
ter was  declared  illegitimate ;  and  Anne  Boleyne  ac-
knowledged as  queen  of  England.  At  the  same  time,
Henry  began  not  only  to  neglect  and  to  threaten  the
pope,  whom  he  had  hitherto  courted,  but  to  make  in-
novations in  the  church,  of  which  he  had  formerly  been
such  a  zealous  defender.  Clement,  who  had  already
seen  so  many  provinces  and  kingdoms  revolt  from  the
holy  see,  became  apprehensive  at  last  that  England
might  imitate  their  example ;  and  partly  from  his  soli-
citude to  prevent  that  fatal  blow,  partly  in  compliance
with  the  French  king's  solicitations,  determined  to  give
1534.  Henry  such  satisfaction  as  might  retain  him
March  23.  within  the  bosom  of  the  church.  But  the  vio-
lence of  the  cardinals,  devoted  to  the  emperor,  did  not
allow  the  pope  leisure  for  executing  this  prudent  reso-
lution, and  hurried  him,  with  a  precipitation  fatal  to  the
Roman  see,  to  issue  a  bull  rescinding  Cranmer's  sen-
tence, confirming  Henry's  marriage  with  Catharine,  and
declaring  him  excommunicated,  if,  within  a  time  spe-
cified, he  did  not  abandon  the  wife  he  had  taken,  and
return  to  her  whom  he  had  deserted.  Enraged  at  this
unexpected  decree,  Henry  kept  no  longer  any  measures
Papal  au-  with  ^e  court  of  Rome ;  his  subjects  seconded
abouXed  k*s  resentment  and  indignation  ;  an  act  of  par-
in  Eng-  liament  was  passed,  abolishing  the  papal  power
and  jurisdiction  in  England ;  by  another,  the
king  was  declared  supreme  head  of  the  church,  and  all
the  authority  of  which  the  popes  were  deprived  was
vested  in  him.  That  vast  fabric  of  ecclesiastical  do-
minion which  had  been  raised  with  such  art,  and  of
which  the  foundations  seemed  to  have  been  laid  so  deep,
being  no  longer  supported  by  the  veneration  of  the
people,  was  overturned  in  a  moment.  Henry  himself,
with  the  caprice  peculiar  to  his  character,  continued  to
defend  the  doctrines  of  the  Romish  church  as  fiercely
as  he  attacked  its  jurisdiction.  He  alternately  perse-

1534.]  BOOK V.  265

cuted  the  Protestants  for  rejecting  the  former,  and  the
Catholics  for  acknowledging  the  latter.  But  his  sub-
jects, being  once  permitted  to  enter  into  new  paths,  did
not  choose  to  stop  short  at  the  precise  point  prescribed
by  him.  Having  been  encouraged  by  his  example  to
break  some  of  their  fetters,  they  were  so  impatient  to
shake  off  what  still  remain ed,k  that,  in  the  following
reign,  with  the  applause  of  the  greater  part  of  the  nation,
a  total  separation  was  made  from  the  church  of  Rome
in  articles  of  doctrine,  as  well  as  in  matters  of  disci-
pline and  jurisdiction.

Death  of ^  short  delay  might  have  saved  the  see  of

clement Rome  from  all  the  unhappy  consequences  of

Clement's  rashness. Soon  after  his  sentence

against  Henry,  he  fell  into  a  languishing  distemper,

which,  gradually  wasting  his  constitution,  put

'*  an  end  to  his  pontificate,  the  most  unfortunate,

both  during  its  continuance,  and  by  its  effects,  that

Election  of  ^e  cnurcn  nad  known  for  many  ages. The

Paul  in. very  day  on  which  the  cardinals  entered  the

Octob.  13.  11  -i

conclave,  they  raised  to  the  papal  throne  Alex-
ander Farnese,  dean  of  the  sacred  college,  and  the
oldest  member  of  that  body,  who  assumed  the  name  of
Paul  III.  The  account  of  his  promotion  was  received
with  extraordinary  acclamations  of  joy  by  the  people
of  Rome,  highly  pleased,  after  an  interval  of  more  than
a  hundred  years,  to  see  the  crown  of  St.  Peter  placed
on  the  head  of  a  Roman  citizen.  Persons  more  capable
of  judging,  formed  a  favourable  presage  of  his  admi-
nistration, from  the  experience  which  he  had  acquired
under  four  pontificates,  as  well  as  the  character  of
prudence  and  moderation  which  he  had  uniformly
maintained  in  a  station  of  great  eminence,  and  dur-
ing an  active  period  that  required  both  talents  and
address.1

Europe,  it  is  probable,  owed  the  continuance  of  its

k  Herbert. Burn.  History  of  Reform. .  »  Guic.  1.  xx.  556. F.  Paul,  64.

266  CHARLES V.  [1534.

peace  to  the  death  of  Clement  ;  for  although  no  traces
remain  in  history  of  any  league  concluded  between
him  and  Francis,  it  is  scarcely  to  be  doubted  but  that
he  would  have  seconded  the  operations  of  the  French
arms  in  Italy,  that  he  might  have  gratified  his  ambition
by  seeing  one  of  his  family  possessed  of  the  supreme
power  in  Florence,  and  another  in  Milan.  But  upon
the  election  of  Paul  III.,  who  had  hitherto  adhered
uniformly  to  the  imperial  interest,  Francis  found  it
necessary  to  suspend  his  operations  for  some  time,  and
to  put  off  the  commencement  of  hostilities  against  the
emperor,  on  which,  before  the  death  of  Clement,  he
had  been  fully  determined.

insurrec-  While  Francis  waited  for  an  opportunity  to
tion  of  the  renew  a  war  which  had  hitherto  proved  so  fatal
to  himself  and  his  subjects,  a  transaction  of  a

German^.  very  sjnguiar  nature  was  carried  on  in  Ger-
many. Among  many  beneficial  and  salutary  effects  of
which  the  Reformation  was  the  immediate  cause,  it  was
attended,  as  must  be  the  case  in  all  actions  and  events
wherein  men  are  concerned,  with  some  consequences
of  an  opposite  nature.  When  the  human  mind  is  roused
by  grand  objects,  and  agitated  by  strong  passions,  its
operations  acquire  such  force,  that  they  are  apt  to  be-
come irregular  and  extravagant.  Upon  any  great  re-
volution in  religion,  such  irregularities  abound  most
at  that  particular  period,  when  men,  having  thrown  off
the  authority  of  their  ancient  principles,  do  not  yet
fully  comprehend  the  nature,  or  feel  the  obligation  of
those  new  tenets  which  they  have  embraced.  The
mind,  in  that  situation,  pushing  forward  with  the  bold-
ness which  prompted  it  to  reject  established  opinions,
and  not  guided  by  a  clear  knowledge  of  the  system
substituted  in  their  place,  disdains  all  restraint,  and
runs  into  wild  notions,  which  often  lead  to  scandalous
or  immoral  conduct  Thus,  in  ^e  first  ages  of  the  Chris-
tian church,  many  of  the  riew  converts,  having  re-

1534.]  BOOK V.  267

nounced  their  ancient  systems  of  religious  faith,  and
being  but  imperfectly  acquainted  with  the  doctrines
and  precepts  of  Christianity,  broached  the  most  ex-
travagant opinions,  equally  subversive  of  piety  and
virtue ;  all  which  errors  disappeared  or  were  exploded
when  the  knowledge  of  religion  increased,  and  came
to  be  more  generally  diffused.  In  like  manner,  soon
after  Luther's  appearance,  the  rashness  or  ignorance  of
some  of  his  disciples  led  them  to  publish  tenets  no  less
absurd  than  pernicious,  which  being  proposed  to  men
extremely  illiterate,  but  fond  of  novelty,  and  at  a  time
when  their  minds  were  occupied  chiefly  with  religious
speculations,  gained  too  easy  credit  and  authority  among
them.  To  these  causes  must  be  imputed  the  extrava-
gances of  Muncer,  in  the  year  1525,  as  well  as  the
rapid  progress  which  his  opinions  made  among  the
peasants ;  but  though  the  insurrection  excited  by  that
fanatic  was  soon  suppressed,  several  of  his  followers
lurked  in  different  places,  and  endeavoured  privately
to  propagate  his  opinions.

In  those  provinces  of  Upper  Germany  which

Origin  and  r  rr  J  .

tenets  of  had  already  been  so  cruelly  wasted  by  their
enthusiastic  rage,  the  magistrates  watched  their
motions  with  such  severe  attention,  that  many  of  them
found  it  necessary  to  retire  into  other  countries  ;  some
were  punished,  others  driven  into  exile,  and  their  errors
were  entirely  rooted  out.  But  in  the  Netherlands  and
Westphalia,  where  the  pernicious  tendency  of  their
opinions  was  more  unknown,  and  guarded  against  with
less  care,  they  got  admittance  into  several  towns,  and
spread  the  infection  of  their  principles.  The  most  re-
markable of  their  religious  tenets  related  to  the  sacra-
ment of  baptism,  which,  as  they  contended,  ought  to
be  administered  only  to  persons  grown  up  to  years  of
understanding,  and  should  be  performed  not  by  sprink-
ling them  with  water,  but  by  dipping  them  in  it :  for
this  reason  they  condemned  the  baptism  of  infants ;

268  CHARLES V.  [1534.

and  rebaptizing  all  whom  they  admitted  into  their  so-
ciety, the  sect  came  to  be  distinguished  by  the  name
of  anabaptists.  To  this  peculiar  notion  concerning
baptism,  which  has  the  appearance  of  being  founded
on  the  practice  of  the  church  in  the  apostolic  age,  and
contains  nothing  inconsistent  with  the  peace  and  order
of  human  society,  they  added  other  principles  of  a
most  enthusiastic  as  well  as  dangerous  nature.  They
maintained  that,  among  Christians  who  had  the  pre-
cepts of  the  gospel  to  direct,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  to
guide  them,  the  office  of  magistracy  was  not  only  un-
necessary, but  an  unlawful  encroachment  on  their  spiri-
tual liberty ;  that  the  distinctions  occasioned  by  birth,
or  rank,  or  wealth,  being  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the
gospel,  which  considers  all  men  as  equal,  should  be
entirely  abolished ;  that  all  Christians,  throwing  their
possessions  into  one  common  stock,  should  live  to-
gether in  that  state  of  equality  which  becomes  mem-
bers of  the  same  family ;  that  as  neither  the  laws  of
nature,  nor  the  precepts  of  the  New  Testament,  had
imposed  any  restraints  upon  men  with  regard  to  the
number  of  wives  which  they  might  marry,  they  should
use  that  liberty  which  God  himself  had  granted  to  the
patriarchs.

Settle  in  Such  opinions,  propagated  and  maintained
Munster.  ^[fa  enthusiastic  zeal  and  boldness,  were  not
long  without  producing  the  violent  effects  natural  to
them.  Two  anabaptist  prophets,  John  Matthias,  a
baker  of  Haerlem,  and  John  Boccold,  or  Beukels,  a
journeyman  tailor  of  Leyden,  possessed  with  the  rage
of  making  proselytes,  fixed  their  residence  at  Mun-
ster,  an  imperial  city  in  Westphalia,  of  the  first  rank,
under  the  sovereignty  of  its  bishop,  but  governed  by
its  own  senate  and  consuls.  As  neither  of  these  fa-
natics wanted  the  talents  requisite  in  desperate  enter-
prises— great  resolution,  the  appearance  of  sanctity,
bold  pretensions  to  inspiration,  and  a  confident  and

1534.]  BOOK  V.  269

plausible  manner  of  discoursing — they  soon gained
many  converts. Among  these  were  Roathman,  who
had  first  preached  the  Protestant  doctrine  in  Munster,
and  Cnipperdoling,  a  citizen  of  good  birth  and  con-
siderable eminence. Imboldened  by  the  countenance
of  such  disciples,  they  openly  taught  their  opinions ;
and  not  satisfied  with  that  liberty,  they  made  several
attempts,  though  without  success,  to  become  masters  of
the  town,  in  order  to  get  their  tenets  established  by
public  authority. At  last,  having  secretly  called  in
their  associates  from  the  neighbouring  country,  they
suddenly  took  possession  of  the  arsenal  and
masters  of senate-house  in  the  night-time,  and  running
that  city, through  the  streets  with  drawn  swords,  and
horrible  howlings,  cried  out  alternately,  "  Repent,  and
be  baptized ;"  and  "  Depart,  ye  ungodly." The  sena-
tors, the  canons,  the  nobility,  together  with  the  more
sober  citizens,  whether  Papists  or  Protestants,
aary* terrified  at  their  threats  and  outcries,  fled  in
confusion,  and  left  the  city  under  the  dominion  of  a
frantic  multitude,  consisting  chiefly  of  strangers. No-
thing now  remaining  to  overawe  or  control  them,  they
set  about  modelling  the  government  according  to  their
own  wild  ideas ;  and  though  at  first  they  shewed  so
much  reverence  for  .the  ancient  constitution,  as  to  elect
Establish  a  senators of  their  own  sect,  and  to  appoint
n Cnipperdoling  and  another  proselyte  consuls,
this  was  nothing  more  than  form ;  for  all  their
proceedings  were  directed  by  Matthias,  who,  in  the
style,  and  with  the  authority  of  a  prophet,  uttered  his
commands, which  it  was  instant  death  to disobey.
Having  begun  with  encouraging  the  multitude  to  pil-
lage the  churches,  and  deface  their  ornaments ;  he  en-
joined them  to  destroy  all  books  except  the  Bible,  as
useless  or  impious ;  he  ordered  the  estates  of  such  as
fled  to  be  confiscated,  and  sold  -  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  adjacent  country;  he  commanded  every  man  to

•270  CHARLES V.  [1534.

bring  forth  his  gold,  silver,  and  other  precious  effects,
and  to  lay  them  at  his  feet ;  the  wealth  amassed  by
these  means,  he  deposited  in  a  public  treasury,  and
named  deacons  to  dispense  it  for  the  common  use  of  all.
The  members  of  this  commonwealth  being  thus  brought
to  a  perfect  equality,  he  commanded  all  of  them  to  eat
at  tables  prepared  in  public,  and  even  prescribed  the
dishes  which  were  to  be  served  up  each  day.  Having
finished  his  plan  of  reformation,  his  next  care  was  to
provide  for  the  defence  of  the  city ;  and  he  took  mea-
sures for  that  purpose  with  a  prudence  which  savoured
nothing  of  fanaticism.  He  collected  large  magazines
of  every  kind ;  he  repaired  and  extended  the  fortifica-
tions, obliging  every  person  without  distinction  to
work  in  his  turn;  he  formed  such  as  were  capable  of
bearing  arms  into  regular  bodies,  and  endeavoured  to
add  the  stability  of  discipline  to  the  impetuosity  of
enthusiasm.  He  sent  emissaries  to  the  anabaptists  in
the  Low  Countries,  inviting  them  to  assemble  at  Mun-
ster,  which  he  dignified  with  the  name  of  Mount-Sion,
that  from  thence  they  might  set  out  to  reduce  all  the
nations  of  the  earth  under  their  dominion.  He  him-
self was  unwearied  in  attending  to  every  thing  neces-
sary for  the  security  or  increase  of  the  sect ;  animating
his  disciples  by  his  own  example  to  decline  no  labour,
as  well  as  to  submit  to  every  hardship ;  and  their  en-
thusiastic passions  being  kept  from  subsiding  by  a  per-
petual succession  of  exhortations,  revelations,  and  pro-
phecies, they  seemed  ready  to  undertake  or  to  suffer
thing  in  maintenance  of  their  opinions.
The  bishop  While  they  were  thus  employed,  the  bishop
Smarms  °^  Munster?  having  assembled  a  considerable
againa  army,  advanced  to  besiege  the  town.  On  his
approach,  Matthias  sallied  out  at  the  head  of
some  chosen  troops,  attacked  one  quarter  of  his  camp,
forced  it,  and  after  great  slaughter  returned  to  the  city
loaded  with  glory  and  spoil  Intoxicated  with  this  sue-

1534.]  BOOK V.  271

cess,  he  appeared  next  day  brandishing  a  spear,  and  de-
clared, that,  in  imitation  of  Gideon,  he  would  go  forth
with  a  handful  of  men  and  smite  the  host  of  the  ungodly.
Thirty  persons,  whom  he  named,  followed  him
without  hesitation  in  this  wild  enterprise,  and,
rushing  on  the  enemy  with  a  frantic  courage,  were  cut
off  to  a  man. The  death  of  their  prophet  occasioned
at  first  great  consternation  among  his  disciples; but
Boccold,  by  the same gifts  and  pretensions
L0eyde°n which  had  gained  Matthias  credit,  soon  revived
gr^t'Tu- their  spirits  and  hopes  to  such  a  degree,  that
thority he  succeeded  the  deceased  prophet  in  the  same

among  tlie  *

anabap-  absolute  direction  of  all  their  affairs.  As  he  did
not  possess  that  enterprising  courage  which
distinguished  his  predecessor,  he  satisfied  himself  with
carrying  on  a  defensive  war ;  and,  without  attempting
to  annoy  the  enemy  by  sallies,  he  waited  for  the  succours
he  expected  from  the  Low  Countries,  the  arrival  of  which
was  often  foretold  and  promised  by  their  prophets.
But  though  less  daring  in  action  than  Matthias,  he  was
a  wilder  enthusiast,  and  of  more  unbounded  ambition.
Soon  after  the  death  of  his  predecessor,  having,  by  ob-
scure visions  and  prophecies,  prepared  the  multitude
for  some  extraordinary  event,  he  stripped  himself  naked,
and,  marching  through  the  streets,  proclaimed  with  a
loud  voice,  "  That  the  kingdom  of  Sion  was  at  hand  ;
that  whatever  was  highest  on  earth  should  be  brought
low,  and  whatever  was  lowest  should  be  exalted."  In
order  to  fulfil  this,  he  commanded  the  churches,  as  the
most  lofty  buildings  in  the  city,  to  be  levelled  with  the
ground ;  he  degraded  the  senators  chosen  by  Matthias,
and  depriving  Cnipperdoling  of  the  consulship,  the
highest  office  in  the  commonwealth,  appointed  him  to
execute  the  lowest  and  most  infamous,  that  of  common
hangman,  to  which  strange  transition  the  other  agreed,
not  only  without  murmuring,  but  with  the  utmost  joy ;
and  such  was  the  despotic  rigour  of  Roccold's  adminis-

272  CHARLES V.  [1534.

tration,  that  he  was  called  almost  every  day  to  perform
some  duty  or  other  of  his  wretched  function.  In  place
of  the  deposed  senators,  he  named  twelve  judges,  ac-
cording to  the  number  of  tribes  in  Israel,  to  preside  in
all  affairs;  retaining  to  himself  the  same  authority
which  Moses  anciently  possessed  as  legislator  of  that
people.

Elected  Not  satisfied,  however,  with  power  or  titles
king.  which  were  not  supreme,  a  prophet,  whom  he
had  gained  and  tutored,  having  called  the  multitude  to-
gether, declared  it  to  be  the  will  of  God,  that  John  Boc-
cold  should  be  king  of  Sion,  and  sit  on  the  throne  of
David.  John,  kneeling  down,  accepted  of  the
heavenly  call,  which  he  solemnly  protested  had
been  revealed  likewise  to  himself,  and  was  immediately
acknowledged  as  monarch  by  the  deluded  -multitude.
From  that  moment  he  assumed  all  the  state  and  pomp
of  royalty.  He  wore  a  crown  of  gold,  and  was  clad  in
the  richest  and  most  sumptuous  garments.  A  Bible  was
carried  on  his  one  hand,  a  naked  sword  on  the  other.
A  great  body  of  guards  accompanied  him  when  he  ap-
peared in  public.  He  coined  money  stamped  with  his
own  image,  and  appointed  the  great  officers  of  his  house-
hold and  kingdom,  among  whom  Cnipperdoling  was
nominated  governor  of  the  city,  as  a  reward  for  his  for-
mer submission.

Having  now  attained  the  height  of  power,
Boccold  began  to  discover  passions  which  he
duct>  had  hitherto  restrained  or  indulged  only  in  se-
cret. As  the  excesses  of  enthusiasm  have  been  observed
in  every  age  to  lead  to  sensual  gratifications,  the  same
constitution  that  is  susceptible  of  the  former,  being  re-
markably prone  to  the  latter,  he  instructed  the  prophets
and  teachers  to  harangue  the  people  for  several  days
concerning  the  lawfulness,  and  even  necessity,  of  taking
more  wives  than  one,  which  they  asserted  to  be  one  of
the  privileges  granted  by  God  to  the  saints.  When

1534.]  BOOK  V.  273

their  ears  were  once  accustomed  to  this  licentious  doc-
trine, and  their  passions  inflamed  with  the  prospect  of
such  unbounded  indulgence,  he  himself  set  them  an  ex-
ample of  using  what  he  called  their  Christian  liberty,
by  marrying  at  once  three  wives,  among  which  the
widow  of  Matthias,  a  woman  of  singular  beauty,  was
one.  As  he  was  allured  by  beauty,  or  the  love  of  va-
riety, he  gradually  added  to  the  number  of  his  wives,
until  they  amounted  to  fourteen,  though  the  widow  of
Matthias  was  the  only  one  dignified  with  the  title  of
queen,  or  who  shared  with  him  the  splendour  and  orna-
ments of  royalty.  After  the  example  of  their  prophet,
the  multitude  gave  themselves  up  to  the  most  licentious
and  uncontrolled  gratification  of  their  desires.  No  man
remained  satisfied  with  a  single  wife.  Not  to  use  their
Christian  liberty,  was  deemed  a  crime.  Persons  were
appointed  to  search  the  houses  for  young  women  grown
up  to  maturity,  whom  they  instantly  compelled  to  marry.
Together  with  polygamy,  freedom  of  divorce,  its  inse-
parable attendant,  was  introduced,  and  became  a  new
source  of  corruption.  Every  excess  was  committed,  of
which  the  passions  of  men  are  capable,  when  restrained
neither  by  the  authority  of  laws  nor  the  sense  of  de-
cency;01 and  by  a  monstrous  and  almost  incredible
conjunction,  voluptuousness  was  engrafted  on  religion,
and  dissolute  riot  accompanied  the  austerities  of  fana-
tical devotion.

A  confe- Meanwhile  the  German  princes  were  highly

deracy offended  at  the  insult  offered  to  their  dignity

Anabap- by  Boccold's  presumptuous  usurpation  of  royal

honours  ;  and  the  profligate  manners  of  his  fol-

m  Prophetae  et  coneionatorum  autoritate  juxta  et  exemplo,  tota  urbe  ad  rapiendas
pulcherrUnaa  quasque  faeminas  discursum  est.  Nee  iutra  paucos  dies,  in  tanttt  ho-
minum  turba  fere  ulla  reperta  est  supra  annum  decimumquartum  quae  stuprumpassa
non  fuerit.  Lamb.  Hortens.  p.  303. — Vulgo  viris  quiuas  esse  uxores,  pluribus  senas,
nonnuliis  septenas  et  octonas.  Puellas  supra  duodecinmm  getatis  annum  stalim  amare.
Id.  30,5.  Nemo  una.  contentus  fuit,  neque  cuiquam  extra  eflfuetas  &  viris  immaturas
continent!  esse  licuit.  Id.  307. — Tacebo  hie,  ut  sit  suus  honor  auribus,  quanta  bar-
l>aria  et  inalitia  usi  sunt  in  puellis  vitiandis  nondum  aptis  raatrimonio,  id  quod  inihi
neque  ex  vano,  neque  ex  vulgi  sermonibus  haustum  est,  sed  ex  e£  vetultl,  cui  cura
sic  vitiatarum  demandata  fuit,  auditura.  Joh.  Corvinus,  316.

VOL. IV.  T  (

274  CHARLES V.  [1535.

lowers,  which  were  a  reproach  to  the  Christian  name,
filled  men  of  all  professions  with  horror.  Luther,  who
had  testified  against  this  fanatical  spirit  on  its  first  ap-
pearance, now  deeply  lamented  its  progress,  and  having
exposed  the  delusion  with  great  strength  of  argument,
as  well  as  acrimony  of  style,  called  loudly  on  all  the
states  of  Germany  to  put  a  stop  to  a  frenzy  no  less
pernicious  to  society,  than  fatal  to  religion.  The  em-
peror, occupied  with  other  cares  and  projects,  had  not
leisure  to  attend  to  such  a  distant  object  ;  but  the  princes
of  the  empire,  assembled  by  the  king  of  the  Romans,
voted  a  supply  of  men  and  money  to  the  bishop  of
Munster,  who  being  unable  to  keep  an  army  on  foot,
had  converted  the  siege  of  the  town  into  a  blockade.
Besiege  the  The  forces  raised  in  consequence  of  this  reso-
town.  lution,  were  put  under  the  command  of  an  officer
of  experience,  who  approaching  the  town  towards  the
end  of  spring,  in  the  year  1535,  pressed  it  more  closely
than  formerly  ;  but  found  the  fortifications  so  strong
and  so  diligently  guarded,  that  he  durst  not  attempt  an
assault.  It  was  now  above  fifteen  months  since  the
Anabaptists  had  established  their  dominion  in  Munster;
they  had  during  that  time  undergone  prodigious  fa-
tigue in  working  on  the  fortifications,  and  performing
May  military  duty.  Notwithstanding  the  prudent
andlfanati  attenti°n  °f  their  king  to  provide  for  their  sub-
of  the  sistence,  and  his  frugal  as  well  as  regular

~

besieged.  , .  ,.  , , ,

economy  in  their  public  meals,  they  began  to
feel  the  approach  of  famine.  Several  small  bodies  of
their  brethren,  who  were  advancing  to  their  assistance
from  the  Low  Countries,  had  been  intercepted  and  cut
to  pieces  ;  and,  while  all  Germany  was  ready  to  com-
bine against  them,  they  had  no  prospect  of  succour.
But  such  was  the  ascendant  which  Buccold  had  ac-
quired over  the  multitude,  and  so  powerful  the  fasci-
nation of  enthusiasm,  that  their  hopes  were  as  sanguine
as  ever,  and  they  hearkened  with  implicit  credulity  to

1535.]  BOOK V.  275

the  visions  and  predictions  of  their  prophets,  who  as-
sured them,  that  the  Almighty  would  speedily  interpose
in  order  to  deliver  the  city.  The  faith,  however,  of
some  few,  shaken  by  the  violence  and  length  of  their
sufferings,  began  to  fail ;  but  being  suspected  of  an  in-
clination to  surrender  to  the  enemy,  they  were  punished
with  immediate  death,  as  guilty  of  impiety  in  distrusting
the  power  of  God.  One  of  the  king's  wives  having
uttered  certain  words  which  implied  some  doubt  con-
cerning his  divine  mission,  he  instantly  called  the  whole
number  together,  and  commanding  the  blasphemer,  as
he  called  her,  to  kneel  down,  cut  off  her  head  with  his
own  hands ;  and  so  far  were  the  rest  from  expressing
any  horror  at  this  cruel  deed,  that  they  joined  him  in
dancing  with  a  frantic  joy  around  the  bleeding  body  of
their  companion.

By  this  time,  the  besieged  endured  the  utmost
taken! y  rigour  of  famine;  but  they  chose  rather  to  suf-
June  *'  fer  hardships,  the  recital  of  which  is  shocking
to  humanity,  than  to  listen  to  the  terms  of  capitulation
offered  them  by  the  bishop.  At  last  a  deserter,  whom
they  had  taken  into  their  service,  being  either  less  in-
toxicated with  the  fumes  of  enthusiasm,  or  unable  any
longer  to  bear  such  distress,  made  his  escape  to  the
enemy.  He  informed  their  general  of  a  weak  part  in
the  fortifications  which  he  had  observed,  and  assuring
him  that  the  besieged,  exhausted  with  hunger  and  fa-
tigue, kept  watch  there  with  little  care,  he  offered  to
lead  a  party  thither  in  the  night.  The  proposal  was
accepted,  and  a  chosen  body  of  troops  appointed  for
the  service;  who,  scaling  the  walls  unperceived,  seized
one  of  the  gates,  and  admitted  the  rest  of  the  army.
The  Anabaptists,  though  surprised,  defended  them-
selves in  the  market-place  with  valour,  heightened  by
despair;  but  being  overpowered  by  numbers,  and  sur-
rounded on  every  hand,  most  of  them  were  slain,  and
the  remainder  taken  prisoners.  Among  the  last  were

T  2

276  CHARLES V.  [1535.

Punish- the  king  and  Cnipperdoling. The  king,  loaded
ment  of -fa  cnams  was  carried  from  city  to  city  as  a

the  king  »

and  his spectacle  to  gratify  the  curiosity  of  the  people,

associates. *  i  / n i • • IA TT-  • •.

and  was  exposed  to  all  their  insults.  His  spirit,
however,  was  not  broken  or  humbled  by  this  sad  re-
verse of  his  condition,  and  he  adhered  with  unshaken
firmness  to  the  distinguishing  tenets  of  his  sect.  After
this  he  was  brought  back  to  Minister,  the  scene  of  his
royalty  and  crimes,  and  put  to  death  with  the  most
exquisite  as  well  as  lingering  tortures,  all  which  he  bore
with  astonishing  fortitude.  This  extraordinary  man,
who  had  been  able  to  acquire  such  amazing  dominion
over  the  minds  of  his  followers,  and  to  excite  commo-
tions so  dangerous  to  society,  was  only  twenty-six
years  of  age.11

Character  Together  with  its  monarch,  the  kingdom  of
tne  Anabaptists  came  to  an  end.  Their  princi-
pjes  having  taken  deep  root  in  the  Low  Coun-
tries, the  party  still  subsists  there  under  the  name  of
Mennonites;  but  by  a  very  singular  revolution,  this
sect,  so  mutinous  and  sanguinary  at  its  first  origin,  hath
become  altogether  innocent  and  pacific.  Holding  it
unlawful  to  wage  war,  or  to  accept  of  civil  offices,  they
devote  themselves  entirely  to  the  duties  of  private  citi-
zens, and  by  their  industry  and  charity  endeavour  to
make  reparation  to  human  society  for  the  violence  com-
mitted by  their  founders.0  A  small  number  of  this  sect
which  is  settled  in  England,  retain  its  peculiar  tenets
concerning  baptism,  but  without  any  dangerous  mix-
ture of  enthusiasm.

Proceed- ^e  mutiny  of  the  Anabaptists,  though  it
ings  and drew general  attention,  did  not  so  entirely

authority  .,  .  c '  J

engross  the princes  of  Germany,  as  not  to

n  Sleid.  190,  &c.  Tumultuum  Anabaptistarum  Liber  unus.  Ant.  Lamberto  Hor-
tensio  auctore  ap.  Scardium,  vol.  ii.  p.  298,  &c.  De  Miserabili  Monasteriensium
Ubsidione.&c.  LibeHus  Antonii  Corvini  ap.  Scar.  3l3.  Annaies  Anabaptistici  a
Joh.  Henrico  Ottio,  4to.  Basileae,  1672.  Cor.  Heersbachius  Hist.  Anab.  edit.  1637.
P*  140>  °  Bayle  Diction,  art.  Anabaptistes.

1535.]  BOOK V.  277

ofthc  allow  leisure  for  other  transactions.  The
league  of  alliance  between  the  French  king  and  the
'  confederates  at  Smalkalde,  began  about  this
time  to  produce  great  effects.  Ulric,  duke  of  Wur-
temberg,  having  been  expelled  his  dominions  in  the
year  1519,  on  account  of  his  violent  and  oppres-
sive administration,  the  house  of  Austria  had  got
possession  of  his  duchy.  That  prince  having  now
by  a  long  exile  atoned  for  the  errors  in  his  conduct,
which  were  the  effect  rather  of  inexperience  than  of  a
tyrannical  disposition,  was  become  the  object  of  gene-
ral compassion.  The  landgrave  of  Hesse  in  particular,
his  near  relation,  warmly  espoused  his  interest,  and  used
many  efforts  to  recover  for  him  his  ancient  inheritance.
But  the  king  of  the  Romans  obstinately  refused  to  re-
linquish a  valuable  acquisition  which  his  family  had
made  with  so  much  ease.  The  landgrave,  unable  to
compel  him,  applied  to  the  king  of  France,  his  new
ally.  Francis,  eager  to  embrace  any  opportunity  of
distressing  the  house  of  Austria,  and  desirous  of  wrest-
ing from  it  a  territory,  which  gave  it  footing  and  influ-
ence in  a  part  of  Germany  at  a  distance  from  its  other
dominions,  encouraged  the  landgrave  to  take  arms,  and
secretly  supplied  him  with  a  large  sum  of  money.  This
he  employed  to  raise  troops  ;  and  marching  with  great
expedition  towards  Wurtemberg,  attacked,  defeated,  and
dispersed  a  considerable  body  of  Austrians,  intrusted
with  the  defence  of  the  country.  All  the  duke's  sub-
jects hastened,  with  emulation,  to  receive  their  native
prince,  and  re-  invested  him  with  that  authority  which
is  still  enjoyed  by  his  descendants.  At  the  same  time
the  exercise  of  the  Protestant  religion  was  established
in  his  dominions.11

The  king  of Ferdinand,  how  sensible  soever  of  this  unex-
0™  1S  pected  blow,  not  daring  to  attack  a  prince  whom

them- all  the  Protestant  powers  in  Germany  were

P  Sleid.  172. Bellay,  159,  &c.

278  CHARLES V.  [153,5.

ready  to  support,  judged  it  expedient  to  conclude
a  treaty  with  him,  by  which,  in  the  most  ample
form,  he  recognised  his  title  to  the  duchy.  The  suc-
cess of  the  landgrave's  operations  in  behalf  of  the  duke
of  Wurtemberg,  having  convinced  Ferdinand  that  a
rupture  with  a  league  so  formidable  as  that  of  Smal-
kalde,  was  to  be  avoided  with  the  utmost  care,  he  en-
tered likewise  into  a  negotiation  with  the  elector  of
Saxony,  the  head  of  that  union,  and  by  some  conces-
sions in  favour  of  the  Protestant  religion,  and  others
of  advantage  to  the  elector  himself,  he  prevailed  on
him,  together  with  his  confederates,  to  acknowledge  his
title  as  king  of  the  Romans.  At  the  same  time,  in  order
to  prevent  any  such  precipitate  or  irregular  election  in
times  to  come,  it  was  agreed  that  no  person  should
hereafter  be  promoted  to  that  dignity  without  the  una-
nimous consent  of  the  electors;  and  the  emperor  soon
after  confirmed  this  stipulation.9

Paul  in.  These  acts  of  indulgence  towards  the  Pro-
neraUoun-  tenants,  and  the  close  union  into  which  the
at  Mantua  ^u&  of  the  Romans  seemed  to  be  entering  with
the  princes  of  that  party,  gave  great  offence  at
Rome.  Paul  III.,  though  he  had  departed  from  a  re-
solution of  his  predecessor,  never  to  consent  to  the  call-
ing of  a  general  council,  and  had  promised  in  the  first
consistory  held  after  his  election,  that  he  would  convoke
that  assembly  so  much  desired  by  all  Christendom,  was
no  less  enraged  than  Clement  at  the  innovations  in
Germany,  and  no  less  averse  to  any  scheme  for  reform-
ing either  the  doctrines  of  the  church,  or  the  abuses  in
the  court  of  Rome :  but  having  been  a  witness  of  the
universal  censure  which  Clement  had  incurred  by  his
obstinacy  with  regard  to  these  points,  he  hoped  to
avoid  the  same  reproach  by  the  seeming  alacrity  with
which  he  proposed  a  council;  flattering  himself,  how-
ever, that  such  difficulties  would  arise  concerning  the

i  Sleid.  173.  Corps  Diplom.  torn.  iv.  p.  2.  119.

1535.]  BOOK V.  27.9

time  and  place  of  meeting,  the  persons  who  had  a  right
to  be  present,  and  the  order  of  their  proceedings,  as
would  effectually  defeat  the  intention  of  those  who  de-
manded that  assembly,  without  exposing  himself  to  any
imputation  for  refusing  to  call  it.  With  this  view  he
dispatched  nuncios  to  the  several  courts,  in  order  to
make  known  his  intention,  and  that  he  had  fixed  on
Mantua  as  a  proper  place  in  which  to  hold  the  council.
Such  difficulties  as  the  pope  had  foreseen,  immediately
presented  themselves  in  great  number.  The  French  king
did  not  approve  of  the  place  which  Paul  had  chosen,  as
the  papal  and  imperial  influence  would  necessarily  be  too
great  in  a  town  situated  in  that  part  of  Italy.  The  king
of  England  not  only  concurred  with  Francis  in  urging
that  objection,  but  refused,  besides,  to  acknowledge  any
council  called  in  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  the
pope.  The  German  Protestants  having  met
together  at  Smalkalde,  insisted  on  their  ori-
ginal demand  of  a  council  to  be  held  in  Germany,  and
pleading  the  emperor's  promise,  as  well  as  the  agree-
ment at  Ratisbon  to  that  effect,  declared  that  they
would  not  consider  an  assembly  held  at  Mantua  as  a
legal  or  free  representative  of  the  church.  By  this  di-
versity of  sentiments  and  views,  such  a  field  for  intrigue
and  negotiation  opened,  as  made  it  easy  for  the  pope
to  assume  the  merit  of  being  eager  to  assemble  a  coun-
cil while  at  the  same  time  he  could  put  off  its  meeting
at  pleasure.  The  Protestants,  on  the  other  hand,  sus-
pecting his  designs,  and  sensible  of  the  importance
which  they  derived  from  their  union,  renewed  for  ten
years  the  league  of  Smalkalde,  which  now  became
stronger  and  more  formidable  by  the  accession  of  seve-
ral new  members.1

r  This  league  was  concluded  December,  1535,  but  not  extended  or  signed  in
form  till  September  in  the  following  year.  The  princes  who  acceded  to  it  were, —
John  elector  of  Saxony,  Ernest  duke  of  Brunswick,  Philip  landgrave  of  Hesse,  Ulric
duke  of  Wurtemberg,  Barniru  and  Philip  dukes  of  Pomerania,  John,  George,  and
Joachim,  princes  of  Anhalt,  Gebhard  and  Albert  counts  of  Mansfield,  William  count

280  CHARLES V. [1535.

The  empe-  During  these  transactions  in  Germany,  the

ror'sexpe-  emperor undertook his famous enterprise

chtion  to  . *

Africa,  against  the  piratical  states  in  Africa. I  hat

of  that  e  part  of  the  African  continent  lying  along  the

country.  COBS^  Qf  faQ  Mediterranean  sea,  which  anci-

ently formed  the  kingdoms  of  Mauritania  and  Massylia,
together  with  the  republic  of  Carthage,  and  which  is
now  known  by  the  general  name  of  Barbary,  had  un-
dergone many  revolutions.  Subdued  by  the  Romans,
it  became  a  province  of  their  empire.  When  it  was
conquered  afterward  by  the  Vandals,  they  erected  a
kingdom  there.  That  being  overturned  by  Belisarius,
the  country  became  subject  to  the  Greek  emperors,
and  continued  to  be  so  until  it  was  overrun  towards  the
end  of  the  seventh  century,  by  the  rapid  and  irresistible
arms  of  the  Arabians.  It  remained  for  some  time  a
part  of  that  vast  empire  which  the  Caliphs  governed
with  absolute  authority.  Its  immense  distance,  how-
ever, from  the  seat  of  government  encouraged  the  de-
scendants of  those  leaders  who  had  subdued  the  country,
or  the  chiefs  of  the  Moors,  its  ancient  inhabitants,  to
throw  off  the  yoke,  and  to  assert  their  independence.
The  caliphs,  who  derived  their  authority  from  a  spirit
of  enthusiasm,  more  fitted  for  making  conquests  than
for  preserving  them,  were  obliged  to  connive  at  acts  of
rebellion  which  they  could  not  prevent  ;  and  Barbary
was  divided  into  several  kingdoms,  of  which  Morocco,
Algiers,  and  Tunis,  were  the  most  considerable.  The
inhabitants  of  these  kingdoms  were  a  mixed  race,  Arabs,
Negroes  from  the  southern  provinces,  and  Moors,  either
natives  of  Africa,  or  who  had  been  expelled  out  of
Spain  ;  all  zealous  professors  of  the  Mahometan  religion,
and  inflamed  against  Christianity  with  a  bigotted  hatred
proportional  to  their  ignorance  and  barbarous  manners.

of  Nassau.  The  cities,—  Strasburg,  Nuremberg,  Constance,  Ulm,  Magdeburg,  Bre-
men, Ruetlmgen,  Hailbron,  Memmengen,  Lindau,  Campen,  Isna,  Bibrac,  Wind-

Esling'  Brunswick'  Goslar'  Ha"ove'-'

1535.]  BOOK V.  281

Rise  of  the Among  these  people,  no  less  daring,  ineon-
piraticai stant,  and  treacherous,  than  the  ancient  inha-

states,

bitants  of  the  same  country  described  by  he
Roman  historians,  frequent  seditions  broke  out,  and
many  changes  in  government  took  place.  These,  as
they  affected  only  the  internal  state  of  a  country  ex-
tremely barbarous,  are  but  little  known,  and  deserve  to
be  so  :  but  about  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century
a  sudden  revolution  happened,  which,  by  rendering  the
states  of  Barbary  formidable  to  the  Europeans,  hath
made  their  history  worthy  of  more  attention.  This  re-
volution was  brought  about  by  persons  born  in  a  rank
of  life  which  entitled  them  to  act  no  such  illustrious
And  of  thePart-  Horuc  and  Hayradin,  the  sons  of  a  potter
Barba-  |n  the  isle  of  Lesbos,  prompted  by  a  restless  and

enterprising  spirit,  forsook  their  father's  trade,
ran  to  sea,  and  joined  a  crew  of  pirates.  They  soon
distinguished  themselves  by  their  valour  and  activity,
and  becoming  masters  of  a  small  brigantine,  car-
ried on  their  infamous  trade  with  such  conduct  and
success,  that  they  assembled  a  fleet  of  twelve  gal-
leys, besides  many  vessels  of  smaller  force.  Of  this
fleet  Horuc  the  elder  brother,  called  Barbarossa  from
the  red  colour  of  his  beard,  was  admiral,  and  Hayradin
second  in  command,  but  with  almost  equal  authority.
They  called  themselves  the  friends  of  the  sea,  and  the
enemies  of  all  who  sail  upon  it ;  and  their  names  soon
became  terrible  from  the  straits  of  the  Dardanelles  to
those  of  Gibraltar.  Together  with  their  fame  and
power,  their  ambitious  views  extended,  and  while  acting
as  corsairs,  they  adopted  the  ideas,  and  acquired  the
talents  of  conquerors.  They  often  carried  the  prizes
which  they  took  on  the  coasts  of  Spain  and  Italy  into  the
ports  of  Barbary  ;  and,  enriching  the  inhabitants  by  the
sale  of  their  booty,  and  the  thoughtless  prodigality  of
their  crews,  were  welcome  guests  in  every  place  at
which  they  touched.  The  convenient  situation  of  these

282  CHARLES V.  [1535.

harbours,  lying  so  near  the  greatest  commercial  states
at  that  time  in  Christendom,  made  the  brothers  wish
for  an  establishment  in  that  country.  An  opportunity
of  accomplishing  this  quickly  presented  itself,  which
they  did  not  suffer  to  pass  unimproved.  Eutemi,  king
of  Algiers,  having  attempted  several  times,  without
success,  to  take  a  fort  which  the  Spanish  governors  of
Oran  had  built  not  far  from  his  capital,  was  so  ill  advised
as  to  apply  for  aid  to  Barbarossa,  whose  valour  the  Afri-
cans considered  as  irresistible.  The  active  corsair  gladly
accepted  of  the  invitation,  and  leaving  his  brother
Hayradin  with  the  fleet,  marched  at  the  head
of  five  thousand  men  to  Algiers,  where  he  was  received
as  their  deliverer.  Such  a  force  gave  him  the  com-
mand of  the  town ;  and  as  he  perceived  that  the  Moors
neither  suspected  him  of  any  bad  intention,  nor  were
capable  with  their  light-armed  troops  of  opposing  his
Home,  the  disciplined  veterans,  he  secretly  murdered  the
monarch  whom  he  had  come  to  assist,  and  pro-
c^anne(i  himself  king  of  Algiers  in  his  stead.
Algiers.  The  authority  which  he  had  thus  boldly  usurped,
he  endeavoured  to  establish  by  arts  suited  to  the  ge-
nius of  the  people  whom  he  had  to  govern  ;  by  libe-
rality without  bounds  to  those  who  favoured  his  pro-
motion, and  by  cruelty  no  less  unbounded  towards  all
whom  he  had  any  reason  to  distrust.  Not  satisfied  with
the  throne  which  he  had  acquired,  he  attacked  the  neigh-
bouring king  of  Tremecen,  and  having  vanquished  him
in  battle,  added  his  dominions  to  those  of  Algiers.  At
the  same  time,  he  continued  to  infest  the  coast  of  Spain
and  Italy  with  fleets  which  resembled  the  armaments  of
a  great  monarch,  rather  than  the  light  squadrons  of  acor-
i5i8  sa*r'  Their  frequent  and  cruel  devastations  obliged
Charles,  about  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  to  fur-
nish the  marquis  de  Comares,  governor  of  Oran,  with
troops  sufficient  to  attack  him.  That  officer,  assisted  by  the
dethroned  king  of  Tremecen,  executed  the  commission

1535.]  BOOK V.  283

with  such  spirit,  that  Barbarossa's  troops  being  beat  in
several  encounters,  he  himself  was  shut  up  in  Tremecen.
After  defending  it  to  the  last  extremity,  he  was  over-
taken in  attempting  to  make  his  escape,  and  slain  while
he  fought  with  an  obstinate  valour,  worthy  of  his  former
fame  and  exploits.

The  pro-  His  brother  Hayradin,  known  likewise  by  the
gress  of  name  of  Barbarossa,  assumed  the  sceptre  of  Al-

Hayradm, , .  -11  i  • •  ...

the  second  giers  with  the  same  ambition  and  abilities,  but
with  better  fortune.  His  reign  being-  undis-
turbed by  the  arms  of  the  Spaniards,  which  had  full
occupation  in  the  wars  among  the  European  powers,
he  regulated  with  admirable  prudence  the  interior  po-
lice of  his  kingdom,  carried  on  his  naval  operations
with  great  vigour,  and  extended  his  conquests  on  the
continent  of  Africa.  But  perceiving  that  the  Moors  and
Arabs  submitted  to  his  government  with  the  utmost  re-
luctance, and  being  afraid  that  his  continual  depreda-
tions would,  one  day,  draw  upon  him  the  arms  of  the
Christians,  he  put  his  dominions  under  the  protection
puts  his  of  the  grand  seignior,  and  received  from  him  a
under  the?  body  of  Turkish  soldiers  sufficient  for  his  secu-
Sf Uiesui1  r*tv  against  his  domestic  as  well  as  his  foreign
tan.  enemies.  At  last  the  fame  of  his  exploits  daily
increasing,  Solyman  offered  him  the  command  of  the
Turkish  fleet,  as  the  only  person  whose  valour  and  skill
in  naval  affairs  entitled  him  to  command  against  An-
drew Doria,  the  greatest  sea-officer  of  that  age.  Proud
of  this  distinction,  Barbarossa  repaired  to  Constanti-
nople ;  and  with  a  wonderful  versatility  of  mind,  ming-
ling the  arts  of  a  courtier  with  the  boldness  of  a  corsair,
gained  the  entire  confidence  both  of  the  sultan  and
his  vizier.  To  them  he  communicated  a  scheme  which
he  had  formed  of  making  himself  master  of  Tunis,  the
most  flourishing  kingdom,  at  that  time,  on  the  coast  of
Africa;  and  this  being  approved  of  by  them,  he  obtained
whatever  he  demanded  for  carrying  it  into  execution.

•284  CHARLES  V.  [1535-

His  His  hopes  of  success  in  this  undertaking  were

conqu'erfn'  founded  on  the  intestine  divisions  in  the  king-
Tunis.  D  dom  Of  Tunis.  Mahmed,  the  last  king  of  that
country,  having  thirty-four  sons  by  different  wives,  ap-
pointed Muley-Hascen,  one  of  the  youngest  among
them  to  be  his  successor.  That  weak  prince,  who  owed
this  preference  not  to  his  own  merit,  but  to  the  ascen-
dant which  his  mother  had  acquired  over  a  monarch
doating  with  age,  first  poisoned  Mahmed  his  father  in
order  to  prevent  him  from  altering  his  destination  with
respect  to  the  succession  ;  and  then,  with  the  barbarous
policy  which  prevails  wherever  polygamy  is  permitted,
and  the  right  of  succession  is  not  precisely  fixed,  he  put
to  death  all  his  brothers  whom  he  could  get  into  his
power.  Alraschid,  one  of  the  eldest,  was  so  fortunate
as  to  escape  his  rage  ;  and  finding  a  retreat  among  the
wandering  Arabs,  made  several  attempts,  by  the  assist-
ance of  some  of  their  chiefs,  to  recover  the  throne  which
of  right  belonged  to  him.  But  these  proving  unsuc-
cessful, and  the  Arabs,  from  their  natural  levity,  being
ready  to  deliver  him  up  to  his  merciless  brother,  he  fled
to  Algiers,  the  only  place  of  refuge  remaining,  and  im-
plored the  protection  of  Barbarossa;  who,  discerning
at  once  all  the  advantages  which  might  be  gained  by
supporting  his  title,  received  him  with  every  possible
demonstration  of  friendship  and  respect.  Being  ready,
at  that  time,  to  set  sail  for  Constantinople,  he  easily
persuaded  Alraschid,  whose  eagerness  to  obtain  a  crown
disposed  him  to  believe  or  undertake  any  thing,  to  ac-
company him  thither,  promising  him  effectual  assistance
from  Solyman,  whom  he  represented  to  be  the  most  ge-
nerous, as  well  as  most  powerful  monarch  in  the  world.
But  no  sooner  were  they  arrived  at  Constantinople,
than  the  treacherous  corsair,  regardless  of  all  his  pro-
mises to  him,  opened  to  the  sultan  a  plan  for  conquer-
ing Tunis,  and  annexing  it  to  the  Turkish  empire,  by
making  use  of  the  name  of  this  exiled  prince,  and  co-

1535.]  BOOK  V.  285

operating  with  the  party  in  the  kingdom  which  was
ready  to  declare  in  his  favour.  Solyman  approved,
with  too  much  facility,  of  this  perfidious  proposal,  ex-
tremely suitable  to  the  character  of  its  author,  but  al-
together unworthy  of  a  great  prince.  A  powerful  fleet
and  numerous  army  were  soon  assembled  ;  at  the  sight
of  which  the  credulous  Alraschid  flattered  himself  that
he  should  soon  enter  his  capital  in  triumph.

But  just  as  this  unhappy  prince  was  going  to
embark,  he  was  arrested  by  order  of  the  sultan,
shut  up  in  the  seraglio,  and  was  never  heard  of  more.
Barbarossa  sailed  with  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  and  fifty
vessels  towards  Africa.  After  ravaging  the  coasts  of
Italy,  and  spreading  terror  through  every  part  of  that
country,  he  appeared  before  Tunis ;  and  landing  his
men,  gave  out  that  he  came  to  assert  the  right  of  Alras-
chid, whom  he  pretended  to  have  left  sick  aboard  the
admiral's  galley.  The  fort  of  Goletta,  which  commands
the  bay,  soon  fell  into  his  hands,  partly  by  his  own  ad-
dress, partly  by  the  treachery  of  its  commander ;  and
the  inhabitants  of  Tunis,  weary  of  Muley-Hascen's  go-
vernment, took  arms,  and  declared  for  Alraschid  with
such  zeal  and  unanimity,  as  obliged  the  former  to  fly
so  precipitately,  that  he  left  all  his  treasures  behind  him.
The  gates  were  immediately  set  open  to  Barbarossa,  as
the  restorer  of  their  lawful  sovereign.  But  when  Alras-
chid himself  did  not  appear,  and  when,  instead  of  his
name,  that  of  Solyman  alone  was  heard  among  the  ac-
clamations of  the  Turkish  soldiers  marching  into  the
town,  the  people  of  Tunis  began  to  suspect  the  corsair's
treachery.  Their  suspicions  being  soon  converted  into
certainty,  they  ran  to  arms  with  the  utmost  fury,  and
surrounded  the  citadel,  into  which  Barbarossa  had  led
his  troops.  But,  having  foreseen  such  a  revolution,  he
was  not  unprepared  for  it;  he  immediately  turned
against  them  the  artillery  on  the  ramparts,  and  by  one
brisk  discharge  dispersed  the  numerous  but  undirected

•286  CHARLES V.  [1535.

assailants,  and  forced  them  to  acknowledge  Solyman  as
their  sovereign,  and  to  submit  to  himself  as  his  viceroy.
Barba-  RIS  first  care  was  to  Put  t^ie  kingdom,  of

formidable  which  he  had  thus  got  possession,  in  a  proper
power.  posture  of  defence.  He  strengthened  the  cita-
del which  commands  the  town  ;  and  fortifying  the  Go-
letta  in  a  regular  manner,  at  vast  expense,  made  it
the  principal  station  for  his  fleet,  and  his  great  arsenal
for  military  as  well  as  naval  stores.  Being  now  pos-
sessed of  such  extensive  territories,  he  carried  on  his
depredations  against  the  Christian  states  to  a  greater
extent,  and  with  more  destructive  violence  than  ever.
Daily  complaints  of  the  outrages  committed  by  his
cruizers  were  brought  to  the  emperor  by  his  subjects,
both  in  Spain  and  Italy.  All  Christendom  seemed  to
expect  from  him,  as  its  greatest  and  most  fortunate
prince,  that  he  would  put  an  end  to  this  new  and  odious
species  of  oppression.  At  the  same  time  Muley-
kingrf1  C  Hascen,  the  exiled  king  of  Tunis,  finding  none
Sores 'the  °f tne  Mahometan  princes  in  Africa  willing  or
emperor's  ^[Q  ^o  assist  him  in  recovering  his  throne,  ap-

assistance. »», . :  < w* -  «  i  i  -i  IT

April  21.  plied  to  Charles  as  the  only  person  who  could
assert  his  rights  in  opposition  to  such  a  formi-
dable usurper.  The  emperor,  equally  desirous  of  de-
livering his  dominions  from  the  dangerous  neighbour-
hood of  Barbarossa ;  of  appearing  as  the  protector  of
an  unfortunate  prince  ;  and  of  acquiring  the  glory  an-
nexed, in  that  age,  to  every  expedition  against  the  Maho-
metans, readily  concluded  a  treaty  with  Muley-Hascen,
and  began  to  prepare  for  invading  Tunis.  Having  made
trial  of  his  own  abilities  for  war  in  the  late  campaign
in  Hungary,  he  was  now  become  so  fond  of  the  mili-
His  prep*- tarv  character,  that  he  determined  to  command,
the°ex  fe-  on  ^s  occasion,  in  person.  The  united  strength
dition.  of  his  dominions  was  called  out  upon  an  enter-
prise in  which  the  emperor  was  about  to  hazard  his
glory,  and  which  drew  the  attention  of  all  Europe.  A

1535.]  BOOK  V.  287

Flemish  fleet  carried,  from  the  ports  of  the  Low  Country,
a  body  of  German  infantry;5  the  galleys  of  Naples  and
Sicily  took  on  board  the  veteran  bands  of  Italians  and
Spaniards,  which  had  distinguished  themselves  by  so
many  victories  over  the  French ;  the  emperor  himself
embarked  at  Barcelona  with  the  flower  of  the  Spanish
nobility,  and  was  joined  by  a  considerable  squadron
from  Portugal,  under  the  command  of  the  infant  Don
Lewis,  the  empress's  brother ;  Andrew  Doria  conducted
his  own  galleys,  the  best  appointed,  at  that  time,  in
Europe,  and  commanded  by  the  most  skilful  officers ;
the  pope  furnished  all  the  assistance  in  his  power  to-
wards such  a  pious  enterprise  ;  and  the  order  of  Malta,
the  perpetual  enemies  of  the  infidels,  equipped  a  squa-
dron, which,  though  small,  was  formidable  by  the  valour
of  the  knights  who  served  on  board  it.  The  port  of
Cagliari,  in  Sardinia,  was  the  general  place  of  ren-
dezvous. Doria  was  appointed  high-admiral  of  the  fleet;
the  command  of  the  land-forces  under  the  emperor  was
given  to  the  marquis  de  Guasto.

Lands  in  O*1  tne  16th  of  July,  the  fleet,  consisting  of
Africa.  near  £ve  hundred  vessels,  having  on  board
above  thirty  thousand  regular  troops,  set  sail  from  Cag-
liari, and  after  a  prosperous  navigation  landed  within
sight  of  Tunis.  Barbarossa  having  received  early  in-
telligence of  the  emperor's  immense  armament,  and  sus-
pecting its  destination,  prepared  with  equal  prudence
and  vigour  for  the  defence  of  his  new  conquest.  He
called  in  all  his  corsairs  from  their  different  stations ;
he  drew  from  Algiers  what  forces  could  be  spared ;  he
dispatched  messengers  to  all  the  African  princes,  Moors
as  well  as  Arabs,  and,  by  representing  Muley-Hascen
as  an  infamous  apostate,  prompted  by  ambition  and
revenge,  not  only  to  become  the  vassal  of  a  Christian
prince,  but  to  conspire  with  him  to  extirpate  the  Ma-
hometan faith,  he  inflamed  those  ignorant  and  bigotted

•  Haraai  Annales  Brabant,  i.  599.

288  CHARLES  V.  [1535.

chiefs  to  such  a  degree,  that  they  took  arms  as  in  a  com-
mon cause. Twenty  thousand  horse,  together  with  a
great  body  of  foot,  soon  assembled  at  Tunis  ;  and,  by
a  proper  distribution  of  presents  among  them  from  time
to  time,  Barbarossa  kept  the  ardour  which  had  brought
them  together  from  subsiding. But  as  he  was  too  well
acquainted  with  the  enemy  whom  he  had  to  oppose,  to
think  that  these  light  troops  could  resist  the  heavy-
armed  cavalry  and  veteran  infantry  which  composed  the
imperial  army,  his  chief  confidence  was  in  the  strength
of  the  Goletta,  and  in  his  body  of  Turkish  soldiers,  who
were  armed  and  disciplined  after  the  European  fashion.
Six  thousand  of  these,  under  the  command  of  Sinan,  a
renegado  Jew,  the  bravest  and  most  experienced  of  all
his  corsairs,  he  threw  into  that  fort,  which  the  emperor
Lays  siege  immediately  invested. As  Charle-s had the
to  Goletta.  command  of  the  sea,  his  camp  was  so  plenti-
fully supplied  not  only  with  the  necessaries,  but  with
all  the  luxuries  of  life,  that  Muley-Hascen,  who  had  not
been  accustomed  to  see  war  carried  on  with  such  order
and  magnificence,  was  filled  with  admiration  of  the  em-
peror's power. His  troops,  animated  by  his  presence,
and  considering  it  as  meritorious  to  shed  their  blood
in  such  a  pious  cause,  contended  with  each  other  for
the  posts  of  honour  and  danger. Three  separate  at-
tacks were  concerted,  and  the  Germans,  Spaniards,  and
Italians,  having  one  of  these  committed  to  each  of  them,
pushed  them  forward  with  the  eager  courage  which
national  emulation  inspires. Sinan  displayed  resolu-
tion and  skill  becoming  the  confidence  which  his  master
had  put  in  him  ;  the  garrison  performed  the  hard  service
on  which  they  were  ordered  with  great  fortitude. But
though  he  interrupted  the  besiegers  by  frequent  sallies,
though  the  Moors  and  Arabs  alarmed  the  camp  with
their  continual  incursions ;  the  breaches  soon  became
so  considerable  towards  the  land,  while  the  fleet  bat-
tered those  parts  of  the  fortifications which  it  could

1535.]  BOOK V.  289

approach  with  no  less  fury  and  success,  that  an  assault
Takes  it being  given  on  all  sides  at  once,  the  place  was

Juiyst25m'  taken  by  Storm'  Sinan>  with  the  remains  of  his
garrison,  retired,  after  an  obstinate  resistance,
over  a  shallow  part  of  the  bay  towards  the  city.  By
the  reduction  of  the  Goletta,  the  emperor  became  mas-
ter of  Barbarossa's  fleet,  consisting  of  eighty-seven  gal-
leys and  galliots,  together  with  his  arsenal,  and  three
hundred  cannon,  mostly  brass,  which  were  planted  on
the  ramparts ;  a  prodigious  number  in  that  age,  and  a
remarkable  proof  of  the  strength  of  the  fort,  as  well  as
of  the  greatness  of  the  corsair's  power.  The  emperor
marched  into  the  Goletta  through  the  breach,  and  turn-
ing to  Muley-Hascen,  who  attended  him,  "  Here,"  says
he,  "  is  a  gate  open  to  you,  by  which  you  shall  return
to  take  possession  of  your  dominions."

Barbarossa,  though  he  felt  the  full  weight  of  the  blow
which  he  had  received,  did  not,  however,  lose  courage,
or  abandon  the  defence  of  Tunis.  But  as  the  walls  were
of  great  extent,  and  extremely  weak  ;  as  he  could  not
depend  on  the  fidelity  of  the  inhabitants,  nor  hope  that
the  Moors  and  Arabs  would  sustain  the  hardships  of  a
siege,  he  boldly  determined  to  advance  with  his  army,
which  amounted  to  fifty  thousand  men,1  towards  the
imperial  camp,  and  to  decide  the  fate  of  his  kingdom
by  the  issue  of  a  battle.  This  resolution  he  communi-
cated to  his  principal  officers,  and  representing  to  them
the  fatal  consequences  which  might  follow,  if  ten  thou-
sand Christian  slaves,  whom  he  had  shut  up  in  the  cita-
del, should  attempt  to  mutiny  during  the  absence  of  the
army,  he  proposed  as  a  necessary  precaution  for  the
public  security,  to  massacre  them  without  mercy  before
he  began  his  march.  They  all  approved  warmly  of  his
intention  to  fight;  but  inured  as  they  were,  in  their  pi-
ratical depredations,  to  scenes  of  bloodshed  and  cruelty,
the  barbarity  of  his  proposal  concerning  the  slaves,  filled

1  Epistres  des  Princes,  par  Ruscellij  p.  119,  &c.
VOL. IV.  U

290  CHARLES V.  [1535

them  with  horror;  and  Barbarossa,  rather  from  the  dread
of  irritating  them,  than  swayed  by  motives  of  humanity,
consented  to  spare  the  lives  of  the  slaves.

By  this  time  the  emperor  had  begun  to  ad-
Barbaros-  vance  to  wards  Tunis ;  and  though  his  troops
rmy'  suffered  inconceivable  hardships  in  their  march,
over  burning  sands,  destitute  of  water,  and  exposed  to
the  intolerable  heat  of  the  sun,  they  soon  came  up  with
the  enemy.  The  Moors  and  Arabs,  imboldened  by  their
vast  superiority  in  number,  immediately  rushed  on  to
the  attack  with  loud  shouts,  but  their  undisciplined
courage  could  not  long  stand  the  shock  of  regular  bat-
talions ;  and  though  Barbarossa,  with  admirable  pre-
sence of  mind,  and  by  exposing  his  own  person  to  the
greatest  dangers,  endeavoured  to  rally  them,  the  rout
became  so  general,  that  he  himself  was  hurried  along
with  them  in  their  flight  back  to  the  city.  There  he
found  every  thing  in  the  utmost  confusion;  some  of
the  inhabitants  flying  with  their  families  and  effects ;
others  ready  to  set  open  their  gates  to  the  conqueror ;
the  Turkish  soldiers  preparing  to  retreat ;  and  the  cita-
del, which  in  such  circumstances  might  have  afforded
him  some  refuge,  already  in  the  possession  of  the  Chris-
tian captives.  These  unhappy  men,  rendered  desperate
by  their  situation,  had  laid  hold  on  the  opportunity
which  Barbarossa  dreaded.  As  soon  as  his  army  was
at  some  distance  from  the  town,  they  gained  two  of
their  keepers,  by  whose  assistance,  knocking  off  their
fetters,  and  bursting  open  their  prisons,  they  over-
powered the  Turkish  garrison,  and  turned  the  artillery
of  the  fort  against  their  former  masters.  Barbarossa,  dis-
appointed and  enraged,  exclaiming  sometimes  against
the  false  compassion  of  his  officers,  and  sometimes  con-
demning his  own  imprudent  compliance  with  their  opi-
nion, fled  precipitately  to  Bona.

Tunis  sur- Meanwhile  Charles,  satisfied  with  the  easy
renders. an(j a]mOst bloodless victory  which he  had

1535.]  BOOK  V.  291

gained,  and  advancing  slowly  with  the  precaution
necessary  in  an  enemy's  country,  did  not  yet  know  the
whole  extent  of  his  own  good  fortune.  But  at  last,  a
messenger  dispatched  by  the  slaves  acquainted  him
with  the  success  of  their  noble  effort  or  the  recovery
of  their  liberty;  and  at  the  same  time  deputies  arrived
from  the  town,  in  order  to  present  him  the  keys  of  their
gates,  and  to  implore  his  protection  from  military  vio-
lence. While  he  was  deliberating  concerning  the  pro-
per measures  for  this  purpose,  the  soldiers,  fearing  that
they  should  be  deprived  of  the  booty  which  they  had
expected,  rushed  suddenly,  and  without  orders,  into  the
town,  and  began  to  kill  and  plunder  without  distinction.
It  was  then  too  late  to  restrain  their  cruelty,  their  ava-
rice, or  licentiousness.  All  the  outrages  of  which  sol-
diers are  capable  in  the  fury  of  a  storm,  all  the  excesses
of  which  men  can  be  guilty  when  their  passions  are
heightened  by  the  contempt  and  hatred  which  differ-
ence in  manners  and  religion  inspires,  were  commit-
ted. Above  thirty  thousand  of  the  innocent  inhabitants
perished  on  that  unhappy  day,  and  ten  thousand  were
carried  away  as  slaves.  Muley-Hascen  took  possession
of  a  throne  surrounded  with  carnage,  abhorred  by  Tiis
subjects,  on  whom  he  had  brought  such  calamities,  and
pitied  even  by  those  whose  rashness  had  been  the  oc-
casion of  them.  The  emperor  lamented  the  fatal  acci-
dent which  had  stained  the  lustre  of  his  victory ;  and
amidst  such  a  scene  of  horror  there  was  but  one  spec-
tacle thaf  afforded  him  any  satisfaction.  Ten  thousand
Christian  slaves,  among  whom  were  several  persons  of
distinction,  met  him  as  he  entered  the  town ;  and,  fall-
ing on  their  knees,  thanked  and  blessed  him  as  their
deliverer.

Restores  At  the  same  time  that  Charles  accomplished
kin6 to ht  n*s  Promise  to  tne  Moorish  king,  of  re-esta-
throne.  blishhig  him  in  his  dominions,  he  did  not  neg-
lect what  was  necessary  for  bridling  the  power  of  the

u  2

CHARLES  V.  [1535.

African  corsairs,  for  the  security  of  his  own  subjects,
and  for  the  interest  of  the  Spanish  crown :  in  order  to
gain  these  ends,  he  concluded  a  treaty  with  Muley-
Hascen  on  the  following  conditions  : — That  he  should
hold  the  kingdom  of  Tunis  in  fee  of  the  crown  of  Spain,
and  do  homage  to  the  emperor  as  his  liege  lord ;  that
all  the  Christian  slaves  now  within  his  dominions,  of
whatever  nation,  should  be  set  at  liberty  without  ran-
som; that  no  subject  of  the  emperor's  should  for  the
future  be  detained  in  servitude;  that  no  Turkish  corsair
should  be  admitted  into  the  ports  of  his  dominions ;
that  free  trade,  together  with  the  public  exercise  of  the
Christian  religion,  should  be  allowed  to  all  the  empe-
ror's subjects ;  that  the  emperor  should  not  only  retain
the  Goletta,  but  that  all  the  other  sea-ports  in  the  king-
dom which  were  fortified  should  be  put  i nto  his  hands;
that  Muley-Hascen  should  pay  annually  twelve  thou-
sand crowns  for  the  subsistence  of  the  Spanish  garrison
in  the  Goletta ;  that  he  should  enter  into  no  alliance
with  any  of  the  emperor's  enemies,  and  should  present
to  him  every  year,  as  an  acknowledgment  of  his  vas-
salage, six  Moorish  horses,  and  as  many  hawks." Hav-
ing thus  settled  the  affairs  of  Africa ;  chastised  the  in-
solence of  the  corsairs ;  secured  a  safe  retreat  for  the
ships  of  his  subjects,  and  a  proper  station  to  his  own
fleets,  on  that  coast  from  which  he  was  most  infested  by
Au ir piratical  depredations;  Charles  embarked  again
for  Europe,  the  tempestuous  weather,  and  sick-
ness among  his  troops,  not  permitting  him  to  pursue
Barbarossa.x

The  glory  By  this  expedition,  the  merit  of  which  seems
emperor e  to  nave  been  estimated  in  that  age,  rather  by
acquired.  ^  apparent  generosity  of  the  undertaking,  the

u  Du  Mont  Corps  Diplomat,  ii.  128. Surainonte  Hist,  di  Napoli,  iv.  89.

*  J£k-  Etr°P"  Diarium  Expedition. Tunetanae,  ap.  Scard.  vol.  ii.  p.  320,  &c.

Jov'1  Histor.  lib.  xxxiv.  153,  &c. Sandov.  ii.  154,  &c. Vertot  Hist,  de  Cheval.

de  Malthe. Epistres  des  Princes,  par  Ruscelli,  traduites  par  Belleforest,  p.  119,

120,  &c. Anton.  Pontii  Consentini  Hist.  Belli  adv.  Barbar.  ap.  Matthaji  Analecta.

1535.]  BOOK  V.  293

magnificence  wherewith  it  was  conducted,  and  the  suc-
cess which  crowned  it,  than  by  the  importance  of  the
consequences  that  attended  it,  the  emperor  attained  a
greater  height  of  glory  than  at  any  other  period  of  his
reign.  Twenty  thousand  slaves  whom  he  freed  from
bondage,  either  by  his  arms,  or  by  his  treaty  with  Mu-
ley-Hascen,y  each  of  whom  he  clothed  and  furnished
with  the  means  of  returning  to  their  respective  coun-
tries, spread  all  over  Europe  the  fame  of  their  benefac-
tor's munificence,  extolling  his  power  and  abilities  with
the  exaggeration  flowing  from  gratitude  and  admiration.
In  comparison  with  him,  the  other  monarchs  of  Europe
made  an  inconsiderable  figure.  They  seemed  to  be  so-
licitous about  nothing  but  their  private  and  particular
interests ;  while  Charles,  with  an  elevation  of  sentiment
which  became  the  chief  prince  in  Christendom,  ap-
peared to  be  concerned  for  the  honour  of  the  Christian
name,  and  attentive  to  the  public  security  and  welfare.

y  Summonte  Hist,  de  Nap.  vol.  iv.  p.  103.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

or  THX

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

BOOK  VI.

1535. UNFORTUNATELY  for  the  reputation  of  Fran-

The  causes  . ,  .

of  a  new cis  I.  among  his  contemporaries,  his  conduct,
at  this  juncture,  appeared  a  perfect  contrast  to

and  er°r tnat  °f  his  rival,  as  he  laid  hold  on  the  oppor-
Frands. tunity  afforded  him,  by  the  emperor's  having
turned  his  whole  force  against  the  common  enemy  of
Christendom,  to  revive  his  pretensions  in  Italy,  and  to
plunge  Europe  into  a  new  war. The  treaty  of  Cambray,
as  has  been  observed,  did  not  remove  the  causes  of
enmity  between  the  two  contending  princes  ;  it  covered
up,  but  did  not  extinguish  the  flames  of  discord.  Francis
in  particular,  who  waited  with  impatience  for  a  proper
occasion  of  recovering  the  reputation  as  well  as  the  ter-
ritories which  he  had  lost,  continued  to  carry  on  his
negotiations  in  different  courts  against  the  emperor,
taking  the  utmost  pains  to  heighten  the  jealousy  which
many  princes  entertained  of  his  power  or  designs,  and
to  inspire  the  rest  with  the  same  suspicion  and  fear  :
among  others,  he  applied  to  Francis  Sforza,  who,  though
indebted  to  Charles  for  the  possession  of  the  duchy  of
Milan,  had  received  it  on  such  hard  conditions,  as  ren-
dered, him  not  only  a  vassal  of  the  empire,  but  a  tribu-
tary dependant  upon  the  emperor. The  honour  of  hav-
ing married  the  emperor's  niece  did  not  reconcile  him
to  this  ignominious  state  of  subjection^  which  became

1535.]  BOOK  VI.  295

so  intolerable  even  to  Sforza,  though  a  weak  and  poor-
spirited  prince,  that  he  listened  with  eagerness  to  the
first  proposals  Francis  made  of  rescuing  him  from  the
yoke.  These  proposals  were  conveyed  to  him  by  Mara-
viglia,  or  Merveille,  as  he  is  called  by  the  French  his-
torians, a  Milanese  gentleman  residing  at  Paris ;  and
soon  after,  in  order  to  carry  on  the  negotiation  with
greater  advantage,  Merveille  was  sent  to  Milan,  on  pre-
tence of  visiting  his  relations,  but  with  secret  creden-
tials from  Francis  as  his  envoy.  In  this  character  he
was  received  by  Sforza.  But  notwithstanding  his  care
to  keep  that  circumstance  concealed,  Charles  suspecting,
or  having  received  information  of  it,  remonstrated  and
threatened  in  such  a  high  tone,  that  the  duke  and  his
ministers,  equally  intimidated,  gave  the  world  immedi-
ately a  most  infamous  proof  of  their  servile  fear  of  of-
fending the  emperor.  As  Merveille  had  neither  the
prudence  nor  the  temper  which  the  function  wherein  he
was  employed  required,  they  artfully  decoyed  him  into
a  quarrel,  in  which  he  happened  to  kill  his  antagonist,
one  of  the  duke's  domestics,  and  having  in-

December.  ,  . i  i  • i  -, t  i  •  1-1

stantly  seized  him,  they  ordered  him  to  be  tried
for  that  crime,  and  to  be  beheaded.  Francis,  no  less
astonished  at  this  violation  of  a  character  held  sacred
among  the  most  uncivilized  nations,  than  enraged  at  the
insult  offered  to  the  dignity  of  his  crown,  threatened
Sforza  with  the  effects  of  his  indignation,  and  com-
plained to  the  emperor,  whom  he  considered  as  the  real
author  of  that  unexampled  outrage.  But  receiving  no
satisfaction  from  either,  he  appealed  to  all  the  princes
of  Europe,  and  thought  himself  now  entitled  to  take
vengeance  for  an  injury,  which  it  would  have  been  in-
decent and  pusillanimous  to  let  pass  with  impunity.

Being;  thus  furnished  with  a  pretext  for  be-

irancis  .  r

destitute ginning  a  war,  on  which  he  had  already  re-
solved, he  multiplied  his  efforts  in  order  to  draw
in  other  princes  to  take  part  in  the  quarrel. But  ail  his

-2.96  CHARLES  V.  [1535,

measures  for  this  purpose  were  disconcerted  by  unfore-
seen events.  After  having  sacrificed  the  honour  of  the
royal  family  of  France  by  the  marriage  of  his  son  with
Catharine  of  Medici,  in  order  to  gain  Clement,  the
death  of  that  pontiff  had  deprived  him  of  all  the  advan-
tages which  he  expected  to  derive  from  his  friendship.
Paul,  his  successorr  though  attached  by  inclination  to
the  imperial  interest,  seemed  determined  to  maintain
the  neutrality  suitable  to  his  character  as  the  common
father  of  the  contending  princes.  The  king  of  Eng-
land, occupied  with  domestic  cares  and  projects,  de-
clined, for  once,  engaging  in  the  affairs  of  the  continent,
and  refused  to  assist  Francis,  unless  he  would  imitate
his  example,  in  throwing  off  the  papal  supremacy.
Hisnegoti-  These  disappointments  led  him  to  solicit,

with  with  greater  earnestness,  the  aid  of  the  Pro-
roan  Pro-  testant  princes  associated  by  the  league  of
testants.  Smalkalde.  That  he  might  the  more  easily  ac-
quire their  confidence,  he  endeavoured  to  accommodate
himself  to  their  predominant  passion  —  zeal  for  their  re-
ligious tenets.  He  affected  a  wonderful  moderation
with  regard  to  the  points  in  dispute  ;  he  permitted  Bel-
lay,  his  envoy  in  Germany,  to  explain  his  sentiments
concerning  some  of  the  most  important  articles,  in  terms
not  far  different  from  those  used  by  the  Protestants  ;a  he
even  condescended  to  invite  Melancthon,  whose  gentle
manners  and  pacific  spirit  distinguished  him  among  the
reformers,  to  visit  Paris,  that  by  his  assistance  he  might
concert  the  most  proper  measures  for  reconciling  the
contending  sects  which  so  unhappily  divided  the
church.b  These  concessions  must  be  considered  rather
as  arts  of  policy,  than  the  result  of  conviction  ;  for  what-
ever impression  the  new  opinions  in  religion  had  made
on  his  sisters,  the  queen  of  Navarre  and  duchess  of  Fer-
rara,  the  gaiety  of  Francis's  own  temper,  and  his  love

*  Freheri  Script.  Rer.  German,  iii.  354,  &c. Sleid.  Hist.  178.  183. Seckend.
lib.  iii.  103.  fc

•»  Caraerarii  Vita  Ph.  Melancthonis,  12mo. Hag.  1665.  p.  12.

1535.]  BOOK VI.  297

of  pleasure,  allowed  him  little  leisure  to  examine  theo-
logical controversies.

irritates  But  soon  after  he  lost  all  the  fruits  of  this  dis-
them.  ingenuous  artifice,  by  a  step  very  inconsistent
with  his  declarations  to  the  German  princes*  This  step,
however,  the  prejudices  of  the  age,  and  the  religious
sentiments  of  his  own  subjects,  rendered  it  necessary  for
him  to  take.  His  close  union  with  the  king  of  England,
an  excommunicated  heretic  ;  his  frequent  negotiations
with  the  German  Protestants ;  but,  above  all,  his  giving
public  audience  to  an  envoy  from  sultan  Solyman,  had
excited  violent  suspicions  concerning  the  sincerity  of
his  attachment  to  religion.  To  have  attacked  the  em-
peror, who,  on  all  occasions,  made  high  pretensions  to
zeal  in  defence  of  the  Catholic  faith,  and  at  the  very
juncture  when  he  was  preparing  for  his  expedition
against  Barbarossa,  which  was  then  considered  as  a
pious  enterprise,  could  not  have  failed  to  confirm  such
unfavourable  sentiments  with  regard  to  Francis,  and
called  on  him  to  vindicate  himself  by  some  extraordi-
nary demonstration  of  his  reverence  for  the  established
doctrines  of  the  church.  The  indiscreet  zeal  of  some
of  his  subjects,  who  had  imbibed  the  Protestant  opi-
nions, furnished  him  with  such  an  occasion  as  he  de-
sired. They  had  affixed  to  the  gates  of  the  Louvre,  and
other  public  places,  papers  containing  indecent  reflec-
tions on  the  doctrines  and  rites  of  the  Popish  church.
Six  of  the  persons  concerned  in  this  rash  action  were
discovered  and  seized.  The  king,  in  order  to  avert  the
judgments  which  it  was  supposed  their  blasphemies
might  draw  down  upon  the  nation,  appointed  a  solemn
procession.  The  holy  sacrament  was  carried  through
the  city  in  great  pomp ;  Francis  walked  uncovered  be-
fore it,  bearing  a  torch  in  his  hand ;  the  princes  of  the
blood  supported  the  canopy  over  it ;  the  nobles  marched
in  order  behind.  In  the  presence  of  this  numerous  as-
sembly, the  king,  accustomed  to  express  himself  on

298  CHARLES V.  [1535.

every  subject  in  strong  and  animated  language,  declared
that  if  one  of  his  hands  were  infected  with  heresy,  he
would  cut  it  off  with  the  other,  and  would  not  spare
even  his  own  children,  if  found  guilty  of  that  crime.
As  a  dreadful  proof  of  his  being  in  earnest,  the  six  un-
happy persons  were  publicly  burnt  before  the  proces-
sion was  finished,  with  circumstances  of  the  most  shock-
ing barbarity  attending  their  execution.0
They  re-  The  Prmces  of  the  league  of  Smalkalde,  filled
fuse  to  with  resentment  and  indignation  at  the  cruelty

join  him. •  i i  • i i • i i  i  11

with  which  their  brethren  were  treated,  could
not  conceive  Francis  to  be  sincere,  when  he  offered  to
protect  in  Germany  those  very  tenets,  which  he  per-
secuted with  such  rigour  in  his  own  dominions ;  so
that  all  Bellay's  art  and  eloquence  in  vindicating  his
master,  or  apologizing  for  his  conduct,  made  but  little
impression  upon  them.  They  considered  likewise,  that
the  emperor,  who  hitherto  had  never  employed  violence
against  the  doctrines  of  the  reformers,  nor  even  given
them  much  molestation  in  their  progress,  was  now  bound
by  the  agreement  at  Ratisbon,  not  to  disturb  such  as
had  embraced  the  new  opinions ;  and  the  Protestants
wisely  regarded  this  as  a  more  certain  and  immediate
security,  than  the  precarious  and  distant  hopes  with
which  Francis  endeavoured  to  allure  them.  Besides,
the  manner  in  which  he  had  behaved  to  his  allies  at  the
peace  of  Cambray  was  too  recent  to  be  forgotten,  and
did  not  encourage  others  to  rely  much  on  his  friendship
or  generosity.  Upon  all  these  accounts,  the  Protestant
princes  refused  to  assist  the  French  king  in  any  hostile
attempt  against  the  emperor.  The  elector  of  Saxony,
the  most  zealous  among  them,  in  order  to  avoid  giving
any  umbrage  to  Charles,  would  not  permit  Melancthon
to  visit  the  court  of  France,  although  that  reformer,
flattered  perhaps  by  the  invitation  of  so  great  a  monarch,
or  hoping  that  his  presence  there  might  be  of  signal

c  Belcarii  Comment.  Rer.  Gallic.  646. Sleid.  Hist.  175,  &c.

1535.]  BOOK VI.  299

advantage  to  the  Protestant  cause,  discovered  a  strong
inclination  to  undertake  the  journey  .d
The  French But  though  none  of  the  many  princes  who
vance*to- envied  or  dreaded  the  power  of  Charles  would
wards  Italy.  secon(j  Francis's  efforts  in  order  to  reduce  and
circumscribe  it,  he,  nevertheless,  commanded  his  army
to  advance  towards  the  frontiers  of  Italy. As  his  sole
pretext  for  taking  arms  was  that  he  might  chastise  the
duke  of  Milan  for  his  insolent  and  cruel  breach  of  the
law  of  nations,  it  might  have  been  expected  that  the
whole  weight  of  his  vengeance  was  to  have  fallen  on
his  territories. But  on  a  sudden,  and  at  their  very
commencement,  the  operations  of  war  took  another  di-
rection. Charles,  duke  of  Savoy,  one  of  the  least  active
and  able  princes  of  the  line  from  which  he  descended,
had  married  Beatrix  of  Portugal,  the  sister  of  the  em-
press. By  her  great  talents,  she  soon  acquired  an  ab-
solute ascendant  over  her  husband  :  and  proud  of  her
affinity  to  the  emperor,  or  allured  by  the  magnificent  pro-
mises with  which  he  flattered  her  ambition,  she  formed  a
union  between  the  duke  and  the  imperial  court,  extremely
inconsistent  with  that  neutrality,  which  wise  policy  as
well  as  the  situation  of  his  dominions  had  hitherto  in-
duced him  to  observe  in  all  the  quarrels  between  the
contending  monarchs. Francis  was  abundantly  sen-
sible of  the  distress  to  which  he  might  be  exposed,  if,
when  he  entered  Italy,  he  should  leave  behind  him  the
territories  of  a  prince,  devoted  so  obsequiously  to  the
emperor,  that  he  had  sent  his  eldest  son  to  be  educated
in  the  court  of  Spain,  as  a  kind  of  hostage  for  his  fide-
lity. Clement  the  Seventh,  who  had  represented  this
danger  in a  strong  light  during  his  interview  with
Francis  at  Marseilles,  suggested  to  him,  at  the  same
time,  the  proper  method  of  guarding  against  it,  having
advised  him  to  begin  his  operations  against  the  Mi-
lanese, by  taking  possession  of  Savoy  and  Piedmont,  as

*  Camerarii  Vita  Melan.  1-42,  &c.  -115. Seckeud.  lib.  iii.  107.

300  CHARLES  V.  [1535.

the  only  certain  way  of  securing  a  communica-

Takes  pos-  /, ,  .  , . .  n  i  • i  i

session  of  tion  with  his  own  dominions,  rrancis,  highly
's  irritated  with  the  duke  on  many  accounts,  parti-
cujariy  for  naving  supplied  the  constable  Bour-
bon with  the  money  that  enabled  him  to  levy  the  body  of
troops  which  ruined  the  French  army  in  the  fatal  battle
of  Pavia,  was  not  unwilling  to  let  him  now  feel  both
liow  deeply  he  resented,  and  how  severely  he  could
punish  these  injuries.  Nor  did  he  want  several  pre-
texts which  gave  some  colour  of  equity  to  the  violence
that  he  intended.  The  territories  of  France  and  Savoy
lying  contiguous  to  each  other,  and  intermingled  in
many  places,  various  disputes,  unavoidable  in  such  a
situation,  subsisted  between  the  two  sovereigns  con-
cerning the  limits  of  their  respective  property ;  and
besides,  Francis,  in  right  of  his  mother  Louise  of  Savoy,
had  large  claims  upon  the  duke  her  brother,  for  her
share  in  their  father's  succession.  Being  unwilling,  how-
ever, to  begin  hostilities  without  some  cause  of  quarrel
more  specious  than  these  pretensions,  many  of  which
were  obsolete,  and  others  dubious,  he  demanded  per-
mission to  march  through  Piedmont  in  his  way  to  the
Milanese,  hoping  that  the  duke,  from  an  excess  of  at-
tachment to  the  imperial  interest,  might  refuse  this
request,  and  thus  give  a  greater  appearance  of  justice
to  all  his  operations  against  him.  But,  if  we  may  be-
lieve the  historians  of  Savoy,  who  appear  to  be  better
informed  with  regard  to  this  particular  than  those  of
France,  the  duke  readily,  and  with  a  good  grace,  granted
what  it  was  not  in  his  power  to  deny,  promising  free
passage  to  the  French  troops  as  was  desired ;  so  that
Francis,  as  the  only  method  now  left  of  justifying  the
measures  which  he  determined  to  take,  was  obliged  to
insist  for  full  satisfaction  with  regard  to  every  thing
that  either  the  crown  of  France  or  his  mother  Louise
could  demand  of  the  house  of  Savoy.6  Such  an  evasive

•  HistoireGeuealogique  de  Savoye,  pai  Guicheuon,  2  tom.fol.Lyon.  1660.  i.639,&c.

1535.]  BOOK VI.  301

answer,  as  might  have  been  expected,  being  made  to
this  requisition,  the  French  army  under  the  admiral
Brion,  poured  at  once  into  the  duke's  territories  at  dif-
ferent places.  The  countries  of  Bresse  and  Bugey,
united  at  that  time  to  Savoy,  were  overrun  in  a  mo-
ment. Most  of  the  towns  in  the  duchy  of  Savoy  opened
their  gates  at  the  approach  of  the  enemy ;  a  few  which
attempted  to  make  resistance  were  easily  taken ;  and
before  the  end  of  the  campaign,  the  duke  saw  himself
stripped  of  all  his  dominions,  but  the  province  of  Pied-
mont, in  which  there  were  not  many  places  in  a  con-
dition to  be  defended.

The  city  of  To  complete  the  duke's  misfortunes,  the  city
recovers  of  Geneva,  the  sovereignty  of  which  he  claimed,
its  liberty.  an(j  jn  some  degree  possessed,  threw  off  his
yoke,  and  its  revolt  drew  along  with  it  the  loss  of  the
adjacent  territories.  Geneva  was,  at  that  time,  an
imperial  city ;  and  though  under  the  direct  dominion
of  its  own  bishops,  and  the  remote  sovereignty  of  the
dukes  of  Savoy,  the  form  of  its  internal  constitution
was  purely  republican,  being  governed  by  syndics
and  a  council  chosen  by  the  citizens.  From  these  dis-
tinct and  often  clashing  jurisdictions,  two  opposite
parties  took  their  rise,  and  had  long  subsisted  in  the
state ;  the  one  composed  of  the  advocates  for  the  pri-
vileges of  the  community,  assumed  the  name  ofEignotz,
or  confederates  in  defence  of  liberty ;  and  branded  the
other,  which  supported  the  episcopal  or  ducal
prerogatives,  with  the  name  of  Mammelukes  or
slaves.  At  length,  the  Protestant  opinions  beginning
to  spread  among  the  citizens,  inspired  such  as  embraced
them  with  that  bold  enterprising  spirit  which  always
accompanies  or  was  naturally  produced  by  them  in
their  first  operations.  As  both  the  duke  and  bishop
were  from  interest,  from  prejudice,  and  from  political
considerations,  violent  enemies  of  the  Reformation,  all
the  new  converts  joined  with  warmth  the  party  of  the

302  CHARLES V.  [1535.

Eignotz ;  and  zeal  for  religion,  mingling  with  the  love
of  liberty,  added  strength  to  that  generous  passion.
The  rage  and  animosity  of  two  factions,  shut  up  within
the  same  walls,  occasioned  frequent  insurrections,  which
terminating  mostly  to  the  advantage  of  the  friends  of
liberty,  they  daily  became  more  powerful.

The  duke  and  bishop,  forgetting  their  ancient  con-
tests about  jurisdiction,  had  united  against  their  com-
mon enemies,  and  each  attacked  them  with  his  proper
weapons.  The  bishop  excommunicated  the  people  of
Geneva  as  guilty  of  a  double  crime;  of  impiety  in
apostatizing  from  the  established  religion ;  and  of
sacrilege,  in  invading  the  rights  of  his  see.  The  duke
attacked  them  as  rebels  against  their  lawful  prince,
and  attempted  to  render  himself  master  of  the  city,
first  by  surprise,  and  then  by  open  force.  The
citizens,  despising  the  thunder  of  the  bishop's
censures,  boldly  asserted  their  independence  against
the  duke  ;  and  partly  by  their  own  valour,  partly  by
the  powerful  assistance  which  they  received  from  the
canton  of  Berne,  together  with  some  small  supplies  both
of  men  and  money,  secretly  furnished  by  the  king  of
France,  they  defeated  all  his  attempts.  Not  satisfied
with  having  repulsed  him,  or  with  remaining  always
upon  the  defensive  themselves,  they  now  took  advan-
tage of  the  duke's  inability  to  resist  them,  while  over-
whelmed by  the  armies  of  France,  and  seized  several
castles  and  places  of  strength  which  he  possessed  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Geneva ;  thus  delivering  the
city 'from  those  odious  monuments  of  its  former  sub-
jection, and  rendering  the  public  liberty  more  secure
for  the  future.  At  the  same  time  the  canton  of  Berne
invaded  and  conquered  the  Pays  de  Vaud,  to  which
it  had  some  pretensions.  The  canton  of  Friburgh,
though  zealously  attached  to  the  Catholic  religion,  and
having  no  subject  of  contest  with  the  duke,  laid  hold
on  part  of  the  spoils  of  that  unfortunate  prince,  A

1535.]  BOOK  VI.  303

great  portion  of  these  conquests  or  usurpations  being
still  retained  by  the  two  cantons,  add  considerably  to
their  power,  and  have  become  the  most  valuable  part
of  their  territories.  Geneva,  notwithstanding  many
schemes  and  enterprises  of  the  dukes  of  Savoy  to  re-
establish their  dominion  over  it,  still  keeps  possession
of  its  independence  ;  and  in  consequence  of  that  bless-
ing, has  attained  a  degree  of  consideration,  wealth,  and
elegance,  which  it  could  not  otherwise  have  reached/
The  em-  Amidst  sucha  succession  of  disastrous  events,
the  duke  of  Savoy  had  no  other  resource  but  the
emPeror's  protection,  which,  upon  his  return
Savoy,  from  Tunis,  he  demanded  with  the  most  earnest
importunity ;  and  as  his  misfortunes  were  occasioned
chiefly  by  his  attachment  to  the  imperial  interest,  he
had  a  just  title  to  immediate  assistance.  Charles,  how-
ever, was  not  in  a  condition  to  support  him  with  that
vigour  and  dispatch  which  the  exigency  of  his  affairs
called  for.  Most  of  the  troops  employed  in  the  African
expedition,  having  been  raised  for  that  service  alone,
were  disbanded  as  soon  as  it  was  finished ;  the  veteran
forces  under  Antonio  de  Leyva  were  hardly  sufficient
for  the  defence  of  the  Milanese ;  and  the  emperor's
treasury  was  entirely  drained  by  his  extraordinary
efforts  against  the  infidels.

Oct  24  But  the  death  of  Francis  Sforza,  occasioned,
Death  of  according  to  some  historians,  by  the  terror  of  a
duke  of  French  invasion,  which  had  twice  been  fatal  to
his  family,  afforded  the  emperor  full  leisure  to
prepare  for  action.  By  this  unexpected  event,  the
nature  of  the  war,  and  the  causes  of  discord,  were  totally
changed.  Francis's  first  pretext  for  taking  arms,  in
order  to  chastise  Sforza  for  the  insult  offered  to  the
dignity  of  his  crown,  was  at  once  cut  off;  but  as  that
prince  died  without  issue,  all  Francis's  rights  to  the

'  Hist,  de  la  Ville  de  Geneve,  par  Spon,  I2rao.  Utr.  1685,  p.  99.  Hist,  de  la  Re-
formation de  Suisse  par  Rouchat.  Gen.  1728,  torn.  iv.  p.  294,  &c.  torn.  v.  p.  916
Sue.  Mem.  de  Bellay,  181.

304  CHARLES V.  [1535.

duchy  of  Milan,  which  he  had  yielded  only  to  Sforza
and  his  posterity,  returned  back  to  him  in  full  force.
As  the  recovery  of  the  Milanese  was  the  favourite  ob-
ject of  that  monarch,  he  instantly  renewed  his  claim  to
it;  and  if  he  had  supported  his  pretensions  by  ordering
the  powerful  army  quartered  in  Savoy  to  advance  with-
out losing  a  moment  towards  Milan,  he  could  hardly
have  failed  to  secure  the  important  point  of  possession.
But  Francis,  who  became  less  enterprising  as  he  ad-
vanced in  years,  and  who  was  overawed  at  some  times
into  an  excess  of  caution  by  the  remembrance  of  his
past  misfortunes,  endeavoured  to  establish  his  rights
Francis's  ^7  negotiation,  not  by  arms;  and  from  a  timid
preten-  moderation,  fatal  in  all  great  affairs,  neglected

sionsto  .  7 , „  J°  . ' .

that  to  improve  the  favourable  opportunity  which
ichy'  presented  itself.  Charles  was  more  decisive  in
his  operations,  and  in  quality  of  sovereign,  took  pos-
session of  the  duchy,  as  a  vacant  fief  of  the  empire.
While  Francis  endeavoured  to  explain  and  assert  his
title  to  it,  by  arguments  and  memorials,  or  employed
various  arts  in  order  to  reconcile  the  Italian  powers  to
the  thoughts  of  his  regaining  footing  in  Italy,  his  rival
was  silently  taking  effectual  steps  to  prevent  it.  The
emperor,  however,  was  very  careful  not  to  discover  too
early  an  intention  of  this  kind ;  but  seeming  to  admit
the  equity  of  Francis's  claim,  he  appeared  solicitous
only  about  giving  him  possession  in  such  a  manner  as
might  not  disturb  the  peace  of  Europe,  or  overturn  the
balance  of  power  in  Italy,  which  the  politicians  of  that
country  were  so  desirous  of  preserving.  By  this  arti-
fice he  deceived  Francis  and  gained  so  much  confi-
dence with  the  rest  of  Europe,  that,  almost  without  in-
curring any  suspicion,  he  involved  the  affair  in  new
difficulties,  and  protracted  the  negotiations  at  pleasure.
Sometimes  he  proposed  to  grant  the  investiture  of
Milan  to  the  duke  of  Orleans,  Francis's  second  son,
sometimes  to  the  duke  of  Angouleme,  his  third  son ;

1535.]  BOOK  VI.  305

as  the  views  and  inclinations  of  the  French  court  varied,
he  transferred  his  choice  alternately  from  the  one  to
the  other,  with  such  profound  and  well-conducted  dis-
simulation, that  neither  Francis  nor  his  ministers  seem
to  have  penetrated  his  real  intention  ;  and  all  military
operations  were  entirely  suspended,  as  if  nothing  had
remained  but  to  enter  quietly  into  possession  of  what
they  demanded.

1536. During  the  interval  of  leisure  gained  in  this
Charles's manner,  Charles,  on  his  return  from  Tunis,  as-
sembled  the  states  both  of  Sicily  and  Naples;

and  as  they  thought  themselves  greatly  honoured
by  the  presence  of  their  sovereign,  and  were  no  less
pleased  with  the  apparent  disinterestedness  of  his  ex-
pedition into  Africa,  than  dazzled  by  the  success  which
had  attended  his  arms,  he  prevailed  on  them  to  vote
him  such  liberal  subsidies  as  were  seldom  granted  in
that  age.  This  enabled  him  to  recruit  his  veteran
troops,  to  levy  a  body  of  Germans,  and  to  take  every
other  proper  precaution  for  executing  or  supporting  the
measures  on  which  he  had  determined.  Bellay,  the
French  envoy  in  Germany,  having  discovered  the  in-
tention of  raising  troops  in  that  country,  notwithstand-
ing all  the  pretexts  employed  in  order  to  conceal  it,
first  alarmed  his  master  with  this  evident  proof  of  the
emperor's  insincerity/  But  Francis  was  so  possessed
at  that  time  with  the  rage  of  negotiation,  in  all  the  ar-
tifices and  refinements  of  which  his  rival  far  surpassed
him,  that  instead  of  beginning  his  military  operations,
and  pushing  them  with  vigour,  or  seizing  the  Milanese
before  the  imperial  army  was  assembled,  he  satisfied
himself  with  making  new  offers  to  the  emperor,  in
order  to  procure  the  investiture  by  his  voluntary  deed.
His  offers  were,  indeed,  so  liberal  and  advantageous,
that  if  ever  Charles  had  intended  to  grant  his  demand,
he  could  not  have  rejected  them  with  decency.  He

K  Mem.  de  Bellay,  192.
VOL.  IV.  X

306  CHARLES V.  [1536.

dexterously  eluded  them  by  declaring,  that,  until  he
consulted  the  pope  in  person,  he  could  not  take  his  final
resolution  with  regard  to  a  point  which  so  nearly  con-
cerned the  peace  of  Italy.  By  this  evasion  he  gained
some  farther  time  for  ripening  the  schemes  which  he
had  in  view.

The  em-  The  emperor  at  last  advanced  towards  Rome,
?e7s°]Rome,  and  made  his  public  entry  into  that  city  with
April  e.  extraordinary  pomp ;  but  it  being  found  neces-
sary to  remove  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  temple  of  Peace,
in  order  to  widen  one  of  the  streets  through  which  the
cavalcade  had  to  pass,  all  the  historians  take  notice  of
this  trivial  circumstance,  and  they  are  fond  to  interpret
it  as  an  omen  of  the  bloody  war  that  followed.  Charles,
it  is  certain,  had  by  this  time  banished  all  thoughts  of
peace  ;  and  at  last  threw  off  the  mask,  with  -which  he
had  so  long  covered  his  designs  from  the  court  of
France,  by  a  declaration  of  his  sentiments  no  less  sin-
gular than  explicit.  The  French  ambassadors  having,
in  their  master's  name,  demanded  a  definitive  reply  to
his  propositions  concerning  the  investiture  of  Milan,
Charles  promised  to  give  it  next  day,  in  presence  of  the
pope  and  cardinals  assembled  in  full  consistory.  These
His  public  being  accordingly  met,  and  all  the  foreign  am-
"galnlt™  bassadors  invited  to  attend,  the  emperor  stood
Francis.  Up?  an^  addressing  himself  to  the  pope,  expa-
tiated for  some  time  on  the  sincerity  of  his  own  wishes
for  the  peace  of  Christendom,  as  well  as  his  abhor-
rence of  war,  the  miseries  of  which  he  enumerated  at
great  length,  with  studied  and  elaborate  oratory ;  he
complained,  that  all  his  endeavours  to  preserve  the  tran-
quillity of  Europe  had  hitherto  been  defeated  by  the
restless  and  unjust  ambition  of  the  French  king  •  that
even  during  his  minority  he  had  proofs  of  the  unfriendly
and  hostile  intentions  of  that  monarch  ;  that  afterward,
he  had  openly  attempted  to  wrest  from  him  the  imperial
crown,  which  belonged  to  him  by  a  title  no  less  just  than

1536.]  BOOK VI.  307

natural ;  that  he  had  next  invaded  his  kingdom  of  Na-
varre ;  that  not  satisfied  with  this,  he  had  attacked  his
territories  as  well  as  those  of  his  allies,  both  in  Italy  and
the  Low  Countries;  that  when  the  valour  of  the  impe-
rial troops,  rendered  irresistible  by  the  protection  of  the
Almighty,  had  checked  his  progress,  ruined  his  armies,
and  seized  his  person,  he  continued  to  pursue  by  deceit
what  he  had  undertaken  with  injustice ;  that  he  had
violated  every  article  in  the  treaty  of  Madrid,  to  which
he  owed  his  liberty,  and  as  soon  as  he  returned  to  his
dominions  took  measures  for  rekindling  the  war  which
that  pacification  had  happily  extinguished  ;  that  when
new  misfortunes  compelled  him  to  sue  again  for  peace
at  Cambray,  he  concluded  and  observed  it  with  equal
insincerity ;  that  soon  after  he  had  formed  dangerous
connexions  with  the  heretical  princes  in  Germany,  and
incited  them  to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  the  empire ;
that  now  he  had  driven  the  duke  of  Savoy,  a  prince
married  to  a  sister  of  the  empress,  and  joined  in  close
alliance  with  Spain,  out  of  the  greater  part  of  his  terri-
tories ;  that  after  injuries  so  often  repeated,  and  amidst
so  many  sources  of  discord,  all  hope  of  amity  or  con-
cord became  desperate ;  and  though  he  himself  was
still  willing  to  grant  the  investiture  of  Milan  to  one  of
the  princes  of  France,  there  was  little  probability  of  that
event  taking  place,  as  Francis,  on  the  one  hand,  would
not  consent  to  what  was  necessary  for  securing  the
tranquillity  of  Europe,  nor  on  the  other,  could  he  think
it  reasonable  or  safe  to  give  a  rival  the  unconditional
possession  of  all  that  he  demanded.  "  Let  us  not,  how-
Chaiienges  ever,"  added  he,  "  continue  wantonly  to  shed
JinM0  tne  blood  of  our  innocent  subjects;  let  us  de-
combat.  cide  the  quarrel  man  to  man,  with  what -arms
he  pleases  to  choose,  in  our  shirts,  on  an  island,  a
bridge,  or  aboard  a  galley  moored  in  a  river ;  let  the
duchy  of  Burgundy  be  put  in  deposit  on  his  part,  and
that  of  Milan  on  mine  ;  these  shall  be  the  prize  of  the

x  2

308  CHARLES V.  [1536.

conqueror ;  and,  after  that,  let  the  united  forces  of  Ger-
many, Spain,  and  France,  be  employed  to  humble  the
power  of  the  Turk,  and  to  extirpate  heresy  out  of  Chris-
tendom. But  if  he,  by  declining  this  method  of  ter-
minating our  differences,  renders  war  inevitable,  no-
thing shall  divert  me  from  prosecuting  it  to  such
extremity,  as  shall  reduce  one  of  us  to  be  the  poorest
gentleman  in  his  own  dominions.  Nor  do  I  fear  that
it  will  be  on  me  this  misfortune  shall  fall ;  I  enter  upon
action  with  the  fairest  prospect  of  success  ;  the  justice
of  my  cause,  the  union  of  my  subjects,  the  number  and
valour  of  my  troops,  the  experience  and  fidelity  of  my
generals,  all  combine  to  ensure  it.  Of  all  these  advan-
tages, the  king  of  France  is  destitute ;  and  were  my
resources  no  more  certain,  and  my  hopes  of  victory  no
better  founded  than  his,  I  would  instantly  throw  myself
at  his  feet,  and  with  folded  hands,  and  a  rope  about  my
neck,  implore  his  mercy.  "h

This  long  harangue  the  emperor  delivered  with  an
elevated  voice,  a  haughty  tone,  and  the  greatest  vehe-
mence of  expression  and  gesture.  The  French  ambas-
sadors, who  did  not  fully  comprehend  his  meaning,  as
he  spoke  in  the  Spanish  tongue,  were  totally  discon-
certed, and  at  a  loss  how  they  should  answer  such  an
unexpected  invective :  when  one  of  them  began  to
vindicate  his  master's  conduct,  Charles  interposed
abruptly,  and  would  not  permit  him  to  proceed.  The
pope,  without  entering  into  any  particular  detail,  sa-
tisfied himself  with  a  short  but  pathetic  recommenda-
tion of  peace,  together  with  an  offer  of  employing  his
sincere  endeavours  in  order  to  procure  that  blessing  to
Christendom ;  and  the  assembly  broke  up  in  the  great-
est astonishment  at  the  extraordinary  scene  which  had
been  exhibited.  In  no  part  of  his  conduct,  indeed,  did
Charles  ever  deviate  so  widely  from  his  general  cha-
racter. Instead  of  that  prudent  recollection,  that

h  Bellay,  199. Sandov,  Hist,  del  Emper.  ii.  226.

1536.]  BOOK VI.  309

The  mo- composed  and  regular  deportment  so  strictly

lives  of  .  ,  1  1 • ii-i

this  rash  attentive  to  decorum,  and  so  admirably  adapted
to  conceal  his  own  passions,  for  which  he  was
at  all  other  times  conspicuous,  he  appears  on  this  oc-
casion, before  one  of  the  most  august  assemblies  in
Europe,  boasting  of  his  own  power  and  exploits  with
insolence ;  inveighing  against  his  enemy  with  inde-
cency ;  and  challenging  him  to  combat  with  an  osten-
tatious valour,  more  becoming  a  champion  in  romance,
than  the  first  monarch  in  Christendom.  But  the  well-
known  and  powerful  operation  of  continued  prosperity,
as  well  as  of  exaggerated  praise,  even  upon  the  firmest
minds,  sufficiently  accounts  for  this  seeming  inconsis-
tency. After  having  compelled  Solyman  to  retrdat,  and
having  stripped  Barbarossa  of  a  kingdom,  Charles  be-
gan to  consider  his  arms  as  invincible.  He  had  been
entertained,  ever  since  his  return  from  Africa,  with  re-
peated scenes  of  triumphs  and  public  rejoicings ;  the
orators  and  poets  of  Italy,  the  most  elegant  at  that  time
in  Europe,  had  exhausted  their  genius  in  panegyric  on
his  conduct  and  merit,  to  which  the  astrologers  added
magnificent  promises  of  a  more  splendid  fortune  still  in
store.  Intoxicated  with  all  these,  he  forgot  his  usual
reserve  and  moderation,  and  was  unable  to  restrain  this
extravagant  sally  of  vanity,  which  became  the  more  re-
markable, by  being  both  so  uncommon  and  so  public.

He  himself  seems  to  have  been  immediately  sensible
of  the  impropriety  of  his  behaviour;  and  when  the  French
ambassadors  demanded  next  day,  a  more  clear  explana-
tion of  what  he  had  said  concerning  the  combat,  he  told
them,  that  they  were  not  to  consider  his  proposal  as
a  formal  challenge  to  their  master,  but  as  an  expedient
for  preventing  bloodshed;  he  endeavoured  to  soften
several  expressions  in  his  discourse ;  and  spoke  in  terms
full  of  respect  towards  Francis.  But  though  this  slight
apology  was  far  from  being  sufficient  to  remove  the
offence  which  had  been  given,  Francis,  by  an  unac-

310  CHARLES V.  [1536.

countable  infatuation,  continued  to  negotiate,  as  if  it
had  still  been  possible  to  bring  their  differences  to  a
period  by  an  amicable  composition.  Charles  rinding
him  so  eager  to  run  into  the  snare,  favoured  the  decep-
tion, and  by  seeming  to  listen  to  his  proposals,  gained
farther  time  to  prepare  for  the  execution  of  his  own
designs.1

At  last  the  imperial  army  assembled  on  the
invades frontiers  of  the  Milanese,  to  the  amount  of  forty
thousand  foot,  and  ten  thousand  horse,  while
that  of  France  encamped  near  Vercelli  in  Piedmont,
being  greatly  inferior  in  number,  and  weakened  by  the
departure  of  a  body  of  Swiss>  whom  Charles  artfully
persuaded  the  Popish  cantons  to  recall,  that  they  might
not  serve  against  the  duke  of  Savoy,  their  ancient  ally.
The  French  general,  not  daring  to  risk  a  'battle,  re-
tired as  soon  as  the  Imperialists  advanced. The  em-
peror put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  forces,
'  which  the  marquis  del  Guasto,the  duke  of  Alva,
and  Ferdinand  de  Gonzago,  commanded  under  him,
though  the  supreme  direction  of  the  whole  was  com-
mitted to  Antonio  de  Leyva,  whose  abilities  and  expe-
rience justly  entitled  him  to  that  distinction. Charles
soon  discovered  his  intention  not  to  confine  his  opera-
tions to  the  recovery  of  Piedmont  and  Savoy,  but  to  push
forward  and  invade  the  southern  provinces  of  France.
This  scheme  he  had  long  meditated,  and  had  long  been
taking  measures  for  executing  it  with  such  vigour  as
might  ensure  success. He  had  remitted  large  sums  to
his  sister,  the  governess  of  the  Low  Countries,  and  to
his  brother,  the  king  of  the  Romans,  instructing  them
to  levy  all  the  forces  in  their  power,  in  order  to  form
two  separate  bodies,  the  one  to  enter  France  on  the  side
of  Picardy,  the  other  on  the  side  of  Champagne;  while
he,  with  the  main  army,  fell  upon  the  opposite  frontier
of  the  kingdom. Trusting  to  these  vast  preparations,

de  Bellay,  205,  &c.

1536.]  BOOK VI.  311

he  thought  it  impossible  that  Francis  could  resist  so
many  unexpected  attacks  on  such  different  quarters ;
and  began  his  enterprise  with  such  confidence  of  its
happy  issue,  that  he  desired  Jovius  the  historian,  to
make  a  large  provision  of  paper,  sufficient  to  record
the  victories  which  he  was  going  to  obtain.

His  ministers  and  generals,  instead  of  entertaining
the  same  sanguine  hopes,  represented  to  him,  in  the
strongest  terms,  the  danger  of  leading  his  troops  so  far
from  his  own  territories,  to  such  a  distance  from  his
magazines,  and  into  provinces  which  did  not  yield  suf-
ficient subsistence  for  their  own  inhabitants. They  en-
treated him  to  consider  the  inexhaustible  resources  of
France  in  maintaining  a  defensive  war,  and  the  active
zeal  with  which  a  gallant  nobility  would  serve  a  prince
whom  they  loved,  in  repelling  the  enemies  of  their
country ;  they  recalled  to  his  remembrance  the  fatal
miscarriage  of  Bourbon  and  Pescara,  when  they  ven-
tured upon  the  same  enterprise,  under  circumstances
which  seemed  as  certain  to  promise  success ;  the  mar-
quis del  Guasto,  in  particular,  fell  on  his  knees,  and
conjured  him  to  abandon  the  undertaking  as  desperate.
But  many  circumstances  combined  in  leading  Charles
to  disregard  all  their  remonstrances. He  could  seldom
be  brought,  on  any  occasion,  to  depart  from  a  resolu-
tion which  he  had  once  taken;  he  was  too  apt  to  un-
derrate and  despise  the  talents  of  his  rival  the  king  of
France,  because  they  differed  so  widely  from  his  own ;
he  was  blinded  by  the  presumption  which  accompanies
prosperity,  and  relied  perhaps,  in  some  degree,  on  the
prophecies  which  predicted  the  increase  of  his  own
grandeur. He  not  only  adhered  obstinately  to  his  own
plan,  but  determined  to  advance  towards  France  with-
out waiting  for  the  reduction  of  any  part  of  Piedmont,
except  such  towns  as  were  absolutely  necessary  for  pre-
serving his  communication  with  the  Milanese.

CHARLES V.  [1536.

The  marquis  de  Saluces,  to  whom  Francis
part  of  the  had  intrusted  the  command  of  a  small  body  of
troops  left  for  the  defence  of  Piedmont,  ren-

dominions.

reason  to  expect.  That  nobleman,  educated  in  the  court
of  France,  distinguished  by  continual  marks  of  the
king's  favour,  and  honoured  so  lately  with  a  charge  of
such  importance,  suddenly,  and  without  any  provoca-
tion or  pretext  of  disgust,  revolted  from  his  benefactor.
His  motives  to  this  treacherous  action  were  as  childish
as  the  deed  itself  was  base.  Being  strongly  possessed
with  a  superstitious  faith  in  divination  and  astrology,
he  believed  with  full  assurance,  that  the  fatal  period  of
the  French  nation  was  at  hand  ;  that  on  its  ruins  the
emperor  would  establish  a  universal  monarchy  ;  that
therefore  he  ought  to  follow  the  dictates  of  'prudence,
in  attaching  himself  to  his  rising  fortune,  and  could
incur  no  blame  for  deserting  a  prince  whom  heaven
had  devoted  to  destruction.1"  His  treason  became  still
more  odious,  by  his  employing  that  very  authority  with
which  Francis  had  invested  him,  in  order  to  open  the
kingdom  to  his  enemies.  Whatever  measures  were
proposed  or  undertaken  by  the  officers  under  his  com-
mand for  the  defence  of  their  conquests,  he  rejected  or
defeated.  Whatever  properly  belonged  to  himself,  as
commander-in-chief,  to  provide,  or  perform  for  that
purpose,  he  totally  neglected.  In  this  manner,  he  ren-
dered towns  even  of  the  greatest  consequence  unten-
able, by  leaving  them  destitute  either  of  provisions,  or
ammunition,  or  artillery,  or  a  sufficient  garrison  ;  and
the  Imperialists  must  have  reduced  Piedmont  in  as  short
a  time  as  was  necessary  to  march  through  it,  if  Mont-
pezat,  the  governor  of  Fossano,  had  not,  by  an  extraor-
dinary effort  of  courage  and  military  conduct,  detained
them  almost  a  month  before  that  inconsiderable  place.

k  Bellay,  222,  a  j  246,  b.

1536.]  BOOK VI.  313

Francis's ?7  ^s  meritorious  and  seasonable  service,
plan  for  the  ^e  nrainecl  his  master  sufficient  time  for  assem-

defence  of .  °

his  king-  bling  his  forces,  and  for  concerting  a  system  of
defence  against  a  danger  which  he  now  saw  to
be  inevitable.  Francis  fixed  upon  the  only  proper  and
effectual  plan  for  defeating  the  invasion  of  a  powerful
enemy ;  and  his  prudence  in  choosing  this  plan,  as  well
as  his  perseverance  in  executing  it,  deserves  the  greater
praise,  as  it  was  equally  contrary  to  his  own  natural
temper,  and  to  the  genius  of  the  French  nation.  He
determined  to  remain  altogether  upon  the  defensive ;
never  to  hazard  a  battle,  or  even  a  great  skirmish,  with-
out certainty  of  success ;  to  fortify  his  camps  in  a  regu-
lar manner ;  to  throw  garrisons  only  into  towns  of  great
strength  ;  to  deprive  the  enemy  of  subsistence,  by  lay-
ing waste  the  country  before  them ;  and  to  save  the
whole  kingdom  by  sacrificing  one  of  its  provinces.
intrusts  The  execution  of  this  plan  he  committed  en-
Montmo-  tirely  to  the  marechal  Montmorency.  who  was

rency  with  »  •

the  execu-  the  author  of  it ;  a  man  wonderfully  fitted  by
nature  for  such  a  trust.  Haughty,  severe,  con-
fident in  his  own  abilities,  and  despising  those  of  other
men ;  incapable  of  being  diverted  from  any  resolution
by  remonstrances  or  entreaties ;  and,  in  prosecuting  any
scheme,  regardless  alike  of  love  or  of  pity.

Montmorency  made  choice  of  a  strong  camp
camp"  at  under  the  walls  of  Avignon,  at  the  confluence
Avignon.  of  the  Rhone  and  the  Durance,  one  of  which

plentifully  supplied  his  troops  with  all  necessaries  from
the  inland  provinces,  and  the  other  covered  his  carnp
on  that  side  where  it  was  most  probable  the  enemy  would
approach.  He  laboured  with  unwearied  industry  to
render  the  fortifications  of  this  camp  impregnable,  and
assembled  there  a  considerable  army,  though  greatly
inferior  to  that  of  the  enemy ;  while  the  king,  with  ano-
ther body  of  troops,  encamped  at  Valence,  higher  up  the
Rhone.  Marseilles  and  Aries  were  the  only  towns  he

314  CHARLES  V.  [1536.

thought  it  necessary  to  defend  ;  the  former,  in  order  to
retain  the  command  of  the  sea ;  the  latter,  as  the  barrier
of  the  province  of  Languedoc ;  and  each  of  these  he
furnished  with  numerous  garrisons  of  his  best  troops,
commanded  by  officers  on  whose  fidelity  and  valour  he
could  rely.  The  inhabitants  of  the  other  towns,  as  well
as  of  the  open  country,  were  compelled  to  abandon  their
houses,  and  were  conducted  to  the  mountains,  to  the
camp  at  Avignon,  or  to  the  inland  provinces.  The  for-
tifications of  such  places  as  might  have  afforded  shelter
or  defence  to  the  enemy,  were  thrown  down.  Corn,
forage,  and  provisions  of  every  kind,  were  carried  away
or  destroyed ;  all  the  mills  and  ovens  were  ruined,  and
the  wells  filled  up  or  rendered  useless.  The  devastation
extended  from  the  Alps  to  Marseilles,  and  from  the  sea
to  the  confines  of  Dauphine ;  nor  does  history  afford
any  instance  among  civilized  nations,  in  which  this  cruel
expedient  for  the  public  safety  was  employed  with  the
same  rigour.

At  length,  the  emperor  arrived  with  the  van
enters  of  his  army  on  the  frontiers  of  Provence,  and
B*  was  still  so  possessed  with  confidence  of  success,
that  during  a  few  days,  when  he  was  obliged  to  halt
until  the  rest  of  his  troops  came  up,  he  began  to  divide
his  future  conquests  among  his  officers ;  and  as  a  new
incitement  to  serve  him  with  zeal,  gave  them  liberal
promises  of  offices,  lands,  and  honours  in  France.1  The
face  of  desolation,  however,  which  presented  itself  to
him,  when  he  entered  the  country,  began  to  damp  his
hopes;  and- convinced  him  that  a  monarch,  who,  in
order  to  distress  an  enemy,  had  voluntarily  ruined  one
of  his  richest  provinces,  would  defend  the  rest  with
desperate  obstinacy.  Nor  was  it  long  before  he  became
sensible  that  Francis's  plan  of  defence  was  as  prudent
as  it  appeared  to  be  extraordinary  ^  His  fleet,  on  which
Charles  chiefly  depended  for  subsistence,  was  prevented

1  Bellay,  266,  a.

1536.]  BOOK VI.  315

for  some  time  by  contrary  winds,  and  other  accidents  to
which  naval  operations  are  subject,  from  approaching
the  French  coast ;  even  after  its  arrival,  it  afforded  at
best  a  precarious  and  scanty  supply  to  such  a  numerous
body  of  troops  ;m  nothing  was  to  be  found  in  the  coun-
try itself  for  their  support;  nor  could  they  draw  any
considerable  aid  from  the  dominions  of  the  duke  of
Savoy,  exhausted  already  by  maintaining  two  great  ar-
mies. The  emperor  was  no  less  embarrassed  how  to
employ,  than  how  to  subsist  his  forces ;  for  though  he
was  now  in  possession  of  almost  an  entire  province,  he
could  not  be  said  to  have  the  command  of  it,  while  he
held  only  defenceless  towns  ;  and  while  the  French,  be-
sides their  camp  at  Avignon,  continued  masters  of  Mar-
seilles and  Aries. At  first  he  thought  of  attacking  the
camp,  and of  terminating  the  war  by one decisive
blow;  but  skilful  officers, who  were  appointed  to  view
it,  declared  the  attempt  to  be  utterly  impracticable.
Besieges He  then  gave  orders  to  invest  Marseilles  and
Marseilles.  Aries,  hoping  that  the  French  would  quit  their
advantageous  post  in  order  to  relieve  them  ;  but  Mont-
morency  adhering  firmly  to  his  plan,  remained  im-
movable at  Avignon,  and  the  Imperialists  met  with  such
a  warm  reception  from  the  garrisons  of  both  towns,  that
they  relinquished  their  enterprises  with  loss  and  dis-
grace. As  a  last  effort,  the  emperor  advanced  once
more  towards  Avignon,  though  with  an  army  harassed
by  the  perpetualmcursions  of  small  parties  of  the  French
light  troops,  weakened  by  diseases,  and  dispirited  by
disasters,  which  seemed  the  more  intolerable,  because
they  were  unexpected.

Montmo-  D  tiring  these  operations,  Montmorency  found
tkuC/e1nf°r"  himself  exposed  to  greater  danger  from  his  own
tohifTan  tro°Ps  ^an  fr°m  the  enemy  >  and  their  incon-
of  defence,  siderate  valour  went  near  to  have  precipitated
the  kingdom  into  those  calamities,  which  he  with  such

»  Sandov.  ii.  231.

316  CHARLES  V.  [1536.

industry  and  caution  had  endeavoured  to  avoid. Un-
accustomed to  behold  an  enemy  ravaging  their  country
almost  without  control ;  impatient  of  such  long  inaction ;
unacquainted  with  the  slow  and  remote,  but  certain  ef-
fects of  Montmorency's  system  of  defence ; the  French
wished  for  a  battle  with  no  less  ardour  than  the  Imperial-
ists. They  considered  the  conduct  of  their  general  as  a
disgrace  to  their  country. His  caution  they  imputed  to
timidity ;  his  circumspection  to  want  of  spirit ;  and  the
constancy  with  which  he  pursued  his  plan,  to  obstinacy
or  pride. These  reflections,  whispered  at  first  among
the  soldiers  and  subalterns,  were  adopted,  by  degrees,
by  officers  of  higher  rank  ;  and  as  many  of  them  envied
Montmorency's  favour  with  the  king,  and  more  were
dissatisfied  with  his  harsh  disgusting  manner,  the  dis-
content soon  became  great  in  his  camp,  'which  was
filled  with  general  murmurings,  and  almost  open  com-
plaints against  his  measures. Montmorency,  on  whom
the  sentiments  of  his  own  troops  made  as  little  impres-
sion as  the  insults  of  the  enemy,  adhered  steadily  to  his
system ;  though  in  order  to  reconcile  the  army  to  his
maxims,  no  less  contrary  to  the  genius  of  the  nation,
than  to  the  ideas  of  war  among  undisciplined  troops,  he
assumed  an  unusual  affability  in  his  deportment,  and
often  explained,  with  great  condescension,  the  motives
of  his  conduct,  the  advantages  which  had  already  re-
sulted from  it,  and  the  certain  success  with  which  it
would  be  attended. At  last,  Francis  joined  his  army  at
Avignon,  which  having  received  several  reinforcements,
he  now  considered  as  of  strength  sufficient  to  face  the
enemy. As  he  had  put  no  small  constraint  upon  him-
self, in  consenting  that  his  troops  should  remain  so  long
upon  the  defensive,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  but  that
his  fondness  for  what  was  daring  and  splendid,  added
to  the  impatience  both  of  officers  and  soldiers,  would  at
last  have  overruled  Montmorency's  salutary  caution."

n  Mem.  de  Bellay,  269,  &c.  312,  &c.

1536.]  BOOK VI.  317

The  retreat  Happily  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  delivered
ed  con-  °  l~  the  kingdom  from  the  danger  which  any  rash
ti!e°£npe-  res°luti°n  might  have  occasioned.  The  em-
rial  army,  peror,  after  spending  two  inglorious  months  in
Provence,  without  having  performed  any  thing  suitable
to  his  vast  preparations,  or  that  could  justify  the  confi-
dence with  which  he  had  boasted  of  his  own  power,
found  that,  besides  Antonio  de  Ley  va,  and  other  officers
of  distinction,  he  had  lost  one-half  of  his  troops  by  dis-
eases or  by  famine  ;  and  that  the  rest  were  in  no  con-
dition to  struggle  any  longer  with  calamities,  by  which
so  many  of  their  companions  had  perished.  Necessity,
therefore,  extorted  from  him  orders  to  retire  ;  and
though  he  was  some  time  in  motion  before  the  French
suspected  his  intention,  a  body  of  light  troops,  assisted
by  crowds  of  peasants,  eager  to  be  revenged  on  those
who  had  brought  such  desolation  on  their  country,
hung  upon  the  rear  of  the  Imperialists,  and,  by  seizing
every  favourable  opportunity  of  attacking  them,  threw
them  often  into  confusion.  The  road  by  which  they
fled,  for  they  pursued  their  march  with  such  disorder
and  precipitation,  that  it  scarcely  deserves  the  name  of
a  retreat,  was  strewed  with  arms  or  baggage,  which  in
their  hurry  and  trepidation  they  had  abandoned,  and
covered  with  the  sick,  the  wounded,  arid  the  dead ;  in-
somuch, that  Martin  Bellay,  an  eye-witness  of  their
calamities,  endeavours  to  give  his  readers  some  idea  of
them,  by  comparing  their  miseries  to  those  which  the
Jews  suffered  from  the  victorious  and  destructive  arms
of  the  Romans.0  If  Montmorency,  at  this  critical  mo-
ment, had  advanced  with  all  his  forces,  nothing  could
have  saved  the  whole  imperial  army  from  utter  ruin.
But  that  general,  by  standing  so  long  and  so  obstinately
on  the  defensive,  had  become  cautious  to  excess  ;
his  mind,  tenacious  of  any  bent  it  had  once  taken,
could  not  assume  a  contrary  one  as  suddenly  as  the

0  Mem.  de  Bellay,  316. Sandov.  Hist,  del  Emper.  ii.  232.

318  CHARLES V.  [1536.

change  of  circumstances  required ;  and  he  still  con-
tinued to  repeat  his  favourite  maxims,  that  it  was  more
prudent  to  allow  the  lion  to  escape,  than  to  drive  him  to
despair,  and  that  a  bridge  of  gold  should  be  made  for  a
retreating  enemy.

The  emperor,  having  conducted  the  shattered  re-
mains of  his  troops  to  the  frontiers  of  Milan,  and  ap-
pointed the  marquis  del  Guasto  to  succeed  Leyva  in
the  government  of  that  duchy,  set  out  for  Genoa.  As
he  could  not  bear  to  expose  himself  to  the  scorn  of  the
Italians,  after  such  a  sad  reverse  of  fortune;  and  did
not  choose,  under  his  present  circumstances,  to  revisit
those  cities  through  which  he  had  so  lately  passed
in  triumph  for  one  conquest,  and  in  certain  expecta-
tion of  another,  he  embarked  directly  for

November. ~

Spam.p

Operations  -^or  was  tne  Pr°gress  of  his  arms  on  the  op-
iu  Picardy.  posite  frontier  of  France  such  as  to  alleviate,
in  any  degree,  the  losses  which  he  had  sustained  in
Provence.  Bellay,  by  his  address  and  intrigues,  had
prevailed  on  so  many  of  the  German  princes  to  with-
draw the  contingent  of  troops  which  they  had  furnished
to  the  king  of  the  Romans,  that  he  was  obliged  to  lay
aside  all  thoughts  of  his  intended  irruption  into  Cham-
pagne. Though  a  powerful  army  levied  in  the  Low
Countries  entered  Picardy,  which  they  found  but  feebly
guarded,  while  the  strength  of  the  kingdom  was  drawn
towards  the  south ;  yet  the  nobility,  taking  arms  with
their  usual  alacrity,  supplied  by  their  spirit  the  defects
of  the  king's  preparations,  and  defended  Peronne,  and
other  towns  which  were  attacked,  with  such  vigour,  as
obliged  the  enemy  to  retire,  without  making  any  con-
quest of  importance."1

Thus  Francis,  by  the  prudence  of  his  own  measures,
and  by  the  union  and  valour  of  his  subjects,  rendered
abortive  those  vast  efforts  in  which  his  rival  had  almost

P  Jovii  Histor.  lib- xxxr.  p.  174,  &c.  9  Mem.  de  Bellay,  318,  &c.

1536.]  BOOK VI.  319

exhausted  his  whole  force. As  this  humbled  the  em-
peror's arrogance  no  less  than  it  checked  his  power,  he
was  mortified  more  sensibly  on  this  occasion  than  on
any  other,  during  the  course  of  the  long  contests  be-'
tween  him  and  the  French  monarch.

One  circumstance  alone  imbittered  the  ioy

Death  of  .  .  J.  J

the  dau-  with  which  the  success  of  the  campaign  in-
spired Francis.  That  was  the  death  of  the
dauphin,  his  eldest  son,  a  prince  of  great  hopes,  and
extremely  beloved  by  the  people  on  account  of  his  re-
imputed  to  semblance  to  his  father.  This  happening  sud-
poison.  denly,  was  imputed  to  poison,  not  only  by  the
vulgar,  fond  of  ascribing  the  death  of  illustrious  person-
ages to  extraordinary  causes,  but  by  the  king  and  his
ministers.  The  count  de  Montecuculi,  an  Italian  noble-
man, cup-bearer  to  the  dauphin,  being  seized  on  sus-
picion and  put  to  the  torture,  openly  charged  the  im-
perial generals,  Gonzago  and  Leyva,  with  having  insti-
gated him  to  the  commission  of  that  crime:  he  even
threw  out  some  indirect  and  obscure  accusations  against
the  emperor  himself.  At  a  time  when  all  France  was
exasperated  to  the  utmost  against  Charles,  this  uncer-
tain and  extorted  charge  was  considered  as  an  incon-
testable proof  of  guilt;  while  the  confidence  with  which
both  he  and  his  officers  asserted  their  own  innocence,
together  with  the  indignation,  as  well  as  horror,  which
they  expressed  on  their  being  supposed  capable  of
such  a  detestable  action,  were  little  attended  to,  and
less  regarded/  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the  em-
peror could  have  no  inducement  to  perpetrate  such  a
crime,  as  Francis  was  still  in  the  vigour  of  life  himself,
and  had  two  sons,  beside  the  dauphin,  grown  up  almost
to  the  age  of  manhood.  That  single  consideration,
without  mentioning  the  emperor's  general  character,
unblemished  by  the  imputation  of  any  deed  resembling
this  in  atrocity,  is  more  than  sufficient  to  counterbalance

'  Mem.  de  Bellay,  289.

320  CHARLES  V.  [1536.

the  weight  of  a  dubious  testimony,  uttered  during  the
anguish  of  torture.5  According  to  the  most  unpreju-
diced historians,  the  dauphin's  death  was  occasioned
by  his  having  drank  too  freely  of  cold  water  after
overheating  himself  at  tennis  ;  and  this  account,  as  it  is
the  most  simple,  is  likewise  the  most  credible.  But  if
his  days  were  cut  short  by  poison,  it  is  not  improbable
that  the  emperor  conjectured  rightly,  when  he  affirmed
that  it  had  been  administered  by  the  direction  of  Catha-
rine of  Medici,  in  order  to  secure  the  crown  to  the  duke
of  Orleans,  her  husband.*  The  advantages  resulting  to
her  by  the  dauphin's  death,  were  obvious  as  well  as
great  ;  nor  did  her  boundless  and  daring  ambition  ever
recoil  from  any  action  necessary  towards  attaining  the
objects  which  she  had  in  view.

1537.  Next  year  opened  with  a  transaction  very
Sr'arihf  uncommon>  but  so  incapable  of  producing  any
mentof  effect,  that  it  would  not  deserve  to  be  men-

13

tioned,  if  it  were  not  a  striking  proof  of  the

emperor.  personal  animosity  which  mingled  itself  in  all
the  hostilities  between  Charles  and  Francis,  and  which
often  betrayed  them  into  such  indecencies  towards  each
other,  as  lessened  the  dignity  of  both.  Francis,  accom-
panied by  the  peers  and  princes  of  the  blood,  having
taken  his  .seat  in  the  parliament  of  Paris  with  the  usual
solemnities,  the  advocate-general  appeared  ;  and  after
accusing  Charles  of  Austria  (for  so  he  affected  to  call
the  emperor)  of  having  violated  the  treaty  of  Cambray,
by  which  he  was  absolved  from  the  homage  due  to  the
crown  of  France  for  the  counties  of  Artois  and  Flan-
ders ;  insisted  that  this  treaty  being  now  void,  he  was
still  to  be  considered  as  a  vassal  of  the  crown,  and  by
consequence  had  been  guilty  of  rebellion  in  taking
arms  against  his  sovereign  ;  and  therefore  he  demanded
that  Charles  should  be  summoned  to  appear  in  person,

*  SandoY.  Hist,  del  Emper.  ii.  231.
1  Vera  y  Zuniga  Vida  de  Carlo  V..p.  75.

1537.]  BOOK VI.  321

or  by  his  counsel,  before  the  parliament  of  Paris,  his
legal  judges,  to  answer  for  this  crime.  The  request
was  granted;  a  herald  repaired  to  the  frontiers  of
Picardy,  and  summoned  him  with  the  accustomed  for-
malities to  appear  against  a  day  prefixed.  That  term
being  expired,  and  no  person  appearing  in  his  name,
the  parliament  gave  judgment,  "  That  Charles  of  Aus-
tria had  forfeited  by  rebellion  and  contumacy  those
fiefs ;  declared  Flanders  and  Artois  to  be  reunited  to
the  crown  of  France ;"  and  ordered  their  decree  for
this  purpose  to  be  published  by  sound  of  trumpet  on
the  frontiers  of  these  provinces."
Campai  n  Soon  after  this  vain  display  of  his  resent-
opens  in  ment,  rather  than  of  his  power.  Francis  marched

the  Low  i i T  sx  PITT-

Countries,  towards  the  Low  Countries,  as  if  he  had  m-
rch'  tended  to  execute  the  sentence  which  his  par-
liament had  pronounced,  and  to  seize  those  territo-
ries which  it  had  awarded  to  him.  As  the  queen
of  Hungary,  to  whom  her  brother  the  emperor  had
committed  the  government  of  that  part  of  his  dominions,
was  not  prepared  for  so  early  a  campaign,  he  at  first
made  some  progress,  and  took  several  towns  of  impor-
tance. But  being  obliged  soon  to  leave  his  army,  in
order  to  superintend  the  other  operations  of  war,  the
Flemings,  having  assembled  a  numerous  army,  not
only  recovered  most  of  the  places  which  they  had  lost,
but  began  to  make  conquests  in  their  turn.  At  last
they  invested  Terouenne ;  and  the  duke  of  Orleans,
now  dauphin,  by  the  death  of  his  brother,  and  Mont-
morency,  whom  Francis  had  honoured  with  the  con-
stable's sword,  as  the  reward  of  his  great  services  during
the  former  campaign,  determined  to  hazard  a  battle
in  order  to  relieve  it.  While  they  were  ad-
vanchig  for  this  purpose,  and  within  a  few
re '  miles  of  the  enemy,  they  were  stopped  short
by  the  arrival  of  a  herald  from  the  queen  of  Hungary,

u  Lettres  et  Memoires  d'Etat,  par  Ribier,  2  torn. Blois,  1666,  torn.  i.  p.  1.

VOL.  iv.  Y

322  CHARLES  V.  [1537.

acquainting  him  that  a  suspension  of  arms  was  now
agreed  upon.

This  unexpected  event  was  owing  to  the  zealous
endeavours  of  the  two  sisters,  the  queens  of  France  and
of  Hungary,  who  had  long  laboured  to  reconcile  the
contending  monarchs.  The  war  in  the  Netherlands
had  laid  waste  the  frontier  provinces  of  both  countries,
without  any  real  advantage  to  either.  The  French  and
Flemings  equally  regretted  the  interruption  of  their
commerce,  which  was  beneficial  to  both.  Charles,  as
well  as  Francis,  who  had  each  strained  to  the  utmost,
in  order  to  support  the  vast  operations  of  the  former
campaign,  found  that  they  could  not  now  keep  armies
on  foot  in  this  quarter,  without  weakening  their  ope-
rations in  Piedmont,  where  both  wished  to  push  the
Jui  so  war  w^  tne  greatest  vigour.  All-  these  cir-
cumstances facilitated  the  negotiations  of  the
two  queens ;  a  truce  was  concluded,  to  continue  in  force
for  ten  months,  but  it  extended  no  farther  than  the
Low  Countries/

And  in  In  Piedmont  the  war  was  still  prosecuted  with
Piedmont.  ^reat  animosity  -  and  though  neither  Charles
nor  Francis  could  make  the  powerfuj  efforts  to  which
this  animosity  prompted  them,  they  continued  to  exert
themselves  like  combatants,  whose  rancour  remains
after  their  strength  is  exhausted.  Towns  were  alter-
nately lost  and  retaken ;  skirmishes  were  fought  every
day ;  and  much  blood  was  shed  without  any  action  that
gave  a  decided  superiority  to  either  side.  At  last,  the
two  queens,  determining  not  to  leave  unfinished  the
good  work  which  they  had  begun,  prevailed,  by  their
importunate  solicitations,  the  one  on  her  brother,  the
other  on  her  husband,  to  consent  also  to  a  truce  in
Piedmont  for  three  months.  The  conditions  of  it  were,
That  each  should  keep  possession  of  what  was  in  his
hands,  and  after  leaving  garrisons  in  the  towns,  should

*  Memoltes  deHibier,  56.

1537.]  BOOK VI.  323

withdraw  his  army  out  of  the  province ;  and  that  ple-
nipotentiaries should  be  appointed  to  adjust  all  matters
in  dispute  by  a  final  treaty/

Motives  The  powerful  motives  which  inclined  both
princes  to  this  accommodation,  have  been  often
mentioned.  The  expenses  of  the  war  had  far  exceeded
the  sums  which  their  revenues  were  capable  of  supply-
ing, nor  durst  they  venture  upon  any  great  addition  to
the  impositions  then  established,  as  subjects  had  not
yet  learned  to  bear  with  patience  the  immense  burdens
to  which  they  have  become  accustomed  in  modern
times.  The  emperor,  in  particular,  though  he  had
contracted  debts  which,  in  that  age,  appeared  prodi-
gious,2 had  it  not  in  his  power  to  pay  the  large  arrears
long  due  to  his  army.  At  the  same  time,  he  had  no
prospect  of  deriving  any  aid,  in  money  or  men,  either
from  the  pope  or  Venetians,  though  he  had  employed
promises  and  threats,  alternately,  in  order  to  procure  it.
But  he  found  the  former  not  only  fixed  in  his  resolution
of  adhering  steadily  to  the  neutrality  which  he  had
always  declared  to  be  suitable  to  his  character,  but
passionately  desirous  of  bringing  about  a  peace.  He
perceived  that  the  latter  were  still  intent  on  their  an-
cient object  of  holding  the  balance  even  between  the
rivals,  and  solicitous  not  to  throw  too  great  a  weight
into  either  scale.

Of  which  What  made  a  deeper  impression  on  Charles
Sfcnce*  tnan  a^  rt1686?  was  tne  dread  of  the  Turkish  arms,
with  the  which,  by  his  league  with  Solyman,  Francis
emperor  had  drawn  upon  him.  Though  Francis,  with-
consTder1-  out  the  assistance  of  a  single  ally,  had  a  war  to
able-  maintain  against  an  enemy  greatly  superior  in
power  to  himself,  yet  so  great  was  the  horror  of  Chris-
tians, in  that  age,  at  any  union  with  infidels,  which  they
considered  not  only  as  dishonourable,  but  profane,  that
it  was  long  before  he  could  be  brought  to  avail  himself

y  Meraoires  de  Ribier,  62.  z  Ribier,  i.  294.

Y  2

,324  CHARLES  V.  [1537.

of  the  obvious  advantages  resulting  from  such  a  confe-
deracy. Necessity  at  last  surmounted  his  delicacy  and
scruples.  Towards  the  close  of  the  preceding  year,  La
Forest,  a  secret  agent  at  the  Ottoman  Porte,  had  con-
cluded a  treaty  with  the  sultan,  whereby  Solyman  en-
gaged to  invade  the  kingdom  of  Naples  during  the  next
campaign,  and  to  attack  the  king  of  the  Romans  in
Hungary,  with  a  powerful  army,  while  Francis  under-
took to  enter  the  Milanese  at  the  same  time  with  a
proper  force.  Solyman  had  punctually  performed  what
was  incumbent  on  him.  Barbarossa,  with  a  great  fleet,
appeared  on  the  coast  of  Naples ;  filled  that  kingdom,
from  which  all  the  troops  had  been  drawn  towards
Piedmont,  with  consternation ;  landed,  without  resist-
ance, near  Taran  to ;  obliged  Castro,  a  place  of  some
strength,  to  surrender ;  plundered  the  adjacent  country,
and  was  taking  measures  for  securing  and  extending
his  conquests,  when  the  unexpected  arrival  of  Doria,
together  with  the  pope's  galleys,  and  a  squadron  of  the
Venetian  fleet,  made  it  prudent  for  him  to  retire.  In
Hungary  the  progress  of  the  Turks  was  more  formida-
ble. Mahmet,  their  general,  after  gaining  several  small
advantages,  defeated  the  Germans,  in  a  great  battle  at
Essek  on  the  DraveA  Happily  for  Christendom,  it  was
not  in  Francis's  power  to  execute  with  equal  exactness
what  he  had  stipulated ;  nor  could  he  assemble,  at  this
juncture,  an  army  strong  enough  to  penetrate  into  the
Milanese.  By  this  he  failed  in  recovering  possession
of  that  duchy ;  and  Italy  was  not  only  saved  from  the
calamities  of  a  new  war,  but  from  feeling  the  desolating
rage  of  the  Turkish  arms,  as  an  addition  to  all  that  it^
had  suffered.6  As  the  emperor  knew  that  he  could  not
long  resist  the  efforts  of  two  such  powerful  confederates,
nor  could  expect  that  the  same  fortunate  accidents
would  concur  a  second  time  to  deliver  Naples,  and  to
preserve  the  Milanese  ;  as  he  foresaw,  that  the  Italian

a  Istuanheffi  Hist.  Hung.  lib.  xiii.  p.  139.  b  Jovii  Hist.  lib.  xxxv.  p.  183.

1537.]  BOOK VI.  325

states  would  not  only  tax  him  loudly  with  insatiable
ambition,  but  might  even  turn  their  arms  against  him,
if  he  should  be  so  regardless  of  their  danger  as  obsti-
nately to  protract  the  war,  he  thought  it  necessary,  both
for  his  safety  and  reputation,  to  give  his  consent  to  a
truce.  Nor  was  Francis  willing  to  sustain  all  the
blame  of  obstructing  the  re-establishment  of  tranquil-
lity, or  to  expose  himself  on  that  account  to  the  danger
of  being  deserted  by  the  Swiss  and  other  foreigners  in
his  service.  He  even  began  to  apprehend,  that  his
own  subjects  would  serve  him  coldly,  if,  by  contribut-
ing to  aggrandize  the  power  of  the  infidels,  which  it
was  his  duty,  and  had  been  the  ambition  of  his  ances-
tors to  depress,  he  continued  to  act  in  direct  opposition
to  all  the  principles  which  ought  to  influence  a  monarch
distinguished  by  the  title  of  Most  Christian  King.  He
chose,  for  all  these  reasons,  rather  to  run  the  risk  of
disobliging  his  new  ally,  the  sultan,  than,  by  an  unsea-
sonable adherence  to  the  treaty  with  him,  to  forfeit
what  was  of  greater  consequence.
Negotia-  But  though  both  parties  consented  to  a  truce,
a°neSacI  *ke  Plenipotentiaries  found  insuperable  difficul-
between  ties  in  settling  the  articles  of  a  definitive  treaty,
and  Fran-  Each  of  the  monarchs,  with  the  arrogance  of  a

conqueror,  aimed  at  giving  law  to  the  other;
and  neither  would  so  far  acknowledge  his  inferiority,
as  to  sacrifice  any  point  of  honour,  or  to  relinquish  any
matter  of  right ;  so  that  the  plenipotentiaries  spent  the
time  in  long  and  fruitless  negotiations,  and  separated
after  agreeing  to  prolong  the  truce  for  a  few  months.

1538  The  pope,  however,  did  not  despair  of  ac-
The  pope  complishing  a  point  in  which  the  plenipotenti-
these  in  aries  had  failed,  and  took  upon  himself  the  sole

burden  of  negotiating  a  peace.  To  form  a  confe-
deracy capable  of  defending  Christendom  from  the  formi-
dable inroads  of  the  Turkish  arms,  and  to  concert  effec-
tual measures  for  the  extirpation  of  the  Lutheran  heresy,

320  CHARLES  V.  [1538.

were  two  great  objects  which  Paul  had  much  at  heart,
and  he  considered  the  union  of  the  emperor  with  the
king  of  France  as  an  essential  preliminary  to  both.
To  be  the  instrument  of  reconciling  these  contending
monarchs,  whom  his  predecessors,  by  their  interested
and  indecent  intrigues,  had  so  often  embroiled,  was  a
circumstance  which  could  not  fail  of  throwing  distin-
guished lustre  on  his  character  and  administration.
Nor  was  he  without  hopes,  that,  while  he  pursued  this
laudable  end,  he  might  secure  advantages  to  his  own
family,  the  aggrandizing  of  which  he  did  not  neglect,
though  he  aimed  at  it  with  a  less  audacious  ambition
than  was  common  among  the  popes  of  that  century.
Influenced  by  these  considerations,  he  proposed  an  in-
terview between  the  two  monarchs  at  Nice,  and  offered
to  repair  thither  in  person,  that  he  might 'act  as  me-
diator in  composing  all  their  differences. When  a
pontiff  of  a  venerable  character,  and  of  a  very  advanced
age,  was  willing,  from  his  zeal  for  peace,  to  undergo
the  fatigues  of  so  long  a  journey,-  neither  Charles  nor
Francis  could  with  decency  decline  the  interview.  But
though  both  came  to  the  place  of  rendezvous,  so  great
was  the  difficulty  of  adjusting  the  ceremonial,  or  such  the
remains  of  distrust  and  rancour  on  each  side,  that  they
refused  to  see  one  another,  and  every  thing  was  trans-
acted by  the  intervention  of  the  pope,  who  visited  them
alternately. With  all  his  zeal  and  ingenuity,  he  could
not  find  out  a  method  of  removing  the  obstacles  which
prevented  a  final  accommodation,  particularly  those
arising  from  the  possession  of  the  Milanese ;  nor  was
all  the  weight  of  his  authority  sufficient  to  overcome
the  obstinate  perseverance  of  either  monarch  in  assert-
A  truce  for  mg  n^s  own  claims. At  last,  that  he  might  not
cmiciTded  seem  to  ^ave  laboured  altogether  without  effect,
at  Nice, he  prevailed  on  them  to  sign  a  truce  for  ten

June  18.  & .

years,  upon  the  same  condition  with  the  former,
that  each  should  retain  what  was  now  in  his  possession,

1538.]  BOOK VI.  327

and  in  the  mean  time  should  send  ambassadors  to  Rome,
to  discuss  their  pretensions  at  leisure.6

Thus  ended  a  war  of  no  long  continuance,  but  very
extensive  in  its  operations,  and  in  which  both  parties
exerted  their  utmost  strength.  Though  Francis  failed
in  the  object  that  he  had  principally  in  view — the
recovery  of  the  Milanese — he  acquired,  nevertheless,
great  reputation  by  the  wisdom  of  his  measures  as  well
as  the  success  of  his  arms  in  repelling  a  formidable  inva-
sion ;  and  by  keeping  possession  of  one-half  of  the  duke
of  Savoy's  dominions,  he  added  no  inconsiderable  ac-
cession of  strength  to  his  kingdom.  Whereas  Charles,
repulsed  and  baffled,  after  having  boasted  so  arrogantly
of  victory,  purchased  an  inglorious  truce,  by  sacrificing
an  ally  who  had  rashly  confided  too  much  in  his  friend-
ship and  power.  The  unfortunate  duke  murmured,
complained,  and  remonstrated  against  a  treaty  so  much
to  his  disadvantage,  but  in  vain;  he  had  no  means  of
redress,  and  was  obliged  to  submit.  Of  all  his  domi-
nions, Nice,  with  its  dependencies,  was  the  only  corner
of  which  he  himself  kept  possession.  He  saw  the  rest
divided  between  a  powerful  invader  and  the  ally  to
whose  protection  he  had  trusted,  while  he  remained  a
sad  monument  of  the  imprudence  of  weak  princes,  who,
by  taking  part  in  the  quarrel  of  mighty  neighbours,  be-
tween whom  they  happen  to  be  situated,  are  crushed
and  overwhelmed  in  the  shock.

interview  A  few  days  after  signing  the  treaty  of  truce,
the  emperor  set  sail  for  Barcelona,  but  was
at  driven  ^y  contrary  winds  to  the  island  of  St.
mortes.  Margaret  on  the  coast  of  Provence.  When
Francis,  who  happened  to  be  not  far  distant,  heard  of
this,  he  considered  it  as  an  office  of  civility  to  invite
him  to  take  shelter  in  his  dominions,  and  proposed  a
personal  interview  with  him  at  Aigues-mortes.  The

c  Recueil  des  Traitez,  ii.  210. Relatione  del  Nicolo  Tiepolo  de  1'Abocaraento
di  Nizza,  chez  Du  Mont  Corps  Diplomat,  par.  ii.  p.  174.

328  CHARLES V.  [1538.

emperor,  who  would  not  be  outdone  by  his  rival  in
complaisance,  instantly  repaired  thither.  As  soon  as
he  cast  anchor  in  the  road,  Francis,  without  waiting  to
settle  any  point  of  ceremony,  but  relying  implicitly  on
the  emperor's  honour  for  his  security,  visited  him  on
board  his  galley,  and  was  received  and  entertained
with  the  warmest  demonstrations  of  esteem  and  affec-
tion. Next  day  the  emperor  repaid  the  confidence
which  the  king  had  placed  in  him.  He  landed  at
Aigues-mortes  with  as  little  precaution,  and  met  with  a
reception  equally  cordial.  He  remained  on  shore  dur-
ing the  night,  and  in  both  visits  the  two  monarchs  vied
with  each  other  in  expressions  of  respect  and  friend-
ship/ After  twenty  years  of  open  hostilities,  or  of
secret  enmity ;  after  so  many  injuries  reciprocally  in-
flicted or  endured;  after  having  formally  given  the  lie,
and  challenged  one  another  to  single  combat;  after  the
emperor  had  inveighed  so  publicly  against  Francis  as
a  prince  void  of  honour  or  integrity ;  and  after  Francis
had  accused  him  of  being  accessary  to  the  murder  of
his  eldest  son,  such  an  interview  appears  altogether
singular  and  even  unnatural.  But  the  history  of  these
monarchs  abounds  with  such  surprising  transitions.
From  implacable  hatred  they  appeared  to  pass,  in  a
moment,  to  the  most  cordial  reconcilement;  from  sus-
picion ajid  distrust  to  perfect  confidence;  and  from
practising  all  the  dark  arts  of  a  deceitful  policy,  they
could  assume,  of  a  sudden,  the  liberal  and  open  man-
ners of  two  gallant  gentlemen.

The  pope,  besides  the  glory  of  having  restored  peace
to  Europe,  gained,  according  to  his  expectation,  a
point  of  great  consequence  to  his  family,  by  prevailing
on  the  emperor  to  betroth  Margaret  of  Austria,  his  na-
tural daughter,  formerly  the  wife  of  Alexander  de  Me-
dici, to  his  grandson  Octavio  Farnese,  and  inconsider-

*  Saudov.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  238.  Relation  de  1'Entrevue  de  Charl.  V.  et  Fran.  I.  par
M.  de  la  Rivoire.  Hist,  de  Langued.  par  D.  D.  De  Vic  et  Vaisette,  torn.  v.  Preuve?,
p.  93.

1538.]  BOOK  VI.  329

ation  of  this  marriage,  to  bestow  several  honours  and
The  assas-  territories  upon  his  future  son-in-law.  A  very
Alexander  tragical  event,  which  happened  about  the  be-
de  Medici.  ginning  Of  tne  year  1537)  nad  deprived  Mar-
garet of  her  first  husband.  That  young  prince,  whom
the  emperor's  partiality  had  raised  to  the  supreme  power
in  Florence,  upon  the  ruins  of  the  public  liberty,  neg-
lected entirely  the  cares  of  government,  and  abandon-
ed himself  to  the  most  dissolute  debauchery.  Lorenzo
de  Medici,  his  nearest  kinsman,  was  not  only  the  com-
panion but  director  of  his  pleasures,  and  employing  all
the  powers  of  a  cultivated  and  inventive  genius  in  this
dishonourable  ministry,  added  such  elegance  as  well  as
variety  to  vice,  as  gained  him  an  absolute  ascendant
over  the  mind  of  Alexander.  But  while  Lorenzo  seemed
to  be  sunk  in  luxury,  and  affected  such  an  appearance
of  indolence  and  effeminacy,  that  he  would  not  wear  a
sword,  and  trembled  at  the  sight  of  blood,  he  concealed
under  that  disguise  a  dark,  designing,  audacious  spirit.
Prompted  either  by  the  love  of  liberty,  or  allured  by
the  hope  of  attaining  the  supreme  power,  he  determined
to  assassinate  Alexander  his  benefactor  and  friend.
Though  he  long  revolved  this  design  in  his  mind,  his
reserved  and  suspicious  temper  prevented  him  from
communicating  it  to  any  person  whatever;  and  continu-
ing to  live  with  Alexander  in  their  usual  familiarity,
he,  one  night,  under  pretence  of  having  secured  him
an  assignation  with  a  lady  of  high  rank,  whom  he  had
often  solicited,  drew  that  unwary  prince  into  a  secret
apartment  of  his  house,  and  there  stabbed  him,  while
he  lay  carelessly  on  a  couch  expecting  the  arrival  of
the  lady  whose  company  he  had  been  promised.  But
no  sooner  was  the  deed  done,  than  standing  astonished,
and  struck  with  horror  at  its  atrocity,  he  forgot,  in  a
moment,  all  the  motives  which  had  induced  him  to
commit  it.  Instead  of  rousing  the  people  to  recover
their  liberty  by  publishing  the  death  of  the  tyrant,  in-

330  CHARLES V.  [1538.

stead  of  taking  any  step  towards  opening  his  own  way
to  the  dignity  now  vacant,  he  locked  the  door  of  the
apartment,  and,  like  a  man  bereaved  of  reason  and  pre-
sence of  mind,  fled  with  the  utmost  precipitation  out  of
the  Florentine  territories.  It  was  late  next  morning
before  the  fate  of  the  unfortunate  prince  was  known,
as  his  attendants,  accustomed  to  his  irregularities,  never
entered  his  apartment  early.  Immediately  the  chief
persons  in  the  state  assembled.  Being  induced  partly
by  the  zeal  of  cardinal  Cibo  for  the  house  of  Medici,  to
which  he  was  nearly  related,  partly  by  the  authority  of
Francis  Guicciardini,  who  recalled  to  their  memory,
and  represented  in  striking  colours  the  caprice  as  well
as  turbulence  of  their  ancient  popular  government,
Cosmo  di  they  agreed  to  place  Cosmo  di  Medici,  a  youth
at  vof  eighteen,  the  only  male  heir  of  that  illus-

onheFh>-  tri°us  house,  at  the  head  of  the  government  ;
rentine  though  at  the  same  time  such  was  their  love  of

stfttc

liberty,  that  they  established  several  regula-
tions in  order  to  circumscribe  and  moderate  his  power.
His  go-  Meanwhile  Lorenzo,  having  reached  a  place

opposed  of  safety,  made  known  what  he  had  done  to
reynUneFl0"  PhiliP  Strozzi  and  the  other  Florentines  who
exiles.  had  been  driven  into  exile,  or  who  had  volun-
tarily retired  when  the  republican  form  of  government
was  abolished,  in  order  to  make  way  for  the  dominion
of  the  Medici.  By  them  the  deed  was  extolled  with
extravagant  praises,  and  the  virtue  of  Lorenzo  was
compared  with  that  of  the  elder  Brutus,  who  disre-
garded the  ties  of  blood,  or  with  that  of  the  younger,
who  forgot  the  friendship  and  favours  of  the  tyrant,
that  they  might  preserve  or  recover  the  liberty  of  their
country.6  Nor  did  they  rest  satisfied  with  empty  pane-
gyrics ;  they  immediately  quitted  their  different  places
of  retreat,  assembled  forces,  animated  their  vassals  and
partisans  to  take  arms,  and  to  seize  this  opportunity  of

c  Lettere  di  Pincipi,  torn.  iii.  p.  25.

1538.]  BOOK VI.  331

re-establishing  the  public  liberty  on  its  ancient  founda-
tion. Being  openly  assisted  by  the  French  ambassa-
dor at  Rome,  and  secretly  encouraged  by  the  pope,  who
bore  no  good- will  to  the  house  of  Medici,  they  entered
the  Florentine  dominions  with  a  considerable  body  of
men.  But  the  persons  who  had  elected  Cosmo  pos-
sessed not  only  the  means  of  supporting  his  govern-
ment, but  abilities  to  employ  them  in  the  most  proper
manner.  They  levied,  with  the  greatest  expedition,  a
good  number  of  troops ;  they  endeavoured  by  every  art
to  gain  the  citizens  of  greatest  authority,  and  to  render
the  administration  of  the  young  prince  agreeable  to  the
people.  Above  all,  they  courted  the  emperor's  protec-
tion, as  the  only  firm  foundation  of  Cosmo's  dignity
and  power.  Charles,  knowing  the  propensity  of  the
Florentines  to  the  friendship  of  France,  and  how  much
all  the  partisans  of  a  republican  government  detested
him  as  the  oppressor  of  their  liberties,  saw  it  to  be
greatly  for  his  interest  to  prevent  the  re-establishment
of  the  ancient  constitution  in  Florence.  For  this  reason,
he  not  only  acknowledged  Cosmo  as  head  of  the  Flo-
rentine state,  and  conferred  on  him  all  the  titles  of
honour  with  which  Alexander  had  been  dignified,  but
engaged  to  defend  him  to  the  utmost;  and  as  a  pledge
of  this,  ordered  the  commanders  of  such  of  his  troops
as  were  stationed  on  the  frontiers  of  Tuscany,  to  sup-
port him  against  all  aggressors.  By  their  aid,  Cosmo
obtained  an  easy  victory  over  the  exiles,  whose  troops
he  surprised  in  the  night-time,  and  took  most  of  the
chiefs  prisoners;  an  event  which  broke  all  their  mea-
sures, and  fully  established  his  own  authority.  But
though  he  was  extremely  desirous  of  the  additional
honour  of  marrying  the  emperor's  daughter,  the  widow
of  his  predecessor,  Charles,  secure  already  of  his  attach-
ment, chose  rather  to  gratify  the  pope  by  bestowing  her
on  his  nephew/

f  Jovii  His.  c.  xcviii.  p.  218,  &c. Belcarii  Comment.  1,  xxii.  p.  696. Istoria  de
sui  Tempi  di  Giov.  Bat.  Adriani.  Ven.  1587.  p.  10.

332  CHARLES V.  [1538.

The  friend-  During  the  war  between  the  emperor  and
Francis,  an  event  had  happened  which  abated
in  some  degree  the  warmth  and  cordiality  of

vin.  be- friendship  which  had  long*  subsisted  between

gins  to  .

abate.  the  latter  and  the  king  of  England.  James  the
Fifth  of  Scotland,  an  enterprising  young  prince,  having
heard  of  the  emperor's  intention  to  invade  Provence,
was  so  fond  of  shewing  that  he  did  not  yield  to  any  of
his  ancestors  in  the  sincerity  of  his  attachment  to  the
French  crown,  and  so  eager  to  distinguish  himself  by
some  military  exploit,  that  he  levied  a  body  of  troops
with  an  intention  of  leading  them  in  person  to  the  as-
sistance of  the  king  of  France.  Though  some  unfortu-
nate accident  prevented  his  carrying  any  troops  into
France,  nothing  could  divert  him  from  going  thither  in
person.  Immediately  upon  his  landing,  he  hastened  to
Provence,  but  had  been  detained  so  long  in  his  voyage,
that  he  came  too  late  to  have  any  share  in  the  military
operations,  and  met  the  king  on  his  return  after  the  re-
treat of  the  Imperialists.  But  Francis  was  so  greatly
pleased  with  his  zeal,  and  no  less  with  his  manners  and
conversation,  that  he  could  not  refuse  him  his  daughter
Jan.  i.  Magdalen,  whom  he  demanded  in  marriage.  It
1537.  mortified  Henry  extremely  to  see  a  prince,  of
whom  he  was  immoderately  jealous,  form  an  alliance,
from  which  he  derived  such  an  accession  of  reputation
as  well  as  security.5  He  could  not,  however,  with  de-
cency, oppose  Francis's  bestowing  his  daughter  upon  a
monarch  descended  from  a  race  of  princes,  the  most
ancient  and  faithful  allies  of  the  French  crown.  But
when  James,  upon  the  sudden  death  of  Magdalen,  de-
manded as  his  second  wife  Mary  of  Guise,  he  warmly
solicited  Francis  to  deny  his  suit,  and,  in  order  to  dis-
appoint him,  asked  that  lady  in  marriage  for  himself.
When  Francis  preferred  the  Scottish  king's  sincere
courtship  to  his  artful  and  malevolent  proposal,  he  dis-

s  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  p,  73.

1538.]  BOOK VI.  333

covered  much  dissatisfaction.  The  pacification  agreed
upon  at  Nice,  and  the  familiar  interview  of  the  two  ri-
vals at  Aigues-mortes,  filled  Henry's  mind  with  new
suspicions,  as  if  Francis  had  altogether  renounced  his
friendship  for  the  sake  of  new  connexions  with  the  em-
Theempe-  Peror-  Charles,  thoroughly  acquainted  with
Henrurts  ^  temPer  of  tne  English  king,  and  watchful
to  observe  all  the  shiftings  and  caprices  of  his
passions,  thought  this  a  favourable  opportunity  of  re-
newing his  negotiations  with  him,  which  had  been  long
broken  off.  By  the  death  of  queen  Catharine,  whose
interest  the  emperor  could  not  with  decency  have  aban-
doned, the  chief  cause  of  their  discord  was  removed ;  so
that  without  touching  upon  the  delicate  question  of  her
divorce,  he  might  now  take  what  measures  he  thought
most  effectual  for  regaining  Henry's  good- will.  For
this  purpose,  he  began  with  proposing  several  marriage-
treaties  to  the  king.  He  offered  his  niece,  a  daughter
of  the  king  of  Denmark,  to  Henry  himself;  he  demanded
the  princess  Mary  for  one  of  the  princes  of  Portugal,
and  was  even  willing  to  receive  her  as  the  king's  illegi-
timate daughter.11  Though  none  of  these  projected
alliances  ever  took  place,  or  perhaps  were  ever  seriously
intended,  they  occasioned  such  frequent  intercourse  be-
tween the  courts,  and  so  many  reciprocal  professions  of
civility  and  esteem,  as  considerably  abated  the  edge  of
Henry's  rancour  against  the  emperor,  and  paved  the
way  for  that  union  between  them  which  afterward
proved  so  disadvantageous  to  the  trench  king.

The  ambitious  schemes  in  which  the  empe-

.rrogress  ,  _

of  the  Re- ror  had  been  engaged,  and  the  wars  he  had

formation. •,  . .  /.  i

been  carrying  on  for  some  years,  proved,  as
usual,  extremely  favourable  to  the  progress  of  the  Re-
formation in  Germany.  While  Charles  was  absent
upon  his  African  expedition,  or  intent  on  his  projects
against  France,  his  chief  object  in  Germany  was  to  pre-

>  Mem.  de  Ribier,  torn.  i.  496.

334  CHARLES V.  [1538.

vent  the  dissensions  about  religion  from  disturbing  the
public  tranquillity,  by  granting  such  indulgence  to  the
Protestant  princes  as  might  induce  them  to  concur  with
his  measures,  or  at  least  hinder  them  from  taking  part
with  his  rival.  For  this  reason,  he  was  careful  to  secure
to  the  Protestants  the  possession  of  all  the  advantages
which  they  had  gained  by  the  articles  of  pacification  at
Nuremberg,  in  the  year  1 532  ;*  and  except  some  slight
trouble  from  the  proceedings  of  the  imperial  chamber,
they  met  with  nothing  to  disturb  them  in  the  exercise
of  their  religion,  or  to  interrupt  the  successful  zeal  with
Negotia-  which  they  propagated  their  opinions.  Mean-
hi°t!?uesd  wkile  t^e  P°Pe  continued  his  negotiations  for
with  re-  convoking  a  general  council;  and  though  the
agenerai  Protestants  had  expressed  great  dissatisfaction
council.  w-tk  j^  intentj,on  to  fix  Up0n  Mantua  as  the

place  of  meeting,  he  adhered  obstinately  to  his  choice,
issued  a  bull  on  the  2d  of  June,  1536,  appointing  it  to
assemble  in  that  city  on  the  23d  of  May  the  year  fol-
lowing; he  nominated  three  cardinals  to  preside  in  his
name ;  enjoined  all  Christian  princes  to  countenance  it
by  their  authority,  and  invited  the  prelates  of  every  na-
tion to  attend  in  person.  This  summons  of  a  council,
an  assembly  which  from  its  nature  and  intention  de-
manded quiet  times,  as  well  as  pacific  dispositions,  at
the  very  juncture  when  the  emperor  was  on  his  march
towards  France,  and  ready  to  involve  a  great  part  of
Europe  in  the  confusions  of  war,  appeared  to  every  per-
son extremely  unseasonable.  It  was  intimated,  how-
ever, to  all  the  different  courts  by  nuncios  dispatched
on  purpose.1"  With  an  intention  to  gratify  the  Ger-
mans, the  emperor,  during  his  residence  in  Rome,  had
warmly  solicited  the  pope  to  call  a  council ;  but  being
at  the  same  time  willing  to  try  every  art  in  order  to
persuade  Paul  to  depart  from  the  neutrality  which  he

1  Du  Mont  Corps  Diplom.  torn.  iv.  part.  ii.  p.  138.
k  Pallavic.  Hist.  Cone.  Trid.  113.

1538.]  BOOK  VI.  335

preserved  between  him  and  Francis,  he  sent  Heldo  his
vice-chancellor  into  Germany,  along  with  a  nuncio"  dis-
patched thither,  instructing  him  to  second  all  the  nun-
cio's representations,  and  to  enforce  them  with  the
Feb.  25.  whole  weight  of  the  imperial  authority.  The
Protestants  gave  them  audience  at  Smalkalde,
where  they  had  assembled  in  a  body  in  order  to  receive
them.  But  after  weighing  all  their  arguments,  they
unanimously  refused  to  acknowledge  a  council  sum-
moned in  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  the  pope
alone ;  in  which  he  assumed  the  sole  right  of  presiding ;
which  was  to  be  held  in  a  city  not  only  far  distant  from
Germany,  but  subject  to  a  prince  who  was  a  stranger  to
them,  and  closely  connected  with  the  court  of  Rome ;
and  to  which  their  divines  could  not  repair  with  safety,
especially  after  their  doctrines  had  been  stigmatized  in
the  very  bull  of  convocation  with  the  name  of  heresy.
These  and  many  other  objections  against  the  council,
which  appeared  to  them  unanswerable,  they  enumerated
in  a  large  manifesto,  which  they  published  in  vindica-
tion of  their  conduct.1

Against  this  the  court  of  Rome  exclaimed  as  a  fla-
grant proof  of  their  obstinacy  and  presumption,  and  the
pope  still  persisted  in  his  resolution  to  hold  the  council
at  the  time  and  in  the  place  appointed.  But  some  un-
expected difficulties  being  started  by  the  duke  of  Man-
tua, both  about  the  right  of  jurisdiction  over  the  per-
Oct.  s.  sons  wno  resorted  to  the  council,  and  the  secu-
1538.  rjtv  Q£  jj-g  capital  amidst  such  a  concourse  of
strangers,  the  pope,  after  fruitless  endeavours  to  adjust
these,  first  prorogued  the  council  for  some  months,  and
afterward  transferring  the  place  of  meeting  to  Vicenza,
in  the  Venetian  territories,  appointed  it  to  assemble  on
the  1st  of  May  in  the  following  year.  As  neither  the
emperor  nor  the  French  king,  who  had  not  then  come
to  any  accommodation,  would  permit  their  subjects  to

1  Sleidan,  1.  xii.  123,  &c. Seckend.  Com.  lib.  iii.  p.  143,  &c.

336  CHARLES V.  [1538.

repair  thither,  not  a  single  prelate  appeared  on  the  day
prefixed  ;  and  the  pope,  that  his  authority  might  not
become  altogether  contemptible  by  so  many  ineffectual
efforts  to  convoke  that  assembly,  put  off  the  meeting  by
an  indefinite  prorogation."1

e  mint  not  seem  to  have  turned

A  artiai

reforma- his  whole  attention  towards  a  reformation  which

abuses  by  he  was  not  able  to  accomplish,  while  he  neg-

jecte(j  t^at  wnich  was  in  his  own  power,  he
deputed  a  certain  number  of  cardinals  and  bishops,  with
full  authority  to  inquire  into  the  abuses  and  corruptions
of  the  Roman  court  ;  and  to  propose  the  most  effectual
method  of  removing  them.  This  scrutiny,  undertaken
with  reluctance,  was  carried  on  slowly  and  with  remiss-
ness.  All  defects  were  touched  with  a  gentle  hand,
afraid  of  probing  too  deep,  or  of  discovering-  too  much.
But  even  by  this  partial  examination,  many  irregularities
were  detected,  and  many  enormities  exposed  to  light,
while  the  remedies  which  they  suggested  as  most  pro-
per, were  either  inadequate,  or  were  never  applied.
The  report  and  resolution  of  these  deputies,  though  in-
tended to  be  kept  secret,  were  transmitted  by  some  ac-
cident into  Germany,  and  being  immediately  made  pub-
lic, afforded  ample  matter  for  reflection  and  triumph  to
the  Protestants.11  On  the  one  hand  they  demonstrated
the  necessity  of  a  reformation  in  the  head  as  well  as
the  members  of  the  church,  and  even  pointed  out  many
of  the  corruptions  against  which  Luther  and  his  fol-
lowers had  remonstrated  with  the  greatest  vehemence.
They  shewed,  on  the  other  hand,  that  it  was  vain  to
expect  this  reformation  from  ecclesiastics  themselves,
who,  as  Luther  strongly  expressed  it,  piddled  at  curing
warts,  while  they  overlooked  or  confirmed  ulcers.0
A  league  The  earnestness  with  which  the  emperor
formed  in  seemed,  at  first,  to  press  their  acquiescing  in

m  F.  Paul,  117. Pallavic.  117.
u  Sleidan,  233.  «  Seek.  1.  iii.  164.

1539.]  BOOK VI.  337

to  that'of"  ^e  P°Pe's  scheme  of  holding  a  council  in  Italy,
Sruaikaide,  alarmed  the  Protestant  princes  so  much,  that
they  thought  it  prudent  to  strengthen  their  confederacy,
by  admitting  several  new  members  who  solicited  that
privilege,  particularly  the  king  of  Denmark.  Heldo,
who,  during  his  residence  in  Germany,  had  observed
all  the  advantages  which  they  derived  from  that  union,
endeavoured  to  counterbalance  its  effects  by  an  alliance
among  the  Catholic  powers  of  the  empire.  This  league,
distinguished  by  the  name  of  Holy,  was  merely  defen-
sive ;  and  though  concluded  by  Heldo  in  the  emperor's
name,  was  afterward  disowned  by  him,  and  subscribed
by  very  few  princes. q

Alarms  the The  Protestants  soon  got  intelligence  of  this
Protestants,  association,  notwithstanding  all  the  endeavours
of  the  contracting  parties  to  conceal  it ;  and  their  zeal,
always  apt  to  suspect  and  to  dread, even  to  excess,
every  thing  that  seemed  to  threaten  religion,  instantly
took  the  alarm,  as  if  the  emperor  had  been  just  ready
to  enter  upon  the  execution  of  some  formidable  plan
for  the  extirpation  of  their  opinions.  In  order  to  disap-
point this,  they  held  frequent  consultations,  they  courted
the  kings  of  France  and  England  with  great  assiduity,
and  even  began  to  think  of  raising  the  respective  con-
tingents, both  in  men  and  money,  which  they  were
obliged  to  furnish  by  the  treaty  of  Smalkalde. But  it
was  not  long  before  they  were  convinced  that  these
apprehensions  were  without  foundation,  and  that  the
emperor,  to  whom  repose  was  absolutely  necessary
after  efforts  so  much  beyond  his  strength  in  the  war
with  France,  had  no  thoughts  of  disturbing  the  tran-
quillity of  Germany. As  a  proof  of  this,  at  an  inter-
view with  the  Protestant  princes  in  Frankfort,  his  am-
bassadors agreed  that  all  concessions  in  their
favour,  particularly  those  contained  in  the  pa-
cification of  Nuremberg,  should  continue  in  force  for

P  Idem,  1.  iii,  171. Recueil  de  Traitez.
VOL. IV.  Z

338  CHARLES  V  [1539.

fifteen  months ;  that  during  this  period  all  proceedings
of  the  imperial  chamber  against  them  should  be  sus-
pended ;  that  a  conference  should  be  held  by  a  few
divines  of  each  party,  in  order  to  discuss  the  points  in
controversy,  and  to  propose  articles  of  accommodation,
which  should  be  laid  before  the  next  diet.  Though  the
emperor,  that  he  might  not  irritate  the .  pope,  who  re-
monstrated against  the  first  part  of  this  agreement  as
impolitic,  and  against  the  latter  as  an  impious  encroach-
ment upon  his  prerogative,  never  formally  ratified  this
convention,  it  was  observed  with  considerable  exact-
ness, and  greatly  strengthened  the  basis  of  that  eccle-
siastical liberty,  for  which  the  Protestants  contended.*1
April  24.  A  few  days  after  the  convention  at  Frankfort,
fon0e™a-  George  duke  of  Saxony  died,  and  his  death  was
wished  in  an  event  of  great  advantage  to  the  Reforma-

every  part  —

of  Saxony,  tion.  That  prince,  the  head  of  the  Albertine,
or  younger  branch  of  the  Saxon  family,  possessed,  as
marquis  of  Misnia  and  Thuringia,  extensive  territories,
comprehending  Dresden,  Leipsic,  and  other  cities  now
the  most  considerable  in  the  electorate.  From  the  first
dawn  of  the  Reformation,  he  had  been  its  enemy  as
avowedly  as  the  electoral  princes  were  its  protectors,
and  had  carried  on  his  opposition,  not  only  with  all  the
zeal  flowing  from  religious  prejudices,  but  with  a  viru-
lence inspired  by  personal  antipathy  to  Luther,  and
imbittered  by  the  domestic  animosity  subsisting  be-
tween him  and  the  other  branch  of  his  family.  By  his
death  without  issue,  his  succession  fell  to  his  brother
Henry,  whose  attachment  to  the  Protestant  religion  sur-
passed, if  possible,  that  of  his  predecessor  to  Popery.
Henry  no  sooner  took  possession  of  his  new  dominions,
than,  disregarding  a  clause  in  George's  will,  dictated
by  his  bigotry,  whereby  he  bequeathed  all  his  territo-
ries to  the  emperor  and  king  of  the  Romans,  if  his  bro-
ther should  attempt  to  make  any  innovation  in  religion,

i  F.  Paul,  82. Sleid.  247. Seek.  1.  iii.  200.

1539.]  BOOK  VI.  339

he  invited  some  Protestant  divines,  and  among  them
Luther  himself,  to  Leipsic.  By  their  advice  and  assist-
ance, he  overturned  in  a  few  weeks  the  whole  system
of  ancient  rites,  establishing  the  full  exercise  of  the  re-
formed religion,  with  the  universal  applause  of  his  sub-
jects, who  had  long  wished  for  this  change,  which  the
authority  of  their  duke  alone  had  hitherto  prevented/
This  revolution  delivered  the  Protestants  from  the  dan-
ger to  which  they  were  exposed  by  having  an  inveterate
enemy  situated  in  the  middle  of  their  territories ;  and
they  had  now  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  that  the  pos-
sessions of  the  princes  and  cities  attached  to  their  cause
extended  in  one  great  and  almost  unbroken  line  from
the  shore  of  the  Baltic  to  the  banks  of  the  Rhine.
A  mutiny  Soon  after  the  conclusion  of  the  truce  at
perta"1"  Nice,  an  event  happened,  which  satisfied  all
troops.  Europe  that  Charles  had  prosecuted  the  war  to
the  utmost  extremity  that  the  state  of  his  affairs  would
permit.  Vast  arrears  were  due  to  his  troops  whom  he
had  long  amused  with  vain  hopes  and  promises.  As
they  now  foresaw  what  little  attention  would  be  paid
to  their  demands,  when  by  the  re-establishment  of  peace
their  services  became  of  less  importance,  they  lost  all
patience,  broke  out  into  an  open  mutiny,  and  declared
that  they  thought  themselves  entitled  to  seize  by  vio-
lence what  was  detained  from  them  contrary  to  all  jus-
tice. Nor  was  this  spirit  of  sedition  confined  to  one  part
of  the  emperor's  dominions  ;  the  mutiny  was  almost  as
general  as  the  grievance  which  gave  rise  to  it.  The
soldiers  in  the  Milanese  plundered  the  open  country
without  control,  and  filled  the  capital  itself  with  con-
sternation. Those  in  garrison  at  Goletta  threatened  to
give  up  that  important  fortress  to  Barbarossa.  In  Sicily
the  troops  proceeded  to  still  greater  excesses ;  having
driven  away  their  officers,  they  elected  others  in  their
stead,  defeated  a  body  of  men  whom  the  viceroy  sent

«•  Sleidan,  249.

z  2

340  CHARLES V.  [1539.

against  them,  took  and  pillaged  several  cities,  conduct-
ing themselves  all  the  while  in  such  a  manner,  that  their
operations  resembled  rather  the  regular  proceedings  of
a  concerted  rebellion,  than  the  rashness  and  violence  of
military  mutiny.  But  by  the  address  and  prudence  of
the  generals,  who  partly  by  borrowing  money  in  their
own  name,  or  in  that  of  their  master,  partly  by  extorting
large  sums  from  the  cities  in  their  respective  provinces,
raised  what  was  sufficient  to  discharge  the  arrears  of
the  soldiers,  these  insurrections  were  quelled.  The
greater  part  of  the  troops  were  disbanded,  such  a  num-
ber only  being  kept  in  pay  as  was  necessary  for  garri-
soning the  principal  towns,  and  protecting  the  sea-coasts
from  the  insults  of  the  Turks.3

It  was  happy  for  the  emperor  that  the  abili-

Cortes  Of  rrv  . *  .  r

Castiieheid  ties  ot  his  generals  extricated  him  out  ot  these
!do'  difficulties,  which  it  exceeded  his  own  power
to  have  removed.  He  had  depended,  as  his  chief  re-
source for  discharging  the  arrears  due  to  his  soldiers,
upon  the  subsidies  which  he  expected  from  his  Castilian
subjects.  For  this  purpose,  he  assembled  the  cortes  of
Castile  at  Toledo,  and  having  represented  to  them  the
extraordinary  expense  of  his  military  operations,  toge-
ther with  the  great  debts  in  which  these  had  necessarily
involved  him,  he  proposed  to  levy  such  supplies  as  the
present  exigency  of  his  affairs  demanded,  by  a  general
The  com-  excise  on  commodities.  But  the  Spaniards  al-
•d!^t?»fe£  rea(ty  felt  themselves  oppressed  with  a  load  of
tionofthat  taxes  unknown  to  their  ancestors.  They  had
n  y'  often  complained  that  their  country  was  drained
not  only  of  its  wealth  but  of  its  inhabitants,  in  order  to
prosecute  quarrels  in  which  it  was  not  interested,  and
to  fight  battles  from  which  it  could  reap  no  benefit;  and
they  determined  not  to  add  voluntarily  to  their  own
burdens,  or  to  furnish  the  emperor  with  the  means  of
engaging  in  new  enterprises,  no  less  ruinous  to  the

•  Jovii  Histor,  1.  xxxvii.  203.  c. Sandov.  Ferreras,  ix.  209.

1539.]  BOOK VI.  341

kingdom  than  most  of  those  which  he  had  hitherto
carried  on. The  nobles,  in  particular,  inveighed  with
great  vehemence  against  the  imposition  proposed,  as
an  encroachment  upon  the  valuable  and  distinguishing
privilege  of  their  order,  that  of  being  exempted  from
the  payment  of  any  tax.  They  demanded  a  conference
with  the  representatives  of  the  cities  concerning  the  state
of  the  nation. They  contended  that  if  Charles  would
imitate  the  example  of  his  predecessors,  who  had  re-
sided constantly  in  Spain,  and  would  avoid  entangling
himself  in  a  multiplicity  of  transactions  foreign  to  the
concerns  of  his  Spanish  dominions,  the  stated  revenues
of  the  crown  would  be  fully  sufficient  to  defray  the  ne-
cessary expenses  of  government. They  represented  to
him,  that  it  would  be  unjust  to  lay  new  burdens  upon
the  people,  while  this  prudent  and  effectual  method  of
re-establishing  public  credit,  and  securing  national  opu-
lence, was  totally  neglected.1 Charles,  after  employing
arguments,  entreaties,  and  promises,  but  without  suc-
cess, in  order  to  overcome  their  obstinacy,  dismissed  the
The  ancient  assembly  with  great  indignation. From  that
of^hecortS  Periocl  neither  the  nobles  nor  the  prelates  have
subverted, been  called  to  these  assemblies,  on  pretence
that  such  as  pay  no  part  of  the  public  taxes,  should  not
claim  any  vote  in  laying  them  on. None  have  been
admitted  to  the  cortes  but  the  procurators  or  repre-
sentatives of  eighteen  cities. These,  ta  the  number  of
thirty-six,  being  two  from  each  community,  form  an
assembly  which  bears  no  resemblance  either  in  power
or  dignity  or  independence  to  the  ancient  cortes,  and
are  absolutely  at  the  devotion  of  the  court  in  all  their
determinations." Thus  the  imprudent  zeal  with  which
the  Castilian  nobles  had  supported  the  regal  preroga-
tive, in  opposition  to  the  claims  of  the  commolte  during
the  commotions  in  the  year  1521,  proved  at  last  fatal

1  Sandov.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  269.
«*  Sandov.  ibid. Le  Science  du  Gouvernement,  par  M.  de  Real,  torn.  ii.  p.  102.

342  CHARLES V.  [1539

to  their  own  body.  By  enabling  Charles  to  depress
one  of  the  orders  in  the  state,  they  destroyed  that  ba-
lance to  which  the  constitution  owed  its  security,  and
put  it  in  his  power,  or  in  that  of  his  successors,  to
humble  the  other,  and  to  strip  it  gradually  of  its  most
valuable  privileges.

The  Spa-  At  that  time,  however,  the  Spanish  grandees
dees  sS?"  st^  possessed  extraordinary  power  as  well  as
possessed  privileges,  which  they  exercised  and  defended

high  pnvi- JT  o  J

leges.  with  a  haughtiness  peculiar  to  themselves.  Of
this  the  emperor  himself  had  a  mortifying  proof  during
the  meeting  of  the  cortes  at  Toledo.  As  he  was  re-
turning one  day  from  a  tournament  accompanied  by
most  of  the  nobility,  one  of  the  Serjeants  of  the  court,
out  of  officious  zeal  to  clear  the  way  for  the  emperor,
struck  the  duke  of  Infantado's  horse  with  his  batoon,
which  that  haughty  grandee  resenting,  drew  his  sword,
beat  and  wounded  the  officer.  Charles,  provoked  at
such  an  insolent  deed  in  his  presence,  immediately
ordered  Ronquillo  the  judge  of  the  court  to  arrest  the
duke ;  Ronquillo  advanced  to  execute  his  charge,  when
the  constable  of  Castile  interposing,  checked  him,
claimed  the  right  of  jurisdiction  over  a  grandee  as  a
privilege  of  his  office,  and  conducted  Infantado  to  his
own  apartment.  All  the  nobles  present  were  so  pleased
with  the  boldness  of  the  constable  in  asserting  the  rights
of  their  order,  that,  deserting  the  emperor,  they  at-
tended him  to  his  house  with  infinite  applauses,  and
Charles  returned  to  the  palace  unaccompanied  by  any
person  but  the  cardinal  Tavera.  The  emperor,  how
sensible  soever  of  the  affront,  saw  the  danger  of  irri-
tating a  jealous  and  high-spirited  order  of  men,  whom
the  slightest  appearance  of  offence  might  drive  to  the
most  unwarrantable  extremities.  For  that  reason,  in-
stead of  straining  at  any  ill-timed  exertion  of  his  pre-
rogative, he  prudently  connived  at  the  arrogance  of
a  body  too  potent  for  him  to  control,  and  sent  next

1539.]  BOOK VI.  343

morning  to  the  duke  of  Infantado,  offering  to 'inflict
what  punishment  he  pleased  on  the  person  who  had
affronted  him.  The  duke  considering  this  as  a  full
reparation  to  his  honour,  instantly  forgave  the  officer ;
bestowing  on  him,  besides,  a  considerable  present  as  a
compensation  for  his  wound.  Thus  the  affair  was  en-
tirely forgotten  ;x  nor  would  it  have  deserved  to  be  men-
tioned, if  it  were  not  a  striking  example  of  the  high
and  independent  spirit  of  the  Spanish  nobles  in  that
age,  as  well  as  an  instance  of  the  emperor's  dexterity
in  accommodating  his  conduct  to  the  circumstances  in
which  he  was  placed.

insurrec  Charles  was  far  from  discovering  the  same
tion  at  condescension  or  lenity  towards  the  citizens  of

Ghent,  who  not  long  after  broke  out  into  open
rebellion  against  his  government.  An  event  which
happened  in  the  year  1536,  gave  occasion  to  this  rash
insurrection,  so  fatal  to  that  flourishing  city.  At  that
time  the  queen-dowager  of  Hungary,  governess  of  the
Netherlands,  having  received  orders  from  her  brother
to  invade  France  with  all  the  forces  which  she  could
raise,  she  assembled  the  states  of  the  United  Provinces,
and  obtained  from  them  a  subsidy  of  twelve  hundred
thousand  florins,  to  defray  the  expense  of  that  under-
taking. Of  this  sum,  the  county  of  Flanders  was
obliged  to  pay  a  third  part  as  its  proportion.  But  the

citizens  of  Ghent,  the  most  considerable  city

Pretensions  J

of  the  CHI-  in  that  country,  averse  to  a  war  with  France,
with  which  they  carried  on  an  extensive  and
gainful  commerce,  refused  to  pay  their  quota,  and  con-
tended, that  in  consequence  of  stipulations  between
them  and  the  ancestors  of  their  present  sovereign  the
emperor,  no  tax  could  be  levied  upon  them,  unless  they
had  given  their  express  consent  to  the  imposition  of  it.
The  governess,  on  the  other  hand,  maintained,  that  as
the  subsidy  of  twelve  hundred  thousand  florins  had

*  Saudov.  ii.  274. Ferreras,  ix.  '.U2. Miniana,  113.

344  CHARLES V.  [I53&

been  granted  by  the  states  of  Flanders,  of  which  their
representatives  were  members,  they  were  bound,  of
course,  to  conform  to  what  was  enacted  by  them,  as  it
is  the  first  principle  in  society,  on  which  the  tranquillity
and  order  of  government  depend,  that  the  inclinations
of  the  minority  must  be  overruled  by  the  judgment  and
decision  of  the  superior  number.
Proceed  ^ie  c^zens  °^  Ghent,  however,  were  not
ings  against  willing  to  relinquish  a  privilege  of  such  high
importance  as  that  which  they  claimed.  Hav-
ing been  accustomed,  under  the  government  of  the
house  of  Burgundy,  to  enjoy  extensive  immunities^
and  to  be  treated  with  much  indulgence,  they  dis-
dained to  sacrifice  to  the  delegated  power  of  a  regent,
those  rights  and  liberties  which  they  had  often  and
successfully  asserted  against  their  greatest  princes.
The  queen,  though  she  endeavoured  at  first  to  soothe
them,  and  to  reconcile  them  to  their  duty  by  various
concessions,  was  at  last  so  much  irritated  by  the  obsti-
nacy with  which  they  adhered  to  their  claim,  that  she
ordered  all  the  citizens  of  Ghent,  on  whom  she  could
lay  hold  in  any  part  of  the  Netherlands,  to  be  arrested.
But  this  rash  action  made  an  impression  very  different
from  what  she  expected,  on  men,  whose  minds  were
agitated  with  all  the  violent  passions  which  indigna-
tion at  oppression  and  zeal  for  liberty  inspire.  Less
affected  with  the  danger  of  their  friends  and  com-
panions, than  irritated  at  the  governess,  they  openly
despised  her  authority,  and  sent  deputies  to  the  other
towns  of  Flanders,  conjuring  them  not  to  abandon
their  country  at  such  a  juncture,  but  to  concur  with
them  in  vindicating  its  rights  against  the  encroach-
ments of  a  woman,  who  either  did  not  know  or  did
not  regard  their  immunities.  All  but  a  few  incon-
siderable towns  declined  entering  into  any  confede-
racy against  the  governess :  they  joined,  however,  in
petitioning  her  to  put  off  the  term  for  payment  of  the

1539.]  BOOK  VI.  345

tax  so  long,  that  they  might  have  it  in  their  power  to
send  some  of  their  number  into  Spain,  in  order  to  lay
their  title  to  exemption  before  their  sovereign.  This
she  granted  with  some  difficulty.  But  Charles  re-
ceived their  commissioners  with  a  haughtiness  to
which  they  were  not  accustomed  from  their  ancient
princes,  and  enjoining  them  to  yield  the  same  respect-
ful obedience  to  his  sister,  which  they  owed  to  him  in
person,  remitted  the  examination  of  their  claim  to  the
council  of  Malines.  This  court,  which  is  properly  a
standing  committee  of  the  parliament  or  states  of  the
country,  and  which  possesses  the  supreme  jurisdiction
in  all  matters  civil  as  well  as  criminal/  pronounced  the
claim  of  the  citizens  of  Ghent  to  be  ill-founded,  and
appointed  them  forthwith  to  pay  their  proportion  of
the  tax.

The  take  Enraged  at  this  decision,  which  they  con-
arms,  and  sidered  as  notoriously  unjust,  and  rendered

offer  to  i .  i

submit  to  desperate  on  seeing  their  rights  betrayed  by
that  very  court  which  was  bound  to  protect
them,  the  people  of  Ghent  ran  to  arms  in  a  tumultuary
manner,  drove  such  of  the  nobility  as  resided  among
them  out  of  the  city ;  secured  several  of  the  emperor's
officers ;  put  one  of  them  to  the  torture,  whom  they
accused  of  having  stolen  or  destroyed  the  record  that
contained  a  ratification  of  the  privileges  of  exemption
from  taxes  which  they  pleaded;  chose  a  council  to  which
they  committed  the  direction  of  their  affairs;  gave  orders
for  repairing  and  adding  to  their  fortifications ;  and
openly  erected  the  standard  of  rebellion  against  their
sovereign.2  Sensible  however  of  their  inability  to  sup-
port what  their  zeal  had  prompted  them  to  undertake,
and  desirous  of  securing  a  protector  against  the  for-
midable forces  by  which  they  might  expect  soon  to  be

y  Descrittione  di  tutti  Paesi  Bassi  di  Lud.  Guicciardini.  Ant.  1571.  fol.  p.  53.

»  Memoires  sur  la  Revolte  de  Gantois  en  1539,  par  Jean  d'Hollander,  ecrit  en
1547.  A  la  Ha^e,  1747.  P.  Heuler.  Rer.  Austr.  lib.  xi.  p,  262.  Sandov.  Histor.
torn,  ii-  p.  282.

346  CHARLES  V.  [1539.

attacked,  they  sent  some  of  their  number  to  Francis,
offering  not  only  to  acknowledge  him  as  their  sove-
reign, and  to  put  him  in  immediate  possession  of  Ghent,
but  to  assist  him  with  all  their  forces  in  recovering
those  provinces  in  the  Netherlands,  which  had  an-
ciently belonged  to  the  crown  of  France,  and  had  been
so  lately  reunited  to  it  by  the  decree  of  the  parliament
of  Paris.  This  unexpected  proposition  coming  from
persons  who  had  it  in  their  power  to  have  performed
instantly  one  part  of  what  they  undertook,  and  who
could  contribute  so  effectually  towards  the  execution
of  the  whole,  opened  great  as  well  as  alluring  prospects
to  Francis's  ambition.  The  counties  of  Flanders  and
Artois  were  of  greater  value  than  the  duchy  of  Milan,
which  he  had  so  long  laboured  to  acquire  with  passion-
ate but  fruitless  desire  ;  their  situation  with-  respect  to
France  rendered  it  more  easy  to  conquer  or  to  defend
them ;  and  they  might  be  formed  into  a  separate  prin-
cipality for  the  duke  of  Orleans,  no  less  suitable  to  his
dignity  than  that  which  his  father  aimed  at  obtaining.
To  this,  the  Flemings,  who  were  acquainted  with  the
French  manners  and  government,  would  not  have  been
averse ;  and  his  own  subjects,  weary  of  their  destructive
expeditions  into  Italy,  would  have  turned  their  arms
towards  this  quarter  with  more  good-will,  and  with
Francis  de  £reater  vigour.  Several  considerations,  never-
ciiues  their  theless,  prevented  Francis  from  laying  hold
of  this  opportunity,  the  most  favourable  in
appearance  which  had  ever  presented  itself,  of  ex-
tending his  own  dominions  or  distressing  the  emperor.
From  the  time  of  their  interview  at  Aigues-mortes,
Charles  had  continued  to  court  the  king  of  France
with  wonderful  attention ;  and  often  flattered  him  with
hopes  of  gratifying  at  last  his  wishes  concerning  the
Milanese,  by  granting  the  investiture  of  it  either  to
him  or  to  one  of  his  sons.  But  though  these  hopes
and  promises  were  thrown  out  with  no  other  intention

1539.]  BOOK VI.  347

than  to  detach  him  from  his  confederacy  with  the  Grand
Seignior,  or  to  raise  suspicions  in  Solyman's  mind  by
the  appearance  of  a  cordial  and  familiar  intercourse
subsisting  between  the  courts  of  Paris  and  Madrid,
Francis was  weak enough  to catch  at the  shadow
by  which  he  had  been  so  often  amused,  and  from
eagerness  to  seize  it,  relinquished  what must have
proved  a  more  substantial  acquisition. Besides  this,
the  dauphin,  jealous  to  excess  of  his  brother,  and  un-
willing that  a  prince  who  seemed  to  be  of  a  restless
and  enterprising  nature  should obtain  an  establish-
ment, which  from  its  situation  might  be  considered
almost  as  a  domestic  one,  made  use  of  Montmorency,
who,  by  a  singular  piece  of  good  fortune,  was  at  the
same  time  the  favourite  of  the  father  and  of  the  son,
to  defeat  the  application  of  the  Flemings,  and  to  divert
the  king  from  espousing  their  cause. Montmorency,
accordingly,  represented,  in  strong  terms,  the  reputa-
tion and  power  which  Francis  would  acquire  by  re-
covering that  footing  which  he  had  formerly  in  Italy,
and  that  nothing  could  be  so  efficacious  to  overcome
the  emperor's  aversion  to  this  as  a  sacred  adherence  to
the  truce,  and  refusing,  on  an  occasion  so  inviting,  to
countenance  the  rebellious  subjects  of  his  rival.  Francis,
apt  of  himself  to  overrate  the  value  of  the  Milanese,
because  he  estimated  it  from  the  length  of  time  as  well
as  from  the  great  efforts  which  he  had  employed  in
order  to  reconquer  it,  and  fond  of  every  action  which
had  the  appearance  of  generosity,  assented  without
difficulty  to  sentiments  so  agreeable  to  his  own,  re-
jected the  propositions  of  the  citizens  of  Ghent,  and
dismissed  their  deputies  with  a  harsh  answer.*

Not  satisfied  with  this,  by  a  farther  refine-

Comraum-  J

cates  their ment  in  generosity,  he  communicated  to  the

intentions  ,  . , ,  .. .  .  , ,,  ,

to  the  em- emperor  his  whole  negotiation  with  the  male-
,Peror- contents,  and  all  that  he  knew  of  their  schemes

*  Mem.  de  Beliay,  p.  263. P.  Heuter.  Her.  Austr.  lib.  xi.  263.

348  CHARLES V.  [1539.

and  intentions.1*  This  convincing  proof  of  Francis's  dis-
interestedness relieved  Charles  from  the  most  disquiet-
ing apprehensions,  and  opened  a  way  to  extricate  him-
self out  of  all  his  difficulties.  He  had  already  received
full  information  of  all  the  transactions  in  the  Nether-
lands, and  of  the  rage  with  which  the  people  of  Ghent
had  taken  arms  against  his  government.  He  was
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  genius  and  qualities  of
his  subjects  in  that  country ;  with  their  love  of  liberty ;
their  attachment  to  their  ancient  privileges  and  customs ;
as  well  as  the  invincible  obstinacy  with  which  their
minds,  slow  but  firm  and  persevering,  adhered  to  any
measure  on  which  they  had  deliberately  resolved.  He
easily  saw  what  encouragement  and  support  they  might
have  derived  from  the  assistance  of  France  ;  and  though
now  free  from  any  danger  in  that  quarter,  he  was  still
sensible  that  some  immediate  as  well  as  vigorous  inter-
position was  necessary,  in  order  to  prevent  the  spirit  of
disaffection  from  spreading  in  a  country  where  the
number  of  cities,  the  multitude  of  people,  together  with
the  great  wealth  diffused  among  them  by  commerce,
rendered  it  peculiarly  formidable,  and  would  supply  it
Charles's  Wl^  inexhaustible  resources.  No  expedient,
deiibera-  after  jon£  deliberation,  appeared  to  him  so

tions  con-  i  i  •  ••  ITVTI

cerning  his  effectual  as  his  going  in  person  to  the  Nether-
thTNether-  lands  ;  and  the  governess  his  sister,  being  of  the
same  opinion,  warmly  solicited  him  to  under-
take the  journey.  There  were  only  two  routes  which
he  could  take ;  one  by  land  through  Italy  and  Germany,
the  other  entirely  by  sea,  from  some  port  in  Spain  to
one  in  the  Low  Countries.  But  the  former  was  more
tedious  than  suited  the  present  exigency  of  his  affairs  ;
nor  could  he  in  consistency  with  his  dignity,  or  even
his  safety,  pass  through  Germany  without  such  a  train
both  of  attendants  and  of  troops,  as  would  have  added
greatly  to  the  time  that  he  must  have  consumed  in  his

b  Sandov.  Histor.  torn.  ii.  284.

1539.]  BOOK VI.  349

journey ;  the  latter  was  dangerous  at  this  season,  and
while  he  remained  uncertain  with  respect  to  the  friend-
ship of  the  king  of  England,  was  not  to  be  ventured
upon,  unless  under  the  convoy  of  a  powerful  fleet.  This
perplexing  situation,  in  which  he  was  under  the  neces-
sity of  choosing,  and  did  not  know  what  to  choose,
inspired  him  at  last  with  the  singular  and  seemingly
Proposes  extravagant  thought  of  passing  through  France,
through  as  tne  most  expeditious  way  of  reaching  the  Ne-
France.  therlands.  He  proposed  in  his  council  to  demand
Francis's  permission  for  that  purpose.  All  his  counsel-
lors joined  with  one  voice  in  condemning  the  measure  as
no  less  rash  than  unprecedented,  and  which  must  infal-
libly expose  him  to  disgrace  or  danger ;  to  disgrace,  if
the  demand  were  rejected  in  the  manner  that  he  had  rea-
son to  expect ;  to  danger,  if  he  put  his  person  in  the
power  of  an  enemy  whom  he  had  often  offended,  who
had  ancient  injuries  to  revenge,  as  well  as  subjects  of
present  contest  still  remaining  undecided.  But  Charles,
who  had  studied  the  character  of  his  rival  with  greater
care  and  more  profound  discernment  than  any  of  his  mi-
nisters, persisted  in  his  plan,  and  flattered  himself  that  it
might  be  accomplished  not  only  without  danger  to  his
own  person,  but  even  without  the  expense  of  any  con-
cession detrimental  to  his  crown.

With  this  view  he  communicated  the  matter

To  which

Francis  to  the  French  ambassador  at  his  court,  and  sent
Granvelle  his  chief  minister  to  Paris,  in  order  to
obtain  from  Francis  permission  to  pass  through  his  do-
minions, and  to  promise  that  he  would  soon  settle  the
affair  of  the  Milanese  to  his  satisfaction.  But  at  the
same  time  he  entreated  that  Francis  would  not  exact
any  new  promise,  or  even  insist  on  former  engagements,
at  this  juncture,  lest  whatever  he  should  grant,  under
his  present  circumstances,  might  seem  rather  to  be  ex-
torted by  necessity,  than  to  flow  from  friendship  or  the
love  of  justice.  Francis,  instead  of  attending  to  the

350  CHARLES V.  [1539.

snare  which  such  a  slight  artifice  scarcely  concealed,
was  so  dazzled  with  the  splendour  of  overcoming  an
enemy  by  acts  of  generosity,  and  so  pleased  with  the
air  of  superiority  which  the  rectitude  and  disinterested-
ness of  his  proceedings  gave  him  on  this  occasion,  that
he  at  once  assented  to  all  that  was  demanded.  Judg-
ing of  the  emperor's  heart  by  his  own,  he  imagined  that
the  sentiments  of  gratitude,  arising  from  the  remem-
brance of  good  offices  and  liberal  treatment,  would  de-
termine him  more  forcibly  to  fulfil  what  he  had  so  often
promised,  than  the  most  precise  stipulations  that  could
be  inserted  in  any  treaty.

His  recep-  Upon  this,  Charles,  to  whom  every  moment
that  kin  was  Preci°us>  set  out,  notwithstanding  the  fears
dom.  and  suspicions  of  his  Spanish  subjects,  with  a
small  but  splendid  train  of  about  a  hundred  persons.
At  Bayonne,  on  the  frontiers  of  France,  he  was  received
by  the  dauphin  and  the  duke  of  Orleans,  attended  by
the  constable  Montmorency.  The  two  princes  offered
to  go  into  Spain,  and  to  remain  there  as  hostages  for
the  emperor's  safety ;  but  this  he  rejected,  declaring,
that  he  relied  with  implicit  confidence  on  the  king's
honour,  and  had  never  demanded,  nor  would  accept  of
any  other  pledge  for  his  security.  In  all  the  towns
through  which  he  passed,  the  greatest  possible  magni-
ficence was  displayed ;  the  magistrates  presented  him
the  keys  of  the  gates ;  the  prison-doors  were  set  open  ;
and,  by  the  royal  honours  paid  to  him,  he  appeared
more  like  the  sovereign  of  the  country  than  a  foreign
prince.  The  king  advanced  as  far  as  Chatelherault  to
meet  him  ;  their  interview  was  distinguished  by
the  warmest  expressions  of  friendship  and  re-
gard. They  proceeded  together  towards  Paris,  and
presented  to  the  inhabitants  of  that  city,  the  extraordi-
nary spectacle  of  two  rival  monarchs,  whose  enmity  had
disturbed  and  laid  waste  Europe  during  twenty  years,
making  their  solemn  entry  together  with  all  the  symp-

1539.]  BOOK  VI.  351

toms  of  a  confidential  harmony,  as  if  they  had  forgotten
for  ever  past  injuries,  and  would  not  revive  hostilities
for  the  future.0

Charles remained  six days at  Paris: but

The  era-  J

peror's  so-  amidst  the  perpetual  caresses  ot  the  French
1  e'  court,  and  the  various  entertainments  contrived
to  amuse  or  to  do  him  honour,  he  discovered  an  ex-
treme impatience  to  continue  his  journey,  arising  as
much  from  an  apprehension  of  danger  which  constantly
haunted  him,  as  from  the  necessity  of  his  presence  in
the  Low  Countries.  Conscious  of  the  disingenuity  of
his  own  intentions,  he  trembled  when  he  reflected  that
some  fatal  accident  might  betray  them  to  his  rival,  or
lead  him  to  suspect  them;  and  though  his  artifices
to  conceal  them  should  be  successful,  he  could  not
help  fearing  that  motives  of  interest  might  at  last
triumph  over  the  scruples  of  honour,  and  tempt
Francis  to  avail  himself  of  the  advantage  now  in  his
hands.  Nor  were  there  wanting  persons  among  the
French  ministers,  who  advised  the  king  to  turn  his  own
arts  against  the  emperor,  and  as  the  retribution  due  for
so  many  instances  of  fraud  or  falsehood,  to  seize  and
detain  his  person  until  he  granted  him  full  satisfaction
with  regard  to  all  the  just  claims  of  the  French  crown.
But  no  consideration  cquld  induce  Francis  to  violate
the  faith  which  he  had  pledged,  nor  could  any  argu-
ment convince  him  that  Charles,  after  all  the  promises
that  he  had  given,  and  all  the  favours  which  he  had
received,  might  still  be  capable  of  deceiving  him.  Full
of  this  false  confidence,  he  accompanied  him  to  St.
Quintin  ;  and  the  two  princes,  who  had  met  him  on  the
borders  of  Spain,  did  not  take  leave  of  him  until  he
entered  his  dominions  in  the  Low  Countries.
And  dis-  As  soon  as  the  emperor  reached  his  own  ter-

ity.  ritories,  the  French  ambassadors  demanded  the

Tsin 24

accomplishment of what he had  promised,

«  Thuan.  Hist  lib.  i.  c.  14. Mem.  de  Bellay,  264.

352  CHARLES  V.  [1540.

concerning  the  investiture  of  Milan;  but  Charles
under  the  plausible  pretext  that  his  whole  attention  was
then  engrossed  by  the  consultations  necessary  towards
suppressing  the  rebellion  in  Ghent,  put  off  the  matter
for  some  time.  But  in  order  to  prevent  Francis  from
suspecting  his  sincerity,  he  still  continued  to  talk  of  his
resolutions  with  respect  to  that  matter  in  the  same  strain
as  when  he  entered  France,  and  even  wrote  to  the  king
much  to  the  same  purpose,  though  in  general  terms,
and  with  equivocal  expressions,  which  he  might  after-
ward explain  away  or  interpret  at  pleasure/
Reduction  Meanwhile,  the  unfortunate  citizens  of  Ghent,
5nt;  destitute  of  leaders  capable  either  of  directing
their  councils,  or  conducting  their  troops;  abandoned
by  the  French  king,  and  unsupported  by  their  country-
men, were  unable  to  resist  their  offended  sovereign,
who  was  ready  to  advance  against  them  with  one  body
of  troops  which  he  had  raised  in  the  Netherlands,  with
another  drawn  out  of  Germany,  and  a  third  which  had
arrived  from  Spain  by  sea.  The  near  approach  of
danger  made  them,  at  last,  so  sensible  of  their  own
folly,  that  they  sent  ambassadors  to  the  emperor,  im-
ploring his  mercy,  and  offering  to  set  open  their  gates
at  his  approach.  Charles,  without  vouchsafing  them
any  other  answer,  than  that  he  would  appear  among
them  as  their  sovereign,  with  the  sceptre  and  the  sword
in  his  hand,  began  his  march  at  the  head  of  his  troops.
Though  he  chose  to  enter  the  city  on  the  24th  of  Fe
bruary  his  birthday,  he  was  touched  with  nothing  of  that
tenderness  or  indulgence  which  was  natural  towards  the
And  p«-  place  of  his  nativity.  Twenty-six  of  the  princi-
ofSthTnt  Pal  citizens  were  put  to  death;  a  greater  num-
ker  was  sent  into  banishment;  the  city  was  de-
clared to  have  forfeited  all  its  privileges  and
immunities;  the  revenues  belonging  to  it  were  confis-
cated ;  its  ancient  form  of  government  was  abolished ;

a  Menioires  de  Ribier,  i.  504.

1540.]  BOOK  VI.  353

the  nomination  of  its  magistrates  was  vested  for  the
future  in  the  emperor  and  his  successors ;  a  new  system
of  laws  and  political  administration  was  prescribed;1*
and  in  order  to  bridle  the  seditious  spirit  of  the  citi-
zens, orders  were  given  to  erect  a  strong  citadel,  for
defraying  the  expense  of  which  a  fine  of  a  hundred
and  fifty  thousand  florins  was  imposed  on  the  inhabit-
ants, together  with  an  annual  tax  of  six  thousand  florins
for  the  support  of  the  garrison.0  By  these  rigorous  pro-
ceedings, Charles  not  only  punished  the citizens  of
Ghent,  but  set  an  awful  example  of  severity  before  his
other  subjects  in  the  Netherlands,  whose  immunities
and  privileges,  partly  the  effect,  partly  the  cause  of
their  extensive  commerce,  circumscribed  the  preroga-
tive of  their  sovereign  within  very  narrow  bounds,  and
often  stood  in  the  way  of  measures  which  he  wished  to
undertake,  or  fettered  and  retarded  him  in  his  operations.
Charles Charles  having  thus  vindicated  and  re-esta-
blished  his  authority  in  the  Low  Countries,
^^  ^^US  now  uu&^  no  necessity  of  continu-
ing  the  same  scene  of  falsehood  and  dissimula-
tion with  which  he  had  long  amused  Francis,  began
gradually  to  throw  aside  the  veil  under  which  he  had
concealed  his  intentions  with  respect  to  the  Milanese.
At  first,  he  eluded  the  demands  of  the  French  ambassa-
dors, when  they  again  reminded  him  of  his  promises;
then  he  proposed,  by  way  of  equivalent  for  the  duchy
of  Milan,  to  grant  the  duke  of  Orleans  the  investiture
of  Flanders,  clogging  the  offer,  however,  with  imprac-
ticable conditions,  or  such  as  he  knew  would  be  re-
jected/  At  last,  being  driven  from  all  his  evasions  and
subterfuges  by  their  insisting  for  a  categorical  answer,
he  peremptorily  refused  to  give  up  a  territory  of  such
value,  or  voluntarily  to  make  such  a  liberal  addition  to
the strength  of  an  enemy  by  diminishing  his  own

b  Les  Coutumes  et  Loix  da  Compte"  de  Flandre,  par  Alex,  le  Grande,  3  torn.  fol.
ambray,1719,  torn.  i.  p.  169.
«  Haraei  Annales  Brabantis,  vol.  i.  616.  *  Mera.  de  Ribier,  i.  509.  514.

VOL.  IV.  2 A

354  CHARLES  V.  [1540.

power.6  He  denied,  at  the  same  time,  that  he  had  ever
made  any  promise  which  could  bind  him  to  an  action
so  foolish,  and  so  contrary  to  his  own  interest/

Of  all  the  transactions  in  the  emperor's  life,  this,
without  doubt,  reflects  the  greatest  dishonour  on  his
reputation.g  Though  Charles  was  not  extremely  scru-
pulous at  other  times  about  the  means  which  he  em-
ployed for  accomplishing  his  ends,  and  was  not  always
observant  of  the  strict  precepts  of  veracity  and  honour,
he  had  hitherto  maintained  some  regard  for  the  maxims
of  that  less  precise  and  rigid  morality  by  which  mo-
narchs  think  themselves  entitled  to  regulate  their  con-
duct. But,  on  this  occasion,  the  scheme  that  he  formed
of  deceiving  a  generous  and  open-hearted  prince ;  the
illiberal  and  mean  artifices  by  which  he  carried  it  on;
the  insensibility  with  which  he  received  all.  the  marks
of  his  friendship,  as  well  as  the  ingratitude  with  which
he  requited  them ;  are  all  equally  unbecoming  the  dig-
nity of  his  character,  and  inconsistent  with  the  gran-
deur of  his  views.

This  transaction  exposed  Francis  to  as  much  scorn
as  it  did  the  emperor  to  censure.  After  the  experience
of  a  long  reign,  after  so  many  opportunities  of  disco-
vering the  duplicity  and  artifices  of  his  rival,  the  cre-
dulous simplicity  with  which  he  trusted  him  at  this
juncture  seemed  to  merit  no  other  return  than  what  it
actually  met  with.  Francis,  however,  remonstrated  and
exclaimed,  as  if  this  had  been  the  first  instance  in  which
the  emperor  had  deceived  him.  Feeling,  as  is  usual,
the  insult  which  was  oifered  to  his  understanding  still
more  sensibly  than  the  injury  done  to  his  interest,  he
discovered  such  resentment,  as  made  it  obvious  that  he
would  lay  hold  on  the  first  opportunity  of  being  re-
venged, and  that  a  war,  no  less  rancorous  than  that
which  had  so  lately  raged,  would  soon  break  out  anew
in  Europe.

«  Ribier,  i.  519.  f  Bellay,  365,  366.  s  Jovii  Hist.  lib.  xxxix.  p.  238.  a.

1540.]  BOOK  VI.  355

The  pope But  singular  as  the  transaction  which  has
been  related  may  appear,  this  year  is  rendered

or°d8r  ofhe  sti11  more  memorable  by  the  establishment  of
Jesuits.  the  order  of  Jesuits  ;  a  body  whose  influence
on  ecclesiastical  as  well  as  civil  affairs  hath  been  so
considerable,  that  an  account  of  the  genius  of  its  laws
and  government  justly  merits  a  place  in  history.  When
men  take  a  view  of  the  rapid  progress  of  this  society
towards  wealth  and  power;  when  they  contemplate  the
admirable  prudence  with  which  it  has  been  governed  ;
when  they  attend  to  the  persevering  and  systematic
spirit  with  which  its  schemes  have  been  carried  on  ;
they  are  apt  to  ascribe  such  a  singular  institution  to  the
superior  wisdom  of  its  founder,  and  to  suppose  that  he
had  formed  and  digested  his  plan  with  profound  policy.
But  the  Jesuits,  as  well  as  the  other  monastic  orders,
are  indebted  for  the  existence  of  their  order,  not  to  the
wisdom  of  their  founder,  but  to  his  enthusiasm.  Ignatio
Loyola,  whom  I  have  already  mentioned  on  occasion
of  the  wound  which  he  received  in  defending  Pampe-
luna,h  was  a  fanatic  distinguished  by  extravagancies  in
sentiment  and  conduct,  no  less  incompatible  with  the
maxims  of  sober  reason,  than  repugnant  to  the  spirit
of  true  religion.  The  wild  adventures  and  visionary
schemes,  in  which  his  enthusiasm  engaged  him,  equal
any  thing  recorded  in  the  legends  of  the  Roman  saints.
but  are  unworthy  of  notice  in  history.

Prompted  by  this  fanatical  spirit,  or  incited

Fanaticism  *  . f 3

of  Loyola,  by  the  love  of  power  and  distinction,  from  which
ler'  such  pretenders  to  superior  sanctity  are  not  ex-
empt, Loyola  was  ambitious  of  becoming  the  founder
of  a  religious  order.  The  plan,  which  he  formed,  of
its  constitution  and  laws,  was  suggested,  as  he  gave
out,  and  as  his  followers  still  teach,  by  the  immediate
inspiration  of  Heaven.1  But  notwithstanding  this  high

h  Book  ii.  p.  64.

1  Compte  rendu  des  Constitutions  des  Jesuites  au  Parlement  de  Provence,  par
M.  de  Monclar,  p,  285*

2  A  2

CHARLES  V.  [1540.

pretension,  his  design  met  at  first  with  violent  opposi-
tion. The  pope,  to  whom  Loyola  had  applied  for  the
sanction  of  his  authority  to  confirm  the  institution,  re-
ferred his  petition  to  a  committee  of  cardinals.  They
represented  the  establishment  to  be  unnecessary  as  well
as  dangerous,  and  Paul  refused  to  grant  his  approbation
of  it.  At  last  Loyola  removed  all  his  scruples  by  an
offer  which  it  was  impossible  for  any  pope  to  resist.
s  He  proposed,  that,  besides  three  vows  of  po-
vert7>  of  chastity,  and  of  monastic  obedience,
the  order.  which  are  common  to  all  the  orders  of  regulars,
the  members  of  this  society  should  take  a  fourth  vow  of
obedience  to  the  pope,  binding  themselves  to  go  whi-
thersoever he  should  command  for  the  service  of  reli-
gion, and  without  requiring  any  thing  from  the  holy  see
for  their  support.  At  a  time  when  the  papal -authority
had  received  such  a  shock  by  the  revolt  of  so  many  na-
tions from  the  Romish  church ;  at  a  time  when  every
part  of  the  Popish  system  was  attacked  with  so  much
violence  and  success,  the  acquisition  of  a  body  of  men,
thus  peculiarly  devoted  to  the  see  of  Rome,  and  whom
it  might  set  in  opposition  to  all  its  enemies,  was  an
object  of  the  highest  consequence.  Paul  instantly  per-
s«  t  27  ceiving  this,  confirmed  the  institution  of  the
Jesuits  by  his  bull;  granted  the  most  ample
privileges  to  the  members  of  the  society;  and  appointed
Loyola  to  be  the  first  general  of  the  order.  The  event
hath  fully  justified  Paul's  discernment,  in  expecting
such  beneficial  consequences  to  the  see  of  Rome  from
this  institution.  In  less  than  half  a  century,  the  society
obtained  establishments  in  every  country  that  adhered
to  the  Roman  Catholic  church ;  its  power  and  wealth
increased  amazingly ;  the  number  of  its  members  be-
came great;  their  character  as  well  as  accomplishments
were  still  greater ;  and  the  Jesuits  were  celebrated  by  the
friends  and  dreaded  by  the  enemies  of  the  Romish  faith,
as  the  most  able  and  enterprising  order  in  the  church.

1540.]

BOOK  VI.

357

its  consti- The  constitution  and  laws  of  the  society  were
a" perfected  by  Laynez  and  Aquaviva,  the  two

™ceutrPaatr."  generals  who  succeeded  Loyola,  men  far  su-
tention.  perior  to  their  master  in  abilities,  and  in  the
science  of  government.  They  framed  that  system  of
profound  and  artful  policy  which  distinguishes  the  or-
der. The  large  infusion  of  fanaticism,  mingled  with
its  regulations,  should  be  imputed  to  Loyola  its  founder.
Many  circumstances  concurred  in  giving  a  peculiarity
of  character  to  the  order  of  Jesuits,  and  in  forming  the
members  of  it  not  only  to  take  a  greater  part  in  the  af-
fairs of  the  world  than  any  other  body  of  monks,  but  to
acquire  superior  influence  in  the  conduct  of  them.
The  ob'ect  ^e  Pr*mary  object  of  almost  all  the  monastic
of  the  order  orders  is  to  separate  men  from  the  world,  and
from  any  concerns  in  its  affairs.  In  the  soli-
tude and  silence  of  the  cloister,  the  monk  is  called  to
work  out  his  own  salvation  by  extraordinary  acts  of
mortification  and  piety.  He  is  dead  to  the  world,  and
ought  not  to  mingle  in  its  transactions.  He  can  be  of
no  benefit  to  mankind,  but  by  his  example,  and  by  his
prayers.  On  the  contrary,  the  Jesuits  are  taught  to  con-
sider themselves  as  formed  for  action.  They  are  chosen
soldiers,  bound  to  exert  themselves  continually  in  the
service  of  God,  and  of  the  pope,  his  vicar  on  earth.
Whatever  tends  to  instruct  the  ignorant  ;  whatever  can
be  of  use  to  reclaim  or  to  oppose  the  enemies  of  the  holy
see,  is  their  proper  object.  That  they  may  have  full
leisure  for  this  active  service,  they  are  totally  exempted
from  those  functions,  the  performance  of  which  is  the
chief  business  of  other  monks.  They  appear  in  no  pro-
cessions ;  they  practise  no  religious  austerities  ;  they
do  not  consume  one-half  of  their  time  in  the  repetition
of  tedious  offices.k  But  they  are  required  to  attend  to
all  the  transactions  of  the  world  on  account  of  the  in-

k  Corapte  rendu,  par  M.de  Monclar,  p.  xiii,  290. Sur  la  Destruct.  des  Jesuitei,
par  M.  D'Alciubert,  p.  42.

358  CHARLES V.  [1540.

fluence  which  these  may  have  upon  religion ;  they  are
directed  to  study  the  dispositions  of  persons  in  high
rank,  and  to  cultivate  their  friendship ; l  and  by  the  very
constitution  as  well  as  genius  of  the  order,  a  spirit  of
action  and  intrigue  is  infused  into  all  its  members.
Pecuiiari-  As  tlie  object  of  the  society  of  Jesuits  dif-
ties  in  the  fered  from  that  of  the  other  monastic  orders,
p00riTcy,  the  diversity  was  no  less  in  the  form  of  its  go-
witSpS  vernment.  The  other  orders  are  to  be  consi-
too*heer  of  dered  as  voluntary  associations,  in  which  what-
the  general,  ever  affects  the  whole  body,  is  regulated  by  the
common  suffrage  of  all  its  members.  The  executive
power  is  vested  in  the  persons  placed  at  the  head  of
each  convent,  or  of  the  whole  society  ;  the  legislative
authority  resides  in  the  community.  Affairs  of  moment,
relating  to  particular  convents,  are  determined  in  con-
ventual chapters ;  such  as  respect  the  whole  order  are
considered  in  general  congregations.  But  Loyola,  full
of  the  ideas  of  implicit  obedience,  which  he  had  derived
from  his  military  profession,  appointed  that  the  govern-
ment of  his  order  should  be  purely  monarchical.  A
general,  chosen  for  life  by  deputies  from  the  several
provinces,  possessed  power  that  was  supreme  and  in-
dependent, extending  to  every  person,  and  to  every
case.  He,  by  his  sole  authority,  nominated  provincials,
rectors,  and  every  other  officer  employed  in  the  govern-
ment of  the  society,  and  could  remove  them  at  pleasure.
In  him  was  vested  the  sovereign  administration  of  the
revenues  and  funds  of  the  order.  Every  member  be-
longing to  it  was  at  his  disposal ;  and  by  his  uncon-
trollable mandate,  he  could  impose  on  them  any  task,
or  employ  them  in  what  service  soever  he  pleased.  To
his  commands  they  were  required  not  only  to  yield  out-
ward obedience,  but  to  resign  up  to  him  the  inclinations
of  their  own  wills,  and  the  sentiments  of  their  own  un-
derstandings. They  were  to  listen  to  his  injunctions,

1  Compte  par  M.  de  Monelar,  p.  12.

1540.]  BOOK  VI.  359

as  if  they  had  been  uttered  by  Christ  himself.  Under
his  direction,  they  were  to  be  mere  passive  instruments,
like  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter,  or  like  dead  carcases
incapable  of  resistance."1  Such  a  singular  form  of  po-
licy could  not  fail  to  impress  its  character  on  all  the
members  of  the  order,  and  to  give  a  peculiar  force  to
all  its  operations.  There  is  not  in  the  annals  of  man-
kind any  example  of  such  a  perfect  despotism,  exer-
cised not  over  monks  shut  up  in  the  cells  of  a  convent,
but  over  men  dispersed  among  all  the  nations  of  the
earth.

As  the  constitutions  of  the  order  vest  in  the

Circum-
stances general  such  absolute  dominion over  all  its

"to  members,  they  carefully  provide  for  his  being
perfectly  informed  with  respect  to  the  charac-
ter  ^^  a^^*^es  °^  n^s  subjects.  Every  novice
who  offers  himself  as  a  candidate  for  entering
into  the  order,  is  obliged  to  manifest  his  conscience  to
the  superior,  or  to  a  person  appointed  by  him ;  and  in
doing  this  is  required  to  confess  not  only  his  sins  and
defects,  but  to  discover  the  inclinations,  the  passions,
and  the  bent  of  his  soul.  This  manifestation  must  be
renewed  every  six  months.11  The  society,  not  satisfied
with  penetrating  in  this  manner  into  the  innermost  re-
cesses of  the  heart,  directs  each  member  to  observe  the
words  and  actions  of  the  novices ;  they  are  constituted
spies  upon  their  conduct ;  and  are  bound  to  disclose
every  thing  of  importance  concerning  them  to  the  su-
perior. In  order  that  this  scrutiny  into  their  character
may  be  as  complete  as  possible,  a  long  noviciate  must
expire,  during  which  they  pass  through  the  several  gra-
dations of  ranks  in  the  society,  and  they  must  have  at-
tained the  full  age  of  thirty-three  years  before  they  can
be  admitted  to  take  the  final  vows,  by  which  they  be-

m  Corapte  rendu  au  Parlctn.  de  Bretagne,  par  M.  de Chalotais,  p.  41,  &c.
Compte  par  M.  de  Monclar,  83.  185.  43.

n  Compte  parM.  de  Monclar,  p.  121,  &c.

360  CHARLES V.  [1540,

come  professed  members.0  By  these  various  methods,
the  superiors,  under  whose  immediate  inspection  the
novices  are  placed,  acquire  a  thorough  knowledge  of
their  dispositions  and  talents.  In  order  that  the  gene-
ral, who  is  the  soul  that  animates  and  moves  the  whole
society,  may  have  under  his  eye  every  thing  necessary
to  inform  or  direct  him,  the  provincials  and  heads  of
the  several  houses  are  obliged  to  transmit  to  him  regu-
lar and  frequent  reports  concerning  the  members  under
their  inspection.  In  these  they  descend  into  minute
details  with  respect  to  the  character  of  each  person,  his
abilities  natural  or  acquired,  his  temper,  his  experience
in  affairs,  and  the  particular  department  for  which  he
is  best  fitted.p  These  reports,  when  digested  and  ar-
ranged, are  entered  into  registers  kept  on  purpose,  that
the  general  may,  at  one  comprehensive  view,  survey
the  state  of  the  society  in  every  corner  of  the  earth ;
observe  the  qualifications  and  talents  of  its  members ;
and  thus  choose,  with  perfect  information,  the  instru-
ments, which  his  absolute  power  can  employ  in  any
service  for  which  he  thinks  meet  to  destine  them.q
Pro  ressof  ^s  ^  was  ^ne  Pr°fesse(l  intention  of  the  order
the  power  of  Jesuits,  to  labour  with  unwearied  zeal  in  pro-
ence  of  moting  the  salvation  of  men ;  this  engaged  them,
ier'  of  course,  in  many  active  functions.  From  their

•  Compte  par  M.  de  Monclar,  215.  241.  Sur  la  Destr.  des  Jesuites,  par  M.
d'Alemb.  p.  39.

P  M.  de  Chalotais  has  made  a  calculation  of  the  number  of  these  reports,  which
the  general  of  the  Jesuits  must  annually  receive  according  to  the  regulations  of  the
society.  These  amount  in  all  to  6584*  If  this  sum  be  divided  by  57,  the  number
of  provinces  in  the  order,  it  will  appear  that  177  reports  concerning  the  state  of  each
province  are  transmitted  to  Rome  annually.  Compte,  p.  52.  Besides  this,  there
may  be  extraordinary  letters,  or  such  as  are  sent  by  the  monitors  or  spies  whom  the
general  and  provincials  entertain  in  each  house.  Compte  parM.  de  Moncl.  p.  431.
Hist,  des  Jesuites,  Amst.  1761,  torn.  iv.  p.  56.  The  provincials  and  heads  of  houses
not  only  report  concerning  the  members  of  the  society,  but  are  bound  to  give  the
general  an  account  of  the  civil  affairs  in  the  country  wherein  they  are  settled,  as  far
as  their  knowledge  of  these  may  be  of  benefit  to  religion.  This  condition  may  ex-
tend to  every  particular,  so  that  the  general  is  furnished  with  full  information  con-
cerning the  transactions  of  every  prince  and  state  in  the  world.  Compte  par  M.  de
Moncl.  443.  Hist,  des  Jesuites,  ibid.  p.  58.  When  the  affairs  with  respect  to  which
the  provincials  or  rectors  write  are  of  importance,  they  are  directed  to  use  ciphers  ;
and  each  of  them  has  a  particular  cipher  from  the  general.  Compte  par  M.  Chalo-

4  Compte  par  M.  de  Moncl.  p.  215.  439.  Conipte  par  M.  de  Chalotais,  p.  52. 222.

1540.]  BOOK  VI.  361

first  institution,  they  considered  the  education  of  youth
as  their  peculiar  province ;  they  aimed  at  being  spi-
ritual guides  and  confessors ;  they  preached  frequently
in  order  to  instruct  the  people ;  they  set  out  as  mis-
sionaries to  convert  unbelieving  nations.  The  novelty
of  the  institution,  as  well  as  the  singularity  of  its  objects,
procured  the  order  many  admirers  and  patrons.  The
governors  of  the  society  had  the  address  to  avail  them-
selves of  every  circumstance  in  its  favour,  and  in  a  short
time  the  number  as  well  as  influence  of  its  members  in-
creased wonderfully.  Before  the  expiration  of  the  six-
teenth century,  the  Jesuits  had  obtained  the  chief  di-
rection of  the  education  of  youth  in  every  Catholic
country  in  Europe.  They  had  become  the  confessors
of  almost  all  its  monarchs,  a  function  of  no  small  im-
portance in  any  reign,  but  under  a  weak  prince,  superior
even  to  that  of  minister.  They  were  the  spiritual  guides
of  almost  every  person  eminent  for  rank  or  power.  They
possessed  the  highest  degree  of  confidence  and  interest
with  the  papal  court,  as  the  most  zealous  and  able  cham-
pions for  its  authority.  The  advantages  which  an  active
and  enterprising  body  of  men  might  derive  from  all
these  circumstances  are  obvious.  They  formed  the
minds  of  men  in  their  youth.  They  retained  an  as-
cendant over  them  in  their  advanced  years.  They  pos-
sessed, at  different  periods,  the  direction  of  the  most
considerable  courts  in  Europe.  They  mingled  in  all
affairs.  They  took  part  in  every  intrigue  and  revolu-
tion. The  general,  by  means  of  the  extensive  intelli-
gence which  he  received,  could  regulate  the  operations
of  the  order  with  the  most  perfect  discernment,  and  by
means  of  his  absolute  power,  could  carry  them  on  with
the  utmost  vigour  and  effect/

«•  When  Loyola,  in  the  year  1540,  petitioned  the  pope  to  authorize  the  institution
of  the  order,  he  had  only  ten  disciples.  But  in  the  year  1608,  sixty-eight  years
after  their  first  institution,  the  number  of  Jesuits  iiad  increased  to  ten  thousand  five
hundred  and  eighty-one.  In  the  year  1710,  the  order  possessed  twenty-four  pro-
fessed houses ;  fifty-nine  houses  of  probation  j  three  hundred  and  forty  residences  j

362  CHARLES  V.  [1540.

Progress  of  Together  with  the  power  of  the  order,  its
its  wealth.  wealth  continued  to  increase.  Various  expe-
dients were  devised  for  eluding  the  obligation  of  the  vow
of  poverty.  The  order  acquired  ample  possessions  in
every  Catholic  country ;  and  by  the  number  as  well  as
magnificence  of  its  public  buildings,  together  with  the
value  of  its  property,  moveable  or  real,  it  vied  with  the
most  opulent  of  the  monastic  fraternities.  Besides  the
sources  of  wealth  common  to  all  the  regular  clergy,  the
Jesuits  possessed  one  which  was  peculiar  to  themselves.
Under  pretext  of  promoting  the  success  of  their  mis-
sions, and  of  facilitating  the  support  of  their  mission-
aries, they  obtained  a  special  licence  from  the  court  of
Rome,  to  trade  with  the  nations  which  they  laboured  to
convert.  In  consequence  of  this,  they  engaged  in  an
extensive  and  lucrative  commerce,  both  in  the'  East  and
West  Indies.  They  opened  warehouses  in  different
parts  of  Europe,  in  which  they  vended  their  commo-
dities. Not  satisfied  with  trade  alone,  they  "imitated
the  example  of  other  commercial  societies,  and  aimed
at  obtaining  settlements.  They  acquired  possession
accordingly  of  a  large  and  fertile  province  in  the
southern  continent  of  America,  and  reigned  as  sove-
reigns over  some  hundred  thousand  subjects.5
Pernicious  Unhappily  for  mankind,  the  vast  influence
effects  of  which  the  order  of  Jesuits  acquired  by  all  these
dvii  different  means,  has  been  often  exerted  with  the
*ety*  most  pernicious  effect.  Such  was  the  tendency
of  that  discipline  observed  by  the  society  in  forming  its
members,  and  such  the  fundamental  maxims  in  its  con-
stitution, that  every  Jesuit  was  taught  to  regard  the  in-
terest of  the  order  as  the  capital  object,  to  which  every
consideration  was  to  be  sacrificed.  This  spirit  of  at-
tachment to  their  order,  the  most  ardent,  perhaps,  that

six  hundred  and  twelve  colleges;  two  hundred  missions;  one  hundred  and  fifty
seminaries  and  boarding  schools  ;  and  consisted  of  nineteen  thousand  nine  hundred
and  nirity-eight  Jesuits. Hist,  des  Jesuites,  torn.  i.  p.  20.
»  Hist,  des  Jes.  iv.  168—196,  &c.

1540.]  BOOK  VI.  363

ever  influenced  any  body  of  men,1  is  the  characteristic
principle  of  the  Jesuits,  and  serves  as  a  key  to  the  genius
of  their  policy,  as  well  as  to  the  peculiarities  in  their
sentiments  and  conduct.

As  it  was  for  the  honour  and  advantage  of  the  so-
ciety, that  its  members  should  possess  an  ascendant  over
persons  in  high  rank  or  of  great  power,  the  desire  of
acquiring  and  preserving  such  a  direction  of  their  con-
duct, with  greater  facility,  has  led  the  Jesuits  to  propa-
gate a  system  of  relaxed  and  pliant  morality,  which
accommodates  itself  to  the  passions  of  men,  which  jus-
tifies their  vices,  which  tolerates  their  imperfections,
which  authorizes  almost  every  action  that  the  most  au-
dacious or  crafty  politician  would  wish  to  perpetrate.

As  the  prosperity  of  the  order  was  intimately  con-
nected with  the  preservation  of  the  papal  authority,  the
Jesuits,  influenced  by  the  same  principle  of  attachment
to  the  interests  of  their  society,  have  been  the  most
zealous  f  atrons  of  those  doctrines,  which  tend  to  exalt
ecclesiastical  power  on  the  ruins  of  civil  government.
They  have  attributed  to  the  court  of  Rome  a  jurisdiction
as  extensive  and  absolute  as  was  claimed  by  the  most
presumptuous  pontiffs  in  the  dark  ages.  They  have
contended  for  the  entire  independence  of  ecclesiastics
on  the  civil  magistrate.  They  have  published  such
tenets  concerning  the  duty  of  opposing  princes  who
were  enemies  of  the  Catholic  faith,  as  countenanced  the
most  atrocious  crimes,  and  tended  to  dissolve  all  the
ties  which  connect  subjects  with  their  rulers.

As  the  order  derived  both  reputation  and  authority
from  the  zeal  with  which  it  stood  forth  in  defence  of
the  Romish  church  against  the  attacks  of  the  reformers,
its  members,  proud  of  this  distinction,  have  considered
it  as  their  peculiar  function  to  combat  the  opinions,  and
to  check  the  progress  of  the  Protestants.  They  have
m,ade  use  of  every  art,  and  have  employed  every

1  Comptc  par  M.  dc  Moncl.  p.  285.

364  CHARLES  V.  [1540.

weapon  against  them.  They  have  set  themselves  in
opposition  to  every  gentle  or  tolerating  measure  in  their
favour.  They  have  incessantly  stirred  up  against  them
all  the  rage  of  ecclesiastical  and  civil  persecution.

Monks  of  other  denominations  have,  indeed,  ven-
tured to  teach  the  same  pernicious  doctrines,  and  have
held  opinions  equally  inconsistent  with  the  order  and
happiness  of  civil  society.  But  they,  from  reasons
which  are  obvious,  have  either  delivered  such  opinions
with  greater  reserve,  or  have  propagated  them  with
less  success.  Whoever  recollects  the  events  which
have  happened  in  Europe  during  two  centuries,  will
find  that  the  Jesuits  may  justly  be  considered  as  re-
sponsible for  most  of  the  pernicious  effects  arising  from
that  corrupt  and  dangerous  casuistry,  from  those  ex-
travagant tenets  concerning  ecclesiastical  power,  and
from  that  intolerant  spirit,  which  have  been  the  dis-
grace of  the  church  of  Rome  throughout  that  period,
and  which  have  brought  so  many  calamities  ujfon  civil
society  .u

Some  ad-  But  amidst  many  bad  consequences  flowing
resuhfrT  ^rom  ^e  institution  of  this  order,  mankind,  it
from  the  must  be  acknowledged,  have  derived  from  it
of  tiSllon  some  considerable  advantages.  As  the  Jesuits
order '  made  the  education  of  youth  one  of  their  capital
objects,  and  as  their  first  attempts  to  establish  colleges
for  the  reception  of  students  were  violently  opposed  by
the  universities  in  different  countries,  it  became  neces-
sary for  them,  as  the  most  effectual  method  of  acquiring
the  public  favour,  to  surpass  their  rivals  in  science  and
Particu-  industry.  This  prompted  them  to  cultivate  the
lariy  to  study  of  ancient  literature  with  extraordinary

literature.  m,  -  i V

ardour.  1  his  put  them  upon  various  methods
for  facilitating  the  instruction  of  youth ;  and  by  the
improvements  which  they  made  in  it,  they  have  con-
tributed so  much  towards  the  progress  of  polite  learn-

u  Encyclopedic,  art.  Jcsuites,  torn.  viii.  513.

1540.]  BOOK VI.  365

ing,  that  on  this  account  they  have  merited  well  of
society.  Nor  has  the  order  of  Jesuits  been  successful
only  in  teaching  the  elements  of  literature  ;  it  has  pro-
duced likewise  eminent  masters  in  many  branches  of
science,  and  can  alone  boast  of  a  greater  number  of
ingenious  authors,  than  all  the  other  religious  frater-
nities taken  together/

More  espe- But  it  is  in  the  new  world that  the  Jesuits
nave  exhibited  the  most  wonderful  display  of

thenje°sfuits  t^16^r  a^^^^es'  an(*  have  contributed  most  effec-
in  Para-'  *  tually  to  the  benefit  of  the  human  species.  The
conquerors  of  that  unfortunate  quarter  of  the
globe  acted  at  first  as  if  they  had  nothing  in  view  but
to  plunder,  to  enslave,  and  to  exterminate  its  inhabit-
ants. The  Jesuits  alone  made  humanity  the  object  of
their  settling  there.  About  the  beginning  of  the  last
century  they  obtained  admission  into  the  fertile  pro-
vince of  Paraguay,  which  stretches  across  the  southern
continent  'of  America,  from  the  east  side  of  the  immense
ridge  of  the  Andes,  to  the  confines  of  the  Spanish  and
Portuguese  settlements  on  the  banks  of  the  river  de  la
Plata.  They  found  the  inhabitants  in  a  state  little  dif-
ferent from  that  which  takes  place  among  men  when
they  first  begin  to  unite  together  ;  strangers  to  the  arts  ;
subsisting  precariously  by  hunting  or  fishing  ;  and
hardly  acquainted  with  the  first  principles  of  subordi-
nation and  government.  The  Jesuits  set  themselves  to

x  M.  d'Alembert  has  observed,  that  though  the  Jesuits  have  made  extraordinary
progress  in  erudition  of  every  species  ;  though  they  can  reckon  up  many  of  their
brethren  who  have  been  eminent  mathematicians,  antiquaries,  and  critics;  though
they  have  even  formed  some  orators  of  reputation  ;  yet  the  order  has  never  pro-
duced one  man,  whose  mind  was  so  much  enlightened  with  sound  knowledge,  as  to
merit  the  name  of  a  philosopher.  But  it  seems  to  be  the  unavoidable  effect  of
monastic  education  to  contract  and  fetter  the  human  mind.  The  partial  attachment
of  a  monk  to  the  interest  of  his  order,  which  is  often  incompatible  with  that  of  other
citizens  ;  the  habit  of  implicit  obedience  to  the  will  of  a  superior,  together  with  the
frequent  return  of  the  wearisome  and  frivolous  duties  of  the  cloister,  debase  his
faculties,  and  extinguish  that  generosity  of  sentiment  and  spirit,  which  qualifies  men
for  thinking  or  feeling  justly  with  respect  to  what  is  proper  in  life  and  conduct.
Father  Paul  of  Venice  is,  perhaps,  the  only  person  educated  in  a  cloister,  thaterer
was  altogether  superior  to  its  prejudices,  or  who  viewed  the  transactions  of  men,
and  reasoned  concerning  the  interests  of  society,  with  the  enlarged  sentiments  of  a
philosopher,  with  the  discernment  of  a  man  conversant  in  affairs,  and  with  the
liberality  of  a  gentleman.

366  CHARLES  Y.  [1540.

instruct  and  to  civilize  these  savages.  They  taught
them  to  cultivate  the  ground,  to  rear  tame  animals,  and
to  build  houses.  They  brought  them  to  live  together
in  villages.  They  trained  them  to  arts  and  manufac-
tures. They  made  them  taste  the  sweets  of  society  ;
and  accustomed  them  to  the  blessings  of  security  and
order.  These  people  became  the  subjects  of  their  be-
nefactors ;  who  have  governed  them  with  a  tender  at-
tention, resembling  that  with  which  a  father  directs  his
children.  Respected  and  beloved  almost  to  adoration,
a  few  Jesuits  presided  over  some  hundred  thousand
Indians.  They  maintained  a  perfect  equality  among
all  the  members  of  the  community.  Each  of  them  was
obliged  to  labour  not  for  himself  alone,  but  for  the
public.  The  produce  of  their  fields,  together  with  the
fruits  of  their  industry  of  every  species,  were  deposited
in  the  common  storehouses,  from  which  each  individual
received  every  thing  necessary  for  the  supply  of  his
wants.  By  this  institution,  almost  all  the  passions
which  disturb  the  peace  of  society,  and  render  the
members  of  it  unhappy,  were  extinguished.  A  few
magistrates,  chosen  from  among  their  countrymen,  by
the  Indians  themselves,  watched  over  the  public  tran-
quillity, and  secured  obedience  to  the  laws.  The
sanguinary  punishments  frequent  under  other  govern-
ments were  unknown.  An  admonition  from  a  Jesuit;
a  slight  mark  of  infamy  ;  or,  on  some  singular  occasion,
a  few  lashes  with  a  whip,  were  sufficient  to  maintain
good  order  among  these  innocent  and  happy  people/
Even  here  But  even  in  this  meritorious  effort  of  the  Je-
su^s  ^or  ^ie  goo&  °f  mankind,  the  genius  and

policy  of  spirit  of  their  order  have  mingled  and  are  dis-
discern-  cemible.  They  plainly  aimed  at  establishing
in  Paraguay  an  independent  empire,  subject  to
the  society  alone,  and  which,  by  the  superior  excellence
of  its  constitution  and  police,  could  scarce]^  have  failed

y  Hist,  du  Paraguay  par  Pere  de  Charlevoix,  torn.  ii.  42,  &c. Voyage  au  Perou
par  Don  G.  Juan  et  D.  Ant,  de  Ulloa,  torn.  i.  540,  &c. Par.  4to.  17'52.

1540.]  BOOK  VI.  307

to  extend  its  dominion  over  all  the  southern  continent
of  America.  With  this  view,  in  order  to  prevent  the
Spaniards  or  Portuguese  in  the  adjacent  settlements,
from  acquiring  any  dangerous  influence  over  the  peo-
ple within  the  limits  of  the  province  subject  to  the
society,  the  Jesuits  endeavoured  to  inspire  the  Indians
with  hatred  and  contempt  of  these  nations.  They  cut
off  all  intercourse  between  their  subjects  and  the  Spa-
nish or  Portuguese  settlements.  They  prohibited  any
private  trader  of  either  nation  from  entering  their  ter-
ritories. When  they  were  obliged  to  admit  any  person
in  a  public  character  from  the  neighbouring  govern-
ments, they  did  not  permit  him  to  have  any  conversa-
tion with  their  subjects,  and  no  Indian  was  allowed
even  to  enter  the  house  where  these  strangers  resided,
unless  in  the  presence  of  a  Jesuit.  In  order  to  render
any  communication  between  them  as  difficult  as  pos-
sible, they  industriously  avoided  giving  the  Indians
any  knowledge  of  the  Spanish,  or  of  any  other  Euro-
pean language;  but  encouraged  the  different  tribes,
which  they  had  civilized,  to  acquire  a  certain  dialect
of  the  Indian  tongue,  and  laboured  to  make  that  the
universal  language  throughout  their  dominions.  As
all  these  precautions,  without  military  force,  would  have
been  insufficient  to  have  rendered  their  empire  secure
and  permanent,  they  instructed  their  subjects  in  the
European  arts  of  war.  They  formed  them  into  bodies
of  cavalry  and  infantry,  completely  armed  and  regu-
larly disciplined.  They  provided  a  great  train  of  artil-
lery, as  well  as  magazines  stored  with  all  the  imple-
ments of  war.  Thus  they  established  an  army  so  nu-
merous and  well-appointed,  as  to  be  formidable  in  a
country,  where  a  few  sickly  and  ill-disciplined  batta-
lions composed  all  the  military  force  kept  on  foot  by
the  Spaniards  or  Portuguese.2

z  Voyage  de  Juan  et  de  UHoa,  torn.  i.  549. Recueij  des  toutes  les  Pieces  qui
ont  paru  sur  les  Affaires  des  Jesuites  en  Portugal,  tora.  i,  p.  7,  &c.

368  CHARLES  V.  [1540

The  Jesuits  gained  no  considerable  degree  of

Reasons  for  °

giving  so  power  during  the  reign  01  Charles  V .,  who,  with
his  usual  sagacity,  discerned  the  dangerous
tendency  of  the  institution,  and  checked  its

gress  of  the  progress.* But  as  the  order  was  founded  in

order.  A  • •• /» -i  • i T • 11-  i

the  period  of  which  I  write  the  history,  and  as
the  age  to  which  I  address  this  work  hath  seen  its  fall,
the  view  which  I  have  exhibited  of  the  laws  and  genius
of  this  formidable  body  will  not,  I  hope,  be  unaccept-
able to  my  readers  ;  especially  as  one  circumstance  has
enabled  me  to  enter  into  this  detail  with  particular
advantage.  Europe  had  observed,  for  two  centuries,
the  ambition  and  power  of  the  order.  But  while  it  felt
many  fatal  effects  of  these,  it  could  not  fully  discern
the  causes  to  which  they  were  to  be  imputed.  It  was
unacquainted  with  many  of  the  singular  regulations  in
the  political  constitution  or  government  of  the  Jesuits,
which  formed  the  enterprising  spirit  of  intrigue  that
distinguished  its  members,  and  elevated  the  body  itself
to  such  an  height  of  power.  It  was  a  fundamental
maxim  with  the  Jesuits,  from  their  first  institution,  not
to  publish  the  rules  of  their  order.  These  they  kept  con-
cealed as  an  impenetrable  mystery.  They  never  com-
municated them  to  strangers ;  nor  even  to  the  greater

O  '  D

part  of  their  own  members.  They  refused  to  produce
them  when  required  by  courts  of  justice;5  and  by  a
strange  solecism  in  policy,  the  civil  power  in  different
countries  authorized  or  connived  at  the  establishment
of  an  order  of  men,  whose  constitution  and  laws  were
concealed  with  a  solicitude,  which  alone  was  a  good
reason  for  excluding  them.  During  the  prosecutions
lately  carried  on  against  them  in  Portugal  and  France,
the  Jesuits  have  been  so  inconsiderate  as  to  produce  the
mysterious  volumes  of  their  institute.  By  the  aid  of
these  authentic  records  the  principles  of  their  govern-

*  Compte  par  M.  <le  Moncl.  p.  312.
*  Hist,  des  Jes.  torn.  iii.  256,  &c Compte  par  M.  de  Chalot. .38

1540.]  BOOK VI.  369

ment  may  be  delineated,  and  the  sources  of  their  power
investigated,  with  a  degree  of  certainty  and  precision,
which,  previous  to  that  event,  it  was  impossible  to  at-
tain.0 But  as  I  have  pointed  out  the  dangerous  ten-
dency of  the  constitution  and  spirit  of  the  order  with
the  freedom  becoming  an  historian,  the  candour  and
impartiality  no  less  requisite  in  that  character  call  on
me  to  add  one  observation,  that  no  class  of  regular
clergy  in  the  Romish  church  has  been  more  eminent
for  decency,  and  even  purity  of  manners,  than  the  major
part  of  the  order  of  Jesuits/  The  maxims  of  an  in
triguing,  ambitious,  interested  policy  might  influence
those  who  governed  the  society,  and  might  even  cor-
rupt the  heart,  and  pervert  the  conduct  of  some  indi-
viduals, while  the  greater  number,  engaged  in  literary
pursuits,  or  employed  in  the  functions  of  religion,  was
left  to  the  guidance  of  those  common  principles  which
restrain  men  from  vice,  and  excite  them  to  what  is  be-
coming and  laudable.  The  causes  which  occasioned
the  ruin  of  this  mighty  body,  as  well  as  the  circum-
stances and  effects  with  which  it  has  been  attended  in
the  different  countries  of  Europe,  though  objects  ex-
tremely worthy  the  attention  of  every  intelligent  ob-
server of  human  affairs,  do  not  fall  within  the  period  of
this  history.

Affairs  of  ^"°  sooner  na(i  Charles  re-established  order
Germany.  jn  the  Low  Countries,  than  he  was  obliged  to
turn  his  attention  to  the  affairs  in  Germany.  The  Pro-
testants pressed  him  earnestly  to  appoint  that  conference
between  a  select  number  of  the  divines  of  each  party,
which  had  been  stipulated  in  the  convention  at  Frank-

c  The  greater  part  of  ray  information  concerning  the  government  and  laws  of  i\ie
order  of  Jesuits,  I  have  derived  from  the  reports  of  M.  de  Chalotais  and  M.  de
Monclar.  I  rest  not  my  narrative,  however,  upon  the  authority  even  of  these  re-
spectable magistrates  and  elegant  writers,  hut  upon  innumerable  passages  which
they  have  extracted  from  the  constitutions  of  the  order,  deposited  in  their  hands.
Hospinian,  a  Protestant  divine  of  Zurich,  in  his  Hhtoria  Jesuitica,  printed  A.  D.
1619,  published  a  small  part  of  the  constitutions  of  the  Jesuits,  of  which  by  some
accident  he  had  got  a  copy  ;  p.  13—54.

d  Sur  la  Destruct.  des.  Jes.  par  M.  d  Alembert,  p.  55.

VOL.  IV.  2  B

370  CHARLES  V.  [1540.

fort.  The  pope  considered  such  an  attempt  to  examine
into  the  points  in  dispute,  or  to  decide  concerning  them,
as  derogatory  to  his  right  of  being  the  supreme  judge
in  controversy ;  and  being  convinced  that  such  a  con-
ference would  either  be  ineffectual  by  determining  no-
thing, or  prove  dangerous  by  determining  too  much,
A  confer-  ne  employed  every  art  to  prevent  it.  The  em-
ence  be-  peror,  however,  finding  it  more  for  his  interest

tween  the r  7  \

Popish  and  to  soothe  the  Germans  than  to  gratify  Paul,  paid
divines," little  regard  to  his  remonstrances. In  a  diet
June  25. ^^  ^  Huguenaw,  matters  were  ripened  for
the  conference. In  another  diet  assembled  at
Worms,  the  conference  was  begun,  Melancthon
on  the  one  side  and  Eckius  on  the  other,  sustaining  the
principal  part  in  the  dispute ;  but  after  they  had  made
some  progress,  though  without  concluding  any  thing,
it  was  suspended  by  the  emperor's  command,  that  it
might  be  renewed  with  greater  solemnity  in  his  own
presence  in  a  diet  summoned  to  meet  at  Ratisbon.
This  assembly  was  opened  with  great  pomp,
and  with  a  general  expectation  that  its  pro-
ceedings would  be  vigorous  and  decisive. By  the
consent  of  both  parties,  the  emperor  was  intrusted
with  the  power  of  nominating  the  persons  who  should
manage  the  conference,  which  it  was  agreed  should  be
conducted  not  in  the  form  of  a  public  disputation,  but
as  a  friendly  scrutiny  or  examination  into  the  articles
which  had  given  rise  to  the  present  controversies. He
appointed  Eckius,  Gropper,  and  Pflug,  on  the  part  of
the  Catholics ;  Melancthon,  Bucer,  and  Pistorius,  on
that  of  the  Protestants ;  all  men  of  distinguished  re-
putation among  their  own  adherents,  and,  except  Ec-
kius, all  eminent  for  moderation,  as  well  as  desirous  of
peace. As  they  were  about  to  begin  their  consulta-
tions, the  emperor  put  into  their  hands  a  book,  com-
posed, as  he  said,  by  a  learned  divine  in  the  Low  Coun-
tries, with  such  extraordinary  perspicuity  and  temper,

1541.]  BOOK VI.  371

as,  in  his  opinion,  might  go  far  to  unite  and  compre-
hend the  two  contending  parties.  Gropper,  a  canon
of  Cologne,  whom  he  had  named  among  the  managers
of  the  conference,  a  man  of  address  as  well  as  of  eru-
dition, was  afterward  suspected  to  be  the  author  of
this  short  treatise.  It  contained  positions  with  regard
to  twenty-two  of  the  chief  articles  in  theology,  which
included  most  of  the  questions  then  agitated  in  the
controversy  between  the  Lutherans  and  the  church  of
Rome.  By  ranging  his  sentiments  in  a  natural  order,
and  expressing  them  with  great  simplicity ;  by  employ-
ing often  the  very  words  of  Scripture,  or  of  the  primi-
tive fathers  ;  by  softening  the  rigour  of  some  opinions,
and  explaining  away  what  was  absurd  in  others ;  by
concessions,  sometimes  on  one  side,  and  sometimes  on
the  other;  and  especially  by  banishing  as  much  as
possible  scholastic  phrases,  those  words  and  terms  of
art  in  controversy,  which  serve  as  badges  of  distinction
to  different  sects,  and  for  which  theologians  often  con-
tend more  fiercely  than  for  opinions  themselves ;  he  at
last  framed  his  work  in  such  a  manner,  as  promised
fairer  than  any  thing  that  had  hitherto  been  attempted,
to  compose  and  to  terminate  religious  dissensions.6

But  the  attention  of  the  age  was  turned,
with  such  acute  observation,  towards  theolo-
gical controversies,  that  it  was  not  easy  to  impose  on
it  by  any  gloss,  how  artful  or  specious  soever.  The
length  and  eagerness  of  the  dispute  had  separated  the
contending  parties  so  completely,  and  had  set  their
minds  at  such  variance,  that  they  were  not  to  be  recon-
ciled by  partial  concessions.  All  the  zealous  Catholics,
particularly  the  ecclesiastics  who  had  a  seat  in  the  diet,
joined  in  condemning  Gropper 's  treatise  as  too  favour-
able to  the  Lutheran  opinion,  the  poison  of  which
heresy  it  conveyed,  as  they  pretended,  with  greater
danger,  because  it  was  in  some  degree  disguised.  The

«  Goldast.  Constit.  Imper.  ii,  p.  182.

2  B2

372  CHARLES V.  [1541.

rigid  Protestants,  especially  Luther  himself,  and  his
patron  the  elector  of  Saxony,  were  for  rejecting  it  as
an  impious  compound  of  error  and  truth,  craftily  pre-
pared that  it  might  impose  on  the  weak,  the  timid,  and
the  unthinking. But  the  divines,  to  whom  the  exami-
nation of  it  was  committed,  entered  upon  that  business
with  greater  deliberation  and  temper. As  it  was  more
easy  in  itself,  as  well  as  more  consistent  with  the  dig-
nity of  the  church,  to  make  concessions,  and  even  alter-
ations with  regard  to  speculative  opinions,  the  dis-
cussion whereof  is  confined chiefly  to schools,  and
which  present  nothing  to  the  people  that  either  strikes
their  imagination  or  affects  their  senses,  they  came  to
an  accommodation  about  these  without  much  labour,
and  even  defined  the  great  article  concerning  justifica-
tion to  their  mutual  satisfaction. But,  when  they  pro-
ceeded to  points  of  jurisdiction,  where  the  interest  and
authority  of  the  Roman  see  were  concerned,  or  to  the
rites  and  forms  of  external  worship,  where  every  change
that  could  be  made  must  be  public,  and  draw  the  ob-
servation of  the  people,  there  the  Catholics  were  alto-
gether untractable  ;  nor  could  the  church  either  with
safety  or  with  honour  abolish  its  ancient  institutions.
All  the  articles  relative  to  the  power  of  the  pope,  the
authority  of  councils,  the  administration  of  the  sacra-
ments, the  worship  of  saints,  and  many  other  particu-
lars, did  not,  in  their  nature,  admit  of  any  tempera-
ment ;  so  that,  after  labouring  long  to  bring  about  an
accommodation  with  respect  to these,  the  emperor
found  all  his  endeavours  ineffectual. Being  impatient,
however,  to  close  the  diet,  he  at  last  prevailed  on  a
majority  of  the  members  to  approve  of  the  following
Recess  of recess  :  "  That  the  articles  concerning  which
Ratfsbon* ^e Divines  had agreed in the conference,
in  favour should  be  held  as  points  decided,  and  be  ob-
served  inviolably  by  all  ;  that  the  other  articles

July  **• about  which  they  had  differed,  should  be  re-

1541.].  BOOK VI.  373

ferred  to  the  determination  of  a  general  council,  or  if
that  could  not  be  obtained,  to  a  national  synod  of  Ger-
many ;  and  if  it  should  prove  impracticable,  likewise,
to  assemble  a  synod,  that  a  general  diet  of  the  empire
should  be  called  within  eighteen  months,  in  order  to
give  some  final  judgment  upon  the  whole  controversy •
that  the  emperor  should  use  all  his  interest  and  autho-
rity with  the  pope,  to  procure  the  meeting  either  of  a
general  council  or  synod ;  that,  in  the  mean  time,  no
innovations  should  be  attempted,  no  endeavours  should
be  employed  to  gain  proselytes  ;  and  neither  the  reve-
nues of  the  church,  nor  the  rights  of  monasteries,
should  be  invaded."  f

Gives  of-  ^  ^e  Proceedings  °f  this  diet,  as  well  as
fence  both  the  recess  in  which  they  terminated,  gave  great
and  pPro-S  offence  to  the  pope.  The  power  which  the
testants.  Germans  had  assumed  of  appointing  their  own
divines  to  examine  and  determine  matters  of  contro-
versy, he  considered  as  a  dangerous  invasion  of  his
rights ;  the  renewing  of  their  ancient  proposal  concern-
ing a  national  synod,  which  had  been  so  often  rejected
by  him  and  his  predecessors,  appeared  extremely  un-
dutiful ;  but  the  bare  mention  of  allowing  a  diet,  com-
posed chiefly  of  laymen,  to  pass  judgment  with  respect
to  articles  of  faith,  was  deemed  no  less  criminal  and
profane,  than  the  worst  of  those  heresies  which  they
seemed  zealous  to  suppress.  On  the  other  hand,  the
Protestants  were  no  less  dissatisfied  with  a  recess,  that
considerably  abridged  the  liberty  which  they  enjoyed
Charles  at  that  time.  As  they  murmured  loudly  against
courts  the  ft  Charles,  unwilling  to  leave  any  seeds  of

Protes-  °  *

tants  discontent  in  the  empire,  granted  them  a  pri-
vate declaration  in  the  most  ample  terms,  exempting
them  from  whatever  they  thought  oppressive  or  in-
jurious in  the  recess,  and  ascertaining  to  them  the  full

f  Slcidan,  267,  &c, Paljav.  1.  iv.  c.  11.  p.  136. F.  Paul,  p.  86. Seckend.  I.
Hi.  256.

374  CHARLES  V.  [1541.

possession  of  all  the  privileges  which  they  had  ever
enjoyed.8

Affairs  of  Extraordinary  as  these  concessions  may  ap-
Hungary.  pear,  the  situation  of  the  emperor's  affairs  at
this  juncture  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  grant  them.
He  foresaw  a  rupture  with  France  to  be  not  only  un-
avoidable, but  near  at  hand,  and  durst  not  give  any  such
cause  of  disgust  or  fear  to  the  Protestants,  as  might
force  them,  in  self-defence,  to  court  the  protection  of
the  French  king,  from  whom,  at  present,  they  were
much  alienated.  The  rapid  progress  of  the  Turks  in
Hungary,  was  a  more  powerful  and  urgent  motive  to
that  moderation  which  Charles  discovered.  A  great
revolution  had  happened  in  that  kingdom ;  John  Zapol
Scsepus  having  chosen,  as  has  been  related,  rather  to
possess  a  tributary  kingdom,  than  to  renounce  the  royal
dignity  to  which  he  had  been  accustomed,  had,  by  the
assistance  of  his  mighty  protector  Solyman,  wrested
from  Ferdinand  a  great  part  of  the  country,  and  left  him
only  the  precarious  possession  of  the  rest.  But  being
a  prince  of  pacific  qualities,  the  frequent  attempts  of
Ferdinand,  or  of  his  partisans  among  the  Hungarians,
to  recover  what  they  had  lost,  greatly  disquieted  him ;
and  the  necessity  on  these  occasions  of  calling  in  the
Turks,  whom  he  considered  and  felt  to  be  his  masters
rather  than  auxiliaries,  was  hardly  less  mortifying.  In
order,  therefore,  to  avoid  these  distresses,  as  well  as  to
secure  quiet  and  leisure  for  cultivating  the  arts  and  en-
A  D  J°y*n£  amusements  in  which  he  delighted,  he  se-
"'  cretly  came  to  an  agreement  with  his  competitor,
on  this  condition : — That  Ferdinand  should  acknow-
ledge him  as  king  of  Hungary,  and  leave  him,  during
life,  the  unmolested  possession  of  that  part  of  the  king-
dom now  in  his  power  ;  but  that,  upon  his  demise,  the
sole  right  of  the  whole  should  devolve  upon  Ferdinand.11

8  Sleid.  283. Seckend.  366. Dumont  Corps  Diplom.  iv.  p.  ii.  p.  210.
h  Istuanhaffii  Hist.  Hung.  lib.  xii.  p.  135.

BOOK VI.  375

As  John  had  never  been  married,  and  was  then  far  ad-
vanced in  life,  the  terms  of  the  contract  seemed  very
favourable  to  Ferdinand.  But,  soon  after,  some  of  the
Hungarian  nobles,  solicitous  to  prevent  a  foreigner  from
ascending  their  throne,  prevailed  on  John  to  put  an  end
to  a  long  celibacy,  by  marrying  Isabella,  the  daughter  of
Death  of  Sigismond,  king  of  Poland.  John  had  the  satis-
of  Huo-8  faction,  before  his  death,  which  happened  within
sai>  less  than  a  year  after  his  marriage,  to  see  a  son
born  to  inherit  his  kingdom.  To  him,  without  regarding
his  treaty  with  Ferdinand,  which  he  considered,  no
doubt,  as  void,  upon  an  event  not  foreseen  when  it  was
concluded,  he  bequeathed  his  crown ;  appointing  the
queen  and  George  Martinuzzi,  bishop  of  Waradin,
guardians  of  his  son,  and  regents  of  the  kingdom.  The
greater  part  of  the  Hungarians  immediately  acknow-
ledged the  young  prince  as  king,  to  whom,  in  memory
of  the  founder  of  their  monarchy,  they  gave  the  name  of
Stephen.1

Ferdinand's  Ferdinand,  though  extremely  disconcerted  by
obtain  the  ^s  unexpected  event,  resolved  not  to  abandon
crown.  tne  kingdom  which  he  flattered  himself  with
having  acquired  by  his  compact  with  John.  He  sent
ambassadors  to  the  queen  to  claim  possession,  and  to
offer  the  province  of  Transylvania  as  a  settlement  for
her  son,  preparing,  at  the  same  time,  to  assert  his  right
by  force  of  arms.  But  John  had  committed  the  care  of
his  son  to  persons  who  had  too  much  spirit  to  give  up
the  crown  tamely,  and  who  possessed  abilities  sufficient
to  defend  it.  The  queen,  to  all  the  address  peculiar  to
her  own  sex,  added  a  masculine  courage,  ambition  and
Character  magnanimity.  Martinuzzi,  who  had  raised
of  Marti- r  himself  from  the  lowest  rank  in  life  to  his  pre-
nuzzL  sent  dignity  ?  was  one  of  those  extraordinary
men,  who,  by  the  extent  as  well  as  variety  of  their  ta-
lents, are  fitted  to  act  a  superior  part  in  bustling  and

»  Jovii  Hist.  Lib.  xxxix.  p.  239,  a,  &c.

376  CHARLES V.  [1541.

factious  times.  In  discharging  the  functions  of  his  ec-
clesiastical office,  he  put  on  the  semblance  of  an  humble
and  austere  sanctity.  In  civil  transactions  he  discovered
industry,  dexterity,  and  boldness.  During  war  he  laid
aside  the  cassock,  and  appeared  on  horseback  with  his
scimitar  and  buckler,  as  active,  as  ostentatious,  and  as
gallant,  as  any  of  his  countrymen.  Amidst  all  these
different  and  contradictory  forms  which  he  could  assume,
an  insatiable  desire  of  dominion  and  authority  was  con-
spicuous. From  such  persons  it  was  obvious  what  an-
swer Ferdinand  had  to  expect.  He  soon  perceived  that
he  must  depend  on  arms  alone  for  recovering  Hungary.
Having  levied,  for  this  purpose,  a  considerable  body
of  Germans,  whom  his  partisans  among  the  Hungarians
joined  with  their  vassals,  he  ordered  them  to  march  into
that  part  of  the  kingdom  which  adhered  to  Stephen.
Martinuzzi,  unable  to  make  head  against  such  a  power-
ful army  in  the  field,  satisfied  himself  with  holding  out
the  towns,  all  of  which,  especially  Buda,  the  place  of
greatest  consequence,  he  provided  with  every  thing  ne-
Caiis  in  cessary  for  defence  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  he
the  Turks.  sent  ambassadors  to  Solyman,  beseeching  him
to  extend  towards  the  son  the  same  imperial  protection
which  had  so  long  maintained  the  father  on  his  throne.
The  sultan,  though  Ferdinand  used  his  utmost  endea-
vours to  thwart  this  negotiation,  and  even  offered  to
accept  of  the  Hungarian  crown  on  the  same  ignomini-
ous condition  of  paying  tribute  to  the  Ottoman  Porte,
by  which  John  had  held  it,  saw  such  prospects  of  advan-
tage from  espousing  the  interest  of  the  young  king,  that
he  instantly  promised  him  his  protection ;  and  command-
ing one  army  to  advance  forthwith  towards  Hungary,
he  himself  followed  with  another.  Meanwhile  the  Ger-
mans, hoping  to  terminate  the  war  by  the  reduction  of
a  city  in  which  the  king  and  his  mother  were  shut  up,
had  formed  the  siege  of  Buda.  Martinuzzi,  having
drawn  thither  the  strength  of  the  Hungarian  nobility,

1541.]  BOOK VI.  377

defended  the  town  with- such  courage  and  skill,  as  al-
lowed the  Turkish  forces  time  to  come  up  to  its  relief.
They  instantly  attacked  the  Germans,  weakened  by  fa-
tigue, diseases,  and  desertion,  and  defeated  them  with
great  slaughter.1"

Soiyman's  Solyman  soon  after  joined  his  victorious
Z8secon-  troop's,  and  being  weary  of  so  many  expensive
expeditions  undertaken  in  defence  of  dominions
which  were  not  his  own,  or  being  unable  to  resist  this
alluring  opportunity  of  seizing  a  kingdom,  while  pos-
sessed by  an  infant,  under  the  guardianship  of  a  woman
and  a  priest,  he  allowed  interested  considerations  to  tri-
umph with  too  much  facility  over  the  principles  of  honour
and  the  sentiments  of  humanity.  What  he  planned
ungenerously,  he  obtained  by  fraud.  Having  prevailed
on  the  queen  to  send  her  son,  whom  he  pretended  to
be  desirous  of  seeing,  into  his  camp,  and  having,  at  the
same  time,  invited  the  chief  of  the  nobility  to  an  enter-
tainment there,  while  they,  suspecting  no  treachery,
gave  themselves  up  to  the  mirth  and  jollity  of  the  feast,
a  select  band  of  troops,  by  the  sultan's  orders,  seized
one  of  the  gates  of  Buda.  Being  thus  master  of  the  ca-
pital, of  the  king's  person,  and  of  the  leading  men  among
the  nobles,  he  gave  orders  to  conduct  the  queen,  together
with  her  son,  to  Transylvania,  which  province  he  allott-
ed to  them,  and  appointing  a  bashaw  to  preside  in  Buda
with  a  large  body  of  soldiers,  annexed  Hungary  to  the
Ottoman  empire.  The  tears  and  complaints  of  the  un-
happy queen  had  no  influence  to  change  his  purpose,
nor  could  Martinuzzi  either  resist  his  absolute  and  un-
controllable command,  or  prevail  on  him  to  recall  it.1

Before  the  account  of  this  violent  usurpation

Ferdinand's  r

overtures  to  reached  Ferdinand,  he  was  so  unlucky  as  to

have  dispatched  other  ambassadors  to  Solyman

with  a  fresh  representation  of  his  right  to  the  crown  of

k  Istuanhaffii  Hist.  Hung.  lib.  xiv.  p.  150.
1  Ibid,  lib,  xiv.  p.  56. Jovii  Histor.  lib.  xxxix.  p.  2476,  &c.

378  CHARLES  V.  [1541.

Hungary,  as  well  as  a  renewal  of  his  former  overture  to
hold  the  kingdom  of  the  Ottoman  Porte,  and  to  pay  for
it  an  annual  tribute.  This  ill-timed  proposal  was  re-
jected with  scorn.  The  sultan,  elated  with  success,  and
thinking  that  he  might  prescribe  what  terms  he  pleased
to  a  prince  who  voluntarily  proffered  conditions  so  un-
becoming his  own  dignity,  declared  that  he  would  not
suspend  the  operations  of  war,  unless  Ferdinand  in-
stantly evacuated  all  the  towns  which  he  still  held  in
Hungary,  and  consented  to  the  imposition  of  a  tribute
upon  Austria,  in  order  to  reimburse  the  sums  which  his
presumptuous  invasion  of  Hungary  had  obliged  the
Ottoman  Porte  to  expend  in  defence  of  that  kingdom."1
In  this  state  were  the  affairs  of  Hungary.  As  the
unfortunate  events  there  had  either  happened  before
the  dissolution  of  the  diet  of  Ratisbon,  or  were'  dreaded
at  that  time,  Charles  saw  the  danger  of  irritating  and
inflaming  the  minds  of  the  Germans,  while  a  formida-
ble enemy  was  ready  to  break  into  the  empire;  and
perceived  that  he  could  not  expect  any  vigorous  assist-
ance either  towards  the  recovery  of  Hungary,  or  the
defence  of  the  Austrian  frontier,  unless  he  courted  and
satisfied  the  Protestants.  By  the  concessions  which
have  been  mentioned,  he  gained  this  point,  and  such
liberal  supplies  both  of  men  and  money  were  voted  for
carrying  on  the  war  against  the  Turks,  as  left  him  un-
der little  anxiety  about  the  security  of  Germany  dur-
ing the  next  campaign.0

Emperor  Immediately  upon  the  conclusion  of  the  diet,
vmts  itay.  ^e  emperor  set  out  £or  Jta]y.  As  he  passed

through  Lucca  he  had  a  short  interview  with  the  pope ;
but  nothing  could  be  concluded  concerning  the  proper
method  of  composing  the  religious  disputes  in  Germany,
between  two  princes,  whose  views  and  interests  with
regard  to  that  matter  were  at  this  juncture  so  opposite.
The  pope's  endeavours  to  remove  the  causes  of  discord

«  Istuanhaffii  Hist.  Hung,  lib,  xiv.  p.  158.  »  Sleid.  283.

1541.]  BOOK  VI.  379

between  Charles  and  Francis,  and  to  extinguish  those
mutual  animosities  which  threatened  to  break  out  sud-
denly into  open  hostility,  were  not  more  successful.

The  emperor's  thoughts  were  bent  so  entirely,
-at  that  time,  on  the  great  enterprise  which  he
had  concerted  against  Algiers,  that  he  listened
with  little  attention  to  the  pope's  schemes  or
overtures,  and  hastened  to  join  his  army  and  fleet.0

Algiers  still  continued  in  that  state  of  dependence  on
the  Turkish  empire  to  which  Barbarossa  had  subjected
it.  Ever  since  he,  as  captain  bashaw,  commanded  the
Ottoman  fleet,  Algiers  had  been  governed  by  Hascen-
Aga,  a  renegado  eunuch,  who,  by  passing  through
every  station  in  the  corsair's  service,  had  acquired  such
experience  in  war,  that  he  was  well  fitted  for  a  station
which  required  a  man  of  tried  and  daring  courage.
Hascen,  in  order  to  shew  how  well  he  deserved  that
dignity,  carried  on  his  piratical  depredations  against
the  Christian  states  with  amazing  activity,  and  outdid,
if  possible,  Barbarossa  himself  in  boldness  and  cruelty.
The  commerce  of  the  Mediterranean  was  greatly  inter-
rupted by  his  cruisers,  and  such  frequent  alarms  given
to  the  coast  of  Spain,  that  there  was  a  necessity  of
erecting  watch-towers  at  proper  distances,  and  of  keep-
ing guards  constantly  on  foot,  in  order  to  descry  the
approach  of  his  squadrons,  and  to  protect  the  inhabi-
tants from  their  descents.p  Of  this  the  emperor  had
received  repeated  and  clamorous  complaints  from  his
subjects,  who  represented  it  as  an  enterprise  correspond-
ing to  his  power,  and  becoming  his  humanity,  to  re-
duce Algiers,  which,  since  the  conquest  of  Tunis,  was
the  common  receptacle  of  all  the  freebooters;  and  to
exterminate  that  lawless  race,  the  implacable  enemies
of  the  Christian  name.  Moved  partly  by  their  entrea-
ties, and  partly  allured  by  the  hope  of  adding  to  the
glory  which  he  had  acquired  by  his  last  expedition  into

0  Sandov.  Hist.  torn.  ii.  298.  f  Jovii  Hist.  K  xf.  p.  266.

380  CHARLES  V.  [1541.

Africa,  Charles,  before  he  left  Madrid,  in  his  way  to
the  Low  Countries,  had  issued  orders  both  in  Spain  and
Italy  to  prepare  a  fleet  and  army  for  this  purpose. No
change  in  circumstances,  since  that  time,  could  divert
him  from  this  resolution,  or  prevail  on  him  to  turn  his
arms  towards  Hungary; though  the  success of  the
Turks  in  that  country  seemed  more  immediately  to  re-
quire his  presence  there ;  though  many  of  his  most  faith-
ful adherents  in  Germany  urged  that  the  defence  of  the
empire  ought  to  be  his  first  and  peculiar  care ;  though
such  as  bore  him  no  good-will  ridiculed  his  preposte-
rous conduct  in  flying  from  an  enemy  almost  at  hand,
that  he  might  go  in  quest  of  a  remote  and  more  ignoble
foe. But  to  attack  the  sultan  in  Hungary,  how  splen-
did soever  that  measure  might  appear,  was  an  under-
taking which  exceeded  his  power,  and  was  not  consis-
tent with  his  interest. To  draw  troops  out  of  Spain  or
Italy,  to  march  them  into  a  country  so  distant  as  Hun-
gary, to  provide  the  vast  apparatus  necessary  for  trans-
porting thither  the  artillery,  ammunition,  and  baggage
of  a  regular  army,  and  to  push  the  war  in  that  quarter,
where  there  was  little  prospect  of  bringing  it  to  an  issue
during  several  campaigns,  were  undertakings  so  expen-
sive and  unwieldy  as  did  not  correspond  with  the  low
condition  of  the  emperor's  treasury. While  his  princi-
pal force  was  thus  employed,  his  dominions  in  Italy  and
the  Low  Countries  must  have  lain  open  to  the  French
king,  who  would  not  have  allowed  such  a  favourable
opportunity of  attacking  them to go  unimproved.
Whereas  the  African  expedition,  the  preparations  for
which  were  already  finished,  arid  almost  the  whole  ex-
pense of  it  defrayed,  would  depend  upon  a  single  ef-
fort ;  and  besides  the  security  and  satisfaction  which
the  success  of  it  must  give  his  subjects,  would  detain
him  during  so  short  a  space,  that  Francis  could  hardly
take  advantage  of  his  absence,  to  invade  his  dominions
in  Europe.

1541.]  BOOK VI.  381

His  prepa- On  all  these  accounts,  Charles  adhered  to  his
first  plan,  and  with  such  determined  obstinacy,
that  he  paid  no  regard  to  the  pope,  who  advised,  or  to
Andrew  Doria,  who  conjured  him  not  to  expose  his
whole  armament  to  almost  unavoidable  destruction,  by
venturing  to  approach  the  dangerous  coast  of  Algiers
at  such  an  advanced  season  of  the  year,  and  when  the
autumnal  winds  were  so  violent. Having  embarked  on
board  Doria's  galleys  at  Porto  Venere  in  the  Genoese
territories,  he  soon  found  that  this  experienced  sailor
had  not  judged  wrong  concerning  the  element  with
which  he  was  so  well  acquainted;  for  such  a  storm
arose  that  it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  and  danger
he  reached  Sardinia,  the  place  of  general  rendezvous.
But  as  his  courage  was  undaunted,  and  his  temper  often
inflexible,  neither  the  remonstrances  of  the  pope  and
Doria,  nor  the  danger  to  which  he  had  already  been
exposed  by  disregarding  their  advice,  had  any  other
effect  than  to  confirm  him  in  his  fatal  resolution. The
force,  indeed,  which  he  had  collected  was  such  as  might
have  inspired  a  prince  less  adventurous,  and  less  confi-
dent in  his  own  schemes,  with  the  most  sanguine  hopes
of  success. It  consisted  of  twenty  thousand  foot,  and
two  thousand  horse,  Spaniards,  Italians,  and  Germans,
mostly  veterans,  together  with  three  thousand  volun-
teers, the  flower  of  the  Spanish  and  Italian  nobility,
fond  of  paying  court  to  the  emperor  by  attending  him
in  his favourite  expedition,  and  eager  to  share  in  the
glory  which  they  believed  he  was  going  to  reap ;  to
these  were  added  a  thousand  soldiers  sent  from  Malta
by  the  order  of  St.  John,  led  by  a  hundred  of  its  most
gallant  knights.

Lands  in  The  voyage  from  Majorca  to  the  African
Afnca*  coast,  was  not  less  tedious,  or  full  of  hazard,
than  that  which  he  had  just  finished.  When  he  ap-
proached the  land,  the  roll  of  the  sea,  and  vehemence
of  the  winds,  would  not  permit  the  troops  to  disem-

382  CHARLES V.  [1541.

bark.  But  at  last,  the  emperor,  seizing  a  favourable
opportunity,  landed  them  without  opposition,  not  far
from  Algiers,  and  immediately  advanced  towards  the
town.  To  oppose  this  mighty  army,  Hascen  had  only
eight  hundred  Turks,  and  five  thousand  Moors,  partly
natives  of  Africa,  and  partly  refugees  from  Granada.
He  returned,  however,  a  fierce  and  haughty  answer
when  summoned  to  surrender.  But  with  such  a  hand-
ful of  soldiers,  neither  his  desperate  courage,  nor  con-
summate skill  in  war,  could  have  long  resisted  forces
superior  to  those  which  had  defeated  Barbarossa  at  the
head  of  sixty  thousand  men,  and  which  had  reduced
Tunis,  in  spite  of  all  his  endeavours  to  save  it.
The  disas-  But  how  far  soever  the  emperor  might  think
befell  to?  himself  beyond  the  reach  of  any  danger  from
army,  fa^  enemy,  he  was  suddenly  exposed  'to  a  more
dreadful  calamity,  and  one  against  which  human  pru-
dence and  human  efforts  availed  nothing.  On  the  second
day  after  his  landing,  and  before  he  had  time  for  any
thing  but  to  disperse  some  light-armed  Arabs  who  mo-
lested his  troops  on  their  march,  the  clouds  began  to
gather,  and  the  heavens  to  appear  with  a  fierce  and
threatening  aspect.  Towards  evening,  rain  began  to  fall,
accompanied  with  violent  wind;  and  the  rage  of  the  tem-
pest increasing  during  the  night,  the  soldiers,  who  had
brought  nothing  ashore  but  their  arms,  remained  ex-
posed to  all  its  fury,  without  tents,  or  shelter,  or  cover
of  any  kind.  The  ground  was  soon  so  wet  that  they
could  not  lie  down  on  it;  their  camp,  being  in  a  low
situation,  was  overflowed  with  water,  and  they  sunk  at
every  step  to  the  ancles  in  mud;  while  the  wind  blew
with  such  impetuosity,  that,  to  prevent  their  falling,
they  were  obliged  to  thrust  their  spears  into  the  ground,
and  to  support  themselves  by  taking  hold  of  them.
Hascen  was  too  vigilant  an  officer  to  allow  an  enemy
in  such  distress  to  remain  unmolested.  About  the  dawn
of  morning,  he  sallied  out  with  soldiers,  who,  having

1541.]  BOOK VI.  383

been  screened  from  the  storm  under  their  own  roofs,
were  fresh  and  vigorous.  A  body  of  Italians,  who  were
stationed  nearest  the  city,  dispirited  and  benumbed
with  cold,  fled  at  the  approach  of  the  Turks.  The
troops  at  the  post  behind  them  discovered  greater  cou-
rage ;  but  as  the  rain  had  extinguished  their  matches,
and  wet  their  powder,  their  muskets  were  useless,  and
having  scarcely  strength  to  handle  their  other  arms,
they  were  soon  thrown  into  confusion.  Almost  the
whole  army,  with  the  emperor  himself  in  person,  was
obliged  to  advance,  before  the  enemy  could  be  re-
pulsed, who,  after  spreading  such  general  consterna-
tion, and  killing  a  considerable  number  of  men,  retired
at  last  in  good  order.

But  all  feeling  or  remembrance  of  this  loss

And  fleet.  ..  . °

and  danger  were  quickly  obliterated  by  a  more
dreadful  as  well  as  affecting  spectacle.  It  was  now
broad  day ;  the  hurricane  had  abated  nothing  of  its  vio-
lence, and  the  sea  appeared  agitated  with  all  the  rage
of  which  that  destructive  element  is  capable ;  all  the
ships,  on  which  alone  the  whole  army  knew  that  their
safety  and  subsistence  depended,  were  seen  driven  from
their  anchors,  some  dashing  against  each  other,  some
beat  to  pieces  on  the  rocks,  many  forced  ashore,  and  not
a  few  sinking  in  the  waves.  In  less  than  an  hour  fifteen
ships  of  war,  and  a  hundred  and  forty  transports  with
eight  thousand  men,  perished ;  and  such  of  the  unhappy
crews  as  escaped  the  fury  of  the  sea,  were  murdered
without  mercy  by  the  Arabs,  as  soon  as  they  reached
land.  The  emperor  stood  in  silent  anguish  and  asto-
nishment beholding  this  fatal  event,  which  at  once
blasted  all  his  hopes  of  success,  and  buried  in  the  depths
the  vast  stores  which  he  had  provided,  as  well  for
annoying  the  enemy,  as  for  subsisting  his  own  troops.
He  had  it  not  in  his  power  to  afford  them  any  other
assistance  or  relief  than  by  sending  some  troops  to  drive
away  the  Arabs,  and  thus  delivering  a  few  who  were  so

384  CHARLES  V.  [1541.

fortunate  as  to  get  ashore  from  the  cruel  fate  which  their
companions  had  met  with.  At  last  the  wind  began  to
fall,  and  to  give  some  hopes  that  as  many  ships  might
escape,  as  would  be  sufficient  to  save  the  army  from
perishing  by  famine,  and  transport  them  back  to  Europe.
But  these  were  only  hopes ;  the  approach  of  evening
covered  the  sea  with  darkness  ;  and  it  being  impossible
for  the  officers  aboard  the  ships  which  had  outlived  the
storm,  to  send  any  intelligence  to  their  companions  who
were  ashore,  they  remained  during  the  night  in  all  the
anguish  of  suspense  and  uncertainty.  Next  day  a  boat
dispatched  by  Doria,  made  shift  to  reach  land,  with
information,  that  having  weathered  out  the  storm,  to
which,  during  fifty  years'  knowledge  of  the  sea,  he  had
never  seen  any  equal  in  fierceness  and  horror,  he  had
found  it  necessary  to  bear  away  with  his  shattered  ships
to  Cape  Metafuz,  He  advised  the  emperor,  as  the  face
of  the  sky  was  still  lowering  and  tempestuous,  to  march
with  all  speed  to  that  place,  where  the  troops  could  re-
embark  with  greater  ease.

Obliged  Whatever  comfort  this  intelligence  afforded
to  retreat.  Charles,  from  being  assured  that  part  of  his  fleet
had  escaped,  was  balanced  by  the  new  cares  and  per-
plexity in  which  it  involved  him  with  regard  to  his
army.  Metafuz  was  at  least  three  days'  march  from  his
present  camp  ;  all  the  provisions  which  he  had  brought
ashore  at  his  first  landing  were  now  consumed ;  his  sol-
diers, worn  out  with  fatigue,  were  hardly  able  for  such
a  march,  even  in  a  friendly  country ;  and  being  dispi-
rited by  a  succession  of  hardships,  which  victory  itself
would  scarcely  have  rendered  tolerable,  they  were  in
no  condition  to  undergo  new  toils.  But  the  situation
of  the  army  was  such  as  allowed  not  one  moment  for
deliberation,  nor  left  it  in  the  least  doubtful  what  to
choose.  They  were  ordered  instantly  to  march,  the
wounded,  the  sick,  and  the  feeble,  being  placed  in  the
centre ;  such  as  seemed  most  vigorous  were  stationed

1541.]  60 OK  VI.  385

in  the  front  and  rear.  Then  the  sad  effects  of  what
they  had  suffered  began  to  appear  more  manifestly  than
ever,  and  new  calamities  were  added  to  all  those  which
they  had  already  endured.  Some  could  hardly  bear  the
weight  of  their  arms;  others,  spent  with  the  toil  of
forcing  their  way  through  deep  and  almost  impassable
roads,  sunk  down  and  died  ;  many  perished  by  famine,
as  the  whole  army  subsisted  chiefly  on  roots  and  berries,
or  the  flesh  of  horses,  killed  by  the  emperor's  order,  and
distributed  among  the  several  battalions ;  many  were
drowned  in  brooks ;  which  were  swoln  so  much  by  the
excessive  rains,  that  in  passing  them  they  waded  up  to
the  chin ;  not  a  few  were  killed  by  the  enemy,  who,
during  the  greatest  part  of  their  retreat,  alarmed,  ha-
rassed, and  annoyed  them  night  and  day.  At  last  they
arrived  at  Metafuz ;  and  the  weather  being  now  so  calm
as  to  restore  their  communication  with  the  fleet,  they
were  supplied  with  plenty  of  provisions,  and  cheered
with  the  prospect  of  safety.

During  this  dreadful  series  of  calamities,  the

His  forti-
tude of emperor discovered great  qualities, many of

which  a  long-continued  flow  of  prosperity  had
scarcely  afforded  him  an  opportunity  of  displaying.
He  appeared  conspicuous  for  firmness  and  constancy  of
spirit,  for  magnanimity,  fortitude,  humanity,  and  com-
passion. He  endured  as  great  hardships  as  the  meanest
soldier ;  he  exposed  his  own  person  wherever  danger
threatened  ;  he  encouraged  the  desponding ;  visited  the
sick  and  wounded  :  and  animated  all  by  his  words  and
example.  When  the  army  embarked,  he  was  among
the  last  who  left  the  shore,  although  a  body  of  Arabs
hovered  at  no  great  distance,  ready  to  fall  on  the  rear.
By  these  virtues,  Charles  atoned,  in  some  degree,  for
his  obstinacy  and  presumption  in  undertaking  an  ex-
pedition so  fatal  to  his  subjects.

Returns The  calamities  which  attended  this  unfortu-
to  Europe.  n^Q  enterprise  did  not  end  here  ;  for  no  sooner
VOL.  Jv.  2  c

386  CHARLES V.  [1541.

were  the  forces  got  on  board,  than  a  new  storm  arising,
though  less  furious  than  the  former,  scattered  the  fleet,
and  obliged  them,  separately,  to  make  towards  such
ports  in  Spain  or  Italy  as  they  could  first  reach ;  thus
spreading  the  account  of  their  disasters,  with  all  the
circumstances  of  aggravation  and  horror,  which  their
imagination,  still  under  the  influence  of  fear,  suggested.
The  emperor  himself,  after  escaping  great  dangers,  and
being  forced  into  the  port  of  Bugia  in  Africa,
where  he  was  obliged  by  contrary  winds  to  re-
main several  weeks,  arrived  at  last  in  Spain,  in  a  con-
dition very  different  from  that  in  which  he  had  returned
from  his  former  expedition  against  the  infidels.55

z  Carol.  V.  Expeditio  ad  Argyriam,  per  Nicolaum  Villagnoncin  Equitem  Rho-
dium, ap.  Scardium,  v.  ii.  365.  Jovii  Hist.  1.  xl.  p.  269,  &c.  Vera  y  Zuniga  Vida
de  Carlos  V.  p.  83.  Sandov.  Histor.  ii.  299,  &c.

END OF VOL. IV.

Printed  by  J.  F.  DOVE,  St.  John's  Square.

^v

al

m

Eftv

D
7

R7
1824

Robertson,  William
Works

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
