Rochester Knockings! (Anonymous, 1851)
======================================
Anonymous — The original 1851 pamphlet on the Rochester knockings — the movement's birth certificate. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (rochesterknockin00mcma) — 1851 pamphlet.

BF  1283
J7.R6


<  o

1^

w

f*

oV

f...  V^V     v^*V    v*^*>

^      c0.-^.*       >*\c^.\       /.^"V

*-   "M

4  o

-a

*   <v    >


V^1

ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS!

DISCOVERY

EXPLANATION

OF   THJ5

SOURCE  OF  THE  PHENOMENA  GENERALLY  KNOWN

IROCHESTEK   KNOCKINGS.

Here's   a  knocking  indeed !    *    *    *    *    *    Knock !  knock !  knock !    *    *    *    *    *

Who's  there  i'  the  name  o'  Beelzebub  ?   *    *    *   Who's  there  i'  the  devil's  name  ?

Knock  !  knock  !  knock  !

Macbeth.

BUFFALO:
GEORGE     H,    DERBY    ASD     CO.,    PUBLISHERS.

NE  W    YORK:
WM.    H.    GRAHAM    AND     CO.

d

1851.

,t>

PUBLISHER'S  NOTICE.

To  meet  the  wishes  of  many  who  have  expressed  curiosity  to  know  some-
thing further  respecting  the  exposition  of  the  Rochester  Knocking^  than  is
contained  in  the  communication  published  in  the  Buffalo  Commercial  Ad-
vertiser, February  17th,  1851,  the  undersigned  have  republished  the  edi-
torial article  contained  in  the  Buffalo  Medical  Journal,  of  March  1851,  to
which  a  few  notes  have  been  added,  and  an  appendix  containing  several  articles
relating  to  the  subject,  which  it  is  thought  will  interest  the  reader.

GEO.  H.  DERBY  &  CO.

ftW-For  Contents  see  third  page  of  Cover.  Jg£8

ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS!

DISCOVERY

EXPLANATION

SOURCE  OF  THE  PHENOMENA  GENERALLY  KNOWN

ROCHESTER   KNOCKINGS.

Here's   a  knocking   indeed  !*****    Knock  !  knock !  knock  !*****

Who's  there  i'  the  name  o'  BeeLzebub  ?    *    *    *    Who's  there  i'  the  devil's  name  ?

Knock  !  knock  I  knock  !

Macbeth.

BUFFALO :

GEORGE    H-    DERBY    AND     CO.,    PUBLISHERS.

NEW    YORK:
WM.    H.    GRAHAM    AND    CO.

1851.


tf$fr

Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1851,  by
GEORGE  H.  DERBY  &  CO.,

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  Northern  District  of  New  York.

STEAM  PRESS  OF  JEWETT,  THOMAS  &  Co.,

COMMERCIAL   ADVERTISER  OFFICE,

BUFFALO,  N.  Y.

DISCOVERY

SOURCE   OF  THE  ROCHESTER  BLOCKINGS.

Nee  Deus  intersit,  nisi  dignus  vindice  nodus,
Inciderit " —

Horace,  Epis.  ad  Pisones.

[From  the  Buffalo  McdiealJournal,  No.  for  March,  1851.]

All  our  readers  have  heard  of  the  Rochester  Knockings  that  have  occa-
sioned not  a  little  stir  in  different  parts  of  the  country  during  the  past  two
or  three  years.  The  knockings  were  first  manifested  in  a  family  of  the
name  of  Fox,  then  residing  in  a  small  town  in  the  western  part  of  this
State,  and  the  removal  of  this  family,  shortly  afterward,  to  Rochester,
whence  have  emanated  many  of  the  marvelous  stories  connected  with  the
subject,  has  secured  for  that  city  the  honor  of  forming  the  adjective  in  the
title  by  which  they  are  commonly  mentioned.  The  knockings,  however,
have  not  been  confined  to  Rochester,  but  have  been  heard  in  some  other
places.  They  accompany  members  of  the  Fox  family  in  their  peregrina-
tions, of  course,  but  we  understand  that  other  persons  than  those  belonging
to  this  family  have  assumed  to  be  media  for  similar  supernatural  manifes-
tations. (A.)

Being  regarded  by  the'  credulous  and  superstitious  as  phenomena  pro-
duced by  the  agency  of  departed  spirits,  indicating  their  presence,  and
furnishing  a  means  of  communication  with  them,  it  is  not  singular  that,
however  ridiculous  the  subject  may  seem  to  persons  of  well  balanced
minds,  to  those  of  a  different  mental  cast  it  assumes  a  different  aspect,  and
becomes  invested  with  great  interest  and  importance.  In  every  commu-
nity persons  are  to  be  found  who  are  fond  of  indulging  and  cultivating  a

4  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

love  for  the  marvelous,  and  who  are  ready  to  believe  that  a  supernatu-
ral agency  is  involved  in  whatever  transcends  their  comprehension.  Such
tendencies  are  by  no  means  found  in  connection  exclusively  with  low  intel-
lectual powers  and  small  attainments.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  not  infre-
quently the  case  that  persons  of  education,  of  reflection,  and  even  of  supe-
rior mental  endowments  in  some  respects,  are  led  astray  by  what  appeals
strongly  to  the  mental  qualities  underlying  an  unfortunate  excess  of  credu-
lity. The  chicaneries  of  mesmerism,  the  faith  inspired  by  revelations  like
those  of  Davis,  etc.,  sufficiently  attest  the  truth  of  the  remark  just  made.
We  might  also  quote,  as  illustrations,  the  transient  success  of  homoeopathy,
and  other  kindred  medical  delusions.  The  annals  of  every  age  furnish
abundance  of  examples,  showing  the  absurd  extravagances  into  which  men
may  be  led  who  allow  unrestrained  scope  to  the  imaginative  and  supersti-
tious elements  of  the  mental  constitution ;  showing,  also,  the  astonishing
extent  to  which  cunning  impostors  are  able  to  take  advantage  of  these  ele-
ments of  human  character.  Based,  as  are  the  various  delusions,  imposi-
tions, and  humbugs,  that  prove  successful,  upon  qualities  of  mind  which  it
is  not  to  be  expected  will  soon  cease  to  be  predominant  in  certain  individu-
als, albeit  science  and  knowledge  are  progressively  advancing,  and  despite
the  accumulated  lessons  of  experience,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the
future,  more  than  the  past  and  present,  will  be  devoid  of  instances  exem-
plifying human  weakness  and  folly  like  that  to  which  reference  has  been
made.  (B.)  But  to  return  to  the  Rochester  hiockings.  We  have  not  taken
pains  to  ascertain  how  extensively  belief  in  their  supernatural  character
has  prevailed.  Many  of  our  readers  are  probably  better  informed  on  this
point  than,  ourselves,  as  our  pursuits  do  not  permit  us  to  keep  up  with  the
times  in  matters  of  this  kind.  That  many  well  meaning  persons  have  been
beguiled  and  carried  away  with  this  subject,  we  know,  and  that  not  a  little
time,  money,  thought,  and  feeling,  have  been  expended  in  the  efforts  to
hold  communion,  by  rappings,  with  inhabitants  of  the  spirit  world,  is  a
fact  but  too  apparent  to  any  one  who  looks  into  newspapers.  The  impo-
sition, unfortunately,  is  not  to  be  considered  merely  a  successful  but  harm-
less experiment  on  the  exhaustless  fund  of  human  credulity.  Among  other
serious  consequences,  we  have  been  told  that  several  cases  of  insanity  have
originated  in  the  mental  excitement  occasioned  by  fancied  intercourse  with
the  spirits  of  departed  friends.

The  imposition,  which  had  already  escaped  detection  for  several  years,
would  still  find  plenty  of  dupes,  if  the  mysterious  sounds  were  to  continue
unaccounted  for.  The  absurdity  of  the  professed  spirituality  of  the  block-
ings can  undoubtedly  be  fully  proved  in  a  variety  of  modes,  but  the  only

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  5

effectual  preventive  of  the  farther  progress  of  the  humbug  is  to  determine
satisfactorily  their  nature  and  source.  To  do  this  is  to  strike  at  the  root
of  the  delusion,  by  rendering  it  as  ridiculous  as  the  explanation  is  simple.
We  are  not  aware  that  the  curious  and  (in  other  than  a  literal  sense)  strik-
ing phenomena  have  been,  as  yet,  accounted  for.  To  what  extent  they
have  been  made  the  subject  of  investigation,  by  physicians,  we  cannot  say.
As  we  are  prepared  to  unravel  the  mystery,  we  trust  our  readers  will  not
think  the  subject  unworthy  the  space  which  we  propose  to  devote  to  it,
more  especially  as  the  sounds  possess  interest  in  a  physiological  point  of
view,  apart  from  the  remarkable  imposition  to  which  they  have  been  made
subservient.

Two  members  of  the  celebrated  family  of  Rochester  knockers,  recently
made  their  debut  in  this  city,  accompanied  by  the  noisy  spirits,  and  com-
menced operations,  drawing  crowds  of  visitors,  at  a  dollar  a  head,  many  of
whom  were  impressed  with  the  wonderful  revelations  interpreted  from  the
raps,  and  several  intelligent  persons  became  converts  to  the  doctrine  of  the
spiritual  origin  of  the  sounds.  From  motives  of  curiosity  we  were  led,  with
some  of  our  colleagues,  to  pay  them  a  visit,  and,  we  must  confess,  we  were
surprised  and  puzzled  by  the  loudness  of  the  sounds,  the  apparent  eviden-
ces of  non-instrumentality  on  the  part  of  the  females,  and  the  different
directions  from  which  they  seemed  to  emanate.  Close  observation,  how-
ever, of  the  countenances  and  deportment  of  the  two  females,  led  to  the
conviction  that  the  production  of  the  sounds  involved  a  voluntary  effort  by
the  younger  sister  of  the  two — a  girl  about  seventeen  years  of  age,  the
elder  sister  (who  is  said  to  be  a  widow)  being  about  thirty-five.  The  lat-
ter was  apparently  the  managing  partner,  conducting  the  spiritual  commu-
nications, while  the  former,  it  was  clear,  was  the  performer,  i.  e.,  the  one
that  produced  the  knockings.  Assuming  the  above  as  a  point  of  departure,
by  the  process  of  reasoning  given  below,  the  diagnosis  was,  that  the  sounds
must  necessarily  be  articular.  This  conclusion,  and  the  process  by  which
it  was  arrived  at,  were  stated  to  a  number  of  persons  directly  after  the
visit.  The  question,  then,  was,  how  such  sounds  could  come  from  joints.
The  snapping  of  the  phalangal  joints  of  one  hand  by  lateral  motions  made
with  the  other  hand,  is  familiar  to  every  one.  Some  persons  have  the
power  to  produce  the  same  snapping  by  means  of  the  muscles  inserted  into
the  phalangal  bones,  without  any  aid  from  the  other  hand.  Dislocated
bones  return  to  their  place  witb  an  audible  snap,  as  all  surgeons  know.  A
patient  once  consulted  us  for  a  loud  noise  in  his  joint  produced  by  walking.
Almost  every  one  has  occasionally,  by  an  accidental  oblique  movement  of

6  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

the  lower  extremities,  caused  a  loud  report  in  the  knee  joint.  These  facts
suggested  themselves,  but  works  on  physiology,  anatomy,  and  dislocations,
were  consulted,  in  vain,  for  any  account  of  loud  noises  like  the  Rochester
knockings  originating  in  the  articulations.  While  pursuing  these  inquiries,
which  had  been  unexpectedly  provoked,  we  chanced  to  meet  with  a  person
who  said  that  his  wife  could  produce  similar  sounds.  He  did  not  then
know  in  what  way  they  were  produced;  his  wife  had,  in  jest,  kept  him  in
ignorance  on  this  point.  At  our  request  he  immediately  went  home  to
ascertain,  and  returned  with  the  information  that  the  noise  came  from  the
knee  joint,  and  that  we  were  at  liberty  to  satisfy  ourselves  with  respect  to
this  fact,  and  also  of  the  mode  in  which  they  were  produced.  Accordingly*
at  first  alone,  and  afterward  accompanied  by  Drs.  Lee  and  Coventry,  (in
concert  with  whom  the  prior  investigations  were  conducted,)  we  visited  the
lady  referred  to,  and  on  the  following  day  the  subjoined  exposition  was  com-
municated for  one  of  the  daily  papers  of  the  city.*

To  the  Editor  of  the  Commercial  Advertiser:

Curiosity  having  led  us  to  visit  the  room  at  the  Phelps  House  in  which
two  females  from  Rochester,  (Mrs.  Fish  and  Miss  Fox,)  profess  to  exhibit
striking  manifestations  of  the  spiritual  world,  by  means  of  which  commu-
nion may  be  held  with  deceased  friends,  &c,  and  having  arrived  at  a  phy-
siological explanation  of  the  phenomena,  the  correctness  of  which  has  been
demonstrated  in  an  instance  that  has  since  fallen  under  observation,  we  have
felt  that  a  public  statement  is  called  for,  which  may  perhaps  serve  to  pre-
vent further  waste  of  time,  money,  and  credulity,  (to  say  nothing  of  senti-
ment and  philosophy,)  in  connection  with  this  so  long  successful  imposition.,

The  explanation  is  reached,  almost  by  a  logical  necessity,  on  the  applica-
tion of  a  method  of  reasoning  much  resorted  to  in  the  diagnosis  of  diseases,
viz :  reasoning  by  way  of  exclusion.  It  was  reached  by  this  method  prior
to  the  demonstration  which  has  subsequently  occurred.

It  is  to  be  assumed,  first,  that  the  manifestations  are  not  to  be  regarded
as  spiritual,  provided  they  can  be  physically,  or  physiologically  accounted
for.     Immaterial  agencies  are  not  to  be  invoked  until  material  agencies

*  In  transferring  that  communication  to  our  columns,  we  have  corrected  an  error  in
the  account  of  the  displacement  of  the  joint  which  produces  the  sounds.  The  exposi-
tion was  drawn  up  hastily,  and  published  at  once,  in  order  to  check,  as  promptly  as  prac-
ticable, the  farther  progress  of  the  imposition,  and  the  mechanism  was  not  so  fully  ascer-
tained, as  it  has  been  by  subsequent  examinations.  We  will  thank  editors  of  medical
Journals  who  may  notice  this  matter  to  copy  the  anatomical  explanation  from  this  arti-
cle, and  not  from  the  newspaper,  and  to  make  the  correction  referred  to,  should  they
have  already  quoted  the  first  statement.

SOURCE    OF   THE    ROCHESTER   KNOCKINGS.  7

fail.  We  are  thus  to  exclude  spiritual  causation  in  this  stage  of  the  inves-
tigation.

Next,  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  rappings  are  not  produced  by  arti-
ficial contrivances  about  the  persons  of  the  females,  which  may  be  con-
cealed by  the  dress.  This  hypothesis  is  excluded,  because  it  is  understood
that  the  females  have  been  repeatedly  and  carefully  examined  by  lady
committees.

It  is  obvious  that  the  rappings  are  not  caused  by  machinery  attached  to
tables,  doors,  etc.,  for  they  are  heard  in  different  rooms,  and  different  parts
of  the  same  room,  in  which  the  females  are  present,  but  always  near  the
spot  where  the  females  are  stationed.  This  mechanical  hypothesis  is  then
to  be  excluded.

So  much  for  negative  evidence,  and  now  for  what  positively  relates  to
the  subject.

On  carefully  observing  the  countenances  of  the  two  females,  it  was  evi-
dent that  the  sounds  were  due  to  the  agency  of  the  younger  sister,  and
that  they  involved  an  effort  of  the  will.  She  evidently  attempted  to  con-
ceal any  indications  of  voluntary  effort,  but  in  this  she  did  not  succeed : —
a  volutary  effort  was  manifest,  and  it  was  plain  that  it  could  not  be  con-
tinued very  long  without  fatigue.

Assuming,  then,  this  positive  fact,  the  inquiry  arises,  how  can  the  will
be  exerted  to  produce  sounds  (rappings)  without  obvious  movements  of  the
body  ?  The  voluntary  muscles  are  the  only  organs  (save  those  whieh  be-
long to  the  mind  itself)  over  which  volition  can  exert  any  direct  control.
But  the  contractions  of  the  muscles  do  not,  in  the  muscles  themselves,
occasion  obvious  sounds.  The  muscles,  therefore,  to  develop  audible  vibra-
tions, must  act  upon  parts  with  which  they  are  connected.  Now,  it  was
sufficiently  clear  that  the  rappings  were  not  vocal  sounds:  these  could
not  be  produced  without  movements  of  the  respiratory  muscles,  which
would  at  once  lead  to  detection.  Hence,  excluding  vocal  sounds,  the  only
possible  source  of  the  noises  in  question,  produced,  as  we  have  seen  they
must  be,  by  voluntary  muscular  contractions,  as  in  one  or  more  of  the  mo-
vable articulations  of  the  skeleton.  From  the  anatomical  connections  of
the  voluntary  muscles,  this  explanation  remains  as  the  only  alternative.

By  an  analysis  prosecuted  in  this  manner,  we  arrive  at  the  conviction
that  the  rappings,  assuming  that  they  are  not  spiritual,  are  produced,  by
the  action  of  the  will,  through  voluntary  muscles,  upon  the  joints.  (C.)

Various  facts  may  be  cited  to  show  that  the  motion  of  joints,  under  cer-
tain circumstances,  is  adequate  to  produce  the  phenomena  of  the  rappings;

8  DISCOVERY   OF    THE

but  we  need  not  now  refer  to  these.  By  a  curious  coincidence,  after  ar-
riving at  the  above  conclusion  respecting  the  source  of  the  sounds,  an
instance  has  fallen  under  our  observation,  which  demonstrates  the  fact,  that
noises  precisely  identical  with  the  spiritual  rappings  may  be  produced  in
the  knee  joint.

A  highly  respectable  lady  of  this  city,  possesses  the  ability  to  develope
sounds  similar,  both  in  character  and  degree,  to  those  professedly  elicited
by  the  Rochester  imposters,  from  the  spiritual  world.  We  have  witnessed
the  production  of  the  sounds  by  the  lady  referred  to,  and  have  been  per-
mitted to  examine  the  mechanism  by  which  they  are  produced.  Without
entering,  at  this  time,  into  a  minute  anatomical  and  physiological  explana-
tion, it  is  sufficient  to  state  that,  owing  to  relaxation  of  the  ligaments  of  the
knee  joint,  by  means  of  muscular  action  and  pressure  of  the  lower  extre-
mity against  a  point  of  resistance,  the  large  bone  of  the  leg  (the  tibia)  is
moved  laterally  upon  the  lower  surface  of  the  thigh  bone  (the  femur)
giving  rise,  in  fact,  to  partial  lateral  dislocation.  This  is  effected  by  an  act
of  the  will,  without  any  obvious  movement  of  the  limb,  occasioning  a  loud
noise,  and  the  return  of  the  bone  to  its  place  is  attended  by  a  second  sound.
Most  of  the  Rochester  rappings  are  also  double.  It  is  practicable,  how-
ever, to  produce  a  single  sound,  by  moving  the  bone  out  of  place  with  the
requisite  quickness  and  force  and  allowing  it  to  slide  slowly  back,  in  which
case  it  is  noiseless.

The  visible  vibrations  of  articles  in  the  room  situated  near  the  operator,
occur,  if  the  limb,  or  any  portion  of  the  body,  is  in  contact  with  them  at
the  time  the  sounds  are  produced.  The  force  of  the  semi- dislocation  of
the  bone  is  sufficient  to  occasion  distinct  jarring  of  doors,  tables,  etc.,  if  in
contact.  The  intensity  of  the  sound  may  be  varied  in  proportion  to  the
force  of  the  muscular  contractions,  and  this  will  render  the  apparent  source
of  the  rappings  more  or  less  distinct.

We  have  witnessed  repetitions  of  experiments  in  the  case  just  referred
to,  sufficient  to  exhibit  to  us  all  the  phenomena  of  sounds  belonging  to  the
Rochester  rappings,  and  without  further  explanations  at  this  time,  we  ap-
pend our  names  in  testimony  of  the  facts  contained  in  the  foregoing  hastily
penned  exposition.*

University  )  AUSTIN  FLINT,  M.  D.,
of        V  CHARLES  A.  LEE,  M.  D.,

Feb.  17,  1851.  Buffalo.    )  C.  B.  COVENTRY,  M.  D.

*  The  object  in  publishing  the  above  communication  was  to  prevent  (if  possible)  the
farther  progress  of  what,  if  the  facts  set  forth  in  the  exposition  are  credited,  cannot
but  be  deemed  a  gross  and  pernicious,  as  well  as  a  remarkable  imposition.  Fully
satisfied  of  the  verity  of  the  explanation  submitted,  the  subscribers  did  not  hesitate  to

SOURCE    OF   THE    ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  9

The  disclosure  announced  in  the  foregoing  communication  occasioned
not  a  little  excitement  among  those  who  had  become  interested  in  the
knochings.  The  correctness  of  the  explanation  was  not  only  called  in
question  by  these,  but  was  doubted  by  many  who  had  not  hesitated  to
look  upon  the  matter  as  a  gross  deception.  The  Rochester  Ladies,  of
course,  stoutly  denied  the  imputation  that  the  sounds  proceeded  from  the
joints,  or  were  produced  by  any  agency  of  theirs,  and,  the  next  day,  they
inserted  in  the  daily  papers  the  following  card: — (D.)

ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.

To  Docts.  Flint,  Coventry  and  Lee:

Gents, — We  observe  by  a  communication  in  the  Commercial  Adverti-
ser, that  you  have  recently  made  an  examination  of  a  highly  respectable
lady  of  this  city,  by  which  you  have  discovered  the  secret  of  the  "  Roches-
ter Imposters."  As  we  do  not  feel  willing  to  rest  under  the  imputation  of
being  imposters,  we  are  very  willing  to  undergo  a  proper  and  decent
examination,  provided  we  can  select  three  male  and  three  female  friends
who  shall  be  present  on  the  occasion.

We  can  assure  the  public  that  there  is  no  one  more  anxious  than  our-
selves to  discover  the  origin  of  these  mysterious  manifestations.  If  they
can  be  explained  on  "  anatomical"  and  "  physiological"  principles,  it  is  due
to  the  world  that  the  investigation  be  made,  and  that  the  "  humbug  "  be
exposed.  As  there  seems  to  be  much  interest  manifested  by  the  public
on  this  subject,  we  would  suggest  that  as  early  an  investigation  as  is  con-
venient would  be  acceptable  to  the  undersigned.

Ann  L.  Fish.
Margaretta  Fox.

The  invitation  thus  proffered  was  accepted  by  those  to  whom  it  was  ad-
dressed, and  on  the  following  evening,  by  appointment,  the  examination
took  place.  After  a  short  delay,  the  two  Rochester  females  being  seated
on  a  sofa,  the  knockings  commenced,  and  were  continued  for  some  time  in
loud  tones  and  rapid  succession.  The  "  spirits"  were  then  asked  "  whether
they  would  manifest  themselves  during  the  sitting  and  respond  to  inter-
rogatories."    A  series  of  raps  followed,  which  were  interpreted  into  a  re-

treat the  imposition  as  such,  and  to  call  it  by  its  right  name.  "  Good  motives  and  justi-
fiable ends"  seemed  to  require  this  course.  In  so  doing,  however,  we  have  no  desire
to  judge,  or  make  war  with  individuals.  We  leave  those  concerned  in  the  imposition
to  the  tribunal  of  conscience.

The  communication  is  dated  from  the  University  of  Buffalo.  It  is  hardly  necessary
to  say,  that,  by  this,  it  was  intended,  simply,  to  express  to  those  readers  to  whom  the
names  of  the  subscribers  were  unknown,  the  fact  that  they  are  connected  with  the
University.  It  was  not  expected  that  any  one  would  infer  the  exposition  to  have  ema-
nated from  the  University,  or  that  the  University  could  in  any  way  be  compromised  by
it.  This  statement  is  made  to  avoid  an  occasion  for  misconception.  For  the  merit  or
demerit  of  the  exposition,  the  persons  whose  names  are  thereto  appended  are  alone  re-
sponsible.

10  DISCOVERY    OF    THE

ply  in  the  affirmative.  The  two  females  were  then  seated  upon  two  chairs
placed  near  together,  their  heels  resting  on  cushions,  their  lower  limbs
extended,  with  the  toes  elevated  and  the  feet  separated  from  each  other.
The  object  in  this  experiment  was  to  secure  a  position  in  which  the  liga-
ments of  the  knee  joint  should  be  made  tense,  and  no  opportunity  offered
to  make  pressure  with  the  foot.  We  were  pretty  well  satisfied  that  the
displacement  of  the  bones  requisite  for  the  sounds  could  not  be  effected
unless  a  fulcrum  were  obtained  by  resting  one  foot  upon  the  other,  or  on
some  resisting  body.

The  company,  seated  in  a  semi-circle,  quietly  waited  for  the  "  manifesta-
tions" for  more  than  half  an  hour,  but  the  "  spirits,"  generally  so  noisy,
were  now  dumb.  The  position  of  the  younger  sister  was  then  changed  to
a  sitting  posture,  with  the  lower  limbs  extended  on  the  sofa,  the  elder  sis-
ter sitting,  in  the  customary  way,  at  the  other  extremity  of  the  sofa.  The
"  spirits"  did  not  choose  to  signify  their  presence  under  these  circumstan-
ces, although  repeatedly  requested  so  to  do.  The  latter  experiment  went
to  confirm  the  belief  that  the  younger  sister  alone  produces  the  rappings.
These  experiments  were  continued  until  the  females  themselves  admitted
that  it  was  useless  to  continue  them  longer  at  that  time,  with  any  expecta-
tion of  manifestations  being  made.

In  resuming  the  usual  position  on  the  sofa,  the  feet  resting  on  the  floor,
hiockings  very  soon  began  to  be  heard.  It  was  then  suggested  that  some
other  experiment  be  made.  This  was  assented  to,  notwithstanding  the  first
was,  in  our  minds,  amply  conclusive.  The  experiment  selected  was,  that  the
knees  of  the  two  females  should  be  firmly  grasped,  with  the  hands  so  applied
that  any  lateral  movement  of  the  bones  would  be  perceptible  to  the  touch.
The  pressure  was  made  through  the  dress.  It  was  not  expected  to  prevent
the  sounds,  but  to  ascertain  if  they  proceeded  from  the  knee  joint.  It  is  ob-
vious that  this  experiment  was  necessarily  far  less  demonstrative,  to  an  ob-
server, than  the  first,  because  if  the  bones  were  distinctly  felt  to  move,  the
only  evidence  of  this  fact  would  be  the  testimony  of  those  whose  hands
were  in  contact  with  them.  The  hands  were  kept  in  apposition  for  several
minutes  at  a  time,  and  the  experiment  repeated  frequently,  for  the  course
of  an  hour,  or  more,  with  negative  results :  that  is  to  say,  there  were  plenty
of  raps  when  the  knees  were  not  held,  and  none  when  the  hands  were  ap-
plied save  once,  as  the  pressure  was  intentionally  somewhat  relaxed.  (Dr.
Lee  being  the  holder,)  two  or  three  faint,  single  raps  were  heard,  and  Dr.
Lee  immediately  averred  that  the  motion  of  the  bone  was  plainly  percep-
tible to  him.     The  experiment  of  seizing  the  knees  as  quickly  as  possible

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  11

when  the  knockings  first  commenced,  was  tried  several  times,  but  always
with  the  effect  of  putting  an  immediate  quietus  upon  the  manifestations.

The  proposition  to  bandage  the  knees  was  then  discussed.  This  experi-
ment was  objected  to,  on  the  part  of  the  friends  of  the  females,  unless  we
would  concede  that  it  should  be  an  exclusive  test  experiment.  We  were
not  prepared  with  appliances  to  render  the  limb  immovable,  and  therefore
declined  to  have  it  considered  such  a  test.  This  was  the  experiment  anti-
cipated, and  one  which,  we  presume,  the  females  thought  would  end  in
their  triumph.  A  bandage  applied  above  and  below  the  patella,  admitting
of  flexion  of  the  limb,  will  probably  not  prevent  the  displacement,  as  we
have  but  little  doubt  had  been  ascertained  by  the  Rochester  females  be-
fore an  examination  was  invited.  Should  it  become  necessary  to  repeat
experiments  in  other  places,  in  furtherance  of  the  explosion  of  the  imposi-
tion, we  would  suggest  that  the  bandage  be  not  relied  upon.  Plenty  of
roller,  with  lateral  splints,  firmly  applied,  so  as  to  keep  the  limbs  extended,
and  render  the  joints  immovable,  would  doubtless  succeed  in  arresting
sounds  so  far  as  they  involve  the  knee  joint.  It  will  be  observed  that,  in
our  exposition,  we  do  not  claim  that  this  joint  is  exclusively  the  source  of
sounds,  and  had  our  experiments,  which  were  first  directed  to  this  joint,
failed,  we  should  have  proceeded  to  interrogate,  experimentally,  other  arti-
culations. This,  however,  as  the  reader  will  note,  seemed  quite  unneces-
sary. The  conclusion  seemed  clear  that  the  Rochester  knockings  emanate
from  the  knee  joint.

Since  the  exposition  was  published,  we  have  heard  of  several  cases  in
which  movements  of  the  bones,  entering  into  other  articulations,  are  pro-
duced by  muscular  effort,  giving  rise  to  sounds.  We  have  heard  of  a  per-
son who  can  develop  knockings  from  the  ankle,  of  several  who  can  produce
noises  with  the  joints  of  the  toes  and  fingers,  of  one  who  can  render  loudly
audible  the  shoulder,  and  another  the  hip  joint.  We  have  also  heard  of
two  additional  cases  in  which  sounds  are  produced  by  the  knee  joint.  We
have  not,  as  yet,  had  an  opportunity  to  make  a  personal  examination  in
any  of  these  cases,  or  to  hear  the  sounds.  The  exposure  of  the  imposition
opens  a  new  and  curious  field  of  physiological  inquiry,  and  we  would  com-
mend the  subject  to  those  who  have  leisure  and  facilities  for  prosecuting
it.  Articular,  as  well  as  articulated  sounds,  seem  to  claim  an  investigation
which  they  have  not  heretofore  received.  Had  the  facts  which  the  detec-
tion of  this  trick  has  developed,  been  contained  in  anatomical  or  physiolo-
gical treatises,  the  progress  of  the  deception  would  have  been  arrested  long
ere  this.     Doubtless  these  facts  are  not  entirely  new — they  must  have  been

12  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

observed  in  other  cases,  the  histories  of  which  have  escaped  record.  That
sounds  so  loud  should  originate  in  the  way  we  have  ascertained  that  they
are  produced,  would  surprise  even  the  medical  listener,  and  perhaps  seem
almost  incredible.  It  is  readily  conceivable  how,  to  other  than  medical  lis-
teners, the  phenomena  should  appear,  not  only  inexplicable,  but  in  a  high
degree  mysterious.  The  remark  was  made  by  many,  after  the  explanation
was  published,  that  it  required  almost  as  much  stretch  of  the  imagination  to
believe  that  such  sounds  could  be  produced  in  joints,  as  that  they  involved
a  supernatural  agency.  The  anatomical  conformation  of  the  knee  joint  is
evidently  most  favorable  for  the  production  of  loud  sounds  by  displacement.
The  broad  articular  surfaces  offer  considerable  space  for  lateral  motion,
provided  the  ligaments  are  sufficiently  relaxed,  and  the  requisite  motor
force  is  properly  applied.  The  relative  shortness  of  the  outer  condyl  of
the  femur  favors  the  outward  displacement,  and  true  dislocation  in  this
direction  would  be  likely  to  occur,  were  it  not  for  the  numerous  strong  liga-
ments which  render  this  the  strongest  articulation  in  the  body.  Owing  to
the  great  protection  afforded  by  the  ligaments  against  injuries,  to  which,
from  the  position  and  relations  of  this  joint,  it  is  particularly  exposed,  dislo-
cations are,  in  fact,  very  rare  in  their  occurrence.  The  displacement  oc-
casioning the  knockings  is  sufficient  to  remove  the  ridge  of  bone  which
divides  the  two  articular  surfaces  of  the  upper  extremity  of  the  tibia,  from
its  situation  in  the  sulcus  between  the  condyls  of  the  femur,  and  to  carry
it,  more  or  less,  upon  the  surface  of  the  outer  condyl.  This  movement
gives  rise  to  the  first  sound,  and  the  return  of  the  bone  to  its  place  causes
the  second  sound,  which,  in  the  Rochester  knockings,  generally  follows
quickly  upon  the  first.  We  are  unable  to  explain  fully  the  precise  mecha-
nism by  which  the  displacement  is  effected.  In  the  case  of  the  lady  of
this  city  who  reproduces  the  spiritual  rappings,  the  bone  slips  outward
with  very  slight  voluntary  effort,  and  it  is  not  easy,  from  her  own  account,
or  by  manual  exploration,  to  determine  the  particular  muscles  that  are
brought  to  bear  upon  the  joint.  In  this  case  the  displacement  occasionally
occurs,  in  bending  the  limb,  when  no  effort  is  made  to  produce  it,  but,  under
these  circumstances,  it  is  not  generally  attended  with  much  noise.  The
bone  returns  to  its  place  directly  the  muscular  effort  which  has  produced
the  displacement  ceases.  To  develop  sound  the  displacement  must  take
place  with  a  certain  quickness  and  force,  and  the  latter  may  be  graduated,
in  some  measure,  at  will.  A  fulcrum  for  the  foot  appears  also  to  be  requi-
site, as  already  stated.  The  lady  just  referred  to  is  now  able  to  produce
the  sounds  in  one  knee  only.     In  early  life  she  had  this  power  in  both

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  13

knees.  From  the  number  and  volume  of  sounds  produced,  it  is  evident
that  both  the  knees  of  the  Rochester  rappers  now  in  this  city  are  endowed
with  sonorous  powers.  It  might  be  supposed  that  the  frequent  repeti-
tions of  these  displacements  would  produce,  after  a  time,  irritation  and  dis-
ease within  the  joint.  In  the  case  of  the  lady  of  this  city  they  are  fol-
lowed by  some  soreness,  but  in  early  life,  when  she  was  in  the  habit  of
practising  them  daily,  more  or  less,  she  experienced  no  pain,  nor  any  un-
pleasant consequences,  and  she  was  then  able  to  develop  louder  sounds
than  she  can  at  present.  How  rare  are  instances  of  that  peculiarity  in  the
condition  of  the  joint,  which  admits  of  the  audible  phenomena,  that  have
given  origin  to  the  new  science  of  spiritual  Tappings,  we  are  unable  to  say.
That  they  are  not  common,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  the  Rochester
imposture  has  eluded  detection  so  long;  and  that  instances  of  a  similar
idiosyncrasy  do  occur,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  several  rappers  have  ap-
peared in  different  parts  of  the  country.  It  is  a  sad  commentary  on  hu-
man nature,  that  the  latter  should  prefer  to  have  adopted,  and  carried  on,
the  imposition,  when  they  discovered  their  peculiar  power,  rather  than  dis-
close the  secret,  and  thus  put  a_stop  to  the  progress  of  the  deception.
Mrs.  P.,  the  lady  of  this  city,  to  whom  we  are  much  indebted  for  the
means  of  establishing  the  exposure  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  public,  thus,
deserves  honorable  mention,  and  the  thanks  of  the  community.  (E.)  A  diffi-
culty with  some  persons  who  have  visited  the  Rochester  rappers,  in  believ-
ing the  sounds  to  be  articular,  arises  from  the  idea  that  the  raps  come  from
different  quarters  of  the  room,  at  a  distance  from  the  place  at  which  the
females  are  stationed.  This  difficulty  involves  several  explanatory  circum-
stances. In  the  first  place,  the  sounds  do  not  really  come  from  a  distance.
It  may  seem  that  this  is  so,  but  it  is  a  delusion,  arising  from  not  apprecia-
ting, correctly,  some  of  the  laws  of  acoustics.  We  do  not  ordinarily  deter-
mine the  direction  from  which  aural  impressions  are  received,  save  by  the
conjoined  exercise  of  other  senses.  Variations  in  the  supposed  distance  of
the  source  of  sound  may  be  imitated,  simply  by  variations  in  intensity  of
the  .sound,  provided  the  source  be  not  obvious  to  other  senses  than  hear-
ing. Upon  these  principles  the  deceptions  of  the  ventriloquist  are  based.
The  ventriloquist  does  not  transmit  his  voice  in  different  directions,  and  at
various  distances,  as  is  vulgarly  supposed,  but  he  graduates  its  intensity  so
as  to  make  it  appear  more  or  less  remote,  concealing,  at  the  same  time,  all
the  external  evidences  that  he  makes  the  sounds,  and  he  relies  upon  direct-
ing, by  his  conversation,  the  attention  of  the  audience  to  particular  places,
for  the  success  of  his  effort  to  make  it  appear  that  the  sounds  proceed

14  DISCOVERY   GF   THE

from  these  places.  The  knee  knockings  are  muffled  by  the  dress,  and  the
slight  movements  are  also  thus  concealed;  hence,  females  make  the  best
impostors  in  this  line.  The  raps  are  then  conducted  by  whatever  solid
substances  are  in  contact  with  the  limb,  or  body.  The  Rochester  knockers
prefer  that  their  visitors  should  be  seated  around  a  long  table,  they  sitting
at  one  extremity  of  the  table.  Placing  the  limb,  then,  in  contact  with  any
part  of  the  table,  the  knockings  seem  to  be  upon  the  latter.  But  if  the
limb  is  in  contact  only  with  the  floor,  the  sounds  will  appear  to  come  from
below.  The  Rochester  females,  when  they  wish  to  give  exhibitions  of  the
sounds,  sometimes  stand  near  a  door.  If  they  touch  the  door  with  a  limb,
or  rest  against  it,  the  sounds  seem  to  come  from  the  door,  and  the  door
may  be  felt  to  vibrate.  If  they  stand  at  a  little  distance  from  the  door,
the  sounds  appear  to  come  from  below.  The  raps  do  not,  in  reality,  ever
appear  to  come  from  much  distance,  unless  the  delusion  is  aided  by  a  vivid
imagination,  or  a  degree  of  credulousness  very  easily  operated  on.  The
loudness  of  the  sounds  will,  aside  from  the  degree  of  motive  power  and
quickness  by  which  the  displacement  is  effected,  depend  on  the  conducting
properties  of  different  bodies  in  contact.*

That  part  of  this  scheme  of  imposition,  which  relates  to  the  communi-
cations made  by  means  of  the  knockings,  opens  a  field  of  curious  inquiry,
not  devoid  of  interest  and  importance.  Admitting  that  the  sounds  are
shown  to  be  physically  produced,  and  dependent  on  the  volition  of  those
engaged  in  conducting  the  deception,  some,  who  have  been  impressed  by
the  degree  of  penetration  manifested  in  the  accuracy  of  certain  of  the
responses,  and  the  striking  character  of  the  fancied  revelations,  will  ask,
i  How  are  these  phenomena  to  be  accounted  for  ?  '  In  accounts  that  have
been  published  by  many — we  doubt  not  well-meaning  and,  on  most  subjects,
sensible  persons — there  are  statements  which,  to  the  reader  who  does  not
see  fit  to  deny  in  toto  the  veracity  and  intelligence  of  the  narrators,
certainly  must  appear  extraordinary.f  We  do  not  propose  to  discuss  at
length  this  view  of  the  subject.  To  do  this  does  not  belong  to  us,  aud
would  be  inappropriate  in  the  pages  of  a  medical  journal.  We  will  offer
but  a  few  remarks.

Having  traced  the  knockings  to  their  source,  explained  the  mechanism

*  See,  in  appendix,  letter  of  Prof.  Lee  to  Editor  of  N.  Y.  Tribune  for  the  laws  of
sound  relating  to  this  subject.

t  The  reader  who  may  have  any  curiosity  to  read  accounts  of  some  of  the  marvel-
lous revelations  that  have  been  published,  is  referred  to  the  two  works  mentioned  in
note  (A.)

SOURCE  OP  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  15

of  their  production,  and  thus  divested  them  of  their  supernatural  character
and  of  all  mystery,  the  field  of  inquiry,  just  referred  to,  presents  an  aspect
different  from  that  which  it  had  prior  to  the  exposition.  While  the  origin
of  the  sounds  was  unknown,  the  belief  in  their  spiritual  derivation  would
be  entertained  by  those  whose  mental  constitution  and  habits  favored
credulity  in  such  matters,  and  the  communications  would  be  received  with
a  corresponding  degree  of  faith  ;  and  even  some,  not  over  credulous
persons,  might  reason  themselves  into  the  conviction  that  the  sounds  must
be  due  to  intelligent,  invisible  spirits,  from  the  apparent  utter  impossi-
bility of  accounting,  on  any  other  hypothesis,  for  the  information  thereby
obtained.  But  assuming  that  the  deception  is  unmasked,  and  the  mode
in  which  it  is  conducted  satisfactorily  explained,  it  follows,  of  course,  that
the  communications. are  part  and  parcel  of  the  humbug,  and  it  only  remains
to  show  how  it  is  that  they  are  of  a  character  to  occasion  surprise  and
astonishment.  This  question  might  be  disposed  of,  so  far  as  the  present
subject  is  concerned,  by  saying  that  phenomena  of  the  same  character,
and  equally  extraordinary,  occur  in  connection  with  fortune-telling,  into
which  it  is  not  professed  that  spiritual  agencies  enter,  and  which  no  one
supposes  to  involve  aught  beyond  human  sagacity.  The  question  covers
all  the  various  modes  of  imparting  pretended  supernatural  revelations.

Much  is  due  to  the  laws  of  probabilities  alone — in  other  words,  many  of
the  wonders  are  coincidencies,  which  always  occur  in  a  series  of  random
guesses*  This  plain  fact  is  not  always  recollected,  viz  :  That  whenever  a
response  involves  either  an  affirmative  or  negative,  the  chances  that  it  will
be  right  or  wrong  are  exactly  equal.  Guesses  under  such  circumstances,
in  the  long  run,  will  be  as  often  true  as  false.  It  may  be  admitted,
however,  that  the  whole  philosophy  of  the  matter  is  not  resolvable  into
the  laws  of  probabilities:  other  reasons  must  therefore  be  given. —
Several  reasons  suggest  themselves,  some  of  which  we  will  mention,
without  attempting  to  assign  to  them,  respectively,  their  precise  force.

A  person  of  close  observation  and  great  shrewdness,  can  acquire  a  degree
of  skill  in  furnishing  communications  purporting  to  be  spiritual,  which  can
hardly  be  appreciated  by  one  who  has  not  given  much  thought  to  the
subject.  This  is  a  kind  of  acquirement  not  sought  for,  except  by  those
who  mean  to  make  it  subservient  to  deception  ;  and,  therefore,  by  most
persons  is  but  little  understood.  Let  an  individual  of  proper  capacity,
make  it  a  business  to  study  the  significance  of  every  slight  movement,
intonation  of  voice,  and  expression  of  countenance,  as  criteria  of  concealed
thoughts,  and  let  this  pursuit  be  prosecuted  for  years,  under  the  incentives

16  DISCOVERY    OF    THE

afforded  by  the  love  of  gain  or  applause,  and  the  fear  of  detection,  and
the  tact  thus  acquired,  will  be  likely  to  develop  results  that  appear  almost
incredible,  and  by  the  superstitious  are  regarded  as  divinations.  This  is  one
consideration  to  which  not  a  little  weight  belongs.  (F.)

Another  explanatory  consideration  is  as  follows  :  Persons  resorting  to
oracular  communications,  in  proportion  as  their  minds  became  excited,  and
full  credence  secured,  can  hardly  fail  to  exhibit,  in  various  ways,  indications
which  are  so  many  clues  by  which  a  practiced  observer  is  led  to  apprehend
facts  supposed  to  be  completely  hidden.  A  person,  who  has  been  much
interested  in  the  Tcnochings,  and  who  believes  that  there  exists  a  kind  of
mesmeric  relation  between  the  females  and  the  questioners,  by  means  of
which  the  knowledge  of  the  latter  is  perceived  by  the  former,  informed
us  that  he  observed  those  persons  who  had  full  faith  that  they  should
obtain  true  responses,  generally  got  them,  while  those  who  were  incredulous
were  unsuccessful.  We  do  not  doubt  the  correctness  of  this  observation,
and  it  is  fully  explained  by  reference  to  the  consideration  just  stated.

They,  too,  who  become  converts,  are  anxious  to  explain  any  errors  and
incongruities  in  the  Sibyline  responses,  and  are  ready  to  accept  expla-
nations, which  are  only  pertinent,  by  a  large  latitude  of  construction.  They
have  an  eager  desire  that  what  they  seek  to  have  communicated  shall  be
communicated,  and  are  ready  to  adopt  any  kind  of  interpretation  which
will  secure  the  credit  of  the  spirit  which  condescends  to  hold  intercourse
with  them.  It  is  sufficiently  obvious  to  those  who  have  made  the  art  of
discovering  truth  by  observation  a  subject  of  study,  that  a  pre-coneeived
notion  often  gives  a  bias  even  to  the  exercise  of  the  senses.  Not  a  few  of
the  false  facts  of  science  are  thus  derived.  Persons  are  apt  to  see
precisely  what  they  have  pre-determined  they  shall  see.  How  much
more  is  it  to  be  expected  that  this  self-deception  will  be  operative,  when,
instead  of  the  sober  realities  of  scientific  research,  the  credulous  mind  is
in  pursuit  of  information  to  be  imparted  by  miraculous  means  !  (G.)

Again,  the  impression  produced  by  successful  hits  in  any  of  the  arts  of
soothsaying  or  conjuration,  is  naturally  greater  than  is  consistent  with  a
due  regard  to  the  failures.  The  number  of  the  latter  is  forgotten,  while
the  former  are  remembered,  and  thus  acquire  an  undue  preponderance. —
More  especially  this  consideration  will  apply  to  the  prodigies  related  in
written  narratives,  taking  cognizance  of  those  things  which  are  only  won-
derful when  isolated.  The  principle  is  the  same  as  that  upon  which
certificates  of  secret  nostrums  appeal  to  the  confidence  of  the  public.
Admitting  the  certificates  to  be  authentic,  and  even  true  in  point  of  fac

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  17

we  have  only  the  extraordinary  cures,  without  any  of  the  host  of  cases  in
which  the  effect  of  the  remedy  was  either  nugatory  or  pernicious.  These
cases  may  predominate  immensely  over  those  in  which  benefit  was
attributed,  while  the  latter,  if  considered  exclusively,  seem  to  furnish  an
overwnelming  mass  of  evidence.

We  might  add  to  these  considerations,  others  ;  but  we  have  already  said
more  upon  this  branch  of  the  subject  than  we  had  intended,  and  perhaps  more
than  the  indulgence  of  our  readers  will  lead  them  to  excuse.  We  must  offer
as  an  apology  for  according  to  the  subject  so  much  space,  in  addition  to  the
reasons  before  assigned,  the  personal  interest  in  it  growing  out  of  the  part  we
have  taken  in  the  detection  and  disclosure  of  the  source  of  the  Rochester
Knockings.  In  engaging  in  this  investigation,  we  literally  followed  the  scrip-
tural injunction,  to  '^believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits."  The  re-
sult is  an  exposition,  the  correctness  of  which  rests,  in  the  first  place,  upon  a
train  of  reasoning  which  we  claim  to  be  in  itself  conclusive  ;  and,  in  the
second  place,  upon  demonstrative  evidence,  tested  by  experiments  which
may  be  readily  repeated  and  extended  in  all  places  where  the  knockings
may  be  re-produced.  It  remains  to  see  whether  this  result  will  succeed  in
bringing  the  career  of  this  singular  species  of  imposture  to  a  close,  and  thu
to  say  the  least,  diverting  the  current  of  credulity  into  some  new  channel.

Certain  physical  phenomena  in  addition  to  the  knockings,  are  said
to  be  occasionally  produced  in  connection  with  the  latter;  such  as  moving
of  tables  and  chairs;  opening  and  shutting  bureau  drawers;  pulling  the
hair,  etc.,  of  persons  assembled  to  witness  the  exhibition,  and  various  other
palpable  demonstrations  of  what  is  claimed  to  be  an  unknown  and  myste-
rious agency.  With  regard  to  these  phenomena  we  have  only  to  say  that
none  of  them  have  fallen  under  our  observation,  nor  are  we  aware  that
any  have,  as  yet,  been  exhibited  in  this  city,  although  we  understand  it  has
been  intimated  that  they  will  appear  by  and  by.  Assuming  that  such  phe-
nomena do  take  place,  we  leave  for  others  the  task  of  explaining  the  mecha-
nism by  which  they  are  produced.

NOTES

Note  A,  Page  3. —  The  curiosity  of  some  of  our  readers  may  lead
them  to  desire  further  particulars  respecting  the  rise  and  progress  of  this
remarkable  imposition.  We  copy  the  following  account  from  a  publication
entitled  "  History  of  the  strange  sounds  or  rappings,  heard  in  Rochester
and  Western  New  York,  and  usually  called  the  Mysterious  Noises,  which
are  supposed  by  many  to  be  communications  from  the  spirit  world,  together
with  all  the  explanation  that  can  as  yet  be  given  of  the  matter."*

"  The  sounds  were  first  heard  in  a  small  village  named  Hydesville,  in  the
town  of  Arcadia,  Wayne  county,  New  York.  The  house  where  they  were
heard  was  occupied,  during  a  part  of  the  years  1846  and  1847,  by  Mr.
Michael  Weekman.  During  this  time,  Mr.  W.  states  that,  one  evening
about  nine  o'clock,  as  he  was  preparing  to  retire  for  the  night,  he  heard  a
rapping  on  the  out-side  door.  He  opened  it,  but  saw  no  one.  In  a  few
moments,  the  rapping  on  the  door  was  repeated,  and  was  louder  than  at
first.  He  immediately  stepped  to  the  door,  and  opened  it;  no  person  was
to  be  seen.  He  went  into  the  street,  and  looked  about  the  house,  and  re-
urned,  without  seeing  any  one.  Soon  the  noise  was  repeated,  and,  failing,
to  see  any  person,  he  placed  his  hand  on  the  latch  of  the  door,  in  order  to
open  it  immediately,  should  the  annoyance  be  continued.  Again  the  rap-
ping was  heard  —  he  felt  the  door  jar,  and  sprang  into  the  street.  No  per-
son was  to  be  seen  any  where  in  the  vicinity.

"  Excepting  a  manifestation  to  the  daughter  of  Mr.  W.,  then  some  eight
years  old,  nothing  unusual  is  reported  to  have  been  seen  on  heard  by  him
while  he  occupied  the  premises.

"The  family  of  Mr.  John  D.  Fox  moved  into  the  house  on  the  11th  of
December,  1847.      Their  former  residence  was  Rochester.     They  heard

*  Published  by  D.  M,  Dewey,  Arcade  Hall,  Rochester,  March,  1850.

20  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

the  rapping  first,  the  latter  part  of  March,  1848,  one  evening,  after  they  had
retired  for  the  night.  It  seemed  to  be  in  one  of  the  bedrooms,  and  sounded
as  though  some  one  was  knocking  on  the  floor,  moving  chairs,  &c.  Four
or  five  members  of  the  family  were  at  home,  and  they  all  got  up,  to  ascer-
tain the  cause  of  the  noise.  Every  part  of  the  house  was  searched,  yet
nothing  could  be  discovered.  A  perceptible  jar  was  felt  by  putting  their
hands  on  the  bedsteads  and  chairs ;  a  jar  was  also  experienced  while  stand-
ing on  the  floor.  The  noise  was  continued  that  night  as  long  as  any  one
was  awake  in  the  house.  The  following  evening  they  were  heard  as  before7
and  on  the  evening  of  the  21st  of  March,  the  neighbors  were  called  in  for
the  first  time.

"  The  following  is  an  extract  from  Mrs.  Fox's  statement,  made  soon  after
the  occurrences  narrated  took  place ;

"  '  On  Friday  night,  we  concluded  to  go  to  bed  early,  and  not  let  it  dis-
turb us;  if  it  came,  we  thought  we  would  not  mind  it,  but  try  and  get  a
good  night's  rest.  My  husband  was  here  on  all  these  occasions,  heard  the
noise,  and  helped  search.  It  was  very  early  when  we  went  to  bed  on  this
night;  hardly  dark.  We  went  to  bed  so  early,  because  we  had  been
broken  so  much  of  our  rest,  that  I  was  almost  sick.

"  '  My  husband  had  not  gone  to  bed  when  we  first  heard  the  noise  on
this  evening.  I  had  just  laid  down.  It  commenced  as  usual.  I  knew  it
from  all  other  noises  I  had  ever  heard  in  the  house.  The  girls,  who  slept
in  the  other  bed  in  the  room,  heard  the  noise,  and  tried  to  make  a  similar
noise  by  snapping  their  lingers.  The  youngest  girl  is  about  twelve  years
old;  she  is  the  one  who  made  her  hand  go.  As  fast  as  she  made  the  noise
with  her  hands  or  fingers,  the  sound  was  followed  up  in  the  room.  It  did
not  sound  any  different  at  that  time,  only  it  made  the  same  number  of
noises  that  the  girl  did.  When  she  stopped,  the  sound  itself  stopped  for  a
short  time.

"  '  The  other  girl,  who  is  in  her  fifteenth  year,  then  spoke  in  sport,  and
said,  'Now  Oo  just  as  I  do.  Count  one,  two,  three,  four/  &c,  striking  one
hand  in  the  other  at  the  same  time.  The  blows  which  she  made  were  re-
peated as  before.  It  appeared  to  answer  her  by  repeating  every  blow  that
she  made.  She  only  did  so  once.  She  then  began  to  be  startled;  and
then  I  spoke  and  said  to  the  noise,  '  count  ten,'  and  it  made  ten  strokes  or
noises.  Then  I  asked  the  ages  of  my  different  children  successively,  and  it
gave  a  number  of  raps,  corresponding  to  the  ages  of  my  children.

"  '  I  then  asked  if  it  was  a  human  being  that  was  making  the  noise  ?  and
if  it  was,  to  manifest  it  by  the  same  noise.  There  was  no  noise.  I  then
asked  if  it  was  a  spirit  ?  and  if  it  was,  to  manifest  it  by  two  sounds.  I  heard
two  sounds  as  soon  as  the  words  were  spoken.  I  then  asked,  if  it  was  an
injured  spirit,  to  give  me  the  sound,  and  I  heard  the  rapping  distinctly.  I
then  asked  if  it  was  injured  in  this  house  ?  and  it  manifested  it  by  the  noise.
If  the  person  was  living  that  injured  it?  and  got  the  same  answer.  I  then
ascertained,  by  the  same  method  that  its  remains  were  buried  under  the
dwelling,  and  how  old  it  was.     When  I  asked  how  many  years  old  it  was  ?

SOURCE  OP  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  21

it  rapped  31  times;  that  it  was  a  male;  that  it  had  left  a  family  of  five
children ;  that  it  had  two  sons  and  three  daughters,  all  living.  I  asked  if
it  left  a  wife?  and  it  rapped.  If  its  wife  was  then  living?  no  rapping;  if
she  was  dead  ?  and  the  rapping  was  distinctly  heard ;  how  long  it  had  been
dead  ?  and  it  rapped  twice.'

"  Mrs  Fox  asked  if  the  noises  would  continue  if  she  called  in  the  neigh-
bors that  they  might  hear  it  ?  There  was  rapping  the  same  as  when  i^
was  supposed  affirmative  answers  were  given.  Mrs.  Redfield,  the  nearest
neighbor,  was  first  called.  The  children  had  informed  her  previously,  that
strange  noises  were  heard  in  the  house,  and  she  went,  thinking  to  have  some
sport  with  the  family.  She  found  the  girls  very  much  agitated.  Mrs.  Fox
said,  '  Mrs.  Redfield,  what  shall  we  do  ?  We  have  heard  the  noise  for
some  time,  and  now  it  answers  all  our  questions,  and  we  cannot  account
for  it'

"  Mrs.  R.  heard  the  sounds,  and  commenced  asking  questions,  which  were
answered  correctly,  greatly  to  her  astonishment.  She  says  the  girls  con-
tinued to  be  much  frightened,  and  she  told  them  not  to  be  afraid ;  if  it  was
a  revelation  from  the  spirit  world,  it  was  not  to  injure  them.  One  of  the
girls  said  with  much  feeling, — '  We  are  innocent — how  good  it  is  to  have  a
clear  conscience."  ( ! !)

"  Messrs.  Redfield,  Duesler,  Hyde,  Jewell,  and  their  wives  were  sub-
sequently called  during  the  same  evening.  They  asked  many  questions,
and  received  answers.  Questions  relating  to  the  age,  number  of  children,
<fec,  of  the  persons  present,  are  said  to  have  been  answered  correctly.  Mr.
Fox  and  Mr.  Redfield  remained  in  the  house  during  the  night.  Mrs.  Fox
and  her  daughters  spent  the  night  at  the  house  of  one  of  the  neighbors.

"  A  report  of  the  strange  noises  heard  in  the  house  of  Mr.  Fox,  spread
throughout  that  part  of  the  town  the  next  (Saturday)  morning,  and  a  large
number  of  persons  assembled,  and  remained  at  the  house  during  the  day.
No  noises  were  heard  until  evening,  when  the  sounds  commenced  as  before.
A  committee  was  appointed  to  investigate  the  matter,  and  a  great  variety
of  questions  were  asked  and  answered.

"  On  Sunday  morning,  April  2d,  the  sounds  were  heard,  and  they  con-
tinued to  be  made  throughout  the  day.  This  is  the  first  instance  in  which
they  are  reported  to  have  been  heard  in  the  day  time.  Sunday  evening,
and  throughout  that  night,  no  noises  were  heard.

"  Several  individuals  received  answers  to  questions  intimating  that  a
murder  had  been  committed  in  the  house,  and  that  the  body  was  buried  in

22  DISCOVERY    OF   THE

the  cellar.     The  following  statement  relating  to  this  matter  is  signed  by  Mh
Wm.  Duesler.

"  '  I  went  over  again  on  Sunday,  between  one  and  two  o'clock,  P.  M.  I
went  into  the  cellar  with  several  others,  and  had  them  all  leave  the  house
over  our  heads  ;  and  then  I  asked,  if  there  had  been  a  man  buried  in  that
cellar,  to  manifest  it  by  rapping,  or  any  other  noise  or  sign  ?  The  moment
I  asked  the  questions,  there  was  a  sound  like  the  falling  of  a  stick,  about  a
foot  long  and  half  an  inch  through,  on  the  floor  in  the  bedroom  over  our
heads.  It  did  not  seem  to  bound  at  all ;  there  was  but  one  sound.  I  then
told  Stephen  Smith  to  go  right  up  and  examine  the  room,  and  see  if  he
could  discover  the  cause  of  the  noise.  He  came  back  and  said  he  could
discover  nothing, —  that  there  was  no  one  in  the  room,  or  in  that  part  of  the
house.  I  then  asked  two  more  questions,  and  it  rapped  in  the  usual  way.
We  all  then  went  up  stairs,  and  made  a  thorough  search  around  the  rooms,
but  could  find  nothing.

"  'I  then  got  a  knife  and  a  fork,  and  tried  to  see  if  I  could  make  the
same  noise  by  dropping  them,  but  I  could  not.  This  was  all  I  heard  on
Sunday.  There  is  only  one  floor,  or  partition,  or  thickness,  between  the
bed-room  and  the  cellar  —  no  place  where  any  thing  could  be  secreted  to
make  the  noise.  When  this  noise  was  heard  in  the  bed-room,  I  could  feel  a
slight  tremulous  motion  or  jar.

"  *  There  was  some  digging  in  the  cellar  on  Saturday  night.  They  dug
until  they  came  to  water,  and  then  gave  it  up.  The  question  had  been
previously  asked,  whether  it  was  right  that  they  should  dig  on  that  night  ?
and  there  was  no  rapping.  Then,  whether  it  was  wrong  ?  and  the  rapping
was  heard.  Whether  they  should  dig  on  Sunday  ?  no  rapping ;  on  Mon-
day ?  and  the  rapping  commenced  again.  However,  some  insisted  on  dig-
ging at  this  time,  and  dug  accordingly,  but  with  no  success.

"  '  On  Monday  night  heard  this  noise  again,  and  asked  the  same  ques-
tions I  did  before,  and  got  the  same  answers.  This  is  the  last  time  I  have
heard  the  rapping.  I  can  in  no  way  account  for  this  singular  noise,
which  I  and  others  have  heard.  It  is  a  mystery  to  me,  which  I  am  wholly
unable  to  solve.  I  am  willing  to  testify  under  oath  that  I  did  not  make
the  noises  or  rapping  which  I  and  others  heard;  that  I  do  not  know  of
any  person  who  did  or  could  have  made  them ;  that  I  have  spent  consider-
able time  since  then,  in  order  to  satisfy  myself  as  to  the  cause  of  it,  but  can-
not account  for  it  on  any  other  ground  than  it  is  supernatural.  I  lived  in
the  same  house  about  seven  years  ago,  and  at  that  time  never  heard  any
noises  of  the  kind  in  and  about  the  premises.     *     *     *

"  *  I  never  believed  in  haunted  houses,  or  heard  or  saw  any  thing  but
what  I  could  account  for  before ;  but  this  I  cannot  account  for.

(Signed)  Wm.  Duesler.

"  'April  12,  1848/

"  In  a  pamphlet,  published  at  Canandaigua,  in  1848,  by  E.  E.  Lewis,  cer-
tificates corroborating  the  foregoing  statements  are  given,  signed  by  the
following  persons :

"  'John  D.  Fox,  Walter  Scotten,  Elizabeth  Jewel,  Lorren  Tenney,
James  Bridger,  Chauncey  P.  Losey,  Benjamin  F.  Clarke,  Elizabeth  Fox,
Vernelia  Culver,  William  D.  Storer,  Marvin  P.  Loser,  David  S.  Fox,  and
Mary  Reduclcr/

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  BLOCKINGS.  23

"  At  one  time,  when  those  investigating  wished  to  ascertain  a  certain
name,  the  spirit  was  asked  if  it  would  rap  for  the  initial  letters  when  they
were  named.  The  reply  was  in  the  affirmative ;  and  when  the  alphabet
was  called  over,  there  was  rapping  at  particular  letters.  Soon  the  experi-
ment was  carried  still  farther,  and  by  request  entire  names  and  sentences
of  considerable  length  were  spelled  out  A  signal  for  the  alphabet  is  made
when  the  spirit  desires  to  communicate  in  this  way.  The  signal  is  five  raps
in  quick  succession.

"  The  following  brief  statement  in  regard  to  the  manner  in  which  the
use  of  the  alphabet,  in  these  communications,  was  ascertained,  is  signed  by
several  members  of  the  family :

"  '  During  the  first  inquiries  to  learn  the  name  of  the  person  who  was  re-
presented as  the  injured  spirit,  it  was  asked  if  it  would  rap  at  the  initials  of
his  name.  It  rapped  in  the  affirmative,  and  on  calling  over  the  letters,  it
rapped  at  the  letters  C.  R. ;  and  at  a  subsequent  period,  David  Fox,  one  of
the  family,  spent  several  hours  in  communication  with  it,  and  learned  the
whole  name ;  and  afterwards  Mrs.  A.  S.  Fish  learned  that  five  successive
raps  was  an  indication,  or  signal,  to  repeat  the  alphabet,  when  questions
were  asked,  to  which  a  simple  negative  or  affirmative  would  not  be  a  cor-
rect reply  without  qualification.

"  '  It  is  thus  that  directions  are  now  given  in  answer  to  questions ;  and
often  it  voluntarily  calls  by  the  signal  for  the  alphabet,  and  communicates
entire  sentences,  many  of  them  interesting,  and  of  considerable  length.

"  «  Mrs.  Ann  L.  Fish,
Mrs.  Margaret  Fox,
C.  R.  Brown,

«  'Rochester,  March  6th,  1850.  David  S.  Fox.'

"  Soon  after  the  occurrence  of  the  events  heretofore  related,  a  part  of  the
family  removed  from  Hydesville  to  Rochester,  and  resided  with  an  older
sister —  Mrs.  Fish  —  who  has  been  a  resident  of  the  city  some  years.  The
rappings  were  then  heard  in  both  places,  and  communications  were  as
readily  made  in  one  place  as  in  the  other.  It  may  here  be  remarked,  that
when  the  sounds  first  began  to  attract  attention,  and  during  the  inve  stiga
tion  at  Hydesville,  they  were  heard  in  the  presence  of  any  member  of  the
Fox  family.  They  were  also  distinctly  and  repeatedly  heard  by  persons
who  were  examining  the  house  when  every  member  of  the  family  was
absent.

"  It  was  not  long,  however,  before  the  noises  were  made  more  freely  in
the  presence  of  the  two  youngest  girls,  one  named  Margaretta,  the  other
Catharine.  When  the  noises  first  commenced,  Margaretta  was  about
fourteen  years  of  age,  and  Catharine  about  twelve.  The  elder  of  the  two
first  removed  to  Rochester.  The  sounds  were  made  freely  when  she  was
with  her  sister,  Mrs.  Fish."

24  DISCOVERY   GF   THE

The  production  of  the  rappings  at  Rochester  having  given  rise  to  con-
siderable  excitement,  a  public  meeting  was  called,  and  two  committees?
successively,  chosen  to  investigate  the  matter.  Ex-Chancellor  Frederick
Whittlesey,  and  Dr.  H.  H  Longworthy,  were  members  of  one  of  these
committees.  Both  committees  failed  to  arrive  at  any  rational  explanation
of  the  extraordinary  sounds.

Subsequently,  as  we  learn  from  a  publication  entitled  "  Singular  Reve-
lations. Explanation  and  History  of  the  mysterious  communion  with
spirits,  comprehending  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  mysterious  noises  in
Western  New  York,  generally  received  as  spiritual  communications*  the
rappings  have  been  heard  in  several  families  in  Rochester,  and  in  other
places  in  the  vicinity.  They  appear  to  have  made  considerable  progress  in
Auburn.  From  the  work  just  mentioned,  we  take  the  following  extract?
relating  to  their  development  in  Auburn.

'*  The  first  of  its  being  heard  in  this  city  was  when  the  youngest
daughter  of  Mr.  Fox  visited  our  boarding  house.  (!!)  After  she  returned.,
it  was  heard  for  some  time  in  the  presence  of  several  who  had  heard  the
sounds  in  her  presence,  and  in  a  few  months  spread  to  several  families,
where  it  has  gradually  grown  more  free.  Hardly  a  week  passes  without
our  receiving  authentic  information  of  some  new  place  where  these  occur-
rences have  commenced.  We  are  informed  of  at  least  six  families  in  Au-
burn, who  hear  more  or  less  of  the  same  sounds.

"  In  almost  every  place  where  it  has  commenced,  there  has  been  at
first  but  a  few  sounds,  and  generally  much  more  faint  than  after  it  be-
comes more  common.

"  It  is  a  very  common  occurrence  in  the  family  and  social  circles,  to  be
talking  of  some  matter  connected  with  this  strange  development,  or  some
kindred  subjects,  and  for  all  in  the  room  to  hear  a  distinct  rap  —  perhaps
two  or  three  —  as  if  confirming  what  was  said.  This  is  generally  the  way
it  commence  s  at  new  places.

"  It  may  be  proper  here  to  remark,  that  persons  of  any  considerable
degree  of  investigating  powers  stand  in  no  fear  of  being  deceived,  as  the
sounds  have  never  yet  been  imitated,  nor  do  we  believe  they  can  be.  Per-
sons who  have  heard  but  little  of  them,  and  who  have  very  vivid  imagina-
tions and  large  organs  of  wonder,  may,  at  times,  mistake  some  other
sounds  for  the  genuine  ones,  or  those  produced  by  the  spirits;  but  a  per-
son who  is  not  over  imaginative,  never."

The  rappings  have  also  been  manifested  in  Connecticut,  Massachusetts,
and  other  sections  of  the  country,  of  which  we  are  not  aware  of  any  ac-
counts having  been  published,  save  in  newspapers,  which  are  not  at  hand.

The  publications  mentioned  may  be  consulted  by  those  who  wish  for
a  more  detailed  history  of  the  progress  of  the  imposition.     Other  works

*  By  Eliab  W.  Capron  and  Henry  D.  Barron.  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  published  by  Caproia
&  Barron.     Second  edition,

SOURCE  OP  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  25

may  have  been  published  relating  to  the  subject,  which  have  not  fallen
under  our  notice.

The  Fox  family,  or  a  portion  of  the  family,  visited  the  city  of  New  York
a  short  time  since,  and  were  well  patronised.  Examinations  were  made  in
that  city,  with  a  view  to  detect  the  true  source  of  the  mysterious  sounds,
which  proved  unsuccessful.

Note  B,  Pace  4. — It  is  often  observed  that  persons  who,  on  many  sub-
jects, display  a  skeptical  turn  of  mind,  are  among  the  first  to  attach  credit  to
what,  by  the  majority,  is  deemed  too  absurd  and  improbable  to  be  believed'

And  the  opinions  of  such  persons  are  sometimes  permitted  to  have  con-
siderable weight,  from  the  fact  that  they  are  supposed  to  be  remarkably
slow  in  adopting  what  admits  of  doubt.  Writers  on  mental  philosophy,  we
believe,  unite  in  attributing  to  similar  qualities  of  mind,  an  excess,  both  of
skepticism  and  credulity.  The  old  adage  that  '  extremes  meet,'  is  here
emphatically  true.  He  who  is  excessively  skeptical  is,  of  necessity,  credulous,
and  he  who  is  noted  as  a  credulous  man  in  some  things,  will  be  likely  to  be
a  skeptic  in  others.  Skepticism,  in  fact,  may  involve  a  far  greater  amount
of  credulity  than  belief.  To  reject  the  evidence  of  revealed  religion,  for
example,  requires  a  greater  degree  of  credulousness.than  the  belief  which  is
a  legitimate  result  of  a  candid  examination  of  this  evidence.  The  principle
in  the  philosophy  of  mind  which  has  been  stated,  will  serve  to  explain  the
apparent  incongruity  presented,  when  one  who  denies  the  miracles  of  the
Bible,  insists  upon  the  spiritual  origin  of  mysterious  sounds  !

Note  C,  Page  1. — In  justice  to  a  matter  of  fact,  we  re-affirm  the  as-
sertion that  the  conviction  of  the  knockings  being  due  to  the  joints,  was
entertained  prior  to  the  instance  in  this  city,  which  confirmed  the  correct-
ness of  the  conviction,  coming  under  our  observation.  We  are  aware  that
some  colloquial  critics  have  intimated  that  the  instance  just  referred  to  was
first  observed,  and  the  reasoning  subsequently  adopted.  We  could  show
the  incorrectness  of  this  assertion  by  several  persons  to  whom  the  convic-
tion was  stated,  together  with  the  logical  proof  by  which  it  was  arrived  at,
on  the  afternoon  and  evening  of  the  day  of  our  first  hearing  the  Rochester
Knockings.  The  case  that  was  met  with  on  the  day  following,  demonstra-
ted the  correctness  of  the  conclusion  already  formed,  but  did  not  suggest
or  lead  to  them.  We  are  not,  however,  the  less  under  obligations  for  the
opportunity  which  that  case  afforded  of  establishing  our  positions  to  the
satisfaction  of  others.

It  may  be  said  that  this  statement  diminishes  the  force  of  the  demonstra-
tion, inasmuch  as  there  is  room  for  the  supposition  that  the  fact  was  ob-

26  DISCOVERY    OF    THE

served  under  the  bias  of  a  prior  conclusion.  If  the  fact  of  the  essential
identity  of  the  rappings,  in  both  cases,  depended  exclusively  on  our  assertion,
this  would  be  a  legitimate  criticism,  and  should  have  weight  with  those,  to
say  the  least,  who  have  not  confidence  in  the  observers  from  personal  know-
ledge. The  sounds,  however,  have  been  heard  and  compared  by  several
persons  in  every  way  competent  to  make  observations  of  that  nature,
to  whom  the  objection  could  not  be  made  that  they  were  already  committed
to  an  opinion  as  to  the  method  in  which  the  knockings  were  produced.

We  claim  that  the  train  of  reasoning,  to  one  acquainted  with  the  human
organism  sufficiently  to  appreciate  it,  is  conclusive,  assuming  that  the  sounds
are  not  spiritual  But  some  may  say,  and  it  has  been  said,  '  you  have  no
right  to  assume  that  the  sounds  are  not  produced  by  spirits/  It  would  be
perfectly  fair  to  meet  this  objection  by  saying  that  in  so  far  as  spiritual,  or,
in  other  words,  miraculous  interposition  in  the  causation  of  physical  phe-
nomena is  concerned,  the  burthen  of  proof  lies  exclusively  with  those  who
affirm  its  existence.  And,  in  the  nature  of  things,  the  existence  of  a  spiritual
causation  cannot  be  proved,  except  by  negative  evidence.  It  does  not
admit  of  demonstrative  proof  in  a  scientific  sense.  It  is,  therefore,  purely
an  assumption  on  the  part  of  those  who  make  the  affirmation,  until,  to  say
the  least,  the  phenomena  referred  to  such  a  source,  have  been  shown  to  be
explicable  in  no  other  way.  In  making  the  knocking  phenomena  the  sub-
ject of  investigation,  we  were  perfectly  right  in  excluding  the  spiritual
hypothesis.  Do  we  allow  such  an  hypothesis  in  prosecuting  a  scientific  in-
vestigation of  any  physical  phenomena  ?  Our  scientific  treatises  would  pre-
sent quite  a  new  aspect  if,  whenever  any  phenomena  were  found  not  to  be
resolvable  into  known  laws,  they  were  to  be  set  down  as  the  results  of  spe-
cial volitions  of  spiritual  existences  !

We  have  reaffirmed  the  fact  of  the  reasoning  having  preceded  the  demon-
stration, simply  because  it  is  true,  without  reference  to  the  question,  whether
the  correctness  of  the  exposition  be  strengthened  or  weakened  by  it.

Note  D,  Page  9. — The  "spirits,"  themselves,  did  not  sustain  the
knockers  in  their  denial,  if  the  following  anecdote  be  true,  which  we  give,
in  substance,  as  it  was  related  to  us :  —  Shortly  after  the  exposition  ap-
peared, several  persons  being  assembled  to  hold  communion  with  the  rap-
ping "  spirits,"  one  of  the  visitors  inquired  if  the  *-  spirit "  with  which  he
was  in  communication  would  reply  to  a  question  which  he  had  written,
either  affirmatively  or  negatively.  Assent  was  signified  by  raps;  and  the
"  spirit "  proceeded  to  rap  at  successive  letters  of  the  alphabet  named,  until
yes  was  spelled.     This  denoted  an  affirmative  reply  to  the  question.     The

SOURCE    OF   THE   ROCHESTER   KNOCKINGS.  27

latter  being  now  read,  proved  to  be  an  inquiry  whether  the  knockings  were
produced  by  the  knee  joint  !  The  "  mediums,"  as  they  term  themselves,
however,  have  a  resource  in  an  emergency  like  this.  The  " spirits"  they
say,  do  not  respond  correctly,  save  to  proper  questions,  asked  with  the  ex-
pectation of  being  truthfully  answered.  In  other  words,  they  are  not  to  be
trifled  with.  It  is  at  once  obvious  that  this  is  an  expedient  readily  available
in  any  failure  when  persons  who  have  not  full  faith  in  the  spirituality  of  the
JcnocJcings  are  in  communication.  If  persons  are  sufficiently  credulous  to
have  full  faith,  they  will  be  ready  enough  to  overlook  failures,  or  to  explain
them  away  in  some  mode  or  other.  The  experience  of  the  "  mediums"  has
no  doubt  abundantly  confirmed  the  truth  of  the  latter  remark.

The  same  resource  proves  convenient  in  other  difficulties.  For  example,
when,  at  the  examination  invited  by  the  tappers,  to  test  the  correctness  of
the  exposition,  the  results  fully  substantiated  the  positions  assumed,  the
only  alternative  was  to  throw  the  responsibility  on  the  " spirits"  These
disembodied  existences  have  their  whims  and  humors  like  incarnate  mortals.
They  do  not  choose  to  rap  when  the  "mediums"  are  placed  in  positions  in
which,  agreeably  to  the  explanation  offered,  it  would  not  be  expected  that
JcnocJcings  could  be  produced ;  or  under  circumstances  when  the  movements
necessary  to  the  sounds  would  be  apparent  !  !

It  cannot,  by  the  way,  fail  to  strike  the  mind  of  every  reflecting  reader,
that  rapping  is  a  very  clumsy,  not  to  say,  discreditable  way  of  holding  spi-
ritual communications.  If  spirits  can  rap,  it  would  be  expected  that  they
could  also  speak,  or,  at  all  events,  produce  sounds  more  spirit-like  than  those
arising  from  the  friction  of  bones  and  cartilage  !  Strange,  too,  that  they
should  confine  themselves  so  rigidly  to  such  peculiar  noises,  instead  of  vary-
ing their  raps  with  their  changing  humors !  The  excuse  that  the  "  spirits"
are  frequently  guilty  of  falsehood,  although  very  convenient,  as  has  been
seen,  to  help  the  "  mediums"  out  of  an  embarrassing  predicament,  is  an  as-
sertion which  cuts  in  either  direction.  In  matters  pertaining  to  the  future,
or  which  are  unknown  to  the  "  mediums"  and  questioners,  what  assurance
js  there  that  the  "  spirits"  speak  the  truth  ?  If  they  are  not  infallible,  the
correctness,  or  incorrectness  of  the  communications,  in  all  cases,  is  to  be  de-
termined by  the  private  judgment  of  those  who  receive  them  !  In  the  his-
tory of  the  imposition  it  is  stated  that  the  spirituality  of  the  JcnocJcings  was
publicly  announced  by  instructions  of  the  spirits  themselves.  This  was  a
reliable  communication  made  by  some  "  spirit"  of  veracity,  but  the  confes-
sion that  the  sounds  were  made  with  the  knee-joint  was  made  by  a  "  lying
spirit"!

28  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

Note  E,  Page  13.

^1

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  BLOCKINGS.  29

In  order  that  the  reader,  not  versed  in  anatomy,  may  form  a  better  idea
of  the  organs  and  mechanism  involved  in  the  production  of  sounds  with  the
knee-joint  than  can  be  readily  conveyed  by  a  verbal  account,  we  have  in-
troduced the  wood-cut  on  the  preceding  page,  representing  all  the  bones  of
the  lower  extremity  excepting  those  of  the  foot.

The  upper  bone  is  the  femur,  or  thigh  bone,  the  largest  bone  in  the  body.
The  rounded  head,  at  the  upper  extremity,  attached,  by  what  is  called  the
neck,  to  the  shaft  of  the  bone,  forming,  with  the  latter,  an  obtuse  angle,  en-
ters into  the  hip  joint.  The  lower  extremity  enters  into  the  knee  joint.
This  extremity  is  expanded  so  as  to  form  two  lateral  projections,  which  are
called  condyls.  The  outer  condyl  (fig.  2,)  is  the  broadest  and  most  pro-
minent. The  inner  condyl  (fig.  1,)  extends  lower  than  the  outer.  Be-
tween the  two  condyls  there  is  a  depression,  or  fossa.

The  two  bones  of  the  leg  are  represented  in  the  other  figure.  One  of
these  bones  only  enters  into  the  knee  joint.  This  bone  is  called  the  tibia.
The  upper  extremity  of  the  tibia  is  large,  and  expanded  on  either  side,  form-
ing what  are  termed  the  two  tuberosities.  The  upper  surfaces  of  both  tu-
berosities are  smooth,  for  the  purpose  of  articulating  with  the  condyls  of
the  femur.  Fig.  1,  indicates  the  upper  surface  of  the  outer  tuberosity,
which  is  fitted  to  the  external  condyl  of  the  femur  (No,  2.)  Fig.  2,  indi-
cates the  upper  surface  of  the  other  tuberosity  which  receives  the  inner
condyl  of  the  femur  (No.  1.)  Between  the  two  tuberosities  of  the  tibia  is
a  projecting  ridge  of  bone,  the  spinous  process,  which,  when  the  bones  are
in  contact,  enters  the  corresponding  depression,  or  fossa,  between  the  two
condyls  of  the  femur.

In  the  living  body  the  articulating  surfaces  of  the  condyls  are  covered
with  a  layer  of  cartilage,  a  yielding,  elastic  substance,  commonly  called
gristle.  The  articulating  surfaces  of  the  tibia  are  also  covered  with  the
same  substance,  which  is  thicker  at  the  sides  of  the  surface,  thus  forming
an  excavation  for  the  reception  of  the  condyls.  The  surfaces  of  the  two
bones  thus  in  contact  are  invested  with  a  firm,  smooth  membrane,  which  is
kept  moist  by  a  little  ropy  fluid,  to  facilitate  motion,  and  prevent  injury  from
friction.

From  the  formation  of  this  joint,  in  so  far  as  the  bones  are  concerned,  it
would  naturally  occur  to  the  observer  that  dislocations  should  be  of  fre-
quent occurrence.  The  bony  conformation  of  the  joint  is  not  such  as  to
afford  much  security  against  displacement  This,  however,  is  provided
against  by  the  patella  or  knee-pan  in  front,  and  by  numerous  strong  liga-
ments passing  from  one  bone  to  the  other  in  different  directions,  and  sur-

30  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

rounding  the  joint  on  every  side.     By  this  arrangement  the  joint  is,  in  fact,
rendered  the  strongest  in  the  body,  dislocations  being  extremely  rare.

The  protection  of  this  joint  being  thus  chiefly  due  to  the  ligaments,  it  is
obvious  that,  in  proportion  as  the  latter  may  be  defective,  or  elongated  in
some  persons,  the  extremeties  of  the  bones  are  susceptible  of  more  or  less
displacement  from  their  proper  positions.  This  must  be  the  case  in  the
Rochester  females  of  the  Fox  family,  and  in  others  who  can  produce  the
rapping  sounds  with  the  knee  joint.  In  the  instance  in  this  city,  in  which
we  have  been  permitted  to  ascertain  the  mode  in  which,  the  sounds  are  pro-
duced, the  displacement,  which  can  be  effected  by  the  muscles  at  will,  is
such,  that  the  upper  extremity  of  the  tibia  projects  half  an  inch,  or  more,  in
a  lateral  outward  direction.  The  ridge  of  bone  between  the  two  articula-
ting surfaces  of  the  tibia  must  be  removed  from  its  situation  between  the
condyls,  and  rests  upon  the  outer  condyl  (fig.  2.)  This  movement  is  ac-
companied by  a  loud  noise,  and  the  return  of  the  bone  to  its  place  is
attended  by  another  equally  loud  sound.  These  are  the  two  characteristic
sounds  of  the  Rochester  hioclcings.  Having  first  heard  them  as  made  by
one  of  the  family  of  Rochester  Rappers,  and  afterward  by  the  lady  who
made  no  secret  or  mystery  of  the  mode  in  which  they  are  produced,  the
similarity  was  immediately  recognized.  Indeed,  it  was  impossible  to  mis-
take the  identity,  as  the  character,  as  well  as  the  succession  of  the  two
sounds,  is  striking  and  characteristic.

Many  persons  are  able  to  produce  a  similar  displacement  of  the  bones  of
the  fingers  of  one  hand  by  a  force  applied  with  the  other  hand.  This,  as
the  reader  is  aware,  is  often  practiced  as  a  habit,  and  in  proportion  as  the
habit  is  indulged,  the  displacement  becomes  greater  in  degree,  and  is  made
with  more  facility.  The  movement  of  the  bones,  in  this  case,  is  attended  by
a  sound,  which  is  often  pretty  loud.  This  familiar  illustration  is  a  represen-
tation, in  miniature,  of  the  mechanism,  and  the  sounds  produced  by  a  similar
movement  of  the  bones  composing  the  knee  joint.  The  former  is  typical
of  the  latter,  requiring  only  to  be  magnified  to  render  the  exemplification
complete.  Any  individual  in  whom  the  conformation  of  this  joint,  as  respects
the  ligaments,  admits  of  sufficient  lateral  motion  of  the  expanded  surfaces
of  the  bones  in  contact,  by  the  action  of  the  muscles  of  the  lower  extremity,
may  become  a  rapper  ;  but  the  facility  with  which  the  requisite  motions
are  made  and  repeated,  as  also  the  loudness  of  the  sounds,  will  doubtless
depend  not  a  little  upon  practice.  Like  any  feat  of  legerdemain,  performed
by  the  voluntary  muscles,  the  more  it  is  practiced,  the  more  skillfully  and
successfully  it  is  done.

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  31

The  constant  practice  of  this  accomplishment,  must  tend  to  impair  the
strength  and  healthy  tone  of  the  joint  ;  and  we  suspect  if  the  movements
of  the  younger  members  of  the  Fox  family  are  ^observed,  it  will  be
found  that  their  gait  will  show  a  weakness  in  this  portion  of  the  locomotive
apparatus.

The  rapidity  with  which  the  sounds  follow  each  other,  is  an  objection
offered  by  some  to  receiving  the  explanation  which  refers  them  to  the  joints.
If  done  by  the  voluntary  muscles,  however,  it  is  not  strange  that  they
should  be  produced  in  rapid  succession.  It  is  not  a  difficult  act  if  the  con-
dition of  the  joint  admits  readily  of  the  displacement.  The  lady,  in  this
city,  who  has  been  referred  to,  can  make  the  knockings  nearly,  infact  quite
as  rapidly  as  the  Rochester  rappers.

The  conformation  of  the  knee  suitable  for  rapping  is  certainly  not  very
common.  But  it  is  probably  not  so  rare  but  that,  when  it  becomes  gener-
ally known  that  the  sounds  proceed  from  the  joints,  many  places  will  be
found  to  furnish  instances.  We  infer  this,  from  having  heard  of  several
cases  already  in  this  vicinity,  during  the  few  days  that  have  elapsed  since
the  exposition  was  made  public.  This  conformation  is  a  peculiarity  of  organi-
zation, which,J  like  other  similar  anomalies,  may  extend  to  different  mem-
bers of  the  same  family.  The  lady  of  this  city  to  whom  we  have  referred,
had  an  aunt  who  possessed  the  same  ability  to  dislocate  the  knee  that  she
has.  It  (jis  not,  therefore  surprising  that  two  members,  at  least,  of  the  Fox
family  are  rappers.

The  difficulty  of  conceiving  that  sounds  so  loud  as  the  Rochester  knock
ings  can  come  from  the  knee,  or  any  other  joint,  leads  many  to  suppose
that  the  problem  of  the  knockings,  is  not  yet  solved.  We  confess  that,
even  to  one  who  has  made  the  human  organism  an  object  of  study,  this,  at
the  first  blush,  appears  to  be  a  valid  difficulty.  It  vanishes,  however,  when
we  take  into  consideration  the  size  of  the  bones  forming  the  joint,  the  extent
of  articulating  surfaces,  and  the  number  and  size  of  the  muscles  of  the  lower
extremity.  The  femur  and  tibia  are  the  largest  bones  in  the  body  ;  the
articulation  is  much  larger  than  any  other,  being  from  ten  to  twenty  times
as  large  as  the  finger  joints,  and  the  m  uscular  power  bearing  upon  the
movements  of  the  knee,  directly,  and  indirectly,  by  acting  on  the  bones  as
levers,  is  very  great.  These  are  elements  which  it  requires  some  considera-
tion to  estimate,  and  which  by  those  not  acquainted  with  Anatomy  and
Physiology,  it  would  hardly  be  expected  should  be  fully  appreciated.

From  the  circumstances  just  mentioned,  there  is  no  other  joint  in  the
body,  proba  bly,  which  is  capable  of  yielding  such  loud  sounds  as  the  knee ;

32  DISCOVERY    OF    THE

other  joints,  however,  may  emit  sounds  by  a  similar  mechanism.  Some
of  the  mysterious  noises  perhaps  are  produced  by  other  joints.  We  do  not
claim  that  all  the  rappings  heard  in  different  places  are  produced  at  the
knee ;  but,  as  stated  in  the  context,  the  result  of  the  examination  of  the  mem-
bers of  the  Fox  family  now  in  this  city,  goes  to  show  that  this  is  the  source
in  that  instance.

Note  F,  Page  16. — In  a  communication  published  in  the  Daily  Courier,
of  this  city,  over  the  signature  H.  [George  Haskins,  Esq.,]  the  author
states  that  while  the  "  spirits"  were  replying  to  written  questions,  by  rap-
ping, as  he  pointed  with  his  pencil  to  a  series  of  various  words  and  figures,
among  which  the  answers  sought  for  were  included,  he  observed  the  raps
were  invariably  made  whenever  he  intentionally  allowed  the  pencil  to  rest
upon  the  paper  longer  than  usual.

While  we  were  witnessing  the  phenomena,  at  our  first  and  only  visit,
except  when  invited  to  test  the  correctness  of  the  exposition,  we  noticed
that  generally  the  rap  came  in  the  interval  between  designating  one  figure,
or  word,  and  the  next  in  succession.  This  gave  room  for  selecting  either
that  might  chance  to  express  the  correct  answer,  and  thus  increased  the
probabilities  of  success  in  guessing.

A  critical  observer  in  studying  the  countenances  and  actions  of  the  two
females  while  the  performance  was  going  on,  could  not  fail  to  perceive  that
while  the  younger  was  striving  in  every  way  to  conceal  the  voluntary  act
by  which  the  sounds  were  produced,  and  to  assume  the  different  positions
favorable  to  the  production  of  the  knockings,  the  senior  sister  was  intently
engaged  in  determining  when  the  raps  should  occur.  The  two  sisters  are
never  separated  while  the  manifestations  are  going  on.

Note  G.  Page  16. — The  idea  of  being  able  to  hold  converse  with  the
spirits  of  deceased  relatives  and  friends,  it  is  needless  to  remark,  is  eminent-
ly calculated  to  excite  powerfully  a  mind  impressible  by  what  claims  to  be
supernatural.  There  is  scarcely  any  delusion  to  which  the  assent  of  the
understanding  would  be  more  willingly  yielded  than  to  this.  In  this  fact
we  may  find  reason  for  the  readiness  with  which  many  persons  are  duped,
aside  from  an  innate  love  of  the  marvelous  and  mysterious.  The  imposition
avails  itself  of  one  of  the  strongest  of  the  yearnings  of  the  human  heart,
and  from  this  feature  it  derives  not  a  little  of  its  success.  A  person  per-
suaded of  the  reality  of  a  communion  with  those  who  had  been  honored  or
loved  when  living,  is,  assuredly,  not  in  a  frame  of  mind  suited  for  an  impar-
tial observer,  or  a  candid  reasoner.  Nor  are  the  reports  of  such  persons
worthy  of  much  confidence,  admitting  that  they  do  not  designedly  deceive,

SOURCE    OF   THE    ROCHESTER   KNOCKINGS.  33

but  are  perfectly  honest  in  their  declarations.  They  are  not  credible  wit-
nesses, because  they  cannot,  if  they  would,  divest  themselves  of  emotions,
which  must  necessarily  distort  their  perceptions,  and  bias  the  judgment,  and
are  therefore  incompatible  with  a  philosophical  investigation  for  truth.  A
large  share  of  the  wonders  attested  by  the  converts  to  the  doctrine  of  the
spiritual  origin  of  the  Rochester  Tappings,  are  at  once  disposed  of,  by  al-
lowing proper  weight  to  the  consideration  just  stated.

The  individuals  engaged  in  conducting  the  spiritual  manifestations  appre-
ciate the  importance  of  investing  the  performance  with  as  much  solemnity,
and  formality,  as  practicable.  This  is  shown  by  the  subjoined  regulations
prescribed  by  them,  which,  as  the  reader  will  perceive,  evince  considerable
shrewdness : —

"  Attention  is  respectfully  called  to  the  ensuing  rules  of  order" : —

1.  All  persons  present  at  interviews  are  expected  to  observe  the  order
and  decorum,  which  should  characterize  meetings  of  religious  solemnity
and  importance.

2.  No  controversies  with  reference  to  the  truth  or  falsity  of  the  commu-
nications should  be  entered  into  during  their  continuance.

3.  All  persons  should  follow,  without  delay  or  discussion,  all  directions
given  with  reference  to  conduct,  position,  &c,  as  compliance  with  directions
given  generally  ensures  satisfactory  manifestations,  while  neglect,  or  refusal,
generally  results  in  their  partial  or  complete  cessation.

4.  When  any  individual  indicated  by  the  spirits  is  in  communication  with
them,  no  other  person  should  interfere,  as  this  often  occasions  discontinu-
ance of  the  manifestations.

5.  The  ladies  in  whose  presence  the  manifestations  are  made,  will  use
their  best  exertions  to  satisfy  all  enquiries  ;  but  since  the  manifestations,
alike  in  their  commencement,  character  and  duration,  are  above  their  per-
sonal control,  they  cannot  promise  that  all  persons,  or  all  inquiries,  will
obtain  answers,  no  manifestations  being  made,  except  at  the  spirits'  will.

Terms  of  admission  one  dollar.  Interviews  may  be  obtained  at  the  fol-
lowing hours :  —  9  to  10  A.  M.,  11  to  12  A.  M.,  3^-  to  5  P.  M.  No  admit-
tance  after  these  hours,  or  after  the  interviews  have  commenced.  Gentle-
men will  please  provide  tickets  at  the  office. "

The  "  spirits "  do  by  no  means  hold  communion  with  all  who  invoke
their  presence.  This  being  understood,  the  persons,  as  well  as  the  most
favorable  occasions,  may  be  selected  at  discretion,  which  is  a  matter  of  no
small  advantage,  as  will  be  at  once  obvious.  At  the  time  of  our  visit,  there
were  nearly  twenty  persons  seated  around  the  table.  Of  these,  while  we
c

34  SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.

remained  in  the  room,  the  "  spirits"  were  willing  to  communicate  with  only
one.  We  thought,  at  first,  that  the  selection  was  a  judicious  one  for  the
"  spirits,"  but  the  result  proved  otherwise,  for  scarcely  any  of  a  series  of
questions  was  answered  correctly,  until,  at  length,  the  questioner  stated
that  he  was  fully  satisfied,  and  declined  any  more  interrogations.

APPENDIX

Letter  by  Prof.  Chas.  A.  Lee. — The  subjoined  letter  by  Prof.  Lee,
was  addressed  to  the  editor  of  the  New  York  daily  Tribune,  and  published
in  that  print  on  the  26th  ult.  It  contains  a  brief  statement  of  facts,  relating
to  the  exposition,  which  hare  already  been  presented  in  the  article  by  the
editor  of  the  Buffalo  Medical  Journal.  But  the  author  enters  more  fully
into  a  consideration  of  the  laws  of  sound  involved  in  the  explanations  of  the
fact  that  the  raps  appear  to  be  made  upon  different  objects,  and  in  different
quarters  of  the  room.  The  editor  of  the  Tribune,  in  his  comments  on  the
letter,  says :  "  Dr.  L's  explanation  of  the  manner  in  which  sounds  have
seemed  to  be  produced  at  a  distance  from  the  persons  by  whose  physical
efforts  his  theory  ( ?)  assumes  that  they  actually  were  produced,  appears
sufficient"

THE  "ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS"  EXPOSED.

Phelps  House,  Buffalo,  Friday,  Feb.  21.

To  the  Editor  of  The  Tribune:

Knowing  that  you  have  taken  much  interest  in  the  "  Rockester  Knock-
ing^," so  called,  and  believing  that  you,  together  with  thousands  of  others
have  been  grossly  deceived  by  certain  members  of  the  Fox  Family,  I  feel  it
my  duty  to  make  to  you  this  communication.  You  will  have  noticed  an  ar-
ticle in  the  Buf.  Com.l  of  the  l7thinst.,  headed  "Exposition  of  the  Roches-
ter Knockings,"  to  which  my  name,  in  company  with  the  names  of  Prof's.
Flint  and  Coventry,  is  appended.  I  need  not  go  over  the  ground  there  oc-
cupied, nor  repeat  the  mode  of  reasoning  by  which  the  results  were  arrived
at,  nor  describe  more  fully  the  particulars  of  the  case  of  Mrs.  P.,  who  has
the  power  of  producing  the  same  sounds,  and  by  which,  the  truth  of  our
position  was  demonstrated.  You  will  also  have  noticed  in  the  same  paper
of  the  18th,  a  "  Card"  from  Mrs.  Fish  and  Miss  M.  Fox,  inviting  us  to  test
the  truth  of  our  theory,  and  denying  the  charge  of  their  being  impostors.
On  the  evening  of  the  18th,  we  accordingly  attended  at  their  rooms,  in  com-
pliance with  the  above  invitation.  Some  eight  or  ten  individuals,  including
three  ladies,  friends  of  Mrs.  Fish  and  Miss  F.  were  present,  and  at  our  re-
quest, Mr.  N.  Rogers,  of  the  Phelps  House,  Mr.  Marshall,  Attorney  at  Law,

36  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

and  Judge  Stow.  The  preliminaries  being  arranged,  we  asked  "  whether
the  '  spirits'  would  be  present  and  communicate  with  us  through  the  even-
ing." After  an  interval  of  a  minute  or  so,  "  raps"  were  heard,  and  con-
tinued in  quick  succession  for  some  time,  which  Mrs.  Fish  declared  to  be  an
affirmative  answer.  This  was  repeated,  so  that  there  would  be  no  mistake
as  to  the  willingness,  on  the  part  of  the  "  spirits,"  to  accommodate  us.  This
being  settled,  Mrs.  Fish  and  Miss  Fox  were  requested  to  be  seated  on  chairs,
their  limbs  extended,  and  their  heels  resting  on  cushions.  The  reasons  for
placing  them  in  this  position  were  stated,  viz :  That  we  believed,  in  order
that  the  raps  should  be  heard,  that  the  feet  should  have  some  solid  support,
serving  as  &  fulcrum;  else  the  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the  leg  would
not  throw  the  bone  (head  of  the  tibia)  out  of  place ;  or,  if  so,  no  sound
would  be  heard,  unless  the  concussion,  or  vibration,  which  would  be  thus
produced,  could  be  communicated  to  some  sonorous,  or  vibrating  body.
While  thus  seated,  more  than  fifty  minutes  elapsed,  during  which  no  "  raps"
were  heard,  though  the  "  spirits"  were  urged  and  called  upon  by  Mrs.  F.  to
"  manifest"  themselves.  A  part  of  this  time,  Miss  Fox  was  allowed  to  seat
herself  on  the  sofa,  her  limbs  and  feet  resting  on  the  cushions  of  the  same,
No  sounds  having  been  heard,  it  was  suggested  that  the  ladies  be  allowed
to  take  any  position  they  pleased,  and  see  if  any  "  raps"  were  then  heard.
Accordingly,  they  seated  themselves  on  the  sofa,  their  feet  resting  on  the
floor,  when  immediately  a  loud  succession  of  "  raps"  followed,  and  continued
for  several  minutes.  We  then  proposed  to  try  another  test ;  so,  seating  our-
selves before  the  ladies,  we  grasped  each  of  their  knees  firmly,  so  as  to  pre-
vent any  lateral  movement  of  the  bones ;  the  "  raps"  immediately  ceased^
and  were  not  heard  while  the  knees  were  thus  held,  except  near  the  close
of  the  experiment,  which  continued  once  forty  minutes,  when  two  slight
sounds  were  heard,  on  slightly  relaxing  my  grasp,  while  at  the  same  time  I
distinctly  felt  the  heads  of  the  bones  grating  on  each  other,  and  the  muscles
contracting,  which,  though  a  very  positive  kind  of  evidence  to  me,  I  am
aware  is  not  so  satisfactory  to  bystanders.

I  should  state  that  our  hands  were  removed  several  times  from  the  knees
during  the  trial,  and  "  raps"  were  always  heard  during  the  interval  of  re-
moval. At  the  close  of  the  sitting,  which  continued  till  past  11  o'clock,
Miss  Fox  was  much  affected  and  shed  many  tears,  which  excited  much  sym-
pathy on  the  part  of  some  of  the  gentlemen  present.  I  need  not  add,  that
our  position  was  triumphantly  sustained,  and  that  public  opinion  here,  is  now
almost  universally  on  our  side.

On  the  evening  of  the  19th,  a  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  met  at  the
house  of  Prof.  F.,  when  Mrs.  P.,  the  lady  whom  we  accidentally  discovered
to  have  the  power  of  "rapping"  in  her  knees,  was  present.  During  the
evening  all  the  phenomena  of  the  "  Rochester  Knockings"  were  produced,
the  sounds  being  exactly  similar  in  character  and  degree  to  those  produced
by  the  Foxes.  I  should  state,  perhaps,  that  the  sounds  are  produced,  not
as  first  suggested,  "  by  the  muscles  inserted  into  the  upper  and  inner  side  of
the  large  bone  of  the  leg  (the  tibia)  near  the  knee-joint,  being  brought  into
action  so  as  to  move  the  upper  surface  of  the  bone  just  named,  laterally  up-
on the  lower  surface  of  the  thigh  bone,  (the  femur,)  giving  rise  to  a  partial
lateral  dislocation,"  [Commercial  Advertiser,  Feb.  17;)  but  the  partial  dis-
location consists  in  the  movement  of  the  tibia  outward,  partly  occasioned,  I
believe,  by  pressure  on  the  foot,  there  being  great  relaxation  of  the  liga-

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  37

ments  about  the  knee-joint;  but  chiefly  by  the  action  of  the  muscles  of  the
leg  below  the  knee.  At  least  this  is  the  iact  with  regard  to  Mrs.  P.,  for  by
placing  the  hand  on  the  side  of  the  joint,  the  bone  can  be  felt,  at  the  instant
the  loud  double  rap  is  heard,  slipping  out  laterally,  and  as  suddenly  slipping
back  again ;  although,  by  an  effort  of  the  will,  it  can  be  made  to  glide  back
noiselessly,  so  that  only  one  "  rap"  is  heard.  But  this  can  be  repeated  in
pretty  rapid  succession  for  a  long  time,  although  it  requires  evidently  con-
siderable practice  to  attain  great  skill  in  this  new  and  hitherto  myste-
rious art

You  may  very  naturally  ask  why  has  not  this  physiological  phenomenon
been  known  to  physicians  before  ?  I  answer,  that  it  has,  so  far  as  the
smaller  joints  are  concerned.  Every  person,  almost,  can  snap  the  finger-
joints;  many,  also,  as  Mr.  Burr,  can  snap  their  toe-joints,  and  some  their
ankles,  producing  a  pretty  loud  "  rap"  when  placed  in  contact  with  seme
sonorous  body ;  but  the  same  phenomenon  is  very  seldom  met  with  in  the
larger  joints,  as  the  knee ;  and  when  it  is,  it  has  escaped  particular  observa-
tion, and  not  been  made  known  to  physicians,  as  it  neither  requires,  perhaps,
nor  admits  of  medical  aid.

But  it  may  be  said  by  some,  that  the  above  explanation  is  not  altogether
satisfactory,  inasmuch  as  these  "rappings"  are  heard  in  different  parts  of  the
room  at  the  same  time ;  or  sometimes  on  the  table,  then  the  door,  then  the
walls  of  the  room,  and  at  a  distance  from  the  "  rappers,"  &c.  After  spend-
ing several  hours  a  day,  for  three  days,  with  Mrs.  Fish  and  Miss  F.,  during
which  the  "  raps"  were  invariably  heard,  whenever  called  for,  without,  as  I
recollect,  a  single  exception,  I  found  that  in  no  one  instance  did  the  sounds
seem  to  proceed  from  the  door,  unless  Miss  F.  was  near  enough  to  touch  it
with  her  heel ;  nor  did  the  sounds  seem  to  proceed  from  the  table,  unless
she  was  near  enough  to  the  leg  of  the  table  to  touch  it  with  her  foot ;  but
generally,  they  proceeded  from  the  floor,  apparently  in  her  vicinity,  although
the  floor  could  be  felt  to  vibrate  at  some  distance  from  her,  just  as  the
whole  table  would  vibrate  when  she  placed  her  foot  against  one  of  its  legs.
Much  of  the  confusion  and  error  on  this  subject  arises,  doubtless,  from  an
ignorance  of  the  laws  which  regulate  the  propagation  of  sounds.  We
should  recollect  that  sounds  may  be  propagated  in  various  ways,  as

First:  By  reciprocation,  as  vibrations  are  excited  in  a  sounding  body,
when  it  is  capable  of  yielding  a  musical  tone  of  definite  pitch,  and  another
body  of  the  same  pitch  is  made  to  sound  near  it.  As  examples  of  this,  if
two  strings  of  the  same  length  and  tension  be  placed  alongside  of  each
other,  and  one  of  them  be  sounded  with  a  violin  bow,  the  other  will  be
thrown  into  reciprocal  vibration ;  or  if  the  same  tone  be  produced  near  the
string  in  any  other  manner,  as  by  a  flute  or  a  tuning-fork,  the  same  effect
will  result.  So  also  glass  tumblers  are  made  to  sound  by  a  violin,  played
at  some  distance.  Two  watches,  which  do  not  tick  alike,  will  soon  beat  in
unison  when  placed  near  each  other  on  the  same  table.  On  the  same  prin-
ciple, sonorous  bodies,  as  iron-blowers,  pianos,  &c,  may  be  made  to  give
forth  sounds  in  the  same  room  where  the  "  raps"  are  made,  at  some  dis-
tance from  them ;  and  a  gentleman  of  respectability  informs  me  that  he  has
noticed  this  phenomenon  in  the  room  where  the  ladies  were  exhibiting  here.

Second:  We  may  have  vibrations  of  resonance,  which  occur  when  a
sounding  body  is  placed  in  connection  with  any  other.  Here  one  or  more
parts  will  be  thrown  into  reciprocal  vibration,  even  though  the  tone  of  the

38  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

whole  be  different,  or  it  be  not  capable  of  producing  a  definite  tone  at  all
If  we  place  a  tuning-fork  in  vibration,  upon  a  table  or  sound-board,  we  find
that,  though  the  whole  board  has  no  definite  fundamental  note,  it  will  di-
vide itself  into  a  number  of  parts,  which  will  reciprocate  the  original  sound,
so  as  greatly  to  increase  its  intensity ;  and  the  same  sound-board  will  act
equally  well  for  tuning-forks  of  different  degrees  of  pitch,  although  when
smaller  bodies  are  used  for  resonance,  it  is  essential  that  there  should  be  a
relation  between  its  fundamental  note  and  that  of  the  sonorous  body,  other-
wise no  distinct  resonance  is  produced.  These  principles  are  well  known  to
scientific  musicians,  and  they  are  occasionally  illustrated  in  rooms  where
these  "raps"  are  produced.

Third:  Sounds,  however,  can  strictly  be  said  to  be  propagated,  only,  by
vibrations  of  conduction,  and  in  this  way,  for  the  most  part,  are  the  sounds
produced  by  the  "  rappers"  propagated.  Thus,  when  Miss  Fox  "  raps,"  her
feet  resting  solely  on  the  floor,  the  sound,  in  consequence  of  the  clothes  fall-
ing closely  about  the  feet,  is  somewhat  muffled,  and  the  vibrations  being
propagated  to  the  floor  in  every  direction,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  decide,
where  they  are  most  intense.  Those  having  a  nice  musical  ear,  can  gene-
rally locate  them  directly  in  her  vicinity ;  but,  if  the  attention  is  drawn  to
another  part  of  the  room,  then,  as  in  the  case  of  ventriloquism,  the  sound
seems  to  proceed  thence.  This  power  of  distinguishing  the  direction  of
sounds,  it  is  well  known,  is  chiefly  acquired  by  habit,  and  varies  exceedingly
in  different  individuals.  Thus,  when  these  "  raps"  have  been  heard,  I  have
often  known  them  to  be  located  in  different  parts  of  the  room  by  different
persons  present.  We  judge  of  the  direction  of  sound  chiefly,  if  not  altoge-
ther, by  the  relative  intensity  of  the  impressions  produced  by  the  two  ears
respectively.

If  the  sounds,  then,  be  produced  under  circumstances  where  the  same
impression  is  made  on  both  ears,  or  auditory  nerves,  then  we  are  wholly  un-
able to  designate  from  what  quarter  they  come.  This  often  happens  in  a
small  room,  where  there  are  many  vibrating  bodies,  when  these  muffled
"  raps"  are  heard,  although  we  have  generally  been  able,  by  close  attention,
to  locate  them  in  the  vicinity  of  Miss  Fox.  So,  also,  our  idea  of  the  distance
of  a  sound  is  altogether  an  acquired  perception,  depending  principally  on  the
loudness  or  faintness  of  the  sound,  if  we  have  no  other  indications  to  guide
us.  When  we  are  entirely  ignorant  how  a  certain  sound  is  produced,  and
how  intense  it  might  be  expected  to  be,  we  have  no  means  of  judging  of
the  distance  of  the  sonorous  body  from  us,  and  we  may  suppose  that  a
sound  proceeds  from  a  remote  part  of  the  house,  when  it  is  actually  located
a  few  feet  distact  only.  A  shrill  railroad  whistle,  made  several  miles  off,
appears  to  be  quite  near  to  us,  while  a  dull  sound  appears  remote,  although
made  in  our  immediate  vicinity.  These  principles,  which  are  often  over-
looked or  unknown,  will  serve,  I  believe,  to  explain  all  the  varieties  and  phe-
nomena of  sounds  connected  with  the  "  Rochester  Rappings,"  and  to  recon-
cile the  various  clashing  opinions  which  have  been  made  with  regard  to
their  location,  &c.

I  hope  I  need  make  no  apology  for  this  communication,  which  is  solely
for  the  purpose  of  subserving  the  interests  of  truth,  by  clearing  up  a  mys-
tery which  has  thus  far  baffled  many  enquirers,  and  which  has  been  pro-
ductive of  much  evil  in  the  community.

I  am,  very  respectfully,  yours,  CHARLES  A.  LEE,  M.  D.

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.

RAPPINGS  AT  THE  ANKLE,  BY  MOVEMENTS  OF  A  TENDON.

Since  the  article  taken  from  the  Buffalo  Medical  Journal  was  written,  an
instance  has  fallen  under  observation,  in  which  rappings  are  produced  at  the
ankle  joint  by  the  movements  of  a  tendon.  A  young  man  of  this  city  is  able  to
develop  pretty  loud  sounds  in  this  situation,  which  are  very  similar,  in  char-
acter, to  the  Rochester  knockings.  We  have  been  allowed  to  examine  the
modus  operandi  in  this  instance.  We  have  heard  of  two  other  instances  in
which  sounds  are  produced  in  a  similar  manner.  This  may  be  the  mode
pursued  by  some  of  the  numerous  media  of  spiritual  communications  scat-
tered about  the  country.  It  is,  therefore,  important  to  be  prepared  to  de-
tect the  imposition  when  practised  by  means  of  this  mode  of  originating
mysterious  noises.  We  take  this  occasion  to  repeat,  it  is  not  contended
that  in  all  the  instances  of  spiritual  rappings,  the  bones  entering  into  the
knee  joint  are  the  instruments  of  sound.  Some  rappers,  doubtless,  use  the
knees,  as  do  the  Foxes,  others  may  use  the  toes,  others  the  tendon,  as  will
be  presently  described,  and  others,  perhaps,  other  joints,  or  possibly  other  ten-
dons. The  sounds,  it  will  be  thus  perceived,  are  not  exclusively  articular,
as  was  at  first  supposed,  but  they  may  be  tendonic  as  well  as  toeic  !  All,  how-
ever, have  these  features  in  common,  viz.:  they  are  voluntary,  and  produced
by  the  will  acting  through  voluntary  muscles  upon  moveable  parts  with
which  the  latter  are  connected.  This  new  field  of  scientific  inquiry  has  been
too  recently  opened  to  have  ascertained  all  the  different  ways  in  which
sounds  may  be  originated  in  accordance  with  the  principle  just  stated.

The  rappings  at  the  ankle  joint,  which  we  have  called  tendonic,  are  ex-
plained as  follows : — A  muscle,  called  the  peroneus  longus,  arises  from  the
upper  part  of  the  leg,  just  below  the  knee,  and  terminates  in  a  long  round
tendon,  or  sinew,  or  chord,  which  passes  through  a  groove  in  the  back  part
of  the  bony  protuberance  constituting  the  outer  ankle,  (melleolus  externus.)
The  tendon  then  arches  forward,  passes  under  the  foot,  and  is  attached  to
the  middle  of  the  sole.  In  most  persons  this  tendon  is  firmly  fixed  in  the
groove  by  ligaments,  but  in  those  who  are  able  to  rap  by  means  of  this
agent,  it  is  not  closely  confined,  but  may  be  moved  forward  for  the  space  of
an  inch  or  more,  by  contraction  of  the  muscle  with  which  it  is  connected,
and  the  contraction  of  this  muscle  may  be  produced  by  an  exertion  of  the

40  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

will  acting  exclusively  on  it.  The  quick  and  forcible  movement  of  the  ten-
don over  the  outer  ankle  bone  causes  a  sound,  and  a  second  sound  occurs
when  the  tendon  returns  to  its  place.  The  proximate  cause  of  the  sounds
is  essentially  the  same  as  when  they  are  produced  in  the  joints.  As  in  the
latter  case,  the  extent  to  which  the  movement  may  be  effected,  the  facility
and  force  with  which  it  is  done,  and  the  corresponding  loudness  of  the
sounds,  will  depend  not  a  little  on  practice.  The  young  man  referred  to.
cannot  recollect  the  time  when  he  began  to  rap;  and  during  his  youth  he
was  daily  in  the  habit  of  producing  the  sounds  more  or  less  frequently.  As
it  was  impossible  for  persons  in  the  same  room  to  refer  the  sounds  to  their
true  source,  they  were  supposed  to  proceed  from  different  directions,  and
he  was  thus  accustomed  to  derive  much  amusement  from  the  exercise  of
the  trick.  The  requisite  movements  are  made,  as  in  the  case  of  the  knee,
with  no  visible  motion  of  the  limb.  On  grasping  the  leg,  however,  the
muscle  is  plainly  felt  to  contract.  By  pressing  the  finger  on  the  outer
ankle,  and  preventing  the  slipping  over  it  of  the  tendon,  no  sound  can  be
made.

The  sound  produced  in  this  way  is  not  so  loud  as  that  emanating  from
the  knee.

A  fulcrum  for  the  foot  is  not  necessary  for  this  kind  of  rapping.  The
plan  of  placing  .the  rapper  in  a  position  to  prevent  sonorous  displacements
of  the  bones  of  the  knee  joint,  would,  therefore,  not  suffice  to  detect  the  im-
position.

If  the  rapper  depended  on  this  tendon,  the  way  to  strike  the  "  spirits  "
dumb,  would  be  to  grasp  the  legs  or  ankles  with  the  hand.  The  humor  of
the  spirits  would  not  permit  them  to  make  any  manifestation  under  thes  e
circumstances!

The  frequent  repetition  of  the  movements  of  the  tendon  necessary  to
produce  the  sounds  in  this  case,  do  not  occasion  pain  or  irritation,  more
than  the  semi-dislocations  of  the  knee  joint,  especially  if  the  practice  be
kept  up.  The  parts  become  inured  to  the  friction,  precisely  as  in  the  case
of  the  finger  joints,  which  some  persons,  as  is  well  known,  are  continually
snapping.

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  41

EXPOSITION  BY  SHADRACK  BARNES— TOE OLOGY!

A  series  of  articles  have  lately  appeared  in  the  New  York  Express  on  the
subject  of  the  spiritual  rappings,  signed  Shadrack  Barnes,  containing  some
rich  illustrationsof  the  practical  working  of  the  new  science.  Since  our  exposi-
tion was  published,  the  writer,  who  has  adopted  the  above  signature  as  a  nomme
de  plume,  has  favored  us  with  several  letters,  from  which  we  are  permitted
to  give  extracts,  and  also  to  make  free  use  of  the  articles  referred  to.  The
writer  has  adopted  the  explanation,  originating,  we  believe,  with  Mr.  Burr,
a  public  lecturer,  which  refers  the  JcnocJcings  to  a  peculiar  motion  of  the
toes.  Mr.  Barnes  (using  the  assumed  title)  states,  that  he  can  himself  make
loud  rappings  with  the  toes,  and  reproduce  most  of  the  phenomena  of  sound
which  are  exhibited  by  the  Fox  family  and  others.  Since  our  attention
has  been  called  to  this  method  of  producing  sounds,  we  have  met  with  an
individual  who  is  able  to  make  them  in  that  way  with  facility,  and  without
any  visible  movements.  The  sounds  resemble  those  of  the  Rochester
knockers,  but  are  not  so  loud,  nor  do  the  vibrations  appear  to  be  so  readily
communicated  to  doors,  tables,  &c,  in  contact  with  the  limb.  They  seem
to  us,  in  fact,  to  be  pretty  good  imitations  of  the  spiritual  rappings,  rather
than  the  veritable  rappings  themselves.  We  think  it  highly  probable  that
this  method  of  rapping  is  adopted  by  some  of  the  numerous  media  in  differ-
ent parts  of  the  country,  and  it  should,  therefore,  be  understood  by  those
disposed  to  interest  themselves  in  the  explosion  of  the  imposition.  With
this  view,  we  shall  avail  ourselves  of  the  private  letters  of  Shadrach  Barnes.
"  A  chief  difficulty,"  he  remarks,  "  with  the  knee  explanation  is,  that  not
one  person  in  ten  thousand  can  do  it.  If  you  consider  the  number  of
'  media,''  it  would  seem  that  so  large  a  portion,  who  can  produce  sounds  by
these  means  could  not  be  found."*  He  continues,  "  the  same  effect  would
be  the  consequence,  if  the  toe  doctrine  is  correct,  which  you  have  observed
with  the  Rochester  ladies  ;  that  is,  if  you  hold  the  knees,  they  cannot  rap
without  being  detected  by  the  motion  of  the  muscles ;  and  with  a  thin  shoe,
the  rapping  would  be  faint  and  readily  detected  by  observation,  if  the  heels
are  placed  on  cushions.  I  have  tried  all  these  things  myself.  I  can  rap
loud  with  my  heels  on  a  pillow  or  cushion,  or  while  standing  on  a  bed,  and
I  can  also  rap  quite  well  with  my  feet  entirely  off  the  floor.     But  in  all

*  It  is  doubtful  if  this  objectiou  will  apply-     We  have  already  heard  of  four  persons
in  this  vicinity  who  can  rap  with  the  knee  joints.

42  DISCOVERT   OF    THE

these  cases  the  muscular  movement  would  be  too  apparent  to  permit  any
earthly  hands  to  grasp  my  knees.     I  have  seen  published  statements  of  dis-
creet matrons,  who  have  disrobed  the  damsels,  and  caused  them  to  stand
en  chemise,  on  pillows,  and  still  the  sounds  were  produced.     It  will  be
found  that  in  all  these  cases,  these  ladies  have  been  permitted  to  stand  in
their  shoes.     The  sounds  always  partake  of  the  nature  of  the  locality  of  the
feet.      If  the  "  medium  "  stand  on  a  carpeted  floor,  the  sounds  are  muffled
somewhat,  but  if  on  an  unclad  floor,  they  are  more  sonorous;  a  marble
pavement  is  the  vehicle  of  just  such  "  spiritual "  sounds  as  my  own  toes
produce.     Persuade  the  medium  to  stand  on  a  tin  pan,  or  a  sheet-iron  ves-
sel of  any  kind,  and  the  sounds  are  regular  metalic  sounds.     All  efforts
then  to  persuade  the  spirits  to  rap  on  the  wall  or  table,  or  at  a  distance,
will   hardly   be   available,  because   there  can  be  no   mistake  as  to  the
locality  of  a  sound  so  definite  in  its  character,  and  hence  the  wary  ghosts
will  not  attempt  it.     The  convenience  of  female  drapery  enables  the  ladies
to  place  their  feet  in  a  great  many  positions.     By  tucking  the  foot  under,
and  sitting  upon  it,  the  sounds  are  as  if  on  the  chair,  the  vibrations  are
clearly  perceptible,  but  the  *  honest  searcher  after  truth '  is  more  than  ever
bewildered  as  to  the  precise  location  of  the  "  raps  /"     So  if  the  rapper  sits
at  a  table  contiguous  to  one  of  its  legs,  she  can  easily,  and  without  any  mo-
tion that  could  be  observed,  place  a  foot  against  the  table  leg,  then  the  rap-
ping is  on  the  table,  the  vibration  is  plainly  felt,  and  the  intensity  and
quality  of  the  sound  will  depend  upon  the  position  of  the  foot,  whether
against  the  top  or  bottom  of  the  table  leg.     The  common  centre  table  is
most  convenient,  the  horizontal  portion  to  which  the  upright  shaft  is  at-
tached, serves  for  a  very  good  resting  place  for  the  feet."

"  Can  you  conceive  of  anything  more  amusing  than  to  sit  with  a  '  circle'
of  '  rappers,'  and  to  throw  in  an  occasional  rap !  rap !  of  your  own,  in  an-
swer to  some  interrogatory  ?  The  joke  is,  that  the  priestess  does  not  ob-
ject, for  the  'counterfeit  presentment'  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the
genuine.  I  have  said  that  I  can  rap  loud;  and  that,  with  all  looking  at
my  feet,  no  motion  can  be  perceived.  I  will  go  further,  and  say,  that  with
a  few  weeping  women,  in  the  belief  that  I  am  a  '  medium,'  and  a  few  be-
fogged harmonial  philosophers,  I  can  rap  while  they  have  their  hands  on  my
feet,  and  not  be  detected.  I  mentioned  that  I  thought  pulverised  soap
stone  would  stop  the  rapping.  This  substance  is  used  by  boot  makers  to
facilitate  the  sale  of  tight  boots.  Its  effects  on  leather  are  curious.  I  ven-
ture the  following  prescription  for  the  disease  : — R.  Pulv.  Sapolapis,  q.  s.
Introduce  into  the  toe  of  the  shoe."

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  43

As  we  have  remarked,  it  is  altogether  probable  that  some  of  the  spiritual
rappers  may  employ  the  toes  in  the  mode  mentioned  by  the  writer  of  the
foregoing.  It  is  therefore  well  to  be  aware  of  this  source  of  sounds,  in  con-
ducting examinations  for  proof  of  the  fact  that  they  are  occasioned  by  vo-
lition, acting  upon  voluntary  muscles.  Let  the  toes  be  looked  after  on  such
occasions,  as  well  as  the  knees  and  other  joints.  Some  may  produce  sounds
both  with  the  knees  and  toes.  In  the  case  of  the  younger  sister  of  the  Fox
family  now  in  this  city,  however,  we  are  fully  satisfied  that  the  rappings
come  from  the  knee.

The  fact  of  such  loud  rappings  being  produced  by  the  toes,  ought  to
satisfy  those  persons  who  think  it  incredible  that  the  Kochester  knockings
can  emanate  from  the  knee  joint,  the  physical  conditions  for  the  production
of  sound  being  very  much  greater  in  the  latter.

We  proceed  to  give  the  developments  contained  in  the  communications
by  Shadrach  Barnes  for  the  N.  Y.  Express.  The  facts  contained  in  the
following  article  speak  for  themselves.  The  person  to  whom  the  fictitious
letter  was  addressed,  La  Roy  Sunderland,  is  Editor  of  a  weekly  periodical
entitled  the  Spirit  World,  devoted  especially  to  "  communications  from
spirits/"  The  extent  to  which  this  remarkable  imposition  has  been  car-
ried is  truly  astonishing.  A  large  portion  of  the  community  who  have
taken  no  pains  to  look  into  the  matter,  are  probably  not  aware  of  the  pro-
gress it  has  made.

We  copy  the  article  from  the  Buffalo  Morning  Courier,  retaining  the
introductory  remarks  prefaced  by  the  Editor  of  that  print.

The  Spiritual  Rappings. — The  following  article  from  the  N.  Y.  Ex-
press, written  over  the  assumed  name  of  "  Shadrach  Barnes,"  exposes  the
infamous  humbuggery  practised  by  Mr.  La  Roy  Sunderland,  one  of  the
great  "  spiritual  rappers"  of  Boston.  It  it  a  remarkably  rich  develope-
ment,  and  should  be  read  by  every  one  who  has  been  to  see  the  "rappers"
here,  or  who  has  any  curiosity  on  the  subject.  A  few  more  exposures,
such  as  this,  will  so  nauseate  the  public  with  the  "  science"  that  they  will
look  upon  all  its  "  professors"  with  a  feeling  that  we  will  not  take  the  trou-
ble to  name : —

In  former  communications  on  the  subject  of  "Mysterious  Rappings"  a
few  facts  and  observations  have  been  presented  in  a  plain  way,  with  a  view
to  show  the  knavery  of  this  blasphemous  imposture.  Without  attempting
to  argue  that  rapping  and  kicking  are  indecorous  and  unseemly  ways  for
disembodied  spirits  to  adopt  for  the  purpose  of  making  themselves  known,
I  have  been  willing  to  receive  their  manifestations  in  any  way  they  may
choose  to  adopt,  and  have  never  resorted  to  any  indiscriminate  cry  of  hum-
bug and  collusion,  without  fair  investigation.  It  has  been  shown  that  the
infinite  variety  of  get-offs,  subterfuges  and  evasions  would  prevent  any

44  DISCOVERY   OE    THE

thing  like  a  fair  investigation,  and  that  a  resort  to  pious  frauds  to  try  the
spirits,  has  been  absolutely  necessary.  The  similia  similibus,  "hair  of  the
same  dog  will  cure  the  bite," — humbug  for  humbug — system,  has  thus  far
been  productive  of  the  most  satisfactory  results.

The  following  correspondence  is  a  practical  application  of  this  method,
and  is  at  the  same  time  interesting  as  showing  that  Boston  "  ghosts"  are
no  more  reliable  than  the  spirits  of  Rochester  or  Brooklyn.  The  first  let-
ter, signed  Phebe  Newell,  was  written  by  myself.  If  in  this  vast  city
there  should  chance  to  be  any  other  Phebe  Newell,  I  wish  it  distinctly
understood  that  she  had  no  agency  in  the  following  orthographical  produc-
tion. The  personal  identity  of  Shadrach  with  Phebe  can  be  fully  estab-
lished. And  so  if  there  be  discovered  any  Mary  Ellens  among  the  Per-
kinses, they  are  no  children  of  mine,  unless  they  are  out  of  their  heads,
and  flitey,  and  with  their  "  dear  Mother  Newell"  all  the  time, — and  even
then  I  shall  ignore  the  maternity.  But  here  is  the  letter  of  the  afflicted
Phebe,  verbatim,  et  literatim,  et  punctuatim.

"  respected  sur  I  send  one  dollar  if  you  please  ut  have  some  questions
respecting  of  my  daughter  which  departed  this  lif  January  the  19.  1851  i
brot  her  up  from  a  child  she  was  a  daughter  too  me  her  name  is  mary
ellen  Perkins  and  was  19  when  she  dide  my  mind  is  exercirsed  very  much
in  respect  of  her  state  of  mind  in  a  religious  point  of  view  which  if  you
Communion  with  spirits  in  the  other  world  she  was  flitey  and  out  of  her
head  as  the  poet  sais  afflictions  soar  long  time  she  bore  physician  was  in
vain  send  me  a  letter  i  want  two  here  if  her  state  of  mind  is  happy  no
more  at  present

PHEBE  NEWELL

new  Yore  sity  feb,  the  31  st  1851.

mr  laroy  Sunderland."

This  letter,  enclosing  one  dollar,*  addressed  in  characteristic  chirography
to  Mr.  La  Roy  Sunderland,  Boston,  was  read  to  a  friend,  and  by  him  de-
posited in  the  post  office,  postage  paid,  Feb.  13,  1851.

The  following  is  Mr.  Sunderland's  reply :

Eliot-St.,  Boston,  Mass.,
■J-  past  10,  A.  M.,  Feb.  15,  1851

.\

My  Sister  Dear: — I  have  this  moment  laid  your  letter  before  the  Spi-
rits, and  received  the  following  answer: — Tell  her,  Mary  is  happy  and
with  her  dear  Mother  Newell  all  the  time.  I  watch  over  her  for  good ;
and  I  love  her  now  more  than  ever.  I  will  be  near  her  and  stand  at  her
right  hand  when  she  reads  your  answer.  She  must  not  grieve.  I  will
soon  make  sounds  in  her  presence  when  she  is  alone,  which  she  can  hear,
when  she  will  know  it  is  me."

"  And  I  understood  the  spirits  to  say  that  you  was  not  her  own  mother,
but  she  loved  you  as  her  own,  and  she  said  she  came  here  to  tell  what  to

*  This  is  the  fourth  dollar  I  have  paid  for  spiritual  information.     I  am  free  to  admit
in  all  instances  I  have  received  a  quid  pro  quo.  S.  B.

SOURCE  OP  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS,  45

say  to  you  when  I  answered  your  letter.     In  the  Sphere  where  Mary  has
gone  none  are  miserable,  but  all  are  as  happy  as  they  possibly  can  be."
Yours  truly,

LA  ROY  SUNDERLAND."

"  It  is  not  often  that  I  attempt  an  answer  to  letters  like  yours,  but  I  sup-
pose I  was  attracted  to  Mary's  sweet  spirit  to  gratify  you.  She  has  stood
-by  me  while  writing,  as  I  believe."

This  "  gem  from  the  spirit  land"  comes  written  on  what  may  be  called,
I  suppose,  Spiritual  world  paper .  The  sheet  is  surmounted  with  an  en-
graved vignette,  in  which  are  clouds  in  fleecy  plenitude,  and  in  their  midst
is  a  series  of  three  concentric  circles.  In  the  inner  circle  is  a  triangle,
within  which  is  a  gas  light  burning.  "  Wisdom,"  "  Love,"  "  Will,"  appear
on  the  shadowy  triangle,  while  "  Truth,"  "  Goodness"  and  "Justice"  are
well  bestowed  in  the  background  as  outsiders.  The  following  is  printed
beneath:

$£W  "  For  Information  in  answer  to  all  Questions  respecting  Spirits,
and  the  Future  Destiny  of  the  Human  Race,  read  the  paper  with  the
above  title  (Spirit  World.)  It  contains  communications  produced  by  Au-
dible responses  from  the  Spirit  World;  explains  the  use  of  Spiritual  mani-
festations, and  the  conditions  on  which  they  are  made.  Pledged  to  no
Traditional  Dogmas  in  Theology,  Philosophy,  or  Science,  it  acknowledges
no  authority  but  the  Infinite  Harmonia,  and  takes  for  the  scope  of  its
mission  the  universal  diffusion  of  Goodness,  Justice  and  Truth.  Published
weekly  ($1  per  volume,)  at  28  Eliot  street."

Mr.  Sunderland  is  the  Ursa  Major  of  the  Spiritual  doings  at  Boston.
His  paper  contains  all  that  is  late  and  interesting  from  the  upper  spheres.
He  tells  us  the  communications  he  receives  are  audible,  truthful  and  relia-
ble responses  from  Angels,  and  often  speaks  of  the  assistance  he  derives
from  these  celestial  visitants  in  the  discharge  of  his  Editorial  duties.  It
seems  he  believes  he  was  "  attracted  by  Mary's  sweet  spirit,"  and  she  stood
by  him  while  he  was  writing!  I  may  as  well  state  that  I  was  not  con-
scious of  any  spirit  standing  by  my  "right  side"  whilst  reading  the  letter
from  Mr.  -S.  So  I  am  inclined  to  think  Miss  "  Mary  Ellen  Perkins"  was
not  at  my  right  hand,  though  she  may  have  been  *  over  the  left.'  As  to
"  audible  sounds"  which  are  to  be  vouchsafed  to  "  dear  Mother  'Newell  "
while  alone,  by  this  shadow  of  a  shade,  Miss  Perkins,  I  can  only  say,  bring-
on  the  sounds!  Phebe  "is  willing."

The  late  Braintree  suicide  has  called  public  attention  to  the  considera-
ration  of  some  of  the  consequences  of  the  delusion.  No  person  can  read
the  artless  statement  of  the  poor  girl,  (George  Sand,)  left  behind  her,  with-
out being  filled  with  commiseration  for  the  deluded  victims,  and  contempt
for  the  heartless  sharpers  who  deceived  them.

The  report  of  the  Superintendent  of  the  different  Insane  Hospitals  will
furnish  another  chapter.  We  shall  continue  to  "  try  the  spirits,"  consider-
ing it  to  be  right  to  expose  all  the  trickery  and  villainy  we  can  get  hold  of.
The  delicate  morality  of  the  Providence  Post  will,  I  suppose,  be  shocked  by
the  spurious  letter  of  "Mrs.  Newell."  I  can't  help  it;  it  is  a  part  of  the
similia  similibus  system  that  provides  for  "  tests  "  which  cannot  be  thwarted
by  Peter  Funks  or  "  Philosophers."  The  original  letter  of  Mr.  Sunderland
is  in  the  hands  of  the  editors  of  the  Express,  and  also  a  copy  of  Phebe's

46

DISCOVERY   OF   THE

epistle,  in  her  own  caligraphy.  Now  let  us  see  how  these  spirits  will  get
out  of  this  trap.  The  "  lying  spirits  *  game  won't  do  this  time ;  and  it
will  hardly  be  worth  while  to  cry  out  "  error  i'  the  bill."

SHADRACH  BARNES.

The  following  letter  from  "  Shadrech  Barnes,"  relates  to  the  foregoing
communication : —

"  Since  the  publication  of  the  above  correspondence,  I  have  been  much
amused  with  the  grave  explanations  of  the  '  faithful/  and  the  ingenious  ex-
cuses, curious  subterfuges  and  endeavors,  to  get  '  Brother  Sunderland'  out
of  the  snare.

"  As  might  be  expected,  the  old  story  of  attributing  all  to  the  machina-
tions of  '  lying,  discordant  or  insane  spirits,'  is  most  prominent.  There  is
too  much  harmony  for  discordant,  too  much  '  method  in  the  madness'  for
insane  spirits,  and  while  the  mendacity  is  sufficiently  apparent,  we  are  in-
clined to  believe  its  origin  is  a  long  way  this  side  of  Styx.

"  It  so  happens  this  plan  for  trapping  Sunderland  was  devised  with  espe-
cial reference  to  this  objection,  after  reading  his  own  rules  for  judging  of
the  reliability  of  spiritual  communications  as  published  by  him  in  his  '  Spi-
rit World.'  After  the  long  and  philosophic  expositions  of  spiritual  com-
munications with  especial  reference  to  their  being  genuine,  with  the  assis-
tance, as  he  avers,  of  celestial  visitants,  one  would  suppose  he  was  so
completely  au  fait  in  matters  of  ultra  mundane  converse,  that  no  *  goblin
damned'  could  by  any  possibility  fool  him.  But  a  few  week  since  a  '  circle'
of  '  Harmonial  Philosophers'  met  at  his  house,  and  after  successfully  evok-
ing the  '  venerated  spirit'  of  the  late  Dr.  William  Ellery  Channing,  by  his
assistance  and  approval,  proceeded  to  establish  the  laws  by  which  the  cor-
rectness and  reliability  of  spiritual  communications  could  be  determined.
Now  after  a  careful  examination  of  the  labors  of  these  sapient  codifiers,  I
unhesitatingly  declare  that  this  case  of  '  Phebe  Newell'  is  clearly  '  within
the  statute  in  such  case  made  and  provided.'

"  According  to  these  laws — much  depends  on  the  '  medium' — '  When  the
'  medium'  is  low  or  surrounded  by  mortals  and  spirits  who  are  low  in  the
sphere  of  knowledge  and  goodness,  the  responses  through  such  mediums
must  correspond,  and  consequently  be  more  or  less  discordant.'  '  All  me-
diums are  known  and  estimated  according  to  their  works. '  Much  depends
on  attraction,  a  kind  of  spiritual  affinity — the  general  principle  of  which
seems  to  be  that  '  birds  of  a  feather  flock  together.'  Thus,  '  spirits  who
have  not  progressed  very  far  may  be  attracted  by  congenial  spiritual  affini-
ties in  the  human  world  to  appear  or  to  respond  in  borrowed  names*.

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  BLOCKINGS.  47

"  This  masquerading  policy  seems  to  obtain  quite  generally  among  the
spirits.  One  writer  and  exponent  says :  '  there  are  gangs  of  unprogressed
spirits  from  the  first,  second,  and  third  spheres,  whose  minds  are  dark,'  who
are  opposed  to  this  '  diffusion  of  knowledge/  and  he  intimates  these  chaps
hang  around,  and  keep  off  the  more  respectable  and  refined  celestials  who
are  disposed  to  make  communications.  The  same  writer  says,  these  scamps
are  in  the  habit  of  lying  about  their  location,  as  well  as  names,  '  because
they  do  not  wish  it  known  that  their  grade  is  so  low  in  the  other  world !'
and  he  gravely  suggests,  that  when  we  find  these  unprogressed  spirits  dis-
posed to  put  on  airs,  we  must  treat  them  kindly,  '  gently  reprove  them,  ask
them  questions  as  to  their  avocations,  anxieties,  hopes,  associations,'  and
their  views  on  matters  and  things  in  general ;  and  finally,  '  ask  them  to  tell
us  candidly  what  sphere  they  are  in.'  Another  writer  says,  he  has  found
that  the  best  way  is  to  deal  harshly,  to  scold  at  these  graceless  interlopers,
and  by  such  means  compel  them  to  own  up,  and  doff  their  aliases.

*  I  have  so  much  confidence  in  the  skill  and  judgement  of  Mr.  Sunderland,
that  I  presume  he  availed  himself  of  a  '  medium'  who  was  reliable,  and  not
low,  or  such  as  would  attract  any  '  congenial  spiritual  affinities'1  like  those
unprogressed  sans  culottes,  of  '  kingdom  come,'  just  mentioned,  when  he  re-
ceived the  consolatory  message  from  '  Mary  Ellen  Perkins'  to  'dear  Mother
Newell'

"  '■  All  mediums  are  known  by  their  works,'  and  the  '  works'  of  Sunder-
land's '  mediums'  hitherto,  have  been  considered  marvelous  in  the  extreme,
both  for  goodness  and  knowledge.  This  medium  has  attracted  the  spirit
of  the  lamented  Dr.  Channing ;  and  La  Roy  says,  at  one  spiritual  sitting,
where  his  medium  and  another  were  present,  the  spirits  said  there  were
t  more  than  three  hundred  angels  present ! '  Such  an  extensive  delegation
from  the  unseen  world  would  seem  to  imply  that  Mr.  Sunderland  is  not
wanting  in  ultra-mundane  friends,  and  the  only  mystery  is  that  they  should
so  far  forget  their  duties  as  guardian  spirits,  as  not  to  cry  out — '  Beware  of
counterfeits ! '

"  Among  the  laws  established  by  the  *  circle'  of  spiritual  Solons,  it  is  laid
down  '  that  reliable  responses  are  never  to  be  expected  from  spirits,  between
whom  and  some  one  in  the  circle,  some  direct  relation  can  not  be  shown
to  exist'  Now,  as  the  imaginary  '  Miss  Perkins'  had  no  direct  relation  with
'  Brother  Sunderland,'  it  has  been  doubted  whether  this  message  was  from
a  reliable  spirit  The  same  difficulty  has  been  suggested  in  regard  to  the
spirit  of  Dr.  Channing,  by  a  correspondent  of  Sunderland.  La  Roy  dis-
poses of  this  man  of  little  faith  very  quickly,  by  saying  there  was  a  '  direct

48

DISCOVERY   OF   THE

paternal  relation'  existing.     'Advice'  was  given;  and,  lie  asks  triumphantly
*  can  advice  be  given  and  received  without  any  relation  ?  '     The  case  of
Phebe  is  perfectly  plain  now.     '  Mary  Allen'  gives  Mather  Newell  advice
and  consolation ;  and  if  sceptics  will  doubt  the  genuineness  of  '  Miss  Per-
kins and  her  message,  they  will  be  compelled  to  presume  that  Mr.  Sunder-
land has  been  humbugged,  both  in  spirit  land  and  Yankee  land;  a  con-
clusion, by  the  way,  which  seems  fully  warranted  by  the  facts.     If  he  was
not '  attracted  by  Mary's  sweet  spirit,'  and  if  she  did  not  stand  at  his  side
when  he  wrote  to  Sister  Newell,  I  should  be  inclined  to  think  that  perhaps
Mr.  S.  was  attracted  by  the  dollar  enclosed  in  'Mrs.  Newell's'  letter;  and,
considering  that  he  might  minister  to  a-  mind  so  much  '  exercised,'  without
resorting  to  the  usual  mummery  of  calling  up  spirits,  he  wrote  himself  down
an  ass,  at  the  same  time  he  wrote  to  Mrs.  Newell ;  and  his  promise  of  sounds
to  the  trusting  Phebe  is  a  draft  in  perspective  on  the  credulity  of  the  ima-
ginary old  lady.     The  hint,  in  Phebe's  letter,  that  '  she  was  a  daughter  to
me,'  was  snapped  up  very  greedily,  and  the  marvelous    discovery  that
'Mary  Allen'  was  not  an  'own  child,'  was  set  forth  as  an  instance  of  re-
markable spiritual  ken !     In  this  instance,  as  in  every  other  where  it  has
been  tried  by  myself,  leading  questions,  interrogatories  suggestive  of  the
answers  have  produced  replies  corresponding.     Afford  the  mediums  the  in-
ducement and  means  to  deceive,  as  they  suppose,  and  they  immediately
avail  themselves  of  it.     The  knowledge  imparted  is  just  what  the  mediums
have  to  give  forth.     Attempt  to  humbug  the  medium  in  a  bungling  manner,
or  purposely  let  them  '  smell  a  rat,'  and  *  lying  spirits'  are  off  in  a  twinkling,
and  the  '  good  spirits  will  rap  reproof  suitable  to  the  occasion !     Any  man
possessing  two  grains  of  common  sense,  sufficient  to  rub  together,  and,  by
attrition,  develop  the  newest  modicum  of  mental  electricity,  may  determine
the  laws  which  govern  these  pretended  marvels.     There  need  be  no  con-
sultation of  the  musty  tomes  of  magic  lore,  no  wierd  incancantations,  no
'me wings  of  brindled  cats,'  no  calling  up  of  venerated  spirits.     Humbug
the  humbugs.  "SHADRACH  BARNES."

The  following  extracts,  from  communications,  by  the  same  spirited  writer,

for  the  New  York  Express,  will  interest  the  reader.     Shadrack  Barnes

proves  himself  fully  competent  to  "  try  the  spirits,"  and  to  develop  results

perfectly  satisfactory   to  all  save    those    who  are    hyper-credulous,  and

who    are,    unfortunately,    committed   in  their  belief   in   this  astonishing

humbug : —

*  For  the  ultimate  purpose  of  eliciting  truth,  it  became  necessary  to  make
use  of  the  pro  tern,  deception  I  have  described.     Finding  how  readily  cor-

SOURCE    OF   THE   ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  49

rect  hints  were  appropriated,  false  ones  were  tried.  The  story  of  the
drowned  sister,  and  the  anxiety  of  the  family,  and  all  that,  were  fabrications,
designed  to  show,  which  they  certainly  do,  that  if  inducements  are  held  out
to  deceive,  these  'spirits'  avail  themselves  of  them;  that  the  information  they
afford  is  according  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Rappers,  that  the  answers  are
their  answers,  and  that  these  revelations  and  marvelous  manifestations  are
not  such  a  long  way  'above  the  controul  of  the  ladies  as  many  suppose.
All  these  rappings  were  on  the  floor,  and  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of
Mrs.  B.'s  feet.  The  rappings  were  single,  differing  from  those  of  the  Fox
family.*

"  St.  Paul  would  not  rap  on  the  table,  nor  in  any  locality  except  beneath
the  feet  of  the  lady.

"  Upon  mentioning  these  facts  to  a  gentleman  who  was  a  firm  believer  in
these  revelations,  and  well  acquainted  with  the  '  medium,'  I  was  told  that
I  had  been  deceived  by  lying  '  spirits.'  some  '  goblins  damned' — who  had
stole  the  Every  of  the  apostle  for  the  occasion !  Certainly  the  lying  is  suf-
ficiently apparent.  This  plan  of  ascribing  incorrect  replies  to  lying,  irregu-
lar, and  discordant  spirits,  is  a  common  and  convenient  subterfuge.  That
'  lying  spirits'  could  so  readily  assume  the  style  and  name  of  St.  Paul  as  to
deceive  the  Medium,  and  those  faithful  exponents,  the  Doctor  and  friend,
is  indeed  strange !  There  was  no  hiatus  between  the  communications  con-
cerning the  drowned  sister,  and  those  elaborate  accounts  of  the  manners
and  customs  of  the  Spirit  World.  The  former  portion  of  the  session  was
regarded  as  conclusive  evidence  of  the  reality  of  the  spiritual  mission.
These  considerations  derive  some  importance  just  now,  from  the  fact  that  it
is  said  a  book  of  *  Spiritual  Expositions,'  derived  from  St.  Paul,  with  this
same  lady  as  a  '  medium,'  is  about  being  published,  and  I  believe  something
of  the  kind  from  this  source  has  already  been  printed.  It  becomes,  there-
fore, a  matter  of  grave  investigation  how  far  we  shall  be  able  to  distinguish
those  '  gems  from  the  spirit  world,'  so  abundantly  vouchsafed  by  the  '  coun-
terfeit presentments,'  from  the  veritable  revelations  of  him  '  who  fought  the
beasts  at  Ephesu's.'

"  The  Fox  family,  while  in  this  city,  were  humbugged  in  a  manner  simi-
lar to  that  detailed  above.  Some  more  management  was  required.  Foxes
are  proverbially  on  the  look  out  for  traps.  Their  long  experience  had
learned  them  to  be  on  the  qui  vive.  They  had  the  first  intimations  that
disembodied  spirits  could  communicate  with  the  living  by  audible  sounds !
It  was  in  this  family  that  the  ghost  of  that '  pedlar  who  was  buried  in  the
cellar,  first  made  his  complaint,  and  who  would  not  rest  until  the  neighbors
dug  for  his  bones ! '  The  pale,  cadaverous  man  who  officiated  as  door-
keeper at  the  hotel,  was  furnished  with  a  few  hints  in  regard  to  a  deceased
sister.  As  this  was  my  first  appearance  with  *  Spiritual  Rappers,'  some
general  survey  was  requisite.  But  when  it  was  my  turn  to  make  the  usual
interrogatory,  '  Will  the  spirit  converse  with  me  ? '  I  got  no  answer — the
time  for  the  '  Session'  expired,  the  spirit  rapped  'Done,'  and  I  was  but  little
wiser.  So  three  sessions  passed.  Each  day  the  door-keeper,  when  he  took
the  dollar,  informed  me  that  most  persons  obtained  some  communication  ;
and  he  thought  I  must  ultimately  succeed  in  getting  a  reply  to  my  queries.
The  fourth  session  had  already  passed  without  any  more  demonstrations

*  We  have  lately  met  with  a  case  in  which  the  sounds  on  the  knee  were  produced,
not  by  a  lateral  displacement,  but  by  a  movement  backward  and  forward.  In  this  case
the  knocking  is  single. — Ed.  Buff.  Jour.

50  DISCOVERT   OF   THE

than  before ;  the  spirits  had  rapped  out  '  Done,'  and  the  ladies  were  about
leaving  the  table  to  call  for  the  rappings  on  the  door  as  was  their  custom?
when  my  faithful  door-keeper  came  in.  and  asked  if  I  had  received  answers
to  my  inquiries.  He  was  answered  negatively.  '  Well,'  said  he,  addressing
the  ladies,  '  if  this  gentleman  is  ever  going  to  have  answers,  I  should  think
it  high  time.'  He  then  wished  me  to  put  the  question  again.  This  was
done  with  much  humility,  and  I  need  not  add,  with  much  faith,  and  a
prompt  rap,  rap,  was  the  reply!  Ques.- — 'Will  the  spirit  of  my  sister  con-
verse with  me  ? '  Two  raps.  To  make  all  sure, — '  Is  this  the  spirit  of  my
departed  sister  ? '  Two  raps.  By  writing  down  figures,  I  learned  that  she
was  27  years  old  at  the  time  of  her  death.  This  number,  27,  was  obtained
by  peculiar  intonation,  and  was  the  age  agreed  upon  with  a  friend  who
went  with  me.  I  asked  if  spirits  could  move  from  place  to  place,  if  they
could  converse,  and  was  answered  in  the  affirmative.  Ques. — '  Are  these
spirits  acquainted  with  the  spirits  who  make  the  manifestations  at  the  house
of  Dr.  Phelps,  at  Stratford,  Conn.'     Ans. — Two  light  raps.

"  A  gentleman  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  this  response  was  by  faint
rapping,  and  Mrs.  Fish  said  it  meant  they  were  slightly  acquainted.  With-
out being  able  to  discover  the  relation  between  slight  rapping  and  slight
acquaintance,  I  must  conclude  this  is  the  correct  explanation.

"  Ques. — Are  these  spirits  acquainted  with  the  spirits  who  rap  at  the
house  of  Mr.  Salsbury,  in  Mina,  Chatauque  county,  of  this  state.  Answered
by  two  raps.

"  This  is  the  first  I  had  heard  of  such  demonstrations  at  this  place.  The
name  and  abiding  place  of  Mr.  Salsbury  were  alike  portions  of  a  pious  fraud
to  *  try  the  spirits.'

"  The  moving  chairs  and  tables,  and  other  physical  demonstrations,  I
believe,  was  not  attempted  by  the  Foxes  while  in  this  city.  It  must  not  be
forgotten,  that  whenever  this  thing  takes  place,  it  is  customary  for  spirits  to
call  for  the  '  dark  circle.'  The  lights  must  be  extinguished !  Believers
answer  the  cavils  of  the  worldly,  in  regard  to  this  '  dark  circle,'  by  saying
they  are  instructed  by  the  spirits,  that  these  demonstrations  require  a  visi-
ble appearance  of  the  ghostly  power  that  produces  them,  and  as  the  world
is  not  yet  prepared  for  their  appearance,  the  darkness  is  a  requisite.  Yet
many  of  the  faith  say  they  have  seen  tables  and  chairs  moved  in  broad
daylight !  but  they  make  no  mention  of  the  visible  appearance  which  the
spirits  declare  to  be  a  necessary  concomitant."

As  evidence  that  these  denizens  of  the  "  upper  deep  "  can  be  led  along,
"  sold  "  and  humbugged  as  readily  as  the  "  earth  earthy,"  I  give  you  the
following: — In  company  with  two  friends,  I  attended  by  invitation,  a  "spi-
ritual session"  at  the  house  of  a  gentleman  in  Brooklyn.  Mrs.  Benedict
was  the  "  medium."  We  agreed  upon  a  plan  to  "  try  the  spirits  "  before-
hand. The  substance  of  which  was,  to  act  on  the  doctrine  of  "  similia
similibus — humbug  those  who  attempted  to  humbug  us.  I  was  to  be  a
believer;  my  friends,  open  to  conviction,  willing  to  examine.  When  we
were  ushered  into  the  presence  we  were  very  fortunate  in  finding  the
ground  unoccupied.  The  worthy  Doctor  in  whose  dwelling  these  marvels
transpired,  was  a  firm  believer.  He  ga\  e  us  an  account  of  the  strange  de-
velopments and  extraordinary  sayings  of  the  spirits,  which  of  course  we
swallowed  without  hesitancy.

As  soon  as  we  were  seated  around  a  table,  profound  silence  for  a  few
moments  was  observed,  in   order  to  give  the  spirits  an  opportunity  of

SOURCE  OP  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  51

coming  around,  then  a  few  faint  rappings  were  heard,  immediately  in  the
vicinity  of  Mrs.  B.'s  feet.  The  Doctor  then  asked  in  a  lugubrious  tone,  if
spirits  were  present,  and  more  indefinite  rapping  was  the  reply.  This,
however,  was  so  vague  and  unreliable  that  another  time  of  profound
silence  was  required.  During  this  time  of  stillness  our  Doctor  received
two  or  three  shocks,  apparently  so  violent  that  he  nearly  leaped  out  of  his
chair.  This  was  a  strong  attack  upon  our  gravity,  but  by  biting  lips,  &c,
we  managed  to  live  through  it,  and  maintain  our  faces  with  the  most  be-
soming longitudinally.

The  spirits,  however,  were  not  inclined  to  converse  freely  with  the  Doc-
tor, and  at  his  suggestion,  I  asked  if  the  spirit  would  converse  with  me.
The  reply  was  three  distinct  raps,  which  with  this  "  medium  "  means  Yes.
Question — "  will  the  spirit  of  my  sister  converse  with  me  f"  No  answer.
Question — "will  any  spirit  converse  with  me?"  Answer — three  raps.
The  Doctor  said  this  was  Paul ;  he  knew  the  raps !  To  be  sure  of  it  I
asked—"  is  it  the  spirit  of  St.  Paul  ?"  Three  raps.  Question — "  is  the
spirit  of  St.  Paul  acquainted  with  the  spirit  of  my  sister  ?  Three  raps.
Question—"  will  the  spirit  communicate  with  me  for  my  sister  ?"  Three
raps.  Question — "  will  the  spirit  of  St.  Paul  inform  me  of  the  manner  of
my  sister's  death  ?"  There  was  no  reply,  and  without  pressing  the  ques-
tion, I  remarked  casually  with  much  apparent  sincerity,  that  my  sister  was
lost  on  the  steamboat  Erie  which  was  burned  a  few  years  since  on  Lake
Erie,  near  Silver  Creek;  that  our  family  had  felt  much  anxiety  to  know
the  circumstances  attending  her  death.

The  Doctor  wished  to  know  if  the  body  was  ever  found,  and  was  an-
swered in  the  negative.  Question — "will  St.  Paul  inform  me  of  the  man-
ner of  my  sister's  death  ?"  Answered  by  a  succession  of  raps  which  was
interpreted  as  a  call  for  the  alphabet.  The  alphabet  was  repeated,  and
the  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles  spelled  out  "jumped  overboard!"  Question —
"  was  she  in  company  with  any  one  ?"  Three  raps.  Question — "  if  I  call
the  names  of  several  persons,  will  the  spirit  indicate  by  a  rap,  when  1
mention  the  right  one  ?  Three  raps.  "  Was  it  Julius  Holmes  ?"  Three
raps.  "Did  she  leap  into  the  water  at  his  request?"  Three  raps.
"  With  him?"  Three  raps.  Question — "were  they  engaged  to  be  mar-
ried ?"  Three  raps.  Question — "  what  was  the  age  of  my  sister  at  the
time  of  her  death?"  The  "spirit"  did  not  seem  inclined  to  reply,  and  I
took  occasion  to  ask  one  of  my  friends,  very  casually,  if  he  "remembered
how  old  Clarissa  was?"  he  said  21.  I  corrected  him;  positively  avering
her  true  age  to  be  23,  and  the  spirit  settled  all  doubt  by  promptly  rapping
23!

I  may  mention  here  what  the  reader  has  already  anticipated,  that  this
drowned  sister  of  mine  was  a  creature  of  the  imagination.  1  never  had  a
real  sister,  and  the  gallant  Julius  Holmes,  who  leaped  with  his  betrothed
from  the  burning  wreck  into  the  waves,  is  as  shadowy  as  the  most  ethe-
rial  phantom.  A  grave  looking  man,  who  it  seems  was  an  amateur  in  this
kind  of  "  Spiritual  Philosophy,"  now  came  in  and  plied  the  good  Saint  with
divers  queries  of  an  ethical  and  religious  nature.  Many  of  these  questions
I  put  myself,  and  in  all  cases  prompt  replies  were  given.

In  answer  to  questions,  or  rather  in  most  cases  by  rapping  assent  to
what  the  Doctor  would  say,  much  "  wisdom  in  solid  chunks "  was  given
forth.  Thus,  (Doct.  loquitur,)  I  suppose  spirits  constantly  progress  in  the
world  of  spirits,  (rap,  rap,  rap.)     They  hold  communion  with  each  other,

52  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

(rap,  rap,  rap.)  In  their  own  sphere  ?  (rap,  rap,  rap,)  and  instruct  each
other,  (rap,  rap,  rap,)  and  instruct  and  guide  those  in  the  sphere  below,
(rap,  rap,  rap,)  and  attract  them  to  the  higher  spheres,  (rap,  rap,  rap,)  and
so  on.  Question — can  spirits  move  from  place  to  place  ?  Three  raps.
How  ?  by  attraction  ?  Three  raps.  Through  the  nervous  fluid  ?  Three
raps.  Question — do  spirits  know  the  thoughts  of  the  living.  Three  raps.
And  do  they  suggest  thoughts?  Three  raps.  Question— are  they  ac-
quainted with  the  feelings,  motives,  and  wishes  of  those  who  interrogate
them  ?  Three  raps.  Doctor — and  I  suppose  they  commonly  sympathize
with  those  they  have  left  behind,  (rap,  rap,  rap,)  communing  with  them,
(rap,  rap,  rap,)  and  they  feel  for  them  in  their  afflictions,  (rap,  rap,  rap.)

We  learned  also  that  spirits  never  sleep,  that  they  never  feel  the  pas-
sion of  revenge,  nor  anger.  The  Doctor  and  his  friend  were  much  aston-
ished at  the  wonderful  wisdom  evinced  by  the  answers  of  the  spirit.  They
made  many  comments.

Question. — "  Are  there  any  spirits  in  the  world  of  spirits  who  are  any
more  miserable  than  they  were  here  ?"  Alphabet  called  for  and  an  an-
swer spelt  out — "  They  suffer  in  mind  until  they  are  submissive  to  the  love
of  truth."  This  reply,  especially,  called  forth  the  most  extravagant  enco-
miums. It  was  a  remarkable  answer,  such  a  volume  of  thought  in  so  few
words!  Of  course,  we  gave  our  assent, — "they  suffer  in  mind,"- — mark
that,  "  in  mind."

Question. — "  Do  spirits  require  sustenance  or  nourishment."  Answer
spelled  out — "Light,  harmony,  and  an  increase  of  wisdom!"  Another
gem  from  the  spirit  world !  Was  there  human  being  who  could  answer
thus?

Many  other  sayings  of  the  spirit  were  duly  chronicled  and  commented
upon.

One  of  my  friends  asked  a  question  which  the  spirit  did  not  answer.
He  desired  to  know  if  the  spirit  could  inform  him  what  it  was  he  had  lost
a  few  days  since — something  he  prized  highly — "  could  the  spirit  tell  what
it  was?"  No  answer  was  given;  the  transition  to  such  earthly  considera-
tions was  too  sudden.  So  my  friend  intimated  that  he  doubted  the  reality
of  these  marvels!  Then  the  "spirit  was  grieved,"  we  got  no  more  com-
munications, and  he  only  consented  reluctantly  to  "  bid  the  gentleman  good
bye,"  by  a  few  courteous  raps.

SHADRACH  BARNES.

THE  ELECTRO-MAGNETIC  THEORY  !

Some  who  have  become  interested  in  the  Rochester  Knochings  are  in-
clined to  refer  them  to  an  electro-magnetic  influence.  The  anatomical
explanation,  it  would  seem,  is  altogether  too  simple  to  be  credited.  The
claim  of  being  spiritual  manifestations  exceeds  somewhat  the  amplitude  of
their  credulity,  but  they  are  persuaded  there  is  some  mysterious  agency
involved  in  the  production  of  the  sounds,  and  it  better  suits  their  love  of  the
marvelous,  to  imagine  that  an  imponderable  force,  aside  from  the  will  and

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  53

the  muscles,  is  necessary  to  the  exposition.  The  following  article  from  the
Daily  Express  of  this  city,  contains  a  series  of  propositions  developing  the
electro-magnetic  theory,  which  we  insert  as  a  curiosity  in  its  way.  It  will
not  be  expected  by  the  reader  acquainted  with  the  rudiments  of  the  branch
of  physics  treating  of  electricity  and  magnetism,  that  the  merits  of  the
theory  will  be  gravely  discussed : —

The  Phenomena  of  the  "  Rochester  Knockings."  We  visited  the
room  of  the  Rappers  during  their  sojourn  in  this  city —  not  for  the  purpose
of  investigating  it  in  its  scientific  relations,  or  of  believing  in  its  relation  to
the  spirit  world  —  but  from  a  native  Yankee  curiosity  to  see  the  Rappers,
hear  the  noises,  and  then  guess  how  it  is  done.  From  our  observation,  we
are  rather  heterodox  in  regard  to  the  anatomical  expose  of  the  Medical
Faculty  of  the  University  of  Buffalo.  It  is  scarcely  within  the  range
of  our  credulity  to  believe,  after  what  we  have  seen  and  heard,  that
the  sounds  proceed  from  dislocated  joints  or  the  rapping  of  distended  and
contracted  ligaments  —  and  we  are  equally  incredulous  as  to  their  being
manifestations  from  the  Spirit  World  —  and  what  they  are,  or  whither
they  come  —  we  leave  for  future  discussion  when  we  have  more  time  and
have  given  the  subject  a  more  thorough  investigation.

There  are  those  among  us,  aside  from  the  Medical  Faculty,  who  firmly
believe  that  they  have  discovered  the  phenomena  of  the  "knockings." —
They  attribute  it  to  animal  electricity,  or  magnetism,  and  in  the  exercise
of  faith  we  think,  rather  exceeding  the  Professors — and  at  the  same  time,
like  the  Professors,  emphatically  disclaim  all  belief  in  the  existance  of  any
spiritual  agency. —  Like  all  other  infantile  efforts  to  develop  science  or
evolve  new  theories,  the  believers  in  animal  electricity  groping  their  way
to  the  full  light  of  public  confidence,  unaided  by  any  decisive  experimental
manifestations  to  serve  as  tapers  in  their  pathway.  It  is  due  to  the
believers  in  this  new  theory  of  "  Knocking,"  that  they  should  afford  the
public  "  the  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in  them,"  in  this  regard,  and  we
give  the  following  suggestions  or  propositions  from  a  gentleman  who  has
been  a  close  observer  of  the  Rappings,  and  has  examined  the  subject  with
the  sole  desire  of  satisfying  his  own  mind  what  agents  produce  the  sounds
and  manifestations.

1st.  That  all  men  receive  and  evolve  E'ectricity.  Some  more  —  some
less.

2d.  Some  men  have  power  to  retain,  and  evolve,  this  fluid,  in  greater  or
less  degree,  by  act  of  their  own  will.  In  a  modified  form,  in  the  human
body,  it  is  vulgarly  called  Animal  Magnetism.

3d.  The  habit  of  controlling  or  evolving  this  fluid  increases  the  power  to
do  so.

4th.  It  is  a  modified  form  of  Electricity  that  is  the  agent  in  producing
the  various  magnetic  phenomena.

5th.  Some  men  are  charged  with  this  subtle  fluid  beyond  their  ability  to
retain,  and  it  escapes  when  they  are  in  the  vicinity  of  conductors.  It  does
not  require  absolute  contact  with  conductors,  but  passes  through  air  a  lim-
ited distance.

6th.  When  this  fluid  escapes,  and  passes  into  any  sounding  substance,  it
makes  a  detonation.

54  DISCOVERT   OF  THE

7th.  Some  men  are  charged  positively,  some  negatively  with  electricity..
Two  persons  charged,  one  positively  and  the  other  negatively,  by  standing;
near  each  other,  will  produce  rapid  movement  of  the  electric  fluid,  and  if  a
circle  is  made,  an  electric  battery  will  be  formed,  of  which  they  are  the  op-
posite poles.

8th.  In  the  battery  thus  formed  the  fluid  is  under  the  control  of,

First — The  positively  charged  person.

Secondly — The  person  to  whom  the  power  is  transferred  by  will  of  the
first.

9th.  That  the  imaginary  conversation  with  departed  spirits,  is  a  mode  of
exercising  this  power  when  transferred.

10th.  That  the  answers  are  the  detonations  produced  by  the  electro-
magnetic fluid,  discharging  itself  against  or  into  the  sounding  substance,
and  the  discharge  is  at  the  will  of  the  questioner,  when  he  expects,  desires,
or  firmly  wills  an  answer.

11th.  In  this  way  the  phenomena  of  question  and  answer  are  explained,,
and  are  demonstrated  to  be  subject  to  the  laws,  and  liable  to  all  the  mis-
apprehensions of  Animal-Magnetism  or  Clairvoyance.

12th.  So  far  as  regards  the  movement  of  chairs,  tables,  &c,  it  is  only
necessary  to  admit  that  Electricity  (Animal  or  Material)  is  a  motive  power,,
and  can  be  made  subservient  to  the  will  to  conceive  that  it  may  produce
the  results  claimed.

An  ingenious  friend  expresses  his  unqualified  admiration  of  the  above
theory  (like  the  old  romances  founded  on  fact)  and  regards  its  applications
to  the  phenomena  of  rapping  as  among  the  most  trifling  of  its  merits.  He
suggests  a  great  number  of  others,  out  of  which  we  give  two  or  three  as
specimens.     Truly  we  are  a  great  people,  and  live  in  the  1 9th  century  !

By  selecting  eight  or  ten  strongly  electrical  persons  and  arranging  them
in  a  circle,  with  hands  grasped  right  and  left,  like  the  connexions  in  a
Grove's  battery,  a  living  circuit  is  obtained,  which  may  be  substituted  for
the  cups  in  the  Telegraph,  and  will  produce  animal  electricity  of  such  ten-
sion and  force,  as  to  pass  through  wires  several  hundred  miles  in  length,
and  work  at  the  most  distant  stations  the  machines  of  Morse,  Bain,  or  House,
at  a  greatly  reduced  cost !  It  is  probable  that  a  single  individual,  if  of  a
very  nervous  temperament,  after  sufficient  practice,  might  be  able,  by  a
strong  effort  of  the  will  and  without  any  aid  from  the  battery,  to  send  his
own  message  directly  through  the  wires !  It  has  been  suggested  that  for
telegraphic  purposes  very  wiry  persons  would  be  found  preferable !

A  caveat  for  this  invention  has  been  filed  at  Washington,  with  the  inten-
tion of  taking  out  a  patent  when  it  is  perfected.  The  proceeds  of  the  sale
of  the  patent  right  are  to  be  divided  equally  between  ourselves  and  the  au-
thor of  the  suggestion,  we  taking  the  larger  half,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases  !

If  eight  or  ten  persons  are  arranged  as  above,  on  placing  another  indi-
vidual between  the  extreme  right  and  left  —  the  poles  at  the  distance  of
about  two  feet  —  he  will  experience  a  very  severe  shock,  when,  by  the

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  55

electrical  accumulation,  the  extensor  muscles  of  the  positive  and  negative
poles  are  suddenly  put  in  motion.  If  any  one  doubts  this  fact,  we  are  ready
to  prove  it  on  him,  by  a  practical  demonstration  —  by  what  may  be  termed
literally  a  knock  down  argument.

Indeed  the  same  thing  may  be  verified  still  more  simply,  by  first  tying
the  doubters  hands  behind  his  back,  and  then  bringing  both  fists  with  great
force  against  each  side  of  the  head,  in  the  region  of  the  temporal  bone.
The  effect  which  follows  is  not,  of  course,  to  be  ascribed  to  the  momentum
or  motion ;  but  to  that  which  produces  the  motion,  viz.,  the  electricity.  It
is  a  well  known  fact,  that  heavy  charges  of  this  fluid,  such  as  a  flash  of
lightning,  are  capable  of  knocking  down  men,  and  even  tearing  to  pieces
the  most  substantial  buildings,  directly  and  without  the  agency  of  any  other
substance ;  and  it  should  not  be  regarded  as  strange,  therefore,  that  they
should  be  able  to  do  it  through  the  intervention  of  another  force.

Still  more  beautiful  is  the  application  of  these  principles  to  the  science  and
art  of  education.  Is  a  scholar  lazy  or  dull  ?  A  deficiency  of  electricity  is
the  cause :  and  instead  of  being  scolded  and  lectured  (remedies  of  acknow-
ledged inefficiency,)  the  plain  indication  is  to  supply  the  deficient  force  and
to  charge  the  system  with  the  lacking  electricity.  The  common  electric
machine  will  accomplish  this,  if  turned  long  enough,  or  it  may  be  effected
still  more  readily  by  electrified  medicines,  such  as  galvanic  rings,  pills,  and
plasters.  The  bodily  vigor  and  courage  of  the  knights  of  romance  (errone-
ously ascribed  to  their  rough  mode  of  life  and  temperance)  is,  without  doubt,
due  to  their  habit  of  wearing  steel  and  iron  armor,  the  metalic  electricity
generated  by  which,  like  a  universal  galvanic  belt,  supplied  the  nervous
force,  which  makes  their  feats  of  strength  and  endurance  fables  to  the  men
of  this  generation.  Should  the  method  suggested  fail  with  the  dullest  boys,
the  teacher  may,  by  a  strong  effort  of  the  will,  send  a  shock  across  the  room
against  the  head  of  the  unlucky  urchin,  with  a  loud  "detonation"  or  report,
which  will  serve  the  double  purpose  of  directly  quickening  the  dormant
energies  of  the  culprit,  and  of  indirectly  opening  the  eyes  and  ears  of  the
other  pupils.  In  case  again  this  should  fail,  he  may  apply  the  electricity
through  the  muscles  of  the  right  arm,  by  directing  the  palm  of  the  hand  or
the  fist  forcibly  against  the  side  of  the  dull  head,  or  by  the  intervention  of
a  ruler  or  twig  of  birch.  The  discovery  of  this  last  method  is  due  to  that
old  Hebrew,  King  Solomon,  a  man  who  looked  deeply  into  the  causes  and
reasons  of  things,  and  who  was  very  wise  for  the  age  in  which  he  lived ;
but  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  understood  animal  magnetism  and  electri-
city, or  was  therefore  acquainted  with  the  mode  in  which  his  remedy  works
he  cure.

56  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

THE  COCK-LANE  GHOST.

Fancied  visitations  of  spirits  have  generally  been  predicated  on  mysterious
noises  produced  with,  the  design  oi  deception,  or  otherwise ;  and  numerous
stories  might  be  gathered  of  delusions  that  have  prevailed,  more  or  less,
until  the  strange  sounds  supposed  to  involve  a  spiritual  agency  have  been
traced  to  their  true  source,  and  their  origin  explained.      In  connection  with
the  Rochester  knockings  the  inquiry  arises,  whether  noises  of  the  same
description  have  entered  into  impositions  of  a  similar  character  heretofore
practiced.   Our  acquaintance  with  the  history  of  humbugs  is  not  sufficient  to
authorise  us  to  say  in  how  far  the  imposture  which  we  have  exposed  is
entitled  to  the  merit  of  originality.    We  take  it,  however,  to  possess  novelty
from  the  fact  that  if  many  instances  had  occurred  in  past  time,  they  would
have  been  sought  out,  as  means  either  of  confirming,  or  disproving  the  spiritual
claims  of  the  hnocTcings.     One  instance,  however,  must  be  familiar  to  most
of  our  readers  by  the  title  at  least.      The  imposture  of  the  "  Cock-lane
Ghost,"  which  occurred  nearly  a  century  ago  in  London,  resembles,  in
several  particulars,  that  which  has  lately  emanated  from  Rochester.     The
Ghost  of  Cock-lane  manifested  itself  by  knocks,  and  communications  with
it  were  held  through  their  intervention.  The  knocking  spirit  accompanied  ex-
clusively one  person,  a  young  girl,  and  the  knocks  were  only  made  while  she
was  in  bed.   She  was  the  "  medium  "  according  to  the  modern  nomenclature.
The  bed  was  observed  to  shake  violently  when  the  rapping  occurred,  which
was  considered  to  be  the  effect  of  the  spiritual  presence !     This  imposture
occurred  during  the  life  of  the  celebrated  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  who,  it  is
well  known,  with  all  his  learning  and  intellectual  acumen,  evinced,  on  some
points,  a  superstitious  turn  of  mind.     He  was  thought,  at  first,  to  be  some-
what inclined  to  give  credit  to  the  apparition ;    afterward,  however,   he
assisted  in  detecting  the  deception,  and  published  an  exposition  in  the
newspapers.

The  reader  of  the  foregoing  pages,  who  is  not  already  familiar  with  the
Cock-lane  Ghost  story,  will  be  interested  in  it  from  the  points  of  similiarity
already  referred  to.  We,  therefore,  give  it  at  length,  as  related  in  a  work
entitled  Memoirs  of  extraordinary  delusions,  by  Charles  Mackay.*     The

*  In  two  vols.,  12mo.,  published  by  Lindsay  &  Blakeston,  Philadelphia,  1850.

SOURCE    OF   THE    ROCHESTER   KNOCKINGS.  57

real  source  of  the  mysterious  noise  in  this  famous  instance  appears  never
to  have  been  understood.  Mr.  Mackay  says,  "  the  precise  manner  in  which
the  deception  was  carried  on  has  never  been  explained."  He  is  disposed
to  think  that  the  knocking  was  made  on  the  wall  by  the  mother  of  the  girl
who  was  the  medium  of  the  manifestations.  It  is  hardly  probable  that
this  could  be  practiced  without  detection.  By  others  the  sounds  were
thought  to  be  due  to  ventriloquism.  This  explanation's  not  reasonable.
From  the  history,  we  entertain  little  doubt  that  the  sounds  were  produced
by  the  girl,  acting  through  the  muscles,  upon  moveable  parts,  as  in  the
case  of  the  Rochester  knockings.  It  might  be  suspected,  even,  that  the
Rochester  rappers  obtained  the  hint  of  their  operations  from  the  Cock-
lane  Ghost.  The  reader  who  is  satisfied  of  the  verity  of  the  discovery
of  the  source  of  the  Rochester  rappings  will,  we  think,  agree  with  us  that
the  same  explanation  most  satisfactorily  accounts  for  the  phenomena  in
that  curious  instance  of  imposture,  which,  although  proved  to  be  a  decep-
tion, and  the  parties  severely  punished,  has  remained  unexplained  for
nearly  a  century !

The  following  is  the  narrative: —

At  the  commencement  of  the  year  1760,  there  resided  in  Cock  Lane,
near  West  Smithfield,  in  the  house  of  one  Parsons,  the  parish  clerk  of  St.
Sepulchre's,  a  stockbroker,  named  Kent.  The  wife  of  this  gentleman
had  died  in  childbed  during  the  previous  year,  and  his  sister-in-law  Miss
Fanny,  had  arrived  from  Norfolk  to  keep  his  house  for  him.  They  soon
conceived  a  mutual  affection,  and  each  of  them  made  a  will  in  the  other's
favor.  They  lived  some  months  in  the  house  of  Parsons,  who,  being  a
needy  man,  borrowed  money  of  his  lodger.  Some  difference  arose
betwixt  them,  and  Mr.  Kent  left  the  house,  and  instituted  legal  proceed-
ings against  the  parish  clerk  for  the  recovery  of  his  money.

While  this  matter  was  yet  pending,  Miss  Fanny  was  suddenly  taken  ill
of  the  small-pox;  and,  notwithstanding  every  care  and  attention,  she  died
in  a  few  days,  and  was  buried  in  a  vault  under  Clerkenwell  church.  Par-
sons now  began  to  hint  that  the  poor  lady  had  come  unfairly  by  her  death,
and  that  Mr.  Kent  was  accessory  to  it,  from  his  too  great  eagerness  to
enter  into  possession  of  the  property  she  had  bequeathed  him.  Nothing
further  was  said  for  nearly  two  years;  but  it  would  appear  that  Parsons
was  of  so  revengeful  a  character,  that  he  had  never  forgotten  or  forgiven
his  differences  with  Mr.  Kent,  and  the  indignity  of  having  sued  for  the
borrowed  money.  The  strong  passions  of  pride  and  avarice  were  silently
at  work  during  all  that  interval,  hatching  schemes  of  revenge,  but  dis-
missing them  one  after  the  other  as  impracticable,  until,  at  last,  a  notable
one  suggested  itself.  About  the  beginning  of  the  year  1762,  the  alarm
was  spread  over  all  the  neighbourhood  of  Cock-lane,  that  the  house  of
Parsons  was  haunted  by  the  ghost  of  poor  Fanny,  and  that  the  daughter
of  Parsons,  a  girl  about  12  years  of  age,  had  several  times  seen  and
conversed  with  the  spirit,  who  had,  moreover,  informed  her,  that  she"  had

58  DISCOVERY   OF    THE

not  died  with  the  small-pox,  as  was  currently  reported,  but  of  poison,
administered  by  Mr.  Kent.  Parsons,  who  originated,  took  good  care  to
countenance  these  reports;  and,  in  answer  to  numerous  inquiries,  said
his  house  was  every  night,  and  had  been  for  two  years,  in  fact,  ever  since
the  death  of  Fanny,  troubled  by  a  loud  knocking  at  the  doors  and  in
the  walls.  Having  thus  prepared  the  ignorant  and  credulous  neighbors  to
believe  or  exaggerate  for  themselves  what  he  had  told  them,  he  sent  for
a  gentleman  in  a  higher  class  in  life,  to  come  and  witness  these  extra-
ordinary occurrences.  The  gentleman  came  accordingly,  and  found  the
daughter  of  Parsons,  to  whom  the  spirit  alone  appeared,  and  whom  alone
it  answered,  in  bed,  trembling  violently,  having  just  seen  the  ghost,  and
been  again  informed  that  she  had  died  from  poison.  A  loud  knocking
was  also  heard  from  every  part  of  the  chamber,  which  so  mystified  the
not  very  clear  understanding  of  the  visitor,  that  he  departed,  afraid  to
doubt  and  ashamed  to  believe,  but  with  a  promise  to  bring  the  clergy-
man of  the  parish  and  several  other  gentlemen  on  the  following  day,  to
report  upon  the  mystery.

On  the  following  night  he  returned,  bringing  with  him  three  clergymen,
and  about  twenty  other  persons,  including  two  negroes,  when,  upon  a
consultation  with  Parsons,  they  resolved  to  sit  up  the  whole  night,  and
await  the  ghost's  arrival.  It  was  then  explained  by  Parsons,  that  although
the  ghost  would  never  render  itself  visible  to  anybody  but  his  daughter,
it  had  no  objection  to  answer  the  questions  that  might  be  put  to  it,  by
any  person  present,  and  that  it  expressed  an  affirmation  by  one  knock,  a
negative  by  two,  and  its  displeasures  by  a  kind  of  scratching.  The  child
was  then  put  into  bed  along  with  her  sister,  and  the  clergymen  examined
the  bed  and  bed-clothes  to  satisfy  themselves  that  no  trick  was  played,  by
knocking  upon  any  substance  concealed  among  the  clothes.  As  on  the
previous  night,  the  bed  was  observed  to  shake  violently.

After  some  hours,  during  which  they  all  waited  with  exemplary  patience,
the  mysterious  knocking  was  heard  in  the  wall,  and  the  child  declared
that  she  saw  the  ghost  of  poor  Fanny.  The  following  questions  were  then
gravely  put  by  the  clergyman,  through  the  medium  of  one  Mary  Frazer,
the  servant  of  Parsons,  and  to  whom  it  was  said  the  deceased  lady  had
been  much  attached.  The  answers  were  in  the  usual  fashion,  by  a  knock
or  knocks : —

"  Do  you  make  this  disturbance  on  account  of  the  ill  usage  you  received

from  Mr.  Kent  ?"— "  Yes."

"  Were  you  brought  to  an  untimely  end  by  poison  ?" — "  Yes."
"  How  was  the  poison  administered,  in  beer  or  purl  ?" — "  In  purl."
"  How  long  was  that  before  your  death  ?" — "  About  three  hours."
•'  Can  your  former   servant,  Carrots,  give  any  information  about  the

poison?"— "Yes."

"  Are  you  Kent's  wife's  sister  ?" — "  Yes."

"Were  you  married  to  Kent  after  your  sister's  death?" — "  No."

"Was  anybody  else,   besides  Kent,    concerned    in    your   murder?" —

"No."

"  Can  you,  if  you  like,  appear  visibly  to  any  one  ?" — "  Yes."

"  Will  you  do  so  ?"— "  Yes."

"Can  you  come  out  of  this  house?" — "  Yes."

"Is  it  your  intention  to  follow  this  child  about  everywhere?" — "  Yes."

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  59

■  Are  you  pleased  in  being  asked  these  questions  ?" — "  Yes."

"  Does  it  ease  your  troubled  soul  ?" — "  Yes."

[Here  there  was  heard  a  mysterious  noise,  which  some  wiseacre  present
compared  to  the  fluttering  of  wings.]

"  How  long  before  your  death  did  you  tell  your  servant,  Carrots,  that
you  were  poisoned  ? — An  hour  ?" — "  Yes."

[Carrots,  who  was  present,  was  appealed  to;  but  she  stated  positively
that  such  was  not  the  fact,  as  the  deceased  was  quite  speechless  an  hour
before  her  death.  This  shook  the  faith  of  some  of  the  spectators,  but  the
examination  was  allowed  to  continue.]

"  How  long  did  Carrots  live  with  you  ?" — "  Three  or  four  days."

[Carrots  was  again  appealed  to,  and  said  that  this  was  the  case.]

"  If  Mr.  Kent  is  arrested  for  this  murder,  will  he  confess  ?" — "  Yes."

"  Would  your  soul  be  at  rest  if  he  were  hanged  for  it  ?" — "  Yes."

"Will  he  be  hanged  for  it?"— "Yes."

"  How  long  a  time  first  ?" — "  Three  years."

"  How  many  clergymen  are  there  in  this  room  ?" — "  Three."

"  How  many  negroes  ?" — "  Two."

" Is  this  watch  (held  up  by  one  of  the  clergymen)  white?" — "  No."

"  Is  it  yellow  ?" — "  No."

"  Is  it  blue  ?"— "  No."

"Is  it  black?"— "  Yes."

[The  watch  was  in  a  black  shagreen  case.]

"  At  what  time  this  morning  will  you  take  your  departure  ?"

The  answer  to  this  question  was  four  knocks,  very  distinctly  heard  by
every  person  present  ;  and  accordingly,  at  four  o'clock  precisely,  the  ghost
took  its  departure  to  the  Wheatsheaf  public  house,  close  by,  where  it
frightened  mine  host  and  his  lady  almost  out  of  their  wits  by  knocking  in
the  ceiling  rio-ht  above  their  bed.

b

The  rumour  of  these  occurrences  very  soon  spread  over  London,  and
every  day  Cock  Lane  was  rendered  impassable  by  the  crowds  of  people
who  assembled  around  the  house  of  the  parish  clerk,  in  expectation  of
either  seeing  the  ghost,  or  of  hearing  the  mysterious  knocks.  It  was  at
last  found  necessary,  so  clamorous  were  they  for  admission  within  the
haunted  precincts,  to  admit  those  only  who  would  pay  a  certain  fee,  an
arrangement  which  was  very  convenient  to  the  needy  and  money-loving
Mr  Parsons.  Indeed,  things  had  taken  a  turn  greatly  to  his  satisfaction;
he  not  only  had  his  revenge,  but  he  made  a  profit  out  of  it.  The  ghost,
in  consequence,  played  its  antics  every  night,  to  the  great  amusement  of
many  hundred  of  people  and  the  great  perplexity  of  a  still  greater
number.

Unhappily,  however,  for  the  parish  clerk,  the  ghost  was  induced  to  make
some  promises  which  were  the  means  of  utterly  destroying  its  reputation.
It  promised,  in  answer  to  the  questions  of  the  Reverend  Mr.  Aldritch  of
Clerkenwell,  that  it  would  not  only  follow  the  little  Miss  Parsons  wherever
she  went,  but  would  also  attend  him,  or  any  other  gentleman,  into  the
vault  under  St.  Johns  Church,  where  the  body  of  the  murdered  woman
was  deposited,  and  would  there  give  notice  of  its  presence  by  a  distinct
knock  upon  the  coffin.  As  a  preliminary,  the  girl  was  conveyed  to  the
church,  where  a  large  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen,  eminent  for  their
acquirements,  their  rank,  or  their  wealth,  had  assembled.     About  ten  o'clock

60  DISCOVERY   OF   THE

on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  February,  the  girl  having  been  brought  from  Cock
Lane  in  a  coach,  was  put  to  bed  by  several  ladies  in  the  house  of  Mr
Aldritch ;  a  strict  examination  having  been  previously  made  that  nothing
was  hidden  in  the  bedclothes.  While  the  gentlemen,  in  an  adjoining
chamber,  were  deliberating  whether  they  should  proceed  in  a  body  to  the
vault,  they  were  summoned  into  the  bedroom  by  the  ladies,  who  affirmed,
in  great  alarm,  that  the  ghost  had  come,  and  that  they  heard  knocks  and
scratches.  The  gentlemen  entered  accordingly,  with  a  determination  to
suffer  no  deception.  The  little  girl,  on  being  asked  whether  she  saw  the
ghost,  replied,  "  No;  but  she  felt  it  on  her  back  like  a  mouse."  She  was
then  required  to  put  her  hands  out  of  bed,  and  they  being  held  by  some
of  the  ladies,  the  spirit  was  summoned  in  the  usual  manner  to  answer,  if
it  were  in  the  room.  The  question  was  several  times  put  with  solemnity;
but  the  customary  knock  was  not  heard  in  reply  in  the  walls,  neither  was
there  any  scratching.  The  ghost  was  then  asked  to  render  itself  visible,
but  it  did  not  choose  to  grant  the  request,  It  was  next  solicited  to  give
some  token  of  any  sort,  or  by  touching  the  hand  or  cheek  of  any  lady  or
gentleman  in  the  room ;  but  even  with  this  request  the  ghost  would  not
comply.

There  was  now  a  considerable  pause,  and  one  of  the  clergymen  went
down  stairs  to  interrogate  the  father  of  the  girl,  who  was  waittng  the
result  of  the  experiment.  He  positively  denied  that  there  was  any  decep-
tion, and  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  himself,  upon  one  occasion
had  seen  and  conversed  with  the  awful  ghost.  This  having  been  commu-
nicated to  the  company,  it  was  unanimously  resolved  to  give  the  ghost
another  trial;  and  the  clergyman  called  out  in  a  loud  voice  to  the  supposed
spirit  that  the  gentleman  to  whom  it  had  promised  to  appear  in  the  vault,
was  about  to  repair  to  that  place,  where  he  claimed  the  fulfilment  of  its
promise.  At  one  hour  after  midnight  they  all  proceeded  to  the  church,
and  the  gentleman  in  question,  with  another,  entered  the  vault  alone,  and
took  their  position  alongside  of  the  coffin  of  poor  Fanny.  The  ghost  was
then  summoned  to  appear,  but  it  appeared  not :  it  was  summoned  to  knock,
but  it  knocked  not;  it  was  summoned  to  scratch,  but  it  scratched  not,  and
the  two  retired  from  the  vault,  with  the  firm  belief  that  the  whole  business
was  a  deception  practised  by  Parsons  and  his  daughter.  There  were  others,
however,  who  did  not  wish  to  jump  so  hastily  to  a  conclusion,  and  who
suggested  that  they  were,  perhaps,  trifling  with  this  awful  and  supernatu-
ral being,  which,  being  offended  with  them  for  their  presumption,  would
not  condescend  to  answer  them.  Again,  after  a  serious  consultation,  it
was  agreed  on  all  hands  that,  if  the  ghost  answered  anybody  at  all,  it
would  answer  Mr.  Kent,  the  supposed  murderer ;  and  he  was  accordingly
requested  to  go  into  the  vault.  He  went  with  several  others,  and  sum-
moned the  ghost  to  answer  whether  he  had  indeed  poisoned  her.  There
being  no  answer,  the  question  was  put  by  Mr.  Aldritch,  who  conjured  it,  if
it  were  indeed  a  spirit,  to  end  their  doubts — make  a  sign  of  its  presence,
and  point  out  the  guilty  person.  There  being  still  no  answer  for  the  space
of  half  an  hour,  during  which  time  all  these  boobies  waited  with  the  most
praiseworthy  perseverance,  they  returned  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Aldritch,  and
ordered  the  girl  to  get  up  and  dress  herself.  She  was  strictly  examined,
but  persisted  in  her  statement  that  she  used  no  deception,  and  that  the
ghost  had  really  appeared  to  her.

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  61

So  many  persons  had,  by  their  openly  expressed  belief  of  the  reality  of
the  visitation,  identified  themselves  with  it,  that  Parsons  and  his  family
were  far  from  being  the  only  persons  interested  in  the  continuance  of  the
delusion.  The  result  of  the  experiment  convinced  most  people  ;  but  these
were  not  to  be  convinced  by  any  evidence,  however  positive,  and  they,
therefore,  spread  abroad  the  rumor,  that  the  ghost  had  not  appeared  in
the  vault  because  Mr.  Kent  had  taken  care  beforehand  to  have  the  coffin
removed.  That  gentleman,  whose  position  was  a  very  painful  one,  immedi-
ately procured  competent  witnesses,  in  whose  presence  the  vault  was  en-
tered and  the  coffin  of  poor  Fanny  opened.  Their  deposition  was  then
published ;  and  Mr.  Kent  indicted  Parsons  and  his  wife,  his  daughter,  Mary
Frazer  the  servant,  the  Reverend  Mr.  Moor,  and  a  tradesman,  two  of  the
most  prominent  patrons  of  the  deception,  for  a  conspiracy.  The  trial  came
on  in  the  court  of  King's  Bench,  on  the  10th  of  July,  before  Lord  Chief
Justice  Mansfield,  when,  after  an  investigation  which  lasted  twelve  hours,
the  whole  of  the  conspirators  were  found  guilty.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Moor  and
his  friend  were  severely  reprimanded  in  open  court,  and  recommended  to
make  some  pecuniary  compensation  to  the  prosecutor  for  the  aspersions
they  had  been  instrumental  in  throwing  upon  his  character.  Parsons  was
sentenced  to  stand  three  times  in  the  pillory,  and  to  be  imprisoned  for  two
years  :  his  wife  to  one  year's,  and  his  servant  to  six  months'  imprisonment
in  the  Bridewell.  A  printer,  who  had  been  employed  by  them  to  publish
an  account  of  the  proceedings  for  their  profit,  was  also  fined  fifty  pounds,
and  discharged.

CONCLUDING  REMARKS.

In  the  article  taken  from  the  Buffalo  Medical  Journal,  it  is  stated  that  in-
timations were  thrown  out  shortly  after  the  exposition  was  made  public,  of
wonderful  phenomena,  in  addition  to  the  JcnocJcings,  shortly  to  be  produced,
These  promises,  it  is  currently  reported,  have  been  fulfilled.  Bells  and
gongs  placed  under  tables,  have  been  rung ;  chairs  have  been  moved ;  per-
sons have  been  pulled  about,  by  invisible  hands,  etc.  It  has  been  seriously
argued  against  the  correctness  of  the  exposition  of  the  JcnocJcings,  that  it
does  not  cover  these  subsequent  manifestations,  as  if,  forsooth,  there  was,  of
necessity,  any  connection  between  the  two  classes  of  phenomena,  and  as  if
persons  engaged  in  the  rapping  imposition  might  not  superadd  various  other
juggling  tricks  to  help  along  the  deception.  As  remarked  in  the  article  re-
ferred to,  these  feats  of  legerdemain  are  left  to  others  who  have  the  dispo-
sition, leisure,  and  ability  necessary  to  discover  and  explain  the  manner  in
which  they  are  done.  To  suppose  that  such  fooleries  involve  other  than
physical  agencies,  is  to  attribute  to  spirits  a  very  dignified  occupation !  The
recreations  of  the  higher  order  of  existences,  according  to  this  idea,  are  of  a
very  frivolous  kind.     As  a  clerical  friend  has  remarked,  the  character  of  the

62

DISCOVERY    OF   THE

phenomena  reputed  to  take  place,  suffices  to  disprove  the  spirituality  of  their
origin,  for  they  are  beneath  the  dignity  of  angel  or  devil.  As  tricks  of  jug-
gling they  are  quite  inferior  to,  and  certainly  not  less  inexplicable,  than  those
exhibited  by  Mons.  Adrien,  Signor  Blitz,  or  any  of  the  magicians,  so  called.
The  latter  are  exhibited  with  the  understanding  that  they  are  deceptive,
while  the  former  are  confined  to  those  already  prepared  to  believe  in  their
spiritual  causation.  Nor  is  there  any  thing  new  in  the  production  of  these
phenomena,  and,  for  purposes  of  imposition,  their  being  attributed  to  ghosts.
The  reader  who  has  any  curiosity  on  this  point,  if  he  will  consult  Mackay's
History  of  Popular  Delusions,  will  find  accounts  of  similar  performances
carried  on,  for  mischievous  purposes,  many  years  ago.  The  chief  difference
between  the  modern  tricks  and  those  of  former  days,  consists  in  this-
while  those  engaged  in  the  latter  were  made  to  feel  the  majesty  of  the  law,
the  former  are  well  patronized,  and  thus  turn  out  to  be  a  good  money  ma-
king enterprise.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  credulity  of  mandind  has
diminished  with  the  progress  of  civilization,  but  there  can  be  no  question
that  there  is  a  far  greater  degree  of  toleration,  in  respect  to  such  matters,
now,  than  formerly.

The  exposition  by  the  three  "  University  Professors,"  has  now  been  for
some  time  before  the  public,  and  has  called  out,  as  was  to  have  been  expec-
ted, various  newspaper  commentators.  Nothing,  however,  has  appeared,
calculated  to  disprove  the  correctness  of  the  explanation.  It  would  be
strange  if  those  engaged  in  the  imposition,  together  with  some  of  those  in-
terested in  consequence  of  being  committed  in  its  behalf,  should  consent  to
yield  the  field  without  defending  it  with  such  small  artillery  as  they  can
command.  To  the  latter,  more  especially,  the  consolation  of  wasting  some
ammunition  should  be  accorded.  With  this  view  of  the  matter  the  firing
(keeping  up  the  figure)  will  not  be  likely  to  be  returned,  while  the  reason-
ing and  the  facts  upon  which  the  exposition  rests,  remain  unaffected.

That  they  who  have  become  infatuated  with  the  delusion  would  be
speedily  convinced,  assuredly  was  not  to  be  looked  for.  Nothing  is  plainer
than  that  a  portion  of  mankind  are  determinately  bent  on  being  humbugged,
and  that  a  more  unwelcome  office  cannot  be  tendered,  than  to  open  their
eyes  to  the  fact  of  their  having  been  duped.  The  object  of  the  exposition  was
not  to  convince  such  persons,  but  to  prevent,  if  practicable,  the  further  pro-
gress of  this  method  of  imposing  on  the  credulous.  To  take  pains  for  that
end  will  probably  prove  a  thankless  task,  but  this  is  of  no  consequence  so
that  the  end  be  attained.

To  some  it  may  seem  that  it  was  hardly  worth  while  to  interfere  with  the

SOURCE  OF  THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS.  63

continued  success  of  the  humbug.  'Let  it  go  on,'  it  may  be  said,  'and  if
persons  are  willing  to  be  duped,  it  is  their  own  business.'  Some,  even,  look
with  a  lenient  eye  on  the  deception,  because  it  is  so  cleverly  conducted,  and
has  eluded  detection  so  long.  Even  an  imposture  appeals  to  the  sympa-
thies of  many  when  it  is  carried  on  with  boldness  and  singular  address.
These  apologies  might  be  less  out  of  place  if  made  in  behalf  of  an  ingenious
hoax,  got  up  in  mere  merriment,  and  which  possibly  would  even  prove  use-
ful in  gauging  the  gullibility  of  society.  But  this  is  something  more  than  a
clever  joke.  Aside  from  the  audacious  blasphemy  of  the  pretended  com-
munications with  invisible  spirits,  it  is  a  matter  affecting  profoundly  the
minds  of  not  a  few  of  those  whose  faith  in  the  spiritual  origin  of  the  sounds
is  secured.  And  this  result  is  contemplated  in  the  imposition.  Witness
the  rules  of  order  [see  page  33]  in  which  the  same  solemnity  which  should
characterize  religious  meetings,  is  enjoined.  Insanity  and  suicide  are  among
the  effects  already  developed.  An  incident  occurring  at  one  of  the  sessions
in  this  city,  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  heartless  cruelty  of  some  of  the  reve-
lations. A  mother,  who  had  lost  a  child  by  drowning,  goes  to  make  inqui-
ries of  the  departed  spirit.  The  mode  of  death  is  correctly  designated ;  then
follow  the  questions  '  was  the  child  thrown  into  the  canal  ?'  '  was  it  done  in
anger  ?'  to  each  of  which  an  affirmative  answer  is  returned.  The  person
thus  accused  of  homicide,  is  afterward  designated  among  a  list  of  names ;
and  the  lady  then  remarked  that  the  person  designated  had  been  suspected
by  her  of  throwing  her  child  into  the  canal.  She  left  the  room  apparently
in  the  full  persuasion  that  her  child  had  been  wilfully  destroyed  through
the  agency  of  the  child  of  a  neighbor.  Assuming,  as  we  may  do,  that  the
sounds  by  which  this  information  was  communicated,  were  voluntary  on  the
part  of  those  who  call  themselves  '  mediums,'  the  reader  will  make  his  own
comments  on  the  character  of  such  a  transaction.

Taking  the  nature  and  consequences  of  the  imposture  into  considera-
tion, none  can  doubt  the  importance  of  resorting  to  appropriate  means  to
arrest  it.  This  can  be  done  by  verifying  in  every  place  visited  by  the
Rappers,  the  principle  involved  in  the  Exposition  which  has  given  rise  to
this  publication.  This  principle  is,  that  the  sounds  are  produced  by  the  will
acting,  through  voluntary  muscles,  upon  some  of  the  moveable  parts  with
which  the  muscles  are  connected.  The  situation  of  the  sounds  may  be
different  in  different  cases ;  but  let  an  intelligent  committee,  embracing  one
or  more  physicians,  subject  any  medium  to  careful  examination,  and  the
true  source,  in  every  instance,  will  not  fail  to  be  detected.  The  reader  of
the  foregoing  pages  will  have  perceived  that  the  Jcnockings  may  emanate

64  DISCOVERT   OF   THE

from  the  knees,  the  ankles,  and[  the  toes.  These  sources  are  to  be  in-
terrogated by  experiments  calculated  to  prevent  the  sounds  from  being
produced,  or  to  detect  the  motions  of  the  parts  producing  them.  Placing
the  .medium  in  a  posture  in  which  she  can  get  no  fulcrum  for  the  foot,  will
probably  prevent  all  knee  manifestations,  and  if  this  should  chance  to  fail,
let  the  joint  be  rendered  immoveable,  the  limb  being  extended,  by  gutta  per-
cha  splints  and  an  abundance  of  roller  bandage.  To  put  a  quietus  on  toe-rap-
ping let  the  feet  be  denuded,  and  elevated,  so  that  no  pressure  with  the  foot
is  practicable.  The  tendonic  movements  of  the  ankle  may  be  seen  if  the
part  is  c  losely  observed,  and  if  not  seen  they  may  be  felt,  as  well  as  the
contraction  of  the  muscle  on  the  outer  part  of  the  leg  which  causes  the
movements^.  We  are  inclined  to  the  belief  that  in  most  instances  the  rapping
will  be  fourjd  to  come  from  one  or  more  of  these  sources  but  it  is  by  no
means  impi  obable  that  other  joints,  or  tendons,  may  be  available  for  this
species  of  de  ception.

To  prove  that  the  sounds  are  voluntary,  and  to  point  out  the  simple  modes
in  which  theT  are  developed,  suffice  to  expose  the  imposition,  without
taking  the  trouble  to  explain  any  superadded  marvels.  If  the  former  are
due  to  deception,  the  latter  are  equally  so,  as  a  matter  of  course,  whether
explained  or  not .  The  claim  to  supernatural  agency  rests  on  the  mystery
of  the  knockings.  This  claim  would  be  considered  valid  by  many  credu-
lous minds,  so  loW  as  a  writer  advocating  the  spiritual  origin  of  sounds
could  say,  "  men  oie  the  most  acute  discrimination  have  long  been  engaged
in  the  investigation,  intelligence  and  skepticism,  sharpened  by  the
suspicion  of  fraud,  have  not  failed  to  institute  every  ordeal  afforded
by  the  resources  of  science  and  art,  till  sensible  and  candid  men  have
been  forced  to  aband\on  all  idea  of  tracing  the  mysterious  phenomena*
to  any  human  devie  e."  If  the  principle  of  the  Exposition  be '  true
(and  of  its  truth  we  have  no  more  doubt  than  of  any  scientific
deduction  sustained  by  irrefragable  proof )  the  assertion  contained  in  the
foregoing  quotation  can  no  longer  be  repeated.  To  establish  the  truth  of
the  principle  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  public,  provided  the  imposture  be  not
abandoned,  must  be  left  tc>  the  co-operation  of  others;  and,  as  respects  the
result,  the  authors  can  havfr*  no  special  peisonal  interest  therein,  save  what
pertains  to  the  consciousness \  of  having  been  instrumental  in  whatever  good
may  be  connected  with  it.

*   Quoted  from  a  pamphlet  on  tM  "Rapping;s"  published  in  New  York,  by  a  writer
who  signs  himself  "  A  Dweller  in  the  Temple.' r

CONTENTS.

page.
Editorial  Article  from  Buffalo  Medical  Journal, 3

Notes, 19

APPENDIX.

Letter  by  Prof.  C.  A.  Lee, 35

Rappings  at  the  Ankle,  by  movements  of  a  tendon, 39

Exposition  by  Shadrach  Barnes-Toeology, 41

The  Electro-Magnetic  Theory, 52

The  Cock  Lane  Ghost, 56

Concluding .  Remarks 6\

wmm  amum  wMmwmw

rN  ALL  THE    STATES    IN    THE    UNION,

TO  CANVASS  for  the  following  important  and  valuable  Works,
which  are  sold  by  subscription.

LIVES  OF  JAS.  MADISON  AND  JAS.  MONROE.

Fourth  and  Fifth  Presidents  of  the  United  States,  by  John  Quincy  Adams,  to  which
is  added  a  history  of  their  Administration.  1  Vol.  12  mo.  435  pp,  with  Steel
Portraits,  cloth,  price  $  1  25

Extracts  from  Letters  Received  by  the  PublisJier.

It  is  really  a  valuable  addition  to  American  Biography,  as  it  is  a  gratifying  proof
of  the  enterprise  and  public  spirit  of  the  Publishers.  Z.  TAYLOR.

Such  a  work  may  be  read  with  profit  and  advantage  by  all  who  take  a  lively
interest  in  the  eminent  men  of  our  country.  '  H.gCLAY.

FEEMONT'S  EXPLORING  EXPEDITION

Through  the  Rocky  Mountains,  Oregon  and  California.  "With  additional  "  El  Do-
rado "  matter,  with  several  portraits  and  illustrations. —  435  pp.  12  mo.  Cloth  or
sheep,  $  1  25.

Now  that  the  hope  of  getting  them  out  of  Congressmen  is  at  an  end,  while'three-
fourths  of  the  applications  must  have  been  unsuccessful,  we  advise  the  Californians  to
walk  up  to  the  Captain's  office  and  buy  Mr,  Derby's  edition. —  The  letter  press  is
far  better  than  that  of  Congress. —  JV.  Y.  Tribune.

OREGON,

Its  HISTORY,  CONDITION,  PROSPECTS,  Geography,  Climate  and  Productions,
with  personal  adventures  among  the  Indians  during  a  residence  on  the  plains  border-
ing the  Pacific  while  connected  with  the  Oregon  mission,  embracing  extended  notes
of  a  voyage  around  the  world. —  By  Rev.  Gustavus  Hines.  435  pp.  12  mo.,  sheep  or
cloth  binding  —  price,  %  1  25.

YOUNGS  SCIENCE  OF  GOVERNMENT.

New  and  improved  edition,  370  pp.,  in  morocco  binding  —  price  $  1  25.

Questions  of  public  policy,  not  merely  affecting  the  interests  of  our  country,  but
involving  constitutional  principles,  and  even  liberty  itself,  are  not  unfrequently
decided  at  the  ballot  box.  The  poll  lists  of  our  State  are  annually  swelled  by  thou-
sands of  new  voters,  who  have  never  given  the  Constitution  so  much  as  a  single  reading  !

LIFE  OF  GEN.  ANDREW  JACKSON.

New  edition,  revised  and  enlarged,  with  Bancroft's  Eulogy.  Steel  portrait  —  400
pages,  cloth  or  sheep  -r-  $  1  25.

Noble  Deeds  of  American  Women, —  Edited  by  Mrs.  L.H.  Sigournby  and  J-
Clement,  Esq.    500  12  mo.  pages,  $  1  50.

Lectures  on  the  Progress  of  Civilization  and  Government  —  and  other  sub-
jects By  John  C.'Loed,  P.  D.    Price  75  cents.

TURNERS  HISTORY  OF  THE  HOLLAND  PURCHASE

OF  WESTERN"  NEW  YORK,  with  eight  portraits  of  the  early  pioneers— Maps
and  Plates,  700  pp.,  8  vo.,  cloth  or  sheep  —  price  $>  2  50.

LIBRARY  OF  NATURAL  HISTORY.

1  Vol.  royal  octavo,  with  400  engravings:  compiled  from  the  works  of  writers  on
Natural  History.     Cloth,  extra  binding  —  price  %  3  50.

CYCLOPCEDIA  OF  USEFUL  AND  ENTERTAINING  KNOWLEDGE.

Forming  a  complete  Library  of  useful  and  entertaining  Knowledge,  kt.,  &c.  By
W.  R.  Murray,  Esq.  Embellished  with  350  engravings,  1  vol.,  royal  8  vo.  Mo-
rocco, extra  binding  —  Price  $  4  50.

For  further  particulars  apply,  post  paid,  to  ,

£  GEO.  H.  DERBY  &  CO.,

P    C  -  9  6  u4  Publishers,  BUFFALO.

•    »0^

Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide
Treatment  Date:  Nov.  2004

.7*     <v*       *<r  '       j  PreservationTechnologie<

AV  «/»  AN  flU.  "C-  *  W°RLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATIOIs

<•  °         •  *    /y^L*  *        9r>  ^  .  *JW  *  *         *P~  1 1 1  Thomson  Pa*  Drive

•o«

Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066
(724)779-2111

&*m*&r-w ,

v

*         O  J  ^

0*     •  !.•.?-     *>

\

,4q

^    ->Va\    **   *♦    ;

0OB6S  BROS.       »

LIBRARY  BINDING     ..

DEC      81/

ST.  AUGUSTINE  v       .  i.  *  *
|v    FLA.       /*
32084
