The Koran (John Medows Rodwell, 1861)
=====================================
The first English Quran arranged in chronological order of the surahs. Text from the 1876 second edition. Public domain. Internet Archive scan.

EL-KOR'AN,   OR  THE  KORAN.

[I.]

SURA»  XCVL- CLOTS  OF  BLOOD.
Mecca. — 19  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.'

Read  !^  in  the  name  of  tliy  Lord  who  created  ; —
Created  man  from  CLOTS  OF  BLOOD  :—

'  The  word  Sura  occurs  nine  times  in  the  Koran,  viz.  Sura  ix.  65,  87,
125,  128  ;  xxiv.  1,  xlvii.  22  (twice),  ii.  21,  x.  39  ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to
determine  whether  it  means  a  whole  chapter  or  part  only  of  a  chapter,  or
is  used  in  the  sense  of  "  revelation."  See  Weil's  Mohammed  der  Prophet,
pp.  361-363.  It  is  understood  by  the  Muhammadan  commentators  to
have  a  primary  reference  to  the  succession  of  subjects  or  parts,  like  the
rous  of  bricks  in  a  wall.  The  titles  of  the  Suras  are  generally  taken  from
some  word  occurring  in  each,  which  is  printed  in  large  type  throughout,
where  practicable.     (Comp.  the  word  hoio  in  2  Sam.  i.  18,  22.)

^  This  formula — Bismillahi  'rrahmani  'rrahcem — is  of  Jewish  origin.
It  was  in  the  first  instance  taught  to  the  Koreish  by  Omayah  of  Taief,
the  poet  (one  of  the  Hanyfs,  Sprenger,  i.  76),  who  was  a  contemporary
with,  but  somewhat  older  than,  Muhammad,  and  who,  during  his
mercantile  journeys  into  Arabia  Petra'a  and  Syria,  had  made  himself
acquainted  with  the  sacred  books  and  doctrines  of  Jews  and  Christians.
(Kitab  al-Aghani,  16.  Delhi)  Muhammad  adopted  and  constantly  used
it,  and  it  is  prefixed  to  each  Sura  except  the  ninth.  The  former  of  the
two  epithets  implies  that  the  mercy  of  God  is  exercised  as  occasions  arise
towards  all  his  creatures  ;  the  latter,  that  the  quality  of  mercy  is  inherent
in  God  and  permanent, — so  that  there  is  only  a  shade  of  difi'erence  between
the  two  words.  ^laracci  well  renders,  Tn  Nomine  Dd  Miseratoris,  Miseri-
cordis.  The  rendering  I  have  adopted  is  that  of  Mr.  Lane  in  his  extracts
from  the  Koran.  (See  also  Freytag's  Lex.  ii.  p.  1 33.)  Perhaps,  In  the
name  of  AllaJi,  the  God  of  Mercy,  the  Merciful,  would  more  fully  express
the  original  Arabic.  The  first  five  verses  of  this  Sura  are,  in  the  opinion
of  nearly  all  commentators,  ancient  and  modern,  the  earliest  revelations
made  to  Muhammad,  in  the  40th  year  of  his  life,  and  the  starting-point
of  El-Islam.  (See  the  authority  quoted  in  detail  in  Noldeke's  Geschichte
des  Qorans,  p.  62,  n.)

^  This  is  the  usual  rendering,  and  has  been  understood  (1)  as  a  command

B

I  THE    KORAN.

Read !     For^  thy  Lord  is  the  most  beneficent,
Who  hath  taught  the  use  of  the  pen ; —
Hath  taug^ht  Man  tliat  which  he  knew  not.
^  Nay,  verily/  Man  is  most  extravagant  in  wickedness
Because  he  seeth  himself  possessed  of  wealth.
Verily  unto  the  Lord  is  the  return  of  all.
What  thinkcst  thou  of  him  who  forbiddeth
10     A  servant  of  GocP  when  he  prayeth  ?

What  thinkest  thou  ?  that  he  hath  followed  the  true

guidance*  or  enjoined  piety  ?
What  thinkest  thou,  if  he  hath  treated  the  truth  as  a

lie  and  turned  his  back  ?

I)y  Galiriel  the  Archangel  to  Muhammad  to  read  the  Revelation  which  he
had  brouiiht  from  Heaven  ;  or  (2)  as  a  command  to  recite  publicly  Suras
prepared  for  rehearsal.  But  the  word  Kama  (which  is  the  root  of  Koran)
may  also  mean  to  address,  cry  aloud,  ]}roclaim.  On  this  rendering  of
Ikrd  see  a  valuable  amount  of  information  supplied  by  M.  Deutsch,
Quarterly  Bcvicin,  No.  254,  Art.  Islam.  The  passage  will  then  mean,
"  Preach  to  thy  fellow-men  what  thou  believest  to  be  true  of  thy  Lord,
who  has  created  man  from  the  meanest  materials,  and  can  in  like  manner
prosper  the  truth  which  thou  proclairaest.  He  has  taught  man  the  art  of
writing  (recently  introduced  at  Mecca),  and  in  this  thou  wilt  find  a
powerful  help  for  jiropagating  the  knowledge  of  the  divine  Unity."  The
speaker  in  this,  as  in  all  the  Suras,  is  Gal)riel,  of  whom  ]\Iuhammad  had,
as  he  believed,  a  vision  on  the  mountain  Hira,  near  Mecca.  (See  Note  3
on  the  next  page.)  The  idea  of  receiving  revelations  from  an  Angel  sent
down  from  Heaven  is  Jewish.  It  had  also  been  adopted  by  the  Ebionites
in  thf  third  century.     Epiph.  Ha;r.  10.

'  Or  with  Ullmann,  bei  deinem  Ilcrrn.

'  This,  and  the  following  verses,  may  have  been  added  at  a  later  period,
though  previous  to  the  Flight,  and  with  special  reference,  if  we  are  to
believe  the  commentators  Beidhawi,  &c.,  to  the  opposition  which  Mu-
h.imraad  experienced  at  the  hands  of  his  opponent,  Al)u  Jahl,  who  had
threatened  to  set  his  foot  on  the  Pro]ihet's  neck  when  prostrate  in  prayer.
But  the  whole  passage  admits  of  application  to  mankind  in  general.

'  Muhammad.  Noldeke,  however,  proposes  to  reuder  "  a  slave."  And
it  is  certain  that  the  doctrines  of  Islam  were  in  the  first  instance  embraced
Ijy  slaves,  many  of  whom  had  been  carried  away  from  Christian  homes,
or  born  of  Christian  parents  at  Mecca.  "  Men  of  this  descri^jtion,"  says
Dr.  Sprenger  (Life  of  Mohannnad,  Allahabad,  p.  159),  "  no  doubt  pre-
pared the  way  for  the  Islam  V)y  inculcating  purer  notions  respecting  God
upon  their  nia-sters  and  their  bretliren.  These  men  saw  in  Mohammad  their
liberator  ;  and  being  superstitious  enough  to  consider  his  fits  as  the  con-
sequence of  an  inspiration,  they  were  among  the  first  who  acknowledged
him  as  a  prophet.  Many  of  them  suffered  torture  for  their  faith  in  him,
aiifl  two  of  them  died  as  martyrs.  The  excitement  among  the  slaves  when
Mi)liamniad  first  assumed  his  office  was  so  great,  that  Abd  Allah  bin
Jod'an,  who  had  one  hundred  of  these  suff'erers,  found  it  necessary  to
remove  them  from  Makkah,  lest  they  should  all  turn  converts."  (See
Sura  xvi.  105,  111  ;  ii.  220.)

*  Lit.  hast  tlwu  seen  if  he  he  upon  the  guidance.

THE    KORAN.  3

Doth  he  not  know  that  God  seeth  ?

Nay,  verily,  if  he  desist  not,  We  will  assuredly  seize

him  by  th  "5  forelock,

The  Ivine:  sinful  forelock  !

•  '  1


We  too  will  summon  the  guards  of  Hell :

Nay  !  obey  him  not ;  but  adore,  and  draw  nigh  to  God.^

[IL]

SUEA  LXXIV.— THE  ENWRAPPED.'
Mecca. — 55  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

0  THOU  ENWRAPPED  in  thy  mantle !
Arise  and  warn !

'  The  principal  men  of  the  Koreish,  Avho  adhered  to  Abu  Jahl.

^  Durinff  a  period  variously  estimated  from  six  months  to  three  years
from  the  revelation  of  this  Sura,  or  of  its  earliest  verses,  the  prophetic
inspiration  and  the  revelation  of  fresh  Suras  is  said  to  have  been  suspended.
This  interval  is  called  the  Fatrah,  or  intermission  ;  and  the  Meccan  Suras
show  that  at  or  durinr;  this  period  Muhammad  had  gained  an  increasing
acquaintance  with  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Scriptures.  "  The  accounts,
however,"  says  Mr.  Muir  (vol.  ii.  86),  "  are  throughout  confused,  if  not
contradictory  ;  and  we  can  only  gather  with  certainty  that  there  was  a
time  during  which  his  mind  hung  in  suspense,  and  doubted  the  divine
mission."  Muhammad's  belief  in  the  personality  and  influence  of  Satans
and  Djinn,  the  struggles  of  an  earnest  mind  anxious  to  attain  to  truth,
the  morbid  excitability  of  an  epileptic  subject,  disgust  at  Meccan  idolatry,
and  a  desire  to  teach  his  countrymen  the  Divine  Unity,  sufficiently  account
for  this  period  of  indecision,  and  for  the  determination  which  led  Mu-
hammad, in  all  sincerity,  to  •  take  upon  himself  the  office  and  work  of  a
Messenger  from  God.  We  may  perhaps  infer  from  such  passages  as
Sura  ii.  123,  what  had  ever  been  the  leading  idea  in  Muhammad's  mind.

^  This  Sura  is  placed  by  ^Sluir  in  the  "  second  stage  "  of  ISIeccan  Suras,
and  twenty-first  in  chronological  order,  in  the  third  or  fourth  year  of  the
Prophet's  career.  According,  however,  to  the  chronological  list  of  Suras
given  by  Weil  (Leben  M.  p.  364)  from  ancient  tradition,  as  well  as  from
the  consentient  voice  of  traditionists  and  commentaries  (v.  N<ild.  Ge-
schichte,  p.  69;  Sprenger's  Life  of  Mohammad,  p.  Ill),  it  was  the  next
revealed  after  the  Fatrah,  and  the  designation  to  the  prophetic  ofhce.
The  main  features  of  the  tradition  are,  that  Muhammad,  whUe  wandering
about  in  the  hills  near  ^lecca,  distracted  by  doubts  and  by  anxiety  after
truth,  had  a  vision  of  the  Angel  Gabriel  seated  on  a  throne  between
heaven  and  earth,  that  he  ran  to  his  wife,  Chadijah,  in  the  greatest  alarm,
and  desired  her,  perhaps  from  superstitious  motives  (and  believing  that  if

B  2

4  THE    KORAN.

And  thy  Lord — magnify  Him  !

And  thy  raiment^ — purify  it !

And  the  abomination- — flee  it !

And  bestow  not  favours  that  thou  mayest  receive  again
with  increase;

And  for  thy  Lord  wait  thou  patiently.

For  when  there  shall  he  a  trump  on  the  trumpet,^

That  then  shall  he  a  distressful  day,
10     A  day,  to  the  unbelievei's,  devoid  of  ease.

Leave  me  alone  to  deal  with  him*-whom  I  have  created,

And  on  whom  I  have  bestowed  vast  riches.

And  sons  dwelling  before  him,^

And  for  whom  I  have  smoothed  all  things  smoothly ; —

Yet  desireth  he  that  I  should  add  more  !

But  no  !  verily  to  our  signs  he  is  a  foe —

I  will  lay  grievous  woes  upon  him.^

Lo  !  he  plotted  and  he  planned !

Then  be  he  cursed  !     How  he  planned  !
20     Again,  may  he  be  cursed  !     How  he  planned  !

Then  looked  he  around  him.

Then  frowned  and  scowled.

Then  turned  his  back  and  swelled  with  disdain,

And  said,  "This  is  merely  a  tale  of  sorcery  ;7

covered  with  clothes  he  should  be  shielded  from  the  glances  of  evil  spirits
— comp.  Stanley  on  1  Cor.  xi.  10),  to  envelop  him  in  his  mantle,  that
then  Gabriel  came  down  and  addressed  him  as  in  v,  1.  This  vision,  like
that  which  preceded  Sura  xcvi.,  may  actually  have  occurred  during  the
hallucinations  of  one  of  the  epileptic  fits  from  which  Muhammad  from
early  youth  appears  to  have  suffered.  Hence  Muhammad,  in  Sura  Ixxxi.,
appeals  to  it  as  a  matter  of  fact,  and  such  he  doubtless  believed  it  to  be.
It  may  here  be  observed,  that  however  absurd  the  Muslim  traditions  may
be  in  manj^  of  their  details,  it  will  generally  be  found  that  where  there  is
an  ancient  and  tolerably  universal  consent,  there  will  be  found  at  the
bottom  a  residuum  of  fact  and  historical  truth.  At  the  same  time  there
can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  details  of  the  traditions  are  too  commonly
founded  upon  the  attempt  to  explain  or  to  throw  light  upon  a  dark
passage  of  the  Koran,  and  are  pure  inventions  of  a  later  age.

'  This  idea  may  have  been  derived  from  the  religious  washings  of  the
Ebionites.     Comp.  Epiphan.  Ha-r.  10,  2.

"  Idolatry.     See  Ibn  Ishak,  253  ;  Sura  xxii.  31.

^  The  Arabic  words  are  not  those  used  in  later  Suras  to  express  the
same  idea.

•*  Said  to  be  Walid  b.  Mogheira,  a  person  of  note  among  the  unbelieving
Meccans.  This  portion  of  the  Sura  seems  to  be  of  a  diflerent  date  from
the  first  seven  verses,  though  very  ancient,  and  the  change  of  subject  is
similar  to  that  at  v.  9  of  the  previous  Sura.

^  Lit.  iritncsscs ;  i.  e.  remaining  in  his  presence.

®  Lit.  I  v-ill  force  him  to  asccml,  i.  c.  the  steeps  of  trial.

'  Lit.  Sorcery  that  is  related.

THE    KORAN.  O

Vcrih%  it  is  but  the  word  of  a  man."

We  will  surely  cab!,  him  into  Hell-fire  to  be  burned.

And  what  shall  teach  thee  what  Hell-fire  is  ?

It  leaveth  nought  and  spareth  nought.

Blackening  the  skin  of  man.
30     Over  it  are  nineteen  angels.

None  but  angels  have  we  made  guardians  of  the  fire ;  ^
nor  have  we  made  this  to  he  their  number  but  to
perplex .  those  who  beheve  not,  in  order  that  they
to  whom  the  Scriptures  have  been  given  may  be
certain  of  the  tndh  of  the  Koran,  and  in  order  to
increase  the  faith  of  those  who  beheve ;

And  that  they  to  whom  the  Scriptures  have  been  given,
and  the  believers,  may  not  be  in  doubt;

And  that  the  infirm  of  heart  and  the  unbelievers  may
say,  What  meaneth  God  by  this  figure  of  speech  ?

Thus  God  misleadeth  whom  He  will,  and  whom  He
will  doth  He  guide  aright  ;  and  none  knoweth
the  armies  of  thy  Lord  but  He ;  and  this  is  no
other  than  a  warning  to  mankind.

Nay,  by  the  Moon  !

And  by  the  Night  when  it  retreateth !

And  by  the  Morn  when  it  brighteueth  !

Verily,  Hell  is  one  of  the  most  grievous  luoes,

Fraught  with  warning  to  man,
40     To  him  among  you  who  desireth  to  press  forward,  or
to  remain  behind.-

For  its  own  works  lieth  every  soul  in  pledge.  But
they  of  God's  right  hand

In  their  gardens  make  inquiry  of  the  wicked ; —

"  What  hath  cast  you  into  Hell-fire  V'^

They  will  say,  "  We  were  not  of  those  who  prayed.

And  we  were  not  of  those  who  fed  the  poor.

And  we  plunged  into  vain  disputes  with  vain  disputers,

And  we  rejected  as  a  lie  the  day  of  reckoning.

^  This  and  the  three  following  verses  wear  the  appearance  of  having
been  inserted  at  a  later  period  to  meet  objections  respecting  the  number
of  the  angels  who  guard  hell,  raised  by  the  Jews  ;  perhaps  at  INIedina  ;  as
the  four  classes  of  persons  specified  are  those  whom  Muhammad  had  to
deal  with  in  that  city,  viz.  the  Jews,  Believers,  the  Hj-pocrites  or  un-
decided, and  Idolaters.  These  are  constantly  mentioned  together  in  the
Medina  Suras.

^  That  is,  who  believe,  and  do  not  believe.

'  As  the  word  sakar  disturbs  the  rhyme,  it  may  have  been  inserted  by
a  mistake  of  the  copyist  for  the  usual  word,  which  suits  it.

b  THE    KORAN.

Till  the  Certainty '  came  upon  us  " —

Therefore  intercession  of  interceders   shall  not  avail

them.
50     "\^niat  then  hath  come  to   them  that  they  turn  aside

from  the  AV'^arnini!:
As  if  they  were  affrighted  asses  fleeing  from  a  lion  ?
But  every  one  of  them  would  fain  have  open  pages

given  to  him  out  of  Heaven  I
Nay,  but  they  fear  not  the  life  to^come.
Nay,  verily  this  Konhi  is  a  warning,^  and  whoso  will,

beareth  it  in  mind ;
But  not  unless  God  please,  will  they  bear  it  in  mind.

Meet  is  He  to  be  feared,  and  meet  is  forgiveness

in  Him.

[III.]

SURA  LXXIII.— THE  ENFOLDED.'
Mecca. — 20  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

0  Thou  ENFOLDED  in  thy  mantle,*

Stand  up  all  night,  except  a  small  portion  of  it,  for

prayer  :
Half ;  or  curtail  the  half  a  little, —
Or  add  to  it  :    And  with   measured  tone    intone  the

Koran ;  ^

'  That  is,  death.     Beidh.     Comp.  Sura  xv.  99.

'  Lit.  that  lohich  brings  to  mind,  a  remembrancer.

^  From  the  first  line  of  this  Sura,  and  its  expressions  concerning  the
Koran,  Praj'er,  and  Future  Punishment,  front  the  simihirity  of  the  tra-
dition with  re;:;ard  to  its  havinf,'  been  preceded  by  a  vision  of(};ibriel
(Beidh.,  &c.),  it  seems  to  belong  to,  or  at  least  to  describe,  a  period  ])ei'hnp.s
immediately  ?ucceedin{T  the  J'atrah,  durin;f  which  the  hours  of  niffht  were
spent  by  jNIuhanimad  in  devotion  imd  in  the  labour  of  workinj^  up  his
materials  in  rhythmical  and  rbyminjf  Suras,  and  iu  preparation  for  the
public  assumption  of  the  prophetic  office.  Comp.  especially  verses  11,
19,  20,  at  the  end,  with  11,  .'■>4,  55  of  the  precedhijf  Sura.

■•  This,  as  well  as  v.  1  of  the  precediji^f  Sura,  may  be  equivalent,  not-
withstandincc  the  traditions,  to  0  thou  sleeper.  The  Oriental  is  content
with  a  single  covering  for  the  head  and  body,  as  all  his  bedclothes,

*  Singe  den  Koran  laut.  H.  v,  P.  Psalle  Alcoranum  psallendo.  Mar.
Singe  den  Koran  mit  singcnder  und  lauter  Stimme  ab.  UUm.  V.
Sprenger's  Loben  Mohammad,  i.  321,  322

THE    KORAN.  /

Lo,  We  devolve  on  thee  weighty  words.

Verilv,  the  oncoLMiig  of  night  is  most  fitted  for  earnest

devotion,  and  words  are  more  collected ;  ^
(Verily  in  the  daytime  thou  hast  continual  employ — )
And  commemorate  the  name  of  thy  Lord,  and  devote

thyself  to  Him  with  entii'e  devotion  ;
Lord  of  the  East  and  of  the  West  !     No  God  is  there

but  He  !     Take  Him  then  for  thy  guardian,
10     And  endure  what  they  say  with  patience,  and  depart

from  them  with  a  decorous  departure.
And  let   me    alone   with   the   gainsayers,   rich  in  the

pleasures  of  this  life ;   and  bear  thou  with  them

yet  a  little  while  ; —
Verily  with  Us  are  strong  fetters,  and  a  flaming  fire.
And  food  that  choketh,  and  a  sore  torment.
On  the  day  when  the  earth  and  the  mountains  shall

tremble ;  and  the  mountains  shall  become  a  loose

sand-heap.
Verily,  we  have  sent  you  an  Apostle  to  bear  witness

to  yon,  even  as  we  sent  an  Apostle  to  Pharaoh  :
But  Pharaoh  rebelled  against  the  Apostle,  and  we  laid

hold  on  him  with  a  severe  chastisement.
And  how,  if  ye  believe  not,  will  ye  screen  yourselves

from    the    day    that    shall    turn    children    grey-
headed?
The  heaven  shall  be  rent  asunder  by  it :  it  is  a  threat

that  shall  be  carried  into  effect.
Lo  !   this  is  a  warning.     Let  him  then  who  will,  take

the  way  to  his  Lord.
^  20  Of  a  truth,"  thy  Lord  knoweth  that  thou  prayest  almost

two-thirds,  or  half,  or  a  third  of  the  night,  as  do

*  Or,  for  keeping  down  improper  thought,  and  more  suitable  for  correct
'pronunciation.

^  This  verse,  according  to  a  tradition  of  Ayesha,  was  revealed  one  year
later  than  the  previous  part  of  the  Sura.  Noldeke  says  it  is  "  offenbar
ein  Medinischcr."  V.  Dr.  Sprengcr  as  above,  note  5,  p.  6.  It  need  not,
however,  surprise  us  to  find  in  the  very  outset  of  Muhammad's  career  a
frequent  mention  of  Alms,  Prayer,  Heaven,  Hell,  Judgment,  Apostles,
&c.,  in  their  usual  sense,  when  we  remember  that  Judaism  was  exten-
sively naturalized  in  Arabia,  and  Christianity  also,  although  to  a  smaller
extent — in  fact,  only,  says  ]\Lr.  Muir,  among  "  the  Bani  Harith  of  Najran,
the  Bani  Hanifa  of  Yemania,  and  some  of  the  Bani  Tay  at  Tayma,  and
hardly  any  more."  The  words  and  phrases  of  these  religions  were  doubt-
less familiar  to  the  Meccans,  especially  to  that  numerous  body  who  were
anxiously  searching  after  something  better  than  the  idolatries  of  their
fathers  (v.  on  Sura  iii.  19,  60),  and  provided  Muhammad  with  a  copious
fund  from  which  to  draw  his  materials.

8  THE    KORAN.

a  part  of  thy  followers.  But  God  measure tli  the
night  and  the  day : — He  knoweth  that  ye  cannot
count  its  hours  aright,  and  therefore  tnrneth  to
you  mercifully.  Recite  then  so  much  of  the  Koran
as  may  be  easy  to  you.  He  knoweth  that  there
will  be  some  among  you  sick,  while  others  travel
through  the  earth  in  quest  of  the  bounties  of  God;
and  others  do  battle  in  his  cause.  Recite  there-
fore so  much  of  it  as  may  be  easy.  And  observe
the  Prayers  and  pay  the  legafAlms,  and  lend  God
a  liberal  loan  :  for  whatever  good  works  ye  send
on  before  for  your  own  behoof,  yo  shall  find  with
God.  This  will  be  best  and  richest  in  the  recom-
pense. And  seek  the  forgiveness  of  God  :  verily,
God  is  forgiving.  Merciful.

[IV.]

SURA  XCIII.'— THE  BRIGHTNESS.
Mecca. — 11  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  the  noon-day  BRIGHTNESS,

And  by  the  night  when  it  darkeneth  !

Thy   Lord   hath  not  forsaken    thee,    neither  hath  He

hated  thee,
And  surely  the  Future  shall  be  better  for  thee  than

the  Present,
And  thy  Lord  shall  assuredly  be  bounteous  to  thee  and

thou  be  satisfied.
Did  He  not  find  thee  an  oi-phan  -  and  provide  thee  a

home?

'  This  and  the  six  following  Suras  are  expressions  of  a  state  of  deep
mental  anxiety  and  depression,  in  which  IMuhaniniad  seeks  to  reassure
himself  by  calling  to  mind  the  past  favours  of  God,  and  by  fixing  his  mind
steadfastly  on  the  Divine  Unity.  They  belong  to  a  period  either  before
the  public  commencement  of  his  ministry  or  when  his  success  was  very
dubious,  and  his  future  career  by  no  means  clearly  marked  out.

'  The  charge  of  the  orphaned  Muhammad  was  undertaken  by  Abd-al-
Mutalib,  his  grandfather,  a.d.  576.  Hishami,  p.  35;  Kitab  alWakidi,
p.  22,  have  preserved  traditions  of  the  fondness  with  which  the  old  man
of  fourscore  years  treated  the  child,  spreading  a  rug  for  him  under  the
shadow  of  the  Kaaba,  protecting  him  from  the  rudeness  of  his  own
sons,  &c.

THE    KORAN.  y

And  He  found  thcc  erring  and  guided  thee/
And  found  thee  r  3edy  and  enriched  thee.
As  to  the  orphan  therefore  wrong  him  not ;
10     And  as  to  him  that  asketh   of  thee,  chide  him  not

away ;
And  as  for  the  favours  of  thy  Lord,  tell  them  then

abroad.

[V.]
SURA  XCIV.— THE  OPENING.

Mecca. — 8  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Have  we  not  OPENED  thy  breast  for  thee  ?

And  taken  off  from  thee  thy  burden,

Which  galled  thy  back  ?

And  have  we  not  upraised  thy  name  for  thee  ?

Then  verily  along  with  the  difficulty  cometh  ease.

Verily  along  with  the  difficulty  cometh  ease.

But  when  thou  art  set  at  liberty/  be  instant  (in  prayer),

And  seek  thy  Lord  with  fervour.

[VL]

SUKA  CXIIL— THE  DAYBREAK
Mecca. — 5  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Say  :  I  betake  me  for  refuge  to  the  Lord  of  the  DAY-
BREAK
Against  the  mischief  of  his  creation ;

'  Up  to  his  fortieth  year  Muhammafl  followed  the  religion  of  hig
coimtrymen.  Waq.  Tabari  says  that  when  be  first  entered  on  his  office
of  Prophet,  even  his  wife  Chadijah  bad  read  the  Scriptures,  and  was
acquainted  with  the  History  of  the  Prophets.  Spreng,  p.  100.  But  his
conformity  can  only  have  been  partial.

-  Lit.  Juxst  ended  {thy  preaching)  or  (thy  relaxation).

10  THE    KORAN.

And  against  the  miscliief  of  the  first  darkness  when

it  overspreadeth  ;  ^
And  against  the  mischief  of  enchantresses  ;  ^
And  against  the  mischief  of  the  envierwhenhe  envieth.

[VII.]

SURA  CXIV.-MEN.

Mecca.— 6  Verses.

Li  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Say  :  I  betake  me  for  refuge  to  the  Lord  of  MEN^

The  King  of  men,

The  God  of  men.

Against  the   mischief   of   the    stealthily  withdrawing

whisperer,^
AVho  whispereth  in  man's  breast —
Against  djinn  and  men.

[VIIL]

SURA^  I.— THE  OPENING.

Mecca. — 7  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Praise  bo  to  God,  Lord  of  the  worlds  !
The  compassionate,  the  merciful  !

1

Or,  of  the,  moon  ivhcn  it  is  eclipsed.

•  Lit.  uomcn  who  hlnw  on  hiois.  Accordinsr  to  some  comtnentators,  an
allusion  to  a  species  of  chann.  Conip.  Vir*,'.  Ec.  viii.  77.  But  the  reference,
more  probably,  is  to  women  in  general,  who  disconcert  schemes  as  thread
is  disentangled  by  blowing  upon  it.  Suras  cxiii.  c.xiv.  are  called  the
el  viouvu-idhctnni,  or  preservative  chapters,  arc  engraved  on  amulets,  &c.

^  Satan  ;  who  hidrf!  himself  at  the  Name  of  God.

*  This  Sura,  which  Noldeke  places  last,  and  Muir  sixth,  in  the  earliest
class  of  Meccan  Suras,  must  at  least  have  been  composed  prior  to
Sura  XXX vii.  182,  where  it  is  quoted,  and  to  Sura  xv.  87,  which  refers
to  it.     And  it  can  scarcely  be  an  accidental  circumstance  that  the  words

THE    KORAN.  11

King  on  the  day  of  juclgment  !

Thee  onJi/  do  wt   worship,  and  to  Thee  do  we  cry  for

help.
Guide  Thou  us  on  the  right  path/
The  path  of  those  to  whom  Thou  art  gracious ;
Not  of  those  with  whom   Thou  art  angered,  nor  of

those  who  go  astray.-

[IX.]

suEA  cix.— unbelie\t:rs.

Mecca. — 6  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Say  :  0  ye  UNBELIEVERS  !
I  worship  not  what  ye  worship,

of  the  first,  second,  and  fifth  verses  do  not  occur  in  any  other  Suras  of
the  first  ^leccan  period  as  given  by  Noldeke,  but  ft-equently  in  those  or
the  second,  which  it  therefore,  in  Noldeke's  opinion,  immediately  pre-
cedes. But  this  may  be  accounted  for  by  its  having  been  recast  for  the
purposes  of  private  and  public  devotion  by  Muhammad  himself,  which  is
the  meaning  probably  of  the  Muharumadan  tradition  that  it  was  revealed
twice.  It  should  also  be  observed,  that  including  the  auspicatory  formula,
there  are  the  same  number  of  petitions  in  this  Sura  as  in  the  Lord's
Prayer.  It  is  recited  several  times  in  each  of  the  five  daily  prayers,  and
on  many  other  occasions,  as  in  concluding  a  bargain,  &c.  It  is  termed
"  the  Opening  of  the  Book,"  "  the  Completion,"  "  the  Sufficing  Sura,"
"the  Sura  of  Praise,  Thanks,  and  Prayer,"  "  the  Healer,"  "  the  Eemedy,"
"  the  Basis,"  "  the  Treasure,"  "  the  Mother  of  the  Book,"  "  the  Seven
Verses  of  Kepetition."  The  Muhammadans  always  say  "Amen"  after
this  prayer,  Muhammad  having  been  instructed,  says  the  Sonna,  to  do  so
by  the  Angel  Gabriel.
'  Islam.

'  The  commentators  refer  the  first  clause  of  line  7  to  the  Jews,  the  latter
to  the  Christians.

The  following  transfer  of  this  Sura  from  the  Arabic  into  the  corre-
sponding English  characters  may  give  some  idea  of  the  rhyming  prose  in
which  the  Koran  is  written  : —

Bismillahi  'rrahhmani  'rrahheem

El-hamdoo  lillahi  rabi  'lalameen

Arrahhmani  raheem

Maliki  yowmi-d-deen

Eyaka  naboodoo,  waeyaka  nestaeen

Ihdina  'ssirat  almostakeem

Sirat  alezeena  anhamta  aleihim

Gheiri-'l  mughdoobi  aleihim,  wala  dsaleen.     .A  men.

12  THE   KORAN.

And  ye  arc  not  worshippers  of  Avhat  I  worship  ;
And  I  am  not   a  worshipper  of  what  ye  have  wor-
shipped.
And  ye  are  not  worshippers  of  what  I  worship.
To  you  your  religion  ;  and  to  me  my  rehgion.^

[X.]

SURA  CXII.-THE  UNITY.

Mecca. — 4  Verses.

hi  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  tlic  Merciful.

Say  :  He  is  one  God  :

God  the  everlasting  !

He  bogetteth  not,  and  He  is  not  begotten  ;

And  there  is  none  like  unto  Him.

[XL]

SURA  CXI.— ABU  LAHAB.
Mecca. — 5  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Coin])assionatc,  the  Merciful.

Let  the  hands  of  ABU  LAHAB  perish,^  and  lot  him-
self perish  !
His  wealth  and  his  gains  shall  avail  him  not.

'  This  Sura  is  siifl  to  have  been  revealed  when  Walirl  iirf^ed  Muhammad
to  consent  that  his  God  should  be  worshipped  at  the  same  time  with  the
old  Meccan  deities,  or  alternately  every  year.  Hishami,  p.  79  ;  Tabari,
p.  139.  It  is  a  distinct  renunciation  of  Meccan  idolatry,  as  the  following
Sura  is  a  distinct  recognition  of  the  Divine  Unity.

-  Or  shall  perish.  Undoubtedly  one  of  the  earliest  Suras,  and  refers  to
the  rejection  of  Muhammad's  claim  to  the  prophetic  office  by  his  uncle,
Abu  Lahab,  at  the  instigation  of  his  wife,  0mm  I)jemil,  who  is  said  to
have  strewn  the  path  of  Muhammad  on  one  occasion  with  thorns,  and
hence  ciUed,  according  to  some,  the  carrier  nf  ivood  in  the  text.  But  the
rendering  given  above  harmonizes  best  with  the  context.  The  following
six  Suras,  like  the  two  first,  have  special  reference  to  the  difficulties  which
the  Prophet  met  with  in  the  outset  of  his  career,  especially  from  the  rich.

THE    KORAN.  13

Burned  shall  he  be  at  the  fiery  flame,^
And  his  wife  lac3n  with  the  fire- wood, —
On  her  neck  a  rope  of  twisted  palm-fibre.

[XII.]

SURA  CVIII.— THE  ABUNDANCE.

Mecca. — 3  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Truly  we  have  given  thee  an  ABUNDANCE ;  -
Pray  therefore  to  thy  Lord,  and  slay  the  victims.^
Verily  whoso  hateth  thee  shall  be  childless.*

[XIII.]

SURA  CIV.— THE  BACKBITER.

Mecca. — 9  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Woe  to  every  BACKBITER,  Defamer  !

Who  hath  amassed  wealth  and   stored  it  against  the

future  !
He  thinketh  that  his  wealth  hath  made  him  immortal.
Nay  !  he  shall  surely  be  flung  into  the  Crushing  Fire

{Hotama) ;
And  what  shall  teach  thee  what  the  Crushing  Fire  is  ?
It  is  God's  kindled  fire,

AVhich  shall  mount  above  the  hearts  of  the  damned  ;
It  shall  verily  rise  over  them  like  a  vault,
On  outstretched  columns.

'  In  allusion  to  the  meaning  of  Abu  Lahab,  father  of  flame.

^  Comp.  xciii.  6,  p.  9.

^  See  Sura  xxii.  38,  n.

*  A  reply  to  those  who  had  taunted  Muhammad  with  the  death  of  his
sons  Al-Kasim  and  Abd-Manaf,  as  a  mark  of  the  divine  displeasure.  Lit.
tail-hss.  As  ]Manaf  is  the  name  of  a  INIeccan  idol,  Muhammad  must
have  thus  named  his  child  long  before  he  had  conceived  the  idea  of
founding  a  new  religion.

14  THE    KOKAN.

[XIV.]

SURA  CVIL— HELP,  or  ALMS.

Mecca. — 7  Verses.

1)1  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

What  tliinkest  thou  of  him' who  treateth  the  day  of

judgment  as  a  lie  ?
He  it  is  who  thrusteth  away  the  orphan,
And  stirreth  not  otliers  up  to  feed  the  poor.
Woe  then  to  those  who  pray/
Who  in  their  prayer  are  careless  ;
Who  make  a  show  of  devotion.
But  refuse  help  to  the  needy}

[XV.]

SURA  Cn.— DESIRE.

Mecca. — 8  Verses.

Iti  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

The  desire  of  increasing  riches  occupieth  you,

Till  ye  come  to  the  grave.

Nay  !  but  in  the  end  ye  shall  know —

Nay  !   once  more;  in  the  end  ye  shall  know  your  folly .

Nay  !  would  that  ye  knew  it  with  knowledge  of  cer-
tainty !

Surely  shall  ye  see  hell-fire.

Then  shall  ye  surely  see  it  with  the  eye  of  certainty;

Then  shall  ye  surely  on  that  day  he  taken  to  task
concerning  the  pleasures  of  this  life.

'  Lit.  common  necessaries,  or  alms.

THE    KORAN.  15

[XVL]

SURA  XCIL— THE  NIGHT.
Mecca. — 21  Verses.

Ill  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  the  NIGHT  when  she  spreadeth  her  veil ;

By  the  Day  when  it  appeareth  in  glory ;

By  Him  who  made  male  and  female ;

Verily  your  aims  are  indeed  different !

As  then  for  him  who  giveth  alms  and  feareth  God,

And  yieldeth  assent  to  the  Good ;

To  him  will  We  therefore  make  easy  the  path  to  hap-
piness.

But  as  to  him  who  is  covetous  and  bent  on  riches.

And  calleth  the  Good  a  lie^
10     To  him  will  We  make  easy  the  path  to  distress;

And  what  shall   his  wealth  avail  him  when  he  goeth
down  headlong  ?

Truly  man^s  guidance  is  with  Us,

And  Ours,  the  next  Life  and  this  life  Present.

I  warn  vou  therefore  of  the  flamingf  fire  :

None  shall  be  burned  at  it  but  the  most  wretched, —

Who  hath  called  the  truth  a  lie  and  turned  his  back.

But  the  greatly  God-fearing  shall  escape  it, —

Who  giveth  away  his  substance  that  he  may  become
pure ;  ^

And  who  offereth  not  favours  to  any  one  for  the  sake
of  recompense,
20     But  only  as  seeking  the  face  of  his   Lord   the  Most
High.

And  assuredly  in  the  end  he  shall  be  well  content.

^  Comp.  Luke  xi.  41.     Muhammad  perhaps  derived  this  view  of  the
meritorious  nature  of  almsffivincr  from  the  Jewish  oral  law.

]6  THE    KORAN.

[xvir.]

SURA  LXVIIL— THE  PEN.

Mecca. — 52  Verses.

Jw  the  Natne  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

NuN.^     By  the  PEN  ~  and  by  what  they  write.

Thou,  0  Prophet ;  by  the  grace  of  thy  Lord  art  not

possessed  !  ^
And  truly  a  boundless  recompense  doth  await  thee,
And  verily  thou  art  of  a  noble  nature  ;  *
And  thou  shalt  see  and  they  shall  'see
Which  of  you  is  the  demented.
Now  thy  Lord  !  well  knowcth  He  who  erreth  from  his

path,  and  well  doth  He  know  who  have  yielded  to

Guidance ;
Give  not  place,  therefore,  to  those  who  treat  thee  as  a

liar:
They  desire  thee  to  deal  smoothly  with  them  :    then

would  they  deal  smoothly  with  tbee:
10     But  yield  not  to  every  man  of  oaths,  despicable,
Defamer,  going  about  with  slander,

^  It  has  been  conjectured,  that  as  the  word  Nun  meimsfsh,  there  may-
be a  reference  to  the  fish  which  swallowed  Jonas  (v.  48).  The  fact,  how-
ever, is  that  the  nieanmg  of  this  and  of  the  similar  symbols  throughout  the
Koran,  thou^rh  here  it  obviously  jioints  to  the  Rhyme,  was  unknown  to  the
Muhanimadans  themselves,  even  in  the  first  century.  Possibly  the  letters
JIa,  Mini,  which  are  prefixed  to  numerous  successive  Suras,  were  private
marks,  or  initial  letters,  attached  by  their  proprietor  to  the  copies  fur-
nished to  Said  when  effecting  his  recension  of  the  text  under  Othman.
In  the  same  way,  the  letters  prefixed  to  other  Suras  may  be  monograms,
or  abbreviations,  or  initial  letters  of  the  names  of  the  persons  to  whom
the  copies  of  the  respective  Suras  belonged.  This  subject  is  discussed  by
Beidhawi  on  Sura  ii.  (the  Cow),  and  an  excellent  translation  of  his  remarks
is  to  be  found  in  De  Sacy's  Anthol.  Arab.  pp.  1-10.

2  This  Sura  has  been  supposed  by  ancient  Muslim  authorities  to  be,  if
not  the  oldest,  the  second  revelation,  and  to  have  followed  Sura  xcvi.
But  this  opinion  probably  originatt-d  from  the  expression  in  v.  1  compared
with  Sura  xcvi.  4.  Verses  17-3:3  read  like  a  later  adilitioii,  and  this  pas-
sage, as  well  as  verses  48- 5f),  has  been  classed  with  the  Medina  revelations.
In  the  absence  of  any  reliable  criterion  for  fixing  the  date,  I  have  placed
this  Sura  with  those  which  detail  the  opposition  encountered  by  the
Pro]jhet  at  Mecca.

^  By  djiim.     Comp.  Sura  xxxiv.  45.

*  In  bearing  the  taunts  of  the  unbelievers  with  patience.

THE    KORAN.  17

Hinderer  of  good,  transgressor,  criminal,

Harsh — beside  tK's,  impure  of  birth.

Though  a  man  of  riches  and  with  sons  ;

"Who,  when  our  wondrous  verses  (signs)  are  recited  to

him  saith — "  Fables  of  the  ancients '' —
On  the  nostrils  will  we  brand  him.
Verily,  we   have    proved   them    (the  Meccans)   as  we

proved   the    owners    of    the    garden,    when    they

swore  that  at  morn  they  would  cut  its  fruits;
But  added  no  reserve  ;  ^
Wherefore    an    encircling    desolation    from   thy  Lord

swept  round  it  while  they  slumbered,
20     And    in    the    morning    it    was    like    a   garden  whose

fruits  had  all  been  cut.
Then  at  dawn  they  called  to  each  other,
"  Go  out  early  to   your  field,  if  ye  would  cut  your

dates.''
So  on  they  went  and  said  to  each  other  in  a  low  voice,
"  No  poor  man  shall  this  day  enter  your  garden  for

you  :  "
And  they  went  out  at    daybreak    with    this   settled

purpose,
And  when  they  beheld  it,  they  said,  "  Truly  we  have

been  in  fault :
Yes  !  we  are  forbidden  our  fruits,"
The  most  rightminded  of  them  said,  "  Did  I  not  say

to  you,  Will  ye  not  give  praise  to  God  ?  "
They  said,  "  Glory  to  our  Lord  !     Truly  we  have  done

amiss.''
30     And  they  fell  to  blaming  one  another  :

They  said,  "  Oh  woe  to  us  !    we  have  indeed  trans-
gressed !
Haply  our  Lord  will   give   us    in    exchange  a  better

garden  than  this  :  verily  we  crave  it  of  our  liord."
Such  our  chastisement  —  but  heavier   assuredly   shall

be  the  chastisement  of  the  next  world :  did  they

but  know  it.
Verily,  for  the  God-fearing  are  gardens  of  delight  in

the  presence  of  their  Lord.
Shall  we  then  deal  with  those  who  have  surrendered

themselves  to  God  (Muslims),  as  with  those  who

offend  Him  ?
What  hath  befallen  you  that  ye  thus  judge  ?

^  They  did  not  add  the  restriction,  if  God  will.
C

18  THE    KORAN.

Have  ye  a  Scripture  wherein  ye  can  search  out

That  ye  shall  have  the  things  ye  choose  ?

Or  have  ye  oaths  which  shall  bind  Us  even  until  the
day  of  the  resurrection,  that  ye  shall  have  what
yourselves  judge  right?
40     Ask  them  which  of  them  will  guarantee  this  ?

Or  is  it  that  they  have  gods  with  God  ?  let  them  pro-
duce   those    associate-gods    of  theirs,  if  they  be
men  of  truth.
/  On  a  certain  day  the  leg    shall   be  bared,^  and  men

shall   be    called   upon    to   bow  in  adoration,  but
>  .  •  shull  not  be  able  ;

Their  looks  downcast  * —  shame  shall  cover  them  —
because,  while  yet  in  safety,  they  were  invited
to  bow  in  worship,  hut  would  not  obey.

Leave  me  alone  therefore  with  him  who  chargeth  this
revelation  with  imposture.  We  will  lead  them
by  degrees  to  their  ruin  by  ways  which  they
know  not;

Yet  will  I  bear  long  with  them  ;  for  my  plan  is  sure.
^  Askest  thou  a  recompense  from  them  ?    But  they  are
burdened  with  debt.

Are  the  secret  things  within  theii'  ken  so  that  they
copy  them  from  the  Book  of  God  ?

Patiently  then  await  the  judgment  of  thy  Lord,  and
be  not  like  him  who  was  in  the  fish,^  when  in
deep  distress  he  cried  to  God ;

Had  not  favour  from  his  Lord  reached  him,  cast  forth
would  he   have   been   on   the   naked   shore,  dis-
graced ;
50     But  his  Lord  chose  him  and  made  him  of  the  just.

And  of  a  truth  almost  would  the  infidels  strike  thee
down'  with  their  looks  when  they  hear  the
warning  of  the  Koran .  And  they  say,  "  Lo,  he  is
certainly  possessed ;  "

Yet  is  it  nothing  less  than  a  warning  for  all  creatures.

'  An  expression  implying  a  grievous  calamity  ;  borrowed  probably  from
the  action  of  stripping  previous  to  flight,  &c.

^  Lit.  the  companion  of  the  fish.  Couip.  ou  Jonah,  Sura  xxxvii.  139-
148,  and  Sura  xxi.  87.

'  Lit.  cause  thee,  to  slip.

THE    KOEAN.  19

[X^^III.]

SURA  XC— THE  TERRITORY.
Mecca. — 20  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

I  SWEAR  by  this  TERRITORY,

And  in  tliis  territory  thou  dost  dwell,

And  by  sire  and  offspring  !  ^

Surely  in  trouble  have  we  created  man.

Thinketh  he  that  no  one  hath  any  power  over  him  ?

"  I  have  wasted/^  saith  he,  "  enormous  riches  ! "

Thinketh  he  that  no  one  regardeth  him  ?

Have  we  not  made  him  eyes.

And  tongue,  and  lips,
]  0     And  guided  him  to  the  two  highways  ?  ^

Yet  he  attempted  not  the  steep.

And  what  shall  teach  thee  what  the  steep  is  ?

It  is  to  ransom  the  captive,^

Or  to  feed  in  the  day  of  famine

The  orphan  who  is  near  of  kin,  or  the  poor  that  lieth  ■*
in  ^he  dust ;

Beside  this,  to  be  of  those  who  believe,  and  enjoin
steadfastness  on  each  other,  and  enjoin  compas-
sion on  each  other.

These  shall  be  the  people  of  the  right  hand :

While  they  who  disbelieve  our  signs,

Shall  be  the  people  of  the  left —
20     Over  them  shall  be  a  vault  of  fire.^

^  Lit.  and  begetter  and  ichat  he  hath  begotten.  The  commentators  state
that  what  follows  has  reference  to  one  of  Muhammad's  most  determined
Meccan  opponents,  Walid  ben  el  Mogheira.

'  Of  good  and  evil.

'  Thus  we  read  in  Hilchoth  INIatt'noth  Aniim,  c.  8,  "The  ransoming  of
captives  takes  precedence  of  the  feeding  and  clothing  of  the  poor,  and
there  is  no  commandment  so  great  as  this."

■*  Lit.  familiar  2cith,  possessed  of  nothing  but  {his  mother  earth).

^  Lit.  closed  over,  or  vaulted.

c  2

20  THE    KORAN.

[XIX.]

SURA  CV.— THE  ELEPHANT.

Mecca. — 5  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Hast  thou  not  seen^  Iiotv  thy  Lord  dealt  with  the  army

of  the  ELEPHANT  ?
Did  He  not  cause  their  stratagem  to  miscarry  ?
And  He  sent  against  them  birds  in  flocks,
Claystones  did  they  hurl  down  upon  them.
And  He  made  them  like  stubble  eg^ten  down  !

[XX.]

SUEA  CVI.— THE  KOREISH.

Mecca. — 4  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  iJte  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

For  the  union  of  the  KOREISH  :—

Their  union  in  equipping  caravans  winter  and  summer.

Let  them  then  worship  the  lord  of  this  house,  who

providoth  them  with  food  against  hunger.
And  sccureth  them  against  alarm.^

'  This  Sura  is  probably  Muhammad's  appeal  to  the  Meccans,  intended
at  the  sanio  time  for  liis  own  cncourajrenient,  on  the  ffronnd  of  their  de-
liverance from  the  army  of  Abraha  (strcnfftlienod  Ijy  tliirteen  elephants),
the  Christian  king  of  Abyssinia  and  Arabia  Felix,  said  to  have  been  lost
in  the  year  of  Muhammad's  birth  in  an  expedition  aj,'ainst  Mecca  for  the
purpose  of  destroyinj?  the  Ca.aba.  This  army  was  cut  off  by  small-pox
(Wakidi  ;  Hisham),  and  there  is  no  doubt  (as  the  Arabic  word  for  small-
pox also  means  "  small  stones,"  in  reference  to  the  hard  gravelly  feeling
of  the  pustules)  what  is  the  true  interpretation  of  the  fourth  line  of  this
Sura,  which,  like  many  other  poetical  passages  in  the  Koran,  has  formed
the  starting-point  for  the  most  puerile  and  extravagant  legends.  Vide
Gibbon's  jjecline  and  Fall,  c.  1.  The  small-pox  first  showed  itself  in
Arabia  at  the  time  of  the  invasion  by  Abraha.  M.  de  Hammer  Gemal-
desaal,  i.  24.     Reiske,  opusc.  Med.  Araljum.     Hahe,  1776,  p.  8.

*  In  allusion  to  the  ancient  inviolability  of  the  Haram,  or  precinct
round  Mecca.  See  Sura  xcv.  n.  p.  2b.  This  Sura,  therefore,  like  the
preceding,  is  a  brief  appeal  to  the  Meccans  on  the  ground  of  their
peculiar  privileges.

THE    KORAN.  21

[XXI.]

SUEA  XC\  ri.— POWER,  or  AL  KADK.
Mecca. — 5  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Verily,  we  have  caused  It^  to  descend  on  the  night  of
POWER.

And  what  shall  teach  thee  what  the  night  of  power  is  ?

The  night  of  power  is  better  than  a  thousand  months :

Therein  descend  the  angels  and  the  Spirit  by  per-
mission of  their  Lord  for  every  matter  ;  -

All  is  peace  until  the  breaking  of  the  morn.

[XXII.]

SUEA  LXXXVI.— THE  NIGHT-COMER.

Mecca. — 17  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  the  heaven,  and  by  the  NIGHT-COMER  !
But  what  shall  teach  thee  what  the  night-comer  is  ?
^Tis  the  star  of  piercing  radiance.
Verily  every  soul  has  of  a  surety  a  guardian  over  it.
Let  man  then  reflect  out  of  what  he  was  created.
He  was  created  of  the  poured-forth  germs,
Which  issue  from  between  the  loins  and  breastbones  ;
Well  able  truly  is  God  to  restore  him  to  life, —
On  the  day  when  all  secrets  shall  be  searched  out,
10     And  he  shall  have  no  other  might  or  helper.

'  The  Koran,  which,  so  far  as  already  revealed,  is  now  pressed  on  the
Meccans  with  increasing  prominence,  as  will  be  seen  in  many  succeeding
Suras  of  this  period.

2  The  night  of  Al  Kadr  is  one  of  the  last  ten  nights  of  Ramadhan,  and,
as  is  commonlj'  believed,  the  seventh  of  those  nights  reckoning  backward.
See  Sura  xliv.  2,  "  Three  books  are  opened  on  the  New  Year's  Day, — one
of  the  perfectly  righteous,  one  of  the  perfectly  wicked,  one  of  the  inter-
mediate. The  perfectly  righteous  are  inscribed  and  sealed  for  life,"  &c.
Bab.  Talm.  Rosh.  Hash.,  §  1.

22  THE    KOEAN.

I  swear  by  the  heaven  which  accomplisheth  its  revo-
lution,

And  by  the  earth  which  opcucth  her  bosom,

That  this  Koran  is  indeed  a  discriminating  discourse,

And  that  it  is  not  frivolous.

They  verily  plot  a  plot  against  thee,

And  I  will  plot  a  plot  against  them.

Deal  gently  therefore  with  the  infidels ;  grant  them  a
gentle  respite.

[XXIII.]

SUEA  XCL— THE  SUN.

Mecca. — 15  Verses.

In,  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  the  SUN  and  his  (her)  noonday  brightness  !
By  the  Moon  when  she  followeth  liim  !
By  the  Day  when  it  revcalcth  his  glory  !
By  the  Night  when  it  enshroudcth  him  !
By  the  Heaven  and  Him  who  built  it  !
By  the  Earth  and  Him  who  spread  it  forth  !
By  a  Sold  and  Him  who  balanced  it,
And  breathed  into  it  its  wickedness  and  its  piety,
Happy  is  he  who  hath  kept  it  pure,
10     And  undone  is  he  who  hath  corrupted  it !

Thamood  ^  in  his  impiety  rejected  the  message  of  the

Lord,
When  the  greatest  wi'etch  among  them  rushed  up  : —
And  the  Apostle  of  God  said  to  them, — ''  The  Camel

of  God  !  and  let  her  drink. '^
But  they  treated  him  as  an  impostor  and  hamstrung

her.      So    their    Lord    destroyed    them  for  their

crime,  and  visited  all  alike  :
Nor  feared  He  the  issue.

'  See  Sura  vii.  33,  for  the  story  of  Thcamood.

THE    KORAN.  23

[XXIV.]

SUEA    .XXX.— HE  FROWNED.
Mecca. — 42  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

HE  FROWNED,  and  he  turned  liis  back/

Because  the  blind  man  came  to  him  !

But  what  made  thee  know  whether  he  would  not  aim
at  holiness/

Or  be  warned,  and  the  warning  profit  him  ?

As  to  him  who  has  become  wealthy —

Him  therefore  thou  didst  receive  with  honour  :

Yet  is  it  not  thy  concern  that  he  endeavours  not  to
be  pure ;  ^

But  as  to  him  who  cometh  to  thee  in  earnest,

Ajid  full  of  fears —
1 0     Him  dost  thou  negloct.

Do  not  so.     Verily  it  (the  Koran)  is  a  warning;

(And  whoso  is  willing  beareth  it  in  mind)

Written  on  honoured  pages.

Exalted,  purified.

By  the  hands  of  Scribes,  honoured,  righteous.

Cursed  be  man  !     What  hath  made  him  unbelieving  ?

Of  w^hat  thing  did  God  create  him  ?

Out  of  moist  germs.^

He  created  him  and  fashioned  him,
20     Then  made  him  an  easy  passage //-oni  the  ivomh,

Then  causeth  him  to  die  and  burieth  him ;

Then,  when  He  pleaseth,  will  raise  him  again  to  life.

Nay  !  but  man  hath  not  yet  fulfilled  the  bidding  of  his
Lord.

Let  man  then  look  at  his  food :

It  was  We  who  rained  down  the  copious  rains,

'  We  are  told  in  the  traditions,  &c.,  that  when  engaged  in  converse
with  Walid,  a  chief  man  among  the  Koreish,  Muhammad  was  interrupted
by  the  blind  Abdallah  Ibn  0mm  Maktum,  who  asked  to  hear  the  Koran.
The  Prophet  spoke  very  roughly  to  him  at  the  time,  but  afterwards  re-
pented, and  tre;ited  him  ever  after  with  the  greatest  respect.  So  much
so,  that  he  twice  made  him  Governor  of  Medina.

'^  Lit.  ichat  lets  thee  knoiv  whdher  he  icill,  £c.

'  That  is,  embrace  Islam,  and  so  become  pure  from  sin.

*  Ex  spermate.

24  THE    KORAN.

Then  cleft  the  earth  with  clefts ;

So  caused  We  the  upgrowth  of  the  grain,

And  grapes  and  healing  herbs.

And  the  olive  and  the  palm,
30     And  enclosed  gardens  thick  with  trees.

And  fruits  and  herbage,

Provision  for  yourselves  and  for  your  cattle.

But  when  the  stunning  trumpet-blast  shall  arrive,^

On  that  day  shall  a  man  fly  from  his  brother,

And  his  mother  and  his  father.

And  his  wife  and  his  children  ;

For  every  man  of  them  on  that  day  his  own  concern
shall  be  enough.

There  shall  be  faces  on  that  day  radiant.

Laughing  and  joyous :
40     And  faces  on  that  day  with  dust  upon  them  :

Blackness  shall  cover  them  !

These  are  the  Unbelievers,  the  Impure.

[XXV.]

SURA  LXXXVIL— THE  MOST  HIGH.
Mecca. — 19  Verses,

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Praise  the  name  of  thy  Lord  THE  MOST  HIGH,

Who  hath  created  and  balanced  all  things,

And  who  hath  fixed  their  destinies  and  guided  them  ;

Who  bringeth  forth  the  pastures.

Then  reduceth  them  to  dusky  stubble.

We  will   teach    thee    to  recite    the   Koran,   nor  aught

shalt  thou  forget.
Save   what    God   pleaseth  ;    He  verily  knoweth  alike

the  manifest  and  what  is  hidd(!n;
And  wo  will  make  easy  for  thee  the  easiest  way.^

'  Descriptions  of  the  Day  of  Judf:fment  now  become  very  frequent.
See  Suras  pp.  28,  29,  and  almost  every  Sura  to  the  fifty-fifth,  after  whicli
they  become  gradually  more  historical.  In  the  curly  part  of  his  career,
Muhammad  appears  to  represent  the  day  of  doom  a-s  near  at  hand.

^  i.  €.  in  matters  of  faith.

THE    KORAN.  25

Waru  therefore ;  verily  the  warning  is  profitable  :
10     He  that  feareth  God  will  receive  the  warning, —

And  the  greatest  v  retch  only  will  turn  aside  from  it,

"Who  shall  be  burned  at  the  terrible  lire  ;

Then  shall  he  not  die  therein,  and  shall  not  live.

Happy  he  who  is  purified  hij  Islam,

And  remembereth  the  name  of  his  Lord  and  prayeth.

But  ye  prefer  this  present  life,

Though  the  life  to  come  is  better  and  more  enduring.

This  t^'uly  is  in  the  Books  of  old,

The  Books  of  Abraham  ^  and  Moses.

[XXVI.]

SUEA  XCV.— THE  FIG.
Mecca. — 8  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

I  SWEAR  by  the  FIG  and  by  the  olive.

By  Mount  Sinai,

And  by  this  inviolate  soil  !  ^

Of  goodliest  fabric  have  we  created  man.

Then  broug^ht  him  down  to  be  the  lowest  of  the  low:^ —

Save  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are  right,  for
theirs  shall  be  a  reward  that  faileth  not.

Then,  what  henceforth  shall  make  thee  treat  the  Judg-
ment as  a  lie  ?

Is  not  God  the  most  just  of  judges  ?

1

Thus  the  Ribbins  attribute  the  Book  Jezirah  to  Abraham.  See  Fabr.
Cod.  Apoc.  V.  T.  p.  349.

^  In  allusion  to  the  sacredness  of  the  territory  of  Mecca.  This  valley,
in  about  the  fourth  century  of  our  era,  was  a  kind  of  sacred  forest  of
thirty-seven  miles  in  circumference,  and  called  Haram — a  name  applied
to  it  as  early  as  the  time  of  Pliny  (vi.  32).  It  had  the  privilege  of  asylum,
but  it  was  not  lawful  to  inhabit  it,  or  to  carry  on  commerce  within  its
limits,  and  its  religious  ceremonies  were  a  bond  of  union  to  several  of  the
Bedoum  tribes  of  the  Hejaz.  The  Koreish  had  monopolized  most  of  the
offices  and  advantages  of  the  Haram  in  the  time  of  Muhammad.  See
Sprenger's  Life  of  Mohammad,  p.  7-20.

'  This  may  refer  to  the  tradition  of  the  judgment  inflicted  on  the  sinners
mentioned  Sura  vii.  166.

26  THE    KOKAN.

[XXVII.]

SURA  cm.— THE  AFTERNOON.
Mecca. — 3  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

I  SWEAE  by  the  declining  day  !     -

Verily  man^s  lot  is  one  of  loss/

Save  those  who  beHeve  and  do  the  things  which  be

right,  and  enjoin  truth,  and  enjoin  steadfastness

on  each  other.

[XXVIII.]

SURA  LXXXV.— THE  ST^VRRY.

Mecca. — 22  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  the  star-bespangled  Heaven  !  ^
By  the  predicted  Day  !
By  the  witness  and  the  watnessed  !  ^
Cursed  the  masters  of  the  trench  *
Of  the  fuel-fed  fire.
When  they  sat  over  against  it

And   were   witnesses   of  what   they   inflicted   on   the
believers !

'  This  Sura  is  said  to  have  been  recited  in  the  Mosque,  shortly  before
his  death,  by  MuhamrBad.     See  Weil,  p.  32S.

'  Lit.  hy  the  Heaven  furnished  with  towers ;  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac.
See  Sura  xv.  1.5.

^  That  is,  by  Muhammad  and  by  Islam  ;  or,  Muhammad  and  the
Resurrection.     See,  however,  v.  7.

*  Prepared  by  Dhn  Nowas,  kinir  of  Yemen,  a.d.  523,  for  the  Christiana.
See  Gibbon's  Decline  and  Fall,  chiip.  xii.  towards  the  end.  Pocock,  Sp.
Hist.  Ar.  p.  62.  And  thus  the  comm.  generally.  But  Geiger  (p.  192)
and  Nfildeke  (p.  77  n.)  understand  the  passage  of  Dan.  iii.  But  it  should
be  borne  in  mind  that  the  Suras  of  this  early  period  contain  very  little
allusion  to  .Jewish  or  Chrbtian  legends.  A  third  interpretation  is  given
by  Dr.  Sprenger,  i.  465.

THE    KORAN.  27

Nor  did  they  dislike  them  but  for  theii-  faith  in  God^

the  Mighty,  tl:  ?  Praiseworthy  :  ^
His  the  kingdom    jf  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth;

and  God  is  the  witness  of  everything.
10     Verily,  those  who  vexed  the  believers,  men  and  women,

and  repented  not,  doth  the  torment  of  Hell,  and

the  torment  of  the  burning,  await.
Yerily  for   those    who    shall   have  believed  and  done

the  things  that  be  right,  are  the  Gardens  beneath

whose  shades  the  rivers  flow.     This  the  immense

bliss  !
Verily,  right  terrible  will  be  thy  Lord's  vengeance  !
Lo,  He  it  is  who  produceth  all  things,  and  causeth

them  to  return ;
And  is  He  the  Indulgent,  the  Loving ;
Possessor  of  the  Glorious  throne ;
Worker  of  that  He  willeth.
Hath  the  story  reached  thee  of  the  hosts
Of  Pharaoh  and  Thamood  ?
Nay  !  the  infidels  are  all  for  denial ;
20     But  God  suiToundeth  them  from  behind.
Yet  it  is  a  glorious  Koran,
Written  on  the  preserved  Table.

[XXIX.]

SUEA  CL— THE  BLOW.

Mecca. — 8  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

The  blow  !  what  is  the  Blow  ?
And  what  shall  teach  thee  what  the  Blow  is  ?
The  Day  when  men  shall  be  like  scattered  moths,
And  the  mountains  shall  be  like  carded  dyed  wool !
Then  as  to  him  whose  balances  are  heav}' — his  shall
be  a  life  that  shall  please  him  well :

'  Verses  8-11  wear  the  appearance  of  a  late  insertion,  on  account  of
their  length,  which  is  a  characteristic  of  the  more  advanced  period.
Observe  also  the  changes  in  the  rhymes.

28  THE    KOEAN.

And  as  to  him  whose  balances  are  light — his  dwelling-
place  ^  shall  be  the  lowest  pit  of  Hell.
And  what  shall  teach  thee  what  that  pit  is  ?
A  raofino^  fire  !

[XXX.]

SURA  XCIX.— THE  EARTHQUAKE.
Mecca. — 8  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

When  the  Earth  is  shaken  with  its  shaking/

And  (when)  the  Earth  hath  cast  forth  her  burdens^

And  man  shall  say,  What  aileth  her  ?

On  that  da}!"  shall  she  tell  out  her  tidings.

Because  thy  Lord  hath  inspired  her.

On  that  day    shall    men    come    forward    in    bands  to

behold  their  works.
And  whosoever  shall  have  wrought  an  atom^s  ^  weight

of  good  shall  behold  it,
Ajid  whosoever  shall  have  wrought  an  atom's  weight

of  evil  shall  behold  it.

[XXXI.]

SURA  LXXXIL— THE  CLOVEN.
Mecca.—  19  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

When  the  Heaven  shall  be  CLOVEN  asunder.

And  when  the  stars  shall  be  scattered,

And  when  the  seas  •*  shall  be  commingled,

Aud  when  the  graves  shall  be  turned  upside  down,

'  Lit.  Mnlhr.

^  i.  e.  the  earthquake  which  is  to  follow  the  V)last  of  the  Archanffcl'.s
trumpet.  '  Lit.  a  siinjlc  ant.

*  Salt  water  and  fresh  water.

THE    KOKAN.  29

Each  soul   shall    recognize   its    earliest  and  its  latest

actions.^
0  man  !    what  hatl   seduced  thee  from  thy  generous

Lord,
Who  created   thee    and    moulded    thee  and  disposed

thee  aright?
In  the  form  wh^ch   pleased  Him  hath  He  fashioned

thee.
Nay  !  but  ye  treat  the  Judgment  as  a  lie.
10     Yet  truly  there  are  guardians  over  you —
Hlustrious  recorders —
Cognisant  of  your  actions.
Surely  amid  delights  shall  the  righteous  dwell,
But  verily  the  wicked  in  Hell-fire  :
They  shall  be  burned  at  it  on  the  day  of  doom,
And  thoy  shall  not  be  hidden  from  it.
What  shall  teach  thee  what  the  day  of  Judgment  is  ?
Once  more.     What  shall  teach  thee  what  the  day  of

Judgment  is  ?
It  is   a    day  when    one    soul    shall    be    powerless  for

another  soul  ;    and  all    on    that    day  shall  be  in

the  hands  of  God.^

[XXXII.]

SURA  LXXXI.— THE  FOLDED  UP.
Mecca. — 29  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

When  the  sun  shall  be  FOLDED  UP/

And  when  the  stars  shall  shoot  downwards.

And  when  the  mountains  shall  be  set  in  motion.

And  when  the  camels  ten  months  gone  with  foal  shall

be  abandoned,
And  when  the  wild  beasts  shall  be  gathered  together,*
And  when  the  seas  shall  be  swollen,

*  Or,  what  it  hath  done  and  left  undone.
^  Lit.  and  the  matter  on  that  day  to  God.

^  Involutus  fu^Tit  tenebris.     Mar.     Comp.  iXi'ltic  in  Heb.  i.  12.

*  Thus  Bab.  Talm.  Erchin.  3.     "  In  the  day  to  come  (i.  e.  of  judgment),
all  the  beasts  will  assemble  and  come,  &c."

30  THE    KORAN.

And  wlien  souls  shall  be  paired  icitli  their  bodies,

And  when  the  damsel  that  had  been  buried  alive  shall

be  asked
For  what  crime  she  was  put  to  death/
10     And  when  the  leaves  of  the  Book  shall  bo  unrolled,
And  when  the  Heaven  shall  be  stripped  away,'
And  when  Hell  shall  be  made  to  blaze.
And  when  Paradise  shall  be  brought  near.
Every  soul  shall  know  what  it  hath  produced.
And  I  swear  by  the  stars '  of  retrograde  motion,
'\^^lich  move  swiftly  and  hide  themselves  away.
And  by  the  night  when  it  cometli  darkening  on.
And  by  the  dawn  when  it  clears  away  the  darkness  by

its  breath,
That  verily  this  is  the  word  of  an  illustrious  Messenger,*
20     Powerful  with  the  Lord  of  the  throne,  of  established

rank.
Obeyed  by  Angels,  faithful  also  to  his  trust,
And  your  compatriot  is  not  one  possessed  by  djinn  ;
For  he  saw  him  ^  in  the  clear  horizon :
Nor  doth  he  keep  back^  heaven's  secrets,''
Nor  doth  he  teach  the  doctrine  of  a  cursed  ^  Satan.
'\'VTiither  then  are  ye  going  ?
Verily  this  Koran  is  no  other  than  a  warning  to  all

creatures ;
To  him  among  you  who  willeth  to  walk  in  a  straight

path :
But  will  it  ye  shall  not,  unless  as  God  willeth  it,^  Lord

of  the  worlds.

»  See  Snra  xvi.  61  ;  xvii.  33.

2  Like  the  skin  from  a  catncl  wlieii  flayed.  The  idea  is  perhaps  borrowed
from  the  Sept.  V.  of  Psalm  civ.  2.     Vulj,'.  sicut  pellcm.

3  Mercury,  Venus,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Saturn.

*  Gabriel ;  of  the  meaning  of  whose  name  the  next  verse  is  probably  a
paraphra.se.

'  Gabriel.  ®  Lit.  grudge,  niggard  of.

'  Sura  liii.  7.

«  Lit.  stoned.  Sura  iii.  31.  This  vision  or  hallucination  is  one  of  the
few  clearly  stated  miracles  to  which  Muhanim;ul  appeals  in  the  Koran.
It  is  the  tradition  of  Ibn-Abbas  in  Wacpiidi,  that  he  was  preserved  by  it
from  committing  suicide  by  throwing  himself  down  from  Mount  Hira,
and  that  after  it,  God  cheered  him  and  strengthened  his  heart,  and  one
revelation  speedily  followed  another.

•  Comp.  the  doctrine  of  predestination  in  Sura  Ixxvi,  v.  25  to  end.

THE    KORAN.  31

rxxxiii.]

SURA  LXXXIV.— THE  SPLITTING  ASUNDER.
Mecca. — 25  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

When  the  Heaven  hath  been  SPLIT  ASUNDER
And  hath  duteously  obeyed  its  Lord  :^
And  when  Earth  is  stretched  out  as  a  level  plain.
And   hath   cast   forth  what  was   in  her  and  become

empty,
And  doteously  obeyed  her  Lord ;
O  man,  thou  verily  hast  laboured  to   reach  thy  Lord,

and  shalt  meet  Him.
He  then  into  whose  right  hand  his  Book  shall  be  given
Shall  be  reckoned  with  \^  an  easy  reckoning.
And  shall  turn  back,  rejoicing,  to  his  kindred.
10     But  he  whose  Book  shall  be  given  him  behind  his  back^
Shall  invoke  destruction.
But  at  the  fire  shall  he  burn.
Verily  he  lived  joyously  among  his  kindred —
Verily  he  thought  that  he  should  by  no  means  return

to  God  —
Nay,  but  verily  his  Lord  beheld  him.
And  I  swear  bv  the  sunset  redness.
And  by  the  night  and  its  gatherings,'
And  by  the  moon  when  at  her  full.
That  state  after  state  shall  ye  encounter.*
20     "What  then  hath  come  to  them  that  they  believe  not  ?
And  that  when  the  Koran  is  recited  to  them  they

adore  not  ?
Nay,  rather  the  unbelievers  treat  it  as  a  lie.
But  God  well  knoweth   what    they  secrete   in   their

breasts.

'  Lit.  has  hearkened  to  its  Lord,  and  is  verified  (or  Jcnorcn)  as  obedient.

'  That  is,  into  his  left  hand.  The  Muhammadans  believe  that  the  right
hand  of  the  damned  will  be  chained  to  the  neck  ;  the  left  chained  behind
the  back.

'  Probably  of  the  animal  tribes.

•*  Lit.  be  carried  omrard — from  Life  to  Death,  from  the  Grave  to
Resurrection,  thence  to  Paradise.

32  THE    KORAN.

Let  tlieir  tidings^  then  be  those  of  painful  punishment ;
Save  to  those  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  be
right.     An  unfailing  recompense  shall  be  theirs.

[XXXIV.]

SUEA  C— THE  CHAKGERS.
Mecca. — 11  Verses,^

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  the  panting  CHAR  GEES  !      "

And  those  that  dash  ofif  sparks  of  fire  !

And  those  that  scour  to  the  attack  at  morn  !

And  stir  therein  the  dust  aloft;

And  cleave  therein  their  midway  through  a  host !

Truly,  Man  is  to  his  Lord  ungrateful,

And  of  this  ho  verily  is  himself  a  witness;

And  trul}'^  he  is  vehement  in  the  love  of  this  world's

good.
Knoweth  he  not,  then,  that  when  that  which  is  in  the

graves  shall  be  torn  forth,
10     And  that  which  is  in  men's  breasts  shall  be  brought

out,
Verily  their  Lord  shall  on  that  day  be  well  informed

concerning  them  ?

[XXXV.]

SURA  LXXIX.^-THOSE  WHO  DRAG  FORTH.
Mecca. — 46  Verses.

Tn  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  those  angels  who  DRAG  FORTH  souls  with  vio-
lence.
And  by  those  who  with  gentle  release  release  them;

'  The  expression  is  ironical.     See  Freyt.  in  Lex.  on  the  word.     Lit.  tell
them  glad  tidings.
"  This  Sura  obviously  consists  of  three  portions,  verse?  1-14,  15-26,

THE    KORAN.  33

Bv  those  who  swim  alongr  with  swiraminsf  motion :
By  those  who  speed  foremost  witli  foremost  speed  ;^
By  those  who  cou'uct  the  affairs  of  tlie  universe!
One  day,  the  disturbing  trumpet-blast  shall  disturb  it,
Which  the  second  blast  shall  follow :
Men's  hearts  on  that  day  shall  throb  : —
Their  looks  be  d  twncast.
10     The  iniidcls  will  sav,  "  Shall  we  indeed  be  restored  to

the  former  state  ?
What !  when  we  have  become  rotten  bones  ?"
*'This  then,"  say  they,  "will  be  a  return  to  loss."-
And  it  will  be  but  a  single  blast.
And  lo  !   they  are  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.
T[  Hath  the  story  of  Moses  reached  thee  ?

When  his  Lord  called  to  him  in  Toowa's  holy  vale  :
"  Go  to  Pharaoh  ;  lo,  he  hath  burst  all  bounds  :
And  say,  Wouldest  thou  become  pure  ?
Then  I  will  guide  thee  to  thy  Lord  that  thou  mayest

fear  to  sin."
20     And  he  showed  him  the  great  miracle, —

But  he  treated  him  as  an  impostor,  and  rebelled, —

Then  turned  his  back  all  hastily.

And  gathered  an  assembly  and  proclaimed,

And  said,  "  I  am  your  Lord  supreme."

So  God  visited  him  with  the  punishment  of  the  next

life  and  of  the  present  :^
Verily,  herein  is   a  lesson  for  him  who  hath  the  fear

of  God.
%  Are  ye  the  harder  to  create,  or  the  heaven  which  He

hath  built  ?
He  reared  its  height*  and  fashioned  it.
And  gave   darkness  to  its  night,  and  brought  out  its

sunshine,
30     And  afterwards  stretched  forth  the  earth.

Brought  forth  from  it  its  waters  and  its  pastures,

27-46,  of  -which  the  third  is  the  latest  in  point  of  style,  and  the  second,
more  detailed  than  is  usual  in  the  Suras  of  the  early  period,  which  allude
to  Jewish  and  other  legend  only  in  brief  and  vague  terms.  It  may  there-
fore be  considered  as  one  of  the  short  and  early  Suras.

'  Or,  hy  those  angels  ichich  precede,  i.  e.  the  souls  of  the  pious  into  Para-
dise. Or,  are  beforehand  -with  the  Satans  and  Djinn  in  learning  the
decrees  of  God.

'  Lit.  which  wanders  from  the  right  way.  Hie  sane  reditus  est  falsus. —
Mar.

'  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  this  tale  is  amplified  in  Sura  xxvi.  9-66.

*  Or,  roof.

D

34  THE    KORAN.

And  set  the  mountains  firm,
For  you  and  for  your  cattle  a  provision.
But  when  the  grand  caLamity  shall  come,
The  day  when  a  man  shall  be  reminded  of  all  his  aims^
And  Hell  shall  be  in  full  view  of  each  beholder ;
Then,  as  for  him  who  hath  transgressed
And  hath  chosen  this  present  life,
Verily,  Hell — that  his  dwelling-place  :
40     But  as  to  him  who  feared  the  majesty  of  his  Lord,  and

refrained  his  soul  from  lust,  '
Verily,  Paradise — that  his  dwelling-place  :
^  They  will  ask  thee  of  "  the  Hour,^^  when  will  be  its

fixed  time  ?
But  what  record  hast  thou  of  it  ?  .
Its  appointed  period  is  known  onhj  to  thy  Lord; —
Thou  art  only  charged  with  the  warning  of  those  who

fear  it ; —
On  the  day  when  they  shall  see  it,  it  shall  seem  to  them

as  though  they  had  not  tarried  in  the  tomb,  longer

than  an  evening  or  its  morn.

[XXXVE.]
SURA  LXXVII.— THE  SENT.

Mecca. — 50  Verses.  f

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.  I

By  the  train  of  THE  SENT  ones,i
And  the  impetuously  swift  in  their  swiftness;'
By  the  scattercrs  who  scatter.
And  the  distinguishers  who  distinguish;
And  those  that  give  forth  monition.
To  excuse  or  warn  ;

Verily  that  with  which  ye  arc  menaced  is  imminent.
When  the  stars,  tbcu,  shall  be  blotted  out,
And  when  the  heaven  shall  be  cleft,
10     And  when  the  mountains  shall  be  scattered  in  dust,

'  Lit.  hji  the  sent  (fern.)  one  after  another.  Per  musan. — Mar.  Either
angeh  following  in  a  continued  series  ;  or,  winds,  which  disperse  rain
over  thii  earth  ;  or  the  successive  verses  of  the  Koran  which  disperse  truth
and  distinrjuish  truth  from  error.

'  Lit.  stormy  winds.

THE    KORAN.  35

And  when  the  Apostles  sliall   liavo   a  time  assigned
tlicm —

For  -what  day  is  th^  fixed  term  appointed  ?

For  the  day  of  severing- !

And  who  shall  teach  thee  what  the  day  of  severing  is  ?

Woe  on  that  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture !

Have  "We  not  dcLtroyed  them  of  old  ?

We  will  next  cause  those  of  later  times  to  foUow  them.^

Thus  deal  We  with  the  evil  doers.

Woe  on  that  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture  !
20     Have  We  not  created  you  of  a  sorry  germ,

Then  laid  it  up  in  a  secure  place.

Till  the  term  decreed /o7"  birth?

Such  is  our  power  !  and,  how  excellent  in  power  are
We!~

Woe  on  that  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture !

Have  We  not  made  the  earth  a  receptacle

For  the  living  and  the  dead  ?

And  placed  on  it  the  tall  firm  mountains,  and  given
you  sweet  water  to  drink  ?

Woe  on  that  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture  !

"  Begone  to  that  Hell  which  ye  called  a  lie  : —
30     Begone  to  the  shadows  that  lie  in  triple  masses  ;  ^

But  not  against  the  flame  shall  they  shade  or  help  : " —

The  sparks  which  it  casteth  out  are  like  towers —

Like  tawny  camels.

Woe  on  that  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture  !

On  that  day  they  shall  not  speak.

Nor  shall  it  be  permitted  them  to  allege  excuses.

Woe  on  tliat  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture  !

This  is  the  day  of  severing,  when  We  will  assemble  you
and  those  of  olden  time.

If  now  ye  have  any  craft  try  your  craft  on  me.
40     Woe  on  that  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture  !

Lo,  the  God-fearing  shall  he  placed  amid  shades  apd
fountains,

And  fruits,  whatsoever  they  shall  desire  :

"Eat  and  drink,  with  health,'* as  the  meed  of  yourtoils" —

'  Sura  xliv.  40.

'  Or,  and  we  determined  it  beforehand,  and  how  excellent  {are  toe)  icho
determinid  !  '  Or,  forled  branches.

*  Maimonides  says  that  the  majority  of  the  Jews  hope  that  ^Messiah
shall  come  and  "raise  the  dead,  and  they  shall  be  pathered  into  Para-
dise, and  there  shall  eat  and  drink  and  be  in  good  health  to  all  eternity."
—  Sanhedrin,  fol.  119,  col.  1.

D    2

36  THE    KORAN.

Lo,  thus  recompense  We  tlie  good.

Woe  on  that  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture

"  Eat  ye  and  enjoy  yourselves  yet  a  little  while.    Verily,

ye  are  doers  of  evil.^'
Woe  on  that  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture  !
And  when  it  is  said  to  them,  Bow  down,  they  worship

not.
Woe  on  that  day  to  those  who  charged  with  imposture  !
50     And  in  what  revelation  after  this^^will  they  believe  ?

[XXXVII.]

SURA  LXXVIII.— THE  NEWS.
Mecca. — 41  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Concerning  what  ask  they  one  of  another  ?
Of  the  great  NEWS,i
The  theme  of  their  disputes.
Nay,  they  shall  know  its  truth  !
Again.     Nay,  but  they  shall  know  it !
Have  We  not  made  the  Earth  a  couch  ?
And  the  mountains  its  tent-stakes  ?
And  We  have  created  vou  of  two  sexes.
And  ordained  your  sleep  for  rest,
10     And  ordained  tlie  night  as  a  mantle.

And  ordained  the  day  for  gaining  livelihood.
And  built  above  you  seven  solid  ^  heavens,
And  placed  therein  a  brightly-burning  lamp;
And  We  send  down  water  in  abundance  from  the  rain-
clouds,
That  We  may  bring  forth  by  it  corn  and  herbs,
And  gardens  thick  with  trees.
Lo  !  the  day  of  Severance  is  fixed ;

'  Of  the  Resurrection.  "With  regard  to  the  date  of  this  Sura,  we  can
only  be  guided  (1)  by  the  general  style  of  the  earlier  portion  (to  verse  37),
which  is  analogous  to  that  of  the  early  Moccan  Suras  ;  (2)  by  verse  17,
which  presupposes  Ixxvii.  12  ;  (.3)  by  the  obviously  later  style  of  verse  37
to  the  end.

'  See  Sura  ii.  27.  This  is  the  title  given  by  the  Talmudists  to  the  fifth
of  the  seven  heavens.

THE    KORAN.  37

The  day  wheu  there  shall  be  a  blast  on  the  trumpet,
aud  ye  shall  come  iu  crowds,

And  the  heaven  sh  .11  be  opened  and  be  full  of  portals/
20     And  the  mountains  shall  be  set  in  motion,  and  become
thin  vapour.

Hell  truly  shall  be  a  place  of  snares.

The  home  of  trai  sgressors.

To  abide  therein  ages  ;

No  coolness  shall  they  taste  therein  nor  any  drink.

Save  boiling  water  and  running  sores  ;

Meet  recompense  !

Verily  they  looked  not  forward  to  their  account ;

And  they  gave  the  lie  to  our  signs,  charging  them
with  falsehood ;

But  We  noted  and  wrote  do^vn  all ;
30     "  Taste  this  then  :  and  We  will  not  give  you  increase
but  of  torment."

Lo  !  for  the  God-fearing  is  a  blissful  abode.

Enclosed  gardens  and  vineyards  ;

And  damsels  with  swelling  breasts,  theii'  peers  in  age.

And  a  full  cup  :

There  shall  they  hear  no  vain  discourse  nor  any  false-
hood :

A  recompense  from  thy  Lord — sufficing  gift ! —

Lord  of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth,  and  of  all  that
between  ^  them  lieth — the  God  of  Mercy  !  But
not  a  word  shall  they  obtain  from  Him.

On  the  day  whereon  the  Spirit^  and  the  Angels  shall
stand  ranged  in  order,  they  shall  not  utter  a  word,
save  he  whom  the  God  of  Mercy  permits,  and
who  shall  say  that  which  is  right.

This  is  the  sure  day.     Whoso  then  Avill,  let  him  take
the  path  of  return  to  his  Lord.
40     Verily,  We  warn  you  of  a  chastisement  close  at  hand ;

The  day  on  which  a  man  shall  see  the  deeds  which
his  hands  have  sent  before  him  ;  and  when  the
unbeliever  shall  say,  "  Oh  !  would  I  were  dust  ! "

'  For  the  Angels  going  and  returning.       <

*  This  phrase  is  of  constant  recurrence  in  the  Talmud.  Maimonides,
Yad  Hach.  i.  3,  makes  it  one  of  the  positive  commands  of  the  Rabbins
to  believe  *'  that  there  exists  a  first  Being  .  .  .  and  that  all  things  ex-
isting, Heaven  and  Earth,  and  whatever  is  between  them,  exist  only
through  the  truth  of  his  existence.'"'

3  Gabriel.

38  THE    KOKAN.

[XXXVIII.]

SURA  LXXXVIII.— THE  OVEESHADOWING.

Mecca. — 26  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Have  tidings  of  the  day  that  shall  OVERSHADOW
reached  thee  ?

Downcast  on  that  day  shall  be  the  countenances  of
some.

Travailing  and  worn.

Burnt  at  the  scorching  fire,

Made  to  drink  from  a  fountain  fiercely  boiling.

No  food  shall  they  have  but  the  fruit  of  Darih/

Which  shall  not  ftitten,  nor  appease  their  hunger.

Joyous  too,  on  that  day,  the  countenances  of  others,

AVell  pleased  with  their  past  efforts,
10     In  a  lofty  garden  :

No  vain  discourse  shalt  thou  hear  therein  :

Therein  shall  bo  a  gushing  fountain.

Therein  shall  be  raised  couches.

And  goblets  ready  placed,

And  cushions  laid  in  order,

And  carpets  spread  forth.

Can  they  not  then  look  up  to  the  clouds,  how  they  are
created ;

And  to  the  heaven  how  it  is  upraised ;

And  to  the  mountains  how  they  are  rooted ;
20     And  to  the  earth  how  it  is  outspread  ?

Warn  thou  then ;  for  thou  art  a  warner  only  :

Thou  hast  no  authority  over  them  :

But  whoever  shall  turn  Ijack  and  disbelieve,

God  shall  punish  him  with  the  greater  punishment.

Verily  to  Us  is  their  return  ;

Then  truly  shall  it  be  Ours  to  reckon  with  them.

'  The  name  of  a  bitter,  burning  shrub  growing  in  Hell.

THE    KORAN.  39

[XXXIX.]

SUEA  LXXaIX.— THE  DAYBREAK.
Mecca. — 30  Verses.

7a  ihe  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  tlie  DAYBREAK  and  ten  nights/
By  the  double  and  the  single/
By  the  night  when  it  pursues  its  course ;
Is  there  not  in  this  an  oath  for  a  man  of  sense  ?
Hast  thou  not  seen  how  thy  Lord  dealt  with  Ad,
At  Irem  adorned  with  lofty  structures,
Wliose  like  have  not  been  reared  in  the  lands  !
And  with  Thamood  who  hewed  out  rocks  in  the  valley ;
And  with  Pharaoh  the  impaler  ; '
10     Who  all  committed  excesses  in  the  lands.
And  multiplied  wickedness  therein.
Wherefore    thy    Lord    let   loose    on  them  a  mingled

scourge  of  chastisement ;  *
Verily  thy  Lord  is  upon  a  watch-tower ;
But  as  to  man,  when  his  Lord  trieth  him,  and  honoureth

him,  and  is  bounteous  to  him,
Then  saith  he,  "  My  Lord  honoureth  me  :  "
But  when  He   proveth  him  and  limiteth.  his  gifts  to

him.
He  saith,  "  My  Lord  despiseth  me."
Nay,  but  ye  honom*  not  the  orphan.
Nor  urge  ye  one  another  to  feed  the  poor,
20     And  ye  devour  heritages,  devouring  greedily.
And  ye  love  riches  with  exceeding  love.
Nay,  but  when  the  earth  shall  be  crushed  with  crushing

on  crushing.
And  thy  Lord  shall  come  and  the  angels  rank  on  rank.
And  Hell  on  that  day  shall  be  moved  up  ^ — Man  shall

on   that    day   remember  himself — But  how  shall

remembrance  help  him?

3

Of  the  sacred  month  Dhu'lhajja.

i.  e.  things  created  in  pairs,  and  the  one  Creator.
^  Lit.  lord  of  the  stalces,  to  which  Pharaoh  is  fabled  to  have  fastened  the
Israelites  and  then  subjected  them  to  various  torments.
■*  Or,  poured  on  them  the  mixed  cup  of  chastisement.
*  The  orthodox  Muhammadans  take  this  passage  literally.    Djelal  says

40  THE    KOEAN.

He  stall  say,  Oh  !  would  that  I  had  prepared  before-
hand for  this  my  life  !  On  that  day  none  shall
punish  as  God  punisheth.

And  none  shall  bind  with  such  bonds  as  He,

Oh,  thou  soul  which  art  at  rest,

Return  to  thy  Lord  well-pleased,  and  pleasing  Him  :  ^

Enter  thou  then  among  ray  servants,
30     And  enter  thou  my  Paradise.

[XL.]

SURA  LXXV.— THE  RESURRECTION.
Mecca. — 40  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

I  SWEAR  by  the  day  of  the  RESURRECTION,

And  I  swear  by  the  self-accusing  soul."

Thinketh  man  that  We  cannot  re-unite  his  bones  ?

Aye  !   his  very   finger-bones    are   We    able   evenly  to

replace.
But  man  chooseth  to  go  astray  as  to  his  future.'
He  asketh,  ''  "When  this  day  of  Resurrection  ?  "
AVhcn  then  the  eyesight  shall  be  dazzled.
And  the  moon  shall  be  darkened.
And  the  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  together,*
10     On  that  day  man  shall  cry,  "  Where  is  there  a  ulace  to

flee  to  ?  '^
But  in  vain — there  is  no  place  of  refuge —
With  thy  Lord  on  that  day  shall  be  the  sole  asylum.
On  that  day  shall  man  be  told  of  all  that  he  hath  done

first  and  last ;  ^
Yea,  a  man  shall  be  the  evidence  against  himself:
And  even  if  he  put  forth  his  pleas ^

thnt  hell  will  "be  dragged  up  l)y  70,000  chains,  each  pulled  by  70,000
angels,'  as  if  it  were  an  enormous  aiiinial  or  locomotive  engine.  So
Zamalshan,  who  attributes  this  idea  to  Muhammad  hiuiself.

*  Lit.  rnntenl  and  accepted.  ^  Said  to  refer  to  Adam.
^  Lit.  that  vhich  is  before  him.

*  Lit.  shall  be  united.     In  the  loss  of  light,  or  in  the  rising  in  the  west.
— Beidh.

*  Or,  done  and  left  undone.

*  Supply,  they  shall  not  be  accepted.

THE    KORAN.  -II

(Move  not  thy  tongue  that  thou    mayest   hurry  over

tJie  revelation  :  ^
We  verily  will  see  to  !:he  collecting  and  the  recital  of  it ;
When  therefore  We   recite   it,  then  follow  thou  the

recital.
Afterwards  verily  it  shall  be  Ours  to  make  it  clear  to

thee.)
20     No,  but  ye  love  the  transitory,
And  ye  neglect  the  life  to  come.
On  that  day  shall  faces  beam  with  light,
Outlooking  towards  their  lord  ;
And  faces  on  that  day  shall  be  dismal,
As  if  they  thought  that  some  calamity  would  therein

befall  them.
Assuredly  when  the  soul  shall  come  up  to  the  breast-
bone.
And  there  shall  be  a  cry,  "  Who  is  the  magician  to

restore  him  ?  '*
And  the  man  feeleth  that  the  time  of  his  departure  is

Come,
And  when  one  leg  shall  "be  enlaced  with  the  other,=^
30     To  thy  Lord  on  that  shall  he  be  driven  on ;
For  he  believed  not,  and  he  did  not  pray.
But  he  called  the  truth  a  lie  and  turned  away,
Then,  walking  with  haughty  mien,  rejoined  his  people.
May  (evil)  draw  nearer  to  thee  and  nearer,^
Then,  may  it  draw  nearer  to  thee  and  nearer  still.
Thinketh  man  that  he  shall  be  left  uncared  for  ?
Was  he  not  a  mere  embryo  ?  *
Then  he  became  thick  blood  of  which  God  formed  him

and  fashioned  him  ;
And  made  him  twain,  male  and  female.
40     Is  not  He  powerful  enough  to  quicken  the  dead  ?

'  Verses  16 — 19  are  parenthetic,  and  either  an  address  to  Muhammad
by  Gabriel  desiring  him  (1)  not  to  be  overcome  by  any  fear  of  being
unable  to  follow  and  retain  the  revelation  of  this  particular  Sura  ;  (2)  or,
not  to  interrupt  him,  but  to  await  the  completion  of  the  entire  revelation
before  he  should  proceed  to  its  public  recital  In  either  case  we  are  led
to  the  conclusion  that,  from  the  first,  Muhammad  had  formed  the  jjlan  of
proniulging  a  written  book.     Comp.  Sura  xx.  112.

^  In  the  death-struggle.

'  Or,  v--oe  to  thee,  and  woe  !  again,  woe  to  thee,  and  woe  !  Thus  Sale,
Ullm.  Beidhawi ;  who  also  gives  a  rendering  (which  is  that  of  Maracci)
referring  to  the  approach  of  "  the  Hour,"  viz.  It  is  nearer  to  thee  and
nearer.

■*  Nonne  fuit  humor  ex  spermate  quod  spermatizatur.

42  THE    KORAN.

[XLL]

SURA  LXXXIIL— THOSE  WHO  STINT.
Mecca. — 36  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Woe  to  those  who  STINT  the  measure :

Who  when  they  take  by  measure  from  others,  exact

the  full;
But  when  they  mete  to  them  or  weigh  to  them,  minish —
Have  they  no  thought  that  they  shall  be  raised  again
For  a  great  day,
A  day  when  mankind  shall  stand  before  the  Lord  of

the  worlds  ?
Nay,  verily,  the  register  of  the  wicked  is  in  Sidjm;^
And  what  shall  make  thoe  understand  what  Sidjin  is  ?
It  is  a  book  distinctly  written.
10     Woe,  on  that  day,  to  those  who  treated  our  signs  as  lies.
Who  treated  the  day  of  judgment  as  a  lie  !
But  none  treat  it  as  a  lie,  save  the  transgressor,  the

criminal.
Who,  when  our  signs    are    rehearsed    to  him,   saith,

"  Tales  of  the  Ancients  ! "
Nay,  but  their  own  works  have  got  the  mastery  over

their  hearts :
Yes;  they  shall  sui'ely  be  shut  out  as  by  a  veil  from

their  Lord  on  that  day ;
Then  shall  they  be  surely  burned  in  Hell-fire :
Then  shall  it  be  said  to  them,  "  This  is  what  ye  deemed

a  lie."
Nay,  verily  the  register  of  the  righteous  is  in  llliyoun  ;
And  what  shall  make  thee  understand  what  Illiyoun  is  ?
20     A  book  distinctly  written  ;

The  aiifjiis  who  draw  nigh  unto  God  attest  it.
Surely  among  delights  >^h(dl  the  righteous  dwell!
Seated  on  bridal  couches  they  will  gaze  around;
Thou  shalt  mark  in  their  faces  the  brightness  of  delight;
Choice  sealed  wine  shall  be  given  them  to  quaff, —

'  Sidjin  is  a  prison  in  Hell  which  gives  its  name  to  the  register  of
actions  there  kept,  as  Illiyoun,  a  name  of  the  lofhj  apartments  of  Para-
dise, is  transferred  to  the  register  of  the  righteous.

THK    KORAN.  43

Tho  seal  of  musk, — For  this  let  those  pant  who  pant

for  hliss —
Mingled  therewith  snail  bo  the  waters  o/Tasnim^ —
Fount  whereof  they  who  tlraw  nigh  to  God  shall  drink.
The  sinners  indeed  lauo-h  the  faithful  to  scorn :

O

30  And  when  they  pass  by  them  they  wink  at  one
another, —

And  when  they  return  to  their  own  people,  they  re-
turn jesting,

And  when  they  see  them  they  say,  "  Verily  these  are
the  erring  ones.''

And  yet  they  have  no  mission  to  bo  their  guardians.

Therefore,  on  that  day  the  faithful  shall  laugh  the
infidels  to  scorn,

As  reclining  on  bridal  couches  they  behold  them.

Is  there  a  repayment  to  the  unbelievers  in  accordance
with  their  deeds?

[XLII.]

SURA  LXIX.— THE  INEVITABLE.
Mecca. — 52  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

The  INEVITABLE! 2

What  is  the  Inevitable  ?

And  what  shall  make  thee  comprehend  what  the  In-
evitable is  ?

Thamood  and  Ad  treated  the  day  of  Terrors ^  as  a  lie.

So  as  to  Thamood,*  they  were  destroyed  by  a  violent
thunderstorm ;

And  as  to  Ad,  they  were  destroyed  by  a  roaring  furious
blast.

'  Derived  from  tlie  root  sanima,  to  be  high  :  this  water  being  conveyed
to  the  highest  apartments  in  the  Pavilions  of  Paradise.

^  faialis. — Mar.     Or,  the  merited,  i.  e.  punishment.

^  Thus  Beidh.,  Sale,  &c.  But  with  reference  to  another  sense  of  the
root  karaa,  it  may  be  rendered  the  day  of  decision,  the  day  on  which  man's
lot  shall  be  decided.

*  On  Ad  and  Thamood,  see  Sura  vii.  63-77,

44  THE    KORAN.

It  did  the  biddincf    of  God^  ajjaiust  tliein   seven  ill-

omeued  nights  and  eight  days  together,  in  which

thou  luightest  have  seen  the  people  laid  low,  as

though  they  had  been  the  roots  of  rotten  palm-
trees  ; —
And  couldst  thou  have  seen  a  remnant  of  them  ?
Pharaoh  also,  and  those  who  flourished  before  him,  and

tiie  overthrown-  cities,  committed  sin, —
10     And  disobeyed  the  Sent  one  of  their  Lord :  therefore

did  He  lay  hold    on  them  with  an  accumulated

chastisement.^
Yerily,  when  the  Flood  rose  high,  We  bare  you  in  the

Ark,4
That  We  might  make  tliat  event ^^  a  warning  to  you,

and  that  the  retaining  ear  might  retain  it.
But  when  one  blast  shall  be  blown  on  the  trumpet,
And  the  earth  and  the  mountains  shall  be  lifted  up,

and  shall  both  be    dashed    in  pieces  at  a  single

stroke.
On  that  day  the  woe  that  must  come  suddenly  shall

suddenly  come,^
And  the  heaven  shall  cleave  asunder,  for  on  that  day

it  shall  be  reft ;
And  the  angels  shall  be  on  its  sides,  and  over  them

on  that  day  eight  shall  bear  up  the  throne  of  thy

Lord.
On  that  day  Yo  shall  be  brought  before  Ilim  :  no  hidden

deed  shall  remain  hidden  from  you.
And  as  for  him  who  shall  have  his  book  given  to  him

into  his  right  hand,  he  will  then  say  to  his  friends,

"  Take  ye  it ;  read  ye  my  book  ;
20     I  verily  thought  that  to  my  reckoning  I  should  come.^'
And  his  shall  be  a  life  that  shall  please  him  well.
In  a  lofty  garden,

Whose  clusters  shall  be  near  at  hand :
"Eat  ye  and  drink  with  healthy  relish,  as  the  meed  of

what  ye  sent  on  beforehand  in  the  days  which  ax'e

past.'^

'  Lit.  God  subjected  it  to  Himself ,  availed  Himself  of  it  ar;ainst  them.
'  Ar.  Mutafika,  a  Hebrew  worfl,  used  in  Gen.  xix.  25,  of  these  cities.
Conip.  the  Syriac  version  of  2  Pet.  ii.  6.
'  Lit.  grasp.  *  Lit.  the  {sea-)tr aver  sing.

*  Or  it,  i.e.  the  Ark.     See  n.  Sura  ix.  71.

*  El-ii:akia,  the  sudden  event,  the  calamity  ;  the  woe  that  must  break
in  upon  Heaven  and  Earth.  The  same  word  is  used,  Sura  Ivi.  1,  and
ci.  1,  for  the  Resurrection  and  Day  of  Judgment.

THE    KORAN.  4o

And  as  for  liim  who  sliall  have  his  book  given  into  his
left  hand,  he  w  U  then  say,  "  0  that  my  book  had
never  been  given  me  !

And  that  I  had  never  known  this  my  reckoning;  ^

0  that  death  had  made  an  end  of  me  !
My  wealth  hath  not  profited  me  !

My  power  hath  perished  from  me  ! "
30     "  Lay  ye  hold  on  him  and  chain  him.
Then  at  the  Hell-fire  burn  him.
Then  into  a  chain  whose  length  in  seventy  cubits  thrust

him  ;
Yerily  he  believed  not  in  God,  the  Great,
And  was  not  careful  to  feed  the  poor;
No  friend  therefore  shall  he  have  here  this  dav,
Nor  food,  but  corrupt  sores.
Which  none  shall  eat  but  the  sinners."

1  swear  by  what  ye  see,

And  by  that  which  ye  see  not,
40     That  this  verily  is  the  word  of  an  apostle  worthy  of
honour !

And  that  it  is  not  the  word  of  a  poet — how  little  do  ye
beHeve !

Neither  is  it  the  word  of  a  soothsayer — how  little  do
ye  receive  warning !

It  is  a  missive  from  tlie  Lord  of  the  worlds.

But  if  Muhammad  had  fabricated  concerning  us  any
sayings.

We  had  surely  seized  him  by  the  right  hand.

And  cut  throusfh  the  vein  of  his  heart.

Nor  would  We  have  withheld  any  one  of  you  from  him.

But  verily,  It  (the  Koran)  is  a  warning  for  the  God-
fearing ;

And,  of  a  truth,  We  well  know  that  there  are  of  you
who  treat  it  as  a  falsehood  ;
50     But  it  shall  be  the  very  despair-  of  infidels.

For  it  is  assuredly  the  truth  of  sure  knowledge.

Praise,  then,  the  name  of  thy  Lord,  the  Great.

^  In  allusion  to  the  mode  of  executing  criminals  in  some  Eastern
countries.

'  Lit.  cause  of  sighs.

46  THE    KORAN.

[XLIII.]

SURA  LI.— THE  SCATTERING.
Mecca. — GO  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Comj)assionate,  the  Merciful.

By  those  1  which  scatter  with  SCATTERING,

And  those  which  bear  tJieir  load,

And  those  which  speed  hghtly  along,

And  those  who  appoi'tion  by  command  !

Only  with  that  which  is  true  are  ye  tbreatened,

And  lo  !  the  judgment  will  surely  come  to  pass.

By  the  star-tracked  heaven  1

Verily  ye  are  discordant  in  what  ye  say ;

But  whoso  is  turned  from  the  truth,  is  turned  from  it

by  a  divine  decree.
10     Perish  the  liars.

Who  are  forgetful  in  the  depths  of  their  ignorance !

They  ask,  "When  this  day  of  judgment?"

On  that  day  they  shall  be  tormented  at  the  fire —

"  Taste  ye  your  torment ;  it  is  this  whose  speedy  coming

ye  challenged.^^
But   the   God-fearing   shall   dwell   amid   gardens  and

fountains.
Enjoying  what  their  Lord  hath  given  them,  for  they

verily  aforetime  were  doers  of  good  :
But  little  of  the  night  was  it  that  they  slept.
And  at  dawn  they  ])raycd  for  pardon.
And  of  their  wealth   a  due   share  tvas  given  to  the

suppliant  and  the  outcast.
20     Moreover  on  earth  are  signs  for  men  of  firm  belief.

And  in  your  own  selves  :  Will  ye  not  then  behold  them  ?
And   the  Heaven  hath   sustenance  for  you,  and  that

which  you  are  promised.
By  tlie  Lord  then  of  heaven  and  earth,  this  is  the  very

truth,  even  as  yu  speak  yourselves.^

'  Lit.  (I swear)  hy  those  ivhich  scatter  {i.e.  the  rain)  with  a  scattering,
(2)  and  hy  those  ivliich  carry  a  burden,  (3)  and  hy  those  which  run  lightly,
(4)  and  hy  those  ivhich  divide  a  matter,  or,  hy  command.  The  participles
are  all  in  the  feminine  :  some  interpret  verse  1  of  winds,  verse  2  of  clouds,
verse  .3  of  ships,  verse  4  of  angels.

'  i.e.  This  oath  is  for  the  confirmation  of  the  truth,  as  ye  are  woEjb  to
confirm  things  one  among  another  by  an  oath.

THE    KORAN.  47

^  Hath  the  story  reached  thee  of  Abraham^s  honoured

guests  ?^
When  they  went  in  unto  him  and  said,  "  Peace ! "  he

repHed,  "  Peace  : — they  are  strangers."
And  he  went  apart  to  his  family^  and  brought  a  fatted

calf,
And  set  it  before  them.     He  said,  "  Eat  ye  not  ?'^
And  he  conceived  a  fear  of  them.     They  said,  ''  Fear

not/'  and  announced  to  him  a  wise  son.
Then  his  wife  came  up  with  outcry,  and  smote  her  face

and  said,  ''What  I,  old  and  barren  V
30     They  said,  "Thus  saith  thy  Lord.     He  truly  is  the

Wise,  the  endued  with  knowledge."
Said  he,  "  Aud  what,  0  messengers,  is  your  errand  ?"
They  said,  "Verily  to  a  wicked  people  have  we  been

scnt,2
To  hurl  upon  them  stones  of  clay.
Destined^  by  thy  Lord  for  men  guilty  of  excesses."
And  we  brought  forth  the  believers  who  were  in  the

city:
But  we  found  not  in  it  but  one  family  of  Muslims.
And   signs   we  left  therein  for  those  who   dread  the

afflictive  chastisement, —
And  in  j\Ioses  :  when  we   sent  him  to  Pharaoh  with

manifest  power :
But  together  with  his  nobles  he  turned  his  back  and

said,  "  Sorcerer,  or  Possessed."
40     So  we   seized  him  and  his  hosts  and  cast  them  into

the  sea ;  for  of  all  blame  was  he  worthy —
And  in  Ad :  when  we  sent  against  them  the  desolating

blast :
It  touched  not  aught  over  which  it  came,  but  it  turned

it  to  dust —
And  in  Thamood:'*  when  it  was  said  to  them,  "Enjoy

yourselves  for  yet  a  while ;

'  Ck)mp.  Sura  xi.  72,  and  xv.  51.  From  the  want  of  connection  with
what  precedes,  it  is  hitrhly  probable  that  the  whole  passage  from  verse
24-60  did  not  originally  form  a  part  of  this  Sura,  but  was  added  at  a
later  period,  perhaps  in  the  recension  of  the  text  under  Othnian.

-  In  Sura  xv.  61,  Muhammad  corrects  the  mistake  into  which  he  has
here  fallen  in  makincr  the  Ancrels  come  to  Abraham  after  the  destruction
of  the  cities.

3  Lit.  marked,  with  the  names  of  the  individuals  to  be  slain,  say  the
commentators.

*  For  Ad  and  Thamood,  see  Sura  xi.

48  THE    KORAN.

But  they  rebelled  against  their  Lord's  command  :   so

the  tempest  took  them  as  they  watclicd  its  coming,^
So  that  the)'  were  not  able  to  stand  upright,  and  conld

not  help  themselves.
And  tee  destroyed  the  people  of  Noah,  before  them  :  an

impious  people  truly  were  they  !
And  the  Heaven — with  Our  hands   have  We  built  it

up,  and  we  verily  gave  it  its  expanse ;
And  the  Earth — We  stretched  it  out  like  a  carpet ;  and

how  pleasantly  have  We  spread  the  couch  !
And   of   everything  have  We  created  pairs  :  haply  ye

will  reflect.
50     Fly  then  to  God  :    verily  I  come  to  you  from  Him  a

manifest  warner ;
And  set  not  up  another  god  with  God :  verily  I  come

to  you  from  Him  an  open  warner.
Even  thus  came  there  no  apostle  to  those  who  flourished

before   them,  but  they  exclaimed,  "  Sorcerer,  or

Possessed.''
Have  they  made  a  legacy  to  one  another-  of  this  scoff?

Yes,  they  are  a  rebel  people.
Turn  away,  then,  from  them,  and  thou  shalt  not  incur

reproach :
Yet  warn  them,  for,  in  truth,  the  warning  will  profit

the  believers.
Moreover  I  have  not  created  Djinn  and  men,  but  that

they  should  worship  Me  :
I  require  not  sustenance  from  them,  neither  require  I

that  they  feed  Me  :
Verily,  God  is  the  sole  sustainer :  possessed  of  might,

the  powerful :
Therefore,  of  a  truth,  to  the  transgressors  shall  be  a  fate

like  the  fate  of  their  fellows  of  old — Lot  them  not

then  challenge  ^le  to  hasten  it.
GO     And  woe  to  the  infidels,  because  of  their  threatened

day.

'  i.e.  in  broad  claylif;ht.     Thus  Boidh.     Conip.  Sura  xlvi.  22.
^  Or,  recommended  to  one  another.

THE    KORAN.  49

\   [XLIV.]

SURA  LIT.— THE  MOUNTAIN.
Mecca. — 49  Verses.

Xn  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  the  MOUNTAIN,
And  by  the  Book^  written
On  an  outspread  scroll,
And  by  the  frequented  fane,*^
And  by  Heaven's  lofty  roof.
And  by  the  swollen  sea,'

Yerily,    a   chastisement  from  thy  Lord   is    most   im-
minent.
And  none  shall  put  it  back.
With  reeling  on  that  day  the  Heaven  shall  reel,
10     And  with  moving  shall  the  mountains  move,"*

And  woe,  on  that  day,  to  those  who  called  the  apostles

bars.
Who  plunged  for  pastime  into  vain  disputes —
On  that  day  shall  they  be  thrust  with  thrusting  to  the

fire  of  Hell : —
"  This  is  the  fire  which  ye  treated  as  a  lie  !
Is  it  magic,  then  ?  or,  do  ye  not  see  it  ?
Burn  ye  therein  :  and  bear  it  patiently  or  impatiently  it

will  be  the  same  to  you  :  ye  only  receive  the  reward

of  your  doings.^'
But  ^mid  gardens   and  delights  sliall  they  dwell  who

have  feared  God,
Rejoicing  in  what  their  Lord  hath  given  them ;  and

that   from   the  pain   of  hell-fire  hath  their  Lord

preserved  them.
"  Eat  and  drink  with  healthy  enjoyment,  in  recompense

for  your  deeds.''
20     On  couches  ranged  in  rows  shall  they  recline ;  and  to

the   damsels  with   large   dark   eyes  will   we  wed

them.

'  Of  the  Koran  ;  or  of  the  Law  ;  or  of  the  register  of  human  actions.

"  Of  the  Caaba.  ^  Or,  poured  forth  {over  the  earth).

*  Comp.  Psalm  Ixviii.  9.

£

50  THE    KORAN.

And  to  those  who  have  believed,  whose  offspring  have

followed  them  in  the  faith,  will  We  again  unite

their  ofispring ;    nor  of  the  meed  of  their  works

will  We  in  the  least  defraud  them.     Pledged  to

God  is  every  man  for  his  actions.^
And  fruits  in  abundance  will  We  bestow  on  them,  and

such  flesh  as  they  shall  desire  :
Tlierein    shall   they   present  to   one  another  the  cup

which  shall  engender  no  light  discourse,  no  motive

to  sin  :-
And  youths  shall  go  round   unto   them  beautiful  as

imbedded  pearls :
And  they  shall  accost  one   another  and  ask  mutual

questions.
"  A  time  indeed  there  was,"  will  they  say,  "  when  we

were  full  of  care  as  to  tJie  future  lot  of  our  families ;
But  kind  hath  God  been  to  us,  and  from  the  pesti-
lential torment   of  the   scorching  wind'  hath  He

preserved  us ;
Verily,  heretofore  we  called  upon  Him — and  He  of  a

truth.  He  is  the  Beneficent,  the  Merciful."
Warn  thou,  then.     For  thou  by  the  favour  of  thy  Lord

art  neither  soothsayer  nor  possessed.
30     Or  will  they  say,  "  A  poet !  let  us  await  some  adverse

turn  of  his  fortune  "  ?*
Say,  wait  ye,  and  in  sooth  I  too  will  wait  with  you.
Or  is  it  their  dreams  which  inspire  them  with  this  ?  or

is  it  that  they  are  a  perverse  people  ?
Or  say  they,  "  He  hath  forged  it  (the  Koran)  himself"  ?

Nay  rather,  they  will  not  believe.
Let  them  then  produce  a  discourse  like  it,  if  they  speak

the  Truth.
Or  were  they  created  of  nothing  ?   or  were  they  the

creators  of  themselves  ?
Or  created  they  the  Heavens  and  Earth  ?     Nay  rather.

they  have  no  faith.
Or  hold  they  thy  Lord^s  treasures  ?  or  bear  they  the

rule  supreme  ?

'  The  more  prosaic  style  of  this  verse  indicates  a  later  origin  than  that
of  the  context.  Muir  places  the  whole  Sura  in  wrhat  he  terms  the  fourth
stage  of  Mcccan  Suras.

*  Or,  therein  shall  they  present  to  one  another  a  cup :  in  it  (Paradise)  is
no  vain  discourse  and  no  accusation  of  sin.

^  The  simoom.

*  Lit.  the  calamity  of  times,  or  adverse  fortune.

THE    KORAN.  51

Or  have  they  a  lad-^cr  for  hearing  the  angels  ?   Then  let

any  one  who  h  th  heard  them  bring  a  clear  proof

of  it.
Or  hath  God  the  daughters,  and  ye  the  sons  ?
40     Or  askest  thou  pay  of  them  ?    But  they  are  themselves

weighed  down  with  debts.
Or  have  they  a  knoxdedge  of  the  secret  things  ?     Then

let  them  write  them  down.
Or  desire  they  to  lay  snares /or  iliee?     But  the  snared

ones  are  they  who  do  not  believe.
Or  have  they  any  god  beside  God  ?     Glory  be  to  God

above  what  they  join  with  Him.
And  should  they  see  a  fragment  of  the  heaven  falling

down,  they  would  say,  "It  is  only  a  dense  cloud. ■'^
Leave  them  then  until  they  come  face  to  face  with  their

day  wherein  they  shall  swoon  away;
A  day  in  which  their  snares  shall  not  at  all  avail  them,

neither  shall  they  be  helped.
And  verily,  beside  this  is  there  a  punishment  for  the

evil-doers  :  but  most  of  them  know  it  not.
But  wait  thou  patiently  the  judgment  of  thy  Lord,  for

verily  thou  art  in  our  eye ;  and  celebrate  the  praise

of  thy  Lord  when  thou  risest  up,
And  in  the  night-season  :  and  praise  Him  at  the  weaning

of  the  stars.^

[XLV.]

SURA  LYI.— THE  IXEVITABLR

Mecca. — 96  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

When  the  day  that  must  come  shall  have  come  sud-

denly,=
None  shall  treat  its  sudden  coming  as  a  lie :

'  This  refers  to  certain  observances  after  the  morning  prayer.  Comp.
Sura  50,  .39.  ''  ^

"  The  renderings  of  Mar.,  cum  inciderit  casura,  or,  a.s  in  Sura  Ixix.  15,
ingTiurit  ingrucns,  nearly  express  the  peculiar  force  of  the  Arabic  verb
and  of  the  noun  formed  from  it ;  i.  e.  a  calamity  that  falls  suddenly  and
surely.  Weil  renders,  wenn  der  Auferstehung's  Tag  eintritt  (p.  389) ;
Lane,  when  the  calamity  shall  have  happened.

E  2

52  THE    KORAN.

Bay  that  shall  abase  !     Bay  that  shall  exalt !

When  the  earth  shall  be  shaken  with  a  shock,

And  the  mountains  shall  be  crumbled  with  a  crumbling,

And  become  scattered  dust,

And  into  three  bands  shall  ye  be  divided;^

Then  the  people  of  the  right  hand " — how  happy  the

people  of  the  right  hand  !
And  the   people    of   the   left  hand — how  luretchcd  the
people  of  the  left  hand  !
10     And  they  who  were  foi'emost  on  earth — the  foremost

These  are  they  who  shall  be  brought  nigh  to  God,
In  gardens  of  delight ;
A  crowd  from  the  ancients.
And  few  from  later  generations  ;
On  inwrought  couches
Reclining  on  them  face  to  face  :
Immortal  youths  go  round  about  to  them
With  goblets  and  ewers  and  a  cup  from  a  fountain ;
Their  hroivs  ache  not  from  it,  nor  fails  the  sense:'*
20     And  with  such  fruits  as  they  shall  make  choice  of.
And  with  flesh  of  such  birds  as  they  shall  long  for  :
And  theirs  shall  he  the  Houris  with  large  dark  eyes  like

close-kept  pearls,
A  recompense  for  their  labours  past.
No  vain  discourse  shall  they  hear  therein,  nor  charge

of  sin.
But  only  the  cry,  "  Peace  !  Peace  ! "
And   the  people   of  the   right  hand — how  happy  the

people  of  the  right  hand  !
Amid  thornlcss  lote- trees  •''
And  bananas  clad  with  flowers,*^
And  extended  shade,
30     And  flowing  waters,
And  abundant  fruits,"^

'  Comp.  Tr.  Rosch  Haschanah,  fol.  16,  h.

^  Lit.  the  covipanions  of  the  right  liand,  what  {shall  be)  the  companions
of  the  right  hand  !  (and  thus  in  verses  9,  37,  40) ;  i.  c.  whose  books,  con-
taining,' an  account  of  their  actions  during  life,  shall  be  placed  in  their
right  or  left  hands.

'  Lit.  the  prececlers,  the  ^rreceders.  The  meaning  probably  is  that  they
who  were  first  to  embrace  Islam  shall  be  the  first  in  Paradise.

*  Lit.  theij  are  not  exhausted.

*  Sec  Sura  liii.  14.

®  The  ]\Iusa,  or  Banana  ;  according  to  others,  i\\G  Acacia  gummifcra.
''  "  A  Muslim  of  some  learning  professed  to  me  that  he  considered  the

THE    KORAN.  53

Unfailing/  and  unforbidden.

And  lofty  couches.

Yerily  of  a  rare  creation  have  We  created  tlie  Hoiiris,

And  We  have  made  them  ever  virgins,

Dear  to  their  spouses,  of  equal  age  icith  thevi,-

For  the  people  of  the  right  hand,

A  crowd  from  the  ancients.

And  a  crowd  from  later  rjenerations.^
40     But  the  people  of  the  left  hand — how  xvretchecl  shall  be
the  people  of  the  left  hand  !

Amid  pestilential  *  winds  and  in  scalding  water,

And  the  shadow  of  a  black  smoke,

Not  cooling,  and  not  pleasant.

They  truly,  ere  this,  were  blessed  with  worldly  goods.

But  persisted  in  heinous  wickedness.

And  were  wont  to  say,

''When  we  have  died,  and  become   dust  and  bones,
shall  we  indeed  be  raised  ?

And  our  fathers  the  men  of  yore  ?  "

(Say  :  Aye,  the  former  and  the  latter :
50     Gathered  shall  they  surely  be  for  the  time  of  a  known
day.

Then  verily  ye,  0  ye  the  erring,  the  imputers  of  false-
hood.

Shall  surely  eat  of  the  tree  Zakkoum,

And  fill  your  bellies  with  it.

And  thereupon  shall  ye  drink  of  the  boiling  water.

And  ye  shall  drink  as  the  thirsty  camel  drinketh.

This  shall  be  their  repast  in  the  day  of  reckoning !
^  We  created  you ;  will  ye  not  then  credit  Us  ?  ^

What  think  ye  ?     The  germs  of  life  ^ —

Is  it  ye  who  create  them  ?  or  are  We  their  creator  ?
GO     It  is  We  who  have  decreed  that  death  should  be  among
you;

descriptions  of  Paradise  given  in  the  Koran  to  be,  in  a  great  measure,
figiirative  ;  '  like  those,'  said  he,  '  in  the  book  of  the  Revehition  of
St.  John  ;'  and  he  assured  me  that  many  learned  Muslims  were  of  the
same  opinion." — Lane's  Modern  Egyptians,  i.  p.  75,  note.

'  Lit.  not  cut  off.  ^  Like  them,  grow  not  old.

^  This  seems  a  direct  contradiction  to  verse  14,  unless  we  suppose,  with
Beidhawi,  that  an  inferior  and  more  numerous  class  of  believers  is  here
spoken  of.  The  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  two  passages  must  have  been
early  felt,  as  Zamakshari  mentions  a  tradition  that  verse  38  was  specially
revealed  in  answer  to  the  Prophet's  prayer,  in  explanation  of  14,  above.

*  Or,  scorching.  ^  As  to  the  resurrection.

^  Lit.  semen  quod  emittUis.

5A  THE    KORAN.

Yet  arc  We  not  thereby  hindered '  from  replacing  you

with  others,  your  likes,   or  from   producing  you

again  in  a  form  which  yo  know  not !
And  already  ye  have  known  the  first  creation :  will  ye

not  then  reflect?
What  think  ye  ?     That  which  ye  sow —
Do  ye  cause  its  upgrowth,  or  are  We  the  givers  of  it  ?
If  We  pleased  We  surely  could  so  make  it  so  dry  and

brittle  that  ye  would  ever  marvel  and  say,
"  We  have  been  indeed  at  cost,-''yet  are  we  forbidden

harvest."
What  think  ye  also  of  the  water  ye  drink  ?
Is  it  ye  who  send  it  down  from  the  clouds,  or  send  Wo

it  down  ?
Brackish  could  We  make  it,  if  We  pleased  :  will  ye  not

then  be  thankful  ?
70     What  think  ye  too  of  the  fire  which  ye  obtain   hy

friction —
Is  it  ye  who  rear  its  tree,  or  do  We  rear  it  ?
It  is  We  who  have  made  it  for  a  memorial  and  a  benefit

to  the  dwellers  in  the  desert ;
Praise  therefore  the  nume  of  thy  Lord,  the  Great.
And  I  swear  by  the  places  where  the  stars  do  set.
And  that  is   surely  a  great  oath,  if  ye   (only)  knew

it  ;—
Verily  it  is  the  honourable  Koran,
Written  in  the  preserved  Book  :^
Let  none  touch  it  but  the  purified,*
It  is  a  revelation  from  the  Lord  of  the  worlds.
80     Such  tidings  then  as  these  will  ye  disdain  ?

And  will  ye  make  it  your  daily  bread  to  gainsay  them  ?
Why  then  when  the  soul  of  a  dying  man  has  reached

the  throat.
And  ye  then  arc  looking  on, —
And  We  are  nearer  to  hiui  than  ye,  although  ye  see  Ua

not : —
Why  could  ye  not,  if  ye  are  to  escape  all  retribution,

'  Lit.  forestalled,  anticipated.  '  Lit.  have  incurred  debt.

'  i.  c.  the  Prototype  of  the  Koriln  written  down  in  the  Book  kept
by  CJofl  himself.

■•  Thiw  passage  implies  the  existence  of  copies  of  portions  at  least  of  the
Koran  in  common  use.  It  was  quoted  by  the  sister  of  Omar  when,  at
his  conversion,  he  desired  to  take  her  copy  of  8ura  xx.  into  his  hands.
Verses  77,  78  were  directed  by  the  Chalif  Muhammad  Abulcasim  ben
Abdallah  to  be  inscribed  on  all  copies  ot  the  Koran.

THE    KORAN.  55

Cause  that  soul  t">  return?     Tell  me,  if  ye  speak  the

truth.
But  if  he  be  one  of  those  permitted  to  draw  near  to  God,
His  shall  be   repose    and   pleasure  and  a  garden  of

delights ;
And  if  he  be  of  t\e  people  of  the  right  hand — ■
90     From  the  people  of  the  right  hand  shall  be  the  greeting,

''Peace  be  to  theo:^^
And   if  he   be    of  those  who    treat  the  prophets  as

deceivers.
And  of  the  erring,

His  entertiiinment  shall  be  of  scalding  water,
And  the  broiling  of  hell-fire.
Verily  this  is  a  certain  truth ;
Praise  therefore  the  name  of  thy  Lord,  the  Great.

[XLVI.]

SURA'  LIIL— THE  STARS.
Mecca. — 62  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  the  STAES  when  they  set.

Your  compatriot  ^  erreth  not,  nor  doth  he  go  astray,

Neither  speaketh  he  fi'om  mere  impulse.

Verily  the  Koran  is  uo  other  than  a  revelation  revealed

to  him  :
One  ten-ible  in  power  ^  taught  it  him,

'  This  Sura  was  revealed  at  about  the  time  of  the  first  emigration  of
Muhammad's  followers  to  Abyssinia,  A.  5.  The  manner  in  which  the
Prophet  cancelled  the  objectionable  verses  19,  20,  is  the  strongest  proof
of  his  sincerity  (as  also  is  the  opening  of  Sura  Ixxx.)  at  this  period-  Had
he  not  done  so,  nothing  would  have  been  easier  for  him  than  to  have
effected  a  reconciliation  with  the  powerfiU  party  in  Meccii,  who  had
recently  compelled  his  followers  to  emigrate.

•  Or,  associate,  i,  c.  of  the  KoreLsh.

^  The  Angel  Gabriel,  to  the  meaning  of  whose  name,  n-i  the  stivng  one
nf  God,  these  words  probably  allude.

56  THE    KORAN.

Endued  witli  understanding.     With  even  balance  stood

he;i
And  he  was  in  the  highest  point  of  the  horizon  :
Then  came  he  nearer  and  approached  closely.
And  was  at  the  distance  of  two  bows,  or  even  closer, —

10     And  he  revealed  to  his  servant  what  he  revealed —
His  heart  falsified  not  what  he  saw  :
Will  ye  then  dispute  with  him  as  to  what  he  saw?
And  he  saw  him  once  again,

Near  the  Sidrah-tree,  which  marks  the  boundary,^
Near  which  is  the  garden  of  the  abode.
When  that  covered  the  Sidrah-tree'  which  covered  it:'*
His  gaze  turned  not  aside,  nor  did  it  wander  :
For  he  saw  the  greatest  of  the  signs  of  his  Lord.
What  think  ye  then  of  El-Lat  and  Er-Uzza,^

20     And  Manat  the  third  idol  besides  ?  ^

Shall  ye  have  male  progeny  and  God  female  ?

'  Or,  he  stood  erect  in  his  proper  form,  according;  to  some  commentators.

^  That  is,  Beyond  which  neither  men  nor  angels  can  pass  (Djehil).  The
original  word  is  also  rendered,  the  Lote-trec  of  the  extremity,  or  of  the
loftiest  spot  in  Paradise,  in  the  seventh  Heaven,  on  the  right  hand  of  the
throne  of  God.  Its  leaves  are  fabled  to  be  as  numerous  as  the  members
of  the  whole  human  family,  and  each  leaf  to  bear  the  name  of  an  indi-
vidual. This  tree  is  shaken  on  the  night  of  the  ir)th  of  Tvamadan  every
year  a  little  after  sunset,  when  the  leaves  on  which  are  inscribed  the
names  of  those  who  are  to  die  in  the  ensuing  year  fall,  either  wholly
withered,  or  with  more  or  less  green  remaining,  according  to  the  months
or  weeks  the  person  has  yet  to  live.

'  The  Sidrah  is  a  prickly  plum,  which  is  called  Ber  in  India,  the  Zizy-
phus  jvjuba  of  Linnjeus.  A  decoction  of  the  leaves  is  used  in  India  to
wash  the  dead,  on  account  of  the  sacredness  of  the  tree.

•*  Hosts  of  adoring  angels,  by  which  the  tree  was  masked.

*  Al-Lat  or  El-Lat,  probably  the  Alilat  of  Herodotus  (iii.  8),  was  an  idol
at  Nakhlah,  a  place  east  of  the  present  site  of  Mecca.  Al-Ozza  was  an
idol  of  the  Kinanah  tribe  ;  but  its  hererlitary  priests  were  the  Banu
Solaym,  who  were  stationed  along  the  mercantile  road  to  Syria  in  tho
neighbourhood  of  CJhaibar.

^  When,  at  the  first  recital  of  this  Sura,  the  Prophet  had  reached  this
yerse,  he  continued, —

These   are   the   exalted  females  [or,  sublime  swans,  i.  e.  mounting

nearer  and  nearer  to  God],
And  truly  their  intercession  may  be  expected.
These  words,  however,  which  wore  received  by  the  idolaters  with  great
exultation,  were  disowned  by  Muhammad  in  the  course  of  a  few  days  as
a  Satanic  suggestion,  and  replaced  by  the  text  as  it  now  stands.  The
probability  is  that  the  difficulties  of  his  position  led  him  to  attempt  a
compromise  of  which  he  speedily  repented.  In  the  Suras  subsequent  to
this  period  the  denunciations  of  idolatry  became  much  sterner  and  clearer.
The  authorities  are  given  by  Weil,  Sprenger,  and  Muir.  Sec  Sura  [Ixvii.]
xvii.  74-76.

rilE    KORAN.  57

This  then  were  an  unfair  partition  !

Verily  these  are  nere  names,  which  ye  and  your
fathers  have  given  them  :  God  hath  not  sent  down
any  warranty  in  their  regard.  Aye,  a  mere  conceit
and  their  own  impulses  do  they  follow,  though
"  the  guidaucf^ ''  from  their  Lord  hath  come  to
them.

Shall  man  have  whatever  he  ^\'isheth  ?

The  future  and  the  present  ^  are  in  the  hand  of  God  :

And  many  as  are  the  Angels  in  the  Heavens,  their
intercession  shall  be  of  no  avail  *

Save  after  God  hath  permitted  it  to  whom  He  shall
please,  and  whom  He  ^vill  accept.

Verily,  it  is  they  who  believe  not  in  the  life  to  come,
who  name  the  angels  with  names  of  females  :

But  herein  they  have  no  knowledge  :  Verily  they  follow

a  mere  conceit ;  and  truly  mere  conceit  can  profit

nothingf  aofainst  the  truth.

30     Withdraw  then  from   him   who   turneth   his   back  on

Our  warning  and  dv.sireth  only  this  present  life.

This  is  the  sum  of  their  knowledge.  Truly  thy  Lord
best  knoweth  him  who  erreth  from  his  way,  and
He  best  knoweth  him  who  hath  received  guidance.

And  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth  is
God's,  that  He  may  recompense  those  who  do
evil  according  to  their  deeds,  and  recompense
those  who  do  good  with  good  things.

To  those  who  avoid  j^t-aaJ^  crimefj  and  scandals  but
commit  only  lighter  faults,  verily,  thy  Lord  will
be  rich  in  forgiveness.  He  well  knew  you  when
He  produced  you  out  of  the  earth,  and  when
ye  were  embryos  in  your  mothers'*  womb.  Assert
not  then  your  own  purity.  He  best  knoweth
who  feareth  Him.
^  Hast  thou  considered  him  who  turneth  his  back

And  giveth  little  and  is  covetous  ?

Is  it  that  he  hath  the  knowledge  of  the  secret  things,
and  doth  he  see  them  ?

Hath  he  not  been   told  of  what  is  in  the  pages  of
Moses,

'  Lit.  (he  end  and  the  first  beginning.

'  Verses  26-33  are  probably  later  than  the  previous  part  of  the  Sura,
but  inserted  with  reference  to  it.  Some  (as  Omar  b.  Muhammad  and
Itq.)  consider  verse  33,  or  (as  Itq.  36)  verses  34-42,  or  (as  Omar  b.
Muhammad)  the  whole  Sura,  to  have  originated  at  Medina.

1

58  THE    KORAN.

And  of  AbTaham  faithful  to  his  engagement/

That   no   burdened    soul   shall    bear   the   burdens   of

another,
40     And  that  nothing  shall  he  reckoned  to  a  man  but  that

for  which  he  hath  striven,
And  that  his  efforts  shall  at  last  be  seen  in  their  true

li(jht :
Then  he  shall   be  recompensed  with  the  most  exact

recompense —
And  that  with  thy  Lord  is  the  term  of  all  thliigs,
And  that  it  is  He  who  causeth  to  laugh  and  to  weep,
And  that  He  causeth  to  die  and  maketh  alive,
And  that  He  hath  created  the  sexes,  male  and  female,
From  the  diffused  germs  of  life,'   •
And  that  with  Him  is  the  second  creation,^
And  that  He  enricheth  and  causeth  to  possess,
50     And  that  He  is  the  Lord  of  Sirius,*

And  that  it  was  He  who  destroyed  the  ancient  Adites,
And  the  people  of  Thamood  and  left  not  one  survivor,
And  before  them  the  people  of  Noah  ?  verily  they  were

most  wicked  and  most  perverse.
And  He  destroyed  the  cities  that  were  overthrown.
So  that  that  which  covered  them^  covered  them.
Which  then  of  thy  Lord's  benefits  wilt  thou  make  a

matter  of  doubt  ?  "^
He  who  wameth  you  is  one  of  the  warners  of  old.
The  day  that  must  draw  nigh,  draweth  nigh  —  none

but  God  can  reveal  its  time.
Is  it  at  this  saying  that  ye  marvel,
60     And  that  ye  laugh,  and  weep  not  ?
And  that  ye  are  triflers  ?
Prostrate  yourselves  then  to  God  and  worship.

'  See  Sura  Ixxxvii.  19,  p.  26.

'  Ex  spermate  cum  seminatum  fuerit.

'  The  Kcsurrcction.

■•  The  Dog-star,  worshipped  by  the  Arabians.

»  The  Dead  Sea.

®  Compare  the  refrain  in  Sura  Iv.  p.  Gl.

TUE    KORAN.  59

\  [XL VII.]

SURA  LXX.— THE  STEPS  OR  ASCENTS.
Mecca. — 44  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

An  inquirer  inquired  ^  concerning  the  punishment  that

shall  light
On  the  infidels  : — none  can  hinder

God  from  inflicting  it,  the  master  of  those  ASCENTS,
By  which  the  angels  and  the  spirit  ascend  to  Him  in

a  day,  whose  length  is  fifty  thousand  years.^
Be  thou  patient  then  with  becoming  patience  :
They  indeed  see  that  day  as  distant.
But  we  see  it  nigh  :
The  day  when   the   heaven   shall    become   as  molten

brass.
And  the  mountains  shall  become  like  flocks  of  wool, —
10     And  friend  shall  ask  no  question  of  friend.

Though  they  look  at  one  another  !     Fain  would  the

wicked  redeem  himself  from  punishment  on  that

day  at  the  price  of  his  children,
Of  his  spouse  and  his  brother.
And  of  his  kindred  who  sheltered  him.
And  of  all  who  are  on  the  earth  that  they  might  then

deliver  him.
But  no.     Verily  Hell-fire,
Dragging  by  the  scalps.

Shall  claim  him  who  turned  his  back  and  went  away.
And  amassed  and  hoarded.
Man  truly  is  by  creation  hasty ;
20     When  evil  befalleth  him,  impatient ;

But  when  good  falleth  to  his  lot,  tenacious.

Not  so  the  prayerful.

Who  are  ever  constant  at  their  prayers ;

'  Lit.  one  asking  ashed :  probably  some  unbeliever,  with  reference  to  the
openijig  of  Sura  IvL  p.  51,  or  like  statements  in  some  previous  Sura.

*  The  expression  is  hyperbolical,  and,  as  such,  identical  with  Sura  [Ixx.]
xxxii.  4.  Compare  also  Siu-a  xcviL  p.  21,  where  the  descent  is  said  to
take  place  in  a  single  night.

60  THE    KORAN.

And  of  whose  substance  there  is  a   due   and  stated

portion
For  him  who  asketh^  and  for    him  who  is  ashamed  ^

to  beg ;
And  who  own  the  judgment-day  to  be  a  truth,
And  who  thrill  with  dread  at  the  chastisement  of  their

Lord —
(Verily  there  is  none   safe  from  the  chastisement  of

their  Lord) —
And  who  control  their  desires,
30     Save  with  their  wives  or  the  slaves  whom  their  right

hands  have  won,  —  in  that  case  verily  they  shall

be  blameless  ;
(And  whoever  indulge   their  desires  beyond  this  are

transgressors) ;
And  who  are  true  to  their  trusts  and  their  engage-
ments.
And  who  witness  uprightly.
And  who  keep  strictly  the  hours  0/ prayer:
These  shall  chrcll,  laden  with  honours,  amid  gardens.
But  what  hath  come  to  the  unbelievers  that  they  run

at  full  stretch  around  thee,
On  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  in  bands  ?
Is  it  that   every  man   of  them  would  fain  enter  the

Garden  of  delights  ?
Not  at  all.     Yerily  We  have  created  them,  they  know

of  what !
40     And  I  swear  by  the  Lord  of  the  East  and  of  the  West-

that  We  truly  have  power
To  replace  them  with  better  than  themselves  ;  neither

are  We  to  be  hindered.
Wherefore  let  them  flounder  on  and  disport  themselves,

till  they  come  face  to  face  with  their  threatened

day.
The  day  on  which  they  shall   come   forth  out  of  their

graves   in  haste,   as    if  they  were   rallying  to   a

standard  : —
Their  eyes  downcast;  disgrace  shall  cover  them.    Such

their  threatened  day.

'  Lit.  forhidden  or  prevented  by  shame.
'  See  next  Sura,  v.  IC.

THE    KORAN.  61

SUEA  LV.— THE  MERCIFUL.

Mecca.— 78  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

The  God  of  MERCY  hath  taught  the  Koran,

Hath  created  man,

Hath  taught  him  articulate  speech.^

The  Sun  and  the  Moon  have  each  their  times,-

And  the  plants  and  the  trees  bend  in  adoration.

And  the  Heaven,  He  hath  reared  it  on  high;  and  He
hath  appointed  the  balance.

That  in  the  balance  ye  should  not  transgress  ;

Weigh  therefore  with  fairness,  and  scant  not  the  balance.

And  the  Earth,  He  hath  prepared  it  for  the  living  tribes :
10     Therein  are  fruits,  and  the  palms  with  sheathed  clusters.

And  the  grain  with  its  husk,  and  the  supports  of  life.

Which  then  of  the  bounties  of  your  Lord  will  ye  twain  ^
deny?

He  created  man  of  clay  like  an  earthen  vessel.

And  He  created  the  djinn  of  pure^  fire  :

"WTiich  then  of  the  bounties,  &c.

He  is  Lord  of  the  East,^

And  He  is  Lord  of  the  West :

Which,  &c.

He  hath  let  loose  the  two  seas  ^  which  meet  each  other :
20     Yet  between  them  is  a  barrier  which  they  overpass  not :

Which,  &c.

From  each  He  bringeth  up  the  pearls  both  great  and
small :  7

WTiich,  &c.

^  Or,  dear  demonstration,  eloquence.

*  Lit.  cum  computo  {i.e.  certa  regula).  Mar.
'  Men  and  djinn.  The  verb  is  in  the  dual.
■•  Free  from  smoke.

*  Lit.  of  the  two  easts,  of  the  two  wests,  i.e.  of  all  that  lies  between  the
extreme  points  at  which  the  sun  rises  and  sets  at  the  winter  and  summer
solstices.

®  Lit.  he  hath  set  at  large,  poured  forth  over  the  earth  the  masses  of
fresh  and  salt  water  which  are  in  contact  at  the  mouths  of  rivers,  &c.
See  Sura  [Ixviii.]  xx^ii.  62  ;  [IxxxvL]  xxxv.  13.

''  Or,  coral.

62  THE    KORAN.

And  Ilis  arc  tho  ships  towering  up  at  sea  like  the  tall

mountains  :
Which,  &c.

All  on  the  earth  passeth  away,

But  the  face  of  thy  Lord  abideth  in  its  majesty  and  glory :
Which,  &c.

To  Him  makoth  suit  all  that  is  in  the  Heaven  and  tho
Earth ;  every  day  doth  He  work  :
30     Which,  &c.

We  will  settle  accounts  with  you,  0  ye  men  and  djinn  :  ^
Which,  &c.

0  company  of  djinn  and  men,  if  ye  can  overpass  the
bounds    of    the    Heavens    and    the   Earth,  then
overpass  them.     But   by  our  leave  only  shall  ye
overpass  them  :
Which,  &c.

A  bright  flash  of  fire  shall  be  hurled  at  you  both,  and
molten  brass,  and  ye  shall  not  defend  yourselves
from  it :
Which,  &c.
And  when  the  Heaven    shall    be  cleft  asunder,  and

become  rose-red,  like  stained  leather  :
Which,  &c.

On  that  day  shall  neither  man  nor  djinn  be  asked  of
his  sin  :
40     Which,  &c.

By  their  tokens  shall  the  sinners  be  known,  and  they

shall  be  seized  by  their  forelocks  and  their  feet :
Which,  &c.

"  This  is  Hell  which  sinners  treated  as  a  lie."
To  and  fro  shall  they  pass  awhile  between  it  and  the

boiling  water :
Wliich,  &c.
But  for  those  who  feared  the  majesty  of  their  Lord

shall  be  two  gardens :
Which,  &c.

With  o'erbranching  trees.
Which,  &c.
50     And  in  each  two  fountains  flowing :
Which,  &c.

And  in  each  two  kinds  of  every  fruit :
Which,  &c.

Or,  lit.  ?<;e  vAll  finish  7oith  you,  0  ye  two  heavy  ones,  or  weights,  i.  e.

any  collective  body  of  creatures  or  things.

THE    KORAN.  63

On  couches  with  linings  ^  of  brocade  sliall  they  recline,

and  the  fruit  ol  the  two  gardens  shall  bo  near  at

hand :
Which,  &c.
Therein  shall  be  the  damsels  with  retiring  glances,

whom  nor   man   nor   djinn  hath  touched  before

them :
Which,  &c.

Like  jacinths  and  pearls  :
Which,  &c.
fiO     Shall  the  reward  of  good  be  aught  but  good  ?
Which,  &c.

And  beside  these  shall  be  two  otJier  gardens  :  ^
Which,  &c.
Of  a  dark  green  :
Which,  &c.

With  gushing  fountains  in  each  :
Which,  &c.

In  each  fruits  and  the  palm  and  the  pomegranate :
Which,  &c.
70     In  each,  the  exquisite,  the  beauteous  ones  :
Which,  &c.

With  large  dark  eyeballs,  kept  close  in  pavilions :
Which,  &c.
Whom  man  hath  not  touched  before  them,  nor  any

djinn  : '
Which,  &c.
Their  spouses  on  soft  green  cushions  and  on  rich  carpets

shall  recline :
Which,  &c.
Blessed  be  the  name  of  thy  Lord,  full  of  majesty  and

glory.

'  Or,  in  vests.

'  One  for  men,  the  other  for  the  Genii ;  or,  two  for  each  man  and
Genius  ;  or,  both  are  for  the  inferior  chisses  of  Muslims.     Beidh.

'  It  should  be  remarked  that  these  promises  of  the  Houris  of  Paradise
are  almost  exclusively  to  be  foimd  in  Suras  -written  at  a  tune  when  Mu-
hammad had  only  a  single  wife  of  sLxty  years  of  age,  and  that  in  all  the
ten  years  subsequent  to  the  Hejira,  women  are  only  twice  mentioned  as
part  of  the  reward  of  the  faithful.  Suras  ii.  23,  and  iv.  60.  While  in
Suras  xxxvi.  56,  xliii.  70,  xiii.  23,  xl.  8,  the  proper  vnvcs  of  the  faithful
arc  spoken  of  as  accompanying  their  husbands  into  the  gardens  of  bliss.

64  THE    KORAN.

[XLIX.]

SURA  LIV.— THE  MOON.
Mecca. — 55  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate ,  the  Merciful.

The  hour  hath  approached  and  the  MOON  hath  been

cleft :  1
But  if  the  unbelievers  see  a  miracle  they  turn  aside  and

say,  "  Magic  that  shall  pass  away,"
And  they  treat  the  prophets  as  impostors,  and  follow

their   own   lusts  ;    but    everything  is  unalterably

fixed.
Yet  messages  of  prohibition-  had  come  to  them —
Consummate  wisdom — but  warners  profit  them  not.
Turn  away  then  from  them.      On  the  day  when  the

summoner  shall  summon  to  a  horrible '  affair.
With  downcast  eyes  shall  they  come  forth  from  their

graves,  as  if  they  were  scattered  locusts,
Hastening  with  outstretched  necks  to  the  summoner.*

"  This,"  the  infidels  say,  "  is  the  distressful  day."
Before  them  the  people  of  Noah  treated  the  truth  as

a   lie,    and    Our    servant    did   they    charge    with

falsehood,  and   said,    "  Demoniac  !  "  and  he  was

scouted.
10     Then  cried  he  to    his    Lord,    "  They  prevail  against

me ;  come  thou  therefore  to  my  succour."
So  AVe  opened  the  gates  of  Heaven  with  water  which

fell  in  torrents.
And  We  caused  the  earth  to  break  forth  with  springs,

and  by  settled  decree  did  their  waters  meet,
And  AVe  bare  him  on  a  vessel  made  with  planks  and

nails  :

'  Or,  2uiU  he,  cleft,  the  future  being  expressed  by  the  Prophetic  preterite,
and  the  reference  beinf;  to  one  of  the  si<rns  of  the  last  day.  The  rendering
hath  been  rle/t  is  in  accordance  with  a  miracle  said  to  have  been  wrought
by  Muhammad,  who  possibly  may  allude  to  some  meteor  or  comet  which
he  fancied  to  be  a  part  of  the  moon.

'  Or,  fnJl  of  alarm, — ahschreckende  Beisjyicle,  Sprenger ;  Histories  of
Cities  destroyed  for  their  unbelief.     Thus  Kas.

^  Lit.  strange,  unheard  of.  ■*  The  angel  Israfil.

THE    KORAN.  65

Under  Our  eyes  it  sailed  on  :  a  recompense  to  him
who  had  been  i  "ejected  with  unbelief —

And  truly,  We  left  it  a  sign :  ^  but^  who  receives  the
warnincf  ?

And  how  great  was  my  vengeance  and  my  menace  !

Easy  now  for  warning  have  We  made  the  Koran — but,
who  receives  the  warning?

The  Adites  called  the  tnith  a  lie  :  but  how  great  was
my  vengeance  and  my  menace  ;

Lo,  We  sent  against  them  a  roaring  wind  on  an  ill-
starred  day,  with  bitter  blast :
20     It  tore  men  away  as  though  they  were  uprooted  palm-
stumps.

And  how  great  was  my  vengeance  and  my  menace  !

Easy  now  for  warning  have  We  made  the  Koran — but,
who  receives  the  warning  ?

The  tribe  of  Thamood  treated  the  threatenings  as
lies  :

And  they  said,  "  Shall  we  follow  a  single  man  from
among  ourselves  ?  Then  verily  should  we  be  in
error  and  in  folly.

On  him  alone  among  us  is  the  office  of  warning  de-
volved ?     Xay  rather,  he  is  a  liar,  a  vain-boaster.'^

"  To-morrow  shall  they  learn  who  is  the  liar,  the  vain-
boaster  ;

Verily  We  will  send  the  she-camel  to  prove  them  :
do  thou  mark  them  well,  0  Saleh,  and  be
patient ;

And  foretell  them  that  their  waters  shall-  be  divided
between  themselves  and  her,  and  that  every
draught  shall  come  by  turns  to  them.''

But  they  called  to  their  comrade,  and  he  took  a  hnife
and  ham-strung  her —
30     And  how  great  was  my  vengeance  and  my  menace  !

We  sent  against  them  a  single  shout  ;^  and  they
became  like  the  dry  sticks  of  the  fold-builders.

'  The  traditions  as  to  the  collection  of  pitch  from  wood  of  the  Ark,  in
the  time  of  Berosus  (B.C.  250  ?),  for  amulets,  and  of  the  wood  itself,  in  the
time  of  Joscphus  f  Ant.  i.  3,  6  ;  c.  Apion,  i.  1 9),  must  have  reached  Mu-
hammad through  his  Jewish  informants.  Fragments  are  said  to  have
existed  in  the  days  of  Benjamin  of  Tudela,  and  to  have  been  carried  away
by  the  Chalif  Omar  from  the  mountain  al  Djoudi  to  the  mosque  of  Gazyrat
Ibu  Omar.

^  See  Sura  [Ivi.]  xxvi.  155  ;  also  Sura  [Ixxxvii.]  vii.  71.

'  Comp.  Sura  xli.  Ifi,  and  vii.  76.  The  word  shout  may  therefore  be
used  here  metaphorically  for  tempest.

P

CG  THE    KORAN.

Easy  now  have  We  made  the  Koran  for  warning — but,

who  receives  the  warning  ?
The  people  of  Lot  treated  the  warning  as  a  lie  ; —
Lo,  Wo  sent   a  stone-charged  wind  against  them  all,

except  the  family  of  Lot,  whom  at  daybreak  We

delivered,
By  our  special  grace — for  thus  We  reward  the  thankful.
And    he    indeed    had    already    warned    them    of    our

severity,  but  of  that  warning  they  doubted  ;
Even  his  guests  did  they  demand  :  therefore  We  de-
prived them  of  sight
And    said,    "Taste    ye    my    chastisement    and    my

menace ; "
And  in  the  morning  an  abiding' punishment  overtook

them  :  "  Taste  therefore  my  chastisement  and  my

menace/^
40     Easy  now  have  We  made  the  Koran  for  warning — ^but,

who  receives  the  warning  ?
To  the  people  of  Pharaoh  also  came  the  threatenings;
All  our  miracles  did  they  treat  as  impostures ;  there-
fore punished  We  them  as  He  only  can  punish,  who

is  the  Mighty,  the  Strong.
Are  your  infidels,  0  Meccans,  better  men  than  these  ?

Is   there   an   exemption   for   you   in    the   sacred

Books  ?
Will   they    say,    "  We   are   a   host   that   can    defend

itself '^  ?
The   host  shall  be   routed,  and   they  shall  turn  the

back.
But,  "  the  llour^'  is  their  threatened  time,^  and  "the

Hour"  shall  bo  most  severe  and  bitter;
Verily,   the   wicked   are   sunh  in    bewilderment    and

madness ;
On  that  day  they   shall  be  dragged  into  tho  fire  on

their  faces. — "Taste  ye  the  touch  of  Hell.""
Lo,  all  things  have  We  created  after  a  fixed  decree  :
50     And  Our  command  was  but   one    word,   swift  as  the

twinkling  of  an  eye.
And  already  have  We  destroyed  the  like  of  you — yet  is

any  one  warned  ?
And  everything  that  they  do  is  in  the  sacred  Books ; '

'  Or,  tinu  of  their  rendezvous.

'  This,  and  verse  7  above,  may  be  insertions  of  a  later  period.

'  Kept  by  the  Guardian  Angels,  or,  in  ancient  Scriptures,  generally.

THE    KORAN.

67

Each  action,  both  ;niall  and  great,  is  written  down.
Yerilj,    amid    garJens^   and    rivers    shall   the   pious

dwell,
In  the  seat  of  truth,  in  the  presence  of  the  potent

Monarch.

[L.]

SURA  XXXYII.-THE  RANKS.
Mecca. — 182  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

By  the  angels  who  range  themselves  in  rank  for  Songs

of  Praise,
And  by  those  who  repel  demons,^
And  by  those  who  recite  the  Koran  for  warning,
Truly  your  God  is  One,
Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,  and  of  all  that

is  betweeii  them,  and  Lord  of  the  East.^
Verily  We  have  adorned  the  lower  heaven  with  the

adornment  of  the  stars ;
Tliey  servo  also  as  a  guard   against    every  rebellious

Satan,
That  they  overhear  not  the  exalted  Chiefs,"*  for  they

are  darted  at  from  every  side,^
Driven  off  and  consigned  to  a  lasting  torment ;
10     While,  if  one  steal  a  xoord  by  stealthy  then  a  glistening

flame  pursueth  him.

^  The  Talmudic  descriptions  of  the  Gardens—  for  the  later  Jews  believed
in  more  than  one  Paradise — and  of  the  rivers  and  trees  therein,  will  be
found  in  Schroeder  Talm.  Rabb.  Judenthum,  pp.  418-432.

'  I  have  given  in  the  text  the  sense  of  these  first  two  verses  according
to  Muhammadan  commentators.  The  original,  literally  translated,  would
not  convey  an  intelligible  idea  to  the  English  reader.  [Mar.  renders,  Per
ordinantes  ordinando  d  agitantes  agitaiulo.  Some  understand  the  latter
clause  of  the  Angels  who  drive  forward  clouds,  or,  of  those  who  keep  men
back  from  sin.

^  Ar.  Easts.  Errat  in  phiralitate  mundorum .  Mar.  But  the  allusion
probably  is  to  the  different  points  of  the  horizon  at  which  the  sun  rises
and  sets  in  the  course  of  the  year.

*  The  Angels.

«  See  Sura  [Ivii.]  xv.  18.

P  2

68  THE    KORAN.

Ask  the  Mcccans  tlien,  Are  they,  or  the  angels  whom
We  have  made,  the  stronger  creation  ?  Ay,  of
adhesive  clay  have  We  created  them.

But  thou  marvellest  ^  and  they  mock ;

And  when  they  are  warned,  no  warning  do  they  take  ;

And  when  they  see  a  sign,  they  fall  to  mocking,

And  say,  "  Lo,  this  is  no  other  than  clear  sorcery  ;

What  !  when  dead,  and  become  dust  and  bones,  shall
we  indeed  be  raised  ?

Our  sires  also  of  olden  time  ?  "

Say,  Yes ;  and  ye  shall  be  of  no  account.

For,  one  shout  -  only,  and  lo  !  they  gaze  around  them
20     And    say,    ''  Oh  !    woe    to    us  !    this   is   the    day    of
reckoning ;

This  is  the  day  of  decision  which,  ye  gainsaid  as  an
untruth. ^^

"  Gather  together  those  who  have  acted  unjustly,  and
their  consorts,'  and  the  gods  whom  they  wor-
shipped

Beside  God ;  and  guide  them  to  the  road  for  Hell.

Set  them  forth  :  verily  they  shall  be  questioned."

"  How  now,  that  ye  help  not  one  another  ?  "

But  on  this  day  they  shall  submit  themselves  to  God,

And  shall  turn  towards  one  another  with  mutual  ques-
tionings ;

They  say,  "  In  sooth,  ye  came  to  us  in  well-omened
sort : "  *

But  they  answer,  "  Nay,  it  was  ye  who  would  not
believe ;  and  we   had  no  power  over  you.     Nay,
ye  were  people  given  to  transgress  ;
50     Just,  therefore,  is  the  doom  which  our  Lord  hath  passed
upon  us.^ — We  shall  surely  taste  it —

And  we  made  you  err,  for  we  had  en'ed  ourselves." —

Partners  therefore  shall  they  verily  be  in  punishment
on  that  day.

Lo,  thus  will  We  deal  with  the  wicked

Who,  when  it  was  said  to  them,  "  There  is  no  God  but
God,"  were  proudful

'  At  their  unbelief.

^  The  shout  or  cry  {increpatio,  Mar.)  of  the  Archangel  Gabriel

'  Or,  comrades,  i.  e.  the  demons.

••  Lit.  from  the  right  hand,  the  side  of  good  omen,  i.  e.  with  semblance
of  tmth.  Others  render,  with  force ;  others,  ivith  false  oaths,  i.  e.  attested
by  rai.-iing  the  right  hand.

*  See  Sura  [h..]  xxxvi.  6,

THE    KOKAN.  69

And  exclaimed,  ''  Shall  we  in  sooth  abandon  our  gods

for  a  crazed  poi  t  ?  "
Nay  rather,  he  cometh  vrith  the  Truth  and  confirmeth

the  Sent  Ones  of  old.
Ye  shall  verily  taste  the  painful  punishment.
And  ye  shall  not  be  lewarded  but  as  ye  have  wrought.
But  the  sincere  servants  of  God
40     Shall  have  a  stated  provision

Of  fruits ;  and  honoured  shall  they  be

In  the  gardens  of  delight.

Upon  couches  face  to  face  ;

A    cup    shall    be    borne   round   among    them    from    a

fountain.
Limpid,  delicious  to  those  who  drink  ;
It  shall  not  oppress  the  sense,^  nor  shall  they  therewith

be  inebriated ;
And  with  them,  the  large-eyed  ones  with  modest  re-
fraining glances,  fair  like  the  sheltered  egg."
And    they    shall   address    one    another    with   mutual

questions.
Saith  one  of  them,  ''  I  truly  had  a  bosom  friend,
50     Who  said,  '  Art  thou  indeed  of  those  who  credit  it  ?
When  we  are  dead,  and  become  dust  and  bones,  shall

we  indeed  be  judged  "f '  "  ^
He    shall    say    to    those   around    him,    '^Will   ye   look

down  ?  "
And  he  shall  look  down,  and  see  him  in  the  midst  of  hell.
He  shall  say  to  him,    "  By   God,    thou   hadst  almost

brought  me  to  destruction  ;
And,  but  for  the  favour  of  my  Lord,  I  had  surely  been

of  those  given  over  into  torment."
"  Are  we  not  then  liable  to  die,"  sai/  the  blessed,
"  Any  other  than  our  first  death  ?  and  have  we  escaped

the  torment?  "  ^
Lo,  this  is  indeed  the  great  felicity  !
For  the  like  of  this  should  the  travailers  travail  !
60     Is  this  the  better  repast  or  the  tree  Ez-zakkoum  ?

Verily  We  have  made  it  for  a  subject  of  discord  to  the

wicked  :
Lo,  it  is  a  tree  which  cometh  up  from  the  bottom  of

hell;

'  Lit.  in  it  {is)  no  injurious  force.

•The  ostrich  egg  c<arefully  protected  from  dust.

"Or,  recompensed.
*  Lit.  ayid  are  we  not  among  the  punished  ?

70  THE    KORAN.

Its  fruit  is  as  it  were  the  lieads  of  Satans  ;

And,  lo  !  the  danincd  shall  surely  cat  of  it  and  fill  their

bellies  with  it :
Then  verily  shall   they  have  thereupon  a  mixture  of

boiling  water ;
Then  verily  shall  they  return  to  hell.
Lo,  they  found  their  fathers  erring,
And  they  hastened  on  in  their  footsteps ;
Also  before  them  the  greater  number  of  the  ancients

had  erred,
70     Though  We  had  sent  warners  among  them  ;

See  then  what  was  the  end  of  these  warned  ones,
Except  of  God's  sincere  servants.
%  Noah  called  on  Us  of  old,  and  We. returned  a  gracious

answer.
And  We  saved  him   and   his   family  out  of  the  great

distress.
And  We  made  his  offspring  the  survivors ;
And  We  left  for  him  with  posterity,
"  Peace  bo  on  Noah  throughout  the  worlds  !  "
Thus  verily  do  We  reward  the  well-doers ;
Verily  he  was  one  of  our  believing  servants ; —
80     Then  the  rest  We  drowned.

%  And  truly,  of  his  fellowship^  was  Abraham,
When  he  brought  to  his  Lord  a  perfect  heart.
When  he  said  to  his  father  and  to  his  people,  '^  What

is  this  ye  worship  ?
Prefer  ye  with  falsehood  gods  to  God  ? "
And  what  deem  ye  of  the  Lord  of  the  worlds  ?  "
So  gazing  he  gazed  towards  the  stars,
And  said,  "  In  sooth  I  am  ill :  "  ^
And  they  turned  their  back  on  him  and  departed.
Then  hewont  aside  totheir  gods  and  said,  ''Do  ye  not  eat  ?
90     What  aileth  you  that  yo  do  not  speak?  "

Then   he   turned   upon    them,    with    the   right  hand

striking  :
Then  In's  trihesmcn  rushed  on  him  with  hurried  steps —
Ho  said,  "  Worship  ye  what  yo  carve.
When  God  hath  created  you,  and  the  idols  ye  make  V
They  said,  "  Build  up  a  pyre  *  for  him  and  cast  him  into

the  glowing  flame,"

'  Lit.  sect,  religion.

^  Or,  dn  yc  choose  n  falsehood,  rjoch  in  'preference  to  God  ?
'  And  therefore  unable  to  assist  at  your  sacrifices.
*  Lit.  a  building.

THE    KOKAN.  71

And  they  chose  to  plot  against  him^  but  We  brought
them  very  low.

And  he  said,  ''  Verily,  I  repair  to  my  Lord  who  will
guide  me :

0  Lord  give  me  a  son,  of  the  righteous  " —

So  We  announced  to  him  a  gracious  youth.
100  And  when  he  attained  to  such  an  age  that  he  could
assist  him  in  work  ^

His  father  said  to  him,  "  My  son,  I  have  seen  in  a
dream  that  I  should  sacrifice  thee ;  consider  there-
fore what  thou  seest  right.''

He  said,  "  My  father,  do  what  thou  art  bidden ;  of  the
patient,  if  God  please,  shalt  thou  find  me.^^

And  when  they  had  surrendered  themselves  to  the  will
of  God,  he  laid  him  down  upon  his  forehead :

Then  cried  Wo  unto  him,  "  0  Abraham  !

Now  hast  thou  satisfied  the  vision.''  Lo,  thus  do  We
recompense  the  righteous  !

This  was  indeed  a  clear  trial,

And  We  ransomed  his  son  .v^ith  a  costly  ^  victim,

And  We  left  for  him  among  posterity,

"  Peace  be  on  Abraham  !  "
110  Thus  do  We  reward  the  well-doers  ;

Yerily  he  was  of  our  believing  servants.

And  We  announced  Isaac  to  him — a  righteous  Prophet —

And  on  him  and  on  Isaac  We  bestowed  our  blessing.
And  among  their  offspring  was  a  righteous  man
and  one  to  his  own  hurt  an  undoubted  sinner.^
%  And  of  old,^  to  Moses  and  to  Aaron  showed  We  favours:

And  both  of  them,  and  their  people.  We  rescued  from
the  great  distress  :

And  We  succoured  them,  and  they  became  the  con-
querors :

And  We  gave  them  (Moses  and  Aaron)  each  the  lucid
book  :

And  We  guided  them  each  into  the  right  way  :

And  We  left  for  them  among  posterity,

'  So,  Beidh.  Mar.  Lane.  The  text  seems  to  imply  that  this  son  was
Ishmael  !     See  Geiger,  pp.  131,  133.

-  Brou(,'ht,  says  Rabbi  Jehoshua,from  Paradise  by  an  angeL  Midr.  fol.  28.

3  Jacob  and  JEsau  priniarily,  but  inclusive  of  their  descendants.

*  The  Arabic  particle  which  is  here  and  elsewhere  rendered,  of  old  (also,
already,  certainly),  serves  to  mark  the  position  of  a  past  act  or  event  as
prior  to  the  time  present,  and  in  all  such  passages  merely  gives  a  fulness
and  intensity  to  our  perfect,  or  pluperfect  tense.

72  the  koran.

120  "  Peace  be  on  Moses  and  Aaron.''

Lo,  thus  do  We  reward  the  well-doers  ;
Veril}^  they  were  two  of  our  believing  servants.
^  xVnd  EHas  truly  was  of  our  Sent  Ones,

When  he  said  to  his  people,  "  Fear  ye  not  God  ?
Invoke    ye    Baal    and    forsake    ye    the    most    skilful

Creator,
God  your  Lord,  and  Lord  of  your  sires  of  old?  "
But  they  treated  him  as  a  liar,  and  shall  surely  be

consigned /o^9i<Hks/ime??f,
Except  the  servants  of  God  who  kept  the  true  faith.
And  We  left  for  him  among  posterity,
130  ''  Peace  be  on  Eliasin  !  "  ^  (II  yasseen).
Lo,  thus  do  AVe  reward  the  well-doers  ;
Yerily  he  was  one  of  our  believing  servants.
%  And  Lot  truly  was  of  our  Sent  Ones,
AVhen  We  rescued  him  and  all  his  family,
Save  an  aged  woman  among  those  who  tarried ;
Afterward  We  destroyed  the  others.
And,   lo  !    ye   pass    by    their  ruined  dwellings  in  the

morning
And  at  night :  will  ye  not  then  understand  ?
^  And  verily  Jonas  was  one  of  the  Apostles,
140  When  he  fled  unto  the  laden  ship.

And  lots  were  cast,-  and  he  was  doomed.

And  the  fish  swallowed  him,  for  he  was  blameworthy.

But  had  he  not  been  of  those  w4io  praise  Us,

In  its  belly   had   he  surely  remained,  till  the  day  of

resurrection.
And  We  cast   him   on   the   bare  shore— and  ho  was

sick  ; —
And  We  caused  a  gourd-plant  to  grow  up  over  him.
And  AVe  sent  him  to  a  hundred  thousand  persons,  or

even  more,
And  because  they  believed.  We  continued  their  enjoy-
ments for  a  season.
^  Inquire  then  of  the  Mcccaoft  whether  thy  Lord  hath  the
daughters,  aud  they,  the  sons  ?
150  Have  We  created  angels  females?  and  were  they  wit-
nesses ?
Is  it  not  truly  a  falsehood  of  their  own  when  they  say,

'  The  form  of  this  word  is  altered  in  the  original,  from  the  singular  to
the  phmil,  for  the  sake  of  the  rhyme.
'  Lit.  he  cast  lots  (with  the  sailors).

THE    KORAN.  73

"  God  hath  begotten  "  ?  and  they  verily  are  the  liars.

Hath  He  preferred  d  lughters  to  sons  ?

What  reason  have  ye  for  thus  judging  ?

Will  ye  not  then  receive  this  warning?

Have  ye  a  clear  authority  ?

Bring  forth  your  Book  if  ye  speak  truth.

And  they  make  him  to  be  of  kin  with  the  Djinn  :  but

the  Djinn  know  that  these  idolaters  shall  be  brought

up  hefore  God :
High  be  the  glory  of  God  above  what  they  impute  to

Him,
160  Except  His  servants,  who  are  pure  in  their  faith.
"  Verily  then,  ye  and  what  ye  worship
Shall  not  stir  up  atuj  against  God,
Save  him  who  shall  burn  in  Hell.
And  not  one  of  us  but  hath  his  appointed  place,
And  verily  we  do  range  ourselves  in  order.
And  verily  we  do  celebrate  His  praises."  ^
But  tJie  infidels  say,

"  Had  we  a  warning  from  our  forefathers,"
We  had  surely  been  God^s  servants,  pure  in  faith."
170  Yet  they  believe  not  tJte  Koran — But  they  shall  know

its  tnith  at  last.
And  our  word  came  of  old  to  our  servants  the  Sent

Ones,
That  they  should  surely  be  the  succoured.
And  that  verily  our  armies   should  gain   victory  for

them.
Turn  aside  therefore  from  the  wihelievers  for  a  time.
And  behold  them,  for  they  too  shall  in  the  end  behold

their  doom.
Would  they  then  hasten  our  vengeance  ?
But  when  it  shall  come  down  into  their  courts,  an  evil

morning  shall  it  be  to  those   who  have  had  their

warning  :
Turn  aside  from  them  therefore  for  a  time.
And  behold  them  ;  for  they  too  shall  in  the  end  behold

their  doom.
180  Far  be  the  glory  of  thy  Lord,  Lord  of  greatness,  above

what  they  impute  to  Him  !
And  peace  be  on  His  Sent  Ones  !
And  praise  be  to  God,  Lord  of  the  worlds  !

'  This  Terse  and  the  five  preceding  are  the  words  of  the  Angel  Gabriel.
•Compare  verse  69.

74  THE    KORAN.

[LL]

SURA  LXXI.— N0AH.1
Mecca. — 29  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

JjO,  We  sent  NOAH  to  his  people,  and  said  to  him,
"Warn  then  thy  people  ere  there  come  on  them
an  afflictive  punishment."

He  said,  "  0  my  people  !  verily  I  come  to  you  an  open
Warner :

Serve  God  and  fear  Him,  and  obey  me :

Your  sins  will  He  forgive  you,  and  respite  you  till  a
fixed  Time — Verily  when  God's  Time  arrives,  it
shall  not  be  put  back — Would  that  ye  knew
this !  "

He  said,  "  O  my  Lord,  verily  I  have  cried  to  my  people
night  and  day;  and  my  cry  doth  but  make  them
^eefrom  me  the  more.

And  verily,  so  oft  as  I  cry  to  them,  that  Thou  mayest
forgive  them,  they  thrust  their  fingers  into  their
ears,  and  wrap  themselves  in  their  garments,  and
persist  in  their  error,  and  are  disdainfully  dis-
dainful :

Then  verily  I  cried  to  them  in  public ;

Then  verily  spake  I  openly,  and  in  private  did  I  secretly
address  them  :

And  I  said,  '  Implore  forgiveness  of  your  Lord ;  truly
He  is  ready  to  forgive  :
10     He   will    send   down    the   very  Heaven  upon   you  in
plenteous  rains ;

And  will  increase  you  in  wealth  and  children ;  and  will
appoint  you  gardens  and  watercourses  : —

What  hath  come  to  you  that  yo  hope  not  for  kindness
from  God  ?

For  He  it  is  who  hath  formed  you  by  successive  steps.'

'  Compare  the  later  development  of  Noah'3  history  in  Sura  xi.  263.
Nbldeke  (p.  90)  supposes  this  to  bo  a  fragment  of  some  longer  Sura.
*  See  Sura  xxii.  5.

THE    KORAN.

75

See  ye  not  how  God  liath  created  seven  heavens  one

over  the  other  ?  |
And  He  hath  placed  therein  the  moon  as  a  light,  and

hath  placed  there  the  sun  as  a  torch;
And  God  hath  caused  you  to  spring  forth  from  the

earth  like  a  plant ,
Then  will  He  turn  you  back  into  it  again,  and  will

bring  you  forth  anew —
And  God  hath  spread  the  earth  for  you  like  a  carpet.
That  ye  may  walk  therein  along  spacious  paths/  "
20     Said  Noah,  "  0  my  Lord !  they  verily  rebel  against

me,    and    they  follow    those '    whose   riches  and

children  do  but  aggravate  their  ruin/'
And  they  plotted  a  great  plot ;
And  they  said,  ''  Forsake  not  your  Gods ;  forsake  not

Wadd  nor  Soowa,
Nor  Yaghooth  and  Ya'ook  and  Nasr;''
And    they  caused    men    to    err ;  - — and  thou,  too,  0

Muhammad !  shalt    he    the    means    of   increasing

only  error  in  the  wickeu —
Because  of  their  sins  were  they  drowned,  and  made  to

enter  into  the  Fire ;
And  they  found  not  for  themselves  any  helper  against

God.
And  Noah  said,   "  O  my  Lord,  leave  not  any  of  the

unbelievers  on  Earth ;
Verily,  if  Thou  leave  them  they  will  beguile  thy  servants

and  will  beget  only  sinners,  unbelievers.
0  my  Lord,  forgive  me,  and  my  parents,  and  every

one  who,  being  a  believer,  shall  enter  my  house,

and  believers  men  and  women  :   and  add  to  the

wicked  nought  but  perdition.^'

^  This  may  refer  to  "Walid  b.  Mogheira,  who  had  seven  sons  as  well  as
immense  riches.     Spreng.  i.  360.     Lit.  thaj  follow  him.

•Or,  the  idols  had  seduced  many.     Thus  Kas.     Beidh.  gives  both  inter-
pretations.— See  on  these  idols  Freytag's  Einleitung,  p.  349.

76  THE    KORAN.

[LIL]

SURA  LXXVI.— MAN.

Mecca. — 31  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Doth  not  a  space  of  time  pass  over  MAN^  during  which

he  is  a  thing  unremembered  ?  ^
Verily  We  have  created   man   from   the   union   of  the

sexes  that  We  might  prove    him ;    and  hearing,

seeing,  have  We  made  him  :
In  a  right  way  -  have  We  guided  him,  be  he  thankful  or

ungrateful.
For  the  infidels  We  have  got  ready  chains  and  collars

and  flaming  fire.
Verily  a  wine-cup  tempered  with  camphor  ^  the  just

shall  quaff:
Fount  whence  the   servants  of  God   shall  drink,  and

guide  by  channels  from  place  to  place  ;
They  who  fulfilled  their  vows,  and  feared  the  day  whose

woes  will  spread  far  and  wide  ;
Who  though  longing  for  it  themselves,*  bestowed  their

food  on  the  poor  and  the  orphan  and  the  bonds-
man :
"  We  feed  you  only  for  the  sake  of  God  :  we  seek  from

you  neither  recompense  nor  thanks  :
10     Verily,  a  stern  and  calamitous  day  dread  we  from  our

Lord.^'
From  the  evil  therefore  of  that  day  hath  God  set  them

free,  and  cast  on  them  brightness  of  face  and  joy  :
And  hath  rewarded  their  constancy  with  Paradise  and

sillicn  rohes  :
Reclining  therein  on  bridal  couches,  nought  shall  they

know  ^  therein  of  sun  or  piercing  cold  :  ^'
And  its  shades  shall  be  close  over  them,  and  low  shall

its  grape-clusters  hang  drooping  :

'  WTien  in  the  womb.  ^  Lit.  the  way.

•With  (the  water  of)  Kafoor.— Lane.     Or  at  the  Camphor  fountain.

*  So  Zamakshari  ;  Maracci,  siq^er  araore  ejus  {i.  e.  qui  ip-iis  erat  gratus.
—Mar.  For  his  (God's)  sate— Sale.  Ullm.  But  this  sentiment  is  ex-
pressed in  the  following  verse.

'  Lit,  see.  *  Or,  moov.

THE    KORAN.  77

And  vessels  of  s  Iver  and    goblets  of  glass  shall  be

borne  round  amono-  tliem  :
Glass  bottles  like   silver   whose   measure  themselves

shall  mete.
And  therein  shall  they  be  given  to  drink  of  the  cup

tempered  with  zandjabeel   (ginger) ;
A  fount  is  therein  whose  name  is  Salsabeel  (the  softly-
flowing)  .
Immortal  youths  also  go  round  among  them.     When

thou  lookest  at  them  thou  wouldest  deem  them

scattered  ^  pearls  ;
20     And  when  thou  seest  this,  then  thou  seest  delights  and

a  vast  domain :
Their    clothing   green    silk   robes    and   rich   brocade,

and  with  silver  bracelets  shall  they  be  adorned,

and  drink  of  a  pure   beverage   shall   their  Lord

give  them.
Lo,  this  shall  be  your  recompense,  and  your  efforts

shall  meet  with  tharks.
Of  a  truth  We  have  sent  down  to  thee  the  Koran  as  a

missive  from  on  high;
Await  then  with  patience   the  judgment  of  thy  Lord,

and  obey  not    the    wicked  among    them   or  the

unbelieving  :
And  make  mention  of  the  name  of  thy  Lord  at  morn,

at  even,
And  during  the  night.     And   adore  Him,  and  praise

Him  the  livelong  night.
Of  a  truth  these   men  love  the  fleeting  present,  and

leave  behind  them  the  heavy  day  of  doom.
We  ourselves   created  them,  and    strengthened  their

joints  ;  and  when  We  please,  with  others  like  unto

themselves  will  We  replace  them.
This  truly  is  a  warning :  And  whoso  willeth,  taketh

the  way  to  his  Lord ;
30     But  will  it  ye  shall  not.   unless  God  will  it.     Verily

God  is  Knowing,  Wise.
He   causeth  whom   He  will  to  enter  into  his  mercy.

But  for  the   evil-doers.  He  hath  made  ready  an

afflictive  chastisement.

*  Or,  spread  out.

78  THE    KORAN.

[LIIL]

SURA    XLIV.— SMOKE.
Mecca. — 59  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Ha.  Mim.^     By  the  clear  Book"!

Truly  on  a  blessed  night "  have  We  sent  it  down  (verily

We  warn  manldnd)  :
On  the  night  wherein  all  things  are  disposed  in  wisdom,'
By  virtue  of  our  behest.    Lo  !  We  send  forth  Apostles,
A  mercy  from  thy  Lord  :  He  truly  is  the  Hearing,  the

Knowing —
Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,  and  of  all  that  is

between  them, — if  ye  be  firm  in  faith —
There  is   no   God  but  He !  —  He   maketh   alive   and

killeth ! — Your  Lord  and  the  Lord  of  your  sires

of  old  !
Yet  wath  doubts  do  they  disport  themselves.
But  mark  them  on  the  day  when  the  Heaven  shall  give

out  a  palpable  SMOKE,
10     Which    shall    enshroud    mankind  :    this,    an   afflictive

torment.
They  will  cry,  ''  O  our  Lord  !  relieve  us  from  the  tor-
ment :  verily  we  are  believers.'^
But  how  did  warning  avail  them,  when  an  undoubted

apostle  came  to  them  ;
Then  turned  they  their  backs  on  him,  and  said,  "Taught

by  others,  possessed  !  "
Were  We  to  relieve  you  from  the  punishment  even  a

little,  ye  would  certainly  relapse  :*
But  on  the  day  when  We  shall  severely  put  forth  our

great  severity,  We  will  surely  take  vengeance  on

them  !

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  1,  n.  1,  p.  IG.

'  Of  the  23rd  and  24th  of  Ramadhan,  in  which,  according  to  the
Muslim  creed,  all  the  events  of  the  year  subsequent  are  arranged.  See
Sura  xcvii.  n.  2,  p.  21.

*  Lit.  In  it  is  settled  each  wise  affair— caWeA  wise,  because  proceeding
direct  from  the  -will  of  Him  who  is  absolute  wisdom.

■•  Beidh.  and  others  suppose  this  verse  to  have  been  revealed  at  Medina.
This  opinion,  however,  is  based  upon  the  supposition  that  it  refers  to  the
famine  with  which  Mecca  was  visited  after  the  Hejira.

THE    KORAN.  79

%  Of  old,  before  the'r  time,  had  We  proved  the  peoplo
of    Pharaoh,    when    a    noble    apostle    came    to
them  : —
"  Give  up  to  me,"  cried  he,  "  the  servants  of  God  ;  for

I  am  unto  you  an  apostle  worthy  of  all  credit :  "
And  "  exalt  not  yourselves  against  God  j  verily  I  come

to  you  with  undoubted  authority ;
And  truly  I  take  refuge  with  my  Lord  and  your  Lord,
that  ye  stone  me  not :
20     And  if  ye  believe  me  not,,  then  separate  yourselves
from  me."
So   he    cried  to  his  Lord,  "  That  these  are  a  wicked

people."
''  March  forth  then,"  said  God,  ^'  with  my  servants  by

night ;  verily  ye  will  be  pursued,
And  leave  behind  you  the  disparted  sea  :  they  indeed

are  a  host  who  shall  be  drowned."
How  many  a  garden  and  fountain  did  they  quit  !
And  corn-fields  and  noblj  dwellings  !
And  pleasures  in  which  they  rejoiced  !
So  was  it :  and  "We  gave  them  as  a  heritage  to  another

people ;
Nor  Heaven  nor  Earth  wept  for  them,  nor  were  they

respited ;
And  We  rescued  the  children  of  Israel  from  a  degrading
punishment —
30     From  Pharaoh ;  verily  he  was  haughty,  one  of  those
given  to  excess ;
And  We  chose   them,    in   our   prescience,   above   all

peoples,^
And  We  showed  them  miracles  wherein  was  their  clear
trial.
^  Yerily  these  infidels  say,

"There  is  but  our  first  death,    neither   shall  we  be

raised  again;
Bring  back  then  our  sires,  if  ye  be  men  of  truth."
Are  they  better  than  the  people  of  Tobba,-
And  those  who  flourished  before  them  whom  We  de-
stroyed ?     Of  a  truth  they  were  evil-doers.
Moreover,  We  have  not  created  the  Heavens  and  the
Earth  and  whatever  is  between  them  in  sport :

'  Comp.  Ex.  XX.  20  ;  Deut.  viii.  16.     Lit.  wer  all  the  worlds.
^  Tobba,  i.e.  Chalif  or  successor;  is  the  title  of  the  kings  of  Yemen  ;  or
of  Hadraniont,  Saba,  and  Hamjar. — See  Pocock,  Spec.  Hist.  Ar.  p.  60.

80  THE    KORAN.

We  liave  not  created  tlicm  but  for  a  serious  end  :^  but

the  greater  part  of  men  know  it  not.
40     Yerilv  the  day  of  severing "  shall  be  the  appointed  time

of  all :
A  day  when  master  shall  not  at  all  be  aided  by  ser-

vaut,3  neither  shall  they  be  helped  ;
Save  those  on  whom  God  shall  have  mercy  :  lo,  He  is

the  mighty,  the  merciful.
Verily  the  tree  of  Ez-Zakkoum  \
Shall  be  the  sinner's  ^  food :
Like  dregs  of  oil  shall  it  boil  up  in  their  bellies,
Like  the  boiling  of  scalding  water.
" — Seize  ye  him_,  and  drag  him 'into  the  mid-fire;
Then  pour  on  his  head  of  the  tormenting  boiling  water.
— '  Taste  this  : '  for  thou,  forsooth,  art  the  mighty,  the

honourable  !
60     Lo  !   this  is  that  of  which  ye  doubted."

Verily  the  pious  shall  be  in  a  secure  place.

Amid  gardens  and  fountains,

Clothed  shall  they  be  in  silk  and  brocade,  facing  one

another :
Thus  shall  it  be  :  and  We  will  wed  them  to  the  virgins

with  large  dark  eyes  :
Therein  shall  they  call,  secure,  for  every  kind  of  fniit ;
Therein,  their  first  death  past,  shall  they  taste  death

no  more  ;  and  He  shall  keep  them  from  the  pains

of  Hell  :—
'Tis  the  gracious  bounty  of  thy  Lord  !     This  the  great

felicity.
^  Wc  have  only  made  this  Koran  easy  for  thee  in  thine

own  tongue,  that  they  may  haply  be  warned  :
Therefore  watch  thou ;  they  verily  are  watching.^

'  Lit.  in  fruth.  '  That  is,  of  the  j^ood  from  the  bad.

^  Thus  Kii3.  Sale.     Or,  when  partner  shall  not  be  helpod  by  his  partner.

*  See  Sura  xxxvii.  GO.

'  The  commentators  suppose  this  sinner  to  be  Abu  Jahl,  one  of  the
chief  of  the  Koreish,  and  the  bitter  enemy  of  Muhammad.

*  To  see  the  turn  which  events  may  take.

THE    KORAN.  81

[LIV.]

SURA    L.— KAF.
Mecca. — 45  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

EIAF.i     By  the  glorious  Koran  !

But  they  marvel  that  one  of  themselves  hath  come  to
them  charged  with  warnings.  Then  say  the  unbe-
lievers, "  This  is  a  marvellous  thing  :

"When  dead  and  turned  to  dust  shall  we- ?   Far  off

is  such  a  return  as  this  !  "

Now  know  We  what  part  of  them  the  earth  con-
sumeth,  and  with  Us  is  a  Book  in  which  account
is  kept :

But  they  have  treated  the  truth  after  its  coming  to
them  as  falsehood  ;  perplexed  therefore  is  their
state.

Will  they  not  then  look  up  to  the  heaven  above  them,
and  consider  how  We  have  reared  it  and  decked  it
forth,  and  that  there  are  no  flaws  therein  ?

And  as  to  the  earth,  We  have  spread  it  out,  and  have
thrown  the  mountains  upon  it,  and  have  caused  an
upgrowth  in  it  of  all  beauteous  kinds  ^  (f  plants,

For  contemplation  and  an  admonition  to  every  servant
who  turneth  to  God  :

And  We   send  down  rain  from    the   heaven  with  its
blessings,*  by  which  We  cause  gardens  to  spring
forth  and  grain  of  harvest,
10     And  the  tall  palm-trees  with  date-bearing  branches  one
above  the  other

For  Our  servants^  nourishment  ;  and  life  give  We
thereby  to  a  dead  land.  Such  shall  be  the  resur-
rection.

'  See  Sura  Lxviii.  1,  p.  16.

*  Supply,  be  restored  to  life  again.

^  In  the  commentiiry  of  Zamakshari  on  this  verse,  the  Rabbinical  tra-
dition as  to  the  imperishable  natiure  of  the  os  coccygis  in  the  grave  is  put
into  the  mouth  of  Muhammad.

*  Or,  the  blessed  rain.

82  THE    KOKAN.

^  Ere  tJic  days  of  these  (Meccaus)  tlie  people  of  Noah,

and  the  men  of  Rass  ^  and  Thamood^  treated  their

prophets  as  impostors  :
And  Ad  and  Pharaoh,  and  the  brethren  of  Lot  and  the

dwellers  in  the  forest,"  and  the  people  of  Tobba/

all  accused  the  apostles  of  imposture  :  justly  there-
fore were  the  menaces  inflicted.
Are  We  then  wearied  out  with  the  first  creation  ?    Yet

are  they  in  doubt  of  a  new  creation  !  *
But  of  old  We  created  man :  and  We  know  what  his

soul  whispereth  within  him,  and  We  are  closer  to

him  than  his  neck- vein.
When  the  two  angels  charged  with  taking  account  shall

take  it,  one  sitting  on  the  right  hand,^  the  other

on  the  left :
Not  a  word  doth  he  utter,  but  there  is  a  watcher  with

him  ready  to  note  it  down  :
And  the  stupor  of  death  cometh  upon  him  in  truth  : —

"  This  is  what  thou  wouldst  have  averted  " —
And  there  shall  be  a  blast  on  the  trumpet, — it  is  the

threatened  day  !
20     And  every  soul  shall  come, — an  angel  with  it  urging  it

along,  and  an  angel  to  witness  against  it  ^ —
Saith    he,    "  Of    this    day  didst    thou    assuredly  live

in  heedlessness  :   therefore   have  we  stripped  off

thy  veil  from    thee,    and    thy  sight    this    day  is

sharp. ^'
And  he  who  is  at  his  side  ^  shall  say,  "  This  is  what  I

am  prepared  with  against  thee  ;  "
And  God  will  say,  "  Cast  into  Hell,  ye  twain,  every

infidel,  every  hardened  one.
The    hinderer    of    the    good,    the    transgressor,    the

doubter,
Who  set  up  other  gods  with  God ;  cast  ye  him  therefore

into  the  fierce  torment."
He  who  is  at  his  side  shall  say,  "  0  our  Lord !  I  led

■  See  [Ixvi.]  xxv.  40.  ^  Aika  or  Midian.

»  See  xliv.  36,  p.  79.

*  Lit.  in  confusion  as  to  a  new  crfMion,  i.  c.  the  Resurrection.

*  Lit.  vjhen  the  two  learners  learn.  But  these  two  words  may  also  be
rendered  with  Ullni.,  wenn  die  zwei  Zusammentreffenden  Engel  dem  Men-
schen  begegnen.

*  Lit.  a  driver  and  a  witness.

^  Lit.  his  companion ;  the  Satan  who  is  chained  to  him.  Sura  [Ixxi.]
xli.  24.

THE    KORAN.  83

him  not  astray ;  bat  he  was  in  an  error  wide  of

truth."
He  shall  say,  "  Wrangle  not  together  in  my  presence,

for  I  plied  you  beforehand  with  menaces  :
My  doom  cannot  be  changed,  and  I  am  not  unjust  to

my  servants."
On  that  day  will  We  cry  to  hell,   "  Art  thou  full  ? "

And  it  shall  say,  "  Are  there  more  ?  "  ^
30     And  not  far  from  thence   shall  Paradise  be  brought

near  unto  the  Pious  :
— '^  This  is  what  ye  have  been  promised :  to  every  one

who  hath  turned  hi  penitence  to  God  and  kept  his

hnvs  ;
Who  hath  feared  the  God  of  Mercy  in  secret,  and  come

to  Him  with  a  contrite  heart :
Enter  it  in  peace  :  this  is  the  day  of  Eternity."
Therein  shall  they  have  all  that  they  desire :  and  Ours

will  it  be  to  augment  their  bliss.
^  But  how  many  generations  have  We  destroyed  ere  the

days   of  these   (Meccans),  mightier  than  they  in

strength  !     Search  ye  then  the  land — was  there

any  escape  ?
Lo  !  herein  is  warning  for  him  who  hath  a  heart,  or

lendeth  the  ear,  and  is  himself  an  eye-witness."
And  of  old  We  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and

all  that  is   between  them  in   six   days,   and   no

weariness  touched  Us.^
Wlierefore   bear   patiently   with  what   they    say,    and

celebrate  the    praise    of  thy  Lord  before  sunrise

and  before  sunset.
And  in  the  night  praise  Him  :  and  at  the  end  of  the

adorations.*
40     And  list  for  the  day  whereon  the  crier  shall  cry  from  a

place  near  to  every  one  alike  :

'  Lit.  is  there  any  addition  ?  which  some  explain  as  if  Hell  inquired
■whether,  being  already  full,  any  addition  could  be  made  to  its  size.
Comp.  Prov.  xxx.  15,  and  Othioth  Derabbi  Akiba,  8,  1:  "That  the
Prince  of  Hell  saith  dailj',  'Give  me  food  enough,'  is  clear  from  what  is
said  (Is.  V.  14) .  "  Therefore  Shaol  hath  enlarged  herself,  and  opened  her
mouth  without  measure,"  &c.

'  That  is,  of  the  ruins  of  the  destroyed  cities,  &c.

'  This  verse  is  said  (by  Omar  b.  IShihammad,  Itq.  36,  Djelal  Eddin,  ap.
Maracc.  and  Beidh.)  to  have  been  revealed  in  answer  to  the  Jews,  who
told  the  Prophet  that  if  God  rested  on  the  Sabbath,  it  was  because  He
was  weary.     But  a  connection  with  verse  14  seems  more  natural.

■*  This  alludes  to  certain  supererogatory  devotions  at  the  close  of  the
prescribed  pravers.

G    2

84  THE    KORAN.

The  day  on  which  men  shall  in  very  truth  hear  that

shout  ^  will   be    the  day    of   their    coming   forth

from  tlie  grave.
Verily  We  cause  to  live,  and  cause  to  die ;  and  to  Us

shall  all  return  :
On  the  day  when  the  earth  shall  swiftly  cleave  asunder

from  them  (the  dead)  will  this  gathering  be  easy

to  Us.
We  know  best  what  the  infidels-  say  :  and  thou  art  not

to  compel  them.
Warn  then  by  the  Koran  those  who  fear  My  menace.

[LV.]

SURA    XX.2— TA.   HA.
Mecca. — 135  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate j  the  Merciful.

TA.  HA.3     Not  to  sadden  thee  have  We  sent  down

this  Koran  to  thee,
But  as  a  warning  for  him  who  fearcth ;
A  missive  from  Him  who  hath  made  the  earth  and  the

lofty  heavens,
The  God  of  Mercy  who  sittcth  on  his  throne  !
His,  whatsoever  is  in  the  heavens  and  whatsoever  is  in

the  earth,  and  whatsoever  is  between  them  both,

and  whatsoever  is  beneath  the  humid  soil !
And  thou  nccdest  not  raise  thy  voice  in  prayer  :  *     He

verily  knoweth   the    secret   whisper,  and  the  yet

more  hidden !

'  The  Arabic  saikat,  shout,  seems  to  change  its  meaning  as  the  Koran
progresses,  and  to  pass  from  a  poetical  to  a  technical  sense,  as  in  this
passage,  and  to  be  used  of  a  present,  or  future  judgniont.

^  The  first  fourteen  or  sLxteen  verses  of  tiiis  Sura  are  said  to  have
induced  Omar  to  embrace  Islam  (His.  226.  Ibn  .Sad,  i.  and  v.  Comp.
Weil,  p.  f;o.     Causs.  i.  396  fT.)  in  the  sixth  year  before  the  Hejira.

'  Freytag  supposes  these  letters  to  mean,  Ihish  !  but  see  Sura  Ixviii.  1,
p.  16.

*  Lit.  and  if  thou  raise  thy  voice,  yet  verily  He,  &c.

THE    KORAN.  85

God !    There  is  no  God  but  Him  !     Most  excellent  His

titles  !
^  Hath  now  the  history  of  Moses  reached  thee  ?

When  he  saw  a  fire,  .md  said  to  his  family,  *'  Tarry  ye

here ;  verily  I  perceive  a  fire  :
10     Haply  I  may  bring  you  a  brand  from  it,  or  by  the  fire

find  guidance.^
And  when  he  came  to  it,  he  was  called  to,  "  0  Moses  !
Verily,  I  am  thy  Lord  :   therefore  pull  off  thy  shoes.

Lo,  thou  art  in  the  holy  valley  Toowa.^
And  I  have  chosen  thee  ;  hearken  then  to  what  shall

be  revealed.
Yerily,  I  am  God :  there  is  no  God  but  Me  :  therefore

worship  Me,  and  observe  prayer  for  a  remembrance

of  Me.
Verily  the  hour  is  coming : — I  all  but  manifest  it —
That  every  soul  may  be  recompensed  for  its  efforts —
Nor  let  him  who  believeth  not  therein  and  followeth

his  lust,  turn  thee  aside  from  this  truth,  and  thou

perish.
Now,  what  is  that  in  thy  right  hand,  O  Moses  ?"
Said  he,  "  It  is  my  staff  on  which  I  lean,  and  by  means

of  it  I  beat  down  leaves  for  my  sheep,  and  I  have

other  uses  for  it.'^
20     He  said,  "  Cast  it  down,  0  Moses  ! "

So  he  cast  it  down,  and  lo  !  it  became  a  serpent  that

ran  along.
He  said,  "Lay  hold  on  it,  and  fear  not:  to  its  former

state  will  We  restore  it."
"  Now  draw  thy  hand  close  to  thy  side  :  it  shall  como

forth  white,  hut  unhurt : — another  sign  !  —
That  We  may  show  thee  of  our  great  signs.
Go  to  Pharaoh ;  verily  he  hath  burst  all  bounds.''
He  said,  "  0  my  Lord  !  enlarge  my  breast  for  me,
And  make  my  work  easy  for  me,
And  loose  the  knot  of  my  tongue,^
That  they  may  understand  my  speech.
30     And  give  me  a  counsellor*  from  among  my  family,

^  Moses  had  lost  his  way,  say  the  coninientators,  when  journeymg  to
Egypt  to  visit  bis  mother.

^  A  valley  near  Mount  SinaL

'  The  ^luhamuiadan  commentators  tell  how  Moses,  when  a  child,  burnt
his  tongue  with  a  live  coal.  The  same  story  is  found  in  Midr.  Jalkut  on
Ex.  c.  166,  and  in  Shalsheleth  Hakabalah,  p.  5,  h.     Ed.  Amsterd.

^  Lit.  vizier,  i.  e.  one  who  bears  the  burdens  (of  office).

86  THE    KORAN.

Aaron  my  brother;

By  liim  gird  up  my  loins/

And  make  him  a  colleague  in  my  work,

That  we  may  praise  Thee  oft  and  oft  remember  Thee ; —

Of  a  truth  Thou  beholdest  us."

He  said,  "  0  Moses,  now  thou  hast  obtained  thy  suit :

Already,  at  another  time,  have  Wo  showed  thee  favour,

When  We  revealed  unto  thy  mother  what  was  re-
vealed :

'  Cast  him  into  the  ark  :"  then  c^ast  him  on  the  sea  [the

river],  and  the  sea  shall  throw  him  on  the  shore:

an  enemy  to  me  and  an  enemy  to  him  shall  take  him

up/    And  I  have  made  thee  an  object  of  my  love,^

40     And  that  thou  mightest  be  reared  under  mine  eye.

When  thy  sister  went  and  said,  '  Shall  I  show  you  one
who  will  nurse  him?*  Then  We  returned  thee  to
thy  mother  that  her  eye  might  be  cheered,^  and
that  she  might  not  grieve.  And  when  thou  slewest
a  person.  We  delivered  thee  from  trouble,  and  We
tried  thee  with  otJier  trials.

For  years  didst  thou  stay  among  the  people  of
Midian ;    then  camest  thou  Jiither  by  my  decree,

0  Moses,

And  I  have  appointed  thee  to  act  for  Me.

Go  thou   and  thy  brother  with  ray  signs  and  be   not

slack  to  remember  Me  :
Go  ye  to  Pharaoh,  for  he  hath  burst  all  bounds  ;
But  speak  ye  to  him  with  gentle  speech ;  haply  he  may

be  admonished  or  fear."
They  said,  "  0  our  Lord  !  verily  wo  fear  lest  ho  break

forth  against  us,  or  act  with  exceeding  injustice."
He  said,  "  Fear  ye  not ;  verily  I  will  be  with  you  both.

1  will  hearken  and  I  will  behold.

Go  ye  then  to  him  and  say,  *  Verily  we  are  Sent  ones
of  thy  Lord;  send  therefore  the  children  of  Israel
with  us  and  vex  them  not :  now  are  we  come  to
thee  with  signs  from  thy  Lord,  and  Peace  shall  be
on  him  who  followeth  the  ririht  guidance.

*  Or,  strengthen  my  bach

•i'ho  form  of  the  word  in  the  original  is  not  the  pure  Hebraic,  but  the
later  Rabbinic  form.

'  Lit.  /  have  cast  love  from  myself  upon  thee ;  or,  with  UUm.,  Ich
erregte  liehevolle  Gesinnunqen  gfr/en  dich.

*  See  Sura  [Ixxix.]  xxviii.  li,  12.

*  Lit.  be  cool,  refreshed.     Corap.  Sur.  xix.  26.

THE    KORAN.  87

50  Verily  uow  to  us  hath  it  been  revealed  that  the  chastise-
ment shall  be  on  him  who  chargeth  with  falsehood,
and  turneth  away.' "

He  said,  "  And  wh*"  is  the  Lord  of  you  twain,  O
Moses  ?  "

He  said,  "  Our  Lord  is  He  who  hath  given  to  every-
thing its  nature,  and  then  guideth  it  aright."

"  But  what,''  said  he,  "  was  the  state  of  generations
past?"^

He  said,  "  The  knowledge  thereof  is  with  my  Lord  in
the  Book  of  his  decrees.  My  Lord  erreth  not,
and  doth  not  forget.

Who  hath  spread  the  earth  for  you  as  a  bed,"  and  hath
made  you  to  walk  therein  by  paths,  and  hath  sent
down  rain  from  the  heaven,  and  by  it  we  bring
forth  the  kinds '  of  various  herbs,  saying,

'  Eat  ye,  and  feed  your  cattle  ' — Of  a  truth  in  this  are
signs  unto  men  endued  with  understanding — •

From  it  have  We  created  ycu,  and  into  it  will  We  re-
turn you,  and  out  of  it  will  We  bring  you  forth  a
second  time."*

Moreover  we  showed  him  all  our  signs,  but  he  treated
them  as  falsehoods,  and  refused  to  believe  :

He  said,  "  Hast  thou  come  to  us,  O  Moses,  to  drive  us
from  our  land  by  thine  enchantments  ?
60  Therefore  will  we  assuredly  confront  ^  thee  with  like
encbantments  :  so  appoint  a  meeting  between  us
and  thee  ^ — we  will  not  fail  it,  and  do  not  thou —
in  a  place  alike  for  both."

He  said,  ''On  the  feast  day^  be  your  meeting,  and  in
broad  daylight  let  the  people  be  assembled."

Then  Pharaoh  turned  away,  and  mustered  his  artifices
and  came.

Said  Moses  to  them,  "  Woe  to  you  !  devise  not  a  lio
against  God;

'  What  is  their  condition  after  their  death  as  to  happiness  or  misery  ?
Beidh.,  whom  Sale  follows.  But  the  word  state,  which  Mar.  renders
mens,  refers  rather  to  their  creed.  "  How,"  inq\iires  Pharaoh,  "  do  you
explain  the  fact  that  the  past  generations  of  men  have  always  practised
a  ditferent  worship  ?"

^  Lit.  knth  viadc  the  earth  a  bed.  '  Lit.  pairs.

*  The  Midrasch  Tanchumah  on  Ex.  viL  gives  a  very  similar  dialogue
between  Pharaoh  and  Moses.  *  Lit.  come  to.

*  Lit.  middle,  i.  e.  halfway  between  you  and  us.

''  Lit.  the  day  of  ornament,  when  temples  and  altars  were  decked  out
with  flowers,  &c.

88  TUE    KOliAN.

For  then  will  Ho  destroy  you  by  a  punishment.  They
who  have  devised  lies  have  ever  pcjnshcd."

And  the  magicians  discussed  their  plan  among  them-
selves, and  spake  apart  in  secret :

They  said,  "  These  two  are  surely  sorcerers :  fain
would  they  drive  you  from  your  land  by  their
sorceries,  and  lead  away  your  most  distinguished
nobles :

So  muster  your  craft :  then  come  in  order :  and  well
now  this  day  shall  it  be  for  him  who  shall  gain
the  upper  hand/'

They  said,  "  0  Moses,  wilt  thou  first  cast  down  thy
rod,  or  shall  we  be  the  first  who  cast  ?  "

He  said,  "Nay,  cast  ye  diovfn  first."     And  lo  !  by  their
enchantment  their  cords  and  rods  were  made  to
appear  to  him  as  if  they  ran  along.
70     And  Moses  conceived  a  secret  fear  within  him.

We  said,  "  Fear  not  thou  -,  verily  thou  shalt  be  the
uppermost :

Cast  forth  then  what  is  in  thy  right  hand  :  it  shall
swallow  up  what  they  have  produced :  they  have
only  produced  the  deceit  of  an  enchanter :  and
come  where  he  may,  ill  shall  the  enchanter
fare."

Then  the  magicians  fell  down  and  worshipped.  They
said,  "We  believe  in  the  Lord  of  Aaron  and  of
Moses.'"

Said  Pharaoh,  "  Believe  ye  on  Him  ere  I  give  you  leave  ?
He  in  sooth  is  your  Master  who  hath  taught  you
magic.  I  will  surely  therefore  cut  off  your  hands
and  your  feet  on  opposite  sides,  and  crucify  you
on  trunks  of  the  palm,  and  assuredly  shall  ye  learn
which  of  us  is  severest  in  punishing,  and  who  is
the  more  abiding.''^

They  said,  "  Wo  will  by  no  means  have  more  regard
to  thee  than  to  the  clear  tokens  which  have  come
to  us,  or  than  to  Him  who  hath  made  us  :  doom
then  the  doom  thou  wilt:  Thou  canst  only  doom
as  to  this  present  life  :  of  a  truth  wo  have  believed
on  our  Lord  that  He  may  pardon  us  our  sins  and
the  sorcery  to  which  thou  hast  forced  us,  for  God
is  better,  and  more  abiding  flian  thouJ^

'  In  punishing. — Beidh.     i.e.  God  or  Pharaoh.
*  To  recompense. — Beidh.

THE    KOEAN.

89

Lo,  he  who  shall  come  to  his  Lord  Lxden  with  crime —

for  him  then  verily  is  Hell :  ho  shall  not  die  in  it

and  he  shall  not  live ;
But  he  who  shall  com^  to  Him,  a  believer,  with  righteous

works, — the  loftiest  c-rades  await  them:
Gardens  of  Eden,  beneath  xrhosc  trees'^  the  rivers  flow  :

therein  shall  they  abide  for  ever.     This,  the  reward

of  him  who  hath  aimed  to  be  pure."
Moreover  We  had  revealed  to  Moses,  "  Go  forth  by

night  with  my  servants  and  cleave  for  them  a  dry

path  in  the  sea;
80     Thou  art  in  no  fear  of  being  overtaken,  neither  be

thou  afraid/'
Then  PJiaraoh  followed  them  with  his  hosts,  and  the

whelming  billows  of  the  sea  overwhelmed  them,^

for  Pharaoh  misled  his  people,  and  did  not  guide

them.
0  children  of  Israel !  We  rescued  you  from  your  foes  ;

and  We   appointed   a   meeting   with  you  on  the

right  side  of  the  mountain ;  and  We  caused  the

manna  and  the  quail  to  descend  upon  you  :
"Eat,"  said  TFe,-"of  the  good  things  with  which  We

have   supplied  you ;  but  without  excess,  lest  my

wrath  fall  upon  you ;  for  on  whom  my  wrath  doth

fall,  he  perisheth  outright.
Surely  however  I  am  very  forgiving  to  him  who  turneth

to  God  and  believeth,  and  worketh  righteousness,

and  then  yieldeth  to  guidance.
^  But  what  hath  hastened  thee  on  apart  from  thy  people,^

0  Moses  ?  "
He  said,  "  They  are  hard  on  my  footsteps  :  but  to  Thee,

O  Lord,  have  I  hastened,  that  Thou  mightest  bo

well  pleased  with  me."
He  said,  "  Of  a  truth  now  have  We  proved  thy  people

since  thou  didst  leave  them,  and  Samiri  "*  had  led

them  astray."

'  As  the  garden  is  said  in  Sura  Ixxxviii.  to  be  lofty  in  point  of  situation,
this  frcfiuently  recurrinj,'  phrase  may  mean  that  rivers  run  at  its  base.
The  commentators,  however,  generally  understand  it  to  imply  that  the
rivers  flow  beneath  its  shades  or  pavilions.

-  Lit.  and  there  ovcrwhdvicd  them  of  the  sea  that  which  overwhelmed
them.

'  The  seventy  elders  who  were  to  have  accompanied  him.

•*  That  is,  the  Samaritan.  This  rendering,  which  is  probably  the  true
explanation  of  the  word  Samiri,  involves  a  grievous  ignorance  of  history
on  the  part  of  ^Muhammad.     Selden  (de  Diis  Syr.  Syn.  i.  ch.  4)  supposes

90  THE    KORAN.

Then  Moses  returned  to  his  people,  angered,  sorrowful.

He  said,  "  0  my  ])eoplo  !  did  not  your  Lord  promise
you  a  goodly  promise  ?  Seemed  then  the  time  of
my  absence  long  to  you  ?  or  desired  ye  that  wrath
from  your  Lord  should  light  upon  you,  that  ye
failed  in  your  promise  to  me  ?  "
90  They  said,  *'  Not  as  far  as  lay  in  our  power  have  we
failed  in  the  promise  to  thee,  but  we  were  made
to  bring  loads  of  the  people's  trinkets,  and  we
threw  them  into  the  jire^^and  Samiri  likewise
cast  them  in,  and  brought  forth  to  them  in  bodily
shape  a  lowing^  calf:  and  they  said,  'This  is  your
God  and  the  God  of  Moses,  whom  he  hath  for-
gotten/ ''

Saw  they  not  then  that  it  returned  them  no  answer,
and  could  neither  hurt  nor  help  them  ?

And  Aaron  had  before  said  to  them,  "  0  my  people  !
by  this  caJf  are  ye  only  proved :  and  verily  your
Lord  is  the  Merciful :  follow  me  therefore  and
obey  my  bidding/'

They  said,  "  We  will  by  no  means  cease  in  our  devotion
to  it,  till  Moses  come  back  to  us."

He  said,  "  O  Aaron  !  when  thou  sawest  that  they  had
gone  astray,  what  hindered  thee  from  following
me  ?     Hast  thou  then  disobeyed  my  command?''

He  said,  "  0  Son  of  my  mother  !  seize  vie  not  by  my
beard,  nor  by  my  head :  indeed,  I  feared  lest
thou  shouldst  say,  '  Thou  hast  rent  the  children

that  Samiri  is  Aaron  himself,  the  Shomter,  or  keeper  of  Israel  during
the  absence  of  Moses.  Many  Arabians  identify  him  with  the  Micha  of
Judges  xvii.,  who  is  said  to  have  assisted  in  making  the  calf(Kaschi,
Sanhedr.  102,  2  ;  Hottinger,  Hist.  Orient,  p.  84).  Geiger  suggests  that
Samiri  may  be  a  corruption  of  Samael.  See  next  note.  But  it  is  pro-
bable that  the  name  and  its  application,  in  the  present  instance,  is  to  be
traced  to  the  old  national  feud  between  the  Jews  and  Sainaritiins.  See
De  Sacy,  Chrestom.  i.  p.  189,  who  quotes  Abu  Kihan  ^Muhammad  as
stating  that  the  Samaritans  were  called  Al-limsahsit,  the  people  who  say,
"Touch  me  not"  (verse  97,  below),  and  JuynboU  Chron.  Sam.  (Leid.
1848),  p.  113.  Sale  also  mentions  a  similar  circumstance  of  a  tribe  of
Samiritan  Jews  dwelling  on  one  of  the  islands  in  the  Red  Sea  ;  and
Josephus  states  that  a  colony  of  Samaritans  were  settled  in  Egypt  by
Ptolemy  L,igus,  Ant.  xii.  c.  1,  some  of  whose  descendants  appear  to  have
remained  in  Cairo  so  late  as  the  time  of  Scaligcr.  Vide  his  Le  Emend.
Temp.  vii.  p.  622.

*  "The  calf  came  forth  (Ex.  xxxii.  24)  lowing,  and  the  Israelites  beheld
it.  R.  Jehuda  saith,  Samael  entered  into  it  and  lowed  in  order  to  mis-
lead Israel." — Pirke  R.  Eliezer,  §  45.

THE    KORAN.  91

of  Israel    asunder,   and  hast   not   observed   my
saying/"

He  said,  "And  what  was  thy  design,  0  Samiri?"  He
said,  "  I  saw  Wiat  they  saw  not :  so  I  took  a
handful  of  dust  from  the  track ^  of  the  messenger
of  God,  and  flung  it  into  the  calf,  for  so  my  soul
prompted  me."

He  said,  "  Begone  then  :  and  verily  thy  doom  even  in
this  life  shall  be  to  say,  '  Touch  me  not.'  ~  And
verily  there  is  a  threat  against  thee,  which  thou
shalt  in  no  case  escape  hereafter.  Now  look  at
thy  god  to  which  thou  hast  continued  so  devoted :
We  will  surelv  burn  it  and  reduce  it  to  ashes,
which  We  will  cast  into  the  sea.

But  your  God  is  the  God  beside  whom  there  is  no  God  :
In  his  knowledge  He  embraceth  all  things."
^  Thus  have  We  recited  to  thee  histories  of  what  passed
of  old  ;  and  from  ourself  have  We  now  given  thee
admonition.
100  Whoso  shall  turn  aside  from  it  shall  verily  carry  a
burden  on  the  day  of  the  Resurrection  :

Under  it  shall  they  remain  for  aye :  and  grievous  the
burden  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  !

On  that  day  there  shall  be  a  blast  on  the  trumpet,  and
We  will  gather  the  wicked  together  on  that  day
with  leaden  ^  eyes  :

They  shall  say  in  a  low  voice  one  to  another, — "  Verily
ye  tarried  but  ten  days  on  the  earth."

We  best  know  what  they  vriW  say  when  the  most  vera-
cious *  of  them  will  say,  "'Verily  ye  have  not  tarried
above  a  day."
^  And  they  will  ask  thee  of  the  mountains  :  Say  then  :
scattering  my  Lord  will  scatter  them  in  dust ;  ^

*  From  the  track  of  Gabriel's  horse,  or  of  Gabriel  himself.
^  Lit.  no  touch.

^  I  have  adopted  the  word  leaden  as  expressive  of  the  idea  implied  in
the  original  word,  viz.  grey  or  greyish  hhie  ;  hence,  dulled,  dimmed.  The
Arabians  have  a  great  aversion  to  blue  and  grey  eyes,  as  characteristic  of
their  enemies  the  Greeks.  The  word,  however,  may  also  mean  blind.
Comp.  V.  124,  5.

•*  Lit.  the  most  excellent  or  just  of  them  in  his  way :  dignitate,  Mar.  ;
but  Kam.  in  Freyt.  (iii.  150j,  jnstissimus  eorum,  simillimus  veracibus.
The  sense  of  the  last  clause  is,  "  Ye  have  not  tarried  even  so  much  as  ten
days,  such,  now  that  we  look  back  upon  it,  is  the  brevity  of  life."  See
Sura  [Ixiv.]  xxiii.  115  .

*  It  is  possible  that  the  curiosity,  or  alarm,  of  the  Meccans  may  have

92  THE    KOKAN.

And  Ho  will  leave  tliem  a  level  plain  :  thou  shalt  see  in
them  no  hollows  or  jutting  hills.

On  that  day  shall  men  follow  the  Summoner^ — he
marcheth  straight  on  :  ~  and  low  shall  be  their
voices  (to)  before  the  Merciful,  nor  shalt  thou
hear  aught  but  the  light  footfall.

No  intercession  shall  avail  on  that  day,  save  his  whom
the  Merciful  shall  allow  to  intercede,  and  whose
words  He  shall  approve.

He  knoweth  their  past  and  their  future  ;  but  in  their
own  knowledge  they  comprehend  it  not : —
110  And   humbled  shall  be   their   faces  before  Him  that
Liveth,  the  Self-subsisting  :  and  undone  he,  who
shall  bear  the  burden  of  iniquity ;

But  he  who  has  done  the  things  that  are  right  and  is
a  believer,  shall  fear  neither  wrong  nor  loss.
^  Even  thus  have  We  sent  down  to  thee  an  Arabic
Koran,  and  have  set  forth  menaces  diversely
therein  ;  haply  they  will  fear  God,  or  it  may
give  birth  to  reflection  in  them.

Exalted  then  be  God,  the  King,  the  Truth !  Be  not
hasty  in  its  recital ''  while  the  revelation  of  it  to
thee  is  incomplete,  and  say,  "  O  my  Lord,  increase
knowledge  unto  me."
^  And  assuredly  of  old  We  made  a  covenant  with  Adam ;
but  he  forgot  it ;  and  We  found  no  firmness  of  'pur-
pose in  him.

And  when  We  said  to  the  angels,  ''  Fall  down  in
worship  to  Adam,^'  they  worshipped  nil,  save
Eblis,  ivho  refused  :  And  We  said,  "  0  Adam  !  this
truly  is  a  foe  to  thee  and  to  thy  wife.  Let  him
not  then  drive  you  twain  out  of  the  garden,  and
thou  become  wretched  :*

Verily  to  thee  is  it  granted  that  thou  shalt  not  hunger
therein,  neither  shalt  thou  be  naked;

been  excited  by  previous  statements  about  the  mountains,  as  in  Suras
Ixxiii.  Ixxvii.  Ixix.,  in  which  it  is  said  that  they  will  become  sandheajis;
in  Sura  Ixxviii.  p.  42,  thin  vapour;  in  Ixx.  p.  59,  ci.  p.  27,  wool-flocks;
■while  Ixxxi.  p.  29,  hi.  p.  52,  describe  their  motion.       '  The  angel  Israfil.

*  Lit.  there  is  no  croohdncss  in  him.     Ullm.  renders,  from  whom  no  one
can  escape,  %.  e.  no  recedinj^.

*  Compare  Sura  Ixxv,  16-19,  p.  41.     Or,  in  regard  to  the  Koran.

*  The  number  seems  to  be  changed  from  the  dual  to  the  singular  for
the  sake  of  the  rhyme.

THE    KORAN.  93

And  that  thou  shalt  not  thirst  therein,  neither  shalt
thou  parch  -svith  heat ;  "

But  Satan  whispered  him  :  said  he,  "  0  Adam  !  shall
I  show  thee  the  tree  of  Eternity,^  and  of  the
Kingdom  that  faileth  not  ?  "

And  they  both  ate  thereof,  and  their  nakedness  ap-
peared to  them,  and  they  began  to  sew  of  the
leaves  of  the  Garden  to  cover  them,  and  Adam
disobeyed  his  Lord  and  went  astray.
120  Afterwards  his  Lord  chose  him  for  himself,  and  relented
towards  him,  and  guided  him.

And  God  said,  "  Get  ye  all  down  hence,  and  one  of  you
a  foe  unto  the  other.  And  if  hereafter  guidance
come  unto  you  from  Me  ;

Then  whoso  followeth  My  guidance  shall  not  err,  and
shall  not  be  wretched  :

But  whoso  turneth  away  from  My  warning,  his  truly
shall  be  a  life  of  misery  :

And  "We  will  raise  him  from  the  dead  on  the  day  of  the
Resurrection,  blind.^^^

He  will  say,  "  0  my  Lord  !  why  hast  Thou  raised  me
blind  ?  whereas  I  was  endowed  with  sigfht."

He  will  answer,  "  Thus  :  Our  signs  came  unto  thee  and
thou  didst  forget  them,  and  thus  art  thou  forgotten
this  day.'^

Even  thus  will  We  recompense  him  who  transgresseth
and  believeth  not  in  the  signs  of  his  Lord ;  and
assuredly  the  chastisement  of  the  next  world  will
be  most  severe  and  lasting.

Are  not  they  then  (the  Meccans)  who  walk  the  very
places  where  they  dwelt,  aware  how  many  genera-
tions We  have  destroyed  before  them  ?  Verily  in
this  are  signs  for  men  of  insight.

And  had  not  a  decree  of  respite  from  thy  Lord  first
gone  forth,  there  would  surely  have  been  a  lasting
'punishment:  Yet  the  time  is  fixed.
130  Endure  then  with  patience  what  they  say;  and  cele-
brate the  praise  of  thy  Lord  before  the  sunrise,
and  before  its  setting ;  and  at  times  in  the  night

'  It  should  be  observed  that  here  and  in  Sura  vii.  19,  Muhammad  seems
unaware  of  the  distinction  between  the  tree  of  knowledge  and  the  tree  of
life,  as  given  in  Gen.  ti.  9  and  iiL  5.

'  From  the  intensity  of  the  light,  mentioned  Sura  [Ixxx.]  xxxix.  69.

94  THE    KORAN.

do  thou  praise  Him,  and  in  tlie  ^  extremes  of  the
day,  that  thou  mayest  please  Ilim.

And  strain  not  thine  eyes  after  what  We  have  bestowed
on  divers  of  them — the  braveries  of  this  world —
that  We  may  thereby  prove  them.  For  the  por-
tion icliich  thy  Lord  ivill  give,  is  better  and  more
lasting.

And  enjoin  prayer  on  thy  family,  and  persevere  therein
thyself.  We  ask  not  of  "thee  to  make  provision
for  thyself — We  will  provide  for  thee,  and  a  happy
issue  shall  there  be  to  piety.

But  they  say,  "  If  he  come  not  to  us  with  a  sign  from

his  Lord ^ !  "    But  hath  not  clear  teaching  come

to  them,  in  what  is  in  the  Books  of  old  ?

And  had  We  destroyed  them  by  a  chastisement  before
his '  time,  they  would  surely  say,*  "  0  our  Lord  !
How  could  we  helieve  if  Thou  didst  not  send  unto
us  an  Apostle  that  we  might  follow  thy  signs  ere
that  we  were  humbled  and  disgraced."

Say  :  Each  one  awaiteth  tJic  isstie  of  events.  Wait  ye
then,  and  ye  shall  know  which  of  us  have  been
followers  of  the  even  way,  and  who  hath  been  the

rightly  guided,

5

[LVL]
SUKA  XXVL— THE  POETS."

Mecca. — 228  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Ta.    Sin.    Mim.'^     These   arc   the   signs   of  the  lucid
Book.

*  In  order  to  reconcile  this  passage  with  the  prescribed  hours,  some
understand  the  extremes  to  mean  the  mid-day,  -when  the  day  is  as  it  were
divided.  ^  Supply,  we  will  not  believe.

'  The  Prophets  ;  or,  before  its  time,  i.  e.  before  its  revelation.

*  At  the  resurrection.

*  See  Sura  xxv.  77  (n.)  p.  190.

*  This  Sura  belongs  to  about  the  seventh  year  of  Muhammad's  prophetic
life.  7  See  Sura  Ixviii.  1,  p.  17.

THE    KORAN.  VO

Haply  thou  wearest  thyself  away  with  grief  because

they  believe  not.
Were    it  Our  ^vill,   we    could    send  down  to  them  a

sign  from  the   Heaven,  before  which  they  would

ever  humbly  bow.^
But   from   each   fresh   warning  that  cometh  to  them

from  the  God  of  Mercy  they   have    only   turned

aside,
And  treated  it  as  a  lie  :  But  tidings  shall  reach  them

which  they  shall  not  laugh  to  scorn.
Have  thev  not  beheld  the  earth — how  We  have  caused

to  spring  up  therein  of  every  noble  sort  ?
Verily,  in  this  is  a  sign :  but  most  of  them  believe  not.
And  truly,  thy  Lord! — He  assuredly  is  the  Mighty,

the  Merciful.
^  And  remtmher  when  thy  Lord  called  to  Moses,  ''  Go  to

the  Tricked  people,
10     The  people  of  Pharaoh.     Will  they  not  fear  Me  ?  ''

He  said,  "  My  Lord,  in  sooth  I  fear  lest  they  charge

me  with  imposture  :
And  my  breast  is  straitened,  and  I  am  slow  of  speech;-

send  therefore  to  Aaron  to  be  my  helpmate:
And  they  have  a  charge  ^  against  me,  and  I  fear  lest

they  put  me  to  death."
He  said,  "  Surely  not.   Go  ye  therefore  with  Our  signs  :

We  will  be  with  you  and  will  hearken.
And  go  to  Pharaoh  and  say :  '  Verily  we  are  a  deputa-

ti^  from  the  Lord  of  the  worlds

Send  forth  with  us  the  children  of  Israel.'  "

He   said,  "Did  we  not  rear  thee   among  us  when  a

child  ?     And  hast  thou  not  passed   years  of  thy

hfe  among  us  ?
And  yet  what  a  deed  is  that  which  thou  hast  done  !  *

and  thou  art  one  of  the  ungrateful.''
He  said,  ''  I  did  it  indeed,  but  then  I  was  one  of  those

who  were  in  error  :
20     So  I  fled  from  you  because  ^  I  feared  you ;  but  my

Lord  hath  given  me  wisdom,  and  hath  made  me

one  of  his  Sent  Ones  :

*  Lit.  to  icJiich  their  necks  would  humhle  themselves.

'  Lit.  my  tongue  is  not  free.     This  verse  appears  to  be  a  studied  simpli-
fication of  Ex.  iv.  10-13.

^  The  murder  of  the  Egyptian.     See  Geiger,  159.

*  Lit.  and  thou  hast  done  thy  deed  which  thou  hast  done.    See  xxviii.  15.

*  Lit.  after  that.

96  THE    KORAN.

And  is  this  the  favour  thou  hast  conferred  on  me,  that
thou  hast  enslaved  the  childi'en  of  Israel  ?  "

Said  Pharaoh,  "  Who  then  is  the  Lord  of  the
Worlds?"

He  said,  "  The  Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth
and  of  all  that  is  between  them,  if  only  je  be-
lieve it."

Said  Pharaoh  to  those  around  him,  "  Hear  not  ye
this  ?"

"  Your  Lord,"  said  Moses,  ''  and  Lord  of  your  sires  of
old."

"  In  sooth,  your  Sent  One  who  hath  been  sent  to  you,"
said  Pharaoli,  "  is  certainly  possessed."

He  said,  ''  liord  is  He  of  the  East  and  of  the  West,  and
of  all  that  is  between  them,  if  ye  understand."

He  said,  "  If  ye  take  any  God  beside  me,^  I  will  surely
make  thee  of  those  in  ward."

Said  Moses,  "  What  if  I  bring  thee  that  which  shall  be
a  proof  of  my  mission  ?  "
30     He  said,  "  Forth  with  it  then,  if  thou  art  a  man  of
truth."

Then  threw  he  down  his  staff,  and  lo !  an  undoubted
serpent :

And  he  drew  out  his  hand,  and  lo  !  it  was  white ^  to
the  beholders.

He  said  to  his  nobles  around  him,  "  This  truly  is  a
right  cunning  sorcerer;

Fain  would  he  drive  you  out  of  your  land  by  his
Sorcery — But  what  do  ye  suggest  ?  "

They  said,  "  Put  him  and  his  brother  off  awhile,  and
send  summoners  to  all  the  cities.

Who  shall  bring  to  thee  every  cunning  magician."

So  the  magicians  were  mustered  at  a  set  time,  on  a
solemn  ^  day :

And  it  was  said  to  the  people.  "  Are  ye  all  as-
sembled ?  "

— ''Yes !  and  then  perchance  we  will  follow  the  magi-
cians if  they  gain  the  day."
40     And  when  the   magicians  were  arrived  they  said  to
Pharaoh,  "  Shall  we  have  a  reward  if  we  gain  the
day  ?  "

'  See  Sur.  xxviii.  38.

'  Thus  Pirke  R.  Elieser,  §  48.     "  He  placed  his  hand  in  hia  bosom  and
drew  it  forth,  white  as  snow  with  leprosy."
^  Or,  known,  predetermined.

THE    KORAN.  97

He  said,  "  Yes.     And  verily  in  that  case  ye  shall  be  of

those  who  are  near  my  person,"
Moses  said  to  them,  "  Throw  down  what  ye  have  to

throw.''
So  they  cast  down  their  ropes  and  rods,  and  said,  "  By

Pharaoh's  might  1  we  shall  surely  win."
Then  Moses  threw  down  his  rod,  and  lo  !  it  swallowed

up  their  lying  inventions.
Then  the  magicians  threw  themselves  down  in  worship  :
They  said,  "  We  believe  on  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds,
The  Lord  of  Moses  and  of  Aaron."
Said  Pharaoh,  "  Have  ye  then  believed  on  Him  ere  I

gave  you  leave  ?     He  truly  is    your  master  who

hath  taught  you  magic. ^    But  by-and-by  ye  shall

surely  know  my  'potvcr.
I  will  siu'ely  cut  off  your  hands  and  feet  on  opposite

sides,  and  will  assuredly  have  you  all  crucified."
50     They   said,  "  No  harm  ;  verily  to   our  Lord  shall  we

return  :
Assuredly  we  trust  that  our  Lord  will  forgive  us  our

sins,  since  we  are  the  first  who  believe."
Then  revealed  We  this  order  to  Moses  :   "  Go  forth  by

night  with  my  servants,  for  ye  will  be  ])ursued."
And  Pharaoh  sent  summoners  through  the  cities  : —
"  In  sooth  these  Israelites,"  said  they,  "  are  a  scanty

band  ;
And  verily  they  are  enraged  against  us — •
But  we  truly  are  numerous,  wary."
Thus  We  caused  them  to  quit  gardens  and  fountains.
And  treasures  and  splendid  dwellings ;
So  was  it ;  and  We  gave  them  to  the  children  of  Israel

for  an  heritage.^
60     Then  at  sunrise  the  Eg}^tians  followed  them  ;

And  when  the  hosts  came  in  view  of  one  another,  the

comrades  of  Moses   said,   ''  We  surely  are  over-
taken."
He  said,  "By  no  means: — verily  my  Lord  is  with  me

— He  will  guide  me."
And  We  revealed  this  order  to  Moses,  "  Strike  the  sea

with  thy  rod"j     and   it   clave  asunder,  and  each

part  became  like  a  huge  mountain.

'  "  The  Pharaoh  who  lived  in  the  days  of  Moses  was  a  ;^reat  maj;ician."
Mid.  Jalkut,  c.  182.  Com.  Sura  xx%-iii.  38,  Avhcre,  in  accordance  with  the
Eabbinic  traditions,  Pharaoh  chiims  to  be  a  god.

»  See  ii.  58,  and  Midr.  Jalkut  on  Ex.  xii.  c.  208.

H

98  THE    KORAN.

Then  made  Wc  the  others  to  draw  on ;

And  We  saved  JNIoses,  and  those  who  were  with  him^  all;

Then  drowned  We  the  others.

Truly  in  this  was  a  sign ;  but  most  of  them  were  not

believers.
But  verily  thy   Lord_, — Ho    truly  is    the   Mighty,  the

Merciful !
^  And  recite  to  them  the  story  of  Abraham
70     AVTien  he  said  to  his  father  an^  to  his  people,  "  AVhat

worship  ye  ?  "
They  said,  "  We  worship  idols,  and  constant  are  we  in

devotion  to  them."
He  said,  "  Can  they  hear  you  when  ye  cry  to  them  ?
Or  help  you  or  do  you  harm  ?  "

They  said,  "  But  we  found  our  fathers  do  the  like.^'
He  said,  "  How  think  ye  ?     They  whom  ye  worship.
Ye  and  your  fathers  of  old.

Are  my  foes  :  but  not  so  ^  tJie  liord  of  the  Worlds,
Who  hath  created  me,  and  guideth  me,
Who  giveth  me  food  and  drink  ;
80     And  when  I  am  sick,  then  He  healeth  me.

And  who  will  cause  me  to  die  and  again  quicken  me,
And  who,  I  hope,  will  forgive  me  my  sins  in  the  day  of

reckoning.
My  Lord  !  bestow  on  me  wisdom  and  unite  me  to  the

just.
And  give  me  a  good  name-  among  posterity.
And  make  me  one  of  the  heirs  of  the  garden  of  delight.
And  forgive  my  father,  for  he  was  one  of  the  erring,
And  put  me  not  to  shame  on  the  day  when  mankind

shall  be  raised  up,
The  day  when  neither  wealth  nor  children  shall  avail.
Save  to  him  who  shall  come  to  God  Avith  a  sound  heart,
90     And  Paradise  shall  be  brought  near  the  pious.

And  Hell  shall  be  laid  open"'  to  those  who  have  gone

astray,
And  it  shall  be  said  to  them,  '  Where  are  they  whom

3'e  worshipped
Beside  God  ?    Can  they  harm  you  or  help  themselves?'
And  they  shall  be  cast  face  downwards  into  it — the

seduced  and  the  seducers,

'  Lit.  except.

"  Lit.  a  tongue  of  truth,  i.e.  high  repute.     Or,  grant  that  my  words  may
be  hdiereil  among  jjosterity.     See  [Iviii.]  xix.  47.
^  i.  e.  to  the  view.

THE    KORAN.  99

And  the  hosts  of  Eblis,  all  together.
They  shall  say,  as  they  wrangle  therein  together,
'  By  God  we  Nvere  verily  in  a  plain  error,
When  we  equalled  3'ou  with  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds  :
And  none  misled  us  but  the  wicked ;
100  And  we  have  none  to  plead /or  us,
Nor  friend  who  careth /br  ns,

And  could  we   but    return,   we  would  be   of  the  be-
lievers.^ "
Verily,  in  this  was  a  sign  :  but  most  of  them  beheved

not.
And  truly  thy  Lord  ! — He  assuredly  is  the  Mighty,  the

Merciful  !
^  The  people  of  Noah  gainsaid  the  Sent  of  God,  ,

When  their  brother  Noah  said  to  them,  "  Will  ye  not

fear  God  ?
Of  a  truth  am  I  your  faithful  Apostle ;
Fear  God  then  and  obey  me.
And  I  ask  of  you  no  reward  for  this,  for  my  reward  is

of  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds  alone  :
110  Fear  God  then  and  obey  me.^'

They  said,  "  Shall  we  believe  on  thee  when  the  meanest

only  are  thy  followers  ?  "
He  said,  "  But  I  have  no  knowledge  of  that  they  did  :^
To  my  Lord  only  must  their  account  be  given  :  would

that  ye  understood  this  !
And  I  will  not  thrust  away  those  who  believe.
Of  a  truth  I  am  only  an  open  warner.^^
They  said,  "  Now  unless   thou  desist,  0  Noah,  one  of

the  stoned  shalt  thou  surely  be."
He  said,  "  0  my  Lord  !  verily  my  people  treat  me  as  a

liar  :
Decide  Thou  therefore  a  decision  between  me  and  them,

and  rescue  me  and  the  faithful  who  are  with  me."
So  W^e  saved  him,  and  those  who  were  with  him  in  the

fully-laden  ark, —
120  Afterwards  We  drowned  the  rest.

Herein  truly  was  a  sign,  but  most  of  them  believed

not.
But  verily  thy  Lord  ! — He  is  the  Mighty,  the  Merciful.
%  The  Adites  -  treated  the  Sent  Ones  as  liars.

When  their  brother  Houd  said  to  them,  "  Will  ye  not

fear  God  ?

'  Of  their  motives  in  embracing  my  doctrine.
.    ^  The  Adites  are  mentioned  in  vii.  and  xi.
H    2

100  THE    KORAN.

I  truly  am  your  Apostle,  worthy  of  all  credit ;

Fear  God  then  and  obey  me  :

I  ask  of  you  no  reward  for  this ;  for  my  reward  is  of

the  Lord  of  the  Worlds  alone.
Build  ye  a  landmark  on  every  height,  in  pastime  ?  ^
And  raise  ye  structures  to  be  your  lasting  abodes?^
130  And  when  ye  put  forth  your  power  do  ye  put  it  forth

with  harshness  ?
Fear  ye  God  then  and  obey  me-j
And  fear  ye  Him  who  hath  plenteously  bestowed  on

you  ye  well  know  what :
Plenteously  bestowed  on  you  flocks  and  children,
And  gardens  and  fountains  ;

Indeed  I  fear  for  you  the  punishment  of  a  great  day/'
They  said,  "  It  is  the  same  to  us  whether  thou  warn  or

warn  us  not ;
Yerily  this  is  but  a  creation  [tale]  of  the  ancients,
And  we  are  not  they  who  shall  be  punished/'
So  they  charged  him  with  imposture;  and  We  destroyed

them.   Verily  in  this  was  a  sign  :  yet  most  of  them

believed  not.
140  But  verily  thy  Lord  ! — He  is  the  Mighty,  the  Merciful !
%  The  Thamoodites  also  treated  the  Sent  Ones  as  liars.
When  their  brother  Saleh  said  to  them,  "  Will  ye  not

fear  God  ?
I  truly  am  your  Apostle  worthy  of  all  credit :
Fear  God,  then,  and  obey  me.
I  ask  of  you  no  reward  for  this :  my  reward  is  of  the

Lord  of  the  Worlds  alone.
Shall  ye  be  left  secure  amid  these  things  here  ?
Amid  gardens  and  fountains,
And  corn-fields  and  palm-trees,  with  sheaths  thin  and

smooth  ?  ^
And,  insolent  that  ye  are,  hew  ye  out  dwellings  in  the

mountains  ?
150  But  fear  God  and  obey  me,

And  obey  not  the  bidding  of  those  who  commit  excess,
Who  act  disorderly  on  the  earth  and  reform  it  not."
They  said,  "  Certainly  thou  art  a  person  bewitched;
Thou  art  only  a  man  like  us  :  produce  now  a  sign  if

thou  art  a  man  of  truth."

'  TJIlman,  ein  gotzendienstliches  Zeicheri  ttm  dort  zu  scherzen.

'  This  may  be  understood  of  the  small  forts  erected  by  the  nomades  of
the  Hejaz  alontj  the  route  of  the  caravans  to  guarantee  their  safety.  Comp.
Gen.  xi.  l-lo,  and  Sura  Ixxxix.  6,  p.  45.     Lit.  that  ye  may  live  for  ever.

'  The  spathe  of  the  palm  when  distended  with  flowers.

THE    KOrAn.  101

He  said,  "  This  she-camel — drink  shall  there  be  for
^  her,  and  drink  shall  there  be  for  you,  on  a  several

day  for  each  ;

But  harm  her  not,  lest  the  punishment  of  a  great  day-
take  you/'

But  they  hamstrung  her,   and  repented  of  it  on  the
morrow ;

For  the  punishment  oi'^rtook  them.     In  this  truly  was
a  sijjn,  but  most  of  them  believed  not.

But  verily  thy  Lord ! — He  is  the  Powerful,  the  Mer-
ciful !
160  ^  The  people  of  Lot  treated  the  Sent  Ones  as  liars.

When  their  brother  Lot  said  to  them,  "  Will  ye  not
fear  God?

I  am  your  Apostle  worthy  of  all  credit :

Fear  God,  then,  and  obey  me.

For  this   I   ask  you  no   reward  :  my  rewai'd  is  of  the
Lord  of  the  AVorlds  al<>ne.

With  men,  of  all  creatures,  will  ye  have  commerce?^

And  leave  ye  your  wives  whom  your  Lord  hath  created
for  you  ?     Nay  !  ye  are  an  erring  people  !  "

They   said,   "  0    Lot,    if   thou  desist  not,   one   of  the
banished  shalt  thou  surely  be."

He  said,  "Verily  I  am  of  those  who  abhor  your  doings:

My   Lord  !    deliver    me    and    my   family   from    what
they  do."
170  So  We  delivered  him  and  his  whole  family —

Save  an  aged  one  among  those  who  tarried- —

Then  We  destroyed  the  rest —

And  We  rained  a  rain  upon  them,  and  fatal  was  the
rain  to  those  who  had  received  their  warning.

In  this  truly  was  a  sign ;  but   most  of  them  did  not
believe.

But  verily  thy  Lord  !     He  is  the  Powerful,  the  Mer-
ciful !
^  The  dwellers  in  the  forest  of  Madian  ^  treated  the  Sent
Ones  as  liars.

^  Or,  more  litemlly,  Approach  ye  to  men  among  mankind  ?

'  Here  and  in  Sur.  xxvi.  and  viL  81,  Dr.  Sprenger  renders  ghabiryni  by
Vebertreter.

*  The  Madian  and  the  El-Aika  of  this  and  other  Suras,  are  unquestion-
ably one  and  the  same  place,  as  they  have  the  same  prophet  Shoaib  (or
Sho'eyb),  the  Jethro  of  Scripture — a  name  perhaps  altered  from  Hobab
(Numb.  X.  29)— and  because  the  same  sin  is  laid  to  the  charge  of  both.
See  Winer's  Realworterbuch  on  Jethro.  The  Midr.  Rabbah  on  Ex.  ii.
16,  Par.  1,  makes  Jethro  renounce  idolatry,  and  his  office  of  Priest,  and
under lto  banishment  from  the  Midianites.

102  THE    KORAN.

When  Sboaib  their  brother  said  to  thorn,  "  Will  ye  not
fear  God?

I  truly  am  your  trustworthy  Apostle.

Fear  God,  then,  and  obey  me  :
180  No  reward  ask  I  of  you  for  this:  my  reward  is  of  the
Lord  of  the  Worlds  alone.

Fill  the  measure,  and  be  not  of  those  who  minish  :

Weigh  with  exact  balance  :   •

And  defraud  not  men  in  their' substance,  and  do  no
wrong  on  the  earth  by  deeds  of  licence ;

And  fear  Him  who  made  you  and  tlie  races  of  old.''

They  said,  "  Certainly  thou  art  one  of  the  bewitched;

Thou  art  but  a  man  like  us,  and  in  sooth  we  deem  thee
to  be  a  liar —

Make  now  a  part  of  the  heaven  to  fall  down  upon  us,  if
thou  art  a  man  of  truth.''

He  said,  "  My  Lord  best  knoweth  your  doings."

And  when  they  treated  him  as  a  liar,  the  chastisement
of  the   day  of  cloud  overtook   them.     This  truly
was  the  chastisement  of  a  great  day  !
190  Verily  in  this  was  a  sigu,  but  most  of  them  believed
not.

But  truly  thy  Lord  !  —  He  is  the  Mighty,  the  Mer-
ciful 1
^  Verily  from  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds  hath  this  Booh
come  down;

The  faithful  spirit  ^  hath  come  down  with  it

Upon  thy  heart,  that  thou  mightest  become  a  warner —

In  the  clear  Arabic  tongue  :

And  truly  it  is  foretold  in   the  Scriptures  of  them  of
yore.*^

Shall  it  not  be  a  sign  to  them  ^  that  the  learned  among
the  children  of  Israel  recognized  it  ?

If  We  had  sent  it  down  unto  any  foreigner.

And   he    had   recited    it    to   them,   they  had   not  be-
lieved.
200  In   such  sort   have  We  influenced'*  the  heart  of  tho
wicked  ones,

'  Gabriel.     See  Stira  Ixxxi.  19,  p.  30.

*  See  Sura  xiii.  36.    This  verse  is  said  to  have  been  revealed  at  Medina
by  Itq.  .34.

'  The  unbelieving  Meccans.     Lit.  (hoi  the  Icnoioing  {Doctors,  Uhlemas)
knev)  it.

*  Lit.  have  introduced  it,  i.e.  infidelity  :  or  the  Kordn. — Beidh.     The
latter  interpretation  seems  most  accordant  vrith  the  context.

THE    KORAN.  103

That  they  will  not  believe  it  till  they  see  the  grievous

chastisement.
And  it  shall  come  upon  them  on  a  sudden  when  they

look  not  for  it :
And  they  will  say,  ''  Can  we  be  respited  ?  "
Will  they  then  seek  to  hasten  on  our  chastisement  ?
How  thinkest  thou  ?    If  after  We  have  given  them  their

fill  for  years,
That  with  which  they  are  menaced  come  upon  them  at

last.
Of  what  avail  will  thoir  enjoyments  be  to  them  ?
We  have  destroyed    no   city   which   had   not  first  its

Warners
With  admonition;  nor  did  We  deal  unjustly.
210  The  Satans  were  not  sent  down  with  this  Koran  :
It  beseemed  them  not,^  and  they  had  not  the  power.
For  they  are  far  removed  from  hearing  ^  the  discourse  of

Angrls.
^  Call  not  thou  then  on  any  other  god  with  God,  lest

thou  be  of  those  consigned  to  torment :
But  warn  thy  relatives  of  nearer  kin,^
And  kindly  lower  thy  wing  over  the  faithful  who  follow

thee,
And  if  they  disobey  thee,  then  say :  ''^I  verily  am  clear

of  your  doings ; " —
And  put  thy  trust  in  the  Mighty,  the  Merciful,
Who  seeth  thee  when  thou  standest  in  prayer,
And  thy  demeanour  among  those  who  worship  ;
220  Yerily  He  is  the  hearer,  the  kuower.

Shall  I  tell  you  on  whom  the  Satans  descend  ?

They  descend  on  every  lying,  wicked  person  :

They  impart  what  they  have  heard  ;*  but  most  of  them

are  liars.
^  It  is  the  POETS  ^  whom  the  erring  follow  :

'  Ncqne  competit  illis  (/loc).— !Mar.     It,  is  not  for  their  purpose. — Sale.

'  Comp.  Sura  xxxvii.  7,  8,  p.  67.

'  It  is  probable  that  within  three  or  four  years  from  his  entry  upon  the
prophetic  office,  Muhammad  bad  made  about  4(i  converts.  Some  bio-
graphers refer  to  this  passage,  and  not  to  Sura  lxxi%'.  1,  as  the  first  call  to
preach.  But  this  Sura  bears  evidence  of  the  opposition  to  which  the
prophet  had  become  exposed,  and  of  adherents  to  his  cause,  now  become
numerous.  The  diffuseness  and  feebleness  of  the  style  clearly  point  to  a
later  origin.

*  They  impart  to  their  votaries  on  earth  what  they  have  learned  by
stealth  and  partially,  in  heaven.

"  Muhammad  found  it  necessary  to  employ  the  pens  of  certain  poets  to

104  THE   KORAN.

Seest   thou   not   liow   they  rove   distraught   in  every

valley  ?
And  that  they  say  that  which  they  do  not  ?
Save  those  who  believe  and  do  good  works,  and  oft

remember  God ;
And    who    defend  themselves   when  unjustly  treated.

But  they  who  treat  them,  unjustly  shall  find  out

what  a  lot  awaiteth  them  hereafter.^

[LVII.]
SURA  XV.— HEDJR.2

Mecca. — 99  Verses.

J?i  tJie  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elif.  Lam.  Ea.^  These  are  the  signs  of  the  Book,  and
of  the  lucid  Koran.

Many  a  time  will  those  who  have  not  believed  wish
that  they  had  been  Muslims  !

Let  them  feast  and  enjoy  themselves,  and  let  hope
beguile  thein  :  l)ut  they  shall  know  the  truth  at
last.

We  never  destroyed  a  city  whose  term  was  not  pre-
fixed :  *

No  people  can  forestall  or  retard  its  destiny.^

defend  himself  and  his  religion  from  the  ridicule  and  satire  of  other  poets,
whose  productions  were  recited  at  the  great  annual  fair  held  at  Okatz,  the
Olynipia  of  the  Hejaz.  The  poems  which  were  judged  the  best  were  writ-
ten up  in  letters  of  gold,  or  suspended  (hence  called  Moall.ikat)  in  the
Caidta.  These  poetical  contests  were  sul)soqnently  suppressed  by  Mu-
hfinimad,  as  offering  openings  for  discussions  which  might  prove  incon-
venient, and  dangerous  to  his  rising  claims.

'  Lit.  vith  irhat  rdnrn  they  shall  return  {to  God).

^  Hedjr,  a  valley  in  the  route  between  Medina  and  Syria,  originally  the
country  of  the  Thamoodites,  the  Egra  of  Ptolemy  and  the  Petra  of  Strabo.
Hedjr  is  literally  a  stone ;  in  JEth.  a  city.

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  p.  16.  ''  Lit.  hut  also  to  it  a  known  writing.

*  Can  precede  its  term  or  remain  behind  it.

THE    KORAN.  105

And  they  say :   "  0  thou   to  whom   the  warning  hath

been  sent  down,  surely  thou  art  possessed  by  a

djinn  :
Why  dost  thou  not  bring  the  angels  to  us  if  thou  art

of  those  who  assert  the  truth  ?  "
— We  send  not  down  angels  without  due  cause/  and

the   Infidels   would   not    in   that    case   have  been

respited ;
Yerily,  We  have  sent  down  "  the  Warning/^  and  verily

We  will  be  its  guardian  ;
10     And  already  have  We  ^eiit  Apostles ,  before  thee,  among

the  sects  of  the  ancients ;
But  never  came  Apostles  to  them  whom  they  did  not

deride.
In  like  manner  have  We  caused  unbelief  to  enter  the

hearts  of  the  sinners  of  Mecca :
They  will  not  believe  on  him,  though  the  example  of

those  of  old  hath  gone  before.
Even  were  We  to  open  above  them  a  gate  in  Heaven,

yet  all  the  while  they  were  mounting  up  to  it,
They  would  surely  say  :   "  It  is  only  that  our  eyes  are

bewildered :  nay,  we  are  a  people  enchanted. ^^
^  We  have  set  the  signs  of  the  zodiac "  in  the  Heavens,

and  decked  them  forth  for  the  beholders.
And  We  guard  them  from  every  stoned  ^  Satan,
Save  such  as  steal  a  hearing  :  •*  and  him  do  visible  flames

pursue.
And  the  Earth  have  We    spread  forth,    and  thrown

thereon  the  mountains,  and  caused  everything  to

spring  forth  in  it  in  balanced  measure  :
20     And   \\^e   have  provided    therein   sustenance   for  you,

and  for  creatures  which  not  ye  sustain  :
And  no  one  thing  is  there,  but  with  Us  are  its  store-
houses ;  and  We  send  it  not  down  but  in  settled

degree :
And  We  send  forth  the  fertilizing^  winds,  and  cause

the  rain    to    come    down    from    the  heaven,   and

'  That  is,  not  Tuerely  to  gratify  the  curiosity  of  the  doubting,  but  to
execute  prompt  punishment.    It  might  also  be  renderfd,  save  with  justice.

'  Ar.  bourdj,  Gr.  irvpyoi,  towers,  i.e.  Signs  of  the  Zodiac.

^  See  V.  34  ;  and  note.

■•  Conip.  Sura  xxxvii.  6,  p.  67.  In  Chagiga  16,  1,  the  Demons  (schedim)
are  said  to  learn  the  secrets  of  the  future  by  listening  behind  the  veil
(pargod).

*  i.  c.  which  fertilize  or  impregnate  the  clouds.

106  THE    KORAN.

give  you  to  drink  of  it;    and    it    is    not  yo  who

are  its  storers :
And  verily  We,  We  cause  to  live,  and  We  cause  to  die,^

and  We  are  the  heir  of  all  things  :
And  of  a  certainty  We  know  those  of  you  who  desire  to

advance,  and  of  a  ti-uth  We  know  those  who  tarry

behind  :
And  truly  thy  Lord  will  gather  them  together  again,

for  He  is  Wise,  Knowing.
^  And  verily  We  created  man  of  dried  clay,  of  dark  loam

moulded;
And  the  djinn  had  We  before  created  of  subtile  fire.^
Remember  when  thy  Lord  said  to  the  Angels,  "  I  create

man  of  dried  clay,  of  dark  loam  moulded  :
And  when  I  shall    liave   fashioned  him  and  breathed

of  my  spirit  into  him,  then  fall  ye  down  to  him

in  worship. ^^
30     And  the  Angels  bowed  down  in  worship,  all  of  them,

all  together.
Save  Eblis  :  he  refused  to  be  with  those  who  bowed  in

worship.
"  0  Eblis,''  3  said  God,  "  wherefore  art  thou  not  with

those  who  bow  down  in  worship  ?  "
He  said,  "  It  beseemeth  not  me  to  bow  in  worship  to

man  whom  Thou  hast  created  of  clay,  of  moulded

loam.''
He  said,  "  Begone  then  hence ;  thou  art  a  stoned  one,^
And  verily  the  curse  shall  be  on  thee  till  the  day  of

judgment."
He  said,  "  My  Lord  !  respite  me  then  till  the  day  when

they  shall  be  Ta.\scd  from  the  dead."
He  said,  "  One  then  verily  of  the  respited  shalt  thou  bo
Till  the  day  of  the  predestined  time."

'  Compare  precisely  a  similar  association  of  subjects,  the  Rain,  Food,
Gofl,  a-s  Lord  of  life  and  death,  in  Tr.  Taanith,  fol.  1  a.

'  Or,  fire  of  the  Simoom,  the  pestilential  scorchinc;  wind  of  the  desert.

3  Comp.  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  32.  There  is  much  in  this  dialogue  between
Eblis  and  Allah  which  reminds  of  the  dialogue  between  Jehovah  and  Satan
in  the  opening  of  the  Book  of  Job.

■•  That  is,  accursed.  According  to  the  Muhanimadan  tradition,  Abraham
drove  Satan  away  with  stones  when  he  would  have  hindered  him  from
sacrificing  Ismael.  Hence  the  custom  during  the  pilgrin)age  of  throwing
a  certain  number  of  stones— the  Shafcis,  4!i  ;  the  Hanafis,  70— as  if  at
Satiin,  in  the  valley  of  Mina,  near  Mecca.  The  spot  where  the  apparition
of  Satan  to  Abraham  took  place  is  marked  by  three  small  pillars,  at  which
the  stones  are  now  thrown.     Comp.  Gen.  xv.  11.

THE    KORAN.  107

He  said,  "  'My  Lord  !  because  Thou  hast  beguiled  me,

I  will  surely  make  all  fair  seeming  to  them  ^  on

the  earth  ;  and  I  will  surely  beguile  them  all ;
40     Except  such  of  them  as  sJiall  be  thy  sincere  servants."
He  said,  "  This  is  the  right  way  with  Me ;
Yerily  over  none  of  my  servants  shalt  thou  have  power,

save  those  begfuiled  ones  who  shall  follow  thee.^'
And  verily,  Hell  is  the  promise  for  them  one  and  all —
It  hath  seven  Portals ;  ^  at  each  Portal  is  a  separate

band —
Truly  'mid    gardens    and    fountains    shall   the  pious

dwtll  :
"  Enter  ye  it  in  peace,  secure."
And  We    will   remove    what    is    in    their    breasts    of

rancour  as  brethren  face  to  face  on  couches :
Therein  no  weariness  shall  touch  them,  nor  forth  from

it  shall  they  be  taken.
Announce  to  my  servants  that  I  am  the  Gracious,  the

Merciful,
50     And  that  my  chastisement  is  the  grievous  chastise-
ment.
^  And  tell  them  of  Abraham's  guests.

"When  they  entered  in  unto  him,  and  said,  ''Peace;"

"  Verily,"  said  he,  "  We  fear  you."
They  said,  "  Fear  not,  for  of  a  sage  son  we  bring  thee

tidings."
He  said,  "Bring  ye  me  such  tidings  though^  old  age

be  come  upon  me  ?     What,  therefore,   are  your

tidings?  "
They  said,  "  Our  tidings  to  thee  are  in  very  truth.    Be

not  then  one  of  the  despairing."
"  And  who,"  said  he,  "  despaireth  of  the  mercy  of  his

Lord,  but  thev  who  err  ?  "
He   said,   "  What    is  your  business  then,   0  ye  Sent

Ones  ?  "
They  said,  "  Truly  We  are  sent  unto  a  people  who  are

sinners.
Except  the  family  of  Lot,  whom  verily  We  will  rescue

all,

'  Or.  I  u'iU  emhellish,  prepare.

*  Thus,  in  Sota,  10,  David  is  said  to  have  rescued  Absalom  from  "  the
seven  dwellings  of  Hell  ;"  in  Midr.  on  Ps.  xi.  "There  are  seven  houses
of  abode  for  the  wicked  in  Hell ;"  and  in  Sohar  ii.  150,  "  Hell  hath  seven
gates."

^  Lit.  upon  that.     iVoTi  obstante  qudd.—  'Mar,

108  THE    KORAN.

60     Except  his  wife.      We  have    decreed   that   she  shall

surely  be  of  those  who  linger/^  ^
So  when  the  Sent  Ones  reached  the  family  of  Lot
He  said,  "Ye  are  verily  strange  to  me."
They  said,  "Nay;  but. We  have  come   to  thee  for  a

purpose  about  which  thy  loeople  doubt  :
And  We  have   brought   thee   the  truth,  and  We  are

truthful   envoys.
Lead  forth   therefore  thy  family  in  the   dead   of  the

nisfht :  and  follow  thou  on  their  rear  :  and  let  no

one  of  you  turn  round,  but  pass  ye  on  whither  ye

are  bidden/^
And  this  command  We  gave  him  because  to  the  last

man  should  these  people  be  cut  off  at  morning.
Then    came    the    people  of  the    city   rejoicing    at  the

news  ^ —
He  said,  "  These  truly  are  my  guests  :  therefore  dis-
grace me  not,
And  fear  God  and  put  me  not  to  shame."
70     They  said,  "  Have  we  not  forbidden  thee  to  entertain

any  one  whatever  ?  '
He    said,    "  Here    are    my    daughters,  if  ye  will  thus

act.'*
As  thou  livest,  0  Muhammad,  verily  they  wandered

distractedly  in  their  drunkenness  of  lust.
So  a  blast  *  overtook  them  at  sunrise,
And  We  turned  the  city  upside  down,  and  We  rained

stones  of  baked  clay  upon  them.
Verily,  in  this  are  signs  for  those  who  scan  heedfully ;
And    truly    these    cities   are    permanent    on   the  high

road.^
Verily,  in  this  is  a  sign  for  the  faithful.
^  The  inhabitants  also  of  El  Aika"  wore  sinners:

So  We  took  vengeance  on  them,  and  they  both "  became

a  plain  example.
80^  And  the  people  of  HEDJR  had  treated  God's  mes-
sengers as  liars,

'  Or,  an  evil-doer,  transgressor.  '  At  the  arrival  of  strangers.

^  Comp.  Midr.  RaVjbah  on  Gen.  Par.  50.

*  Or,  cry,  the  shout  of  Gabriel.

*  From  Arabia  to  Syria.  The  pronoun  in  the  fem.  sing,  may  refer  to
the  Pentapolis  as  to  a  single  city,  or  to  Sodom  alone.  Or,  serve  to  confirm
men  in  the  right  u'ay.

*  See  Sura  [Ivi.]  xxvi.  176.
''  Sodom  and  El-Aika.

THE    KORAN.  109

And  We  brought  forth  our  signs  to  them^  but  they
drew  back  from  them  ;

And  they  hewed  them  out  secure  abodes  in  the  moun-
tains ;

But  a  blast  ^  surprised  them  at  early  morn.

And  their  labours  availed  them  nothing.

Moreover  We  have  not  created  the  heavens  and  the
earth  and  all  that  between  them  is,  but  for  a
worthy  end.-  And  verily,  ''  the  hour "  shall
surely  come.  Wherefore  do  thou,  Muhammad,
forgive  with  decorous  forgiveness,

For  thy  Lord  !  He  is  the  Creator,  the  Knowing.
^  We  have  already  given  thee  the  seven  verses  of  repe-
tition ^  and  the  great*  Koran.

Strain  not  thine  eyes  after  the  good  things  We  have
bestowed  on  some  of  the  unhelievers ;  and  afflict
not  thyself  on  their  account  j  and  lower  thy  wing
to  the  faithful,^

And  SAY  :  I  am  only  the  piain-spoA-e?i  warner.
90     We  will  punish  them  as  We  punished  those  who  divide,^

Who  take  the  Koran  to  pieces  :

And  by  thy  Lord !  We  will  surely  reckon  with  them
one  and  all.

For  that  which  they  have  done  !

Profess  publicly  then  what  thou  hast  been  bidden,^  and
withdraw  from  those  who  join  gods  to  God.

^  Or,  cry,  shout,  as  above,  v.  73.

*  See  Sura  [Ixxiii.]  xvi.  3.     Or,  after  a  settled  plan.

'  That  is,  the  seven  verses  of  Sura  1,  p.  10.  Others  understand,  the
seven  long  Suras  ;  or,  the  fifteen  Suras  which  make  a  seventh  of  the  whole  ;
or,  this  Sura  (Hedjr)  as  originally  the  seventh.  Mathani  is  an  allusion,
according  to  some,  to  the  frequency  with  which  the  fatthah  is  to  be  re-
peated ;  or,  to  the  frequent  repetitions  of  great  truths,  etc.,  in  order  to
impress  them  on  the  memory  of  the  hearer  and  reader  ;  or,  to  the  manner
in  which  waid  and  ud'd,  promises  and  threatenings,  alternate  and  balance
each  other  in  the  same  or  subsequent  verses  and  Suras,  in  pairs.  This
verse  and  Sura  x.  10  show  that  a  part  at  least  of  the  Koran  was  known
under  that  name  and  existed  as  a  whole  in  the  time  of  Muhammad.
Geiger's  interpretations  at  pp.  59,  60  (and  in  the  note)  seem  very  forced.
Dr.  Sprenger  understands,  smeuerte,  offenharungen,  but  it  seems  difficult
to  reconcile  this  rendering  with  the  epithet  seven.

*  Sale,  glorious.  But  it  may  simply  mean  in  full,  i.e.  as  far  as  now
revealed.

*  Corap.  Sura  Qvi.]  xxvi.  215,  i.e.  demean  thyself  gently.

*  Lit.  as  u-e  seiit  doicn  upon  the  dividers,  Le.  those  who  receive  part  of
the  Koran  and  reject  part,  and  try  to  show  its  weak  points.

'  In  this,  the  fourth  year  of  his  mission,  Muhammad  is  said  to  have
hazarded  the  step  of  mounting  the  Safa,  a  slight  eminence  in  one  of  the

110  THE    KORAN.

Verily,  "We  -will  maintain  thy  cause  against  those  who

deride  tliee,
Who  set  up  other  gods  with  God  :  and  at  last  shall

they  know  tJieir  folhj.
Now  know  We  that  thy  heart  is  distressed^  at  what

they  say ;
But  do  thou  celebrate  the  praise  of  thy  Lord,  and  be  of

those  who  bow  down  in  worship ;
And  serve  thy  Lord  till  the  certainty  ^  overtake  thee.

[LVIIT.]

SURA  XIX.3— MARY.

Mecca. — 98  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Kaf.  Ha.  Ya.  Ain.  Sad.*     A   recital   of  thy   Lord's

mercy  to  his  servant  Zachariah;
When  he  called  upon  his  Lord  with  secret^  calling.
He  said  :  "  0  Lord,  verily  my  bones  are  weak,  and  the

hoar  hairs  glisten  on  my  head,

streets  of  Mecca,  and  publicly  preached  to  the  Koreish.  The  authorities
are  given  in  Sprenger,  Lebeu,  i.  525,  and  p.  177  of  the  Life  (Allahabad).

'  Lit.  contracted.  ^  Death.

3  Comp.  the  first  .37  verses  of  this  Sura  ^ith  Sura  iii.  35-57,  with  refer-
ence to  the  different  .style  adopted  by  Muhaniniad  in  the  later  Suras,  pro-
bably for  the  purpose  of  avoiding  the  ini]>utation  of  his  being  merely  a
poet,  a  sorcerer,  or  person  possessed.  Sura  Iii  20,  30  ;  xxi.  5  ;  Ixviii.  2,
51. — This  Sura  is  one  of  the  fullest  and  earliest  Koranic  Gospel  Histories,
and  was  recited  to  the  Nagash  or  King  of  Ethiopia,  in  the  presence  of  the
ambassadors  of  the  Koreish.  His.  220  ;  Caussin,  i.  322  ;  Sprenger  (Life
of  M.),  p.  193.

■'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  1,  p.  16.  Golius  conjectured  that  these  letters  repre-
sent coh  ya'ax,  thus  hr  covjiselled,  and  that  they  were  added  by  some. Jewish
scribe.  Sprenger  (Journ.  of  As.  Soc.  of  Bengal,  xx.  2S())  arnuiges  them  as
Ain,  Sad,  Kaf,  Ha,  Ya,  and  supposes  them  to  be  taken  from  the  Arabic
■words  for  Aim  {Jesvx)  of  the  Naznrenes,  King  of  the  Jews.  But  we  can
hardly  imagine  that  Muhammad  would  ascribe  such  a  title  to  our  Lord,
and  the  word  which  Dr.  Sprenger  uses  for  Jev:s  is  not  the  form  peculiar  to
the  Koran.  '  Lit.  in  secret.

THE    KORAX.  Ill

And   never,   Lord,   have    I   prayed   to  Thee   with   ill

success.
But  now  I  have  fear$  for  my  kindred  after  me ;  ^  and

my  wife  is  barren  :
Give  me,  then,  a  successor  as  thy  special  gift,-  who

shall    be   my  heir  and   an   heir  of  the   family  of

Jacob  :     and    make    him.    Lord,  well-pleasing   to

Thee.

}}

— 0  Zachariah  !  verily  AVe  announce  to  thee  a  son, —

his  name  John  :
That  name  AVe  have  given  to  none  before  him/'  ^
He  said  :  "  0  mv  Lord  !  how  when  mv  wife  is  barren

shall  I  have  a  son,  and  when  I  have  now  reached

old  age,  failing  in  my  powers?  "
10     He  said:   "  So  shall  it  be.     Thy  Lord  hath  said,  Easy

is  this  to  !Me,  for  I  created  thee  aforetime  when

thou  wast  nothing.^'
He  said  :  "  Vouchsafe  me,  0  my  Lord  !    a  sign.^^     He

said :   "  Thy  sign  shail  be   that  for  three  nights,

though    sound    in   health,    thou    speakest   not  to

man.'^

And  he  came  forth  from  the  sanctuary  to  his  people,

and  made  signs  to  them  as  though  he  would  say,

*'  Praise  God  at  morn  and  even.^'
We  said  :  "0  John!   receive  the  Book  with  purpose

of  heart  :  "  * — and  We  bestowed  on  him  wisdom

while  yet  a  child ;
And  mercifulness  from  Ourself,  and  purity ;  and  pious

was  he,  and  duteous  to  his  parents  ;  and  not  proud,

rebellious ;
And  peace  was  on  him  on  the  day  he  was  born,  and

the  day  of  his  death,  and  shall  be  on  the  day  when

he  shall  be  raised  to  life  !
%  And  make  mention   in   the  Book,  of  Mary,  when  she

went  apart  from  her  family  to  a  place  eastward,^

'  Lest  they  should  desert  the  worship  of  the  God  of  Israel.

"  Lit.  from  before  thee.

'  Ar.  Yahia.  It  may  be  true  that  the  name  in  this  form  had  never  been
given.  Other\vise,  we  have  in  this  passa&e  a  niisunderstandinjc  of  Luke  i.
61,  as  well  as  iirnoranee  of  the  Jewish  tjcriptiires.  Comp.  2  Kinj.'s  xxv.
23  ;  1  Chron.  iii.  10  ;  Ezra  viii.  12  ;  Jereni.  xl.  8.  Some  commentators
try  to  avoid  the  difficulty  by  renderinjr  samiyan,  deserving  of  the  name.
But  the  word  means  literally  a  namesake.

*  Or,  v:ith  firm  resolve.     See  Sura  [xcvii.]  iii.  36.     The  speaker  is  God.

*  To  an  eastern  chamber  in  the  temple  to  pray.  Or  it  may  mean,  to
some  place  eastward  from  Jerusalem,  or  from  the  house  of  her  parents.

112  THE    KORAN.

And  took  a  veil  fo  aJirovd  hcrsrlf  from  them  :  ^  and  We

sent  our  spirit  -  to  her^  and  he  appeared  before  her

like  a  perfect  man.'
She  said  :   "  I  %  for  refuge  from  tliee  to  the  God  of

Mercy,  if  thou  /earest  Him  !  "
He  said  :   "  I  am  only  a  messenger  of  thy  Lord,  that  I

may  bestow  on  thee  a  holy  son/'
20     She  said:   ''How  shall  I  have  a  son,  when  man  hath

not  touched  me,  and  I  am  not  unchaste?"
He  said  :    "  So    shall    it   be.    -^'hy   Lord   hath    said :

'  Easy  is  this  with  Me  ;  '  and  We  will  assuredly

make  him  a  sign  to  mankind,  and  a  mercy  from

Us.     For  it  is  a  thing  decreed."
And   she   conceived  him,*  and  retired  with  him  to  a

far-off  place.
And   the   throes  came  upon   her^    at  the  trunk   of  a

palm.     She  said  :    "  Oh,  would  that  I  had  died

ere  this,  and  been    a   thing  forgotten,  forgotten

quite  !  "
And  one  cried  to  her  from  below  her :  ^  "  Grieve  not

thou,  thy  Lord  hath  provided  a  streamlet  at  thy

feet  :—
And  shako  the  trunk  of  the  palm-tree  toward  thee  :  7

it  will  drop  fresh  ripe  dates  ready  gathered  upon

thee.
Eat   then    and    drink,    and  be  of  cheerful  eye  :  ^  and

shouldst  thou  sec  any  one  of  mankind,
Then  say, — Verily,  I  have  vowed  a  fast  unto  the  God

of  mercy ;  to   no  one   therefore  will  I  speak  this

day."

'  Thus  the  Protev.  Jac.  c.  12  says  that  Mary,  althowrjh  at  a  later  period,
iicpvfitv  'tnvTi)v  anb  riuv  u'luii'  'l(T^)aj|\.■ — But  Wahl,  she  laid  aside  her  veil.

2  Gabriel.

'  See  Sura  [Ixxxix.]  vi.  9.  Or,  he  appeared  to  her  a  man,  perfect  in
form.     Ullm.  schonr/fhiliht.

*  It  is  quite  clear  from  this  passage,  and  from  verse  36,  that  Muhammad
believed  Jesus  to  have  been  conceived  by  an  act  of  the  divine  will.  Comp.
Sura  [xcvii.]  iii.  .'")2  ;  see  also  note  at  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  81.

*  Or,  fhe  thrnes  urged  hir  to  the  friivk  of,  etc.

*  This  was  either  the  Infant  which  si)oke  as  soon  as  born,  or  Gabriel.
Comp.  Thilo  Cod.  Apoc.  136-139  on  this  passage.  Beidhawi  explains  :
from  hehitul  the  palm-tree.

7  See  Thilo  Cod.  Apoc.  N.T.  p.  13S,!ni(l  thoTTist.  Nat.  Mar.  c.  SO^vhich
connects  similar  incidents  with  the  flic^ht  into  ii<j;y\)t.  Thus  also  Latoiia,
'Afiipi  S^  <l>oh'iKi  jiaXe  Trijxn,  Call.  H.  in  ApoU.  and  kXi0>7  <poivtKO£  irori
'^^p^^l^'l>v,  H.  in  Delum.

^  Lit.  cool  thine  eye  ;  i.e.  probably,  by  not  inflaming  it  with  tears.  The
birth  of  a  son  is  still  called  korrat  ol  ain.

THE    KORAN.  113

Then  came  she  with  the  hahe  to  her  people,  bearing

him.     They  said,  "  O  Mary  !  assuredly  now  hast

thou  done  a  strange  thing  !
0  sister  of  Aaron  ! '  chy  father  was  not  a  wicked  man,

nor  unchaste  thy  mother.'"
30     And  she  made  a  sign  to  -them,  pointing  towards  the

hahe.     They  said,  ''  How  shall  we  speak  with  him

who  is  in  the  cradle,  an  infant  ?  "
It  said/-  '^Verily,  I  am  the  servant  of  God;  He  hath

given  me  the   Book,   and   He   hath   made  me  a

prophet ;
And  He  hath  made  me  blessed  wherever  I  may  be,

and  hath  enjoined  me  prayer  and  almsgiving  so

long  as  I  shall  live ;
And  to  be  duteous  to  her  that  bare  me  :  and  He  hath

not  made  me  proud,  wretched.
And  the  peace  of  God  was  on  me  the  day  I  was  born,

and  ivill  he  the  day  I  shall  die,  and  the  day  I  shall

be  raised  to  life."
This  is  Jesus,^  the  son  of  Mary ;  this  is  a  statement  of

the  truth  concerning  which  they  doubt.
Tu  beseemeth  not  God  to  beget  a  son.     Glory  be  to

Him  !  when  He  decreeth  a  thing,  He  only  saith

to  it,  Be,  and  it  Is.*
And  verily,  God  is  my  Lord   and   your  Lord  ;  adore

Him  then.     This  is  a  right  way.
But  The  Sects  ^  have  fallen  to  variance  among  them-
selves ahout  Jesus  :  and  woe,  because  of  the  wit-

nessing-place  of  a  great  day,  to  those  who  believe

not  !
Make  them  hear,  and  make  them  behold  a  day  when

they  shall  come   before    Us  !     But  the  offenders

this  day  are  in  a  manifest  error.
40     And  warn  them  of  a  day  of  sighing  when  the  decree

'  The  anachronism  is  probably  only  apparent.  See  Sura  iii.  1,  n.  Mu-
hammad may  have  supposed  that  this  Aaron  (or  Harun)  was  the  son  of
Imran  and  Anna.  Or,  if  Aaron  the  brother  of  Moses  be  meant,  Mary  may
be  called  his  sister,  either  because  she  was  of  the  Levitical  race,  or  by  way
of  comparison.  2  ggg  g^-j^  [cxiv.]  v.  109.

^  Ar.  Im,  the  letters  of  the  Hebrew  form  of  the  word  being  reversed
and  slightly  altered  so  as  to  make  the  name  nearly  identical  with  Esau.
Judopi  scelestissumi  fuerunt  in  hoc  Mahumeto  magistri,  Judajis  vero  Di'a-
bolus  !  says  Maracci.

■*  From  the  change  in  the  rhyme,  and  from  the  more  polemical  tone  of
the  following  five  verses,  it  may  be  infeiTed  that  they  were  added  at  a
somewhat  later  period.  *  Or,  the  Heathen.

I

114  THE    KORAN.

shall  be  accomplished,  though  they  are  sunk  in

heedlessness  and  believe  not.
Verily,  We  will  inherit  the  earth  and  all  who  are  upon

it,  and  to  Us  shall  they  return.
^  Make  mention  also  in  the  Book,  of  Abraham  ;  for  he

was  a  man  of  truth,  a  Prophet.^
When  he  said  to  his  father,  ''  O  my  father  !  why  dost

thou  worship  that  which  heareth  not,  neither  seeth,

nor  proliteth  thee  aught  ?    _
0  my  father  !   verily  now  hath  a  knowledge  come  to

me   which    hath   not   come   to  thee.     Follow   me

therefore — I  will  guide  thee  into  the  right  path ;
O  my  father  !  worship  not  Satan ;  verily  Satan  was  a

rebel  against  the  God  of  Mercy  ;
O  my  father  !  indeed  I  fear  lest  a  chastisement  from

the  God  of  Mercy  light  upon  thee,  and  thou  be-
come Satan's  vassal. ■''
He  said,    ''  Art  thou  about  to  forsake  ^  my  Gods,  O

A.braham  ?     If  thou   forbear   not,    I    will    surely

stone  thee.       Begone    from    me   for  a  length  of

time.''
He  said,  "  Peace  be  on  thee  !     I  will  pray  my  Lord

for  thy  forgiveness;  verily  He  is  gracious  to  me:
But  I  will  separate  myself  from  you,  and  the  gods  ye

call  on   beside  God,  and  on  ray  Lord  will  I  call.

Haply,  in  my  prayers  to  my  Lord  1  shall  not  be

disappointed."
50     And  when  he  had  separated  himself  from  them  and  that

which  they  worshipped  beside  God,  We  bestowed

on  liim  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  each  of  them  We  made

a  prophet :
And  We  bestowed  gifts  on   them   of  our  mercy,  and

gave  them  the  lofty  tongue  of  truth.''
f  And  commemorate  Moses  in   '^  the  Book ; "  he  of  a

truth  was    sincere    in    his    faith   and    became   an

Apostle,  a  Prophet :
From  the   right    side    of  the    mountain  We  called  to

'  The  title  Nahi,  prophet,  is  used  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  as  de-
positaries of  the  worship  of  the  one  true  Ood,  but  with  a  mission  restricted
to  their  own  families  ;  whereas  Houd,  Saloh,  Slioaib,  etc.,  are  designated
as  {Resonl)  apostles  and  envoys,  charged  with  a  more  extended  mission  to
the  tribes  of  Arabia.  In  Moses,  Jesus,  and  Muhammad,  etc.,  are  united
the  office  and  gift  both  of  prophet  {nabi)  and  apostle  {resoul).

'  Lit.  art  thou  averse  *rom.

'  Made  them  to  be  hi^nly  praised.  -Beidh.

THE    KORAN.  115

him,    and    caused  him   to   draw  nigh  to  Us  for
secret  converse :

And  We  bestowed  on  him  of  our  mercy  his  brother
Aaron,  a  Propheu.
^  And  commemorate  Ismael  in  "  the  Book  ;  "  he  verily
was  true  to  his  promise,  and  became  an  Apostle,
a  Prophet ;

And   used    to    enjoin    prayer   and    almsgiving    on  his
people,  and  was  well-pleasing  to  his  Lord.
^  And  commemorate  Edris  ^  in  "  the   Book ;  "  verily  he
was  a  man  of  truth,  a  Prophet :

And  We  uplifted  him  to  a  place  on  high.-

These  are  they  among  the  prophets  of  the  posterity
of  Adam^  and  among  those  whom  We  bare  with
Noah,  and  among  the  posterity  of  Abraham  and
Israel,  and  among  those  whom  We  have  guided
and  chosen,  to  whom  God  hath  showed  favour.
When  the  signs  of  the  God  of  Mercy  were  re-
hearsed to  them,  the^"  bowed  down  worshipping
and  weeping.
GO  But  a  succeeding  generation  have  come  in  their  place
after  them  :  tliey  have  been  unmindful  of  prayer,
and  have  gone  after  iheir  own  lusts ;  and  in  the
end  they  shall  meet  with  destruction,

Save  those  who  have  turned  to  God  and  believed  and
done  that  which  is  right,  these  shall  enter  the
Garden,  and  in  nought  shall  they  be  wronged  :

Gardens  ^  of  Eden,  which  the  God  of  Mercy  hath  pro-
mised to  his  servants,  though  yet  unseen  :  *  truly
his  promise  shall  come  to  pass  :

No  vain  discourse  shall  they  hear  therein,  hut  only
"  Peace  ; "  and  their  food  shall  therein  be  given
them  at  morn  and  even  :

'  Enoch.  Beidhawi  derives  the  name  Edris  from  the  Ar.  darasa,  to
search  out,  with  reference  to  his  knowledge  of  divine  mysteries.  The  Heb.
Enoch,  in  like  manner,  means  initiated.

'  Comp.  Gen.  v.  24,  and  the  tract  Derek  Erez  in  Midr.  Jalkut,  c.  42,
where  Enoch  is  reckoned  among  the  nine — according  to  other  TalmndLsts,
f?i !'r^ea—(Schra?der'3  Talm.  und  Rabb.  Judenthum) — individuals  who
were  exempted  from  death  and  taken  straight  to  Paradise.  It  should  be
observed  that  both  here  and  Sura  xxi.  8-3,  Edris  is  named  after  Ismael.

^  Im  plural  ohnstreitig,  um  die  Grosse  zu  bezeichnen.—  Freyt.  Einl.
p  479.     On  the  word  Eden  see  Geiger,  p.  47-8.

*  Maracci  and  Beidh.iwi,  in  absentia.  Sale,  as  an  object  of  faith.  Beid-
hawi  ad  f..  in  reward  for  their  secret  faith.  Ullmann, /ur  die  verborgene
Zukunft.

I  2

116  THE    KORAN.

This  the  Garden  which  We  will  make  the  heritage  of
those  our  servants  who  have  feared  Us.
^  Moreover  AVe^  come  not  down  from  Ilcaveii  but  by  thy
Lord^s  command.  His,  whatever  is  before  us  and
whatever  is  behind  us,  and  whatever  is  between
the  two  !     And  thy  Lord  is  not  forgetful, —

Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,  and  of  all  that
is  between  them  !  Worship  Him,  then,  and  abide
thou  steadfast  in  his  worship.  Knowest  thou  any
other  of  the  same  name  ?  ^

Man  saith  :  ''  What  !  after  I  am  dead,  shall  I  indeed
be  brought  forth  alive  ?  "

Doth  not  man  bear  in  mind  that  We  made  him  at  first,
when  he  was  nought  ?

And  I  swear  by  thy  Lord,  We  will  surely  gather  to-
gether them  and  the  Satans  :  then  will  We  surely
set  them  on  their  knees  round  Hell :
70  Then  will  We  surely  take  forth  from  every  band  those
of  them  who  have  been  stoutest  in  proud  rebellion
against  the  Merciful ;

Then  shall  We  know  right  well  to  whom  its  burning  is
most  due  :

And  verily  no  one  is  there  of  you  who  shall  not  go
down  3  unto  it — This  is  a  settled -decree  with  thy
Lord —

Then  will  We  deliver  those  who  feared  God,  and  the
wicked  will  We  leave  in  it  on  their  knees.

And  when  our  clear  signs  are  rehearsed  to  them,  the
unbelievers  say  to  those  who  have  believed,  "Which
of  the  two  parties  *  is  in  the  best  plight  ?  and  which
is  the  most  goodly  company  ?  "

But  how  many  generations  have  We  brought  to  ruin
before  them,  who  surpassed  them  in  riches  and  in
splendour  !

Say  :  As  to  those  who  are  in  error,  the  God  of  Mercy
will  surely  lengthen  out  to  them  a  length  of  days.

Until  when  thoy  have  seen  that  with  which  they
are  threatened,  whether  it  be  some  present  chas-

'  This  verse  is  to  be  understood  as  an  answer  on  the  part  of  Ga.briel  to
Muhammad's  complaints  of  the  long  intervals  l)ctwcen  tlic  revelations.

2  The  idolaters  called  their  deities  Gods,  but  as  Polytheists  were  unused
to  the  singular  Allah,  God.     Lit.  a  namesake.

'  Even  the  pious  on  their  way  to  Paradise  are  to  pass  the  confines  of
Hell.

■*  The  Koreish,  or  the  Muslims.

THE    KORAN.  117

tisement,  or  whctber  it  be  "  the  Hour/^  ^  tliey  sliall

tlicu  know  which  is  iu  the  worse  state,  and  which

the  more  weak  in  forces  :
But   God   will    increase    the    guidance  of  the  already-
guided.
And  good  works  which  abide,  are  in  thy  Lord's  sight

better  in  respect  of  guerdon,  and  better  in  the

issue  than  all  worldly  goods.
80     Hast  thou  mai'ked  him  who  hath  disbelieved  our  siorns,

and  said,  "  I  shall  surely  have  riches  and  children

bestowed  upon  me  "  ?
Hath  he  mounted  up  into  the  secrets  of  God  ?     Hath

he  made  a  compact  with  the  God  of  Mercy  ?
No  !  We  will  write  down  what  he  saith,  and  will  lengthen

the  length  of  his  chastisement :
And  We  will  cause  him  to  inherit  what  he  spake  of,

and  he  shall  come  before  Us  all  alone.
Also  they  have  taken  other  gods  beside  God  to  be  their

help  :  -
But   it   shall  not  be ;    those  gods  will   disavow  their

worship  and  will  become  their  enemies.
Seest  thou  not  that  We  send  the  Satans  against  the

unbelievers  to  urge  them  into  sin  ?
^Vherefore  be  not  thou  in  haste  with  them  ;  ^  only  a

small  number  of  days  do  We  number  to  them.
One  day  We  will  gather  the  CrocZ-fearing  unto  the  God

of  Mercy  with  honours  due  :  ^
But  the  sinners  will  AVe  drive  into  Hell,  like  flocks

driven  to  the  watering.
90     None  shall  meet  with  intercession  save  he  who  hath

entered  into  covenant  ^  with  the  God  of  Mercy.
1  And  they  say  :  "  The  Merciful  hath  begotten  offspring.^'

Now  have  ye  asserted  a  monstrous  thing  !
Almost  might  the  Heavens  be  rent  thereat,  and  the

Earth    cleave    asunder,    and    the    mountains   fall

down  in  fragments.
That  they  ascribe  a  son  to   the  Merciful  when  it  be-

seemeth  not  the  Merciful  to  besret  a  son  !

'C3"

'  Used  here  of  the  judgment.  This  use  of  the  word  is,  of  course,  due  to
Christian  influence.     See  xxii.  54.

'  Or,  glory,  strength.

'  To  call  down  judgments  upon  them.

■*  As  ambassadors  come  into  the  presence  of  a  prince. — Sale.  This  is
implied  in  the  original.

*  Or,  5a ic  he  who  hath  entered  into  (lit.  taken)  alliance.

118  THE    KORAN.

Verily  there  is  none  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth
but  shall  approach  the  God  of  Mercy  as  a  servant.
Already  hath  He  taken  note  of  them,  and  num-
bered them  with  exact  numbering  :

And  each  of  theta  shall  come  to  Him,  on  the  day  of
Resurrection,  singly :

But  verily  love  will  the  God  of  Mercy  vouchsafe  to
those  who  have  believed  and  dune  the  things  that
be  right.
^  And  We  have  made  this  Koran  easy  and  in  thine  own
tongue,  only  that  thou  mayest  announce  glad
tidings  by  it  to  the  God-fearing,  and  that  thou
mayest  warn  the  contentious  by  it.

And  how  many  generations  have  We  destroyed  before
them  !  Canst  thou  search  out  any  one  of  them  ?
or  canst  thou  hear  a  whisper  from  them  ?

[LIX.]

SURA  XXXVIIL— SAD.
Mecca. — 88  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

SAD.^  By  the  Koran  full  of  warning !  But  the  un-
believers are  absorbed  in  pride  and  in  contention
ivith  thee.

How  many  generations  have  We  destroyed  before
them  !  And  they  cried  for  merci/,  but  no  time
was  it  of  escape  !

And  they  marvel  that  a  warner  from  among  themselves
hath  come  to  them  ;  and  the  unbelievers  say,
"  This  is  a  sorcerer,  a  liar  :

Maketh  he  the  gods  to  be  but  one  god  ?  A  strange
thing  forsooth  is  this  !  "

And  their  chiefs  went  their  way  :  "  Go,"  said  they,

'  The  letter  S.     See  Sura  Ixviii.  p.  16.

THE    KORAN.  119

"  and  cleave    steadfastly  ^  to  your  gods — Ye  see

the  thing  aimed  at^ —
We  heard  not  of  this  in  the  last  religion ;  ^  verily  it  is

but  a  lying  devi'^e  ;
To  him  alone  among  us  hath  the  hook  of  warning  been

sent  down  ?  " — Nay,  they  are  in  doubt  as  to  my

warnings  !      Nay,  they  have  not  yet  tasted  my

chastisement  !
Are  the  treasures  of  the  mercy  of  thy  Lord,  the  Mighty,

the  bounteous,  in  their  hands  ?
Is  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth  and  of

all  that  is  between  them  theirs  ?     Then  let  them

mount  up  into  the  tracts  of  Heaven  !
10     Any  army  of  confederates'*  shall  here  be  routed.

Before  them  the  people  of  Noah  and  Ad  and  Pharaoh

the  impaler^  treated  their  prophets  as  impostors;
And  Thamood,  and  the  people  of  Lot,  and  the  dwellers

in  the  forest ;  these  were  the  confederates  ;
All  verily   did   naught   but   charge   the   apostles  with

falsehood  :  Just  therefore  my  retribution.
And  these  (Meccans)    await   but    one    single   trumpet

blast — There  shall  be  no  delaying  it —
Yet  they  say,   "  0  our  Lord  !  hasten  our  sentence  to

us,  before  the  day  of  reckoning. ^^
Put  thou  up  with  what  they  say  :  and  remember  our

servant  David,  a  man  strong  of  hand  ;  ^  one  verily

who  turned  to  Us  in  penitence  :
Lo,  We  constrained  the  mountains ''  to  join  with  him  in

lauds  at  even  and  at  sunrise  ;
And  the  assembled  birds  which  would  all  return  to

him ;
And  We   stablished  his  kingdom  :    and  wisdom,  and

skill  to  pronounce  clear  decisions,  did  We  bestow

on  him.

'  These  verses  are  said  to  have  been  revealed  when,  upon  the  conversion
of  Omar,  the  Koreish  went  in  a  body  to  Abu  Talib  and  requested  him  to
■withdraw  his  protection  from  Muhammad  ;  but  being  put  to  silence  by  the
Litter,  departed  in  great  confusion.     Wah.  Beidh.

'  Lit.  Verily  this  is  the  thing  desired,  viz.  to  withdraw  you  from  them.

'  That  is,  in  the  Christian  religion,  which  teaches,  Muhammad  ironically
implies,  a  plurality  of  Gods.

*  This  may  idlude  to  the  so-called  ''  confederacy"  of  the  Koreish  against
Muhammad  ;  or,  more  generally,  the  heathen,  Idolaters.     Thus  v.  12.

*  See  Sura  Ixxxix.  9,  p.  ,39.

*  Praditi  (manibns)  virtutc. — Mar.
'  Comp.  Ps.  cxlviii.  9,  10.

120  THE   KORAN.

20  And  hath  the  story  of  the  two  pleaders  ^  reached  thee,
0  Muhammad,  when  they  climbed  over  the  wall
of  the  private  apartment  ?

When  they  entered  in  upon  David  and  he  was  fright-
ened at  them,  they  said,  "  13e  not  afraid,  we  are
two  opposing  parties  :  one  of  us  hath  wronged  the
other.  Judge  therefore  with  truth  between  us,
and  be  not  unjust,  but  guide  us  to  the  right  way.

Now  this  my  brother  had  ninety  and  nine  ewes,  and  I
had  biit  a  single  ewe,  and  he  said,  '  Commit  her
to  my  care  -/  and  he  prevailed  over  me  in  the
dispute.^'

He  said,  "  Certainly  he  hath  wronged  thee  in  asking
for  thine  ewe  to  add  her  to  his  own  ewes  :  and
truly  many  who  are  mixed  up  in  business  do  one
another  wrong — except  those  who  believe  and  do
the  things  that  are  right ;  and  few  is  it  that  they
are  ! ''  And  David  perceived  that  it  was  himself
We  proved,  and  asked  pardon  of  his  Lord^  and
fell  down  bowing  and  repented.

So  We  forgave  him  that  his  sin ;  and  truly  he  shall  have
with  Us  a  near  approach,  and  an  excellent  retreat
in  Paradise.

"  0  David  !  verily  We  have  made  thee  a  vicegerent  upon*
earth.  Judge  therefore  between  men  with  truth,
and  follow  not  thy  passions,  lest  they  cause  thee
to  err  from  the  way  of  God.  Verily  they  who  err
from  the  way  of  God  shall  meet  with  severe  chas-
tisement, for  that  they  have  forgotten  the  day  of
reckoning.

We  have  not  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth  and
what  is  between  them  for  nought.  That  is  the
thought  of  unbelievers  ;  but  woe  to  those  who
believe  not,  because  of  the  fire  !

Shall  We  treat  those  who  believe  and  do  the  things
that  are  right  like  those  who  propagate  evil  on
the  earth  ?  Shall  We  treat  the  God-fearing  like
the  impious  ?

A  blessed  Book^  have  We  sent  down  to  thee,  that  men
may  meditate  its  verses,  and  that  those  endued
with  understanding  may  be  admonished."

'  Two  angels  who  pretended  to  appeal  to  David  in  order  to  convince
him  of  his  sin  in  the  matter  of  Uriah's  wife.     Comp.  1  Sam.  xii.

'  The  Psalms,  if  we  suppose  with  Noldeke,  p.  U'J,  that  David  is  still  ad-
dressed :  the  Koran,  if  with  Sale  we  refer  the  passage  to  Muhammad.

THE    KORAN.  121

^  And  Solomon  gave  We  unto  David^ — an  excellent  ser-
vant— verily  he  was  one  who  turned  Godward.
30     Bemcmher  when  at    eventide    the   pranciutr^  coursers
were  set  before  liiin^

And  he  said,  ''  Truly  I  have  loved  the  good  of  tliis
world  so  as  to  neglect  all  thought  of  my  Lord,  till
the  sun  hath  been  hidden  by  the  veil  of  darkness?

Bring  them  back  to  me '' — And  he  began  to  sever  the
legs  and  necks.

We  also  made  trial  of  Solomon,  and  placed  a  phantom^
on  his  throne  :  whereupon  he  returned  to  Us  in
penitence.

He  said,  0  my  Lord  !  pardon  me,  and  give  me  a  do-
minion that  may  not  be  meet  for  any  one  beside
me ;  for  Thou  verily  art  the  liberal  giver.

So  We  subjected  the  wind  to  him ;  it  ran  softly  at  his
bidding,  whithersoever  he  directed  it :

And  the  Satans — every  builder  and  diver —

And  others  bound  in  chains  :  ^

"  This,^'  said  We,  "  is  oar  gift :  be  bounteous  then,
or  withhold  thy  favours ;  no  account  shalt  thou
render '' —

And  verily  with  Us  shall  he  have  a  near  access  and  an
excellent  retreat.
40  ^  And  remember  our  servant  Job  when  he  cried  to
his  Lord,  ''  Satan  hath  laid  on  me  ^  disease  and
pain."

"  Stamp,"  said  We,  "  with  thy  foot.  This  ^  is  a  place
to  wash  in,  cool,  and  a  beverage."

•  The  Commentators  say  that  the  word  used  in  the  original  implies  that
the  mares  stood  on  three  feet,  and  touched  the  ground  -with  the  edge  of
the  fourth  foot.     Lit.  so  as  to  neglect  the  thought  of,  &c.

^  Solomon,  in  his  admiration  of  these  horses,  the  result,  we  are  told,  of
David's  or  his  own  conquests,  forgot  the  hour  of  evening  prayer,  and  when
aware  of  his  fault  commenced  their  slaughter.  The  Tr.  Sanhedr.  fol.  21,
mentions  Solomon's  love  for  horses,  and  that  he  determined  to  have  a  large
stud  ;  yet  not  to  send  the  people  to  Egypt  (Deut.  xvii.  16),  but  to  have
them  brought  to  him  out  of  Egypt  (1  Kings  x.  28).

»  Lit.  a  body.  One  of  the  Djinn.  The  absurd  fiction  may  be  seen  in
extenso  in  Sale.  Compare  Tr.  Sanhedr.  fol.  20,  b,  and  Midr.  Jalkut  on
1  Kings  vi.  §  182.

■•  Thus  the  second  Targum  on  Esther  i.  2,  mentions  the  four  different
kinds  of  Demons  which  were  "  given  into  the  hand"  of  Solomon,— a  legend
derived  from  a  misunderstanding  of  Eccl.  ii.  8.

^  Hath  toxiched  me  vith.

^  The  fountain  which  had  sprung  up.  To  this  history  the  Talmudists
have  no  allusion.

122  THE    KORAN.

And  We  gave  him  back  his  family,  and  as  many  more

with  them,  in  our  mercy;    and  as  a  monition  to

men  of  understanding.
And  We  said,  "  Take  in  ihine  hand  a  rod,  and  strike '

with  it,  nor  break  thine  oath."     Verily,  We  found

him  patient !
How  excellent  a  servant  !     Verily,  he  was  one  who

turned  to  Us  !
1[  And  remember  our  servants  Abraham  and  Isaac  and

Jacob,  men  of  might  and  virion  ; "
Verily  with  this  cleansing  did  We  cleanse  them — the

remembrance  of  the  abode  of  Paradise.^
And  verily,  they  were,  in  our  sight,  of  the  elect  and  of

the  best.
And  remember  Ishmael  and  Elisha  and  Dhoulkefl,'*  for

all  these  were  of  the  best.
This  is  a  monition :    and  verily,  for  the  Godfearing  is

a  goodly  retreat :
50     Gardens  of  Eden — its  portals  opened  to  them —

Therein   reclining,  they  call  therein  for  many  a  fruit

and  drink :
And  with  them,  are  the  virgins  of  their  own  age,  with

modest  retiring  glances  : —
"  This  is  what  ye  were  promised  at  the  day  of  reck-
oning ;
Lo  !  this  is  our  provision :  it  shall  never  fail."
Even  so.     But  verily,  for  the  evil-doers  is  a  wretched

home —
Hell — wherein  they  shall  be  burned :  how  wretched  a

bed!
Even  so.     Let  them  then  taste  it — boiling  water  and

gore.
And  other  things  of  like  kind  in  union  therewith  !
To  their  leaders  it  shall  he  said,  "  This  company  shall

rush  in  headlong  with  you :    No  welcomes  await

them  !     Lo,  they  shall  bo  burned  in  the  fire.^'
GO     They  shall  say  :    "  But  ye  !    no  welcome  for  you  !     It

'  Thy  wife— on  whom  hfi  had  sworn  that  he  would  inflict  an  hundred
blows,  because  she  had  absented  herself  from  him  when  in  need  of  her
assistance,  or  for  her  words  (Job  ii.  9).  The  oath  was  kept,  we  are  told,
by  his  giving  her  one  blow  with  a  rod  of  a  hundred  stalks.  This  passage
is  often  quoted  by  the  Muslims  as  authorizing  any  similar  manner  of  re-
lease from  an  oath  inconsiderately  taken.

'  Lit.  men  of  haiul  and  of  sifjht.     Sale,  slrmwms  and  prjulent.

'  i.  e.  by  their  frequently  calling  to  mind  the  life  to  come.

*  V.  n.  on  Sur.  xxi.  Hb.

THE    KORAN.  123

was  ye  who  brought  it  upon  us,  and  wretched  is

the  abode  !  "
They  will  say  :   ''  0  our  Lord  :  increase  then  twofold  in

the  fire^  the  praishment  of  him  who  hath  brought

it  upon  us/'
And  they  will  say :  "  Why  see  we  not  the  men  whom

we  numbered  amoug  the  wicked —
Whom  we  treated  with  ridicule  ?     Have  they  escaped

our  eyes  ?  "  ^
Verily  this  is  truth — the  wrangling  of  the  inmates  of

the  fire.
%  Say  :  I  am  but  a  warner ;  and  there  is  no  God  but  God

the  One,  the  Almighty  !
Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,  and  of  all  that

is  between  them,-  the  Potent,  the  Forgiving  !
Sat  :  It  is  a  weighty  message,^
From  which  ye  turn  aside  !
No  knowledge  had  I  of  what  passed  among  the  celestial

chiefs  when  they  disnuted,*
70     — Verily,  it  hath  been  revealed  to  me  only  because  I

am  a  public  preacher —
When  thy  Lord  said  to  the  angels,  ''  I  am  about  to

create  man  of  clay  /
When  therefore  I  have  formed  him  and  breathed  of  my

spirit  into  him,  then  worshipping  fall  down  before

him.''
And  the  angels  prostrated  themselves,  all  of  them  in  a

body.
Save  Eblis.     He  swelled  with  pride,  and  became  an

unbeliever.
"0  Eblis,"  said  God,  ''what  hindereth  thee  from  pro-
strating thyself  before  him  whom  I  have  created

with  mine  own  hands  ?
Is  it  that  thou  art  puffed  up  with  pride  ?  or  art  thou  of

the  lofty  ones  ?  "
He  said :  ''I  am  more  excellent  than  he  :  me  hast  Thou

'  Lit.  or  do  the  eyes  wander  from  them?

*  See  verses  9,  26,  above.  It  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  peculiari-
ties of  Muhammad,  as  a  person  very  deKcient  in  iraa^nation,  to  dwell
upon  and  repeat  the  same  ideas  with  an  intensity  which  is  at  once  an  evi-
dence of  deep  personal  conviction  and  consciousness,  and  well  suited  to
impress  the  mind  and  memory,  of  the  simple  Arabian  especially.

^  The  connection  between  the  concluding  episode  and  the  preceding  part
of  the  Sura  does  not  seem  very  clear.  It  probably  originated  at  a  different
but  uncertain  period.

*  About  the  creation  of  man.  *  Comp.  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  28,  S.

124  THE    KORAN.

created  of  fire :  ^   but  of  clay  hast  Thou  created

him/'
He  said  :  "  Begone  then  lienco  :  lo  !  thou  art  accursed/

and  lo  !    my  ban  shall  be  on  thee  till  the  day  of

the  reckoning/'
80     He  said :  "  O  my  Lord  !  respite  me  then  till  the  day

of  Resurrection/'
He  saidj  "One  then  verily  of  the  respited  shalt  thou  be,
Till  the  day  of  the  predetermined  time."
He  said :  "  I  swear  therefore  by  thy  glory,  that  all  of

them  will  I  surely  lead  astray,
Save  thy  servants  among  them  the  pure  in  faith."
He  said:    ''It  is  truth  then,  and  the  truth  I  speak.

With  thee  will  I  surely  fill  Hell,  and  with  such  of

them  as  shall  follow  thee,  one  and  all."
^  Say  :  I  ask  no  wage  of  you  for  this,  nor  am  I  one  of

the  specious  pretenders.
Of  a  truth  the  Koran  is  no  other  than  a  warning  to  all

creatures.
And  after  a  time  shall  ye  surely  know  its  message.

[LX.]

SURA  XXXVI.— YA.  SIN.

Mecca. — 83  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

YA.  SIN.'     By  the  wise  Koran  !
Surely  of  the  Sent  Ones,  Thou,
Upon  a  right  path  1

A  revelation  of  the  Mighty,  the  Merciful,
That  thou  shouldcst  warn  a  people  whose  fathers  were
not  warned  and  who  live  in  heedlessness  !

'  Comp.  Ps.  civ.  4.  ^  Lit.  stoned.     See  Sura  xv.  34,  p.  123.

'  This  Sura  is  said  to  have  boon  termed  by  Muhammad  "  the  heart  of
the  Koran."  It  is  recited  in  all  Muhammadan  countries  to  the  dying,  at
the  tombs  of  saints,  &c.     On  Ya  Sin,  see  Sura  Ixviii.  p.  16.

THE    KORAN.  125

Just,  now,  is  our  sentence  ^  against  most  of  them  ;  for

they  will  not  believe.
Verily  on    their  necks  have  We  placed  chains  which

reach  the  chin,  and  forced  up  are  their  heads  :
And  before  them  have  We  set  a  barrier  and  behind

them  a  barrier,  and  We  have  shrouded  them  in  a

veil,  so  that  they  shall  not  see :
And  alike  is  it  to  them  if  thou  warn  them  or  warn  them

not :  they  will  not  believe.
10     Him   only  shalt  thou  realh/  warn,  who  followeth  the

monition  and  feareth  the  God  of  mercy  in  secret :

to  him  then  announce  tidings  of  pardon,  and  of  a

noble  recompense.
Verily,  it  is  We  who  will  quicken  the  dead,  and  We

write  down  the  works  which  they  send  on  before,

and   the  traces  which  they  leave  behind :  -    and

everything  do  We  set  down  in  the  clear  Book  of

our  decrees.^
%  And  set  forth  to  them  thp  instance  of  the  people  of  the

city^  when  the  Sent  Ones  came  to  it ;
When  We  sent  two  unto  them  and  they  charged  them

both  with  imposture — therefore  with  a  third  We

strengthened  them  :  and  they  said,  "Verily  we  are

the  Sent  unto  you  of  God."
They  said,  "  Ye  are  only  men  like  us  :  Nought  hath  the

God  of  Mercy  sent  down;  In  sooth  ye  do  but  lie.^'
They  said,  "  Our  Lord  knoweth  that  we  are  indeed  sent

unto  YOU :
And  to  proclaim  a  clear  message  is  our  only  duty."
They  said,  "  Of  a  truth  we  augur  ill  from  you  :  ^  if  ye

desist  not  we  will  surely  stone  you,  and  a  grievous

punishment  will  surely  befall  you  from  us."
They  said,  "  Your  augury  of  ill  is  with  yourselves.  Will

ye  be  warned  ?  *"     Nay,  ye  are  an  erring  people."

*  Sura  xxxTiiL  85,  p.  124.

'  Lit.  ichat  they  have  done  before,  and  their  traces.

'  Lit.  in  the  dear  prototype,  that  is,  in  the  Preserved  Table,  on  which
all  the  actions  of  mankind  are  ^v^itten  down.

*  Antioch,  to  which  Jesus  is  said  to  have  sent  two  disciples  to  preach
the  unity  of  God,  and  subsequently  Simon  Peter.  This  vague  storj',  and
that  of  the  seven  sleepers  in  Sura  xviii.  are  the  only  traces  to  be  found  in
the  Koran  of  any  knowledj^e,  on  the  part  of  Muhammad,  of  the  history  of
the  Church  subsequent  to  the  day  of  Pentecost.

*  Comp.  Sura  xxvii.  48  ;  vii.  12S,  where,  as  in  this  passage,  the  word
augur  refers  to  the  mode  of  divination  practised  previous  to  Islam,  by  the
flight  of  birds.

*  Lit.  if  ye  have  been  warned  {xcill  ye  still  disbelieve  ?). .

126  THE    KORAN.

Then  from  the  end  of  the  city  a  man  came  running  :^
He  said,  '^  0  my  people  !  follow  the  Sent  Ones  ;
20     Follow  those  who  ask  not  of  you  a  recompense,  and  who
are  rig'htly  guided  ;

And  why  should  I  not  worship  Him  who  made  me,  and
to  whom  ye  shall  be  brought  back  ?

Shall  I  take  gods  beside  Him  ?  If  the  God  of  Mercy
be  pleased  to  afflict  mc,  their  intercession  will  not
avail  me  at  all,  nor  will  they  deliver  me ;

Truly  should  I  in  that  case  be  in  a  manifest  error. —

Verilv,  in  your  Lord  have  I  believed;  therefore  hear
me."2

— It  was  said  to  him,    "Enter  thou  iuto  Paradise:"

And  he  said,  "  Oh  that  my  people  knew
How  gracious  God  hath  been  to  me,  and  that  He  hath

made  me  one  of  His  honoured  ones."
But  no  army  sent  We  down  out  of  heaven  after  his

death  against  his  people,   or   in  such  manner  as

Wo  are  wont  to  send  ;
Verily,  there  was  but  one  shout /rom  Gabriel,  and  lo  !

they  were  extinct.
Alas  for  my  servants  !     No  apostle  cometh  to  them  but

they  laugh  him  to  scorn.
30     See  they  not  how  many  generations  We  have  destroyed

before  them  ?
That  not  to  false  gods  shall  they  be  brought''  back  ?
But  verily,   when  all  gathered  together,  they  shall  be

set  before  Us.
Moreover,  the  dead  earth  is  a  sign  to  them  :  Wo  quicken

it  and  bring  forth  the  grain  from  it,  and  they  eat

thereof:
And  Wo  make  in  it  gardens  of  the  date  and  vine ;  and

We  cause  springs  to  gush  forth  in  it ;
That  they  may  eafc  of  its  fruits  and  of  the  labour  of  their

hands.     Will  tliey  not  therefore  be  thankful  ?
Glory  be  to    Him,   who  hath   created   all    the    sexual

pairs  of  such  things  as  Earth  produceth,*  and  of

'  Habib,  tlie  carpenter,  Avho,  as  implied  at  verse  25,  was  martyred,  and
whose  tomb  at  Antioch  is  still  an  object  of  veneration  to  the  ISIuhamma-
dans.

'  Ullm.  following  Wahl,  renders,  J  Is  sic  (die  Stadtleute)  darauf  ihn
xchcindlich  behandleten.  The  verb  in  the  original  is  thus  used  in  the  4th
conj.  Nfildcke  supposes  that  words  to  this  effect  have  been  lost  from  the
text.     But  of  this  there  is  no  trace  in  the  Commentators.

'  Or,  (he  Apostles  shall  not  return  to  them  again.  —Ullm.

*  For  instance,  date-trees,  the  female  blossoms  of  which  were  carefully

THE    KORAN.  127

maiikind  themselves,  and  of  things  beyond  then-

ken!
A  sign  to  them  also  is  the  Night.     Wo  withdraw  the

day  from  it,  and  lo  !  they  are  plunged  in  darkness ;
And  the  Sun  hasteneth  to  her  place  of  rest — This,  the

ordinance  of  the  Misrhtv,  the  Knowing  ! —
And  as  for  the  !Moon,  We  have  decreed  stations  for  it,

till  it  change  like  an  old  withered  palm-branch  : —
40     To  the  Sun  it  is  not  given  that  she  overtake  the  Moon,

nor  doth  the  night  outstrip  the  day ;  but  each  in

its  own  sphere  doth  move  onwards.
It  is  also  a  sign  to  them  that  We  bare  their  posterity

in  the  fuU-ladcn  Ark  ;
And  that  We  have  made  for  them  vessels  like  it  on

which  they  embark ;
And  if  We  please,  We  drown  them,  and  there  is  none

to  help  them,  and  they  are  not  rescued.
Unless  through  our  mercy,  and  that  they  may  enjoy

themselves  for  yet  awhile.
And  when  it  is  said  to  them,  "  Fear  what  is  before  you

and  what  is  behind  you  •,^   haply  ye  may  obtain

mercy "

Aye,  not  one  sign  from  among  the  signs  of  their  Lord

dost  thou  bring  them,  but  they  turn  away  from  it  !
And  when  it  is  said  to  them.  Give  alms  of  what  God

hath  bestowed  on  you,-  they  who  believe  not  say

to  the  believers,  "  Shall  we  feed  him  whom  God

can  feed  if  He  will  ?    Truly  ye  are  in  no  other  than

a  plain  error. ^^
And  they  say,  "When  u- (7/ this  menace  he  fulfilled,  if

what  ye  say  be  true  ?  "
They  await  but  a  single  blast:'  as  they  are  wrangling

shall  it  assail  them  ;
50     And  not  a  bequest  shall  they  be  able  to  make,  nor  to

their  families  shall  they  return ;
And  the  trumpet  shall  be  blown,  and,  lo  !  they  speed

out  of  their  sepulchres  to  their  Lord  :
They  shall  say,  "  Oh  !  woe  to  us  !   who  hath  roused  us

from  our  sleeping-place  ?     'Tis  what  the  God  of

imprefrnatcd,  -when  requisite,  by  branches  of  the  male  plant.  See  Freyt.
Eiul.  p.  271.

'  The  chastisements  of  this  world  and  of  the  next.

'  On  account  of  this  precept,  Itq.  35,  and  Omar  b.  Muhammad  suppose
the  verse  to  have  originated  at  Medina.

^  Of  the  trumpet.     Lit.  cry  or  shout  of  Grabriel.

128  THE    KORAN.

Mercy  threatened ;   and   the  Apostles   spake  the

truth  "—
But  one  blast  shall  there  be/  and,  lo  !  they  are  as-
sembled before  Us,  all  together ;
And  on  that  day  shall  no  soul  be  wronged  in  the  least :

neither  shall  ye  be  recompensed  but  as  ye  shall

have  wrought.
Verily,  joyous  on  that  day  the  inmates  of  Paradise,  in

their  employ  ;
In  shades,  on  bridal  couches  reclining,  they  and  their

spouses  :
Fruits  have  they  therein,  and  whatever  they  call  for —
*'  Peace  \"  shall  be  the  word  of  a  merciful  Lord.
"  But  be  ye  separated  this  day,  0  ye  sinners  !
60     Did  I  not  enjoin  on  you,  O  sons  of  Adam,  '  Worship

not  Satan,  for  that  he  is  your  declared  foe/
But  '  Worship  Me  :   this  is  the  right  path  '?
But  now  hath  he  led  a  vast  host  of  you  astray.     Did  ye

not  then  comprehend?
This  is  Hell  with  which  ye  were  threatened :
Endure  its  burning  this  day,  for  that  ye  believed  not."
On  that  day  Avill  We  set  a  seal  upon  their  mouths;  yet

shall  their  hands  speak  unto  Us,  and  their  feet^

shall  bear  witness  of  that  which  they  have  done.
And,  if  We  pleased.   We  could  surely  have  put  out

their  eyes  :  yet  even  then  would  they  speed  on

with  rivalry  in  their  path :  but  how  should  they

see  ?
And,  if  We  pleased.  We  could  surely  have  transformed

them  as  they  stand,^  so  that  they  would  not  be

able  to  move  onward,  or  to  return  :
And  him  cause  We  to  stoop  throxigh  age  whose  days

We  lengthen.     Will  they  not  then  understand  ?
^  We  have  not  taught  him    (Muhammad)    poetry,^  nor

would  it  beseem  him.     This  Book  is  no  other  than

a  warning  and  a  clear  Koran,
70     To  warn  whoever  liveth ;  and,  that  against  the  unbe-
lievers sentence  may  be  justly  given.

'  The  Muhammadans  affirm  that  a  space  of  forty  years  will  intervene
between  two  blasts  of  the  Trumpet.  Maracci  suggests  that  the  idea  of
the  two  blasts  is  derived  from  1  Thess.  iv.  IG,  "the  voice  of  the  archangel
and  ....  the  trumji  of  God."

'  Thus  Chagiga,  16  ;  Taanith,  11.  "  The  very  members  of  a  man  bear
witness  against  him.  for  thus  is  it  written  (Is.  xliii.  12),  Ye  yourselves  are
my  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord."     See  also  Sura  [Ixxi.]  xli.  19,  20.

*  Lit,  in  their  place.  *  See  Sura  xxvi.  225.

THE    KORAN.  129

See  they  not  that  "We  have  created  for  them  amonfj  the

things  which  our  hands  have  wrought,  the  animals

of  which  they  are  the  masters  ?
And  that  We  have  subjected  them  unto  them  ?     And

on  some  they  ride,  and  of  othei'S  they  eat ;
And  they  find  in  them  profitable  uses  and  beverages

will  they  not  therefore  be  thankful  ?
Yet  have  they  taken  other  gods  beside  God,  that  they

may  haply  be  helped  by  them  :
No  power  have  they  to  help  them  :  yet  are  their  votaries

an  armv  at  their  service.^
Let  not   then   their  speech   grieve  thee  :    Verily,  We

know  what  they  hide  and  what  they  bring  to  light.
Doth  not  man  perceive  that  We  have  created  him  of

the  moist  germs  of  life  ?     Yet  lo  !  is  he  an  open

caviller;
And  he  meeteth  Us  with  arguments,-  and  forgetteth

his  creation  :  "  "SMio,"  saith  he,  "  shall  give  life

to  bones  when  rotten,""
Say  :  He  shall  give  life  to  thera  who  gave  them  being

at  first,  for  in  all  creation  is  He  skilled  :
80     Who  out  of  the  green  tree  hath  given  you  fire,'  and  lo  !

ye  kindle  flame  from  it.
Must  not  He  who  hath  created  the  Heavens  and  the

Earth  be  mighty   enough    to    create  your  likes  ?

Yes  !  and  He  is  the  skilful  creator.
His  command  when  He  willeth  aught,  is  but  to  say  to

it,  BE,  and  IT  IS.
So  glory  be  to  Him  in  whose  hand  is  the  sway  over  all

things  !     And  to  Him  shall  ye  be  brought  back.

*  Lit.  made  present.

'  Lit.  he  settdh  forth  to  us  comparisons.

'  The  form  of  the  Arabic  word  is  Rabbinic.

130  THE    KORAN.

[LXI.]

SURA  XLIII.— OENAIMENTS  OF  GOLD.

Mecca. — 89  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Com^passionate,  the  Merciful.

Ha.  M]m.^     By  tlie  clear  Book  !

Verily,  We  have  made  it  an  Arabic  Koran  that  ye  may

haply  understand :
And  it  truly  is  a  transcript  of  the  archetypal  Book/

kept  by  Us,  the  sublime,  the  wise  :
Shall  AVe  then  turn  aside  this  warning  from  you  as

if  with  repulsion,   because   ye  are  a  people  who

transgress  ?
Yet  how  many  prophets  sent  We  among  those  of  old  !
But  no  prophet  came  to  them  whom  they  made  not  the

object  of  their  scorn  :
Wherefore  We  destroyed  nations  mightier  than  these

Meccans  in  strength.    Yet  the  example  of  those  of

old  had  gone  before  !
And  truly,  if  thou  ask  them  who  created  the  Heavens

and  the  Earth,    they  will    assuredly  say:    ''The

Mighty,  the  Sage,  created  them  both'' —
Who  hath  made  the  Earth  as  a  couch  for  you,  and  hath

traced  out  for  you  routes  therein  that  haply  ye

might  be  guided :
10     And  who  sendeth  down  from  Heaven  the  rain  in  due

degree,  by  which  We  quicken  a  dead  land ;   (thus

shall  ye  be  brought  forth //-om  the  grave  :)
And  who  hath  created  the  sexual  couples,  all  of  them,

and   hath   made    for   you  the    ships,  and   beasts

whereon  ye  ride,
That  ye  may  sit  balanced  on  their  backs,  and  remember

the  goodness  of  your  Lord  as  ye   sit  so  evenly

*  See  Sura  IxviiL  1,  p.  16.

»  Lit.  it  is  in  the  Mother  of  the  Book,  i.e.  the  original  of  the  Koran,  pre-
served in  the  presence  of  God.     Comp.  Ps.  cxxxix.  16.

THE    KOEAN.  131

thereon,  and  say :  ''  Glory  to  Ilim  who  hath  sub-
jected these  to  us  !  for  we  could  not  have  attained
to  it  of  ourselves  :

And  truly,  unto  our  J  ord  shall  we  return."

Yet  do  they  assign  to  Him  some  of  his  own  servants
for  offspring  !     Verily  man  is  a  manifest  ingrate  !

Hath  God  adopted  daughters  from  among  those  whom
He  hath  created,  and  chosen  sons  for  you  ?  ^

But  when  that-  is  announced  to  anyone  of  them,  which
he  imputeth  to  the  God  of  Mercy,  as  his  likeness,
his  face  settleth  into  darkness  and  he  is  silent-
sad.

And  make  they  a  female  to  he  the  offspring  of  God,  one
who  is  brought  up  among  trinkets,  and  is  con-
tentious without  reason  ?

And  they  make  the  angels  who  are  the  servants  of  the
God  of  Mercy,  females  !  Did  they  witness  their
creation  ?  Their  witness  shall  be  taken  down,  and
they  shall  hereafter  be  inquired  at.

And  they  say  :  "  Had  the  God  of  Mercy  so  willed  it  we
had  not  worshipped  them."     No  knowledge  have
they  in  this  :  verily  they  only  lie.
20     Have  we  ere  this  given  them  a  Book  ?3  and  do  they
possess  it  still  ?

But  say  they  :  "  Verily  we  found  our  fathers  of  a  reli-
gion ;  and  behold,  along  their  footsteps  are  we
guided."

Even  thus,  never  before  thy  time  did  We  send  a  warner
to  any  city,  but  its  wealthy  ones  said  :  "  Verily  we
found  our  fathers  with  a  religion,  and  behold,  on
their  tracks  we  tread."

Sat  [such  was  our  command  to  that  apostle):  "What!
even  if  I  bring  you  a  religion  more  right"*  than
that  in  which  ye  found  your  fathers?"  And  they
said  :   "  Verily  we  believe  not  in  your  message."

Wherefore  We  took  vengeance  on  them,  and  behold
what  hath  been  the  end  of  those  who  treated  our
messengers  as  liars  !
1j  And  hear  in  mind  when  Abraham  said  to  his  father
and  to  his  people,  "  Verily  I  am  clear  of  what  ye
worship.

'  Lit.  and  chosen  you  for  the  sons,  i.e.  to  have  them.
'  i.  e.  the  birth  of  a  female.
^  To  authorize  angel-worship.

*  Lit.  c  ven  if  I  conu  to  you  as  having  followed  a  better  direction.

K   2

132  THE    KORAN.

I  only  icorsJiip  Him  who  hath  created  me;    and  He

truly  will  vouchsafe  me  guidance/'
And  this  he  established  as  a  doctrine  that  should  abide

among  his  posterity,  that  haply  to  God  they  might

return.
But  to  these  idolatrous  Arabians  and  to  their  fathers

did  I  allow  their   full  enjoyments,   till  the  truth

should  come  to  them,  and  an  undoubted  apostle  :
And  now  that  the  truth  hath  come  to  them,  they  say,

"  'Tis  sorcery,  and  in  sooth  we  believe  it  not."
30     And  they  say,  "  Had  but  this  Koran  been  sent  down

to  some  great  one  of  the  two  cities^  .  .   .  .\"
Are  they  the  distributors  of  thy  Lord's  mercy  ?     It  is

We  who   apportion   their   supports  of  life  among

them  in  this  world's  life  ;  and  We  raise   some  of

them  by  grades  above  others,   that  the  one  may

take  the  other  to  serve  himr    but  better  is  the

mercy  of  thy  Lord  than  all  their  hoards.
And  were  it  not  that  all  mankind  would  have  become  a

single  people  of  unheJ levers,  We  would  certainly

have  given  to  those  who  believe  not  in  the  God  of

Mercy  roofs  of  silver  to  their  houses,  and  silver

stairs  to  ascend  by ;
And  doors  of  silver  to  their  houses,   and  couches   of

silver  to  recline  on  ;
And  ORNAMENTS   OF  GOLD :  yet  verily  all  these

are  merely  the   good  things  of  the  present  life  ;

but  the  next  life  doth  thy  Loi'd  reserve^  for  those

who  fear  Him.
And  whoso   shall  withdraw  from  the  Warning  of  the

God  of  Mercy,  we  will  prepare  a  Satan  for  him,  and

he  shall  bo  his  fast  companion  :
For  the   Satans  verily  will  turn   men  aside  from  the

Way,  who  yet  shall  deem   themselves   in   sooth

rightly  guided  ;
Until  when  man  shall   come  before  Us,  he  shall  say,

''  0  Satan,  would  that  between  me  and  thee  were

the  distance  of  the  East  and  West."*    A  wretched

companion,  then,  is  a  Satan  !
But  it  shall  not  avail  you  on  that  day,  when  ye  have

■  Supply,  Mecca  and  Taief,  ive  would  have  received  it.
'  i.e.  without  payment.  ^  Lit.  {is)  wUh  thy  Lord.

*  Lit.  the  two  Easts,  by  which  some  understand  the  distance  between  the
two  solstices.

THE    KORAN.  .133

been  transgressors,  that  partners  shall  ye  be  in  the

torment.
Canst  thou  then  make  the  deaf  to  hear,  or  guide  the

blind,  and  him  who  is  in  palpable  error  ?
40     And  if  We  take  thee  away  by  death,  surely  will  We

avenge  ourselves  on  them;
Or  if  We  make  thee  to  behold  the  acconqjUshment  of

that  with  which   We    threatened  them.   We  will

surely  gain  the  mastery  over  them.^
Hold  thou  fast  therefore  what  hath  been  revealed  to

thee  :   verily  thou  art  on  a  right  path :
For  truly  to  thee  and  to  thy  people  it  is  an  admonition  ;

and  ye  shall  have  an  account  to  render  for  it  at

last.2
And  ask  our  Sent  Ones  whom  We  have  sent  before

thee,    "Appointed  We  gods   beside   the   God   of

Mercy  whom  they  should  worship  ?"'
%  And  of  old  sent  We  Moses  with  our  signs  to  Pharaoh

and    his    nobles  :    and  he  said,  "  I  truly  am  the

Apostle  of  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds,"
And  when  he  presented  himself  before  them  with  our

signs,  lo  !  they  laughed  at  them.
And  We  did  not  show  them  any  sign   that  was  not

greater  than  its  fellow  :*  and  therefore  did  We  lay

hold  on  them  with  chastisement,  to  the  intent  that

they  might  haply  turn  to  God.
Then  they  said,  "  0  Magician  !    call   on  thy  Lord  on

our  behalf  to  do  as  He  hath  engaged  with  thee,

for  truly  we  would  fain  be  guided.''^
But  when  We  relieved  them  from  the  chastisement,  lo  !

they  broke  their  pledge.
50     And    Pharaoh   made  proclamation  among  his  people.

Said  he,  "  0  my  people  !  is  not  the  kingdom  of

Egypt  mine,  and  these  rivers  which  flow  at  my

feet?^     Do  ye  not  behold  ?
Am  I  not  mightier  than  this  despicable  fellow —

'  Comp.  Suras  xl.  77  ;  xxiii.  97  ;  x.  47  ;  xxix.  53  ;  xxxvii.  179  ;  xiii.
42.  These  passages  clearly  show  that  Muhammad  had  at  this  period —
towards  the  close  of  his  Meccan  period — full  faith  in  his  ultimate  success,
and  in  the  fulfilment  of  his  menaces  aj^ainst  the  unbelievers.

'  Lit.  ye  shaJl  be  examined  in  the  end.

^  This  verse  is  said  (see  Ndld.  p.  100,  n.)  to  have  been  revealed  in  the
temple  at  Jerusalem  on  the  occasion  of  the  night  journey  thither.  See
also  Weil's  Muhammed  der  Prophet,  p.  374.

*  Lit.  sister.  *  See  Sura  [Ixxix.]  xxviii.  39,  n.

134  THE    KORAN,

And  who  scarce  can  speak  distinctly  ?

Have  bracelets  of  gold^  tlien  been  sent  down  upon  him,
or  come  there  with  him  a  train  of  Angels  ?''

And  he  inspired  his  people  with  levit}',  and  they  obeyed
him ;  verily  they  were  a  perverse  people  :

And  when  they  had  angered  Us,  We  took  vengeance
on  them,  and  We  drowned  them  all ;

And  We  made  them  a  precedent  and  instance  of  divine
jud(iments  to  those  who  came  after  them.
%  And  when  the  Son  of  Mary  was  set  forth  as  an  instance
of  divine  power,  lo  !  thy  people  cried  out  for  joy
thereat  :

And  they  said,  '^  Arc  our  gods  or  is  He  the  better  ?""
They  put  this  forth  to  thee  only  in  the  spirit  of
dispute — But  they  are  a  contentious  people.

Jesus  is  no  more  than  a  servant  whom  We  favoured,
and  proposed  as  an  instance  of  divine  power  to  the
children  of  Israel.
60  (And  if  We  pleased.  We  could  certainly  from  your-
selves bring  forth  Angels  to  succeed  you  on
earth)  :^

And  he  verily  shall  be  a  sign  of  the  last  hour;*  doubt
not  then  of  it,  and  follow  ye  me  :  this  is  the  right
way;

And  let  not  Satan  turn  you  aside  from  it ;  verily  he  is
your  manifest  foe.

And  when  Jesus  came  with  manifest  proofs,  he  said,
"  Now  am  I  come  to  you  with  wisdom,  and  to  clear
up  to  you  a  part  of  those  things  about  which  ye
are  at  variance;  fear  ye  God,  therefore,  and  obey
me  ;

Verily,  God  is  my  Lord  and  your  Lord  ;  wherefore
worship  ye  Him  :  this  is  a  right  way.''

But  the  different  parties^  fell  into  disputes  among
themselves;  but  woe  to  those  who  finis  trans-
gressed, because  of  the  punishment  of  an  afflictive
day!

1  Comp.  Gen.  xli.  42.

'  This  was  a  captious  ohjection  made  to  Mnhainmad  by  the  idolaters  of
Mecca  when  he  condemned  their  <iods  (Sura  xxi.  98),  as  if  they  had  said,
"  Jesus  is  worshipped  as  a  God  by  the  Christians  :  does  he  come  under
your  anathema  equally  with  our  idols  ?"

'  That  is,  as  we  caused  Jesus  to  be  bom  without  a  human  father.

*  At  his  return  to  this  earth.  Some  refer  this  to  the  Koran  as  revealing
the  last  Hour.     Lit.  He  is  for  knoivleilge,  or  a  means  of  knowing.

*  Jewish  and  Christian  sects  ;  or  pagans.

THE    KOKAN.  135

For  what  wait  they  but  for  "  the  Hour  "  to  come  sud-
denly on  them,  while  they  expect  it  not  ?^
Friends  on  that  day  shall  become  foes  to  one  another,

except  the  God-fearing  : —
"  O  my  servants  !   on  this  day  shall  no  fear  come  upon

you,  neither  shall  ye  be  put  to  grief.
Who  have  believed  in  our  signs  and  become  Muslims  :
70     Enter  into  Paradise,  ye  and  your  wives,  delighted/^
Dishes  and  bowls  of  gold  shall  go  round  unto  them  :

there  shall  they  enjoy  whatever  their  souls  desire,

and  whatever  their  eyes  delight  in :   and  therein

shall  ye  abide  for  ever.
For  this  is  Paradise,  which  ye  have  received  as  your

heritage  in  recompense  for  your  works  ;
Therein  shall  ye  have  fruits  in  abundance,  of  which  ye

shall  eat.
But  in  the  torment  of  Hell  shall  the  wicked  remain  for

ever :
It  shall  not  be  mitigated  to  them,  and  they  shall  be

mute  for  despair  therein.
For  it  is  not  AYe  who  treated  them  unjustly,  but  it  was

they  who  were  the  unjust :
And  they  shall  cry,  "  O  Malec  !  -  would  that  thy  Lord

would  make  an  end  of  us  !  "     He  saith  :  "  Verily

here  must  ye  tarry."
^  We  have  come  to  you  with  the  truth  (0  Meccans),  but

most  of  you  abhor  the  truth.
Have  they  drawn  tight  their  toils  for  thee  ?  ^     Verily,

then,  will  We  tighten  ours.
80     Think  they  that  We    hear  not  their  secrets  and  their

private  talk  ?    Nay  rather,  our  angels  also  who  are

at  their  sides  write  them  down.
Sat  :    If  the  God  of  Mercy  had  a  son,  the  first  then

would  I  be  to  worship  him  :
Glory  be  to  the  Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,

the  Lord  of  the  Throne,  above  that  which  they

impute  to  Him !
Wherefore  let  them  alone,  to  plunge  on  and  sport,  until

they  meet  their  day  with  which  they  are  menaced.

'  Thus,  "  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  an  hour  when  ye  think  not  of
it."     Comp.  xli.  47.

'  Malec  is  one  of  the  keepers  of  Hell,  who  specially  presides  over  the
torments  of  the  damned.

'  Lit.  if  they  have  tn~isted  tight  or  set  firmly  the  affair,  i.e.  their  plota
against  thee  and  the  tmth.

136  THE    KORAN.

He  who  is  God  in  the  Heaven  is  God  in  earth  also :  and

He  is  the  AVise,  the  Knowing.
And  blessed  be  He  whose  is  the  kiuofdom  of  the  Heavens

and  of  the  Earth  and  of  all  that  is  between  them  ;

and  with  Hun  is  the  knowledge  of  the  Hour,  and

to  Him  shall  ye  retuj-n.
The  gods  whom  they  call  upon  beside  Him  shall  not

be  able  to  intercede  for  others  :  they  only  shall  be

able  who  bore  witness  to  the  truth  ^  and  knew  it/'
If  thou  ask  them  who  hath  created  them,  they  will  be

sure  to  say,  "  God/'     How  then  hold  they  false

opinions  ?
And  one^  saith,  '^O  Lord  !  verily  these  are  people  who

believe  not."
Turn  thou  then  from  them,  and  say,  "  Peace :  "  in  the

end  they  shall  know  their  folly .

[LXII.]

SURA  LXXII.— DJINN.
Mecca. — 28  Venses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Say  :  It  hath  been  revealed  to  me  that  A  company  of
DJINN''  listened,  and  said, — '^  Yorily,  we  have
heard  a  marvellous  discourse  (Koran),

It  guideth  to  the  truth  ;  wherefore  we  believed  in  it,
and  we  will  by  no  means  join  any  being  with  our
Lord ;

He, — may  the  majesty  of  our  Lord  be  exalted  ! — hath
taken  no  spouse  nor  begotten  offspring  ;

'  The  Commentators  say  that  Jesus,  Ezra,  and  the  angels,  will  be  allowed
to  intercede.

"  Mnhaniiiiad.     Lit.  and  the  sayiiKj  (of  the  ])rophcf)  {x.

^  This  interview  with  the  Djinn  took  place  at  Nakhla,  probably  the
"Wady  INIohram"  of  Burckhardt,  midway  betwpen  Mecca  and  Taief,  when
Muhammad  was  driven  from  Mecca,  A.D.  620.  Each  verse,  to  19,  is  a
separate  step  in  this  revelation,  and  is  prefaced  in  the  original  by  And
that.     V.  Wrif,'ht's  Ar.  Grammar,  vol.  i.  §  367,  f.

THE    KOKAX.  137

A  foolish  one  among  us  ^  spoke  an  untruth  concerning

God;
And  we  verily  had  thought  that  neither  man  norDjinn

would  haV'O  uttered  a  lie  agfainst  God  :
There  are   people    among    men  who  have  sought  for

refuge  unto  people  among  Djinn :  but  they  only

increased  their  folly  :
They  thought,  as  ye  thought,-  that  God  would  by  no

means  raise  any  from  the  dead  ;
The  Heaven   did  we  essay,  but  found  it  filled  with  a

mighty  garrison,  and  with  darting  flames  ;
We  sat  on  some  of  its  seats  to  listen,  but  whoever  now

listeneth  findeth  a   darting  flame  in  ambush  for

him  ;
10     We  know  not  whether  evil  be  meant  for  them  that  are

on  earth,    or   whether   their    Lord   meaneth  true

guidance  for  them  ;
There  are  among  us  the  good,  and  others  among  us  of

another  kind;^ — we  foUow  various  ways;
We  judged  that  we  could  not  at  all  frustrate  God  on

earth,  neither  could  we   at  all  frustrate  Him  by

flight ;
As  soon  as  we  had  heard  '  the  guidance '  we  believed

in  it ;  and  whoever  believeth  in  his  Lord,  need

not  fear  either  loss  or  wrong;
There  are  some  among  us  who  have  resigned  them-
selves to  God  (Muslims),  and  there  are  others  of

us  who  have  gone   astray ;  and  whoso  resigneth

himself  to  God  pursueth  the  true  guidance  ;
But  as  for  those  who  swerve  from  it,  they  shall  be  fuel

for  Hell ;
If  they  walk  uprightly  in  the  rujht  path,  We  will  surely

give  them  to  drink  of  abundant  waters,
That  We  may  prove  them  thereby  :   but  whoso  with-

draweth  from  the  remembrance  of  his  Lord,  him

will  He  send  into  a  severe  torment ;
It  is  unto  God  tliat  the  temples  are  set  apart  :  call  not

then  on  any  other  tJtercin  with  God.''
When  the  servant  of  God  *  stood  up  to  call  upon  Him,

the  djinn  almost  jostled  him  ^  by  their  crowds.

'  Iblees,  or  as  it  is  commonly  written,  Eblis.

'  The  words  of  the  Djinn  to  their  fellow  JDjinn. — Zamakshari.

'  Intermediate  between  good  and  bad.—  Zamakshari.

■*  Abd- Allah.     This  may  be  an  allusion  to  Muhammad's  name.

*  Lit.  nrre  almost  vpon  him.

138  THE    KORAN.

20     Say  :  I  call  only  upon  my  Lord,  and  I  join  no  other
being  with  Ilim.

Say  :  No  power  have  I  for  your  huri)  or  benefit.

Say  :  Verily  none  can  protect  me  against  God,

Neither  shall  I  find  any  refuge  beside  Him  :

My  sole  icork  is  preaching  from  God,  and  His  message :
and  for  such  as  rebel  against  God  and  his  apostle
verily  is  the  fire  of  Hell  !  they  shall  abide  therein
for  ever !

Until  they  see  the  vengeance  with  which  they  were
threatened,  they  will  continue  perverse !  but  then
shall  they  know  who  was  the  weakest  in  a  pro-
tector and  the  fewest  in  number  !

Say  :  I  know  not  whether  that  with  which  ye  are
threatened  be  nigh,  or  whether  ray  Lord  hath
assigned  it  to  a  distant  period :  He  knoweth  the
secret,  nor  doth  He  divulge  his  secret  to  any,

Except  to  that  Apostle  who  pleaseth  Him  ;  ^  and  verily
before  him  and  behind  him  He  makcth  watchers
to  march :  -

That  He  may  know  that  7ms  Apostles  have  delivered
the  message  of  their  Lord  :  and  He  embraceth  in
his  hnowleilge  all  their  ways,  and  taketh  account
of  everything  by  number.

[LXIIL]

SURA  LXVIT.— THE  KINGDOM.

Mecca. — 30  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Blessed  be  He  in  whoso  hand  is  the  KINGDOM  !  and

over  all  things  is  He  potent ;
Who  hath  created  death  and  life  to  prove  which  of  you

'  Jesus. — See  xliii.  Ifil.

"^  Zamakshari  gives  his  readers  the  choice  of  the  battle  of  Bcdr  or  of  the
Resurrection,  as  the  interpretation  of  this  verse.

THE    KORAN.  139

will  be  most  righteous  in  works  ;   and  He  is  the

]Mighty,  the  Forgiving  !
Who  hath  created  seven  Heavens  one  above  another :

No  defect  ^  canst  thou  see  in  the  creation  of  the

God   of  Merey  :    Repeat  the   gaze  :   Seest  thou  a

single  flaw  ?
Then  twice  more  repeat  the  gaze  :  thy  gaze  returns  to

thee  dull  and  wearied.
And  of  a  surety  We  have  decked  the   lower  heaven

with    lights,    and   have  placed  them   there  to   be

hurled  at  the  Satans,  for  whom  We  have  prepared

the  torment  of  the  flaminsf  fire.
And  for  those  who  believe  not  in  their  Lord  is  the

torment  of  Hell ;  and  horrid  the  journey  thither  !
When  they  shall  be  thrown  into  it,  they  hear  it  bray-
ing :  ~  and  it  shall  boil —
Almost  shall  it  burst  for  fury  !    So  oft  as  a  crowd  shall

be  thrown  into  it,  its  keepers  ask  them,  ''  Came

not  the  Warner  to  you  ? ''
They  shall  say,  "  Yes  !  there   came  to  us  one  charged

with  warnings  ;  but  wo  treated  him  as  a  liar,  and

said,  '  No  revelation  hath  God  sent  down  :  lo,  ye

are  only  in  a  vast  delusion.'  "
10     And  they  shall  say,  "  Had  we  but  hearkened  or  under-
stood, we  had  not  been  among  the  dwellers  in  the

flames  " —
And  their  sin  shall  they  acknowledge  :  Far  then  be

pardon  from  the  dwellers  in  the  flame  !
Yerily  there  is   pardon  and  a  great  reward  for  those

who  fear  their  Lord  in  secret !
And    be    your   converse    hidden    or    open.    He    verily

knoweth  the  inmost  recess  of  your  breasts  !
Shall  He  not  know  who   hath  created  ?  for  He  is  the

Subtil,-^  the  Cognizant.
It  is   He  who   hath  made  the  earth  commodious  for

you :  traverse  then  its  broad    sides,    and    eat  of

what  He  hath  provided — unto  Him  shall  be  the

resurrection.  •

'Lit.  disparity,  ivant  of  proportion.

^  Thus  Shakespeare  uses  the  word  hraying  of  clamours  of  Uell ;  and
Milton  speaks  oi  braying  horrible  discord.     Comp.  Sura  xxv.  12-21.

^  Der  alles  durchdringt,  Ullm.  ;  pcrspicax,  Mar.  ;  sagacious,  Sale.
The  primary  meanincr  of  the  Arabic  root  is  to  draw  near;  hence  the  above
signitication,  in  the  sense  of  God's  presence  as  interpenetrating  all  things;
hence  also  the  other  sense  of  benign,  as  in  Sura  [Ixxxiii.]  xlii.  18.

140  THE    KORAN.

Are  ye  sure  that  He  who  is  in  Heaven  will  not  cause

the  earth  to  swallow  you  ?    And  lo,  it  shall  quake  !
Or  are  ye  sure  that  He  who  is  in  Heaven  will  not  send

uarainst    yon    a    stone-cliaro-ed  whirlwind  ?     Then

shall  ye  know  all  that  my  warning  nteant !
And  of  a  surety,   those  who   flourished    before  them

treated  their  prophets  as  liars  :  and  how  grievous

my  wrath  !
Behold  they  not  the  birds  over  their  heads,  ontstretch-

insr  and  drawingr  iu  their  wingrs?     None,  save  the

God  of  Mercy,  upholdeth  them :    verily,  He  re-

gardeth  all  things.
20     "Who  is  he  that  can  be  as  an  army  to  you,  to  succour

you,  except  the  Merciful  ?     Truly  the  unbelievers

are  in  the  merest  delusion.
Who  is  he  that  will  furnish  you  supplies,  if  He  with-
hold His  supplies?     Yet  do  they  persist  in  pride

and  in  fleeing  from  Him  !
[s  he  who  goeth  along  grovelling  on  his  face  better

guided  than  he  who  goeth  along  evenly  on  a  right

path?
Say  :  It  is  He  who  hath  brought  you  forth,  and  gifted

you  with  hearing  and  sight  and  heart :  yet  how

few  are  grateful !
Say  :  It  is  He  who  hath  sown  you  in  the  earth,  and  to

Him  shall  ye  bo  gathered.
But  they  say,  "  When  shall  this  threat  be  put  in  force,

if  ye  speak  the  truth  ?  "
Say  :  This  knowledge  is  with  God  alone ;  and  I  am

only  a  plain  war  nor  :
But  when  they   shall   see  it  nigh,   sad  shall  wax  tho

countenances  of  the  unbelievers  :  and  it  shall  be

said,  "  Tiiis  is  what  ye  called  for."
Say:  What  think  ye?     Whether  God  destroy  me  or

not  and  those  who  follow  me,  or  whether  He  have

mercy  on  us,  yet  who  will  protect  the  unbelievers

from  a  woeful  torment  ?
Say  :  He  is  the  God  of  Mercy  :  in  Him  do  we  believe,

and  in  Him  put  we  our  trust ;  and  ye  shall  know

hereafter  who  is  in  a  manifest  error.
30     Say:  What  think  ye?     If  at  early  morn  your  waters

have  sunk  away,  who  then  will  give  you  clear-
running  water?

THE    KORAN.  1  41

[LXIY.]

SURA  XXIII.— THE  BELIEVERS.
Mecca.' — 118  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Happy  now  the  BELIEVERS,

Who  humble  themselves  in  their  prayer,

And  who  keep  aloof  from  vain  words,-

And  who  are  doers  of  alms-deeds.

And  who  restrain  their  appetites,

(Save  with  their  wives,  or  the  slaves  whom  their  right

hands  possess  :  for  in  that  case  verily  they  shall  be

free  from  blame  :
But  they  whose  desires  reach  further  than  this, — these  !

transgressors  they !)
And  who  tend  well  their  trusts  and  their  covenants.
And  who  keep  strictly  to  their  prayers :
10     These  shall  be  the  heritors.

Who  shall  inherit  the  paradise,'  to  abide  therein  for

ever.
1"  And  verily  of  particles  of  clay  did  We  create  man ;
Then  We  placed  him,  a  moist  germ,  in  a  safe  abode  :
Then  made  We  the  moist  germ  a  clot  of  blood ;  then

made  the  clotted  blood  into  a  piece  of  flesh ;  then

made  the  piece  of  flesh  into  bones ;  and  We  clothed

the  bones  with  flesh :  then  brought  forth  man  of

o

'  This  Sura  is  said  by  Wahidi  Intr,  and  by  Assuyuti,  55,  to  be  the  last
Meccan  revelation.     But  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  for  this  opinion.

"  lu  prayer.  Eccl.  v.  1  ;  Matt.  vi.  7.  But  it  may  be  understood  of  idle
talk  ijenerally.

^  The  oritfinal  meaning  of  this  word,  which  occurs  only  twice  in  the
Koran,  is  a  garden  or  park  planted  with  trees.  The  Greek  Trupd^uaoQ,  as
well  as  the  Ar.  Jircloos,  pi.  faradiso,  and  the  late  Hebr.  paredes,  are  to  b»
traced,  through  the  old  Persian,  to  the  Sanskrit  paradisa.

142  THE    KORAN.

yet  another  make  ^ — Blessed  therefore  be  God,  the
most  excellent  of  Makers  - —

Then  verily  after  this  ye  shall  die ;

Then  shall  ye  b.e  waked  up  on  the  day  of  resurrection.

And  We  have  created  over  you  seven  heavens/  and
We  are  not  careless  of  the  creation ;

And  We  send  down  water  from  the  Heaven  in  its  due
degree,  and  We  cause  it  to  settle  on  the  earth,
and  truly  We  have  power  for  its  withdrawal : —

And  by  it  We  cause  gardens  of  palm-trees  to  spring
forth  for  you,  and  vineyards  for  you,  in  which  ye
have  plenteous  fruits,  and  whereof  ye  eat ;
20     And  the  tree  that  groweth  up  on  Mount  Sinai,  which
yieldeth  oil  and  a  juice  for  those  who  eat.

And  verily  there  is  a  lesson  for  you  in  the  cattle.  We
give  you  to  drink  of  what  is  in  their  bellies,  and
many  advantages  do  ye  derive  from  them,  and  for
food  they  serve  you;

And  on  them  and  on  the  ships  are  ye  borne.  '

%  We  sent  Noah  hei'etofore  unto  his  people,  and  he  said,
"  0  my  people  !  serve  God  :  ye  have  no  other  God
than  He  :  will  ye  not  therefore  fear  Him  ?  "

Then  said  the  chiefs  of  the  people  who  believed  not,
"  This  is  but  a  man  like  yourselves  :  he  fain  would
raise  himself  above  you  :  but  had  it  pleased  God
to  send,  He  would  have  sent  angels :  we  heard
not  of  this  with  our  sires  of  old; —

Verily  he  is  but  a  man  possessed;  leave  him  alone"*
therefore  for  a  time.^'

He  said,  "  O  my  Lord !  help  me  against  their  charge

of  imposture.^^
So  We  revealed  unto  him,  "  Make  the  ark  under  our
eye  and  as  We  have  taught,  and  when  our  doom
shall  come  on,  and  the  earth^s  surface  shall  boil

up/
Then  bring  into  it  of  every  kind  a  pair,  and  thy  family,
save   him   among  them   on  whom   sentence  hath

'  That  is,  a  perfect  man  at  last,  composed  of  soul  and  body.  The  verb
halaka,  to  create,  is  used  tliroiifjhout,  for  ■which  I  have  necessarily  substi-
tuted to  make,  in  order  to  retiiin  the  same  word  throuffliout  the  verse.

'  These  words  are  said  by  most  commentators  on  Sura  vi.  93,  to  have
been  uttered  by  Muhammad's  scribe,  Abdallah,  on  hearing  the  previous
part  of  this  verse,  and  to  have  been  adopted  by  the  prophet,  at  the  same
moment,  as  identical  with  his  own  inspirations.

'  Lit.  seven  patlis — a  Talmudic  expression.

*  Lit,  await  him.  ^  See  Sura  [Ixxv.]  xi.  42,  n.

THE    KOEAN.  143

already  passed  :    and  plead  not  with  Me  for  the
wicked ;  verily  they  shall  be  drowned.

And  when  thou^  and  they  who  are  with  thee,  shall  have
gone  up  into  the.  ark ;  say,  '  Praise  be  unto  God.
who  hath  rescued  us  from  the  wicked  folk ;'
30  And  say,  '  0  my  Lord  !  disembark  ^  me  with  a  blessed
disembarking  :  for  Thou  art  the  best  to  disem-
bark.' ''

Yerily  in  this  were  signs,  and  verily  We  made  proof
oj  mail.

We  then  raised  up  other  generations  after  them ;

And  We  sent  among  them  an  apostle  from  among
themselves,  with,  "  Worship  ye  God  !  ye  have  no
other  God  than  He  :  will  ye  not  therefore  fear
Him?''

And  the  chiefs  of  his  people  who  believed  not,  and  who
deemed  the  meeting  with  Us  in  the  life  to  come  to
be  a  lie,  and  whom  We  had  richly  supplied  in  this
present  life,  said,  "  This  is  but  a  man  like  your-
selves ;  he  eateth  of  what  ye  eat.

And  he  drinketh  of  what  ye  drink  :

And  if  ye  obey  a  man  like  yourselves,  then  ye  will
surely  be  undone.

Doth  he  foretell-  you,  that  after  ye  shall  be  dead  and
become  dust  and  bones,  ye  shall  be  brought  forth  ?

Away,  away  with  his  predictions  !  ^

There  is  no  life  beyond  our  present  life;  we  die,  and
we  live,  and  we  shall  not  be  quickened  again  !
40     This  is  merely  a  man  who  forge th  a  lie  about  God:
and  we  will  not  believe  him."

He  said,  "  0  my  Lord  !  help  me  against  this  their
charge  of  imposture."

He  said,  "  Yet  a  little,  and  they  will  surely  repent
them  ! "

Then  did  the  shout  of  the  destroying  angel  in  justice
surprise  them,  and  We  made  them  like  leaves
swept  down  by  a  torrent.  Away  then  with  the
wicked  people  !

Then  raised  We  up  other  generations  after  them —

Neither  too  soon  nor  too  late  shall  a  people  reach  its
appointed  time  * —

'  Lit.  cause  me  to  descend.

^  Or,  promise;  or,  threaten.     Thus  in  the  verse  following.

^  Lit.  that  ye  are  threatened  icith.

*  Lit.  no  nution  shall  anticipate  its  time,  nor  shall  they  be  delayed.

144  THE    KORAN,

Then  sent  We  our  apostles  one  after  another.     Oft  as

tlieir  apostle  presented  himself  to  a  nation,  they

treated  him  as  a  liar-  and  We  caused  one  nation

to  follow  another;  and  We  made  them  the  burden

of  a  tale,  ■  Away  then  with  the  wicked  people  !
^  Then  sent  We  Moses  and  his  brother  Aaron,  with  our

signs  and  manifest  power,
To  Pharaoh  and  his  princes ;  but  they  behaved  them-
selves proudly,  for  they  were  a  haughty  people.
And  they  said,  "  Shall  we    bejieve   on   two  men  like

ourselves,  whose  people  are  our  slaves  V
50     And  they  treated  them  both  as  impostors ;  wherefore

they  became  of  the  destroyed.
And  We  gave  Moses  the  Book  for  Israel's  guidance.
^  And  We  appointed  the  Son  of  Mary  and  his  mother

for  a  sign ;  and  We  prepared  an  abode  for  both  in

a  lofty  spot,^  secure,  and  watered  with  springs.
"  0  ye  apostles  !   eat  of  things  that  are  good;  and  do

that  which  is  right :  of  your  doings  I  verily  am

cognizant.
And  truly  this  your  religion  is  the  one  religion;^  and

I  am  your  Lord  :  therefore  fear  Me.'^
But  men  have  rent  their  great   concern,   one  among

another,  into  sects;  every  party  rejoicing  in  their

own  peculiar;
Wherefore  leave  them  till  a  certain  time, in  their  depths'

of  i'lTor.
Think  they  what  We  largely  bestow  on  them  of  wealth

and  children,
We  hasten  to  them  as  good  things  ?     Nay,  they  have

no  knowledge ;
Yerily  they  who  arc  awed  with  the  dread  of  their  Lord,
60     And  who  believe  in  the  signs  of  their  Lord,
And  who  join  not  otlier  gods  with  their  Lord,
And  who  give  what  they  have  to  give  with  hearts  thrilled

with  dread  because  they  must  return  unto  their

Lord,
These  hasten  emulously  after  good  things,  and  they  are

the  first  to  win  them.
And  We  will  not  burden  a  soul  beyond  its  power:  and

with  Us  is  a  book,  which  speaketh  the  truth;  and

they  shall  not  be  wronged :

'  Comp.  Sura  xix.  22  ff.     Wahl  understands  this  passajje  of  Paradise.
'  Comp.  Sura  xxi.  92.  *  Lit,  flood,  or  confused  viass.

THB    KORAX.  145

But  as  to  this  Bool-,^  their  hearts  are  plunged  in  error,
and  their  works  are  far  other  than  those  of  Mus-
Ihn.t,-  and  they  will  work  those  icorJxs,

Until  when  We  lay  hold  on  their  aflBuent  ones  with
punishment ;  lo  !   they  cry  for  hip  :

— "  Cry  not  for  help  this  day  :  verily  by  Us  ye  shall
not  be  succoured  :

Of  a  surety  my  signs  were  rehearsed  to  you,  but  ye
turned  back  on  your  heels.

Puffed  up  with  pride,  discoursing  foolishly  by  night."
70     Do  they  not  then  consider  the  things  spoken — whether
that  hath  come  to  them  which  came  not  to  their
fathers  of  old  ?

Or  do  they  not  recognize  their  apostle ;  and  therefore
disavow  him?

Or  say  they,  "A  Djinn  is  in  him"?  Nay!  he  hath
come  to  them  with  the  truth ;  but  the  truth  do
most  of  them  abhor.

But  if  the  truth  had  followed  in  the  train  of  their
desires,  the  heavens  a,nd  the  earth,  and  all  that
therein  is,  had  surely  come  to  ruin  !  But  We  have
brought  them  their  warning ;  and  from  their  warn-
ing they  withdraw.

Dost  thou  ask  them  for  remuneration  ?  But,  remu-
neration from  thy  Lord  is  best ;  and  He  is  the
best  of  providers.

And  of  a  truth  thou  dost  surely  bid  them  to  a  right
path  ;

But  verily  they  who  believe  not  in  the  life  to  come,
from  that  path  do  surely  wander !

And  if  We  had  taken  compassion  on  them,  and  relieved
them  from  their  trouble,  they  would  surely  have
persisted  in  their  wickedness,  wildly  wandering.^

We  formerly  laid  hold  on  them  with  chastisement,  yet
they  did  not  humble  themselves  to  their  Lord,  nor
did  they  abase  themselves ;

Until,  when  We  opened  upon  them  the  door  of  a  se-
vere punishment,  lo  !  they  were  in  despair  at  it.
80     It  is   He  who  hath  implanted  in  you*  hearing,  and
sight,  and  heart ;  how  few  of  you  give  thanks  !

It  is  He  who  hath  created  you  on  the  earth  :  and  unto
Him  shall  ye  be  gathered.

'  Or,  Religion.  '  Lit.  and  they  hare  varies  other  than  this.

'  There  is  no  reliable  tradition  as  to  the  nature  of  the  visitation  here
alluded  to.  ■*  Lit.  produced  for  you.

L

146  THE    KORAN.

And  it  is  He  who  maketli  alive  and  killoth,  and  of  Him

is  the  change  of  the  night  and  of  the  day  :  will  ye

not  then  understand  ?
But  they  say,  as  said  those  of  old  : —
They  say,  "  When  we  have  died,  and  become  dust  and

bones,  shall  we  indeed  be  raised  to  life  ?
This  have  we  been  promised,  we  and  our  fathers  afore-
time :  but  it  is  only  fables  of  the  ancients."
Sat  :  Whose  is  the  earth,  and  all  that  is  therein ; — if  ye

know  ?
They  will  answer  "  God's.-"     Say  :  Will  ye  not  then

reflect  ?
Sat  :  Who  is  the  Lord  of  the  seven  heavens,  and  the

Lord  of  the  glorious  throne  ?
They  will  say,  ''  They  are  God's.-"     Say  :  Will  ye  not

then  fear  Him  ?
90     Say  :  In  whose  hand  is  the  empire  of  all  things,  who

protecteth,  but  is  not  protected  ?^  if  ye  know  :
They  will  answer,  "  In  God's."     Say  :  How,  then,  can

ye  be  so  spell-bound  ?
Nay,  We  have  brought  them  the  truth  ;  but  of  a  truth

they  are  surely  liars  :
God  hath  not  begotten  offspring  ;  neither  is  there  any

other  God  with  Him  :  else  had  each  god  assuredly

taken  away  that  which  he  had  created,^  and  some

had  assuredly  uplifted  themselves  above  others  !

Far  from  the  glory  of  God  be  what  they  affirm  of

Him  !
He  knoweth  alilce  the  unseen  and  the  seen  :  far  be  He

uplifted  above  the  gods  whom  they  associate  with

Him  !
Say  :  O  my  Lord  !  If  Thou  shalt  cause  me  to  witness

Ulc  hiflictlon  of  that  with  which  they  have  been

threatened,
0  my  Lord !    then   place   me   not   among  the  unjust

people.
Verily,  We  are  well  able  to  make  thee  see  the  punish-
ment with  which  We  have  threatened  them.
Turn   aside  evil  with  that  which  is  better:  We  best

know  what  they  utter  against  thee  ;

'  The  passive  verb  is  used  impersonally.  Lit.  neither  is  it  protected  over
him.

*  i.e.  each  would  have  formed  a  separate  and  independent  kingdom.
Lit.  would  have  gone  off  with.

THE    KORAN.  147

And   SAY :    "  0  my  fjord  :    I   take   refuge  with  Thoe,
against  the  promptings  of  the  Satans;
100  And  I  betake  me  to  Thee,  0  my  Lord !  that  they  gain
no  hurtful  acces*:  to  me;^'^

Until  when  death  overtaketh  one  of  the  wicked,  he
saith,  "  Lordj  send  me  back  again  to  lif'',

Haply  I  shall  do  the  good  which  I  left  undone/^  -
"  By  no  means/'  Lo,  this  is  the  very  sentence
which  He  shall  pass :  and  behind  them  shall  be
a  barrier,  until  the  day  when  they  shall  be  raised

again.

And  when  the  trumpet  shall  be  sounded,  the  ties  of

kindred  between  them  shall  cease  on  that  day;'

neither  shall  they  make  inquiries  of  one  another.*
They  whose    balances     shall    be    heavy,  shall   be   the

blest.
But  they  whose  balances  shall  be  light,  these  are  they

who    shall   lose    their    souls,  abiding   in  hell    for

ever :
The  fire  shall  scorch  their  faces,  and  they  shall  show

their  teeth  as  they  gnash  them  : —
— "  Were  not  my  signs  rehearsed  unto  you  ?  and  did

ye  not  treat  them  as  lies  V
They  shall  say,  "  0  our  Lord  !  our  ill-fortune  prevailed

against  us,  and  we  became  an  erring  people.
0  our  Lord  !  Bring  us  forth  hence  :  if  we  go  back  again

to  our  sins,  we  shall  indeed  be  evil-doers.'''
110  He  will  say,  "  Be  ye  driven  away  into  it ;  and  address

Me  not.''
A  part  truly  of  my  servants  was  there,  who  said,  "  0

our  Lord  !  we  believe  :  forgive  us,  then,  and  be

merciful  to  us,  for  of  the  merciful  art  Thou  the

best."
But  ye  received  them  with  scoffs  until  ye  forgat  my

warnings,  and  laughed  them  to  scorn.
Verily  this  day  will   I   reward  them  for  their  patient

endurance  :  the  blissful  ones  shall  they  be  !
He  will  say,  "  What  number  of  years   tarried  ye  on

earth?"

'  Lit.  that  they  be  not  present  vnth  me.
'  Or,  in  {the  world)  which  I  have  left.
'  Lit.  relationships  (are)  not  on  that  day.
*  i.e.  every  one  will  be  preoccupied  with  his  own  fate.

L  2

148  THE    KORAN.

They  will  say,  "  We  tarried  a  day,  or  part  of  a  day ;  ^
but  ask  the  recording  ongcls.""

God  will  say,  "  Short  indeed  was  the  time  ye  tarried,
if  that  ye  knew  it.

Did  ye  then  think  that  We  had  created  you  for  pastime,
and  that  ye  should  not  be  brought  back  again  to
Us  ?"  Wherefore  let  God  be  exalted,  the  King,
the  Truth  !  There  is  no  God  but  He !  Lord  of
the  stately  throne  !  And  whoso,  together  with
God  shall  call  on  another"  god,  for  whom  he  hath
no  proof,  shall  give  account  only  to  his  Lord.  Aye,
it  shall  fare  ill  with  the  infidels.

And  SAY  :  "  0  my  Lord,  pardon,  and  have  mercy  ;  for
of  those  who  show  mercy  art  Thou  the  best."

[LXY.]

SURA  XXL— THE  PROPHETS.

Mecca. — 1 1 2  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

This  people's  reckoning  drawcth  nigh,  yet,  sunk  in
carelessness  they  turn  aside  :

Every  warning  that  cometh  to  them  from  their  Lord
they  hear  only  to  mock,' —

Jesting  in  their  hearts  :  and  they  who  do  this  wrong
say  in  secret  discourse,  "  Is  he  more  than  a  man
like  yourselves  ?  Will  ye,  then,  with  your  eyes
open,*  accede  to  sorcery  ?  "

Say  :  "  My  Lord  knoweth  what  is  spoken  in  the  hea-
ven and  on  the  earth  :  Ho  it  is  who  heareth,
knoweth."

"  Nay,"  say  they,  "  it  is  the  medley  of  dreams :  nay,
he  hath  forged  it :  nay,  he  is  a  poet :  let  him  then

'  i.  e.  our  past  life  seems  brevity  itself  in  comparison  with  eternal  tor-
ment.

'  Lit.  those  who  number,  or  keep  account,  i.e.  our  torments  distract  us
too  much  to  allow  us  to  compute.

'  Lit.  hut  they  hear  it  and  they  mock.       *  Lit.  while  ye  see  {it  to  be  such).

THE    KORAN.  149

come  to  us  with  a  sign  as  the  prophets  of  old  were

sent/'
Before  their  time,  none  of  the  cities  which  We  have

destroyed,  believed  :  will  these  men,  then,  believe  ?
And  we  sent  none,  previous  to  thee,  but  men  to  whom

We  had  revealed    ourselves — Ask  ye,   then,   the

people  who  are  warned  by  Scriptures,^  if  ye  know

it  not —
And  We  gave  them  not  bodies  which  could  dispense

with  food, — and  they  were  not  to  live  for  ever ;
Then  made  We  good  our  promise  to  them,  and  We

delivered  them   and  whom  We  pleased,  and  We

destroyed  the  transgressors.
10     Assuredly  now  have  We  sent  down  to  you  "  the  Book,"

in  which  is  your  warning  :  Will  ye  not  then  un-
derstand ?
And  how  many  a  guilty  city  have  We  broken  down,

and  raised  up  after  it  other  peoples  :
Then  when  they  felt  our  vpugeance,  lo  !   they  fled/rom

it—
"Flee  not,'*  said  the  angels  in  mockery,  "but  come

back  to  that  wherein   ye   revelled   and  to   your

abodes  !     Questions  will  haply  be  put  to  you.''
They  said,   "  Oh,  woe  to  us  !     Verily  we  have  been

evil-doers;"
And  this   their  cry  ceased  not,  until  Wo   made  them

like  reaped  corn,  extinct.
Also  We   created  not  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and

what  is  between  them,  for  sport :
Had  it  been  our  wish  to  find  a  pastime.  We  had  surely

found  it  in  ourselves  ; — if  to  do  so  had  been  our

will.
Nay,  We  will  cast  the  truth  over  falsehood,  and  it  shall

smite  it  and  lo,  it  vanisheth !     But  woe  to  you  for

what  ye  utter  of  God.
And  all  beings  in  the  heavens  and  on  the  earth  are  His  :

and  they  who  are  in  his  presence  disdain  not  his

service,  neither  are  they  wearied  :
20     They  praise  Him  night  and  day  :    they  are  not  worn

out  with  weariness,-

'  Lit.  the  people  or  famih/  of  the  admonition.  Itq.  34  considers  this
verse  to  have  been  revealed  at  Medina.  Dr.  Sprcnger  understands  this,
and  v.  2  of  the  Schof '  or  sacred  books  of  the  Hauyfs,  i.  p.  553.

'  Comp.  Rev.  iv.  8.     Or,  they  invent  not  (concerning  Him).     So  Kas.

150  THE    KORAN.

Have  they  taken  gods  from  the  earth  who  can  quicken

the  dead  ?
Had  there  been  in  either  heaven  or  earth  srods  besides

God,  both  surely  had  gone  to  ruin.     But  glory  be

to  God,  the  Lord  of  the  throne,  beyond  what  they

utter !
He  shall  not  be  asked  of  his  doings,  but  they  shall  be

asked.
Have  they  taken  other  gods  bedside  Him  ?    Say  :  Bring

forth  your  proofs  iliat  they  are  gods.     This  is  the

warning^  of  those  who  are  living  with  mo,  and  the

warning  of  those  who  were  before  me  :  but  most

of  them  know  not  the  truth,  and  turn  aside.
And  no  apostle  have  We  sent  before  thee  to  whom  We

did  not  reveal  that  "  There  is  no  God  beside  Me :

therefore  worship  Me.^^
Yet  they  say,  "  The  God  of  Mercy  hath  begotten  issue

{tlie  angels)."     Glory  be  to  Him  !     Nay,  they  are

but  his  honoured  servants  j
They  speak  not  till  He  hath  spoken,^  and  they  do  his

bidding ;
He  knoweth  what  is  before  them  and  what  is  behind

them  ;'  and  no  plea  shall  they  offer
Save    for  him   with    whom    He    is  pleased,   and  they

tremble  for  fear  of  Him  ;
30     And  him  among  them  who  saith  "  I  am  a  god  beside

Ilim,'^ — that  then  will  We  recompense  with  hell :

in  such  sort  will  We  recompense  the  offenders.
Do  not  the  unbelievers  see  that  the  heavens  and  the

earth  were  both  a  solid  mass,  that  then  We  clave

them   asunder,  and   that   by  means   of  water  Wo

gave  life  to    everything?*      Will  they  not  then

believe  ?
And  We  set  mountains  on  the  earth  lest  it  should  move

with  them,   and  We  made  on   it  broad  passages

between    them    as   routes  :     Haply   they    will   be

guided  aright ;
And  We  made  the  heaven  a  roof  strongly  upholden  ;'^

yet  turn  they  away  from  its  signs ;
And  He"  it  is  who  hath  created  the  night  and  the  day,

'  i.e.  the  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  God.
^  Lit.  they  jyrec.ede  him  not  in  speech.
^  What  they  have  done  and  shall  do.

*  Thi.s  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the  Ebionite  doctrine.    Spr.  i.  30,  n.

*  Or,  iriU-fjiinrih'il.

TRE    KORAN.  151

and  the  sun  and  the  moon,  each  rolling  onwards

in  its  sphere.
And  at  no  time  ^  have  We  granted  to  man  a  life  that

shall  last  for  ever  :  if  thou  then  die,  shall  they  live

ever  ?
Every  soul  shall  taste  of  death  :  -  and  for  trial  will  We

prove  you  with  evil  and  with  good,  and  unto  Us

shall  ye  be  brought  back.
And  when  the  infidels  see  thee  they  verily  receive  thee

only  with  scoffs  : — "  Is  this  he  who  maketh  such

mention  of  your  gods  ?  "     Yet  they,  at  mention  of

the  God  of  Mercy,  believe  not.
Man  is  made  up  of  precipitation.'    But  I  will  show  you

my  signs :  * — desire  them  not  then  to  be  hastened : —
Yet  they  say,  "  When  will  this  threat  he  made  good  ?

Tell  us,  if  ye  be  men  of  truth."
40     Did  those  who  disbelieve  but  know  the  time  when  they

shall  not  be   able   to  keep  off  the  fire  of  hell  from

their  faces  or  from  their  backs,  neither  shall  they

be  helped !
But  it   shall  come  on    them    suddenly    and    confound

them,  and  they  shall  not  be  able  to  put  it  back,

neither  shall  they  be  respited.
And  truly  apostles  have  been  scoffed  at  before  thee  :

and  then  that  doo7n  at  which  they  mocked  encom-
passed the  scoffers.
Say  :  "^Mio  shall  protect  you  by  night  and  by  day  from

the  God  of  Mercy  ?     Yet  turn  they  away  from  the

warning  of  their  Lord,
Have   they   gods    beside  Us  who  can  defend  them  ?

For  their  own  succour  have  they  no  power ;  neither

shall  the  gods  they  join   with  God  screen  them

from  Us.^
Nay  !    We   have  given  these   men  and  their  fathers

enjoyments  so  long  as  their  life  lasted.     See  they

'  Lit.  before  thee,  which  might  seem  to  imply  that  the  grant  of  immor-
tality had  been  made  to  Miihamraad.  I  have  therefore  rendered,  as  in  the
text,  to  avoid  the  ambiguity.  Comp.  Sunis  [xcvii.]  iii.  182  ;  [l.xxxL]  xjiix.
57,  and  Weil's  Life  of  Mohammad,  p.  350.

"  Comp.  Matt.  xvi.  28  ;  Heb.  il  9.  Hist.  Josephi  Fabr.  Lign.  c.  22,  at
the  end.

'  See  the  index  under  the  word  Man.  The  Rabbins  teach  that  man
was  created  with  innate  evil  propensities.  See  Schrceders  Talm.  Rabb.-
Judenthum,  p.  378.

^  i.e.  my  teaching  as  to  the  future  lot  of  the  infidels,  etc.

^  Lit.  neither  shail  they  be  preserved  from  «.?.

162  THE    KORAN.

not  then  that  We  come  to  a  land  and  straiten  its

bonders  ?  ^     Is  it  they  then  who  prevail  ?
Say  :  I  only  warn  you  by  what  hath  been  revealed  to

me  :  but  the  deaf  will  not  hear  the  call^  whenever

they  are  warned ;
Yet  assuredly  if  a  breath  of  thy  Lord's  chastisement

touch  them,   they  will    certainly  exclaim,  "  Oh  !

woe  to  us  !  we  have  indeed  been  oflenders/'
And  just  balances  will  We  set  up  for  the  day  of  the

resurrection,  so  that  no  soul  be  wronged  in  aught ;

and  if  a  worh  were  but  the  weight  of  a  grain  of

mustard-seed,    We   would    bring    it   forth    to    be

weighed  :  and  our  reckoning  will  suffice.^
^  We  gave  of  old  to  Moses  and  Aaron  the  illumination,^

and  a  light  and  a  warning  for  the  God-fearing.
50     Who    dread   their   Lord    in  secret,  and  who  tremble

because  of  "  the  Hour."
And  this  Koran  which  We  have  sent  down  is  a  blessed

warning  :  will  ye  then  disown  it  ?
And  Wc  gave  unto  Abraham  his  direction  aforetime,*

for  We  knew  him  to  he  ivorthy ;
When   he    said    to    his    father    and    to    his    people,

"AVhat  are  these  images   to  which  ye   show  de-
votion ?  "
They  said,  "  We  found  our  fathers  worshipping  them  ;"
He  said,  "  Truly  ye  aad  your  fathers  have  been  in  a

plain  mistake  :  "
They  said,  "  Hast  thou  come  unto  us  in  earnest,^  or  art

thou  of  those  avIio  jest  ?  "
He  said,  "  Nay,  your  Lord  is  Lord  of  the  Heavens  and

'  Muhammad  appeals  to  the  rapid  progress  of  Islam  as  a  proof  of  his
divine  mission,  A  land  must  be  here  understood  of  the  lands  of  unbe-
lievers.

^  Lit.  we  arc  sufficient  as  an  arrow  plant.

^  At.  furrinan — a  word  derived  by  Muhammad  from  the  Jews,  con-
stantly used  in  the  Talnuid  as  the  ecjuivalent  of  rns  and  7W  ,  and
meaninff,  as  in  Syr.  and  yEth.,  dclircrance,  liberation.  Thus,  .Sura  viii.  29,
42  ;  and  hence,  lUumination,  revelation,  generally.  Another  interpretation
here  and  in  other  passages  is  the  distinction,  i.e.  between  good  and  evil,
lawJul  and  unlawful.  The  title  is  applied  to  the  Koran  and  Pentateuch
alike.

'•  This  story  is  taken  in  part  verbatim  from  Midr.  Kabbah  on  Gen.  par.
17.  See  also  Schalsceleth  Hakabala,  2  ;  Maimon  de  Idol.  ch.  1  ;  and  Yad
Hachaziikah,  vii.  6,  who  makes  Abraham— in  his  40th  year— renounce
star- worship,  break  images,  escape  the  wrath  of  the  king  by  a  miracle,  and
preach  that  there  is  one  God  of  the  whole  universe.

*  Or,  hast  thou  brought  ut  the.  truth.

TUE    KORAN.  153

of  the  Earth,  both  of  which  He  hath  created ;  and

of  this  am  I  one  of  those  who  witness  to  you ;
— And,    by    God,   I  will  certainly    lay  a   plot   against

your  idols,  aftei  ye  have  retired  and  turned  your

backs.'^
So  he  broke  them  all  in  pieces,  except  the  largest  of

them,  that  haply  on  it  they  might  lay  the  blame  :
60     They  said,  "  Who  hath  done  this  to  our  gods  ?    Verily

he  is  one  of  the  unjust/'
They  said,  "  We  heard  a  youth  make  mention  of  them

who  is  called  Abraham/'
They  said,  "Then  bring  him  before  the  people's  eyes;

haply  they  will  witness  against  him."
They   said,    "  Hast  thou  done   this    to    our   gods,   0

Abraham  ?  "
He  said,  "  Nay,  this  their  chief  hath  done  it :  but  ask

ye  them,  if  they  can  speak."
So  they  returned  to  their  senses,  and  said  of  them-
selves, "  Ye  truly  ai-e  the  impious  pei'sons."
Then  became  headstrong  in   their  former  error -^  and

exclaimed,    "  Thou    knowest     that    these    speak

not."
He  said,  "  Do  ye  then  worship,  instead   of  God,  that

which  cannot  profit  you  at  all,    nor  injure  you?

Fie   on  you  and  on  that  ye  worship    instead  of

God  !     Will  ye  not  then  understand  ?  "
They  said  :  -  "  Burn  him,  and  succour  your  gods  :  if  ye

will  be  men  of  action."
We  said,  "0  fire  !  be  thou  cold,  and  to  Abraham  a

safety  !  " »
70     And  they  sought  to  lay  a  plot  against  him,  but  We

made  them  the  greatest  losers  :
And  We  brought  him  and  Lot  in   safety  to  the  land

which  We  have  blessed  for  all  human  beings  :

'Lit.  sie  neigtcn  sich  nach  ihren  Kopfen.  They  were  turned  down  upon
their  heads.— U Urn.  and  Sale  in  notes.  But  UUm.  in  the  text,  vcrjiden
sie  icieilcr  in  ihren  Abcrglauhen.

'  The  Rabbins  make  Nimrod  to  have  been  the  persecutor  of  Abraham.
Comp.  Targ.  Jon.  on  Gen.  xv.  7  ;  Tr.  Bavu  Bathra,  fol.  L»l  o;  Maimon.
More  Nevochim,  iii.  29  ;  Weil,  Legenden,  p.  74.

'  Or,  ht  peace  be  upon  AbraJiam.  Comp.  Targ.  Jon.  on  Gen.  xi.  28,
from  the  mistranslation  of  which  this  legend  took  its  rise,  the  word  ur  in
Heb.  meaning  Jire.  See  also  Targ.  Jon.  on  Gen.  xv.  7.  The  legend  was
adopted  by  some  of  the  Ea.-<tern  Christians  ;  and  commemorated  in  the
Syrian  Calendar  on  Jan.  29  (Hyde  de  Rel.  V.  Pers.  74).  Comp.  the  Abys-
sinian Calendar  on  Jan.  25  (Ludolf.  Hist.  p.  409).

154  THE    KORAN.

And  We  ga.ve  him  Isaac  and  Jacob  as  a  farther  gift,
and  We  made  all  of  them  ri<^hteous ;

We  also  made  them  models  who  should  guide  others  by
our  com"mand,  and  We  inspired  them  with  good
deeds,  and  the  observance  of  prayer,  and  alms-
giving, and  they  worshipped  Us.
^  And  unto  Lot  We  gave  wisdom  and  knowledge  ;  and
We  rescued  him  from  the  city  which  wrought  fil-
thiness ;  aye,  they  were  a  people,  evil,  perverse.

And  We  caused  him  to  enter  into  our  mercy  :  verily  he
was  of  the  righteous.
^  And  remember  Noah  when  aforetime  he  cried   to  Us
and  We  heard   him,   and  delivered  him   and  his
family  from  the  great  calamity ;

And  We  helped  him  against  the  people  who  treated  our
signs  as  impostures.  An  evil  people  verily  were
they,  and  We  drowned  them  all.
^  And  David  and  Solomon  ;  when  they  gave  judgment
concerning  a  field  when  some  people's  sheep  had
caused  a  waste  ^  therein  ;  and  We  were  witnesses
of  their  judgment.

And  We  gave  Solomon  insight  into  the  affair ;  and  on
both  of  them  We  bestowed  wisdom  and  know-
ledge. And  We  constrained  the  mountains  and
the  birds  to  join  with  David  in  oiTr  praise  :  And
Our  doing  was  it !
80  And  We  taught  David  the  art  of  making  mail  ^  for  you,
to  defend  you  from  each  other's  violence :  will  ye
then  be  thankful  ?

And  to  Solomon  We  suhjccfed  the  strongly-blowing
wind  :  it  sped  at  his  bidding  to  the  land  We  had
blessed;  for  We  know  all  things  :
And  sundry  Satans'  to  dive  for  him  and  perform  other
work  beside :  and  We  kept  watch  over  them.
^  And  rem  ember  Job  :  When  he  cried  to  his  Lord,
"  Truly  evil  hath  touched  me  :  but  Thou  art  the
most  merciful  of  those  who  show  mercy."

'  Or,  strayed  for  pasture.

'  It  has  been  observed  that  the  blacksmith  has  ever  been  looked  upon
with  awe  by  barbarians,  on  the  same  principle  that  made  Vulcan  a  deity.
In  Abyssinia  all  artisans  are  Budah,  sorcerers,  especially  the  blacksmith,
and  he  is  a  social  outcast,  as  amon^'  the  Sonial  ;  .  .  .  .  Throuffhout  the  rest
of  El-Islam,  the  blacksmith  is  respected  as  treadinj?  in  the  path  of  David,
the  father  of  the  craft.— Burton  :  First  Footsteps  in  E.  Africa,  p.  3:3.  The
numerous  wars  in  which  David  was  engaged  may  have  given  rise  to  the
myth  of  his  being  the  inventor  of  mail.         '  See  >Sura  xxxviii.  37,  p.  140.-

THE    KOKAN.  155

So  We  heard  him,   and  lightened  the  burden  of  his

woe ;  and  We  gave  him  back   his  family,  and  as

many  more  with  them, — a  mercy  from  Us,  and  a

memorial  for  those  who  serve  Us.
And  Ismael,  and  Edris^  and  Dhoulkell" — all  steadfast

in  patience —
And  We  caused  them  to  enter  into  our  mercy ;  they

truly  were  of  the  righteous  :
And  Dhoukioun  ;  '  when  he  went  on  his  way  in  anger,

and   thought  that  We    had    no    power  over  him.

But  in  the  darkness  he  cried,  "  There  is  no  God

but  Thou  :  Glory  be  unto  Thee  !     Verily,  I  have

been  one  of  the  evil-doers.^'
So  We  heard  him  and  rescued  him  from  misery  :  for

thus  rescue  We  the  faithful :
And  Zacharias ;  when  he  called  upon  his  Lord  saying,

"  0  my  Lord,  leave  me  not  childless  :  but  there

is  no  better  heir  than  Thyself :  "  "*
90     So  We  heard  him,  and  gi^ve  him  John,  and  We  made

his  wife  fit  for  child-bearing  : — Yerily  these  vied

in  goodness,  and    called    upon  Us  with  love  and

fear,  and  humbled  themselves  before  Us  : — ■
And  her  who  kept  her  maidenhood,  and  into  whom

We  breathed  of  our  spirit,  and  made  her  and  her

son  a  sign  to  all  creatures.
Of  a  truth,  this  your  religion   is    the  one^  E-eligion,

and  I  your  Lord ;  therefore  serve  Me  :
But  they  have   rent  asunder  this  their  great  concern

among  themselves  into   sects.      All  of  them  shall

return  to  Us.
And  whoso  doth  the  things  that  are  right,  and  he  a

'  See  Sura  xL\.  55-6,  p.  115.

*  The  man  of  the  lot  or  'portion.  Or,  of  care,  support  According  to
some,  Elius,  as  others  say,  Isaiah.  It  is  move  probable,  however,  that  he
is  the  Obadiah  of  1  Kinj^s  xviii.  4,  who  supported  100  prophets  in  the  cave  ;
or  Ezechiel,  who  is  called  Kephil  by  the  Arabs.  See  Niebuhr,  Travels,
ii.  265.

^  The  man  of  the  fish — Jonah.

••  See  Sunis  [xcvii.]  iii.  33 ;  xix.  p.  110,  for  the  story  of  Zacharias  in  full.
The  concluding  sentence  of  this  chuise  is  obscure.  It  probably  means  that
even  if  no  heir  were  vouchsafed  to  Zacharias,  yet  since  God  will  be  the
heir  of  all  things,  he  would  take  Zacharias  to  himself,  and  thus  abun-
dantly recompense  him.     See  Sura  [Ixxix.]  xxviii.  58.

*  See  Sura  [cix.]  Ixvi.  12.  It  is  quite  clear  from  these  two  passages  that
Muhammad  believed  in  the  Immaculate  and  miraculous  conception  of
Jesus.

*  i.e.  identical  with  that  of  the  previous  prophets,  etc.

156  THE    KORAN.

believer,  his  efforts  shall  not  be  disowned :  ^  and
truly  We  write  them  down  for  him.

There  is  a  ban  on  every  city  which  we  have  destroyed,
that  they  shall  not  arise  again.

Until  Gog  and  Magog"  have  had  a  way  opened  for  them,
and  they  shall  hasten  from  every  high  land,

And  this  sure  promise  draweth  on.  And  lo  !  the  eyes
of  the  infidels  shall  stare  amazedly ;  and  they  shall
say,  "  Oh,  our  misery !  of  this  were  we  careless  !
nay,  we  were  impious  persons."

Verily,  ye,  and  what  ye  worship  beside  God,'  shall  be
fuel  for  hell ,  ye  shall  go  down  into  it.

"Were  these  gods,  they  would  not  go  down  into  it ;  but
they  shall  all  abide  in  it  for  ever —
1 00  Therein  shall  they  groan ;  but  nought  therein  shall  they
hear  to  comfort  them.

Yerily  they  for  whom  We  have  before  ordained  the  good
reward  shall  be  far  away  from  it ;

Its  slightest  sound  they  shall  not  hear:  and  in  that  which
their  souls  longed  for,  shall  they  abide  for  ever :

The  great  terror  shall  not  trouble  them ;  and  the  angels
shall  meet  them  with,  "  This  is  your  day  which  ye
were  promised."

On  that  day  We  will  roll  up  the  heaven  as  one  rolleth
up*  written  scrolls.  As  We  made  the  first  crea-
tion, so  will  We  bring  it  forth  again.  This  pro-
mise bindeth  us ;  verily.  We  will  perform  it.

And  now,  since  the  Law  was  given,  have  We  written
in  the  Psalms  that  ^' my  servants,  the  righteous,
shall  inherit  the  earth." ^

Vei'ily,  in  this  Koran  is  teaching  for  those  who  serve
God.

'  Lit.  thcTc  fhall  not  he  a  denial  to  his  effort.

'  See  Sura  [Ixix.]  xviii.  93.  Thus,  the  ancient  Jewish  and  Chri.stian
legend  connects  Gog  and  Magog  with  the  end  of  the  world  (Rev.  xx.  8).
P.sendojon.  on  Lev.  xxvi.  44.  Conip.  Numb.  xi.  27.  Gog,  however,  ia
probably  the  mountain  Ghef  or  Ghoj,'h  (sec  Rcinegg's  Beschreib.  der  Cauca,-
SU.S,  ii.  79),  and  the  .syllable  Ma  in  Magog,  the  Sanscrit  mah,  maha,  great.

'  "  Whenever  a  people  is  punished  (for  idolatry),  the  beings  honoured
by  them  as  gods  shall  also  be  punished,  for  so  it  is  written  ;  on  all  the
gods  also  of  Egypt  will  I  inflict  judgments  "  (Sakkah,  29).

*  Ar.  Svljill,  which  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  the  name  of  the  angel  who
writes  down  the  actions  of  every  man's  life  upon  a  scroll,  which  is  rolled
up  at  his  death  (comp.  Isai.  xxxiv.  4)  ;  by  others,  to  be  the  name  of  one
of  Muhammad's  secretaries.  But  in  one  dialect,  sidjill  means  rir. — Kam.
The  text  may  be  rendered  literally— as  the  rolling  up  a  scroll  for  writings.

*  Ps.  xxxvii.  29.  This  is  the  only  text  quoted  in  the  Koran  from  the
Holy  Scriptures.

THE    KORAN.  157

We  have  not  sent  tliee  otherwise  than  as  mercy  unto

all  creatures.
Say  :  Only  hath  it  been  revealed  to  me  that  your  God

is  one  God ;  are  ye  then  resigned  to  Him  ?  (Mus-
lims.)
But  if  they  turn  their  backs,  then  say  :  I  have  warned

you  all  alike ;   but  I  know  not  whether  that  with

which  ye  are  threatened  be  nigh  or  distant.
110  God   truly  knoweth    what  is    spoken    aloud,   and  He

knoweth  that  which  yc  hide.
And  I  know  not  whether  haply  this  delay  be  not  for

your  trial^  and  that  ye  may  enjoy  yourselves  for  a

time.
Say  :  O  my  Lord,^  judge  Thou  with  truth ;    and  our

Lord  is  the  God  of  Mercy — whose  help  is  to  be

sought  against  what  ye  utter.

[LXYI.]

SURA  XXV.— AL  FURKAN.

Mecca. — 77  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Blessed  be  He  who  hath  sent  down  AL  FURKAN
(the  illumination)  to  his  servant,  that  to  all  crea-
tures ^  he  may  be  a  warner.

His  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  !
No  son  hath  He  begotten  !  No  partner  hath  He
in  his  Empire  !  And  all  things  hath  He  created,
and  decreeing  hath  decreed  their  destinies.

Yet  have  they  adopted  gods  beside  Him,  which  have
created  nothing,  but  were  themselves  created :

And  no  power  have  they  for  themselves  of  evil  or  of

*  Thus  Ullraann.     Or  (my  Lord)  saith.
'  See  Sura  [Ixv.]  xxi.  49,  p.  152.

^  Lit.  to  the  loorlds,  i.  e.  the  three  classes  of  rational  creatures,  men,
genii,  and  angels.

158  THE    KORAN.

good,  nor  h.ive  they  power  of  death,  or  of  life,  or
of  raising'  the  dead.

And  the  unbelievers  say,  "  Verily  this  Koran  is  a  mere
fraud  of  Jiis  own  devising,  and  others  have  helped
him  with  it,^  who  had  come  hither  by  outrage  and
lie."-

And  they  say,  ''  Tales  of  the  ancients  that  he  hath  put
in  writing !  and  they  were  dictated  to  him  morn
and  even,"

Say  :  He  hath  sent  it  down  wlio  knoweth  the  secrets
that  are  in  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth.  He
truly  is  the  Gracious,  the  Merciful.

And  they  say,  "AYhat  sort  of  apostle  is  this  ?  He  eateth
food  and  he  walketh  the  marts  !  Unless  an  angel
be  sent  down  and  take  part  in  his  warnings,

Or  a  treasure  be  thrown  down  to  him,  or  he   have  a

garden  that   supplieth  him  with  food "'  and

those  unjust  persons  say,  "  Verily  ye  follow  but  a
man  enchanted.^'
1 0     See,  how  they  strike  out  likenesses  for  thee  !    But  they
err,  and  cannot  find  the  way.

Blessed  be  He  who  if  He  please  can  give  thee  better
than  that  of  ivhlch  they  speak — Gardens,  'neath
which  the  rivers  flow  :  and  pavihons  will  He  as-
sign thee.

Aye,  they  have  treated  the  coming  of  "the  Hour"  as
a  lie  :  But  a  flaming  fire  have  We  got  ready  for
those  who  treat  the  coming  of  the  Hour  as  a  lie.

When  it  shall  see  them  from  afar,  they  shall  hear  its
raging  and  roaring, —

And  when  they  shall  be  flung  into  a  narrow  space
thereof  bound  together,  they  shall  invoke  destruc-
tion on  the  spot :

— "  Call  not  this  day  for  one  destruction,  but  call  for
destructions  many."

Say  :    Is  this,  or  the  Paradise  of  Eternity  which  was

*  Comp.  Sura  [Ixxiii.]  xvi.  105.  The  frequency  with  which  Muhammad
feels  it  necessary  to  rebut  this  charge  by  mere  denial  is  strongly  indicative
of  its  truth.

'  "  The  meaning  may  possibly  be,  that  the  teachers  of  Muhammad  were
persons  who  had  taken  refuge  in  Arabia  for  offences  and  heresies."— Spren-
ger,  Life  of  M.,  p.  96,  n.  Or,  hut  they  idler  an  injvslicc  and  a  falsehood.
Noldeke  combats  Dr.  Sprengcr's  supposition  that  "  Tales  of  the  ancients"
(verse  6)  is  a  book.     Hist,  of  Qoran,  p.  13.

^  Supply,  we  will  not  believe.

THE    KORAN.  159

promised  to  the  God-fearing  best  ?     Their  recom-
pense and  retreat !

Abiding  therein  for  ever,  they  shall  have  in  it  all  that
they  desire  !  It  is  a  promise  to  be  claimed  of  thy
Lord.

And  on  the  day  when  He  shall  gather  them  together,
and  those  whom  they  worshipped  beside  God,  He
will  then  say,  "  Was  it  ye  who  led  these  my  ser-
vants astray,  or  of  themselves  strayed  they  from
the  path  ?  "

They  will  say,  "  Glory  be  to  Thee  !  It  beseemed  not
us  to  take  other  lords  than  Thee.  But  Thou  gavest
them  and  their  fathers  their  fill  of  ffood  thingrs,  till
they  forgat  the  remembrance^  ofTlcee,  and  became
a  lost  people.^'
20  Then  will  God  say  to  the  Idolaters,  ''Now  have  they
made  you  liars  in  what  ye  say,-  and  ye  have  no
power  to  avert  your  doom,  or  for  succour."

And  whosoever  of  you  this  offendeth.  We  will  make
him  taste  a  great  punishment.

Nor  have  We  sent  Apostles  before  thee  who  verily  ate
not  common  food,  and  walked  not  the  marts.  And
We  test  you  by  means  of  each  other.  Will  ye  be
steadfast?  Thy  Lord  is  looking  on  !
^  They  who  expect  not  to  meet  Us  say,  "  If  the  angels
be  not  sent  down  to  us,  or  unless  we  behold  our

Lord ■"     Proud  are  they  now  of  heart,*

and  exceed  with  great  excess  !

On  the  day  when  they  shall  see  the  angels,  no  good
news  shall  there  be  for  the  guilty  ones,  and  they
shall  cry  out,  ''A  barrier  that  cannot  be  passed  !"*

Then  will  Wo  proceed  to  the  works  which  they  have
wrought,  and  make  them  as  scattered  dust.

Happy,  on  that  day,  the  inmates  of  the  Garden  as  to
abode,  and  as  to  the  most  excellent  place  of  noon-
tide slumber !

And  on  that  day  shall  the  heaven  with  its  clouds  be
cleft,  and  the  angels  shall  be  sent  down,  descending :

^  Or,  the  admonition  (of  the  truth  or  Koran).

^  In  your  ascriptions  of  divinity  to  them. — Beidh.

'  Lit.  in  their  souls,  i.e.  within  themselves.

*  Or,  far,  far  be  they  removed.  I'he  same  words  occur  at  the  end  of
verse  55.  The  Commentators  doubt  whether  they  are  spoken  by  the
wicked  of  the  impossibility  of  their  attaining  Paradise,  or  by  the  angels
to  the  wicked.  "

160  THE    KORAN.

On  that  day  shall  all  empire  be,  as  is  justly  due,  with

the  God  of  Mercy,  and  a  hard  day  shall  it  be  for

the  Infidels.
And  on  that  day  shall  the  wicked  one  ^  bite  his  hands,

and  say,  ''  Oh  !  would  that  I  had  taken  the  same

path  with  the  Apostle  !
30     ''  Oh  !  woe  is  me  !  would  that  I  had  not  taken  such  an

one  -  for  my  friend  !
It  was  he  verily  who  led  me  astray  from  the  Warning

which  had  reached  me  !    mid  Satan  is  man^s  be-

trayer.'^  ^
Then  said  the  Apostle,  "  0  my  Lord  !  truly  my  people

have    esteemed    this    Koran    to    be    vain    bab-
bling.''
Eyen  thus  have  We  given  to  every  Prophet  an  enemy

from  among  the  wicked  ones — But  thy  Lord  is

a  sufficient  guide  and  helper.
And  the  unbelievers  say,  "  Unless  the  Koran  be  sent

down  to  him  all   at  once "     In  this  way

would  "We  stablish   thy  heart  by  it ;   and  slowly

and  distinctly  have  We  repeated  it.*
Nor  shall  they  come  to  thee  with  puzzling  questions,^

but  We  will   bring  thee  the  truth,  and  the  best

solution.
They  who  shall  be  gathered  upon  their  faces  to  hell,

shall  have  the  worst  place,  and  be  farthest  from

the  path  of  hajipiness.
Heretofore  We  gave  the  law  to  ]\[oses,  and  appointed

his  brother  Aaron  to  be  his  counsellor  :  ^
And  We  said,  "  Go  ye  to  the  people  who  treat  our

signs  as    lies.''     And  We    destroyed  them  with

utter  destruction.
And  as  to    the   people  of  Noah  !  when  they  treated

their  Apostles    as  impostors.  We  drowned  them,

and  We  made  them  a  sign   to  mankind  :    and  a

grievous  chastisement  have  We  prepared  for  the

wicked !

'  Said  by  Beirlh.  to  be  the  polythcist  Okbch,  the  son  of  Abu  Mo'eyt,
who  by  Muhammad's  persuasion  professed  Islam,  but  afterwards  retracted
to  please  Ubei  ben  Khalaf.     See  Gagnier's  Vie  de  Mahom.  i.  362.

'  Ar.  fulani  (whence  the  Spanish  fulano),  identical  with  the  Heb.  'J^S  ;
used  of  a  person  only  in  Kuth  iv.  1,  but  by  the  Kabbinic  writers,  con-
stantly. 3  Or,  abandoner.

*  Or,  we  hm!e  parcelled  it  out.  This  verse  seems  to  show  that  the  Koran
was  of  gradual  growth  in  the  time  of  Muhammad  himself.

*  Lit.  parables,  similitudes.  *  Lit.  vizier.

THE    KOKAN.  161

40     And  Ad  and   Thamood,   and  the  men   of  Rass/  and
many  generations  between  them;

Unto  each  of  them  did  "We  set  forth  parables  for
learnings,  and  ea^h  of  them  did  We  utterly  ex-
terminate :

And  verily  these  unhelieving  Meccans  have  passed  by
the  city  on  which  was  rained  a  fatal  rain.  Have
they  not  seen  it  ?  But  they  did  not  dread  the
resurrection  !
%  And  when  they  see  thee,  verily  they  do  but  take  thee
as  the  subject  of  their  railleries.  "  Is  this  he
whom  God  hath  sent  as  an  Apostle  ?

Indeed  he  was  nigh  leading  us  astray  from  our  gods,
had  we  not  persevered  steadfastly  in  their  service/'
But  they  shall  know,  when  they  see  the  punish-
ment, who  hath  most  strayed  from  the  path.

"What  thinkest  thou  ?  He  who  hath  taken  his  pas-
sions for  a  god — wilt  thou  then  be  a  guardian
over  him  ?

Thinkest  thou  that  the  greater  part  of  them  hear  or
understand  ?  Verily,  they  are  just  like  the
brutes  !  Yes  !  they  stray  even  further  from  the
right  way.

Hast  thou  not  seen  how  thy  Lord  lengtheneth  out
the  shadow?-  Had  He  pleased  He  had  certainly
made  it  motionless.'  Then  We  make  the  sun  to
be  a  means  of  showing  it ;

Then  draw  it  in  unto  Us  with  easy  indrawing.

And  He  it  is  who  hath  ordained  the  night  as  a  gar-
ment, and  sleep  for  rest,  and  ordained  the  day
for  waking  up  to  life  :
50  He  too  it  is  who  sendeth  the  winds  as  the  glad  herald
of  his  mercy  (rain)  ;  and  pure  water  send  We
down  from  Heaven,

That  We  may  revive  by  it  a  dead  land  :  and  We  give
it  for  drink  to  our  creation,  beasts  and  men  in
numbers ;

And  verily  We  cause  it  to  flow  among  them  in  order  that
they  may  bear  Us  in  mind  :  but  most  men  refuse
to  be  aught  but  thankless.

'  It  is  uncertain  whether  Bass  is  the  name  of  a  city  in  Yemama ;  or,
merely,  as  some  interpret  it,  of  a  well  near  Midian  ;  or,  according  to  others,
in  the  territory  of  Hadramont.

'  This  passage  probably  alludes  to  2  Kings  xx.  9-12.

'  Lit.  quiescent,  i.e.  always  the  same.

il

162  THE    KORAN.

Moreover,  had  We  pleased.  We  had  certainly  raised
up  a  Warner  in  every  city ;

Give  not  way  then  to  the  unbelievers,  but  by  means
of  this,  io ran  strive  against  them  with  a  mighty
strife.

And  He  it  is  who  hath  let  loose  the  two  seas,^  the  one
sweet,  fresh ;  and  the  other  salt,  bitter ;  and  hath
put  an  interspace  between  them,  and  a  barrier
which  it  is  forbidden  them  to  pass.

And  it  is  He  who  hath  created  man  of  water,-  then
made  him  capable  of  the  ties  of  kindred  and
affinity  :  and  potent  is  thy  Lord.

Yet  beside  God  do  they  worship  what  can  neither
help  nor  hurt  them  :  and  the  unbeliever  is  Satan's
helper  against  his  Lord  :

Yet  We  have  sent  thee  only  as  a  herald  and  a  warner.

Say  :  I  ask  of  you  no  other  recompense  for  it,'  than
that  he  who  will  should  take  the  way  to  his
Lord.*
60  And  put  thou  thy  trust  in  Him  that  liveth  and  dieth
not,  and  celebrate  his  praise — (He  fully  knoweth
the  faults  of  his  servants) — who  in  six  days  cre-
ated the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,  and  whatever
is  between  them,  then  seated  Himself  firmly  on
his  Throne  —  the  God  of  Mercy  !  Ask  now  of
the  Wise  concerning  Him.

But  when  it  is  said  to  them,  "  Bow  down  to  the  God
of  Mercy,^^  they  say,  "  And  who  is  the  God  of
Mercy  ?  Shall  we  bow  down  to  what  thou  biddest
us  ?  "     And  they  fly  from  thee  the  more.

Blessed  bo  He  who  hoth  placed  in  the  Heaven  the
signs  of  the  Zodiac  !  '^  who  hath  placed  in  it  the
Lamp  of  the  Sun,  and  the  light-giving  Moon  !

And  it  is  He  who  hath  ordained  the  night  and  the
day  to  succeed  one  another  for  those  who  desire
to  think  on  God  or  desire  to  be  thankful.

*  According  to  some  commentators,  Muhammad  here  speaks  of  the  v?a-
ters  of  the  TFgris,  which  do  not  mingle  with  the  salt  water  of  the  sea  till
they  have  reached  a  considerable  distance  from  the  river-mouth.  See  Zech.
xiv.  8.  But  it  more  probably  refers  to  the  great  and  ever-separate  bodies
of  fresh  and  salt  water.

'  See  Sura  [cv.]  xxiv.  44,  n.

'  "  Thou  art  taught  that  whoever  would  make  a  profit  by  the  Law  de-
priveth  himself  of"lifc."— Pirke  Aboth,  i.  4.  This  precept  is  of  frequent
occurrence  in  the  Talmud.  *  i.e.  become  a  Muslim.

*  Comp.  Sura  [xc]  xiii.  29  ;  and  the  following  Sura  xvii.  109,  n.

THE    KORAN.  163

And  the  servants  of  the  God  of  Mercy  are  they  who
walk  upon  the  earth  softly ;  and  when  the  ignorant  ^
address  them,  they  reply,  "  Peace  !  " —

And  they  that  pass  tho  night  in  the  adoration  of  their
Lord,  prostrate,  and  standing  for  prayer : —

And  that  say,  "  0  our  Lord  !  turn  away  from  us  the
torment  of  Hell ;  verily  its  torment  is  endless ;
verily  it  is  indeed  an  ill  abode  and  resting-place ! " —

And  those  who  when  they  spend  are  neither  lavish  nor
niggard,  but  keep  the  mean  : —

And  those  who  call  on  no  other  gods  with  God,  nor
slay  whom  God  hath  forbidden  to  be  slain,  except
for  a  just  cause,  and  who  commit  not  fornication
(for  he  who  doth  this  shall  find  a  recompense  for
his  sin)  ;

Doubled  to  him  shall  be  the  chastisement  on  the  day  of
Resurrection  ;  and  in  it  shall  he  remain,  disgraced,
for  ever : —
"0  (Save  those  who  have  repented  and  believed  and  done
righteous  works — as  to  them,  God  will  change
their  evil  things  into  good  things,  for  God  is
Gracious,  Merciful —

And  whoso  hath  repented  and  done  what  is  right,  he
verily  it  is  who  turneth  to  God  with  a  true  conver-
sion) : —

And  they  who  bear  not  witness  to  that  which  is  false,
and  when  they  pass  by  frivolous  talkers,^  pass  on
with  dignity  : —

And  they  who,  when  monished  by  the  revelations  of
their  Lord,  fall  not  down  thereat,  as  if  deaf  and
blind  :—

And  who  say,  "  0  our  Lord  !  give  us  in  our  wives  and
offspring  the  joy  of  our  eyes,  and  make  us  examples
to  those  who  fear  Thee  :"

These  shall  be  rewarded  with  the  High  Places  of  Para-
dise for  their  steadfast  endurance,  and  they  shall
be  accosted  therein  with — Salutation  and  Peace  : —
to  live  therein  for  ever  :  a  fair  abode  and  resting-
place  !

Say  :^  Not  on  your  account  doth  my  Lord  care  if  ye

'  The  idolaters.  '  Lit.  vain,  or  obscene,  discourse.

^  This  verse  seems  to  be  misplaced.  Dr.  Sprenger  conjectures  that  it
followed  Sur.  xx.  134,  p.  108  ;  but  was  suppressed  by  Muhammad,  and
preserved  by  the  industry  of  the  compilers. — Leben,  i.  p.  562.

M   2

164  THE    KORAN,

call  not  on  Him  !  Ye  have  treated  his  Apostle  as
an  impostor  :  but  in  the  end  shall  be  an  abiding
punishment.

[LXVII.]

SUEA  XVII.-THE  NIGHT  JOURNEY.

Mecca.' — 111  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

(I  declare)  the  Glory  of  Him  who  transported  his  ser-
vant by  night^  from  the  sacred  temple  at  Mecca
to  the  temple^  that  is  more  remote,  whose  precinct
We  have  blessed,  that  We  might  show  him  of  our
Signs  !   He  verily  is  the  Hearer,  the  Beholder.

And.*  We  gave  the  Book  to  Moses,  and  ordained  it  for
guidance  to  the  children  of  Israel — "  that  ye  take
no  other  Guardian  than  Me.''

0  posterity  of  those  whom  We  bare  with  Noah  !  He
truly  was  a  grateful  servant !

And  We  solemnly  declared  to  the  children  of  Israel  in
the  Book,  "  Twice  surely  will  ye  enact  crimes  in
the  earth,  and  with  great  loftiness  of  pride  will  ye
surely  be  uplifted.''

So  when  the  menace  for  the  first  crime^  came  to  he  in-
flicted, We  sent  against  you  our  servants  endued

'  Verses  12,  23-41,  75-82,  87,  are  supposed  by  many  commentators  to
have  originated  at  Medinca.

2  Waquidy  says  the  night-journey  took  place  on  the  17th  of  Rabhy'  1,
a  twelvemonth  before  the  Hejira.

^  Of  Jerusalem  ;  and  thence  through  the  seven  heavens  to  the  throne  of
God  on  the  back  of  Borak,  accompanied  by  Gabriel,  according  to  some
traditions  ;  while  others,  and  those  too  of  early  date,  regard  it  as  no  more
than  a  vision,  which  is  probablv  the  meaning  of  verse  62  below.  It  was,
however,  in  all  probability,  a  dream.  Muir,  ii.  219;  Ndld.  p.  102,  who
give  the  Muhammadan  sources  of  information.

*  It  is  probable  that,  as  this  verse  has  no  real  or  apparent  connection
with  the  preceding,  a  verse  may  have  been  lost,  and  that  verse  1  has  been
placed  at  the  head  of  the  Sura  merely  because  the  night-journey  is  else-
where alluded  to  in  it.  .

'  According  to  the  commentators,  the  slaughter  of  Isaiah  and  the  im-
prisonment of  Jeremiah,  punished  by  the  invasion  of  the  Assyrians.

THE    KORAN.  165

with  terrible  prowess ;  and  they  searched  the  in-
most part  of  your  abodes,  and  the  menace  was
accomplished.

Then  We  gave  you  tne  mastery  over  them^  in  turn,
and  increased  you  in  wealth  and  children,  and
made  you  a  most  numerous  host.
We  said,  "If  ye  do  well,  to  your  own  behoof  will  ye  do
well :  and  if  ye  do  evil,  against  yourselves  will  ye
do  it.  And  when  the  menace  for  your  latter  crime^
came  to  be  inflicted,  then  we  sent  an  enemy  to
sadden  your  faces,  and  to  enter  the  temple  as  they
entered  it  at  first,  and  to  destroy  with  utter  de-
struction, that  over  which  they  had  gained  the
upper  hand.

Haply  your  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  you  !  but  if  ye
return  We  will  return  :^  and  We  have  appointed
Hell  to  be  the  prison  of  the  infidels.

Verily,  this  Koran  guideth  to  what  is  most  upright ;
and  it  announce^h  to  bJievers
10     Who  do  the  things  that  are  right,  that  for  them  is  a
great  reward ;

And  that  for  those  who  believe  not  in  the  life  to  come.
We  have  got  ready  a  painful  punishment.
%  Man  prayeth  for  evil  as  if  he  were  praying  for  good ;

for  man  is  hasty.
^  We  have  made  the  night  and  the  day  for  two  signs :
the  sign  of  the  night  do  We  obscure,  but  the  sign
of  the  day  cause  We  to  shine  forth  visibly,  that  ye
may  seek  plenty  from  your  Lord,  and  that  ye  may
know  the  number  of  the  years  and  the  reckoning
of  time ;  and  We  have  explained  everything  with
clear  explanation.

And  every  man's  fate  *  have  We  fastened  about  his
neck  :  and  on  the  day  of  Eesurrection  will  We
bring  forth  to  him  a  book  which  shall  be  proflfered
to  him  wide  open  ;

— "  Read  thy  Book  :  ^  there  needeth  none  but  thyself
to  make  out  an  account  against  thee  this  day.'"

For  his  own  good  only  shall  the  guided  yield  to  guid-

'  Over  Sennacherib.

'  The  slaying  Zacharias,  John  Baptist,  and  Jesus,  punished  by  the  de-
struction of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans.  Comp.  Tr.  Gittin,  fol.  57,  where
we  read  of  the  sufferings  drawn  down  upon  the  Jews  in  consequence  of
the  former  of  these  crimes.

'  That  is,  if  ye  return  to  sin,  we  will  return  to  punish.

*  Lit  bird.  »  Comp.  Mischnah  Aboth,  3,  20.

16G  THE    KORAN.

ance,  and  to  his  own  loss  only  shall  the  erring  err ;
and  the  heavy-laden  shall  not  be  laden  with
another's  load.  And  We  punished  not  until  We
had  first  sent  an  apostle  :

And  when  We  willed  to  destroy  a  city,  to  its  affluent  ones
did  We  address  our  bidding,  because  they  acted
criminally  therein  ;  just  therefore  was  its  doom,
and  AVe  destroyed  it  with  an  utter  destruction.

And  since  Noah,  how  many  nations  have  We  exter-
minated !  And  of  the  'sins  of  his  servants  thy
Lord  is  sufficiently  informed,  observant.

Whoso  chooseth  this  quickly-passing  life,  quickly  will
We  bestow  on  him  therein  that  which  We  please
— even  on  him  We  choose  ;  afterward  We  will
appoint  hell  for  him,  in  which  he  shall  burn — dis-
graced, outcast  :
20  But  whoso  chooseth  the  next  life,  and  striveth  after  it
as  it  should  be  striven  for,^  being  also  a  believer,
— these,  then  !  their  striving  shall  be  acceptable  :

To  all — both  to  these  and  those — will  we  prolong  the
gifts  of  thy  Lord ;  and  the  gifts  of  thy  Lord  shall
not  be  hindered.

See  how  We  have  caused  some  of  them  to  excel  others  !  '^
but  the  next  life  shall  be  greater  in  its  grades,  and
greater  in  excellence.

Set  not  up  another  god  with  God,  lest  thou  set  thee
down  disgraced,  helpless.''

Thy  Lord  hath  ordained  that  ye  worship  none  but  Him  ;
and,  kindness  to  your  parents,  whether  one  or
both  of  them  attain  to  old  age  with  thee  :  and  say
not  to  them  "  Fie  !  "  neither  reproach  them  j  but
speak  to  them  both  with  respectful  speech ;

And  defer  humbly  to  them*  out  of  tenderness  ;  and  say,
"  Lord,  have  compassion  on  them  both,  even  as
they  reared  me  when  I  was  little. '^

Your  Lord  well  knoweth  what  is  in  your  souls ;  He
hnoweth  whether  ye  be  righteous.

And  verily  gracious  is  He  to  those  who  return  to  Him
•       in  penitence.

And  to  him  who  is  of  kin  render  his  due,  and  also  to
the  poor  and  to  the  wayfarer  ;  yet  waste  not  waste-
fully ;

'  Lit.  as  Mar.  et  cucurrcrit  ad  earn  cursu  ejus.

'  i.  e.  in  the  good  things  of  this  world.

^  Comp.  in  Heb.  Isai.  liii.  .3.  *  Lit.  lower  a  wing  of  humility.

THE    KORAN.  167

Truly,  the  wasteful  are  brethren  of  the  Satans,  and

Satan  was  ungrateful  to  his  Lord  :
80     But  if  thou  turn  away  from  them,  while  thou  thyself

seekest  mercy  fr6m  thy  liord  for  which  thou  hopest,

at  least  speak  to  them  with  kindly  speech  :
And  let  not  thy  hand  be  tied  up  to  thy  neck  ;  nor  yet

open  it  with  all  openness,  lest  thou  sit  thee  down

in  rebuke,  in  beggary.
Yerily,  thy  Lord  will  provide  with  open  hand  for  whom

He  pleaseth,  and  will  be  sparing.     His  servants

doth  He  scan,  inspect.
Moreover,  kill  not  your  children  for  fear  of  want  :^  for

them  and  for  you  will  We  provide.     Verily,  the

killing  them  is  a  great  wickedness.
Have  nought  to  do  with  adultery  ;  verily  it  is  a  foul

thing  and  an  evil  way  :
Neither  slay  any  one  whom  God  hath  forbidden  you  to

slay,  unless  for  a  just  cause  :  and  whosoever  shall

be  slain  wrongfully,  to  his  heir"  have  We  given

powers  ;  but  let  him  not  outstep  bounds  in  putting

tJie  manslayer  to  death;  he  verily  will  be  assisted

and  avenged.
And  touch  not  the  substance  of  the  orphan,  unless  in

an  upright  way,  till  he  attain  his  age  of  strength  :

And  perform  your  covenant ;  verily  the  covenant

shall  be  inquired  of :
And  give  full  measure  when  you  measure,  and  weigh

with  just  balance  ;  this  will  be  better,  and  fairest

for  settlement.
And  follow  not  that  of  which  thou  hast  no  knowledge  ; '

verily  the  hearing  and  the  sight  and  the  heart, —

each  for  this  shall  be  inquired  of  :
And  walk  not  proudly  on  the  earth  :  truly  thou  canst

by  no  means  cleave  the  earth,  neither  canst  thou

reach  to  the  mountains  in  height  :
40     All  this  is  evil  with  thy  Lord,  odious.

This  is  a  part  of  the  wisdom  which  thy  Lord  hath  re-
vealed to  thee.     And  set  not  up  any  other  god

with  God,  lest  thou  be  cast  into   Hell,  rebuked,

castaway.

*  Comp.  Sura  [bcxxix.]  vi.  151  ;  Ixxxi.  8,  p.  30.  Zaid,  the  sceptical
seeker  after  truth,  is  reported  to  have  discouraged  the  killing  of  daughters,
saying,  "  I  will  support  them."—  Kitab  al  Wackidi,  p.  255.  See  note  at
Sura  [xcviL]  iii.  18.  '  Or,  next  of  kin.

'  Or,  accuse  not  any  of  a  crime  if  thou  art  not  sure  of  his  guilt.

168  THE    KOKAN.

Hatli,  then,  your  Lord  preferred  you  for  sons,  and
taken  for  Himself  daughters  from  among  the
angels  ?  Indeed,  yo  assuredly  say  a  dreadful
saying.^

Moreover,  for  man's  warning  have  we  varied^  this
Koran  :  Yet  it  only  increaseth  their  flight /row  it.

Sat  :  If,  as  ye  affirm,  there  were  other  gods  with  Him,
they  would  in  that  case  seek  occasion  against  the
occupant  of  the  throne  :

Glory  to  Him  !  and  let  Him  be  exalted  far  above  what
they  utter  by  a  great  exaltation.

The  seven  heavens''  praise  Him,  and  the  earth,  and  all
who  are  therein ;  neither  is  there  aught  which  doth
not  celebrate  his  praise ;  but  their  utterances  of
praise  ye  understand  not.  Verily  He  is  kind,  in-
dulgent.

When  thou  recitest  the  Koran  We  place  between  thee
and  those  who  believe  not  in  the  life  to  come,  an
enshrouding  veil ;

And  We  put  coverings  over  their  hearts,  lest  they  should
understand  it,  and  in  their  ears  a  heaviness ;

And  when  in  the  Koran  thou  namest  thy  One  Lord,
they  turn  their  backs  in  flight.
60  We  well  know  why  they  hearken,  when  they  hearken
unto  thee,  and  when  they  whisper  apart ;  when  the
wicked  say,  "  Ye  follow  no  other  than  a  man  en-
chanted."

See  what  likenesses  they  strike  out  for  thee  !  But
they  go  astray,  neither  can  they  find  a  path.

They  also  say,  "  After  we  shall  have  become  bones  and
dust,  shall  we  in  sooth  be  raised  a  new  creation  ?"

Say  :  "  Though  ye  were  stones  or  iron  or  any  other
created  matter,  to  your  seeming  most  hard  to  raise
to  life."*  But  they  will  say,  "  Who  shall  bring
us  back  V  Say  :  "  He  who  created  you  at  first.''
And  they  will  wag  their  heads  at  thee,  and  say,
"When  shall  this  be?"  Say:  "Haply  it  "is
nigh  "—

A  day  when  God   shall   call   you   forth,  and  ye  shall

'  V.  Siir.  16,  59,  60,  n.

'  Used  a  variety  of  ar;,n.iment3  and  illustrations.

'  Thus  Tr.  Cbaj^iga,  fol.  9  b.  "  There  are  seven  heavens  (rakian) :  the
veil,  the  finnanient,  the  clouds,  the  habitation,  the  abode,  the  fixed  seat,
the  araboth."     See  Wetst.  on  2  Cor.  xii.  2.

■*  Lit.  Be  ye  stone*  or  iron,  or  a  creatwre  from  that  which  shall  he  hard,
in  your  breasts.

THE    KOKAN.  169

answer  by  praising  Him  ;  and  ye  shall  think  that
ye  have  tarried  but  a  little  while.
^  Enjoin   My  servants  to  speak  in  kindly  sort :  Verily
Satan  would   stir   up    strifes    among  them ;    aye,
Satan  is  man's  avowed  foe.

Your  Lord  well  knoweth  you :  if  He  please  He  will
have  mercy  on  you  ;  or  if  He  please  he  will  chas-
tise you :  and  We  have  not  sent  thee  to  be  a
guardian  over  them.

Thy  Lord  hath  full  knowledge  of  all  in  the  heavens  and
the  earth.  And  truly  higher  gifts  have  We  given
to  some  of  the  prophets  than  to  others,  and  the
Book  of  Psalms  \Ve  gave  to  David.

Say  :  Call  ye  upon  those  whom  ye  fancy  to  be  gods
beside  Him ;  yet  they  will  have  no  power  to  re-
lieve you  from  trouble,  or  to  turn  it  away.

Those  whom  ye  call  on,  themselves  desire  union  with
their  Lord,^  striving  which  of  them  shall  be  nearest
to  Him:  they  also  hope  for  his  mercy  and  fear
his  chastisement.  Yerily  the  chastisement  of  thy
Lord  is  to  be  dreaded,
60  There  is  no  city  which  We  will  not  destroy  before  the
day  of  Resurrection,  or  chastise  it  with  a  grievous
chastisement.     This  is  written  in  the  Book.

Nothing  hindered  Us  from  sending  then  with  the  power
of  working  miracles,  except  that  the  peoples  of  old
treated  them  as  lies.  We  gave  to  Thamood*  the
she-camel  before  their  very  eyes,^  yet  they  mal-
treated her  !  We  send  not  a  propliet  with  miracles
but  to  strike  terror.

And  remember  when  We  said  to  thee,  Yerily,  thy  Lord
is  round  about  mankind ;  and  We  ordained  the
vision*  which  We  showed  thee,  and  likewise  the
cursed  tree  of  the  Koran,  only  for  men  to  dispute
of;  moreover.  We  will  strike  them  with  terror ;
but  it  shall  only  increase  in  them  enormous  wicked-
ness :

^  And  when  We  said  to  the  Angels,  "  Prostrate  your-
selves before  Adam  : "    and   they  all   prostrated

'  In  obvious  allusion  to  the  saint-worship  of  the  Christians.

'  See  Sura  [Ixxxvii.]  vii.  71.

'  Lit.  the  visible  she-camel.

*  See  note  on  v.  1.  The  tree  is  Zakkoum  (Sura  [xlv.]  Ivi.).  The  Rab-
bins teach  that  food  of  the  bitterest  herbs  is  one  of  the  punishments  of
Hell.     See  Schroder's  Rabb.  und  Talm.  Judenthum,  p.  40.3.

170  THE    KORAN.

themselves  save  Eblis.     ''  Shall  I/^  said  he,  "  bow
down  before  him  whom  Thou  hast  created  of  clay  V

He  also  said,  "  Seest  Thou  this  man  whom  Thou  hast
honoured  above  me  ?  Verily,  if  Thou  respite  me
till  the  day  of  Resurrection,  I  will  surely  destroy
his  offspring,  except  a  few/^

He  said,  "  Begone ;  but  whosoever  of  them  shall  follow
thee,  then,  verily  Hell  shall  be  your  recompense ;
an  ample  recompense  !

And  entice  such  of  them  as  thou  canst  by  thy  voice  ;
and  assault  them  with  thy  horsemen  and  thy  foot-
men;^ and  be  thou  their  partner*^  in  their  riches
and  in  their  children,  and  make  them  promises.
But  Satan  shall  make  them  only  deceitful  pro-
mises !

Verily,  as  to  my  servants,  no  power  over  them  shalt
thou  have ;  and  thy  Lord  ivill  he  their  sufficient
guardian. '^
^  It  is  your  Lord  who  speedeth  onward  the  ships  for  you
in  the  sea,  that  ye  may  seek  of  his  abundance;
verily  He  is  merciful  towards  you.

And  Avhen  a  mishap  befalleth  you  at  sea,  they  whom
ye  invoke  beside  Him  are  not  to  be  found  :^
70     Then  when  He  bringeth  you  safe  to  dry  land,  ye  place
yourselves  at  a  distance  from  Him.     Ungrateful
is  man.

Are  ye  sure  that  He  will  not  cleave  the  sides  of  the
earth  for  you?  or  that  He  will  not  send  against
you  a  whirlwind  charged  with  sands  ?  Then  shall
ye  find  for  yourselves  no  protector.

Or  are  ye  sure  that  lie  will  not  cause  you  to  put  back
to  sea  a  second  time,  and  send  against  you  a  storm-
blast,  and  drown  you,  for  that  ye  have  been  thank-
less ?  Then  shall  ye  find  no  helper  against  Us
therein.

And  now  have  We  honoured  the  children  of  Adam  :
by  land  and  by  sea  have  We  carried  them  :  food
have  We  provided  for  them  of  good  things,  and
with  endowments  beyond  many  of  our  creatures
have  We  endowed  them.
^  One  day  We  will  summon  all  men  with  their  leaders  ;*

'  That  is,  with  all  thy  might.

'  Mar.  impertire.     But  this  sense  is  only  usual  in  the  4th  conj.     Sale,
partake  iidth  them  in.  ^  Or,   arc  forgotten.

*  Imams,  i.e.  prophets,  etc.

THE    KORAN.

171

then  they  whose  book  shall  be  given  into  their
right  hand,  shall  read  their  book,  and  not  be
wronged  a  thread :

And  he  who  has  bebn  blind  here,  shall  be  blind  here-
after, and  wander  yet  more  from  the  Way.

And,  verily,  they  had  well-nigh  beguiled  thee  from
what  We  revealed  to  thee,  and  caused  thee  to  in-
vent something  else  in  our  name  :^  but  in  that
case  they  would  surely  have  taken  thee  as  a
friend  ;-

And  had  We  not  settled  thee,  thou  hadst  well-nigh
leaned  to  them  a  little  :

In  that  case  We  would  surely  have  made  thee  taste  an
equal  share  (of  the  punishment)  of  life  and  death  :  ^
then  thou  shouldest  not  have  found  for  thyself  a
helper  against  Us.

And  truly  they  had  almost  caused  thee  to  quit  the  land,
in  order  to  drive  thee  forth  from  it :  *  and  in  that
case  they  would  not  ^lave  tarried  but  a  little  after
thee.
80  Tliis  was  our  way  with  our  Apostles  whom  We  have
already  sent  before  thee,  and  in  this  our  way  thou
slialt  find  no  change.
^  Observe  prayer  at  sunset,  till  the  first  darkening  of  the
night,  and,  the  daybreak- reading :  truly  the  day-
break-reading hath  its  witnesses  :

And  watch  unto  it  in  a  portion  of  the  night :  this  shall
be  an  excess  in  thy  service ;  *  it  may  be  that  thy
Lord  will  raise  thee  to  a  gloi-ious  station  :

'  Lit  upon,  or,  concerning  Vs.

'  Zamakahari  rektes  that  this  passage  was  revealed  when  the  Thaqyfites,
in  framing  the  document  of  agreement  between  themselves  and  Muham-
mad, required  that  the  words  requiring  the  prostrations  in  worship  should
not  be  added.  The  writer  looked  at  the  prophet,  who  stood  by  in  silence,
when  Omar  stood  up  and  drew  his  sword  with  menacing  words.  They  re-
plied, "  We  speak  not  to  thee,  but  to  jNIuhanimad."  Then  this  verse  was
revealed.  Thus  Dr.  Sprenger,  Life,  p.  186.  He  renders  the  last  clause,
but  at  the  right  moment  a  friend  reprehended  thee.

'  i.  e.  a  double  punishment.

*  "  The  Jews,  envious  of  Muhammad's  good  reception  and  stay  there,
told  him,  by  way  of  counsel,  that  Syria  was  the  land  of  the  Prophets,  and
that  if  he  was  really  a  prophet,  he  ought  to  go  there."—  Sale,  from  Djelal
Eddin,  ap.  Mar.  Geiger,  p.  12,  quotes  a  Tahaiudical  saying  to  the  same
effect,  but  without  any  reference,

*  A  work  of  supererogation,  and  therefore  doubly  meritorious.  Thus  Tr.
Beracboth,  foL  4.  The  word  station  (mekam)  is  still  used  of  the  nearness
to  God,  attained  in  spiritual  ecstasies,  etc.

1 72  THE    KORAN.

And  SAY,  "  0  my  Lord,  cause  me  to  enter  ^  with  a

perfect  entry,  and  to   come  forth  with  a  perfect

forthcoming,  and  give  me   from    thy   presence   a

helping  power.'"
And  SAY :  Truth  is  come,   and  falsehood  is  vanished.

Verily,  falsehood  is  a  thing  that  vanisheth.
And  We  send  down  of  the  Koran  that  which  is  a  medi-
cine and  a  mercy  to  the  faithful  :  But  it  shall  only

add  to  the  ruin  of  the  wicked.
And  when  We  bestow  favours  on  man,  he  withdraweth

and  goeth  aside ;  but  when  evil  toucheth  him,  he

is  despairing.
Say  :    Every  one  acteth    after  his  own  manner  :    but

your  Lord  well  knoweth  who  is  best  guided  in  his

path.
%  And  they  will  ask  thee  of  the  Spirit.^     Say  :  The  Spirit

proceedeth  at    my  Lord^s   command  :    but  of  the

knowledge  hereof  ou]y  a  little  is  given  to  you.
And  assuredly,   if  We  pleased.  We  could  take  away

what  We    have    revealed  to    thee :   none  couldst

thou  then  find  for  thyself  to  undertake  thy  cause

therein  with  Us,^
90     Save  as  a  mercy  from  thy  Lord ;  great,  verily,  is  his

favour  towards  thee.
^  Say  :    Assuredly    if   mankind    and    the   Djinn   should

conspire  to  produce  the  like  of  this  Koran,  they

could  not  produce  its  like,  though  the  one  should

help  the  other.
And  of  a  truth  now  have  Ws  set  out  to  men  every

kind  of  similitude   in  this  Koran,  but  most  men

only  reject  it  with  ingratitude.
And  they  say,  "  By  no  means  will  we  believe  on  thee

till  thou  cause  a  fountain  to  gush  forth  for  us  from

the  earth  ;
Or,  till  thou  have  a  garden  of  palm-trees  and  grapes,

and  thou  cause  forth-gushing  rivers  to  gush  forth

in  its  midst;  *
Or  thou  make  the  heaven  to  fall  on  us,  as  thou  hast

'  That  is,  to  enter  the  Grave,  or  Mecca.     Lit.  with  an  entry  of  truth.

*  The  word  spirit  is  probiibly  to  be  understood  of  the  Anjfel  Gabriel.
Conip.  1  Kings  xxii.  21.  Others  understand  it  of  the  immaterial  soul  of
man.  See  note  on  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  81.  JJer  Gcist  ist  geschaffen  auf  den
Befehl  rndnes  Hirrn. — Ullm.     So  Kas.

■'  Or,  to  help  thee  therein  against  Us.

*  Ar.  as  Mar. y?umt7ia  erumpere  facias  ernmpoido.

THE    KORAN.  178

given  out,  in  pieces ;  or  thou  bring  God  and  the
angels  to  vouch  for  thee  ;

Or  thou  have  a  house  of  gold  ;  or  thou  mount  up  into
Heaven  ;  nor  wiU  we  believe  in  thy  mounting  up,
till  thou  send  down  to  us  a  book  which  we  may
read/'  Say  :  Praise  be  to  my  Lord  !  Am  I  more
than  a  man,  an  apostle  ?

And  what  hindereth  men  from  believing,  when  the
guidance  hath  come  to  them,  but  that  they  say,
"  Hath  God  sent  a  mere  man  as  apostle  ?  "

Say  :  Did  angels  walk  the  earth  as  its  familiars,^  We
had  surely  sent  them  an  angel-apostle  out  of
Heaven.

Say  :  God  is  witness  enough  between  you  and  me.  His
servants  He  verily  scanneth,  eyeth.
100  And  he  whom  God  guideth  is  guided  indeed  ;  and  for
whom  He  misleadeth  thou  shalt  find  no  helper  but
Him  :  and  We  will  gather  them  together  for  the
day  of  the  Resurrection  on  their  faces,  blind  and
dumb  and  deaf:  Hell  shall  be  their  abode  :  so  oft
as  its  fires  die  down.  We  will  rekindle  the  flame.

This  shall  be  their  reward  for  that  they  believed  not
our  signs,  and  said,  "  When  we  have  become  bones
and  dust,  shall  we  indeed  be  raised  a  new  crea-
tion ? '^

Do  they  not  perceive  that  God,  who  created  the  Hea-
vens and  the  Earth,  is  able  to  create  their  like  ?
And  He  hath  ordained  them  a  term ;  there  is  no
doubt  of  it :  but  the  wicked  only  regard  this  tnith
with  ingratitude.

Say  :  If  ye  had  power  over  the  treasures  of  my  Lord's
mercy,  ye  would  in  that  case  assuredly  retain  thein
through  fear  of  spending  them,  for  man  is  nig-
gardly.
%  We  heretofore  gave  to  Moses  nine  clear  signs.  Ask
thou,  therefore,  the  children  of  Israel  how  it  was
when  he  came  unto  them,  and  Pharaoh  said  to
him,  "Verily,  I  deem  thee,  O  Moses,  a  man
enchanted.''

Said  Glioses,  "  Verily  thou  knowest  that  none  hath
sent  down  these  clear  signs  but  the  Lord  of  the
Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  ;  and  I  assuredly  deem
thee,  0  Pharaoh,  a  person  lost."

*  Lit.  enjoying  security;  vertraulich,  Ullm.

174  THE    KORAN.

So  Pharaoli  sought  to  drive  them  out  of  the  land ;  but
We  drowned  him  and  all  who  sided  with  him.
%  And  after  Jiis  dcatli,^  We  said  to  the  children  of  Israel,
''  Dwell  ye  in  the  land  :  "  and  when  the  promised
term  of  the  next  life  shall  have  come  to  pass.  We
will  bring  you  up  in  a  mingled  crowd  to  judgment.
Moreover,  in  truth  have  We  sent  down  the  Koran,
and  in  truth  hath  it  descended,  and  We  have  only
sent  thee  to  announce  and  to  warn.

And  We  have  parcelled  out  the 'Koran  into  sections,
that  thou  mightest  recite  it  unto  men  by  slow  de-
grees ;  and  We  have  sent  it  down  piecemeal.

Say  :  Believe  ye  therein  or  believe  ye  not  ?  They
verily  to  whom  knowledge  had  been  given  pre-
viously, fall  down  on  their  faces  worshipping  when
it  is  recited  to  them,  and  say :  "  Glory  be  to  God  !
verily  the  promise  of  our  Lord  is  indeed  made
good ! ''
110  And  they  fall  down  on  their  faces  weeping,  and  It
increaseth  their  humility.
^  Say  :  Call  upon  God  (Allah),^  or  call  upon  the  God  of
Mercy  (Arrahman),  by  whichsoever  ye  will  invoke
Him,  for  He  hath  most  excellent  names.  And  be
not  loud  in  thy  prayer,  neither  pronounce  it  too
low  ;  ^  but  between  these  follow  a  vitddle  way  :

And  SAY :  Praise  be  to  God,  who  hath  not  begotten  a
son,  who  hath  no  partner  in  the  Kingdom,  nor
any  protector  on  account  of  weakness.  And  mag-
nify Him  by  proclaiming  his  greatness.*

'  Lit.  after  him.

^  The  infidels  hearing  Muhammad  say,  Ya  Allali  !  Ya  Rahman  !  in  his
prayers,  imagined  that  he  was  addressing  two  Deities  ;  hence  this  passage.
Comp.  [Lxxiii.]  xvi,  52  ;  [Ixvi.]  xxv.  61.  As  this  title  of  God  (Rahman)
disappears  from  the  later  Suras,  it  has  been  inferred  that  Muhammad's
original  intention  was  to  have  combined  it  with  Allah,  but  that  through
fear  lest  Allah  and  Arrahman  should  be  supposed  to  be  two  Gods,  he
dropped  the  latter.  This  title  was  applied  to  their  deities  by  the  Himya-
rites  ;  and  it  occurs  in  Ps.  Ixxviii.  38,  and  Ex.  xxxiv.  6.  The  root  is  not
found  in  vEthiopic.

^  The  Talm.  Tr.  Berachoth,  31-2,  forbids  loudness  in  prayer  by  the
example  of  Hannah.

■•  Lit.  marpiify  Him  hy  m/jnifying.  This  is  understood  by  the  Muslim
as  a  command  to  magnify  God  by  repeating,  Allah  akbar.

THE    KORAN.  175

[LXYIIL]

SURA  XXVII.— THE  ANT.
Mecca. — 95  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Ta.  Sad.^  These  are  the  signs  (verses)  of  the  Koran
and  of  the  lucid  Book;

Guidance  and  glad  tidings  to  the  believers  who  observe
prayer  and  pay  the  stated  alms,  and  believe  firmly
— do  they — in  the  life  to  come.

Verily,  as  to  those  who  believe  not  in  the  life  to  come,
We  have  made  their  own  doings  fair-seeming  to
them,  and  they  are  bewildered  tJierein.

These  are  they  whom  the  woe  of  chastisement  awaiteth  ;
and  in  the  next  life  they  shall  suffer — yes  shall
they — greatest  loss ;

But  of  a  truth  thou  hast  certainly  received  the  Koran
from  a  Wise,  a  Knowing  God.
^  Bear  in  mind,  when  Moses  said  to  his  family,  "  Lo  !  I
perceive  a  fire ;

I  will  bring  you  tidings  from  it,  or  will  bring  you  a
blazing  brand,  that  ye  may  haply  warm  you,"

And  when  he  came  to  it,  he  was  called  to,  "  Blessed,
He  who  is  in  the  fire,  and  He  who  is  about  it ;  and
glory  be  to  God,  Lord  of  the  worlds  !

O  Moses  !  verily,  I  am  God,  the  Mighty,  the  Wise  !
10  Throw  down  now  thy  staff.''  And  when  he  saw  that
it  moved  itself  as  though  it  were  a  serpent,  he  re-
treated backward  and  returned  not.  "  O  Moses,
fear  not ;  for  the  Sent  Ones  fear  not  in  my  pre-
sence.

Save  he  who  having  done  amiss  shall  afterwards
exchange  the  evil  for  good  j  for  verily  I  am  For-
giving, Merciful.

Put  now  thy  hand  into  thy  bosom  :  it  shall  come  forth

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  p.  16,  n.

17G  THE    KOKAX.

white,  yet  free  from  hurt :  ^  one  of  nine  signs  to
Pharaoh  and  his  people ;  verily,  a  perverse  people
are  they/'

And  when  our  signs  were  wrought  in  their  very  sight,^
they  said,  "  This  is  plain  magic."

And  though  in  their  souls  they  knew  them  to  be  true,
yet  in  their  wickedness  and  pride  they  denied
them.  But  see  what  was  the  end  of  the  corrupt
doers  !
^  And  of  old  We  gave  knowledge  to  David  and  Solomon  :
and  they  said,  ''  Praise  be  to  God,  who  hath  made
us  to  excel  many  of  his  believing  servants  \"

And  in  knowledge  Solomon  was  David's  heir.  And  he
said,  "  0  men,  we  have  been  taught  the  speech  of
birds,'  and  are  endued  with  everything.  Lo  !  this
is  indeed  a  clear  boon//-o7?t  God."

And  to  Solomon  were  gathered  his  hosts  of  Djinn*  and
of  men  and  of  birds,  and  they  were  marched  on  in
order.

Until  when  they  reach  the  Valley  of  Ants,  saith  AN
ANT,  "  0  ye  ants,  enter  your  dwellings,  lest  So-
lomon and  his  army  crush  you  and  know  it  not."

Then  smiled  Solomon,  laughing  at  lier  words,  and  he
said,  "  Stir  me  up,  0  Lord,  to  be  thankful  for  thy
favour  which  Thou  hast  showed  upon  mo  and  upon
my  parents,  and  to  do  righteousness  that  shall  be
well  pleasing  to  Thee,  and  bring  me  in,  by  thy
mercy,  among  thy  servants  the  righteous,"
20  And  he  reviewed  the  birds,  and  said,  "  How  is  it  that
I  see  not  the  hoopoe  ?     Is  it  one  of  the  absent  ?

Surely  with  a  severe  chastisement  will  I  chastise  it,  or
I  will  certainly  slaughter  it,  or  it  shall  surely  bring
me  a  clear  excuse."

Nor  tarried  it  long  ere  it  came  and  said,  "  I  know  what
thou  knowest  not,  and  with  sure  tidings  have  I
come  to  thee  from  Saba  :

'  Not  really  leprous.  '  Lit.  when  our  visible  signs  came  to  them,'

*  This  tradition  may  be  derived  from  1  Kinr:;s  iv.  33.  Comp.  Geiger,
p.  185.  The  legend  of  Solomon's  power  over  the  Genii  originates  in  a
mistranslation  of  Eccl.  ii.  8.  Comp.  also  for  other  points  in  this  story  Prov.
vi.  6  ;  1  Kings  x.  1-10.

*  "Demons  obeyed  him  (Solomon) and  evil  spirits  were  subjected

to  him  "  [TuTg.  2  on  Esther,  c.  i.  2).  From  the  same  source  Muhammad  has
adopted,  with  slight  variations,  the  whole  story  of  Solomon's  intercourse
with  the  Queen  of  Saba.  Comp.  also  Tr.  Gittin,  fol.  68,  and  Midr.  Jalkut
on  1  Kings  vi.  ch.  182.

THE    KORAiV.  177

Lo,  I  found  a  woman  reigning  over  them^  gifted  with
everything,  and  she  hath  a  splendid  throne;

And  I  found  her  and  her  people  worshipping  the  sun
instead  of  God ;  and  Satan  hath  made  their  works
fair-seeming  to  them,  and  turned  them  from  the
Way;  wherefore  they  are  not  guided

To  ^  the  worship  of  God,  who  bringeth  to  light  the
secret  things  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  knoweth
what  men  conceal  and  what  they  manifest :

God !  there  is  no  God  but  He  !  Lord  of  the  glorious
throne  ! "

He  said,  "  AVe  shall  see  whether  thou  hast  spoken
truth,  or  whether  thou  art  of  them  that  lie.

Go  with  this  my  letter  and  throw  it  down  to  them  :
then  turn  away  from  them  and  await  their  an-
swer/'

She  said,  "  0  my  nobles  !  verily  an  honourable  letter
hath  been  thrown  down  to  me  :
30     Of  a  truth  it  is  from  Solomon  ;  and  lo  !  it  is  '  In  the
name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful  I

Set  not  up  yourselves  against  me,  but  come  to  me  sub-
mitting (Muslims)/  "

She  said,  "  0  ye  nobles,  advise  me  in  mine  affair :  I
decide  not  an  affair  without  your  concurrence/' "

They  said,  "  We  are  endued  with  strength  and  are
endued  with  mighty  valour. — But  to  command  is
thine  :  See  therefore  what  thou  wilt  command  us.''

She  said,  "  Verily  kings,  when  they  enter  a  city,  spoil
it,  and  abase  the  mightiest  of  its  people :  and  in
like  manner  will  these  also  do.

But  I  will  send  to  them  a  gift,  and  await  what  the
envoys  bring  back."

And  when  the  messenger  came  to  Solomon,  he  said,
"  Would  ye  increase  my  riches  ?  But  what  God
hath  given  to  me  is  better  than  what  He  hath
given  you  :  yet  ye  glory  in  these  your  gifts  :

Return  to  them :  for  we  will  surely  come  to  them  with
forces  which  they  cannot  withstand,  and  we  will
assuredly  drive  them  from  thrir  land  humbled;
and  they  shall  become  contemptible."

Said  he,  "  O  nobles,  which  of  you  will  bring  me  her
throne  before  they  come  to  me,  submitting  ?  (Mus-
lims)/'

'  Lit.  so  that  they  do  not  worship.  '  Lit.  until  ye  bear  witness.

N

178  THE    KORAN.

An  Efreet^  of  the  Djinn  said  :  "  I  will  bring  it  tbee  ere
thou  risest  from  thy  place  :  for  verily  I  have  power
for  this,  and  am  trusty/'
40  And  one  who  had  the  knowledge  of  Scripture  said,  "  I
will  bring  it  to  thee  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye."^
And  when  he  saw  it  set  down  before  him,  he  said,
''  This  is  of  the  favour  of  my  Lord,  to  try  me
whether  I  will  be  thankful  or  unthankful.  And  he
who  is  thankful  is  only  thankful  to  his  own  behoof ;
and  as  for  him  who  is  unthankful — truly  then  my
Lord  is  self-sufficient,  bounteous  ! "

Said  he,  "  Make  her  throne  so  that  she  know  it  not :
we  shall  see  whether  she  hath  or  hath  not  Guid-
ance.'^

And  when  she  came,  it  was  asked,  "  Is  thy  throne  like
this  ?  "  She  said,  "  As  though  it  were  the  same."
"  And  we,"  said  he,  "  have  had  knowledge  given
us  before  her,  and  have  become  Muslims  ;

But  the  gods  she  has  worshipped  instead  of  God  have
led  her  astray  :  verily  she  is  of  a  people  who  be-
lieve not.''

It  was  said  to  her,  "  Enter  the  Palace  :  "  and  when  she
saw  it,  she  thought  it  a  lake  of  water,  and  bared
her  legs.  He  said,  "  Lo  !  it  is  a  palace  smoothly
paved  with  glass."

She  said,  "  0  my  Lord  !  verily  I  have  acted  wickedly  ^
{Jby  worshipping  idols),  and  I  resign  myself,  with
Solomon,  to  God,  Lord  of  the  Worlds."
^  And  truly  of  old  We  sent  to  Thamood  their  brother
Saleh,  with  "  Serve  ye  God  :"  then  lo  !  they  became
two  sets  of  disputants  wrangling  with  each  other.

He  said,  "  0  my  people,  why  will  ye  hasten  on  evil
rather  than  good  ?  will  yc  not  ask  pardon  of  God  ?
perhaps  ye  ma}'^  find  mercy."

They  said,  "  We  augur*  ill  concerning  thee  and  those
who  are  with  thee."  He  said,  "  The  ills  of  which
ye  augur  ^  depend  on  God.  But  ye  are  a  people
on  your  trial."

'  That  is,  malignaM.  "  The  Efrocts  are  generally  believed  to  diflfer  from
the  other  Djinn  in  being  very  powerful  and  always  malicious  ;  but  to  be
in  other  respects  of  a  similar  nature"  (Lane's  Modern  Egyptians,  i.  285).
"  The  ghosts  of  dead  persons  are  also  called  by  this  name  "  {ib.  289).

*  Or,  before  thy  glance  can  be  rvithdravm  from  any  object.
'  Lit.  I  have  vjrongefl  my  soul  (myself).

••  Lit.  we  have  conaulied  the  flight  of  birds  :  hence  presage.

*  Lit.  your  birds  (auguries)  are  vnth  God.

THE    KORAN.  179

And  there  were  in  the  city  nine  persons  of  a  family  who
committed  excesses  in  the  land,  and  did  not  that
which  is  right.
>0  Thev  said,  "  Swear  ye  to  one  another  bv  God  that  we
will  surely  fall  oil  him  and  on  his  family  by  night :
then  will  we  declare  to  the  avenger  of  blood,  *  we
witnessed  not  the  destruction  of  his  family  :  and
verily  we  speak  only  truth.'  "

And  they  devised  a  device,  and  We  devised  a  device,
and  they  were  not  aware  of  it —

But  see  what  was  the  end  of  their  device  !  We  de-
stroyed them  and  their  whole  people  :

So  that  for  their  sin,  these  their  houses  are  empty
ruins :  Verily  in  this  is  a  sign  to  those  who  have
knowledge ;

But  We  delivered  those  who  believed  and  were  God-
fearing.
^  Remember  also  Lot,  when  he  said  to  his  people,  "  Pro-
ceed ye  to  such  filthiness  with  your  eyes  open  ?

Come  ye  indeed  with  lust  tuto  men  rather  than  to  wo-
men ?     Nay,  ye  are  an  ignorant  people.''

And  the  answer  of  his  people  was  but  to  say,  "  Cast
out  the  family  of  Lot  from  your  city  :  they,  for-
sooth, are  men  of  purity  !  "

So  We  rescued  him  and  his  family ;  except  his  wife,
whom  We  decreed  to  be  of  them  that  lingered :  ^

And  We  rained  a  rain  upon  them,  and  fatal  was  the
rain  to  those  who  had  received  their  warning.
60  %  Say  :  Praise  be  to  God,  and  peace  be  on  His  servants
whom  He  hath  chosen  !     Is  God  the  more  worthy,
or  the  gods  they  join  with  Him  ?

Who  hath  made  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,  and  sendeth
down  the  rain  to  you  from  Heaven,  by  which  We
cause  luxuriant  groves  to  spring  up  ?  Not  in  your
power  is  it  to  cause  its  trees  to  spring  up  !
Wliat !  A  god  with  God  ?  Yet  they  are  a  people
who  find  equals  ^  for  Him  !

Who  hath  made  the  earth  firm,  and  made  rivers  in  its
midst,  and  placed  mountains  upon  it,  and  put  a
barrier  between  the  two  seas?'  A  god  with  God?
Yet  the  greater  part  of  them  have  no  knowledge  !

WTio  answereth  the  oppressed  when  they  cry  to  him,

'  See  Sur.  xxtL  171,  p.  101.

'  Or,  Kay,  these  are  a  people  v;ho  go  astray,  swerve  from  justice.
'  Comp.  Sura  [Ixvi]  xjxv.  55,  p.  162.

N    2

180  THE    KORAN.

and  taketh  off  their  ills,  and  hath  made  you  to

succeed   your  sires''-  on   the  earth?     A  god  with

God?     How  few  bear  these  thiiujs  in  mind  1^
Who  guideth  you  in  the  darkness  of  the  land  and  of

the  sea  ?  and  who  sendeth  forth  the  winds  as  the

forerunners    of  his    mercy  ?      A  god  with  God  ?

High  be  God   exalted  above  what  ye  join  with

Him  !
Who  createth  a  Being,  then  reneweth  it  ?   and  who

supplieth  you  out  of  the  Heaven  and  the  Earth  ?

A  god  with  God?     Say  :  Bring  forth  your  proofs

if  you  speak  the  truth.
Say  :  None  either  in   the    Heavens   or   in  the  Earth

knoweth  '  the  secret'  but  God.   And  they  know  not
When  they  shall  be  raised;
— Yet  their  knowledge  has  comprehended  (somewhat)

of  the  life  to  come  :^ — yet  are  they  in  doubt  about

it : — yet  are  they  blind  about  it !
And  the  unbelievers  say  :  "  When  we  and  our  fathers

have  become  dust,  shall  we  indeed  be  taken  forth

from  the  grave  ?
70     Of  old  have  we  been  promised  this,  we  and  our  sires  of

old  :  verily  this  is  but  fables  of  the  ancients. '^
Say  :  Go  ye  through  the  land,  and  see  what  hath  been

the  end  of  the  wicked  ;
And  grieve  not  thou  for  them,  nor  be  in  distress  at

their  devisings  against  thee.
And  they  say,  "  When  will  this  promise  be  made  good,

if  ye  speak  true  ?  "
Say  :  Haply  a  part  of  what  ye  desire  to  be  hastened

may  be  close  upon  you.
And  truly  thy  Lord  is  full  of  goodness  towards  men  :

But  most  of  them  are  not  thankful.
And  verily  thy  Lord  knoweth  well  what  their  breasts

enshroud,  and  what  they  bring  to  light.
And  there  is  no  secret  thing  in  the  Heaven  or  on  the

Earth,  but  it  is  in  the  perspicuous  Book.
Truly  this  Koran  declareth  to  the  children  of  Israel

most  things  wherein  the}^  disagree :
And   it  is  certainly  a  guidance   and  a  mercy  to  the

faithful.
80     Verily,  by  his  wisdom  will  thy  Lord  decide  between

them  :  for  He  is  the  Mighty,  the  Knowing.

'  Or,  (His)  Vicegerents.  ^  Or,  little  do  ye  reject.

*  Or,  still  less  have  they  comprehended,  &c.

THE    KORAN.  181

Put  thou  then  thy  trust  in  God :  for  thou  hast  clear
truth  on  thy  side.^

Verily  thou  shalt  not  make  the  dead  to  hear;  neither
shalt  thou  make  the  deaf  to  hear  the  call,  when
they  turn  their  backs  upon  thee ;

Neither  art  thou  the  guide  of  the  blind  out  of  their
errors  :  none  sbalt  thou  make  to  hear  but  those
who  believe  our  signs  :  and  they  are  Muslims.

And  when  the  doom  shall  light  upon  them,  A\'e  will
cause  a  monster-  to  come  forth  to  them  out  of  the
earth,  and  cry  to  them,  that  "mankind  have  not
firmly  believed  our  signs  ^^  (revelations).

And  on  that  day  will  We  gather  out  of  every  nation  a
company  of  those  who  have  gainsaid  our  signs,
and  they  shall  be  kept  marching  in  ranks

Till  they  come  before  God,  who  will  say,  "  Treated  ye
my  signs  as  impostures,  although  ye  embraced
them  not  in  your  knowledge  ?  What  is  it  that  ye
have  done  ?  "

And  doom  shall  light  upon  them  for  their  evil  deeds,
and  nought  shall  they  have  to  plead. ^

See  they  not  that  We  have  ordained  the  night  that  they
may  rest  in  it,  and  the  day  with  its  gift  of  Hght  ?
Of  a  truth  herein  are  signs  to  people  who  believe.

On  that  day  there  shall  be  a  blast  on  the  trumpet,  and
all  that  are  in  the  heavens,  and  all  that  are  on  the
earth,  shall  be  terror-stricken,  save  him  whom
God  pleaseth  to  deliver ;  and  all  shall  come  to  Him
in  humble  guise.
90  And  thou  shalt  see  the  mountains,  which  thou  thinkest
so  firmly  fixed,  pass  away  with  the  passing  of  a
cloud  !  ^Tis  the  work  of  God,  who  ordereth  all
things  !     Lo  !   He  is  well  aware  of  your  actions.

He  who  shall  present  himself  with  good  works,  shall
reap  the  benefit  therefrom,  and  they  shall  be  secure
from  terror  on  that  day  ;

And  they  who  shall  present  themselves  with  evil  shall
therefore  be  flung  face  downwards  into  the  fire.
Shall  ye  be  recompensed  but  as  ye  have  wrought  ?

Say  :  Specially  am  I  commanded  to  worship  the  Lord
of  this  land,  which  He  hath  sanctified.  And  all
things  are  his  :  and  I  am  commanded  to  be  one

*  Lit.  verihj  thou  art  on  tlu  char  truth.  ^  Al  Jassasa,  the  Spy.

'  Lit.  and  they  shall  not  speak.

182  THE    KOKAN.

of  those  who  surrender  themselves  to  God  (a  Mus-

And  to  recite  the  Koran  :  and  whoever  is  rightly
guided,  will  be  rightly  guided  only  to  his  own
behoof  j  and  as  to  hitn  who  erreth,  then  say,  I
truly  am  a  warner  only.
95  And  SAY,  Praise  be  to  God  !  He  will  show  you  his
signs,  and  ye  shall  acknowledge  them  :  and  of
what  ye  do,  thy  Lord  is  not  regardless.

[LXIX.]

SURA  XVIII.— THE  CAVE.

Mecca. — 110  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Comijaasionate,  the  Merciful.

Praise  be  to  God,  who  hath  sent  down  the  Book  to  his
servant,  and  hath  not  made  it  tortuous^

But  direct ;  that  it  may  warn  of  a  grievous  woe  from
Him,  and  announce  to  the  faitliful  who  do  the
things  that  arc  right,  that  a  goodly  reward  wherein
they  shall  abide  for  ever,  awaiteth  them ;

And  that  it  may  warn  those  who  say,  "  God  hath  be-
gotten a  Son.'^

No  knowledge  of  this  have  either  they  or  their  fathers  !
A  grievous  saying  to  come  out  of  their  mouths  !
Verily  they  speak  no  other  than  a  lie  I

Haply,  then,  if  tlicy  believe  not  in  this  new  revelation,
thou  wilt  fret  thyself  to  death  on  their  very  foot-
steps, out  of  vexation.

Verily,  We  have  made  all  that  is  on  earth  as  its  adorn-
ment, that  We  might  make  trial  who  among  man-
kind- would  excel  in  works  :

But  verily  We  are  about  to  reduce  all  that  is  thereon
to  dust  bare  of  herbaere  !

"o'

Lit,  hath  not  p>it  crookedness  into  it.  '  Or,  lit.  them.

THE    KORAN.

183

t  Hast  thou  reflected  that  the  Inmates  of  THE  CAYE
and  Er-Rakeem  ^  were  one  of  our  wondrous
signs  ?

When  the  youths  bftook  them  to  the  cave,  they  said,
"  0  our  Lord  !  grant  us  mercy  from  before  Thee,
and  order  for  us  our  afl'air  aright."
10     Then  struck  We  upon  their  ears  with  deafness  in  the
cave  for  many  a  year :

Then  We  awaked  them  that  We  might  know  which
of  the  two  parties  could  best  reckon  the  space
of  their  abiding.

We  will  relate  to  thee  their  tale  with  truth.  Yerily
they  were  youths  who  believed  in  their  Lord,  and
in  Guidance  had  We  increased  them  ;

And  We  made  them  stout  of  heart  when  they  stood  up
and  said,  "  Our  Lord  is  Lord  of  the  Heavens  and
of  the  Earth  ;  by  no  means  will  we  call  on  any
other  God  than  Him  ;  for  then  we  had  said  a
thing  outrageous.

These  our  people  have  taken  other  gods  beside  Him,
though   they  bring  no   clear  authority  for  them ;
but,  who  more  iniquitous  than  he  who  deviseth  a
lie  concerning  God  ?

So  when  ye  have  separated  yourselves  from  them  and
from  that  which  they  worship  beside  God,  then
betake  you  to  the  cave  :  Your  Lord  will  unfold  hit
mercy  to  you,  and  will  order  your  affair  for  you  for
the  best.''

And  thou  mightest  have  seen  the  sun  when  it  arose,
pass  on  the  right  of  their  cave,  and  when  it  set,
leave  them  on  the  left,  while  they  were  in  its  spa-
cious chamber.  This  is  one  of  the  signs  of  God.
Guided  indeed  is  he  whom  God  guideth,  but  for
him  whom  He  misleadeth,  thou  shalt  by  no  means
find  a  patron,  a  guide.

And  thou  wouldst  have  deemed  them  awake,-  though
they  were  sleeping  :  and  AYe  turned  them  to  the
right  and  to  the  left.     And  at  the  threshold  lay

■  The  valley,  or  mountain,  in  which  the  cave  of  the  Seven  Sleepers  of
Ephesus  was  situated.  Comp.  Fundgruben  des  Orients,  iii.  347-381  ;
Gibbon's  Decline  and  Fall,  cb.  xxxiii.,  especially  the  concluding;  sentences.
Others,  however,  interpret  Er-Eakceni  of  a  leaden  plate  inscribed  with  the
names  of  the  Seven  Sleepers.

'  Beciiuse  they  slept  with  their  eyes  open.— Beidh.

184  THE    KORAN.

their  dog  with  paws  outstretched.^  Hadst  thou
come  suddeuly  upon  them,  thou  wouldst  surely
have  turned  thy  back  on  them  in  flight,  and  have
been  filled  with  fear  at  them.

So  We  awaked  them  that  they  might  question  one
another.  Said  a  speaker  among  them,  "  How
long  have  ye  tarried  here  ?  "  They  said,  "  We
have  tarried  a  day  or  part  of  a  day.'*  They  said,
''Your  Lord  knoweth  best  how  long  ye  have
tarried  :  Send  now  one  of  you  with  this  your  coin
into  the  city,  and  let  him  mark  who  therein  hath
purest  food,  and  from  him  let  him  bring  you  a
supply ;  and  let  him  be  courteous,  and  not  discover
you  to  any  one  :

Of  a  truth  they,  if  they  find  you  out,  will  stone  you  or
turn  you  back  to  their  faith,  and  in  that  case  it
will  fare  ill  with  you  for  ever."
20  And  thus  made  We  their  adventure  known  to  their
felloiv  citizens,  that  they  might  learn  that  the
promise  of  God  is  true,  and  that  as  to  "  the  Hour  "
there  is  no  doubt  of  its  coming.  When  they  dis-
puted among  themselves  concerning  what  had
befallen  them,  some  said,  "  Build  a  building  over
them ;  their  Lord  knoweth  best  about  them."
Those  who  prevailed  in  their  matter  said,  "  A
place  of  worship  will  we  surely  raise  over  them."

They  will  say,  "  They  were  three;  their  dog  the
fourth  :  "  and  they  will  say,  "  Five  ;  their  dog  the
sixth,"  doubtfully  guessing  at  the  secret  :  and
they  will  say,  "  Seven  ;  and  their  dog  the  eighth."
Say  :  My  Lord  best  knoweth  the  number :  none,
save  a  few,  shall  know  them.

Therefore  be  clear  in  thy  discussions  about  them,^  and
ask  not  any  one  concerning  them.

And  say  not  thou  of  a  thing,  "  I  will  surely  do  this
to-morrow ;"  without,  "  If  God  will."^  And  when
thou  hast  forgotten,  call  thy  Lord  to  mind;  and

'  The  Muharamadans  believe  that  this  doer  will  be  arlmitted  into  Para-
dise. One  of  its  traditional  names  is  Katniir,  a  word  whose  consonants,  it
has  been  observed,  are,  with  one  exception,  identical  with  those  of  Rakira.

'  Lit.  dispute  not  about  them  wdess  vnth  clear  disputation.

^  Muhammad  had  omitted  to  use  the  qualifying  phrase  when,  in  reply-
to  the  Jews  who  asked  for  the  History  of  the  Seven  Sleepers,  he  simply
promised  to  give  it  on  the  morrow  ;  hence,  this  verse.  Comp.  James  iv.
1.3-15.

THE    KORAN.  185

say,  "  Haply  my  Lord  will  guide  me,  that  I  may
come  near  to  the  truth  of  this  story  with  correct-
ness."

And  they  tarried  in  their  cave  300  years,  and  they  un-
derwent an  increase  of  nine.'

Say  :  God  best  knoweth  how  long  they  tarried  :  With
Him  are  the  secrets  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the
Earth  :  Look  thou  and  hearken  unto  Him  alone?
Man  hath  no  guardian  but  Him,  and  none  may
bear  part  in  his  judgments  : —

And  publish  what  hath  been  revealed  to  thee  of  the
Book  of  thy  Lord — none  may  change  his  words, —
and  thou  shalt  by  no  means  find  a  place  of  refuge
other  than  Him  :

And  be  thou  patient  with  those  who  call  upon  their
Lord  at  morn  and  even,  seeking  his  face  :  and  let
not  thine  eyes  be  turned  away  from  them  in  quest
of  the  pomp  of  this  life ;  '^  neither  obey  him  ■*  whose
heart  We  have  made  careless  of  the  remembrance
of  Us,  and  who  followeth  his  own  lusts,  and  whose
ways  ai-e  unbridled.^

And  SAY :  The  truth  is  from  your  Lord :  let  him  then
who  will,  believe ;  and  let  him  who  will,  be  an
unbeliever.  Verily  for  these  offenders  We  have  got
ready  the  fire  whose  smoke  shall  enwrap  them  :
and  if  they  implore  help,  helped  shall  they  be  with
water  like  molten  brass  which  will  scald  their
faces  !     Wretched  the  drink  !  and  evil  the  couch  !

As  to  those  who  have  believed  and  done  the  things  that
are  right, — Verily  We  will  not  suffer  the  reward  of
him  whose  works  were  good,  to  perish  !
30  For  them,  the  gardens  of  Eden  :  at  their  feet  ^  shall
rivers  flow  :  decked  shall  they  be  therein  with
bracelets  of  gold,  and   green  robes   of   silk  and

'  They  entered  the  cavern  under  Decius,  and  awoke  in  the  time  of  Theo-
dosius,  according  to  the  tradition  ;  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the
number  of  years  given  in  the  text

'  Thus  Ullra.  But  the  words  may  be  taken,  with  Beidh.  and  Sale,  as
ironical.  Make  thou  Him  to  see  and  hear.  Maracci, /ac  videre  in  eo  et
fac  audire.

^  Said  to  have  been  promulgated  at  Medina. — Nold.  p.  106.

*  Omaya  Ibn  Chalf,  who  advised  Muhammad  to  cast  off  all  his  poorer
followers,  out  of  respect  to  the  Koreish.

*  Lit.  whose  affair  is  in  advance  of  {the  truth],  i.e.  he  casts  the  truth  of
Religion  behind  his  back.  The  word  properly  applies  to  a  horse  which
outstrips  others.  ''  Lit.  beneath  them.

186  THE    KORAN.

rich  brocade  shall  they  wear,  reclining  therein  on
thrones.  Blissful  the  reward !  and  a  pleasant
couch.!  '
^  Now  set  forth  to  them  as  a  parable  two  men ;  on  one  of
whom  We  bestowed  two  gardens  of  grape  vines,
and  surrounded  both  with  palm-trees,  and  placed
corn-fields  between  them  :  Each  of  the  gardens
did  yield  its  fruit,  and  failed  not  thereof  at  all :

And  We  caused  a  river  to  Aqw  in  their  midst  :  And
the  one  man  received  his  fruit,  and  said  to  his  com-
panion, disputing  with  him,  "  More  have  I  than
thou  of  wealth,  and  my  family  is  mightier.^'

And  he  went  into  his  garden — to  his  own  soul  unjust.
He  said,  "  I  do  not  think  that  this  will  ever
perish :

And  I  do  not  think  that  '  the  Hour '  will  come  :  and
even  if  I  be  taken  back  to  my  Lord,  I  shall  surely
find  a  better  than  it  in  exchange.'^

His  fellow  said  to  him,  disputing  with  him,  ''  What  !
hast  thou  no  belief  in  Him  who  created  thee  of  the
dust,  then  of  the  germs  of  life,^  then  fashioned
thee  a  man  ?

But  God  is  my  Lord ;  and  no  other  being  will  I  asso-
ciate with  my  Lord.

And  why  didst  thou  not  say  when  thou  enteredst  thy
garden,  '  What  God  willeth  !  There  is  no  power
but  in  God.'  Though  thou  seest  that  I  have  less
than  thou  of  wealth  and  children.

Yet  haply  my  Lord  may  bestow  on  me  better  than  thy
garden,  and  may  send  his  bolts  upon  it  out  of  the
Heaven,  so  that  the  next  dawn  shall  find  it  barren
dust;

Or  its  water  become  deep  sunken,  so  that  thou  art  un-
able to  find  it."
40     And  his  fruits  were  encompassed  hy  destruction.    Then
began  he  to  turn  down  the  palms  of  his  hands  at
what  he  had  spent  on  it ;  for  its  vines  were  falling

'  Is  is  probable  that  this  and  the  numerous  similar  descriptions  of  the
enjoyments  in  Paradise  are  Ijased  upon  Muhammad's  knowledge,  or  pos-
sibly personal  observation,  of  the  luxurious  habits  of  the  Persians,  to  whom
many  Arabian  tribes  owed  allegiance,  and  with  whom  they  had  mercantile
transactions  by  means  of  caravans.  The  word  Faradisc,  the  names  of  cups
and  brocade,  and  the  word  sv,ndus  in  this  passage,  are  all  Persian.

*  Lit.  ex  spcrmate.

THE    KOKAN.  187

down  on  their  trellises,  and  he  said,  "  Oh  that  I
had  not  joined  any  other  god  to  my  Lord  !  "

And  he  had  no  host  to  help  him  instead  of  God,  neither
was  he  able  to  help  himself.

Protection  in  such  a  case  is  of  God — the  Truth  :  He  is
the  best  rewarder,  and  He  bringeth  to  the  best
issue. -^
^  And  set  before  them  a  similitude  of  the  present  life.
It  is  as  water  which  We  send  down  from  the
Heaven,  and  the  herb  of  the  Earth  is  mingled  with
it,  and  it  becometh  dry  stubble  which  the  winds
scatter  :  for  God  hath  power  over  all  things.

Wealth  and  children  are  the  adornment  of  this  present
hfe  :  but  good  works,  which  are  lasting,  are  better
in  the  sight  of  thy  Lord  as  to  recompense,  and
better  as  to  hope.
^  And  call  to  mind  the  day  when  We  will  cause  the  moun-
tains to  pass  away,"  and  thou  shalt  see  the  earth
a  level  plain,  and  We  will  gather  7nanhind  toge-
ther, and  not  leave  of  them  any  one.

And  they  shall  be  set  before  thy  Lord  in  ranks  : —
"  Now  are  ye  come  unto  us  as  We  created  you  at
first :  but  ye  thought  that  We  should  not  make
good  to  you  the  promise."

And  each  shall  have  his  book  put  into  his  hand  :  and
thou  shalt  see  the  wicked  in  alarm  at  that  which
is  therein  :  and  they  shall  say,  "  0  woe  to  us  !
what  meaneth  this  Book  ?  It  leaveth  neither  small
nor  great  unnoted  down  !  "  And  they  shall  find
all  that  they  have  wrought  present  to  them,  and
thy  Lord  will  not  deal  unjustly  with  any  one.
%  When  We  said  to  the  angels,  "  Prostrate  yourselves
before  Adam,"  they  all  bowed  down  save  Eblis,
who  was  of  the  Djiun,^  and  revolted  from  his  Lord's
behest. — Will  ye  then  take  him  and  his  offspring
as  patrons  rather  than  Me,  and  they  your  enemies  ?
Sad  exchange  for  the  ungodly  !

I  made  them  not  witnesses  of  the  creation  of  the  Hea-

'  Lit.  the  best  as  to  success.  '  Conip.  Ls.ai.  xl.  4,  etc.

^  Muhammad  appears,  according  to  this  text,  to  have  considered  Eblis
as  one  of  the  number  of  the  Djinn.  The  truth  appears  to  be  that  Mu-
hammad derived  his  doctrines  of  the  Genii  from  the  Persian  and  Indian
mythologies,  and  attempted  to  identify  them  with  the  Satan  and  demons
of  the  Semitic  races.  Both  the  Satans  and  Djinn  represent  iu  the  Koran
the  principle  of  Evil.     See  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  32,  n.

188  THE    KORAN.

vens  and  of  the  Earth,  nor  of  their  own  creation^
neither  did  I  take  seducers  as  my  helpers.
50  On  a  certain  day,  God  shall  say,  "  Call  ye  on  the  com-
panions ye  joined  with  Me,  deeming  them  to  he
gods  :  "  and  they  shall  call  on  them,  but  they  shall
not  answer  them  :  then  will  We  place  a  valley  of
perdition  between  them  :

And  the  wicked  shall  see  the  fire,  and  shall  have  a
foreboding  that  they  shall  fall  into  it,  and  they
shall  find  no  escape  from  it.

And  now  in  this  Koran  We  have  presented  to  man
similitudes  of  every  kind :  but,  at  most  things  is
man  a  caviller.

And  what,  now  that  guidance  is  come  to  them,  letteth
men  from  believing  and  from  asking  forgiveness
of  their  Lord — unless  they  wait  till  that  the  doom
which  befell  the  ancients  overtake  them,  or  the
chastisement  come  upon  them  before  their  very
eyes.^

We  send  not  our  Sent  Ones  but  to  announce  and  to
warn  :  but  the  infidels  cavil  with  vain  words  in
order  to  refute  the  truth  ;  and  they  treat  my  signs
and  their  own  warnings  with  scorn.

But  who  is  worse  than  he  who,  when  told  of  the  signs
of  his  Lord,  tumeth  away  and  forgetteth  what
in  time  past  his  hands  have  wrought  ?  Truly
We  have  thrown  veils  over  their  hearts  lest  they
should  understand  this  Koran,  and  into  their  ears
a  heaviness :

And  if  thou  bid  them  to  "  the  guidance,"  yet  will  they
not  even  then  be  guided  ever.

The  gracious  one,  full  of  compassion,  is  thy  Lord  !  had
He  willed  to  chastise  them  for  their  demerits.
He  would  doubtless  have  hastened  their  chastise-
ment. But  they  have  a  time  fixed  -  for  the  ac-
complishmevt  of  our  menaces:  and  beside  God
they  shall  find  no  refuge.

And  those  cities  did  We  destroy  when  they  became
impious ;  and  of  their  coming  destruction  We  gave
them  warning.
^  Remernber  when  Moses  said  to  his  servant,  "I  will  not
Btop  till  I  reach  the  confluence  of  the  two  seas,'  or
for  years  will  I  journey  on.'^

'  Or,  lit.  piihlicly.  '  Or,  a  promise  (of  respite).

'  The  sea  of  Greece  and  the  sea  of  Persia.     But  a.s  no  literal  interpreta-

i

THE    KORAN.  189

60     But  wlien  they  reached  their  confluence  they  forgot
their  fish,  and  it  took  its  way  in  the  sea  at  will.^

And  when  they  had  passed  on,  Moses  said  to  his
servant,  "  Bring  us  our  morning  meal  ;  for
now  we  have  incurred  weariness  from  this  our
journey."

He  said,  ''  What  thinkest  thou  ?  When  we  repaired
to  the  rock  for  rest,  then  verily  I  forgot  the  fish ;
and  none  but  Satan  made  me  forget  it,  so  as  not
to  mention  it ;  and  it  hath  taken  its  way  in  the
sea  in  a  wondrous  sort."

He  said,  ''  It  is  this  we  were  in  quest  of."  -  So  they
both  went  back  retracing  their  footsteps.

Then  found  they  one  of  our  servants  to  whom  We  had
vouchsafed  our  ^  mercy,  and  whom  We  had  in-
structed with  our*  knowledge;

Moses  said  to  him,  "  Shall  I  follow  thee  that  thou  teach
me,  for  guidance,  of  that  which  thou  too  hast  been
taught  ?  "

He  said,  "Verily,  thou  caiist  by  no  means  have  pa-
tience with  me  ;

And  how  canst  thou  be  patient  in  matters  whose  mean-
ing thou  comprehendest  not  ?  "

He  said,  "  Thou  shalt  find  me  patient  if  God  please,
nor  will  I  disobey  thy  bidding."

He  said,  "  Then,  if  thou  follow  me,  ask  me  not  of  aught
until  I  have  given  thee  an  account  thereof."
70  So  they  both  went  on,  till  they  embarked  in  a  ship,  and
he — the  unknown — staved  it  in.  "  What !  "  said
Moses,  "  hast  thou  staved  it  in  that  thou  mayest
drown  its  crew  ?  a  strange  thing  indeed  now  hast
thou  done !  "

He  said,  "Did  I  not  tell  thee  that  of  a  truth  thou
couldst  no  way  have  patience  with  me  ?  "

tion  of  the  passage  seems  satisfactory,  the  Commentators  have  devised  a
spiritual  or  metaphorical  one,  and  explain  it  of  the  two  oceans  of  natural
and  supernatural  knowledge.  There  is  no  trace  of  this  legend  in  the  Rab-
binic writings.

'  Or,  hy  a  channel  {underground),

'  The  loss  of  our  fish  is  a  sign  to  us  of  our  finding  him  whom  we  seek,
namely,  El-Khidr,  or  El-Khadir,  the  reputed  vizier  of  Dhoulkamain,  and
said  to  have  drunk  of  the  fountain  of  life ,  by  virtue  of  which  he  still  lives,
and  will  live  till  the  day  of  judgment.  He  is  also  said  to  appear,  clad  in
green  robes,  to  Muslims  in  distress  ;  whence  his  name.  Perhaps  the  name
Khidr  is  formed  from  Jethro.

'  Lit.  fram  icith  Vs.  *  Lit.  from  before  Us.

190  THE    KOrAn.

He  said,  "  Chide  me  not  that  I  forgat,  nor  lay  on  me  a
hard  command."  ^

Then  they  went  on  until  they  met  a  youth,  and  he  slew
him.  Said  Moses,  ''  Hast  thou  slain  him  who  is
free  from  guilt  of  blood  ?  Assuredly  now  hast  thou
wrought  an  unheard-of  thing  !  "

He  said,  ''  Did  I  not  tell  thee  that  verily  thou  couldst
by  no  means  have  patience  with  me  ?  "

Moses  said,  "  If  after  this  I  ask  thee  aught,  then  let
me  be  thy  comrade  no  longer ;  now  hast  thou  my
excuse."

Then  went  they  on  until  they  came  to  the  people  of  a
city.  Of  its  people  they  asked  food,  but  they  re-
fused them  for  guests.  And  they  found  in  it  a
wall  that  was  about  to  fall,  and  he  set  it  upright.
Said  Moses,  "  If  thou  hadst  wished,  for  this  thou
mightest  certainly  have  obtained  pay."

He  said,  "  This  is  the  parting  point  between  me  and
thee.  Bid  I  y^iW  first  tell  thee  the  meaning  of  that
with  which  thou  couldst  not  have  patience.

"  As  to  the  vessel,  it  belonged  to  poor  men  who  toiled
upon  the  sea,  and  I  was  minded  to  damage  it,  for
in  their  rear  was  a  king  who  seized  on  every  ship
by  force ;

And  as  to  the  youth,  his  two  parents  were  believers,
and  we  feared  lest  he  should  trouble  them  by  error
and  unbelief  J
80  So  we  desired  that  their  Lord  might  give  them  in  his
place  a  child,  better  than  he  in  virtue,  and  nearer
to  filial  affection.

And  as  to  the  wall,  it  belonged  to  two  orphan  youths
in  the  city,  and  beneath  it  was  a  treasure  of  theirs  :
and  their  father  was  a  righteous  man  :  and  thy
Lord  desired  that  they  should  reach  the  age  of
strength,  and  take  forth  their  treasure  as  a  mercy
from  thy  Lord.  And  not  of  mine  own  will  have  I
done  this.  This  is  the  interpretation  of  that  which
thou  couldst  not  bear  with  patience."
^  They  will  ask  thee  of  Dhoulkarnain  [the  two-horned  ^^ .
Say  :  I  will  recite  to  you  an  account  of  him.

'  Lit.  a7id  do  not  lay  on  me  a  difficulty  in  my  command,  or  in  what  I
am  covimavded.

'  Probably  Alexanrler  the  Great,  callcrl  Dhoulkarnain,  i.e.  He  of  the
two  horns  (with  which  he  is  represented  on  his  coins),  from  his  expeditions
to  the  East  and  West.     He  seems  to  be  regarded  in  this  passage  as  in-

THE    KORVN.  191

Verily  We  established  his  power  upon  the  earth,  and
We  gave  him  a  means  to  accomplish  every  end,
so  he  followed  his  way,

Until  when  he  reached  the  setting  of  the  sun,  he  found
it  to  set  in  a  miry  fount ;  and  hard  by  he  found  a
people.

We  said,  "  O  Dhoulkarnain  !  whether  thou  chastise  or
whether  thou  treat  them  generously  " —

''As  for  him  who  is  impious/'  said  he,  *' we  will  chas-
tise him ; "  then  shall  he  be  taken  back  to  his
Lord,  and  He  will  chastise  him  with  a  grievous
chastisement.

But  as  to  him  who  believeth  and  doeth  that  which  is
right,  he  shall  have  a  generous  recompense,  and
We  will  lay  on  them  our  easy  behests.

Then  followed  he  a  route.

Until  when  he  reached  the  rising  of  the  sun  he  found
it  to  rise  on  a  people  to  whom  We  had  given  no
shelter  from  it.
90     Thus  it  was.    And  We  had  full  knowledge  of  the  forces
that  were  with  him.

Then  followed  he  a  route.

Until  he  came  between  the  two  mountains,  beneath
which  he  found  a  people  who  scarce  understood  a
language.

They  said,  "  0  Dhoulkarnain  !  verily,  Gog  and  Magog  ^
waste  this  land  ;  shall  we  then  pay  thee  tribute,  so
thou  build  a  rampart^  between  us  and  them  ?  "

He  said,  "  Better  than  your  tribute  is  the  might  where-
with my  Lord  hath  strengthened  me ;  but  help  me
strenuously,  and  I  will  set  a  barrier  between  you
and  them.

Bring  me  blocks  of  iron,'' — until  when  it  filled  the
space  between  the  mountain  sides — "  Blow,"  said
he,  ''upon  it," — until  when  he  had  set  it  on  fire,
he  said, — "  Bring  me  molten  brass,  that  I  may
pour  upon  it."

vested  with  a  divine  commission  for  the  extirpation  of  impiety  and  idola-
try. Comp.  Dan.  viiL  andTr.  Tanith,  fol.  32.    Hottinger,  Bibl.  Orient.  109,

'  Ar.  Yadjoudj  and  Madjoiidj,  the  barbarous  people  of  E.  Asia.  See
Ibn  Batoutah's  Travels,  iv.  p.  274  (Par.  ed.)  ;  and  Rosenmiiller  on  Ezek.
xxxviii.  1.     See  also  note  at  p.  156,  above.

*  This  rampart  h;i5  been  identified  with  fortifications  which  extended
from  the  AV.  shore  of  the  Caspian  Sea  to  the  Pontus  Euxinus,  made,  as  it
is  said,  by  Alexander,  and  repaired  by  Yezdegird  II.  Caussin  de  Perce-
val, vol.  i.  p.  66.     See  Sura  [Ixv.j  xxi.  96.

192  THE    KORAN.

And  Gog  and  Magog  were  not  able  to  scale  it,  neither
were  they  able  to  dig  through  it,

"  This/'  said  he,  "  is  a  mercy  from  my  Lord  :

But  when  -the  threat  of  my  Lord  cometh  to  pass,  He
wnll  turn  it  to  dust ;  and  the  threat  of  my  Lord  is
a  truth."

On  that  day  We  will  let  them  dash  like  billows  one  over
another;    and  there  shall  be  a  blast  on  the  trum-
pet, and  We  will  gather  them  together  in  a  body.
100  And  We  will  set  Hell  on  that  day  close  before  the  in-
fidels

Whose  eyes  were  veiled  from  my  warning,  and  who
had  no  power  to  hear.

Do  the  infidels  think  that  they  can  take  my  servants  as
their  patrons,  beside  Me  ?  Verily,  We  have  got
Hell  ready  as  the  abode  of  the  infidels.

Say  :  Shall  We  tell  you  who  they  are  that  have  lost
their  labour  most ;

Whose  efforts  in  the  present  life  have  been  mistaken,
and  who  deemed  that  what  they  did  was  right  ?

They  are  those  who  believed  not  in  the  signs  of  the
Lord,  or  that  they  should  ever  meet  Him.  Vain,
therefore,  are  their  works ;  and  no  weight  will  We
allow  them  on  the  day  of  Resurrection.

This  shall  be  their  reward — Hell.-^  Because  they  were
unbelievers,  and  treated  my  signs  and  my  Apostles
with  scorn.

But  as  for  those  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are
right,  thoy  shall  have  the  gardens  of  Paradise^  for
their  abode  :

They  shall  remain  therein  for  ever :  they  shall  wish  for
no  change  from  it.

Say  :  Should  the  sea  become  ink  for  the  words  of  my
Lord,  the  sea  would  surely  fail  ere  the  words  of
my  Lord  would  fail,  though  We  brought  its  like  in
aid.'
110  Say  :  I  am  only  a  man  like  you.  It  is  only  revealed  to
me  that  your  God  is  one  God :  let  him  then  who

'  The  form  of  this  word  in  the  Arabic,  with  the  h  in  the  second  syllable
and  the  final  m,  shows  that  the  word  was  borrowed  from  the  Hebrew,  and
not  from  the  Greek  or  Syriac.

'  Observe  in  this  expression  the  same  admixture  of  the  Semitic  and
Indo- Persian  elements  as  was  noticed  above  in  the  identification  of  Satans
and  Djinn,  verse  48.

'  Comp.  St.  John  xxi.  25.

THE    KORAN.

193

hopetli  to  meet  his  Lord  work  a  righteous  work :
nor  let  him  give  any  other  creature  a  share  in  the
worship  of  his  Lord.

[LXX.]
SURA  XXXII.— ADORATION.

Mecca. — 30  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elif.  Lam.  Mim.^  This  Pook  is  without  a  doubt  a
Eevelation  sent  down  from  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds.

"Will  they  say,  He  hath  forged  it  ?  Nay,  it  is  the  truth
from  thy  Lord,  that  thou  mayest  warn  a  people
to  whom  no  warner  hath  come  before  thee.  Haply
they  will  be  guided.

God  it  is  who  hath  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth
and  all  that  is  between  them  in  six  days ;  then
seated  Himself  upon  his  throne.  Save  Him  ye
have  no  patron,  and  none  to  plead  for  you.  Will
ye  not  then  be  admonished?

From  the  Heaven  to  the  Earth  He  governeth  all  things  :
hereafter  shall  they  come  up  to  Him  on  a  day
whose  length  shall  be  a  thousand  of  such  years  as
ye  reckon.^

This  is  He  who  knoweth  the  unseen  and  the  seen ;  the
Mighty,  the  Merciful,

Who  hath  made  everything  which  He  hath  created
most  good ;  and  began  the  creation  of  man  with
clay;

Then  ordained  his  progeny  from  germs  of  life,^  from
sorry  water :

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  1,  p.  16.     Lit.  the  sending  dotv^  of  the  Book,  there  is
no  doubt  thereof  (is),  &c.

*  Comp.  Sura,  [cvii.]  xxii.  46,  and  Ps.  xc.  4,  which  is  taken  literally  by
many  of  the  Talmudists.     Comp.  e.  g.  Sanhed.  96,  2.

^  Lit.  ex  spsrmate  genitcUi.

O

194  THE    KORAN.

Tlien  shaped  him,  aud  breathed  of  His  Spirit  into  him,
and  gave  you  hearing  and  seeing  and  hearts  :  what
little  thanks  do  ye  return  !

And  they  say,  "  What  !  when  we  shall  have  lain  hid-
den in  the  earth,  shall  we  become  a  new  creation  ?  "
10     Yea,  they  deny  that  they  shall  meet  their  Lord.

Say  :  The  angel  of  death  who  is  charged  with  you  shall
cause  you  to  die :  then  shall  ye  be  returned  to
your  Lord.

Couldst  thou  but  see  when  the  guilty  shall  droop  their
heads  before  their  Lord,  and  cry,  "  0  our  Lord  !
we  have  seen  and  we  have  heard :  return  us  then
to  life  :  we  will  do  that  which  is  right.  Verily  we
believe  firmly  ! "

(Had  We  pleased  We  had  certainly  given  to  every  soul
its  guidance.  But  true  shall  be  the  word  which
hath  gone  forth  from  Me — I  will  surely  fill  hell
with  Djinn  and  men  together.)

"  Taste  then  the  recompense  of  your  having  foi'gotten
the  meeting  with  this  your  day.  We,  verily,  We
have  forgotten  you  :  taste  then  an  eternal  punish-
ment for  that  which  ye  have  wrought."

They  only  believe  in  our  signs,^  who,  when  mention  is
made  of  them,  fall  down  in  ADORATION,  and
celebrate  the  praise  of  their  Lord,  and  are  not
puffed  up  with  disdain  :

Wlio,  as  they  arise  -  from  their  couches,  call  on  their
Lord  with  fear  and  desire,  and  give  alms  of  that
with  which  We  have  supplied  them.

No  soul  knoweth  what  joy  ^  of  the  eyes  is  reserved /or
flic  fjoiul  in  recompense  of  their  works.

Shall  he  then  who  is  a  believer  be  as  he  who  sinneth
grossly  ?  they  shall  not  be  held  alike.

As  to  those  who  believe  and  do  that  which  is  right,
they  shall  have  gardens  of  eternal  abode  as  the
meed  of  their  works  :
20  But  as  for  those  who  act  wickedly,  their  abode  there-
fore the  Fire  !  so  oft  as  they  shall  desire  to  escape
out  of  it,  back  shall  they  bo  turned  into  it.  And
it  shall  be  said  to  them.  Taste  ye  the  torment  of
the  Fire,  which  ye  treated  as  a  lie.

And  We  will  surely  cause  them  to  taste  a  punishment

'  i.  c.  verses,  revelations.  ^  Lit.  their  sides  are  removed.

"  Lit.  coolness,  i.  e.  not  heated  by  tears.

THE    KORAN.  195

yet  nearer  at  hand,  besides  the  greater  punish-
ment, that  haply  they  may  turn  to  us  in  penitence.

Who  acteth  worse  than  he  who  is  warned  by  the  signs
of  his  Lord,  th'^n  turneth  away  from  them  ?  We
will  surely  take  vengeance  on  the  guilty  ones.

We  heretofore  gave  the  Book  of  the  law  to  Moses :
have  thou  no  doubt  as  to  the  meeting  with  him  :^
and  We  appointed  it  for  the  guidance  of  the
children  of  Israel.

And  We  appointed  Imams  from  among  them  who
should  guide  after  our  command,  when  they  had
themselves  endured  with  constancy,  and  had  firmly
believed  in  our  signs.

Now  thy  Lord  !  He  will  decide  between  them  on  the
day  of  Resurrection  as  to  the  subject  of  their  dis-
putes.

Is  it  not  notorious  to  them  how  many  generations,
through  whose  abodes  they  walk,  We  have  de-
stroyed before  them  ?  Truly  herein  are  signs  :
will  they  not  then  hear  ?

See  they  not  how  We  drive  the  rain  to  some  parched
laud,  and  thereby  bring  forth  corn,  of  which  their
cattle  and  themselves  do  eat  ?  Will  they  not  then
behold  ?

They  say,  '*  When  will  this  decision  take  place  ?  Tell
us,  if  ye  are  men  of  truth  t"

Say  :  On  the  day  of  that  decision,  the  faith  of  infidels
shall  not  avail  them^  and  they  shall  have  no  further
respite.
30     Stand  aloof  from  then,  and  wait  thou,  for  they  verily
wait."^

'  Noldeke  thinks  that  the  word  for  muting  is  used  here  in  the  same
sense  as  in  v.  10  above  and  Sura  [Ixxi.]  xli.  54,  and  that  the  clause  does
not  belong  to  this  verse.  The  passage  is  interpreted  either  of  an  interview
between  Moses  and  Muhammad,  or  of  the  Revelation  of  the  Koran  to
Muhammad,  or  of  the  meeting  between  God  and  Moses.

'  Wait  thou  for  their  punishment  as  they  wait  for  thy  downfall.

0  2

196  THE    KORAN.

[LXXI.]

SURA '  XLI.— THE  MADE  PLAIN.

Mecca. — 54  Versus.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Ha.  Mm."     A  Revelation  from  the  Compassionate,  the

Merciful !
A  Book  whose  verses  (signs)  are  MADE  PLAIN — an

Arabic  Koran,  for  men  of  knowledge ;
Bearer  of  glad  tidings  and  charged  with  warnings  !    But

most  of  them  withdraw  and  hearken  not :
And  they  say,  "  Our  hearts  are  under  shelter  from  thy

teachings,  and  in  our  ears  is  a  deafness,  and  be-
tween us  and  thee  there  is  a  veil.     Act  thou  thy

part :  we  verily  shall  act  ours."
Say  :  I  am  only  a  man  like  you.^     It  is  revealed  to  me

that  your  God  is  one  God  :  act  uprightly  then  with

Him,  and  implore  his  pardon.     And  woe  to  those

who  join  gods  with  God  ;
Who  give  not  alms,  and  in  the  life  to  come  believe

not !
Verily  they  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are

right  shall  receive  an  uninterrupted  (everlasting)

recompense.
Say  :  Do  ye  indeed  disbelieve  in  Him  who  in  two  days

created  the  earth  ?  and  do  ye  assign  Him  peers  ?

The  Lord  of  the  worlds  is  He  !
And  He  hath  placed  on  the  earth  the  firm  mountains

which  tower  above  it;"*  and  He  hath  blessed  it,

'  In  some  MSS.  this  Sura  is  entitlerl  Adoration.  Thus  Beidh.  Ac-
cording; to  His.  186,  conip.  Caussin,  i.  375  f.,  Muhammad's  aim  in  this
Sura  was  the  conversion  of  a  noble  Meccan,  Utba  ben  liiibia,  to  Islam.
The  precise  year  is  uncertain.  *  See  Sura  Ixviii.  1,  p.  16.

'  Thus  SS.  Paul  and  Barnabas,  Acts  xiv.  15.

■•  Lit.  from  above  it,  or  from  its  surface.

THE    KORAN.  197

and  distributed  its  nourishments  throughout  it,
for  the  craving's  of  all  alike,  in  four  days  :
10  Then  He  applied  himself  to  the  Heaven,  which  was
but  smoke  :  a'-^d  to  it  and  to  the  Earth  He  said,
"  Come  ye,  in  obedience  or  against  your  will ; "
and  they  both  said,  "  We  come  obedient."

And  He  completed  them  as  seven  heavens  in  two  days,
and  in  each  heaven  made  known  its  office ;  and  We
furnished  the  lower  heaven  with  lights  and  guar-
dian angels.  This  the  disposition  of  the  Almighty,
the  All-knowing.

But  if  they  turn  away,  then  say  :  I  warn  you  of  a
tempest,  like  the  tempest  of  Ad  and  Thamood  !

When  the  apostles  came  to  them  on  every  side,^  saij-
ing,  "  Worship  none  but  God,^^  they  said,  "  Had
our  Lord  been  pleased  to  send  down,  He  had  surely
sent  down  angels ;  and  in  sooth,  your  message  We
do  not  believe.'^

And  as  to  Ad,  they  deme".ned  themselves  proudly  and
unjustly  in  the  land,  and  said,  "Who  mightier
than  we  in  prowess  ?"  Saw  they  not  that  God
their  creator  was  mightier  than  they  in  prowess  ?
And  they  rejected  our  signs.

Therefore  on  ill-omened  days  did  We  send  against
them  an  impetuous  blast  that  We  might  make
them  taste  the  chastisement  of  shame  in  this
world  : — but  more  shameful  surely  shall  be  the
chastisement  of  the  life  to  come ;  and  they  shall
not  be  protected.

And  as  to  Thamood,  We  vouchsafed  them  also  guid-
ance; but  to  guidance  did  they  prefer  blindness;
wherefore  the  tempest  of  the  shameful  punishment
overtook  them  for  their  doings ;

But  We  rescued  the  believing  and  the  God-fearing.

And  one  day  the  enemies  of  God  shaU  be  gathered^
unto  the  fire,  urged  on  in  bands  :

Until  when  they  reach  it,  their  ears  and  their  eyes  and
their  skins  shall  bear  witness  against  them  of  their
deeds :
20  And  they  shall  say  to  their  skins,  "  Why  have  ye  borne
witness  against  us  ?  "  They  answer,  "  God,  who
giveth  a  voice  to  all  things,  giveth  us  a  voice  :  He

'  Lit.  from  before  them  and  from  behind  them.
^  See  Sura  [Ix.]  xxxvi.  64,  n.

198  THE    KORAN.

created  you  at  first,  and  to  Ilim  are  ye  brought
back.
And  ye  could  not  hide  yourselves  so  that  neither  your
ears  nor  your  eyes  nor  your  skins  should  witness
ao-ainst  you  :  but  ye  thought  that  God  knew  not
many  a  thing  that  ye  did  !
And  this  your  thought  which  ye  did  think  of  your  Lord
hath  ruined  you,  so  that  ye  are  become  of  those
who  perish.^^
And  be  they  patient,  still  the  fire  shall  be  their  abode  :
or  if  they  beg  for  favour,  yet  shall  they  not  be  of
the  favoured.
For  We  prepared  Satnns  to  be  their  fast  companions;
and  it  was  they  who  made  their  present  and  future
state  seem  fair  and  right  to  them;'^  and  the  sen-
tence passed  on  the  peoples  of  Djinn  and  men  who
flourished  before  them  hath  justly  lighted  on  them,
that  verily  they  shall  perish.
Yet  the  unbelievers  say,  "  Hearken  not  to  this  Koran,
but  talk  aloud  therewith :  perchance  ye  may  over-
power the  voice  of  the  reader  :"
Surely  therefore  will  We  cause  the  unbelievers  to  taste

a  terrible  punishment,
And  recompense  them  according  to  the  worst  of  their

actions.
This  the  reward  of  the  enemies  of  God, — the  Fire  !  it
shall  be  their  eternal  abode,  in  requital  for  their
rejecting  our  revelations  (signs).
And  they  who  believed  not  shall  say,  "  0  our  Lord  !
show  us  those  of  the  Djinn  and  men  who  led  us
astray,  that  we  may  put  thorn  under  our  feet,  in
order  that  they  may  be  of  the  humbled."
30     Verily  those  who  say,  "  Our  Lord  is  God,"  and  who
walk  uprightly,^  the  angels  shall  descend  to  them
and  say,  "  Fear  ye  not,  neither  be  ye  grieved,  but
rejoice  ye  in  the  paradise  which  ye  have  been  pro-
mised ;
We  are  your  guardians  in  this  life  and  in  the  next :
yours  therein  shall  be  your  soul's  desire,  and  yours
therein  whatever  ye  shall  ask  for.
The  hospitality  of  a  Gracious,  a  Merciful  One.^^
And  who  speaketh  fairer  than  ho  who  biddeth  to  God

'  Lit.  ami  fhnj  adorned  that  vMch  loas  before  them  and  behind  them.
'  Comp.  Sura  [Ixxxviii.]  xlvi.  12.

THE    KORAN.  199

and  doth  the  thing  that  is  right,  and  saith,  "  Lo  !
I  am  of  the  Muslims/^

Moreover,  good  and  evil  are  not  to  be  treated  as  the
same  thing.  Turn  away  eril  by  what  is  better,
and  lo  !  he  between  whom  and  thyself  was  enmity,
shall  be  as  though  he  were  a  warm  friend  ;

Bat  none  attain  to  this  save  men  steadfast  in  patience,
and  none  attain  to  it  except  the  most  highly  fa-
voured ;^

And  if  an  enticement  from  Satan  entice  thee,  then  take
refuge  in  God :  He  truly  is  the  Hearing,  the
Knowing.

And  among  his  signs  are  the  night,  and  the  day,  and
the  sun,  and  the  moon.  Bend  not  in  adoration  to
the  sun  or  the  moon,  but  bend  in  adoration  before
God,  who  created  them  both,  if  ye  would  serve
Him.

But  if  they  are  too  proud  for  tJiis,  yet  they  who  are
with  thy  Lord  do  celebrate  his  praises  night  and
day,-  and  weary  noi.

And  amonof  his  sio'ns  is  this,  that  thou  seest  the  earth
drooping  :  but,  when  We  send  down  the  rain  upon
it,  it  is  stirred  and  swelleth ;  verily  He  who  giveth
it  life,  will  surely  give  life  to  the  dead ;  lo  !  his
might  extendeth  over  all  things.^
40  They  truly  who  with  obloquy  disown  our  signs  are  not
hidden  from  Us.  Is  he  then  who  shall  be  cast
into  the  fire,  or  he  who  shall  come  forth  secure  on
the  day  of  Resurrection,  in  the  better  position  ?
Do  what  ye  will :  hiU  surely  He  is  beholding  what
ye  do.

Verily,  they  who  believe  not  in  "  the  warning/'  after

it  hath  come  to  them yet  verily  the

Koran  is  a  glorious  book  !

Falsehood,  from  whatever  side  it  cometh,  shall  not
come  nigh  it;'*  it  is  a  missive  from  the  Wise,  the
Praiseworthy.

Nothing  hath  been  said  to  thee  which  hath  not  been
said  of  old  to  apostles  before  thee.  Verily  with
thy  Lord  is  forgiveness,  and  with  Him  is  terrible
retribution.

And  had  We  made  it  a  Koran  in  a  foreign  tongue,  they

'  Lit.  the  possessor  of  great  good  fortune.

'  Conip.  Rev.  iv.  8  in  the  original.  ^  Th'is  Tr.  Taanith  (init.).

*  Lit.  vanity  shall  not  coine  to  it  from  before  it,  or  from  behind  it.

200  THE    KOKAN.

had  surely  said,  "  Unless  its  verses  be  made  clear

^!      Mltat !  in  a  foreign  tongue  ?  and  he

(the  prophet)  Arabian  ? "  Say  :  It  is  to  those
who  believe  a  guide  and  a  medicine;  but  as  to
those  who  believe  not,  there  is  a  thickness  in  their
ears,  and  to  them  it  is  a  blindness :  they  are  like
those  who  are  called  to  from  afar,-

Of  old  "VVe  gave  the  Book  to  Moses,  and  disputes  arose
about  it :  and  if  a  decree  of  respite  from  thy  Lord
had  not  gone  before,  there  would  surely  have  been
a  decision  between  them  :  for  verily  great  were
their  doubts  and  questionings  about  it.^

He  who  doth  right — it  is  for  himself :  *  and  he  who  doth
evil — it  is  for  himself :  and  thy  Lord  will  not  deal
unfairly  with  his  servants.

To  Him  alone  is  reserved  the  knowledge  of  "  the
Hour."  No  fruit  cometli  forth  from  its  coverings,
neither  doth  any  female  conceive  nor  is  she  de-
livered, but  with  his  knowledge.  And  on  that
day  He  shall  call  to  them,  "  Where  are  the  com-
panions ye  gave  Me  ?  "  They  shall  say,  "  We
assure  Thee  that  no  one  of  us  can  witness  for
them ;  "

For  the  gods  whom  they  erst  called  on  have  passed
away  from  them,  and  they  perceive  that  there  will
be  no  escape  for  them,

Man  is  never  weary  of  praying  for  good  ;  but  if  evil
betide  him  he  is  then  desponding,  despairing,
50  And  if  We  cause  him  to  taste  our  mercy  after  affliction
hath  touched  him,  he  is  sure  to  say,  "  This  is  my
due :  and  I  do  not  think  that  '  the  Hour '  is  certain
to  come ;  and  if  I  be  brought  back  to  my  Lord,
verily  I  shall  only  receive  good  at  his  hands,"
But  We  will  then  certainly  declare  their  doings  to
the  unbelieving,  and  cause  them  to  taste  a  stern
punishment.

When  We  are  gracious  to  man,  he  withdraweth  and
turneth  him  aside  :  but  when  evil  toucheth  him,  he
is  a  man  of  many  prayers.

Say  :  What  think  ye  ?     If  this  Book  be  from  God  and

*  We  icill  not  receive  it.    The  literal  rendering  of  the  following  words  is
foreign  and  A  rabian  ?

'  i.  e.  they  shall  not  hear.

*  Lit.  verily  they  vjere  in  suspicious  or  disquieting  doubts  about  it,

*  Lit.  for  his  soul.    See  next  Sura,  v.  14,

THE    KOBAN.  201

ye  believe  it  not,  who  will  have  gone  further  astray
than  he  who  is  in  wide  separation //-o/h  it?

We  will  shew  them  our  signs  in  different  countries  and
among  themsehes,  until  it  become  plain  to  them
that  It  is  the  truth.  Is  it  not  enough  for  thetn
that  thy  Lord  is  witness  of  all  things  ?

Is  it  not  that  verily  they  have  doubts  as  to  a  meeting
with  their  Lord  ?  Is  it  not  true  that  verily  He
encompasseth  all  things  ?

[LXXIL]

SURA  XL  v.— THE  KNEELING.

Mecca. — 36  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Ha.  Mim.'^     This  Book  is  sent  down^  from  God,  the

Mighty,  the  Wise  !
Assuredly  in  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  are  signs  for

those  who  believe  firmly ;
And  in  your  own  creation,  and  in  the  beasts  which  He

hath  dispersed  abroad  are  signs   to  the  firm  in

faith  :
And  ill  the   succession  of  night  and  day,  and  in  the

supply  which  God  sendeth  down  from  the  Heaven

whereby   after   its    death   He    giveth   life    to  the

earth,  and  in  the  change  of  the  winds,  are  signs

for  people  of  discernment.
Such  are  the  signs  of  God :  with  truth  have  We  recited

them   to   thee.     But  in  what    teaching  will  they

believe,  if  they  reject  ^  God  and  his  signs  ?
Woe  to  every  bar,  a  wicked  person.
Who  heareth  the  signs  of  God  recited  to  him,  and

then,  as  though  he  heareth  them  not,  persisteth

'  See  Siuu  IxviiL  p.  16.

"  Lit.  a  sending  down,  i.e.  the  revelation  of  the  Book.

'  Lit.  after  God.

202  THE    KORAN.

in  proud  disdain  ! — Apprise  him  therefore  of  an
afflictive  punishment ; —

And  when  he  hath  become  acquainted  with  any  of  our
signs  he  turneth  them  into  ridicule.  These !  a
shameful  punishment  for  them  !

Hell  is  behind  them  !  and  neither  their  doings  nor  the
lords  whom  they  have  adopted  beside  God  shall
avail  them  aught :  and  theirs,  a  great  punishment  !
10  This  is  the  *'  Guidance  :  "  and  for  those  who  have  dis-
believed the  signs  of  their  Lord,  the  punishment
of  an  afflictive  torrpent.

It  is  God  who  hath  subjected  the  sea  to  you  that  the
ships  may  traverse  it  at  his  bidding,  and  that  yo
may  go  in  quest  of  his  bounties,  and  that  ye  may
haply  be  thankful.

And  He  hath  subjected  to  you  whatever  is  in  the
Heavens  and  whatever  is  on  the  Earth  :  all  is
from  Him.  Verily,  herein  are  signs  for  those  who
reflect.

Tell  those  who  have  believed  to  pardon  those  who  hope
not  for  the  days  of  God  ^  in  which  He  purposeth
to  recompense  -  men  according  to  their  deserts.

He  who  doeth  that  which  is  right,  doeth  it  to  his  own
behoof,  and  whoso  doeth  evil,  doeth  it  to  his  own
hurt.  Hereafter,  to  your  Lord  shall  ye  be  brought
back.

Also  to  the  children  of  Israel  gave  We  of  old  the  Book
and  the  Wisdom,  and  Prophecy,  and  We  supplied
them  with  good  things,  and  privileged  them  above
all  peoples  :

And  We  gave  them  clear  sanctions  for  our  behests :  ^
neither  did  they  differ,  through  mutual  envy,  till
after  they  had  become  possessed  of  '  the  know-
ledge'; verily  thy  Lord  will  judge  between  them
on  the  day  of  Resurrection,  as  to  the  subject  oi
their  disagreements.

Afterwards  We  put  thee  in  the  right  way  concerning
the  faith :  *  follow  it  then  :  and  follow  not  the
wishes  of  those  who  are  devoid  of  knowledge.

'  That  is,  the  days  of  victory.  In  Scripture  phrase,  "  the  days  of  the
right  hand  of  the  Most  High."

'  Lit.  that  He  may  recompense.

'  Lit.  emdence  of  the  affair  {of  religion).

*  The  Arabic  awn  may  be  rendered  either  cnmmand  or  hxisiness,  i.  e.  of
religion.  Lit.  constiluiinus  tc  super  legem  circa  negutium  {rcligionis), — Mar.

THE    KOKAN.  203

For  against  God  they  will  verily  stand  thee  in  no  stead.
And  in  sooth  the  doers  of  evil  are  one  another's
patrons ;  but  the  patron  of  them  that  fear  Him  is
God  himself.

This  Booli  is  clear  teaching  for  mankind,  and  a  Guid-
ance and  Mercy  to  a  people  who  are  firm  in  faith.
20  Deem  they  who  seek  to  do  evil,  that  We  will  deal  with
them  as  with  those  who  have  believed  and  wrought
righteousness,  so  that  their  lives  and  deaths  shall
be  ahke  ?     Ill  do  they  judge.

And  in  truth  ^  hath  God  created  the  Heavens  and  the
Earth,  and  He  w411  recompense  every  soul  accord-
ing to  its  deserts  ;  and  they  shall  not  be  wronged.

What  then  thinkest  thou  ?  He  who  hath  made  a  god
of  his  passions,  and  whom  God  causeth  to  err  of
his  own  previous  knowledge,  and  whose  ears  and
whose  heart  He  hath  sealed  up,  and  over  whose
sight  He  hath  placed  a  veil — who,  after  his  rejec-
tion hy  God,  shall  guivle  such  a  one  ?  Will  ye  not
then  bear  it  in  mind  ?

And.  they  say,  "  There  is  only  this  our  present  life  :  we
die  and  we  live,  and  nought  but  time  destroyeth
us.''  But  in  this  they  have  no  knowledge :  verily
it  is  but  their  own  conceit.

And  when  our  clear  signs  are  recited  to  them,  their
only  argument  is  to  say,  "  Bring  back  our  fathers,
if  ye  speak  the  truth."

Say  :  God  giveth  you  life,  then  causeth  you  to  die  :
then  will  He  assemble-  you  for  the  day  of  Resur-
rection :  there  is  no  doubt  of  it :  but  most  men
have  not  this  knowledge.

And  God's  is  the  kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the
Earth  ;  and  on  the  day  when  the  Hour  shall  arrive,
on  that  day  shall  those^  who  treated  the  Koran
as  a  vain  thing  perish.

And  thou  shalt  see  every  nation  KNEELING :  to  its
own  book  shall  every  nation  be  summoned  : —
"  This  day  shall  ye  be  repaid  as  ye  have  wrought.

This  our  Book  will  speak  of  you  with  truth :  verily  We
have  written  down  whatever  ye  have  done;"

And  as  to  those  who  have  believed  and  wrought  right-

'  i.e.  for  a  serious  end.  '  Matt.  xxiv.  ,31.

'  Lit.  ihe  makers  vain,  i.e.  vanitatis  arguentcs  alcoranuw, — Mar. ;  or
dealers  in  vanities.

204  THE    KORAN.

eously^  into  his  mercy  shall  their  Lord  cause  them
to  enter.     This  the  undoubted  bliss  !
30     But   as  to  the  Infidels  — "  Were   not  then  my  signs
recited  to  you  ?  but  ye  were  proud,  and  were  a
sinful  people.'^

And  when  it  was  said,  "  Verily  the  Promise  of  God  is
truth ;  and  as  to  the  Hour/  there  is  no  doubt  of
it ;  "  ye  said,  "  We  know  not  what  the  hour  is —
we  conceive  it  to  be  a  mere  conceit,  and  we  have
no  assurance  of  it."

And  the  evils  they  have  wrought  shall  rise  up  into  their
view,  and  that  at  which  they  mocked  shall  hem
them  in  on  every  side.

And  it  shall  be  said  to  them,  "  This  day  will  We  for-
get you  as  ye  forgat  the  meeting  with  this  your
day,  and  your  abode  shall  be  the  fire,  and  none
shall  there  be  to  succour  you : —

This,  because  ye  received  the  signs  of  God  with
mockery,  and  this  present  life  deceived  you."  On
that  day  therefore  they  shall  not  be  brought  out
from  it ;  and  they  shall  not  be  asked  to  win  the
favour  of  God.

Praise  then  be  to  God,  Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  Lord
of  the  Earth  ;  Lord  of  the  worlds  !

And  his  be  the  greatness  in  the  Heavens  and  on  the
Earth ;  and  He  is  the  Mighty,  the  Wise  !

[LXXIIL]

SURA  XVI.— THE  BEE.

Mecca. — 128  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Com-passionate,  the  Merciful,

The  doom  of  God  cometh  to  pass.  Then  hasten  it  not.
Glory  be  to  Him  !  and  high  let  Him  be  exalted
above  what  they  join  with  Him  !

'  This  use  of  the  word  Hour  is  of  Christian  origin  ;  the  Meccans  would
therefore  not  be  likely  to  understand  it.     See  Sur.  xix.  77,  p.  (117).

THE    KORAN.  205

By  his  own  behest  He  causcth  the  angels  to  descend
with  the  Spirit  on  whom  He  pleaseth  among  his
servants,  hiddiiKj  them,  "Warn  that  there  is  no
God  but  Me  ;  therefore  fear  Me."

He  hath  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  to  set  forth
his  truth;  high  let  Him  be  exalted  above  the
gods  they  join  with  Him  !

Man  hath  He  created  from  a  moist  germ ;  ^  yet  lo  !
man  is  an  open  caviller.

And  the  cattle  !  for  you  hath  He  created  them  :  in
thom  ye  have  warm  garments  and  gainful  uses ;
and  of  them  ye  eat :

And  they  beseem  you  well  ^  when  ye  fetch  them  home
and  when  ye  drive  them  forth  to  pasture  :

And  they  carry  your  burdens  to  lands  which  ye  could
not  else  reach  but  with  travail  of  soul :  truly  your
Lord  is  full  of  goodness,  and  merciful :

And  He  hath  given  you  horses,  mules,  and  asses,  that
ye  may  ride  them,  ari  for  your  ornament:  and
things  of  which  ye  have  no  knowledge  hath  He
created.

And  of  God  it  is  to  point  out  "  the  Way."  ^  Some
turn  aside  from  it :  but  had  He  pleased.  He  had
surely  guided  you  all  aright.
/  0  It  is  He  who  sendeth  down  rain  out  of  Heaven  :  from
it  is  your  drink  ;  and  from  it  are  the  plants  by
which  ye  pasture  your  jioclxs.

By  it  He  causeth  the  corn,  and  the  olives,  and  the
palm-trees,  and  the  grapes  to  spring  forth  for
you,  and  all  kinds  of  fruits  :  verily,  in  this  are
signs  for  those  who  ponder.

And  He  hath  subjected  to  you  the  night  and  the  day;
the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  stars  too  are  sub-
jected to  you  by  his  behest ;  verily,  in  this  are
signs  for  those  who  understand  :

^  E.r  gutta  qyermatis.    Pirke  Aboth  iii.      Unde  venisti  ?  e:c  giMd  faitidd.

Thus  the  xEi\i.  Bours  (ISIS.  F.  Bib.  Soc.  in  medio) :  "  Thou  hast  created
Die  from  a  little  drop,  wrapped  up  in  the  womb,"  &c.  This  verse  is  said
to  be  an  allusion  to  a  difficulty  proposed  by  an  idolatrous  Arab,  who  brought
a  carious  leg-bone  to  Muhammad,  and  asked  whether  it  could  be  restored
to  life.  Compare  a  similar  argument  for  the  Resurrection,  Tr.  Sanhedrin,
fol.  91a.

'  Lit.  there  is  beauty  in  them  for  you,  i.  e.  they  win  you  credit.

^  Lit.  from  God  is  the  right  icay.

206  THE    KORAN.

And  all  of  varied  hues  that  Ho  hath  created  for  you
over  the  earth :  verily,  in  this  are  signs  for  those
who  remember.

And  He  it  is  who  hath  subjected  the  sea  to  you,  that
ye  may  eat  of  its  fresh  fish,  and  take  forth  from
it  ornaments  to  wear — and  thou  seest  the  ships
ploughing  its  billows — and  that  ye  may  go  in
quest  of  his  bounties,  and  that  ye  might  give
thanks.

And  He  hath  thrown  firm  mountains  on  the  earth,
lest  it  move  with  you ;  and  rivers  and  paths  for
your  guidance,

And  way-marks.     By  the  stars  too  are  men  guided.

Shall  He  then  who  hath  created  be  as  ho  who  hath
not  created  ?     Will  ye  not  consider  ?

And  if  ye  would  reckon  up  the  favours  of  God,  yo
could  not  count  them.  Aye  !  God  is  right
Gracious,  Merciful  !

And  G  od  knoweth  what  ye  conceal,  and  what  ye  bring
to  light,
20     While  the  gods  whom  they  call  on  beside  God,  create
nothing,  but  are  themselves  created  :

Dead  are  they,  lifeless  !  and  they  know  not

When  they  shall  be  raised  !

Your  God  is  the  one  God :  and  they  who  believe  not  in
a  future  life,  have  hearts  given  to  denial,  and  are
men  of  pride  : —

Beyond  a  doubt  God  knoweth  what  they  conceal  and
what  they  manifest : —

He  truly  loveth  not  the  men  of  pride.

For  when  it  is  said  to  them,  "  What  is  this  your
Lord  hath  sent  down  ?  "  they  say,  "  Fables  of
the  ancients," —

That  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  they  may  bear  their
own  entire  burdens,  and  of  the  burdens  of  those
whom  they,  in  their  ignorance,  misled.  Shall  it
not  be  a  grievous  burden  to  them  ?

They  who  were  before  them  did  plot  of  old.  Then
God  attacked  their  building  at  its  foundation —
then  the  roof  fell  on  them  from  above  ;  and,
whence  they  looked  not  for  it,  punishment  over-
took them  :  ^

Then  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  will  He  shame  them,

'  In  allusion  to  Gen,  xi.  1-10.

THE    KORAN.  207

and  will  say,  "  Where  are  the  gods  the  subject  of
your  disputes,  whom  you  associated  with  Me  ? "
They  to  whom  "  the  knowledge  "  hath  been  given
will  say.  Verily,  Jiis  day  shall  shame  and  evil  fall
on  the  infidels.
30  The  sinners  against  their  own  souls  whom  the  angels
cause  to  die  will  proffer  the  submission,  "  No  evil
have  we  done/^  Nay  !  God  knoweth  what  ye
have  wrought :

Enter  ye  therefore  the  gates  of  Hell  to  remain  therein
for  ever  :  and  horrid  the  abiding-place  of  the
haughty  ones  !

But  to  those  who  have  feared  God  it  shall  be  said,
"  What  is  this  that  your  Lord  hath  awarded  ?  "  ^
They  shall  say,  "  That  which  is  best/'  To  those
who  do  good,  a  good  reward  in  this  present
world ;  but  better  the  mansion  of  the  next,  and
right  pleasant  the  abode  of  the  God-fearing  !

Gardens  of  Eden  into  wh^'ch  they  shall  enter;  rivers
shall  flow  beneath  their  shades ;  all  they  Avish  for
shall  they  find  therein  !  -  Thus  God  rewardeth
those  who  fear  Him;

To  whom,  as  righteous  persons/  the  angels  shall  say,
when  they  receive  their  souls,"*  "  Peace  be  on
you  !  Enter  Paradise  as  the  meed  of  your
labours."

What  can  the  infidels  expect  but  that  the  angels  of
death  come  upon  them,  or  that  a  sentence  of  thy
Lord  come  to  pass  ?  Thus  acted  they  who  flourished
before  them.  God  was  not  unjust  to  them,  but  to
their  ownselves  were  they  unjust ;

And  the  ill  which  they  had  done  recoiled  upon  them,
and  that  which  they  had  scoffed  at  encompassed
them  round  about.

They  who  had  joined  other  gods  with  God  say,  "  Had
He  pleased,  neither  we  nor  our  fathers  had  wor-
shipped aught  but  Him ;  nor  had  we,  apart  from
Him,5  declared  anything  unlawful. '^  Thus  acted
they  who  were  before  them.  Yet  is  the  duty  of
the  apostles  other  than  public  preaching  ?

'  Lit.  sent  doion.  '  Lit.  for  them  therein  what  they  wish.

'  Or,  favourable,  kind,  as  epithet  of  the  Angels.
■*  Lit.  tchen  they  cause  them  to  die.
*  i.e.  without  his  permission.

208  THE    KORAN.

And  to  every  people  have  "We  sent  an  apostle,  saying  :
— "  Worship  God  and  turn  away  from  Taghoot.^
Some  of  them  there  were  whom  God  guided,  and
there  were  others  decreed  to  err.-  But  go  through
the  land  and  see  what  hath  been  the  end  of  those
who  treated  my  apostles  as  liars  !

If  thou  art  anxious  for  their  guidance,  Jawiv  that  God
will  not  guide  him  whom  He  would  lead  astray,
neither  shall  they  have  any  helpers.
40  And  they  swear  by  God  with 'their  most  sacred  oath
that  '^  God  will  never  raise  him  who  once  is
dead."  Nay,  but  on  Him  is  a  promise  binding,
though  most  men  know  it  not, —

That  He  may  clear  up  to  them  the  subject  of  their
disputes,  and  that  the  infidels  may  know  that
they  are  liars.

Our  word  to  a  thing  when  we  will  it,  is  but  to  say,
"  Be,"  and  it  is.^

And  as  to  those  who  when  oppressed  have  fled  their
country  for  the  sake  of  God,  We  will  surely
provide  them  a  goodly  abode  in  this  world,  but
greater  the  reward  of  the  next  life,  did  they  but
know  it.

They  who  bear  ills  with  patience  and  put  their  trust  in
the  Lord !

None  have  We  sent  before  thee  but  men  inspired — ask
then  of  those  who  have  Bools  of  Monition,"*  if  ye
know  it  not —

With  proofs  of  their  mission  and  Scriptures  :  and  to
thee  have  We  sent  down  a  Book  of  Monition  that
thou  mayest  make  clear  to  mankind  what  hath
been  sent  down  to  them,  and  that  they  may
ponder  it.

Wliat !  Are  they  then  who  have  plotted  mischiefs
sure  that  God  will  not  cause  the  earth  to  cleave
under  them  ?  or  that  a  chastisement  will  not  come
upon  them  whence  they  looked  not  for  it  ?

Or  that  He  will  not  visit  upon  them  in  their  employ-
ments, and  they  shall  not  be  able  to  resist
Him?  5

'  The  idols  worshipped  by  the  Meccans.

'  Or,  worthy  of  error.  '  Ps.  xxxv.  9.

*  Lit.  the  family  of  the,  admonition^  i.  e.  Jews  and  Christians  versed  in
the  Pentateuch  and  Gospel.

*  Or,  iind  Him  weak.

THE    KORAN.  209

Or  that   He    will    not    visit    them    with  some  slowly-
wasting  scourge  ?     But  verily  your  Lord  is  Good,

Gracious.
50     Have    they    not    seen    how    everything    which    God

hath  created  turncth    its  shadow   right  and  left,

prostrating  itself  before  God  in  abasement  ?  *
And  all  in  the  Heavens,  and   all  on  the  Earth,  each

thing  that  moveth,  and  the  very  angels,  prostrate

themselves  in  adoration  before  God,  and  are  free

from  pride ;
They  fear  their  Lord  who  is  above  them,  and  do  what

they  are  bidden :
For  God  hath  said,  *'  Take  not  to  yourselves  two  gods,

— He  is  only  one  God :  Me,  therefore  !  yea.  Me

revere  ! ""
And  all  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth  is  His  !  and

His  due  unceasing  service  !     Will  ye  then  fear

any  other  than  God  ?
And  ye  have  no  blessing  but  it  is  from  God :  then,

when  trouble  befalleth  you,  to  Him  ye  turn  for

help  :
Then  when  He  relieveth  you  of  the  trouble,  lo  !  some

of  you  join  associates  with  your  Lord  : —
So  as  to  be  thankless  for  our  gifts  !     Enjoy  yourselves

then  :  but  in  the  end  ye  shall  know  the  truth.
And  for  idols,  of  which  they  know  nothing,  they  set

apart  a  share  of  our  bounties  !     By  God  ye  shall

surely  be  called  to  account  for  your  devices  !
And  they  ascribe   daughters  unto  God  !     Glory  be  to

Him  !     But  they  desire  them  not  for  themselves  :^
60     For  when  the  birth  of  a  daughter  is  announced  to  any

one  of  them,  dark  shadows  settle  on  his  face,  and

he  is  sad :
He  hideth  himself  from  the  people  because  of  the  bad

news  :  shall  he  keep  it  with  disgrace  or  bury  it  in

the  dust  ?  ^     Are  not  their  judgments  wrong  ?
To  whatever  is  evil   may  they  be  likened  who  believe

'  Or,  even  though  they  be  of  no  account,  or  small.

'  The  idolatrous  Arabians  regarded  Angels  as  females  and  daughters  of
God.  But  their  own  preference  was  always  for  male  offspring.  Thus
Rabbinism  teaches  that  to  be  a  woman  is  a  great  degradation.  The  mo-
dern Jew  says  in  his  Daily  Prayers,  fol.  5,  6,  "  Blessed  art  thou,  0  Lord
our  God  !  King  of  the  Universe  !  who  hath  not  made  me  a  woman."

^  See  Sura  Ixxxi.  8,  p.  30.  It  is  said  that  the  only  occasion  on  which
Othman  ever  shed  a  tear  was  when  his  little  daughter,  whom  he  was  bury-
ing alive,  wiped  the  dust  of  the  grave-earth  from  his  beard.

P

210  THE    KORAN.

not  in  a  future  life ;  ^  but  God  is  to  be  likened
to  whatever  is  loftiest :  for  He  is  the  Mighty,  the
Wise.

And  should  God  punish  men  for  their  perverse  doings.
He  would  not  leave  on  earth  a  moving  thing  !  but
to  an  appointed  term  doth  He  respite  them  ;  and
when  their  term  is  come,  they  shall  not  delay  or
advance  it  an  hour.

Yet  what  they  loathe  for  themselves  do  they  assign  to
God ;  and  their  tongues  trtter  the  lie,  that  theirs
shall  be  a  goodly  lot.  But  beyond  a  doubt  is  it
that  Hell-fire  awaiteth  them,  and  that  they  shall  be
hastened  into  it.

By  God  We  have  sent  Apostles  to  nations  before  thee,
but  Satan  prepared  their  works  for  them,  and  this
day  is  he  their  liege;  and  a  woeful  punishment
doth  await  them.

And  We  have  sent  down  the  Book  to  thee  only  that
thou  mightest  clear  up  to  them  the  subject  of  their
wranglings,  and  as  a  guidance  and  a  mercy  to
those  who  believe.

And  God  sendeth  down  water  from  Heaven,  and  by  it
giveth  life  to  the  Earth  after  it  hath  been  dead :
verily,  in  this  is  a  sign  to  those  who  hearken.

And  lo,  ye  have  teaching  from  the  cattle.  We  give  you
drink  of  the  pure  milk,  between  dregs  and  blood,
which  is  in  their  bellies ;  the  pleasant  beverage  of
them  that  quaff  it.

And  among  fruits  ye  have  the  palm  and  the  vine,  from
which  ye  get  wine  and  healthful  nutriment :  in
this,  verily,  are  signs  for  those  who  reflect.
70  And  thy  Lord  hath  taught  the  BEE  :— "  Provide  thee
houses  in  the  mountains,  and  in  the  trees,  and  in
the  hives  which  men  build  tlcee  :

Feed  moreover  on  every  kind  of  fruit,  and  walk  the
easy-  paths  of  thy  Lord.''  From  its  belly  cometh
forth  a  fluid  of  varying  hues,^  which  yieldeth  me-
dicine to  man.  Verily  in  this  is  a  sign  for  those
who  consider.

And  God  hath  created  you :   by  and  by  will  He  take

'  Lit.  an  evil  comparison  to  those,  &c. ;  hut  to  God  the  most  exalted  simili-
tude ;  i.e.  He  is  above  all  comparison.  ^  Lit.  the  comviodious.

'  The  Arabs  are  curious  in  and  fond  of  honey  :  Mecca  alone  affords
eight  or  nine  varieties— green,  white,  red,  and  browu. — Burton's  Pilgr.
ill  IIU.

TUB    KORAN.  211

you  to  Himself;  but  some  among  you  will  He
carry  on  to  abject  old  age,  when  all  tliat  once  was
known  is  known  no  longer.  Aye,  God  is  Knowing,
Powerful.

And  God  liatli  favoured  some  of  you  more  than  others
in  the  supplies  of  life;  yet  they  who  have  been
made  superior  to  otJtcrs  give  not  back  their  wealth
to  the  slaves  whom  their  right  hands  possess,  so
that  they  may  share  alike.  Will  they  deny  then
that  these  boons  are  from  God  ?

God,  too,  hath  given  you  wives  of  your  own  race,  and
from  your  wives  hath  He  given  you  sons  and  grand-
sons, and  with  good  things  hath  He  supplied  you.
What,  will  they  then  believe  in  vain  idols  ?  And
for  God's  boons  they  are  ungrateful !

And  they  worship  beside  God  those  who  neither  out  of
the  Heavens  or  the  Earth  can  provide  them  aught^
and  have  no  power  in  themselves  !

Propound  not  comparisons,  therefore,  for  God.^  Verily,
God  hath  knowledge,  but  ye  have  no  knowledge,

God  propounds  a  comparison  between  a  slave-  the
property  of  his  lord,  who  hath  no  power  over
anything,  and  a  free  man  whom  We  have  ourselves
supplied  with  goodly  supplies,  and  who  giveth
alms  therefrom  both  in  secret  and  openly.  Shall
they  be  held  equal  ?  No  :  praise  be  to  God  !  But
most  men  know  it  not.

God  also  propounds  a  comparison  between  two  men,
one  of  whom  is  dumb  from  Ids  birth,  and  hath
no  power  over  anything,  and  is  a  burden  to  his
lord  :  direct  him  where  he  will,  he  cometh  not  back
with  success.  Shall  he  and  the  man  who  en-
joineth  what  is  just,  and  keepeth  in  the  straight
path,  be  held  equal  ?

God's  too  are  the  secrets  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the
Earth  !  and  the  business  of  the  last  hour  will  be
but  as  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  or  even  quicker.
Yes  !  for  all  things  is  God  Potent.
80  And  God  hath  brought  you  out  of  your  mothers'  wombs
devoid  of  all  knowledge  ;  but  hath  given  you  hear-
ing, and  sight,  and  heart :  haply  ye  will  render
thanks.

Do   they  not  behold  the  birds  subjected  to  Him  in

'  Ex.  XX.  4.

^  The  slave,  and  the  dumb  in  verse  following,  are  the  idols,

p  2

212  THE    KORAN.

Heaven's  vault  ?  None  holdetli  tliem  in  hand  *
but  God  !  Verily  in  this  are  signs  for  those  who
believe.

And  God  hath  given  you  tents  to  dwell  in  :  and  He
hath  given  you  the  skins  of  beasts  for  tents,  that
ye  may  find  them  light  when  ye  shift  your  quar-
ters, or  when  ye  halt ;  and  from  their  wool  and
soft  fur  and  hair,  hath  He  s^ijpplied  you  ivlth  fur-
niture and  goods  for  temporary  use.

And  from  the  things  which  He  hath  created,  hath  God
provided  shade  for  you,  and  hath  given  you  the
mountains  for  places  of  shelter,  and  hath  given
you  garments  to  defend  yourselves  from  heat,  and
coats  of  mail  to  defend  you  in  your  wars.  Thus
doth  He  perfect  his  goodness  towards  you  :  haply
ye  will  resign  yourselves  to  Him.

Then  if  they  turn  their  backs,  still  thy  office  is  only
plain-.s^'o/rew  preaching.

They  own  the  goodness  of  God — afterwards  disown  it
— and  most  of  them  are  infidels.

But  one  day  We  will  raise  up  a  witness  out  of  every
nation :  then  shall  the  infidels  have  no  permission
to  tnalce  excuses,  and  they  shall  find  no  favour.

And  when  they  who  have  acted  wickedly  behold  their
torment,  it  shall  not  be  made  light  to  them,  nor
shall  they  be  regarded  ?>//  God.

And  when  they  who  had  joined  associates  with  God
see  those  their  associate-gods,  .they  shall  say,  "  O
our  Lord  !  these  are  our  associate-gods  Avhom  we
called  upon  beside  Thee."  And  they  shall  aver  ^  to
them,  "  Verily,  ye  are  liars.''

And  on  that  day  shall  they  aver  submission  to  God ;
and  the  deities  of  their  own  invention  shall  leave
them  in  the  lurch.
90  As  for  those  who  were  infidels  and  turned  others  aside
from  the  way  of  God,  We  will  add  to  them  a  punish-
ment in  addition  to  the  punishment  for  their  evil
doings.

And  one  day  We  will  summon  up  in  every  people  a
witness  against  them  from  among  themselves ;  and
We  will  bring  thee  as  a  witness  against  these  Mec-
cans  :  for  to  thee  have  We  sent  down  the  Book
which    cleareth    up    everything,  a   guidance,  and

'  Sale,  xupporteth  ;  Mar.  rdincbit  cos  (ne  volent).
^  Lit.  throw  out,  rUter,  the  declaration.

THE    KOKAN.  213

mercy,  and  glad  tidings  to  those  who  resign  them-
selves to  God  (to  Muslims).

Verily,  God  enjoineth  justice  and  the  doing  of  good,
and  bestowment  of  gifts  to  kindred ;  and  He  for-
biddeth  wickedness  and  wrong  and  oppression.
He  warneth  you  that  haply  ye  may  be  mindful.

And  be  faithful  in  the  covenant  of  God  when  ye  cove-
nant, and  break  not  your  oaths  after  ye  have
pledged  them  :  for  now  have  ye  made  God  to  stand
surety  for  you.  Verily,  God  taketh  knowledge  of
what  ye  do.

And,  because  you  are  a  more  numerous  people  than  other
people,^  be  not  like  her  who  unravelloth  into  strands
the  thread  which  she  had  strongly  spun,  by  taking
your  oaths  with  mutual  perfidy.  God  truly  is
making  trial  of  you  in  this  :  and  in  the  day  of
Eesurrection  He  will  assui-edly  clear  up  to  you  that
concerning  which  ye  are  now  at  variance.

And  had  God  pleased,  Re  had  surely  made  you  one
people  :  but  He  causeth  whom  He  will  to  err,  and
whom  He  will  He  guideth  :  and  ye  shall  assuredly
be  called  to  account  for  your  doings.

Therefore  take  not  vour  oaths  with  mutual  fraud,  lest
the  foot  slip  after  it  hath  been  firmly  fixed,  and  ye
taste  of  evil  because  ye  have  turned  others  aside
from  the  way  of  God,  and  great  be  your  punish-
ment.

And  barter  not  the  covenant  of  God  for  a  mean  price ;
for  with  God  is  that  which  is  better  for  you,  if  ye
do  but  understand.

AJl  that  is  with  you  passeth  away,  but  that  which  is
with  God  abideth.  With  a  reward  meet  for  their
best  deeds  will  We  surely  recompense  those  who
have  patiently  endured.

Whoso  doeth  that  which  is  right,  whether  male  or
female,  if  a  believer,  him  will  We  therefore  quicken
to  a  happy  life,  and  assuredly  recompense  them
with  a  reward  meet  for  their  best  deeds.
^100  When  thou  readest  the  Koran,  have  recourse  to  God
for  help  against  Satan  the  stoned,^

For  no  power  hath  he  over  those  who  believe,  and  put
their  trust  in  their  Lord,

'  Or,  partji.     The  Arabs,  who  regarded  treaties  as  binduig  only  when
they  were  weaker  in  numbers,  are  here  rebuked.
'  See  Sura  [xcviL]  iii.  34,  and  n.  4,  p.  106.

214  THE    KORAN.

But  only  hath  lie  power  over  those  who  turn  away  from
God,  and  join  other  deities  with  Ilira.

And  w^hen-we  change  one  (sign)  verse  for  another,  and
God  knoweth  best  what  He  revealeth,  they  say,
"  Thou  art  only  a  fabricator/^  Nay  !  but  most  of
them  have  no  knowledge.

Say  :  The  Holy  Spirit  ^  hath  bi'ought  it  down  with
truth  from  thy  Lord,  that  He  may  stablish  those
who  have  believed,  and  a:s  a  guidance  and  glad
tidings  to  the  Muslims.

We  verily  also  know  that  they  say,  "  Surely  a  person
teacheth  him.^^  But  the  tongue  of  him  at  whom
they  hint^  is  foreign,  while  this  Koran  is  in  the
plain  Arabic.

As  for  those  who  believe  not  in  the  signs  of  God,  God
will  not  guide  them,  and  a  sore  torment  doth  await
them.

Surely  they  invent  a  lie  who  believe  not  in  the  signs  of
God — and  those — they  are  the  liars.

Whoso  after  he  hath  believed  in  God  denieth  Him,  if
he  were  forced  to  it  and  if  his  heart  remain  stead-
fast in  the  faith,  aliaU  he  guiltless:'^  but  whoso
openeth  his  breast  to  infidelity — on  them  in  that
case  shall  be  wrath  from  God,  and  a  severe  punish-
ment awaiteth  them.

This,  because  they  have  loved  this  present  life  beyond
the  next,  and  because  God  guideth  not  the  unbe-
lievers !
110  These  are  they  whose  hearts  and  ears  and  eyes  God
hath  sealed  up:  these  are  the  careless  ones  :  in  the
next  world  shall  they  be  the  losers  beyond  a  doubt.

To  those  also  who  after  their  trials  fled  their  country,'*

'  Gabriel.  Compare  the  expressions  Sur.  Ixxxi.  21,  p.  30  ;  liii.  5,  p.  55  ;
xxvi.  1<J3,  p.  102.

'  Or,  tvickedltj  incline.  This  passage  has  been  supposed  to  refer  to  Sal-
man the  Persian.  He  did  not,  however,  embrace  Islam  till  a  much  later
period,  at  Medina.— Nold.  p.  110.  Mr.  Muir  thinks  that  it  may  refer  to
Suheib,  son  of  Sinan,  "the  first  fruits  of  Greece,"  as  Muhammad  styled
him,  who,  while  yet  a  boy,  had  been  carried  off  by  some  Greeks  as  a  slave,
from  Mesopotamia  to  Syria,  bought  by  a  party  of  the  Beni  Kulb,  and  sold
to  Abdallah  ibn  Jodda'an  of  Mecca.  He  became  rich,  and  embraced
Islam.  Dr.  Sprenger  thinks  the  person  alluded  to  may  have  been  Addas,
a  monk  of  Mincveh,  who  had  settled  at  Mecca  (Life  of  M.  p.  79).

^  This  is  to  be  understood  of  the  persecutions  endured  by  the  more
humble  and  needy  Muslims  from  their  townspeople  of  Mecca.

*  From  Mecca  to  Medina,  i.  e.  the  Mohadjers,  to  whom  also  verse  43
refers.     Both  passages,  therefore,  are  of  a  later  date  than  the  rest  of  this

THE    KORAN.  215

then  fought  and  endured  with  patience,  verily,  thy
Lord  will  afterwards  be  forgiving,  gracious.

On  a  certain  day  s'lall  every  soul  come  to  plead  for
itself,  and  every  soul  shall  be  repaid  according  to
its  deeds  ;  and  they  shall  not  be  wronged.

God  proposeth  the  instance  of  a  city/  secure  and  at
ease,  to  which  its  supplies  came  in  plenty  from
every  side.  But  she  was  thankless  for  the  boons
of  God ;  God  therefore  made  her  taste  the  woe  ^
of  famine  and  of  fear,  for  what  they  had  done.

Moreover,  an  apostle  of  their  own  people  came  to  them,
and  they  treated  him  as  an  impostor.  So  chas-
tisement overtook  them  because  they  were  evil-
doers.

Of  what  God  hath  supplied  you  eat  the  lawful  and
good,  and  be  grateful  for  the  favours  of  God.  if  ye
are  his  worshippers.

He  hath  forbidden  to  you  that  only  which  dieth  of
itself,  and  blood,  ana  swine's  flesh,  and  that  over
which  invocation  hath  been  made  to  any  other
than  God :  but  if  any  be  forced,  and  neither  lust
for  it  nor  wilfully  transgress,  then  verily  God  is
forgiving,  gracious.^

And  say  not  with  a  wilful  lie  upon  your  tongues,  "  This
is  lawful  and  this  is  forbidden ;''  so  as  to  invent
a  lie  concerning  God :  verily  they  who  invent  a  lie
concerning  God  shall  not  prosper  :

Brief  their  enjoyment,  but  sore  their  punishment !

Moreover,  to  the  Jews  *  We  have  forbidden  that  of
which  We  before  told  thee  ;  and  We  injured  them
not,  but  they  injured  themselves.
120  Then  indeed  to  those  who  have  done  evil  in  ignorance,
then  afterwards  have  repented  and  amended,
verily  thy  Lord  will,  after  this,  be  gracious,  mer-
ciful.

Verily,  Abraham  was  a  leader  in  religion  :  *  obedient

Sura.  Thus  Noldeke.  Sprengcr,  however  (Life,  p.  159),  explains  this
passage  of  the  seven  slaves  purchased  and  manumitted  by  Abu  Bekr.
They  had  been  tortured  for  professing  Islam,  shortly  after  Muhammad
assumed  the  Prophetic  office.

'  Mecca.  ^  Lit.  the  garment.

'  Comp.  Sura  [Ixxxix.J  vi.  119.

■*  Comp.  Sura  [Ixxxix.J  vi.  1 47.  This  verse  as  well  as  the  verse  follow-
ing, and  verse  12.5,  were  probably  added  at  Medina.

*  J  ?i<is<«s,  Maracci.  Or  the  text  maybe  literally  rendered  ^6raA,am
was  a  'people,  i.e.  even  when  he  had  no  followers  like  thee,  0  Muhammad.

216  THE    KORAN.

to  God,  sound  in  faith  :  ^  he  was  not  of  those  who
join  gods  with  God.

Grateful  was  he  for  His  favours  :  God  chose  him  and
g-uided  him  into  the  straight  way ;

And  We  bestowed  on  him  good  things  in  this  world  :
and  in  the  world  to  come  he  shall  surely  be  among
the  just.

Then  We  revealed  to  thee,  "  follow  the  religion  of  Abra-
ham, the  sound  in  faith,-  for  he  was  not  of  those
who  join  gods  with  God.''^

The  Sabbath  was  only  ordained  for  those  who  differed
about  it :  ^  and  of  a  truth  thy  Lord  will  decide  be-
tween them  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  as  to  the
subject  of  their  disputes.

Summon  thou  to  the  way  of  thy  Lord  with  wisdom  and
with  kindly  warning :  dispute  with  them  in  the
kindest  manner  :  thy  Lord  best  knoweth  those
who  stray  from  his  way,  and  He  best  knoweth
those  who  have  yielded  to  his  guidance.

If  ye  make  reprisals,*  then  make  them  to  the  same
extent  that  ye  were  injured  :  but  if  ye  can  endure
patiently,  best  will  it  surely  be  for  the  patiently
enduring :

Endure  then  with  patience.  But  thy  patient  endurance
must  he  sought  in  none  but  God.  And  be  not
grieved  about  the  infidels,  and  be  not  troubled  at
their  devices ;  verily  God  is  with  those  who  fear
Him  and  who  do  good  deeds,

'  Ar.  a  Hanyf.  Accordinrr  to  a  tradition  in  Waqiiidi,  fol.  255,  Zaid
vwho  died  only  five  years  before  Muhammad  received  his  first  inspiration,
and  undoubtedly  prepared  the  way  for  many  of  his  subsequent  announce-
ments) adopted  this  term  at  the  instance  of  a  Christian  and  a  Jew,  who
exhorted  him  to  become  a  Jlanyf.     Zaid  liaviiig  at  this  time  renounced

"  0  God,  I  bear  witness  that  I  follow  the  relij^ion  of  Abraham."    The  root,
whence  Hanyf  is  derived,  means  generally  to  turn  from  good  to  bad,  or
vice  versa,  and  is  equivalent  to  the  verbs  convert  and  pervert.
"  Or,  as  a  Ifanyf.  '  i.e.  only  for  the  Jews.

'All  Muhammadan  commentators  explain  this  verse  as  a  prohibition  to
avenge  the  death  of  Hamza  on  the  Meccans  with  too  great  severity.

THE    KORAN.  217

[LXXIV.]

SUEA  XXX.-THE  GREEKS.
Mecca. — 60  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elip.  Lam.  Mim.i    THE  GREEKS  have  been  defeated^
In  a  land  hard  by  :^     But  after  their  defeat  they  shall

defeat  their  foes,
In  a  few  years. ^     First  and  last  is  the  affair  with  God.

And  on  that  day  shall  the  faithful  rejoice
In  the  aid  of  their   God  :    He  aideth  whom  He  will ;

and  He  is  the  Mighty,  the  Merciful.
It  is  the  promise  of  God  :     To  his  promise  God  will  not

be  untrue  :  but  most  men  know  it  not ; —
They  know  the  outward  shows  of  this  life  present,  but

of  the  next  Hfe  are  they  careless.
Have  they  not  considered  within  themselves  that  God

hath  not  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,  and

all  that  is  between  them  but  for  a  serious  end,  and

for  a  fixed  term  ?     But  truly  most  men  disbelieve

a  meeting  with  their  Lord.
Have  they  never  journeyed  through  the  land,  and  seen

what  hath  been  the  end  of  those  who  were  before

them  ?  Mightier  were  they  than  these^  in  strength  ;

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  1,  p.  16.

^  By  the  Persians  ;  probably  in  Palestine  in  the  6th  year  before  the
Hejira,  under  Khosrou  Parviz  (ann.  615.  See  Gibbon's  Decline  and  Fall,
cb.  xlvi.).  The  sympathies  of  Muhammad  would  naturally  be  enlisted  on
the  side  of  the  Christians  rather  than  on  that  of  the  idolatrous  fire- wor-
shippers, with  whom  Islam  had  nothing  in  common.

^  Lit.  -171  the  nearest  part  of  the  Earth.

*  This  alludes  to  the  defeat  of  the  Persians  by  Heraclius,  ann.  625.  The
Muhammadans  appeal  to  this  passage  as  a  clear  proof  of  the  inspiration
of  their  prophet.  But  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  vowel  points
of  the  consonants  of  the  Arabic  word  for  defeated  in  verse  1,  not  being
originally  written,  and  depending  entirely  on  the  speaker  or  reader,  would
make  the  prophecy  true  in  either  event,  according  as  the  verb  received  an
active  or  passive  sense  in  pronunciation.  The  whole  passage  was  probably
constructed  with  the  view  of  its  proving  true  in  any  event.

*  Meccans.

218  THE,  KORAN.

and  tlicy  broke  up  the  land,  and  cultivated  it  more
than  these  cultivated  it ;  and  their  apostles  came  to
them  with  proofs  of  their  mission  :  and  it  was  not
God  who  would  wrong  them,  but  they  wronged
themselves  :

Then  evil  was  the  end  of  the  evil-doers,  because  they
had  treated  the  signs  of  God  as  lies,  and  laughed
them  to  scorn.
10     God  bringeth   forth  the  creation — then  causeth  it  to
return  again — then  to  Him  shall  ye  come  back.^

And  on  the  day  when  the  Hour  shall  arrive,  the  guilty
shall  be  stinick  dumb  for  despair,

And  they  shall  have  no  intercessors  from  among  the
gods  whom  they  have  joined  with  God,  and  they
shall  deny  the  gods  they  joined  with  Him.

And  on  that  day  when  '  the  Hour^  shall  arrive,  shall  men
be  separated  one  from  another ;

And  as  for  those  who  have  believed  and  done  the  things
that  are  right,  they  shall  be  made  joyful  in  a
flowery  mead  ;

But  as  for  those  who  have  not  believed,  but  treated  our
signs  and  the  meeting  of  the  next  life  as  lies,  these
shall  be  given  over  to  the  torment.

Glorify  God  therefore  when  ye  reach  the  evening,  and
when  ye  rise  at  morn  :

And  to  Him  be  praise  in  the  Heavens  and  on  the
Earth ;  and  at  twilight,  and  when  ye  come  to  noon-
tide.

He  bringeth  forth  the  living  out  of  the  dead,  and  He
bringeth  forth  the  dead  out  of  the  living  :  and  He
quickeneth  the  earth  after  its  death.  Thus  is  it
that  ye  too  shall  be  brought  forth .^

And  one  of  his  signs  it  is  that  He  hath  created  you  out
of  dust ;  then  lo  1  ye  become  men  who  spread  them-
selves far  and  wide  :
20  And  one  of  his  signs  it  is,  that  He  hath  created  wives
for  you  of  your  own  species,^  that  ye  may  dwell
with  them,  and  hath  put  love  and  tenderness  be-
tween you.  Herein  truly  are  signs  for  those  who
reflect.

'  Comp.  Psalm  xc.  30,  in  the  Arabic  version.

'  Tho  TalinudiHts  apply  the  description  of  God  as  the  sender  of  the  rain
to  the  divine  command  which  shall  cause  the  dead  to  arise. — Taanith  (init.).

'  Lit.  from  yourselves,  i.e.  either  from  the  side  of  Adam  or  of  human,
and  no  other  kind  of  being. — Beidh.

THE    KORAN.  219

And  among  his  signs  are  the  creation  of  the  Heavens
and  of  the  Earth,  and  the  variety  of  your  tongues
and  of  your  colovirs.  Herein  truly  are  signs  for  all
creatures.

And  of  his  signs  are  your  sleep  by  night  and  day,  and
your  going  in  quest  of  his  bounties.  Herein  truly
are  signs  for  those  who  hearken.

And  of  his  signs  are,  that  He  sheweth  you  the  light-
ning, a  source  of  awe  and  hope;^  and  that  He
sendeth  down  rain  from  the  heaven  and  giveth
life  by  it  to  the  earth  after  its  death.  Herein  truly
are  signs  to  those  who  understand.

And  of  his  signs  also  one  is  that  the  Heaven  and  the
Earth  stand  firm  at  his  bidding :  hereafter,  when
by  a  summons  He  shall  summon  you  out  of  the
earth, — lo  !  forth  shall  ye  come.

And  his,  whatsoever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  on  the
Earth  :  all  are  obedient  to  Him.

And  He  it  is  who  bringeth  forth  his  creation,  then
causeth  it  to  return  again,  and  to  Him  is  this  most
easy  :  and  to  whatever  is  loftiest  in  heaven  and
earth  is  He  to  be  likened;-  and  He  is  the  Mighty,
the  Wise.

He  setteth  forth  to  you  an  instance  drawn  from  your-
selves. Have  ye  among  the  slaves  whom  your
right  hands  have  won,  any  partner  in  what  We
have  bestowed  on  you,  so  that  ye  share  therein
alike  ?  Fear  ye  them  as  ye  fear  each  other  ? —
Thus  make  We  the  signs  clear  to  men  of  under-
standing—

Nay  rather,  the  wicked,  devoid  of  knowledge,  follow
their  own  desires  :^  and  those  whom  God  mis-
leadeth,  who  shall  guide  ?  and  they  shall  have  no
helper.

Set  thou  thy  face  then,  as  a  true  convert,*  towards  the
Faith,  the  creation  of  God,^  for  which  He  hath
created  man,  (No  change  is  there  in  the  creation
of  God  :  this  is  the  right  Faith,  but  the  greater
part  of  mankind  know  it  not,)
30     Turning  with  repentance  to  Him  ;  and  fear  ye  Him,

'  i.e.  of  rain.      Thus  in  Ps.  cxxxv.  7  :  "He  sendeth  forth  liirhtnings
with  the  rain."  '  Lit.  His  is  the  most  exalted  likeness.

^  By  worshipping  idols  conjointly  with  God.
■*  Lit.  as  a  Hanyf.     See  note  on  the  preceding  Sura,  121,  p.  21.5.
*  It  may  also  mean  "  a  religious  frame  of  mind  inspired  by  God."

220  THE    KORAN.

and  observe  prayer,  and  be  not  of  those  who  unite

gods  with  God :
Of  those  who  have   split  up   their  reh'gion,  and  have

become  sects,  where  every  party  rejoices  in  what

is  their  own.^
When  some  evil  hath  touched  men,  they  turn  to  their

Lord  and  call  upon  Him  :  then  when  He  hath  made

them  taste  his  mercy,  lo  !  a  part  of  them  join  other

gods  with  their  Lord,
Ungrateful  for  our  gifts  to  them  !     Enjoy  yourselves

then — But  in  the  end  ye  shall  know  your  folly.
Have    We   sent    down    to    them    any  mandate  which

uttereth  a  word  in  favour  of  what  they  habitually

join  with  God  ?
Moreover,  when  We  have  caused  men  to  taste  mercy

they   rejoice  in  it ;  but   if,   for  that  which  their

hands  have  aforetime  wrought,  evil  befalleth  them,

lo  !   they  despair.
See  they  not  that  God  bestoweth  full  supphes  on  whom

He  pleaseth,  and  giveth  sparingly  to  whom  He

pleaseth  ?     Signs  truly  are  there  herein  to  those

who  believe.
To  him  then  who  is  of  kin  to  thee  give  his  due,  and  to

the  poor  and  to  the  wayfarer  :  this  is  best  for  those

who  seek  the  face  of  God ;  and  with  them  it  shall

be  well.
And  whatever  ye  put  out  at  usury  to  increase  it  with

the  substance  of  others  shall  have  no  increase  from

God  :  -  but  whatever  ye  give  in  alms,  as  seeking

the  face  of  God — these  are  they  to  whom  it  shall

be  doubled.
It  is  God  who  created  you — then  fed  you — then  will

cause  you  to  die — then  will  make  you  alive.     Is

there  any  of  your  companion -gods   who   can  do

aught  of  these  things  for  you  ?     Praise  be  to  Him  !

and  far  be  He  exalted  above  the  gods  they  join

with  Him.
40  ^  Violence  hatli  appeared  by  land  and  by  sea  on  account

of  what  men^s  hands  have  wrought,  that  it  might

'  Peculiar  to  and  distinctive  of  themselves.  Muhammad  had  a  just
appreciation  of  that  narrowness  of  mind  which  is  the  characteristic  of
sectarians  in  every  age,  who  seize  upon  some  one  point  of  truth,  through
inability  to  grasp  the  whole  in  its  due  proportions  and  bearing,  and  glory
in  it,  as  if  the  fragment  were  the  whole.

'  Comp.  Ps,  XV.  5.

THE    KORAN.  221

make  them  taste  somewhat  of  the  fruit  of  their
doings :  haply  they  will  return  to  God.

Say  :  Journey  through  the  land,  and  see  what  hath
been  the  end  of  Jiose  who  were  before  you  !  The
greater  part  of  them  joined  other  gods  with  God.

Set  thy  face  then  towards  the  right  faith,  ere  the  day
come  which  none  can  hinder  God  from  bringing
on.^     On  that  day  shall  they  be  parted  in  twain —

Unbelievers  on  whom  shall  be  their  unbelief,  and  they
who  have  wrought  righteousness  :  verily  they
shall  spread  for  themselves  couches  of  repose ;

That  of  his  bounty  He  may  reward  those  who  have
believed  and  wrought  righteousness :  verily  the
unbelievers  He  loveth  not.
^  And  one  of  his  signs  is  that  He  sendeth  the  winds  with
glad  tidings  of  rain,  both  that  He  may  cause  you
to  taste  his  mercy,  and  that  ships  may  sail  at  his
command,  that  out  of  his  bounties  ye  may  seek
wealth  :  and  haply  ye  will  render  thanks.

Moreover,  We  have  sent  apostles  before  thee  to  their
peoples,  and  they  presented  themselves  to  them
with  clear  proofs  of  their  mission ;  and  while  it
behoved  Us  to  succour  the  faithful.  We  took  ven-
geance on  the  guilty.

It  is  God  who  sendeth  the  winds  and  uplifteth  the
clouds,  and,  as  He  pleaseth,  spreadeth  them  on
high,  and  breaketh  them  up  ;  and  thou  seest  the
rain  issuing  from  their  midst  ;  and  when  He
poureth  it  down  on  such  of  his  servants  as  He
pleaseth,  lo  !  they  are  filled  with  joy.

Even  they  who  before  it  was  sent  down  upon  them,  were
erst  in  mute  despair.

Look  then  at  the  traces  of  God's  mercy — how  after  its
death  He  quickeneth  the  earth  !  Lo  !  this  same  God
will  surely  quicken  the  dead,  for  to  all  things  his
might  is  equal.
50  Yet  should  We  send  a  blast,  and  they  see  their  harvests
turn  yellow,  they  would  surely  afterwards  continue
ungrateful.

Verily  then  thou  canst  not  make  the  dead  to  hear,
neither  canst  thou  make  the  deaf  to  hear  the  call,
when  they  withdraw  and  turn  their  backs  :

Neither  canst  thou  guide  the  blind  out  of  their  error  :

'  Lit.  there  is  no  averting  it  from  God.

222  THE    KORAN.

none  verily  shalt  thou  make  to  hear,  save  him  who
shall  believe  in  our  signs  :  for  they  are  resigned  to
our  will  (Muslims).

It  is  God  who  hath  created  you  in  weakness,  then  after
weakness  hath  given  you  strength :  then  after
strength,  weakness,  and  grey  hairs  :  He  createth
what  He  will :  and  He  is  the  Wise,  the  Powerful.

And  on  the  day  whereon  '  the  Hour '  shall  arrive,  the
wicked  will  swear

That  not  above  an  hour  have  -they  waited :  Even  so
used  they  to  utter  lies  on  earth  :

But  they  to  whom  knowledge  and  faith  have  been
given  "will  say,  "  Ye  have  waited  now,  in  accord-
ance with  the  book  of  God,  till  the  day  of  Resur-
rection :  for  this  is  the  day  of  the  Resurrection —
but  ye  knew  it  not."

And  on  that  day  their  excuse  shall  not  avail  the  wicked,
neither  shall  they  again  be  bidden  to  seek  accept-
ance ivith  God.

And  now  have  We  set  before  mankind,  in  this  Koran,
every  sort  of  parable  :  yet  if  thou  bring  them  but
a  single  verse,  the  unbelievers  will  surely  say,  *'  Of
a  truth  ye  are  only  followers  of  vain  things."

Thus  God  setteth  a  seal  upon  the  hearts  of  those  who
are  devoid  of  knowledge.
60     But  do  thou,  Muhamviacl,  bear  with  patience :  verily
the  promise  of  God  is  true,  and  let  not  those  who
have  no  firm  belief,  unsettle  thee.^

'  Lit.  induce  levity  in  thee.

THE    KORAN.

223

[LXXV.]

SURA   XL— HOUD.
Mecca. — 123  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Comjpassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elif.  Lam.  Ra.^  A  book  whose  verses  are  stablished  in
wisdom-  and  then  set  forth  with  clearness — from
the  Wise,  the  All-informed —

That  ye  worship  none  other  than  God — Verily  I  come
to  you  from  Him  a  wanner  and  announcer ;

And  that  ye  seek  pardon  of  your  Lord,  and  then  be
turned  unto  Him !  Goodly  enjoyments  doth  He
give  you  to  enjoy  until  a  destined  time,  and  his
favours  doth  He  bestow  on  every  one  who  deserveth
his  favours.^  But  if  ye  turn  away,  then  verily  I
fear  for  you  the  chastisement  of  a  great  day.

Unto  God  is  your  return,  and  over  all  things  is  He
Potent.

Do  they  not  verily  enfold  their  breasts,  that  they  may
hide  themselves  from  Him  ?

But  when  they  enshroud  themselves  in  their  garments,
doth  He  not  know  alike  what  they  conceal  and
what  they  shew  forth  ?  Truly  He  knoweth  the
inmost  breast.

And  there  is  no  moving  thing  on  earth  whose  nourish-
ment dependeth  not  on  God,  and  He  knoweth  its
haunts  and  final  resting-place  :  all  is  in  the  clear
Book.

And  He  it  is  who  hath  made  the  Heavens  and  the
Earth  in  six  days,  and  his  throne  was  ere  this

'  See  Sura  IxTiii.  p.  16.

'  Sale  renders,  guarded  against  corruption.

^  Or,  tcill  bestow  his  grace  on  every  gracious  one,  or  vAll  bestow  his  abun-
dance on  every  one  who  hath  abundance  {of  merit).  The  difficulty  of
rendering  this  passage  arises  from  the  word  fadhl,  which  means  merit  as
applied  to  man,  favour  as  applied  to  God.

^^24  THE    KORAN.

upon  the  waters/ that  He  might  make  proof  which
of  you-  would  excel  in  works.
10     And  truly  if  thou  say,  "Verily  after  death  ye  shall  be
raised  again/'  the  unbelievers  will  certainly  ex-
claim, "  Lo  !  this  is  nothing  but  clear  sorcery .''

And  if  We  defer  their  chastisement  to  some  definite
time,  they  will  assuredly  exclaim,  ''  What  keepeth
it  back  ?"  What !  will  it  not  come  upon  them  on
a  day  when  it  cannot  be  averted  from  them  ?
And  that  at  which  they  sciafifcd  shall  inclose  them
in  on  every  side.

And  assuredly  if  We  cause  man  to  taste  our  mercy
and  then  deprive  him  of  it,  verily  he  is  despairing,
ungrateful :

And  assuredly  if  after  trouble  hath  befallen  him  We
cause  him  to  taste  our  favour,  he  will  exclaim,
''^The  evils  are  passed  away  from  me.'*  Verily,
he  is  joyous,  boastful ; —

Except  those  who  endure  with  patience  and  do  the
things  that  are  right :  these  doth  pardon  await
and  a  great  reward.
^  Perhaps  then  thou  wouldest  suppress  a  part  of  what
hath  been  revealed  to  thee,  and  art  distressed  at
heart'  lest  they  should  say,  *'If  a  treasure  be  not
sent  down  to  him,  or  an  angel  come  with  him'*

"     But  thou  art  only  a  warner,  and  God

hath  all  things  in  his  charge.

If  they  shall  say,  "  TIte  Koran  is  his  own  device,"  say  :
Then  bring  ten  Suras  like  it'  of  yoitr  devising,  and

'  That  is,  before  the  Creation.  Precisely  the  same  statement  occurs  in
Raschi  on  Gen.  i.  2,  as  also  in  the  modern  catechism,  Tsenah  ur^enah
h'noth  Tsion,  authoritatively  put  forth  by  the  Polish  and  German  Tal-
y/Muh'sf  Kabbins.  "  At  the  first  creation  of  Heaven  and  Earth  ....  the
throne  of  glory  of  the  Blessed  God  stood  in  the  air  above  the  waters."
Comp.  Ps.  civ.  3.

*  Comp.  Tr.  Aboth,  v.  Mischna  1,  where  a  similar  reason  is  given  for
the  creation  of  the  Heaven  and  Earth  in  six  days,  &c.

^  Lit.  thy  breast  becomes  straitened.  *  Supply  we  will  not  believe.

*  Comp.  verse  37  and  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  21.  It  should  be  observed  that  the
challenge  in  these  piissages  is  not  to  produce  a  book  which  shall  equal  the
Koran  in  point  of  poetry  or  rhetoric,  but  in  the  importance  of  its  subject-
matter,  with  reference  to  the  Divine  Unity,  the  future  retribution,  &c.
Upon  these  topics  Muhammad  well  knew  that  he  had  preoccupied  the
ground.  And  we  may  infer  from  the  fragments  of  the  Revelations  of
Musailima  and  Sajah  (Hisam.  !)40 ;  Attabari  (ed.  Kosegarten),  i.  134,  136,
1 .52  ;  Tab.  Agani,  339),  which  are  mere  imitations  of  the  Koran,  that  he
felt  this  to  be  the  case.

THE    KORAN.  225

call  whom  ye  can  to  your  aid  beside  God,  if  ye  are
men  of  truth.

But  if  they  answer  you  not,  then  know  that  it  hath
been  sent  down  to  ijoii  in  the  wisdom  of  God  only,
and  that  there  is  no  God  but  He.  Are  ye  then
Muslims  ?

Those  who  choose  this  present  life  and  its  braveries,
We  will  recompense  for  their  works  therein  :  they
shall  have  nothing  less  therein  than  their  deserts —

These  are  they  for  whom  there  is  nothing  in  the  next
world  but  the  Fire  :  and  all  that  they  have  wrought
in  this  life  shall  come  to  nought,  and  vain  shall  be
all  their  doings.
20  WWi  such  can  he  be  compared  who  resteth  upon  clear
proofs  from  his  Lord,  and  to  whom  a  witness  from
Him  reciteth  the  Kordn,^  and  who  is  preceded  by
the  Book  of  Moses,  a  guide  and  mercy?  These
have  faith  in  it :  but  whoso  of  the  partisans  of
idolatrij  believeth  not  in  it,  is  therefore  menaced
with  the  Fire  !  Have  thou  no  doubts  then  about
that  Book  :  verily  it  is  the  truth  from  thy  Lord  :
But  most  men  believe  not.

And  who  is  guilty  of  a  greater  wickedness  than  he  who
inventeth  a  lie  concerning  God  ?  They  shall  be
set  before  their  Lord,  and  the  witnesses  shall  say,
"  These  are  they  who  lied  of  their  Lord.''  Shall
not  the  malison  of  God  be  on  these  wicked  ones.

Who  pervert  others  from  the  way  of  God,  and  seek  to
make  it  crooked,  and  believe  not  in  the  life  to
come  ?  God's  power  on  earth  these  persons  shall
not  weaken,  and  against  God  shall  they  have  no
protectors  !  Doubled  shall  be  their  punishment !
They  had  no  power  to  hearken,  and  they  did  not
see;

These  are  they  who  have  lost  their  souls,  and  the
deities  of  their  own  devising  vanish  from  them —

There  is  no  doubt  but  that  in  the  next  world  they  shall
be  the  greatest  losers.

Verily  they  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are
right,  and  humble  themselves  before  their  Loi*d,
shall  be  the  inmates  of  Paradise,  therein  to  abide
for  ever.

Or,  and  whom  a  icifnese  from  him  atfendeth, — Sale  ;  sequitur,  i.e.  Ga-
briel,— Mar.  But  it  is  better  to  understand  the  first  clause  of  believers
generally,  the  second  of  Muhammad.

Q

226  THE    KORAN.

ThesG  two  sorts  of  persons  resemble  the  blind  and  deaf,
and  the  seeing  and  hearing  :  are  these  similitudes
equal  ?     Will  ye  not  then  receive  monition  ?
^  And  We  sent  Noah  of  old  unto  his  people  : — "  Verily  I
come  to  you  a  plain  admonisher,

That  ye  worship  none  but  God.  Verily  I  fear  for  you
the  punishment  of  a  grievous  day.^^

Then  said  the  chiefs  of  his  people  who  believed  not,
"We  see  in  thee  but  a  man  like  ourselves;  and
we  see  not  who  have  folfowed  thee  except  our
meanest  ones  of  hasty  judgment/  nor  see  we  any
excellence  in  you  above  ourselves  :  nay,  we  deem
you  liars. '^
30  He  said,  "  O  my  people  !  how  think  ye  ?  If  I  possess
a  clear  revelation  from  my  Lord,  who  hath  be-
stowed on  me  mercy  from  Himself  to  which  ye  are
blind,"  do  we  force  it  on  you,  and  ye  averse  from
it?

And,  O  my  people  !  I  ask  yon  not  for  riches  in  return  :
my  reward  is  of  God  alone :  and  I  will  not  drive
away  those  who  believe  :  verily  they  shall  meet  their
Lord : — but  I  see  that  ye  are  an  ignorant  people.

And,  O  my  people  !  were  I  to  drive  them  away,  who
shall  help  me  against  God  ?  Will  ye  not  then  be
monished  ?

And  I  tell  you  not  that  with  me  are  the  treasures  of
God  :  nor  do  I  say,  *  I  know  the  things  unseen  ;'
nor  do  I  say,  '  I  am  an  angel ; '  nor  do  I  say  of
those  whom  you  eye  with  scorn,  '  No  good  thing
will  God  by  any  means  bestow  on  them  : ' — God
best  knoweth  what  is  in  their  minds — verily  then
should  I  be  one  of  those  who  act  wickedly."

They  said  :  "  0  Noah  !  already  hast  thou  disputed  with
us  and  multiplied  disputes  with  us  :  bring  then
upon  us  what  thou  hast  threatened,  if  thou  be  of
those  who  speak  truth .^^

He  said,  "  God  will  bring  it  on  you  at  his  sole  pleasure,
and  it  is  not  you  who  can  weaken  Him  ;

Nor^  if  God  desire  to  mislead  you,  shall  my  counsel
profit  you,  though  I  fain  would  counsel  you  aright.
He  is  your  Lord,  and  unto  Him  shall  ye  be  brought
back."

Do  they  say,  "This  Koran  is  of  his  own  devising?"

'  Lit.  of  first  thought.  '  Lit.  and  it  is  hidden  from  you.

THE    KORAN.  227

Say  :  On  me  then  be  my  own  guilt,  if  I  have  de-
vised it ;  but  1  am  clear  of  that  whereof  ye  are
guilty.

And  it  was  revealed  unto  Noah  that "  None  of  thy  people
will  by  any  means  believe,  save  they  who  have
believed  already;  therefore  be  not  thou  grieved  at
their  doings,

But  build  the  Ark  under  our  eye  and  after  our  revela-
tion :  and  plead  not  with  Me  for  the  evil-doers  :
verily  they  are  to  be  drowned.''^
40  So  he  built  the  Ark  ;  and  whenever  the  chiefs  of  his
people  passed  by  they  laughed  him  to  scorn  :^
Said  he,  "Though  ye  laugh  at  us,  afterwards  we
truly  shall  laugh  at  you,  even  as  ye  laugh  at  us :
so  that  in  the  end  ye  shall  know

On  whom  a  punishment  shall  come  that  shall  shame
him,  and  on  whom  shall  light  a  lasting  punish-
ment.^^

Thus  ivas  it  until  our  sentence  came  to  pass,  and  the
earth's  surface-  boiled  up.  We  said,  "  Carry  into
it  one  pair  of  every  kind,  and  thy  family,  except
him  on  whom  sentence  hath  before  been  passed,
and  those  who  have  believed.^'  But  there  be-
lieved not  with  him  except  a  few.

And  he  said,  "  Embark  ye  therein.  In  the  name  of
God  be  its  course  and  its  riding  at  anchor  !  Truly
my  Lord  is  Gracious,  Merciful."

And  the  Ark  moved  on  with  them  amid  waves  like
mountains:  and  Noah  called  to  his  son — for  he
was  apart — "  Embark  with  us,  0  my  child  !  and
be  not  with  the  unbelievers. '^

He  said,  "  I  will  betake  me  to  a  mountain  that  shall

'  "  They  laughed  and  jeered  at  hira  in  their  words."—  Midr.  Tanchuma.
"  The  passatje  Job  xii.  5  refers  to  the  righteous  Noah,  who  taught  them
and  spake  to  them  words  severe  as  flames  :  but  they  scorned  hini,  and
said,  '  Old  man  !  for  what  purpose  is  this  ark  ? ' " — Saiihedr.  108.  Comp.
Midr.  Rabbah  on  Gen.  30,  and  33  on  Ecc!.  ix.  14.  And  in  the  Sibylline
Oracles : —

"  Sic  ait :  ast  illi  vulgo  ridore  monentem,
Dicereque,  insanuni  demeutatumque  furore,"  &c.

■■'  Or,  oven ;  according  to  others,  reservoir  ;  or,  a  place  whence  waters  gush
forth.  Geiger  thinks  that  the  expression  the  oven  boiled  up  may  be  a
figurative  mode  of  expressing  the  Rabbinic  idea  that  "  the  generation  of
the  Deluge  were  punished  by  hot  water."— Rosch.  Haschanah,  xvi.  2;
Sanhedr.  108.  Comp.  Weil's  Legenden,  p.  44.  In  Ibn  Batoutah  (vol.  i.
p.  318)  the  Arabic  ianUr  is  used  for  the  orifice  of  the  well  Zem-Zem.

Q  2

228  THE    KORAN.

secure  me  from  the  water."  He  said,  '^  None
shall  be  secure  ^  this  day  from  the  decree  of
God,  save  him  on  whom  He  shall  have  mercy."
And  a  wave  passed  between  them,  and  he  was
among  the  drowned.

And  it  was  said,  "  0  Earth  !  swallow  up  thy  water  ;  "
and  "  cease  0  Heaven  !  "  And  the  water  abated,
and  the  decree  was  fulfilled,  and  tJie  Ark  rested  -
upon  Al-Djudi ;  ^  and  it  was  said,  "  Avaunt !  Tribe
of  the  wicked  !  "

And  Noah  called  on  his  Lord  and  said,  "  0  Lord,
verily  my  son  was  of  my  family  :  and  indeed
thy  promise  is  truth,  and  Thou  art  the  most
just  of  judges.'"

He  said,  ''  0  Noah  !  verily  he  belonged  not  to  thy
family ;  in  this  thou  actest  not  aright  :  *  Ask  Me
not  then  of  that  whereof  thou  knowest  nought  :

O

I  warn  thee  that  thou  become  not  of  the
ignorant."

He  said,  ''  To  Thee  verily,  0  my  Lord,  do  I  repair
lest  I  ask  that  of  Thee  wherein  I  have  no  know-
ledge :  for  unless  Thou  forgive  me  and  be  merciful
to  me  I  shall  be  of  the  lost."
60  It  was  said  to  him,  "  0  Noah  !  debark  with  peace  from
Us,  and  with  blessings  on  thee  and  on  peoples  to
he  horn  from  those  who  are  with  thee  ;  but  as  for
other  and  unhelieving  peoples.  We  will  give  them
their  good  things  in  this  loorld,  hut  hereafter  shall
a  grievous  punishment  light  on  them  from  Us.

This  is  one  of  the  secret  Histories  :  We  reveal  it  unto
thee  :  neither  thou  nor  thy  people  knew  it  ere
this  :  be  patient  then  :  verily  there  is  db  prosperous
issue  to  the  God-fearing."
^  And  unto  Ad  We  sent  their  Brother  HOUD.  He  said,
"  0  my  people,  worship  God.  Ye  have  no  God
beside  Him ;  lo,  ye  are  only  devisers  of  a  lie.

O  my  people  !  I  ask  of  you  no  recompense  for  this  ;
verily  my  recompense  is  with  Him  only  who  hath
made  me.     Will  ye  not  then  understand  ?

And  0  my  people  !    ask  pardon  of  your  Lord ;   then

'  Lit.  no  defender  {for  any  one).  '  Lit.  ivasfirm  and  square.

'  The  Monies  Gordyai,  perhaps.

*  According  to  another  reading :  He  hath  done  amiss.     The  origin  of
this  story  is  probably  Gen.  ix.  20-25.     Lit.  it  is  an  act  devoid  of  right.

THE    KOKAN.  229

turn  unto  Him  with  penitence  :  He  will  send  down
the  heavens  upon  you  with  copious  rains  :

And  with  strength  in  addition  to  your  strength  will
He  increase  you ;  but  turn  not  back  with  deeds
of  evil."

They  said,  ''  0  Houd,  thou  hast  not  brought  us  proofs
of  thy  mission  :  and  we  are  not  the  persons  to  aban-
don our  gods  at  thy  word,  and  we  believe  thee  not ;

We  can  only  say  that  some  of  our  gods  have  smitten
thee  with  evil."  Said  he,  "  Now  take  I  God  to
witness,  and  do  ye  also  witness,  that  I  am  innocent
of  that  which  ye  associate  (in  worship  with  God)

Beside  Himself.  Conspire  then  against  me  altogether,
and  delay  me  not ;

Lo,  I  trust  in  God,  my  Lord  and  yours.  No  moving
creature^  is  there  which  He  holdeth  not  by  its  fore-
lock. Right,  truly,  is  the  way  in  which  my  Lord
goeth.
60  So  if  ye  turn  back,  then  I  have  already  declared  to
you  that  wherewith  I  was  sent  to  you,  and  my
Lord  will  put  another  people  in  your  place,  nor
shall  ye  at  all  injure  Him ;  verily,  my  Lord  keepeth
watch  over  all  things."

And  when  our  doom  came  to  he  inflicted,  We  rescued
Houd  and  those  who  had  like  faith  with  him,  by
our  special  mercy ;  and  We  rescued  them  from
the  rigorous  chastisement.

And  these  men  of  Ad  gainsaid  the  signs  of  their
Lord,  and  rebelled  against  his  messengers,  and
followed  the  bidding  of  every  proud  contumacious
person  ;

Followed  therefore  were  they  in  this  world  by  a  curse ;
and  in  the  day  of  the  Resurrection  it  shall  be  said
to  them,  "  Did  not,  verily.  Ad  disbelieve  their
Lord  ?  "  Was  it  not  said.  Away  with  Ad,  the
people  of  Houd?
^  And  unto  Thamood  We  sent  their  Brother  Saleh  :  ^ —
"  0  my  people  !  "  said  he,  "  worship  God  ;  you
have  no  other  god  than  He.  He  hath  raised  you
up  out  of  the  earth,  and  hath  given  you  to  dwell

'  The  Arabic  word  is  used  properly  of  beasts  of  burden.

'  A  Prophet,  so  far  as  we  know,  ot  Muhammad's  own  invention,  unless
Muir's  conjectiure  be  admitted  that  he  was  a  Christian  or  Jewish  mission-
ary, whose  adventures  and  persecution  were  recast  into  this  form. — The
name  may  have  been  suggested  by  Methusa/e^,  upon  whose  piety  the
Midrasch  enlarges.

230  THE    KORAN,

therein.  Ask  pardon  of  Ilim  then,  and  turn
unto  Him  ;  truly  my  Lord  is  Nigh,  Ready  to
answer.^^

They  said,  "  0  Saleh  !  our  hopes  were  fixed  on  thee
till  now  :  ^  forbiddest  thou  us  to  worship  what  our
fathers  worshipped  ?  And  truly  we  have  dis-
quieting doubt  as  to  that  to  which  thou
callest  us,"

He  said,  "  0  my  people  !  what-  think  ye  ?'  If  I  rest
on  a  revelation  from  my  Lord,  and  if  He  hath
showed  his  mercy  on  me,  who  then  could  protect
me  from  God  if  I  rebel  against  Him  ?  so  that  ye
would  only  bring  on  me  inci'ease  of  ruin.

And  0  my  people  !  this  is  the  she- Camel  of  God,  and
a  sign  unto  you.  Let  her  go  at  large  therefore
and  feed  in  God's  earth,  and  do  her  no  harm,
lest  a  speedy  punishment  come  on  you."

But  yet  they  hamstrung  her  :  then  said  he,  "  Yet  three
days  enjoy  yourselves  in  your  dwellings  :  this
menace  will  not  prove  untrue."

And  when  our  sentence  came  to  pass.  We  rescued
Saleh  and  those  who  had  a  like  faith  with  him,  by
our  mercy,  from  ignominy  on  that  day.  Verily,
thy  Lord  is  the  Strong,  the  Mighty  !
70  And  a  violent  tempest  overtook  the  wicked,  and  they
were  found  prostrate  on  their  breasts  in  their
abodes.

As  though  they  had  never  dwelt  in  them.  Was  it  not
said,  Verily  Thamood  disbelieved  his  Lord  ?  Was
it  not  said,  Away  with  Thamood  ?
^  And  of  old  our  messengers  came  to  Abraham  with  glad
tidings.  "Peace,"  said  they.  He  said  "Peace,"
and  tarried  not,  but  brought  a  roasted  calf :

And  when  he  saw  that  their  hands  touched  it  not,^
he  misliked  them,  and  grew  fearful  of  them :
They  said,  "  Fear  not  ;  lo,  we  are  sent  to  the
people  of  Lot."

And  his  wife  was  standing  by  and  laughed ;  ^  and  We
announced  Isaac  to  her;  and  after  Isaac,  Jacob,

She  said,  "  Ah,  woe  is  me  !  shall  I  bear  a  son  when  I

'  i.e.  we  had  intended  to  make  thee  our  chief. — Beidh.

"^  Thus,  in  contradiction  to  Gen.  xviii.  8,  the  Rabbins  ;  comp.  Tr.  Baba
Mezia,  fol.  86.  "  They  made  as  though  they  ate."

^  Or,  menstrua  passa  est,  in  token  of  the  possibility  of  her  bearing  a
child.

THE    KORAN.  231

am   old,   and  when  this  my  husband  is  an  aged
man  ?     This  truly  would  be  a  marvellous  thing."

They  said,  "Marvellest  thou  at  the  command  of  God?
God^s  mercy  and  blessing  be  upon  you,  0  people
of  this  house ;  verily  He  is  the  Praiseworthy,  the
Glorious  !  "

And  when  fear  passed  away  from  Abraham,  and  these
glad  tidings  had  come  home  to  him,  he  pleaded
with  Us  for  the  people  of  Lot.^  Verily  Abraham
was  kind,  pitiful,  relenting.

"  0  Abraham  !  desist  from  this ;  verily  the  command
of  thy  Lord  hath  already  gone  forth ;  and  as  for
them,  a  punishment  not  to  be  averted  is  coming
on  them."

And  when  our  messengers  came  to  Lot,  he  was  grieved
for  them  ;  but  he  was  too  weak  to  protect  them,^
and  he  said,  "  This  is  a  day  of  difficulty."
80  And  his  people  came  rushing  on  towards  him,  for
aforetime  had  they  wrought  wickedness.  He
said,  "  0  my  people  !  these  my  daughters  will
be  purer  for  you  :  fear  God  then,  and  put  me  not
to  shame  in  the  ^persons  of  my  guests.  Is  there  no
rightminded  man  among  you  ?  "

They  said,  "  Thou  well  knowest  that  we  make  no
claim  for  thy  daughters ;  and  verily  thou  knowest
what  we  require."

He  said,  "  Would  that  I  had  strength  to  resist  you,
or  that  I  could  find  refuge  with  some  powerful
chieftain.''' '

The  Angels  said,  "  0  Lot  !  verily  we  are  the  mes-
sengers of  thy  Lord  :  they  shall  by  no  means
touch  thee  :  depart  then  with  thy  family  in  the
dead  of  night,  and  no  one  of  you  will  turn  back
except  thy  wife  ;  on  her  truly  shall  light  what
shall  light  on  them.  Verily,  that  with  which  they
are  threatened  is  for  the  morning.  Is  not  the
morning  near  ?  "

And  when  our  decree  came  to  he  executed  We  turned
those  cities  upside  down,  and  We  rained  down
upon  them  blocks  of  claystone  one  after  another.

'  This  trait  does  not  occur  in  any  previous  recital  of  this  history.     See
Sur.  xxvii.  xxvL  vii.

'  Lit.  his  arm  was  straitened  concerning  them.
'  Lit.  column.

232  THE    KORAN.

marked  ^  by  tliy  Lord  Himself.  And  this  Mecca
is  not  distant  from  those  wicked  ones.
^  And  We  sent  to  Madian~  their  brother  Shoaib.  He
said,  "  0  my  people  !  worship  God  :  no  other  God
have  you  than  He  :  give  not  short  weight  and
measure :  I  see  indeed  that  ye  revel  in  good
things ;  but  verily  I  fear  for  you  the  punishment
of  an  all-encompassing  day.

And  0  my  people  !  give  weight  and  measure  with
fairness;  and  purloin  not  other  men's  goods;  and
do  not  evil  on  the  earth  with  corrupt  practices  :

A  residue,^  the  gift  of  God,  will  be  best  for  you  if  ye
are  believers  :

But  I  am  not  a  guardian  over  you."

They  said,  "  0  Shoaib  !  is  it  thy  devotions  which  enjoin
thee  that  we  should  leave  what  our  fathers  wor-
shipped, or  that  we  should  not  do  with  our  sub-
stance as  pleaseth  us  ?  Thou  forsooth  art  the
mild,  the  righteous  !"
90  He  said,  "  0  my  people !  How  think  ye  ?  If  I  rest
upon  a  clear  revelation  from  my  Lord,  and  if  from
Himself  He  hath  supplied  me  with  goodly  supplies,
and  if  I  will  not  follow  you  to  that  which  I  myself
forbid  you,  do  I  seek  aught  but  your  amendment
so  far  as  in  me  lieth  ?  My  sole  success  is  of  God  :
in  Him  do  I  trust,  and  to  Him  do  I  turn.

And  0  my  people  !  let  not  your  opposition  to  me*  urge
you  on  so  as  to  draw  down  upon  you  the  like  of  that
which  befell  the  people  of  Noah,  or  the  people  of
Houd,  or  the  people  of  Saleh  :  and  the  people  of
Lot  were  not  for  distant  from  you  !

Seek  pardon  of  your  Lord  and  be  turned  unto  Him  :
verily,  my  Lord  is  Merciful,  Loving.''

They  said,  "  0  Shoaib  !  we  understand  not  much  of
what  thou  sayest,  and  we  clearly  see  that  thou  art
powerless  among  us :  were  it  not  for  thy  family
we  would  surely  stone  thee,  nor  couldest  thou
prevail  against  us."

He  said,  "  0  my  people  !  does  my  family  stand  higher  in
your  esteem  than  God  ?    Cast  ye  Him  behind  your

'  With  the  name,  it  is  said,  of  the  person  each  should  strike.
'  See  Sura  [Ivi.]  xxvi.  176.

*  i.e.  after  giving  fair  measure.     Lit.  that  which  is  left  yon  by  God.

*  Or,  let  not  my  saverancc  from  you  make  you  so  gnilty  as  that  tliere
shall  befall  you,  &c.

THE    KORAN.  23

r»

back,  with  neglect  ?     Verily,  my  Lord  is  round
about  your  actioiis.

And,  0  my  people  !  act  with  what  power  ye  can  for  mij
hurt :  I  verily  will  act :  and  ye  shall  know

On  whom  shall  light  a  punishment  that  shall  disgrace
him,  and  who  is  the  liar.  Await  ye ;  verily  I  will
await  with  you."

And  when  our  decree  came  to  pass.  We  delivered
Shoaib  and  his  companions  in  faith,  by  our  mercy  :
And  a  violent  tempest  overtook  the  wicked,  and  they
were  found  prostrate  on  their  faces  in  their  houses

As  if  they  had  never  dwelt  in  them.  Was  it  not  said,
Away  with  Madian,  even  as  Thamood  perished  ?
^  And  of  old  sent  We  Moses  with  our  signs  and  with
manifest  power  to  Pharaoh,  and  to  his  nobles  ;
but  they  followed  the  behest  of  Pharaoh;  and
unrighteous  was  the  behest  of  Pharaoh.
100  He  shall  head  his  people  or  the  day  of  the  Resurrec-
tion, and  cause  them  to  descend  into  the  fire  :
and  wretched  the  descent  into  which  thev  shall
descend  !

They  were  followed  by  a  curse  in  this  world  ;  and  on
the  day  of  the  Resurrection,  wretched  the  gift
that  shall  be  given  tit  em  !
%  This,  from  the  histories  of  the  cities  which  We  relate
to  thee.  Some  of  them  are  standing,  others  mown
down :

And  We  dealt  not  unfairly  by  them,  but  they  dealt  not
fairly  by  themselves  :  and  their  gods  on  whom
they  called  beside  God  availed  them  not  at  all
when  thy  Lord's  behest  came  to  pass,  and  they
did  but  increase  their  ruin.

Such  was  thy  Lord's  punishment^  when  He  punished
the  cities  that  had  been  wicked.  Verily  his  pun-
ishment is  aflBictive,  terrible  !

Herein  truly  is  a  revelation  addressed  to  him  who
feareth  the  torment  of  the  latter  day.  That  shall
be  a  day  unto  which  mankind  shall  be  gathered
together,  and  that  shall  be  a  day  witnessed  hy  all
creatures,

Nor  do  We  delay  it,  but  until  a  time  appointed.

When  that  day  shall  come  no  one  shall  speak  a  word
but  by  his  leave,  and  some  shall  be  miserable  and
others  blessed.
'  Lit.  seizure,  for  punishment.     Hence,  the  punishment  itself.

234  THE    KORAN.

And  as  for  those  who  shall  be  consigned  to  misery —
their  place  therefore  the  Fire  !  their  lot  therein
sighing  and  moaning  ! —

Therein  they  abide  while  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth
endure,  unless  thy  Lord  shall  will  it  otherwise;
verily  thy  Lord  is  the  mighty  worker  of  his  will.
110  And  as  for  the  blessed  ones — their  place  therefore  the
Garden  !  therein  they  abide  as  long  as  the  Hea-
vens and  the  Earth  endure,  unless  thy  Lord  shall
will  otherwise^ — an  uninterrupted  boon.

Have  thou  no  doubts  therefore  concerning  that  which
they-  worship  :  they  worship  but  what  their  fathers
worshipped  before  them  :  We  will  surely  assign
them  their  portion  with  nothing  lacking.
1  And  of  old  gave  We  Moses  the  Book ;  afterwards  they
fell  to  variance  about  it;  and  if  a  decree  of  respite
had  not  gone  forth  from  thy  Lord,  there  had  surely
been  a  decision  between  them  ;  and  verily  they  are
still  in  suspicious  doubts  about  it.

And  truly  thy  Lord  will  of  a  surety  repay  every  one
according  to  their  works  !  He  verily  is  well  aware
of  what  they  do.

Walk  uprightly  then  as  thou  hast  been  commanded,
and  he  also  who  hath  turned  to  God  with  thee,  and
transgress  ye  no  more.  Verily  He  beholdeth  what
ye  do.

And  lean  not  on^  the  evil-doers,  lest  the  Fire  lay  hold  on
you  ;  for  ye  have  no  protectors  against  God,  and  ye
shall  not  be  helped  against  Kim  ;

And  observe  prayer  at  each  morning,  at  the  close  of  the
day,  and  at  the  approach  of  night, — verily  good
deeds  drive  away  evil  deeds — I'his  is  a  warning
for  those  who  reflect :

And  persevere  thou  steadfastly,  for  verily  God  will  not
suffer  tlie  reward  of  the  righteous  to  perish.

And  were  the  generations  before  you,  endued  with
virtue,  and  who  forbade  corrupt  doings  on  the
earth,  more  than  a  few  of  those  whom  We  de-
livered ?  but  the  evil -doers  followed  their  selfish
pleasures,  and  became  transgressors  ;

And  thy  Lord  would  not  have  destroyed  those  cities
unjustly,  so  long  as  their  people  were  righteous.
120  Moreover,   had    thy  Lord  pleased.  He  had  assuredly

'  i.  e.  by  giving  them  increase  of  blessedness.

'  The  unbelieTere.  '  Or,  incline  not  towards.

THE    KORAN.  235

made  mankind  of  one  religion  :  but  those  only  to
whom  thy  Lord  hath  granted  his  mercy  will  cease
to  differ.  And  unto  this  hath  He  created  them  ;
for  the  word  of  thy  Lord  shall  be  fulfilled,  "  I
will  assuredly  fill  hell  with  Djinn  and  men  to-
gether.^'

And  all  that  "We  have  related  to  thee  of  the  histories  of
these  Apostles,  is  to  confirm  thy  heart  thereby,  and
by  these  hath  the  truth  reached  thee,  and  a  moni-
tion and  a  warning  to  those  who  believe.

But  say  to  those  who  believe  not,  "  Act  as  ye  may  and
can  :  "VVe  truly  will  act  our  part  :  and  wait  ye ;
We  verily  waiting^."

And  to  God  belong  the  secret  things  of  the  Heavens
and  of  the  Earth,  and  all  things  return  to  Him  :
worship  Him  then  and  put  thy  trust  in  Him ;  for
thy  Lord  is  not  regardless  of  your  doings.^

[LXXYL]  .

SURA  XIV.— ABRAHAM,  ON  WHOM  BE  PEACE.
Mecca. — 52  Verses,

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Comjyassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elip.  Lam.  Ea.  This  Book  have  We  sent  down  to
thee  that  by  their  Lord's  permission  thou  mayest
bring  men  out  of  darkness  into  light,  into  the
path  of  the  Mighty,  the  Glorious —

'  In  the  later  period  of  his  life  Muhammad  attributed  his  grey  hairs  to
the  effect  produced  upon  him  by  this  Sura  and  its  "  Sisters."  While  Abu
Bekr  and  Omar  sat  in  the  mosque  at  ^ledina,  Muhammad  suddenly  came
upon  them  from  the  door  of  one  of  his  wives'  houses  ....  And  Abu  Bekr
said,  "  Ah  !  thou  for  -whom  I  would  sacrifice  father  and  mother,  white
hairs  are  hastening  upon  thee  ! "  And  the  Prophet  raised  up  his  beard
with  his  hand  and  gazed  at  it ;  and  Abu  Bekr's  eyes  filled  with  tears.
"  Yes,"  said  Muhammad,  "  Hiid  and  its  sisters  have  ha-stened  my  white
hairs."  "  And  what,"  asked  Abu  Bekr,  "  are  its  sisters  "  ?  "  the  In-
evitable (Sura  Ivi)  and  the  Blow  (Sura  ci.)."— Kitab  al  Wakidi,  p.  84,  ap.
Muir.

236  THE    KORAN.

Of  God;  to  whom  belongeth  wliatever  is  ia  the  Hea-
vens and  whatever  is  on  the  Earth  :  and  woe  !  for
their  terrible  punishment,  to  the  unbeHevers,

Who  love  the  life  that  now  is,  above  that  which  is
to  come,  and  mislead  from  the  way  of  God,  and
seek  to  make  it  crooked.  These  are  in  a  far-gone
error.

And  in  order  that  he  might  speak  clear  to  them,  "We
have  not  sent  any  Apostle,  save  with  the  speech  of
his  own  people ;  but  God  misleadeth  whom  He
will,  and  whom  He  will  He  guideth :  and  He  is
the  Mighty,  the  Wise.

Of  old  did  We  send  Moses  with  our  sio^ns  :  and  said  to
him,  ''Bring  forth  thy  people  from  the  darkness
into  the  light,  and  remind  them  of  the  days  of
God.^'i  Verily,  in  this  are  signs  for  every  patient,
grateful  person :

And  bear  in  mind  when  Moses  said  to  his  people,  ^'Re-
member  the  kindness  of  God  to  you,  when  He
rescued  you  from  the  people  of  Pharaoh,  who  laid
on  you  a  cruel  affliction,  and  slaughtered  your  male
children,  and  suffered  only  your  females  to  live.'*
And  in  this  was  a  sore  trial  from  your  Lord —

And  when  your  Lord  caused  it  to  be  declared,  "  If  ye
render  thanks,   then  will    I    surely  increase  you

more  and  more  :  but  if  ye  be   thankless

Verily,  terrible  my  chastisement  \"

And  Moses  said,  "  If  ye  and  all  who  are  on  the  Earth
be  thankless,  yet  truly  God  is  Rich,^  and  Worthy
of  praise."

Hath  not  the  story  reached  you  of  those  who  were
before  you,  the  people  of  Noah,  and  ^Ad,  and
Thamood,
10  And  of  those  who  lived  after  them?  None  knoweth
them  but  God.  When  their  prophets  came  to
them  with  proofs  of  fJieir  mission,  they  laid  their
hands  on  their  mouths  and  said  "In  sooth,  we
believe  not  your  message  ;  and  in  sooth,  of  that  to
which  you  bid  us,  we  arc  in  suspicious  doubt."

Their  pj-ophets  said  ;  "  Is  there  any  doubt  concerning
God,  maker  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,  who
calleth  you  that  of  your  sins  He  may  forgive,  and
respite  you  until  an  appointed  time  ?"

'  i.  e.  when  God  would  bestow  victory  on  the  Muslims.
'  Or,  sdj-sufficient,  avTapKtjQ,  needeth  not  your  thanks.

THE    KORAN.  237

They  said,  "  Ye  are  verily  but  men  like  us  :  fain  would
ye  turn  us  from  lur  fathers'  worship.  Bring  us
therefore  a  clear  authority."

Their  Apostles  said  to  them,  "  We  are  indeed  but  men
like  you.  But  God  bestoweth  favours  on  such  of
his  servants  as  He  pleuseth,  and  it  is  not  in  our
power  to  bring  you  an  authority,

But  by  the  leave  of  God,  and  in  God  therefore  let  the
faithful  trust.

And  why  should  we  not  put  our  trust  in  God,  since  He
hath  already  guided  us  in  our  ways  ?  Moreover,
we  will  certainly  bear  with  constancy  your  inju-
rious treatment  of  us.  And  in  God  then  let  the
trustful  trust."

And  they  who  believed  not  said  to  their  Apostles,
"  Forth  from  our  land  will  we  surely  drive  you,  or,
to  our  religion  surely  shall  ye  return."  Then  their
Lord  revealed  to  them,  "  We  will  certainly  destroy
the  wicked  doers,

And  We  shall  certainly  cause  you  to  dwell  in  the  land
after  them.  This,  for  him  who  dreadeth  my  judg-
ment-seat and  who  dreadeth  my  menace  !"

Then  sought  they  help  from  God,  and  every  proud
rebellious  one  perished  :

And  hell  is  before  each :  and  of  tainted^  water  shall  he
be  made  to  drink  :
20  He  shall  sup  it  and  scarce  swallow  it  for  loathing  ;  and
Death  shall  assail  him  on  every  side,  but  he  is  not
to  die :  and  before  him  shall  he  seen  a  grievous
torment.

A  likeness  of  those  who  believe  not  in  their  Lord.
Their  works  are  like  ashes  which  the  wind  scat-
tereth  on  a  day  of  storm :  no  power  shall  they
have  for  aught,  as  the  result  of  their  doings.^  This
is  the  far-gone  wandering.

Seest  thou  not  that  in  truth'  hath  God  created  the
Heavens  and  the  Earth  ?  Were  such  his  pleasure
He  could  make  you  pass  away,  and  produce  a  new
creation.

And  this  would  not  be  hard  for  God.

And  all  mankind  shall  come  forth  before  God ;  and  the
weak  shall  say  to  the  men  of  pride,  ''  Verily,  we

'  Or,  boiling.  '  i.  e.  they  shall  gain  no  advantage.

'  See  Sura  [Ixxxiv.]  x.  5.

238  THE    KORAN.

were  your  followers  :  will  ye  not  then  stand  in  our
place  against  the  vengeance  of  God?'''

They  shall  say,  "  If  God  had  guided  us,  we  surely  had
guided  you.  It  is  all  the  same  to  us  whether  we
bear  impatiently  or  endure  with  patience ;  we  have
no  escape. ^^

And  after  doom  hath  been  given,  Satan  shall  say,
"  Verily,  God  promised  you  a  promise  of  truth :
I,  too,  made  you  a  promise,  but  I  deceived  you.
Yet  I  had  no  power  over-you, —

Other  than  that  I  called  you  and  ye  answered  me.
Blame  not  me  then,  but  blame  yourselves  :  I  can-
not aid  you,  neither  can  ye  aid  me.  I  never
believed  that  I  was  his  equal  with  whom  ye  of  old
joined  me.^^  ^  Aye,  the  evil-doers,  a  grievous  tor-
ment doth  await  them.

But  they  who  have  believed  and  wrought  righteous-
ness, shall  be  brought  into  gardens  beneath  which
the  rivers  flow,  therein  to  abide  for  ever  by  the
permission  of  their  Lord :  their  greeting  therein
shall  be  "  Peace.''

Seest  thou  not  to  what  God  likeneth  a  good  word  ? "
To  a  good  tree :  its  root  firmly  fixed,  and  its
branches  in  the  Heaven,
30  Yielding  its  fruit  in  all  seasons  by  the  will  of  its  Lord  :
(And  God  setteth  forth  these  similitudes  to  men
that  haply  they  may  be  admonished,)

And  an  evil  word  is  like  an  evil  tree  torn  up  from  the
face  of  the  earth,  without  strength  to  stand. ^

Those  who  believe  will  God  stablish  by  his  steadfast
word  both  in  this  life  and  in  that  which  is  to  come  :
but  the  wicked  will  He  cause  to  err  :  and  God
doth  his  pleasure.

Hast  thou  not  beholden  those  who  have  exchanged  the
grace  of  God  for  infidelity,  and  sink  their  people
into  the  abode  of  perdition —

Hell — therein  shall  they  be  burned ;  and  wretched  the
abode !

They  set  up  compeers  with  God  in  order  to  mislead  from
his  Way.  Say  :  Enjoy  yourselves  yet  aivliile,  but
assuredly,  your  journey  hence  shall  be  into  the  Fire.

'  Lit.  I  truly  renounce  your  having  associated  me  (ivith  God)  heretofore.
*  The  preaching  and  the  profession  of  Islam.     Conip.  Ps.  i.  3,  4.     Lit.
Seest  thou  not  how  God  puts  forth  a  j^aTable  ?    A  good  ivord  is  as,  &c.
'  Lit.  hath  no  secure  j)lace.

THE    KORAN.  239

Speak  to  my  servants  who  have  beh'eved^  that  they
observe  prayer,  ai  d  give  alms  of  that  with  which
We  have  provided  them,  both  privately  and  openly,
ere  the  day  come  when  there  shall  bo  neither
traffic  nor  friendship.

It  is  God  who  hath  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,
and  sendeth  down  water  from  the  Heaven,  and  so
bringeth  forth  the  fruits  for  your  food  :  and  He
hath  subjected  to  you  the  ships,  so  that  by  his
command,  they  pass  through  the  sea;  and  He
hath  subjected  the  rivers  to  you  :  and  He  hath
subjected  to  you  the  sun  and  the  moon  both  con-
stant in  their  courses  :  and  He  hath  subjected  the
day  and  the  night  to  you  :  of  everything  which  ye
ask  Him,  giveth  He  to  you  ;  and  if  ye  would
reckon  up  the  favours  of  God,  ye  cannot  count
them  !  Surely  man  is  unjust,  ungrateful !
^  And  remember  when  ABP  AHAM  said  :  "  0  Lord
make  this  laud  secure,  and  turn  aside  me  and  my
children  from  serving  idols  :

Many  men,  0  my  Lord,  have  they  verily  led  astray.
But  whosoever  shall  follow  me,  he  truly  shall  be
of  me ;  and  whosoever  shall  disobey  me, — in  that
case  verily  Thou  art  Gracious,  Merciful.
40  0  our  Lord  !  verily  I  have  settled  some  of  my  offspring
in  an  unfruitful  valley,  nigh  to  thy  holy  house ;  ^
0  our  Lord,  that  they  may  strictly  observe  prayer !
Make  Thou  therefore  the  hearts  of  men  to  yearn
towards  them,  and  supply  them  with  fruits  :  haply
they  will  be  thankful.

0  our  Lord  !  Thou  truly  knowest  what  we  hide  and
what  we  bring  to  light;  nought  on  earth  or  in
heaven  is  hidden  from  God.  Praise  be  to  God
who  hath  given  me,  in  my  old  age,  Ismael  and
Isaac  !  Of  a  truth,  my  Lord  is  the  hearer  of
prayer.

0  my  Lord  !  make  me  and  my  posterity  to  be  constant
in  prayer.  O  our  Lord  !  and  accept  my  petition.
0  our  Lord  !  forgive  me  and  my  parents  and  the
faithful,  on  the  day  when  the  reckoning  shall
come.'^
%  And  think  thou  not  that  God  is  regardless  of  the
deeds   of   the  wicked.     He    only    respiteth  them

'  The  Caaba.

240  THE    KORAN.

to  the  day  on  which  all  eyes  shall  stare  up  with
terror  :

They  hasten  forward  in  fear ;  their  heads  upraised  in
supplication  ;  their  looks  riveted ;  ^  and  their
hearts  a  blank.  Warn  men  therefore  of  the  day
when  the  punishment  shall  overtake  them.

And  the  evil-doers  shall  say,  "  0  our  Lord  !  respite  us
yet  a  little  while  :  ^

To  thy  call  will  we  make  answer  and  thine  Apostles
^vill  we  follow."  "  Did  ye  not  once  swear  that  no
change  should  befall  you  ?

Yet  ye  dwelt  in  the  dwellings  of  those  •"'  who  were  the
authors  of  their  own  undoing/  and  it  was  made
plain  to  you  how  We  had  dealt  with  them ;  and
We  held  tliem  up  to  you  as  examples.  They  plotted
their  plots  :  but  their  craftiness  was  under  the  con-
trol of  God,  even  though  their  craftiness  had  been
Kuch  that  the  mountains  should  be  moved  by  it  \"^

Think  not  then  that  God  will  fail  his  promise  to  his
Apostles  :  aye  !  God  is  mighty,  and  Vengeance  is
His—

On  the  day  when  the  Earth  shall  be  changed  into
another  Earth,  and  the  Heavens  also,  and  men
shall  come  forth  unto  God,  the  Only,  the  Vic-
torious—
50  And  thou  shalt  see  the  wicked  on  that  day  linked
together  in  chains —

Their  garments  of  pitch,  and  the  fire  shall  enwrap  their
faces — that  God  may  recompense  every  soul  as  it
deserveth ;  verily  God  is  prompt  to  reckon.

This  is  a  message  for  mankind,  and  that  they  may
thereby  be  warned :  and  that  they  may  know  that
there  is  but  one  God,  and  that  men  of  under-
standing may  ponder  it.

'  Or,  their  looh  shall  not  be  turned  to  them.    i.  e.  being  fixed  with  horror.
^  Lit.  to  n  term  near  at  hand.

^  Of  the  anciently-destroyed  cities  of  Thamood,  Ad,  etc.
■*  Lit.  11'r.rc  unjust  to  their  own  souls.

*  The  word  rendered  by  moved  and  rhanrfe.  in  v.  46  has  a  primary
reference  to  the  declination  of  the  sun  from  the  meridian.

THE    KORAN.  241

[LXXYII.]
SURA  XII.— JOSEPH,  PR.\.CE  BE  ON  HIM.

Mecca. — 111  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elip.  Lam.  Ea.'^     These  are  .signs  of  the  clear  Book.

Verily  an  Arabic  Koran  have  We  sent  it  down :  Haply
ye  will  understand.

In  revealing  to  thee  this  Kortin,^  one  of  the  most  beau-
tiful of  narratives  will  We  relate  to  thee,  of  which
thou  hast  verily  aforeti'ue  been  regardless.

Wten  Joseph  said  to  his  father^  "  0  my  father  !  lo  !  I
beheld  eleven  stars  and  the  sun  and  the  moon —
beheld  them  make  obeisance  to  me  !  "  ^

He  said,  "  0  my  son  !  tell  not  thy  vision  to  thy  bre-
thren, lest  they  plot  a  plot  against  thee  :  verily
Satan  is  a  manifest  foe  to  man.

For  it  is  thus  that  thy  Lord  will  take  thee  as  his  elect
and  teach  thee  the  interpretation  of  dark  sayings,
and  perfect  his  favours  upon  thee  and  upon  the
family  of  Jacob,  as  aforetime  He  perfected  it  upon
thy  fathers  Abraham  and  Isaac  ;  verily  thy  Lord
is  Knowing,  Wise  !

Assuredly  now  in  JOSEPH  and  his  brethren  are  signs  *
for  the  inquirers ;  *

When  they  said,  "  Surely  better  loved  by  our  father,
than  we  who  are  more  in  number,^  is  Joseph  and
his  brother ;  verily,  our  father  hath  clearly  erred.

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  p.  IG.  In  no  other  Sura  beside  this  is  one  subject
treated  of  throughout.  It  was  recited  to  the  first  eight  of  the  Ansars  who
were  converted,  and  clearly  proved  that  Muhammad  must  have  been  in
confidential  intercourse  with  learned  .Jews.

-  The  word  Koran  is  here  used  in  the  same  sense  as  Sura. — Zamakshari.

^  Muhammad  was  either  unaware  of  the  previous  dream,  mentioned  Gen.
xxxvii.  7,  or  passes  it  by  in  silence.

*  Signs  of  Divine  providence  and  watchfulness  over  its  servants.

^  The  captious  and  unbelieving  Koreish.  Zamakshari,  however,  ex-
plains this  verse  of  questions  asked  by  Jews.

^  Lit.  a  party  between  ten  and  forty. — Zamakshari.

R

242  THE    KOKAN.

Slay  ye  Joseph  !  or  cast  him  forth  to  some  distant
land  :  your  fothor's  face  shall  be  open  towards
you,  and  afterwards  ye  shall  be  upright  persons."
10  A  speaker  among  them  said,  "  Slay  j-e  not  Joseph,  but
cast  him  down  to  the  bottom  of  a  well :  if  ye  do
that,  some  company  of  wayfarers  may  take  him  up/'

They  said,  "  0  our  father  !  why  dost  thou  not  entrust
us  with  Joseph  ?  for  indeed  we  mean  him  well :

Send  him  with  us  to-morrow  that  he  may  enjoy  himself
and  sport :  and  verily  we  will  keep  him  safely."

He  said,  "Verily,  your  taking  him  away  will  sorely
grieve  me  ;  and  I  fear  lest  while  ye  are  heedless
of  him  the  wolf  devour  him."

They  said,  "  Surely  if  the  wolf  devour  him,  and  we  so
large  a  party,  verily  we  must  in  that  case  pay  the
penalty."  ^

So  when  they  had  gone  away  with  him  they  agreed  also
together  to  place  him  at  the  bottom  of  the  well ;
and  We  revealed  to  him,  "  Thou  wilt  yet  tell  them
of  this  their  deed,  and  they  shall  not  recognize
thee."

And  they  came  at  nightfall  to  their  father  weeping.

They  said,  "  O  our  father  !  of  a  truth,  we  went  to  run
races,  and  we  left  Joseph  with  our  chattels,  and
the  wolf  devoured  him  :  but  thou  wilt  not  believe
us  even  though  we  speak  the  truth."

And  they  brought  his  shirt  with  false  blood  upon  it.
He  said,  "  Nay,  your  own  minds  have  contrived
this  affair,  but  patience  is  becoming:  and  the  help
of  God  is  to  be  implored  for  what  you  tell  me."

And  wayfarers  came  and  sent  their  drawer  of  water,'^
and  he  let  down  his  bucket.  "  Good  news  !  "  '
said  he.  "  This  is  a  youth  !  "  And  they  kept  him
secret,  to  make  merchandise  of  him — But  God
knew  what  they  were  doing.
20  And  they  sold  him  for  a  paltry  price — for  some  dirheras
counted  down,  at  no  high  rate  did  they  value  him.

And  he  who  bought  him — an  Egyptian — said  to  his
wife,  "  Make  his  abode  honourable  ;  haply  he  may

'  Lit.  he  the  losern.  Wir  mussten  denn  zuerst  das  L(Acn  einbilssen. — Wahl.
Ullm.  Maracci.  But  Sale,  we  shall  be  weak  indeed,  which  is  scarcely  ac-
curate.

"  According  to  Gen.  xxxvii.  24,  the  well  or  pit  had  "  no  water  in  it."
'  Some  take  the  Arabic  Boshrai  as  the  proper  name  of  the  person  who
accompanied  the  drawer  of  water.

THE    KORAN.  243

be  useful  to  us,  oi*  we  may  adopt  him  as  a  son."
Thus  did  We  settle  Joseph  in  the  land,  and  We
instructed  him  in  the  interpretation  of  clarlc  say-
ings, for  God  is  equal  to  his  purpose ;  but  men
know  it  not.

And  when  he  had  reached  his  agfe  of  strength  We
bestowed  on  him  judgment  and  knowledge ;  for
thus  do  We  recompense  the  well-doers.

And  she  in  whose  house  he  was,  conceived  a  passion
for  him,  and  she  shut  the  doors  and  said,  "  Come
hither.^^  He  said,  "  God  keep  me  !  Verily,  my
lord  hath  given  me  a  good  home  :  verily  the  in-
jurious shall  not  prosper."

But  she  longed  for  him  ;  and  he  had  longed  for  her
had  he  not  seen  a  token  from  his  Lord.^  Thus  We
averted  evil  and  defilement  from  him  ;  verily  he
was  one  of  our  sincere  servants.

And  they  both  made  for  the  door,  and  she  rent  his
shirt  from  behind;  and  at  the  door  they  met  her
lord.  "  What,"  said  she,  "  shall  be  the  recom-
pense of  him  who  intended  evil  to  thy  family,  but
a  prison  -  or  a  sore  punishment  ?  "

He  said,  '■  She  solicited  me  to  evil."  And  a  witness
in  her  own  farnily  ^  witnessed  :  "  If  his  shirt  be
rent  in  front,  then  hath  she  spoken  truth,  and  he  is
a  liar  :

But  if  his  shirt  be  rent  from  behind,  then  she  hath  lied
and  he  is  a  man  of  truth."

And  when  his  lord  saw  his  shirt  torn  from  behind,  he
said,  "  This  verily  is  one  of  your  devices  !  verily
your  devices  are  groat !

Joseph  !  turn  away  from  this  ;  and  thou,  0  wife,  ask
pardon  for  thy  crime :  verily  thou  hast  sinned."
30  And  in  the  city  the  women  said,  "  The  wife  of  the
Prince  hath  solicited  her  servant :  he  hath  fired
her  with  love  :  verily  we  perceive  her  to  he  in  a
manifest  ci-ror."

And  when  she  heard  of  their  cabal,  she  sent  to  them
and  got  ready  a  banquet  for  them,  and  gave  each
one  of  them  a  knife,  and  said,  "Joseph,  come  forth

'  The  apparition  of  his  father,  who  said,  "  Hereafter  shall  the  names  of
thy  brethren,  enfrraven  on  precious  stones,  shine  on  the  breast  of  the  High
Priest.  Shall  thine  be  blotted  out  ? "  Tr.  Sotah,  fol.  36.  Comp.  Weil,
Legenden,  p.  109,  n.  ^  Lit.  that  he  he  imprisoned.

^  An  infant  in  the  cradle.— Sepher  Hadjascher,  as  below  on  v.  31.

K  2

244  THE    KORAN,

to  tliem."  And  when  they  saw  hini  they  extolled
him^  and  cut  their  hands/  and  said,  "  God  keep
us  !  This  is  no  man  !  This  is  none  other  than
a  noble  angel  !  "

She  said,  "  This  then  is  he  about  whom  ye  blamed
me.  And  I  wished  him  indeed  to  yield  to  my  de-
sires, but  he  stood  firm.  But  if  he  obey  not  my
command,  he  shall  surely  be  cast  into  prison,  and
become  one  of  the  contemptible."

He  said,  ''  0  my  Lord  !  I  prefer  the  prison  to  com-
pliance with  their  bidding  :  but  unless  Thou  turn
away  their  snares  from  me,  I  shall  play  the  youth
with  them,  and  become  one  of  the  unwise  :  "

So  his  Lord  heard  him  and  turned  aside  their  snares
from  him  :  verily  He  is  the  Hearer,  the  Knower.

Then  resolved  they,  even  after  they  had  seen  the  signs
of  his  innocence,  to  imprison  him  for  a  time  : —

And  there  came  into  the  prison  with  him  two  youths.
Said  one  of  them,  "  Verily  I  saw  myself  (in  a
dream)  pressing  Avine  from  (jrapes."  And  the  other
said,  "  I  verily  saw  myself  carrying  bread  upon  my
head,  of  which  the  birds  were  eating.  Declare  to
us  the  interpretation  of  this,  for  truly  we  see  thou
art  a  virtuous  person .''

He  said,  "  No  food  shall  come  to  you  wherewith  ye
shall  be  supplied,  but  I  will  acquaint  you  with  its
interpretation  ere  it  come  to  you.  This  is  a  'part
of  that  which  my  Ijord  hath  taught  mo  :  I  indeed
have  abandoned  the  religion  -  of  those  who  believe
not  in  God,  and  who  deny  the  life  to  come ;

And  I  follow  the  religion  of  my  fathers,  Abraham  and
Isaac  and  Jacob.  We  may  not  associate  aught
with  God.  This  is  of  God's  bounty  towards  us
and  towards  mankind  :  but  the  greater  part  of
mankind  are  not  thankful.

O  my  two  fellow-prisoners  !  are  sundry^  lords  best,  or

God,  the  One,  the  Omnipotent  ?

40     Ye   worship  beside  Him  mere   names  which  ye  have

invented,  ye  and  your  fathers,  for  which  God  hath

not  sent  down  any  warranty.    Judgment  belongeth

'  Instead  of  their  food,  through  surprise  at  his  beauty. — Seph.  Hadj.  in
Midr.  Jalkut.    See  also  Midr.  Abkhir,  ih.  ch.  146.

*  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  Muhammad,  in  this  and  the  following
verse,  puts  his  own  doctrine  and  convictions  into  the  mouth  of  Joseph.

"*  Lit.  divided  among  themselves.

THE    KORAN.  215

to  God  alono.  He  liatli  bidden  you  worship  none
but  Him.  Th.s  is  tlic  right  faith  ;  but  most  men
know  it  not.

0  my  two  fellow-prisoners  !  as  to  one  of  you^  be  will
serv^e  wine  unto  his  lord  :  but  as  to  the  other,  ho
will  be  crucified,  and  the  birds  shall  eat  from  off
his  head.  The  matter  is  decreed  concei'ning  which
ye  inquire  of  me."

And  he  said  unto  him  of  the  twain  whom  he  judged
would  be  set  at  larafe,  "  Remember  mo  with  thv
lord,"  and  Satan  caused  him  to  forget  the  remem-
brance of  his  lord/  so  he  remained  some  years  in
prison.

And  the  King  said,  "  Verily  I  saw  in  a  dream  seven
fat  kine  which  seven  lean  devoured ;  and  seven
green  ears  and  other  withered.  0  nobles,  instruct
me  in  my  vision,  if  a  vision  ye  are  able  to  ex-
pound."

They  said,  "  They  are  confused  dreams,  nor  have  we
knowledge  in  interpretation  of  dreams."

And  he  of  the  twain  who  had  been  set  at  large,  said
(for  he  recollected  Joseph  after  a  time,)  ''1  will
make  you  acquainted  with  its  interpretation ;  let
me  then  go  for  it."

"  Joseph,  0  thou  man  of  truth  !  teach  us  of  the  seven
fat  kine  which  seven  lean  devoured,  and  of  the
seven  green  ears,  and  other  withered ;  that  I  may
return  to  the  men,  and  that  they  may  know  the
ivterjpretation."

He  said,  *'  Ye  shall  sow  seven  years  as  is  your  wont ;
but  the  corn  which  ye  have  reaped  leave  ye  in  its
ear,  except  the  little  of  which  ye  shall  eat.

Then  after  that  shall  come  seven  grievous  years  which
shall  eat  what  ye  have  provided  for  them,  except
a  little  which  ye  shall  have  kept.

Then  shall  come  after  this  a  year,  in  which  men  shall
have   rain,    and   in   which    they    shall    press    the
grape."
50     And  the  King  said,  "  Bring  him  to  me."^     And  when

'  Satan  induced  Joseph  to  place  his  confidence  in  man,  rather  than  in
God  alone,  in  punisliiiient  of  which  sin  the  imprisonment  was  continued.
Thus  Midr.  Rabba.  Gen.  Par.  89.     Midr.  Jalkut,  ih.  ch.  147.

'  In  Gen.  xli.  14,  Joseph  is  released  from  prison  before  the  interpreta-
tion of  the  dreams.  But  the  Koran  makes  him  decline  to  quit  it  till  his
character  is  cleared.

246  THE    KORAN.

the  messenger  came  to  Josepli  lie  said,  "  Go  back
to  thy  lortl,  and  ask  him  what  meant  the  women
who  cut  their  hands,  verily  my  lord  knoweth  the
snare  "they  laid/^

Then  said  the  Pnnce  to  the  ivomen,  "  What  was  your
purpose  when  ye  solicited  Joseph  ?  "  They  said,
"  God  keep  us  !  we  know  not  any  ill  of  him."  The
wife  of  the  Prince  said,  "  Now  doth  the  truth
appear.  It  was  I  who  would  have  led  him  into
unlawful  love,  and  he  is  assuredly  one  of  the
truthful.'^

"  This,"  said  Joseph,  "  that  r?z//  lord  may  learn  that
I  did  not  in  his  absence  play  him  false,  and  that
God  guidcth  not  the  machination  of  deceivers.

Yet  do  I  not  absolve  myself :  verily  the  heart  is  prone
to  evil,  save  those  on  which  my  Lord  hath  mercy.
Lo  !  my  Lord  is  Gracious,  Forgi\nng,  Merciful."

And  the  King  said,  "  Bring  him  to  me :  I  will  take
him  for  my  special  service."  And  when  he  had
spoken  with  him,  he  said,  "  This  day  verily  tliou
shall  be  with  us,  invested  with  place  and  trust."

He  said,  "  Set  me  over  the  granaries  of  the  land,^  I
truly  will  he  their  prudent  keeper  ! "

Thus  did  We  stablish  Joseph  in  the  land  that  he  might
house  himself  therein  at  pleasure.  We  pour  down
our  mercy  on  whom  We  will,  and  suffer  not  the
reward  of  the  righteous  to  perish  :

And  truly  the  recompense  of  the  life  to  come  is  better,
for  those  who  have  believed  and  feared  God.

And  Joseph's  brethren  came  and  went  in  to  him,  and
he  recognized  them,  but  they  knew  not  him ;

And  when  he  had  provided  them  with  their  provision,
he  said,  "  Bring  me  your  brother  from  your  father.
See  ye  not  that  I  fill  the  measure,  and  am  the  best
of  hosts  ?
60  But  if  ye  bring  him  not  to  me,  then  no  measure  of
corn  shall  there  be  for  you  with  me,  nor  shall  ye

come  near  me."

They  said,  "  We  will  ask  him  of  his  father,  and  we

will  surely  do  it."
And  he  said  to  his  servants,  "  Put  their  money  into

their  camel-packs,  that  perchance  they  may  per-

'  According  to  Gen.  xli.  39,  Pharaoh  of  his  own  accord  sets  Joseph  over
his  house  and  land.

THE   KORAN.  247

ceive  it  when  tliey  have  returned  to  their  family,
and  come  back  ''

And  when  they  returned  to  their  father,  they  said,  ''  0,
our  father !  corn^  is  withholden  from  us  :  send
therefore  our  brother  with  us,  and  we  shall  receive
our  measure;  verily  we  will  be  Ixis  guardians."

He  said,  "  Can  I  entrust  you  with  him  otherwise  than
as  I  before  entrusted  you  with  his  brother  ?  But
God  is  the  best  guardian,  and  of  the  compassionate
He  US'  the  most  compassionate."

And  when  they  opened  their  goods  they  found  their
money  had  been  returned  to  them.  They  said,
"  0,  our  father,  what  more  can  we  desire  ?  Here
is  our  money  returned  to  us  ;  we  will  provide  corn
for  our  families,  and  will  take  care  of  our  brother,
and  shall  receive  a  camel's  burden  more  of  corn.
This  is  an  easy  quantity."^

He  said,  ''  I  will  by  no  means  send  him  with  you  but
on  your  compact  before  God  that  ye  will  indeed
bring  him  back  to  me,  unless  ye  be  encompassed
by  hindrances."  And  when  they  had  given  him
their  pledge,  he  said,  "  God  is  witness  of  what  we
say."

And  he  said,  *'  0,  my  sons  !  Enter  not  by  one  gate,
but  enter  by  different  gates. ^  Yet  can  I  not  help
you  against  aught  decreed  by  God.  Judgment
belongeth  to  God  alone.  In  Him  put  I  my  trust,
and  in  Him  let  the  trusting  trust."

And  when  they  entered  as  their  father  had  bidden
them,  it  did  not  avail  them  aught  against  God,
except  to  gi-atify  a  settled  wish  in  Jacob's  mind ;
for  he  verily  was  possessed  of  knowledge  which
We  had  taught  him  :  but  most  men  have  not  that
knowledge.
And  when  they  came  in  to  Joseph,  he  took  his  brother
to  him  as  a  guest.  He  said,  "  Verily,  I  am  thy
brother ;  be  not  thou  therefore  grieved  for  what
they  did."-*
70     And  when  he  had  provided  them  with  their  provisions,

'  Lit.  mtasurt,  i.e.  the  liberty  of  purchasing  corn.

"^  For  the  king  to  bestow.  Or,  with  Ulhn.,  das  reicht  nicht  aus.  This
{which  ice  have  already  brought)  is  a  small  measure.

3  Thus  we  read  in  Mid.  Rab.  on  Gen.  Par.  91,  "Jacob  said  to  them,
Enter  ye  not  all  by  one  gate."     See  also  Midr.  Jalkut,  ch.  148.

*  Thus  also,  in  the  Sepher  Hadjaschar,  Joseph  first  discovers  himself  to
Benjamin  ;  in  opposition  to  Gen.  xlv.  1.

248  THE    KORAN.

he  placed  his  drinking-cup  in  his  brother's  camel-
pack.  Then  a  crier  cried,  "  0  travellers  !  ye  are
surely  thieves."

They  said. (and  turned  towards  them),  "What  is  that
ye  search  for  ?  "

"  We  are  searching,"  said  they,  "  for  the  prince's  cup.
And  for  him  who  shall  restore  it,  a  camel's  load  of
corn  !     And  I  pledge  myself  for  it."

They  said,  "  By  God  !  ye  know  certainly  that  we  came
not  to  do  wrong ^  in  the  'land,  and  we  are  not
thieves."

"  But  what,"  said  the  Egyptians,  "  shall  be  the  recom-
pense of  him  who  hath  stolen  it,  if  ye  be  found
liars?"

They  said,  "  That  he  in  whose  camel-pack  it  shall  be
found  be  given  up  to  you  in  satisfaction  for  it.
Thus  recompense  we  the  unjust."

And  Joseph  began  with  their  sacks,  before  the  sack  of
his  brother,  and  then  from  the  sack  of  his  brother
he  drew  it  out.  This  stratagem  did  We  contrive
for  Joseph.  By  the  King's  law  he  had  no  power
to  seize  his  brother,  had  not  God  pleased.  We
uplift  into  grades  of  luisdom  whom  We  will.  And
above  every  one  endued  with  knowledge  is  He  who
Knoweth  all.

They  said,  ''  If  he  steal,  a  brother  of  his  then  hath
stolen  heretofore.^' 2  But  Joseph  kept  his  secret,
and  did  not  discover  it  to  them.  Said  he,  aside,
"  Ye  are  in  an  evil  condition.  But  God  well
knoweth  that  of  which  ye  are  discoursing."

They  said,  "  O  Prince  !  Verily  he  hath  a  very  aged
father ;  in  his  stead,  therefore,  take  one  of  us  -,
verily  we  perceive  that  thou  art  of  those  who  act
aright."

He  said,  "  God  forbid  that  we  should  take  but  him  with
whom  our  property  was  found ;  verily  then  should
we  act  unjustly."
80     And  when  they  despaired  of  Benjamin,  they  went  apart

'  Comp.  Gen.  xlii.  9.

'  Joseph  is  said  by  the  Muhamraadan  commentators  to  have  stolen  an
idol  of  pold  belonj^inff  to  his  mother's  father,  which  he  broke,  that  he  mif(ht
not  worship  it.  But  this  comment,  as  well  as  the  text  of  the  Koran,  is
probably  biised  upon  some  such  tradition  as  that  of  Midr.  Rabba,  Par.  92,
"  He  Ls  a  thief  and  the  son  of  a  thief"  (Comp.  Gen.  xxxi.  19),— spoken  of
Benjamin.

THE    KOKAN.  249

for  counsel.  The  eldest  of  tliem  said,  "  Know  ye
not  how  that  your  fjither  hath  taken  a  pledge  from
you  before  God,  and  how  formerly  ye  failed  in
duty  with  regard  to  Joseph?  By  no  means  there-
fore will  I  quit  the  land  till  my  father  give  me
leave,  or  God  decide  for  me ;  for  of  those  who  de-
cide is  He  the  best.

Return  ye  to  your  father  and  say,  "  0  our  father !
Yerily  thy  son  hath  stolen ;  and  we  bear  witness
only  of  what  we  know,  and  we  could  not  guard
against  the  unforeseen.

Inquire  for  thyself  in  the  city  where  we  have  been,  and
of  the  caravan  with  which  we  have  arrived ;  and
we  are  surely  speakers  of  the  truth. ^'

He  said,  "  Nay,  ye  have  arranged  this  matter  your-
selves :  but  patience  is  seemly  :  God,  it  may  be,
will  bring  them  back  to  me  all  together;  verily
He  is  the  Knowing,  *he  Wise."

And  he  turned  away  from  them  and  said,  "  Oh  !  how  I
am  grieved  for  Joseph  \"  and  his  eyes  became
white  with  grief,  for  he  bore  a  silent  sorrow.

They  said,  "  By  God,  thou  wilt  never  cease  to  think
of  Joseph  till  thou  art  at  the  point  of  death,  or  art
of  those  who  perish. ^^

He  said,  "  I  only  plead  my  grief  and  my  sorrow  to
God  :  and  I  know  from  God  what  ye  know  not  :^

Go,  my  sons,  and  seek  tidings  of  Joseph  and  his
brother,  and  despair  not  of  God's  mercy,  verily
none  but  the  unbelieving  despair  of  the  mercy  of
God.''

And  when  they  came  in  to  Joseph,  they  said,  ''  O
Prince,  distress  hath  reached  us  and  our  family,
and  little  is  the  money  that  we  have  brought.  But
give  us  full  measure,  and  bestow  it  on  us  as  alms  ;
truly,  God  will  recompense  the  almsgivers."

He  said,  "  Know  ye  what  ye  did  to  Joseph  and  to  his

brother  in  your  ignorance  ?  "

90     They  said,  "  Canst  thou  indeed  be  Joseph  ?"    He  said,

"  I  am  Joseph,  and  this  is  my  brother.    Now  hath

God  been  gracious  to  us.     Verily  whoso  feareth

God  and  endureth .     Aye,  verily  God  will  not

suffer  the  reward  of  the  righteous  to  perish  !"

'i.e.  that  Joseph  was  still  alive.     Thus  Midr.  Tanchumah  on  Gen.
xUi.  1.

250  THE    KORAN.

They  said,  "  By  God  !  surely  now  hatli  God  chosen  then
above  us,  and  verily  we  have  been  sinners  ! "

He  said,  "  No  blame  be  on  you  this  day.  God  will
forgive  you,  for  He  is  the  most  merciful  of  those
who  show  mercy.

Go  ye  w^ith  this  my  shirt  and  throw  it  on  my  father's
face ;  he  shall  recover  his  sight :  and  bring  mo
your  family  one  and  all.^'

And  when  the  caravan  had  departed,  their  father  said,
"  I  surely  perceive  the  smell  of  Joseph  :  ^  think  ye
that  I  dote? ''2

They  said,  "  By  God,  thou  art  verily  in  thy  old  mis-
take : "

And  when  the  bearer  of  good  tidings  came,  he  cast  it
on  Jacob's  face,  and  he  was  restored  to  sight.

He  said,  "  Did  I  not  tell  you  that  verily  I  knew  from
God  what  ye  knew  not  ?"

They  said,  "0  our  father,  ask  pardon  for  us  of  our
crimes  :  verily  we  have  sinned."

He  said,  "  I  will  ask  your  pardon  of  my  Lord  ;  verily
He  is  the  Gracious,  the  Merciful."
100  And  when  they   came  in  to   Joseph  lie  provided  an
abode  for  his  parents,^  and  said,  *'  Enter  ye  Egypt,
if  God  will,  secure."

And  he  raised  his  parents  to  a  seat  of  state,  when  they
had  fallen  down  with  prostrations  before  him ;  and
he  said,  "  O  my  father,  this  is  the  meaning  of  my
dream  of  old.  My  Lord  hath  now  made  it  true,
and  hath  dealt  graciously  with  me,  since  He  took
me  forth  from  the  prison,  and  hath  brought  you
up  out  of  the  desert,  after  that  Satan  had  stirred
up  strife  between  me  and  my  brethren ;  verily  my
Lord  is  gracious  to  whom  He  will;  verily  He  is
the  Knowing,  the  Wise.

0  my  Lord,  Thou  hast  given  me  dominion,  and  hast

'  Comp.  Gen.  xxvii.  27.  Joseph,  the  commentators  say,  had  received
this  vestment  from  Gabriel  when  his  brethren  had  thrown  him  into  the
■well.

^  Lit.  unless  ye  think  that  I  dote.  But  lula  may  also  be  taken  as  a  par-
ticle of  reprimand.

^  Joseph's  mother  had  \omr  been  dead.  See  Gen.  xxxv.  19.  But  the
object  of  Muhammad  was  probably  to  bring  the  event  into  strict  accord-
ance with  the  prediction  of  the  dream  (Gen.  xxxvii.  10).  Some,  however,
suppose  that  Billah  is  here  meant,  and  her  appearance  before  Joseph  is
also  asserted  to  be  the  fulfilment  of  the  dream  by  some  of  the  Kabbins.
Comp.  Raschi  on  Gen.  xxxvii.  10.

THE    KOKAN.  251

taught  me  to  expound  dark  sayings. — Maker  of
the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  !  My  guardian
Thou  in  this  world  and  in  the  next !  Cause  Thou
me  to  die  a  Muslim,  and  unite  me  with  the  just/'

This  is  one  of  the  secret  histories^  which  We  reveal
unto  tliee.  Thou  wast  not  present  with  Joseph's
brethren  when  they  concei'ted  their  design  and
laid  their  plot  :  but  the  greater  part  of  men,
though  thou  ardently  desire  it,  will  not  believe.

And  thou  shalt  not  ask  of  them  any  recompense  for
this  message.  It  is  simply  an  instruction  for  all
creatures.

And,  how  many  a  sign  is  there  in  Heaven  and  Earth,
by  which  they  pass,  turning  aside  from  it :

And  most  of  them  believe  not  in  God,  without  also
joining  other  deities  with  Him.

Are  they  then  sure  that  God's  day  of  doom  and  chas-
tisement" shall  not  come  upon  them,  or  that  that
Hour  shall  not  come  upon  them  suddenly,  while
they  are  unaware  ?

Say:  This  is  my  way:  resting  on  clear  evidence,  I  cry
unto  God,  I  and  whoso  foUoweth  me  :  and  I  glorify^
God,  and  I  am  not  one  of  those  who  add  other
deities  to  Him.

And  before  thee  We  have  only  sent  men,  chosen
out  of  the  people  of  the  cities,  to  whom  We  made
revelation. — (Will  they  not  journey  through  the
land,  and  see  what  hath  been  the  end  of  those  who
were  before  them  ?  But  the  mansion  of  the  next
life  shall  be  better  for  those  who  fear  God.  Will
they  not  then  comprehend?) —
110  Until  when  the  Apostles  lost  all  hope,  and  deemed  that
they  were  deluded,  our  aid  reached  them,  and  We
delivered  whom  AVe  would  ;  but  our  vengeance
was  not  averted  from  the  wicked.

Certainly  in  their  histories  is  an  example  for  men  of
understanding.     This   (Koran)   is  not  a  story  in-

'  Lit.  This  is  of  the  announcements  of  the  things  unseen  (by  thee,  Mu-
hammad). Compare  the  manner  in  which  the  story  of  the  Creation  and
of  Moses  in  the  mount  is  introduced,  Sura  xxxviii.  70  ;  xxviii.  45.  Mr.
Muir  thinks  that  Muhanmiad  must  at  this  period,  while  recasting  and
working  up  these  materials,  have  entered  upon  a  course  of  wilful  dissimu-
lation and  deceit  (although  the  end  would  justify  to  him  the  means  em-
ployed) in  claiming  inspiration  for  them.   •

'  Lit.  doomsday  from,  the  chastisement  of  God.

'  Lit.  (J  celebrate)  the  praise  of  God.

252  THE    KOKAN.

vented   (by   IMuhammad),    but    a    confirmation  of
previous    scriptures,    and    an    explanation    of  all
things,  and   guidance    and    mercy  to  those  who
believe.

[LXXVIII.]

SURA  XL.— THE  BELIEVER.

Mecca.— 85  Verses,

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Ha.  Mm.  The  Revelation  (sending  down)  of  the  Book
is  from  God  the  Almighty,  the  All-knowing,'

Forgiver  of  sin,  and  receiver  of  penitence, — vehement
in  chastisement,

Long-suffering !  There  is  no  God  but  He  :  to  Him  doth
man  return.^

None  but  infidels  gainsay  the  signs  of  God  :  but  let  not
their  prosperity  in  the  land  deceive  thee.

The  people  of  Noah,  and  the  confederates  ^  after  them,
brought  the  charge  of  imposture  before  these
Meccans  :  and  each  nation  hath  schemed  against
their  apostle  to  lay  violent  hold  on  him,  and  they
disputed  with  vain  words,  thereby  to  refute  the
truth.  Therefore  did  I  lay  violent  hold  on  them  ;
and  how  great  was  my  chastisement !

And  thus  thy  Lord's  sentence,  that  inmates  shall  they
be  of  the  fire,  was  accomplished  upon  the  infidels.

They  who  bear  the  throne  *  and  they  who  encircle  it,
celebrate  the  praise  of  their  Lord  and  believe  in
Him,  and  implore  forgiveness  for  the  believers : —
"  O  our  Lord  !  Thou  embracest  all  things  in  mercy
and  knowledge;  do  Thou  forgive  therefore  those

'See  Sura  Ixviii.  1,  p.  16,  '  Lit.  the  journey  back.

'Or,  hejithen,  parfans.

The  Chenibic  Vjciiif^s  of  Scripture  are  said  to  be  above  the  throne  of
God  (Is.  vi.  1),  beneath  it  (Ezek.  x.) ;  and  the  mystical  beasts  in  the  Reve-
lations are  said  to  be  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  round  about  it.

THE    KORAN.  253

who  turn  to  Thee  and  follow  thy  path,  and  keep
them  from  the  \  ains  of  hell :

0  oar  Lord  !  and  brinsr  them  into  the  Gardens  of  Eden
which  Thou  hast  promised  to  them,  and  to  the
rigrhteous  ones  of  their  fathers,  and  their  wives
and  their  children ;  verily  Thou  art  the  All-mighty,
the  All-wise :

And  keep  them  from  evil  :  for  on  him  hast  Thou  mercy
whom  on  that  day  Thou  shalt  keep  from  evil;"
and  this  will  be  the  great  felicity.
10  Verily  to  the  infidels  shall  voices  cry,  "  Surely  the
hatred  of  God  is  more  grievous  than  your  hatred
of  yourselves,  when  ye  were  called  to  the  faith,  and
remained  unbelievers.'"

They  shall  say,  "  Twice,  0  our  Lord,  hast  Thou  given
us  death,  and  twice  hast  Thou  given  us  life  :  ^  we
therefore  acknowledge  our  sins  :  but  is  there  no
way  to  escape  ?  "

"  This  hath  befallen  you,  for  that  when  One  God  was
proclaimed  to  you,  ye  believed  not  :  but  when
partners  had  been  united  with  Him,  ye  believed :
but  judgment  belongeth  unto  God,  the  High,  the
Great.''

It  is  He  who  showeth  you  his  signs,  and  sendeth  down
supplies  to  you  from  Heaven  :  but  none  receive
the  warning  save  he  who  turneth  to  God  in  peni-
tence :

Call  then  on  God,  ofiering  Him  a  pure  worship,  even
though  the  infidels  abhor  it.

Of  exalted  grade,  of  the  throne  possessed.  He  sendeth
forth  the  Spirit  at  his  own  behest  on  whomsoever
of  his  servants  He  pleaseth,  that  He  may  warn  of
the  day  of  meeting,-

Their  day  when  they  shall  come  forth  from  their  graves,
and  when  nought  that  concerneth  them  shall  be
hidden  from  God.  AVith  whom  shall  be  the  power
supreme  on  that  day  ?  With  God,  the  One,  the
Almighty.

On  that  day  shall  every  soul  be  recompensed  as  it  hath
deserved  :  no  injustice  on  that  day  !  Verily,  God
will  be  swift  to  reckon.

And  warn  them  of  the  approaching  Day,  when  men's

'  Probably  the  union  of  life  and  death  in  the  womb,  and  the  subsequent
life  followed  by  death.

2  Coiup.  Phil.  iii.  11  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  17,  in  the  Ar.

254  THE    KORAN.

hearts  kJioJI  rise  iip  to  tlieir  throats,  choking  them  ;

Wlien  the  evil-doers  shall  have  no  friend  or  intercessor
who  shall  prevail.
20     God   knoweth    the  deceitful   of  eye,  and  what  men's
breasts  conceal,

And  everythinr/  will  God  decide  with  truth:  But  no-
thing shall  those  gods  whom  men  call  on  beside
Him,  decide.  Verily,  God  !  the  Hearer,  the  Be-
holder, He  !

Have  they  never  journeyed  in  the  land,  and  seen  what
hath  been  the  end  of  those  who  flourished  before
them  ?  Mightier  were  they  in  strength  than  these
Meccans,  and  their  traces  remain  in  the  land  :  Yet
God  took  them  in  their  sins,  and  there  was  none
to  defend  them  against  God.

This,  because  their  apostles  had  come  to  them  with
proofs  of  tlieir  mission,  and  they  believed  not :  so
God  inflicted  punishment  on  them ;  for  He  is
mighty,  vehement  in  retribution.
^  Moreover,  We  had  sent  Moses  of  old  with  our  signs
and  with  clear  authority.

To  Pharaoh,  and  Haman,  and  Karun  :  -  and  they  said,
"  Sorcerer,  impostor.''

And  when  he  came  to  them  from  our  presence  with
the  truth,  they  said,  "  Slay  the  sons  of  those  who
believe  as  he  doth,^  and  save  their  females  alive;"
but  the  stratagem  of  the  unbelievers  issued  only
in  mistake.

And  Pharaoh  said,  "  Let  mo  alone,  that  I  may  kill
Moses ;  and  let  him  call  upon  his  Lord :  verily  I
fear  lest  he  change  your  religion,  or  cause  disorder
to  show  itself  in  the  land."

And  ]\Ioses  said,  "  I  verily  take  refuge  with  my  Lord
and  your  Lord  from  every  proud  one  who  believeth
not  in  a  day  of  reckoning."

And  a  man  of  the  family  of  Pharaoh,  who  was  a  BE-
LIEVER,3  but  hid  his  faith,  said,  "  Will  ye  slay  a
man  because  he  saith  my  Lord  is  God,  when  he
hath  already  come  to  you  with  proofs  of  his  mission
from  your  Lord  ?  for  if  he  be  a  liar,  on  him  then
will  be  his  lie  :  *  but  if  he  be  a  man  of  truth,  part

'  Sec  Sura  [Ixxix.]  xxviii.  76.  ^  Lit.  with  him.

•  Thus  Sura  [Ixxix. 1  xxviii.  20,  and  Sura  [Ix.]  xxxvi.  19,  we  have  a  simi-
lar character  introduced  into  the  narrative.

*  Corap.  Acts  V.  38,  39.

THE    KORAN.  255

at  least  of  what  he  threatenetli  will  light  upon  you.
Truly  God  guic'eth  uot  him  who  is  a  transgressor,
a  liar.
30  0  my  people  !  tliis  day  is  the  kingdom  yours,  tlie  emi-
nent of  the  earth  !  but  who  shall  defend  us  from
tlie  vengeance  of  God  if  it  come  on  us  ?  "  Pharaoh
said,  "  I  would  have  you  see  only  what  I  see ;  and
in  a  right  way  only  will  I  guide  you.^*

Then  said  he  who  believed,  "  0  my  people  !  truly  I  fear
for  you  the  like  of  the  day  of  the  aUies,^

The  like  of  the  state  of  the  people  of  Noah  and  'Ad  and
Thamood,

And  of  those  who  came  after  them ;  yet  God  willeth  not
injustice  to  his  servants.

And,  O  my  people  !  I  indeed  fear  for  you  the  day  of
mutual  outcry —

The  day  when  ye  shall  be  turned  back  from  the  Judg-
ment into  hell :  No  protector  shall  ye  then  have
against  God.  And  he  whom  God  shall  mislead,
no  guide  shall  there  be  for  him.
%  Moreover,  Joseph  came  to  you  before  with  clear  tokens,
but  ye  ceased  not  to  doubt  of  the  message  with
which  he  came  to  you,  until  when  he  died,  ye  said,
'  God  will  by  no  means  raise  up  an  apostle  after
him.'  Thus  God  misleadeth  him  who  is  a  trans-
gressor, a  doubter.

They  who  gainsay  the  signs  of  God  without  authority
having  come  to  them,  are  greatly  hated  ^  by  God
and  by  those  who  believe.  Thus  God  sealeth  up
every  proud,  contumacious  heart.

And  Pharaoh  said,  "  0  Haman,*  Build  for  me  a  tower
that  I  may  perchance  reach  the  avenues.

The  avenues  of  the  heavens,  and  may  mount  to  the  God

of  Moses,  for  I  verily  deem  him  a  liar.''

40     And  thus  the  evil  of  his  doings  was  made  fair-seeming  to

Phai-aoh,  and  he  was  turned  away  from  the  path  of

truth;  but  the  artifice  of  Pharaoh  issued  only  in  ruin.

'i.e.  I  only  point  out  to  you  what  I  think  (to  be  right).

^  The  Arab  tribes,  no  doubt,  constantly  formed  temporary  alliances.
Muhammad  implies  that  they  were  confederate  against  their  prophets.  Or
it  may  be  rendered  pagan.%  banded  in  idolatry.

^  Lit.  it  (i.  e.  the  gainsaying)  is  grievorisly  odious  to.

■*  Haman,  the  fovourite  of  Ahasuerus  and  the  enemy  of  the  Jews,  is  thus
made  the  vizier  of  Pharaoh.     The  Rabbins  make  this  vizier  to  have  been
Korah,  Jethro,  or  Balaam. — ^lidr.  Jalknt  on  Ex.  oh.  1,  Sect.  162-168
and  Tr.  Solah,  fol.  11.     See  Sura  [Lxxix.]  xxviii.  5.

256  THE    KOEAN.

And  ho  who  believed  said,  "  0  my  people  !  follow  me  :
into  the  right  way  will  I  guide  you.

0  my  people  !  this  present  life  is  only  a  passing  joy,
but  verily  the  life  to  come^  that  is  the  mansion
that  abideth.

Whoso  hath  wrought  evil  shall  not  be  recompensed  but
with  its  like ;  but  whoso  hath  done  the  things  that
are  right,  whether  male  or  female,  and  is  a  be-
liever— these  shall  enter  paradise  :  without  reckon-
ing shall  they  be  supplied  therein.

And,  0  my  people  !  how  is  it  that  I  bid  you  to  salva-
tion, but  that  ye  bid  me  to  the  fire  ?

Ye  invite  me  to  deny  God,  and  to  join  with  Him  that
of  which  I  know  nothing ;  but  I  invite  you  to  the
Mighty,  the  Forgiving.

No  doubt  is  there  that  they  to  whom  ye  invite  me  are
not  to  be  invoked  either  in  this  world  or  in  the
world  to  come,  and  that  unto  God  is  our  return,
and  that  the  transgressors  shall  be  the  inmates  of
the  Fire :

Then  shall  ye  remember  what  I  am  saying  unto  you :
and  to  the  judgment  of  God  submit  I  my  case  :
Verily,  God  beholdeth  his  servants.''

So  God  preserved  him  from  the  evils  which  they  had
planned,  and  the  woe  of  the  punishment  encom-
passed the  people  of  Pharaoh.

It  is  the  Fire  to  which  they  shall  be  exposed  morning
and  evening,  and  on  the  day  when  "  the  Hour'*
shall  arrive — "  Bring  in  ^  the  people  of  Pharaoh
into  the  severest  of  the  punishment."
50  And  when  they  shall  wrangle  together  in  the  fire,  the
weak  shall  say  to  those  who  had  borne  them-
selves so  proudly,  "  Verily  it  is  you  we  followed :
will  ye  therefore  relieve  us  from  aught  of  the
Fire  ?  "

And  those  proud  ones  shall  say,  '^Verily  we  are  all
in  it  ;  lo,  now  hath  God  judged  between  his
servants."

And  they  who  are  in  the  Fire  shall  say  to  the  keepers
of  Hell,  "  Implore  your  Lord  that  He  would  give
us  ease  but  for  a  day  from  the  torment :  "

They  shall  say,  "  Came  not  your  apostles  to  you  with
the  clear  evidences?"     They  shall  say,  ''Yes;""

'  According  to  another  pointing,  Enter.     See  verse  76.

})

THE    KORAN.  257

They  shall  say,  "  Cry  ye  then  for  help  : "  but  the
cry  of  the  unbelievers  shall  be  only  in  vain.
Verily,  in  this  present  life  will  We  assuredly  succour
our  apostles  and  those  who  have  believed,  and  on
the  day  when  the  witnesses  shall  stand  forth ;
A  day  whereon  the   plea  of  the    evil-doers   shall  not
avail  them ;  but  theirs  shall  be  a  curse,  and  theirs
the  woe  of  the  abode  in  Hell.
And  of  old  gave  We  Moses  the  guidance,   and  We
made  the   children  of  Israel  the  heritors  of  the
Book, — a  guidance  and  warning  to  men  endued
with  understanding.

Therefore  be  thou  patient ;  true  verily  is  the  promise
of  God;  and  seek  pardon  for  thy  fault,^  and  cele-
brate the  praise  of  thy  Lord  at  evening  and  at
morning.
Verily  those  who  cavil  at  the  signs  of  God  without
authority  having  reacned  them,  nought  is  there
but  pride  in  their  breasts  :  but  they  shall  not
succeed.  Fly  thou  for  refuge  then  to  God ;  He
verily  is  the  Hearer,  the  Beholder.

Greater  surely  than  the  creation  of  man  is  the  creation  of
the  heavens  and  of  the  earth  :  but  most  men  know
it  not.
GO  Moreover,  the  blind  and  the  seeing,  and  the  evil-
doer and  they  who  believe  and  do  the  things
that  are  right,  shall  not  be  deemed  equal.  How
few  are  monished  !

Verily,  "  the  Hour ''  will  surely  arrive  :  there  is  no
doubt  with  regard  to  it :  but  most  men  believe
not.

And  your  Lord  saith,  "  Call  upon  Me — I  will  hearken
unto  you  :  but  they  who  turn  in  disdain  from  my
service  shall  enter  Hell  rejected. ^^

It  is  God  who  hath  ordained  the  night  for  your  rest,
and  the  day  to  give  you  light  :  verily  God  is
rich  in  bounties  to  men :  but  most  men  are  not
thankful.

This  is  God  your  Lord,  Creator  of  all  things  :  no
god  is  there  but  He  :  How  then  do  ye  choose
a  falsehood  ?

Yet  thus  do  they  choose  a  falsehood  who  gainsay  the
signs  of  God.

'  Thy  remissness  in  propagating  Islam. — Beidh.

s

258  TIIK    KORAN.

It  is  God  wlio  hatli  given  yon  the  Earth  as  a  secure
abode^  and  the  Heaven  as  a  ceiled  roof^  and  formed
you,  and  made  )'onr  forms  beautiful,  and  supplieth
you  with  good  things.  This  is  God  your  Lord.
Blessed  then  be  God  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds  !

He  is  the  Living  One.  No  God  is  there  but  He.  Call
then  upon  Him  offering  Him  a  pure  worship.
Praise  be  to  God  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds  !

Say  :  Verily  I  am  forbidden  to  worship  what  ye  call  on
beside  God,  after  that  the  clear  evidences  have  come
to  me  from  my  Lord,  and  I  am  bidden  to  surrender
myself  to  fits  Lord  of  the  Worlds.

He  it  is  who  created  you  of  the  dust,  then  of  the
germs  of  life,  then  of  thick  blood,  then  brought
you  forth  infants  :  then  He  letteth  you  reach  your
full  strength,  and  then  become  old  men  (but  some
of  you  die  first),  and  reach  the  ordained  term.
And  haply  ye  will  understand.
70  It  is  He  who  giveth  life  and  death  ;  and  when  He  de-
creeth  a  thing.  He  only  saith  of  it,  "  Be,"  and  it  is.

Seest  thou  not  those  who  cavil  at  the  signs  of  God  ?
how  are  they  turned  aside  !

They  who  treat  "  the  Book,'^  and  the  message  with
which  We  have  sent  our  Sent  Ones,  as  a  lie,  shall
know  tJie  tndh  hereafter  :

When  the  collars  shall  be  on  their  necks  and  the  chains,
they  shall  be  dragged  into  Hell  :  then  in  the  fire
shall  they  be  burned.

Then  shall  it  be  said  to  them,  "  Where  are  they  whom
ye  made  the  objects  of  joint  worship  besides  God  V
They  shall  say,  "  They  have  vanished  away  from
us.  Nay,  it  was  nought  on  which  we  called
heretofore."  Thus  God  leadcth  the  unbelievers
astray.

—  "This  for  you,  because  of  j^our  exulting  on  earth
apart  from  truth,  and  because  of  your  inso-
lence.

Enter  ye  the  portals  of  Hell  to  abide  therein  for
ever.  And,  wretched  the  abode  of  the  haughty
ones  !  "

Therefore  be  thou  steadfast  in  patience  :  verily  the
promise  of  God  is  truth  :  and  whether  We  shall
let  thee  witness  part  of  the  woes  with  which  We
threatened  them,  or  whether  We  cause  thee  first
to  die,  unto  Us  shall  they  be  brought  back.

THE    KORAN.  259

And  We  have  already  sent  apostles  before  ttee  :  of
some  We  have  told  thee^  and  of  others  We  have
told  thee  nothing  :  ^  but  no  apostle  had  the  power
to  come  with  a  sign  unless  by  the  leave  of  God.
But  when  God's  behest  cometh,  everything  will  be
decided  with  truth  :  and  there  they  perish  who
treated  it  as  a  vain  thing.

It  is  God  who  hath  given  you  the  cattle  that  on  some
of  them  ye  may  ride,  and  of  some  may  eat ;
80  (Other  advantages  too  do  ye  derive  from  them) — and
that  by  them  ye  may  effect  the  projects  ye  cherish
in  your  breasts  ;  for  on  them  and  on  ships  are  ye
borne :

And  He  showeth  you  his  signs  :  which,  then,  of  the
signs  of  God  will  ye  deny?

Have  they  not  journeyed  in  this  land,  and  seen  what
hath  been  the  end  of  those  who  flourished  before
them?  More  were  they  than  these  in  number,
and  mightier  in  strength,  and  the  traces  of  their
power  are  yet  rcmanijng  in  the  land  :  -  but  what
they  had  acquired  availed  them  nothing ;

And  when  their  apostles  had  come  to  them  with  the
tokens  of  their  mission,  they  exulted  in  what  they
possessed  of  knowledge ;  but  that  retribution  at
which  they  had  scoffed  encompassed  them.

And  when  they  beheld  our  vengeance  they  said,  "  We
believe  in  God  alone,  and  we  disbelieve  in  the
deities  we  once  associated  with  Him.''

But  their  faith,  after  that  they  witnessed  our  ven-
geance, could  not  profit  them.  Such  the  proce-
dure of  God,  which  was  in  force  in  regard  to  his
servants. — And  there  the  unbelievers  perished.

'  It  is  possible  that  Muhammad,  conscious  of  his  ignorance  of  Jewish
history,  intends  in  this  verse  to  screen  himself  from  the  charge  of  passing
over  the  histories  of  many  of  their  prophets.

*  The  wealth  of  Mecca,  although  it  still  numbered  about  12,0()0  inhabi-
tants (as  well  as  of  Arabia  generally),  had  much  declined  at  the  time  of
Muhammad,  owing  mainly  to  the  navigation  of  the  Red  Sea,  under  the
Roman  dominion  over  Egypt,  which  of  course  impoverished  the  tribes  situ-
ated on  the  line  of  the  old  mercantile  route  southward.  Mecca,  however,
was  still,  to  a  certain  extent,  prosperous.     Comp.  Sura  [LxL]  xliii,  28.

s  'J

260  THE    KORAN.

[LXXIX.]

SURA  XXVIII.— THE  STORY.
Mecca. — 88  Verses.

Ill  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Ta.  Sin.  Mim.'  These  are  the  signs  of  the  lucid
Book.

We  will  recite  to  thee  portions  of  the  History  of  Moses
and  Pharaoh  with  truth,  for  the  teaching  of  the
faithful.

Now  Pharaoh  lifted  himself  up  in  the  earth,  and  di-
vided his  people  into  parties  :  one  portion  of  them
he  ill-treated — He  slew  their  male  children,  and
let  their  females  only  live ;  verily  he  was  one  of
those  who  committed  acts  of  violence.

And  We  were  minded  to  show  favour  to  those  who
were  brought  low  in  the  land,  and  to  make
them  spiritual  chiefs,-  and  to  make  them  Pha-
raoh's heirs.

And  to  staljlish  them  in  the  land ;  ^  and  to  make  Pha-
raoh and  Haman  and  their  hosts  the  eye-witnesses
of  what  they  dreaded  from  them.*

And  We  said  by  revelation  to  the  mother  of  Moses,
"  Give  him  suck  ;  and  if  thou  fearest  for  him,
launch  him  on  the  sea  ;  and  fear  not,  neither  be
grieved ;  verily  We  will  restore  him  to  thee,  and
make  him  one  of  the  apostles.^'

And  Pharaoh's  family  took  him  up  to  be  a  foe  and  a
sorrow  to  them  ;  sinners  of  a  truth,  were  Pharaoh
and  Haman  and  their  hosts  1  ^

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  1  (p.  16).  '  Lit.  Imams.

'  Comp.  [xcL]  ii.  .58.

*  Hainan,  the  vizier,  according  to  the  Koran,  of  Pharaoh  !

5  The  Rabbins  (Miflr.  Jalkut  on  Exodus  ii.  Pirke  R.  Eliezer,  48)  state
that  the  cruelty  of  Pharaoh  was  occasioned  by  a  dream  in  which  he  saw
himself  slain  by  a  Hebrew  youth.

THE    KORAN.  261

And  Pharaoh's  wife  said,  "  Joy  of  the  eye  ^  to  me  and
thee  !  put  him  not  to  death  :  haply  he  will  be
useful  to  us,  or  we  may  adopt  him  as  a  son."
But  they  knew  not  what  they  did.

And  the  heart  of  Moses's  mother  became  a  blank  -
through  fear  :  almost  had  she  discovered  him,
but  that  We  girded  up  her  heart  with  constancy,
in  order  that  she  might  become  one  of  those  who
believe.
10  And  she  said  to  her  sister,  "Follow  him."  And  she
watched  him  from  afar  :  and  they  perceived  it  not.

And  We  caused  him  to  refuse  the  nurses,^  until  the
sister  came  and  said,  "  Shall  I  point  out  to  you
the  family  of  a  house  who  will  rear  him  for  you
and  be  careful  of  him  ?  "

So  We  restored  him  to  his  mother,  to  be  the  joy  of  her
eyes,  and  that  she  might  not  fx-et,  and  that  she
might  know  that  the  promise  of  God  was  true.
But  most  men  knew  it  not.

And  when  he  had  reached  his  age  of  strength,  and
had  become  a  man,  We  bestowed  on  him  wisdom
and  knowledge  ;  for  thus  do  We  reward  the
righteous.

And  he  entered  a  city  at  the  time  when  its  inhabitants
were  careless  :  ■*  and  found  therein  two  men  figfht-
mg :  the  one  of  his  own  party,  the  other  of  his
enemies.  And  he  who  was  of  his  own  party
asked  his  help  against  him  who  was  of  his  enemies,
and  Moses  smote  him  with  his  fist  and  made  an
end  of  him.  Said  he,^  "  This  is  a  work  of  Satan ;
lo,  he  is  an  enemy,  a  manifest  misleader."

He  said,  "  0  my  Lord,  verily  I  have  sinned  to  mine
own  hurt  6 — forgive  me  then."  So  God  forgave
him ;  lo  !  He  is  the  Forgiving,  the  Merciful.

He  said,  "  Lord,  because  Thou  hast  showed  me  this

'  This  child  will  be  a  comfort  to  us.  See  Sura  [Iviii.]  xix.  26.  In  Ex.
ii.  5-10  it  is  the  daughter,  not  the  wife,  of  Pharaoh  who  rescues  the  babe.

'  Lit.  empty,  void.

3  "  "WTiy  must  the  nurse  be  a  Hebrew  woman  ?  (Ex.  ii.  7.)  This  shows
that  he  refused  the  brea.«t  of  all  the  Egyptian  women.  For  the  Holy,
blessed  be  He,  had  said.  Shall  the  mouth  that  is  to  speak  with  me  suck
an  unclean  thing  ?  "     Sotah.  xii.  2.

*  Lit.  in  the  time  of  neglect  on  the  part  of  its  people,  i.  e.  at  the  hour  of
the  noon  sleep.

'  "With  immediate  repentance  for  what  he  had  done.

^  Lit.  I  hare  acted  xinjusthj  to  my  soul.

262  TUB    KORAN.

grace,  I  will  by  no  means  be  the  helper  of  the
wicked."

And  in  the  city  at  morn  he  was  full  of  fear,  casting
furtiv^e  glances  round  him  ;  when  lo  !  the  man
whom  he  had  helped  the  day  before,  cried  out  to
him  again  for  help.  Said  Moses  to  him,  "  Verily
thou  art  plainly  a  depraved^  person."

Then  when  he  would  have  laid  violent  hands  on  him
who  was  their  common  foe,  he  said  to  him,  "  0
Moses,  dost  thou  desire  to  slay  me,  as  thou  slayedst
a  man  yesterday  ?  Thou  desirest  only  to  become
a  tyrant  in  this  land,  and  desirest  not  to  become  a
peacemaker."

And  a  man  came  running  up  from  the  city's  end  who
said,  "  O  Moses,  of  a  truth  the  nobles  consult  to
slay  thee — Begone  then — verily  I  counsel  thee  as
a  friend."
20  So  forth  he  went  from  it  in  fear,  looking  warily  about
him.  He  said,  '*  0  Lord,  deliver  me  from  the
unjust  people."

And  when  he  was  journeying^  toward  Madian,  he  said,
"  Haply  my  Lord  will  direct  me  in  the  right
path!"

And  when  he  arrived  at  the  water  of  Madian,  he  found
at  it  a  company  of  men  watering :

And  he  found  beside  them  two  women'  driving  back
their  flock :  "  Why  do  ye,"  said  he,  "  thus"  ?
They  said,  "  We  cannot  water  till  the  shepherds
have  driven  off;  for  our  father  is  very  aged.''

So  he  watered  for  them — then  retired  to  the  shade  and
said,  "  O  my  Lord  !  verily  of  the  good  Thou  hast
caused  mo  to  meet  with  I  stand  in  need."  *

And  one  of  them  came  to  him,  walking  bashfully.  Said
she,  "  Lo,  my  father  calleth  thee,  that  he  may  pay
thee  wages  for  thy  watering  for  us,"  And  when
he  came  to  him  and  had  told  him  his  STORY,
''  Fear  not,"  said  he,  ''  thou  hast  escaped  from  an
unjust  people."

One  of  them  said,  "0  my  father,  hire  him  :  verily  the
best  thou  canst  hire  is  the  strong,  the  trusty."

He  said,  "  Verily  to  one  of  these  my  two  daughters  I

'  Or,  one  who  is  in  the  vrrong,  quarrelsome.

*  Lit.  hcul  set  his  face.

*  Comp.  Ex.  ii.  16,  17,  whore  the  djiughters  are  said  to  he  seven.

*  That  is,  of  a  wife.     Lit.  /  am  poor  in  regard  to  that  ivhich,  &c.

THE    KORAN.  263

desire  to  marrv  thee,  if  for  eight  years  thou  wilfc
be  my  hired  servant :  ^  and  if  thou  fulfil  ten,  it  shall
be  of  thine  own  accord,  for  I  wish  not  to  deal
hardly  with  thee.  Thou  wilt  find  me,  if  God  will,
one  of  the  upright.'^

He  said,  "  Be  it  so  between  me  and  thee :  whichever
of  the  two  terms  I  fulfil,  there  will  be  no  injustice
to  me.     And  God  is  witness  of  what  we  say.'''

And  Avhen  Moses  had  fulfilled  the  term,  and  was
journeying  with  his  family,  he  perceived  a  fire  on
the  mountain  side.  He  said  to  his  family,  "  Wait
ye ;  I  perceive  a  fire.  Haply  I  may  bring  you
tidings  from  it,  or  a  brand  from  the  fire  to  warm

you.-

30  And  when  he  came  up  to  it,  a  Voice  cried  to  him-  out
of  the  bush  from  the  right  side  of  the  valley  in  the
sacred  hollow,  "  O  Moses,  I  truly  am  God,  the
Lordof  the  Worlds  :''

And  ''  Throw  down  now  thy  rod.''  Then  when  he  saw
it  stir  itself  as  though  it  were  a  serpent,  he  re-
treated and  fled  and  retraced  not  his  steps.  "  0
Moses,"  cried  the  Voice,  "  draw  nigh  and  fear  not ;
verily  thou  art  in  safety.

Put  thy  hand  into  thy  bosom  ;  it  shall  come  forth  white,
but  unharmed  :  and  draw  back  thy  hand  ^  to  thee
without*  fear,  for  these  shall  be  two  signs  from  thy
Lord  to  Pharaoh  and  his  nobles ;  verily  they  are  a
perverse  people."

He  said,  "  0  my  Lord  !  truly  I  have  slain  one  of  them,
therefore  fear  I  lest  they  slay  me  :

And  my  brother  Aaron  is  clearer  of  speech  than  I;
Send  him  therefore  with  me  as  a  help,  and  to  make
good  my  cause ;  verily  I  fear  lest  they  treat  mo  as
an  impostor."

He  said,  "  We  will  strengthen  thine  arm  with  thy
brother,  and  We  will  give  power  unto  you  both,

'  The  compact  (Gen.  xxLx.  15 — .39)  between  Laban  and  Jacob  must  have
been  present  to  the  mind  of  Aruhammad  when  coinposinf;  this  tale.

'  Lit.  he  icas  cried  to.  According  to  Muliainmad,  Moses  had  resolved
to  quit  Madian  previously  to  the  Vision  of  the  Bush,  which,  according  to
Ex.  iii.,  was  the  real  occasion.

'  Lit.  thtj  wing.

'*  Lit.  from,  i.e.  returning  back  from.  The  tradition  of  the  Muslims  is,
that  Moses  was  a  black.  The  Rabbinic  traditions,  in  opposition  to  Ex.
7,  8,  agree  with  the  Koran  in  stating  that  this  miracle  was  performed. —
Pirke,  R.  EUezer,  48.

264  THE    KORAN.

SO  that  they  shall  not  equal  you  as  to  our  signs.

Ye  twain  and  they  who  follow  you,  shall  gain  the

day."
And  when  Moses  came  to  him  with  our  demonstrative

signs,  they   said,    ^'  This   is    nought  but  magical

device ;  and  we  never  heard  the  like  among  our

sires  of  old."
And  Moses  said,    "  My  Lord  best  knoweth  on  whom

He  hath  bestowed  his  guidance,  and  whose  shall

be  the  recompense  of  the  abode  of  Paradise.  Verily,

the  wicked  shall  not  prosper."
And  Pharaoh  said,  "  0  ye  nobles,  ye  have  no  other  god

that  I  know  of  but  myself.     Burn  me  then,  Haman,

bricks  of  clay,^  and  build  me  a  tower  :  perhaps  1

may  mount  up  to  the  God  of  Moses,  for  in  sooth,

I  deem  him  a  liar."
And  he  and  his  hosts  behaved  themselves  proudly  and

unjustly  on  the  earth,  and  thought  that  they  should

never  be  brought  back  to  Us,
40     So  We  seized  on  him  and  his  hosts  and  cast  them  into

the  sea ;   (Behold  then,  what  was  the  end  of  the

wrongful  doers  :)
And  We  made  them  leaders  who  invite  to  the  fire  of

hell,  and  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  they  shall  not

be  helped ; —
We  pursued   them  with  a  curse   in   this   world,  and

abhorred  shall  thoy  be  on  the  day  of  Resurrection.
%  And  after  We  had  destroyed  the  former  generations,

We  gave  the  Book  of  the  Law  to  Moses,  a  demon-
stration to  men  and  a  guidance  and  a  mercy,  that

haply  they  might  be  monished.
And  thou  wast  not  on  the  western  slope  of  Sinai  when

We  laid  his  charge  on  Moses,  nor  wast  thou  one  of

the  witnesses ;
But  We  raised  up  generations  after  Moses,  men  whose

days  were  lengthened;^  neither  didst  thou  dwell

among  the  inhabitants  of  Madian  to  rehearse  to

them  our  signs,  but  We  sent  Apostles  to  them  :'

'  Lit.  kindle  tipon  the  clay.  Comp.  [Ixxviii.]  xl.  38-49.  "  He  (Pharaoh)
said  to  them  :  From  the  first  have  ye  spoken  an  untruth,  for  the  Lord  of
the  Worlds  am  L  I  created  myself  and  the  Nile,  as  it  is  said  (Ez.  xxix.
.3),  *  My  river  is  mine  own,  and  I  have  made  it  for  myself.'  "  (E.T.) — Mid.
Kab.  on  Ex.  Par.  Ti.

'  So  that  the  oral  traditions  would  be  easily  handed  down.

'  Or,  yet  have  we  sent  thee  as  an  Ajyostle.

THE    KORAN.  265

Nor  wast  thou  on  *lie  slope  of  Sinai  wlion  We  called  to
Moses,  but  it  is  of  the  mercy  of  thy  Lord  that  thou
warnest  a  people  to  whom  uo  waruer  had  come
before  thee  :  haply  they  will  be  monished :

And  that  when  a  calamity  befalleth  them  for  their  pre-
vious handy-workj  they  should  not  then  exclaim,
"  0  our  Lord  !  why  hast  Thou  not  sent  an  Apostle
to  us  ?  Then  we  should  have  followed  thy  signs
and  been  of  the  believers/^

Yet  when  the  truth  came  to  them  from  our  very  pre-
sence, they  said,  "  Unless  the  like  powers  be  given

to  him  that  wei-e  given  to  Moses "^    But

did  they  not  disbelieve  in  what  of  old  was  given  to
Moses  ?  They  said,  "  Two  works  of  sorcery  ^  have
helped  each  other ; "  and  thoy  said,  "  Aye,  we
disbelieve  them  both/'

Say  :  Bring  then  a  Book  from  before  God  which  shall
be  a  better  guide  the  i  these  two,  that  I  may  follow
it ;  if  ye  speak  the  truth.
50  And  if  they  answer  thee  not,  then  know  that  they  are
only  following  their  own  caprices  :  and  who  goeth
more  widely  astray  than  he  who  followeth  his  own
caprice  without  guidance  from  God  ?  Verily  God
guideth  not  the  wicked.

And  now  have  We  caused  the  word  {of  the  Koran)  to
come  unto  them  ;  haply  they  will  receive  the
monition  :

They  ^  to  whom  We  gave  the  Scriptures  before  it  believe
in  it.

And  when  it  is  recited  to  them  they  say,  "We  believe
in  it :  lo  !  it  is  the  truth  from  our  Lord.  We  were
verily  Muslims  before  it  came.''

Twice  shall  their  reward  be  given  them,  for  that  they
suffer  with  patience,  and  repel  evil  with  good,  and
give  alms  out  of  that  with  which  We  provided
them.

And  when    they  hear  light  discourse  they  withdraw

'  Supply,  wc  inll  not  believe.  '  The  Pentateuch  and  the  Koran.

^  The  Meccan  Jews  and  Christians  who  had  formerly  embraced  Islam,
and  could  now  affirm  that  they  had  always  held  the  same  faith.  This
passage  could  not  have  been  written  after  Muhammad's  experience  of
Jewish  unbelief  at  Medina.  Dr.  Sprenger,  however  (vol.  i.  p.  71),  thinks
that  we  have  here  a  proof  that  the  doctrines  of  Islam  and  the  title  Muslim
were  known  and  professed  before  the  time  of  Muhammad,  i.  e.  by  the
Hanyfs,  &c.  In  fact,  even  Abraham,  according  to  ]\Iuhammad,  was  a
Muslim.

266  THE    KORAN.

from  it,  and  say,  "  Gur  works  for  us  and  your
works  for  you  !  Peace  be  on  you  !  We  are  not
in  quest  of  fools  ! ''

Thou  truly  canst  not  guide  whom  thou  desirest ;  but
God  guideth  whom  He  will ;  and  He  best  knoweth
those  who  yield  to  guidance.

But  they  say,  "  If  we  follow  the  way  into  which  thou  art
guided,^  we  shall  be  despoiled  of  our  country. ^^
But  have  We  not  established  for  them  a  secure
asylum,  to  which  fruits  of  every  kind,  our  gift  for
their  support,  are  gathered  together  ?  But  most
of  them  have  no  knowledge.

And  how  many  cities  have  AV^e  destroyed  that  flourished
in  wanton  ease  !  ^  And  these  their  dwellings  have
not  been  inhabited  since  their  time  save  by  a  few,
and  it  is  We  who  became  their  heirs.

But  thy  Lord  did  not  destroy  tltese  cities  till  He  had  sent
an  apostle  to  their  mother-city  to  rehearse  our
signs  to  its  people  :  nor  did  We  destroy  the  cities
unless  its  people  were  unjust.
60  And  all  that  hath  been  bestowed  on  you  is  only  the
enjoyment  of  this  life  present  and  its  pomp  :  but
that  which  is  with  Grod  is  better  and  more  lasting.
Will  ye  not  be  wise  ?

Shall  he  then  to  whom  We  have  promised  a  goodly
promise  which  he  shall  meet  with,  be  as  he  on
whom  We  have  bestowed  the  conveniences  of  this
life  present,  and  who  on  the  day  of  Resurrection
shall  be  brought  forward /t»/*  puu/s/imcni  ?

And  on  that  day  will  God  cry  to  them  and  say,  "  Where
are  my  companions,  as  ye  supposed  them  ?  "

They  on  whom  doom  shall  be  justly  pronounced  will
say,  "  O  our  Lord  !  these  are  they  whom  we  led
astray :  we  led  them  astray  even  as  we  went
astray  ourselves  :  Thou  hast  no  cause  of  blame
against  us.'  It  was  not  us  whom  they  wor-
shipped.*

And  it  shall  be  said,  "  Call  now  on  those  whom  ye
made  God's  companions  :  "  and  they  shall  call  on
them,  but  they  will  not  answer  them ;  and  they

'  Lit.  the  guidance  with  thee.

*  T>it.  v'hose  manner  of  living  was  insolent.

'  Lit.  ire  quit  07irselvfs  of  them  (and  turn)  unto  thee.

*  But  their  own  imaginations  and  passions.

THE    KORAN.  267

shall  see  the  punishment.     Would  that  they  had
been  guided  aright !

And  on  that  day  shall  God  call  to  them  and  say,  "  What
answer  gave  ye  to  the  apostles  ?  "

But  on  that  day  they  shall  be  too  blinded  ivith  con-
fusion to  give  an  account/  nor  shall  they  ask  it  of
one  another.

Yet  as  to  him  who  shall  turn  to  God  and  believe  and  do
the  thing  that  is  right,  it  may  come  to  pass  that  he
shall  be  among  the  happy.

And  thy  Lord  createth  what  He  -will  and  hath  a  free
choice;  but  they,  the  false  f]ods,  have  no  power  of
choice.  Glory  be  to  God  !  and  high  let  Him  be
exalted  above  those  whom  they  associate  with
Him:—

And  thy  Lord  knoweth  what  their  breasts  conceal  and
what  they  bring  to  light : —
70     And  He  is  God !     There  is  no  god  but  He  !     His  all
praise  in  this  life  and  in  the  next,  and  with  Him  is
judgment,  and  to  Him  shall  ye  be  brought  back  !

Say  :  What  think  ye  ?  If  God  should  enshroud  you
with  one  long  night  until  the  day  of  Eesurrection,
what  god  beside  God  would  bring  you  light  ?  Will
ye  not  then  hearken  ?

Say  :  What  think  ye  ?  If  God  should  make  it  one  long
day  for  you  until  the  day  of  Resurrection,  what  god
but  God  could  bring  you  the  night  in  which  to
take  your  rest  ?      Will  ye  not  then  see  ?

Of  his  mercy  He  hath  made  for  you  the  night  that  ye
may  take  your  rest  in  it ;  and  the  day  that  ye  may
seek  what  ye  need  out  of  his  bounteous  supplies  :
haply  ye  will  be  thankful.

One  day  God  will  call  to  them  and  say,  ''  Where  are
my  companions  as  ye  supposed  them  ?  "

And  We  will  bring  up  a  witness  out  of  every  nation
and  say,  "  Bring  your  proofs."  And  they  shall
know  that  the  truth  is  with  God  alone,  and  the
gods  of  their  own  devising  shall  desert  them.

^  Now  Korah  -  was  of  the  people  of  Moses  :  but  he

'  Lit.  tht  account  shall  be  blind  or  dark  to  them.  Sie  werden  vor  Bestiir-
zung  keine  Eechenschaft  geben. — Ullm.

'  Ar.  Karun.    "  Joseph  concealed  three  treasures  in  Egypt,  one  of  which

became  known  to  Korah the  keys  of  Korah's  treasure-chambers  were

a  burden  for  300  white  mules."  Midr.  Jalknt  on  Eccl.  v.  12,  "  Riches  kept
lor  the  owners  thereof  to  their  hurt," — which  may  have  furnished  xMu-

268  THE    KORAN.

behaved  haughtily  toward  them  ;  for  We  had  given
him  such  treasure  that  verily  its  keys  would  have
burdened  a  company  of  men  of  strength.  When
his  people  said  to  him,  '^  Exult  not ;  verily  God
loveth  not  those  who  exult ;

But  seek,  by  means  of  what  God  hath  given  thee,  to
attain  the  future  Mansion  ;  and  neglect  not  thy
part^  in  this  world,  but  be  bounteous  to  others  as
God  hath  been  bounteous  to  thee,  and  seek  not  to
commit  excesses  on  the  earth  ;  verily  God  loveth
not  those  who  commit  excesses  :"

He  said,  "  It  hath  been  given  me  only  on  account  of
the  knowledge^  that  is  in  me."  Did  he  not  know
that  God  had  destroyed  before  him  generations
that  were  mightier  than  he  in  strength  and  had
amassed  more  abundant  wealth  ?^  But  such  sin-
ners need  not  be  asked  of  their  crimes.

And  Korah  went  forth  to  his  people  in  his  pomp.
Those  who  were  greedy  for  this  present  life  said,
"  Oh  that  we  had  the  like  of  that  which  hath  been
bestowed  on  Korah  !  Truly  he  is  possessed  of
great  good  fortune."
80  But  they  to  whom  knowledge  had  been  given  said,
"  Woe  to  you  !  the  reward  of  God  is  better  for  him
who  believeth  and  worketh  righteousness,  and
none  shall  win  it  but  those  who  have  patiently
endured."

And  We  clave  the  earth  for  him  and  for  his  palace,  and
he  had  no  forces  against  God,  to  help  him — nor
was  he  among  those  who  are  succoured.

And  they  who  the  day  before  had  coveted  his  lot  soon
said,  "  Aha  !  *  God  enlargeth  supplies  to  whom  He
pleaseth  of  his  servants,  or  is  sparing.  Had  not
God  been  gracious  to  us.  He  had  surely  caused  i]in
earth  to  cleave  for  us.  Aha  !  the  ungrateful  shall
not  prosper."
^  As  to  this  future  Mansion,  We  will  bestow  it  on  those
who  seek  not  to  exalt  themselves  in  the  earth  or

hammad  with  the  nucleus  of  this  story.  Compare  also  Tract.  Psachini^
fol.  119a  ;  and  Geiger,  pp.  168-171.

'  Or,  forrjcl  not  thy  portion.

'  Of  alchemy,  according  to  the  Commentators.

^  Lit.  more  ahnndcuit  in  amassiyig.

*  This  is  the  only  passage  in  which  the  particle  waikana  occurs  in  the
Koran.     Lit.  Ah,  as  if ;  or,  Ah,  sec.

THE    KORAN,  2G9

to  do  wrong  :  and  there  is  a  happy  issue  for  the
God-fearing.

Whoso  doeth  good  shall  have  a  reward  of  the  same
kind,  and  they  who  do  evil  shall  be  rewarded  only
as  they  have  wrought.
^  He  verily  who  hath  sanctioned  the  Koran  to  thee  will
bring  thee  to  thy  homo.^  Say  :  My  Lord  best
knoweth  who  hath  guidance,  and  who  is  in  un-
doubted error.

And  thou  couldest  not  have  expected  that  "the  Book"
would  be  sent  down  to  thee,  but  of  thy  Lord's
mercy.  Be  not  thou  helpful  then  to  the  unbelievers:

Neither  let  them  turn  thee  aside  from  the  signs  of  God
after  they  have  been  sent  down  to  thee  :  but  sum-
mon mankind  to  thy  Lord,  and  be  not  of  those
who  add  gods  to  God,

And  call  not  on  any  other  god  with  God.  There  is  no
god  but  He  !  Everything  shall  perish  except  Him-
self !-  Judgment  is  his,  and  to  Him  shall  ye
return  !

[LXXX.]

SURA  XXXIX.— THE  TROOPS.

Mecca. — 75  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

The   Book'   sent   down   from    God,  the  Mighty,  the

Wise  !
Verily  We  have  sent  down  the  Book  to  thee  with  the

truth  :  serve  thou  God  then,  showing  forth  to  Him

a  pure  religion —
Is  not  a  pure  worship  due  to  God  ?

'  Probably  to  Paradise  ;  according  to  others  to  Mecca,  as  a  conqueror.
But  this  latter  interpretation  involves  the  revelation  of  this  verse  at  least,
at  Medina.  '  Lit.  his  face.

^  Lit.  the  sending  doicn,  or  revelation,  of  the  Booh  is,  etc.

270  THE    KORAN.

But  they  who  have  taken  others  beside  Him  as  lords,
saijiug,  "  We  serve  them  only  that  they  may  bring
us  near  unto  God," — of  a  truth,  God  will  judge
between  them  and  the  faithful,  concerning  that
wherein  they  have  differed.^

Verily  God  guideth  not  him  who  is  a  liar,  an  unbe-
liever.

Had  God  desired  to  have  had  a  son.  He  had  surely
chosen  what  He  pleased  out  of  his  own  creation.
But  praise  be  to  Him  !  He  is  God,  the  One,  the
Almighty.

For  truth 2  hath  He  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  :
it  is  of  Him  that  the  night  returneth  upon  the  day
and  that  the  day  returneth  upon  the  night :  and
He  hath  subjected  the  sun  and  the  moon  to  laws,
so  that  each  speedeth  to  an  appointed  goal.  Is
He  not  the  Mighty,  the  Gracious  ?

He  created  you  all  of  one  man,  from  whom  He  after-
wards formed  his  wife  ;  and  of  cattle  He  hath  sent
down  to  you  four  pairs. ^  In  the  wombs  of  your
mothers  did  He  create  you  by  creation  upon  crea-
tion in  triple  darkness.  It  is  He  who  is  God  your
Lord :  the  kingdom  is  his  :  there  is  no  God  but
He.  How  then  are  ye  so  turned  aside  from
Him?

Suppose  ye  render  Him  no  thanks  !  yet  forsooth  is  God
rich  •*  without  you :  but  He  is  not  pleased  with
thanklcssness  in  his  servants  :  yet  if  ye  be  thankful
He  will  take  pleasure  in  you.  The  soul  burdened
vjWi  its  ovjn  works  shall  not  be  burdened  with  the
burden  of  another  :  hereafter  shall  ye  return  to  your
Lord,  and  He  will  tell  you  of  all  your  works,
10     For  He  verily  ktioweth  the  very  secrets  of  your  breasts.

When  some  trouble  hath  touched  a  man,  he  turneth  to
his  Lord  and  calleth  on  Him  :  yet  no  sooner  hath
He  enriched  him  with  his  favour  than  he  forgetteth
Him  on  whom  he  before  had  called,  and  setteth  up

'  The  Djinn  and  other  Arabian  deities  seem  to  have  occupied  the  same
relation  to  Alhih  that  Saints  and  Angels  bear  to  God  in  some  Christian
countries  ;  and  perhaps  the  black  stones,  sacred  trees,  and  other  Fetishes
of  the  pre-Islamic  Arabs  bore  the  same  relation  to  the  Djinn  that  relics
do  to  Saints.

'  Lit.  in  truth,  i.  e.  for  a  serious  and  earnest  purpose,  and  not  as  mere
pastime.

'  That  is,  camels,  oxen,  sheep,  and  goats.

*  i.  e.  self-sufficient,  able  to  do  without  you.

THE    KOKAN.  271

peers  with  God,  so  as  to  beguile  others  from  his
way.  Say  :  Enjoy  thou  thyself  yet  a  little  in  thine
ingratitude  !  (unbelief);  verily  thou  shalt  be  of  the
inmates  of  the  fire.

Shall  he  who  observeth  the  hours  of  the  night,  prostrate
or  standing  in  devotion,  heedful  of  the  life  to  come,

and  hoping  for  the  mercy  of  his  Lord ?

Sat  :  Are  they  who  have  knowledge  and  they  who
have  it  not,  on  an  equality  ?  Only  men  of  under-
standing will  receive  the  warning.

Say  :  0  my  believing  servants,  fear  your  Lord.  Good
things  for  those  who  do  good  in  this  world  !  and
broad  is  God's  earth  ;  ^  only  those  who  endure  with
patience  shall  be  repaid  :  their  reward  shall  not  be
by  measure.

Say  :  I  have  been  commanded  to  serve  God  showing
forth  to  Him  a  pure  religion,  and  I  have  been  bid-
den to  be  the  first  of  those  who  surrender  them-
selves to  Him  (Muslims).

Say  :  Yerily  I  fear  if  I  rebel  against  my  Lord  the
punishment  of  a  great  day.

Say  :  God  will  I  serve,  presenting  Him  with  a  pure
worship  :

But  serve  ye  what  ye  will  beside  Him.  Say  :  The  losers
truly  will  they  be  who  have  lost  their  own  souls
and  their  families  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  :  Will
jiot  this  be  an  undoubted  loss  ?

Canopies  -  of  fire  over  them,  and  floors  of  fire  beneath
them  !  With  this  doth  God  alarm  his  servants  :
Fear  ye  Me,  then,  O  my  servants  !

But  good  tidings  are  there  for  those  who  shun  the
worship  of  Thagout  and  turn  to  God.  Cheer  then
with  good  tidings  those  my  servants  who  hearken
to  my  word  and  follow  its  excellence.  These  are
they  whom  God  hath  guided  and  these  are  men  of
insight.
20  Him  then  on  whom  the  sentence  of  punishment  hath
justly  lighted — him  who  is  in  the  fire  canst  thou
set  free  ?

But  for  those  who  fear  their  Lord  are  storied  pavilions,^
beneath  which  shall  the  rivers  flow  :  it  is  the  pro-
mise of  God  :  God  will  not  fail  a  promise.

*  The  wording  of  this  verse  would  seem  to  indicate  a  period  when  Mu-
hammad was  meditating  flight  from  Mecca.     Comp.  [Ixxxi.]  xxix.  56.
-  Lit.  shades.      '  Lit.  lofty  apartments,  above  them  lofty  apartments  built.

272  THE    KORAN.

Seest  thou  not  that  God  sendeth  down  water  from
heaven,  and  guideth  it  as  springs  in  the  earth —
then  bringeth  forth  by  it  corn  of  varied  hues — then
He  withers  it  and  thou  seest  it  become  yellow —
them  crumbleth  He  it  away  ?  Verily  !  herein  is
teaching  for  men  of  insight.

Shall  he  then  whose  breast  God  hath  opened  to  Islam,

and  he  resting  on  light  from  his  Ijord ?  But

woe  to  those  whose  hearts  are  hardened  against  the
remembrance  of  God  !    These  are  in  manifest  error.

The  best  of  recitals  hath  God  sent  down — a  book  in
unison  with  itself,  and  teaching  by  iteration.^  The
very  skins  of  those  who  fear  their  Lord  do  creep
at  it !  Then  do  their  skins  and  their  hearts  soften
at  the  remembrance  of  their  Lord  !  This  is  God's
guidance  :  by  it  will  Ho  guide  whom  He  pleaseth  ;
and,  whom  God  shall  mislead,  no  guide  shall  there
be  for  him.

Who  then  shall  protect  his  face  from  the  torment  of  the
punishment  on  the  day  of  the  Resurrection  ?  Aye,
to  the  evil-doers  it  shall  be  said,  "  Taste  what  ye
have  gained.''

They  who  preceded  them  falsel}'  denied  it;  but  a
punishment  came  upon  them  whence  they  looked
not  for  it.

And  God  made  them  taste  humiliation  in  this  present
life  ;  but  more  grievous  surely  will  be  the  punish-
ment of  the  life  to  come,  had  they  but  known  it !

Now  have  We  set  before  man  in  this  Jvoran  every  kind
of  parable  that  haply  they  might  be  monished;

An  Arabic  Koran,  free  from  tortuous  wording,  that
haply  they  may  fear  God.
30  God  setteth  forth  the  comparison  of  a  man  with  asso-
ciates -  at  variance  among  themselves,  and  of  a  man
devoted  wholly  to  a  man.  Are  these  alike  ?  No,
praise  be  to  God  !  But  the  greater  part  of  them
understand  not.

Thou  truly  art  mortal,  0  Muhammad,  and  they  truly
are  mortals ;

Then,  at  the  day  of  Resurrection,  ye  shall  dispute  with
one  another  in  the  presence  of  your  Lord.

'  See  on  the  word  Mathiini,  Sura  xv,  86,  p.  109.  Or.  as  to  its  repeated
portions,  hij  rhyming  covplds.

'  The  word  associates  contains  an  implied  alhision  to  the  deities  asso-
ciated with  God,  and  who  distract  the  idolaters  in  their  worship.

THK    KORAN.  273

And  who  more  wicked  thau  he  who  hath  lied  of  God,
and  treated  the  truth  when  it  came  to  him,  as  a  lie  ?
Is  there  not  a  dwelling-place  in  Hell  for  the  unbe-
lievers?

But  he  who  has  come  with  the  truth,^  and  he  who  hath
believed  it  to  be  the  truth,  these  are  the  God-fearing:

Whatever  they  shall  desire,  awaiteth  them  with  their
Lord  !     This  is  the  reward  of  the  righteous ;

That  God  may  cancel  the  guilt  of  their  worst  actions,
and  for  their  best  actions  render  them  their  reward.

Is  not  God  all-sufficient  for  his  servant  ?  Yet  would
they  scare  thee  by  their  idols. ^  But  no  guide  shall
there  be  for  him  whom  God  misleadeth ;

And  he  whom  God  guideth  shall  have  none  to  mislead
him.     Is  not  God  mighty,  able  to  avenge  ?

And  assuredly  if  thou  ask  thf^m  who  hath  created  the
Heavens  and  the  Earth,  they  will  certainly  answer,
God.  Say  :  Think  ye  then  that  they  ^  whom  ye
invoke  beside  God,  if  God  choose  affliction  for  me,
could  remove  his  affliction?  or  if  he  choose  mercy
for  me,  could  they  withhold  His  mercy  ?  Say  :
God  sufficeth  me  ;  on  Him  let  the  trusting  trust.
40  Say  :  0  my  people,  act  your  part  as  best  ye  can,  I  too
am  acting  mine ;  and  in  the  end  ye  shall  know

On  whom  shall  light  a  punishment  that  shall  shame  him,
and  on  whom  a  lasting  punishment  shall  fall.

Assuredly  we  have  sent  down  the  Book  to  thee  for  man-
kind in  truth.     Whoso  is  guided  by  it — it  will  be
for  his  own  advantage,  and  whoso  goeth  astray,
only  to  his  own  loss  doth  he  err.     But  not  to  thy
keeping  are  they  entrusted.
^  God  taketh  souls   unto  Himself  at  the  time  of  their
death ;  and  during  their  sleep  those  who  do  not
die  :  ■*  and  He  retaineth  those  on  which  He  hath
passed  a  decree  of  death,  but  sendeth  the  others
back  till  a  time  that  is  fixed  :  Verily  herein  are
signs  for  the  reflecting.
Have  they  taken  aught  beside  God  as  intercessors?
Say  :     WJiat !  though  they  have  no  power  at  all,
neither  do  they  understand?
Say  :  Intercession  is  wholly  with  God :  ^  His  the  king-

'  Muhammad.  -  Lit.  hy  those  who  are  heside  Him.

^  In  the  fern,  gender  in  the  Ar.    This  passage  was  revealed  shortly  after
the  circumstances  mentioned  liii,  20,  n.  p.  56.

^  See  Sura  [Ixxxix.]  vi.  60.

*  i.e.,  none  may  intercede  vciih.  Him  but  those  whom  He  permits  to
do  so,  as  the  Angels,     Sur.  xl.  7.

T

274  THE    KORAN.

clom  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  !     To  Him
shall  ye  be  brought  back  hereafter  !

But  when  the  One  God  is  named^  the  hearts  of  those
who  believe  not  in  the  life  to  come,  contract  with
horror  ;  but  when  the  deities  who  are  adored  beside
Him  are  named,  lo  !  they  are  filled  with  joy.

Say  :  0  God,  creator  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,
who  knowest  the  hidden  and  the  manifest.  Thou
shalt  judge  between  thy  servants  as  to  the  subject
of  their  disputes.

Even  if  the  wicked  possessed  all  that  is  in  the  earth
and  as  much  again  therewith,  assuredly  they  would
ransom  themselves  with  it  from  the  pain  of  the
punishment  on  the  day  of  the  Resurrection ;  and
there  shall  appear  to  them  from  God,  things
they  had  never  reckoned  on  :

And  their  own  ill  deeds  shall  be  clearly  perceived  by
them,  and  that  fire  at  which  they  were  wont  to
mock  shall  encircle  them  on  every  side.
^  50  And  when  trouble  hath  befallen  a  man  he  crieth  to  Us  ;
afterwards,  when  We  have  vouchsafed  our  favour
to  him,  he  saith,  ''  God  knew  that  I  deserved  it.^'i
Nay  rather,  it  is  a  trial :  But  the  greater  part
of  them  know  it  not.

The  same  said  those  who  flourished  before  them ;  but
their  deeds  did  not  profit  them,

And  their  own  ill  deeds  recoiled-  upon  them.  And
whoso  among  these  (Meccans)  shall  do  wrong,  on
them  likewise  their  own  misdeeds  shall  light,
neither  shall  they  make  God  of  none  effect.

Know  they  not  that  God  eulargcth  supplies,  and  giveth
by  measure,  to  whom  He  will  ?  Of  a  truth  herein
are  signs  to  those  who  believe.

Say  :  0  my  servants  who  have  sinned  against  your  own
souls,^  despair  not  of  God's  mercy;  verily  all  sins
doth  God  forgive  ;  aye,  (Jracious,  Merciful  is  He  !  —

And  return  ye  to  your  Lord,  and  to  Him  resign  your-
selves, ere  the  punishmentcome  on  you ;  then  ye
shall  not  be  helped  :

'  Lit.  It  ivas  only  given  to  mc  on  account  of  knmvledge. —  Mar.  Deus
sciebat  nie  esse  di<(num  eo. — Thus  Sale.  Or,  for  my  ovm  knowledge.  Sec
Sur.  xxviii.  78,  p.  268.

'  Lit.  lighted.

^  By  becoming  apostates  from  Islam.  Comp.  Sura  [Ixxiii.]  xvi.  108.
This  and  the  two  following  verses  arc  said  to  have  originated  at  Medina.
His.  230,  Wah.     Omar  ben  Muhammad.     Beidh.     Itq.  19.

THE    KORAN.  275

And  follow  that  most  excellent  thing  vvhicli  hath  been
sent  down  to  you  from  your  Lord,  ere  the  punish-
ment come  on  you  suddenly,  and  when  ye  look  not
for  it :

So  that  a  soul  say,  "^  Oh  misery  !  for  my  failures  in
duty  towards  God  !  for  verily  I  was  of  those  who
scoffed  : "

Or  say,  "  Had  God  guided  me,  I  had  surely  been  of
those  who  feared  Him :  "

Or  say,  when  it  seeth  the  punishment,  "  Were  but  a
return  vouchsafed  me,  then  I  would  be  of  the
righteous.'"
60  Nay !  my  signs  had  already  come  to  thee,  and  thou  didst
treat  them  as  untruths,  and  wast  arrogant,  and
becamest  of  those  who  believed  not.

And  on  the  Resurrection  day,  thou  shalt  see  those  who
have  lied  against  God,  with  theirfaces  become  black !
Is  there  not  an  abode  in  Hell  for  the  arrogant  ?

But  God  shall  rescue  those  who  fear  Him  into  their  safe
retreat :  no  ill  shall  touch  them,  neither  shall  they
be  put  to  grief.

God  is  the  creator  of  all  things,  and  of  all  things  is  He
the  guardian.  His  the  keys  of  the  Heavens  and
of  the  Earth  !  and — who  believe  not  in  the  signs
of  God — these  !  they  shall  perish  !

Say  :  Do  ye  then  bid  me  worship  other  than  God,
O  ye  ignorant  ones  ?

But  now  hath  it  been  revealed  to  thee  and  to  those
who  flourished  before  thee, — "  Verily  if  thou  join
partners  with  God,  vain  surely  shall  be  all  thy
work,  and  thou  thyself  shalt  surely  be  of  those
who  perish :

Nay,  rather  worship  God  then  !  and  be  thou  of  those
who  render  thanks. ^^

But  they  have  not  deemed  of  God  as  is  His  due  :  ^  for
on  the  Resurrection  day  the  whole  Earth  shall  be
but  his  handful,  and  in  his  right  hand  shall  the
Heaven  be  folded  together."  Glory  be  to  Him  !
and  high  be  He  uplifted  above  the  partners  they
join  with  Him  !

And  there  shall  be  a  blast  on  the  trumpet,  and  all  who
are  in  the  Heavens  and  all  who  are  in  the  Earth

'  Lit.  they  have  not  esteemed  God  according  to  the  truth  of  His  estima-
tion.

*  Comp.  Isai.  xxxiv.  4.

rp     o

1    u

27G  THE    KORAN.

shall  expire/  save  those  whom  God  shall  will  to
live.  Then  shall  there  be  another  blast  on  it,  and
lo  !  .arising  they  shall  gaze  around  them  :

And  the  earth  shall  shine  with  the  light  of  her  Lord,
and  the  Book  shall  be  set,  and  the  prophets  shall
be  brought,  and  the  witnesses  ;  and  judgment
shall  be  given  between  them  with  equity ;  and
none  shall  be  wronged  :
70  And  every  soul  shall  be  repaid  in  full  for  what  it  has
wrought;  for  well  knoweth  He  man's  actions.

And  by  TROOPS  shall  the  unbelievers  be  driven
towards  Hell,  until  when  they  reach  it,  its  gates
shall  be  opened,  and  its  keepers  shall  say  to  them,
"  Came  not  apostles  from  among  yourselves  to
you,  reciting  to  you  the  signs  of  your  Lord,  and
warning  you  of  the  meeting  with  this  your  day  V~
They  shall  say,  "  Yea."  But  just  is  the  sentence
of  punishment  on  the  unbelievers  :

It  shall  be  said  to  them,  "  Enter  ye  the  gates  of  Hell,
therein  to  dwell  for  ever ; "  and  wretched  the  abode
of  the  arrogant !

But  they  who  feared  their  Lord  shall  be  driven  on  in
crowds  to  Paradise  until  they  reach  it,  and  its
gates  shall  be  opened,  and  its  keepers  shall  say  to
them,  "  Peace  be  on  you  !  virtuous  have  ye  been  :
enter  it  then,  to  abide  herein  for  ever/'

And  they  shall  say,  "  Praise  be  to  God,  who  hath  made
good  to  us  his  promise,  and  hath  given  to  us  the
earth  as  our  heritage,  that  we  may  dwell  in  Para-
dise wherever  we  please  !  And  goodly  is  the
toiler's  reward  !

And  thou  shalt  see  the  Angels  circling^  around  the
Throne,  uttering  the  praises  of  their  Lord  :  And
judgment  shall  be  pronounced  between  them
with  equity :  and  it  shall  be  said,  "  Glory  be  to
God  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds."

'  Or,  sivoon.

'  Or,  the  occwrrencc  of.     Adventum  diei  hujus. — Mar.
^  The  A  ngclos  nudatos  pedibus  of  Maracci  is  inaccurate.   The  root  whence
he  derived  nudatos,  &c.,  has  a  different  plural  from  that  in  the  text.

THE    KOKAN.  277

[LXXXI.]

SURA  XXIX.— THE  SPIDER.
Mecca. — 69  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Meiciful.

Elif.  Lam.  Mim.^  Do  men  think  that  they  shall  be
left  alone  in  saying/  "  We  believe/^  when  they
are  not  put  to  proof?

Already  have  We  proved  thoLe  who  lived  before  them  ;
for  God  will  surely  take  knowledge  of  those  who
are  sincere^  and  will  surely  take  knowledge  of  the
liars.

Think  they  who  work  evil  that  they  will  get  the  better '
of  Us  ?     Ill  do  they  judge.

To  him  who  hopeth  to  meet  God,  the  set  time  of
God  will  surely  come.  The  Hearer,  the  Knower,
He!

And  whoso  maketh  efforts  for  the  faith  maketh  them
for  his  own  good  only.  Verily  God  is  rich  enough
to  dispense  with  all  creatures.

And  as  to  those  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are
right,  their  evil  deeds  will  We  surely  expiate,  and
according  to  their  best  actions  will  We  surely
reward  them.

Moreover  We  have  enjoined  on  man  to  show  kindness
to  parents ;  but  if  they  strive  with  thee  in  order
that  thou  join  that  with  Me  of  which  tliou  hast
no  knowledge,*  then  obey  them  not.  To  Me  do
ye  return,  and  I  will  tell  you  of  your  doings,

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  p.  16.    The  first  ten  verses  of  this  Sura  were  revealed
at  Medina,  after  the  battles  of  Bedr  and  Ohod. — Nold.  p.  115.
'  t.  e.  Do  men  think  that  it  ia  enough  for  them  to  say,  &c.

*  Lit.  anticipate,  pass  hy.

*  Deities  for  whose  worship  thou  canst  show  no  authority  Comp.  Tr.
Jebhamoth,  fol.  6.  If  a  father  saith  to  his  son,  "  Defile  thyself,"  or  saith,
"  Make  not  restitution,"  shall  he  obey  him  ?  It  is  said  (Lev.  xix.  3),  Let
every  man  reverence  his  father  and  mother,  but  keep  my  Sabbaths  all  of
you  :  ye  are  all  bound  to  honour  me.  Thus  also  Midr.  Jalkut,  604.  Comp.
next  Sura,  v.  13.

278  TUE    KOKAN.

And  those  who  beheve  and  do  the  things  that  are
right,  "We  will  surely  cause  to  enter  in  among
the  righteous.

But  some  persons  say,  "  We  believe  in  God,"  yet
when  they  meet  with  sufferings  in  the  cause  of
God,  they  regard  trouble  from  man  as  a  chastise-
ment from  God.  Yet  truly  if  a  success  come  from
thy  Lord  they  are  sure  to  assert,  "  We  verily  were
on  your  side  !  "  Doth  not  God  also  well  know
what  is  in  the  breasts  of  all  creatures  ?
10  Yes,  and  God  is  well  acquainted  with  those  who  have
believed,  and  He  is  well  acquainted  with  the
hypocrites.

Also  the  unbelievers  say  to  the  faithful,  "  Follow  ye
our  way,  and  we  will  surely  bear  your  sins."  But
not  aught  of  their  sins  will  they  bear — verily  they
are  indeed  liars  !

But  their  own  burdens,  and  burdens  together  with
their  own  burdens  shall  they  surely  bear :  and
inquisition  shall  surely  be  made  of  them  on  the
day  of  Resurrection  as  to  their  ftilse  devices.
^  And  of  old  sent  AVe  Noah  to  his  people :  a  thousand
years  save  fifty  did  he  tarry  among  them,  and  the
flood  overtook  them  in  their  wrongful  doings :

But  Wo  rescued  him  and  those  who  were  in  the  vessel ;
and  We  made  it  a  sign  to  all  creatures  :
^  And  Abraham  ;  when  he  said  to  his  people,  "  Worship
God  and  fear  Him.     This  will  be  best  for  you,  if
ye  know  it ;

Ye  only  worship  idols  beside  God,  and  are  the  authors
of  a  lie :  truly  those  whom  ye  worship  beside  God
can  give  you  no  supplies  :  seek,  then,  your  supplies
from  God ;  and  serve  Him  and  give  Him  thanks.
To  Him  shall  ye  I'eturn.

Suppose  that  ye  charge  with  imposture  :  then,  already,
nations  before  you  have  charged  with  imposture ;
but  plain  preaching  is  the  only  duty  of  the
Apostle.

Have  they  not  seen  how  God  bringeth  forth  created
things?  and  then  causeth  them  to  return  again?
This  truly  is  easy  for  God.

Say,^  Go  through  the  earth,  and  see  how  He  hath
brought  forth  created  beings.     Hereafter,  with  a

'  The  word  say— the  usual  address  of  God  or  Gabriel  to  Muhammad—
must  either  be  considered  as  spoken  by  God  to  Abraham,  in  which  case

TUE    KORAN.  279

second  birth  will  God  reproduce  them  ;  aye,  God

is  xVluiiy;hty.
20     Whom  He  pleaseth  will  He  chastise,  and  on  whom  He

pleaseth  will  He  have  mercy,  and  to  Him  shall  ye

be  taken  back  ;
And  ye  shall  not  invalidate   his   power  either  in  the

Earth  or  in  the  Heaven :  ^  and,  save  God,  ye  shall

have  neither  patron  nor  helper.
As  for  those  who  believe  not  in  the  signs  of  God,  and

that  they  shall  ever  meet  Him,  these  of  my  mercy

shall  despair,  and  these  doth  a  grievous  chastise-
ment await. '^
And  the  only  answer  of  his  people  was  to  say,  "  Slay

him  or  burn  him.''     But  from   the  fire  did  God

save  him  !     Yerily,  herein  are  signs  to  those  who

believe.
And  Abraham  said,  "  Of  a  truth  ye  have  taken  idols

along  with  God  as  an  object  of  love  in  this  life

present ;
But  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  some  of  you  shall  deny

the  others,  and  some  of  you  shall  curse  the  others ;

and  your  abode  shall  be  the  fire,  and  ye  shall  have

none  to  help."
But  Lot  believed  on  him,^  and  said,  "  I  verily  betake

me  to  my  Lord,  for  He  truly  is  the  Mighty,  the

AVise."
And  We  bestowed  on  him  Isaac  and  Jacob,^  and  placed

the  gift  of  prophecy  and  the  Scripture  among  his

posterity ;  And  We  gave  him  his  reward  in  this

world,  and  in  the  next  he  verily  shall  be  among

the  just.
We  sent  also  Lot :  when  he  said  to  his  people,  "  Yerily

we  have  a  curious  instance  of  the  manner  in  which  IMuhammad  identifies
himself  with  A-braham,  and  makes  Abraham  speak  in  words  which  he
constantly  elsewhere  uses  himself ;  or,  with  Wahl,  we  must  suppose  that
from  V.  17  to  v.  22  are  misplaced.

*  Comp.  Ps.  cxxxix.  7.

^  Thus'  Sura  [Ixv.]  xxi.  71.  The  Midr.  Eabbah  on  Gen.  Par.  18,  says
that  Haran,  the  father  of  Lot,  wa.s  brought  by  Abraham's  deliverance  from
the  furnace  to  the  adoption  of  his  doctrines.  Muhammad  may  have  trans-
ferred this  idea  to  Lot

^  The  following  passages  deserve  to  be  compared,  as  showing  the  loose
way  in  which  Muhammad  could  speak  of  the  relationship  subsisting  be-
tween Abraham  and  the  other  Patriarchs.  See  38  below.  Sura  [xcL]  ii.
127  ;  [Ixxxix.]  vi.  84  ;  [Iviii.]  xix.  50  ;  [Ixv.]  xxi.  72  ;  [Ixxvii.]  xii.  6.  It
is  a  curious  coincidence  that  in  the  Sonna  398,  400,  Joseph  is  said  to  be
the  grandson,  and  Jacob  the  son,  of  Abraham.

280  THE    KORAN.

ye  proceed  to  a  filthiness  in  which  no  people  in  the
world  liath  ever  surpassed  you.

Proceed  ye  even  to  men  ?  and  do  ye  infest  the  high-
way ?  and  proceed  ye  to  the  crime  in  your  assem-
blies ?  '^  But  the  only  answer  of  his  people  was
to  say, ''  Bring  God's  chastisement  upon  us,  if  thou
art  a  man  of  truth. ^'  ^  He  cried  :  "  My  Lord  !
help  me  against  this  polluted  people.^'
30  And  when  our  messengers  came  to  Abraham  with  the
tidings  of  a  son,  they  said,  "  Of  a  truth  Wo  will
destroy  the  people  of  this  city;  verily  its  people
are  evil-doers.^'

He  said,  "Verily  Lot  is  therein."  They  said,  "We
know  full  well  who  therein  is.  Him  and  his
family  will  We  surely  save,  except  his  wife  ;  she
is  of  those  who  will  linger."

And  when  our  messengers  came  to  Lot,  he  was  troubled
for  them,  and  his  arm  was  too  weak  ^  to  protect
them  ;  and  they  said,  "  Fear  not,  and  distress
not  thyself,  for  thee  and  thy  family  will  We
save,  except  thy  wife  ;  she  is  of  those  who  will
linger  ;^

Lo  !  We  will  bring  down  upon  the  dwellers  in  this
city  vengeance  from  Heaven  for  the  excesses  they
habitually  commit."

And  of  a  truth  We  left  therefrom  a  clear  sign  to  men  of
understanding.
^  And  to  Madian  We  sent  their  brother  Sho'aib.  And
he  said,  "  Oh  !  my  people  !  worship  God,  and
expect  the  latter  day ;  and  enact  not  evil  in  the
land  with  deeds  of  violence."

But  they  treated  him  as  an  impostor :  so  an  earthquake
assailed  them  ;  and  at  morn  they  were  found  pros-
trate and  dead  in  their  dwellings.
^  And  We  de-'itroyed  Ad  and  Thaiiiood;  already  is  this
made  plain  to  you  in  the  ruins  of  their  dwellings  ;
for  Satan  had  made  their  own  works  fair-seeming
to  them,  and  drew  them  from  the  right  path,
keen-sighted  though  they  were  :

And  Korah  and  Pharaoh  and  Haman.  With  proofs  of
his  mission   did  Moses  come   to  them,  and  they

'  This  passage,  which  docs  not  occur  in  Suras  xv.  and  li.,  was  probably
occasioned  by  the  ridicule  which  Muhammad  met  with  at  Mecca.
^  Lit.  u-as  straiUmcd  in  regard  to  them.
'  See  [Ixxv.]  xi.  83.

THE    KOKAX.  281

behaved  proudly  on  the  earth ;  but  Us  they  could
not  outstrip/

For  every  one  of  them  did  "We  seize  in  his  sin  :  against
some  of  them  did  We  send  a  stone-charged  wind  :
some  of  them  did  the  terrible  cry  of  Gabriel  sur-
prise :  for  some  of  them  We  cleaved  the  earth ;
and  some  of  them  We  drowned.  And  it  was  not
God  who  was  dealing  wrongly  by  them,  but  they
dealt  wrongly  by  themselves.
40  %  The  likeness  for  those  who  take  to  themselves  guar-
dians besides  God  is  the  likeness  of  the  SPIDER
who  buildeth  her  a  house :  but  verily,  frailest  of
all  houses  surely  is  the  house  of  the  spider.  Did
they  but  know  this  !

God  truly  hath  knowledore  of  all  that  they  call  on  beside
Him ;  and  He  is  the  Miphty,  the  Wise  :

These  similitudes  have  We  set  forth  to  men  :  but  none
will  understand  them  except  the  endued  with
knowledge.

God  hath  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  for  a
serious  end.^  Verily  in  this  is  a  sign  to  those  who
believe.

Recite  the  portions  of  the  Book  which  have  been  re-
vealed to  thee  and  discharge  the  duty  of  prayer  :
verily  prayer  restraineth  from  the  filthy  and  the
blame-worthy.  And  assuredly  the  gravest  duty
is  the  remembrance  of  God ; '  and  God  knoweth
what  ye  do.
^  Dispute  ye  not,  unless  in  kindliest  sort,*  with  the  people
of  the  Book  ;  ^  save  with  such  of  them  as  have
dealt  wrongfully  tcitk  you  :  and  say  ye,  "We
believe  in  what  hath  been  sent  down  to  us  and
hath  been  sent  down  to  you.  Our  God  and  your
God  is  one,  and  to  Him  are  we  self-surrendered  "
(Muslims).

And  thus  have  We  sent  down  the  Book  of  the  Koran

'  So  as  to  fly  from  our  vengeance.  '  Lit.  in  truth.

'  This  may  be  understood  of  the  dzikr.

*  Or,  x'.nhss  in  favour  of  a  thing  or  truth  which  is  better.     Conip.  xl.  5.

*  With  the  Jews.  This  pissage  is  quoted  by  modern  Muslims  in  justi-
fication of  their  indifference  with  respect  to  the  propagation  of  their  re-
ligion. "  The  number  of  the  faithful,"  said  one  of  them  to  Mr.  Lane,  "  is
decreed  by  God,  and  no  act  of  man  can  increa.se  or  diminish  it"  (Mod.
Eg)"pt,  i.  p.  364).  Noldeke  supposes  this  verse  to  have  been  revealed  at
Medina,  and  renders,  Contend  not  except  in  the  best  way,  i.  e.  not  by  words,
but  by  force.

282  THE    KORAN.

to  thee  :  and  tbey  to  whom  We  have  given  the
Book  of  fJic  law  believe  in  it:  and  of  these  Ara-
hians  there  are  those  who  believe  in  it:  and  none,
save  the  Infidels,  reject  our  signs.

Andthoa  didst  not  recite  any  book  (of  revelation)  before
it :  with  that  right  hand  of  thine  thou  didst  not
transcribe  one  :  else  might  they  who  treat  it  as  a
vain  thing  *  have  justly  doubted  :

But  it  is  a  clear  sign  in  the  hearts  of  those  whom  "  the
knowledge ''  hath  reached;  and  none  except  the
wicked  reject  our  signs.

They  say  also,  "  Unless  a  sign  be  sent  down  to  him

from  his  Lord "     Say  :  Signs  are  in  the

power  of  God  alone,  and  I  am  only  an  open
Warner.
50  Is  it  not  enough  for  them  that  We  have  sent  down  to
thee  the  Book  to  be  recited  to  them  ?  In  this
verily  is  a  mercy  and  a  warning  to  those  who
believe.

Say  :  God  is  a  sufficient  witness  between  me  and  you :

He  knoweth  all  that  is  in  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,
and  they  who  believe  in  vain  things^  and  dis-
believe in  God — these  shall  suffer  loss.

And  they  challenge  thee  to  hasten  the  punishment :
but  had  there  not  been  a  season  fixed  for  it,  that
punishment  had  already  come  upon  them — But  it
shall  surely  overtake  them  suddenly  when  they
look  not  for  it —

They  challenge  thee  to  hasten  the  punishment  :  but
verily  Hell  shall  be  round  about  the  infidels  :

On  a  certain  day  the  punishment  shall  come  upon
them  from  above  them  and  from  beneath  their
feet  ;  and  God  will  say,  "  Taste  ye  your  own
doings.'^

O  my  servants  who  have  believed  !  Vast  tmily  is  my
Earth  :  ^  Me,  therefore  !  yea  worship  Me.

Every  soul  shall  taste  of  death :  afterwards  to  Us  shall
ye  return.

But  those  who  have  believed  and  wrought  righteous-
ness will   We    assuredly  lodge    in    gardens  with

'  Lit.  )/,'/io  iLmI  in  vanities — triflers.  '  Idols.

•''  That  is,  you  may  find  places  of  refuge  where  you  may  worship  the  true
CJod  in  some  other  parts  ot  the  earth,  if  driven  forth  from  your  native  city.
This  verso  is  very  indicative  of  a  late  Meccan  orij,dn.  Flight  from  Mecca
must  have  been  imminent  when  Muhammad  could  thus  write.

THE    KOKAN.  283

lofty  apartments^  beneath  which  the  rivers  flow,
to  abide  therein  for  ever.  Goodly  the  reward  of"
those  who  labour,

Who  patiently  endure,  and   put    their  trust  in  their
Lord !
60     And  how  many  animals  are  there  which  provide  not  ^
their  own   food  !      God  provideth  food  for  them
and  you.     He  Heareth,  Knoweth  atl  things.

And  if  thou  ask  them  who  created  the  Heavens  and  the
Earth,  and  subjected  the  sun  and  the  moon  to  his
service,  they  will  certainly  say,  ''  God.^''  How
then  can  they  devise  lies  ?   (other  gods).

God  lavisheth  supplies  on  such  of  his  servants  as  He
pleaseth  or  giveth  to  them  by  measure.  Verily
God  knoweth  all  things.

And  if  tliou  ask  them  who  sendeth  down  rain  from
heaven,  and  by  it  quickeneth  the  eai'th  after  it
hath  been  dead,  they  will  certainly  answer,  "  God."
Say  :  Praise  be  to  God  !  Yet  most  of  them  do
not  understand  ;

And  this  present  life  is  no  other  than  a  pastime  and  a
disport :  but  truly  the  future  mansion  is  life  indeed  !
Would  that  they  knew  this  !

Then  when  they  embark  on  shipboard,  they  call  upon
God,  professing  to  Him  the  purity  of  their  faith  ;
but  when  He  bringeth  them  safe  to  land,  behold
they  join  partners  with  Him  ;

Believing  not  in  our  revelation,-  and  yet  take  their  fill  of
good  things :  but  in  the  end  they  shall  know  their
folly.

Do  they  not  see  that  We  have  established  a  safe  pre-
cinct' while  all  around  them  men  despoil  ?  Will
they  then  believe  in  vain  idols,  and  not  own  •*  tho
goodness  of  God  ?

But  who  acteth  more  wrongly  than  he  who  deviseth  a
lie  against  God,  or  calleth  the  truth,  when  it  hath
come  to  him,  a  lie  ?  Is  there  not  an  abode  for  the
infidels  in  Hell  ?

And  those  who  have  made  efforts  for  Us,  in  our  paths
will  We  surely  guide :  for  verily  God  is  with  those
who  do  righteous  deeds.

'  Lit.  carry  not.     Comp.  Matt.  vi.  26  ;  Luke  xiL  24.

*  Or,  so  that  they  are  ungrateful  for  our  gifts.        ^  At  Mecca.

■*  Or,  be  unyratcfid  for.

284  THE    KORAN.

[LXXXII.]
SURA  XXXI.— LOKMA.N.>

Mecca. — 34  Verses.

1)1  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elif.  Lam.  Mim.^  These  are  the  verses  (signs)  of  the
wise  Book,

A  guidance  and  a  mercy  to  the  righteous,

Who  observe  prayer,  and  pay  the  legal  alms/  and  be-
lieve firmly  in  the  life  to  come  : —

These  rest  on  guidance  from  their  Lord,  and  with  these
it  shall  be  well.

But  a  man  there  is  *  who  buyeth  an  idle  tale,  that  in  his
lack  of  knowledge  ho  may  mislead  others  from
the  way  of  God,  and  turn  it  to  scorn  : — For  such  is
prepared  a  shameful  punishment !  —

And  when  our  sij^ns  are  rehearsed  to  him,  he  turneth
away  disdainfully,  as  though  he  heard  them  not, —
as    though    his    ears    were    heavy    with    deafness.

'Nothing  certain  is  known  concerning  the  history  of  this  fabulist  and
sage.  The  opinion  most  generally  received  is  that  Lokinan  is  the  same
person  whom  the  Greeks,  not  knowing  his  real  name,  have  called  ^sop,
i.e.  iEthiops.  This  Sura  shows  the  hi^^h  degree  of  resp'^ct  entertained  for
Lokman  in  Arabia  at  the  time  of  Muhammad,  who  doubtless  aimed  to
promote  the  interests  of  his  new  religion  by  connecting  the  Koran  with  so
celebrated  a  name.  Dr.  Sprenger  thinks  that  Lokman  is  identical  with
the  Elxai  of  the  Ebionites.  Vol.  i.  p.  35  (Leben).  But  iu  this  Sura  there
are  no  clear  points  of  contact  with  Ebionite  doctrines  ;  and  Dr.  S.  ac-
knowledges (vol.  i.  p.  101)  that  the  identity  is  "eine  sehr  unsichere  Kon-
jektur."    The  old  Arab  writers  ascribe  proverbs  but  not  fables  to  Lokman.

'  See  Sura  [Ixviii.j  i.  p.  16.

'  Beidh.  and  Itq.  suppose  this  verse  to  have  been  revealed  at  Medina,
on  account  of  the  precept  to  pay  the  impost,  required  by  Muhanmiad  of
his  followers  as  a  religious  duty,  and  different  from  the  alms.  The  former
is  usually  coupled  with  the  duty  of  observing  prayer.  Mar.  renders,  sa-
crum ccnsvm  in  marg.

*  Nodhar  Ibn  El  Hareth,  who  had  purchased  in  Persia  the  romance  of
Roustem  and  Isfendiar,  two  of  the  most  famous  heroes  of  that  land,  which
he  recited  to  the  Koreish  as  superior  to  the  Koran.

THE    KOKAN.  285

Announce  to  him  therefore  tidings  of  an  aflflictive
punishment  !

Verily  they  who  believe  and  do  good  works^ — for  them,
gardens  of  delight ;

To  dwell  therein  for  ever :  God^s  true  promise  !  and
He  is  the  Mighty,  the  Wise.

Without  pillars  that  can  be  seen  hath  He  created
the  heavens,  and  on  the  earth  hath  thrown  moun-
tains lest  it  should  move  with  you  ;  ^  and  He  hath
scattered  over  it  animals  of  every  sort :  and  from
the  Heaven  We  send  down  rain  and  cause  eveiy
kind  of  noble  plant  to  grow  up  therein —
10  This  the  creation  of  God  :  Show  me  now  what  others
than  He  have  created — Nay  !  the  ungodly  are  in  a
manifest  delusion.
^  Of  old  We  bestowed  wisdom  upon  LOKMAN,  and  tavght
him  thus — "  Be  thankful  to  God  :  for  whoever  is
thankful,  is  thankful  to  his  own  behoof;  and  if  any
shall  be  thankless then  verily  God  is  self-
sufficient,  worthy  of  praise  ! "

And  hear  in  mind  when  Lokman  said  to  his  son  by  way
of  warning,  "  0  my  son  !  join  not  other  gods  with
God,  verily,  the  joining  gods  with  God  is  a  great
impiety.''

(We  have  commanded "  man  concerning  his  parents. —
His  mother  carrieth  him  with  weakness  upon  weak-
ness ;  nor  until  after  two  years  is  he  weaned.^ —
Be  grateful  to  Me,  and  to  thy  parents.  Unto  Me
shall  all  come.

But  if  they  importune  thee  to  join  that  with  Me  of  which
thou  hast  no  knowledge,  obey  them  not :  comport
thyself  towards  them  in  this  world  as  is  meet  and
right ;  but  follow  the  way  of  him  who  turneth  unto
Me.  Unto  Me  shall  ye  return  at  last,  and  then  will
I  tell  you  of  your  doings ;)

"  O  my  son  !  verily  God  will  bring  everything  to  light,
though  it  were  but  the  weight  of  a  grain  of  mustard-
seed,  and  hidden  in  a  rock  or  in  the  heavens  or  in  the
earth ;  verily  God  is  sharp-sighted,  informed  of  all.

0  my  son  !  observe  prayer,  and  enjoin  the  right  and

'  Comp.  Ps.  civ.  5.

'  This  verse  and  the  verse  following  would  seem  more  naturally  to  follow
verse  18,  where  Wahl  has  placed  them.     See  preceding  Sura,  v.  7.

^  Comp.  Talm.  Kethuboth,  60,  1,  "  A  woman  is  to  nurse  her  child  two
years."     Comp.  Jos.  Ant.  ii.  9,  6.

2SG  THE    KORAN.

forbid  the  wrong,  and  be  patient  under  whatever
shall  betide  thee  :  verily  this  is  a  bounden  duty.^

And  distort  not  thy  face  at  men;  nor  walk  thou  loftily
on  tbe  earth ;  verily  God  loveth  no  arrogant  vain-
glorious person ;

But  let  thy  pace  be  middling;  and  lower  thy  voice  :
verily  the  least  pleasing  of  voices  is  surely  the  voice
of  asses."

See  ye  not  how  that  God  hath  subjected  to  you  all  that  is
in  the  heavens  and  all  that  is  on  the  earth,  and  hath
been  bounteous  to  you  of  his  favours,  both  for  soul
and  body.-  But  some  are  there  who  dispute  of
God  without  knowledge,  and  have  no  guidance  and
no  illuminating:  Book:
20  And  when  it  is  said  to  them.  Follow  ye  what  God  hath
sent  down,  they  say,  "  Nay  ;  that  religion  in  which
we  found  our  fathers  will  we  follow.^^  What!  though
Satan  bid  them  to  the  torment  of  the  flame  ?

But  whoso  setteth  his  face  toward  God  with  self-sur-
render, and  is  a  doer  of  that  which  is  good,  hath
indeed  laid  hold  on  the  surest  handle :  Verily  unto
God  is  the  issue  of  all  things.

But  let  not  the  unbelief  of  the  unbelieving  grieve  thee  :
unto  Us  shall  they  return  :  then  will  We  tell  them
of  their  doings  ;  aye,  God  knoweth  the  very  secrets
of  the  breast ;

Yet  a  little  while  will  We  provide  for  them ;  then  force
them  to  a  stern  punishment.

Moreover,  if  thou  ask  them  who  hath  created  the  Hea-
vens and  the  Earth,  they  will  certainly  reply,
"  God."  Say  :  God  be  praised  !  But  most  of
them  have  not  this  knowledge.

God's,  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  !
Verily  God,  He  is  the  Kich,''  the  Praiseworthy ;

And  if  all  the  trees  that  are  upon  the  earth  were  to
become  pens,  and  if  God  should  after  that  swell
the  sea  into  seven  seas  of  ink,  his  words  would  not
be  exhausted  :  of  a  truth  God  is  Mighty,  Wise.*

'  Lit.  this  is  (God's)  fixed  resolve  for  Qiunvan)  affairs.

*  Or,  the  seen  and  unseen,  lit.  outrvardhj  and  inwardly.
^  Or,  as  rendered  in  verse  11,  "the  self-sufficient.''

*  Wah.  Omar  ben  Muhannnad,  Zani.  and  Beidh.  suppose  this  and  the
three  followinfj  verses  to  have  been  revealed  at  Medina,  in  answer  to  the
Jews,  who  had  affirmed  that  all  knowledi,'c  was  contained  in  their  own
Law.  But  the  accuracy  of  this  supposition  is  very  doubtful,  if  considered
with  regard  to  the  preceding  and  following  context.

THE    KORAN.  287

Tour  creation  and  your  quickening  hereafter,  are  but  as
those  of  a  single  individual.  Verily,  God  Heareth,
Seeth !

Seest  thou  not  that  God  causeth  the  night  to  come  in
upon  the  day,  and  the  day  to  come  in  upon  the
night  ?  and  that  lie  hath  subjected  the  sun  and
the  moon  to  laws  by  which  each  speedeth  along  to
an  appointed  goal?  and  that  God  is  acquainted
■with  that  which  ye  do  ?

This,  for  that  God  is  the  truth  ;  and  that  whatever  they
call  upon  beside  Him  is  a  vain  thing ;  and  that
God — He  is  the  High,  the  Great.
30  Seest  thou  not  how  the  ships  speed  on  in  the  sea,
through  the  favour  of  God,  that  He  may  show  you
of  his  signs  ?  lo,  herein  are  signs  to  every  patient,
grateful  person.

And  when  the  waves  cover  them  like  dark  shadows
they  call  upon  God  as  with  sincere  religion ;  but
■when  He  safely  landeth  them,  some  of  them  there
are  who  halt  between  two  opinions.^  Yet  none
reject  our  signs  but  all  deceitful,  ungrateful  ones.

0  men  !  fear  ye  your  Lord,  and  dread  the  day  whereon
father  shall  not  atone  for  son,  neither  shall  a  child
in  the  least  atone  for  him  who  begat  him.

Aye  !  the  promise  of  God  is  a  truth.  Let  not  this
present  life  then  deceive  you ;  neither  let  the  de-
ceiver deceive  you  concerning  God.

Aye  !  God  ! — with  Him  is  the  knowledge  of  the  Hour  :
and  He  sendeth  down  the  rain — and  He  knoweth
what  is  in  the  wombs — but  no  soul  knoweth  what
it  shall  have  gotten  on  the  morrow  :  neither
knoweth  any  soul  in  what  land  it  shall  die.  Verily
God  is  knowing,  informed  of  all.

'  Between  idolatry  and  Islam

288  THE    KORAN.

[LXXXIIL]    ,,

SURA  XLIL— COUNSEL,  or  CONSULTATION.
Mecca. — 53  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Ha.  Mm.  Am.  Sin.  Kap.^  Thus  unto  thee  as  nnto
those  who  preceded  thee  doth  God,  the  Mighty,
the  Wise,  reveal  Himself!

All  that  is  in  the  Heavens  and  all  that  is  in  the  Earth
is  his  :  and  He  is  the  High,  the  Great  !

Ready^  are  the  Heavens  to  cleave  asunder  from  above
for  very  awe  ;  and  the  angels  celebrate  the  praise
of  their  Lord,  and  ask  forgiveness  for  the  dwellers
on  earth  :  is  not  verily  God  the  Indulgent,  the
Merciful  ?

But  whoso  take  other  deities  as  lords  beside  Him — God
watcheth  them  !  but  thou  hast  them  not  in  thy
charge.

It  is  thus  moreover  that  We  have  revealed  to  thee  an
Arabic  Koran,  that  thou  mayest  warn  the  mother-
city'  and  all  around  it,  and  that  thou  mayest  warn
them  of  that  day  of  the  Gathering,  of  which  there
is  no  doubt — when  part  shall  be  in  Paradise  and
part  in  the  flame  of  Hell.

Had  God  so  pleased.  He  had  made  them  one  people
and  of  one  creed :  but  He  bringeth  whom  He  will
within  his  mercy ;  and  as  for  the  doers  of  evil,  no
protector  nor  helper  shall  there  be  for  them.

Will  they  take  other  protectors  than  Him  ?  But  God,
He  is  man's  sole  protector  :  and  He  quickeneth
the  dead;  and  He  is  mighty  over  all  things.

And  whatever  the  subject  of  your  disputes,  with  God
doth  its  decision  rest.  This  is  God,  my  Lord  :  in
Him  do  I  put  my  trust,  and  to  Him  do  I  turn  in
penitence ;

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  1,  p.  17.

'  Lit.  want  Jnit  lUtlc  nfhnvr;  rent  ammder,         '  Mecca

THE    KORAN.  289

Creator  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  !  He  hath
made  for  you  pairs  from  among  your  own  selves,
and  pairs  from  cattle — by  this  means  He  mul-
tiplies you  :  nought  is  there  like  Him  !  and  verily
He  is  the  Hearer,  the  Beholder  !
1 0  His,  the  keys  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  !  He
enlargeth  supplies  or  givcth  them  by  measure  to
whom  He  will :  He  verily  knoweth  all  things.

To  you  hath  He  prescribed  the  faith  which  He  com-
manded unto  Noah  and  which  We  have  revealed
to  thee  and  which  We  commanded  unto  Abraham
and  Moses  and  Jesus,  saying,  '^  Observe  this  faith,
and  be  not  divided  into  sects  therein.^'  Intolerable
to  those  who  worship  idols  jointly  with  God

Is  that /ai//i  to  which  thou  dost  call  them  !  Whom  He
pleaseth  doth  God  choree  for  it,  and  whosoever
turneth  to  Him  in  penitence  will  He  guide  unto  it.

Nor  were  they  divided  into  sects  through  mutual  jea-
lousy, till  after  that  "  the  knowledge  "  had  come
to  them  :  and  had  not  a  decree  from  thy  Lord  gone
forth  respiting  them  to  a  fixed  time,  there  had
surely  been  a  decision  between  them.^  And  truly
they  who  have  inherited  *^the  Book '^  after  them,
are  in  perplexity  of  doubt  concerning  it.

For  this  cause  summon  thou  them  to  the  faith,  and
walk  uprightly  therein  as  thou  hast  been  bidden,
and  follow  not  their  desires  :  and  say  :  In  whatso-
ever Books  God  hath  sent  down  do  I  believe :  I
am  commanded  to  decide  justly  between  you  :  God
is  your  Lord  and  our  Lord :  we  have  our  works
and  you  have  your  works  :  between  us  and  you  let
there  be  no  strife  :  God  will  make  us  all  one :  and
to  Him  shall  we  return.

And  as  to  those  who  dispute  about  God,  after  pledges
of  obedience  given  to  Him,-  their  disputings  are
of  no  force  with  their  Lord,  and  wrath  shall  be
upon  them,  and  theirs  a  sore  torment.

It  is  God  who  hath  sent  down  the  Book  with  truth,  and
the  Balance  :^  but  what  shall  inform  thee  whether
haply  "  the  Hour  "  be  nigh  ?

'  Jews  and  Christians.

^  Or,  nachdem  ihm  (Mohamcd)  die  Lehre  geworden. — TJllm.     Postquam
respo7i.<ium  fnit  illi  (id  est,  Mahumeto  de  Religione  manifestanda). — Mar.

^  The  law  contained  in  the  Koran.     The  second  ckuse  of  this  verse
is  capable  of  other  renderings.

U

290  THE    KORAN.

They  who  believe  not  therein,  challenge  its  speedy
coming  :^  but  they  who  believe  are  afraid  because
of  it,  and  know  it  to  be  a  truth  :  Are  not  they
verily  who  dispute  of  the  Hour  in  a  fargone
error  ?

Beniffn  is  God  towards  his  servants :  for  whom  He  will
doth  He  provide  ;  and  He  is  the  Strong,  the
Mighty.

Whoso  chooses  the  tillage  of  the  life  to  come,  to  him
will  We  give  an  ample  increase  in  his  tillage :  and
whoso  chooseth  the  tillage  of  this  life,  thereof  will
We  give  him  :  but  no  portion  shall  there  be  for
him  in  the  life  to  come."
20  Is  it  that  they  (the  Meccans)  have  gods  who  have
sanctioned  for  them  aught  in  the  matter  of  reli-
gion which  God  hath  not  allowed  ?  But  had
it  not  been  for  a  decree  of  fufure  severance,
assuredly  judgment  would  have  taken  place  be-
tween them  :  and  verily  for  the  impious  is  a  pain-
ful torment.

On.  that  day  thou  shalt  see  the  impious  alarmed  at  their
own  works  when  the  coiiseguevce  thereof  is  falhng
upon  them  ;  but  they  who  believe  and  do  the
things  that  are  right,  shall  dwell  in  the  meadows
of  Paradise  :  whatever  they  shall  desire  awaiteth
them  with  their  Lord  : — This,  the  great  boon —

This  is  what  God  announceth  to  his  servants  who
believe  and  do  the  things  that  are  right.  Say  :
For  this  ask  I  no  wage  of  you,  save  the  love  of
kindred.  And  whoever  shall  have  won  the  merit
of  a  good  deed.  We  will  increase  good  to  him
therewith  ;  aye,  God  is  forgiving,  grateful.

Will  they  say  he  hath  forged  a  lie  of  God  ?  But  if  God
pleased,  He  could  seal  up  thy  very  heart.^  But
God  will  bring  untruth  to  nought,  and  will  make
good  the  truth  by  his  word ;  verily  Ho  knoweth
the  secrets  of  the  breast.

He  it  is  who  accepteth  repentance  from  his  servants,
and  forgiveth  their  sins  and  knoweth  your  ac-
tions :

'  Isai.  V.  1 9.  =>  Comp.  Gal.  vi.  7,  8.

'  i.e.  deprive  thee  of  the  Prophetic  mission  ;  or,  fortify  thee  with
patience  against  the  calumny  of  forging  lies  of  God.  Thus  Mar.  If  this
latter  interpretation  be  adopted,  the  remainder  of  the  verse  must  be  ren-
dered :  And  God  mill  abolixh  the  lie  and,  etc.

THE    KORAN.  291

And  to  those  who  believe  and  do  tlie  things  that  are
right  will  He  hearken,  and  augment  his  bounties
to  them  :  *  but  the  unbelievers  doth  a  terrible
punishment  await.

But  were  God  profuse  in  supplies  to  his  servants^
they  would  certainly  commit  excesses  on  the
earth  :  but  He  sendeth  down  what  He  will  by
measure ;  truly  He  knoweth,  beholdeth  his  ser-
vants.

He  it  is  who  after  that  men  have  despaired  of  it,
sendeth  down  the  rain,  and  spreadeth  abroad  his
mercy  :  and  He  is  the  Protector,  the  Praiseworthy.

Amoncf  his  siarns  is  the  creation  of  the  Heavens  and
of  the  Earth,  and  the  creatures  which  He  hath
scattered  through  both  :  and,  for  their  gathering
together  when  He  will,  He  is  all-powerfal !

Nor  happencth   to    you    any    mishap,    but    it    is    for
your  own   handy-work  :    and    yet   He  forgiveth
many  things.
30     Ye  cannot  weaken  Him  on  the  earth  :  neither,  beside
God,  patron  or  helper  shall  ye  have.

Among  his  signs  also  are  ships  out  at  sea,  like  moun-
tains :  if  such  be  his  will,  He  lulleth  the  wind  and
they  lie  motionless  on  the  back  of  tlie  waves  : —
truly  herein  are  signs  to  all  the  constant,  the
grateful ; —

Or  for  their  ///  deserts  He  causeth  them  to  founder ;
yet  forgiveth  He  much  :

But  they  who  gainsay  our  signs  shall  know  that  for
them  there  is  no  escape.

All  that  you  receive  is  but  for  enjoyment  in  this  life
present :  but  better  and  more  enduring  is  a  por-
tion with  God  for  those  who  believe  and  put  their
trust  in  their  Lord  ;

And  who  avoid  the  heinous  things  of  crime,  and  filthi-
nesses,  and  when  they  are  angered,  forgive  ;

And  who  hearken  to  their  Lord,  and  observe  prayer,
and  whose  affairs  are  guided  by  mutual  COUNSEL,
and  who  give  alms  of  that  with  which  we  have
enriched  them  ;

And  who,  when  a  wrong  is  done  them,  redress  them-
selves :

— Yet  let  the  recompense  of  evil  be  only  a  like  evil —

'  Lit.  ^i  will  increase  (hew.     Comp.  Ps.  cxv.  14.
u  2

292  THE    KORAN.

but  he  who  forgiveth  and  maketh  peace,  shall  find
his  reward  for  it  from  God  ;  verily  He  loveth  not
those  who  act  unjustly.

And  there  shall  be  no  way  o  )en  against  those  who,
after  being  wronged,  avenge  themselves ;
40  Only  shall  there  be  a  way  open  against  those  who
unjustly  wrong  others,  and  act  insolently  on  the
earth  in  disregard  of  justice.  These  !  a  grievous
punishment  doth  await  them.

And  whoso  beareth  wrongs  with  patience  and  for-
giveth— this  verily  is  a  bounden  duty  ;  ^

But  he  whom  God  shall  cause  to  err  shall  thenceforth
have  no  protector.  And  thou  shalt  behold  the
doers  of  injustice

Exclaiming  when  they  see  the  torment,  "  Is  there  any
way  of  return  ?  "

And  thou  shalt  see  them  when  set  before  it,  down-
cast for  the  shame  :  they  shall  look  at  it  with
stealthy  glance  :  and  the  believers  shall  say,
"  Truly  are  the  losers  they  who  have  lost  them-
selves and  their  families  on  this  day  of  Resur-
rection !  Shall  not  verily  the  ungodly '^  be  in
lasting  torment  ?  "

And  no  other  protectors  shall  there  be  to  succour  them
than  God ;  and  whom  God  shall  cause  to  err,  no
pathway  therefore  for  him  !

Hearken  to  your  Lord  ere  the  day  come,  which  there
will  be  no  averting  on  the  part  of  God.^  No  place
of  refuge  for  you  on  that  day  !  no  disavowal  of
your  works  !

But  if  they  turn  aside  from  thee,  yet  We  have  not  sent
thee  to  be  guardian  over  them.  'Tis  thine  but
to  preach.  And  verily,  when  We  cause  man  to
taste  our  gifts  of  mercy,  he  rejoiceth  in  them ;  but
if,  for  their  by-gone  handy-work,  evil  betide  them,
then  lo  !  is  man  ungrateful.

God's,  the  kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the
Earth  !  He  createth  what  He  will  !  and  He
giveth  females  to  whom  He  will,  and  He  giveth
males  to  whom  He  will  :

'  Lit.  {Ood's)  fixed  resolve  concerning  affairs.

'  The  word  rendered  ungodly  may  mean  perpetrators  of  injustice,  in
allusion  to  verse  40.

'  Lit.  cujus  nan  est  repulsio  a  Deo. — Mar.  Which  Ood  will  not  keep
back. — Sale.

THE    KOKAN.  293

Or    He    uniteth    with    them    children   of  both   sexes,
and  Ho    maketh  whom   He  will  to  be  childless  ;
truly  He  is  Wise,  Powerful  !
50     It  is  not  for  man  that  God  should  speak  with  him  but
by  revelation,  or  from  behind  a  veil :

Or  He  sendeth  a  messenger  to  reveal,  by  his  per-
mission, what  He  will  :  verily  He  is  Exalted,
Wise  !

And  thus  have  We  sent  the  Spirit  (Gabriel  ^)  to  thee
with  a  revelation,  by  our  command.  Thou  knewest
not,  ere  this,  what  "  the  Book  "  was,  or  what  the
faith.  But  We  have  ordained  it  for  a  light :  by  it
will  We  guide  whom  We  please  of  our  servants.
And  thou  verily  shalt  surely  guide  into  the  right
way.

The  way  of  God,  to  whom  helongeth  all  that  is  in
Heaven  and  Earth.  Shall  not  all  things  return
to  God  ?

[LXXXIV.]

SURA  X.-JONAH,  PEACE  BE  ON  HIM  !

Mecca. — 109  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elip.  Lam.  Ra.^  These  are  the  signs  (revelations)  of
the  wise  Book  !

A  matter  of  wonderment  is  it  to  the  men  of  Mecca,
that  to  a  person  among  themselves  We  revealed,
"  Bear  warnings  to  mankind  :  and,  to  those  who
believe,  bear  the  good  tidings  that  they  shall  find
with  their  Lord  the  reward  of  their  sincerity  ?  "^
The  unbelievers  say,  "  Lo  !  this  is  a  manifest
sorcerer. ^^

Verily  your  Lord  is  God  who  hath  made  the  Heavens

'  Thus  Beidhawi.  But  lit.  Thus  have  We  revealed  to  thee  the  Spirit  ;
which  Mar.  understands  of  the  Koran,  as  the  life  of  souls.

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  n.  2,  p.  16.  These  letters  have  been  understood  as
meaning  amar  li  rabbi,  my  Lord  hath  said  to  me.

^  Lit.  that  to  them  hath  gone  be/ore  sincerity  with  their  Lord.

294  THE    KORAN.

and  the  Earth  in  six  days — then  seated  Himself
on  his  throne  to  administer  the  rule  of  all  things  :
No^e  can  intercede  with  jdim  but  after  his  own
permission  :  This  is  God  your  Lord  :  therefore
serve  ye  Him  :   Will  ye  not  then  reflect  ?

Unto  Him  shall  ye  return,  all  together  :  the  promise  of
God  is  sure :  Lo,  He  produceth  a  creature,  then
causeth  it  to  return  again — that  He  may  reward
those  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are  right,
with  equity  :  but  as  for  the  infidels  ! — for  them  the
draught  of  boiling  water  and  an  afflictive  torment
— because  they  have  not  believed.

It  is  He  who  hath  appointed  the  sun  for  brightness,
and  the  moon  for  a  light,  and  hath  ordained  her
stations  that  ye  may  learn  the  number  of  years
and  the  reckoning  of  time.  God  hath  not  created
all  this  but  for  the  truth.*  He  maketh  his  signs
clear  to  those  who  understand.

Verily,  in  the  alternations  of  night  and  of  day,  and  in
all  that  God  hath  created  in  the  Heavens  and  in
the  Earth  are  signs  to  those  who  fear  Him.

Verily,  they  who  dread  not  a  meeting  with  Us,^  and
find  their  satisfaction  in  this  wox'ld^s  life,  and  rest
on  it,  and  they  who  of  our  signs  are  heedless ; —

These  !  their  abode  the  fire,  in  recompense  of  their
deeds  !

Verily  they  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are
right,  shall  their  Lord  direct  aright  because  of
their  faith.  Rivers  shall  flow  at  their  feet  in  gar-
dens of  delight :
lU  Their  cry  therein,  "Glory  be  to  Thee,  0  God!''  and
their  salutation  therein,  "  Peace  ! "

And  the  close  of  their  cry,  "  Praise  be  to  God,  Lord  of
all  creatures  \"
^  And  if  God  should  hasten  evil  upon  men  as  they  fain
would  hasten  good,  then  would  their  end'  bo
decreed  for  them  !  Therefore  We  leave  those
who  dread  not  the  meeting  with  Us,  bewildered
in  their  error.

Moreover,  when  trouble  touchcth  a  man,  he  crieth  to
Us,  on  his  side,  or  sitting,  or  standing;  and  when
We  withdraw  his  trouble  from  him,  he  passeth  on

'  That  is,  for  a  serious  end,  and  to  manifest  the  Divine  Unity.
'  Or,  hoj^e  not  to  meet  us.     Thus  in  verses  12,  1(5.
'  i.  e.  their  death.

THE    KOKAN.  295

as  though  he  had  not  called  on  Us  against  the
trouble  which  touched  him  !  Thus  are  the  deeds
of  transgressors  pre-arranged  for  them.
%  And  of  old  destroyed  We  generations  before  you,  0
Meccans,  when  they  had  acted  wickedly,  and  their
Apostles  had  come  to  them  with  clear  tokens  of
their  missio)t,  and  they  would  not  believe  : — thus
recompense  We  the  wicked —

Then  We  made  you  their  successors  on  the  earth,  that
We  might  see  how  ye  would  act.

But  when  our  clear  signs  are  recited  to  them,  they  who
dread  not  the  meeting  with  Us  say,  ''  Bring  a
different  Koran  from  this,  or  change  it/'  Say  :
It  is  not  for  me  to  change  it  as  mine  own  soul
prompteth.^  I  follow  only  what  is  revealed  to
me:  verily  I  fear,  if  I  r^bel  against  my  Lord,  the
punishment  of  a  great  day.

Say  :  Had  God  so  pleased,  I  had  not  recited  it  to  you,
neither  had  I  taught  it  to  you ;  and  I  have  dwelt
among  you  for  years,  ere  it  was  revealed  to  me.
Do  ye  not  then  understand  ?

And  who  is  more  unjust  than  he  who  coineth  a  lie
concerning  God,  or  treateth  his  signs  as  lies  ?
Surely  the  wicked  shall  not  prosper  !

And  they  worship  beside  God  that  which  cannot  hurt
or  help  them ;  and  say,  "  These  shall  be  our  ad-
vocates with  God  !  "  Say  :  Will  ye  inform  God
of  aught  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth  which
He  knoweth  not  ?  Glory  be  to  Him  !  and  high
be  He  exalted  above  the  deities  they  join  with
Him!
20  Men  were  of  one  religion  only  :^  then  they  fell  to
variance  :  and  had  not  a  decree  (of  respite)  pre-
viously gone  forth  from  thy  Lord,  their  differences
had  surely  been  decided  between  them  !

And  they  say  :  "  Why  is  not  a  sign  sent  down  to  him
from  his  Lord.''  But  say  :  The  Hidden  is  only
with  God  :  wait  ye  therefore  :  I  truly  will  be
with  you  among  those  who  wait.

And  when  after  a  trouble  which  had  befallen  them,^
We  caused  this  people  to  taste  of  mercy,  lo  !  a
plot  on  their  part  against  our  signs  !   Say  :  Swifter

'  Lit.  of  mine  own  accord.     Tilqua,  a  meeting.  '  Gen.  xi.  1.

^  This  refers  to  the  seven  years  of  scarcity  with  which  Mecca  had  been
visited.

296  THE     KOKAN.

to  plot   is   God  !      Verily,   our  messengers  ^   note
down  your  plottings.  )

He  it  is  who  letteth  you  travel  by  land  and  by  sea,
until,'  when  ye  are  on  board  of  ships — and  they
sail  away  with  them  ^  with  favouring  bi-eeze  in
which  they  rejoice,  there  overtakes  them  a  tem-
pestuous gale  and  the  billows  come  on  them  from
every  side  and  they  think  that  they  are  encom-
passed therewith,  tJiey  call  on  God,  professing
unto  Him  sincere  religion  : — "  Wouldst  Thou  but
rescue  us  from  this,  then  will  we  indeed  be  of  the
thankful/'

But  when  We  have  rescued  them,  lo  !  they  commit
unjust  excesses  on  the  earth  !  0  men !  your  self-
injuring  excess  is  only  an  enjoyment  of  this  life
present :  soon  shall  ye  return  to  Us  :  and  We  will
declare  unto  you  what  ye  have  done  !

This  present  life  resembleth  the  water  which  We  send
down  from  Heaven,  and  the  produce  of  the  earth
of  which  men  and  cattle  eat  is  mingled  with  it,
till  the  earth  hath  received  its  golden  raiment  and
is  decked  out  :  and  they  who  dwell  on  it  deem
that  they  have  power  over  it  !  hut,  Our  behest
Cometh  to  it  by  night  or  by  day,  and  We  make  it
as  if  it  had  been  mown  down — as  if  it  had  not
teemed  only  yesterday  !  Thus  make  We  our  signs
clear  to  those  who  consider.

And  God  calleth  to  the  abode  of  peace  ;'  and  He  guideth
whom  Ho  will  into  the  right  way.

Goodness*  itself  and  an  increase  of  it  for  those  who
have  done  good  !  neither  blackness  nor  shame
shall  cover  their  faces  !  These  shall  be  the  in-
mates of  Paradise,  therein  to  abide  for  ever.

And  as  for  those  who  have  wrought  out  evil,  their
recompense  shall  be  evil  of  like  degree,  and
shame  shall  cover  them — no  defender  shall  they
have  against  God — as  though  their  faces  were
darkened  with  deep  •'  murk  of  night !     These  shall

'  The  recording  angels.  '  An  abrupt  change  of  person  for  loith  you.

'  Paradise.

*  Verses  27,  28  are  to  be  noted,  as  defining  the  proportion  to  be  observed
in  rewards  and  punishments,  the  severity  of  the  latter  being  only  in  pro-
portion to  the  crime,  the  excellence  of  the  former  being  above  and  beyond
its  strict  merits.

*  The  Arabic  word  implies  that  part  of  the  night  when  darkest,  towards
morning.

THE    KORAN.  297

be  inmates  of  the  Fire  :  therein  they  shall  abide
for  ever.

And  on  that  day  will  ^Ve  gather  them  all  together  :
then  will  "We  say  to  those  who  added  gods  to  God,
"  To  your  place,  ye  and  those  added  gods  of
yours  ! "  Then  We  will  separate  between  them  :
and  those  their  gods  shall  say,  "  Ye  served  us
not;!
30  And  God  is  a  sufficient  witness  between  us  and  you :
verily  we  cared  not  aught  for  your  worship. ^^

There  shall  every  soul  make  proof  of  what  it  hath  sent
on  before,  and  they  shall  be  brought  back  to  God
their  true  lord,  and  the  deities  of  their  own
devising  shall  vanish  from  them.

Say  :  "Who  supplieth  you  from  the  Heaven  and  the
Earth  ?  Who  hath  powor  over  hearing  and  sight  ?
And  who  bringeth  forth  the  living  from  the  dead,
and  bringeth  forth  the  dead  from  the  living  ?
And  who  ruleth  all  things  ?  They  will  surely  then
say,  ''God:"  therefore  sat:  Will  ye  not  then
fear  Him  ?

This  God  therefore  is  your  true  Lord :  and  after  the
truth  is  gone,  what  is  there  which  remaineth  but
error  ?     How  then  are  ye  so  perverted  ?

Thus  is  the  word  of  thy  Lord  made  good  on  the  im-
pious— that  they  shall  not  believe.

Say  :  Is  there  any  of  the  gods  whom  ye  add  to  God
who  produceth  a  creature,  then  causeth  it  to  return
to  Him  ?  Say  :  God  produceth  a  creature,  then
causeth  it  to  return  to  Him  :  How  then  are  ye
turned  aside  ?

Say  :  Is  there  any  of  the  gods  ye  add  to  God  who
guideth  to  the  truth  ?  Say  :  God  guideth  unto
the  truth.  Is  He  then  who  guideth  to  the  truth
the  more  worthy  to  be  followed,  or  he  who  guideth
not  unless  he  be  himself  guided  ?  What  then
hath  befallen  you  that  ye  so  judge  ?

And  most  of  them  ibllow  only  a  conceit : — But  a  conceit
profiteth  nothing  against  the  truth  !  Verily  God
knoweth  what  they  do.

Moreover  this  Koran  could  not  have  been  devised  apart
from   God  :  but  it  confirmeth  what  was  revealed

'  But  rather  your  own  lusts.    The  Muhammadans  believe  that  idols  will
be  gifted  with  speech  at  the  day  of  judgment.

298  THE    KORAN.

before  it,  aud  is  a  clearing  up  of  the  Scriptures  ^ —
there  is  no  doubt  therein — from  the  Lord  of  all
creatures.

Do  they  say,  "  He  hath  devised  it  himself^'  ?  Say  :
Then  bring  a  Sura  like  it ;  and  call  on  whom  ye
can  beside  God,  if  ye  speak  truth.
40  But  that  which  they  embrace  not  in  their  knowledge
have  they  charged  with  falsehood,  though  the
explanation  of  it  hath  not  yet  been  given  them.
So  those  who  were  before  them  brought  charges
of  imposture  :  But  see  what  was  the  end  of  the
unjust !

And  some  of  them  believe  in  it,  and  some  of  them
believe  not  in  it.  But  thy  Lord  well  knoweth  the
transgressors.

And  if  they  charge  thee  with  imposture,  then  Say  :  My
work  for  me,  and  your  work  for  you  !  Ye  are  clear
of  that  which  I  do,  and  I  am  clear  of  that  which
ye  do.

And  some  of  them  lend  a  ready  ear  to  thee  :  But  wilt
thou  make  the  deaf  to  hear  even  though  they
understand  not  ?

And  some  of  them  look  wistfully  at  thee  :  But  wilt
thou  guide  the  blind  even  though  they  see  not  ?

Verily,  God  wrongeth  not  men  in  aught,  but  men  wrong
their  own  souls.

Moreover,  on  that  day.  He  will  gather  them  all  toge-
ther :  They  shall  seem  as  though  they  had  waited
but  an  hour  of  the  day !  They  shall  recognize  one
another  !  Now  perish  they  who  treated  the  meeting
with  God  as  an  untruth,  and  were  not  guided
aright !

Whether  We  cause  thee  to  see  some  of  our  menaces
against  them  fulfilled  or  whether  We  first  take  thee
to  Ourself,'  to  Us  do  they  return — Then  shall  God
be  a  witness  to  what  they  have  done.

And  every  people  hath  had  its  apostle. "*  And  vvhen
their  apostle  came,  a  rightful  decision  took  place
between  them,  and  they  were  not  wronged.

'  Or,  of  the  Book,  i.e.  the  Prototype  of  the  Koran  preserved  in  Heaven.
So  Sprenj^er,  ii.  286.

-The  ordinary  Arabic  word  for  to  die  seems  often  to  be  avoided  in
speaking  of  Jesus  and  Muhammad.

•This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Kabbins.  Comp.  Midrasch  Kabba,  and
Midr.  Jalkut  on  Numb.  xxii.  ^.

THE    KOKAN.  299

Yet  they  say,  "  When  will  this  menace  be  made  good  ?

Tell  us  if  ye  speak  truly/^
60     Say  :  I  have  no  po^Yer  over  my  own  woe  or  weal,  but

as   God  pleaseth.     Every  people  hath   its   time :

when  their  time  is  come,  they  shall  neither  retard

nor  advance  it  an  hour.
Say  :  How  think  ye?  if  God's  punishment  come  on  you

by  night  or  by  day,  what  portion    of  it  will  the

wicked  desire  to  hasten  on  ?
When  it  falleth  on  you.  will  ye  believe  it  then  ?     Yet

did  ye  desire  to  hasten  it  on.^
Then  shall  it  be  said  to  the  transgressors,  "  Taste  ye

the  punishment  of  eternity  !   Shall  ye  be  rewarded

but  as  ye  have  wrought  ?  "
They  will  desire  thee  to  inform   them  whether  this  be

true  ?    Say  :  Yes  !  by  ir  y  Lord  it  is  the  very  truth  :

and  it  is  not  ye  who  can  weaken  Him.
And  if  every  soul  that  hath  sinned  possessed  all  that  is  on

eai'th,  it  would  assuredly  ransom  itself  therewith  ;

and  they  will  proclaim  their  repentance  when  they

have  seen  the  punishment  :  and  there  shall  be  a

rightful  decision  between  them,  and  they  shall  not

be  unjustly  dealt  with.
Is   not  verily  whatever   is    in   the   Heavens    and   the

Earth  God's  ?     Is  not  indeed  the  promise  of  God

true  ?     But  most  of  them  know  it  not —
He  maketh  alive  and  He  causeth  to  die,   and  to  Him

shall  ye  be  returned.
%  0   men  !  now  hath  a  warning  come  to  you  from  your

Lord,  and  a  medicine   for  what  is  in  your  breasts,

and  a  guidance  and  a  mercy  to  believers.
Say  :  Through  the   grace  of  God  and  his  mercy  !  and

in  this   let  them  therefore  rejoice  :  better  is  this

than  all  they  amass.
60     Say  :  What  think  ye  of  the  supplies  which  God  hath  sent

down  to  you,  and  which  ye   have  made  unlawful

and  lawful?     Say  :  Hath  God  permitted  you  ?    or

invent  ye  on  the  part  of  God  ?
But  what  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  will  be  the  thought

of  those  who  invent  a  lie  on  the  part  of  God  ?

Truly  God  is  all-bounteous  towards  man ;  but  most

of  them  give  not  thanks.

'  The  unbelievers  had  doubtless  challenged  JIuhammad  to  bring  down
the  whole  or  part  of  the  divine  judgments.  Lit.  ivill  ye  believe  it  at  the
time  ?  or  now  ■

300  THE    KOKAN.

Thou  shalt  not  be  employed  in  affairs,  nor  shalt  thou
read  a  text  out  of  the  Koran,  nor  shall  ye  work  any
work,  but  We  will  be  witnesses  over  you  when  ye
are  engaged  therein  :  and  not  the  weight  of  an
atom  on  Earth  or  in  Heaven  escapeth  thy  Lord  ;
nor  is  there  aught  that  is  less  than  this  or  greater,
but  it  is  in  the  perspicuous  Book.

Are  not  they  truly  the  friends  of  God,  on  whom  no
fear  cometh,  nor  are  they  put  to  grief  ?

They  who  have  believed  and  lived  in  the  fear  of  God, —

For  them,  good  tidings  in  this  life  and  in  the  next !  No
change  in  the  decrees  of  God !  This,  the  great
felicity  !

And  let  not  their  discourse  grieve  thee :  Verily  power
is  wholly  God^s :  the  Hearer,  the  Knower  He  !

Is  not  of  a  truth  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  what-
ever is  in  the  Earth  subject  to  God  ?  What  then  do
they  follow  who,  beside  God,  call  upon  deities  they
have  joined  with  Him  ?  Verily  they  follow  but  a
conceit !  and  verily  they  are  nought  but  liars  !

It  is  He  who  hath  ordained  for  you  the  night  wherein
to  rest,  and  the  lightsome  day.^  Verily  in  this  are
signs  for  those  who  will  hearken.
^  They  say,  "God  hath  begotten  issue."  No!  Glory
be  to  Him  !  He  is  the  self-sufficient.  All  that  is
in  the  Heavens  and  all  that  is  in  the  Earth  is  His  !
Have  ye  warranty  for  that  assertion  ?  Speak  ye
of  God  that  which  ye  know  not  ?
70  Say  :  Verily,  they  who  devise  this  lie  concerning  God
shall  fare  ill  :

A  provision  have  they  in  this  world ;  then  to  Us  they
return  !  Then  make  We  them  to  taste  the  vehement
torment,  for  that  they  were  unbelievers.
^  Also  recite  to  them  the  history  of  Noah  -  when  he  said  to
his  people, — "  If,  0  my  people  !  my  abode  with  you
and  my  reminding  you  of  the  signs  of  God  be  griev-
ous to  you,  yet  in  God  is  my  trust :  Muster  there-
fore your  designs  and  your  false  gods,  and  let  not
your  design  be  carried  on  by  you  in  the  dark  :  then
come  to  some  decision  ^  about  me,  and  delay  not :

'  i.e.  enabling  you  to  behold  objects.

^  The  preachincf  of  Noah  is  mentioned  by  the  Rabbins.  Sanhedrin,  108.
Comp.  Midr.  Kabbah  on  Gen.  Par.  30  and  33,  on  Eccl.  ix.  14,  and  in  the
probably  sub- Apostolic  2  Pet.  ii.  b.

'  f^r,  make  known  {your  wishes)  to  me.

THE    KORAN.  801

And  if  ye  turn  away,  yet  ask  I  no  reward  from  you  :
my  reward  is  with  God  alone,  and  I  am  com-
manded to  be  of  the  Muslims/'

But  they  treated  him  as  a  liar :  therefore  We  rescued
him  and  those  who  were  with  him  in  the  ark,  and
We  made  them  to  survive  the  others ;  ^  and  We
drowned  those  who  had  charcjed  our  sio^ns  with
falsehood.  See,  then,  what  was  the  end  of  these
warned  ones  !

Then  after  him.  We  sent  Apostles  to  their  peoples,  and
they  came  to  them  with  credentials  ;  but  they  would
not  believe  in  what  they  had  denied  aforetime :
Thus  seal  We  up  the  hearts  of  the  transgres-
sors !

Then  sent  We,  after  them,  Moses  and  Aaron  to  Pha-
raoh and  his  nobles  with  our  signs ;  but  they  acted
proudly  and  became  sinners  :

And  when  the  truth  came  to  them  from  Ourself,  they
said,  "Verily,  this  is  clear  sorcery. •"'

Moses  said  :  "  Say  ye  of  the  truth  after  it  hath  come
to  you,  '  Is  this  sorcery  '  ?  But  sorcerers  shall  not
prosper.^'

They  said :  "  Art  thou  come  to  us  to  pervert  us  from
the  fait] I  in  which  we  found  our  fathers,  and  that
to  you  twain  shall  be  greatness  in  the  land  ?  But
we  believe  you  not."
80  And  Pharaoh  said  :  "  Fetch  me  every  skilled  magician.^'
And  when  the  magicians  arrived,  Moses  said  to
them,  "  Cast  down  what  ye  have  to  cast.''

And  when  they  had  cast  them  down,  Moses  said,
"  Verily,  God  will  render  vain  the  sorceries  which
ye  have  brought  to  pass  :  aye,  God  prospereth  not
the  work  of  evil-doers.

And  by  his  words  will  God  verify  the  Truth,  though  the
impious  be  averse  to  it.''

And  none  believed  on  Moses  but  a  race  among  his
own  people,-  through  fear  of  Pharaoh  and  his
nobles,  lest  he  should  afflict  them  :  For  of  a  truth
mighty  was  Pharaoh  in  the  land,  and  one  verily
who  committed  excesses.

And  Moses  said  :  "  0  my  people  !  if  ye  believe  in  God,
then  put  your  trust  in  Him — if  ye  be  Muslims."

And  they  said  :  "  In   God  put  we  our  trust.     0  our

'  Lit.  successors  (of  the  drowned).

=>  The  tribe  of  Levi.— Geiger,  "  was  hat  Mohammed,"  &c.,  p.  160

302  THE    KORAN.

Lord  !  abandon  us  not  to  trial  ^  from  that  unjust
people,

And  deliver  us  by  thy  mercy  from  the  unbelieving
people/^

Then  thus  revealed  We  to  Moses  and  to  his  brother :
"  Provide  houses  for  your  people  in  Egypt,  and  in
your  houses  make  a  Kebla,  and  observe  prayer
and  proclaim  the  good  tidings  to  the  believers/'

And  Moses  said  :  "  O  our  Lord  !  Thou  hast  indeed  given
to  Pharaoh  and  his  nobles  splendour  and  riches  in
this  present  life  :  0  our  Lord  !  that  they  may  err
from  thy  way !  0  our  Lord  !  confound  their  riches,
and  harden  their  hearts  that  they  may  not  believe
till  they  see  the  dolorous  torment.^'

He  said  :  "  The  prayer  of  you  both  is  heard  :  walk  ye
both  therefore  uprightly,  and  follow  not  the  path
of  those  who  have  no  knowledge."
90  And  We  led  the  children  of  Israel  through  the  sea ;
and  Pharaoh  and  his  hosts  followed  them  in  eager
and  hostile  sort  until,  when  the  drowning  overtook
him,  he  said,  "  I  believe  that  there  is  no  God  but
He  on  whom  the  children  of  Israel  believe,  and
I  am  one  of  the  Muslims.'^

Yet  now,  said  God:  "Though  thou  hast  been  rebellious
aforetime,  and  wast  one  of  the  wicked  doers.

This  day  will  We  rescue  thee  with  thy  body  that  thou
may  est  be  a  sign  to  those  who  shall  be  after  thee  :^
but  truly,  most  men  are  of  our  signs  regardless  !  "
^  Moreover  AVe  prepared  a  salubrious  abode  for  the
children  of  Israel,  and  provided  them  with  good
things  :  nor  did  they  fall  into  variance  till  the
Knowledge  (the  Law)  came  to  them :  truly  thy
Lord  will  decide  between  them  on  the  day  of
Resuri'cction  concerning  that  in  which  they  dif-
fered.

'  Lit.  mal-e  ux  not  {the  subject  of)  trial,  or  pimishment,  to,  &c.

^  This  is  in  accordance  with  Talniudic  lei^end.  "  Recognize  the  power
of  repentance  in  the  case  of  Pharaoh,  King  of  Egypt,  who  rebelled  exces-
sively against  the  most  High  ;  IFho  in  God  that  I  shotdd  hearken  to  his
voice  ?  (Ex.  V.  2).  But  with  the  same  tongue  that  sinned  he  did  penance  :
Who  is  like  thee,  0  Lord,  ammuj  the  Gods  ?  (xv.  11).    The  Holy  One,  Blessed

be  He,  delivered  him  from  the  dead, so  that  he  should  not  die  (ix.  15,

16).— For  now  have  I  stretched  forth  my  hand,  and  verily  thee  have  I
raised  up  from  among  the  dead,  to  proclaim  my  might."  Ex.  ix.  15.  16.
A  strange  comment !  Pirke  R.  Eliezer,  §  43.  Comp.  Midr.  on  Ps.  cvi.
Midr.  Jalkut,  oh.  238.

THE    KORAN.  303

And  if  tliou  art  in  doubt  as  to  what  We  have  sent  down

to  thee,  inquire  at  those  who  read  the  Scriptures

before  thee.^     Now  hath  the  truth  come  unto  thee

from  thy  Lord  :  be  not  thou  therefore  of  those  who

doubt.
Neither  be  of  those  who  charj^e  the  siorns  of  God  with

falsehood,  lest  thou  be  of  those  who  perish.
Yerily  they  against  whom   the  decree  of  thy  Lord  is

pronounced,  shall  not  believe,
Even  though  every  kind  of  sign  come  unto  them,  till

they  behold  the  dolorous  torment !
Were  it  otherwise,  any  city,  had  it  believed,  might

have  found  its    safety  in   its  faith.-      But  it  was

so  only  with  the  people  of  JONAS.     When  they

believed,  AVe  delivered  them  from  the  penalty  of

shame  in  this  world,  and  provided  for  them  for  a

time.
But  if  thy  Lord  had  pleased,  verily  all  who  are  in  the

earth  would  have  believed  together.     Wilt  thou

then  compel  men  to  become  believers?
100  No  soul  can  believe  but  by  the  permission  of  God  :  and

He    shall    lay  his  wrath    on    those  who  will  not

understand.
Sat  :  Consider  ye  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  on

the  Earth  :   but   neither    signs  nor  warners  avail

those  who  will  not  believe  !
What  then  can  they  expect  but  the  like  of  such  days

of  icrath    as    befell  those    who   flourished  before

them  ?    Sat  :  Wait ;  I  too  will  be  with  you  among

those  who  wait ;
Then  will   We  deliver  Our    apostles    and    those  who

believe :  Thus  is  it  binding  on  Us  to  deliver  the

faithful.
if  Sat  :  0  men  !  if  ye  are  in  doubt  as  to  my  religion,  then

I  worship  not  whom  ye  worship  beside  God ;  but

I  worship  God,  who  will  cause  you  to  die  :  and  I

am  commanded  to  be  a  believer.
And  set  thy  face  toward  the  true  religion,  sound  in  faith

(Hanyf),  and  be  not  of  those  who  join  other  gods

with  God  :
Neither  invoke  beside  God  that  which  can  neither  help

'  i.e.,  whether  thou  art  not  foretold  in  the  Law  and  Gospel,  and
whether  the  Koran  is  not  in  unison  with,  and  confirmatory  of  them.

"  Lit.  And  if  not  {there  might  have  been)  a  city  (which)  had  believed,  and
its  faith  icould  have  profited  it.     Save  the  people  of  Jonah,  when,  etc.

304  THE    KORAli.

nor  hurt  thee :  for  if  thou  do,  thou  wilt  certainly
then  be  one  of  the  unjust.

And  if  God  lay  the  touch  of  trouble  on  thee,  there  is
none"  to  remove  it  but  He  :  and  if  He  would  confer
^ood  upon  thee,  there  is  none  to  keep  back  his
bounty  :  He  will  confer  it  on  such  of  his  servants  as
He  chooseth  :  and  He  is  the  Gracious,  the  Merciful !

Say  :  0  mankind  !  now  hath  the  truth  come  unto  you
from  your  Lord.  He  therefore  who  is  guided
aright,  is  guided  only  for  his  own  behoof:  but  he
who  is  in  error  erreth  only  against  the  same  ;  and
I  am  not  guardian  over  you  !

And  follow  what  is  revealed  to  thee  :  and  persevere
steadfastly  till  God  shall  judge,  for  He  is  the  best
of  Judges.

[LXXXV.]

SURA   XXXIV.— SABA.'

Mecca. — 54  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Praise  be  to  God  !  to  whom  belongeth  all  that  is  in
the  Heavens  and  all  that  is  on  the  Earth ;  and  to
Him  be  praise  in  the  next  world :  and  He  is  the
All-wise,  the  All-informed  !

He  knowcth  what  entereth  into  the  earth,  and  what
proceedeth  from  it ;  and  what  cometh  down  from
heaven,  and  what  goeth  up  into  it :  and  He  is  the
Merciful,  the  Forgiving  !

But  the  unbelievers  say,  "  The  Hour  will  not  come  upon
us  ! "  Say  :  Nay  rather,  by  my  Lord  it  will  surely
come  upon  you  !  Him  who  knoweth  the  secret
things  not  the  weight  of  a  mote  (an  ant)  either
in  the  Heavens  or  in  the  Earth  escapeth ;  nor  is
there  aught  less  than  this  or  aught  greater,  which
is  not  in  the  perspicuous  Book; —

lA  city  of  Yeman,  the  Sheba  of  Scripture,  destroyed  by  the  flood  of
El'  Ireni.     It  took  its  name  from  the  great-grandson  of  Joctan.

THE    KOHAN.  305

To  the  inteut  tliat  God  may  reward  those  who  beheve
and  do  the  things  that  are  right :  Pardon  and  a
noble  provision  for  them  !

But  as  for  those  who  aim  to  invahdate  our  signs, — for
them  a  chastisement  of  painful  torment  !

And  they  to  whom  knowledge  hath  been  given  see  that
what  hath  been  sent  down  to  thee  from  thy  Lord
is  the  truth,  and  guideth  into  the  way  of  the
Glorious,  the  Praiseworthy.

But  the  unbelievers  say  to  those  wliom  they  fall  in  ivith,
"  Shall  we  point  out  to  you  a  man  who  will  fore-
tell you  that  when  ye  have  been  utterly  torn  and
rent  to  pieces,  ye  shall  verily  be  restored  in  a  new
creation  ?

He  deviseth  a  lie  about  God,  or  there  is  a  djinn  in
him.^'  Ihit  they  who  beiieve  not  in  the  next  life,
shall  incur  chastisement,  and  be  lost  in  remote
estranfjemcnt  from  God.

Have  they  never  contemplated  that  which  is  before
them  and  behind  them  in  Heaven  and  Earth  ?  If
such  were  our  pleasure,  We  could  cause  the  Earth
to  swallow  them  up,  or  cause  a  portion  of  the
Heaven  to  fall  upon  them  !  ^  Herein  truly  is  a  sign
for  every  returning  servant.
10  ^  And  on  David  bestowed  We  from  Ourself,  a  special
boon  : — "  0  mountains,  repeat  ye  (the  praises  of
God)  with  him,  and  ye  birds. '^  And  We  made
the  iron  soft  for  him  : — "  Make  coats  of  mail,  and
arrange  its  plates  ;  and  work  ye  righteousness ;
verily  I  behold  your  actions.^^

And  unto  Solomon  did  We  subject  the  wind,  which
travelled  in  the  morning  a  month^s  journey,  and  a
month's  journey  in  the  evening,-  and  We  caused
a  fountain  of  molten  brass  to  flow  for  him.  And
of  the  Djinn  were  some  who  worked  in  his  pre-
sence, by  the  will  of  his  Lord ;  and  such  of  them
as  swerved  from  our  bidding  We  caused  to  taste
the  torment  of  the  flame.

'  See  Sur.  xxx.  47,  in  the  Ar.  p.  258.  The  Arabs,  like  the  Jews,  pro-
bably conceived  of  the  Heavens  as  a  solid  vault.  Thus  Dr.  Sprenger,  xvii.
94,  p.  200.     Comp.  xxvi.  187,  208.  p.  102.

*  This  rendering  is  in  accordance  with  the  Muhammadan  traditions
given  by  Beidhawi  and  others  (see  note  ap.  Sale  on  Sur.  xxvii.  21)  as  to
Solomon's  mode  of  travelling.  Lit.  its  morning-{time)  a  month,  and  its
evening-{time)  a  month ;  i.e.  (it  blew)  for  a  month  in  the  morning,  &c.

X

306  THE   KORAN.

They  made  for  him  whatever  he  pleased,  of  private
chambers,  and  images,  and  dishes  large  as  tanks,
and  cooking-pots  that  stood  firmly.      '' AVork,"
saiciWe,  "  0  family  of  David,  with  thanksgiving."
But  few  of  my  servants  are  the  thankful !
And  when  We  decreed  the  death  of  Solomon,  nothing
showed  them  that  he  was  dead  but  a  reptile  of  the
earth  that  gnawed  the  staff  which  supported  his
corpse}     And  when  it  fell,  the  Djinn  perceived
that  if  they  had  known  the  things  unseen,  they
had  not  continued  in  their  shameful  affliction.-
f  Of  old  truly  there  was  a  sign  to  SABA,  in  their  abodes  :
— two  gardens,  the  one  on  the  right  hand  and  the
other  on  the  left : — ''  Eat  ye  of  your  Lord's  sup-
plies, and  give  thanks  to  Him  :  goodly  the  country,
and  gracious  the  Lord  ! "
]5ut  they  turned  aside:  so  We  sent  upon  them  the
flood  of  Irem,"  and  We  changed  them  their  gar-
dens into  two  gardens  of  bitter  fruit  and  tamarisk
and  some  few  lote-trees.
Such  was  our  retribution  on  them  for  their  ingratitude  :
but  do  We  thus  recompense  any  except  the  un-
grateful ?
And  We  placed  between  them  and  the  cities  which  Wo
have  blessed,  conspicuous    cities,    and  We  fixed
easy  stages  therein  :  "  Travel  ye  through  them  by
night  and  day,  secure.'^
But  they  said,  "  0  Lord  !  make  the  distance  between
our  journeys  longer,'''* — and  against  themselves
did  they  act  unjustly :  so  We  made  them  a  tale,
and    scattered    them   with    an   utter   scattering.
Truly  herein  are  signs  to  every  one  that  is  patient,
grateful.

'  The  Talmud  mentions  the  worm  Shameer,  used  by  Solomon  to  cut  the
stones  for  building;  the  temple.— Pirke  Aboth.  v.  See  Buxt.  Lex.  Talmud.
p.  245G  ;  Tr.  Gitthi,  fol.  68  ;  and  Midr.  Jalkut  on  1  Kinj^s  vi.  7.  This
pa.ssage  of  Scripture  may  have  suggested  the  idea  that  Solomon  built,  etc.,
by  the  aid  of  Spirits.

^  i.  e.  in  their  difficult  toils.

3  See  M.  Caussin  de  Perceval,  Hist,  des  Arabes,  vol.  iii.,  who,  as  well  as
M.  de  Sacy,  fixes  this  event  in  the  second  century  of  our  era.  Lit.  the  flood
of  Ihi'  monnds  or  dams.

*  The  i<ahn  of  verse  14  funned  an  important  branch  of  the  trading  popii-
latiou  of  Yemen.  This  whole  passage,  14-18,  alludes  to  the  cessation  ot
traffic  between  them  and  Syria,  which  led  to  the  desire  to  lengthen  the
stiiges  and  diminish  the  expense  of  the  journey.  See  Muir's  Life  of  Mu-
hammad, i.  p.  cxxxix.    JMuhauimad  attributes  this  desire  to  covetousness.

THE    KORAN.  307

And  assuredly  now  Eblis  proved  that  lie  had  judged
truly  of  tlicm ;  and  they  nil,  except  a  portion  of
the  faithful,  followed  him  :
20  Yet  no  power  had  ho  over  them.  Only  We  would  dis-
cern him  who  believed  in  the  life  to  come,  from
him  who  doubted  of  it ;  for  thy  Lord  keepeth  watch
over  all  thinofs.
^  Say  :  Call  ye  (JNIeccans)  upon  those  wdiom  ye  deem
gods  beside  God :  their  power  in  the  Heavens  and
in  the  Earth  is  not  the  weight  of  an  atom —
— neither  have  they  any  share  in  either;  nor  hath
He  a  helper  from  among  them.

No  intercession  shall  avail  with  Him  but  that  which  He
Himself  alloweth  ^ — until  when  at  last  their  hearts
are  relieved  from  terror,  they  say,  "What  saitli
your  Lord?^^  they  answer,  ''The  Truth;  for  He
is  the  High,  the  Great. ^'

Say  :  Who  supplieth  you  out  of  the  Heavens  and  the
Earth  ?     Say  :  God.     And  verily  we  or  ye  have
N  guidance  or  are  in  palpable  error  !

Say  :  Not  as  to  our  faults  shall  ye  be  questioned,
neither  shall  we  bo  questioned  as  to  your  actions ;

Say  :  Our  Lord  will  gather  us  together — then  will  He
judge  between  us  in  justice;  for  He  is  the  Judge,
one  who  knoweth  all  tltlnrjs.

Say  :  Show  me  those  whom  ye  have  united  with  Him
as  associates  :  away  with  them  !  nay,  rather.  He
is  God,  the  Mighty,  the  Wise !

And  We  have  not  sent  thee  otherwise  than  to  mankind
at  large,-  to  announce  and  to  warn  :  but  most  men
understand  not.

And  they  say,  "  When  will  this  threat  come  to  pass  ?
Tell  us,  if  ye  be  men  of  truth  :  "

Say  :  Ye  are  menaced  with  a  day,  which  not  for  an
hour  can  ye  retard  or  hasten  on.
•30  The  unbelievers  say,  "  We  will  by  no  means  believe  in
this  Koran,  nor  in  the  Books  which  preceded  it."
But  couldst  thou  see  when  the  wicked  shall  be
set  before  their  Lord  !  With  repi'oachps  will  they
answer  one  another  :  those  who  were  reputed
weak  will  say  to  those  who  were  arrogant,  '*  But
for  you  we  had  assuredly  been  behevers :"

'  Lit.  hut  to  u-hom  He  shall  permit .

*  Li  t.  universally,  or  vlwlhj  to  mankind,  or  altogether  as  an  announcer,  &c.

X  2

o08  THE    KOUAN.

Then  shall  the  arrogant  ones  say  to  the  weak,  "  Was
it  wo  who  turned  you  aside  from  the  guidance
which  had  reached  you  ?  Nay,  but  ye  acted  wick-
edly yourselves.'^

And  the  weak  shall  say  to  the  arrogant,  "  Nay,  but
there  was  a  plot  by  night  and  by  day,  when  ye
bade  us  believe  not  in  God,  and  assign  Him  peers."
And  they  shall  proclaim  their  repentance  after
they  have  seen  the  punishment  !  And  yokes  will
We  place  on  the  necks  of  those  who  have  not
believed  !  Shall  they  be  rewarded  but  as  they  have
wrought  ?

Nor  have  We  sent  a  warner  to  any  city  whose  opu-
lent men  did  not  say,  "  In  sooth  we  disbelieve
your  message ;''

And  said,  "  Wc  arc  the  more  abundant  in  riches
and  in  children,  nor  shall  wc  be  among  the
punished.''

Say:  Of  a  truth  my  Lord  is  liberal  of  supplies  to
whom  He  pleaseth,  or  giveth  by  measure  ;  but
the  greater  part  of  men  acknowledge  it  not  :

Neither  by  your  riches  nor  by  your  children  shall  you
bring  yourselves  into  nearness  with  Us  ;  but  they
who  believe  and  do  the  thing  that  is  right  shall
have  a  double  reward  for  what  they  have  done,
and  in  the  pavilions  of  Paradise  shall  they  ihceU
secure  ;

But  they  who  aim  to  invalidate  our  signs,  shall  be
consigned  to  punishment.

Say  :  Of  a  truth  my  Lord  is  liberal  of  supplies  to  whom
He  pleaseth  of  his  servants,  or  is  sparing  to
them :  and  whatever  ye  give  in  alms  He  will
return;  and  He  is  the  best  dispenser  of  gifts.

One  day  He  will  gather  them  all  together :  then  shall
He  say  to  the  angels,  ''  Did  these  worship
you  ?  "
40  They  shall  say,  "  Glory  be  to  Thee  !  Thou  art  our  friend,
not  these  !  "  ^  Nay,  they  worshipped  the  Djinn  :  it
was  in  them  that  most  of  them  believed.

On  this  day  the  one  of  you  shall  have  no  power  over
others  for  help  or  hurt ;  and  We  will  say  to  the
evil-doers,  "  Taste  ye  the  torment  of  the  fire,
which  ye  treated  as  a  delusion."

'  Lit.  'inthout  them.

THE    KOKAN.  o09

For  when  our  distinct  signs  are  recited  to  them  they
say,  "  This  is  merely  a  man  who  would  fain  per-
vert you  from  your  fathers'  worship  " — And  they
say,  "This  (Koran)  is  no  other  than  a  forged  false-
hood." And  the  unbelievers  say  to  the  truth  when
it  is  presented  to  them,  '*  ^Tis  verily  nothing  but
palpable  sorcery : "

Yet  have  We  given  them  no  books  in  which  to  study
deeply,  nor  have  We  sent  any  one  to  them  before
thee,  charged  Avith  Avarnings.

They  also  who  flourished  before  them  treated  our
apostles  as  impostors  in  like  sort  :  but  not  to
the  tenth  part  of  what  We  bestowed  on  them  ^
have  these  attained.  And  yet  when  they  charged
my  apostles  with  xleceit,  how  terrible  was  my
vengeance !

Say  :  One  thing  only  do  I  advise  you  : — that  ye  stand
up  before  God  two  and  two,  or  singly,-  and  then
reflect  that  in  your  fellow-citizen  is  no  djinn : ''
he  is  no  other  than  your  warner  before  a  severe
punishment.

Say  :  I  ask  not  any  wage  from  you :  that  is  with  your-
selves :  verily  my  wage  is  of  God  alone  : — And  He
is  witness  over  all  thinsfs  !

Say  :  Truly  my  Lord  sendeth  forth  ^  the  Truth : —
Knower  of  things  unseen  !

Say  :  Truth  is  come,  and  falsehood  shall  not  appear,
and  shall  return  no  more !

Say  :  If  I  err,  verily  to  my  own  cost  only  do  I  err :
but  if  I  have  guidance,  it  is  of  my  Lord's  re-
vealing. Verily  He  is  the  Hearer,  the  Near  at
hand.
oO  Couldst  thou  sec  how  they  shall  tremble  but  find
no  escape,  and  be  taken  forth  from  the  place
that  is  so  near  ;  ^

And  say,  "  We  believe  in  Him  !  "  But  how,  in  their
present  distance,*^  shall  they  receive  the  faith,

'  i.e.  of  strength  and  material  prosperity.

'•^  i.e.  so  as  to  form  a  judgment  free  from  the  influence  of  others.

'  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  when  the  power  of  ^Vluhammad  became
firmly  established,  he  never  reverts  to  the  insinuations  ar,'ainst  the  sound-
ness of  his  mind  which  in  the  earlier  Suras  he  so  often  rebuts.

■*  Or,  ca.its  his  truth  {over  his  .'<i:rvants).

'  i.  e.  the  grave. — Mar.  So  called  because  there  is  but  a  step  into  it  from
the  surface  of  the  earth. — Ullm.

*  i,  e,  beyond  the  grave.

310  THE    KORAN.

When  they  had  before  denied  it,  and  aimed  their  shafts

at  the  mystery  from  afar  ?  ^
And  a  barrier  shall  bo  passed  between  them  and  that

which  they  desire —
As  was  done  unto  those  of  a  like  persuasion  of  old.

Verily    they   were    lost    in    the    questionings    of

doubt.

[LXXXVI.]

SURA  XXXV.— THE  CREATOR,  OR  THE  ANGELS.

Mecxia, — 45  Verses,

III  the  Name  of  God,  the  ComjJCissionate,  the  Merciful.

Pr.AiSE  bo  to  God,  Maker  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the
Earth  !  Who  cmployeth  the  ANGKLS  as  envoys,
having  two  and  three  and  four  pairs  of  wings  :
He  addeth  to  his  creature  what  He  will  !  Truly
God  hath  power  over  all  things.

The  mercy  which  God  layeth  open  for  man  no  one  can
withhold ;  and  what  He  withholdcth,  none  can
afterwards "  send  forth.  And  Ho  is  tho  Mighty,
the  Wise.

O  men  !  bear  in  mind  the  favour  of  God  towards  you.
Is  there  a  creator  other  than  God  who  nourishcth
you  out  of  heaven  and  earth  ?  There  is  no  God
but  He !     How   then   are   ye   turned  aside  from

mm  ?

If  they  treat  thee  as  an  impostor,  then  before  thee  have
apostles  been  treated  as  impostors — But  to  Uod
shall  all  thincrs  return.

0  men  !  verily  the  promise  of  God  is  true  :  let  not  then
the  present  life  deceive  you  with  vain  hopes  :  and
let  not  the  Deceiver  deceive  you  as  to  God.^

'  i.e.  when  in  this  life.

^  Lit.  (ifliir  hiw,  i.e.  after  he  has  withhold  it.

^  Lit.  .'icduce  you  from  God.

THE   KORAN.  311

Yes^  Satan  is  your  foe.  For  a  foe  then  hold  him.  He
summoneth  his  followers  only  to  become  inmates
of  the  flame.

The  unbelievers, — for  them  a  terrible  punishment ! —

But  believers  and  doers  of  good  Avorks,  for  them  is
mercy,  and  a  great  reward  !

Shall  he,  the  evil  of  whose  deeds  are  so  tricked  out  to
him  that  he  deemeth  them  good,  he  treated  like
him  who  seeth  thimjs  aright  ?  Verily  God  mislead-
eth  whom  He  will,  and  guideth  whom  He  will.
Spend  not  thy  soul  in  sighs  for  them  :  verily  God
kuoweth  their  doing^s.
10  It  is  God  who  sendeth  forth  the  winds  which  raise  the
clouds  aloft ;  then  drive  We  them  on  to  some  land
dead  from  drought,^  and  give  life  thereby  to  the
earth  after  its  death.  So  shall  be  the  Eesurrec-
tion.

If  any  one  desireth  greatness,  greatness  is  wholly  with
God.  The  good  word  riseth  up  to  Him,  and  the
righteous  deed  doth  He  exalt.  But  a  severe  punish-
ment awaiteth  the  plotters  of  evil  things ;  and  the
plots  of  such  will  be  in  vain.

Moreover  God  created  you  of  dust — then  of  the  germs
of  life — then  made  you  two  sexes  :  and  no  female
conceiveth  or  bringeth  forth  without  his  know-
ledge ;  and  the  aged  ageth  not,  nor  is  aught
minished  from  man's  age,  but  in  accordance  with
the  Book.     An  easy  thing  truly  is  this  to  God.

Nor  are  the  two  seas  ~  alike  :  the  one  is  fresh,  sweet,
pleasant  for  drink,  and  the  other  salt,  bitter ;  yet
from  both  ye  eat  fresh  fish,  and  take  forth  for  your-
selves ornaments  to  wear;  and  thou  seest  the  ships
cleaving  the  waters  that  ye  may  go  in  quest  of
his  bounties;  and  haply  ye  will  be  thankful.

He  causeth  the  night  to  enter  in  upon  the  day,  and
the  day  to  enter  in  upon  the  night ;  and  He  hath
given  laws  to  the  sun  and  to  the  moon,  so  that
each  journeyeth  to  its  appointed  goal  :  This  is  God
your  Lord  :  All  power  is  his  :  But  the  gods  whom
ye  call  on  beside  Him  have  no  power  over  the  husk
of  a  date-stone !

^  See  note  at  Sura  [xctIL]  iii.  IS.  This  is  one  of  the  passages  said  to
have  originated  ■with  Zayd.

^  Not  only  sca.^,  properly  so  called,  but  the  great  masses  of  fresh  water
in  the  Nile,  Tigris,  inland  lakes,  etc.

312  THE    KOEAN.

If  ye  cry  to  them  they  hear  not  your  cry,  and  if  they
heard  they  would  not  answer  you ;  and  in  the  day
of  Resurrection  they  will  disown  your  joining  them
with  "God.  And  none  can  instruct  thee  like  Him
who  is  informed  of  all.

O  men  !  ye  are  but  paupers  in  need  of  ^  God ;  but  God
is  the  Richj  the  Praiseworthy  !

If  He  please.  He  could  sweep  you  away,  and  bring  forth
a  new  creation  !

Nor  will  this  be  hard  for  God.

And  the  burdened  soul  shall  not  bear  the  burden  of
another  :  and  if  the  heavy-laden  soul  cry  out  for
its  burden  to  he  carried,  yet  shall  not  aught
of  it  be  carried,  even  by  the  near  of  kin  !  Thou
shalt  only  warn  those  who  fear  their  Lord  in
secret,  and  observe  prayer.  And  whoever  shall
keep  himself  pure,  he  purifieth  himself  only  to  his
own  behoof:  for  unto  God  shall  be  the  journey
back.
20  And  the  blind  and  the  seeing  are  not  alike ;  neither
darkness  and  light ;  nor  the  shade  and  the  hot
wind;

Nor  are  the  living  and  the  dead  the  same  thing  !  God
indeed  shall  make  whom  He  will  to  hearken ;  but
thou  shalt  not  make  those  who  are  in  their  graves
to  hearken  :  only  with  warning  art  thou  charged.

Verily  We  have  sent  thee  with  the  truth  ;  a  bearer  of
good  tidings  and  a  warner ;  nor  hath  there  been
a  people  unvisited  by  its  warner :

And  if  they  treat  thee  as  a  liar,  so  did  those  who  were
before  them  treat  their  Apostles  who  came  to  them
with  the  pi'oofs  of  tlwir  mission,  and  with  the
Scriptures,  and  with  the  enlightening  Book  : "

Then  chastised  1  the  unbelievers  :  and  how  great  was
my  vengeance  !

Seest  thou  not  that  God  sendeth  down  water  from
the  Heaven,  and  that  by  it  We  cause  the  up-
growth of  fruits  of  varied  hues,  and  that  on  the
mountains"  are  tracks  of  varied  hues,  white  and

'  Lit.  toioards.     Ullman,  vor  Cfott.  ^  The  Gospel.

'  This  idea  was  probably  suggested  by  MuhaiuDiad's  reminiscences  of
the  view  from  the  Cavo  of  Hira,  to  the  north  and  west  of  which  there  is  a
prospect  thus  described  by  Lurckhardt  (Travels,  p.  176).  "  The  country
before  us  had  a  dreary  aspect,  not  a  single  green  spot  being  visible  ;  barren,
black,  and  grey  hills,  and  white  sandy  valleys,  were  the  only  objects  in
Bight."

THE    KORAN.  olo

redj  and  others  are  of  a  raven  black  ?  ^  And  of
men  and  reptiles  and  animals,  various  likewise
are  the  hues.  Accordingly,  such  only  of  his  servants
as  are  possessed  of  //u'.s-  knowledge  fear  God.  Lo  !
God  is  Mighty,  Gracious  !

Verily  they  who  recite  the  Book  of  God,  and  observe
prayer,  and  give  alms  in  public  and  in  private  from
what  We  have  bestowed  upon  them,  niaij  hope  for
a  merchandise  that  shall  by  no  means  perish  :

God  will  render  them  their  due  recompense,  and  of
his  bounty  increase  them  more  and  more  :  Verily
He  is  Gracious,  Grateful.

And  that  which  We  have  revealed  to  thee  of  the  Book
is  the  very  Truth,  confirmatory  of  previous  Scrip-
tures :  Verily  God  knoweth  and  beholdeth  his
servants.

Moreover,  We  have  made  the  Book  an  heritage  to  those
of  our  servants  whom  We  have  chosen.  Some  of
them  injure  themselves  by  evil  deeds;  others  keep
the  mean  between  good  and  evil ;  and  others,  by  the
permission  of  God,  outstrip  in  goodness ;  this  is
the  great  merit !
30  Into  the  gardens  of  Eden  shall  they  enter :  with  brace-
lets of  gold  and  pearl  shall  they  be  decked  therein,
and  therein  shall  their  raiment  be  of  silk  :

And  they  shall  say,  "  Praise  be  to  God  who  hath  put
away  sorrow  from  us  !  Verily  our  Lord  is  Gracious,
Grateful,

Who  of  his  bounty  hath  placed  us  in  a  mansion  that
shall  abide  for  ever :  therein  no  toil  shall  reach  us,
and  therein  no  weariness  shall  touch  us.^'

But  for  unbelievers  is  the  fire  of  Hell ;  to  die  shall  never
be  decreed  thcni,  nor  shall  aught  of  its  torment  be
made  light  to  them.  Thus  reward  We  every  infidel !

And  therein  shall  they  cry  aloud,  "  Take  us  hence,  O
our  Lord  !  righteousness  will  we  work,  and  not
what  we  wrousfht  of  old." — "  Prolonged  We  not
your  days  that  whoever  would  be  monished  might
be  monished  therein  ?  And  the  warner  came  to
you—

Taste  it  then.'^ — And  there  shall  be  no  protector  for
the  wicKed  !

God   truly  knoweth    the  hidden    things  both    of   the

'  Also  rendered  And  there  are  black  ravens ;  or,  black  grapes.

314  THE   KORAN.

Heavens  and  of  tlio  Earth :  aye,  Ho  knoweih  tho
very  secrets  of  the  breast.
It  is  He  who  hath  appointed  you  his  vicegerents  in  the
earth  :  And  whoever  believeth  not,  on  him  is  his
unbehef;  and  their  unbelief  only  increaseth  hatred
for  unbelievers  at  the  hands  of  their  Lord  : — aye,
their  unbelief  only  increaseth  for  unbelievers  their
own  perdition !
f  Say  :  What  think  ye  of  the  gods  whom  ye  invoke  beside
God  ?  Shew  me  what  part  of  the  earth  they  have
created  ?  Had  they  a  share  in  the  creation  of  the
Heavens  ?  Have  Wo  given  them  a  Book  in  which
they  can  find  proofs  that  thcf/  arc  to  he  invohcd  ?
Nay,  the  wicked  promise  one  another  only  de-
ceits.

Verily  God  holdeth  fast  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  that
they  pass  not  away  :  and  if  they  were  passing  away
none  could  hold  them  back  but  He  :  ^  Verily  He
is  Kind,  Gracious.
40  They  swore  by  God  with  their  mightiest  oath  that  should
"  a  preacher  come  to  them  they  would  yield  to  guid-
ance more  than  any  people  :  but  when  the  preacher
came  to  them,  it  only  increased  in  them  their
estrangement,

Tlieir  haughtiness  on  earth  and  their  plotting  of  evil  !
But  the  plotting  of  evil  shall  only  entangle  those
who  make  use  of  it.-  Can  they  then  expect  aught
but  God's  way  '  of  deaUmj  with  the  peoples  of  old  ?
Thou  shalt  by  no  means  find  any  change  in  tho
way  of  God, —

Yea,  thou  shalt  not  find  any  variableness  in  tho  way  of
God.

Have  they  never  journeyed  in  the  land  and  seen  what
hath  been  the  end  of  those  who  flourished  before
them,  though  mightier  in  strength  than  they  ?  God
is  not  to  bo  frustrated  by  aught  in  tho  Heavens  or
in  the  Earth;  Verily  He  is  the  All-knowing,  tho
All- mighty.

If  moreover,  God  should  chastise  men  according  to
their  deserts.  He  would  not  leave  even  a  reptile  on
the  ])ack  of  the  earth  !  But  to  an  appointed  time
doth  He  respite  them.

'  i.  e.  if  God  should  withdraw  his  support.     Lit.  after  Him.

*  Lit.  sliall  nwnmpass  its  people.

3  Method  ofdmling,  i.e.  lirst  wamiiifr,  then  punishing.

THE   KORAN.  315

Aud  when  their  tlmo  comcth^  thcQ  verily  is  the  eye  of
God  upon  his  servants.

[LXXXVII.]

SURA  VII —AL  ARAF,  OR  KNOWLEDGE.

Mecca.— 205  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elif.  Lam.  Mim.  Sad.^     A  Book  hath  been  sent  down

to  thee — therefore  let  there  be  no  difficulty  in  thy

breast  concerning-  it — to  the  intent  that  thou  maycst

warn  thereby,  and  as  a  monition  to  the  faithful.
Follow  ye  what  hath  been  sent  down  to  you  from  your

Lord;  and  follow  no  masters  beside  Him.     How

little  will  ye  bo  monished  !
And   how  many  cities  have  We  destroyed  !     For  by

night,  or  while  they  were  in  their  midday  slumber,

did  our  wrath  reach  them,
And  their  cry  when  our  wrath  reached  them  was  only

to  say,  "  Verily,  we  have  been  evil-doers  V
Surely,  therefore,  will  We  call  those  to  account,  to  whom

an  Apostle  hath  been  sent ;  and  of  the  sent  ones

themselves  will  we  certainly  demand  a  reckoning,
Aud  with  kuowlcdg-c  will  We  assuredly  tell  them  of  their

dreds,  for  We  were  not  absent  from  them.
And  the  weighing  -  on  that  day,  shall  be  with  justice  !

and  they  whoso  balances  shall  bo  heavy,  these  arc

they  who  shall  be  happy;
And  they  whose  balances  shall  be  light,  these  are  they

who  have  lost  their  souls,  because  to  our  signs  they

were  unjust.^

'  The  initial  letters,  it  has  been  conjectured,  of  (Amara  li  Muhaimnad
sahdiq),  thus  spake  to  me  MuJiammad  the  truthful.  But  see  Sura  Ixviii.
p.  16.  The  first  part  of  this  Sura  was  perhaps  revealed  when  the  Arabians
were  assembled  at  the  Pilgrimage.     See  verse  29.

-  A  figure  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Talmud.  See  Tr.  Rosh.  Has-
chana,  17a.  '  i.e.  disbelieved  our  revelations.

s  :

)
olG  THE    KOliAN.

%  And  now  have  We  stablislied  you  on  the  earth,  and  given
you  therein  the  supports  of  life — How  little  do  ye
give  thanks  ! —
10  AV'e  created  you  ;  then  fashioned  you  ;  then  said  We  to
the  anguls,  "  Prostrate  yourselves  unto  Adam  :  * '
and  they  all  bowed  down  in  worship,  save  Eblis
lie  was  not  of  those  who  prostrated  themselves  !

To  him  said  God:  "What  hath  hindered  thee  from
prostrating  thyself  in  worship  at  my  bidding  ?  "
He  said,  "  Nobler  am  I  than  he  :  me  hast  Thou
created  of  fire — and  of  clay  hast  Thou  created  him."

He  said,  "  Get  thee  down  hence  :  Paradise  is  no  place
for  thy  pride  :  ^  Go  forth  then  ;  Verily  one  of  the
despised  shalt  thou  he."

He  said,  "  Respite  me  till  the  day  when  mankind  shall
be  raised  from  the  dead/^

He  said,  "  Verily  one  of  the  respited  shalt  thou  be.''

He  said,  "  Because  then  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  err,
surely  in  thy  straight  path  will  I  lay  wait  for  them  :

Then  will  I  surely  come  upon  them  from  before  and
from  behind,  and  from  their  right  hand  and  from
their  left,  and  Thou  shalt  not  lind  the  greater  part
of  them  to  be  thankful."

He  said,  "  Go  forth  from  hence,  a  scorned,  a  banished
one!  AVhoever  of  them  shall  follow  thee,  1  will
surely  fill  hell  with  you,  one  and  all.

And,  O  Adam  !  dwell  thou  and  thy  wife  in  Paradise,
and  eat  ye  whence  ye  will,  but  to  this  tree  approach
not,  lest  ye  become  of  the  unjust  doers."

Then  Satan  whispered  them  to  show  them  their  naked-
ness, which  had  been  hidden  from  tbem  both  ;  and
he  said,  "  This  tree  -  your  Lord  hath  not  forbidden
you,  only  lest  ye  should  become  angels,  or  become
immortals  :  "
20  And  he  sware  to  them  both,  "Verily  I  am  unto  yoii
one  who  counselleth  aright."

8o  he  beguiled  them  to  their  fall  by  deceits  :  and  when
they  had  tasted  of  the  tree,  their  nakedness  ap-
peared to  them,  and  they  began  to  sew  together
upon  themselves  the  leaves  of  the  garden.  And
their  Lord  called  to  them,  "  Did  I  not  forbid  you
this  tree,  and  did  I  not  say  to  you,  '  Verily,  Satan
is  your  declared  enemy'?"

'  Lit.  it  shall  not  he  for  thcc  that  thou  demean  thyself  proudlif  in  it.
^  Conip.  Sura  xx.  118,  p.  iV-i.

1

THE    KORAN.  ol/

They  said,  "  0  our  Lord  !  With  ourselves  have  we  dealt
unjustly  ;  and  il"  Thou  forg'ivc  us  not  and  have  pity
on  us,  we  shall  surely  be  of  those  who  perish/'

He  said,  "  Get  ye  down,  the  one  of  you  an  enemy  ^  to
the  other  ;  and  on  the  earth  shall  be  an  abode  for
you,  and  provision  for  a  season/^
.  He  said, ''  On  it  shall. ye  live,  and  on  it  shall  ye  die,  and
from  it  shall  ye  be  taken  forth/'
%  0  children  of  Adam  !  now  have  We  sent  down  to  you
raiment  to  hide  your  nakedness,  and  splendid  gar-
ments ;  but  the  raiment  of  piety — this  is  best.
This  is  one  of  the  signs  of  God  :  Haply  man  will
be  monished.
^  0  children  of  Adam  !  let  not  Satan  lead  you  into  temp-
tation, as  he  drove  forth  your  parents  from  the
Garden  by  despoiling  thjm  of  their  raiment  that
he  might  cause  them  to  see  their  nakedness  :  He
truly  seeth  you,  he  and  his  hosts,  whence  ye  see  not
them.  Verily  We  have  made  the  Satans  tutelars
of  those  who  believe  not.

And  when  the  n-ickcd  commit  some  filthy  deed,"  they
say,  "  We  found  our  fathers  practising  it,  and  to
us  hath  God  commanded  it  " — Say  :  Verily  God
enjoincth  not  filthy  deeds.  Will  ye  speak  of  God
ye  know  not  what  r

Say  :  My  Lord  hath  enjoined  what  is  right.  Turn  your
faces  therefore  towards  eveiy  place  where  He  is
worshipped,^  and  invoke  Him,  showing  forth  a  pure
faith.  As  He  created  you,  to  Ilim  shall  ye  return  :
some  hath  He  guided,  and  some  hath  He  justly  left
in  error  :  \'erily  they  have  takea  to  themselves  the
Satans  as  their  tutelars  beside  God,  vet  deemed
that  thev  wei-e  "guided  ariofht.
•[  O  children  of  Adam  !  wear  your  goodly  apparel  when
ye  repair  to  any  mosque,*  and  eat  ye  and  drink

'  Con.  iii.  15.

-  In  connection,  probably,  with  ancient  idolatrous  worship.

'  Lit.  totnmb  lach  hiosipw,  i.e.  towards  tlio  kibia  of  each  inosqne.  Tlie
word  mosque,  htcsjid,  however,  is  usually  applied  only  to  that  of  Mecca.
The  common  term  in  use  for  larger  places  of  worship  is  djami,  a  word  un-
known, in  that  sense,  to  the  Koran.

■•  For  full  information  as  to  the  clothing  of  the  ancient  Arabians,  see
Freyt.  Einl.  pp.  295-327.  The  Koreish  (we  are  told  in  Sirat  Arrasul,  fol.
20,  and  Beidh.),  in  order  to  instil  a  deep  respect  for  the  Caaba  and  other
holy  places  into  the  minds  of  the  Arabians,  had  forbidden  all  food  during
the  processions,  and  requii-ed  that  no  clothes,  except  those  borrowed  from

)

318  THE    KOUAN.

but  exceed  not :  Verily  He  loveth  not  those  who
exceed.
30  Say  :  "Who  hath  prohibited  God's  goodly  raiment,  and
the  healthful  viands  which  He  hath  provided  for  his
servants  ?  Say  :  These  are  for  the  faithful  in  this
present  life,  but  above  all  on  the  day  of  the  Re-
surrection— Thus  make  We  our  signs  plain  for
people  of  knowledge —
Say  :  Only  hath  my  Lord  forbidden  filthy  actions
whether  open  or  secret,  and  iniquity,  and  unjust
violence,  and  to  associate  with  God  that  for  which
He  hath  sent  down  no  warranty,  and  to  speak  of
God  that  of  which  ye  have  no  knowledge.

%  Every  nation  hath  its  set  time.  And  when  their  set
time  is  come,  they  shall  not  retard  it  an  hour,  and
tbey  shall  not  advance  it.

^  0  children  of  Adam  !  if  there  come  to  you  Apostles  from

among   yourselves,  rehearsing   my  signs  to  you,

then  whoso  feareth  God  and  doeth  good  works,  no

fear  shall  bo  upon  them,  neither  shall  they  be  put

to  grief;

But  they  who  charge  our  signs  with  falsehood,  and

turn  away  from  them  in  their  pride, — these  shall

be  inmates  of  the  Fire :  for  over  shall  they  abide

therein .

And  who  is  more  unjust  than  he  who  deviseth  a  lie  of

God,  or  treateth  our  signs  as  lies  ?     To  them  shall

a  portion'  here  hcloiv  be  assigned  in  accordance  with

the  Book  of  our  decrees,  until  the  time  when  our

messengers  come  to  them,-  rvho,  as  they  receive

their  souls,  shall  say,  "  AVhere  are  they  on  whom

ye  called  beside  God?"     They  shall  say  :  ''Gone

away  from  us.''*    And  they  shall  witness  against

themselves  that  they  were  unbelievers.

He  shall  say,  "Enter  ye  into  the  Fire  with  the  races  of

Djinn  and  men  who  have  preceded  you.     So  oft  as

a  fresh  race  entcreth,  it  shall  curse  its  sister  (race),

until  when  they  have  all  reached  it,  the  last  corner.'!

shall  say  to  the  former,  '  0  our  Lord  1  these  are

Meccans,  should  be  worn,  or  that  those  who  wore  their  own  should  devote
them  to  God  as  holy  vestments.  The  consequence  was,  that  most  of  the
pilgrims  visited  the  holy  places  in  perfect  nudity.  Hence  the  precept  in
the  text.     Lit.  at  (my  vios(jne.

'  Lit.  their  portion  shall  be  given  [shall  reach]  them  from  the  Book.

'  The  Angels  of  Death.

THE   KOKAN.  319

they  who  led  us  astray :  assign  them  therefore  ti
double  torment  of  the  fire  :' ''  He  will  say,  '^  Ye
shall  all  have  double  ;•"' — But  of  this  are  ye  in
ignorance  : —

And  the  former  of  them  shall  say  to  the  latter,  "  What
advantage  then  have  ye  over  us  ?  Taste  ye  there-
fore the  torment  for  that  which  ye  have  done/^

Verily,  they  who  charge  our  signs  with  falsehood  and
turn  away  from  them  in  their  pride,  Heaven^s  gates
shall  not  be  opened  to  them,  nor  shall  they  enter
Paradise,  until  the  camel  ^  passeth  through  the  eye
of  the  needle  :  and  after  this  sort  will  We  recom-
pense the  trangressors  ; —

Hell  shall  be  their  bed,  and  above  them  coverings  of
jire  !  And  after  this  sort  will  We  recompense  the
evil-doers  :
40  But  as  to  those  who  believe  and  do  the  things  which
are  right,  (We  lay  on  no  soul  a  burden  beyond  its
power) — These  shall  be  inmates  of  Paradise  :  for
ever  shall  they  abide  therein  ;

And  We  will  remove  whatever  rancour  was  in  their
bosoms  :  rivers  shall  roll  at  their  feet :  and  they
shall  say,  ''' Praise  be  to  God  who  hath  guided  us
hither  !  We  had  not  been  guided  had  not  God
guided  us  !  Of  a  surety  the  Apostles  of  our  Lord
came  to  us  with  truth. '^  And  a  voice  shall  cry  to
them,-  "  This  is  Paradise,  of  which  as  the  meed
of  your  works,  ye  are  made  heirs/^

And  the  inmates  of  Paradise  shall  cry  to  the  inmates
of  the  fire,  "  Now  have  we  found  what  our  Lord
promised  us  to  be  true  ;  have  ye  too  found  what
your  Lord  promised  you  to  be  true  ?  "  And  they
shall  answer,  "  Yes  ;"  and  a  Herald  shall  proclaim
between  them,  "The  curse  of  God  bo  upon  the
evil-doers.

Who  turn  men  aside  from  the  way  of  God,  and  seek  to
make  it  crooked,  and  themselves  believe  not  in  the
life  to  come  !  "

*  Conip.  Matt.  xix.  24  ;  Mark  x.  25  ;  Luke  xviii.  25.  By  the  change
of  a  sinole  vowel  in  the  Arabic  word  for  cainel,  we  obtain  the  renderint;
cable.  In  the  Kabbinic  form  of  the  proveiij  (see  Geiger,  p.  71),  however,
the  elephant  is  substituted  for  the  carnd,  which  confirms  the  usual  render-
ing and  reading. — It  may  be  remarked  that  "the  needle'.s  eye"  is  the
name  given  in  the  Knst  to  the  small  doorway  at  the  side  of  a  larger  gate-
way.

*  Lit.  theij  shall  be  ci-ied  to.

o20  THE  koj:an.

And  between  them  a  partition  :  and  on  tlic  wallx  AL
ARAF,^  men  who  know  all  -  by  their  tokens  ;  and
they  cry  to  the  inmates  of  Paradise,  "  Peace  be  on
you  !  "  but  they  cannot  yet  enter  it,  although  they
long  to  do  so ;

And  when  their  looks  are  turned  towards  the  inmates
of  the  Fire,  they  say,  "  0  our  Lord  !  place  us  not
with  the  wicked  people  : ''

And  they  who  are  upon  Al  Araf  cry  to  those  whom
they  know  by  their  tokens/-  and  say,  "  Your  amass-
ings  and  your  pride  have  availed  you  nothing :

Are  those '"^  they  to  whom  ye  sware  that  (rod  would  not
extend  mercy  ?  Enter  ye  into  Paradise !  where
no  fear  shall  be  upon  you,  neither  shall  ye  be  put
to  grief."

And  the  inmates  of  the  Fire  shall  cry  to  the  inmates  of
Paradise  :  "  Pour  upon  us  some  water,  or  of  that
with  which  *  God  hath  supplied  you  !  "  They  say,
"  Truly  God  hath  forbidden  both  to  unbelievers.

Who  made  their  religion  a  sport  and  pastime,  and
whom  the  life  of  the  world  hath  deceived.'^  This
day  therefore  do  We  forget  them,  oven  as  they
forgot  the  meeting  with  this  their  day,  and  as  they
gainsaid  our  signs.
^  50  And  now  liave  We  brought  them  the  Book  :  with
knowledge  have  We  explained  it ;  a  guidance  and
a  mercy  to  them  that  believe  : —

"What  have  they  to  wait  for  now  but  its  interpretation  ?
When  its  interpretation-'  shall  come,  they  who
aforetime  were  oblivions  of  it  will  say,  "  The
J'rophcts  of  our  Lord  did  indeed  bring  the  truth  ;
have  we  then  any  intercessors  to  irjtercede  for  us?
or  could  we  be  sent  back,  that  we  might  act  other-

'  "  On  these  walls  (which  separate  Paradise  from  Hell,  and  whose  name
is  derived  from  A rafa,  Ar.  and  y1'"th.,  'to  know,'  with  allusion  to  the
employment  of  those  npon  it)  will  stand  those  whose  ffood  and  rvil  works
are  equal,  and  are  not,  therefore,  deserving  of  cither  Paradise  or  Gehenna.
The  idea,  which  is  analoi^ous  to  that  of  Purgatory,  may  be  derived  from
the  Talmud.  Thus  in  the  Midrasch  on  Eccl.  vii.  14,  'How  much  space
is  there  between  the  two?'  (Paradise  and  TTcll).  II.  Jochanan  saith,  a
wall ;  11.  Acha,  a  span  :  others  hold  them  to  be  so  close  that  a  person  may
see  from  one  into  the  other."     See  Plato's  Phad.  C2.

-  They  will  know  the  inmates  of  Paradise  by  the  whiteness,  and  the
people  of  Ilell  by  the  l)lackness,  of  their  faces.

•■'  The  believers  :  to  whom  the  speakers  on  Al  Araf  are  supposed  to  point.

*  The  fruits  of  Paradise.     Comp.  Luke  xvi.  19.

*  The  fulfilment  of  its  promises  and  threats.

THE    KORAN.  321

wise  than  we  acted  ?  "  But  tlicy  have  ruined  their
souls,  and  the  deities  of  their  own  devising  have
departed  from  them  !
^  Verily  your  Lord  is  God,  who  in  six  days  created  the
Heavens  and  the  Earth,  then  seated  Himself  on
His  throne  :  He  throweth  the  veil  of  night  over  the
day — it  pursueth  it  swiftly  :  and  He  created  the  sun
and  the  moon  and  the  stars,  subjected  to  laws  by
his  behest :  is  not  all  creation  and  its  empire  his  ?
Blessed  be  God  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds  !

Call  upon  your  Lord  with  lowliness  and  in  secret ;
verily  He  loveth  not  transgressors  !

And  commit  not  disorders  on  the  earth  after  it  hath
been  well  ordered ;  and  call  on  Him  with  fear  and
longing  desire  :  verily  the  mercy  of  God  is  nigh
unto  the  righteous.

And  He  it  is  who  sendeth  forth  the  winds  as  the
heralds  of  his  compassion,^  until  they  bring  up  the
laden  clouds  which  We  drive  along  to  some  dead
land,  and  send  down  water  thereon  by  which  We
cause  an  upgrowth  of  all  kinds  of  fruit. — Thus  will
We  bring  forth  the  dead  !  Haply  ye  will  receive
admonition.

Also  a  rich  soil  bringeth  forth  its  plants  ahundanthj  by
the  will  of  its  Lord,  and  that  which  is  bad  bringeth
them  forth  but  scantily.  Thus  do  We  make  clear
our  signs  to  those  who  are  thankful.
^  Of  old  sent  We  Noah  to  his  people,"  and  he  said,  "  0
my  people  !  worship  God  :  Ye  have  no  god  but
Him  :  indeed  I  fear  for  you  the  chastisement  of  a
great  day.^'

The  chiefs  of  his  people  said,  "  Verily  w^e  clearly  see
thee  (to  be)  in  a  palpable  error  :  "

He  said,  "  There  is  no  mistake  on  my  part,  0  my
people  !  but  I  am  a  messenger  from  the  Lord  of
the  Worlds  :
60  I  deliver  to  you  the  message  of  my  Lord,  and  I  give
you  friendly  counsel ;  for  I  know  from  God  what
ye  know  not.

'  The  rain.  Thus,  the  Eabbins  call  the  rain  "  the  raifrht  and  power  of
God"  (Comp.  Tract  Tanith,  fol.  1),  and  connect  it  with  the  Resurrection,
Tract  Berachoth,  fol.  .33.

2  The  Rabbins  in  like  manner  describe  the  mission  of  Noah.  Comp.
Sanhedr.  108  ;  Midr.  Rabbah  on  Gen.  par.  30,  33;  and  on  Eccl.  9,  14.
See  Surd  [Ixxv.]  xi.  40.

Y

322  THE    KORAN.

Marvel  ye  that  a  Warning  should  come  to  you  from
your  Lord  through  one  of  yourselves,  that  he  may
warn  you,  and  that  ye  may  fear  God  ?  ^  And
haply  ye  may  find  mercy/'

But  they  treated  him  as  a  liar :  so  We  delivered  him
and  those  who  were  with  him  in  the  ark,  and  We
drowned  those  who  charged  our  signs  with  im-
postui*e  ;  verily  they  were  a  blind  people.
f  And  to  Ad  -  We  sent  their  brother  Hood.*'  "  0  my
people,"  said  he,  "  worship  God  :  ye  have  no  other
god  than  Him  :  will  ye  not  then  fear  Him  V

Said  the  unbelieving  chiefs  among  his  people,  "  We
certainly  perceive  that  thou  art  unsound  of  mind;
and  verily  we  deem  thee  an  impostor.'^

He  said,  "  O  my  people  !  there  is  no  unsoundness  of
mind  in  me,  but  1  am  an  Apostle  from  the  Lord
of  the  Worlds.

The  messages  of  my  Lord  do  I  announce  to  you,  and  I
am  your  faithful*  counsellor.

Marvel  ye  that  a  warning  hath  come  to  you  from  your
Lord  through  one  of  yourselves  that  He  may  warn
you?  But  remember  when  He  made  you  the
successors  of  the  people  of  Noah,  and  increased
you  in  tallness  of  stature.  Remember  then  the
favours  of  God ;  haply  it  shall  be  Avell  with  you.''

They  said,  "  Art  thou  come  to  us  in  order  that  we  may
worship  one  God  only,  and  desert  what  our  fathers
worshipped  ?  Then  bring  that  upon  us  with
which  thou  threatonest  us,  if  thou  be  a  man  of
truth."

'  Or,  that  ye  may  take  heed  to  yourselves.

'  The  two  tribes  of  Ad  and  Thaiuood — the  latter  of  whom  is  mentioned
by  Diod.  Sic.  and  both  by  Ptolemy— lay  to  the  north  of  Mecca,  in  the
direct  line  of  traffic  between  the  countries  to  the  north  and  to  the  south,
and  both  probably  disappeared  with  its  cessation,  when  the  Arabs  were
no  lont^er  held  in  check  by  the  Romans.  The  traditions  adopted  by  Mu-
hammad attribute  this  to  the  divine  vengeance,  throughout  the  Koran,
and  were  derived  by  him  from  the  Jewish  popular  legends  of  Arabia.  See
Freyt.  Einl.  p.  12,  and  Preface,  p.  xvi.

'  On  Hood,  see  Geiger,  pp.  113-119.  He  supposes  him  to  be  the  Eber
of  the  Bible.  But  Mr.  INIuir  suggests  that  both  Hood  and  Saleh  may  have
been  persecuted  Jewish  or  Christian  emissaries  and  teachers,  whose  rejec-
tion was  thus  recast  by  Muhammad.  See  note  on  verse  71.  It  should
be  observed  that  in  all  "these  histories  the  blame  of  the  people's  unbelief  is
laid  at  the  door  of  the  nobles.  Couii)aring  the  histories  of  the  same  events
in  Sur.  xxvi.  and  xxvii.,  we  have  a  clue  to  the  dates  of  each.

■•  Or,  entrusted,  i.e.  with  the  office  of  apostle.

THE    KORAN.  323

He  said,  "  Vengeance  and  wrath  shall  suddenly  light
on  you  from  your  Lord.     Do  ye  dispute  with  me
about  names  that  you  and  your  fathers  have  given
those   idols,  and    for  which  God    hath    sent  you
down  no  warranty  ?     Wait  ye  then,  and  I  too  will
wait  with  you.''
/O     And  We  dehvered    him   and  those  who  were  on  his
side,  by  our  mercy,  and  We  cut  off  to  the  last
man,  those  who  had  treated  our  signs  as  lies  and
who  were  not  believers.
1  And  to  Thamood  We  sent  their  brother  Saleh.^     He
said,  "  O  my   people  !  worship  God :  ye  have  no
other  god  than  Him  :    now  hath  a  clear  proof  of
my  mission  come  to  you  from  your  Lord  ;  this  she-
camel  of  God  is  a  sign  to  you  :  therefore  let  her  go
at  large  to  pasture  on  God's  earth :  and  touch  her
not  to    harm   her,    lest  a   grievous  chastisement
seize  you.
%  And  remember  how  He  hath  made  you  successors  to  the
Adites,   and  given  you   dwellings  in  the  land,  so
that   on  its  plains  ye  build  castles,  and  hew  out
houses  in  the  hills.    And  bear  in  mind  the  benefits
of  God,  and  lay  not  the  land  waste  ~  with  deeds  of
licence."
Said  the  chiefs   of  his  people  puffed  up  with  pride,  to
those  who  were  esteemed  weak,  even  to  those  of
them  who  believed,    "  Know  ye   for   certain  that
Saleh  is  sent  by  his  Lord  ?  "     They  said,    "  Truly
we  are  believers  in  that  with  which  he  hath  been
sent."
Then  said  those  proud  men,  ''Verily,  we  reject  that  in

which  ye  believe  :  "
And  they  ham-strung  the  she-camel,  and  rebelled  against
their  Lord's   command  and   said,    "  0  Saleh,  let
thy  menaces  be  accomplished  upon  us  if  thou  art
one  of  the  Sent  Ones."
Then  the  earthquake  surprised  them  ;  and  they  were

found  dead  on  their  faces  in  their  dwellings.
So  he  turned  away  from  them,  and  said,  "O  my  people  !
I  did  indeed  announce  to  you  the  message  of  my

'  Saleh— according  to  Bochart,  the  Peleg  of  Gen.  xi.  16.     DHerbelot,
B.  0.  740,  makes  him  the  Schelah  of  Gen.  xi.  13.     See  v.  63,  n.
*  Lit.  do  not  evil  in  the  land.

324  THE    KOEAN.

Lord,  and  I  gave  you  faithful  counsel ;  but  ye  love
not  faithful  counsellors/'  ^
%  We  also  sent  Lot ;  when  he  said  to  his  people,  "  Pro-
ceed ye  to  a  filthy  deed  in  which  no  creature  hath
gone  before  you  ?

Verily  ye  come   to  men,  instead  of  women,  lustfully  !
Nay,  but  ye  are  a  people  given  up  to  excess."
80     But  the  answer  of  his  people  was  only  to  say,  "  Turn
them  out  of  your  city ;  Verily  they  are   men  who
vaunt  themselves  pure  !  "

Then  We  delivered  him  and  his  family  except  his  wife ;
she  was  of  those  who  lingered  :  ^

And  We  rained  a  rain  upon  them  :  and  see  what  was  the
end  of  the  wicked  !
^  And  we  sent  to  Madian  their  brother  Sho'aib.  He
said,  "  0  my  people  !  worship  God ;  ye  have  no
other  God  than  Him.  Now  hath  a  clear  sign  come
to  you  from  your  Lord  :  give  therefore  the  full  in
measures  and  Aveights ;  take  from  no  man  his  chat-
tels, and  commit  no  disorder  on  the  earth  after  it
has  been  made  so  good.  This  will  be  better  for
you,  if  you  believe.

And  lay  not  in  ambush  by  every  road  in  menacing  sort ;
nor  mislead  him  who  believeth  in  God  from  His
way,  nor  seek  to  make  it  crooked  ;  and  remember
when  ye  were  few  and  that  He  multiplied  you,  and
behold  what  hath  been  the  end  of  the  authors  of
disorder !

And  if  a  part  of  you  believe  in  that  with  which  I  am
sent,  and  a  part  of  you  believe  not,  then  wait  stead-
fastly until  God  shall  judge  between  us ;  for  H^
is  the  best  of  judges."

Said  the  chiefs  of  his  people  puffed  up  with  pride,  "  We
will  surely  banish  thee,  0  Sho'aib,  and  thy  fellow-
believers  from  our  cities,  or  ye  shall  surely  come
back  to  our  religion."  "  What !  "  said  he,  "  though
we  abhor  it  ?

A  lie  now  should  we  devise  concerning  God,  if  after  He
hath  delivered  us  from  your  religion  we  return  to

'  It  is  just  possible  that  the  act  of  Koleib,  chief  of  the  Banu  Taghlib
tribe,  in  killinj;  the  milch-camel  of  Basils,  a  female  relative  of  his  wile  of
Bani-Bakr  lineage — -which  led  to  a  forty  years'  war  between  these  two
tribes,  A.D.  4.90 — may  have  been  worked  up  by  Muhammad  into  this
account  of  the  persecutions  of  Saleh.

'  Sec  Sura  xxvi.  171,  p.  101.

THE    KORAN.  325

it ;  nor  shall  we  return  to  it,  unless  by  the  will  of
God  our  Lord  :  our  Lord  embraceth  all  things  in
his  ken.  In  God  have  we  put  our  trust :  0  our
Lord  !  decide  between  us  and  between  our  people
with  truth ;  for  the  best  to  decide  art  Thou.^^

And  the  chiefs  of  his  people  who  believed  not,  said,
"  Assuredly  if  ye  follow  Sho^aib  ye  shall  then
perish.'^

An  earthquake  therefore  surprised  them,  and  they  fell
dead  on  their  faces  in  their  dwellings  !
90  Those  who  had  treated  Sho'aib  as  an  impostor,  became
as  though  they  had  never  dwelt  in  them  :  they
who  treated  Sho'aib  as  an  impostor  were  they
that  perished.

So  he  turned  away  from  them  and  said,  "  0  my  people  !
I  proclaimed  to  you  the  Jiessages  of  my  Lord,  and
I  counselled  you  aright ;  but  how  should  I  be
grieved  for  a  people  who  do  not  believe  ?  "
If  Nor  did  We  ever  send  a  prophet  to  any  city  whose
people  "We  did  not  afflict  with  adversity  and  trouble,
that  haply  they  might  humble  themselves  ;  ^

Then  changed  We  their  ill  for  good,  until  they  waxed
wealthy,  and  said,  "  Of  old  did  troubles  and  bless-
ings befall  our  fathers  :  "  ^  Therefore  did  We  seize
upon  them  suddenly  when  they  were  unaware.

But  if  that  the  people  of  these  cities  had  believed  and
feared  Us,  We  would  surely  have  laid  open  to  them
blessings  out  of  the  Heaven  and  the  Earth  :  but
they  treated  our  signs  as  lies,  and  We  took  ven-
geance on  them  for  their  deeds.

Were  the  people  then  of  those  cities  secure  that  our
wrath  would  not  light  on  them  by  night,  while
they  were  slumbering?

Or  were  the  people  of  those  cities  secure  that  our  wrath
would  not  light  on  them  in  broad  day,  while  they
were  disporting  themselves  ?

Did  they  then  think  themselves  secure  from  the  deep
counsel  ^  of  God  ?  But  none  think  themselves
secure  from  the  deep  counsel  of  God,  save  those
who  perish.

'  This  verse  may  contain  an  implied  reference  to  the  famine  with  which
Mecca  had  been  visited,  and  fix  the  date  of  this  part  of  the  Sura.  Comp.
verse  127.

'  i.e.  in  the  course  of  nature— apart  from  any  divine  providence.

'  Lit.  plot,  stratagem.

326  THE    KORAN.

Is  it  not  proved  to  those  who  inherit  this  land  after  its
ancient  occupants,  that  if  We  please  We  can  smite
them  for  their  sins,  and  put  a  seal  upon  their  hearts,
that  they  hearken  not  ?
t  As  to  these  cities  We  will  tell  thee  their  story.  Their
apostles  came  to  them  with  clear  proofs  of  their
mission  ;  but  they  could  not  believe  in  what  they
had  before  treated  as  imposture. — Thus  doth  God
seal  up  the  hearts  of  unbelievers —
100  And  We  found  not  of  their  covenant  in  most  of  them  ;
but  of  a  truth  We  found  most  of  them  to  be  indeed
perverse.
^  Then  after  them  We  sent  Moses  with  our  signs  to  Pha-
raoh and  his  nobles,  who  acted  unjustly  in  their
regard.  But  see  what  was  the  end  of  the  evil-
doers !

And  Moses  said,  ''  0  Pharaoh  !  verily  I  am  an  apostle
from  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds.

Nothing  but  truth  is  it  right  for  me  to  speak  of  God.
Now  am  I  come  to  you  from  your  Lord  with  a
proof  of  my  mission;  Send  away,  therefore,  the
children  of  Israel  with  me."  He  said,  ''If  thou
comest  with  a  sign,  show  it  then  if  thou  art  a  man
of  truth."

So  he  threw  down  his  rod,  and  lo  !  it  distinctly  became
a  serpent :  ^

Then  drew  he  forth  his  hand,  and  lo  !  it  was  white  ^  to
the  beholders.

The  nobles  of  Pharaoh's  people  said,  "  Verily,  this  is
an  expert  enchanter  :

Fain  would  he  expel  you  from  your  land  :  what  then  do^
ye  order  to  he  done  ?  "

They  said,  "  Put  "^  him  and  his  brother  off  awhile,  and
send  round  men  to  yovr  cities  who  shall  muster.

And  bring  to  thee  every  skilled  enchanter."
110  And  the  enchanters    came   to   Pharaoh:     Said    they,
"  Shall  we  surely  be  rewarded  if  we  prevail?"

He  said,  "  Yes ;  and  verily  ye  shall  be  near  my  per-
son."

'  Lit.  and  lo  !  it  a  manifest  serpent.

'  Conip.  the  passage  from  Pirke  R.  Eliezer,  c.  48,  who  makes  Moses  per-
form this  miracle  in  the  presence  of  Pharaoh,  which  the  Scripture  (Ex.
vii.)  account  does  not.  The  Muhammadan  tradition  is  that  Moses  was  a
black.

'  Lit.  cause  him  to  hope,  temporize  with  him.

THE    KORAN.  327

They  said,  '^  0  Moses  !  either  cast  thou  down  thy  rod
first,  or  we  will  cast  down  ours."

He  said,  "  Cast  yo  down."  And  when  they  had  cast
them  down  they  enchanted  the  people's  eyes,  and
made  them  afraid ;  and  they  displayed  a  great
enchantjnent.

Then  spake  We  unto  Moses,  "  Throw  down  thy  rod  ;  "
and  lo  !  it  devoured  their  lying  wonders.

So  the  truth  was  confirmed,  and  that  which  they  had
wrought  proved  vain  :

And  they  were  vanquished  on  the  spot,  and  returned
back  ^  humiliated.

But  the  other  enchanters  prostrated  themselves  adoring  :

Said  they,  "  We  believe  on  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds,

The  Lord  of  Moses  and  Aaron.''
120  Said  Pharaoh,  "Have  ye  be^'.eved  on  Him,  ere  I  have
given  you  leave  ?  Lo,  this  is  surely  a  plot  which
ye  have  plotted  against  this  city,  that  ye  may
drive  out  from  it  its  people.  But  ye  shall  know  in
the  end  ichat  mhall  Jiappen —

I  will  surely  cut  otf  your  hands  and  feet  on  opposite
sides;  then  will  I  have  you  all  crucified.'^

They  said,  "  Verily,  to  our  Lord  do  we  return ;

And  thou  takest  vengeance  on  us  only  because  we
have  believed  on  the  signs  of  our  Lord  when  they
reached  us.  0  our  Lord  !  pour  out  constancy  upon
us,  and  cause  us  to  die  Muslims."

Then  said  the  chiefs  of  Pharaoh's  people — "  AVilt  thou
let  Moses  and  his  people  go  to  spread  disorders  in
the  land,  and  desert  thee  and  thy  gods  ?  "  He  said,
"  We  will  cause  their  male  children  to  be  slain  and
preserve  their  females  alive  :  and  verily  we  shall
be  masters  over  them."

Said  Moses  to  his  people,  "  Cry  unto  God  for  help,
and  bear  up  patiently ;  Verily  the  earth  is  God's  :
to  such  of  his  servants  as  He  pleaseth  doth  He
give  it  as  a  heritage ;  and  for  those  that  fear  Him
is  a  happy  issue."

"  We  have  been  oppressed,"  they  said,  "  before  thou
camest  to  us,  and  since  thou  hast  been  with  us."
"  Perhaps,"  said  he,  "  your  Lord  will  destroy  your
enemy,  and  will  make  you  his  successors  in  the
land,  and  He  will  see  how  ye  will  act  therein."

'  Lit.  reversi  sunt,  evaserunt ;  were  rendered. — Mar.,  Sa]e.

328  THE    KOKAN.

Already  had  "VVe  chastised  the  people  of  Pharaoh  with
dearth  and  scarcity  of  fruits,  that  haply  they  might
take  warning.

And  when  good  fell  to  their  lot  they  said,  "  This  is  our
due."  But  if  ill  befel  them,  they  drew  an  evil  au-
gury from  Moses  and  his  partisans.^  Yet,  was  not
their  augury  of  evil  only  with  God  ?  But  most  of
them  knew  it  not.

And  they  said,  "  Whatsoever  sign  thou  bring  us  to
enchant  us  thereby,  yet  we  will  not  beheve  on  thee."
130  And  We  sent  upon  them  the  flood  and  the  locusts  and
the  lice  and  the  frogs  and  the  blood, — distinct
signs  2  —  but  they  behaved  proudly,  and  were  a
sinful  people.

And  when  any  plague  lighted  upon  them,  they  said,  "  0
Moses  !  pray  for  us  to  thy  Lord,  according  to  that
which  He  hath  covenanted  with  thee  :  Verily  if
thou  take  off  the  plague  from  us,  we  will  assuredly
believe  thee,  and  semi  the  children  of  Israel  with
thee."  But  when  We  had  taken  off  the  plague
from  them,  and  the  time  which  God  had  granted
them  had  expired,'^  behold  !  they  broke  their
promise ;

Therefore  We  took  vengeance  on  them  and  drowned
them  in  the  sea,  because  they  treated  our  signs  as
falsehoods,  and  were  heedless  of  them.

And  We  gave  to  the  people  who  had  been  brought  so
low  the  eastern  parts  of  the  Earth  and  its  western,
which  We  had  blessed,  as  an  heritage :  and  the
good  word  of  thy  Lord  was  fulfilled  on  the  children
of  Israel,  because  they  had  borne  up  with  patience  : .
and  We  destroyed  the  works  and  the  structures  of
Pharaoh  and  his  people  :

And  We  brought  the  children  of  Israel  across  the  sea,
and  they  came  to  a  people  who  devoted  themselves
to  their  idols.  They  said,  "  0  Moses  !  make  us  a
god,  as  they  have  gods."  He  said,  "  In  truth,  ye
are  an  ignorant  people  :

'  Lit.  male  ominati  mnt.—M.&T.  They  traced  their  calamities  to  Moses.
So  Sale.  Kas.  But  Ullniann  renders,  they  attributed  their  misfortunes  to
the  predidioTis  of  Moses.

2  In  Suras  [Ixvii.]  xvii.  and  [Ixviii.]  xxvii.  Muhammad  speaks  of  nine
plagues.     The /oorfis  not  mentioned  in  the  Scripture.

^  Lit.  when  we  removed  from  them  the  -plague  until  a  jjeriod  at  which
they  should  arrive.

THE    KORAN.  329

Verily  as  for  these,  the  worship  they  practise  ^  shall  be
destroyed,  and  that  which  they  do  is  vanity/^

He  said,  "  Shall  I  seek  any  other  god  for  you  than  God,
when  it  is  He  who  hath  favoured  you  above  all
other  peoples  ?  "

And  ronembcr  when  We  rescued  you  from  the  people
of  Pharaoh  who  had  laid  on  you  a  cruel  affliction ;
they  slew  your  sons,  and  let  only  your  daughters
live,  and  in  this  was  a  great  trial  from  your
Lord.

And  We  appointed  a  meeting  with  Moses  for  thirty
nights,  which  We  completed  with  ten  other
nights,  so  that  his  whole  time  with  his  Lord^
amounted  to  forty  nights.  And  Moses  said  to
his  brother  Aaron,  "Act  thou  as  my  deputy  among
my  people,  and  do  rightly,  and  follow  not  the  way
of  those  who  act  corruptly."

And  after  that  Moses  came  at  our  set  time  and  his
Lord  had  spoken  with  him,  he  said,  "  0  Lord,
show  Thyself  to  me,  that  I  may  look  upon  Thee."
He  said,  "  Thou  canst  by  no  means  see  Me ;  but
look  towards  the  mount,  and  if  it  abide  firm  in
its  place,  then  shalt  thou  see  Me."  And  when
He  manifested  Himself  to  the  mountain.  He  turned
it  to  dust !  and  Moses  fell  in  a  swoon  !
140  And  after  that  he  came  to  himself,  he  said,  "  Glory  be
to  Thee  !  To  Thee  do  I  turn  in  penitence,  and  I
am  the  first  of  them  that  believe."

He  said,  ''  0  Moses  !  verily  thee  above  all  men  have  I
chosen  by  my  commission,  and  by  my  speaking
with  thee.  Take  therefore  what  I  have  brought
thee,  and  be  one  of  those  who  render  thanks."

And  We  wrote  for  him  upon  the  tables  a  monition
concerning  every  matter,  and  an  explanation
for  every  matter,  and  said,  "  Receive  them  then
with  steadfastness,  and  command  thy  people
to  receive  them  for  the  observance  of  its '  most
goodly  precepts  :  I  will  show  you  the  abode  of  the
Avicked."

Those  who  act  insolently  upon  the  eai*th  will  I  turn  aside
from  my  signs,  for  even  if  they  see  every  sign  they

'  Lit.  that  in  which  these  are.

'  Lit.  the  set  time  of  his  Lord  was  fulfilled  in  forty  nights.

'  The  pronoun  refers  back  to  the  tables.

330  THE    KORAN.

will  not  believe  them  ;  and  if  they  see  a  path  of
uprifrhtness,  they  will  not  take  it  for  their  path,
but  if  they  see  a  path  of  error,  for  their  path  will
they  take  it :

This, — for  that  they  treated  our  signs  as  lies,  and  were
heedless  of  them  :

And  fruitless  shall  be  the  works  of  those  who  treated
our  signs,  and  the  meeting  of  the  life  to  come,
as  lies  !  Shall  they  be  rewarded  but  as  they  have
wrought  ?

And  the  people  of  Moses  took  for  themselves  during
his  absence  a  calf  made  of  their  ornaments  in  a
bodily  shape  and  lowing.^  Saw  they  not  that
it  could  not  speak  to  them,  nor  guide  them  in
the  Way  ?—

Yet  they  took  it  for  a  god,  and  became  offenders  :

But  when  they  bitterly  repented,^^  and  saw  that  they
had  erred,  they  said,  '^  Truly  if  our  Lord  have
not  mercy  on  us,  nnd  forgive  us,  we  shall  surely
be  of  those  who  perish/'

And  when  Moses  returned  to  his  people,  wrathful,
angered,  he  said,  "  Evil  is  it  that  ye  have  done
behind  my  back  after  my  departure.  Would  ye
hasten  on  the  judgment  of  your  Lord  ?  "  And  he
threw  down  the  tables,  and  seized  his  brother  by
the  head  and  dragged  him  unto  him.  "  Son  of
ray  mother,"  said  he,  "  verily  the  people  thought
me  weak,  and  had  well-nigh  slain  me.  Make  not
then  mine  enemies  to  rejoice  over  me,  and  place
mo  not  among  the  doers  of  evil.''
150  He  said,  '' O  Lord,  forgive  me  and  my  brother,  and
cause  us  to  enter  into  thy  mercy  ;  for  of  those  who
show  mercy  Thou  art  the  most  merciful."

Verily  as  to  those  who  took  the  calf  as  a  god,  wrath
from  their  Lord  will  overtake  them  and  shame  in
this  present  life,  for  thus  recompense  We  the
devisers  of  a  lie  :

But  to  those  who  have  done  evil,  then  afterwards  re-
pent and  believe,  verily  thy  Lord  will  thereafter  be
Lenient,  Merciful.

And  when  the  anger  of  Moses  was  stilled,  he  took  up

A  different  rendering— rwfW?/  lile  gold—h  proposed  by  Freytag  in  y.
That  the  calf  lowed  in  conseriuence  of  Saniael  having  entered  into  it,  is '
one  of  the  traditions  of  the  Talmud.     Pirke  R.  Eliezcr,  c.  45.
'  Or  it  may  mean  that  they  fell  doion  upon  their  hands.

THE    KORAN.  331

the  tables,  and  in  their  writing  was  gnidance  and
mercy  for  those  who  dread  their  Lord.

And  Moses  chose  seventy  men  of  his  people  for  a  meet-
ing appointed  by  Us.  And  when  the  earthquake
overtook  them,  he  said,  "  0  my  Lord  !  if  it  had
been  thy  pleasure,  Thou  hadst  destroyed  them  and
me  ere  this  !  wilt  Thou  destroy  us  for  what  our
foolish  ones  have  done  ?  It  is  but  a  trial  from
Thee  :  Thou  wilt  mislead  by  it  whom  Thou  wilt,
and  guide  whom  Thou  wilt.  Our  guardian.  Thou  !
Forgive  us  then,  and  have  mercy  on  us  ;  for  of
those  who  forgive  art  Thou  the  best.

And  write  down  for  us  what  is  good  in  this  world,  as
well  as  in  the  world  to  come :  verily  to  Thee  are
we  guided. '^  He  said,  '^I  will  inflict  my  chastise-
ment on  whom  I  will,  aad  my  mercy  embraceth
all  things,  and  I  write  it  down  for  those  who
fear  Me,  and  pay  the  alms,  and  believe  in  our
signs.

Who  follow  the  Apostle,  the  unlettered^  Prophet —
whom  they  find  described  with  them  in  the  Law
and  Evangel.  What  is  right  will  he  enjoin  them,
and  forbid  them  what  is  wrong,  and  will  allow
them  healthful  viands,  and  prohibit  the  impure,
and  will  ease  them  of  their  burden,  and  of  the
yokes  which  were  upon  them ;  and  those  who
believe  in  him,  and  strengthen  him,  and  help  him,"
and  follow  the  light  ^  which  hath  been  sent  down
with  him, — these  are  they  with  whom  it  shall  be
well."

Say  to  them  :  0  men !  Verily  I  am  unto  you  all  the
apostle  of  God  :

'  Compare  Sura  [Ixxxi.]  xxix.  47  [xciv.],  Ixxii.  2  [xci.],  ii.  73.  The  word
ummy  is  derived  from  ummah,  a  nation,  and  means  Gentile  ;  it  here  re-
fers to  Muhammad's  ignorance,  previous  to  the  revelation  of  Islam,  of  the
ancient  Scriptures.  It  is  equivalent  to  the  Gr.  laic,  ethnic,  and  to  the  terni
gojim,  as  applied  by  the  Jews  to  those  unacquainted  with  the  Scriptures.
Tnere  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that  Muhammad — in  spite  of  his  asser-
tions to  the  contrary,  with  the  view  of  proving  his  inspiration — was  well
acquainted  with  the  Bible  histories.  He  wished  to  appear  iffnorant  in
order  to  raise  the  elegance  of  the  Koran  into  a  miracle.  For  the  passages
of  Scripture  said  to  foretell  Muhammad,  see  Pocock's  Sp.  Hist.  Ar.  p.  188,
ed.  White  ;  and  Dr.  'SI.  AmoUl's  "  Islam  and  Christianity,"  cxi.  p.  358,  flF.

'  If  these  words,  as  Noldeke  supposes,  contain  an  aUusion  to  the  Ansars,
it  is  likely  that  this  verse  was  added  at  Medina.  The  epithet  Al-Ummy
(the  unlettered)  does  not,  thus,  occur  in  Meccan  Suras.

«  The  Koran.

332  THE    KOKAN.

Wliose  is  tlio  kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the
Earth  !  There  is  no  God  but  He  !  He  maketh
alive  and  killeth  !  Therefore  beheve  on  God,  and
his  -Apostle  —  the  unlettered  Prophet  —  who  be-
lieveth  in  God  and  his  word  —  And  follow  him
that  ye  may  haply  be  guided  aright.

And  among  the  people  of  Moses  there  is  a  certain
number  i  who  guide  others  with  truth,  and  prac-
tise what  is  just  according  to  it.
IGO  And  We  divided  the  Israelites  into  twelve  tribes  omcI
races  ;  and  We  said  by  revelation  unto  Moses  when
the  people  asked  drink  of  him — "  Strike  the  rock
with  thy  staff:  "  and  there  gushed  forth  from  it
twelve  fountains — the  men  all  knew  their  drinking-
places.  And  We  caused  clouds  to  overshadow
them,  and  sent  down   upon  them  the  manna  and

the  quails "  Eat  of  the  good  things  with  which

We  have  supplied  you.^^    But  it  was  not  Us  whom
they  injured,  but  they  injured  their  own  selves.

And  when  it  was  said  to  them,  "  Dwell  in  this  city,
and  eat  therefrom  what  ye  will,  and  say  '  Hittat '
(forgiveness),  and  enter  the  gate  with  prostra-
tions ;  then  will  We  pardon  your  offences, — We
will  give  increase  to  the  doers  of  good  :  " —

Then  the  evil-doers  among  them  changed  that  word
into  another  than  that  which  had  been  told  them  :  ^
therefore  sent  We  forth  wrath  out  of  Heaven
upon  them  for  their  evil  doings.
^  And^  ask  them  about  the  city  that  stood  by  the  sea,
when  its  inhabitants  broke  the  Sabbath ;  when
their  fish  came  to  them  appearing  openly  on
their  Sabbath-day,  but  came  not  to  them  on  the
day  when  they  kept  no  Sabbath.  Thus  did  We
make  trial  of  them,  for  that  they  were  evil-
doers.*

And  when  a  company  of  them  said,  "  Why  warn  ye
those  whom  God  would  destroy  or  chastise  with

'  Pirke  R.  Eliezer,  45,  explains  Ex.  xxxii.  26,  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  as
not  having  been  implicated  with  the  other  tribes  in  the  sin  of  the  golden
calf.

"^  The  Jews  changed  hittat,  absolution,  indulgence,  into  habhaf,  corn.

•^  This  and  the  next  six  verses  are  supposed  to  have  been  added  at
Medina.

*  Comp.  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  61.  No  trace  of  this  legend  is  to  be  found  in
the  Tahmudists.  The  city  is  said  to  have  been  Aila  (Elatii),  on  the  Red
Sea.

THE    KORAX.  333

terrible  chastisement  ?  "  they  said,  "  For  our  own
excuse  with  your  Lord  ;  and  haply  they  may  fear
Him/'

And  when  they  forgot  their  warnings,  We  delivered
those  who  had  forbidden  evil ;  and  We  inflicted  a
severe  chastisement  on  those  who  had  done  wrong,
for  that  they  were  evil-doers.

But  when  they  proudly  persisted  in  that  which  they
had  been  forbidden.  We  said  to  them,  "  Become
scouted  apes ;  "  and  then  thy  Lord  declared  that
until  the  day  of  the  Resurrection  He  would  surely
send  against  them^  (the  Jews)  those  who  should
evil  entreat  and  chastise  them  :  -  verily,  right
prompt  is  thy  Lord  to  punish ;  and  verily  He  is
the  Forgiving,  Merciful.

And  We  have  divided  them  u^  on  the  Earth  as  peoples  ;
some  of  them  upright  and  some  otherwise ;  and
by  good  things  and  by  evil  things  have  We
proved  them  :  haply  they  will  return  to  Us.

And  they  have  had  successors  to  succeed  them  :  they
have  inherited  the  Book  :  they  grasp  this  world's
gear^  and  say,  ''It  will  be  forgiven  us."  Yet
if  the  like  temporal  goods  came  to  them  again,
they  would  again  receive  them.  But  hath  there
not  been  received  on  their  part  a  covenant  through
the  Scripture  that  they  should  speak  nought  of  God
but  the  truth  ?  And  they  study  its  contents  !  But
the  mansion  of  the  next  world  hath  more  value
for  those  who  fear  God — Do  ye  not  then  com-
prehend ? —

And  who    hold  fast    the  Book,  and   observe    prayer  :
verily.  We  will  not  suffer  the  reward  of  the  right-
eous to  perish.
1 70  And  when  We  shook  the  mount  *  over  them  as  if  it  had

'  Perhaps  in  allusion  to  Deut.  xxviii.  49,  50.

*  Lit.  as  ^lar.  qui  itisigniret  eos  malo  pa:n(r.

'  As  bribes  to  pervert  Scripture,  etc.

••  Sinai — which,  however,  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Koran  as  the  place
■where  the  law  was  given.  Comp.  "  I  will  cover  vou  with  the  mountain
like  a  roof."     Abodah  Sar.  2.  2.     Thus  also  in  tract  Sabbath,  f.  88,  1,

"  K.  Avdimi saith,  These  words  teach  us  that  the  Holy  One,  blessed

be  He,  turned  the  mountain  over  them  like  a  vessel,  and  said  to  them.  If
ye  will  receive  the  law,  well  ;  but  if  not,  there  shall  be  your  grave."  This
tradition  is  still  held  by  the  Jews.  See  D.  Lewis,  Pent.  Prayers,  fol.  150.
Its  origin  is  a  misunderstanding  of  Ex.  xix.  17,  rightly  rendered  in  the
E.  version  at  the  nether  part  of  the  mountain.

834  THE    KORAN.

been  a  shadow^  and  they  thouglit  it  falling  upon
them, "  Receive,"  isaiJ  TFe,  "with  stead-
fastness what  We  have  brought  you,  and  remember
what  is  therein ;  haply  ye  will  fear  God."

And  when  thy  Lord  brought  forth  their  descendants
from  the  reins  of  the  sons  of  Adam  and  took  them
to  witness  against  themselves,  "  Am  I  not,"  said
He,  "your  Lord  ?  "  They  said,  "  Yes,  we  witness
it."  This  we  did,  lest  ye  should  say  on  the  day  of
Resurrection,  "Truly,  of  this  were  we  heedless,
because  nninformeJ ;  "

Or  say,  "  Our  fathers,  indeed,  aforetime  joined  other
gods  with  our  God,  and  we  have  become  their  seed
after  them :  wilt  Thou  then  destroy  us  for  the  doings
of  vain  men?  "

Thus  make  We  our  signs  clear :  and  haply  they  w^U
return  to  God.
^  Recite  to  them  ^  the  history  of  him  ^  to  whom  We  vouch-
safed our  signs,  and  who  departed  from  them,  so
that  Satan  followed  him,  and  he  became  one  of
the  seduced.

Had  We  pleased.  We  had  certainly  thereby  exalted  him ;
but  he  crouched  to  the  earth  and  followed  his  own
lust;  and  his  likeness  is  as  that  of  a  dog  which
lolls  out  his  tongue,  whether  thou  attack  him  or
leave  him  alone  !  Such  is  the  likeness  of  those  who
treat  our  signs  as  lies.  Tell  them  this  tale  then
— haply  they  will  consider  :

Evil  the  likeness  of  those  who  treat  our  signs  as  lies  -,
and  wrong  their  own  souls  !

He  whom  God  guideth  is  the  guided,  and  they  whom
He  misleadeth  the  lost.

Many,  moreover,  of  the  Djinn  and  men  have  We  created
for  Hell.  Hearts  have  they  with  which  they  un-
derstand not,  and  eyes  have  they  with  which  they
see  not,  and  ears  have  they  with  which  they  hearken
not.  They  are  like  the  brutes  :  nay,  they  go  more
astray  :  these  are  the  heedless.

Most  excellent  titles  hath  God  : '  by  these  call  ye  on

•  To  the  Jews.  .      .

'  Balaam.  But  according  to  others,  a  Jew  who  renounced  his  faith  m
Muhammad.  Dr.  Sprenjrcr  understands  this  passage  of  Oinaya  the  Poet
and  Haiiyf,  who,  according  to  tradition,  aspired  to  be  the  Prophet  of  the
Arabians,  i.  80.  .

"  The  99  titles  of  God,  taken  from  the  Koran,  are  to  be  found  in
Maracci,  vol.  ii.  p.  414,  or  in  Macbride's  Religion  of  the  Mohammedans,

THE    KORAX.  335

Him,  and  stand  aloof  from  tbose  who  pervert  ^  his
titles.  For  what  they  have  done  shall  they  be
repaid  !
180  And  among  those  whom  AVe  have  created  are  a
people  who  guide  others  with  truth,  and  in  accord-
ance therewith  act  justly  :

But  as  for  those  who  treat  our  signs  as  lies,  We  will
gradually  bring  them  to  punishment  by  means  of
which  they  know  not :

And  though  I  lengthen  their  days  to  them,  verily  my
stratagem  shall  prove  eflfectual.

AYill  they  not  bethink  them  that  their  companion
Muhammad  is  not  djinn-possessed?  of  a  truth  he  is
only  a  plain  warner.

Will  rhey  not  look  forth  on  the  realms  of  the  Heaven
and  of  the  Earth,  and  on  rll  things  which  God  hath
made,  to  see  whether  haply  their  eud  be  not  drawing
on  ?  And  in  what  other  book  will  they  believe  -
who  reject  the  Koran  ?

No  other  guide  for  him  whom  God  shall  mislead  !  and
He  will  leave   them  distraught  in   their  wander-

ings.

%  They  will  ask  thee  of  the  Hour — for  what  time  is  its
coming  fixed  ?  Say  :  The  knowledge  of  it  is  only
with  my  Lord :  none  shall  manifest  it  in  its  time
but  He  :  it  is  the  burden  ^  of  the  Heavens  and  of
the  Earth  :  not  otherwise  than  on  a  sudden  will  it
come  on  vou.'*

They  will  ask  thee  as  if  thou  art  privy  to  it :  Say  :
The  knowledge  of  it  is  with  none  but  God.  But
most  men  know  not  this.

Say  :  I  have  no  control  over  what  may  be  helpful  or
hurtful  to  me,  but  as  God  -vvilleth.  Had  I  the
knowledge  of  the  Secret,  I  should  surely  revel  in
the  good,  and  evil  should  not  touch  me.  But  I  am
only  a  warner,  and  an  announcer  of  good  tidings
to  those  who  believe.

p.  121.  To  facilitate  the  repetition  of  these  names,  the  Muslims  use  a
rosary.

'  In  altering  the  names  of  God,  changing  Alia  into  Allat,  Elaziz  into
Alozza,  Mennan  into  Menat,  etc.

"  Lit.  and  in  what  declaration  after  it  icill  they  believe  ?

3  That  is,  it  weighs  heavily  on  the  hopes  and  fears  of  men,  djinn,  and
angels.

*  Probably  the  usual  final  clause,  whence  ye  looked  not  for  it,  should  here
be  added,  to  make  good  the  rhyme,  which  is  otherwise  interrupted.

/

336  THE    KORAN.

He  it  is  who  bath  created  you  from  a  single  person,  and
from  him  brought  forth  his  wife  that  he  might
dwell  with  her  :  and  when  he  had  known  her,  she
bore  a  light  burden  and  went  about  with  it ;  and
when  it  became  heavy,  they  both  cried  to  God  their
Lord,  ''  Surely  if  Thou  give  us  a  perfect  child  we
will  indeed  bo  of  the  thankful."
1 90  Yet  when  God  had  given  them  a  perfect  child,^  they  ^
joined  partners  with  Him  in  return  for  what  He
had  given  them.  But  high  be  God  exalted  above
the  partners  they  joined  with  Him  !

Will  they  join  those  with  Him  who  cannot  create  any-
thing, and  are  themselves  created,  and  have  no
power  to  help  them,  or  to  help  themselves?

And  if  ye  summon  them  to  "  the  guidance,"  they  will
not  follow  you  !  It  is  the  same  to  you  whether
ye  summon  them  or  whether  ye  hold  your
peace  !

Truly  they  whom  ye  call  on  beside  God,  are  servants,
like  yourselves  !  Call  on  them  then,  and  let  them
answer  you,  if  what  ye  say  of  them  be  true  !

Have  they  feet  to  walk  with  ?  Have  they  hands  to  hold
with  ?  Have  they  eyes  to  see  with  ?  Have  they
ears  to  hear  with  ?  Say  :  Call  on  these  joint  gods
of  yours  ;  then  make  your  plot  against  me,  and
put  me  not  off  with  delay —

Verily,  my  protector  is  God,  who  hath  sent  down  "  the
I3ook  ;  "  and  He  protecteth  the  righteous —

But  they  whom  ye  call  on  beside  Him  can  lend  you
no  help,  nor  can  they  help  themselves  :

And  if  ye  summon  them  to  "  the  guidance,"  they  hear
not :  and  thou  seest  them  look  towards  thee,  yet
do  they  not  see  !

Adopt  a  placable  method ;  ^  and  enjoin  what  is  just,
and  withdraw  from  the  ignorant :

And  if  stirrings  to  evil  from  Satan  stir  thee,  then  fly
thou    for    refuge    to    God :    He    verily    heareth,
knoweth  !
200  Verily,  they  who  fear  God,  when   some  phantom  from

'  Some  render  salihan,  well-made,  rightly-shaped ;  others  virtuous,  mo-
rally perfect.

'  And  their  idolatrous  posterity. — Beidh.

'  Lit.  (nice  or  use  indulgence ;  i.e.  Be  placable  towards  opponents,  and
make  all  due  allowances.  Some  under.stand  it  of  Muhammad's  accepting
such  voluntary  and  superfluous  alms  as  the  people  could  spare.

THE    KORAN.  337

Satan  touchetli  them,  remember  Him,  and  lo  !  they
see  clearly ;

And  their  Brethren  ^  will  He  cause  to  increase  in  error,
nor  do  they  afterwards  desist.

And  in  case  thou  bringest  not  a  verse  of  the  Koran  to
them,  they  say,  "  Hast  thou  not  yet  sought  it
out  ?  "  -  Say  :  I  only  follow  what  is  revealed  to
me  by  my  Lord.  This  is  a  clear  proof  on  the  part
of  your  Lord,  and  a  guidance  and  mercy  for  those
who  believe.

And  when  the  Koran  is  rehearsed,  then  listen  ye  to  it
and  keep  silence  :  haply  ye  may  obtain  mercy.

And  think  within  thine  own  self  on  God,  with  low-
liness and  with  fear  and  without  loud-spoken
words,  at  even  and  at  morn ;  and  be  not  of  the
heedless.

Verily  they  who  are  with  thy  Lord  disdain  not  his
service,  and  praise  Him  and  prostrate  themselves
before  Him.

[LXXXYIIL]

SUEA  XLVL— AL  AHKAF.
Mecca. — 35  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Ha.  Mim.3  The  Revelation  (sending  down)  of  this  Book

is  from  God,  the  Mighty,  the  Wise!
We  have  not  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  and

all  that  is  between  them  otherwise  than  in  truth

and  for  a  settled  term.     But  they  who  believe  not

turn  away  from  their  warning.
Say  :    What  think  ye  ?     As  for  those  whom  ye  invoke

beside  God,  show  me  what  part  of  the  earth  it  is

'  i.e.  those  under  Satanic  influence.
'  Collected  it  from  thy  informants,  &c.  (Beidh.).
'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  p.  16.
Z

338  THE    KORAN.

which  they  haye  created  ?  Had  they  a  share  in  the
Heavens  ?  Bring  me  a  Book  sent  down  by  them
before  this  Koran,  or  traces  of  Knowledge  :  ^ — if
ye  are  men  of  truth.

And  who  erreth  more  than  he  who,  beside  God,  calleth
upon  one  who  shall  not  answer  him  until  the  day
of  Resurrection  ?  for  they  regard  not  their  invoca-
tions ;

And  when  mankind  are  assembled  together,  will
become  their  enemies,  and  ungratefully  disown
their  worship.

And  when  our  clear  signs  are  recited  to  them,  they  who
believe  not  say  of  the  truth  when  it  cometh  to
them,  "  This  is  plain  sorcery.''

Will  they  say,  ^' He  hath  devised  It"?  Say:  If  I
have  devised  the  Koran,  then  not  one  single  thing
can  ye  ever  obtain  for  me  from  God  !  He  best
knoweth  what  ye  utter  in  its  regard !  Witness
enough  is  He  between  me  and  you  !  And  He  is
the  Gracious,  the  Merciful.

Say  :  I  am  no  apostle  of  new  doctrines :"  neither  know
I  what  will  be  done  with  me  or  you.  Verily,  I
follow  nothing  but  what  is  revealed  to  me,  and
I  am  only  charged  to  warn  openly.

Say  :  What  think  ye  ?  If  thiti  Book  be  from  God,  and
ye  believe  it  not,  and  a  witness  of  the  children  of
IsraeP  witness  to  its  conformity  with  the  Laiv  and

believe,  while  ye  proudly  disdain  it ?     Ah!

God  guidoth  not  the  people  guilty  of  sucJi,  a
wrong  !
10  But  the  unbelievers  say  of  the  believers,  "  If  it  were  a
good  Book  they  would  not  have  been  before  us  in
believing  it  :"*  And  not  having  submitted  to  its
guidance,  they  proceed  to  say,  "  It  is  an  old  lying
legend  \"

But  before  the  Koran  was  the  Book  of  Moses,  a  rule
and  a  mercy;  and  this  Book  confirmeth  it  (the
Pentateuch) — in  the  Arabic  tongue  —  that  those
who  are  guilty  of  that  wrong  may  be  warned,  and
as  glad  tidings  to  the  doors  of  good.

Verily  they  who   say,    "  Our  Lord  is  God,"  and  act

'  Of  a  divine  revelation,  authorizing  the  worship  of  other  gods  than  God.
'  Lit.  /  am  not  tipav,  new-fangled,  a/mong  the  A2)0stles.
^  Abdalhih  bin  Salma,  say  the  commentators,  who  had  embraced  Islam.
*  Conip.  John  vii,  48.

THE    KORAN.  339

uprightly — no  fear  shall  come  on  them^  neither
shall  they  be  put  to  grief:

These  the  inmates  of  Paradise !  to  remain  therein  for
ever, — the  recompense  of  their  deeds  !

Moreover,  We  have  enjoined  on  man  to  show  kindness
to  his  parents.  With  pain  his  mother  beareth
him  ;  yfiih  pain  she  bringeth  him  forth  :  and  his
bearing  and  his  weaning  is  thirty  months ;  until
when  he  attaineth  his  strength,  and  attaineth  to
forty  years,^  he  saith,  "  0  my  Lord !  stir  me  up
to  be  grateful  for  thy  favours  wherewith  Thou  hast
favoured  me  and  my  parents,  and  to  do  good
works  which  shall  please  Thee  :  and  prosper  me  in
my  offspring :  verily  to  Thee  am  I  turned,  and
verily  I  am  resigned  to  thy  will "  (am  a  Muslim) .

These  are  they  from  whom  We  will  accept  their  best
works,  and  whose  evil  works  We  will  pass  by;
among  the  inmates  shall  they  be  of  Paradise  : — a
true  promise  which  they  are  promised.

But  he  who  saith  to  his  parents,  "  Fie  on  you  both !
Promise  ye  me  that  I  shall  be  taken  forth  from  the
grave  alive,  when  generations  have  already  passed
away  before  me  ?  "  But  they  both  will  implore  the
help  of  God,  and  say,  "Alas  for  thee  !  Believe  :
lo,  the  promise  of  God  is  true.^^  But  he  saith,
"  It  is  only  a  fable  of  the  ancients. ^^

These  are  they  in  whom  the  sentence  passed  on  the
nations,  djinn  and  men,  who  flourished  before
them,  is  made  good,  that  verily  they  shall  incur
perdition.

And  there  are  grades  for  all,  according  to  their  works,
that  God  may  repay  them  for  their  works ;  and
they  shall  not  be  dealt  with  unfairly.

And  they  who  believe  not  shall  one  day  be  set  before
the  Fire — "  Ye  received  your  good  things  "  during
your  life  on  earth ;  and  ye  took  your  fill  of  plea-
sure in  them  :  This  day,  therefore,  with  punish-
ment of  shame  shall  yc  be  recompensed,  for  that
ye  behaved  proudly  and  unjustly  on  the  earth,  and
for  that  ye  were  given  to  excesses."

•  Thus  !Mischn.  Aboth,  v.  21,  "at  forty  years  of  age  a  man  comes  to  in-
telligence." This  verse  refers,  it  is  said  by  the  Sonnites,  to  Abu  Bekr,
afterwards  Chalif,  who  embraced  Islam  in  his  40th  year.  But  this  inter-
pretation was  probably  invented  after  his  accession  to  power.

'  Or,  2/e  made  away  icith.

z  2

040  THE    KORAN.

•[  20  Remember  too,  the  brother  of  Ad  ^  when  he  warned
his  people  in  AL  AHKAF  " — and  before  and  since
his  time  have  warners  flourished — saying,  "Wor-
ship none  but  God  :  verily  I  fear  for  you  the
punishment  of  a  great  day."

They  said,  "  Art  thou  come  to  us  to  turn  us  away  from
our  gods  ?  Bring  upon  us  then  the  woes  which
thou  threatenest — if  thou  spcakest  truth."

"  That  knowledge/'  said  he,  "  is  with  God  alone  :  and
I  proclaim  to  you  the  message  with  which  I  am
sent :  But  I  perceive  that  ye  are  a  people  sunk  in
ignorance."

So  when  they  saw  a  sky-traversing  cloud  making  for
their  valleys,  they  said,  "  It  is  a  cloud  that  shall
give  us  rain."  ''Nay,  it  is  that  whose  speedy
coming  ye  challenged  —  a  blast  wherein  is  an
afflictive  punishment: —

It  will  destroy  everything  by  the  bidding  of  its  Lord  !  "
And  at  morn  nought  was  to  be  seen  but  their
empty  dwellings  !  After  this  sort  repay  We  a
wicked  people.

And  truly  We  had  endued  them,  even  as,  0  Meccans,
We  have  endued  you ;  and  We  had  given  them
ears  and  eyes  and  hearts :  yet  neither  their  eyes
nor  their  ears  nor  their  hearts  availed  them  at  all,
when  they  gainsaid  the  signs  of  God,  and  that
punishment  at  which  they  had  mocked  encom-
passed them.

And  truly  We  destroyed  the  cities  which  were  round
about  you  ;  and,  in  order  that  they  might  haply
return  to  Us,  We  made  our  revelations  clear.

Did  not  then  those  whom  they  took  for  gods  beside
God  as  his  kindred  deities,  help  them  ?  ^  Nay,
they  withdrew  from  them.  And  such  was  their
delusion,  and  their  device  !
1[  And  remember  when  We  turned  aside  a  company  of
the  djinn  to  thee,  that  they  might  hearken  to  the

'  The  Prophet  Hood.

'i.e.  Sandhills;  at  Taief,  to  which  Muhammad  had  retired  in  con-
sequence of  the  opposition,  etc.  of  the  Meccans.  Verses  20-.31  are  probably
misplaced,  as  they  interrupt  the  connectien  between  19  and  32,  but  appear
to  belontf  to  the  same  period  as  the  rest  of  the  Sura.

^  Thus  Ullm.  ah  nahcvcrwaiidte  Goiter.  But  Wahl,  denen  sie  sick  mit
goltesdienstlichen  Opfer  ndhcrten.  Ad  appropinquandum  (magis  ipsi  Deo),
by  intercession. — Mar.  Beidh.  ;  i.  e.  a  vieans  of  access  to  God.  But  the
rendering  as  given  in  the  text  is  to  be  preferred.

THE    KOKAN.  341

Koran :  and  when  they  were  present  at  its  read-
ing then  they  said  to  each  other,  ''  Hist ; ''  and
when  it  was  ended,  they  returned  to  their  people
with  warnings  :

They  said,  "  0  our  people  !  verily  we  have  been  listen-
ing to  a  book  sent  down  since  the  days  of  Moses,
affirming  the  previous  scriptures ;  it  guideth  to
the  truth,  and  to  the  right  way  :
30  O  our  people !  Obey  the  Summoner  of  God,  and
believe  in  Him,  that  He  may  forgive  your  sins,  and
rescue  you  from  an  afflictive  punishment :

And  he  who  shall  not  respond  to  God's  preacher,  yet
cannot  weaken  God^s  power  on  earth,  nor  shall  he
have  protectors  beside  Him.     These  are  in  obvious

See  they  not  that  God  who  created  the  Heavens  and
the  Earth  and  was  not  wearied  with  their  creation,
is  of  power  to  quicken  the  dead  ?  Nay,  verily.  He
is  for  all  things  Potent.

And  a  day  is  coming  when  the  infidels  shall  be  set
before  the  fire—''  Is  not  this  it  in  truth  ?  "  They
shall  say,  "Aye,  by  our  Lord.''  He  saith,  "  Taste
then  the  punishment,  for  that  ye  would  not  be-
lieve.^'

Bear  thou  up,  then,  with  patience,  as  did  the  Apostles
endued  with  firmness,  and  seek  not  to  accelerate
their  doom.  On  the  day  when  they  shall  see  that
with  which  they  have  been  menaced.

It  shall  be  as  though  they  had  waited  but  an  hour  of
daylight.  A  Warning  !  Shall  then  any  perish
save  they  who  disobey  ?

342  TBE    KORAN.

[LXXXIX.]

SURA  VI.— CATTLE.

Mecca. — 165  Verses,

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Praise  be  to  God,  who  hath  created  the  Heavens  and
the  Earth,  and  ordained  the  darkness  and  the
lio-ht !  Yet  do  the  unbelievers  hold  other  deities
to  be  the  equals  of  their  Lord  !

He  it  is  who  created  you  of  clay — then  decreed  the
term  of  your  life :  and  with  Him  is  another  pre-
fixed term  for  the  Resurrection.  Yet  have  ye
doubts  thereof !

And  He  is  God  in  the  Heavens  and  on  the  Earth  !  He
knoweth  your  secrets  and  your  disclosures  !  and
He  knoweth  what  ye  deserve.^

But  never  did  one  single  sign  from  among  the  signs
of  their  Lord  come  to  them,  from  which  they
turned  not  away ;

And  now,  after  it  hath  reached  them,  have  they  treated
the  truth  itself  as  a  lie.  But  in  the  end,  the  mes-
sage at  which  they  mocked  shall  overtake  them  !

See  they  not  how  many  generations  We  have  de-
stroyed before  them.  We  had  settled  them  on
the  earth  as  We  have  not  settled  you,  and  Wo
sent  down  the  very  heavens  upon  them  in  copious
rains,  and  We  made  the  rivers  to  flow  at  their
feet :  yet  Wo  destroyed  them  in  their  sins,  and
raised  up  other  generations  to  succeed  them.

And  had  We  sent  down  to  thee  a  Book  Avritten  on
parchment  and  they  had  touched  it  with  their
hands,  the  unbelievers  had  surely  said,  ''  Verily
this  is  nought  but  plain  sorcery.^^

They  say  too,  "  Why  is  not  an  angel  sent  down  to
him  V     But  if  We  had  sent  down  an  angel,  their

'  Lit.  what  ye  have  gained,  i.e.  by  good  works.

THE    KORAN.  3 i3

judgment  would  have  come  on  them  at  once^^  and
they  would  have  had  no  respite  :

And  if  We  had  appointed  him  -  as  an  angel,  We  should
certainly  have  appointed  him  in  the  form  of  a  man,
and  We  would  certainly  have  obscured  for  them
that  which  they  themselves  obscured.^
10  Moreover,  apostles  before  thee  hav^e  been  laughed  to
scorn  :  but  that  which  they  laughed  to  scorn  en-
compassed the  mockers  among  them  !

Say  :  Go  throusrh  the  land :  then  see  what  hath  been
the  end  of  those  who  treated  them  as  liars.

Say  :  Whose  is  all  that  is  in  the  Heavens  and  the
Earth?  Say:  God's.  He  hath  imposed  mercy*
on  Himself  as  a  law.  He  will  surely  assemble  you
for  the  Resurrection  day — there  is  no  doubt  of  it :
but  they  who  are  the  puthors  of  their  own  ruin
believe  it  not.

His,  whatsoever  hath  its  dwelling  in  the  night  and  in
the  day  !  and  He,  the  Hearing,  the  Knowing  !

Say  :  Other  than  God  shall  I  take  as  Lord,  maker  of
the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,  who  nourisheth  all
and  of  none  is  nourished  ?  Say  :  Verily,  I  am
ordered  to  be  the  first  of  those  who  surrender
themselves  to  God  (profess  Islam)  :  and,  "  be  not
thou  of  those  who  join  gods  with  God.'^

Say  :  Verily  I  fear,  if  I  rebel  against  my  Lord,  the
punishment  of  a  great  day  :

From  whomsoever  it  shall  be  averted  on  that  day,  He
will  have  had  mercy  on  him  :  and  this,  the  manifest
felicity.

And  if  God  touch  thee  with  trouble,  there  is  none  to
remove  it  but  He :  and  if  He  lay  on  thee  the
touch  of  good — it  is  He  whose  power  is  over  aU
things ;

And  He  is  the  Supreme  over  his  servants ;  and  He  is
the  Wise,  the  Cognizant !

Say  :    What  is  weightiest  in  bearing  witness  ?     Say  :

'  Lit.  their  affair  would  have  bccn'decided.  In  that  case  there  would
no  longer  have  been  an  opportunity  for  the  warnings  of  the  prophets  and
for  repentance,  but  the  angeL?  would  at  once  have  executed  the  divine
judgments.

*  i.  e.  the  Apostle  {quern  pdunt). — Mar.

^  i.e.  the  angelic  messenger  in  human  form  would  not  have  been  recog-
nized as  an  angelic  being.  See  Sura  xli.  13,  p.  197.  Or,  as  others  render,
We  shauld  have  clothed  him  before  them  in  garments  like  their  own.

■•  Lit.  hMh  written  mercy  to  himself.

344  THE    KORAN.

God  is  witness  between  me  and  you ;  and  this
Koran  liatli  been  revealed  to  me  that  I  should
warn  you  by  it  and  all  whom  it  shall  reach.  Will
ye  really  bear  witness  that  there  are  other  gods
with  God  ?  Say  :  I  bear  no  such  witness.  Say  :
Verily^  He  is  one  God^  and  I  truly  share  not  with
you  the  guilt  of  associating  gods  with  Him.
20  They  to  whom  we  have  given  the  Book^  know  him
(Muhammad)  as  they  know  their  own  children :  ^
They  who  are  the  authors  of  their  own  perdition,
believe  not  on  him.

And  who  more  wicked  than  he  who  inventeth  a  falsehood
concerning  God,  or  who  treateth  our  revelations  as
lies  ?    Verily  those  wicked  ones  shall  not  prosper.^

And  on  "  the  Day  "  We  will  gather  them  all  together :
then  will  We  say  to  those  who  joined  gods  with
God,  "  Where  are  those  companion-gods  of  yours,
whom  ye  supposed  to  be  gods  ?  "

Then  shall  no  other  excuse  be  theirs  but  to  say,  "  By
God  our  Lord  !  we  joined  not  companions  with
Him  :  "—

Behold  !  how  they  lie  against  themselves — and  the  gods
of  their  own  inventing  desert  them  !

/^nd  some  among  them  hearken  unto  thee  :  but  We  have
cast  veils  over  their  hearts  that  they  should  not
understand  the  Koran,  and  a  weight  into  their  ears  :
and  though  they  see  all  kinds  of  signs,  they  refuse
faith  in  them,  until,  when  they  come  to  thee  to
dispute  with  thee,  the  infidels  say,  "  Verily,  this
is  nothing  but  fables  of  the  ancients ; "

And  they  forbid  it,  and  depart  from  it : — but  they  are
only  the  authors  of  their  own  perdition,  and  know
it  not.

If  thou  couldst  see  when  they  shall  be  set'  over  the  fire
and  say,  "  Oh  !  would  we  might  be  sent  back  !
then  we  would  not  treat  the  signs  of  our  Lord  as
lies  !  and  we  would  be  of  the  believers,"

Nay  !  that  hath  become  clear  "*  to   them  which   they

'  See  Sum  [xc]  xiii.  .36.

*  This  denunciation  is  repeated  in  eleven  other  passages  of  the  Koran,
and  coupled  with  the  known  rovoronce  of  the  early  Muslims  for  what  they
considered  as  the  word  of  God,  must  have  greatly  tended  to  secure  the
revelations  of  the  Prophet  from  being  in  any  way  tampered  with  and
corrupted.  '  Lit.  mcw/e  to  stand.

*  They  are  self-convicted  of  their  own  hypocrisy  and  of  the  hollowness
of  their  professions.

THE    KORAN.  345

before  concealed ;  but  though  they  should  return,
they  would  surely  go  back  to  that  which  was  for-
bidden them  ;  for  verily  they  are  liars  I

And  they  say,  "  There  is  no  other  than  our  life  in
this  world,  neither  shall  we  be  raised  again/^
30  But  if  thou  couldest  see  when  they  shall  be  set  before
their  Lord  !  He  saith  to  them,  "  Is  not  this  it  ^
in  truth  ?^'  They  say,  "Aye,  by  our  Lord  !  ^^
"  Taste  then,'^  saith  He,  "  the  torment,  for  that
ye  believed  not !  "

Lost  now  are  they  who  deny  a  meeting  with  God,  until,
when  "  the  Hour "  cometh  suddenly  upon  them
they  say,  "  Oh  woo  to  us  for  past  negligence  of
this  lioiir  !  "  And  they  shall  bear  their  burdens  on
their  back  !  Will  not  that  be  evil  which  they  shall
carry  ?

And  the  life  in  this  world  is  but  a  play  and  pastime  :
but  surely,  better  for  men  of  godly  fear  will  be  the
future  mansion !  Will  ye  not  then  comprehend?

Now  know  We  that  verily  what  they  speak  vexeth  thee  :  ^
But  it  is  not  merely  thee  whom  they  charge  with
falsehood,  but  the  ungodly  gainsay  the  signs  of
God.

Before  thee  have  apostles  already  been  charged  with
falsehood  :  but  they  bore  the  charge  and  the  wrong
with  constancy,  till  our  help  reached  them ; — for
none  can  change  the  decrees  of  God :  But  the
history  of  His  Sent  Ones  hath  already  reached  thee.

And  if  their  estrangement  be  grievous  to  thee,  and  if
thou  art  able  to  seek  out  an  opening  into  the  earth
or  a  ladder  into  Heaven,^  that  thou  mightest  bring

them  a  sign* Yes  !  But  if  God  pleased  He

would  surely  bring  them,  one  and  all,  to  the  Guid-
ance !  therefore  be  not  thou  one  of  the  ignorant.

To  those  only  who  lend  an  ear  will  He  make  answer :

'  The  Kesurrection,  etc.

"  Abu  Jahl  had  said  :  "  Muhammad  speaks  truth,  and  he  never  said  a
falsehood  ;  but,  if  the  Banu  Chosai,  who  enjoy  already  the  offices  of  bear-
ing the  standard,  of  providing  the  pilgrims  with  water,  and  of  keeping  the
keys  of  the  Kaaba,  should  also  obtain  the  Prophetship,  what  would  remain
for  the  other  Koreish  \ " — Kashaf  in  1.

^  See  Sura  lii.  38,  p.  50.  These  passages  may  allude  to  the  ladder  set
np  in  a  tower  by  Wacih  ben  Salamah,  one  of  the  ancient  doorkeepers  of
the  Caaba,  by  which  he  professed  to  mount  up  to  God  and  receive  divine
oracles. — Freyt.  Einl.  p.  371.

*  Supply,  then  do  it.

346  THE    KORAN.

and  as  for  the  dead,  God  will  raise  them  up ;  then
unto  Him  shall  they  return.

Moreover  they  say,  "  Unless  a  sign  be  sent  down  to

him  from  his  Lord  ^ "     Say  :   Verily,  God

is  able  to  send  down  a  sign  ;  but  the  greater  part
of  them  acknowledge  it  not.

No  kind  of  beast  is  there  on  earth  nor  fowl  that  flicth
with  its  wings,  but  is  a  folk  ^  like  you  :  nothing
have  we  passed  over  in  the  Book  :  ^  then  unto  their
Lord  shall  they  be  gathered.

They  who  gainsay  our  signs  are  deaf,  and  dumb,  in
darkness  :  God  misleadeth  whom  He  will,  and  whom
He  pleaseth  doth  He  place  upon  the  right  path.
40  Say  :  What  think  ye  ?  If  the  punishment  of  God  were
to  come  upon  you,  or  "  the  Hour  "  wei'e  to  come
upon  you,  would  ye  cry  to  any  other  than  God  ?
Tell  wc,  if  ye  speak  the  truth  ?

Nay,  to  Him  will  ye  cry  :  and  if  He  please  He  will
deliver  you  from  that  ye  cry  to  Him  to  avert,  and
ye  shall  forget  the  partners  ye  joined  with  Him.

Already  have  We  sent  Apostles  to  nations  that  were
before  thee,  and  we  laid  hold  on  them  with  troubles
and  with  straits  that  haply  they  might  humble
,  themselves : —

Yet  when  our  trouble  came  upon  them,  why  did  they
not'*  humble  themselves?  But  their  hearts  were
hardened,  and  Satan  pre-arranged  for  them  ^  their
course  of  conduct.

And  when  they  had  forgotten  their  warnings  We  set
open  to  them  the  gates  of  all  things,  until,  when
they  were  rejoicing  in  their  boons.  We  suddenly  laid
hold  upon  them,  and  lo  !  they  were  in  despair, —

And  the  uttermost  part  of  that  impious  people  was
cut  off.  And  praise  be  to  God,  the  Lord  of  the
Worlds !

Say  :  What  think  ye  ?  If  God  should  take  away  your
hearing  and  your  sight  and  set  a  seal  upon  your
hearts,  what  god  is  there  but  God  who   would

'  Supply,  ve  loill  not  believe.  But  the  sentence  may  also  be  rendered
interrogatively.

'A  community.  Ccrap.  Prov.  xxx.  25,  26.  Animals  as  well  as  man-
kind are  under  the  control  of  God,  are  held  within  the  limits  of  his  decrees,
are  accountable  to  Him,  and  will  stand  before  Him  in  the  judgment.

^  Of  the  Eternal  decrees.

*  Lit.  if  not,  interrogative.     Sec  Wright's  Ar.  Gram.  ii.  169.

*  Or,  embellished,  made  fair-seeming.

THE    KORAN.  347

restore  it  to  you  ?     See !  how  we  vary  our  won-
drous verses  !  yet  do  they  turn  away  from  them  !

Say  :  What  think  ye  ?  If  the  punishment  of  God  come
on  you  suddenly  or  foreseen/  shall  any  perish  ex-
cept the  impious  ^

And  "We  send  not  our  Sent  Ones  but  as  heralds  of  good
news  and  warners ;  whoso  then  believeth  and
amendeth^  on  them  shall  come  no  fear^  neither  shall
they  be  put  to  grief :

But  whoso  chargeth  our  signs  with  falsehood,  on  them
shall  fall  a  punishment  for  their  evil  doings.
50  Say  :  I  say  not  to  you,  "  In  my  possession  are  the
treasures  of  God ;  "  nor  "  I  know  things  secret ;  "
neither  do  I  say  to  you,  "  Verily,  I  am  an  angel  :  "
Only  what  is  revealed  to  me  do  I  follow.  Say  :
Shall  the  blind  and  the  sf  jing  ~  be  esteemed  alike  ?
Will  ye  not  then  reflect  ?

And  warn  by  the  Koran  those  who  dread  their  being
gathered  to  their  Lord  ivhcn  patron  or  intercessor
they  shall  have  none  but  Him — haply  they  will
fear  Him  !

And  thrust  not  thou  away  those  who  cry  to  their  Lord
at  morn  and  even,  craving  to  behold  his  face.  It  is
not  for  thee  in  anything  to  judge  of  their  motives,
nor  for  them  in  anything  to  judge  of  thine. ^  If  thou
thrust  them  away,  thou  wilt  be  of  the  doers  of
wrong.

And  thus  have  We  made  proof  of  some  of  them  by  others,
that  they  may  say,  "  Are  these  they  among  us  to
whom  God  hath  been  gracious  ?  "  Doth  not  God
best  know  the  thankful  ?

And  when  they  who  believe  in  our  signs  come  to  thee,
then  Say  :  Peace  be  upon  you  !  Your  Lord  hath
laid  down  for  Himself  a  law  of  mercy ;  that  if  any
one  of  you  commit  a  fault  through  ignorance,  but
afterwards  turn  and  amend,  then  will  He  be  Gra-
cious, Merciful.

And  thus  have  We  distinctly  set  forth  our  signs,  that
the  way  of  the  wicked  might  be  made  known.

Say  :  Forbidden  am  I  to  worship  those  whom  ye  call
on  beside  God.     Say  :  I  follow  not  your  wishes  ;

•  Lit.  openly,  i.e.  preceded  by  some  sign.
^  i.  e.  you  and  I.

^  Lit.  {there  is)  not  on  them  of  thy  reckoning  (or  estimate)  in  aught,  etc.
t.  e.  thou  art  not  answerable  for  them.

348  THE    KORAN.

for  then   should  I  go  astray,  and  not  be  of  the
guided.

Say  :  I  verily  act  upon  clear  teaching  from  my  Lord  :
but  "ye  treat  it  as  a  falsehood.  That  which  ye
desire  to  hasten  is  not  in  my  power  ;  ^  Verily  judg-
ment is  with  God  only  :  He  will  declare  the  truth  ;
and  He  is  the  best  settler  of  disputes.

Say  :  If  what  ye  would  hasten  on,  were  in  my  power,
the  matter  between  me  and  you  had  surely  been
decided  :  but  God  best  knoweth  the  impious.

And  with  Him  are  the  keys  -  of  the  secret  things  ;  none
knoweth  them  but  He  :  and  He  knoweth  whatever
is  on  the  land  and  in  the  sea ;  and  no  leaf  falleth
but  He  knoweth  it ;  neither  is  there  a  grain  in  the
darknesses  of  the  earth,  nor  a  thing  green  or  sere,
but  it  is  noted  in  the  perspicuous  Book.'
60  And  it  is  He  who  taketh  you  to  Himself  at  night,'*  and
knoweth  what  ye  have  merited  in  the  day :  then  He
awaketh  you  therein,  that  the  set  life-term  maybe
fulfilled:  then  unto  Him  is  your  return;  and  then
shall  Ho  declare  to  you  that  which  ye  have  wrought.

And  He  is  the  supreme  over  his  servants,  and  sendeth
forth  guardians  who  watch  over  you  until,  when
death  overtaketh  any  one  of  you,  our  messengers
receive  him,  and  they  fail  not;

Then  are  they  returned  to  God  their  true  Lord.  Is  not
judgment  his  ?  And  swiftest  He,  of  those  who
take  account !

Say  :  Who  rcscueth  you  from  the  darknesses  of  the
land  and  of  the  sea,  when  humbly  and  secretly  ye
cry  to  Him — "  If  Thou  rescue  us  from  this  dan-
ger,  we  will  surely  be  of  the  thankful  ?  " —

Say  :  God  rcscueth  you  from  them,  and  from  every
strait  :  yet  afterwards  ye  join  other  gods  with
Him!

Say  :  It  is  He  who  hath  power  to  send  on  you  a  punish-
ment from  above  you,  or  from  beneath  your  feet,
or  to  clothe  you  with  discord,^  and  to  make  some

'  The  Moccans  had  challenrfed  the  specrly  coming  of  judgments.
-  The  Rabbins  speak  of  the  three  keys  in  the  hand  of  God. — Tr.  Tanith,
fol.  1.

'  On  the  preserved  tablet,  on  which  are  written  the  decrees  of  God.

*  i.e.  during  sleep.  See  Sura  xxxix.  43,  p.  273.  Or,  layeth  to  rest.
Mar.  renders  literally,  defungi  faciei  vos,  id  est,  obdormiscere.  Thus  also
Beidh.     But  see  the  use  of  the  same  word  in  the  next  verse.

•  Or,  to  perpkx  you  {by  dividing  yon  into)  sects.

THE    KORAN.  349

of  you  to  taste  the  violence  of  others  !  See  how
variously  We  handle  the  wondrous  verses — haply
they  will  be  wise  !

But  thy  people  have  accused  the  Koran  ^  of  falsehood,
though  it  be  the  truth  :  Say  :  I  am  not  in  charge
of  you  :  To  every  prophecy  is  its  set  time,  and  in
the  end  ye  shall  know  it !

And  when  thou  seest  those  who  busy  themselves"  with
cavilling  at  our  signs,  withdraw  from  them  till
they  busy  themselves  in  some  other  subject :  and
if  Satan  cause  thee  to  forget  this,  sit  not  after
warning  them,^  with  the  ungodly  people :

Not  that  thev  who  fear  God  are  in  auffht  to  answer  for
them ;  but  let  there  be  a  warning  :  Haply  they
will  fear  Him  : —

And  quit  those  who  make  their  religion  a  sport  and  a
pastime  and  whom  this  present  life  hath  deceived ;
and  warn  them  hereby  that  a  soul  will  be  consigned
to  doom  for  its  own  works  :  patron  or  intercessor,
beside  God,  shall  it  have  none  :  and  could  it  com-
pensate with  fullest  compensation,  it  would  not  be
accepted  from  it.  They  who  for  their  deeds  shall
be  consigned  to  doom — for  them  are  draughts  of
boiling  water,  and  a  grievous  torment ;  for  that
they  believed  not !
70  Say  :  Shall  we  call  upon  those  beside  God  who  can
neither  help  nor  hurt  us  ?  Shall  we  turn  upon
our  heel  after  that  God  hath  guided  us  ?  Like
some  bewildered  man  whom  the  Satans  have  spell-
bound in  the  desert,  though  his  companions  call
him  to  the  true  guidance,  saying,  ''  Come  to  us  ! "
Say  :  Yerily,  guidance  from  God,  that  is  the  true
guidance ;  and  we  are  commanded  to  surrender
ourselves  to  the  Lord  of  the  Worlds.

And  observe  ye  the  times  of  prayer,  and  fear  ye  God :
for  it  is  He  to  whom  ye  shall  be  gathered.

And  it  is  He  who  hath  created  the  Heavens  and  the
Earth,  in  truth,  and  when  He  saith  to  a  thing,
''Be,"  it  is.

His  word  is  the  truth  :  and  his  the  kingdom,  on  the
day  when  there  shall  be  a  blast  on  the  trumpet :
He  knoweth  alike  the  unseen  and  the  seen  :  and
He  is  the  Wise,  the  Cognizant.

'  Al.  the  menaced  judgments.  ^  Plunge  into  a  discussion  of.

^  Or,  after  recollection.

350  THE    KORAN.

^  And  remember  when  Abraham  said  to  his  father  Azar/
Takest  thou  images  as  gods  ?  Verily,  I  see  that
thou  and  thy  people  are  in  manifest  error.

And  so  "did  We  show  Abraham  the  domain  of  the
Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,-  that  he  might  be  one
of  those  who  are  stablished  in  knowledge.

And  when  the  night  overshadowed  him,  he  beheld  a
star  :  "  This,^^  said  he,  "  is  ray  Lord  :  "  but  when
it  set,  he  said,  "  I  love  not  gods  which  set.^^

And  when  he  beheld  the  moon  uprising,  "  This,^'  said
he,  "  is  my  Lord  :  ^'  but  when  it  set,  he  said,
"  Surely,  if  my  Lord  guide  me  not,  I  shall  be  of
those  who  go  astray.'^

And  when  he  beheld  the  sun  uprise,  he  said,  "  This  is
my  Lord  ;  this  is  greatest. ^^  But  when  it  set,  he
said,  "  0  my  people  !  I  share  not  with  you  the
guilt  of  joining  gods  with  God;

I  verily  turn  my  face  to  Him  who  hath  created  the
Heavens  and  the  Earth,  following  the  right  reli-
gion ;  and  I  am  not  one  of  those  who  add  gods  to
God.^^
80  And  his  people  disputed  with  him. — He  said  :  ^'  Dis-
pute ye  with  me  about  God,  when  He  hath  even
now  guided  me  ?  And  I  fear  not  the  deities  whom
ye  join  with  Him,  for  only  by  the  will  of  my  Lord
have  they  any  power  :^  My  Lord  embraceth  all
things  in  his  knowledge.  Will  ye  not  then  be
admonished  ?

And  how  should  I  fear  what  ye  have  joined  with  God,
since  ye  fear  not  for  having  joined  with  Him  that
for  which  He  hath  sent  you  down  no  warranty  ?

'  Azar.  This  form  is  probably  borrowed  from  Athar,  as  Terah  is  called
by  Eusebius.  See  Maracci  Prodr.  iv.  J)().  Compare  a  similar  narrative
(>Iiilr.  Ivabbah  on  Gen.  par.  17),  in  which  Abraham  is  given  over  by  his
idolatrous  father  Zarah  to  Ninirod,  who  says,  "  We  will  adore  the  Fire  :"
"  Rather,"  said  Abraham,  "  the  water  which  puts  out  fire."  "  The  Water
then  "— "  Rather  the  clouds  that  bear  the  water."  "  The  Clouds  then  "—
"  Rather  the  wind  which  scatters  the  clouds."  "  The  Wind  then " —
"  Rather  man  who  endures  the  wind."  Whereupon  Abraham  was  thrown
bito  the  furnace. — It  is  quite  possible  that  in  what  foyoM's,  Muhammad
may  have  intended  to  imply  that  Abraham  had  renounced  the  Sabian
star-worship  of  his  fathers,  and  to  vindicate  liim  from  the  habit  of  con-
sulting the  stars  attributed  to  him  by  the  Talmudists.  Shabl)ath,  fol.  LOG',
coL  1.  "Abraham  replied,  I  have  consulted  my  Astrology."  Comj).
Rashi  on  Gen.  xv.  5.     See  Maim.  Yad.  Hachaz.  vii.  G.

^  Comp.  Gen.  xv.  5.

*  Lit.  unless  that  my  Lord  shall  will  anything.

THE    KORAN.  351

"Which,  therefore,  of  the  two  parties  is  more  worthy
of  safety  ? — Know  ye  that  ? —

They  who  believe,  and  who  confuse  not  their  faith  with
error/  theirs  is  safety ;  And  they  are  guided
aright."

This  is  our  reasoninsr  with  which  We  furnished  Abra-
ham  against  his  people  :  We  uplift  to  grades  of
wisdom  whom  We  will ;  Verily  thy  Lord  is  Wise,
Knowing.
^  And  We  gave  him  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  guided  both
aright ;  and  We  had  before  guided  Noah ;  and
among  the  descendants  of  Ahraliam,  David  and
Solomon,  and  Job  and  Joseph,  and  Moses  and
Aaron  :  Thus  do  We  recompense  the  righteous  :

And  Zachariah,  John,  Jesus,  and  Elias  :  all  were  just
persons  :

And  Ismael  and  Elisha  and  Jonas,  and  Lot :  all  these
have  We  favoured  above  all  creatures  :

And  some  of  their  fathers  and  of  their  offspring  and
of  their  brethren  :  and  We  chose  them,  and  guided
them  into  the  right  way.

Tliis  is  God's  guidance  :  He  guideth  thereby  such  of  his
servants  as  He  will :  But  if  they  join  other  gods
with  Him,  vain  assuredly  shall  be  all  their  works ; —

These  are  they  to  whom  We  gave  the  Scripture  and
Wisdom 2  and  Prophecy :  but  if  these  their  pos-
terity believe  not  therein.  We  will  entrust  these
gifts  to  a  people  who  will  not  disbelieve  therein.
90  These  are  thev  whom  God  hath  guided  :  follow  there-
fore  their  guidance.  Say  :  No  reward  do  I  ask  of
you  for  this  :^  Verily  it  is  no  other  than  a
Teaching  for  all  creatures.

And  no  just  estimate  do  they  form  of  God  when  they
say,  "  Nothing  hath  God  sent  down  to  man.''
Say  :  Who  sent  down  the  Book  which  ^Moses
brought,  a  light  and  guidance  to  man,  which  ye
set  down  on  paper,  showing  part,  but  concealing
most ;  though  ye  have  now  been  taught  that  which
neither  ye  nor  your  fathers  knew?  Say:  God:
"  Then  leave  them  in  their  pastime  of  cavillings."*

'  Or,  confuse  not  their  faith  unth  -wrong,  injustice,  i.  e.  idolatry.

^  Die  (geistliche)  Herrschaft. — Sprengor.  ^  Koran.

•*  This  verse  and  the  following  were  probably  added  at  Medina  after  the
Hejira ;  at  least  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  that  Muhammad  would  have
ventured  thus  to  have  wiitten  at  Mecca.    See  Sprenger,  Leben,  p.  294,  n.

352  THE    KORAN.

And  this  Book  which  We  have  sent  do\^^^  is  blessed,
confirming  that  which  was  before  it ;  and  in  order
that  thou  mightest  warn  the  mother-city  and  those
who  dwell  round  about  it.  They  who  believe  in
the  next  life  will  believe  in  It,  and  will  keep  strictly
to  their  Prayers.

But  is  any  more  wicked  than  he  who  deviseth  a  lie  of
God,  or  saith,  "  I  have  had  a  revelation,"  when
nothing  was  revealed  to  him,^  and  who  saith,  "  I
can  bring  down  a  book  like  that  which  God  hath
sent  down  "  ?  But  couldst  thou  see  when  the  un-
godly are  in  the  floods  of  death,  and  the  angels
reach  forth  their  hands,  saying,  "  Yield  up  your
souls  : — this  day  shall  ye  be  recompensed  with  a
humiliating  punishment  for  your  untrue  sayings
about  God,  and  for  proudly  rejecting  his  signs  !  "

"  And  now  are  ye  come  back  to  Us,  alone,  as  We
created  you  at  first,  and  ye  leave  behind  you  the
good  things  which  We  had  given  you,  and  We  see
not  with  you  your  intercessors  whom  ye  regarded
as  the  companions  of  God  among  you.  There  is  a
severance  between  you  now,  and  those  whom  ye
regarded  a-s  gods  with  God,  have  deserted  you.'^
^  Verily  God  causcth  the  grain  and  the  date-stone  to
break  forth :  He  bringeth  forth  the  living  from  the
dead,  and  the  dead  from  the  living  !  This  is  God  !
Why,  then,  are  ye  turned  aside  from  Him  ?

He  causeth  the  dawn  to  break,  and  hath  ordained  the
night  for  rest,  and  the  sun  and  the  moon  for  com-
puting time  !  This  is  the  ordinaoce  of  the  Mighty,
the  Wise  !

And  it  is  He  who  hath  ordained  the  stars  for  you,  that
ye  may  be  guided  thereby  in  the  darknesses  of  the
land  and  of  the  sea  !  clear  now  have  We  made  our
signs  for  men  of  knowledge.

And  it  is  He  who  hath  produced  you  from  one  man,  and
hath  ])rovided  for  yon  an  abode  and  resting-place  !^
Clear  now  have  We  made  our  signs  for  men  of
insight.

And  it  is  He  who  sendeth  down  rain  from  Heaven  :  and

'  This  verse  is  said  to  have  been  revealed  at  Medina,  and  to  be  aimed
at  the  false  prophets  Moseilama,  Aswad,  and  Anisi ;  also  at  Abdallah  Ibn
Saad,  Muhammad's  secrctjiry,  who  for  corrnptintr  the  sacred  text  and  for
apostasy,  was  one  of  the  ten  proscribed  at  the  taking  of  Mecca.

^  In  the  worab.

THE    KORAN.  353

We  bring  forth  by  it  the  germs  of  all  the  plants,
and  from  them  bring  We  forth  the  green  foliage,
and  the  close-growing  grain;  and  from  the  palm-
trees  the  low-hanging  date-clusters  out  of  their
sheaths :  and  gardens  of  grapes,  and  the  olive
and  the  pomegranate,  like  and  unlike.^  Look  ye
on  their  fruits  when  they  fruit  and  ripen.  Truly
herein  are  signs  unto  people  who  believe.
100  Yet  have  they  assigned  the  Djinn  to  God  as  his  asso-
ciates, though  He  created  them ;  and  in  their
ignorance  have  they  falsely  ascribed  to  Him  sons
and  daughters.  Glory  be  to  Him  !  And  high  let
Him  be  exalted  above  that  which  they  attribute  to
Him!

Sole  maker-  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  !  how,
when  He  hath  no  consort,  should  He  have  a  son  ?
He  hath  created  everything,  and  He  knoweth
everything !

This  is  God  your  Lord.  There  is  no  God  but  He,  the
creator  of  all  things  :  therefore  worship  Him  alone;
— and  He  watcheth  over  all  things.

No  vision  taketh  in  Him,  but  He  taketh  in  all  vision  :  ^
and  He  is  the  Subtile,  the  All-informed.

Now  have  proofs  that  may  be  seen,  come  to  you  from
your  Lord  :  whoso  seeth  them,  the  advantage  will
be  his  own  :  and  whoso  is  blind  to  them,  his  own
will  be  the  loss  :  And  I  am  not  made  keeper  over
you.

Even  thus  do  We  explain  our  signs,^  and  that  they
may  say,  "  Thou  hast  studied  deep  : "  and  that  to
people  of  understanding  We  may  make  them  clear.

Follow  thou  that  which  hath  been  revealed  to  thee  by
thy  Lord — "  there  is  no  god  but  He  !  "  and  with-
draw from  those  who  join  other  gods  with  Him.

And  had  God  pleased,  they  had  not  joined  other  gods
with  Him  :  but  We  have  not  made  thee  keeper  over
them,  neither  art  thou  a  guardian  over  them.

Revile  not  those  whom  they  call  on  beside  God,^  lest
they,  in  their  ignorance,  despitefully  revile  Him.
Thus  have  We  made  their  actions  fair-seeming  to
every  people  ;  then  shall  they  return  to  their  Lord,

'  Lit.  similar  and  without  tmitual  resemblance.
'  Creator,  in  the  sense  of  Originator.

^  Mr.  Lane  renders,  "  the  eyes  see  not  Him,  but  He  seeth  the  eyes."   Or,
the  passage  may  be  rendered,  no  eyesight  reacheth  to  Him,  &c.
*  The  verses  of  the  Koran.  *  Comp.  Ex.  xxii.  28.

2  A

354  THE    KORAN.

and  He  will  declare  to  them  what  those  actions
have  been.

With  their  most  binding  oath  have  they  sworn  by  God,
that  if  a  sign  come  unto  them  they  will  certainly
believe  it ;  Say  :  Signs  are  in  the  power  of  God
alone  :  and  what  shall  make  ye  to  understand  that  if
they  were  wrought  these  men  would  not  believe  ?  ^
110  And  We  will  turn  their  hearts  and  their  eyes  upside
down  even  as  they  did  not  believe  therein  at  first,
and  We  will  leave  them  in  their  transgressions,
wandering  in  perplexity.

And  thoucrh  We  had  sent  down  the  angels  to  them,
and  the  dead  had  spoken  to  them,  and  We  had
gathered  all  things  about  them  in  hosts  -  they
had  not  believed,  unless  God  willed  it !  but  most
of  them  are  in  ignorance.

Even  thus  have  We  given  an  enemy  to  every  prophet —
Satans  among  men  and  among  Djinn :  tinsel
discourses  do  they  suggest  the  one  to  the  other,  in
order  to  deceive  :  but  had  thy  Lord  willed  it,  they
would  not  have  done  it.  Therefore,  leave  them
and  their  vain  imaginings —

And  let  the  hearts  of  those  who  believe  not  in  the  life  to
come  incline  thereto,  and  let  them  find  their  content
in  this,  and  let  them  gain  what  they  are  gaining  !

Shall  I  seek  other  judge  than  God,  when  it  is  He  who
hath  sent  down  to  you  the  distinct  Book  and  they
to  whom  We  have  given  the  Book  know  that  it  is
sent  down  from  thy  Lord  with  the  truth  ?  Be  not
thou  then  of  those  who  doubt.

And  the  words  of  thy  Lord  are  perfect  in  truth  and  in
justice  :  none  can  change  his  words :  and  He  is
the  Hearing,  Knowing.

But  if  thou  obey  most  men  in  this  land,  from  the  path
of  God  will  they  mislead  thee :  verily  they  follow
but  a  conceit,  and  they  are  only  liars.

Verily  thy  Lord  !  He  best  knoweth  those  who  err  from
his  path,  and  He  best  knoweth  the  rightly-guided.

Eat  then  of  that  over  which  the  name  of  God  hath  been
pronounced,  if  ye  believe  in  his  signs.^

'  Notwithstandinr;  this  disclaimer,  the  Muslim  tradition,  etc.  speak  of
many  of  their  Prophet's  miracles.  See  Maracci's  Prodr.  p.  ii.  p.  16,  and
30-46  ;  Sprenger,  ii.  413.

'  Or,  before  their  eyes.

^  Verses  118-121  seem  misplaced,  and  should  probably  follow  154.

THE    KORAN.  355

And  why  eat  ye  not  of  that  over  which  the  name  of
God  hath  been  pronounced,  since  He  hath  made
plain  to  you  what  He  hath  forbidden  you,  save  as
to  that  which  is  forced  upon  you  ?  But  indeed
many  mislead  others  by  their  appetites,  through
lack  of  knowledge.  Verily,  thy  Lord  !  He  best
knoweth  the  transgressors.
120  And  abandon  the  semblance  of  wickedness,  and  wicked-
ness itself.^  They,  verily,  whose  only  acquirement  is
iniquity,  shall  be  repaid  for  what  they  have  gained  !

And  eat  not  of  that  on  which  the  name  of  God  hath  not
been  named,  for  that  is  a  crime  :  and  of  a  truth  the
Satans  will  assuredly  suggest  to  their  votaries  to
wrangle  with  you;  but  if  ye  obey  them,  ye  will
verily  be  of  those  who  join  gods  with  God.

Shall  he  who  was  dead,-andv»  horn  We  have  quickened,
and  for  whom  We  have  ordained  a  light  whereby
he  may  walk  among  men,  be  like  him  whose  like-
ness is  in  the  darkness  whence  he  cannot  come
forth  ?  Thus  have  the  doings  of  the  unbelievers
been  made  fair-seeming  to  them.

Even  so  have  We  placed  in  every  city  its  greatest  sinners
that  they  may  scheme  therein  :  but  only  against
themselves  do  they  scheme  !  and  they  know  it  not.

And  when  a  sign  cometh  to  them  they  say,  "  We  will
by  no  means  believe,  till  the  like  of  what  was
accorded  to  the  apostles  of  God,  be  accorded  to
us.^^  God  best  knoweth  where  to  appoint^  his  mes-
sage. Disgrace  with  God,  and  a  vehement  punish-
ment shall  come  on  transgressors  for  their  plottings.

Whom  then  God  shall  please  to  guide,  that  man^s  breast
will  He  open  to  Islam ;  but  whom  He  shall  please
to  mislead,  strait  and  narrow  will  He  make  his
breast,  as  though  he  were  mounting  up  into  the
very  Heavens  !  Thus  doth  God  inflict  dire  punish-
ment on  those  who  believe  not.

And  this  is  the  straight  way  of  thy  Lord.  Now  have
We  clearly  explained  our  signs  unto  those  who  will
be  admonished.

For  them  a  dwelling  of  peace  with  their  Lord  !  and  He,
in  recompense  for  their  works,  their  protector.

'  Lit.  the  outside  of  iniquity  and  its  inside.     Some  understand  these
words  of  open  sins  and  secret  sins.

*  i.  e.  Muhammad,     The  Muslims,  however,  interpret  this  verse  of  the
conversion  of  Hamza.  '  Or,  in  what  way  to  effect,  &c.

2  a2

350  THE    KORAN.

And  wlien  God  shall  gather  them  all  together "0

race  of  Djinn,"  ivill  He  say,  great  use  did  ye  make
of  mankind  ! "  And  their  votaries  from  among  men
shall  say,  "  0  our  lord!  we  rendered  one  another
mutual  services:^  butwe have  reached  our  set  term
which  Thou  hast  set  for  us."  He  will  say,  "  Your
abode  the  fire  !  therein  abide  ye  for  ever,  unless
as  God  shall  will.  Verily,  thy  Lord  is  Wise,
Knowing —

Even  thus  place  We  some  of  the  wicked  above  others,"
as  the  meed  of  their  doings  : —
130  0  race  of  Djinn  and  men  !  came  not  apostlesto  you
from  among  yourselves,  rehearsing  my  signs  to
you,  and  warning  you  of  the  meeting  of  this  your
day  ?''  They  shall  say,  ''We  bear  witness  against
ourselves.'' — This  world's  life  had  deceived  them  ;
and  they  bear  witness  against  themselves  that  they
were  infidels : —

This,  because  thy  Lord  would  not  destroy  the  cities  in
their  sin,  while  their  people  were  yet  careless  ;

And  for  all  are  grades  of  recompense  as  the  result  of
their  deeds  j  and  of' what  they  do,  thy  Lord  is  not
regardless ;

And  thy  Lord  is  the  IJich  one,  full  of  compassion  !  He
can  destroy  you  if  He  please,  and  cause  whom  Ho
will  to  succeed  you,  as  He  raised  you  up  from  the
offspring  of  other  people  :

Verily,  that  which  is  threatened  you  shall  surely  come
to  pass,  neither  shall  ye  frustrate  it.

Say  ;  0  my  people  !  Act  as  ye  best  can  :  I  verily  will
act  my  part,  and  hereafter  shall  ye  know

^Vhose  will  be  the  recompense  of  the  abode  !  Verily,
the  ungodly  shall  not  prosper.

Moreover,  they  set  apart  a  portion  of  the  fruits  and
cattle  '^  which  He  hath  produced,  and  say,   "  This

'  Or,  derived  pleasure  or  advantage  frovi  one  another.

'  Some  will  be  more,  others  less,  punished  in  hell,  according  to  their
deserts. — Ullni.

3  It  appears  to  have  been  the  custom  of  the  idolatrous  Arabs  to  set  apart
one  portion  of  their  fields  for  the  Supreme  God,  and  the  other  for  the
inferior  fiods  represented  by  their  idols.  If  any  of  the  fruit  happened  to
fall  from  the  part  consecrated  to  the  idols  into  that  consecrated  to  God,
they  restored  it ;  but  if  the  reverse  occurred,  they  gave  it  to  the  idols.
God,  said  they,  is  rich,  and  can  dispense  with  it.  'J'he  secret,  however,
was,  that  the  idols'  portion  was  reserved  for  the  priests.— Beidhawi.  Frey-
Lig  mentions  the  names  of  73  idols  worshipped  by  the  Arab  tnbes,  pre-

THE    KOKAN.  357

for  God  " — so  fancy  they — "  And  this  for  those
whom  we  associate  with  Him/'  ^  But  that  which
is  for  these  associated  gods  of  theirs,  cometh  not
to  God ;  yet  that  which  is  for  God,  cometh  to  the
associated  gods.    An  evil  judgment  do  they  form  !

And  thus  have  the  companion-gods  cajoled/  many  of
those  who  join  them  with  God,  to  slay  their  children,
that  they  might  ruin  them,  and  throw  the  cloak
of  confusion  over  their  religion.  But  if  God  had
pleased,  they  had  not  done  this : — Therefore,  leave
them  and  their  devices.

They  also  say^  "  These  cattle  and  fruits  are  forbidden  :
none  may  taste  them  but  they  whom  we  allow  :"  so
deem  they — "  And  there  are  cattle,  whose  backs
should  be  exempt /Voj/«  burdens."  And  there  are
cattle  over  which  they  do  not  pronounce  the  name
of  God  :  inventing  in  all  t]us  a  lie  against  Him.
— For  their  inventions  shall  He  reward  them  !
1-40  And  they  say,  "That  which  is  in  the  wombs  of  these
cattle  is  allowed  to  our  males,  and  forbidden  to  our
wives ;  "  but  if  it  prove  an  abortion,  both  partake
of  it.  God  shall  reward  them  for  their  distinctions  !
Knowing,  Wise  is  He.

Lost  are  they  who,  in  their  ignorance,  have  foolishly
slain  their  children,  and  have  forbidden  that  which
God  hath  given  them  for  food,  demising  an  untruth
against  God  !  Verily  they  have  erred;  and  they
are  not  rightly  guided.

He  it  is  who  produceth  gardens  with  trellises  for  vines,
and  without  them,^  and  the  palm-trees,  and  corn,
the  food  from  which  is  various  in  kind,  and  olives,
and  pomegranates,  like  and  unlike.  Eat  ye  of  their
fruit  when  they  bear  fruit,  and  pay  the  due  thereof
on  the  day  of  its  ingathering  :  and  be  not  prodigal,
for  God  loveth  not  the  prodigal.

And  there  are  cattle  for  burdens  and  for  slaughter.  Eat
of  what  God  hath  given  you  for  food;  and  follow

vious  to  Islam  (Einl.  pp.  270  and  342-357),  and  generally  with  Allah,  as
Supreme  God.

'  Lit.  and  this  for  our  Companions,  or  Penates. — From  137-147  may
be  an  independent  fragment.

^  Lit.  made  the  slaughter  specious  ;  but  some  MSS.  read  the  verb  in  the
passive.     V.  Wright,  Ar.  Gram.  ii.  241.

^  Or,  the  allusion  may  be  to  gardens  of  low-growing  herbs,  and  to  those
which  mount  aloft — in  die  Hbhe  steigen. — Sprenger,  ii.  479.

358  THE    KORAN.

not  the  steps  of  Satan,  for  he  is  your  declared
enemy.
You  liave  four  sorts  of  cattle  in  pairs  :  ^  of  sheep  a  pair,
and  of  goats  a  pair.  Say  :  Hath  He  forbidden  the
two  males  or  the  two  females ;  or  that  which  the
wombs  of  the  two  females  have  conceived  ?  Tell
me  with  knowledge,  if  ye  speak  the  truth  :

And  of  camels  a  pair,  and  of  oxen  a  pair.  Say  :  Hath
He  forbidden  the  tw^o  males  or  the  two  females ;  or
that  which  the  wombs  of  the  two  females  contain  ?  ^
Were  ye  witnesses  when  God  enjoined  you  this  ?
Who  then  is  more  wicked  than  he  who,  in  his  igno-
rance, inventeth  a  lie  against  God,  to  mislead  men  ?
God  truly  guideth  not  the  wicked.

Say  :  I  find  not  in  what  hath  been  revealed  to  me  aught
forbidden  to  the  eater  to  eat,  except  it  be  that
which  dietli  of  itself,  or  blood  poured  forth,  or
swine's  flesh, — for  this  is  unclean  ;  or  that  which
is  profane,  being  slain  in  the  name  of  other  than
God.  But  whoso  shall  be  a  forced  partaker,  if  it
be  without  wilfulness,  and  not  in  trangrcssion, —
then  verily,  thy  Lord  is  Indulgent,  Merciful  !

To  the  Jews  did  We  forbid  every  beast  having  an
entire  hoof,  and  of  both  bullocks  and  sheep  We
forbade  them  the  fat,  save  what  might  be  on  their
backs,  or  their  entrails,  or  the  fat  attached  to  the
bone.  With  this  have  We  recompensed  them,
because  of  their  transgression  :  and  verily  We  are
equitable.

If  then  they  treat  thee  as  an  impostor,  say  :  Your  Lord
is  of  all-embracing  mercy  :  but  his  severity  shall
not  be  turned  aside  from  the  wicked.

They  who  add  gods  to  God  will  say,  "If  God  had
pleased,  neither  we  nor  our  fathers  had  assigned
to  Him  those  who  share  his  honour,  nor  should  we
have  interdicted  anything.''  Thus  did  they  who
flourished  before  them  charge  with  imposture,
until  they  had  tasted  our  severity  !  Say  :  Have  ye
any  knowledge  ?  then  produce  it  to  Us  ?  Ye  do  but
follow  a  conceit :  and  verily,  ye  do  but  utter  lies  !
150  Say:  Peremptory  proof  then  is  God's  !=^  therefore,  had
He  pleased  He  had  assuredly  guided  you  all  aright.

'  Lit.  eight  (in)  couples.  '  Coinp.  Sura  [cxlv.]  y.  102.

'  i.e.  In  God's  hands  are  satisfiictory  proofs  of  the  truth  of  his  revela-
tions.    Or  render,  convincinfj  argument.

THE    KORAN.  359

Say  :  Bring  liither  your  witnesses  who  can  witness  that
God  hath  forbidden  these  animals  :  but  if  they
bear  witness,  witness  not  thou  with  them,  nor
witness  to  the  conceits  of  those  who  charge  our
signs  with  falsehood,  and  who  believe  not  in  the
life  to  come,  and  assign  equals  to  our  Lord.

Say  :  Come,  I  will  rehearse  what  vour  Lord  hath  made
binding  on  you  ^ — that  ye  assign  not  aught  to  Him
as  sharers  of  his  Divine  honour,  and  that  ye  be
good  to  your  parents;  and,  that  ye  slay  not  your
children  because  of  poverty — for  them  and  for  you
will  We  provide:"  and  that  ye  come  not  near  to
pollutions  outward  or  inward  :  ^  and  that  ye  slay
not  any  one  whom  God  hath  forbidden  you,  unless
for  a  just  cause.  This  hath  He  enjoined  on  you :
haply  ye  will  understand.

And  come  not  nigh  to  the  substance  of  the  orphan,  but
to  improve  it,  until  he  come  of  age :  and  use  a  full
measure,  and  a  just  balance  :  We  will  not  task*  a
soul  beyond  its  ability.  And  when  ye  give  judg-
ment, observe  justice,  even  though  it  be  the  affair
of  a  kinsman,  and  fulfil  the  covenant  of  God.  This
hath  God  enjoined  you  for  your  monition —

And,  "  this  is  my  right  way.'^  Follow  it  then ;  and
follow  not  o^/;er  paths,  lest  ye  be  scattered  from  his
path.  This  hath  He  enjoined  you,  that  ye  may  fear
Him.
^  Then  *  gave  We  the  Book  to  Moses — complete  for  him
who  should  do  right,  and  a  decision  for  all  matters,
and  a  guidance,  and  a  mercy,  that  they  might
believe  in  the  meeting  with  their  Lord.

Blessed,  too,  this  Book  which  We  have  sent  down.
Wherefore  follow  it  and  fear  God  : — haply  ye  may
find  mercy  : —

Lest  ye  should  say,  ''The  Scriptures  were  indeed  sent
down  only  unto  two  parties  before  us,  but  we
were  not  able  to  go  deep  into  their  studies  :  '^^

Or  lest  ye  should  say,  "  If  a  book  had  been  sent  down

'  The  ten  precepts  in  this  and  the  next  verse  are  probably  based  upon,
and  borrowed  in  part  from,  the  Jewish  Decalogue.

*  Comp.  Sura  xvii.  33,  p.  167.  ^  See  verse  120  above.

*  In  order  to  make  out  ten  precepts,  we  must  read  tokallifil,  and  render
Ye  shall  not,  &c.

*  This  very  abnipt  transition  to  Jewish  history  seems  to  indicate  that  a
passage  between  this  and  the  preceding  verse  is  lost.

*  Lit.  we  were  careless  of  their  studies.

360  THE    KORAN.

to  US,  we  had  surely  yielded  to  guidance  more  than
they."  But  now  hath  clear  teaching  come  to  you
from,  your  Lord,  and  a  guidance  and  a  mercy.
Who  then  is  more  wicked  than  he  who  treateth
the  signs  of  God  as  lies,  and  turneth  aside  from
them  ?  We  will  recompense  those  who  turn  aside
from  our  signs  with  an  evil  punishment,  because
they  have  turned  aside.

What  wait  they  for,  but  the  coming  of  the  angels  to
them,  or  the  coming  of  thy  Lord  Himself,  or  that
some  of  the  signs  of  thy  Lord  should  come  ?  On
the  day  when  some  of  thy  Lord's  signs  shall  come,
its  faith  shall  not  profit  a  soul  which  believed
not  beforOj  nor  wrought  good  works  in  virtue  of
its  faith.  Say  :  Wait  ye  ?  Verily,  We  are  waiting
also  !
160  Verily,  as  to  those  who  split  up  their  religion  and
become  sects,  have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  them  :
their  doom  is  with  God  only;  then  shall  He  tell
them  what  they  have  done.

He  who  shall  bring  a  good  action  shall  have  ten  {good
actions)  as  its  equivalents;  but  he  who  shall  bring
an  evil  work  shall  not  be  recompensed  but  with
its  like ;  and  they  shall  not  be  treated  unjustly.

Say  :  As  for  me,  my  Lord  hath  guided  me  into  a
straight  path  ;  a  true  ^  religion,  the  creed  of  Abra-
ham, the  sound  in  faith ;  -  for  he  was  not  one  of
those  who  join  gods  with  God.

Say  :  Verily  my  prayers  and  my  worship  and  my  life
and  my  death  are  unto  God,  Lord  of  the  Worlds.
He  hath  no  associate,  and  this  am  I  commanded;
and  I  am  the  first  of  the  Muslims.

Say  :  Shall  I  seek  any  other  Lord  than  God,  when  He
is  Lord  of  all  things  ?  No  soul  shall  labour  but
for  itself;  and  no  burdened  one  shall  bear  another's
burden.  At  last  ye  shall  return  to  your  Lord,  and
He  will  declare  that  to  you  about  which  you  differ.

And  it  is  He  who  hath  made  you  the  successors  of
others  on  the  earth,  and  hath  raised  some  of  you
above  others  by  various  grades,  that  He  may  prove
you  by  his  gifts.  Verily  thy  Lord  is  Swift  to
punish.     Verily  also  He  is  Gracious,  Merciful !

'  Lit.  unchanging.  *  Lit.  the  Hanyf ;  v.  n.  p.  216.

THE    KORAN.  861

[XC]

SURA  XIII.— THUNDER.
Mecca. — 43  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elif.  Lam,  Mim,  Ra.^  These,  the  signs  of  the  Book  !
And  that  which  hath  been  sent  down  to  thee  from
thy  Lord  is  the  very  trut'-i :  But  the  greater  part
of  men  believe  not.

It  is  God  who  hath  reared  the  Heavens  without  pillars
thou  canst  behold;  then  seated  Himself  upon  his
throne,  and  imposed  laws  on  the  sun  and  moon  :
each  travelleth  to  its  appointed  goal.  He  ordereth
all  things.  He  maketh  his  signs  clear.  Haply  ye
will  have  firm  faith  in  a  meeting  with  your  Lord.

And  He  it  is  who  hath  outstretched  the  earth,  and
placed  on  it  the  firm  mountains,  and  rivers  :  and
of  every  fruit  He  hath  placed  on  it  two  kinds  :  He
causeth  the  night  to  enshroud  the  day.  Verily  in
this  are  signs  for  those  who  reflect.

And  on  the  earth  hard  by  each  other  are  its  various
portions  :  and  gardens  of  grapes  and  corn,  and
palm-troes  clustered  or  single  at  the  root.  Though
wsLx,.  u.  bv  the  same  water,  vet  some  make  We
more  excellent  as  food  than  other  :  Verily  in  this
are  signs  for  those  who  understand.

If  ever  thou  dost  marvel,  marvellous  surely  is  their
saying,  "  What  !  when  we  have  become  dust,
shall  we  indeed  he  restored  in  a  new  creation  ?  "

These  are  they  who  in  their  Lord  believe  not :  and
these  !  the  collars  shall  be  on  their  necks ;  and
these  shall  be  inmates  of  the  fire,  to  abide  therein
for  aye.

Moreover,  to  hasten  evil  rather  than  good  will  they
challenge  thee  :  but,  before  their  time  have  been
like   examples ;  and  verily,   full   of  mercy  is  thy

'  See  Sura  Ixviii.  p.  16.

362  THE    KORAN.

Lord  unto  men  despite  i  their  sins  ;  but  verily,  thy
Lord  is  vehement  to  punish.

And  they  who  beheve  not  say,  "  Why  is  not  a  sign
from  his  Lord  sent  down  to  him  ?  "  Thou  art  a
Warner  only. — And  every  people  hath  its  guide.

God  knoweth  the  burden   of  every  female,   and  how
much  their  wombs  lessen  and  enlarge;  and  with
Him  everything  in  its  due  measure  :
10     Knower  of  the  Hidden  and  the  Manifest !  the  Great  !
the  Most  High  !

Alike  to  Him  is  that  person  among  you  who  concealeth
his  words,  and  he  that  telleth  them  abroad  :  he
who  hideth  himself  in  the  night,  and  he  who
Cometh  forth  freely  in  the  daylight.

Each  hath  a  succession  of  Angels  before  him  and  behind
him,  who  w^atch  over  him  by  God's  behest.  Verily,
God  doth  not  change  his  gifts  to  a  people,  till
they  change  what  is  in  themselves  :  and  when
God  willeth  evil  unto  a  people,  there  is  none
can  turn  it  away,  nor  have  they  any  protector
beside  Him.

He  it  is  who  maketh  the  lightning  to  shine  unto  you,
for  fear,  and  for  hope  of  rain,  and  who  bringeth
up  the  laden  clouds  :

And  the  THUNDER  uttereth  his  praise,  and  the
Angels  also,  for  awe  of  Him  :  and  He  sendeth  his
bolts  and  smiteth  with  them  whom  He  will'^  while
they  are  wrangling  about  God  !  Mighty  is  He  in
prowess.

Prayer  is  his  of  right :  but  these  deities  to  whom  they
pray  beside  Him  give  them  no  answer  at  all,  other-
wise than  as  he  is  answered  who  stretcheth  forth
his  hands  to  the  water  that  it  may  reach  his
mouth,  when  it  cannot  reach  it!  The  prayer  of
the  infidels  is  only  in  error.

And  unto  God  doth  all  in  the  Heavens  and  on  the
Earth  bow  down  in  worship,  willingly  or  by  con-
straint :  their  very  shadows  also  morn  and  even  !

'  Compare  the  use  of  the  preposition  7V  Job  x.  7,  xvi.  17.

=  This  is  said  by  the  traditionists  and  commentators  generally,  to  refer
to  Amir  and  Arbad  ben  Kais,  who  in  the  year  9  or  10  conspired  against ,
Muhammad's  life,  and  were  struck  dead  by  lightning.  See  the  authorities
in  Nold.  p.  ]  20  ;  Weil,  256  ;  Caussin,  iii.  295.  But  this  explnnation  may
have  been  sufffrested  bv  the  words  of  the  text,  which  must,  if  the  comment
be  correct,  have  been  revealed  at  Medina.

THE    KORAN.  363

Say  :  Who  is  Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Eartli  ?
Say  :  God.  Say  :  Have  ye  then  taken  beside  Him
protectors^  who  even  for  their  own  selves  have  no
power  for  help  or  harm  ?  Say:  Whit!  shall  the
blind  and  the  seeing  be  held  equal?  Shall  the
darkness  and  the  light  be  held  equal  ?  Or  have
they  given  associates  to  God  who  have  created  as
He  hath  created,  so  that  their  creation  appeareth
to  them  like  his  ?  Say  :  God  is  the  Creator  of  all
things  !     He  is  the  One  !  the  Conquering  !

He  sendeth  down  the  rain  from  heaven  :  then  flow  the
torrents  in  their  due  measure,  and  the  flood
beareth  along  a  swelling  foam ;  and  out  of  that
ore  which  they  ignite  in  the  fire  for  the  sake  of
ornaments  or  utensils,  a  like  scum  ariseth.  In  this
way  doth  God  depict  (set  forth)  truth  and  false-
hood. As  to  the  scum,  it  passeth  off  like  froth,
and  as  to  what  is  useful  to  man,  it  remaineth  on
the  earth.  Thus  doth  God  set  forth  comparisons  !
To  those  who  respond  to  their  Lord  shall  be  an
excellent  reward ;  but  those  who  respond  not  to
his  call,  had  they  all  that  the  earth  containeth
twice  over,  they  would  surely  give  it  for  their
ransom.  Evil  their  reckoning,  and  hell  their
home,  and  wretched  the  bed  !

Shall  he  then  who  knoweth  that  what  hath  been  sent

down  to  thee  from  thy  Lord  is  the  truth,  be  hke  him

who  is  blind  ?  Men  of  insight  only  will  be  monished,

20     Who  fr^""     aeir  pledge  to   God,   and  break  not  their

compact ;

And  who  join  together  what  God  hath  bidden  to  be
joined,  and  who  fear  their  Lord,  and  dread  the  evil
of  the  reckoning ;

And  who,  from  desire  to  behold  the  face  of  their  Lord,
are  constant  aynid  trials,  and  observe  prayer  and
give  alms  in  secret  and  openly  out  of  what  We
have  bestowed  upon  them,  and  turn  aside  evil  by
good  :   for  these  is  the  recompense  of  the  Abode,

Gardens  of  Eden — into  which  they  shall  enter  together
with  the  just  of  their  fathers,  and  their  wives,  and
their  descendants  :  and  the  angels  shall  go  in  unto
them  at  every  portal : —

*■'  Peace  be  upon  you  !  "  say  they,  "  because  ye  have
patiently  endured  !  "     And  charming  the  recom-
'    pense  of  the  Abode  !

364  THE    KOKAN.

But  those  wlio,  after  having  contracted  it,  break  their

covenant   with   God,   and   cut   asunder  what  God

hath-  bidden  to  be  united,  and  commit  misdeeds

on  the  earth,  these,  a  curse  awaiteth  them,  and  an

ill  abode  !

God  enlargeth  supplies  to  whom  He  will,  or  is  sparing.^

And  they  rejoice  in  the  life  that  now  is  ;   but  this

present  life  is  but  a  passing  good,  in  respect  of  the

life  to  come  !  -

And  they  who  behove  not  say,  "  Why  is  not    a  sign

sent  down  to  him  from  his  Lord  ?  '^     Say  :  God

truly  misleadeth  whom  He  will  ;  and  He  guideth  to

Himself  him  who  turneth  to  Him,

Those  who  believe,  and  whose  hearts  rest  securely  on

the  thought  of  God.   Shall  not  men's  hearts  repose

in  the  thought  of  God  ?     They  who  believe  and  do

the    things    that    be    right — blessedness  awaiteth

them,  and  a  goodly  home.^

^  Thus  have  We  sent  thee  to  a  people  whom  other  peoples

have  preceded,   that   thou    mightest   rehearse   to

them  our  revelations  to  thee.  Yet  they  believe  not

on  the    God  of  Mercy  *     Say  :    He  is   my  Lord.

There  is  no  God  but  He.     In  Him   do  I  put   my

trust,  and  to  Him  is  my  conversion.

30     If  there  were  a  Koran  by  which  the  mountains  could  be

set  in  motion,  or  the  earth  cleft  by  it  or  the  dead  bo

addressed   by  it !  *     But  all  sovereignty  is

in  the  hands  of  God.  Do  not  then  the  believers
know  that  had  He  pleased,  God  would  certainly
have  guided  all  men  aright  ?
And  misfortune  ^  shall  not  cease  to  light  on  the  unbe-
lievers for  what  they  have  done,  or  to  take  up  its
abode  hard  by  their  dwellings,  until  the  threat  of
God  come  to  pass.  Verily,  God  will  not  fail  his
plighted  word.

Lit.  measures  out  to  a  nicety.
'  Thus,  "  onfi  hour  of  bliss  in  the  world  to  come  is  better  than  all  life  in
this  world."— Mischnah  Aboth,  iv.  17.     Comp.  Sura  [cxiii.]  ix.  38.
^  Lit.  cccellence  of  place  of  return.

*  See  Sura  xvii.  109.  Tllis  verse  is  said  to  liave  been  occasioned  by  the
refusal  of  the  Meccaiis  at  Hudaibiya  to  adopt  the  formula  prescribed  by
Muhammad— /n  the  Name  of  the  God  of  Mercy,  the  Merciful— dechmng
that  they  knew  not  who  the  God  of  Mercy  (Arrahman)  was.  This  was  in
Hej.  6.     See  n.  p.  174.

*  Supply,  they  v^ould  not  believe.

*  i.e.  Catastrophe  and  Divine  judgments.

THE    KORAN,  305

Before  thee  indeed  have  apostles  been  mocked  at —
and  I  bore  long  ^  with  the  unbelievers ;  then  I
chastised  them ; — and  how  severe  was  my  punish-
ment !

Who  is  it  then  that  is  standing  over  every  soul  to  mark
its  actions  ?  -  Yet  have  they  set  up  associates  with
God  !  Say  :  Name  them.  Would  ye  inform  God
of  that  which  He  knoweth  not  on  the  Earth  ?  Or
are  they  not  a  mere  empty  ^  name?  But  prepared
of  old  for  the  infidels  was  this  fraud  of  theirs  ;  and
they  are  turned  aside  from  the  path ;  and  whom
God  causeth  to  err,  no  guide  then  shall  there  be
for  him  !

Chastisement  awaiteth  them  in  this  present  life,  and
assuredly  more  grievous  shall  be  the  chastisement
of  the  next :  and  none  shall  screen  them  from
God.

A  picture  of  the  Paradise  which  God  hath  promised  to
them  that  fear  Him.  The  rivers  flow  beneath  its
bowers  :  its  food  and  its  shades  are  perpetual.  This
is  the  reward  of  those  who  fear  God ;  but  the
reward  of  the  unbelievers  is  the  Fire  of  Hell.

They  to  whom  we  have  given  the  Book  ^  rejoice  in  what
hath  been  sent  down  to  thee  ;  yet  some  are  banded
together^  who  deny  a  part  of  it.  Say  :  I  am  com-
manded only  to  worhip  God,  and  not  to  associate
any  creature  with  Him.  On  Him  do  I  call,  and  to
Hin.       my  place  of  return.

Thus  then,  as  a  rule  of  Judgment  in  the  Arabic  tongue
have  We  sent  down  the  Koran  ;  and  truly,  if  after
the  knowledge  that  hath  reached  thee  thou  follow
their  desires,  thou  shalt  have  no  guardian  nor
protector  against  God.

And  apostles  have  We  already  sent  before  thee,  and
wives  and  offspring  have  We  given  them.  Yet  no
apostle  had  come  with  miracles  unless  by  the  leave
of  God.     To  each  age  its  Book.

'  Lit.  respited.

'  Lit.  shall  then  he  who  is  standing  over  every  soul  (to  mark)  its  actions
be  as  he  who  takes  no  note  of  them  ?
^  Lit.  apparent,  outirard.

*  i.  e.  the  Jews,  who  at  this  poriod  of  Muhammad's  prophetic  func-
tion, must  have  been  highly  gratified  at  the  strong  leaning  towards,  and
respect  for,  their  Scriptures  and  Histories,  which  shows  itself  increasingly
in  the  later  Meccan  Suras.

*  Al.  heathen  (Arahx).

366  THE    KORAN.

What  He  pleaseth  doth  God  abrogate  or  confirm  :  for
with  Him  is  the  source  of  revelation.*
40  Moreover^  whether  We  cause  thee  to  see  the  fulfilment
of  part  of  our  menaces  to  them,  or  whether  We
take  thee  hence,  verily,  thy  work  is  preaching
only,  and  ours  to  take  account.

See  they  not  that  We  come  into  their  land  and  cut  short
its  borders  ?  ^  And  if  God  pronounce  a  doom,
there  is  none  to  reverse  his  doom.,  and  swift  is  He
to  take  account.

And  already  those  who  lived  before  them  made  plots  :
but  all  plotting  is  controlled  by  God  :  He  knoweth
the  works  of  every  one,  and  the  infidels  shall  know
whose  will  be  the  recompense  of  the  abode.

The  infidels,  moreover,  will  say ;  Thou  art  not  sent  of
God.  Say  :  God  is  witness  enough  betwixt  me
and  you;  and,  whoever  hath  knowledge  of  the
Book.

[XCL]
SURA  II.— THE  COW.»

Medina. — 286  Verses.

hi  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elif.  Lam.  Mim."*  This  Book,  there  is  no  doubt  regard-
ing it,^  is  a  guidance  to  the  God-fearing,

'  Lit.  Mother,  or  Prototype  of  the  Boole.  Either  God's  knowledge  or
prescience,  or  the  fabled  preserved  tablet,  on  which  is  written  the  original
of  the  Koran,  and  all  God's  decrees.  The  Jews  have  a  tradition  that  the
Law  existed  before  the  Creation.     Midr.  Jalkiit,  7.

2  i.e.  the  progressive  conquests  of  the  Muslims  trench  more  and  more
on  the  territories  of  the  idolatrous  Arabians.

'  The  greater  part  of  this,  the  oldest  of  the  Medina  Suras,  was  revealed
in  the  early  part  of  the  second  year  of  the  Hejira,  and  previously  to  the
battle  of  Bedr. — The  Hejira  took  place  in  the  beginning  uf  Muharrani,  or
middle  of  April,  A.D.  022.  The  numbers  who  emigrated  with  Muham-
mad at  first  were  150  persons.  Medina  is  250  miles  north  of  Mecca,  and
ten  davs'  journey.

*  Said  to  mean  Amara  li  Muhammad,  i.e.  at  the  command  of  Muham-
mad ;  but  see  Sura  Ixviii.  p.  16.  .     u  •

*  Lit.  this  book,  no  doubt  in  it ;  i.  e.  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  its  bemg  a

THR    KORAN.  367

Vfho  believe  in  the  unseen  ^  and  observe  prayer,  and
out  of  what  We  have  bestowed  on  thcm^  expend
for  God;

And  who  beHeve  in  what  hath  been  sent  down  to  thee,
and  what  hath  been  sent  down  before  thee,  and
full  fixith  have  they  in  the  life  to  come  :

These  are  guided  by  their  Lord  ;  and  with  these  it
shall  be  well.

Verily  as  to  the  unbelievers  it  is  all  one  to  them  whether
thou  warn  them  or  whether  thou  warn  them  not —
thev  will  not  believe  :

Upon  their  hearts  and  their  ears  hath  God  set  a  seal,
and  over  their  eyes  is  a  covering ;  and  for  them  a
severe  chastisement !

And  some  -  there  are  who  say,  "  We  believe  in
God,  and  in  the  latter  day  :  "  Yet  are  they  not
believers !

Fain  would  they  deceive  God  and  those  who  have  be-
lieved ;  but  they  deceive  themselves  only,  and
know  it  not.

Diseased  are  their  hearts  !  And  that  disease  hath  God
increased  to  them.  Theirs  a  sore  chastisement,
for  that  they  treated  their  prophet  as  a  liar  !
10  And  when  it  is  said  to  them,  "  Cause  not  disorders  in
the  earth  : "  they  say,  "  Nay,  rather  do  we  set
them  right.^^

Is  it  not  ^hej  are  themselves  the  authors  of  disorder?
But  they  perceive  it  not !

And  when  it  is  said  to  them,  "  Believe  as  other  men
have  believed/^  they  say,  "  Shall  we  believe  as
fools  have  believed  ?  "  Is  it  not  that  they  are
themselves  fools  ?     But  they  know  it  not  !

And  when  they  meet  those  who  have  believed,  they  say,
"  We  believe ;  '•"  but  w^hen  they  are  apart  W' ith
their  Satans  ^  they  say,  "  Verily  we  hold  with  you,
and  at  them  we  only  mock  " —

God  shall  mock  at  them,  and  keep  them  long  in  their
excess  of  impiety,  wandering  in  perplexity.

These  are  they  who  have  purchased  error  at  the  price

guidance,  &c.     Beidliawi,  referring  to  verse  21,  remarks  that  the  meaning
cannot  be  that  men's  minds  are  free  from  doubts  abou^  the  Book  itself.

'  Death,  Resurrection,  Judgment,  &c.

"  The  Jews.

'  The  Jews  and  Christians,  hostile  to  the  mission  of  Muhammad.

368  THE    KORAK.

of  "  the  guidance  :  "  but  their  traffic  hath  not  been
gainful,  neither  are  they  guided  at  all.^

They  are  like  one  ^  who  kindleth  a  fire^  and  when  it  hath

thrown  its  Hght  on  all  .around  him, Godtaketh

away  their  light  and  Icaveth  them  in  darkness —
they  cannot  see  ! —

Deaf,  dumb,  blind :  therefore  they  retrace  not  their
steps  from  error !

Or  like  tliose  who,  when  there  cometh  a  storm-cloud  out
of  the  Heaven,  big  with  darkness,  thunder,  and
ligflitninof,  thrust  their  fingfers  into  their  ears  be-
cause  of  the  thunder-clap,  for  fear  of  death  !  —
And  God  is  round  about  the  unbelievers. —

The  lightning  almost  snatcheth  away  their  eyes  !  So  oft
as  it  gleameth  on  them  they  walk  on  in  it,  but  when
darkness  closeth  upon  them,  they  stop  !  And  if  God
pleased,  of  their  ears  and  of  their  eyes  would  He
surely  deprive  them  : — verily  God  is  Almighty  !  O
men  of  Mecca,^  adore  your  Lord,  who  hath  created
you  and  tliose  who  were  before  you  :  haply  ye  will
fear  Him,
20  Who  hath  made  the  earth  a  couch  for  you,  and  the
heaven  a  ceiled  roof,  and  hath  caused  water  to
come  down  from  heaven,  and  by  it  hath  brought
forth  fruits  for  your  sustenance  1  Do  not  then
wittingly  give  peers  to  God.

And  if  ye  be  in  doubt  as  to  that  which  We  have  sent
down  to  our  servant,  then  produce  a  Sura  of  like
sort,  and  summon  your  witnesses,  beside  God,'*  if
ye  are  men  of  truth  :

But  if  ye  do  it  not,  and  by  no  means  shall  ye  do  it,  then
fear  the  fire  prepared  for  the  unbelievers,  whose
fuel  is  men  and  stones  :  ^

And  announce  to  those  who  believe  and  do  the  things
that  are  right,  that  for  them  are  gardens  ^neath
which  the  rivers  flow  !  So  oft  as  they  are  fed
therefrom  with  fruit  for  sustenance,  they  shall  say,

'  Muhammad's  reminiscences  of  his  mercantile  journeys  may  have  given
rise  to  the  terms  used  in  this  verse.     Comp.  v.  246.

"  Lit.  the  similitude  of  them  is  as  the  similitude  of,  etc.

'  The  people  of  Medina  are  generally  addressed  with  "  0  ye  wlio  be-
lieve;"  the  Meccans  with  "O  men."  Hence  it  has  been  inferred  that
from  verse  19  (Omen)  to  37  inclusively,  is  of  the  Meccau  period.  The
subjects  treated  of  also  lead  to  this  conclusion.

*  i.  e.  the  false  gods  whom  ye  worship  beside  God.

*  The  statues  of  false  gods.

THE    KORAN.  309

''  This  same  was  our  sustenance  of  old  ■/'  and  thoy
shall  have  its  like  given  to  them/  and  therein  shall
they  have  wives  oi perfect  purity,  and  therein  shall
they  abide  for  ever.

Verily  God  is  not  ashamed  to  coin  as  well  the  instance
of  a  gnat  ^  as  of  any  nobler  object :  for  as  to  those
who  have  believed,  they  know  that  it  is  the  truth
from  their  Lord ;  and  as  to  the  unbelievers,  their
saying  is,  "  What  meaneth  God  by  this  compari-
son ?  "  Many  doth  He  mislead  by  such  parables,
and  many  guide  :  but  none  doth  He  mislead  thereby
except  the  wicked,

^^^lo,  after  its  establishment,  violate  the  covenant  of
God,^  and  cut  in  sunder  what  God  hath  bidden  to
be  joined,  and  act  disorderly  on  the  Earth.  These
are  they  who  shall  sufter  loss  !

How  can  ye  withhold  faith  from  God  ?  Ye  were  dead
and  He  gave  you  life ;  next  He  will  cause  you  to
die ;  next  He  will  restore  you  to  life :  next  shall
ye  return  to  Him  !

He  it  is  who  created  for  you  all  that  is  on  Earth,  then
ascended  to  the  Heaven,  and  as  seven*  Heavens
did  He  fashion  it :  and  He  knoweth  all  things.
•[[  And  when  thy  Lord  said  to  the  angels,  "  Verily,  I  am
about  to  place  one  in  my  stead  on  earth,''  ^  they
sa~:k  Wilt  Thou  place  there  one  who  will  act
corruptly  therein  and  shed  blood  ?  But  we  cele-
brate thy  praise  and  extol  thy  holiness."  God
said,  "Verily,  I  know  what  ye  know  not.''

And  He  taught  Adam  the  names  of  all  things,  and  then
set  them  before  the  angels,^  and  said,  "  Tell  me

'  It  will  be  an  agreeable  surprise  to  the  blessed  to  have  fruits,  which  at
first  sight  resemble  those  of  earth,  but  are  infinitely  more  delicious.

'  Muhammad  had  been  reproached  for  having  drawn  illustrations  from
the  Ant,  Bee,  Spider,  etc.

'  Concerning  faith  in  Mulmmmad,  see  verse  .39  below,  note.

*  The  number  of  the  Heavens  is  borrowed  from  the  Talmud,  or  tradi-
tions based  upon  it :  but  the  idea  probobly  has  its  root  in  the  Scriptural
expression,  "  Heaven  of  Heavens."

*  Lit.  a  caliph,  vicegerent.  "When  the  Holy  One,  Blessed  be  He,  would
create  man.  He  took  counsel  with  the  Angels,  and  said  to  them.  We  will
make  man  in  our  image." — Midr.  Rabbah  on  Numb.  iv.  par.  19.  Comp.
Midr.  on  Gen.  1,  par.  8,  17  ;  Sanhedr.  38.

"  "  God  said  to  the  Angels,  '  His  wisdom  is  greater  than  yours.'  Then
brought  He  before  them  beasts,  cattle,  and  birds,  and  asked  for  their  names,
but  they  knew  them  not.  But  when  He  had  created  man,"  etc. — Midr.  as
above.

2    B

370  THE    KORAN.

the  names  of  these,  if  ye  are  endued  with  wis-
dom/^ ^
30     They  said,  "  Glory  be  to  Thee !     We  have  no  know-
ledge   but  what  Thou    hast    given    us    to  know.
Verily  Thou  !     Thou  art  the  Knowing,  the  Wise."

He  said,  "  0  Adam,  inform  them  of  their  names.'^
And  when  he  had  informed  them  of  tiieir  names,
He  said,  "  Did  I  not  say  to  you  that  I  know  the
hidden  things  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,
and  know  what  ye  bring  to  light,  and  what  ye
hide  ?  "

And  when  We  said  to  the  angels,  "  Bow  down  and
worship  Adam/'  then  worshipped  they  all,  save
Ebhs.-  He  refused  and  swelled  with  pride,  and
became  one  of  the  unbelievers.

And  We  said,  "  0  Adam  !  dwell  thou  and  thy  wife  in
the  Garden,  and  eat  ye  plentifully  therefrom
wherever  ye  list ;  but  to  this  tree  come  not  nigh,
lest  ye  become  of  the  transgressors. ''

But  Satan  ^  made  them  to  fall  from  it,  and  caused  their
banishment  from  the  place  in  which  they  were.
And  We  said,  "  Get  ye  down,  the  one  of  you  an
enemy  to  the  other  :  and  there  shall  be  for  you  in
the  earth  a  dwelling-place,  and  a  provision  for  a
time.''

And  words  of  prayer  learned  Adam  from  his  Lord  :  and
God  relented  towards  him  ;  verily  He  is  the  Re-
lenting,"* the  Merciful.

We  said,  "  Get  ye  down  from  it,  all  together  :  and  if
Guidance  shall  come  to  you  from  Me,  then  whoso

'  Or,  if  ye  are  tndhfid,  or  can  make  good  a  better  claim  to  the  vice-
gerency.

'  In  the  name  Iblees  or  Eblis  (diabolos)  and  in  the  honour  claimed  for
Adam  as  a  kind  of  God-man,  there  are  traces  of  a  Christian  original,  as
■well  as  in  the  identification  of  the  serpent  with  Satan.  Comp.  Ps.  civ.  4  ;
Heb.  i.  0.  The  Talmudists  also  enlarge  on  the  honour  paid  to  Adam.
"Adam  sat  in  the  garden,  and  the  Angels  brought  him  flesh  and  cooling
wine." — Sanhodr.  29.  "  In  the  hour  when  the  Holy  One,  Blessed  be  He,
created  man.  the  Angels  went  astray  in  regard  to  him,  and  essayed  to  say
before  him,  '  0  Holy  One  !  '  then  God  permitted  sleep  to  fall  on  him,  and
all  knew  that  he  w;is  of  earth."— Midr.  iJabbah  on  Gen.  par.  8.  It  is  pos-
sible that  the  Arabic  word  balas,  a  profligate,  wicked  person,  may  have
influenced  Muhammad  in  the  formation  of  the  word  Eblis.  See  note,
p.  187.  Eblis  is  used  in  the  Arabic  version  of  the  New  Testament,  for  the
probable  date  of  which,  see  Tischendorf,  Prol.  p.  78.

^  Observe  the  change  from  Eblis,  the  calumniator,  to  Satan,  the  hater.

*  Lit.  07ie  uho  turneth.

THE    KORAN.  371

shall  follow  my  guidance,  on  them  shall  come  no
fear,  neither  shall  they  be  grieved  :

But  they  who  believe  not,  and  treat  our  signs  as  false-
hoods, these  shall  be  companions  of  the  fire  ;  in  it
shall  they  remain  for  ever."
%  0  children  of  Israel !  remember  my  favour  wherewith
I  showed  favour  upon  you,  and  be  true  to  your
covenant  with  Me ;  I  will  be  true  to  my  covenant
with  you ;  Me  therefore,  revere  Me ;  and  believe
in  what  I  have  sent  down  confirming  your  Scrip-
ture, and  be  not  the  first  to  disbelieve  it,  neither
for  a  mean  price  barter  my  signs  :  Me  therefore,
fear  ye  Me  !

And  cloak  not  the  truth  with  falsehood,  and  hide  not
the  truth  when  ye  know  it  :  ^
40     And  observe  prayer  and  give  alms,  and  bow  down  with
those  who  bow.

Will  ye  enjoin  what  is  right  upon  others,  and,  though
ye  read  the  Book,  forget  your  own  souls  ?  will  ye
not  then  understand  ?

And  seek  help  with  patience  and  prayer  :  and  a  hard
duty  indeed  is  this,  but  not  to  the  humble,

^Yho  bear  in  mind  that  they  must  meet  their  Lord,  and
that  unto  Him  shall  they  return.

0  children  of  Israel !  remember  my  favour  wherewith
I  Si — ed  favour  upon  you  ;  and  that  to  you  above
all  creatures  have  I  been  bounteous.

And  fear  ye  a  day  in  which  a  soul  shall  not  satisfy  for
a  soul  at  all,  nor  shall  any  intercession  be  accepted
from  them,  nor  shall  any  ransom  -  be  taken,  neither
shall  they  be  helped.

And  remember  when  Vie  rescued  you  from  the  people  of
Pharaoh,  who  had  laid  on  you  a  cruel  chastisement.
They  slew  your  male  children,  and  let  only  your
females  live  :  and  in  this  was  a  sore  trial  from
your  Lord  :

And  when  We  parted  the  sea  for  you  and  saved  you,
and  drowned  the  people  of  Pharaoh,  while  ye
beheld  it :

'  Muhammad  rarely  accused  the  Jews  and  Christians  of  corrupting,  but
often  of  misinterpreting,  their  Sacred  Books,  in  order  to  evade  his  claims.
His  charges,  however,  are  always  very  vaguely  worded,  and  his  utterances
upon  this  subject  are  tanUvmount  to  a  strong  testimony  in  favour  of  the
unimpeachable  integrity  of  the  sacred  books,  both  of  the  Jews  and  Chris-
tians, so  far  as  he  knew  them.  See  Sura  [Ixxxvii.]  viL  16y,  and  verse  73
below.  '  Lit.  compensation.

2  B  2

372  THE    KORAN.

And  when  We  held  converse  '  with  Moses  forty  nights  :
then  during  his  absence  took  ye  the  calf  and  acted
wicke'dly ;

Then  after  this  We  forgave  you  : — Haply  ye  will  be
grateful : —
50     And  when  We  gave  Moses  the  Book  and  the  Illumina-
tion - — haply  ye  will  be  guided  : —

And  remember  when  Moses  said  to  his  people,  "  0  my
people  !  verily  ye  have  sinned  to  your  own  hurt,
by  your  taking  to  yourselves  the  calf  to  worship  it  :
Be  turned  then  to  your  Creator,  and  slay  the  guilty
among  you;^  this  will  be  best  for  you  with  your
Creator;^'  So  He  relented  towards  you  :  verily  He
is  the  Relenting,  the  Merciful :

And  when  ye  said,  "  0  Moses  !  we  will  by  no  means
believe  thee  until  we  see  God  plainly  •/'  the
thunderbolt  fell  upon  you  as  ye  gazed  :

Then  We  raised  you  to  life  after  ye  had  been  dead  :* —
haply  ye  will  give  thanks  : —

And  We  caused  the  clouds  to  overshadow  you,  and  We
sent  down  manna  and  quails  upon  you  ; — "  Eat  of
the  good  things  We  have  given  you  for  sus-
tenance;^'— and  they  injured  not  Us  but  they  in-
jured themselves.^

And  when  We  said,  "  Enter  this  city,^  and  eat  there-
from plentifully  at  your  will,  and  enter  the  gate
with  prostrations,  and  say,  'Forgiveness;'  and
We  will  pardon  you  your  sins,  and  give  an  increase
to  the  doers  of  good  :" —

But  the  evil-doers  changed  that  word  into  another  than
that  spoken  to  them,'^  and  We  sent  down  upon
those  evil-doers  wrath  from  heaven,  for  their  im-
pious doings  :
%  And  when  Moses  asked  drink  for  his  people.  We  said,
"  Strike  the  rock  with  thy  rod ;  "  and  from  it  there
gushed  twelve  fountains  :  each  tribe  ^  knew  their

'  Lit.  appointed  a  time,  or  pluihted  faith.

'  See  Sum  [Ixv.J  xxi.  49,  p.  152.

'  Lit.  siny  yourselves.     Comp.  Ex.  xxxii.  27.

*  The  Taitnudists  relate  how  the  Israelites  who  had  died,  on  hearing  the
divine  voice,  etc.,  were  restored  by  the  intercession  of  the  Law  itself.
— Sanh.  f).

''  By  storing  them  up  in  violation  of  God's  command.

*  .Jericho  according  to  some  commentators,  Jerusalem  according  to  others ;
but  see  verse  58.  '  See  Sura  [Ixxxvii.]  vii.  162.

"  Lit.  all  men.  This  incident  is  perhaps  inadvertently  borrowed  from
Ex.  XV.  27.

THE    KORAN.  373

drinking-placo  : — "  Eat  and  drink/'  said  We,  "  of
the  supply  of  God,  and  do  no  wrong  on  the  earth
bv  licentious  deeds  :  "

And  when  ye  said,  "  0  Moses  !  we  will  not  put  up
with  one  sort  of  food  :  pi'ay,  therefore,  thy  Lord
for  us,  that  He  would  bring  forth  for  us  of  that
which  the  earth  groweth,  and  its  herbs  and  its
cucumbers  and  its  garlic  and  its  lentils  and  its
onions  :"  He  said,  "  Desire  ye  to  take  in  exchange
that  which  is  worse  at  the  price  of  what  is  better  ?
Get  ye  down  into  Egypt ; — for  verily  ye  shall  have
what  ye  have  asked :  "  Vileness  and  poverty  were
stamped  upon  them,  and  they  brought  down  on
themselves  the  wrath  of  God  :  This,  for  that  they
used  to  disbelieve  the  signs  of  God,  and  slew  the
Prophets  ^  unjustly  :  thic,  for  that  they  rebelled
and  transgressed  !
^  Yerily,  they  who  believe  (Muslims),  and  they  who  fol-
low the  Jewish  religion,  and  the  Christians,  and
the  Sabeites  - — whoever  believeth  in  God  and  the
last  day,  and  doeth  that  which  is  right,  shall  have
their  reward  with  their  Lord :  and  fear  shall  not
come  upon  them,  neither  shall  they  be  grieved.
60  Call  to  mind  also  when  AVe  entered  into  a  covenant  with
you,  and  lifted  up  the  mountain  ^  over  you : — "  Take
hb.  _  said  We,  "  on  what  We  have  revealed  to  you,
with  resolution,  and  remember  what  is  therein  :
Haply  ye  will  fear  Me.''

Then  after  this  ye  turned  back,  and  but  for  God's  grace
and  mercy  toward  you,  ye  had  surely  been  of  the
lost !  Ye  know  too  those  of  you  who  transgressed
on  the  Sabbath,  and  to  whom  We  said,  "  Become
scouted  apes  :  "  *

And  We  made  them  a  warning  to  those  of  their  day,

'  This  passage  (comp.  xxvi.  59)  is  oue  of  the  numerous  jinachronisms
which  abound  iu  the  Koran,  and  prove  the  gross  ignorance  of  the  Arabian
Prophet.

-  The  Sabeites  (whose  religion  was  a  mixture  of  Judaism  and  Chris-
tianity, with  perhaps  a  slight  infusion  of  Parseeism)  are  identical  with  the
Mendaites,  or  so-called  Christians  of  S.  John,  residing  in  the  marshy  dis-
trict at  the  mouth  of  the  Euphrates,  but  are  not  the  same  with  the  star-
worshipping  Sabians  of  Harran  in  Mesopotamia.  Sec  D'Herbelot,  Bibl.
Or.  under  the  word  ISabi ;  Assemani,  Bibl.  Or.  iii.  2,  609.  For  curious
details  as  to  the  elements  of  the  Sabeite  religion,  see  Chwolson's  SSabier
und  SSabaismus,  i.— Sprenger,  Leben,  L  40.  The  Sabeites  appear  also  to
have  been  termed  Hanyfs.  ^  See  Sura  [Ixxxvii.]  vii.  170.

"•  See  Sura  [Ixxxvii.]  vii.  164.

374  THE    KORAN.

and  to  those  who  came  after  them,  and  a  warning
to  the  God-fearing  :
^  And  when  Moses  said  to  his  people,  "  Yerily,  God
commandeth  you  to  sacrifice  a  COW;  "  ^  they  said,
"  Makest  thou  a  jest  of  us?  "  He  said,  "  God  keep
me  from  being  one  of  the  foolish/^  They  said,
"  Call  on  thy  Lord  for  us  that  He  would  make  plain
to  us  what  she  is/'  He  said,  "Verily  God  saith,
'  She  is  a  cow  neither  old  nor  young,  hut  between
the  two  : '  do  therefore  what  yo  are  bidden/'

They  said,  "  Call  on  your  Lord  for  us,  that  He  would
make  plain  to  us  what  is  her  colour."  He  said,
''Verily  God  saith,  '  She  is  a  fawn-coloured  cow;
her  colour  is  very  bright;  she  rojoiccth  the  be-
holders. '  "

They  said,  ''  Call  on  thy  Lord  for  us  that  He  would
make  plain  to  us  what  cow  it  is — Verily  to  us  are
cows  alike, — and  truly,  if  God  please,  we  shall
be  guided  rightly ;  "

He  said,  "  God  saith,  '  She  is  a  cow  not  worn  by
ploughing  the  earth  or  watering  the  field,  sound,
no  blemish  in  her.'  "  They  said,  "Now  hast  thou
brought  the  truth  :  "  Then  they  sacrificed  her  ;
Yet  nearly  had  they  done  it  not :

And  when  ye  slew  a  man,  and  strove  among  yourselves
about  it,  and  God  would  bring  to  light  what  ye  had
hidden ;

Then  We  said,  "  Strike  the  corpse  with  part  of  her."  So
God  giveth  life  to  the  dead,  and  showeth  you  his
signs  :  haply  yo  will  understand  :

Then  after  that  your  hearts  became  hard,  and  they
were  like  rocks,  or  harder  still :  for  verily  there  are
rocks  from  which  rivers  have  gushed ;  and  there
are  others,  verily,  from  which  when  cleft,  water
hath  issued;  and  there  are  others,  verily,  which
have  sunk  down  through  fear  of  God  :  And  God
is  not  regardless  of  your  actions.
70  IT  Desire  ye  then  that  tlte  Jews  should  believe  you  ?  Yet
a  part  of  them  had  already  heard  the  word  of  God,
and  then,  after  they  had  understood  it,  perverted
it,  and  knew  that  they  did  so.

'  Compare  Numb.  xix. ;  Deut.  xxii.  1-9.  The  cow  was  to  be  sacrificed
in  order  that  a  murderer  raij^ht  be  discovered  through  the  miracle  to  be
wrought  on  the  corpse  by  a  piece  of  her  flesh.

THE    KOKAN.  375

And  when  they  fall  in  wirh  those  who  have  believed,
they  say,  "  We  believe  ;  "  but  when  they  are  apart  ^
one  with  another,  they  say,  ''Will  ye  acquaint
them  with  what  God  hath  revealed  to  you,  that
they  may  dispute  with  you  about  it  in  the  pre-
sence of  your  Lord  ?  "  Do  ye  not  then  understand
their  aim  ?

Know  they  not  that  God  knoweth  what  they  hide,  as
well  as  what  they  bring  to  light  ?

But  there  are  illiterate  ones  among  them  who  are  un-
acquainted with  the  Scriptures  -  but  according  to
their  own  vain  imaginations,  and  verily  they  have
but  vague  fancies.  Woe  therefore  to  those  who
with  their  own  hands  transcribe  the  Book,  and
then  say,  "  This  is  from  God,^^  that  they  may  sell
it  for  some  mean  price  !  ^.V^oe  then  to  them  for  that
which  their  hands  have  written  !  and,  Woe  to  them
for  what  they  have  earned  !

And  they  say,  "The  fire  of  Hell  will  certainly  not  touch
us,  but  for  computed  days:"''  Say  :  Have  ye  re-
ceived such  a  promise  from  God  ?  then  God  will
not  break  his  promise :  or,  Speak  ye  of  God  that
which  ye  know  not  ?

But  they  whose  acquirement  is  evil,  and  whom  their  sin
(JmV-  '^nviron — these  shall  therefore  be  inmates  of
the  xire,  to  abide  therein  for  ever  :

But  they  who  have  believed  and  done  the  things  that
be  right,  these  shall  be  the  inmates  of  Paradise, —
therein  to  abide  for  ever  :
%  And  when  We  entered  into  covenant  with  the  children
of  Israel,  We  said,  "  Worship  none  but  God,  and
be  good  to  your  parents  and  kindred,  and  to
orphans,  and  to  the  poor,  and  speak  with  men  what
is  right,  and  observe  prayer,  and  pay  the  stated
alms."  Then  turned  ye  away,  except  a  few  of  you,
and  ye  withdrew  afar  off".

And  when  We  made  a  covenant  with  you  that  ye  should
not  shed  your  own  blood,^  nor  expel  one  another

■  This  is  one  of  the  passages  which  shows  great  familiarity  with  the
habits  of  the  Jews,  on  the  part  of  Muhammad.  See  Maracci's  Prodr.  i.
44  ;  WahVs  Einleitung.  xxx.  xxxv.

^  The  Pentateuch.  This  shows  that  the  art  of  writing  was  known  in
Medina  shortly  after  the  Hejira.

^  Forty  days  ;  the  period  during  which  they  worshipped  the  calf.

*  The  blood  of  those  who  are  as  your  own  flesh.

376  THE    KORAN.

from  your  abodes,  then  ye  ratified  it  and  yourselves
were  witnesses;

Then  were  ye  the  very  persons  who  slew  one  another ;
and  ye  drove  out  a  part  of  your  own  people  from
their  abodes,  lending  help  against  them  with
wrong  and  hostiUty  :  but,  if  they  come  captives
to  you,  ye  redeem  them  ! — Yet  it  was  forbidden
you  to  drive  them  out.^  Believe  ye  then  a  part
of  the  Book,  and  deny  a  part  ?  But  what  shall  be
the  meed  of  him  among  you  who  doth  this,  but
shame  in  this  life  ?  And  on  the  day  of  the  Resur-^
rection  they  shall  be  sent  away  to  the  most  severe
torment;  for  God  is  not  regardless  of  what  ye  do.
80  These  are  they  who  purchase  this  present  life  at  the
price  of  that  which  is  to  come  :  their  torment
therefore  shall  not  he  lightened,  neither  shall  they
be  helped.
f  Moreover,  to  Moses  gave  We  "  the  Book,^'  and  We
caused  apostles  to  succeed  him ;  and  to  Jesus,  son
of  Maiy,  gave  We  clear  proofs  of  Jiis  mission,  and
strengthened  him  by  the  Holy  Spirit."  So  oft  then
as  an  apostle  came  to  you  with  that  which  your
souls  desired  not,  did  ye  swell  with  pride,  and  treat
a  portion  as  impostors,  and  slay  others?

And  they  said,  "  Uncircumcised  are  our  hearts.^'  Not
so ;  but  Goth  had  cursed  them  for  their  unbelief :
few  therefore  were  they  who  believed  !

And  when  a  Book  had  come  to  them  from  God,  con-
firming that  which  they  had  received  already —
although  they  had  before  prayed  for  victory  over
those   who   believed   not — yet  when  that  Koran  ^

'  Two  Jewish  tribes  (Koreidha  and  Nadhir)  in  alliance  with  certain  Arab
tribes  who  were  at  war,  destroyed  one  another's  abodes,  but  redeemed  the
Jewish  captives,  professing  that  they  were  commanded  to  do  this  by  the
Law.     So  the  commentiitors.

*  Gabriel.  Muhanunad  either  knowingly  rejected  the  divinity  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  or  confounded  Gabriel  announcing  the  conception  with  the
Holy  Spirit  that  overshadowed  Mary.  It  is  probable  that  Muhammad's
ideas  of  the  Spirit  were  at  first  indefinite,  but  that  the  two  expressions,
Gabriel  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  became  ultimately  synonymous.  See  note
on  Sura  [Ixvii.]  xvii.  87.  Geiger  (p.  82)  quotes  an  instance  in  which  the
Jewish  expositors  understand  the  distinctly-speaking  Sfirit  (Sanhedr.  44)
of  Gabriel.

'  Dr.  Sprenger  (i.  160)  supplies  the  word  Messias,  and  renders,  "Yet
when  he,  the  Messiah,  came,"  etc. ;  understanding  the  passage  of  Muham-
mad's claim  to  be  the  Messiah  promised  in  Hag.  ii  8,  where  the  Hebrew
root  is  identical  with  that  of  Muhammad,  though  in  a  different  sense.
Comp.  Is.  xliv.  0  ill  Ibb.

THE    KORAN.  377

came  to  them,  of  which  they  had  knowledge,  they
did  not  recognize  it.  The  curse  of  God  then  is  on
the  infidels.

For  a  vile  price  have  they  sold  their  souls  that  they
should  not  believe  in  what  God  hath  sent  down,
envious  of  the  trrace  which  God  hath  sent  down  on
such  of  his  servants  as  He  pleaseth  :  ^  and  they  have
brought  on  themselves  wrath  upon  wrath.  And
for  the  unbelievers  is  a  disgraceful  chastisement.

And  when  it  is  said  to  them,  "  Believe  in  what  God
hath  sent  down,^'  they  say,  "  In  that  which  hath
been  sent  down  to  us  do  we  believe :  "  but  what
hath  since  been  sent  down  they  disbelieve,  although
it  be  the  truth  confirmatory  of  their  own  Scrip-
tures.*^  Say  :  Why  then  have  ye  of  old  slain  God^s
prophets,-''  if  ye  are  indeed  believers  ?

Moreover,  Moses  came  unto  you  with  proofs  of  his
mission.  Then  in  his  absence  ye  took  the  calf/or
your  God,  and  did  wickedly.

And  when  We  accepted  your  covenant,  and  uplifted  *
the  mountain  over  you.  We  said,  "  Take  firm  hold
on  what  We  have  given  you,  and  hearken."  They
said,  "  We  have  hearkened  and  have  rebelled  :  "
then  were  they  made  to  drink  down  the  calf  into
thv  -darts  for  their  ingratitude.  Say  :  A  bad
thing  hath  your  faith  comanded  you,  if  ye  be  indeed
believers.

Say  :  If  the  future  dwelling-place  with  God  be  specially
for  you,  but  not  for  the  rest  of  mankind,  then  wish
for  death,  if  ye  are  sincere  :

But  by  no  means  can  they  wish  for  it,  because  of  that
which  their  own  hands  have  sent  on  before  them  !  ^
And  God  knoweth  the  offenders.
90  And  thou  wilt  surely  find  them  the  greediest  of  men
after  life,  beyond  even  the  polytheists.  To  be  kept
alive  a  thousand  years  would  one  of  them  desire  :
but  that  he  may  be  preserved  alive,  he  shall  not
reprieve  himself^  from  the  punishment !  And  God
seeth  what  they  do.

'  The  gift  of  the  prophetic  office,  etc.,  to  a  pagiin  Arab,  and  not  to  a
Jew.

*  Lit.  they  disbelieve  what  is  behind  it,  though  it  be  the  truth  confirmatory
of  what  is  with  them.  ^  Matt,  xxiii.  .37.

■»  See  Sura  vii.  170,  p.  333.  '  Comp.  1  Tim.  v.  24.

*  Lit.  place  himself  at  a  distance  from.

378  TUE    KOKAN.

Say  :  Whoso  is  the  enemy  of  Gabriel — For  he  verily
it  is  who  by  God's  permission  hath  caused  the  Koran
to  descend  on  thy  hearty  the  confirmation  of
previous  revelations,  and  a  guidance,  and  good
tidings  to  the  faithful —

Whoso  is  an  enemy  to  God  or  his  angels,  or  to  Gabriel,
or  to  Michael,  sliall  have  God  as  his  enemy  :  for
verily  God  is  an  enemy  to  the  unbelievers.

Moreover,  clear  signs  have  We  sent  down  to  thee,  and
none  will  disbelieve  them  but  the  perverse.

Oft  as  they  have  formed  an  engagement  luith  thee,  will
some  of  them  set  it  aside  ?  But  most  of  them
believe  not.

And  when  there  came  to  them  an  apostle  from  God,
affirming  the  previous  revelations  made  to  them,
some  of  those  to  whom  the  Scriptures  had  been
given,  threw  the  Book  of  God  behind  their  backs
as  if  they  knew  it  not :

And  they  followed  what  the  Satans  taught  ^  in  the  reign
of  Solomon  :  not  that  Solomon  was  unbelieving,  but
the  Satans  were  unbelieving.  Sorcery  did  they
teach  to  men,  and  what  had  been  revealed  to  the  two
angels,  Haroot  and  Maroot,  at  Babel.  Yet  no  man
did  these  two  teach  until  they  had  said,  ''We  are
only  a  temptation. — Be  not  then  an  unbeliever.''
From  these  two  did  men  learn  how  to  cause  division
between  man  and  wife:  but  unless  by  the  permission
of  God,  no  man  could  they  harm  thereby.  They
learned,  indeed,  what  would  harm  and  not  profit
them ;  and  thus  they  knew  that  he  who  should
purchase  that  art  would  have  no  part  in  the  life  to
come  !  And  vile  the  price  for  which  they  sold
themselves,  did  they  but  know  it !

'  In  Solomon's  Book  of  Magic.  This  story  has  been  supposed  to  be  of
Persian  origin.  See  Hyde  rle  Rel.  Vet.  Pers.  ch.  xii.  But  from  a  passage
in  the  Midr.  A.bbkhir,  qnoted  in  the  Midr.  Jalkut,  ch.  44,  and  from  a
quotation  in  Maracci's  Prodr.  iv.  82,  Geiger  infers  that  Muhammad  hiis
transferred  to  the  time  of  Solomon  the  Rabbinic  traditions  concerning  the
influence  of  angels  upon  men  at  the  time  of  the  Deluge  (p.  KKi).  "Babel
is  regarded  by  "the  Muslims  as  the  fountain-head  of  the  science  of  magic.
They  suppose  Haroot  and  Maroot  to  be  two  angels  who,  in  conse-
quence of  their  want  of  compassion  for  the  frailties  of  mankind,  were  sent
down  to  earth  to  be  tempted.  They  both  sinned,  and  being  penoitted  to
choose  whether  they  would  be  punished  now  or  hereafter,  chose  the  former,
and  are  still  suspended  by  the  feet  at  Babel  in  a  rocky  pit,  and  are  the
great  teachers  of  magic,"— Lane  on  ch.  iii.  note  14  of  the  10f)l  Nights.

THE    KORAN.  379

But  had  they  believed  and  feared  God,  better  surely
would  liave  been  the  reward  from  God, — if  they
had  but  known  it !
^  0  ye  who  believe  !  say  not  to  the  apostle,  ''  Raina  "  ^
(Look  at  us)  ;  but  say,  "  Ondhorna ''  (Regard  us).
And  attend  to  this ;  for  the  Infidels  shall  suffer  a
grievous  chastisement.

The  unbelievers  among  the  people  of  the  Book,  and
among  the  idolaters,  do  not  wish  that  any  good
should  be  sent  down  to  you  from  your  Lord :  but
God  will  show  his  special  mercy  to  whom  He  will,
for  God  is  of  great  bounty.
100  Whatever  verse  We  cancel,-  or  cause  thee  to  forget,'
We  bring  a  better  or  its  like.  Knowest  thou  not
that  God  hath  power  over  all  things  ?

Knowest  thou  not  that  the  ciominion  of  the  Heavens
and  of  the  Earth  is  God^s  ?  and  that  ye  have
neither  patron  nor  helper,  save  God  ?

Would  ye  ask  of  your  apostle  as  of  old  it  was  asked  of
Moses  ?  But  he  who  hath  exchanged  faith  for
unbelief,*  hath  already  erred  from  the  even  way.

Many  of  those  who  have  Scripture  would  like  to  bring
you  back  to  unbelief  after  ye  have  believed,  out  of
sy]fioU  oTivy,  even  after  the  truth  hath  been  clearly
sho>.  11  to  them.  Forgive  them  then,  and  shun
them  till  God  shall  come  with  his  decree.  Truly
God  hath  power  over  all  things.

And  observe  prayer  and  pay  the  legal  impost :  ■''  and
whatever  good  thing  ye  have  sent  on  before  for

'  Raina,  as  pronounced  in  Hebrew,  '''our  bad  one;"  hut  in  Arabic,  "look
7tpon  us,"  a  kind  of  salutation  of  the  same  signification  as  ondhorna,  which,
however,  does  not  admit  of  any  secondary  bad  sense  like  raina.

'  Comp.  Sura  xvi.  103  ;  iv.  84.  The  Muslims  admit  that  there  are  225
verses  cancelled  by  later  ones.  The  doctrine  of  "  abrogation  "  is  taught  in
the  Talnuid.     Thus  Hilchoth  Manirim,  ii.  1,  2,  etc.

'  Or,  lit.  according  to  the  reading  in  Fluegel's  text,  cause  it  to  be  for-
gotten.

*  i.e.  does  not  weigh  the  evidence  for  Muhammad's  mission  already
.  given,  but  demands,  as  the  Jews  did,  to  see  God  him.self.

'  In  all  Muharamadan  countries,  the  first  time  of  prayer  is  the  moghreb
or  sunset,  or  rather  four  minutes  later  ;  the  second  the  eshe,  when  it  has
become  quite  dark  ;  the  third  the  soohh  or  fegr,  the  daybreak  ;  the  fourth
doohr,  or  a  little  after  noon,  when  the  sun  has  begun  to  decline  ;  the  fifth
the  asr,  midway  between  noon  and  nightfall.  The  obligatory  legal  alms
or  impost  are  called,  as  here,  zekah  (lit.  purity),  the  voluntary,  sudackah.
It  is,  however,  left  to  the  conscience  of  individuals  to  give  and  to  apply
them  as  they  think  fit.

380  THE    KORAN.

your  souFs  sake,  ye  shall  find  it  with  God.    Verily
God  seetli  what  ye  do.

And  they  say,  "  By  no  means  shall  any  but  Jews  or
Christians  enter  Paradise:^'  This  is  their  belief.
Say  :  Give  your  proofs  if  ye  speak  the  truth —

But,  they  who  set  their  face  with  resignation  Godward/
and  do  what  is  right, — their  reward  is  therefore
Avith  their  Lord,  and  no  fear  shall  come  on  them,
neither  shall  they  be  grieved.

Moreover,  the  Jews  say,  "The  Christians  lean  on
nought  :  "  "  On  nought  lean  the  Jews,'*  say  the
Christians  :  Yet  both  are  readers  of  the  Book.
So  with  like  words  say  they  who  have  no  know-
ledge.- But  on  the  Resurrection  day,  God  shall
judge  between  them  as  to  that  in  which  they  have
differed.

And  who  committeth  a  greater  wrong  than  he  who
hindereth  the  temples  of  God  from  having  his
name  mentioned  in  them,  and  who  hasteth  to  ruin
them?^  Such  men  cannot  enter  them  but  with
fear.  There  is  shame  for  them  in  this  world,  and
a  severe  torment  in  the  next.

The  East  and  the  West  is  God's  :  therefore,  whichever
way  ye  turn,  there  is  the  face  of  God  \*  Truly
God  is  Immense,  Knowing  [Omnipresent,  Omni-
scient] .
110  And  they  say,  '' God  hath  begotten  a  son."  Glory  be
to  Him  !  Nay  rather — his,  whatever  is  in  the
Heavens  and  the  Earth  !     All  obeyeth  Him, —

Sole  maker  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  !  And
when  He  decreeth  a  thing.  Ho  only  saith  to  it,
"Be,"  and  it  is.

And  they  who  have  no  knowledge  say,  "Why  doth  not
God  speak  to  us,  or  thou  come  to  us  with  a  sign  ?  "
So  spake  those  who  were  before  them  the  like  of
their  words  :  their  hearts  are  alike  :  Clear  now
have  We  made  the  signs  (verses)  for  those  who
have  firm  faith  :

Verily,  with  the  Truth  have  We  sent  thee,  a  bearer  of

'  i.e.  profess  el  Islam.  ^  The  idolatrous  Arabs.

•''  If  this  verse  is  aimed  at  the  Meccans  who,  in  the  Gth  year  of  the  He-
jira,  forbade  Muhammad  and  his  followers  to  enter  the  temple  of  Mecca  in
the  e.xpedition  of  Ilodeibiya,  it  is  misplaced  here.

■•  Abrogated  by  verse  139  below.

THE    KORAN.  381

good  tidings  and  a  warner  :  and  concerning  the
inmates  of  Hell  thou  shalt  not  be  questioned.

But  until  thou  follow  their  religion,  neither  the  Jews
nor  the  Christians  will  ever  be  satisfied  with  thee.
Say  :  Verily,  guidance  of  God, — that  is  the  guid-
ance !  And  if  after  "  the  Knowledge "  which
hath  reached  thee,  thou  follow  their  desires,
thou  shalt  find  from  God  neither  helper  nor  pro-
tector.

They  to  whom  ^Ye  have  given  the  Book,  and  tuho  read
it  as  it  ought  to  be  read, — these  believe  therein  :
but  whoso  believeth  not  therein,  these  are  they
who  shall  be  the  losers.

0  children  of  Israel !  remember  my  favour  wherewith  I
have  favoured  you,  and  that  above  all  creatures
have  I  been  bounteous  to  you  :

And  dread  the  day  when  not  in  aught  shall  soul  satisfy
for  soul,  nor  shall  any  ransom  be  taken  from  it,
nor  shall  any  intercession  avail,  and  they  shall  not
be  helped.
^  When  his  liOrd  made  trial  of  Abraham  by  commands
which  he  fulfilled.  He  said,  "  I  am  about  to  make
thee  an  Imam  to  mankind :  "  he  said,  "  Of  my
oflfg^*  ^  also  :"  '^  My  covenant,"  said  God,  "^em-
bracetli  not  the  evil-doers."

And  rememher  when  We  appointed  the  Holy  House  ^
as  man's  resort  and  safe  retreat,  and  said,  "  Take
ye  the  station  of  Abraham  for  a  place  of  prayer."
And  We  commanded  Abraham  and  Ismael,  "  Pu-
rify my  house  for  those  who  shall  go  in  procession
round  it,  and  those  who  shall  abide  there  for  devo-
tion, and  those  who  shall  bow  down  and  prostrate
themselves."
120  And  when  Abraham  said,  "  Lord  !  make  this  land
secure,  and  supply  its  people  with  fruits,  such  of
them  as  believe  in  God  and  in  the  last  day  :"  He
said,  "  And  whoso  believeth  not,  little  therefore
will  I  bestow  on  him  ;  then  will  I  drive  him  to  the
torment  of  the  Fire  !  and  ill  the  passage  ! "

And  when  Abraham,  with  Ismael,  raised  the  founda-
tions- of  the  House,   they  said,  "  O  our  Lord  !

»  The  Caaba.

»  Freytag  (Einl.  p.  339)  says  that  there  is  no  good  reason  for  doubting
that  the  C;wba  was  founded  as  stated  in  this  passage.  See  note  on  Sura
[xcvil]  iii.  90.

382  THE    KORAN.

accept  it  from  us ;  Thou  of  a  truth  art  the  Hearer,
the  Knower.

0  our  Lord  !  and  make  us  thy  Muslims  (resigned  to
Thee),  and  our  posterity  a  Muslim  people;  and  teach
us  our  holy  rites,  and  be  turned  towards  us  :  verily
Thou  art  He  who  turneth,  the  Merciful.

0  our  Lord  !  and  raise  up  among  them  an  apostle  ^
from  themselves  who  may  rehearse  thy  signs  unto
them,  and  teach  them  '  the  Book,'  and  Wisdom,
and  purify  them  :  of  a  truth  Thou  art  the  Mightv,
the  Wise?'

And  who  but  he  that  hath  debased  his  soul  to  folly  \vi\\
mislike  the  faith  of  Abraham,  when  We  have
chosen  him  in  this  world,  and  truly  in  the  world  to
come  he  shall  be  assuredly  of  the  Just  ?

When  his  Lord  said  to  him,  "  Resign  thyself  to  Me  "
(become  a  Muslim),  he  said,  "  I  resign  myself  to
the  Lord  of  the  Worlds."

And  this  to  his  children  did  Abraham  enjoin,  and
Jacob  also,  saying,  "  0  my  children  !  truly  God
hath  chosen  a  religion  for  you ;  so  die  not  without
having  become  Muslims."

Were  ye  present  when  Jacob  was  at  the  point  of  death  ?^
when  he  said  to  his  sons,  "  Whom  will  ye  worship
when  I  am  gone  ?  "  ^  They  said,  "  We  will  wor-
ship thy  God  and  the  God  of  thy  fathers  Abraham
and  Ismaol  and  Isaac,  one  God,  and  to  Him  are  we
surrendered  (Muslims)."

That  people  have  now  passed  away ;  to  them  the  meed
of  their  deeds,  and  to  you  the  meed  of  your  deeds  :
but  of  their  doings  ye  shall  not  be  questioned.

They  say,  moreover,  "  Become  Jews  or  Christians,  that
ye  may  have  the  true  guidance."  Say  :  Nay  !  the
religion  of  Abraham,  the  sound  in  faith,*  and  not

'  Dent,  xviii.  15.

"^  "  At  the  time  when  our  father  Jacob  quitted  this  world,  he  summoned
his  twelve  sons,  and  said  to  them,  Hearken  to  your  father  Israel  (Gen.
xlix.  2).  Have  ye  any  doubts  in  your  hearts  concerning  the  Holy  One,
Blessed  be  He  !  They  said.  Hear,  0  Israel,  our  Father.  As  there  is  no
doubt  in  thy  heart,  so  ncitlicr  is  there  in  ours.  For  the  Lord  is  our  God,
and  He  is  one." — Midr.  Kabbah  on  Gen.  par.  98,  and  on  Deut.  par.  2.
Comp.  also  Tarp.  Jer.  on  Deut.  vi.  4.  Tract.  Pesachim,  56.  This  verse
is  addressed  to  the  Jews  of  Medina.  The  commentators  have  been  much
perplexed  by  the  position  of  Ishmael  in  this  passage.  See  Sprenger's
Leben,  ii.  284.  ^  Lit.  after  me.

See  Sura  [Ixxiii.]  xvi.  121,  n.  p.  215.

THE    KORAN.  383

one  of  those  vrho  join  gods  with  God  is  our  reli-
gidii  !
loO  Say  ye:  ''We  believe  in  God,  and  that  which  hath
been  sent  down  to  us,  and  that  which  hath  been
sent  down  to  Abraham  and  Ismael  and  Isaac  and
Jacob  and  the  tribes  ;  and  that  which  hath  been
given  to  Moses  and  to  Jesus,  and  that  which  was
given  to  the  prophets  from  their  Lord.  No  dif-
ference do  we  make  between  any  of  them  :  and  to
God  are  we  resigned  (Muslims).'^
If  therefore  they  beheve  the  like  of  what  ye  believe,
then  have  they  true  guidance  ;  but  if  they  turn
back,  then  verily  they  are  in  a  state  of  separation
froTn  you;  and  God  will  suffice  to  jj'^'otect  thee
against  them  :  and  He  is  the  Hearer,  the  Knower.^

^  We  have  the  Baptism  of  God,~  and  who  is  better  to
baptize  than  God  ?  And  Him  do  we  serve.
Say  :  Will  ye  dispute  with  us  about  God  when  He  is
our  Lord  and  your  Lord  !  AVe  have  our  works
and  ye  have  your  works ;  and  we  show  forth  to
Him  a  pure  faith.
Will  ye  say,  "  Verily  Abraham  and  Ismael  and  Isaac
and  Jacob  and  the  tribes  were  Jews  or  Chris-
tian" "^  "  Say  :  Yfho  knoweth  best,  ye,  or  God  ?
And  wno  is  more  in  fault  than  he  who  concealeth
the  witness  which  he  hath  from  God  ?  But  God
is  not  regardless  of  what  ye  do.

•  That  people  have  now  passed  away  :  they  have  the
reward  of  their  deeds,  and  for  you  is  the  meed  of
yours ;  but  of  their  doings  ye  shall  not  be  ques-
tioned.

%  The  foolish  ones  will  say,  "  What  hath  turned  thorn
from  the  Kebla  which  they  used  ?  "  Say  :  The
East  and  the  West  are  God's.  He  guideth  whom
He  will  into  the  right  path.

'  Ibn  Batutah  assures  us  (vol.  ii.  10)  that  when  in  the  14th  century  he
visited  Basra,  he  saw  in  the  uiosque  the  copy  of  the  Koran  whicli  the
Caliph  Othnian  had  in  his  hands  when  rnurtiered,  and  that  the  marks  of
his  blood  were  still  visible  at  the  words  of  this  verse.  Othman's  originals
are  also  said  to  be  preserved  in  Etrypt,  Morocco,  Damascus,  Mecca,  and
Medina.     See  M.  Quatremere  in  Journ.  Asiatiquf',  .Juillet,  1838.

^  The  original  simply  has  Baptism  of  God.  This  may  be  understood
either  of  Islam  generally,  or,  with  Ullmann,  in  the  more  restricted  sense
of  circumcision.  Perhaps  ^luhammad  used  the  word  advisedly  as  a  hint
to  the  Christians  of  his  land,  that  in  the  reception  of  his  religion  consisted
the  true  new  birth.

384  THE    KOEAN.

Thus  have  We  made  you  a  central  people,^  that  ye  may
be  witnesses  in  regard  to  mankind^  and  that  the
apostle  may  be  a  witness  in  regard  to  you.

And  We  appointed  the  Kebla  which  thou  formerly
didst  use,  only  that  We  might  know  him  who
followeth  the  apostle  from  him  who  turneth  round
upon  his  heels.  The  change  truly  is  a  difficulty,
but  not  to  those  whom  God  hath  guided.  But
God  is  not  the  one  to  let  your  fiiith-  be  fruitless  : '
verily  unto  man  is  God  Merciful,  Compassionate,

We  have  formerly  seen  thee  turning  thy  face  towards
every  part  of  the  Heaven  ;  bnt  We  will  assuredly
have  thee  turn  to  a  Kebla  which  shall  please  thee.
Turn  then  thy  face  towards  the  sacred  Mosque,*
and  wherever  ye  be,  turn  your  faces  in  that  direc-
tion ;  and  they  verily,  to  whom  ''  the  Book  "  hath
been  given,  know  this  to  be  the  truth  from  their
Lord  :  and  God  is  not  regardless  of  what  ye  do.
140  Even  though  thou  shouldest  bring  every  kind  of  sign
to  those  who  have  been  given  the  Scriptures,  yet
thy  Kebla  they  will  not  follow ;  nor  dost  thou  fol-
low their  Kebla ;  nor  will  one  part  of  them  follow
the  Kebla  of  the  other.  And  assuredly  if,  after  the
knowledge  which  hath  come  to  thee,  thou  follow
their  wishes,  verily  in  that  case  wilt  thou  become
of  the  unrighteous.

They  to  whom  We  have  given  the  Scriptures  know  him
— the  ajwstle — even  as  they  know  their  own  chil-
dren :  but  truly  a  part  of  them  do  conceal  the
truth,  though  acquainted  with  it.^

This  ti'uth  is  from  thy  Lord. — Be  not  then  of  those  who
doubt.

And  every  nation  has  a  quarter  of  the  Heavens :
It  is  God  who  turneth  them  towards  it  :^  hasten
then    emulously    after     good  :     wheresoever    ye

'  Or,  intermediate,  i.e.,  according  to  the  commentators,  not  addicted  to
excess,  just.  Ullm.  ein  vermittelndes  Volk,  zwischcn  Juden  und  Christen
die  Mittc  haltend.

"^  In  having  prayed  towards  Jerusalem.

'  Lit.  perish,  i.e.  he  unrewarded.

*  Of  Meccii.  This  change  of  the  Kebla  from  Jerusalem  to  Mecca  shows
that  this  part  of  the  Sura  was  revealed  at  a  time  when  the  breach  between
Muhammad  and  the  Jews  was  past  healing  ;  i.  e.  in  the  first  half  of  the
second  year  of  the  Hejira.     See  Thilo's  Cod.  Apoc.  p.  21,  n.

'  i.  e.  the  Jews  are  really  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Muhammad's  mission.

'  i.  e.  in  prayer.

THE    KORAN.  385

be,  God  will  one  day  bring  you  all  together;  verily,
God  is  all-powerful.

And  from  whatever  place  thou  comest  forth,  then  turn
thy  face  toward  the  sacred  Mosque ;  for  this  is  a
duty  enjoined  of  thy  Lord  ;  And  God  is  not  inat-
tentive to  your  doings.

And  from  whatever  place  thou  comest  forth,  then  turn
thy  face  toward  the  sacred  Mosque ;  and  wherever
ye  be,  to  that  part  turn  your  faces,  that  men  have
no  cause  of  dispute  against  you,  but  against  the
impious  among  them  ;  therefore  fear  them  not,
but  fear  Me ;  and  I  will  perfect  my  favours  on  you,
and  haply  ye  will  be  guided  aright.

Thus  have  We  sent  to  you  an  apostle  from  among
yourselves  to  rehearse  our  signs  unto  you  and  to
purify  you  and  to  instruct  you  in  "  the  Book "
and  in  the  wisdom,  and  to  teach  you  that  which
ye  had  not  known  :

Therefore  remember  Me  :  I  will  remember  you ;  and
render  thanks  to  Me,  and  be  not  ungrateful  to
Me.

0  ye  who  believe !  seek  help  through  patience  and
prayer  :  verily  God  is  with  the  patient.
^  And  say  ~  '  jf  those  who  are  slain  on  God^s  path^  that
they  are  Dead;  nay  rather,  that  they  are  Living  !
But  ve  understand  not.
150  With  somewhat  of  fear  and  hunger  and  loss  of  wealth
and  of  lives,  and  of  fruits,  will  We  surely  prove
you  :  but  bear  good  tidings  to  the  patient.

Who  when  a  mischance  chanceth  them,  say,  ''  Verily
we  are  God^s,  and  verily  to  Him  do  we  re-
turn :''2

These  !  blessings  on  them  from  their  Lord,  and  mercy  :
and  these  ! — they  are  the  rightly  guided.

Verily,  Safa  and  Marwa  ^  are  among  the  sanctuaries  of
God :  whoever  therefore  maketh  a  pilgrimage  to
the  temple,  or  visiteth  it,  shall  not  be  to  blame
if  he  go  round  about  them  both.*     And  as  for  him

'  i.e.  warring  with  the  infidels.  The  precise  date  of  verses  148-152
depends  upon  whether  this  passage  refers  to  the  battle  of  Bedr  or  Ohod.

'■'  These  words  are  constantly  used  by  pious  Muslims  when  in  any  trouble.

'  Hills  in  the  sacred  territory  of  Mecca,  which  had  long  been  objects  of
superstitious  reverence  to  the  idolatrous  Arabs,  on  which  account  the
Muslims  were  at  first  unwilling  to  include  them  among  the  sacred  places.

*  i.  e.  in  procession.

2  c

;386  THE    KORAN.

who  of  his  own  accord  doeth  what  is  right

God  then  verily  is  Grateful,  Knowing.
^  Verily  they  who  conceal  aught  that  We  have  sent  down
of  clear  proof  or  of  guidance,  after  what  We  have
so  clearly  shown  to  men  in  the  Book/  God  shall
curse  them,  and  they  who  curse  shall  curse  them.

Except  those  who  turn  to  Me,  and  amend  and  make
known  ihe  truth ;  unto  them  will  I  also  turn,  for  I
am  He  who  Turneth,  the  Merciful.

Verily,  they  who  are  infidels  and  die  infidels, — these  !
upon  them  shall  be  the  malison  of  God  and  of
angels  and  of  ail  men  :

Under  it  shall  they  remain  for  ever :  their  torment
shall  not  be  lightened,  and  they  shall  not  even  be
looked  at  hij  God.

And  your  God  is  one  God  :^  there  is  no  God  but  He,
the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Verily  in  the  creation  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  ;
and  in  the  alternation  of  night  and  day;  and  in
the  ships  which  pass  through  the  sea  with  what  is
useful  to  man ;  and  in  the  rain  which  God  sendeth
down  from  Heaven,  giving  life  by  it  to  the  earth
after  its  death,  and  by  scattering  over  it  all  the
moving  creatures ;  and  in  the  change  of  the  winds,
and  in  the  clouds  that  are  made  to  do  service
between  the  Heaven  and  the  Earth  ; — are  signs
for  those  who  understand.
160  Yet  there  are  men  who  take  to  them  idols  along  with
God,  and  love  them  with  the  love  due  to  God:  But
they  who  believe  are  stronger  in  the  love  of  God  ;
although  the  impious  will  see,  when  they  look  upon
the  chastisement,  that  power  is  entirely  God's,  and
that  God  is  severe  in  chastising ;

When  those  who  have  had  followers'  shall  declare
themselves  clear  from  their  followers  after  they
have  seen  the  chastisement,  and  when  the  ties
between  them  are  cut  asunder;

And  the  followers  exclaim,  "  Had  we  but  a  return  to
life,  then  would  we  keep  ourselves  clear  from  them,
as  they  have  declared  themselves  clear  of  us.''
After  this  sort  will  God  show  them  their  works  !

•The  Pentateuch.     See  verse  141.

'  This  and  the  three  following  verses  are  probably  Meccau,  as  also  verses
167   171.
'  The  ringleaders  of  infidelity  and  idolatrous  faiths.

THE    KORAN.  387

Sighing  shall  be  upon  them  !  but,  forth  from  the
fire  they  come  not.
•[  Oh  men  !  eat  of  that  which  is  lawful  and  good  on  the
earth,  but  follow  not  the  steps  of  Satan  :  verily  he
is  to  you  a  manifest  enemy  :

He  only  enjoineth  you  evil  and  wickedness,  and  that  ye
should  aver  concerning  God  that  of  which  ye  have
no  knowledge.

And  when  it  is  said  to  them,  "  Follow  ye  that  which
God  hath  sent  down;"  they  say,  "Nay,  we  follow
the  usages  wherein  we  found  our  fathers. '^  What !
though  their  fathers  were  utterly  ignorant  and
devoid  of  guidance  ?

The  infidels  resemble  him  who  shouteth  aloud  to  that
which  heareth  no  more  than  a  call  and  cry  !  ^  Deaf,
dumb,  blind,  therefore  they  understand  not !
1[  0  ye  who  believe  !  eat  of  the  good  things  with  which
We  have  supplied  you,  and  give  God  thanks  if  ye
are  his  worshippers.

Only  that  which  dieth  of  itself,  and  blood,  and  swine^s
flesh,  and  that  over  which  any  other  name  than
that  of  God  hath  been  invoked,  hath  God  forbidden
you.  But  he  who  shall  partake  of  ihem  by  con-
sivb,\  , without  desire,  or  as  a  transgressor,  then
no  sin  shall  be  upon  him.  Verily  God  is  Indul-
gent, Merciful.

They  truly  who  conceal  the  Scriptures  which  God  hath
sent  down,  and  barter  them  for  a  mean  price —
these  shall  swallow  into  their  bellies  nought  but
Hell-fire  ;  and  God  will  not  speak  to  them  or  assoil
them  on  the  day  of  the  Resurrection :  and  theirs
shall  be  a  grievous  torment.
1  70  These  are  they  who  have  bartered  guidance  for  error,^
and  pardon  for  torment :  But  how  great  will  be
their  sufferings  in  the  fire  !

This  shall  he  their  doom,  because  God  had  sent  down
"  the  Book  '^  with  the  very  truth  :  and  verily  they
who  dispute  about  that  Book  are  in  a  far-gone
severance //"O/^i  it.'^
^  There  is  no  piety  in  turning  your  faces  toward  the  east
or  the  west,  but  he  is  pious  who  believeth  in  God
and  the  last  day  and  the  angels  and  the  Scrip-

^i.e.  a  beast,  which  cunnot  distinguish  words.

^  Lit.  have  purchased  error  at  the  price  of  guidance.     Mar.  Quanta  trii
sustinentia  eorum  !  •*  Or.  lit.  schism.

2  c  2

388  THE    KORAN.

tures  and  the  propliets ;  who  for  the  love  of  God
disburseth  his  wealth  to  his  kindred,  and  to  the
orphans,  and  the  needy,  and  the  wayfarer,  and
those  who  ask,  and  for  ransoming ;  who  observeth
prayer,  and  payeth  the  legal  alms,  and  who  is  one
of  those  loho  are  faithful  to  their  engagements  when
they  have  engaged  in  them,  and  patient  under  ills
and  hardships  and  in  time  of  trouble  :  these  are
they  who  are  just,  and  these  are  they  who  fear
God.
^  0  believers  !  retaliation  for  bloodshedding  is  prescribed
to  you :  the  free  man  for  the  free,  and  the  slave
for  the  slave,  and  the  woman  for  the  woman  :  but
he  to  whom  his  brother  shall  make  any  remission  ^
is  to  be  dealt  with  equitably;  and  a  payment  should
be  made  to  him  with  liberality.

This  is  a  relaxation"  from  your  Lord  and  a  mercy.  For
him  therefore  who  after  this  shall  transgress,^  a
sore  punishment !

But  in  this  law  of  retaliation  is  your  security  for  life,  0
men  of  understanding  !  Haply  ye  will  fear  God.
V  It  is  prescribed  to  you  when  any  one  of  you  is  at  the
point  of  death,  that  if  he  leave  goods,  he  bequeath
equitably  to  his  parents  and  kindred ;  this  is  bind-
ing on  those  who  fear  God  : —

Whoso  then  after  he  hath  heard  what  a  bequest  is  shall
change  it,  the  guilt  of  this  shall  be  on  those  only
who  alter  it ;  verily,  God  Heareth,  Knoweth  :

But  he  who  feareth  from  the  testator  any  mistake  or
wrong,  and  shall  make  a  settlement  between  the
parties — that  then  shall  be  no  guilt  in  him ;  verily,
God  is  Forgiving,  Merciful.
^  0  believers  !  a  Fast  is  prescribed  to  you,  as  it  was  pre-
scribed to  those  before  you,  that  ye  may  fear  God,
ISO  For  certain  days.  But  he  among  you  who  shall  be
sick,  or  on  a  journey,  shall  fast  that  same  number
of  other  days :  and  for  those  who  are  able  to  heep
it  and  yet  break  it,  there  shall  be  as  an  expiation

'  Lit.  to  whom  his  brother,  that  is,  any  Arab  or  believer,  shall  remit  the
penalty  of  death  ;  there  is  to  he  afollovnng  up  loith  what  is  good,  and  pay-
ment vith  liherality.

'  Of  the  stricter  Mosaic  lex  talionis,  as  well  as  of  the  ante-Islaniitic
Arabian  custom,  by  which  the  killing  of  a  slave  was  avengefl  by  the  death
of  a  free  man,  and  the  killing  of  a  woman  by  taking  the  life  of  a  man.  See
Freyt.  Einl.  p.  19.3.     Comp.  Ex.  xxi.  23.

'  i.e.  by  killing  the  manslayer.

THK    KOKAN.  389

the  maintenance  of  a  poor  man.  And  he  who
of  his  own  accord  performeth  a  good  work,  shall
derive  good  from  it :  and  that  ye  fast  is  good  for
you — if  ye  but  knew  i^.

As  to  the  month  Ramadhan  in  which  the  Koran  was
sent  down  to  be  man's  guidance,  and  an  explana-
tion of  that  guidance,  and  an  illumination,^  as  soon
as  any  one  of  you  observeth  the  moon,  let  him  set
about  the  fast ;  but  he  who  is  sick,  or  upon  a
journey,  shall  fast  a  like  number  of  other  days.
God  wisheth  you  ease  and  wisheth  not  your  dis-
comfort, and  that  you  fulfil  the  number  of  days,
and  that  you  glorify  God  for  his  guidance  :  and
haply  you  will  be  thankful.

And  when  my  servants  ask  thee  concerning  Me,  then
verily  will  I  be  nigh  unfj  them — will  answer  the
cry  of  him  that  crieth,  when  he  crieth  unto  Me  :
but  let  them  hearken  unto  Me,  and  believe  in  Me.
Haply  they  will  proceed  aright.

You  are  allowed  on  the  night  of  the  fast  to  approach
your  wives :  they  are  your  garment  and  ye  are
their  garment.-  God  knoweth  that  ye  have  mu-
tually defrauded  yourselves  therein ;  so  He  turneth
unto  vr»n  and  remitteth  unto  you.  Now,  thereforoj,
go  »_  anto  them  with  full  desire  for  that  which
God  hath  ordained  for  you;  and  eat  and  drink
until  ye  can  discern  a  white  thread  from  a  black
thread  ^  by  the  daybreak  :  afterwards,  fast  strictly
till  night,  and  go  not  in  unto  them,  but  pass  the
time  in  the  Mosques.  These  are  the  bounds  set
up  by  God  :  therefore  come  not  near  to  transgress
them.  Thus  God  maketh  his  signs  clear  to  men  :
haply  they  will  fear  Him.*

Consume   not  your  wealth  among  yourselves  in  vain

things ;  nor  offer  it  to  judges  as  a  bribe  that  ye

may  consume  a  part  of  men's  wealth  unjustly,  while

ye  know  the  sin  which  ye  commit.

^  They  will  ask  thee  of  the  new  moons.     Say  :  They  are

'  On  the  work  Furquan,  see  Sura  [Ixv.]  xxi.  49.

'  A  mutual  comfort  to  each  other.

'  Thus  Misch.  Berachoth,  1,  2,  "  Prayer  is  to  be  said  as  soon  as  one  can
distinguish  bcticeen  a  blue  and  white  thread."

*  Judging  from  the  minuteness  of  the  precepts  laid  down  in  this  and  the
following  verses  to  193,  it  would  appear  that  they  were  added  at  a  lute
period  of  Muhammad's  residence  at  Medina.

^

•

390  THE    KORAN.

periods  fixed  for  man's  service  and  for  the  Pil-
grimage. But  there  is  no  piety  in  entering  your
houses  at  the  back^^  but  piety  consists  in  the  fear
of  God.  Enter  your  houses  then  by  their  doors ;
and  fear  God  :  haply  ye  shall  be  prosperous.

And  fight  for  the  cause  of  God  against  those  who  fight
against  you  :  but  commit  not  the  injustice  of
attacking  them  first :  verily  God  loveth  not  the
unjust  :

And  kill  them  wherever  ye  shall  find  them,  and  eject
them  from  whatever  place  they  have  ejected  you  ;
for  seduction  from  the  truth  is  worse  than  slaugh-
ter :  yet  attack  them  not  at  the  sacred  Mosque,
until  they  attack  you  therein ;  but  if  they  attack
3^ou,  then  slay  them — Such  the  recompense  of  the
infidels  !  —

But  if  they  desist,  then  verily  God  is  Gracious,  Mer-
ciful—

And  do  battle  against  them  until  there  be  no  more
seduction  from  the  truth"  and  the  only  worship
be  that  of  God :  but  if  they  desist,  then  let  there
be  no  hostility,  save  against  wrong-doers.
1 90  The  sacred  month  and  the  sacred  precincts  are  under
the  safeguard  of  reprisals  :  •"'  whoever  therefore
offereth  violence  ^  to  you,  offer  ye  the  like  violence
to  him,  and  fear  God,  and  know  that  God  is  with
those  who  fear  Him.

Give  freely  for  the  cause  of  God,  and  throw  not  your-
selves with  your  own  hands  into  ruin;  ■'''  and  do  good.
Verily  God  loveth  those  who  do  good.

Accomplish  the  Pilgrimage  and  the  Visitation  ^  of  the

'  Such  appears  to  have  been  tlie  superstitious  custom  of  the  Arabs  after
their  return  from  pilgrimafjes  to  Mecca.

2  Or,  civil  difcnrd ;  i.  e.  their  drivinrj  you  out  of  Mecca.

'  Lit.  the  sacred  month  for  the  sacred  month,  and  the  sacred  precincts  (or
ordinances)  (for)  reprisals.  The  meaning  of  this  difficult  passage  is,  that
in  wars  for  the  cause  of  religion,  the  sacred  montli  and  the  temple  of
Mecca  may  be  made  the  time  and  scene  of  contests,  which  then  and  there
are  usually  prohibited.  For  the  most  accurate  information  as  to  the  Pil-
grimage, see  Freytag,  Einl.  418.  "  Lit.  transgresseth.

*  This  shows  that  Muhammad  could  at  times  inculcate  the  doctrine  of
freedom  of  the  will.  Or  render,  neither  vwke  your  own  hands  accessory  to
yoiir  destruction.

^  The  greater  Pilgrimage,  which  every  Muslim  is  bound  to  perform  once
in  his  life,  is  the  Hadjat  el  Farz  (the  one  obligatory  Pilgrimage),  or  the
Hadjat  el  Islam.  The  Umrah,  or  little  pilgrimage,  may  be  performed  at
any  time  except  the  pilgrimage  season,  and  its  ceremonies  are  much  fewer.

THE    KORAN.  391

holy  places  in  lionour  of  God  :  and  ifye  be  hemmed
in  by  foes  then  send  whatever  offering  shall  be  the
easiest :  and  shave  not  your  heads  until  the  offering
reach  the  place  of  sacrifice.  But  whoever  among
you  is  sick,  or  hath  an  ailment  of  the  head,  must
satisfy  by  fasting,  or  alms,  or  a  victim  for  sacrifice.
And  when  ye  are  secure  from  foes,  then  he  who
delights  himself  in  the  Visitation  of  the  holy  place,
until  the  Pilgrimage,  sJiall  bring  whatever  offering
shall  be  the  easiest.  But  he  who  findeth  nothing
to  offer,  shall  fast  three  days  in  the  Pilgrimage,  and
seven  days  when  ye  return  ;  they  shall  be  ten  days
in  all.  This  is  binding  on  him  whose  family  have
not  been  present  at  the  sacred  Mosque.  And  fear
God,  and  know  that  God  is  terrible  in  punishing.

Let  the  Pilgrimage  be  made  in  the  months  already
known  :  ^  whoever  therefore  undertaketh  the  Pil-
grimage therein,  let  him  not  know  a  woman,  nor
let  there  be  transgression  or  wrangling  in  the
Pilgrimage ;  and  the  good  which  ye  do  God  know-
eth.  And  provide /or  your  journey ;  but  the  best
provision  is  the  fear  of  God  :  fear  Me  then,  0  men
of  understanding  !

It  shall  be  no  crime  in  you  if  ye  seek  boons  from  your
Lo»  and  when  ye  disperse  from  Arafat,  then
remember  God  at  the  holy  hill ;  and  remember  Him
because  He  hath  guided  you  ;  for  verily  before  this
ye  were  assuredly  of  those  who  go  astray  :

Then  pass  on  quickly  ^  from  the  place  *  whence  the
people  quickly  pass,  and  ask  pardon  of  God  :  Verily
God  is  Forgiving,  Merciful.

And  when  ye  have  finished  your  holy  rites,  remember
God  as  ye  remember  your  own  fathers,  or  with  a
yet  more  intense  remembrance.  Some  men  there
are  who  say,  "  0  our  Lord  !  give  us  our  j^ortion  in
this  world :  "  but  such  shall  have  no  portion  in  the
next  life :

And  some  are  there  who   say,  "  0  our  Lord  !  give  us

They  are  described  by  Capt.  Burton  in  his  "  Pilgrimage,"  vol.  iii.  ch.
xxviii.

'  Or  {the  time  for)  the  pilgrimage  is  {the)  knoion  month ;  viz.  Shawal,
Dhu  Ikaida,  and  Dhulhajja.

'  By  trading  during  the  Hadj.

'  The  pilgrims  move  on  very  rapidly  when  in  the  immediate  neighbour-
hood of  the  Holy  Places.  ■•  Kuzah,  near  Mecca.

y

392  THE    KORAN.

good  in  this  world  and  good  in  the  next_,  and  keep

us  from  the  torment  of  the  fire  '^ —
They  shall  have  the  portion  which  they  have  merited  :  ^

and  God  is  swift  to  reckon.
And  bear  God  in  mind  during  the  stated  days  :  but  if

any  haste  away  ^  in  two  days,  it  shall  be  no  fault

in  him  :  And  if  any  tarry  longer,  it  shall  be  no  fault

in  him,  if  he  fear  God.     Fear  God  then,  and  know

that  to  Him  shall  ye  be  gathered.
200  ^  A  man    there  is '  whose  discourse    concerning  this

present  life  surpriseth  thee — and  he  taketh  God  to

witness  as  to  what  is  in  his   heart ;   yet  is  he  the

most  contentious  in  disputing  icith  thee.
And  when  he  turneth  his  back  on  thee,  he  speedeth

thi'ough  the  land  to  enact   disorders  therein,  and

layeth  waste  the  fields  and  the  young  of  flocks ;

but  God  loveth  not  the  disorder  :
And  when  it  is  said  to  him,  "Fear  God,"   his  pride

seizeth  on  him  with  its  guilt :  Hell  therefore  shall  be

his  sufiicing  reward,  and  right  wretched  the  couch  !
A  man  too  there  is  *  who  selleth  his  very  self  out  of

desire    to    please    God  :  and   God  is  good  to  his

servants.
^  0  believers  !   enter  completely  into  the  true  religion,

and  follow  not  the  steps  of  Satan :  of  a  truth  he  is

your  manifest  enemy.
But  if  ye  lapse  after  that  the  clear  proofs^  have  reached

you,  then  know  that  God  is  Mighty,  Wise  :
What  can  they  expect  but  that  God  should  come  down

to  them  overshadowed  by  clouds,^  and  the  angels,

and  their  doom   be  sealed  ?     And  to  God  shall  all

things  return.
^  Ask  the  children  of  Israel  how  many  clear  signs  We

have  given  them  !     But  if  any  man  shall  change

away  the  gracious  gift  ^  of  God  after  it  hath  reached

'  Lit.  from  what  {the  result  of  what)  they  have  done.

'  From  the  valley  of  Mina.

'  Said  to  have  been  one  Al  Akhnaa  Ibn  Shoraik,  a  dissembler  with
Muhanmiad  ;  but  both  this  verse  and  203  may  be  of  general  application.
In  this  case  render,  And  of  men  there  are,  &c.

*  Sohaib,  when  he  joined  the  standard  of  Muhammad,  left  all  his  pro-
perty in  the  hands  of  the  infidels.

*  Verses  204-210  are  probably  addressed  to  those  Muslims  who  were
desirous  to  observe  certain  parts  of  the  Jewish  law.

*  Lit.  in  shadows,  or  coverings  from  clouds,  and  the  angels,  and  the  de-
crees, be  accomplished.  ^  The  Koran.

THE    KORAN.

393

him,  then  assuredly  God  will  be  vehement  to  punish
him.
This  present  life  is  made  fair-seeming  to  those  who  believe
not,  and  who  mock  at  those  who  have  beheved.
But  they  who  fear  God  shall  be  above  them  on  the
day  of  Resurrection;  and  God  will  provide  for  whom
He  will  without  measure.

%  Mankind  was  but  one  people  ;  *  then  God  sent  prophets  Q
to  announce  glad  tidings  and  to  warn  ;  and  He  sent
down  with  them  the  Book  with  the  Truth,  that  it
.,^  might    decide    the    disputes   of  men ;    and    none

disputed  but  those  to  whom  the  Book  had  been
given,  after  the  clear  tokens  had  reached  them,
through  mutual  jealousy.  And  God  guided  those
who  believed  unto  the  truth,  whereas,  by  his  per-
mission, they  had  disagreed  ;  and  God  guideth
whom  He  pleaseth  into  the  straight  path.
210  Think  ye  to  enter  Paradise,  before  there  shall  have  come
on  you  the  like  of  what  came  on  those  who  passed
away  before  you  ?  Ills  and  troubles  tried  them  ;
and  so  agitated  were  they  that  at  last  -  the  Apostle
and  they  who  shared  his  faith,  said,  "  When  will
the  help  of  God  come  ?  " — Is  not  verily  the  help  of
G^^     "^h?

^  They  wiii  ask  thee  what  they  shall  bestow  in  alms.  Say  :
Let  the  good  which  ye  bestow  be  for  parents,  and
kindred,  and  orphans,  and  the  poor,  and  the  way-
farer ;  and  whatever  good  ye  do,  of  a  truth  God
knoweth  it.  ~j

1  War  is  prescribed  to  you ;  but  to  this  ye  have  a  re-  jr
pugnance :  J

Yet  haply  ye  are  averse  from  a  thing,  though  it  be  good
for  you,  and  haply  ye  love  a  thing  though  it  be  bad
for  you  :  And  God  knoweth  ;  but  ye,  ye  know  not.
They  will  ask  thee  concerning  war  in  the  Sacred  Month.
Say  :  The  act  of  fighting  therein  is  a  grave  crime  :
but  the  act  of  turning  others  aside  from  the  path
of  God,  and  unbelief  in  Him,  and  to  prevent  access
to  the  Sacred  Mosque,  and  to  drive  out  his  people,
is  worse  in  the  sight  of  God ;  and  civil  strife  ^  is
worse  than  bloodshed.     But  they  will  not  cease  to

'  i.  e.  there  was  oricjinally  but  one  religion  in  the  world.
*  Lit.  they  were  shaken  until  the  Apostle,  &c.
^  Or,  temptation  {to  idolatry).

394  THE    KORAN.

war  against  you  until  they  turn  you  from  your  re-
ligion, if  they  be  able  :  but  whoever  of  you  shall
turn  from  his  religion  and  die  an  infidel,  their  works
shall  be  fruitless  in  this  world  and  in  the  next :
and  they  shall  be  consigned  to  the  fire  ;  therein  to
abide  for  aye.

But  they  who  believe,  and  who  fly  their  country,  and
fight  in  the  cause  of  God,  mayhope  for  God^s  mercy :
and  God  is  Gracious,  Merciful.
^  They  will  ask  thee  concerning  wine^  and  games  of
chance."  Say  :  In  both  is  great  sin,  and  advantage
also,  to  men ;  but  their  sin  is  greater  than  their
advantage.  They  will  ask  thee  also  what  they  shall
bestow  in  alms :

Sat  :  What  ye  can  spare.^  Thus  God  maketh  clear  his
signs  to  you  :  Haply  ye  will  ponder

On  this  present  world,  and  on  the  next.  They  will  also
ask  thee  concerning  orphans.  Say  :  Fair  dealing
with  them  is  best ;

But  if  ye  mix  yourselves  up  (in  their  affairs) — they  are
your  brethren  :  God  knoweth  the  foul  dealer  from
the  fair  dealer:  and,  if  God  please.  He  will  surely
distress  you  !  Verily,  God  is  Mighty,  Wise.
%  220  And  marry  not  idolatresses  until  they  believe;  for
assuredly  a  slave  who  believeth  is  better  than  an
idolatress,  though  she  please  you  more.  And  wed
not  your  daughters  to  idolaters  until  they  believe;
for  a  slave  who  is  a  believer  is  better  than  an
idolater,  even  though  he  please  you.

They  invite  to  the  Fire ;  but  God  inviteth  to  Paradise,
and  to  pardon,  if  He  so  will,  and  maketh  clear  his
signs  to  men  :  Perchance  they  will  be  monished.
^  They  will  also  question  thee  as  to  the  courses  of  women.
Say  :  They  are  a  pollution.  Separate  yourselves
therefore  from  women  and  approach  them  not,  until
they  be  cleansed.  But  when  they  are  cleansed,  go
in  unto  them  as  God  hath  ordained  for  you.  Verily
God  loveth  those  who  turn  in  penitence  to  Him,
and  loveth  those  who  purify  themselves.

Your  wives  are  your  field :  go  in  therefore  to  your
field  in  what  way  so  ever  ye  will ;  but  do  first  some
act  for  your  souls'   good  :  and  fear  ye  God,  and

Comp.  Sura  [c]  iv.  42,  and  [cxiv.]  v.  90,  100.
'  Or,  drawing  lots.  '  Or,  overplus,  superfluity.

THE    KORAN.  395

know  that  ye   must   meet  Him;    and   bear  these
tidings  to  the  faithful.  -^

^  And  swear  not  by  God '  that  ye  will  be  virtuous  and      7
fear  God,  and  promote  peace  among  men;  for  God       >
is  He  who  Hearcth,  Knoweth.

God  will  not  punish  you  for  a  mistake  -  in  your  oaths  :
but  He  will  punish  you  for  that  which  your  hearts
have  assented  to.^     God  is  Gracious,  Merciful.

For  those  who  intend  to  separate  from  their  wives  shall
be  a  period  of  waiting  for  four  months  ;  but  if  they
go  back  from  their  purpose,  then  verily  God  is
Gracious,  Merciful :

And  if  they  resolve  on  a  divorce,  then  verily  God  is  He
who  Heareth,  Knoweth  :

And  the  divorced  shall  await  the  result  by  themselves
until  they  have  had  thei-  courses  thrice,  nor  is  it
allowable  for  them  to  conceal  what  God  hath  created
in  their  wombs,  if  thev  believe  in  God  and  the  last
day  ;  and  it  will  be  more  just  in  their  husbands  to
bring  them  back  when  in  this  state,  if  they  desire
a  reconciliation.  And  it  is  for  the  women  to  act
as  they  [the  Jiushands)  ad  towards  them  with  all
fairness  ;  yet  are  the  men  a  step  above  them  ;  and
Gori  --  Mighty,  Wise.

Ye  may  uivorce  your  wives  twice :  but  after  that,  ye
must  either  retain  them  with  kindness  or  put  them
away  with  benefits.  But  it  is  not  allowed  you  to  ap-
propriate to  yourselves  aught  of  what  ye  have  given
to  them,  unless  both  fear  that  they  cannot  keep
within  the  bounds  *  set  up  of  God.  And  if  ye  fear
that  they  cannot  observe  the  ordinances  of  God,
then  no  blame  shall  attach  to  either  of  you  for  what
the  wife  shall  herself  give  for  her  redemption.
These  are  the  bounds  of  God  :  therefore  overstep
them  not ;  for  whoever  oversteppeth  the  bounds  of
God  are  evil-doers.
230  Then  if  the  husband  divorce  her  a  third  time,  it  is  not
lawful  for  him  to  take  her  again,  until  she  shall  have
married  another  husband ;  and  if  he  also  divorce
her,  then  sliall  no  blame  attach  to  them  if  they

'  Lit.  make  not  Allah  the  scope  for  your  oaths.

^  Lit.  trifling  or  inconsiderate  word.  '  Lit.  gained.

*  Limits,  fences.     The  word  is  Talmudic.     Thus  Pirke  Aboth,  i.  "  The

men  of  the  great  sjiiagogue  said Make  a  fence  for  the  law;"  and  ill.

13,  "  Tradition  is  a  fence  to  the  law."

39G  inE    KORAN.

return  to  each  other,  thinking  that  they  can  keep
within  the  bounds  fixed  of  God.     And  these  are
\^      the  bounds  fixed  of  God ;  He  maketh  them  clear
to  those  who  have  knowledge.
And  when  ye  divorce  women,  and  they  have  reached
the    prescribed    time,    either    retain    them   with
generosity,   or  put  them   away  with  generosity :
but  retain    them  not    by  constraint  so  as  to  be
unjust  towards  them.     He  who  doth  so,  doth  in
fact  injure  himself.     And  make  not  the  signs  of
God  a  jest;   but  remember  God's  favour  toward
you,    and    the  Book  and   the  Wisdom  which  He
hath  sent  down  to  you  for  your  warning,  and  fear
God,  and  know  that  God  hath  knowledge  of  every-
thing.
And  when  ye  divorce  your  wives,  and  they  have  reached
the  prescribed  time,  hinder  them  not  from  marry-
ing their  husbands  when  they  have  agreed  among
themselves  in  an  honourable  way.     This  warning
is  for  him  among  you  who  believeth  in  God  and  in
the  last  day.  This  is  most  pure  for  you,  and  most  de-
cent.   And  God  hath  knowledge,  but  ye  know  not.
^  Moreover  mothers,  t(;/te7i  divorced,  shall  give  suck  to  their
children  two  full  years,^  if  the  father  desire  that
the  suckling  be  completed  ;  and  such  maintenance
and  clothing  as  is  fair  for  them  shall  devolve  on
the  father.     No  person  shall  be  charged  beyond
his  means.     A  mother   shall  not  be  pressed  un-
fairly for  her  child,  nor  a  father  for  his  child:
And  the  same  with  the  father's  heir.     But  if  they
choose  to  wean  the  child  by  mutual  consent  and
consultation,  it  shall  be  no  fault  in  them.     And  if
ye  choose  to   seek  a  nurse  for  your  children,  it
shall  be  no  fault  in  you,  in  case  ye  pay  what  ye
bestow  according  to  that  which  is  fair — And  fear
God,  and  know  that  God  seeth  what  ye  do.
t  If  those  of  you  who  die  leave  wives,  they  must  await
their  state^  during  four  months  and  ten  daijs ;  and
when  they  have  reached  this  their  term,  you  shall
not  be  answerable  for  the  way  in  which  they  dis-
pose of  themselves  in  a  befitting  way  :  And  God
is  cognizant  of  what  ye  do.
And  then  shall  no  blame  attach  to  you  in  making  pro-

3

(!omp.  Sura  [Ixxxii.]  xxxi.  13.
Lit.  in  their  souls,  i.  e.  in  tlicmselves.

THE    KOKAN.  307

posals  of  marriage^  to  such  womerij  or  in  keeping
such  intentions  to  yourselves  ?  God  knoweth
that  ye  will  not  forget  them.  But  plight  not
faith  to  them  in  secret,  unless  ye  speak  honour-
able words  ;

And  resolve  not  on  the  marriage  tie  until  the  prescribed
period  be  reached ;  and  know  that  God  knoweth
what  is  in  your  minds  :  therefore,  beware  of  Him ;
And  know  that  God  is  Gracious,  Kind !

It  shall  be  no  crime  in  you  if  ye  divorce  your  wives  so
long  as  ye  have  not  consummated  the  marriage,
nor  settled  any  dowry  on  them.  And  provide  for
them — he  who  is  in  easy  circumstances  according
to  his  means,  and  he  who  is  straitened,  according
to  his  means — with  fairness  :  This  is  a  duty  for
those  who  do  what  is  right.

But  if  ye  divorce  them  before  consummation,  and  have
already  settled  a  dowry  on  them,  ye  shall  give  them
half  of  what  ye  have  settled,  unless  they  make  a
release,  or  he  make  a  release  in  whose  hand  is  the
marriage  tie.  But  if  ye  make  a  release,  it  will  be
nearer  akin  to  piety.  And  forget  not  generosity
onp  ♦•'—ards  another ;  Verily  God  beholdeth  your
doiugs.
^  Observe  strictly  the  prayers,  and  the  middle  -  prayer,
and  stand  up  with  devotion  before  God.
240  And  if  you  have  any  alarm,  then  pray  on  foot  or
mounted  :  and  when  you  are  secure,  then  remem-
ber God, — how  He  hath  made  you  to  know  what
ye  knew  not.
%  And'  such  of  you  as  shall  die  and  leave  wives,  shall
bequeath  their  wives  a  year's  maintenance  without
causing  them  to  quit  their  homes  ;  but  if  they  quit
them  of  their  oivn  accord,  then  no  blame  shall
attach  to  you  for  any  disposition  they  may  make
of  themselves  in  a  befitting  way.  And  God  is
Mighty,  Wise.

And  for  the  divorced  let  there  be  a  fair  provision  :  This
is  a  duty  for  the  God-fearing ;

*  Within  the  four  months  and  ten  days.

'  Either  the  asr,  midway  between  noon  and  nightfall  (see  verse  104
above)  or  the  prayer  immediately  after  midday.    See  note  on  Sura  [c]  iv.

46.

'  This  verse  is  certainly  older  than  the  commencement  of  Sura  iv.,  which
alters  the  law  here  laid  down.

398  THE    KORAN.

Thus  God  maketli  his  signs  clear  to  you  that  ye  may
understand.
^  Hast  thou -not  thoui^ht  on  those  who  quitted  their
dwellings — and  they  were  thousands — for  fear  of
death  ?i  God  said  to  them,  ''Die:"  then  He
restored  them  to  life.  Verily  full  of  bounty  to-
wards man  is  God :  But,  most  men  give  not
thanks !

And  fight  in  the  cause  of  God  ;  and  know  that  God  is
He  who  Heareth,  Knoweth.

Who  is  he  that  will  lend  to  God  a  goodly  loan  ?  So
will  He  double  it  to  him  again  and  again  :  God
draweth  in,  and  stretcheth  forth  his  hand  :  ^  And
unto  Him  shall  ye  return.
^  Hast  thou  not  considered^  the  assembly  of  the  children
of  Israel  after  the  death  of  Moses,  when  they  said
to  a  prophet  of  theirs,  "  Raise  up  for  us  a  king ;
we  will  do  battle  for  the  cause  of  God  ?  "  He
said,  "  May  it  not  be  that  if  to  fight  were  ordained
you,  ye  would  not  fight  ?  "  They  said,  "  And
why  should  we  not  fight  in  the  cause  of  God,  since
we  are  driven  forth  from  our  dwellings  and  our
children  ?  "  But  when  fighting  was  commanded
them  they  turned  back,  save  a  few  of  them  :  But
God  knew  the  offenders  !

And  their  prophet  said  to  them,  "Verily  now  hath
God  raised  up  Saul  (Taloot)  to  be  king  over  you."
They  said,  "  How  shall  the  dominion  (kingship)
over  us  be  his,  when  we  are  more  worthy  of  the
dominion  than  he,  and  of  wealth  he  hath  no
abundance  !* "  He  said,  "  Verily  God  hath  chosen
him  to  be  over  you,  and  hath  given  him  an  excel-
lent increase*  in  knowledge  and  stature  ;  for  God
giveth  dominion  to  whom  He  pleaseth ;  And  God
is  All-embracing,  Knowing  !  "

'  Comp.  Ezek.  xxxvii.  1-10.  These  Jews  are  said  by  some  commenta-
tors to  have  abandoned  their  dwellinjfs  through  fear  of  a  pestilence  (comp.
Talmud  Sanhed.  92) ;  by  others,  for  fear  of  being  compelled  to  serve  in
the  wars  of  God.

'  i.e.  is  liberal  in  the  bestowal  of  good  things,  or  withdraws  them  at
pleasure.     Lit.  contracts  and  enlarges.

'  This  and  the  seven  following  verses  show  that  Muhammad,  foreseeing
an  open  rupture  with  the  people  of  Medina  at  no  distant  period,  felt  it
necessary  to  stimulate  the  zeal  and  courage  of  his  partisans  by  examples
from  .Jewish  history.

Lit.  hath  increcised  him  in  excellence.

i

THE    KORAN.  399

And  their  prophet  said  to  them,  "  Verily,  the  sign  of
his  kingship  shall  be  that  the  Ark  shall  come  to
you  :  in  it  is  a  p1ed<je  of  security  ^  from  your  Lord
and  the  relics"  left  by  the  family  of  Moses  and
the  family  of  Aaron ;  the  angels  shall  bear  it :
Truly  herein  shall  be  a  sign  indeed  to  you  if  ye  arc
believers/^
250  And  when  Saul  departed  with  his  forces,  he  said,
"  Verily  God  will  test  you  by  a  river,  and  he  who
drinketh  of  it  shall  not  be  of  my  band;  but  he
who  shall  not  taste  it,  drinking  a  drink  out  of  the
hand  excepted,  shall  be  of  my  band/'  ^  And,
except  a  few  of  them,  they  drank  of  it ;  and  when
they  had  passed  it,  he  and  those  who  believed  with
him,  the  former  said,  *' We  have  no  strength  this
day  against  (Djalout)  Goliath  and  his  forces : "
But  they  who  bore  in  mind  that  they  must  meet
God,  said,  ''  How  oft,  by  God's  will,  hath  a  small
host  vanquished  a  numerous  host  !  and  God  is
with  the  steadfastly  enduring."

And  when  they  went  forth  against  Goliath  and  his
forces,  they  said,  "  0  our  Lord  !  pour  out  stead-
fastness upon  us,  and  set  our  feet  firm,  and  help
us  ..^      .st  the  unbelievers.''

And  by  the  will  of  God  they  routed  them ;  and  (Daood)
David  slew  Goliath ;  and  God  gave  him  the  king-
ship and  wisdom,  and  taught  him  according  to  his
will :  and  were  it  not  for  the  restraint  of  one  by
means  of  the  other  imposed  on  men  by  God,  verily
the  earth  had  assuredly  gone  to  ruin ;  but  God  is
bounteous  to  his  creatures.

Such  are  the  signs  of  God  :  with  truth  do  We  rehearse
them  to  thee,  for  one  truly  of  the  Sent  Ones  art
Thou.
%  Some  of  the  apostles  We  have  endowed  more  highly
than  others  :  To  some  God  hath  spoken,  and  He
hath  raised  others  of  them  to  the  loftiest  grade;
and  to  Jesus  the  Son  of  Mary  We  gave  manifest
proofs  of  his  mission,  and  We  strengthened  him

'  At.  Shechiiiah.  See  Freytag  Lex.  in  v.  This  word,  as  well  as  the
Arabic  word  for  ark  (p.  86,  n.),  betniy  iu  their  form  a  Rabbinic  origin.
Also  Geiger's  "  Was  hat  ]SIohammed,"  &.C.,  pp.  54,  5-5.

*  The  shoes  and  rod  of  Moses,  the  mitre  of  Aaron,  the  vase  of  manna,
the  fragments  of  the  two  tables  of  the  law.

^  Observe  the  confusion  between  Gideon  and  Saul.

400  THE    KORAN.

with  the  Holy  Spirit.^  And  if  God  had  pleased,
they  who  came  after  them  would  not  have  wrangled,
after  the  clear  proofs  had  reached  them.  But  into
disputes-  they  fell:  some  of  them  believed,  and
some  were  unbelievers ;  yet  if  Grod  had  pleased,
they  would  not  have  thus  wrangled  :  but  God  doth
what  He  will.
^  O  Believers  !  give  alms  of  that  with  which  We  have
supplied  you,  before  the  day  cometh  when  there
shall  be  no  trafficking  nor  friendship  nor  inter-
cession !  And  the  unbelievers  are  the  guilty  of
injustice.
^  God  !  There  is  no  god  but  He  ;  the  Living,  the  Self-
subsisting  ;  neither  slumber  seizeth  Him,  nor
sleep ;  his,  whatsoever  is  in  the  Heavens  and
whatsoever  is  in  the  Earth  !  Who  is  he  that  can
intercede  with  Him  but  by  his  own  permission?
He  knoweth  what  is  present  with  his  creatures,
and  what  is  yet  to  befall  them  ;  yet  nought  of  his
knowledge  do  they  comprehend,  save  what  He
willeth.  His  Throne  reacheth  over  the  Heavens
and  the  Earth,  and  the  upholding  of  both  bur-
deneth  Him  not;  and  He  is  the  High,  the  Great  !

Let  there  be  no  compulsion  in  Religion.^  Now  is  the
right  way  made  distinct  from  error ;  whoever
therefore  denieth  Tughoot*  and  believeth  in  God
hath  taken  hold  on  a  strong  handle  that  hath  no  flaw
therein  :  And  God  is  He  who  Heareth,  Knoweth.

God  is  the  patron  of  believers  :  He  bringeth  them  out
of  darkness  into  light :

As  to  those  who  believe  not,  their  patrons  are  Taghoot :
they  bring  them  out  of  light  into  darkness  :  they
shall  be  inmates  of  Hell-fire  :  they  shall  abide
therein  foF  ever.
260  %  Hast  thou  not  thought  on  him  ^  who  disputed  with
Abraham   about  his  Lord,  because   God  had  given

'  See  verse  81.

'  The  drift  of  these  words,  which  are  of  siich  frequent  recurrence  in  the
Koran,  is,  that  the  former  revelations  had  been  abused,  and  instead  of
leadint;  them  to  Islam,  broke  them  up  into  sects  and  dissentient  parties.

^  This  verse  must  have  been  revealed  before  Muhammad  felt  himself
secure  in  his  new  position  at  Medina.

*  A  name  applied  to  an  idol  or  idols — especially  Allat  and  Ozza,  the
ancient  idols  of  the  Meccans.  The  termination  of  the  word  Taghoot  is
more  Hebraic  than  pure  Arabic  ;  it  means  literally  error.

*  Nimrod.

I  HE    KORAN.  401

him  Dominion  ?  When  Abraham  said,  "  My  Lord
is  He  who  miiketh  alive  and  causeth  to  die/^  he
said,  "  It  is  I  who  make  alive  and  cause  to  die  !  "
Abraham  said,  "  God  verily  bringeth  the  sun  from
the  East;  do  thou  then  bring  it  i'roni  the  West/'
Then  was  the  unbeliever  confounded;  for  God
guideth  not  the  evil-doers.
Or  considered  him  ^  who  passed  by  a  city  laid  low  in
ruins.^  "  How/^  said  he,  "  shall  God  give  life  to
this  city  after  this  her  death?'' — So  God  caused
him  to  die  for  an  hundred  years,  then  raised  him
to  life,  and  said,  "How  long  hast  thou  waited?"
He  said,  "  I  have  waited  a  day  or  part  of  a  day."
He  said,  "  Nay,  thou  hast  waited  an  hundred  years.
Look  on  thy  food  and  thy  drink  ;  they  are  not
grown  mouldy ;  and  look  ca  thine  ass,  for  it  is  our
intent  to  make  thee  a  sign  unto  mankind  :  and  look
on  the  bones  of  thine  ass,  how  We  raise  them,  then
clothe  them  with  flesh."  And  Avhen  this  was  shown
to  him,  he  said,  "  I  acknowledge  that  God  hath
power  to  do  all  things."

1[  And  when  Abraham  said,  "  0  Lord  show  me  how  Thou
wilt  give  hfe  to  the  dead  !  "  He  said,  "  Hast  thou  not
yet '  ;ved  ?  "  He  said,  "Yea;  but  I  have  ashed
this  of  Thee  that  my  heart  may  be  assured."  He
said,  "  Take,  then,  four  birds,^  and  draw  them  to-
wards thee,  then  place  portions  of  them  on  every
mountain,  then  call  them  :  they  shall  come  swiftly  to
thee  :  And  know  thou  that  God  is  Mighty,  Wise!"

^  The  likeness  of  those  who  expend  their  wealth  for  the
cause  of  God,  is  that  of  a  grain  of  corn  which  pro-
duceth  seven  ears,  and  in  each  ear  a  hundred
grains  :  God  will  multiply  to  whom  He  pleaseth  :
and  God  is  Liberal,  Knowing  !
They  who  expend  their  wealth  for  the  cause  of  God,
and  do  not  afterwards  follow  what  they  expend
with  reproaches  or  injury,  shall  have  their  reward
with  their  Lord  ;  no  fear  shall  come  upon  them,
neither  shall  they  be  put  to  grief.

'  Oz;iir  or  Esdras  doubted  whether  Jerusalem  could  be  rebuilt  after  its
destruction  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the  miracle  here  narrated  was  wrought
for  his  assurance.  The  fable  has  its  origin  in  the  circuit  made  by  Nehe-
miah  around  the  ruined  city.     Neh.  ii.  13.     Lit.  like  him.

-  Lit.  falling  on  its  roofs ;  i.  e.  its  walls  falling  in  upon  the  fallen  roofs.

^  Comp.  Gen.  xv.  9.

2   D

402  THE    KORAN.

A  kind  speech  and  forgiveness  is  better  than  alms  fol-
lowed by  injury.     And  God  is  Rich,  Clement.
0  ye  who   believe  !  make  not  your  alms  void  by  re-
proaches and   injury,  like  him  who   spendeth  his
substance  to  be  seen  of  men,  and  believeth  not  in
God  and  in  the  latter  day.     The  likeness  of  such
an  one  is  that  of  a  rock  with  a  thin  soil  upon  it,  on
which  a  heavy  rain  falleth,  but  leaveth  it  hard  :  No
profit  from  their  works  shall  they  be  able  to  gain ;
for  God  guideth  not  the  unbelieving  people.
And  the  likeness  of  those  who  expend  their  substance
from  a  desire  to  please  God,  and  through  their  own
steadfastness,  is  as  a  garden  on  a  hill,  on  which
the  heavy  rain  falleth,  and  it  yieldeth  its  fruits
twofold ;  and  even  if  a  heavy  rain  fall  not  on  it,
yet  is  there  a  dew:  And  God  beholdcth  your  actions.
Desireth  any  one   of  you  to  possess  a  garden  of  palms
and  vines  beneath  which  rivers  flow,  in  which  he
may  have  every  fruit,    and    that    old  age  should
come  upon  him  with  a  weakly  offspring,  and  that
then  a  whirlwind  accompanied  by  flame  shall  strike
it  so  that  it  shall  be  burned  ?     Thus  God  maketh
plain  his  signs  to  you,  that  ye  may  reflect.
0  ye  who  believe  !  bestow  alms  of  the  good  things  which
ye   have   acquired,    and   of  that   which  We  have
brought  forth  for  you  out  of  the  earth,  and  make
not  choice  of  the  bad  for  almsgiving,
270  Such  as  ye  would  accept  yourselves  only  by  connivance  :
And  know  that  God  is  Rich,  Praiseworthy.
Satan  menaccth   {promisvtJi)  you  with   poverty,^    and
enjoineth  base  actions:  but   God    promiseth    you
pardon  from  Himself  and  abundance  :  And  God  is
All-bounteous,  Knowing.
He  giveth  wisdom  to  whom  He  will  :   and  he  to  whom
wisdom  is  given,  hath  much  good  given  unto  him ;
but  none  will  bear  it  in  mind,  except  those  gifted
with  understanding  hearts.
And  whatever  ye  expend  in  alms  or  whatever  vow  ye
vow,  of  a  truth  God  knoweth  it :  but  they  who  act
unjustly  shall  have  no  helpers.     If  ye  give  your
alms  openly,^  it  is  well ;   and  if  ye  conceal  them
and  give  them   to   the  poor,  this  too  will  be  of

•  i.e.  Satan  would  dissuade  you  from  liberal  contributions  by  instilling
the  fear  of  poverty.
»  Comp.  Matt.  vi.  3,  4.

THE    KORAN.  403

advantage  to  you  and  will  expiate  your  sins  :  And
God  is  cognizant  of  your  actions.
Their  guidance  is  not  tliino  affair,  0  Muhammad,  but
God  guideth  whom  He  pleaseth.     And  the  wealth
that  ye  expend  in  alms  shall  redound  unto  your-
selves; and  ye  shall  not  so  expend  but  as  seeking
the  face    of   God  ;    and  whatever    good  thing  ye
expend  as  alms,  shall  be  repaid  you,  and  ye  shall
not  be    wronged.     To    the    poor   should    alms  he
given  who  being   prevented   by  fighting    for  the
cause  of  God,  have  it  not  in  their  power  to  strike
out  into  the  earth  in  gvcst  of  riches.     Those  who
know  them   not,   think  them  rich  because  of  their
modesty.     By  this  their  token  thou   shalt  know
them — they  ask  not  of  men  with  importunity  :  and
whatever  good  thing  ye  expend  in  alms,  God  verily
taketh  knowledge  of  it.
They  who  expend  their  substance   in  alms,  by  night
and  day,  in  private  and  in  public,  shall  have  their
reward  with  their  Lord  :  no  fear  shall  come  on
them,  neither  shall  they  be  put  to  grief.
^  They  who  swallow  down  usury,  shall  arise  in  the  Resur-
rection o"ixr  ag  -j^Q  ariseth  whom  Satan  hath  infected
by  his  .^uch.     This,  for  that  they  say,  "  Selling  is
only  the  like  of  usury  :  "  and  yet  God  hath  allowed
selling,    and    forbidden    usury;    and    whosoever
receiveth    this  admonition    from    his    Lord,    and
abstaineth  from  it  shall  have  pardon  for  the  past,
and  his   lot^  shall  be  with   God.     But  they  who
return  to  usury,  shall  be  given  over  to  the  Fire, —
therein  to  abide  for  ever.
God  will  bring  usury  to  nought,  but  will  grant  an  increase
to  alms,  and  God  loveth  no  infidel,  or  evil  person.
Verily  they  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are
right,  and  observe  the  prayers,  and  pay  the  legal
impost,    they  shall   have    their  reward  with  their
Lord  :  no   fear  shall  come  on  them,  neither  shall
they  be  put  to  grief.
0  believers  !    fear  God  and  abandon  your  remaining

usury,  if  ye  are  believers ;
But  if  ye  do  it  not,  then  hearken  for  war  on  the  part  of
God  and  his  apostle :   yet   if  ye  repent,  ye  shall

'Or,  his  affair  {spedabit  ad  Deum.—Mar.) ;  i.e.  his  lot  shall  depend  on
God.

2  D  2

404  THE    KORAN.

have  the  principal  of  your  money.     Wrong  not,
and  ye  shall  not  be  wronged.

280  If  -any  one  Jind  difficulty  in  discharging  a  debt
then  let  there  be  a  delay  until  there  be  a  time  of
ease  for  him  :  but  if  ye  remit  it  as  alms  it  will
be  better  for  you^ — if  ye  know  it : —

And  fear  the  day  wherein  ye  shall  return  to  God  :  then
shall  every  soul  be  rewarded  according  to  its  desert,
and  none  shall  have  injustice  done  to  them.

O  ye  who  believe  !  when  ye  contract  a  debt  (payable)
at  a  fixed  date,  write  it  down,  and  let  the  notary
faithfully  note  between  you  :  and  let  not  the  notary
refuse  to  note,  even  as  God  hath  taught  him ;  but
let  him  note  it  down,  and  let  him  who  oweth  the
debt  dictate,  and  let  him  fear  God  his  Lord,  and
not  diminish  aught  thereof.  But  if  he  who  oweth
the  debt  be  foolish  or  weak,  or  be  not  able  him-
self to  dictate,  let  his  friend  dictate  for  him  with
fairness  :  and  call  to  witness  two  witnesses  of  your
people :  but  if  there  be  not  two  men,  let  there  be
a  man  and  two  women  of  those  whom  ye  shall
judge  fit  for  witnesses  :  if  the  one  of  them  should
mistake,  the  other  may  cause  her  to  recollect.  And
the  witnesses  shall  not  refuse,  whenever  they  shall
be  summoned.  And  disdain  not  to  put  the  debt  in
writing,  be  it  large  or  small,  with  its  time  of  pay-
ment :  this  will  be  more  just  for  you  in  the  sight
of  God,  better  suited  for  witnessing,  and  the  best
for  avoiding  doubt.  But  if  the  goods  be  there
present,  and  ye  pass  them  from  hand  to  hand —
then  it  shall  be  no  fault  in  you  not  to  write  it  down.
And  have  witnesses  when  ye  sell,  and  put  no
constraint  on  writer  or  witness  :  it  will  be  a  crime
in  you  to  do  this.  But  fear  God,  and  God  will  give
you  knowledge,  for  God  hath  knowledge  of  all
things.

And  if  ye  be  on  a  journey  and  find  no  notary,  let  pledges
be  taken  ;  but  if  one  of  you  trust  the  other,  let  him
who  is  trusted,  restore  what  ho  is  trusted  with,
and  fear  God  his  Lord.  And  refuse  not  to  give
evidence.  He  who  refuseth  is  surely  wicked  at
heart :  and  God  knoweth  your  deeds.
^  Whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth  is  God's  :
and  whether  ye  disclose  what  is  in  your  minds  or
conceal  it,  God  will  reckon  with    you  for  it;  and

THE    KORAN.  405

whom  He  pleaseth  will  He  forgive,  and  whom  He
pleaseth  will  He  punish ;  for  God  is  All-powerful.

The  apostle  believeth  in  that  which  hath  been  sent  down
from  his  Lord,  as  do  the  faithful  also.  Each  one
believeth  in  God  and  his  Angels  and  his  Scrip-
tures and  his  Apostles  :  We  make  no  distinction
between  any  of  his  Apostles.^  And  they  say,  "  We
have  heard  and  we  obey.  Thy  mercy,  Lord !  for
unto  Thee  must  we  return.'^

God  will  not  burden  -  any  soul  beyond  its  power.  It
shall  enjoy  the  good  which  it  hath  acquired,  and
shall  bear  the  evil  for  the  acquirement  of  which
it  laboured.^  0  our  Lord  !  punish  us  not  if  we
forget,  or  fall  into  sin ;  0  our  Lord  !  and  lay  not
on  us  a  load  like  that  which  Thou  hast  laid  on
those  who  have  been  before  us ;  0  our  Lord  !
and  lay  not  on  us  that  for  which  we  have  not
strength :  but  blot  out  our  sins  and  forgive  us,
and  have  pity  on  us.  Thou  art  our  protector  :  help
us  then  against  the  unbelievers.

[XCIL]

SURA  XCVIII.-CLEAR  EVIDENCE.
Medina. — 8  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

The  unbelievers  among  the  people  of  the  Book,  and
the  Polytheists,  did  not  waver,  until  the  CLEAR
EVIDE.NX'E  had  come  to  them  ;

A  messenger  from  God,  reciting  to  them  the  pure
pages  wherein  are  true  *  Scriptures  !

'  This  contradicts  or  abrogates  verse  254,  as  well  as  several  verses  in
Sura  [Iviii.]  xix.

*  Lit.  compel.

^  Lit.  to  it  ichat  it  hath  gained,  and  on  it  rchat  it  hath  acquired.

*  Sprenger  renders  here  and  at  verse  4,  unicandelbare,  unchanging,  and
supposes  the  passage  to  be  a  reply  to  those  of  his  hearers  who  demanded
from  ^[uhammad  revelations  free  from  any  subsequent  alterations.

406  THE    KORAN.

Neitlier  were  they  ^  to  whom  the  Scriptures  were  given
divided  into  sects,  till  after  this  clear  evidence  had
reached  them  !

Yet  was  not  aught  enjoined  on  them  but  to  worship
God  with  sincere  religion,^  sound  in  faith  ;  ^  and  to
observe  prayer  and  pay  the  stated  alms.  For  this
is  the  true  (religion).

Verily  the  unbelievers  among  the  people  of  the  Book,
and  among  the  Polytheists,  sJiall  go  into  the  fire
of  Gehenna  to  abide  therein  for  aye.  Of  all  crea-
tures are  they  the  worst  ! —

But  they  verily  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are
right — these  of  all  creatures  are  the  best  !

Their  recompense  with  their  Lord  shall  be  gardens  of
Eden,  'neath  which  the  rivers  flow,  in  which  they
shall  abide  for  evermore.

God  is  well  pleased  in  them  and  they  in  Him  !  This,
for  him  who  feareth  his  Lord.

[XCIIL]

SURA  LXIV.— MUTUAL  DECEIT.
Medina.'' — 18  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Gomioassionate,  the  Merciful.

All  tbat  is  in  the  Heavens,  and  all  that  is  in  the  Earth,
praiseth  God  :  his  the  Kingdom  and  his  the  Glory  !
and  He  hath  power  over  all  things  !

It  is  He  who  hath  created  you;  and  some  of  you  are

'  The  Muslims.

^  The  word  dyn  used  in  the  earlier  Suras  of  the  day  of  judgment,  is  used
in  the  Later  Suras  in  the  sense  of  rdigion.

'  Hanyfs.

■*  The  first  verse  of  tliis  Sura  and  the  phrase  ohe,]i  God,  and  the  Apostle
(verses  8,  12),  which  usually  occurs  only  in  the  Medina  Suras,  the  phrases
in  verse  16  compared  with  Sura  (cii.]  lix.  9,  as  well  as  the  subject-matter,
incline  me  to  follow  those  Muslim  commentators  who  are  of  opinion  that
the  whole  Sura  was  revealed  at  Medina.  Weil  and  Muir  suppose  it  to  be
Meccan.

THE    KORAN.  407

unbelievers   and  others    believers  :    Aud  God  be-
huldetli  all  your  actions.

He  hath  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  in  Truth  ;  ^
and  He  hath  fashioned  you  and  given  you  goodly
forms;    And  to  Him  must  ye  all  return.

He  knoweth  all  that  passeth  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the
Earth ;  and  He  knoweth  what  ye  hide  and  what  ye
bring  to  light;  And  God  knoweth  the  very  secrets
of  men's  breasts.

Hath  not  the  story  reached  you  of  those  who  disbelieved
of  yore,  and  therefore  tasted  the  evil  consequences
of  their  doings  ?  And  a  sore  punishment  doth
await  them.

This,  for  that  when  their  apostles  came  to  them  with
the  clear  tokens,  they  then  said,  "  Shall  men  be
our  guides  ?  "  And  they  believed  not  and  turned
their  backs.  But  God  can  dispense  with  them ;
and  God  is  Rich,  Praiseworthy  !

The  unbelievers  pretend  that  they  shall  by  no  means
be  raised /ro;/i.  the  dead.  Say  :  Nay,  by  my  Lord,
ye  shall  surely  be  raised ;  then  shall  ye  surely  be
told  of  your  deeds  !     And  easy  is  this  for  God.

Believe  then  in  God  and  his  apostle  and  in  the  light
whi  i  e  have  sent  down ;  for  God  is  fully  aware
of  all  ye  do.

The  day  when  He  shall  gather  you  together  for  the  day
of  the  assembly,  will  be  the  day  of  MUTUAL
DECEIT,^  and  whoso  believeth  in  God  and  doth
what  is  right,  his  deeds  of  evil  will  He  cancel,  and
He  will  bring  him  into  the  gardens  beneath  whose
shades  the  rivers  flow,  to  abide  therein  for  ever-
more. This  will  be  the  great  bliss  !
10  But  the  unbelieving — those  who  gave  the  lie  to  our
signs — shall  be  the  inmates  of  the  fire,  wherein
they  shall  remain  for  ever.  And  a  wretched  pas-
sage thither  !

No  mischance  chanceth  but  by  God's  permission ;  and
whoso  believeth  in  God,  that  man's  heart  He
sruideth  :    And  God  knoweth  all  thinfjs.

Obey  God  then  and  obey  the  apostle :  but  if  ye  turn

*  i.e.  for  a  serious  purpose.

*  i.e..  the  day  on  which  it  will  be  found  that  if  the  just  had  been  wicked
they  would  have  taken  the  place  of  the  reprobates,  while  the  reprobates
will  see  that  if  they  had  been  just  persons,  they  would  have  gone  to
Paradise.

i08  THE    KOKAN.

away,  yet  is  our  apostle  only  charged  with  open

preaching.
God  !  there  is  no  God  but  He  !     And  on  God  then  let

the  faithful  trust.
0  ye   who  believe  !     Verily  in  your  wives  and  your

children  ye  have  an  enemy  :  wherefore  beware  of

them.   But  if  ye  remit '  and  pardon  and  are  lenient,

then  verily  God  too  is  Lenient,  Merciful.
Your  wealth  and  your  children  are  only  a  trial !  but

God  !  with  Him  is  the  great  recompense.
Fear  God  then  with  all  your  might,  and  hear  and  obey  :

and  expend  in  alms  for  your  soul's  weal;  for  whoso

is  saved  from  his  own  greed, — these  shall  prosper.
If  ye  lend  God  a  generous  loan.  He  will  double  it  to

you  and  will  forgive    you,   for  God  is    Grateful,

Kind.
Cognizant  alilie  of  the  Hidden  and  the  Manifest  !   the

Mighty,  the  Wise  !

[XCIV.]

SURA  LXII.— THE  ASSEMBLY.
Medina. — 11  Verses,

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Com.i>assionate,  the  Merciful.

All  that  is  in  the  Heavens,  and  all  that  is  on  the
Earth,  uttereth  the  Praise  of  God,  the  King  !  the
Holy  !  the  Mighty  !  the  Wise  !

It  is  He  who  hath  sent  to  the  pagan  folk  (Arabs)  an
Apostle  from  among  themselves,  to  rehearse  his
signs  to  them,  and  to  purify  them,  and  to  impart
to  them  a  knowledge  of  "  the  Book  "  and  wisdom  ;
for  verily  they  were  aforetime  in  a  manifest  error.

And  others  among  them  have  not  yet  overtaken  those

'  Their  occarsionally  beguiling  you  from  your  duty,  especially  that  of
contending  for  the  faith.     Conip.  1  Cor.  vii.  32.

TQE    KORAN.  409

rrho  preceded  them  in  the  faith.     But  He  is  the
Mighty,  the  Wise  !

This  is  the  goodness  of  God  :  He  bestoweth  it  on  whom
He  will;  and  God  is  of  immense  goodness  !

The  likeness  for  those  on  whom  the  burden  of  the  law
was  laid,  and  who  afterwards  would  not  bear  it,  is
that  of  an  ass  beneath  a  load  of  books. ^  A  sorry
likeness  this,  ibr  the  people  who  gave  the  lie  to  the
signs  of  God  !  and  God  guideth  not  the  people  who
do  this  wrong  !

Say  :  0  ye  Jews,  if  ye  profess  that  ye  rather  than  other
men  are  the  friends  of  God,  then  covet  death  if  ye
are  men  of  truth  ;

But  never,  on  account  of  their  previous  handy  work,  will
they  covet  it ;  and  God  knoweth  the  wrong-doers.

Say  :  Verily  the  death  from  vdiich  ye  flee  will  surely
meet  you  :  Then  shall  ye  be  brought  back  to  Him
who  knoweth  alike  the  things  done  in  secret  and
openly  :  and  He  will  tell  you  of  your  actions.
^  0  ye  who  believe  !  "When  ye  are  summoned  to  prayer
on  the  day  of  THE  ASSEMBLY,^  haste  to  the
commemoration  of  God,  and  quit  your  traffic.
This,  if  ve  knew  it,  is  best  for  you.
10  And  wu  clie  Prayer  is  ended,  then  disperse  your-
selves abroad  and  go  in  quest  of  the  bounties  of
God,  and  oft  remember  God;  Haply  it  shall  be  well
with  you.

But  when  they  get  a  sight  of  merchandise  or  sport,
they  disperse  after  it,  and  leave  thee  standing
alone.^  Say  :  God  hath  in  reserve  what  is  better
than  sport  or  merchandise.  And  God  is  the  best
of  providers.

■  Lit.  the  likeness  for  those  to  whom  the  law  was  given  to  camj,  but  after-
icardji  (lid  not  carry  it,  is  the  likeness  of  an  ass  who  carrieth  books.

^  Friday ;  the  day  on  which  Muhammad  made  his  first  entry  into  Me-
dina ;   and  the  day  on  which  creation  was  finished.

^  It  is  said  that  when  Muhammad  was  preaching,  Dahya  Alkalbi,  while
yet  a  heathen,  came,  on  a  Friday,  into  Medina  at  the  head  of  a  caravan,
and  that  all  the  congregation,  attracted  by  the  music  of  the  tambours  which
preceded  it,  left  the  sermon  for  the  spectacle. — Muquatil  ap.  Alfarra.  If
this  account  be  accurate,  we  may  approximate  to  the  date  of  this  Sura  as
in  Hcj.  5  (towards  the  close).  Dahya  is  known  to  have  fought  in  the
rttnks  of  the  Muslims  at  the  battle  of  the  Ditch.     And  as  the  former  part

aimed  at  the  Jews,  it  is  probably  of  the  same  period  as  Sura  [xci.]  ii,

-ilO  THE    KORAN.

[XCV.]

SUKA  VIII.— THE  SPOILS.'
Medina. — 76  Verses.

i

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassioiiate,  the  Merciful.

They  will  question  thee  about  THE  SPOILS.  Say:
The  spoils  are  God's  and  the  apostle's.  Therefore,
fear  God,  and  settle  this  among  yourselves;  and
obey  God  and  his  apostle,  if  you  are  believers.

Believers  are  they  only  whose  hearts  thrill  with  fear
when  God  is  named,  and  whose  faith  increaseth  at
each  recital  of  his  signs,^  and  who  put  their  trust
in  their  Lord  ;

Who  observe  the  prayers,  and  give  alms  out  of  that
with  which  We  have  supplied  them  ;

These  are  the  believers  :  their  due  grade  awaiteth  them
in  the  presence  of  their  Lord,^  and  forgiveness,  and
a  generous  provision.
^  Eemevibcr  how  thy  Lord  caused  thee  to  go  forth  from
thy  home*  on  a  mission  of  truth,  and  verily  a  part
of  the  believers  were  quite  averse  to  it :

They  disputed  with  thee  about  the  truth""'  after  it  had
been  made  clear,  as  if  they  were  being  led  forth  to
death  and  saw  it  before  them  :

And  remember  when  God  promised  you  that  one  of  the
two  troops^  should  fall  to  you,  and  ye  desired  that

'  On  this  Sura,  which  relates  mainly  to  the  battle  of  Bedr,  see  Weil's
M.  der  Prophet,  p.  268.

'  Lit.  and  when  are  recited  to  them  his  Signs,  it  increaseth  their  Faith,
'  Lit.  due  to  them  {arc)  grades  with  their  Lord.

*  At  Medina.

*  The  necessity  for  the  combat  and  its  probable  result.

"  Muhammad  had  conceived  the  design  of  attackinj^  an  unarmed  cara-
van beloufjing  to  the  Koreish  on  its  way  from  Syria  to  Mecca.  Abu  Sofian,
who  had  char^^e  of  it,  sent  to  Mecca  for  succour,  whence  a  body  of  nearly
1,000  armed  men  at  once  set  out  to  his  assistance.  Some  of  the  Muslims
were  anxious  to  attack  the  caravan  :  others,  notwithstanding  the  disparity
of  numbers,  proposed  to  throw  themselves  upon  the  succours.

THE    KORAN.  411

they  who  had  no  arms  should  fall  to  you :  but  God
purposed  to  prove  true  the  truth  of  his  words^  and
to  cut  off  the  uttermost  part  of  the  infidels  ;

That  He  might  prove  his  truth  to  be  the  truth,  and  bring
to  nought  that  which  is  nought/  though  the  impious
were  averse  to  it : —

When  ye  sought  succour  of  your  Lord,  and  He  answered
you,  "  1  will  aid  you  with  a  thousand  ^  angels,  rank
on  rank  :  "  ^
lU  And  God  made  this  promise  as  pure  good  tidings,  and
to  assure  your  hearts  by  it :  for  succour  cometh
from  God  alone  !     Yerily  God  is  Mighty,  Wise.

Recollect  when  sleep,  a  sign  of  security  from  Him,  fell
upon  you,  and  He  sent  down  upon  you  water  from
Heaven  that  He  might  thereby  cleanse  you,  and
cause  the  pollution  of  Sat.in  ^  to  pass  from  you,  and
that  He  might  gird  up  your  hearts,  and  stablish
your  feet  by  it :

When  thy  Lord  spake  unto  the  angels,  "  I  will  be  with
you  ;  therefore  stablish  ye  the  faithful : — I  will  cast
a  dread  into  the  hearts  of  the  unbelievers.^'  Strike
off  their  heads  then,  and  strike  off  from  them
evf>»"'  ^iger-tip  :

This,  bbotiase  they  have  opposed  God  and  his  apostle  :

And  whoso  shall  oppose  God  and  his  apostle

Then  verily,  God  will  be  severe  in  punishment.

"  This  for  you  !  Taste  it  then  !  since  for  unbelievers  is
the  punishment  of  Hell-fire  !  "

0  ye  who  believe  !  when  ye  meet  the  marshalled  hosts
of  the  unbelievers,  turn  not  your  backs  to  them  :

For  whoso  turneth  his  back  to  them  on  that  day,  unless
he  turn  aside  to  fighting  or  to  rally  to  some  other
troop,  will  draw  down  on  himself  the  wrath  of  God :
Hell  shall  be  his  abode  and  wretched  the  journey
thither!

So  it  was  not  ye  who  slew  them,  but  God  slew  them  ;
and  those  shafts  were  God's  not  thine  ! "  He  would

>  Idolatry.

'  In  Sura  [xcvii.]  iii.  the  angels  are  said  to  be  3,000  ;  but  some  MSS.
read  in  this  passage  thousands.

^  YAt.  following  one,  another.

■*  Instilled,  say  the  commentators,  into  the  minds  of  the  faithful  in
dreams.

*  Lit.  thou  didst  not  cast  when  thou  didst  cast,  but  God  cast.  This  is
explained  of  the  miracle  of  the  gravel-stones  and  sand  cast  by  God  into
the  eyes  of  the  Koreish  at  Ecdr.

tl2  THE    KORAN.

make  trial  of  the  faithful  by  a  gracious  trial  from
Himself;    Verily,  God  Heareth,  Knoweth  :

This  hcfell,  that  God  might  also  enfeeble  the  craft  of  the
unbelievers.

0  Mecca ns !  if  ye  desired  a  decision,  now  hath  the  de-
cision come  to  you.^  It  will  be  better  for  you  if
ye  give  over  the  struggle  If  ye  return  to  it.  we
will  return  ;  and  your  forces,  though  they  be  many,
shall  by  no  means  avail  you  aught,  because  God  is
with  the  faithful.
20  0  ye  faithful !  obey  God  and  his  apostle,  and  turn  not
away  from  Him,  now  that  ye  hear  the  truth ;

And  be  not  like  those  who  say,  "  We  hear,^^  when  they
hear  not ; —

Verily  the  vilest  beasts  in  God's  sight  are  the  deaf,  the
dumb,  who  understand  not :

And  had  God  known  avy  good  in  them.  He  would  cer-
tainly have  made  them  hear;  and  if  He  had  made
them  hear,  they  would  certainly  have  turned  back
and  withdrawn  afar.

0  ye  faithful !  make  answer  to  the  appeal  of  God  and
his  apostle  when  he  calleth  you  to  that  which  giveth
you  life.  Know  that  God  cometh  in  between  a
man  and  his  own  heart,  and  that  to  Him  shall  ye
be  gathered  !

And  be  afraid  of  temptation  :  -  not  on  the  evil-doers
among  you  will  it  peculiarly  light :  ^  And  know  ye
that  God  is  severe  in  punishment.

And  remember  when  ye  were  few,'*  and  reputed  weak  in
the  land,  that  ye  feared  lest  men  should  pluck
you  away;  then  was  it  that  He  took  you  in  and
strengthened  you  with  his  help,  and  supplied  you
with  good  things  ;  Haply  ye  will  give  thanks.
^  0  ye  who  believe  1  deal  not  falsely  with  God  and  his
apostle  ;  and  be  not  false  in  your  engagements,
with  your  own  knowledge  :

And  know  that  your  wealth  and  your  children  are  a

'  i.  e.  by  our  victory  over  you.  '  Or,  sedition  ;  but  see  verse  28.

'i.e.  it  will  involve  others,  beside  the  actual  evil-doers,  in  its  conse-
quences.

■•  Muhammad  specially  addresses  the  Mohadjers  in  this  verse,  i.  e.  those
who  had  fled  with  him  to  Mt;diiia.  This  verse  and  verse  30  refer  to  the
plot  of  the  Koreish  against  Muhammad,  of  which  the  details  are  given  in
Syed  Ameer  All's  Life  of  Muhammad,  p.  6.3.

THE    KOKAN.  ^^''J

temptation  ;  and  that  God  !  with  Him  is  a  glorious

recompense.
0  ye  who  believe !  if  ye  fear  God  He  will  make  good

your    deliverance,    and  will    put   away  your  sins

from  you,  and  will  forgive  you.     God  is  of  great

bounteousness !
30  %  And  call  to  mind  when  the  unbelievers  plotted  against

thee,  to  detain  thee  prisoner  or  to  kill  thee  or  to

banish  thee  :  They  plotted— but  God  plotted :  and

of  plotters  is  God  the  best !
And  when  our  signs  were  rehearsed  to  them,  they  said,

"  Now    have    we    heard  :  if  we  pleased  we  could

certainly  utter  the  like  !    Yes,  it  is  mere  tales  ^  of

the  ancients : "
And  when  they  said,  "  God  !  if  this  be  the  very  truth

from  before  Thee,  rain  uown  stones  upon  us  from

Heaven,  or  lay  on  us  some  grievous  chastisement :"
But  God  chose  not  to  chastise   them  while  thou  wast

amonsr  them  :  nor  would  God  chastise  them  when

they  sued  for  pardon  : —
But  when  they  debar  the  faithful  from  the  holy  temple

albeit  they  are  not  its  guardians,  nothing  is  there

c.         .r  part  why  God  should  not  chastise  them.

The  Godfearing  only  are  its  guardians;   but  most

of  them  know  it  not.
And  their  devotion  at  the  house  of  God  is  no  other  than

whistling  through  the  fingers  and  clapping  of  the

hands — "  Taste  then  the  torment,  for  that  ye  have

been  unbelievers. ''
Verily  the  infidels  spend  their  riches  ^  with  intent  to

turn  men  aside  from   the  way  of  God :  spend  it

then  they  shall ;  then  shall  sighing  be  upon  them,

then  shall  they  be  overcome —
And  the  infidels  shall  be  gathered  together  unto  Hell,
That  God  may  separate  the  bad  from  the  good,  and  put

the  bad  one  upon  the  other,  and  heap  them  up

altogether,  and  put   them  into  Hell  !     These  are

they  who  shall  be  lost.
Say  to  the  infidels  :  If  they  desist  from  their  unbelief,

what  is  now  past  shall  be  forgiven  them  ;  but  if

they  return  to  it,  they  have  already  before  them  ^

the  doom  of  the  ancients  !

'  The  word  in  the  oriainal  is  probably  taken  from  the  Greek  laropia.
'  Twelve  of  the  Koreish  had  given  camels  and  a  large  sum  in  aid  of  the
Meccan  succours.  '  Lit.  hath  preceded.

414  THE    KORAN.

40  Figlit  then  against  them  till  civil  strife  be  at  an  end,
and  the  religion  be  all  of  it  God's ;  and  if  they
desist,. verily  God  bcholdoth  what  they  do;

But  if  they  turn  their  back,  know  ye  that  God  is  your
protector :  Excellent  protector !  and  excellent
helper  !
^  And  know  ye  that  when  ye  have  taken  any  booty,
a  fifth  ^  part  belongeth  to  God  and  to  the  Apostle
and  to  the  near  of  kin  and  to  orphans,  and  to  the
poor  and  to  the  wayfarer,  if  ye  believe  in  God
and  in  that  which  We  have  sent  down  to  our
servant  on  the  day  of  the  victory,^  the  day  of  the
meeting  of  the  Hosts ;  And  over  everything  is  God
potent.

AVhen  ye  were  encamped  on  the  near  side  of  the  valley,
and  they  were  on  the  further  side,  and  the  caravan
was  below  you,  if  ye  had  made  an  engagement
to  attack,  ye  would  assuredly  have  failed  the
engagement ;  but  ye  vere  led  into  action  notwith-
standing,  that  God  might  accomplish  the  thing
destined  to  be  done  :

That  he  who  perisheth  may  perish  in  spite  of  clear  evi-
dence^ before  him,  and  that  he  who  liveth  may
live  with  it.     And  verily,  God  Heareth,  Knoweth.

Remember  when  God  showed  them  to  thee  in  thy  dream
as  few  :  Had  he  shown  them  numerous,  ye  would
certainly  have  become  fainthearted,  and  would
certainly  have  disputed  about  the  matter — But  from
this  God  preserved  you — Verily  He  knoweth  the
secrets  of  the  breast —

And  when,  on  your  meeting  He  made  them  to  appear

in  your  eyes  as  few,  and  diminished  you  in  their

eyes,  that  God  might  carry  out  the  thing  that  was

to  be  done.*    And  to  God  do  all  things  return.

^  Believers  !  when  ye  confront  a  troop,  stand  firm  and

'  Before  Islnm  it  had  been  the  custom  aniorif^  the  Arabians  to  assign  a
fourth  part  of  the  booty  to  the  leader  of  an  expedition.  See  Freyt.  Einl.
p.  266.

"  On  the  day  of  the  battle  of  Eedr.     See  Sura  xxi.  40,  p.  152.

^  A  mission  of  Gabriel  to  Muhammad  with  the  promise  of  victory,  ac-
cording to  some.     Or,  the  surprising  nature  of  the  victory  itself.

*  Compare  the  different  account  in  Sura  [xcvii.]  iii.  11.  The  commenta-
tors, however,  get  over  the  discrepancy  by  explaining  the  apjiarent  dimi-
nution of  the  Muslims  at  the  commencement  only  of  the  battle,  which  had
the  effect  of  drawing  on  the  enemy  in  self-confidence.

THE    KORAN.  415

make  frequent  mention  of  the  name  af  God ; '  liaply
it  shall  fare  well  with  you  :

And  obey  God  and  his  Apostle  ;  and  dispute  not  among
yourselves,  lest  ye  become  fainthearted  and  your
success  go  from  youj  but  endure  with  steadfastness.
Verily  God  is  with  the  steadfastly  enduring.

And  be  not  like  those  Meccans  who  came  out  of  their
houses  insolently  and  to  be  seen  of  men,  and  who
turn  others  from  the  way  of  God — and  God  is
round  about  their  actions —
50  When  Satan  prepared  their  actions  for  them,  and
said,  "No  man  shall  conquer  you  this  day;  and
verily  I  will  be  near  to  help  you  : ''  But  when  the
two  armies  came  in  sight,  he  turned  on  his  heels,
and  said,  "  Lo,  I  am  clear  of  you  :  Lo  I  see  what
ye  see  not  :  -  Lo,  I  am  afraid  of  God  ;  and  God
is  severe  in  punishing/' —

When  the  hypocrites  and  the  diseased  of  heart  said,
"  Their  religion  hath  deceived  the  Muslims  ;  ^    But

whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  God yes,  verily,

God  is  Mighty,  Wise  !

And  if  thou  didst  see,  when  the  angels  take  the  life
of  jlievers  !     They  smite  their  faces  and  their

backs,  and — "  Taste  ye  the  torture  of  the  burning

This,  for  what  your  hands  have  sent  on  before  you  :  " — ■
and  because  God  is  not  unjust  to  his  servants.

Their  state  is  like  that  of  the  people  of  Pharaoh  and  of
those  before  them  who  believed  not  in  the  signs
of  God :  therefore  God  seized  upon  them  in  their
sin  !     Verily  God  is  Mighty,  severe  in  punishing.

This,  because  God  changeth  not  the  favour  with  which
He  favoureth  a  people,  so  long  as  they  change  not
what  is  in  themselves  ;  and  because  God  Heareth,
Knoweth.

Their  state  is  like  that  of  the  people  of  Pharaoh,  and  of
those  before  them  who  treated  their  Lord's  signs
as  lies.  We  therefore  destroyed  them  in  their
sins,  and  We  drowned  the  people  of  Pharaoh  ;  for
they  were  all  doers  of  wrong.

The  worst  beasts  truly  in  the  sight  of  God  are  the
thankless  who  believe  not ;

'  Or,  remember  God  much.

^  The  angels  fighting  for  the  Muslims.

'  By  inducing  them  to  attack  so  greatly  superior  a  force.

tlO  THJS    KOkAn.

They  with  whom  thou  hadst  leagued,  but  who  ever
afterwards  break  their  league,  and  fear  not  God  !

And  if  thou  capture  them  in  battle,  then  (by  the
example  of  their  fate)  put  to  flight  those  who  are
behind  them — they  will  perhaps  be  warned  : —
60  Or  if  thou  fear  treachery  from  any  people,  throw  back
their  treaty  to  them  as  thou  fairly  may  est  ;^  Verily
God  loveth  not  the  treacherous.

And  think  not  that  the  infidels  shall  get  the  better  of
Us  ! — Verily  they  shall  not  find  God  to  be  weak. —

Make  ready  then  against  them  what  force  ye  can,  and
squadrons  of  horse  whereby  ye  may  strike  terror
into  the  enemy  of  God  and  your  enemy,  and  into
others  beside  them  whom  ye  know  not,  but  whom
God  knoweth ;  And  all  that  you  expend  for  the
cause  of  God  shall  be  repaid  you ;  and  ye  shall  not
be  wronged.

But  if  they  lean  to  peace,  lean  thou  also  to  it ;  and  put

thy  trust  in  God  :   He  verily  is  the  Hearing,  the
Knowing.

But  if  they  seek  to  betray  thee,  then  verily  God  will  be
all-suflBcient  for  thee.  He  it  is  who  strengthened
thee  with  his  help  and  with  the  faithful,  and  made
their  hearts  one.  Hadst  thou  spent  all  the  riches
of  the  earth,  thou  wouldest  not  have  united  their
hearts;  but  God  hath  united  them:  He  verily  is
Mighty,  AVise.

0  prophet  !  God,  and  such  of  the  faithful  as  follow
thee,  will  be  all-sufficient  for  thee  !

O  prophet  !  stir  up  the  faitliful  to  the  fight.  Twenty
of  you  who  stand  firm  shall  vanquish  two  hundred  :
and  if  there  be  a  hundred  of  you,  they  shall  van-
quish a  thousand  of  the  infidels,  for  they  are  a
people  devoid  of  understanding.

Now  hath  God  made  your  work  easy,  for  He  knoweth
that  there  is  weakness  among  you.  If  therefore
there  be  a  hundred  of  you  who  endure  resolutely,
they  shall  vanquish  two  hundred  ;  and  if  there  be
a  thousand  of  you,  they  shall  vanquish  two  thou-
sand^  by  God's  permission ;  for  God  is  v/ith  those
who  are  resolute  to  endure.

No  prophet  hath  been  enabled  to  take  captives  until  he
had  made  great  slaughter  in  the  earth.     Ye  desire

'  Thus  Beidh.     Or,  more  simply,  render  them  the  like.
'  Comp.  Lev.  xxvi.  8  ;  Josh,  xxiii.  10.

THE    KORAN.  417

the  passing  fruitions  of  this  world,  but  God  de-
sireth  the  next  life  for  you.  And  God  is  Mighty,
Wise.

Had  there  not  been  a  previous  ordinance  ^  from  God,  a
severe  chastisement  had  certainly  befallen  you,  on
account  of  the  ransom  which  ye  took.
70  Eat  therefore  of  the  spoils  ye  have  taken  that  which  is
lawful  and  good ;  and  fear  God :  verily  God  is
Gracious,  Merciful.

0  prophet !  say  to  the  captives  who  are  in  your  hands,
"  If  God  shall  know  good  -  to  be  in  your  hearts.
He  will  give  you  good  beyond  all  that  hath  been
taken  from  you,  and  will  forgive  you  :  for  God  is
Forgiving,  Merciful, ''

But  if  they  seek  to  deal  treachprously  with  thee — they
have  already  dealt  treacherously'  with  God  before  !
Therefore  hath  He  given  you  power  over  them.
And  God  is  Knowing,  Wise.

Yerily,  they  who  believe  and  have  fled  their  homes
and  spent  their  substance  and  themselves  for  the
cause  of  God,  and  they  who  have  taken  in  the
2'>rophet  and  been  helpful  to  liirn,  shall  be  near  of
kin  J  one  to  the  other.  And  they  who  have
believed,  but  have  not  fled  their  homes,  shall  have
no  rights  of  kindred  with  you  at  all,  until  they  too
fly  their  country.  Yet  if  they  seek  aid  from  you
on  account  of  the  faith,  your  part  it  is  to  give
them  aid,  except  against  a  people  between  whom
and  yourselves  there  may  be  a  treaty.  And  God
beholdeth  your  actions.

And  the  infidels  have  the  like  relationships  one  with
another.  Unless  ye  do  the  same,  there  will  be
discord  in  the  land  and  great  corruption.

But  as  for  those  who  have  believed  and  fled  their
country,  and  fought  in  the  cause^  of  God,  and  pro-
vided the  prophet  an  asylum  and  been  helpful  to
him,  these  are  the  faithful;  Mercy  is  their  due  and
a  noble  provision.

And  they  who  have  believed  and  have  since  fled  their
country,  and  fought  at  your  side,  these  also  are

'  Authorizing  the  ransom  of  captives.
'  i.e.  a  disposition  to  become  Aluslims.
^  i.  e,  ou  account  of  their  infidelity.

*  i.e.  as  heirs  of  property.

*  Lit.  171  the  path.

2    E

418  I'HB    KORAN.

of  you.  Those  who  are  united  by  ties  of  blood  ^
are  the  nearest  of  kin  to  each  other.  This  is  in
the  Book  of  God.   Verily,  God  knoweth  all  things.

[XCVI.]
SURA2   XLVII.— MUHAMMAD.

Medina. — 40  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Whoso  believe  not,  and  turn  others  aside  from  the  way
of  God — their  works  will  He  cause  to  miscarry  ;^

But  whoso  believe,  and  do  the  things  that  are  right,
and  believe  in  what  hath  been  revealed  to  MU-
HAMMAD—for  it  is  the  truth  from  their  Lord—
their  sins  will  He  cancel,  and  dispose  their  hearts
aright.

This — because  the  infidels  follow  falsehood,  while  those
who  believe,  follow  the  truth  from  their  Lord.
Thus  to  men  doth  God  set  forth  their  likenesses.

When  ye  encounter  the  infidels,*  strike  off  their  heads
until,  when  ye  have  made  a  great  slaughter  among
them,  then  bind  fast  the  fetters  ;

And  aftenvards  either  shoiv  liberality  ly  free  dismissals
or  exact  ransoms  until  the  war  hath  laid  down  its
burdens.  Thus  do.  Were  such  the  pleasure  of
God,  He  could  surely  Himself  take  vengeance  on
them  :  but  He  would  rather  prove  the  one  of  you

>  See  Weil,  Life  of  M.,  p.  84,  n.  t>  j       i.

»  This  Sura  was  revealed  at  a  period  after  the  victory  at  Bedr,  when
there  was  still  some  hesitation  on  the  part  of  Muhammad's  followers  to
take  decided  steps  for  sccurint;  their  position.     See  37.

»  Lit.  xvill  He  cau^e  to  wander,  that  is,  from  their  proper  aim  and  end,
the  rewards  of  Paradise.     See  verse  5  ad  f.

*  The  Meccans  and  other  unbelievers  of  Muhammad's  time.  The  Hane-
fites  suppose  this  law  to  apply  only  to  the  battle  of  Bedr.  The  Shiites
take  it  as  of  universal  obligation.

THE    KORAN.  U  l'

by  the  other.     And  whoso  fight'  for  the  cause  of
God,  their  works  He  will  not  suffer  to  miscarry ;

He  will  vouchsafe  them  guidance^  and  dispose  their
hearts  aright ;

And  He  will  bring  them  into  the  Paradise,  which  He
hath  made  known  to  them.

Believers !  if  ye  help  God,  God  will  help  you,  and  will
set  your  feet  firm  :

But  as  for   the  infidels,  let  them  perish  !     And  their
works  shall  God  bring  to  nought :
10     This — because  they  were    averse   from   what  God  re-
vealed; Fruitless,  therefore,  shall  He  render  their
works.

Have  they  not  then  journeyed  through  the  land,  and
seen  what  hath  been  the  end  of  those  who  flourished
before  them  ?  God  brought  destruction  on  them  :
and  the  like  of  this  doth  await  the  infidels.

This — because  God  is  the  protector  of  those  who
believe,  and  because  the  infidels  have  no  pro-
tector.

Verily  God  will  bring  those  who  believe,  and  do  the
things  that  ai'e  right,  into  the  Gardens  beneath
whv  -.ades  the  rivers  flow  :  but  thev  who  believe
not,  take  their  fill,  and  eat  as  the  beasts  eat !  And
their  dwelling-place  the  fire  of  Hell !

And  how  many  cities  were  mightier  in  strength  than
thy  city  which  hath  thrust  thee  forth  !^  We  de-
stroyed them,  and  there  was  none  to  help  them.

Shall  he  then  who  folio weth  the  clear  teaching  of  his
Lord  be  as  he,  the  evil  of  whose  doings  hath  been
made  to  seem  good  to  him,  and  as  those  who  follow
their  own  passions  ?
^  A  picture  of  the  Paradise  which  is  promised  to  the
God-fearinof  !  Therein  are  rivers  of  water  which
corrupt  not ;  and  rivers  of  milk  whose  taste
changeth  not ;  and  rivers  of  wine  delicious  to
those  who  quafi"  it ;

And  rivers  of  honey  clarified  :  and  therein  are  all  kinds
of  fruit  for  them,  and  forgiveness  from  their  Lord  !
Is  this  like  the  lot  of  those  who  must  dwell  for
ever  in  Hell-fire,  and  shall  have  draughts  of  boiling

'  According  to  another  reading,  are  xlain.

^  This  verse  is  said  (by  Omar  b.  Muhammad,  and  Itq.  43)  to  be  the
expression  of  INIuharamad's  feelings  at  the  injuries  inflicted  on  Mecca.
He  is  reported  to  have  wept  over  it.

2  E  2

420  THE    KORAN.

water  forced  on  them  which  will  rend  their  bowels
asunder  ?

Some  of  them  indeed  hearken  to  thee,  until  when  they
go  out  from  thee,  they  say  to  those  to  whom  "  the
knowledge'^  hath  been  given,  "  What  is  this  he
said  just  now  V  These  are  they  on  whose  hearts
God  hath  set  a  seal,  and  who  follow  their  own
lusts.

But  as  to  those  who  have  the  guidance,  He  will  increase
their  guidance,  and  He  will  teach  them  what  to
fear.^
20  For  what  then  do  the  infidels  wait,  but  that  the  Hour
come  suddenly  on  them  ?  Already  are  its  signs
come,^  and  when  it  hath  come  on  them  indeed,
how  can  they  be  warned  then?

Know  then  that  verily  there  is  no  god  but  God  :  and
ask  pardon  for  thy  sin,  and  for  believers,  both  men
and  women.  God  knoweth  your  busy  movements,
and  jour  final  resting-places.

Moreover  the  believers  say,  "  Oh,  would  that  a  Sura
were  sent  down  ! ''  but  when  a  peremptory  Sura^
is  revealed  whose  burden  is  war,  thou  mayest  see
the  diseased  of  heart  look  toward  thee  with  the
look  of  one  on  whom  the  shadows  of  death  have
fallen  !  But  better  in  them  would  be  obedience
and  becoming  language ;

And  if,  when  the  command  for  war  is  issued,*  they  are
true  to  God,  it  will  be  assuredly  best  for  them.

Would  it  then  have  happened  that  ye,  if  ye  had  been
put  in  authority,^  would  have  spread  disorder  in
the  land,  and  violated  your  ties  of  blood  ?

These  are  they  whom  God  hath  cursed,  and  made  deaf,
and  blinded  their  eyes  !

Will  they  not  then  meditate  on  the  Koran  ?  Are  locks
upon  their  hearts  ?

Verily  those  who  return  to  their  errors  ^  after  "  the
guidance ''  hath  been  made  plain  to  them, — Satan

'  Or,  with  UUman  and  others,  He  vill  reward  their  jnety.

'  The  first  si<fn  being  the  mission  of  Muhammad  ;  the  second,  the  split-
ting of  the  moon  ;  the  third,  the  smoke  mentioned  in  Sura  xliv.  p.  90.

^  Commanding  war  against  the  infidels,  and  not  to  be  abrogated  by  any
subsequent  revelation.

*  Lit.  when  the  affair  is  resolved  upon.  Mar.  ubi  vero  firmatum  fuerit
•prmceptum  {de  pra;lio).

*  Or,  if  ye  had  turned  hack  from  Islam  to  idolatry.  Thus  Ullraan  and
others.  *  Lit.  who  turn  upon  their  backs.

THE    KOKAN.  421

hath  beguiled  them,  and  continued  to  buoy  them

up  icitli  his  suggestions.
This — because  they  say  to  those  who  abhor  what  God

hath  revealed,  "  We  will  comply  with  you  in  part

of  what  ye  enjoin/^    But  God  knoweth  their  secret

reservations.
But  how  when  the  angels,  in  causing  them  to  die,  shall

smite  them  on  their  faces  and  their  backs  !
30     This — because  they  follow  that  which  angereth  God,

and  abhor  what  pleaseth  Him  :  therefore  will  He

make  their  works  fruitless.
Think  these  men  of  diseased  hearts,  that  God  will  not

bring  out  their  malice  to  light  ?
And  if  such  were  our  pleasure,  We  could  certainly  point

them  out  to  thee,  and  thou  surely  know  them  by  their

tokens  :  and  know  them  ■■  hou  shalt,  by  the  strange-
ness of  their  words. ^     God  knoweth  your  doings.
And  We  will  surely  test  you,  until  We  know  the  valiant

and  the  steadfast  among  you  :  and  We  will  test  the

reports  of  your  conduct.
Yerily  they  who  believe  not,   and  turn  others  from  the

way  of  God,  and  separate  from  the  Apostle  after

th>^<"  "  the    guidance "  hath    been    clearly    shown

thbtxi,  shall  in  no  way  injure  God  :  but  their  works

shall  He  bring  to  nought.
Believers  !  obey  God  and  the  Apostle  and  render  not

your  works  of  none  effect.
Yerily  those  who  believe  not,   and  who  pervert  others

from  the  way  of  God,  and  then   die  in  unbelief,

God  will  not  forgive.
Be  not  faint-hearted  then ;  and  invite  not  the  iiifidels  to

peace  when  ye  have  the  upper  hand  :  for  God  is

with  you,  and  will  by  no  means  defraud  you  of  the

recompense  of  your  works.
Man^s  life  in  this  world  is  a  mere  play  and  pastime  !

but  if  ye  believe  and  fear  God,  He  will  give  you

your  rewards  : — but  He  will  not  demand  your  riches

of  you : —
Should  He  ask  them  of  you  and  urge  you,  ye  might

show  yourselves    niggards,  and  He  would  bring

your  grudges  -  to  ligld.

'  Unintelligible  or  affected  words,  applied  to  the  new  religion  in  con-
tempt. See  Sura  [xcL]  ii.  56,  p.  372.  Or  it  may  be  rendered,  hy  the
vicious  pronunciation  of  their  vords.

-  Hatreds,  or  ill  feelings,  i.e.  towards  the  Prophet.     Comp.  v.  31  above.

422  THE    KORAN.

40  Lo  !  ye  are  they,  who  are  called  to  expend  for  the  cause
of  God  :  and  some  of  you  are  niggards  :  but  whoso
is  niggardly,  shall  bo  niggard  only  to  his  own  loss  ;
for  God  is  the  Rich,  and  ye  are  the  poor  :  and  if
ye  turn  hack,  He  will  resolve  to  change  you  for
another  people  :^  Then  shall  they  not  be  your  like  !

[XCVIL]

SUEA  III.— THE  FAMILY  OF  IMRAN.^
Medina. — 200  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

Elif.  Lam.  Mim.^  God !  there  is  no  god  but  He,  the
Living,  the  Self-subsisting.

In  truth  hath  He  sent  down  to  thee  "  the  Book,'^  which
confirmeth  those  which  precede  it :  For  He  had
sent  down  the  Law  and  the  Evangel  aforetime,  as
man's  Guidance ;  and  noio  hath  He  sent  down  the
"Illumination''*  (Furkan).

Verily  for  those  who  believe  not  in  the  signs  of  God,  is

>  Matt.  xxi.  43.

'  Verses  1-87  probably  belonrr  to  the  period  between  the  battle  of  Bedr
and  Hej.  6. —  Muhaimiiad  supposed  Iniran  or  Am  ran  to  be  the  father  of
the  Vir^iin  Mary  (Sura  [cix.]  Ixvi.  12) — Mary  and  Elizabeth  to  be  sisters  ;
who,  with  Jesus,  John,  and  Zacharias,  make  up  the  family  of  Imrau.  It
is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  Muhammad  is  K'uilty  of  the  ana-
chronism of  confounding  Miriam  with  the  Virgin  Mary.  On  the  other
hand  is  the  difficulty  of  conceiving  that  as  the  sequence  of  time  and  fact
is  observed  with  tolerable  accuracy  in  regard  to  the  main  features  of  Jew-
ish and  Christian  History,  he  should  h;ive  fallen  into  so  serious  an  error,
or  have  so  inadvertently  adopted,  as  Mr.  Muir  supposes,  the  phraseology
of  bis  Jewish  informants  (amongst  whom  the  only  well-known  Mary  (Mi-
riam) was  the  daui;hter  of  Imnin  and  the  sister  of  Moses)  as  to  have  over-
looked the  discrepancy  in  their  respective  dates.  But  it  is  possible  that
Muhammad  believed,  as  some  Muslim  writers  assert,  that  Miriam's  soul
and  body  were  mimculously  preserved  till  the  time  of  Jesus,  in  order  to
become  Mary  his  mother.  Certainly  the  Talmudists  fabled  that  the  Angel
of  Death  and  the  worm  of  corruption  had  no  power  over  Miriam.  Comp.
Babha  Bathra,  17  ;  Jos.  Ant.  iv.  4,  6.

^  See  note,  p.  16.         *  Sec  Sura  xxi.  49,  p.  152,  n.

THE    KOKAN.  42'6

a  severe  chastisement !     Aud  God  is  Mighty,  the
Avenger  !

God !  nought  that  is  in  Earth  or  that  is  in  Heaven,
is  hidden  unto  Him.  He  it  is  who  formed  you,
according  to  his  own  pleasure  in  the  womb.  There
is  no  god  but  He;  the  Mighty,  the  Wise  !

He  it  is  who  sent  down  to  thee  "  the  Book."  Some  of
its  signs  are  of  themselves  perspicuous; — these  are
the  basis  ^  of  the  Book — and  others  are  figurative.
But  they  whose  hearts  are  given  to  err,  follow  its
figures,  craving  discord,  and  craving  an  interpre-
tation ;  yet  none  knoweth  its  interpretation  but  God.
But  the  stable  in  knowledge  say,  "  We  believe  in
it :  it  is  all  from  our  Lord.""  Yet  none  receive  the
admonition,  save  men  endued  with  understanding.

0  our  Lord  !  suffer  not  our  hearts  to  go  astray  after
that  Thou  hast  once  guided  us,  and  give  us  mercy
from  before  Thee  ;  verily  Thou  art  He  who  giveth  !

0  our  Lord  !  For  the  day  of  luhose  comi)i(j  there  is  not
a  doubt  Thou  wilt  surely  gather  mankind  together :
Yerily  God  will  not  fail  the  promise.

Verily  as  for  the  unbelievers  neither  their  wealth  nor
thft'"  ''hildreu  shall  by  any  means  avail  them  aught
agw.iist  God ;  and  they  shall  be  fuel  for  the  fire.

After  the  wont  of  the  people  of  Pharaoh,  and  of  those
who  went  before  them,  they  treated  our  signs  as
falsehoods.  Therefore  God  laid  hold  of  them  in
their  sins  ;  and  God  is  severe  in  punishing  !
10  Say  to  the  infidels  :  Ye  shall  be  worsted,  and  to  Hell
shall  ye  be  gathered  together ;  and  wretched  the
couch  !

Ye  have  alrearlv  had  a  sio^n-  in  the  meeting  of  the  two
hosts.  The  one  host  fought  in  the  cause  of  God,
and  the  other  was  infidel.  In  their  own  eyesight,
the  infidels  saw  you  twice  as  many  as  themselves  :  ^
And  God  aided  with  his  succour  whom  He  would  :
In  this  truly  was  a  lesson  for  men  endued  with
discernment.

Made  fair-seeming  to  men  is  the  love  of  pleasures  from
women  and  children,  and  treasured  talents  *  of  gold

'  Lit.  mother,  Le.  groimd-work.

*  In  the  battle  of  Bedr,  Muhammad,  with  319  followers,  routed  l/AHJ
ileccans,  A.H.  2.

^  Lit.  th<:y  saw  than  (as)  their  likes,  or  cqulv'aUiUi.

*  The  talent  is  1,200  oz.  of  gold.

424  THE    KORAN.

^

and  silver,  and  horses  of  mark,  and  flocks,  and
cornfields  !  Such  the  enjoyment  of  this  world^s
life.     But  God  !  goodly  the  home  with  Him.

Say  :  Shall  I  tell  you  of  better  things  than  these,  pre-
pared for  those  who  fear  God,  in  his  presence  ?
Theirs  shall  be  gardens  beneath  which  the  rivers
flow  and  in  which  shall  they  abide  for  ever,  and
wives  of  stainless  purity,  and  acceptance  with  God  :
for  God  regardeth  his  servants —

Who  say,  ''  0  our  Lord !  Verily  we  have  believed ;
forgive  us  then  our  sins,  and  keep  us  from  the  tor-
ment of  the  fire  ; '' —

The  patient,  and  the  truthful,  and  the  lowly,  and  the
charitable,  and  they  who  seek  pardon  at  each  day-
break.
^  God  witnesseth  that  there  is  no  god  but  He  :  and
angels,  and  men  endued  with  knowledge,  stablished
in  righteousness,  proclaim  "  There  is  no  god  but
He,  the  Mighty,  the  Wise  !  "

Verily  the  true  religion  with  God  is  Islam  :  and  they  to
whom  the  Scriptures  had  been  given,  differed  not
till  after  "  the  knowledge "  ^  had  come  to  them,
(and)  through  mutual  jealousy.  But  as  for  him
who  believeth  not  in  the  signs  of  God — God  of  a
truth  will  be  prompt  to  reckon  icith  him  ! —

And  if  they  dispute  with  thee,  then  sat,  I  have  sur-
rendered myself  to  God,  as  have  they  who  follow
me ;

And  SAY  to  those  who  have  been  given  the  Scripture,
and  to  the  common  folk.  Do  ye  surrender  your-
selves unto  God  ?  2  Then,  if  they  become  Muslims,
are  they  guided  aright :  but  if  they  turn  away,  then
thy  duty  is  only  preaching ;  and  God's  eye  is  on
his  servants.

'  i.e.  knowledge  or  revelation  became  the  cause  of  disputings.

'  i.  e.  Will  ye  receive  Islam  ?  The  TJinmiin,  or  common  folk,  the  heathen
Arabians  destitute  of  Revelation.  In  the  earliest  extant  liiography  of
Muhammad,  by  Ibn  Ishaq,  we  find  those  words  addressed  by  Zaid,  pre-
vious to  the  assumption  of  the  prophetic  office  by  Muhammad,  to  the
Koreish.  This  is  one  of  the  facts  which  show  that  the  way  was  to  a  great
extent  prepared  for  Islam.  This  whole  address  of  Zaid's — which  contains
not  less  than  six  passages  afterwards  repeated  in  the  Koran — may  be  seen
in  Dr.  Sprenger's  Life  of  M.,  p.  42.  The  instances  of  others  who  had
learned  to  disbelieve  in  idolatry,  and  had  either  become  Jews  or  Chris-
tians, or  held  their  minds  in  suspense,  might  easily  be  multiplied.  Comp.
SharastAni,  p.  437  ;  INIasudi,  ch.  6.

THE    KORAN.  '425

20  Verily  those  who  believe  not  in  the  signs  of  God  and
unjustly  slay  the  prophets  and  slay  those  men  who
enjoin  uprightness, — to  them  then  announce  an
afflictive  chastisement.

These  are  they  whose  works  come  to  nought  in  this
world,  and  in  the  next ;  and  none  shall  they  have
to  help  them  !

Hast  thou  not  marked  those  who  have  been  given  a
portion  of  the  Scriptures,  when  they  are  summoned
to  the  Book  of  God  that  it  may  settle  their  dif-
ferences ?  Then  did  a  part  of  them  turn  back,
and  were  averse ;

This — because  they  said,  "  The  fire  shall  by  no  means
touch  us,  but  for  certain  days :  ^' — And  their  own
devices  have  deceived  them  in  their  religion.

But  how,  when  We  shall  assemble  them  together  for
the  day  of  whose  coming  there  is  no  doubt,  and
when  every  soul  shall  be  paid  what  it  hath  earned,
and  they  shall  not  be  wronged  ?
%  Say  :  0  God,  possessor  of  all  power,^  Thou  givest  power
to  whom  Thou  wilt,  and  from  whom  Thou  wilt.
Thou  takest  it  away  !  Thou  raisest  up  whom
Tb'^-  !lt,  and  whom  Thou  wilt  Thou  dost  abase  !
In  tny  hand  is  good  !  Verily  Thou  art  over  all  things
potent.

Thou  causest  the  night  to  pass  into  the  day,  and  Thou
causest  the  day  to  pass  into  the  night ;  and  Thou
bringest  the  living  out  of  the  dead^  and  Thou
bringest  the  dead  out  of  the  living ;  and  Thou
givest  sustenance  to  whom  Thou  wilt,  without
measure.
^  Let  not  believers  take  unbelievers  for  their  friends  ^
rather  than  believers  :  whosoever  doth  this  hath
nothing  to  hope  from  God — unless  indeed  ye  fear  a
fear  from  them :  But  God  would  have  you  beware
of  Himself;  for  to  God  ye  return.  Say  :  Whether
ye  hide  what  is  in  your  breasts,  or  whether  ye
publish  it  abroad,  God  knoweth  it :  He  knoweth
what  is  in  the  heavens  and  what  is  in  the  earth;
and  over  all  things  is  God  potent.

'  The  King  of  the  Kingdom,  or  Lord  of  Might.  This  verse  and  the
followiug  are  either  fragments  of  some  lost  Sura,  or  belong  to  one  of  the
Meccan  Suras.  At  any  rate,  they  are  misplaced,  intemipting  as  they  do
the  connection  of  the  preceding  and  subsequent  verses.

''  Or,  patrons,  protectors.

•

426  THE    KOKAN.

On  that  day  shall  every  soul  find  pi'esent  whatever
it  hath  wrought  of  good;  ^  and  as  to  what  it  hath
wrought  of  evil,  it  will  wish  that  wide  were  the
space  between  itself  and  it!  But  God  would  have  you
beware  of  Himself;  for  God  is  kind  to  his  servants.

Say  :  If  ye  love  God,  then  follow  me  :  God  wilt  love
you,  and  will  forgive  your  sins;  for  God  is  Forgiv-
ing, Merciful.  Say  :  Obey  God  and  the  Apostle  ;
but  if  ye  turn  away,  then  verily,  God  loveth  not  the
unbelievers.
30  Verily  above  all  human  beings  did  God  choose  Adam,
and  Noah,  and  the  family  of  Abraham,  and  the
family  of  IMRAN,  the  one  the  posterity  of  the
other  :  And  God  Heareth,  Knoweth.

Remember  when  the  wife  of  Imran  ^  said,  "  O  my  Lord  !
Verily  I  vow  to  thee  what  is  in  my  womb,  for  thy
special  service.  Accept  it  then  from  me,  for  Thou  art
He  who  Heareth,  Knoweth  !  "  And  when  she  had
given  birth  to  it  she  said,  "  0  my  Lord  !  Verily
I  have  brought  forth  a  female,^^ — God  knew  what
she  had  brought  forth ;  a  male  is  not  as  a  female  ^ —
"and  I  have  named  her  Mary,  and  I  commend  her
and  her  offspring  to  thy  protection  from  Satan  the
stoned."  '^

So  with  goodly  acceptance  did  her  Lord  accept  her,  and
with  goodly  growth  did  He  make  her  grow ;  ^  and
Zacharias  reared  her.  So  oft  as  Zacharias  went  in
to  Mary  at  the  sanctuary,  he  found  her  supplied
with  food.^     "  Oh  Mary  !  "  said  he,  "  whence  hast

'  i.e..  along  with  itself  before  God.

'  The  wife  of  Iinran  is  Hannah  or  Anne,  Conip.  Protev.  Jac.  iv.  EZttc
Sk  'Awn,  Zi)  Ki'pcoc  o  0H)(.-  ^ov,  tt'iv  yti'Viieuj  lire  dppiv  tin  OijXv,  TrpoTa^io
avTo  5cupoi/  \i.vpii{)  Tip  Bi<il  1.10V,  Kui  irrrai  Xtirovpyovi/  avriii  naaaq  tuq  i)ftipae
TtjQ  'CcjiiQ  avTov.—  KvAnvr.  (io  Nat.  Mar.  1  :  Voveruut  taiiien  (IVIariai  paren-
tes)  si  forte  donaret  eis  Deus  sobolem,  earn  se  Dei  servitio  niancipaturos.
— Although  Muhammad  had  no  direct  access  to  the  Apocryphal  Gospels,
yet  these  may  have  influenced,  or  at  any  rate  contained  much  in  common
with,  the  ordinary  traditions  of  S.  Syria.  And  of  this  the  Immaculate
Conception  of  the  B.  V.  Mary,  supposed  by  Gibbon  (ch.  50)  to  have  been
"  borrowed  from  the  Koran,''  probably  formed  a  part.

^  i.e.  the  female  could  not  become  a  priest.  *  See  note,  p.  106.

^  According  to  a  tradition  of  Muhammad,  every  new-born  child  is  touched
by  Satan,  wiTh  the  exception  of  Mary  and  her  Son,  between  whom  and
Satan  God  interposed  a  veil.  (Djelal.  Beidh.)  Hence  this  passage  ma?/ im-
ply the  Immaculate  Conception  of  the  B.  V.  Mary.     See  ^erse  37  below.

^  Evang.  de  Nat.  Mar.  7  :  Quotidie  ab  angelis  frequentabatur,  quotidie
divina  visione  fruebatur,  qute  earn  a  malis  omnibus  custodiebat  ct  bonis

THE    KOKaN.  427

thou  this  ?  "  She  said,  "  It  is  from  God  ;  verilj
God  supplieth  whom  He  will,  without  reckoning  !  "

There  did  Zacharias  call  upon  his  Lord  :  "  0  my  Lord  !  '•'
said  he, "  vouchsafe  me  from  Thyself  good  descend-
ants ;  ^  Thou  verily  art  the  hearer  of  prayer/^  Then
did  the  angels  call  to  him,  as  he  stood  praying  in
the  sanctuary :  ^

"  God  announceth  John  (Yahia)  to  thee,  who  shall  be  a
verifier  of  the  Word  from  God,  and  a  great  one,
chaste,  and  a  prophet  of  the  number  of  the  just/^

lie  said,  "  0  my  Lord !  how  shall  I  have  a  son  now
that  old  age  hath  come  upon  me,  and  my  wife
is  barren  ? "  He  said,  "  Thus  will  God  do  his
pleasure/^

He  said,  "Lord  !  give  me  a  token."  He  said,  "  Thy
token  is,  that  not  for  three  days  shalt  thou  speak
to  man  but  by  signs :  But  remember  thy  Lord
often,  and  praise  Him  at  even  and  at  morn/'

And  remember  when  the  angels  said,  "  0  Mary  !  verily
hath  God  chosen  thee,^  and  purified  thee,  and
chosen  thee  above  the  women  of  the  worlds  !

0  Mary  !  be  devout  towards  thy  Lord,^  and  prostrate
thyself,  and  bow  down  with  those  who  bow.''

This  ib  of  the  announcements  of  things  by  thee

unseen  :  ^  To  thee,  0  Muhammad!  do  we  reveal  it :
for  thou  wast  not  with  them  when  they  cast  lots
with   reeds  ^  which    of   them  should  rear  Mary  j

omnibus  redundare  faciebat.  Protev.  Jac.  8  :  'Hv  tl  Mapian  wail  wipia-
Ttpd  vifiofiiVT]  iv  r<il  vatf)  Kvpiov  k-at  iXiifilSavi  Tpo(pi)v  Ik  xeipog  dy-yiXov. —
Hist.  Nativ.  Mar.  6  :  Quotidie  esca,  quam  de  manu  angcli  accipiebat,  ipsa
tantum  reficiebatur.

'  The  word  rendered  descendants  is  a  collective  noun.  Gerock  (p.  20)
thinks  that  Zacharias'  prayer  was  not  for  a  son  of  his  own,  but  for  an
adopted  son — as,  for  instance,  the  future  husband  of  Mary,  who  iiiiirht
become  his  heir,  and  hence  accounts  for  his  surprise  and  unbelief  at  the
announcement  of  John.

'  Lit.  chamber.  By  this  may  be  meant  an  virfoi^ov  of  the  Temple.  Comp.
Luke  i.  2L  ^  ^  Luke  i.  28.

■•  Hist,  de  Nativ.  M;ir.  6  :  Abierunt  simul  Joachim  et  Anna  uxor  ejus

ad  templum  domini,  et tradiderunt Mariam  in  coutubernio  vir-

ginum  quae  die  noctuque  in  Dei  laudibus  manebant.

*  Lit.  of  the  secret.

*  These  reeds,  say  the  commentators,  were  written  over  with  passages
from  the  law,  and  cast  into  Jordan  That  of  Zacharias  alone  swam,  and
was  the  token  that  the  charge  of  Mary  was  to  devolve  on  lum.  Others
render,  their  divining  arrovjs.  See  a  detailed  account  of  the  manner  in
which  this  matter  was  settled  by  pa/Jcoi,  virgae,  in  Protev.  Jac,  Thilo.
p.  204.     Hist.  Nat.  Mat.  ib.  p.  359,  sqq.

428  THE    KORAN.

nor  wast  thou  with  them  when  they  disputed  to-
gether.
40  Bememher.  when  the  angel  said,  ''  O  Mary  !  Verily  God
announcoth  to  thee  the  Word  from  Him  :  His  name
shall  be,.  Messiah  Jesus  the  son  of  Mary/  illustrious
in  this  world  and  in  the  next,  and  one  of  those  who
have  near  access  to  God  ;

And  he  shall  speak  to  men  when  in  the  cradle  and
when  grown  up ;  and  he  shall  be  of  the  righteous.^'

She  said,  "  How,  0  my  Lord  !  shall  1  have  a  son,  when
man  hath  not  touched  me  ?  ''  He  said,  "  Thus  :
God  createth  what  He  will ;  Wlien  He  hath  de-
creed a  thing  then  He  only  saith, '  Be/  and  it  is.^^

And  He  will  instruct  him  in  the  Book,  and  the  AVisdom,
and  the  Law,  and  the  Evangel ;  and  he  shall  be
an  apostle  to  the  children  of  Israel.  ''  Now  have  I
come,''  hr  will  say,  "  to  you  with  a  sign  from  your
Lord  :  Out  of  clay  will  I  make  for  you,  as  it  were
the  figure  of  a  bird  :  and  I  will  breathe  into  it,  and
it  shall  become  by  God's  permission  a  bird;^  And
I  will  heal  the  blind,  and  the  leper ;  and  by  God's
leave  will  I  quicken  the  dead  ;  and  I  will  tell  you
what  to  cat,  and  what  to  store  up  in  your  houses  !
Truly  in  this  will  be  a  sign  for  you,  if  ye  are  be-
lievers;

And  I  come  to  attest  the  law  which  was  before  me,  and
to  allow  you  part  of  that  which  had  been  forbidden
you ;  and  I  come  to  you  with  a  sign  from  your
Lord  :  Fear  God  then  and  obey  me  ;  of  a  truth
God  is  my  Lord  and  your  Lord  :  Therefore  wor-
ship Him.     This  is  a  right  way."

And  when  Jesus  perceived  unbelief  on  their  part,  he
said,  "  Who  will  be  my  helpers  in  the  cause  of
God  ?  "  3  The  apostles  4  said,  "  We  will  he  God's
helpers  !  We  believe  in  God,  and  bear  thou  witness
that  we  are  Muslims.

O  our  Lord !  we  believe  in  what  Thou  hast  sent  down,
and  we  follow  the  Apostle ;  write  us  up  then  with
those  who  bear  witness  to  him."

'  Ar.  El-Mesich  Isa  hen  Mariam,  illustrious  in  this  world  as  a  Prophet,
in  the  next  as  an  Intercessor. — Beidh.

*  Evang.  Thoma;,  ch.  2  (Thilo.  p.  281),  and  Evang.  Infantia;  Arab,  ch,
36,  46.  (Thilo.  pp.  Ill,  12,3.)

'  i.e.  helpers  of  his  relicrion. — Beidhawi.     Lit.  unto  God.

*  See  Sura  [cxiv.]  v.  111.

THE    KORAN.  429

And  tJtr  JeiVK  plotted,  and  God  plotted  :  But  of  those
who  plot  is  God  the  best.

Bememhcr  when  God  said,  "  0  Jesus  !  verily  I  will  cause
theetodie,^  and  will  take  thee  up  to  Myself  and
deliver^  thee  from  those  who  believe  not;  and  I
will  place  those  who  follow  thee  above  those  who
believe  not,  until  the  day  of  Resurrection  :  Then,
to  Me  is  your  return,  and  wherein  ye  differ  will  I
decide  between  you :

And  as  to  those  who  believe  not,  I  will  chastise  them
with  a  terrible  chastisement  in  this  world  and  in  the
next ;  and  none  shall  they  have  to  help  them ;
50  But  as  to  those  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are
right.  He  will  thei'efore  pay  them  their  recompense ;
but  God  loveth  not  the  doers  of  evil.'^

These  signs  and  this  wise  warning  do  We  rehearse  to
thee.

Yerily,  Jesus  is  as  Adam  in  the  sight  of  God.-^  He
created  him  of  dust :  He  then  said  to  him,  "  Be  " —
and  he  was.

The  truth  from  thy  Lord !  Be  not  thou,  therefore,  of
those  who  doubt :

But  ac  .  those  *  who  dispute  with  thee  about  him
after  ''  the  knowledge  ^^  which  hath  reached  to  thee.
Say  then  :  Come,^  let  us  summon  our  sons  and
your  sons,  our  wives  and  your  wives,  and  ourselves

'  Muhammad  probably  believed  that  God  took  the  dead  body  of  Jesus
to  Heaven — for  three  hours,  accordin<r  to  some — while  the  Jews  crucified
a  man  who  resembled  him.  Sura  [c]  iv.  156.  The  word  motewaffika  (comp.
Sura  [Ixxx.]  xxxix.  156)  means,  in  speaking  of  God,  to  cause  to  die,  take
to  Himself.  It  would  also  seem  from  Sura  [Iviii.]  xix.  34,  that  Muham-
mad supposed  .Jesus  to  have  died  a  natural  death,  though  it  is  nowhere
said  how  long  he  continued  in  that  state.  The  jNIuhammadans  believe  that
Jesus,  on  his  return  to  earth  at  the  end  of  the  world,  will  shiy  the  Anti-
christ, die,  and  be  raised  again.  A  vacant  place  is  reserved  for  his  body
in  the  Prophet's  tomb  at  Medina.    See  Capt.  Burton's  Pilgrimage,  vol.  ii.

'  Lit.  imriftj.     UUm.  befrcien.

'  Lit.  verily  the  similitude  or  analogy  of  Isa  is  as  the  similitude  or  ana-
logy of  Adam,  i.e.  neither  of  them  had  a  human  father.

■*  This  refers  to  an  embassy  from  the  Christians  in  Nedjran  in  Arabia
with  their  bishop,  Abu  Hareth,  at  their  head,  to  Muhammad  at  Medina,
who  had  now  acquired  political  power.  The  embassy  declined  to  be
parties  to  the  strange  mode  of  settling  the  dispute  here  proposed,  but
consented  to  pay  tribute  on  condition  of  not  being  molested  in  their
religion  or  lands.

*  If  this  be  not  a  mere  figure  of  speech,  it  must  mean,  let  us  call  over
and  curse  the  nam^s,  the  persons  being  at  a  distance.

i3lJ  THE    KORAN.

and  yourselves.^ — Then  will  we  imprecate  and  laj^
the  malison  of  God  on  those  that  lie  !

Assuredly  this  recital  is  very  truth,  and  there  is  no  god
but  God  ;  and  verily  God  is  the  Mighty,  the  Wi.se  :

But  if  they  turn  away,  then  verily  God  hath  knowledge
of  the  corrupt  doers.

Say  :  0  people  of  the  Book  !  come  ye  to  a  like  deter-
mination between  us  and  you — That  we  worship
not  aught  but  God,  and  that  we  join  no  other  god
with  Him,  and  that  the  one  of  us  take  not  the  other
for  lords,^  beside  God.  Then  if  they  turn  their
backs,  Say  therefore:  Bear  ye  witness  that  we  are
Muslims.

Oh  people  of  the  Book  !  Wliy  dispute  about  Abraham,^
when  the  Law  and  the  Evangel  were  not  sent  down
till  after  him  ?     Do  ye  not  then  understand  ?

Lo  !  ye  are  they  who  dispute  about  that  in  which  ye
have  knowledge ;  *  but  why  dispute  ye  about  that
of  which  ye  have  no  knowledge  ?  And  God  hath
knowledge,  but  ye  know  nothing.
60  Abraham  was  neither  Jew  nor  Christian  ;  but  he  was
sound  in  the  faith,''  a  Muslim ;  and  not  of  those
who  add  gods  to  God.

Verily,  they  among  men  who  are  nearest^  to  Abraham
are  surely  those  who  follow  him  and  this  prophet
Muhammad,  and  they  who  believe  on  him  :  But
it  is  God  who  is  near  to  the  faithful.

A  party  among  the  people  of  the  Book  would  fain
mislead  you  :  but  they  only  mislead  themselves,
and  perceive  it  not.

0  people  of  the  Book  !  why  disbelieve  the  signs  of  God,
of  which  yourselves  are  witnesses  ?

0  people  of  the  Book  !  why  clothe  ye  the  truth  with
falsehood?  Why  wittingly  hide  the  truth?

And  a  party  of  the  people  of  the  Book  say  :  "  Believe
in  what  hath  been  sent  down  to  the  believers,  at
daybreak,  and  deny  it  at  its  close " — That  they
may  perchance  go  back  "^ —

'  Or,  our  slaves  and  your  slaves.     Comp.  Gen.  xii.  .5  in  the  Heb.

*  As  the  Christians  flo  their  Bishops  and  Priests,  or  Saints.
'  Whether  he  were  a  .Jew  or  Christian.

*  About  Moses  and  Jesus,  and  their  respective  faiths.

*  Hanyf.     See  Sura  xvi.  121,  p.  216,  note.

*  Wall  may  also  be  rendered  frieyid  in  both  parts  of  this  vei'se.

'  This  somewhat  dark  text  is  best  cleared  up  by  understanding  these
words  to  be  a  parenthetic  and  contemptuous  remark  by  Muhammad.

TIIK    KORAN.  4ol

"And  believe  in  those  only  who  follow  your  Religion."
Say  :  Yerily  true  guidance  is  guidance  from  God —
that  to  another  may  be  imparted  the  like  of  what
hath  been  imparted  to  you  :  or,  if  they  wrangle
with  you  in  the  presence  of  your  Lord,  Say  :  Verily
plenteous  gifts  are  in  the  hands  of  God ;  He  im-
parteth  them  unto  whom  He  will,  and  God  is
Bounteous,  Wise  :

He  will  vouchsafe  his  mercy  to  whom  He  will,  for  God
is  of  great  bounteousness.
%  Moreover  among  the  people  of  the  Book  are  those,  to
one  of  whom  if  thou  entrust  a  talent  he  will  restore
it  to  thee  :  And  there  is  of  them  to  whom  if  thou
entrust  a  dinar,  he  will  not  restore  it  to  thee,  unless
thou  be  ever  instant  with  him.

This — because  they  say,  "We  are  not  bound  to  keep
faith  with  the  ignorant  (Pagan)  folk;  " — and  they
utter  a  lie  against  God,  and  know  thev  do  so  :
70     But  whoso  is  true  to  his  engagement,  and  feareth  God,
— verily  then  God  loveth  those  that  fear  Him.

Verily  they  who  barter  their  engagement  with  God,  and
their  oaths,  for  some  paltry  price — These  !  no  por-
tio  ^r  them  in  the  world  to  come  !  and  God  will
not  speak  to  them,  and  will  not  look  on  them
on  the  day  of  Resurrection,  and  will  not  assoil
them  !   And  for  them  a  grievous  chastisement  !

And  some  truly  are  there  among  those  who  pervert  the
Scriptures  with  their  tongues,  in  order  that  ye  may
suppose  it  to  be  from  the  Scripture,  though  it  is  not
from  the  Scripture.  And  they  say,  "  This  is  from
God ;  "  yet  it  is  not  from  God :  and  they  utter  a
lie  against  God,  and  they  know  they  do  so.

It  beseemeth  not  a  man,  that  God  should  give  him  the
Scriptures  and  the  Wisdom,  and  Prophecy,  and  that
then  he  should  say  to  men,  "  Become  worshippers
of  me,  as  well  as  of  God  ;  "  *  but  rather,  "  Become
learned  in  things  pertaining  to  God,-  since  ye  know
the  Scriptures  and  have  studied  them  :  "

Ajid  God  doth  not  command  you  to  take  to  yourselves
the  angels  or  the  prophets  as  lords.  Would  He  en-
join unbelief  on  you  after  ye  have  become  Muslims  ?

'  Muhammad  insinuates  that  the  claim  to  be  equal  with  God  could  never
have  been  made  by  Jesus  himself,  but  by  his  followers,  in  ignorance  of
the  Scriptures  and  of  his  true  nature.

'  Lit.  Dominici. — Mar.

432  THE    KORAN.

Moreover,  when  God  entered  into  covenant  with  the
prophets/  He  said,  "  This  is  the  Book  and  the
Wisdom  which  I  give  you  ;  hereafter  shall  a  prophet
come  unto  you  to  confirm  the  Scriptures  already
with  you.  Ye  shall  surely  believe  on  him,  and  ye
shall  surely  aid  him.  Are  ye  resolved  ?  "  said  He,
and  do  ye  accept  my  covenant  on  these  terms  ?  "
They  said.  We  are  resolved ;  "  "  Be  ye  then  the
witnesses/'  said  He,  "  and  I  will  be  a  witness  as
well  as  you ;

Whoever  therefore  turneth  back  after  this,  these  are
surely  the  impious."

Other  religion  then  than  that  of  God  desire  they  ?  To
Him  doth  everything  that  is  in  the  Heavens  and  in
the  Earth  submit,  in  willing  or  forced  obedience  :
and  to  Him  do  they  return  !

Say  :  We  believe  in  God,  and  in  what  hath  been  sent
down  to  us,  and  what  hath  been  sent  down  to
Abraham  and  Ismael  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  and
the  tribes,  and  in  what  was  given  to  Moses  and
to  Jesus  and  to  the  Prophets  from  their  Lord. —
We  make  no  difference  between  them. — And  to
Him  are  we  resigned  (Muslims)  ;

And  whoso  desireth  any  other  religion  than  Islam,  it
shall  by  no  means  therefore  be  accepted  from  him,
aad  in  the  next  world  he  shall  be  among  the  lost.
80  How  shall  God  guide  a  people  who,  after  they  had
believed  and  borne  witness  that  the  Apostle  was
true,  and  after  that  clear  proofs  of  his  mission  had
reached  them,  disbelieved  ?  For  God  guideth  not
the  people  who  transgress.

These  !  their  recompense  is  that  the  curse  of  God  and
of  angels  and  of  men  one  and  all  is  on  them  !

Under  it  shall  they  abide  for  ever ;  their  torment  shall
not  be  assuaged,  nor  shall  God  even  look  upon
them  !

Save  those  who  after  this  repent  and  amend  ;  for  verily
God  is  Gracious,  Merciful  !

As  for  those  who  become  infidels  after  having  believed,
and  then  increase  their  infidelity — their  repentance

'  Assembled  on  Mount  Sinai.  Compare  the  Jewish  legend,  that  all  the
prophets,  even  those  who  were  not  yet  born,  were  present  on  Mount  Sinai
when  God  gave  the  law  to  Moses.  See  Shemoth  Rabba,  Parashah  28,
according  to  which,  not  only  the  Prophets  but  the  Rabbis  of  every  gene-
ration, were  present  at  the  giving  of  the  Law.

THE    KORAN.  433

sliall  by  no  means  be  accepted.     And  these  !  they
are  the  erring  ones.

As  for  those  who  are  unbelievers,  and  die  unbelievers,
from  no  one  of  them  shall  as  much  gold  as  the
earth  contains  be  by  any  means  accepted,  even
though  he  should  offer  it  in  ransom.  These  !  a
grievous  punishment  awaiteth  them  ;  and  they
shall  have  none  to  help  them.

Ye  shall  by  no  means  attain  to  goodness  till  ye  expend
that  vrhich  ye  love  as  alms  ;  and  whatever  ye  so
expend,  then  of  a  truth  God  knoweth  it.

All  food  was  allowed  to  the  children  of  Israel,  except
what  Jacob  forbad  himself  ere  the  law  was  sent
do\\Ti ;  Say  :  Bring  ye  then  the  law  and  read  it,  if
ye  be  men  of  truth.

And  whoso  after  this  inventeth  a  lie  about  God  : —
These  then  are  the  evil-doers.

Say  :  God  speaketh  truth.  Follow  therefore  the  reli-
gion of  Abraham,  the  sound  in  faith,^  and  who  was
not  one  of  those  who  joined  other  gods  with  God.
90  Yerily  the  first  temple  that  was  founded  for  mankind
was  certainly  that  in  Becca,- — Blessed,  and  a  guid-
ance to  «11  creatures.

In  it  ar*.  ,,ident  signs,  even  the  standing-place^  of
Abraham  :  and  he  who  entereth  it  is  safe.  And  the
pilgrimage  to  the  temple  is  a  service  due  to  God
from  men  who  are  able  to  journey  thither  : — -

And  as  to  him  who  believeth  not — then  verily  God  can
afford  to  dispense  with  all  creatures  !

Say  :  0  people  of  the  Book  !  why  disbelieve  ye  the
signs  of  God  ?    But  God  is  witness  of  your  doings  !

Say  :  O  people  of  the  Book  !  why  turn  aside  believers
from  the  way  of  God  ?  Ye  fain  would  make  it
crooked,  and  yet  ye  are  its  witnesses  !  But  God  is
not  regardless  of  your  conduct,

'  See  note,  p.  216.

'  Becca.  place  of  crowding,  i.  e.  Mecca.  This  sentence,  together  with
other  Suras — the  Cave,  Mary,  Tmran,  Repentance,  T,  H,  are  woven  into
the  Kiswah  or  covering  of  the  Caaba,  which  is  renewed  annually.

'  The  Makam  Ibrahim  (praying-place  of  Abraham)  is  a  small  building
supported  by  six  pillars  about  8  ft.  high,  four  of  which  are  surrounded  from
top  to  bottom  by  a  fine  iron  railing,  while  they  leave  the  space  between
the  two  hind  pillars  open  ;  within  the  railing  is  a  frame  about  5  ft.  square,
said  to  contain  the  sacred  stone  on  which  Ibrahim  stood  when  he  built
the  Caaba.— Burckhardt.  Capt.  Burton  (Pilgrimage,  ill.  336)  says  that
as  the  Arab  tradition  speaks  clearly  and  consistently  as  to  the  fact  of
Abraham  having  visited  Mecca  to  build  the  Caaba,  it  may  be  considered
an  open  question.     Thus  also  Dr.  G.  W.  Freytag  (Einl.).

2   P

•

434  THE    KORAN.

0  believers  !  if  ye  obey  a  party  amongst  tbose  who
have  received  the  Scripture,  after  your  very  Faith
will  they  turn  you  back  into  disbelief:

But  how"  can  ye  disbelieve,  when  the  signs  of  God  are
recited  to  you,  and  his  Prophet  is  among  you  ?
And  whoever  holdeth  fast  by  God,  is  in  that  case
already  guided  to  a  right  path.

0  ye  believers  !  fear  God  as  He  deserveth  to  be  feared ;
and  die  not  without  having  become  Muslims.

And  hold  ye  fast  by  the  cord^  of  God,  all  of  you  to-
gether, and  break  not  loose  from  it  ;2  and  remem-
ber God's  goodness  towards  you,  how  that  when
ye  were  enemies.  He  united  your  hearts  so  that
by  his  favour  ye  became  brethren;

And  when  ye  were  on  the  brink  of  the  pit  of  fire.  He
drew  you  back  from  it.  Thus  God  clearly  showeth
you  his  signs  that  perchance  ye  may  be  guided  ;
100  And  that  there  may  be  from  among  you  a  people  who
invite  to  the  Good,  and  enjoin  the  Just,  and  forbid
the  Wrong ;  and  these  are  they  with  whom  it  shall
be  well.

And  be  ye  not  like  those  who  have  formed  divisions,
and  fallen  to  variance  after  the  clear  proofs  have
come  to  them.  And  these  !  a  great  chastisement
doth  await  them,

On  THE  DAY  when  faces  shall  turn  white,  and  faces  shall
turn  black  !     And  as  to  those  whose  faces  shall

have  turned  black   " What !  after  your

belief  did  ye  become   infidels  ?     Taste  then   the
chastisement,  for  that  ye  became  unbelievers."

And  as  to  those  whose  faces  shall  have  become  white,
they  shall  therefore  be  within  the  mercy  of  God,
therein  to  abide  for  ever.

These  aro  the  signs  (revelations)  of  God  :  we  recite
them  to  thee  in  truth :  And  God  willeth  not  injus-
tice to  his  creatures ;

And  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens,  and  whatever  is  on
the  Earth,  is  God's,  and  to  God  do  all  things
return.

Ye  are  the  best  folk  that  hath  been  raised  up  for  man-
kind. Ye  enjoin  the  Just,  and  ye  forbid  the  Evil,
and  ye  believe  in  God  :  And  if  the  people  of  the
Book  had  believed,  it  had  surely  been  better  for

'  i.  e.  covenant ;  the  Koran,  or  Islam,

^  Or,  as  in  venje  101  below,  form  not  divisions.

THE    KORAN.  435

them  !     Believers  there  are  amoBg  them,  but  most
of  them  are  disobedient.

They  •will  by  no  means  inflict  upon  you  more  than  a
trifling  damage,  and  if  they  do  battle  with  you,
they  shall  turn  their  backs  to  you  ;  then  they  shall
not  be  succoured  :

Vileness  is  stamped  on  them^  wherever  found,  except
they  be  in  compact  with  God  and  compact  with  men !
And  the  wrath  of  God  do  they  incur,  and  poverty
is  stamped  upon  them  !  This — for  that  they  be-
lieved not  in  the  signs  of  God,  and  slew  the  pro-
phets unjustly  :  This — because  they  rebelled,  and
became  transgressors.

Yet  all  are  not  alike :  Among  the  people  of  the  Book  is
an  upright  folk,  who  recite  the  revelations  of  God
in  the  night-season,  and  aaore ;
110  They  believe  in  God  and  in  the  latter  day,  and  enjoin
justice,  and  forbid  evil,  and  are  emulous  in  good
works;  and  these  are  of  the  righteous.

And  of  whatever  good  ye  do,  ye  shall  by  no  means  be
denied  the  meed :  And  God  taketh  knowledge  of
those  who  fear  Him.

Verily  ?'■  "  che  infidels,  their  wealth,  and  their  chil-
dren shall  avail  them  nothing  against  God ;  and
they  shall  be  the  inmates  of  the  fire,  to  abide
therein  eternally  :

That  which  they  expend  in  this  present  life,"-  is  like  a
freezing  wind,  which  falleth  upon  the  cornfields  of
a  people  who  have  been  to  themselves  unjust,  so
that  it  destroyeth  them  ;  and  God  did  them  no
injustice,  but  they  were  unjust  to  themselves.
^  0  ye  who  have  believed  !  form  not  intimacies  among
others  than  yourselves.  They  will  not  fail  to
corrupt  you.  They  long  for  your  ruin.  Hatred
hath  already  shown  itself  at  their  mouths,  but  more
grievous  is  what  their  breasts  conceal.  The  tokens
thereof  We  have  already  made  plain  ^  to  you,  if  ye
will  comprehend.

See  now  !  ye  love  them,  but  they  love  not  you ;  and  ye
believe  the  entire  Book.  And  when  they  meet
you,  they  say,  "We  believe ;''  but  when  they  are
apart,  they  bite  their  fingers'  ends  at  you  out  of

'  Or,  they  are  smitteyi  xnth. — Sale.     S'etendra  comme  une  tente. — Kas.
trifft  sie. — Ullm.  '  i.e.  as  alms,  in  fighting  against  Islam.

'  Or,  these  revelations  do  ice  make  plain,  etc.

2  f2

436  THE    KORAN.

wrath.     Say:  "Die  in  your  wrath!"     God  trulj'
knoweth  the  very  recesses  of  your  breasts.

If  good  befalleth  you  it  grieveth  them,  and  if  ill  lighteth
on  you,  they  rejoice  in  it.  But  if  ye  be  steadfast
and  fear  God,  their  craft  shall  in  no  way  harm  you.
Verily  God  is  round  about  their  doings.
^  And  remember  when  thou  didst  leave  thy  household  at
early  morn,  that  thou  mightest  prepare  the  faithful
a  camp  for  the  war  -^ — and  God  heard,  knew  it —

When  two  troops  of  you  became  anxious  through  fear
lest  they  should  be  faint-hearted,  and  God  became
the  protector  of  both  !  In  God  then  let  the  faithful
trust.

And  God  had  already  succoured  you  at  Bedr,  when  ye
were  the  weaker !  Fear  God  then,  that  ye  may
perchance  be  thankful ;
120  When  thou  didst  say  to  the  faithful,  "  Is  it  not  enough
for  you  that  your  Lord  aideth  you  with  three  thou-
sand angels  sent  down  from  on  high  ?  "

Nay,  hut  if  ye  be  steadfast  and  fear  God,  and  the  foe
come  upon  you  in  hot  haste,^  your  Lord  will  help
you  with  five  thousand  angels  in  their  cogni-
zances !  ^

And  this,  as  pure  good  tidings  for  you,  did  God
appoint,  that  your  hearts  might  thereby  be  as-
sured— for  only  from  God,  the  Mighty,  the  Wise,
Cometh  Victory — and  that  He  might  cut  off  the
uttermost  part  of  those  who  believed  not,  or  cast
them  down  so  that  they  should  be  overthroAvn,
defeated  without  resource.

It  is  none  of  thy  concern  whether  He  relent  towards
them  in  kindness  or  chastise  them ;  for  verily  they
are  wrongful  doers  :

And  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  is
God^s  !  He  forgiveth  whom  He  will  and  whom
He  will,  chastiseth :  for  God  is  Forgiving,  Merci-
ful.
%  0  ye  who  believe  !  devour  not  usury,  doubling  it  again
and  again !  ■*  But  fear  God,  that  haply  ye  may
prosper;

'  This  probably  refers  to  the  battle  of  Ohod.

^  Fara  is  literally  to  boil.  Hence,  after  their  haste,  i.  e.  immediately  on
their  arrival,  without  resting.

'  The  Arabic  word  occurs  at  verse  13  of  horses  as  known  by  certain
marks.     So  here  these  angels  would  be  known  by  their  accoutrements,  etc.

*  Lit.  the  double  doubled.

THE    KOEAN.  437

And  fear  the  fire  which  is  prepared  for  them  that
beheve  not,  and  obey  God  and  the  Apostle,  that
perhaps  ye  may  find  mercy  ;

And  vie  in  haste  for  pardon  from  your  Lord,  and  a
Paradise,  vast  as  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,  pre-
pared for  the  God-fearing,

ANTio  give  alms,  alihe  in  prosperity  and  in  distress,  and
who  master  their  anger,  and  forgive  others  ! — And
God  loveth  the  doers  of  good —

And  who,  after  they  have  done  a  base  deed  or  com-
mitted a  wrong  against  their  own  souls,  remember
God  and  implore  forgiveness  of  their  sins — and
who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only  ? — and  per-
severe not  in  what  they  have  wittingly  done
amiss ;
130  As  for  these  !  Pardon  from  their  Lord  shall  be  their
recompense,  and  gardens  ^neath  which  the  rivers
flow  ;  for  ever  shall  they  abide  therein  :  And  goodly
the  reward  of  those  who  labour  !
^  Already,  before  you  have  punishments  been  enforced  !  ^
Traverse  the  earth  then,  and  see  what  hath  been
the  e^''  "f  those  who  tre^t  iirophets  as  liars.

This  Koru,.i  is  a  manifesto  to  man,  and  a  guidance,  and
a  warning  to  the  God-fearing  !

And  be  not  faint-hearted,  and  be  not  sorrowful  :  For  ye
shall  gain  the  upper  hand  if  ye  be  believers."

If  a  wound  hath  befallen  you,  a  wound  like  it  hath
already  befallen  others :  and  We  alternate  these
days  of  successes  and  reverses  among  men,  that  God
may  know  those  who  have  believed,  and  that  He
may  take  martyrs  from  among  you,  —  but  God
loveth  not  the  wrongful  doers —

And  that  God  may  test  those  who  believe,  and  destroy
the  infidels.

Do  ye  think  that  ye  could  enter  Paradise  without  God's
taking  knowledge  of  those  among  you  who  have
fought  (for  Him)  and  of  those  who  steadfastly
endured  ?

Moreover  ye  formerly  desired  death, — ere  ye  met  it.
But  ye  have  now  seen  it — and  ye  shall  behold  it.

Muhammad  is  no  more  than  an  apostle ;  other  apostles
have  already  passed  away  before  him ;  if  then  he

'  Lit.  have  ordinances  (for  punishment)  been  in  force.
'  This  and  the  following  verses  to  154  were  probably  revealed  shortly
after  the  reverse  of  Ohod.

438  THE    KORAN.

die,^  or  be  slain,  will  ye  turn  upon  your  heels  ?  ^
But  he  who  turneth  on  his  heels  shall  not  injure
Godat  all :  And  God  will  reward  the  thankful  !

And  no  one  can  die  except  by  God's  permission  acco7'£Z-
i)i^  to  the  Book  that  fixeth  the  term  of  life.^  And
he  who  desireth  the  recompense  of  this  world,  We
will  give  him  thereof ;  And  he  who  desireth  the
recompense  of  the  next  life,  We  will  give  him
thereof !  And  We  will  reward  the  thankful.
140  And  how  many  a  prophet  hath  combated  an  enemy  on
whose  side  were  many  myriads  !  Yet  were  they  not
daunted  at  what  befell  them  on  the  path  of  God,
nor  were  they  weakened,  nor  did  they  basely  sub-
mit !  And  God  loveth  those  who  endure  with
steadfastness.

Nor  said  they  more  than  this  :  *  ^^  0  our  Lord  !  forgive
us  our  sins  and  our  mistakes  in  this  our  work  ;  and
set  our  feet  firm  ;  and  help  us  against  the  unbe-
lieving people.''  And  God  gave  them  the  recom-
pense of  this  world,  and  the  excellence  of  the
recompense  of  the  next.  And  God  loveth  the
doers  of  what  is  excellent.
^  0  ye  who  have  believed  !  if  ye  obey  the  unbelievers,  they
will  cause  you  to  turn  upon  your  heels/  and  ye  will
fall  back  into  perdition  :

Nay  rather  God  is  your  liege  lord,  and  Ho  is  the  best
of  helpers.

We  will  cast  a  dread  into  the  hearts  of  those  who  believe
not,  because  they  have  joined  gods  with  God
without  warranty  sent  down  ;  and  their  abode
shall  be  the  fire ;  and  wretched  shall  be  the  abode
of  the  evil-doers.

Ah-eady  had  God  made  good  to  you  his  promise,  when

'  This  verse  and  xxxix.  3).  (p.  272)  were  recited  at  Muhammad's  death
by  Abu  Bekr,  in  order  to  convince  Omar  and  the  other  Muslims  of  the
possibility  of  that  event.  It  has  been  supposed  that  these  passages  were
invented  by  Abu  Bekr  on  this  occasion,  and  inserted  into  the  Koran.  But
this  is  more  than  doubtful.     See  Nrildeke,  pp.  199-201.

^  i.e.  return  to  idolatry.  A  report  had  been  spread  in  the  battle  of  Ohod
that  Muhammad  had  been  slain.

^  Lit.  {according  to)  a  vrriting  {i.e.  of  God)  (hfinite,  or  fixed.  The  passive
participle  has  here  an  active  sense.  The  Rabbins  also  teach  (Com.  Tract.
Rosch.  Haschanah)  that  there  are  books  in  which  God  has  written  down
the  lifetime  of  every  individual.     Lit.  No  soul  can  die.

*  Lit.  and  their  saying  ni'as  no  other  than  that  they  said.

*  To  relapse  into  infidelity.    The  Koreish  attempted  to  seduce  the  Muf*
linis  to  renounce  their  faith  after  the  battle  of  Ohod.

THE    KORAN.  489

by  his  permission  ye  destroyed  your  foes,  until
your  courage  failed  you,  and  ye  disputed  together
about  the  order, ^  and  disobeyed,  after  that  the
Prophet  had  brought  you  within  view  of  that  for
which  ye  longed.-

Some  of  you  were  for  this  world,  and  some  for  the  next.^
Then,  in  order  to  make  trial  of  you.  He  turned
you  from  them  in  flight — yet  hath  He  now  forgiven
you ;  for  all-bounteous  is  God  to  the  faithful —

AVhon  ye  came  up  the  height  ^  and  took  no  heed  of
any  one,  while  the  Prophet  in  your  rear  was  calling
you  to  thejight !  God  hath  therefore  recompensed
you  with  trouble  upon  trouble,  so  that  ye  might
learn  not  to  be  chagrined  at  your  loss  of  hooty,  nor
at  what  befell  you  !  And  God  is  acquainted  with
your  actions.

Then  after  that  trouble,  God  sent  down  security  upon
you.  Drowsiness  came  upon  a  part  of  you  :  as  to
the  other  part — their  own  passions  stirred  them  up
to  think  unjustly  of  God  with  thoughts  of  igno-
rance !  They  said — What  gain  we  by  this  affair  ?
Say  :  ^-rily  the  affair  resteth  wholly  with  God.
Thej  uid  in  their  minds  what  they  did  not  speak
out'to  thee,  saying,  "  Were  we  to  have  gained  aught
in  this  affair,  none  of  us  had  been  slain  at  this
place. '^  Say  :  Had  ye  remained  in  your  homes,
they  who  were  decreed  to  be  slain  would  have  gone
forth  to  the  places  where  they  lie  :  ^ — in  order  that
God  might  make  trial  of  what  was  in  your  breasts,
and  might  discover  what  was  in  your  hearts  :  and
God  knoweth  the  very  secrets  of  the  breast.

Of  a  truth  it  was  Satan  alone  who  caused  those  of
you  to  fail  in  duty  who  turned  back  on  the  day
when  the  host  met,  for  some  of  their  doings  !
But  now  hath  God  pardoned  them  ;  Verily  God
is  Forgiving,  Gracious.
150  ^  0  ye  who  believe  !  be  not  like  the  infidels,  who  said
of  their  brethren  when  they  had  travelled  by  land

'  The  command  to  abstain  from  takmg  the  spoils.  This  disobedience
turned  the  scale  of  victory  against  the  Muslims.  Abulfeda,  Life  of  M.
p.  65.

^  Victory  and  plunder.

^  Some  took  to  flight,  others  stood  firm,  and  were  not  careful  of  their
lives.

*  In  confused  rout,

*  Lit.  resting  or  sleeping  places.     The  allusion  is  to  the  sleep  of  death.

440  THE    KORAN.

or  had  become  combatants,  "  Had  they  kept  with
us,  they  had  not  died,  and  had  not  been  slain  !  "
God  purposed  that  this  affair  should  cause  them
heart  sorrow  !  ^  And  God  maketh  alive  and  killeth ;
and  God  beholdeth  your  actions.

And  certainly,  if  ye  be  slain  or  die  on  the  path  of  God,
pardon  from  God  and  mercy,  is  better  than  all
your  amassings ;

And  certainly,  if  ye  die  or  bo  slain,  unto  God  shall  ye
be  gathered.
^  And  by  the  mercy  of  God  thou  hast  been  mild  towards
them  :  But  hadst  thou  been  harsh  and  hard-hearted,
they  would  have  certainly  dispersed  from  around
thee.  Therefore,  forgive  them  and  ask  for  pardon
for  them,  and  consult  them  in  the  aflfair  of  war,  and
when  thou  art  resolved,  then  put  thou  thy  trust  in
God;    Verily  God  loveth  those  who  trust  in  Him.

If  then  God  help  you,  none  shall  overcome  you  ;  but  if
He  abandon  you,  who  is  the  one  that  shall  help
you  when  He  is  gone  ? "  In  God  then  let  the
faithful  trust.
%  Moreover,  it  is  not  in  the  Prophet  to  defraud  you  ;  ^ —
and  he  who  shall  defraud,  shall  come  forth  with
his  defraudings  on  the  day  of  the  Resui'rection :
then  shall  every  soul  be  paid  what  it  hath  merited,
and  they  shall  not  be  treated  with  injustice  :

Shall  he  then  who  hath  followed  the  good  pleasure  of
God  be  as  he  who  hath  brought  on  himself  wrath
from  God,  and  whose  abode  shall  be  Hell  ?  and
wretched  the  journey  thither.

These  are  in  varying  grades  with  God:  and  God  be-
holdeth what  they  do.
%  Now  hath  God  been  gracious  to  the  faithful,  when  He
raised  up  among  them  an  apostle  out  of  their  own
people,  to  rehearse  unto  them  his  signs,  and  to
cleanse  them,  and  to  give  them  knowledge  of  the
Book  and  of  Wisdom  :  for  verily  aforetime  they
were  in  assuredly  manifest  error.

When  a  reverse  hath  befallen  you,  the  like  of  which  ye
had  before  inflicted,'*  say  ye,  "  Whence  is  this  ?  "

'  Lit.  that  God  might  'ituike  this  a  cause  of  sighing  in  their  hearts.

'  Lit.  after  Him.

'  Muhammad  had  been  accused  of  having  secretly  appropriated  a  por-
tion of  the  spoil.

*  At  Ohod.  Lit.  ye  had  already  met  with  two  pieces  of  good  fortune  equi-
valent to  it,  i.e.  at  Bedr.

THE    KORAN.  441

Say  :  It  is  from  yourselves.  Yerily  God  hath  power
over  all  things.
160  And  that  which  befell  you  on  the  day  when  the  armies
met,  was  certainly  by  the  will  of  God,  and  that  He
might  know  the  faithful,  and  that  He  might  know
the  hypocrites !  And  when  the  word  was  "  Advance,
fight  on  the  path  of  God,^'  or  "  Drive  back  the  foe,"
— they  said,  "  Had  we  known  how  to  fight,  we
would  certainly  have  followed  you.'^  Nearer  were
some  of  them  on  that  day  to  unbelief  than  to  faith  :

They  said  with  their  mouths  what  was  not  in  their
hearts  !     But  God  knew  what  they  concealed.

Who  said  of  their  brethren  while  themselves  sat  at  home,
"  Had  they  obeyed  us,  they  had  not  been  slain.''
Say  :  Then  keep  back  death  from  yourselves  if  ye
speak  truth ;

And  repute  not  those  slain  on  God's  path  to  be  dead : '
Nay,  rather,  alive  with  their  Lord,  they  are  pro-
vided for ;

Rejoicing  in  what  God  of  his  bounty  hath  vouchsafed
them,  and  filled  with  joy  for  those  who  folloxo  after
thsp™  ^  but  have  not  yet  overtaken  them,  that  on
thb*-  nor  fear  shall  come,  nor  grief;

Filled  with  joy  at  the  favours  of  God,  and  at  his  bounty  :
and  that  God  sufiereth  not  the  reward  of  the  faith-
ful to  perish.

As  to  those  who  after  the  reverse  ^  which  befell  them,
responded  to  God  and  the  Apostle — such  of  them
as  did  good  works  and  feared  God,  shall  have  a
great  reward :

Who,  when  men  said  to  them,  "  Yerily  the  Meccans  have
mustered  against  you ;  therefore  fear  them  !  "  it
only  increased  their  faith ;  and  they  said,  "  Our
sufficiency  is  God ;  and  excellent  the  Guardian  !  "

They  returned,  therefore,  with  the  favour  of  God,  en-
riched by  Him,  and  untouched  by  harm ;  and  they
followed  what  was  well-pleasing  to  God.  And  God
is  of  great  Munificence.

Only  would  that  Satan*  instil  the  fear  of  his  adherents  :
Fear  them  not ;  but  fear  Me  if  ye  are  believers.

"  See  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  149.

'  For  whom  the  honour  of  martyrdom  is  reserved.

*  At  Ohod  ;  lit.  v:ound.

*  Said  to  refer  to  Noaim,  or  Abu  Sofian,  the  leader  of  the  Koreish.  Or,
Satan  icill  instil  fear  only  into  his  own  adherents :  Therefore  fear  them  not,
&c.

442  THE    KORAN.

170  And  let  not  those  who  vie  in  haste  after  unbelief  grieve
thee  :  Verily  not  one  whit  shall  they  injure  God !
God  will  refuse  them  all  part  in  the  life  to  come,
and  a  heavy  chastisement  shall  be  their  lot.

They  truly  who  purchase  infidelity  at  the.  price  of  their
faith,  shall  not  at  all  injure  God  !  and  a  grievous
chastisement  shall  be  their  lot.

And  let  not  the  infidels  deem  that  the  length  of  days
We  give  them  is  good  for  them  !  We  only  prolong
their  lives  that  they  may  increase  their  sins  !  and  a
shameful  chastisement  shall  be  their  lot.

It  is  not  in  God  to  leave  the  faithful  in  the  state  in
which  they  are,  until  He  sever  the  bad  from  the
good  :

Nor  is  God  minded  to  lay  open  the  secret  things  to  you,
but  God  chooseth  whom  He  will  of  his  apostles  to
know  them}  Believe,  therefore,  in  God  and  his
apostles  :  and  if  ye  believe  and  fear  God  then  a
great  reward  awaiteth  you.

And  let  not  those  who  are  niggard  of  what  God  hath
vouchsafed  them  in  his  bounty,  think  that  this  will
be  good  for  them — Nay,  it  will  be  bad  for  them —

That  of  which  they  have  been  niggard  shall  be  their
collar  on  the  day  of  the  Eesurrection.  And  God^s,
the  heritage  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  !  And
God  is  well-informed  of  what  ye  do.

Now  hath  God  heard  the  saying  of  those  who  said  :
"Aye,  God  is  poor  and  we  are  rich.'^  ^  We  will
write  down  their  sayings,  and  their  unjust  slaughter
of  the  prophets ;  and  We  will  say,  "  Taste  ye  the
torment  of  the  burning —

This,  for  what  your  hands  have  sent  on  before  you  ;  and
because  God  will  not  inflict  a  wrong  upon  his
servants !  "

To  those  who  say,  ''  Verily,  God  hath  enjoined  us  that
we  are  not  to  credit  an  apostle  until  he  present  us
a  sacrifice  which  fire  out  of  Heaven  shall  devour,"
1 80  Say  :  Already  have  apostles  before  me  come  to  you
with  demonstrative  proofs,  and  with  that  of  which
ye  speak.  Wherefore  then  slew  ye  them  ?  Tell  me,
if  ye  are  men  of  truth.

'  This  is  an  answer  to  the  taunt  that  Muhammad  could  not  distinguish
true  believers  from  hypocrites.

^This  was  the  taunt  of  the  Jews  of  the  tribe  of  Kainoka,  when  Mu-
hammad demanded  tribute  of  them  in  the  name  of  God.

THE    KORAN.  4-43

But  if  they  treat  thee  as  a  liar,  then  of  old  have  apostles
been  treated  as  liars  before  thee,  though  they  came
with  clear  proofs  of  their  mission  andwith  Scriptures
and  with  the  lif^ht-g-ivinof  Book.

o         o  o

Every  soul  shall  taste  of  death  :  and  ye  shall  only
receive  your  recompenses  on  the  day  of  Resurrec-
tion. And  whoso  shall  escape  the  fire,  and  be
brought  into  Paradise,  shall  indeed  be  happy.
And  the  life  of  this  world  is  but  a  cheating
fruition  !

Ye  shall  assuredly  be  tried  in  your  possessions  and  in
yourselves.  And  many  hurtful  things  shall  ye
assuredly  hear  from  those  to  whom  the  Scriptures
were  given  before  you,  and  from  those  who  join
other  gods  with  God.  B'^.t  if  ye  be  steadfast,  and
fear  God — then  this  verily  is  God's  decree  for  the
affairs  of  life.

Moreover,  when  God  entered  into  a  covenant  with  those
to  whom  the  Scriptures  had  been  given,  and  said,
"  Ye  shall  surely  make  it  known  to  mankind  and
not  hide  it,^^  they  cast  it  behind  their  backs,  and
sol''  "  Tor  a  sorry  price  !  But  vile  is  that  for
whicn  they  have  sold  it.

Suppose  not  then  that  they  who  rejoice  in  what  they  have
brought  to  pass,  and  love  to  be  praised  for  what
they  have  not  done^ — suppose  not  they  shall  be  in  a
place  of  refuge  from  the  chastisement.  An  afflic-
tive chastisement  doth  await  them  :

For  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  is
God^s,  and  God  hath  power  over  all  things.

Verily,  in  the  creation  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,
and  in  the  succession  of  the  night  and  of  the  day,
are  signs  for  men  of  understanding  heart ;

Who  standing,  and  sitting,  and  reclining,  bear  God
in  mind,  and  muse  on  the  creation  of  the  Heavens
and  of  the  Earth.  "O  our  Lord!''  say  they,
"  Thou  hast  not  created  this  in  vain.  No.  Glory
be  to  Thee  !  Keep  us  then  from  the  torment  of
the  fire.

0  our  Lord  !  surely  Thou  wilt  put  him  to  shame  whom
Thou  shalt  cause  to  enter  into  the  Fire,  and  the
wrong-doers  shall  have  none  to  help  them.

'  i.e.  who  rejoice  in  their  successful  corruptions  of  their  own  sacred
books,  especially  the  testimony  of  Moses  to  Muhammad,  and  in  their  own
fancied  righteousness.     Thus  some  of  the  commentators.

444  THir  KORAN.

190  0  our  Lord  !  wc  have  indeed  heard  one  that  called,  and
calling  us  to  the  faith  said,  '  Believe  ye  on  your
Lord/  and  we  therefore  believed.

O  our  Lord  !  forgive  us  then  our  sin,  ajid  hide  away
from  us  our  evil  deeds,  and  cause  us  to  die  with
the  righteous.

O  our  Lord  !  and  give  us  what  Thou  hast  promised  us
by  thine  apostles,  and  put  us  not  to  shame  on  the
day  of  the  Resurrection.  Verily,  Thou  wilt  not
fail  thy  promise. ^^

And  their  Lord  answereth  them,  "  I  will  not  suffer  the
work  of  him  among  you  that  worketh,  whether  of
male  or  female,  to  be  lost.  The  one  of  you  is  the
issue  of  the  other. ^

And  they  who  have  fled  their  country  and  quitted  their
homes  and  suffered  in  my  cause,  and  have  fought
and  fallen — I  will  blot  out  their  sins  from  them  and
will  bring  them  into  gardens  beneath  which  the
streams  do  flow.^'

A  recompense  from  God  !  and  God !  with  Him  is  the
perfection  of  recompense !

Let  not  prosperity  in  the  land  -  on  the  part  of  those
who  believe  not,  deceiv^e  thee.  ^Tis  but  a  brief
enjoyment !  Then  shall  Hell  be  their  abode  ;  and
wretched  the  bed !

But  as  to  those  who  fear  their  Lord — for  them  are  the
gardens  ^neath  which  the  rivers  flow  :  therein  shall
they  abide  for  aye.  Such  their  reception  with
God — and  that  which  is  with  God  is  best  for  the
righteous.

And  verily  among  the  people  of  the  Book  are  those  who
believe  in  God,  and  in  what  He  hath  sent  down  to
you,  and  in  what  He  hath  sent  down  to  them,
humbling  themselves  to  God.  They  barter  not
the  signs  of  God  for  a  mean  price.

These  !    their   recompense  awaiteth  them  with   their
Lord  :  aye  !  God  is  swift  to  take  account.
200  0  ye  who  believe  !  suffer  patiently,  and  excel  in  pa-

'  Lit.  some  of  you  are  from  others.  These  worfls  were  occasioned  by  one
of  the  Prophet's  wives  having  told  him  that  God  often  praised  the  men,
but  not  the  women,  who  had  fled  their  country  for  the  faith. — Beidh.

^  Lit.  their  movements,  their  comings  and  goings.  Hence,  the  success  of
the  Meccans  in  their  trading  journeys.  This  may  point  to  the  comparative
freedom  for  trade  and  general  independence  of  the  Meccans  after  the  affair
at  Ohod.

THE    KORAN.  445

tience,   and   be   firm,    and   fear    God.      Haply  it
shall  be  well  with  you.

[XCVIII.]

SURA  LXL— BATTLE  ARRAY.
Medina. — 14  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

All  that  is  in  the  Heavens  and  all  that  is  on  the  Earth
praiseth  God  ;  and  He  is  the  Mighty,  the  Wise  !

Believers  !  why  profess  ye  that  which  ye  practise
not?i

Most  hat*>^'-'  -'s  it  to  God  that  ye  say  that  which  ye  do
not —

Verily  God  loveth  those  who,  as  though  they  were  a
solid  building,  do  battle  for  his  cause  in  serried
lines  !

And  bear  in  mind  when  Moses  said  to  his  people,
"  Why  do  ye  harm  me,  O  my  people,  kno^ving  (as
ye  do)  that  I  am  God^s  apostle  unto  you  ?  "  And
when  they  went  astray,  God  led  their  hearts  astray ;
for  God  guideth  not  a  perverse  people :

And  remember  when  Jesus  the  son  of  Mary  said,  ''  O
children  of  Israel  !  of  a  truth  I  am  God's  apostle
to  you  to  confirm  the  law  which  was  given  before
me,  and  to  announce  an  apostle  that  shall  come
after  me,  whose  name  shall  be  Ahmad  !  "  -     But

'  Addressed  to  the  Muslims  who  had  turned  their  backs  to  the  enemy
at  Ohod.

'  Muhammad  had  no  doubt  heard  that  Jesus  had  promised  a  Paracletos.
John  xvL  7.  This  title,  understood  by  him,  probably  from  the  similarity
of  sound,  as  equivalent  to  Periclytos,  he  applied  to  himself  with  reference
to  his  own  name,  Muhammad  (i.e.  praised,  glorified),  from  the  same  root
and  of  the  same  meaning  as  Ahmad,  also  one  of  the  Prophet's  names.  It
may  be  here  remarked  that  the  name  Muhammad,  if  pronounced  Muham-
med,  "  might  be  understood  by  an  Arab  in  an  active  instead  of  a  passive
sense "  (Lane,  Kor.  p.  52).     Other  passages  of  Scripture  understood  by

44G  THE    ^OR^N.

when  he  (Ahmad)  presented  himself  with  clear
proofs  of  his  mission,  they  said,  "  This  is  manifest
sorcery  ! "

But  who  more  impious  than  he  who  when  called  to
Islam  deviseth  a  falsehood  concerning  God  ?  And
God  guideth  not  the  wicked  !

Fain  would  they  put  out  the  light  of  God  with  their
mouths !  but,  though  the  Infidels  abhor  it,  God
will  perfect  his  light :

He  it  is  who  hath  sent  his  apostle  with  guidance  and
the  religion  of  truth,  that,  though  they  detest  it
who  join  other  gods  with  God,  He  may  make  it
victorious  over  every  other  religion.
10  0  ye  who  believe  !  shall  I  direct  you  unto  a  merchandise
which  shall  deliver  you  from  the  sore  torment  ?

Believe  in  God  and  his  apostle,  and  do  valiantly  in  the
cause  of  God  with  your  wealth  and  with  your
persons !  This,  did  ye  but  know  it,  will  be  best
for  you  :

Your  sins  will  He  forgive  you,  and  He  will  bring  you
into  gardens  beneath  whose  shades  the  rivers
flow — into  charming  abodes  in  the  gardens  of
Eden  :  This  the  great  bliss. —

And  other  things  which  ye  desire  will  He  hestow,  Help
from  God  and  speedy  conquest !  ^  And  bear  thou
these  tidings  to  the  faithful.

0  ye  who  believe  !  be  helpers  (ansars)  of  God ;  as  said
Jesus  the  son  of  Mary  to  his  apostles,  "  Who  will
be  my  helpers  in  the  cause  of  God  ?  "  "  We,'*'
said  the  apostles,  "  will  be  helpers  of  God."  ^  And
a  part  of  the  children  of  Israel  believed,  and  a  part

Muslims  of  their  Prophet  are  Deut.  xxxiii.  2,  where  Sinai  is  said  to  mean
Judaism,  Seir  (in  Galilee)  Christianity,  and  Paran  (in  Arabia)  Islam  ;  Isai.
xxi.  6,  where  the  "  rider  on  the  ass "  is  Jesns,  the  "  rider  on  the  camel "
Muhammad  ;  Matt.  xx.  1-16,  where  the  morning,  noon,  and  even  are
Judaism.  Christianity,  and  Islam  ;  John  iv.  21  ;  1  John  iv.  2,  .3,  where
Muhammad  is  said  to  be  "  the  spirit  that  is  of  God,"  because  he  proclaimed
that  Jesus  was  a  tme  man,  and  not  God.  It  seems  probable,  from  the
traditions  (v.  Sprcngcr,  i.  p.  155,  ff.),  that  the  Prophet  did  not  adopt  the
name  Muhammad  till  after  the  Flight,  and  that  he  was  previously  called
Abd- Allah.    See  Sura  xlviii.  29,  and  note  on  Sura  ii.  83  ;  also  Sura  xciv.

'  If  this  allude  to  a  meditated  attack  on  the  Banu  Nadir  (see  Sura  [en.]
lix.),  we  have  a  clue  to  the  probable  date  of  the  Sura.  The  promise,  how-
ever, may  be  general.  But  the  tone  of  verse  9  evidently  points  to  a  period
when,  as  at  Medina,  the  prospects  of  Islam  were  becoming  hopeful.

'  Comp.  Sura  iii.  45,  where  the  same  passage  occurs.

THE    KORAN.  447

believed  not.  But  to  those  who  believed  gave  We
the  upper  hand  over  their  foes,  and  soon  did  they
prove  victorious.

[XCIX.]

SURA  LVIL  — IRON.

Medixa.' — 29  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

All  that  is  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth  praiseth
God,  and  He  is  the  Mighty,  the  AVise  !

His  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth ;
He  maketh  alive  and  killeth ;  and  He  hath  power
over  all  things  !

He  is  th*»  ^  and  the  last ;  the  Seen  and  the  Hidden  ;^
and  He  knoweth  all  things  !

It  is  He  who  in  six  days  created  the  Heavens  and  the
Earth,  then  seated  Himself  firmly  on  his  throne.
He  knoweth  that  which  entereth  the  earth  and
that  which  goeth  forth  from  it,  and  what  cometh
down  from  Heaven  and  what  mounteth  up  to  it ;
and  wherever  ye  are.  He  is  with  you ;  and  God
beholdeth  all  your  actions  !

His  the  kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth ;  and
to  God  shall  all  things  return  !

He  causeth  the  night  to  pass  into  the  day,  and  He
causcth  the  day  to  pass  into  the  night :  and  He
knoweth  the  very  secrets  of  the  bosom  !

Believe  in  God  and  his  Apostle,  and  bestow  in  alms  of
that  whereof  God  hath  made  you  heirs  :  for  who-
ever among  you  believe  and  give  alms — theirs
shall  be  a  great  recompense.

And  what  hath  come  to  you  that  ye  believe  not  in  God

'  The  general  tone  of  this  Sura  shows  it  to  have  been  revealed  at  Me-
dina, and  from  verse  22  it  may  be  inferred  that  its  true  date  lies  between
the  battle  of  Ohod  and  the  battle  of  the  Ditch.

*  Lit.  the  exterior  or  apparent,  and  the  interior.

448  THE    i^RAN.

and  the  Apostle  who  summoneth  you  to  believe  in
your  Lord,  when  He  hath  already  entered  into  a
compact  with  you,  to  the  intent  that  ye  should
become  believers  ?  ^

He  it  is  who  hath  sent  down  clear  tokens  upon  his
servant,  that  He  may  bring  you  out  of  darkness
into  light  j  and  truly,  Kind  Merciful  to  you  is
God.
1 0  And  what  hath  come  to  you  that  ye  expend  not  for  the
cause  of  God,  since  the  heritage  of  the  Heavens
and  of  the  Earth  is  God's  ?  Those  among  you
who  contributed  before  the  victory,  and  fought,
shall  not  be  held  equal  to  certain  others  among
you  !  Such  are  of  a  nobler  grade  than  those  who
contributed  and  fought  after  it.  But  a  goodly
recompense  hath  God  promised  to  all ;  and  God  is
acquainted  with  what  ye  do.

Who  is  he  that  will  lend  a  generous  loan  to  God  ?  So
will  He  double  it  to  him,  and  he  shall  have  a  noble
reward.

One  Day  thou  shalt  see  the  believers,  men  and  women,
with  their  light  running  before  them,  and  on  their
right  hands."  The  angels  shall  say  to  them,  "  Good
tidings  for  you  this  day  of  gardens  beneath  whose
shades  the  rivers  flow,  in  which  ye  shall  abide  for
ever  ! "     This  the  great  bliss  !

On  that  day  the  hypocrites,  both  men  and  women,  will
say  to  those  who  have  believed,  "  Tarry  for  us,
that  we  may  kindle  our  light  at  yours."  It  shall
be  said,  "  Return  ye  back,  and  seek  light  for  your-
selves." ^  But  between  them  shall  be  set  a  wall
with  a  gateway,  within  which  shall  be  the  Mercy,
and  in  front,  without  it,  the  Torment.  They  shall
cry  to  them,  "  Were  we  not  with  you  ?  "  They
shall  say,  "  Nay  !  but  ye  led  yourselves  into
temptation  and  ye  delayed  and  ye  doubted  and
the  things  ye  craved  deceived  you,  till  the  doom  of
God  arrived  : — and  the  seducer  seduced  you  from
God."

On  that  day,  therefore,  no  ransom  shall  be  taken  from
you  or  from  those  who  have  not  believed : — your

'  Thus  Ullmann.    Or,  as  if  you  were  believers.
*  To  guide  them  on  their  route  to  Paradise.
'  Comp.  Matt.  xxv.  8,  9.— L.R.

I

THE    K()R\\.  449

abode  the  fire  ! — This  the  proper  place  for  you  !  ^
and  wretched  the  journey  thither  !

Hath  not  the  time  come,  for  those  who  have  beheved
to  humble  their  hearts  at  the  warning  of  God  and
at  the  truth  which  He  hath  revealed  ?  and  that
they  be  not  as  those  to  whom  the  Scriptures  were
given  heretofore,  whose  lifetime  was  prolonged,
but  whose  hearts  were  hardened,  and  many  of  them
were  evil-doers  ?

Know  that  God  quickeneth  the  earth  after  its  death  !
Now  have  We  made  these  signs  clear  to  you  :
haply  ye  will  understand.

Verily,  they  who  give  alms,  both  men  and  women,  and
they  who  lend  a  generous  loan  to  God, — doubled
shall  it  be  to  them — and  t\ey  shall  have  a  noble
recompense.

And  they  who  believed  in  God  and  his  apostles  are  the
men  of  truth,  and  the  witnesses  in  the  presence  of
their  Lord ;  -  they  shall  have  their  recompense
and  their  light :  But  as  for  the  unbelievers,  and
those  who  give  the  lie  to  our  signs,  these  shall  be
the  inmotes  of  Hell.

Know  jh  -.at  this  world's  life  is  only  a  sport,  and
pastime,  and  show,  and  a  cause  of  vainglory  among
you  !  And  the  multiplying  of  riches  and  children
is  like  the  plants  xolucli  spring  up  after  rain,  whose
growth  rejoiceth  the  husbandman;  then  they  wither
away,  and  thou  seest  them  all  yellow ;  then  they
become  stubble.  And  in  the  next  life  is  a  severe
chastisement,
20  Or  else  pardon  fi-om  God  and  his  acceptance  :  And  this
world's  life  is  but  a  cheating  fruition.^

Vie  in  hasting  after  pardon  from  your  Lord,  and  Para-
dise— whose  outspread  is  as  the  outspread  of  the
Heaven  and  of  the  Earth  :  Prepared  is  it  for  those
who  believe  in  God  and  his  apostles  :  Such  is  the
bounty  of  God  :  to  whom  He  will  He  giveth  it :
and  of  immense  bounty  is  God  !

No  mischance  chanceth  either  on  earth  or  in  your  own
persons,  which,  ere  We  brought  it  into  being,  was
not  in  the  Book  ;* — Verily,  easy  is  this  tcrGod —

'  Palronus. — Mar.     Beschutzer. — Ullm. — or,  your  master.

•  Against  the  infidels.

^  Supellex  dcceptionis. — Mar.     Lit.  of  vain  hope.

*  Of  the  eternal  decrees.     The  pronoun  it,  accordincr  to  Zamakshari,
may  refer  either  to  the  persons,  or  to  the  mischance.

2  G

450  Tii^

KORAN.

Lest  ye  distress  yourselves  if  good  fJdngs  escape  you,
and  be  over  joyous  for  what  /alleth  to  your  sliare.
For  God  loveth  not  the  presumptuous,  boastful
persons.

Who  are  avaricious  and  incite  others  to  avarice.  But
let  who  will  turn  away  from,  almsgiving,  at  least
God  is  the  Rich,  the  Praiseworthy.
^  Already  now  have  We  sent  our  apostles  with  clear  evi-
dences, and  We  have  caused  the  Book  and  the
balance  ^  to  descend  with  them,  that  men  might
observe  fairness — And  We  have  sent  down  IRON
— Strong-  force  ^  resideth  in  it  as  well  as  advantage
to  mankind  ! — that  God  might  know  who  will  assist
Him  and  his  apostles  in  secret.  Verily,  God  is
Powerful,  Strong.

And  of  old  sent  We  Noah  and  Abraham,  and  on  their
seed  conferred  the  gift  of  prophecy,  and  the  Book ;
and  some  of  them  We  guided  aright;  but  many
were  evil-doers.

Then  We  caused  our  apostles  to  follow  in  their  foot-
steps ;  and  We  caused  Jesus  the  son  of  ]\Iary  to
follow  them ;  and  We  gave  him  the  Evangel,^  and
We  put  into  the  hearts  of  those  who  followed  him
kindness  and  compassion  :  but  as  to  the  monastic
life,*  they  invented  it  themselves.  The  desire  only
of  pleasing  God  did  We  prescribe  to  them,  and
this  they  observed  not  as  it  ought  to  have  been
observed  :  but  to  such  of  them  as  believed  gave
We  their  reward,  though  many  of  them  were  evil-
doers.

Oye  who  believe  !  fear  God  and  believe  in  his  Apostle  :
two  portions  of  his  mercy  will  He  give  you.  He
will  bestow  on  you  a  light  by  which  ye  shall  walk,
and  He  vdll  forgive  you  :  for  God  is  Forgiving,
Merciful ;

'  Brought  by  Gabriel  to  Noah,  who  imparted  its  use  to  liis  posterity.
So  say  the  commentators.  But  the  expression  seems  rather  to  be  figura-
tive.    Comp.  Sura  Iv.  G,  p.  fjl.

'  Comp.  Uon.  iv.  22,  and  Michna  Tr.  Aboth,  5,  9.

^  We  are  not  to  understand  by  the  word  Evangel  the  actual  volume  of
the  New  Testament,  or  any  one  of  its  component  parts,  but  rather  the
revelation  made  to  Jesus  by  God  himself,  which  Muhammad  may  have
imagined  to  have  been  committed  to  Writing  subsequently,  in  the  same
way  as  his  own  Koran.

*  The  followers  of  Elxai,  a  sect  of  the  Essenes,  rejected  celibacy.  Vide
Sprenger's  Leben,  i.  p.  31.

THE   KORAN.  451

That  the  people  of  the  Book  may  know  that  they  have
no  control  over  aught  of  the  favours  of  God,  and
that  these  gifts  of  grace  *  are  in  the  hands  of  God,
who  vouchsafeth  them  to  whom  He  will  ;  for  God
is  of  immense  bounty.

[C]

SUEA  IV.— WOMEN."
Medina. — 175  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

O  MEN  !  fear  your  Lord,  who  hath  created  you  of  one
man  (nnfs,  soul),  and  of  him  created  his  wife,  and
froTU  -ose  twain  hath  spread  abroad  so  many  men
and  ^\  OMEN.  And  fear  ye  God,  in  whose  name  ye
ask  mutual  favours — and  reverence  the  wombs  that
hare  you.     Verily  is  God  watching  you  !

And  give  to  the  orphans  their  property,  and  substitute
not  worthless  things  of  your  own  for  their  valuable
ones,  and  enjoy  ^  not  their  property  in  addition*
to  your  own  ;  verily  this  is  a  great  crime.

And  if  ye  are  apprehensive  that  ye  shall  not  deal  fairly
with  orphans,  then,  of  other  women  who  seem  good
in  your  eyes,  marry  hut  two,  or  three,  or  four  ;^  and

The  word  in  the  original  is  the  same  for  favours,  gifts  of  grace,  bounty.
The  reference  is  to  the  gift  of  prophecy  (Beidh.)  mentioned  verse  27.

'  Most  of  the  events  alluded  to  in  this  Sura  fall  between  the  end  of  the
third  and  the  close  of  the  fifth  year  after  the  Flight  to  Medina.

'  Lit.  devour.  ■*  Wright's  Gram.  ii.  p.  92.

*  Lit.  by  twos,  by  threes,  by  fours,  i.e.  this  limitation  is  to  apply  to  all
Muslim  marriages,  however  numerous.  Muhammad  assumed  to  himself
the  privilege  of  having  a  yet  greater  number  of  wives  ;  but  in  doing  so  he
wiis  probably  actuated  by  a  desire  for  male  ofi'spring.  Chadijah  was  his
only  wife  untU  quite  a  late  period  of  his  career.  Ccrap.  Arbah  Turim .  Ev.
Hazaer,  1,  "  A  man  may  marry  many  wives,  for  Rabba  saith  it  is  lawful  to
do  so,  if  he  can  provide  for  them.  Nevertheless,  the  wise  men  have  given
good  advice,  that  a  man  should  not  marry  more  than  four  wives."  See
also  Yad  Hachazakah  Hilchoth  Ishuth,  14.  3.

2g2

452  THE   KORAN.

I

if  ye  fit  ill  fear  that  ye  sliall  not  act  equitably,  then
one  only ;  or  the  slaves  whom  ye  have  acquired :
this  will  make  justice  on  your  part  easier.  And
give  women  their  dowry  as  a  free  gift ;  but  if  of
their  own  free  will  they  kindly  give  up  aught
thereof  to  you,  then  enjoy  it  as  convenient,  and
profitable  :

And  entrust  not  to  the  incapable  the  substance  which
God  hath  placed  with  you  as  a  means  of  support ;
but  maintain  them  therewith,  and  clothe  them,  and
speak  to  them  with  kindly  speech.

And  make  trial  of  orphans  until  they  reach  the  age  of
marriage  ;  and  if  ye  perceive  in  them  a  sound
judgment,  then  hand  over  their  substance  to  them  ;
but  consume  ye  it  not  profusely  and  hastily

Only  because  they  have  attained  their  majority.^  And
let  the  rich  guardian  not  even  touch  it  -,  and
let  him  who  is  poor  then  use  it  for  his  support
with  discretion.

And  when  ye  make  over  their  substance  to  them,  then
take  witnesses  in  their  presence  :  God  also  taketh
a  sufficient  account.

Men  ought  to  have  a  part  of  what  their  parents  and
kindred  leave,  and  women  ^  a  part  of  what  their
parents  and  kindred  leave  :  whether  it  be  little  or
much,  let  them  have  a  stated  portion  :

And  when  they  who  are  of  kin  are  present  at  the  divi-
sion, and  the  orphans  and  the  poor,  bestow  some-
what upon  them  therefrom  ;  and  speak  to  them
with  kindly  speech :
10  And  let  those  be  afraid  to  wrong  orphans,  who,  should
they  leave  behind  them  weakly  offspring,  would  be
solicitous  on  their  account.  Let  them  then  fear
God,  and  let  them  propose  what  is  convenient.

Verily  they  who  swallow  the  substance  of  the  orphan
wrongfully,  swallow  down  only  fire  into  their
bellies,  and  shall  burn  at  the  flame  !

'  Or,  in  case  they  should  not  attain,  &c.

'  Verses  8  and  12  are  said  by  the  commentators  to  have  been  revealed
in  consequence  of  the  complaints  of  Onim  Kuhha  that,  in  accordance  with
the  ante-Islamitic  custom,  she  had  been  exchided  from  any  portion  of  her
deceased  husband's  property.  The  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the  Muham-
madan  traditions  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact,  that  no  less  than  six  dif-
ferent names  are  assigned  to  him.  It  is,  however,  probable  that  these  and
similar  laws  relative  to  inheritances  were  given  at  a  time  when  many  heads
of  families  had  fallen,  as  at  Ohod,  in  battle.  This  remark  applies  to  verses
33-45.

THE    KORAN.  453

^  With  regard  to  your  children,  God  commandeth  you  to
give  the  male  the  portion  of  two  females ;  and  if
they  be  females  more  than  two,  then  they  shall
have  two-thirds  of  that  which  their  father  hath
left :  but  if  she  be  an  only  daughter  she  shall  have
the  half;  and  the  father  and  Taoi\\eY  of  the  deceased
shall  each  of  them  have  a  sixth  part  of  what  he
hath  left,  if  he  have  a  child;  but  if  he  have  no
child  and  his  parents  be  his  heirs,  then  his  mother
shall  have  the  third  :  and  if  he  have  brethren,  his
mother  shall  have  the  sixth,  after  paying  the
bequests  he  shall  have  bequeathed,  and  his  debts.
As  to  your  fathers,  or  your  children,  ye  know  not
which  of  them  is  the  most  advantageous  to  you.
This  is  the  ordinance  of  God.  Verily,  God  is
Knowing,  Wise  !

Half  of  what  your  wives  leave  shall  be  yours,  if  they
have  no  issue  ;  but  if  they  have  issue,  then  a
fourth  of  what  they  leave  shall  be  yours,  after
paying  the  bequests  they  shall  bequeath,  and
debts.

And  your  ■«— -es  shall  have  a  fourth  part  of  what  ye
leavb,  ii  ye  have  no  issue ;  but  if  ye  have  issue,
then  they  shall  have  an  eighth  part  of  what  ye
leave,  after  paying  the  bequests  ye  shall  bequeath
and  debts.

If  a  man  or  a  woman  make  a  distant  relation  their  heir,
and  he  or  she  have  a  brother  or  a  sister,  each  of
these  two  shall  have  a  sixth ;  but  if  there  are  more
than  this,  then  shall  they  be  sharers  in  a  third,
after  payment  of  the  bequests  he  shall  have  be-
queathed, and  debts.

Without  loss  to  any  one.  This  is  the  ordinance  of  God,
and  God  is  Knowing,  Gracious  !

These  are  the  precepts  of  God ;  and  whoso  obeyeth  God
and  his  Prophet,  him  shall  God  bring  into  gardens
beneath  whose  shades  the  rivers  flow,  therein  to
abide  for  ever :  and  this,  the  great  blessedness  ! —

And  whoso  shall  rebel  against  God  and  his  Apostle,  and
transgress  his  ordinances,  him  shall  God  cause  to
enter  unto  Hell-fire,  to  abide  therein  for  ever  ;  and
his,  a  shameful  torment !
^  If  any  of  your  women  be  guilty  of  whoredom,  then  bring
four  witnesses  against  them  from  among  your-
selves; and  if  they  bear  witness   to  the  fact,  shut

454  THE    KOKAN.

them  up  within  their  houses  till  death  release  them,^
or  God  make  some  way  for  th-em.
20  A.nd  if  two  vien  among  you  commit  tho  crime,  then
punish  them  both  ;  but  if  they  repent  and  amend,
then  let  them  be  :  Yerily  God  is  He  who  relenteth.
Merciful !

Only  is  there  relenting  (turning)  on  the  part  of  God  to
those,  who  have  done  evil  ignorantly,  a?icZ  then  turn
speedily  unto  Him.  These !  God  will  turn  unto
them  :  and  God  is  Knowing,  Wise  1

But  no  relenting  -  shall  there  be  on  God's  part  towards
those  who  do  evil^  until,  when  death  is  close  to  one
of  them,  he  saith,  ''Now  verily  am  I  turned  to
God ;  "  nor  to  those  who  die  unbelievers.  These  !
We  have  made  ready  for  them  a  grievous  torment !
^  0  believers  !  it  is  not  allowed  you  to  be  heirs  of  your
wives  against  their  will ;  nor  to  hinder  them  from
marrying  in  order  to  take  from  them  part  of  the
dowry  you  had  given  them,  unless  they  have  been
guilty  of  undoubted  lewdness ;  but  deal  kindly  with
them  :  for  if  ye  are  estranged  from  them,  haply  ye
are  estranged  from  that  in  which  God  hath  placed
abundant  good.

And  if  ye  be  desirous  to  exchange  one  wife  for  another,
and  have  given  one  of  them  a  talent,  make  no
deduction  from  it.  Would  ye  take  it  by  slandering
her,  and  with  manifest  wrong?

How,  moreover,  could  ye  take  it,  when  one  of  you  hath
gone  in  unto  the  other,  and  they  have  received  from
you  a  strict  bond  of  union  ?

And  marry  not  women  whom  your  fathers  have  married :
for  this  is  a  shame  and  hateful,  and  an  evil  way: —
though  what  is  past^  may  be  allowed.

Forbidden  to  you  are  your  mothers,  and  your  daughters,
and  your  sisters,  and  your  aunts,  both  on  the  father
and  mother's  side,  and  your  nieces  on  the  brother
and  sister's  side,  and  your  foster-mothers,  and  your
foster-sisters,  and  the  mothers  of  your  wives,  and

'  Women  found  guilty  of  adultery  and  fornication  were  punished,  at  the
first  rise  of  Islam,  by  being  literally  immured.  But  this  was  exchanged,
in  the  case  of  a  maiden,  for  one  year's  banishment  and  100  stripes  ;  and
in  the  case  of  a  married  woman,  for  stoning.

'  Turning.

'  What  took  place  in  the  times  of  ignorance,  previous  to  the  revelation
of  the  Koran.  See  Freytag's  Einl.  p.  201,  as  to  the  incestuous  nature  of
the  ante-Islamitic  Arabian  marriages.

THE    KORAN.  -455

your  step-daugliters  who  are  your  wards,  born  of
your  wives  to  whom  ye  have  gone  in  :  (but  if  ye
have  not  gone  in  unto  them,  it  shall  bo  no  sin  in
you  to  marnj  them)  ;  and  the  wives  of  your  sons  who
proceed  out  of  your  loins ;  and  ye  may  not  have
two  sisters ;  except  where  it  is  already  done.^
Yerilyj  God  is  Indulgent,  Merciful !

Forhidden  to  ]fou  also  are  married  women,  except  those
who  are  in  your  hands  as  slaves  :  This  is  the  law
of  God  for  you.  And  He  hath  allowed  you,  beside
this,  to  seek  out  wives  by  means  of  your  wealth,
with  modest  conduct,  and  without  fornication.  And
give  those  with  whom  ye  have  cohabited  their
dowry.  This  is  the  law.  But  it  shall  be  no  crime
in  you  to  make  agrcemeLcs  over  and  above  the
law.    Verily,  God  is  Knowing,  Wise  !

And  whoever  of  you  is  not  rich  enough  to  marry  free
believing  women,  then  let  him  marry  such  of  your
believing  maidens  as  have  fallen  into  your  hands
as  slaves ;  God  well  knoweth  your  faith.  Ye  are
sprung  the  one  from  the  other.  Marry  them  then,
witli  *^~  leave  of  their  masters,  and  give  them  a
fair  vower  :  but  let  them  be  chaste  and  free  from
fornication,  and  not  entertainers  of  lovers.
oO  If  after  marriage  they  commit  adultery  then  inflict  upon
them  half  the  penalty  enacted  for  free  married
women.  This  laiv  is  for  him  among  you  who  is
afraid  of  doing  wrong  :  ^  but  if  ye  abstain,'  it  will
be  better  for  you.     And  God  i^ Lenient,  Merciful,

God  desireth  to  make  this  known  to  you,  and  to  guide
you  into  the  ways  of  those  who  have  been  before
you,  and  He  turneth  to  you  with  relenting.  And
God  is  Knowing,  Wise  !

And  God  desireth  th  us  to  turn  Himself  unto  you  :  but
they  who  follow  their  own  lusts,  desire  that  with
great  swerving  should  ye  swerve  from  the  rujJit
ivay  !  God  desireth  to  make  your  burden  light  to
you :  for  man  hath  been  created  weak,
^  0  believers !  devour  not  each  other's  substance  in
mutual  frivolities  ;  *  unless  there  be  a  trafficking

'  See  previous  note.

^  By  marrying  w  ithout  means  adequate  to  the  support  of  a  free  wife,  or
by  remaining  single.

*  From  marrying  slaves.     Lit.  if  yc  tndure  patiently.

*  Games  of  chance,  usury,  etc.

456  Th/  KORAN.

among  you  by  your  owu  consent :  and  commit  not
suicide  : — Of  a  truth  God  is  m-erciful  to  you — ■

And  wlioever  sliall  do  this  maliciously  and  wrongfully,
We  will  in  the  end  bui'n  him  at  hell-^re  ;  for  this  is
easy  with  God.

If  ye  avoid  the  great  sins  which  ye  are  forbidden,  We
will  blot  out  your  faults  and  cause  you  to  enter
Paradise  with  honourable  entry.

And  covet  not  the  gifts  by  which  God  hath  raised  some
of  you  above  others.  The  men  shall  have  a  portion
according  to  their  deserts,  and  the  women  a  portion
according  to  their  deserts.  Of  God,  therefore,  ask
his  gifts.  Yerily,  God  hath  knowledge  of  all  things.

To  every  one  have  We  appointed  kindred,  as  heirs  of
what  parents  and  relatives,  and  those  with  whom
ye  have  joined  right  hands  in  contract,  leave.  Give,
therefore,  to  each  their  portion.  Verily,  God  wit-
nesseth  all  things.

Men  are  superior  to  women  on  account  of  the  qualities
with  which  God  hath  gifted  the  one  above  the  other,
and  on  account  of  the  outlay  they  make  from  their
substance /o/-  them.  Virtuous  women  are  obedient,
careful  during  the  hushamVs  absence,^  because  God
hath  of  them  been  careful. ^  But  chide  those  for
whose  refractoriness  ye  have  cause  to  fear;  remove
them  into  sleeping-chambers  apart,  and  scourge
them  :  but  if  they  are  obedient  to  you,  then  seek
not  occasion  against  them  :  verily,  God  is  High,
Great  !     •

And  if  ye  fear  a  breach  between  man  and  wife,  then
send  a  judge  chosen  from  his  family  and  a  judge
chosen  from  her  family ;  if  they  are  desirous  of
agreement,  God  will  effect  a  reconciliation  between
them;  verily,  God  is  knowing,  apprised  of  all !
40  And  Worship  God,  and  join  not  aught  with  Him  in
worship.  Bo  good  to  parents,^  and  to  kindred,  and
to  orphans,  and  to  the  poor,  and  to  a  neighbour,  a

'  Lit.  for  the  nhse.nt.

'  By  providing  for  them  a  home  and  the  protection  of  a  husband.  Or,
of  that  which  God  loonld  have  them  care  for,  i.  e.  their  persons  and  the  pro-
perty of  their  husbands.     So  Kas.

'  An  undutiful  child  is  very  seldom  heard  of  among  the  Egyptians,  or
the  Arabs  in  general.  Sons  scarcely  ever  sit,  or  eat,  or  smoke,  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  father,  unless  bidden  to  do  so  ;  and  they  often  wait  upon  him
and  upon  his  guests  at  meals  and  on  other  occasions  :  they  do  not  cease  to
act  thus  when  they  have  become  men. — Lane's  Mod.  Egypt,  vol.  i.  p.  69.

THE    KORAN.  457

kinsman  or  near  neighbour,  and  to  a  familiar  friend
and  to  the  wayfarer,  and  to  the  slaves  whom  your
right  hands  hold  :  verily,  God  loveth  not  the  proud,
the  vain  boaster.

Who  are  niggardly  themselves,  and  bid  others  be  nig-
gards, and  hide  away  what  God  of  his  bounty  hath
given  them.  We  have  made  ready  a  shameful
chastisement  for  the  unbelievers,

And  for  those  who  bestow  their  substance   in  alms  to
.   be  seen  of  men,   and  believe  not  in  God  and  in
the  last  day.     "\Mioever  hath  Satan  for  his  com-
panion, an  evil  companion  hath  he  !

But  what  hlesaedness  luoiild  be  theirs,  if  they  should  be-
lieve in  God  and  in  the  last  day,  and  bestow  alms
out  of  what  God  has  vouchsafed  them ;  for  God
taketh  knowledofe  of  them  !

God  truly  will  not  wrong  any  one  of  the  weight  of  a
mote  ;  and  if  there  be  any  good  deed.  He  will  repay
it  doubly ;  and  from  his  presence  shall  be  given  a
great  recompense  !

How  shall  it  be  then  with  unbelievers  when  We  bring  up
aga''"'"  !.hem  witnesses  from  all  peoples,  and  when
We  unng  thee  up  as  a  witness  against  these  ?  On
that  day  they  who  believed  not  and  rebelled
against  the  Prophet,  shall  wish  that  the  earth
were  levelled  with  them  !  But  no  event  shall  they
hide  from  God.
^  0  ye  true  believers,^  come  not  to  prayer  when  drunken,
but  wait  till  ye  can  understand  what  ye  utter ;  nor
when  ye  are  polluted,-  unless  ye  be  travelling  on
the  road,  until  ye  have  washed  yourselves.  If  ye
be  sick,  or  on  a  journey,  or  any  one  of  you  have
come  from  the  unclean  place,  or  have  touched  a
woman,  and  ye  find  not  water,  then  take  pure  sand
and  bathe  your  face  and  your  hands  with  it :  verily
God  is  Lenient,  Merciful.
^  Hast  thou  not  remarked  those  ^  to  whom  a  part  of  the

'  The  Koranic  precepts  as  to  prayer  savour  of  Jewish  origin.  Thus,
lOyO  n'psn  "  Prayer  should  be  said  standing,"  is  a  Rabbinic  precept. —
Comp.  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  240.— Misch.  Berachoth,  10— may  be  shortened  in
dangerous  places,  ib.  iv.  10 — is  forbidden  to  the  drunken,  ib.  31-2.  Eru-
bin,  64 — and  to  the  polluted  ;  Berachoth,  iii.  4— and  is  to  be  preceded,  in
this  case,  by  washings  with  water  or  sand.  See  Sura  xvii.  110,  note  2,
p.  174  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  21.

-  Effiuxu  seminis.  '  The  Jews  and  their  Rabbis.

458  THE  korAn.

Scriptures  liatli  been  given  ?  Vendors  are  they  of
error,  and  are  desirous  that  ye  go  astray  from  the
Way.  But  God  knoweth  your  enemies ;  and  God
is  a  sufficient  patron,  and  God  is  a  sufficient  helper  !

Among  the  Jews  are  those  who  displace  the  words
of  their  ScripUires,  and  say,  "  We  have  heard,  and
we  have  not  obeyed  -,  and  hear  thou,  but  as  one
that  hearetji  not ;  and  look  at  us  ;  ^  perverting
with  their  tongues,  and  wounding  the  Faith  :

But  if  they  would  say,  ''  AVe  have  heard,  and  wc  obey  ;
hear  thou,  and  regard  us  ; "  it  were  assuredly  better
for  them,  and  moi'e  right.  But  God  hath  cursed
them  for  their  unbelief.  Only  few  then  of  them
believe  !
50  ^  0  ye  to  whom  the  Scriptures  have  been  given  !  believe
in  what  We  have  sent  down  confirmatory  of  the
Scripture  which  is  in  your  hands,  ere  We  deface
your  features,  and  render  them  after  the  manner  of
their  hinder  parts,  or  curse  you  as  We  cursed  the
sabbath- breakers  : "  And  the  command  of  God  was
effected.

Verily,  God  will  not  forgive  the  union  of  other  gods
with  Himself;  but  other  than  this  will  He  forgive
to  whom  He  pleaseth.  And  whoso  uniteth  gods
with  God,  hath  devised  a  great  wickedness.

Hast  thou  not  marked  those  who  hold  themselves  to
be  righteous  ?  But  God  holdeth  righteous  whom
He  will ;  and  they  shall  not  be  wronged  the  husk
of  a  date-stone.

Behold  how  they  devise  a  falsehood  of  God  !  Therein
is  wickedness  manifest  enough  !

Hast  thou  not  observed  those  to  whom  a  part  of  the
Scriptures  hath  been  given  ?  '  They  believe  in  Djibt
and  Thagoot,  and  say  of  the  infidels,  "  These  are
guided  in  a  better  path  than  those  who  hold  the
faith."

These  are  they  whom  God  hath  cursed :  and  for  him
whom  God  hath  cursed,  thou  shalt  by  no  meaus
find  a  helper.

Shall  they  have  a  share  in  the  kingdom,  who  would  not

'  See  Sura  [xcL]  ii.  98,  p.  379.

'  Lit.  the  companions  of  or  vun  of  the  Sabbath.    See  [xci.]  ii.  61,  p.  373.
*  This  refers  to   certain  reneffjide  Jews,  who,   out  of  hatred  against
Muhammad,  went  over  to  the  Koreish.     Sec  Noldeke,  p.  149.

THE    KORAN.  459

even  then  bestow  on  their  fellow  men  even  the  speck
in  a  date-stone  ?

Envy  they  other  men  -what  God  of  his  bounty  hath  given
them  ?  We  gave  of  old  the  Scriptures  and  wisdom
to  the  line  of  Abraham,  and  We  gave  them  a  grand
kingdom  :

— Some  of  them  believe  on  the  Prophet  and  some  turn
aside  from  him  : — the  flame  .of  Hell  their  sufficing
piDiislimeiit !  ^

Verily  those  who  disbelieve  our  signs.  We  will  in  the
end  burn  at  the  fire  :  so  oft  as  their  skins  shall  be
well  burnt,-  We  will  change  them  for  fresh  skins
that  they  may  taste  the  torment  !  Verily  God  is
Mighty,  Wise !
CO  But  as  for  those  who  have  believed,  and  done  the  things
that  are  right.  We  will  bring  them  into  gardens
'neath  which  the  rivers  flow — therein  to  abide  eter-
nally ;  therein  shall  they  have  wives  of  stainless
purity  :  and  We  will  bring  them  into  aT/^-shadow-
ing  shades.
^  Verily,  God  enjoineth  you  to  give  back  your  trusts  to
thp'*-  ners,  and  when  ye  judge  between  men,  to
judge  with  equity.  Verily,  excellent  is  tlie  practice
to  which  God  exhorteth  you.  Verily,  God  Heareth,
Beholdeth !

O  ye  who  believe  !  obey  God  and  obey  the  Apostle,  and
those  among  you  invested  with  authority ;  and  if
in  aught  ye  differ,  bring  it  before  God  and  the
Apostle,  if  ye  believe  in  God  and  in  the  latter  day.
This,  the  best  and  fairest  way  of  settlement.

Hast  thou  not  marked  those  who  profess  that  they
believe  in  what  hath  been  revealed  to  thee,  and
what  hath  been  revealed  before  thee  ?  Fain
would  they  be  judged  before  Thagoot,'  though
commanded  not  to  believe  in  him  ;  and  Satan  would
make  them  wander  with  wanderings  \y'\(\.Q  of  tnUh.

And  when  it  is  said  to  them,  "  Accede  to  that  which
God  hath  revealed,  and  to  the  Apostle,"  thou
seest  the  hypocrites  avert  themselves  from  thee
with  utter  aversion.

But  how,  when  some  misfortune  shall  befall  them,  for
their  previous  handywork  ?     Then  will  they  come

'  Lit.  hut  there  is  burning  enough  in  Gehenna.  '  Lit.  ripened.

'  Said  to  refer  to  a  Jew  of  great  wickedness,  Caab  ben  Alashraf,  whose
judgments  would  be  prompted  by  Satan.

460  THE   KORAN.

/

to  thee,    swearing  by    God,  "  Yerily  we  desired
nothing  but  to  promote  good  and  concord  ! ''

These  are  they,  the  secrets  of  whose  hearts  God  knoweth.
Therefore  break  off  from  them,  and  warn  them,
and  speak  to  them  words  that  may  penetrate  their
souls.  ^

We  have  not  sent  any  apostle  but  to  be  obeyed,  if  God
so  will :  but  if  they,  after  they  have  sinned  to  their
own  hurt  by  unbelief,  come  to  thee  and  ask  pardon
of  God,  and  the  Apostle  ask  pardon  for  them,  they
shall  surely  find  that  God  is  the  Relenting,  the
Merciful.

And  they  will  not — I  swear  by  thy  Lord — they  will  not
believe,  until  they  have  set  thee  up  as  judge  between
them  on  points  where  they  differ.  Then  shall  they
not  find  in  their  own  minds  any  difiiculty  in  thy
decisions,  and  shall  submit  with  entire  submission.

Had  We  laid  down  such  a  law  for  them  as  "  Kill  your-
selves, or  abandon  your  dwelUngs,^'  but  few  of
them  would  have  done  it  !  But  had  thev  done  that
to  which  they  were  exhorted,  better  had  it  been
for  them,  and  more  valid  for  the  confirmation  of
their  faith.
70  In  that  case  We  had  surely  given  them  from  Ourself  a
great  recompense,  and  on  the  right  path  should
We  surely  have  guided  them ;

And  whoever  shall  obey  God  and  the  Apostle,  these
shall  be  with  those  of  the  Prophets  and  of  the
Sincere  and  of  the  Martyrs  and  of  the  Just,  to
whom  God  hath  been  gracious  : — And  these  are  a
goodly  band  !

This  is  the  bounty  of  God  ;  and  in  knowledge  doth  God
suffice.
1[  0  ye  who  believe !  make  use  of  precautions ;  and  advance
in  detachments,  or,  advance  in  a  body.

And  verily  there  is  of  you  ^  who  tarrieth  behind ;  and
if  a  reverse  befall  you,  he  saith,  "  Now  hath  God
dealt  graciously  with  me,  since  I  was  not  with  you
in  the  fight :  "  '

But  if  a  success  from  God  betide  you,  he  will  certainly
say — not  that  there  had  ever  been  any  friendship
between  you  and  him — "  Oh,  would  I  had  been
with  them,  that  I  might  have  won  a  rich  prize  !  "

'  Or,  lit.  speak  to  them  in  their  souls  (with)  affecting  (or  eloquent)  speech.
^  i.e.  a  portion  of  you.  •''  Or,  lit.  a  ivitness.     Sale,  present.

THE    KORAN.  461

Let  those  then  fight  in  the  cause  of  God  who  barter
this  present  life  for  that  which  is  to  come ;  for
whoever  fighteth  on  God's  path,  whether  he  be
slain  or  conquer,  We  will  in  the  end  give  him  a
great  reward.

But  what  hath  come  to  you  that  ye  fight  not  on  the
path  of  God/  and  for  the  weak  among  men,
women  and  children,  who  say,  "  0  our  Lord !
bring  us  forth  from  this  city  -  whose  inhabitants
are  oppressors  ;  give  us  a  champion  from  thy
presence ;  and  give  us  from  thy  presence  a  de-
fender ?  "

They  who  believe  fight  on  the  path  of  God  ;  and  they
who  believe  not  fight  ca  the  path  of  Thagoot :
Fight  then  against  the  friends  of  Satan — Verily
the  craft  of  Satan  shall  be  powerless  !

Hast  thou  not  marked  those  to  whom  it  was  said,
"Withhold  your  hands  awhile  from  tear;  and
observe  prayer,  and  pay  the  stated  alms  ?  "  But
when  war  is  commanded  them,  lo  !  a  portion  of
them  fear  men  as  with  the  fear  of  God,  or  with  a
yet  dter  fear,  and  say  :  "  0  our  Lord  !  why
hast  Thou  commanded  us  war  ?  Couldst  Thou
not  have  given  us  respite  until  our  not  distant
end  ?  "  Say  :  Small  the  fruition  of  this  world  ;
but  the  next  life  is  the  true  good  for  him  who
feareth  God !  and  ye  shall  not  be  wronged  so
much  as  the  skin  of  a  date-stone.
80  Wherever  ye  be,  death  will  overtake  you — although  ye
be  in  lofty  towers  !  If  good  fortune  betide  them
they  say,  "This  is  from  God; ''  and  if  evil  betide
them  they  say,  "  This  is  from  thee.''  •  Say  :  All
is  from  God  :  But  what  hath  come  to  these  people
that  they  hardly  understand  what  is  told  them  ?

Whatever  good  betideth  thee  is  from  God,  and  what-
ever betideth  thee  of  evil  is  from  thyself;  and
We  have  sent  thee  to  mankind  as  an  apostle  :  And
God  is  thy  sufilcing  witness.

Whoso  obeyeth  the  Apostle,  in  so  doing  obeyeth  God  :
and  as  to  those  who  turn  back  from  thee,  We  have
not  sent  thee  to  be  their  keeper.

Moreover,  they  say :  "  Obedience  !  "  but  when  they
come  forth  from  thy  presence,  a  party  of  them  brood

'  i.e.  for  Islam.  ^  Mecca.

4G2  TH|   KORAN.

by  night  over  something  else  than  thy  words ;  but
God  writeth  down  what  they  .brood  over  :  therefore
separate  thyself  from  them,  and  put  thou  thy  trust
in  God  :  and  God  is  a  sufficient  protector  !
Can  they  not  then  consider  the  Koran  ?    Were  it  from
any  other   than  God,  they  would  assuredly  have
found  in  it  many  contradictions.
And  when  tidings  either  of  security  or  alarm  reach  them,
they  tell  them  abroad  ;  but  if  they  would  report  it
to  the  Apostle,  and  to  those  who  are  in  authority
amonof  them,  those  who  desire  information  would
learn  it  from  them.     And  but  for  the  goodness
and  mercy  of  God  towards  you,  ye  would  certainly
have  followed  Satan  except  a  few  !
Fight  then,  on  the  path  of  God  :  lay  not  burdens  on  any
but  thyself;  ^  and  stir  up  the  faithful.  The  prowess
of  the  infidels   God  will  haply  restrain;  for  God  is
the  stronger  in  prowess,  and  the  stronger  to  punish.
^  He  who  mediateth  hetiveen  men  for  a  good  purpose  ^  shall
be  the  gainer  by  it ;  but  he  who  mediateth  with  an
evil  mediation  shall  reap  the  fruit  of  it.^   And  God
kcepeth  watch  over  everything.
^  If  ye  are  gi-eeted  with  a  greeting,  then  greet  ye  with  a
better  greeting,   or  at  least  return  it;  Verily  God
taketh  count  of  all  things.
God !  there  is  no  god  but  He  !  He  will  certainly  assemble
you  for  the  day  of  Resurrection. — Thoi'e  is  no  doubt
of  it.     And  whose   announcement  more  true  than
God's  ?
90     A\liy  are  ye  two  parties  on  the  subject  of  the  hvpocrites,
when  God  hath  upset  them  for  their  doings  ?  Desire
ye  to  guide  those  whom  God  hath  led  astray?    But
for  him  whom  God  leadeth  astray,  thou  shalt  by  no
means  find  a  pathway.
They  desire  that  ye  should  be  unbelievers  as  they  are
unbelievers,  and  that  ye  should  be  alike.     Take
therefore  none  of  them  for  friends,  until  they  have
fled  their  homes  for  the  cause  of  God.  If  they  turn
back,  then  seize  them  and  slay  them  wherever  ye
find  them  ;  but  take  none  of  them  as  friends  or
helpers,

'  Or,  no  (soul)  shall  he  compelled  to  fujht  except  thyself.
■Lit.  /ic  who  mediates  (or  intercede^  a  good  mediation  shall  have  aj)art
therefrom.
^  Lit.  then  shall  he  to  him  thi  like,  or  tJic  dotible,  therefrom.

THE   KORAN.  4G3

Except  those  wlio  seek  asylum  among  your  allies,  and
those  who  come  over  to  you — prevented  by  their
own  hearts  from  making  war  on  you,  or  from  making
war  on  their  own  people.  Had  God  pleased.  He
would  certainly  have  given  them  power  against  you
and  they  would  certainly  have  made  war  upon  you  !
But,  if  they  depart  from  you,  and  make  not  war
against  you  and  offer  you  peace,  then  God  alloweth
you  no  occasion  against  them.

Ye  will  find  others  Avho  seek  to  gain  your  confidence  as
well  as  that  of  their  own  people  :  So  oft  as  they
return  to  sedition,  they  shall  be  overthrown  in  it :
But  if  they  leave  you  not,  nor  propose  terms  of
peace  to  you  nor  withhold  their  hands,  then  seize
them,  and  slay  them  wherever  ye  find  them.  Over
these  have  We  given  you  undoubted  power.
%  A  believer  killcth  not  a  believer  but  by  mischance  :  and
whoso  killeth  a  believer  by  mischance  shall  be
bound  to  free  a  believer  from  slavery ;  ^  and  the
blood-money  ^  shall  be  paid  to  the  family  of  the
slain,  unless  they  convert  it  into  alms.  But  if  the
slain  believer  be  of  a  hostile  people,  then  let  him
"'"  "  .'  freedom  on  a  slave  who  is  a  believer ;  and
h  ne  be  of  a  people  between  whom  and  yourselves
there  is  an  alliance,  then  let  the  blood-money  be
paid  to  his  family,  and  let  him  set  free  a  slave  who  is
a  believer  :  and  let  him  who  hath  not  the  means,
fast  two  consecutive  months.  This  is  the  penance
enjoined  by  God ;   and  God  is  Knowing,  Wise  !

But  whoever  shall  kill  a  believer  of  set  purpose,  his
recompense  is  Hell ;  for  ever  shall  he  abide  in  it ;
God  shall  be  wrathful  with  him  and  curse  him,  and
get  ready  for  him  a  great  torment.

O  believers  !  when  yc  go  forth  to  the  fight  for  the  cause
of  God,  use  discernment ;  and  say  not  to  every  one
who  giveth  you  the  salutation,  '^  Thou  art  not  a
believer,^'-''  in  your  greed  after  the  chance  good
things  of  this  present  life  !  for  with  God  are  abun-
dant spoils.  Such  hath  been  your  wont  in  times
past ;   but  God  hath  been  gracious  to  you.     Be

'  Lit.  whoso  kUldk  a  believer  by  mischance,  then  </te  freeing  of  a  believing
neclc.

"  Lit.  ransom.

'  And  therefore  a  fit  subject  for  plunder.

'464  TH\:    KORAN.

discerning  then ;    verily  God  well  knoweth  what
ye  do.

Those  believers  who  sit  at  home  free  from  trouble,  and
those  who  do  valiantly  in  the  cause  of  God  with
their  substance  and  their  persons,  shall  not  be
treated  alike.  God  hath  assigned  to  those  who
contend  earnestly  with  their  persons  and  with  their
substance,  a  rank  above  those  who  sit  at  home.
Goodly  promises  hath  lie  made  to  all  :  But  God
hath  assigned  to  the  strenuous  a  rich  recompense,
above  those  who  sit  still  at  home,

Rank  of  his  own  bestowal,  and  forgiveness,  and  mercy ;
for  God  is  Indulgent,  Merciful.

The  angels,^  when  they  took  the  souls  of  those  who  had
been  unjust  to  their  own  weal,  demanded,  "  What
hath  been  your  state  "^ "  ^  They  said,  "  We  were
the  weak  ones  ^  of  the  earth."  They  replied,  "  Was
not  God's  earth  broad  enough  for  you  to  flee  away
in  ?  "  These  !  their  home  shall  be  Hell,  and  evil
the  passage  to  it —
TOO  Except  the  men  and  women  and  children  who  were  not
able  through  their  weakness  to  find  the  means  of
escape,  and  were  not  guided  on  their  way.  These
haply  God  will  forgive  :  for  God  is  Forgiving,
Pardoning.

Whoever  flieth  his  country  for  the  cause  of  God,  will
find  in  the  earth  many  refuges  and  abundant
resources ;  and  if  any  one  shall  quit  his  home  and
fly  to  God  and  bis  Apostle,  and  then  death  over-
take him, — his  reward  from  God  is  sure  :  *  for  God
is  Gracious,  Merciful !

And  when  ye  go  forth  to  .var  in  the  land,  it  shall  be  no
crime  in  you  to  cut  short  your  prayers,^  if  ye  fear
lest  the  infidels  set  upon  you ;  Verily,  the  infidels
are  your  undoubted  enemies  !

And  when  thou,  0  apostle !  shalt  be  among  them,  and

'  Some  of  the  Meccans,  after  embracing  Islam,  did  not  thoroughly  break
with  the  infidels  and  fly  their  country.  These  persons  were  miraculously
slain  by  angels  at  Bedr.  Others  suppose  the  angels  to  be  Nakir  and
Monkir,  who  examine  the  dead  in  the  grave.

'  i.e.  to  what  religion  did  ye  belong  I

^  And  therefore  could  not  resist  the  unbelievers.

*  Lit.  is  incumbent  on.

*  Thus  the  Rabbins  Tr.  Bcraohoth,  iv.  4,  "  He  that  goeth  in  a  dangerous
place  may  pray  a  short  prayer."

THE    KOHAN.  4G5

sbalt  pray  ^  with  them,  then  let  a  party  of  them
stand  up  with  thee,  but  let  them  take  their  arms ;
and  when  they  have  made  their  prostrations,  then
let  them  fall  to  your  rear,  and  let  another  party
that  hath  not  yet  prayed  come  forward,  and  pray
with  thee  ;  but  let  them  take  their  precautions  and
their  arms.  Pleased  would  the  infidels  be  for  you
to  neglect  your  arms  and  your  baggage,  that  they
might  turn  upon  you  at  once  !  And  it  is  no  crime
in  you  to  lay  down  your  arms  if  rain  annoy  you,  or
if  ye  be  sick.  But  take  your  precautions.^  Verily,
God  hath  made  ready  a  shameful  punishment  for
the  unbelievers.

Then  when  ye  have  ended  the  prayer,  make  mention  of
God,  standing,  and  sitt'ng,  and  reclining  on  your
sides  :  and  as  soon  as  ye  are  secure,  observe
prayer ;  verily,  to  the  faithful  prayer  is  a  pre-
scribed duty,  and  for  stated  hours.

And  slacken  not  in  pursuit  of  the  foe.  If  ye  suffer,
assuredly  they  suffer  as  ye  suffer ;  but  ye  hope
from  God  for  what  they  cannot  hope  !  And  God
is  Knowing,  Wise  !

Verily  We  have  sent  down  the  Book  to  thee  with  the
ti  ,  that  thou  mayest  judge  between  men  ac-
cording as  God  hath  given  thee  insight :  But
with  the  deceitful  ones  dispute  not :  and  implore
pardon  of  Godi  for  thevi.  Verily,  God  is  Forgiving,
Merciful.^

And  plead*  not  with  Us  for  those  who  defraud  one
another;  verily  God  loveth  not  him  who  is  deceit-
ful, criminal.

From  men  they  hide  themselves  ;  but  they  cannot  hide
themselves  from  God  :  and  when  they  hold  nightly
discourses  which  please  Him  not,  He  is  with  them  :
and  God  is  I'ouud  about  their  doings  !

Oh  !  ye  are  they  who  plead  in  their  favour  in  this
present  life  ;    but  who  shall  plead  with  God  for

'  Lit.  institisti  orationi.     Or,  with  Mar.  indixeris  orationem.

'  See  Mischna  Tr.  Berachoth,  10,  where  there  is  a  similar  precept.

'  This  verse  is  said  to  have  been  revealed  when  Muhammad  was  about
to  acquit  a  Muslim  who  had  committed  theft,  and  laid  the  guilt  at  the
door  of  a  Jew.  But  the  particulars  are  given  in  a  very  contradictory
manner.     See  Noldeke,  p.  151.

■*  Lit.  dispute,  contend  not  for  those  who  mutually  defraud  themselves.
The  sixth  conjugation,  which  in  this  verb  is  not  used,  is  here  replaced  by
the  eighth.

2    H

160  THE    KORAN.

them  on  the  day  of  the  Resurrection  ?     Who  will
be  the  guardian  over  them  ?
110  Yet  he  who  doth  evil  or  acteth  against  his  own  weal,
and  then  asketh  pardon  of  Gfod,  will  fiud  God  For-
giving, Merciful :

And  whoever  committeth  a  crime,  commit-teth  it  only
to  his  own  hurt.     And  God  is  Knowing,  Wise !

And  whoever  committeth  an  involuntai-y  fault  or  a
crime,  and  then  layeth  it  on  the  innocent,  shall
in  that  ease  surely  bear  tJue  guilt  of  calumny  and
of  a  manifest  crime.

And  but  for  the  grace  and  mercy  of  God  upon  thee,
a  party  among  them  had  assuredly  resolved  to
mislead  thee,  but  they  only  misled  themselves,
nor  in  aught  did  they  harm  thee.  And  God  hath
caused  the  Book  and  the  Wisdom  to  descend  upon
thee,  and  what  thou  knewest  not  He  hath  caused
thee  to  kuQAv  :  and  the  grace  of  God  toward  thee
hath  been  great.

In  most  of  their  secret  talk  is  nothing  good ;  but  only
in  his  who  enjoineth  almsgiving,  or  that  which  is
right,  or  concord  among  men  ;  and  whoso  doth
this  out  of  desire  to  please  God,  We  will  give  him
at  the  last  a  great  reward  :

But  whoso  shall  sever  himself  from  the  Prophet  after
that  "  the  guidance  "  hath  been  manifested  to  him,
and  shall  follow  any  other  path  than  that  of  the
faithful.  We  will  turn  our  back  on  him  as  he  hath
turned  his  back  on  Us,^  and  We  will  burn  him  at
Hell-fire, — and  an  evil  journey  thither  !

God  truly  will  not  forgive  the  joining  other  gods  with
Himself.  Other  sins  He  will  forgive  to  whom  He
will  :  but  he  who  joineth  gods  with  God,  hath
erred  with  far-gone  error.

Verily  they  call,  beside  Him,  upon  mere  goddesses  !
they  invoke  a  rebel  Satan  !

On  him  is  the  malison  of  God.  For  he  said,  "A  set
portion  of  thy  servants  will  I  surely  take,  and  lead
them  astray,  and  stir  desires  witliin  them,  and
command  th(^m  and  tlKjy  shall  cut  the  ears  of
animals, 2  and  cominand  them  to  alter  the  creation

'  Or,  we  will  turn  him  ax  he  has  turned  himself,  i.e.  will  put  it  into  his
power  to  follow  his  own  bent.

*  In  allusion  to  an  idolatrous  and  superstitious  custom  of  the  old  Ara-
bians.

THE    KORAN.  407

of  God."  ^     PIo  who  takcth  Satan  rather  than  God
for  his  patron,  is  ruined  with  palpable  ruin  : —

He    maketh      them    promises^    and    stirreth     desires
within  them  ;    but  Satan  promiseth,  only  to  be-
guile !
120  These  !  their  dwelling,  Hell !  and  no  escape  shall  they
find  from  it !

But  those  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are  right,
will  We  bring  into  gardens  beneath  whose  shades
the  rivers  flow ;  For  ever  shall  they  abide  therein.
It  is  the  true  promise  of  God;  And  whose  word
more  sure  than  God^s  !

Not  according  to  your  wishes,  or  the  wishes  of  the
people  of  the  Book,  sJtall  these  things  he.  He  who
doth  evil  shall  be  recompensed  for  it ;  and  patron
or  helper,  beside  God,  shall  he  find  none.

But  whoso  doth  the  things  that  are  right,  whether  male
or  female,  and  he  or  she  a  believer, — these  shall
enter  Paradise,  nor  shall  they  be  wronged  so  mncJt,
as  the  skin  of  a  date-stone.

And  who  hath  a  better  religion  than  he  who  resigneth
himself  (his  face)  to  God,  who  doth  what  is  good,
ar""  "  ".oweth  the  faith  of  Abraham,  the  sound  in
faitn'^ — And  God  took  Abraham  for  his  friend —

All  that  is  in  the  Heavens  and  all  that  is  on  the  Earth
is  God's  :  and  God  encompasseth  all  things  !
^  Moreover,  they  will  consult  thee  in  regard  to  women  :
Say  :  God  hath  instructed  you  about  them ;  and
his  will  is  rehearsed  to  you,^  in  the  Book,  concern-
ing female  orphans  to  whom  ye  give  not  their
legal  due,  and  whom  ye  refuse  to  marry ;  also  with
regard  to  weak  children  ;  and  that  ye  deal  with
fairness  towards  orphans.  Ye  cannot  do  a  good
action,  but  verily  God  knoweth  it.

And  if  a  wife  fear  ill  usage  or  aversion  on  the  part  of
her  husband,  then  shall  it  be  no  fault  in  them  if
they  can  agree  with  mutual  agreement,  for  agree-
ment is  best.  Men's  souls  are  prone  to  avarice  ;
but  if  ye  act  kindly  and  piously,  then  verily,  your
actions  are  not  unnoticed  by  God !

And  ye  may  not  have  it  at  all  in  your  power  to  treat
your  wives  with  equal  justice,   even  though  you

By  the  mutilation  of  slaves,  branding  their  bodies,  filing  the  teeth,  etc.
Or,  as  a  Haiiyf  {see  p.  216,  n.),  or  orthodox.
Lit.  and  that  which  is  read  to  you.

2  h2

40^  THE    KORAN.        )

fain  would  do  so  ;  but  yield  not  wholly  to  disin-
clination, so  tliat  ye  leave  one  of  them  as  it  were
in  suspense ;  if  ye  come  to  an  understanding,  and
act  in  the  fear  of  God,  then  verily,  God  is  Forgiv-
ing, Merciful ;

But  if  they  separate,  God  can  compensate^  both  out  of
his  abundance ;  for  God  is  Vast,  Wise  ;
130  And  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth  is
God^s  !  We  have  already  enjoined  those  to  whom
the  Scriptures  were  given  before  you,  and  your-
selves, to  fear  God.  But  if  ye  be  unbelievers,  yet
verily  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth
is  God's  :  and  God  is  Rich,  Praiseworthy.

All  that  is  in  Heaven  and  all  that  is  in  Earth  is  God's  !
and  God  is  a  sufficient  protector  !

If  He  pleased,  He  could  cause  you  to  pass  away,  0
mankind  !  and  place  others  in  your  stead  :  and  for
this  hath  God  power.

If  any  one  desire  the  recompense  of  this  world,  yet
with  God  is  the  recompense  of  this  world  and
of  the  next !  And  God  is  He  who  Heareth,  Be-
holdeth.
^  0  ye  who  believe !  stand  fast  to  justice,  when  ye  bear
witness  before  God,  though  it  be  against  your-
selves, or  your  parents,  or  your  kindred,  whether
the  party  be  rich  or  poor.  God  is  nearer  than  you
to  both.  Therefore  follow  not  passion,  lest  ye
swerve  from  justice.  And  if  ye  wrest  your  testi-
mony or  stand  aloof,  then  verily  God  is  well  aware
of  what  ye  do.
^  0  ye  who  believe  !  believe  in  God  and  his  Apostle  and
the  Book  which  He  hath  sent  down  to  his  Apostle,
and  the  Book  which  He  hath  sent  down  aforetime.
Whoever  believeth  not  on  God  and  his  Angels  and
his  Books  and  his  Apostles  and  on  the  last  day,  he
verily  hath  erred  with  far-gone  error.

Verily,  they  who  believed,  then  became  unbelievers,
then  believed,  and  again  became  unbelievers,  and
then  increased  their  unbelief—  it  is  not  God  who
will  forgive  them  or  guide  them  into  the  Way  :

Announce  ^  to  the  hypocrites  that  a  dolorous  torment
doth  await  them.

Those  who  take  the  unbelievers  for  friends,'  beside  the

'  Lit.  satisfy,  enrich.  '  See  Sura  Ixxxiv.  24,  p.  32,  note.

*  Or,  patrons.

THE    KORAN.  469

faithful — seek  they  honour  at  their  hands  ?    Verily,
honour  helongeth  wholly  unto  God  !
And  already  hath  He   sent   this  down  to  you  in  the
Book/  "  When  ye  shall  hear  the  signs  of  God

THEY  shall  be    DISBELIEVED    AND    MOCKED   AT/'       Sit

ye  not  therefore  with  such,  until  they  engage  in
other  discourse  ;  verily  ye  would  then  become  like
them.  Lo,  God  will  gather  the  hypocrites  and  the
infidels  all  together  in  Hell —
140  Those  who  watch  you  narrowly  :  so  if  God  grant  you  a
victory,  they  say,  "  Were  we  not  with  you  V  and
if  the  infidels  meet  with  a  success,  they  say  to
them,  *'  Did  we  not  get  the  upper  hand  for  you  ?
and  did  we  not  defend  you  from  the  believers  ?"
God  therefore  shall  judge  betwixt  ye  on  the  day  of
the  Resurrection,  and  God  will  by  no  means  make
a  way  for  the  infidels  over  the  believers.

Verily  the  hj-pocrites  would  deceive  God ;  but  He  will
deceive  them  !  When  they  stand  up  for  prayer,
they  stand  carelessly,  to  be  seen  of  men,  and  they
remember  God  but  little  :

Wavering  between  the  one  and  the  other — belonging
y^fiithr^T.  to  these  nor  those  !  but  by  no  means  shalt
thu-  lind  a  path  for  him  whom  God  misleadeth.
^  0  believers  !  take  not  unbelievers  for  friends  rather
than  believers.  Do  ye  wish  to  furnish  God  with
clear  right  to  punish  you  ?"

Verily  the  hypocrites  shall  be  in  the  lowest  abyss  of
the  fire  :  and,  by  no  means  shalt  thou  find  a  helper
for  them ;

Save  for  those  who  turn  and  amend,  and  lay  fast  hold
on  God,  and  approve  the  sincerity  of  their  religion
to  God ;  these  shall  be  numbered  with  the  faithful,
and  God  will  at  last  bestow  on  the  faithful  a  great
reward.

Why  should  God  inflict  a  chastisement  upon  you,  if  ye
are  grateful,  and  believe  ?  For  God  is  Grateful,
Wise!
%  God  loveth  not  that  evil  be  matter  of  public  talk,  unless
any  one  hath  been  wronged  :  and  God  is  the
Hearing,  the  Knowing  !

Whether  ye  publish  what  is  good,  or  conceal  it,  or
pardon  evil,  verily  God  is  Pardoning,  Powerful !

'  Sutra  vi.  '  Lit.  against  yon

470  THE    KORAN.        f

Of  a  truth  they  who  believe  not  on  God  and  his
Apostles,  and  seek  to  separate  between  God  and
his  Apostles,  and  say,  "  Some  we  believe,  and
some  we  believe  not,'^  and  desire  to  take  a  middle
way;
150  These  !  they  are  veritable  infidels  !  and  for  the  infidels
have  We  prepared  a  shameful  punishment.

And  they  who  believe  on  God  and  his  Apostles,  and
make  no  difference  between  them — these  !  We  will
bestow  on  them  their  reward  at  last.  And  God
is  Gracious,  Merciful !

The  people  of  the  Book  will  ask  of  thee  to  cause  a
Book  to  come  down  unto  them  out  of  Heaven.
But  a  greater  thing  than  this  did  they  ask  of
Moses  !  for  they  said,  "  Show  us  God  plainly  ! "
and  for  this  their  wickedness  did  a  storm  out  of
Heaven  lay  hold  on  them.  Then  took  they  the
calf  as  the  object  of  their  worship,  after  that  our
clear  tokens  had  come  to  them ;  but  We  forgave
them  this,  and  conferred  on  Moses  undoubted
power.

And  We  uplifted  the  mountain  ^  over  them  when  We
made  a  covenant  with  them,  and  We  said  to  them,
"  Enter  the  gate  adoring  : "  and  We  said  to  them,
"  Break  not  the  Sabbath,"  and  We  received  from
them  a  strict  covenant.

So,  for  that  they  have  broken  their  covenant  and  re-
jected the  signs  of  God  and  put  the  prophets  to
death  unjustly,  saying  the  while,  "  Our  hearts  are
uncircumciscd," — Nay,  but  God  hath  sealed  them
up  for  their  unbcHcf,  so  that  but  few  believe, —

And  for  their  unbelief,— and  for  their  having  spoken
against  Mary  a  grievous  calumny, —

And  for  their  saying,  "  Verily  we  have  slain  the  Mes-
siah, Jesus  the  son  of  Mary,  an  Apostle  of  God  "

2      Yet   they   slew   him   not,  and    they

crucified  him  not,  but  they  had  only  his  likeness.'
.    And  verily  they  who  differed  about  him  were  in

'  See  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  60,  p.  373.  ^  Supply,  we  have  cursed  tfum.

'  Lit.  one  vms  made  to  appear  to  them  like  (Jctus).  Comp.  [xcvii.j  iii.
48.     Photius,  Bibl.  Cod.  cxiv.  says  that  the  Apocr.  Book,  Tnpiodoi    awn-

aTo\u)v,  TToWaq &.ToniaQ  avmrXdrTfi,  Kal  tup   X()1(Ttoi'  fxr)  (rravpotOi'ivai,

aW  fTt(tov  avr'  avTov. — This  individual,  accordini,'  to  the  Basilidans,  was
Simon  of  Cyrene  ;  according  to  the  Evang.  Barnabge,  Judas.— Man i,  Ep.
Fund.  ap.  Evodium  :  "  Princeps  itaque  tenebrarum  cruci  est  affixus,  idem-
que  coronara  spineam  portavit."

THE    KOUAN.  471

doubt  concerning  him;^  No  sure  knowledge  had
they  about  him,  but  followed  only  an  opinion,  and
they  did  not  really  slay  him,  but  God  took  him  up
to  Himself:  And  (jiod  is  Mighty,  Wise  !

And  there  shall  not  be  one  of  the  people  of  the  Book
but  shall  believe  in  Him  before  his-  death  :  and  in
the  day  of  Resurrection,  He  will  be  a  witness
against  them.

And  because  of  wrong  done  by  those  who  were  Jews,
and  because  they  turn  many  from  the  path  of
God,  We  have  forbidden  them  good  things  which
were  before  allowed  them ;

And  because  they  have  taken  usury,  though  they  had
been  forbidden  it,  and  have  devoured  men^s  sub-
stance in  frivolity.  A  ad  We  have  got  ready  for
the  infidels  among  them  a  grievous  torment.
160  But  those  of  them  who  are  firmly  rooted  in  knowledge,
and  the  believers  who  believe  in  that  which  hath
been  sent  down  to  thee,  and  in  what  hath  been
sent  down  before  thee,  and  observe  prayer,  and
pay  the  alms  of  obligation,  and  believe  in  God  and
the  latter  day, — these  !  We  will  give  them  a  great
rew«»*d.
^  Verily  . .  e  have  revealed  to  thee  as  We  revealed  to
Noah  and  the  Prophets  after  him,  and  as  We
revealed  to  Abraham,  and  Ismael,  and  Isaac,  and
Jacob,  and  the  tribes,  and  Jesus,  and  Job,  and
Jonah,  and  Aaron,  and  Solomon  ;  and  to  David
gave  We  Psalms.

Of  some  apostles  We  have  told  thee  before  :  of  other
apostles  We  have  not  told  thee — And  discoursing
did  God  discourse  with  Moses —

And  of  apostles  charged  to  announce  and  warn,  that
men,  after  those  apostles,  might  have  no  plea
against  God.     And  God  is  Mighty,  Wise  !

But  God  is  Himself  \\atness  of  what  He  hath  sent  down
to  thee  :  In  his  knowledge  hath  He  sent  It  down
to  thee.  The  angels  also  are  witnesses  :  but  God
is  a  sufficient  witness  !

'  i.e.  the  different  opinions  were  only  so  many  doubts.

*  Commentators  are  not  agreed  as  to  whom  his  refers.  If  it  refer  to
the  death  of  Jesus,  it  alludes  to  his  death  after  his  second  coming,  when
he  will  slay  Antichrist,  and  die  again.  If  it  refer  to  dying  generally,  it
may  allude  to  the  examination  by  the  Angel  of  Death  at  the  moment  of
death.

472  THE    KORAN.         I

Verily,  they  who  beHeve  not  and  pervert  from  the
way  of  God,  have  indeed  erred  with  error  wide  of
truth.

Verily,  those  who  believe  not,  and  act  wrongfully,  God
will  never  pardon,  nor  will  He  guide  them  on
path

Other  than  the  path  to  Hell,  wherein  they  shall  abide
for  ever !  And  this  is  easy  for  God.
^  0  men  !  now  hath  an  apostle  come  to  you  with  truth
from  your  Lord.  Believe  then;  it  will  be  better
for  you.  But  if  ye  believe  not,  then  verily  all  that
is  in  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  is  God's ;  and
God  is  Knowing,  Wise  !

0  people  of  the  Book  !  overstep  not  bounds  in  your
religion ;  ^  and  of  God,  speak  only  the  truth.  The
Messiah,  Jesus,  son  of  Mary,  is  only  an  apostle  of
God,  ahd  his  Word  which  He  conveyed  into  Mary,
and  a  Spirit-  idroceeding  from  Himself.  Believe
therefore  in  God  and  his  apostles,  and  say  not,  "  A
Triad  "  (there  is  a  Trinity) — Forbear — it  will  be
better  for  you.  God  is  only  one  God  !  Far  be  it
from  his  glory  that  He  should  have  a  son  !  His,
whatever  is  in  the  Heavens,  and  whatever  is  in  the
Earth  !  And  God  is  a  sufficient  Guardian.
1  70  The  Messiah  by  no  means  disdaineth  to  be  a  servant  of
God,  nor  do  the  angels  who  are  nigh  unto  Him.^

And  whoso  disdaineth  his  service,  and  is  filled  with
pride,  God  will  gather  them  to  Himself  one  and
all.

Then  as  to  those  who  believe  and  do  the  things  that  are
right.  He  will  pay  them  their  due  recompense,  and
out  of  his  bounty  will  He  give  them  an  increase  :
but  as  for  those  who  are  disdainful  and  proud,  with
a  grievous  chastisement  will  He  chastise  them  ;

And  none  beside  God  shall  they  find  to  protect  or  to
help  them.

0  men  !  now  hath  a  proof  come  to  you  from  your  Lord,
and  We  have  sent  down  to  you  a  clear  light.  As
to  those  therefore  who  believe  in  God  and  lay  fast

'  By  believing  too  much,  like  the  Christians,  who  regarded  Jesus  as  God  ;
or  too  little,  like  the  Jews,  who  would  not  believe  on  Muhammad.

*  i.e.  a  Being  possessing  a  Spirit.

•  Malayika  Monkarrabun — a  word  from  the  same  root  as  the  Hebrew
Cherub  (Hyde  de  Rel.  Vet.  Pers.  p.  263).  Fiirst  (Lex.)  identifies  313
with  3-|p.

THE    KOK\N'.  ilo

hold  on  Him,  these  will  He  cause  to  enter  into  his
own  mercy  and  grace,  and  by  a  right  way  will  He
guide  them  unto  Himself.
^  They  will  consult  thee.  Say  :  God  instructeth  you  as
to  distant  kindred.  If  a  man  die  childless  but  have
a  sister,  half  what  he  shall  leave  shall  be  hers ;
and  if  she  die  childless  he  shall  be  her  heir.  But
if  there  be  two  sisters,  two  third  parts  of  what  he
shall  leave  shall  be  theirs  ;  and  if  there  be  both
brothers  and  sisters,  the  male  shall  have  the  por-
tion of  two  females.  God  teacheth  you  plainly,
that  ye  err  not :  and  God  knoweth  all  things.

[CL]

SURA  LXV.— DIVOECE.'
Mecca. — 12  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

0  Prophet  !  when  ye  divorce  women,  divorce  them  at
their  special  times.  And  reckon  the  time,  and
fear  God  your  Lord.  Put  them  not  forth  from
their  houses,  nor  let  them  go  forth,  unless  they
have  committed  a  proven  adultery .~  This  is  the
precept  of  God ;  and  whoso  transgresseth  the  pre-
cept of  God,  injureth  his  own  self.  Thou  knowest
not  whether,  after  this,  God  may  not  cause  some-
thing new  to  occur  which  may  bring  you  together
again.

And  when  they  have  reached  their  set  time,  then  either
keep  them  with  kindness,  or  in  kindness  part  from

'  Comp.  Sura  [xcL]  ii.  228,  which  this  Sura  is  perhaps  intended  to  sup-
plement. Wahidi  and  Beidhawi  state  that  it  was  revealed  on  account
of  Ibn  Omar,  who  had  divorced  his  wife  at  an  improper  time,  and  was
obliged  to  take  her  again.

^  Or,  more  lit.,  a  manifest  iincleanness.

474  THE    KOKAN.  '

them.  And  take  upright  witnesses  from  among
you,  and  offer  straightforward  witness  before  God.
This  is  a  caution  for  him  who  believeth  in  God  and
in  the  latter  day.  And  whoso  feareth  God,  to  him
will  He  grant  a  prosperous  issue,  and  will  provide
for  him  whence  he  reckoned  not  upon  it.

And  for  him  who  putteth  his  trust  in  Him  will  God  be
all-sufficient.  God  truly  will  attain  his  purpose.
For  everything  hath  God  already  assigned  a  fixed
decree.

As  to  such  of  yonr  wives  as  have  no  hope  of  the  recur-
rence of  their  times,  if  ye  have  doubts  in  regard  to
them,  then  reckon  ^  three  months,  and  let  the  same
be  the  term,  of  those  who  have  not  yet  had  them.
And  as  to  those  who  are  with  child,  their  period
shall  be  until  they  are  delivered  of  their  burden.
And  God  will  make  his  command  easy  to  him
who  feareth  Him.

This  irs  God's  command  which  He  hath  sent  down  to
you :  and  whoso  feareth  God,  his  evil  deeds  will  He
cancel  and  will  increase  his  reward.

Lodge  the  divorced  wherever  ye  lodge,  according  to  your
means  ;  and  distress  them  not  by  putting  them
to  straits.  And  if  they  are  pregnant  then  be  at
charges  for  them  until  they  are  delivered  of  their
burden :  and  if  they  suckle  your  children,  then
pay  them  their  hire  and  consult  among  yourselves,
and  act  generously :  And  if  herein  ye  meet  with
obstacles,  then  let  another  female  suckle  for
him.

Let  him  who  hath  abundance  spend  of  his  abundance ;
let  him  also  whose  store  is  scanty,  give  of  what
God  hath  vouchsafed  to  him.  God  imposeth  burdens
on  no  one  but  in  accordance  with  the  queans  which
He  hath  given.  God  can  cause  ease  to  succeed
difficulties.
^  How  many  cities  have  turned  aside  from  the  command
of  their  Lord  and  of  his  apostles  !  Therefore  did
We  reckon  with  them  in  a  severe  reckoning,  and
chastised  them  with  a  horrible  chastisement;

And  they  tasted  the  heinousness  of  their  own  conduct :
and  the  end  of  their  conduct  was  ruin.
10     A    vehement     chastisement     had   God    prepared    for

'  Lit.  let  their  term  be.

THE    KORAN.  475

them !  Fear  God,  then,  0  ye  men  of  under-
standing !  ^

Believers !  Now  hath  God  sent  down  to  you  a  warning ! —
a  prophet,  who  reciteth  to  you  the  clear  signs  of
God,  that  He  may  bring  those  who  believe  and  do
the  things  that  are  right,  out  of  the  darkness  into
the  light.  And  whoso  believeth  in  God,  and  doeth
the  things  that  are  right,  God  will  cause  them  to
enter  the  gardens  beneath  which  the  rivers  flow,
to  remain  therein  for  aye  !  A  goodly  provision
truly  hath  God  made  for  him.

It  is  God  who  hath  created  seven  heavens  and  as  many
earths.  -  The  Divine  command  cometh  down
through  them  all,  that  ye  may  know  that  God
hath  power  over  all  things,  and  that  God  truly
embraceth  all  things  in  his  knowledge  !

[CIL]

SURA  LIX.— THE  EMIGRATION.
Medina. — 24  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

All  that  is  in  the  Heavens  and  all  that  is  on  the
Earth  praiseth  God  !  And  He,  the  Mighty,  the
Wise !

He  it  is  who  caused  the  unbelievers  among  the  people
of  the  Book  to  quit  their  homes  and  join  those
who  had  EMIGRATED  previously .^     Ye  did  not

'  In  order  to  make  good  the  rhyme,  verse  10  ought  to  be  continued  to
the  end  of  the  first  clause  of  \erse  11.

'  Lit.  and  of  the  earth,  their  likes.  The  style  of  this  verse  resembles  that
of  the  Meccan  >Suras.  Hence,  probably,  a  tradition  in  Omar  ben  Muham-
mad makes  the  whole  Sura  Meccan.

^  The  Jews  of  Nadhir,  three  miles  from  Medina,  had  broken  a  treaty
made  with  Muhammad,  and  in  the  month  Eabi  of  the  fourth  year  of  the
Hejira  were  besieged  by  him,  and  driven  first  to  the  Jews  of  Kainoka,  who
had  emigrated  previously,  under  compulsion,  after  the  battle  of  Bedr,  and
subsequently  out  of  Arabia. — WeU,  Life  of  M.  p.  137,  n.

476  THE    KORAN.  I

think  that  they  would  quit  them ;  and  they  on
their  part  thought  that  their  fortresses  would  pro-
tect them  against  God  :  But  God  came  upon  them
whence  they  looked  not  for  Him,  and  cast  such
fear  into  their  hearts  that  by  their  own  hands  as
well  as  by  the  hands  of  the  victorious  believers
they  demolished  their  houses !  Profit  then  by
this  example  ye  who  are  men  of  insight  !

And  were  it  not  that  God  had  decreed  their  exile,  surely
in  this  world  would  He  have  chastised  them  :  but
in  the  world  to  come  the  chastisement  of  the  fire
awaiteth  them.

This  because  they  oppose  God  and  his  Apostle ;  and

whoso  opposeth  God !  truly  then  is  God

vehement  to  punish.

Your  cutting  down  some  of  their  palm-trees  ^  and
sparing  others  was  by  God^s  permission,  and  to
put  the  wicked  to  shame.

And  the  spoils  of  these  Jews  which  God  had  assigned
to  his  Apostle,  ye  pressed  not  onwards  with  horse
or  camel.2  g^^  Qq(^  giveth  his  apostles  power  over
whom  He  will ;  and  God  is  Almighty.

The  spoil  taken  from  the  people  of  the  towns  and
assigned  by  God  to  his  Apostle,  belongeth  to  God,
and  to  the  Apostle,  and  to  his  kindred,  and  to  the
orphan,  and  to  the  poor,  and  to  the  wayfarer,  that
none  of  it  may  circulate  among  such  only  of  you  as
are  rich  :  What  the  Apostle  hath  given  you,  take  :
What  he  hath  refused  you,  refuse  :  And  fear  ye
God,  for  God  is  severe  in  punishing.

To  the  poor  refugees  (Mohadjeriu)  alsodoth  apart  belong,
who  have  been  driven  from  their  homes  and  their
substance,  and  who  seek  favour  from  God  and  his
goodwill  and  aid  God  and  his  Apostle  :  These  are
the  men  of  genuine  virtue.

They  of  Medina  who  had  been  in  possession  of  their
abodes  and  embraced  the  faith  before  them,  cherish
those  who  have  taken  refuge  with  them  ;  and  thoy
find  not  in  their  breasts  any  desire  for  what  hath
fallen  to  their  share  :  they  prefer  them  before  them-

'  Lit.  what  ye  cut  down  of  palm-tree^  or  left  standing  on  their  roots.

'  The  expedition  against  the  Jews  of  Nadhir  was  carried  out  on  foot,  on
which  account  these  spoils  were  entirely  assigned  to  Muhammad,  and  not
divided  in  the  usual  manner.  See  Sura  [xcv.]  viii.  42.— Weil,  pp.  138,
184.

TOE    KORAN,  477

selves,  though  poverty  be  their  own  lot.  And  with
such  as  are  preserved  from  their  own  covetousness
shall  it  be  well.
10  And  they  who  have  come  after  them  into  the  faith  ^  say,
"  0  our  Lord  !  forgive  us  and  our  brethren  who
have  preceded  us  in  the  faith,  and  put  not  into  our
hearts  ill-wnll  agfainst  those  who  believe.  O  our
Lord  !  thou  verily  art  Kind,  Merciful.^*
%  Hast  thou  not  observed  the  disaffected  saying  to  their
unbelieving  brethren  -  among  the  people  of  the
Book,  "  If  ye  be  driven  forth,  we  will  certainly  go
forth  with  you  ;  and  in  tvhat  concerneth  you,  never
will  we  obey  any  one  :  and  if  ye  be  attacked  we
will  certainly  help  you  ?  "  But  God  is  witness  that
they  are  certainly  liars.

Assuredly  if  they  were  driven  forth,  they  would  not
share  their  banishment :  if  they  were  attacked
they  would  not  help  them,  or  if  they  help  them  they
will  surely  turn  their  backs  :  then  would  they
themselves  remain  unhelped.

Assuredly  the  fear  of  you  is  more  intense  in  their  hearts
than  the  fear  of  God  !  This  because  they  are  a
peonle  devoid  of  discernment.

They  \^v  .  Jews)  will  not  fight  against  you  in  a  body  ex-
cept in  fenced  towns  or  from  behind  walls.  Mighty
is  their  valour  among  themselves  !  thou  thinkest
them  united — but  their  hearts  are  divided.  This,
for  that  they  are  a  people  who  understand  not.

Tliey  act  like  those  who  lately  preceded  them,^  who  also
tasted  the  result  of  their  doings ;  and  a  grievous
chastisement  awaiteth  them —

Like  Satan  when  he  saith  to  a  man,  ''  Be  an  infidel :  "
and  when  he  hath  become  an  infidel,  he  saith,
"  Verily  I  share  not  thy  guilt :  *  aye,  I  fear  God
the  Lord  of  the  Worlds.''

Of  both  therefore  shall  the  end  be  that  they  dwell  for
ever  in  the  fire  :  This  is  the  recompense  of  the
evil-doers.

0  ye  who  believe  !  fear  God.  And  let  every  soul  look
well  to  what  it  sendeth  on  before  for  the  morrow  :

'  Or,  to  Medina  from  Mecca.

To  the  Jews  of  the  tribe  of  Nadhir.
*  The  idolaters  slain  at  Bedr  (Djal.),  or  the  Jews  of  Kainoka,  who  had
been  plundered  previously  to  those  of  Nadhir.
^  Lit.  I  am  clear  of  thee.

478  Trv.    KOT^AN.

And  fear  ye  God  :     Verily,   God  is  cognizant  of
what  ye  do.

And  be  ye  not  like  those  who  forget  God,  and  whom
He  hath  therefore  caused  to  forget  their  proper
selves.  Such  men  are  the  evil-doers.
20  The  inmates  of  the  Fire  and  the  inmates  of  Paradise
are  not  to  be  held  equal.  The  inmates  of  Paradise
only  shall  be  the  blissful.

Had  We  sent  down  this  Koran  on  some  mountain,  thou
wouldst  certainly  have  seen  it  humbling  itself,  and
cleaving  asunder  for  the  fear  of  God.  Such  are  the
parables  We  propose  to  men  in  order  that  they  may
reflect.

He  is  God  beside  whom  there  is  no  god.  He  knoweth
things  visible  and  invisible  :  He  is  the  Compas-
sionate, the  Merciful  !

He  is  God  beside  whom  there  is  no  god :  He  is  the
King,  the  Holy,  the  Peaceful,  the  Faithful,  the
Guardian,  the  Mighty,  the  Strong,  the  Most  High  !
Far  he  the  Glory  of  God  from  that  which  they
unite  with  Him  !

He  is  God,  the  Producer,  the  Maker,  the  Fashioner  !
To  Him  are  ascribed  excellent  titles.  Whatever
is  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth  praiseth  Him  ;
and  He  is  the  Mighty,  the  Wise  !

[CIIL]

SURA  XXXIII.— THE  CONFEDERATES.
Medina. — 73  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compkssionate,  the  Merciful.

O  Prophet,  fear  thou  God,  and  obey  not  the  unbe-
lievers and  the  hypocrites  ; — Truly  God  is  Know-
ing, Wise  :

Medina  was  besieged,  when  this  Sura  was  revealed,  by  certain  con-
federate tribes,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Jews,  an.  Hej.  5.     The  first  nine
verses,  however,  have  no  immediate  reference  to  this  event,  but  to  Mu-
hammad's cotemporary  marriage  with  Zeinab.     See  below,  verse  37.     Or
heathen.

THE    KORAN.  479

But  follow  thou  what  is  revealed  to  thee  from  thy  Lord  :
Cognizant  truly  is  He  of  all  your  actions —

And  put  thou  thy  trust  in  God,  for  a  sufficient  guardian
is  God.
^  God  hath  not  given  a  man  two  hearts  within  him;
neither  hath  He  made  your  wives  whom  ye  divorce^
to  be  as  your  mothers;  nor  hath  He  made  your
adopted  sons  to  be  as  your  own  sons.  Such  words
are  indeed  in  your  mouths ;  but  God  speaketh  the
truthj  and  in  the  right  way  He  guideth.

Name  them  after  their  fathers  :  this  will  be  more  right
before  God.  But  if  ye  know  not  who  their  fathers
are,  still  let  them  be  your  brethren  in  the  faith,
and  your  comrades.  And  unless  made  with  intent
of  heart,  mistakes  in  this  matter  shall  be  no  crime
in  you  :  for  God  is  Lenient,  Merciful.

Nearer  of  kin  to  the  faithful  is  the  Prophet,  than  they
are  to  their  own  selves.  His  wives  are  their
mothers.  According  to  the  Book  of  God,  they
who  are  related  by  blood,  are  nearer  the  one  to
the  other  than  other  believers,  and  than  those
who  have  fled  their  country  ^  for  the  cause  of
God  :  but  whatever  kindness  ye  show  to  your
kiii^  ^xl,  shall  be  noted  down  in  the  Book.
1  And  remember  that  We  have  entered  into  covenant
with  the  Prophets,  and  with  thee,  and  with  Noah,
and  Abraham,  and  Moses,  and  Jesus,  Son  of
Mary :  and  We  formed  with  them  a  strict  cove-
nant,

That  God  may  question  the  men  of  truth  as  to  their
truth.3  But  a  sore  torment  hath  He  prepared  for
the  uubolievers.

O  believers  !*  remember  the  goodness  of  God  towards
you,  when  the  armies  came  against  you,  and  We
sent   against   them    a    blast,   and    hosts    that  ye

'  The  Arabians  had  been  accustomed,  before  the  time  of  Muhammad,  to
divorce  their  wives  with  the  words,— thy  back  be  to  me  as  the  back  of  my
mother.  The  drift  and  motive  of  this  passage  is  explained  by  verse  37
below.  It  had  ako  been  the  custom  to  hold  adopted  sons  to  be  as  nearly
related  to  them  as  their  natural  ones.      See  Sura  Iviii.  2.

^  The  Mohadjers— those  who  had  emigrated  with  Muhammad  from
Mecca.  This  verse  abrogates  Sura  [xcv.]  viii.  73.  Lit.  unless  that  ye  per-
form kindness.

'  How  they  have  discharged  their  prophetic  functions.

*  Verses  9-33  have  reference  to  the  events  of  the  year  Hej.  5,  towards
the  close.    See  next  note.     His.  688  ;  Waq.  4  /.

480  THE    KORAN.  J

saw  not; — for  the  eye  of  God  was  upon  your
doings  : — ■
10  When  they  assailed  you  from  above  you,  and  from
below  you,^  and  when  your  eyes  became  distracted,
and  your  hearts  came  up  into  your  throats  and  ye
thought  hard  thoughts  of  God  : —

There  were  the  faithful  tried,  and  with  strong  quaking
did  they  quake  : —

And  when  the  disaffected  and  the  diseased  ^  of  heart
said,  "  God  and  his  Apostle  have  made  us  but  a
cheating  promise  :"

And  when  a  party  of  them  said,  "  0  people  of  Yath-
rib  !  ^  there  is  no  place  of  safety  for  you  here ;  *
therefore  return  into  the  city,"  another  party  of
you  asked  the  Prophet^s  leave  to  return,  saying,
*'  Of  a  truth  our  houses  are  left  defenceless."  But
they  were  not  left  defenceless  :  verily  theu'  sole
wish  was  to  flee  away.

If  the  enemy  had  effected  an  entry  at  all  points,'  and
they  had  then  been  asked  to  promote  confusion,  they
■would  certainly  have  done  so ;  but  only  a  short
time  would  they  have  remained  in  it  (Medina).**

They  had  before  pledged  themselves  to  God  that  they
would  not  turn  their  backs ;  and  a  pledge  given
to  God  must  be  inquired  of.

Say  :  Flight  can  by  no  means  profit  you  ;  if  ye  have
fled  the  death  or  the  slaughter,  yet  even  then,  but
a  little  while  would  ye  enjoy  your  good  things  !

Say  :  Who  is  he  that  can  screen  you  from  God,  whether
He  choose  to  bring  evil  on  you,  or  to  show  you
mercy  ?  None  beside  God  shall  they  find  for
themselves  as  patron  or  helper.

God  well  knoweth  those  among  you  who  cause  hin-
drances,   and   those  who    say  to    their  brethren,

'  In  the  engagement  which  took  place  under  the  walls  of  Medina,  some
of  the  enemy  were  posted  on  a  height  to  the  east  of  the  city,  others  in  a
valley  on  the  west.  The  besiegers  were  12,000,  the  Muslims  3,000  strong,
when  a  violent  storm  which  upset  the  tents,  put  out  the  camp  fires,  and
blinded  the  eyes  of  the  confederates  with  .sand,  turned  the  scale  of  victory
against  them.     Muhammad  ascribes  the  storm  to  angelic  ag(>ncy.

*  i.e.  with  infidelity.  ^  The  ancient  name  of  El-Medina.

*  In  the  trenches  which  had  been  dug  around  the  city  by  the  advice  of
Salman,  the  Persian.

*  Lit.  and  if  it  had  been  entered  upon  them  from  its  sides.

*  They  would  speedily  have  quitted  the  city  to  attack  the  faithful  in  the
trenches.

Trii:  KoijAx.  481

"  Come   hither    to    us/'    but   who    display    Httle
valour ;

Covetous  in  your  regard  :  ^  for  when  an  alarm  cometh,
thou  mayest  see  them  look  to  thee,  and  roll  their
eyes  like  him  on  whom  the  shadows  of  death  have
fallen  !  Yet,  when  the  alarm  is  passed,  with  sharp
tongues  will  they  assail  you,  covetous  of  the  best
of  the  spoil.  No  faith  have  these;  therefore  will
God  make  their  doings  of  no  avail  :  and  easy  is
this  with  God.
20  They  thought  that  the  CONFEDERATES  would  never
retire  :  *  and  were  the  confederates  to  come  again,
they  would  fain  be  dwelling  among  the  Arabs  of
the  desert,  and  there  ask  news  about  you  !  but
had  they  been  with  yo'.,  they  would  have  fought
but  little.

An  excellent  pattern  had  ye  in  God's  Apostle  for  all
who  hope  in  God  and  in  the  latter  day,  and  who
oft  remember  God.

And  when  the  faithful  saw  the  confederates,  they  said,
"  This  is  what  God  and  his  Apostle  promised  us,^
and  God  and  his  Apostle  spoke  truly  :  '*  and  it
only  increased  their  faith  and  self-devotion.

Some  .  J  there  among  the  faithful  who  made  good
what  they  had  promised  to  God.  Some  have  ful-
filled their  vow,  and  others  await  its  fulfilment ,  and
have  in  no  way  changed  :  *

That  God  may  reward  the  truthful  for  their  truthful-
ness, and  may  punish  the  hypocrites,  if  He  so
please,  or  be  turned  unto  them  :  verily  God  is
Forgiving,  Merciful.

And  God  drove  back  the  infidels  in  their  wrath;  they
won  no  advantage  ;  and  God  sufficed  the  faithful
in  the  fight :  and  God  is  Strong,  Mighty  !

And  He  caused  those  of  the  people  of  the  Book  (the
Jews)  who  had  aided  the  confederates,  to  come
down  out  of  their  fortresses,  and  cast  dismay
into  their  hearts :  a  part  ye  slew,  a  part  ye  took
prisoners  :  °

'  i.  e.  over  careful  of  themselves  ;  or,  over  greedy  of  spoil.

*  i.  e.  raise  the  siege.

'  I.  e.  that  through  trials  we  should  attain  to  Paradise,  v.  29.

*  Lit.  h.av>:  not  changed  (vAth)  a  changing.

*  After  the  siege  of  Medina  had  been  raised,  Muhammad  made  a  suc-
cessful expedition  against  the  Jews  of  Koreidha,  for  their  treason  and
violation  of  treaties.

2  I

482  THE    KORAN.

And  He  gave  you  their  land  and  their  dwellings  and
their  wealth,  for  an  heritage — even  a  land  on
which  ye  had  never  set  foot :  for  the  might  of  God
is  equal  to  all  things.
%  0  Prophet !  say  to  thy  wives/  If  ye  desire  this  present
life  and  its  braveries,  come  then,  I  will  provide  for
you,  and  dismiss  you  with  an  honourable  dis-
missal ;

But  if  ye  desire  God  and  his  Apostle,  and  a  home  in
the  next  life,  then  truly,  hath  God  prepared  for
those  of  you  who  are  virtuous,  a  great  reward.
30  O  wives  of  the  Prophet  !  should  any  of  you  be  guilty
of  a  proven  lewdness,  twofold  shall  her  chastise-
ment be  doubled ;  and  with  God  this  is  easy  :

But  whoever  of  you  obeyeth  God  and  his  Apostle,  and
doth  that  which  is  right,  twice  over  will  We  give
her  her  reward,  and  We  have  prepared  for  her  a
noble  provision.

O  wives  of  the  Prophet !  ye  are  not  as  other  women.
If  ye  fear  God,  be  not  too  complaisant  of  speech,
lest  the  man  of  unhealthy  heart  should  lust  after
you,  but  speak  with  discreet  speech  :

And  abide  still  in  your  houses,  and  go  not  in  public
decked  as  in  the  days  of  your  former  ignorance,^
but  observe  prayer,  and  give  alms,  and  obey  God
and  his  Apostle:  God  only  desireth  to  put  away
filthiness  from  you^  as  his  household,  and  with
cleansing  to  cleanse  you  :

And  recollect  what  is  rehearsed  to  you  in  your  houses
of  the  Book  *  of  God,  and  of  wisdom  :  for  God  is
keen-sighted,  cognizant  of  all.

Truly  the  men  who  resign  themselves  to  God  (Muslims),
and  the  women  who  resign  themselves,  and  the
believing  men  and  the  believing  women,  and  the
devout  men  and  the  devout  women,  and  the  men
of  truth  and  the  women  of  truth,  and  the  patient

'  Muhammad's  wives  having  caused  him  nuich  annoyance  by  demands
of  rich  dresses,  etc.,  he  gave  them  the  choice  of  continuing  with  him  a-s
l)efore  or  of  divorce.  They  chose  the  former.  See  Abulfeda's  Hist.  Moh.
p.  77,  and  Gagnier's  Vie  de  Moh.  i.  4,  chap.  ii.

'  i.e.  idolatry.  Acts  xvii.  ;3().  Freytag  (Einl.  p.  453)  thinks  that,  pre-
vious to  Islam,  the  Arabian  women  went  in  puVjlic  unveiled.

^  The  pronoun  is  in  the  pi.  masc,  whereas  the  pi.  fem.  is  used  in  the
previous  part  of  the  verse.  The  partisans  of  Ali  quote  this  passage  to
prove  the  intimate  union  of  Ali  and  his  posterity  with  the  Prophet.

■•  Lit.  signs.

Tirb;  KOK'AN.  483

men  and  the  patient  women,  and  the  humble  men
and  the  humble  women,  and  the  men  who  give
alms  and  the  women  who  give  alms,  and  the  men
who  fast  and  the  women  who  fast,  and  the  chaste
men  and  the  chaste  women,  and  the  men  and  the
women  who  oft  remember  God  :  for  them  hath
God  prepared  forgiveness  and  a  rich  recom-
pense.
And  it  is  not  for^  belieger,  Tnan  f^r  wnTn.9T?,,ff*  .h«vp  any
choice  in  their  affairs,  when  God  and  bis  Apostle
ba^g_jiecreed"li~malleFr'amr  whoever  disobeyeth
God  and  his  Apostle  hath   erred  with  palpable

%  And,  remember,  when  thou  saidst  to  him  unto  whom
God  had  shown  favour.^  and  to  whom  thou  also
hadst  shown  favour,  ''Keep  thy  wife  to  thyself,
and  fear  God;''  and  thou  didst  hide  in  thy  mind
what  God  would  bring  to  light,-  and  thou  didst
fear  man  ;  but  more  right  had  it  been  to  fear  God.
And  when  Zaid  had  settled  the  necessary  matter
of  her  divorce.  We  married  her  to  thee,  that  it
might  not  be  a  crime  in  the  faithful  to  marry  the
wives  of  their  adopted  sons,  when  they  have  set-
C  .xie  necessary  affair  concerning  them.  And
the  behest  of  God  is  to  be  performed.

No  blame  attacheth  to  the  Prophet  where  God  hath
given  him  a  permission.  Such  was  the  way  of  God
with  those  prophets  who  flourished  before  ; — for
God's  behest  is  a  fixed  decree —

Who  fulfilled  the  mission  with  which  God  had  charged
them,'^  and  feared  Him,  and  feared  none  but  God.
And  God  taketh  a  sufficient  account.
40  ^  Muhammad  is  not  the  father  of  any  man  among  you,
but  he  is  the  Apostle  of  God,  and  the  seal  of  the
prophets  :  and  God  knoweth  all  things.

0  Believers!  remember  God  with  frequent  remem-
brance, and  praise  Him  morning  and  evening.

He  blesseth  you,"*  and  his  angels  intercede  for  you,  that

'  i.  e.  to  Zaid.  The  favour  of  God  to  Zuid  consisted  in  having  caused
him  to  become  a  Muslim  :  the  favour  of  Muhammad  in  adopting  him  as
his  son.  Zaid  and  Abu  Lahab  (Sura  cxi.  p.  12)  are  the  only  contempo-
raries of  Muhammad  mentioned  by  name  in  the  Koran.

'  Thy  plan  to  obtain  Zeinab,  or  Zenobia,  Zaid's  wife,  as  thy  wife.

'  Lit.  ivho  brought  the  inesssages  of  God.

*  Lit.  He  prayeth  over  you,

2  I  2

481-  THE    KORAN.

He  may  bring  you  forth  out  of  darkness  into  light :
and  Merciful  is  He  to  the  Believers.

Their  greeting  on  the  day  when  they  meet  Him  shall
be  "  Peace  !  "  And  He  hath  got  ready  for  them
a  noble  recompense.

0  Prophet !  Verily  We  have  sent  thee  to  be  a  witness,
and  a  herald  of  glad  tidings,  and  a  warner.

And  one,  who  through  his  permission  summoneth  to
God,  and  alight-giving  torch.

Announce  therefore  to  believers,  that  great  boons  do
await  them  from  God ;

And  obey  not  the  infidels  and  hypocrites — yet  abstain
from  injuring  them,^  and  put  thou  thy  trust  in  God,
for  God  is  a  sufficient  guardian.
^  0  Believers  !  when  ye  marry  believing  women,  and  then
divorce  them  before  ye  have  consummated  the
marriage,  ye  have  no  term  prescribed  you,  which
ye  must  fulfil  towards  them  :  provide  for  them,  and
dismiss  them  with  a  reputable  dismissal.

0  Prophet !  Verily  We  allow  thee  thy  wives  whom  thou
hast  dowered,  and  the  slaves  whom  thy  right  hand
possesseth,  out  of  the  booty  which  God  hath  put
into  thy  power,  and  the  daughters  of  thy  uncles,
and  of  thy  paternal  and  maternal  aunts  who  fled
with  thee  to  Medina,  and  any  believing  woman
who  hath  given  herself  up  to  the  Prophet,  if  the
Prophet  desired  to  wed  her — a  Privilege  for  thee
above  the  rest  of  the  Faithful —
50  We  well  know  what  We  have  settled  for  them,  in  regard
to  their  wives  and  to  the  slaves  whom  their  right
hands  hold,  that  there  may  be  no  fault  on  thy  part :  ^
and  God  is  Indulgent,  Merciful  !

Thou  mayst  decline  for  the  present  whom  thou  wilt  of
them,  and  thou  may  est  take  to  thy  bed  her  whom
thou  wilt,  and  whomsoever  thou  shalt  long  for  of
those  thou  shalt  have  before  neglected ;  and  this
shall  not  be  a  crime  in  thee.  Thus  will  it  be  easier
to  refresh  their  eyes,  and  that  they  grieve  not,
and  that  they  be  satisfied  with  what  thou  shalt
accord  to  each  of  them.  God  knoweth  what  is
in  your  hearts,  and  God  is  Knowing,  Gracious.

'  Or,  take  no  notice  of,  let  alone  their  ill  treatment  (of  thee).
*  If  thou  makest  use  of  the  special  prerogative  (conferred  in
verse  49).

THK    KHRAN.  485

It  is  not  permitted  thee  to  take  other  wives  hereafter,^
nor  to  change  thy  present  wives  for  other  women,
thongh  their  beauty  charm  thee,  except  for  slaves
whom  thy  right  hand  shall  possess.-  And  God
watcheth  all  things.
%  0  Believers  !  enter  not  into  the  houses  of  the  Prophet,^
save  by  his  leave,  for  a  meal,  without  waiting  his
convenience.  But  when  invited  then  enter,  and
when  ye  have  eaten  then  disperse  at  once,*  and
engage  not  in  familiar  talk,  for  this  would  cause
the  Prophet  trouble  and  he  would  be  ashamed  of
you  ;  but  God  is  not  ashamed  of  the  truth.  And
when  ye  would  ask  any  gift  of  his  wives,  ask  it  from
behind  a  veil.  Purer  will  this  be  for  your  hearts
and  for  their  hearts.  And  it  is  not  for  you  to
trouble  the  Apostle  of  God,  nor  to  marry  his  wives
after  him,  for  ever.  This  verily  would  be  a  grave
offence  with  God.

Whether  ye  bring  a  matter  to  the  light  or  hide  it,  God
truly  hath  knowledge  of  all  things.

No  blame  shall  attach  to  them  (your  wives)  for  speaJcing
to  their  fathers  unveiled,  or  to  their  sons,  or  to
thei>*  brothers,    or  to  their  brothers^  sons,  or  to

I. sisters'  sons,  or  to  their  women,  or  to  the

slaves  whom  their  right  hands  possess.     And  fear
ye  God :  verily  God  witnesseth  all  things.

Verily,  God  and  his  Angels  bless  the  Prophet !  Bless
ye  him,  0  Believers,  and  salute  him  with  saluta-
tions of  Peace.

Verily,  they  who  affront  God  and  his  Apostle,  the  curse
of  God  is  on  them  in  this  world,  and  in  the  world
to  come  :  and  He  hath  prepared  for  them  a  shame-
ful chastisement  :

And  they  who  shall  affront  believing  men  and  believing
women  for  no  fault  of  theirs,  shall  surely  bear
the  guilt  of  slander,  and  of  a  clear  wrong.

'  He  had  nine  wives  at  this  period,  beside  slaves.  The  number  of  wives
allowed  to  the  faithful  is  four.     See  note,  p.  451.

'  The  tirst  slave  whom  Muhammad  took  to  wife  was  Raihana,  at  the
conquest  of  the  Banu  Koreidha. — His.  603  ;  Weil,  170.

^  Verses  53-55  refer  to  the  conduct  of  the  guests  at  Muhammad's  house
after  his  marriaj^e  with  Zeinab. — Albuhari,  passim  ;  Muslim,  i.  824  11'.
Wah.     Comp.  Caussir,  iii.  151.

■•  Ullmann,  p.  263,  quotes  a  similar  precept  from  the  Talmud,  "Do  all
that  the  master  of  the  house  biddeth,  but  wait  not  to  be  asked  to  depart. '

486  THE    KORAN.

0  Prophet !  speak  to  thy  wives  and  to  thy  daughters,^
and  to  the  wives  of  the  Faithful,  that  they  let  their
veils  fall  low.  Thus  will  they  more  easily  be  known,*
and  they  will  not  be  affronted.  God  is  Indulgent,
Merciful  !
60  If  the  Hypocrites,  and  the  men  of  tainted  heart,  and  the
stirrers  of  sedition  in  Medina  desist  not,  We  will
surely  stir  thee  up  against  them.  Then  shall  they
not  dwell  near  thee  therein,  but  for  a  little  while ; —

Cursed  wherever  they  are  found ;  they  shall  be  seized
and  slain  with  slaughter  !

Such  hath  been  the  way  of  God  with  those  who  lived
before  them ;  and  no  change  canst  thou  find  in  the
way  of  God.
^  Men  will  ask  thee  of  "  the  Hour."  Say  :  The  knowledge
of  it  is  with  God  alone :  and  who  can  tell  thee
whether  haply  the  Hour  be  not  nigh  at  hand  ?

Verily,  God  hath  cursed  the  Infidels,  and  hath  got  ready
for  them  the  flame  :

For  aye  shall  they  abide  therein ;  none  to  befriend  them,
no  helper  shall  they  find  I

On  the  dav  when  their  faces  shall  be  rolled  in  the  fire,
they  shall  cry  :  ''  Oh  !  would  that  we  had  obeyed
God,  and  obeyed  the  Apostle  !  "

And  they  shall  say  :  "  Oh  our  Lord  !  indeed  we  obeyed
our  chiefs  and  our  great  ones,  and  they  misled  us
from  the  way  of  God —

0  our  Lord  !  give  them  a  double  chastisement,  and
curse  them  with  a  heavy  curse.

0  Believers  !  be  not  like  those  who  affi'onted  Moses.^
But  God  cleared  him  from  what  they  said  of  him,
and  of  God  was  he  highly  esteemed.
70     0  Believers  !  fear    God,   and  speak   with  well-guided
speech,

That  God  may  bless  your  doings  for  you,  and  forgive
you  your  sins.  And  whoso  obeyeth  God  and  his
Apostle,  with  great  bliss  surely  shall  he  be  blessed.

'  This  verse  cannot  be  of  later  date  than  Hcj.  8,  when  Muhammad's
daughter  Omm  Kulthuni  died,  leaving  only  Fatiina.

'  i.e.  as  modest  women.

•''  This  may  refer  to  the  charge  of  adultery  said  by  the  Rabbins  to  have
been  brought  by  Korah  against  Moses.  Corap.  Tr.  Sanhcdrin,  fol.  1 10a,
and  Numbers  xii.  1.  The  verse  is  said  to  have  been  revealed  on  account
of  aspersions  thrown  on  Muhammad  for  unfairly  dividing  spoils,  where-
upon he  said,  "  God  be  merciful  to  my  brother  Moses.  lie  was  wronged
more  than  this,  and  bore  it  with  patience."

TUE    KOKAN.  i87

Verily^  We  pi'oposed  to  the  Ileaveus  and  to  the  Earth
aud  to  the  Mountains,  to  receive  the  Faith,  but  they
refused  the  burden,  aud  they  were  afraid  of  it.  But
man  undertook  to  bear  it,  for  he  is  unjust,^  sense-
less !

That  God  may  punish  the  hypocritical  men  and  the
hypocritical  women,  and  the  men  and  the  women
who  join  gods  with  God;  and  that  to  the  believing
men  and  women  God  may  turn  Himself:  and  God
is  Indulgent,  Merciful !

[CIV.]

SURA  LXIII.''— THE  HYPOCKITES.
Medina. — 11  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

When  the  Hypocrites  come  to  thee,  they  say,  "  We
bear  witness  that  thou  art  indeed  the  Sent  One
of  God,  and  God  knoweth  that  thou  art  indeed
his  Sent  One  :  "  but  God  beareth  witness  that  the
HYPOCRITES  do  surelv  lie.

Their  faith  ^  have  they  used  as  a  cloak,  and  they  turn
aside  others  from  the  way  of  God  !  Evil  verily  are
all  their  doings.'*

This,  for  that  they  believed,  then  disbelieved  !  There-
fore hath  a  seal  been  set  upon  their  hearts,  and
they  understand  not.

And  when  thou  seest  them,  their  persons  make  thee
marvel ;    and   if  they   speak,   thou  listenest  ivith

'  i.e.  to  himself;  self-injurious.

'  Revealed  shortly  after  the  expedition  against  the  Bauu  '1  Muskiliq  in
Hej.  6.  See  Nold.  p.  156,  n.  The  "  Hypocrites"  mentioned  in  the  later
Suras  are  the  disaffected  portion  of  the  population  of  Medina,  who  covertly
opposed  the  claims  of  Muhammad  to  temporal  authority  over  that  city.
They  were  gradually  absorbed  as  the  authority  of  Islam  increased.

^  Or,  in  accordance  with  another  reading,  oaths.     Comp.  Ps.  cix.  18.

■•  Lo  !  they — evil  is  it  that  tfiey  do.

488  THK    KORAN.

pleasure  to  their  discourse.  Like  propped-up  tim-
bers are  they,^  yet  fancy  that  every  shout  is  against
them.  They  are  enemies — Beware  of  them  then —
God  do  battle  ^  with  them  !  How  have  they  been
turned  aside  !

And  when  it  is  said  to  them,  "Come,  the  Apostle  of
God  will  ask  pardon  for  you,"  they  turn  their  heads
aside,  and  thou  seest  them  withdraw  in  their
arrogance  :

Alike  shall  it  be  to  them  whether  thou  ask  forgiveness
for  them,  or  ask  it  not.  By  no  means  will  God
forgive  them  :  Verily  God  hath  no  guidance  for  a
perverse  people.

These  are  they  who  say  to  you  of  Medina,  "  Spend  not
aught  upon  those  who  are  with  the  Apostle  of  God,
and  they  will  be  forced  to  quit  him.^'^  Yet  the
treasures  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  are
God^s  !     But  the  Hypocrites  do  not  understand.

They  say  :  "  If  we  return  to  the  city,  the  mightier  will
assuredly  drive  out  the  meaner  from  it."  But  might
is  with  God,  and  with  the  Apostle,  and  with  the
Faithful  !    Yet  the  Hypocrites  have  no  knowledge.

0  ye  who  believe  !  let  not  your  wealth  and  your  children
beguile  you  from  the  remembrance  of  God.  Who-
ever shall  act  thus,  shall  surely  suffer  loss.
10  And  expend  in  the  cause  of  God  out  of  that  with  which
We  have  supplied  you,  ere  death  come  to  some  one
of  you,  and  he  say,  "  0  Lord  !  why  hast  Thou  not
respited  me  for  a  brief  term,  so  that  I  might  give
alms,  and  become  one  of  the  just  ?  "

But  by  no  means  will  God  respite  a  soul  when  its  set
time  hath  come  1  And  God  is  cognizant  of  what
ye  do.

'  Like  timbers  or  joists  supported  in  a  wall  or  leaned  against  it,  i.e.
their  persons  are  bulky,  but  their  hearts  so  hypocritical  and  cowardly  that
they  are  afraid  of  the  slightest  noise.  In  the  original,  saikat  is  perhaps
an  allusion  to  the  shovt  of  Gabriel  which  is  to  exterminate  the  wicked.

*  i.  e.  curse.

'  Lit.  until  they  are  separated  (from  him).

THE    KOKAN.  489

[CV.]

SURA    XXIV. —  LIGHT.
Medina. — 64  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

A  Sura  which  We  have  sent  down  and  sanctioned  !
Clear  signs  have  We  sent  down  therein  :  Haply  ye
will  take  warning.

The  whore  and  the  whoremonger — scourge  each  of
them  with  a  hundred  stripes ;  and  let  not  compas-
sion keep  you  from  carrying  out  the  sentence  of
God,  if  ye  believe  in  God  and  the  last  day  :  And
let  some  of  the  faithful  witness  their  chastise-
ment.^

The  whoremonger  shall  not  marry  other  than  a  whore
o.  .  idolatress ;  and  the  whore  shall  not  marry
other  than  a  whoremonger  or  an  idolater.  Such
alliances  are  forbidden  to  the  faithful.

They  who  defame  virtuous  women, ^  and  bring  not  four
witnesses,  scourge  them  with  fourscore  stripes,
and  receive  ye  not  their  testimony  for  ever,  for
these  are  impious  persons —

Save  those  who  afterwards  repent  and  live  virtuously ;
for  truly  God  is  Forgiving,  Merciful !

And  they  who  accuse  their  Avives,  and  have  no  wit-
nesses but  themselves,  the  testimony  of  each  of
them  shall  be  a  testimony  by  God  four  times
repeated,  that  he  is  indeed  of  them  that  speak
the  truth ;  ^

'  With  this  verse  commences  the  reference  to  the  scandal  against  Aye-
sha,  to  which  verses  6-9  read  like  a  later  addition.  See  His.  731  flf.  ;  Al-
buhari,  passim  ;  Muslim,  IL  628  flF.  ;  Tirm.  524  ;  Tabari  and  Weil,  p.  151.

'  Said  to  refer  to  Hilal  ben  Umaiya  (Muslim,  i.  886  ;  Tirm.  523  ;  An-
nasai,  409  f. ;  Assamarq.),  who  had  accused  his  wife  of  adultery.  Two  of
these  commentators,  however,  give  the  name  of  another  Muslim  as  the
person  intended.

'  Comp.  Numb.  v.  11,  31,  with  which  Muhammad  must  have  been  ac-
quainted.

490  TlIS    KORAN.

And  the  fifth  time  that  the  malison  of  God  be  upon
him,  if  he  be  of  them  that  He.

But  it  shall  avert  the  chastisement  from  her  if  she
testify  a  testimony  four  times  repeated,  by  God,
that  he  is  indeed  of  them  that  lie ;

And  a  fifth  time  to  call  down  the  wrath  of  God  on  her,
if  he  have  spoken  the  truth.
lO     And  but  for  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God  towards
you,    and   that    God  is  He  who  loveth  to  turn,

Wise !  1

•[f  Of  a  truth,  they  who  advanced  that  lie  ~  were  a  lai'ge
number  of  you;  hut  regard  it  not  as  an  evil  to
you ;  No,  it  is  an  advantage  to  you.^  To  every
man  among  them  shall  it  be  done  according  to  the
offence  he  hath  committed ;  and  as  to  that  person*
among  them  who  took  on  himself  to  aggravate  it,^
a  sore  punishment  doth  await  him.

Why  did  not  the  faithful  of  both  sexes,  when  ye  heard
of  this,  form  a  favourable  judgment  in  their  own
minds  and  say,  ''  This  is  a  manifest  lie  "  ? —

Why  have  they  not  brought  four  witnesses  of  the  fact  ?
If  they  cannot  produce  the  witnesses,  then,  liars
are  they  in  the  sight  of  God.

And  but  for  the  goodness  of  God  towards  you,  and  his
mercy  in  this  world  and  in  the  next,  a  severe
punishment  had  come  upon  you  for  that  which
ye  spread  abroad,  when  ye  uttered  it  with  your
tongues,  and  spake  with  your  mouths  that  of
which  ye  had  no  knowledge.  And  ye  deemed
it  to  be  a  light  matter ;  but  with  God  it  was  a
grave  one.

And  why  did  ye  not  say  when  ye  heard  it,  "  It  is  not
for  us  to  speak  of  this  affair !  0  God !  By  thy
Glory,  this  is  a  gross  calumny  "  ?

God  hath  warned  you  that  ye  go  not  back  to  the  like
of  this  for  ever,  if  ye  be  believers  ;

'  Supply,  He  would  have  punisJied  at  once.

■■'  The  rumour  of  improper  intimacy  between  Ayesha  and  Safwan  Ibii
El  Moattal,  durinr;  Muhanuna(r.s  return  from  the  expedition  against  the
tribe  of  Mostalifj  (an.  Hej.  9),  in  which  he  was  separated  from  her  for  an
entire  day,  which  she  passed  in  the  company  of  Safwan,  who  had  found
her  when  accidentally  left  behind.  Verses  4-26  were  revealed  shortly
after  the  return.

'  Whose  characters  are  cleared.

*  Abdallah  Ibn  Obba  (Abulf,  p.  83).

'  Lit.  as  Mar.  assumpsit  sibi  gravitatem  ejus  {nempe  iniquitalis).

THK    KORAN.  iOl

And  God  tnaketh  the  Signs  ^  clear  to  you  :  for  God  is
Knowing,  Wise ;

But  as  for  those  wlio  love  that  foul  calumnies  should
go  forth  against  those  who  believe,  a  grievous
chastisement  awaiteth  them

In  this  world  and  in  the  next :  And  God  hath  know-
ledge, but  ye  have  not.
20     And  but  for  the  goodness  of  God  towards  yon  and  his

Mercy,  and  that  God  is  Kind,  Merciful !  ^

^  0  ye  who  believe !  follow  not  the  steps  of  Satan,  for
whosoever  shall  follow  the  steps  of  Satan,  on  him
will  he  verily  enjoin  the  foul  and  the  blameworthy ;
and  but  for  the  goodnes:.  of  God  towards  you  and
his  mercy,  no  one  of  you  had  been  cleansed  for
ever :  but  God  maketh  whom  He  will  to  be  clean ;
and  God  Heareth,  Knoweth.

And  let  not  persons  of  wealth  and  means  among  you
swear  that  they  will  not  give  to  their  kindred,  to
the  poor,  and  to  those  who  have  fled  their  homes
in  the  canse  of  God ;  let  them  rather  pardon  and
pass  over  the  offence.^  Desire  ye  not  that  God
should  forgive  you  ?  And  God  is  Gracious,  Merciful !

Verilv-  ^^'^y  who  throw  out  charges  against  virtuous
hu,.  careless  women,  who  yet  are  believers,  are
cursed  in  this  world  and  in  the  woi4d  to  come,  and
a  terrible  punishment  doth  await  them ,

Their  own  tongues,  and  hands,  and  feet,  shall  one  day
bear  witness  against  them  of  their  doings  ;^ —

On  that  day  will  God  pay  them  their  just  due,  and
they  shall  know  that  God  is  the  clear  Truth
itself.

Bad  women  for  bad  men,  and  bad  men  for  bad  women  ;
but  virtuous  women  for  virtuous  men,  and  vir-
tuous men  for  virtuous  women  !  These  shall  be
cleared  from  calumnies  ;  theirs  shall  be  forgive-
ness and  an  honourable  provision.
^  0  ye  who  believe  !  enter  not  into  other  houses^  than

'  i.e.  verses  of  the  Koran.  '  Comp.  verse  10,  n.

'  Abubekr  had  been  desirous  to  punish  one  of  his  relatives,  IMestah,  who
had  propagated  the  scandal  against  Ayesha,  by  refusing  him  gifts  or
alms.

••  "  The  very  members  of  a  man  shall  testify  against  him  ;  for  thus  we
read  (Jer.  xliii.  12),  Ye  are  yourselves  my  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord."  —
Chagiga,  16  ;  Thaanith,  11a.

*  It  wa.s  the  custom  in  Arabia,  before  Islam,  to  enter  houses  without
permission. — Freyt.  Einl.  p.  216.

492  THE    KORAN.

your  own,  until  ye  have  asked  leave,  and  have
saluted  its  inmates.  This  will  be  best  for  you  :
haply  ye  will  bear  this  in  mind.

And  if  ye  find  no  one  therein,  then  enter  it  not  till
leave  be  given  you ;  and  if  it  be  said  to  you,  "  Go
ye  back,^^  then  go  ye  back.  This  will  be  more
blameless  in  you  ;  and  God  knoweth  what  ye  do.

There  shall  be  no  harm  in  your  entei'ing  houses  in
which  no  one  dwelleth  ;  within  them  may  be  the
supply  of  your  needs  :  and  God  knoweth  what  ye
do  openly  and  what  ye  conceal.
1[  30  Speak  unto  the  believers  that  they  cast  down  their
eyes  and  observe  continence.  Thus  will  they  be
more  pure.  Of  a  truth  God  is  well  aware  of  what
they  do.

And  speak  to  the  believing  women  that  they  refrain
their  looks,  and  observe  continence  ;  and  that
they  display  not  their  ornaments,  except  those
which  are  external ;  and  that  they  draw  their  veils
over  their  bosoms,  and  display  not  their  orna-
ments, except  to  their  husbands  or  their  fathers,
or  their  husbands'  fathers,  or  their  sons,  or  their
husbands'  sons,  or  their  brothers,  or  their  brothers*
sons,  or  their  sisters'  sons,  or  their  women,  or
their  slaves,  or  male  domestics  who  have  no  na-
tural force,  or  to  children  who  note  not  women's
nakedness.  And  let  them  not  strike  their  feet
together,  so  as  to  discover  their  hidden  orna-
ments.^ And  be  ye  wholly  turned  to  God,  0  ye
believers  !  haply  it  shall  be  well  with  you.

And  marry  those  among  you  who  are  single,  and  your
good  servants,  and  your  handmaidens.  If  they
are  poor,  God  of  his  bounty  will  enrich  them.
And  God  is  all-bounteous,  Knowing.  And  let
those  who  cannot  find  a  match "  live  in  continence
till  God  of  his  bounty  shall  enrich  them.

And  to  those  of  your  slaves  who  desire  a  deed  of  manu-
mission, execute  it  for  them,  if  ye  know  good  in
them,  and  give  them  a  portion  of  the  wealth  of
God  which  He  hath  given  you.'  Force  not  your
female  slaves  into  sin,  in  order  that  ye  may  gain
the  casual  fruitions  of  this  world,  if  they  wish  to

'  i.e.  the  anklets.     Conip.  Isai.  iii.  16,  18.     Lit.  ihat  their  ornaments
which  they  hide  may  be  known.  '  On  acconnt  of  poverty.

'  (Joiiip.  Dent.  XV.  12-15.

TIIK    KORAN.  49

o

preserve  their  modesty.  Yet  if  any  one  compel
them,  then  verily,  after  their  compulsion,  will  God
be  Forgiving,  Merciful.
^  And  now  have  We  sent  down  to  you  clear  signs,  and
an  instance  from  among  those  who  flourished
before  you,  and  a  caution  for  the  God-fearing.^

God  is  the  LIGHT  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth.
His  Light  is  like  a  niche  in  which  is  a  lamp — the
lamp  encased  in  glass — the  glass,  as  it  were,  a
glistening  star.  From  a  blessed  tree  is  it  lighted,
the  olive  neither  of  the  East  nor  of  the  West,
whose  oil  would  well-nigh  shine  out,  even  though
fire  touched  it  not !  It  is  light  upon  light !  God
guideth  whom  He  will  to  his  light,  and  God
setteth  forth  parables  to  men,  and  God  knoweth
everything.
%  In  the  temples  which  God  hath  allowed  to  be  reared,
that  his  name  may  therein  be  remembered,  do
men  praise  Him  morn  and  even  :

Men  whom  neither  merchandise  nor  traffic  beguile
from  the  remembrance  of  God,  and  from  the  ob-
servance of  prayer,  and  the  payment  of  the  stated
alms,  through  fear  of  the  day  when  hearts  shall
L.     ,  and  eyes  shall  roll :

That  for  their  most  excellent  works  may  God  recom-
pense them,  and  of  his  bounty  increase  it  to  them
more  and  more :  for  God  maketh  provision  for
whom  He  pleaseth  without  measure.

But  as  to  the  Infidels,  their  works  are  like  the  mirage
in  a  level  plain  which  the  thirsty  deemeth  to  be
water,  until  when  he  cometh  unto  it,  he  findeth  it
not  aught,  but  findeth  that  God  is  with  him;  and
He  fully  payeth  him  his  account :  for  swift  to  take
account  is  God  :
40  Or  like  the  darkness  on  the  vast  and  deep  sea  when
covered  by  billows  riding  upon  billows,  above
which  are  clouds  :  darkness  upon  darkness.  When
a  man  reacheth  forth  his  hand,  he  can  scarcely
see  it !  He  to  whom  God  shall  not  give  light,  no
light  at  all  hath  he  !
%  Hast  thou  not  seen  how  all  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the
Earth  uttereth  the  praise  of  God  ? — the  very  birds

*  The  meaning  probably  is,  that  the  scandal  raised  against  Ayesha
resembled  the  scandal  in  the  case  of  Joseph  in  Egypt  and  of  the  Virgin
Mary,  detailed  in  previous  Suras.

494  THE    KORAN.

as  they  spread  tlieir  wings  ?  Every  creature
knoweth  its  prayer  and  its  praise  !  and  God
knoweth  what  they  do  :

God's  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth :
and  unto  God  the  final  return  !

Hast  thou  not  seen  that  God  driveth  clouds  hghtly
forward,  then  gathereth  them  together,  then  pileth
them  in  masses  ?  And  then  thou  seest  the  raiu
forthcoming  from  their  midst;  and  He  causeth
clouds  like  mountains,  charged  with  hail,  to  de-
scend from  the  heaven,  and  He  maketh  it  to  fall
on  whom  He  will,  and  from  whom  He  will  He
turneth  it  aside. — The  brightness  of  his  lightning
all  but  taketh  away  the  sight !

God  causeth  the  day  and  the  night  to  take  their  turn.
Verily  in  this  is  teaching  for  men  of  insight.  And
God  hath  created  every  animal  of  water. -^  Some
go  upon  the  belly,  and  some  go  upon  two  feet,  and
some  go  upon  four  feet.  God  createth  what  He
will.     Aye,  God  hath  power  over  all  things.

Now  have  We  sent  down  distinct  signs. — And  God
guideth  whom  He  will  into  the  right  path :

For  there  are  who  say,  "  We  believe  on  God  and  on
the  Apostle,  and  we  obey  ; "  yet,  after  this,  a
part  of  them  turn  back.^  But  these  are  not  of
the  faithful.

And  when  they  are  summoned  to  God  and  his  Apostle
that  He  may  judge  between  them,  lo  !  a  part  of
them  withdraw :

But  had  the  truth  been  on  their  side,  they  would  have
come  to  Him,  obedient.

Are  they  diseased  of  heart?  or  do  they  doubt?  or  are
they  afraid  that  God  and  his  Apostle  will  deal
unfairly  with  them  ?  Nay,  they  are  the  unjust
doers.
50  The  words  of  believers,  when  called  to  God  and  his
Apostle  that  He  may  judge  between  them,  are
only  to  say,  "  We  have  heard,  and  we  obey  :  "
these  are  they  with  whom  it  shall  be  well.

And  whoso  obeyeth  God  and  his  Apostle,  and  dreadeth

'An  idea  perhaps  derived  from  Gen.  i.  20,  21.  Comp.  Tr.  Cholin,
fol.  27a.

*  Verses  46-56  obviously  refer  to  a  period,  perhaps  that  between  the
battle  of  Ohod  and  the  end  of  the  war  of  the  Ditch,  when  Muhammad's
prospects  were  overclouded,  and  the  confidence  of  his  followers  shaken.

TFTE    KORAN.  495

God  and  feareth  Him,  these  are  they  that  shall  be
the  blissful.

And  they  swore  by  God,  with  their  most  solemn  oath,
that  if  thou  give  them  the  word,  they  will  certainly
march  forth.  Say  :  Swear  ye  not :  of  more  worth ^
is  obedience.  Verily,  God  is  well  aware  of  what
ye  do.

Say  :  Obey  God  and  obey  the  Apostle.  But  if  ye  turn
back,  still  the  burden  of  his  duty  is  on  him  only,
and  the  burden  of  your  duty  rests  on  you.  And  if
ye  obey  him,  ye  shall  have  guidance  :  but  plain
preaching  is  all  that  devolves  upon  the  Apostle.

God  hath  promised  to  those  oi  you  who  believe  and  do
the  things  that  are  right,  that  He  will  cause  them
to  succeed  others  in  the  land,  as  He  gave  succes-
sion to  those  who  were  before  them,  and  that  He
will  establish  for  them  their  religion  in  which  they
delight,  and  that  after  their  fears  He  will  give
them  security  in  exchange.  They  shall  worship
Me  :  nought  shall  they  join  with  Me  :  And  whoso
after  this  believe  not,  they  will  be  the  impious  :

But  observe  prayer,  and  pay  the  stated  alms,  and  obey
the  Aioostle,  that  haply  ye  may  find  mercy.

Let  u,  .ae  Infidels  think  that  they  can  weaken  God
on  his  own  Earth  :  their  dwelling-place  shall  be
the  Fire  !  and  wretched  the  journey  !
^  0  ye  who  believe  !  let  your  slaves,  and  those  of  you
who  have  not  come  of  age,  ask  leave  of  you,  three
times  a  day,  ere  they  come  into  your  presence  : —
before  the  morning  prayer,  and  when  ye  lay
aside  your  garments  at  the  mid-day  heat,  and
after  the  evening  prayer.  These  are  your  three
times  of  privacy.-  No  blame  shall  attach  to  you
or  to  them,  if,  after  these  times,  when  ye  go  your
rounds  of  attendance  on  one  another,^  they  come  in
without  permission.  Thus  doth  God  make  clear
to  you  his  signs  :  and  God  is  Knowing,  Wise  !

And  when  your  children  come  of  age,  let  them  ask
leave  to  come  into  your  presence,  as  they  who
were  before  them  asked  it.  Thus  doth  God  make
clear  to  you  his  signs  :  and  God  is  Knowing,  Wise.

As  to  women  who  are  past  childbearing,  and  have  no

'  Lit.  is  befitting,  or  honourable.  *  Lit.  nakedness.

^  Lit.  circumeuntes  erga  vos  alii  vestrum  erga  alios,  i.e.  obsequia  prse-
stantes  vobis  mutuo. — Mar.

490  THV  KORAN.

hope  of  marriage,  no  blame  shall  attach  to  them
if  they  lay  aside  their  outer  garments,  but  so  as
not  to  show  their  ornaments.  Yet  if  they  abstain
from  this,  it  will  be  better  for  them  :  and  God
Heareth,  Knoweth.
%  60  No  crime  ^  shall  it  be  in  the  blind,  or  in  the  lame,  or  in
the  sick,  to  eat  at  your  tables  :  or  in  yourselves,
that  ye  eat  in  ^  your  own  houses,  or  the  houses
of  your  fathers,  or  of  your  mothers,  or  of  your
brothers,  or  of  your  sisters,  or  of  your  uncles
on  the  father^s  side,  or  of  your  aunts  on  the
father's  side,  or  of  your  uncles  on  the  mother's
side,  or  of  your  aunts  on  the  mother's  side,  or  in
I  those  of  which  ye  possess  the  keys,  or  in  the  house

of  your  friend.     No    blame   shall    attach  to  you
whether  ye  eat  together  or  apart.

And  when  ye  enter  houses,  salute  one  another  with  a
good  and  blessed  greeting  as  from  God.  Thus
doth  God  make  clear  to  you  his  signs,  that  haply
ye  may  comprehend  them.

Verily,  they  only  are  believers  who  believe  in  God  and
his  Apostle,  and  who,  when  they  are  together
with  him  upon  any  affair,  depart  not  until  they
have  sought  his  leave.  Yes,  they  who  ask  leave
of  thee,  are  those  who  believe  in  God  and  his
Apostle.  And  when  they  ask  leave  of  thee  on
account  of  any  affairs  of  their  own,  then  grant  it
to  those  of  them  whom  thou  wilt,  and  ask  indul-
gence for  them  of  God  :  verily  God  is  Indulgent,
Merciful.
%  Address  not  the  Apostle  as  ye  address  one  another.'
God  knoweth  those  of  you  who  withdraw  quietly
from  the  assemblies,  screening  themselves  behind
others.     And  let  those  who  withstand  his  command

'  This  verse  was  intended  to  relieve  the  scruples  of  the  Muslims,  who,
following  the  superstitious  customs  of  the  Arabs,  thought  that  they  ought
11'  t  to  admit  the  blind,  etc.  to  their  tables,  to  eat  alone,  or  in  a  house  of
wliieh  they  were  entrusted  with  the  key,  etc.  ^  Ar.  from.

^  Lit.  make  nol  the  calling  of  the  Aj)Ostle  among  you,  like  the  calling  of
some,  of  you  to  others,  i.e.  address  him  by  some  respectful  and  honourable
title.  Thus  in  the  Talmud,  "  It  is  forbidden  to  a  disciple  to  call  his  Eabbi
by  name,  even  when  he  is  not  in  his  presence  ;"  and  ajrain  :  "  Neither  is
he  to  salute  his  Rabbi,  nor  to  return  his  salutation,  in  the  same  way  that
salutations  are  given  and  returned  among  friends."  "  Whoever  despises
the  wise  men,  hath  no  portion  in  the  world  to  come."  See  Hilchoth  Torah.
c.  ").

THE    KORAN.  497

beware,  lest  some  present  trouble  befall  tliem,  or
a  grievous  chastisement  befall  them,  horcafter.
Is  not  verilv  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth
God's  ?  He  knoweth  your  state ;  and  one  day
shall  men  be  assembled  unto  Him,  and  He  will
tell  them  of  what  they  have  done :  for  God
knoweth  all  things.

[CVI.]

SURA  LVIII.-SHE  WHO  PLEADED.
Medina. — 22  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  tJie  Merciful.

Now  hath  God  heard  the  words  of  HER  ^  WHO
PLEADED  with  thee  against  her  husband,  and
iL  her  plaint  to  God ;  and  God  hath  heard
your  mutual  arguments :  verily  God  Heareth,
Beholdeth.

As  to  those  of  you  who  put  away  their  wives  hy  saying,
''Be  thou  to  me  as  my  mother's  hack" — their
mothers  -  they  are  not ;  they  only  are  their
mothers  who  gave  them  birth  !  and  verily  they
utter  a  blameworthy  saying  and  an  untruth :

But  truly,  God  is  Forgiving,  Indulgent.

And  those  who  thns  put  away  their  wives,  and  after-
wards would  recall  their  words,  must  free  a  captive
before  they  can  come  together  again.  To  this  are
ye  warned  to  conform  :  and  God  is  cognizant  of
your  actions.

'  Khaula,  daughter  of  Thalaba,  who  had  been  divorced  by  the  formula
in  verse  2,  which  was  understood  amon;^  the  Arabs  to  imply  perpetual
separation.  This  ]Muhammad  had  asserted  in  her  case ;  but  in  conse-
quence of  the  woman's  prayers,  etc.,  a  relaxation  of  the  law,  on  fulfilment
of  the  conditions  mentioned  in  verses  4,  5,  was  hereby  allowed.  None  of
the  earlier  traditions  fix  any  date  for  this  Sum,  though  later  authorities
(Weil,  184)  fix  the  end  of  Hej.  6,  or  the  beginning  of  Hej.  7. — The  subject-
matter  is  in  part  similar  to  that  of  Sura  xxiv.

*  See  Sura  [ciiL]  xxxiii  4.

2   K

498  ITIR    KORAN.

And  he  wlio  fiudeth  not  a  captive  to  set  free,  shall  fast
two  mouths  in  succession  before  they  two  come
together  :  And  he  who  shall  not  be  able  to  do  so,
shall  feed  sixty  poor  men.  This,  that  he  may
believe  in  God  and  his  Apostle;  and  these  are  the
statutes  of  God :  and  for  the  unbelievers  is  an
afflictive  chastisement !

Truly  they  who  oppose  God  and  his  Apostle  shall  be
broujxht  low,  as  those  who  were  before  them  were
brought  low.  And  now  have  We  sent  down
demonstrative  signs  :  and,  for  the  Infidels  is  a
shameful  chastisement,

On  the  day  when  God  shall  raise  them  all  to  life,  and
shall  tell  them  of  their  doings.  God  hath  taken
count  thereof,  though  they  have  forgotten  the
same ;  ^  and  God  is  witness  over  all  things.

Dost  thou  not  see  that  God  knoweth  all  that  is  in  the
Heavens  and  all  that  is  in  the  Earth  ?  Three
persons  speak  not  privately  together,  but  He  is
their  fourth ;  nor  five,  but  He  is  their  sixth  ;  nor
fewer  nor  more,  but  wherever  they  be  He  is  with
them.  Then  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  He  will
tell  them  of  their  deeds :  aye  !  God  knoweth  all
things.

Hast  thou  not  marked  those  who  have  been  forbidden
secret  talk,  and  return  to  what  they  have  been
forbidden,  and  talk  privately  together  with  wicked-
ness, and  hate,  and  disobedience  towards  the
Apostle  !  And  when  they  come  to  thee,  they
greet  thee  not  as  God  greeteth  thee : "  and  they
say  among  themselves,  "  Why  doth  not  God  punish
us  for  what  we  say  ?  "  Hell  shall  be  their  meed  :  ^
they  shall  be  burned  at  its  fire :  and  a  wretched
passage  thither.
10  O  Believers  I  when  ye  hold  private  converse  together,
converse  not  with  wickedness,  and  hate,  and  dis-
obedience towards  the  Apostle;  but  let  your
private  converse  be  with  justice  and  the  fear  of
God :  and  fear  ye  God  unto  whom  ye  shall  be
gathered  !

Only   of  Satan  is  this    clandestine  talk,  that  he  may

'  The  pronouns  are  in  the  singular  in  this  clause.

'  Instead  of  saying,  Es-salam  aleika,  "  Peace  be  on  thee,"  the  Infidels
and  Jews  said,  Es-sam  aleika,  "  a  plague  or  poison  on  thee."— See  Geiger,
p.  18.  '  Lit.  sufficiency.

THE    KOK\N.  499

bring  the  faithful  to  grief:  but,  unless  by  God's
permission,  not  aught  shall  he  harm  them  !  in  God
then  let  the  faithful  trust.

0  ye  who  believe  !  when  it  is  said  to  you,  "  Make  room
in  your  assemblies/'  then  make  ye  room.  God
will  make  room  for  you  in  Paradise  !  And  when
it  is  said  to  you,  "  Rise  up,"  then  rise  ye  up.  God
will  uplift  those  of  you  who  believe,  and  those  to
whom  "  the  Knowledge  "  is  given,  to  lofty  grades  !
and  God  is  cognizant  of  your  actions.

O  ye  who  believe  !  when  ye  go  to  confer  in  private
with  the  Apostle,  give  alms  before  your  private
conference.  Better  will  this  be  for  you,  and  more
pure.  But  if  ye  find  not  the  means,  then  truly
God  is  Lenient,  Merciful.

Do  ye  hesitate  to  give  alms  previously  to  your  private
conference  ?  Then  if  ye  do  it  not  (and  God  will
excuse  it  ^  in  you),  at  least  observe  prayer,  and  pay
the  stated  impost,  and  obey  God  and  bis  Apostle  :
and  God  is  cognizant  of  your  actions.

Hast  thou  not  remarked  those  who  make  friends  of
that  people  with  whom  God  is  angered  ?  They
are  ■^'^ither  of  your  party  nor  of  theirs  ;  and  they
s..  -ttr  to  a  lie,"  knowing  it  to  be  such ;

God  hath  got  ready  for  them  a  severe  torment :  for,
evil  is  that  they  do.

They  make  a  cloak  of  their  faith,  and  turn  others  aside
from  the  way  of  God :  wherefore  a  shameful  tor-
ment awaiteth  them.

By  no  means  shall  their  wealth  or  their  children  avail
them  aught  against  God.  Companions  shall  they
be  of  the  fire  :  they  shall  abide  therein  for  ever.

On  the  day  when  God  shall  raise  them  all,  they  will
then  swear  to  Him  as  they  swear  to  you,  deeming
that  it  will  avail  them.  Are  they  not — yes  they —
the  liars  ?
20  Satan  hath  gotten  mastery  over  them,  and  made  them
forget  the  remembrance  of  God.  These  are
Satan's  party.  Shall  not  verily  the  party  of  Satan
be  the  losers  ?

Verily,  they  who  oppose  God  and  his  Apostle  shall
be  amonsT  the  most  vile.     God  hath  written  this

'  Lit.  and  God  is  turned  (L  e.  is  gracious  to)  you.
-  The  Jews  swear  that  they  are  Muslims.
2  K  2

500  THE    KORAN.

decree  :  "  I  will  surely  prevail,  I  and  my  Apostles."
Truly  God  is  Strong,  Mighty.
Thou  shalt  not  find  that  any  of  those  who  believe  in
God,  and  in  the  last  day,  love  him  who  opposeth
God  and  his  Apostle,  even  though  they  be  their
fathers,  or  their  sons,  or  their  brethren,  or  their
nearest  kin.  On  the  hearts  of  these  hath  God
graven  the  Faith,  and  with  his  own  Spirit  hath
He  strengthened  them  ;  and  He  will  bring  them
into  gardens,  beneath  whose  shades  the  rivers  flow,
to  remain  therein  eternally.  God  is  well  pleased
in  them,  and  they  in  Him.  These  are  God's
party  !  Shall  not,  of  a  truth,  the  party  of  God  be
those  with  whom  it  is  well  ?

[CVII.]

SURA  XXII.— THE  PILGRIMAGE.
Medina.* — 78  Verses,

In,  the  Name  of  God,  the  Oompassioyiate,  the  Merciful.

0  Men  of  Mecca,  fear  your  Lord.  Verily,  the  earth-
quake ^  of  the  last  Hour  will  be  a  tremendous
thing  !

On  the  day  when  ye  shall  behold  it,  every  suckling
woman  shall  forget  her  sucking  babe  ;  and  every
woman  that  hath  a  burden  in  her  wom,h  shall  cast
her  burden;  and  thou  shalt  see  men  drunken,  yet
are  they  not  drunken  ;  but  it  is  the  mighty  chas-
tisement of  God  !

'  This  Sura  is  generally  said  to  have  been  revealed  at  Mecca  ;  but  this*
is  probably  only  the  case  with  verses  1-24,  4.3-56,  60-65,  67-75.  Mr.  Muir
places  it  at  the  close  of  the  Meccan  Suras  of  the  fifth  period.     See  Nold.
p.  158.

'  Comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  7.

THE    KORAN.  501

There  is  ca  man  ^  who,  without  knowledge,  wrangleth
about  God,  and  followeth  every  rebellious  Satan  ;

Against  whom  it  is  decreed,  that  he  shall  surely  be-
guile, and  guide  into  the  torment  of  the  flame,
whoever  shall  take  him  for  his  lord,

0  men  !  if  ye  are  in  doubt  about  the  Resurrection,  yet,
of  a  truth,  have  We  created  you  of  dust,  then  of
the  moist  germs  of  life,  then  of  clots  of  blood,  then
of  pieces  of  flesh  shapen  and  unshapen,  that  We
might  give  you  proofs  of  our  'power !  And  We
cause  one  sex  or  the  other,  at  our  pleasure,  to  abide
in  the  womb  until  the  aj^ipointed  time ;  then  We
bring  you  forth  infants  ;  then  permit  you  to  reach
your  age  of  strength ;  and  one  of  you  dieth,  and
another  of  you  liveth  on  to  an  age  so  abject  that
all  his  former  knowledge  is  clean  forgotten !  ^
And  thou  hast  seen  the  earth  barren :  but  when
We  send  down  the  rain  upon  it,  it  stirreth  and
swelleth,and  groweth  every  kind  of  beauteous  herb.

This,  for  that  God  is  the  Truth,  and  that  it  is  He  who
quickeneth  the  dead,  and  that  He  hath  power  over
everything :

And  t-^  the  Hour  "  is  coming — there  is  no  doubt  of

it — and  that   God  will  wake  up  to  life  those  who
are  in  the  tombs.

A  man  there  is  who  disputeth  about  God  without  know-
ledge or  guidance  or  enlightening  Book,

Turning  aside  in  scorn  to  mislead  others  from  the  way
of  God  !  Disgrace  shall  be  his  in  this  world  ;  and
on  the  day  of  the  Resurrection,  We  will  make  him
taste  the  torment  of  the  burning  : —
10  "  This  for  thy  handywork  of  old  !  and  because  God  is
not  unjust  to  his  servants. ^^

And  there  is  a  man  who  serveth  God  in  a  single
point.^  Then  if  good  come  upon  him,  he  resteth  in
it;  but  if  trial  come  upon  him,  he  becometh  a
pervert,*  with  the  loss  both  of  this  world  and  of
the  next !     This  same  is  the  clear  ruin  !

'  Said  to  be  Abu  Jahl  (see  Sura  xcvi.  p.  2,  n.  2).  Or,  according  to
others,  Ibn-el-Hareth ;  but  this  verse,  as  well  as  verses  8,  11,  may  be  un-
derstood of  men  generally.

^  Lit.  so  that  after  knowledge  he  knoweth  not  aught.

^  Lit.  upon  the  verge  of  religion.

"Lit.  he  is  turned  upon  himself.  It  may  be  also  rendered,  is  turned
according  to  his  manner.

502  THE    KORAN.

He  calleth  beside  God  upon  that  which  cannot  hurt
him,  and  -svhich  cannot  profit  him.  This  same
is  the  far-gone  error  !

He  calleth  on  him  who  would  sooner  hurt  than  profit
him.  Surely  bad  the  lord,  and.  bad  the  com-
panion !

Verily  God  wall  bring  in  those  who  believe  and  do  the
things  that  ai'e  right,  into  gardens  ^ueath  which
the  rivers  flow  :  verily  God  doth  that  which  He
pleaseth.

Let  him  who  thinketh  that  God  will  by  no  means  aid
his  Apostle  in  this  world  and  in  the  next,  stretch
a  cord  aloft  to  destroy  himself ;  then  let  him  cut
it,  and  see  w^hether  his  devices  can  bring  that  ^  to
naught  at  which  he  w%as  angry  !

Even  thus  send  We  it  [the  Koran]  down,  as  clear
signs  (verses)  :  and  because  God  guideth  whom
He  pleaseth.

Verily  thoy  who  believe,  and  the  Jews  and  the  Sabeites,-
and  the  Christians,  and  the  Magians,  and  those
who  join  other  gods  with  God,  verily  God  shall
decide  between  them  on  the  day  of  Resurrection  :
verily  God  is  witness  over  all  things.

Seest  thou  not  that  all  in  the  Heavens  and  all  on  the
Earth  adoreth  God  ?  the  sun  and  the  moon  and
the  stars,  and  the  mountains,  and  the  trees,  and
the  beasts,  and  many  among  men  ?  But  of  many
is  the  chastisement  their  due  :

And  whom  God  disgraceth  there  shall  be  none  to
honour :  Verily  God  doth  that  which  pleaseth
Him.
20  These,  the  Faithful  and  the  Lijldels,  are  the  two  dis-
putants who  dispute  concerning  their  Lord  :  but
for  those  who  have  disbelieved  garments  of  fire
are  cut  out  ;  boiling  water  shall  be  poured  down
over  their  heads  :

All  that  is  in  their  bowels,  and  their  skins  shall  be
dissolved  :  and  maces  of  iron  await  them  ; —

So    oft  as  they,  for  anguish,   would  fain  come  forth

'  Lit.  remove,  i.e.  the  teachings  and  progress  of  Islam.  The  sense  of
this  somewhat  obscure  passage  seems  to  be,  "  Let  him  have  recourse  to
means,  however  absurd  and  impracticable."

'  See  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  59.  The  Subeites  were  probably  Hanyfs.  v.  n.
p.  216.

THE    KOKAN.  50o

thence,   back  shall  they   be  turned  into  it,  with,
"  Taste  ye  the  torment  of  the  burning/'

Verily  God  will  bring  in  those  who  believe,  and  do  the
things  that  are  right,  into  gardens  'neatli  which
the  rivers  flow.  Adorned  shall  they  be  therein
with  golden  bracelets  and  with  pearls,  and  their
raiment  therein  shall  be  of  silk  :

For  they  were  guided  to  the  best  of  words  ;  and  were
guided  to  the  glorious  path  !

Verily  those  who  believe  not,  and  seduce  others  from
the  way  of  God,  and  from  the  Holy  Mosque  which
We  have  appointed  to  all  men,  alike  for  those  who
abide  therein,  and  for  the  stranger  ;

And  him  who  seeketh  impiously  to  profane  it,  We  will
cause  to  taste  a  grievous  punishment.
^  And  call  to  mind  when  We  assigned  the  site  of  the
House  ^  to  Abraham  and  said  :  ''  Unite  not  aught
with  Me  in  worship,  and  purify  My  House  for
those  who  go  in  procession  round  it,  and  who
stand  or  bow  in  worship  :" —

And  proclaim  to  the  peoples  a  PILGRIMAGE  :  Let
them  come  to  thee  on  foot  and  on  every  fleet''
C5*»'-    ' J  arriving  by  every  deep  defile  :

That  they  may  bear  witness  of  its  benefits  to  them,  and
may  make  mention  of  God's  name  on  the  ap-
pointed days  ^  over  the  brute  beasts  with  which
He  hath  supplied  them/b?-  sustenance  :  Therefore
eat  thereof  yourselves,  and  feed  the  needy,  the
poor  :
30  Then  let  them  bring  the  neglect  of  their  persons  to  a
close  ■*  and  pay  their  vows,  and  go  in  circuit  round
the  ancient  House.

This  do.  And  for  him  that  holdeth  in  honour  the  sacred

'  The  Kaaba.  Sharastani  informs  us  that  there  was  an  opinion  pre-
valent among  the  Arabs  that  the  walking  round  the  Kaaba  and  other
ceremonies  were  symbolic  of  the  motion  of  the  planets  and  of  other
astronomical  facts.  Watwat,  Mabahij  al  Fikr.  lib.  i.  c.  2,  says  that  "  most
Arabic  tribes  were  originally  star-worshippers,  Sabeans.  The  people  of
Saba  worshipped  the  sun,  the  tribes  of  Asad  and  Kaninah  the  moon,  etc.
etc.  At  a  later  period  they  all  sunk  into  idolatry,  and  in  the  time  of
Muhammad  the  idols  round  the  Kaaba  amounted  to  360,"  one  for  each
day  of  the  year.

^  Lit.  thin,  with  the  implied  sense  of  fleet.

'  The  ten  first  days  of  the  Dhu'lhajja.  For  the  ceremonies,  see  Frey-
tag's  Einleitung,  p.  418  ;  Burton's  Pilgrimage,  vol.  iii.  ;  Sale's  Notes  and
Preliminary  Discourse.

■*  i.  e.  the  uncut  beards,  nails,  etc.

)

504(  THE    KORAN.

ordinances  of  God,  it  shall  be  well  with  his  Lord.
The  /6>s//  of  cattle  is  allowed  you,  save  of  those
already  specified  for  you.  Shun  ye  therefore  the
pollution  of  idols,  and  shun  ye  the  word  of  falsehood;

Sound  in  faith  ^  Godward,  uniting  no  god  with  Him ;
for  whoever  uniteth  gods  with  God,  is  like  that
which  falleth  from  on  high,  and  the  birds  snatch
it  away,  or  the  wind  bloweth  it  away  to  a  distant
place.

This  do.  And  whoso  holdeth  in  honour  the  offerings
made  to  God,  doth  so  verily  from  piety  of  the  heart.

Ye  may  obtain  advantages  from  the  cattle  up  to  the  set
time  for  slaijing  them  :  then,  the  place  for  sacri-
ficing them  is  at  the  ancient  House.

And  to  every  people  have  We  appointed  rites,  that  they
may  commemorate  the  name  of  God  over  the  brute
beasts  which  He  hath  provided  for  them.  And
your  God  is  the  one  God.  To  Him,  therefore,  sur-
render yourselves  :  and  bear  thou  good  tidings  to
those  who  humble  themselves, —

Whose  hearts,  when  mention  is  made  of  God,  thrill
with  awe  ;  and  to  those  who  remain  steadfast  under
all  that  befalleth  them,  and  perform  the  prayers,
and  give  alms  of  that  with  which  We  have  supplied
them.

And  the  camels  have  We  appointed  you  for  the  sacri-
fices to  God  :  much  good  have  ye  in  them.  Make
mention,  therefore,  of  the  name  of  God  over  them
when  ye  slay  them,  as  they  stand  with  three  feet
on  the  ground  and  one  forefooot  tied  up ;  *  and
when  they  are  fallen  over,  eat  of  them,  and  feed
him  who  asketh  humbly,  and  him  who  asketh  not,
though  poor.  Thus  have  We  subjected  them  to
you  :   Haply  ye  will  be  thankful.''

»  Lit.  Hanyfs,  p.  216,  n.

'  This  is  expressed  in  the  original  by  a  single  word,  which  literally
means  a  rniu.

'  Offerings  of  animals  are  by  no  means  confined  to  Mecca  and  the  Pil-
grimage. "  It  is  not  uncommon,  "  says  Mr.  Lane,  "without  any  definite
view  but  that  of  obtaining  general  blessings,  to  make  vows  (of  animals)  ;
and  sometimes  a  peasant  vows  that  he  will  sacrifice,  for  the  sake  of  a
saint,  a  calf  which  he  possesses,  as  soon  as  it  is  grown  and  fatted.  It  is
let  loose,  by  consent  of  all  his  neighbours,  to  pasture  where  it  will,  even
in  fields  of  young  wheat ;  and  at  last,  after  it  has  been  sacrificed,  a  public
feast  is  made  of  Its  meat.  Many  a  large  bull  is  thus  given  away"  (Mo-
dern Egyptians,  i.  307).  Compare  Dr.  Gobat's  Abyssinia,  p.  294,  7,  for
similar  customs  among  Christians  of  probably  Arabian  extraction.     Five

TIIK    KORAN.  505

By  no  means  can  their  flesh  reach  unto  God,  neither
their  blood ;  but  piety  on  your  part  reacheth  Him.
Thus  hath  He  subjected  them  to  you,  that  ye  might
magnify  God  for  his  guidance  :  and,  announce  glad
tidings  to  the  doers  ot"  good.

Verily  God  will  ward   off  mischief  from  believers  :   lo^,
God  loveth  not  the  false,  the  unbeliever.
40^  A  sanction   is  given  to  those  who,  because  they  have
suffered  outrages,  have  taken  up  arms  ;  and  verily,
God  is  well  able  to  succour  them —

Those  who  have  been  driven  forth  from  their  homes
wrongfully,  only  becaus''  they  say,  "  Our  Lord  is
the  God.^'  And  if  God  had  not  repelled  some  men
by  others,  cloisters  and  churches  and  oratories  and
mosques  wherein  the  name  of  God  is  ever  com-
memorated, would  surely  have  been  destroyed !
And  him  who  helpetli  God  will  God  surely  help  :  ^
Verily,  God  is  Strong,  Mighty  : —

Those  who,  if  We  stablish  them  in  this  land,  will  ob-
serve prayer  and  pay  the  alms  of  obligation  and
enjoin  what  is  recognized  as  right,  and  forbid  Avliat
is  unlawful.      And  the   final  issue  of  all  things  is

%  Moreover,  if  they  charge  thee  with  imposture,  then
already,  before  them,  the  people  of  Noah,  and  Ad
and  Thamood,  and  the  people  of  Abraham,  and  the
people  of  Lot,  and  the  dwellers  in  Madian,  have
charged  their  prophets  with  imposture  !  Moses
too  was  charged  with  imposture  !  And  I  bore
long  with  ^  the  unbelievers,  then  chastised  them,
and  how  great  was  the  change  I  wrought !

And  how  many  cities  which  had  acted  wickedly  have
We  destroyed,  and  they  are  laid  low  in  rnin  on  their
own  foundations,  and  wells  abandoned  and  lofty
castles  !

Have  they  not  then  journeyed  through  the  land  ?  Have
they  not  hearts  to  understand  with,  or  ears  to  hear
with  ?  But  it  is  not  verily  that  their  eyes  are  blind,
but  the  hearts  that  are  in  their  breasts  are  blind  !

or  six  thousand  animals  are  said  to  have  been  slain  in  the  valley  of  Mina
by  the  pilc^rims  of  the  year  1854.  (See  Capt.  Burton's  PilKriman;e,  iii.
p.  313.)  The  victim  is  considered  by  the  devout  as  an  expression  of  their
conviction  that  death  is  their  desert  at  the  hands  of  God.

'  See  Ibn  Batoutah,  iv.  106  (Par.  ed.).

'  Lit.  respited,  or  gTanted  a  long  life  to.

506  THE    KORAN.

And  they  will  bid  thee  to  hasten  the  chastisement :  but
God  cannot  tail  his  threat,  and  verily,  a  day  with
thy  Lord  is  as  a  thousand  years  ^  of  those  which  ye
reckon !

And  with  how  many  cities  have  I  lonf^  borne,  wicked
though  they  were,  then  chastised  them  !  And  unto
Me  shall  all  return.

Say  :  0  men  !   I  am  only  your  open  warner ;

And   they  who   believe    and  do    the    things  that  are
right,  shall  have  forgiveness   and  an  honourable
provision ;
oO     But  they  who  strive   to  invalidate   our  signs   shall  be
inmates  of  Hell.

Nor  have  We  sent  any  apostle  or  prophet  before  thee,
among  whose  desires  -  Satan  injected  not  some
tvrong  desire,  but  God  shall  bring  to  naught  that
which  Satan  had  suggested.  Then  shall  God  affirm
His  revelations  :  ^  for  God  is  Knowing,  Wise  ! —

That  He  may  make  that  which  Satan  hath  injected,  a
trial  to  those  in  whose  hearts  is  a  disease,  and
whose  hearts  are  hardened. — And  verily,  the
wicked  are  in  a  far-gone  severance /rom  the  truth!

And  that  they  to  whom  "  the  Knowledge  "  hath  been
given  may  know  that  the  Koran  is  the  truth  from
thy  Lord,  and  may  believe  in  it,  and  their  hearts
may  acquiesce  in  it :  and  of  a  truth  God  is  surely
the  guider  of  those  who  believe,  into  the  right  path.

But  the  unbelievers  will  not  cease  to  doubt  concerning
it,  until  "  the  Hour  "  come  suddenly  upon  them,
or  until  the  chastisement  of  the  day  of  desolation  *
come  upon  them.

On  that  day  the  Kingdom  shall  be  God's  :  He  shall
judge  between  them  :  and  they  who  have  believed
and  done  the  things  that  are  right,  shall  be  in
gardens  of  delight :

But  they  who  disbelieved  and  treated  our  signs  as  lies
— these  then — a  shameful  chastisement  awaiteth
them  !

And  as  to  those  who  fled  their  country  for  the  cause  of

'  Comp.  Sur.  xxxii.  4,  p.  193.

'  Or,  readings.     Vide  Sale's  note,  vol.  ii.  p.  168.

'  The  ayats,  sipis  or  verses  of  the  Koriiii.  It  is  said  by  tradition  that
Muhammad  was  consoled  by  this  revelation  for  the  Satanic  sujfgestion
mentioned  Sur.  liii.  20,  p.  65,  n.  But  in  this  view  of  the  text,  for  among
whose  desires  or  affections,  we  should  render  tchen  he  recited. — Thus  Mar.

*  Lit.  barren  or  grievous  day.

TIIF.    KOKAN.  507

God,  and  were  afterwards  slaiu,  or  died,  surely  with
goodly  provision  will  God  provide  for  them  !  for
verily,  God  is  the  best  of  providei'S  !

He  will  assuredly  bring  them  in  ^  with  an  in-bringing
that  shall  please  them  well :  for  verily,  God  is
Knowing,  Gracious.

So  shall  it  be.  And  whoever  in  making  exact  reprisal
for  injury  done  him  shall  again  be  wronged,  God
will  assuredly  aid  him  :  of  a  truth  God  is  Merciful,
Forafivinor.
60  So  shall  it  be  ;  for  that  God  cr  asetli  the  night  to  enter
in  upon  the  day,  and  He  causeth  the  day  to  enter  in
upon  the  night :  and  for  that  God  Heareth,  Seeth.

So  shall  ic  be,  for  that  God  is  the  truth;  and  because
what  they  call  on  beside  Him  is  vanity :  and
because  God  is  the  Lofty,  the  Mighty  !

Seest  thou  not  that  God  sendeth  down  water  from
Heaven,  and  that  on  the  morrow  the  earth  is  clad
with  verdure  ?  aye  God  is  benignant,  cognizant  of
all

His,  all  in  the  Heavens  and  all  on  Earth  :  and  verily,
God  !   He  is  the  Rich,  the  Praiseworthy  !

Seest  ''  .  not  that  God  hath  subjected  to  you  whatever
is  in  the  earth  ;  and  the  ships  which  traverse  the
sea  at  his  bidding  ?  And  He  holdcth  back  the
heaven  that  it  fill  not  on  the  earth,  unless  He
permit  it !  Verily  God  is  Gracious  to  mankind,
Merciful.

And  He  it  is  who  hath  given  you  life,  then  will  cause
you  to  die,  then  will  give  you  life — of  a  truth  man
is  ungrateful.

To  every  people  have  We  appointed  observances  which
they  observe.  Thei'efore,  let  them  not  dispute
this  matter  with  thee,  but  bid  them  to  thy  Lord  :
Verily  thou  art  on  the  right  way  :

But  if  they  debate  with  thee,  then  Say  :  God  best
knoweth  what  ye  do  !

God  will  judge  between  you  on  the  day  of  Resurrection,
as  to  the  matters  wherein  ye  differ.

Knowest  thou  not  that  God  knoweth  whatever  is  in  the
Heaven  and  on  the  Earth  ?     This   truly  is  written
in  the  Book :  this  truly  is  easy  for  God.
70     Moreover  they  worship  beside  God,  that  for  which  He

'  i.e.  into  Paradise.

508  THE    KORAN.

hath  sent  down  no  warranty,  and  that  of  which
they  have  no  knowledge  :  but  for  those  who  do  this
wrong,  no  helper !

And  when  our  verses  are  rehearsed  to  them  as  clear
proofs,  thou  perceivest  displeasure  in  the  counte-
nances of  those  who  disbelieve.  Scarce  can  they
refrain  from  rushing  to  attack  those  who  rehearse
our  verses  to  them  !  Say  :  Shall  I  tell  you  of
worse  than  this  ?  The  fire  which  God  hath  threat-
ened to  those  who  believe  not !  And  wretched  the
passage  thither !

O  men  !  a  parable  is  set  forth  to  you,  wherefore  hearken
to  it.  Verily,  they  on  whom  ye  call  beside  God,
could  by  no  means  create  a  fly,  though  they  assem-
bled for  it ;  and  were  the  fly  to  carry  off  aught  from
them,  they  could  not  take  it  away  from  it  !  Weak
the  suppliant  and  the  supplicated  !

Unworthy  the  estimate  they  form  of  God  !  '  Verily,
God  is  Powerful,  Mighty!

God  choseth  messengers  from  among  the  angels  and
from  among  men  :  verily,  God  Heareth,  Seeth.

He  knoweth  what  is  before  them  and  what  is  behind
them ;  and  unto  God  shall  all  things  return.

Believers  !  bow  down  and  prostrate  yourselves  and
worship  your  Lord,  and  work  righteousness.  Haply
ye  shall  fare  well ;

And  do  valiantly  in  the  cause  of  God  as  it  behoveth  you
to  do  for  Him.  He  hath  elected  you,  and  hath
not  laid  on  you  any  hardship  in  religion,  the  Faith
of  your  father  Abraham.  He  hath  named  you  the
Muslims,

Heretofore  and  in  this  Book,  that  the  Apostle  may  be  a
witness  against  you,  and  that  ye  may  bo  witnesses
against  the  rest  of  mankind.  Therefore  observe
prayer,  and  give  alms,  and  cleave  fast  to  God.  He
is  your  liege  liord — excellent  the  Lord,  and  excel-
lent the  Helper  !

'  Lit.  they  measure  not  God  ivith  truth  of  his  measurement.

TH?:  korAn.  ^>(^9

[CVIII.]

SURA  XLYIII.— THE  VICTORY.
Medina. — 29  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compasnonate,  the  Merciful.

Verily,  We  have  won  for  thee  an  undoubted
VICTORY  1—

In  token  that  God  forgiveth  thy  earlier  and  later  faults,
and  fulfilleth  his  goodness  to  thee,  and  guideth
thee  on  the  right  way.

And  that  God  succoureth  thee  with  a  mighty  succour.

He  it  is  who  sent  down  a  spirit  of  secure  repose^  into
the  hearts  of  the  faithful  that  they  might  add  faith
to  their  faith, ^  (for  God's  are  the  armies  of  the
P'  .ns  and  of  the  Earth;  and  God  is  All-knowing,
All-wise  :)

That  He  might  bring  the  believing  men  and  the  be-
lieving women  into  gardens  ^neath  whose  trees  the
rivers  flow,  to  dwell  therein  for  ever,  and  that  He
might  cancel  their  evil  deeds  :  and  this  is  the  great
bliss  with  God  :

And  that  He  might  punish  the  hypocritical  men  and
the  hypocritical  women,  and  the  men  and  women
who  join  other  gods  with  God,  aud  think  evil
thousfhts  of  Him.  Theirs  shall  he  a  round  of  evil :
and  God  is  angry  with  them  and  hath  cursed  them,
and  hath  prepared  Hell  for  them  :  and,  an  evil
journey  thither  !

The  armies  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  are  God's,
and  God  is  Mighty,  Wise  !

'  This  Sura  was  probably  revealed  shortly  after  the  peace  of  Hudaibiya,
Ann.  Hej.  6.  Some  commentators,  however,  understand  the  Victory  of
the  taking  of  Mecca  two  years  later— the  preterite  being  used  in  the  pro-
phetic style  for  the  future  —  others  of  the  taking  of  Chaibar,  or  Muta,  a
town  of  the  Roman  empire.

*  Lit.  who  sent  tranquillity.

'  Lit.  that  they  might  increase  faith  with  their  faith.

OIO  '■^E    KOKAN.

Verily,  We  have  seut  thee  to  be  a  witness  and  a  herald
of  good,  and  a  warner.

That  ye  may  believe  on  God  and  on  his  Apostle ;  and
may  assist  Him,  and  honour  Him,  and  praise  Him,
morning  and  evening.
10  In  truth,  they  who  plight  fealty  ^  to  thee,  really  plight
that  fealty  to  God :  the  hand  of  God  is  over  their
hands  !  Whoever  therefore  breaketh  his  oath,
only  breaketh  it  to  his  own  hurt ;  but  whoever  is
true  to  his  engagement  with  God,  He  will  in  that
case  give  him  a  great  reward.
%  The  Arabs  who  took  not  the  field  with  you,^  will  say
to  thee,'  "  We  were  engaged  with  *  our  property,
and  our  families ;  therefore  ask  thou  pardon  for
us."  They  speak  with  their  tongues  what  is  not
in  their  hearts.  Say  :  And  who  hath  any  power
to  prevail  for  you  with  God,  whether  He  will  you
some  loss,  or  whether  He  will  you  an  advantage  ?
Nay,  God  is  acquainted  with  your  doings —

Nay,  ye  thought  that  the  Apostle  and  the  ftiithful  could
by  no  means  come  back  to  their  families;  and  ye
were  pleased  in  your  hearts  at  this;  ^  and  ye  thought
an  evil  thought  of  tins  expedition,  and  ye  became
an  undone  people:

For,  whoso  believeth   not  in  God  and  his  Apostle

Verily  then.  We  have  got  ready  the  flame  for  the
unbelievers  !

And  God's  is  the  kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the
Earth  ;  AVhom  He  will  He  forgiveth,  and  whom  He
will  He  punisheth  :  and  God  is  Gracious,  Merciful !

They  who  took  not  the  field  with  you  will  say,  when  ye
go  forth  to  the  spoil  to  take  it,  "  Let  us  follow  you.''
Fain  would  they  change  the  word  of  God.^  Say  :
Ye  shall  by  no  means  follow  us:  thus  hath  God  said
already.  They  will  say  then,  "  Nay,  ye  are  jealous
of  us."  Nay  !  they  are  men  of  but  little  under-
standing.

Say  to  those  Arabs  of  the  desert,  who  took  not  the  field,

'  The  Ar.  word  implies  the  making  a  contract  by  striking  hands.

'  Lit.  were  left  behind.

^  On  the  return  to  Medina.     See  Weil's  Leben  M.  p.  173,  n.

*  Lit.  occufied  us.

*  Lit.  this  tras  made  to  appear  pleasing  in  yovr  hearts.

'  The  law  relative  to  booty,  viz.  that  those  who  were  not  at  Hudaibij'a
should  have  no  share  in  the  booty  to  be  obtained  from  the  Jews  at  Chai-
bar.     Muhammad  marched  against  them  in  Hej.  7.

THE    KORAN.  ol  1

Ye  shall  be  called  forth  against  a  people  of  mighty
valour.  Ye  shall  do  battle  with  them,  or  they  shall
profess  Islam.  If  therefore  ye  obey,  a  goodly  re-
compense will  God  give  you ;  but  if  ye  turn  back
as  ye  turned  back  aforetime,  He  will  chastise  you
with  a  sore  chastisement.
%  It  shall  be  no  crime  on  the  part  of  the  blind,  the  lame,
or  the  sick,  if  they  go  not  to  the  fight.  But  whoso
obeyeth  God  and  his  Apostle,  He  shall  bring  him
into  the  gardens  'neath  whi-^ih  the  rivers  flow  :  but
whoso  turneth  back,  He  will  punish  him  with  a  sore
punishment.

"Well  pleased  now  hath  God  been  with  the  believers
when  they  plighted  fealty  to  thee  under  the  tree  ;  ^
and  He  knew  what  was  in  their  hearts :  therefore
did  He  send  down  upon  them  a  spirit  of  secure
repose,  and  rewarded  them  with  a  speedy  victory.

And  with  the  rich  booty  which  they  took :  for  God  is
Mighty,  AVise  !
20  God  promised  you  the  taking  of  a  rich  booty  -  and  sped
it  to  you ;  and  He  withheld  men^s  hands  from  you,
for  a  sign  to  the  faithful,  and  that  He  might  guide
you  along  the  right  way : —

And  c  hoot  I/,   over  which  ye  had  not  power:  but

now  hath  God   compassed  it  for  you ;   for  God  is
over  all  things  Potent.

If  the  unbelievers  (Meccans)  fight  against  you,  they
shall  assuredly  turn  their  backs  ;  then,  neither  pro-
tector nor  helper  shall  they  find  !

Such  is  God^s  method  carried  into  efl^ect  of  old  :  and  no
change  canst  thou  find  in  God's  mode  of  dealing.

And  He  it  was  who  held  their  hands  from  you  and  your
hands  from  them  in  the  valley  of  Mecca,'^  after  that
He  had  given  you  the  victory  over  them  :  for  God
saw  what  ye  did.

These  are  they  who  believed  not,  and  kept  you  away
from  the  sacred  !Mosque,  as  well  as  the  offering
which  was  prevented   from  reaching  the  place  of

'  When  the  rumour  reached  Muhammad  at  Hudaibiya  that  Othman
Ibn  Affan,  whom  he  had  sent  to  inform  the  Meccans  that  he  was  merely
coming  to  visit  their  temple,  and  with  peaceable  intentions,  had  been  slain
by  them.  ^  At  Chaibar.

^  The  valley  (or  interior  part,  lit.  belly)  of  Mecca  may  mean  Hudaibiya.
But  the  commentators  explain  this  verse  of  different  events.  It  probably,
however,  refers  to  the  50  (according  to  Djalalein  80)  prisoners  whom
Muhammad  dismissed  freely  at  Hudaibiya.

512  Th/ KORAN.

sacrifice.     And  had  it  not  been  tliat  ye  would  have
trodden  down  believers  both  men  and  women  whom
ye  could  not  recognize,  so  that  guilt  might  have
lighted  on  you  without  your  knowledge,  on  their
account,  and  that  God  would  bring  whom  He  will
within  his  mercy,  tJiis  woidd  have  been  otherwise
ordered.     Had   they   been  apart,^  We  had  surely
punished  such  of  them  as  believed  not,  with  a  sore
punishment.
When  the  unbelievers  had  fostered  rage  in  their  hearts
— the  rage  of  ignorance  (of  unbelief) — God  there-
fore sent  down  his  peace  on  his  Apostle  and  on
the  faithful,  and   fixed   firmly  in  tlaem  the  word
of  piety,  for  they  were  most  worthy  and  deserving
of  it :  and  God  hath  knowledge  of  all  things.
Now  hath  God  in  truth  made  good  to  his  Apostle  the
night- vision  -  in  which  He  said,  "  Ye  shall  surely
enter  the  sacred  Mosque,  if  God  will,  in  full  security,
having  your  heads  shaved  and   your  hair  cut :  ye
shall  not  fear ;  for  He  knoweth  what  ye  know  not ;
and  He  hath  ordained  you,  beside  this,  a  speedy
victory.'^
It  is  He  who  hath  sent  his  Apostle  with   "  the  Guid-
ance,^^  and  the  religion  of  truth,  that  He  may  make
it  victorious  over  every  other  religion.   And  of  this
God  is  a  sufficient  witness.
Muhammad  is  the  Apostle  of  God ;   and  his  comrades
are  most  vehement  against  unbelievers,  hut  full  of
tenderness  among  themselves.     Thou  mayst  see
them   bowing  down,   prostrating  themselves,  im-
ploring favours  from   God  and  his  good  pleasure
in  them.  Their  tokens  ^  are  on  their  faces,  the  traces
of  their  prostrations.     This  is  their  picture  in  the
Law,  and  their  picture  in  the  Evangel  * — they  are
as  the  seed  which  putteth  forth  its    stalk ;    and
strcngtheneth  it,  and  it  groweth  stout,  and  riseth
upon   its  stcm,^  rejoicing  the  sowers — to   incense

'  Had  the  believers  been  separate  from  the  infidels.

'  This  dream  Mnhiuninad  had  at  Medina,  before  he  set  out  for  Al  Hu-
daibiya.  His  followers  expected  its  fulfilment  within  the  year,  but  when
the  truce  frustrated  their  hopes,  this  verse  was  revealed  to  pacify  them.

'  Dust  from  the  pavement.  The  Muhammadans  who  say  their  prayers
on  carpets  often  place  little  bricks  before  them  which  they  touch  in  pro-
stration with  their  forehead.

*  Com  p.  Mark  iv.  28.  ^  Lit.  legs.

THE    KORAN.  513

unbelievers  by  their  tneans.  To  such  of  them  as
believe  and  do  good  works,  hath  God  promised
forgiveness  and  a  noble  recompense.

[CIX.]

SURA  LXVI.— THE  FO^RBIDDING.
Medina. — 12  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Gompassionate,  the  Merciful.

Why,i  0  Prophet !  dost  thou  FORBID  that  which  God
hath  made  lawful  to  thee,  from  a  desire  to  please
thy  wives  ?     But  God  is  Lenient,  Merciful !

God  truly  hath  allowed  you  release  from  your  oaths ;  and
God  is  your  master  :  and  He  is  the  Knowing,  Wise.

When  **■ "  Prophet  told  a  recent  occurrence  as  a  secret
lo  one  of  his  wives,  and  when  she  divulged  it  and
God  informed  him  of  this,  he  acquainted  her  with
part  and  withheld  part.-  And  when  he  taxed  her
with  it,  she  said,  "  Who  imparted  this  to  thee  ?  "
He  said,  "The  All-knowing,  the  Wise,  told  it
me.

"  If  ye  both^  be  turned  to  God  in  penitence,  for  now
have  your  hearts  gone  astray  ....  *  but  if  ye  assist
one  another  against  the  Prophet,  then  verily,  God
is  his  Protector,  and  Gabriel,  and  every  just  man
among  the  faithful :  and  the  angels  are  his  helpers
besides.

'  The  first  verses  of  this  Sura  were  revealed  (Hej.  7)  on  occasion  oi
Muhamniivd's  reviving  afifection  for  Mary,  a  Copt  slave  sent  him  by  the
goveraor  of  Egypt,  from  whom  he  had  recently  (verse  3)  sworn  to  his  wife
Hafsa  to  separate  entirely.  Hafsa,  who  had  been  greatly  incensed  at  their
amour,  of  which  Muhammad  had  himself  informed  her,  communicated  the
matter  in  confidence  to  Ayesha,  from  whose  altered  manner,  probably,  the
Prophet  found  that  his  secret  had  been  betrayed.  To  free  Muhammad  from
his  obligation  to  Hafsa  was  the  object  of  this  chapter.

'  Muhammad  withheld  part  of  his  information,  but  taxed  Hafsa  Avith
not  having  kept  his  secret.  '  Ayesha  and  Hafsa.

*  Supply,  God  will  pardon  you.

2    L

51  i  TH^/ KORAN.

"  Haply  if  he  put  you  both  away,  his  Lord  will  give  hiui
in  exchange  other  wives  better  than  you,  Muslims,
believers,  devout,  penitent,  worshippers,  observant
of  fasting,  known  of  man;  and  virgins/'
^  0  Believers  !  save  yourselves  and  your  families  from
the  fire  whose  fuel  is  men  and  stones,  over  which
are  set  angels  fiei'co  and  mighty  who  disobey  not
God  in  what  He  hath  commanded  them,  but  execute
his  behests.

0  ye  Infidels  !  make  no  excuses  for  yourselves  this  day;
ye  shall  only  be  recompensed  according  to  your
works.

0  Believers  !  turn  to  God  with  the  turning  of  true
repentance ;  haply  your  Lord  Avill  cancel  your  evil
deeds,  and  will  bring  you  into  the  gardens  'neath
which  the  rivers  flow,  on  the  day  when  God  will
not  shame  the  Prophet,  nor  those  who  have  shared
his  faith  :  their  light  shall  run  before  them,  and  on
their  right  hands  !  they  shall  say,  ''  Lord,  perfect
our  light,  and  pardon  us :  Verily  thou  hast  power
over  all  things.'^

O  Prophet  !  make  war  on  the  infidels  and  hypocrites,
and  deal  rigorously  with  them.  Hell  their  abode!
and  wretched  the  passage  to  it !
10  God  setteth  forth  as  an  example  to  unbelievers  the  wife
of  Noah  and  the  wife  of  Lot;  they  were  under  two  of
our  righteous  servants,  both  of  whom  they  deceived:
but  their  husbands  availed  them  nought  against
God  :  and  it  shall  be  said,  ''  Enter  ye  into  the  fire
with  those  who  enter.''

God  also  holdeth  forth  to  those  who  believe  the  example
of  the  wife  of  Pharaoh,^  when  she  said,  "  Lord,
build  me  a  mansion  with  thee  in  Paradise,  and
deliver  me  from  Pharaoh  and  his  doings ;  and
deliver  me  from  the  wicked :  "

And  Mary,  the  daughter  of  Imran,  ever  Virgin,  and
into  whose  womb  ^  we  breathed  of  our  spirit,  and
who  believed  in  the  words  of  her  Lord  and  his
Scriptures,  and  was  one  of  the  devout.

'  Asia,  a  name,  perhaps,  corrupted  from  that  of  Pharaoh's  daughter
Bithiah  (1  Chron.  iv.  18).

'  See  Sura  xxi.  91.  Lit.  qucB  rimam  suam  tuita  est,  in  qtiam  {rvmam)
inflavimus  Spiritus  nostri  partem.     Thus  Beidh.

THE    KORAN.  51

i>

[OX,]

SURA'  LX.-SHE  WHO  IS  TRIED.
Medina. — 13  Verses.

7)1  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

O  YE  who  believe  !  take  not  my  foe  ~  and  your  foe
for  friends  :  ye  show  them  tindness,  although  they
believe  not  that  truth  which  hath  come  to  you  :
they  drive  forth  the  Apostle  and  yourselves  be-
cause ye  believe  in  God  your  Lord  !  If  when  ye
go  forth  to  fight  on  my  path,  and  from  a  desire
to  please  Me,  ye  show  them  kindness  in  private,
then  I  well  know  what  ye  conceal,  and  what  ye
^'  /er!  And  whoso  of  you  doth  this  hath  verily
therefore  gone  astray  from  the  even  way.

If  they  catch  you,  they  will  prove  your  foes  :  hand  and
tongue  will  they  put  forth  for  your  hurt,^  and  de-
sire that  you  become  infidels  again.

Neither  your  kindred  nor  your  children  shall  at  all
avail  you  on  the  day  of  the  Resurrection.  A  seve-
rance between  you  will  it  make  !  and  your  actions
doth  God  behold.

A  good  example  had  ye  in  Abraham,*  and  in  those  who

'  Revealed  probably  as  far  as  verse  9  (Ramadlian  Hej.  8)  shortly  before
the  taking  of  Mecca.

'  Haleb  Ben  Abu  Baltaa  had  informed  the  Koreish  of  an  intended  sur-
prise of  Mecca  on  the  part  of  Muhammad,  with  the  view  of  uiakincj  terms
for  his  own  family,  who  had  been  left  there.  The  offence  was  pardoned,
but  the  revelation  was  nevertheless  published  with  the  view  of  preventing
similar  acts  of  treachery  in  future.

'  Lit.  \nth  evil.

*  Speaking  of  the  representatives  of  the  different  relij,aou3  systems  pre-
valent in  the  Roman  Empire,  as  Orpheus,  Abraham,  Christ,  Apollonius  of
Tyana,  enshrined  among  the  household  deities  of  Alexander  Severus,  Mr.
^iilman  remarks  (Hist,  of  Christianity,  ii.  p.  231)  that  "  it  is  singular  that
Abraham,  rather  than  Moses,  was  placed  at  the  head  of  Judaism  :  it  is
possible  that  the  traditionary  sanctitv  which  attached  to  the  first  parent

2  L  2

516  TiE    KORAN.

followed  him,  wlien  they  said  to  their  people,
"  Verily,  we  are  clear  of  you  and  of  what  ye  wor-
ship beside  God  :  we  renounce  you  :  and  between
us  and  you  hath  hatred  and  enmity  sprung  up  for
ever,  until  ye  believe  in  God  alone."  Yet  imitate
not  the  laneruage  of  Abraham  to  his  father,  *'  I
will  assuredly  pray  for  thy  forgiveness,  but  not
aught  shall  I  obtain  for  thee  from  God."  ^  O  our
Lord  !  in  Thee  do  we  trust  !  to  Thee  do  we  turn  !
to  Thee  do  we  come  back.

O  our  Lord  !  expose  us  not  for  trial  to  the  unbelievers,
and  forgive  us  :  verily  Thou  art  the  Mighty,  the
Wise!

A  good  example  even  now  had  ye  in  them,  for  all  who
hope  in  God  and  in  the  last  day.  But  let  who
will  turn  back,  God  truly  is  the  Rich,  the  Praise-
worthy !

God  will  perhaps  establish  goodwill  between  your-
selves and  those  of  them  with  whom  ye  are  at
enmity .'^  And  God  is  Powerful :  and  God  is  Gra-
cious, Merciful.

God  doth  not  forbid  you  to  deal  with  kindness  and
fairness  towards  those  who  have  not  made  war
upon  you  on  account  of  your  religion,  or  driven
you  forth  from  your  homes  :  verily  God  loveth
those  who  act  with  fairness.

Only  doth  God  forbid  you  to  make  friends  of  those  who,
gn  account  of  your  religion,  have  warred  against
you,  and  have  driven  you  forth  from  your  homes,
and  have  aided  your  expulsion :  and  whoever
maketh  friends  of  them,  these  therefore  are  evil-
doers.
10  O  Believers ! '  when  believing  women  come  over  to
you  as  refugees  (Mohadjers),  then  make  TRIAL
of  them.  God  best  knoweth  their  faith;  but  if
ye  have  also  ascertained  them  to  be  believers,
let  them  not  go  back  to  the  unbelievers ;  they  are

of  the  Jewish  people  and  of  many  of  the  Arab  tribes,  and  which  was  after-
wards embodied  in  the  Koran,  was  fioatin^f  in  the  East,  and  would  com-
prehend, as  it  were,  the  opinions,  not  only  of  the  Jews,  but  of  a  much
wider  circle  of  the  Syrian  natives."

'  Sura  [cxiii.]  ix.  115.

*  i.e.  by  their  conversion  hereafter.

'  Said  (see  Nold.  p.  163)  to  have  been  revealed  at,  or  shortly  after,  the
peace  of  Hudaibiya.  According  to  the  terms  then  agreed  upon,  a  mutual
restitution  of  property  was  to  take  place.

THE    KOKAN.

517

not  lawful  for  them,  nor  are  the  unbelievers  lawful
for  these  women.  But  give  them  back  what  they
have  spent /or  their  dowers ;  and  no  crime  shall  it
be  in  you  to  marry  them,  provided  ye  give  them
their  dowers.  Do  not  retain  any  right  in  the
infidel  women,  but  demand  back  what  you  have
spent  for  their  dowers,  and  let  the  unbelievers  de-
mand back  what  they  have  spent  for  their  wives}
This  is  the  ordinance  of  God  which  He  ordaineth
among  you  :  and  God  is  Knowing,  Wise.

And  if  any  of  your  wives  escape  from  you  to  the
unbelievers,  and  ye  succeed  in  turn,  then  give  those
whose  wives  have  gone  away,  the  like  of  what
they  have  spent  for  their  dowers ;  and  fear  God
in  whom  ye  believe.

0  Prophet !  when  believing  women  come  to  thee,  and
pledge  themselves  to  thee  that  they  will  not  asso-
ciate aught  with  God,  and  that  they  will  not  steal  or
commit  adultery,  nor  kill  their  children,  nor  bring
scandalous  charges,-  nor  disobey  thee  in  what  is
right,  then  plight  thou  thy  faith  to  them,  and  ask
pardon  for  them  of  God  :  verily  God  is  Indulgent,
.     .ciful!

0  Believers  !  enter  not  into  amity  with  those  against
whom  God  is  angered  ;  they  truly  despair  of  the
life  to  come,  even  as  the  unbelievers  despair  of  the
inmates  of  the  tombs.

'  Who  are  converted  to  Islam.

'  Lit.  v:ith  a  calumny  ivhich  they  have  devised  hetiveen  their  hands  and
their  feet.  Referring,  probably,  to  illegitimate  children  which  the  women
attempted  to  father  on  their  husbands.  Said  to  have  been  revealed  at  the
taking  of  Mecca. — Tab.    Beidh.

518  THE    KOKAN.

[CXI.]

SURA'  ex.  — HELP.
Medina. — 3  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Gomimssionate,  the  Merciful.

When  the  HELP  of  God  and  the  victory  arrive,

And  thou  seest  men  entering  the  religion  of  God  by

troops  ;
Then  utter  the  praise  of  thy  Lord,  and  implore  his

pardon  ;  verily  He  loveth  to  turn  in  mercy.

[CXIL]

SURA  XLIX.— THE  APARTMENTS.
Medina. — 18  Verses.

In  the  Name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  tJie  Merciful.

0  Believers  !  enter  not  upon  any  affair  ere  God  and
his  Apostle  ^  permit  you ;  and  fear  ye  God :
verily  God  is  one  who  Heareth,  Knoweth.^

0  Believers  !  raise  not  your  voices  above  the  voice  of
the  Prophet,  neither  speak  aloud  to  him,  as  ye
speak  aloud  one  to  another,  lest  your  works  come
to  naught,  and  ye  unaware  of  it.

'  This  Sura  was  revealed  after  the  taking  of  Mecca,  and  is  supposed  to
have  given  Muhammad  warning  of  his  death.

'  Or,  do  not  put  yourselves  forward  ;  take  not  the  lead  of  Ood  and  his
Apostle.

2  All  the  ancient  interpreters  (as  His.  93.3  ff.,  Ibn  Sa'd,  320,  Tab.  Aganf
f.  116  f.— comp.  also  Weil,  244  ff.,  Caussin,  iii.  271)  refer  from  1-5  to
the  disrespectful  demeanour,  in  Muhammad's  presence,  of  the  envoys  of
the  Banu  Tamira  in  Hej.  9  or  10,

THK    KORAN.  519

Verily  they  wlio  lower  tteir  voices  in  the  presence  of
the  Apostle  of  Clod,  are  the  persons  whose  hearts
God  hath  inclined  ^  to  piety.  Foi'giveness  shall  be
theirs  and  a  rich  reward.

Of  a  truth  they  who  call  out  to  thee  while  thou  art
within  -  thine  APARTMENTS,  have  most  of  them
no  right  perception  of  what  is  due  to  thee ;

But  if  they  wait  patiently  till  thou  come  forth  to  them,
it  would  assuredly  be  be^^ter  for  them.  But  God
is  Indulgent,  Merciful.

0  Believers  !  if  any  bad  man  ^  come  to  you  with  news,
clear  it  up  at  once,*  lest  through  ignorance  ye
harm  others,  and  speedily  have  to  repent  of  what
ye  have  done.

And  know  that  an  Apostle  of  God  is  among  you  ?
should  he  give  way  to  you  in  many  matters  ye
would  certainly  become  guilty  of  a  crime.  But
God  had  endeared  the  faith  to  you,  and  hath  given
it  favour  in  your  hearts,  and  hath  made  unbelief
and  wickedness,  and  disobedience  hateful  to  you.
^  Such  are  they  who  pursue  a  right  course,

_hrough  the  bounty  and  grace  which  is  from  God :  and
God  is  one  who  Knoweth,  Wise.

Moreover,  if  two  b^  ^ies  of  the  faithful  are  at  war,  then
make  ye  peace  between  them  :  ^  and  if  the  one  of
them  wrong  the  other,  then  fight  against  the  party
which  doth  the  wrong,  until  they  come  back  to
the  precepts  of  God :  then  if  they  come  back,
make  peace  between  them  with  fairness,  and  act
impai'tially ;  verily  God  loveth  those  who  act  with
impartiality.
10  Only  the  faithful  are  brethren  :  wherefore  make  peace
between  your  brethren,  and  fear  God;  Haply  ye
may  obtain  mercy.

O  Believers  !  let  not  men  laugh  men  to  scorn  who  haply
maybe  better  than  themselves  ;  neither  let  women

'  Lit.  has  made  trial  of  for  piety.  *  Lit.  behind.

'  The  commentators  mentioned  in  the  last  note,  as  well  as  others,  ex-
plain this  verse  of  Al  Walid  ben  Uqba,  who  had  brought  a  felse  report  of
the  refusal  of  the  Banu'lmustiiliq  to  pay  certain  alms  which  Muhammad
had  sent  him  to  demand.  This  Al  Walid  became  govenior  of  Kufa  under
Othman.     He  probably  was  never  really  converted  to  Islam.

*  Lit.  use  discernment.

*  Upon  this  passage  91-2,  die  Muslimen,  says  Noldeke,  verschiedene
Geschichten  erzahlen,  so  dass  sich  Nichts  sicher  bestimmen  lasst  (p.  164).
This  remark  applies  to  the  great  mass  of  Muhammadan  comment.

520  THE  VoR.^N.

laugh  women  to  scorn  who  haply  may  be  better  than
themselves.^    Neither  defame  one  another,  nor  call
one  another  by  nicknames.      Bad  is  it  to  be  called
wicked    after   having  jnofessed  the    faith :  ^    and
whoso  repent  not  of  this  are  doers  of  wrong.
0  Believers  !  avoid  frequent  suspicions,  for  some  sus-
picions are  a  crime  ;  and  pry  not :  neither  lot  the
one  of  you  traduce  another  in  his  absence.  Would
any  one  of  you  like  to  eat  the  flesh  of  his  dead
brother  ?     Surely  ye  would  loathe  it.     And  fear
ye  God :  verily  God  is  Eelenting,  Merciful.
O  men  !  verily  We  have  created  you  of  a  male  and  a
female  ;   and  We   have   divided  you  into  peoples
and  tribes,  that  ye  might  take  knowledge  one  of
another.     Truly,  the  most  worthy  of  honour  in  the
sight  of  God  is  he  who  feareth  Him  most.^  Verily,
God  is  Knowing,  Cognizant.
The  Arabs  of  the  desert  *  say,  "  We  believe."     Say
thou :  Ye  believe  not ;  but  rather  say,  "  We  pro-
fess  Islam  ;  "  for  the  faith  hath  not  yet  found  its
way  into  your  hearts.     But  if  ye  obey  God  and
his  Apostle,  He  will  not  allow  you  to  lose  any  of
your  actions  :  verily  God  is  Indulgent,  Merciful.
The  true  believers  are  those  only  who  believe  in  God
and  his  Apostle,   and  afterwards  doubt  not ;  and
who  contend  with   their  substance  and  their  per-
sons on  the  path  of  God.     These  are  the  sincere.
Say  :  Will  ye  teach  God  about  your  religion  ?  when
God  knoweth  whatever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  on
the  Earth  ?  yea,  God  hath  knowledge  of  all  things.
They  taunt  thee  with  their  having  embraced  Islam.*
Say  :  Taunt  me  not  with  your  having  embraced
Islam  :  rather  will  God  taunt  you  with  his  having
guided  you  to  the  faith  :  acknowledge  this  if  ye  are
sincere.

»  Said  to  refer  to  Safia,  one  of  Muhammad's  wives,  who  had  been  taunted
by  his  other  wives  with  being  a  Jewess.

^  Lit.  Bad  the  name,  vnckednais,  after  faith.

»  i.e.  not  the  most  nobly  born,  like  the  Koreish.  This  verse  is  said  to
have  been  revealed  in  Mecca  on  the  day  of  its  conquest.  See  Weil,  Leben,
p.  .372,  and  n.

*  The  Band  Asad  had  come  to  Medina  in  a  year  of  famine  to  seek  sup-
port for  themselves  and  fiirailies,  and  made  profession  of  Islamiam.— Beidh.
Thus  also  Ibn  Sad.  Tabari.  Wah.

'  As  if  by  so  doing  they  had  conferred  a  ftivour  on  the  Prophet.  The
verb  implies  the  act  of  reproaching  by  reminding  of  favours  conferred.

THE

korAn.  521

Verily^  God  knoweth  tlio  secrets  of  the  Heavens  and  of
the  Earth  :  and  God  beholdeth  what  ye  do.

[CXIII.]

c

SURA  IX.'— IMMUNITY,  or  REPENTANCE.
Medina. — 130  Vei*ses.

An  immunity  from  God  and  his  Apostle  to  those
with  whom  ye  are  in  league^  among  the  Polytheist
Arahs  ! —

Go  ye  therefore  at  large  in  the  land  four  months  :  but
know  that  ye  shall  not  find  God  feeble ;  -  and  that
those  who  believe  not,  God  will  put  to  shame —
y  And  a  proclamation  on  the  part  of  God  and  his  Apostle
to  the  people  on  the  day  of  the  greater  pilgrimage,
that  God  is  free  from  am/  engagement  ivith  those
who  worship  other  gods  with  God,  as  is  his  Apostle  !
If  then,  ye  turn  to  God  it  will  be  better  for  you ;
but  if  ye  turn  back,  then  know  that  ye  shall  not
find  God  feeble :  and  to  those  who  believe  not,
announce  thou  a  grievous  punishment.

But  this  concemeth  not  those  Polytheists  with  whom
ye  are  in  league,  and  who  have  afterwards  in  no
way  failed  you,  and  not  yet  aided  any  one  against
you.  Observe,  therefore,  your  engagement  with
them  through  the  whole  time  of  their  treaty  :
verily  God  loveth  those  who  fear  Him.

And  when  the  sacred  months  ^  are  passed,  kill  those

'  The  "Immunity"  is  said  by  some  commentators  to  have  formed  ori-
ginally one  Sura  with  the  eighth  (p.  410),  and  that  on  this  account  the
usual  formula  of  invocation  is  not  prefixed.  The  Caliph  Othman  accounted
for  this  omission  of  the  Bismillah  from  the  fact  of  this  Sura  having  been
revealed,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  verses,  shortly  before  the  Prophet's
death,  who  left  no  instructions  on  the  subject.  (Mishcat  i.  p.  526.)  The
former  verses,  from  1-12,  or,  accordiing  to  other  traditions,  from  1-40,
were  recited  to  the  pilgrims  at  Mecca  by  Ali,  Ann.  Hej.  9.

'  Or,  that  ye  cannot  tceaken  God,  i. e.  frustrate  his  decree.

^  Shawal,  Dhu'lkaada,  Dhu'lhajja,  Muharram.  These  months  were  ob-
served by  the  Arabians  previous  to  the  time  of  Muhammad.

J

522  THE    KORAN.

who  join  other  gods  with   God   wherever  ye  find
them ;  and  seize  them,  and  besiege  them,  and  lay
wait  for  them    with  every  kind  of  ambush  :  but  if
they  repent  and  observe  prayer  and  pay  the  obli-
gatory alms,  then  let  them  go  their  way  :  verily.
God  is  Gracious,  Merciful.
If  any  one  of  those  who  join  gods  with  God  ask  an
asj^um   of  thee,   grant  him  an  asylum,   in   order
that  he  hear  the  Word  of  God  ;  then  let  him  reach
his  place  of  safety.     This,  for  that  they  are  people
devoid  of  knowledge.
How  can  they  who  add  gods  to  God  be  in  league  with
God  and  with  his  Apostle,  save  those  with  whom
ye  made  a  league  at  the  sacred  temple  ?     So  long
as    they   are    true    to  you,  be  ye  true  to  them :
verily,  God  loveth  those  who  fear  Him.
How  can  they  ?  since  if  they  prevail  against  you,  they
will  not  regard  in  their  dealing  with  you,  either
ties  of  blood  or  good  faith  :     With  their  mouths
they  content  you,  but  their  hearts  are  averse,  and
most  of  them  are  perverse  doers.
They  sell  the  signs  of  God  for  a  mean  price,  and  turn
others  aside   from  his  way  :  of  a  truth,  evil  is  it
that  they  do  1
10     They  respect  not  with  a  believer  either  ties  of  blood  or
good  faith  ;  and  these  are  the  transgressors  !
Yet  if  they  turn  to  God  and  observe  prayer,  and  pay
the  impost,  then  are  they  your  brethren  in  religion :
and  We  make  clear  the  signs  for  men  of  know-
ledge.
But  if,  after  alliance  made,  they  violate  their  covenant
and  revile  your  religion,  then  do  battle  with  the
ringleaders  of  infidelity — verily,  there  is  no  faith
in  them  !     Haply  they  will  desist.
Will  ye  not  do  battle  with  a  people^  who  have  broken
their  covenant  and  aimed  to  expel  your  Apostle
and   attacked   you  first  ?      Will  ye  dread  them  ?
God  truly  is  more  worthy  of  your  fear,  if  ye  are
believers  !
Make  war  on  them  :  By  your  hands  will  God  chastise
them,  and    put    them    to   shame,    and    give  you
victory    over    them,    and    heal    the    bosoms  of  a
people  who  believe ;

'  The  Meccans.

THE    KOKAN.  523

Aud  will  take  away  the  wrath  of  their  hearts.  God
will  turn  relentingly  unto  whom  He  will  :  and
God  is  Knowing,  Wise.

Think  ye  that  ye  shall  be  forsaken,  and  that  God  doth
not  yet  know  those  among  you  who  do  valiantly,
and  take  none  for  their  intimate  friends  beside
God  aud  his  Apostle  and  the  faithful  ?  But  God
is  well  apprised  of  your  doings.

It  is  not  for  the  votaries  of  other  gods  with  God,  wit-
nesses against  themselves  of  infidelity,  to  visit  the
temples  of  God.  These  !  vain  their  works :  and
in  Hell-fire  shall  they  abide  for  ever !

He  only  should  visit  the  temples  of  God  who  believeth
in  God  and  the  last  day,  and  observe th  prayer,
and  payeth  the  legal  alms,  and  dreadeth  none  but
God  :  For  these  are  among  the  rightly  guided.

Do  ye  place  the  giving  drink  to  the  pilgrims,  and  the

visitation  of  the  sacred  temple,^  on  the  same  level

with  him  who  believeth  in  God  and  the  last  day,

and  fighteth  for  the  cause  ~  of    God  ?     They  are

.  not  held  equal  by  God  :  and  God  guideth  not  the

unrighteous.
20     They  who  have  believed,    and  fled  their  homes,   and
striven  with  their  substance  and  with  their  persons
on  tho  path  of  God,  are  of  the  highest  grade  with
God :  and  these  are  they  who  shall  enjoy  felicity  !

Tidings  of  mercy  from  Himself  and  of  his  acceptance
doth  their  Lord  send  them,  and  of  gardens  in
which  lasting  pleasure  shall  be  theirs  ; —

Abiding  therein  for  ever ;  Aye,  God !  with  Him  is  a
great  reward.

O  Believers  !  make  not  friends  of  your  fathers  or  your
brethren  if  they  love  unbelief  above  faith  :  and
whoso  of  you  shall  make  them  his  friends,  these
therefore  are  evil-doers.

Say  :  If  your  fathers  and  your  sons  and  your  brethren
and  your  wives  and  your  kindred  and  wealth  which
ye  have  gained,  and  merchandise  which  ye  fear
may  be  unsold,  and  dwellings  wherein  ye  delight,
be  dearer  to  you  than  God  and  his  Apostle  and
efforts  on  his  Path,  then  wait  until  God  shall  Him-

'  Al  Abbas,  Muhammad's  imcle,  when  taken  prisoner,  had  defended  his
unbelief,  and  declared  that  he  had  performed  these  two  important  duties.
— Beidh.  '  Lit.  on  the  way.

524'  THK    KOK^N.

self  enter  on  his  work  :  ^  And  God  guideth  not  the
impious.

Now  hath  God  helped  you  in  many  battle-fields,  and,
on  the  day  of  Honein,-  when  ye  prided  yourselves
on  your  numbers ;  ^  but  it  availed  you  nothing ;
and  the  earth,  with  all  its  breadth,  became  too
strait  for  you :  *  then  turned  ye  your  backs  in
flight :

Then  did  God  send  down  a  spirit  of  tranquillity^  upon
his  Apostle,  and  upon  the  faithful ;  and  He  sent
down  hosts  which  ye  saw  not  and  punished  the
Infidels ;  And  this,  the  Infidels'  recompense  !

Yet  after  this,  will  God  turn  relentingly  to  whom  He
pleaseth  :  for  God  is  Gracious,  Merciful  !

O  Believers  !  only  they  who  join  gods  with  God  are
unclean  !  Let  them  not  therefore  after  this  their
year,  come  near  the  sacred  Temple.  And  if  ye
fear  want,^  God  if  He  please  will  enrich  you  out  of
his  abundance  :  Verily,  God  is  Knowing,  Wise,

Make  war  upon  such  of  those  to  whom  the  Scriptures
have  been  given  as  believe  not  in  God  or  in  the
last  day  and  who  forbid  not  that  which  God  and
his  Apostle  have  forbidden,  and  who  profess  not
the  profession  of  the  Truth,  until  they  pay  tribute
out  of  hand,^  and  they  be  humbled."
30  Moreover,  the  Jews  say  "  Ezra  (Ozair)  is  a  son  of
God  :  "  ^  and  the   Christians  say  "  The  Messiah  is

'  Or,  shall  issue  hia  behest.

'^  At  the  battle  of  Honein,  a  valley  about  ten  miles  to  the  N.E.  of  Mecca
(A.H.  8),  the  Muhaiinnadans,  presuming  upon  the  great  superiority  of
their  numbers  (12,000  men)  over  the  enemy,  who  were  only  4,000  strong,
were  seized  with  a  panic  throughout  their  ranks.  Order  was  restored  and
victory  obtained  through  the  bravery  and  presence  of  mind  of  Muhammad
and  his  kindred.

*  Lit.  rohen  your  nuwhers  caused  you  to  wonder.

*  The  enemy  attacked  and  routed  you  on  all  sides.

*  Or,  security.     See  ii.  249,  p.  30!).

*  Through  the  breaking  off  commercial  relations.

''  i.e.  without  the  intervention  of  a  third  person.  Or,  hy  right  of  suh-
"ection,  Sale  ;  in  cash,  Wahl.  ;  all  unthout  reception,  K.  i.  e.  as  if  by
counting  hands.

^  Thus  Hilchoth  Mclachim,  vi.  4.  The  Jews  are  commanded,  in  case
of  war  with  the  Gentiles,  to  offer  peace  on  two  conditions  : — that  they
become  tributaries,  and  renounce  idolatry.     Thus  also  chap.  viii.  4.

'  The  Muhammadan  tradition  is,  that  Ezra  was  raised  to  life  after  he
had  been  100  years  dead,  and  dictated  from  memory  the  whole  Jewish
law,  which  had  been  lost  during  the  Captivity,  to  the  scribes.  That  the
Jews  regarded  Ezra  as  a  son  of  God  is  due  to  Muhammad's  own  invcn-

THE    KORAN.  525

a  son  of  God  ;  "  Such  the  sayings  in  their  mouths  !
They  resemble  the  saying  of  the  unbelievers  of
old  !  God  do  battle  with  (curse)  them  !  How  are
they  misguided  !

They  take  their  teachers,  and  their  monks,  and  the
Messiah  son  of  Mary,  for  Lords  ^  beside  God,
though  bidden  to  worship  one  God  only.  There  is
no  God  but  He  !  Glory  be  to  Him  beyond  what
they  associate  with  Him  !  -

Fain  would  they  put  out  God^s  light  with  their  mouths ;
but  God  only  desire th  to  perfect  his  light,  albeit
the  unbelievers  abhor  it.

He  it  is  who  hath  sent  his  Apostle  with  the  Guidance
and  a  religion  of  the  truth,  that  He  may  make  it
victorious  ^  over  eveiy  other  religion,  albeit  they
who  assign  partners  to  God  be  averse  from  it.

O  Believers  !  of  a  truth,  many  of  the  teachers  and
monks  do  devour  men's  substance  in  vanity,  and
turn  them  from  the  Way  of  God.  But  to  those
who  treasure  up  gold  and  silver  and  expend  it
not  for  the  cause  of  God,  announce  tidings  of  a
^  grievous  punishment.

Oil  that  day  their  treasures  shall  be  heated  in  hell-fire,
and  their  foreheads  and  their  sides  and  their  backs

shall  be  branded  with  them "  This  is

what  ye  have  treasured  up  for  yourselves  :  taste
therefore  what  ye  have  treasured  !  "
^  Yerily,  twelve  months  is  the  number  of  months  with
God,*  according  to  God's  book,  since  the  day  when
He  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  :  of  these,
four  are  sacred  :  this  is  the  right  usage  :  There-
fore  wrong    not    yourselves   therein,    and  attack

tion.  See  Sonna,  462  v.  H.  v.  Purgstall's  Fundgruben  des  Orients,  i.
288.  The  Talniudists,  however,  use  very  exaggerated  language  concerning
him.  Thus,  Sanhedrin,  21,  22,  "Ezra  would  have  been  fully  worthy  to
have  been  the  lawgiver,  if  Moses  had  not  preceded  him."  Joscphus,Ant.  xi.
5,  5,  speaks  of  his  high  repute  (coKa)  with  the  people,  and  of  his  honour-
able burial.  Muhammad  probably  represents  the  Jews  as  having  deified
Ezra,  with  the  view  of  showing  that  they,  as  well  as  the  Christians,  had
tampered  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Divine  unity.

'  An  allusion  to  the  word  Rabbi,  used  by  Jews  and  Christians  of  their
priests,  etc.,  but  in  Arabic  of  God  only.     Comp.  Matt,  xxiii.  7,  8.

*  Lit.  (J  celebrate)  his  j^raise.     (May  He  be  exalted)  above  what,  etc.
^  See  Sura  [cxiv.]  v.  85.

*  The  intercalation  of  a  month  every  third  year,  in  order  to  reduce  the
lunar  to  the  solar  years,  is  justified  by  the  Muhammadans  from  this
passage

52G  THE    KORAN.

those  who  join  gods  with  God  one  and  allj  as  they
attack  you  one  and  all :  and  know  that  God  is
with  those  who  fear  Him.
To  carry  over  a  sacred  month  to  another,  is  only  an
increase  of  unbelief.  They  who  do  not  believe  are
led  into  error  by  it.  They  allow  it  one  year  and
forbid  it  another,  that  they  may  make  good  the
number  of  months  which  God  hath  hallowed,  and
they  allow  that  which  God  hath  prohibited.  The
evil  of  their  deeds  hath  been  prepared  for  them  by
Satan  :  for  Gt)d  guideth  not  the  people  who  do  not
believe.

^  0  Believers  !  what  possessed  you,  that  when  it  was  said
to  you,  "  March  forth  on  the  Way  of  God,^^  ye  sank
heavily  earthwards  ?  Are  ye  contented  with  the
life  of  this  world  instead  of  the  next  ?  Yet  the
fruition  of  this  mundane  life,  in  respect  of  that
which  is  to  come,  is  but  little.^
Unless  ye  march  forth,  with  a  grievous  chastisement
will  He  chastise  you,  and  place  another  people  in
your  stead,  and  ye  shall  in  no  way  harm  Him  :  for
over  everything  is  God  potent.
40  If  ye  assist  not  yoiu-  Prophet,  yet  God  assisted  him  for-
merly, when  the  unbelievers  drove  him  forth  in
company  with  a  second  only  ^  when  they  two  were
in  the  cave,  when  the  Prophet  said  to  his  companion,
"  Bo  not  distressed ;  verily,  God  is  with  us.^'  So
God  sent  down  his  ]*rotection  to  him,  and  strength-
ened him  with  hosts  ye  saw  not,  and  made  the
word  of  those  who  believed  not,  to  be  abased,  and
the  word  of  God  the  exalted  :  for  God  is  Mighty,
Wise.

^  March  ye  forth,  the  light  and  heavy  armed,^  and  contend
with  your  substance  and  your  persons  on  the  Way
of  God.  This,  if  yo  know  it,  will  be  best  for  you.
Had  there  been  a  near  advantage  and  a  short  journey,
they  would  certainly  have  followed  thee  ;  but  the
distance  seemed  long  to  them.*  Yet  will  they  swear

'  See  Sura  xiii.  26,  p.  364,  n.

'  With  Abubekr. — lit.  second  of  two.

^  Wahl.  reich  oder  arm.  Savary,  yoking  or  old.  Ibn  Hisam  (924)  pro-
nounces this  to  be  the  oldest  verse  of  the  Sura.

*  This  refers  to  the  expedition  of  Tabouk,  a  town  halfway  between
Medina  and  Damascus,  against  the  Greeks, — A.H.  9.  Muhammad  was
now  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  30,000  men.  Verses  42-48  are  said  to  have
been  revealed  durinir  the  march.

THE    KORAN.  527

by  God,  "  Had  we  been  able,  we  had  surely  gono
forth  with  you,"  They  are  self-destroyers  !     And
God  knoweth  that  they  are  surely  liars  !
God  forgive  thee  !     Why  didst  thou  give  them  leave  to
stay  heJiind  ere  they  who  make  true  excuses  had
become  known  to  thee,  and  thou  hadst  known  the
liars  ?
They  who  beheve  in  God  and  in  the  last  day  will  not
ask  leave  of  thee  to  be  exempt  from  contending
with  their  substance  and  tneir  persons.     But  God
knoweth  those  who  fear  Him  !
They  only  will  ask  thy  leave  who  believe  not  in  God
and  the  last   day,   and  whose    hearts  are  full  of
doubts,  and  who  are   tossed  up  and  down  in  their
doubtings.
Moreover,  had  they  been  desirous  to  take  the  field,
they  would  certainly  have  got  ready  for  that  pur-
pose the  munitions  of  war.*     But  God  was  averse
to  their  marching  forth,  and  made  them  laggards  ;
and  it  was  said,  "  Sit  ye  at  home  with  those  who
sit.'^
\    ^'^d  they  taken  the  field  with  you,  they  would  only  have
added  a    hindrance    to   you,  and    assuredly  have
hurried  about  among  you,"  stirring  you  up  to  sedi-
tion :  and  some  there  are  among  you  who  would
have  listened  to  them  :  and  God  knoweth  the  evil-
doers.
Of  old  aimed  they  at  sedition  and  deranged  thy  affairs,
until  the  truth  arrived    and  the    behest  of  God
became    apparent,   averse   from   it    though  they
were.
Some  of  them  say  to  thee,  "  Allow  me  to  remain  at
home,  and  expose  me  not  to  the  trial."     Have  they
not  fallen  into  the  trial  already  ?    But  verily.  Hell
shall  environ  those  who  do  not  believe  !
50     If  a  success   betide  thee,   it  annoyeth   them  :  but  if  a
reverse  betide  thee,  they  say,  "  We  had  taken  our
measures  ^  beforehand :  "  and  they  turn  their  backs
and  are  glad.
Say  :  By  no  means   can  aught  befall  us  but  what  God
hath  destined*  for  us.     Our  liege-lord  is  He  :  ou
God  therefore  let  the  faithful  trust !

'Lit.  prepared  a  preparation.
-  Lit.  in  your  midst,  or  among  your  camels.
'  i.e.  to  remain  at  home.  ■•  Lit.  vrritten.

528  THE    KORAN.

Say  :  Await  ye  for  us  other  than  one  of  the  two  best
things  ?  1  But  we  await  for  you  the  infliction  of  a
chastisement  by  God^  from  Himself,  or  at  our
hands.  Await  ye  then  ;  we  verily  will  await  with
you.

Say  :  Make  ye  your  offerings  out  of  obedience  or  against
your  will,  it  can  by  no  means  be  accepted  from  you  ;
verily  ye  are  a  wicked  people  :

And  nothing  hindereth  the  acceptance  of  their  offer-
ings, bat  that  they  believe  not  in  God  and  his
Apostle,  and  discharge  not  the  duty  of  -prayer  but
with  sluggishness,  and  make  not  offerings  but  with
reluctance.

Let  not,  therefore,  their  riches  or  their  children  amaze
thee.  God  is  only  minded  to  punish  them  by
means  of  these  in  this  life  present,  and  that  their
souls  may  depart  while  they  are  yet  unbelievers.^

And  they  swear  by  God  that  verily  they  are  on  your
side ;  yet  they  are  not  on  your  side,  but  they  are
people  who  are  afraid  of  you  :

If  they  find  a  place  of  refuge,  or  caves,  or  a  hiding-place,
they  assuredly  will  turn  towards  it  and  haste  thereto.

Some  of  them  also  defame  thee  in  regard  to  the  alms ;
yet  if  a  part  be  given  them,  they  are  content,
but  if  no  part  be  given  them,  behold,  they  are
angry  !

Would  that  they  were  satisfied  with  that  which  God
and  his  Apostle  had  given  them,  and  would  say,
"  God  sufiiceth  us  !  God  will  vouchsafe  unto  us  of
his  favour,  and  so  will  his  Apostle  :  verily  unto
God  do  we  make  our  suit !  "
CO  But  alms  are  only  to  he  given  to  the  poor  and  the  needy,'
and  those  who  collect  them,*  and  to  those '  whose
hearts  are  won  to  Islam,  and  for  ransoming,  and
for  debtors,  and  for  the  cause  of  God,  and  the
wayfarer.  This  is  an  ordinance  from  God  :  and  God
is  Knowing,  Wise.

i.  e.  victory  or  martyrdom.

'  Comp.  Sura  iii.  172,  p.  442.  Geiwer,  p.  76,  shows  that  this  is  precisely
the  teaching  of  the  Tahiiudists  with  rc<i;ard  to  the  wicked.

'  The  poor,  i.e.  absolute  paupers  ;  the  needy,  i.e.  those  in  some  tem-
porary distress.

*  Lit.  toilers,  or  those  who  labour  for  them,  i.e.  as  collectors  or  distri-
butors.

*  The  petty  Arab  chiefs  with  whom  Muhammad  made  terras  after  the
battle  of  Honein,  in  order  to  secure  their  followers.

THE    KORAN.  529

And  there  are  some  of  them  who  wrong  ^  the  Prophet
and  say,  ''He  is  all  ear."  Say:  An  ear  of  good  to
you !  He  beheveth  in  God,  and  believeth  the  be-
lievers :  and  is  a  mercy  to  such  of  you  as  believe  :

But  they  who  wrong  the  Apostle  of  God,  shall  suffer  a
dolorous  chastisement.

They  swear  to  you  by  God  to  please  you ;  but  worthier
is  God  and  his  Apostle  that  they  should  please
Him,  if  they  are  behevers.

Know  they  not  that  for  him  who  opposeth  God  and  his
Apostle,  is  therefore  the  fire  of  Hell  in  which  he
shall  remain  for  ever  ?     This  the  great  ignominy  !

The  hypocrites  are  afraid  lest  a  Sura  should  be  sent
down  concerning  them,  to  tell  them  plainly  what
is  in  their  hearts.  Say  :  Scoff  ye ;  but  God  will
bring  forth  that  which  ye  are  afraid  of.

And  if  thou  question  them,  they  will  surely  say,  "  We
were  only  discoursing  and  jesting."  Say  :  Do  ye
scoflf  at  God,  and  his  signs,  and  his  Apostle  ?

Make  no   excuse  :    from   faith   ye    have  passed  to  in-
fidelity !     If  We  forgive  some    of  you.  We  will
\  punish  others,  for  that  they  have  been  evil-doors.

Hypocritical  men  and  women  imitate  one  another.^
They  enjoin  what  is  unlawful,  and  forbid  what  is
right,  and  shut  up  their  hands.^  They  have  for-
gotten God,  and  He  hath  forgotten  them.  Verily,
the  hypocrites  are  the  perverse- doers.

God  promiseth  the  hypocritical  men  and  women,  and
the  unbelievers,  the  fire  of  Hell — therein  shall  they
remain  for  ever — this  their  sufficing  portion  !  And
God  hath  cursed  them,  and  a  lasting  torment  shall
be  theirs.
70  Te  act  like  those  who  flourished  before  you.  Mightier
were  they  than  you  in  prowess  and  more  abundant
in  wealth  and  children,  and  they  enjoyed  their  share
of  happiness  :  so  ye  also  enjoy  your  portion,  as
they  who  were  before  you  enjoyed  theirs ;  and  ye
hold  vaiti  discourses  like  their  vain  discourses.
These  !   fruitless  their  works  both  for  this  world,

'  There  seems  to  be  a  play,  in  the  orij^nal,  upon  the  similarity  of  the
words  for  injure,  or  icrong,  and  ear.  The  Arabs  probably  accused  Mu-
hammad of  lending  too  ready  an  ear  to  Jewish  and  Christian  teachings
and  doctrines.

^  Lit.  (are)  the  one  from  the  other.  Or,  with  Ullniann,  die  Einen  iv-ie  die
Andern.  ^  From  giving  alms.

2   M

530  THE    KORAN.

and  for  that  whicli  is  to  come,  and  these  !  they  are
the  lost  ones.

Hath  not  the  history  reached  them  of  those  who  were
before  them  ? — of  the  people  of  Noah  ^  and  of  Ad^
and  of  Thamood  and  of  the  people  of  Abraham,
and  of  the  inhabitants  of  Madian  and  of  the  over-
thrown cities  ?  Their  apostles  came  to  them  with
clear  proofs  of  their  inission,  and  God  would  not
deal  wrongly  by  them,  but  they  dealt  wrongly  by
themselves.

And  the  faithful  of  both  sexes  are  mutual  friends  :  they
enjoin  what  is  just,  and  forbid  what  is  unlawful,
and  they  observe  prayer,  and  pay  the  legal  impost,
and  obey  God  and  his  Apostle.  On  these  will  God
have  mercy :  verily,  God  is  Mighty,  Wise.

To  the  faithful,  both  men  and  women,  God  promiseth
gardens  'neath  which  the  rivers  flow,  in  which
they  shall  for  ever  abide,  and  goodly  mansions  in
the  gardens  of  Eden.  But  best  of  alt  will  he  God^s
good  pleasure  in  them.  This  will  be  the  great
bliss.

0  Prophet !  contend  against  the  unbelievers  and  the
hypocrites,  and  be  rigorous  with  them  :  and  Hell
shall  be  their  dwelling-place,  and  wretched  the
journey  !

They  swear  by  God  that  they  said  no  such  thing,  yet
spake  they  the  word  of  infidelity,  and  after  their
profession  of  Islam  became  unbelievers  and  planned
what  they  could  not  effect ;  ^  and  only  disapproved
of  it  because  God  and  his  Apostle  had  enriched
them  by  his  bounty  !  If  then  they  repent  it  will
be  better  for  them  ;  but  if  they  fall  back  into  their
sin,  with  a  grievous  chastisement  will  God  chastise
them  in  this  world  and  the  next,  and  on  earth  they
shall  have  neither  friend  nor  protector  !

'  The  traditions  as  to  the  collection  of  pitch  from  wood  of  the  Ark,  in
the  time  of  Bcrosus  (B.C.  2')()  ?)  for  amulets,  and  of  tlie  wood  itself,  in  the
time  of  Josephus  (Ant.  i.  3,  ('>,  c.  Apion,  i.  19)  must  have  reached  Muham-
mad through  his  Jewish  inforniiints.  Fragments  are  said  to  have  existed
in  the  days  of  Bcnjiuuiii  of  Tudola,  and  to  have  been  carried  away  by  the
Chalif  Omar,  from  tiie  mountain  Al  J)joudi  to  the  mosque  of  Oazyrat  Ibn
Omar  !

'  To  kill  ]yiuhammad.  The  circumstances  are  given  in  a  tradition  pre-
served ap.  Weil,  p.  2(5.'),  note.  The  meaning  is,  that  the  people  of  Medina,
who  had  become  enriched  by  Muhammad's  residence  among  them,  had  no
better  motive  for  disapproving  the  attempt  upon  his  life.

THE    KORAN.  53  i

And  some  there  are  of  them  who  covenanted  with
God — ''If  truly  He  give  us  of  his  bounties,  we
will  assuredly  give  alms  and  assuredly  be  of  the
righteous/'

Yet  when  He  had  vouchsafed  them  of  his  bounties,
they  became  covetous  thereof,  and  turned  their
backs,  and  withdrew  afar  off.

So  He  caused  hypocrisy  to  follow  in  their  hearts,  nntil
the  day  on  which  they  shall  meet  Him — for  that
they  failed  their  promis)  to  God,  and  for  that
they  were  liars  !

Know  they  not  that  God  knoweth  their  secrets  and
their  private  talk,  arid  that  God  knoweth  the
secret  things  ?
80  They  who  traduce  such  of  the  faithful  as  give  their
alms  willingly,  and  those  who  find  nothing  to  give
but  their  earnings,  and  scoff  at  them — God  shall
scoff  at  them  ;  and  there  is  a  grievous  torment  in
store  for  them.

Ask  thou  forgiveness  for  them,  or  ask  it  not,  it  will  he

the  same.     If  thou  ask  forgiveness  for  them  seventy

times,  yet  God  will  by  no  means  forgive  them.  This,

V  for  that  they  believe  not  in  God  and  his  Apostle  !

And  God  guideth  not  the  people  who  transgress.

They  who  were  left  in  their  homes  were  delighted  to
stay  behind  ^  God's  Apostle,  and  were  averse  from
contending  with  their  riches  and  their  persons  for
the  cause  of  God  and  said,  "  March  not  out  in  the
heat.''  Say  :  A  fiercer  heat  will  be  the  fire  of
Hell !     Would  that  they  understood  this.

Little  then  let  them  laugh,  and  much  let  them  weep  as
the  meed  of  their  doings  !

And  if  God  bring  thee  back  from  the  fight  to  some  of
them,  and  they  ask  thy  leave  to  take  the  field,
then  Say  :  By  no  means  shall  ye  ever  take  the
field  with  me,  and  by  no  means  shall  ye  fight  an
enemy  with  me  :  ye  were  well  pleased  to  sit  at
home  at  the  first  crisis  :  sit  ye  at  home  then,  with
those  who  stay  behind.

And  never  pray  thou  for  any  one  of  them  who'dieth,  or
stand  at  his  grave- — verily  they  believed  not  in
God  and  his  Apostle,  and  died  in  their  wickedness.

'  Or,  in  opposition  to.

*  i.e.  for  prayer.     Prayers  for  the  dead  were  customary  among  the
Arabians  before  Muhammad.     See  Freyt.  Einl.  p.  221.

2  M  2

532  THE    KOP^.

And  let  not  their  riches  or  their  children  astonish  thee  :
through  these  God  is  fain  only  to  punish  them  in
this  world,  and  that  their  souls  should  depart
while  they  are  still  unbelievers.

Moi'cover  when  a  Sura  was  sent  down  with  "  Believe
in  God  and  contend  in  company  with  his  Apostle/'
those  of  them  who  are  possessed  of  riches  de-
manded exemption,  and  said,  ''  Allow  us  to  be
with  those  who  sit  at  Jiomc  ":

Well  content  were  they  to  be  with  those  who  stay
behind,  for  a  seal  hath  been  set  on  their  hearts  so
that  they  understand  not : —

But  the  Apostle  and  those  who  share  his  faith,  contend
for  the  faith  with  purse  and  person;  and  these  !
all  good  things  await  them,  and  these  are  they
who  shall  be  happy  ;
90  God  hath  made  ready  for  them  gardens  'neath  which
the  I'ivers  flow,  wherein  they  shall  remain  for  ever  :
tliis  will  be  the  great  bliss.
%  Some  Arabs  of  the  desert  came  with  excuses,  praying
exemption ;  and  they  who  had  gainsaid  God  and
his  Apostle  sat  at  home :  a  grievous  punishment
shall  light  on  such  of  them  as  believe  not.

It  is  no  crime  in  the  weak,  and  in  the  sick,  and  in
those  who  find  not  the  means  of  contributing,  to
sfaij  at  home,  provided  they  are  sincere  with  God
and  his  Apostle.  In  those  who  act  righteously,
there  is  no  cause  of  blame  :  and  God  is  Gracious,
Merciful : —

Nor  in  those  who  when  they  came  to  thee  that  thou
shouldst  mount  them,  and  thou  didst  say,  "  1  find
not  wherewith  to  mount  you,''  ^  turned  away  their
eyes,  and  shed  floods  of  tears  for  grief,  because
they  found  no  means  to  contribute  toivards  the
expense.

Only  is  there  cause  of  blame  in  those  who,  though
they  are  rich,  ask  thee  for  exemption.  They  are
pleased  to  be  with  those  who  stay  behind ;  and
God  hath  sealed  up  their  hearts  so  that  they  have
no  knowledge.

They  will  excuse  themselves  to  you  when  ye  come  back
to  them.  Say  :  Excuse  yourselves  not ;  we  can
by  no  means  believe  you :  now  hath  God  informed

'i.e.   provide  with  means  of  conveyance  and  other  requisites  for  a
journey.

THE    KORAN.  533

US  about  you  :  God  hath  beheld  your  doings,  and
so  hath  his  Apostle  :  to  Him  who  knoweth  alike
things  hidden  and  things  manifest  shall  ye  here-
after be  brought  back  :  and  He  will  tell  you  what
ye  have  done.

They  will  adjure  you  by  God  when  ye  are  come  back
to  them,  to  withdraw  from  them  :  Withdraw  from
them  then  :  verily  they  are  an  abomination,  and
their  dwelling  shall  be  Hell,  in  recompense  for
their  deserts.

They  will  adjure  you  to  take  pleasure  in  them  ;  but  if
ye  take  pleasure  in  them,  then  truly  God  will  take
no  pleasure  in  those  who  act  amiss.

The  Arabs  of  the  desert  are  most  stout  in  unbelief
and  dissimulation ;  and  likelier  it  is  that  they
should  be  unaware  of  the  ordinances  which  God
hath  sent  down  to  his  Apostle  :  and  God  is  Know-
ing, Wise.

And  of  the  Arabs  of  the  desert  are  some  who  reckon
what  they  expend  in  the  cause  of  God  as  a  forced
loan,  and  wait  for  some  change  of  fortune  to  befall
you :  a  change  for  evil  shall  befall  them  !  And
God  is  He  who  Heareth,  who  Knoweth.
100  And  of  the  Arabs  of  the  desert,  some  believe  in  God
and  in  the  last  day,  and  deem  their  alms  an
approach^  to  God  and  to  the  Apostle^s  prayers.
Are  they  not  verily  their  approach  ?  Into  his
mercy  shall  God  lead  them  :  yes,  God  is  Indulgent,
Merciful.

As  for  those  who  led  the  way,  the  first  of  the  ]Mohad-
jers-  and  the  Ansars,  and  those  who  have  followed
their  noble  conduct,  God  is  well  pleased  with
them,  and  they  with  Him  :  He  hath  made  ready
for  them  gardens  under  whose  trees  the  rivers
flow,  to  abide  therein  for  aye  :  this  shall  be  the
great  bliss.

And  of  the  Arabs  of  the  desert  round  about  you  some
are  hypocrites,  and  of  the  people  of  Medina  some
are  stubborn  in  hypocrisy  :  Thou  knowest  them
not,  0  Muhammad  :  We  know  them :  twice  ^  will

'  Or,  means  of  draimng  nigh.

'  The  Mohadjers  Avere  those  who  fled  with  Muhammad  from  Mecca  to
Medina,  the  Ansars  his  auxiliaries  in  Medina.

'  The  commentators  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  nature  of  this  double  pun-
ishment.

534  THE    KORAN.

We  chastise  tliem  :  tlien  shall  they  be  given  over
to  a  great  chastisement.

And  others  have  owned  their  faults, — that  with  an  ac-
tion that  is  right  they  have  mixed  another  that  is
wrong.  God  will  haply  relent  towards  them :
verily  God  is  Forgiving,  Merciful.

Take  alms  of  their  substance,^  that  thou  mayest  cleanse
them  and  purify  them  thereby,  and  pray  for  them  :
of  a  truth  thy  prayers  shall  assure  their  minds :  ^
and  God  is  He  who  Heareth,  Knoweth.

Know  they  not  that  when  his  servants  turn  to  Him
with  repentance,  God  accepteth  it,  and  that  He
accepteth  alms^  and  that  God  is  the  Relenting,  the
Merciful  ?

And  SAT  :  Work  ye  :  so  God  will  behold  your  work,  and
so  will  bis  Apostle,  and  the  faithful :  and  ye  shall
be  brought  back  to  Him  who  knoweth  alike  the
Hidden  and  the  Manifest ;  then  will  He  tell  you
of  all  your  works.

And  others  await  the  decision  of  God,  whether  He  will
punish  them,  or  whether  He  will  turn  relentingly
unto  them  :  And  God  is  Knowing,  Wise.
^  There  are  some^  who  have  built  a  Mosque  for  mischief*
and  for  infidelity  and  to  disunite  the  faithful  and  a
place  of  ambush  for  him^  who  aforetime  warred
against  God  and  his  Apostle,  and  they  assuredly
swear,  "  Our  aim  was  only  good  : "  but  God  is
witness  that  they  are  liars.

Never  stand  thou  up  in  it.^    There  is  indeed  a  Mosque  "^

'  The  fine  of  a  third  part  of  all  their  substance  was  imposed  upon  seven
of  those  who  had  held  back  from  the  expedition  to  Tabouk.  This  is  the
fault  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  verse.

'  Lit.  {shall  be)  a  security  to  them,  or  means  of  quieting.

•  The  tribe  of  Beni  Ganim  had  built  a  mosque,  professedly  from  reli-
gious motives,  which  they  invited  Muhamntad,  on  his  way  to  Tabouk,  to
dedicate  by  a  solemn  act  of  prayer.  Muhammad,  however,  discovered
that  the  real  motive  of  the  Beni  Ganim  was  jealousy  of  the  tribe  of  Beni
Amru  Ibn  Auf,  and  of  the  mosque  at  Kuba,  and  that  there  existed  an
understanding  between  them  and  his  enemy  the  monk  Abu  Amir,  who
was  then  in  Syria,  for  the  purpose  of  urging  the  Greeks  to  attack  the
Muslims  and  their  mosque.  It  is  to  him  that  the  word  irsddan  refers.
Thus  Weil  in  his  Life  of  M.

*  To  the  dwellers  at  Kuba.  Verses  108-111  were  probably  promulged
on  the  return  from  Tabouk  previous  to  the  entry  into  Medina.

'  Abu  Amir,  or  as  a  means  of  preparation.  *  i.e.  for  prayer.

'  The  mosque  of  Kuba,  about  three  miles  8.S.E.  of  Medina.  The  spot
where  this  verse  was  revealed  is  still  pointed  out,  and  called  "  Makam  el
Ayat,"  or  "  the  place  of  signs."— Burton's  "  Pilgrimage,"  ii.  p.  214.     Mu-

TUE    KOKAN.  535

founded  from  its  first  day  upon  tlio  fear  of  God.
More  right  is  it  that  thou  take  thy  stand  therein  :
therein  are  men  who  aspire  to  keep  themselves
pure,  and  God  loveth  those  who  purify  themselves.
110  Which  of  these  two  is  best?  He  who  hath  founded
his  building  on  the  fear  of  God  and  the  desire  to
please  Him,  or  ho  who  hath  founded  his  building
on  the  brink  of  a  tottering  water-worn  bank,  so
that  it  falleth  in  ruin  wit>  him  into  the  fire  of  Hell  ?
But  God  guideth  not  the  doers  of  wrong.

Their  building  which  they  ^  have  built  will  not  cease  to
cause  uncertainty  in  their  hearts,  until  their  hearts
are  cut  in  pieces :  ^  And  God  is  Knowing,  Wise.

Verily,  of  the  faithful  hath  God  bought  their  persons
and  their  substance  on  condition  of  Paradise  for
them  in  return  :  on  the  path  of  God  shall  they
fight  and  slay  and  be  slain  :  a  promise  for  this  is
pledged  in  the  Law  and  in  the  Evangel  and  in  the
Koran — and  who  more  faithful  to  his  engagement
than  God  ?  Rejoice  then  in  the  contract  that  ye
have  contracted :  for  this  shall  be  the  great  bliss.

Those  who  turn  to  God  in  penitence,  those  who
worship,  who  praise,  who  fast,  who  bow  down,
who  prostrate  themselves,  who  enjoin  what  is
right  and  forbid  what  is  unlawful,  and  keep  to  the

bounds^  of  God *     Wherefore  bear  these

ofood  tidings  to  the  faithful.

It  is  not  for  the  Prophet  or  the  faithful  to  pray  for  tho
forgiveness  of  those  who,  even  though  they  be
near  of  kin,  associate  other  gods  with  God,  after  it
hath  been  made  clear  to  them  that  they  are  to  he
the  inmates  of  Hell.

For  neither  did  Abraham  ask  forgiveness  for  his  father,
but  in  pursuance  of  a  promise  which  he  had  pro-
mised to  him ;  but  when  it  was  shown  him  that  ho
was  an  enemy  to  God,  he  declared  himself  clear
of  him  :  Yet  Abraham  was  pitiful,  kind.

Nor  is  God  the  one  to  lead  a  people  into  error  after  He
hath  guided  them  aright,   until  that  which  they

hanunad  laid  the  first  brick,  and  it  was  the  first  place  of  public  prayer  in
El  Islam.— 16.  p.  209.  •  The  Beni  Ganira.

^  i.  e.  up  to  the  time  of  their  death,  they  will  never  reflect  on  what  they
have  done  without  bitter  pangs  of  conscience.  See  Weil's  M.  der  Prophet,
pp.  268,  269,  and  note.

^  Lit.  limits,  i.e.  laws.  ■*  Shall  have  their  recompen.se.

536  THE    KORAN.

have  to   dread   hath   been   clearly  shown   them :
Yeriljj  God  knoweth  all  things.

God  !  his  the  kingdom  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the
Earth  !  He  maketh  alive  and  killeth !  And  yo
have  no  patron  or  helper  save  God.

NoAV  hath  God  turned  Him  unto  the  Prophet  and  the
refugees,  and  the  auxiliaries/  who  followed  him
in  the  hour  of  distress,  after  that  the  hearts  of
a  part  of  them  had  well  nigh  gone  aside.  Then
turned  He  unto  them :  verily  He  was  kind  to
them,  Merciful.

He  hatli  also  turned  in  Mercy  unto  the  three  ^  who  were
left  behind,  so  that  the  earth,  spacious  as  it  is,
became  too  strait  for  them;  and  their  souls
became  so  straitened  within  them,  that  they
bethought  them  that  there  was  no  refuge  from
God  but  unto  Himself.  Then  was  He  turned  to
them  that  they  might  tui'n  to  Ilim.  Verily  God
is  He  that  turneth,  the  Merciful.
120  Believers  !  ^  fear  God,  and  be  with  the  sincere.

No  cause  had  the  people  of  Medina  and  the  Arabs  of
the  desert  around  them  to  remain  behind  the
Apostle  of  God,  or  to  prefer  their  own  lives  to
his  life;  because  neither  thirst  nor  labour  nor
hunger  could  come  upon  them  wdien  on  the  path
of  God,*  neither  do  they  step  a  step  which  may
anger  the  unbelievers,  neither  do  they  receive
from  the  enemy  an  injury,  but  it  is  written  down
to  them  as  a  good  work ;  verily,  God  will  not  suf-
fer the  reward  of  the  righteous  to  perish  :

Nor  give  they  alms  either  small  or  great,  nor  traverse
they  a  torrent,  but  it  is  thus  reckoned  to  them ;
that  God  may  reward  them  with  better  than  they
have  wrought.'''

And  the  faithful  must  not  march  forth  all  together  to
the  wars  :  and  if  a  party  of  every  band  of  them
march  not  out,  it  is  that  they  may  instruct  them-
selves   in    their  religion  and  warn  their  people

'  See  verse  KH.

-  Three  Ansars  who  did  not  accompany  Muhammad  to  Tabouk,  and
who  on  his  return  were  put  under  interdict,  and  not  released  from  it  till
after  fifty  days  of  penance.

'  Verses  120-128  probably  belong  to  the  period  after  the  return  from
Tabouk  to  Medina.  "  While  fighting  for  the  cause  of  God.

*  Or,  that  God  may  reward  the  best  of  their  works.

THE    KORAN.  537

when  they  come  back  to  them  :  haply  they  will
take  heed !

Believers  !  wage  war  against  such  of  the  unbelievers
as  are  your  neighbours,  and  let  them  assuredly
find  rigour  in  you  :  and  know  that  God  is  with
those  who  fear  Him.
%  Moreover,  when  a  Sura  is  sent  down,  there  are  some
of  them  who  say,  ''Whose  faith  hath  it  in-
creased ?  "  As  to  tho:^e  who  believe,  their  faith
will  it  increase,  and  they  shall  rejoice ;

But  as  to  those  in  whose  hearts  is  a  disease,  it  will  add
doubt  to  their  doubt,^  and  they  shall  die  unbe-
lievers.

Do  they  not  see  that  they  are  proved  every  year  once
or  twice  ?  Yet  they  turn  not,  neither  are  they
warned.

And  whenever  a  Sura  is  sent  down,  they  look  at  one

another ''  Doth  any  one  see  you  ?  "  then

turn  they  aside.  God  turneth  their  hearts  aside,
because  they  are  a  people  devoid  of  under-
standing.

Now  hath  an  Apostle  come  unto  you  from  among
yourselves :  your  iniquities  press  heavily  upon
him.  He  is  careful  over  you,  and  towards  the
faithful,  compassionate,  merciful.
130  And  if  they  turn  away,  then  Say  :  God  sufficeth  me  :
there  is  no  God  but  He.  In  Him  put  I  my  trust.
And  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  Glorious  Throne  !

'  Or,  abomination  to  their  ahomination.

538  XU£    KORAN.

[CXIV.]

S  U  R  A  V.  —  T  H  E  T  A  B  L  E.

Medina. — 120  Verses.

1)1  the  Name  of  God,  tlie  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

O  YE  who  believe  !  be  faithful  to  your  engagements.
Ye  are  allowed  the  flesh  of  brute  beasts,  but  not
of  that  which  is  hcrciiiafter  recited  to  you,  not  vio-
lating the  prohibition  against  the  chase  while  ye
are  on  pilgrimage.  Verily  God  ordaineth  what  He
pleaseth.

0  Believers  !  violate  neither  the  rites  of  God,  nor  the
sacred  month  Muhtirram,  nor  tlie  offering,  nor  its
neck-ornaments,^  nor  those  who  press  on  to  the
sacred  house  seeking  favour  from  their  Lord  and
acceptance.

And  when  all  is  over,^  then  take  to  the  chase  :  and  let
not  ill-will  at  those  ^  who  would  have  kept  you
from  the  sacred  mosque  urge  you  to  transgress,*
but  rather  be  helpful  to  one  another  for  goodness
and  piety,  but  be  not  holjiful  for  evil  and  malice  :
and  fear  ye  God.  Verily,  God  is  severe  in  punishing!

That  which  dieth  of  itself,  and  blood,  and  swine^s
flesh,  and  all  that  hath  been  sacrificed  under  the
invocation  of  any  other  name  than  that  of  God,
and  the  strangled,  and  the  killed  by  a  blow,  or  by
a  fall,  or  by  goring,^  and  that  which  beasts  of  prey
have  eaten  of,  except  what  ye  make  clean  hy  giving

'  The  garlauds,  etc.,  attached  to  the  victims  oiTered  at  Mecca.

'  When  you  have  again  returned  to  your  common  and  every-day  life  by
laying  aside  the  ihram,  or  pilgrim's  robe.  This  generally  consists  of  two
pieces  of  cotton,  or  linen,  or  woollen  cloth,  without  seam  or  ornament,  one
of  which  is  wrapped  round  the  loins,  and  the  other  thrown  over  the  shoul-
ders.    The  instep,  heel,  and  head  must  be  bare.

*  The  Koreish  sent  to  meet  Muhammad,  who  was  on  his  way  to  visit  the
Caaba  with  1,400  men,  at  Hudaibiya  (An.  Hej.  6)  to  prohibit  his  nearer
approach.     A  truce  for  ten  years  was  ultimately  concluded.

*  By  making  war  in  the  holy  month.  *  Comp.  Tract  Oholin,  c.  3.

THE    KORAN.  539

the  death-strohe  yourselves,  and  that  wliich  hath
been  sacrificed  on  the  blocks  of  stone/  is  forbidden
you  :  and  to  make  division  of  the  slain  by  co)i-
sulting  the  arrows,*  is  impiety  in  you.  Woo  this
day  on  those  who  deny  your  religion  !  Fear  them
not  then,  but  fear  Me,

This  day  have  I  perfected  your  religion  for  you,  and
have  filled  up  the  measure  of  my  favours  towards
you  :  and  it  is  my  pleasare  that  Islam  be  your  re-
ligion ;  whoso  then  without  wilful  leanings  to  wrong
shall  be  forced  by  hunger  to  transgress,  to  him,
verily,  will  God  be  Indulgent,  Merciful.
^  They  will  ask  thee  what  is  made  lawful  for  them.
Say  :  Those  things  which  are  good  '  are  legalized
to  you,  and  tJie  prey  0/ wild  beasts  which  ye  have
trained  like  dogs,  teaching  them  as  God  hath
taught  you.  Eat,  therefore,  of  what  they  shall
catch  for  you,  and  make  mention  of  the  name  of
God  over  it,  and  fear  God  :  Verily,  Swift  is  God
to  reckon  :

This  day,  things  sweet  and  clean  are  legalized  to  you,
and  the  meats  of  those  who  have  received  the
Scriptures  are  allowed  to  you,  as  your  meats  are
to  them.  And  you  are  ■permitted  to  marry  virtuous
women  who  are  believers,  and  virtuous  women
of  those  who  have  been  given  the  Scriptures  before
you,  when  you  have  provided  them  their  portions,
living  chastely  with  them  without  fornication,  and
not  taking  concubines.  And  whoso  shall  renounce
the  faith,  of  a  truth  therefore  shall  his  works  be
fruitless  !  And  in  the  next  world  he  shall  be  of
the  lost.

O  Believers  !  when  ye  address  youx'selves  to  prayer,  then
wash  your  faces,  and  your  hands  up  to  the  elbow,
and  wipe  your  heads,  and  your  feet  to  the  ankles.

And  if  ye  have  become  unclean,  then  purify  yourselves.
But  if  ye  are  sick,  or  on  a  journey,  or  if  one  of
you  come  from  the  place  of  retirement,  or  if  ye
have  touched  women  and  find  no  water,  then  take

•  Lit.  on  shafts  of  stone.  These  were  set  up  by  the  pagan  Arabs  in  front
of  their  houses,  for  the  purpose  of  sacrificing  thereon.  See  Freytag"s  Einl.
p.  462,  and  Tr.  Cholin,  pp.  39,  40,  41.

^  It  was  the  custom  to  draw  lots  for  joints  of  a  camel  with  arrows,  some
feathered  and  others  unfeathered,  kept  for  this  purpose  in  the  temple  of
Mecca.     See  Pocock,  Spec.  Hist.  Ar.  under  the  word  Hobal.

'  In  the  sense  of  sound,  healthful.

)

540  THF,    KORAN.

clean  sand  and  rub  your  faces  and  your  hands
with  it.^  God  dcsireth  not  lO  lay  a  difficulty  upon
yoUj  but  He  desireth  to  purify  you,  and  to  fill  up
the  measure  of  his  favour  upon  you :  Haply  ye  will
be  grateful.
10  And  remember  the  favour  of  God  upon,  and  his  cove-
venant  which  He  hath  covenanted  with  you,  when
ye  said,  ''  We  have  heard  and  will  obey/'  -  and
fear  God  ;  verily,  God  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the
breast.

O  Believers  !  stand  fast  to  integrity  when  bearing
witness  before  God  :  and  let  not  ill-will  at  any,
induce  you  not  to  act  uprightly.  Act  uprightly.
Next  will  this  be  to  the  fear  of  God.  And  fear
ye  God  :  verily,  God  is  apprised  of  what  ye  do.

God  hath  promised  to  those  who  believe,  and  do
the  things  that  are  right,  that  for  them  is  par-
don and  a  great  reward ;

But  they  who  are  Infidels  and  treat  our  signs  as  lies —
these  shall  be  mated  with  Hell-fire.

O  Believers  !  recollect  God's  favour  upon  you,  when-^
certain  folk  were  minded  to  stretch  forth  their
hands  against  you,  but  He  kept  their  hands  from
you.  Fear  God  then  :  and  on  God  let  the  faith-
ful place  their  trust.

And  of  old  did  God  accept  the  covenant  of  the  children
of  Israel,*  and  out  of  them  We  raised  up  twelve
leaders,  and  God  said,  "Verily,  I  will  be  with
you.  If  ye  observe  prayer  and  pay  the  obliga-
tory alms,  and  believe  in  my  Apostles  and  help
them,  and  lend  God  a  liberal  loan,  I  will  surely
put  away  from  your  evil  deeds,  and  I  will  cause
you  to  enter  into  gardens  'neath  which  the  rivers
flow !      Whoso    then  of  you  after  this  believeth

'  Thus  Talm.  Tr.  Berachoth,  46,  in)  "inv?  r\pr:i

^  This  rffers  to  the  oatli  nf  fidelity  which  Muhammad's  followers  took
at  Al  Akaba.— Abulf.  Vit.  Moh.  p.  43.

^  It  is  quite  uncertain  to  what  events  this  refers.  The  commentators
narrate,  and  have  doubtless  invented,  various  incidents  as  having  occa-
sioned it.

*  Verses  15-.38  belong  probably  to  the  period  shortly  before  the  taking
of  Chaibar  in  the  beginning  of  Hej.  7.  It  is  remarkable  that  Muhammad,
although  he  has  invented  these  twelve  leaders  of  tribes,  should  nowhere
mention  the  number  of  the  Apostles.  There  is  no  doubt,  liowever,  from
the  ancient  biographies,  that  he  chose  twelve  assistants  for  the  propaga-
tion of  Islam.     See  Gagnier,  Vie  de  M.  ii.  xvi.

THE    KORAN.  541

not,  hath  indeed  therefore  erred  from  the  even
path/'

So  for  their  breaking  their  covenant  we  have  cursed
them,  and  have  hardened  their  hearts.  They
shift  the  words  of  Scripture  from  their  places,
and  have  forgotten  part  of  what  they  were
taught.  Thou  wilt  not  cease  to  discover  the  trea-
cherous ones  among  them,  except  a  few  of  them.
But  forgive  them  and  piss  it  over  :  Verily,  God
loveth  those  who  act  generously  !

And  of  those  who  say,  "  Verily  we  are  Christians,"
have  We  accepted  the  cov^enant.  But  they
too  have  forgotten  a  part  of  that  which  they  were
warned ;  ^  wherefore  We  have  stirred  up  enmity
and  hatred  among  them  that  shall  last  till  the  day
of  the  Resurrection ;  and  in  the  end  will  God  tell
them  of  their  deeds.

O  people  of  the  Scriptures  !  now  is  our  Apostle  come
to  you  to  clear  up  to  you  much  that  ye  concealed
of  those  Scriptures,  and  to  pass  over  much.
Now  liath  a  light  and  a  clear  Book  come  to  you
from  God,  by  which  God  will  guide  him  who  fol-
loweth  after  his  good  pleasure,  to  paths  of  peace,
and  brinof  them  out  of  the  darkness  to  the  light
by  his  will ;  and  guide  them  to  the  right  path.

Infidels  assuredly  are  they  who  say,  "  Verily  God  is
the  Messiah  Ibn  Maryam  (son  of  Mary)  !  Say  :
Who  then  could  have  any  power  over  God,  if  He
chose  to  destroy  the  Messiah  Ibn  I\Iaryam,  and
his  mother,  and  all  who  are  on  the  earth  to-
gether ?
20  For  with  God  is  the  sovereignty  of  the  Heavens  and  of
the  Earth,  and  of  all  that  is  between  them  !  He
createth  what  He  will ;  and  over  all  things  is  God
potent.

Moreover  the  Jews  and  Christians  say,  "  Sons  are  we
of  God  and  His  beloved."  Say  :  Why  then  doth
He  chastise  you  for  your  sins  ?  Nay  !  ye  are  but
a  part  of  the  men  whom  He  hath  created  !  He  par-
doneth  whom  He  pleaseth,  and  chastiseth  whom  He
pleaseth,  and  with  God  is  the  sovereignty  of  the
Heavens  and  of  the  Earth,  and  of  all  that  is  between
them^  and  unto  Him  do  all  things  return.

'  i.e.  the  texts  which  foretold  the  coming  of  Muhammad.

J

542  THE    KORAN.

O  people  of  the  Book  !  now  hath  our  Apostle  come  to
you  to  clear  up  to  you  the  cessation  ^  of  Apostles,
lest  you  should  say,  "  There  hath  come  to  us  no
bearer  of  good  tidings,  nor  any  warner/'  Now
then  hath  a  bearer  of  good  tidings  and  a  warner
reached  you.     And  God  is  Almighty.

^  And  remember  when  Moses  said  to  his  people,  ^'  0
my  people !  call  to  mind  the  goodness  of  God
towards  you  when  He  appointed  Prophets  among
you,  and  appointed  you  kings,  and  gave  you  what
never  had  been  given  before  to  any  creatures  :

Enter,  0  my  people  !  the  holy  land  which  God  hath
destined  for  you.  And  turn  not  back,  lest  ye  be
overthrown  to  your  ruin.^'

They  said,  "  0  Moses.  Lo  !  therein  are  men  of  might !
And  verily,  we  can  by  no  means  enter  it  till  they
be  gone  forth.  But  if  they  go  forth  from  it,  then
verily  will  we  enter  in."

Then  said  two  men  of  those  who  feared  their  Lord  and
to  whom  God  had  been  gracious,  "  Enter  in  upon
them  by  the  gate  :  and  when  ye  enter  it,  then
verily  ye  overcome  !  And  if  ye  be  believers,  put
ye  your  trust  in  God.'^

They  said,  "  0  Moses  !  by  no  means  can  we  enter  while
they  remain  therein ;  Go  thou  and  thy  Lord  and
fight ;  lo,  here  will  we  sit  us  down.''

He  said,  "  O  my  Lord,  Verily  of  none  am  I  master  but
of  myself  and  my  brother  :  put  Thou  therefore  a
difference  between  us  and  an  ungodly  people."

He  said,  "Verily  the  land  shall  be  forbidden  them
forty  years  :  they  shall  wander  in  the  earth  per-
plexed. Fret  not  thyself  therefore  for  the  ungodly
people."
30  ^  Relate  to  them  exactly  the  story  of  the  sons  of  Adam  ^
when  they  each  offered  an  offering  ;  accepted  from
the  one  of  them,  and  not  accepted  from  the  other.
The  one  said,  "  I  will  surely  slay  thee."  Said  the
other,  "  God  only  accepteth  from  those  that  fear
Him:

"  Even  if  thou  stretch  forth  thine  hand  against  me
to  slay  me,  I  will  not  be  stretching  forth  my  hand

■  The  space  between  the  mission  of  different  prophets.

^  Called  by  the  Arabians  Habeel  and  Kabeel.  The  dialogue  between
Cain  and  Abel  is  slightly  varied  from  that  given  in  Targ.  Jerua.  on  Gen.
iv.  8,  and  Jonath.  Ben  Uzziel.

ff

THE    KOR\N.  543

against  thee  to  slay  thee.  Truly  I  fear  God  the
Lord  of  the  Worlds.
Yea,  rather  than  slaij  thee  would  I  that  thou  shonldest
bear  my  sin  ^  and  thine  own  sin,  and  thou  become
an  inmate  of  the  Fire ;  for  that  is  the  recompense
of  the  unjust  doers  :  "

Then  his  passion  led  him  on  -  to  slay  his  brother  :  so
he  slew  him,  and  he  became  one  of  those  who
perish.

And  God  sent  a  raven  which  sr  matched  upon  the  ground,
to  show  him^  how  he  might  hide  his  brother's
wrong.  He  said  :  "  0  woe  is  me  !  am  I  too  weak
to  become  like  this  raven,  and  to  hide  away  my
brother's  wrong?"  So  he  became  one  of  the
repentant.

For  this  cause  have  We  ordained  to  the  children  of
Israel  that  he  who  slayoth  any  one,  unless  it  be  a
person  guilty  of  manslaughter  *  or  of  violence  in  the
land,  shall  be  as  though  he  had  slain  all  mankind  ;
but  that  he  who  saveth  a  life,  shall  be  as  though
he  had  saved  all  mankind  alive.^
%  Of  old  our  Apostles  came  to  them  with  the  proofs  of
their  mission ;  then  verily  after  this  most  of  them
committed  excesses,  in  the  land.

Only,  the  recompense  of  those  who  war  against  God
and  his  Apostle,  and  go  about  to  enact  violence  on
the  earth,  is  that  ihej  shall  be  slain  or  crucified,  or
have  their  alternate  hands  and  feet  cut  off,  or  be
banished  the  land  :     This   their   dissfrace  in  this

o

'  Lit.  the  sin  against  me,  i.e.  of  slaying  me.

'  Lit.  his  soul  permitted  him.

'  In  the  Jewish  tradition  the  raven  shows  the  mode  of  burial  to  Adam,
not  to  Cain. — Pirke  K.  Elieser,  c.  21  ;  Midr.  fol.  11  ap.  Weil  (Legenden,
p.  39).

*  Lit.  absque  ani  ma.  alia,  i.e.  unum  tantum  hominem, — Mar.;  but
Uilmann,  aus  Vergeltung,  unless  in  case  of  retaliation  or  punishment  for
murder.

*  Thus  Mischn.  Sanhedr.  iv.  5,  "  We  find  it  said  in  the  case  of  Cain
who  murdered  his  brother — '  The  voice  of  thy  brother's  bloods  crieth ' —
It  is  not  said,  blood  of  thy  brother,  but  bloods,  i.e.  his  blood  and  the  blood
of  his  seed.  Therefore  was  man  created  single,  in  order  to  show  that  to
him  who  kills  a  single  individual  of  Israel  it  shall  be  reckoned  as  if  he
had  slain  the  whole  race,  and  that  he,  etc.,"  precisely  as  in  the  text.  Comp,
also  the  same  form  of  expression  in  Bab.  Tal.  Kidush,  §  1,  "If  one  fulKl
but  one  commandment,  he  causes  the  scale  of  innocence  to  preponderate
for  himself  and  the  whole  world  ;  but  if  he  commit  one  sin,  he  causes  the
scale  of  guilt  to  preponderate  for  himself  and  the  whole  world."

544  THE    KOL-^N.

world^  and  in  the  next  a  great  torment  shall  be
theirs —

Except  those  who,  ere  you  have  them  in  your  power,
shall  repent ;  for  know  that  God  is  Forgiving,
Merciful.

O  ye  who  believe !  fear  God,  and  desire  union  with
Him,  and  contend  earnestly  on  his  path ;  It  may
be  that  you  will  attain  to  happiness.
40  Verily  the  unbelievers — if  they  had  twice  the  riches  of
the  earth  altogether,  to  be  their  ransom  from
torment  on  the  day  of  Resurrection,  it  should  not
be  accepted  from  them  !  And  a  dolorous  torment
shall  be  theirs.

Fain  would  they  come  forth  from  the  Fire ;  but  forth
from  it  they  shall  not  come  !  and  a  lasting  torment
shall  be  theirs.

As  to  the  thief,  whether  man  or  woman,  cut  ye  off  their
hands  in  recompense  for  their  doings.^  This  is  by
ivay  of  example  from  God  himself.  And  God  is
Mighty,  Wise.

But  whoever  shall  turn  to  God  after  this  his  wickedness,
and  amend,  God  truly  will  turn  to  him  :  Verily
God  is  Forgiving,  Merciful.

Knowest  thou  not  that  the  sovereignty  of  the  Heavens
and  of  the  Earth  is  God's  ?  He  chastiseth  whom
He  will,  and  whom  He  will  He  forgiveth.  And  God
bath  power  over  all  things.

O  Apostle  !  let  not  those  who  vie  with  one  another  in
speeding  to  infidelity  vex  thee; — of  those  who  say
with  their  mouths,  "  We  believe,"  but  whose  hearts
believe  not ; — or  of  the  Jews — listeners  to  a  lie —
listeners  to  others — but  who  come  not  to  thee.
They  shift  the  words  of  the  law  ^  from  their  places
and  say,  "  If  this  be  brought  to  you,  receive  it ;
but  if  this  be  not  brought  to  you,  then  beware  of
it."  For  him  whom  God  would  mislead,  thou  canst
in  no  wise  prevail  with  God  !  They  whose  hearts
God  shall  not  please  to  cleanse,  shall  incur  disgrace

'  Muhammad  is  said  by  the  early  traditionists  to  have  punished  a
woman  who  had  been  guilty  of  theft  in  this  manner  while  on  the  route  to
Mecca  previous  to  its  capture.  We  are,  therefore,  able  to  fix  the  dates
of  verses  39-44.

^  Dr.  Sprenger  understands  this  of  the  perversion  of  Muhammad's  own
teaching  (Lcben,  iii.  40).

r

THE    KORAN.  545

in  this  world,  and   iu  the  next  a  grievous  punish-
ment;

Listeners  to  a  falsehood  and  greedij  devourers  of  the
forbidden  !  ^  If,  therefore,  they  have  recourse  to
thee,  then  judge  between  them,  or  withdraw  from
them  ;  but  if  thou  withdraw  from  them,  then  can
they  have  no  power  to  injure  thee.  And  if  thou
judge,  then  judge  between  them  with  equity.
Verily,  God  loveth  those  who  deal  equitably.

But  how  shall  they  make  thee  their  judge,  since  they
possess  already  the  Law,  in  which  are  the  behests
of  God,  and  have  not  obeyed  it  ?  Then  after  this
they  will  turn  their  backs ;  but  such  are  not
believers.

Verily,  We  have  sent  down  the  Law,  wherein  are  guid-
ance and  light.  By  it  did  the  prophets  who  pro-
fessed Islam  judge  the  Jews;  and  the  doctors  and
the  teachers  judged  by  that  portion  of  the  Book
of  God,  of  which  they  were  the  keepers  and  the
witnesses.  Therefore,  0  Jews  !  fear  not  men  but
fear  Me ;  and  barter  not  away  my  signs  for  a  mean
price  !  And  whoso  will  not  judge  by  what  God
hath  sent  down — such  therefore  are  unbelievers.

And  therein  -  have  We  enacted  for  them,  "  Life  for  life,
an  eye  for  an  eye,  and  nose  for  nose,  and  ear  for
ear,  and  tooth  for  tooth,  and  for  wounds  retalia-
tion :  " — Whoso  remitteth  it  as  alms  ^  shall  have
therein  the  expiation  of  his  shi :  And  whoso  will
not  judge  by  what  God  hath  revealed — such  in
that  case  ai-e  the  transgressors.
0  And  iu  the  foosteps  of  the  prophets  caused  we  Jesus
the  son  of  Mary,  to  follow,  confirming  the  law
which  was  before  him  :  and  We  gave  him  the
Evangel  with  its  guidance  and  light,  confirma-
tory of  the  preceding  Law;  a  guidance  and  warn-
ing to  those  who  fear  God  ; —

And  that  the  people  of  the  Evangel  may  judge  ac-
cording to  what  God  hath  sent  down  therein.
And  whoso  will  not  judge  by  what  God  hath  sent
down — such  then  are  the  pervei'se.
And  to  thee  We  have  sent  down  the  Book  of  the
Kordn  with  truth,  confirmatory  of  previous  Scrip-
ture, and  its  safe-guard.*  Judge  therefore  between

'  Usurj-,  bribes.  ^  Ex.  xxi.  23-27.  ^  Or,  pass  it  over.

■*  Und  dariiber  Amen  gesagt. — Sprenger,  iii.  41.

2  N

540  THE    KORAN.

tbem  by  what  God  hath  sent  dowii,  and  follow
not  their  desires,  after  the  truth  which  hath  come
unto  thee.  To  every  one  of  you  have  We  given  a
rule  and  an  open  way.

And  if  God  had  pleased  He  had  surely  made  you  all
one  people ;  but  He  would  test  you  by  what  He
hath  given  to  each.  Be  emulous  tlien,  in  good
deeds.  To  God  do  ye  all  return,  and  He  will  tell
you  concerning  the  subjects  of  your  disputes.

Wherefore  do  thou  judge  between  them  by  what  God
hath  sent  down,  and  follow  not  their  wishes  !  but
be  on  thy  guard  against  them  lest  they  beguile
thee  from  any  of  those  precepts  which  God  hath
revealed  to  thee ;  and  if  they  turn  back,  then
know  thou  that  for  some  of  their  crimes  doth  God
choose  to  punish  them :  for  truly  most  men  are
perverse.

Desire  they,  therefore,  the  judgments  of  the  times  of
pagan  ignorance  ?  But  what  better  judge  can
there  be  for  those  who  believe  firmly  than  God  ?
^  0  Believers  !  take  not  the  Jews  or  Christians^  as  friends.
They  are  but  friends  to  one  another;  and  if  any
one  of  you  taketh  them  for  his  friends,  then  surely
he  is  one  of  them  !  Verily  God  will  not  guide  the
evil-doers.

So  shalt  thou  see  the  diseased  at  heart  speed  away  to
them,  and  say,  ''  We  fear  least  a  change  of  fortune
befall  us.''  JBut  haply  God  will  of  himself  bring
about  some  victory  or  event  of  his  own  ordering;
then  soon  will  they  become  repentant  for  their
secret  imaginings  :

And  the  faithful  will  say,  "  Are  these  t4iey  who  swore
by  God  their  most  solemn  oath,  that  they  were
surely  on  your  side  ?  "  Vain  their  works  ;  and  they
themselves  shall  come  to  ruin.

O  ye  who  believe  1  should  any  of  you  desert  his  reli-
gion, God  will  then  raise  up  a  people  whom  He
loveth,    and    who    love    Him,    lowly   towards  the

'  This  may  refer  to  proposals  made  to  tho  Muslims  to  enter  into
alliance  with  tho  Jews  and  Christians  ar;ainst  the  heathen,  after  the
reverse  at  Ohod.  Lane  observes  (Mod.  Ejryptians,  i.  :3r)8)  with  reffard  to
this  precept,  that  "  of  the  leading  features  of  the  character  of  the  Mooslims
none  is  more  remarkable  than  their  religious  pride.  They  regard  persons
of  every  other  faith  as  the  children  of  perdition  ;  and  such  the  Mooshm
is  early  taught  to  despise."  They  are,  however,  "  as  remarkable  for  their
toleration  as  for  their  contempt  of  unbelievers."

THE    KORAN.  547

faithful,  haughty  towards  the  unbelievers.  For
the  cause  of  God  loill  they  contend,  and  not  fear
the  blame  of  the  blamer.  This  is  the  Grace  of
God  !  On  whom  He  will  He  bestoweth  it  1  And
God  is  all-embracing,  Omniscient !
GO  Verily,  your  protector  is  God  and  his  Apostle,  and
those  who  believe,  who  observe  prayer,  and  pay
the  alms  of  obligation,  and  who  bow  in  worship.

And  whoso  take  God  and  his  Apostle  and  those  who
believe  for  friends,  they  truly  are  the  people  of
God  !  they  shall  have  the  upper  hand.

O  ye  who  believe  !  take  not  such  of  those  who  have
received  the  Scriptures  before  you,  as  scoff  and
jest  at  your  religion,  or  the  Infidels,  for  your
friends  :  but  fear  God  if  ve  are  believers  :

Nor  those  who  when  ye  call  to  prayer,  make  it  an  object
of  raillery  and  derision.  This  they  do  because
they  are  a  people  who  have  no  understanding.

Sat  :^  0  people  of  the  Book  !  do  ye  not  disavow  us
only  because  we  believe  in  God,  and  in  what  He
hath  sent  down  to  us,  and  in  what  He  hath  sent
down  aforetime^  and  because  most  of  you  are
doers  of  ill  ?

Say  :  Can  I  announce  to  you  any  retribution  worse
than  that  which  awaiteth  them  with  God  ?^  They
whom  God  hath  cursed  and  with  whom  He  hath
been  angry — and  some  of  whom  He  hath  changed
into  apes  and  swine, — and  the  worshippers  of
Thagoot,  are  in  evil  plight,  and  have  gone  far-
thest astray  from  the  right  path  !

When  they  presented  themselves  to  you  they  said,
"We  believe;'^  but  Infidels  they  came  in  unto
you,  and  Infidels  they  went  forth  !  God  well  knew
what  they  concealed.

Many  of  them  shalt  thou  see  hasten  together  to  wicked-
ness and  malice,  and  to  eat  unlawful  things.  Bad
indeed  is  what  they  do  !

Had  not  their  doctors  and  teachers  forbidden  their
uttering  wickedness,  and  their  eating  unlawful
food,  bad  indeed  would  have  been  their  doings  I

"  Moreover,  the  hand  of  God,^'  say  the  Jews,  "  is  tied

'  Weil  suj^gests  that  verses  64-88  were  revealed  subsequently  to  con-
tests with  the  Jews,  but  before  Muhammad  had  broken  with  the  Chris-
tians, i.e.  between  Hej.  4  and  8.

*  Lit.  Can  I  announce  to  you  worse  than  this  (as)  retribution  with  God  ?

2   N   2

548  THE    KORAN.     ^

up."^  Their  own  hands  shall  be  tied  up —
and  for  that  which  they  have  said  shall  they  be
cursed.  Nay  !  outstretched  arc  both  his  hands  !
At  his  OAvn  pleasui'e  doth  He  bestow  gifts,  and
that  which  hath  been  sent  down  to  thee  from  thy
Lord  will  surely  increase  the  rebellion  and  unbelief
of  many  of  them ;  and  we  have  put  enmity  and
hatred  between  them  fJiat  shall  Icxst  till  the  day  of
the  Resurrection.  Oft  as  they  kindle  a  beacon  fire
for  war  shall  God  quench  it !  and  they  strive  after
violence  on  the  earth  :  but  God  loveth  not  the
abettors  of  violence.
70  But  if  the  people  of  the  Book  believe  and  have  the  fear
of  God,  We  will  surely  put  away  their  sins  from
them  and  bring  them  into  gardens  of  delight :
and  if  they  observe  the  Law  and  the  Evangel,  and
what  hath  been  sent  down  to  them  from  their
Lord,  they  shall  surely  have  their  fill"  of  yond
things  from  above  them  and  from  beneath  their
feet.  Some  thei'e  are  among  them  who  keep
the  right  path  ;  but  many  of  them — evil  are  their
doings  !

O  Apostle  !  proclaim  all  that  hath  been  sent  down  to
thee  from  thy  Lord :  for  if  thou  do  it  not,  thou
hast  not  proclaimed  his  message  at  all.  And
God  will  protect  *'  ^e  from  evil  men :  verily,  God
guideth  not  t^  >Jievers.

Say  :  0  people  oa  '^  !  ye  have  no  ground  to

stand   on,    uni  \serve   the  Law    and    the

Evangel,  and  tl  \  hath  been  sent  down  to

you  from  your  Lc  That  which  hath  been  sent

down  to  thee  from  ^ny  Lord  will  certainly  increase
the  rebellion  and  unbelief  of  many  of  them ;  but,
be  not  thou  troubled  for  the  unbelievers.

Verily,  they  who  believe,  and  the  Jews,  and  the
Sabeites,*  and  the  Christians — whoever  of  them
believeth  in  God  and  in   the  last   day,  and  doth

'•  i.  e.  God  has  ceased  to  be  bounteous.  The  Muslims  believe  that  at
the  day  of  judgment  all  the  Jews  Avill  appear  witli  the  right  baud  tied  to
the  neck.

'  Lit.  shnU  mirchj  cat.

'  i.e.  the  Koran.  The  Jew  was  to  retain  a  faith  in  the  Towrat,  or  Law  ;
the  Christian  in  the  Injil,  or  Gospel  ;  but  both  Jews  and  C'luistians  were
to  receive  the  Koran  as  the  coniplenient  of  both.

*  See  Sura  [xci.]  ii.  5ii,  p.  373.

THE    KORAN.  549

what  is  right,  on  them  shall  come  no  fear,  neither
shall  they  be  put  to  grief.

Of  old  we  accepted  the  covenant  of  the  children  of
Israel,  and  sent  Apostles  to  them.  Oft  as  an
Apostle  came  to  them  with  that  for  which  they
had  no  desire,  some  they  treated  as  liars,  and  some
they  slew  ;^

And  they  reckoned  that  no  harm  would  come  of  it : —
so  they  became  blind  and  deaf  !  Then  was  God
turned  unto  them :  thf  xi  many  of  them  again
became  blind  and  deaf!  but  God  beheld  what
they  did.
%  Surely  now  are  they  Infidels  who  say,  "God  is  the  Messiah
Son  of  Mary  ;"  for  the  Messiah  said,  "  0  children
of  Israel !  worship  God,  my  Lord  and  your  Lord."
Verily,  those  who  join  other  gods  with  God,
God  doth  exclude  from  Paradise,  and  their  abode
the  Fire ;  and  for  the  wicked  no  helpers  !

They  surely  are  Infidels  who  say,  "  God  is  a  third  of
three:"-  for  there  is  no  God  but  one  God  :  and
if  they  refrain  not  from  what  they  say,  a  grievous
chastisement  shall  assuredly  befall  such  of  them  as
believe  not.

Will  they  not,  therefore,  turn  unto  God,  and  ask  pardon
of  Him  ?  since  God  is  Forgiving,  Merciful  !

The  Messiah,  Son  of  Mary,  is  but  an  Apostle ;  other
Apostles  have  flourished  before  him;  and  his
mother  was  a  just-'  person:  they  both  ate  food.*
Behold !  how  AVe  make  clear  to  them  the  signs !
then  behold  how  they  turn  aside  !
80  Say:  Will  ye  worship,  beside  God,  that  which  can
neither  hurt  you  nor  help  you  ?  But  God  !  He
only  Heareth,  Knowcth.

Say  :  0  people  of  the  Book  !  outstep  not  bounds  of

truth  in  your  religion ;  neither  follow  the  desires

of  those  who  have  already  gone  astray,  and  caused

'  many  to   go  astray,  and  themselves  gone  astray

from  the  evenness  of  the  way.

Those  among  the  children  of  Israel  who  beHeved  not

'  1  Thess.  iL  15.

'i.e.  one  of  thre-c  ;  or,  of  a  Triad.  The  ordinal  expresses  indefinitely
one  of  the  individuals  designated  by  the  cardinal. — Wright's  Ar.  Gram,
ii.  p.  266.

^  Did  not  give  herself  out  to  be  a  goddess. — Djelal.

''  {.  e.  ■were  human  beings,  and  subject  to  the  usual  ■wants  and  liabili-
ties of  ordinarj'  persons.

650  THE    KORANj

were  cursed  by  the  tongue  of  David/  and  of  Jesus,
Son  of  Mary.  This,  because  they  were  rebeUious
and  became  transgressors ;  they  forbade  not  one
another  the  iniquity  which  they  wrought  !  de-
testable indeed  are  their  actions  !

Thou  shalt  see  many  of  them  make  friends  of  unbe-
lievers :  Evil  the  actions  which  their  own  passions
have  sent  on  beforehand ;  for  God  is  angry  with
them,  and  in  torment  are  they  to  abide  for  ever :

But,  if  they  had  believed  in  God,  and  the  Prophet,  and
the  Koran  which  hath  been  sent  down  to  him,  they
had  not  taken  them  for  their  friends  ;  but  perverse
are  most  of  them.

Of  all  men  thou  wnlt  certainly  find  the  Jews  aud  those
who  join  other  gods  with  God,  to  be  the  most
intense  in  hatred  of  those  who  believe  ;  and  thou
shalt  certainly  find  those  to  be  nearest  in  affection
to  them  who  say,  ''  We  are  Christians. '^  This,
because  some  of  them  are  priests  and  monks,^  and
because  they  are  free  from  pride.

And  when  they  hear  that  which  hath  been  sent  down
to  the  Apostle,  thou  seest  their  eyes  overflow  with
tears  at  the  truth  they  recognize  therein,  saying,
"  0  our  Lord  !  we  believe ;  write  us  down  there-
fore with  those  who  bear  witness  to  it :

And  why  should  we  not  believe  in  God,  and  in  the
truth  which  liath  come  down  to  us,  and  crave  that
our  Lord  would  bring  us  into  Paradise  with  the
Just  ? ''

Therefore  hath  God  rewarded  them  for  these  their
words,  with  gardens  ^neath  which  the  rivers  flow  ;
they  shall  abide  therein  for  ever:  this  the  reward
of  the  righteous  !  But  they  who  believe  not  and
treat  our  signs  as  lies  shall  be  the  inmates  of  Hell-
fire.
^  O  ye  who  believe  !  interdict  not  the  healthful  viands
which  God  hath  allowed  you;  go  not* beyond
this  limit  —  Verily  God  loveth  not  those  who
outstep  it  ■'' —

'  See  Sum  ii.  61,  p.  373  ;  Mark  viii.  30.

'  Geiger  derives  both  the  Arabic  words  from  Syriac  terms,  and  renders
elders  and  clerics,  p.  51.  But  the  root  of  the  Arabic  word  rendered  rroonk
is  generally  said  to  be  rahiha,  to  fear.

^  Comp.  Sura  [cix.j  Ixvi.  2.  The  date  of  verses  89-91  is  therefore
probably  Hej.  7.

/

/'

THE    KORAN.  551

90  And  eat  of  what  God  hath  given  you  for  food  that
which  is  lawful  and  wholesome  :  and  fear  God,  in
whom  ve  believe.

God  will  not  punish  you  for  a  mistaken  word  in  your
oaths  :  but  He  will  punish  you  in  regard  to  an
oath  taken  seriously.^  Its  expiation  shall  be  to
feed  ten  poor  persons  with  such  middling  food  as
ye  feed  your  own  families  with,  or  to  clothe  them  ;
or  to  set  free  a  captive  :  But  ho  who  cannot  find
the  means,  shall  fast  three  days.  This  is  the
expiation  of  your  oaths  when  ye  have  sworn —
Keep  then  your  oaths :  Thus  God  maketh  his
signs  clear  to  you  :  Haply  ye  will  be  thankful.
^  0  Believers  !  Wine  and  games  of  chance,^  and  statues,
and  the  diciiiing  arrows,  ai'e  only  an  abomination
of  Satan's  woi"k !  Avoid  them,  that  ye  may
prosper.

Only  would  Satan  sow  hatred  and  strife  among  you,  by
wine  and  games  of  chance,  and  turn  you  aside
from  the  remembrance  of  God,  and  from  prayer :
will  ye  not,  therefore,  desist  from  them  ?  Obey
God  and  obey  the  Apostle,  and  be  on  your  guard :
but  if  ye  turn  back,  then  know  that  our  Apostle  is
onli/  bound  to  deliver  a  plain  announcement.

No  blame  attacheth  to  those  who  believe  and  do  good
works,  in  regard  to  food  they  have  tasted,^  in  case
they  fear  God  and  believe  and  do  the  things  that
are  right,  and  still  fear  God  and  believe,  and  still
fear  Him  and  do  good  ;  for  God  loveth  those  who
do  good.
%  O  ye  who  believe  !  God  will  surely  make  trial  of  you
with  such  game  as  ye  may  take  with  your  hands,
or  by  your  lances,  that  God  may  know  who  feareth
Him  in  secret  :  and  whoever  after  this  trans-
gresseth,  shall  suffer  a  grievous  chastisement.

O  Believers  !^  kill  no  game  while  ye  are  on  pilgrimage.
Whosoever   among   you    shall    purposely    kill   it,

'  If  you  violate  it.

'  See  verse  4.  Tradition  has  expanded  the  word  ansah,  r>o  as  to  include
all  figures,  and  hence  the  strict  observers  of  the  letter  of  the  Koran  forbid
the  game  of  chess.  The  Persians,  however,  and  Indians  generally,  inter-
pret this  verse  more  liberally.

'  i.e.  food  not  at  that  time  forbidden  them.

*  This  and  the  two  following  verses  are  placed  by  the  commentators  m
'the  year  of  Hudaibiya,  as  also  98,  99,  100.

552  THE    KORANy

sliall   compensate   for  it  in    domestic   animals   of
equal  value    (according   to  the  judgment   of  two
just  persons  among  you),  brought  to  the  Caaba  as
an  offering  ;  or  in  expiation  thereof  shall  feed  the
poor ;  or  as  the  equivalent  of  this  shall  fast,  that
he  may  taste  the  ill  consequence  of  his  deed.    God
forgiveth  what  is  past ;  but  whoever  doth  it  again,
God   will   take  vengeance    on    him  ;    for   God   is
mighty,  and  vengeance  is  his.
It  is  lawful  for  you  to  fish  in  the  sea,  and  to  eat  Jish,^
as  provision  for  you  and  for  those  who  travel ;  but
unlawful  to  you  is  the  game  of  the  land  while  ye
are  still   on   pilgrimage  :   fear  ye    God,  therefore,
before  whom  ye  shall  be  assembled.
%  God  hath  appointed  the  Caaba,^  the  sacred  house,  to
be  a  station  (asylum)  for  mankind,  and  the  sacred
month,  and  the  offering,  and  its  ornaments.    This,
that  ye  may  know  that  God  knoweth  all  that  is  in
the  heavens  and  on  the  earth,  and  that  God  hath
knowledge    of  everything.       Know    that    God   is
severe  in  punishing,  and  that  God  is  Forgiving,
Merciful.
The   Apostle   is    only   bound    to    preach  :    and    God
knoweth   what   ye    bring   to  light,    and  what  yo
conceal.
]  00  Say  :  The  evil  and  the  good  are  not  to  be  valued  alike,
even  though  the   abundance  of  evil  please  thee ;
therefore  fear  God,  0  ye  of  understanding  !  Haply
it  shall  be  well  with  you.
0  Believers!  ask  Us  not  of  things  which  if  they  were  told
might  only  pain  you ;  but  if  ye  ask  of  such  things
when  the   entire  Koran  shall   have  been  revealed
they  will  be  declared  to  you :  God  will  pardon  you
for  this,  for  God   is  Forgiving,  Gracious.     They

'  Lit.  allowed  to  you  is  the  game  (produce)  of  the  sea  and  the  eating.

'  That  is,  Cubo-House,  Maison  Carree.  It  is  also  commonly  called
the  Bait  Ullah,  Jlnuse  of  God.  The  Caaba  is  an  oblons;  massive  structure
.'j.'ift.  in  lcn(;th,  45  in  breadth,  and  the  height  somewhat  greater  than  the
length.  At!' the  S.K.  corner  is  the  famons  llnjar  El-Aswad,  or  Black
Stone,  according  to  Captain  Burton,  an  undoubted  aerolite.  It  is  figured
in  Mr.  Muir'.s  "Life  of  Mahomet."  The  Caaba  stands  in  an  open  paral-
lelogram of  about  500  ft.  by  530  ft.,  and  is  surrounded  by  colonnades,  the
pillars  of  which,  made  of  various  marbles,  some  Egyptian  but  mostly
Meccan,  stand  in  a  f|n;idruplc  row  on  the  east  side,  and  three  deep  on
the  other  sides,  and  amount  to  554.  It  has  been  rebuilt  several  times,
but  has  not  been  materially  altered  since  A.H.  1040.

THE    KORAN.  553

who  were  before  you  asked  concerning  such  things^
then  became  unbelievers  therein.

God  hath  not  ordained  anything  on  the  subject  of
Baheera,  or  Saiba,  or  Waseela,  or  Hami ;  ^  but  the
unbehevers  have  invented  this  lie  against  God  :
and  most  of  them  had  no  understanding.

And  when  it  was  said  to  thenij  ''Accede  to  that  which
God  hath  revealed,  and  to  the  Apostle/'  they
say,  "  Sufficient  for  us  is  the  faith  in  which  we
found  our  fathers.^'  "What  !  though  their  fathers
had  no  knowledge  and  no  guidance?

O  Believers  !  take  heed  to  yourselves. ~  He  who  erreth
shall  not  hurt  you  when  ye  have  the  "  guidance  :"
to  God  shall  ye  all  return,  and  He  will  tell  you  of
your  deeds.
^  0  Believers  !  let  there  be  witnesses  between  you,  when
death  draweth  nigh  to  any  of  you,  at  the  time  of
making  the  testament ;  two  witnesses — just  men
from  among  yourselves,  or  two  others  of  a  differ-
ent tribe  from  yourselves — if  ye  be  journeying  in
the  earth,  and  the  calamity  of  death  surprise  you.
Ye  shall  shut  them  both  up  after  the  prayer ;  then
if  ye  doubt  them,  they  shall  swear  by  God,  "  We
will  not  take  a  bribe  ^  though  the  party  be  of  kin
to  us  ;  neither  will  we  conceal  the  testimony  of
God,  for  in  that  case  we  surely  should  be  among
the  wicked/'

Then  if  it  shall  be  made  clear  that  both  have  been  guilty
of  a  falsehood,  two  others  of  those  who  think  them
to  be  guilty,  the  two  nearest  in  blood,  shall
stand  up  in  their  place,  and  they  shall  swear  by
God,  "  Verily  our  witness  is  more  true  than  the
witness  of  these  two ;  neither  have  we  advanced
anything  untrue,^  for  then  should  we  assuredly  be
of  the  unjust. '^

Thus  will  it  be  easier  for  men  to  bear  a  true  *  witness,

'  Names  given  to  the  sacred  animals  which  were  marked  and  allowed
to  range  for  pasture  at  liberty.  The  dedicated  mothcr-camel  was  tlie
ffaiha  ;  the  Ma^eela  included  also  goats  or  ewes  ;  the  eleventh  female
offspring  of  the  camel  was  Baheera ;  the  dedicated  stallion  was  Hami.
These  forms  of  superstition  grew  up,  obviously,  from  a  remote  period,  out
of  the  intense  affection  of  the  Bedouin  for  his  flocks,  especially  his  horses
and  camels.  '  Lit.  on  you  your  souls.

'  Lit.  sell  it  for  a  price,  i.e.  our  evidence.

*  Lit.  and  ire  have  not  transgressed,  i.  e.  prevaricated.

*  Lit.  upon  its  face,  i.  e.  according  to  its  plain  scope.

554  TUE    KORA'^.

or  fear  lest  after  tlieir  oath  another  oath  be  given.
Therefore  fear  God  and  liearkeu  ;  for  God  guideth
not  the  perverse.
^  One  day  will  God  assemble  the  Apostles,  and  say,
"  What  reply  was  made  to  you  ?  "  They  shall  say,
"  We  have  no  knowledge  :  Verily,  Thou  art  the
Knower  of  Secrets  :  "

When  God  shall  say  :  ''  0  Jesus !  Sou  of  Mary !  call
to  mind  my  favour  upon  thee  and  upon  thy
mother,  when  I  strengthened  thee  with  the  Holy
Spirit  that  thou  shouldest  speak  ^  to  men  alike
in  the  cradle,  and  when  grown  up  : —
110  ''And  when  I  taught  thee  the  Scripture  and  W^isdom,
and  the  Law,  and  the  Evangel ;  and  when  thou
didst  fashion  of  clay,  as  it  were  the  figure  of  a
bird,  by  my  permission,  and  didst  breathe  into  it
and  by  my  permission  it  became  a  bird ;  and  thou
didst  heal  the  blind  and  the  leper,  by  my  per-
mission ;  and  when,  by  my  permission,  thou  didst
bring  forth  the  dead ;  and  when  I  withheld  the
children  of  Israel  from  thee  when  thou  hadst
come  to  them  with  the  clear  tokens  :  and  such  of
them  as  believed  not  said,  '  This  is  naught  but
plain  sorcery  ; '  -

"  And  w^hen  I  revealed  unto  the  Apostles,  '  Believe  on
Me  and  on  my  Sent  One,'  they  said,  '  We  believe  ;
and  bear  thou  witness  that  we  are  Muslims.' "
^  And  remember  when  the  Apostles'  said — "  O  Jesus,
Son  of  Mary  !  is  thy  Lord  able  to  send  down  a
furnished  TABLE  to  us  out  of  the  Heaven  ? "
He  said — "  Fear  God  if  ye  be  believers."

They  said — ''  We  desire  to  eat  therefrom,  and  to  have
our  hearts  assured,  and  to  know  that  thou  hast
indeed  spoken  truth  to  us,  and  to  become  witnesses
thereof."

'  See  Evang.  Infant,  c.  1,  Invenimus  in  libro  Joseph!  Pontificis  qui
vixit  tempore  Christi,  Jesum  locutum  esse,  et  quidem  cum  in  cunis
jaceret,  etc.     The  date  of  verse  108  to  the  end  is  uncertain.

'  Precisely  the  same  expression  is  applied  to  our  Lord  in  the  Arabic
Evang.  Infantise,   c.  .36  at  the  end,  which  also  relates  the  story  of  the  Bird.

^  Ar.  El-hav:ari.yin,  a  difierent  word  from  that  used  for  Jesus,  Houd,
Saleh,  and  the  other  apostles  par  excellence.  The  root  of  the  word  is  the
.^thiopic  hanijra,  to  go,  send ;  hence  the  Church  is  called  in  JEthiopic,
the  Beth  chrestyan  ant  havariynt,  i.e.  Apostolic.  See,  however,  the  note
on  Thilo's  Cod.  Apoc.  p.  \h2,  who  derives  from  the  root  hur,  to  he  white,
pure  ;  hence,  friends,  helpers.

(  I

r,.^9

xi.

109  (234) ;  vi.

«

Fire,

civ.  4,

5    '

xi.   52

(228) ;

37).
edina,

xxxiii.

INDEX.

■  47  (484).
[The  Roman  figures  show  the  Sara,  the  second  figures  the  verse.^  j^jj    {3
third,  in  parenthesis,  the  page.]

Aaron,  relics,  of,  ii.  249  (399).

—  Receives  a  revelation,  iv.  161
(552)  ;

vi.  138  (329)  ;  xxi.  49  (152).

—  Makes  the  calf,  xx.  92  (90).

—  Clear  of  speech,  xxviii.  34  (263).

—  Brother  of  Mary,  xix.  29  (113).
ABABiLS,or  (birds  in  flocks),  cv.  3  (20).
Abel  and  Cain,  v.  30  (636).
Ablutions,  iv.  46  (457)  ;  v.  9  (539).
Abu  Jahl,  xcvi.  16  (3).

Lahab,  cii.  (12).

Abraham,  receives  a  revelalion,  ii.
130  (383)  ;  Ixxxvii.  19  (25).

—  Neither  Jew  nor  Christian,  ii.  134
(383).

—  Is  a  Hanyf,  or  sound  in  faith,  iii.
89  (433) ;  ^±  162  (360)  ;  xvi.  121
(252).

—  Is  visited  by  Angels,  xi.  72  (230);
IV.  51  (107).

—  Preaches  the  Divine  Unity,  xxix.
15  (278);  xliii.  25  (131);  vi.  74
(350).

.  —  Is  made  Imam,  ii.  118  (381).

'  —  Argues  with  Nimrod,  ii.  260  (400).

—  Is  taught  the  resurrection,  ii.  262
(401).

—  Is  a  Muslim,  iii.  60  (430).

—  Is  ready  to  sacrifice  his  son,  xixvii.
101  (71).

—  Builds  the  Caaba,  xxii.  27  (503)  ;
iii.  91,  note  (433).

—  Prays  for  his  race,  xiv.  38  (239).

—  Is  condemned  to  the  flames,  xxi.
68  (153).

Abrogation,  ii.  100  (379)  ;  xvi.  103

(214).
Ad  or  Adites,  vii.  63,  note  (322).
Adam,  his  sin,  vii.  18  (316)  ;  ii.  34

(370).

—  Worshipped  by  angels,  ii.  32  (370);
XX.  115  (92) ;  xviii.  48  (187) ;  xvii.
63  (169).

—  Is  as  Jesus,  iii.  52  (429).

(489);xxxig^5]:

Adopted  Children,  xxxiii.

»  •      in  on  /ic-\      ?sociate

Adultery,  iv.  19,  30  (45o)  ;  x

(167) ;  xxiv.    6

(482).
Ahmad,  Ixi.  6  (445).
Al-Jassasa,  xxvii.  84  (181).  ,,^

Alexander  the  Gke.at,  or  Dn>        '

KARN.AIN,  xviii.  82  (190),  ._Q,

Alms,  ii.  211  (393)  ;  h-iii.  13, 14  (4.*^'*^'

Ixiv.  16,  17  (408) ;  XXX.  38  (220,
Amulets,  note  (10).
Angels,  bear  God's  throne,  Ixix.  1"

(44).

—  Intercede,  xl.7  (252) ;  xlii.3  (288).,

—  Die,  xxxix.  68  (275).

—  Aid  believers,  xiii.12  (362) ;  xli.  31
(198) ;  iii.  120  (436) ;  vi.  61  (348) ;
viii.  9,  12  (411).

—  Daughters  of  God,  xvi.  59  (209)  ;
xvii.  42  (168)  ;  xxxvii.  150  (72)  ;
xliii.  18  (131)  ;  liii.  28  (57).

—  Guard  Hell,  Ixxiv.  30  (5).

—  Of  Death,  vi.  61  (348)  ;  vii.  35
(315)  ;  x\-i.  35  (207)  ;  xxxii.  11
(194)  ;  xlvii.  29  (421).

—  Of  Babel,  ii.  96  (378).
Ant,  xxvii.  17  (176).

Al  Araf  (Purgatory),  vii.  44  (320).
Akafat,  ii.  194  (391).
Ayesha,  xxiv.  11  (490,  note).
AZAR,  vi.  74  (350)  ;  Ix.  4  (516).

B.

Babel,  Angels  of,  ii.  96  (378).
Balance,  xxi.  48  (152) ;  vii.  7  (315) ;

Ivii.  25  (450).
Bafhsm,  ii.  132  (383).
Bedr,  iii.  11  (423)  ;    viii.  5  (410),  42

(414).
Becca.    See  Mecca.
Bird,  i.e.    Fate   or  Augury,  vii.  128

(328);  xvii.  14  (165);  xxvii.  48  (178) ;

xxx^n.  18  (125).

—  (Ababils),  cv.  3(20).

00-i

y

c.

or  fear  1
Therefo'(iio) ;  xl^iii.  19, 20
not  the
1[  One    day  v

"W^"-'^^  (^"2);  88  (377);
VVe     .   vii.  146  (330);  XX.

Know

^^      °76  (267);  xxix.  38  (280);

mot^less  opposed  to  Mnslims

gpV9,  etc.,  V.  85  (550).

•  ^rays  hate  one  another,  V.  17

110    ^' And  SIGN,  not  mentioned  in  the

-y  of  the  workl,  xvi.  3  (205)  ;
.  (83) ;  xiii.   3,  4  (361)  ;  XXXV.
lO)  ;  ib.  12  (311).
Heavens  and-  Earth,  xli.  8-11
3).

s  forth  God's  truth,  xvi.  3  (205).
.r  man,  xvi.  14  (206).  82  (212).

D.

ID,  makes  coats  of  mail,  xxi.  80
,154)  ;  xxxiv.  10  (305).
His  judj,'ment,  xxxviii.  20  (120).

-  His  praise  of  God,  xxxiv.  10  (305);
xxxviii.  16,  17  (119).

Qeluge,  liv.  9  (64)  ;  Ixix.  11  (44) ;  xi

42(227).
Dhoul  Karnaix,  xviii.  82  (190).
-r  Dhoul  Kefl,  xxi.  85  (155)  ;  xxxviii.
l'       48  (122).

Dhoul  Noun,  xxi.  87  (155).
Disciples  of  Christ,  Ivii.  27  (450).
Divorce,   iv.    24   (454)  ;   xxxiii.    48

(484)  ;   Iviii.  4    (496)  ;  Ixv.   1,  2,  6

(479)  ;  ii.  226  sqq.  (395).
D.T.\LUT  (Goliath),  ii.  251  (399).
Djibt,  iv.  54  (458).
Djinn,  vi.  100  (353),  128  (356);  xli.

24,  29  (198).

—  Created  of  fire,  xv.  27  (106) ;  Iv.
14  (61).

—  Good  and  bad,  xi.  120  (235);  Ixxii.
11  (137).

—  In  the  power  of  Solomon,  xx\ni.  39
(178);  xxxviii,  36  (121).

—  Ho>ir  the  Koran,  xlvi.  28  (340)  ;
kxii.  (136).

—  Hear  what  passes  in  Heaven,  xxvi.
212  (103);  XV.  18  (105)  ;  xx.xvii.  7
(67)  ;  xviii.  48  (187),  etc.

E.

Eblis  (note,  370).

Eden,   ix.  73  (530)  ;  xiii.  23  (363)  ;

INDEX'.

xviii.  30  (363)  ;  XXXV.  30  (313);  Ixi.

12  (•416).
Edri.s  or  Exocn,  .xix.  57  (115)  ;    xsi

85  (155).
Egypt.  See  under  Pharaoh,  Moses,

Magicians.
Elders,  70  chosen  by  Moses,  vii.  154

(331).
Elephant,  cv.  (20).
Elias    (an    Apostle),    vi.   85  (351) ;

xxxvii.  123  (72).
Elisha,    vi.    86    (351) ;    xxxviii.  48

(122).
Enemies,  treatment  of.  Is.  9  (516).
Eucharist,  v.  115  (555).
Evangel,  Ivii.  27,  note  (450).
Ezra,  ix.  30  (524).

P.

Fast,  the,  ii.  179-183  (388).
Fatalism,  iii.  139  (438)  ;  Ixxxvii.  3

(24);  viii.  17  (411);  ix.   51  (527)  ;

xiii.  30  (364)  ;  xiv.  4  (236)  ;  xviii.

81  (190),  102  (192).
Fatthah,  cvii.  note  (11).
Faith  and  Good  Works,  xvi.  99  (213);

viii.  1  (410).
Fire,  obtained  by  friction,  xxxvi.  80

(129) ;  Ivi.  70  (54)
Flood.     See  Deluge.
Forgiveness   of   Injuries,  xlii.    37

(291).
Furquan,  p.  152,  n.

G.

Gabriel,  xvi.  104  (214) ;  Ixvi.  4  (514)
Ixxxi.  19  (30).

—  Enpmy  of  the  Jews,  ii.  81  (376)  ;
91  (378).

—  Bearer   of   Eevelation,   Hii.    5,    6
(55).

Gehennam,   the    form    of    the  word
(192),  note,

—  Has  seven  gates,  xv.  44  (107).

—  Its  guardians,  xl.  52  (256) ;  Ixxiv.
30  (5).

Genii.  See  Djinn.

God   (Allah),  one,  cxii.   (12);  xxxvii.
4  (67)  ;  XX.  7  (85).

—  His  names,  vii.  179  (334)  ;  lix.  22-
21.,  (478).

—  Creator,  vi.  101  (353).

—  Unwearied  by  creation,  1.  37  (83).

—  His    power,    ii.   (throughout)  ;  iii.
159  (410).

—  Is  a  light,  xxiv.  35  (493).

—  Perfect  in  His  works,  Ixvii.  3  (139).

—  Provides  for  all,  xv.  20  (105);xvii.
21,  32  (167).

IKDF.X.

559

God,  his  wortls  are  countless,  xviii.  109
(192)  ;  xxxi.  26  (2S6).

—  The  avenger,  iii.  3  (423)  ;  v.  96
(552 1  ;  X.  100  (303)  ;  xiv.  48  (240).

^-  Hiia  no  offspript^.  ii.  110  (380);  vi.
100  (353);  xix.  36(113),91.93  (117);
xxi.  26  (150)  ;  xsxvii.  149  (72)  ;
xxxix.  6  (270)  ;  Ixxii.  3  (136).

—  Bc5aJise_He_has  no  wife,  vi.  101
C3o3)Tcxii.  3'JVrj.

—  Changes  not.  xlviii.  23  (511).

—  Created  all  beings  to  adore  Him,
Ii.  56  (48).

—  How  He  speaks  with  man,  xlii.  50
(293).

—  Leads  and  misleads,  xxxv.  9  (311) ;
xiii.  27  (36  0;  Ixi.  5  (415).

—  Hearer  of  Praver,  xiv.  41  (239).

—  His  decrees,  xiv.  4.  32  (236,  238).

—  Made  reprobates  for  Hell,  vii.  178
(334).

—  Is  aathor  of  good  and  evil  deeds,
xci.  8  (22).

—  And  yet  good  is  from  Him,  evil
from  man,  iv.  81  (461).

—  Omniscient,  vi.  59  (348) ;  Iviii.  8
(498).

—  Omnipotent  (passiut).

—  All  -  seeing  but  unseen,  vi.  103
(353) ;  Ivii.  4  (447).

—  All-hearing,  xliv.  5  (78).

—  Omnipresent,  Ivii.  3   (447).

—  His  Pro%'idencc  (passim).

—  Eternal,  cxii.  2  (12).

—  The  first  and  last,  Ivii.  3   (4i7).

—  Forgiving  (passim).

—  Grateful,  iv.  146  (469).

—  Subtile,  vi.  103  (353).

—  Self-sufficient,  xxvii.  40  (178)  ;
xxxv.  16  (312).

Gog,    Magog,    xvlii.   93    (191)  ;  xxi.

96  (156).
Goliath.  See  Djalout.
Greeks,  xxx.  1  (217).
Geeetixgs,  iv.  88  (462).

H.

Habil  (Abel),  v.  30  (542).

Haman',    viaier  of    Pharaoh,    xxviii.

5  (260) ;    xxix.  38  (280)  ;    xl.  25,

38  (254).
Hanyf,  xvi.  124  (216).
Kakoot  and  Maroot,  ii.  96  (378).
Heavens,    seven,    Lxvii,     3     (.139)  ;

Ixxviii.  12  (36).
Hedjr,  XV.  8U  (108).
Hell,  made  for  Djinn  and  men,  vii.

36  (318)  ;  xi.  120  (235).

;  Hell,  duration  of,  xi.  109  (234) ;  vi.

128  (35f)).
Honein,  ix.  25  (524).
lioTAMA  OR  Crushing  Fire,   civ.  4,

5  (13).
HouD,   vii.    63   (322) ;  xi.    52  (228)  ;

xxvi.  123  (99).
HouRis,  liii.  34  (53).
Hypocrites,  ii.  9-19  (367).

—  Their  conduct  at  Medina,  xxxiii.
9-15  (479).

—  Their  treatment,  xxxiii.  47  (484).

—  The'.-  portion  hereafter,  Ivii.  13
(448).

I.

Idolaters,  and  those  who  associate
other  gods  with  God,  ii.  107  (380)  ;
XXV.  3  (157) ;  xxviii.  62-74  (267) ;
Hi.  34-49  (50).

—  Are  unclean,  ix.  28  (524).

—  Not  to  be  prayed  for,  ix.  114,
(535).

—  The  unpardonable  sin,  iv.  51  (458),
116  (466).

Immunity,  ix.  1  (521).
IMRAN,  iii.  30  (426) ;  Ixvi.  12  (514).
Infidels  deny  the  future  life,  vi.  29
(345);  xix.' 67  (116).

—  Their  portion,  iii.  8  (423),  112
(435),  and  passitn.

—  Their  hardness  of  heart,  vi.  109
(354).

—  Hold  mere  opinions,  liii.  29  (57).

—  Those  who  die  infidels,  iii.  85
(433).

Initial  Letters,  16  (note).

Irem,  Ixxxix.  6  (39).

IsAAK   (Ishak),  ii.   127  ff.  (382)  ;  vi.

84   (351)  ;  xi.   74    (230)  ;    xix.    5l'

(114);  xxi.  72   (154);  xxxvii.   112

(71).
ISLA.M,  ii.  132   (383);  iii.  79   (432);

xlix.  14  (520)  (v.  539).
Ismael,    ii.    119    ff.    (.381)  ;    vi.    86

(351) ;  xix.   55  (115)  ;    xxxviii.  4B

(122).
Israelites,  a   pre-eminent  race,  ii.

116  (381).

—  Pass  the  Red  Sea,  xxvi.  63  (97).

—  In  Egypt,  xxviii.  2,  3   (260).

—  See  Jews.

J.

Jacob  (charge  of  Abraham  to),  ii.
126  (382) ;  iii.  87  (433) ;  xxxviii.
45  (122).

—  Food  forbidden,  iii.  87  (433).

560

/

y

INDEX.

J

Jacob,  announcement  of  his  birth,  xi.
74  (230).

—  Is  a  prophet,  .^ix.  50  (114).

—  and  seer,  xxxviii.  45  (140),

—  Enters  E<rypt,  xii.  100  (250).
Jesus,  His  birtli,  xix.  23,  24  (112).

—  Strengthened     with     the     Holy
Spirit,  ii.  81  (376),  254  (399).

—  Sent  to  confirm    the   law,   v.    50
(545).

—  Is  one  of  the  just,  vi.  85  (351).

—  Abode  prepared  for  him,  xxiii.  52
(144).

—  Is  a  follower  of  Noah  and  Abra-
ham, Ivii.  27  (450).

—  Foretells  Muhammad,  Ixi.  6  (445).

—  The  Apostles  liis  Ansars,  Ixi.  14
(446)'.

—  la  a,  sign  of  the  last  hour,  xliii.  61
(134').

—  His  J  history,  iii.  40-52  (428).

—  Hii    divinity  denied,  iii.  73  (431).

—  Wfis   not   put   to   death,    iv.  156
(470).

—  G  od    could   destroy    him   if    He
cl>ose,  V.  19  (541).

—  Is  only  a  servant  of  God,  v.  109
yff.  (554) ;  xliii.  59  (134).
/-  His  profession,  xix.  31   (113).
^Ews,   why  afraid   of   death,  ii.   88

(377).
\ —  Would  mislead  Muslims,  iii.  62-
67  (430).
-  Call  Ezra  Son  of  God,ix.  30  (524).

—  The  punishment  in  stoi'o  for  them,
/          iv.  50  (458)  ;  V.  69  (548).

'        —  Treatment  of  their  covenant,  iii.
184  (443).

—  Their    captions    words,   iii.    179
(442).

—  Their  perversions  of  words,  ii.  98
(379)  ;  iv.  48  (458).

—  Enemies  to  Muslims,  v.  85  (550).

—  Their  lex  taUonis,   v.  48,  49,  69
(545).

—  Their      calumnies      against     the
Virgin  Mary,  iv.  155  (470).

Job,    vi.  84    (351)  ;   xxi.  83    (154)  ;

xxxviii.  40  (121).
John,  xix.  7  (111)  ;  xxi.  90  (155).
JoNAn,  vi.  86   (351)) ;  x.   98  (303)  ;

xxxvii.  139  (72)  ;  Ixviii.  48  (18).
Joseph,  vi.  84  (351) ;  xii.  (241)  j  xl.

36  (255).
Joshua,  xviii.  59  (188).

K.

Kadr  ok  Power  (niglit  of),  xii  v.  2,
3  (78);xcvii.  1-5  (21).

Kargu.v    (Corah),  xxviii.   76  (267)  ;

xxix.  38  (280);  xl.  25  (254).
Kebla,  ii.  109   (380),  136-145  (383).
KriiDU,  xviii.  63,  n.  (189).
Koran,  derivation  of  word,  (1),  n.  3.

—  Its  composition,  Pref.  ad  init.

—  A  divine  work,  iv.  84  (462).

—  Not  devised  by  M.,  xlvi.  7  (338)  ;
xi.  16  (224).

—  A    revelation,    liii.    4    (55)    and
passim.

— Revealed   in     portions,  xvii.   107
(174).

—  How  esteemed  by  Infidels,  xxv.  6
(158).

—  Abrogated  verses,  ii.   100   (379)  ;
xvi.  103  (214).

—  Preserved    in    Heaven,    xiii.    39
(366);  Ixxxv.  21  (27).

—  Is  not  the  work  of  Satans,  xxvi.
210  (103).

—  Is  admired  bydjinn,  Ixxii.l  (136)  ;
xlvi.  28  (340).

—  Confirms    the    Scriptui-es,    x.   38
(297).

—  KOREiSH,  cvi.  1  (20).

Law  (tables  of),  vii.  149  (330).

LoKMAN,  xxxi.  (284).

Lot  (a  prophet),  vi.  86  (351)  j  vii.  78

(324).
Lotus  (of  the  boundary),  liii.  14,  note

(56).

M.

Madian,  Aai.  83  (324) ;  xxviii.  22  (262).

Magi,  xxii.  17  (502).

Magicians,  Pharaoh's,  x.  80  (301),  xx.

60  (87);  xxvi.  37  (96).
Malec,  xhii.  77  (135).
Man,  his  creation,  ii.  28  (369),  etc.

—  Hasty,  xxi.  38  (151) ;  xvii.  12  (165);
Ixx.  19  (59).

—  Created  weak,  iv.  32  (455),

—  Ofclay,  XV.  26  (106).

—  OT'clots  of  blood,  xcvi.  2  (1)  ;  xxii.
5  (501).

—  Inconstant,  xxii.  11  (501).

—  Ungrateful,  xvii.  69  (170).

—  Was  one  people,  ii.  209  (393).
Manna,  vii.  160  (332) ;  xx.  82  (89).
Marriage,  xxxiii.  50  (484).

—  Lawful  and  unlawful,  ii.  220  (391);
V.  7  (539);  iv.  26-30  (454).

Mary,  her  birth,  iii.  31  (426).

—  Her  conception,  iv.  169  (472);  xir.
22  (112)  ;  Ixvi.  12   (604).

—  Her  fcson,  the  Messiah,  v.  79  (549).

INDEX.

5G1

Marv,    pure   Yirgin,    xxi.  91    (155) ;
Ixvi.  12  (60-t).

—  Calumniated  bv  Jews,  iv.  155  (470).
Meats,  forbidden,' ii.  168  (,3S7) ;  v.  1-4

(538);  vi.  118  (351).
Mecca  or  Becca,  iii.  90  (433)  ;  xlriL

14  (419)  ;  xlviii.  24  (511).
Marwa,  ii.  153  (385).
Michael,  ii.  92  (378).
MiXA,  ii.  199  (392).  n.
MoHAPJERS.is.lOl  (533);  lix.  8  (476).
Monastic  Life,  Ivii.  27  (450).
Mo.VKS,  ir.  31  (525).
Mo.nth  (sacred),  ii.  190  (390) ;  ix.  5

(521).
Moon,  its  worship  forbidden,  xli.  37

(199).
Moses,  ii.  48  ff.  (372) ;  ^^i.  101  £f.
— Brings  water  from  rock,  vii.  160

(332).
—Reared    in    Egvpt,    xx.   36    (86)  ;

xxviii.  2  30  (260).
— His  meeting  with  Khidr,  sriii.  62

(189).
— His  wrath  at  Aaron,  xx.  95  (90).
— Prophet  and  apostle,  xix.  52  (114).
Muhammad,  illitei-ate,  vii.  156  (331).

—  Foretold   in   the    Scriptures,   vii.
156  (ib.);  Ixi.  6  (Uo).

—  Seal  of  the  Prophets,  xxxiii.   40
(483).

—  Sees  Gabriel,  liii.  9  (56) ;  Ixxxi.  22
(30).

—  Becomes   an   apostle   late,  x.  17
(295).

—  Subject  to  hallncinations,  note  3
(3).

—  His  Night-jonmey,  xrii.  1  (164)  ;
See  Pref .

—  Belief  in   Satanic    influence,  xvi.
101-2  (213).

—  His  Devotions,  Ixxiii.  20  (7).
Muslims,  their  description,  iii.  188

(443)  ;  xl%nii.  29  (512).

N.

Needle's  Ere,  vii.  38  (319).
Nick.vames  forbidden,  xlix.  12  (529).
XoAH.  chosen  of  Go<l,  iii.  30  (426).

—  Is  a  prophet,  iv.  161  (471).

—  And  apostle,  vii.  57  (321).

—  Builds  the  ark,  xi.  40  (227).

—  Preaches,  Lxxi.  1—29  (74).

O.

Opferings,  v.  2  (538).
Ondhorxa,  ii.  98  (379).
OZAIE  OR  ESDRAS,  ix.  30  (524).

P.

Parables  of  the  two  Gardens,  xviii.
31  (186).

—  Of  the  Fly,  xxii.  72  (SOS).

—  Of  the  Light,  xxiv.  35  (493).

—  For    the    Resurrection,     xli.    39
(199).

—  For  Infidels,  ii.  16,  18,  etc.  (368).

—  Of  Truth  and  EiTor,  xiii.  18  (363).
Paraclete,  Ixi.  6,  note  (445).
PAR.i.'^isE,  hi.  12  (52);  Iv.  46  (62).

—  Terrestrial,  iL  33  (370).

—  The  abode  of  tlie  blessed,  ii.  23
(368)  ;  xxx-s-i  54  ff.  (128)  ;  xxxvii.

38  (69)  ;  description  of,  xh-ii.  16
(419).

Parents,  duties  towards,  xvii.  24,  25

(166);    xxix.    7    (277);    xxxi.    13

(285)  ;  xlvi.  14  (339).
Pilgrimage,  xxii.  28   (503)  ;  ii.  153

(385) ;  iii.  91  (433).      ■
Pharaoh,  ii.  46   (371)  ;  x.  76  (301)  ;

xliii.  45  (133);  xl.  38  (255).

—  A  believer  in  his   familv,  xl.  29
(254).

—  The  impaler,  xxxviii.  12  (119).
Prayer,    Kebla,  iL  136— 110    (383)  ;

iv.  46  (457) ;  v.  8  (539) ;  \'ii.  204
(337) ;  xiiL  15  (362);  xi.  116  (234)  ;
xvii.  80   (171)  ;  xxix.  44  (281)  ;  L

39  (83).

—  In  war,  iv.  102-3  (464).

—  The  Muslims,  iiL  188  (443)  ;  xxv.
66,  74  (163).

—  Joseph's,  xii.  102  (250).

—  Abraham's,  .xiv.  38  (239)  ;  ii.  120
(381).

Predestination   of   Death,    iii.   148
(439).

—  Of  Error,  xvi.  38  (208).

—  Of  Hell,  xxxiL  13  (194) ./- -^

—  Of  Prophets,  xxxiii.  38  (4«3W

—  Of  a"^Yife.  lb.  37  Lib.)  7

—  Of  Actions,  xxxiv.  9  (311).

—  Of  Faith,  XXX vi.  6  (125).

—  Of  Birtli,  liii.  33  (57).

—  InTBelBoot,  Ivii.  22  (449).

—  Fixed  by  God,  \-i.  35  (345).
Prophecies    of   Muhammad   in   the

Scriptures,  ii.  286  (405).
Prophets,  xix.  42,  note  (114).

—  Of  different  degrees,  ii.  254  (399) ;
xvii.  57  (169).

—  Not  to  be  worshipped,  iii.  74  (431).

—  False,  vi.  93  (352).

Psalter,   xvii.    57   (169)  ;   xxi.    105

(156).
PURGATOHY,  vii.  44  (320).

2    O

y

562

INDEX.

k

Kaixa,  ii.  98  (379).

E.\KEEM,  xviii.  8  (183).

Kamadha.v,  ii.  181  (389).

Rass,  XXV.  40  (161) ;  1.  12  (82).

Refrain  (in  verses).

--  Instances  of,   Ii.  50,  51  (48)  ;  lir.

17  ff.  (65)  ;  Ivn.  13,  14,  and  39,  40

(52)  ;  Ixxvii.  15  £E.   (35) ;  Iv.  20  to

end  (61).
Religion  (Monotheistic),  ii.  124—134

(382);  rfii.  11  (289).
Reprobates,   iii.   80   (132)  ;    vi     69

(349)  ;  jixi.  45  ff.   (151)  ;  xxii.  20

ff-  (502);  Lxxvii.  7—40  (34).
Resurre  ction,  ii.  261  (401)  ;  xcix.  2

(28),  ^nd passim.

Saba,  x:  ^vii.  22  (176)  ;  xxxiv.  (304).

Sabei^;es,  ii.  59  (373)  n.

SacrIj,fices,  xxii.  37  (504).

Safa,~  ii.  153  (385).

Sak^ir,  Ixxiv.  43  (5).

Sali-'^h,  \-ii.  71  (323)  n.

San  ,d,  for  washing,  v.  9  (539)  ;  \v.  46
(.457).

S^'riptures,    falsified   bv   Jews   and

;  Christians,  ii.  39  (371)  ;  73  (375),

/'  and  elsewhere.
/Solomon,  vi.  84  (351).
/  —  His  judgment,  etc.,  xxi.  78  (154).
' —  Lord  of  Djinn  and  winds,  xxi.  81
(154)  ;  xxxiv.  11,  13   (.304).
-  and  Qneen  of  Saha,  xxvii.  22  (176).

—  His  liorses,  xxxviii.  29,  38  (121).

—  His  death,  xxxiv.  13  (.306).
Saul,  ii.  248  (399).
Salsabekl,  Ixxvi.  18  (77).
Seven  Sleepers,  xviii.  8  (183).
Shoaib,  vii.  83  (324)  ;  xi.85ff.  (232);

XX  vi.  176  (102)  ;  xxix.  35  (280).
SiDJi.v,  Ixxxiii.  7  (42).
SiDJiLL,  xxi.  101,  note  (156).
Sinai,    shaken  over    Israel,    ii.    87

(377);  vii.  170(333).
Souls,  taken  by  God  during  sleep,

vi.  60  (348).

Spider,  .xxix.  10  (281).
SpiriTj  x>-ii.  87  (172).

—  Conveyed  unto  the  Virgin's  womb.
iv.  169  (472).,,  -Jiuam.,

—  The  Hohj  Spirit,  ii.  81  (376).  254
(400) ;  x^-i.  104  (214).

Statues  and  Lmages,  v.  92  (551).
Suicide  Forbidden^v.  33  (456).
Sun,  its  worsTupTorKdden,   xli.    37

(199).
S.\MiRi,  XX.  88  (89),  n.

Table,  Lord's,  v.  112  (54 J).
Talut  (Saul),  ii.  253  (399).
Tasnim,  Ixxxiii.  27  (43).
Testament,  ii.  176  ff.   (388)  ;  v.  105

(553).
Thamood,  vii.  71  (377) ;  ix.  71  (530).
Throne  (verse  of),  ii.  256  (400).
Trinity,  iv.  169  (472) ;  v.  77  (549).
Trumpet    (last),    xxiii.    103    (147)  ■

xxxvi.  51  (127).
Trumpets,  Ixxix.  6  (33).

Visit   (Umra)    of   the   Holy  places,
.  ix.  18  (523).

W.

Washings,  iv.  46  (457).
Water,  source  of  life,  xxi.  81  (150).
Wine,  rivers  of,  xlvii.  16  (419).
Wives,  number  allowed,  iv.  3  (451).
Women,  inferior  to  men,  iv.  38  (456).
Whistling  in  the  Mosque,   viii.   35
(il3).

Y.

Yathkib,  xxxiii.  13  (480).

Z.

Zacharias,    iii.    32    (426)  ;    vi.    85
(351) ;  xix.  1  (110);  xxi.  88  (155).
Zaid,  xxxiii.  37  (483).
Zakkoum,  xxxvii.  60  (69);  xliv.  43

(80)  ;  Ivi.  52  (53).
Zandjabeel,  Ixxvi.  17  (77).

WTMAN    AlfD   SONS,    PBINTERS,    OBSAT   QUEEN   STREET,   LONDON,   W.r.

/

Y^

u

University  of  Toronto
Library

Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LiMHBD