Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks (Erwin Rohde, 1925)
==========================================================
Rohde's Psyche (English 1925) — the immortal study of the Greek soul, hero cult, and the origins of the belief in immortality. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

erate! ea Ae heer Rye WE Pr ee Man hehe SI Ree et Roe tan a eee ee anne ae eee eee ee eerie ice eins ea ilies Sua peated eie. os, oa 
Le eee ee Oe ee Patan SE 9 RRP Bay MaRS NM RAP Ba ee ep ON An ne RT ATR Riba alana mii 


LAS, bet Re he an Ment pt tte Bee en TRAST NNT MN ir rmartien Me AS < 
ee ee enn ane RL at ot 


> 7a9 om hens 


Dee Pe MeN My eva aeg ntl Reqeae eter me Sc Feet 


be eT ne 
Ne AE ee 


wp Madness Oe ian ee 
ae stare rte Seema edi med att ae 
rstigednm => eee see 


eo tt ea a 
ré aig ene CR 


snes Sethe Se 
wise teres, Ta ies ees 


x Seige yn nts 


ee ee 


Ee es een Cette re Mee beak eee as 


See pease Ba UT 
me ase teeter ee ome Be yin te eR MT eS He ratien eam 
ees Rae oe Sn ae tect a nae en Fae an Tie ra Hw 


w/e Fe Ste 
Sethe ine Hee Ente eS 

r cea St 

hag a PRION Mn OS te FN ee ee ge lng Dan Phe Ti a ep A et 


a Bama PE Beg ES ie ame eee Sea mtn 


am av set Seapine 


Mat scibims omarion 


Salemi inset eget 


ae. A 
Praia me rat 
FL ein AE mts 


{LTA Sigg 8 ame ce 


an ee 
me pe 2S tne the ee D  esne He m o s 
- geist” ra Ms Sa RTS er 
se athe erg Ant) ane Year Tame at 
a3 Tok oo eta Fae 2mrsti even tee Pe msi AR PAT AOE OT 
ioe eg senses am mem SONIA Soak rn ar att Si miseen en 5 
ie roar Sac wy pect eae hi gn Se MAD AS 
ee er adie ape ears Se tn Sel it Nit 
— apes s : 
Jeet Fea Rei OP ene OES Lie AIT ENT Tie 
m sted te al 2 a 
ee aaien Si cesT tip Bit p gate h BEEN ie - 
op eine 


Hagen F Cans EE ent lenin Sie ny Orgy a Baer ae ij ing Pa OIE em ee 
i Te a lel 


Aegean Tia ime a 
: ee 


Tam tm Pen a ae ON TOT Ta Me 
(yarns mens Te te 


ote eR ata te Seam Po 


so a att ge ihe POE ne ps ao veer eusi 

ne tbe: ng a ER Mit cer 

pe erin he Ti ng Pine To ema tan 
1g eta ete em semen aren nec et 


erm On orate 
ee pT pie me 


mm ee 


a a et in pe 


apne gs 
Ra a aaa 
sipe: Nm te amen 9 
Pe PAR BR 


57 
= 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Princeton Theological Seminary Library 


https://archive.org/details/osychecultofsoul00Orohd 


International Library of Psychology 
Philosophy and Scientific Method 


Psyche 


International Library of Psychology 
Philosophy and Scientific Method 


GENERAL EDITOR : d ; , CAK; OGDEN, Miaas 

Magdalene College, Cambridge. 
PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES . . : . ° . . by G. E. Moore, Litt.D. 
Tut Misuse oF MIND : c : : g by KARIN STEPHEN 
CONFLICT AND DREAM : : : : : : by W.H. R. Rivers, F.R.S. 
PsycHOLOGY AND Po LiTics - 3 ; . . by W.H. R. Rivers, F.R.S. 
MEDICINE, Macic, AND RELIGION ; - : . by W. H.R. Rivers, F.R.S. 
TRACTATUS LOGICO- PHILOSOPHICUS : 3 © by L. WITTGENSTEIN 
THE MEASUREMENT OF EMOTION 7 . ‘ G . by W. WHATELY SMITH 
PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES : 5 5 ° : : cs G. June, M.D., LL.D. 
ScienriFic METHOD . c 5 : ; A : by A. D. RITCHIE 
SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT ; : c : by Cc. D. BroapD, Litt.D. 
THE MEANING OF MEANING 3 é 5 “by C.K, Osun and J. A. RICHARDS 
CHARACTER AND THE UNCONSCIOUS . : 4 6 . by J. H. VAN DER Hoop 
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY . 3 f c 5 : 3 . by ALFRED ADLER 
CHANCE, LOVE, AND LOGIC . < 6 : : A by C. S. PEIRCE 
SPECULATIONS (Preface by Jacob Epstein) : 5 : : . byT. E. HULME 
THE PsyCHOLCGY OF REASONING 5 5 Q by EUGENIO RIGNANO 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF MUSIC é : é : : : . by W. POLE, F.R.S. 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF “‘AS IF”. 5 4 : 5 5 . by H. VAIHINGER 
THE NATURE OF LAUGHTER : 7 6 4 S . by J. C. GREGORY 
THE NATURE OF INTELLIGENCE . C : ° : . by L. L. THURSTONE 
TELEPATHY AND CLAIRVOYANCE . : 2 : é é . by R. TISCHNER 
THE GROWTH OF THE MIND 3 A © : : a ; by K. KorrKa 
THE MENTALITY OF APES . : 5 . : 4 by W. KOHLER 
PsyCHOLOGY OF RELIGIOUS Mysticism ; : : : : ty J. H. LEuBA 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF A MUSICAL PRODIGY . ; . , : by G. REVESZ 
PRINCIPLES OF LITERARY CRITICISM . - - c “ . by I. A. RICHARDS 
PHYSIQUE AND CHARACTER : 5 é - . by ERNST KRETSCHMER 
METAPHYSICAL FOUNDATIONS OF SCIENCE c : ‘ OV Ree AcR UR TD mia 
PsyYCHOLOGY OF EMOTION . : 6 : c ‘ by J. T. MacCurpy, M.D. 
Tue PsyCHOLOGY OF TIME P c A ‘ . < by M. STURT 
CoLouR-BLINDNESS . : . ; : A 5 5 by M. Cottins, Ph.D. 
PROBLEMS OF PERSONALITY 4 - < “ in honour of MorTON PRINCE 
Psy china. . : é 5 : < b : . : by E, ROHDE 


IN PREPARATION 


THE LAwS OF FEELING 0 : : 5 a 9 5 : by F, PAULHAN 
CONVERSION . é o : : 9 A : by S. DE SANCTIS 
THOUGHT AND THE BRAIN . ; ; : 3 ‘ ‘ z by H. Pitron 
Tue History oF MATERIALISM . : 5 : 4 a 5 by F. A. LANGE 
EMOTION AND INSANITY  . , ‘ 4 : 3 : by S. THALBITZER 
PERSONALITY . : : : 5 ', by R. G. Gorpon, M.D, 
REPRESSION IN SAVAGE SOCIETIES : . : by B. MALInowskI, D.Sc. 
THE ANALYSIS OF MATTER : Fi 5 J ‘by BERTRAND RUSSELL, ¥, Reo: 
PsYCHOLOGY AND ETHNOLOGY . é 5 : . by W. H.R. RIVERS, F.R.S. 
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 5 C 3 5 . by CHARLES Fox 
STATISTICAL METHOD IN ECONOMICS . : 3 : by P. SARGANT FLORENCE 
THE PRIMITIVE MIND 3 : 5 - 3 A é by P. Rapin, Ph.D. 
CoLouR-HARMONY : s : . 6 : ROY, JAMES Woop 
Tue THEORY OF HEARING : : : : : “by H. PartripcE, D.Sc. 
SUPERNORMAL PHYSICAL PHENOMENA . : : ‘ i by E. J. DINGWALL 


THEORETICAL BIOLOGY . é fad 2 . VON UEXKULL 


INTEGRATIVE ACTION OF THE MIND 6 : A A . Miter, M.D. 
PLATO’s THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE : : 5 ig F. M. CoRNFORD 
PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOPATHOLOGY ; : A by WiLurAM Brown, M.D., D.Sc. 
THEORY OF MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS . : by F. G. CROOKSHANK, M.D. 
LANGUAGE AS SYMBOL AND AS EXPRESSION : : by E. SAPIR 
A History or ETHICAL THEORY : : ‘ é by M. GInSBERG, D.Litt. 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF LAw . : ; : : : A by A. L. GOoDHART 
PsycHoLtocy oF MusIcAL GENIUS : 5 4 2 oe) by G. REVESZ 
MODERN THEORIES OF PERCEPTION . : A 3 . by W. J. H. Sprott 
SCOPE AND VALUE OF ECONOMIC THEORY . 5 : . by BARBARA WooTToN 
MATHEMATICS FOR PHILOSOPHERS : : 3 E by, G. Ho HARDYSE. Rio: 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS : : by E. von HARTMANN 
THE PsycHoLocy or MyTHS P ‘ é F "by G. Evuiot SmitH, F.R.S. 
THE PsycHOLoGY oF Music : : : : 6 . by EDWARD if DENT 
PSYCHOLOGY OF PRIMITIVE PEOPLES . a . 7 by B. Matinowskl], D.Sc. 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHINESE THOUGHT . : 3 : by LianG CHE-CHIAO 


AnY OF PRINGES 
CS ON 


JAN 13 Tet 2 
we 


By 
“OLogiga, sew 


Esy che 


The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality 
among the Greeks 


By 
ERWIN “‘ROHDE 


LONDON 
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LID. 
NEVWeCORK: SHAKCOURT, (BRACE «& COMPANY. ING. 
1925 


Translated from the eighth edition by 
WB Hite as 


Printed tn Great Britain by Stephen Austin & Sons, Ltd., Hertford. 


CHAP: 


WBE 
WALT: 


VIII. 


PO Lie 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION . 
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


PRELIMINARY NOTE TO THE SEVENTH AND 
EIGHTH EDITION . 


TRANSLATOR’S NOTE 
BA Rae ST 


BELIEFS ABOUT THE SOUL AND CULT OF SOULS 
IN THE HOMERIC POEMS 


ISLANDS OF THE BLEST. Tyvanslation 
CAVE DEITIES. SUBTERRANEAN Tyvanslation . 
HEROES 
THE CULT OF Sine 
I. Cult of Chthonic nee 


II. Funeral ceremonies and eer of 
the dead 


Deel raceseoletnesCult.ot cours in “ite 
Blood Feud and Satisfaction 
for murder 


THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 
IDEAS OF THE FUTURE LIFE 


PART II 


ORIGINS OF THE BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY. 
THE THRACIAN WORSHIP OF DIONYSOS 

DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE. ITs 
AMALGAMATION WITH APOLLINE RELIGION. 
ECSTATIC PROPHECY. RITUAL PURIFICA- 
TION AND EXORCISM. ASCETICISM 

THE ORPHICS 

THE PHILOSOPHERS ‘ ; : : 

THE Lay AvuTuHorS (Lyric PoETS—PINDAR— 
THE TRAGEDIANS) 


PAGE. 


Vil 


xii 


253 


282 
335 
362 


411 


vi 


CHAR. 


XIII. 
Ly, 


CONTENTS 


PLATO 


THE LATER Rowe OF THE Can EK Moen 


Ty Philosophy. 
II. Popular Belief 


APPENDIX 


Consecration of persons struck lightning 


pacxadtopos 


Guvnrot, dyapor, lenis in fe lower esa 


The Tetralogies of Antiphon 
Ritual Purification ‘ 
Hekate and the ‘Exartixa ddcpara 
The Hosts of Hekate 


Disintegration of Consciousness At Hee 


duplication of Personality 
The Great Orphic Theogony 


Previous Lives of Relat ee! 
Hades . 


His Descent to 


Initiation considered as dation By ie ual 


Magical Exorcisms of the Dead 


® 


ieee POO EAE SER Seb bY Trion 


] Hb book offers an account of the opinions held by the 
Greeks about the life of the human soul after death, 
and is thus intended as a contribution to the history of 
Greek religion. Such an undertaking has in a special measure 
to contend with the difficulties that face any inquiry into 
the religious life and thought of the Greeks. Greek religion 
was a natural growth, not a special foundation, and the ideas 
and feelings which gave it its inward tone and outward shape 
never received abstract formulation. It expressed itself in 
religious performances alone: it had no sacred books from 
which we might determine the inward meaning and inter- 
connexion of the ideas with which the Greeks approached 
the gods created by their faith. The central essence of the 
religion held by the Greek people, in spite of this absence 
of conceptual formulation—or perhaps because of it— 
preserved its original character to a remarkable degree : 
the speculations and fancies of Greek poets continually 
refer to this central nucleus. Indeed the poets and philosophers 
in such of their writings as have come down to us are 
our only authorities for the religious thought of the 
Greeks. In the present inquiry they have naturally had 
to be our guides for the greater part of the way. But though 
under the special conditions of Greek life the religious views 
of poets and philosophers represent an important side of 
Greek religion, they yet allow us to perceive very clearly 
- the independent and self-determined position with regard 
to the ancestral religion retained by the individual. The 
individual believer might always, if his own temper and 
disposition allowed him, give himself up to the plain and 
unsophisticated emotions which had shaped and decided 
the faith of the people and the religious performances of 
popular e«ic¢éfeaa. But we should know very little of the 
religious ideas that filled the mind of the believing Greek 
if we had to do without the evidence of philosophers and 
poets (and of some Attic orators as well) in whose words 
dumb and inarticulate emotion finds expression. The 
inquirer would, however, be entirely on the wrong track 


Vill PREFACE TO. BIRS belo 


and be led to some remarkable conclusions who ventured 
without more ado to deduce from the religious ideas that 
find expression in Greek literature a complete Theology of 
the Greek people. Where direct literary statements and 
allusions fail us we are left with nothing but surmises in face 
of the religion of the Greeks and its inmost guiding forces. 
Of course there are plenty of people of sanguine temperament 
and industrious fancy who find no difficulty in producing 
for our benefit the most admirable solutions of the problem. 
Others in varying degrees of good faith press the emotions 
of Christian piety into the service of explaining ancient 
faith in gods. Thus injustice is done to both forms of religion 
and an understanding of the essentials of Greek belief in 
its true and independent reality is made completely impossible. 
A good example of this is provided by the Eleusinian Mysteries, 
and by that favourite topic of controversy (which has, indeed, 
received more than its due share of attention from students 
of religion), the amalgamation of the worship of gods and 
the belief in Souls said to have taken place therein. Nowhere 
else has the complete unprofitableness of the attempt to 
make use of the shifting ideas and tendencies of modern 
civilization to explain the underlying motive forces of these 
significant cult practices, been more strikingly and repeatedly 
demonstrated. On this head in particular the author of 
the present work has renounced all attempts to cast a fitful 
and ambiguous light upon the venerable gloom of the subject 
by the help of the farthing dip of his own private imaginings. 
There is no denying that here as in so many departments 
of ancient etcdBea there is something greater and _ finer 
that eludes our grasp. The revealing word, never having 
been written down, has been lost. Instead of trying to find 
a substitute in modern catch phrases it seems better simply 
to describe, in the plainest and most literal fashion, the actual 
phenomena of Greek piety exactly as they are known to us. 
There will be plenty of opportunity for the author’s own 
suggestions and they need not always obtrude themselves. 
The aim of this work is to make plain the facts of the Greek 
Cult of Souls and of that belief in immortality the inner 
workings of which are only partially intelligible to our most 
sympathetic efforts to understand them. To give a clearer 
presentation of the origin and development of those practices 
and those beliefs ; to distinguish the transformations through 
which they passed and their relationship with other and 
kindred intellectual tendencies; to disentangle the many 
different lines of thought and speculation from the inextricable 


PRE PACH ST OmEIRS DT mE DITION ibs 


confusion in which they lie in many minds (and in many 
books) and to let them stand out clearly and distinctly 
- one from another, seemed particularly desirable. Why 
_ this design has not been carried out by the same methods 
throughout ; why it has sometimes seemed sufficient to 
give a bald summary of the essential points, while at other 
times certain topics are pursued into their most distant 
ramifications (sometimes with apparently irrelevant prolixity), 
will be obvious enough to those who are familiar with the 
subject. Where a more careful examination of the over- 
flowing mass of detail was to be attempted advantage has been 
taken of the Appendix to achieve a greater, though still 
only a relative degree of completeness. This was made 
possible by the lengthy period which elapsed between the 
publication of the two parts of the book. The first half 
[to the end of chapter vii] appeared as long ago as the spring 
of 1890. Unpropitious circumstances have delayed the 
completion of the remainder till the present moment. The 
two parts could easily be kept separate (as they have been) : 
in the main they fall apart and correspond to the two sides 
of the question indicated in the title of the book—Cult of 
Souls and Belief in Immortality. The Cult of Souls and the 
faith in immortality may eventually come together at some 
points, but they have a different origin and travel most of 
the way on separate paths. The conception of immortality 
in particular arises from a spiritual intuition which reveals 
the souls of men as standing in close relationship, and indeed 
as being of like substance, with the everlasting gods. And 
simultaneously the gods are regarded as being in their nature 
like the soul of man, i.e. as free spirits needing no material 
or visible body. (It is this spiritualized view of the gods— 
not the belief in gods itself as Aristotle supposes in the 
remarkable statement quoted by Sextus Empiricus Adv. 
Mathematicos, iii, 20 ff.—which arises from the vision of 
its own divine nature achieved by the soul xaé’ éauz7v 
relieved of the body, in é@ovotacpot and parretac.) And 
this conception leads far away from the ideas on which the 
Cult of Souls was based. 

The publication of the book in two parts has brought 
with it a regrettable circumstance for which I must ask 
the indulgence of well-disposed readers (that the first half 
found so many of them is a fact which I must gratefully 
acknowledge). As the dimensions of the whole work grew 
beyond expectation and almost overstepped the pérzpov 
avrapxes, the sixteen excursuses which were promised in 


X PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION 


the first volume have had to be dropped: the book would 
otherwise have been overloaded. So far as they possess 
independent interest they will find a place elsewhere. They 
are real excursuses and were intended as such, and the proper 
understanding of the book will not be affected by their 
absence. 


ERWIN ROHDE. 
HEIDELBERG. 
November 1st, 1893. 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


‘| HE publication of a second edition of this book affords 

me a welcome opportunity of making my account more 
exact and to the point in certain places; of adding some 
points that had been overlooked or omitted ; and of noticing 
with approval or disapproval some divergent opinions that 
had obtained currency in the interval. Controversy is, 
however, confined within the narrowest hmits and to points 
of minor importance (and only then in answer to more serious 
and significant objections). The plan and—if I may say so— 
the style of the whole book demanded throughout, and more 
especially in the great points at issue, a purely positive 
statement of my own views and the results of my own studies. 
Such a statement, it may well be imagined, was not arrived 
at without being preceded in the mind of the author by 
a controversial reckoning with the manifold views and 
doctrines of others upon the subjects here dealt with—views 
which in some cases he felt obliged to reject. Controversy 
in this sense lies behind every page of the book, though 
as a rule only in a latent condition. In this condition I have 
been content to let it remain in this revised edition of the 
book. My opinions were not arrived at without toil and 
much careful reflection ; one view being made to reinforce 
another till they were all bound together in a single closely- 
knitted whole. Neither further reflection on my part nor the 
criticisms of others have shaken my belief in the tenability 
of opinions reached in this way. I have therefore ventured 
to leave my account unaltered in all its main points. I 
hope that it contains its own justification and defence in 
itself without further vindication on my part. 

Nothing in the plan or execution of the whole or its parts 
has been altered; neither have I taken anything away. 
The book contained nothing that was superfluous to the 
attainment of the object that I had in view. This object, 
it will be apparent, was not in the least to provide a brief 
and compendious statement of the most indispensable facts 
about the cult of Souls and the belief in immortality among 
the Greeks for the benefit of those who wished to take a hasty 


xu PREFACE TO SECOND» EDITION 


glance over the subject. Such a hasty picker-up of knowledge 
who regards himself—I cannot imagine why—as peculiarly 
fitted to criticize my book, has ingenuously besought me, 
in view of a second edition which he was kind enough to 
think probable, to throw overboard most of what he con- 
sidered the superfluous parts of the book. With this request 
I have not felt myself able to comply. My book was written 
for maturer readers who have passed beyond the school 
stage and look for something more than an elementary 
handbook, and who would be able to understand and 
appreciate the plan and intention which led me to draw my 
material so widely from many departments of literary and 
cultural history. The first edition of the book found many 
such readers: I may hope and expect that the second will 
do the same. 

In its revised form the book has been divided for the 
convenience of those who use it into two volumes (which 
correspond with the two parts in which it was first published). 
I was urged to take away the notes that stand at the foot 
of the text and relegate them to a place by themselves in 
a separate appendix. I found, however, that I could not 
bring myself to adopt this fashionable modern practice, 
which so far as I have experience of it in books published 
in recent years seems to me to be inconvenient and to hinder 
rather than help that undisturbed appreciation of the text 
which such an arrangement is intended to serve. Independent 
readers who in using the book are working out the subject 
for themselves would certainly not desire the separation 
of the documentary evidence from the statement of the 
author’s view. The book has also, to my peculiar satisfaction, 
attracted a large number of readers from outside the immediate 
circle of professional philologists. Such readers have evidently 
not been seriously disturbed by the elaborate and perhaps 
rather pedantic aspect of the mysterious disquisitions at 
the foot of the page, and have been able to fix their attention 
upon the clearer language of the text above. I have therefore 
decided to remove a few only of the notes which had grown 
to independent dimensions to an appendix at the end of 
each of the two volumes. 


ERWIN ROHDE. 
HEIDELBERG. 
November 27th, 1897. 


PRE IEVIEN A RY oN @ Die Oy CAE 
SEVENTH AND EIGHTH EDITIONS 


ie supervising together this reprint of “ Psyche ’’ we have 

found ourselves faced with the question which Scholl 
and Dieterich had to decide in bringing out the third edition— 
whether changes or additions would be admissible. It went 
without saying that the text must remain untouched in 
the form last given to it by Rohde’s own hand. Nor was 
it possible to make any additions to the notes without seriously 
disturbing the carefully considered architecture of the whole 
book. It would have been more possible to add an appendix 
or supplementary pamphlet recording the literature of the 
subject which has appeared since 1898 and giving an account 
of the present state of the questions dealt with by Rohde: 
as has been done with the “ Griechische Roman” by W. 
Schmid. But on making the attempt we soon found that 
the problem was a different one in the case of “‘ Psyche ”’ 
with which (much more than in the other case) all subsequent 
study of the history of religion as pursued by all nations 
has had to reckon, and from which such study has in no 
small degree taken its starting point. We have therefore 
refrained ; and we have also refrained from remodelling 
the citations to make them correspond with critical editions 
that have since appeared. This process could not be carried 
through without, in some places, introducing contradictions 
with Rohde’s interpretation that would have necessitated 
more detailed discussion. Rohde’s own method of citation 
was only seriously inconvenient in the case of Euripides: 
here he evidently, as we observed from about the middle 
of the first volume onwards, made use of more than one edition 
at the same time, and has consequently quoted lines in 
accordance with different enumerations. For the greater 
assurance and convenience of the reader the lines are uniformly 
referred to according to the numbering of Nauck. This 
task has been undertaken by our devoted helper Frl. Emilie 
Boer, who has also verified, with a very few exceptions, 
the whole of the references to ancient writers and inscriptions ; 


xiv NOTE ITO SEVENTH AND GEIGH THE DITIONS 


a considerable number of errors missed by the author or 
later editors have thus been corrected. The minor changes 
introduced in the third and following editions—the recording 
on the margin of the pagination of the first edition and the 
valuable enlargement of the index due to W. Nestle with 
the assistance of O. Crusius—have all naturally been retained. 


BA Bon. 
HEIDELBERG. O. WEINREICH. 
November, 1920. 


TRANSLATOR’S NOTE 


ee is very unsystematic in his mode of quoting from 

ancient authorities: he has, for example, four different 
ways of referring to the Iliad and the Odyssey, two of referring 
to Demosthenes and the Orators, etc. In quoting from the 
lesser authorities he sometimes used editions which have 
since become antiquated. (He even goes so far as to quote 
Clem. Alex. by the page and letter of Heinsius’ re-edition 
of Sylburg.) I have made an attempt to reduce the number 
of inconsistencies and to give references where possible to 
modern editions. In these and other small ways I have 
tried to make the notes—the text I hope is intelligible enough 
—more accessible to English readers. I have given references 
to English translations of German works (where I have been 
able to find them) ; but Ihave refrained from adding references 
to the modern literature of the subject : most readers of the 
book will prefer to do that for themselves. In order to 
save space I have used abbreviation pretty freely in quoting 
names of authors and titles of books. The abbreviated 
forms agree generally with those given in Liddell and Scott 
(supplemented by the list drawn up for the new edition of 
the Lexicon): most of them are obvious enough, but the 
following may be noted :— 


A. (or Aesch.) = Aeschylus. 


Amm. = Ammonius. 

TD Et: = Anthologia Palatina. 

Apollod. = Ps.-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca (unless Epit. is added). 

A. R: = Apollonius Rhodius. 

Ath. Mitth. = Mitthetlungen d. deutsch. arch. Inst. zu Athen. 

Aug. = Augustine. 

D. (or Dem.) = Demosthenes. 

DAC: ==) Dio, Cassius: 

1G LGN a == Dio Chrysostom. 

als ke = Dionysius of Halicarnassus (i.e. Rom. Antig., unless 
otherwise indicated). 

Did Bs = Diogenes Laertius. 

DFP. = Dionysius Periegetes. 

DAS: = Diodorus Siculus. 

E. (or Eur.) = Euripides. 

Epigr. Gr. = Kaibel, Epigrammata Graeca. 


Eun, = Eunapius Vitae Sophistarum. 


Xv1 TRANSEATOR SaaNOAte 


Gal. = Galen (vol. and page of Kiihn). 

Gols = Collitz, Griechische Dialektinschriften. 

Gp. = Geoponica. 

Grimm = Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie transl. as Teutonic 


Mythology, by J. S. Stallybrass, Lond., 1880. 


Heraclid. Pol. Heraclides Ponticus, Politica. 


Him. je Ligneritics 

Hipp. = Hippolytus. 

Hp. = Hippokrates. 

Hsch. == S1eESYChiUs: 

Hismycrn, = Hermippus of Smyrna. 


Homer is quoted by the majuscules of the Greek alphabet for the 
books of the Iliad, by the minuscules for the Odyssey. 


Inscr. Ferg. = Inschriften von Pergamon ed. Fraenkel. 

WEI Ed eX: = Inscriptiones Ponti Euxini ed. Latyschev. 

Is —lcacus: ’ 

yee = Justin Martyr. 

Leg. Sacr. = von Prott and Ziehen, Leges Graecorum Sacrae. 

Pall. = Palladius, de Re Rustica. 

Phid. = Philodemus. 

(Sale =a. Pindar. 

PE a 1) ROD 

PLG. = Bergk, Poetae Lyrict Graeci ed. 4. 

Plot. = Plounus. 

Plu. = Plutarch. 

PMagPar. = Paris Magical Papyrus ed. Wessely. 

Rh. Mus. = Reinisches Museum. 

>. (Or SOopht) Wi ==sopuontes: 

SR Dy =/ Sextus Empiricus, 

SG = Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum ed. 2 
(unless otherwise stated). 

Str. = Strabo (Casaubon’s page). 

Tab. Defix. = Tabellae Defixionum ed. Wiinsch (Appendix to 
CI Ax). . 

Thphr. = Theophrastus (Ch. = Characters ed. Jebb). 

Tylor = E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture ed. 4. 

Ata = AIZELZeS: 

Vg. Sav eros 

Vors. = Diels, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker ed. 4 (vol. i 
unless otherwise indicated). 

X. (or Xen.) = Xenophon historicus. 

“nD. = Zeno bins. 


I take this opportunity of thanking my friend Mr. R. Burn, 
of Glasgow University, for his invaluable help in these matters. 


W:. Bo sHipeies 


CHAPTER aL 


BELIEFS ABOUT THE SOUL AND CULT OF SOULS IN THE 
HOMERIC POEMS 


I 
§ 1 


To the immediate understanding of mankind nothing seems 
so self-evident, nothing so little in need of explanation, as 
the phenomenon of Life itself, the fact of man’s own existence. 
On the other hand, the cessation of this so self-evident 
existence, whenever it obtrudes itself upon his notice, arouses 
man’s ever-renewed astonishment. There are primitive 
peoples to whom death whenever it occurs seems an arbitrary 
abbreviation of life : if it is not due to visible forces, then some 
invisible magic must have caused it. So difficult is it for such 
peoples to grasp the idea that the present state of being alive 
and conscious can come to an end of its own accord. 

Once reflection on such problems is aroused, life itself, 
standing as it does on the threshold of all sensation and 
experience, soon begins to appear no less mysterious than 

/death—that kingdom into which no experience reaches. It 
may even come about that when they are regarded too long 
and too hard, ight and darkness seem to change places. It 
was to a Greek poet that the question suggested itself: 
“Who knows then whether Life be not Death, and what we 
here call Death be called Life there below ? ”’ 

From such jaded wisdom and its doubts Greek civilization 
is still far removed when, though already at an advanced 
stage in its development, it first speaks to us in the Homeric 
poems. The poet and his heroes speak with lively feeling of 
the pains and troubles of life, both in its individual phases and 
as a whole. The gods have allotted a life of pain and misery 
to men, while they themselves remain free from care. On the 
other hand, to turn aside from life altogether never enters 
the head of anyone in Homer. Nothing may be said expressly 
of the joy and happiness of life, but that is because such things 


4 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


go without saying among a vigorous folk engrossed in a move- 
ment of progress, whose circumstances were never complicated 
and where all the conditions of happiness easily fell to the 
lot of the strong in activity and enjoyment. And, indeed, it is 
only for the strong, the prudent, and the powerful that this 
Homeric world is intended. Life and existence upon this 
earth obviously belongs to them—is it not an indispensable 
condition of the attainment of all particular good things? 
As for death—the state which is to follow our life here—-there 
is no danger of anyone mistaking that for life. “ Do not try 
and explain away death to me,” says Achilles to Odysseus 
in Hades; and this would be the answer any Homeric man 
would have given to the sophisticated poet, if he had tried 
to persuade him that the state of things after life on this earth 
\, is the real life. Nothing is so hateful to man as death and the 
gates of Hades: for when death comes it is certain that life— 
this sweet life of ours in the sunlight—is done with, whatever 
else there may be to follow. 


§ 2 


But what does follow? What happens when life departs 
for ever from the inanimate body ? 

It is strange that anyone should have maintained (as it 
has been in recent times +) that in any stage of the develop- 
ment of the Homeric poems the belief can be found that with 
the moment of death all is at an end: that nothing survives 
death. We are not warranted by any statement in either of 
the two poems (to be found perhaps in their oldest parts, as 
is suggested) nor yet by the tell-tale silence of the poet, in 
attributing such an idea either to the poet or his con- 
temporaries. Wherever the occasion of death is described 
we are told how the dead man (still referred to by his name), 
or his “‘ Psyche’’, hastens away into the house of Aides— 
into the kingdom of Aides and the grim Persephoneia ; 
goes down to the darkness below the earth, to Erebos; or, 
more vaguely, sinks into the earth itself. In any case, it is 
no mere nothing that can enter the gloomy depths, nor over 
what does not exist could one suppose that the divine Pair 
holds sway below. 

But how are we to think of this “ Psyche” that, unnoticed 
during the lifetime of the body, and only observable when it is 
“separated ”’ from the body, now glides off to join the 
multitude of its kind assembled in the murky regions of the 
‘‘ Invisible ’”’ (Aides) ? Its name, like the names given to the 


FHE HOMERIC POEMS 5 


“ soul’ in many languages, marks it off as something airy 
and breathlike, revealing its presence in the breathing of the 
living man. It escapes out of the mouth—or out of the gaping 
wound of the dying—and now freed from its prison becomes, 
as the name well expresses it, an “‘image’”’ (eiSwdov), On 
the borders of Hades Odysseus sees floating “ the images of 
those that have toiled (on earth)’. These immaterial images 
withdrawing themselves from the grasp of the living, like 
smoke (J/. xxiii, 100) or a shadow (Od. xi, 207; x, 495), 
must at least recognizably present the general outlines of 
the once living person. Odysseus immediately recognizes 
his mother, Antikleia, in such a shadow-person, as well as the 
lately dead Elpenor, and those of his companions of the 
Trojan War who have gone before him. The psyche of 
Patroklos appearing to Achilleus by night resembles the dead 
man absolutely in stature, bodily appearance and expression. 
The nature of this shadowy double of mankind, separating 
itself from man in death and taking its departure then, can 
best be realized if we first make clear to ourselves what 
qualities it does not possess. The psyche of Homeric belief 
does not, as might have been supposed, represent what we are 
accustomed to call “ spirit ’’ as opposed to “ body’. All the 
faculties of the human “spirit”’ in the widest sense—for 
which the poet has a large and varied vocabulary—are indeed 
only active and only possible so long as a man is still alive : 
when death comes the complete personality is no longer in 
existence. The body, that is the corpse, now becomes mere 
“senseless earth’’ and falls to pieces, while the psyche 
remains untouched. But the latter is by no means the refuge 
of “spirit ’’ and its faculties, any more than the corpse is. 
It (the psyche) is described as being without feeling, deserted 
by mind and the organs of mind. All power of will, sensation, 
and thought have vanished with the disintegration of the 
individual man into his component parts. So far from it 
being permissible to ascribe the functions of “ spirit ’’ to the 
psyche, it would be more reasonable to speak of a contrast 
between the two. Man is a living creature, conscious of him- 
self and intelligently active, only so long as the psyche remains 
within him. Butitis not the psyche which communicates its 
own faculties to man and gives him capacity for life together 
with consciousness, will and knowledge. It is rather that 
during the union of the psyche and the body all the faculties 
of living and acting lie within the empire of the body, of which 
they are functions. Without the presence of the psyche, the 
body cannot perceive, feel, or will, but it does not use these 


6 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


or any of its faculties through or by means of the psyche. 
Nowhere does Homer attribute any such function to the 
psyche in living man : it is, in fact, only mentioned when its 
separation from the living man is imminent or has occurred. 
As the body’s shadow-image it survives the body and all its 
vital powers. 

If we now ask—as our Homeric psychologists generally 
do—which, in the face of this mysterious association between 
a living body and its counterfeit the psyche, is the “real” 
‘man, we find that Homer in fact gives contradictory answers. 
Not infrequently (indeed, in the first lines of the Iliad) the 
material body is contrasted,? as the “‘ man himself ”’, with the 
psyche—which cannot therefore be any organ or component 
part of the living body. On the other hand, that which takes 
its departure at death and hastens into the realm of Hades 
is also referred to by the proper name of the person as 
“himself ’’ 3—which means that here the shadowy psyche 
(for nothing else can go down to Hades) is invested with the 
name and value of the complete personality, the “self ”’ of 
the man. But those who draw from these phrases the 
conclusion that either the body or the psyche must be the 
‘real man ”’ have, in either case,* left out of account or un- 
explained one half of the recorded evidence. Regarded without 
prejudice, these apparently contradictory methods of speaking 
simply prove that both the visible man (the body and its 
own faculties) and the indwelling psyche could be described 
as the man’s “ self ’’. According to the Homeric view, human 
beings exist twice over: once as an outward and visible 
shape, and again as an invisible “image ”’ which only gains 
its freedom in death. This, and nothing else, is the Psyche. 

Such an idea—-that the psyche should dwell within the 
living and fully conscious personality, like an alien and 
a stranger, a feebler double of the man, as his “ other self ””— 
this may well seem very strange to us. And yet this is what 
so-called “savage” peoples,’ all over the world, actually 
believe. Herbert Spencer in particular has shown this most 
decisively. Itis therefore not very surprising to find the Greeks, 
too, sharing a mode of thought that lies so close to the mind of 
primitive mankind. The earlier age which handed down to 
the Greeks of Homer their beliefs about the soul cannot have 
failed any more than other nations to observe the facts upon 
which a fantastic logic based the conclusion of man’s double 
personality. It was not the phenomena of sensation, will, 
perception, or thought in waking and conscious man which 
led to this conclusion. It was the experience of an apparent 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 7 


double of the self in dreaming, in swoons, and ecstasy, that 
gave rise to the inference of a two-fold principle of life in man, 
and of the existence of an independent, separable “ second 
self ’’ dwelling within the visible self of daily life. One has 
only to listen to the words of a Greek writer of a later period 
who, far more explicitly than Homer, describes the nature of the 
psyche and at the same time lets us see the origin of the belief 
in such an entity. Pindar (fr. 131) tells us that the body obeys 
Death, the almighty, but the image of the living creature 
lives on (“since this alone is derived from the gods ”’ : which, 
of course, is not Homeric belief) ; for it (this evddlon) is 
sleeping when the limbs are active, but when the body is 
asleep it often reveals the future in a dream. Words could 
hardly make it plainer that in the activities of the waking and 
conscious man, the image-soul has no part. Its world is the 
world of sleep. While the other “I ’’, unconscious of itself, 
lies in sleep, its double is up and doing. In other words, while 
the body of the sleeper lies wrapped in slumber, motionless, 
the sleeper in his dream lives and sees many strange and 
wonderful things. It is “ himself ’’ who does this (of that there 
can be no doubt), and yet not the self known and visible to 
himself and others; for that lies still as death beyond the 
reach of sensation. It follows that there lives within a man a 
second self, active in dreaming. That the dream experiences 
are veritable realities and not empty fancies for Homer is also 
certain. He never says, as later poets often do, that the 
dreamer “ thought ”’ he saw this or that. The figures seen in 
dreams are real figures, either of the gods themselves or a 
“dream spirit ’’ sent by them, or a fleeting “‘ image ”’ (eiddlon) 
that they allow to appear fora moment. Just as the dreamer’s 
capacity for vision is no mere fancy, so, too, the objects that 
he sees are realities. In the same way it is something real that 
appears to a man asleep as the shape of a person lately dead. 
Since this shape can show itself to a dreamer, it must of 
necessity still exist ; consequently it survives death, though, 
indeed, only as a breath-like image, much as we have seen 
reflections of our own faces mirrored in water.® It cannot, 
indeed—this airy substance—be grasped or held like the 
once visible self ; and hence comes its name, the “‘ psyche ”’. 
The primeval argument for such a counterpart of man is 
repeated by Achilleus himself (Z/. xxiii, 103 f.) when his dead 
friend appears to him and then vanishes again: so, then, ye 
Gods, there yet lives in Hades’ house a psyche and shadowy 
image (of man), but there is no midriff in it (and consequently 
none of the faculties which preserve the visible man alive). 


8 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


The dreamer, then, and what he sees in his dream proves 
Vv the existence of an alter ego in man.’ Man, however, also 
observes that his body may suffer a deathlike torpor without 
the second self being occupied with dream experiences. In 
such moments of “‘ swoon ’’, according to Greek thought and 
actual Homeric expression, ‘‘ the psyche has left the body.” ® 
Where had it gone ? No man could tell. But on this occasion 
it comes back again : whereupon the “ spirit is gathered again 
into the midriff ’’. If ever, as happens in the case of death, the 
psyche should become completely separated from the visible 
body, then the “ spirit ’’ will never return. But the psyche, 
which in those temporary separations from the body ® did 
not perish, will not vanish into nothingness now. 


§ 3 


So far experience takes us, from which primitive logic 
arrived at very much the same conclusions all over the world. 
But, we may proceed to ask, where does this liberated psyche 
go? What becomes of it? Here begins “ the undiscovered 
country ’ and it might appear that at its entrance there was 
a complete parting of the ways. 

Primitive peoples are accustomed to attribute unlimited 
powers to the disembodied “soul ’’—powers all the more 
formidable because they are not seen. Indeed, they refer in 
part all invisible forces to the action of “ souls’’, and strain 
anxiously by means of the richest offerings within their power 
to secure for themselves the goodwill of these powerful spirits. 
Homer, on the contrary, knows nothing of any influence 
exerted by the psyche upon the visible world, and, con- 
sequently, hardly anything of a cult of the psyche. How, 
indeed, could the souls (as I may venture to call them without 
further risk of misunderstanding) have any such influence ? 
They are all without exception collected in the realm of 
Aides, far from the living, separated from them by Okeanos 
and Acheron, guarded by the relentless god himself, the 
inexorable doorkeeper. Only a fabled hero like Odysseus 
may for once, perhaps, reach the entrance of that gloomy 
kingdom alive: the souls themselves, once they have crossed 
the river, never come back—-so the soul of Patroklos assures 
his friend. How do they get there? The implication seems 
to be that on leaving the body the soul passes away, unwilling 
and complaining of its fate, but, nevertheless, unresisting, 
to Hades; and after the destruction of the body by fire, 
disappears for ever into the depths of Erebos. It was only a 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 9 


later poet who, in giving the final touches to the Odyssey, 
introduced Hermes, the “‘ Guide of the Dead’. Whether this 
is an invention of the poet’s, or, as appears more likely, it is 
borrowed from the ancient folk-belief of some remote corner 
of Greece, in the completely rounded circle of Homeric belief 
at any rate it is an innovation and an important one. Doubt 
has arisen, it appears, whether indeed all the souls must of 
necessity pass away into the Unseen ; and they are provided 
with a divine guide who by his mysteriously compelling 
summons (Od. xxiv, 1) and the power of his magic wand 
constrains them to follow him.}® 

Down in the murky underworld they now float unconscious, 
or, at most, with a twilight half-consciousness, wailing in a 
shrill diminutive voice, helpless, indifferent. Of course, flesh, 
bones, and sinews,"! the midriff, the seat of all the faculties 
of mind and will-—these are all gone for ever. They were 
attached to the once-visible partner of the psyche, and that 
has been destroyed. To speak of an “ immortal life’ of these 
souls, as scholars both ancient and modern have done, is 
incorrect. They can hardly be said to lve even, any more than 
the image does that is reflected in the mirror ; and that they 
prolong to eternity their shadowy image-existence—where in 
Homer do we ever find this said? The psyche may survive 
its visible companion, but it is helpless without it. Is it possible 
to believe that a realistically imaginative, materially minded 
people like the Greeks would have regarded as immortal a 
creature incapable (once the funeral is over) of requiring or 
receiving further mnouvishment—either in religious cult or 
otherwise ? 

The daylight world of Homer is thus freed from spectres 
of the night (for even in dreams the psyche is seen no more 
after the body is burnt); from those intangible and ghostly 
essences at whose unearthly activity the superstitious of every 
age tremble. The living are no longer troubled by the dead. 
The world is governed by the gods alone ; not pale and ghostly 
phantoms, but palpable and fully materialized figures, working 
powerfully everywhere, and dwelling on the clear mountain 
tops: “and brightness gleams around them.’”’ No daimonic 
powers can compare with the gods or can avail against them ; 
and night does not set free the departed souls of the dead. 
The reader starts involuntarily and begins to suspect the 
influence of another age, when in a part of Book XX of the 
Odyssey, added by a later hand, he reads how shortly before 
the destruction of the suitors the clairvoyant soothsayer 
beholds in hall and forecourt the soul-phantoms (eiddla) 


10 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


floating in multitudes and hurrying down to the darkness 
under the earth: “‘ the sun was darkened in the heaven and 
a thick mist came over all.” The later poet has been very 
successful in suggesting the terror awakened by a foreboding 
of tragedy ; but such terror in the face of the doings of the 
spirit world is entirely un-Homeric. 


§ 4 


Were the Greeks, then, always so untroubled by such fears 
of the souls of the dead? Was there never any cult of dis- 
embodied spirits, such as was not only known to all primitive 
peoples throughout the world, but was also quite familiar to 
nations belonging to the same family as the Greeks, for instance, 
the Indians and the Persians? The question and its answer 
have more than a passing interest. In later times—long 
subsequent to Homer—-we find in Greece itself a lively worship 
of ancestors and a general cult of the departed. Were it 
demonstrable—as it is generally assumed without proof—-that 
the Greeks only at this late period first began to pay a religious 
cult to the souls of the dead, this fact would give very strong 
support to the oft-repeated theory that the cult of the dead 
arose from the ruins of a previous worship of the gods. 
Anthropologists are accustomed to deny this and to regard 
the worship of disembodied souls as one of the earliest forms 
(if not as originally the only form) of the reverence paid to 
unseen powers. The peoples, however, upon whose conditions 
of life and mental conceptions such views are generally based, 
have indeed behind them a long past, but no history. What is 
to prevent pure speculation and theorizing in conformity with 
the preconceived idea just mentioned (which is almost elevated 
to the position of a doctrine of faith by some comparative 
religionists) from introducing into the dim past of such savage 
peoples the primitive worship of gods, out of which the worship 
of the dead may then subsequently arise ? But Greek religious 
development can be traced from Homer onwards for a long 
period ; and there we find the certainly remarkable fact 
that a cult of the dead, unknown to Homer, only appears later, 
in the course of a long and vigorous expansion of religious 
ideas in after times; or, at least, then shows itself more 
plainly—but not, it is important to notice, as the precipitate 
of a dying belief in gods and worship of the gods, but rather 
as a collateral development by the side of that highly developed 
form of piety. 

Are we, then, really to believe that the cult of disembodied 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 11 


spirits was absolutely unknown to the Greeks of pre- 
Homeric times ? 
Such an assertion, if made without due qualification, is con- 
tradicted by a closer study of the Homeric poems themselves. 
It is true that Homer represents for us the earliest great 
stage in the evolution of Greek civilization of which we have 
clear evidence. But the poems do not stand at the beginning 
of that evolution. Indeed, they only stand at the beginning of 
Greek Epic poetry—-so far as this has been transmitted to us— 
because the natural greatness and wide popularity of the 
Iliad and the Odyssey secured their preservation in writing. 
Their very existence and the degree of artistic finish which 
they show, oblige us to suppose that behind them lies a long 
history of heroic “Saga ’”’ poetry. The conditions which they 
describe and imply point to a long course of previous develop- 
ment—from nomadic to city life, from patriarchal rule to the 
organization of the Greek Polis. And just as the maturity of 
material development tells its tale, so do the refinement and 
maturity of culture, the profound and untrammelled know- 
ledge of the world, the clarity and simplicity of thought 
reflected in them. All these things go to show that before 
Homer, in order to reach Homer, the Greek world must have 
thought and learned much—must, indeed, have unlearned 
and undone much. As in art, so in all the products of 
civilization, what is simple, appropriate, and convincing is not 
the achievement of beginners, but the reward of prolonged 
study. It is prima facie unthinkable that during the whole 
length of Greek evolution before Homer, religion alone, the 
relationship between man and the invisible world, should have 
remained stationary at any one point. It is not from the 
comparison of religious beliefs and their development among 
kindred nations, nor even from the study of apparently 
primitive ideas and usages in the religious life of the Greeks 
themselves of later times, that we are to seek the truth about 
the religious customs of that remote period which is obscured 
for us by the intervening mass of the Homeric poems. Com- 
parative studies of this kind are valuable in their way, but 
must only be used to give further support to the insight 
derived from less easily misleading methods of inquiry. For 
us the only completely satisfactory source of information 
about pre-Homeric times is Homer himself. We are allowed— 
indeed, we are forced—to conclude that there have been 
changes in conceptions and customs, if, in that otherwise so 
uniform and rounded Homeric world, we meet with isolated 
occurrences, customs, forms of speech that contradict the 


£2 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


normal atmosphere of Homer and can only be explained by 
reference to a world in all essentials differently orientated 
from his own and for the most part kept in the background 
by Homer. All that is necessary is to open our eyes, freed 
from preconceived ideas, to the “‘ rudiments ”’ (“‘ survivals”, 
as they are better called by English scholars) of a past stage of 
civilization discoverable in the Iliad and Odyssey themselves. 
§ 5 

Such rudiments of a once vigorous soul-worship are not 
hard to find in Homer. In particular, we may refer to what the 
Iliad tells us of the manner in which the dead body of Patroklos . 
is dealt with. The reader need only recall the general outline 
of the story. In the evening of the day upon which Hektor 
has been slain, Achilles with his Myrmidons sings the funeral 
dirge to his dead friend: they go three times in procession 
round the body, Achilles laying his “ 
the breast of Patroklos and calling upon him with the words : 
“Hail, Patroklos mine, even in Aides’ dwelling-place ; 
what I vowed.to thee before is now performed ; Hektor lies 
slain and is the prey of dogs, and twelve noble Trojan youths 
will I slay at thy funeral pyre.’ After they have laid aside 
their arms he makes ready the funeral feast for his com- 
panions—bulls, sheep, goats, and pigs are killed, “and all 
around, in beakers-full, the blood flowed round the corpse.” 
During the night the soul of Patroklos appears to Achilles 
demanding immediate burial. In the morning the host of 
the Myrmidons marches out in arms, bearing the body in their 
midst. The warriors lay locks of their hair, cut off for the 
purpose, upon the body, and last of all Achilles places his 
own hair in the hand of his friend—it was once pledged by 
his father to Spercheios the River-god, but Patroklos must 
now take it with him, since return to his home is denied to 
Achilles. The funeral pyre is got ready, many sheep and 
oxen slaughtered. The corpse is wrapped in their fat, while 
their carcasses are placed beside it ; jars of oil and honey are 
set round the body. Next, four horses are killed, two dogs 
belonging to Patroklos, and last of all twelve Trojan youths 
taken prisoner for this purpose by Achilles. All these are 
burnt together with the corpse, and Achilles spends the whole 
night pouring out dark wine upon the earth, calling the while 
upon the psyche of Patroklos. Only when morning comes is 
the fire extinguished with wine ; the bones of Patroklos are 
collected and laid in a golden casket and entombed within 
a mound. 


murderous hands” on — 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 13 


Here we have a picture of the funeral of a chieftain which, 
in the solemnity and ceremoniousness of its elaborate detail, 
is in striking conflict with the normal Homeric conception of 
the nothingness of the soul after its separation from the body. 
A full and rich sacrifice is here offered to such a soul. This 
sacrifice is inexplicable if the soul immediately upon its 
dissolution flutters away insensible, helpless and powerless, 
and therefore incapable of enjoying the offerings made to it. 
It is therefore not unnatural that a method of interpretation 
which isolates Homer as far as possible and adheres closely 
to his own fixed and determinate range of ideas, should attempt 
to deny the sacrificial character of the offerings made on this 
occasion.12 We may well ask, however, what else but a 
sacrifice, 1.e. a repast offered in satisfaction of the needs of 
the person honoured (in this case the psyche), can be intended 
by this stream of blood about the corpse; this slaughtering 
and burning of cattle and sheep, horses and dogs, and finally 
of twelve Trojan prisoners on or at the funeral pyre? To 
explain it all as a mere performance of pious duties, as is 
often done in interpreting many of the gruesome pictures of 
Greek sacrificial ceremonies, is impossible here. Besides, 
Homer often tells us of merely pious observances in honour 
of the dead, and they are of a very different character. And 
the most horrible touch of all (the human sacrifice) is not put 
in simply to satisfy Achilles’ lust for vengeance—twice over 
does Achilles call to the soul of Patroklos with the words : 
“To you do I bring what I formerly promised to you” 
(71. xxiii, 20 ff., 180 ff.).13 The whole series of offerings on this 
occasion is precisely of the kind which we may take as typical 
of the oldest sort of sacrificial ritual such as we often find in 
later Greek religion in the cultus of the infernal deities. The 
sacrificial offerings are completely burnt in honour of the 
Daimon and are not shared between the bystanders as in the 
case of other offerings. If such “ holocausts’’, when offered 
to the Chthonic and some of the Olympian deities, are to be 
regarded as sacrificial in character, then it is unjustifiable 
to invent some other meaning for the performances at the 
funeral pyre of Patroklos. The offering of wine, oil, and honey, 


at least, are normal in sacrificial rituals of later times. Even // 


the severed lock of hair spread out over the dead body or 
laid in the cold hand is a well known sacrificial tribute, and 
must be supposed such here as much as in later Greek 
ceremonial or in that of many other peoples.14 In fact, this 
gift in particular, symbolically representing as it does a more 
valuable sacrifice by means of another and less important 


14 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


object (in the giving of which only the goodwill of the giver 
is to be considered)—this very offering, like all such symbolical 
substitutions, bears witness to the long duration and past 
development of the cultus in which it occurs—in this case of 
the worship of the dead in pre-Homeric times. 

The whole narrative presupposes the idea that by the 
pouring out of streams of blood, by offerings of wine and burnt 
offerings of human beings and of cattle, the psyche of a person 
lately dead can be refreshed, and its resentment mollified. 
At any rate, it is thus thought of as accessible to human 
prayers and as remaining for some time in the neighbourhood 
of the sacrifice made to it. This contradicts what we expect 
in Homer, and, in fact, just in order to make this unusual 
performance plausible to an audience no longer familiar with 
the idea, and to make it admissible on a special occasion, the 
poet (though the actual course of his story does not really 
require it) 15 makes the psyche of Patroklos appear by night 
to Achilles. And, in fact, to the end of the narrative Achilles 
repeatedly greets the soul of Patroklos as though it were 
present.1® The unusual way in which Homer deals with this 
whole affair, so full of primeval, savage ideas as it is, seems, 
indeed, to betray a certain vagueness about what its real 
meaning may be. That the writer has certain qualms on 
the subject is indicated by the brevity—not at all hike Homer— 
with which the most shocking part of the story, the slaughter 
of human beings, together with horses and dogs, is hurried 
over. But the thing to be noted particularly is that the poet 
is certainly not devising such unpleasant circumstances for the 
first time out of his own imagination. This epic picture of the 
worship of the dead was adopted by Homer from an earlier 
source (whatever that source may have been),1? and not 
invented by him. He makes it serve his special purpose, which 
is to provide a satisfactory climax to the series of vivid and 
emotional scenes beginning with the tragic death of Patroklos 
and ending with the death and dishonouring of the champion 
of Troy. After such emotional exaltation the overstrained 
nerves must not be allowed to relax too suddenly; a last 
flicker of the superhuman rage and grief that made Achilles 
rave so furiously against his foes must show itself in the serving 
up of this awful banquet to the soul of his friend. It is 
as though a primitive and long-suppressed savagery had 
broken out again for a last effort. Only when all is over does 
the soul of Achilles find repose in melancholy resignation. 
More calmly he calls upon the rest of the Achzans to take their 
seats ‘in a wide circle round about’; and there follows the 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 15 
description of those splendid ‘“‘Games”’, a subject that must 
have awakened the enthusiasm of every experienced athlete 
in the audience—and was there ever a Greek who was not 
an athlete ? It is true that athletic contests are described by 
Homer mainly on account of their own peculiar interest and 
for the sake of the artistic effects that their description 
allowed. Still, the selection of such games as a fitting con- 
clusion to a chieftain’s funeral cannot be fully understood 
except as a survival of an ancient and once vigorous worship: 
of the dead. Such athletic contests in honour of the great 
immediately after their death are often referred to by 
Homer ; 18 indeed, a funeral is the only occasion 1° recognized 
by him as suitable for the exhibition of athletic prize-com- 
petitions. The practice never quite died out, and it became 
usual in later post-Homeric times to mark the festivals of 
Heroes and, later of gods, too, by Games which gradually 
became regularly repeated performances, developed from the 
traditional contests that had concluded the funeral ceremonies. 
of great men. Now, no one doubts that the Agon at the festival 
of a Hero or a god formed part of their religious worship. 
It is only reasonable, then, to suppose that the funeral games. 
which accompany the burial of a chieftain (and are confined 
to that one occasion) belong to the religious cult of the dead,. 
and to recognize that such a mode of worship can only have 
been introduced at a time when men regarded the soul, in 


whose honour the ceremony took place, as capable of sharing 


consciously in its enjoyment. Even Homer is certainly 
conscious of the fact that the games, like the rest of the 
offerings made then, were intended for the satisfaction of 
the dead and not solely for the entertainment of the 
living.2°. We may also cite the declared opinion of 
Varro, who says that the dead in whose honour funeral 
games are celebrated are thereby proved to have been 
regarded originally, if not as gods, at least as very powerful 
spirits.24_ Of course, this feature of the original cultus of the 
soul was very easily stripped of its real meaning— 
it recommended itself quite apart from its religious 
significance---and for that very reason remained longer than. 
other performances of the kind in general use. 

If we now survey the whole series of ritual acts directed to: 
the honouring of the soul of Patroklos, we can deduce from 
the seriousness of these attempts to please the disembodied 
spirit what must have been the strength of the original 
conception--how vivid must have been the impression of 
enduring sensibility, of formidable power possessed by a soul. 


< 


16 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


to whom such a cult was offered. It is true of the cult of the 
dead, as of any other sacrificial custom, that its perpetuation 
is due solely to the hope of avoiding hurt and obtaining 
assistance at the hands of the Unseen.** A generation that no 
longer anticipated either help or harm from the “ Souls ”’ 
might be ready to perform last offices of all kinds to the deserted 
body out of pure piety, and to offer to the dead a certain 
traditional reverence. But this would testify rather to the 
erief of those left behind than to any special reverence felt 
for the departed.28 This is mostly the case in Homer. It is 
not, however, what we should call piety, but much rather 
mistrust of a “ ghost ”’ become powerful through its separation 
from the body, that explains the exaggerated fullness of the 
funeral offerings that are made at the burial of Patroklos. 
They cannot be made to fit in with the ordinary circle of 
Homeric ideas. Indeed, that this circle of ideas excluded all 
misgiving at the possible action of unseen spirits is quite 
clearly shown by the fact that the honours paid even to a dead 
man held in such veneration as Patroklos are confined to the 
solitary occasion of his funeral. As the psyche of Patroklos 
himself assures his friend, once the burning of the bedy is 
completed, it, the psyche, will take its departure to Hades, 
never to return.?4 It is easy to see that from this point of 
view there was no motive whatever that could lead to a 
permanent cult of the soul such as was common among the 
Greeks of later times. But it should be noticed further that 
the luxurious repast offered to the soul of Patroklos on the 
occasion of his funeral had no point if the goodwill of the 
soul which was to be assured by that process would never have 
\an opportunity in the future of making itself felt. The con- 
tradiction between Homeric belief and Homeric practice on 
this occasion is complete, and shows decisively that the 
traditional view that would see in this description of soul- 
worship at the funeral of Patroklos an effort after new and 
more lively ideas of the life after death, must certainly be 
wrong. When new surmises, wishes, conjectures begin to 
arise and seek a means of expression, the new ideas generally 
find incomplete utterance in the old and inappropriate 
external forms, but express themselves more clearly and 
certainly (generally with some tendency to exaggeration) in 
the less conservative words and language of men. Here just 
the opposite occurs: every word the poet utters about the 
circumstances contradicts the elaborately wrought ceremonial 
which those circumstances call forth. It is impossible to point 
to a single touch that accords with the belief implied by the 


TORS HOMERIC™ POEMS Ly 


ceremonial. The poet’s bias is a different and, indeed, an 
opposite one. Of this much at least there cannot be the slightest 
doubt: the funeral ceremonies over the body of Patroklos 
are not the first budding of a new principle, but rather repre- 
sent a “ vestige ’’ of a more vigorous worship of the dead in 
earlier times, a worship that must once have been a complete 
and sufficient expression of belief in the great and enduring 
power of the disembodied spirit. It has, however, been 
preserved unaltered into an age that, with quite other religious 
beliefs, no longer understands, or at best half-guesses at the 
sense of such strange ceremonial observances. Thus ritual 
generally outlives both the state of mind and the belief which 
originally gave rise to it. 


§ 6 


Neither the Iliad nor the Odyssey contains anything that 
can equal the scenes at the funeral of Patroklos as evidence 
of primitive worship of the dead. But even the ordinary forms 
of interment of the dead are not entirely without such 
“ vestigial ’’ features. The dead man’s eyes and mouth are 
closed,”> the body is washed and anointed, and after being 
wrapped in a clean linen cloth is laid upon a bier,?® and the 
funeral dirge begins.?” It is hardly possible to see even the 
remotest, lingering, reminiscence of a once vigorous worship 
of the dead in such performances as these ; or in the very 
simple burial customs that follow the burning of the body ; 
the bones are collected in a jar or a casket and buried under 
a mound, and a post set up to mark the place as a “ grave- 
mound ”’.28 But when we find that the body of Elpenor, in 
accordance with the command issued by his psyche to 
Odysseus (Od. xi, 74), is burned together with his weapons 
(Od. xii, 13) ; when, further, we read that Achilles burnt the 
weapons of his overthrown foe together with his body on the 
funeral pyre (J/. vi, 418), it is impossible not to feel that we 
have here, too, survivals of an ancient belief that the soul 
in some mysterious fashion was capable of making use of these 
objects that are burnt along with its discarded bodily envelope. 
No one doubts that this is the reason for such a custom when 
it meets us in the case of other nations; with the Greeks, 
too, it must have had an equally good foundation, however 
little such is to be discovered in the ordinary Homeric view 
of the soul. The custom, moreover, more precisely described 
in these cases, was of general observance ; we often hear how 
the completeness of a burial requires the burning of the 
possessions of the dead along with the body.?® We cannot 

Cc 


18 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


tell to what extent the duty of offering to the dead all his 
movable possessions ®° (a duty originally without doubt 
interpreted quite literally) had come in Homeric times to 
be interpreted in a symbolical sense—a process which reached 
its lowest stage in the custom prevalent in later times of 
presenting an obol “‘ for the Ferryman of the Dead’. Finally, 
the ‘funeral feast ’’ offered by the king to the mourning 
people either after the funeral of a chieftain (J/. xxiv, 802, 
665), or before the burning of his body (//. xxiii, 29 ff.), could 
only have derived its full meaning from an ancient belief 
that the soul of the person thus honoured could itself take 
a share in the feast. In the banquet in honour of Patroklos> 
the dead man is given a definite portion—-the blood of the 
slaughtered animals which is poured round his body (JJ. xxiii, 
34). Like the funeral games, this banquet is apparently 
intended to propitiate the soul of the dead man. Consequently, 
we find even Orestes, after slaying Aigisthos, his father’s 
murderer, offering him a funeral feast (Od. 111, 309)—not, 
surely, in a mood of simple “ piety ’’. The custom of inviting 
the whole people, on the occasion of important funerals, to 
such a banquet no longer appears in later times ; it has little 
resemblance to the funeral feasts shared by the relations of 
the dead man (zepidamva) that were afterwards customary ; 
it is far closer to the great cene ferales that accompanied the 
silicernia in Rome, to which the relations of the dead man, 
if he were an important person, invited the whole population3+ 
After all, it is no harder to understand the underlying con- 
ception of the soul in this case sharing the feast with the whole 
people, than it is to understand the same conception when 
applied to the great sacrifices to the gods which, though the 
congregation partakes, are, in name and in fact, essentially 
“ Banquets of the Gods ”’ (Od. 111, 336). 

Such are the relics of ancient soul-worship to be found 
within the limits of the Homeric world. Further attention to 
the spirits of the dead beyond the time of the funeral was 
prevented by the deeply ingrained conviction that after the 
burning of the body the psyche was received into the 
inaccessible world of the Unseen, from which no traveller 
. returns. But, in order to secure this complete departure of 
the soul, it is necessary for the body to be burnt. Though we 
do occasionally read in the Iliad or the Odyssey that 
immediately after death and before the burning of the body 
“the psyche departed to Hades ’’,?? the words must not be 
taken too literally ; the soul certainly flies off at once towards 
Hades, but it hovers now between the realms of the living and 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 19 


the dead until it is received into the final safekeeping of the 
latter after the burning of the body. The psyche of Patroklos 
appearing by night to Achilles declares this; it prays for 
immediate burial in order that it may pass through the door 
of Hades. Until then the other shadow-creatures prevent 
its entrance and bar its passage across the river, so that it 
has to wander restlessly round the house of Ais of the wide 
gate (11. xxiu, 71 ff.). This hastening off towards the house of 
Hades is again all that is meant when it is said elsewhere of 
Patroklos himself (//. xvi, 856) that the psyche departed out 
of his limbs to the house of Hades. In exactly the same way 
it is said of Elpenor, the companion of Odysseus, that “‘ his 
soul descended to Hades ”’ (Od. x, 560). This soul meets his 
friend, nevertheless, later on, at the entrance of the Shadow- 
world, not yet deprived of its senses like the rest of the dwellers 
in that House of Darkness; not until the destruction of.its 
physical counterpart is complete can it enter into the rest 
of Hades. Only through fire are the souls of the dead 
“appeased ” (Il. vu, 410). 50 long, then, as the psyche retains 
any vestige of “‘ earthliness ’’ it possesses some feeling still, 
some awareness of what is going on among the living. . | 

But once the body is destroyed by fire, then is the psyche 
relegated to Hades ; no return to this earth i is permitted to it, 
and not a breath of this world can penetrate tou there: Lt 
cannot even return in thought. Indeed, it no longer thinks 
at all, and knows nothing more of the world beyond. The 
living also forget one so completely cut off from themselves 
(Il. xxii, 389). What, then, should tempt them, during the 
rest of their lives here, to try to hold communication with 
the dead by means of a cult? 


SG, 


The practice of cremation itself will perhaps give us one 
last piece of evidence that there had been a time when the 
idea of the prolonged sojourn of the disembodied spirit in the 
realm of the living and its power of influencing the survivors 
existed among the Greeks. Homer knows of no other kind 
of funeral than that of fire. Ona funeral pyre are burnt the 
bodies of king or leader with the most solemn ritual ; those of 
the common people fallen in war are given to the flames with 
less ceremony ; none are buried. We may well ask whence 
comes this custom, and what is its meaning for Greeks of the 
Homeric age? This means of disposing of the bodies of the 
dead is not by any means the most simple and obvious ; it 


20 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


is far easier to carry out, and far less expensive, to bury them 
in the earth. It has been suggested that the custom of 
cremation as observed by Persians, Germans, Slavs, and other 
/ peoples, is inherited from a nomadic period. The wandering 
horde has no permanent habitation in which or near which 
the body of the beloved dead can be buried and perpetual 
sustenance offered to his soul. Unless, therefore, as is 
the custom with some nomadic tribes, the dead body is given 
up to be the prey of beasts or weather, it might seem a natural 
idea to reduce it to ashes and carry the remains, preserved in 
a light jar, along with the tribe on its further journeyings.®# 
Whether such practical reasonings can have had so much 
influence in a connexion that is generally governed entirely 
by fancy, and in which practical considerations are altogether 
scouted—I shall leave undecided. But, in any case, if we 
postulate a nomadic origin for the practice of burning the dead 
among the Greeks, we should have to go back altogether too 
far into the past to explain a mode of behaviour that, by no 
means exclusively practised in early times by the Greeks, 
becomes absolutely prescriptive in a period when they have 
long ceased to wander. The Asiatic Greeks, and in particular 
the Ionians, whose popular beliefs and customs are, in general 
outline, at least, reproduced for us in Homer, deserted one 
settled habitation in order to found another. Cremation then 
must have been so permanently established among them that 
it never entered their heads to seek any other method of 
disposing of their dead. In Homer not only the Greeks before 
Troy and Elpenor, far away from home, are burnt when they 
die ; Eétion, too, in his own home is given a funeral pyre 
by Achilles (Z/. vi, 418). Hektor’s body is burnt in the 
middle of Troy and the Trojans themselves in their own native 
land burn their dead (J/. vii). The box or urn that holds the 
cremated bones of the dead is buried in a mound ; the ashes 
of Patroklos, Achilles, Antilochos, and Aias rest on foreign 
soil (Od. 111, 109 ff.; xxiv, 76° ff.). “It never G6ccurs to 
Agamemnon that if Menelaos dies before Ilios his brother’s 
grave could be anywhere else than at Troy (JJ. iv, 174 ff.). 
There is, therefore, evidently no intention on the part of the 
living of taking the remains of the dead with them on 
their return home ;* and this cannot be the object of 
cremation. It will be necessary to look for some principle 
more in accordance with primitive modes of thought than 
such merely practical considerations. Jakob Grimm 3¢ 
suggested that the burning of the corpse might have been 
intended as an offering of the dead man to the gods. Among 


THE HOMERIC” POEMS 21 


the Greeks this could only mean the gods of the lower worid ; 
but nothing in Greek belief or ritual suggests such a grim 
intention.3’ The real purpose aimed at in cremation is not so 
far to seek. Since the destruction of the body by fire is 
supposed to result in the complete separation of the spirit 
from the land of the living,?* it must be assumed that this 
result is also intended by the survivors who employ the means 
in question ; and consequently that the complete banishment 
of the psyche once and for all into the other world is the real 
purpose and the original occasion of the practice of cremation. 
Isolated expressions of opinion among the nations that have 
practised the custom do, as a matter of fact, indicate as its 
object the speedy and entire separation of soul from body.*® 
The exact nature of the intention varies with the state of 
belief about the soul. When the Indians turned from the 
custom of burying their dead to that of burning them, they 
were actuated, it appears, by the idea that the sooner and 
more completely the soul was freed from the body and its 
limitations, the more easily would it reach the Paradise of the 
Just.49 Of the purifying effects of the fire implied in this 
conception, the Greeks knew nothing until the idea was 
revived in later times.44 The Greeks of the Homeric age, 
innocent of any such “ Kathartic’’ notion, thought only of 
the destructive powers of that element to which they entrusted 
the body of their dead, and of the benefit that they were 
conferring upon the soul in freeing it by fire from the lifeless 
body, thus adding their assistance to its own efforts to get 
free.42 Nothing can destroy the psyche’s visible counterpart 
more quickly than fire. If, then, the body is burnt and the 
most treasured possessions of the dead man consumed along 
with it, no tie remains that can detain the soul any longer in 
the world of the living. 

Cremation, therefore, is intended to benefit the dead, whose 
soul no longer wanders unable to find rest ; but still more the 
living, for they will not be troubled by ghosts that are securely 
confined to the depths of the earth. The Greeks of Homer, 
accustomed by long usage to the burning of the dead, are free 
from all fears of haunting “‘ ghostly ’’ presences. But when the 
practice of the fire-funeral was first adopted, that which was 
to be guarded against in the future by the destruction of the 
body with fire must have been a real cause of fear.42 The souls 
that were so anxiously relegated to the other world of the 
Unseen must have been feared as awesome inhabitants of this 
world. And so, from whatever source it may have come to 
them,44 the custom of cremation gives firm ground for 


22 THE HOMERIC ,.POEMS 


supposing that at some period of their history the belief in 
the power and activity of the spirits of the dead and their 
influence upon the living—a subject of fear rather than 
reverence—must have been prevalent amongst the Greeks ; 
even though only a few scattered hints still bear witness to 
such beliefs in the Homeric poems. 


§ 8 


And evidence of these ancient beliefs we can now see with 
our eyes and touch with our hands. Owing to an inestimable 
series of fortunate circumstances, we are enabled to catch 
a glimpse of a far distant period of Greek history, which not 
only supplies a background to Homer, but makes him cease 
to be the earliest source of our information upon Greek life 
and thought. He is brought suddenly much nearer, perhaps 
deceptively nearer, to ourselves. The last decades of ex- 
cavation in the citadel and lower town of Mycenze and other 
sites in the Peloponnese right into the centre of the peninsula 
and as far northwards as Attica and Thessaly, have resulted 
in..the discovery of graves—shaft-graves, chamber-graves, 
and elaborately constructed domed vaults, which were built 
and walled up in the period before the Dorian invasion. 
w These graves prove to us—what was already hinted at by a 
few isolated expressions in Homer #—that the Greek “ Age 
of: Burning ’’ was preceded, as in the case of the Persians, 
Indians, and Germans, by a period in which the dead were 
buried in the ground intact.*® The lords and ladies of golden 
Mycene, and lesser folk, too (in the graves at Nauplia, in 
Attica, etc.), were buried when they died. Chieftains take 
with them into.the grave a rich paraphernalia of gorgeous 
furniture and ornaments—unburnt like their own bodies ; 
they rest upon a bed of small stones, and are covered by a 
layer of loam and pebbles ; 4? traces of smoke and remains of 
ashes and charred wood bear witness to the fact that the dead 
were laid upon the place where the “‘ sacrifice for the dead ”’ 
had already been made; upon the hearth where offerings 
had been previously burnt inside the grave chamber.*8 
This may very well be a burial procedure of the most primeval 
antiquity. Our oldest “ Giants’ ”’ graves, in whose treasures 
no metal of any kind is found, and whose age is on that account 
considered to be pre-Teutonic, exhibit similar features. 
Either on the ground, or, occasionally, on a specially prepared 
basis of fire-brick, the sacrificial fire is lighted, and, when it 
has burnt out, the corpse is set down upon the place and given 


/ 


THE: HOMERIC POEMS 23 


a covering of sand, loam, and stone.*4® Remains of burnt 
sacrificial animals (sheep and goats) have also been found 
in the graves at Nauplia and elsewhere.®® In conformity 
with such different burial customs, the conceptions then held 
of the nature and powers of the disembodied spirits must 
have differed widely from those of the Homeric world. 
Offerings to the dead at a funeral occur in Homer only on 
special and isolated occasions and accompanied by an obsolete 
and half-understood ritual. Here they were the regular 
procedure both with rich and poor alike. But why should they 
have made offerings to their dead if they did not believe in 
their power ? And why should they have taken away gold 
and jewellery and art treasures of all kinds and in astonishing 
quantities from the living and given them to the dead if they 
had not believed that the dead could find enjoyment in their 
former possessions even in the grave? Where thé material 
body still remains intact, there the second self can at least 
occasionally return. Its treasured possessions laid by its side 
in the tomb are there to prevent its appearing uninvited in 
the outer world.*! 

Supposing, however, that the soul could return if and where 
it liked, it is evident that the cult of the dead would not be 
confined to the occasion of the funeral. And, indeed, that 
very circumstance—the prolongation of the cult paid to the 
dead beyond the time of the funeral—of which we could not 
find a vestige in Homer, can at last (as it seems to me) be 
traced in pre-Homeric Mycene. Over the middle one of four 
shaft-graves found on the citadel stands an altar which can 
only have been placed there after the grave was closed and 
sealed up.*?. It is a round altar, hollow inside, and not closed 
in at the bottom ; in fact, a sort of funnel standing directly 
upon the earth. If, now, the blood of the victim, mingled with 
the various drink-offerings, were poured down into this 
receptacle, the whole would flow downwards into the ground 
beneath and to the dead man lying there. This is no altar 
(Bwuds) such as was in use in the worship of the gods above, 
but a sacrificial hearth (écxydépa) for the worship of the 
inhabitants of the underworld. This structure corresponds 
closely with the description we have of the hearths upon 
which offerings were made in a later age to “‘ Heroes ’’, i.e. 
the souls of transfigured human beings.°* Here, then, we 
have a contrivance for the permanent and repeated worship 
of the dead ; for such worship alone can this structure have 
been intended. The funeral offering to the dead had already 
been completed inside the grave-chamber. We thus find a 


va 


24 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


meaning in the ‘‘ beehive’’ tombs, for the vaulted main- 
chamber, beside which the corpse lay in a smaller chamber 
by itself. They were evidently intended to allow sacrifices. 
to be made inside them—and not once only.®** At least this is 
the purpose which the outer chamber serves elsewhere in 


/ double-vaulted graves. The evidence of the eye is therefore 


able to establish the truth of what could only be made out 
with difficulty from the Homeric poems. We can thus see 
that there had been a time in which the Greeks, too, believed 
that after the separation of body and soul the psyche did 
not entirely cease from intercourse with the upper world. 
Such a belief naturally called forth a cult of the soul, which 
lasted on even when the method of burying the body had 
changed, and even survived into Homeric times, when, with 
the prevalence of other beliefs, such observances ceased to have 
any meaning. 


II 


Homer consistently assumes the departure of the soul into 
an inaccessible land of the dead where it exists in an 
unconscious half-life. There it is without clear self-conscious- 
ness and consequently neither desires nor wills anything. 
It has no influence on the upper world, and consequently no 
longer receives any share of the worship of the living. The 
dead are beyond the reach of any feelings whether of fear or 
love. No means exists of forcing or enticing them back again. 
Homer knows nothing of necromancy or of oracles of the 
dead,®* both common in later Greek life. Gods come into the 
poems and take part in the action of the story ; the souls of 
the departed never do. Homer’s immediate successors in the 
Epic tradition think quite differently on this point ; but for 
Homer the soul, once relegated to Hades, has no further 
importance. 

If we think how different it must have been before the time of 
Homer, and how different it certainly was after him, we can 
hardly help feeling surprise at finding at this early stage of 
Greek culture such extraordinary freedom from superstitious 
fears in that very domain where superstition is generally most 
deeply rooted. Inquiries, however, into the origin and cause 
of such an untroubled attitude must be made very cautiously 
and a completely conclusive answer must not be expected. 
More especially it must be borne in mind that in these poems 
we have to do, directly and immediately, at least, only with 
the poet and his circle. The Homeric Epos can only be called 
“folk poetry’ in the sense that it was adapted to the 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 25 


acceptance of the whole family of Greek-speaking people 
who welcomed it eagerly and transformed it to their own uses ; 
and not because the “folk ”’ in some mystical sense had a 
share in its composition. Many hands contributed to the 
composition of the poem, but they merely carried it further 
in the general direction which had been given to it not by the 
“Folk” or by the “‘Saga’’ tradition, as is sometimes too 
confidently asserted, but by the authority of the greatest 
poetic genius that the Greeks or, indeed, mankind ever knew. 
The tradition once formed was handed on bya close corporation 
of master-poets and their pupils who preserved, disseminated, 
continued and imitated the original great poet’s work. If, 
then, we find on the whole, and apart from a few vagaries 
in detail, a single unified picture of the world, of gods and men, 
life and death, given in these two poems, that is the picture 
which shaped itself in the mind of Homer and was impressed 
upon his work, and afterwards preserved by the Homeridai. 
It is plain that the freedom, almost the freethinking, with 
which every possible occurrence in the world is regarded in 
these poems, cannot ever have been characteristic of a whole 
people or race. And not only the animating spirit, but even 
the outward shape that is given in the two epic poems to the 
ideal world surrounding and ruling over the world of men, is 
the work of the poet. It was no priestly theology that gave 
him his picture of the gods. The popular beliefs of the time, 
each peculiar to some countryside, canton, or city, must, if 
left to themselves, have split up into even more contradictory 
varieties of thought than they did in later times when there 
existed some few religious institutions common to all Hellas 
to act as centres of union. The poet alone must have been 
responsible for the conception and consistent execution of the 
picture of a single and unified world of gods, confined to a 
select company of sharply characterized heavenly beings, 
grouped together in certain well-recognized ways and dwelling 
together in a single place of residence above the earth. If we 
listened to Homer alone we should suppose that the 
innumerable local cults of Greece, with their gods closely 
bound to the soil, hardly existed. Homer ignores them almost 
entirely. His gods are pan-Hellenic, Olympian. In fact, in 
his picture of the gods, Homer fulfilled most completely his 
special poetic task of reducing confusion and superfluity to 
uniformity and symmetry of design—the very task which 
Greek idealism in art continually set before itself. In his 
picture Greek beliefs about the gods appear absolutely 
uniform—as uniform as dialect, political condition, manners, 


26 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


and morals. In reality—of this we may be sure—no such 
uniformity existed ; the main outlines of pan-Hellenism were 
doubtless there, but only the genius of the poet can have 
combined and fused them into a purely imaginary whole. 
Provincial differences in themselves interested him not at all. 
So, too, in the special question that we are considering, if we 
find him speaking of a single kingdom of the underworld, the 
resort of all departed spirits ruled over by a single pair of 
divinities and removed as far from the world of men and their 
cities as the Olympian dwelling of the Blessed Ones is in 
the opposite direction, who shall say how far he represents 
naive popular belief insuch matters ? On this side Olympus, 
the meeting place of all the gods that rule in the daylight ; °° 
on that the realm of Hades that holds in its grasp the unseen 
spirits that have left this life behind—the parallel is too 
apparent to be due to anything but the same simplifying and 
co-ordinating spirit in the one case as in the other. 


§ 2 

It: would, however, be an equally complete misunderstanding 
of the relation in which Homer stood to the popular beliefs 
of his time if we imagined that relation to be one of opposition, 
or even supposed him to have taken up an attitude resembling 
that of Pindar or the Attic Tragedians towards the con- 
ventional opinions of their time. These later poets often 
enough allow us to see quite clearly the intentional departure 
from normal opinion represented by their more advanced 
conceptions. Homer, on the contrary, is as free from con- » 
troversy as he is from dogma. He does not offer his pictures 
of God, the world and fate as anything peculiar to himself ; 
and it is natural, therefore, to suppose that his public 
recognized them as substantially the same as their own. The 
poet has not taken over the whole body of popular belief, but 
what he does say must have belonged to popular belief. The 
selection and combination of this material into a consistent 
whole was the poet’s real work. If the Homeric creed had 
not been so constructed in essentials that it corresponded to 
the beliefs of the time, or, at least, could be made to correspond, 
then it is impossible to account (even allowing for the poetic 
tradition of a school) for the uniformity that marks the work 
of the many poets that had a hand in the composition of the 
two poems. In this narrow sense it can be truly said that 
Homer’s poems represent the popular belief of their time ; 
not, indeed, the belief of all Greece, but only of the Ionian 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 27 


cities of the coasts and islands of Asia Minor in which the 
poet and his songs were at home. Ina similarly restricted sense 
may the pictures of outward life and manners that we find 
in the Ihad and the Odyssey be taken as a reflection of the 
contemporary life of the Greeks with particular reference to 
that of the Ionians. This life must have differed in many 
respects from that of the “‘ Myceneean civilization ’’, and there 
can be little doubt that the reasons for this difference are to 
be sought in the long-continued disturbances which marked 
the centuries that divide Homer from the age of Mycene, 
more especially in the Greek migrations, both in what they 
destroyed and what they created. The violent invasion of 
northern Greek peoples into the central mainland and the 
Peloponnese, the destruction of ancient empires and _ their 
civilization, the foundation of new Dorian states held by right 
of conquest, the great migrations to the Asiatic coasts, and the 
institution of a new lfe on foreign soil—all these violent 
modifications of the old course of existence must have dealt 
a severe blow at the whole fabric of that civilization and 
culture. In the same way we find that the cult of Souls 
and the conception-of the fate of departed spirits which 
governed this cult did not remain in Ionia (the beliefs of 
which country are reflected in Homer) what it had been at the 
height of the Mycenzan period. To this change, as to the 
others which accompanied it, we may well suppose that the 
struggles and wanderings of the intermediate period con- 
tributed a good deal. Homer’s clear-sighted vision that 
transcends the limits of city and even of racial gods, faiths, 
and worships, would hardly be explicable without the freedom 
of movement beyond the boundaries of country, the common 
life shared with companions of other races, the widened 
knowledge of all the conditions of foreign life, such as must 
have resulted from the dislocations and migrations of whole 
peoples. It is true that the Ionians of Asia Minor did, as we 
can prove, take a good many of their religious observances 
with them to their new homes. The migrations, however, did 
not preserve the connexion between the old homes and the 
new country with anything like the closeness that marked the 
later colonization ; and when the colonists left the familiar 
soil behind, the local cults attached to the soil must often 
have had to be abandoned, too. Now the worship of ancestors, 
connected as it was with the actual graves of those ancestors, 
was essentially a local cult. JKemembrance of the great ones 
of the past might survive transplantation, but not their 
religious worship, which could only be offered at the one spot 


28 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


where their bodies lay buried and which had now been left 
behind in an enemy’s country. The deeds of ancestors lived 
on in song, but they themselves began to be relegated to the 
domain of poetry and imagination. Imagination might adorn 
the story of their earthly life, but a world that was no longer 
reminded of their power by the regularly repeated performance 
of ceremonial, ceased to pay honour to their disembodied 
souls. Thus the most highly developed form of the cult of 
Souls—ancestor worship—died out, and the later version of 
the same thing, the cult of those of the tribe that had died in 
the new land and been buried there, was prevented from 
attaining a similar force and development by the newly- 
introduced practice of burning the bodies of the dead. It may 
well be that the origin of this new form of funeral rite lay, 
as has been suggested, in the wish to dismiss the soul of the 
dead man as quickly and completely as possible from the 
realm of the living; but it is beyond doubt that the result 
of this practice was to cut at the root of the belief in the near 
presence of the departed and the duty of performing the 
religious observances that were their right ; so that such things 
being deprived of their support, fell into decay and dis- 
appeared. 


§ 3 


We can thus see at least dimly how it was that the Ionian 
people of the Homeric age were led by the events of their own 
history and the alteration in funeral customs into holding that 
view of the soul which a study of their own poets has persuaded 
us was theirs. This view can hardly have retained more than 
a few stray vestiges of the ancient cult of the dead. Still, we 
should only be in a position to say what were the real reasons 
for this alteration in belief and custom if we knew and under- 
stood more about the intellectual changes that led to the 
gradual appearance of the Homeric view of the world; a 
view which included within its range a set of beliefs about the 
soul. Here it is best to confess our ignorance. We have before 
us the results only of those changes. From them, however, 
we can at least perceive that the religious consciousness of 
the Greeks, among whom Homer sang, had developed in a 
direction which did not allow much scope to the belief in 
ghosts and spirits of the dead. The Homeric Greeks had the 
deepest consciousness of man’s finite nature, of his dependence 
upon forces that lay without him. To remind himself of this 
and be content with his lot was his proper form of piety. Over 
him the gods hold sway, wielding a supernatural power— 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 29 


not infrequently a misguided and capricious power—but 
a conception of a general world-order is beginning to make its 
way ; ofa plan underlying the cross-purposes of individual and 
common life, working itself out in accordance with measured 
and appointed lot (ota). The arbitrary power of individual 
daimones is thus limited, and it is limited further by the will of 
the highest of the gods. The belief is growing that the world » 
is, in fact, a cosmos, a perfect organization such as men 
try to establish in their earthly states. In the face of such 
conceptions it would be increasingly difficult to believe in 
the vagaries of a supernatural ghostly order which, in direct 
opposition to the real heavenly order, is always distinguished 
by the fact that it stands outside any all-embracing dis- 
pensation, and allows full play to the caprice and malice of 
individual unseen powers. The irrational and _ the 
unaccountable is the natural element of the belief in ghosts 
and spirits; this is the source of the peculiar disquiet 
inspired by this province of belief or superstition. It owes 
most of its effect to the instability of its figures. The Homeric 
world, on the contrary, lives by reason ; its gods are fully 
intelligible to Greek minds and their forms and behaviour 
are clearly and easily comprehensible to Greek imagination. 
And the more distinctly were the gods represented, the more 
did the spirit-phantoms fade away into empty shadows. 
There was no one who might have been interested in the 
preservation and extension of the superstitious side of 
religion ; there was in particular no priesthood with a 
monopoly of instruction or an exclusive knowledge of the 
details of ritual and the methods of controlling the behaviour 
of spirits. If anyone did possess any monopoly of teaching, 
it was, in this age when all the highest faculties of the spirit 
found their expression in poetry, the poet and the singer. 
They, however, showed a completely “ secular ’”’ outlook even 
in religious matters. Indeed, these very clear-headed men, 
belonging to the same stock which in a later age “ invented ”’ 
(if one may be allowed to put it so) science and philosophy, 
were already displaying a mental attitude that distantly 
threatened the whole system of that plastic representation of 
things spiritual which the older antiquity had laboriously 
constructed. 

The earliest view held by primitive man about the activities 
of willing, feeling, or thinking, regards them simply as the 
manifestations of something which lives and wills inside the 
visible man. This something is regarded as embodied in one 
or other of the organs of the human body or as concealed 


30 THE, HOMERIC ‘POEMS 


therein. Accordingly the Homeric poems give the name of the 
‘midriff’ (dpiv, peeves) to most of the phenomena of will 
or feeling and even to those of the intellect. The “ heart ” 
(fzop, 4p) is also the name of a variety of feelings that were 
regarded as located in the heart and even identified with it. 
But this mode of expression had already for Homer become 
mere formula ; such expressions are not always to be taken 
literally ; the words of the poet often show that as a matter of 
fact he thought of these functions and emotions as incorporeal, 
though they were still named after parts of the body.°? 
And so we often find mentioned side by side with the 
“ midriff’? and in the closest conjunction with it, the dupés, 
a name which is not taken from any bodily organ and shows 
already that it is thought of as an immaterial function. In 
the same way many other words of this kind (véos-voeiv- 
vena, BovdrAy, wévos, pats) are used to describe faculties 
and activities of the will, sense, or thought, and show that 
these activities are thought of as independent, free-working, 
and incorporeal. A single thread still attaches the poet to the 
modes of conception and expression of the older world, but 
he himself has penetrated adventurously far into the realm 
of pure spirit. With a less cultured people the identification of 
the special functions of the will and the intellect only leads to 
the materialization of these into the notion of special physical 
entities, and consequently to the association of still other 
“souls ’’, in the shape of “‘ Conscience ’’, it may be, or “ Will ”, 
in addition to that other shadowy “ double’ of mankind, 
the “second self ’’.2 The tendency of the Homeric singers 
was already setting in just the opposite direction—the 
mythology of the “‘ inner man ”’ was breaking down altogether. 
They had only to take a few steps further in the same direction 
to find that they could dispense with the fsyche.as well. The 
belief in the existence of the psyche was the oldest and most 
primitive hypothesis adopted by mankind to explain the 
phenomena of dreams, swoons, and ecstatic visions; these 
mysterious states were accounted for by the intervention of a 
special material personality. Now, Homer has little interest 
in premonitions and ecstatic states, and no inclination in that 
direction whatever. He cannot, therefore, have been very 
much concerned with the evidence for the existence of a 
psyche in living men. -The final proof of the idea that the 
psyche must have been dwelling in man is the fact that it is 
separated from him in death. A man dies when he breathes 
out his last breath. This breath, something like a breath of 
air, and not a “‘ nothing ’’, any more than the wind its relative, 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 31 


but a body with a definite form (though it may not be visible 
to waking eyes)—this is the psyche, whose shape, the image 
of the man himself, is well known from dream-vision. One, ' 
however, who has become accustomed to the idea of bodiless 
powers working inside man will, on this last occasion when the 
powers within man show themselves, be likely to suppose that 
what brings about the death of a man is not a physical thing 
that goes out of him, but a power—a quality—which ceases to 
act ; nothing else, in fact, than his “life”. And he would 
not, of course, think of ascribing an independent continuous 
existence after the disruption of the body to a mere abstract 
idea like “life ’’. Homer, however, never got quite as far as 
this; for the most part the psyche is for him and always 
remains a real “‘ thing ’—the man’s second self. But that he 
had already begun to tread the slippery path in the course of 
which the psyche is transformed into an abstract “ concept 
of life’’, is shown by the fact that he several times quite 
unmistakably uses the word ‘‘ psyche’ when we should say 
“life’’.’ It is essentially the same mode of thought that leads 
him to say “ midriff’ (¢péves) when he no longer means 
the physical diaphragm, but the abstract concept of will or 
intellect. To say “‘ psyche ”’ instead of “ life ’’ is not the same 
thing as saying “‘life’’ instead of “‘ psyche’’ (and Homer 
never did the latter) ; but itis clear that for him in the process 
of dematerializing such concepts, even the psyche, a figure once 
so full of significance, is beginning to fade and vanish away. 
The separation from the land of their forefathers, and 
habituation to the use of cremation, the new direction taken 
by religious thought, the tendency to turn the once material 
forces of man’s inner life into abstractions—all these things 
contributed to weaken the belief in a powerful and significant 
life of the disembodied soul and its connexion with the affairs 
of this world. And at the same time it caused the decline of 
the cult of the Souls. So much, I think, we may safely assert. 
The deepest and most fundamental reasons for this decline 
in both belief and cult may elude our search, just as it is 
impossible for us to be sure how far in detail the Homeric 
poems reflect the beliefs of the people who first listened to 
them, and where the free invention of the poet begins. But 
the combination of the various elements of belief into a whole 
which, though far from being a dogmatically closed system, 
may yet not unfairly be called the Homeric Theology—this, 
we may Say, is most probably the work of the poet. The poet 
has a free hand in the picture he gives of the gods and never 
comes into conflict with any popular doctrine because Greek 


32 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


religion then, as always, consisted essentially in the right 
honouring of the gods of the country and not in any particular 
set of dogmas. There could hardly be any general con- 
ception of godhead and divinity with which the poet might 
come into conflict. That the popular mind absorbed 
thoroughly that picture of the world of gods which the Homeric 
poems had given, is shown by the whole future development of 
Greek culture and religion. If divergent conceptions did, in 
fact, also maintain themselves, they derived their strength 
not so much from a different religious theory, as from the 
postulates of a different religious cult that had not been 
influenced by any poet’s imagination. They might also more 
particularly have had the effect of causing an incidental 
obscurity within the epic itself, in the poet’s vision of the 
Unseen World and its life. 


III 


A test case of the thorough-going uniformity and con- 
sistency of the Homeric conception of the nature and circum- 
stances of the souls of the departed is provided for us, within 
the limits of the poems themselves, by the story of Odysseus’ 
Journey to Hades—a test they are hardly likely to survive, it 
may well be thought. How is the poet in describing a living 
hero’s dealings with the inhabitants of the shadow-world, going 
to preserve the immaterial, dreamlike character of the Homeric 
“Souls”? ? How keep up the picture of the soul as something 
that holds itself resolutely aloof and seems to avoid all active 
intercourse with other folk? It is hard to see what could 
tempt the poet to try and penetrate with the torch of 
imagination into this underworld of ineffectual shadows. 
The matter becomes somewhat more intelligible, however, as 
soon as it is realized in what manner the narrative arose ; 
how through continual additions from later hands it gradually 
assumed a form quite unlike itself. 


§ 1 

It may be taken as one of the few certain results of the 
critical analysis of the Homeric poems that the narrative of 
the Descent of Odysseus to the Underworld did not form part 
of the original plan of the Odyssey. Kirke bids Odysseus 
undertake the journey to Hades in order that he may see 
Teiresias there and be told of “‘ the way and the means of his 
return, and how he may reach his home again over the fish- 
teeming deep ” (Od. x, 530 f.). Teiresias, however, on being 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 33 


discovered in the realm of shadows, fulfils this requirement only 
very partially and superficially. Whereupon, Kirke herself 
gives to the returned Odysseus a much fuller account, and as 
regards the one point already mentioned by Teiresias, a much 
more precise account, of the perils that lie before him on his 
homeward journey.® The journey to the land of the dead was 
thus unnecessary, and there can be no doubt that originally 
it had no place in the poem. It is plain, however, that the 
composer of this adventure only used the (superfluous) 
inquiry addressed to Teiresias as a pretext which afforded a 
more or less plausible motive for the introduction of this 
narrative into the body of the poem. The real object of the 
poet, the true motive of the story, must then be sought 
elsewhere than in the prophecy of Teiresias, which turns out 
to be so brief and unhelpful. It would be natural to suppose 
that the aim of the poet was to give the eye of imagination a 
glimpse into the marvels and terrors of that dark realm into 
which all men must go. Such an intention would be very 
intelligible in the case of a medieval or a Greek poet of later 
times ; and there were afterwards plenty of Greek poems 
which described a Descent to Hades. But it would be hard to 
account for it in a poet of the Homeric school ; for such a poet 
the realm of the dead and its inhabitants could hardly supply 
a subject for a narrative. And, in fact, the inventor of 
Odysseus’ visit to the dead had quite a different object in 
view. He was anything but a Greek Dante. It is possible to 
see the purpose which guided him as soon as his poem is 
stripped of the manifold additions with which later times 
invested it. The original kernel which thus remains is then 
seen to be nothing but a series of conversations between 
Odysseus and the souls of those of the dead with whom he had 
stood in close personal relationship. Besides Teiresias he speaks 
with his old ship-companion Elpenor, who had just died, 
with his mother Antikleia, with Agamemnon and Achilles ; 
and he triss in vain to effect a reconciliation with the 
implacable Aias. These conversations in Hades are, for the 
general furtherance of the story of Odysseus’ wanderings and 
return, quite superfluous, and they serve in a very minor 
degree and only incidentally to give information about the 
conditions and character of the inscrutable world beyond 
the grave. The questions and answers there given are confined 
entirely to the affairs of the upper world. They bring Odysseus, 
who has now been wandering so long alone and far from the 
world of actual humanity, into ideal association with the 
substantial world of flesh and blood to which his thoughts 


D 


34 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


stretch out, and in which he himself had once been an actor 
and is soon to play an important part again.** His mother 
informs him of the distracted state of Ithaca, Agamemnon 
of the treacherous deed of Aigisthos carried out with the help 
of Klytaimnestra. Odysseus himself is able to console Achilles 
with an account of the heroic deeds of his son, who is still alive 
in the daylight ; with Aias, resentful even in Hades, he cannot 
come to terms. Thus the theme of the second part of the 
Odyssey begins to appear; even to the shadows below there 
reaches an echo of the great deeds of the Trojan war and of the 
adventures of the Return from Troy, which occupied the minds 
of all the singers of the time. The introduction of these stories 
by means of conversations with the persons who took part in 
them is the essential purpose of the poet. The impelling 
instinct to expand in all directions the circle of legend in 
whose centre stood the adventure of the Iliad, and link it up 
with other circles of heroic legend, was fully satisfied by later 
poets in the separate poems of the Epic Cycle. At the time 
when the Odyssey was composed these other epic narratives 
were in the full tide of their youthful exuberance. The streams 
had not yet found a convenient bed in which to run, and they 
added their individuai contributions (for they all related events 
which preceded it) to the elaborate narration of the return 
of the last Hero who still wandered vainly and alone. The main 
object of the story of Telemachos’ journey to meet Nestor 
and Menelaos (in the third and fourth books of the Odyssey) 
is manifestly to bring the son into relation with the father’s 
companions in war, and so to provide occasion for further 
narratives in which a more detailed picture of some of the 
events between the [iad and the Odyssey might be given. 
Demodokos, the Pheacian bard, is made to recount (in 
abbreviated form) two adventures that had occurred to 
the great chieftain. Even when such stories did not 
immediately add to the picture of Odysseus’ deeds or 
character, they served to point to the great background from 
which the adventures of the much-enduring wanderer, now 
completely isolated, should stand out; and to set these in 
the ideal framework which could alone give them their full 
significance. This natural creative instinct of legendary poetry 
also inspired the poet of the “‘ Journey to Hades’’. He, too, 
saw the adventures of Odysseus not in isolation but in lively 
and vital connexion with all the other adventures that took 
their origin from Troy. He conceived the idea of bringing once 
more, for the last time, the chieftain famed in council and war, 
into communication with the mightiest king and the noblest 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 35 


hero of that famous expedition ; and to do that he had to take 
him to the realm of the shadows which had long contained 
them. Nor could he well avoid the tone of pathos which is 
natural to this interview on the borders of the realm of 
nothingness to which all the desire and the strength of life 


must eventually come. The questioning of Teiresias is merely, 


as has been said, the poet’s pretext for confronting Odysseus 
with his mother and his former companions, and this meeting 
was his prime motive. Probably this particular device was 
suggested by the recollection of the story which Menelaos 
tells of his meeting with Proteus, the Old Man of the Sea 
(Od. iv, 351 ff.),®§ where the inquiry from the seer as to the 
means of reaching home again is also a mere pretext for the 
narration of Return adventures—those of Aias, Agamemnon, 
and Odysseus. 


§ 2 

It is certain that the intention of this poet cannot possibly 
have been simply the description of the underworld for its 
own sake. Even the scenery of these mysterious incidents 
which might well have attracted his fancy, is only given in 
brief allusions. The ship sails over Okeanos to the people of 
the Kimmerians ® that never see the sun, and reaches at last 
the “barren coast ”’ and the “ Grove of Persephone ’’, with 
its black poplars and weeping willows. Odysseus with two 
companions goes on ahead to the entrance of Erebos, where 
Pyriphlegethon and Kokytos, a branch of the Styx, flow into 
Acheron. There he digs his sacrificial trench to which the souls 
flock upward out of Erebos over the asphodel-meadows. 
It is the same underworld in the bowels of the earth that is 
presupposed in the Iliad, too, as the dwelling-place of the 
dead, only more accurately described and more fully realized. © 
The details of the picture are so lightly sketched in that one 
might well suppose that they, too, had been taken from some 
older mythical material. At any rate, he borrowed the 
“ Styx ”’, so well known in the Iliad ; and it may be supposed 
that the same applies to the other rivers as well, whose names 
are clearly derived from words meaning burning (of dead 
bodies ?),6 lamentation, and sorrow.” The poet himself, 
interested only in the representation of character, is not at 
all disposed to dwell upon the merely fanciful, and confines 
himself to a few brief allusions. Nor does he give any very 
lengthy account of the dwellers in Erebos, and what he does 
say of them keeps well within the limits of the usual Homeric 
belief. The Souls resemble shadow- or dream-pictures, and 


36 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


are. impalpable to the human touch.68 They are without 
consciousness when they appear. Elpenor alone, whose body 
still lies unburnt, has for that very reason retained his senses 
and even shows a form of heightened consciousness that 
approaches prophecy ; resembling in this respect Patroklos 
and Hektor at the moment when the psyche is parted from the 
body.®® This, however, is to leave him as soon as his corpse 
is destroyed. Teiresias alone, the prophet famed above all 
others in Theban legend, has preserved his consciousness and 
prophetic vision even in the Shadow-world through the good- 
will of Persephone; but this is an exception which only 
establishes the rule. What Antikleia tells her son of the power- 
lessness and immateriality of the soul after the burning of the 
body 7° sounds almost like an official confirmation of the 
orthodox Homeric view. Everything, in fact, in this poet’s 
description enforces the truth of this belief, and though the 
living are, indeed, untroubled by the feeble souls banished to 
outer darkness, yet out of Erebos itself the piteous knell of 
this decree reaches us in the lament of Achilles as he refuses 
his friend’s attempt at comfort—everyone knows the 
unforgettable words. 


S53 

And yet the poet ventures to go beyond Homer in one 
important point. What he hints rather than actually says of 
the condition of things in Hades conflicts in no single point 
with the conventional Homeric view; but it is an innovation 
to suggest that this condition of things can even for the 
briefest moment be interrupted. The blood drunk by the souls 
gives them back for a moment their consciousness; their 
remembrance of the upper world returns to them. Their 
senses must then all the while have been not dead but sleeping. 
There can be no doubt that the poet for whom this supposition 
is indispensable to his story did not thereby intend to formulate’ 
an entirely new doctrine. But in order to add to his poetic 
effect, he was led to include in his story some touches which, 
meaningless within the circle of his own beliefs, pointed else- 
where, and, indeed, backward, to older, quite differently 
moulded beliefs, and to the usages founded upon them. 
He makes Odysseus, following the advice of Kirke, dig a 
grave at the entrance of Hades in which to pour out a solemn 
drink-offering to “all the dead’”’, consisting first of all 
in a mixture of milk and honey, then wine and water, over 
which white meal is finely sprinkled. Next he slaysaram and 
a black ewe, bending their heads downwards into the grave.”! 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 37 


Then the bodies of the animals are burnt, and round the blood 
collect all the souls, who flutter about it, kept at a distance 
by Odysseus’ sword 7? till Teiresias has first drunk. Here the 
drink-offerings constitute undoubtedly a sacrificial offering 
devoted to the dead and poured out for their satisfaction. 
The poet indeed does not think of the slaughtered animals 
as a sacrifice ; the tasting of the blood is simply intended to 
restore to the souls their consciousness; in the case of 
Teiresias, who retains his senses, the gift of prophetic 
clairvoyance. But this, we can see clearly, is a fiction of the 
poet’s; what he here describes is in every detail a sacrifice 
to the dead, such as we so often find described as such in 
accounts from later times. The scent of the blood calls up 
the spirits; their satiation with blood (afpaxovpia) is the 
essential purpose of such offerings; and these are what. 
the poet’s imagination dimly recalls as models. Nothing in w 
this picture has been invented. Neither, on the other hand, it 
is quite clear, has he altered his sacrificial ceremony to make 
it fit in with novel ideas that were beginning to gain ground’; | 
ideas that ascribed a more vital existence to the souls of the 
dead. For here, too, just as in the case of the offerings to the 
dead described in the funeral of Patroklos, the poet’s manner 
of conceiving the life of the dead is not such as could give 
support to new and more vigorous cult ceremonies. His 
conception tends rather to contradict the ceremonies that he 
describes. In fact, what we have here, too, is a “‘ fossilized ” 
and no longer intelligible vestige of a practice that was once 
rooted in belief—a relic deprived of its original meaning and 
adapted by the poet to the special purposes of his narrative. 
The sacrificial ritual used to attract the souls on this occasion 
strikingly resembles the ritual which was used in later times 
to conjure up the souls of the dead at those places which were 
supposed to give entrance to the ghostly world below the earth. 
It is also not impossible that, even in the time of the poet of 
the “ Journey to Hades ’’, in some remote corners of Greek 
lands such calling-up of the dead was still practised as a relic 
of former belief. But, supposing that the poet had some 
information of such local cults of the dead, and modelled his 
story on them,’ that only makes it the more remarkable that 
he effaces all trace of the original meaning of his ritual, and 
in adherence to the strict Homeric doctrine on the point, 
banishes all thought that the souls may possibly continue 
in the neighbourhood of the living and can thence be conjured 
up into the light of day.74_ He knows only of one kingdom 
of the Dead far off in the dim West, beyond the bounds of sea 


38 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


and ocean, where the legendary hero of romance can, indeed, 
reach its gateway, but where alone he can have communication 
with the souls of the dead. The House of Hades never allows 
its inhabitants to pass out. 

And yet all this is hopelessly contradicted by the votive 
offerings that the poet, by what can only be called an over- 
sight, makes Odysseus promise to all the dead, and particularly 
to Teiresias, upon his return home (Od. x, 521-6; xi, 29-33). 
Of what use would it be to the dead to receive the offering of 
a ‘barren cow ’’,” of “‘ treasures ’’ burnt upon the funeral 
pyre; or how could Teiresias enjoy the slaughtering of a 
black sheep far away in Ithaca—when they are all confined 
to Erebos and could not taste the offerings made to them ? 
This is the most remarkable and important of all vestiges 
of an ancient worship of the dead. It proves indubitably that 
in pre-Homeric times the belief prevailed that even after the 
funeral of the body the soul is not eternally banished to the 
inaccessible land of shadows, but is able to approach the 
sacrificer and to enjoy the sacrifices offered to it, just as much as 
the gods can. A single obscure allusion in the Iliad 7° suggests 
what is here much more clearly and almost naively revealed— 
namely that even at the time when the Homeric view of the 
nothingness of the souls for ever parted from their bodies 
reigned supreme, the custom of making offerings to the dead 
after the funeral was over (though in exceptional circumstances 
only, and not as a regularly recurring performance) had not 
been entirely forgotten. 

§ 4 


The contradictions into which he is betrayed by the intro- 
duction of such intercourse between the living and the dead 
proves that the undertaking was rather venturesome for a 
Homeric poet of strictly orthodox views. Still, in the picture 
of Odysseus’ meeting with his mother and former companions, 
which was his main object, the poet hardly strayed at all 
from the normal Homeric path. This, however, was, as it 
happened, the very point in which later generations of poetically 
inclined readers or hearers found his narrative wanting. 
He himself carefully linked up every detail with his living 
hero, the central interest of his story, and only made him 
speak with the souls of such as had some real and close con- 
nexion with him. A review of the motley inhabitants of the 
underworld in their multitude hardly interested him at all. 
It was the very thing which seemed indispensable to later 
readers. They made additions to his story and introduced 
the multitudes of the dead of all ages; the warriors with 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 39 


wounds still visible and in bloodstained armour; 77 or else, 
more in the manner of a Hesiodic catalogue for the assistance 
of the memory than making them live in Homeric fashion 
for the imagination, they pictured a whole host of mothers, 
the illustrious ancestors of great families, passing before 
Odysseus, though they had no particular claim upon his 
sympathy ; nor, indeed, is any serious attempt made to bring 
them into relationship with him.?® This seemed to improve 
the picture of the general multitude of the dead, represented 
in the persons of selected individuals. Next, the condition of 
things in the world below must at least be illustrated by a 


few examples. Odysseus casts a glance into the inner recesses |/ 


of the underworld—which was hardly possible for him, con- 
sidering that he stood at its outermost gateway—and sees 
there the heroic figures of those who, like true “images ”’ 
(eiSwda) of the living, still continue the activities of their 
former lives. There he sees Minos giving judgment among the 
dead, Orion hunting, Herakles still with the bow in his hand, 
and the arrow fitted to the string, “like one ever about to 
shoot.”’ This is certainly not Herakles, the “‘ Hero-God ’’, as 
he was known to later ages. The poet knows nothing as yet 
of the elevation of the son of Zeus above the lot of all mortals— 
any more than the earliest poet of the ‘‘ Journey ”’ knew of the 
translation of Achilles out of Hades. The disregard of such 
things was naturally regarded by later readers as a negligence 
on the part of the poet. And, in fact, they boldly inserted 
three verses here whichinform us that he “‘ himself ’’, the real 
Herakles, dwells among the gods—what Odysseus saw in 
Hades was only his counterfeit. Whoever wrote this was 
practising a little original theology on his own account. Such 
a contrast between a fully animated “self ’’ possessing the 
original man’s body and soul still united, and a counterfeit 
presentment of himself (which cannot be his psyche) relegated 
to Hades, is quite strange both to Homer and to Greek thought 
of later times.*® It is, in fact, an example of the earliest 
“harmonizer’s’’ solution of a difficulty. The poet does, 
indeed, attempt to connect Herakles with Odysseus by making 
the two enter into conversation, in imitation of the con- 
versations with Agamemnon and Achilles. But it is soon 
evident that these two have really nothing to say to each 
other ; Odysseus, in fact, is silent. There was no real relation- 
ship between them, at most an analogy; Herakles, too, 
having once descended alive into Hades. This analogy alone, 
in fact, appears to have suggested the introduction of Herakles 
in this place.® 


40 THE HOMERIC POEMS 


There now remains (inserted after Minos and Orion and 
before Herakles and probably composed by the same hand 
that was responsible for them) the incident of the three 
‘‘penitents”’ undergoing punishment; a passage that no 
reader can possibly forget. First Tityos, whose giant frame 
is preyed upon by two vultures, is seen, then Tantalos, who 
in the middle of a lake is parched with thirst and cannot 
reach up to the fruit-laden branches over his head, and last 
Sisyphos, who is bound to roll up-hill the stone that ever rolls 
back again. The limits of the Homeric conception (with which 
the pictures of Minos, Orion, and Herakles might still perhaps 
be reconciled) are in these pictures definitely overstepped. 
The souls of these three unfortunates are credited with com- 
plete and continuous consciousness. Without this, their 
punishment would not have been felt and would not have been 
inflicted. And, observing the extraordinarily matter-of-fact 
and cursory description, which takes the reasons of the 
punishment for granted except in the case of Tityos, we cannot 
help feeling that these examples of punishment after death 
were not invented for the first time by the composer of these 
lines. They cannot have been offered to the astonished ears 
of their hearers as a daring novelty, but were rather recalled 
briefly to those hearers’ recollection. Probably these three 
are selected as examples out of a much larger collection of such 
pictures. Can it be that still older poets (who may still, 
however, have been more recent than the poet of the earlest 
parts of the “ Journey ’) had already dared to desert the 
Homeric view of the soul ? 

However that may be, we may be sure that the punishment 
of the three “ penitents’’ was not intended to contradict 
flatly the Homeric conception of the unconsciousness and 
nothingness of the shades. They could not in that case have 
accommodated themselves so well to a poem that is founded 
upon such conceptions. They do not disprove the rule because 
they are, and are only intended to be, exceptions to that rule. 
This, however, would be impossible if it were justifiable to 
interpret the poet’s fiction as representing, in the person of 
these three unfortunates, three types of special sins and classes 
of sinners ; as, for example, unbridled Lust (Tityos), insatiable 
Gluttony (Tantalos), and Pride of the Intellect (Sisyphos).* 
/ They would in that case be particular examples of the 
retribution which one must think of as being extended to all 
the innumerable hosts of shadows who have been guilty of 
the same sins. But nothing in the description itself warrants 
such a theological interpretation ; indeed, we have no reason 


THE HOMERIC POEMS _ 4t 


or excuse for attributing to this particular poet such a desire 
to prove the existence of a compensatory justice in an after 
life. It is quite strange to Homer, and so far as it ever became 
known to later Greek theology, it was only introduced very 
late, through the influence of a speculative mysticism. No, 
the almighty power of the gods is able in special cases, so 
this picture assures us, to preserve for individual souls their 
consciousness ; in the case of Teiresias as a reward, in the 
case of these three objects of the gods’ hatred, in order that 
they may be capable of feeling their punishment. The real 
fault for which they are punished can be guessed fairly 
certainly from what the poet tells us about Tityos—it is in 
each case a grievous offence committed by them against the 
gods. The crime of Tantalos we can make out from what we 
know of him through other sources. It is less easy to discover 
what was the exact misdeed for which the crafty Sisyphos 
is punished.®* In any case, it is clear that retribution has 
overtaken all three of them for sins against the gods them- 
selves—sins which human beings of later times could not 
possibly commit. And for this reason alone, neither their 
deeds nor their punishment can have anything typical or 
representative about them; they are sheer exceptions, 
and that is why the poet found them interesting. 

The episode of Odysseus’ journey to Hades (even in its 
latest portions) suggests no acquaintance whatever with any 
general class of sinners who receive their punishment in that 
place. If, indeed, it had alluded to the punishment in the 
after-world of perjurers, orthodox Homeric doctrine would 
not in that case have been violated. Twice over in the Iliad, 
on solemn occasions of oath-taking, besides the gods of the 
upper world, the Erinyes also are called upon as witnesses of 
the oath ; for they punish under the earth those who break 
their oath.*? Not without reason have these passages been held 
to show “that the Homeric conception of the phantasmal 
half-life of the souls under the earth, where they are without 
feeling or consciousness, was not a general folk-belief.”’ *4 
We must add, however, that the belief held in Homeric times 
of the punishment of oath-breakers in the realm of shadows 
cannot as yet have been very vital, for it was quite unable to 
prevent the success of the totally incompatible belief in the 
unconscious nothingness of disembodied spirits. A solemn 
oath-formula (so much that is primitive persisting, even after 
it has become dead letter, in formula) preserved a reference 
to that ancient belief, which had become strange to Homeric 
ears—a vestige, in fact, of a bygone point of view. It may be 


42 - THE HOMERIC POEMS 


that in the dim past, when men still vividly and literally 
believed in the reality of a punishment in after life for perjury, 
all the souls in Hades were credited with a conscious existence ; 
but there never was a time when men generally believed 
that earthly sins (including perjury as only one among many) 
were punished in Hades. Oath-breaking was not punished 
as a specially outrageous moral failing—it may well be doubted 
whether the Greeks ever considered or felt it to be such. The 
perjurer, rather than any other particular sinner, was the 
special victim of the dread goddesses, for the simple reason that 
the perjurer in his desire to emphasize in the most awful 
manner his aversion to falsehood, has invoked against himself, 
if he fails to keep his oath, the most terrible fate of all—to 
suffer torment in the realm of Hades whence is no escape. *® 
To the Infernal Spirits of the Underworld, to whom he had 
condemned himself, he falls a victim if he breaks his word. 
Belief in the supernatural power of such imprecations,*® 
and not any special moral importance attached to truth- 
telling—an idea quite strange to the older Antiquity—gave 
to the oath its peculiar terrors. 


Sao 

A final example of the tenacity with which custom may 
outlive the belief on which it is founded is afforded by the 
story told of Odysseus, that in fleeing from the Kikonian land, 
he did not leave it until he had called thrice upon those of his 
companions who had fallen in the battle with the Kikones 
(Od. ix, 65-6). References to similar callings upon the dead in 
later literature make the meaning of such behaviour clear. 
The souls of the dead who have fallen in foreign lands must be 
“called” ; 8’ they will then, if this is properly done, follow the 
caller to their distant home, where an ‘‘empty grave” awaits 
them.88 This duty is regularly performed in Homer for the 
benefit of those whose bodies it is impossible to recover and 
bury in the proper way. But a summons of the dead and the 
erection of such empty receptacles—intended for whom if 
not for the souls who must then be accessible to the devotion 
of their relations ?—was natural enough for those who 
believed in the possibility of the soul’s sojourn in the neigh- 
bourhood of its living friends; it was not admissible for 
supporters of the Homeric belief. Here we have once more a 
remarkable vestige of an ancient belief, surviving in a custom 
that has not been entirely given up even in altered times. Here, 
too, the belief which had given rise to the custom, was extinct. 


THE HOMERIC POEMS 43 


If we ask the Homeric poet for what purpose a mound was 
heaped up over the grave of the dead and a gravestone set upon 
it, he will answer us: in order that his fame may remain 
imperishable among men, and that future generations may not 
be ignorant of his story.®® That sounds truly Homeric. When 
a man dies his soul departs into a region of twilit dream-life ; 
his body, the visible man, perishes. Only his glorious name, 
in fact, lives on. His praises speak to after ages from the 
monument to his honour on his grave-mound—and in the 
song of the bard. A poet would naturally be inclined to think 
such things. 


NOTES f£O; GHAR PE Raat 


I 


1 E. Kammer, Einheit d. Odyssee, 510 ff. 

20 oan Ao. ToAdas dS’ i¢Bipous puxes (kedadrds Apol. Rhod., as in 
A 55: mistakenly) “ALS mpotawpev Hpwwv, adtovs de Bees TEeDYE 
KUVETOW. WelGo, mavvu xin yap pot IlargoxAjos SevAoto puxi) epeotyKet 

. &ixto b€ eae atT@ (cf. 66). 

Bolt 0 ae es O 2 eer Avr ifvopos vles bm’ ?Arpeidn Baordf.e méotpov 
avaTAnaavTes Tg ddépov “Aiéos ciow. The fuyy of Elpenor and after- 
wards that of Teiresias, of his mother, of Agamemnon, etc., is addressed 
by Odysseus in the Nekyia of the Od. simply as: °Enfvop, Tecpeoin, 
pyrep eu, etc. Andcf. such expressions as; Y 244, eis 6 Kev avTOS EyW 
Aide cevOwpa, or O 251, Kai i o7 éywy eda ny, véexvas kat 60p’ *Aidao 
pare TOS tEcoOa.. . & A56 f., etc. 

4 The first view is Nagelsbach? s, the second that of Grotemeyer. 

5 And of civilized peoples, too, in antiquity. Just sucha second self, 
an efSwdov duplicating the visible self of man, were, in their original 
significance, the genius of the Romans, the Fravashi of the Persians, 
the Ka of the Egyptians. 

6 JrorlBerat (sc. Homer) ras Yuyes tots e(8wAots Tots ev TOls KaTOTMTpOLS 
hawopevois Opoias Kal Tots 61a THY VddTwY cuMLoTAaperols, a KADdTAE Hut 
efeixkaoTau Kal Tas KiIVNOELS puLpeEtTaL OTEpEepVLwoNH Sé UmdoTacW ovdEpiar 
Eyer els avTiAniuw Kai adjv, Apollod. zw. Pedy ap. Stob., Ecl. i, p. 420 W. 

? Cf. Cic., Div. 1,63: lacet corpus dormientis ut mortui, viget autem 
et vivit animus. Quod multo magis faciet post mortem cum omnino 
corpore excesserit. TD. i, 29: visis quibusdam saepe movebantur 
eisque maxime nocturnis, ut viderentur ei qui vita excesserant vivere. 
Here we have precise ancient testimony both for the subjective and 
the objective elements in dreaming and for their importance for the 
origin of belief about the soul. 


8 Tov 0 GAtre Wu y nie ge aUTis 0% a ervbvOn, E 696 f. Tiyv de 
Tt o¢barpav epeBevv7) vve exahurpev, pire & €fomiaw, amo dé puyny 
ExamVvooEv . . . EEL OUV GuTVUTO Kal és Ppéva Dumos ayépOn—X 466 ff., 


475; and w 348: drop yovta. 

® Speaking of suspivium (= Aemwopuyxia), Sen., Ep. liv, 2, says, 
medici hanc ‘‘ meditationem mortis’’ vocant. faciet enim aliquando 
spiritus ille quod saepe conatus est. 

10 A remarkable idea seems to be obscurely suggested in an expression 
such as that of € 207, dA’ Frou tov Kfjpes EBav Cavaroio dépovaat eis 
*Aidao Sdpovs; cf. B 302. Usually the Keres bring death to men: 
here {like Thanatos himself in later poetry) they conduct the dead into 
the realm of Hades. They are daimones of Hades, originally and 
primitively themselves souls of the departed (see below, p. 168), and it is 
a natural idea to make such soul-spirits, hovering in the air, carry off 
the souls of men just dead to the realm of the souls. In Homer only 
a stereotyped phrase preserves the vague memory of such a conception. 


NOPESIELO DV CHAPT Rest 45 


11 Of the dead we read in A 219, od yap Ett oapKas TE Kal doréa tres 
€éxyovot. Taking the words strictly this might mean that the dead 
possess sinews but not the flesh or bones that should be held together 
by the sinews. This is how Nauck, in fact, understood the Homeric 
words: Mélanges Grécorom.iv, 718. But it is very difficult to picture 
*“shadows ”? which in this manner possess sinews but no body of flesh 
and bones: the corrupt words of fr. 229, preserved apart from their 
context, are quite insufficient to prove that Aesch. derived such an 
unrealizable impression from the Homeric words.—That the poet of 
these lines from the Nek. simply meant “‘ flesh, bones, and sinews, 
too, which might have held them together ’’, is shown quite clearly 
by what follows: dAda ra pév te mupos Kpatepov pévos aidopévoro 
Sapuvd, éemel xe mp@ta Aimy AevK’ dorda Buuds, uy 8 HiT’ dveErpos 
anmontayevyn memotyntat. How, then, could the fire help destroying 
the sinews too? 

12 The sacrificial character of the proceedings at the rogus of 
Patroklos has again been called in question by v. Fritze, de libatione 
veterum Gvraecorum, 71 f. (1893). He admits this interpretation of 
the pouring of the blood on the pyre, but explains the other circum- 
stances differently. It would be quite easy to disprove in this fashion 
the sacrificial character of every oAoKxavtTwya for xdmoe whether 
Heroes. or the dead. It is ‘true that the bodies of sheep and cattle, 
horses and dogs, thus completely consumed by fire, are not a “‘ food- 
offering ’’, but they are a sacrifice for all that, and belong to the class 
of expiatory offerings in which the flesh is not offered for the food of 
the daimon but the lives of the victims are sacrificed to him. That 
Achilles slays the Trojan prisoners at the rogus xrapévoto yoAwbels 
(Y 23) does not destroy the sacrificial character of this offering intended 
to appease the wrath (felt also by Achilles) of the dead man.—The 
whole procedure gives a picture of primitive sacrificial ritual in honour 
of the dead and differs in no particular from the ritual of sacrifice 
to the @eoi yPovor. This is recognized by Stengel in his Chthonischer 
und Todtencult (Festschr. Friedland.), p. 432, who also marks clearly 
the differences between the two religious ceremonies as they were 
gradually evolved in the process of time. 

13 Tt cannot be denied that the libation of wine poured out by 
Achilles during the night (to which he expressly summons the psyche 
of Patroklos, Y 218-22) is sacrificial in character, like all similar yoaf. 
The wine with which the embers of the funeral pyre are extinguished 
may have been intended to serve that purpose alone and not as a 
sacrifice. But the jars of honey and oil which Achilles has placed 
upon the pyre (WY 170; cf. w 67-8) can hardly be regarded as any- 
muceebit sacriticial (cf. Bergk, Opusc. ii, 675; acc. to. Stengel, 
Jahrb. Philol., p. 649, 1887, they only serve to kindle the flames, but 
the honey, at any rate, seems a strange material for the purpose. 
For libations at the vogus or at the grave honey and oil are regularly 
used—see Stengel himself, loc. cit., and Philol. xxxix, 378 ff.). Acc. 
to v. Fritze, de libat., 72, the jars of honey and oil were intended not 
as libations but for the “‘ bath of the dead ”’—in the next world, in 
the Homeric Hades !—Honey can only have been used for bathing 
purposes, in Greece as elsewhere, by those who unintentionally fell 
into it like Glaukos. 

14 On Greek hair offerings see Wieseler, Philol. ix, 711 ff., who 
rightly regards these offerings as symbolic and as substitutes for 
primitive human sacrifice. The same explanation of the offering of 
hair is given in the case of other peoples also; cf. Tylor, ii, 401. 


46 NO PHS se LO MCHA Lads mer 


18 Patroklos’ request for prompt burial (69 ff.) gives no sufficient 
motive, since Achilles has already given orders for the funeral to take 
place next day, 49 ff. (cf. 94f.). 

16 11,19; 179. Again, in the night following the erection of the 
funeral pyre, when the body is burning, Achilles calls to the soul of 
Patroklos puyiy nxAjoxav IatpoxAjos decAoio 221. The person thus 
called upon is evidently supposed to be still close at hand. This is 
not contradicted by the formula yatpe ... Kai ety *Atdao Sdpoics 
(19, 179), for in 1. 19, at least, the words cannot mean in Hades, 
since the soul is still outside Hades, as it tells us itself, 71 ff. The 
words can only mean “‘about’’, “‘ before’’ the House of Hades (like 
év morduw ‘by the river’’, etc.). In the same way eis ’Atdao ddpor 
often only means towards the house of Hades (Ameis on « 512). 

17 From descriptions in ancient poetry ? or had similar customs— 
at least, at the funerals of chieftains—survived into the poet’s own 
time ? Especially magnificent, e.g., were the burials of Spartan kings— 
and also Cretan kings, it appears, so long as there were any; cf. Arist. 
fr. 476, p. 1556a, 37 ff. 

18 Funeral games for Amarynkeus, VY 630 ff., for Achilles, w 85 ff. 
Such games are referred to as being quite the usual custom in w 87 ff. 
Later poetry is full of descriptions of such dyd@ves émradior of the 
heroic age. 

19 As Aristarchos noticed: see Rh. Mus. 36, 544 f. Rather 
different are the (certainly ancient) games and contests for the hand 
of a bride (cf. stories of Pelops, Danaos, Ikarios, etc.). 

20 Cf. WY 274, ef pev viv emi dArkw deOAevoupev > Ayaroi, i.e. in honour 
of Patroklos; cf. 646: cov ératpov aéAAovot Krepéile. xrepetlery means 
to give the dead man his xrépea, i.e. his-former possessions (by burning 
them). The games are therefore on exactly the same footing as the 
burning of the personal effects of the dead in which the soul of the dead 
man was supposed still to take pleasure. 

21 Aug., CD. viii, 26: Varro dicit omnes mortuos existimari manes 
deos, et probat per ea sacra quae omnibus fere mortuis exhibentur, 
ubi et ludos commemorat funebres, tamquam hoc sit maximum 
divinitatis indicium, quod non solent ludi nisi numinibus celebrari. 

22 Quae pietas ei debetur a quo nihil acceperis ? aut quid omnino, 
cuius nullum meritum sit, ei deberi potest ? ... (dei) quamobrem 
colendi sint non intellego nullo nec accepto ab eis nec sperato bono, 
Cic., ND. i, 116; cf. Pl., Euthpbhr. pass. Homer speaks in the same 
way of the dyou8% ayaxdAaris éxatouPns, y 58-9 (cf. aporBas Tov 
@vo.d@v from the side of the gods, Pl., Smp., 202 E). 

23 rodrd vu Kat yépas olov oilupoiot Bpototow, Kelpacfal re Kopny 
Baréew 7 ame daxpu mapecdv, § 197 f.; cf. w 188 f., 294 f. 

24 ob ydp Er adtis vicoua ef ’ Atdao emi pe mupds Neha ynre, V 75 Ff. 

25 —idvte eis’ Atdao xepoi car’ dd0adpods ér€eww vv Te oTOp’” Epetoat, 
A 426; cf. A 453, w 296. To do this is the duty of the next of kin, 
mother or wife. The necessity for closing the sightless eyes and dumb 
mouth of the dead is intelligible without reference to any superstitious 
arviéve pensée. Such an idea is, however, dimly discernible in such 
a phrase as adypis drov wuyrv pov pytpos xépes ciAav an’ dcowv, Epigr. 
Gry., 314, 24. Was there originally some idea of the “‘soul’’ being 
released by these means ?—Seat of the soul in the xdpy of the eye: 
puoxat 8 ev dd0adpoiat tT&v teAevtwytTwv, Babr. 95, 35 (see Crusius, 
Rh. Mus. 46, 319). Augurium non timendi mortem in aegritudine 
quamdiu oculorum pupillae imaginem reddant, Plin., N.H. 28, 64; 
cf. Grimm, p. 1181. (If a person can no longer see his or her eiSwAov 


NODES TO; CHAPTER E 47 


in a mirror it is a sign of approaching death, Oldenburg, Rel. d. Ved., 
526 [p. 4498 French tr.].)—Among many peoples it is believed that the 
eyes of the dead must be closed in order to prevent the dead person 
seeing or haunting anyone in the future: Robinsohn, Psychol. d. 
Naturv., 44; cf. Cic., Verr. v, 118 (of the Greeks) ; Vg., A. iv, 684 f. ; 
extremus si quis super halitus errat orelegam. Serv. ad loc. : muliebriter, 
tamquam possit animam sororis excipere et in se transferre (cf. 
Epigr. Gr., 547; IG. Sic. et It., 607e, 9-10). uy making its exit 
through the mouth I 409; cf. ‘‘ Among the Seminoles of Florida 
when a woman died in childbirth the infant was held over her face 
to receive her parting spirit and thus acquire strength and knowledge 
for future use,’’ Tylor, i, 433. 

26 And even ava mpoOupov tetpappevos, T 212, i.e. with feet turned 
towards the door. The reason for this custom—which existed else- 
where, too, and still exists—is hardly to be sought only in the ritus 
natuvae, as Plin. 7, 46, thinks. This has generally little to do with 
the customs observed on the solemn occasions of life. The meaning of 
the practice is much more naively revealed in a statement about the 
manners of the Pehuenchen Indians in South America given by Popig, 
Reise in Chile, Peru, etc., i, 393. There they carry the dead man feet 
foremost out of the door “‘ because if the corpse of the dead man were 
carried out otherwise his wandering ghost might come back into the 
house’’. The Greek custom, though in Homeric times long faded to 
a mere symbol, must be supposed to have depended originally upon 
similar fears of the return of the “‘soul’’. (Similar precautions arising 
from the same belief were customary at funerals elsewhere : Oldenberg, 
Rel. d. Veda, 573-4 [489 F.T.]. Robinsohn, Psychol. d. Naturv., 45 f.} 
Belief in the incomplete departure of the soul from this world has 
dictated these customs, too. 

2” The details of the procedure until the funeral dirge are given in 
& 343-55. 

28 +yuBos and oryHAn, IT 457, 675, P 434, A 371, w 14. A heaped-up 
ojpa as the burial-place of Eetion round which the Nymphs plant 
elms: Z 419 ff.—which preserves a trace of the custom, obtaining also 
in later times, of planting trees and even a whole grove round the grave. 

29 xrépea KTepetcew in the formula ofpa ré of yedar Kal emi KTEpea 
KTepetcewv, a 291, B 222. Here the xrepetfey comes after the heaping 
up of the grave-mound—possibly the xrépea are to be burnt on or at 
the grave-mound. Schol. B on T 212 is, however, mistaken in the rule 
deduced from these cases: mpotriOecar, cira €Bantov, eira éruuBoxdovyr, 
eira éxtepeifov. All the cases refer to the ceremonial at empty graves. 
Where the body was obtainable the relatives or friends would have 
burnt the xrépea with the body. This is done in the case of Eetion 
and Elpenor, and it must be understood in the close connexion of 
the words éy aupit kyaev Kal emt xrépea Krepicaev, 2 38, and again 
odp erapov Odrrot Kai emt KTépea KTEpicerev, y 285. 

$0 a custom that originally belonged to all primitive peoples 
and remained in force for a very long time among many of them. Ali 
the possessions of a dead Inca remain his own absolute property : 
Prescott, Peru*, i, 31. Among the Abipones of Paraguay all the 
possessions of the dead are burnt: Klemm, Culturges. ii, 99. The 
Albanians of the Caucasus buried all the dead man’s possessions with: 
him, cai 8a roiro wévytes CHow odSév marpdov Exovres, Str. 503. Of 
ancient origin are also the extravagant burial customs of the Mingrelians. 
living in what was formerly Albania: Chardin, Voy. en Perse (ed. 
Langlés), i, 325, 298, 314, 322. 


48 NOTES =1O (OHA Pa ela 


31 Examples given by O. Jahn, Persius, p. 219 fin. 

32 uy 8 ex pebéwy mrapevn *’Aiddade BeByKer, dv moTLOV yodwoa 
Armob0” avSporqra Kal WBynv, I 756, X 362 cf. Y 294, N 415. puyxy 
8 ?AiSdade xariAgev, « 560, A 65. Complete departure into the 
depths of the kingdom of Hades is more clearly expressed in such 
words as Bainv Sdpov ’’Aidos ciaw, 2 246, Kxiov ’’Aidos etaw, Z 422, etc. 
Again, in A 150, the soul of Teiresias while speaking to Odysseus is 
still in Hades in the wider sense but is more exactly on the extreme 
edge of that region: we are told puxy perv EBn dopov *’Aidos eiow— 
now at last it goes back again into the depths of the Kingdom of 
Hades. 

83 Aristonikos on YW 104 » % du7AW Ort Tas TOY ataduwv uyas ‘’ Opnpos 
ért awlovaas tHv dpovnow broridera. (Rather too systematically 
put by Porph. ap. Stob., Ecl.i, p. 422, 20 ff.; 425, 25 ff. W.) Elpenor 
is the first to approach Odysseus’ sacrificial trench od yap mw éréfanrto, 
A52. His duyy had not yet been received into Hades (fh. Mus.1, 615). 
Achilles’ treatment of the body of Hektor shows that he thought of 
his enemy (because he was still unburied) as being able to feel what 
was doneto him: lacerari eum et sentire credo putat, Cic., TD. i, 105. 

34 Plin. vii, 187, explains the change among the Romans from 
burial to cremation as being due to the fear that in times of war and 
disturbance the dead might be deprived of their rest. If a man dies 
in war time, i.e. during a period of temporary nomadism, his body is 
burnt, but a limb (sometimes the head) is cut off to be taken home and 
buried ad quod servatum iusta fierent, Paul. Festi, 148, 11; Varro, 
LL v,- 23°; > Cic.,-Lg. i1,°55 600 “hersame’ customs tonndeamiame 
certain German tribes: see Weinhold, Sitzb. Wien. Ac. xxix, 156; 
xxx, 208. Even among the negroes of Guinea and the South American 
Indians practices resembling the os resectum of the Romans are 
found in the case of those who die in war in foreign country; cf. 
Klemm, Culturg. iii, 297; ii, 98 f. In every case burialjsiregarded 
as the ancient and traditional mode of disposing of the dead, and the 
one strictly required on religious grounds. 

35 Only once is there any mention of taking home the burnt bones, 
H 334 f. Aristarch. rightly recognized this as being in conflict with 
the normal conceptions and practice of Homer and regarded the lines 
as the composition of a later poet (Sch. A ad loc. and on 4 174; Sch. 
EMQ., y 109). The lines may have been inserted to account for the 
absence from the Troad of such enormous grave-mounds as the burial of 
the ashes of both armies should have produced. The same reason— 
the desire expressed in these lines to bring back those who have died 
in a foreign country to their own land at last—is implied as the origin 
of cremation in the illustrative story of Herakles and Argeios, the son 
of Likymnios, in the (foropia (derived from Andron) of Sch. A on 
A 52. 

ty KU SCHYs1 11, a2 bose 20 

87 It would apply better to Roman beliefs: cf. Vg., A. iv, 698-9— 
though even that means something else. (Cf. also Oldenberg, Fel. d. 
Veda, 585, 2.) 

a8 Ci esp. 9775-6; (Ar218=22; 

89 Serv. ad A. iii, 68: Aegyptii condita diutius servant cadavera 
scilicet ut anima multo tempore perduret et corpori sit obnoxia nec 
cito ad aliud transeat. Romani contra faciebant, comburentes 
cadavera ut statim anima in generalitatem, i.e. in suam naturam 
rediret (the pantheistic touch may be neglected).—Cf. the account 
given by Ibn Foslan of the burial customs of the pagan Russians 


NOTES TOs CHAPTER | I 49 


(quoted from Frahn by J. Grimm, KI. Schr. ii, 292): the preference 
for burning was due to the idea that the soul was less quickly set free 
on its way to Paradise when the body was buried intact, than when 
it was destroyed by fire. 

#0 Cf. the Hymn of the Rigveda (x, 16) which is to be said ata 
cremation, esp. v. 2, 9 (quoted by Zimmer, Altind. Leben, 402 f.), 
and also Rigv. x, 14, 8 (Zimmer, p. 409). The Indians also wished to 
prevent the return of the dead to the world of the living. The feet 
of the corpse were chained so that the dead could not return (Zimmer, 
p. 402). 

41 It lies at the root of the stories of Demeter and Deinophoon (or 
Triptolemos), and also that of Thetis and Achilles, when the goddess, 
laying the mortal child in the fire, wepijper tas Ovynras cdapkas, édbetper 
6 Hv avtT® Ovynrov, in order to make it immortal (cf. Preller, Dem. u. 
Perseph., 112) ; cf. also the custom observed at certain festivals (? of 
Hecate, cf. Bergk, PLG. iii, 682) of lighting fires in the streets and 
leaping through the flames carrying children, see Grimm (E.T.), 
p. 625; cf. also Cic., Div. i, 47: o praeclarum discessum cum ut 
Herculi contigit mortali corpore cremato in lucem animus excessit ! 
Ove, Mix, 200 3) Luc., Herm. 7; 0.5. v, 640 ff. . (for more about 
then *purityine:: effects) of Mire, see, below,;chap. ix; n. 127.) 

42 Nothing else than this is implied by the words of H 409-10, 
ov yap tis hevdw vexvwv KatatTeOvnwtwv ylyver’, evel Ke Advwou mupos 
precAtcooguev @xa. The souls of the dead must be quickly ‘“‘ assuaged 
with fire’’ (their longing gratified) and so their bodies are burnt. 
Purification from what is mortal and unclean, which Dieterich (Nekyza, 
197, 3) thinks is referred to in this passage, is certainly not suggested 
as such by the words of the poet. 

43 Light may be incidentally thrown on the question of the transition 
from burial to cremation by such a story as that which an Icelandic 
Saga tells of a man who is buried by his own wish before the door of 
his house; ‘‘ but as he returned and did much mischief his body was 
exhumed and burnt and the ashes scattered over the sea ’’ (Weinhold, 
Alinord. Leben, 499). We often read in old stories how the body. of 
a dead man who goes about as a vampire is burnt. His soul is then 
exorcized and cannot come back again. 

44 It is natural to think of Asiatic influence. Cremation hearths 
have recently (1893) been discovered in Babylonia. 

45 See Helbig, D. Hom. Epos aus d. Denkm. erl., 42 f. 

46 That the men of the ‘“‘Mycenaean’’ culture, though much 
affected by foreign influénces, were Greeks—the Greeks of the Heroic 
age of whom Homer speaks—may now be regarded as certain (see 
esp, EH. Reisch, Verh. Wien. Philol., 99. ff.). 

47 See Schliemann, Mycenae, E.T., 155, 165, 213-14. 

48 Helbig, Hom. Epos?, p. 52. 

49 Cf. K. Weinhold, Sitzb. Wien. Ak., 1858 (Phil. hist. Ci.), xxix, 
pp. 121, 125, 141. The remarkable coincidences between the 
Mycenaean and these North European burial customs do not seem as 
yet to have been noticed. (The object of this elaborate foundation 
and covering may have been to preserve the corpse from decay longer, 
and especially from the effects of damp.) 

50 Also in the domed grave of Dimini: Ath. Mitth., xii, 138. 

51 The soul of a dead man from whom a favourite possession is with- 
held returns (equally whether the body and the possessions with it are 
burnt or buried). The story in Lucian, Philops., xxvii, of the wife of 
Eukrates (cf. Hdt. v, 927), is quite in accordance with popular belief. 


E 


50 NOLES 410 CHA RRM aa 


52 Schliemann, Myc., 212-13: see plan F. A similar altar in the 
Hall of the Palace of Tiryus: Schuchhardt, Schliemann’s Exc. (E.T.), 

UE 
Piss écydpa is essentially é¢’ #s rots jpwow amodvopev, Poll. i, 8; 
cf. Neanthes ap. Ammon., Diff. Voc., p. 34 V. Such an altar rested 
directly on the ground without anything intervening (u17 €xovoa 
bios GAN emt yHs [Spupery), it is round (crpoyyvAoerdys) and hollow 
(xofAn): cf. esp. Harp., 87, 15 ff. Phot., s.v. éoxapa (2 glosses) ; 
AB, 256, 32°; EM. (384,12 ff... Schivon G25" hustasCd sep aos 
(~ 71): Sch. Eur., Ph., 284. It is evident that the éoydpa is not 
very far removed from the sacrificial trench of the cult of the dead : 
thus it is actually called also Bd@pos; Sch. Eur., Ph., 274 (oxanryH 
Soy 2, aol eMein:): 

54 Stengel has a different view (Chthon. u. Todt., 427, 2). 


II 


55 Tt is doubtful whether Homer even knew of dream-oracles (which 
would be closely related to oracles of the dead. That in A 63 
eyKotunats is “ at least alluded to”? (as Nagelsbach, Nachhom. Theol., 
172, thinks) is by no means certain. The dvecpomdios would not be 
a priest who intentionally gave himself up to prophetic sleep and thus 
bmép érépwv ovetpouvs opa, but rather an dvecpoxpirns—an interpreter of 
other men’s unsought dream-visions. 

56 Even the river-gods and Nymphs who are usually confined to 
their own homes are called to the ayopa of all the gods in Olympos, 
Y4 ff. These deities who remain fixed in the locality of their worship 
are weaker than the Olympians just because they are not elevated 
with the rest to the ideal summit of Olympos. Kalypso resignedly 
admits this, « 169f., ef xe Deol y’ €0éAwor, Tol odpavoyv edpdy Exovo.r, 
ot pev déprepol elor vojoat Te Kphvat Te. They have sunk to the second 
rank of deities. They are, however, never thought of as free and 
independent, but as a mere addition to the kingdom of Zeus and the 
other Olympians. 

57 Exx. in Nagelsbach, Hom. Theol.*, 387 f. (dpéves), W. Schrader, 
Jb. f. Philol. 1885, p. 163 f. (7470p). 

58 The belief in the existence of more than one soul in the same 
person is very wide-spread. See J. G. Miiller, Americ. Uvrelig., p. 66, 
207 f., Tylor, i, 432f. The distinction between the five spiritual 
powers dwelling within man given by the Avesta rests upon similar 
grounds (Geiger, Civ. of East. Ivan, 1,124 ff.). Even in Homer Gomperz, 
Greek Thinkers, i, 249, finds a ‘‘two-soul’’ theory fully developed. 
According to him Homer recognizes in the 9vuyp0s—a word supposed to 
be derived from the steam rising from freshly shed and still warm 
blood—a second soul in addition to the Jvyy: a “‘ smoke-soul ”’ side 
by side with the “ breath-soul”’. But if by soul a “‘ something ”’ is 
meant—as it must be in popular psychology—which is added 
independently to the body and its faculties, something which lives 
separately in the body and after the death of the body (with which 
it is not indissolubly united) dissociates itself and goes off independently 
—then the duucs of Homer cannot be called a ‘“‘ soul’? or a double 
of the puy7. Again and again the Ouyéds is clearly referred to as a 
mental faculty of the living body ; either thinking or willing or merely 
feeling (Ovud vodw, Ovud Seica, ynOjce Ove, éexoAdcato bvpa, 
npape Ovuov é€dwdfH, etc.) is conducted by its means. It is the seat 
of the emotions (pévos €AAaBe Ovpdv) and belongs to the body of the 
living man, and is especially enclosed in the ¢péves. In the face of 


NO DE See lOs” CHART E Rae 51 


this it is impossible to regard it as something independent of the 
body or as anything else than a special faculty of the same living 
body. Once, indeed, H 131, the @uyés is spoken of, instead of sux, 
as that which goes down to Hades, but this can only be an error or 
an oversight (see also below, ch. xi, n. 2). According to Homeric 
ideas—and this is a conception repeated over and over again in Greek 
literature and even in Greek philosophy—the body has all its vital 
powers in itself, not merely Ouuds but peévos, vdos, wHris, BovdAyj. Yet 
it only acquires life when supplemented by the ¢vy7, which is something 
different from all these bodily powers—something with an independent 
being of its own and alone deserving the name “soul’’, a name which 
belongs aslittle to Ouyds as to vdos. Gomperz thinks that Oupods, etc., 
were at first the only recognized faculties of the body and that puyyH 
was only (for the Greeks) added later. This is certainly not to be made 
oy from Homer—or any other part of Greek literature. 

9 wept wuyns Odov, X 161; mepi buxdwv epdyovro, x 245; puxny 
eee T3229 Un ye mapOémevot, y 74, « 255; puxis 
avtagiov, I 401; and Cie 5e3 mee yap 57 wuyxis Te Kal aldves oe 
duvainny evdviy moijoas mépusar Sdopov *’Aidos eiaw. No one Strictly 
speaking can go into Hades bereft of his fuy7, for it is the yuyx7 alone 
which goes there. Thus dJvy7 here clearly = life, as is shown also 
by the addition of the words xai aidvos for the sake of clearness. 
It is more doubtful whether this is pS explanation of suyjs oAeOpos, 
X 325, or of suyas dAé€aavtes, N 763, 2168. Other passages adduced 
by Nagelsb., Hom. Th.?, 381, and Schrader, Jb. f. Philol., 1885, p. 167, 
either admit or require the material sense of the word puyy: e.g. 
E 696 ff., @ 123, o 91, etc. 


IIT 


6° A more detailed statement and documentation of the following 
analysis of the Nekyia in Od. A will be found in Rh. Mus. 1, 600 ff. 
(1899). (KL. Schr. ii, 255.] 

61 The information given by Teiresias, A 107 ff., about Thrinakia 
and the cattle of Helios seems to be put in such a brief and inadequate 
form just because the fuller account given by Kirke, p 127, was already 
known to the poet who did not wish to repeat this word for word. 

62 A final example of such pictures intended to suggest the back- 
ground of the Odyssey is the conversation between Achilles and 
Agamemnon in the “‘ second Nekyia’’, w 19 ff. The composer of these 
xines has understood quite correctly the meaning and purpose of his 
model, the original Nekyia of A, though his continuation of it is 
certainly very clumsy. 

68 « 539-40 is borrowed from § 389-90, 470.—I find after writing 
this that Kammer had already suggested imitation of 6 in the Nekyia: 
Einheit d. Od., 494 f. 

64 Tt is striking (and may have some special reason) that in Kirke’s 
account there is no mention of the Kimmerians. It is easier to see 
why the careful description of the country in Kirke’s speech, « 509-15, 
is not afterwards repeated but merely recalled to the memory of the 
reader in a few words (A 21-2). 

6° T can see no essential difference between the conception and 
Situation of Hades as indicated in the Iliad and the account given 
in the Nekyia of the Odyssey. J. H. Voss and Nitzsch were right 
in this matter. Nor do the additional details given in ae *“ second 
Nekyia”’ of w essentially ‘‘ conflict’ (as Teuffel, Stud. Charact., 
thinks) with the description of the first Nekyia. It nase nae adhere 


52 NOTES @LO CHARIS 


slavishly to its original, but it rests upon the same fundamental 
conceptions. 

66 Sch. H.Q., « 514, ITupipdeyédwv, frou ro mip to adgavilov ro 
adpxwov tav Bpotay, cf. Apollodor., z. dedv, ap. Stob., Eel. i, p. 420, 
QW. LTupidreyé0av eipyrat amo tod mupt pAéyecBas tovs TeAcvTavTas. 

67 Acheron, too, seems to be regarded as a river. The soul of the 
unburied Patroklos, which has already departed, av’ edpumudés ’’Aidos 
$6, and has therefore passed over Okeanos, is prevented by the other 
souls from passing over ‘‘the river”, WY 72f, This can hardly be 
the Okeanos, and must, therefore, be Acheron (so, too, Porph. ap. 
Stob., Ecl. i, p. 422 f., 426 W.). «515 does not in the least prove that 
Acheron was thought of asa lake and not ariver, as Bergk, Opusc. ii, 
695, thinks. 

68 Cf. X 206 ff., 209-393 ff., 475. 

69 See JT 851 ff. (Patroklos), X 358 ff. (Hektor), A 69 ff. Behind 
each of these there lies the ancient belief that the soul in the moment 
of escape achieves a higher state of being and returns to a form of 
knowledge independent of sense-perception (cf. Artemon ap. Sch., 
IT 854, Arist. fy. 12 (10) R.). Otherwise this power belongs to gods 
and, strictly, only to Zeus, who can foresee everything (in Homer). 
But. the statements are intentionally modified to suggest an undefined 
middle position between prophecy in the full sense and mere oroydleobau 
(cf. Sch. B.V., X 359)—X 359 at the most may go beyond this point. 

gO AR 1 Oecd. 

71 Civ dpverov pélew, OAAVY TE pédAaLvar, ets *’EpeBos orpéisas, Kk 527 Ff. 
From the word péAawav the div apverdv is also to be understood amo 
Kowod aS being, more precisely, black (and so again in 572)—the ram 
offered to the gods (or Souls) of the underworld is regularly black. 
ets ’’EpeBos orpéwas, i.e. bending the head downwards (not towards 
the west) = és Bd8pov, A 36—as Nitzsch rightly explains it. Every- 
thing corresponds to the regular é€vropa of later times for the 
underworld beings (cf. Stengel, Zitsch. f. Gymn., 1880, p. 743 f.). 

72 xown Tis mapa avOpmmos eotiv UoAnYts OTL veKpol Kal Saipoves 
atdypov doBodvra, Sch. Q., A 48. It is really the sound of the bronze 
or iron that drives away spirits: Luc., Philops. 15 (cf. O. Jahn, 
Abergl. d. bos. Blicks, 70). But even the mere presence of iron objects 
is sufficient:. [Aug.] Hom. de sacrileg. (about the seventh century), 
22, states that to the sacrilegi belong among others those who wear 
rings or armlets of iron, aut qui in domo sua quaecumque de ferro, 
propter ut daemones timeant, ponunt. 

73 The idea that the Thesprotian vexvopavreiov by the river Acheron 
was the original of the Homeric picture was first started by Paus. 
1, 17, 5. He was followed by K. O. Miler, Introd. to a Scientific 
System of Myth., pp. 297-8 (E. T., Leitch), who has been followed by 
many others. But it has scarcely more justification than has e.g. the 
localization of the Homeric entrance to Hades at Cumae, Herakleia 
Pont. (cf. Rh. Mus. 36, 555 ff.), or other places of ancient worship 
of the dead (e.g. Pylos). At such places the traditional names of 
Acheron, Kokytos, Pyriphlegethon were easily introduced—but 
taken from Homer and not coming thence into Homer. The fact that 
it.is just this Thesprotian oracle of the dead that is mentioned in 
Hdt.’s well-known story (v, 92 7) does not at all prove that this was 
the oldest of all such oracles. 

74 To this extent Lobeck’s denial of necromancy to the Homeric 


poems (Ag/.316) may, perhaps, require to be modified; but so modified 
it may be accepted. 


NODES Te LO CHA P Te Ret 53 


75 In accordance with primeval sacrificial custom. To the dead 
only female (or castrated) animals are offered (see Stengel, Chthon. u. 
Todtenc., 424). Here it is a oreipa Bods, dyova rots aydvois (Sch.). So 
among the Indians, “‘ to the Manes that are without the powers of life 
and procreation ”’ a wether instead of a ram was offered: Oldenberg, 
ferman Ved., 308 {= 306 Fre Tit. 

76 (2 592 ff. Achilles says to the dead Patroklos py pou atporire 
oxvdpavepev at Ke TUOnae ev *’Aidds mep eo dtu ‘’Extopa Siov édvoa 
matpt dirw, Emer ov poe aetkéa SOKev amowa. aol 8 ab éyad Kai TaVS’ 
amoddacopat doo’ éeréotxev. The possibility that the dead in Hades 
may be able to know what is happening in the upper world is referred 
to only hypothetically (ai xe)—-not so, however, the intention of 
giving the dead man a share in the gifts of Priam (8. émradiwv eis 
avtov aywvay as Sch. B.V. on 594 thinks). The strangeness of such a 
promise seems to have been one of the reasons that made Aristarch. 
(unjustly) athetize ll. 594-5. 

77 40-1, This is not un-Homeric, cf. esp. © 456. Thus on many 
vase-paintings we see the psyche of a fallen warrior flying over the 
corpse, often clad in full armour, but very diminutive in size—to 
express invisibility. 

*8 Strictly speaking Odysseus is supposed to enter into conversation 
with the women while each informs him of her fate (231-4); every 
now and then comes a ¢aro 236, 474 237, evyero 261, dacxe 306. But 
the whole section is little more than a review at which Odysseus 
assists without taking any real part. 

9 Cf. Rh. Mus. 1, 625 ff. The nearest parallel to such a distinction 
between an e/dwAov and the fully animated airs is to be foundin what 
Stesichoros (and Hesiod before him: see Paraphr. ant. Lyc., 822, 
p. 71, Scheer, and PLG. iii, p. 215) relates of Helen and her e’dwdov. 
Prob. this latter story gave rise to the insertion of these lines, A 602 ff. 

oe Cts 623 ff. 

81 Welcker, Gv. Gotterl. i, 818, and others following him. 

SA pollods|,1,°9,, 3; 2; Sch., -A 180 (ps 18b,, 23 ff.; Bekk.) gives 
as reason for the punishment of Sisyphos that he betrayed to Asopos 
the rape of his daughter Aigina by Zeus. This, however, does not 
rest upon good epic tradition. Another story follows up the betrayal 
with the myth of the outwitting of Death and then Hades by 6., 
after which he is sent down to Hades again and punished by the task 
of the endless stone-rolling. The story of the double outwitting of 
the powers of death (cf. the similar fairy tale of Spielhansel: Grimm, 
Fairy Tales, n. 82, and Anm., vol. ii, p. 163, ed. 1915) is obviously 
intended humorously, and so it seems to have been treated in a satyr- 
drama of Aesch., the Liaudos dpanérys [Sch., Z 153.] The fact that 
this story ends in the punishment of the stone-rolling ought to be 
sufficient warning against taking it in the serious and edifying sense 
in which Welcker and his followers interpret it. It is quite contrary 
to ancient ideas to suppose that Sis. is punished for his cunning as 
a warning to other crafty (as well as good) men. In Z 153 he is called 
KépdioTos avépav as praise and not blame: so Aristarch. rightly 
maintained and supported his case by clear ava¢opa to the line of 
the Nekyia (see Sch., Z 153, K 44, Lehrs, Aristarch.®, p. 117 and 
A593). The idea that the adj. refers to the xaxdrpomov of S. is merely 
a misunderstanding of Porph. ap. Sch., A 385. How little anyone 
thought of S. as a criminal, even with the Homeric story in his mind, 
is shown by the Platonic Sokrates who rejoices (Apol., 41 C) over the 
fact that in Hades he will meet, amongst others, Sisyphos (cf. also 


54 NODES iOW CHAP RE Kaa 


Thgn., 702 ff.). The case of Sis. presents the most serious difficulties 
that face any attempt to give a moralizing sense (quite outside the 
poet’s intention) to the section of the “three penitents”’. (See also 
Rh. Mus. 1, 630.) 

83 279, T 260 (cf. Rh. Mus.1, 8). Nitzsch, Anm. z. Od. iii, p. 184 f., 
vainly employs all the arts of interpretation and criticism to deny 
their obvious meaning to both passages. 

84 K. O. Miller, Aeschylus Eumenides, p. 167 = E.T., 1853, p. 159. 

85 It should be remembered also that no legal penalties against 
perjury existed in Greece, any more than in Rome. They were 
unnecessary in face of the general expectation that the deity whom 
the perjurer had invoked against himself would take immediate 
revenge upon the criminal. (Esp. instructive are the words of 
Agamemnon on the Trojan breach of faith, 4 158 ff.) Such revenge 
would be taken either during the life time of the perjurer—in which 
case the instruments of vengeance would be the spirits of Hell, the 
Erinyes: Hes., Op., 802 ff.—or else after death. 

86 The oath as a bond in favour of the oath-gods: Thgn., 1195 f., 
pnts Oeovs eriopkov éropvuli, od yap avuatov afavatovs Kpvwau xpeios 
opetAcpevoyv. Perjury would be eis @¢€ovs dpapravewy, Soph. fr. 431 
(472 P.). 

87 Eust., Od.,p. 1614-15, has understood this. He callsattention to 
Pi., P.4, 159, céAerat yap éav uvyav KopiEa Ppi€os €XOdvras mpos Ainra 
AaAajuouvs—on which passage the Sch. refers us back again to Homer. 
Both passages imply the same belief: r&v dmodomévwy ev E€vn yi 
Tas wuyds edyats tiow émeKkadrobdvtTo amomAEedvtes of Pirot ets THY exEeivwY 
maTploa Kal eéddKouy KaTayew avTovs mpos Tovs olKxelous (Sch. +65 f£., Sch. 
H,-¢ 62). Nitzsch, Anum. iii, 17-18, vainly attempts to get out of 
the necessity of seeing in this act the fulfilment of a religious duty. 
He supposes that Odysseus is merely satisfying a “‘need of the heart’’, 
etc. The real meaning of religious performance is too often obscured 
by such “‘ethical’’ interpretation. 

‘88 The command of Athene to Telem., a 291, presupposes as 
universally customary the erection of a cenotaph for those who die 
in. foreign lands unless their bodies can be obtained by their friends. 
Menelaos erects an empty tomb to Agamemnon in Egypt, 6 584. 

8° § 584, xed’ "Ayapeuvow rdpBov iv’ doBeorov KAéos ein. A 75 f., 
onua Té por xedar tmodrqs emt Ovi Aadrdoons, avdpos SvoTHvoio, Kat 
€goomevotot wU0ec8a. Achilles in the second Nekyia, w 30 ff., says 
to. Agam.: Would thou hadst died before Troy, for then the Achaeans 
would have set up a tomb for thee and kal o madi péya KA€os Ha’ 
oricow (cf. 93 f., where Agam. says to Achilles ds od pév od8€é Oavav 
dvop” Wrecas arAd ToL alel mdvras em” avOpwmmovs KAr€os EaceTat eobAdv 
"AxtAXed). The words of Hektor, H 84 ff., show how the ofjua enti 
mare? ‘EAAnowdvtw served to remind sailors as they passed, dvdpds 
wev 768€ ofa mada Katatebvyna@ros KTA. and to suggest that this was 
the proper and principal purpose of such erections.—In contrast with 
this cf. what is stated of the inhabitants of the Philippine Islands: 
“they laid their illustrious dead in a chest and set them up on a high 
place or on a rock by the bank of a river in order that they might be 
worshipped by the pious’’: Lippert, Seelencult, p. 22. 


CHAPTER II 
ISLANDS OF THE BLEST 


TRANSLATION 


The Homeric picture of the shadow-life of the disembodied 
soul is the work of resignation, not of hope. Hope would never 
have beguiled itself with the anticipation of a state of things 
which neither afforded men the chance of further activity 
after death, nor, on the other hand, gave them rest from the 
toil of life ; one which promised them only a restless, purpose- 
less fluttering to and fro, an existence, indeed, but without 
any of the content that might have made it worthy of the name 
of life. 

Was there never any aspiration after a more consolatory 
picture of the life after death? Did the tremendous vital 
energies of that time really devote themselves so completely 
to the realms of Zeus that not even a ray of hope penetrated 
to the House of Hades? We should have had to suppose so 
were it not for a single passing glimpse which we get of a 
distant land of hearts’ desire, such as even the Greece that lay 
under the sway of the Homeric order of things still imagined 
for itself. 

When Proteus, the sea-god who could foretell the future, 
has finished informing Menelaos, on the sea-shore of Egypt, 
of the circumstances of his return home to his country and of 
the fate of his dearest companions, he adds the prophetic 
words—so Menelaos himself informs Telemachos in the 
fourth book of the Odyssey (560 ff.) : “ But thou, god-like 
Menelaos, art not ordained to die in horse-pasturing Argos 
or to meet thy fate there ; for the immortals shall send thee 
far away to the Elysian plain, to the ends of the world where 
dwells fair-haired Rhadamanthys, and where life is most 
easy for men. There is neither snow nor heavy storms nor 
rain, but Okeanos ever sends zephyrs with soft-breathing 
breezes to refresh men—because thou hast Helen to wife and 
art thereby in their eyes the son-in-law of Zeus.”’ 

These verses allow us a glimpse into a world about which 
the Homeric poems are otherwise silent. At the end of the 


56 ISEANDS Ol LHe bLisr 


world, by the River Okeanos, lies the “ Elysian Plain”’, a 
land where the sky is always clear, as in the land where the 
gods live.t There dwells the great Khadamanthys, not alone, 
one may suppose as ‘‘ men ” are spoken of (565, 568). Thither 
shall the gods some day send Menelaos—he is not to die 
(562) ; that is to say, he is to reach that place alive nor shall 
he suffer death there. The place to which he is to be sent is not 
a part of the realm of Hades, but a land on the surface of the 
earth set apart as the abode not of disembodied “souls ”’, 
but of men whose souls have not been separated from their 
visible selves—for only thus can they feel and enjoy the sense 
of life (565). The picture which fancy has drawn here is the 
precise opposite of the blessed immortality of the soul in its 
separate existence. Just because such an idea remained quite 
unthinkable for Homeric singers, hope sought and found an 
exit from the shadow-world which swallows up all living 
energy. Hope imagined a land at the end of the world, but 
still of this world, to which occasionally some few favourites 
of the gods might be “ translated ”’ without the psyche being 
separated from its body and descending to Hades. 

The actual mention of such miraculous “ translation ”’ 
stands alone in the Homeric poems, and the passage in the 
Odyssey seems to have been introduced by a later hand.? 
But the conditions of such a miracle are all implied within 
the range of Homeric ideas. Menelaos is carried off by the 
power of the gods and lives an eternal life far from the world 
/ of mortals. The belief that a god could suddenly withdraw 
his earthly favourite from the eyes of men and invisibly waft 
him away on the breeze not infrequently finds its application 
in the battle-scenes of the Iliad. The gods could also make 
a mortal “ invisible ’’ for a prolonged period. When Odysseus 
has been so long lost to his friends they suspect that the gods 
have “‘ made him invisible ”’ (Od. i, 235 ff.) ; they do not regard 
him as “ dead ”’ but “ the Harpies have carried him away ”’, 
and he is consequently withdrawn from all human ken 
(Od. i, 241 f.; xiv, 371). Penelope, in her grief, prays either 
for swift death through the arrows of Artemis, ov that a storm 
wind may lift her up and carry her away on dark pathways 
to the mouths of Okeanos, that is, to the entrance of the Land 
of the Dead (Od. xx, 61-5; 79 ff.).4 To explain her wish she 
recalls a fairy tale of the kind that must often have been told 
in the women’s quarters ; how the daughters of Pandareos, 
after the violent death of their parents, were brought up to 
lovely maidenhood by Aphrodite and provided by Hera, 
Artemis, and Athene with all kinds of gifts and accom- 


ISPAND SmiG) Tee ot Pee BEES L 57 


plishments ; till one day when Aphrodite had gone to Olympos 
to ask Zeus to make a match for them, the Harpies came and 
carried them off and made them the hand-maidens of the 
hated Erinyes.® This folk-tale reveals more clearly than is 
usual with the generally cultured Homeric narrative the 
popular belief that men might be carried off permanently 
from the land of the living, and, without seeing death, live 
on in another dwelling-place. For the daughters of Pandareos 
are carried away alive—to the Kingdom of the Dead, it is 
true, for that is where they must go if they become the servants 
of the Erinyes, the spirits of the underworld.* That is where 
Penelope wishes to be carried off, and without dying first— 
away from the land of the living which has become intolerable 
for her. Such a translation is accomplished by means of the 
Harpies or the Stormwind, which is the same thing, since the 
Harpies are nothing else but wind-deities of a peculiarly 
sinister kind. They may be compared to the Devil’s Bride 
or the “ Whirlwind’s Bride ’’ of German folk-tales, who rides 
in the whirlwind and also carries off men with her.? The 
Harpies and what we are here told of them, belong to the 
‘“ vulgar mythology ”’ which so seldom finds any expression 
in Homer ; a popular folk-lore that could tell of many things 
between heaven and earth of which the Homeric “ grand | 
style ’’ takes little notice. In Homer the Harpies never act 
on their own authority ; only as the servants of the gods or of 
a single god do they transport mortals where no word of man, 
no human power, can reach.® 

The prophesied removal of Menelaos to the Elysian fields 
at the end of the world is only another example of such a 
“translation ’’ by the will and the might of the gods. Even 
the fact that prolonged habitation in that happy land, 
inaccessible to other men, is promised to him, does not 
differentiate the fate of Menelaos from that of the daughters 
of Pandareos, or from that which Penelope wishes for herself. 
For Menelaos, however, immortal life is promised not in Hades, 
or even at its entrance, but in a special country of the blest, 
as though in a new kingdom of the gods. He is to become a 
Pecod ’; for ‘since to the Homeric poets “god” and 
“immortal ” are interchangeable terms, a man who is granted 
immortality (that is, whose psyche is never separated from 
his visible self) becomes for them a god. 

It is also a Homeric belief that gods can raise mortals to 
their own realm, to immortality. Kalypso wishes to make 
Odysseus “‘immortal and ageless for all time ’’, that he may 
remain for ever by her side (Od. v, 135 f. ; 209f.; xxiii, 3351.), 


58 ISLANDS* "OF “EH Epi Est 


that is to say, make him a god like herself. The immortality 
of the gods is conditioned by the eating of the magic food 
ambrosia and nectar ;* man, too, by eating continually the 
food of the gods, becomes an immortal god. What Odysseus 
in his longing for the earthly home, to which he is drawn by 
loyalty and duty, rejects, has been attained by other mortals. 
The Homeric poems can tell of more than one mortal promoted 
to immortal life. 

As he is struggling in the stormy sea rescue comes to 
Odysseus in the person of Ino Leukothea, once the daughter of 
Kadmos, ‘“‘ who had formerly been a mortal woman, but now 
in the waves of the sea shares in the honour of the gods ”’ 
(Od. v, 333 ff.).1° Did some god of the sea bear her away and 
imprison her for ever in his own element ? The belief existed 
that a god might descend from heaven even upon an earthly 
maiden and carry her off for ever as his spouse (Od. vi, 
280 f.).1 

Ganymede, the most beautiful of mortals, had been carried 
away by the gods to Olympos to dwell among immortals, 
as the cup-bearer of Zeus (J/. xx, 232 ff.).12 He was a scion of 
the old Trojan royal house, to which Tithonos also belonged, 
whom both the Iliad and the Odyssey already know as the 
husband of Eos ; from his side the goddess arose every morning 
to bring the light of day to gods and men.!? It appears that 
she had “‘ translated ’’ her beloved not to Olympos but to the 
distant dwelling-place by the River Okeanos from which she 
sets out in the morning.t* It was Eos who had once borne off 
the beautiful Orion, and in spite of the jealousy of the other 
gods had enjoyed his love until Artemis “on Ortygia’”’ had 
slain him with her gentle arrow (Od. v, 122 ff.). The story may 
be derived from ancient star-myths, which represented in the 
language of myth what is actually. to be observed in the 
morning sky. But in such myths the elements and celestial 
phenomena are thought of as living and animate like men. 
And in the same way, these star-spirits, in accordance with the 
regular development of legend, have long ago sunk, for the 
Homeric poet, to the level of earthly youths and heroes. If 
the goddess can raise Orion into her own kingdom, then, 
according to the belief of the time (which is all that matters 
to us here), the same thing might happen to any mortal 
through the favour of the gods. A simple imitation of the 
same legend in a purely human setting is the story of Kleitos, 
a youth of the family of the seer Melampous, whom Eos 
has carried off for the sake of his beauty that he may dwell 
among the gods (Od. xv, 249 f.). 


TISPANDSHOr CEP BEES 59 
§ 2 


The translation, then, of Menelaos, while still alive, to the 
ends of the earth to live there in perpetual blessedness is 
indeed a miracle, but a miracle that finds its justification and 
precedent in the range of Homeric belief. The only thing new 
about it is that Menelaos has a special dwelling-place assigned 
to him, not in the land of the gods, the proper realm of 
immortality, nor as in the case of Tithonos and as Kalypso 
desired for Odysseus, in the company of a deity, but in a 
separate place specially allotted to the translated hero, the 
Elysian fields. Nor does this appear to be the invention of the 


writer of these lines. He refers so briefly to the “ Land of the v4 


Departed ’’ © and its delights that we are forced to believe 
that he did not himself originate so enticing a vision.1® He 
can only, in the case of Menelaos, have added a fresh com- 
panion to the company of the blessed. That Rhadamanthys 
the Just dwells there seems to be known to him from ancient 
tradition, for he evidently only intends to recall the fact and 
does not think it necessary to justify this selection of the 
brother of Minos.!’ It might even be supposed that the picture 
of such a wonderland had been invented and embellished by 
older poets simply for the benefit of RKhadamanthys. The 
only novelty is that this picture, which has been fully adopted 
into the circle of Homeric poetry, now includes a hero of the 
Trojan epic cycle among the number of those translated to 
that land of ever unclouded happiness. The lines were inserted, 
as has already been remarked, at a later date, into the prophecy 
of Proteus, and it is hard not to suppose that the whole idea 
lay far from the thoughts of previous Homeric singers. Would 
the flower of the heroic chivalry, including Achilles himself, 
have been doomed to that dim shadow-world in which we see 
them wandering in the Nekyia of the Odyssey, if a way out 
into a life exempt from death had already revealed itself to 
imagination at the time when the Epic gave the stamp of its 
approval to the stories which dealt with the fate of the greater 
number of the heroes? Because the poem of the Trojan 
War and the adventures of the Return from Troy had not 
yet decided upon the fate of Menelaos, a later poet could 
speak of his ‘‘ translation’’ to the—since ‘ discovered ’’— 
Land of Destiny. I1 is highly probable that even at the time of 
the composition of the Journey to Hades of Odysseus this 
conception—afterwards so important for the development of 
the Greek belief in immortality—of a secluded resting-place 
of living and translated heroes had not yet been completely 


60 ISLANDS FOF SLES DUES 


formulated. It fits easily into the framework of belief 
prevailing in the Homeric poems, but it is not necessarily 
required by that framework. It is natural on this account to 
suppose that it entered the Epic from without. And, remem- 
bering the Babylonian story of Hasisatra and the Hebrew one 
of Enoch,!8 both of whom without suffering death were trans- 
lated into the realm of immortal life—either to “ Heaven ” 
or to the ‘‘ End of the Rivers’”’ to the gods—we might be 
inclined to follow the fashion that prevails in some quarters 
nowadays, and believe that these earliest Greek translation 
legends were borrowed from Semitic tradition. Little, however, 
would be gained by such a mechanical derivation. Here and 
in all such cases the main question remains still unanswered : 
what were the reasons which led the Greek mind to wish to 
borrow this particular idea at this particular time from 
abroad ? In the present instance at least, nothing argues 
specially for the handing on of the belief in translation from 
one nation to another rather than for its independent origin 
in the different countries out of similar needs. 

This new idea did not contradict the normal Homeric 
beliefs about the soul but on the contrary presupposed them 
and supplemented them without incongruity. It was also, 
as we have seen, based upon conceptions that were familiar 
and natural to Greek thought. There was, indeed, no need 
for any stimulus from without to produce from these 
materials the undoubtedly new and peculiarly attractive idea 
of which we receive the earliest intimation in the prophecy 
of Proteus. 


§ 3 

The importance of this new creation for the later develop- 
ment of Greek belief makes it all the more necessary to be 
quite clear as to what exactly this novelty really was. Was 
it a Paradise for the pious and the just? A sort of Greek 
Valhalla for the bravest heroes ?>—or was it that a recon- 
ciliation and adjustment between virtue and happiness such 
as this life never knows had revealed itself to the eyes of hope 
in a Land of Promise ? Nothing of the kind is warranted by 
these lines. Menelaos was never particularly remarkable 
for those virtues which the Homeric age rated highest.19 He 
is only to be transported to Elysium because he has Helen to 
wife and is therefore the son-in-law of Zeus ; such is Proteus’ 
prophecy to him. We are not told why Rhadamanthys has 
reached the place of happiness ; nor do we learn it through 
the title by which he was referred to almost invariably by 


‘hobbsUNGBles (Ole dehs, -2sy OS et 61 


later poets, the “ Just ’’. We may, however, remind ourselves 
that as brother of Minos he was also a son of Zeus.?® It was 
not virtue or merit that gave him a claim to blessedness after 
this life ; indeed, of any such claim we never find the least 
trace. Just as the retention of the psyche in the body and the 
consequent avoidance of death can occur only as a miracle 
or by magic—that is, as an exceptional case—so does trans- 
lation into the “ Land of Destiny’”’ remain a privilege of a 
few special favourites of the gods. No one could deduce from 
such cases any article of faith of universal application. The 
nearest parallel to this miraculous preservation of life for a 
few individuals in a land of blessed repose is to be found in the 
equally miraculous preservation of consciousness in those three 
enemies of the gods in Hades whom we hear of in the Nekyia 
of the Odyssey. The Penitents in Erebos and the blessed in 
Elysium correspond: both represent exceptions which do not 
destroy the rule and do not affect the main outline of Homeric 
belief. In the first case, as in the second, the omnipotence 
of Heaven has broken through the rule. Those, however, who 
owe to the special favour of the gods their escape from death 
and their translation to Elysium are near relatives of the gods. 
This seems to be the only reason for the favour shown to 
them.*4 If therefore any more general reason beyond the 
capricious good-will of some god is to account for the trans- 
lation of these individuals it might perhaps be found in the 
belief that near relationship with the gods, that is, the very 
highest nobility of lineage, could preserve a man from the 
descent into the common realm of hopeless nothingness 
after the separation of the psyche from the body. In the same 
way the beliefs of many primitive peoples represent the 
ordinary man as departing to a joyless country of the dead 
(if he is not annihilated altogether) while the descendants of 
gods and kings, or the aristocracy, go to a land of unending 
happiness.*? Such a fancy, however, is only dimly apparent 
in the promise made to Menelaos ; nowhere is anything said 
of a general rule from which the individual case might be 
deduced.— 


§ 4 
But the individuals who are admitted to an everlasting life 
in the Elysian land at the end of the world are much too 
distantly removed from the habitations of the living for them 
to be credited with the power of influencing the world of men.*% 


They resemble the gods only in the enjoyment accorded to 
them of an unendingly conscious life. Of the omnipotence of 


62 ISLANDS OE. Wiis GEE St 


the gods they have not the smallest share 24 any more than 
the dwellers in Erebos, from whose fate their own is otherwise 
so different. We must not suppose, therefore, that the origin 
of the stories of the promotion of individual heroes above their 
companions and their translation into a distant dwelling- 
place, is to be sought in any cultus offered to those individuals 
in their previous earthly dwelling-place. Every religious cult 
is the worship of something real and powerful; no popular 
religion and no poet’s fancy would have given the national 
heroes, if they were to be regarded as powerful and worshipped 
accordingly, such a distant and inaccessible home. 

It was the free activity of the poetic fancy which created 
and embellished this last refuge of human aspiration upon the 
Elysian plain. The needs which this new creation was chiefly 
intended to satisfy were poetical and not religious. 

The atmosphere of the younger of the two Homeric epics 
already differs widely from that of its older companion, the 
Iliad, with its heroic delight in the untiring manifestation 
of vital energy. It is likely that the feelings of the conquerers 
of a new home upon the Asiatic coast may have differed 
considerably from those of the same people confirmed in 
undisturbed possession and enjoyment of their conquests. 
It seems as if the Odyssey reflected the temper and aspiration 
of these Ionian city-dwellers of a later time. A spirit of con- 
tentment and leisure seems to flow lke an undercurrent 
through the whole poem, and has made for itself a haven of 
rest in the midst of the busy action of the story. When the 
poet’s own feelings find their true expression they show us 
idyllic scenes of quiet enjoyment of daily life; magnificent 
in the country of the Phzacians, gay and more homely at the 
farm of Eumaios; pictures of quiet repose after the fights 
of the heroic past, that have now faded into a mere pleasant 
memory, such as we get in the house of Nestor, or in the 
Palace of Menelaos and the regained Helen. Or, again, we 
have a description of nature in a mood of liberality and 
gentleness, as upon the island of Syrié, the home of Eumaios’ 
childhood, upon which in ample possession of cattle, wine 
and corn, a people live free from necessity and pain, till they 
arrive at a good old age when Apollo and Artemis with their 
gentlest shafts bring swift death to them (Od. xv, 403 ff.). If 
you ask the poet where this fortunate island lies he will tell 
you that it lies over there beyond Ortygié where the sun turns 
back. But where is Ortygié,*° and who can point out the place 
where the sun begins his return journey far in the West ? 
The country of idyllic happiness lies indeed almost beyond 


ISLANDS Ob THEM BLEST RR 


the limit of this world. Phoenician merchant-men who go 
everywhere may perhaps reach that land as well (415 ff.), and 
Ionian seamen in this earliest period of Greek colonization 
into which the composition of the Odyssey reaches may well 
have hoped to find far out over the sea such propitious 
habitations of a new life. 

In the same way the country and the life of the Pheacians 
seem like an ideal picture of an Ionian state newly founded in 
a distant land far from the turmoil, the restless competition, 
and all the limitations of their familiar Greek homes. But 
this unclouded dream-picture, bathed in purest light, lies . 
far away in a distant land all but inaccessible to man. Only 
by chance is a strange ship cast away on to that coast, and at 
once the magic ships of the Phzeacians carry back the stranger 
through night and cloud to his own home again. True, there 
is no reason to see in the Phezacians a sort of ferry-people of 
the dead, neighbours of the Elysian fields. Still, the poetic | 
fancy which invented the country of the Pheacians is not 
unrelated to that which gave rise to the idea of an Elysian 
plain beyond the bounds of the inhabited world. Given the 
idea that a life of untroubled bliss can only be had in the 
remotest confines of the earth, jealously guarded from all 
intrusion, only one more step remains to be taken before men 
come to believe that such bliss is really only to be found 
where neither accident nor purpose can ever bring men, more 
remote even than the Pheacians, than the country of the 
Ethiopians, the beloved of the gods, or than the Abioi of 
the North, already known to the Iliad. It must lie beyond the 
bounds of real life. Such idyllic longings have given rise to 
the picture of Elysium. The happiness of those who there 
enjoy everlasting life seemed to be fully safeguarded only if 
their place of abode were removed for ever beyond the range 
of all exploration, out of reach of all future discovery. This 
happiness is imagined as a condition of perfect bliss under the 
most benignant sky; easy and untroubled says the poet, 
is the life of men there, in this resembling the life of the gods, 
but at the same time without aspiration and without activity. 
It is doubtful whether the poet of the Iliad would have 
considered such a future worthy of his heroes, or given the 
name of happiness to such felicity as this. 


§ 5 
We were obliged to assume that the poet who inserted these 
inimitably smooth, melodious verses in the Odyssey was not 
the first inventor or discoverer of the Elysian paradise beyond 


64 ISA ND SO Hime Cte leben 


the realm of mortality. But though he followed in the foot- 
steps of others, when he introduced into the Homeric poem 
a reference to this new belief, he was giving this idea for the 
first time an enduring place in Greek imagination. Other 
poems might disappear, but anything that appeared in the 
Iliad or the Odyssey was assured of perpetual remembrance. 

The imagination of Greek poets or Greek people never 
gave up the alluring fancy of a distant land of blessedness 
into which individual mortals might by the favour of the gods 
be translated. Even the scanty notices which have come 
_ down to us of the contents of the heroic poems that led up to, 
continued, or connected the two Homeric Epics and linked 
them up with the whole cycle of Theban and Trojan legend 
enable us to see how this post-Homeric poetry took pleasure 
in the recital of still further examples of translation. 

The Kypria first described how the army of the Achzans 
for the second time encamped in Aulis, was detained by adverse 
* winds sent by Artemis ; and how Agamemnon on the advice 
of Kalchas would have sacrificed his own daughter Iphigeneia 
to the goddess. Artemis, however, snatched away the maiden 
and transported her to the land of the Taurians, and there 
made her immortal.?® 

The Aithiopis, a continuation of the Iliad, tells of the help 
brought to the Trojans by Penthesileia and her Amazons, 
and after her death by Memnon the A!thiopian prince, an 
imaginary representative of the eastern monarchies of inner 
Asia. Antilochos, the new favourite of Achilles, falls in the 
war, but Achilles slays Memnon himself. Thereupon Eos 
the mother of Memnon (and known as such already to the 
Odyssey) obtains the permission of Zeus to give immortality 
to her son.?” It may be supposed that the poet described 
what we see so often represented upon Greek vases: the 
mother bearing through the air the dead body of her son. 
According to the story told in the Iliad, Apollo, with the help 
of Sleep and Death, the twin brothers, bore off the body of 
Sarpedon, the son of Zeus, to his Lycian home after he had 
been slain by Achilles, merely in order that he might be buried 
in his own country. But the poet of the Aithiopis has tried 
to outdo the story in the Iliad in impressiveness (for it was 
evidently his model),?8 and has made Eos, with the permission 
of Zeus, not merely carry off the dead to his far-off home in the 
East, but there awaken him to immortal life. 

Soon after the death of Memnon fate overtakes Achilles 
himself. When his body, rescued by his friends after much 
hard fighting, is laid upon its bier, Thetis, his mother, with 


TSN) Sat ee tH tab BST 65 


the Muses and the other sea-goddesses come and sing the 
funeral dirge. Of this we are told in the last book of the 
Odyssey (xxiv, 47 ff.) which relates further how his body was 
burnt, his bones gathered together and entombed under a 
mound, and the psyche of Achilles departed to the House 
of Hades ; the whole story being told to him in the underworld 
by the psyche of Agamemnon. JBut the author of the 
Aithiopis—always remarkable for his bold innovations in 
the traditional material—here ventures upon an important 
new touch. From the funeral pyre, he tells us, Thetis carried 
off the body of her son and brought him to Leuke.?® That 
she restored him to lfe again there and made him immortal 
the one meagre extract which accident has preserved to us 
does not say. But there can be no question that that is what 
the poet narrated—all later accounts conclude the story in 
this way. 

The parallel is clear: the two opponents, Achilles and 
Memnon, are both set free from the fate of mortals by their 
goddess-mothers. In bodies once more restored to life they 
continue to live, not among men, nor yet among the gods, 
but in a distant wonderland—Memnon in the east, Achilles 
in the “ White Island’”’. The poet himself can hardly have 
imagined Achilles’ Island to have been in the Euxine Sea, 
where, however, later Greek sailors located this purely 
mythical spot. 

The translation of Menelaos is still more closely paralleled 
by the story told in the Telegoneia, which was the final and 
the latest-written of the Cyclic poems, of the fate which 
attended the family of Odysseus. Telegonos, the son of 
Odysseus and Kirke, slays his father unwittingly ; when he 
discovers his mistake he brings the body of Odysseus with 
Penelope and Telegonos to his mother, Kirke, who makes them 
immortal; and there they dwell now (in the Isle Aiaia, far 
away over the sea, we must suppose)—Penelope as the wife of 
Telegonos, and Kirke with Telemachos.*° 


§ 6 

It is natural to feel surprise that in none of these stories 
is there any mention of translation to a common meeting- 
place of the Elect, such as the Elysian plain seemed to be. 
We must on that account be content to leave unanswered the 
question to what precise extent these lines of the Odyssey 
which describe the translation of Menelaos to Elysium may 
have influenced the development of translation stories in 
the post-Homeric Epics. The influence must clearly have been 

F 


66 ISLANDS OF THE BLEST 


considerable.31_ The stories of the translation of individual 
heroes to a solitary after-life in secluded abodes of immortality 
show, at any rate, the same direction of fancy as that which 
produced the fields of Elysium. No longer does Eos, after she 
has snatched him from Hades, raise her son to be among the 
gods as once she had raised Kieitos and others of her favourites. 
Memnon enters upon a peculiar state of being that 
differentiates him from the rest of mankind as much as from 
the gods. The same applies to Achilles and the other trans- 
lated heroes. Thus did poetry increase the number of those 
who belonged to this middle realm ; who, born in immortality 
have, outside the realms of Olympos, achieved immortality. 
It is still only favoured individuals who enter this kingdom ; 
it is still poetical aspiration, giving free rein to its creative 
instinct, that continues to transport an ever-increasing number 
of the bright figures of Legend into the illumination of ever- 
lasting life. Religious worship can have had no more influence 
in the development of these stories than it had in the narrative 
of the translation of Menelaos. Achilles, for example, may in 
later times have had a cult paid to him on an island at the 
mouth of the Danube, supposed to be Leuke. But the cult 
was the result and not the motive or the cause of the story. 
Iphigeneia was certainly the epithet of a Moon-goddess ; but 
the poet who told of the translation of her namesake, the 
daughter of Agamemnon, had no suspicion of the latter’s 
identity with a goddess—otherwise he would never have 
regarded her as Agamemnon’s daughter. Nor, we may be 
fairly certain, can it have been an accidental meeting with the 
cult of the goddess Iphigeneia, which induced him to invent 
an immortality ture postlimim for his mortal Iphigeneia, 
by the machinery of translation. Both for the poet and his 
contemporaries the importance and the essence of his 
narrative—whether free invention or a reconstruction out of 
older material—lay in the fact that it told of the raising of a 
mortal maiden, the daughter of mortal parents, to immortal 
life, and not to religious veneration which could not have made 
itself very apparent to the maiden relegated to the distant 
Tauric country. 

The busy expansion of the legendary material went on in 
epics that finally lost themselves in genealogical poems. To 
what extent it may have made use of the motif of translation 
or transfiguration we can no longer accurately judge. The 
materials at our disposal are quite insufficient to warrant any 
conclusion. When such a misty figure as Telegonos is deemed 
worthy of immortality, it may be supposed that in the mind 


LSND See OTe Lh ees OES i 67 


of the poet all the heroes of Epic tradition had come to be 
possessed of a virtual claim to a share in this mode of con- 
tinued existence in a life after death. Certainly the more 
important among them could not be left out—those at least 
of whose end the Homeric poems themselves had not already 
given a different version. The poem of the Return of the 
Heroes from Troy may especially have given scope for many 
translation stories.22. We may, for example, ask whether 
Diomedes, at least, whose immortality is often vouched for 
by later mythology, was not already added to the number of 
the immortals in the epics of the Heroic cycle. An Attic 
folk-song of the fifth century can speak with assurance of 
Diomedes as not having died but as living in the “ Islands of 
the Blest ’. Thus a far greater company of the Heroes of the 
Trojan War was thought of by the poetry of Homeric 
tradition as gathered together in “ Isles of the Blest’’, far out 
to sea, than we should guess from the summaries of the post- 
Homeric Epics which accident has preserved to us. This 
conclusion must be drawn from the lines of a Hesiodic poem 
which give us some remarkable information about the oldest 
Greek forms of the Cult of the Souls and belief in immortality; 
and the lines, therefore, must be subjected to a closer 
examination. 


II 


The Hesiodic poem known as the “ Works and Days’’’ 
consists of a number of independent pieces of didactic or 
narrative interest loosely strung together. In it, not far from 
the beginning, comes the story of the Five Ages of Men. As 
regards its subject-matter, the train of thought which unites 
this section to the passages which precede and follow it is 
hardly discoverable ; in form it is quite disconnected. 

In the beginning we are there told the gods of Olympos 
created a Golden race whose members lived like the gods, 
without care, sickness or decrepitude, and in enjoyment of 
rich possessions. After their death, which came upon them 
like sleep to tired men, they became, by the will of Zeus, 
Daimones and Guardians of mankind. They were followed by 
a Silver race, far inferior to the first, and unlike them in body 
asinmind. The men of this race had a long childhood, lasting 
a hundred years, followed by a short youth, during which their 
wantonness and pride in their dealings with each other and 
with the gods brought them much sorrow. Because they 
refused the honours due to the gods Zeus destroyed them 
and they are now Daimones of the Underworld, honoured 


68 ISLANDS .OF “THE “bEBs! 


but inferior to the Daimones of the Golden Age. Zeus then 
created a third race, this time of Bronze—hard-hearted and of 
great strength ; war was their delight, and being destroyed 
by their own hands they went down unhonoured to the 
House of Hades. Thereupon Zeus made a fourth race that 
was juster and better, the race of Heroes, who were called 
‘Demigods’. They fought before Thebes and Troy and some 
of them died, while others Zeus sent to dwell at the ends of the 
world on the Islands of the Blest by the river Okeanos, where 
the Earth brings them her fruits three times in the year. 
‘Would that I did not belong to the fifth Age ; would that 
I had died earlier or been born hereafter,’ says the poet, 
‘since now is the Iron Age,” when toil and grief never leave 
men, when there is enmity of all against all and force conquers 
right, and Envy, evil-tongued, delighting in wickedness, 
fierce-eyed, is over everything. Now, Shame and the goddess 
of retribution, Nemesis, depart from men and go to the gods ; 
every misfortune is left behind for man, and there is no defence 
against evil. 

_.The author here lays before us the results of gloomy 
reflection upon the origin and growth of evil in the world of 
men. He sees the steps of mankind’s degeneration from the 
height of godlike happiness to the extremes of misery and 
wickedness. He is following popular conceptions. It is natural 
to every race of men to lay the scene of earthly perfection in 
the past, so long, at least, as man gets his information about 
that past not from distinct historical memory, but from the 
picturesque stories and beautiful dreams of the poets which 
encourage the natural tendency of fancy to retain only the 
more attractive features of the past in the memory. The folk- 
lore of many lands can tell of a Golden Age and how mankind 
gradually fell from that high estate; and it is not at all 
surprising if fanciful speculation starting from the same point 
and travelling along the same road has reached the same 
conclusion in the case of more than one people without the 
aid of any historical connexion. We have a number of 
expressions of the idea of man’s gradual degeneration through 
several Ages which present the most striking similarities 
among themselves and with the Hesiodic picture of the five 
Ages of Men. Even Homer is sometimes overcome by the 
mood ; it lies, for instance, at the root of such idealizations of 
the past as are implied when in his description of the heroic 
life he thinks of “‘ men as they now are’ and “‘ how few sons 
are equal to their fathers in virtue ; worse, most of them ; 
few, indeed, are the men who are better than their fathers ”’ 


ISLANDS OF THE BLEST 69 


(Od. ii, 276 f.). But the epic poet keeps himself and his fancy 
on the heights of the heroic Past ; only occasionally, and in 
passing, his glance falls upon the commonplace level of real 
life. But the poet of the “ Works and Days” has all his 
thoughts fixed upon the level plain of real and contemporary 
life ; the glance which he occasionally casts upon the heights 
of the storied past is all the more bitter on that account. y 

What he has to say of the first condition of mankind and — 
the gradual process of deterioration is given, not as an abstract 
exposition of what in the necessary course of things must have 
occurred, but rather as a traditional account of what had 
actually happened—in fact, as history. 

In this light he himself must certainly have eaves it, 
though, apart from a few vague memories, no historical 
tradition is contained in what he says of the nature and deeds 
of the earlier generations of mankind. His story remains an 
imaginary picture. And for this reason the development, as 
he presents it, takes a logically defined and regulated course, 
based on the idea of a gradual deterioration. The uneventful 
happiness of the first race of men who know neither virtue nor 
vice is followed by a second race, which after a prolonged 
minority displays pride and contempt of the gods. In the third, 
or brazen age, active wickedness breaks out, with war and 
murder. The last age, at the beginning of which the poet him- 
self seems to stand, marks the breakdown of all moral restraint. 
The fourth race of men, to which the heroes of the Theban and 
Trojan wars belong, is alone among all the others in not being 
named and ranked after a metal. It is an alien in the 
evolutionary process. The downward course is checked during 
the fourth age, and yet in the fifth it goes on again as if it had 
never been interrupted. It is not apparent why that course 
should have been interrupted. Most of the commentators 
_ have recognized in the story of the fourth age a fragment 
of different material, originally foreign to the poem of the 
Ages of Men and added deliberately by Hesiod to this poem, 
which he may have taken over in its essential features from 
older poets. But if we adopt this view we have to ask 
what can have tempted the poet to such serious disturbance 
and dislocation of the orderly succession of the original 
speculative poem. It will not be enough to say that the poet, 
brought up in the Homeric tradition, found it impossible to 
pass over, in a description of the earlier ages of men, the 
figures of the heroic poetry which, thanks to the power of 
song, had acquired in the imagination of the Greeks more 
reality than the plainest manifestations of actual life. Nor 


70 ISVANDSI OF (el Ewe isd 


is it likely that, having in his grim description of the Bronze 
race introduced a darker picture of the Heroic age, drawn 
from a point of view different from that of the courtly Epos, 
he wished to set by its side this bright vision of the same age 
as he saw it in his own mind. If the picture of the Bronze 
race does really refer to the Heroic age,*? giving its reverse 
side, so to speak, Hesiod never seems to have noticed the fact. 
He must have had stronger grounds than these for the intro- 
duction of his narrative. He cannot have failed to perceive 
that he was breaking the continuity of moral deterioration 
by his introduction of the Heroic race. It follows that he 
must have had some aim, other than that of the description of 
the moral deterioration of men, which he imagined himself 
to be serving by the introduction of this new section. This 
other purpose will become plain if we inquire what it is that 
really interests the poet in the Heroic race. It is not their 
higher morality—that only interrupted the series of con- 
tinually worsening generations. Nor would he in that case 
have dismissed the subject with a few words which barely 
suffice to connect this section with the theme of moral develop- 
ment. Further, it is not the fights and great deeds done at 
Thebes or Troy that interest him for he says nothing of their 
greatness, and at once declares that the cruel war and the 
dread fury of battle destroyed the Heroes, This, again, does 
not discriminate between the Heroes and the men of the Bronze 
age who also, being destroyed by their own deeds, had to go 
down to Hades. What distinguishes the Heroic age from the 
others is the way in which some of the Heroes depart from this 
life without dying. This is the point that interests the poet, 
and this it must have been that chiefly induced him to bring 
in here his account of the fourth race of men. He combines 
clearly enough with his main purpose of describing the 
advancing moral decline of man, a secondary aim—that of 
telling what happened after death to the representatives of 
each successive race. In introducing the Heroic race of men 
this secondary aim becomes the chief one, and justifies what 
would otherwise have been merely an intrusive episode. It is 
this aim, too, which gives the Hesiodic narrative its im- 
portance for our present inquiry. 


§ 2 
The men of the Golden Age, after sleep has overcome them 
and they have died and been laid in the earth, become by the 
will of Zeus “ Daimones ”—Daimones upon earth, watchers 
of men, wandering over all the earth, veiled in clouds, 


ISLANDS OF THE BLEST 71 


observing justice and injustice,34 dispensing riches like kings. 
These men of the earliest times have then become effective 
realities. They are not spirits confined to an inaccessible 
region beyond this world, but powefs acting and working 
amongst men. In this exalted state Hesiod calls them 
Daimones, and thus describes them by a name which is other- 
wise applied by him as well as by Homer only to the immortal 
gods. The name so employed is not to be understood as 
implying a separate class of immortals, an intermediate class 
of beings between gods and men, as later speculation used the 
word.®> These later beings of an intermediate class were 
thought of as possessing an originally immortal nature like 
the gods, and as dwelling in an intermediate region of their 
own. Hesiod’s Daimones, on the contrary, have once been 
men and have only after their death become immortals 
invisibly 3° roaming the earth. When they are given the name 
Daimones nothing more is implied than that they now share 
the invisible might and unending life of the gods, and to that 
extent may be called gods—with as much right as Ino 
Leukothea, for instance, who, according to Homer, became a 
goddess after being a mortal; or as Phaéthon, who, according 
to the Hesiodic Theogony, was raised by Aphrodite from the 
world of mortality and is now called a “ godlike Daimon ”’ 
(Th., 991). On the other hand, these immortals who were once 
men are clearly distinguished from the everlasting gods, 
“who have their Olympian dwellings,’ by being called 
Daimones “who rule upon earth ’’.8? And though they are 
given the name, familiar to everybody from Homer, of 
Daimones, i.e. gods, they, nevertheless, form a class of beings 
which is entirely unknown to Homer. Homer knows of certain 
individual men who are raised or translated, body and soul 
together, to undying life. The later Epos can tell of certain 
also who, like Memnon or Achilles, receive a new life after 
their death and now live on in undivided unity of body and 
soul. But that the soul outside Erebos could carry on a con- 
scious life of its own and influence living men—of this there is 
no mention in Homer. Yet this is exactly what has happened 
according to the Hesiodic poem. The men of the Golden Age 
have died and now live on divided from their bodies, invisible 
and godlike, and therefore called gods. Just as in Homer, 
the gods themselves assume manifold shapes and visit the cities 
of men, observing the good and evil deeds of men,*® so 
also do the souls of the dead in Hesiod. For the beings who 
here, after their separation from the body, have become 
Daimones, are Souls—that is to say, beings who after their 


72 ISLANDS OF THE: BLEST 


death have entered in any case upon a higher existence than 
was theirs while they were united to the body. This, however, 
is an idea that we never meet with in the Homeric poems. 
And yet it is quite unthinkable that this remarkable 
conception is the independent and passing invention of the 
Boeotian poet. He comes back to it again later on in the course 
of his poem. “Thirty thousand,’ that is, innumerable 
immortal Watchers over mortal men wander invisibly in the 
service of Zeus over the earth, taking note of right and wrong ~ 
(Op., 252 ff.). The conception is important to him for ethical 
reasons ; if he is to make use of it in his argument he must 
not have invented it himself. And, in fact, nothing that belongs 
to the sphere of religious belief and cultus, or even the lower 
levels of superstition, has been invented by this earnest- 
minded poet. The Boeotian school of poetry to which he 
belonged was far removed from, and indeed, hostile to the 
free inventiveness and roaming fancy with which the Homeric 
school “. . . know how to put forward many les and make 
them seem like truth ’’ (Th., 27). In pursuance of their purpose 
not simply to please but always in some sense to teach, the 
Boeotian poets never innovate in the region of the purely 
mythical, but simply order or piece together, or merely 
register what they find in the tradition. In religion especially 
invention les farthest from their minds, though they do not 
by any means deny themselves the right of independent 
speculation about the traditional. Thus, what Hesiod tells 
us about the men of a previous age, whose souls after death 
become Daimones, came to him from tradition. It might 
still be objected that this tradition while being older than 
Hesiod may, nevertheless, be more recent than Homer, and 
be the result of post-Homeric speculation. It is unnecessary 
to develop the reasons which make such a view untenable ; 
the course of our inquiry up to the present has made it possible 
for us to maintain decidedly that in what Hesiod here 
says we have a fragment of primitive belief reaching back 
far beyond Homer and surviving in the secluded Boeotian 
countryside. We have found even in the poems of Homer 
vestiges of a cult of the dead sufficient to make us believe 
that once in a distant past the Greeks resembled the majority 
of other nations and believed in the continued, conscious 
existence of the psyche after its separation from the body and 
in its powerful influence upon the world of men. We found, 
too, that in accordance with this belief, religious honours of 
various sorts were paid to the disembodied souls. In Hesiod’s 
narrative we simply have documentary confirmation of 


ISEANDS “OF “THE? BLES? 73 


what could only be with difficulty extracted from the study 
of Homer. Here we encounter the still living belief in the 
elevation of the soul after death to a higher hfe. They are the 
souls, it must be noted, of a race of men long since disappeared, 
about whom this belief is held. The belief in their godlike 
after-life must therefore be long-standing, and the worship 
of these souls as powerful beings still continues. For when it is. 
said of the souls of the second race “these also receive 
worship ”’ 89 (Of., 142), it is distinctly implied that the 
Daimones of the first or Golden generation a fortiori received 
worship. 

The men of the Silver generation, on account of their refusal 
to pay due honour to the Olympians, are “‘ hidden ”’ by Zeus. 
under the earth, and are now called ‘“‘mortal Blessed Ones 
that live below the earth, second in rank, yet worship is paid 
to them also ” (141-2). Thus, the poet knows of the souls of 
men who likewise belonged to the distant past, whose home is 
in the bowels of the earth, who receive religious honour and 
who must therefore have been conceived as powerful. The 
poet has not specified the nature of their influence upon the 
upper world. It is true that he does not distinctly call the 
spirits of this second generation “ good ’’, as he had done the 
first (122), and he makes them spring from the less perfect 
Silver age and seems to have given them inferior rank. But it 
does not follow that he here anticipated later speculation and 
thought of the second generation as a class of wicked demons 
whose nature it is to work evil.4® Only to the Olympians do 
they seem to stand in a rather more distant relationship— 
almost one of hostility. They had before paid the gods none of 
their pious dues, and so now they are not called, like the souls 
of the first race, “‘ Daimones appointed by Zeus to be Watchers 
of men.’ The poet refers to them with a remarkable 
expression, ‘“‘mortal Blessed Ones,” that is, mortal gods. 
This very singular denomination, the two parts of which really 
cancel one another, points to a certain embarrassment felt 
by the poet in making use of an expression taken from the 
Homeric vocabulary (to which the poet felt himself confined) 
to designate clearly and effectively a class of beings that was 
unknown to Homer.*! The disembodied souls of the first 
race he had simply called Daimones. But this name, common 
as it was both to the race of those who from mortality had 
achieved immortality and to the immortal gods, left the 
essential difference between the two classes of immortal beings 
unexpressed. For that very reason the name was never 
employed in Hesiod’s fashion by later ages,** who always 


74 ISGANDS# OF) LOE BLES 


called such as, not having been born immortal, had achieved 
immortality, by the name of “‘Heroes’’. Hesiod, who could 
not use the word in this sense, described them by the bold 
oxymoron: mortal Blessed Ones, human gods. As immortal 
spirits they resembled the gods in their new state of being. 
But their nature was still mortal, and hence their bodies 
had to die, and this constituted their difference from the ever- 
lasting gods.*% 

The name Daimones then does not appear to involve any 
essential distinction between the spirits of the men of the 
Silver generation and the Daimones of the Golden Age. Only 
the place where the two classes of spirits have their dwelling 
is different—the Daimones of the Silver race live in the depths 
of the earth. The expression “of the underworld ’’, used of 
them, is a vague one, and only suffices to differentiate them 
from the spirits of the “upper world ’’ who were derived 
from the first race. Still, the abode of the souls of the Silver 
Age is in any case not thought of as being the distant meeting- 
place of the unconscious, vegetating shadow-souls—the House 
of Hades; the “phantoms” that hover about that place 
could not have been called Daimones or “ mortal gods ’’, nor 
do they receive any kind of worship after their death. 


§ 3 

The Silver Age, then, belongs to a long-since vanished past. #4 
The stalwarts of the Bronze Age, we are told, destroyed by 
their deeds, went down into the gloomy home of the dreadful 
Hades, nameless. Black Death seized them, for all their 
violence, and they left the light of the sun. 

Except for the addition of the adjective ‘“‘ nameless ”’ one 
might, indeed, suppose that this was a description of the fate 
of the souls of the Homeric heroes. Perhaps, however, the 
word *® only means that no honourable and distinctive title, 
such as belonged to the souls of the first and second as well as 
to the fourth race, was attached to those who had gone down 
into the shadow-world of annihilation and become as nothing. 

There follows “ the divine race of Heroes who were called 
the Demigods ’’. The wars at Thebes and Troy destroyed 
these. Part were “ enfolded in the destiny of Death’ ; others 
received life and a home far from men at the hand of Zeus 
Kronides, who gave them a dwelling-place at the ends of the 
world. There they live, free from care, in the Islands of the 
Blest, by the deep-flowing Okeanos ; favoured Heroes, for 
whom the Earth, of her own accord, brings forth her sweet 
fruits three times a year. 


ISEAN DSS OL eae DELS 75 


Here, at last, for the first time we have reached a clearly 
definable period of legendary history. The poet means to 
speak of the Heroes whose adventures were narrated in the 
Thebais, the Iliad and kindred poems. What we notice here 
specially is how little the Greeks yet knew of their history. 
Immediately after the disappearance of the Heroes the poet 
begins the age in which he himself must live. Where the 
realm of poetry ends, there is an end of all further tradition ; 
there follows a blank, and to all appearances the present age 
immediately begins. That explains why the Heroic Age is the 
last before the fifth, to which the poet himself belongs, and 
why it does not, for example, precede the (undated) Bronze 
Age. It connects itself conveniently with the Bronze Age also 
in what is related of the fate suffered by a part of its repre- 
sentatives, for the subject which here particularly interests 
the poet is the fate of the departed. Some of the fallen Heroes 
simply die—that is to say (there can be no doubt of it) they 
enter the realm of Hades like the members of the Bronze 
race or the Heroes of the Iliad. But when others are 
distinguished from those whom “ Death took”’ in that they 
reach the Islands of the Blest, it is impossible not to suppose 
that these last have not suffered death, that is, the separation 
of the Psyche from the visible Self, but have been carried 
away alive in the flesh. The poet is thinking of such. cases as 
those we have met with in the Odyssean narrative of Menelaos, 
or, in the Telegoneia, of Penelope, Telemachos and Telegonos. 
These few exceptional instances could hardly have made such 
a deep impression on him that he felt himself bound on their 
behalf to erect a special class of the Translated to be set over 
against those who simply died. There can be no doubt that he 
had many more examples before him of this same mysterious 
mode of separation from the world of men that did not involve 
death. We have already seen how the lines in the Odyssey in 
which the translation of Menelaos is foreshadowed, point 
back to other and earlier poems of the same kind. Further, 
the references to the subject which we found in the remains of 
the Cyclic Epics make it easy to suppose that later Heroic 
poetry had been continually widening the circle of those who 
enjoyed translation and illumination. 

Only from such a poetical source can Hesiod have derived 
his conception of a common meeting-place where the 
Translated enjoy for ever their untroubled existence. He 
calls that place the ‘“‘ Islands of the Blest’’; and these lie 
far removed from the world of men, in the Ocean, on the 
confines of the earth, just where the Odyssey puts the Elysian 


76 PSAIN DSO tae Hl eet ts 


plain, another meeting-place of the still-lving Translated, 
or rather the same under a different name. Its name does not 
oblige us to regard the “‘ Elysian plain” as an island, but 
neither does it exclude that assumption. Homer never 
expressly calls the land of the Phzeacians an island,*® but the 
imagination of most readers will picture Scherié as such, and 
so did the Greeks perhaps already at the time of the Hesiodic 
school of poets. In the same way a poet may have thought of 
the “‘Land of Destiny ’”’ that receives passing mention in 
Homer as an island, or group of islands; only an island 
surrounded and cut off by the sea can give the full impression 
of a distant asylum far from the world, inaccessible to all save 
those specially called thither. And accordingly the mythology 
of many peoples, especially those who live by the sea, has made 
a distant island the dwelling-place of the souls of the departed. 

Complete isolation is the essential feature of the whole 
idea of translation, as Hesiod clearly shows. A later poet has 
added a line—which does not quite fit into its place—to make 
this isolation even more marked.47 According to it, these 
Blessed Ones live not only “ far from men ”’ (167), but also 
(169) far from the immortals, and are ruled over by Kronos. 
The writer of this line follows a beautiful legend, later, 
however, than Hesiod, in which Zeus released the aged Kronos, 
together with the other Titans, from Tartaros, so that the old 
king of the gods, under whose rule the Golden Age had once 
prevailed with peace and happiness upon earth, now wields 
the sceptre of another Golden Age over the Blessed in Elysium, 
himself a figure of peaceful contemplation dwelling far away 
from the stormy world, from the throne of which he has 
been ousted by Zeus. Hesiod himself has provoked this 
transference of Kronos from the Golden Age to the land of the 
Translated ; for in the few lines that he devotes to the 
description of the life of the Blessed a reminiscence of the 
picture of the Golden Age’s untroubled existence is clearly 
discernible. Both pictures, the one of a childhood’s paradise 
in the past, the other of unclouded happiness reserved in the 
future for the elect, are closely related ; it is difficult to say 
which of them has influenced the other*® since the colours 
must have been the same in any case—the purely idyllic 
having an inevitable uniformity of its own. 


§ 4 
Hesiod says nothing of any influence upon this world — 


exerted by the souls of the Translated in the Islands of the 
Blest, such as is attributed to the Daimones of the Golden 


olersvnG Be: 1Giy tele” isiblens 17 


race, nor of any religious worship, which would be implied 
by such influence if it existed, such as the underworld spirits 
of the Silver Age receive. All relations with this world are 
broken off, for any influence from this side would completely 
contradict the whole conception of these blessed departed. 
Hesiod faithfully sets down the conception of the Translated 
exactly as poetic fancy, without any interference from religious 
cultus, or the folk-belief founded on it, had instinctively 
shaped it... 

Supposing, then, that he follows Homeric and post-Homeric 
poetic tradition in this particular, whence did he derive his 
ideas about the Daimones and spirits of the Golden and Silver 
Ages? He did not and could not have got these from Homeric 
or semi-Homeric sources, for they (unlike the idea of Trans- 
lation) do not simply expand, but actually contradict Homeric 
beliefs about the soul. To this question we may answer with 
certainty ; he derived them from cultus. There survived, in 
spite of Homer, at least in central Greece where the Hesiodic 
poetry had its home, a religious worship paid to the souls 
of certain departed classes of men ; and this cultus preserved 
alive, at least as a vague tradition, a belief which Homer 


had obscured and dispossessed. It only reached the Boeotian y 


poet, whose own conceptions spring entirely from the soil of 
Homeric belief, as from a far distance. Already in the days of 
the Bronze race, he tells us, the souls of the dead were 
swallowed up in the dread House of Hades, and this (with a 
few miraculous exceptions) applies to the Heroic race as well. 
And for the poet, standing as he does, at the opening of the 
Iron Age, to which he himself belongs, nothing remains but 
dissolution in the nothingness of Erebos. That such is his 
view is proved by his silence about the fate after death of his 
generation—a silence that is all the more oppressive because 
the grim picture that he gives of the misery and ever-increasing 
_ depravity of real and contemporary life might seem to require 
a brighter and more hopeful picture of future compensation, 
if only to balance it and make it endurable. But he is 
silent about all such future compensation ; he has no such 
hope to offer. Though in another part of the same poem Hope 
alone of all the blessings of an earlier and better age still 
remains among men, such Hope no longer illuminates the 
next world, at any rate, with its beams. The poet, more 
deeply distressed by the common realities of life, can by no 
means dispense so easily as the singers of the epic tradition 
enclosed in the magic circle of their poetry, with such hopes 
of the future. He can draw comfort only from what poetry 


78 ISLANDS OF “THE BLESE 


or religious myth tell him of the far distant past. It never 
enters his head to believe that the miracle of the translation 
of living men could transcend the limits of the Heroic Age 
and repeat itself in the common and prosaic present day. 
And the time when, according to a law of nature no longer 
(so it seems) in operation, the souls of the dead became 
Daimones and lived a higher life upon and beneath the earth, 
is situated far back in the distant past. Another law rules 
- now; the men of to-day may still worship the immortal 
spirits of the Golden and the Silver Age, but they themselves 
will never be added to the number of those illuminated and 
exalted souls. 


§ 5 


Hesiod’s description, then, of the five Ages of Men gives us 
the most important information about the development of 
Greek belief in the soul. What he tells us of the spirits of the 
Silver and Golden race shows that from the earliest dawn of 
history down to the actual lifetime of the poet, a form of 
ancestor-worshtp had prevailed, based upon the once living 
belief in the elevation of disembodied and immaterial souls 
to the rank of powerful, consciously active spirits. But the 
company of these spirits receives no additions from the life of 
the present day. For centuries now the souls of the dead have 
been claimed by Hades and his vain shadow world. The 
worship of the soul is stationary ; it affects only the souls of 
the long-since departed ; it no longer increases the number of 
the objects of its worship. In other words, the belief has 
changed; the Homeric poems have triumphed and the view 
they held, and to which they gave authority, and, as it were, 
official sanction, now prevails. They teach men that the 
psyche once separated from the body loses all its powers and 
consciousness ; the strengthless shadows are received into a 
distant Underworld. For them, no action, no influence upon 
the world of men is possible, and therefore no cult can be paid 
to them. Only on the farthest horizon faintly appear the 
Islands of the Blest, but the circle of the fortunate, who, 
according to the visionary fancy of the poets, are translated 
alive there, is now closed, just as the circle of epic story is 
complete also. Such miracles no longer happen. 

Nothing in this evolutionary process so clearly depicted in 
the poem of Hesiod contradicts what we have learned from 
Homer. One thing only is new and immensely important ; 
in spite of everything the memory survives that once the 
souls of departed generations of men had achieved a higher, 


ISCAND Se Ole HEE BUEST 79 


undying life. Hesiod speaks in the present tense of their 
being and working and of the worship paid to them after their 
death ; if they are believed to be immortal, men will naturally 
continue to worship them. And the opposite also is true ; 
if the worship of such spirits had not survived into the 
present, no one would have held them to be deathless and 
eternally potent. 

In a word, we are in the old Greek mainland, the land of 
Boeotian peasants and urban farmers, among a stay-at-home 
race which neither knows nor desires to know of the seafaring 
life that tempts men to foreign lands whence they bring back 
so much that is new and strange. Here in the central uplands. 
vestiges of ancient custom and belief remained that had been 
forgotten in the maritime cities of new Greece on the Asiatic 
coast. Even here, however, the new learning had penetrated 
to this extent: the structure of ancient belief, transported 
into the distant past, interwoven with fanciful tales of the 
earliest state of mankind, like the expiring echo of half- 
forgotten song lives on only in memory. But the cult of Souls. 
is not yet quite dead ; the possibility remains that it may yet 
renew its strength and expand into fresh life when once the 
magic influence of the Homeric view of the world shall have 
been broken. 


NOTE St LOR CHAP TT haa 


1 Tt is not for nothing that what is here said of the “‘climate’’, 
if one may so call it, of the Elysian plain, 6 566-8, reminds us so 
‘strikingly of the description of the abode of the Gods on Olympos, 
€ 43-5. 
: 2 The announcement of the fate of Menelaos is quite superfluous ; 
it is not necessitated (and not even justified) by his first request 
(468 ff.), or by his further questions (486 ff.; 551 ff.). Nitzsch 
already regarded the lines 561-8 as a later addition: Anm. z. Od. iii, 
p. 352—though indeed on grounds that I cannot regard as conclusive. 
Others have done the same since. 

3 The following are made invisible (by envelopment in. a cloud) 
and carried away—this, though not always stated, is most probably 
to be understood in most cases: Paris, by Aphrodite, I" 380 ff. ; 
Aeneas, by Apollo, EF 344f.; Idaios, son of Dares, the priest of 
Hephaistos, by Heph., # 23; Hektor, by Apollo, Y 443 f.; Aeneas, 
by Poseidon, Y 325 ff.; Agenor, by Apollo, @ 596 ff.—this last appears 
to be the original copied twice over in the story of this one day of 
fighting by later poets (in the above-mentioned cases of the use of 
the motif, Y 325 ff.; 443f.). It is remarkable (for no special reason 
for it suggests itself) that all these cases of translation are found 
on the Trojan side. Otherwise we only have one instance (and that 
only in the narrative of a long past adventure), the translation of the 
Anaktoriones by their father Poseidon, A 750 ff. Lastly, a case that 
hardly goes beyond those already mentioned: Zeus could have 
translated alive his son Sarpedon out of the fray and placed him in 
his Lykian home ( J] 436), but refrains owing to the warning of Hera 
{440 ff.). 

4 The wish to die quickly is expressly contrasted with the wish to 
‘be carried off by the Harpies, 63 7 €mesra—“‘ or if not,’’ i.e. if quick 
death is denied to me. (v. Rh. Mus. 50, 2, 2.) Again 79-80: ws 
é aiorwoeav "OAvpma Swpar Exovtes He pw’ etmAdKapos Badrou 
°*’Apreuts. Thus the Harpies (= OéveAAa 63) in this case do not 
bring death but carry away men alive (avapmaéaca olyoito 63 f., 
dpmucat avnpeivavto 77 = avédAovto OveXXAa 66, and they carry them 
off kar’ nepdsevta KéAevba 64 to the mpoyoat apoppdov ’QKeavoto 65 
édocav otvyepjow “Epwiow apditodAcvew 78). At the ‘‘ mouths of 
Okeanos’”’ (where it goes into the sea) is the entrance to the world 
of the dead: « 508 ff., A 13 ff. To be carried off by the storm-spirits 
used proverbially as a wish: Z 345 ff. ads pw’ oder’ uate TH OTE pe 
mp@Tov TEKE UATHP OLxecIat mpodepovoa Kak avépoto BverAa Els pos 
7 €ls KOpa toAvddrAoicBoro Jadraoons (i.e. to some solitary place, Orph., 
H. 19, 19; 36, 16; 71, 11). Such transportation through thevaings 
elsewhere contrasted with death and dwelling in Hades, asin Penelope’s 
prayer. (Roscher, Kynanthropie [Abh. d. sachs. Ges. d. Wiss. xvii], 
p. 67, gives a strange but hardly the correct explanation of this.) 
Ci. Soph., Tv., 953 ff.; At., 1193 ff. ; (Phil., 1092 fi. 2); cil alsoutee 
Hipp., 1279 ff.; Lon, 805 £.; Supp., 833-6. A deeply rooted popular 
mode of thought, and one of primeval antiquity, lies at the root of all 


“~*_ae 


NO EE SiO CHAE Hin tet 81 


these instances.—t70 mvevpatwy oavvaprayévta adavtov yevéobar is 
a reason for tiwal a@dvaro, in the only half-rationalized story of 
Hesperos in D.S. 3, 60, 3. 

> One would like to know more of this strange story, but what we 
learn elsewhere of Pandareos and his daughters (Sch. v 66-7; 7 518; 
Ant. Lib. 36) contributes nothing to the understanding of the Homeric 
narrative and probably belongs in part to another connexion. 
Pandareos, father of Aédon (7 518 ff.), seems to be another person. 
Even the strange representation of the two daughters of Pandareos in 
Polygnotos’ picture of the underworld (Paus. 10, 30, 2) casts no light 
on the Homeric fable. (Cf. Roscher, Kynan., 4 ff., 65 f.) 

§ The Erinyes live normally in Erebos, as is shown esp. by I 571 f. ; 
T 259. But when they punish during the lifetime of the criminal 
acts done in contravention of the laws of family life, it must be supposed 
that they were sometimes thought of as going about the earth, e.g. 
I 454; 2 278—for “working at a distance’? seems impossible— 
as in Hes., Op., 803 f£.— Epitow audiTodAcve (78) cannot be anything 
but “serve the Erinyes.’’, “‘ become their apd¢dimodAo.”’. To under- 
stand it as Roscher does (AKynan., 65, n. 183) following Eustathius, 
in the sense “ fly about in the train of the E.”’ is forbidden by the use 
of the simple dative ’Epuvvor joined closely with apd. (Aeats aditoAadv 
soph., O.C., 680, is different.) 

7 ** When the Bride of the Wind comes by you must throw yourself 
on the ground as though it were the Muodisheere (on which see Grimm 
(EeI.), *p. 931) otherwise they will.carry -you . off.’’ Birlinger, 
Volksthiml. a. Schwaben, i, 192, ‘‘ She is the Devil’s Bride,” ib. (On 
eieme ride of the Wind *, etc., see Grimm, pp. 632,°1009.) Such 
wind-spirits are in unholy alliance with the “‘ Furious Host ’’, i.e. the 
unquiet “souls”? of the dead that travel through the air by night. 

§ On the Harpies, see Rh. Mus., 50, 1-5. 

® See Nagelsb., H.T., pp. 42-3, and Roscher, Nektar u. Ambrosia, 
p. 51 ff., answering Bergk’s objections, Opusc. ii, 669. (Arist. Meta., 
1000a, 9-14, is very definite.) 

10 It is not improbable that this Ino Leukothea was originally a 
goddess who was later turned into a “‘ Heroine ”’ (identified with the 
daughter of Kadmos for reasons no longer recoverable) and only after- 
wards turned back again into a goddess. But for the Homeric age 
she was essentially a mortal who had become a goddess: for this 
reason, just because she was an example of such deification of mortals, 
she remained an interesting character to later writers; cf. in addition 
to the well-known passages in Pindar, etc., Cic., 7.D. i, 28. Only 
what the actual conception of the people and their poets was—not 
what may possibly be suggested as the doubtful background of such 
conceptions—concerns me in this as in many other cases. 

11 Only temporary translation (avjpmace) of Marpessa by. Apollo 
I 564. 

12 Ganymedes, dvipmace Beams dedAa, h. Ven., 208, as the veda 
(= “Apaua) did the daughters of Pandareos. The eagle is the 
addition of later poetry. 

Bee beoice? |: 

14° Hos... am’ ?Qreavoto podwv wpvv8’, tv’ abavarorar fPows PEpot 
dé Bpototow, T1f.; cf. & 244 (h. Merc., 184f.). So also h. Ven., 
224 ff., says of Tithonos: °’Hot tepmdpevos ypuvcobpdvw hpryeve(n 
vate map’ °Qreavoto pons émt melpace yains, in good Homeric style. 
It seems that the magic island Aiaia was considered the home of Eos 
{and of Tithonos): p 3: viadv 7 Alainv, 60: 7’ >Hots npvyeveins 

G 


82 NOSE Spi Ole OLE haar 


oixia Kal yopoi eiat Kal avroXai jeAtovo. I need not here go into the 
attempts made even in antiquity to explain the much-discussed difficulty 
introduced by this verse and to bring it into conformity with the 
westerly situation of Aiaia implied in the rest of the Odyssey. One 
thing is certain: the first composer of this verse thought of Aiaia 
as lying towards the east. Only the last resources of the com- 
mentator’s art could situate the place of the “‘sun’s uprising’ and 
the ‘‘ dwelling of the Dawn ”’ in the west. 

i5 Among innumerable unsuccessful attempts made by the ancients 
at finding an etymological derivation for the word ’HAvotov (Sch., 8 
563, Eust., p. 1509, Hesych.,.s.v., etc., also Cels) ap;2Ong. Celis ie 
28, p. 53 L.) occurs also the right one, £.M., 428, 36: aapa ray 
éAevow, Eva ot evaeBeis mapayivovra. The grammarians seem to have 
disputed over the question, did Menelaos live for ever in Elysion ? 
It was agreed on all hands that he reached that abode alive, without 
separation of psyche from body; but the over-subtle thought that 
the prophecy meant that he too should die there though not in Argos 
—not that he should never die at all: soesp. E. Gud., 242, 2 ff. This 
was the opinion also of those who derived ’HAvo.ov from the fact that 
there the puyal AeAvpdvar THvV cwyuatwv Sidyovor: Eust., 1509, 29, 
E.M., etc. The etymology is as bad as the interpretation of the line. 
The line remained, however, throughout antiquity as a curiosity: 
intelligent readers understood the prophecy quite rightly as referring 
to the translation of Menelaos to everlasting life without separation of 
ux from body ; e.g. Porph. ap. Stob., Ecl.i, p. 422, 8 ff., W. So, 
too, those who gave the right interpretation of fact, but rested it 
upon the more dubious etymology : ’Hdvatov oddvatov, 6tt od dradvovTat 
a76 T&v cwpydtwy at dvyat. Hesych. (cf. F.M., 428, 34-5; Sch., 
0 003 ;) Proclzonviies.,20 p26 109). 

16 oF pv daivetai ye (6 moinTHs) mpoayaywr tov Adyov és mA€ov ws 
eUpnua av Tis olKEelov, mpocarapevos 5€ avTo povov are es aTav Hn 
dcaBeBonpévov to ‘“EXAnvixdv—to adopt the words that Pausanias 
(10, 31, 4) uses of a similar case. 

17 The reasons for the special favour shown to Rhadamanthys are 
as unknown to us as they evidently were to the Greeks of later times. 
What is generally said of the ‘“‘ justice’ of Rhad. rests upon private 
opinion only and does not supply the place of the precise legend that 
should have justified his translation. That he once had a complete 
legend of his own may be guessed from the allusion to him in y 323, 
though that passage still leaves us quite in the dark. At any rate, 
it certainly does not follow from that reference that while dwelling 
in Elysion he was a neighbour of the Phaeacians as Welcker thinks : 
nor further that he had always been a dweller in Elysion, as Preller 
supposes, instead of being transported there. Nothing in the former 
passage justifies us in regarding him as then dwelling in Elysion ; 
while the other reference to him must be supposed to mean that Rhad. 
just as much as Menelaos, was translated to Elys. (and so e.g. Paus. 
understood the poet 8, 53, 5: apdrepov S€ éru ‘PaddpavOuy evtat0a 
qxew; doubtful: <Aesch. fv. 99, 12-13). In fact, we have lost the 
legends which gave the details of his translation: his figure had become 
isolated and had not entered into the greater circle of epic figures— 
and as a consequence his mythical context soon disappeared too. 

18 Hasisatra’s Tvanslation: see the translation of the Babylonian 
account in Paul Haupt’s Der Keilins. Sintfluthber. (Leip. 1881), p. 17, 
18. The expressions used by the Greek-writing reporters are exactly 
like those common in Greek accounts of translation: yevéofar adavA 


NOTES TO CHAPTER: II 83 


(rov Sicovdpov) peta Trav Gedv oikynoovra, Beros. ap. Sync., p. 55, 6, 11 
Di.; @Qeot ww €& avOpdtwv adavilovo, Abydenus ap. Syncell., 
P. 70, 13. Of Enoch we read, Gen. 524: ody evpiaxero OTL peteOnev 
avtov 6 Oeds (pereréOn, Ecclus., AS Hebr. 6 Oe) Be aveAn gon a0 
ths yqs, Ecclus. 4914; dvexcspyoe mpos TO Qetov, Jos., AJ. i, 3, 4 (of 
Moses: ddaviterat, Jos., AJ. iv, 8, 48). On the translation of Enoch 
and Elijah, see also Schwally, D. Leben. nach d. Tode n.d. Vorst. d. a. 
Isvael (1892), p. 140. Translation of the living into Sheol often in the 
O.T., see Schwally, p. 62. Even Enoch has not escaped the fate of 
being regarded by comparative mythologists as the sun. Enoch 
may be given up to them, if the Orientalists have no objection; but 
it seems a pity that the theory, in accordance with the favourite 
argument from analogy, should be applied to Greek Translation- 
myths too, so that we should see the whole series of such figures, 
from Menelaos to Apollonios of Tyana, transformed by magic into 
mythological suns (or dawns, water-meadows, thunder-clouds, etc.). 

® wadOaxos aixpnris, P 588. 

20 & 321-2. 

21 One might even suspect that Menelaos is translated to everlasting 
life not merely because he has Helen, Zeus’ daughter, to wife: odvex’ 
éxets ‘EXévnv as Proteus tells him, but in zmztation of a much earlier 
mythical tradition, according to which Helen herself was translated 
and madeimmortal. No ancient tradition reports the death of Helen— 
with the exception of the absurd invention of Ptolemaios Chennos 
(Phot. Bibl., p. 149a, 37 Bk. ; 42 ; 1490, 1 ff.) and the not very superior 
aetiological myth in Paus. 3, 19, 10. On the other hand, we often 
hear of her deification, living on the island Leuke or else in the 
Islands of the Blest. It was not unnatural that mythological tradition 
should have at an early period set free the most ‘‘daemonic ”’ of women 
from the usual fate of mankind and that Menelaos should rather 
have followed her example than she his (as Isoc. 10, 62, definitely 
says). . 

Berl ylOr. i, .S0.; J: Gs Muller; Ges: ¢d. Americ. Urrelizi, 660 £7; 
Waitz, Anthrop. v, 2, 114; vi, 302, 307. 

23 We are told that Rhadamanthys was once conveyed by the 
Phaeacians to Euboea ézopopevos Titvov Farniov viov (y 321 ff.). We 
have no grounds and no right to complete this story by supposing that 
this was when Rh. already lived in Elysion. To regard the Phaeacians 
as a sort of “‘ferry-folk of the dead’’ connected in some way with 
Elysion is pure unsupported fancy. 

24 The possessor of d9avaciéa did not necessarily possess also Sdvapuy 
iad8eov (Isoc. 10, 61). 

25 To identify Oncoy ian o 404, with Delos, and Lupin with the island 
Syros as the older commentators and K. O. Miiller, Dorier, i, 381 
[? notin E&.T.}, did, isimpossible on account of the addition of the words 
00. tpomal yeArio1o alone. These show that Syrie was far away in 
the fabulous west, the only possible place for such a wonderland. It is 
evident that Ortygia is originally a purely mythical spot, sacred to 
Artemis and no more certainly fixed in one place than the Dionysian 
Nysa, and for that reason always to be found wherever the cult of 
Artemis was especially popular, in Aetolia, Syracuse, Ephesos, or 
Delos. Delos is clearly distinguished from O. in h. Ap. 16, and only 
later identified with O. (Delos being considered the older name, 
O. Schneider, Nicandr., p. 22, n.), when Artemis had been brought 
into closer connexion with Apollo, and even then not invariably 
Thus in Homer Ortygia never clearly = Delcs. 


84 NO PE Se LOOP GCEOVE iE gaat 


26’ Anrepis Sé adryv e€apmaéaca eis Tavpous petaxopiler (cf. the 
peréOnxev abtov 6 beds of Enoch, Gen. 574) cai afdavatov moret, €Aadov 
S¢ avri rHs Képys maplorna TH Bawa, Procl., Chrest. ap. Kinkel Epic. 
Fy., p. 19: [Apollod.] Epit. iii, 22, Wagn. 

27 roUTw (7a Mépvon) "Has mapa Aros airnoapévyn abavactav didwor 
says Proclus with regrettable brevity (p. 33, Kinkel). 

28 Tt cannot be doubted (in spite of Meier, Annals dell’ Inst. Arch., 
1883, p. 217 ff.) that the story given in JI of Sarpedon’s death and the 
carrying away of his body, even if it does not belong to the oldest 
part of the poem (which I cannot regard as certain), is nevertheless 
earlier than the Aithiopis and was the model for its account of Memnon’s 
death (cf. also Christ, Chron. altgr. Epos., p.25). But why do Thanatos 
and Hypnos carry away the body of Sarpedon (instead of the usual 
OvedAa, deAAa, ‘’Apmura, or the winds, Q.S. ii, 550, in the case of 
Memnon) ? Where these two are found on Attic lekythoi as bearers of 
the corpse (Robert, Thanatos, 19) they were perhaps intended in some 
consolatory sense as in the grave inscriptions dmvos €xer ce, waxap... 
Kat véeKxus ovK eyévov. The Homeric poet, however, can hardly have 
meant anything of the sort, but merely invents the indispensable 
second bearer to assist Thanatos—an effective touch but not one that 
rested on any religious grounds. Hypnos as brother of Thanatos is 
also found in the Aids adaaryn, & 231. 

29 ex THS Tupas % Oétis advapmaoaca Tov matéda eis THY AevKiV vijoov 
Scaxoptler, Procl., Chrest., p. 34, Kink. Then he continues, oi dé 
"Ayaol tov tadov xdoavtes aydva tiPOé€aow. Thus a grave-mound 
is set up though the body of Achilles has been translated: evidently 
a concession to the older narrative (w 80-4), which knew nothing of 
the translation of the body but gives prominence to the grave-mound. 
Besides which, the tumulus of Achilles—a landmark on the seashore 
of the Troad—required explanation, and the poet accordingly speaks 
of the erection of a cenotaph. It was not considered a contradiction 
to erect cenotaphs, not only to those whose bodies were irrecoverable 
(see above, Ch. I, n. 88), but also to Heroes whose bodies had been 
translated. Thus Herakles, after he has been struck by lightning 
and snatched up into the sky, has a ya made for him, though no 
bones were found upon the wupa, D.S. 4, 38, 5; 39,1. (The tumuli 
found in the Troad were not, indeed, originally empty as Schliemann, 
Tvoy, etc., pp. 252, 263, supposed; they were not cenotaphs but 
merely grave-mounds that had once been filled and belong to a type 
frequently met with in Phrygia; see Schuchhardt, Schliemann’s Excav. 
[E-1.], p+ 84 ff. Kretschmer, Einl. Ges: er.2opr, 1896 oy Lon 

*0 What became of Odysseus? Proclus is silent on the point, 
and we have no means of guessing. According to Hyginus 127 he 
was buried in Aiaia; but if nothing more was going to be done with 
his body why bring him to Aiaia? Acc. to Sch. Lyc., 805, he was 
raised to life again by Kirke, but what happened to him then? (Acc. 
to [Apollod.] Epit. vii, 37 W., the dead Odysseus seems to remain 
in Ithaka.—We have no grounds for altering the words to suit the 
Telegoneia as Wagner does, esp. as a complete correspondence with 
that poem cannot be obtained.) The death and burial of Od. among 
the Tyrrhenians (Miiller, Etruscans iii, 281 tr. Gray) belong to quite 
another connexion. 

31 The Aithiopis is later than the Hades scenes in w, and con- 
sequently later still than the Nekyia of A. The prophecy of the 
Translation of Menelaos in 6 is likewise later than the Nekyia but to 
all appearance older than the Aithiopis. 


INOUE Sel One GA Petes iL 85 


82 The extract from the Nostoi in Proclus, Chrest., is particularly 
inadequate and evidently gives no full idea of the very wide and various 
subject matter of that poem. Thus, too, the notices of it preserved 
from other sources give details of its subject matter (esp. of the Nekyia 
which was included in it) that cannot be fitted into the limits of Proclus’ 
outline. 

33 The idea that the Bronze age is really identical with the age of 
Mietoes israt first sight attractive!(see ¢€.g. Steitz, Die Wu. T. des 
Hesiod, p. 61); one soon finds, however, that it breaks down on closer 
examination. 

34 It does not seem to me absolutely necessary to strike out lines 
124 f. (ot pa dvdAaacaovalv te Sixas Kal ayérAVa Epya, Hépa écodpevos 
mavtn doitavres em atav). They are repeated in lines 254 f., but that 
is a natural place to repeat them. Proclus does not comment on 
them ; but it does not follow that he did not have them before him ; 
and Plutarch, D.O. 37, p. 431 B, seems to allude to 1. 125 in its 
present context. 

35 Plu., D.O., 10, p. 415 B, in obvious error, takes Hesiod’s daipoves 
for such an intermediate class of beings; he supposes that Hesiod 
distinguishes four classes t&v Aoyex@v, Oeol, daiuoves, ypwes, avOpwror. 
In this Platonist division the 7pwes would correspond rather with 
Hesiod’s daiuoves of the first age. (What Proclus has to say on 
Hesiod, Op. 121, p. 101, Gaisf., is taken evidently word for word 
from Plutarch’s commentary on Hesiod and resembles closely the 
remarks in the passage cited from the Def. Ovac.) Modern critics 
have often failed to notice the difference between the MHesiodic 
daipoves and the Platonic. Plato himself is very decided about the 
difference (Crat. 397 E-398 C). 

36 népa é€oodmevor 125 (cf. 223; & 282) is a naive equivalent for 
“invisible ’? as Tzet. correctly explains. This is how it is to be under- 
stood regularly in Homer whenever there is mention of envelopment 
in a cloud and the like. 

37 These daimones are called émuxfdvoe in contrast (not to the 
troxPovo of 1. 141, but) to the deol émovpaviot, as Proclus on 1. 122 
rightly remarks. Thus in Homer we have éemyx@évor regularly used 
as an adjective, or, standing alone, as an equivalent of men as dis- 
tinguished from gods. Then the jzox@dvwoe of 141 are brought in to 
form another and secondary contrast with the émuy@dvior. 

88 » 485 ff. It follows that the descriptions of the visits paid by 
gods to the homes of men are cf great antiquity: cf. my Grech. 
Roman, p. 506 ff. Zeus Philios in particular is fond of visiting men : 
Diod. Com. ’EaixAnp., Mein. Com. iii, p. 543 f. (ii, p. 420 K.). 

39 uu Kal Ttotow dandet 142. sium in the sense not of simple 
honour but of practical worship, as frequently in Homer, e.g. in 
such phrases as: tit Kat Kddos dandet, P 251; tits arovipevos, 
w 30; rep Sé AeASyxaow ica Beotow, r 304; Eyer TrHv, A 495, etc. 
In the same way here, 1. 138: otvexa tuuds odk edidovv paxdpeoat 
Geots. 

40 Light and dark, i.e. good and bad, Satyoves are acc. to Roth, 
Myth. v. d. Weitaltern (1860), pp. 16-17, distinguished in Hesiod’s 
daimones of the golden and silver age. Such a distinction, however, 
never appears in Hesiod; and it is hardly credible that the gods and 
spirits of ancient Greek popular belief (which never really admitted 
the categories good and bad) should in this primitive period have been 
actually classified in accordance with such categories. At any rate, 
Greek readers never found anything of the kind expressed in Hesiod : 


86 NO TESP lO MCHARLE Kier 


the conception of bad daimones is regularly supported by reference to 
the philosophers alone (e.g. Plut., D.O., 17, p. 419 A), and the con- 
ception is certainly no older than the earliest philosophic speculation. 

41]. 141: rol pév broxPovior (emrxPdvor all MSS. except one, see 
Kéchly’s Apparatus; also Tz.) paxapes Ovnrot Kadéovrat.—dvdAakes 
@vnroé was read and explained by Proclus. This is clearly wrong, 
and is corrected to dvAaxes Ovnrav (as in 1. 123) by Hagen and Welcker. 
But this transfers from the first to the second race an expression that 
we cannot be sure Hesiod meant to be transferred. Not merely the 
words but the sense, too, is thus corrected, without due ground. 
paxapes does not look like a corruption ; it is more likely that dvAaxes 
is an accidental alteration. ~ ia. paKapes Ovyntots kaXé€ovraris the reading 
of the latest editor: but here to say the least of it the addition of 
Ovnrois is superfluous. We should rather try to understand and 
explain the traditional text and show how the poet came by the 
remarkable expression. 

42 When philosophers and philosophizing poets of a later age 
occasionally refer to the soul when freed from the body as a daipuav, 
the expression has a totally different sense. 

43 Similarly, though the oxymoron is much less daring in his case, 
Isocrates, 9, 72, has daiuwv Ovnrds. In order to describe a daimon 
who has originally been a mortal later ages boldly invented the 
compound dv#pwrodaiuwyv, which corresponds fairly well with the 
Hesiodic pdéxap Ovyrds: [Eur.] Rhes., 971; Procop., An. 12, p. 79, 
17 D. (vexvdaiuwv on a defixio from Carthage, BCH. xii, 299). Later 
still a king destined to become a god is called, even at his birth, by 
Manetho (i, 280) @eov Bporov avOpadmovow. 

44 The silver race was created by the gods of Olympos, like the 
golden before them (1. 110; 128); only the third race (1. 143) and then 
the fourth (158) by Zeus alone. It might be supposed from this 
that the silver age as well as the golden age occurred in the period 
before Zeus’ rule, éwi Kpovov 67° otpav@ éuPagidevev (1. 111); and in 
this sense ‘‘ Orpheus”? understood the words of Hesiod when he 
rod apyupod yévous PaatAeveww dynol tov Kpodvoy (Proclus on 1. 126). But 
it would be very difficult to reconcile 1. 138 Zeds Kpovidyns xrdA. with 
this view. Hesiod may then have placed the silver age in the time 
when sub Iove mundus erat (as Ovid explicitly states, M. i, 113 f.); 
but all the same it lay for him in the far distant past before all 
history. 

45 yevupvor 154 may quite as well mean “‘nameless’’, i.e. without 
name or special title, as ‘‘fameless’’ (as it does for the most part 
though not invariably in Homer). 

46 See Welcker, Kl. Schr. ii, 6, who, however, in the desire to rule 
out all possibility of identifying Scherie with Korkyra asserts too 
positively that it was a part of the mainland. ¢ 204 (compared with 
6 354) at least comes very close to regarding it as an island. But 
it is clear that nowhere is it explicitly called an island.—It is 
possible that Lyepin, connected with cyepds, may really mean ‘* main- 
1and °* (Welcker, loc. cit.; Kretschmer, Einl. Gesch. e717," Spin ae 
but the question still remains whether the Homeric poet, who did 
not invent the name, understood or respected its original significance. 
At any rate, it was no longer understood by those who in very early 
times identified Scherie with the island Korkyra. 

47 The objections to 1. 169 as regards its form are brought out by 
Steitz, Hesiods W. u. T., p. 69. The line is missing in most of the 
MSS. ; it was rejected (together with the line following, which, however, 


¢ 


NO DES me Om CHAR LE iv sit 87 


is quite sound) by ancient critics (Proclus on 1. 158). Later editors 
are united in condemning it. But the interpolation is at any rate 
old: probably even Pindar already knew the line in this place: 
Gait, 70). 

48 Nice 56é€ Zeds adfitos Titdvas Pi. (P. iv, 291), in whose time, 
however, this was a well-known myth to which he is only making 
a passing allusion for the sake of anexample. The Hesiodic Theogony 
still knows nothing of it. 

49 Before Hesiod we have no mention of the myth of a Golden, 
Saturnian Age, nor any complete description of the imaginary life 
upon Blessed Islands. But epic poetry had already, as we have seen, 
provided him with occasional examples of translation to a place of 
blessedness, and he only collects these into a combined picture of 
such a place. To that extent the belief in a blessed life beyond the 
grave meets us earlier than the myth of a Golden Age. But we have 
not the slightest ground for saying that the former “‘ must have existed 
from the beginning among the Greeks ”’ (as Milcbhofer at least thinks, 
Anf. Kunst, p. 230). On the other hand, it may be mere accident 
that the myth of the Golden Age has no older authority than Hesiod— 
the story itself may be much earlier. After Hesiod it was frequently 
taken up and improved upon; not, however, first by Empedocles as 
Graf supposes, ad auree aet. fab. sym. (Leip. Stud. viii, p. 15), but 
already in the epic ’AAkpewvis, see Philod. Pzet., p. 51 Gp. (See 
also some remarks by Alfred Nutt, The Voyage of Bran, p. 269 f., 1895, 
with which I cannot agree.) 


GHAR LE Rea 
CAVE DEITIES: SUBTERRANEAN TRANSLATION 


The history of Greek culture and religion shows no sudden 
break or revolution in its course. The Greeks neither at any 
time experienced a movement from within that caused 
a violent recoil from the path which they had chosen, nor 
were they ever diverted by the overwhelming might of an 
invading force from the natural course of their evolution. 
Out of their own natural feelings and reflexion this most 
intellectually gifted nation evolved the great ideas that 
nourished’ succeeding centuries. They anticipated all later 
ages. The profoundest and the boldest, the most devout 
as well as the most irreverent speculations as to the nature 
of God, the world and men have their origin among the Greeks. 
But this excessive many-sidedness led to a general condition 
of equipoise in which individual factors restrained or balanced 
each other. Whereas the most violent impacts and sudden 
revolutions in the history of civilization are given by just 
those nations who are only able to embrace one idea at a time 
and who, confined in the narrow limits of their fanaticism, 
throw everything else overboard. 

It is true, indeed; that the Greeks wereveveryopenmace 
influences—whether civilized or the reverse—from abroad. 
In wave after wave of peaceful invasion foreign ideas and ways 
of life, especially from the East, flowed over Greece. In one 
case, at least (that of the ecstatic religion of the Thracian 
Dionysos-worshippers), a spring flood burst out that broke 
down all the dykes. In many cases the invading elements 
might be easily eliminated again from Greek culture ; in many 
others they obtained a permanent footing and influenced it 
deeply. But never did an influence from abroad obtain in 
Greece an authority at all comparable to the subversive and 
transforming power exercised by Buddhism, Christianity, 
or Islam over the peoples on whom they laid their grip. The 
Greek genius, as supple as it was tenacious, maintained control 
over all such foreign influences, in full possession of its original 
nature, its genial naivity. New ideas, whether introduced from 
abroad or engendered at home, were taken up and assimilated, 
but the old were not done away with; they gradually amal- 
gamated with the new so that much was learnt while nothing 
was quite forgotten. The stream flowed on in its peaceful 
course, but it still remained the same stream. Nec manet ut 
fuerat nec formas servat easdem: sed tamen ipse idem est. 


SUBTERRANEAN TRANSLATION 89 


The history of Greek culture, then, has no sharply contrasted 
epochs, no periods of abrupt change, when the old is completely 
given up and a new era definitely begins. Indeed, the most 
serious revulsions of Greek history, culture, and religion 
took place beyond doubt before the time of the Homeric 
Epos, and in that dim past it is possible that more violent and 
startling upheavals may have occurred to make the Greeks 
what we afterwards know them to be. Greek life becomes 
first clearly known to usin Homer. It is true that the broad 
uniformity that it has in the picture reflected for us in the 
poems of Homer vanishes in the course of the years that follow. 
New forces emerge ; much that was forgotten comes to light 
again now that the Homeric system of ideas, once all powerful, 
is falling to pieces; out of the very old and the quite new 
things of which Homer never gives the least hint are being 
put together. But nowhere during the violent movements of 
the next troubled centuries after Homer did any absolute 
break with the Epic or its system take place. Only in the 
sixth century did the defiant speculation of a few bold spirits 
begin to seek a way of escape from the thraldom of the 
Homeric poems which still lay over the whole of Greece. 
The history of the Greek common people knows nothing of a 
reaction against Homer and his world. Homeric religion and 
moral ideas gradually ceased to reign supreme in men’s minds, 
but they were never violently or completely discarded. 

So we, too, though we leave behind us Homer and the 
Epos and enter upon the tortuous paths of the later history 
of Greek soul worship and belief in immortality, may still 
for a time be guided by the Ariadne thread of the epic. In 
our subject, too, there are links which connect the Homeric 


with following ages. Soon enough the thread will break, 


and we shall have to enter the new field of inquiry depending 
on our own resources. 
§ 1 

Prominent among the chieftains, who, under the leadership 
of Adrastos, came to the help of Polyneikes and laid siege to 
Thebes, was Amphiaraos the Argive hero and seer descended 
from the mysterious priest and prophet Melampous. He was 
drawn into the war against his will, for he foresaw its unhappy 
end. After the decisive struggle in which the opposing brothers 
fell slain by each other’s hand, the Argive host turned to flight, 
and with them fled Amphiaraos. But before Periklymenos, 
who was pursuing him, could drive his spear into the fugitive’s 
back, Zeus made the earth open before him in a flash of 


90 CAVE DELLIES 


lightning and Amphiaraos with his horses, his chariot, and 
his charioteer, was swallowed up in the depths where Zeus 
made him tmmortal. So runs the legend of the fate of 
Amphiaraos as we learn it from innumerable sources from 
Pindar onwards,! and we may be sure that thus it was told 
in the Thebais, the old epic poem of the war of the Seven against 
Thebes, which was taken up into the Epic Cycle.? 

At Thebes, then, Amphiaraos lived on for ever under the 
earth. Northwards in the Boeotian countryside, near Lebadeia, 
men told of a similar marvel. In a cave of the mountainous 
ravine, before which Lebadeia les, lived Trophonios for 
ever immortal. The legends that professed to explain his 
miraculous cave-existence do not quite agree among them- 
selves, as, indeed, is generally the case with those figures who 
were not early taken up by the poets and given a fixed place 
in the narratives of heroic adventure. But all accounts (the 
oldest of which perhaps go back to the “‘ Telegoneia ’’) agree 
in the assumption that Trophonios, like Amphiaraos, was 
first a man, a famous master-builder, who while flying from 
his foes, had dived underground at Lebadeia and now lives 
for ever in the depths of the earth whence he foretells the 
future to those who come and question him there. 

These stories, then, claim to speak of men who during their 
lifetime were swallowed up by the earth, and who now live 
on for ever at the places where they were taken down into the 
depths—places situated in quite definite localities of the 
Greek countryside. 

We are not entirely without other legends of a similar 
character. One of the wild spirits of the Lapith people from 
Thessalia, Kaineus by name, having been made invulnerable 
by Poseidon (who had before this transformed him from 
a woman into a man), was cudgelled with tree-trunks in a 
battle with the Centaurs ; but they could do nothing to him, 
and with “upright foot’ (i.e. standing upright, alive, not 
lying at full length like a dead man or one mortally wounded) 
he clove the earth under him and went down alive into the 
depths. In Khodos Althaimenes was honoured as the 
““founder’’ of the Greek cities on that island; he had not 
died but had vanished into a chasm in the ground.‘ Like 
Amphiaraos, his son Amphilochos, the heir of his prophetic 
power, appears to have had a legend according to which he 
still dwelt alive under the earth either in Akarnania or 
Cilicia.® A few more examples of the same type might be 
produced,® but the number of such stories remains small, 
and they only make their appearance here and there, as if by 


SUBTERRANEAN TRANSLATION 91 


accident, in the tradition. Epic poetry without whose co- 
operation such local legends rarely achieved widespread or 
lasting popularity, with few exceptions left such narratives 
out of account. In fact, they conflicted with the normal 
Homeric outlook. The belief, however, that immortality when 
it was miraculously bestowed by the favour of heaven upon 
certain individual men, was absolutely conditioned by the 
non-occurrence of death, 1.e. the separation of the psyche from 
the visible man—this belief has helped to shape these stories 
too. They never speak of an undying existence of the soul 
by itself in separation from the body. Thus far they are 
firmly rooted in orthodox Homeric belief. 

But the heroes of these stories have their everlasting 
existence in special abodes under the surface of the earth, 
in subterranean chambers ‘—not in the common meeting place 
of the departed; they each have their own peculiar domain 
far from the House of Aidoneus. Such isolation of individuals 
below the earth does not agree with Homeric ideas ; though 
it almost seems as if a dim echo of these stories of seers like 
Amphiaraos and Amphilochos, translated alive and with 
consciousness undestroyed, could be discerned in what the 
Homeric Nekyia says of Teiresias the Theban seer, in whom 
alone of all the shadows Persephone had allowed consciousness 
and intelligence (the essential vital powers) to remain un- 
diminished.® But even he is fast bound in Erebos, the general 
home of the dead, and cut off from all connexion with the upper 
world, as is demanded by the Homeric view of the world. 
Amphiaraos and Trophonios, on the other hand, are released 
from Hades ; not having suffered death they have not entered 
the world of the strengthless dead. They are also translated 
out of this life (besides out of Hades). But this “ subterranean 
translation ”’ is in its nature and in the origin of the belief in 
it quite distinct from that “translation to Islands of the 
Blest ’ of which we spoke in the last chapter. Those Heroes 
dwelling alone or in company on holy islands far out over the 
sea are far removed from human life and beyond the reach 
of prayers and desires. No influence upon the things of this 
world is attributed to them, and consequently no cult is offered 
to them ; there never existed a cult of the dwellers in Elysium 
as such. They glimmer in the distance like visions of the poet’s 
fancy from which no one anticipates active interference with 
the world of reality. It is quite different with these dwellers 
in the caves. They are actually alive under the surface of the 
earth ; not far away in the inaccessible, spectral world of 
Hades, but here in the midst of Greece. Questions and prayers 


92 CAVE DEITIES 


can reach down to them, and they can send up aid to those who 
call to them. To them, accordingly, as powerful and effectual 
Spirits a cult is paid. 

We have detailed information of the manner in which 
Amphiaraos was worshipped, more especially in later times, 
when, in addition to the neighbourhood of Thebes, where the 
original legend of his descent beneath the earth was localized, 
Oropos also, the boundary town between Boeotia and Attica, 
was with overwhelming success identified as the place of his 
disappearance and made a centre of his influence.’ We have 
also a certain amount of information, again from later ages, 
about the cult of Trophonios. With the passage of time, the 
details of the worship grew and multiplied, but among them 
all certain features stand out as especially characteristic and 
allow us to understand the religious ideas lying behind them. 
To Amphiaraos and Trophonios were offered just those 
sacrifices which were also paid to the Chthonic deities, i.e. those 
deities who dwelt in the depths of the earth.° Aid was not 
expected from them in the details of the daily life of individuals 
or states. Only in the actual locality of their descent were they 
effectual, and only there because they revealed the future. 
Kroisos had already, and Mardonios after him, sent inquiries 
to the most famous oracles of the day,!! and among them to 
Amphiaraos at his ancient oracular seat near Thebes and to 
Trophonios at Lebadeia. Of Amphiaraos it was believed that 
he revealed the future by visions sent in dreams to those who 
after making offering laid themselves down to sleep in his 
temple. To question Trophonios, it was necessary to pass 
through a narrow passage into his cave. Inside, the inquirer 
expected to see Trophonios in person or, at least, to hear his 
instructions.1* He dwelt, like a spirit confined to the scene of 
his magical existence, in bodily person at the bottom of his 
cave. In fact, the method of Incubation, or temple-sleep, by 
which Amphiaraos (like many other daimones and Heroes) 
was questioned, was based on the assumption that the daimon, 
who was only visible indeed to mortal eyes in the higher state 
achieved by the soul in dreams, had his permanent dwelling 
at the seat of his oracle.13 That is why his appearance can only 
be expected at this particular place and nowhere else. 
Originally, too, it was only the dwellers in the depths of the 
earth who were thus visible in dreams to those who lay down 
to sleep in the temple over the place where they had their 
subterranean abode. Homer knows nothing of either gods or 
daimones who live permanently under the ground in definite 
places in the inhabited world, near mankind; and for that 


SUBTERRANEAN TRANSLATION 93 


reason he betrays no knowledge of Incubation-oracles.14 
There is some ground for the belief that this method, inherent 
in the divinatory power, of getting into touch with the spirit 
world, was one of the oldest types of Greek oracular art— 
certainly not later than the Apolline mantiké of inspiration. 
And it is precisely in the legend of Amphiaraos, as we may 
believe it to have been related as early as the cyclic poem of the 
Thebais, that we have a proof that already in the days when 
the quasi-Homeric poetry was still popular, people believed 
in deathless dwellers below the earth and in their active 
potency in the mantic art. 

It is clear, then, that the worship of Amphiaraos and the 
belief in his subterranean existence was not due to the influence 
of the Epic. Rather the reverse was the case ; the cult already 
existed and provided the idea of the daimon and this gave rise 
to the Epic narrative. The Epic found an existing cult of an 
oracular daimon who dwelt beneath the earth near Thebes 
ready to its hand. It reduced this fact to a form which it 
could understand in a manner typical of the relation which 
frequently existed between the facts of religious life and Epic 
poetry. The cult was connected with an event in legendary 
history, and so brought into harmony with the Epic outlook. 
The Epic knew nothing of gods attached in this way to a 
cult particular earthly spot, and so the spirit worshipped in the 
became in the epic imagination a chieftain and Seer who had 
not always lived beneath the earth in that place, but had only 
been transported there subsequently by a miraculous fiat 
of the supreme god, who had also accorded an eternal life in 
the depths to the translated hero.!° 

We may perhaps find a parallel in more recent Saga story 
that will throw light on the question. German mythology is 
perfectly familiar with such figures for ever, or until the day 
of judgment, alive in caverns of the mountains or subterranean 
chambers. Thus, Charlemagne, or it may be Charles the Fifth, 
still has his abode in Odenberg or in Unterberg, near Salzburg, 
Frederick II (or, in more recent versions of the legend, 
Frederick I Barbarossa) in Kyffhauser, Henry the Fowler in 
Sudemerberg, near Goslar. Thus, too, King Arthur, Holger 
Danske, and many other favourite characters of popular 
tradition dwell in subterranean caverns.t® Occasionally, we 
can still plainly see how these were originally ancient gods 
who according to pagan belief dwelt in hollow mountains 
and whose place has been taken by these heroes and holy 
men “translated ’’ beneath the earth.1” So, too, Greek 
tradition allows us to see even now that those ancient trans- 


94 OAV Te Tab PES 


lated mortals, Amphiaraos and Trophonios, are only Epic 
substitutes for ancient deities who did not owe their ever- 
lasting life and subterranean abode to the favour of heaven, 
but had possessed these from the beginning. At least, at the 
site of his worship men knew that the prophetic dweller 
in the cave was a god; one of them is called Zeus Trophonios 
or Trephonios, not only by learned authorities, but in 
inscriptions from Lebadeia ;1* Amphiaraos, too, is once called 
Zeus Amphiaraos and more often a god.!® In the Translation 
legends of Christianized. people the kings have usurped the 
place of the ancient gods because the gods themselves, fallen 
into neglect, have been dethroned. For reasons not so very 
different from these the ancient gods on Greek soil were 
turned into heroes. 

Surrounded by the unending multiplicity of contemporary 
notions of divinity the imagination of the Epic poet had 
fashioned for itself a generalized picture of a divine kingdom. 
This was at that time a solitary attempt to erect a Panhellenic 
theological system, but it had the greatest influence upon the 
mental conceptions of Greeks of every race, for the Epic poet 
addressed them all. He stood as though on a height looking 
down on all the narrow valleys and mountainous countrysides 
cut off from the rest of the world, and a wide prospect opened 
out before his eyes. He soares above all the innumerable 
contradictory and conflicting details of local cult and belief, 
and finds something universal beyond. The name and con- 
ception of Zeus, Apollo, Hermes, Athena, and all the gods 
represented innumerable diversities in the myths and ritual 
of the different cities and races; their outward shapes and 
personalities differed widely according to their localization 
and the manner of their influence. Instead of all these the 
Epic poet sees only one Zeus, Apollo, etc., reduced in each 
case to a single unified personality. .And just as he had looked 
beyond the multiplicity of local deities so he did not confine 
his gods to particular local habitations and centres of influence 
in the Greek countries ; they did not belong to one locality 
more than another. True they worked and ruled in the world, 
but they were for all that free to move where they would. 
They dwell and meet together on the heights of Olympos, 
the Pierian Holy Mountain, which, however, became in the 
imagination of Homer, unfettered by attachment to any 
particular place, more and more an ideal mountain of fancy. 
So the broad sea is the dwelling-place of Poseidon ; he is not 
confined to any one place. Even the rulers of the spirit world, 
Aides and Persephoneia, have their abode, not, indeed, on 


SUBTERRANEAN TRANSLATION 95 


Olympos, and certainly not here or there beneath the surface 
of the Greek countryside, but far away in a land of fancy ; 
they, too, are not bound to any particular locality of the actual 
world. At the end of this enormous work of unification and 
idealization, that, out of all the infinite special manifestations 
of the name Zeus, each worshipped only in its narrow little 
circle in Greece, had evolved the single almighty figure of 
Zeus Father of Gods and Men—how could one who had 
imagined all this be able to understand, if he met with such 
a creature, a special Zeus, calling himself Zeus Trophonios, 
who passed his undying existence in a cave near Lebadeia 
and was only powerful in that one spot ? 

Of course, the inhabitant of such a holy spot would not 
allow himself to be deprived of the beliefin the existence and 
presence of the god on his native soil. Though he might be 
ready enough in general and in respect of other men’s 
local deities to regulate conceptions of the nature of the gods 
in accordance with the Homeric picture, yet he refused 
absolutely to be shaken in his belief in his own local deity, 
however unknown to the Olympian family of gods in Homer 
that deity might be. The local worship in its unaltered, 
undisturbed persistence, witnessed to the objective truth of 
his belief. Thus there were preserved in the pious faith of 
their worshippers large numbers of local deities whose circle 
of influence was, however, very limited. They had not been 
raised with the other gods to the heights of Olympos, but had 
remained faithful to the soil in which they had their home,?°® 
witnesses to a far distant past in which the members of every 
remote little community had their separate god bound to the 
soil beyond which their thoughts did not stray. We shall see 
how in post-Homeric times many such ancient earth-gods, 
1.e. gods thought of as living below the surface of the ground, 
were given new and in some cases a more wide-reaching lease 
of life. The Epic in its prime knew nothing of these earth- 
dwelling deities. When it could not close its eyes to their 
existence it changed them into translated heroes, and beyond 
the immediate locality of the cult this version of them became 
the commonly accepted one throughout the rest of Greece. 


§ 2 


But the Epic was by no means uniform in intention, or 
carried through as a systematic unity ; it was far from being 
the offspring of a learned reflection that could tolerate no 
discrepancy. Even here we find at least some few dim 


96 CAV Ee DELETES 


recollections of the ancient belief in gods that can have their 
permanent abode in mountain hollows. 

The Odyssey (xix, 178 f.) calls Minos, the son of Zeus 
(cf. I]. xiii, 450 ; xiv, 322 ; Od. xi, 568) who ruled in Knossos 
the Cretan ‘city, “the familiar gossip “of "greats Zetisme =. 
Very probably the poet meant by these words much the same 
as was understood by them in later times: that Minos was 
personally acquainted with Zeus, on earth, of course, and, in 
fact, in the cave—not far from Knossos on the side of Mount 
Ida—which was revered:-as the “ Cave of Zeus ’’.22. The island 
of Crete, overrun by the Greeks at an early period, still 
preserved in its remote seclusion much that was primeval 
in belief and legend. There, sometimes on Mount Ida, some- 
times on Mount Dicte (in the east of the island) the holy cave 
was pointed out where (already in Hesiod) Zeus was said to 
have been born.” According to a local legend, which probably 
was present to the fancy of the writer of these lines of the 
Odyssey, the god now fully grown up still dwelt in his sub- 
terranean chamber, and was visited by individual mortals. 
As Minos before him, so, too, Epimenides had been allowed to 
hear the prophecies of the god.24 The Zeus that dwelt in 
Ida was worshipped in a mystical cult;?° every year 
a “‘ throne ’’ was “spread ’’ for him, i.e. probably a “‘ divine 
banquet ”’ (Theoxenion) was prepared for his consumption, 
as for other especially Chthonic deities. The initiated then 
entered the cave dressed in black woollen garments, and 
remained within for thrice nine days.2® Everything points to 
the existence of conceptions similar to those that we found 
expressed in the cult of Zeus Trophonios at Lebadeia. Zeus 
dwelling in bodily form in the depths of his cave can appear in 
person to those who enter his cave duly sanctified. 

Then there appears, from the fourth century onwards, the 
strange statement, perhaps started by Euhemeros and eagerly 
taken up in later ages by scoffers like Lucian or Christian 
opponents of the old religion, that Zeus lay buried on Ida.?? 
What is here called the grave of the god is nothing in reality 
but the cave which was generally regarded as his permanent 
abode.?8 The idea—always strange to the Greeks 2®—that a 
god could lie buried anywhere on the earth, deprived of life 
for ever or even for a limited period of time, is often met with 
in the tradition of Semitic and other non-Greek peoples.? 
We need not inquire what deeper or perhaps allegorical sense 
such legends may have had in the beliefs of those nations ; 
there is no reason to suppose that such foreign legends had 
any influence in the formation of Greek myth. Nor does the 


SUBTERRANEAN TRANSLATION 97 


tradition in Greek lands give the slightest support to the view 
current among modern mythologists that the death and burial 
of gods is intended to symbolize the ‘‘death of Nature’”’. It 
is, in fact, plain that in the legend of the Cretan Zeus’ grave, 
the “ grave ’’ has simply taken the place of the cave as the 
everlasting abode of the undying god, and that it is a 
paradoxical expression intended to signify his perpetual 
confinement to that place. We are immediately reminded of a 
no less paradoxical notice of a god’s grave at Delphi. Under 
the navel stone. (Omphalos) of the Earth-goddess (which was 
a vaulted piece of masonry in the Temple of Apollo recalling 
in its shape the ancient vaulted tombs),*4 there lay buried 
a divine being. Our learned authorities call this being Python, 
the enemy of Apollo ; one and only one quite untrustworthy 
witness says it was Dionysos.®2 Here we have a case of one god 
setting up his temple and abode over the grave of another 
god. Apollo, the god of prophecy, thrones it over the Earth- 
spirit Python, the son of the Earth-goddess Gaia. Now, we 
have ancient and in the highest degree trustworthy traditions 
to the effect that there was originally at Delphi an ancient 
Earth-Oracle into whose place Apollo and his mantic art came 
later as anintruder. We are therefore justified in believing 
that this circumstance in the history of religion has found 
expression in the legend that Apollo’s temple and oracular 
seat stood over the place where an ancient and superseded 
oracle-daimon lay “ buried ’’.*3 In the days when the primeval 
Earth-Oracle was still powerful its guardian would not lie 
dead and buried under the Omphalos of the Earth-goddess, 
but would have dwelt there alive underground, like 
Amphiaraos or Trophonios or Zeus on Ida. 


§ 3 

The “ grave’ under the Omphalos means in the case of 
Python the overthrow of an earth-dwelling Chthonic Daimon 
by the cult of Apollo. The “grave” of Zeus, which had 
thrust itself into the place of an older legend of the dwelling 
of Zeus in the cave of the mountain, expresses the same idea 
as this legend, but expresses it in a form current in later ages 
which knew of many “ Heroes ’”’ who after their death and 
from their graves gave proof of a higher existence and a power- 
ful influence. The Zeus that died and is buried is only a god 
reduced to a Hero : 34 remarkable and paradoxical is only 
the fact that unlike Zeus Amphiaraos, Zeus Trophonios 
(and Zeus Asklepios), he has not, in the usual fashion, dropped 
his title of god, which directly contradicted his “ Hero ” 


H 


, 


98 CAVE DEITIES 


nature. It is possible that in the case of this cave-Zeus, half- 
god half-Hero, a conception has been transferred merely on 
analogy from other cases where it was applied more properly, 
after they had become fully ‘‘ Heroized’’, to gods who 
according to the no longer intelligible theory had once been 
dwellers in the depths of the earth. 

We have several accounts of Heroes who were buried in 
temples of gods and were sometimes associated with the cult 
of the higher god to whom the temple was dedicated. The 
way in which such legends could arise may be seen unusually 
clearly from the case of Evechtheus. 

The Ship-Catalogue in the Iliad (ii, 546 ff.) tells us that 
Erechtheus was the son of the Earth, but that Athene brought 
him up and “ settled him in her rich temple ’’,®° where the 
Athenians every year honour him with sacrifice of sheep and 
bulls. It is plain that Erechtheus is here thought of as 
still living ; to honour a dead man with such offerings, repeated 
every year and attended by the whole community, would be 
a custom quite unknown to Homer. Erechtheus is, therefore, 
thought of as dwelling alive in the temple in which Athene has 
set him down, i.e. the ancient temple on the Acropolis which 
was enclosed in the “ strong house of Erechtheus ’’, to which, 
according to the Odyssey, Athene betakes herself as her own 
home. On the old citadel of the Kings, royal residence and 
sanctuary of the goddess were combined; its foundation 
walls have recently been discovered on the spot where later 
joint worship was paid to Athene and Erechtheus in the 
“ Erechtheion ’’.37 Erechtheus dwells below the ground in 
a crypt of this temple,** like other earth-deities, in the form 
of a snake, immortally. He is not dead, for as Euripides still 
says, in a story which otherwise follows different lines, “ the 
earth gaped and covered him over,’ °° i.e. he was translated 
and lived on under the earth. On the analogy of the examples 
already discussed it is clear that this is also a case of a primitive 
local deity,*® once supposed to have been living always in 
a cave on the mountain-side, transformed to a Hero who has 
been brought there and raised toimmortal life. The later belief 
in Heroes required a grave at which the continued existence 
and potency of the ‘“‘ Hero’”’ was localized; by a natural 
process of development the Hero Erechtheus translated alive 
and made immortal is thought of as buried in a grave. 
Erichthonios, who was expressly identified with the Homeric 
Erechtheus, was by later ages supposed to be buried in the 
Temple of Polias, i.e. the oldest temple of Athene, on the 
Acropolis.44 We have clearly before us the steps by which the 


SUBTERRANEAN TRANSLATION $9 


aboriginal deity, dwelling beneath the ground, the son of 
Earth, is made into a mortal Hero, translated to immortality 
and placed under the protection of the Olympian goddess 
who has now become more powerful than he; and finally 
transferred, cave and all, to the precincts of her temple, and 
finally réduced to the condition of a Hero like another, who 
had died and lies peacefully buried in the temple of the goddess 
on the citadel. 

With this example before us we may explain several other 
analogous cases, in which we have only the last stage of the 
process, the grave of a Hero in a god’s temple, without any 
of the intermediate steps. A single example may be given. 

At Amyklai, not far from Sparta, in the holiest temple of 
Laconia, stood the ancient bronze statue of Apollo upon an 
altar-shaped base, within which, according to legend, 
Hyakinthos lay buried. Through a bronze door in the side of 
the altar offerings for the dead were sent down to 
“ Hyakinthos ’’ buried below every year at the festival of 
the Hyakinthia.4* The recipient of these offerings has little 
resemblance to the gentle youth of popular legend. The 
Hellenistic poets tell how he was beloved by Apollo and died 
by a cast of Apollo’s discus and was changed into a flower. 
The fable, almost destitute of local reference, has been put 
together from many popular themes.*® The sculpture on the 
above-mentioned altar, on the other hand, represents among 
many gods and heroes Hyakinthos and his sister Polyboia 
as they are being carried up to heaven—which will not square 
with the metamorphosis story. Further, he is represented as 
bearded, and so not as the boy whom Apollo loved,*4 but as 
a grown man (of whose daughters indeed other legends make 
mention).* The true story of this Hyakinthos has disappeared | 
almost without leaving a trace. But in what the monument — 
reveals and in what we know of the yearly festival held in 
honour of Hyakinthos significant features emerge which 
perhaps can tell us the real character of the Daimon that was 
honoured at Amyklai together with, and as our information 
clearly shows, before Apollo himself.46 Hyakinthos was given 
offerings that were otherwise peculiar to the gods that ruled 
the lower world.4’ These offerings were let down directly into 
the underground place where, in fact, Hyakinthos himself 
was supposed to dwell. In the great festival of the Hyakinthia 
the alternate worship of Apollo and Hyakinthos (after whom 
as the chief personage the festival is named) points to the 
incomplete amalgamation of two originally distinct cults ; 
and the plain and unadorned, almost dismal, ceremonies of 


100 CAV. Ear DETELVS 


the days devoted to Hyakinthos—contrasted with the more 
cheerful worship paid to Apollo on the middle day of 
the feast 48—allow us to see clearly the real nature of 
Hyakinthos as a Daimon related to the gods of the underworld. 
On the altar-relief Polyboia: was represented as his sister: 
she was a goddess of the underworld like Persephone.*?® 
Hyakinthos was, then, an old local deity of the Amyklaian 
countryside, dwelling below the earth, and his worship at 
Amyklai was older than that of Apollo. But he is a dim 
figure. The Olympian god (probably not before the Doric 
conquest of the Achzan land) has set himself down beside, 
and indeed over, the ancient earth-spirit, and now outshines 
him without quite. being able to banish his worship. The 
divine existence of the latter under the ground could not be 
imagined: by later ages, except as the after-existence of the 
psyche of a dead and buried Hero whose body lay in the 
“grave ’’ under the statue of the god. Next, in order to 
explain their association in cult, poetic legend made the 
god a lover, just as in another case, and for similar reasons, 
it had made him the lover of Daphne.*° 


§ 4 

Thus it may be that under many a Hero whose grave was 
shown in the Temple of a god an ancient local-god was hidden, 
whose abode beneath the earth had been converted into a 
“ grave ’’ now that he himself had sunk from a deity of higher 
rank to a human chieftain. It depended upon the circum- 
stances of the case whether his humanization was complete 
or whether the memory of his former god-head (preserved in 
cult) secured for him a second elevation to the heavenly 
regions *! among the Olympian gods whose nature was 
originally quite foreign to that of the old earth-daimon. Such 
conceptions, differing widely according to the circumstances 
of place and time, are shown most clearly in the different views 
taken of Asklefios. For Homer and the poets he is generally ~ 
a great chieftain, a mortal who had learnt the art of healing 
from Cheiron. In religious cult he was generally set on a level 
with the upper gods. In reality he, too, is a local earth-dwelling 
deity from Thessaly, who from beneath the earth dispenses, 
like so many earth-spirits, healing from the ills of the flesh 
and knowledge of the future **—the two being closely con- 
nected in antiquity. He, too, easily bore the change from god 
to Hero. Asklepios was struck by Zeus’ lightning which in 
this, as in many cases, did not destroy life, but translated the 
person affected to a higher existence outside the visible world.*? 


SUBTERRANEAN TRANSLATION 101 


We can now easily understand what it means when even this 
ancient earth-deity is said to be “ buried ’’—his grave being 
shown at different places.°* Many peculiarities of the worship 
paid to him show clearly the original character of Asklepios 
as an ancient god living below the earth.*> One essential 
characteristic indeed of such earth-spirits he lacks—he is not 
bound to any one particular place. An enterprising priesthood, 
wandering in company with the rest of their tribe, had taken 
with them this old established worship of theirs, and spread 
it far and wide, so that Asklepios himself became at home in 
many different places. 

Now, in closest relationship, though they remained more 
faithful to their original character, with this Zeus Asklepios 
stood those Boeotian earth-spirits with whom this discussion 
began. Trophonios, and Amphiaraos, too, might have been 
described as an Asklepios, who had stayed at home in his old 
cavern dwelling.*°6 They, too, Amphiaraos and Trophonios, 
had become mortal men of a past age in the imagination of 
a time which could no longer properly understand such cave- 
Splits. but we never hear of their “graves” ; for the 
generation which made them Heroes knew nothing of mortal 
chieftains who after dying and being buried yet lived on with 
undiminished powers. But it was the belief in their un- 
interrupted potency that gave those strange cavern deities 
a secure place in men’s memory. In the epic and in legends 
inspired by the epic they are recognized as human beings 
that had not died but had been translated, without any 
division of soul from body, to everlasting life in the depths 
of the earth. Ever afterwards—even when they are not only 
called immortal, but actually “ gods ’—they are reckoned 
as men who have become immortal or godlike.*’ And they have 
become the patterns of what other mortals too may rise to. 
In the Electra of Sophokles (836 ff.) the chorus wishing to 
justify the hope of a continued life for the departed, expressly 
- appeal to the example of Amphiaraos, who still rules below 
the earth with all his spiritual powers intact. For the same 
reason these and other examples offered by ancient legend 
and poetry of the “ translation ”’ of individual great men to 
a life below the earth are important for our inquiry too. In 
them, as it did (in another sense) in the case of those trans- 
lated to the Islands of the Blest, the Epic points beyond its 
own resigned and gloomy conception of the state after death 
towards a higher life after the visible world has been left 
behind. It took isolated cases of the once numerous class of 
cavern deities worshipped in Greek countries, and deprived 


102 CAVE DEITIES 


them of their god-head, though not of the superhumanly 
continued existence and (especially mantic) powers claimed 
for them by the belief and cult of their countrymen. Thus 
reduced to mortal rank, it interwove them in the fabric of the 
heroic mythology, and in so doing instituted a class of out- 
standing human individuals who had been raised to a godlike 
existence, far, indeed, from the upper world, but, at least, not 
condemned to the common realm of the souls. Instead they 
were given a home beneath the earth, each in a definite place 
in Greek territory, near living men, and able to help them. 
The descent from god to mortal Hero resulted, since the 
essential point of continued existence was not denied, in a 
corresponding exaltation of the mortal and the heroic to the 
divine. Thus the epic leads us in this instance towards a range 
of conceptions which the poems themselves treated as though 
it never existed, and which now suddenly comes into view. 


NOTES TO CHAPTER III 


1 pi., N. ix, 24 ff., x, 8 f., [Apollod.] iii, 6, 8, 4 (adv TO dppate Kai 
T@ nvioxw Barav... expvddn cat Zeds aPavarov avrov éroinoer), etc. 
The expressions used to describe the translation and continued 
conscious existence of A. are noteworthy: kara yat’ adrov ré vw Kai 
hatdipovs tmmovus Euapyer, Pi., O. vi, 14. Zeds xpvwev dp’ tamots, N. ix, 
25. yata brédexto pavtw Olkdreidav, x, 8. pavris KexevOws modeptas 
b70 xGovds, A.,Th.,588. éb€€aropayeica On Baia kovs,S.fr.,873(=958 P.). 
Oeot Cavr’ avapmdacartes és pvxyovs xPovos adrois TeOpinmots EevAoyotaww 
eugavas, E. Supp., 928 f. apmacev ydpuBdis olwvooKxdmov, téOpimmov 
dpua meptBadrotoa xydopatt, 501 f. (Eriphyle) "Audiapaov éxpuy’ tao 
yhv avrotot adv trots, Oracle in Ephorus ap. Ath., 232 F. ’Apdrapaov 
Cavros TO oHpa Katade~acba thy yRv, Agatharch., p. 115, 21 Mi. 
é€neonaoato 4 yi CaHvra, Philostr., V. Ap., 2, 37, p. 79, 18 Kays. 
adaviopos Of A., St. Byz. s. “’Apaura.—mapisvyos avacce, S., El., 841 ; 
det Cav tiara, Xen., Cyn. i, 8. 

2 That the translation of Amphiaraos in the form so frequently 
repeated by later authors (clearly following an important and influential 
original) appeared already in the Thebais of the epic cycle is taken 
by Welcker for granted, Ep. Cyl. ii, 362, 66. The view isintrinsically 
probable ; but it can claim more definite grounds. Pi., O. vi, 12-17, 
tells us that after Amphiaraos and his team had been swallowed up 
by the earth, Adrastos, over the seven funeral-pyres (which consumed 
the bodies of the Argives who had fallen in battle), said ro@éw orparias 
odbadApov eas, audotepov, pavrw 7 ayadov kat Souvpi udpvacba. That 
this famous lament was taken é€x ris xuxAkfs OnBatdos, fr. 5 Kinkel, 
p. 12, is proved by the testimony of the ancient scholia on woféw xri., 
quoting Asklepiades. This means that in the Thebais too, after the 
battle was over Amphiaraos was not to be found either among 
the fallen or the survivors—was in fact translated. Pindar must 
have taken not merely the words of the lament of Adrastos but the 
whole situation that led up to these words, as he described it, from 
the Thebais. (Bethe, Theb. Held. [1891], p. 58f., 94 ff., claims to 
prove that Pindar took nothing but the words dydérepov cri. from 
the Thebais which said nothing of the burial of these who had fallen 
before Thebes, and that Pindar added this last on his own account, 
O. vi, as well as N. ix, 25. But the “‘ proofs’”’ of this view, in itself 
highly improbable, on closer examination come to nothing.)—In the 
Odyssey it is said of Amph. 6dAe7’ év OnBya, 0 247; Oavev ’Apdiapaos 
253. The expression “‘ is naturally to be understood as merely implying 
disappearance from the earth’ says Welcker, Ep. C. ii, 366. All we 
can claim is that the expression does not indeed prevent us from 
assuming that the story of the “‘ disappearance ’’ of Amph. was known 
also to the poet of these lines. Thus in the OC. of Soph. Antigone 
says twice over (ll. 1706, 1714) that Oedipus €@ave, whereas he really 
was like Amphiaraos translated alive (doxomot mAdKes Epapyay 1681). 

3 Pi., fr. 167, A.R.i, 57-64 (Cwods mep Ere . . . €SvoeTo verdh yatns). 
Orph., Arg., 171-5 (daciv... Cwov 7’ ev dbtpéevoroe porety bro Kevbece 
yains). Agatharch., p. 114, 39-43 Mi. (els riv yay Karadivar opbov 
te Kai Cévra). Schol. and Eust. on A 264, p. 1001.—In Ovid, M. xii, 
514 ff., the translation becomes a metamorphosis (into a bird); and 


104 NO iS Ome C tA Pie Ke Ee 


often an ancient translation myth has thus been replaced by 
a metamorphosis in later mythology. The connected story of Kaineus 
has been lost, and only a few fragments survive in Sch., A.R. i, 57; 

Sch., A 264 (the best known being the change of sex [cf. also Meineke, 
h. crit. com., 345], the meaning of which is very dubious. Similar 
stories are told of Teiresias, Sithon (Ov., M.iv, 280), Iphis, and Ianthe, 
this last reminding us strikingly of a narrative in the Mahabharata. 
Then frequently in many miracle tales, both heathen and Christian, 
to which far too much respect is paid by those who seek to find in 
them dark reminiscences of bisexual gods). No traces of a cujt of 
Kaineus can be found. 

- Althaimenes, son of Katreus (cf. Rh. Mus. 36, 432 f.), evédpevos 
umd xdopatos éexpvBy [Apollod.], iii, 2, 2, 3. Rationalistic version of 
Zeno of Rhodos ap. D.S., 5, 59, 4, who says, however, vorepov Kata 
xXpnopudcyv Twa Tuas Eoxe Tapa Panter qpwikdas, and, in fact, we learn 
from an insc. in Newton, Gr. Insc. in B.M. ii, 352, that a political 
division (Ktoina ?) of the people of Rhodos was called ’AXOatpevis, 
whose ypws éxrmvupos must have been Althaimenes. 

5 Amphilochos appeared in person to sleepers at his dream-oracle 
at Mallos in Cilicia (Luc., Philops., 38)—so also did his rival Mopsos, 
Plut., DO. 45, 434 D—as well as at his oracle in Akarnania, Aristid. i, 
p. 78 D. [38, 21 Keil]. Mopsos in Cilicia and Amphilochos i in Akarnania 
are alike in being among those dSatudvwa which fdpupéva ev tur tTOT7w 
todtov olxovow, Orig., c. Cels. iii, 34, pp. 293-4 L. The same author 
says of Amph. Mopsos and others, dv@pwmoedets Oewpeiabar Geovs, 
a 35, p. 53. 

6 Laodike, daughter of Priam [Apollod.], Epit. v, 25; Nicol. Prog. 
ii, 1.—Aristaios, who ddavros yiyverat in M. Haemus and is now 
honoured Ae ere Tuais, D.S.iv, 82, 6. (Cf. Hiller v. Gartr., Pauly- 
Wiss, ii, 855, 23 ff.) 

* The regular expression for these subterranean dwelling-places is 
péyapa. lLex.rhet. ap. Eust., Od.,1387,17f. Hencealso the sacrificial 
pits into which men lowered the offerings made to the deities of the 
lower world are called péyapa (Lob., Agl., 830; péyapa = ydoparta, 
Schol. Luc., D. Mer. 2, pp. 275 ff. Rabe). It was thought that by sinking 
the gifts in the ground they would immediately reach the dwelling- 
place of the spirit who lived there. The sacrificial chasm is itself the 
*“chamber’”’, wéyapov, in which the spirit lives (in the form of a snake) 
and dwells. 

Kk 492 ff., bux xp700 wévous OnBaiov Tetpeciao, pavrnos aAaod 
708 TE Aeitipes Epme dol elou’ T@ Kal reOvndre voov mope Ilepoedovea, 
otw memvicba rol dé cxial diacovaiw. . His dpéves being undestroyed 
the most important and distinguishing feature of death is absent. 
His body, indeed, is destroyed and hence he is called reOvnds like all 
the other dwellers in Hades, though it is still difficult to see how the 
g¢péves could remain without a body. It is highly probable that the 
idea of the continued existence of the consciousness of the famous 
seer renowned in Theban legend was derived by the poet from a popular 
tradition according to which Teiresias still gave proof of the clearness 
of his wits by the oracles which he sent up from below the earth. In 
Orchomenos there was a ypnotnpiov Tetpeciov, Plu., DO. 44, p. 434C 
(as Nitzsch, Anm. Od. iii, p. 151, also reminds us). If we may argue 
from the context in which Plutarch speaks of him, this must have 
been an earth-oracle, i.e. an incubation-oracle. There stories like 
those told at Thebes of Amphiaraos may have been related of Teiresias 
and his survival after death. Some such information the poet of 


NOTES 710) CHAPTER =III 105 


the Nekyia may then have transformed and made use of for his own 
purposes. Str. 762 not without good ground connects these verses 
about Teiresias with the stories of Amphiaraos and Trophonios. 

® The ancient site of the Oracle of Amphiaraos was near Thebes 
at the place (Knopia) where according to the epic story he sank into the 
earth. Paus., 9, 8, 3, Str. 404. Even at the time of the Persian war 
the envoy of Mardonios inquired of him there, near Thebes, as Hdt. viii, 
134, unmistakably says. (That the oracle lay in Theban territory is 
shown also by the addition of the words, otherwise pointless, OnBaiwv 
ovdevi €€eoTt pavrevecba avro#i. A similar rule is found at the temple 
of Herakles in Erythrai which may be approached by Thracian women 
but not by Erythrean women [Paus., 7, 5, 7-8]; and in the same 
way the Lampsakenoi were excluded from the funeral games of 
Miltiades on the Chersonnese: Hdt. vi, 38.) Oropos also claimed to 
harbour Amphiaraos under its soil; Sch. Pi., O. vi, 18, 21-3; differently 
in Paus., 1, 34, 2-4. But the oracle must have been moved there 
afterwards—hardly before the end of the fifth century (pe@udpv6n, 
Str. 404); to suppose that it had always been confined to Oropos 
is contrary to all the traditional evidence. 

10 Those who wished to inquire of his oracle offered by night to 
Trophonios, before going down into the cave, a ram, sacrificing it in 
a pit (Bé@pos): Paus., 9, 39, 6; to Amphiaraos, after a considerable 
fast (Philos., VA., 2, 37, pp. 79, 19 ff. K.) and the provision of a 
KkaQdapotov, the inquirer offered aram upon the fleece of which he lay 
down to sleep (Paus., 1, 34, 5).—Cleanthem cum pede terram 
percussisset versum ex Epigonis (prob. of Soph.) ferunt dixisse : audisne 
haec, Amphiarae, sub terram abdite? Cic., 7D.ii, 60. The gesture 
also must have been borrowed from the same scene in the ’Emiyovot. 
It was thus customary to knock on the ground in calling upon A., as 
in the case of other xarayOdvo. (Apdidpae xOdvie Occurs as late as 
P. Mag. Par. 1446 f. W.): 1568; cf. Paus.,8, 15,3. Cf. also Nagelsb., 
Nachh. Theol., 102, 214. Skedasos in Sparta yf#v t¥mTwv avexadeiro 
tas ’Epwias, Plu., AN. 3, p. 774 B. In his grief for the loss of his 
daughter Herodes Atticus threw himself on the ground rv yfv maiwy 
kal Body’ ri aor, Ovyarep, Kabayiow; 7i cor EvvOdyw; Philostr., 
VS. 2, 1,10. Pythagoras érav Bpovrjon tis ys dpacbat maphyyerder, 
Iamb., VP. 156. 

11 That the dream-oracle of Trophonios had a much older influence 
is implied by the story of the inquiry made of it by the Bowroi 
dAdvres b70 Opaxadv in Phot. (Suid.) Avovor rereral. 

12 Trophonios himself was supposed to appear in the cave at 
Lebadeia. The inquirer goes down to it Seopevos ovyyevéoba TH 
darpoviw (Max. Tyr. 14, 2, p. 249 R.); indications were sought from 
sacrifice «f 87 Tov KatidvTa edpevas Kal trAews Sé€erat (Trophonios), 
Paus. 9, 36, 6. Saon, the discoverer of the oracle and founder of the 
cult, had after entering the pavretov met Trophonios himself in person, 
Tv lepovpyliay ... dudaxOFvar mapa tod Tpodwriov gaci (Paus. 
9, 40, 2). He dwells and is visible in the oracular cavern: Orig., 
Cels. iii, 34, pp. 293-4 L. vii, 35, p.53; Aristid.i, p. 78 D. [38, 21 Keil]. 
Even the stupidly rationalizing account of Troph. in Schol. Ar., 
Nub. 508, p. 190 Ruth., Sch. Luc., DM. iii, Cosm. ad Greg. Naz. 
p. 184 (Clarke, p. 52] (Eudoc., Viol., p. 682, 8)—implies the bodily 
presence of an éyxarouxfoav Saipdvov in the cave of Trophonios. 
Lucian, too, shows that this was the popular impression (DM. iii, 2) 
by his curious satiric fiction that whereas Troph. himself was in Hades 
(to which acc. to Necyom. 22 the cave of Trophonios was only an 


106 NOTES TO CHAPTER III 


entrance) ro Qetov tpuiroyov of Trophonios yp@ ev Bowwria. Thus 
the visitor expected to meet Trophonios there in his divine shape, as 
Ampelius puts it in a similar case with great simplicity and direct- 
ness, 8, 3: ibi (Argis in Epiro) Iovis templum hyphonis (irretrievably 
corrupt: Tvophonti absurdly Duker; Typhonis, Tychonis others not 
much better) unde est ad inferos descensus ad tollendas sortes: in 
quo loco dicuntur ii qui descenderunt Iovem ipsum videre. Otherwise, 
Tr. was said to inhabit the cave in the shape of a snake as is so frequently 
the case with earth-deities. Not only are snakes sacred to him as to 
Asklepios (Paus. 9, 39, 3) and live in his cave (to propitiate them 
people take honey-cakes down with them) but he himself is present 
in the form of asnake: édus Fv 6 pavrevdpevos, Schol. Ar., Nub. 508; 
cf. Suidas Tpodwuos. It was this personal contact between the god 
and the inquirer which specially distinguished the oracle of Tr. povov 
€xeivo (TO pavretov) du’ avtod yp& Tod ypwyevov. Philostr., VA. 8, 19, 
p-. 335, 30 K. Of course, many only heard without seeing: tis Kat 
eldev kal adAXros yeovoev, Paus. 9, 39, 11. But it was the god they 
heard. 

13 Speaking of Zalmoxis among the Getae (cf. Str. 297 f.; 762; 
Hdt. iv, 95-6. EM. ZddAp.), Mopsos in Cilicia, Amphilochos in 
Akarnania, Amphiaraos and Trophonios—in fact, all of them daimones 
who had oracles of Incubation—Or. (Cels. iii, 34, p. 293-4 L.) says: 
they have temples and dydApara as datpoviots ovK 018’ brws iSpupévots 
év Tit TOTW, Ov . . . olkovow. They dwell within this éva cexAnpwpévov 
tomov, Vii, 35 (pp. 53-4 L.), cf. 111, 35 fin. In that place and only there 
are such daimones visible. Cels. vii, 35 (p.53 L.),ofthe temples of Amph., 
Troph., Mops.: é€v@a dnaiv avOpwmoedets BewpeicAar Beods Kai ov 
yevdopevous adda Kat évapyeis. ... petal tis adrod’s ody amag 
mapappvevtas ... GAA’ det tots BovdAopévots optdAobvTas (and so ever 
present there). Aristid. i, p. 78 Di. (38, 21 K.], "Apdidpaos Kai 
Tpodwvios é€v Bowwrtia cat ’Apdiroxos ev Aitwiia xpynopmodovar Kal 
gaivovraz. On the extension beyond its original home of the cult 
of such an Incubation-deity localization in a single spot was of course 
relaxed. It was either disputed where his permanent habitation 
really was (as in the case of Amph.), or else the god gradually ceased 
to be bound to any one place, though still bound to certain places 
in the sense that he could appear only there, and not anywhere he chose. 
Such is the case with Asklepios and with various other daimones 
equally bound originally to a single spot, who then émdatvorra, 
€migoir@ouw, in certain other temples as well (cf. for example, the 
account of the é€mddverar of Machaon and Podaleirios in Adrotta given 
by Marin., V. Procli, 32; cf. Suid. Evoréduos, from Damascius, 
V. Isid.). But when inquiries are made of a god by Incubation the 
god must always appear in person; if he is absent no oracle can be 
given. See the story of Amphiaraos in Plu., DO. 5, p. 412 A. In 
the records of miracles of healing found in Epidauros the god himself 
regularly comes to the sleeper in the dévrov (or else in the form of a 
snake ’E¢. ’Apy. ’83, p. 215 f., ll. 113-19), sometimes accompanied 
by his va7jperat (the Asklepiadai), cf. Ed. "Apx. °85, p. 17 ff., ll. 38 ff., 
111 f. In the old miracle of Aristagora of Troezen (’Ed¢. ’Apy. °85, 
p. 15, 1. 10 ff.) reported already by Hippys of Rhegion (which there 
is no reason to doubt) at first only “‘ the sons of the god’’ appeared 
to the sick woman ovx émdapotvtos atrod add’ ev "Emédatpw €dvtos. 
Only in the following night did Asklepios himself appear to her fxav 
ef ’Emdavpov. Everywhere it is implied that dream-healing can 
only take place through personal action of the god (cf. Ar., Péut.) ; 


NO DESael Ome HAT Lio a LT 107 


later by the advice, at least, of the god, personally appearing to the 
patient (see Zacher, Hermes, xxi, 472 f.); and this presumption is 
explained by the fact that originally Incubation could only take place 
at the actual spot where the god (or Hero) had his permanent abode. 

14 The taodjrat of the Dodonian Zeus the SLedrdol, avirromodes 
xapaedvar, IT 234f., were explained by some already in antiquity as 
priests of an Incubation oracle (Eust., J/., p. 1057, 64 ff.), Welcker 
agreeing with them, K/. Schr. iti, 90 f. This view is founded solely 
on the adj. yapa:edva:, which is not, however, to be separated from 
avintomodes. But since av:mrémodes can have no connexion with 
Incubation neither then can yapaedvar. Both epithets refer obviously 
to the special severity and simplicity of the life of the XeAdoi, the 
{ritual) reason for which it is true we do not know and have no 
means of guessing. 

15 It remains indeed impossible to determine what moved the epic 
to recognize in the Boeotian cave-daimon the Argive seer Amphiaraos 
{even during his life-time an adept in the incubation-mantic art acc. 
Pom Pausece 13, 5/ ject id. inwGp:-2,.30, 8,¢p../3; 14 i. 1 Beckh), 
or why the heroized god Amphiaraos was turned into an Argive and 
made a member of the prophetic family of Melampous otherwise 
the foes of the Boeotian seers; or, finally, why he was brought to 
Boeotia as an enemy and then made to dwell for ever in that hostile 
and alien land. 

16 Henry the Fowler in Sudemerberg: Kuhn and Schwartz, Nordd. 
Sag., p. 185. The other examples in Grimm, ch. xxxii.—G. Voigt in 
Sybel’s hist. Zeits. xxvi (1871), pp. 131-87, shows in his most lucid 
account that it was not originally Frederick Barbarossa but Frederick II 
whom the legend represented as not dead but “ lost’? and to whom the 
expectation referred that he would come again some day. From the 
fifteenth century the story begins to appear that he was dwelling in 
Kyffhauser (or in a cave in the rocks near Kaiserslautern) ; the name 
of Barbarossa does not appear till the sixteenth century, and then 
gradually predominates. But how it came about that from a definite 
moment onwards the translated emperor was thought of as living on 
in a hollow mountain is by no means clear from the written documents 
alone or from the critical study of the evolution of thelegend. Suddenly 
and without intermediate steps the story assumes this shape, and it 
can hardly be accounted for except on the view that it arose from the 
combination of the Frederick legend with already existing Saga- 
stories of translated Heroes or gods (as Voigt also suggests, p. 160). 

17 Grimm, pp. 959-61. Simrock, D. Myth.®, p. 144.—How easily 
similar legends can appear spontaneously among different peoples 
without interconnexion appears from the fact that translation legends 
are also found not only in Greece but in distant Mexico; see Miller, 
Gesch. am. Urrel. 582. Holy men who have “ vanished ”’ and are not 
dead but live on in the depths of mountain caves, and are expected 
one day to reappear on earth, occur in the legends of Mohammedan 
peoples of the East: A. v. Kremer, Culturg. Streifz. Geb. Islam, 50 ; 
Gesch. Ideen Islam, 375 f., 378. ; 

18 Avi Tpedwvios Insc. from Lebadeia, Meister, Bédot. Insc. 423 (GDI. 
i, p. 163) ; otherwise only Tpedwyvior (n. 407, 414, caraBas ev Tpedwviov 
BCH. ’90, p. 21), Tpodwviw (n. 413); and side by side occur 76 At ri 
Baowrett x1) 76 Tpedwviv, etc. (n. 425, 429, 430). Arovdow evoradpvAw 
Kata xpyopov Aros Tpodwviov Insc. from Labadeia in Stephani Retse 
d. Geg. nord. Griechen, No. 47. Ins. from Leb. [GSept. i, 3077 (Ist-2nd 
cent. A.D.)—Str. 414: AeBddera drov Atos Tpodwviov pavreiov tdpuTat. 


108 NODES OM GHAR LE Kaerrr 


Liv. 45, 27, 8, Labadiae templum Iovis Trophonii adiit. Obs. 50 
(= 110) Lebadiae Eutychides in templum Iovis Trophonii degressus—. 
Aids pavretov is the name given to the oracle of Tr. in Phot. also and 
Hesych. AeBdadeca. 

19 Aids "Audtapdov tepdv (at Oropos): [Dicaearch.] Descr. Gr. i, 
§ 6 (i, 100 Mii.). Even Hyperides in the speech for Euxenippos refers 
throughout to Amph. at Oropos as a god. Amph. in Or. 6 @eds 
(Ist-2nd cent. B.c.): IGS. i,-3498; 412; CIG. 1570a, 25, 30, 52. 
Liv. 45, 27, 10 (in Oropos) pro deo vates antiquus colitur. Cic. 
Div.i, 88: Amphiaraum sic honoravit fama Grecie, deus ut haberetur. 
Plutarch also, speaking of the embassy sent by Mardonios to the ancient 
Theban oracle, calls Amph. Oeds: DO. 5, p. 412 A. Acc. to Paus. 
1, 34, 2, however, Amph. was first honoured as a god in Oropos. 

20 Origen is expressing it in his own way, but he is quite right in 
principle when he distinguishes the local gods remaining in the country- 
side from the gods of Olympos, Cels. iii, 35 fin.: poxOnpadv Satpdovwv 
Kal TOmous é€ml ys mpoxarerAndotwr, eet THs KaDapwrépas ov SUvavrat 
edaypacbat ydpas Kal Oevorépas. He says of Asklepios, 5, 2 (p. 169 L.), 
Beds pev av ein det 5€ Aaywy olketv THY yqv Kal WomEpel duyas TOO TOTOV 
tav Oedv. 

21 Avods peyaddov daptotyjs. The word implies quite as much familiar 
conversation as well as general intimacy with Zeus. The obscure 
evvéwpos need not be considered here. In any case it is to be taken 
closely with BaoiXeve, next to which it stands, and not with Atos p. 
daptoTns (aS Many even ancient writers have done). 

22 Intercourse of Minos with Zeus in the cave: [Pl.] Min. 319 E. 
(whence Str. 762), Ephorus ap. Str. 476; (from Eph. also Nic. Dam. 
ap.sotobi Fil. civ, 2,°25, p. .161 (H.). (V.M21, "2, | exteo ee bleres re 
position of the cave is as a rule not precisely stated. But the Idaian 
cave is generally meant and Max. Tyr. definitely refers to this one 
as' the place where Minos met Zeus, 38, 2 (p. 221 R.). 

83 Birth of Zeus in the cave: Alyalw év oper Hes., Th. 481 ff. 

Thence his mother bore him és Avxrov 482 (cf. 477), which would be 
near Ida :—és Aixrnvy SchOmann. And, at any rate, the cave on Mt. 
Dicte was the generally reputed place of Zeus’ birth: [Apoll.] 1, 1, 6. 
D.S. 5, 70, 6; Mela 2, 113; D.H. 2, 61 (who also makes Minos visit 
Zeus there). At Praisos 76 rot Aikratov Atos fepov: Str. 475-8. 
Others, indeed, mention Ida as the place of the birth of Zeus: D.S. 
710s 2A sre lh 1li,01 04 bothethe holy caves are thus continually 
rivals; but it appears that the legend of the birth of Zeus was 
principally localized at the Diktaian cave, that of his intercourse with 
Minos chiefly at the Idaian; cf. now also M. Mayer, Myth. Lex. s. 
Kronos, ii, 1533 ff. 
24 Max. Tyr. 16, 1 (cf. 38, 3; prob. from Max. only, Theod. Met. 
Misc. c. 90, p. 580 Mii.). Cf. Rh. Mus. 35, 161 f. Max. speaks of 
the cave of Diktaian Zeus, perhaps only inexactly and by oversight. 
It would be to Ida rather and its cave which rose above Knossos, 
the home of Epimenides, that the legend would make him go on 
pilgrimage. So, too, D.L. viii, 1, 3, of Pythagoras, év Kpirn odv 
"Empevidn xarHiAGev eis to “ISatov dvrpov. Pyth. in the Idaian cave, 
Porph:, ViP.:.17: . 

5 Schol. Plat., Leg. i, introd. (p. 372 Herm.) and Leg. 625: B, 
see Lob., Agl. 1121. (Ads "I8alov porns, Eur., Cret. fr. 472, 10 N.) 
Recently the Idaian cave of Zeus has been rediscovered high up in 
the mountains, a day’s journey from Knossos (Fabricius, Ath. Mitth., 
-vol. x, 59 ff.). Remains of votive offerings of antiquity have been 


NOTES ae LOm CHARLEERR pitt 109 


found, but only before the entrance to the cave éy 7 oropiw rob avrpov 
(where Thphr. had already remarked the like, HP. 3, 3, 4); inside 
the cave, which, like a vaulted tomb, consisted of two chambers, 
only traces of the cult from Roman times were found. It seems 
from this that the sacrificial ritual of the previous period did not 
reach further than the entrance of the cave (as was the case also at 
the temple of Troph. at Lebadeia) ; while the interior of the cave 
as the seat of the god himself was only entered by Mystai and priests 
(the birth-chamber was not to be approached at all: Boios, ap. Ant. 
dabse19). 

26 Porph., | VAI Deco Nenkels oe 70 Tdatov KaXrovpevov avTpov 
kaTaBas € pia EXuv péAavaras vo utlo pevas Tpls évvea (cf. Nauck ons:,0G. 
483) 7 Epas exe’ Svétpipev cal xadynytoev TH Ai, Tov te otopvUpevov avT@ 
Kat’ éros Opdvov €Geaoato. The historical ‘truth of the story of Pyth.’s 
visit to the cave need not be discussed here, but we may assume the 
credibility of the details given of the cult of Zeus in the cave and the 
customary ceremonial of pilgrimage to it. (The story comes from 
relatively good sources, Gv. Roman, p. 254.)—The long time spent 
in the cave (i.e. in the wide and lofty outer chamber) has its companion 
picture in what Str. 649 says of Xapwrov at Acharaka, Plu., Gen. Soc. 
21, 590 B., of the cave of Trophonios. It was necessary also to 
spend several days in the olknpua. Aaipovos ayabot cat Tvxns in 
preparation for the descent into the cave: Paus. 9, 39, 5. The (to 
Zeus) ortopvtpevos Kat’ é€tos Opovos has nothing to do with the 
Korybantic @povicpds (see Hiller, Hermes, 21, 365). What is meant 
isin any case a lectisternium: thus in Athens it was usual to kirivny 
otpa@cat T@ ITdovtTww, CIA. ii, 948-50; to Asklepios (CIA. ii, 453b 
11); to Attis, CIA. ii, 622; (in Cos at the fenopuds of Herakles, Ins. 
Cos 36b, 22), etc. The @pdvos (atpwrvew Opdvovs dvo for a goddess 
CIA. ii, 624, 9, 10) appearing instead of a xAivn is possibly in accordance 
with ancient ritual. Thus in the so-called feasts of the dead in ancient 
times the Hero is represented on a throne while later he reclines on 
the xXivn. Thus in Rome besides lectisternia we sometimes have 
sellisternia especially for female deities: Comm. Lud. Saec., 1. 71; 
MiteatoS | Dessau, ii, 1, p. 282; CIL. vi, 32] and elsewhere. 

27 Acc. to Ennius, Euh. 73 Vahl. (ap. Lactant. i, 11, and ap. Min. 
Fel. xxi, 1) Euhemeros spoke of the grave of Zeus. Call., h. Jov. 
8-9, clearly attacks the fable of Zeus’ grave in Crete. It seems to 
me very probable that Euh. had taken up the story as one that evidently 
suited his cheap pragmatical interpretation of myths and had intro- 
duced it into literature. It would be Euh. then whom Call., loc. 
cit., was attacking as he did elsewhere the yépwy ddrafwv and his 
adixa BiBAia (fr. 86). 

28 The grave of Zeus in Crete is spoken of without exact specification 
Bethe place by-Call., loc. ‘cit:; Cic., ND>iii, 53.;>D.S. 3, 61,2; :Mela 
pe Luc., Tim. 6, J«Tr. 45, Sacr. 10, D. Cone. Grea viinwexxt, 8) 
Firm., Err. Prof. Rel, vii, 6.. Euhemeros ap. Min. xxi, 1, speaks of 
the Dictei LIovis sepulcrum obviously inexactly, for acc. to Lact. 
i, 11, he made the grave in oppido Cnosso far from Mt. Dicte. Even 
there he means not “‘in’”’ but “‘ near’’ Knossos, i.e. on Mt. Ida. For 
the fact that it was on Mt. Ida we have the testimony of Varro de 
litovalibus ap. Solin. 11, p. 81, 12-15 Momms. Finally, the situation of 
the grave within the Idaian cave is clear from ROrp lem izes pecoun. 

29 Hence the story of the grave of Zeus (when not denied outright 
ey. Call.) was allegorized ; Celsus hinted at rtpomxas vmovolas: 

, Cels. iii, 43, p. 307.L.; cf. Philostr.,4VS.p376,. 15 ff. 1K; 


110 NOTES 2 LO; (CHART HR ern 


30 Examples are frequent in the mythology of Oriental, and 
generally but not exclusively Semitic, peoples. It is generally 
“¢ Kronos’ who is buried (cf. Mayer, Myth. Lex. ii, 1487 ff.) ; at other 
times Astarte, Adonis, the Phrygian Attis, ‘‘ Herakles,’’ and others. 
Cf. also the stories of the Heroes sleeping eternally in Sardinia (fh. 
Mus. 35, 157 ff.; 37, 465 ff.); and of Kragos and the other adypior 
Beot (or Geoi dypeis? JHS. 10, 57, 55) who “‘ were made immortal ”’ 
on Mt. Kragos in Lykia (St. Byz. Kpdayos) : they, too, were thought of 
as sleeping, and not ‘‘dead’”’, as Eust. on D.P. 847 expresses it. 

31 Varro, LL. vii, 17, p. 124 Sp.?, compares the shape of the Omphalos 
with a thesaurus, i.e. with one of the vaulted buildings which used to 
be called treasuries, but which have now been undoubtedly proved to 
be really vaulted graves. On a smaller scale (as vase paintings show) 
the éudadds had the shape generally given to the dwelling-places 
made for the spirits of the departed who dwelt below the earth, as 
well as that of the abodes of other earth-spirits: even the yaopa 
yjs over the cavern of Trophonios was of this shape, Paus. 9, 39, 10. 
Was this dome-shape especially connected with earth-spirits who had 
mantic powers? The Delphic ‘‘omphalos’’ was even used as a 
technical expression to describe this ‘‘tholos’’ shape: thus the 
budadrot (of didrar) kai THv Badaveiwy of OdAou wapdporor, Ath. 501 D. E. 
(cf. Hesych, Badavetopdadovs, AB. 225, 6). It was called dudadcs Iijs 
because sacred to the earth-goddess. It was laterinterpreted “‘ navel’’, 
i.e. middle point of the earth, by mistake, and then fabulous accounts 
made up to explain this. . 

32 Modern writers have adopted the view that Dionysos was buried 
under the Omphalos: e.g. Enmann, Kypros u. Ursp. Aphrod., 
S. Petersb., 1886, p. 47 ff. But closer examination shows that all 
that we have good authority for is that the dudaddés was Pythonis 
tumulus (Varro, LL. vii, 17, p. 124 Sp.), tados rot ITv@wvos (Hesych. 
s. Toétov Bovves). Dionysos, on the other hand, was buried at Delphi, 
mapa Tov "AmddAwva tov ypvaoobdy (Philochoros ap. Sync. 307, 4 ff. Di. ; 
Eus. Arm. = ‘Hier. Chr., pp. 44-5 Sch.;~° Malal., p: 49, 7-Diizom 
Africanus acc. to Gelzer, Afric. i, 132 f.), i.e. he was buried in the 
adurov (cf. Paus. 10, 24, 5), or, what comes to the same thing, zapa 
TO xpnorypiov (Plu., Is. et O. 35, 365 A.), mapa rov rpimoda (Call. 
ap. Tz. Lyc. 208; cf. EM. AeAdoi). The tripod stood in the Adyton 
(D.S. 16, 26; Str. 419; cf. Hdt. vii, 140). Whether the dydados 
also stood in the Adyton (or whether as some think, in the Cella of 
the Temple) cannot be made out for certain though it seems probable. 
No one, however, made the grave of Dionysos under the Omphalos 
except Tat., Gr. viii, p. 40 Ott. [p. 9, 16 ff. Schw.]: 6 dudadds trados 
€ori Arov’cov, and the statement of this very careless pamphleteer 
cannot stand against the witness of Varro, etc. Itis plain that Tatian 
confused the two “‘ graves ’’, as Hyg. 140 and Serv. (A. iii, 92 ; iii, 360 ; 
vi, 347) did, reversing the process and making the tripod into the 
grave of the Python. The real tradition knew, besides the grave of 
Dionysos near the tripod, the grave of Python in the Omphalos of 
his mother Gaia. This was never seriously denied; doubt might 
rather have been believed to linger over the question, who then was 
preserved in the tripod? Porph., VP. 16, p. 25, 6 ff. N., says that 
it was Apollo himself, or possibly an Apollo the son of Silenos. This 
absurdity seems to go back to Euhemeros (cf. Minuc. xxi, 1 ; worthless 
is Fulgentius Expos., 2, p. 769 Stav. = p. 112, 3 ff. Helm), and may 
be merely a frivolous jest. (Too much respect is paid to this tradition 
by K. O. Miller, Introd. to Scient. Myth., p. 246.) 


NOTES. TO. CHAPTER III 111 


33 That the snake killed by Apollo was the guardian of the old 
pavteiov xOdvov we have on unimpeachable authority (testim. collected 
by Th. Schreiber, A pollo Pythoktonos, p. 3): esp. Eur., 17. 1245 ff. 
Call, fr. 3664 ; mounTat acc. to Paus. 10, 6, 6, who say that (rov 
IT$0wva) émi 7H pavtetw pvdAaxa imo Is rerey bat Krr. That the 
struggle was for the oracle is shown briefly and plainly by [Apollod. ‘J 
1,4, 1, 3: ods b€ 6 ppoupav 70 peavretoy IlvOwv odis exddAvev avrov 
(AnddAwva) mapeAOetv émi ro yaopa (the oracular cleft), todrov dveAdy 
TO pavtetov mapadaypaver. The snake form is proper to earth-spirits, 
and, as earth-spirits always have mantic power, to oracle-spirits. 
Trophonios appeared as a snake and so did Asklepios. There can be 
no doubt that the Delphian dSpaxwy is the embodiment of the pre- 
Apolline oracle-daimon. Thus Hesych. says exactly []v@wv Satpovior 
pavtixov (elaborated in Hyg. 140). Cf. Act. 161®—Supporters of the 
doctrine of the Greek “‘ religion of Nature’’ find even in the legend of 
Apollo’s fight with the snake an allegorical version of a physical fact 
tending to become an ethical one. I cannot regard such an allegory 
as primitive. 

84 An instructive parallel may be added. In [Clem.] Hom. 5, 22, 
p. 70, 32 Lag., there is mention of a grave of Plouton év r7j ’Ayxepovoia 
Aipyvn. This may be explained as follows. At Hermione Hades 
under the name of Klymenos was honoured together with Demeter 
X@ovia and Kore. Pausanias knew well that Klymenos was a titular 
name (émixAnots) of Hades (2, 35, 9), but his rejection of the opinion 
that Klymenos was a man from Argos who had come to Hermione 
(as founder of the Chthonic cult) shows that this was the general view. 
Behind the temple of Chthonia lay ywpia & xadotow ‘Eppuovets ro pév- 
Kdvpévov, to d€ ITAovtTwvos, 76 Tpitov S€ adtadv Aipvynv ’Ayepovotay. 
At this Aipyn ’Ayepovaia it is possible that a grave of Hades, trans- 
formed into the Hero Klymenos, may have been shown. This Clemens 
referred to, but instead of Klymenos or Hades used inaccurately the 
name more familiar to later times, Plouton. 

© Kad 8° év ’AOrvya’ eloev, €@ evi miove vn@. These words may be 
kept in mind in order to explain the mysterious narrative in Hesiod 
Th. 987 ff. of Phaethon whom Aphrodite dpr’ avepepapévn Kat pu 
Cabeos evi vows vno 70 Nov pvxtov motjcaro, Saiuova diov. Aphr., in 
fact, “‘translated ’’ Phaethon alive and made him immortal—within 
her own temple just as Athene had Erechtheus. Perhaps Phaethon 
was translated beneath the ground under the temple—the adj. pvxov 
may mean this. @eot pvxyor are those that rule over the puyxds of 
a house, e.g. over the OaAapos as the inmost chamber: thus ’Adpodirn 
poxia (Ael., HA. x, 34). Anrw puyia (Plu. ap. Eus., PE. iii, 1, 3, 
p. 84c.). <A goddess called simply Muyia, ins. fr. Mytilene, GDI. 255, 
But pvyx.oe could also mean dwellers in the depths of the earth (pvyd 
x9oves edpvodeins, Hes., Th. 119; more commonly in the plural puyxoi 
x9oves, see Markland on Eur., Sup. 545; cf. "Aisos puxds, AP. vii, 213, 6 
(Archias) ; also puyos eace Bean, d0avdrwy under the earth, Epigr. 
Gr. 241 a, 18; 658 a; Rh. Mus. 34, 192). Thus (of the Erinyes) 
Orph. H. 69, 3) pdyvat, b70 Keveaw oiki’ Exovoar advTpw ev HepoevTt. 
Phot. 274, 18, px ome dov" ys Bados, “Ardns. 

86 That the pw of line 550 refers to aren ittens and not Athene 
is shown by the context: Schol. BL. states it expressly. Athene 
cannot have been intended to accept the offering of bulls and rams, 
for OnAcea 7H AOnva Aovo.w. And, in fact, cows, not bulls, were offered 
to Athene; cf. P. Stengel, guaest. sacr., p. 4-5, Berl. 1879. 

37 See Wachsmuth, Ber. sachs. Ges. Wiss., p. 399 ff., 1887. 


112 NOTES 10° CHAPTERSEE 


88 Thus there was, at the temple of Palaimon on the Isthmus, an 
dSvrov Kadovpevov, KdBodos dé és adro badyews, Evba 5H Tov ITahaipova 
xexpv¢Oat (i.e. not dead and buried) ¢aciv. Paus. 2, 2, 1. 0 | 

39 ydoua Kptatet xOoves, Eur., fon, 292,—Erechtheus ab love 
Neptuni rogatu fulmine est ictus, Hyg. 46. That is only another 
kind of translation. 

49 We need not here speak of the relationship between Erechtheus 
and Poseidon, with whom he was eventually merged. 

41 Clem. Al. Protr. iii, p. 39 P. (with Arnob. and the others who 
copy him); [Apollod.] 3, 14, 7, 1. Clemens (quoting Antiochos of 
Syracuse) mentions a grave of Kekrops on the citadel. It is uncertain 
what is the relation between this and the Kexpdémtov known from insc. 
CIA.i, 322, and 76 rot Kéxpo7mos iepov on the citadel (Decree honouring 
the Epheboi of the tribe Kekropis in the year 333: BCH. ’89, p. 257, 
Le10)e 

42 ‘Vaxw@iots mpo ths tod ’AmdodAwvos Ovalas és totrov ‘YaxivOw 
tov Bwpov b1a Ovpas yadkis evayilovow’ ev dptotepG Sé€ €oTw 7 Ovpa 
tod Bwpyot. Paus. 3, 19, 3. We shall meet with similar examples in | 
treating of the sacrifices made to Heroes. This naive sacrificial rite 
regularly presumes the physical presence of the god or “‘spirit’’ in 
the place underground into which the offerings are poured or thrown 
(as in the péyapa of Demeter and Kore, etc.). 

43 The story of Hyakinthos is found in its familiar form in the poets 
of the Hellenistic period and their imitators, Nikander, Bion, Ovid, 
etc.; already Simmias and Euphorion had told it (see Welcker, 
Kl, Sch. i, 24 ff.; and G. Knaack, Anal. Alexandrino-vomana, p. 60 ff.). 
It may even reach back to earlier times; the death of H. caused by 
Apollo’s discus-throw is mentioned by Eur., Hel. 1472 ff., though he 
does not speak of the love of Apollo for H. As the story was generally 
given, and, indeed, as it had already been implicitly told by Nikias, 
it had no local colouring and no importance as local legend. It was 
not evereven an aetiological myth for it could only account in the most 
general way for the melancholy character of the Hyakinthos festival 
and not at all for the peculiar features of its ritual. It is an erotic 
myth leading up to a metamorphosis, like so many others of its 
kind, in substance, it is true, closely related the Linos myth, etc., 
with which it is generally compared—and in accordance with the 
fashionable theory interpreted as an allegory of the spring blossom 
fading beneath the heat ofthesun. Itis, in fact, a regular mythological 
theme (the death through the cast of the discus occurring for example 
in the stories of Akrisios, Kanobos, Krokos (see Haupt, Opusc. iii, 
574 f. In Philo ap. Galen. xiii, 268, read v. 13 ni@éoo, v. 15 perhaps 
keivov 57 otabudv). We cannot tell how far the flower Hyakinthos 
had anything to do with the Amyklaian Hyakinthos (cf. Hemsterhuis, 
Lucian ii, p. 291 Bip.) ; perhaps nothing at all—there were no hyacinths 
used in the Hyakinthia. The similarity of the name may have suggested 
this addition to the metamorphosis story to the Hellenistic poets. 

“4 Certainly not as Apollo’s épdpevos (as which Hauser, Philol. 
52, 218, in spite of the beard, regards the Hyakinthos of the Amyklaian 
altar). Bearded zadica are unthinkable as every reader of the Anth. 
Pal. knows. The most ancient form of the story, as implied in the 
sculpture at Amyklai, neither knows anything of the love of Apollo 
and Hyakinthos nor consequently of the latter’s early death, etc. 

*° The ‘Yaxw6ides at Athens were regarded as the daughters 
(strangely migrated to Athens) of the ‘‘ Lacedaemonian ”” Hyakinthos, 
le. the one buried in Amyklai. See St. Byz. Aovola; Harp. 


NODE Sal On CHAP TE Rat LT 113 


*Yaxw6ides; [Apollod.] 3, 15, 8, 5-6; Hyg. 238 (Phanodemos ap. 
Suid. IZap@évor arbitrarily identifies the ‘YaxwOides with the ‘Yades 
or daughters of Erechtheus. So also [Dem.] 60, 27). This idea implies 
a form of the story in which Hyak. did not die while still a boy or a 
half-grown youth as in the metamorphosis version.—That the figure 
of Hyakinthos on the sculpture at Amyklai had a beard is expressly 
mentioned by Paus. 3, 19, 4, as conflicting with the fresh youthfulness 
of Hyakinthos as Nikias (second half fourth century) with reference 
to the love-story had represented him in his famous picture (apwé7Bnv 
‘Yaxw6ov, Nic., Th. 905). Paus. § 5, expressly raises a doubt as to 
the truth of the traditional fable about H.’s death. 

46 spo THs TOU "AmdAAwvos Gvalas, Paus. 3, 19, 3. More than once 
it is stated that at a particular festival sacrifice to the Hero preceded 
that to the god (cf. Wassner, de heroum ap. Gr. cultu, p. 48 ff.). 
Probably the reason in all such cases is that the cult of the ‘‘ Hero” 
(or god turned Hero) is oldey in that particular spot than the worship 
of the god whose cult had only been adopted there at a later time. 
Thus in Plataea at the Daidalia sacrifice was made to Leto before 
Hera (mpodveoc@a): Plu. ap. Eus., PE. iii, 84 C: there it is quite 
evident that the cult of Hera was adopted later. Perhaps even the 
form of the word ‘Yax.w8os implies that it was the name of an ancient 
deity worshipped already by the pre-Greek inhabitants of the 
Peloponnese. See Kretschmer, Einl. in Gesch. gr. Spr. 402-5. 

47 *Vaxiv0w evayifovaw, Paus. 3, 19, 3. 

48 The second day of the festival was sacred to Apollo and not to 
Hyakinthos: rov dedv ddovow Ath. 139 E. (It has been rightly said 
that this was when the zauavy mentioned by Xen., HG. 4, 5, 11, must 
have been sung.) It is impossible to deny, with Unger, Philol. 37, 
30, the cheerful character of this second day of the festival as described 
by Polykrates ap. Ath. 139 E, F. It is true that Didymus (whose 
words Athenaeus is quoting) begins in a way (139 D) that might 
lead one to suppose that all three days of the r@v ‘YaxuOlwy dvoia dua 
TO mévOos TO yevopevov (yivdpevov ?) mepi tov ‘Yaxuw8ov were passed 
in gloom without festivity, crowns, feasting, or Paean, etc. But he 
refutes himself afterwards in his description of the second day of the 
festival, at which not merely at the performances but at the sacrifice 
and the banquetings festivity reigns supreme. We can only suppose 
that his language at the beginning is inaccurate, and that he means 
what he says of the solemnity of the occasion ‘‘because of the mourning 
for Hyakinthos’”’ to be taken as limited like the mourning itself to 
the first day of the feast. 

49 Hesych. ITodvBoua’ Beds tis bm” eviwy péev “Aprepus, bo b€ dAAwY 
Képyn. Cf. K. O. Miller, Dorians, i, 361 ("Apreyis there probably as 
Hekate). 

50 Another view of the combined worship of Apollo and Hyakinthos 
at Amyklai is taken by Enmann, Kypros, etc., 35. In this as elsewhere 
he relies on certain opinions adopted from H. D. Miiller’s mythological 
writings, which must be approved of in general before they can be 
found enlightening as applied to any particular case. 

51 As happened in the case of Hyakinthos, too, in the scene repre- 
sented on the Amyklaian altar, Paus. 3, 19, though nothing can be 
deduced from this as to his original nature. 

52 The oracular activity of Asklepios plays a subordinate part in 
the usual accounts of him in comparison with his powers of healing. 
But originally they were closely united (as was usually the case with 
earth spirits). Apollodorus 7. 6eév ap. Macrob. 1, 20, 4, puts it dis- 


I 


114 NOTES: ©1O (CHART hears 


tinctly: scribit quod Aesculapius divinationibus et auguriis praesit. 
Celsus calls Asklepios evepyerodyra Kal 7a péAdovta mpor€yorta odAats 
moAcow avaxerpevats éavT@, OF., Cels. iii, 3, pp. 255-6 L. 

53 See Appendix I. bx ar 

64 Cicero quoting the pragmatical “‘ theologi”’ says, NUD. iii, 57, 
Aesculapius (the second one) fulmine percussus dicitur humatus esse 
Cynosuris (the district of Sparta ? From asimilar source come Clem. Al., 
Protr. ii, p. 26 P.; Lyd., Mens. iv, 90, p. 164 Wiinsch) ; of the third 
Askl., Cic. § 57 says: cuius in Arcadia non longe a Lusio flumine 
sepulcrum et lucus ostenditur. Even the temple of Asklepios in 
Epidauros was regarded by many as the place of his grave if we are 
to believe the Clementine Hom. v, 21, Rec. x, 24 (sepulcrum demon- 
stratur in Epidauro Aesculapil). 

55 The chthonic character of Asklepios is shown specially by the fact 
that not only are snakes sacred and dedicated to him but that he 
himself was actually thought of as a snake (cf. Welcker, Gotterl. ii, 
734). ddus, I'js wats (Hdt. i, 78) ; deities who dwell in the earth, and 
afterwards ‘‘ Heroes ”’ (in the later sense), appear in the form of snakes 
as yfdvor. Since such earth-spirits generally have oracular powers 
the snake is an oracular animal; but that is a secondary development. 
The offer of a cock, too (as by Sokrates before his departure to the 
underworld), points to the chthonic character of Ask., for it was a 
sacrifice also made to Heroes. Thus the 7pHa at Athens were frequented 
by the priests of Asklepios (CZA. ii, 453 b); cf. Kohler, Ath. Mitth. 
vol. ii, 245 f. (Sacrificial pit, Bo@pos, for this chthonic worship in the 
Asklepieion at Athens ? see Kohler, ib. 254.) 

56 The connexion between Amphiaraos and Asklepios is shown 
also by the fact that Iaso, one of the allegorical figures attached to 
Asklepios, though generally the daughter of Askl. (e.g. EM. 434, 17 
*Iaow with Sylb.; cf. Herond. iv, 6), was probably also regarded as 
the daughter of Amph.: Sch. Ar., Plut: 701. Hesych. stv. .(hex 
portrait in the temple at Oropos, Paus. 1, 34, 3). So, too, “AAxavdpos 
the son of Trophonios (Charax. ap. Schol. Ar., Nub., 508, p. 500 Bk.) 
seems to be the same as “AAxwv, the Asklepiad daimon whose priest 
Sophokles was. The portraits of Trophonios followed the type of the 
Asklepios statues: Paus. 9, 39, 3-4. Troph. son of Valens (= Ischys) 
and Koronis, and brother of Asklepios: Cic., ND. iii, 56, acc. to the 
theologi. With good reason, considering their intrinsic affinity, 
Trophonios, Amphiaraos, Amphilochos, and the Asklepiadai are men- 
tioned side by side by Aristid. i, p. 78 D. 

5? Sulla counted Amphiaraos a ‘‘god’’ and hence the territory 
belonging to his temple at Oropos was excepted from the lease for the 
collection of taxes granted to the Roman publicani. The Roman 
Senate allowed this to stand, ins. from Oropos ’Ed¢. ’Apx., 1884, 
p. 101 ff.; Hermes, 20, 268 ff.; the publicani had denied immortalis 
esse ullos qui aliquando homines fuissent, Cic., ND. iii, 49. Thus only 
the fact that he was now a god was claimed by the other side—it was 
not denied that he had once been a mortal. Paus. again 8, 2, 4, 
mentions Amph. among the @eoi who éyivovro é€& avOpeémuv; so too 
Varro ap. Serv. A. viii, 275; cf. Apul., D. Soc. 15 fin.; also Philo, 
Leg. ad Gaium, § 78, ii, p. 907 M. 


CHAPTER IV 
HEROES 


§ 1 

When about the year 620 Drakon at Athens for the first 
time collected and committed to writing the customary law 
of his country he also ordained that the gods and the national 
Heroes should be honoured together according to ancestral 
usage.? 

We are thus for the first time introduced to Heroes as beings 
of a higher kind, mentioned side by side with the gods, and 
like them to be worshipped with regularly offered sacrifice. 
Their cult, like that of the gods, is by implication of long 
standing: it does not have to be reorganized, but is merely 
established in the form ancestral ordinances had given it. 
We see at this turning-point of Greek religious development 
how defective our knowledge is of the history of religious 
ideas in primitive Greece. This is our earliest record, and it has 
been preserved to us by a mere accident, but it points back- 
wards and beyond itself to a long previous history in the 
worship of such guardian deities of the country—of which, 
however, we have hardly a scrap of early evidence.? We should 
in fact, from the meagre remains of the literature that is so 
important from this point of view, especially the lyric poetry 
of the seventh and early sixth centuries, hardly have derived 
a suspicion of the existence of this quite un-Homeric element 
in the religious life of Greece. When at last the stream of 
surviving literature begins to flow more broadly, then, indeed, 
the Heroes are often referred to. Pindar’s Hymns of Victory 
and Herodotos’ History cover the generations that lived 
through the Persian wars and the following fifty years. From 
them we can see with overwhelming distinctness how strong 
at that time was the belief in the existence and potency of 
Heroes even among men of education who had not been too 
much influenced by the fashionable enlightenment of the time. 
In the beliefs of the people, in the religious customs of 
countries and cities, the national Heroes have their recognized 
place beside the gods. The representatives of states swear 
by the gods and the Heroes of the country : 4 it is to the gods 
and Heroes of Greece that the pious attribute the victory over 
the Barbarians.® So well established, indeed, was the validity 
of the Greek belief in Heroes that even the Persian magi in 
the army of Xerxes made libation by night in the Troad to 
the Heroes buried there.® 


116 HEROES 
§ 2 


If now we inquire into the nature and essence of this species 
of higher beings that was as yet unknown to, or disregarded 
by, the epic we get little information on the subject from direct 
statements as to their nature by writers of antiquity. We can, 
however, learn a great deal about them from what we are told 
of individual Heroes and more particularly from what we know 
of the peculiar nature of the religious worship paid to them.’ 
The Heroes were worshipped with sacrifice like the gods ; 
but these sacrifices were very different from the offerings that 
were made to the Olympians.® They differ in time, place, and 
character. Sacrifice was made to the gods in broad daylight, 
to Heroes towards evening or at night ; ® and not on raised 
altars, but on low, and sometimes hollow, sacrificial hearths 
close to the ground.!® For them were slain animals of black 
colour and male sex," and in sacrificing, the heads of the 
animals were not turned upwards towards heaven as they 
were when offered to the gods, but were bent down to the 
ground.” The blood of these animals was allowed to run down 
into the ground or into the sacrificial hearth, that the Heroes 
might have their “appeasement of blood ’’.1% The carcass 
was completely burnt, for no living man might taste of it.14 
This peculiar mode of worshipping the Heroes was in strict 
usage described by a different name from that used of the 
sacrifices to the gods.4° On special occasions a sacrificial meal 
of cooked food was prepared, to which the Hero was invited 
as a guest.1® They are near by in the earth itself, and there is 
no need in their case, as for the Olympians, to send up the 
savour of sacrifice in smoke to heaven. 

This sacrificial ritual is in those features which distinguish 
it from that commonly in use for the gods of Olympos precisely 
identical with that by which the gods who dwelt under the 
earth, and, later, even the souls of dead men, were honoured. 
This will seem quite natural if we regard the Heroes as closely 
related to the chthonic deities on the one hand, and to the 
dead on the other. In fact, they are nothing else than the 
spirits of dead men who now dwell beneath the earth, immortal 
like the gods of that underworld, and almost equal to them 
in power. Their real nature as the souls of great men of the 
past, who have died but have not been deprived of conscious 
existence, is made plain by another mode of doing honour 
to them originally belonging to them and them only—I mean 
the yearly repeated celebration of Funeral Games. 

Athletic contests for chieftains at the funeral of a prominent 


HEROES ay 


one of their number were known to Homer, and we have 
already referred to them among other relics in epic poetry 
of a once powerful cult of souls.1?7 But Homer knew nothing 
of their repetition, and certainly not of an annual recurrence 
of such funeral celebrations.1® Games celebrated afresh after 
the lapse of a definite period became known to the Greeks 
only when the cult of Heroes had reached its maturity. Many 
of these contests were connected perpetually with the yearly 
festivals of individual Heroes, and were intended to honour 
their memory.?® [Even in historical times, generally on the 
command of the Delphic oracle, annual contests were 
instituted in honour of Heroes.?° It was the mode of worship 
proper to Heroes, and men realized that in holding such 
contests they were really repeating the funeral ceremonies of 
a dead man.” The cult of Heroes was the earliest breeding 
ground of the Agon, that most characteristic feature of Greek 
life and school of the individualism that made the greatness 
of Greece. It was not unreasonable that afterwards many of 
the victors at the great Agdénes were themselves raised by 
popular superstition to the number of the Heroes. The greatest 
Games of all, to which all Greece assembled, the Pythian, 
Olympian, Nemean, and Isthmian, were during the historical 
period, it is true, celebrated in honour of gods; but that they 
had been originally instituted as Funeral Games of Heroes and 
only subsequently transferred to higher guardianship was, at 
any rate, the general opinion of antiquity.” 


§ 3 

The Heroes are, then, spirits of the dead, and not a species 
of inferior deities or “‘ demigods ”’ ; 2? and quite distinct again 
from the “‘daimones’”’ known to Jater speculative thought and, 
indeed, to popular superstition. These latter are divine spirits 
of a lower order ; but spirits which have always been exempt 
from death because they have never entered into the finite 
existence of men. The Heroes on the other hand have once 
been living men; from being men they have become Heroes, 
and that only after their death.?4 Furthermore, they have now 
entered upon a higher stage of existence as a special class of 
beings who are named by the side of gods and men.”®> In them 
we meet with something quite unknown to the Homeric 
poems—souls which after their death and separation from 
the body have a higher imperishable life. 

But though the Heroes have once been men, it does not 
follow that all men become Heroes after their death. On the 
contrary, the Heroes, even though their number was not fixed 


118 HEROES 


and limited, but continually admitted additions, remained an 
exception, a select minority which for that reason alone can be 
contrasted with ordinary humanity. The chief figures, the 
outstanding representatives of this heroic company, we may 
say, were those whose lifetime was fixed by legend or history 
in the distant past—who were in fact the ancestors of later 
humanity. The worship of Heroes is not, then, a cult of souls, 
but in a narrower sense a cult of ancestors. Even their name, 
as it appears, distinguishes the Heroes as men of the past. In 
the Iliad and the Odyssey “‘ Hero ”’ is the honourable title of 
chieftains, and also, generally, of all free men.?® Poetry of later 
centuries, so far as it touched upon the events of the legendary 
past, continued to use the word “ Hero” in this sense. But 
when in post-Homeric times the speaker, whether he is a 
poet or prose-writer, regards the matter from the point of 
view of contemporary life, then by “‘ Hero”’, if he is referring 
toa man at all, he means a man of those days when, according 
to the Homeric poems, this honourable title was still in use 
among living men—he refers in a word to men belonging to 
the legendary fast celebrated in poetry.2” In Hesiod’s 
narrative of the Five Ages of Men, the use of the word Hero is 
confined to the Champions of the wars at Thebes and Troy ; 
they are called, as though by their special name, the “ divine 
race of Heroes ’’.28 For Hesiod the “ Heroes”’ are by no means 
the transfigured dead of past generations.” He knows well 
enough of such transfigured dead of a still earlier past, but 
these he calls “‘ Daimones ’’’. And so, too, when in after times 
the name of Hero is applied to these favoured individuals who 
enjoy a higher life after their death, the name which in 
itself did not imply the higher nature of such departed spirits 
is evidently intended to show that the lifetime of those who had 
received this privilege after their death occurred in a legendary 
past. As these men of the distant past had been ‘‘ Heroes ”’ 
during their life, so, too, they must be called after their death. 
But the meaning of the word Hero has undergone a change, 
and now contains the additional notion of unending trans- 
figured existence. The worship of the Heroes reveals itself 
as something quite new, a form of religious belief and cult, 
of which the Homeric poems at least gave no inkling. And, 
indeed, the conception of such transfigured ancestral souls 
living on in a higher state must have been a novel one, if no 
special word of ancient coinage could be found to express it, 
and a long-standing word of the epic vocabulary had to be 
pressed into a new sense. 

Whence came this new thing ? If we try to derive it from 


HEROES 119 


a natural process of development in the Homeric view of life 
we shall find ourselves in the greatest perplexity when it comes 
to showing the connecting links between two such widely 
different conceptions. It would not avail us much to say that 
the prestige of the epic was such that those whom it had 
honoured in song must have appeared so glorious and 
distinguished among mankind that it was natural for later 
imagination to transform them to demigods and to worship 
them as such. The Homeric poems, so violently opposed to 
any idea of a conscious or active existence of the soul after 
death, could hardly have brought it about that those very 
champions whom it had represented as indeed dead and 
departed to the distant land of Hades should be regarded as 
still living and exercising an influence from out their graves. 
Moreover, it is in the highest degree improbable that in 
the process of historical development it should have been 
just the champions of the epic from whose worship the cult 
of Heroes arose; for in cult, at any rate, with negligible 
exceptions, those champions played little part. And, indeed, 
that any cult at all should have arisen from the mere 
suggestions of fancy, such as the epic offered, is in itself 
unlikely. And it is essentially upon a religious cult that the 
belief in Heroes is founded. 

In fact after all that has been hitherto shown, what we see 
most plainly is the contrast between the belief in Heroes and 
Homeric conceptions. The fanciful thought of the translation 
of individuals to Islands of the Blest or the underground 
dwellings did not itself conflict with the implications of 
Homeric eschatology. The miraculous preservation in an 
immortal existence of men whom the gods loved did not 
involve the separation of soul from body, nor the consequence 
of that separation—the dim borderland existence of the dis- 
embodied soul. But the belief in Heroes was a different 
matter ; that involved the continuation of a conscious mode 
of being, in the neighbourhood of the living, after death, and 
in spite of the separation of soul from body. This directly 
contradicts Homeric psychology. We should have to give up 
the attempt altogether to bring this new belief into any real 
relationship with earlier development—if we could not draw 
upon what we have learnt from our previous investigations. 
In the Homeric poems themselves, in striking contrast with 
the general conception there prevailing of the insubstantiality 
of the disembodied soul, we found vestiges of a once-vigorous - 
cult of the soul which implied the existence of a corresponding 
belief in the conscious after-life of the soul and its lingering 


120 HEROES 


in the neighbourhood of the living. From the study of Hesiod’s 
picture of the Five Ages of Men, we saw that, in fact, vestiges 
of an ancient belief in the continued and enhanced existence 
of dead men, of which no clear trace remained in Homer, 
had been preserved at least in occasional remote corners of the 
Greek countryside. But it was only the dead of a legendary 
past who were regarded by Hesiod as “‘ Daimones ”’ : the poet 
could relate no similar marvels from more recent periods, and 
still less of men in his own lifetime. Thus, we have in this case 
traces of ancestor-worship indeed, but not of a general worship 
of souls that is elsewhere the normal development of the 
worship of ancestors. So, then, in the worship of Heroes, 
what we have before us is not a general cult of the soul but 
a cult of ancestors. We may express the matter in this way: 
in the cult of the ‘‘ Hero” a still burning spark of ancient 
belief is kindled to renewed flame—it is not the appearance of 
something entirely strange and new, but something long 
past and half-forgotten is awakened to new life. Those 
Daimones which arose from the men of the earlier golden and 
silver ages—whom the poet of the ‘‘ Works and Days” had 
situated in the dimmest and remotest past—what are they 
but the “‘ Heroes’ worshipped by later ages under a new 
name and brought down nearer to the period of con- 
temporary life ? 


§ 4 


How it came about that the cult of ancestors was rescued 
from partial, and more than partial, oblivion, and rose to a new 
and lasting importance, that, indeed, we cannot say. We can 
give no real explanation indicative of the origin and progress 
of this important development in Greek religious life. We know 
neither the time nor the place of the first serious revival of 
this newly awakened primitive worship ; nor can we tell the 
manner or stages of its diffusion during those obscure years of 
the eighth and seventh centuries. We can, however, bring the 
fact of the revival of ancestor-worship into relation with a 
number of other facts which prove that during those years 
many hitherto buried or repressed ideas about the life of gods 
and men came to the surface again out of the depths of popular 
faith and out of an older worship of the gods that had never 
quite died out. This revival did not, indeed, suppress the 
Homeric view entirely—that never occurred—but it did set 
itself on a level with that view. The great movement with 
which we shall be dealing in the next chapter also contributed 
to the progress of the belief in Heroes. Many other favouring 


HEROES 12d 


circumstances may in detail have helped to strengthen that 
belief. Even the epic itself had in one point at least approached 
the ideas that were receiving a new life in the worship of 
Heroes. Many of the local gods who had faded before the new 
deities of common Hellenic belief had been reduced to the 
rank of humanity and joined in heroic adventure. By a sort 
of compromise effected with the local cult of such gods the 
epic poets had been led, in a few cases, to the creation of a 
remarkable series of figures in which the divine and the human 
was wonderfully mixed. These champions and seers of old 
time, as they had once been mortal men among other men, 
so now after their departure must they live on and have 
influence eternally like the gods. We can easily see the close 
resemblance that exists between such figures as Amphiaraos 
or Trophonios and the Heroes of later belief; in fact, both 
of them, when they were not called gods, were frequently 
reckoned among these Heroes. But for all that, they are only 
guasi-Heroes ; prototypes of the real Heroes they can never have 
been. They have been translated during their lifetime, and 
live on immortally just because they have never tasted death. 
They, with those others translated to the Islands of the 
Blest, represent the idea of immortality in the only form 
recognized by the Homeric poetry. The Heroes of the newly 
awakening creed, on the contrary, have died unmistakably ; 
and yet they continue to live on, though relieved of their bodies. 
They are entirely distinct from the translated few of the epic 
tradition. They emerge out of the obscurity of the half- 
remembered past as something strange—as something, 
indeed, opposed to the circle of ideas influenced by the epic. 
It was not from poetic imagination or story that the Heroes 
took their origin, but from the remains of an ancient pre- 
Homeric belief which local worship had preserved alive. 


§ 5 

The worship of a Hero is everywhere connected with the site 
of his grave. That is the general rule proved in innumerable 
cases. That is why in the case of a more than ordinarily 
revered Hero, his grave as the centre of his worship is set up 
in some prominent and honourable place—the market-place 
of the city, the Prytaneion,®° or, like the grave of Pelops in 
the Altis at Olympia, in the very middle of the holy precinct, 
in the thick of the festival crowd.! Or else the Hero who 
guarded the city and the land might have his grave in the wall 
of the city gate or upon the farthest border of its territory.** 
Where his grave is, there the Hero is fast bound; that is his 


122 HEROES 


dwelling-place.*3 This idea prevails everywhere, though it may 
not be given such blunt expression as at Tronis, in the country 
of the Phocians, where the blood of the offering made to the 
Hero was poured down through an opening immediately into 
his grave mound.** It is implied, as a rule, in these cases that 
the grave contains the bones of the Hero. The bones—all that 
is left of his mortality—chain the Hero to his grave. Hence, 
when it was thought desirable to attach a Hero and his 
protective power to a city his bones (or what were taken for 
such) on the command of an oracle were brought from a foreign 
land and laid to rest in his native country. We possess many 
accounts of such transference of relics.3° Most of them occurred 
in the distant past, but we also read how in the full light of 
history in the year 476 enlightened Athens brought over the 
bones of Theseus from Skyros ; 36 and not until they were 
buried in the Theseion was Theseus properly attached to 
Athens. 

Since the possession of the corporeal remains 3” of the Hero 
secured the possession of the Hero himself, the cities often 
protected themselves against strangers, who might remove the 
treasured bones, by keeping the position of the grave a 
secret.28 A grave is always necessary to fix the Hero at a 
definite place, or, at least, an ““empty tomb’”’, which some- 
times had to do duty for a grave.3® In such cases the Hero was 
perhaps thought of as bound by a spell to that place.4® As 
a rule, it is the remains of his former body that hold him fast. 
But these remains are a part of the Hero himself; though 
dead (and mummified, as we are told in one case),4#4 he works 
and acts just the same; his psyche, his invisible counterpart 
and double, hovers in the neighbourhood of the body and 
the grave. 

These are all very primitive conceptions such as have, as a 
rule, only been preserved among peoples who have remained 
at a very undeveloped stage of culture.42 When we find them 
in force among Greeks of post-Homeric times, we cannot 
really believe that they arose then for the first time, in com- 
plete contrast with the clear-sighted freedom of the men of the 
Homericage. They have only re-emerged from the repressive 
influence of the Homeric rationalism. It would be natural to 
think that the same ideas that have been described as under- 
lying the belief in Heroes were already in the minds of those 
prehistoric Greeks who in Mycenae and elsewhere took such 
care (even it seems going so far as to embalm them)‘3 
to preserve the bodies of their princes from destruction, and 
who put ornaments and utensils in their graves for future use 


HEROES 125 


or enjoyment. It has been explained above how, in the times 
of which Homer’s poems give us a picture, the alteration in 
sentiment as well as the spread of the custom of completely 
destroying the bodies of the dead with fire must have 
weakened the belief in the confinement of the soul to this world 
and to the remains of the body. This belief never entirely 
perished. It was preserved alive, perhaps for a long time only 
by a few, in those places where there remained a cult attached 
to a grave. Such a cult would not, indeed, extend to those 
whose death had occurred within more recent times, but it 
did not allow the old-established worship of the great dead of 
the past to die out entirely. Over the royal graves on the 
citadel at Mycenae stood a sacrificial hearth,44 which bears 
witness to the continuance of the ancient worship of the 
kings buried there. The Catalogue of Ships in Homer mentions 
the “grave of Aipytos’’, an old Arcadian local monarch, 
as a landmark of the district ; * may not the sanctity of that 
grave have been preserved? In many places, at any rate, 
graves were pointed out and honoured that belonged to Heroes 
who owed their existence solely to poetic fancy or were 
even mere personifications—abstractions of the names of 
places and countries whose ancestors they purported to be. 
In such cases the Hero-worship had become purely symbolic, 
and often perhaps a mere formality. But from such a fictitious 
ancestor-worship the cult of the graves of Heroes cannot 
possibly have arisen; such fictions are themselves only 
intelligible as copies of another and more vivid worship, of 
a cult of real ancestors. If no such cult had existed in actual 
fact before men’s eyes, it would be impossible to understand 
how men came to imitate ancestor-worship in the shape of such 
purely imaginary creatures. A copy implies the existence of 
a model; a symbol requires the contemporary or earlier 
existence of the reality symbolized. We should certainly 
know more of the worship of ancestors among the ancient royal 
families if in nearly all the Greek states monarchy had not 
been abolished at an early period and all traces of it 
suppressed. Sparta alone provides us with a solitary example 
of what may once have been the prevailing custom in all the 
seats of royal authority. When a Spartan king died his 
funeral was celebrated with extreme pomp. His _ body 
(which, even when he had died abroad, was embalmed and 
brought home to Sparta) was laid beside the other dead of his 
family, and honour was paid to him, in Xenophon’s words, not 
as a man, but as a Hervo.4® In this case, which undoubtedly 
represents a traditional usage handed down from remote 


124 HEROES 


antiquity, we have the rudiments of Hero-worship as applied 
to the dead of a royal family. The members of noble families 
who, like the Eupatridai of Athens, sometimes traced their 
descent from a king,4” must also have retained from ancient 
times the practice of ancestor-worship. As of all unofficial 
cults, we hear little of the cults of the old clans based on blood- 
relationship and connexion by marriage (yévy, aézpar). 
But just as out of their combination first the village com- 
munities and then the fully organized Greek Polis grew up, 
so, too, the religious cults which were paid to the ancestors 
of these unions of kinsfolk set a pattern for the manifold social 
groups out of which the developed state was built up.* 


§ 6 

The “‘clans”’ that we meet with at Athens and in other 
Greek states are, as a rule, groups for which a demonstrable 
common kinship is no longer a condition of membership. 
The majority of such politically recognized, self-contained 
clans assemble together for the common worship of particular 
gods but many also honour a Hero as well, who generally in 
such cases gives his name to the clan. Thus, the Eteoboutadai 
at Athens paid honour to Boutes, the Alkmaionidai to 
Alkmaion, the Bouzygai to Bouzyges, in Sparta and Argos 
Talthybios was worshipped by the Talthybiadai, etc. And in 
these cases, as the name of the clan itself shows, the Hero of 
their common worship was regarded as the ancestor of the 
clan.49 Further, this ancestor-worship and the name derived 
from a common, even if fictitious, ancestor, distinguished the 
clans from the cult-associations of a different origin which 
since the time of Kleisthenes had been put on a footing of 
legal equality with the clans in the phratries. The members 
of these associations (Orgeones) lacked a common name, 
the existence of which, therefore, indicated in the case of 
the members of a clan a closer bond of union than mere 
membership of a religious association which had been chosen 
at will, and was not decided by the fact of birth. 

Everywhere these clans kept up the outward formalities 
of ancestor-worship ; and the formality must once have had 
meaning. However the publicly recognized clans may have 
developed their own special characteristics, in their origin, 
at least, they must go back (like the Roman gentes) to 
associations of kinsfolk developed from the family (extended 
through the maleline) and held together bya real bond of kinship. 
Even the purely symbolical ancestor-worship of the later 
“clans ’’, of which hardly a single one could have shown the 


HEROES 125 


pedigree of its descent from the reputed common ancestor, 
must have arisen from the real ancestor-worship of genuine 
groups of kinsfolk. The imitation in this case, too, points to 
the existence at some time of an original. 

In the same way the larger groups into which the Athenian 
state since the time of Kleisthenes was divided were unable 
to dispense with the practice of association for the cult of a 
commonly worshipped Hero. The Heroes of the newly organized 
phyla *® had their temple, land, priests, statues, and regular 
cult ; and so also had the Heroes of the smaller purely local 
divisions, the demes. Here, too, the fiction of ancestor-worship 
was kept up; the names of the phylai, always patronymic 
in form, represent the members of each phyle as the 
descendants of the Hero Eponymos or Archegetes of the 
phyle.®! The demes also in many cases have patronymic titles 
which for the most part are also known to us as the names of 
aristocratic families.°* It is evident that in such demes the 
members of individual aristocratic families had settled down 
together or near each other. The Archegetes, whether real or 
fictitious, of the family must then have been regarded as the 
Archegetes of the deme. We thus see how the cult of a family 
ancestor, taken over by a wider group of worshippers, might 
be preserved and extended—little as the cult might benefit 
in sincerity by such political enlargement. 

The cult of Heroes everywhere has the same features as 
the cult of ancestors; at least, the more influential Heroes, 
those worshipped by the greater communities, were every- 
where regarded as the forefathers and progenitors of the 
groups of countryfolk, citizens, or kinsmen who honoured 
them. The fact that the persons of these prehistoric Heroes 
owed their existence almost without exception solely to poetry 
or fancy allows us to conclude that at the time when ancestor- 
worship had its re-birth in Hero-worship, the memory of the real 
Archegetai of the country, the ancestors of the ruling families 
and clans, together with their cult, had fallen into oblivion. 
A great or illustrious name was introduced where the real 
name was no longer known. More often, even when the real 
forefather of the clan was still well known, the name of a great 
man of the primeval past was placed at the head of the list in 
order to throw the origin of the family as far back into the 
past as possible and connect it the more closely with a divine 
source.°? Men thus came to worship a phantom, often a mere 
symbol, of an ancestor. But they held fast to the imitation 
of real ancestor-worship ; the remains of a true cult of 
ancestors provided the model and were the real starting- 
point for the later belief and cult of Heroes. 


126 HEROES 
§ 7 


We can no longer follow in detail the process of development 
and extension which the idea of the Hero underwent. The 
accounts which we possess show us the fully developed product, 
not the steps which led up to this result. We first get an idea 
of the number of Hero-cults existing in Greece during the 
greatest period of its history from the enormous number of 
graves or cults of Heroes mentioned by Pausanias in the 
account of his travels in the age of the Antonines over the 
most important countries of the Greece that was now fast 
falling into decay. Nearly all the legendary figures celebrated 
in epic poetry were now worshipped as Heroes, whether in 
their own homes (as Achilles in Thessaly, Aias at Salamis, etc.) 
or in other places that either claimed to possess their graves 
(as the Delphians did that of Neoptolemos, the people of 
Sybaris that of Philoktetes, etc.) or else, through the 
genealogical relationship of their leading families with the 
Heroes, regarded themselves as closely connected with them 
(as, for example, the Athenians with Aias and his sons). Inthe 
colonies especially the Hero-cults, like the ingredients of the 
population, may have been a motley crew ; thus, in Tarentum 
the Atreidai, the Tydidai, the Aiakidai, the Laertiadai, and 
especially the Agamemnonidai were worshipped in a combined 
Hero-cult, and Achilles also had a temple of his own.54 

There were Heroes with famous names who may yet have 
owed their subsequent elevation to that position, during the 
times of the greatest extent of the cult, in part to their fame in 
ancient poetry. Side by side with these were a host of obscurer 
figures whose memory had been kept alive by their cult alone, 
which a small circle of country or city folk had paid to them 
from primitive times. These are the real ‘“‘ national Heroes ’’, 
of whose worship Drakon had spoken ; as true forebears and 
real ancestors of their country they, too, are called 
‘’ Archegetai’’.°> We are told the names of the seven 
Archegetai of Plataea to whom Aristeides was commanded by 
the Delphic oracle to sacrifice before the battle of Plataea ; 
not one of them is ever heard of again.5* It might happen that 
the name of a Hero to whom worship had been paid from time 
immemorial might no longer be known even to the dwellers 
near his grave. In the market at Elis there stood a little 
temple whose roof was supported on wooden pillars: men 
knew that this was the chapel belonging to a grave, but no one 
could give the name of the Hero buried there.5? In the market 

at Herakleia on the Black Sea was a monument of a Hero over- 


HEROES 127 


shadowed by wild olive-trees ; it contained the body of that 
Hero whom once the Delphian oracle had bidden the founders 
of Herakleia to placate. The learned differed as to his name ; 
the inhabitants of Herakleia called him simply “ the local 
Hero ’’.58 In the Hippodrome at Olympia stood a round altar 
at which the chariot horses used to shy. It was disputed what 
Hero lay buried there, but the people called him, after the 
effect he had on the horses, simply Taraxippos.” Inthe same 
way many Heroes, instead of being called by their real names, 
were more often referred to by adjectives which recalled their 
nature or their power or some external detail of their 
appearance.*® At Athens there was a Hero Physician, a 
Hero General, and a Hero Garland-bearer.*4 Many a Hero 
may have been known to the neighbourhood which worshipped 
him simply as “the Hero’’.® In such cases it was entirely due 
to the grave and the cult attached to the grave that the 
Hero’s memory had been preserved at all. There might, indeed, 
be stories current as to his doings and nature as a “‘spirit’’, 
but what it was that had marked him out in his lifetime and 
caused his elevation to a Hero was totally forgotten. 
Undoubtedly these are precisely the oldest Hero-cults. In 
the instances quoted from Elis, Herakleia and Olympia, first 
one and then another of the famous champions of antiquity 
were supposed to be buried under that nameless gravestone. 
But, often enough, the doubt was suppressed, and by an 
arbitrary and successful imposition some famous name out 
of the heroic legend may have been substituted as occupant 
of such ownerless or unclaimed grave sanctuaries. 


§ 8 

As a rule there was no difficulty in securing great or famous 
names when it was necessary to find a patron-Hero for the city. 
In particular the founder of the city and its regular worship of 
_ the gods, and the whole divine circle which hedged round the 
life of the citizens, was regularly worshipped with high 
honour as Hero Archegetes.®% Naturally, they were mostly 
mythical or even arbitrarily invented figures to whom the 
greater or lesser cities of Greece, as well as their offshoots 
in foreign lands, did honour as their “ Founder ’’. 

But from the times when colonies were frequently dispatched 
and laid out in accordance with a carefully thought-out plan, 
under the leadership of a single person (generally named by 
an oracle) who was given plenipotentiary powers,®* this real 
Ovkistes was himself usually promoted after his death to the 
rank of Hero. Pindar speaks of the sacred grave of the Hero- 


128 HEROES 


founder of Kyrene in the marketplace of the city; ® the 
inhabitants of the Thracian Chersonnese made sacrifices to 
Miltiades the son of Kypselos as their Oikistes, “as the 
custom is,” and held games annually in his honour ; ®® at 
Katana, in Sicily, Hieron of Syracuse was buried, and was 
worshipped with the honours of a Hero as the Founder of the 
city.67 At Abdera the Teians on the occasion of the second 
founding of the city restored to his position of Hero its original 
founder Timesios.®® On the other hand, the original and real 
Oikistes of a colony might be deprived of his worship if the 
inhabitants quarrelled with the mother country, and another 
“Founder ”’ chosen after the event and given the highest 
honours of a Heroin his place. This was what happened in the 
year 422 with Hagnon and Brasidas in Amphipolis.®® 

In these cases Hero-making leaves the sacred mists of 
antiquity and enters the hght of the contemporary world : 
faith and cult become profaned by political motives. The name 
of Hero, once applied only to the glorified figures of the far 
distant past, now that such Heroizing of the recent dead 
was possible, must have begun to have the more general 
meaning of one who has come to enjoy a higher nature and 
enlarged capacities after his death. In fact, any kind of 
prominence during a man’s lifetime seems at last to have 
given him a virtual claim to heroic honours after his death. 
As Heroes are now regarded, great kings such as Gelon of 
Syracuse, law-givers such as Lykourgos of Sparta,” and even 
representatives of poetic genius from Homer down to Aeschylus 
and Sophokles,”! no less than the most famous victors in the 
contests of bodily skill and strength. One of the Olympic 
victors, Philippos of Kroton, was reputed to be the most 
beautiful man in Greece of his time. Over his grave the people 
of Egesta, so Herodotos (v, 47) tells us, erected a Hero’s 
temple and paid honour to him with sacrifice as to a Hero 
merely on account of his great personal beauty. 

Still, religious or superstitious motives were not always 
absent. They were particularly to the fore in the numerous 
cases where the extent and importance of the world of Heroes 
were added to on the recommendation of the Delphic oracle. 
Ever since the Delphic priesthood had risen from its obscure 
beginnings to a recognized position as the supreme authority 
in all questions of spiritual right, the opinion of the oracle 
had been sought on all occurrences that seemed to have any 
connexion with the unseen world. Especially in the case of 
prolonged drought or infertility of the soil, or when pestilential 
sicknesses had attacked a part of the country, was the oracle 


HEROES 129 


requested to state the origin of the misfortune. In many cases & 


the answer of the oracle would be that the origin of the evil 
lay in the anger of a Hero who was to be placated by sacrifice 
and the foundation of a permanent worship; or it would 
command that the plague should be averted by the recovery 
of the bones of a Hero from a foreign land, which should then 
be preserved at home and be the object of an official cult.” 
Innumerable cults had their origin in this way, nor do the 
examples all belong to a half-legendary past. When pestilence 
and dearth broke out in the island of Cyprus after the death 
of Kimon, the oracle bade the inhabitants of Kition “ not to 
slight *’ Kimon, but to regard him as a “ higher ”’ being, Le. 
do him honour as a Hero.7* So, too, when some one possessed 
by special religious scruples inquired the cause of a strange 
vision that he had had, or of the remarkable appearance of 
the body of one lately dead,’* the oracle would often trace the 
matter to the action of a Hero who must forthwith be given 
an official cult. When a serious undertaking lay before a state, 
whether it was the invasion of a foreign land or a decisive 
battle in war, the oracle would bid the inquirers first placate 
the Heroes of the country that was to be attacked or where the 
battle was to be fought.”° Sometimes the oracle of its own 
accord, without being applied to, commanded the honours of 
a Hero to be paid to a dead man.”® 

A peculiar case is that of Kleomedes of Astypalaia. This man 
had at the 71st Olympic festival (486) killed his opponent in 
the boxing match. He was disqualified by the Hellanodikai 
from taking his crown and returned home to Astypalaia full 
of indignation. There he tore down the pillar which supported 
the roof of a boys’ school, and on the destruction of the boys 
fled to Athene’s temple where he hid himself in a chest. His 
pursuers vainly sought to open the lid of the chest and at last 
the chest itself had to be broken into by main force. But 
Kleomedes was not found inside, either alive or dead. The 
envoys sent to inquire of the oracle were informed that 
Kleomedes had become a Hero, and that he must be honoured 
with sacrifice since he was no longer a mortal.”?”?_ And so the 
inhabitants of Astypalaia paid honour to Kleomedes asa Hero. 
In this case the simple conception of a Hero as one raised to 
divine power after his death is united with the ancient belief, 
which had never quite died out since the great days of the epic, 
in the tvanslation of individual mortals who without dying 
disappear from sight to enter immortal life with body and 
soul complete. Such a miracle seemed to have occurred once 
again in the case of Kleomedes. He had “‘ disappeared ”’ and 


K 


130 HEROES 


been “‘ carried away ’’.78 He could, however, only be called 
a ‘“ Hero’ because there was no common name to describe 
the effect of translation which made men no longer mortals 
nor yet gods. The oracle called Kleomedes “ the last of the 
Heroes’; indeed, it might well appear time to close at last 
the already over-lengthy list of “‘ Heroes”. The Delphic 
oracle 7° had itself contributed largely to their increase, and 
with full intent ; nor did it observe for long its own decision 
to make an end now.®° 

It is easy to understand the reasons for the universal 
acceptance among the Greeks of the unquestioned authority 
of the oracle in all matters connected with the Heroes. The god 
does not invent new Heroes or add to the number of local 
divinities at his own caprice or by the exercise of his own 
authority. He merely sees them where human eyes are not 
clear-sighted enough. He, the all-seeing, recognizes them as 
one spirit does another, and is able to see them at work when 
men only feel the results of their activity. Thus, he enables 
inquirers to be rid of their difficulties, to understand super- 
natural occurrences by the recognition and worship of invisible 
powers. For the believer he is in this, as in all other directions 
of religious life, ‘“‘ the true Expositor ’’.81 He only points out 
what already exists; he does not invent anything new, 
though the information that he gives may be something quite 
new to men. We, indeed, may be permitted to inquire what 
motive the shrewd Delphic priesthood may have had in the 
creation or renewal of so many Hero-cults. There is very 
evident method in their promotion of the belief in Heroes, as 
there is in all the activities of the oracle in religious and 
political matters. Was it ecclesiastical policy that made the 
priests of Delphi, in this as so many other cases, search out 
and multiply to the greatest possible extent the objects of 
belief and cult ? The more widespread and the more deeply 
ingrained was the uneasy dread of an invisible all-powerful 
spirit-world, the greater became the authority of the oracle 
that alone could give guidance in this confused turmoil of 
ghostly activities. Superstition had achieved a power that the 
Homeric age never knew, and it cannot be denied that the 
oracle encouraged this deisidaimonia and did its best to 
increase it. Still, the priests of the oracle themselves were 
undoubtedly subject to the beliefs of their age; at any rate, 
they shared the belief in Heroes. They would think it quite 
natural, when faced by anxious inquiries as to the cause of 
disease or dearth, to confirm the half-expressed attribution of 
the evil to the action of an angry Hero. They had rather 


HEROES 131 


to give their sanction to what was already anticipated than 
invent something new. They only applied to the particular 
case (with free scope in the invention of details) what the 
popular belief of the times had already settled in principle. 
But what it all meant was that the oracle took under its 
protection everything that could promote and strengthen the 
cult of souls; and in so far as it is possible to speak of a 
“ Theology of Delphi’’, the popular belief in the survival 
of the soul after death and the cult of the disembodied 
soul formed two of the most important articles in its 
creed. We shall have more to say on this subject hereafter. 
In any case, if the priests lived in the atmosphere of such 
ideas, it was natural for them in times of need and stress, 
when strange things happened, to regard as the author of the 
disturbance some dead legendary Hero’s ghost or even a 
powerful spirit of more recent times, and to direct the faithful 
accordingly. Thus, the Delphic god became the patron of the 
cult of Heroes, just as he was a patron of the Heroes them- 
selves, and invited them every year at the Theoxenta to a meal 
in his own temple. *® 


§ 9 

Thus encouraged on all sides, Hero-worship began to 
multiply the objects of the cult beyond all counting. The 
great wars of freedom against the Persians had aroused the 
deepest and most religious feelings of the Greeks, and it did 
not seem too much when whole companies of those who had 
fallen for freedom were raised to the rank of Hero. Thus, even 
into a very late period, the solemn procession every year to 
honour the Greeks who had been left on the field of Plataea 
was never omitted ; and at the sacrifice the archon of the city 
called upon the “ brave men who had laid down their lives 
for Greece’ and invited them to a meal and satisfaction of 
blood.8* At Marathon, also, those who had once fallen in battle 
and been buried there were worshipped as Heroes.** 

Out of the enormous multitude of those who had thus 
become Heroes an aristocracy of Heroes of a higher rank came 
to be formed, chiefly composed of those who had been 
honoured in legend and poetry from the earliest times and had 
acquired fame all over Greece. Examples of these are those 
whom Pindar ® in one place names together : the descendants 
of Oineus in Aetolia, Iolaos in Thebes, Perseus in Argos, the 
Dioscuri in Sparta, the many-branched heroic family of the 
Aiakidai in Aegina, Salamis, and many other places. Indeed, 
a brighter lustre seemed to illumine some of the greater Heroes 


132 HEROES 


and to distinguish them almost in kind from the rest of their 
fellows. Thus, Herakles was now elevated to the gods, 
though Homer did not even know him as a “ Hero” in the later 
sense, and though in many places he was still worshipped as 
a Hero.8* Asklepios is sometimes a Hero and sometimes a god, 
as he had been originally.” Then many other Heroes began 
to receive sacrifice as gods,®8 not without the assistance of the 
Delphic oracle, which in the case of Lykourgos, at least, seems 
itself to have given the lead in the elevation of that Hero.” The 
boundary line between the Hero and the god seems to become 
more and more uncertain; sometimes a Hero of the narrowest 
local observance is called a “ god ’’,9° without our having any 
reason for thinking of a formal elevation to divine honour in 
his case or any corresponding alteration of ritual. The title 
of Hero seemed already to have lost some of its value, though 
the time had not yet come when to name a dead man as Hero 
hardly distinguished him at all from all the other dead. 


§ 10 


However much the meaning attached to the name of 
Hero may have widened or even deteriorated, the belief in 
the Heroes lost none of its significance and long retained its 
hold on the people. The belief in such a class of spirits stood 
almost on a par with the belief in gods. If the circle of influence 
possessed by some particular local-Hero was narrow and 
restricted, that only made him seem all the nearer to his 
worshippers. The spirits of their ancestors, their own and the 
country’s peculiar possession and shared with no one else, seemed 
more intimately theirs than other invisible powers even of 
higher rank. Permanent as the gods themselves, such Heroes 
were honoured as hardly second to the gods, “ though they 
cannot equal them in might.’* ‘Not equal ’’—for their 
efficacy was confined within bounds ; it did not reach beyond 
the limits of their home and the little band of their worshippers. 
They were bound to the soil as the Olympian gods no longer 
were--(a Hero who breaks free from local limitations soon. 
achieves divinity). In particular those Heroes who send up, 
from beneath the earth where they dwell, relief in sickness or 
prevision of the future are certainly bound to one spot. Only 
at their graves can such assistance be expected, for that is 
their dwelling-place. In their case the relationship between 
the belief in Heroes and the belief in those subterranean deities, 
of whom something was said in the previous chapter, is 
peculiarly plain. Indeed, in so far as their influence is limited 


HEROES 133 


to a single locality and their powers concerned especially with 
tatromantic manifestations, these two classes of spirits 
essentially coincide. 

Such relief in sickness was expected, not only from Asklepios 
himself, but from the Asklepiadai, Machaon—who had a 
grave and temple at Gerenia on the coast of Laconia—and 
Podaleirios. The latter was buried in Apulia, near Mount 
Garganus. In his herodn those who sought his aid laid them- 
selves down to sleep on the skin of the ram that had been 
previously sacrificed. In sleep they received other revelations 
from the Hero besides remedies for the ailments of man and 
beast.92 Machaon’s son, too, Polemokrates, healed sicknesses 
in his temple of Eua in Argolis.9% In Attica there was a 
Heros Iatros in the city whose efficacy in curing disease was 
witnessed to by innumerable silver ex voto facsimiles of various 
parts of the body restored to health by him.** Another Hero 
Iatros, whose name is given as Aristomachos, had an oracle 
of healing at Marathon.®® Healing of disease was rarely 
attributed to any other than these Asklepiad Heroes. Dream- 
revelations of other kinds, however, were vouchsafed from their 
graves especially by those Heroes who had been seers also in 
their lifetime, such as Mopsos and Amphilochos at Mallos 
in Cilicia, Amphilochos, again, in Akarnania, Teiresias at 
Orchomenos, Kalchas in Apulia near the just-mentioned 
herodn of Podaleirios.°® Besides these Odysseus, too, had a 
dream-oracle among the Eurytanes in Aetolia,®’ Protesilaos 
one at his grave-monument at Elaious in the Thracian 
Chersonnese,®& Sarpedon in Cilicia and another (alleged) in 
the Troad,°® Menestheus, the Athenian leader, far away in 
Spain,?°° Autolykos in Sinope,!®! and perhaps also Anios in 
Delos.19 A Heroine called Hemithea had a dream-oracle, 
from which she dispensed cures in sickness, at Kastabos 
in Karia ; 1° Pasiphaé gave prophecies in dreams at Thalamai 
on the Laconian coast.1°* Since from none of these Heroes 
did the epic tradition give any particular grounds in legend 
for expecting a display of mantic powers, we must suppose 
that knowledge of the future and communication of such 
knowledge to the living was regarded as belonging naturally 
to the spiritual nature of the glorified souls of Heroes. The 
notices which have come down to us allow us to hear of a few 
regular and permanently established MHero-oracles, but 
there may have been numbers of them of which we know 
nothing, and isolated and occasional manifestations of oracular 
_ powers by other Heroes may not have been entirely out ot 
the question.}% 


134 HEROES 


§ 11 


The oracular Heroes are regularly confined to the neighbour- 
hood of their graves. In addition, what we know of the legends 
that were told of the appearances or the unseen activities of 
these Heroes shows that, like the spirits that haunt ancient 
castles or caverns in our own popular mythology, they were 
confined within the boundaries of their native country, the 
neighbourhood of their graves or the site of their cult. They 
are, as a rule, artless stories of the anger displayed by a Hero 
whose rights have been infringed or whose cult neglected. 
At Tanagra 1°° there was a Hero Eunostos, who, having been 
deprived of his life through the machinations of a woman, 
would tolerate no woman in his grove or near his grave.19%? 
If any of the hated sex intruded there was danger of an earth- 
quake or drought, or else the Hero was seen going down to the 
sea (which washes away all pollutions) to cleanse himself. 
In Orchomenos there was a spirit who went about “ with a 
stone’ devastating the neighbourhood. This was Aktaion, 
whose earthly remains were therefore buried with much 
ceremony on the command of an oracle. A bronze statue of 
him was also set up and fastened with chains to a rock, and 
honoured every year in a feast of the dead.1°§ Herodotos 
solemnly tells us of the wrath of Minos with the Cretans, 
who had not avenged his own violent end, whereas they had 
gone to the aid of Menelaos.1°® There is a deeper sense in the 
legend, also related by Herodotos, of Talthybios who was 
enraged not for any private grievance but because of a 
violation of the moral law and order. He himself as the 
protector of heralds and messengers punished the Spartans 
for their murder of the Persian envoys.!° But the most awe- 
inspiring legend of the revenge of a Hero was told of a local- 
Hero of the Athenian parish of Anagyros. A countryman had 
cut down the Hero’s sacred grove.14% The Hero first caused the 
death of the man’s wife and then inspired the second wife with 
a guilty passion for his son, her stepson. The latter opposed 
her wishes and when she denounced him to her husband was 
blinded by him and banished to a desert island. The father, 
having become an object of loathing to all men, hanged him- 
self ; the stepmother threw herself into a well.42 This story is 
remarkable for the fact that in it the Hero, like the gods them- 
selves, is regarded as able to affect men’s consciousness, 
their feelings, and their resolves. Manyof the details may have 
been improved upon by a taste accustomed to poetry of a 
higher style.4% But as a rule the legends of Heroes bear a 


HEROES 135 


thoroughly popular stamp. They are a kind of vulgar 
mythology, which still put forth fresh shoots in this way 
now that the myths of ancient gods and champions have 
become merely traditional and have been given over to the 
never-ending operations of the poets. Such myths were no 
longer thrown off naturally by the creative instinct of the 
people. The gods seemed too far removed, their visible 
influence in the affairs of men seemed only credible in the 
legends of a far-distant past. The spirits of Heroes hovered 
nearer to men; in good fortune and bad men traced their 
handiwork. In the myths and legends of the peop'e arising 
out of the events of the immediate present they now constitute 
the supernatural element without which neither life nor 
stories would offer any attraction or meaning to the simple- 
minded. 

We can learn what these legends were like from a single 
example, which happens to have been preserved to us and 
which must stand for the numbers of similar stories which 
once must have been current. At Temesa, in Lucania, there 
was a Hero who went about destroying any of the 
inhabitants that he could lay his hand on. The Temesians, 
who had got as far as thinking of leaving Italy, turned in 
their distress to the Delphic oracle, and were told that the 
ghost was the spirit of a stranger who had once been stoned 
to death by the inhabitants of the country for the violation 
of a maiden.!!4 A sacred precinct must be dedicated to him, 
and a temple built, where every year the most beautiful 
maiden in Temesa must be delivered up to him. The citizens 
of Temesa did as they were told, and the spirit left them in 
peace, but every year the awful sacrifice took place. To this 
place there came in the 77th Olympiad a famous boxer, 
Euthymos of Locri, returning with his crown of victory back 
to Italy. He heard at Temesa of the sacrifice that was about to 
take place, and entered the temple where he saw the chosen 
maiden waiting for the Hero. Pity and love filled his heart ; 
and when the Hero arrived the victor of somany single combats 
dared to try conclusions with this new foe and finally threw 
him into the sea and rid the country of the monster. It is 
just as in our own fairy tale of the youth who went forth to 
learn how to shudder ; 145 and, of course, now that the land is 
delivered there is a brilliant wedding and the “‘ Knight of Good 
Courage’ marries the beautiful maiden he has rescued. He 
lived on to extreme old age, and even then he did not die 
but was translated alive and is now himself a Hero.1?® 

Such champions of the Pan-Hellenic contests, of whom 


SN 


136 HEROES 


Euthymos was one, are the favourite figures of popular legend 
both in their lifetime and, after their death, as spirits. A 
story was told also of one of the contemporaries of Euthymos, 
Theagenes of Thasos, one of the most famous victors in all the 
great games, and how after his death one of his opponents 
went and thrashed his statue by night till one night the statue 
fell on him and killed him. The Thasians then threw the 
murderous image into the sea, but were thereupon plagued 
with barrenness asa result of the Hero’s anger. This went on 
until, after the several times repeated command of the 
Delphic oracle, they fished up the statue from where it had 
sunk and restored it to its old position and sacrificed to it 
“as toa god’’.4? The remarkable thing about this story is 
the way in which the crude and primitive notion, common to 
almost all image-worshipping peoples, that the strength of a 
“ spirit ’’ resides in his effigy,is here more than usually striking 
and applied to the belief in Heroes. It lies at the bottom of 
many stories of the revenge of dumb statues against those 
who offend them.48 The statue of Theagenes, indeed, cured 
fevers even in later ages,!!° as did the statue of another famous 
boxer, Polydamas of Skotoussa.!#®° An Achzan Olympic 
victor, Oibotas of Dyme, had for centuries prevented the 
Acheans from winning in any contest by a curse.1#!_ When he 
had been appeased the Acheans, on starting out to take part 
in a contest at Olympia, used to do sacrifice to his statue.12? 


§ 12 


But the belief in Heroes rose to still greater heights. Not 
merely in peaceful athletic contests, but in real need, in 
struggles when they were fighting to defend the highest 
possessions of all—the freedom and safety of their country— 
the Heroes were found on the side of the Greeks. Nowhere do 
we see more plainly how real and vivid was the faith of con- 
temporary Greece in the Heroes than in the stories told of the 
appeals then made to them and of their participation in the 
Persian wars. At Marathon there were many who saw an 
apparition of Theseus in full armour fighting in the front of 
the battle against the barbarians.128 In the painting of 
Panainos (the brother of Pheidias) in the Stoa Poikile at 
Athens there was shown among the fighters at Marathon a 
certain Hero, Echetlos, of whose appearance at the battle 
a peculiar story was told.124 In the war against Xerxes 
Delphi was preserved by two of the local Heroes of the land 
against a Persian raid.1*° In the morning before the battle of 
Salamis the Greeks prayed to the gods, but they called directly 


HEROES 137 


upon the Heroes to give them practical help: Aias and 
Telamon were summoned from Salamis, and a ship was sent 
to fetch Aiakos and the other Aiakidai from Aegina.4#® So 
little were these Hero spirits mere symbols or great names to 
the Greeks. Their actual physical participation in the decisive 
hour was confidently expected. And, indeed, they came and 
helped : 1*? after the battle had been won a trireme out of the 
spoil was dedicated to the Hero Aias as well as to the gods as 
a thankoffering.4?8 A Salaminian local Hero, Kychreus, had 
also come to the help of the Greeks, as a snake, in which form 
the Heroes, like the earth spirits, frequently appeared.}?9 
After the battle everyone was fully persuaded that 
they owed their victory to the gods and Heroes.#8° As 
Xenophon puts it, it was the Heroes and their aid which 
“made Greece unconquerable”’ in the fight against the 
barbarians.1%4 Less frequently we hear of the active 
participation of national Heroes in the fights of one Greek 
state against another.!* 

Even in the petty details of the life of individuals the Heroes 
played their part, helping or hindering, as once in mythical 
times the gods had done. Everyone will be reminded of well- 
known legends of the gods, and will at the same time be able 
to measure the difference between the sublime and the merely 
idyllic, in reading Herodotos’ naive and circumstantial tale 
of how Helen once appeared in person to a nurse at Therapne. 
The nurse was praying at Helen’s grave for her ill-favoured 
foster-child, when the Heroine appeared to her and with a 
touch of her hand made the child the most beautiful maiden 
in Sparta.183 So, too, we read how the Hero Astrabakos, in 
the likeness of Ariston, king of Sparta, visited in secret the 
king’s wife and made her the mother of Demaratos.!34 The 
herodn of this Astrabakos was situated by the door of 
Ariston’s house,!%° and it was a frequent custom thus to place 
a Hero’s shrine before the house-door where he might give a 
special protection to his neighbour.13® 

In all the circumstances of human life, in happiness or in 
need, for individuals or the city, the Heroes are thus very near 
tomen. It is now often said of the Hero worshipped by a city 
(just as it was said of the city’s gods) that he rules it, is its 
possessor, or is lord over it ; 187 he is its true guardian and 
protector. It may, indeed, have been the case in many cities, 
as it was said to be in some, that the belief in the city-Hero 
was more deeply held there than the belief in the gods wor- 
shipped by all Greece in common.!88 The relation of man to 
the Heroes is closer than it is to the majestic gods above: 


138 HEROES 


the faith in Heroes gave a different and a more familiar bond 
of union between men and the spirit-world above them. The 
worship of Heroes began as an ancestor-cult and an ancestor- 
cult it remained in essence, but it had now been widened to 
a cult of certain greater human souls who had raised them- 
selves above their fellows by peculiar powers exercised in 
many, and by no means predominantly moral, directions. 
Many of them were of later ages or even of the quite recent 
past, and in this lies the peculiar importance of their cult. 
They show that the company of the spirits is not fixed and 
made up; individual mortals are still continually being 
raised to that higher circle after the completion of their earthly 
life. Death does not end all conscious existence nor does the 
gloom of Hades swallow up all life. 

But for that reason the cult of Heroes cannot be the origin of 
the belief in an immortality belonging to all human souls by 
their very nature. Nor can this ever have been its effect. 
In the beginning, among the hosts that streamed down to 
Hades, the special individuals who had another fate were a 
small class apart and favoured above all others—and so it 
still remained. Though the numbers of the heroic figures 
might be increased enormously, yet every individual case of 
the transition of a human soul into the ranks of the Heroes 
was a fresh and special miracle. Such exceptional cases, 
however frequently repeated, could never produce a general 
rule applying without distinction to all men alike. 

The belief in Heroes in its gradual evolution and extension 
unquestionably led far away from the course taken by the 
Homeric belief in the things after death. In fact, it pointed in 
the opposite direction. But with the belief in Heroes men 
had not yet arrived at the belief in an immortality proper to 
the human soul by virtue of its own nature, nor yet (which 
would be something different again) was a general cult of 
souls thereby founded. In order that such beliefs might arise 
after, but not out of, the cult of Heroes, and maintain them- 
selves side by side with an undiminished cult of Heroes, a 
movement was first necessary that had its origin in different 
sources. 


NOTES 10 sCHAPTER IV 


1 Porph., Abst. 4, 22, p. 268, 23 Nauck. 

2 It is not quite clear whether it is legitimate to see in what Paus. 
2, 2, 2, says about the graves of Neleus and Sisyphos a first trace of 
the worship of Hero-relics; as Lobeck does, Agla. 284. The oracle 
verse from Oinom. ap. Eus., PE. 5, 28, p. 223 B, in which Lykourgos 
is warned to honour MevéAav re kat dAdAovs afavatous Fpwas, ot ev 
Aaxedaiuou din—is certainly quite late, later than the Kreis & Auxdopye 
that was known already to Herod.; earlier however than the second 
century, cf. Isyllos (GDI. 3342), 1. 26. Oinomaos got it, like all the 
oracles that he used in making his Io7jrwv ddpa, from a collection of 
oracular sayings, certainly not from (or even indirectly from) Ephoros 
as has been groundlessly maintained.—Unquestionably the cult of 
Helen and Menelaos at Therapne was ancient: see Ross, Arch. Aufs. 
ii, 341 ff. Connexion with the legitimate pre-Dorian monarchy was 
eagerly sought for in Sparta: thus the bones of Orestes and Tisamenos 
were brought to Sparta and both honoured there as Heroes. The cult 
of Menelaos in Therapne has nothing whatever to do with his trans- 
lation to Elysion (Od. 8). 

3 One Daites yowa tTiudpevov mapa tots Tpwoiv is mentioned by 
Mimn. fr. 18. Still earlier Alc. seems to refer to the cult of Achilles 
as a Hero, fr. 48 b: ’AyidAdAev, 6 yas Akvdixas péders (See Wassner, 
de her. cult., p. 33). 

4 Jeot coor yRv thy ITXdatatda é€xere Kal npwes, Evvictopés ere, 
Thue. ii, 74, 2; paprupas Geodvs Kal jpwas eyxwpiovs toujoopat, Th. iv, 
Bee cis lh. v,1.300%-2-—5, 

5 Hdt. viii, 109: rade yap ode jyets Katepyacapeda arAa Beoi Te Kal 
Npwes. 

§ Hdt. vii, 43. 

7 In the first edition of this book I could not refer to the copiously 
documented article by Deneken on “‘ Heros ”’ in Roscher’s Myth. Lex. 
Even now I must be content to refer the reader generally to the rich 
collections of material there supplied. The view taken of the nature 
and origin of the Hero is, however, one which I can only reject. 
According to that account (which in this follows the current view) 
the belief in Heroes arose from a weakened belief in gods, and the 
race of Heroes was composed of formerly divine figures who had come 
to be regarded in the course of time with diminished awe. But the 
cult of Heroes was by no means an attenuated worship of the gods: 
on the contrary it was fundamentally contrasted in its essence to the 
cult of the gods above: évayifew can never have been derived from 
Ovew in however attenuated a form. Equally little can the Heroes 
of cult have been ever (much less frequently) derived from gods directly. 
The “ Heroes ’’ (as objects of a cult) are invariably elevated souls of 
men, not reduced divinities. This rule holds good even though a 
considerable number of once divine figures after they had been deprived 
of their godhead and made into great men, were when they died 
exalted, as outstanding human beings, to the rank of Hero. In this 
respect they did not differ from the innumerable cases before and 
beside them of simple mortals who had never been gods. Only 
when and because they had become men and been mortal could such 


ieee cr ereeeeeenr —_ 


140 INO DE Se DO geri Cla Ee heameiay, 


ex-divine personages become Heroes: no one stepped straight from 
godhood to Herohood. The Hero is regularly a promoted human 
spirit and nothing else.—I intend here and generally in this book 
to avoid further polemic against the currently accepted view of the 
origin of the Hero out of degraded godhead and to content myself 
instead with the statement of my own positive attitude in these matters. 

8 Pedv dAAots GAXaL TLal mpocKewTat Kal Hpwow aXrAdXAa, Kal adrat 
amoKeKpiévat Tob Bevod, Arr., Anab. iv, 11, 3. 

® Sacrifice to Heroes év dv@uatow adyaév and throughout the night, 
Pi., I. iv, 65 ff. dao xcvédas, Ap. Rh. i, 587 (= zwepi AAtov dvopas, 
Schol.). 7@ pev (AreEdvopr) ws Apwi pera yrvcov dvvavTa éevayilovow 
Edapepiwv 5€ ws Oe Ovovow, Paus. 2, 11, 7. vwixrwp Kata €rtos 
evayiCovaw, (the Pheneatai) to Myrtilos, Paus. 8, 14, 11. By night 
Solon sacrificed to the Salaminian Heroes, Plu., Sol. 9.—After noon, 
a706 écov Huepas, must sacrifice be made to the Heroes, D.L. viii, 33; 
Tois KaToLxXopevolis amo peonpBpias, EM. 468, 34 (cf. Procl. 2m Hes. Op. 
763, Eust., @ 65, p. 698, 36). ‘Ihe Heroes also are among the 
KATOLXYOMEVOL : TOTS Tpwolw WS KaTOLXOMEVOLS EvTOMa EOVOV, aToBAE€TOVTES 
Katw es yqv, Schol. A.D., A 459.—In later times sacrifice seems to have 
been made to the ordinary dead even in broad daylight (see Stengel, 
Chthon. u. Todtencult, 422 f.), but to ‘‘ Heroes’, as once to the dead 
(¥ 218 ff.), always towards evening or at night. 

10 éayapa, see above, Ch. I, n. 53. 

11° Cf. Stengel, Jb. (9 Bail aiSco pp acces 

12 Schol. “A.D., A’ 459. Schok, Ap. Rh. 1, 587. evrépvew, see 
Stengel, Zt. f. Gymn., 1880, p. 743 ff. 

13 gipaxoupia, Pi., O.1,90. Plu., Avistid.21. The word is supposed 
to be Boeotian acc. to Schol. Pi., O. i, 146 (hence Greg. Cor., p. 215, 
Schaefer). 

14 Rightly (as against Welcker) Wassner, deh. cult., p. 6, maintains 
that the évayiopara for Heroes were odoxauTw para. 

15 évayilew to heroes, @vew to gods. Pausanias in particular is 
careful in his use of the words, but even he, and Herodotos, too, 
occasionally says @vew where évayiZey would have been correct (e.g. 
Hdt. vii, 117, 7@ ’Aprayain Ovovor *AxdvOior. ws par). Others 
frequently say @vew instead of évayifeww, which as the more special 
idea could easily be included in 6vew the more generic word for making 
sacrifice. : 

16 Cf. Deneken, de theoxentts (Berl; 1881))) capi le Wacsnerm 
de h. cult., p. 12. The expressions used by primitive peoples allow 
us to see the ideas that lie at the bottom of this mode of offering ; 
cf. Réville, les vel. des peuples non-civ. i, 73. The ritual may be 
regarded as specially primitive and even earlier than the practice of 
burnt offering (cf. Oldenberg, Rel. d. Veda, 344 f.). 

17 See above, Ch. I, p. 14 ff.—ézi "Alan 7G ’Apxados reAevtryoavtt 
GOAa éré0n mp@rov' e€ pev Kat adArdAa ovK oda, immodpopias dé eréOn, 
Paus8,<4).5: 

18 The same is implied by the observation of Aristarchos that Homer 
knows no iepos kai otedavitns aywy, see Rh. Mus. 36, 544 f. (as 
to the observation there put forward that Homer in fact did not know 
the word oré¢avos or its use, cf. further Schol. Pi., Nem. intr., pp. 7, 8 ff., 
Abel; see also Merkel, Ap. Rh, proleg., p. cxxvi: étiorédavos derived 
from oredavyn not from orédavos: Schol. ® 511). 

‘9 Many such Agones for Heroes are mentioned, esp. by Pindar. 

20 e.g. on the command of the oracle an aywv yupuiKkos Kat tamKos 
was founded in honour of the fallen Phocaeans in Agylla, Hdt. i, 167. 


IND DES rel Ope GHA RCE Re LV 141 


Agon for Miltiades, Hdt. vi, 38; for Brasidas Thuc. v, 11; for Leonidas 
in Sparta, Paus. 3, 14, 1. 

21 At the Iolaia in Thebes pupoivns oredavots otedhavotyrat of vik @vteEs’ 
pupotvyn b€ oredavodvrar dia TO elvar THY vexpav orédos, Sch. Pi., J. iii, 
117. (The myrtle rots ydoviows adi€pwro, Apollod. ap. Sch. Ar., Ran. 
330; as adorning graves, Eur., El. 324, 511.) 

22 General statement: éreAotivrTo of madatolt mavtes aya@ves emt Trot 
reteXevTynKoat, Sch. Pi., I., p. 349 Ab. (tas emitupBiovs ravraci 
mavnyvpets, Clem. Alex. calls the four great games, Pvotr. ii, p. 29 P.). 
The Nemean as an aywv émradios for Archemoros, Sch. Pi., N., 
Dp, 7,6 Ab. ; later offered* to Zeus fitst by Herakles, ib., p. 11, 8 ff. ; 
12, 14-13, 4 (cf. Welcker, Ep. Cycl. ii, 350 ff.). Victor’s crown, since 
the Persian wars, of parsley émi tip tTa&v Katorxyopevwr, ib., p. 10 
(parsley on graves: Schneidewin on Dgn. viii, 57; see below. 
oeAivov otédavos mevOipos . . . Aodpis ev TH mept dywvwv, Phot. 506, 5). 
Black dress of the judges, ib., p. 11, 8 ff. Schol. Arg., N. iv, v.— 
Isthmian games as emitadgios aywy for Melikertes and then for Sinis or 
Skiron, Plu., Thes. 25. Sch. Pi., [., pp. 350-2 Ab. Crown made of 
parsley or pine, both signs of mourning, Paus. 8, 48, 2 (and elsewhere 
see Meineke, dn. Alex., 80 ff.). The Pythian games are said to be an 
aywyv émrdadis for Python; the Olympian for Oinomaos or Pelops 
(Phlegon, FHG. iii, 603; cf. P. Knapp, Corresp. Wurt. Gelehr. 1881, 
p. 9 ff.). These notices cannot all be learned invention. It is a fact, 
for instance, that the funeral games of Tlepolemos in Rhodos, known 
to Pindar, O. vii, 77 ff., were later transferred to Helios (cf. Sch. Pi., 
O. vii, 36, 146-7, and Boéckh on v. 77). 

23 ** Half-gods,”® auifeor. The name does not, as is sometimes 
declared, imply that the Heroes were spirits who thus constituted 
a class of intermediate beings between gods and men. The Heroes 
were not called 7nuifeot; the name was really applied to the kings 
and champions of the legendary age, more especially those who fought 
mimitoyeor- hebes (ites,, 0).,-160 ; Hom. M23; hi} Hom., 31, 19;; 
32,19. Callin., fv.i, 19, and often later). It applies to them, however, 
as living men not as glorified spirits (thus Pla., Ap. 41A; cf. D.H. 
7, 32, 13, jucbéwv yevonevwy [on earth] at wvyai).—The 7uibeor are 
a species of men not of spirits or daimones: they are those 
ol mpotepov mot eéemédovto, Oedv 5° e& avaKxtwy eyévovf’ vies Hylbeor 
(Simon., fy. 36; cf. Pla., Crat. 398 D), the sons of gods and mortal 
women and then their companions as well (a potioriso named). Even 
the idea that the great men of the past, thus called 7yifeot, were 
naturally made “ Heroes ”’ after their death as a consequence of their 
half-divine nature which might give them special privileges even then— 
this idea has no very ancient authority. Cicero, ND. iii, 45, seems 
to be the first to suggest such a view. That the Greeks of the best 
period ever regarded semi-divine origin as a qualification for becoming 
a Hero is refuted by the simple fact that for the great majority of the 
“ Heroes ”? descent from a god was not claimed. Of course, poetry 
was always ready to give a Hero a divine father in order to enhance 
his value, cf. Paus. 6, 11, 2; but this was never a condition of being 
made a Hero (rather of being raised from Hero to god). 

24 udKkap pev avdpdv péra, npws 8 Emerta AaoceBys, Pi., P. v, 94 f. 

25 riva Oeov, Tl’ ypwa, Tiva 8 dvdpa; Pi., O. ii init. otre Beods ovre 
npwas ote avOpwmous ataxyvvOcitoa, Antiph. i, 27. With “ daimones ”’ 
added: Gods, daimones, heroes, men: Pl., Rp. 392 A; 427 B; 
Ig.iv, 717 AB. In later times the distinction between @eo/, datpoves, 
jpwes, corresponded to a real and popular opinion, see e.g. GDI. 


142 NODES =[O* GCHARTE Keay, 


1582 (Dodona), cf. also 1566, 1585 b.—There can be no question of 
identifying Heroes with the daimones (as Nagelsb., N. Th. 104, does). 
When philosophers call the dead “‘daimones”’ that is from quite 
a different point of view. It is a speculative idea peculiar to Plutarch 
himself that, in view of the transition from men to Heroes and from 
these to daimones, the Heroes themselves might be regarded as a sort 
of lower daimon (DO. 10, 415 A; Rom. 28). A Schol. on Eur., Hec. 
165, quite justifiably makes a parallel between gods and daimones 
on the one hand and Heroes and men on the other: the gods are 
vibnrAdtepov Tt Taypa THv Satuovwy and this is the relation of of ypwes 
pos Tovs Aottovs avOpwmous, vibnAdTEpol Tives SoKODYTES Kal UTEPEXOVTES. 

26 Aristarchos’ remark that in Homer not only kings but aavzes 
Kowa@s are designated as ypwes, was directed against the mistaken 
limitation of the word by Ister ; see Lehrs, Avistarch. 3, p. 101. Before 
Aristarch., however, the mistaken idea that of jyeyoves TOV apyaiwv 
ovo. Hoav ypwes, of 5€ Aaol dvOpwmor seems to have been general : 
it is expressed in the [Arist.] Pvobl. 19, 48, p. 922b, 18;  Ritianos; 
too, held it, see Schol. T 41 (Mayhoff, de Rhiani stud. Hom., p. 46).— 
It is incorrect to say that in the supposed “ later ’’ parts of the Odyssey 
jpws is no longer used of all free men, but only of the aristocracy 
(Fanta, Staat in Il. u. Od., 17 f.). In 6 268, @ 242, € 97, the word is 
used as an honourable title of free men of superior rank, but there is 
no suggestion of a restriction of the word to such use. In addition 
to which, the word ypws unmistakably appears in its wider sense 
also in other parts of the poem equally and rightly supposed to be late 
(a, 272, 0 483, w 68, ete:). 

27 So for example esp. when Pausanias speaks of the xadovpevor 
npwes, 9, 6, 2% 6,.5, 1 yt lS ee Once 

28 avip@v npwwv Oetov yévos, Hes., Op. 159. 

29 Of the ‘“‘ Heroes”? of his fourth race the great majority fell 
according to Hesiod in the war of Troy or Thebes and died without 
any ‘illumination’; the few, on the other hand, who are 
translated to the Islands of the Blest are illuminated indeed, but have 
never died. To regard them as the prototypes and forerunners of 
the Heroes worshipped in later times (as many do) is inadmissible. 

80 Grave in the market: Battos in Kyrene, Pi; P. v,)) 8/1 .aue 
frequently. Hero-graves in the Prytaneion at Megara, Paus. 1, 43, 2-3. 
Adrastos was buried in the market at Sikyon. Kleisthenes, to play 
a trick on him, brought from Thebes (the corpse of) Melanippos, 
who, when alive, had been his greatest enemy, and placed him é& 7@ 
mputaveim Kai piv tdpvce evOatra ev 7H loxyupotatw, Hdt. v, 67. 
Themistokles had a wvynpetov in the market at Magnesia on the Maiander. 
Th. 1, 138, 5; i.e. a yp@ov (see Wachsmuth, Rh. Mus. lii, 140). 

31 t¥uBov auditodov exwv morvEevwtatw mapa Bwopw, Pi., O. i, 93; 
i.e. the great ash-altar of Zeus. The excavations have confirmed 
Pindar’s description (cf. Paus. 5, 13, 1-2). 

32 Grave built in the gateway: év att 7H mvAG at Elis Aitolos 
the son of Oxylos was buried, Paus. 5, 4, 4; cf. Lobeck, Agl. 281 f. 
Grave at the boundary of the country: Koroibos, the first Olympic 
victor, was buried ’Hdeias éwi 7 mwépate as the insc. stated: Paus. 8, 
26, 4. Grave of Koroibos, son of Mygdon, év dpois ®pvyav Lrex- 
ropnvav, Paus. 10, 27, 1. 

33 The idea of the grave as the dwelling-place of the Hero is shown 
in a very strange fashion by the story that the Phliasians before the 
feast of Demeter xadAotow émt tas omovdas the hero Aras and his sons, 
looking while so doing towards the graves of these Heroes: Paus. 
Me abs. oF 


NOLES iO RCH APT EH heal V: 143 


**) This hero (Xanthippos or Phokos) EXEL emt MEPS TE maon TLLGS, 
Kal ayovtes lepeta of Pwxeis TO pev alwa du’ OmHs eyxéovow és Tov Tadov 
xtA. Paus. 10, 4, 10. Similarly at the grave of Hyakinthos at 
Amyklai, Paus. 3, 19, 3. The meaning of such an offering is the same 
in Greece as in similar cases among any ‘“‘savage’”’ tribe. In Tylor, 
ii, 28, we read: “‘ In the Congo district the custom has been described 
of making a channel into the tomb to the head or mouth of the corpse, 
to send down month by month the offerings of food and drink.” 

35 Most of the examples are mentioned by Lobeck, Ag/. 281 [u],_ but 
he omits the most remarkable case, fully reported by Hdt.i, 67-8, of the 
transference of the bones of Orestes from Tegea to Sparta (cf. Paus. 
3, 3,6; 11, 10; 8, 54, 4. The reason is obvious, cf. Miller, Dorvizans, 
i, 72). Besides this note: the removal of the bones of Hektor from 
Mion, to Thebes, Paus. 9, 18, 5, Sch,.and-Tz., Lyc. 1194, 1204 >. of 
Mieas irom Mainalos to Mantinea;-Paus. 8; 9;°3° cf.°8, 36,8 = of 
Hesiod from Naupaktos to Orchomenos, Paus. 9, 38, 3 ; of Hippodameia. 
from Midea in Argolis to Olympia, Paus, 6, 20, 7; of Tisamenos from 
Helike to Sparta, Paus. 7, 1, 8; of Aristomenes from Rhodos to 
Messene, Paus. 4, 32, 3. Strange story of the shoulder bone of Pelops,. 
Paus. 5, 13, 4-6. In all these cases the removal followed upon a 
command of the oracle, cf. also Paus. 9, 30, 9-11. Practical stimulus. 
may have been given occasionally by the discovery of abnormally 
large bones in dug-up graves; we often hear of such discoveries, 
cf. W. Schmid, Atticismus, iv, 572 f., and it was always believed that 
such gigantic bones were remains of one of tdv Kadovpévwv Apdwyr, 
Peso ose) (Cl. also ly 730, torit) 23; 522,,°9)>) It would. be: the 
business of the oracle to determine the name of the Hero concerned 
and see that the remains were reverently preserved. (One example 
may be given, though from a later period. In the dried-up bed of 
the Orontes a clay coffin 11 yards long was found and a corpse within 
it. The oracle of the Clarian Apollo on being applied to for enlighten- 
ment as to its origin answered ’Opovrny eivat, yévous dé adrov elvat Tod 
*Ivddv, Paus. 8, 29, 4; Philostr.,. H. 669 p. 138, 6-19 K. 

36 Plu., Cim. 8; Thes. 36; Paus. 3, 3, 7.—In the year 437-6 we 
hear of the removal by Hagnon and his Athenians, at the command 
of the oracle, of the bones of Rhesos from Troy to Amphipolis : 
Polyaen. vi, 53. The neighbourhood of the mouth of the Strymon 
on the western slopes of Mt. Pangaios was the original home of Rhesos : 
he was already known to the Doloneia as the son of Eioneus ; to later 
writers as the son of Strymon and (like Orpheus) a Muse—which is the 
same thing (see Conon, 4). On M. Pangaios he still lived as an oracular 
deity : this must have been the popular belief of the district which 
the author of the Rhesus explains after Greek fashion (ll. 955-66). 
He is a tribal god of the Edonians, of the same pattern as Zalmoxis 
of the Getai, and Sabos or Sabazios of other Thracian tribes. In the 
mind of the Greeks he had become since the poem of the Doloneia 
entirely detached from the site of his worship and was a mere mortal 
champion with whom fancy might do what it chose (cf. Parth. 36). 
The restoration of his bones to the neighbourhood of the lower Strymon 
(uvnpetov tod ‘Proov in Amphipolis: Marsyas 6 vewrepos in Sch., 
Rhes. 346), and the heroic cult which was undoubtedly paid to him in 
connexion therewith, may have been a kind of official recognition by 
the Greeks of the worship of Rhesos discovered in that neighbourhood 
by the Athenian colonists. I see no reason for doubting the historical 
fact of the occurrence, though some of the details of Polyaenus’ account 
have a fabulous colouring. It is true Cicero says of Rhesos, nusquam 


144 NOTES tO. CHAPLE Rh aaiy 


colitur (ND. iii, 45), and so it may have been in C.’s time: for the 
earlier period the close of the tragedy clearly suggests the cult of R. 
as a divinity, while the story of Polyaen. implies his Hero-cult. 

37 Sometimes only single parts of the body, e.g. the shoulder-blade 
of Pelops at Olympia (Paus. 5, 13).—In Argos on the road to the 
Akropolis their heads were buried in the pvfjpa trav Alydmrov raldwy, 
while the rest of their bodies were in Lerne, Paus. 2, 24, 2. 

38 See Lob., Agi. 281. This only can be the meaning of Soph., 
OC. 1522 f£. (Nauck otherwise).—A strange case is that of Hippolytos 
in Troizen: dzmoaveiv adtov otk €BéAovaw (of Tpoilyvior) ouvpévta bo 
tav immwv ovdd€ tov tadov amodaivovow eiddres' Tov dé ev ovpava 
Kadovpevov nvioxov Tobrov elvar vopilovow exetvov (éxetvot ?) “ImmddAvtovr, 
Tiny Tapa Oedv tav’trynv éxovra Paus. 2, 32, 1. Here it seems as if 
the grave were not shown because Hipp. was not regarded as having 
died and therefore would not have a grave; he is said to have been 
translated and set among the stars. But there was a grave and the 
translation story must therefore only be an afterthought. (The death 
of Hipp. is spoken of clearly enough by the poets: but what happened 
to him after Asklepios had restored him to life again? The Italian 
Virbius legend seems to have been little known in Greece. Paus. 2, 27, 4, 
knows it from Aricia.)—Very occasionally the possession of the relics 
of the Hero was secured by burning the bones and scattering the ashes 
in the market place of the city. Thus Phalanthos in Tarentum, 
Justin. 3,4, 13 ff.; Solon in SalamisyD:-L51,.62) Plat Soleo cemes 
a rule the scattering of ashes is intended to serve a different purpose, 
cf. Plu., Lycurg. 31 fin.; Nic. Dam., Pavadoz..26, p. 70 West. 

39 A few examples: xevov ofa of Teiresias in Thebes, Paus. 9, 
18, 4; of Achilles at Elis, Paus. 6, 23, 3; of the Argives who fought 
in the war against Troy, at Argos, Paus. 2, 20,6; of Iolaos at Thebes, 
Paus.:9, 23, 1; Sch. Pi., N. iv, 32 (in the tomb. of) Amphitryon? 
Pi.,, P. ix, 81) ; of Odysseus at Sparta, Plut., O.Gr., 43 53020@ es 
Kalchas in Apulia, Lyc. 1047 f. 

40 Perhaps by avakAnars of the puyy? see above, Ch. I, n. 86 (at the 
foundation of Messene ézexadodvro ev Kow® Kal jpwas odiow éeTavyKe 
ovvoikous, Paus. 4, 27, 6). 

“) Kal teOvews Kal taprxos ewv Svvapiv mpos Dedv exer Tov adiKéovTa 
tivecOar, Hdt. ix, 120. 

42 No detailed proof of this statement is needed. We will only remark 
that the attempt to conceal the grave is often met with among so-called 
“ savage ”’ tribes and has the same purpose as in the Greek Hero-cult : 
cf. on this subject Herbert Spencer, Princ. of Sociol. i, p. 176. 

“8 See Helbig, D. hom. Epos aus Denkm.}, p. 41. 

pte ee above, pa 23. 

*° B 603 of 8 éxyov *Apxadinv tad KvudAnvyns dpos ainv, Almvriov 
mapa tvpPov.—Cf. Paus. 8, 16, 2-3.—In the Troad the frequently 
mentioned *’IAov ofa, the ofa modvoxdpOporo Mupivns which 
““men ” call Barieva, were similar monuments. 

46 The ceremonial announcement of death, the xarapwaiveoOar of the 
proper persons (as usual the next of kin to the dead) ; the assembling 
of Spartiates Perioikoi and Helots (cf. Tyrt. fy. 7) with their women 
to the number of several thousands, the extravagant expression of 
grief and praise of the dead, the period of mourning (no business in 
the market for ten days, etc.)—all this is described by Hdt. vi, 58. He 
compares this grandiose funeral with the pomp customary at the 
burial of an Asiatic (Persian) monarch.—The Lycurgan vdépo by these 
funeral rites odx os avOpwmovs aAXr’ ws ypwas rods AakedSatpoviwv 


INOUE SE LOM CH AE aes hv. 145 


Bactreis mporetinjKacw, Xen., Rp. Lac. xv, 9. King Agis I éruye 
gepvoTtépas 4 Kat avOpwrov ta¢qs, Xen., HG. 3, 3, 1.—A peculiar 
circumstance at the burial of a Spartan king is mentioned by Apollod., 
fy. 36.—The burial places of the royal Houses of the Agiadai and the 
Eurypontidai (apart even in their death), Paus. 3, 12, "8 ; 14, 2 (cf. 
Bursian, Geog. ii, 126).—Embalming of the body of a king who dies 
abroad, Xen., HG. DAO Loe mee LOMO Ore mNEDis AA OCS. Somme PI ils, 
Ages. 40.—Besides this the participation in ‘primitive times of the 
whole people in the funeral of the Herakleid kings in Corinth may 
probably be deduced from the story told of the compulsory attendance 
of the Megarian subjects of Corinth at the funeral at Corinth of a king 
Pim tes bakchiadsiamilyes ochy Pi, IN; vit, 155) (cis AB 281,27 te: 
Zenob. v, 8; Dgn. vi, 34). In Crete 7a&v Baoirtéwv Kyndevopéevwv 
Tponyetro mupprxilwy 6 orparos as at the funeral of Patroklos, Y 131 ff.) ; 
Paeceap. ochols V,,. 130: 

47 Huvmarpida, ot ... petéxovtes Tod BactAtKod yévovs, EM. 395, 
50.—Thus the Bakchiadai in Corinth were descendants of the royal 
family of the house of Bakchis. The BaovAidar, a ruling family of 
oligarch nobles in Ephesos (Ael. fv. 48), Erythrai (Arist., Pol. 1305b, 
19), and perhaps Chios as well (see Gilbert, Gr. Ait. ii, 153), also 
traced back their descent to the old kings of those Ionic cities. 
Respect paid to those who were descended é€x rod yévovs of Androklos 
at Ephesos, Stra. 633.—The Aigid Admetos, priest of Apollo Karneios 
at Thera was descended Aaxedaipovos ex BactAjnwy, Epigr. Gr. 191; 
192. 

eullieressome reference might have been expected to Fustel de 
Coulanges’ brilliant and penetrating work La Cité antique. In that book 
the attempt is made to fix upon ancestor-worship, la religion du foyer 
et des ancétves, as the root of all the higher types of worship (among 
the Greeks: only that part of the book concerns us here); and to 
show how out of these ancestor-worshipping aggregations, begun by the 
family, larger communities of ever-widening membership developed, 
and finally out of these the 706Xts itself—the highest and most extensive 
political as well as religious community of all. For the author of 
that book the proof of his theory lies entirely in the simple logical 
consequence with which the details and, as far as we know it, 
the development of both private and public law follow from the original 
causes adopted by him essentially as postulates. A strictly historical 
proof that should not have to deduce the original causes from the 
results but should start from known beginnings and demonstrate 
the actual existence of every step was indeed an impossibility. The 
whole historical process must have been already finished when our 
knowledge first begins: for Homer shows us the mods and its com- 
ponent parts (xpiv’ dvdpas Kata didrda Kata pdpytpas *Ayapepvor) as 
well as the worship of the gods as fully established and developed. 
It is no disparagement of the valuable and fruitful suggestions made 
in that book if we say that its leading idea—as far as Greece is con- 
cerned—cannot be considered as more than an intuition, which though 
it may be just and true, must remain unproved. If there ever was 
a time when ancestor-worship was the only Greek religion at least 
we cannot see into that dim epoch long anterior to all tradition. To 
that remote period long before both the all-powerful religion of the 
gods and the earliest records of the Greek genius, even the narrow 
and slippery path of inference and reconstruction will hardly lead us. 
Natural as it might seem, therefore, so far as the subject itself is con- 
cerned to deal with such questions, I have taken no notice in the 


L 


146 NOTES= 10> CHAP TE sae 


present work of any attempts to deduce Greek religion from an original 
sole worship of ancestors (such as have been made by many scholars 
besides F. de Coulanges both in England and in Germany). 

49 Those worshipped by a yévos regarded as its progenitors, yovets : 
AB. 240, 31 (ra OUpara Si8wow) eis Ta yovéwy (fepa) Ta yévn.— 
Physical relationship between the yevv#ra, originally a fact though 
afterwards only occasionally demonstrable, is indicated by the ancient 
name dpoydAaxres applied to the members of the same clan (Philoch, 
fr. 91-4) and meaning strictly watdes cai waidwv maitdes (Arist., Pol. 
1252b, 18).—The word mdrpa with the same meaning as yévos 
(MiSvrA.8av wazpa, Pi., P. viii, 38), makes it still more clear that the 
members of such a group are regarded as the descendants of a single 
ancestor. See Dikaiarchs ap. St. Byz. warpa. 

50 Whose names were chosen by the voice of the Delphic oracle 
out of a hundred submitted to the Pythia> Arist) AGw m2 ie. 
Cf. Mommsen, Philol., N.F. 1, 456 f. 

51 Instead of the common ézdvupoe we also find the word apynyerae 
used of the Heroes of the phylai: Ar. I'fpas, fr. 126 H.-G. (AB. 449, 
14); PL,dys. 205 D, cf. C1 471i, 1191; 1975. sltas even plainenmtiaet ac 
Hero is regarded as the ancestor of his dvA7 when he is called apynyés: 
thus Oineus was the dpynydés of the Oineidai, Kekrops the dapynyds 
of the Kekropidai, Hippothoén apynyds of the Hippothodntidai in 
[Dem.] 60, 30-1. The apynyos tod yévovs is its physical forebear 
and progenitor, Poll. iii, 19: thus Apollo 6 apynyds tot yévous of the 
Seleucids, CIG. 3595, 26; cf. Isocr. 5, 32. Thus too the members of 
a phyle are actually described as the ovyyevets of their Hero eponymos: 
[Dem.] 60, 28. 

52 Thus we know of both é7pos and yévos of the Ionidai, Philaidai, 
Boutadai (for the intentional distinctness of the Eteoboutadai see 
Meier, p. 39), Kephalidai, Perithoidai, etc.: Meier, de gentil. Aitica, 
p. 35. Such demes were called amo tév xticdvTwy, others amo Tap 
tomwv: Arist. ’A@a. 21, 5 (in which case a name as much like a personal 
name as possible was extracted out of the place-name and made into 
the ‘local Hero: cf. Wachsm:, Stadt Athen, 1) 1243) oa 
conditions existed at other places, In Teos the same names occur as 
mupyou (= dfyor) and cuppopia (= yévn), e.g. KoAwtiwy, tod ’AAKipov 
mvpyov, “AAkiuidns (also names which differ Naiwv, tot Mypadov 
mvpyou, Bpvoxidyns), CLG. 3064, where see Béckh II, p. 651. In Rhodos 
a matpa as well as its larger inclusive group (x7olva ?) is called ’Apuduweis : 
IGM. Aeg. i, 695, ’"Audwéwv martpar EdreAidar, "Apduets, etc. 
(Ancestor worship mpoyowxa fepa in the Rhodian xrotvat is vouched for 
by Hesych. xrvvar: (see Martha, BCH. iv, 144.) 

°§ Thus the descendants of Bakchis in Corinth traced their descent 
to Aletes (D.S. 7, 9, 4; Paus. 2, 4, 3); the descendants of Aipytos 
in Messenia to Kresphontes (Paus. 4, 3, 8), the descendants of Agis 
and Eurypon in Sparta to Eurysthenes and Prokles. The real ancestors 
were in these cases well known and could not be entirely eclipsed 
(being too deeply rooted in cult): thus later, as well as in the earlier 
period, these same families are called BaxyiSa, Almvridar, not 
“HpakdAetdat (D.S., loc. cit., Paus. 4, 3, 8) ; the Spartan royal families 
are still Agidai, Eurypontidai, while the fictitious ancestors 
Eurysthenes and Prokles never quite achieved the status of 
apxnyéra: Ephoros ap. Str. 366. In many other, perhaps more 
numerous, cases the fictitious ancestor may have ousted the real 
and once better known from men’s minds altogether. 

54 fArist.}| Mivab. 106. 


NOTES #207 ‘CHAPTER ATV, 147 


BS See Paus. 10, 4, 10. -In an oracle ap. Plu., Sol. 9: dpynyods 
xwpas Pvaiats ypwas evotkous tAago. 

56 Plu., Avist. 11, names seven dpynyérar ITAataéwy; Clem. Al., 
Protr. ii, 35 P., gives four of these (KuxAaios seems to be a mistake). 
Androkrates seems to have been the most prominent; his réyevos is 
mentioned by Hdt. ix, 25, his 7p@ov Thuc. iii, 24, 1; it stood ina thick 
yrove, Paus. loc. cit. 

= Paus. 6, 24, 9-10. 

58 AR. ii, 835-50, says that this Hero was Idmon the prophet, 
others called him Agamestor. Sch. ad 845: déyer S€ Kat mpopadidas, 
6Tt bua TO ayvoety GoTis Ely EmLxXMpLtov ypwa Kadrobtow of ‘Hpaxrcdrat. 
He was the local daimon worshipped on the spot before the colony 
came, and then taken over by the colonists for their own. Cf. the 
case of Rhesos, above, n. 36. 

5° Paus. 6, 20, 15-19. It was a round altar, according to many 
Ttados avdpos atvtoyxbovos Kal ayabod Ta és immuxyv—the grave and altar 
being one as was the grave and altar of Aiakos at Aegina, Paus. 2, 
29, 8—whose name was Olenios. Acc. to others it was the grave of 
Dameon son of Phlious and of his horse ; or the xevov jplov of Myrtilos 
set up in his honour by Pelops; or of Oinomaos; or of Alkathoés 
son of Porthaon, one of the suitors of Hippodameia—to say nothing 
of the learned suggestion of the avijp Atyv’mrios given by Paus. l.c. as 
a last resort. Acc. to Hesych. rapadéimmos it belonged to Pelops 
himself, acc. to Lyc. 42 f. to a giant called Ischenos (see Sch. and Tz.). 
Besides all this a tapaéiamos seems to have been almost indispensable 
on the racecourses of the great games. The Isthmus and Nemea 
had theirs as well (Paus. § 19)—and Paus. 10, 37, 4, mentions it as 
something unusual that the course at Delphi had no rapdéirmos. 
Cf. Pollak, Hippodromica, p. 91 ff., 1890. 

60 wows evodos, CIG. 4838b, cf. Welcker, Rhein. Mus., N.F. vii, 618— 
Kadapitys Apws (Dem. 18, 129, with Sch. and Hesych. s.v.)—7pws 
terxopvAaé ev Mupivn, Hesych.—apws émréyios, CIA. iii, 1, 290, and 
1, 194-206, see Hiller v. Gart., Philol. 55, 180 f£.—With place-names 
6 émt BrAav’Tn jpws, Poll. vii, 87—7pow ep wediw, Att. ins. ap., Leg. 
Sacy. i. p. 5.—In Epidauros on an architrave occurs the imscr. 
ypwos KAaixoddpov, F. @Epid. i, n. 245. 7 Kxraixoddpw also occurs 
in an inscr. from Mt. Ithome, Leg. Sacr., p. 36 (n. 15, 1. 11).—Probably 
to this class belongs the 7pws mavow at Athens, Pl. Lys. init. ; Hesych. 
Phot. s.v. 

61 wows tatpds in Athens, CIA. ii, 403-4, see below.—A pws 
oTparnyos is mentioned by a (late) ins. "Ed. ’Apy., 1884, p. 170, 1. 53. 
From their activities are named also the Heroes Matton, Keraon in 
Sparta, Deipneus in Achaea (Polemon: Ath. ii, 39C; iv, 173 F).— 
The LX7redavyndopov 7ypdov was mentioned by Antiph., oredavidopos 
jows by Hellan., but his name was unknown: Harp. Phot. Suid. s.v.; 
46,301, 19 ff. Cf. Bockh, Econ. of Ath.?, p. 144 Lew.; CIG. 1, p. 168. 

®2 In Phaleron there was an altar, xadcivar dé “‘ ypwos”’—the 
learned declared it to be an altar of Androgeos the son of Minos: 
Paus. 1, 1, 4.—Cf. 10, 36, 6: Xapadpaious (at Charadra in Phocis) 
‘“Hpdwv Kxadovpévwr (i.e. they were called ‘the Heroes’’) eiciv ev 
TH ayopa Bwpol, Kat adtods of péev Atocxovpwyv, ot S€ émrxwpiwy gaciv 
elvat pwwv.—rypw, ipwivy a Sacrifice is offered at Marathon : 
sacrificial Calendar of the Attic Tetrapolis (fourth century B.C.) in 
Leg. Sacr.i, p.48. pw, jpwivy, ib., p.2; CIA.i, 4: fifth century.— 
Decree ordering a record to be set up in the Peiraeus mapa tov jpw, 
SIG. 834, 26; CJA. ii, 1546-7: ow avédynnev 6 deiva. Roehl, 1G. 


148 NODES@ LO, CHAR PEK aELy 


Ant. 29: (Mykenai) rod jpwds nut, cf. Furtwangler, Ath. Muith. 
1896, p. 9; ib. 323; avéOnxav 7H ypwt (Locris).—On the different 
superimposed layers of stucco on the so-called Heréon west of the Altis 
at Olympia were the ins. ‘“Hpwos, ‘’Hpwop, and once also ‘Hpdwyv. 
There seems to me to be no reason to suppose that this nameless 
Hero was Iamos in particular, the ancestor of the Iamidai (as Curtius 
does, Die Altave v. Olymp., p. 25, Abh. Berl. Ak. 1881). For what 
reason should the name of this highly honoured oracular Hero—which 
had by no means been forgotten—be suppressed ? The name of the 
Hero was not given for the simple reason that it was unknown. 
Nameless wpwes émuxywpiot, who according to some had set up the great 
sacrificial altar of Zeus in Olympia, are mentioned by Paus. 5, 13, 8. 
In some cases the namelessness of a Hero is explained by the fear of 
uttering awful names, which esp. in the case of the spirits of the 
lower world are very frequently suppressed or referred to by a circum- 
locution (cf. Erinyes and spirits of the dead, Rh. Mus. 50, 20, 3): 
cf. Ant. Lib. 13, p. 214,19 W. This was perhaps why Narkissos was 
called pws ovyndds, Str. 404. On the other hand, it was a special 
form of respect, at the sacrifice to a Hero, to call out his name: 7® 
"Aptayain Ovovor >AxavOior é€x Oeompotiov ws ypwi émovvopalortes 
To ovvopa, Hdt. vii, 117. ‘YaAa @vovow kai adrov é€ dvdpartos eis Tpis 
6 tepeds dwvet xrA. Anton. Lib. 26 fin. Cf. Paus. 8, 26, 7: émxadov- 
pevot TOV Mviaypov.—No one will miss the obvious analogy with the 
worship of the gods. In many places in Greece nameless (or merely 
*‘ adjectival ’’’) gods were worshipped, dyvworo. Jeoi, as at Olympia, 
Paus. 5, 14, 8, and elsewhere. At Phaleron Bwypoi de dv re dvopalopévwy 
ayvwotwv Kal Hpwwv (SC., ayvwoTwy ?) Paus. 1, 1, 4. (ayv@res Oeol 
Poll. viii, 119. Hesych.s.v.; Bwypolt dvevupoe in Attica D.L.i, 110.) 

88 TAamodéum apxayéra Pi., O. vii, 78; P. v, 56. The regular 
custom is mentioned by Ephorus ap. Str. 366: 008°’ apynyéras 
vomiobjvar’ Omep maow amodldorat oiKoTais. 

64 Anpokdreldnv d€ KataoTHoa THY atotkiav av’toxpatopa. Official 
decree about Brea :-ClA.i, 31) [(Hicks*and Hill?ny 4 iiss 

So Pism PaaN eS ett. 


CSOT C UV I EOS. 
A Boye Bi bake 5 
peu riCd tani LOS 


8° Thuc. v, 11.—Thus in the fourth century at Sikyon Euphron 
the leader of the demos has been murdered by some of the other party, 
but of moXtra: atrod ws dvdpa ayabov Koprodpevor EOarysdv te ev TH 
ayopa Kal ws apxnyétny THs moAews oéBovrar, Xen., HG. 7, 4, 12. 

7° Worship of the law-givers of Tegea as Heroes: Paus. 8, 48, 1. 

"1 In the case of Sophokles the “‘ heroizing’”’ had a special super- 
stitious reason. He had once received Asklepios as a guest into his 
house (and established a worship of A.) and was therefore regarded 
as especially favoured by heaven and after his death worshipped as 
Hero defiwv: EM. 256, 7-13. (In the temple of Amynos, an 
Asklepiad daimon, on the west of the Akropolis an honorific decree 
dating from the end of the fourth century B.c. has been discovered, 
referring to the dpyedves tod Aceéiwvos together with those of Amynos 
and Asklepios: Ath. Mitt. 1896, p. 299.) In this way many mortals 
who had entertained the gods as guests were themselves made Heroes, 
cf. Deneken, de Theoxen. c, ii. 

72 In the examples collected in n. 35 above the removal of the 
Hero’s bones was in each case commanded by the Delphic oracle. 
Typical examples of the foundation of an annual festival of a Hero on 


NG Ti Se) Ol GHA Bi Rear y: 149 


the recommendation of an oracle: Hdt. i, 167; Paus. 8, 23, 7; 9, 
38, 5. 

73 Plu. Cim. 19—his authority is Nausikrates 6 pyzwp the pupil of 
Isokrates. The god ordered pr dyuedetv Kivwvos. Kimon’s spirit 
was thus expressing its anger at the “‘ neglect’? by sending pestilence 
and yis a¢dopia—he wanted a cult. 

74 Appearance at the battle of Marathon, command of the oracle 
Tipav “E'yerAatov ypwa, Paus. 1, 32, 5—Swarm of bees in the severed 
head of Onesilos at Amathos; the oracle orders his head to be buried 
"Ovncirw Sé Avew ws Apwe ava wav éros, Hdt. v, 114. 

78 Before the battle of Plataea: Plu., Avist. 11. Before the 
occupation of Salamis the oracle ordered Solon apynyods ypwas tAaco, 
Panel. 9. 

76 The Persian Artachaies, of the family of the Achaimenidai, was 
given a burial of great pomp after his death, by Xerxes at Akanthos : 
O@vovor “AxavOior €x Oeompotiov ws ypwe éemovvopalovtes TO ot’vopa, 
Hdt. vii, 117 (—the ’Aprayaiov trados remained a well-known spot, 
Ael., HA. xiii, 20). It is hardly likely that the unusual size of the 
Persian of which Hdt. speaks was the cause of his being made a Hero 
by the oracle. 

ebauseO.89.0-7 9) Plu. 70m. 25. 8 Oinom. ap. Lusi, 5, 34; 
p. 230 C (Vig.). Celsus c. Xt. also refers to the miracle, Or., Cels. iii, 33, 
ee Le Ci. ill, -p, 2065) 111,°29,0 p. 280. 

78 Kleomedes polpa twli datmovia diémty amo THs KiBwrod, Cels. 
Bo mOrge., Ges. 111, 33; p. 293 Lb: Oindm. ap.) Euseb,, PE:.5, 34, 1, 
(p. 296 Giff.) : of Beot avynpetiavro ce WaTep of Tab ‘Op npov tov Tavupndny. 
Thus the gods, acc. to the popular opinion derided by Oinom., gave 
Kleomedes immortality, aQavaciav édwxav, p. 297 Giff. 

79 We rarely hear of other oracles directing Heroes to be worshipped. 
But cf. Xenag. ap. Macr. 5, 18, 30: on the occasion of a failure of the 
crops at Sicily €@vcav Ilediuoxpdryn Twi pwr mpootagavtos avtois Tob 
ex ITa\ukdv ypnotynpiov.—This Hero is probably the same as Pediakrates, 
one of the six orparnyoi of the éyywdpior Xtxavoi in Sicily who were 
slain by Herakles and peéyps tod viv jpwikis Tynqs Tuxdvovaw. D.S. 4, 
Zoeo. {rom limaeus ? 

80 The lines of the oracle about Kleomedes may very well be ancient 
(€axatos 7pHwyv xrX.) simply on the ground that its assertion had not 
been fulfilled. If oracles that come true are rightly regarded as 
subsequent to the events which they profess to foresee, then it is only 
reasonable to regard an oracle which is proved incorrect by later events 
as earliey than the events which contradict its prophecy. 

81 odtos yap 6 Deds epi Ta Tolatta Taow avOpwmois matpios eEnynTHs 
év péeow THs ys emt Tod dudadrod Kabypuevos e€nyetrar, in the words 
of Plato, Rp. 427 C. 

82 yiverar ev AeXdois Hpwou E€via, ev ols Soxet 6 Beds Emi Evia Kadreiv 
Tovs npwas, Sch. Pi., N. vii, 68. 

83 Plu., Avist. 21.—Grave of the Megarians who had fallen in the 
Persian wars, erected in the market of that city: C/G. 1051 (= Sim., 
fy. 107 PLG.), Paus. 1, 43, 3. We hear nothing of the Hero-worship 
of these men, but it is natural to suppose it.—Thus in Phigaleia in 
the market place there was a common grave of the hundred Oresthasians 
who had died fighting for Phigaleia, cal as fpwow adrots évayilovow 
ava mav é€ros, Paus. 8, 41, 1. 

84 Paus. 1, 32, 4: oéBovrar S€ of Mapabdvior tovTous, of mapa rHV 
paxnv améBavov ipwas dvoydlovres. They lay buried on the field of 
battle, Paus. 1, 29,4; 32,3. Every night could be heard the neighing 


150 NOTES lO 3 CHA ET Ee iys 


of horses and the sound of battle. Those who attempted to witness 
the doings of the spirits suffered for it, Paus. l.c. The sight of the 
spirits made men blind or killed them. This is well known of gods— 
yarerol Sé Geol daivecda evapyads. As to the results of seeing a Hero 
ch the) story. insiidts: visi iT. 

SoSPivT ini V) LO weeCis VV BL Vou 40ers 

86 Hdt. ii, 44, has recourse to the idea that there was a difference 
between the god Herakles and the Hero Herakles the son of 
Amphitryon: Kai S8o0xéovor dé por otro dpbdtata “EXAjvwv mor€ew, 
of Scéa ‘Hpdkreva tSpvodpevor ExTnvra Kal TH pev ws abavarw ’OdvpTin 
S¢ éxwvupinv Ovovar, TA Sé ETEpw wS THpwi evayilovar. Combination of 
Jew and evayifew in one sacrifice to Herakles, at Sikyon: Paus. 
2, 10, 1. Herakles. ypws Peds Pi., N. iii, 22. 

87 Varying worship of the same person as Hero and as god, e.g. 
Achilles. He was a god in Epirus for example (called upon as 
*’Aoneros, Plu., Pyr. 1) in Astypalaia (Cic., ND. iii, 45) in Erythrai 
(third century ins. SIG. 600, 50, 75), etc. As Hero he was worshipped 
in Elis where an empty grave was erected to him ex pavreias, and where 
at his annual festival at sunset the women xéarecfat vopilovow, 
i.e. lament over him as dead. Paus. 6, 23, 3. 

88 J shallnot multiply examples and only note Plu., M. Virt., p. 255 E: 
7h Aapitann mpotepov jpwikdas Ttipas amodudevtes, Vatepov ws Ded Oveww 
evn dicavto. 

89 In the well-known lines yes & Avedopye xrA. Hdt. i, 65. 

°° Thus Eupolis calls the Hero Akademos @eds, as Sophokles does the 
Hero Kolonos, and others do the same, see Nauck on Soph., OC. 65. 

91 of Howes Kal al Hpwides Tots Beots Tov adTov Exovar Adyov (i.e. for 
dream-interpretation), aAzv 6ca dvuvdpews azmodcimovra, Artemid. 
iv, 78.—Paus. 10, 31, 11: the ancients considered the Eleusinian 
mysteries aS tooottrov évtiuuétepov than all other religious ceremonies 
dow Kal Beodvs éemimpoobev npwwy. 

82 Machaon’s pvfpa and tepov adytov at Gerenia, Paus. 3, 26,9. His 
bones had been brought by Nestor when he came home from Troy : 
§ 10. \Cf. Schol. Marc. and Tz. Lyc. 1048. ‘The first tojsacriices te 
him was Glaukos the son of Aipytos: Paus: 4, 3, 9.—Podaleirios. 
His np@ov lay at the foot of the Ad dos Apiov by Mt. Garganus 100 stades 
from the sea, pet dé €& atrob moTtadptov mavaKes mpos Tas TOY Opeupatwv 
vooous, Str. 284. The method of incubation given in the text is 
described by Lyc. 1047-55. He also speaks of a river Althainis (so 
called because of its medicinal properties, cf. EM. 63, 3, from Schol. 
Lyc.), which cured disease if one sprinkled oneself with water from 
it-——.? from Timaeus, cf. Tz. on 1050. (Cf. also the spring =by the 
Amphiaraion at Oropos: Paus. 1, 34, 4.) 

®3 Paus. 2, 38, 6.—The brother of Polemokrates, Alexanor, had a 
her6on at Titane in the territory of Sikyon: Paus. 2, 11, 7; 234% 
but we hear nothing of sick-cures (though his name would lead us to 
suspect such).—Other Asklepiadai: Nikomachos, Gorgasos, Sphyros 
(Wide, Lac. Culte, 195). 

*4 Sanctuary of ‘“Hpws larpds near the Theseion: Dem. 19, 249; 
18, 129; Apollon., V. Aesch., p. 265, 5f. West. Decree about 
melting down silver votive-offerings (third and second century), 
CIA. ii, 403-4.—Acc. to Usener (Gétternamen, 149-53) ’Iarpds is to 
be regarded as the proper name of this Hero (really a functional 
“* Sondergoti’’) and not as an adjectival description of a nameless Hero 
(as in qpws otparnyds, orehavnddpos, KAaixodopos—this last in two 
different places, like pws iatpds, see above, n. 61). Acc. to 


NRE See Om CHA LEK Live cr, 151 


his view *Jatpés was given the adj. title wows to distinguish him 
from a 6eos "Jatpds. But this would only be possible if there existed 
a god who was not merely an farpés and so called by this title, like 
"Arodrdwv, Locedav iarpds, but whose proper name was “latpos. 
But there was no such god. Usener (151) infers the existence of a 
god ’Iatpds out of the proper name "JatpoxAfs. But this would only 
be justifiable if there were not a whole host of proper names com- 
pounded with -xAfs, the first part of which is anything but a god’s 
name (list in Fick, Grech. Personennamen*, p. 165 ff.)—There seems 
no real reason for understanding the name ypws latpos differently 
from the analogous 7. ozparnyds, 4. TevyodvAagé, etc.—There existed 
besides even vipdat tatpot, wept ’>HXetav. Hesych. 

9° CIA. ii, 404, distinguishes the Hero referred to by the decree as 
the pws tatpos 6 év doret. This clearly implies a second wows latpos, 
Mam ro Geathens, but thes khets Lex, in 4B. 262,16 f. (ci.iSchs Dems 
p. 437, 19-20 Di.), speaks of a ypws tatpds called Aristomachos és 
etagyn ev Mapaddv mapa to Atovdaiov, who it is clear cannot be the 
jpws tatpos that Demosthenes meant—for he is 6 év dover; but the 
description applies very well to the Hero Physician worshipped in 
Aiticalroutside:the dorv. See L. vo Sybel, Hermes; xx, 43. 

°6 Cenotaph of Kalchas in Apulia near the herodn of Podaleirios, 
Lyc. 1047 ff.—his body was said to be buried in Kolophon: Néaror ; 
Tz. Lyc. 427; Schol. D.P. 850. éyxoipnots at his heroén, sleeping on 
the skin of the sacrificed ram : Str. 284 ; the same as, acc. to Lycophron, 
in the temple of Podaleirios. It almost looks like a mistake in 
either Strabo or Lyc. But the ritual may quite well have been the 
same in both temples and we find it again in the dream-oracle of 
Amphiaraos in Oropos, Paus. 1, 34, 5.—At the present day the 
Archangel Michael is worshipped at Monte Sant’ Angelo beneath 
Mt. Garganus. He appeared there during the fifth century and in 
a cave which is perhaps rightly regarded as the former site of the 
incubation-oracle of Kalchas: Lenormant, a travers TApulie, i, 
p. 61, Paris, 1883. S. Michael had in other cases also taken over the 
duties of the ancient zucubation mantic, and continued them in a 
Christian form—though the task belonged more often to SS. Cosmas 
and Damian—e.g. in the Michaelion in Constantinople, the ancient 
Awobevov: see Malal., pp. 78-9 Bonn.; Soz., HE. ii, 3. 

fielyc, 7/99 1. Arist. and Nicand: ini Schol: ad. loc. Was there a 
legend that made Odysseus die there ? Lyc. himself, it is true, gives 
quite a different story a little later (805 ff.), much to the amazement 
of his scholiasts. Perhaps in 799 f. he was thinking, in spite of the 
dream oracle, only of a xevov offua of Odysseus in Aetolia (as in the 
case of Kalchas). 

*8 Grave of Prot.: Hdt. ix, 116 ff.; Lyc. 532 ff. fepov to6 HpwreatAaov 
Thue. viii, 102, 3. Oracle: Philostr., Her. 678, p. 146 f. K. It was esp. 
also an oracle of healing: ib., 147, 30f. K. 

99 An oracle “‘ Savpedonis in Troade’’ is mentioned in a cursory 
enumeration of oracular sites by Tert., An. 46. It is difficult to 
imagine how Sarpedon, the Homeric one—no other can be meant here— 
whose body had been so ceremoniously brought to Lykia, can have 
had an oracle in the Troad. It may be merely a slip of the pen on 
Tertullian’s part.—At Seleucia in Cilicia there was an oracle of Apollo 
Baapedomos, D.s, 32,10) 2; Zos! 1, 57. Wesseling on D.S:u1,'p. 519, 
has already called attention to the more detailed account in the 
Vit. S. Theclae of Basilius bishop of Seleucia; see the extracts given 
by R. Kohler, Rhein. Mus. 14, 472 ff. There the oracle is described 


152 NOTESU MOM CHARA Ree, 


as a dream-oracle of Sarpedon himself who was consulted at his grave 
in Seleucia. It is also certain, as K6hler remarks, that Sarpedon, 
the son of Europa and brother of Minos, is meant. (This Cretan 
Sarpedon appears first in Hesiod and is quite distinct from the Homeric 
one: Aristonic. on Z 199. Indeed, Homer knows no other brother 
of Minos except Rhadamanthys: & 322. In spite of this he was 
often regarded as the same as the Homeric Sarpedon who came from 
Lykia [cf. the name Zrppaddoni on the Obelisk of Xanthos: Lye. 
Inscr. tab. vii, 1. 6]; acc. to [Apollod.] 3, 1, 3, he lived through three 
yeveal, cf. Schol. V., Z 199: which seems a marvellous feat much in 
the manner of Hellanikos. Others made the Cretan Sarp. into the 
grandfather of the Lykian: D.5.5, 79, 3:) 7) ihevoracles belonged 
properly to Sarpedon ; Apollo seems merely to have been an intruder 
here and to have taken the place of the Hero as he did with Hyakinthos 
at Amyklai.- That Sarpedon, however, was not therefore quite 
forgotten is shown by the Christian notice of him. Perhaps Apollo 
was regarded as merely the patron of the oracle whose real guardian 
was still Sarpedon. It certainly indicates community of worship 
when Ap. is there called “AmoAAwv Laprnddvios; so too in 
Tarentum—brought thither from Sparta and Amyklai—there was 
a tagdos mapa pév tiow ‘Yaxivfov mpocayopevdpevos, mapa d€ Tow 
*"AroXdAwvos ‘YaxivOov (in which no alteration is necessary), Plb. 
8, 30, 2. In Gortyn there was a cult of Atymnos (Solin. 11, 9, p.. 73 
Mom.), the beloved of Apollo (or of Sarpedon) : he too was worshipped 
as Apollo Atymnios (Nonn., D. 11, 131; 258; 12, 217). 

100 The inhabitants of Gadeira sacrificed to Men.: Philostr., VA. 
5, 4, p. 167, 10 K. 7rd MevecOéws pavretov on the Baetis is mentioned 
by Str., p. 140. How it got there we do not know. 

101 Str. 546. Autol. came there as a sharer in the expedition of 
Herakles against the Amazons and with the Argonauts. A.R. ii, 
959-61 SA Elitie Luce: 

102 For Anios see Meineke, An. Alex. 16-17; Wentzel in Pauly- 
Wissowa Anios. Apollo taught him the mantic art and gave him 
great tuuds: D.S. 5, 62, 2. He is called pdvris also by))Clemmmaie 
Strom. i, p.400 P. Perhaps he was also a mantic Hero in the cult that 
was paid to him at Delos; in giving a list of the daiuovas émuywpiovs, 
Clem. Al., Protr. ii, p. 35 P., mentions also wapa 8 ’HAetous ’’Aviov, 
which Sylburg corrected to wapa AndAlous. A priest of Anios fepeds 
*Aviov at Delos is given CIA. ii, 985 D 10; E 4, 53. 

08 D.S. 5, 63, 2. There she is identified with Molpadia, daughter 
of Staphylos. In that case 0éa would more probably be an 
adjectival title of a Heroine whose real name was unknown, like the 
names of the unknown Heroes mentioned above, nn. 60-2. The 
daughter of Kyknos of the same name is quite a different person. 

104 Plut., Agis, 9, cf. Cic., Div. i, 43. At Thalamai we hear of a 
dream-oracle of Jno in front of which was a statue of Pasiphaé : 
Paus. 3, 26, 1. This probably means, as Welcker, KI. Schr. iii, 92, 
says, that the same oracle had once belonged to Pas., but had then been 
afterwards dedicated to Ino. (Not of course that Pasiphaé = Ino, 
and this is not suggested by W., but merely that Ino may have taken 
the place of Pas.) A pavretov As Ilacvdidns is also mentioned by 
gers ay Mir. 49: see also Miller, FHG. ii, 288 [see Keller, Pavadoxogr., 
pwoo, 19): 

#0 Something of the kind seems to be suggested by Pi., P. viii, 57: 
I praise Alkmaion yeirwy dre pow Kal xredvwv dvdAak eudv bravracé 
T’ dovte yas dudaddv map’ doidipov pavrevpdtav 7 édayato ovyy dovotat 


ING OS ae ORCL APIS as LY, 153 


téxvais. Those much-discussed words I can only interpret as follows. 
Alkmaion had a yp@ov near Pindar’s house: he could only be 
** Guardian of his possessions’ if he were either the guardian spirit 
of his neighbour or if Pindar had deposited money for safe keeping 
in his temple—the custom is well known, see Biichsenschtitz, Besitz 
in Cl. Alt., p. 508 ff. As Pindar was once thinking of going to Delphi 
« Alk. applied himself to the prophetic arts traditional in his family ”’ 
(réxvats to be connected with ¢¢ayw., a construction common in Pind.) : 
i.e. he made him a revelation in a dream—on what subject Pindar 
does not say—as was customary in the family of the Amythaonidai, 
though not generally undertaken by Alkmaion (elsewhere) who unlike 
his brother Amphilochos nowhere seems to have had a dream-oracle 
of hisown. (It seems to be a mere slip when Clem. Al., Stv.i, p. 400 P. 
attributes the Oracle in Akarnania to Alk. instead of Amphil.) 

peel, Ow,G7240; 300. D. 

107 Thus no herald might approach the hero6én of Okridion in Rhodos, 
Plu., Q. Gv., 27, 297 C. No flute-player might approach, nor the name 
of Achilles be mentioned in the hero6n of Tenes at Tenedos, ib., 28, 
297 D. How an old grievance of a Hero might be continued into his 
after-life as a spirit is shown by an instructive example given by Hdt. 
v, 67. 

108 Paus. 9, 38,5. The fetters were no doubt intended in such cases 
to fasten the statue (as the abode of the Hero himself) to the site of 
his worship. Thus in Sparta an dyaApa dpyatov of Enyalios was kept 
in fetters. About this the yodpyn trav Aaxedatuoviwy was that ovmore 
tov “Evuddwov devyovta oixjcecbai aodiow evexdpevov tats médais, 
Paus. 3, 15, 7. Similar things elsewhere: Lob., Agl. 275; cf. again 
Paus. 8, 41, 6. The striking effect of the statue fastened to the rocks 
may then very well have given rise to the (aetiological) legend of the 
métpav exov eldwdov. 

109 Hdt. vii, 169-70. 

110 Hdt. vii, 134-7. 

111 Sanctity of trees and groves dedicated to a Hero: Ael., VH. v, 
femetaus, 2, 28,73 but esp. 8, 24, 7. 

112 The story of the wrath of the Hero of Anagyros is told, with a 
few variations in detail, by Jerome ap. Suid. ’Avdy. daiuwv = Apostol. 
Sem ee Dens vov-ii,, 31) (in cod) Coisl’, p. 219 f. Gotting:) ; cf:.Zenob. 
ii, 55 = Dgn. i, 25. Similar stories of a Saiuwv Kirixios, Aiveos, are 
implied but not related by Macarius, iii, 18 (ii, p. 155 Gdtt.). 

113 The story in Suid. goes back to Hieron. Rhod. zepi tpaywd.io701dv 
(fr. 4 Hill.), who compared the story with the theme of the Euripidean 
Phoenix. 

1144 According to Paus. the ghost was explained to be one of the 
companions of Odysseus. Strabo says more particularly Polites, 
who was one of these. But a copy of an ancient picture representing 
the adventure called the daimon Lykas and made him black and 
grim-looking and dressed in a wolf-skin. The last is probably merely 
symbolic and represents full wolf-shape such as belonged to the 
Athenian Hero Lykos: Harp. dexafwv. Wolf-shape given to a death- 
bringing spirit of the underworld, as often: cf. Roscher, Kynanth. 
60-1. This must have been the more ancient form of the legend and 
the daimon was only subsequently changed into a Hero. 

116 The story in its general outline recalls esp. the other Greek 
legends in which similar rescues occur; we are reminded not merely 
of the stories of Perseus and Andromeda or Herakles and Hesione. 
but also of the fight of Herakles with Thanatos for the sake of Alkestis, 


154 NOTES LO @CHAP TICK Sins 


in Eurip., Alc., and of Koroibos’ struggle with the JJoivy in Argos. 
But the story of Euthymos and the Hero of Temesa agrees even in 
its details with a story coming from a far distant locality, Krisa at 
the foot of Mt. Parnassos, where lived the monster Lamia, or Sybaris, 
who was overthrown by Eurybatos—as it is told in Nikander’s 
‘Erepovovpeva, ap. Ant. Lib. viii—and is even to this day related as a 
fairy-tale ; see B. Schmidt, Gv. Marchen, 142, 246 f. It is unnecessary 
to suppose imitation of either legend by the other ; both independently 
reproduce the same fairy-tale motif, which is in fact very common 
everywhere. The monster overcome by the champion is regularly 
a chthonic being, a fiend from below: Thanatos, Poine, Lamia (which 
is the generic name, L’Bapis being apparently the special name of 
this particular Lamia) and the ghostly ‘‘ Hero’”’ of Temesa. 

116 Paus. 6, 6, 7-11, the main source}. Str. 255 ; Ael., VHo-vuipise 
Plut. Paroem. ii, 31; Suid. Hié@vpos. The “ translation ~~ occurs an 
Paus., Ael.,and Suid. According to Aelian he went to the River Kaikinos 
near his old home Locri and disappeared: ddavoOjva. (The river- 
god Kaikinos is regarded as his real father: Paus. 6, 6, 4.) Perhaps 
the heroén of Euthymos may have been near the river. ‘“‘ Heroizing ” 
of Euthymos by a flash of lightning is confirmed by his statue : Callim., 
fr. 399 ; Pliny, NH. 7, 152; Schol. Paus., Hermes, 29, 148.5 sinscrrps 
tion on base of statue of E. at Olympia: Arch. Zeit., 1878, p. 82. 

117 Paus. 6, 11, 2-9; D. Chr.31, 340 M. fi,.247 Armj. Ci) Omonm 
ap. Eus. PE. 5, 34, p. 231-2 V. Oinomaos 232 C refers to a similar 
legend of the pentathlos Euthykles and his statue, at Locri. 

118 The story of Mitys (or Bitys) in Argos is known from Arist. Po. 
9, p. 1452a, 7 ff. (Mirab. 156). A few more such stories are recorded 
in Wyttenbach, Plu. M. vii, p. 316 (Oxon.) ; cf. also Theoc. 23. Just 
as in the story of Theagenes, the statue was punished as responsible 
for the murder, so, too, the attribution of a fetichistic personality 
to inanimate objects lies at the bottom of the ancient customs observed 
in the Athenian murder laws, by which judgment was given in the 
Prytaneion wepi tav aptvywv Tov éuTecdvTwy Til Kal amoKTELWayTwY : 
Poll. viii, 120, after Dem. 23, 76, cf. Arist. A@m. 57, 4. Such judgments 
cannot originally have been merely symbolical in meaning. 

£12) Luc. DisConce 12. aPatsm@Gnm Liao: 

#20 Luc., lc. On Polydamas see Paus. 6, 5, and among many others 
Eus. Chron. Olympionic., Ol. 93, p. 204 Sch. 

**1 His victory was won in Ol. 6 (see also Eus. Chron., Ol. 6, p. 196) ; 
thesstatue erected to him only in Ol 80)s3Pausmye iy ae: 

Pe bans w/iel 7, elo 14. 

feo elie Uness oD. 

eeSe PASS 0 15,8 Ooo Oe 

PEetidts vili.c3S-93 

126 Hdt. viii, 64. The difference should be noted: evéacGat rotar Peotar 
Kal emikarécacbat tos Alaxidas cuupaxovs. So, too, we are told in 
Hdt. v, 75, that both the Tyndaridai éewixAnror eizovro the Spartans 
into the field. (The Aeginetans sent the Aiakidai to the help of the 
Thebans, but as they proved unprofitable the Thebans rods AiaxidSas 
amedidocay. Hdt. v, 80). 

Eote Pitt Lnemte LO: 

128 “Hdte vil e121! 

#9 Kychreus: Paus. 1, 36, 1. The Hero himself appeared as a 
snake, as also e.g. Sosipolis in Elis before the battle, Paus. 6, 20, 4-5; 
Erichthonios, Paus, 1, 24, 7: for ot madaot uddAvoTa tov Cowv Tov 
Spdxovra Tots ypwou ovvwKxeiwoay, Plu., Cleom. 39. The temple snake, 


S 


INO ir Oa CLEA P TE Ree LV 155 


the Kuypetdns odis kept at Eleusis, was undoubtedly the Hero himself ; 
though acc. to the rationalizing account in Str. 393-4 it had merely 
been reared by Kychreus. 

130 Themistokles in Hdt. viii, 109. 

Eocens, Oyn,-i, 17: 

132 The Dioscuri helped the Spartans in war, Hdt. v, 75 ; the Locrian 
Aias the Locrians in Italy: Paus. 3, 19, 12-13; Conon 18 (artistically 
elaborated and no longer naive legend but both taken from the same 
source). 

= -ettat. vi,.61 (hence Paus. 3, 7, 7); grave of Helen ‘at Theérapne, 
ios. 3, 19; 8. 

134 Hdt. vi, 69. Thus, too, the Theagenes mentioned above was 
regarded in Thasos not as the son of Timosthenes, rod Oeayévous 5é 
TH peytpt ‘Hpaxdéovs ovyyevéo@at daca é€orxos Tipoodéver, Paus. 6, 
11, 2.—Everyone will be reminded, too, of the fable of Zeus and 
Alkmene. JBut it should be noticed how near such stories as that so 
naively told by Herod. approach the risky novel-plot in which some 
profane mortal visits in disguise an unsuspecting woman and plays 
the part of a god or spirit-lover. That in Greece, too, such stories 
were current we may perhaps deduce from Eur., fon, 1530 ff. Ov., 
M. iii, 281, says outright: multi nomine divorum thalamos iniere 
pudicos. An adventure of this sort is told by the writer of [Aeschines] 
Ep. 10, and he is able to produce two similar cases which he certainly 
has not invented himself (8-9).—In more recent times both western 
and Oriental nations have delighted in telling such stories; a 
typical Oriental example is the story of “the Weaver as Vishnu ” in 
the Panchatantra (see Benfey, Pantsch. i, § 56); in the West there is 
the story of Boccaccio dealing with Alberto of Imola as the angel 
Gabriel, Decam. iv, 2.—Very suspicious, too, seems the account of a 
miracle that occurred in Epidauros: a barren woman comes to the 
temple of Asklepios to seek advice by éyxolunows. A big snake 
approaches her and she has a child. “Ed. ’Apy. 1885, pp. 21-2, 
peat 20. ff. 

135 é« tod Nowiov Tod mapa THoe OUpyot avrAcina tSpupevov, Hdt. vi, 69. 

136 Hero émi mpodvpw, Callim., Ep. 26; a Hero apo mvAats, mpo 
ddopovow, late epigram from Thrace, Epigy. Gr. 841; apwas mAnoiov 
THs TOO (ddvTOs Oiklas tOpvuéevous, Artemid. iv, 79, p. 248, 9 H. This, 
too, is how Pindar’s words about the Hero Alkmaion as his yeirwy 
Seemtoe be understood:  Pyih. vili, 97, ‘see ‘above, ni 105. An 
Aesopian fable dealing with the relations of a man with his neighbour- 
Hero begins yowd tis él THs olkias Exwv TovT@ ToAUTEADS EOvev, 161 
Halm.; cf. also Babr. 63.—A similar idea is at work when a son put 
up a monument to his father at the doorway of his house—see the 
fine lines of Eur., Hel. 1165 ff. 

137 Kimpw év0a Tetxpos amapye:. Aias éyer Salamis and Achilles 
his island in the Pontus ; Oézis 3é xparet POia, and so, too, Neoptolemos 
in Epirus: Pi., N. iv, 46-51; audéwes used of a Hero, P. ix, 70: rots 
Geots Kal jpwot tots KaTéxovar THY TOAW Kal THY ywpav THY ADnvatwy : 
Dem. 18, 184. 

138 Cf. Alabandus whom the inhabitants of Alabanda sanctius colunt 
quam quemquam nobilium deorum: Cic., NJ. iii, 50 (in connexion 
with an anecdote relating to the fourth century).—Tenem, qui apud 
Tenedios sanctissimus deus habetur, Cic., V. ii, 1, 49. 


CHAPTER V 
THE CULT}OFRSOULS 


Greek civilization as we see it reflected in the Homeric 
poems strikes us as so variously developed, and yet so complete 
in itself, that if we had no further sources of information, we 
should naturally suppose that the characteristic culture of 
the Greeks there reached the highest point attainable under 
the conditions set by national character and external circum- 
stance. In reality the Homeric poems stand on the border 
line between an older development that has come to complete 
maturity and a new, and in many ways differently constituted, 
order of things. The poems themselves offer an idealized 
picture of a past that was on the point of disappearing entirely. 
The profound upheavals of the following centuries can be 
measured by their final results ; we can guess the underlying 
forces from a study of the individual symptoms. But the fact 
remains that in the very imperfect state of our information 
about this period of transformation, we can do little more 
than recognize the existence of all the conditions necessary 
for a complete reorganization of Greek life. We can see how 
the once less-important races in Greece now come into the 
foreground of history ; how they set up new kingdoms by the 
right of conquest on the ruins of the old, and bring into 
prominence their own special ways of thinking. Colonization 
over a wide area meant the expansion of Greek life; while 
the colonies themselves, as 1s so often the case, traversed all 
the stages of development at a much faster rate. Commerce 
and industry developed, calling forth and satisfying new 
demands. New elements of the population came to the fore, 
governments began to fall and the old rule of the kings gave 
way to Aristocracy, Tyranny, Democracy. In friendly and 
(in the West especially) hostile relationship the Greeks 
came into contact more than formerly with foreign peoples in 
every stage of civilization who influenced them in many 
directions. 

All these great movements must have produced many fresh 
currents in intellectual life too. And in fact the attempt to 
get free from tradition, from the long-standing culture that 
seemed, when reflectedin the Homeric poems, so permanent and 


LOCUS ORs SOUES Lod 


complete in itself, is seen most clearly inthe sphere of poetry. 
The poets threw off the tyranny of the epic convention. They 
ceased to obey its formal verse-rhythm. And with the freedom 
thus gained from its vocabulary of stock words, phrases, and 
images, it was inevitable that the point of view also should 
change and gain in width. The poet no longer turns his gaze 
away from his own time and his own person. He himself 
becomes the central figure of his poetry, and to express the 
ferment of his own emotions he invents for himself the most 
natural rhythm, in close alliance with music which now 
becomes an important and independent element in Greek 
life. It is as though the Greeks had just discovered the full 
extent of their own capacities and dared to make free use of 
them. In every branch of the plastic arts the hand of the 
artist wins in the course of the centuries an ever greater 
capacity to give visible shape to the imagined world of beauty. 
Even the ruins of that world reveal to us more plainly and 
impressively (because less mixed with conscious reflexion) 
than any literary achievement, the thing that is of permanent 
value in Greek art. 

It was impossible that religion, alone unaffected by the 
general atmosphere of change, should remain unaltered in the 
old paths. But here, even more than in other directions, we 
must admit that the inward reality of the change remains 
hidden from us. We can see indeed many external alterations, 
but of the directing spirit which called them forth we hardly 
catch more than a glimpse. It is easy, by comparing the 
later condition of religion with the Homeric, to see how enor- 
mously the objects of religious worship have multiplied. We 
can see how much more sumptuous and elaborate ceremonial 
has become and observe the development in beauty and 
variety, in conjunction with the fine arts, of the great religious 
festivals of the different cities and peoples of Greece. Temples 
_and sculpture bear unmistakable witness to the increased power 
and importance of religion. That an inward and far-reaching 
change had come over religious thought and belief might have 
been already guessed from the fame and importance which 
belonged to the oracle at Delphi, now coming into real power ; 
and from the many new developments in Greek religious life 
taking their origin from this spiritual centre. At this time there 
grew up, under the influence of a deepening moral sense, that 
new interpretation of religion that we meet with in its com- 
pleted form in Aeschylus and Pindar. The age was decidedly 
more “‘ religious-minded ”’ than that in which Homer lived. 
It is as though the Greeks then went through a period such as 


158 THE-'GULL “OP SSO ies 


most civilized nations go through at some time or other, and 
such as the Greeks themselves were to repeat more than once 
in after centuries—a period in which the mind after it has at 
least half succeeded in winning its freedom from disquieting 
and oppressive beliefs in invisible powers shrinks back once 
more. Under the influence of adversity it feels the need of 
some comforting illusions behind which it may take shelter 
and be relieved in part of the burden of responsibility. 

The obscurity of this period of growth hides also from our 
sight the origin and development of beliefs about the soul 
very different from the Homeric. The results of the process 
are however visible enough and we can still discern how a 
regular cult of the disembodied soul and eventually a belief 
in immortality fully worthy of the name were being built up 
at this time. These things are the result of phenomena which 
partly represent the re-emergence of elements in religious life 
which had been submerged in the previous period, and partly 
the entry of fresh forces which in conjunction with the 
resuscitated old give rise between them to a third and new 
creation. 


I 
CULT OF “THE GHTHONIC? DEITIES 


The chief new feature revealing itself to comparative study 
in the development of religion in the post-Homeric period is 
the worship of chthonic deities, that is, of deities dwelling in 
the interior of the earth. And yet it is an undoubted fact 
that these divinities are among the oldest possessions of Greek 
religious faith. Indeed, bound as they are to the soil of the 
country, they are the true local deities, the real gods of home 
and country. They are also not unknown to Homer; but 
epic poetry had transferred them, divested of all local limita- 
tion, to a distant subterranean region, inaccessible to living 
men, beyond the limits of Okeanos. There Aides and the 
terrible Persephoneia rule as guardians of the dead. From 
that distant and unapproachable place they can have no 
influence upon the life and doings of men on earth. Religious 
cult, too, only knows these deities in connexion with particular 
localities and particular groups of worshippers. Each of 
these worships the deities of the underworld as denizens of 
their soil and their countryside alone. They are untroubled 
by any considerations of a general and uniform kingdom of 
the gods such as the epic had set up; nor are they disturbed 
by similar and conflicting claims made by neighbouring 


7 io 
i 


- 


CUP moO CECHONICSDETPIES 159 


communities. And only in these local cults are the gods of 
the lower world seen in their true nature as they were con- 
ceived by the faith of their worshippers. They are the gods 
of asettled, agricultural, inland population. Dwelling beneath 
the soul they guarantee two things to their worshippers: they 
bless the cultivation of the ground and ensure the increase of 
the fruits of the soil to the living; they receive the souls of 
the dead into their underworld.t In certain places they also 
send up from the spirit-world revelations of future events. 

The most exalted name we met with among these dwellers 
below the earth is that of Zeus Chthonios. This is at once the 
most general and the most exclusive designation of the god 
of the lower world ; for the name “‘ Zeus ’”’ had in many local 
cults thus preserved the generalized meaning of “‘ god”’ in 
combination with a particularizing adjective. The Iliad also 
once speaks of “ Zeus of the lower world ” ; though by this is 
meant none other than the ruler of the distant realm of the 
dead, Hades. Hades too, in the Hesiodic Theogony is once 
called “ Zeus the Chthonian ’”’.2 But the agricultural poem of 
Hesiod bids the Boeotian countryman, when preparing his 
fields for sowing, pray for a blessing to the Chthonic Zeus. 
Zeus Chthonios was also sacrificed to in Mykonos for the 
Bruits of the earth *’.? 

But, more frequently than under this most general and 
exalted title,4 we meet with the god of the living and the dead 
under various disguises. The gods of the underworld were 
generally referred to by affectionate or cajoling nicknames 
that laid stress on the lofty or beneficent character of their 
rule and threw a veil over the darkest side of their nature with 
conciliatory euphemism.® Thus Hades had many flattering 
titles and special names.® So, too, in many places Zeus of the 
underworld was worshipped as Zeus Eubouleus or Bouleus,’ 
at other places, especially Hermione, as Klymenos.§ Zeus 
Amphiaraos, Zeus Trophonios we have dealt with already 
in their capacity of Heroes, but they are really nothing else 
but such earth deities with honourable titles, who have been 
deprived to some extent of their full status as gods ® and have 
on that account developed all the more strongly the oracular 
side of their powers. Hades, the ruler of that distant kingdom 
of darkness, is one of this class of manifestations of Zeus 
Chthonios that vary in name according to the different 
localities of their worship. The king of the shadows in Erebos 
as he appears in Homer has no altars or sacrifices made to 
him; but these things belong to him as the local god of 
particular places. In the Peloponnese there were local centres 


160 RHE SOU Lie Ole sO iit 


of his worship in Elis and Triphylia,™ sites of a very ancient 
civilization ; and it is probable enough that tribes and clans 
having their origin there contributed by their wanderings to the 
spread of their native cult of the chthonic deity in other Greck 
countries as well.!2 Hades, too, was for his Peloponnesian 
worshippers a god of the fertility of the earth just as much as 
a god of the dead.4? And in the same way he was the lord 
of the Souls as well, in those places where “‘in fear of the name 
of Hades ”’ 14 he was called, in honour of his beneficent powers, 
Plouton, Plouteus, or Zeus Plouteus. 

The welfare of the living and the dead was also the concern 
of the female deity of the underworld called by the name 
of the earth itself Ge or Gaia. At the places where she was 
worshipped she was regarded as one who brought fruitfulness 
to the fields, but she held sway over the souls of the dead as 
well, in conjunction with whom prayers and sacrifice were 
offered to her.1> Her temples remained in honour, especially 
at Athens and at the primeval centre of ancient worship of 
the gods, Olympia.t® But her personality had never been quite 
reduced to definite and intelligible outline from the enormous 
vagueness natural to primitive deities. Earth-goddesses of 
more recent and intelligible form had supplanted her. She 
retained longest her mantic powers which she exercised from 
beneath the earth, the abode of spirits and souls, at ancient 
oracular sites—though even here she often had to give way to 
oracular gods of another description, such as Zeus and Apollo. 
A poet indeed mentions her once side by side with the great 
ruler of the lower world,1? but in actual worship she was 
seldom found among the groups of male and female deities 
of chthonic nature such as were worshipped together at many 
places. Above all, at Hermione there flourished from primitive 
times a solemn cult of the lower-world Demeter in conjunction 
with the lower-world Zeus, under the name of Klymenos, and 
with Kore.1® At other places Plouton and these two goddesses 
were worshipped together, or Zeus Eubouleus and the same 
two, etc.19 The names of the underworld god vary indefinitely, 
but the names of Demeter and her divine daughter appear 
every time unchanged. Either alone or together, and 
worshipped in connexion with other related deities, these 
two goddesses have by far the most important place in the 
cult of the underworld. The fame and widespread popularity 
of their cult in all Greek cities of the mother-country and in 
the colonies proves more than anything else that since 
Homeric times a change must have taken place in the sphere 
of religious emotion and service of the gods. 


CULTSORSCHTLHONIG DEITIES 161 


Homer gives no hint of the character or importance of the 
later cult of Demeter and Persephone. For him Persephone 
is simply the grim unapproachable Queen of the dead, Demeter 
invariably (and solely) a goddess of the fertility of crops * ; 
she stands apart indeed from the rest of the Olympians, but 
no reference to a close asssociation with her daughter is ever 
made.24_ Now, however, both goddesses appear in various 
and changing activity, but always closely associated, and 
it seems as if they had come to share some of their previously 
distinct characteristics. Both are now chthonic deities who 
together have in their protection the growth of the crops 
and the care of the souls of the dead. How in detail the change 
came about we can no longer discover. It may be that, in 
the times of the great migrations, from various centres of the 
worship of the two goddesses, such as had existed from great 
antiquity in the Peloponnese especially,?? there issued forth 
this faith that differed so essentially from the Homeric-Ionic 
view of things. It must have spread just as in later times 
the special variety of the cult of the closely associated goddesses 
that was practised in Eleusis was widely propagated by regular 
missions. It also seems that Demeter, in whose name there 
was early a tendency to recognize a second “ Mother Earth,” 
in many places took the place of Gaia in religious cult, and 
thereby entered into closer connexion with the realm of the 
souls below the earth. 


§ 2 


As the numbers of the underworld beings increased, and 
their cult grew and expanded, these divinities began to have 
a very different meaning for the living from what they once 
had for the Greeks of the Homeric age. The upper and the 
lower worlds are drawn closer to each other ; the world of the 
living borders upon that world after death over which the 
chthonic gods hold sway. The ancient belief that the earth- 
caverns of their own land, on which men dwelt and worked, 
were the near and accessible abode of divinity, now reappeared 
here and there, and was no longer completely awed into silence 
by the poetic lustre of the all-embracing divine world of 
‘Olympos. We have spoken in a previous chapter of Amphi- 
araos at Thebes, Trophonios in the Lebadean cave, and Zeus 
in the cave on Mt. Ida; and again of that Zeus who was seen 
enthroned by those who descended into a cave in Epirus. 
These are all vestiges of the same belief which originally 
underlay all local cults of underworld deities. The realm of 

M 


162 THE CUI Or SsOUIs 


chthonic gods, of spirits and departed souls, seemed to be close 
at hand. Ploutonia, i.e. direct inlets to the underworld, 
existed at many places,?* as also did Psychopompeia, clefts 
in the rock through which the souls can pass out into the upper 
world. In the middle of the city of Athens, in a natural 
chasm on the Areiopagos, underworld beings were reputed to 
have their home.24 The most striking denial of the separation 
between the living and the underworld, such as was demanded 
by Homeric theology, was at Hermione. Here, behind the 
temple of Chthonia lay a sacred precinct of Plouton or 
Klymenos with a chasm in the ground through which Herakles 
had once brought up Kerberos to the earth—and an “ Acher- 
usian Lake ’’.25 So near did the spirit world seem here, that 
the people of Hermione did not give their dead the usual coin 
to pay the fare of Charon, the ferryman of the dead: 2° for 
them, in whose own country lay the river Acheron, no tract of 
water lay between the land of the living and the dead. 

More important than these cases of contact between the 
dark underworld and the world of the living—for the localiza- 
tion of the underworld still remained for the most part matter 
of fancy—is the fact that the creatures of that world are again 
\ drawing closer to the senses ofmen. The thoughts of men turn 
more frequently to the other world at so many festivals and 
anniversaries : the gods who rule below desire and repay the 
veneration of mankind, both of the individual and the city. 
And in the train of the chthonic gods the souls of the dead, 
always closely bound to them, receive a cult which in many 
particulars goes beyond anything customary in the Homeric 
Age. 


II 
FUNERAL CEREMONIES AND WORSHIP OF THE DEAD 


The first duty that the survivors owe to their dead is to bury 
the body in the customary manner. This age takes the matter 
more seriously than the Homeric people had done. Whereas 
in Homer denial of burial to enemies fallen in war is often 
mentioned, it is now regarded as a religious duty that is 
seldom neglected to give back the bodies of the fallen foe for 
burial. To deny the honour of burial to members of one’s own 
city is an outrage of the most extreme kind ; everyone knows 
what terrible vengeance for such a neglect of duty was taken, 
by the excited populace at Athens, on the generals after 
Arginousal. Nothing can release a son from the duty of 
burying his father and offering him the regular gifts at his 


FUNERAL CEREMONIES 163 


grave.*” And if the relations, in spite of everything, neglect 
their task the law at Athens requires the Demarch to see to 
the burial of his fellow demesman.?® Religious requirements, 
however, go beyond the law. At the solemn agricultural 
festival of Demeter the Bouzyges at Athens invoked a curse 
on all who should leave a corpse unburied.?® This matter, 
which the chthonic deities take under their protection, is no 
mere sanitary police regulation. It is not any such considera- 
tion, but solely the “‘ unwritten laws’”’ of religion which are 
obeyed by Antigone when she covers the dead body of her 
brother with a little dust : even such symbolical burial is enough 
to avert the “abomination ’’ (dyos). Motives of pure piety 
may have played their part, but the really fundamental idea 
underlying all such practices was the one already met with 
in the Iliad : 9° that the soul of the unburied person can find 
no rest in the hereafter. The ghost haunts the neighbourhood, 
its rage afflicts the land in which it is detained against its 
will ; and the withholding of burial “‘ is worse for the witholder 
than for him to whom burial is refused ’’.24 Condemned 
criminals, indeed, are thrown by the state, unburied, intoa pit ;%” 
the sacrilegious and traitors to their country are denied burial 
in the ground of that country.** This is a formidable punish- 
ment, for even though the outlaw is buried in a foreign 
country,?4 his soul cannot be permanently tended there. 
Only the family of the dead in their own home can give their 
departed kinsman the honour due to him in the cult of the 
souls, and only they at the spot where his remains lie buried.* 

What we know of the details of the funeral ceremonies, 
differs very little in essence from what had survived into the 
Homeric age as customs no longer fully explained by con- 
temporary belief. The new features that we meet with may 
also, for the most part, be very primitive usage restored to 
currency. Some of the particular details make the solemnity 
of the act more apparent. 

After the eyes and mouth have been closed by the next of 
kin the body is washed and anointed by women of the family, 
and clothed in cleangarments. It is then laid out upon a bier 
in the interior of the house for the ceremonial lying-in-state. In . 
Athens marjoram was strewn under the body, for superstitious 
reasons,®® and also four broken-off vine branches ; in the grave, 
also, the corpse lay on vine branches.37_ Underneath the bier 
were placed ointment vessels of the peculiar slim shape that 
the graves have restored to us again in such numbers. At 
the door of the room, for the benefit of those leaving the house 
who had incurred religious defilement by coming in contact 


164 THEE CULT OF ;SOURS 


with the corpse, was placed a bowl full of pure water brought 
in from another house.?8 Cypress branches fixed upon the 
house door outside warned the scrupulous that a corpse was 
in the house.39 The head of the dead person was generally 
decked with garlands and fillets, in a manner unknown to the 
Homeric age, as a sign, it appears, of respect for the higher 
sanctity of the departed.*° 

The lying-in-state of the dead, lasting the whole of one day, 
was certainly not intended originally to serve the purpose of a 
public “‘ notification of death ’’, such as later writers attribute 
to it.44 The funeral dirge was sung at the bier of the dead 
man, and to give opportunity for this ceremony was its real 
purpose. The habit of the old Attic government of the 
Eupatridai had increased the pomp of funeral ceremonies in 
every direction, and had encouraged an extravagant cult of the 
souls of the departed. Solon’s legislation had to restrain 
and limit such exaggeration in many ways, and in particular, 
the tendency to increase unduly the lamentation sung over 
the dead body required to be kept within bounds. Only the 
women of the immediate family of the dead might take part 
in it, for to them alone the cult of the departed belonged as 
a duty.4* The violent expression of grief, the tearing of the 
cheeks, beating the breast and head, was forbidden,* as also 
was the singing of “‘ poems ’’,44 i.e. in all probability regular 
funeral dirges specially written for the purpose such as 
Homer made the women sing round Hektor’s bier. To extend 
the subject of the funeral dirge to apply to others beside the 
person then being buried had to be made absolutely illegal.* 
This prohibition must also have been applied already to the 
gathering at the graveside. But to sacrifice animals before the 
procession to the grave was a very ancient custom, and it 
seems as if Solon forebade this too.4® In other states, also, 
legislation was necessary to put a curb on the tendency to over- 
do the violence of the expressions of grief for the dead 4” which 
were common in the antiquity of the Greeks as among many 
of the “uncivilized” tribes who carry them to the point of 
exhaustion. It was not simple piety or natural human grief 
(never particularly given to violent or excessive demonstra- 
tion) that caused these things. It was rather the ancient belief 
that the soul of the dead was still invisibly present, and would 
be pleased at the most violent expressions of grief for its loss.“ 
The dirge, carried to this extreme, belongs in fact to the cult 
of the departed spirit. The restraints placed upon the tradi- 
tional lamentation may in their turn—in so far as they were 
effective—have been derived not from considerations of good 


FUNERAL CEREMONIES 165 


sense (which rarely have much influence in such matters) but 
from religious or superstitious reasons.? 

The lying-in-state of the body seems invariably to have 
lasted for one day only.®® In the early morning of the third 
day *! after death the corpse, together with the bier on which 
it lay, was borne out of the house. Legislation was in some 
places necessary to check excessive ostentation at the funeral 
procession.°? What pomp and ceremony was customary in 
the time of the old aristocratic rule at this part of the cult of 
the dead, we may gather (if it corresponded at all to reality) 
from the picture of a funeral procession represented on a very 
archaic “‘ Dipylon vase ’’.®3 There the body is carried on high 
on a wagon drawn by two horses: men carrying swords 
surround it, and a whole company of women, making lamenta- 
tion and beating their heads, follow the procession. At Athens 
the attendance in the procession was confined, in the case of 
women at least, to those of the immediate kinsfolk (for three 
generations). The men, who had their place in front of the 
women seem to have been admitted without such restriction.>4 
The admission of hired companies of Karian women and men, 
singing the national dirges, seems at Athens not to have been 
forbidden.®> At Keos and elsewhere, the laws ordered pro- 
cessions to the grave to be conducted in silence.°® On the 
whole, the discipline of respectable city life reduced the 
“excessive and barbaric ’’,57 which must once have been the 
rule in the display of mourning, to a discreet symbolism. 

On the details of the burial procedure our information is 
incomplete. Occasional expressions used by Greek authors 
allow us to conclude—and this is confirmed by the excavation 
of graves in Greek countries—that besides the custom, 
exclusively prevailing in Homeric times, of cremation, the 
more ancient practice of burying the body unburnt was still 
kept up.6®& The body was not intended to be completely 
destroyed. Out of the ashes of the funeral pyre the son care- 
fully gathers the remains of his father’s bones *® in order to 
bury them, enclosed in an urn or a box. If on the other hand 
the body remains unburnt, it is either enclosed in a coffin made 
of baked clay, or wood ®°—a custom clearly betraying its 
foreign origin, or else—and this must have been certainly 
the older and more purely native Greek usage—it is let down 
into the earth without a coffin, and laid upon a bed of leaves ;* 
at other times, if the nature of the ground allows, it may rest 
unburied in a rock-chamber, upon a bed of stonework. 

The soul, though now set free, keeps up some connexion 
with the body it once inhabited. It is for its use and pleasure 


166 THES CULL RS OTe SOUS 


that an ample provision of household implements and vessels 
is laid beside the corpse (though no longer the whole of the 
dead man’s possessions as once was usual) ; and graves since 
opened have restored such things in large numbers to our 
gaze.®§ But the Greeks never seriously believed that such a 
phantasmal existence could be prolonged to eternity. 
Elaborate expedients for the perpetual preservation of the 
corpse (by embalmment and other means, such as were 
employed in the case of bodies buried in the Mycenzan shaft- 
graves)*®4 were unknown in these later times—except as a 
peculiar archaism in the burial of Spartan kings. 


g 2 


Once the body is buried, the soul of the dead enters the 
invisible company of the “ Better and Superior ’’.® This 
belief, which Aristotle regarded as of primeval antiquity in 
Greece, emerges very clearly in the cult-observance of these 
post-Homeric centuries from the obscurity which the Homeric 
age had imposed upon it. The soul of the dead has its special 
cult-group composed naturally enough of the descendants and 
family of the dead, and of them only. There even survived 
a dim memory of the time when the body of the dead was 
buried inside the house, which thus became the immediate 
centre of his cult.66 That must quite certainly have been 
during an age which knew little or nothing of the almost 
painful sensitiveness to the idea of ritual “ purification ’’ such 
as prevailed in later times. At least, we have no reason for 
supposing that the Greeks (like many so-called “ savage”’ 
peoples among whom the custom prevails of burying the 
corpse within the dead man’s own hut) deserted the house 
that had now become haunted, and left it to the undisturbed 
possession of the ghost of the dead man buried there.*? To 
bury the dead within the walls of the city, at least, was con- 
considered unobjectionable in later times by certain Dorian 
states.68 Even where religious scruples and the practical 
convenience of city life combined to fix the place for burials 
outside the city walls, families kept their graves together 
often in a single extensive plot with a wall built round it.” 
Where a country estate belonged to a family, this generally 
also included the graves of its ancestors.7° 

Wherever it was situated, the grave was holy, as being the 
place where later generations tended and worshipped the souls 
of departed members of their family. Grave columns indicated 
the holiness of the spot ; 74 trees and sometimes a complete 


BUND RAT CEREMONIES 167 


grove surrounded the grave, as they did so often the altars 
and temples of the gods.72, These were intended to serve as 
pleasant retreats for the souls of the beloved dead.” 

Sacrificial offerings began for the most part at the actual 
time of the funeral. The custom of pouring libations of wine, 
oil, and honey at the grave was probably in general use.74 
Even the sacrifice of animals, such as was made at the funeral 
pyre of Patroklos and even of Achilles, cannot have been 
unusual at an earlier period. Solon expressly forbade the 
sacrifice of an ox at the grave.’®> At Keos, permission is just 
as expressly given for a “ preliminary sacrifice to be offered 
at the funeral in accordance with ancestral custom ’’.76 
When the funeral ceremony is over, the members of the family, 
after a solemn rite of religious purification,’? put on garlands 
(they had previously avoided this 78) and begin the funeral 
feast.*® This also was a part of the cult of the dead. The 
soul of the dead man was regarded as being present—even as 
playing the part of host.8° It was awe felt for the invisible 
presence that originally inspired the custom of speaking only 
praise of the dead at the funeral feast.§4 This feast was an 
entertainment given in the house of the dead man to the 
surviving members of his family. The dead man had a meal 
to himself alone, which was offered at the grave ®* on the 
third and on the ninth day after the funeral.®? On the ninth 
day it appears that ancient usage brought the period of 
mourning to an end.8* Where it was extended to a longer ' 
period the earlier series of offerings to the dead was prolonged 
proportionally. Sparta had a period of mourning lasting eleven 
days.®* At Athens, in addition to the sacrifice on the third 
and ninth days, another funeral feast which might be repeated 
several times, was held on the thirteenth day.” 

Even after the ceremonies attached to the funeral itself 
were at last over, the relations of the dead were by no means 
released from the duty of tending not merely the grave, but 
the soul of the deceased member of their family. In particular 
the son and heir had no more sacred duty to perform than the 
offering of “the customary things” (7a véyipa) to the soul 
of his father. These consisted above all of libations to be 
made to the dead on certain fixed and recurrent festivals. 
On the 30th of the month there was a traditional feast of the 
dead.8§ Besides this, every year at the “‘ Genesia ’’, when the 
birthday of the dead came round, the occasion was regularly 


celebrated with sacrifice.8® The day on which he first entered |“ 


this life is still of importance to the psyche of the dead man. 
It is plain that no impassable gulf was fixed between life and 


168 THE CUI Ore SOUES 


death: it almost seems as though life went on quite unin- 
terrupted by death. 

Besides these variable feasts of the Genesia, celebrated as 
they occurred by the individual families, there was at Athens 
a festival, also called the Genesia, at which the whole citizen 
body did honour to the souls of their dead relatives on the 
5th Boédromion.®°® We hear also of the Nemesia as a feast of 
the dead in Athens *! (probably intended for the averting of 
the anger of the dead—always a subject of apprehension), and 
of various festivals of the dead in other Greek States.9* At 
Athens the chief festival of all the dead occurred at the close 
of the Dionysiac feast of the Anthesteria, in the spring, of 
which it formed the concluding day. This was the time when 
the dead swarmed up into the world of the living, as they did 
in Rome on the days when the “‘ mundus patet ’’, and so still 
in the belief of our own (German) country people at “‘ Twelfth- 
tide’. The days belonged to the souls (and their master 
Dionysos) ; they were days of ‘‘ uncleanness ’’*? unsuited to the 
business of city life. The temples of the gods were closed 
during that period.9* As protection against the ghosts 
invisibly present, the citizens employed various old and tried 
precautionary measures; they chewed hawthorn leaves on 
their morning walk, and smeared their doorposts with pitch. 
In this way the ghosts were kept at arms length.9° Each 
family made offering to its own dead, and the offerings they 
made have remained for the most part the appropriate gifts 
of the dead on their feast-days in many lands down to modern 
times. A special offering was made to the dead °° on the last 
day of the feast, the Chytrai, which was sacred to none of the 
Olympians, but to Hermes the leader of the dead. To this 
god—but “for the dead ’’—were offered cooked vegetables 
and seeds in pots (which gave their name to this day of the 
festival).®” It seems probable that as a sacrifice to the dead 
honey-cakes were thrown into a cleft of the earth in the 
Temple of Ge Olympia.®& Indoors, too, the swarming ghosts 
entered and were entertained. They were not, however, 
permanently welcome guests, and finally they were driven out 
of the house in a manner parallelled at the close of festivals 
of the dead among many nations of old and modern times. 
‘“ Begone ye Keres, Anthesteria is over ’’ were the words used 
in sending away the souls, and it is remarkable that in this 
formula they were given their primeval name—a name whose 
original sense had been forgotten by Homer, but not by the 
language of the common people of Attica.’ 

Individuals may have found still further opportunities of 


FUNERAL CEREMONIES 169 


bringing gifts to their own dead and showing their reverence 
for them. The cult paid by the family to the spirits of their 
ancestors is hardly distinguished, except by the greater limita- 
tion of the circle of worshippers, from the worship of under- 
world deities and Heroes. In the case of the souls, however, 
nature itself united the sacrificers and worshippers (and no one 
else) with the object of their devotion. If we wish to form 
some idea of the way in which (under the influence of a 
civilization that tended to reduce all primitive grandeur to 
mere idyll) the worship of the dead altered its character in the 
direction of piety and intimacy—we need only look at the 
pictures representing such worship (though rarely before the 
fourth century) on the oilflasks which were used at funerals in 
Attica and then laid by the side of the dead in the grave. 
These slight sketches breathe a spirit of simple kindliness ; 
we see the mourners decking the grave monument with 
wreaths and ribbons ; worshippers approaching with gestures 
of adoration, bringing with them many objects of daily use— 
mirrors, fans, swords, etc., for the entertainment of the dead.1% 
Sometimes the living seek to give pleasure to the spirit of 
the dead by the performance of music.1% Gifts, too, of cakes, 
fruit, and wine are being made—but the blood of the sacrificial 
animals is never spilt.1° There wasa time when moresolemn— 
and less comfortable—thoughts prevailed ;1°4 and of these 
we learn something from the much older sculptured reliefs, 
found on sepulchral monuments in Sparta, which give the 
dead a more awe-inspiring attitude. The ancestral pair 
sit In state and are approached by members of the family 
(represented as much smaller figures) offering their worship. 
These bring with them flowers, pomegranates, and sometimes 
even animals for sacrifice, a cock, a pig, oraram. Other and 
later types of such “ banquets of the dead ”’ show the dead 
person standing up (not infrequently by the side of a horse) 
or lying upon a couch and accepting the drink-offering made 
to him by the survivors.1® These reliefs allow us to see at 
what a distance the departed spirits are supposed to stand 
from the living: the dead do, indeed, seem now to be “ better 
and stronger ”’ beings ; they are well on the road to becoming 
“ Heroes’’. Drink offerings such as those we see offered on 
these reliefs—a mixture of honey-water, milk, and wine, and 
other liquids, offered in accordance with precise ritual—always 


formed a regular part of sacrifices made to the dead.1% ,_ 


Besides these, animals, too, were slain, especially sheep (less 
often oxen) of black colour. These must be completely burnt, 
as being intended for the sole enjoyment of the dead—a custom 


170 THE CULT OF SOUES 


observed at all sacrifices made to the spirits of the under- 
world.19 

The whole of this very material cult depended upon the 
assumption—-which was sometimes distinctly expressed— 
that the soul of the dead is capable of receiving, and is in 
need of, a physical satisfaction from the gifts made to it.1°° 
It is consequently, not thought of as deprived of the power oi 
sense-perception. Even in the grave it can feel what is going 
on in its neighbourhood.!°? It is not a good thing to attract 
its attention: it is best to pass by the graves of the dead in 
silence.4° The common people thought of the dead, according 
to a famous phrase of Plato’s, as “‘ hovering ’’’ suspended over 
their graves, the site of their cult. The pictures on the 
Attic oilflasks illustrate this belief, for they represent the 
souls of the dead flying above the grave-monument, and the 
diminutive size of these winged figures is evidently intended 
to represent their somewhat contradictory immaterial 
materiality, and to express their invisibility for mortal eyes.1” 
Sometimes, indeed, the souls become visible, and then, like - 
the underworld gods and the Heroes, they prefer the shape of 
a snake.!!® Nor are they absolutely bound to the immediate 
neighbourhood of the grave: they sometimes revisit their 
old habitations among the living, and not only on those days 
of the dead in the month Anthesterion. The Greeks, like other 
people, were acquainted with the custom of allowing what 
fell to the ground to lie there undisturbed for the spirits that 
hovered about the house to carry away if they liked.44 The 
dead man’s spirit, being thus invisibly present, can overhear 
if anyone speaks ill of it; either with the idea of defending 
the helpless, or, on the contrary, to avoid incurring the wrath 
of invisible but potent spirits, a Solonian law forbade abusive 
language to be addressed to a dead man. That is the 
real meaning of the old warning de moriuis nil nisi bene, as 
popular belief understood it. The descendants of a dead man 
were bound to prosecute anyone who slandered their 
ancestor: 4° this also is among the religious duties owed 
by the living to the soul of the dead. 


§3 


Like all other cults, the cult of the dead had more to do with 
the relations of the daimon to the living than with his nature 
and essence considered abstractly, and in itself: a dogmatic 
account of this nature was neither offered nor required by his 
worship. Still, the cult was founded upon a general concep- 


FUNERAL CEREMONIES 171 


tion, merely evading more exact definition, of the nature of the 
departed spirit. Men sacrificed to the souls of the dead, as 
to the gods 48 and Heroes, because they regarded them as 
invisible Powers,!!" a special class of ‘‘ Blessed Ones ’’, as the 
dead were beginning to be called even in the fifth century. 
They attempted to propitiate them,'® or at least to avert 
their easily awakened displeasure.4® Their help was also 
sought in all times of need: but most especially, like the 
chthonic gods into whose realm they have entered, they can 
prosper the fruits of the earth 12° and lend assistance at the 
entry of a new soul into life. For this reason libation is made 
to the souls of ancestors at a marriage.!?4_ The Tritopatores 
also, who were invoked at wedding celebrations in Attica 
that the marriage might prove fruitful,!2? were nothing else 
than the souls of the ancestors.123 We know them also to have 
been referred to as wind-spirits,!*4 and in this there appears, 
plainly or obscurely, an isolated fragment of the most ancient 
belief of the people: the departed spirits of the dead become 
spirits of the air; the ghosts that travel on the winds are the 
liberated souls of the dead. 


§ 4 


Though it is good and profitable in one’s own interest to 
enlist the sympathy and retain the goodwill of these invisible 
Spirit powers by sacrifice, yet their worship is to a much greater 
degree conditioned by a sentiment of piety which no longer 
seeks its own advantage, but the greater honour and welfare 
of the dead. Such piety certainly takes on a curious form, but 
it is this which gives its special character to the cult of the 
souls, and the ideas which lie behind that cult. The souls of 
the dead are dependent upon the cult paid to them by the 
members of their family who still live on in this world ; their 
fate is determined by the nature of this cult.125 The beliefs 
which nourished the cult of the dead are totally distinct from 
the mode of thought prevailing in the Homeric poems accord- 

ing to which the souls are banished into the distant realm of 
- Hades and cut off eternally from all attention or care that the 
living might pay them. It differs again from the beliefs which 
the mysteries implanted in the minds of their worshippers ; 
for in this case it was not their mervit—whether religious or 
moral—which secured to the disembodied souls their position 
in the future life. These two streams of religious belief flowed 
side by side, but never met. The nearest analogue to the cult of 
the souls and its appropriate beliefs was undoubtedly the cult 


172 THES CURT OR SOURS 


of Heroes, but even here the difference is profound. It is no 
longer a special privilege miraculously bestowed upon a few 
favoured individuals ; every soul has a right to the attentive 
care of its own family, and in each case its fate is settled, not 
by the character displayed or deeds done during its lifetime, 
/but by the relation to itself of those who survive. As a 
consequence everybody on the approach of death thinks 
of the ‘“‘ future state’’ of his soul, and that means the cult 
which he would like to make sure will be offered to his departed 
spirit. Sometimes for this purpose he makes a special founda- 
tion, or bequest, which is provided for in his will.126 Of 
course, 1f he leaves a son behind him, the care of his spirit 
will be amply provided for; until that son comes of age, a 
guardian will offer the appropriate gifts.12? Even slaves to 
whom he has given their freedom will be sure to take part in 
the permanent and regular cult of their former master.’ 
One who has no son to leave behind him will make haste to 
take a son from another family into his own house, who, 
together with his property will inherit also the duty of offering 
a regular and enduring cult to his adopted father, and his new 
ancestors, and of caring for the needs of their souls. This is 
the real and original meaning of all adoption; and how 
seriously such provision for the proper care of the souls of the 
departed was taken, can best and most clearly be seen from 
the testamentary speeches of Isaeus, in which with a complete- 
ness of art that almost conceals itself expression is given to 
the genuine and simple feelings of the homely Athenian 
bourgeoisie whom no enlightenment had ever disturbed in 
the beliefs of their fathers.12° 

All cult, all prospect of a full life and future well-being—for 
sO we may express the naive conception—of the soul on its 
separation from the body, depends upon the holding together 
of the family. To the family itself the souls of its former 
ancestors are, in a limited sense, of course, gods—zts gods.1%° 
It can hardly be doubted that here we have the root of all 
belief in the future life of the soul, and we shall be tempted 
to subscribe to the belief—as a guess tending in the right 
direction—of those who see in such family worship of the dead 
one of the most primitive roots of all religious belief—older 
than the worship of the higher gods of the state and the 
community as a whole; older even than the worship of Heroes, 
and of the ancestors of large national groups. The family is 
older than the state,1! and among all peoples that have not 
passed beyond family-organization and formed states, we find 
this type of belief about the soul invariably present. Among 


FUNERAL CEREMONIES 173 


the Greeks, who in the course of their history learnt so much 
that was new without ever quite discarding the old, this belief 
lived on in the shadow of the great gods and their cults, even 
in the midst of the tremendous increase in the power and 
organized influence of the state. But these larger and wider 
organizations cramped and hindered its development. Left 
to itself, and given more freedom to grow, such belief might 
possibly have elevated the souls of the family ancestors to 
the position of all-powerful spirits of the house under whose 
hearth they had once been laid to rest. The Greeks, however, 
never had anything to correspond exactly with the Italian 
Lar familiaris.* The nearest equivalent to it would be the 
Good Daimon which the Greek household honoured. Careful 
examination shows this Daimon to have been originally the 
soul of an ancestor who has become the good spirit of his 
house—but the Greeks themselves had forgotten this.1%% 


§ 5 


We cannot at this late date trace the reawakening of the cult 
of souls in post-Homeric times or the varying stages it may 
have gone through in its development. Still, some of the facts 
are plain Indications have already been noticed that point 
to the view that the cult of the dead was carried on in the days 
when the aristocratic regime still held sway in Greece with 
greater pomp and seriousness than in the centuries—the fifth 
and sixth—beyond which our knowledge hardly extends. In 
these earlier times, we are forced to conclude, there must also 
have been a livelier belief in the power and importance of the 
souls corresponding with the greater vigour of religious cult. 
It seems as if at this time ancient usage and belief broke 
violently through the suppression and neglect under which 
they lay in the times that speak to us in the Homeric 
poems. There is no reason to suppose that any one member of 
the Greek peoples was specially responsible for the change. 
At the same time, different districts in accordance with their 
varying natural proclivities and civilization differed in the 
cult they paid their dead. In Attica, with the spread of 
democracy, the ideas at the bottom of such practice tended 
more and more in the direction of mere affectionate piety. 
In Laconia and Boeotia !*4 and in other places where primitive 
life and customs maintained themselves for a long time, 
more serious notions of the nature and reality of the disembodied 
spirits remained in force and a more serious cult was paid to 
them. Elsewhere, as in Locris and on the island of Keos,!* the 


\ 


174 Phe GUL lO OU 


cult of the dead seems to have maintained itself only in a very 
much weakened form. When advancing culture made indi- 
viduals less dependent on the traditional beliefs of their own 
country many temperamental variations and gradations in 
belief and conception made their appearance. Homeric ideas 
on the subject, universally familiar from poetry, may have 
entered into the question and added to the confusion ; even 
where the cult of the dead was practised with the greatest 
fervour, ideas radically incompatible with that cult—as that 
the souls of the worshipped dead are “in Hades ” 18&—are 
sometimes revealed unintentionally. At quite an early period 
we find expressions of the view, which goes beyond anything 
said in Homer, that nothing at all survives after death. 
Attic orators, for example, are allowed to speak to their 
audience in a tone of hesitation and doubt about hopes 
commonly cherished of continued consciousness and sensation 
after death. Such doubts, however, only affect the theoretic 
consideration of the soul’s future life; the cult of the souls 
was still carried on inside the family. Even an unbeliever, 
if he were in other respects a true son of his city and deeply 
rooted in its ancient customs, might in his last will and 
testament provide seriously for the perpetual cult of his own 
soul and those of his near relatives—as Epicurus did in his 
will, to the astonishment of after ages.18’ Thus, even unbelief 
still clung to cult as to other old established customs, and in 
many an individual the cult still tended to awaken the beliefs 
which alone could justify it. 


III 


TRACES OF THE CULT OF SOULS IN THE BLOOD-FEUD AND 
SATISFACTION FOR MURDER 


§ 1 
In the renewal and development of the cult offered to the 
dead, an important part was again played by that priestly 
association which exercised such a decisive influence on the 
public worship of invisible powers in the Greek states—the 


\/ priesthood of the Delphic oracle. On the occurrence of 


disturbing portents in the sky recourse was had to the god, 
who gave orders that in addition to the gods and Heroes. 
“ sacrifice should be made to the dead also on the appointed 
days, in accordance with custom and tradition, by their 
relatives.’ 188 Individuals in doubt as to what the sacred law 


SATISFACTION FOR MURDER 17 


Or 


required in the observance due to a departed soul applied at 
Athens to one of the “ Exegetai’’—-probably one of that 
college of Exegetai that had been founded under the influence 
of Delphi.48° The god protected the rights of the dead, too ; 
the fact that his decisions confirmed the sanctity of the cult 
of the dead must have contributed a good deal to the con- 
sideration and awe in which that cult was held by the living.14¢ 

The decrees of Delphi were even more influental where 
they concerned a cult to be offered not to one who had died 
in peace, but to a person who had been robbed of his life 
through an act of violence. The treatment of such cases shows 
with striking distinctness the change which had come over the 
beliefs about the dead since the Homeric period. 

In Homer, when a free man has been killed, the State takes 
no share whatever in the pursuit and punishment of the 
murderer. It is the duty of the nearest relatives or the friends 
of the murdered man 1*! to carry on the blood-feud against the 
assailant. As a rule the latter puts himself out of reach of 
reprisals by flight. He withdraws to a foreign country which 
is unconcerned in his action. We hear nothing of any dis- 
tinction between premeditated murder and unintentional or 
even justifiable homicide ;142 and it seems probable that at 
that time, when no regular inquiry was made into the nature of 
the individual case, the relatives of the murdered man took 
no account of the different varieties of killing. If the guilty 
man can escape by flight from those whose duty it is to avenge 
his deed, they on their part may forgo the full toll of vengeance, 
which would have required the death of the murderer, and 
may be satisfied with the payment of compensation, after 
which the doer of the deed is allowed to remain in his own 
country undisturbed.148 The requirements of vengeance are 
thus in essence fulfilled, but the retaliatory murder of the 
murderer can be bought off. This decided relaxing of the 
ancient notion of vengeance can only be accounted for by an 
equally decided weakening of the belief in the continued 
consciousness, power, and rights of the murdered man, upon 
which the requirement of vengeance was founded. The soul 
of the dead is powerless; its claims can be easily satisfied. 
by the payment of ‘“ weregild”’ to the living. In such a 
satisfaction as this, the departed soul is in reality not concerned. 
at all ; it remains a simple business transaction between living 
people.144 In the midst of the general declension of the beliefs. 
about the dead—amounting almost to complete extinction— 
which is found throughout the Homeric poems, this weakening 
of belief in one particular point is not very surprising. But 


176 THE CULE TORR SOUL. 


in this case, as in the general study of Homeric beliefs about 
the dead, it is clear that the conception of the soul as powerless, 
shadowlike, and feeble is not the primitive or original one ; 
it has foisted itself gradually in the course of years upon a 
more ancient mode of conception in which the dead had 
undiminished sensibility and could influence the condition of 
the living. Of this older conception we have emphatic witness 
in the duty—not forgotten even in Homeric Greece—of 
prosecuting the blood-feud. 

In later times the pursuit and punishment of homicide was 
organized in accordance with quite different principles. The 
State recognized its interest in the reprisals made for such a 
breach of the peace: we may take it as certain that in Greek 
cities generally the state took a share in the regular investiga- 
tion and punishment of murder inits courts of justice,1* though 
here, too, it is only in the case of Athenian law that we have 
precise information. At Athens, in accordance with the 
ancient code dealing with the legal prosecution of murder 
(which never fell into disuse after Drakon had established it 
by his penal legislation), the exclusive right—and the un- 
avoidable duty—of prosecuting the murderer belonged to the 
next of kin of the murdered man. (In special cases only it 
was extended to include the more distant relatives, and even 
the members of the phratria to which he had _ belonged.) 
It is clear that this duty of making an accusation which fell 
upon the next of kin, preserves a relic of the ancient duty of 
the blood-feud which has been transformed by the require- 
ments of the public welfare. It is the same narrow circle of 
relationship, extending to the third generation, united by a 
strict religious bond, to which alone belonged the right to 
inherit property and the duty of performing the cult of the 
dead. This circle of relatives is here again called upon to 
‘“ succour ’’ the unfortunate who has been violently done to 
death.t4® The reason for this duty—a duty evidently derived 
from the ancient blood-feud—is easy to understand : it, too, 
is a department of the cult of the dead which was binding as 
a duty upon exactly that circle of relatives. It was no mere 
abstract “right”, but a quite definite personal claim, made 
by the dead man himself, that the surviving relatives were 
required to satisfy. At Athens even in the fourth and fifth 
centuries the belief still survived in undiminished vigour 
that the soul of one violently done to death, until the 
wrong done to him was avenged upon the doer of it, 
would wander about finding no rest,!47 full of rage at 
the violent act, and wrathful, too, against the relatives 


SATISFACTION FOR MURDER Lag 


who should have avenged him, if they did not fulfil their 
duty. He himself would become an “avenging spirit ”’ ; 
and the force of his anger might be felt throughout whole 
generations.148 Implacable revenge is the sacred duty of 
those—-his representatives and executors—who are specially 
called upon to fulfil the needs of the dead soul. The state 
forbids them to take the law into their own hands; but it 
commands them to seek redress at the tribunals of justice. 
It will take over the duties of judge and executioner itself ; 
but a decided consideration will be shown to the relatives of 
the murdered man at the hearing of the case. In duly 
conducted criminal procedure the courts specially appointed 
for this purpose will decide whether the deed is to be considered 
one of wilful murder, unintentional manslaughter, or justi- 
fiable homicide. In making these distinctions the state has 
struck a blow at that older code of the blood-feud in which 
the right of vengeance belonged entirely to the family of the 
murdered man. According to that code, as we cannot but 
conclude from Homer, nothing but the fact of the violent 
death of a relative was considered, not the character or motive 
of the deed itself. Now, however, the murderer is liable to 
a death penalty which he can avoid before the verdict is given 
by going into voluntary and perpetual exile. He disappears 
and leaves the country—at the boundaries of the country 
the state’s authority ceases, and so does the power of the 
indignant spirit of the dead, which is bound to its native soil— 
like that of all local deities, whose influence is confined to the 
place where they are worshipped. If, by such flight over the 
frontier, “‘the doer of the deed withdraws himself from 
the person injured by him—i.e. the angry soul of the dead 
man ”’ 149_-his life is thereby saved, even if he himself is not 
justified. This alone is meant by the permission of such 
voluntary exile. Involuntary homicide !°° is punished by 
banishment for a limited period, after the expiration of which 
the relations of the dead man are to grant a pardon to the 
murderer on his return to his native land.! If they voted 
for it unanimously }? they could even do this before he went 
into banishment, in which case this would not take place at 
all. There can be no doubt that this pardon had to be granted 
by them in the name of the dead man as well, of whose 
rights they were the representatives ; indeed, the man himself 
lying mortally wounded could before his death, even in the case 
of wilful murder, pardon his assailant and thereby excuse his 
relatives the duty of prosecution ; 45? to such an extent was 
the injured soul’s wish for vengeance the only point at issue, 
N 


178 THE] CULES ORSSOUES 


even in the Jegal procedure of a constitutionally governed 
state, and not in the least the lawless act of the murderer as 
such. When there is no desire for vengeance on the part of 
the victim requiring to be satisfied, the murderer goes un- 
punished. When he suffers punishment, he suffers it for the 
satisfaction of the soul of the murdered man. He is no 
longer slain as a sacrifice to his victim ; but when the relations 
of the dead exact vengeance from him by legally constituted 
processes, that, too, is a part of the cult offered to the soul 
of the dead. 
§ 2 

It is true that the state directs the blood-feud required of 
the relatives of the dead man along constitutional channels 
that shall not contravene the laws of the community ; but it 
does not in the least intend to abolish the fundamental idea 
of the ancient family vendetta. It reasserts the original claim 
to vengeance of the victim violently done to death—a claim 
closely bound up with the cult of the dead—by forbidding the 
old custom, common in Homeric times, of buying off the 
blood-guiltiness of the murderer by a compensatory payment 
made to the relatives of the dead man.!°* It does not destroy 
the religious character of the whole transaction; it uses its 
own processes to secure the fulfilment of the requirements of 
religion. That is why the head of all criminal jurisdiction is 
the King Archon, the constitutional administrator of all the 
veligious functions of the ancient royal government. The 
religious basis of the oldest Athenian criminal jurisdiction is 
particularly evident. It has its seat on the Areiopagos, the 
hill of the Curse-Goddesses, over the sacred chasm in which 
they themselves, the “‘ Venerable Ones’, have their dwelling. 
The judicial office is closely bound up with the service of the 
goddesses.4°° At the commencement of the proceedings 
both parties take an oath in the name of the Erinyes.1*¢ 
Each of the three days at the end of the month, upon which 
legal proceedings in these courts took place,!®? was sacred to 
one of the three goddesses.58 To them sacrifice was made by 
those who were acquitted in those courts; 15 for it is the 


goddesses who have given them absolution just as it is the - 


goddesses who demand the punishment of the guilty. They 
still do it, as once they had done in the typical case of Orestes, 
in which they themselves had been the accusers.18° In this 
Athenian worship the Erinyes had not yet entirely lost their 
true and original character. They had not become the mere 
guardians of law in general, as which they were Sometimes 


SATISFACTION FOR MURDER 179 


represented by poets and philosophers who thus extended and 
weakened immeasurably their once much narrower significance. 
They are formidable daimones, dwelling in the depths of the 
earth from which they are con] jured up by the curses and male- 
dictions of those who have no earthly avenger left. Hence 
they are more particularly the avengers of murder committed 
within the family itself; they punish the man who has slain 
the very person whom he would have been called upon to 
avenge, if that person had fallen at the hand of another 
murderer than himself. When the son has slain his father 
or mother, who shall then carry out the blood-feud incumbent 
upon the nearest relation of the dead? This nearest relation 
is the murderer himself. It is the Erinys of the father or the 
mother who sees to it that the dead shall still receive due 
satisfaction. She breaks out from the kingdom of the dead 
to seize the murderer. She is ever at his heels in pursuit, 
leaving him no rest night or day. Vampire-like she sucks his 
blood : 1® he is her destined victim.1®* Even in the judicial 
procedure of the fully organized state it is the Erinyes who 
demand revenge for murder at the courts of law. Their 
absolute power extends in widening circle to all murder, 
even when it is committed outside the limits of the family ; 
though it was only the imagination of the poetically or 
philosophically minded that ever transformed them completely 
to champions of justice of all kinds, in heaven and upon earth. 
In the cult and beliefs proper to individual cities they remained 
the auxiliaries attached to the souls of murdered men. These 
gruesome daimones had their origin in the worship of the dead, 
and they lived on in connexion with the undying worship of 
which they were a part. Indeed, if we examine closely the 
sources of information at our disposal, we can see even through 
their inadequacy and obscurity that the Erinys was nothing 
else but the soul itself of the murdered man, indignant at its 
fate and seizing its revenge for itself—till later ages substituted 
for this the conception of the ghost from hell taking over to 
itself the rage of the dead man’s soul.1® 


§ 3 

Thus, the whole procedure at murder trials was directed 
rather to the satisfaction of invisible powers—the injured 
souls of the dead and the daimones that represent them—than 
of the state and its living members. In essence it was a 
teligious act. Asa result all was not at an end when the human 
verdict on the case had been given. On his return from exile 
the man guilty of involuntaty homicide, besides receiving the 


180 THis CULP ORSsSOUrS 


pardon of the relatives of the dead man, had stilla double duty 
to perform ; he had to be purified and to offer propitiatory 
sacrifice.184 Purification from the blood of the slain was 
necessary even in the case of the unpunished agent of what the 
state regarded as justifiable homicide ;!® it restored the man, 
hitherto regarded as “unclean’’, to participation in the 
religious gatherings of state and family which could not have 
been approached by an unpurified person without suffering 
defilement. The Homeric poems know nothing of any such 
religious purification of those who have incurred the stain 
of blood.16* Analogous occurrences in the religious usage of 
allied peoples make it, however, almost impossible to doubt 
that the notion of religious uncleanness belonging to a man who 
has had any dealings with uncanny powers was of primeval 
antiquity among the Greeks, too. It can only have been 
suppressed in the Homeric view of the matter; just as 
that view also suppressed the usages of expiation. These 
were intended to propitiate the indignant soul of the dead 
and the gods who protected it, by means of solemn sacrifice ; 
but in the Homeric picture of the world they never appear, 
for the ideas on which they were based had themselves been 
swept away. 

The details of purification and expiation—the former 
serving the interests of the state and its religious needs, the 
latter intended as a final appeasement of the injured powers 
of the unseen world—were closely united in practice and 
are often confused in the accounts which have come down to us. 
A hard and fast distinction between them cannot be drawn. 
So much at all events is clear ; the expiatory rites indispensable 
when murder had been committed had the closest possible 
similarity with the ritual of sacrifice to the gods of the under- 
world.1®? And, in fact, the deities invoked at such rites of 
explation—Zeus Meilichios, Zeus Apotropaios, and the rest— 
belong to the underworld circle of gods.188 To them, instead 
of the murderer himself, a victim was offered to appease the 
anger felt by them as the patrons of the departed soul. The 
Erinyes, too, have sacrifice made to them at expiations 169— 
everything in these matters is connected with the kingdom 
of the dead and its inhabitants. 

But it was the Delphic Oracle that saw to the details of 
purification and expiation after murder. The necessity of 
such rights was impressed on men by the example set in the 
story of Apollo’s own flight and purification after the slaying 
of the earth-spirit at Pytho. These events were symbolically 
enacted over again regularly every eight years.179 At Delphi, 


SATISFACTION FOR MURDER 181 


too, according to Aeschylus, Apollo himself purified Orestes 
the matricide from the pollution of his crime.17%* At Athens 
one of the oldest propitiatory sites was called after one of 
Apollo's titles, the Delphinion.17* The Oracle must often 
have directed its inquirers to placate not merely the Heroes, 
but also the angry souls of murdered (and not heroized) men 
by means of expiatory sacrifices : as it bade the murderers of 
Archilochos and the Spartan king Pausanias.’‘%  Propitiatory 
sacrifice in this sense does not belong to the Apolline cult as 
an exclusive possession; it belongs, also, to other, mostly 
lower-world, deities ; but it was the Oracle of Apollo that set 
the seal on its sanctity. At Athens the Exegetai founded 
under the influence of the Delphic Oracle were the official 
administrators of this expiatory ritual.+”74 Plato was certainly 
following the customs of Greek cities when in the “ Laws ”’ 
he declares that his state shall take its regulations for purifica- 
tion and propitiation from Delphi.!”° 


§ 4 

The Oracle, then, of the omniscient God sanctified and 
recommended these rites of expiation; the state regulated 
its judicial procedure in murder cases on the lines of the old 
family blood-feud. It was natural, then, that the ideas on 
which these religious and political institutions were based— 
the conviction of a continued existence enjoyed by the 
murdered man’s soul and of his consciousness and knowledge 
of what occurred among the living who survived, his anger and 
his powers—that these ideas should attain to something like 
the position of an article of faith. The confidence with which 
these beliefs were held still manifests itself to us in the speeches 
at murder trials in which Antiphon, suiting his language to 
his real or imagined public, tries to arouse terror and awe, 
as at the presence of indubitable realities, by calling upon the 
angry soul of the dead man and the spirits that avenge the 
dead.t76 About the souls of murdered men indeed, regarded 
as more than other spirits unable to find rest, a strange and 
ghostly mythology grew up, of which we shall have some 
specimens later on. How primitive such beliefs could be 
we may gather with startling clearness from occasional records 
of purely savage customs 1”? which are derived from them— 
customs which cannot possibly have been freshly invented in the 
Greece of this enlightened period, and must be either primitive 
Greek savagery come to light again, or else barbarisms only 
too easily welcomed from less civilized neighbours. In any 
case they imply the most materialistic view of the survival 


182 THE CULIs 0 Hage. Wile 


of the murdered man, and of the revenge that might be 
taken by his soul. 

It is evident that what men believed about the sou!s of 
murdered men must have had an important influence upon 
the general belief in a future life as it took shape in the mind 
of the people. But the extent of such an influence can be 
more exactly measured in the story which Xenophon tells 
about the dying Kyros: as the strongest grounds for the hope 
that an after-life will be the portion of all souls after their 
separation from the body, the dying king points to the 
unquestioned facts which, as alladmit, prove a special after- 
life for the souls “of those who have suffered injustice’. 
In addition to this he lays stress on the argument that the 
worship of the dead would not have been preserved intact 
to his own time if their souls had been entirely deprived of all 
active power.!78 Thus we see how the cult of the souls of 
the dead was the chief source of the belief in a continued life 
after death. 


NOP Boe lLORCHOA RI Rasy. 
I 


1 This dual efficacy of the y@dvor is explained naturally enough by 
their nature as underground spirits. There is no reason for supposing 
that their influence on the fertility of the fields was a later addition 
(as Preller does, Dem. u. Perseph. 188 ff., followed by many). Still 
less have we any grounds for regarding the protection of souls and 
the care for the fertility of crops as a sort of allegorizing parallel 
(soul = grain of seed) as has been usual since the time of K. O. 
Miiller. 

2 Zevs Kataxdovios, I 457. @Beod yOoviov... idbipov *Atdew, 
Hes. Th. 767 f. Evidently there is no distinction here between 
karaxOovos and yfomos, as Preller, Dem. u. Pers. 187, wishes to make out. 

3 Hes. Op. 465, evyecBar 5€ Avi xyPoviw Anprrepi O ayva xrdr. It 
is impossible even by far-fetched methods of interpretation (such as Lehrs 
makes use of, Popul. Aufs.? 298 f.) to make this Zeds xAdvos into any- 
thing else than a Zeus of the underworld. The god of the lower world, 
totally distinct from the Olympian Zeus (Zeds dAdos, Aesch., Supp. 
231), is here a dispenser of blessings to the farmer. In the sacrificial 
regulation from Mykonos (S7G. 615) it is prescribed to offer: wep 
KapTa@v (xapmay on the stone) 4iut XOoviw IG X0ovin AEPTA 
péAava erynova’ évw ov Oépis (where dSepra = hostias pelle spoliatas, 
see Prott, Leg. Sacr. i, p. 17; though the addition of the colour of 
the no longer visible skin seems remarkable)—ot7ép xapmav here 
belongs to Aui, etc., as the division-mark on the stone before uzeép 
shows: see BCH. 1888, p. 460 f. Evidence of this sort makes it clear 
how unjustifiable it would be to rule out all fructifying influence from 
the “‘ idea of the chthonic ”’ and to regard the chthonic deities as simply 
the power of death and destruction in the world of nature and men, 
as is done by H. D. Miiller (who is met by serious difficulty in this 
passage from the Op.: Mythol. d. griech. St. ii, 40). It is, indeed, 
scarcely necessary to seek for an abstractly formulated “‘ idea of the 
chthonic’; but if this fructifying and life-giving force does belong 
to the nature of the y@dvior as such, what becomes of H. D. Miiller’s 
ingeniously thought-out and violently defended view according to 
which the chthonic only constitutes one side of the nature of 
certain deities who have in addition a different, Olympian, side in 
which they are positively creative and beneficent ? 

4 Zevs xPovos at Corinth, Paus. 2, 2,8; at Olympia, 5, 14, 8. 

5 Thus Persephone is called ‘Ayvy, ice ove etc. ' (Lehrs, Pop. 
Aufs.* 288), also MeXirwdns, MedAtBora; Medwdia consort of Hades, 
Malalas, p. 62, 10, Di. [8th ed., Bonn.] (? MeAivoua, as Hekate is 
MetAwon, Orph., H.71). > Apiorn xGovia, a A Mag. Par. 1450.—Hekate 
is KadXiorn, Edxodivy (xat’ avti¢dpacy 4 pw oteaa evKodAos, EM.), the 
Erinyes Zepvai, Edpevides; their mother EHvwvipn (== If): Ister ap. 
Sch. Soph., OC. 42 (from a similar source, Sch. Aeschin. i, 188), etc. 
Cf. Bticheler, Rh. Mus. 33, 16-17. 

§ [lodvdéxtns, TlodAvdéypwrv, > Aynoidaos (Epigr. Gr. 195; see 
Dentieys ad Callim., Lav: Pall) 130; Preller, Dem. u. Pers. 192; 
Welcker, Gotterl. ii, ’ 482), Evxdfs (Biicheler, Rh. Mus. 36, 332 £.).— 
Exxodos (corresponding to the Ev«odtvn above) as a title of Hades 
must be rejected if K6éhler’s correction of CJA. ii, 3, 1529, is right: 
“Hd0A0s— Edxodov. 


184 NOTES LO) GHARTE hay 


7 Cult of Zeds Edfovdevs at Amorgos, Paros (insc. cit. by Foucart, 
BCH. vii, 402), of Zeds Bovdev’s at Mykonos, SIG. 615 (Zevs BovdAaios, 
Ins. Perg. i, 246, 1. 49, does not belong here) ; of E&BovAos (original 
title of Hades; Orph., H. xviii, 12) in Eleusis (side by side 6 eds, 
" Ged): SIG. 20, 39; CIA. ii, 1620 c.d. (The Athenian legend makes 
Eubouleus into a mortal herdsman: Clem. Al., Protr. 11, pp. 14-15 P. ; 
Schol. Luc., De Merc., 2, p. 275, 27 Rabe.) EvBovAevs simply = Hades: 
Nic., Al. 14; epitaph from Syros, Epigr. Gr. 272, 9, and frequently. 
So, too, the Zeds EvBovdAeds (Hesych. s. Evf.) worshipped in Kyrene 
must have been a Zevds xyAowos. Eubouleus is also a title of Dionysos 
as Zagreus (Iakchos), i.e. the Dionysos of the underworld.—Incidentally, 
what is the origin of this designation of the god of the underworld 
as “good counsellor”? (bont constlit praestitem as Macr. 1, 8, 17, 
translates EdBovAja)? It can hardly have been because he was 
specially able to take counsel on his own behalf (this is the sense in 
which D.S. 5, 72,2, takes the title) ; but rather because*he waseam 
oracle god, and as such dispensed good counsel to inquirers. Thus 
the oracle-god Nereus is called edBovdAos in Pi., P. iii, 92; so also J. 
vii, 32: evBovrAos Gems. 

8 Lasos fr. 1 (PLG. iii, 376), etc——Consecration to KAvpevos from 
Athens: CIG. 409.—Hesych. IlepixAvpevos: 6 IIXovTwyv (it is no 
accident that gave the name Periklymenos to the magically gifted 
son of Neleus). Klymenos = Hades, Epigry. Gr. 522 a 2. 

® The name Tpeduvos, Tpodwdros itself also points to the fact that 
assistance to the fertility of the earth was expected of this Zevds y@dvios. 
In the later cult of Trophonios not a trace of such a belief survives. 

10 éy otdepia wore “ Avdov Bwpyds é€otw. Aiaxvros Pyaiv: pdvos 
Bedv yap Odvaros od Swpwv epa xrr. (fr. 161 Sidg.): Schol., AB. on 
A 158. 

1i In Elis fepds tot ‘Av8ou mepiBoArAds te Kat vads, Paus. 6, 25, 2. 
ue of Demeter and Kore and of Hades in the very fertile Triphylia, 

tr. 344. 

12 Kaukones from Pylos, the Nelidai at their head, reach Attica: 
connexion with the cult of the y@dévor. in Phlya in Eleusis: see K. O. 
Miiller, Al. S. 11, 258. Such accounts may have an historical founda- 
tion. The elaborate accounts by H. D. Miller, Mythol. Gr. 1, c. 6, 
and O. Crusius, Evsch-Grubery ‘‘ Kaukones ’—operate with too many 
uncertain factors for the results to have any certainty. 

13“ Avdns . . . tots evade tocatta ayaba avinaw: Pl., Crat. 403 E. 
6 “’ Atdns od povov tas uyxas cuvexet, GAAG Kal tots Kapmots aiztids eoT 
avamvofs Kal dvaddcews Kai avéjoews: Schol. B.L., O 188. 

4 of moAXot doBovpevoe 76 Ovopa TIdovtwva Kadotow adrév (dv 
“Avdnv), Pl., Crat. 403 A. 

*° At the Genesia (Nekysia) sacrifice for Ge and the dead, Hesych. 
Tevéova.—yoat Ij te nal dOitois, A. Pers. 220: calling to Hermes, 
Ge, and Aidoneus in “ spirit-raising ”, Pers. 628 ff., 640 ff., cf. Ch. 124 ff. 
—appeal to Hermes and I} xdroyos on defixiones: CIG. 538-9. 

*6 Faios in Olympia Paus. 5, 14, 10; cf. E. Curtius, Altave v. Olymbp.., 
p. 15. At Kos it would seem to have been stated that Ge was 
worshipped pdvn bedv, Ant. Lib. 15 (acc. to Boios). Side by side with 
Zevs X@dwos was worshipped I'4 x9ovin at Mykonos, SIG. 615, 26. 

* gotma IH Zayped te, Oedv amavuneprate amdvtwv, Alkmaionis 
fr. 3 (Kink.). 

18 Cult of Klymenos and Demeter XOovia (her festival X6@dve.a : 
see also Ael. HA. xi, 4) in Hermione, Paus. 2, 35, 4ff. Pausanias 
also thinks (3, 14, 5) that the cult of Dem. X@oviéa was brought to Sparta 


NOTES tel On GEA Pili Raa: 185 


from Hermione, which may be right. Kore as MeXiBoua is also 
mentioned in this connexion by Lasos of Herm. fr. 1, PLG. iii, 376. 
Dedicatory inscriptions (C/G. 1194-1200) also mention, side by side 
with Demeter Chthonia, Klymenos, and Kore as well. Once (BCH. 
1889, p. 198, n. 24) only Adparp, KaAvpévm. Demeter was clearly 
the chief goddess: cf. CG. 1193.—From the community of the worship 
of Damater Chthonia in both Hermione and Asine it may be justifiable 
to conclude that this cult belonged originally to the Dryopians who 
combined with the Dorians in Hermione and were driven by them 
out of Argolic Asine. There is no warrant whatever for the fanciful 
derivation of the Demeter-cult of these neighbourhoods from 
“ Pelasgians ’? submerged by Dryopian invaders. 

19 There was a common worship of: Zeus Eubouleus, Demeter, 
and Kore at Amorgos; Zeus Eub., Demeter Thesmophoros, Kore, 
Here, Babo at Paros; Plouton, Demeter, Kore, Epimachos, Hermes 
in Knidos; Plouton and Kore in Karia. See the citations given by 
Foucart, BCH. vii, 402 (with whose own pronouncements I cannot, 
however, agree at all). In Delos, Demeter, Kore, Zeus Eubouleus : 
BCH. 24, 505 n. 4. So, too, in Corinth Plouton, Demeter, and Kore: 
Paus. 2, 18,3; Hades Demeter and Kore in Triphyla, Str. 344. 
Observe also the group of divinities at Lebadeia in the cult of 
Trophonios: Paus. 9, 39.—At Eleusis side by side with Demeter and 
Kore Plouton also was worshipped: CIA. ii, 834 b. But there existed 
even there other groups of yoo. worshipped in conjunction, rw 
Ge) once more joined with Triptolemos, and a second triad: 6 @eds, 
yeeed, and: Eubouleus, CIA.’ Suppl.i, 27b, p. 99, ff. 11, 1620 be; 
iii, 1108-9. ‘This second triad, which is not mentioned on the inscr. 
CIA. i, 5 (from the beginning of the fifth century), may have only 
been subsequently added to the Eleusinian official cult (see Ziehen, 
Leg. Sacr., Dissevt. pp. 9-10). It is a waste of time to try and identify 
the vague appellations @eds and dea with the names of definite chthonic 
deities (as e.g. Kern attempts, Ath. Mitth. 1891, pp. 5-6). Acc. to 
Léschcke, D. Enneakrunosepis. bet Paus., pp. 15-16, these Eleusinian 
divinities were imported into Athens, established in the chasm of the 
Eumenides, and instead of 6 Oeds, 7 8ea and Eubouleus, were called 
Hermes, Ge, and Plouton. But the correlation of these divinities 
worshipped there in conjunction with the ZNepvai (acc. to Paus. 1, 
28, 6) with the Eleusinian group depends entirely upon the identifica- 
tion of the Leuvai with Demeter and Kore. This, however, is based 
on nothing more than a guess of K. O. Miiller’s (Aesch. Eum., p. 176 
[160 f. E.T.]), which would still be very much in the air even if the 
theories about ‘“‘ Demeter Erinys”’ with which it is connected did not 
rest on such insecure foundations. (To identify the Eleusinian- 
Athenian Eubouleus with Plouton is impossible, if only because of 
the fact that in the chthonic cult of those places EHvBovXevs, originally 
the name of an underworld god, has developed into the name of a Hero 
who now has a place alongside the chthonic deities.) —With the cautious 
appelations 6 @eds, 7 Jed we may compare the appeal on a defixio 
from Athens, CIG. 1034: Saipom yOoviw Kal tH xOovia Kai rots 
x9oviots maou KTA. 

20 Cf. Mannhardt, Mythol. Forsch. 1884, p. 225 ff. 

*1 It cannot, however, be denied that already in Homer Persephone 
is the daughter of Demeter and Zeus. Adducing © 326 and A 217 
K. O. Miiller (Kl. Sch. ii, 91) has disposed conclusively of Preller’s 
doubts: in spite of which H. D. Miller in his reconstruction of the 
Demeter-myth clings firmly to the view that the goddess carried 


186 NOTES 2310 +CHAP EL Ray. 


away by Hades was only afterwards made the daughter of Demeter.— 
The Homeric poems seem to know of the rape of Persephone by 
Aidoneus but not the story of her periodical return to the upper 
world—which is the most important feature in the Eleusinian creed. 
What Lehrs says on this much-discussed subject is completely con- 
vincing (Pop. Aufs.*, p. 277 f.). 

22 The cult of Demeter is old in Phthiotis too (— IIvpacov, Ajunrpos 
réwevos, B 695 f.—éyovoa *Avtpdva merpyevta, h. Cer. 490). Also 
in Paros and Crete. That it is possible to trace the extension of the 
worship of Demeter in detail (as many have tried to do), is one of the 
current illusions on this subject that I cannot share. 

23 Aoynon and vexvomavreiov (vyomoumetov Phot. Qeot Modorrixoi 
cf. Append. prov. iii, 18 L.-S.; Eust. «514, p. 1667) at Ephyre on the 
River Acheron in Thesprotia: well known from Hdt.’s story of Periander 
(v, 92). Here the place of Orpheus’ descent to the lower world was 
localized, Paus. 9, 30, 6; cf. also Hyg. 88, p. 84, 19-20 Schm.— 
Entrance to Hades at Tainaron, through which Herakles dragged 
up Kerberos (Schol. D.P. 791, etc.), with wuyoparretov: cf. Plu., 
Ser. Num. Vind. 17, p. 560 E (cf. Stat., Th. ii, 32 ff., 48 £., etc.).— 
Similar entrance to Hades at Hermione, see below; xaraBdovov ddov 
at Aigialos = Sikyon: Call. fy. 110.—At Phigaleia in Arcadia a 
yuyopavretoy at which King Pausanias inquired, Paus. 3, 17, 9.— 
More famous is the %uvyopavretov at Herakleia Pont.: see Rh. Mus. 
36, 556 (this also was a place where Kerberos appeared above, Mela 
i, 103). Hither Pausanias came for guidance, acc. to Plu., Ser. 
Num. 10, p. 555 C; Cimon 6.—The ITXovrwmov and puyopavretov at 
Cumae in Italy had a long-standing reputation (mentioned as early 
as Soph., fy. 682 [748 P.]): cf. Rh. Mus. 36, 555 (an Italian Greek 
applies to tue pvyopavreiov, Plu., Cons. Apoll. 14, p. 109 C).—Next 
the Asiatic ITAovrdvia and Xap@vea: at Acharaka in Karia, Str. 
649-50 ; at Magnesia on the Maiander, dopvov omnAaor iepov, Xapwviov 
Aeyopevov, Str. 636; at Myous, Str. 579. This is what ro év Adryuw 
opuypa must have been, mentioned among other Xapwvia by Antig. 
Caryst. 123; the KipBpos xadrovpevos 6 mept Dpvyiav Bdduvvos also 
mentioned there, may very well have been the place in Phrygia spoken 
of by Alkman ap. Str. 580: Bdduvos KepBiatos Exwv drAeOpiovs atrodopas 
(suggested by Keller on Antig). Perhaps the latter place—named 
after the Korybantes (?) see Bergk on Alcm. fr. 82—is the same as 
the cave at Hierapolis.—Better known than any was the oracular 
cavern at Hierapolis in Phrygia into which only the Galli of the Great 
Mother, the Matris Magnae sacerdos, can go without being overcome 
by the vapours issuing from it: Str. 629-30, Plin. ii, 208. There 
existed under a temple of Apollo a direct karaBaovov adov, accessible 
at least to the faithful rereAeopévor: see the very remarkable account 
of Damasc., V. Istd. ap. Phot., p. 344b, 35-345a, 27 Bk. (Cult of Echidna 
in Hierapolis, see Gutschmid, RA. Mus. 19, 398 ff.; this is also achthonic 
cult: véprepos ’’ Ey:dva, Eur. Ph. 1023; Echidna among the monsters 
of Hades: Ar., Ra. 473).—These are the mortifera in Asia Plutonia, 
quae vidimus, Cic., Div.i, 79 (cf. Gal. ii, 540; xvii, 1, 10).—Entrances 
to Hades were regularly to be found at those places where the cave 
was shown by which Aidoneus made his exit or his entrance in carrying 
off Kore. Thus at Eleusis, 760: wep amvdAa eto’ > Atdao, Orph., A. 
18) .15,.Paus45 °38;'5 3 at Kolonos, Sch. S.; OC! 1590-3 =tae@ emus 
Paus. 2, 36, 7; at Pheneos (a yaoua ev KvAAjvyn: Conon 15), and 
probably in Crete too (cf. Bacch. fr. 53 Jebb, ap. Sch. Hes., Th. 914) ; 
at Enna in Sicily a ydopa xatayeiov: D.S. 5, 3,3; Cic., Verr. iv, 107; 


NODES rOMCHAR RE ThasV. 187 


aL oyracuse at the spring Kyane, D.S. 5, 4, 2; at Kyzikos, Prop. 
3 (4), 22, 4. 

24 The Sepvai live there in a yaopua xBoves, Eur., El. 1266 f., on 
the eastern slope of the hill. 

steiaus, 2, 30, 10. “The precinct of the temple: was: an Asylon, 
Phot. “Eppiovn; AB. 256, 15; Znb. ii, 25 (Ar. BaBvd.).—Kerberos 
is brought up from below at Hermione: Eur., HF.615. An Acheron, 
and even an ’Ayepovotas Atuvy, was to be found in Thesprotia, Triphylia, 
Herakleia on the Pontus, Cumae, and Cosentia in Bruttium—all 
sites of ancient cults of Hades and reputed as in close proximity to 
the underworld. 

26 Strabo vili, 373—the same is reported by Call. fy. 110 of the 
inhabitants of Aiysadds (prob. = Sikyon, where there was a cult of 
Demeter, Paus. 2, 11, 2-3; cf. 2, 5, 8. Hesych. ézwais + Anpurrnp 
mapa 2tkvwviots), where, at any rate, there was a xataBactov adov.— 
The name “‘ Hermione’’ seems almost to have acquired a generic 
sense. In the Orphic Argonautica a city Hermioneia is said to be 
situated in the fabulous north-west of Europe in the neighbourhood 
of the gold-bearing river Acheron, where (as always on the margin of 
the oixovyévn) there dwell yévy dtxatoratwv avOpmmwy, olow arog bipevors 
aveois vavroro réruxras, etc. (1135-47). Thus Hermione in this case 
lies immediately in the country of souls and blessedness, which the 
ancient inhabitants of the Peloponnesian city rather supposed to be 
in the neighbourhood of their own country.—Hesych. strangely: 
‘Eppcdvn*® Kat 7 Anpryrnp Kai 7 xopyn ev Lupaxovoats. Was there a 
place called Hermione there too? See Lob., Paralip. 299. 


II 


27 Tf a father makes money by his son’s unchastity, the son is released 
from the duty of providing food or shelter for his father while the 
latter is alive—damofavov7a 58 adrov Oantérw Kai rddAdAa oteirw 
Ta voutloueva : Solonian law ap. Aeschin., Tim. 13. 

28 Dem. 43, 57-8. 

PeSch. Soph., Ani.295. Philo'ap. Euseb., PE. viii, 358 D; 359 A: 
See Bernays, Berichte Ber. Ak. 1876, p. 604, 606 f. 

come 71 ff. 

ee isoc. 14, 55. 

32 The Bapafpov at Athens, the Katadas at Sparta. But the bodies 
were often given up to the relatives to bury, and in any case the refusal 
of burial can only have been temporary—it is incredible that they 
could have wished to leave the bodies to putrify in the open air. 

33 Athenian law, Xen., HG. 1, 7, 22; common Greek institution 
at least as against temple-robbers, D.S. 16, 25. Examples of the 
enforcement of this law in the fifth and fourth centuries discussed by 
W. Vischer, Rh. Mus. 20, 446 ff.—Suicides in some places were refused 
burial honours (in Thebes and Cyprus) ; even in Athens it was customary 
to cut off the hand of the suicide and bury it separately (Aeschin., 
Cites. 244). This is the punishment of avroéye:pes. Self-starvation 
was considered less shocking and that is perhaps why it occurs so 
frequently as a method of suicide. Cf. Thalheim, Gr. Rechtsalt. 
p- 44f. Perhaps also the religious objection of the Pythagoreans 
(and Platonists) to taking this means of escape from an existence 
that has become unbearable rests upon popular feeling and belief— 
it was not shared at all by the enlightened of later ages. (There is, 
however, nothing in ancient beliefs that points to the idea that the 
body of the suicide should be allowed only burial, not burning. Acc. 


188 NOTES) LO; CHARDEAY 


to the ’JAvds pexpd Aias after taking his own life was buried, not burnt, 
Sia THY dpynyv Tob BaotdAews—fr. 3 | [Apollod.] Eppil.v, 7. Theresia 
ground for supposing that the fable of Philostr., H. 721, p. 188 K., 
acc. to which Kalchas declared the burning of the bodies of suicides 
to be not éaov, is taken out of an ancient poem; as Welcker does 
Flr Schr wit, e29 15) 

34 Cf. the words of Teles zepi duyfs ap. Stob., Fl. 40, 8 (ili, p. 738, 
17 ff. Hens.), and the answer of Krates Cyn. to Demetrius of Phaleron 
ap. Plu., Adul. 28, p. 69 CD. It is worth remarking that in the 
fourth and even third centuries it was still necessary to reply to the 
idea Gums 5€ 70 emt E€vyns tadjvar dverdos. When later on the cosmo- 
politanism preached by the Cynics (and after their model by Teles) 
becomes really common property it seems no longer necessary to 
introduce special grounds of consolation for having to be buried in 
foreign soil into pamphlets zepi duy7s. At least this is not done by 
the Stoic Musonius or the Platonizing Plutarch. Cf. also Philodem. 
Mort., p. 33-4 Mekl. 

25 This is the reason why so often the bones or ashes of those who 
die abroad are collected and brought home for burial by their relations. 
Exx. ap. Westermann on Dem., Eubul. 70; cf. also Plu., Phoc. 37. 

36 Ar., Ec. 1030. Origanon (wild marjoram, white thyme) possesses 
apotropaic power: it keeps away evil spirits. The ancients knew 
of the virtue possessed by these plants of scaring snakes, ants, and 
other vermin—Aristot., HA. 4, 8, 534b, 22; Plin. 10, 195; Thphr., 
CP. 6, 5,4; Diosc., MM. iii,29 ==1).p)37o1Spr.i5 (Gp. LZ Ome 
Niclas ad Gp. 13, 10, 5. Modern superstition employs them against 
goblins and water sprites, witches and ghosts, Grimm, p. 1214; 
p. 1820, n. 980]. If marjoram and gentian are laid by women 
in child-bed ghosts and devils can do them no harm “for they 
shun such herbs”?: J. Ch. Mannlingen ap. Alwin Schultz, Alltags- 
leben e. d. Frau im 18 Jahrh., p. 195 f£. The two purposes are 
closely connected. The pungent odour of herbs and burning stuff 
keeps away snakes as do nocentes spiritus monstra noxia: Pall. 
1, 35 = 11, 3, p. 49 Schn. The same thing applies to monstra noxia 
if they try to approach the corpse in the shape of snakes or insects 
(just as the ghost in Apul., M.ii, 25, approaches the corpse in the 
shape of a weasel; where we also read that the versipelles which 
threaten the corpse et aves et rursum canes et mures immo vero 
etiam muscas induunt: ii, 22). So, too, the marjoram has a kathartic 
effect on the corpse, i.e. it is a means of keeping off underworld spirits. 

37 Ar., Ec. 1031. The corpse lay on vine branches in several of the 
recently discovered Dipylon graves at Athens: Athen. Mitt. 1893, 
pp. 165, 184. Superstitious reasons (as in the cases where olive leaves 
are used as a bed: see below) are to be suspected in this case, too, 
but can hardly be proved: cf. Friedrich, Sarkophagstud., Nach. 
Gott. Ges. Wiss. Ph. Cl. 1895, pp. 18, 69; Anrich, Gr. Mysterienw. 
102, 3. Apart from this the duzedos does not seem to have lustral 
Cirect, 

38 AnxvOor, Trovotpaxov: Ar., Ec. 1032 f.; yep eat dOirdv mvdAats : 
Eur., Al. 98 ff. The bowl was called dpddvov: Sch. Ar., Ec. 1033; 
Poll. viii, 65 (cf. Phot. 346, 1 dpdamov). It contained water fetched 
from another house: Hesych. éorpaxov—obviously because the water 
in the house where the corpse lay was regarded as polluted. (Thus 
when the fire, for example, is “‘ polluted ”’, fresh fire is brought in from 
outside: Plu., Q. Gr. 24, p. 297 A; Arist. 20.) Those who left the 
house purified themselves with it: Hesych. dpdana, cf. anyaiov, 


NOTESt@L OF GHARLE REV, 189 


mnyatov vdwp. A laurel branch (as holy-water sprinkler, as commonly 
in lustrations) was placed in it: Sch. Eur., Al. 98. 

39 Serv., A. ili, 680: apud Atticos funestae domus huius (cupressi) 
fronde velantur. The object may have been to warn the superstitious 
against approaching the “‘ unclean’’ house: it is a characteristic of the 
derovdaiuwv, ore émBHvar pvypatt, ovte éml vexpov ovr emi exw 
éAbety eOeAfoa, Thphr., Ch. 16. This at least was the reason given 
at Rome for a similar custom: Serv., A. 3, 64; 4, 507. 

40 Crowning of the dead with garlands, afterwards a general custom, 
is first mentioned in the ’AdAkpatwvis (epical, but hard to date 
precisely: fr. ii, p. 76 Kink.). On the “‘ Archemoros ”’ vase a woman 
is about to place a myrtle-wreath on the head of Archemoros. The 
myrtle is sacred to the yoo, and hence the myrtle-crown belongs 
to the Mystai of Demeter as well as to the dead: see Apollod. ap. 
Sch. Ar., Ran. 330; Ister ap. Sch. Soph., OC. 681. Grave-monuments 
too were crowned and planted especially with myrtles: Eur., El. 324, 
meceetcimethont., tod, jee. will, 23.6 Notonly they dead 
but graves too were frequently crowned with céAwov, parsley: Plu., 
Timol. 26; Smp. 5, 3, 2, p. 676 D; Diogen. viii, 57, and others ; 
er UGVe, eChap ait, = Tl. 21. The crowning invariably implies some 
form of consecration to a god. Acc. to Tertul., Cor. Mil. 10, the dead 
were crowned quoniam et ipsi idola statim fiunt habitu et cultu con- 
secrationis ; which at least gets nearer the real sense of the practice 
than the view of Sch. Ar., Lys. 601: orédavos €did0T0 tots vexpots ws 
tov Biov dunywricpeévors. 

oe tle JOO eA. Pollo G3. "A still’ Stranger reason added 
ap. Phot. mpddeats. 

42 Permission to attend either the mpd@eots of the corpse (and the 
funeral lamentation) or the funeral procession (the éxdopa) given only 
to women of kinship pexpt avefidtntos: Law ap. Dem. 43, 62-3: 
i.e. within the ayyoreéa, to which alone the duty of the cult of the dead 
belonged in principle. Only these women of the immediate kin are 
pcatvopevar in the case of death: cf. Hdt. vi, 58; this is the reason 
for the restrictions laid down by the funeral regulation from Keos 
(STG. 877, 25 ff.), which makes an even narrower selection within the 
ranks of the ayyore(a. (From 1. 22 yn dzoriAévas, etc., the law speaks 
of the mpd@eots, even though at the beginning only the éxdopa is in 
question.) 

43 Guvxyas KoTTOpEevwy adetrev. Plu., Sol. 21. The democratizing 
of life in Attica after Solon’s time may have contributed to the carrying 
out there of provisions restricting the elaborate funeral rites of the old 
aristocratic period. The practice of kémreoOar emi reOvnKdte appears, 
however, to have remained in use: beating of the head at funeral 
lamentations is a favourite motif in Attic vase-paintings (the so- 
called ‘‘ Prothesis’’ vases): cf. Monum. dell’ Instit. viii, 4, 5; 111, 
60, etc. See Benndorf, Griech. Sicil. Vasenb. 1. 

4 +0 Opnvetvy memroinpéva, Plu., Sol. 21: by which is meant funeral 
hymns carefully prepared beforehand and perhaps ordered from 
professional Opjvwy codiorai, not spontaneous expressions of grief 
breaking out as though involuntarily. 

45 Plu., Sol. 21: Kat ro Kwxvew dardov ev tadais Erépwv adeirerv. 
This must surely mean: Solon forbade dirges to be sung at a funeral 
of one person in honour of another, different from the person actually 
being buried. (é€7épwy is only used for variety after d.Ahov and simply = 
akAwy: as frequently by Attic writers: 1%) mpoiépevov adAdov érépw 
THv aAvdaynv, Pl., Lg. vili, 849 E; érepov—dAdov Isoc. 10, 36, etc.) 


190 NOTES 10 (CHAPTP Keay 


The tendency to extend the funeral hymns to include others besides 
the dead man is implied by a prohibition in a funeral ordinance of the 
matpta of the AaBvada at Delphi (fifth-fourth century B.c.), BCH. 95, 
p. Il, 1. 39 ff. rav 8 mpdota tebvaxorwy ev trois caparecot py 
Opyvety und’ drorvlev (at the funeral of another person). Was Homer 
thinking of something of the kind in T 302: Ilarpoxdov mpdodacw—? 

46 In Athens it had once been the custom tepeia mpooddrrew mpo 
ths éexgopas, i.e. while still in the house of the dead person: [Pl.} 
Min. 315 C. Such a sacrifice before the éx¢opa (which is not described 
till 1. 1261 ff.) is implied by Euripides, Hel. 1255, at the burial of the 
dead body found in the sea: zpoodalerat pev ala mp&ta veprépois— 
where zpoodaytov is used inaccurately of sacrifice at the grave, in 
which case the zpé is meaningless; as also in the insc. from Keos 
(SIG. 877, 21). apodcdaypa is also thus used, Eur., Hec. 41. Plu. 
(Sol. 21) says of Solon: eévayilew 5é€ Body ovx efacev. Possibly Solon 
forebade the sacrifice of animals before the éxdopd, since the author 
of the Ps.-Platonic Minos seems also to refer to such a prohibition. 

47 The Solonian restrictions says Plu. (Sol. 21) have been for the 
most part adopted in our (i.e. the Boeotian) vdépor—as acc. to the 
indubitable witness of Cicero, Solon’s funeral regulations had been 
reproduced eiusdem prope verbis in the tenth of the Twelve Tables 
by the Decemviri. Limits set to ceremonial mourning in Sparta: 
Plu., Lyc. 27 (whence Inst. Lac., 18, p. 238 D), in Syracuse by Gelon : 
D.S. 11, 88, 2: cf. ‘* Charondas 7, *Stob:, 61. 445 40) Ma —ay ee 
p. 153, 10 H. Some degree of restriction was imposed on their members 
(about the beginning of the fourth century B.c.) by the warpia of the 
*AaBvada in Delphi in the te@uds published in the BCH. ’95, p. 9 ff. 

48 We have a very naive expression of the ideas lying behind such 
violent Jamentations, self-inflicted injuries, and other excessive 
demonstrations of grief in the presence of the dead body, when e.g. 
in Tahiti people wound themselves and then “‘ call out to the soul of 
the dead man to witness their attachment to him” (Ratzel, Hist. of 
Mankind, i, 330); cf. Waitz-Gerland, Anthrop. vi, 402. 

49 It is a very ancient idea common to many different nations that 
too violent expressions of grief for the dead man may disturb his rest 
and make him return: see Mannhardt, Gotter der deutschen Volker, 
1860, p. 290 (for Germany in partic. see Wuttke, Deut. Volksabergl.,. 
§ 728, p. 431; Rochholz, D. Glaube u. Brauch, i, 207). Similar 
superstition in Greece is referred to in Lucian, Luct. 24 (in which the 
lateness of the witness does not prevent the belief from being ancient).. 
The survivors who prolong beyond reason their laments are asked : 
péxpe Tivos ddupdpmeba; Eacov avaravcacbat Tovs Tod paKapliov Satpovas.. 
—In Pl., Mx. 248 B, the dead say Sedpueba marépwv kai unrépwv eldévar. 
OTe ov OpnvodvTes odd dAOdupdpEvolr Huds Huty pardtoTa yapiodvrar— 
thus violent grief is intended in Greece, too, to please the dead: see 
last note—aAha . . . ottws dydpiorou elev dv padtata: while acc. to: 
“ Charondas ”’, Stob., Fl. iv, 2, 24, p. 153 H.: dyapioria éori mpos 
daiwovas xfoviovs AVN brép TO péTpov yryvopern. 

°° exdépew Tov amofavervta TH torepaia HF av mpoddvra, mpiv HAtor 
eféxew, Solonian law in D. 43, 62; cf. Antipho, Chor. 34. Klearch. 
ap. Proclus im Pl. Rp. ii, 114 Kroll: Kleonymos in Athens, re@vavat. 
dofas tpitys Huépas ovens Kata Tov vopov mpodvrébn, i.e. it was the 
morning of the third day, immediately before the éxdopa, the 
ampo@eots having occupied the whole of the second day (quite differently 
taken by Maass, Orpheus, 1895, p. 232, 46; but hardly correctly. It 
is scarcely probable that a man re@vdvat Sdéas, i.e. seeming to those- 


NOTES (TO. CHAPRPTER. Vi 191 


around him to be dead, should be recognized by these same people 
and treated as merely in a trance—as in fact, was the case). So, too, 
in the analogous story of Thespesios of Soliin Plutarch, S. Num. Vind. 
22, p. 563 D, rpiraios, 7d mept tas tagas adtas, avyveyxe (Philostr., 
VA. 3, 38, P- 1145-28, Ke: the wife of the man who has just died 
mrept 7Hy evviy vBpice, Tpitalov Ketmevov [SC. Tob avdpds] yapnbecioa 
érépw : i.e. immediately before the éxdopa, while the dead man still 
was in the house). Similar customs are implied for the Greeks in 
Mapiussap, Ants Libs 39, 9, p235; 21 West. [= p. 122.7 f: Mart.) : 
nuepa O€ TPITH TO GHpa mponveyKav eis eugaves (eis todudaves ?) ot 
mpoonKkovtes. Further, acc. to Plato’s view as given in Lg. 959 A, 
there should be tpitaia mpos TO priya éxdopa. 

51 Before sunrise: D. 43, 62 (more distinctly commanded by a law 
of Dem. Phal.: Cic., lg. i1, 66). On the other hand, it was considered 
a disgrace to be buried during the night: 7 Kaxds xaxds tadyjon, 
vukTos ovK év Huéepa, Eur., Tro. 448. 

52 So in particular the funeral-law from Keos, SIG. 877; cf. Plu., 
Sol. 21; Bergk, Rh. Mus. 15, 468. Funeral-law of the Labyadai at 
Delphi, 1. 29 f.: orp@ua de €v baoParérw Kat toixedparatov ev motiOéTw: 
(for the dead). 

°3 Reproduced Monum. deil’ Instituto, ix, 391 [and in Rayet-Collignon, 
Cévamique grecque, Pl. 1]. 

54 The law in D. 43, 62 (cf. 64), makes restrictions in the attendance: 
at a funeral which are to apply to women only (and only then for those: 
under 60): men seem therefore to be granted permission in- 
discriminately. We are told too in Plu., Sol. 21, that at the éxxopidy: 
Solon had not forbidden é€m’ aAddzpia pvypata BadiLew—for men that 
is, we must suppose. The men went in front in procession; the 
women followed: D. 43, 62. Evidently the same applied in Keos: 
SIG. 877, 20.—Pittakos as aesymnetes in Mitylene forbade absolutely 
accedere quemquam in funus aliorum, Cic., Lg. ii, 65.—Funeral- 
law of the Labyadai (Delphi), 1. 42 ff.: from the burial amtpev Folxade 
exaoTov, €x0w opeotiwvy Kai matpadeAdea@v Kat mevdepOv KyKydvwr 
kai yauBpay, i.e. the next-of-kin of the dead in ascending and 
descending order. 

55 This is referred to as still-existing custom by Plato, Lg. 800 E; 
cf. Sch. ad loc.; Hesych. Kapivaz. Menand. Kapivyn, Mein., Com. iv, 
p. 144 (Karo-phrygian funeral-flutes: Ath. 174 F: Poll. iv, 75-9). 

56 tov Oavovta d€ dépev Katakexaduppévoy ciwmh méxpe él TO ofpa, 
putas O77; 11. Funeral-law of Labyad., 1. 40 ff. rov 6€ vexpov 
Kkexaduppevov pepeTw aya, KHv tats otpodais (“‘ at the street-corners ’’) 
wn Kat TLdévrwy bn dapet, pnd drorul ovTwy €x90s tas Fouxias mpty 
kK él Td oGua ikwrte’ THvet d° evayos éotw xKTAr. (the last, not yet 
satisfactorily explained). 

57 Solon diminished (under the alleged influence of Epimenides) at 
funerals 70 oxAnpov kal To BapBapikoy @ ovveixovTo mpdoTepov at mA€ioTat 
yuvatkes, Plu., Sol. 12. 

°8 In the list of quotations from individual authors from the fifth 
Beatuiyeon, given in Becker Char.? i, 98 ff. [= E.T.* pp. 390-1], 
only the foll. speak for burial as the prevailing custom: Plu., Sol. 21, 
ovK etacev (Solon) ouvriOévar wAgov twatiwv tpidv, and Plu., Lyc. 27, 
ouvOamrew ovdev elacev (Lycurg.) adda év dowixide cai gvAdous €dAaias 
Bévres TO G@pa meptéoteAAov; cf. Th. i, 134, 4. Cremation, on the 
other hand, is implied as the more common in Athens (fourth century) 
by Is. 4, 19: ovr Exavaev od? wotodAdynoev; so, too, the will (third 
century) of the Peripatetic Lykon (D.L. v, 70): wept d€ rs exgopas Kat. 


192 NOTES TO CHAPTER V 


Kavoews emipedAnOytwoav KTA. Cf. also Teles ap. Stob. 40, 8, i, p. 747, 
5 H.: ri dcadéper bro mupos Katakav 0 jvat—which is here regarded as 
Greek funeral usage.—In the graves recently discovered before the 
Dipylon gate in Athens those belonging to the earliest period almost 
without exception have their dead buried (without coffin); the 
following period (into the sixth century) generally burnt their dead ; 
later, burial seems to have been more usual—see the account by 
Briickner and Pernice of the excavations before the Dipylon gate, 
Ath. Mitt. 1893, pp. 73-191. Thus it appears that in the later period 
burial was the prevailing practice in Attica (L. Ross, Archeol. Aufs. 
i, 23), as also, being essentially cheaper than cremation, in other 
parts of Greece as well (a few references given in BCH. °95, p. 144, 2). 

59 watordynaev, Is. 4, 19. 

60 The custom of ékdopa on an open «Airy is not in harmony with 
the intention of laying the body of the dead in a coffin, but evidently 
presupposes that the body is to be placed either unenveloped in the 
ground or else to be burnt. The practice of coffin-burial (probably 
introduced from the East) later became common, but was never 
completely harmonized with the-ancient ceremonies of the exdopa. 

61 Coffinless burial was usual in the graves of the ‘‘ Mycenaean ” 
period, and also in the oldest times in Attica. The Spartans were 
merely keeping up this ancient custom when they év gowxids Kal 
dvA\ots €Aaias Oévtes TO CHpa Tepré€oteAAov (buried), Plu., Lyc. 27. 
Here everything points to the retention of primitive usage. The 
bodies were buried in the ancient fashion, not burnt; they were wrapped 
in a crimson robe. Crimson is otherwise the special colour for war 
and festival dress (cf. Miller, Dorians, ii, 264); here it is used in 
connexion with chthonic cult; €ye yap tiva To mopdupobyv xp@pua ovpma- 
Gevav mpos tov Oavarov says rightly Artemid. 1, 77, p. 70, 11 H. This 
can hardly be because of the red colour of blood; any more than that 
is why @avaros is called wopdvpeos. But even Homer £2 796 makes 
Hektor’s bones wrapped aupdupéots méXotvoi—the bones only in this 
case instead of the whole body: clearly a vestige of an older custom 
which survived unchanged in Sparta. Similarly WY 254. So, too, 
e.g. in the Dipylon graves at Athens burnt bones were found wrapped 
in a cloth, Ath. Mitt. 18, 160-1, 185. The head of the murdered 
brother dowvixids exadvgarnv nai ePaarnvy the two other Kabeiroi 
in the religious myth related by Clem. Al., Protr. ii, p. 16 P. Crimson 
frequently occurs as a colour used in chthonic cult: e.g. at the 
ceremonial dpat implying consecration to the infernal deities in 
[Lys.] 6, 51; at sacrifices to the Plataean Heroes: Plt, Avist. 21; 
at the transfer of the bones of Rhesos: see above, chap. iv, n. 36; 
Polyaen. vi, 53; at sacrifices to the Eumenides, Aesch., Eum. 1028. 
—-The custom of burial upon leaves was also retained by the Pytha- 
goreans: they buried their dead (without burning them, Iamb., VP. 
154) in myrti et oleae et populi nigrae foliis (in fact, the trees regularly 
sacred to the y@ovor), Plin. 35, 160. Fauvel (ap. Ross, Arch. Aufs. 
i, 31) found in graves by the Melitean gate at Athens le squelette 
couché sur un lit €pais de feuilles d’olivier encore en état de briler. 
(Olive stones in Mycenaean Graves, Tsundas, ’Ed¢. ’ Apyx, ’88, p. 136; 
‘SOM pelo 2s) 

* Thus in the letter of Hipparchos, in Phlegon, 1; similarly Xen. 
Eph. 3, 7, 4 (see my Griech. Roman, p. 391 n. 2). Plato wished his 
Euthynoi to be buried like this on stone xAtvar (Lg. xii, 947 D); and 
this is probably how the bodies were placed in the rock burial-chambers 
provided with separate couches, such as occur at e.g. Rhodos and Kos 


NOTES LOMCHARTE REV 193 


(see Ross, Arch. Aufs. ii, 384 ff., 392): cf. esp. the description given 
by Heuzey, Mission arch. de Macédoine (Texte), p. 257 ff., °76. It 
is the regular mode of burial in Etruria (following Greek models ?) : 
several skeletons have been found there lying on couches of masonry 
in the grave-chambers. 

63 As though the dead had not entirely departed kai 6mda kal 
oKevn Kal (watia auvyOy Tots TeOvynKdow avvOdmTovTes Hdtov ExXOVOLY 
Plu., Ne Suav. Ep. 26, p. 1104 D. Restrictions in Law of the Labyad. 
(1. 19 ff.) 68’ 6 veOpds ep THY EvroOnKSv* 7) wWA€ov mévTE Kal TpLdKoVTA 
dpaxpav evOduev, unre mprdpevov pte Foixw. 

64 Helbig, Hom. Epos. 41. 

65 BeAtioves Kal xpettroves. Arist., Eudem. 37 [44] ap. Plu., Cons. 
A poll. 27, p. 115 BC. 

66 [Pl.] Min. 315 D. Toraise doubts on this point is mere perversity. 
It is of no avail to advance the argument (which is commonly used 
also against the similar statements about Rome in Serv., A. v, 64; 
vi, 152) that this story only intends to explain the origin of the worship 
of the household Lares. The Greeks did not have this particular 
worship, or else it was so completely forgotten that no explanatory 
account of its origin was ever offered.—Beside the hearth and the altar 
of Hestia the most ancient resting place of the head of the house must 
have been placed too. When the wife of Phokion had had the body of 
her husband burnt abroad évOepéevn 74 KoATw Ta GoTd Kal Kopicaca 
vUKTWP Els THV OlKiav KaTwpUge Tapa THY éoTiav, Plu., Phoc. 37.—It 
was wrongly believed that in the remarkable rock-graves in the neigh- 
bourhood of the Pnyx at Athens examples of such graves situated inside 
the house had been discovered. See Milchhdfer in Baumeister’s 
Denkm. 153b. 

67 This occurs among the New Zealanders, Eskimos, etc.; cf. Lubbock, 
Prehistoric Times, pp. 565, 51], etc. 

68 In Sparta and Tarentum : see Becker, Char.” iii, 105 (E.T.? p. 393). 
Acc. to Klearch. ap. Ath. 522 F certain men of Tarentum were struck 
by lightning and killed ; they were then buried mp6 rdév 6updy of their 
houses and orf#Aae were put up in their honour. If they had really 
been the criminals that legend made them it would have been impossible, 
even in Tarentum, for them to have been buried within the walls of 
the city, still less before the doors of their houses—an honour given 
only to Heroes; cf. above, chap. iv, n. 136. The violent alteration of 
mpo tav Ouvpayv into mpo rHv mvAMv in order to avoid this difficulty, 
is obviously rendered untenable by the previous éxdotn Trav olkiady 
oaovs xTXA. The legend is evidently a fiction and these 86BAnrou 
{to whom it appears, as Heroes, neither the funeral dirge nor the 
usual yoai were offered) must have belonged to the class of those 
whom death by the flash of lightning raised to a higher and 
honoured rank (see Append. 1). Thus, too, the graves in the market 
at Megara mentioned by Becker must have been Hero-graves; see 
above, chap. iv, n. 83. These cases where the graves of Heroes are 
found in the middle of the city, in the market place, etc., show very 
plainly the essential difference that was held to exist between the Heroes 
and the ordinary dead. 

8° The priya Kowov maou tots amo BovcéXou yevopévors Was a modvs 
TOmos meptBeBAnpevos, Wamep of apxator evopilov: D. 43, 79. The 
Bouselidai composed not a yévos, but a group of five ofxo. bound 
together by definitely traceable ties of kinship. The members of 
a yévos in its political sense no longer held graves in common possession : 
see Meier, de gentil. Att. 33; Dittenb., Hermes, 20,4. The Kupodvera 


O 


194 NOLES al OMCHAL LER say, 


pv para were also family-graves: Plu., Cim. 4, Marcellin. V. Th. 17, 
Plu., X Or., p. 838 B. It was always insisted on, for obvious reasons, 
that no stranger to the family should be laid in the family grave. 
But just as the penal clauses so often inscribed on graves of a later period 
were necessary to prevent the burial of strangers in those graves, so 
too Solon had to make a law in respect of graves ne quis alienum 
inferat: Cic., Lg. u, 64. 

70 The speaker in Dem. 55, 13 ff., mentions the wadara pyjpara of 
the zpdéyovor of the earlier possessors of his ywpiov (country-estate). 
This custom of burying the family dead in the private ground of the 
family kat rots dAdots ywpiots ovpBéBnxe. Timarchos is asked by 
his mother 70 ’AAwaéxnoat ywpiov (which lay 11 or 12 stades away from 
the city walls) évradjvat tbroAimetv adrH (in spite of which he sold it) : 
Aeschin., Tim. 99. Examples in East Attica of walled-in family 
cemeteries with room for many graves: Belger, Localsage von den 
Grabern Agamem., etc. (Progr. Berl. 1893), pp. 40-2. It was thus 
the very general custom to keep the family graves on their own ground 
and soil; and this corresponds closely enough with the oldest custom 
of all, that of burying the master of the house in his own home.— 
In Plu., Avist. 1, Demetr. Phal. mentions an ’Apioteidov ywpiov ev 
@ 7téG0anra in Phaleron. 

71 Restriction of the growing magnificence of grave columns in 
Athens made by Demetr. Phal., Cic., Lg. ii, 66. (Penal clauses ei ris 
ka Oa[ arn  émijoraya édiora xrA. in a law from Nisyros [Berl. Phil. 
Woch. 1896, pp. 190, 420]: they probably do not refer to a general 
prohibition of tombstones altogether.) 

"2-Ci. Curtius, 2..Ges. Wegebaus: Gr., p-. 262: 

*3 Nemora aptabant sepulcris ut in amoenitate animae forent post 
vitam: Serv., A. v, 760. In lucis habitabant manes piorum: iii, 
302; cf. ad i, 441; vi, 673. ‘‘ My grave is in a grove, the pleasant 
haunt of birds,’’ says a dead man dd¢pa kal eiv *’Aidc tepmvov Exoupe 
tonov, Epiyr. Gr. 546, 5-14. 

74 Cf. the ins. from Keos, S7G. 877, 8-9. Eur. IT. 633 ff.: €av96 7’ 
edaiw oGpa cov kataoBéow, kal yavos . .. EovOAs weAiaons és mupav Bade. 

75 évayilew 5é Bodv ovK elacev, Plu., Sol. 21. 

*6 szpoodayiw (at the funeral) ypjoba cara ta matpia, SIG. 877, 13. 
In general, however, the sacrifice of animals at the graves of private 
individuals gradually became rarer and rarer: see Stengel, Chthon. 
u. Todt. 430 f. 

™ Cf. esp. the ins. from Keos, 1. 15 ff., 30. The éyyurpiorpiat 
employed in old Athenian usage, [Pl.] Min. 315 C, seem to have been 
women who caught the blood of the sacrificed animals in bowls and 
purified the prawopevor with it. The name itself suggests it; to this 
effect is one among several other, clearly mistaken, explanations 
given by the Schol. to Mim., loc. cit. (differently Sch. Ar., Vesp. 289). 

78 wept Ta wévOn .. . Opomabeig tod KeKunKoTos Korofodpev jpas 
adtovs TH TE Koupa THY TpLxOv Kal TH TOv oteddvwv addaipéce, Arist. 
fry. 108 (101) Rose. 

9 wepidernvov. This is implied as universally occurring by Aen. 
Tact. 10,5. This meal shared by the relatives (who alone are invited : 
Dem. 43, 62) must be meant by Heraklid., Pol. 30, 2, mapa trois Adxpots 
odvpecbar ovK EoTw Emi Tots TeAevTHoaaW, GAA’ ézerdav éexKoplowoww 
evwxoovTat. 

80 9 vrodoxy ylyverat d70 Tod atobavdrros, Artemid. 5, 82, p. 271, 


81 Cic., Lg. ii, 63 (cf. Anaxandr. ap. Ath. 464 A.). On the other 


NORE SS TOSCHARTER VV 195 


hand, mentiri nefas erat. And yet eidé@ecay of madauol ev rots mEpiSeimvors 
Tov teAevtynKOTa EeTaweiv, Kai ef datros Hv, Zenob. v, 28, and other 
Paroemiogr.—Besides this the lamentation for the dead may have been 
renewed at the various commemorations of the dead; the funeral 
regulation of the Labyadai at Delphi forbids expressly (not the 
festival but) the funeral dirge on such occasions: ]. 46 ff. pnéde 
7@ vorepaia (after the burial, on which day the zepiSermvov was held) 
pnde ev tats dexdtats nd’ ev tots éviavtot[s] (we should expect rather 
ev. 7. eviautiows, Cf. nn. 89-92 of this chap.) unr’ oluwlev pyr’ drorvlev. 

82 These meals given to the dead took place at the grave itself. 
Ar., Lys. 612 f. 7&er cor. . .; Is. 8, 39, 7a Evara eajveyxa. 

88 The rpiza and évara, at any rate, were held on the third and 
ninth days after the funeral, and not after the day of death. It is 
true the references to these sacrifices in Ar., Lys. 612 ff., Is., etc., do 
not make this very clear. But if the zpizva had taken place on the 
third day after death it would have coincided with the éxdopa itself, 
which is against all the evidence. Further, the Roman novemdiale, 
which was clearly modelled on Greek custom, also occurred on the 
ninth day after the burial, acc. to the unequivocal testimony of Porph. 
on Hor., Epod. xvii, 48 (nona die quam sepultus est). This is also 
meducible tronneVe., Av, 46 f1., and 105 ;acf. also-Ap., Mix, 31. 

84 That this was the object of the Novemdialia festival at Rome is 
shown clearly enough by the evidence; that the same was true of 
Greece is at least highly probable; cf. K. O. Miiller, Aesch. Eum., 
p. 143 [120 E.T.]. Leist, Gvraecottalische Rechts., p. 34.—Nine is 
evidently a round number, esp. in Homer; i.e. the division of periods 
of time into groups of nine was in antiquity a very common and familiar 
practice. Cf. now, Kaegi, Die Neunzahl bet den Ostariern, Phil. 
Abh. f. Schweitzer-Sidler, 50 ff. Mourning customs were really 
intended to ward off maleficent action on the part of the dead. They 
lasted as a rule as long as the return of the soul of the dead was to 
be feared (esp. so in India: see Oldenberg, fel. d. Veda, p. 589), and acc. 
to ancient belief the soul can return once more on the ninth day after 
death. See below, chap. xiv, ii, n. 154. 

85 A xpovos meévfovs of eleven days, the mourning concluded with 
eeetcceton Demeter jp Plu.) byci27 > ‘ciiw dt. ivi;.98) fin: » The 
Labyadai at Delphi celebrate the tenth day after the funeral as a feast 
of the dead; see above, n. 81 of this chapter. This mourning period 
is not otherwise demonstrable for Greece (SIG. 633, 5, is different), 
but it is met with again among the Indians and Persians (cf. Kaegi, 
p- 5, 11), and may be primitive. 

86 Tex. Rh., in AB. 268, 19 ff.; Phot. a little differently : cafédpa° 
7H tTptaxootH (mpw7n Phot.: A instead of A) jydpa tod amofavevtos 
ot mpoonKovres avveAOovtes Kowh edermvotv emt TH azroPavdrTi—xal 
tobro Kadédpa éxadetro (Phot. adds: ort Kabefopevor edeimvovy Kal 
Ta voutlopeva éemAnjpovv') foav d€ Kabedpar téocapes (the last clause 
is absent from Phot.). It was a meal shared by the relatives of the 
dead in honour of the dead and held “‘ on the thirtieth day ” ; possibly 
nothing more nor less than the oft-mentioned tpraxddes. The guests 
eat their food sitting after the old custom prevailing in Homeric times 
and always observed by women; as applied to men it survived in 
Crete only, see Miiller, Dovians,ii, 284. Perhaps this primitive attitude 
preserved in cultus is what we see in the Spartan sculptured reliefs 
representing “* feasts of the dead ”’ where the figures are seated. ‘There 
were four such xaé8pat, i.e. the period of mourning extended over four 
months: thus it was the law in Gambreion (SIG. 879, 1] ff.) that 


196 NOTES TOP CHAP LER Sy, 


mourning might last at the most three months, or in the case of 
women four. We often hear of monthly repetitions of the feasts of 
the dead: monthly celebration of the etxades for Epicurus in acc. 
with his will, D.L. x, 18; cf. Cic., Fin. ii, 101; Plin. 35,5; xara pave 
sacrifice to the deified Ptolemies, C/G. 4697, 48. (In India, too, the 
sacrifices to the dead on the thirtieth of the month were several times 
repeated: Kaegi, 7; 11.) 

87 The Lexicographers, Harp., Phot., etc. (AB. 308, 5, is ambiguous, 
too), speak of the tpraxds in a way that makes it hard to see whether 
they mean the traditional sacrifice of the dead taking place regularly 
on the thirtieth day of the month, or a special offering on the thirtieth 
day after burial or after the day of death (7 rpiaxoorn jucpa 81a Tob 
davarov Harp., Phot. wera Oavarov is the correction of SchOmann on 
Is., p. 219, but 61a @avdrov is formed, not quite correctly, on the analogy 
of dua xpdvov, dua pécov [even dia mpoydvwy “since the time of our 
forefathers ’’, Polyb. 21, 21, 4], and must mean the same thing, viz. 
“after death’). Butin Lys.1, 14, we have the idea clearly expressed 
that the period of mourning should last till the thirtieth day (see Becker, 
Char.” 3, 117 E.T.3, p. 398), and in this case it is natural to suppose 
that the tpraxades, corresponding with the rpiza and évara, took place 
on the thirtieth day after burial. So, too, the ins. from Keos, SIG. 
877, 21, éwt 7@ Gavovri tpinxooria wn movetv. For Argos see Plu., Q. Gy. 
24, p. 296 F. It is evident that the rptaxddes were not so firmly 
established in Athens (at least in the fourth century) as the zpira 
and évara: e.g. Isaeus generally only refers to these last as the 
indispensable vopildpueva: 2, 36-7; 8, 39. It appears also that it 
is wrong to regard the tpiaxades as otherwise exactly on a footing with 
the zp. and évara, as is generally done. The last-mentioned pair were 
sacrifices to the dead, the spraxddes seems to have been a com- 
memorative banquet of the living.—These fixed periods of mourning 
like so much else in the cult of the dead may have been handed down 
by tradition from a very early time. The third, ninth (or tenth), 
and thirtieth days after the funeral marked stages in the gradually 
diminishing ‘“‘ uncleanness’”’ of the relatives of the dead, and this 
existed, it appears, already in ‘‘ Indo-Germanic”’ times. Until the 
ninth day the relatives were still in contact with the departed and were 
consequently “‘unclean”; the thirtieth day puts an end to this, 
and is a memorial festival (though often repeated) ; cf. Kaegi, pp. 5, 
10, 12 (of the separate edition) ; Oldenberg, 578. In Christian usage, 
sanctioned by the church, the third, ninth, and fortieth days after 
death or after burial were very early observed as memorial days 
(sometimes third, seventh, thirtieth ; .cf. Rochholz, D. Gl. u. Brauch, 
i, 203), and survive in some cases to the present day: see Ac. Soc. 
ph: Lips. vy, 304 £. 

88 +a vexvota TH Tprakads dyerar: Plu., Prov. Alex. viii, p. 6, 10 Crus. 
(App. prov. Vat. in Schneidewin’s Crit. App. to Diogen. viii, 39). 
There was a festival kept by servants in honour of their dead masters 
(aAAabeddes, GDI. 1731, 10; 1775, 29; 1796, 6) twice monthly, at 
the vovynvia and on the seventh: GDI. 1801, 6-7 Delphi. The 
last three days of the month are at Athens sacred to the inhabitants 
of the lower world and therefore admodpades: EM.131, 13 £.; E. Gud. 
70, 3 ff.; cf. Lys., fr. 53. On these days banquets were prepared, 
at the crossroads, etc., for Hekate (acc. to Ath. 325 A), for Hekate 
Kal Tots amotpotatos (Plu., Symp. 7, 6, p. 709 A). The souls of the 
dead were then not forgotten. Sch. Pl., Lg. vii, 800 D, amodpddes 


€ / b] a 
HuEépar ev als Tots KaTovxyopevots yous éemudépovorr. 


NOPE Stet Om CEA Pili RoeV 197 


89 The son evayiler xa’ Exacrov éeviavtdv to his dead father, Is. 2, 
46. This sacrifice to the dead, celebrated once every year (@vcia 
emétevos Offered by a mats wazpi), is the festival of the Ievéova, in vogue 
acc. to Hdt. iv, 26, among the Greeks, everywhere as it appears. As 
the name shows this festival fell on the birthday of the honoured 
ancestor as it recurred (not on the day of his death as Amm. pp. 34-5 
Walck, incorrectly Says) ; cf.;schol.- PRK, Alc.1, 121°C. So Epicurus 
in his will (D.L. x, 18) provides for a yearly celebration of his birthday. 
(Similar foundation, CIG. 3417.) The Koans évayifovor to Hippo- 
krates every year on the 27th Agrianos as his birthday: Soran., 
V.Hp., p. 450, 13-14 West. Hero-festivals, too, fall on the birthday 
of the Hero: Plu., Avat. 53. Gods have their feast-days and their 
birthdays combined ; thus Hermes has his on the 4th of the month, 
Artemis on the 6th, Apollo on the 7th, and so on. These are birthday 
festivals repeated every month. In the second century at Sestos, 
following such precedents, there was held 7a yevé@\ta rot BactAéws 
(one of the deified Attalids) xa@’ Exaorov pjva: SIG.1 246, 36. Celebra- 
tion of the €upnvos yevéovos of the ruling Emperor: Ins. Perg. ii, 
374 B, 14. Even in later times in imitation of heathen usage the 
Kephallenians still honour Epiphanes, son of Karpokrates, xara 
voupnviav, yevéebAtov amobéwauv, Clem. Al., Siy. iii, p. 511 P. 

90 This is the public festival meant by Phryn., p. 103 Lob. = 83, p. 184 
Ruth., when, to distinguish it from the birthday celebrations of living 
persons, yevé@Ava (which did not become common till later), he calls 
the Tevéova, "AOnvnow éopry [wévOipos add. Meursius; cf. Hesych, 
yeveoia; AB. 231, 19]. The Antiatticista, in his rather absurd 
polemic against Phryn. (p. 86, 20 ff.), adds the still clearer statement 
(taken from Solon’s doves and Philochoros) that the €opr7) dypoteAns 
of the Ievéova at Athens was held on the 5th Boedromion. There 
is not the slightest reason for doubting the correctness of this state- 
ment (as many have done). In Rome, too, besides the many moveable 
paventalia of the families there was an official and public Parentalia 
held every year (in Feb.). Similarly in ancient India: Oldenberg, 550, 3. 

%1 The Nepéoera is mentioned by Dem. 41,11. The context suggests 
a rite performed by a daughter in honour of her dead father. It is a 
quite certainly correct conjecture (ujmore—) Of the Lexicog. that the 
Nemeseia may be a festival of the dead (see Harp. s.v. AB. 282, 32: 
both glosses combined in Phot. Suid. vepéowa). It is clear, however, 
that they knew nothing further about it. Mommsen declares (Heort. 
209) the Nemeseia to have been “‘ without doubt” identical with the 
Tevéova. I see no reason at ail for supposing so.—The name vepeéceta 
characterizes it as a festival dedicated to the ‘“‘ wrath ” of the dead, to 
the vépeots THv Oavevrwv, Soph., El. 792; POipévwv wKutatry vépeats, 
Epigr.Gr. 119; cf. 195—this easily becomes a personified Népeois: €ore 
yap ev dOipevors Népects péya, Epigy. Gr. 367,9. The cult of the dead, 
like the cult of the underworld in general, is always apotropaic in 
character (placantur sacrificiis ne noceant, Serv., A. iil, 63): the 
Nemeseia must then have been apotropaic in intention too. 

82 At Apollonia in Chalcidice there was a yearly custom 7a voptpa 
ouvtedeiv tots teAevryjoaow in early times in Elaphebolion, later in 
Anthesterion: Hegesand. ap. Ath. 334 F.—évavova, a yearly festival 
of the dead (but perhaps rather to be taken as sacra privata) in Keos: 
SIG. 878.—There is a month called Nexvovos in Knossos (and common 
to the whole of Crete acc. to the ‘HyepoAdyiov Flor. (Corsini, Fast. Att. 
ii, 428]). It took its name from a feast of the dead (vexvava is 
mentioned along with zepiSevmva, as a regular expression by Artemid. 


198 NODES = LOS CHAP ITS kaay, 


iv, 81, p. 249, 9 H.): for this see ** Treaties of Kretan cities ’’, BCH. 
1879, 294, 1. 56 £.—There was a month ’Aypiwdvios or ’Aypidvios in 
Boeotia and even in Byzantium, Kalymna, Kos, Rhodos: Hesych. 
"Aypidvia’  vexvoua mapa “Apyelors Kai aydves ev OnBas (as to the 
Agon at the A. see the ins. from Thebes, Ath. Mitt. vii, 349).—éreAciro 
8é xat Ovola Tots vexpots év KopivOw, di hv THs méAEews ev Tots uvyipacw 
ovens émépxerat 6 ’Adjrns xtA. Sch. Pi., N. vii, 155. 

9 Hesych. papal yuépar. Phot. prapa ypépa. 

94 guyKkAeo Ojvat Ta tepa during the Choes : Phanodem. ap. Ath. 437 C. 

9% Phot. papa yucpa* ev tots Xovow *AvOeotnpidvos pyvds, ev @ 
(év ols ?) SoKxodow at pvyal tOv TekevTHCdvTWY ayévat, Pdpvov Ewlev 
épacavro, Kat mitTn Tas Ovpas éxptov. “Papvos’ Prrov, 6 é€v tots Xovolw 
ws adAe~idadppakov éuacMuto ewlev' Kat mittn éxplovto Ta owpata 
(leg. SwWpara)’ duiavtos yap atrn’ 610 Kal ev Tois yevécect THY TraLdiwv 
xplovat tas olklas eis atéAaow Tav datpovwv.—l do not recollect having 
read elsewhere of pitch as a protection against malevolent spirits or 
of its use in Greek superstitious practices. (The flame and smoke 
of burning pitch—and of dogadros: Diph. fr. 126 [ii, p. 577 K.] ap. 
Clem. Al. Sty. 7, 4, 26, p. 844 P.—as of sulphur, belong to the region 
of magic and are xafappoi: but that is a different matter.—ra 
Kabapoa’ tadra O€ é€oTt SGdes Kal Oetov Kai acdpadros, Zos. ii, 5, p. 67, 
19 Bk.). Better known is the magic protective power of the papvos. 
It is of use against ¢apypaxa and davréopara, and is therefore hung 
up on the doors év rots évayiouace: Sch. Nic., Th. 860 (Euphorion 
and Sophron had also referred to this superstition). Cf. Anon., de Vir. 
Herb. 9-13, 20 ff., and the Scholia (p. 486, ed. Haupt., Opusc. 2) ; 
also Dioscorides i, 119 fin. (pdvos also frightens away poisonous 
beasts: Diosc. ii, 12. In the same way marjoram and scilla are 
equally available against daimones and (fofdAa.) At Rome the haw- 
thorn (spina alba) is specially known for these purificatory properties. 
Ovid, F. vi, 129 (at a wedding procession a torch made of a branch 
of the spina alba is used [Fest. 245a, 3 Mii.j, and this is purgationis 
causa: Varro ap. Charis., p. 144, 22 K.}.—At the Choes the pdpvos 
(i.e. twigs or leaves of it) is chewed: this is in order that its powers 
may be absorbed into the chewer’s own body. The Superstitious 
man (like the Pythia) puts laurel leaves in his mouth xal otrtw tiv 
quépav mepiratet: also at the Choes ? Thphr., Ch. 16. The laurel in 
addition to its other marvellous properties can also drive off spirits : 
évda av 9 Sadvyn, exmodav Saipoves, GP. 11, 2, 5-7. Lyd., Mens. 4, 4, 
p. 68, 9 Wii. 

9° Sch. Ar., Ach. 961, p. 26, 8 ff. Diibn.—At the vexpdv Setnva 
the souls of the departed members of the family are summoned by the 
mpoanKkovtes to come and take their share (with the single exception 
of those who have hanged themselves): Artemid. i, 4, p. 11, 10f£. H. 
(cf. what is said of the vexvova in Bithynia by Arr. ap. Eust., ¢ 65, 
p. 1615). The same thing must have happened at the Anthesteria. 

*” Worshippers offered the yvtpav mavomepyias to Hermes fAackd pevor 
tov ‘Epuiv cal nept trav anofavevtwy, Sch. Ar., Ach. 1076 (Didymus 
from Theopomp.)—vobvs tore aapayevowevouvs (read mepiywopevous, 
viz. from the Flood) tep trav dmobavevtwy tAdoacba rov ‘Eppfv, 
Sch. Ar., Ran. 218 (after Theop.). The offering was merely placed 
ready for the recipients (not sent up to heaven in flames and smoke) 
as was customary at the Theoxenia (esp. those in honour of chthonic 
deities) and in offerings made to Heroes. The ‘Exdrns Seimva were 
similar, and particularly the offerings to the Erinyes: rd meumépeva 
avtats tepa momava Kal yada év ayyeo Kepapeious, Sch. Aeschin. i, 188. 


INO DE See Om CLA PDT Reg. 199 


98 EM.774,56: ‘Ydpoddpia’ éoptry APjvnot mévOtuos (so far Hesych. 
too, S.v.) emi tots ev TH KatakAvap~@ amodAopevors. The feast of Chytrai 
was also supposed to have been a commemoration of Deucalion’s 
Flood. The flood was said to have subsided finally through a cleft 
in the earth in the Temple of [7 *OAvyaia: Paus. 1, 18, 7. Pausanias 
adds, e€aBdAXovaw és atro (the chasm) ava mav eros adAdita mupav 
péAite pagavres. It is at least natural, with Preller, Dem. u. Pers. 
229, n., to see in the Hydrophoria a part of which is described by 
Pausanias, a festival related to the Chytrai. Connexion of the dead 
with I’7 in the Ievéova too: Hesych. s.v.—' Ydpoddpia a feast of 
Apollo at Aegina: Sch. Pi., N. v, 81 (fanciful remarks thereon by 
pee aviullersin AeschEums, p. 141, £116 E:T.)): 

89 Ovid’s account of the Lemuria at Rome, F. v, shows the closest 
resemblances to the Athen. customs. The spirits are finally driven 
out: Manes exite paterni (443). The same happens in the festivals 
of the dead in many places; esp. in India, Oldenberg, 553; cf. also 
the Esthonian customs: Grimm, p. 1844, n. 42. <A parallel from 
ancient Prussia is given (after Joh. Meletius, 1551) by Ch. Hartknoch, 
in Alt. u. Neues. Preussen, 1684, pp. 187-8. There on the third, 
sixth, ninth, and fortieth day after the funeral a banquet of the 
relatives of the dead was held. The souls of the dead were invited 
and (with other souls as well) entertained. ‘‘ When the feasting was 
ended the priest rose from the table and swept out the house, driving 
forth the souls of the dead as though he were driving out fleas, 
Saying the while: ‘ Ye have eaten and drunk, O ye Blessed Ones, 
depart hence! depart hence!’’’ At the close of the lantern-feast 
to the dead in Nagasaki (Japan) when the entertainment of the souls 
was over a great noise was made all over the house “‘ so that no single 
soul should remain behind and haunt the place—they must be driven 
out without mercy”: Preuss. Exped. nach Ostasien, ii, 22. Other 
examples of the expulsion of souls given in Tylor, 1i, 199. The ghosts 
were thought of in a thoroughly materialistic fashion, and driven out 
by waving clubs in the air, swinging torches, etc., as in the case of the 
fevixol Oeot of the Kaunians: Hdt. i, 172. Compare with this the 
prayers addressed to Herakles in the Orphic Hymns (reproducing 
ancient superstitions as frequently): eéA#é pdKcap.. . e€édacov be 
kakas datas, KAddov ev yepl madrAAwv, mrnvois Tt’ toBddrots Kjpas xaderas 
anomeure (12, 15-16). It will be clear how near such personified 
ara: and xfpes are to the angry “souls ’’, from which in fact they have 
Bemeetmeeect, besides, /Orph jy Hii tl, 23 5) 14,145 636,165: 71, 11.— 
Kipas atrodtoTopumetobat, Plu., Lys. 17. 

100 @Upale Kiajpes, ovx ér’ *AvOeatypia. This is the correct wording 
of the formula: Kdpes the form common later and explained with 
mistaken ingenuity. Photius has it right and explains, &s kata tiv 
modkw tots *Avfeatnpiots TOv Wuydv meprepxouévwv.—Kjpes is clearly 
a most primitive equivalent for %uvyai which has become almost com- 
pletely obscured in Homer, though it dimly appears in B 302, & 207, 
where the K7jpes are spoken of as those who carry away other puyaé 
to Hades. Aeschylus knew it (presumably from old Attic speech) 
and simply substituted wuyai for the Keres in the fate-weighing scene 
in Homer, thus turning the Kerostasia into a Wuxooracia (to the surprise 
of the Schol. A, 9 70; A.B. X 209). See O. Crusius in Ersch-Gruber, 
“ Keren,” 2, 35, 265-7 [Aesch. fr. 279 Sidg.]. 

101 Cf. the collections in Pottier, Les lécythes blancs attiques a repres. 
ner >, 57,70 fk. 

102 Though not all of them, some at any rate of the scenes in which 


200 NOTES +10) CHAR Tih gay, 


lyre-playing at a grave is represented on a lekythos are to be 
taken as implying that the living provide music for the entertain- 
ment of the dead: see Furtwangler on the Sammlung Saburoff. i, 
Eleix: 

103 See Bendorf, Sicil. u. unterital. Vasenb., p. 33. 

104 FHow the mode of conceiving the spiritual activity of the dead 
and consequently the cult of the dead was at first more solemn and 
awestruck and completely on a par with the cult of the x@ovor ; howin 
the course of time the relations of the living to the departed became 
more familiar and the cult of the dead correspondingly less awe-inspiring, 
more piously protective in character than apotropaic—all this is set 
out in more detail by P. Stengel, Chthonisch. u. Todiencult [Fest- 
schrift fiir Friedlander], p. 414 ff. 

105 The reliefs represent a man enthroned, sometimes alone, some- 
times with a woman beside him, stretching out a kantharos to receive the 
offerings. As arule heis approached by a group of worshippers repre- 
sented on a smaller scale. The earliest examples of these reliefs were 
found in Sparta and go back to the sixth century. Since the investi- 
gations of Milchhéfer especially, they are now generally recognized as 
representing the family worship of the dead. They are the forerunners 
of the representations of similar food-offerings in which (following later 
custom) the Hero is lying on a kline and receiving his worshippers. 
(That this class of reliefs representing ‘“‘ banquets of the dead’ was 
also sacrificial in character is proved clearly by the presence of the 
worshippers who in many cases lead sacrificial victims. H. v. Fritze 
in Ath. Mitt. ’96, p. 347 ff., supposes that they are intended to represent 
not sacrifices but the cuyaédotov which the dead person is to enjoy in 
the after life. But he can only account for the presence of the 
worshippers in such a forced and unnatural way [p. 356 ff.], that this 
alone seems to refute his theory. mavpapuides and incense among the 
offerings made do not by any means contradict its nature as a sacrifice 
to the dead.) The same is the meaning of the reliefs found esp. in 
Boeotia in which the person worshipped is seated on a horse, or leading 
a horse, and accepting offerings (Summary by Wolters, Archdol. Zeitung, 
1882, p. 299 ff.; cf. also Gardner, JHS. 1884, pp. 107-42; Furt- 
wangler, Samml. Sab. i, p. 23). The worshippers bring pomegranates, 
a cock (e.g. Ath. Mitt. ii, Pl. 20-2), a pig (cock and pig on Theban 
relief: A. Mitt. iii, 377; pig on Boeotian rel.: A. Mitt. iv, Pl. 17, 2), 
a ram (rel. from Patras: A. Mitt. iv, 125 f.; cf. the ram’s head on 
a grave monument from the neighbourhood of Argos, A. Mitt. viii, 
141). All these gifts are of the kind proper to the underworld. We 
know the pomegranate as food of the y@dévior from the Hymn to 
Demeter; the pig and ram are the main constituents of sacrifice 
made to the x@dvor and burnt in cathartic or hilastic (propitiatory) 
ceremonial. In such cases the cock, of course, does not appear 
because it was sacred to Helios and Selene (cf. D.L. viii, 34; Iamb., 
VP. 84), but because it was a sacrificial animal of the y@évor (and 
of _Asklepios) and for the same reason much used in necromancy, 
spirit-raising, and magic [Dieterich, Pap. mag. 185, 3]. As such it 
was forbidden food to the Mystai of Demeter at Eleusis: Porph., Abs. 
4,16, p.255,5 N. Sch. Luc., D. Me. 7, 4, p. 280, 23 Rabe.—-Anyone who 
partakes of the food of the underworld spirits is forfeit to them. On 
their side the reclining or enthroned spirits of the dead on these reliefs 
are brought into conjunction with a snake (A, Mitt. ii, Pl. 20-25 4a 
Pl. 18,1, etc.), a dog, or a horse (sometimes a horse’s head only 
occurs). The snake is the well-known symbol of the Hero: the 


NOTE See O?) CEVA PIE Res V. 201 


dog and the horse certainly do not represent victims as Gardner, 
p. 131, thinks—their real meaning has not yet been made out. The 
horse occurs sometimes by the side of women and therefore can hardly 
symbolize a knight’s status. Iregard it as also a symbol of the departed 
as now having entered the spirit-world, like the snake too (Grimm 
understands it differently: p. 841 f., 844). I can form no decided 
opinion as to the dog: it is not likely to be mere genre—any more 
than anything else in these sculptures. 

106 The yoal, dmep vexpotor pecdcxtypia, Of wine, honey, water, 
or oil, which are offered in Tragedy by children at the grave of a 
father—A., Pers. 609 ff.; Ch. 84 ff.; E., IT. 159 ff.—are modelled 
upon the food offerings to the dead in real life. Honey and water 
(weAixparov) were always the chief ingredients: cf. Stengel, Philolog. 
39,,3/8 ff.; Jahr. f. Phil. 1887, p. 653. The ritual at the pouring 
of an amoévippa—essentially a cathartic libation-sacrifice but also 
offered eis tipiy tots vexpots is described by Kleidemos év 76 
’EEnyntix®@ (the quotation is not complete), Ath. 409 E f. (Striking 
similarities in ritual and language in Indian sacrifice to the dead : 
Oldenberg, feel. d. Ved. 550. Something extremely primitive may 
be preserved in these uses.) The same is the meaning of the y@dra 
ovtpa Tots vexpots éemudepopeva, Zenob. vi, 45, etc. These things have 
nothing to do with the ‘Y8poddpra, as some have thought. 

107 The regular animal used as victim in evayicuara for the dead is 
a sheep; other animals occur less frequently. The black colour is 
general ; the sacrifice was burnt completely : cf. the instances collected 
by Stengel, Zischr. f. Gymnasi., 1880, p. 743 f£., Jahrb. f. Phil. 1882, 
p. 322 f£.; °83, p. 375.—Phot. kavordv' xapmwrov 6 évayilerat tots 
reteAeuTnKdow (cf. Hesych. xavrdv).—The oéAwov (a plant sacred to 
the dead; see above, n. 40) probably served as food for the dead at 
the rpira and other banquets “‘of the dead”’, and was not used as food 
for the living at the zepidermvov; consequently it might never be 
used at the meals of the living: Plin. 20, 113, following Chrysippos 
and Dionysios. (In the mysteries of the Kabeiroi the avaxroreAéarat 
had a special reason of their own for forbidding parsley adropilov 
€mt tpamelns 7iOévar, Clem. Al., Pvoty. ii, p. 16 P.) 

108 The food offered is a meal for the dead: A., Ch. 483 ff. (cf. Luc., 
Luct. 9; Char. 22). The dead man is summoned to come and drink 
the offerings (€AOé 8’ ws wins): E., Hec. 535 ff. It was the general 
opinion that 6 vexpos mierau of the drink offerings (AP. xi, 8; Epigr. 
Gr. 646, 12), ai yap yoat wapauyy tis elcedepeto Ttois etdwdAots THY 
teteAeuTnKoTwv KTA. Jyd., Mens. 4, 31, p. 90 Wi. 

109 Tt feels when friends or enemies approach its grave: Is. 9, 4, 19. 

110 Sch. Ar., Av. 1490 (referring to the Titavdmaves of Myrtilos, 
a poet of the Old Comedy). Phot. xpeirroves (Hesych. xpeizrovas)* ot 
jpwes’ Soxotor S€ KakwrTikol elvar’ du 6 Kal of Ta pa mapidvTes oww- 
ma@ow. (jpwes and npda here, in accordance with the usage common 
in later times, simply = rereAcuTyKdres and pvjpara of the usual kind.) 
Since a Hero in the higher sense was buried there it was customary 
to pass in silence the monument, e.g., of Narkissos, ypws LvynAds : 
Str. 404 (so also the grove and chasm of Kolonos where the Erinyes 
dwell: S., OC. 130 ff.). The feeling underlying this is easy to under- 
stand, and the custom therefore is widespread: e.g. among West 
African negroes, Réville, Relig. des peuples non civil. i, 73. It isa 
German superstition (Grimm, p. 1811, n. 830). ‘‘ Never call the dead 
by name or you may cry them up”’. 

111 P]., Phd. 81 CD. The puyH.. domep A€yerar wept Ta pyypara TE 


202 NOLES =) OSCHAPR TE Kaay. 


Kal Tods Tagdous KvAwdopevn’ wept a 57 Kai WhOn arta fuyay oKioEdF 
pavTadcpata, KTA. ee 

112 See O. Jahn, Archiiol. Beitr. 128 ff. ; Benndorf, Griech. u. sicil. 
Vasenb., p. 33 £., p. 65 (on Pl. 14, 32); also Pottier, Lécythes blancs, 
p. 65, 2 (who proposes a doubtful theory of a supposed Evos funébre, 
p75. ff.). 

113 We frequently on vases see the occupant of a grave represented 
in the form of a snake at the foot of his tomb, etc.; e:¢yonstue 
Prothesis vase, Monum. d. Instit. viii, 4, 5, and often, see Luckenbach, 
Jahrb. f. Phil., Suppl. ii, 500.—We have already met with snakes as 
a favourite form of incarnation chosen by xy@ovior of all kinds, deities 
of the underworld, Heroes, and the ordinary dead, and we shall 
frequently meet with the same thing again. Here we need only refer 
to Photius pws mouxiAos—é&ia TO Tovds Gets TotKiAovs 6vTas Apwas 
KkaActobat. 

114 What falls to the ground belongs to the wpwes (= souls of the 
dead): Ar. “Hpwes fr. 305 H. and G. tots teteAeutnkdot tadv didwy 
amévepov Ta TinTovTa THS TPOdHS amo TAV TpaTela@y (alluded to by Eur. 
in the Belleroph. 'Stheneb. fr. 667 Din.]), ap. Ath. 427 E. This is the 
origin of the Pythagorean ovpuBodov—as usual founded on ancient 
belief about the soul—ra meodvta amo tpamelfis py avatpetoba, D.L. 
villi, 34. Suid. [Tv@ayépa ra otpBoda. This superstition is also the 
reason for the voyos said to have been current in Kroton, 76 wecov 
emi THY yy KwAtwy avaipetofa, lamb., VP. 126. Similar belief and 
custom in Rome: Plin. 28, 27. Among the ancient Prussians it 
was the custom not to pick up the fragments of food that fell to the 
ground at meal times, but to leave them for the “‘ poor ’’ souls that have 
no blood-relations or friends left behind in the world to look after 
them ; see Chr. Hartknoch, Alt. u. Neues Preussen, p. 188. Similar 
customs elsewhere: Spencer, Princ. of Sociol. i, 281. 

115 Solonian law: D. 20, 104; 40, 49. Plu., Sol. 21, YéAwvos 6 kwrvwv 
vopmos Tov TEOyHKOTA KaKa@s ayopevetv. Kal yap dotov Tos peleoTHKOTAaS 
tepovs vopilew. This reminds us of the words of Arist., Eudem. fr. 
37 [44] given in Plu., C. Apoll. 27, p. 115 B, ro PevoacGat te Kara tev 
TeTeXevTNKOTwWY Kal TO BAacdnpeiv ody Savoy ws Kata BEATLOVwV Kal 
KpettTOvwy dy yeyovorwy (Chilon ap. Stob., Fl. 125, 15 M.: ov 
teteAeuTNKOTA M1 KaKkoXdyer GAAa pakapile). A very extreme form of 
outrage is pevoacbar kata Tob TedevtHoavTos: Is. 9,6; 23; 26. (The 
xaxoddyos is particularly liable to caxa eimeiv mepi rév TereheuTHKOTWY, 
Thphr., Char. 28.) The heir of the dead man has the duty of carrying 
out the cult of the dead man’s soul, and this includes the legal prosecu- 
nae - slanderers of the dead : see Meier and Schémann, Aiét. Process?, 
p. ; 

6 Ar., Tagenist. fr. 488, 12, says of the dead, xal @vopé y’ adrotor 
Tots evaylopacw, womep Oeoiow KrTi. 

pecsuacayes Hesych. Phot. s.v. - Arist. ap.. Plu., Cs» polls 
p. ; 

118 frews €xewv (tovs teAevtnoavtas).: Pl., Rp. A273; 

119 That the pwes dvadpynrot Kal yarerol tots épumedAdlovat 
ylyvovrat (Sch. Ar., Av. 1490) applies equally to the ‘ Heroes ” 
properly so called—see above, chap. iv, § 1], the legends of the Hero 
Anagyros, the Hero of Temesa, etc.—and to those who gradually 
came to be called ‘“ Heroes” in later times by an extension of the 
term, viz. the souls of the dead in general—yaderods Kal mAjxras 
Tovs Hpwas vomilovar, Kal paddov viKrwp 7 web’ %uepay: Chamaileon 
ap. Ath. 461 C (and hence the precautions taken against nocturnal 


NOUS See Oe Ghats hee V 203 


moparitions:.. Ath» 149° C)s” Cfa-Zenob. v; 60.5 Hesych. ,Phot2-s: 
Kpeittoves.— That the 7jpwes do, and are responsible for, evil only and 
never good (Sch. Ar., Av. 1490; Babr. 63) is a late belief; it does 
not apply either to Heroes or ordinary dead in the conceptions of 
earlier ages. Originally the “‘ gods’, just as much as Heroes and the 
dead, shared in the violent and malignant nature of the unseen. This 
was later confined more and more to the lower classes of the xpeirroves 
and came to be attached to them so exclusively that it could in the end 
be regarded as a sufficient ground of distinction between them and the 
gods (as it certainly had not been to start with) that malice is excluded 
from the nature of the gods and benevolence on the contrary from that 
of Heroes and the dead. 

120 Ar., Tagenist. fy. 488, 13: Kai xods ye xedpevor (to the dead) 
attovped’ avtovs Ta KaAa Seip’ aviévae (intended as a wapo.nia or at any 
rate imitated from a tragedian—apostrophe to a dead woman éxe? 
BAémovoa, Seip’ avier tayaba, Sch. Ar., Ran. 1462—and reproduced 
in this passage by the interpolator of Aristoph.). This ‘‘ sending-up 
blessings from below’”’ is to be understood in the widest sense (cf. 
A., Pers. 222); but it is natural to be reminded by such a prayer 
to avévat tayaba of Demeter avnoiddpa (Paus. 1, 31, 4; Plu., Smp. 
9, 14, 4, p. 745 A), and of IW dvnotdwpa. d1a TO Kapmods avievar 
(Hesych.) ; S., OT. 269, evxyopat Beods prt’ aporov adtrois yhs avidvat 
twa.—That the dead who dwell beneath the ground were really 
expected to assist the growth of the soil we may learn especially from 
a very interesting statement in the Hippocratic work wepi évumviwy 
(ii, p. 14 Ktthn; vi, p. 658 Littré [w. dcairys iv, 92]). If a person in 
his dream sees dzo@avovras dressed in white, offering something, that 
is a good omen: azo yap T&v amofavevTwy at tpodai Kal avfjaves 
Kal oméppata yivovraz. There was a custom at Athens of strewing 
seeds of all kinds over the newly-made grave: Isigon., Mir. 67; Cic., 
Lg.ii, 63. The reason for this (evidently religious) is variously given 
(another, no more convincing, is suggested by Kk. O. Miller, Al. Schr. 
ii, 302 f.). It seems most natural to suppose that the seed of the 
earth is put under the protection of the souls of dead who have now 
themselves become spirits inhabiting the earth. (Note besides the 
entirely similar custom in ancient India, Oldenberg, Rel. d. Veda, 
582.) 

121 Electra in A., Ch. 486 ff., makes a vow to the soul of her 
father: xdayw yods oor THs éuis mayxAnpias olow Tmatpw@wv ex Sdpuwyv 
yap.ndAious’ mavrwy b€ mp@tov rovde mpecRevow tadov.—As chthonic 
powers the Erinyes also send blessings on agriculture and the bringing- 
up of children. Rh. Mus. 50, 21. Prayer was also made to If by 
those who desired to have children. 

122 Davddnpuds dnow tt povor "AOnvaior Pvovaw Kat evyovrat avtots 
Umep yevecews Tmaldwy, d6Tav yapety péAAwou, Phot. Suid. tpiromaropes. 

123 The form of the word itself shows that the rpitomaropes are 
simply apdémanmmov. tpitromatwp is the earliest ancestor, 6 mdamzov 
7 77Ons marnp (Arist. ap. Poll. 3,17). Just as wnrpomdrwp 1S 6 wntpes 
matnp and matpotatwp o matpos marynp (Poll. 3, 16), mpomatrwp the 
forefather, yevdordrwp = Wevdys amatryp, éemumdtwp the stepfather 
(unTpopynTwp = uynTpos wyATHp)—in the same way tpitoTaTwp is the 
third forefather, the father of the marpozarwp, i.e. the mpdmammos. 
The rpitomazopes have an alternative form tpitomarpets, Philoch. ap. 
Suidas rpiromaropes: SIG. 443; Leg. Sacr. i, p. 49, 1. 32, 52; in 
Orphic verse this form alone, and not rpitomdropes, could be used : 
see Lobeck, Agi. 764. They were in fact the rpirot warépes (just as 


204 NOTES #10 (CHAP EE Kay, 


the rpitéyyovo. are the zpiror Eyyovor, the éyyovor of the third 
generation). But the ‘‘third forefathers’? are in fact the first 
ancestors (Lobeck, 763 f.), of mpomatopes (Hesych.), of mp@ror apxnyerat 
(AB. 307, 16)—the ancestors of the individual first of all, his bodily 
yovets (the series of whom was not generally counted beyond the 
amponmanmos—lIs. 8, 32—i.e. the tpiromdrwp), and then the “ ancestors ” 
of the human race in general (acc. to the explanation of Philoch. ap. 
Phot. Suid. zpitom.; cf. Welcker, Gétterl. 111, 73).—-We cannot do more 
than refer here to the completely analogous ideas of the ancient Indians 
about the “‘ three-fathers ” : the father, grandfather, great-grand father, 
as the Sapinda-fathers beyond whom the line of ancestry was not 
traced (Kaegi, Neunzahl, pp. 5, 8). 

124 The Tritopatores are most distinctly referred to as aveyor : Demon 
ap. Phot. Suid. tpitoz. cf. deamdrat avéywv Phot. tpiromatwp ; Tz. Lyc. 
738. Orphic poetry made them @upwpods Kal dvAaKkas TaV avépwv. 
This is already a free interpretation; the Attic belief, expressed by 
Demon, knows nothing about this. It can only have been learned 
invention that limited their number to three (as in the case of the 
originally unlimited number of Horai, Erinyes, etc.), and gave them 
definite names (Amalkeides, etc.,.Orph. fv. 240 Ab.) or identified 
them with the three Hekatoncheires (Kleidemos in the "Eény.). The 
genuine and ancient belief about them can still be discerned through 
all the confusion of misinterpretation and misunderstanding, and 
according to this the zpitomdtopes were the souls of ancestors who 
were also wind-spirits. People prayed for children to these spirits : 
and Lobeck, Agl. 755 ff., is right in connecting with this custom the 
Orphic doctrine that the soul of man comes into him from without 
with the wind. Even this, however, is only a speculative embellish- 
ment of the popular belief about the Tritopatores (which the Orphics 
cannot, as Welcker thinks, Gétterl. iii, 71, have “‘invented’”’: they 
only explained it after their fashion and consequently must have 
found it already existing). When -we have stripped off all speculative 
accretions we find the Tritopatores to have been the souls of ancestors 
who have become wind-spirits and travel in the wind like other 
yuxat (whose name even is derived from the breath of the wind). 
From these as from real mvotat Cwoydvor their descendants hope for 
aid where the entry into life of a new wuyxy is concerned. It is not 
hard to understand the connexion between souls and wind-spirits ; it 
is merely that such conceptions were rare among the Greeks and for 
that reason these isolated wind-spirits surviving in popular belief were 
turned into individual daimones—the Tritopatores no less than the 
Harpies (see Rh. Mus. 50, 3 ff.). 

125 The words of Orestes in A., Ch. 483, give very naive expression 
to the belief. He calls to the soul of his father: odrw (if thou sendest 
me aid) yap dv cou daires Evvopot Bpotav xrilolar’* et d€ pH, map’ 
evdeimvors Eoet aTLOS éumUpoLtae KYLawTols yOoves. Thus we see that 
the belief ridiculed by Luc., Luct. 9, was true of earlier times as well : 
TpepovT at dé apa (the dead) Tais Tap’ nutvy yoats Kat Tots kabayilopevors 
én Tay Tapwv * ws el TW BN cin katahehermpevos wmep yas didros 7 
avyyevns, GatTos obTOS veKpos Kal AtuLwTTwY ev adrots ToALTEVETAL. 

126 Epicurus devotes by will certain definite apdcodor to the yearly 
offering of évayiouara to his parents, his brothers, and himself: 
D.L. x, 18.—To the end of the third century belongs the “ Testament 
of Epikteta i.e. the inscription recording the foundation by Epikteta 
(who came from Thera as we know now for certain: ’°E ¢. “Apx. 1894, 
p. 142) of a three-day sacrificial feast to be performed every year for 


INO BES LOM CHAP PER ay. 205 


the Muses and ‘‘ the Heroes ’”’, i.e. for her husband, herself, and her 
sons; and the institution for this special purpose of a xowov Tod 
avdpetov Tav ovyyev@v (together with women of the family). The 
inscr. gives also the rules of this sacrificial society (Michel n. 1001 ; 
CIG. 2448).—The offerings to the dead in this case (vi, 6 ff.) consist 
of a iepetov (i.e. a Sheep) and fepa, especially éAdvras of five choinikes 
of wheaten flour and a stater of dry cheese (é€AA. are a kind of sacrificial 
cake specially offered to the deities of the lower world, as for ex. to 
Trophonios at Lebadeia: GDI. 413 with n., p. 393), and in addition 
to these garlands are mentioned. The following are to be sacrificed : 

the customary parts of the victim, an é€AAvrns, a loaf, a mapaé (= Bapa€, 
Bipné: interchange of tenuis and media as frequently) and some 
ovdpia (i.e. small fishes: cf. the aaonupis for the dead, GDI. 3634 
Kos). The rest was probably consumed by the religious society : 
these special portions the person offering the sacrifice, we are told, 
KapTrwoei, i.e. (he) shall offer them to the Heroes by burning; them entire. 
Cf. Phot. xavorov' xaprurov, 6 évayilerat Tots TeTEAEUTHKOGW (KapTmDAL, 
KapTwpua, odAoKdpmwoats, etc., are frequent in the LXX) and Phot. 
oAoKapmovpevov and ddAoKkavticpos. Kapmotv = dAokavrodv in the 
sacrificial calendar from Kos, GDI. 3636; cf. Stengel, Hermes, 27, 
161 f. 

pa CeLls.). 10} 

128 In manumission records it is sometimes definitely enjoined that 
the freed persons shall at the death of their masters daydavr7w Kal ra 
pia av’t@v motnoarwoav: thus on the insc. from Phokis, S/G. 841. 
(Instructions of this kind as esp. frequent in the records of emancipa- 
tion from Delphi: see Biichsenschtitz, Bes. u. Evw., 178 Anm. 3-4.) 
Ta wpoia when applied to the dead (GDI. 1545-6; dpaiwy rvyeiv E., 
Sup. 175) means the xaé’ dpav ovvreAovpeva tepa (Hesych. owpaia ; 
funeral ordinance of the Labyadai, 1. 49 ff.: ras 8’ dAXas Bolvas Kar’ 
Tav wpav ayayéadat), i.e. the sacrifices to be celebrated periodically 
(rais ixvovpevats Hudpats, Nn. 1388; cf. reAeral wprar, Pi., P. ix, 98 ff.). 
This doubtless means in particular the évavova fepa (cf. nn. 81, 89, 
92 of this chap.). Garlanding of graves xar’ évwavtov tais wplots 
(sc. dpépats), GDI. 1775, 21; Kar’ eviauvrov wpata tepa ameréXovy (to 
the Heroes), Pl., Crz..116 C. 

129 The foll. are the expressions occurring in the speeches of Isaeus 
which conclusively warrant what is Said above. The childless Menekles 
€oKo TEL OTWS [L1) EDOLTO dmats, GAN’ Egouro avr @ ooTts Cavra YNpoTpopraor 
Kal TerevT HoavTa Oaiso. avtov Kal els Tov Emeita ypovov Ta voptlopeva 
avT@ moijnoot, 2, 10. To be cared for in old age, buried after death, 
and to have permanent attention paid to one’s soul is a single unified 
conception, in which ritual burial at the hands of one’s own €xyovot 
(thus securing the cult of the family) does not form the least 
important part (cf. Pl., Hipp. ma. 291 DE: it is Ka dAorov for a man— 
according to the popular view—d gio uevyy és yipas Tous avTou yovéas 
teheutHoavtas KaA@s meptoretAavTe UO THY adTob exy Ova KaA@s Kat 
peyadomperas tapjvar. Medea says to her children in E., Med. 1032 
etxov eATidas TOAAGs ev butv ynpoBocKkyoewT epe Kal EERE xepaw eb 
meptoteAciv, CnAwrov avOpwmmorow). That he may share in this attention 
to the souls of the dead a man must leave behind him a son; upon 
a son alone this will fall as a sacred duty. Hence a man who has* 
no son takes the chosen heir of his possessions into his own family 
by adoption. Inheritance and adoption invariably accompany each 
other in such cases (and even in the first speech, where, though nothing 
is actually said of adoption, it is certainly implied throughout). The 


206 NOTES] tO@CHAP Diskiaay, 


motive of adoption is said in the clearest possible terms to be the desire 
on the part of the adopter for a permanent care of his own soul at the 
hands of his adopted son: 2, 25, 46; 6, 51, 65; 7, 30; 9, 7, 36. 
There is consequently a close connexion between elvat xAnpovédpov 
kal emi ra pvypata lévar, xedpmevor Kat evaytodv7a (6, 51). It is 
a mark of the heir va voptlopeva moieiv, evayilew, xetobat (6, 65) ; 
cf. also D. 43, 65. Duties towards the soul of the dead consist in the 
son and heir’s provision for a solemn funeral, the erection of a 
handsome grave-monument and in his offering of the vpiva and évara 
Kal TaAAa Ta TEpt THY Tadynv: 2, 36, 37; 4,19; 9, 4. After that he 
is responsible for the regular continuation of the cult and of sacrifice 
to the dead, évayilecOat xa’ Exacrov éviavrdv (2, 46), and generally, 
Kal eis Tov EmetTa ypdvov.7a voutldpeva mrovety (2, 10). Then, just 
as he has to carry on for the dead man his family worships, his tepa 
natp@a (2, 46: e.g. for Zeus Ktesios: 8, 16); so also he must, as the 
dead man once did, make regular offering to the zpdéyovor of the house : 
9,7. In this way the family cult secures its own continuity.—Every- 
thing in this reminds us in the strongest way of what is done for 
the continuation of the cult of the dead, esp. by adoption, in the 
country where ancestor-worship reaches its greatest height—China. 
Desire to perpetuate the family name, the strongest. motive with 
us in the adoption of male children, could not be so strong in Greece 
when only individual names were usual. Even this, however, occurs 
as a motive for the adoption of a son, tva pm avwvupos 6 olkos atrob 
yevntat, 2, 36, 46; cf. Isocr. 19, 35 (and Philodem., Mort., p. 28, 9 ff. 
Mekl.). The “house” at any rate is called after its ancestors (like 
those BovoeAidar of whom Dem. speaks), and if the house has no male 
heir this common name will disappear. Apart from this, the adopted 
person will call himself the son of his adoptive father, and will ensure 
the preservation of the latter’s name, in the well-known fashion, by 
giving this name to the eldest (Dem. 39, 27) of his own sons. (A similar 
perpetuation of a name is probably intended in E., JT. 695-8.) 

180 Appealing to @juat, woXAAal Kal ofddpa madaai, Plato asserts, 
Ig. 927 A, ws dpa ai r&v tredevtynsdvtwv pvyal d¥vapw Exovol tia 
tedevTHoacat, } THv Kat’ avOpwmmovs mpaypatwyv éemipedocdvra. Hence 
the €zizpozo of orphaned children zp@rov pév tods dvw Beovs doPelobwv 

. elra Tas THY KeKUnKOTOV Wuxds, als eoTW ev TH dvce TAY abTav 
exyovwy Kyndec8ar diadepdvtws, Kal tTy@at te adtovs edpevets Kal 
attsalovot Svopeveis. It is only the circle of influence belonging 
to the ¢uyat which is here limited (and the circle of worship in 
consequence), not the potency of that influence. 

131 This is true at least of the Greeks, as ancient philosophy was 
already aware: Arist., Pol. i, 2; Dicaearchus ap. St. Byz. aarzpa 
(who apparently thinks of the wdzpa as held together by “‘endogamous ”’ 
marriage). The whole development of Greek law and politics—this 
much at least may be conceded to the analysis of Fustel de Coulanges 
(La Cuté antique)—points to the conclusion that the division into the 
smallest groups goes back to the beginning of Greek life. The Greeks 
were even then divided into families and groups of kinsfolk, from the 
combination of which the later Greek state grew up; they never 
(as happened elsewhere) lived the community life of the tribe or the 
horde. And yet, can we imagine the Greek gods without the tribal 
community that worshipped them ? 

132 The idea of the Lar familiaris can be translated into Greek not 
inadequately by the words 6 kar’ olkiav Hpws, pws ofkoupés, as is 
done by Dionys. Hal., and Plutarch in their accounts of the story 


NOTES 10) CHAPTER: \V 207 


of Ocrisia (D.H. 4, 2,3; Plu. Fort. Rom. 9, p.323 C). But this was not 
an idea current among the Greeks. The Latin genius generis = 
Lar familiavis (Laber. 54 Rib.) is most nearly approached by the 
remarkable expression 7ypws ovyyeveias, CIA. iii, 1460. Inside the 
house, at the family hearth (in whose puyol, ‘‘ dwells’? Hekate: 
E., Med. 397), the Greeks worshipped—no longer the spirits of the 
ancestors—but the @eol matp@o, xrHovor, pvyor, Epxetor. These were 
compared with the Roman Penates (D.H. 1, 67, 3; cf. Hyg. ap. Macr. 
3, 4, 13), but their relationship to the spirits of the house and of the 
family is considerably less apparent than in the case of the Penates. 
(It is simply imitation of Roman custom that makes the dying 
Peregrinus call upon the daipoves marpdou kat pntpa@ot: Luc., Peregr. 
36. Lrédavos tots tod marpos avTov dSaipoow, ins. from Lykia, CIG. 
4232 = BCH. xv, 552, n. 26. tots daiuoot ris amofavotons yuvatkés, 
malo wLep. ad G65, 11. p05. Mss Morezin Lob.) Agii_769) n.) 

138 The ayafos daiuwy of which Attic writers in particular often 
speak has very indefinite features. Those who used the word combined 
ideas—no longer fully intelligible—of a divine being of fairly definite 
nature and shape with this name which in itself was altogether too 
liable to generalization. Modern writers have declared that it was 
originally a daimon of the fertility of crops. But there is just as little 
ground for believing this as there is for identifying it with Dionysos, 
as was done by the physician Philonides in connexion with an absurd 
story which he has invented on his own account (Ath. 675 B). There 
is much, however, that points to the connexion of the dyads datpwv 
with chthonic powers. He appears as a snake (Gerhard, Akad. Abh. 
ii, 24) like all y@dvor. (On a snake on a talisman the words are 
written 70 dvoya Tot ayabot daipovos: P. Mag. Par. 2427 ff.) 
ayafodaipoves was the name given to a special kind of non-poisonous 
snake (described after Archigenes, in the Vatican iologus brought 
to light by myself: Rh. Mus. 38, 278; cf. Photius, aapeta: odets, 
and again esp. s.v. éders mapetas, 364, 1). Sacrifice was made to them 
in Alexandria on the 25th Tybi as rots dyaots dSaipoot tots mpovoov- 
pevots Tav otkiwy: [Callisth.] i, 32 (cod. A), or as “‘ penates dei’”’ as 
the words are translated by Jul. Valer., p. 38, 29 ff. (Kuebl.). In 
this instance the ay. 8. is evidently a good spirit who protects the 
house. Only with this in mind can we understand how anyone could 
consecrate his house aya@ éaiuow, as Timoleon did at Syracuse (aya9 
daipov, Plu., Ips. Laud., 11, p.542 E; rv oixiay tepd daipou xabiépwoer, 
Plu., Timol. 36, where iep@ is evidently an ancient copyist’s error). 
Cf. also the saying of Xeniades, D.L. vi, 74. Such guardian spirits of 
the house are of course familiar enough in our own popular supersti- 
tion, but in their case “‘ the transition from souls of the dead to kindly 
house-spirits or kobolds is still demonstrable’? (Grimm, p. 913). 
At the household meal the first few drops of unmixed wine belong by 
right to the aya@cs Saiuwv (Hug, Plat. Symp.*, p. 23); then follows 
the libation to Zeus Soter. But sometimes it was the ‘“‘ Heroes” 
and not the ay. 6. who preceded Zeus Soter (Sch. Pi., J. v, 10; Gerhard, 
p. 39): they have taken the place of the dy. 6., which itself reveals 
the connexion between the ay. 6. and these “‘souls’’. Another fact 
pointing in the same direction is the worship of the dya@dos éa(ywy in 
common with many other deities of chthonic nature in the temple of 
Trophonios at Lebadeia (Paus. 9, 39, 5). In this case it is mentioned 
by the side of Tyche and these two are sometimes met with together 
in grave-inscriptions (e.g. CIG. 2465 f.) and Tyche herself appears with 
such chthonic deities as Despoina, Plouton, and Persephone (C/G. 


208 NOTES TO CHAPTER V 


1464 Sparta). In epitaphic inscriptions datuovwv ayafav sometimes 
occurs as completely equivalent to Dis Manibus: e.g. Aatpovav 
dya0dv Iorlov, CIG. 2700 b.c. (Mylasa); datudvev ayabav ’Aptéuwvos 
kat Titov, Ath. Mitt. ’90, p. 110 (Mylasa) ; cf. the inscr. from Mylasa 
in Ath. Mitt. °90, pp. 276-7 (nn. 23-5, 27). The singular is rare: 
Aaipovos dyabot ’Apioréov xrA. BCH. ’90, p. 628 (Karia). (datuoow 
éavrod te kat Aatitias THs yuvatkos avrodb = Dis Manibus suis et 
Laetitiae uxoris in the bilingual ins. from Beroea, CIG. 4452; 
cf. 4232 and 5827.) All these have come under Roman influence ; 
but it is worth noticing, all the same, that the aya@os 5. was identified 
with the Di Manes; which means that it was regarded as a daimon 
that had once been a disembodied human soul.—The subject might 
be dealt with more fully than would be in place here. 

134 Tn Boeotia (and elsewhere, particularly in Thessaly) the designa- 
tion of the dead as 7pws—always an indication of a higher conception 
of its spirit nature—is especially frequent on tombstones. More will 
be found on this subject below. The inscriptions are for the most 
part of late date. But even in the fifth century (at all events at the 
beginning of the fourth) the custom of “ heroizing’”’ the ordinary 
dead was current. To this Plato Com. (i, p. 622 K.) alludes in the 
*“Menelaos ”’, ti otk amnyéw, iva OnBnow yows yévyn; (Zenob. vi, 17, 
etc. The Paroemiogrr. connect this with the Theban custom of 
refusing the honours of the dead to those who committed suicide. 
This is certainly wrong and contradicts Pl.’s intention. Keil shows 
this clearly, Syll. Insc. Boeot., p. 153). 

135 Among the Epizephyrian Locrians 6dvpecda ovxn €or emt Tois 
teXevtyoaow, ard’ éemerdav exKxopiowow, edwyotvTa, Heraclid., Pol. 
30, 2. In Keos the men never wear any sign of mourning, though 
women mourn for a year for a son who dies young; ib. 9, 4 (see 
Welcker, Kl. Schr. ii, 502). The funeral regulation of Iulis (SIG. 877) 
published in imitation of Athenian usage implies rather a tendency 
to exaggerated display of mourning, at least among the common 
people. 

86 e.g. Is. 2,47: BonOyoare kal piv cat éexeivw 7H ev *’Ardov ovte. 
Strictly speaking no one can Bondeiv the departed in Hades. Few 
nations have entirely escaped such contradictions between a cult of 
the dead in the house or at a grave and the conception of the relegation 
of the soul to an inaccessible other world. They arise from two 
simultaneously existing mental attitudes (representing also different 
stages of culture) towards these obscure subjects. The naive theology 
of the common people reconciles such discrepancies by attributing 
two souls to men, one of which goes down to Hades while the other 
remains beside the still-animated body and receives the offerings of 
the family: e.g. North American Indians: Miiller, Ges. d. Amer. 
Urvel. 66 ; cf. Tylor, i, 434. These two souls are in reality the creation 
of two mutually incompatible modes of thought. 

_187 —idne testamento cavebit is qui nobis quasi oraculum ediderit 
nihil post mortem ad nos pertinere? Cic., Fin. ii, 102.—Besides 
Epic., Theophrastos seems to have made some arrangement for 
the regular celebration of his memory (by the associates of the 
Peripatos ?). Harp. 139, 4 ff.: more 8€ vorepov vevdpiorar Td emt 
TLL Twas TOV amoPavovTwy auévar Kal dpyedvas duoiws wvopdabat’ 
ws €oTe auvdew ex Tv Ocodpdotov Siabyxdv. The will of Thphr. 
preserved by D.L. 5, 2, 14, is silent on the point. 


NODES 2O™ CHAPTER 2V 209 


Ill 


138 Oracle ap. D. 43, 66 (cf. 67) rots dmod¢Oipéevors ev fxvoupéva 
apépa (ev tats KadnKovcats uépats, § 67) rercetvy Tods KabyKovTas KaTTa 
dynpéva.—ra aynuéva = 7a voploueva “the customary things” 
(Buttmann, Ausf. Gramm., § 113 n. 7, 1, p. 84 Lob.). 

139 Inquiry, at sacrifices to the dead, of an éefnynrys: Is. 8, 39; 
of the €€nynrai (who give detailed instructions and advice): [D.] 47, 
68 ff. Harp. é€nynrijs: éore 6€ kal & (perh. 6re ra) pds TOvS KaTOLXOMEVvOUS 
voutldpueva e€nyotvto tots Seopévors. Tim. Lex. ef€nynrai* pets 
yivovrat mu0dxpyoro (there is no need to understand this other than 
literally, i.e. that the college of the muvfdyp. é€ny. consisted of three 
members: Scholl, Hermes, 22, 564), ofs wéAes xabatpew rods ayer tivt 
eviaxnbevras. ‘The purification of the évayeis is closely connected with 
the cult of the souls. It is true that prescriptions for such purification 
were to be found also év tots tév Edrarprddv (so Miiller, Aesch. Eum. 
163 A. 20 [152 n. E.T.]) warpious: Ath. 9, 410 A, and it may be that 
the college of the é£ Evrarpiddv é€nynrai may have also given decisions 
in such cases. Still, that does not prevent the statement of Timaeus 
in regard to the éefny. mvfdyp. from being true. (Expiations belong 
principally if not exclusively to the Apolline cult.) 

140 Plu., Ser. Num. 17, p. 650 C.D. expressly appeals for confirma- 
tion of the belief in a continued existence of the soul after the death 
of the body to utterances of the Delphic god: dypi tod moAXa Tovaira 
mpobeorilecbat, ovx dordyv eote THs uxAs Katayva@vat Odvarov. 

141 That already in Homer the circle of the ayxvorets (in the Athenian 
legal sense) was called upon to prosecute the blood-feud is certainly 
probable in itself; it cannot, however, be proved from examples 
occurring in Homer. Leist’s statements in Graecoital. Rechtsges., 
p. 42, are not quite exact. The facts are: a father is called upon 
to avenge his son, and a son his father, and a brother to avenge his 
brother (y 307; J 632 f.; w 434); once the avengers are the 
Kaciyvntol re €rau ve Of the murdered man, o 273. éra: has a very wide 
sense and is not even confined to kinship ; at any rate it is not simply 
“‘cousins’’ (€rat kal aveyot side by side, J 464).—In Attic law, too, in 
certain cases the duty of prosecuting the murderer extended beyond 
the limits of the dveyiadot to more distant relatives and even to the 
dpatopes of the murdered man (Law ap. D. 43, 57). 

122 Flight, indeed aedvyla, on account of ddvos axovatos: W 85 ff. 
{The fugitive becomes the #epamwy of the person who receives him into 
his house in the foreign land: 1. 90; cf. O 431 f.; this must have been 
the rule.)—Flight on account of ¢dvos Exovotos (Aoynadpevos 268) 
v 259 ff. And so frequently. 

143 T 632 ff. Kal pév tis Te KaovyvyntoLo dovijos 7 od mardds eb€£aTo 
teOvn@tos’ Kal p’ 6 pev ev Shuw péver adtod 7dAN amoticas Tod O€ 7’ 
€pntvetar Kpadin Kal Oupos ayijvwp mown de€apevov. Here it is very 
plainly represented that all that is required is to appease “ the heart 
and spirit’ of the receiver of the wow: the murdered man is not 
considered. 

144 It is very natural to suppose that the wowy (as K. O. Miller 
suggests in Aesch. Eum. 145 [122 E.T.]) may have arisen out of the 
substitution of a vicarious sacrifice instead of that of the murderer 
himself, who should strictly have been offered to the dead man. Jn 
this way primitive human sacrifice has in many cases been replaced 
by sacrifice of animals. In that case the zow7 too must have 
originally been offered to the murdered man: in Homeric times 


P 


210 NOTES TOP CHABLE Ry, 


only the satisfaction of the living avenger was thought of.—In any case 
it is a mistake to look upon the permission to buy off the blood-feud 
as a mitigation of primitive severity in the taking of vengeance due to 
the intervention of the State. The State in this case mitigated nothing 
since it took no interest at all (in Homer) in the treatment of murder 
cases. Of course, legal proceedings can be taken to decide whether 
a stipulated wow7 has been paid or not (2 497 ff.), as in the case of 
any other cuvpPdAaov. But the prosecution of the murderer in all its 
departments is left entirely in the hands of the family of the murdered 
man. 

145 We have very few details on this point. In Sparta ot yépovres 
(Suxdlovar) tas dovixas (dixas), Arist., Pol. 3, 1, p. 1275b 10 (and in 
Corinth, too, D.S. 16, 65, 6 ff.). Involuntary homicide is punished 
by exile and (in this being more severe than at Athens) perpetual 
exile as it appears. The Spartiate Drakontios serving in the army 
of the Ten Thousand éduye mais @yv otkofev tatda axwy KaTaKkavev 
(like Patroklos in fact, ¥ 87), éujAn wardgas, Xen., An. 4, 8, 25. If 
his banishment had been only temporary the period must have expired 
long before.—In Kyme there are vestiges of egal prosecution of murder 
(with witnesses): Arist., Pol. 1269a, 1 ff.—In Chalkis éwt Opdxn the 
laws of Androdamas of Rhegion were in force wept rte ta dovixa Kat 
Tas émuxAnpous, Arist., Pol. 2, 8, p. 1274b 23 ff.—In Lokri were used 
the laws of Zaleukos in combination with Cretan, Spartan and Areopagite 
institutions; these last undoubtedly dealing with homicide, which 
must therefore have been regulated constitutionally. (Str. vi, 260, 
following Eph.) 

146 The limits of those qualified to inherit extends in Athenian law 
pexpe aver Ov maldwv (Law ap. D. 43, 51; cf. § 27); as did the duty of 
avenging murder peypt dvefraddv: D. 47, 72 (évrds aveudrnTos, 
which must mean the same thing, Law ap. D. 43, 57). The circle of 
persons thus united in the right of inheritance and the duty of taking 
vengeance for murder constituted the ayyoreia, the body of kinsfolk 
tracing their descent (in the male line only) from the same man, the 
father, grandfather, or great-grandfather of them all. This is the 
limit to which the yovets are traced: Is. 8, 32; cf. above, note 123. 
Many nations of the earth are familiar with a similar limitation of the 
narrower body of kinsfolk composing a “‘ house”’: as to the under- 
lying reasons for the practice many conjectures are made by H. E. 
Seebohm, On the Structure of Greek Tribal Society (1895). 

147 As to the restless wandering of the B.atofdvarot more details 
will be given below [Append. vii]. In the meantime it will be enough 
to refer to A., Eum. 98, where the still unavenged soul of the murdered 
Klytaimnestra complains aicyp@s adA@ua. A later authority uses 
words that correspond well with ancient belief: Porph., Abst. ii, 47, 
t&v avOpmrwv ai trav Bia amobavevtwy (vyal) Karéxovrac mpds TO 
owpartt, like the souls of the aTado.. 

#8 In Homeric times the injured dead becomes a 6e@v urvipa to 
the evil-doer (X 358, A 73). Later times believed that the soul of the 
dead man himself angrily pursued the murderer with its terrors till it 
drove him beyond its own boundaries: 6 @avatwéels Ovpotrar TO 
dpacavre KrA., Pl., Lg. 865 DE, appealing to radaudv twa trv apyaiwv 
pvdav Aeyowevov; cf. X., Cyr. 8, 7, 18; A., Cho. 39 ff., 323 ff. If the 
next-of-kin whose duty it is to avenge the death of his relative shirks 
the duty incumbent on him the anger of the dead man is turned upon 
the latter: Pl., Leg. 9, 866 B—roé mafdvros mpocrpemopévov Thy 7a0nv. 
The indignant soul becomes apoortpémaios. mpoorpdmaos probably 


NOTES re LORCr AL RE hiaay 211 


applies only in a derivative sense to a daiuwyv who takes the part of the 
dead man (esp. Zeds mpoorpdmatos) ; it is strictly speaking an epithet 
of the soul itself in its longing for vengeance. Thus in Antiphon 
Tetral. 1, y 10, juiv wev mpootpdmatos 6 amobavwy otK éorat. 3, 6 10, 6 
amoxtetvas (or rather 6 teOvnKws) Tots altiots mpootpdmatos éarat. 
So, too, A., Cho. 287, éx mpoorpomaiwyv év yéver menTWKOTwWv. EM. 42, 7, 
*Hpvyovny, avaptyicacay éavtiv, mpootpdmatov tots AOnvaious yevéo Oar. 
We can, however, see particularly well from this case how easily the 
change came about from a soul in a special condition to a similar 
daimonic being which takes the place of the soul of the dead. The 
same Antiphon speaks also of of r&v dmobavdvtwy mpootpdmatol, 6 
mpoaTpomatos Tob amofavovros as something distinct from the dead 
man himself: Tetr. 3, a 4; 3, B 8; cf. 6 Mupridov mpootpomaos, 
Bee 1S 2, fetc.>) cl. Zacher, Dissevtsephil.. Halens., sii; p. 228. 
whe injured dead himself becomes dpaios, Soph., Tv. 1201 ff. (cf. fr. 
367; E., IT. 778; Med. 608) ; later his place is taken by dSaipoves 
apatot. What terrible evils the unavenged soul can bring upon the 
person who is called upon to take vengeance are painted for us by 
Aesch. in Cho. 278 ff. (or else as some think an ancient interpolator 
of A.). Sickness and trouble might be sent over several generations 
by such zwadaa punvipara of the dead: Pl., Phdr. 244 D (see Lobeck’s 
account, Agl. 636 f.). True to ancient beliefs an Orphic hymn prays 
to the Titanes phrvw yaderiv anonéutew, et Tis a0 xOoviwy mpoyovwr 
otxoist meAdoOn, H. 37, 7 f.; cf. 39, 9-10. 

149 yoewy eat vmeEeAOetvy TH Taddvtt Tov SpdcavTa Tas wWpas Tacas 
Tob eviavtTov, Kal eépnu@oar mavras Tods olkelovs TOmovs EvpTaons THS 
matpioos, Pl., Lg. ix, 865 E. The law says in the case of the criminal 
convicted of murder ecipyew peév tis Tod wa@dvros maTpidos, KTeivew dé 
odx dctoy amavtaxod, D. 23, 


150 When the victim was a citizen, and also in wilful murder of a, 


non-citizen. See Mei. and Sch., Ait. Proc.’, p. 379, n. 520.—When the 
citizenship of a city rested upon conquest the lives of the subjects 
belonging to the older subject population were of less account. In 
Tralles (Karia) the murder of one of the Leleges by an (Argive) full 
citizen might be bought off by payment of a bushel of peas (a purely 
emwolical | zow7) .to\ the relations of the victim :- Plu., Q.Gr. 
46, p. 302 B 

11 On the expiry of the legally appointed period of banishment 
the relations of the dead man do not seem to have been allowed to 
refuse aideous. See Philippi, Aveop. u. Epheten, 115 f. 

P2tbaw ap. D; 43, 57. 

fee /,, 59.., See Philippi, op. cit., p. 144. ff.—Cf. E.,. Hipp. 
1435 f., 1442 f., 1448 f£. 

154 Such prohibition against taking a mowy for murder is made by 
the Law ap. D. 23, 28: Tovs 6° avdpo povous efeivar dToKTEtvew S 
Avpatver bar dé Lm, nde a amoway (cf. § 33 70 de pend GaTroway* 47) XxpHuaTa 
TMpatrew, Ta yap xpHuata adtowa wvdpalov of madAaot). In spite of 
this Meier and others unjustifiably conclude that murder could be 
indemnified by payment of money, from the illegal practice mentioned 
in [D.] 58, 29: this speaks rather for the contrary. They have more 
appearance of justification when they appeal to Harp. (PhotsSuidy 
EM. 784, 26 ; AB. 313, 5 ff.), s.v. bmogdvea* Ta eml povw Srobuere 
XPH para Tots pie TOO ee enda cca iva 11) éme€g (wou. On the strength 
of this Hermann, Gry. Siaatsalt.> 104, 6, says, “‘ even intentional murder 
could be absolutely indemnified.”” Nothing is actually said of ¢évos 
éxovotos here nor do we anywhere learn that the payment of dzog¢ona 


212 NOTES: 1O2GHAP IE Kas 


on the occasion of a murder was ever a formally legalized proceeding. 
It remains possible, and even in the circumstances more probable, 
that Dinarch. and Thphr. in the passages on taog¢owa quoted by 
Harp. referred to the practice as one forbidden by law, though it might 
be, on occasion, an actual fact. If we had only the gloss of Suidas— 
dmowa’ Adtpa, & Si8wol tis brép ddvov } owparos. otTws BodAwv ev 
vépors—we might have concluded that payment of such blood-money 
was allowed in Athens and mentioned in Solon’s laws as allowable. 
This would be quite as justifiable as to argue as above from Harp. s. 
izoddéva. We know, in fact, that the law referred to the dzowa 
and dzowév as forbidden things, from the passages already quoted 
from Dem. (23, 28-33). From these the gloss was itself probably 
derived. 

155 We cannot, however, believe on the poor authority of Sch. Dem. 
p. 607, 16 ff., that the fepomo.i tats Lepvais Heats were selected out 
of the whole Athenian citizen body by the Areiopagos. (‘‘ Three ” 
were chosen out of all the Athenians: D. 21, 115; at other times 
**ten ”?: Dinarch. ap. EM. 469; 12 ff.; an indefinite number?" Phet: 
teporrotoi.) According to all analogies we should rather expect this 
selection to have been made by the popular Assembly. 

156 gi duwpoola Kal Ta Toma, Antiphon, Herod. 88. In more detail 
D. 23, 67-8. Those who had to take an oath swore by the ZXepvai 
feat and other gods: Dinarch., adv. Demosth. 47. Both sides had 
to swear to the justice of their case in respect of the material facts in 
dispute (Philippi, Aveop., pp. 87-95). Such a compulsory oath taken 
by both parties could not of course in any circumstances serve as 
proof: one side at least must be perjured. Nor can the Athenians 
themselves have failed to see this. It is surely doing them an injustice 
not to see the simple explanation of this strange sort of preliminary 
oath-taking and to dismiss the matter with a reference to the Athenians 
as “‘ not a legally-minded people ”’ (as Philippi does, p. 88). It is much 
more natural to suppose that this double oath, taken under circum- 
stances of peculiar solemnity, was not regarded as a juridical matter 
at all, but had a purely religious sense (as it had in the quite similar 
cases mentioned by Meiners, Allg. Gesch. d. Relig. ii, 296 f.). The 
oath-taker invokes a dreadful curse upon himself if he breaks his oath 
and devotes atrov kal yévos kal olkiav THv abtod (Antiphon, Herod. 11) 
to the Curse-Goddesses, the ’Apai or the "Epwies ai 8 tod yatav 
avOpamous tivuvra, otis kK émiopKov buocon (T 259 f.)—and to the 
Gods who are to punish his children and his whole kith and kin on earth 
(Lycurg., Leocr. 79). If the court discovers the perjured party the 
punishment due to his action overtakes him (or if he is the plaintiff, 
he fails in his purpose) and at the same time the justice of heaven 
punishes him for his broken oath (cf. D. 23, 68). But the court may 
make a mistake and not find out the perjurer ; in which case the perjurer 
is still punished for he becomes a victim of the gods to whom he has 
devoted himself—who do not err. Thus the double oath is an addition 
to the judicial inquiry, and heavenly punishment stands side by side 
with that of men. The two may coincide, but this need not be so, 
and in this way the guilty is punished whatever happens. (How 
familiar such ideas were in antiquity we see from expressions used 
by orators: Isoc. 18, 3; D. 19, 239-40; Lycurg., Leocr. 79.) The 
oath, being an appeal to a higher court, supplemented human justice, 
or rather the legal processes of men supplemented the oath-taking, 


for in this partnership the appeal to an oath must have been the older 
member. 


NO LE SarLOm GHAR TE Ke): 213 


157 Poll. 8, 117, wad’ Exaorov S€ phva tpidv huepdv €dixalov (the 
judges on the Areiopagos) é€deéfs, terdpty POivovtos, tpitn, Sevrépga. 

138 of ’"Apeomayirat Tpets mov Tob wHvos Huepas Tas dovixas Sixas edixaloy, 
éExaoTn TOV Oedv piav yuepav amovépovtes, Sch. Aeschin. 1, 188, p. 282 
Sch. This certainly implies that the limitation of the number of the 
Erinyes to three (and not two for example)—which first appears in 
Eurip., but was certainly not his own invention—was officially current 
in the worship of the city.—Since these three days were sacred to the 
Erinyes, as goddesses of Hades, they counted as aodpades uépat: 
EM. 131, 16 f.; Et. Gud. 70, 5 (the thirtieth day of the month is for 
that reason davAn maow Epyous acc. to “ Orpheus ”’ fy. 28 Ab.). 

eeeraits. 1, 28:16; 

160 The Erinyes are the accusers of Orestes not only in Aeschylus 
(and thence in Eurip. too, JT. 940 ff.), but alsoin the varying accounts 
derived from different sources, in which the twelve gods served as 
judges ap. D. 23, 66 ‘cf. 74, and Dinarch., adv. Dem. 87). 

161 The Erinyes are said amo Cavros podetv éepvdpov ex pedéewv 
aéAavov, A., Eum. 264 f.; cf. 183 f.; 302; 305. In this they closely 
resemble the “‘ vampires ’’ which we hear of especially in Slav popular 
mythology, and the Tii of the Polynesians, etc. These, however, 
are the souls of the dead returned from the grave and sucking men’s 
blood. 

152 The Erinyes say to Orestes: éyolt tpadels re kat Kadiepwpevos. 
kat Cav pe Saticerts ovde pos Bwrd odayeis, A., Eum. 304 f. The 
matricide is divis parentum (i.e. their Manes) sacer, their sacrificial 
victim (@fua KataxyPoviov Aids, D.H. 2, 10, 3), in the older belief of 
Greece, too. 

163 See Rh. Mus. 50, 6 ff. 

164 The fact that after receiving the aidears of the dead man’s relatives 
the agent of a ddvos axovatos was still required to offer the expiatory 
sacrifice as well as undergo purification (fAaopdés and xafappds) is 
alluded to by Dem. 23, 72-3, in the double expression Oicau xat 
KkabapOjvat, oovotv Kat KabaipecOa (cf. Miller, Aesch. Eum., p. 144 
fen. 2, E.T.)). 

eaeoece Philippi, Areop. uv. Eph. 62. 

166 In the Iliad and the Odyssey there is a total absence not only 
of all reference to purification from blood-guiltiness but of the necessary 
conditions for it. The murderer goes freely among men without there 
being any fear of others suffering from a placua attaching to him. 
Cf. the case especially of Theoklymenos, o 271-8. Lobeck rightly 
emphasizes this, Ag]. 301. K. O. Miiller’s attempts to prove in spite 
of everything that purifications from the stain of murder were a 
Homeric custom, are failures. See Nagelsbach, Hom. Theol.’, p. 293.— 
The oldest examples of purifications from murder in the literature 
are (Lobeck 309) : purification of Achilles from the blood of Thersites 
in the Ai@tomis, p. 33 Kink.; refusal of Neleus to purify Herakles 
from the murder of Iphitos: Hesiod év xaradAdyors, Sch., Il. B 336.— 
Mythical exx. of such purifications in later accounts: Lob., Agl. 968-9. 

167 Eig. offering of cakes, sacrifice of drink-offerings without wine, 
burning of the materials of sacrifice; cf. the description of tAaocpes 
(in this place clearly distinguished from xafappos) in A.R. iv, 712 ff. 
Similar account (offerings without wine, etc.) of the fAacudés (which 
is, however, improperly called cafapyés, 1. 466) of the Eumenides at 
Kolonos which the chorus recommends to Oedipus, S., O.C. 469 ff. 
No one might eat of the expiatory sacrifice: Porph., Abst. 2, 44. It 
is burnt completely: Stengel, Jahrb. f. Phil. 1883, p. 369 fi.—The 


214 NOTES TO CHAPTER V 


clash of bronze was used mpdés macav addociwow Kat amoxabapow : 
Apollod. fr. 36 (and in offerings to Hekate, Theoc. 1i, 36 ; as protection 
against ghosts, Luc., Philops. 15 ; Sch, Theoc.11, 36 ; Tz.) Lyc.27e 
Clash of bronze in this apotropaic sense occurs, too, in the dance of 
the Kouretes, etc.; see below). The ritual of expiation was affected 
in many ways by admixture of foreign superstitions from Phrygia and 
Lydia. Its chief source is to be found in the Cretan worship of the 
(chthonic) Zeus. Thence it seems to have spread all over Greece 
assisted by the Apolline oracle of Delphi. This is why the ram, the 
peculiar victim of Zetds xOdvos, is the principal victim in expiatory 
sacrifices, its fleece, the Aids cwWdcov, receiving the various materials 
of expiation, etc. 

168 On the chthonic character of the deities of expiation see in gen. 
K. O. Miller, Aesch. Eum., p. 139 ff. (112 ff.). Chief among them is 
Zedvs pecdixios (a euphemistic title: cf. above, n. 5), who is unmis- 
takably a y@dvos. Hence, like all yoo: he is represented as a snake 
on the votive tablet to Z. ped. discovered in the Peiraeus (certainly 
the Athenian god and not a foreign deity identified with this god 
whom all Athenians knew well from the feast of the Diasia) : BCH. 
7, 507 ff.; CIA. ii, 1578 ff. On a votive insc. from Eykiatweshaves 
side by side with the chthonic Hekate, Aut Meriyiw Kai ’Evodia, 
BCH, 13, 392. Other @eot pecrAiyio. in Lokris were worshipped with 
nocturnal sacrifice (as regularly in the case of underworld deities): 
Paus. 10, 38, 8. The Saipoves petAtyror aS yOdvioe are contrasted 
with the paxapecow ovpaviors in the oracle verses ap. Phlegon, Macr. 
iv, p. 93, 5 Kel.; deis milicheis Acta Lud. Saecul: lab. Alli) =e 
vi, 32, 323; see Mommsen, Ges. Schr. viii, 570|.—Then come the 
amotpomaor: their nature can be guessed from the fact that they were 
worshipped together with the dead and Hekate on the thirtieth day 
of the month (see above, n. 88). After a bad dream offerings were 
made to the azo7pémaio, to Ge and the Heroes: Hp., Diaet. 4, 8, 
vi, p. 652 L. Zeds amotpdmavos must have been a x@dvios, but we 
have side by side with him an ’A@nvG azmorpomaia (and an Apollo 
amotp. too): ins. from Erythrai, SIG. 600, 69; 115: the provinces 
of ’OXdvpmor and yAdviot Were not always kept absolutely distinct.— 
An ancient and hereditary service of the propitiation deities belonged. 
to the Attic family of the Phytalids who had once purified and offered 
expiatory sacrifice for Theseus after the murder of Skiron and others 
(ayvicavres kal petAtxta OUoavres): Plu., Thes. 12. The gods to whom 
this family offered sacrifice were y@0ovcor, Demeter and Zeus Meilichios : 
Paus. 1, 37, 2—4.—Isoc. 5, 117, makes a clear distinction between the 
Oeot "Od umot and the gods to whom only an apotropaic cult, dmomop- 
mas, was Offered ; these being the gods of expiation (cf. doco 70p7eto bat 
in propitiatory sacrifices; dmomoumaio: Oeot: Apollod. ap. Harp. 
amotoumds. Cf. also admomopay of evil daimones in contrast to the 
emimoumy Of the same: Anon. Viv. Herb. xxii, 165. See Hemsterhuys, 
Lucian ii, p. 255 Bip.; Lob., Agl. 984, ii). 

Use the description of the tAaopds of Medea by Kirke in A.R. 
ie, JAVA Sie 

170 K. O. Miller, Dorians, i, 328, 336; cf. the same ancient custom 
of flight for nine years and penance for the slaying of a man in the 
legend and cult of Zeus Lykaios; cf. H. D. Miiller, Myth. ad. gy. St. 
ii, 105. See below. 

Ait Cho. 1059-60" Eums)237 #1322819 i. 445 fi eA 70! 

72 The Delphinion, the court for trying ¢dvos 8&i«atos, and the 
ancient dwelling of Aegeus (Plu., Thes. 12), was at the same time 


NOT See Om GEA Peni homey, 215 


(and perhaps originally) an expiation site. Expiatory sacrifice was 
there made for Theseus after his fights with the Pallantidai and the 
highway robbers (adoo.ovpevos ro dyos, Poll. viii, 119). 

Momilioee7. NUM. 17, “p. 000 EES \ Note ‘the expressions ; 
iAdoacbar tHv Tob "ApxtAdxou PuxHv, tAacacba tv ITavoaviov uy jv. 
Suid. “ApyiAoxyos, from Aelian: pediEacbar tiv rob Tedcorxdeiov 
matdos wuynv, Kal mpavvat xoats. 

174 The three e€nyntat mvddxpnorot, ols péder Kadaipew tods ayer 
Twi evioxnféevras, Tim. Lex. p. 109 R. 

75 P]., Lg. 865 B: the agent in a ddvos dxovatos (of a special kind) 
Kabapbeis Kata tov ex AeAddv Koprcbévra mept TovTwv vopov €aTw 
Kadapos. 

76 J set down here the expressions occurring in the speeches and 
the (at any rate contemporary [see Appendix iv]) Tetralogies of 
Antiphon, which throw lght on the religious ideas lying behind the 
procedure in trials for murder. In the prosecution of the murderer 
the following are concerned: 6 reOveds, of vopot, and Qeol of Katw, OY. 
1, 31. The vigorous prosecution of the case on the part of the relations 
of the dead is Bonfety 7H reOvedrt: 1, 31. Tety. 1 B, 18. The con- 
demnation of the murderer is tiuwpla 7H aduxnbeévtr, his personal 
revenge: 5, S38 ='6; 6. The accusing relatives come before the court 
as representatives of the dead man, avril rod mafdvtos émoKximTopev 
vpiv, as they say to the judges, Tety. 3y, 7. The duty of accusing 
as well as the adoéPyya of the deed of bloodshed rests upon them until 
satisfaction is made for it: Tety. la, 3. But the piaoua of the deed 
attaches to the whole city in which the murderer lives. All who sit 
at table with him, or live under the same roof, even the temples he 
walks in, are polluted by his mere presence: hence come a¢opiat 
and dvorvyxeis mpagers on the city. It is to the greatest interest of 
the judges to avert this pollution by giving a propitiatory judgment : 
feat Or.o, 1158290 ety. 1a, 3; 13.9; tl; 3 y, 6,7.” Above 
all it is necessary to find the real criminal and to punish him. If 
the relatives of the dead prosecute some one other than the real doer 
of the deed, it is they, and not the judges (on account of their wrong 
decision), who will have to bear the wrath of the dead man and of the 
avenging spirits: Yetv. la, 3; 34,4; 36, 10; for in this case the 
murdered man is deprived of his tuuwpia: 3a, 4. But perjured 
witnesses and unjust judges are liable to a piacua, too, which they then 
introduce into their own houses: Tety. 3a, 3; or at least, if they 
give a false condemnation (but not a false acquittal) of the accused, 
they incur the pyviya r&v aditynpiwy acc. to Tetr. 3B, 8—i.e. that of 
the falsely condemned person (whereas the murdered man still con- 
tinues angry with his own relatives). If they knowingly acquit the 
murderer contrary to justice, the murdered man becomes ev@vjuos 
to the judges and no longer to his relatives: Tety. 1 y, 10.—The source 
of the resentment is said to be the dead man himself: apoorpématos 
6 anoGaviv, Tetr. ly, 10; cf. 38, 10; where he is parallel with ro 
Lnviwa tov aArnpiwv. The murdered man leaves behind him r7v 
Tav aXditynpiwy Svopéveray (and this is what the placua really is—not 
as some modern writers have imagined, any sort of “‘ moral ”’ pollution 
—as is clearly stated in this passage: tiv tav adit. dvopevecar, 
PE eIELAOILO.. .. <ioayovrat): ety. 3a, 3; cf. again 3p, 8; 
3 y, 7. In this case the avenging spirits substitute themselves for the 
soul of the dead man (just as in the case where a zpoorpémauos Tob 
amo@avovros is spoken of: cf. above, n. 148). The mpoorpdmaio tay 
a7ro8avavrwy become themselves Seuvol adit jpsoe Of the dilatory relatives: 


216 NOLES Os CHAR Dr iia 


Tety.3 a, 4. There is no essential distinction between the two 
(cf. Poll. 5, 131). Elsewhere we hear of 70 zpoorpézatov as the special 
attribute or feeling of the murdered man himself: Tety. 2 6,9. Thus 
also we have the alternatives év@Uutos 6 amofavwy (ly, 10) and 70 
év@vpuov (2 a, 2; 2 6, 9). In this connexion it is clear that évddjmuov 
(as the fixed and conventional expression for these superstitions) 
means the indignant memory, the longing for revenge of the murdered 
man (—év@ip.ov é€otw Adpatpos xat Kovpas, GDI. 3541, 8). The 
proper understanding of this word will help us to see what is meant by 
the expression df€vévuia used of the meal offered to the dead and 
Hekate, and the almost identical purificatory offerings, that after the 
religious cleansing of a house were thrown out at the cross-roads 
(Harp. s.v. Phot. s.v.. Art.*1, 2; 35. AB..287, 24). 28307. a oan 
44 ff.). They are intended to appease the easily awakened anger of the 
souls (and of their patroness Hekate), their o€¥@upov, a stronger version 
of év@vutov, by apotropaic sacrifice. 

177 See Appendix ii (wacxaduopds). 

78 Xen., Cyr. 8, 7, 17 ff.: od yap Symov tobr6 ye cadds Soxeire 
eldévar ws oddey elms eyw Ett, eEmerdav Tod avOpwrivov Biov tedXevTHow’ 
ovde yap viv tor THY y’ eunv puxnv éewpGre ... Tas Sé Tav adixa 
mabovrwy puxas ow KaTevongate, olovs perv PdoBous Tots ptardovors 
€uBaddAdovow, olovs 5€ maAapvatovs (which means first the criminal and 
then, as here, the punishing spirit that avenges the criminal deed, 
exactly like mpoorpdématos, adityptos, adAdoTtwp, pidorwp: see Zacher, 
Dissert. phil. Halens. iii, 232 ff.) tots advociow éeamuméumovar; tois Sé 
POtwEevors Tas Tiuas dtapeverv Ete av SoKeire, EC pndevos adtav at wvyat 
KUplat Hoav ; ovTo. éywye, @ matdes, ovd€ TwTOTE enElaOny, ws H Bux, 
ews pev av ev OvynT@ compare H, CH, Orav Sé tovTov amaddAayh, 7éOvyxev. 
Then follow other popular arguments for the belief in the continued 
existence of the soul after its separation from the body. 


COAT EE havi 


THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 


The cult of the dead, thus pursued in unhampered freedom, 
preserved and encouraged certain ideas of the life of the soul 
after death: of the soul as a conscious and powerful being 
which though separated from the body has not been parted 
for ever from the scene of its earthly existence. To the Greeks 
such ideas had become strange and unfamiliar—strange, at 
least, to the Ionian Greeks of the Homeric age. 

But from such a cult no dogmatic or distinctly outlined 
picture of the life of the departed soul could have been deduced, 
nor ever was deduced. Everything in this connexion dealt 
with the relation of the dead to the living. Families by means 
of sacrifice and religious acts sought to nourish the souls of 
their own dead. But the cult was in itself chiefly precautionary 
(apotropaic) in character, and as a consequence men preferred 
rather to avoid investigation into the nature and condition of 
the dead themselves, except in so far as they came into the 
life of the living. 

This is the point at which the cult of the souls and belief 
in the existence of souls stopped short among many of the 
so-called “savage ’’ peoples who have no history. Nor can 
there be much doubt that it had reached this stage of develop- 
ment in Greece, too, before the time of Homer; though 
temporarily overshadowed, it continued to exist for it was 
rooted firmly in the united life of the family and its traditional 
practices. 

Such traditional beliefs, however, left the nature of the dis- 
embodied soul vague and undefined ; they viewed it purely from 
the standpoint of the living and almost entirely in its relations 
with this world; and resting on such foundations it is not 
very surprising if they yielded unresistingly and sank into © 
insignificance once the feeling of the influence exercised by the 
dead upon the living began to weaken, or if anything happened 
to cause the decline or discredit of the cult of the dead. When 
the living withdrew their support and reverence from the 
departed soul the latter ceased to present any clear picture to 
the minds of men—it became a mere evanescent shadow— 
unsubstantial—little more than nothing. This is what 


218 THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 


happened in the period of Ionic culture, in which Homer 
lived. 

The poetry of that period, however, had of its own accord 
given rise to aspirations after a fuller and more definite picture 
of the long, unbounded future in the life to come. These 
aspirations had been given shape in the pictures of the 
translation of individual mortals to Elysium and the Islands 
of the Blest. 

Such things, however, were, and continued to be, matters of 
poetry, not of religious faith. Even the poetical fancy dealt 
with the marvellous past and with exceptional heroes chosen 
out long ago by the special favour of the gods ; such favour was 
not extended to include the lving generations of men. The 
desire, once it was awakened, for a more hopeful prospect of 
the life to come beyond the grave and for something more than 
the mere negative existence of the ancestors worshipped in 
family cults, must look to other sources for its satisfaction. 
Such desires began to be felt by many, but their originating 
source and the secret forces that set them going must remain 
for us hidden behind the obscurity that lies over the most 
important period of Greek development, the eighth and 
seventh centuries. Nor does it help us very much when 
historians try to stop the gaps of our knowledge with platitudes 
or the barren offspring of their own imagination. The existence 
of such desires and their growing strength is shown by the 
fact that they were able to create for themselves a means of 
satisfaction (a peculiarly limited satisfaction it is true) in a 
direction that immediately occurs to everyone as soon as the 
subject of future blessedness or belief in immortality among the 
Greeks is mentioned—the Eleusinian Mysteries. 


§ 2 


Wherever the cult of the gods of the earth and the lower 
world, and particularly of Demeter and her daughter, was 
at its height it was not difficult for hopes of a better fate in 
the kingdom of souls below the earth, where those deities 
ruled, to become attached to participation in their cult. The 
tendency to connect closely such hopes with the worship of 
these gods may have existed in many different localities. 
In Eleusis alone, however (and in the cults, mostly of later 
origin, affiliated to Eleusis), we see this connexion carried out 
/ as a fully organized institution. We can follow at least in 
general outline the gradual advance of the Eleusinian religious 
organization. The Homeric Hymn to Demeter tells us the origin 


THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 219 


of the cult according to the national legends of Eleusis. In 
the country of the Eleusinians the divine daughter of Demeter, 
after being carried down to the lower world by Aidoneus, came 
up once more to the light of day, and was restored to her 
mother. Before ascending to Olympos and the company 
of the other immortals, in accordance with the wish of Zeus, 
Demeter fulfilled her promise, and when the Eleusinians 
had erected a temple to her outside the city, over the spring 
Kallichoros, she founded the sacred worship whereby men 
should do honour to her in the future. She herself instructed 
the princes of the land “in the performance of the cult and 
taught them her sacred Ovgia ’’, which respect for the goddess 
does not allow them to communicate to others.t This primitive 
Eljeusinian cult of Demeter, then, is the religious service of a 
close corporation. Knowledge of the holy ritual, carrying with 
it the priesthood of the two goddesses is confined to the 
descendants of the four Eleusinian princes to whom Demeter 
once gave her ordinances as an inheritance. The cult is there- 
fore a “secret” one: not more so, indeed, than a great many 
cult-societies of Greece, participation in which was strictly 
forbidden to all unauthorized persons.” It differs from them, 
however, in the solemn promise which is made to the 
participants in its worship. “‘ Blessed is the man who has 
beheld these holy acts ; but he that is uninitiated and has no 
share in the holy ceremonies shall not enjoy a like fate after 
his death, in the gloomy darkness of Hades.’’ To those who 
share in the Eleusinian worship a privileged fate is promised 
after death; but even in his lifetime, we read further on,? 
he is highly blessed whom the two goddesses love: they send 
him Ploutos, the giver of good things, to bea beloved partner 
of his hearth and home. On the other hand, whosoever 
honours not Koré, the queen of the lower world, with gifts 
and sacrifice, shall do penance everlastingly (368 ff.). 

The narrow circle of those to whom such a tremendous 
promise was made began to be extended after the time when 
Eleusis was united with Athens (which may have taken place 
some time in the seventh century), and when the Eleusinian 
worship was raised to the position of an official cult of the 
Athenian state. Nor was it Attica alone, but the whole 
of Greece which became interested in the Eleusinian festival, 
when Athens became the chief centre of Greek life. A solemn 
“truce of God” was proclaimed which assured the peaceful 
and undisturbed performance of the sacred ritual, and 
distinguished the Eleusinia, like the great games and Fairs of 
Olympia, the Isthmus, etc., as a Pan-Hellenic festival. At 


220 THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 


the height of Athenian power (about 440) * a decree of the . 
people was passed which required the yearly offering of first 
fruits of the fields to the Eleusinian temple from Athenian 
citizens and allies, and invited similar offerings from all Greek 
states. The decree could appeal in so doing to ancient and 
ancestral custom, and to an utterance of the Delphic god who 
had authorized these things.® The inner history of the develop- 
ment of the Eleusinian festival is a matter of some obscurity. 
The holy rites continued to be performed at Eleusis ; 
Eleusinian noble families-still took part ® in the worship of the 
goddesses, which was yet directed by the Athenian govern- 
ment. On the other hand, a good deal must have been altered 
in the course of time. The popular decree mentioned above 
acquaints us with the names of two triads, each composed of 
two divine personages and a Hero, who were worshipped at 
Eleusis at that time. Demeter and Koré occur together with 
Triptolemos, and also “ the god, the goddess, and Eubouleus ”’.’ 
The Homeric hymn gives no hint of the very important 
position here (and in innumerable other accounts, as well as 
pictorial representations) attributed to Triptolemos, nor of the 
other addition to the Eleusinian group of‘divinities. It is 
evident that in the course of years many different local 
figures and modes of worship have been added to and fused 
with the old cult of the two goddesses ; and that in these local 
figures we have always the one type of chthonic godhead 
expressing itself anew in ever varied and differentiated forms. 
Their number is not exhausted by the six already mentioned.® 
The most important addition to the Eleusinian circle of deities 
was Iakchos, the son of Zeus (Chthonios) and Persephone. 
This god was himself an underworld deity, quite distinct 
from that Dionysos, with whom other Athenian cults confused 
him, and with whom he was in fact commonly identified.® Itis 
a very probable supposition that this god, who soon came to 
be regarded as the central figure of the group of deities 
worshipped at Eleusis,!° was the contribution of Athens to 
that circle: his temple was situated in Athens not Eleusis ; 4 
in the Athenian suburb Agrai the “ Little Mysteries ’’ were 
celebrated in his honour in the spring as a sort of prelude to 
the greater festival. At the Eleusinia itself, the sacred 
procession, in which the picture of the youthful god was borne 
from Athens to Eleusis, formed the link between the part of 
the festival already performed at Athens and that still to 
take place at Eleusis. The introduction of Iakchos into the 
festival of Eleusis did not merely make an external addition 
to the group of divinities that already shared in it ; it added 


THESE EVUSINTAN @MYSLERIES 221 


an act }* to the sacred story, the representation of which was 
the goal and summit of the festival; and thereby in all 
probability enriched it internally in meaning and substance. 
It is, indeed, quite impossible for us even to hazard a guess 
as to the exact meaning and essence of the change which came 
over the festival thus enlarged in the course of time. We can, 
however, be sure of this much; there is no ground at all for 
entertaining the commonly held view that it was the private 
mysteries of Orphic conventicles which exercised such a 
transforming influence on the public mysteries of the Athenian 
state. Those who are not content with solemn and mysterious 
jargon about “ Orphics”’ and the like, but keep clearly in 
mind the well-known and quite distinctive features of the 
Orphic doctrine about gods and the souls of men, will easily 
recognize that everything points to the unlikelihood of even 
a single one of these having entered the circle of ideas current 
at Eleusis. They could only have shattered such ideas to 
leces. 
: If the festival, then, grew of its own accord in inward meaning 
and outward circumstance, the circle of those who came to 
take part in it grewas well. Originally this festival, so rich in 
promised blessings, admitted only the citizens of Eleusis, 
perhaps only the members of certain noble Eleusinian 
families—and may have appeared to its members an even 
greater privilege through this very exclusiveness. In this 
respect it changed completely. Admission to it was thrown 
open to all Greeks—not merely Athenians, But every Greek 
without distinction of race or country, whether man or woman, 
was welcomed at Eleusis (and even hetairai, who were still 
excluded, e.g. from the Demeter-festival of the Athenian 
women; to say nothing of children and slaves).14 The 
generosity of Athens—such was the glorious boast—wished 
the unexampled salvation which this festival promised to its 
worshippers to be made accessible to all Greeks.° What a 
contrast to the exclusive cult-unions into which a man had to 
be born in order, as citizen of a state, member of a phratria, 
clan, or family, to participate in the advantages they offered ! 
The society of the Eleusinian mystery-festival, once just as 
exclusive as the rest, had thrown open its doors so widely that 
this almost unconditional freedom of access became its 
principle and distinguishing characteristic. The attraction of 
membership was even heightened by the fact that just by his 
own unhampered free will and choice the individual could 
enter the great society through the mediation of one of the 
two families to whom the highest priesthood of the festival 


222 THE ‘ELEUSINIAN’ MYSTERIES 


was committed.!® The only condition made was ritual purity, 
and murderers, for whom this was an impossibility—as it was 
even for those who were only accused of the shedding of 
blood—were as such excluded from the mysteries : as, indeed, 
they were from all the religious ceremonies of the state.*’ 

Religious purification of the worshippers preceded and 
accompanied the holding of the festival; to many of the 
believers it may have appeared that the whole festival itself 
was principally a great purification and religious dedication of 
unusual solemnity, by which the members (“ the Pure ”’ 18 as 
they called themselves) were made worthy of the favour of the 
goddesses. 

§ 3 


As to the actual details of what went on at the long-drawn- 
out festival itself our knowledge hardly extends beyond the 
most external circumstances, and is even so most incomplete. 
A few notices in late and often untrustworthy writers give us 
a very inadequate picture of what took place inside the great 
temple of initiation and of the essential Mystery. The secret 
which was committed !¥ to the Mystai and Epoptai has been 
well kept. Considering the enormous number of worshippers 
indiscriminately admitted to the festival, this would, indeed, 
have been a real miracle, if the secret to be kept had taken the 
form of dogma expressed in concept and words and capable of 
being communicated verbally to others. Since the labours of 
Lobeck, however, drastically reducing to order the confusion 
of opinions on this subject, no reasonable person believes that 
this was the case. It was difficult to let out the “ secret ”’, 
for there was essentially no secret to let out. Profanation 
could only come through actions, through “ the Mysteries 
being acted ’’,2° as they were in the year 415 in the house of 
Poulytion. The Mystery was a dramatic performance, or, 
more strictly, a religious Pantomime, accompanied by sacred 
songs 74 and formal speeches; a representation, as Christian 
authors let us see, of the Rape of Koré, the wanderings of 
Demeter, and the final reunion of the goddesses. This in itself 
would not have made the mysteries remarkable ; a similar 
dramatic reproduction of the circumstances attending the life 
of a god, which had led to the foundation of the festival in 
question, was a very widespread cult-practice in Greece; it 
was part of the festivals of Zeus, Here, Apollo, Artemis, 
Dionysos, and, above all, of other festivals in honour of 
Demeter herself. But the Eleusinia was distinguished from all 
other such festivals, even from the equally secret festivals of 
Demeter known as the Thesmophoria and the Haloa, by reason 


THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 220 


of the hopes which it inspired in the minds of the initiated. 
The Hymn to Demeter tells us that the pious worshipper of 
the Goddess at Eleusis might hope for riches upon earth and a 
better fate after death. Later authorities also speak of the 
success in this hfe which initiation at Eleusis gave good ground 
for expecting. But far more emphatic are the statements, 
made by innumerable witnesses from Pindar and Sophokles 
onwards, that only they who have been initiated into these 
mysteries may entertain a joyful expectation of the life to 
come. To them only isit granted to have real “ life ’’ in Hades ; 
nothing but evil awaits others in that place.?? 

_- It was these promises of a blessed immortality that for 
centuries drew so many worshippers to the Eleusinian festival. 
Nowhere else could such promises be obtained with such 
distinctness and assurance. The injunction commanding 
secrecy must obviously have referred to quite other matters ; 
it cannot have applied to this, the greatest boon anticipated 
from initiation at Eleusis. Everyone speaks out aloud and 
without restraint about it. At the same time, all our 
information is so completely at one on the point and so free 
from doubt or uncertainty that we must perforce believe that 
the performances that were to be preserved so secret were, 
in reality, for the believers the source of an assurance which 
was not held as the mere probable conjecture of individuals, 
but as fixed and certain truth beyond question or need of 
interpretation. 

How this was brought about certainly remains obscure. 
Since the discrediting of “symbolism ’”’ in the sense made 
familiar by Creuzer or Schelling, many of our modern 
mythologists and historians of religion have been all the more 
eager to assert that the performances at the Eleusinian 
mysteries were in reality the true and mystic celebration of 
the Greek “ Religion of Nature”’ as discovered by themselves. 
Demeter, in this view, would be the earth ; Koré-Persephone,. 
her daughter, the seed of corn; the Rape and Return of 
Koré would mean the sowing of the seed in the earth and the 
rise of the young grain from beneath the soil; or, in a 
miotemeecncral sense, ° the yearly decay and renewal. of 
vegetation.’ In some way or other the Mystai must have had. 
revealed to them the real meaning of the “‘ nature-symbolism ”’ 
hidden in the mystical performances. Witnessing these 
performances they are supposed to have learnt that the fate of 
the seed of corn, represented by Persephone, its disappearance 
beneath the earth and eventual rebirth, is an image of the 
fate of the human soul, which also disappears that it may 


224 THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 


live again. This, then, must be the real content of the holy 
Mystery. 

It remains, however, first and foremost, to be proved that 
the Greeks 73 themselves would have regarded such symbolistic 
mummery, in which the phenomena and processes of nature 
appear under the guise of anthropomorphic gods, as religious 
at all, or would have recognized their own religion in such 
things. Still further—admitting for the sake of argument the 
possibility of such an interpretation—the identification of 
Koré with the seed of corn and its fate leads at once, if we try 
to get beyond the vaguest generalities, to intolerable 
absurdity. It is difficult to see, however (and this would 
be the main point at issue), how such an analogy between the 
soul and the grain of seed could have led to a faith in 
immortality that was not to be had, it would seem, in a more 
direct fashion. What possible effect could have been produced 
by such a far-fetched and arbitrary parallel between the pheno- 
mena of two such wholely different provinces of existence? Ifa 
reasonably plausible deduction was to be made from the visible 
and unmistakable (the condition of the grain) to the invisible 
and unknown (the condition of the soul) surely the first and 
simplest requisite would be that a real causal connexion 
between the two should be plainly demonstrated. These may 
seem dull and pedantic considerations where the sublimest 
forebodings of the heart are concerned; but I should not 
have supposed that it would have been so easy to tempt the 
Greeks with vague surmises from the path of logic and lucidity, 
or that such surmises would have afforded them such 
extremity of “ bliss ”’. 

Lastly, the analogy, even if it proved anything, is false. 
It would only hold if the soul, like the grain, after a temporary 
disappearance below the earth, were promised a new life 
upon the earth—if a falingenesia in fact were promised. 
That this, however, was not a belief supported by the officially 
conducted mysteries of Athens, is admitted on all hands. 

Equally untenable is the view that the dramatic 
presentation at the mysteries of the Rape and Return of 
Kore (regarded this time as a divine personage, not as the 
personified grain of corn) was intended to inspire hopes of an 
analogous fate for the human soul, by virtue of a mystic 
unification of the hfe of man with the life of the godhead to 
whom he swears allegiance.24 Even so the hope based-upon the 
typical fate of Koré could only have led to a hope for the 
palingenesia of mankind in general, not (what was and always 
remained the real belief of Eleusis) to the hope of a specially 


THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 229 


favoured after-life for the Mystai in the kingdom below the 
world. Indeed, we must not look to the Eleusinian mysteries 
for the ecstatic exaltation of the soul to the recognition of its 
own godhead—though such exaltation was the motive force 
and the essential core of Greek mysticism, as of all mysticism 
and mystic religion. From the mysteries of Eleusis, however, 
it remained far removed; the belief there fostered, with its 
absolute division and distinction between the divine and the 
human, never transgressed the bounds of popular Greek 
religion, over whose portals stood the universally prescriptive 
words: €& dvipdv, & bedv yévos — “the race of men 
is one, and the race of gods is another.” Nor was Eleusis any 
exception to this rule : the mysteries did not point the way to 
mysticism. 


§ 4 

Inquiry is on the wrong track when a deeper meaning is 
sought for in the mimic presentation of the sacred myth at 
Eleusis whereby the human soul was to obtain the blessed 
hope of immortality. The conviction that the human soul was 
immortal in its own right, by reason of its own nature, was 
not a conviction that was obtained at Eleusis. That is why 
we may dismiss such fanciful analogies as those between the 
human soul and the seed of corn or the goddess of the earth’s 
hfe. Such analogies, if they proved anything, would prove 
aes imost =the complete indestructibility, in spite of all 
vicissitude, of the hfe of the human soul—of every human 
soul. But this was not Eleusinian doctrine. The continued 
conscious existence of the soul after its separation from the 
body was not a doctrine but a presupposition of Eleusis ; 
and it could be thus presupposed because it was the basic 
idea of the popular and widespread cult offered to the souls 
of the departed.2> The advantage obtained by the initiated 
at Eleusis was that a livelier and fuller content was given to 
the bare existence of the disembodied soul, which was all that 
the current worship of the souls essentially contemplated. 
We are assured that only the initiated at Eleusis will have a 
real “‘life’’ after death; that evil will be the fate of “‘ the 
others ’’.2® Not that the soul, relieved of the presence of the 
body, will live hereafter, but how it will live was what Eleusis 
taught men. With the calm assurance common to all close 
and confined religious associations, the Eleusinian society 
divided mankind into two classes: the ‘“‘ Pure’’, that is those 
who had been initiated at Eleusis, and the innumerable 
multitude of the uninitiated. Only for the members in com- 

Q 


226 THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES 


munion with the mystery of Eleusis was salvation assured. 
Salvation was theirs as a reversionary right, but salvation 
such as theirs was a privilege and could only be obtained by 
participation in the bounteous festival of the Athenian State 
and in its ceremonial. Centuries of large-minded tolerance in 
admitting to the mysteries extended this privilege to an 
immense number of Greeks (and of Romans, too, in later 
times). But the prospect of a blessed hereafter never became 
a matter of course; not as man, not even as a virtuous and 
pious man did such a privilege come to anyone. It was granted 
solely to the member of the Eleusinian religious society and 
the participator in the divine service of the goddesses.?’ 
_” What were the means employed to impress this hope—this 
certain expectation rather—of a blessed hereafter in Hades 
upon the Mystai? We must frankly admit that we cannot, 
unfortunately, say anything definite in answer to this question. 
Only to the suggestion that these hopes were grounded upon 
symbolic representations of any kind may we give a decided 
denial. And yet this is the generally accepted opinion. 
‘““Symbols’”’ there may have been, as an assistance to the 
dramatic or pantomimic representation of the Rape and 
Return of Koré ; 28 but hardly in any other sense than that 
of typical condensations—the part being put for the whole, or 
the whole understood in the part—of scenes impossible to 
represent in their entirety. It is true that with the lapse of 
centuries, and in the absence of any official written 
interpretation of the inner meaning and intention of the ritual 
many of these symbols became unintelligible—a disadvantage 
which belonged to all other departments of Greek religion as 
well. As soon as independent reflexion on matters of religion 
began to arise, many sorts of allegorical or symbolical inter- 
pretations began to be applied to the details of the performances 
at the mysteries. Does it follow from this that the mysteries 
of the Earth divinities, as some are inclined to believe, bore 
a symbolical or allegorical character from the outset, and 
differed in this respect from all other Greek worship of the 
gods ? 29 Similar interpretations were applied by philosophers 
or would-be philosophers to the fables of the gods in Homeric 
or popular mythology ; the mysteries did not by any means 
hold a peculiar position in the minds of connoisseurs of myth- 
interpretation in antiquity. If a “deeper meaning” was 
attached by preference to the performances at Eleusis, that 
only shows that much in these performances was no longer — 
understood, or in its real meaning no longer satisfied the spirit 
of the philosophic centuries. But it shows also that for this 


LOD ECE USINIAN SMYSTERIES 227 


festival of unexampled splendour, where night and the 
injunction of secrecy awakened awed expectancy,®° performed. 
according to an archaic ritual of ever-increasing perfection 
and attended by the whole of Greece, an unusual sympathy was 
felt. It offered something to the eye and the ear which was 
attractive to all men, and they exerted themselves to find a 
satisfactory meaning in its sights and sounds. Finally, it is 
likely enough that the “ meaning” which they themselves 
had arbitrarily bestowed upon them was what made the 
mysteries specially attractive to many. To this extent it is 
legitimate to say that symbolism was a real and historical 
factor in the constitution of the mysteries. 

Even supposing, however, that much in the presentation of 
this mystic festival was consciously ordered and disposed by 
the founders of it with a view to symbolic interpretation, and 
consequently to the possibility of an _ ever-increasing 
idealization of its significance, yet this cannot have extended 
to the hopes of a blessed immortality revealed to the Mystai. 
Symbolist or allegorizing modes of interpretation must always 
have been the private concern of individuals and therefore 
liable to much uncertainty and variety.*! | Our authorities, 
however, from the most diverse periods, speak with far too 
great distinctness and unanimity about the blessed here- 
after vouchsafed to the initiated in the mysteries, for it to be 
credible that this can have been the outcome of any 
interpretation of complexities, or of any metaphorical 
application of the hopes derived from events in the life of the 
gods to a quite different province, the life of the human soul. 
What every witness speaks of in the plainest and simplest 
language without any special “‘mystery’’—the hope of 
future blessedness—must have been offered to the participants 
in the mysteries in the most unequivocal fashion. It is natural, 
above all, to suppose that the exhibition of the “ mystic 
_ drama ”’ included particularly the final scene as it is sketched 
in the 2nd Homeric Hymn: the foundation of the Eleusinian 
festival by the goddess herself—what had once been revealed 
to the little city-community must have been proclaimed to 
the great company of those admitted to the common festival 
of Eleusis : ** the highest reward of participation in this 
unparalleled act of worship is what the Homeric Hymn 
distinctly puts forth as such—the peculiar favour of the gods 
of the lower world and a future life of blessedness within their 
kingdom. The statues of the goddesses were seen radiantly 
illuminated ; 33 at this festival of grace in remembrance of 
their trials, their happiness, and their beneficent acts, they 


228 THE ELEUSINIAN. MYSTERIES 


themselves—as it seemed to the faithful believer—were 
invisibly present. What further need of warrant was there for 
the promises of future blessedness ¢ 


§ 5 


In spite of many extravagant statements from antiquity, 
we have no means of estimating how widely participation in 
the Eleusinian mysteries (whether of those celebrated at 
Eleusis itself or in the numerous associated festivals) was 
extended in Greece. Still, it is probable that large numbers, 
not from Athens alone but from the whole of Greece, sought 
eagerly to enter the state of grace vouchsafed to the 
worshippers at Eleusis. In this way the more lively conception 
of the state of the soul in the hereafter may have gradually 
become the common property of Greek imagination. 

On the whole, we must be on our guard against attributing 
too great an importance to these mysteries. There can hardly 
have been any question of moral influence—the ancients 
themselves in their most exaggerated eulogies of the mysteries 
and their greatness, say almost nothing of this.34 Nor is it 
easy to see what part of the mysteries could have served as a 
vehicle of moral influence.*° Distinct dogma in the religious 
sense was never provided by the mysteries any more than by 
other worships of the gods in Greece. Nor was there anything 
exclusive about the cult of the mysteries: side by side with 
that cult and after it the Mystai took part in other worships of 
the gods, according to the usages prevailing in their own homes. | 
The great festival when it was over left no sting behind in 
the hearts of the initiated. No requirement of a new manner 
of life, no new and peculiar condition of conscience was theirs 
onits account ; no strange revaluation of values, contradicting 
the general opinions of the time, was learnt there. There was 
a total absence of that which (if we rightly understand the 
word) gives to the doctrines of sectarian religion their force 
and persuasiveness—paradox. Even the prospect of future 
bliss opened to the initiated did not divert them from the 
normal tenor of their existence. It was a genial prospect ; 
not a compelling demand drawing all things to itself and turning 
men away from ordinary life. The light that fell from beyond 
was not so blinding that it made all things on this earth seem 
dark and mean. If in the decadence of Greek culture—and 
even among the people of Homer—ideas hostile to this life — 
made their appearance and in many places acquired weight 
and influence; if some men began to think death superior 


DO PeREEEUSINIAN MYSPERIES 229 


to life, and this life, of which alone we can be assured, 
as merely a preparation, a land of passage to a higher life 
in the world invisible—for all this the mysteries were not 
responsible. It was not they, nor the feelings and surmises 
awakened by their pictures and performances, that dulled 
the beauty of this earth for the enthusiasts “ intoxicated 
with other-worldliness’’, or made them strangers to the 
instincts of life and sanity prevailing in older and unspoiled 
ages of Greek life. 


NOTES TO CHART Hivmava 


1 H. Cer. 270 ff. (Demeter speaks) add’ dye pot vy dv Te péyav Kal Bwpov 
tn’ avt@ revydvtrwy mas Sijpos brat wodw aim’ te tetxos, KadArxopou 
Kabvnepbev, emt mpovxovte KoAwvd. dpyta 8° adty éeywv vroPjocopa, 
os dv émecta evayéws epdovtes eov pévos tAaoxynobe. Building of the 
temple: 298 ff., and following that the instructions of the goddess 
as to the Spnopoovvyn fepdv and the dpya, 474 ff. 

2 See Lobeck, Agl. 272 ff. 

3 487 ff. I will not stop to answer the attacks made on the con- 
cluding part of the hymn nor to defend the many lines which editors 
have rejected. None of the attacks seem to me justified. ‘ 

4 Korte, Ath. Mitt. 1896, p. 320, dates the decree in the year 41a: 

5 kata Ta waTpla Kal THY pavreiay THY ex AeAdadv, SIG. 20, 1. 5; 
26 {.; 35 [1G. i, Supp.,; p..59, 276]. In Sicily the Eleusimiamaes 
already well known in the time of Epicharmos: Epich. ev ’Odvocei 
avtopoAw ap. Ath. 374 D= 100 Kaib. EM. 255, 2; cf. K. O. Miller, 
TLS OCHY ja 209, 

6 We can only state this definitely of the Eumolpidai who provided 
the male and female hierophants. Severely as the genealogy of this 
family has suffered on all sides through fictitious accretions and com- 
binations there can be no doubt of its Eleusinian origin. On the other 
hand, it is a striking fact that none of the yévn who are known to have 
shared in the direction of the Eleus. mysteries derived their origin 
from the Eleusinian princes mentioned in h. Cer. 475-6 as receiving 
with Eumolpos the instructions of the goddess (Triptolemos, Diokles, 
Keleos). The Krokonidai and Koironidai did, it is true, claim 
Triptolemos as their ancestor, but their connexion with the sacred 
festival is obscure and dubious (see K. O. Miiller, Al. Schr. ii, 255 f.). 
The Kerykes (in whose family the posts of Dadouchos, Herald of the 
Mysteries, Priest éwi Bwyd, etc., were hereditary) were only connected 
with Eumolpos by a tradition which the family itself regarded as 
apocryphal (Paus. 1, 38, 3); they themselves traced their descent 
from Hermes and Herse the daughter of Kekrops (s. Dittenberger, 
Hermes, xx, 2), and therefore evidently regarded themselves as an 
Athenian family. We know too little of these relationships to venture 
to say that this claim was unjustified (as Miiller, p. 250 f., is inclined 
to do). Nothing need prevent us from supposing that this is one of 
the many innovations introduced at and after the union of Eleusis 
and its festival with Athens—many of them are quite evident—and 
that in addition to the old Eleusinian priestly families the Athenian 
family of the Kerykes was given a regular part in the Spnopoovvn 
tep@v. This would then be part of the compromise (cuv44xat, Paus. 
2, 14, 2) between Athens and Eleusis upon which the whole relationship 
between the two states and their religious cults rested. 

*Seepabove, echapievy ns 18, 

® It is doubtful what part the goddess Daeira played in the 
Eleusinia: that she played some part must be regarded as certain 
from the fact that among the official priesthoods of the festival a 
daecpirns is expressly mentioned (Poll. i, 35). She stands in a certain 
opposition to Demeter: but though she is nevertheless identified by Aesch. 


NOSE LOR. HAD Lika 3 Vil 231 


and others with Persephone (K. O. Miiller, A7. Schr. ii, 288) the most 
we may deduce from this is that she also was a chthonic deity. (Acc. 
to the sacrificial calendar of the Attic Tetrapolis, Leg. Sacr.i, p. 48, B. 12. 
Aaipa ots xvotoa was offered. This does not point to the identity of 
this goddess with Persephone—as the editor, p. 52, points out. 
Pregnant animals were by preference offered to Demeter, though 
occasionally to Artemis and Athene too.) Daeira seems from all the 
indications to belong to the y@ovor. (Meaning of the name un- 
certain: ? ‘“‘the knowing one” or “the (torch) burning one’’: cf. 
Lobeck, Pathol. prol. 263.) In Eust. on Z 378, p. 648, 24, among the 
notices collected from the lexicographers there is one in which 
Pherekydes makes her the sister of Styx (it is not Pherekydes but the 
over-subtle scholar to whom Eust. owes his note, who thinks that 
Daeira signified the dypa ducts to the ancients; so also Ael. Dionys. 
quoting of wepi reXeTAs Kal pvorHpra in his Lexicon, ap. Eust. 648, 41. 
This is a worthless allegorical interpretation).—For which reason 
some made her the daughter of Okeanos (Miiller, pp. 244, 288)—-wes 
d¢ dvAaxa Ilepoedovyns bro ITdovtwvos anoderyOjvat dace tHv Adewpav 
(648, 40). According to this she would be a Hades-daimon keeping 
guard over the wife of Aidoneus (cf. the guardian Kwxvtod mepidpopoe 
KuUves in Ar., Ran. 472, quoting Eurip.). In this case we can see the 
origin of Demeter’s hostility. Did this Daeira also play a part (as 
a character) in the Eleusinian Spéua pvotixdv? Ap. Rh. makes her 
the same as Hekate, who, however, in the h. Cer. (and on vase-paintings) 
is the helper rather than the enemy of Demeter. 

® So also in the recently discovered Paean (fourth century B.c.) of 
Philodamos of Skarpheia addressed to Dionysos (BCH. 1895, p. 403), 
where in the third section we are told how Dionysos, the son of Thyone, 
born in Thebes, went from Delphi to Eleusis where he was called Iakchos 
by the mortals to whom he had (in the mysteries) revealed wévwv 
éppov ddAvrov.—The attempt at historical synthesis, bringing 
together as many as possible of the different relations and ramifica- 
tions of the Dionysos nature, is particularly evident in the whole com- 
position of this hymn. The cult of Dionysos was established in Attica 
by the Delphic oracle—so much is certain; and that is enough for 
the poet who now makes Iakchos, too, come from Delphi to the people 
of Attica. Such a conception has no historical significance. 

10 *’Taxxos (there clearly distinguished from Avdvuaos) tis Anpytpos 
daiuwv is described as 6 apynyérns TH pvornpiwy in Str. 468 (cf. Ar., 
Ran. 398 f.). 

fethe “faxyetov (Plu., Avist. 27., Alciphr: iii, 59;-1). 

12 ‘Was the birth of Iakchos any part of the spectacle at the 
mysteries ? It might be thought so from what we are told by Hippol., 
RH. 5, 8, p. 162 D.-S.: the hierophant vuxrds év ’Edevoiv bo ToAA@ 
mupt TeADv Ta pvotypia Bod Kal Kéxpaye Aéywv" lepov ETEKE TOTVLA 
Kodpov Boruw Bpinov. This statement, however, suffers from the dis- 
advantage belonging to all information given by Christian writers 
on the subject of mysteries when not confirmed by earlier evidence : 
such information is admissible at most for the actual time of the 
writer. (Immediately combined with this in Hippol. comes the remark- 
able assertion that the hierophant was edvovyiopévos 81a Kwvetov. 
Of this Epict. for example (3, 21, 16) knows nothing, but only speaks 
of the adyvefa—probably confined to the time of the festival and its 
preparation—of the hierophant. Still, Jerome, adv. Jovin. 1, 49, 
p. 320 C Vall., speaks of the cicutae sorbitionis castrari of the hierophant. 
Likewise Serv., A. vi, 661.) 


232 NODES  LOMGHAL TiN mv 


13 An opportunity of speaking in more detail of Orphic doctrine 
will occur later on. Here I will only point out in passing that the 
ancients themselves never suggested for a moment that Orpheus— 
the master of every kind of mysticism—had anything in particular 
to do with the Eleusinia; as Lob. Agl. 239 shows. 

14 As to the admission of slaves to the Eleusinian initiation ceremonies 
K. O. Miiller, Al. Schr. ii, 56, opposes Lobeck (Agl. 19) and suggests 
a doubt. His main objection is that on the great inscr. dealing with 
the regulation of the Eleusinia (CIA. i, 1) side by side with pvorat 
Kal émomtat there is mention also of axdAovdor (but not of dsobAoz, 
Ziehen, Leg. Sacr. [Diss.], p. 14 f.)—1.e. presumably slaves, not them- 
selves Mystai, belonging to the pvora:. But if slaves were initiated 
that would not prevent there being other slaves, axodovfor of the 
pvorat, uninitiated and not reckoned among the pvora. It is definitely 
stated on the official record of building expenses at Eleusis dating from 
the year 329/8, CIA. ii, 834, b, col. 2, 71, pdnots dvoiv Tdv Snpociwv 
(the state slaves employed in the building operations) 444 (cf. 1. 68). 
Initiation of the dyudoor also in CJA. ii, 834 c, 24. On this view, 
when the comic poet Theophilos (11, p. 473 K.) makes someone 
speak of his ayamnros deaomd7tns by whom he é€pvy@y Geots, it will not 
be necessary to suppose that a freedman (as Meineke, Com. 3, 626) 
is speaking and not a slave.—The generosity implied was all the greater 
since in many of the most sacred feasts of the gods at Athens slaves 
were expressly excluded: cf. Philo, Q. omn. Prob. 20, ii, p. 467 M. 
Casaubon on Ath., vol. 12, p. 495 Schw. 

18 Isoc. 4, 28, Anuntpos yap adixopévns els THy ywpav... Kal 
dovons Swpeds di7Tds, aimep peytoTat TUyYavovol ovoat, TOUS TE KapPTODS 
Kal THv TEAETHY, . . . OUTWS H TOALS HU@V ov povov BEeodtAds aAXa 
kat gtrAavOpwmws eaxev, WoTe KuUpla yevouevn TocovTwy ayabav ovK 
epOovnae Tots aAdous, GAN dv EXaBev aaact (he means all Greeks: 
cf. 157) perédwxev. 

16 pvetv 8° elvat tots odo. Kyptxwv xat Edpodmédav as the law 
appoints, CIA. i,1 (more exactly Supp. p. 3 f.), ll. 110-11. Thus the 
pvyots belonged exclusively to the members of the yévyn of the 
Eumolpidai and Kerykes (but to all the members, not merely those 
serving as officers at the particular festival concerned). Cf. Ditten- 
berger, Hermes, 20, 31 f. The Emperor Hadrian, in order to be able 
to hold the festival in a more sumptuous manner, had himself made 
apxywv of the Edpodmday yévos, having already been made a member 
of that yévos: ins. from Eleusis, Ath. Mitt. 1894, p. 172.—There is no 
reference to the Eleusinia in what is said about the puveiy of a priestess 
belonging to the family of the Phyllidaiin Phot. ®cAAe7Sar: see Topffer, 
Att. Geneal. 92.—The exx. of pvyots collected by Lobeck (Ag/. 28 ff.) 
do not contradict this law : in the case of Lysias who iréoyero pujoew 
the hetaira Metaneira [D.] 59, 21, wvetv merely means defray the cost 
of initiation (quite correctly explained by Miiller, review of Aglaoph., 
Kl. Schr. ii, 56). So, too, in the case of Theoph. (ii, p. 473 K.) éuundnv 
Geots, i.e. at the expense of my master. 

*7 The mpoppynos of the Basileus and the proclamations of the 
hierophant and dadouchos excluded all dv8podédvor from those taking 
part in the mysteries: Lob., Agl. 15. They were also, it is true, excluded 
from all other sacred rites: Lob. 17. Even rots év airéa the Archon 
gave warning améxeofar pvornpiwy Kal tdv dAAwy vopipwr (Poll. 8, 
90) : in fact, the person accused of murder was in any case, as ‘‘ un- 
clean *’, excluded from all véuipa: Antipho, vi, 36 (in AB. 310, 8 
read voyipwyr). 


INO TiS eel Om, CLEA DER Vil 233 


18 Govor pvorat, Ar., Ran. 336. (So, too, the Mystai of the Orphic 
Mmiyvotenicsuates called oc }ootous) Pl.,5 Ap. 363. Cy Orph.,.; A." 84, 13°) 
datos is probably here used in its primitive sense = “clean” (dovae 
xetpes, etc.). [Pl.] Axitoch. 371D refers to tas dalovs ayxvoreias of 
the Eleus. Mystai. In the same way oovodv was used of ritual purifica- 
tion and expiation: dqvyatow oovoty the murder, E., Ov. 5153; sdovody 
the returned homicide, D. 23, 73; (of the Bacchic mysteries Bayyos 
exAnOnv cowwéeis, E. fr. 472, 15). Thus the éoroe are identical with 
the xexafappevor as the initiated are called: Pl. Phd. 69 C, and 
frequently. It would be hazardous to suppose that the Mystai called 
themselves éovou as the only pious and righteous people (though that is 
what dc.os avOpwaos and the like mean elsewhere). Their spiritual 
self-satisfaction hardly went as far as that, and indeed they did not 
ascribe so much personal merit to themselves at all. 

eoeine a soleinn announcement of the = Keryx as)it seems) the 
latter acc. to Sopater dsvaip. Cnrnp. (Walz, Rhet. Gr. viii, 118, 24 f.) 
Sypocia éemitatTer THY olwaynv at the commencement of the sacred 
ritual. 

20 ra pvotypia movetv, Andoc., Myst. 11-12.—The more clearly 
descriptive expression, efopyetcbat Ta pvorypra dces not seem to occur 
before Aristides, Lucian, and the latter’s imitator Alciphron. [Lys.] 
6, 51: obdros evdds orornv, prpovpevos Ta tepa amedeikvue Tots ApuTos 
Kal eime TH PwWYATA atoppyta. The azop. thus divulged were the sacred 
formule uttered by the hierophant. 

*1 At least in later ages there was plenty to hear: els é€dapedrdov 
KatéoTn Tais aKoais Ta Opwpeva, Aristid., Eleus. I, 415 Di. [ii, 28 Ke.). 
We frequently hear of the beautiful voices of the hierophants, of 
duvoe ringing out, etc. 

22 The well-known statements of Pindar, Sophokles, Isokrates, 
Krinagoras, Cicero, and others are collected by Lobeck, Agi. 69 ff. 
There is a reminiscence of Isocr. in Aristid. Eleus. ] 421 Di. [ii, 30 Ke.] 
GAAa pv TO ye Kepdos THS Tavnyvpews ody Saov 7% Tapodcoa edbvpia 

. GAAD Kal Epi THs TeAEvTHS Hdtous Exeww Tas éAmidas. id. Panath. 
I, 302 Di. ras appirovs reXeTas @v Tots petacyxotar Kal peta THY Tod 
Biov teXeuTtHv BeATiw Ta mpaypata ylyvecbat doxet. Cf. also Welcker’s 
account, Gr. Gotterl. 11, 519 ff., in which, however, there is a good deal 
mixed up which has nothing to do with the mysteries. 

*3 That is, in the time of still vital religion and in the circles which 
still retained an unspoilt feeling forit. Apart from these it is true that 
the allegorical interpretation of myths was already familiar in antiquity, 
and in learned circles the gods and the stories of the gods were trans- 
formed and disintegrated eis mvevpata Kal pevpata Kal omdpouvs Kat 
apotous Kal ma0n ys Kal petaBoAas wpdv as Plutarch complains, 
Is. et O. 66, p. 377 D. These allegoricalinterpreters from Anaxagoras 
and Metrodoros onwards are the real ancestors of our modern “‘ nature ”’ 
mythologists. No one doubts, however, that from their interpretations 
nothing can be learnt except what the real sense of Greek belief in the 
gods certainly was vot. It is worth noticing that Prodikos, because he 
said that 7Awov cai ceAnvynv Kat moTapods Kat Aet@vas Kal Kaptovs 
Kal maGv TO Towourm@des were the real essence of the Greek gods, was 
looked upon as one of the d@eou (S.E., M.9, 51-2 = B5 Diels). Quam 
tandem religionem reliquit ? asks the Greek whom Cicero is reproducing 
in ND. i, 118, with reference to this ancient prophet of Greek 
“ nature-religion ”’.—For the ancient allegorists Persephone, too, is 
nothing but 76 8a tay Kaprav depopevov mvedpa (So Kleanthes: Plu. 
as above). Acc. to Varro Persephone “‘ means ”’ fecunditatem seminum, 


234 TENOTES ~ 10} CHAPTHRGLVI 


carried off by Orcus on the occasion of some crop-failure, etc. (Aug., 
CD. vii, 20). In Porph. ap. Eus., PE. 3, 11, 7-9. we actually have 
the very interpretation which has been recently restored to so much 
favour—that Képn is nothing else but a (feminine) personification of 
Kopos = young plant, shoot. 

24 A hint of such an explanation occurs in Sallustius, de Dis iv, 
Kata THY evavtiay ionpepiay (i.e. the autumnal) 4 ris Kopyns aprayy 
puBodroyeito yevéabar' 6 81 KdB080s €ott THv Yuyxav (from the standpoint 
of this Neoplatonist at any rate the analogy might be carried through). 
So, too, Sopater dratp. Cnr..in Walz, Rh. Gr. viii, 115, 3, speaks of 70 
ris wuxis mpos To Oetov ovyyevés as if it were confirmed in the 
(Eleusinian) mysteries. 

25 It may be mentioned here by anticipation that a real doctrine 
of the indestructibility of the human soul was first traditionally 
attributed in antiquity to the Greek philosophers such as Thales or 
to the theosophot such as Pherekydes (and Pythagoras too). In 
what sense this can be regarded as true we shall learn in the course of 
our inquiry. The mysteries of Eleusis, from which many modern 
critics would like to derive the belief in immortality among the Greeks, 
are mentioned by no ancient authority as among the sources of that 
belief or of such a doctrine. In which they were quite right. 

26 Soph. fr. 753 N. [791 P.] ws rpis 6ABioe Ketvor Bpordyv, ot ratra 
SepxOevres TEAN podrAwo’ és “Ardov" rTotade yap prdvois exet CHv €or, 
tots 8’ dAAovot mavr’ éxet Kaka. 

27 The privileged position of the initiated is exhibited with striking 
vigour in the well-known outburst of Diogenes: ri Ayers, Edy, 
Kpeittova potpav fer Ilatatkiwy 6 KXrénTys atobavav 7 ’Enapewovdas, 
ort pepvyntat; Plu., dud. Poet.iv, p. 21 F; D.L. vi, 39; Jak? Oras 
238 A. (p. 308 Hert.).—A homiletic application of Diogenes’ saying is 
made by Philo, Vict. Off. 12, ii, p. 261 M. ovpBaiver moAddKis tov 
pev ayadav avdpav undéva pvetabar, Anotas dé €oTw STE Kal KaTaTOVTLOTAS 
Kal yuvatk@v Oiacovs BdeAvKTGv Kal axodAdatwv, émav apytpiov Tapaaxwot 
tots teAobdat Kai tepodavrotar. Ci. Spec. Leg. 3, 7, 1, p. 306 M. 

28 Of this nature were the fepa which the hierophant ‘‘ showed ” 
and the other things that were employed in the festival: pictures of 
gods, relics, and paraphernalia of all sorts (e.g. the xiorn and the 
xadAafos: O. Jahn, Hermes, 3, 327 f.): see Lob., Agl. 51-62. 

29 Preller, for example (stimulated by K. O. Miiller), is fond of 
dwelling on the special character and meaning of the worship of the 
chthonic deities as something quite distinct from other Greek worships 
of the gods. An example may be found in Pauly-Wissowa!, s.v. Eleusts, 
ili, p. 108: ‘“‘ The department of religion to which the Eleusinian 
cult belongs is that of the chthonic deities, which had been indigenous 
in Greece from the earliest times and was a widely popular cultus. 
In this cultus ideas of the generous fruitfulness of the earth’s soil and 
of the fruitfulness of death—whose seat seems to be beneath the earth 
like the Old Testament Sheol—were interwoven in a mysteriously 
suggestive way: a way which essentially resisted all efforts at clear 
and distinct comprehension, and could not help leading to mystical 
or occult suggestions and obscure symbolistic expression.”® This and 
further amplifications in the same sense all rest upon the unprovable 
axiom that the activities of the y@drio as gods of the soil and as gods 
of the kingdom of the souls were ‘“‘interwoven’’: the suggestive 
haze of the rest follows naturally. But what in all this is Greek ? 

30 4 Kpvyis 4 pvoTiKH THY lep@v cEepvoToret TO Oetov, prpovpern THY 
pvow adtod devyovoay judy tHv aloOnow. Str. 467. 


NO UES Or CHAR LE Kev I BE 


31 In fact the ancient allegorical interpretations of the mysteries 
differed widely among themselves: Lob., Agl. 136-40.—Even Galen 
attributed an allegorical sense to the mysteries of Eleusis, but he thinks 
auvdpa exetva mpos evdecéw Ov omevder SiddcKew (iv, p. 361 K.). This 
cannot have been true of the assurances given to the Mystai of a 
blessed future in Hades. 

32 Such proclamations may have occurred in the fepodavrov praets 
foOp. O1atp. (nz. Walz, vill, b23,,29; ci. Lob., Agi. 189). 

SeeLODS AL. OZ, 08a. 

34 No one says anything of any kind of moral obligation undertaken 
by the Mystai or of any consequent moral influence of the festival : 
not even Andokides in whose warnings addressed to the college of judges 
composed of Mystai (Myst. 31) the words tva timnwphonte ev todvs 
aceBotvras KTA. are not to be taken with the previous pepvyode cal 
éwpaKate Toiv Oeotv ta tepa but with olrwes épKovs peyadous KTA. Kal 
apacapevot xtA. He speaks, in fact, of the moral obligation of the 
jury who have taken the oath, as judges not as Mystai. In Ar., Ran., 
455 ff., the words 6c01 pepujpeba stand loosely side by side with evoeBF 
dujyopev TpOTOV TEpi TOVs E€vous Kai Tovs tdewras. (Of the Samothrakian 
mysteries Diodoros says, 5, 49, 6: yiveodat 5€ dact cai evaeBeatépouvs 
Kal OtKavoTépovs Kal Kata mav BedAtiovas eavTdv tos TaV pvoTnplwy 
Kolwwynoavtas—as it seems without effort on their part by a pure act 
of grace.) 

35 Formal or verbal instruction of a theological or moral kind was 
not supplied at Eleusis: so much may be stated without fear of con- 
tradiction since the work of Lobeck. Thus, the three commandments 
of Triptolemos, which acc. to Xenokrates d:apévover ’EXevoivi (Porph., 
Abs. 4, 22) cannot be regarded as moral precepts proclaimed at the 
mysteries : indeed, there is nothing to lead one to conclude that they 
had anything to do with the mystery festival at Eleusis. In character 
these very simple precepts seem related to the laws of Bouzyges, 
with whom Triptolemos is sometimes confused (Haupt, Opusc. iii, 505) 
and were very likely, like them, recited at some agricultural festival. 
Supposing further that the third “‘law’” of Triptolemos: (6a pu 
oivecOa was really (as Xenokr. seems to have understood it) intended 
to recommend a complete azoxy? éupdywv, then it certainly cannot 
have been proclaimed at the Eleusinia (though this is what Dieterich 
thinks happened, Nehkyta, 165). It is surely unthinkable that the 
Mystai at Eleusis were, after the Orphic model, absolutely forbidden 
to eat flesh for the rest of their lives. It remains a possibility that 
the precept had quite a different meaning—it does not definitely speak 
of the killing of animals—and that it belongs to some simple farmer’s 
festival (not to the great festival of Eleusis, but rather, e.g. the Haloa) 
at which the farmer was recommended to spare his live stock (just as 
the third of the three laws of Demonassa at Cyprus forbade the farmer 
p21 amoKretvar Body aporpiov, D. Chr. 64, 3[329R., 148 Arn.]; Attic law ap. 
Ael. VH. 5, 14, etc.).—In any case to bring all this into connexion 
with the mystery festival of Eleusis is absolutely without justification. 


CHAPTER VIL 
IDEAS OF THE FUTURE LIFE 


Certain allusions in Plutarch and Lucian ! would lead us to 
suppose that the “‘ mystery-drama ”’ of Eleusis included also 
a visual exhibition of the underworld and its blest, or unblest, 
inhabitants. But these contemporaries of a final and luxuriant 
flowering of mystery-reliigions of every kind can serve as 
reliable witnesses only for their own period. In their day the 
Eleusinian festival, in competition it may be with other secret 
worships which were invading the Greco-Roman world in 
ever-increasing numbers, seems to have undergone a con- 
siderable alteration and extension of its primitive and 
traditional shape. We may doubt whether in earlier, classical 
times the Eleusinia can have attempted to bind the 
imagination with what were always petty details, or confine 
within formal limits what lay beyond all human experience. 
Still the solemn promise of future blessedness made in the 
mystic festival may, at any rate, have stimulated the 
imagination of its worshippers and given a more definite turn 
to their own natural efforts to picture the hfe to come. The 
ideas cultivated at Eleusis unmistakably contributed to the 
process by which the picture of Hades acquired colour and 
distinctness. Even without such stimulus, the natural instinct 
of the Greeks at all periods to give form even to what was 
essentially formless, worked in the same direction. The limits 
set by Homeric behefs about the future world had made 
the Odyssean description of a descent to Hades seem a risky 
experiment only to be undertaken with the greatest caution. 
Now, however, since the re-establishment of the belief in a 
conscious after-life of the disembodied soul, such imaginative 
bodyings-forth of the invisible realm of shadows had become 
apparently the most natural and innocent employment of 
poetic fancy. 

The story of Odysseus’ journey to Hades and its expansion 
in conformity with the gradually increasing distinctness with 
which the hfe after death was conceived, was followed at an 
early period in the development of Epic poetry by further 
accounts of such journeys undertaken by other heroes. 
A Hesiodic poem described the descent of Theseus and 
Peirithods to the underworld.? A Nekyia, the details of which 
are unknown, occurred in the poem of the Return of the heroes 


PDAS OL wel Teer UTR He soln 237 


from Troy. The epic which went by the name of the 
““Minyas ”’ seems to have given considerable space to a descent 
to Hades.? The ancient fable of Herakles’ descent to Hades : 
and conflicts in the underworld received embellishment at 
more than one poet’s hand.* Asa result of such repeated and 
rival interpretations of the story the stock of characters and 
events associated with Hades was gradually and continually 
being enlarged. Accident has preserved to us the fact about the 
little-known Minyas that it, too, added to the details of the 
picture. To what extent popular imagination and mythology, 
on the one hand, and poetic inventiveness, on the other, may 
have been responsible for all this we can hardly say. It seems 
probable that here, as in the development of so many Greek 
myths, on the whole the balance of invention lay on the side 
of the poets. Purely poetic visions or pictures like that of the 
translation of individual heroes to Elysium may have gradually 
won their way to popular acceptance. “‘ Dearest Harmodios,”’ 
said the Athenian Skolion, “thou art not dead indeed, but 
livest yet, men say, in the Islands of the Blest.’”’ Not that there 
was anything fixed or dogmatic on the point. In a funeral 
oration Hyperides represents Leosthenes and his companions 
in battle as meeting in Hades, among the illustrious dead, 
the Tyrannicides, Harmodios and Aristogeiton.® 

Much that may have been the invention of poets for the 
filling up or furnishing of the desert region so stamped itself 
upon the general mind that it almost seemed the natural growth 
of authentic popular belief. Everyone was familiar with the 
guardian of the gate of Plouton, the malignant hound of 
Hades who admits everyone but lets no one out again. He is 
the same creature, long known from the adventure of Herakles, 
which is already named Kerberos by Hesiod.® Like the gate and 
the gate-keeper, the waters that divide Erebos from the world 
of the living are already known to Homer. Now they have a 
Ferryman added to them, the churlish old man Charon, who, 
like a second Kerberos, safely transports everyone across the 
water, but lets no one return.? The Muinyas is the first to) 
mention him; that he became a real figure of popular belief 
(as he is still in Greece to this day, though with altered 
significance) is shown by pictures on the Attic vases that were 
put into the graves with the dead. These represent the soul 
as it stands upon the sedgy bank and meets the ferryman who 
will carry it over to the other side whence no man returns.® 
The custom of burying the dead with a small coin fixed between 
the teeth was also explained as provision for the passage- 
money that would have to be paid to Charon.?® 


238 Y IDEAS) OF THE? BULURE Sra 


§ 2 


The soul, then, being safely arrived on the other bank and 
Kerberos passed by—what awaited it there ? Those who had 
been initiated into the mysteries now counted upon enjoying 
the glad future that their hopes had formerly pictured. 
In reality this blessed future, vouchsafed by the grace of the 
deities who rule below, was not very hard to obtain. So many 
were initiated and recommended to divine favour that the 
picture of Hades, once S0 gloomy, began to assume a more 
genial aspect. Quite early we meet with the general name of 
‘““ Blessedness ”’ as applied to the future life ; while the dead 
without much distinction are called the “ Blessed ’’.*° 

Of course, anyone who had been so foolish as to neglect or 
despise initiation has ‘“‘ not the same fate below’’, as the 
Hymn to Demeter discreetly puts it. Only the initiated have 
life, says Sophokles: the uninitiated, with whom it goes ill 
in the land below, can hardly have been thought of otherwise 
than as floating in the glimmering half-life of the shadows in 
“ the Homeric Erebos. Well-meaning modern efforts to read a 
moral meaning into things Greek have sought to prove 
that the Greeks, too, had a genuine popular belief in a future 
judgment and recompense for the past deeds and character 
of the dead. Homer makes hardly the most distant allusion 
to such a belief. The perjurer alone suffers in Homer the 
punishment at the hands of the gods of the underworld which 
he had invoked upon himself in his oath. Even the “ Sinners ” 
and their punishment which later imitation added to the story 
of Odysseus’ Journey to Hades, considered without prejudice, 
do not support the opinion that Homeric poetry knew of a 
belief in retribution hereafter. Later poets were only following 
this model when they made other enemies of the gods endure 
eternal punishment in Hades—Thamyris, for example, or 
Amphion (as the Minvyasrelated), and later Ixion in particular. 
All this does not, even in the slightest degree, suggest a general 
belief in future rewards and punishment. Of course, there is 
the judgment that is given in Hades by “ One ”’ according to 
Pindar (Ol. 1, 65), but this occurs in connexion with a 
description of the “ last things ’’ which the poet has borrowed 
from the teachings of mystic separatists. Aeschylus 1? knows 
of a judgment pronounced by Hades himself ; but his thoughts 
about divine retribution both on earth and hereafter are 
derived from his own religious temperament which was entirely 
opposed to the popular beliefs of his day and more inclined 
to accept the speculative doctrines of the theologians. The 


BD WA See Ober eer UEP URE oi H 239 


first precise account of the three judges in Hades, Minos, 
Rhadamanthys, and Aiakos, who judge the deeds of men done 
in their hfetime upon earth occurs in Plato in a description of 
the other world which reproduces anything rather than the 
popular beliefs of the time.!® Later on, the picture of thejudges uv 
in Hades (to whom Triptolemos was also added),’* hke many 
other details of the Platonic eschatological myths, became a 
real part of popular fancy, as allusions in later literature and 
even, perhaps, pictures of the underworld on vase-paintings 
from Southern Italy, bear witness. But the idea that in theZ 
supreme period of Greek culture the belief in a judgment and 
judges in Hades, who passed sentence on the deeds of men done 
on earth, had really any root in popular belief, is quite un- 
proved and can be shown to be erroneous from the argument 
ex silentio. And where there are no judges no judgment can 
take place. a 

We often see it asserted that the belief in a future state of | 
compensation for the good and evil deeds of this world was 
obtained by the Greeks from the Eleusinian mysteries. In 
reality the opposite is true ; if and in so far as the Greeks ever 
received or entertained such a belef in future rewards and 
punishments the mysteries of Eleusis had nothing whatever to 
do with the matter. We have only to remember the simple 
fact that the Eleusinian mysteries admitted to initiation, 
with the single exception of those stained by the crime of 
murder, Greeks of all sorts without any inquiry into their 
past life and actions, or even their character. The initiated 
were promised a blessed life hereafter ; a gloomy fate awaited 
the uninitiated. The difference was not made by goodness 
or badness: “‘ Pataikion the thief will have a better fate 
after his death because he has been initiated at Eleusis than 
Agesilaos or Epameinondas”’ sneered Diogenes the Cynic. 
Not political or moral worth but “ spiritual’ merit alone is 
decisive. Nor will anyone be very surprised at that. It is so 
in most religions. But in any case, the idea of a sentence passed 
on virtue or vice in Hades had been forestalled by the system 
of rewards and punishments in the lower world which the 
mysteries had already formulated from quite a different point 
_ of view. Where the mysteries were seriously and con- 
scientiously taken they would rather have thrown their 
weight into the scales against any such idea, if it began to 
make itself felt, of compensation for good and evil deeds in 
Hades; they certainly contained nothing that fostered such 
a belief. 

No doubt in the long run, among a spiritually alert people, 


240 IDEAS OPT THE Ser Ue Gi eeeisuies 


the morality inculcated by religion allied itself freely and 
without reluctance to the morality of the citizen in its 
independent development. Only in this way could the former 
maintain its ascendancy. Thus, in the minds of many of the 
Greeks the idea of religious justification (through the 
mysteries) may have lent its support to the idea of civic just 
dealing ; and, at the same time, the company of the unblest 
who had neglected the sacred mysteries and their future 
salvation as well, was increased by the not unimportant body 
of those who receive the wages of sin in Hades and expiate 
their crimes against the gods, the family, and the civil society 
of men. Those who have taken a false oath, parricides, violators 
of the laws of hospitality are made by Aristophanes (in the 
Frogs) to “lhe in the mud ’’—a form of penalty originally 
anticipated for the uninitiated in some Orphic private 
mysteries, but now transferred by him to those guilty of moral 
misdemeanours.!® The inconsistency with the promises made 
in the mysteries themselves involved in such conceptions 
may have been the less observed just because the idea of a 
future system of compensation in accordance with the require- 
ments of morality was never seriously or fully developed, but 
remained merely a matter of vague suggestion. In circum- 
stances of real need that ideal never satisfied anyone in Greece. 
Men expected to see the retributive power of the gods visibly 
active upon earth ; those in whom experience weakened this 
belief would not have derived much comfort from the idea of 
compensation hereafter. Everyone knows the typical case of 
Diagoras, the “ Atheist ’74° 


§ 3 

The picturing of the future life, however seriously it might 
be carried on by adherents of certain mystical sects, remained 
for the poets and the public at Athens in the fifth century 
little more than an amusement of idle fancy in which a man 
might indulge his own whim with perfect freedom. The 
comic poets from Pherekrates onwards regarded a Descent 
into the Unknown country as a suitable framework for a 
burlesque play.’ According to their fancy a Paradise, like that 
of the golden age on earth when Kronos still ruled, awaited 
the “ Blessed ” in the world below ; 18 a “‘ City of Delight ” 1° 
such as men hoped to meet with at the ends of the world, or 
even somewhere upon the real world. It is from a comedy, 
the Frogs of Aristophanes, in connexion with the Descent to 
Hades of a typical commonplace Athenian citizen, who for 
the time being plays the part of Dionysos, that we get a 
clearer outline of the geography of the lower regions. Beyond 


I Dieters (GMa s Wiel WUE OD) BAA aD 241 


the Acherousian Sea with its cross-grained ferryman dwell 
snakes and monsters of all kinds. Having passed by the 
darkness and putrescence of the slough in which wallow per- 
jurers and those who have committed crimes against father or 
stranger, the way leads to the palace of Plouton, near which 
lives the chorus of those who have been initiated into the 
mysteries. For them even in Hades the sun dispenses a 
brilliant light ; they dance in myrtle groves and sing to the 
sound of the flute hymns of praise to the gods of the under- 
world.?® A separation of the inhabitants of the lower regions 
into two classes as taught by the mysteries, is here also carried 
through ; at least clear consciousness is implied in the case of 
the Mystai which in itself marks clearly the change which has 
taken place since the Nekyia of the Odyssey. Then there are 
other regions in Hades besides the places where the initiated 
and the impious dwell. There is a reference to the plain of 
Lethe,?! and to the place where Oknos is plaiting the rope 
which his she-ass gnaws to pieces as fast as he plaits it. This 
is a parody, half humorous, half pathetic, of the Homeric 
figures of Sisyphos and Tantalos ; a sort of bourgeois counter- 
part of that Homeric aristocracy of the enemies of heaven, 
whose punishment, as Goethe remarked, is a type of ever- 
unrewarded labour. But, we may ask, what had honest 
Oknos done to deserve this fate of eternally fruitless toil ° 
He is only a man like other men, but he “ typifies all human 
endeavour.” That anyone could have introduced such 
quaint inventions of innocent humour into the realm of Hades 
shows how far all this was from theological seriousness. 


§ 4 

We ought to be able to observe the change which had come 
over the conception of the future life since the days of Homer 
from a consideration of the picture of the Underworld which 
Polygnotos of Thasos painted on one of the walls of the Hall 
of the Knidians at Delphi. The details of this picture are 
precisely known to us from the account given by Pausanias. 
The first impression that we get from it is the extraordinary 
vagueness and undeveloped state of the mythology of the 
underworld at this period, about the middle of the fifth 
century. On the wall was represented the questioning of 
Teiresias by Odysseus; the companies of heroes, the men 
and women of poetry, occupied the greater part of the space. 
The divine judgment of heaven was illustrated by the figures 
of the Homeric “‘ Sinners ’’, Tityos, Tantalos, and Sisyphes. 
Outside the ranks of the Heroic company is Oknos and his 

R 


242 IDEAS VOR “THE 7b ULU RE Eiri ts 


she-ass. But where is the reward of virtue, the punishment of 
wickedness? In expiation of the worst excesses, those 
committed against gods and parents, a temple-robber receives 
a cup of poison from a sorceress,?* and an undutiful son is 
being choked by his own father.23 Apart from these evil- 
doers are the “‘ uninitiated ’’, those who have made light of the 
Eleusinian mysteries. Because they have missed the “ com- 
pletion”’ of the initiation they are now forced, men and 
women, to pour water from broken pitchers into a (perforated) 
jar in ever-unavailing endeavour.*4 There is no sign anywhere 
of a judge who should-separate the souls into two classes ; 
and of the monsters of the underworld there only appears the 
corpse-devouring daimon Eurynomos who must have been 
known to the artist from some local legend.*» Of the reward 
of the “ virtuous ”’ there is not a trace, and even the hopes of 
the initiated in the mysteries are only vaguely alluded to in 
the casket which Kleoboia, as she crosses the river in Charon’s 
boat with Tellis, is holding on her knee.?® This is a symbol 
of the sacred mysteries of Demeter which Kleoboia once 
brought from Paros to Thasos, the home of Polygnotos. 

With this series of pictures, hardly altered at all from 
Homer,?? contrast for a moment the scenes of torment repre- 
sented in Etruscan pictures of the Underworld, or the pedantic 
details of the trial of the dead on the day of judgment 
as the Egyptians elaborated them in picture and writing. 
From such gloomy severity, from the rigid and over- 
powering dogmatism that a people without imagination had 
constructed for itself out of religious speculations and visions 
_ won by much labour and thought, the Greeks were fortunately 
preserved by their own genius. Their fancy is a winged god 
whose nature it is to pass lightly over things—not to fall 
heavily to earth and there remain ponderously prostrate. 
Nor were they very susceptible during their best centuries 
to the infectious malady of a “‘ sick conscience ’’. What had 
they to do with pictures of an underworld of purgatory and 
torment in expiation of all imaginary types and degrees of 
sin, as in Dante’s ghastly Hell? It is true that even such 
dark fancies of the Christian Hell are in part derived from 
Greek sources. But it was only the misguided fancy of 
particular isolated sects that could call forth such pictures 
as these, and recommend itself to a philosophic speculation 
which in its worst excesses violently contradicted all the 
most fundamental principles of Greek culture. The people 
and the religion of Greece, the mysteries which her cities 
organized and deemed holy, may be freely acquitted of all 
such aberrations. 


NOES ae Om GrbAD hE Ran LT 


1 Plu. (the MSS. wrongly give Themistios) de An. fr. 6 ap. Stob., 
mieiv,, o2 b, 48° H. = p.. 107427 ff Mein:> Luc., Gatapl. 23. 

eas. 9, 31, 5. 

$ The remains in Kinkel, Frag. Epic. i, 215 ff. This Mivuds was 
identified by K. O. Miiller, Orchom?., p. 12, with the Orphic card Baots 
eis ‘“Acdov, and this suggestion has been followed, though with hesita- 
tion, even by Lobeck, Agl. 360, 373. It rests solely on the fact that the 
Orphic xataBaoits was very doubtfully ascribed according to Clemens 
to Prodikos of Samos, according to Suidas to Herodikos of Perinthos 
(or to Kerkops, or to Orpheus of Kamarina); while the Minyas, 
according to Paus. 4, 33, 7, was very doubtfully ascribed to Prodikos 
of Phokaia. Miller first identified Prodikos of Samos with Herodikos 
of Perinthos, and then both of them with Prodikos of Phokaia. The 
justification of such a procedure is by no means “‘self-evident”’ and 
the identification—entirely depending upon this quite arbitrary 
view—of the Orphic xaraBaots eis ‘’Arcdov with the Minyas is in the 
last degree hazardous. Such an alternative title to an ancient narrative 
poem can only be defended by fictitious and quite untenable parallels. 
The name Mivvas has no parallelin Orphic literature, and suggests rather 
a poem dealing with heroic adventure in which the Nekyia would 
only be an episode. If we are to believe in the double title we require 
at least to be told how the name (Minyas) could possibly have been 
given to a poem whose contents as implied by the title cxardBaous ets 
“A.dov plainly consisted in a descent to Hades—made by Orpheus 
himself (as Lobeck also understands, p. 373). Besides, everything 
we learn about the Nekyia of the Minyas differs widely from the temper 
and doctrine of Orphism, which should have manifested themselves 
very distinctly in such a vision of the life to come. Nor is anything 
from the Minyas given elsewhere under the name of Orpheus, like 
so many of the details of underworld mythology. There is nothing 
to suggest that it was Orpheus who sought the aiva atria Ditis: an 
unprejudiced interpretation of fy. 1 (ap. Paus. 10, 28, 2) would suggest 
that it was rather Theseus and Peirithoos whose descent to Hades 
supplied the framework for the Hades episode in the poem. There 
is then not the slightest justification for including the Minyas in the 
list of Orphic poems or for citing what is known of its contents as Orphic 
mythological doctrine (which last Lobeck himself did not do: he knew 
too well the real nature and meaning of Orphism). Cf. Duimmler, 
Delphika, p. 19 (Bas. 1894). 

4 Allusions in the Iliad and Odyssey presuppose the existence of 
an old poem on the journey to Hades of Herakles: how he was 
commissioned by Eurystheus, conducted by Athene (and Hermes), 
went down below and wounded Hades himself and carried off the dog 
of Hades. Many hands must subsequently have taken part in filling 
in the details of the adventure: we cannot, however, definitely name 
the poet who gave its final form and character to the whole. As far 
as the individual features of the poem are known to us (esp. from the 
survey given in [Apollod.], 2, 12, Myth. Gr., 2, 122 ff. W., combining 
both early and late mythological characteristics), they are rather the 
features of a vigorous story of heroic adventure, full of movement 
and tending to the gruesome and the extravagant—not of a static or 


244 NOTES SLO @ CHAP GE I amaveun 


tranquil narrative that would allow of the calm reception of pictures 
illustrating the quiet ordinary life and events of frequent occurrence 
in the mysterious world of darkness, In this respect the xaraBaots 
of Herakles in its traditional form must have differed noticeably 
from the Nekyia in A, as well as from the Minyas. In fact, not one 
of the fabulous details current in later times about Hades can be traced 
back to a description in the Herakles adventure (even ‘‘ Kerberos ”’ 
seems to have got his name elsewhere). 

5 Hyperides, Epit. § 35-9 = p. 92 f. (Blass?) : Leosthenes will meet 
év ‘’AvdSov the Heroes of the Trojan war, the Persian war, and also 
Harmodios and Aristogeiton. This is a stereotyped rhetorical idea : 
cf. Pl, Ap. 41 A-C. An epigram from Knossos on a Cretan who has 
distinguished himself in a cavalry battle (BCH. 1889, p. 60, ll. 1-2, 
after Simon., Ep. 99, 3-4 Bgk.), ll. 9-10: rovverd ce POipévwv Kal’ 
ounyupw 6 KrAvTOs ““Adns tae todtccovxw advOpovov ’[dopevei. 

6 Kerberos is first named in Hes., Th. 311, and he is the same hound 
of Hades which Homer knows and leaves unnamed, as Hesiod. does, 
Th. 769 ff. According to this account he admits everyone, fawning 
about them and wagging his tail: but anyone who tries to slip out 
of Hades again he devours. That Kerberos inspires terror in those 
who enter Hades is therefore a conception of later ages (when his 
name was sometimes derived from the fact that he ras kffpas, 6 dynAot 
Tas wuyas, €xee Bopav: Porph. ap. Eus., PE. 3, 11, 11, p. 110A, etc.) : 
the superstitious are afraid 7é KepBépw dradaxveoba (Plu., N.P. Suav. 
Ep, 1105 A; cf. Verg., A. vi, A0V; Apul., Me?.3, 15 fn.) si he thomas 
cakes given to those who enter Hades are intended to pacify him 
(Sch, Ar., Lys. 601;° Verg., A. wi, 420; Ap., Mets-vi,t 19) 4 slteange 
be proved that this is an ancient conception (certainly not from the 
absurd invention of Philochoros, fy. 46, to which Dieterich, Nekyia, 
49, appeals). Ar., Lys. 601, speaks of the peAttod7ra for the dead 
without suggesting any such purpose; and in fact honeycakes would 
hardly be a satisfactory bait to a dog: they rather suggest offerings 
for underworld snakes (as in the cave of Trophonios, Ar., Nu. 507 ; 
for the Asklepios-snake, Herond. iv, 90-1) and for spirits appearing 
as snakes (and hence customary at offerings for the dead, and even 
e.g. according to the precepts of the pulordpor when digging up medicinal 
plants, Thphr., HP. 9, 8, 7), In the lines of Sophokles;;OG3157 4am 
Léschcke, Aus der Unterwelt, p. 9 (Progr. Dorpat, 1888) finds an ex- 
pression of the idea that there was need of pacifying Kerb. in his rage 
against souls entering Hades. In reality nothing of the kind is even 
suggested there. The traditional text 1s unintelligible, and is emended 
and interpreted with probable correctness by Nauck (é0s instead of 
ov). Adopting this correction the words express a prayer of the 
Chorus addressed to a child of Tartaros and Ge, who is called 
6 aiévumvos, which must mean “‘ who sends to everlasting sleep ” (not 
“who sleeps for ever ’?)—for to separate mats TGs cat Taprdpov from 
atevurvos as the Schol. would do, is impossible. The aiévumvos, as 
the Schol. has already noticed, can hardly be anyone else than Thanatos 
(it would be an unintelligible epithet for Hesychos, of whom L, thinks). 
Thanatos, however, is nowhere else called son of Tartaros and Ge 
(nor is Hesychos, while Typhon and Echidna are, though the adj. 
would not suit them: who else besides Soph., OC. 40, calls the Erinyes 
daughters of Ge and Skotos ?). The Chorus pray to him (acc. to 
Nauck’s correction) to grant Oedipus a safe passage in his journey 
to Hades. Terrors of all kinds were to be met with on the way there, 
odes kat Onpia (Ar., Ra. 143 ff., 278 ff.; we may also remember Verg., 


NOTE See lOm CHAR DE Ras il 245 


A. vi, 273 ff., 285 ff., etc.) : that Kerberos is among these terrors is 
suggested by Soph. as little as it is by Aristoph. in the Frogs. 
In fact, Soph. had spoken of him a few lines before (1569 ff.) in words 
which suggest anything rather than danger to those who enter Hades. 
Sophokles, then, cannot be made to serve as witness for the view that 
the Greeks thought of Kerberos after the manner of the two piebald 
dogs of the Indian Yama that terrify and drive back the dead. 
Further, there is no good evidence for a Greek tradition of two hounds 
of Hell. Nor can it be proved by the case adduced by Loschcke: 
the picture on a sarcophagus from Klazomenai of a naked boy holding 
a cock in each hand and standing between two (female) dogs that 
leap round him (in a manner suggesting play rather than anger). 
The picture can hardly have a mythical sense. This cannot give 
support to the view (as old as Wilford) that KépBepos is no other than 
one of the two piebald (cabala) dogs of Yama and a creation of primitive 
Indo-Germanic times. In any case, the evidence is weak enough. See 
Gruppe, Gr. Culte u. Mythen, i, 113-14; Oldenberg, Rel. d. Veda, 
poonp— 409 Lr. T’.]. 

7 Agatharch. p. 115, 14 ff. Mill., says that it is a popular belief 
T@v ovKEeTL GvTwY TOvs TUTOUS ev TOpOpids StamAciv, ExovTas Xdpwva 
vatKAnpov Kat KuBepyyrny, tva pr Kataotpadévtes Exdopads éemdéwvTae 
ma Aw. 

8 Cf. v. Duhn, Arch. Zeit. 1885, 19 ff.; Jahrb. arch. Inst. ii, 240 ff. 

® Charon’s fare (2 obols instead of the otherwise usual one—the 
difference not satisfactorily explained) is first mentioned in Ar., fran, 
140, 270. ‘That this is the purpose of the money that was inserted 
between the teeth of the dead is frequently asserted by later authors. 
The many different names which were given to this ‘“‘ Charon’s penny ” 
(kapxadwr, cf. Lobeck, Prol. Path. 351; kxatirjpiov, davdkyn and simply 
vadAov: see Hemsterh. Lucian, ii, 514 ff.) show that this idea 
and the symbolism underlying it was a favourite subject of speculation. 
In spite of this we may doubt whether the custom of supplying the 
dead with a small coin has really arisen out of the wish to give them 
the fare-penny for the underworld ferryman. It is extremely doubtful 
whether Charon and his boat can have been figures of such clear 
dogmatic fixity as to have given rise to such a remarkable custom 
expressing itself in such a literal fashion. The custom itself, now, 
it seems, attested in Greece only from graves of a late period (see 
Ross, Archdol. Aufs. i, 29, 32, 57 Anm.; Raoul Rochette, Mém. 
de l’ Inst. de Fr., Ac. des Ins, xiii, p. 665 f.) must be ancient (though 
no older than the use of coined money in Greece), and has held its own 
with the most remarkable tenacity in many parts of the Roman 
Empire toa late age—even through the Middle Ages to our own time 
(cf. among others Maury, La magie et l’astrol. dans lantiq. 158, 2). 
It is not very hard to understand that it might be ingeniously con- 
nected with the poetical story of the ferryman of the dead, and this 
plausible explanation of the strange custom might then become a 
part of popular belief. The custom itself ought rather to have been 
brought into connexion with the practice common in many lands 
of satisfying the requirements of the dead by the gift of some diminutive 
and all but symbolical object which is offered at burial and put in the 
grave (see something of the kind in Tylor, i, 193-4). Parva petunt 
Manes: pietas pro divite grata est munere; non avidos Styx habet 
ima deos. The obol may be the last symbolical vestige of the entire 
property of the dead which the ancient law of the dead required to be 
placed undiminished in their graves. reOvién . . . ex modAGv GBodAov 


246 NOTHS #10 Gri Ahi 


yodvoy éveyxapevos: the epigram of Antiphanes Maced. (AP. xi, 168) 
expresses more nearly perhaps, though in sentimental language, the 
original and primitive intention of the gift of an obol, than does the 
fable of Charon’s penny (cf. AP. xi, 171,7; 209, 3). “Accordingeas 
German superstition “‘ money should be laid in the mouth of the dead 
man so that if he has buried a treasure he may not return ’’, Grimm, 
p. 1785, n. 207. Here the undoubtedly ancient conception is quite 
clearly betrayed: that by giving a coin the property of the dead was 
bought up. The evidence for this first and proper meaning of the 
custom has been preserved in the strangest fashion, together with 
the custom itself, even down to the eighteenth century, when J. Chr. 
Mannlingen voices it, Alberidten 353 (summarized in A. Schultz, 
Alltagsleben e. d. Frau im 18 Jh., p. 232 f.): this custom, common 
both to heathendom and Christianity, of putting a penny in the coffin 
of the dead “‘means that men buy up the property of the dead, 
whereby they think they will have good luck in their life’’. 

10 Ar., Tagenist. fr. 488, 9: 61a ratra yap tow Kat KadobdvTat (of 
vexpol) paxdapto.. mas yap Aéyer Tis, 6 paKxapiTns olxeTat KTA. paKapirys, 
then, was already, by that time, a common expression for the dead 
which had lost its full sense and value, just like the German ‘‘selig”’ 
(which is borrowed from Greek). Strictly speaking it means a 
condition approaching the existence of the paxapes Beal aiev edvtes. 
The full meaning still appears in the appeal to the heroized Persian 
monarch: paxapiras icodaipwv Baorrevs, Aesch., Pers. 633 (viv 8 éori 
paKatpa Saipwyr, E., Alc. 1003) ; cf. also Xen., Ages. xi, 8, vouifwv tovs 
evKAre@s TeTEAEVTNKOTAS pakaplovs. Such passages allow us to see that 
_peakaplos, pakapitns were not used of the dead in any sense kar’ 
avridpacuw, aS ypnoros sometimes is (Plu., Q. Gv. v, p. 292 B; though 
on grave inscr. it is generally meant in its proper sense) ; cf. edxpi7s, 
Phot., Suid. pakxapirns frequently occurs as applied to one lately 
dead in late writers: see Ruhnken, Tim., p. 59. Lehrs, Popul. 
Aufs*., p. 344. Doric form fapepitas: Phot. paxapiras. paxapia 
““ Blessedness ”’, the land of the Blessed, i.e. the dead, is only used 
in a humorous sense in such phrases as dzay’ és waxapiav (Ar. Eq. 1151), 
Barn és paxapiav. So, too, is és 6ABiav. ws els paxaplav’ To els abou, 
Phot. (waxapia, the name of a sacrificial cake—Harp. veyAara—occurs 
in modern Greek usage as a cake used at funerals, Lob., Agl. 879). 

11 The punishment of Ixion for his ingratitude to Zeus consisted 
according to the older form of the story in his being fastened to a winged 
wheel and then being whirled through the air. That Zeus érap- 
tapwoev him (Sch. Eur., Ph. 1185) must then be a later story or one 
which did not become current till later: not until A.R. iii, 61 f., is 
there any mention of Ixion in Hades, though after him frequently ; 
cf. Kliigmann, Annali d. Inst., 1873, pp. 93-5. (The analogy with 
the punishment of Tantalos and its displacement from the upper 
world to Hades is obvious; see Comparetti, Philol. 32, 237.) 

12 Aesch., Eum.2731.; cf. Supp. 230 f. The fact that in this passage 
the poet says éxe? duxaler taumdAacnual’, ws Adyos, Zeds addAdos 
simply shows that he is not simply following his own ideas in this 
fancy of a judgment in the other world (od« é€yuos 6 pddos). It does 
not in the least suggest (as Dieterich, Nek. 126, seems to think) that 
he is reproducing popular tradition or could be so doing. Only theo- 
logical doctrines, at that time at least, knew anything of such a judg- 
ment in the future life upon the deeds of this: it is theiy Adyos that 
Aesch. is following (in this one point). See below, p. 425. 

13 Gorg. 523 A ff. (whence Axtoch. 371 B ff., etc.). When Plato 


IN OTS LOR CHS Pl Re VLE 247 


keeps closer to popular belief, in Ap. 41 A, he speaks of the judges in 
Hades, Minos, Rhadamanthys, Aiakos xat TpimtodAepos Kai ddrdAor 
daot TOV HurOewy Sixaror eyévovto ev TH Eavtov Biw. He says nothing 
of a judgment given on the deeds done in this life, and clearly does not 
imply any decision as to the good or evil deserts of those who have 
just left the upper world and come down to Hades. We should be 
much rather led to suppose that those aAnOds sixaortat, oimep Kal 
A€yovrat exe? dixdlew exercise their powers as judges among the dead, 
too, and decide between them in their disputes just as Minos does in 
the Nekyia of A 568-71, and as Rhadamanthys still does in Pi., O. 
ii, 83 ff., on the paxdpwv vaécos. Only the number of those who have 
this wide authority below is extended (in Plato) almost indefinitely. 
The process seems to have been as follows: the allusions in the Odyssey 
were taken up and in the course of the elaboration of the picture of 
Hades the number was enlarged of those who like Minos are patterns 
of justice among tne dead and give judgment among them. Then 
philosophico-poetical speculation (perhaps not without Egyptian in- 
fluence) about a judgment in the next world handed over to this 
increased number of judges in Hades the office of judging the conduct 
during their lifetime of those who have just entered Hades.—The 
selection of judges is not hard to understand. Aiakos, Rhadamanthys, 
and Minos are regarded as patterns of justice: Dem. 18,127. Minos 
as judge in Hades was taken from 4 568 ff. KRhadamanthys is known 
to 6 564 as dwelling among those who have been translated alive 
to Elysion. There he is—not judge: there is nothing there to judge, 
but—wdpedpos of Kronos, acc. to Pi., O. ii, 83. As soon as men 
began to transfer Elysion to Hades (of which more later) Rhad. also 
found his place there. His fame as the most just of judges (see 
rari, Acipwyres, 2315/1,8p..9o-K.];  Pli, Lg. 948 B, etc.;° cf. also 
Plu., Thes. 16 ad fin.) allowed him easily to find his place next to Minos 
as judge over the dead. Aiakos, too, as a model of evoéBera (Isoc. 
9, 14, etc.), lawgiver to Aegina, arbitrator among the gods themselves 
(Pi., J. viii, 24 f.), seemed naturally called to be a judge among the 
dead. His position as judge, however, was never so secure as that 
of Minos and Rhadamanthys. Pindar, though he often speaks of 
Aiakos and the Aiakidai gives no hint of a special position held by 
Aiakos in the next world. Isoc. 9, 15, Aédyerat mapa ILTAovrTwve Kai 
Kopyn peyloras tipas €xwv mapedpeverv exeivors where nothing is implied 
as to his office of judge but merely to the honour done to Aiakos in 
being given a seat near the ruling pair (cf. Pi., O. 1, 83, of Rhad. ; 
Ar., Ra. 765, there is a rule in Hades that the best artist AauBaver 
Opdvov tod ITXovVtTwvos €€7s. Proedria of the Mystai in Hades, etc.). 
Aiakos is xAevdotyos of Hades: [Apollod.] 3, 12, 6, 10; Epigr. Gr., 
646, 4; P. Mag. Par. 1264 ff.; amvrAwpdes (cf. Hades himself as 
mudaptys, @ 368) in Luc., D. Mort. 13,3; 20,1,6; 22,3; De Luct. 4 ; 
Philops. 25 and Philostr., VA. 7, 31, p. 385 K. ‘“* Holder of the Key ” 
is an office of high distinction (suggested in the case of Aiakos perhaps 
by the cult offered to him together with chthonic powers): keys 
belong to many of the gods—Plouton himself, Paus. 5, 20, 3, and 
others; see Tafel and Dissen on Pi., P. 8, 4; in P. Mag. Par. 1403 
comes the trimeter, xAevSodxe Ilepcédacoa Taprdpovkepy. Itisdifficult 
to believe that the attribution of this remarkable office of distinction 
to Aiakos was a later invention than the apparently commonplace 
office of judge. It seems, in fact, that Eurip. in the Petrithoos 
(fr. 591 N.) made Aiakos the first to meet Herakles as he entered Hades, 
i.e. probably at the gate itself. It can hardly be anything but a 


248 NOTES TO) (GCHAPTE RG WVit 


reminiscence of Eurip. that suggested (not to Aristoph. himself— 
see Hiller, Heymes viii, 455—but to a well-read grammaticus) the 
name ‘‘ Aiakos ”’ as that of the person who meets Herakles at the very 
gate of Plouton in the Frogs (1. 464). Just because the story of Aiakos’ 
position as holder of the key at the gate of Hades was an old one and 
mentioned by respected authorities, the belief in his position as judge 
never quite prevailed, in spite of Plato. 

14 This is obviously Attic invention. Plato certainly mentions 
Triptolemos in addition to Minos and the other judges. But it seems 
that to the Athenians Minos was unacceptable as a type of justice 
(he was, especially on the stage, the object of bitter attacks as an enemy 
of the country; see Plu., Thes. 16), and they tried to substitute their 
own Triptolemos for him. in the triad of judges. Thus we find 
Triptolemos not beside Minos but in his place in a picture of the 
underworld on a vase from Altamura (Tript. Aiak. Rhad.), and in an 
analogous picture on an amphora at Karlsruhe (Aiak. Tript., the left 
side is broken off but prob. represented Rhadamanthys not Minos). 
Cf. Winkler, Darst. d. Unterwelt auf. unterital, Vasen, p. 37. For 
the rest, nothing suggests that the three judges on these vase-pictures 
pass judgment on the deeds of men done in their lifetime : in strictness 
nothing is implied about their giving judgments. What is certain 
is simply that they, as types of justice, éwt ratot rod ITovtTwvos 
oixobaw Ovpats (like the Mystai in Ar., Ra. 163): they enjoy the rights 
of wapedpor of the divine pair, and hence they are seated on @pdvor or 
didpou. 

# Ar., Ra. 145 ff., 273 ff ~‘““ Darkness and mud,“ erore- nee 
BopBopos, as manner and place of punishment for duvnrou kal atéAeoTou, 
are derived from Orphic teaching: Pl. Rp. 363 D; Olympiod. on 
Pl., Phd. 69 C. By an inaccurate extension of meaning this fate 
was said to threaten all aréAeoro. without distinction: Plu. 7. puyis 
ap. Stob. Fl. 120, 28 (4, 108, 2 Mein.); Aristid., 2leus. pe42 ae 
ii, 30 Keil; Plot., 1, 6} 6. Plotinos “undoubtedly hasmthe reuse 
interpretation of the reason for this strange form of punishment: 
the mud in which the uninitiated lie marks them out as px7) Kexabappeévous 
who have not shared in the purifications such as were offered by the 
Orphic initiation ceremonies. Hence they remain fixed for ever in 
their original foulness (and in darkness because of their ignorance of 
the @eia). Itis, in fact, an allegorical punishment which has no meaning 
outside the range of Orphic doctrines of katharsis and atonement. 
Aristoph. transfers it to those who have seriously transgressed the 
laws of city or religion, for whom it was unsuitable: this only shows 
that an appropriate penalty in Hades for crimes against civil society 
had not yet been invented. It had evidently been thought sufficient 
to say generally that the acefeis (or at least the more heinous offenders) 
would be punished in Hades. This commonplace form of the opinion 
is probably to be regarded as a final echo of some definite theological 
doctrine which had become vulgarized and emptied of distinct meaning 
among the general public of the profane. The author of the first 
speech against Aristogeiton ({D.] 25) who speaks of the eis rods doefeis 
wo O7vatin Hades (53), confesses himself an adherent of Orpheus (11).— 
The pepunpévor dwell in Hades next to the palace of Plouton himself : 
Ar., Ra. 162 f., where they have the privilege of zpoeSpia, D.L. vi, 39. 
When a distinction between a y@pos edoeBdv and a y&pos aceBav in 
Hades began to be made, the initiated, in order that they might not 
be deprived of their privileged position, were given zpoedpia in the 
x. evoeB&v. In this way, e.g. the author of the Axioch. 371 D (who 


NOTH SaslOmaCH ARIE evil 249 


can hardly have written before the third century) tries to reconcile 
the hopelessly contradictory pretensions of the evceBeis and 
pepunpevoe to reward in Hades. 

as 'Sex. Emp., M. ix, 53. Suid. Ataydpas. 

17 Descents to Hades occurred in the Kpazatadoe of Pherecr. 
(i, p. 167 K.); the Barpaxyou and I’nputddns of Ar. ; [Pherecr.] Mera. 
(i, p. 174 K.) ; and probably also in the Tpoddmos of Cratin., etc.— 
On a vase from Eretria, fifth century, there is a representation of 
a repulsive scene of torture ; an old woman, naked and tied to a tree, 
is being tortured by threesatyrs. This, according to J. Zingerle, Archdol. 
epigr. Mittherl. a. Oesterveich, 18, 162 ff., is a parody of some incident 
from a comedy of the time, the plot of which was laid in Hades. But 
nothing in the picture suggests that the lower regions are the scene 
of this gruesome affair; and what would the satyrs be doing there ? 

18 Utopian existence in Hades: see in partic. [Pherecr.] MezaAda. 
(i, p. 174 K.). A pretext for such parodies was perhaps given by the 
Orphic promise of an everlasting carouse for the initiated at the 
ovupmeciov THv oaiwy in Hades (Pl., Rp. ii, 263 C, paxdpwv etwxia, 
Ar., fa. 85). Many details were borrowed from the descriptions of 
the reign of bliss upon earth in the golden age under Kronos’ rule 
which had long been a familiar subject of comedy (cf. Pdéschel, Das 
Mirchen vom Schlaraffenland, 7 ff.). The golden age in the dim past 
and the land of Elysion in the future always had many features in 
common. (See above, chap. ii,n.49.) From these traditional pictures 
of a spirit-world only to be met with in the long-vanished past or in 
the next world, the whole Greek literature of imaginary Utopias 
drew its sustenance (see my Griech. Roman, ii, § 2, 3). That literature 
was really an attempt to transpose those early fantasies of a land of 
spirits into real life and on to the inhabited world. 

19 got y” evdaiuwv moAts mapa TH epvOpav OddAatrav, Ar., Av. 144 f. 
(cf. Griech. Roman, 201 ff.). 

20 Aicuvy (the Acherousian lake: Eur., Alc. 443, and often after- 
wards). Charon: Ar., Ra. 137 ff., 182 ff., 185 ff.—oxdros cat BopBopos 
144 ff., 278 ff., 289 ff. Abode and life of the Mystai: 159, 163, 311 ff., 
454 ff. 

21 +6 Anns mediov, 1. 186. This is the earliest reference to Lethe 
of which we can be quite sure; but it is made so casually that it is 
obvious that Aristoph. is merely alluding to a story well known to his 
audience. Plato makes use of the A7@ns mwediov together with the 
"ApuéAns motamos (hence 621 C: AxyOns worayds) in the myth at the 
close of the Republic, x, 621 A, which is intended to illustrate 
and support the theory of palingenesia. Of course, this ingenious 
fancy was eminentiy suitable for use by adherents of the doctrine of 
metempsychosis; but there is nothing to show that it had been 
actually invented for the special benefit of this doctrine, i.e. by Orphics 
or Pythagoreans—as many have supposed. It is probable that it 
was nothing more originally but an attempt to explain symbolically 
the unconscious condition of the dpevnva xapyva. Does Theognis 
already (704, 705) refer to it ?—TIlepcedovnv ... are Bpdrots 
mapéxet ANOnv, BAantovea vdorw. Other references to the A7éns 
mUAat, Aadas Sdpor, AjOns Bdwp are all later: the A7yAns Bpovos in 
the account of Theseus’ journey to Hades in [Apollod.] Epzt. i, 24, is 
perhaps taken from older legendary material. (Bergk’s assertion, 
Opusce. ii, 716: ‘* The conception of Lethe’s fountain and stream is 
certainly ancient and popular: the well of Lethe is nothing but the 
fountain of the gods: whoever drinks of it forgets all sorrows, etc.,” 


250 NOEES) TO (CHART E Ripey it 


is entirely devoid of foundation in fact.) The river of Lethe was in 
later times localized on earth like Acheron and Styx; in the 
R. Limia of Gallaecia—far away on the western sea—men rediscovered 
the Oblivionis flumen (account of the year 137 B.c.: Liv., Epit. 55; 
Flor:, 1, 33, 12; App., Hisp. 72; Plu, Q#34, p? 272, D7 = cies 
3,§ 10; Plin., NH. 4, § 115. Absurd aetiology in Strabo, p. 153). 

22 This is presumably the meaning of the words which Pausanias 
(10, 28, 5) uses: his absurd mannerism makes him talk round the 
incident instead of simply describing it. (Much too artificial explana- 
tion of the circumstance in Diimmler, Delphika, p. 15 [1894].) 

23 Paus. 10, 28, 4. 

2t° See Appendix 111; 

25 Eurynomos: dark-blue body like a bluebottle, with prominent 
teeth, sitting on a vulture’s skin, Paus. 10, 28, 7. There seems to be 
no mention of him in literature: whether the statement of Pausanias 
that he was a daiuwrv r&v ev ‘’Acdov who eats the flesh of corpses off 
their bones, is anything more than a guess, we cannot tell. The 
vulture-skin indeed suggests that the nature of the Daimon who sits 
on it was related to the vulture. The fact that the vulture eats the 
flesh of corpses was often observed by the ancients: see Plu., Rom. 
9, etc.: Leemans on Horapollo, p. 177). Welcker (Kl. Schr. v, 117) 
sees in Eurynomos nothing but the “corruption ’”’ of the body, in 
which case he would be a purely allegorical figure. On the contrary 
he is much more likely to be one of those very concretely imagined 
spirits of Hell (only with a euphemistic name), like the lesser spirits 
Lamia, Mormo, Gorgyra, Empousa, etc. (a word about them will 
be found below, Append. vi). The artist must have known him 
from some local tradition. He devours the flesh of the corpse: thus 
alate epigram (Epigr. Gr. 647,16) calls the dead Aump iy daira Xapwu. 
Even in Soph., El. 542, we have: ‘’Avdns tuepov tréxvwyv tav éxeivns 
é€axe dSaicaoba (Welcker, Syil., p. 94). 

26° Paus.) 104-28,93.0 GO Se] Ann, aA eves elie on Gs 

27 The third century vase-paintings from Southern Italy also as 
a rule keep within the lhmits of the epic Nekyia. In addition to the 
few special types of the sinners undergoing punishment in Hades 
{(Sisyphos, Tantalos, the Danaids) we have allusions to the journeys to 
Hades of Theseus, Peirithoos, Herakles, and Orpheus. All attempts 
to read mystical or edifying intentions into these (as in Baumeister’s 
Denkm. 1926-30) are now regarded as completely mistaken. (Orpheus 
appears there not as founder and prophet of his mysteries but simply 
as the mythical singer who goes down to the underworld to rescue 
Eurydike with his singing. This is rightly maintained by Milchh6fer, 
Philol. 53, 385 ff., 54, 750 f., against Kuhnert, Arch. Jahyb. viii, 104 ff. ; 
Philol. 54, 193.) Nothing at all is suggested as to the fate of mankind 
in general. On a vase from Canosa a father and mother with a boy 
stand on the left of Orpheus: this, too, must belong to the region of 
mythology. (They cannot, however, be Dionysos and Ariadne as 
Winkler suggests, Darst. d. Unterw. auf. unterit. Vasen, 49. But 
itis difficult to imagine that they can be a family of Mystai as Milchhéfer 
supposes.) 


Pt 


ila 


or 


‘ 


1 ty 


a beh, , d * { 
tee (i Darah ses St: 


a 


' 
. 
7 » 
Z “ 
7 ' < F- < 
= s 
+ “ i - = 
> . 
, t z: . > 
a ‘ 
: ~- 7 ao 
os > 
~ 
_— = 
— -_ 
-_ # 
: ‘ » 
' 
+ 
- ‘ 

- « 
y 
‘ - 

. ; # 
‘ “> ~~ 
s ¥ . 
hy G 
= 
. is 
t 
‘ 
’ 
+ 
1 f ' 
. \ te 
; ‘ 
8 * 


GHA Bale Reval 
ORIGINS OF THE BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY 


THE THRACIAN WORSHIP OF DIONYSOS 


The popular conception of the continued existence of the 
souls of the dead, resting upon the cult of the dead, grew up and 
coalesced with a view of the soul derived from Homeric 
teaching on the subject, which was in essential, though 
unrecognized, contradiction with the cult of souls. The 
popular conception, unchanged in all essentials, remained in 
force throughout the coming centuries of Greek life. It did 
not contain within itself the seeds of further development ; 
it did not make any demand for better and deeper ideas of 
the character and condition of the soul in its independent 
life after its separation from the body. Still more, it had 
nothing in it that could have led beyond the belief in the 
independent future life of those souls to the conception of an 
everlasting, indestructible, immortal life. The continued life ~ 
of the soul, such as was implied in and guaranteed by the 
cult of souls, was entirely bound up with the remembrance of 
the survivors upon earth, and upon the care, the cult, which 
they might offer to the soul of their departed ancestor. If 
that memory dies out, if the venerating thoughtfulness of the 
living ceases, the soul of the departed is at once deprived of 
the sole element in which it still maintained its shadow of 
an existence. 

It was impossible, then, that the cult of the souls should 
produce out of itself the idea of a true immortality of the soul 
or of the independent life of the soul indestructible by its 
very nature. Greek religion as it existed among the people 
of Homer could not shape such a belief of its own accord, and 
even if it were offered from outside could not have accepted 
it. It would have meant giving up its own essential character. 

If the soul is immortal, it must be in its essential nature 
lke God; it must itself be a creature of the realm of Gods. 
When a Greek says ‘‘immortal”’ he says “God”: they are 
interchangeable ideas. But the real first principle of the 
religion of the Greek people is this—that in the divine ordering 
of the world, humanity and divinity are absolutely divided 
_ in place and nature, and so they must ever remain. A deep 


254 BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY 


gulf is fixed between the worlds of mortality and divinity. 
The relations between man and God promoted by religion 
depend entirely upon this distinction. The ethical ideas of the 
Greek popular conscience were rooted in the frank admission 
of the limitations proper to human capacity which was 
conditioned by an existence and a fate so different from that 
enjoyed by the gods; in the renunciation of all human 
claims to happiness and independence. Poetic fancies about 
the ‘‘ Translation’ of individual mortals to an unending life 
enjoyed by the soul still united to the body might make their 
appeal to popular belief ;. but such things remained miracles in 
which divine omnipotence had broken down the barriers of 
the natural order on a special occasion. It was but a miracle, 
too, if the souls of certain mortals were raised to the rank of 
Heroes, and so promoted to everlasting life. The gulf between 
the human and the divine was not made any narrower on 
that account; it remained unbridged, abysmal. The bare 
idea that the gulf did not in reality exist, that actually in 
the order of nature the inner man, the “Soul” of man 
belonged to the realm of gods; that as a divine being it had 
everlasting life—such an idea would involve further conse- 
quences about which no one can be in much doubt: it would 
have contradicted every single idea of Greek popular religion. 
It never could have become widely held and believed in by 
the Greek populace. 

Nevertheless, at a certain period in Greek history, and 
nowhere earlier or more unmistakably than in Greece, 
appeared the idea of the divinity, and the immortality 
implicit in the divinity, of the human soul. That idea belonged 
entirely to mystictsm—a second order of religion which, though 
little remarked by the religion of the people and by orthodox 
‘believers, gained a footing in isolated sects and influenced 
certain philosophical schools. Thence it has affected all 
subsequent ages and has transmitted to East and West the 
elementary principles of all true mysticism: the essential 
unity of the divine and the human spirit ; their unification 
as the aim of religion; the divine nature of the human soul 
and its immortality. 

The theory and doctrine of mysticism grew up in the soil 
of an older cult-practice. Greece received from abroad a 
deeply emotional religious cult, accompanied by practices 
that stimulated mysterious and extraordinary imaginings. 
The sparks of momentary illumination struck out by this 
faith were fed and fanned by mysticism till they became 
a vivid and enduring flame. For the first time, clearly dis- 


fore tT HRACTAN WORSHIP OF (DIONYSOS © 255 


cernible through its mystical wrappings, we meet with the 
belief in the indestructibility and eternal life of the soul: 
we meet it in the doctrines of a mystical sect which united in 
the worship of Dionysos. The worship of Dionysos must have 
sown the first seed of the belief in an immortal life of the soul. 
To explain how this may have happened; to make clear to 
the mind of the reader how the essence and inner reality of 
that worship was bound to stir up the belief in an immortal 
life—such is our next task. 


§ 2 


In the spiritual hfe of men and nations, it is not by any 
means the extravagant or, in one sense or another, the 
abnormal that is most difficult for our sympathetic under- 
standing to grasp. By clinging to a traditional and too narrow 
formula for the Greek spirit we make difficulties for ourselves ; 
but it is not really a matter of serious perplexity, if we reflect 
upon it, to understand how Greek religion at the height of its 
development regarded ‘‘madness”’ (wavia) as a religious 
phenomenon of wide-reaching importance. Madness, in this 
sense, 1s a temporary destruction of physical balance, a 
condition in which the self-conscious spirit is overwhelmed, 
‘““ possessed ”’ by a foreign power, as our authorities explain 
it to us. This madness “ which comes not from mortal weak- 
ness or disease, but from a divine banishment of the common- 
place ’’1 found effective application in the mantic and telestic 
arts. Its effects were so common and well recognized that 
the truth and importance of such religious madness (entirely 
distinguishable from bodily disease) was treated as a fact of 
experience not merely by philosophers, but by the doctors 
themselves.” For us it. only remains obscure how such 
“ divine mania ”’ was fitted into the regular working order of 
the religious life ; the sensations and experiences themselves 
belonging to this condition are made intelligible enough by a 


whole host of analogies. In fact if the truth were told we »” 


should rather have to admit that it is easier for us to sympathize 
with such overflowing of sensation and all that goes with it 
than with the opposite pole of Greek religious life, the calm 
and measured composure with which man lifted up heart and 
eye to the gods, as the patterns of all life and the patrons of a 
serenity as brilliant and unmoved as that of the clear heavens 
themselves. 

But how came it that in the character of a single people 
such extravagance of emotion was combined with a fast- 
bound and regulated equilibrium of temper and behaviour ? 
The answer is that these opposing features sprang from two 


256 BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY 


different sources. They were not originally combined in 
Greece. The Homeric poems hardly give any hint of that 
overflowing of religious emotion which later Greek peoples 
knew and honoured as a heaven-sent madness. It spread 
among the Greeks themselves in the train of a religious 
agitation, we might almost say revolution, of which Homer 
records, at most, only the first faint essays. It had its origin 
in the religion of Dionysos, and in company with this religion 
enters as something new and strange into Greek life. 

The Homeric poems do not recognize Dionysos as belonging 
to the gods of Olympos; but they are aware of his existence. 
It is true they nowhere plainly 3 refer to him as the wine-god 
honoured in joyful festivals, but we read (in the narrative 
of Glaukos’ meeting with Diomedes) of the “ frenzied ”’ 
Dionysos and his “‘ Nurses’’ who were attacked by the 
Thracian Lykourgos.4 The Mainas, the frenzied woman of the 
Dionysos-cult, was such a well-known phenomenon, so familiar 
in men’s minds, that the word could be used in a simile to 
explain the meaning of something else.® In this form the 
worship of the god first came to the notice of the Greeks: 
this was the origin of all the other festivals of Dionysos that 
later Greece developed in so many different directions.® 
They learnt to know Dionysos Bakcheios, “‘ who makes men 
frenzied,’’‘ as he was worshipped in his own country. 

That the original home of Dionysos-worship was in Thrace, 
that his cult, popular among many of the Thracian peoples, § 
was particularly honoured among the southernmost of the 
‘Thracian stocks who were best known to the Greeks and 
lived on the coast between the mouths of the rivers Hebros 
and Axios and in the mountainous country behind—to all 
this the Greeks themselves bore frequent and manifold 
witness.? The god whose name the Greeks knew in its Greek 
form “‘ Dionysos”’ had, it appears, among the numerous 
and divided Thracian peoples various appellations of which 
those most familiar to the Greeks were Sabos and Sabazios.!® 
The Greeks must have known and remarked on the nature 
and worship of the god at an early period of their history. 
They may have met with him in Thrace itself. At all periods 
they had an extensive and varied intercourse with this 
country and must in the early days of their wanderings have 
passed through it on their way to their future home. They 
may have had further opportunities of knowing it from the 
Thracian races or tribes who, according to a few isolated 
legends, had dwelt in primitive times in certain localities 
of Central Greece. The ethnographical material of these 


falta Ne eWORSHIP Ob sDIONYSOS. $257 


legends was regarded as founded on fact by the great historians 
of the fifth and fourth centuries." 

The cult of this Thracian divinity differed in every particular 
from anything that we know of from Homer as Greek worship 
of the gods. On the other hand, it was closely related to the 
cult paid by the Phrygians, a people almost identical with 
the Thracians, to their mountain-mother Kybele. It was 
thoroughly orgiastic in character. The festival was held on 
the mountain tops in the darkness of night amid the flickering 
and uncertain light of torches. The loud and troubled sound 
of music was heard; the clash of bronze cymbals; the dull 
thunderous roar of kettledrums; and through them all 
penetrated the “maddening unison” of the deep-toned 
flute,!? whose soul Phrygian auléta: had first waked to life. 
Excited by this wild music, the chorus of worshippers dance 
with shrill crying and jubilation.1> We hear nothing about 
singing : }# the violence of the dance left no breath for regular 
songs. These dances were something very different from the 
measured movement of the dance-step in which Homer’s Greeks 
advanced and turned about in the Paian. It was in frantic, 
whirling, headlong eddies and dance-circles’* that these 
inspired companies danced over the mountain slopes. They 
were mostly women who whirled round in these circular 
dances till the point of exhaustion was reached ; 1° they were 
strangely dressed ; they wore bassarat, long flowing garments, 
as it seems, stitched together out of fox-skins ; 17 over these 
were doeskins,!® and they even had horns fixed to their heads.?9 
Their hair was allowed to float in the wind ; 2° they carried 
snakes sacred to Sabazios *! in their hands and brandished 
daggers or else thyrsos-wands, the spear-points of which were 
concealed in ivy-leaves.”” In this fashion they raged wildly 
until every sense was wrought to the highest pitch of excite- 
ment, and in the “sacred frenzy ”’ they fell upon the beast 
selected as their victim ** and tore their captured prey limb 
from Lmb. Then with their teeth they seized the bleeding 
flesh and devoured it raw. 

It is easy enough, by following poets’ descriptions and plastic 
representations of such scenes, to elaborate still further the 
picture of this nocturnal festival of fanatic enthusiasm. But, 
we must ask, what was the meaning of it all? We shall get 
nearest to the truth if we will exclude as far as possible all 
theories imported from unrelated provinces of thought and 
fix our attention solely on what, for the participants, was the 
result of it all—the result anticipated and consciously proposed 
by them, and therefore the recognized object, or, at least, one 

S 


at 
at? 
as 


258 BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY 


of the recognized objects of these strange proceedings. The 
participators in these dance-festivals induced intentionally 
in themselves a sort of mania, an extraordinary exaltation of 
their being. A strange rapture came over them in which they 
seemed to themselves and others “ frenzied ’’, “‘ possessed ’”’.?4 
‘This excessive stimulation of the senses, going even as far as 
jhallucination,2> was brought about, in those who were 
susceptible to their influence, by the delirious whirl of the 
dance, the music and the darkness, and all the other circum- 
stances of this tumultuous worship.?® This extreme pitch of 
excitement was the result intended. The violently induced 
exaltation of the senses had a religious purpose, in that such 
enlargement and extension of his being was man’s only way, 
as it seemed, of entering into union and relationship with the 
god and his spiritual attendants. The god is invisibly present 
among his inspired worshippers. At any rate, he is close at 
hand, and the tumult of the festival is to bring him completely 
into their midst.2”?. There are various legends about the dis- 
appearance of the god into another world and his return thence 
to mankind.?8 Every second year his return is celebrated, and 
it is just this Appearance, this ‘‘ Epiphany “’ of the god, that 
gives the reason and the motive of the festival. The Bull- 
God, in the most ancient and primitive form of the belief, 
appeared in person among the dancers,?® or else the imitated 
roaring of a bull produced by hidden “ Mimes of Terror ”’ 
served to suggest the invisible Presence.2° The worshippers, 
too, in furious exaltation and divine inspiration, strive after 
the god; they seek communion with him. They burst the 
physical barriers of their soul. A magic power takes hold of 
them ; they feel themselves raised high above the level of 
their everyday existence ; they seem to become those spiritual 
beings who wildly dance in the train of the god.*!_ Nay, more, 
/they have a share in the life of the god himself ; nothing less 


/ can be the meaning of the fact that the enraptured servants 
| of the god call themselves by the name of the god. The 


| 


i 


worshipper who in his exaltation has become one with the 
god, is himself now called Sabos, Sabazios.32. The super- 


' human and the infra-human are mingled in his person; like 


the frenzied god *? he throws himself upon the sacrificial 
animal to devour it raw. To make this transformation of their 
nature outwardly manifest, the participants in the dance- 
festival wear strange dress : they resemble in their appearance 
the members of the wild thiasos of the god ; °4 the horns they | 
set on their heads recall the horned, bull-shaped god himself, 
etc.2° The whole might be called a religious drama, since 


THE HRACTAN sWORSHIP (OF DIONYSOS " 259 


everything is carefully arranged so as to suggest to the 
imagination the actual presence of the mysterious figures from 
the spirit world. At the same time, it is something more than 
mere drama, for it can hardly be doubted that the players 
themselves were possessed by the illusion of living the life of 
a strange person. The awe-inspiring darkness of night, the 
music, especially that of the Phrygian flute, to which the 
Greeks attributed the power of making its hedrers “ full of the 
god ’’,3® the vertiginous whirl of the dance—all these may 
very well, in suitably disposed natures,?? have really led to 
a state of visionary exaltation in which the inspired person 
saw all external objects in accordance with his fancy and 


imagination. Intoxicating drinks, to which the Thracians were | 


addicted, may have increased the excitement ; 38 perhaps they 


even used the fumes derived from certain seeds, with which | 
the Scythians and Massagetai knew how to intoxicate them-| 
selves.2° We all know how even to day in the East the smoke 
of hashish may make men visionaries and-excite-religious 


raptures 4° in which the whole of nature is transformed for the 
enthralled dreamer. “ Only when thus” possessed did the 
Bakchai drink’milk and honey out of the rivers; their power 
ceased when they came to themselves again,” ‘says Plato.” 
For them the earth flowed with milk and honey, and the air 
was filled with the sweet odours of Syria. Hallucination 
was accompanied by a state of feeling in which pain itself was 
only an added stimulus-to-sensation or in which the visionary 
became completely insensible to pain, as is not unusual in 
such states.of exaltation. 4% 

Every detail confirms the picture of a condition of wild 
excitement in which the limitations of ordinary life seemed to 
be abolished. These extraordinary phenomena transcending 
all normal experience were explained by saying that the 
soul of a person thus “ possessed’ 44 was no longer “ at 
home” * but “abroad ”’, having left its body behind. This 
was the literal and primitive meaning understood by the 
Greek when he spoke of the “ ekstasis’’ of the soul in such 
orgiastic conditions of excitement.*® This ekstasis is “‘a brief 
madness ’’, just as madness is a prolonged ekstasis.4” But the 
ekstasis, the temporary alienatio mentis of the Dionysiac cult 
was not thought of as a vain purposeless wandering in a region 
of pure delusion, but as a Aieromania,*® a sacred madness in 
which the soul, leaving the body, winged its way to union with 
the god.4® It is now with and in the god, in the condition of 
enthoustasmos ; those who are possessed by this are €vGeo. ; 
they live and have their being in the god.°® While still retaining 


ae 


— 


260 BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY 


the finite Ego, they feel and enjoy to the full the infinite 
powers of all life. 

In ekstasis the soul is liberated from the cramping prison of 
the body ; it communes with the god and develops powers 
of which, in the ordinary life of everyday, thwarted by the 
body, it knew nothing. Being now a spirit holding communion 
with spirits it is able to free itself from Time and see what only 
the spiritual eye beholds—things separated from it in time 
and space. The enthusiastic worship of the Thracian servants 
of Dionysos gave birth to the inspiration mantiké,*+ a form 
of prophecy which did not (like prophecy as it invariably 
appears in Homer) have to wait for accidental, ambiguous 
and external signs of the god’s will, but on the contrary 
entered immediately into communion with the world of gods 
and spirits and in this heightened spiritual condition 
beheld and proclaimed the future. This power belonged to 
men only in ekstasis, in religious madness, when “ the God 
enters into men’’. The Maznads are the official exponents of 
this mantiké of inspiration.®* It is simple and intelligible 
enough that the Thracian cult of Dionysos, which was through- 
out a means of stimulating men to a condition of extreme. 
exaltation that they might enter into direct communion with 
the spirit-world, also encouraged the prophesying of inspired 
seers, who in their rapt exaltation and frenzy became 
clairvoyant. Among the Thracian Satrai there was a tribe 
called the Bessoi who produced prophéta1, and these were in 
charge of an oracle of Dionysos situated on the top of a high 
mountain. The prophetess of this temple was a woman who 
gave prophecies like the Pythia at Delphi, that is to say, ina 
state of rapt ecstasy. This, at least, is what Herodotos says,*8 
and we have many other accounts of Thracian mantiké and 
its close connexion with the orgiastic cult of Dionysos.*4 


§ 3 


The Greek type of religion, perhaps from its very origin, 
certainly at the earliest period of its development in which 
it becomes accessible to our observation—the period to which 
the Homeric poems belong—had no leaning to anything 
resembling an excited emotional worship like that practised 
by the Thracians in their orgiastic cult of Dionysos. The whole 
movement wherever it came to their notice must have struck 
the Greeks of Homer as something strange and barbaric, 
attractive only through the interest ever attached to the 
unknown. And yet—the fact is certain—the thrilling tones 


Pe AClANa WORSHIP OR DIONYSOS. 261 


of this “‘ enthusiastic ’’ worship awoke an answering chord deep 
in the hearts of many Greeks ; in spite of all that was strange 
they must have recognized a familiar accent in it—something 
that, however outlandishly expressed, could appeal to the 
common nature of mankind. | 
This enthusiastic Thracian cult was in fact only a special ex- 
pression, conforming to their peculiar national characteristics, 
of a religious impulse that is to be found all over the earth, 
and which breaks out in every stage of civilization. It_must, 
indeed, answer to an instinctive need of human nature, and be 
rooted in the physical and psychical.constitution of man..._In 
moments of supreme exaltation man felt the presence above 
him and around him of mighty powers that seemed to express 
themselves even in his own personal life. These he was no 
longer to confront in pious and fearful awe, passively confined 
within the limits of his own separate personality ; he was 
to break down every barrier and clasp them to his heart, 
making them his own in unconditional surrender. Mankind 
needed not to wait for that strange product of poetry and 
thought, Pantheism, before it could experience this instinctive 
need to lose its own private existence, for a moment, in the 
divine. There are whole races of men, not otherwise among the 
most distinguished members of the human family, who have 
a special tendency and gift for such expansion of the human 
consciousness into the supra-personal. They have an urgent 
impulse to such rapt and visionary states, and they regard the 
enticing or horrifying visions that visit them in those states 
as actual experiences of another world into which their “ souls ”’ 
have for a brief while been transported. In every part of the 
world there are peoples who regard such ecstatic exaltation as 
the only true religious act, the only way of intercourse with the 
spirit-world available to man, and base their religious per- 
formances principally upon such ceremonial as experience has 
shown to be most capable of inducing the ecstasies and visions. 
The means most commonly adopted by such peoples to produce 
the desired intensity and stimulation of feeling is a violently 
excited dance prolonged to the point of exhaustion, in the 
darkness of night, to the accompaniment of tumultuous 
music. Sometimes whole companies: of the people induce in 
themselves a state of religious excitement by wild and furious 
dancing.®® More often selected individuals, specially 
susceptible to such impressions, suffer their “ souls’ to be 
drawn out by music and dancing and every other sort of 
stimulating influence, and made to visit the world of spirits 
and gods.° = Such “‘ magicians ”’ and priests who can place 


= SRNR ATT 
SEPT 


262 BELIB ES IN VIMO RAI i iays 


themselves in immediate contact of soul with the spirit world, 
are to be found all over the globe. The shamans of Asia, 
the ‘‘ medicine men’”’ of North America, the Angekoks of 
Greenland, the Butios of the Antilles, the Piajes of the Caribbees 
are merely special cases of a universal type, essentially the 
same in all its different manifestations. Africa, Australia, 
and the island world of the Pacific are equally familiar with 
them. Both their performances and the range of ideas that 
lie behind them belong to a type of religious experience that 
occurs with the regularity of a natural phenomenon, and must 
therefore not be regarded as abnormal. Even among Christian 
peoples of long standing, the smouldering fires of this primitive 
and emotionai type of religion are ever ready to burst out 
again in renewed flames, and those who feel their warmth are 
kindled to a, more than human sense of life and vigour.®’ 
Conventionality and traditionalism, even the substitution of 
a cold and spurious mimicry for real feeling, are of course 
quite compatible with a form of religion which consists so 
much in the display of emotion. But even so, the most 
cautious observers °$ have declared that by such violent 
stimulation of every sense the “ magicians ”’ are thrown into 
a state of quite unfeigned exaltation. In accordance with the 
character and content of their normal modes of thought, the 
hallucinations to which the magicians are subject differ 
in different cases; but as a general rule their frenzy opens to 
them a way of immediate intercourse, frequently of complete 
communion of being, with the gods. Thisis the only explana- 
tion which will account for the fact that, like the inspired 
Bakchantes of Thrace, the magicians and priests of so many 
peoples are called by the name of the divinity to whom their 
“enthusiastic ’’ worship elevates them.®® The impulse to 
union with God, the extinction of the individual in the divine 
—these are what form the fundamental points of contact 
between the mysticism of the most highly cultivated and 
talented peoples and the emotional religion of primitive 
“savages ”’. Even the external machinery of excitement and 
stimulation are not always dispensed with by the mystics : °° 
they are always the same as those with which we are already 
familiar in the orgiastic religion of primitive peoples— 
music, the giddy whirl of the dance, narcotic stimulants. 
Thus (to take the most striking example out of many that 
might be given) the dervishes of the Orient whirl round in 
their violent dances to the rattle of drums, and the sound of 
flutes till the last stages of excitement and exhaustion are 
reached. The purpose of it all is vividly expressed by the 


THE THRACIAN WORSHIP OF DIONYSOS 263 


most fearless of all the mystics, Jelaleddin Rumi, in the 
words: “ He that knows the power of the dance dwells in 
God ; for he has learnt that Love can slay. Allahhu!.. .” 


g 4 


Wherever a cultus of this kind, making its aim and object 
the evocation of ecstatic raptures, has taken root—whether 
in whole races of men or in religious communities—there we 
find in close alliance with it, whether as cause or effect or 
both, a peculiarly vital belief in the life and power of the soul 
of man after its separation from the body. Our comparative 
glance over the analogous phenomena of other lands has shown 
us that the exalted worship offered to “‘ Dionysos ”’ among the 
Thracians was only a single variety of a method, familiar to 
more than half the human race, of getting into touch with 
the divine by a religious “ enthousiasmos’’. We therefore 
expect to find among the Thracians a specially strong and 
well-developed belief in the life of the “‘soul’’. And in fact 
we find Herodotos telling us of a Thracian tribe, the Getai, 
whose belief ‘“ made men immortal ’’.®* They had only one 
god, Zalmoxis by name.®* To this god, who dwelt in a 
cavernous mountain, all the dead of their race, they believed, 
would one day be gathered and have immortal life.64 The 
same belief was held by other Thracian tribes, too.® This 
creed seems to have had in view the “ transplantation ” ° 
of the dead to a blessed life in the hereafter. But, it would 
seem, this transplantation was not perhaps for ever. We hear 
of the belief that the dead would “ return ”’ ®” from the other 
world ; and that this idea existed among the Getai is implied 
(though the narrator does not clearly understand this) by the 
absurd pragmatizing fable which Herodotos got from the 
Greek settlers on the Hellespont and the Pontos.** In this 
story (as often in later accounts too) Zalmoxis is actually a 
slave and pupil of Pythagoras of Samos. Whoever invented 
this fairy-tale was led to it by observing the close relationship 
between the Pythagorean doctrine of the soul and the Thracian 
belief. In the same way later observers of the same fact 
reversed the positions and made Pythagoras the pupil of the 
Thracian.®® In any case the fact cannot to be doubted that 
in Thrace people thought they had found again the special 
doctrine of Pythagoras as to the transmigration of souls. 
The belief in the ‘“‘ return ’”’ of the soul must be interpreted 
as meaning that the souls of the dead return to life in new 
bodies and resume their life on earth, to this extent being 


264 BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY 


“immortal ’’. Only so interpreted could it have been held 
for a moment without coming into conflict with obvious 
appearances. An allusion in Euripides seems to regard as 
Thracian such a belief in a recurrent incarnation of the soul.?° 

We should be justified in expecting to find an inner con- 
nexion between this Thracian belief in immortality, which 
seems to have made such an impression on our Greek inform- 
ants, and the religion and “ enthousiastic ’’ worship of the 
same people. Nor are traces lacking of a close association 
of the Thracian worship of Dionysos and Thracian cult of the 
Souls.*4. But if we ask why the religion of the Thracian 
Dionysos was attended by a belief in the independent, indes- 
tructible life of the soul, a life not confined to the period of its 
sojourn in the body which at present envelopes it, the answer 
must be sought not in the nature of the god to whom the cult 
was Offered (that nature being, in fact, insufficiently known to 
us) but in the nature of the cult itself. The object of that cult 
—we might almost say its special task—was to exalt its 
worshippers to a state of “ ekstasis ’’ in which their “ souls ” 
should be forcibly delivered from the normal circle of their 
human and circumscribed being, and raised as pure spirits to 
communion with the god and his company of spirits. The 
true “‘ Bakchai ”’ 7--those who were really cast into a state 
of religious madness—found in the rapture of these orgies a 
new province of experience open before them : they.experience 
things of which they could give no account in the fully 
conscious light of ordinary day. There can be no doubt that 
the experiences and visions that their “ ekstasis ’ gave them 
were regarded by them as the plainest and most literally 
real of facts.73 The belief in the existence and life of a second 
self distinct from the body and separable from it was already 
encouraged by the “ experiences’ of the separate existence 
and independent behaviour of that self in dreams and fainting 
fits.?4 How much more strongly and vividly must this belief 
have been confirmed for those who in the intoxication of those 
delirious dances had “ experienced ”’ for themselves how the 
soul, freed from the body, could participate in the joys and 
terrors of the divine existence ; not indeed the whole man, 
body and soul together, but the soul by itself and in separation 
from the body—the spiritual being invisibly living within 
the man. The sense of its own divinity, its eternity, which 
had been blindingly revealed to it in ‘‘ ekstasis’’, might be 
developed by the soul into a lasting persuasion that it was 
indeed of a divine nature, and called to a divine life which it 
would enjoy for ever as soon as it was freed from the body, 


be TPKACTIAN (WORSHIP) OF -DIONYSOS. 265 


just as it had then enjoyed it fora moment. No mere intel- 
lectual arguments could give such powerful support to a 
spiritualism of this kind as the personal experience itself 
which, even in this life supplied a foretaste of what the 
individual was one day to enjoy as his own for ever. 

In some such way as this, the persuasion of an independent, 
continued existence of the soul after the death of its body was 
developed into a belief in the divinity and immortality of the 
soul. In all such cases it was almost inevitable that the 
naive distinction between “‘ body ”’ and “‘soul’’, natural to 
simple-minded peoples and individuals, should harden into 
an opposition between the two. The descent from the heights 
where the ecstatic and emancipated soul enjoyed its thrilling 
delights was too sudden: the body could not but seem a 
burden and a hindrance, almost an enemy of the heaven-born 
soul. Disparagement of the ordinary existence of every day, 
a turning aside from this hfe—these are the natural results of 
such an advanced spiritualism, even though it may have no 
speculative basis, when it influences so profoundly the 
religious temperament of a people as yet untroubled by the 
subtleties of a scientific culture. A trace of such a depreciation 
of the earthly life of mankind in comparison with the joys 
of a free spirit-existence is to be found in what Herodotos and 
other narrators tell of certain Thracian tribes 7 who receive 
the new-born among their kinsfolk with mourning, and bury 
their dead with joyful acclamation, for the latter are now 
beyond the reach of all pain, and are living “in perfect 
happiness ’’’.7® The cheerfulness with which the Thracians 
faced death in battle 7? was explained by the persuasion which 
they held that death was only an entrance into a higher life 
for the soul. They were even credited with a real desire for 
death, for to them “ dying seemed so fair ’’.78 


85 

Further than this the Thracians—who never quite outgrew 
a sort of semi-animated torpor of the intellect—could not go 
on the way marked out for them. The seed of a mystical 
form of religion that existed in the ecstatic dance-orgies of 
Dionysos-worship never came to fruition. We never feel 
with them that we are being taken beyond the region of vague 
unconscious emotion; it is but a passing illumination that 
for a moment of wild excitement reveals the near presence 
of overwhelming spirit-forces. 

Not until the flames of such ecstatic worship were fed and 
nourished by a people of more independent and developed 
spiritual life, could fitful suggestions be welded into deep and 


~— 


Vv 


266 BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY 


enduring thought. Reflexion upon the nature of the world and 


of God, the changing and deceptive flow of appearance with 
the indestructible One Reality behind it ; the conception of 
a divinity that is One, a single light that, divided into a 
thousand rays and reflectéd from everything that is, achieves 
its unity again in the soul of man: such thoughts as these, 
allied to the dim half-conscious impulse of an enthusiastic 
dance-worship, might allow the pure waters of the stream of 
mysticism to run clear at last, freed from the turbid and un- 
satisfying enthusiasm of popular religious practices. 

Thus, for example, among the stern and rigid-minded 
peoples of Islam, with their stiff, uncompromising Monotheism, 
there arose, no one knows whence, the inspired dance-orgies 
of the Dervishes, which then spread far and wide carrying 
with them the mystical doctrine of the Sifis, that child of the 
profound mind of India. Man is God; God is All: such 
was the pronouncement of the inspired poetry—the special 
contribution in particular of Persia to this religion of mystic 
ecstacy—now in the most transparent simplicity, now in the 
most gorgeous magnificence of imagery. In the ecstatic 
dance, which in this case remained in organic connexion with 
the mystical doctrine (as the soil of the maternal earth with 
the flowers which she puts forth) new strength was ever being 
added to the spiritual superstructure. Mystical theory was 
invigorated by the practical experience, in heightened con- 
sciousness, of an internal and unquenchable source of undying 
power and might. The veil of the world was torn aside for 
the inspired worshipper; the All-One became sensible and 
intelligible for him; it poured into his own being; the 
“ deification ’’ of the Mystai was realized in him. ‘‘ Who 
knows the power of the Dance dwells in God’’.. . 

Many years before all this, a process of development was 
completed on Greek soil which has no closer parallel than the 
special phase of Oriental religion just referred to. Greek 
religion never indeed (so long at least as the independence of 
Greek life lasted) went to the extravagant lengths of Oriental 
mysticism. Even the sense of the infinite had to be expressed 
by the Greek imagination in plastic form. But for all that, 
on Greek soil, in the ecstatic Cult of Dionysos, under the 
influence of Greek reflexion upon God, the world and mankind, 
the seeds which previously lay undeveloped in the womb of 
that cult were unfolded in a mystical doctrine, whose guiding 
principle was the divinity of the human soul and the infinite- 
ness of its life in God. It was from this source that Greek 
philosophy found the courage to advance a doctrine of the 
immortality of the soul. 


NOTES =O. CHART ER ar Vildd 


Bebe LAG 200 AG 

=-e.2,,Cael. Aurel. (i-eSoranos), Word.-Chr. in § 144 ff. Aret. 
Chron. Pass. i, 6, p. 84 Ktihn [vol. 24]. 

8’ Even the late interpolated passages & 325, w 74, are not quite 
conclusive. Apart from these the statement of Sch. « 198 applies 
strictly throughout both poems: 706 pi) mapadsddvar ‘’Opnpov Ardovucor 
olvov edperyv, Lehrs, Arist.3, p. 181. 

4 Z 132 ff. The scene is evidently meant to be a Bacchic festival. 
This is shown by the @vo6Aa, which the Atwvvaoro teOFvac let fall out 
of their hands. All the rest is obscure. Even in antiquity no one 
knew who the 7:0fvar of Dionysos really were, and hence alternative 
suggestions were all the more numerous: cf. Nauck, Fr. Tvag.*, p. 17. 
Voigt, in Roscher’s Mythol. Lex. i, 1049. It can hardly be necessary 
(with Sch. A on Z 129) to deduce from the reference to rifjvar that 
Dionysos himself was regarded as viHmos éte kal mais. His former 
7tOqvac follow him in the Bacchic festival even after he has grown up, 
exactly as in h. Hom. xxvi, 3, 7-10. ai Atovdcov tpodoi as the frenzied 
mob worshipping the god, 7@ 0€@ dpy:alovoa (in Thessaly), come in 
D.S. 5, 50, 4, in a parallel narrative to the story of Lykourgos and 
the Mainads. With the conception of the god as Accvirns neither his 
leap into the sea (Z 135 ff.), nor esp. the adj. pamvopévoro (132) are 
in harmony. This last word does certainly give us pause. The 
accounts provided. by later ages of the madness of Dionysos are 
obviously made up from the lines of Homer and are therefore of no 
use to us (already ap. Eumelos in the Evpwaia, Schol. AD. Z 131; 
then Pherekydes, Achaios év ’’Ipud:: Phid., Pret., p. 36 [Nauck, 
yi rde eps oll) 6 Cyc.3. Apollod.}- 111,05, 1; is; prob. denved 
pppiiel nerec.aas ate also: bhilistos (7.57, FHG.i ;~Pl Le. 672 Bs 
Nic. ’Oduax. fy. 30 Schn., etc.). Scholastic interpreters even thought 
of a hypallage: pawopévowo = paviotoiod, Baxyelas mapacKevaotiKod," 
meno A, 491325 ci. Sch. By p. 182a, 43: f. Bk “And, indeed, there is 
certainly in this case a sort of mythological or sacramental hypallage : 
the state of mind brought about by the god in those who surround 
him is reflected back on to the god himself (pwawdpevor Latupo, E., 
tae 130: ci, the mad nurses of Dionysos, Nonn., D. ix, 38 ff.). It 
would not be hard to parallel this (e.g. Dionys. who makes men drunk 
is represented as himself drunk, Ath. 428 E, etc.). 

5 X 460, peydporo du€covto pawdds ton, waddAopéevn Kpadinv. The 
evidence of this passage for the familiarity of Homer’s audience with 
the nature of the Mainads cannot be set aside as Lob., Agi. 285, tries 
to do. The word could only be used as an eixdy if the thing were 
often before men’s eyes. paivds, indeed, is even something different 
from, and more specialized than pavopévn (Z 389). 

§ The view that paiveoGar was primitive in the cult of D., the wine, 
etc., being added later, was definitely put forward in 1825 by O. Miiller 
(KI. Schr. ii, 26 ff.) arguing against J. H. Voss. But it is only in quite 
recent times that in tracing the origin of the religion of Dionysos 
occasional inquirers have taken this view as their starting point: 
cf. esp. Voigt in his noteworthy treatment of Dionysos in Roscher’s 
Myth. Lex. i, 1029 ff. 


7 6s paiveoOa evayer avOpwrovs, Hdt. iv, 79. 


268 NOLES* 10> CHARLE Keay iE 


8 E.g. the Odrysai, who, however, lived further north in the Hebros 
valley ; Mela, ii, 17, mentions distinctly the mountain chains of 
Haimos, Rhodope, and Orbelos as sacris Liberi patris et coetu 
Maenadum celebratos. 

PRICOD aA cleo ets 

10 Sabazios: ZaBdliov tov Ardvucov of Opaxes xadodow Sch. Ar., 
Ves. 93: cf. Sch."Ar., Lisi 388 5 .D:S.34,°4,)1 5 Harp. Sabot ieee 
Polyh. ap. Macr. i, 18, 11 (Sebadius: cf. Apul., M. viii, 25, p. 150, 11 Ey. 
The original form of this name seems to have been Savos, Savadtos, 
Kretschmer, Einleitung in. d. griech. Spr. 195 f.; Usener, Gotiernamen 
44), Sabos, Phot: ‘p..495, 11-12) Pors.) Hesych.*siv.t, SOrpi game 
49, 2, etc. The fact that others could call Sabazios a Phrygian god 
(Amphitheos 7. ‘HpaxdAeias ’ ap. Sch. Ar., Av. 874; Str. 470; Hsch. 
s.v.), only serves to bring out more clearly the opinion, unanimously 
held even in antiquity, that the Thracians and the Phrygians were 
closely related. Sabazios (besides being identified with Helios: 
Alex. Polyh. l.c.; cf. Soph. fv. 523 N.), as the supreme and almighty 
god of the Thracians, was even called Zebs aBdlios (Val. Max. 
i, 3, 2), esp. on inss. (a few are given in Rapp, Dionysoscult [Progr.]} 
p- 21); cf. also ins. from Peiraeus “Ed. ’Apy. 1883, p. 245; Ins. 
Per am. i, 248, 33, 49; from Pisidia, Papers of the Amer. School at 
Athens, ii, p. 54, 56. Jovt Sabazio, Orelli, Ins. 1259). We even find 
Zevs Baxyos, Zevds ‘Hos (BCH. vi, 189).—The name ZLaBalios was 
derived from caBalew = edalew, dia TOv yevopevov wept adrov evacpov 
(Qecacpdv): Sch. Ar., Av. 874; Lys. 388. So, too, Baxxyos was on 
this view only another way of expressing the same meaning; since 
this name also was derived by the ancients from Bdlew = edalew 
(it is really from the root Fay (dyéw) Baxyos, with “ affrication ”’ ; 
a reduplicated form of it is FuFayos, ’’Iaxyos, taxyéw, iaxyew; Cf. 
Curtius, Griech. Etym.®, p. 460, 576). Other names of the Thracian 
Dionysos are the following: Baccapevs (Bdcoapos, Orph., H. 45, 2), 
derived from Baoodpa the long dress (made of skin ?) worn by the 
Baooapides = Opaxiac Baxya, AB. 222, 26 f.; Hsch. s.v. Baoodpar 
and EM.s.v. (the last compiled from Orion and Sch. Lyc. 771). Other 
accounts (not contradicting in this point the statement of Hsch.) 
made it the dress worn by the god himself: Sch. Pers. i, 101. (The 
Bacoapevs was generally described as bearded and even senili specie, 
like the representation of Dionysos himself in the oldest Greek art: 
Macr. i, 18, 9.) If Bacoapevs means “‘ the wearer of the long fox-skin ”’ 
we should be strongly reminded of the—also Thracian—god 
Zarporkts (Zarpo€ts), whose name was derived from fladpds = Sopa 
apxtov (Porph., VP. 14, though this comes only from Antonius 
Diogenes 6), and probably means “‘ he who is cloaked in the bearskin ” 
(see Fick, Spracheinh. d. Indog. Europ., p. 418; Hehn, Culturpfianz. 
428 E.T.).—Tiywv a name of Dionysos, EM. 231, 28: perhaps a name 
given to the god in the city Gigonos mentioned in the same 
passage, and the axpa Iiywvis at the western end of the Thracian 
Chalkidike.—EM. 186, 32, is too short to be intelligible: Bada. 
dtatrotktAos. Kal Tov Avdvucov Opaxes.—Avados Arovvaos mapa Ilaioow, 
Hesych. 

1 At any rate the people whom Thuc., Ephoros, and others call 
Thracians and regarded as having been once settled in Phokis, Boeotia, 
etc., are undoubtedly to be considered Thracians—and not the 
impossibly honest and exemplary people, a creation of the fancy, the 
““Thracians of the Muses’”’, alleged to be quite distinct from the 
real Thracian peoples, of whom we have heard so much since K. O. 


ING TE Spee lLOs GHA L Dro Rae Vi LUE 269 


Miiller (Ovchom. 379 ff.) introduced the idea. Antiquity only knew 
of one kind of Thracian. In the Homeric poems they are not so 
different from the Greeks in civilization as they were in later times, 
when we know them from the accounts of Herod. and Xen. For 
all that they are the same people. They seem in the course of time 
to have degenerated, or rather they have not shared in the progress 
made by others and so have remained backward (even behind their 
Phrygian relatives who wandered to Asia Minor and achieved a higher 
culture under Semitic influence). In fact, like the Keltoi, they were 
never able to get beyond a condition of semi-civilization. 

12 uavias éemaywyov opokAay. Aesch. in the "Héwvod ap. Str. 470-1 
(fr. 57), is the locus classicus for the music in the Thracian festival of 
Dionysos. Apart from this it is impossible to distinguish in the 
accounts given by our ancient authorities, between the strictly Thracian 
festival and the zdeal generalized festival of Dionysos (not the mitigated 
ceremonial actually used in the festival in Greece). They merge 
completely into each other. 

13 gaBale = evddlew, Schol. Ar., Av. 874; Lys. 388. 

14 gi Baxyar ovy@ow. Diogen., Prov. iii, 43. 

15 Complete revolution round one’s own axis, as in the dance of 
a dervish, is known at least only in the more fanatic dance-festivals 
of antiquity : otpodnv oroodpatov domep of KaToxor Suvevovtes, Heliod. 
4, 17, p. 116, 1 Bk. divnos THv Oeodop7twyv in Phrygia: Horus ap. 
EM. 276, 32. Crusius, Philol. 55, 565, compares besides Verg., A. 
Semon it Alex seApht,.1 7004, p..6.Us, (in; the Spartan dance 
dtapadéas (?) Seilenoi and Satyrs appeared dpyovpevor tadtpoxa 
[mepitpoxa acc. to Meineke: perhaps better]. Poll. 4, 104. 

16 F., Ba. 116 ff.,. 664 ff. Thracian: assiduis Edonis fessa choreis 
qualis in herboso concidit Apidano, Prop. 1, 3, 5 f. 

17 Bassaris: Thracian acc. to Sch. Pers. i, 101; worn by Baryae 
Hsch. Baoodpa. Lydian, too: dotis yit@vas Bacodpas te Avdias Exes 
modnpeis, A. ev’ H dwvots, fr. 59; cf. Poll. 7, 59. ‘‘ Perhaps a Phrygian 
word that has penetrated into Lydia,’”’ Kretschmer, Einlettung, 390. 
The worship of Dionysos which had also presumably come from 
Phrygia, was esp. popular in Lydia. 

18 Familiar in the Bacchic ceremonial of Greece; but occurring 
already in Thrace: Aesch. in ’Héwvoi (dealing entirely with Thracian 
customs) mentions the veBpides, and in the same place has alyidas 
as well (fr. 64). 

19 The Baxyat of Macedonia and the MipaddAdves, in all respects 
resembling the Thracian Bacchants, kxepatodopotot Kxata pipnoww 
Atovdaov: Sch. Lyc. 1237 (Aadvorias cepaodopovs yuvaixas). 

20 Mentis inops rapitur, quales audire solemus Threicias passis 
Maenadas ire comis, Ov., F. iv, 457 f. 

Bel nphtaCn. 16:(28, p. 141 Jebb)-; Artemid, 2, 13, p. 106,.9.H. 

22 Snakes and daggers are found in the hands of the pipadddves 
xal Bacodpar cat Avda in the train of Ptol. Philad.: Kallixenos ap. 
Ath. 198 E. Snakes and dvpoo. belong to the paraphernalia of the 
€voxor tots "Opdixots Kal tots wept rov Atdvucov dpytacpots yuvaiKes 
in Macedonia, and of the KAwdwves cat MipadrrAoves who zodAAa rots 
"Hdwvict Kal tats wept tov Aipov Opracas dpora dpa, Plu., Alex. 2 
(in connexion with the snake of Olympias. She was especially given 
to the Thrako-Dionysian mysteries: cf. the letter of Olympias to 
Alexander, Ath. 659 F).—@vpoo. of the Macedonian Mipaddoves : 
Polyaen. 4, 1; Sch. Pers. 1, 99.—‘* Even now” the thyrsos wands 
are decked with ivy in the Thraciae populis sollemnibus sacris, Plin., 


270 NODESS hOmCHAP BE Keane 


NH. xvi, 144.—The vap0@né of the thyrsos is really a shepherd’s staff : 
Clem eA eyo lis Deak aeL . 

2 Eur.,.6a..735 tf. and frequently: 

24 Katoxal Kal évOovoracpoi in the Thrako-Macedonian worship of 
Dionysos: Plu., Alev. 2. (The Mimallones imitantur furorem Libert, 
Sch., Pers. i, 99.) of r@ LaBaliw natoxo.: Porph. ap. lamb. de Myst. 
3,9, p. 117, 16. Baxyos' 6 parmddns, Eust. 6249; B16. KAddwves 
is the name given to the pawades kal Baxyat amo To KaTOYoUS yivopevas 
KrAdlew, EM. 521, 50. of Katoyou trois mepi tov Ardvucov dpyracpots, 
Plu.jgls-el7Cs voosap eo0te Ll 

25 of Baxyevopevor Kal KopvBavti@vtes evOovaralovat péxpis av TO 
mofovpevov tomo, Philo, Vit. Cont. 2, li, p. 473 M. 

26 So too the wild shaking and whirling-round of the head, which 
acc. to innumerable lterary and pictorial descriptions was a regular 
feature of the Bacchic dance and cult, must have contributed—and 
was so intended—to bring about the condition of ecstasy and frenzy 
(pepavdyeve adv KAdvyw, Pi., fr. 208; Kpara cetoa, E., Ba. 185, etc.).— 
How such fanatic shaking of the head, if kept up for along time, is 
by itself sufficient, in persons naturally predisposed to it, to bring 
on complete religious €xoraois, may be learnt from a remarkable 
account in Moreau du hachisch, p. 290 ff., derived from personal 
observation in the East. 

*7 The object of the trieteric festival of Dionysos (repeated every 
second year) held in so many places in Greece (cf. Weniger, Dionysos- 
dienst in Elis, Progr. 1883, p. 8) was to celebrate the presence of the god. 
This is clearly shown by D.S. 4, 3, 2, who also attributes the trieteric 
festival to the Thracians: tods Bowwrovds Kal tods dAdouvs ‘EAAnvas 
Kal Opdxas ... Katadetéar tas tprernpidas OPvoias Atovdcw Kal Tov 
Beov vopilew Kata TOV xpovov TobTOV ToLletobat Tas Tapa Tots avOpwrots 
éemdavetas. At this time women and maidens celebrated tiv 
mapovaiav tod Atovdcov. (In the archaic song of the Elean women 
the Bull-god is thus called upon: Plu,, QG. 36, 299° A’; "iss ca Gs: 
35, p. 364 F; whereupon the Eleans believed that tov Oedv odio 
éemipoutav es TOY Oviwv rHhv €opryv: Paus. 6, 26, 1.)—For Bakchos 
amongst the dancers see E., Ba. 185 ff., 306 f., and often. At the 
trieteric festival at Delphi Ardvucos . . . ITapvacov xara mynd yxopever 
mapbévois adv AeAdiow, E., Hypsip. fr. 752. And so often in poetry: 
see Nauck on S., OT. 213; Ant. 1126 ff.—Thracian trieteric festival : 
tuo motae proles Semeleia thyrso Ismariae celebrant repetita triennia 
bacchae, Ov., M. ix, 641 f.; tempus erat, quo sacra solent trieterica 
Baccho Sithoniae celebrare nurus ; nox conscia sacris, etc., vi, 587. 

*8 adaviojos followed by émddvera of Dionysos represent, as we 
frequently learn, the varying relationship of the god with mankind. 
These are alternating and periodically repeated, and they are reflected 
in the trieteric period of the festivals. It is customary to explain this 
disappearance and return of the god as an allegorical typification of 
the destruction and restoration of vegetation. There is no reason 
at all to believe this, except for those who regard the doctrines of the 
Greek “‘ Religion of Nature ”’ as infallible axioms. The god is simply, 
and in the literal sense of the words, regarded as removed for a time 
from the world of men, during which period he is in the world of spirits. 
In the same way Apollo, according to the Delphic legend, is carried 
away from the human world for certain periods: he lives during that 
time among the Hyperboreans, whose land is inaccessible to mortal 
foot or ship. We ought not to be afraid to make use of the light thrown 
on these matters by parallel legends of the temporary disappearance 


NO UE Sea LOmMCI AR DE RaaVEDI 271 


of gods among uncivilized peoples (the god may be sometimes asleep 
G@reunder constraint; cf: Plu., Js. et Os:, 69:fin. 378 FY; ci. what we 
are told in Dobrizhoffer’s Gesch. d. Abip. ii, p. 63 (E.T.), about the 
beliefs held by the Abipones of Paraguay; or, again, what is said of 
the negro races of West Africa, according to whom the god normally 
lives in the depths of the earth, but at regularly recurring intervals 
comes up to visit men ; whereupon the members of a mystical society 
build him a house, receive his oracles, etc.; Réville, Rel. des peuples 
non-civil, i, 110-11. Thus Dionysos, too, is for a time in the under- 
world, in the world of spirits and the souls. This is clearly presupposed 
by the festival at Lerna, in which Dionysos is called up out of the 
bottomless spring Alkyonia by which there was an entrance to Hades 
(just as the inhabitants of Kos every year avaxadoévrar Hylas out of 
Dis spring, i.e. from the underworld, H. Ttirk, De Hyla, -p. 3 f.; 
Welcker, Kl. Schr. i, 12; and see Maass, Litt. Zig. 1896, 7-8). Hence 
also in Lerna a lamb was offered as a victim 7 mvAadyw, i.e. to Hades 
himself, and was thrown into the spring (Plu., Is. et Os. 35, p. 368 F, 
quoting Sokrates mepi rdiv ‘Ociav; Smp. 4, 6, 2, p. 671 E; Paus. 
emso,7 1-0 -37,)5-6).. Because he is in) the realm of the dead 
a pragmatical myth represented him as slain by Perseus and thrown 
into the spring of Lerna: Lob., Agl. 574. In Delphi, too, something 
was known of the death and reawakening of Dionysos, but we have 
in Orph., H. 53, a quite unambiguous expression of the real concep- 
tion, acc. to which D. “‘ rested in the house of Persephone ”’, and appears. 
again in the upper world at the time of the trieteric festival when he 
eyeipes his ck@pov, edvalwy xiva@v te yopovs. We may be all the more 
eertam that the, same ideajis to be attributed to the. trieteric 
festival in Thrace, since the same belief exactly occurs again in the 
legend of the Thracian (Getic) god Zalmoxis (see below)—he was. 
believed to have disappeared into his infernal kingdom among the 
spirits and souls and to have made periodical returns to the world of 
the living. The reason why Dionysos, as worshipped both in Thracian 
and Greek trieteric festivals, stops for a time in the underworld of 
the souls, is clear enough: that too was his realm. We can now under- 
stand why it is that Dionysos is also ruler over the souls and can be 
called Zaypeds, NuxtéXuos, "Icodairns: i.e. he is simply given names of 
daaaesehimself (Plu.,"- ap. D. ix, p. 389 A). His real character of 
master of the souls and spirits (ava€é, pws), as it had been originally in 
the Thracian cult, was thus perserved, in spite of much alteration in 
its Greek form, partly in Greek local cults, partly in the Orphic cult 
of Dionysos.—There is a legend which is based on a reminiscence of 
this periodic disappearance of Dionysos to the underworld, viz. the 
thoroughly Greek story of his descent on a single occasion into Hades 
in order to bring back Semele. Elsewhere his disappearance into the 
realm. of the spirits gave rise to the legend of his escape and flight to 
the Muses; this was spoken of in the Agrionia at Chaironeia (Plu., 
np..oulraet.). 

peer bur, Ba, 920 ff, 1020 f. 

39 tavpodboyyo 8 taopvK@vtal mobev €& adavots doBepot ptmor: 
A. ’H8wroi describing the Thracian worship of D. (fv. 57). This was. 
“certainly intended to increase for the participants in the festival 
the feeling of the god’s presence and thus to add to the wildness 
of their orgies’, as Rapp, Dionysosc., 19, very rightly observes. The 
invisible bellowing bull is the god himself. (Dionysos appears as a 
bull to the insane Pentheus: E., Ba. 920 ff.).—‘*‘ The Batloka, a tribe 
in the Northern Transvaal, hold a yearly festival of the dead in which. 


272 NOTH oes TOs CHAT TR RagsysEnE 


hidden magicians make weird sounds with flutes which the people 
take for the voice of spirits: they say ‘ Modimo is there ’.’’ Schneider, 
Relig. d. Afrikan. Naturv. 143. 

31 The women taking part in the trieteric festival of the god play 
the part of the pawdédes in his train: D.S. 4, 3, 3. Imitation of the 
Novpda re xat ITaves nat LevAnvol cat Ldrvpor in the Baxyeia: Pl., 
Lg. 815 C. What was afterwards merely a piece of traditional ritual 
was originally without doubt a real hallucination of the xaroyor..—The 
idea that a throng, @/acos, of wood-spirits Satyrs and Seilenoi danced 
about the God must also have been common in the Thracian cult 
(cuyxopevtal Atovdcov, Ael., VH. iii, 40; 6 7@ Atovdow mapeTopevos 
dyAos, Ath. 362 E). cavaédar (obviously related to LaBalvos; cf. 
Usener, Gotternamen, 44 f.) was the name given to of cerAnvoi by 
the Macedonians, who in the practice of Dionysos-worship were entirely 
dependent upon the Thracians. MHsch. s.v., cf. Hdt. viii, 138 fin. 

32 The Baxyevovtes T@ Oe@ (i.e. Sabazios, Sabos) are called ocaBor 
Kat odBar kal caBalior: Phot. caBovs; cf. Eust., B 16, p. 1431, 46. 
Harp. (Phot.) s. oaBo.; Phot. rapacaBalew (p. 383, 16 Pors.) ; Sch. Ar., 
Av. 874. This identification of the god with his ecstatic worshippers 
belongs to the Phrygian cult of Kybele as well. Just as the goddess 
is called KuByB7So 6 katexopevos TH wntpl Tav Gedy is called KvByBos : 
Phot. KvByfos, cvBynBov, Eust. B 16. Thus the Greeks in calling the 
ecstatic worshippers of Bakchos by the name of the god were only 
adopting the conceptions and vocabulary of the Thracian religion of 
inspiration into their Dionysos-worship which was modelled on the 
Thracian cult. Bdxyos is their name for the dpytactyns tod Deob 
(etymologically connected is BaBaxrns [xpavyacos, dev Kat Baxyos 
Hsch.] a Phrygian word for the frenzied priest of Kybele: and there- 
fore = KvBnBos; cf. Ribbeck, Alazon, p. 86). It appears that the 
Baxyot of Dionysos were often called by the old Thracian name 
oaBou.: oadBous Kal viv ete toXAoi tods Baxyous Kadodow, Plu., Smp. 
4, 6, 2, p. 671 F (Aadvorio is also a name given, after Avdvuaos 
Aadvartios, to the Baxyou who worship him: Lyc. 1237 with Sch.). 

83 Arévucos wWpadsos (Porph., Abs. ii, 55), aunorjs (Plu., Them. 13), 
Aadvotios, tavpodayos (Soph. fr. 607 N.).—At other times we catch 
a glimpse of the idea that the god himself is the torn and devoured 
bull (just as in many ancient worships the proper victim of the god is 
the animal most homogeneous with him): this is evidently the most 
primitive form of €v—@ovo.acuos, the primeval symbolism of a mystic 
worship that, like all mysticism, desires to take personal possession 
-of the God. 

34 Dionysos himself also carries the thyrsos (as often in sculpture) : 
PERE LIV PS ie e1 Oe eLe: 

85 See above, n. 19 (6 BovKepws ’’Taxyxos, Soph., fr. 874, ravpdKepws 
eos, E., Ba. 100). The Greek Dionysos is often described was 
bull-shaped and horned: this, too, in imitation of Thracian belief. 
It is Sabazios whom they kepaoriay tapevoayova:, D.S. 4, 4, 2; cf. 
3, 64, 2. “Yn ravpoxépwrt, Euphor. fr. 14.—An allusion in D.S. 4, 4, 2, 
‘seems to suggest that the god, the pupidpopdos, was also (like Attis) 
regarded as a herdsman. Something of the sort may be referred to 
in the unintelligible lines quoted by Cl. Al., Prot. ii, p. 14 P., apparently 
in connexion with the Sabazios mysteries. So Dionysos, too, is some- 
times thought of as a Bovxodos: mowpén 8 aypatvrAwy ravpwv, Ards 
alytdxoo vier Kigooxitwve are words used of him in [Orph.] Lith. 260. 
Again, in imitation of the god himself his pvara: are Bouvxddou on the 
inscriptions from Asia Minor (Ins. Perg. ii, 485-8) and Thrace, of 


NOPESHALO MUN ARPL RE Res Vii 273 


which R. Schdll speaks, de commun. et. coll. Graecis (Satura philol. 
Saupp.), p. 178 ff. Bovxorikds occurs among the cult officials in 
ine Jobakcheta at vAthens: “Ath. Mitth., 1894, p. 260, 1) 122; 
archibucolos det Libert on inscriptions of the city of Rome. 
Bovkodos and Bovxodeiv occur in connexion with Bacchic worship as 
early as Kratinos, Aristoph., and Eurip.: vuxtimddAov Zaypéws Bovras, 
Pec resj7e47 2, Vie (acc. towiniels); See-Crusius, Ake iM. 45, 266¢f. ; 
Dieterich de hymnis Orph. (Marb. 1891), p. 3 ff. 

°6 The special flute-melodies going under the name of Olympos 
were called @eta ({Pl.] Min. 318 B); KxaréxeoOar move? (Pl., Smp. 215 C) ; 
Opodroyoupevws tovet tas yuxas evOovoracrexas {Arist., Pol. 134Qa 10). 
Cic., Div. i, 114: ergo et ei quorum animi, spretis corporibus, evolant 
atque excurrunt foras, ardore aliquo incitati atque inflammati, cernunt 
illa profecto quae vaticinantes praenuntiant: multisque rebus 
inflammantur tales animi qui corporibus non inhaerent: ut ei qui 
sono quodam vocum et Phrygiis cantibus incitantur. An unmistakable 
description of what was meant by éxoracts and Korybantic frenzy 
(see below). 

37 i.e. those who are evOovotacpod Kataxwyiuce, aS Aristotle knew 
them; certain pavixal dtafécers are known to Plato. Somewhat 
similar is the g@vots Gevdlovoa which according to Demokritos [D. Chr. 
36, 1] fr. 21 Diels, belongs to the inspired poet. 

38 The drunkenness of the Thracians and their ancient cultivation 
of the vine are well known. They even brewed beer from barley : 
Ath. 547 BC (cf. Hehn, Culturpflanzen, pe iZieh cl.) = hesprophetai 
{(prophesying in “‘enthusiasm’’) of a Thracian pee prophesied 
plurimo mero sumpto, Aristot. ap. Macr. omen 
drank unmixed wine in Thrace: PIL, Lg. 637 EL 

39 Mela, 2, 21 (and from him Solin. 10, 5, p. 75, 16 Mom.) says of the 
Thracians epulantibus ubi super ignes quos circumsident quaedam 
semina ingesta sunt, similis ebrietati hilaritas ex nidore contingit 
(cf. [Plu.] de Flu. 3, 3). There can be no doubt that it was hemp- 
seed (xavvafts) which had this effect. Hdt. iv, 74, says expressly that 
the Thracians knew hemp. It was thus with a sort of hashish that 
they intoxicated themselves (hashish is an extract of cannabis indica). 
The Scythians did something similar: Hdt. tells of their vapour- 
baths in tightly closed huts (iv, 75): they produced a smoke by laying 
hempseeds on red-hot stones and—though Hdt. does not say so— 
must necessarily have got into a state of wild intoxication. This may 
have been a religious performance. Drunkenness is generally regarded 
by savage tribes as a religiously inspired condition. Further, the 
Scythian practice has the most striking parallel in the use of “‘ vapour- 
huts ’ among the North American Indians, in which case the religious 
intention is certain (see the account in Klemm, Culturg. ii, 175-8 ; 
J. G. Miller, Amerth. Urrelig. 92). Hadt. 2 202, also mentions intoxica- 
tion from the fumes of certain “ fruits’? among the Massagetai ; 
these last, after they had completely bemused themselves, stood up 
to dance and sing. The Thracians, too, may very well have used 
intoxication through hashish-fumes as a means of exciting themselves 
to their ecstatic religious dances.—The ancients were quite familiar 
with the practice of inhaling aromatic smoke to produce religious 
hallucinations: [Galen] op. tarp. 187 (xix, p- 462 K.) evJovorac pes 
€or Kkadamep e€iaravral tives emi (70 ’) TOV S70 Ov pw pevev €v Tots 
tepots, << ddopara (om. edd.) > dpa@vres } Tuy Tavwr 7 avrAdv 7 cup porwr 
(scr. xupBddwv) aKxovovres; cf. odorum delenimento potest animus 
humanus externari, Apul., Ap. 43.—For the use of smoke in the 


ae 


274 NO PEST) LOCH ARI hava 


Korybantic ceremonies see below.—The yayarns Xidos brobupabeis 
is useful as an émAnarixdv €Xeyyxos (Dioscor. v, 145) ; it brings on the 
convulsions of the victim of fepa vdcos (epilepsy) [Orph.] L. 478 ff. 
(cf. further Damigeron, de Lap. 20, p. 179 Ab.; Plin., NH. 36, 141; 
and also Gal. xii, p. 203. K.), 

40 Polak, Persien, ii, 245 ff.—We have only to read the accounts 
derived from personal experience of the sensations and hallucinatory 
states accompanying hashish-smoking—such as those given, for instance, 
by Moreau (de Tours) Du hachisch et de l’aliénation mentale (Paris, 
1845), esp. pp. 23 ff., 51 ff., 59 ff., 90, 147 ff., 151 ff., 369 ff.—to have 
a complete parallel to the condition which underlay Bacchic excitement. 
There, too, is the complete €xoraots of the spirit, a waking dream- 
state, an dXAtyoypdovos pwavta. It only requires the special tone and 
character given to the hallucinations and illusions by deep-rooted 
religious or fanciful conceptions—and the external machinery for 
cultivating such illusions—to make them an exact equivalent of the 
delirious condition of the real Bax youat the nightly festival of Dionysos. 
(The helpless state of impressionability to outward—e.g. musical— 
and inward influences is a marked feature of the intoxication and 
fantasia of hashish.) Other narcotics also have similar effects (Moreau, 

. 184 ff.). 
4 41 Pl., Ion, 534 A (perhaps an allusion to the words of Aischines 
Socr. in the ’AAxiBiadys [Aristid. Fh. ii, 23 f. Dind.}). 

42 E., Ba. 142 f., 706 ff. (144 Lupias 8 ws AcBavov Kamves). 

43 Anaesthesia of the Bakchai: émi 8€ Boorpiyous mip Edepov odd” 
éxatev, Ba. 757 f.—suum Bacche non sentit saucia volnus, dum stupet 
Edonis exululata iugis, Ov., Tv. 4, 1, 41 f. qualis deo percussa 
maenas. . . atque expers sui volnus dedit nec sensit, Sen., Tvoad. 682 ff. 
Similar insensibility to pain (certainly not always feigned) was shown 
in their ekstasis by the self-wounding gall1 of Kybele, the priests 
and priestesses of Ma (Tibull. 1, 6, 45 ff.)—something of the sort is 
reported of the prophets of Baal (1 Kings xviii, 28). See in general 
on the subject of anaesthesia and the 6p0ds Katexopevor U0 TOY 
Geav, lamb., Myst. 3, 4, p. 110 Par. In the case of the shamans, the 
Indian Yogis, the dervishes, and the natives of North: America the 
existence of such states of insensibility in religious excitement has been 
actually observed. 

44 Karexdpevos ex Tod Oeod (Pl, Men. 99 D; X., Sym. i, 10. 
KaTexXopevoe Waomep at Baxyai, Pl., Ion, 534 A; Sym. 215 C. pavervte 
Te Kal Katacxopevw Phdr, 244 E). 4 & adpov éftetoa Kai d:actpddovs 
KOpas €Xicaova’, ov dpovota’ & ypHv ppovetv, éx Baxxlov KatelyxeTo, E., Ba. 
1122 ff. . cadroxor above, n. 24. 

* evOeds te yiyverar Kal Exdpwv Kal 6 vobds ovKéTe ev ab’T@ eveotw, 
Pl., [on,534 B (where it is applied to the inspired poet but properly 
belongs to the Bakchai). 

46 Exataas, e€toracba is often used of the inspired state. paiveo@at, 
ev Jovarar, evOeov yiveoba, exorjvar are all used in the same sense and 
apply to the “inspired ’’ prophets (Baxides, LiBvAdAac) and the poets: 
Arist., Prob. 30, 1, p. 954a, 34-9. é&lararat Kat paiverat, Arist. HA. 
6, 22, p. 577a, 12. The religious dpyracpol, éxatdavas buys éaayovte : 
Phintys ap. Stob., Fl. iv, 23,°6la, p. 593 H. éxoraots is a) Svaue 
in which the soul seems estranged from itself; when the olketac 
Kwyoels OUK EvoxAodvTat GAN’ amoppamifovTa (Arist., Pa. Nat. 464a, 25). 
The word became weak and commonplace enough in later usage, 
but it was evidently meant, originally, to express the ‘‘ exit’ of the 
“soul” from its body. In the same way the phrase used of one who 


"Wus Yaey 


NO Doe LOmCn ALI heayVirrl 275 


goes off into a faint : rov 8 édAv7ev wvy7 originally meant the same 
thing and was so understood, see above (chap. i, n. 8). The same idea 
occurs againin P. Mag. Par., 1. 725, p. 63 Wessely: téxdAutos 8’ écet 7H} 
ux Kal ovK ev ceavT® Eoer OTav coramoxpivynrae [the god coniured up]. 

47 €xatacis eotw oAvyoxypovos pavia [Galen] dp. tatp. 485 (xix, p. 462). 
pavin Exotaais €ote xypovios Aretaeus, Chr. Pass. 1, 6, p. 78 K. 

48 Avdvucov pawwdodAnv dpyalovor Baxyxor, wpodayia TV lepopaviav 
adyovTes, Kal TeAickovat Tas Kpewvouias TOV Povwy aveoTEeppéevor Tots 
ddeow éemroAoAVCovtes evav, Clem. Al., Prvotr. ii, p. 11 P. 

49 The évdovoidytes é€x Oeot twos become like the god, AapuBavovcr 
Ta €0n Kal Ta EmiTHSEevpata (Tob Beot), Kafdcov SuvaTov Deod avOpwmw 
petacxety, Pl., Phdr. 253A. More boldly éavt@v éxaravras 6édovs 
evtdpvabat tots Beots Kat éevOedlewv, Procl. in Rp. ii, 108, 23 Kr.— 
ovK E€xoTacts atAws ovTws éotiv, adda (in its positive sense) émi ro 
Kpettrov avaywyi Kal petdotacs, lamb. Myst. 3, 7, p. 114, 9 Parth. 

50 €vfeot yuvatxes of the Bakchai, S. Ant. 963. ai Baxyar érav 
evdeor yévwvtat—Aesch. Socr. ap. Aristid., Rh. (ii, 23 Dind.). évdeos 
nde 7 pavin (the religious sort) Aret., p. 84 K. The essential meaning 
of evOecov eivar (plenum esse deo) is clearly defined in Sch., E., Hip. 141: 
evOeot A€yovtat of bad dPadacpatds Tivos adaipebévtes Tov voov, Kal Um” 
exeitvov Tod Beod tot} dacpatomo.ot Katexdopevor Kal Ta SoKobdvTa Kelvy 
movovvtes. The évfeos is completely in the power of the god; the god 
speaks and acts through him. The év@eos has lost his consciousness 
of himself: like the @etot dvdpes (which phrase in Plato has the same 
meaning as év@eo. dvdpes) esp. the Oeoyavrers, A€yovor prev adAnOA Kat 
moXAd, icaat 8 ovdev adv A€yovat, Pl., Men. 99 C. (Philo, Spec. Leg. 1i, 
p. 343 M., says of the inspired prophet: évfovaid yeyovas ev ayvola, 
peTavioTapevou pev TOO Aoyitopod. .., EemiTmEhoiTyKOTOS OE Kal evwWKNKOTOS 
Tob Geiov mvevpatos Kal macav THs dwVys OpyavoTottay KpovovTos KTA. ; 
eee lambi ysis 3,.4.p. 109:) ; 

51 2yfeo. pavters (Bakides, Sibyllai) Arist., Pvb. 30, 2, 954a, 37. 
Beouavrers Pl., Men. ad fin. parry Kata 7d évbeov, Omep eaTiv 
evOeaortxov [Plu.] Plac. Phil. 5, 1, 1 [Dox., p. 415). 

52 wavtis 6° 6 Saiuwv 6de (Dionysos)' To yap Baxxevorpov Kal TO 
pavid@des ravtexyy moXrAjy exer dtav yap oO Beds els TOOHp EADN Todds, 
Aéyeww To péAAov Tovs peunvotas oret, E., Ba. 298 ff. Here the inner 
relationship of the inspiration mantiké and the “‘ possession ’? which 
took place in ecstatic frenzy is expressed with all possible clearness 
(drunkenness is surely not referred to !). This is how Plu., Smp. 7, 10, 
p. 716 B, also understood Eur. Prophesying Mainads: wpaadas 
Ovookdous E., Ba. 224—oddeis Evvouvs éedanterar pavtikyns evOéov Kai 
aAnbobs, ad 7} Kal? Urvov tiv THs dpovnoews TEdyOeis Svvapww H dra 
vocov » dia tiva évOovaotacpov mapaddAdéas, Pl., Ti. 71 E. voowpara 
pavtika 7 evOovoragrixa Make inspired pdvrecs what they are: Arist. Prob. 
954a, 35. Such manttké takes place in the state of furor, cum a corpore 
animus abstractus divino instinctu concitatur, Cic., Div. i, 66. <A 
famous case is that of Kassandra from whom the deus inclusus corpore 
humano, non iam Cassandra loquitur, §67 ; cf. the Sibyl who prophesies 
pavvopevw otopate (Heraclit. fy. 12 By. = 92 D.) and the Pythia at 
Delphi prophesying ina state of wavia. For the prophecy of Korybantic 
Phrygians possessed and “‘ frenzied ’’, see Arrian ap. Eust., on D.P. 809. 

53 Hdt. vii, 111 (for Hdt. the Bnocoi seem to be a division, perhaps 
a clan, of the Satrai. Polyb., Strabo, Pliny, Dio C., and others know 
them as an independent Thracian tribe): mpdépavtis yur) xpéovca 
Katamep ev AcAhotor—which means that she prophesied in ecstasy, 
for that is what the Pythia at Delphi did. (See Sch. Ar., Plut. 39 ; 


276 NOTES, [O CHAPTER Kee yviies 


Plu., Def. Or. 51, p. 438 B. Lucan vi, 166 ff., clearly describes the 
phenomena supposed to attend their religious ekstasis : artus Phoebados 
irrupit Paean, mentemque priorem expulit, atque hominem toto sibi 
cedere iussit pectore. bacchatur demens aliena, etc.) 

54 § Opnét pdvris Avovuaos, E., Hec. 1267. Rhesos dwelling in 
Mt. Pangaios is Baxxouv mpodyrns, Rh. 972. adixécbar trois AevBn- 
Opious mapa 700 Avovdoov pavrevpa €x Opdxys, Paus. 9, 30,9.  Aristoteles 
qui Theologumena scripsit, apud Ligyreos (?) ait in Thracia esse 
adytum Libero consecratum, ex quo redduntur oracula. Macr. 1, 
18, 1. The wife of Spartacus, herself a Thracian, was pavtixy Te 
Kal KdTOYXos Tots TEpt TOY ALdvucov dpytacpots, Plu., Crass. 8. Octavian 
in Thrace consulted in Liberi patris luco barbara caerimonia, i.e. an 
oracle: Suet., Oct. 94. Even in 11 B.c. the Bessoi still had a tepeds 
rob Avovdaov, Vologeses, who by means of prophesyings (zoAAa @evacas) 
and +4 wapa rob Beot 56€y stirred up his people to rebel against the 
Odrysai: D.C. 54, 34, 5. In 29 B.c. M. Crassus had handed over to 
the Odrysai the piece of land occupied by the Bessoi év 7 Kal Tov Oeov 
adydAAova, D.C. 51, 25, 5.—The spirit of the old Thracian ecstatic cult 
reappeared in the character of the Bacchic worship introduced from 
Greece into Italy whose excesses (in 186 B.c.) are narrated by Livy: 
39, 8 ff.; among these being viros velut mente capta cum iactatione 
fanatica corporis vaticinari: 39, 13, 12. 

55 Compare, for example, what we are told of the religious dances 
of the Ostiaks (Erman, Travels in Siberia, ii, 45 f., E. T., Cooley), the 
Haokah dance of the Dakota, the ‘* medicine-dance ”’ of the Winnebago 
in North America (Schoolcraft, Indian Tribes, ii, 487 ff., 286 ff.), 
the dance of voodoo negroes in Haiti (Nouv. annales des voyages, 
1858, iii, p. 90 ff.). For the violent religious dances of the people in 
ancient Peru see Miller, dmerik. Urrelig. 385; in Australia, R. Brough- 
Smith, Aborigines of Victoria, i, 166 ff. (1878). Among the Veddas 
of Ceylon there was a dance of the “ devil’s priests ”’ (called Kattadias) 
dressed up as demons: see Tennent, Ceylon, i, 540 f.; 1, 442.—In 
antiquity the following have the closest relationship to the ecstatic 
cult of the Thracians: the dance festivals in honour of the “‘ Syrian 
Goddess ”’, of the Kappadocian Ma, of the Phrygian Mountain Mother, 
and of Attis (the last having much the same origin as the Thracian 
festival, but being more strongly affected by Semitic influences, and 
perhaps by the religious practices of the prehistoric inhabitants of Asia 
Minor). Besides these we may remember the account given by 
Poseidonios ap. Strabo, 198, D.P. 570 ff., of the excited nocturnal 
festival celebrated in honour of ‘‘ Dionysos ”’ in an island at the mouth 
of the Loire by the women of the Namnites (Samnites, Amnites) 
Avovvow Katexopevat in the wildest delirium (Avra). 

56 This is regularly the meaning of such excesses practised by 
“magicians ’’, The shaman (with his ‘‘ soul’) voyages out into the 
spirit-world : see the remarkably vivid account of Radloff, Siberien, 
ii, 1-67; and also Erman, Zschr. f. Ethnologte, ii, 324 ff.; A. Krause, 
Tlinkitindianer, p. 294 ff., 1885. So does the Lapp magician (Knud 
Leem, Lappen in Finmarken [{E.T. in Pinkerton’s Voyages]). The 
Angekok enters into communion with his Torngak (Cranz, Hist. of 
Greenland, i, p. 194, E.T., 1820) ; the Butio with the Zemen (Miilier, 
Amertk. Urrelig., 191 f.); the Piajes with the spirits (Miller, 217). 
Thus, too, communication with the divine “ grandfather ”’ of the people 
is established by means of dances, etc., among the Abipones 
(Dobrizhoffer, Abipones, ii, 64, E.T.). The expulsion of the soul to 
visit the spirit-world is also practised (in their convulsions) by the 


iN eto Ome GHAR WH ayaV LET 277 


magicians of the North American Indians, the people of the Pacific 
Islands (Tylor, ii, 133), etc. Such practices start out from a commonly 
held conception of the nature of body and soul and of their relations 
with the unseen. The magicians believe “that in their ecstatic con- 
dition they can break through the barrier between this world and the 
next’, Miller 397. To facilitate this process they employ the various 
means alluded to of stimulating their senses. 

57 The most remarkable case of this is provided by the history of 
a religious sect of our own day widely spread in Russia, who call them- 
selves “‘ the Christs ’’, i.e. sons of God. The sect was founded by a holy 
man named Philippov in whose body God one day took up his abode ; 
after which the man spoke as the living God himself and gave com- 
mandments. The sect particularly stood for the idea that the divine 
dwells in mankind, Christ in men and Mary in women, and that the 
sense of their presence can be awakened in men by the action of the 
Holy Ghost, through the force of strong belief, by saintliness and by 
religious ecstasy. To produce the ecstasy dances are held in common. 
About midnight, after long prayers, hymns, and religious addresses, 
the participators in the secret festival, both men and women, dressed 
in strange costumes begin to dance. Soon the ranks and circles of the 
dancers and singers break up; individuals begin to turn round and 
round, revolving on their own axis with incredible speed, balancing 
meanwhile on their heels. The excitement of the dancing and leaping 
crowd grows continually greater. Finally one of them calls out “‘ He 
comes: He is near—the Holy Ghost’. The wildest ecstasy takes 
hold of every one. Details may be found in N. Tsakni’s La Russie 
sectaive, p. 63 ff. (cf. what is said in the same work, p. 80 ff., of the 
religious dances of the Skopzes, and p. 119 f. of the sect of the 
““Leapers ”’).—All this is true Bacchanalia christiana and therefore 
mentioned here. 

58 e.g, Mariner, Tonga Islanders, i, 108 (1817); Wrangel, Reise in 
Siberien, i, 286 (i, 267 f., French trans.); Radloff, Siberien, ii, 58. 
Even the respectable Cranz, whose own point of view made it impossible 
for him to appreciate properly the Angekok practices so clearly observed 
by him, admits that many of them really saw visions that suggested 
“something supernatural’ to them: Hist. of Greenland, p. 197 E.T. 
Something similar is said about ecstatically dancing dervishes by 
Lane, Modern Egyptians, 11, 197. 

59 Magicians called by the name of the god (Keebet) among the 
Abipones: Dobrizhoffer, ii, 248. Similar cases elsewhere: Miller, 77. 
In Tahiti the person inspired by the god so long as the “inspiration ”’ 
lasted (several days sometimes) was himself called “‘ god ’”’ or given 
the name of some particular god: Waitz, Anthropol. vi, 383. In 
the case of an African tribe dwelling on the banks of Lake Nyanza 
the chief spirit sometimes takes temporary possession of one of the 
magicians (man or woman) who then bears the name of the spirit : 
Schneider, Relig. d. Afrik. Naturv. 151. Sometimes the identity of 
the magician with the god is expressed by the wearing of the god’s 
distinguishing dress and imitation of his outward appearance (in the 
manner of the Thracian Béxryor) ; cf. the devil-dancers in Ceylon, etc. 

6° When it acquires a more philosophical temper mysticism seeks 
its unification with the highest (the €AAapiis ris dicews THs mpcbr7s) 
more by means of the completest passivity of mind and body. It 
employs the els airy EvAAyeaIar Kai dOpoifecGar of the soul (Plato), 
or its withdrawal from all that is finite and particular (the vecojimiento 
of the Spanish mystics). The profoundest quietude of spirit brings 


278 NOTES) LO @CHARLE KMaVPH 


about the unification with the One behind all multiplicity; cf. the 
Neoplatonic mystics, the Buddhists, etc. Sometimes both are found 
together; absorption and passivity of the spirit side by side with 
wild excitement. Both methods were practised by the Persian Sufis. 
Chardin, Voyage en Perse, iv, 458 (ed. Langlés) says of them, cependant 
ils se servent plus communément du chant de la danse et de la musique, 
disant qu’ils produisent plus sirement leur extase. It may be that 
the cult of religious exaltation is always the real origin of these ecstatic 
states. Though the cult sometimes falls into decay itself, its offspring 
the €xotaots survives. 

61 In the language of these mystics the words mean: he knows that 
the passionate longing for reunion with God, the Soul of the universe, 
breaks down the individual personality and its hmitations—“ for 
where Love awakes to life the Self dies, that gloomy tyrant.” 

62 Térat ot abavarilovres, Hdt. iv, 93-4 (adrafavarilovres, Plato and 
ONE see) Wesseling oneDiomi;;p: 105, 32). 

. ovdéva adAdAov Dedv vopilovtes ef 7) TOV oferepov (the Zalmoxis 
es mentioned) Hdt. iv, 94 fin. There we are told that the Getai 
mpos Bpovrnyv te Kal dorpamyy to€evortes dvw amerArctor TH GEG, oddeva 
xrA. If it were true (as most people seem to think) that the god 
(o @eds) threatened by the Getai during thunder was their own god 
Zalmoxis, then it certainly is difficult, or, indeed, impossible, to under- 
stand the point of explaining the threatening of this god by the state- 
ment that they hold him for the only true god. The truth is that 
the 7@ 0c refers simply to the “sky ” during a thunderstorm. The 
usage is common in Greek and is only transferred to the Getai by a 
rather awkward extension. This thundering @eds is not Zalmoxis at 
all (hence Z. is not as some have thought a “‘sky-god’’). The Getai 
regarded Zalmoxis as the only god: the Thunderer is no real god to 
them (at the most a bad demon or a magician or something of the kind). 
To show that they are not afraid of him they shoot arrows against 
him, probably in the hope of breaking the thundercloud. (Parallels 
in other countries: Grimm, p. 1088; Dobrizhoffer, ii, 78. In India, 
Oldenberg, 491-4. Excitement during an eclipse of the moon: 
Weissenborn on Livy, 26, 5, 9. Reminiscence of such customs in 
the myth of Herakles: [Apollod.] 2, 5, 10,5. From Hdt. by indirect 
channels comes Isig., Mir. 42 [p. 162 West.]; cf. also the account of 
D ee 59, 28, 6 about: Caligula. —Pallad., RR. 1, 35 [contra grandinem). ) 

* abavaritovor be Tovde TOV TpOTOV ... OUTE aTOOYHoKEW EwuTovs 
ees iévar Te TOV a7oAAVpEVvov mapa ZaApo€w daipova (of dé adtay 
tov avrov todrov odvoudalovar TeBeréifw), Hdt. iv, 94. Here, as 
regularly in Greek use of the words, we must not understand by 
adavarov eivac a mere shadowy (if timeless) survival of the soul after 
death as in the Homeric Hades. Such a belief if it had been held by 
the Getai would not have struck Hdt. or his readers as remarkable in 
the slightest degree. It must therefore imply an unending and fully 
Soe cious existence, in this last respect resembling the life on earth. 

> adavarilovat be kat Teépilor (repetilor Phot.) wat KpoBulou xat 
tovs azmobavevtas ws Zarpokiv dacw otyecba, Phot. Suid., EM. 
Zaporkts. The Krobyzoi are a well-known Thracian stock. The 
Terizoi are not elsewhere mentioned ; perhaps they may be placed 
in the neighbourhood of Tipiotis, Tipilis dxpa = C. Kaliakra (cf. 
C. Miller on Arrian, P. Eur. 35); there we also hear of a Tiptotis 
modus, Ptolem. With this Tomaschek also agrees (D. alten Thraker, 
Ber. Wien. Ak. 128, iv, p.97). In this case they would be neighbours 
of the Krobyzoi. 


NOTE Se Om ell Ate br Kesey. lil 279 


66 odx amoOvnoKkev adda petorkileacbat vouilovtes is what we hear 


of the Getai in Julian, Caes. 327 D. animas (putant) non extingui sed 
ad beatiora transire, Mela, ii, 18. 

87 | . . tTovs amobavertas ws ZadApokiv dacw otxecOa, ynéew Se 
av@is. Kal tadra aei vopilovow adnbeverv. OAvovor d€ Kal edwyotvrar 
ws ad&is yEovtos Tob amofavevtos, Phot. Suid., EM. Zaporés. Mela, 
ii,18: alii (among the Thracians) redituras putant animas obeuntium. 

68 Hdt. iv, 95, Zalmoxis, a slave of Pythagoras in Samos, is set free 
and comes back a rich man to his poverty-striken country. He collects 
together the leading men of the race in a room, where he entertains 
them and seeks to persuade them of the belief that neither he nor they 
nor their descendants will die but that they will all come after death 
to a place where they will enjoy all good things in abundance. There- 
upon he withdraws into a secret underground chamber and lives there 
for three years. In the fourth year he comes to light again and “ the 
Thracians are persuaded of the truth of what Zalmoxis had told them.” 
This implies—though Hdt. omits to say so, and so does [Hellan.] 
am. von. Bap. (following Hdt.) ap. Phot., etc., s. ZauoAgis—that he had 
also promised that he and his adherents should return to earth alive 
after the expiry of a definite period (three years). That such a belief 
in the “ return ’’ of the dead was actually held by the Thracians is 
clear enough from the quotations given in the last note. The story 
of Zalmoxis’ trick (which was perhaps intended humorously by its 
inventors) seemed suspicious even to Hdt., but it is not pure invention 
(any more than the analogous stories about Pythagoras, Trophonios, 
and later Empedotimos): it is rather a euhemerist version of a 
miraculous legend. The disappearance of Zalmoxis into a subterranean 
chamber is a distortion of the belief in his permanent abode in a hollow 
mountain-side, an avrp@d€s te ydprov in Mt. Kogaionon of which Str. 
298 speaks plainly enough. In that mountain the god dwells; just 
as Rhesos xpumtos é€v dvtpoits THs baapyvpov yOoves of Mt. Pangaios, 
dwells there as an avOpwaodaipwy [E.], Rh. 970; cf. chap. iv, n. 36. 
He lives there undying like the Bdxyouv mpo¢y7ns, who has become a god, 
to whom the tragedy obscurely alludes in ll. 972 f. as living on Mt. 
Pangaios (this may perhaps refer to Lykourgos—see G. Hermann, 
Op. v, 23 f.—surely not to Orpheus as Maass, Orpheus, p. 68 [1895], 
suggests). The obvious parallel is Amphiaraos and Trophonios in 
their caves, and Orig., Cels. iii, 34 (see above, chap. ili, n. 13), puts 
them and Zalmoxis together. We may safely complete Hdt.’s account 
of how the azodAvpevoe of the Getai go away and have everlasting 
life mapa ZaXpo€ww daiuova (iv, 94), by saying that they reach this same 
hollow mountain, a subterranean place of delight where they dwell 
with the god. Mnaseas compares Zalmoxis with Kronos (FHG.; Phot. 
Suid. EM., as before) and the similarity doubtless resides in the fact 
that both rule over the spirits of the blest in another world. But 
besides this the Thracian belief must also have included the idea of 
a periodical appearance of the god in the upper world. MHdt.’s story 
of the trick practised by Zalmoxis shows this (the return of the souls 
to which the story also points, is a sort of counterpart of this). Are 
we to suppose that the émddvera of the god was expected after the 
expiry of three years (just as it was after two years in the Dionysos 
festival ; see above, n. 27) ? We do not know whether these Thracian 
tribes celebrated the émdadvera of the god with ‘‘ enthusiastic ** worship. 
Such an element in the cult of Zalmoxis seems to be suggested by the 
fact that we hear of ‘‘ physicians of Zalmoxis”’ (Pl., Charm. 156 D) 
and of mantiké—which is generally closely bound up with tarpixn— 


280 IN OSPESSP TORCH ARIE Raver 


in the cult of this god. This must be the meaning of calling Zalm. 
himself pavris: Str. 762, 297; cf. also the otherwise valueless 
account of Ant. Diog. ap. Porph. VP. 14-15. Finally, the enthusiastic 
character of the cult seems to be implied in the identifying of the priest 
with the god by the Getai (as in the similar cases mentioned 
above, notes 32 and 59). Thus, the high priest is himself called 
‘st god ”: Str. 298 (he has authority over both king and state: cf. 
the tepevs tod Arovvoov among the LBessoi, above, n. 53; cf. 
Jordanes, Get. 71). This made it easy for the “god” Zalmoxis, 
whom even Hdt. quite rightly regarded as datpwv tis Pérnou emexwpros 
(iv, 96) to be metamorphosed into a man of the historical past (he 
is’ this-ins DS Os ie Le Vii, 297 | cf. J ordanes,’ Get>S9) is the 
contemporary priest was called “ god” it might naturally be concluded 
that the “‘ god’? Zalmoxis was once only a priest too. 

6o°Hermipaa pau) OS-,0-4 penile ec. 

AEA foes defer: (1265 ff.) the Thracian Polymestor prophecies to 
Hekabe that she shall become a dog after her death, mvpo’” €xovca 
Sépypara. Hekabe asks més 8 oicba popdis THs éufs peTaoraswy ; 
Pol.: 6 Opnéi pavris efme Arovucos rdde. It looks as if Eur. in this 
allusion to a belief in metempsychosis was intending to give a realistic 
touch of Thracian national character. He was well informed in such 
matters. 

71 The connexion between Thracian Dionysos-worship and the belief 
in immortality and cult of the dead is vouched for, acc. to Rapp, 
Dionysosc, 15 ff., by the insc. found by Heuzey in Thracian districts. 
An epitaph found at Doxato (near Philippi) says of one who has died 
young (ll. 12 ff.): reparatus vivis in Elysiis. Sic placitum est divis 
aeterna vivere forma qui bene de supero lumine sit merit 
seu te Bromio signatae (see Anrich, Antike Mysterienwesen, 123 f.) 
mystides ad se florigero in prato congregem uti Satyrum, sive canistri- 
ferae poscunt sibi Naides aeque, qui ducibus taedis agmina festa trahas 

. (CIL. iti, 686). It is true that this remarkable fantasy contains 
nothing directly alluding to specifically Thracian worship. On the 
other hand this is certainly suggested and both the Thracian god and 
his connexion with a cult of the dead is implied in the use of the local 
cult-title of Dionysos in an offering made by Bythos and Rufus to 
the thiasi Liberi patris Tasibasteniof 300 denarii ex querum reditu 
annuo rosalibus (and so at the yearly festival of the dead) ad 
monimentum eorum vescentur. CIL. iii, 703; cf. 704. Even the 
conjunction by E., Hec. 1265 ff., of the belief in palingenesia with the 
oracle of the Thracian Dionysos scems to imply a connexion between 
that belief and the cult of Dionysos. 

2 woAdoi pev vapOnKkodopot, matpor d€ te Baxxou, ap. Pl., Phd. 69 C. 
The strict meaning of this Orphic verse (Lob., Agi. 813 ff.\ is that out 
of the multitudes who take part in the Bacchic festival only a few have 
any real right to call themselves by the name of the god-——as having 
become one with him through their ecstasy and exaltation. A special 
morbid state was necessary for that: the same state which in other 
circumstances made the real shamans, Piajes, etc. 

“8 Even when their éxoraois had ceased the ecstatic worshippers 
still regarded as real the visions which they had enjoyed in that con- 
dition: otov ovvéBy ’ Avripeporte TO ’Qpeiry Kal addous efiarapevors. 
Ta yap gavrdopata Eedeyov ws yevdpeva Kal ws pvnpovevovtes, Arist. 
nm. pynuns, 1, p. 451a, 8. ‘ Magicians who had subsequently been con- 
verted to Christianity were still convinced of the reality of their earlier 
visions: they thought they had seen something perfectly real.” 


NO LES ee lO eg Ch ARTEReaV ITT 281 


Miiller, Amerik. Urrelig. 80. Add: Tylor, ii, 131; Cranz, Greenland, 

HES 
Pa see above, chap. i, p. 7 ff. 

7 Hdt. v, 4 (speaking of the Tpavoot. Hsch. has the same, s.v. 
Tpavoods). The story was then added to the regular list of véuipa 
BapBapexa used for illustrating the variability of véyos. It was soon 
after told of the Koeofula: Isig., Mir. 27 (they were also regarded 
as strong adherents of a _ belief in immortality; see above, 
n. 65); then of the Kavotavoi: Nic: Dam., Mir. 18 West. Zenob., 
Prov. v, 25, p. 128, 5 L.-Schn. (Kavoior, Kavevavoi). It occurs again 
in a fragment of some collection of véprpa Bap8apixa written before 
the third century (there is no reason to ascribe it to Aristotle) given 
by Mahaffy, On the Flinders Petrie Papyni, Transcript., p. 29: Kavovavois 
d€ voputpov Tovs pev yryvopevous Opnveiv Tovs Sé TeAEvT@rTas evdarpovilew 
Os moAAGY Kak@v avateravpévous (kak@v aS above or movwy must 
be supplied to fill the gap; cf. the well-known fragment of Eur. 
Cresph.: éxpiv yap nyas . . . fr. 449, which perhaps alludes to Hdt.’s 
account). It is told of Thracians in general, or of some tribe not 
Pericitwatiy named, by S. E:,.£. ii, 232 ;-Val: Max. 2, 6, 12 (both 
clearly drawing on collections of voutpa BapBapixa); Mela, ii, 18; 
eae. ix, 11} (Archias), There were thus three sources of the story : 
Besides Hdt.’s, two in which either the Krobyzoi or the Kausianoi were 
named as the Thracian tribe instead of Hdt.’s Trausoi. 

8 6owv Kaxav e€amaddAaxeis ott ev maon eddaporia, Hdt. v, 4. 

77 See Jul., Caes. 327 D, Mela, ii, 18. Likewise of the Kavotavoc 
imeanon. ap. Mahafiy (see n. 75), p. 29, 10-12. Iamb., VP..173: 
as a result of the (Pythagorean) doctrine of immortality taught by 
Zalmoxis €re kai viv ot Tadara (because they had been instructed 
by Zalm.; from a similar fabulous source comes Hippol., RH. i, 2, 
p- 14, 93 D.-S.) cai of TpddAers Kat modAdAot ta&v BapBapwv rots attav 
viovs mreiGovaw ws ovK Eote POapHvar THv Wuxi... Kal ore TOV Oavator 
ov pofnréov, ddAa mpos Tods KLVSUvous EvpwWuTws ExTEov.—T paddAets Scaliger 
for the MS. rpadis, rightly as far as sense goes. But we find the name 
TPAAEIS given to the Pergamene mercenaries called after the 
Thracian tribes: Ins. Perg.i, n. 13, 23, 59. These had already served 
as infantry in 331 in the army of Alexander the Great: D.S. 17, 65, 1; 
cf. Hsch. Tpaddets. They were a South Thracian tribe: Plu., Ages. 
16; Ap. Lac. 42; Str. 649 (where read TpaddAéwv) ; Tralli Thraeces, 
Liv. 38, 21, 2, who elsewhere calls them Illyriorum genus, 27, 32, 4 ; 
31, 35, 1. It appears that a branch of the Thracian tribe of the Tralles 
reached Illyria in their wanderings ; there Theopompos, too, knew them : 
Steph. Byz. TpadAdia; cf. also s.vv. Biyts, BodAovpos (cf. Tomaschek, 
Seizp.. Wien. Ak., 128,-iv, p. 56 f.). 

78 Appetitus maximus mortis, Mart. Cap. 6, 656. The Thracians 
esp. are meant by Galen when he speaks of BapBdpwy évious who enter- 
tained the belief 671 ro amoOvioKew €or KaXdov (xix, p. 704 K.) 


CH AA Kaa 
DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 


Its AMALGAMATION WITH APOLLINE RELIGION. 
EcstTATIC PROPHECY. RITUAL PURIFICATION AND 
EXORCISM. ASCETICISM 


The Greeks received from the Thracians and assimilated 
to their own purposes the worship of Dionysos, just as, 1n all 
probability, they received the personality and worship of 
Ares and the Muses. Of this assimilation we cannot give any 
further particulars; it took place in a period lying before the 
beginnings of historical tradition. In this period a multi- 
plicity of separate tendencies and conceptions, freely mingled 
with features borrowed from foreign creeds, were welded 
together to form the religion of Greece. 

Homer is already acquainted with the fanatical worship of 
Dionysos ;_ the god is called by the name under which Greek 
worshippers made themselves familiar with the stranger.} 
But in Homer, Dionysos appears only once or twice for a 
moment in the background. He is not the bountiful giver of 
wine ; he does not belong to the Round Table of the great 
gods assembled on Olympos. Nowhere in the story told in 
either of the Homeric poems does he influence the life and 
destiny of human beings. There is no need to seek far for the 
reason of Dionysos’ subordinate position in the Iliad and the 
Odyssey. Homer’s silence makes it quite plain that at that 
time the Thracian god had not yet emerged from a position 
of insignificance or merely local importance in the life and 
faith of Greece. Nor is this hard to understand: the cult of 
Dionysos only gradually won recognition in Greece. Many 
legends tell of the battles that had to be fought by the new 
worship and of the opposition that met the invader. We hear 
how the Dionysiac frenzy and the ekstasis of the Dionysiac 
dance-festival took possession of the whole female population 
of many districts of Central Greece and the Peloponnese. 
Sometimes a few women would venture to join the wandering 
choruses of wild Bacchants who danced upon the mountain 
tops ; here and there the king of the land would oppose the 
progress of this tumultuous worship. Such stories are told of 
the daughters of Minyas in Orchomenos, of Proitos in Tiryns, 
of King Pentheus at Thebes, and Perseus at Argos ;? their 
opposition to the Dionysiac form of worship, occurring in 


DIONY SIACe KEEIGION® IN GREECE 283 


reality at no precise date, assumed a deceptive distinctness in 
the artificial systems of the mythologists and developed 
the character of historical events. In reality what we are told 
of these individuals—how the opponents of Dionysos them- 
selves fell into even wilder frenzy and in Bacchic delirium slew 
and tore in pieces their own children instead of the victim- 
animal, or (as in the case of Pentheus) became themselves the 
victim slain and torn in pieces by the raging women—all this 
belongs to the class of etiological myth. They are legends in 
which special features of worship (for example, the existing 
or dimly remembered sacrifice of human beings at the feasts 
of Dionysos) are provided with a mythical prototype in the 
supposed historical past of mythology, and thus receive their 
justification.* Still, there remains a substratum of historical 
fact underlying such stories. They all presuppose that the 
cult of Dionysos arrived from abroad and entered into Greece 
as something foreign. This presupposition notoriously 
corresponds to the actual facts of the case, and we are bound 
to assume that the account which they immediately proceed to 
give of the violent opposition which this cult, and only this 
cult, met with in many parts of Greece, is not pure fiction.° 
We are obliged to recognize that such stories preserved a trace 
of real historical memory expressed in the one form which 
was invariably assumed by the earliest Greek tradition, namely 
mythology, in which all the accidents and varieties of earthly 
experience were condensed into types of universal applicability. 

It was then not without opposition, it appears, that the 
worship of Dionysos, descending from the north into Boeotia, 
spread from thence to the Peloponnese and at an early period 
invaded even some of the islands as well. In truth, even if 
we had no evidence at all on the point, we should have 
expected the Greeks to feel a profound repugnance to this 
disorderly and tumultuous Thracian worship; a deep-seated 
instinct must in their case have resisted such extravagance 
of emotional excitement and refused to lose itself in the limit- 
less abyss of mere feeling. This unchecked roaming over the \ 
mountain sides in nocturnal revelry might be suitable enough 
for Thracian women-folk, but respectable Greek citizens 
could not give themselves up to such things without a struggle 
—without, indeed, a break with all inherited propriety and 
decorum.® It seems to have been the women who were the 
first to give in to the invading worship,’ carried away in a real 
frenzy of inspired enthusiasm, and the new cult may really 
have owed its first success chiefly to them. What we are told 
of the irresistible progress and widespread success § of the 


284 DION YSIAG, RELIGION IN” GREECE 


Bacchic dance-worship and its exaltation reminds us of the 
phenomena which have attended similar religious epidemics 
such as have in more recent times occasionally burst out 
and overflowed whole countries. We may in particular recall 
to mind the accounts which we have of the violent and wide- 
spread dance-madness which, soon after the severe mental 
and physical shock suffered by Europe in the Black Death of 
the fourteenth century, broke out on the Rhine and for centuries 
could not be entirely stamped out. Those who were attacked 
by the fever were driven by an irresistible impulse to dance 
The bystanders, in convulsions of sympathetic and imitative 
fury joined in the whirling dance themselves. Thus the 
malady was spread by contagion, and soon whole companies 
of men, women, and girls, wandered dancing through the 
country. In spite of the insufficiency of the surviving records, 
the religious character of this dance-enthusiasm is unmis- 
takably apparent. The Church regarded it as a “ heresy”. 
The dancers called upon the name of St. John or of “ certain 
demons’’; hallucinations and visions of a religious nature 
accompanied their ecstasies.? Can it have been another such 
popular religious malady which attacked Greece—-perhaps 
in the train of the disturbance of spiritual equilibrium caused 
by the destructive migrations which take their name from the 
Dorians? The circumstances of the time must have 
predisposed men’s minds in that direction and made them 
ready to accept the Thracian Dionysos and his enthusiastic 
dance-worship. In any case this invasion did not, like its 
medieval counterpart, break down by coming into conflict 
with a well-established religion and an exclusive ecclesiastical 
organization of a very different temper from its own. In the 
deceptive twilight of myth we can only dimly discern the 
arrival and progress of the Dionysiac religion in Greece. But 
so much at least is evident : the Bacchic cult, though it had 
to overcome many obstacles, at last established itself in 
Greece and triumphantly overran both mainland and islands, 
until in the course of time it obtained a profound and far- 
reaching importance in Greek life of which Homer could 
scarcely give a hint. 


§ 2 


It was no longer simply the old Thracian Dionysos who now 
took his place beside the other great gods of the Greek Olympos 
as one of themselves. He had become Hellenized and human- 
ized in the meantime. Cities and states celebrated him in 
yearly festivals as the giver of the vine’s inspiring fruit, as 


DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN -GREECE 285 


the daimonic patron of vegetation, and the whole of Nature’s 
rich and flourishing growth. He was worshipped as the 
incarnation of all natural lfe and vigour in the fullest and 
widest sense; as the typical exponent of the most eager 
enjoyment of life. Even Art, the highest expression of the 
courage and pride of life, drew much of its inspiration and its 
aspiration towards the infinite from the worship of Dionysos ; 
and the drama, that supreme achievement of Greek poetry, 
arose out of the choruses of the Dionysiac festival. 

Now the art of the actor consists in entering into a strange 
personality, and in speaking and acting out of a character 
not his own. At bottom it retains a profound and ultimate 
connexion with its most primitive source—that strange 
power of transfusing the self into another being which the 
really inspired participator in the Dionysiac revels achieved 
in his ekstasis. The essential features of the god as he first 
arrived in Greece from foreign lands, in spite of much altera- 
tion and transformation of the primitive type, were thus not 
entirely lost. There remained also, in addition to the cheerful 
festivity of the daylight worship of Dionysos, as it was 
celebrated more particularly in Athens, certain vestiges of the 
old ecstatic worship which drove men and women over the 
mountains in nocturnal revelry. In many places there were 
still celebrated the trieteric festivals 1° in which at recurrent 
intervals the “ Epiphany ” of Dionysos, his appearance in the 
world of men and ascent from the underworld, was solemized 
by night. The primitive character of Dionysos the Lord of 
Spirits and of the Souls of the dead—a very different figure 
indeed from the tender and delicate Wine-God of later times— 
was still obscurely present in many features of the Dionysiac 
festivals, in those of Delphi especially, but even to some 
extent at Athens too.4 The ecstasy and the violence, even 
the dark savagery of the ancient cult did not quite die out in 
the midst of all the refinements of Greek civilization ; recog- 
nizable traces of such things were preserved in the Nuhtelia 
and Agvionia and in the various trieteric festivals that were 
offered to the god in many different localities.1* In Greece the 
awful god received the blood of human victims.4® Nor did 
the outward signs of delirious frenzy, such as the eating of 
raw flesh, the killing and tearing in pieces of snakes, entirely 
disappear.44 So little, indeed, did the Bacchic frenzy that 
could exalt and lift the worshipper to communion with the 
god and his train, disappear before the gentler attractions of 
the gracious wine-god and his festival, that the raving and 
““ possession ”’ which characterized the cult of Dionysos were 


nee 


A OER enn es 


286 DIONYSTIAC SRELIGION SINS GREEGE 


now actually regarded by foreign peoples as the essentially 
Hellenic form of the worship of the god.’? 

Thus, a sympathetic understanding of the orgiastic cult 
and its tremendous capabilities lived on. The “ Bacchants ” 
of Euripides still preserves for us a breath of its magic, a trace 
of the enthusiasm and exaltation that overwhelmed the senses 
and enthralled the will and consciousness of those who gave 
themselves up to the powerful Dionysiac influence. [ike an 
irresistible current that overwhelms a swimmer or like the 
mysterious helplessness that frustrates the dreamer, the magic 
power emanating from the neighbourhood of the god took 
complete possession of the worshipper and drove him whither 
it willed. Everything in the world was transformed for him ; 
he himself was altered. Every character in the play falls under 
the spell as soon as he enters into the magic circle. Even the 
modern reader who turns over the pages of Euripides’ poem 
feels something of that strange power to subdue the soul 
wielded by the Dionysiac mysteries and experiences in his 
own person a faint reflexion of these extraordinary states of 
mind. 

Probably as a result of this profound Dionysiac fever 
which had once raged through Greece like an epidemic and 
was liable to periodic returns in the nocturnal festivals of the 
god, there remained in the constitution of the Greek people 
a certain morbid weakness, a susceptibility to suddenly appear- 
ing and as suddenly disappearing crises in which the normal 
powers of perceiving and feeling were temporarily overthrown. 
A few stray accounts have come down to us in which we read 
how such brief attacks of passing insanity ran through whole 
cities like an infectious disease.1® The Korybantic form of the 
malady, which was religious in character?’ and took itsname 
from the daimonic companions of the Phrygian Mountain 
Mother, was a phenomenon quite well-known to doctors and 
psychologists. Those affected by such fevers saw strange 
figures that corresponded to no objective reality, and heard 
the sound of invisible flutes, until at last they were excited 


to the highest pitch of frenzy and were seized with a violent 


V desire to dance.18 The initiation festivals of the Phrygian 


deities were specially directed to the discharges and so eventually 
to the cure and“ purgation ’’ of such emotional states; the 
means employed being principally dance and music—more 
especially the music composed for the flute by the old Phrygian 
masters ; music that could fill the soul with inspiration in 
suitably disposed natures.1? By such methods the ecstatic 
element was not simply suppressed or expelled, it was taken 


TONY SIA eR HE WIGIONS ING GREECE 287 


up as a special disciplinary process by the physician-priesthood 
who recognized in it a vital movement and added it to the 
regular worship of the god. 

In a similar fashion Greece in its most enlightened period 
accepted and practised the “ enthusiastic ’’ cult of Dionysos. 
Even the tumultuous night-festivals of the Thracian god— 
festivals closely related to those of Phrygia from which they 
had borrowed and to which they had given so many features— 
were made to serve the “ purgation’’ of the ecstatically 
exalted soul. The worshipper in such festivals “ initiated 
his soul into the company of the godin holy purifications, while 
he raged over the mountains in Bacchic frenzy ’’.2® The 
purification consisted in this case, too, of violent excitement 
in which the soul was stimulated to the highest pitch of 
religious ecstasy. Dionysos as “ Bakcheus”’ awoke the holy 
madness which he himself again, after it had reached its 
highest point of intensity, stilled and tranquillized as Lysios 
and Meilichios.24. The old Thracian cult of ecstasy has here 
been modified in a fashion that belonged only to Greek soil 
and to Greek modes of thought. Legend, allegorizing the 
facts, threw back this final development of the Dionysiac 
worship into the remotest antiquity. Even Hesiodic poems 7% 
related how the daughters of King Proitos of Tiryns wandered 
in the holy frenzy of Dionysos *? over the mountain of Pelopon- 
nesos, until at last they and all the multitide of women who 
had joined them were healed and “ purified ’’ by Melampous 
the Seer of Pylos famed in legend.?4 The cure was effected 
through the intensification of the Dionysiac frenzy “‘ with 
loud crying and inspired dancing,” »° and, further, by the use 
of certain special purificatory devices.2® Melampous did not 
put an end to the Dionysiac cult and its “ enthusiasm ”’ ; 
he rather regulated and developed it. For this reason Hero- 
dotos can even call him the “ Founder” of the Dionysiac 
cult in Greece.?”_ Legend, however, always recognized in this 
“founder ’’ of the Dionysiac festival an adherent of the 
specifically A polline form of religion. ‘‘ Apollo had favoured 
him especially,’ and bestowed upon him the Seership which 
became ancestral in his family.28 Legend used him as a type 
in which the reconciliation between the Apolline and the 
Dionysiac was figuratively expressed. The reconciliation is 
an historical fact, but it did not happen in the primitive past 
of legend. 

It is a fact, however, that Apollo did at last, doubtless after 
prolonged resistance, enter into the closest alliance with this 
remarkable divine brother of his, the Hellenized Dionysos. 


288 DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 


The covenant must have been made at Delphi. There at 
least on the heights of Parnasos, in the Korykian Cave, the 
trieteric festival of Dionysos was held every second year in the 
close neighbourhood of Apollo the Lord of Delphi. Nay, more, 
in Apollo’s own temple the “ grave ”’ of Dionysos was shown,?® 
and at this grave, while the Thyiades of the god rushed over 
the mountain heights, the priests of Apollo celebrated a 
secret festival of their own.?° The festal year of Delphi was 
divided, though unequally it is true, between Apollo and 
\/Dionysos.?! To such an extent had Dionysos taken root at 
Delphi, so closely were the two gods related, that while 
the front pediment of the temple showed the form of Apollo, 
the back pediment represented Dionysos—and the Dionysos 
of the nocturnal ecstatic revels. Apollo, too, shared in the 
trieteric festival of Dionysos,?* while Dionysos in later times 
at the penteteric festival of the Pythia, received, as well as 
Apollo, his share of sacrifice and the contests of cyclic choruses.*4 
The two divinities have many of their titles and attributes 
in common ; in the end the distinction between them seems 
to disappear entirely.® 

Antiquity never forgot that at Delphi, the radiating centre 
of his cult, Apollo was an intruder. Among the older deities 
whom he supplanted there, the name of Dionysos also 
occurred ; 8& but the Delphic priesthood thought it wise to 
tolerate the Thracian god and his ecstatic cult that at first 
seemed so opposed to that of their own deity. Dionysos 
may have been too vigorous a spirit to allow his worship 
to be suppressed like that of the Earth divinity who sent the 
prophetic dreams. Apollo is the “ Lord of Delphi’’; but 
the priesthood of the Delphic Apollo, following in this the 
tendency to religious syncretism which is so recognizable 
in them, took the worship of Dionysos under their protection. 
The Delphic Oracle in fact introduced Dionysos into localities 
where he had hitherto been a stranger, and nowhere so 
successfully or with such momentous consequences as at 
Athens.*” It was this promoting of the Dionysiac form of 
religion by the great corporation which had the leadership 
in Greece in all matters of religion, that did more than 
anything else to secure for the god and his worship that 
profound, wide-reaching influence on Greek religion that 
Homer, who knows little even of the Delphic Oracle, completely 
ignores. 

But it was a gentler and more civilized Dionysos whom 
Delphi popularized and even helped to re-shape ; the extrava- 
gance of his ecstatic abandonment was pruned and moderated 


DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 289 


to suit the more sober temper of ordinary city-life, and the 
brighter, daylight festivals of urban and countryside worship. 
Hardly a trace of the old Thracian worship of ecstasy and 
exaltation is discoverable in the Dionysiac worship of Athens. 
In other places, and especially in the districts ruled over by 
the Delphic Apollo himself, Dionysiac worship preserved 
more of its primitive nocturnal wildness. Even Athens, in 
obedience to an oracular command, sent a religious embassy 
of elected women to the Delphic Trieteria. It is plain enough 
however, that in all this there was nothing but a dim counter- 
part of the former tumultuous mountain-worship of the god, 
and its profound soul-stirring ceremonies; the worship of 
Athens and Delphi had reduced all that to a vague ritual 
traditionalism.?® 


§ 3 


But in spite of all attempts to moderate and civilize it 
outwardly, the cult of Dionysos retained as its most enduring 
feature a tendency to the ecstatic and the extravagant that was 
continually breaking out in threatening or alluring guise. 
So strong indeed was the ecstatic element in Dionysiac worship, 
that when the Apolline and Dionysiac forms of religion became 
united, as at Delphi, it was the Apolline worship—once so 
hostile to anything in the nature of ecstasy—that had to 
accept this entirely novel feature. 

The “ prophecy of inspiration ’’, deriving its knowledge 
of the unseen from an elevation of the human soul to the divine, 
was not always a part of Greek religion. Homer, of course, 
knows of the prophetic art in which specially instructed seers 
explained such signs of the gods’ will as occurred accidentally 
or were purposely sought out by men, and by this means 
claimed to discover the will of heaven both at the moment 
and for the future. This is, in fact, the sort of prophecy that 
Apollo bestowed upon his seers. But the prophecy of 
which there was no “art” and which “no man could be 
taught ’’ 4° (for it came in a moment by “ inspiration ’’)— 
of this Homer shows no trace.*! In addition to professional 
and independently working prophets the Odyssey, and even 
the Iliad, too, are aware of the enclosed oracular institutions 
belonging to the temple of Zeus at Dodona and that of Apollo 
at Pytho.42, Both these used the names of the gods with 
whose service they were concerned to increase the effect and 
the credit of their utterances. In the Odyssey (but not the 
Iliad) there is a reference to the influence wielded by the oracle 
of Apollo in the more important circumstances of a people’s 

U 


b 


290 DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 


life. But whether at that time it was an inspired prophetess 
who gave replies at Delphi we cannot be sure from the poet’s 
words. There must have been oracles of sortilege ** at that 
place from an early period under the protection of the god 
and it is these we should naturally expect a poet to mean who 
nowhere 44 shows any knowledge of the striking phenomena 
of ecstatic mantiké.* 

In any case this new mantiké of inspired prophets, which 
subsequently enjoyed such enormous development and gave 
the Delphic oracle such peculiar power, was a late-coming 
innovation in the Apolline cult. Over the chasm in the rock 
at Pytho, out of which arose a strange and potent vapour 
from the depths of the earth, there had once existed an oracle 
of Gaia at which perhaps inquirers had received their instruc- 
tion through the means of premonitory dreams by night.*® 
The earth-goddess was displaced by Apollo here as at many 
other oracular sites.47 The accuracy of this tradition is 
confirmed by the Delphic temple legend which speaks of the 
overthrow of the oracular earth-spirit Python by Apollo.4® 
The change may have been gradually brought about; in 
any case, where once the earth-divinity had spoken directly 
in dreams to the souls of men, there Apollo now prophesied— 
no longer indirectly through the intervening medium of signs 
and omens, but directly answering those who, in open-eyed 
wakefulness, inquired of him, and speaking to them out of 
the mouth of his ecstatically inspired prophetess. 

This Delphic prophecy of inspiration is as far removed from 
the old Apolline art of interpreting omens as it is closely 
allied to the mantiké which we found attached from the earliest 
times to the Thracian cult of Dionysos.*9 It appears that in 
Greece Dionysos but rarely obtained an official priesthood 
that could have organized or maintained a permanent oracular 
institute attached to a particular place or temple. In the 
one Dionysiac oracle in Greece, however, of which we have 
certain knowledge a priest gave prophecies in a state of 
“enthusiasm ”’ and “ possession ”’ by the god.5® Enthusiasm 
and ecstasy are invariably the means of the Dionysiac prophecy 
just as they were the means of all Dionysiac religious 
experience. When we find Apollo in Delphi itself—the place 
where he most closely allied himself with Dionysos—deserting 
his old omen-interpretation and turning to the prophecy of 
ekstasis, we cannot have much doubt as to whence Apollo 
got this new thing.*! 

With the mantic ekstasis, Apollo received a Dionysiac 
element into his own religion. Henceforward, he, the cold, 


DION Y OLACGH h ELLGION SINE GREECE 291 


aloof, sober deity of former times, can be addressed by titles 
that imply Bacchic excitement and self-abandonment. He is 
now the “ enthusiastic ’’, the Bacchic god: Aeschylus strikingly 
calls him “‘ivy-crowned Apollo, the Bacchic-frenzied prophet ”’ 
(fr. 341). It is now Apollo, who more than any other god, calls 
forth in men’s souls the madness ** that makes them clair- 
voyant and enables them to know hidden things. At not a 
few places there are founded oracular sites at which priests 
or priestesses in frenzied ecstasy utter what Apollo puts into 
their mouths. But the Pythian oracle remained the pattern 
of them all. There, prophecy was uttered by the Pythia, 
the youthful priestess who sat upon the tripod over the earth- 
chasm and was inspired by the intoxicating vapour that arose 
from it, until she was filled with the god, and with his spirit.*8 
The god, so ran the belief, entered into the earthly body ; or 
else the soul of the priestess, “released ’’ from her body, 
received the heavenly revelation with spiritual sense.°* What 
she then “ with frenzied-mouth ”’ proclaimed, that the god 
spoke out of her ; when she said “I’’, Apollo was speaking 
of himself and of what concerned him.*®® It is the god who 
lives, thinks, and speaks in her so long as the madness lasts. 


§ 4 


A profound and compelling tendency of the human mind 
must have been the source of the great religious movement 
that could succeed in establishing, with the ecstatic prophecy of 
the Delphic priestess, a seed of mysticism in the very heart 
of Greek religion. The introduction of ekstasis into the 
ordered stability of the Delphic mode of religion was only a 
symptom of that religious movement and not its cause. 
But now, confirmed by the god himself, and by the experience 
which the mantic practice seemed to make so evident, the 
new belief, so long familiar to Dionysiac religion and worship, 
must have at last invaded the older and original type of Greek 
religion, and taken hold of it in spite of that religion’s natural 


antipathy to anything of the kind. « And this belief was that, 
a highly exalted state of feeling could raise man above the, 
normal level of his limited, everyday consciousness, and 
‘could elevate him to heights of vision and knowledge, 
unlimited ; that, further, to the human soul it was not denied, \ 


in very truth and not in vain fancy, to live for a moment 
the life of divinity. This belief is the fountain-head of all 
mysticism, and tradition still records a few traces of the way 
in which it grew and spread at that time. 


\ 


292 DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 


It is true that the formal and official worship of the gods in 
Greece (where their cults were not obviously affected by foreign 
influence) remained as fast-bound as ever within the confines 
of order and lucidity. We hear very little of the entrance of 
ecstatic exaltation into the constitution of the older cults.*® 
The irresistible religious impulse to such things found an 
outlet through other channels. Men and women began to 
appear who on their own initiative began to act as inter- 
mediaries between the gods and the needs of individual men. 
They were natures, we must suppose, of unusual susceptibility 
to ‘“‘enthusiastic”’ exaltation; having a strange capacity for 
projecting themselves into the infinite. Nothing in the 
organization of Greek religion prevented such men and 
women, if they could not obtain authority from any religious 
community of the state itself, from acquiring a real influence 
in religious matters simply from their own experience of 
divine favour,®’ their own inward communion with divine 
powers. 

In the darkness and ferment of this period of growth, from 
the eighth to the sixth centuries, we can vaguely discern many 
such shadowy figures; they look uncommonly like those 
strange products of the earliest infancy of Christianity when 
prophets, ascetics, and exorcists wandered from land to land, 
called to their work by nothing but the immediate grace of 
god (xdpioua), and not attached to any permanent religious 
community. It is true that what we hear of Sibyls and 
Bakides—men and women who wandered from land to land 
prophesying the future, independently of and uncommissioned 
by any particular oracular institute—is mostly legend ; but 
these are the sort of legends that preserve real historical 
tradition condensed into single types and pictures. The 
nomenclature itself tells us much: Sibyls and Bakides are not 
individual names, but titles belonging to various types *® of 
ecstatic prophet, and we are entitled to suppose that the 
types so named once existed. The appearance in many places 
of Greek Asia Minor and the old mainland of Greece of such 
divinely inspired prophets is among the distinguishing marks 
of a clearly defined period in Greek history: the age of 
promise that came immediately before the philosophic period 
of Greece. The later age, entirely given up as it was to the 
pursuit of philosophic enlightenment, made so little claim to 
the inheritance in their own time of the divine favour that 
had once enabled the Sibyls and Bakides to see their visions 
and utter their wisdom, that there actually began to appear 
in large numbers prophets at second-hand, who were satisfied 


DIONYSIAG RETIGION® IN**GREECE 293 


with preserving the traditional wisdom of the inspired 
prophets of the past, and with the judicious interpretation 
of their treasures.°® The age of enthusiastic prophets was 
evidently a thing of the past. The very literature of Sibylline 
and Bakid oracles, which began to appear just at that time 
and showed itself capable of an almost indefinite extension, 
was itself largely responsible for the veil of myth and legend 
which completely enveloped the original bearers of the 
prophetic title. Earlier and earlier became the historic 
events of the past which they had foretold; further and 
further into the mythical past, before the time of the events 
prophesied, receded the imaginary period of the great prophets. 
In spite of which the scientific chronologists of antiquity, 
who were far from being imposed upon by the delusive anticipa- 
tions of prophetic poems, found reason for fixing the date 
of particular Sibyls—which means for our purpose the whole 
prophetic age of Greece—in the fully historical period of the 
eighth and seventh centuries. * 

We may recognize, in what we hear of these prophets, the 
shadowy representatives of a once real and living past ; they 
are reminiscences of a striking and therefore never quite 
forgotten phase of Greek religious life. The Bakids and Sibyls 
were independent agents—though not entirely without con- 
nexion with the regular worship of the gods, they were 
not attached to any particular temple—who wandered from 
land to land according to the needs of those who sought their 
counsel. In this respect, at least, they resembled the Homeric 
omen-interpreters,®°* and continued their work; but they 
differed from them profoundly in the mode of their pro- 
phesying. They were ‘“‘seized by the god” and in ecstatic 
clairvoyance saw and proclaimed unseen things. It was 
no academic skill that they possessed, enabling them to 
interpret the meaning of signs and omens that anyone could 
see—they saw what was visible only to God and to the 
soul of man filled with God.® In hoarse tones and wild words °* 
the Sibyl gave utterance to what the divine impelling power 
within her and not her own arbitrary fancy suggested ; 
possessed by the god, she spoke in a divine distraction. An 
echo of such daimonic possession, and of the horrible reality 
and terror that it had for the possessed, can still be heard in 
the cries and convulsions which Aeschylus in the Agamemnon 
gives to his Kassandra—a true picture of the primitive 
Sibyl, and a type that the poets of that prophetic 
generation had reflected backwards into the earlier past of 
legend, ® 


— 


SS ete ren tm or Tee seer 


294 DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 


85 


The activity of the seer was not confined to foreseeing and 
foretelling the future. We hear of a “ Bakis’”’ who “ puri- 
fied’ and delivered the women of Sparta from an attack of 


/madness that had spread like an epidemic among them.*® 
’ The prophetic age of Greece must have seen the origin of what 


c 


later became part of the regular duties of the “seer”: the 
cure of diseases, especially those of the mind ; ®” the averting 
of evil of every kind by-various strange means, and particu- 
larly the supply of help and counsel by “ purifications ”’ of a 
religious nature.®8 The gift or art of prophecy, the purification 
of “the unclean’’, the healing of disease, all seem to be 
derived from one source. Nor can we be long in doubt as to 
what the single source of this threefold capacity must have 
been. The world of invisible spirits surrounding man, which 
ordinary folk know only by its effects, is familiar and accessible 
to the ecstatic prophet, the Mantis, the spirit-seer. As exorcist 
he undertakes to heal disease ; °° the Kathartic process 1s 
also essentially and originally an exorcism of the baleful 
influences of the spirit-world. 

The wide popularity and elaboration given to the notion— 
hardly hinted 7° at as yet in Homer—of the universally 
present menace of “ pollution ’’, which is only to be averted 
or got rid of by means of a religious process of purification— 
this is one of the chief distinguishing features of the over- 
anxious piety that marked the post-Homeric age when men 
could no longer be content with the means of salvation 
handed down to them by their fathers. If we confined our 
attention to the fact that now we find purification required 
for such actions as murder and the spilling of blood which 
seem to imply a moral stain to the doer of them,’! we might be 
tempted to see in the development of Kathartic practices a 
fresh step in the history of Greek ethics, and to suppose 
that the new practices arose out of a refinement and deepening 
of the “ conscience ’’ which now desired to be free from the 
taint of “‘ sin ’’ by the help of religion. But such an interpre- 
tation of Katharsis (favourite as it is) is disposed of by a con- 
sideration of the real essence and meaning of the thing. In 
later times the methods of Katharsis were nearly always in 
competition and conflict (rarely in friendly alliance) with ‘“‘ con- 
science’, with the independently developed ethical thought 
that based itself upon the unchanging requirements_of a moral 
law Bean Ee a tire rare ome and even the 
will of daimonic powers. In its origin and essence Katharsis 


aces 


os 


pg 


Be * 
.Y 


DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 295 


had nothing whatever to do with morality or with what we 
should call the voice of conscience. On the contrary, it 
usurped the place which in a more advanced and morally 
developed people would have belonged to a true morality 
based on an inner feeling for what is right. Nor did it fail 
to hinder the free and unfettered development of such a 
morality. Kathartic practices required and implied no feeling 
of offence, of personal guilt, of personal responsibility. All 
that we know of these practices serves to bring this out and 
set the matter in a clearer light. 

_ Ceremonies of “ purification ’’ accompany every step of 
a man’s life from the cradle to the grave. The woman with 
child is “‘ unclean ’’ and so is anyone who touches her; the 
new-born child is unclean ; 7 marriage is fenced about with 
a series of purificatory rites; the dead, and everything that 
approaches them, are unclean. Now, in these instances of 
the common and almost daily occurrence of purification 
ceremonies, there can be no moral stain involved that requires 
to be washed off, not even a symbolical one. Equally little 
can there be any when ritual purifications are employed 
after a bad dream,’* the occurrence of a prodigy,’* recovery 
from illness, or when a person has touched an offering made to 
deities of the lower world or the graves of the dead ; or when 
it is found necessary to purify house and hearth,’ and even 


d 


fire and water 7° for sacred or profane purposes. The purifica-_ 


tion of those who have shed blood stands on exactly the same 
footing. It was necessary even for those who had killed a 
man with just cause, or had committed homicide unknowingly 
or unwillingly ; the moral aspect of such cases, the guilt 
or innocence of the doer, is ignored or unperceived. Even in 
the case of premeditated murder, the remorse of the criminal 
or his “will to amend ” 77 is quite superfluous to the efficacy 
of purification. 

It could not be otherwise. The “ stain ’”’ which is wiped 
out by these mysterious and religious means is not “ within 
the heart of man’’. It clings to a man as something hostile, 
and from without, and that can be spread from him to others 
like an infectious disease.*8 Hence, the purification is effected 
by religious processes directed to the external removal of the 
evil thing ; it may be washed off (as by water from a running 
spring or from the sea), it may be violently effaced and obliter- 
ated (as by fire or even smoke alone), it may be absorbed (by 
wool, fleece of animals, eggs), etc. 

It must be something hostile and dangerous to men that is 
thus removed ; since this something can only be attacked by 


ogee 
PN SS RINE 


296 DIONYSIAGS] RELIGION WINS GREECE 


religious means, it must belong to the daimonic world to 
which alone Religion and its means of salvation have reference. 
There exists a population of spirits whose neighbourhood or 
contact with men renders then “ unclean ’’, for it gives them 
over to the power of the unholy.8° Anyone who touches their 
places of abode, or the offerings made to them, falls under 
their spell; they may send him sickness, insanity, evils of 
every kind. The priest with his purifications is an “ exorcist ” 
who sets free those who have fallen victims to the surrounding 
powers of darkness. He certainly fulfils this function when 
he disperses diseases, i.e. the spirits who send the diseases, 
by his ministrations ; *! when he employs in his purificatory 
ritual hymns and incantatory formule which regularly imply 
an invisibly listening being to whom they are addressed ; * 
when he uses the clang of bronze instruments whose well- 
known property it is to drive away ghosts.§8 Where human 
blood has been shed and requires “ purification’’ the Kath- 
artic priest accomplishes this “‘ by driving out murder with 
murder ’’, 84 1.e. he lets the blood of a sacrificed animal fall 
over the hands of the polluted person. Here, the purification - 
is plainly in the nature of a substitution-sacrifice (the animal 
being offered instead of the murderer).®° In this way the 
anger of the dead is washed away—for this anger is itself the 
pollution that is to be removed.8* The famous scapegoats 
were nothing but sacrifices offered to appease the anger of the 
Unseen, and thereby release a whole city from “ pollution ”’. 
At the Thaggelia or on extraordinary occasions of need in 
Ionic cities, and even in Athens, unfortunate men were in 
ancient times slain or stoned to death or burnt “ for the 
purification of the city ’’.8? Even the materials of purifica- 
tion that in private life served to free the individual and his 
house from the claims of invisible powers, were thought of as 
offerings to these powers : this is proved clearly enough by the 
custom of removing such materials, when they had served 
their purpose as “ purifications ’’, to the cross-roads, and of 
making them over to the unearthly spirits who have their 
being there. The materials of purification so treated are in 
fact identical with offerings to the dead or even with ‘‘ Hekate’s 
banquets ’’.88 In this case we can see most clearly what the 
forces are which Kathartic processes essentially aim at 
averting. In them no attempt was made to satisfy a heartfelt 
consciousness of sin or a moral sense that has become delicate ; 
they were much rather the result of a superstitious fear of 
uncanny forces surrounding men and stretching out after 
them with a thousand threatening hands in the darkness. 


DIONY stAGe KEUIGION® ING GRERCE 297 


It was the monstrous phantasies of their own imagination 
that made men call upon the priests of purification and 
expiation for much-needed aid and protection. 


§ 6 


It is simply the invasion of human life by the sinister 
creatures of the daimonic world that the clairvoyant mantis 
is supposed to avert with his “ purifications’’. Among 
these sinister influences Hekate and her crew are particularly 
noticeable. This is without doubt an ancient product of 
religious phantasy—though it is not mentioned by Homer 
—which did not till a late period emerge from the obscurity 
of local observance and obtain general popularity : even then 
it only here and there ceased to be a private and domestic 
cult and reached the dignity of public city-worship.®® The 
cult of Hekate fled the light of day, as did the wild farrago of 
weird and sinister phantoms that surrounded her. She is 
chthonic, a goddess of the lower world,®° where she is at home ; 
but, more easily than other lower-world creatures, she finds 
her way to the living world of men. Wherever a soul is 
entering into partnership with a body—at birth or in child 
bed—she is at hand; ®! where a soul is separating from a 
body, in burials of the dead, she is there. Amidst the dwelling- 
places of the departed, the monuments of the dead and 
the gloomy ritual of their worship, she is in her element.*? 
She is the queen of the souls who are still fast bognd to the 
upper world. It shows her deep-seated connéxion with 
the primeval worship of the dead at the household hearth, ** 
when we hear of Hekate as dwelling “‘in the depth of the 
hearth ’’,°* and being honoured together with the underworld 
Hermes, her masculine counterpart, among the domestic gods 
who “ were left to us by our forefathers ’’.%° 

This domestic cult may be a legacy from times when in 
familiar intercourse with the lower world men did not yet 
fear “ pollution ’’ therefrom.®* To later ages Hekate was 
the principal source and originator of all that was ghostly 
and uncanny. Men came upon her suddenly and to their 
hurt by night, or in the dreamy solitudes of midday’s blinding 
heat ; they see her in monstrous shapes that, like the figures 
in a dream, are continually changing.°® The names of many 
female deities of the underworld of whom the common 
people had much to say—Gorgyra (Gorgo), Mormo, Lamia, 
Gello or Empousa, the ghost of midday=denote in reality 
so many different personifications and variations of Hekate.*? 


298 DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 


She appeared most frequently by night, under the half-light 
of the moon, at the cross-roads. She is not alone but is 
accompanied by her “ crew ’’, the hand-maidens who follow 
in her train. These are the souls of those who have not had 
their share of burial and the holy rites that accompany it ; 
who have been violently done to death, or who have died 
“‘ before their time ’’.?8 Such souls find no rest after death ; 
they travel on the wind now, in the company of Hekate and 
her daimonic pack of hounds.®? It is not without reason that 
we are reminded of the legends of “‘ wild hunters’ and the 
“furious host’’,sofamiliar in moderntimes in many countries. 
Similar beliefs produced similar results in each case ; perhaps 
there is even some historical connexion between them.?% 
These night-wandering spirits and souls of the dead bring 
pollution and disaster upon all who meet them or fall into 
. their hands; they send evil dreams, nightmares, nocturnal 
apparitions, madness and epilepsy.1% It is for them, the 
unquiet souls of the dead and Hekate their queen, that men 
set out the “banquets of Hekate’ at the cross-roads.1% 
To them men consign with averted faces the remains of the 
purificatory sacrifices 1°4 that they may not come too close 
to human dwelling places. Puppies, too, were sacrificed to 
Hekate for “ purifications ”’, 1.e. “‘ apotropaic ”’ sacrifices. 

Gruesome inventions of all kinds were easily attached to 
this province of supernaturalism ; it is one of the sources 
which, with help from other Greek conceptions and many 
foreign creations of fancy, let loose a stream of anxious 
and gloomy superstitiousness that spread through the whole 
of later antiquity and even reached through the Middle Ages 
to our own day. 

Protection and riddance from such things were sought at 
the hands of seers and “ Kathartic priests ’’ who, in addition 
to ceremonies of purification and exorcism had other ways of 
giving help—prescriptions and recipes of many strange sorts 
which were originally clear and natural enough to the fantastic 
logic of superstition and were still credited and handed down 
as magic and inexplicable formule after their real meaning 
had been entirely forgotten. Others, again, were driven by a 
fearful curiosity to attempt to bring the world of surrounding 
spirits—of whose doings such strange stories were told in 
legend 1%—even closer to themselves. By magic arts and 
incantations, they compelled the wandering ghosts and even 
Hekate herself to appear before them: 1°° the magic power 
forces them to do the will of the spirit-raiser or to harm his 
enemies.1°? It was these creatures of the spirit-world that 


DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 999 


magicians and exorcists claimed to banish or compel. Popular 
belief was on their side in this, but it is hardly possible that 
they never resorted to deceit and imposture in making good 
their claims. 


§ 7 


The mantic and Kathartic practices, together with what 
arose out of them, are known to us almost exclusively as they 
were in the time of their decay. Even in the brief. sketch 
just attempted of this notable by-way of Greek religion, 
many details have had to be taken from the accounts left 
to us by later ages that had quite outgrown the whole idea 
of mantic and Kathartic procedure. Compared on the one 
hand with science, seriously engaged in studying the real and 
inward sources of being and becoming throughout the world, 
together with the limitations of man’s estate, and on the 
other hand with the practical and cautious medical study 
of the physical conditions of human life in health and sick- 
ness, the mantic and Kathartic practices and all the myriad 
superstitions arising from them seemed like a legacy from a 
forgotten and discredited past. But such things persisted 
in many circles of old-fashioned and primitive-minded people, 
though by the emancipated and cultured they were despised 
as the silly and dangerous quackery of mendicant priests and 
wizards. 

But this product of the religious instinct cannot always 
have appeared in such a light ; it certainly was not so regarded 
when it first came into prominence. A movement that was 
zealously taken up by the Delphic oracle, which influenced 
many Greek states in the organization of their religious 
cults, must have had a period when its right to exist was 
incontestable. It must have answered to the needs of a time 
when the dawning sense of the profound unity and inter- 
connexion of all being and becoming in the world still contented 
itself with a religious explanation of what seemed mysterious, 
and when a few chosen natures were seriously credited with 
the power to communicate with the all-embracing spirit- 
world. Every age has its own ideal of Wisdom; and there 
came a time when the ideal of the Wise Man, who by his own 
innate powers has achieved a commanding spiritual position 
and insight, became embodied in the persons of certain great 
men who seemed to fulfil the highest conceptions of wisdom 
and power that were attributed to the ecstatic seer and priest 
of purification. The half-mythical stories in which later 
ages preserved the memory of the times lying just before the 


er 


300 DIONYSIAC’ RELIGION IN GREECE 


age of the philosophic exploration of nature tell us of certain 
great masters of a mysterious and occult Wisdom. It is true 
that they are credited with powers over nature of a magical 
kind rather than with a purely intellectual insight into the 
laws of nature; but even in the scanty accounts of them 
which have come down to us there are clear indications that 
their work already included the first attempts at a mode of 
study based on theory. We cannot call them philosophers— 
not even the forerunners of Greek philosophy. More often 
their point of view was one which the real philosophic impulse 
towards self-determination and the freedom of the soul 
consciously and decisively rejected, and continued to reject, 
though not indeed without occasional wavering and back- 
sliding. These men must be counted among the magicians 
and exorcists who so often appear in the earliest dawn of the 
spiritual ‘history of civilized nations, and, as primitive and 
marvellous types of the spirit of inquiry, precede the philo- 
sophers. They all belong to the class of ecstatic seers and 
Kathartic priests. 

Legend related how, out of the country of the Hyperboreans, 
that distant Wonderland where Apollo hid himself in winter, 
there came to Greece one Abaris, sent by the god himself. He 
was a saint and needed no earthly food. Carrying in his hand 
the golden arrow, the proof of his Apolline origin and mission, 
he passed through many lands dispelling sickness and pesti- 
lence by sacrifices of a magic kind, giving warning of earth- 
quakes and other disasters. Even in later times prophecies 
and “ purifications ’’, going under his name, were still to be 
read.!°8_This man, and also another like him, called Aristeas, 
were already mentioned by Pindar (fr. 271). Aristeas, a man 
of high rank in his native city of Prokonnesos, had the magic 
gift of prolonged ekstasis. When his soul left his body behind, 
being “ seized by Phoibos ’’, it (as his second self made visible) 
was seen in distant places.1°° As Apollo’s attendant he also 
appeared together with the god in Metapontum. A bronze 
statue in the market-place of that city remained to testify 
to his presence there, and to the astonishment awakened 
by his inspired utterances.“° But among all these examples 
of the type,!44 Hermotimos of Klazomenai is the most striking. 
His soul could desert his body “‘ for many years ’’, and on its 
return from its ecstatic voyages, brought with it much mantic 
lore and knowledge of the future. At last, enemies set fire 
to the tenantless body of Hermotimos when his soul was 
away, and the latter returned no more." 

The greatest master of all these magically gifted men was, 


DIONYotACe RELIGION» IN“ GREECE 301 


according to tradition, Epimenides. His home was in Crete, 
an ancient centre of Kathartic wisdom,"? where Epimenides 
was instructed in this lore as an adherent of the cult of 
the underworld Zeus.44 Through a mist of legend and fable 
we hear of his prolonged stay in the mysterious cave of Zeus 
on Mt. Ida, his intercourse with the spirits of the darkness, 
his severe fasting,4° the long ecstasy of his soul,44® and his 
final return from solitude to the light of day, much experienced 
and far-travelled in ‘“‘ enthusiastic wisdom’’.47 Next he 
journeyed through many lands bringing his health-giving 
arts with him, prophesying the future as an ecstatic seer,48 
interpreting the hidden meaning of past occurrences, and as 
Kathartic priest expelling the daimonic evils that arose from » 
specially foul misdeeds of the past. The Kathartic activity of 
Epimenides in Delos and other Greek cities was famous. 
It was in particular never forgotten how in Athens at the end 
of the seventh century he brought to a satisfactory close the 
explation of the godless murder of the followers of Kylon.1?° 
With potent ceremonies of which his wisdom alone knew the 
secret, with sacrifice of animals and men, he appeased !*! the 
anger of the offended spirits of the depth who in their rage 
were “‘ polluting ’’ and harming the city .. . 

It was not without reason that later tradition, undeterred 
by questions of chronological possibility, brought all the names 
just mentioned into connexion with Pythagoras or his adher- 
ents,!*? and was even accustomed to refer to Pherekydes of 
Syros, the latest of the band, as the teacher of Pythagoras. 
The practice, if not the philosophy, of the Pythagorean sect 
grew up among the ideas and what may be called the teaching 
of these men, and belongs to the epoch which honoured them as 
Wise Men. We still possess a few scraps of evidence to show 
that the conceptions guiding their life and work tended to 
reach some sort of unification in the minds of these visionaries 
who were yet something more than the mere practicians of a 
magical species of religion. We cannot, indeed, tell how far 
the fanciful pictures of the origin of the world of men which 
Epimenides 128 and Pherekydes drew were connected with 
the business and professional activity of these men ; 124 but 
when it is related of Hermotimos that he, like his countryman 
Anaxagoras, attempted a distinction between pure “ mind ”’ 
and matter,!2° we can see very clearly how this theory might 
arise out of his special ‘‘ experiences’’. The ecstasies of the 
soul of which Hermotimos himself and this whole generation 
had such ample experience seemed to point to the separability 
of the soul from the body !26—and, indeed, to the superiority of 


302 DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE 


the soul’s essence in its separate state over that of the body— 
as to a fact of the most firmly established authenticity. In 
contrast with the soul the body could hardly help appearing 
as an encumbrance, an obstacle to be got rid of. The con- 
ception of an ever-threatening pollution and “ uncleanness ” 
which was nourished by the teaching and activities of those 
innumerable purification-priests of whom Epimenides is 
known to us as the supreme master, had gradually so pene- 
trated the whole of the official religion itself with purification- 
ceremonies that it might very well have seemed as though, 
in the midst of this renovation and development of a type of 
religious thought that had been more than half forgotten in 
the Homeric period, Greek religion was fast approaching 
the condition of Brahmanism or Zoroastrianism and becoming 
essentially a religion of purification. Those who had become 
familiar with the contrast between body and soul, especially 
if they lived in the atmosphere of Kathartic ideas and their 
practical exercise, were almost bound to proceed to the idea 
that even the “ soul ’’ required to be purified from the polluting 
embarrassment of the body. That such ideas were almost a 
commonplace is shown by many stories and turns of 
phrase which represent the destruction of the body by fire 
as a “‘ purification ’’ of the man himself.12” Wherever these 
ideas—the precise opposite and contrary of the Homeric 
conception of the relation between body and soul-image— 
had penetrated more deeply they must have led to the idea 
that even in the lifetime of the body the purification of 
the soul should be prepared by the denial and inhibition of 
the body and its impulses. The first step was thus taken 
towards a purely negative system of morality, not attempting 
the inner reformation of the will, but aiming simply at averting 
from the soul of mana polluting evil threatening it from without 
—in fact to a morality of religious asceticism such as later 
became such an important and decisive spiritual movement in 
Greece. In spite of all the inadequacy of our information about 
these Wise Men of the early pre-philosophic period, we can still 
dimly make out the fact that their natural bent lay in this 
ascetic direction (the abstention from food practised by Abaris 
and Epimenides are distinct cases of it).1?8 How far, exactly, 
they went in this direction is indeed more than we can say. 
Thus, the ascetic ideal was not absent even from Greece. It 
remained, however—in spite of the influence it had in some 
quarters—always a foreign thing in Greece, having its obscure 
home among sects of spiritualistic enthusiasts, and regarded 
in contrast with the normal and ruling viewof life,as a paradox, 


DIG NY si ACK LIGION SIN GREECE 303 


almost a heresy. The official religion itself is not entirely 
without the seeds of an ascetic system of morality; but the 
ascetic ideal, fully developed and distinguished from the 
simple and normal religious attitude, was in Greece 
found only among minorities who cut themselves off in closed 
and exclusive conventicles of a theological or philosophical 
temper. The “ Wise Men’”’, as idealized in the legends of 
Abaris, Epimenides, etc., were as individuals not far removed 
from the ideal of asceticism. Nor was it long before the 
attempt was made to use these ideals as the basis on which 
to found a society. 


NOBESE LO) CHAT Pilar las 


1 We may safely take it for granted that A:dvuaos isthe Greek name 
of the god, though a completely convincing etymology for the word 
has yet to be found. Recent attempts to derive it from the Thracian 
language are not very convincing. (Tomaschek, Sitzber. Wien. Ak. 
130, 41; Kretschmer, Aus der Anomia, 22 f.;. Einl. 241.) Acerte 
Kretschmer a Thracian origin for the name is proved by the appearance 
of the form Aedvvao-— on inss. found in a few Greek towns surrounded 
by Thracian influences, e.g. Abdera, Maroneia. Acc. to him the 
transition from ct to e before a vowel is regular in Thrako-Phrygian, 
while on the other hand “it is completely incompatible with all the 
laws of Greek phonetics’’. Others have disagreed with this view, 
e.g. G. Curtius, certainly an auctor probabilis, to whom the occasional 
appearance of the transition from u to e before a vowel (side by side 
with the much commoner reverse process) seemed quite compatible 
with the laws of Greek phonetics. He even counted A:dvvcos— 
Aevvuvoos (Anakreon) among the examples of this vowel change within 
the limits of the Greek language (Gr. Etym.*, p. 608 f.). At any rate 
*"Eaowv = "Idowv, and marpovéay = matpwiav are certain cases of it 
(see Meister, Gr. Dial, i, 294; G. Meyer, Gr. Gramm ap teee 
Kretschmer himself, Fini, 225, supplies "AoxAnmeddwpos, Aei = Aci. 
To account for these forms he postulates the influence of Thracian 
surroundings on Greek pronunciation ; but in the case of such a purely 
Greek word as ’AoxAnmiddwpos the Thracian influence must have been 
a secondary phenomenon operating to cause the alteration of the old 
<6 into €0. Why should we not use the same explanation in accounting 
for the change from Avdvucos to Aedvucos and (if Thracian influence 
is to be presumed—by no means probable in view of the statement 
of EM. 259, 30, Aedvucos, ottTw yap L'dpor mpodepovav) say that this 
Thracian influence was a secondary one acting upon the original Greek 
form of the name A.dvucos ?>—It is evident that the ancients had no 
idea that Ardvucos (Aravucos, Avdvvvcos) was the indigenous name of 
the Thracian god, for they would in that case have said so without 
hesitation. They derived the conception, figure, and cult of the god 
from Thrace but not this particular name, which they regularly regard 
as the Greek name of the daimon whom the Thracians spoke of as 
SaBalios or otherwise. (So too Hdt. regards Avdvucos as the Greek 
name of the god whose essential nature is Egyptian.) This is by no 
means without importance; on the contrary, it provides cogent reason 
for doubting the (otherwise insecurely founded) derivation of the name 
from the Thracian. 

2 The women in Boeotia évfewrata éudvynoay (cf. Eur., Ba.). rais 
Aakedatpoviwv yuvaréiy évérec€ tis olotpos Baxxixos Kal tats Tov Xiwy, 
Ael., VH. iii, 42. Hdt. ix, 34, speaks inclusively of the madness of 
the women in Argos (trav ev ’’Apyei yuvarkdv paveroéwv), where others 
‘speak only of the frenzy attacking the daughters of Proitos. Neither 
is incompatible with the other: they simply represent two different 
,/ stages of the story. The paiveo#ar which attacks the entire female 
population is not (as later accounts generally make out) the punish- 
ment sent by Dionysos: it is simply another way of expressing the 
general acceptance of his worship which essentially consisted in 


NIGADES SG) AC UAM PAB ge 19.4 305 


patvecBa (= Baxxevev in Ant. Lib. 10). The paivecda: of individual 
women who try to resist the contagious enthusiasm of the Dionysiac 
revelry going on around them (e.g. the daughters of Eleuther: Suid. 
peAavary. Ardv.) is, however, a punishment sent by the angry gcd 
when it leads them to murder their own children.—The regular 
and widespread “‘mania’”’ of the newly introduced cult of Dionysos 
is referred to also by D.S. 4, 68,4; [Apollod.] 2, 2, 2,5; Paus. 2, 18, 4; 
cf. also Nonn., D. 47, 481 ff. 

3 Resistance of Perseus to Dionysos who in this account arrives 
with the Mainads from the islands of the Aegean Sea (so Paus.) ; 
victory of Perseus, followed, however, by a reconciliation with the god 
whose worship is established and a temple built for Dionysos Kresios : 
Poe se 2, 4 122, 1 23, 7-8. Sosetoo,,Nonn., Ds 4/7, 475-741; 
lod. | 3,50,02,.35) och V., £319 > cf... Memeke, An. Alex. 51. 
(Dionysos is slain in the war with Perseus: Dinarchos “ the poet ”’ 
ap. Eus., Chr. ii, pp. 44-5 Sch. = an. 718 Abr.; Lob., Agl. 537 f.).— 
Lykourgos does not properly belong to this series: his legend, as told 
by [Apollod.] 3, 5, 1 (apparently following the direction given to it 
by Aesch.), is a late transformation of the story preserved by Homer, 
in which stories of Pentheus or the Minyads or the Proitides are 
imitated. 

4 This is esp. clear in the legend dealing with Orchomenos; cf. the 
peeount-in Plu., O.Gr. 38, p.7293 D. It is very probable that the 
other stories, too, were founded upon sacrificial] ritual; cf. Welcker, 
Gr. Gotterl. 1, 444 ff. 

eet feealso. Sch.; Ar>, Ach.. 243: 

6 Cf. Eur., Ba. 217 ff., 487, 32 ff. The daughters of Minyas ézoéovv 
Tovs yapéras (see Perizon. ad loc.) Kat dca totto ovK eyevovto TH Ge 
poauwades, Ael., VH. iii, 42. Throughout all these legends the contrast 
between Dionysos and Hera, who is the patroness of marriage, is very 
marked. 

7 dpovyvvacka Altovvoov—unknown poet ap. Plu., Evil. 17, p. 607 C; 
Smp. 4,6,1, p.671C; Eap. D. 9, 389 B. that, eipadidra, yuvatpaves, 
Weitom. 34, 17. 

8 Like an infection or a conflagration. dy 760° éyyts wore rip 
édanterar UBpiopa Baxkyot, poyos és ““EAAnvas péyas, Pentheus in E., 
Ba. 778. 

® See the accounts reported ap. Hecker, Epidemics of the M.A., pp. 88, 
153 Babington, esp. those of Petrus de Herental (ap. Steph. Baluz., 
Vit. Pap. Avinion. i, 483) : quaaedam nomina daemoniorum appellabant. 
The dancer cernit Mariae fiium et caelum apertum.-—‘‘ The masters 
of the Holy Scripture who exorcized the dancers regarded them as 
being possessed by the devil.’”? (Limburg Chronicle ; see Mon. Germ., 
Chron. iv, 1, ed. Tilemann: p. 64, ed. Wyss.) 

10 Details given by Weniger, Dionysosdienst in Elis, p. 8 (1883). 

11 At Delphi there was a festival called #pwis in which the Dionysiac 
Thyiades took part; a SewéAns avaywyy was the chief feature of the 
dSpapeva davepds (Plu., Q.Gr. 12). The name wpwis points to a 
general festival of the dead (cf. Voigt in Roscher’s Lex. i, 1048) ; for 
another general festival of ‘“‘ Heroes”? at Delphi see chap. iv, n. 82. 
At Athens the great festival of the dead, the Choes and Chytrai 
{chap. v, p. 168) formed part of the Anthesteria. It is precisely 
in these dpyaudrepa Avovdora (Thuc. uu, 15, 4) that Dionysos appears 
as he was in primitive belief, the ‘‘ master of the souls’’. Thus, too, 
in Argos one of the most ancient seats of the worship of Dionysos, 
the Dionysiac festival of the Agriania was at the same time a festival 


x 


306 NOTES 7 10" CHAPTER Kees 


of the dead, vexdoua: Hsch., aypidvea (it was specially émt pid rap 
ITpotrov Ovyarépwv [Iphinoé: Apollod. 2, 22, 8], Hsch. s.v.: even so 
it was a festival of the dead).—In Plu., EF ap. D. 9, 389 A, in view of 
the hopeless confusion shown by Plutarch in that chapter between 
Delphic cult-procedure and the opinions of certain unspecified QeoAdyou, 
it is unfortunately impossible to say with certainty whether it is the 
Delphians who Acdvucov cat Zaypéa Kal Nuxrédov nat “Icodairny 
évopalovow or whether this only apples to the @eoAdyou (in which case 
they are probably Orphics). 

12 UHe Aeon ae OnLem, Savage ° > god (Wunaotis Kal adypidvios as 
contrasted with the xap.dorns Kal perdi xros, Bluse ven 24) were cele- 
brated in Thebes and Argos. UD al Kal vuxrédca @v Ta tmoAAa b1a 
okoTovs dparac are opposed to the orAdvpuma ltepa, by Plu., QR. 112 
p. 29) A. Bacchic din, dddos, at the vuxréAca, Plu., Smp. 4, 6, p. 672 A. 
—Temple of D. Notre Nine at Megara: Paus. 1, 40, 6. Nocturnal 
festivities (vixc7wp 7a woAAa, Eur., Ba. 486) at the Dionysia at Lerna’ = 
Paus. 2, 37, 6, at the festival of Avdvucos Aapnryjp in Pellone: Paus. 
7, 27, 3. dpyta of D. at Melangeia’ in Arcadia’ 8, 6, >; @at-berare 
8, 26, 1.- The orgiastic cult of D. seems to, have been preserveq 
particularly in Sparta. We hear of the oforpos Baxyixds that once 
attacked the women of Sparta from Aelian, VA. iii, 42; some lines 
of Alkman (fy. 34) allude to the fanatical Bacchic revels on the mountain 
tops (quite misunderstood by Welcker, Kl. Schr. iv, 49). It became 
proverbial: virginibus bacchata Lacaenis Taygeta, Vg., G. ii, 487. A 
special word is applied to the Bacchic fury of these Spartan Mainads : 
dvopaivat (Philarg. on Yg., G. ii, 487.; Hsch. s.v.; Meinekew 7.24/22. 
360). In view of these ecstatic mountain-revels we need not be surprised 
at the prohibition of drunken roaming about the city and country- 
side, of which Pl., Lg. 637 AB speaks. 

13 Welcker, Gry. Gétterl. i, 444.—But human sacrifice in the Thracian 
worship of D. is nevertheless suggested by the remarkable story of 
Porph. (Abs. ii, 8) about the Baocoapot (whom he seems to take for 
a Thracian tribe). 

14 Clem. Al., Arn., Firm. all speak of the wyodayla of the Bakchai 
as a Still-prevailing cult-practice. Bernays, Hevraklit. Bniefe, 73. 
Galen, too, speaks in the same way of the tearing in pieces of snakes 
at the Bacchic festivals (quoted Lob., Agl. 271 a); to snare vipers 
KaAAvatos €att Kaipos, dv Kal attos 6 *“Avdpdpaxos (79 ff. of his poem) 
ednAwoer, jira Kat ot T@ Atovdow Baxxevovtes eiwOact dtaomayv tas 
exidvas, mavouévov pev Tod Hpos ovmw 8’ Apypévov Tob Bépovs (Antid. 
i, 8 = xiv, p.45 K.). Avixa—éyidvas are Gal.’s words not Andromachos’. 
Cf. also Prud., Sym. ie SOni te 

toa e need only recall the remarkable story of Hdt. (iv, 79) about 
the Scythian king who in Borysthenes was initiated into the mysteries 
of Dionysos Bakcheios 6s patveabar evayer avOpmmovs. His Scythian 
subjects took exception to this. For them the religion was specifically 
Greek. A Borysthenite says to the Scythians : Qua@v yap Kkatayedare, 
® LkKvda, ort Baxxevo pev Kal nuas oO Beds AapBaver. vov obTos } 
daiuwv kal Tov vpetepov Baotréa AeAGBynKe Kal Baxyever Kat Ud TOD 
Beod paiverau. 

16 Cf. the remarkable account given by Plu., Mul. Virt. 11, p. 249 B; 
fv.de An. ap. Gell. 15, 10; Polyaen. 8,63; and Lucian in H. Conscyr. (25), 1h 

1” Of a different description are the attacks of temporary insanity 
accompanied by similar features but not religious in complexion 
described by Aretaeus, p. 82 K., and Gal. vii, pp. 60-1 K. (the case of 
Theophilos). 


NODE Ser lOrm CHAP hE hr lx 307 


18 Phenomena of xopuBavriacpdes: hearing the sound of flutes 
Beemi. O4 1). Maxon l.,, Disst 38, 2, p..220 Ris cf? Cic., Divwi, 114+ 
seeing davracia, D.H., Dem. 22. It is this waking dream-condition, 
a condition related to hypnosis, which Pliny probably means: 
patentibus oculis dormiunt multi homines, quos corybantiare Graeci 
dicunt, NH. xi, 147. Excitement, beating heart, weeping: PI., 
Smp. 215 E. Maddened dance: of kopvBavtidvtes otk Eudpoves ovTes 
épxoovra, Jon, 534 A. “‘ Sober drunkenness”? péby vyndadcos of the 
kopuB., Philo, Mund. Op. 23,1, p. 16 M.—The name shows that those 
attacked by the disease were regarded as “‘ possessed”? by the Kory- 
bantes. KopuBartiav' to KoptBaot xatéxyecba, Sch. Ar., V. 9. The 
Korybantes pavias Kat évdevacpod eiow éprointixol, ib. 8. evOeos 
ex oepnvav KopuBavrwr, E., Hip. 142; Sch. ad loc.: KopvBavres pavias 
aitto. evev kat kopuBav7.av.—Arrian gives an unusually good account 
of the Korybantic frenzy of the Phrygians in a little noticed passage 
ap. Eust. on D.P. 809: paivovra rH ‘Péa kai mp os KopuBavtwy Kcatéxovrat, 
nyovv KopuBavti@or Satpovavres {i.e. possessed by the Saluwv, see 
Usener, Gétternamen, 293). drav d€ katdoxy adtods 70 Oetov, €AavYdpevot 
kal péya Bodyres kal dpxovpevor Tpobeamilovat Ta péAAovta, Veo dopov pevoe 
Kal pawopevor. The complete similarity between this condition and 
that of the Bacchic worship is sufficiently obvious. 

19 Use of dance and music to cure those who are attacked by 
imoryDantic) excitement :) Pl., le. 790 DE, -791. A. More: especially 
the melodies for the flute composed by Olympos, being @eta, were able 
to discover and cure those hable to Korybantic ekstasis (by means of 
the inspiring effect which they had on such persons). This is shown 
particularly by a passage in Plato (Smp. 215 C—-E) ; where it is evident 
that the xopyvBavridvres of 215 E are not to be distinguished from the 
Oedv Kai teAeT@v Sedpevor of 215 C (C states the general rule of which 
E is a particular application). This homoeopathic cure of the 
KkopuBavti@vtes by the intensification and subsequent discharge of the 
disorder is implied in all that we hear of the character of the Phrygian 
mode as év@ovataorixy and of the péAn "OAvp7ov as exciting the souls 
of men to ‘“ enthousiasmos’’; Arist., Pol. 1340b, 4, 5, 1342b, 1 ff., 
1340a, 8; [Pl.], Min. 318 B; Cic., Div. i, 114. The xopvBavridvres 
are also meant in Arist., Pol. 8, 7, 1342a, 7 ff. . . Kai yap bm0 ravrns 
THS KWHoEws (1.e. Tob evOovotacpod) KaTaKwyxLpol Tives Ela" ex de TAY 
lep@v peAdv op@pev tovtovs, 6tav xpHowvrar tots dpyidlovar tHv yuxnv 
péAecs, Kabtaotapévous Wamep latpeias TuxXOVTas Kal KaBapcews. Plato’s 
analysis (Lg. 790 D ff.) is exactly parallel: the cure for the pavxai 
diabécers Of the Korybantic patients is ody yovyia adda rodvaytiov 
xivnots, whereby they are assisted to regain their €fers Eudpoves. (It 
is from this religio-musical procedure and not from strictly medical 
experience or practice that Aristotle, taking a hint from Plato, Pp. 606, 
derived his idea of the xa@apois tv wabnpuatwy by violent discharge 
of the emotions and transferred it to tragedy—not, as in the explanation 
to which some have recently returned, by a tranquilization of the 
emotions in “‘a final reconciliation’’.) This xa@apors and larpeta 
of the xopuBavri@vres is the object of the initiation ceremony of the 
Korybantes (whose true Baxyo. are the xopvBavridvtes, i.e. the 
worshippers who are in need of and capable of cure) ; of the KopuBavrwyv 
pvorijpia which are held émi xabapud rHs pavias (Sch. Ar., V. 119-20, 
exopuBavtile) ; cf. the reAeT1) THv KopuBavrwy (Pl., Euthd, 277 D, including 
Opdvwars : D. Chr. 12, p. 388 R., § 33 Arn. ; Lob., Ag/. 116, 369. There is 
a parody of Opdévwas in the initiation scene of Ar., Nub. 254, where 
Streps. sits éal rdv fepov oxipmoda. TeOpovicpévos rots Geois = initiated 


308 NOTES@ 1 OMCH AD DEK ess 


in P. Mag. Lond. 747 {. = Kenyon, Greek Papyri in B.M. 1, p. 108) ; 
and cf. the pntp@a Kai KopuBavtixa téAn: D.H., Dem. 22. At the 
initiation ceremony (xopvBavticpes * Ka@apors pavias Hsch.) held in 
the KopuBavreiov (Hdn. Gr. 1, 375, 15 Lentz; App. Prov. 11, 23) the 
famous music of “‘inspiration’’ was played; there was also yxopeia 
(Pl., Euthd.), xo e.g. the sound of r¥urava (Ar., Ves. 120 f.; Luce. 
DD. 12, 1), and also it appears incense-burning: dopai, D.H., Dem. 
22; cf. above, chap. vili, n. 39. All these stimulants intensified the 
pathological tendency of the xopvBavri@vres and gave them relief by 
the violent discharge of their emotions.—There is no need to doubt the 
actual occurrence of such pathological states and their medical treatment 
by music, etc. It was clearly the same type of psychopathical malady 
that invaded Italy in the’ Middle Ages under the name of Tarantism, 
repeating its attacks for several centuries: in this case, too, music 
(and even the sound of a particular melody) served both to excite 
and eventually to cure the violent dance-mania; cf. Hecker 172, 176 ff. 
—There seems to be a fabulous element in other stories current in 
antiquity about the cure of madness, love-passions, and even sciatica 
by the music of the flute (Pythagoras, Empedokles, Damon, 
Thphr. fv. 87). Such belief in the curative powers of music, esp. of 
the flute, seems to have been derived originally from actual experience 
of the xafapoers practised in Korybantic festivals, and then to have 
been exaggerated into a fable. Even doctors had no doubt that pavia 
was curable by the cantiones tibiarum; see Cael. Aur., Morb. Chr. 
i, 5, 175, 178 (Asklepiades) ; Cael. Aur. (i.e. Soranos), ib. 176, however, 
denies it. Jt depended entirely upon the theory, originally derived 
from xopuBavticpes, Of cure by intensification and discharge of the 
emotional state. 

20 @ paKkap dotis ... Oraceverar puyxav, ev dpecot Baxxevwv, oalots 
Kabappotow, E., Ba. 72 ff.—dicunt sacra Liberi ad purgationem animae 
pertinere Serv. on) Vg.,4G. ii, 389 ;\ ci.valso-on. Aiivijg/4 

#1 Avdvuoos Avoros (like A. pecAlyios €AevOepevs and cawrns) is rightly 
taken as the “ freer from orgiastic frenzy’? (and not in the ordinary 
political sense) by Klausen, Orpheus, p. 26 [Ersch-Gruber] and Voigt in 
Roscher’s Lex. i, 1062. That this is the proper meaning of Avovos is 
shown by its being contrasted with fBaxyetos, which by common 
consent means the god 6s paiveoda evayer avOpwmovs (Hdt.); e.g. in 
Korinth, Paus. 2, 2, 6; Sikyon, Paus. 2, 7, 5-6. And JA. Baxyevs 
and petAiyios in Naxos, Ath. iii, 78 C. 

22 In the xatadoyos yuvarkdyv as it seems; fr. 54 Rz. But perhaps 
also in the Melampodia (fr. 184 Kink.). 

23 €uavyoav, ws ‘Hoiodds dat, d6tiTas Atoviaov TeXeTAs Ov KaTEd€éxXOVTO. 
[Apollod.] 2, 2, 2, 2, and cf. 1, 9, 12, 8. The same story (only with the 
name Anaxagoras substituted for that of his grandfather Proitos— 
doubtless on chronological grounds) with the words ras ’Apyetas 
yuvatkas pavetoas da THv Avovdcov phvw: D.S. 4, 68, 4. (wavia—in 
the reign of Anaxagoras—Paus. 2, 18,4; Eust., on B 568, p. 288, 28).— 
Otherwise, it is generally Hera who sends the pavia Akousil. ap. 
[Apollod.] 2, 2, 2, 2 [fr. 14 Diels]. Pherekyd. ap. Sch. on onZ2gm 
Probus and Serv. on Ecl. vi, 48. This is a later version of the legend 
depending upon a different interpretation of the “insanity ”’. 

24 TApollod.] 2, 2,2. Acc. to Hdt. ix, 34, the treatment of Melamp. 
was applied generally to all the ’“Apyeta: yuvaixes (who acc. to [Apollod.] 
§ 5, were also attacked by the madness) ; cf. D.S. 4, 68, 4. (... vas 
"Apyeias 7 Wstwes wGAXgsv dact, Tas IIpoiridas Eustath. xara 7H tatopiav). 
Jepamevew is D.S.” word; éxd@npev, Sch. Pi., N. ix, 30; purgavit Serv. 


NOTH See LOm CHAPTER glx 309 


, \ \ a A 
25 MedAaumovs mapadaBav tots dvuvatwrdtovs Tay veandyv per’ 


araray Lob Kai twos evféov xopeias Ex TOV dpOv adtas €s Lixvava cvveSiwle 
(i.e. the frenzied women who had eventually become very numerous : 
Bro,.0) |Apollod.] 2, 2,2, 7. The account in Pl., Phdy..244\D, E, corre- 
sponds closely with the proceedings of Melampous and perhaps refers 
to them: aAda pv vocwy ye Kai mévwv THv peylotwr, & 8% madaav 
ek LNVLLaT WY Tro bev Ev TLOL TOV yevav 7H pavia éyyevopevyn Kal mpodynTevoaca 
ols €det amadAXdayny evpeto, Katadvyotca mpos Dedv edyds TE Kal AaTpeElas, 
60ev 57) Kadapuadv te Kai TeAeTav tvxotoa eEdvTyn emolnae tov éavTas 
€xovTa mpds TE TOV TapOVvTa Kal TOV EmELTA xpovorv, AVow TH OpAG@s pavevTe 
Kal KaTacyouevw TOV TapdvTwy Kakdv evpopevyn. This is a description 
of the remedial methods used in the Bacchic and Korybantic 
enthoustasmos but applied to special circumstances of the mythical 
past which are regarded as the standard of all later kathartic methods. 

26 «adappot [Apollod.] § 8. The regular kathartic materials are 
oxirha, acgadros, water, etc.; Diphilus, fv. 126 K., employs them alt 
for his own purpose, ap. Clem. Al., Sty. vii, p. 844 P. The black 
heilebore (€AAéBopos péAas) was popularly known as pedAaputod.oy 
because Melampous had first gathered and employed it for the purpose 
(Thphr., HP. 9, 10, 4), esp. when he cured and purified the IIpoirov 
Ouvyarépas paveicas (Gal., Atvabile 7 =v, p. 132 K.; it can only be 
by mistake that he calls it the white hellebore ; cf. also Diosc. 4, 149, 
where the old xafaptys becomes Meddumous tis aiaodos [hence Plin., 
NH. 25, 47]; the reason may be elicited from Thphr., HP. 9, 10, 2). 
The place where the xa@apyoi took place and where the xa@dpova 
were thrown away differed acc. to the natural features of the locality 
and the convenience they offered: thus in Arcadia it was at Lousoi, 
fees at the river! Anigros, etc: ; Ov., M.xv,.322 ff. Vitr. 8, 3, 21; 
Reeue fowl Uigiso, loss —o >) Cl. Call eH.) A7t.233. f.5; Str1346,, ete. 

27 Melampous “EAAnow 6 éfnynoduevos tod Avovdacov 7rd TE ovvopa 
Kal THv Ouainv Kai THY ToT} TOO daddod, Hdt. ii, 49. Hdt.’s elaborate 
theory in this passage of a connexion between Mel. and Egypt, etc., 
is of course historically quite worthless, but the fact that he pitched 
upon Melamp. especially as the introducer of the Dionysiac religion 
can only have been due to the existence of ancient tradition (i.e. 
legendary tradition of course). There can be no doubt that he, like 
Hesiod, regarded as Dionysiac the frenzy in which the Argive women 
were said pavjva and to have been healed by Melamp. (ix, 34). 

28 Meddprovs didratos dv ’Amdd\Awu, Hes., Eoiat, (168 Rz.) ap. 
Sea Ak., i, 118. dtAos °"AndAAwu, D.S. 6, 7,7 Dind. The poet of 
the family tree of the Melampodidai given in o 244 ff. undoubtedly 
regarded Melamp. as an Apolline pavtis (like all pavrecs in Homer). 
This poet at least knows nothing of the Dionysiac side of Melampous’ 
activities. How Mei. met Apollo on the banks of the Alphaios and 
from him received his consecration as true pav7is, we learn from 
fApollod.] 1, 9, 11, 3. The same is said of Polypheides, a descendant 
of Mel. 0 252: adrap simépOvpov Tlodudeidea pdvtw ?AmdrdAwv OiKe 
Bpordv oy’ dpvorov, emet Odvev "Audidpaos. Another descendant of 
Melamp., Polyeidos, comes to Megara to purify Alkathodés from the 
murder of his son, and founds there a temple of Dionysos: Paus. 
tS 43,) 4. 

29, See above, chap. iii, n. 32. 

80 Plu., Is. et O. 35, p. 365 A. Sacrifice made by Agamemnon to 
Dionysos év pvyxots AeAdwiov map’ avtpa Kepdqmov Geot, Lyc. 207-8: 

31 Plu., E ap. D. ix, p. 388 F. Three winter months were sacred 
to Dionysos (cf. the three chief Dionysiac festivals at Athens which 


310 NOTES LOS CEA RE hale. 


occurred in the months Gamelion, Anthesterion, Elaphebolion). 
Only during these three months is the god on earth. So, too, Kore 
shared her rule over the underworld with Aidoneus for three months 
(or six); the rest of the year she is on earth mapa pntpi Kat addros 
adavarotot. 

32 Arovicw tav AcAdadv oddév Frrov 7 7H "AmoAAWM péreotw, Plu., 
E ap. D. 1x, 384 D. 

a ot) dé vedav Té €oTL avwTépw 7a axpa (rob ITapvacob), Kal at 
Ouddes émt tovtos 7H Atovvow Kai 7H *Améhawve patvovtat, Paus. 
10, 32,7. Parnasus gemino petit aethera colle, mons Phoebo Bromioque 
sacer, cui numine mixto Delphica Thebanae referyit trieterica Bacchae, 
Luc., v, 72 ff. We hear of a Delphos the son of Apollo and Thyia 
the first priestess and Mamad of Dionysos at Delphi: Paus. 10, 6, 4. 

34 Apollo himself in an oracular command JJv@idow mevrerjpovsw 

. érafe Baxxov Ovolav yopav te ToAAOY KUKALav GptAdav; SO Says 
Philodamos of Skarpheia in the Paian (second half fourth century B.c.), 
BCH. 1895, p. 408. We must suppose, too, that this command (i.e. 
decree of the Delphic priesthood) was actually carried out. 

35 AeXAdol dé SitAH mpoonyopla tiua@ow (oc, i.e. Apollo), “AmdAdwva 
kat Avdvucov A€yortes, Men. Rhet., p. 446, 5 Sp 


a47g., Sch Diy. <D\ 29), ,B0Ckhalp 2, 5 ff. Drch.}: 760 
mpodyrixod tpimobos (in Delphi) ev @ T™p@Tos Avovucos be piorevoe. 
Andagain . . daxtvdor (a part of the vépos ITv6uxds) amo Atovdacov, 6re 


mpa@tos ovtos SoKxet amo tod tplmodos Oeptotedoar. As it has been 
previously said that at the Delphic pavretov mpatn Nd& expnouwdnoer, 
Dionysos seems to be here regarded as mpoparv7ts of Nyx. Thus, 
at Megara there was a temple of 4idvvcos NuxréXos in the immediate 
neighbourhood of, and in all probability closely associated with a 
Noxtos pavretoy: Paus. 1, 40, 6. 

87 Paus. 1, 2, 5;. Ribbeck, Anf. d. Dionysoscult in Alt., p. 8 (1869) ; 
cf. Dem. 21, 52. Regulation of a festival of Dionysos in Kolone by 
the Oracle: Paus. 3, 13, 7; in Alea, Paus. 8, 23, 1 (at which women 
were scourged, a substitution for primitive human sacrifice, as at the 
dvapaotiymos in Sparta, of which Paus. is reminded). Introduction 
of the worship of 4idvucos SadAynv at Methymna by the oracle: Paus. 
10, 19, 3.— At Magnesia on the Maeander a plane-tree split by a storm 
revealed a statue of Dionysos (a true Avovucos evdevdpos). The Delphic 
oracle commanded the ambassadors sent by the city to build a temple 
to Dionysos (who had hitherto been without one in Magnesia) and put 
a priest in charge of it; then, for the institution of the cult they were 
to introduce from Thebes Mainads of the family of Ino: MawaSdas at 
yevens Eivots dmo Kadunens. (The cult of Dionysos was evidently 
traditional at Thebes in this family which traced its descent from Ino, 
the foster-mother of Dionysos.) The three Mainads obtained from 
Thebes (called Kosko, Baubo, and Thettale) instituted the cult of the 
god and founded three @iacor arranged according to locality (there were 
three @iaco. in Thebes, too, E., Ba. 680 ff.). They themselves remained 
in Magnesia till their death and were buried with great ceremony 
by the city, Kesko sotathese: t411 of Kosko ”’, Baubo ev TaBdpve, 
Thettale mpos 7® Oéatpw. See the dpyatos ypnopos with explanatory 
notes in prose, restored by ’AoAAdvevos MoxsdaAdAns, apxatos ptorns 
(of Dionysos): Ath. Mitth. 15 (1890), p. 331 f. 

38 See Rapp, Rhein. Mus. 27. In spite of his quite correct emphasis 
in general upon the ritual and purely formal character of this sacred 
embassy and the dance-festival that followed, Rapp makes the mistake 
of underestimating the ecstatic side of the Dionysiac festivals—a side 


NOE om Ll Or GHAR TER ay PX 311 


which was once predominant and was always liable to recur. (If this 
element had not been real there would have been no need for asymbolical 
ritualistic imitation of such €xoracis). How even in later times a true 
ekstasis and self-forgetfulness seized upon the Thyiades in their sacred 
night-festivalsand in consequence of thenumerousstimulating influences 
of the occasion, we can learn very clearly from Plutarch’s descripticn 
of the Thyiads who wandered in their frenzy to Amphissa (Mul. Virt. 13, 
249 E). Rapp., p. 22, tries in vain to upset the historical value of 
this account. Other points have already been mentioned incidentally. 

39 Hv Sta pravtoovyny THv of mwépe PoiBos >AmoAdrwr, A 72. 

40 +0 dtexvov Kat adidaxtov (THs pavtiKhs) Toutéotw evimvia Kat 
évOovortacpovs [Plu.] Vit. Poes. Hom. ii, 212. .The only form known 
to Homer is 4 ta&v éeudpovwy Crrnots tod péAAovtos dia te dpvidwy 
motovpevyn Kal TOV GAAwY onpetuyv (Pl., Phdy. 244 C). 

41 The Ps.-Plutarch of the last note does, however, find in 
Thecklymenos’ position among the suitors, v 345-57 (in any case 
a passage added by a later hand), a proof that he is an év@eos pavrts, 
€x TOS emLTVOLas Onpalvwy Ta péAAovta. Butin that story the abnormal 
state belongs rather to the suitors than the seer. See Lob., Agl. 264. 
Still less can we (with Welcker, Gétterl. ii, 11) deduce Homer’s know- 
ledge of ecstatic prophecy from A 91 ff. or H 34-53. The derivation 
of the word pavris from paivecOa, frequently repeated since the time 
of Plato, would make the ecstatic element predominant in the idea of 
the prophet. But this derivation is quite uncertain and a connexion 
with pavtw is much more probable. 

Beeytho..9¢ 80,1 405°) Dodona: ‘17 234, °€ 327 f:,.7 296: f.. An 
oracle is questioned perhaps in a 402 f. See Nagelsbach, Hom. 
mareol., yp. 1S1 i. 

43 See Lob., Agi. 814 f. (even the regular use of the expressions 
avetAev 6 Beds, 7 mvOia suffice to prove it). Cf. also Bgk., Gr. Lit. 
i, 334. h. Hom. Merc, in its own fashion (552-66) tells how the gcd 
deserted the “lot” oracle at Delphi as too unreliable and unworthy 
of the god. 

44 Even the case of Helenos is no real example of this: H 44 
(ePlu.) Vit. Hom. ii, 212, seems to regard it as one). Cic., Div. i, 89, 
expressly distinguishes the prophesying of Helenos from the 
“enthusiastic? frenzy of Kassandra. 

45 Even the h. Hom. Merc. to the Pythian Apollo, though it describes 
the institution of the cult and oracle of Apollo at Delphi, nowhere 
mentions the Pythia (as Lob., Agi. 264, very pertinently remarks). 
(Acc. to 306 f. we must suppose that at that time the prophesying 
was done exclusively by male pavreis or mpodHrat.) 

46 See Eur., JT. 1234 ff. Oracles of earth-divinities were always 
given by Incubation. Even Cicero (Div. i, 38, following Chrysippos 
it seems) refers to vis illa terrae, quae mentem Pythiae divino afflatu 
concitebat (as something that has disappeared). It is often referred 
to by later authors. The placing of the tripod over the chasm from 
which the vapour of inspiration came, is certainly, with Welcker, 
Gétterl. ii, 11, to be regarded as a reminiscence of the ancient method 
of the earth-oracle which was thus continued in the direct inspiration 
of Apollo. (The évOovctacuéss does not exclude other stimulants. 
The Pythia drinks from the inspired spring—like the pavers at Klaros : 
Ath. Mitth. xi, 430—-and thereupon becomes évOeos : Luc., Herm. 60. 
The prophetess of Apollo Deiradiotes at Argos by drinking the sacrificial 
blood Kdroyos ex Tod Geos ylyverac: Paus. 2, 24, 1. The Pythia chews 
the sacred laurel-leaves to become inspired: Luc., Bis Acc. 1; also 


312 NOTES eLO™] CHAR Ti hemeies 


the dadvn, As mote yevodpevos meTarwy avednvev dordas avtos avat 
uxnmrodxos: H. Mag. ap. Abel, Orphica, p. 288. The holy plant 
contains the vis divina which one absorbs into oneself by chewing. 
This is the crude, primitive idea underlying such actions, as plainly 
appears in a similar case mentioned by Porph., Abs. ii, 48.) 

STC Oem il Sparta : €oTw eémovopalopevov Tdonnrov tepov I's. 
SAN go bmep avrotd topuytat Madcarns, Paus. 3, 12, 8.—The legend 
of Apollo and Daphne symbolizes the overthrow of the earth- oracle 
by Apollo and his own kind of prophecy. 

48 See above, chap. iii, p. 97. _Welcker, Gdétterl. 1, 520 ff. 

48 Seerabovesp. 260 G1: 

50 At Amphikleia in Phokis there was an oracle of Dionysos: 
mpopavtis dé 6 Lepevs eat, YO dé Ex TOD Deod Katoyxos, Paus. 10, 33, 11. 
The words of Cornutus probably refer to Greece (chap. xxx, p. 59, 
20 Lang): Kal pavteta €08’ érov tot Atvovdcov €xovros .. . cf. Plu., 
Smp. 7, 10, 17, p. 716 B: of wadatot tov Pedov (Dionysos) partixjs 
modAny Exe HyobdvTo potpay. 

51 Dionysos the first giver of oracles at Delphi: Arg., Pi. Pyth., 
p- 2, 7 Drch. (see above, n. 36). Voigt ap. Roscher, i, 1033-4, regards 
Apollo at Delphi as the heir of the Dionysiac mantiké; but he 
considers Dionysos to have been in the same condition as the Python 
who was overthrown and killed by Apollo—a view that can hardly 
be justified. My own view is that Apollo, after destroying the chthonic 
(dream) Oracle adopted from the mantiké of Dionysos the prophecy 
by furor divinus which had been hitherto unknown to him.—No one 
can seriously claim to have a clear certain insight into the intricate 
and kaleidoscopic changes of power and authority that finally led to 
the supremacy of the composite Apolline cult in the violently disputed 
centre of Greek religion. 

52... 6aous €€ *AmdAAwvos pavhvas Aéyovat (i.e. the ancient 
xyenopoAdyous), Paus. 1, 34, 4. pavia rod ypynoporoyov, Diogen., 
Py 260A] Te SOs Coe Fetgh Sittl, Gebdrden der Gr. u. R. 345. 
6 évovotacucs émimvevoiv twa Oetav Eexew Soxet, Str. 467.—ot 
vuuddoAnntro. Kal OedAnmrot Tdv avOpamwv, émimvola Satpoviov tiv0s 
watep evOovaralovres, Eth. Eud. i, 1, 4, 1214a, 23. 

53 Ecstatic condition ‘of the Pythia: D.S. xvi, 26; misconstaes 
in a Christian sense, Sch. Ar., Plu. 39 (see Hemsterh. ad loc)eny 
yiyverat Tob Oeot, Iamb., Myst. 3, 11, p. 126, 15 Parthey. Description 
of a case in which the prophesying Pythia became completely 
exopwv Pia, Def, O7., 51,0 p 1438.8. 

54 In the inspired mantiké the soul becomes “ free’? from the body : 
animus ita solutus est et vacuus ut eo plane nihil sit cum corpore, 
Cic., Div. i, 113; cf. 70. (kad? éauriv ylyverar 4 pvy7n in dreaming 
and payretar: Arist. ap. S.E., M. 9, 21-[fr. 10 R.J.  €otxe 4 Geyyeyem 
vods) amoAvouevouv Tob Aoyou éoxt'er waAdAov in enthousiasmos, EE. 1248a, 
40; cf. 1225a, 28.) This is €xoracts of the understanding itself: 
see above, p. 260 ff. At other times it is said that the god enters into 
men and fills their souls; whereupon the man is év@eos: see above, 
chap. vili,n. 50; cf. plent et mixti deo vates, Minuc. 7,6. The priestess 
at the oracle of Branchidai béxerau Tov Oeov, lamb., M. 3, 11, p. 127, 7 Par. 
— eforrilera ° ev Byte vous KaTaQ THY TOU Belov TVEVUATOS adieu, KaTa 
dé Thy petavdotacy atrot mardw éookilerar KTr: Philo, QO. ver. div. 
53,43 p. 511 M., speaking of the év@eos xatroywriky Te pavia, } Te 
mpopytiKov yevos xpATat (p. 509 M.); cf. also Spec. Leg. i, p. 343 M. 
This also was the idea prevailing at Delphi. Plu., Def. Or. 9, p. 414 E, 


rejects as evndes, TO oleaGar Tov Geov adtrov, Womep Tovs eyyaoTptpvoous, 


INO Siar Ome @ LUAE FH Te xt 313: 


evSudpevov eis TA OWpmaTa TAY TpodnTarv trodbéeyyeabat, tots exeivwr 
cTopac. Kal dwvats ypwpmevov opyavors. But this was evidently the 
ordinary and deep-rooted opinion (rov @eov eis cdma Kadeipyvivae 
Ovnrov, Plu., Pyth. Or. 8, p. 398 A). The primitive idea is naively 
expressed by alate magic papyrus (Kenyon, Gk. Pap. in BM. i, p. 116 
[1893], No. 12 2 (fourth. century B.c.] 1. 2 ff: éAdé (Lol, KUpLE Dyas wos 
Ta Bpédn ets tas KotAtas Tay yuvarkayv KrA.—Neither in mantiké nor in 
€xoracis is any great distinction made between the out-going of the 
soul and the in-coming of the god: the two ideas merge together. 
The condition is regarded as one in which two ,persons are united 
and become one; the human being ofov dAdos yevdpevos Kai obx adrés, 
Beds yevopmevos oor dé wy, no longer experiencing a sense of division 
between himself and divinity peraéd yap odSé, 038’ ere dvo add’ ev 
agug¢w (as the subtle mysticism of Plotinos describes é€xoraas, 6, 9, 
ao, 6,475 34- 5). In the above-mentioned magic invocation of 
Hermes the yons who has conjured the god into himself says to the god 
(I. 36 ft., P. 117) ov (coe MSS.) yap éyé, Kal éyd at (aor MSS.) * 76 adv 
Ovoua euov Kal TO €mov adv’ eyw yap elu TO ELdOwAdv cov Krr. [CfE. 
Swinburne, Songs before Sunrise ii, 74 f.] 

55 So Bergk, Gr. Lit. i, 335, n.°58:; The verses of the oracle are 
Bevaraed, asthe god’s own: »Plu., Pyth: Or. v, 396 C.ff. Since the 
god himself speaks out of her the Pythia can properly speaking only 
give true oracles odx amoddpov "AndAAwvos tuxovtos, Pi., P. iv, 5; 
i.e. when Apollo is present at Delphi and not (as he is in winter) far 
away among the Hyperboreans. This was why oracles were originally 
only given in the spring month eae (Plu., Q. Gr.9) in which apparently 
the @eoddva occurred (Hdt. i, 51). Just as in the case of the old 
oracular earth-spirits (see above, chap. lil, n. 12) who were confined 
to special localities, so in the case of the gods who work through the 
éevOovotaoues Of an inspired prophetess, their personal presence in 
the temple at the time of the prophesying is requisite. This presence 
is thought of as actual and corporeal in the primitive form of the 
belief (though it was got over and reinterpreted in later times), and 
therefore in the case of the gods can only be temporary. When, in 
summer, Apollo is in Delos (Vg., A. iv, 143 ff.), no ypyornjpiov takes 
place in the temple of Apollo at Patara in Lykia (Hdt. i, 182). And 
so in general duydvtwy 7 petaotarvtwv (Toy mepi Ta pavTeta Kal xpnoTHpia 
TeTaypevwrv Satpoviwy) amoBadde THY Sdvapmy (Ta parteta), Plu., DO. 
15, p: 418 D. 

56 The cult of Zeus in Crete was held wer’ dpyracpotd: Str. 468 
The same applies to the cult offered in many places to the various 
and very different female deities who were pcnerally combined together 
under the name of Artemis: Lob., Agi. 1085 ff.; Meineke, An. Al. 361. 
In their case Asiatic influence was at “work sometimes, but by no means 
always: Welcker, Gdtterl. i, 391; Miller, Dorians, i, 404 ff. The 
worship of Pan was also orgiastic. Otherwise we find it principally in 
foreign worships that had made their way at an early period into private 
cults: e.g. the Phrygian worship of Kybele, etc. These easily combined 
with the Bacchic worship and became almost indistinguishable from 
it; sometimes they even allied themselves with true Greek cults, 
with that of Pan, for example, which was closely assimilated 
both to the worship of Kybele and that of Dionysos. It remains 
obscure how far the Cretan cult of Zeus was affected by Phrygian 
elements. 

*?7 A remarkable example is given by Herod. (ix, 94), who tells us 
of the blind Euenios in Apollonia who suddenly became possessed of 


314 NORE See FO g0C PN bal ly hae 


” 


€udutos wavtixn (not acquired by learning). He is a true Oedpavtis 
(PL AA pec) 

58 The ancients knew quite well that Baxis and L’BvAdAa were really 
common nouns denoting inspired ypnopwdoi: thus LiBvAAa is the 
mapwvupia of Herophile, Plu., P. Ov. 14, p. 401 A, and Baxis an éri@erov 
of Peisistratos, Sch. Ar., Pav 1071. The words are clearly used to 
denote whole classes of individuals by Arist., Prob. 954a, 36: voonjpara 
pavika Kat evOovaraotixa are liable to attack XiBvAXrat cai Baxides Kal 
of év@eot mavres. And in general when the ancients speak in the 
singular of ‘“‘ the Sibyl” or “‘ Bakis’’, the word is generally meant as 
a class-name; just as for the most part when 7 I/v@ia, 4% Ilv@ias 
occurs it is not a particular individual Pythia who is meant but the 
class-concept of “‘ the Pythtra’’ {or some particular member of the 
class actually functioning at the moment). Hence it is by no means 
certain that Herakleitos, etc., when they speak simply of 7 2L/BvAda, 
and Herod. when he says Bdx«s were of the opinion that there was 
only one Sibyl and one Bakis.—It must be admitted that we do not 
know the real meaning of these adjectival words themselves, their 
etymology being quite uncertain. Was the ecstatic character of these 
prophets already expressed in their titles? ovBvAdAaivetv, of course = 
éevOealew (D.S. 4, 66, 7), but the verb is naturally enough derived 
from the name LiBvaAda, just as Baxilew is from Baxis, epuvew from 
*Epwvs and not vice versa. Nor can we tell how far the personal 
names attached to certain Sibyls and Bakides have real historical 
significance. Sibyl names are Herophile, Demophile (abbreviated to 
Demo), ®urow or perhaps rather ®oirw; cf. dortas ayvprpia, A., Ag. 
1273 (so Lachmann on Tib. 2, 5, 68): the Arcadian Bakis was called 
Kydas or Aletes (cf. ®oirw) acc. to Philetas Eph. ap. Sch. Ar., Pa. 
1071. Itisimpossible to extract from the by no means scanty materials 
any real element of historical fact with respect to these stories of 
individual Sibyls. Most untrustworthy of all in this as in all he says 
on this subject is Herakleides Pont. and his story of the Phrygian 
(or Trojan) Sibyl: we might be more inclined to believe what 
Eratosthenes reported acc. to the antiquis annalibus Samiorum of 
a Samian Sibyl (Varro ap. Lactant., Jmust. 1, 6, 9)—if it had not 
included so entirely worthless a story as that preserved in Val. M. 
1, 5, 9.—Clem. Al., Sty. i, 21, p. 398 P., gives after Bakis a whole list 
of xypynopwdoi with names: they evidently do not all belong to legend, 
but hardly one of them is otherwise known to us. The following 
are possibly real persons belonging to the prophetic period : Melesagoras 
of Eleusis who prophesied in Athens like another Bakis éx vupddr 
Katoxos: Max. Tyr. 38, 3(thereis not a shadow of a reason for identifying 
him with Amelesagoras, the author of an alleged ancient Atthis: 
Miller, FHG. ii, 21) ; Euklos of Cyprus whose ypynopol written in the 
old Cypriote language inspire a certain confidence (M. Schmidt, 
Kuhns Ztschr. 1869, p. 361 ff.) ; unfortunately he wrote before Homer : 
Paus. 10, 24, 3; Tat., Gr. 41, which makes his personality dubious 
again. 

59 Of this description were the ypynopoddyou of the fifth and fourth 
——even of the expiring sixth—centuries (Onomakritos belongs entirely 
to this class). Lob., Agi. 978 ff., 932. It is very rarely that we hear 
in these times of real prophets on their own account, prophesying in 
the furor divinus, like that Amphilytos of Acarnania who met 
Peisistratos as he returned from Fretria before the battle éwt ITaXAnvide 
and prophesied to him éevéedfwy (Hdt. i, 62 f.; he is an Athenian in 
{Pl.] Thg. 124 D—where he is mentioned side by side with Baxis re 


On ee LOG A bh Ral 315 


kat 2¢BvAAa—and in Clem. Al., Siv. i, 21, p. 398 P.). In the same way 
occasional “‘ Sibyls’’ occur even in late times (Phaennis, Athenais : 
see Alexandre, Or. Sib.1 ii, p. 21, 48). 

60 Herakl. Pont. ap. Cl. Al., Stv.i, 21, p. 384 P., seems to have been 
the first to speak definitely of two Sibyls, Herophile of Erythrai and 
the Phrygian Sibyl (whom he identifies with the Marpessian Sibyl 
Bate OnGcr pic Lactinls Gal Zusee Alexandre, 11,°p. 25,32, -Philetas 
ap. Sch. Ar., Av. 962, follows him except that he adds a third, the 
Sardian). The Phrygian-Trojan Sibyl is dated by Herakleides in 
the times of “Solon and Cyrus ’”’ (Lact.) ; we cannot tell what date 
he assigned to the Erythraean. Perhaps it was only after his times 
that the xpyopot of Herophile first appeared in which she prophesied 
the Tpwixa. From these verses it was now deduced that she lived 
before the Trojan war: so Paus. 10, 12, 2, and even Apollodoros of 
Erythrai (Lact. 1, 6, 9). Thenceforward the name of Herophile was 
associated with the idea of extreme antiquity. (The Libyan Sibyl 
of Paus. who is said to be the oldest of all is merely an invention of 
Euripides and never really obtained currency: AifBvoca = LiBvaAdra 
anagrammatically. See Alexandre, p. 74 f.) Herophile was identified 
also with the zpwry XLiBvrA\a who came to Delphi and prophesied 
PuctchmeL 1 wl Or ey GIO 1Cr es expressly iso by Paust 10; <12) i;rand 
Bocchus ap. Solin. 2, p. 38, 21-4 Mom. Acc. to Herakleides (ap. Clem. 
Al.) it was rather the ®pvyia who calling herself Artemis prophesied 
in Delphi (so, too, Philetas following Herakl. and see also Suid. 21. 
AeXdis). This is due to the local patriotism of the inhabitants of the 
Troad. Their Sibyl is the Marpessian (= the ®pvyia of Herakl.). 
The artificial sort of interpretation and forgery that enabled a local 
historian of the Troad (it cannot have been Demetrios of Skepsis) 
to identify the Marpessian Sibyl, who also called herself Artemis, 
with Herophile and turn her into the true épv@paia, may be guessed 
from, Paus..10, 12, 2)ff. (The same source as that of Paus. is used 
by St. Byz. s. Mepunoods, as Alexandre, p. 22, rightly remarks.) The 
Erythraean claim to Herophile was also disputed from other directions. 
The Erythraean is distinguished from Herophile as being later by 
Bocchus ap. Solin. 2, p. 38, 24; and in a different fashion the same is 
MomemD ve yvialtw Cap. 11,0159. Acc: )toyiius., Chy.1305) Abrie (not 
Eratosthenes in this case) even the Samian Sibyl was identified with 
Herophile—to say nothing of the Ephesian Herophile in the fragg. 
of the enlarged Xanthos, FHG. ii, 406-8. From the fable of the 
Marpessian Herophile was later invented the story of her prophecy 
to Aeneas: ib. 2, 5; 67; D.H. 1, 55, 4; Alexandre, p. 25.—In com- 
parison with these different claimants to the name of Herophile (even 
the Cumaean Sibyl was said to be the same as Herophile) the rest of 
the Sibyls were hardly able to obtain a real footing in tradition. 

61 The Erythraean Sibyl was dated by Eusebius in Ol. 9, 3 (the 
absurd addition ev Atyiarw belongs only to the author of the Chron. 
Pasc. and not to Eus.: Alexandre, p. 80); he dated the Samian in 
Ol. 17, 1 (it is quite arbitrary to refer this view to Eratosthenes). 
Acc. to Suid. X’PvAdka ?AméAAwvos Kat Aapias the Erythraean lived 
483 years after the fall of Troy; i.e. Ol. 20, 1 (700 B.c.}. Herakleides 
put the Phrygo-Trojan Sib. in the times of Solon and Kyros (to which 
Epimenides also belongs and to which Aristeas and Abaris were 
supposed to belong). Wecan no longer discover or guess at the reasons 
for these datings. In any case the Chronologists to whom they go 
back evidently regarded the Sibyls as later than the earliest Pythia 
at Delphi. Even the Cumaean Sibyl was not to be distinguisned 


316 NODESE SLOP CHART Hi asieg 


from the Erythraean: [Arist.] Mivab. 95, which perhaps comes from 
Timaeus; Varro ap. Serv. A. vi, 36,;. cf D.H. 4, 62,.6. IneSpitemas 
which she is a contemporary of Tarquinius Priscus (this was enough to 
distinguish the Cimmeria in Italia who prophesied to Aeneas from the 
Cumaean Sibyl: Naev. and Calp. Piso in Varro ap. Lact. I, 6, 9). 
Naturally in these chronological straits recourse was had to the favourite 
device of such accounts--—unnatural longevity. The Sibyl is 
moAvxpouwTary [Arist.]: she lived a thousand years or thereabouts : 
Phleg., Macr. 4 (the oracle of this passage was also known to Plu. ; 
cf. PO. 13, 401 B ; a similar source inspires Ov., M. xiv, 132-53. In this 
case the Sibyl has already lived 700 years before the arrival of Aeneas, 
and she will live another 300, which would bring her—by a rather 
inexact calculation—to about the time of Tarquinius Priscus). In the 
verses found at Erythrae belonging to a statue of the Sibyl (Buresch, 
Woch. Klass. Phil. 1891, p.. 10423. “Ath. “Mitt, 11892, po 20) ae 
Erythraean Sibyl is said to live 900 years—unfortunately one cannot 
be sure that this means till the time of the inscr. itself and of the véos 
xtiorns of Erythrai in the age of the Antonines who is referred to at 
the close. Ifso the Sibyl would have been born about the year 700 B.c. 
(as in Suid.) or a little earlier. Perhaps, however, the lengthy period 
refers to the life time of the long since dead Sibyl herself, while the 
avis 8’ evéade éy® Fya of 1. 11 f. only applies to the statue. In which 
case the commencement and end of the Sibyl’s lifetime would be un- 
known.—Cumaeae saecula vatis became proverbial: Alexandre, p. 57. 
Finally the Sibyl was regarded as entirely forgotten by death, as in 
the story in Petronius 48 (cf. also—probably referring to Erythrai— 
Ampel., LLMs vii, 15; Hho Mus, 32, 639). 

od Tepes tate ber ht 

6&3 The Sibyl is overcome by the furor divinus in such a way ut 
quae sapiens non videat ea videat insanus, et si qui humanos sensus 
amiserit divinos assecutus sit, Cic., Div. ii, 110; cf. i, 34. vooyjpara 
pavika Kat evOovataotixa of Sibyls and Bakids Arist. Prob. 30, 1, 954a, 
36. The Sibyl prophesies pavtix# ypwpevn evOéw, Pl., Phdr. 244 B. 
patvomern TE Kal €x TOO Oeod Katoxos, Paus. 10, 12, 2. deo furibunda 
recepto, Ov., M. xiv, 107. There is:in her divinitas et quacdam 
caelitum societas, Plin., NH. vii, 119. Kxaroxy Kat érimvora [Just.}, 
Co. ad. Gr., 37, 36 A. So, too, in our collections of Sibylline oracles 
the 5. often speak of their divine frenzy, etc.: e.g. ii, 4, 5; iii, 162%ee 
295 f.; xi, 317, 320, 323 f.; xii, 294 f., etc. Frenzy of the Cumaeam 
S.: Vg., A. vi, 77 f.—-Bakis has his prophetic gift from the Nymphs 
(Ar., Pa. 1071), he is xataoxetos éx vupdar, paveis ex vupgddyv (Paus. 
10, 12, 11; 4, 27, 4), vupgdornmros (cf. OedAnmros, porPoAnmTos, 
Hy aes eo ae ; Lymphatt: Varro, LL. vii, p. 365 Sp. 
Valitse lest apis 120. ell etis Placid. > p:). 62, 15)f BDeuertay: 

ry Spy de aes cae aot xtA: Herakleitos ap. Plu., Pyth. 
Ov..6, p. 397A, fr. 12 By. = 92 Diels (the words yAtwv eee 
are not H.'s: but=Plutarch’s.- Cl. Al, Siv..1,. 15; p: 358 BP. mseseamam 
Plu.). To regard Herakleitos’ Sibyl as the Pythia (with Bgk., etc.) is 
absurd apart from the fact that the Pythia is never called XiBvAda. 
It is excluded by the way Plu. introduces the word in this passage, 
and connects chap. 9 with chap. 6. It is true, though, that Pl. draws 
a parallel between the nature of the Sibyl and that of the Pythia. 

66 Homer knows Kassandra as one of the daughters of Priam and 
indeed as IIpidpoto Ovyarpav eldos apiornv, N 365; probably that is 
why she is aliotted to Agamemnon as his share of the spoil and why 
she is slain with him, A 421 ff. The Kuvzpua is the first to tell of her 


NOTES meLOm CHA PTE Rvalie 317 


prophetic skill. Was it the narrative of £2 699 which first suggested 
to the vewrepo. the idea of her knowledge of the future ? (In reality 
that passage alludes rather to the ova eva of the sister and daughter 
and not to mantiké: Sch. B. ad loc.) Her prophetic gifts were 
elaborated later in many stories: e.g. Bacchyl. xiv, 50 = fy. 29 Bgk. 
(Porph. on Hor. O. i, 15). Aesch. represents her as the type of the 
ecstatic prophetess (¢pevoparis, Yeoddpntos, Ag. 1140, 1216). As 
such she is called by Eur. pavrtimodos Baxyn, Hec. 121. dorBas 827. 
70 Baxxetov Kapa THs Yeamimdot Kaccavdpas 676. She wildly shakes 
her head like the Bacchants d6rav feoi partdcuvvor mrvevowo’ avayKat, 
pe ) / 60" it. 

66 About the Arcadian Bakis (Kydas.or Aletes by name) OcdmopT0s 
év TH 0 Ta&V Pidvmmnadyv aAAa Te mona t toTopet mapadoga Kal OTL TmoTEe 
tov Aakedatpoviwmy tas yuvaikas pavelaoas éxadnpev, >AtoAwvos TovToLs 
tovtov Kabapriy SovTos, Sch. Ar., Pa. 1071. The story is closely parallel 
to that of Melampous and the Proitides, see above, nn. 22-5. 

87 Cf. e.g. Hippocr. mw. mapeviwy (ii, p. 528 K.; viii, 468 L.). Upon 
their recovery from hysterical hallucinations the women dedicate 
valuable iudtia to Artemis xedeudvtwy T&v pdvtewy. This is the regular 
name for the payou, cafaprai, ayvprat (cf. Teiresias dd6Avos ayvprns, S., 
OT. 388; Kassandra is accused of being doitas ayvtprpia, A., Ag. 1273). 
Hp. speaks elsewhere also of their manner of healing epilepsy, 1, 
p. 588 K. (vi, 354 L.). 

SKkaGappotl . . . Kara tiv pavrixyv, PI., Cvat. 405 AB. The 
pavrecs are able e.g. to drive away by magic the mist that is so dangerous 
for the olive-trees: Thphr., CP. 2, 7,5. The pavrecs cai repatooxdmot, 
ayvptat Kal wavrecs possess the arts of payyavetpara, éemwdai, katadéves, 
and émaywyai which compel the gods to do their will, Pl., Rp. 364 BC ; 
Lg.933 CE. These pavrers correspond in all essentials to the magicians 
and medicine men of savage tribes. Prophet, doctor, and magician 
are here united in a single person. A mythical prototype of these 
Greek “‘ medicine men”’ is Apis, of whom we hear in Aesch., Sup. 260-70. 
(The pavrecs also officiate as sacrificial priests, esp. where the sacrifice 
is combined with a special sacrificial mantihé—quite unknown to Homer 
—in which the will of the gods is inquired: Eur., Held. 401-819 ; 
Ph. 1255 ff. and frequently. Hermann Goittesdienstl, Alterth. 33, 9.) 

eo[he clearest evidence for) this is Hp., Morb. Sacer. (vi, 352 L.). 
See below, n. 81. Assistance in the case of interna] diseases is naturally 
sought in ancient times from magicians, for such diseases arise 
immediately from the action of a god: orvyepos 8€ of €xpae daipor, 
« 396 (cf. x 64), is said of an invalid who lies dypov rnKopevos. Cf. 
vodoos Atos peyddAov, ce 411. In such cases help is sought from the 
tatpopavtes (A., Sup. 263) who is at once partis and tepatrooxdmos and 
KaQaprys like his divine prototype Apollo: A., kum. 62-3. In a long 
illness King Kleomenes I of Sparta resorts to xa@aprai Kal pavtess, 
fu ap. Lac. 11, pa223) E. 

70 A 313 f.; y 481 ff. MWKathartic practices, however much they 
may contain a primitive core, were fairly late in attaining popularity 
in Greece (or.in regaining a lost iOS ei as is shown esp. by the 
all but total absence of any mention of such practices and the supersti- 
tions underlying them from Hesiod, Op., which otherwise preserves 
the memory of so much countryside superstition (something rather 
like it is perhaps to be found in Op. 733-6). 

71 Nothing is said in Homer of the purification of the murderer or 
the homicide: see above, chap. v, n. 166. 

72 Thus at the Dnigongue all who have had anything to do with 


318 INOUE Sel © oe OTA ees 


the paiwous, amoxadalpovra tas yetpas (Suid. s.v.). But even the child 
is lustrated: it is carried in the arms of a grown-up who runs with 
it round the altar and the altar fire: “clearly a= vestige more: me 
amToTpoTlaaguos Kal KaBapois of the child by sacred fire of which so 
many relics have been observed : see Grimm, p. 625 ; Tylor, ii, 430 f.— 
Uncleanness of the pregnant woman until the fortieth day after the 
child is born: Welcker, Kl. Schr. iti, 197-9. At the birth of a child 
crowns of olive-branches or woollen fillets (€pra) were in Attica hung 
up on the house-door; just as cypress-branches were hung on the 
doors of houses where a corpse lay (see above, chap. v, n. 39): for 
kathartic purposes strings of onions (squills) were suspended on 
house-doors ; see below): Hsch. orédavov éxdépewv. Both are lustral 
materials. Use of olive branches at xafapuos: S., OC. 483 f.; 
Vg., A. vi, 230. When a mother gives her child that is to be exposed 
a crown made of olive branches (as in Eur., Jon, 1433 ff.), this, too, has 
an apotropaic purpose as also has the Gorgon’s head on the embroidered 
stuff that also accompanies the child (1. 1420 f.) : see on this O. Jahn, 
Bos. Blick, 60. The olive is also sacred to the y@ovor (hence its use 
as a bed for corpses: see above, chap. v, n. 61; cf. rots amofavotaw 
éXads ouvexhepovow: Artemid. iv, 57, p. 236, 20 H. korivw xat 
tawvia the goddess crowns Chios in his dream and points the man thus 
dedicated to death to his prvfya: Chio, Epist. 17, 2). This makes 
the olive suitable for lustration and daorpomacpot. The house in 
which the child lay was thus regarded as needing “ purification ” 
The “‘ uncleanness ”’ felt to exist in this case is clearly expressed by 
Phot. papvos* apiavtos 4 mitra’ 610 Kal ev Tais yevéceot TOV Tradiwv 
(rav¥Tn) xplovat Tas otkias, els améXacw Satpdvwv (see above, chap. v, 
n. 95). It is the neighbourhood of these (chthonic) Saiuoves that 
cause the pollution. 

1 ALS Pers, 201-9., 216.3) Ari, Ra, 134055 Hp. nsom ait ep aes 
13 K. = vi, p. 654 Tye cf. ees Charicles, p. 133,.n. 4 eT, 

e Ch Plu., Sept. a Conv. ili, p. 149 D, and on this Wyttenb. 

Deo OU st. 

x Purification of houses (xy 481 if) 3" e.g. [D.} 47597 eee 
customary to purify oixias kai mpoBara with black hellebore: Thphr., 
1 P79, 10,4 Dsc.-4; 4149 (hence® the, superstitious? detalisgoisice 
gathering, Thphr., HP." 9, 858, ,and¥Dsc:)) > The “touchinSmotess se 
house by unholy daimones necessitates purification: Thphr., Ch. 
28 (16), 15, of the devovdaliuwr Kal muxva Sé Tv olkiavy KabGpar dSewos 
‘Exatns ddoxwy éermraywyny yeyovevat. 

76 Presence of a dead body in a house makes the water and fire 
unclean ; {‘,clean *’ water and fire must then be brought in from else- 
where. See Plu., OG. 24 (Argos), p. 297 A (see above, chap. v, n. 38). 
At a festival of the dead in Lemnos all the fires were put out (as 
unclean): ‘‘clean’’ fire was sought from Delos, and, after the com- 
pletion of the éevayicuara brought into the country and distributed. 
Philostr., H. 19, 14, p. 206-8, 7 K.—Alexander was following Greek, 
as well as Persian, customs when at the burial of Hephaistion he allowed 
70 mapa tots Ilépaas kadovpevov iepov mip to go out, péype av ter€on 
thv exgopav, D.S. 17, 114, 4. 

“7 “When a Greek saw anyone using expiatory rites, he presumed 
in that person the will to amend,”’ Nagelsbach, Nachhom. Theol., 363. 
If this was really so it is strange that we never see this “‘ presumption ”” 
expressed in words. We do indeed read that the devoudaiuwv mortifies 
himself and éfayopever twas apuaptias atrot Kal wAnppedeias, but in 
whatdothese dpapria: consist ?—ws rode daydvtos 7 mudvTos 7 Badloavtos 


NORE Se Ome eli bl thea lox. 319 


dSov qv odK eta TO Satudvov, Plu., Superstit. 7, p. 168 D: merely 
ritual omissions in fact, not moral transgressions at all. It is the 
same everywhere in this domain. The conceptions underlying 
purificatory practice certainly did not correspond to the refined 
morality of later ages, but they continued in force so long as 
kathavtiuké remained popular: they are well expressed (though 
disapprovingly) by Ovid in the well-known lines which we shall, how- 
ever, do well to recall: omne nefas omnemque mali purgamina causam 
credebant nostri tollere posse senes. Graecia principium moris fuit: 
illa nocentis impia lustratos ponere facta putat.—a! nimium faciles, 
qui tristia crimina caedis fluminea tolli posse putetis aqua, F. 2, 35 ff. ; 
Cite peisips 095 Kogivi, 362°; 

78 We can only here allude to the remarkable parallel provided by 
the purificatory and expiatory ritual of India, which is completely 
analogous to the katharttké of Greece and had a similar origin. . Even 
in details Indian conceptions and procedure answer closely to Greek. 
They are both as far removed as possible from all idea of quieting 
a guilt-laden conscience and are directed solely towards effacing, 
expunging, or expelling an external piacua, a pollution arriving from 
without, a taint arising from contact with a hostile daiudwor 
conceived as something in the nature of a daimonic fluid. Indian 
sources are on this point very rich and full: an excellent account of 
them is given by Oldenberg in his Religion des Veda (esp. Fr. tr. 243 ff. ; 
417 ff.). Greek and Indian practices illuminate each other. It would 
be a valuable experiment to take the highly elaborated kathartic 
ritual of the Avesta and compare it with the history and technique 
of purification and expiation in Greek religion. It would mean 
renewing Lomeier’s old book [Epimenides s. de lustvat. Zutphen 1700] : 
the materials are very scattered and the ground has never been 
thoroughly gone over since then. By the help also of the ‘‘ com- 
parative ’’ method of religious study, which in this case is quite 
justified, it would then be possible to reconstruct a most important 
fragment of primitive veligio—a fragment which had become almost 
entirely forgotten in Homeric times, which then recovered its ancient 
influence and continued to develop and was even transmitted to the 
ritual of the Christian church (cf. Anrich, D. ant. Mysterienw. 190 f.). 
We must be careful, however, to shut our ears to the otherwise very 
convincing people who are so anxious to introduce purely moral interests 
and conceptions into ancient veligio. Morality is a later achievement 
in the life-history of the children of men: this fruit did not grow in 
Eden. 

79 See Appendix v. 

80 What the Greeks meant by piacywa can be very clearly seen, e.g. 
in the conversation between Phaidra and her nurse in Eur., Hp. 
316 ff. Phaidra’s distress of mind is not derived from a deed of blood : 
xetpes ev ayvai She says dpi 8’ éxer plaocua tr. Does the Nurse think 
of any moral disgrace or defilement of the distressed woman in this. 
dpevos placpa? Not at all: she only asks, padv é& éraxtod mynpovis 
€xOpav twos; in other words by “‘ defilement of the mind ”’ she can 
only conceive of an enchantment, something from without that comes. 
by énaywyi Twadv Sapoviwy (see below, n. 108), a stain derived 
from the polluting neighbourhood of such daimones. This was the 
general and popular conception. (Taken literally Plato’s words also: 
give expression to the popular conception: aoAA@v 6vtwv Kat Kaddv- 
év TO T&V avOpamwv Biw, Tots mAeloTos adtdv olov Kipes EmiTmEedvKaary,. 
al Kataptaivoval re Kal Karappumaivovow attra, Lg. 937 D.) 


320 NOLES LOMA PDE aa 


81 Diseases come mwadadv éx pnvipdatwr, Pl., Phdr. 244 DE; i.e. 
from the rage of departed generations of souls or of y@dvor, Lob., 
Agl. 635-7. Esp. madness is a voceiv €£ adaordpwr, S., Tr. 1325, 
a Tapaypwa Taptapeov, E., HF. 89. Cure of such diseases is undertaken 
not by doctors but by xadaprai, payou kal ayvprar, expiatory priests 
with magic proceedings—this is well shown by the treatment of the 
“* sacred disease”? in Hp., Morb. Sac., p. 587-94 K =vi, 352-64 L. 
‘Such people, introducing themselves as magicians in the strict sense 
(p. 358 L.), use no regular medicinal treatment (356), but operate 
partly with xcafapyol and é€mwéat, partly with various prescriptions 
of abstinence dyvetat kal xafapornres. These last are explained by 
Hp. on dietetic grounds but the Kathartat themselves derived them 
from 70 Oetov Kai TO Satpovov (358). And such they were evidently 
in intention. The account of such prescriptions given on pp. 354-6 
mostly refers to abstentions from plants and animals supposed to be 
-sacred to the underworld. Noticeable also: fpdriov pédAav pa exer, 
Savatddes yap to péAay (all trees with black berries or fruit belong 
to the inferi: Macr. 3, 20, 3). Other superstitions are found with 
these: pndé dda emi modi éxew, pyndé yxetpa emi yeipi* tabdra yap 
mavTa KkwAvuata eivar. The belief is familiar from the story of the 
birth of Herakles. See Welcker, Ki. Schr. iii, 191. Sittl, Gebarden 
126. \(Something:-of the kind in P. Mag. Par. 1052 ff, p71) Wesem 
The source of the disease was, however, always supposed to be the 
-direct influence of a daiduwv (360-2) which must therefore be averted. 
Acc. to popular belief it is always God who ro av@pdm0v cpa praiver 
(cf. p. 362). For this reason the magicians purify, xafaipovor, the 
‘sick aipaoe Kal totow dXAAovct Which are used to purify people piacpa 
Tu €xovtas Or on Whom a curse has been laid. The ca@dpora are buried 
or thrown into the sea (kal eis dAa Adpar’ €Baddov, A 314), or carried 
away into a deserted mountain district (p. 362). Such xa@dpora are 
now the resting place of the piacya that has been washed off, and so the 
magician drives eis dpéwv xedadds vovoous te kal dAyyn, Orph. H. 36, 16. 
Similarly in India, Oldenberg 495. 

82 Epddai used for stopping the flow of blood, 7 457. Frequently 
‘mentioned in later times: particularly used in the magic cure of epilepsy, 
Hp. vi, 352-4; [D.] 25, §§ 79-80. When houses and hearths are 
purified by being sprinkled with hellebore ouvverqdovaoi twa émwdny, 
‘Thphr. HP. 9, 10, 4 (comprecationem solemnem is Pliny’s trans., 
NH. 25, 49). Pains of childbirth prevented or alleviated by epédat, 
Pl., Tht. 149 CD. (Much more of the kind in Weicker, K/. S. iii, 64 ff.) 
‘The essential meaning of such epédat is regularly an appeal or exorcism 
addressed to the daimonic creature (clearly an appeal when lions or 
‘snakes are appeased in this way: Welcker, iii, 70, 14-15). Epédat 
accompanying pilorouia are éemxAnoes of the daiuwv &  Boravy 
.avepwrar: P. Mag. Par. 2973 ff. The meaning of such “ conjurings ” 
-addressed to diseases—when the daimon is exorcised—is clearly seen 
in what Plotin. says of the Gnostics: they claimed to heal the sick by 
means Of ezaoidai, peAn, Fro, and Kabaipecba voowv, brooTHAGMEVOL 
TAS yey datpovia elvat, Kal Ta ToLadra efarpetv Adyw dacKovtes SvvacGat, 
IRIE Ai 

83 Clashing of bronze used at dzoxafdpoers to drive away ghosts: 
“see above, chap.,v, n. 167; cf. also Macr. 5, 19, 11. Claud. 1.Cons 
Hon. 149: nec te (like Juppiter) progenitum Cybeleius aere sonoro 
lustravit Corybas. The noise of bronze has a kathartic effect simply 
as averting ghosts. In the process of driving out the ghosts at the 
Lemuria, Temesaea concrepat aera, Ov., F. 5, 441. Hence (?) yaAxod 


NO Te SeeOme Ce LEA EE Rae 1G 321 


avdav xdoviav, E., Hel. 1346. At eclipses of the sun or moon xuwvotat 
xadkov Kat oldypov avOpwmo. waves (cf. Plu., Adem. 17; Juv. vi, 443; 
Mart. xii, 57, 16 f., etc.) ws tods daiuovas azeXavvortes, Al. Aphr., Prd. 
2,46, p. 65, 28 Id. This is the object of the crepitus dissonus at eclipses 
Cig Oesmool  blinwwiN 11. 11,04 ce Livi XXNIy Dye hac A els co, and cf. 
Tib. i, 8, 21 f. ; 0b strias: [Aug.] Sacrileg. v, 16, with Caspari’s refs., 
Dio let: 

84 dovw dovov éxvinrew, E., IT. 1233. Purgantur <cruore> cum 
CLUCTe;POUUUNLUIA. em tletacitii Dp. oo), 0 ochust.[0 = 130)B))). 

85 A.R. iv, 703 ff. xafappots youpoxtrovois . . .: A., Eum. 283, 449, 
atpatos Kafapotov; cf. Miller, Aesch. Eum, 124. Representation of 
the xafapyos of Orestes on well-known vase-paintings: Mon. d. inst. 
iv, 48, etc. 

86 The “‘ purification’ of the stain of blood in these and similar 
cases really consisted in a “substitution” sacrifice whereby the 
anger of the daimones was appeased: so much was, on the whole 
correctly, observed long ago by Meiners, Allg. Gesch. der velig. 
ii, 137. The puiacua that clings to the murderer is in fact just the 
indignation of the murdered man or of the underworld spirits: this 
is plain in Antiph., Tet. 3a, 3 (see above, chap. v, n. 176). The thing 
that makes the son who has not avenged his father’s murder “‘ unclean ”’ 
and keeps him away from the altars of the gods is ody 6pwpévn matpos 
pjnves, A., Ch, 293.—In the case of murder or homicide there is not only 
the contact with the sinister other-world that makes men unclean (this 
applies to all cases of “‘ pollution’’), but, besides this, there is also 
the anger of the murdered soul itself (and of its protecting spirits). 
Hence in this case, besides xafapyos, tAacpés as well is necessary 
(see above, chap. v).. It is evident, however, that it would be difficult 
to keep the two processes distinct and that they would easily merge 
into each other. 

8? The dappaxot are put to death at the Thargelia of Ionic cities : 
Hipponax fr. 37. In other places on extraordinary occasions, but 
‘regularly at the Thargelia in Athens. This is denied by Stengel, 
Hermes, 22, 86 ff., but in the face of definite statements from antiquity 
general considerations can have no weight. In addition it was only 
a special mode of execution applied to criminals already condemned 
to death. (Two men, acc. to Harp. 180, 19: a man and a woman 
Hsch. dapyaxoit: the variation is explained by Hellad. ap. Phot., 
Bibl., p. 354a, 3 ff. Bk.) The dappuaxol serve as xafdpora to the city 
(Hlarp.4180, 19 Bk.).: Hippon, fv. 4; Hellad: ap. Sch. Ar., Eg. 1186. 
dappmakos = xa0appa, Phot., Lex. 640, 8 Pors. The dappaxoi were erther 
burnt (after being put to death) like other propitiatory victims: 
Tz., Ch. v, 736, prob. following Hippon. (the burning of the dapp. at 
Athens seems to be alluded to by Eup. Aju. 120 [i, 290 K.]); or 
stoned: this form of death is implied (in the case of Athens) by the 
legend of Istros ap. Harp. 180, 23. Analogous customs (indicated 
by Miller, Dorians, i, 345) at Abdera: Ov., Ib. 465 f. (which acc. to 
the Sch. is taken from Call., who evidently transferred to Apollonios 
the pious wish directed by Hippon. against Boupalos) ; at Massilia 
(Petr. fy. 1 Bl., where the ¢apyaxds is either thrown down the cliff 
or saxis occidebatur a populo: Lact. ad Stat., Th. 10, 793). Apollonios | 
of Tyana was clearly following ancient custom when he made the people 
of Ephesos stone an old beggar, who was evidently nothing but the 
plague-daimon itself, for the purification of the city: Kafjpas rovs 
’Edeatous tis véaov, Philostr., VA. 4, 10-11. Was the stoning a sort 
of counter-enchantment ? See Roscher, Kynanthropie, 38-9. 


Yi 


322 NOTH Smal OS CHAPTERS 


ch Among the ingredients of a bese Seimvov ev TH TpLodw Was an 
wov éx kaBapaiov: Luc., DM. 1, 1; or the testicles of a sucking pig 
that had been used as a victim: D., 54, 39. The ofv@dma, sacrifices 
to Hekate and the souls of the dead (see above, chap. v, n. 176), are 
identical with the Kabdp para Kal amoAvpara which were thrown out 
at the crossroads in the ‘Exatata: Did. ap. Harp. o€vdévpia; cf. 
EM. 626, 44. xa@apora is the name of the purificatory offerings: 
xa9dppuara of the same when they are thrown away: Ammon., p. 79 
Valck. The dead bodies of dogs which had been used as victims at 
the ‘‘ purification *’ were afterwards thrown 7H ‘Exatyn peta Tov 
GAAwv kabapoliwr, Plu., Qi. 68, Pp: 280 C. Even the blood and water 
of the purificatory sacrifice, the dnd pica, iS also dedicated to the dead : 
Ath. 409 E ff. The fact that the xafdadpyara are made over to the 
invisibly present spirits at the cross roads might be derived also from 
the necessity for throwing them out dpertaorpenrti (see below, n. 104). 
Even the Argive custom of throwing the xa@dapyar7a into the Lernaean 
lake (Znb., iv, 86; Dgn., vi, 7; Hsch. Aédpvn Geardv) shows that these 
kathartic materials are intended as a sacrifice to the underground 
spirits since the Lernaean lake was an entrance to the underworld 
(see above, chap. viii, n. 28). 

89 Annual reAerH to Hekate in Aegina reputed to have been founded 
by Orpheus. Hekate and her xa@appoi were there regarded as valuable 
against insanity (for she can remove what she herself has sent): Ar., 
Ves. 122; Lob., Agl. 242. This initiation festival lasted on into the 
fourth century A.D.—Paus. refers to only one other temple of Hekate 
in Argos: 2, 22, 7.—Indications of a vigorous worship of Hekate 
in Kos: GDI. 3624, ili, p. 345 fin. Hekate was patron-goddess of 
the city of Stratonikeia: Tac., A. ui, 62, Str., 660, and in other cities 
of Karia (as is known from inscr.). Possibly Hekate is there only 
a Greek title of a native Karian deity. The ancient cult of the y@dvor 
at the Triopion in Knidos was, however, Greek: Bockh on Sch. 
Pi; peol4ne-= OFG tip..45, 

° yOovia Kat veprépwyv mpvtavs: Sophr. fr. 7 Kaib. ap. Sch. Theoc. 
ii, 12.—She is actually queen in Hades, sharing the throne of Plouton 
it seems: S., Ant. 1199. She is often called y@ovia. She is "Adpyrov 
Kopn (i.e. of Hades, K. O. Miller, Introd. Scient. Myth. 245): Hsch. 
She is called adu77n herself in H. Mag. Hec., Abel, Orph.,p. 289. She 
is the daughter of Euboulos, i.e. Hades: Orph. H., 72, 3 (elsewhere 
of course she has other origins). As y@oviéa she is often confused with 
Persephone (and both, as they are all thus united in several particulars, 
with Artemis). In the transcript of a metrical inscr. from Budrum 
(Cilicia) in JHS. xi, 252, there appears a I'9 ‘Exarn. This would 
certainly be very remarkable but on the stone itself the actual words 
are tHv ceBdopecO’ ‘Ex[arnv]. [But cf. Tab. Defiz., p. xiii, a 13.) 

°1 Hekate goddess of childbirth: Sophr. fy. 7, worshipped in Athens 
as xoupotpodos, Sch. Ar., V. 804. Samian worship of the xcoupotpddos 
€v TH TpLodw (i.e. as Hek.), [Hdt.] V. Hom. 30; Hes., Thg. 450: O7jxe 
d€ piv (Hek.) Kpovidns xovpotpéfov. (Even as early as this xoup. 1S 
the epithet of Hek. and not the name of an independ. feminine daimon 
which it may have been to begin with, and in isolated cases remained.) 
TeverudXis goddess of childbirth is said to be éoixvia 79 Exarn: Hsch. 
Iev. The goddess Eileithyia to whom dogs were sacrificed in Argos 
is certainly a Hekate (Sokr. ap. Plu., Q. Rom. 52, p- 277 B—she was 
Artemis elsewhere). A consecration to Hekate izép macdds: imscr. 
from Larisa, Ath. Mitth. xi, 450. Hek. is also a goddess of marriage : 
as such (671 yaprAvos 4 “Exary, Sch.) she is called upon with Hymenaios 


NOTES LOmMCHAPTH Re EX 323 


by Kassandra in Eur., Tv, 323. Hekate is yapyAos simply as yori: 
the x@ovco frequently take part in marriage as well as birth: see above, 
chap. v, p. 64 ff.; Gaia: see Welcker, Gétterl. i, 327. Offering made 
mpo Taidwv Kal yaundAiov tédAovs to the Erinyes: A., Eum. 835. 

* Hekate present at funerals (rushing zpos dvdpas vexpov dé€povras, 
Sophr. fr. 7) épxopéva ava 7’ Apia kai pédav ala Theoc. ii, 13. yatpovoa 
oxvAakwy vrakh Kai aipare dotvw ev véxvot otetyovea Kat’ Hpla TebvnwTwr, 
H, Hec. ap. Hipp., RH. iv, 35, p. 102, 64 f. D.-S.—Hekate present at 
all infamous deeds: see the remarkable formulae ap. Plu., Superst. 
10, p. 170 B (Bgk., PLG.* iii, p. 680).—Hek. regarded as devouring 
corpses (like Eurynomos, etc., above, chap. vii, n. 24): aiuomdrs, 
Kapdsddarte, capkogddaye, dwpofope are said of her in the Hymn. Magic. 
5, ll. 53-4 (p. 294 Ab.). ¢Ociknpe should be also read, ib., 1. 44 
(kjpes = yuxat, see above, chap. v, n. 100); cf. dpodayor xAdvior, 
P. Mag. Par. 1444. ‘Exdrn axpovpoBdpyn on a defixio from Megara 
ap. Tab. Defix., p. xiiia, 1. 7 Wiinsch. Probably dwpoBdpy should 
be read (Wunsch differently, p. xxd). 

pee See above, chap.'v, nn. 66, 132. 

*4 Medea in E., Med. 385 ff.: od yap pa tiv Séomowav Hy eyed (as 
magician) o€8w pddtora mavtwy Kal Evvepyov etAdpny, ‘Exarnv, puxois 
valovoav €atias e€u7ns.—Arnuntpos Kdpy is addressed as mupds dSécm0wwa, 
in company with Hephaistos, in E., Phaeth., fy. 781, 59. Probably 
Hekate is meant being here as frequently combined or confused with 
Persephone the daughter of Demeter (cf. Ion, 1048). 

% The pious man cleans and decorates every month roy ‘Epp jv Kai 
tav ‘Exarnv kai Ta Aowta TAY tepOv & 57 TOds Tpoydvovs KaTaALTEiY, 
Theopomp. ap. Porph., Abs. 1i, 16 (p. 146, 8-9 N.). Acc. to this Hekate 
and Hermes belong to the @eot marpHot of the house.—Shrines of 
Hekate before the house-door (Lob., Agl. 1336 f.); cf. the sacella 
Or the; ieroes! in the same place: above, chap. iv, n: 135: 

95a The late interpolation in Hes., Th. 411-52, in praise of Hekate 
leaves out the uncanny side of her character altogether. Hekate 
has here become so much the universally revered goddess that she has 
lost all definite personality in the process. The whole is a telling 
example of the sort of extension that might be given to a single divinity 
who had once been the vital cult-object of a small locality. The 
name of this universally known daimon becomes finally of little 
importance (for everything is heaped upon one personality). Hence 
there is little to be learnt of the special characteristics of Hekate from 
this Hymn. (In any case it is time we gave up calling this Hymn to 
Hekate ‘‘ Orphic’”’?: the word is even more than usually meaningless 
and conventional in this case.) 

%6 Hekate (vatovca at the crossroads, S. fy. 492 N.) meets men as an 
avrata Oeos (S. fr. 311) and is herself called avraia (fy. 311, 368; cf. 
EM. 111, 50, where what precedes is from Sch. A.R. i, 1141). The 
same adj. applies to a daiuwyv that she causes to appear: MHsch. 
avraia, avratos, in this as in most cases with the added sense of hostile. 
Hek. dawopévyn év éextdnos ddcpacw, Suid. ‘Exdryv. (from Elias Cret. 
on Greg. Nz. iv, p. 487 Mg.). She appears or sends apparitions by 
night as well as by day: Etvodia, Ovyatep Aduartpos, & THv vuKTiTOAwy 
edddwv avacaets kat pefapepiwv, E., Ion, 1048 ff. Meilinoe, a euphemis- 
tically (cf. above, chap. v, n. 5) named daimonic creature, either 
Hekate or Empousa, meets dvraias é¢ddorc1 Kata lodoecdéa vixra, 
Orph. H. 71, 9. Hek. appears at midday in Luc., Phtlops. 22. In 
this midday vision she opens the earth and ra év “Avdov dzavra 
become visible (c. 24). This reminds us of the story told by Herakl. 


324 NOTES "LO “CHAPIER IX 


Pont. of Empedotimos to whom Plouton and Persephone appeared 
év peonpBpia oradepa in a lonely spot and the whole world of the spirits 
became visible (ap. Procl. im Rp. ii, 119 Kroll). Lucian is probably 
parodying that story. Elsewhere in the same pamphlet he gives an 
absurd turn to a fabulous narrative of Plutarch’s (de An. fr. 1 Bern. = 
Philops. 25). 

97 "See Append.) vi; 

98 See Append. vii. 

99 Hekate herself is regarded as having the head of a dog: un- 
doubtedly an ancient conception of her (she has cxvrAacwdea dPwvyy, 
H,. Mag. 5, 17 Ab.). She is sometimes even a dog herself: Hsch. 
‘Exarns ayadpa, and partic. AB. 336, 31-337, 5; Call. fr. 100 h, 4. 
She is identified with Kerberos: Lyd., Mens. 3, 8, p.42 W. She 
is actually invoked as a dog in P. Mag. Par. 1432 ff., p. 80 W.: xupia 
‘Exatn etvodia, Kvwv pwéAawva. Hence dogs are sacred to her and are 
sacrificed to her (earliest witness Sophr. fr. 8 Kaib.). The hounds 
with whom she flies about at night are daimonic creatures like Hekate 
herself. Porph. (who was specially well informed about such things) 
said that ca¢d@s the hounds of Hekate were wovnpoi daipoves: ap. Eus., 
PE. 4, 23, 7-8. In Lycophron’s account (ll. 1174-80) Hekabe is 
represented exactly in this way, i.e. as a daimonic creature who 
appears to men as a hound (cf. PLG. iii, 721 f.). She is transformed 
by Hekate (Brimo) into one of her train (€mwaida) who by their 
nocturnal howling strike terror into men who have neglected to make 
offering to the goddess.—Dogs occur as symbols of the dead on 
grave-reliefs >—above, chap. v, n. 105. (Erinyes as hounds; Keres 
as *‘ Hounds of Hades’”’: A.R. iv, 1665; AP. vii, 439, 3 [Theodorid.], 
etc. Ruhnken, £p. Cr. i, 94.) 

BOE ScesWilthey wate Used, eoocet: 

101 The Italian Diana who had long become identical with Hekate 
remained familiar to the Christianized peoples of the early Middle 
Ages (allusions in Christian authors: Grimm, pp. 283, 286, 933, 
949, 1161 f. O. Jahn, Bos. Blick, 108). She was, in fact, the meeting 
point of the endless mass of superstition that had survived into that 
time from Graeco-Roman tradition. The nocturnal riding of a mob of 
women (i.e. “‘ souls”? of women) cum Diana, paganorum dea is quoted 
as a popular superstition by the so-called Canon Episcopi, which in 
the controversies on witches was so often appealed to. This document, 
it seems, cannot be traced back further than Regino (end of ninth 
century). He seems to have got it out of [Aug.] De Sp. e¢ Anima 
(probably written in the sixth century). It was rescued from oblivion 
by Burkhard of Wurms, used in the Decretals of Gratian, and became 
very well known in the Middle Ages. (The passage from Burkhard 
is printed in Grimm, p. 1741. That the whole is a Canon (24) of the 
Council of Ancyra, 314 a.p., is, however, only a mistaken idea of 
Burkhard’s.) This belief in the nightly hunt of Diana with the souls 
may be regarded as a vestige of the ancient idea of Hekate and her 
nocturnal crew. It was all the more likely to survive in northern 
countries with their native legends of wild Hunters and the “ furious 
host ’”? with which it could so easily combine. [‘‘ Herne the Hunter,” 
Merry Wives of Windsor, iv, 4; v, 5.] 

102 6xdaa deipatra vuKTos tapiotata, Kat ddBor Kal mapavora Kal 
avamndnoes ex THS KAivyns Kal PoByTpa Kal devkes €£w, ‘Exarns pac 
elvat emtBodas Kal Hpwwv édddous, Kabappotol Te xpéovTat Kal é€maotdais, 
Hp., Morb. Sac. vi, 362 L.; cf. Plu., Supers., 3, p. 166 A; Hor., 4'P) 4549 
Hekate is pav@y airia, Eust., Il., p. 87, 31 (hence also releases men from 
madness in the initiations of Aegina, see above, n. 89); cf. év@eos 


NOTES TOs CHAPTER? IX 325 


é€ ‘Exdrys, E., Hip. 141. Dreams of Hekate, Artemid., 2, 37, p. 139, 
1 ff H. The jowes amomAjKnrovs moretvy Svvavrac: Sch. Ar., 
Av. 1490. The 7pwes are also the source of nightmares, Rh. Mus. 
37, 467*n. (like Pan as Ephialtes: Didym. ap. Sch. Ar., Ves. 1038— 
where Eddmav should be read, from eva the noise of bleating goats 
and JJév: Suid. and CIG. iv, 8382). The Lamiai and Empousai 
seem also to have been night-terrors: cf. what is said of their amorous 
disposition and desire for human blood by Apollonios ap. Philostr. 
VA. 4, 25, p. 145, 18; and what is said of Pan-Ephialtes, éav $e 
ouvovotatn, Artemid., p. 139, 21 H. General statement: dveipdccew 
comes a0 datpovwy evepyetas Suid. dvecpo7odety, p. 1124 Gaisf. Seirenes: 
@rsius, Pytlol?' 50,97 ft. 

103 The “‘ Banquets of Hekate ’’, besides the xafappuara referred to 
above (n. 88), included also the specially prepared dishes that were 
made and put out for Hekate xara uwjva (Ar., Plu. 596) at the tpraxades 
(see above, chap. v, n. 88) or else at the voupynvia:, Sch. Ar., Plu. 594: 
KaTa THY voupynviar, éomépas; cf. the offering to Hekate and Hermes 
at each vovynvia: Theopomp. ap. Porph., Abs. 2, 16, p. 146, 7 N. 
These banquets of Hek. are meant by Ar., Plu. 594 ff., S. fy. 668 N. ; 
Plu., Smp. 7, 3, p. 709 A.—It is possible that at the turn of the month 
there was a “‘ purification ’’ of the house, in which case the xa@dpova 
and the ‘Exarns Setmva would be again combined.—Ingredients of 
the offerings to Hek.: eggs and toasted cheese (Sch. Ar.) ; tpiyAn and 
pawvas Ath. 325 B.; flame-cakes (of cheese, zAakodvres 81a tupod, Paus. 
Lex. ap. Eust. 1165, 14) adudiddvres (see Lob., Agl. 1062 f.). 

104 The person xafdappata éexmépusas throws them away dotpddorow 
Gppacw: A., Cho. 98-9. The vessel filled with the purificatory 
offerings was emptied év tais tprddorg and dapetaorpenmri: Schol. ib. 
This was regular with ca@appoi: Theoc. xxiv, 94 ff., and at offerings 
to the Erinyes: S., OC. 490. Even Odysseus is obliged at his sacrifice 
to the dead dzovocd: tpazécba, x 528. Medea in collecting her magic 
juices turns her eyes éfomiow xepos: S. ‘Pil. fr. 491 N.; A.R. iv, 1315 ; 
cf. also Lomeier, de lustvat., p. 455 f. This remained the rule at sacrifices 
to y@dvoe and in magic ceremonies which regularly had to do with the 
underworld. Even Marc. Emp. in giving directions for the cure of 
dvaixa often enjoins nec retro respice e.g. 1, 54, likewise Plin., NH. 
21, 176; 29, 91. In making an enchantment qopevouv dvemotpentet 
pndevi Sovs amdxprow, P. Mag. Lond., given in Kenyon Greek Pap. 
in B.M.,i, p. 98. Modern superstition agrees: cf. Grimm, p. 1789, 
ne 09s ciwns357,-095, 890,111372 The eye’ must be turned away 
from the ‘‘ furious host’’: Birlinger, Aus Schwaben, N.S. i, 90. The 
precaution is, however, of primeval antiquity. In the old Indian 
cult of the dead and worship of formidable deities many of the pro- 
ceedings must be performed dpertaorperri, Oldenberg, 335 f., 487 f., 
550, n. 5; 577f.,580. The reason for the precaution is not hard to see. 
If the person looked round he would see the spirits engaged in taking 
possession of the objects thrown to them, which would be sure to bring 
ill-luck—yaderot 8€ Oeoi datverOar evapyds. Hence Odysseus, when 
he is returning Leukothoé’s wimple by throwing it into the sea, must 
avtos amovoodi tparéoba, € 350. Hence Orpheus must not look back 
at Eurydike while she belongs to the lower world. (Cf. Hannibal's 
dream reported after Silenus and Cael. Ant. by Cic., Div. i, 49.) 
of évruyxdvovtes vuxtos Ypwor Siéorpedov tas ders: Sch, Ar., Av. 1493. 
Very clearly put by Ov., F. 5, 437: at the Lemuria the sacrificer 
throws away the beans aversus... nec respicit. umbra putatur 
colligere et nullo terga vidente sequi. At last when the Manes are 


326 NOTES SOS CHAP DE Karin: 


all driven out, respicit (444). One of the Pythagorean ovpfoda, 
those invaluable fragments of Greek old wives’ wisdom,runs: a7o0énpav 
Tis olkias pw émuotpédov’ “Epwies yap perépxovrat (lamb., Proitr., 
p. 114, 29 f. Pist.). Here the reason for the superstitious practice is 
clearly shown (cf. also Grimm, p. 1778, n. 14; cf. n. 360): the under- 
world spirits (wandering over the earth, esp. on the fifth of the month, 
as in Hes., Op. 803) are following the departing person: if he were 
to turn round he would see them. — 

105 Appearance of e/SwAa of the dead: not as in Homer in dreams 
only, but openly before men’s waking eyes. Stories of this go back 
as far as the poems of the Epic Cycle: cf. appearance of Achilles in 
the Little liad (p. 37 Ki), in the Néora (p. 33). How familiar this 
idea had become by the fifth century may be judged from the frequency 
of ghosts in the tragedians: A., Pers. Eum. Prom. Pux.; S., [odv. ; 
cf. fry. 795 N.; E., Hec.; raising of the spirit of a dead man, fr. 912; 
cf. also the stories of Simonides and the grateful dead (Bgk. on Sim. 
fr. 129); of Pelops and the efdwaAov of Killos (see A. Marx, Griech. 
Mirchen von dankbaren Thieren, p. 114 f.). 

106 Spirit-raising at entrances to the underworld at definite 
puxopavreta OF vexvopavteta: see above, chap. v, n. 23. There were, 
however, puxaywyot who could compel individual souls to appear at 
other places as well: E., Alc. 1128 f. Such dvyaywyoi belonging to 
the fifth century and to be found in Thessaly are spoken of by Plu. 
ap. Sch. E., Alc. 1128. People tous te reQvedras dackovtes uyaywyeiv 
Kat Deods bmoxvovpevor TEetBev, ws Yvoiats Te Kal evdyais Kal émwdais 
yonrevovres occur in Pl., Lg. 909 B. Later literature abounds in such 
spirit-raisings. Conjuring Hekate to appear was a favourite magic 
experiment: A.R. iii, 1030 f., etc., recipe for producing this illusion 
in Hipp., RH. iv, 35-6, p. 102 f.D.-S. A ‘Exarns éraywyy occurs as 
early as Thphr., Ch. 28 (16). 

107 ayvprar Kal pavrers profess éedv tis tw’ éexOpov amynpHvar €b€Ay 
peta opikp@v Samavayv opotws dixarov adikw BAaew, émaywyais ter 
Kat Katadéapois Tovs Beov’s, ws dao, metOovtés adiow vbanpertety, Pl., 
Rp. 364 C. And esp. from Lg. 933 AE we get a good idea of the 
fear that the pavrers and repatooxdmo generally inspired with their 
KaTadéces eTTaywyai, emwodat, and other payyavetar (we even hear of 
wax-figures on house-doors, grave-stones, ézi rpuddors, as so frequently 
later, with the same superstitious purpose). Plato himself does not 
rule out the possibility of such magic incantations: at least they did 
not conflict with his own daimonic theory : see Smp. 203 A. émaywyai 
are ‘‘evocations”’ of spirits or gods: see Ruhnk., Tim.,p.115. émumopmai 
have the same meaning: see above, chap. v, n. 168. émuméprew 
frequently in this sense in the Orph. H. xatadécets, xatddecpor are 
the “ bindings ”’ whereby the spirit-raiser magically compels the unseen 
to do his will. Compulsion is regularly found to be necessary: the 
spirits donot come willingly. The magician by his spells and ceremonies 
is their master; he exerts over them that dvdyxyn (6 éadvayxKos is 
frequent in the magical books) or wec@avayxn of which Porph. ap. Eus., 
PE. 5, 8, specially tells us (probably deriving it from Pythagoras of 
Rhodos). ei@ew is Plato’s weaker word: the most extreme is 
Braorixai arecdAai, lamb. Myst. 6, 5 [i.e. Porph. Ep. Anebd. fr. 31 Parth.] ; 
cf. ro deiva mpdfes xdv OéAns Kav wy OédAyns: refrain in a magic hymn, 
P. Mag. Par. 2252 ff.—Just as in these incantations the xardSeats 
affects the gods themselves so in other cases the victim is the un- 
fortunate person whom the magician intends to harm: in this sense 
we have xatadécets, katadeopor, P. Par. 336; Orph. Lith. 582, and the 


NOE Saal Oe CHAPTER Ra LX 327 


devotiones or defixiones written on metal tablets which have been found 
in such numbers in graves; see Gothofred. ad Cod. Theod. Oa, LOn0; 
These are now collected and edited by R. Wiinsch, Defixionum tabellae 
in Attica repertae (CIA. App.), 1897, with those found outside Attica 
included in the Praefatio. Here we find xara8& (xaradlSnp) tov 
d<iva his tongue, limbs, mind, etc. (nn. 68, 89, 95, etc.), i.e. a magical 
disabling, paralysing, fettering of his faculties—and of all his efforts : 
ateAq, evavtia mavra yévorro, nn. 64, 98. The carrying out of this is 
entrusted to Hermes y@émos or to Hekate (katad& adrov mpds tov 
‘Epphv xt.) as the cdtoyou Satuoves; cf. nn. 81, 84, 85, 86, 101, 105, 
106, 107. Sometimes the promoter of the xarddeo.s says of himself 
xaTad@ Kat xatéxw, 109, etc. The defixio itself is called 6 KATOYXOS, 
Gk. Pap. in B.M. (Ken.), No, 121, ll. 394, 429 = p. 97-8. Axtradety is 
therefore here = xaréyeofar movetv (= disable him—not make him 
“ possessed *’) and implies the delivery of the victim into the power 
of the infernal spirits.—The pdvrecs and xafaprai appear as accom- 
plished weather-magicians in Hp., Morb. Sac. vi, 358 L. They are 
claimed to be able to draw down the moon (an old art of Thessalian 
witches), make the sun go out, cause rain or drought at will, etc. A 
yévos Of aveyoxotrac at Korinth was able rods dvépovs xoupilew: 
Hsch. Suid. avepox.; cf. Welcker, Ki.S. iii, 63. The claims made by 
these xafaprac for themselves were made by later ages on behalf of 
Abaris, Epimenides, Pythagoras, etc.; Porph., VP. 28-9 (lamb. 
135 f.) ; Empedokles promised them to his own pupils; 464 ff. Mull., 
fr. 111 Diels; and cf. Welcker, A/.S. iii, 60 f.—These are all examples 
of magical arts from early times; the overwhelming mass of evidence 
for such proceedings in later ages cannot be mentioned here except as 
explaining ancient accounts. 

108 Abaris had been mentioned by Pindar (Harp. ’’Afapis); Hdt. 
mentions him in iv, 36. There we hear of the arrow which he bore 
along with him xara wécav rHv yqv and of his complete abstention from 
food (cf. Iamb., VP. 141). The arrow, a ovpBodrov tot >AmoAAwvos 
(Lycurg. fv. 85, ap. Eudoc., p. 34, 10) is borne by Abaris in his hand— 
the suggestion of Wesseling, recently revived, that we should in Hdt.’s 
passage read ais tov diords meprédepe, has been shown to be linguistically 
impossible by Struve, Opusc. Crit. ii, 269. The embellishment of the 
Abaris story, whereby he (like Musaios) flew through the air on his 
arrow, is later than Hdt. or than Lyk. (The arrow is presumably 
the same as the one of which Herak. Pont. tells some strange things ; 
ap. [Eratosth.] Catast. 29.) The story sounds rather like Herakleides. 
Seeorpi., 2.29); lamb., VP.91, 136; Him), O. 25, 2,4; Nonn. D. 
11, 132 f.; Proc. Gaz., Ep. 96. Abaris was regarded as éveos (Eudoc.) 
as kaQapr7ys and ypyopoXdoyos, as driving away pestilences by magic 
arts (esp. in Sparta, where xwAvrjpia = apotropaic sacrifices, were 
instituted and a temple of Képn owteipa founded: Apollon., Mir. 4— 
prob. from Theopomp.: see Rh. Mus. 26, 558—Iamb., VP. 92, 141; 
Paus. 3, 13, 2). He is also said to have prophesied earthquakes, 
pestilence, etc. (Apollon.), and to have given prescriptions against 
disease and érwédai (P1., Chym. 158 CD); was a type of edxoAlas Kat 
Aréryros Kat Sixacoadyns: Str. 301.—The figure of Abaris thus left 
rather vague in ancient legend was elaborated from two sources: 
(1) the Athenian cult-legends of the foundation of the Proérosta: Harp. 
"AB., Suid. mponpocia. Sch. Ar., Eq. 729; Lycurg. cata Mevecatxpov ; 
and (2) the Pythagorean legends. It is in itself very probable that 
the story in Iamb., VP. 91-3, 147, of the meeting between Abaris 
and Pythagoras goes back to the fabulous “‘ Abaris”’ of Herakleides 


A 


328 NOTES #710 @CHAE DE hei. 


(the story in 215-17 of Abaris and Pythagoras before Phalaris evidently 
comes from Apoll. Ty.). This was suggested by Krische de soc. 
Pythag., p. 38, and has been more definitely maintained by Diels, Arch. 
f. Gesch. d. Philos. iii, 468: it cannot, however, be demonstrated 
absolutely—there is not a scrap of evidence to show that Herakleides 
did actually make Abaris meet Pythagoras. (Ilv@aydpas év 7® mpos 
*ABapw Adyw, Procl. in Tim. 141D, may very possibly, but not 
necessarily, as Diels thinks, refer to the Abaris of Herakleides.)— 
In any case the bringing together of Abaris and Pyth. is a late invention ; 
it is impossible to say whether it could have occurred or did occur as 
early as the Aristotelian work wept tv I]v@ayopetwv.—In any case, 
the guiding conception in all this is that Abaris did not belong to the 
primeval past but came to-Greece in the daylight of historical times. 
Pindar makes this happen xara Kpotoov tov Avédv Bacréa (prob. 
about the time of the Ldpdewv dAwats, Ol. 58, 3 = 546): ‘“ others” 
(acc. to Harp.) made it earlier, in Ol. 21 = 696. It is impossible to 
tell what the reasons were for either of these particular dates. Abaris 
might still be regarded as a contemporary of Pythagoras by those who, 
with Eusebios and Nikostratos ap. Harp., put him in Ol. 53 (xara 
THV VY ‘OXd\vpmaéa, for so the figure in Harp. should be read and not 
y ’OA.; the right reading is preserved from Harp. in Suid. ’’AB.). 
This view, however, is not, as Diels thinks, obtained by making Abaris 
forty years older than Pyth. (The dx«yy of Pyth. falls in Ol. 62— 
see Rh. Mus. 26, 570—and that, too, is the date—not Ol. 63—given 
by “‘ Eusebius Chronica’’, i.e. the Armenian. tr. and the MSS. PEMR 
of Jerome.) Perhaps Abaris was regarded as the contemporary 
of Phalaris whose reign according to one of the versions given by 
Eusebios began in Ol. 53, or 52, 3. Cf. Rh. Mus. 36, 567. 

109 Ekstasis of Aristeas: rovrov daci tiv buynv, orav éBovrAeTOo, 
efvévar Kal émavévar maAw Suid. "Apioréas. His body lies as if dead 
Se Wuxi} exddca tod odpatos éemAaleto ev 7H alOepe wrrA. Max. Tyr. 
16, 2, p. 288 R. (reperimus) Aristeae animum evolantem ex ore in 
Proconneso corvi effigie, Plin., NH. vii, 174 (very similar stories from 
elsewhere, Grimm, p. 1083 [and Baring-Gould, Myths of M.A.)). 
So, too, the "Apuuaoveca said that Aristeas reached the Issedones 
gotBorapmros yevopevos (Hdt. iv, 13); which at least means in some 
strange way impossible for other men, i.e. in Apolline ecstacy (cf. above, 
n. 63, vuuddAnmros, etc.; ev exotracer admodotBwpevos, P. Mag. Par., 
p. 63 Wess.). So, too, Max. Tyr. 38, 3, p. 222. ff., makes Aristeas 
describe how his puy7, xatadtmotca 76 cHua had reached the Hyper- 
boreans, etc. These accounts are not derived from Hdt. who on the 
contrary says that Arist. died in a fuller’s mill at Prokonnesos and that 
his body then disappeared and was seen by a man at Kyzikos. This 
would be translation of body and soul together not éxaoracts of the soul 
alone. In this case Hdt. is probably inaccurate. In such cases of 
translation the point of the story, in fact its whole meaning, lies in the 
fact that the translated person has not died but that he has vanished 
without his soul being separated from his body, i.e. without dying ; 
for normally in death the soul alone vanishes. This applies to all the 
cases of translation referred to in this book (see e.g. the story of the 
Hero Euthymos: above, chap. iv, n. 116; of Kleomedes, p. 129, 
above); and also to the legend of Romulus in Plu., Rom. 27-8, 
in which Plu. rightly finds much resemblance with the story of Aristeas 
as told by Hdt. It applies to the numerous stories of translation which, 
evidently after Greek models, were told of the Latin and Roman 
kings (see Preller, Rom. Mythol.*, p. 84 f., 704). It appears then that 


NOTE See lOmec LA Dit he eis 329 


Hdt. has combined twoversions of the legend: one acc. to which Aristeas 
“ died’ (not only on this occasion but often), i.e. his soul separated 
itself from his body and had a life of its own ; another in which his body 
and soul were “translated”? together without his death. In either 
version Aristeas might meet with the man in Kyzikos: if he were 
translated, it would be his vanished body (cf. Romulus’ meeting 
Julius Proculus) ; but if his soul left his body behind as though lifeless 
then it would be the soul as eiéwdAov of its body that appeared to the 
man (as in the cases of Pythagoras and Apoll. Tyan. who were seen at 
two different places at the same time). This last story seems to be 
the real and primitive one: it is suggested by the above-mentioned 
accounts of the €xoracis of the soul of Aristeas and it was so under- 
stood by the authority (apparently Thpomp.) whom Apollon., Mirab. 2, 
is following. 

110 Hdt. iv, 15, Thpomp. ap. Ath. 13, 605 C: the bronze laurel was 
set up kata tv "Apiotéa tod IIpoxovynaiov éemdnpiav dre ednoev e€ 
‘YrepBopéwy mapayeyoveva. This is not said by Hdt. but is compatible 
with his account. Acc. to Hdt. Aristeas told the people of Metapontum 
that they alone of all the Italiots had been visited by Apollo and that 
he, Aristeas, had been in the god’s train in the shape of a raven (sacred 
to Apollo). This last feature allows us to conclude that Hdt., too, knew 
of the wanderings made by the soul of Aristeas while his body remained 
at home as though dead. The raven is clearly the soul of Aristeas : 
Plin., NH. vii, 174.—The é€médnyuia of Aristeas in Metapontum fell 
acc. to Hdt.’s own calculation (ws ovpBadAdpevos . . . etpicKov) 
240 years (not 230) after the second ddawopds of Aristeas from 
Prokonnesos. As Aristeas had in his poem spoken of the beginning 
of the Kimmerian invasion (Hdt. iv, 13) his first adavopos cannot 
have been befove 681 (the first year of Ardys’ reign, when the Kimmerian 
invasion began acc. to Hdt. 1, 15: Prokonnesos was, too, first founded 
under Gyges: Str. 587). Taking this as a starting point (and it is the 
earliest admissible terminus) and subtracting 240+7 years (Hdt. iv, 
14 fin.) we should arrive at the year 434. This, however, cannot 
possibly have been meant by Hdt. as the year of the miraculous 
presence of Aristeas in Metapontum. We seem to have one of Hdt.’s 
errors of calculation to which he is prone. We cannot indeed make 
out when exactly he intended to date the various scenes of the Aristeas- 
story.—In any case, Hdt. never intended to make Aristeas the teacher 
of Homer, as Bergk following others thinks. He makes Homer’s 
flor. about 856: see Rh. Mus. 36, 397; and puts the Kimmerian 
invasion much later. Aristeas could only be regarded as teacher of 
Homer (Str. 639; Tat. Gr. 41) by those who made Homer a con- 
temporary of the Kimmerian invasion, Thpomp. esp.: see Rh. Mus. 
36, 559.—We do not know what grounds those Chronologists had who 
made Aristeas contemp. with Kroisos and Kyros and put his flor. 
in Ol. 58, 3 (Suid.). The reason may possibly have been “ identifica- 
tion ’’—this is hardly likely—‘* or conjunction with Abaris’”’ (Gutschmid 
ap. Niese, Hom. Schiffskat., p. 49, n.). Unfortunately nothing is known 
of such a conjunction with Abaris (very problematical conjectures by 
Crusius in Myth. Lex.i, 2814 f.). Possibly those who favoured this view 
held that the ’Apidomera had been foisted upon Aristeas; cf. D. H., 
Thuc. 23; 7m. dovs, 10, 4. This work was certainly regarded as 
having been composed at the time of the Kim. invasion. The historical 
reality of Aristeas was never doubted in antiquity and in spite of the 
many legends that gathered about his name there is no need for us to 
do so. The stories of Aristeas’ extremely prolonged lifetime (from the 


330 NOTES et OM CHAPIE Kveic. 


Kim. invasion to the evidently much later period in which he really 
lived) appear to have been derived chiefly from fictions in the 
"Aptsaonera Which probably also gave reasons of a mysterious kind 
for this marvellous extension of his existence. We cannot tell whether 
Aristeas himself wrote the poem and provided his own halo of marvel 
or whether someone else, coming later, made use of this name so 
famous in legend. If there was any basis for the account in Suid. 
ITeicavdpos Ileiowvos fin. we might be justified in attributing the 
composition of the ’Apiudomweca to Aristeas himself. In any case the 
poem was already in existence at the beginning of the fifth century ; 
it can hardly be doubted that Aeschylus modelled upon it his picture 
of the griffins and Arimaspoi in Py. 803 ff. 

111 Dexikreon in Samos, Plu., Q. Gr. 54.—Polyaratos of Thasos, 
Phormion of Sparta: Cl. Al., Stv.i,21, p.399P. Phormion is better known 
because of his marvellous experiences: Paus. 3, 16, 2-3; Thpomp. 
ap. Suid. Bop. ; see Meineke, Com.”, p. 1227 ff.—At the end of the above- 
mentioned enumeration of pavrers ap. Clem. Al., a certain "Eyvedoripos 
6 Lupakoouos is given. Varro ap. Serv. on G. i, 34, tells of the ecstatic 
vision of this Empedotimos: after being a quadam potestate divina 
mortalis aspectus detersus he saw in the sky inter cetera three gates 
and three ways (to the gods and the kingdom of the dead). Varro 
is evidently quoting the account of some ancient authority not a work 
of Empedot. himself; but in any case this vision is the source of what 
Empedotimos had to say about the dwelling-place of the souls in the 
Milky Way: Suid. ’Eyp7ved., "JovAaves: Rh. Mus. 32, 331, n. 1; cf. 
Damasc. ap. Philop. im Arist. Meteor., p.117,10 Hayd. Suid. Eyed. 
calls (probably a guess) the work in which Empedot. gave an account 
of his visions zept guvotxfs axpodcews. (Because E. also brought 
back with him information about the future life, the usual stories 
about the subterranean chamber, etc., are transferred to him by Sch. ad 
Greg. Nz., C. vii, 286 = Eudocia, p. 682, 15.) Apart from this no one 
gives us any information about the personality of Emped. except 
Jul., Ep. 295 B., p. 379, 13 ff. H., who tells us how he was murdered 
but the gods avenged him upon his murderers. This, however, rests 
upon a confusion (either Julian’s or his copyist’s) with ‘“Epyuoripos 
whose murderers were punished in the next world acc. to Plu., Gen. 
Socr. 22, p. 592 C. The above-mentioned story of the souls and the 
Milky Way was also known to Julian (see Suid. JovA.) : his source being 
Herakleides. Pont. (who also probably supplied it to others, e.g. 
Noumenios ay. Procl. in Rp. ii, p. 129 Kroll, Porph., Iamb. ap Stob., 
Ecl. i, p. 378, 12 W., and even earlier, Cicero, Somn. 15-16). No 
older source of this fancy is known: ‘“‘ Pythagoras’’ mentioned as 
its authority by Julian, etc., only takes us back again to Herakleides. 
All that we know up to the present about it suggests the suspicion 
that the very existence and history of this remarkably little-known 
“great Empedotimos’? may have been a simple invention of 
Herakleides’, who may have made use of him in one of his dialogues 
to add interest and importance to some of his own fancies. But now 
we come upon something more detailed about the story told by 
Herakleides of the vision in which Emped. (era tod odparos, p. 122, 2) 
beheld awécav tiv rept rdv puydv aAnbeiav: Procl. in Rp. ii, 119, 
21 Kroll. From this passage it is quite clear that Empedotimos is 
simply a figure in a dialogue by Herakleides, and no more existed 
in reality than Er the son of Armenios or Thespesios of Soli, or than 
as" prototype Kleonymos of Athens ap. Klearchos of Soli (RA. Mus. 
32, 335). 


NO GH ae ELOSPCHAP TE Rex 331 


112 Apollon., Mivab. 3 (prob. from Thpomp.); Plin., NH. vii, 174; 
Plu., Gen. Soc. 22, p. 592 C (‘Epuddwpos—the same copyist’s error 
Secure insroci.72 icp. ii, 113, 24 Kroll); Luc., Enc. Muse..7; Tert., 
Pie 44 {irom ooranos);, ci. Gael, Aur.,. Davrd...1,,3,°5)\; Or., Gels. 
iii, 3; 32. The same Hermotimos of Klazomenai is undoubtedly the 
person meant when a ‘Epyortipos is mentioned among the earlier 
incarnations of the soul of Pythagoras, even when the country of the 
‘person in question is not named (asin D.L. viii, 5 f.; Porph., VP. 45 ; 
Tert., dn. 28) or is incorrectly called a Milesian (e.g. in Hipp., RH. 
1, 2, p. 12 D.-S.). A quite untenable theory about this Hermot. is 
given by Gottling, Opusc. Ac. 211.—Acc. to Plin. the enemies who 
finally burnt the body of Hermot. (with the connivance of his wife) 
were the Cantharidae—-probably the name of a yévos hostile to Hermot. 
—There is a remarkably similar story in Indian tradition: see 
Rh. Mus. 26,559 n. But I no longer suspect any historical connexion 
between this story and that of Hermot.; the same preconceptions 
have led in India as in Greece to the invention of the same tale. Similar 
conceptions in German beliefs: Grimm, 1803, n. 650. 

113 Hence the legend that Apollo after the murder of Python was 
purified not at Tempe, as the story generally went, but in Krete at 
Tarrha by Karmanor: Paus. 2,7,7; 2, 30,3; 10,6, 7 (the hexameters 
of Phemonoé) ; 10, 16,5. The xafdpo.a for Zeus were brought from 
Krete: Orph. fr. 183 Ab.; cf. the oracle ap. Oinom. Eus., PE. 
5, 31, 2; K. O. Miller, Introd. Scient. Myth. 98.—Krete an ancient 
seat of mantiké: the Lokrian Onomakritos, teacher of Thaletas, 
lived in Krete xara réxvnv pavrixyy, Arist., Pol. 1274a, 25. 

114 See above (pp. 96 f). As one who had been initiated into 
the orgiastic cult of Zeus in Krete (Str. 468), Epimenides is called 
véos Kovpys: Plu., Sol. 12; D.L. i, 115. He is called fepeds Asos 
Roieceedssineoche: Clem. Al. -iv,.p., 103sKlotz. 

115 Legend of the dAtwov of E.: H. Smyrn. 18. D.L.i, 114. Plu. 7 Sap. 
14. He was prepared for it by living on dododedos, paddxn, and the 
edible root of a kind of oxiAda (Thphr., HP. 7, 12, 1). All these are 
sacred to the y@dvor (on acdddedos, see partic. AB. 457, 5 ff., which 
goes back to Aristarchos; and Hsch. s.v.), and were only eaten occa- 
sionally by the poor: Hes., Op. 41. 

116 of (’Empevidov) Adyos cis e€lor 4 Yvx STocov FOeAr€ xpovov Kai 
mad elone ev 7d oWpari, Suid. ’"Eapev. This is possibly the meaning 
of mpoomoinbfvar (Aéyerar) moAAdKis avaPeBiwxévax, D.L. i, 114. 
Epimenides like others peta @dvarov év trois C&or yevdopuevos, Procl. 
in Rp. ii, 113, 24 Kr. The story of his prolonged sleep in the cave 
is an example of a widespread fairy-tale motif; see Rh. Mus. 33, 
209, n.2; 35,160. In the case of Epimenides it has been exaggerated 
beyond all bounds and attached to him as a sort of popular mode of 
expressing his long éxordcers. This cave-sleep is interpreted as a state 
of ekstasis by Max. Tyr. 16, 1: év rob Ads tod Acxraiov (see above, 
chap. iii, n. 23) 76 dvtpw Kelwevos Brvm Babet érn ovxva (cf. the 
yuxyyn of Hermot. which amo toi owparos mAalopevn amodnpet 
émt modda érn, Apollon., Mir. 3) dvap ébn évrvxeiv adrds Beois x7. 
Thus his évecpos became &Sdoxados to him, Max. Tyr. 38, 3 ; Ciyoein 
fee 277;.6,) 110° Rb. é ; 

117 godds mept ra Oeta (Sewds ra Beta, Max. Tyr. 38, 3) THY 
evOovaracrixyny codiav, Plu., Sol. 12. Epimen. is put among the ev Geoe 
pdvreis, Bakis and the Sibyl, by Cic., Div. 1, 34.——Prolonged solitude 
is a preparation for the business of the ecstatic seer (cf. Plu.'s story 
of a sort of counterpart to Epimenides, Def. Or. 21, p. 421 B). There 


332 NOTES? [O™ CHAR DE Raa 


is still another fragment remaining from the story of Epim. on this 
head in the account given by Theopompos (though he makes too 
rationalistic a use of it): Epim. did not sleep all that time adda 
ypdvov Twa exmatiaat, acxoAovpevov epi piloroutay (which he needed 
as an darpopav7is): D.L. i, 112. We cannot help being reminded 
of the way in which the Angekok of Greenland, after prolonged and 
profound solitude, severe fasting and concentration of thought, makes 
himself into a magician (Cranz, Hist. of Greenland, p. 194). Inthesame 
way the North American Indian stays for weeks in a solitary wood and 
consciously prepares himself for his visions. At last the real world 
falls away from him, the imagined world of his visions becomes the 
real one and seems almost palpable; till finally in complete ecstasy 
he rushes out of his hiding place. Nor would it be hard to find analogies 
in the religion of civilized peoples. 

118 Epim. is credited with prophecies of coming events: Pl., Lg. 
642 D; D.L. i, 114, and also Cic:, Div. i, 34. On the othershaier 
Arist., Rh. 3, 17, 10, has wept t&v eoopévwy ode épavteveto, adda 
mEpt TOV yeyovoTwy pev adyAwv d€ Which at least means discovering 
the grounds of an event—grounds known only to the god and the seer ; 
e.g. the interpretation of a pestilence as the vengeance of the daimones 
for an ancient crime, etc. If only rational explanation were meant 
there would be no need for a partis. 

119 Delos: Plu., Sept. Sap. 14, p. 158 A. (There is no neeumes 
suppose that there has been any confusion between this péyas xabappos 
by Epimenides and any other purification of Delos that happens to be 
better known to us—the Pisistratean or that of the year 426.) 
Epimenides wodets éxadnpev addas te Kai tiv “AOnvaiwy, Paus. 1, 14, 4. 

120 The purification of Athens from the Kylonian dyos by Epimenides 
is now further confirmed by the Aristotelian ’A@. mod. 1 fin. This 
admittedly is not a very strong guarantee of its historical truth; but 
no strong guarantee is required to dispose of the doubts recently raised 
as to the historical truth of the story that Athens was purified by 
Epimenides, and even of Epimenides’ very existence. There is no 
reason at all for such a doubt. The fact that the historical figure 
of Epimenides has been almost entirely obscured behind the veil of 
fable and romance gives us of course no right to doubt his existence 
(or what would be the fate of Pythagoras, Pherekydes of Syros, and 
of many others ?); and further, because some parts of the story of 
Epim. and his life are fabulous, to doubt the truth of his entirely 
non-fabulous purification of the Athenians from murder is a monstrous 
inversion of true historical method.—No exact dating for the purifica- 
tion of Athens is to be derived from the Aristotelian account of the 
event, as the English ed. (IXenyon) of the ’A@. zo. rightly observes. It 
certainly does not follow (as e.g. Bauer takes for granted in his Forsch. 
zu Arist. "AO. wor. 41) that the purification took place before the 
archonship of Drakon (Ol. 39). Furthermore, it is probable that in 
Plu., Sol. 12, everything that comes before rods dpovs (p. 165, 19, 
Sint. ed. min.) is taken from Aristotle (though perhaps not directly). 
In this case Aristotle, too, would be shown to have attributed to Solon 
the first suggestion that led to the condemnation of the évayets, In 
Plu., however, Solon is still far from having thoughts of his vopodecia, 
he is still only 767 d6€av éxwv, c. 12 (not till c. 14 does his archonship 
begin). Solon’s archonship is put by ’A@. mod. in the year 591/0 
(c. 14, 1, where we should be careful to avoid arbitrary alteration 
of the figures) ; Suid. YéAwv, Eus., Chron. also date it in Ol. 47, and 
the same period is implied by Plu., Sol. 14, p. 168, 12. (’A@. mod. 


NOT BSR OCHADDE Ret rxX 333 


13, 2, also brings the first archonship of Damasias to 582/1 = Ol. 49, 3: 
a date to which all other reliable tradition also points). The condemna- 
tion of the evayets and the purification of Athens by Epimenides thus 
took place some considerable time before 591. It is possible that 
Suid. gives the right date. s.v. "Empevidns* éxadnpe tas "AOjnvas roo 
Kvudwveiov dyous kata tHv pd OdAvumidda (604/1)—that in the Kirrhaian 
war there was an ’AAxpaiwy general of the Athenians offers no objection : 
Plu., Sol. 11. Suidas’ statement has not (as I once thought myself, 
with Bernhardy) been taken from D.L., nor is it to be corrected acc. 
to his text. D.L. i, 100, only brings forward the connexion between 
the purification and the KvdAwveiov dyos as the opinion of “some” 
(which in spite of the vagueness of expression must mean Neanthes 
ap. Ath. 602 C), while the real reason is said to be a Aowtwos, and the 
purification (as in Eus. Chr.) is placed in Ol. 46; i.e. probably 46, 3, 
the traditional date of Solon’s legislation.—Plato, Lg. 642 DE, does 
not conflict with the story of the expiation ot the Kui. dyos by 
Epimenides: his story that Epimen. was present in Athens in the 
year 500 and retarded the threatened Persian invasion for ten years 
is not intended to contest the truth of the tradition of the much earlier 
purification of Athens by Epimen. (‘‘ retarded’’: so Clem. Al., Str. 
vi, 13, p. 755 P., understood Plato and prob. rightly ; we often hear in 
legendary stories of the gods or their prophets retarding coming events 
noiciyshave been determined by fate; cf: Pl., Smp: 201 D; Hdt. 
Pome to OULD oe us:, PEL; 35, p. 233. BC> Vg., A. vi, 313 f.* 
vili, 398 f.; and what Serv. ad loc. reports from the libri Acheruntict). 
How the same man could be living both at the end of the seventh 
and of the sixth centuries would have troubled Plato not at all— 
tradition attributed a miraculously long life to Ep. At any rate, 
it is quite impossible to base the chronology of Ep.’s life on the story 
in Plato. (It may have been suggested by a forged oracle made 
ex eventu after 490 and fathered on Epim., as Schultess suggests, 
De Epim. Crete, p. 47, 1877.) 

121 Details of the expiation ceremonies: D.L. i, 111-12; Neanthes 
ap. Ath. 602 C. It is not the human sacrifice but the sentimental 
interpretation of Neanth. that Polemon (Ath. 602 F.) declares to be 
fictitious. They are invariably sacrifices to the y@éwa that Epim. 
institutes. Thus (as Abaris founded a temple at Sparta for Kopyn 
owreipa) he founded at Athens, evidently as the concluding part of 
the purification, ra iepa tv cepvdv Oedv, i.e. of the Erinyes: D.L. 
2: 

122 Such a connexion must at least be intended when Aristeas is 
brought to Metapontum and Phormion to Kroton, both important 
centres of the Pythagorean society. Aristeas, too, as well as Abaris, 
Epimenides, etc., is one of the favourite figures of the Pythagoreans : 
Becmiamp..) VP. 138. 

123 Tt would certainly be necessary to deny to Epimenides the 
* Theogony’”’ that the whole of antiquity read and quoted under 
the name of Epimenides without once expressing a doubt, if the frag- 
ments of that Theogony really contained borrowings from the teaching 
of Anaximenes or, even worse, from the rhapsodical Theogony of 
Orpheus, as Kern, de Orphei Ep. Pher. Theog. 66 ff. maintains. But 
in the first place a few vague resemblances are not enough to show 
any connexion between Epimenides and those others. In the second, 
supposing the connexion proved, Epimenides need not necessarily 
have been the borrower. In any case, such alleged borrowings do 
not oblige us to advance the period when Ep. lived from the end of 


334 NOILESPFIO @GOAL TH Ramics 


the seventh to the end of the sixth century. If they really exist 
then we should rather have to conclude that the Theogony is itself 
a forgery of a much later date. 

124 The possibility of theoretical activity in the case of these men 
is often implied in the statements of later writers; e.g. when the name 
GeoAdyos is given to Epimenides (D.S. 5, 80, 4) or Abaris (Apollon., 
Mir. 4); or when Aristeas is called an aynp ¢tAdcodos (Max. Tyr. 
35; (Opec cele 

425 TATISt. Pl Cre On nO, kU 

1-OR SEGA. PDeHC aavill: 

127 See above, chap. i, n. 41. Archiloch. fy. 12: Keivou Knedadnv 
Kal xaplevta péAn “’Hdatotos xabapotow ev etpacw auderovynbyn. E., 
Or. 40 f.: the slain Klytaimnestra mupi xaOyyviorat dSéuas and Sch. 
mavTa yap Kabawpet TO Top, Kai ayva doxet elvar Ta KaLopeva, TA O€ ATada 
peptaopeva. E., Sup. 1211: ... tw’ adradyv (those who are being 
buried) cw@pal’ HyvicOn mupi; cf. dyvicov mupad péAabpov, IT. 1216. 
On a grave inscr. from Attica (Epigr. Gr. 104): évéade ArddAoyos 
Kabap@ mupt yuia Kabjpas . . . wyer’ és dbavarovs—evidently modelled 
on ancient ideas; cf. also ib. 109, 5 (CIA. iii, 1325). Those, too, who 
are struck by lightning (see Appendix i) are purified from all earthly 
taint by the holiest sort of wip xa@dpoov (E., TA. 1112; Kxabapoiw 
droyi, E., Hel. 869) and go straight mpos afavatovs. Jamb., Myst. 
v, 12, also explains how fire 7a mpoocaydopeva xabaiper Kal amodAver TaY 
ev TH VAN SecpOv, adoporot tots Peois, etc. 


128°Cf. also Pl., Lg. 677 DE; Plu., Fac: -Orb.. Lun? 25.0 oe 


CHAPTER X 
THE ORPHICS 


The earliest authority who mentions Orphic sects and their 
practices is Herodotos (ii, 81), who calls attention to the 
correspondence between certain sacerdotal and ascetic ordin- 
ances of the Egyptian priesthood, and the “ Orphic and 
Bacchic ’”’ mysteries. The latter, he says, are really Egyptian 
and Pythagorean, or in other words they were founded by 
Pythagoras or Pythagoreans upon Egyptian models ; and thus, 
in the opinion of the historian, they cannot have come into 
existence before the last decade of the sixth century. Hero- 
dotos then, either in Athens or elsewhere, had heard during his 
journeys of certain private societies who by calling themselves. 
after the name of Orpheus, the prototype of Thracian song so 
well known to legend, recognized the origin of their peculiar 
cult and creed in the mountains of Thrace, and did honour to 
Bakchos the Thracian god. The fact that the Greek Orphics ~~ 
did indeed worship Dionysos, the lord of life and death, before 
all other gods, is clearly shown by the remains of the theo- 
logical poems that originated in their midst. Orpheus himself, 
as founder of the Orphic sect, is actually said to have been the 
founder also of the Dionysiac initiation-mysteries.* 

This gathering-together in the name of Orpheus for the 
purpose of offering a special worship to Dionysos was, then, 
the work of sects who, in private association, practised a cult 
which the public and official worship of the state either did 
not know of or disdained. There were many such associa- 
tions, and of very varied character, which kept themselves 
aloof from the organized religion of the community, and were 
tolerated by the state.2 Asa rule, they were “ foreign gods ”’ § 
who were thus worshipped ; and generally by foreigners who 
thus kept up the special worship of their own homes, though 
they did not always exclude natives of their adopted country. 
Now, Dionysos, the god of the Orphic sects, had for a long time 
ceased to be a foreigner in Greek countries ; since his arrival 
from Thrace he had been refined and matured under the 
humanizing sun of Greece, until he had become a Greek god, 
and a worthy associate of the Greek Olympos. It is possible, 
however, that in this process, the old Thracian god may have 
seemed to his original worshippers to have lost his real 


“a 


336 THE SOREL Gs 


character, and they may on that account have joined together 
to offer, in separation from the official worship, a special 
cult in which all the old ideas of the national religion should 
be preserved unaltered. A secondary wave of influence thus 
broke upon the long-since-Hellenized god, the Thracian 
Dionysos in Greece, and this wave the official worship either 
had not the power or lacked the will to assimilate. It was 
therefore left to special sects who honoured the god after their 
own private laws. Whether indeed they were Thracians who, 
as in the similar case of the unmodified worship of Bendis,* 
or Kotytto, thus reinstituted their ancient and national 
wworship of Dionysos in Greek countries, we cannot with 


certainty tell; but this special cult would certainly not have 


achieved the importance it did in Greek life 1f it had not been 
joined by Greek adherents brought up in the native con- 
ceptions of Greek piety, who under the name of “‘ Orphics”’ 
once more adapted the Thracian god to Greek modes of 
NOUR em oe ae this new adaptation differed from the 
previous assimilation of the god by the official worship of the 
state. We have no reason for believing that Orphic sects. 
were formed in Greek states before the second half of the sixth 
century,° that critical age of transition when in so many places 
primitive and mythological modes of thought were develop- 
ing into a theosophy, which in its turn was making an effort to 
become a philosophy. The Orphic religious poetry is itself 
clearly marked by this effort—for in Orphism it never became 
more than an effort and never succeeded in reaching its goal. 
The exact point of origin of this combined movement of 
religion and theosophy, the various steps and manner of its 
development remain hidden from us. Athens was a centre of 
Orphism ; it does not therefore follow that Orphism had its 
origin there, any more than had the multifarious tendencies 
and activities in art, poetry, and science that at about the 
same period flowed together, and as though driven by an 
unseen intellectual current, found their meeting place at 
Athens. Onomakritos, we are told, the giver of oracles in 
the court of Peisistratos ‘‘ founded the secret worship of 
Dionysos ’’.6 This appears to refer to the first founding of 
an Orphic sect at Athens; and we meet with the name of 
Onomakritos among the authors of Orphic poems. But the 
real authorship of these poems is far more often ascribed to 
certain men of Southern Italy and Sicily, who can be more 
or less clearly connected’ with the Pythagorean societies 
which were flourishing in those districts about the last 
decades of the sixth and the first of the fifth centuries. 


ii PenOKRHICS ore 


It seems certain that in Southern Italy at that time, 
Orphic societies were already in existence—for whom else 
can these writers have intended their “‘ Orphic’”’ poems? 
In any case we must take it as certain that the correspondence 
of Orphic and Pythagorean doctrine on the subject of the 
soul is not purely accidental. Did Pythagoras when he came 
to Italy (about 532) find Orphic societies already settled in 
Kroton and Metapontum, and did he associate himself with 
their ideas? Or did the “‘ Orphic ”’ sectaries (as Herodotos 
imagined 8) owe their inspiration to Pythagoras and his 
disciples ? The various cross-currents of reciprocal influence 


can no longer be disentangled by us, but if the Pythagoreans 


were the sole creditors in the bargain we should undoubtedly 
find the whole body of Orphic doctrine thoroughly permeated 
with conceptions that belong exclusively to the Pythagorean 
school. In the wreckage of the Orphic poems, however, 
except for a few negligible traces of the Pythagorean mystic 
theory of numbers,® we find nothing that must necessarily 
have been derived by the Orphics from Pythagorean sources.?° 
Least of all did they need to derive the doctrine of the migra- 


e 


tion of souls and its application from this source. It is possible, _~ 


therefore, that it was the independently developed Orphic 
doctrine which exerted an influence upon Pythogoras and his 
adherents in Southern Italy ; just as it was a ready-made 
Orphic teaching (and that, too, perhaps, brought from Southern 
Italy) with which Onomakritos, the founder of the Orphic sects 
at Athens, associated himself—about the same time as Pytha- 
goras’ similar action in Kroton. It is hardly possible to 
interpret in any other way the various relations of the Orphics 
with each other when we learn that at the court of the Peisis- 
tratids, in addition to Onomakritos, two other men who had 
arrived from Southern Italy were active and were counted 
among the earliest writers of Orphic poems. 


§ 2 


The Orphics wherever we meet with them in Greek countries 
always appear as members of a private cult-society who are 
held together by a specially organized and individual mode of 
worship. The old Thracian worship of Dionysos in its strain- 
ing after the infinite conducted its revels under the open sky 
of night, seeking out deserted mountain-sides and forests where 
it was farthest from civilization and closest to unspoiled 
and untrammelled nature. How this cult may have accom- 
modated itself to the narrow limitations of ordinary city- 

Z 


338 TORO REHIGS 


life, it is hard to imagine ; }* though it is natural to suppose 
that much of the extravagance that was literal and actual 
enough in the old northern festival of night was represented 
in the milder worship of Greece by mere symbol. We have 
less difficulty in discovering the side of their religious activity 
which the Orphics, apart from the private worship of the 
conventicle, revealed to the outer world of the profane. 
Orpheus himself in the tradition had been not merely the 
inspired singer but the seer, the magically endowed physician 
and purification-priest~ as well,1® and the Orphics, as his 
followers, were active, too, in all these directions.14 In the 
composition of Greek Orphism the kathartic ideas which had 
been evolved on Greek soil were combined in a not unnatural 
alliance with the old Thracian worship of Dionysos. The Orphic 
priests of purification were preferred to others of their kind by 
many religious people.4* But among the inner circles of 
Orphism the sacerdotal activities of purification and the 
removal of daimonic hindrances, which were by no means 
given up, tended rather to produce deeper and broader 
ideas of purity and of release from the earthly and the tran- 
sitory. In some such way was evolved that asceticism which 
in close combination with the Thracian worship of Dionysos 
gave the peculiar tone to the faith and temperament of the 
sectaries and gave to their lives their special direction. 

The Orphic sect had a fixed and definite set of doctrines ; 
this alone sufficed to distinguish it both from the official 
worships of the state, and from all other cult-associations of 
the time. The reduction of belief to distinct doctrinal formule 
may have done more than anything else to make Orphism 
a society of believers—none of the other theologi of the time, 


| / Epimenides, Pherekydes, etc., accomplished as much. With- 


out its fundamental religious doctrine Orphism in Greece is 
inconceivable ; according to Aristotle the ‘ doctrines” of 
Orpheus were put into poetical form by the founder of the 
Orphic sect in Athens, Onomakritos.1® The uncertain accounts 
given us by the later authorities do not allow us to make out 
quite clearly 1? what was the extent of Onomakritos’ work in 
the formation or collection of Orphic doctrinal poetry. What is 
important is the fact that he is distinctly named as the author 
of the poem called “ Initiations ’’.18 This poem must have 
been one of the basic, and in the strictest sense “ religious ”, 
writings of the sect ; a poem of this character may very well 
have had for its central incident the dismemberment of the god 
at the hands of the Titans—a story which Onomakritos is 
said to have put into verse.19 


DHEeeORPAICS 339 


The religious beliefs and worship of the sect were founded 
upon the detailed instructions of certain very numerous 
writings dealing with matters of ritual and theology. These 
claimed the authority of religious inspiration,?® and were 
as a whole supposed to be the work of the primitive Thracian 
bard, Orpheus, himself. The anonymity which concealed 
the identity of the real authors of these poems was not, how- 
ever, very thoroughly preserved; even towards the end of the 
fourth century there were those who claimed to be able to 
give with certainty the names of the original authors 
of the various poems. Strictly canonical authority, such as 
would at once have reduced to silence every conflicting view 
or statement, never seems to have belonged to any of these 
writings. In particular, there were several “‘ Theogonies ”’ 74 
—poems which attempted to give expression to the funda- 
mental ideas of Orphic speculation on religious subjects—and 
in spite of much harmony in general effect they differed 
considerably from each other in particular mode of expression. 
They represented ever-renewed and increasingly elaborate » 
attempts to construct a connected doctrinal system for 
Orphism. With unmistakable allusion to the oldest Greek 
theological system—that which had been committed to 
writing in the Hesiodic poem—these Orphic Theogonies 
described the origin and development of the world from obscure 
primordial impulses to the clear and distinct variety-in- 
unity of the organized kosmos, and it described it as the history 
of a long series of divine powers and figures which issue from 
each other (each new one overcoming the last) and succeed 
each other in the task of building and organizing the world 
until they have absorbed the whole universe into themselves 
in order to bring it forth anew, animated with one spirit and, 
with all its infinite variety, a unity. These gods are certainly 
no longer deities of the familiar Greek type. Not merely the 
_ new gods evolved by the creative fancy of Orphism-—-creatures 
which had almost entirely lost all distinct and sensible outline 
under the accumulation of symbolical meaning—but even the 
figures actually borrowed from the Greek world of divinities 
are turned into little more than mere personified abstrac- 
tions. Who would recognize the Zeus of Homer in the Orphic 
Zeus who after he has devoured the World-God and “taken 
unto himself the power of Erikapaios ’’,2? has become himself 
the Universe and the Whole? ‘‘ Zeus the Beginning, Zeus the 
Middle, in Zeus all things are completed.” #8 The concept 
here so stretches the personality that it threatens to break it 
down altogether; the outlines of the individual figures are 


340 POP OPES 


lost and are merged into an intentional ‘‘confusion of 

_/deities’’. 24 

v Still, the mythical envelope was never quite given up; 
these poets could not do without it altogether. Their gods 
did indeed strive to become pure abstractions but they were 
never quite successful in throwing off all traces of individuality 
and the limitations of form and matter: the concept never 

/ quite broke through the veil of mythology. The poets of the 
Orphic Theogonies vied with one another in their attempts 
to make the half-seen and half-conceived accessible alike to 
the imagination and the reason; and in succession gave 
varying expression to the same fundamental conceptions until 
finality was reached as it seems in a poem whose contents 
are better known to us than the others from quotations made 
from it by Neoplatonic writers—the Theogonical poem of the 
four-and-twenty Rhapsodies. Into this poem was poured all 
the traditional material of mythological and symbolical 
doctrine, and in it such doctrine achieved its final expression.” 


$3 

This combination of religion and quasi-philosophical specula- 
tion was a distinguishing feature of the Orphics and of Orphic 
literature. Religion only entered into their Theogonical poetry 
in so far as the ethical personalities of the divinities therein 
described had not entirely faded away into transparent 
allegories.2® It was abstract speculation alone which really 
prevailed there, little respect being paid to religion; and asa 
result a much greater licence was given to speculative construc- 

tion. 
This abstract speculation, however, reached its climax in 
a religious narrative of the first importance for the beliefs 
and cult of the sect. At the end of the series of genealogically 
connected deities came the son of Zeus and Persephone, Diony- 
sos, who was also given the name of the underworld deity 
Zagreus.?7 To him, even in infancy, was entrusted the rule of 
\/ the world by Zeus. But the wicked Titans, urged on by Hera, 
approached him by a stratagem. They were the enemies of 
Zeus, and had already been overthrown by Ouranos,?’ but 
had, it seems, been let loose again by Zeus from Tartaros. They 
made Dionysos trust them by giving him presents, and while 
he was looking at his own image in a mirror 2° that they had 
given him, they fell upon him. He tried to escape them by 
repeated transformations of shape; finally, in the form of a 
bull,?° he was at last overcome and his body torn to pieces 
which his savage foes thereupon devoured. The heart alone 


THE ORPHICS 341 


was rescued by Athene, and she brought it to Zeus who 
swallowed it. From Zeus there sprang the “‘ new Dionysos ”’, 
the son of Zeus and Semele, in whom Zagreus came to life 
again. r 

The myth of the dismemberment of Zagreus by the Titans 
was already put into verse by Onomakritos ; #4 it continued 
to be the culminating point of the doctrinal poetry of the 
Orphics. It occurred not only in the Rhapsodies,®? but in 
other versions of the Orphic legend composed in complete 
independence of these.3* It is a religious myth in the stricter 
sense; its etiological character is most marked; %* its 
purpose is to explain the religious implication of the ritual 
dismemberment of the bull-god at the Bacchic nocturnal 
festivals, and to derive that feature from the legendary 
sufferings of Dionysos-Zagreus. i 

But though the legend thus has its roots in the primitive 
sacrificial ritual of ancient Thrace,®* in its extended form it 
belongs entirely to the region of Hellenic thought ; and in this 
combination of the two elementsit becomes truly Orphic. The 
wicked Titans belong entirely to strictly Greek mythology.*® 
In this case, as the murderers of the god, they represent the 
primeval power of evil.” They dismember the One into 
Many parts; by their impiety the One divine being is dis- 
persed into the multiplicity of the things of this world.3° It is 
reborn as One in the new Dionysos sprung from Zeus. The 
Titans—so the legend goes on to relate—who had devoured the 
limbs of the god were destroyed by Zeus with his lightning 
flash. From their ashes sprang the race of men in whom, in 
conformity with their origin, the good derived from Dionysos- 
Zagreus is mixed with a wicked Titanic element.*® 

With the rule of the new-born Dionysos and the origin of 
mankind, the series of mythological events in the Orphic 
poetry came to an end.4® With the entry of mankind into 
Creation *! the existing period of the world begins ; the period 
of world-revolutions is over. The poems now turn to the subject 
of man and the revelation of his fate, his duty and his purpose 
in the world. 


§ 4 


CThe mixture of the elements that make up the totality of his 
being in itself prescribes for man the direction that his effort 
shall take. He must free himself from the Titanic element and, 
thus purified, return to the god, a fragment of whom is living 
in him.42 The distinction between the Titanic and Dionysiac 
elements in man is an allegorical expression of the popular 


~~ 


342 THESE ORE EGS 


distinction between body and ecurent also corresponds to 
a profoundly felt estimate of the relative value of these two 
sides of man’s being. According to Orphic doctrine man’s 
duty is to free himself from the chains of the body in which 
the soul lies fast bound like the prisoner in his cell.42 The soul 
has a long way, however, to go before it can find its freedom ; 
it may not by an act of violence tear its bonds asunder for 
itself.44 The death of the body only frees it for a short while ; 
for the soul must once more suffer imprisonment in a body. 
After leaving its old body, it flutters free in the wind, but a 
breath of air sends it into a new body again.* So it continues 
its journey, perpetually alternating between an unfettered 
separate existence, and an ever-renewed incarnation— 
traversing the great “‘ Circle of Necessity ”’ in which it becomes 
the life-companion of many bodies both of men and beasts. 
Thus, the “ Wheel of Birth ’”’ 48 seems to return ever upon 
itself in hopeless repetition: in Orphic poetry (and there 
perhaps for the first time) occurs the despairing thought of the 
exact repetition of the past ; events which have already been 
lived through once returning again with the convergence of 
the same attendant circumstances.4? Thus, Nature, ever 
reverting to its own beginnings, draws men with it in its 
senseless revolution round itself. 

But the soul has a way open for escape from this perpetual 
recurrence of all things that threatens to close in upon it ; it 
may hope “ to escape from the circle and have a respite from 
misery ’’.48 It is formed for blessed freedom, and can at last 
detach itself from the condition of being it has to endure 
upon earth—a condition unworthy of it. A “release”’ is 
possible; but man in his blindness and thoughtlessness 
cannot help himself, cannot even, when salvation is at hand, 
turn himself towards it.?9 

Salvation comes from Orpheus and his Bacchic mysteries ; 
Dionysos himself will loose his worshipper from Evil and 
the unending way of misery. Not his own power, but the 
grace of the “ releasing gods ”’ is to be the cause of man’s libera- 
tion.°® The self-reliance of the older Greece is breaking 
down; in humility of heart the pious man looks elsewhere 
for help ; he needs the revelation and mediation of ‘‘ Orpheus 
the Ruler ”’ > in order to find the way of salvation ; he must 
follow his ordinances of salvation with perfect obedience if 
he is to continue in that way. 

It is not only the sacred mysteries themselves, in the form 
in which Orpheus has ordained them, which prepare for the 
release ; a complete “ Orphic life ’ °? must be developed out 


THE ORPHICS 343 


of them. (Asceticism is the prime condition of the pious life. 
This does not mean the practice of the respectable bourgeois 
virtues, nor the discipline and moral reformation of a man’s 
character ; the height of morality is in this case the turning 
again towards god,°* and the turning away not merely from 
the weaknesses and errors of earthly being but from the whole 
of earthly life itself; renunciation of all that ties man to 
mortality and the life of the body..}The fierce determination 
with which the Indian penitent tears away his will from life, 
to which every organ in his body clings desperately—for this, 
indeed, there was no place among the Greeks, the lovers of 
life—not even among the world-denying ascetics. Abstention 
from the eating of flesh was the strongest and most striking 
species of self-denial practised by the Orphic ascetics.*4 
Apart from this, they kept themselves in all essentials uncon- 
taminated by certain things and situations which rather 
suggested to a religious symbolism than actually indicated 
in themselves attachment to the world of death and tran- 
sitoriness. The long-standing ordinances of the priestly ritual 
of purification were taken up and added to; *° but they were 
also raised to a higher plane. They are no longer intended to 
free men from the effects of daimonic contacts; the soul 
itself is made pure by them °*—pure from the body and its 
polluting association, pure from death and its loathsome 
mastery. In expiation of “ guilt ”’ the soul is confined within 
the body,®’? the wages of sin is in this case that life upon 
earth which for the soul is death. The whole multiplicity of 
the universe, emptied of its innocent and natural sequence of 
cause and effect, appears to these zealots under the uniform 
aspect of a correlation between crime and punishment, between 
pollution and purification. Thus, mysticism enters into the 
closest alliance with kathartic practices. The soul which 
comes from the divine and strives to return thither, has no 
other purpose to fulfil upon earth (and therefore no other 
moral law to obey) ; it must be free from life itself and be 
pure from all that is earthly. 

The Orphics, moreover, were the only people who could 
venture among themselves or before strangers to greet each 
other with the special name of the “ Pure’”’.°§ The first 
reward of his piety was received by the initiate of the Orphic 
mysteries in that intermediate region whither men must go 
after their earthly death. When a man dies, Hermes leads 


the ‘‘ deathless soul ’’ into the underworld.®® Special poems é 


of the Orphic community announced the terrors and delights 
of the underworld kingdom.®® What the Orphic mystery- 


344 ‘Loe ORR EES 


priests vouchsafed to their public upon these hidden matters— 
outdoing the promises made in the Eleusinian mysteries in 
coarse appeal to the senses—may have been the most popular, 
but was certainly not the most original feature of Orphic 
Ceaciingwes Hades a judgment awaited the soul—it was 
no instinctive fancy of the people, but the “ sacred doctrine ”’ ® 
of these sectaries which first introduced and elaborated the 
idea of compensatory justice in the world of the dead. The 
impious suffer punishment and purgation in the depths of 
Tartaros ; §&} those who» have not been made pure by the 
Orphic mysteries lie in the miry Pool; ®* “ dreadful things © 
await ’’ the disdainer of the sacred worship. By a conception 
that is quite unique in ancient religion, participation in the 
Orphic ceremonial enables the descendant to obtain from the 
gods “‘ pardon and purification ’’ for his departed ancestors 
who may be paying the penalty in the next world for the 
misdeeds of the past.®® But for the initiate of the Orphic 
mysteries himself who has not merely borne the narthex 
but has been a true Bakchos,®’ his reward is that he shall 
obtain a “‘ milder fate’’ in the kingdom of the underworld 
deities whom he has revered on earth, and dwell ‘‘in the fair 
meadows of deep-running Acheron ’’.68 The blessed home of 
refuge no longer lies like the Homeric Elysium upon earth, 
but below in the world of the Souls, for only the released 
soul reaches there. There, the initiated and purified will live 
in communion with the gods of the nether world ®°—we feel 
that we are listening to Thracian and not Greek conceptions 
of the ideal when we hear of the “ Banquet of the Pure” 
and the uninterrupted intoxication which they enjoy there.’ 

But the depths restore the soul at last to the light, for its 
lasting habitation is not below; it stays there only for the 
interval which separates death from its next rebirth. For the 
reprobate this is a time of punishment and purgation—the 
Orphics could not distress their hearers with the awful and 
intolerable idea of the perpetual punishment of the damned 
in Hell ; many times over the soul rises again to the light and 
in continually renewed bodies fulfils the cycle of births. For 
the deeds of its past life it is recompensed in the next life that 
it lives, and each man must now suffer exactly what he has 
done to another.“ So he pays the penalty for ancient guilt : 
the “ thrice-ancient law ’’—what thou hast done thou shalt 
suffer—is thus fulfilled for him in far livelier fashion than it 
could be in any torments of the shadow-world. So surely 
also shall the pure be rewarded in future lives by ever-increas- 
ing happiness. How exactly the Orphic fancy filled out the 


Um OK LE EILCS 345 


individual gradations in the scale of happiness is beyond our 
knowledge.” 

But the soul is immortal, and even sinners and the unre- 
deemed cannot perish entirely. Hades and the life on earth 
holds them in their perpetual round, and this is their punish- 
ment. (For the soul of the blessed, however, neither Hades nor 
earthly life can offer the highest crown of happiness. If it has 
been made pure and spotless in the Orphic mysteries and the 
Orphic manner of life, it is freed from the necessity of rebirth 
and withdrawn from the cycle of becoming and perishing. The 

“ purification ’’ ends in a final redemption. }The soul mounts 
upwards from the base level of earthly life, not to become 
nothing in a final death, for it is now that it first truly begins 
to live; hitherto it has lain imprisoned in the body like the 
corpse in the grave.’ It was death for the soul when it 
entered into life—now it is free and will no more suffer death ; 
it lives for ever like God, for it comes from God and is itself 
divine. We do not know whether these theosophists went so 
far as to lose themsevles in detailed picturing and contempla- 
tion of the blissful heights of the divine life.** In the remains 
of their poems we read of stars and the moon as other worlds, ”° 
perhaps as the dwelling-place of illuminated spirits.7®° But 
perhaps also the poet allowed the soul to flee from its last 
contact with mortality without himself desiring to follow it 
into the unbroken radiance of divinity that no earthly eye 
can abide. 


§ 5 


This, then, is the keystone that completes the arch of Orphic 
religion—the belief in the divine, immortal, and abiding life 
of the soul for whom union with the body and its desires 
is a thwarting hindrance and repression—a punishment 
from which its one desire, as soon as it is awakened to a full 
knowledge of itself, is to escape in order that it may belong 


entirely to itself in full enjoyment of its powers. The contrast Ve 


between these ideas and those of the Homeric world is com- 
plete ; there, the soul released from the body was credited only 
with a poor, shadowy, half-conscious existence, so that an 
eternity of godlike being in the full enjoyment of life and its 
powers was only thinkable if the body and the soul, the 
twofold self of man, were translated in undissolved communion 
out of the world of mortality. The Orphic legends about the 
origin of the human race do not tell us the real source and 
derivation of the very different beliefs about the soul held 
by the Orphics ; HRS legends only give expression to the 


~ 
\ 


346 THE = ORPHICS 


way—and only one of many ways 7’—in which the already 
established confidence in the divinity of the soul was deducible 
from what might be considered the oldest historical story of 
mankind, and how it might be brought into connexion with 
the Orphic legend of the gods. This persuasion, the belief 
that a god was living in man and a god that could not be free 
until he had broken through the prison of the body, was 
deeply rooted in the worship of Dionysos and the ecstasies 
belonging to that worship; we cannot be .in much doubt 
that it was taken over ready-made, together with the “ enthu- 
siastic’’ cult of the divinity, and further developed by the 
Orphic believers. We have already met with traces of this 
belief even in the Thracian home of the Dionysiac cult ; and 
in what we know of the Thracian form of the religion, traces 


_are not absolutely wanting of an ascetic tendency of living 


that would easily and naturally arise from such a belief.78 
Even in those Northern countries we found the belief in the 
transmigration of souls bound up with the religion of Dionysos, 
and that belief, when it is naively held, has as its essential 
presupposition the idea that the soul, in order to have a 
complete life, and one that can survive bodily death, must 
of necessity be united to another body. Even this idea is, 
however, quite foreign to Orphism. The Orphics retained, in 
spite of everything, the doctrine of transmigration, and 
combined it in a strange alliance with their own belief in the 
divinity of the soul and its vocation to a life of perfect liberty. 
It is evidently improbable that they invented that doctrine 
entirely on their own account; the first principles of their 
creed by no means led necessarily to it. Herodotos 7° asserts 
distinctly that the doctrine of transmigration came to the 
Greeks from Egypt ; and as a consequence, that it was from 
Egyptian tradition that the Orphics received it. This asser- 
tion has no more to recommend it than any other of Herodotos’ 
many pronouncements as to the Egyptian origin of Greek 
opinions and legends, and it is even less likely to mislead us 
in view of the fact that it is by no means certain and not 
even probable that a belief in transmigration ever really 
existed in Egypt.8° This belief has arisen independently in 
many places on the surface of the earth, without the need of 
transmission from one place to another ; ®t it might easily 
arise in a country where the belief prevailed that there existed 
only a limited number of souls of which each one—in order 
that no earthly body might be without its spiritual guest— 
must inhabit many perishable life-tenements, and not 
be bound to any one of them by a real inner necessity. This, 


ibe OKEHICS 347 


however, is a conception common to popular psychology all 
over the world.®? If it is still considered more probable that 
the idea of a migration of the soul through many temporary 
bodies was not spontaneously evolved by the Orphics, but 
was received by them from the hands of others, there is yet 
no reason to reject the most natural assumption—namely, 
that this also was one of the beliefs that the Orphics took 
over with the cult of Dionysos from Thrace. Like other 
mystics, ®* the Orphics took over the belief in transmigration 
from popular tradition and turned it into a serviceable 
member of their own body of doctrine.S4 It served them by 
giving a striking and physical expression to their own con- 
ception of the inevitable connexion between guilt and penance, 
pollution and the refining power of punishment, piety and 
future blessedness upon which all their religious ethic depended. 
It was with an exactly similar purpose that they also retained 
and developed the old Greek idea of a place of the souls in the 
depths below the earth. 

But if they believed in the transmigration of souls, that 
belief did not with them hold the highest place. There is a 
realm where the ever free and divine souls have their being, 
a realm to which the series of lives in earthly bodies is only 
transitional, and the way to it was pointed out by the saving 
doctrine of the Orphic mysteries, by the purification and 
salvation afforded by Orphic asceticism. 


NOTES SOs GH AL EE ages 


Ln ne OSE TOTE KGL Tederas pvornptoas evpeto Baxyouv, AP. Vii, oo 


(Damagetos). 80 Kal tas taro Tod Avovvaou vevo mevas rehenee 
’Opdixas mpocayopevOqvat, D.S. 3, 65, 6. edpe 5€ "Opdeds 7a Atovdaov 
pvotnpia [Apollod.] 1, 3, 2, 3. (Dionysum) love et Luna (natum), cui 
sacra Orphica putantur conftei: Cic., ND. 11,58; cf.) Lyd); Wes 
4,51, p. 107 W. Baxyixa an Orphic poem: Suid. ’Opdevs (cf. Hiller, 
Hermes, 21, 364 f.), whence fry. 3 (Abel) ; and perhaps frr. 152, 167, 
169, 168. 7a ’Opdixa Kadovpeva kal Ta Baxxixa are already reckoned 
as a single class by Hdt. ii, 81. 

* This is seen in the decree of the Council and people of Athens. 
dealing with the éumopo. Kiriets and their temple of “‘ Aphrodite ’”— 
CIA. ii, 168 (333/2 B.c.).—That on the other hand such foreign mystery- 
cults were not always so tolerated (or not without resistance) is shown 
by the caseiof Ninos: Dem., FL. (19) 281 with Scho;=\ci.413ias 
Dinarch, 11. 

3 Qeoi £evixot, Hsch., see Lob., Agi. 627 ff. A nameless Oeds fevixds 
occurs in CIA. i, 273 f., 18.—The foundation of such @iaco. for foreign 
deities (or deities at least not officially worshipped by the city in 
question) is almost invariably the work of foreigners (many exx. from 
Rhodos in BCH. 1889, p. 364). They are all foreigners, e.g. whose 
mames occur in the decree of the @:ace@rar of the Karian) Zeue 
Labraundos, CIA. ‘ii, 613° (298/7 + 8.c.); cf. 1b. 614):) 51 G aaiiss 
Merchants from Kition found a cult of their Aphrodite (Astarte) in 
Athens, just as some Egyptians had a little while before put up ro 
ths *’Iovdos tepov there: CIA. ii, 168. The names of foreigners (in 
addition to Athenians) are very numerous among the dvopata tar 
epaviaota@v Of a collegiun of LaBaliaorai in the Peiraeus (second 
century B.c.): ’Ed¢. ’Apy. 1883, p. 245 f. The foreign worship would 
then begin to receive the support of natives of the host-city (most of 
them being at first of the poorer classes), and in this way the new 
religion would gain a footing in its adopted home. (Pure Athenian 
citizens compose the society of the Dionysiastai in the Peiraeus, 
second, century B.C., Ai. Mtiii1x,3288/— CIAlive24070008 

4 The Bendideia early became a state festival in Athens (even fifth 
century, CIA. i, 210, fy. K, p. 93). An allusion in Plato (Rp. 327 A), 
however, shows that the Thracians (who must have introduced the 
cult of Bendis into Athens, or at least into the Peiraeus, the home 
of most @iacor) still kept up a special worship of their goddess in their 
own manner, side by side with the Hellenized cult. It appears at 
least as if the worship in its remodelled Greek form seemed to them 
no longer the right one. (Bendis, too, like Dionysos, is a divinity of 
both this world and the next: see Hsch. déAoyyov.) 

5 Alleged traces of Orphic influence on special sections of the Iliad 
(Atos amarn) or the Odyssey are entirely illusory, nor did the Orphic 
doctrines exert any influence on the Hesiodic Theogony. On the 
other hand, Orphism was itself strongly affected by the primitive 
Greek theology the fragments of which were put together in the 
Hesiodic poem. 

6 ’Ovopaxpttos . . . Atovdow ovvednKev dpyta, Paus. 8, 37, 5. 


INO TES POM CEA PLT Ra 5X 349 


7 Among the writers of Orphic poems mentioned by (1) Clem. Al., 
Str. 1, 21, p. 397 P. (from Epigenes) and (2) Suidas (from Epigenes and 
another authority : both Su. and Clem. probably got their information 
through the mediation of D.H.)—two certain Pythagoreans are named, 
Brotinos (of Kroton or Metapontum) and Kerkops (not the Milesian). 
[Abel, Orphica, p. 139.] From lower Italy or Sicily come: Zopyros of 
Herakleia (the same person is probably meant by Iamb., VP. 190, 
5 N., when he counts Zopyros among the Pythagoreans coming from 
Tarentum), Orpheus of Kroton, Orpheus of Kamarina (Suid.), 
Timokles of Syracuse. Pythagoras himself is mentioned among the 
writers of Orphic poems in the Tpraypoi of [Ion] (at least as early as 
the beginning of the fourth century). Apart from these the only 
names of conjectured composers of Orphic poems are: Theognetos 
6 GerraXdés, Prodikos of Samos, Herodikos of Perinthos, Persinos of 
Miletos; all of whom are unknown to us except Persinos, whom 
Obrecht not improbably identifies with the court poet of Euboulos 
of Atarneus mentioned by Poll. ix, 93 (cf. Lob. 359 f. Bgk., PLG. 
ili, 655). In this case he is an Orphic of a much later period. 

Oporoyéovar S€ (sc. Alyv¥mrwor) ratra (prohibition to bury the dead 
in woollen clothing) totot ’Opdixotar caXeopévoror, xat Baxkyixotor, 
€otoar d€ Alyumriovo Kat IIlvdaycpetovor, Hdt. ii, 81. There can be no 
doubt that Hdt. in these words meant to derive the ’Opdina Kat 
Baxyixa (the four datives are all neuters, not masc.) from the 
Aiydatia cal ITlvbaydpeca, i.e. the Pythagorean ordinances which were 
themselves derived from Egypt (cf. Gomperz, Sitzb. Wien. Ak. 1886, 
p. 1032). Ifhe had regarded the [Ju@aydpera as entirely independent of 
the Alyvmria (and the’ Opdixa as independent of the Pythag.) he certainly 
could not have brought them in here. (This answers Zeller, Ber. 
Berlin. Ak. 1889, p. 994, who introduces a comma before cat I]v@.)— 
It is equally impossible (with Maass, Orpheus, p. 165, 1895), to connect 
the éotar d€ Alyunrioto: with Baxyixotar only ; it must of necessity go 
with rotor "Opdixotat as well; for it is the whole point of Hdt.’s note 
to show that the religious usage which he mentions has, like so much 
else of the kind in Greece wherever it may be found, been borrowed 
from Egypt, and “‘is Egyptian’’. In this he would fail completely 
if he did not regard the "Opd¢ixa (and hence also the IJu@aydpera) as 
Aiyintia édvta and clearly say so. Hdt. certainly has no idea, as 
Maass would have us believe, of making a generic distinction between 
’"Opdixa and Baxyixa: Baxy. is the name of the genus of which ’Op@. 
is the species.—“ the ’Opdixd, and the Baxyixa in general.’ Not all 
Baxyixa are “Opdixd. This use of cat whereby the whole is added 
subsequently to the part is perfectly regular and legitimate (it may 
also add the part to the whole as in the cases adduced by Maass, 
166 n.: tds Avovvotaxas Kal tas "Opdixds, etc.). Hdt. mentions the 
ITv@ayopeca last in order to indicate by what intermediate step the 
Egyptian element in the first-mentioned ’Opdixa was specially assisted 
—he has further in ii, 123, shown clearly enough that he regarded 
Pythagoras as one of the pupils of the Egyptians (P. in any case is 
one of the teachers of immortality there referred to). This is also 
obvious from his whole attitude.—Hdt.’s opinion does not in any case 
oblige us to believe in it. He was forced to regard Pythagoras as the 
earliest author of Orphic doctrine because fis connexion with Egypt 
seemed certain (cf. Hdt. ii, 123) while that of the ’Opdcxoi themselves 
was not so: in this way only could Hdt. seem to prove the Egyptian 
origin of that doctrine.—The priority of the Orphics is often supposed 
to be proved by the witness of Philolaos (fv. 14 D.) ap. Clem. Al., Sty. 


350 NOTES @ sl Om GLAD hich waeNs 


3,3, p. 518 P. (and cf. Cic., Hortens: fr. 85 Or.) > 1t must be admitted: 
however, that the passage does not prove what it is supposed to do. 

9° F rr.) 143-51. (cf, “Lob, 715! ‘ff.).” Here, indeéd, = Orp items 
Pythagorean doctrine are mixed upinextricably. Fr. 143 ( IIv@ayopeius 
te xal (Opdixds Syrian.) belongs to the eis tov api@uov IIvOaydpe.os 
Uuvos which is several times distinctly so called by Proclus. (The 
frr. are in Nauck,'lamb., VP., p..228, fy. 11). Frol47 (Lyd iienas 
obviously comes from the same (Nauck, p. 234, fy. ix). The same is 
at least highly probable of the frr. 144-6, 148-51. Probably what 
Orpheus says of the number 12 comes from the same typvos (ap. Procl. 
in Rp. ii, 131, 10 Kroll). Proclus, however (tn Rp. 169,:25 K.), also 
cites ll. 2-5 from the dyuvos (Nauck, fy. iii) but this time attributes them 
to an eis Tov apiO wov’Opdixos tuvos. This Orphico-Pythagorean dpuvoshad 
at any rate nothing to do with the (Rhaps.) Theogony of Orpheus. On 
the other hand, the words terpdda tetpaxéparov, which acc. to Procl. 
in Rp. 169, 29 K., occurred pupiaxis in the "Opgixy Peodroyia, come 
from the Theogony. They were possibly used as a title of Zagreus 
the xepdev Bpédos (Nonn., D. vi, 165): though what is here said by 
Proclus about the Acovvoraxy (i.e. of Zagreus) Oedrns, viz. that it 
TeTpas €o7tv, Was applied rather to the four-eyed Orphic Phanes by 
Hermias (fy. 64 Ab.). 

10 On the other hand, there is much in Orphic theology and poetry 
that is taken immediately from the primitive Thracian worship of 
Dionysos and absent from Pythagorean teaching. This makes 
it very probable that even such theologoumena as are common to 
Orphism and Pythagoreanism really go back to the fanatical cult of 
Dionysos, or at least were easily thence derived by religious speculation : 
in this case the Orphics may well have got them from this original 
source of mystic lore that was common to both parties and not by the 
circuitous route of Pythagorean teaching. Orphism remained more 
closely attached to the common source than did Pythagoreanism, 
and may for that reason be regarded as somewhat older than its rival 
and be supposed to have originated independently of it. 

11 Zopyros of Herakleia, Orpheus of Kroton: Tz., Prol. in Aristoph. 
([p. 20, 28 Kaibel, Com. Fr.] Ritschl, Opusc. i, 207); Suid. ’Opd: 
Kpotwwarns (from Asklepiades of Myrlea). 

12 We may not simply take it for granted that the account given in 
Dem. 18, 259-60, of the nocturnal initiations and the processions by 
day through the city held by a mystical sect, is intended to describe 
the secret mysteries of an Ovphic conventicle (as Lob. does 646 ff., 
652 ff., 695 f.). The explanation of the dropdrrew 7d HAG Of that 
passage by reference to the specially Orphic myth of Zagreus and the 
Titans is arbitrary in itself and hard to reconcile with the language 
of Demosth. (Harp. and Phot. are responsible for this expl.) Hardly 
more successful is the derivation of the call drrns dys from the darn 
of Dionysos (Zagreus) on being torn to pieces by the Titans: EM. 
163, 63. A definite connexion undoubtedly does exist between the 
"Opdixa dpyra and the LaBalia cai Mnrtp@a (Str. 471) described by 
Dem.; but the Orphics were never called worshippers of Sabazios 
nor their god LaBdlios, and it seems likely that their secret worship 
was different from the ceremonies of the LaBaliacrai that Dem. had 
in view (the latter may have retained more of the primitive barbaric 
ritual: «cf. theiins. given in “Ed. “Apy. 1883,  p. 245-45 = Cl Agee 
Supp. 1; 0.2026 (be trom the-end “ot second! centurysewe, 

18 See, LOB APL Zoot 2ol, 42k 

14 To attribute the practical side of Orphism to a late degeneration 


NOs sme ae GH AP Tike ox! 351 


of the once purely speculative character of the sect (as many have done) 
is a very arbitrary proceeding and quite unjustifiable on historical 
grounds. The fact that a clear description of this activity does not 
occur before the fourth century (in Plato) does not prove that it did 
not exist earlier. Apart from this an dpdeoreAcoryHs named Philippos. 
is mentioned by Plu., Apoph. Lac. 224 E as a contemporary of King 
Leotychidas II of Sparta (reigned 491-469). This evidence is not 
to be so easily set aside, as K. O. Miiller, Introd. Scient. Myth. 311 ff.,. 
would like to do. The Orphic sect from the very beginning derived 
its strength from its telestic and kathartic practices. 

poe opbhr.. Ci1.282( '6). 

16 adrod ('Opdéws) pev elvar ta Soypata, Tatra d5é dyaow (Aristot.) 
*Ovopaxpitov ev Erect Katateivar Arist. a. d¢idocodias fr. 10 [7] Rose,. 
Arist. Pseudepig. 

 Tatian, Gr. 41 (p. 42 Schw.), seems to speak only of redaction 
(auvreraxOat) of the eis "Opdéa avadepdpmeva among already existing 
Orphic poems as the work of Onomakritos (in the same way Onomakr. 
is only the é:a#érys—the arranger not the author—of the ypyopot of 
*“Mousaios’’, Hdt. vii, 6). Traces of an external linking-together of 
the individual poems of Orpheus in a “‘ redaction ’’ are not wanting 
(cf. the linking-together of the poems of the Epic Cycle or of the 
corpus Hesiodeum) ; first of all coming in all probability the greater 
cpomno (asi the enumeration of Clem. Al... Sir. 1, (21, p. 397 PB); see 
Tob. 370;,417;.469.—-Clem. Al:,-5t7. 1, p.397-P. (and Eus., PE. 10, 11, 
p. 495 D) is only derived from Tatian, though Onomakr. is here definitely 
called the author of the els "Opdéa depopeva mornpatra. Onomakr. 
seems also to have been simply regarded as the author of the ’Opdixa 
iwethe saoxostaphicalsexcerptiapso.t. PP. 1,.30 — 14.97. 361, pi 287 
Mutschm.; cf. Gal., H. Philos. (Dox., p. 610, 15): ’Ovopadxpiros. év 
tots Opdixots.—On the other hand, in the—admittedly incomplete— 
enumeration of Orphic poems in Clem. Al., Siv. 1, 21, p. 397 P., not one 
is attributed to Onomakr., and in Suid. ’Opd¢evs he is only given the 
xpnopot (no confusion with the ypyopoi of Mousaios is to be suspected 
here) and the reAerai. Paus. (8, 37, 5) mentions (without naming them) 
én of Onomakr. (cf. Ritschl, Opusc. i, 241). Some at least of the 
poetry going under the name of Orpheus must have been ascribed to 
Onomakr. by Arist. (fv. 10 [7 Teubn.}). 

18° Suid. "Opdgevs, 2721 A Gaisf. 

19 Onomakr. eivar rods Titavas tH Atovvow tTadv rabypatwv etoinoev: 
avtoupyovs, Paus. 8, 37, 5. Lob., p. 335, thinks this refers to the 
*“ Theogony ’?: but no authority attributes a single one of the several 
Orphic Theogonies to Onomakr. as its real author. We should rather 
be inclined to think of the reAerai which is distinctly ascribed to 
Onomakr. and which at least dealt with the practical side of worship :: 
cf. Pl., Rp. 364 E-365 A, Avoes, Kafappot adducknpdtwv KTArA. ds d7 
teXeTas Kadcdow (but it was not that the mystical BiBAo. were called 
reXeral as Gruppe, Gr. Culte u. Mythen, i, 640, mistakenly supposes : 
he is otherwise quite right in his protest against Abel’s treatment of 
the rederat). They must almost necessarily have dealt with the 
reproduction of the wd40y tod Acovdcov (as providing the tepos Aoyos 
to the Spépeva), and, as the central idea of the orgiastic cult, must 
have included the most important circumstance of the Orphic reAerat 
pom 95. 79, 4 we CleniwAl Pro iild,<p.<15 P.). 

20 One of the poems (perhaps indeed the poem of the pagpwodia, 
and in that case the fepds Adyos as well) made Orpheus distinctly 
appeal to a revelation made to him by Apollo: fr. 49 (see Lob. 469).. 


o2 NOTES 2 OC LAP ges 


21 Besides the three Theogonies distinguished by Damascius there 
were (apart from other more doubtful traces) at least two other 
variations of the same theme: see fy. 85 (Alex. Aphrod.) and frr. 37 ; 
38 (Clem. Rom.) ; cf. Gruppe, i, 640 f.—The series of divine rulers 
given, by. “ Orpheus acc. to Nigid. Fig. ap. “Serva fda ly, 0 mee 
248 Ab.), conflicts with all the other Theogonies but agrees in some 
particulars with Lact. i, 13 (fv. 243). Still, this remark need not 
necessarily have been taken from any Orphic ‘“*‘ Theogony ”’. 

22 (Zeus) . . . mpwroydvoio yavov pévos “Hptxaraiov, tv mavtwy 
Sépuas eiyev EF evi yaorépe KotAn, fr. 120 (from the Rhapsodiai). We 
are accustomed to read here yavwy with Zoéga (Abh. 262 f.): but 
yavwév does not mean “‘ catching up or devouring ”’ [Zo.]; at most it 
might mean, in bad late-Greek, just the opposite of this—“‘ abandoning ”’ 
(transitive). Lobeck’s explanation (p. 519 n.) is also unsatisfactory. 
The word may have been originally yadwv. 

23 The line occurred in various forms in the Theogonic poem : 
frr. 33 (Plato ?); 46 ([Arist.] de Mundo); 123 (Rhapsod).; see Lob. 
520-32. It seems certain then (Gruppe’s doubts go too far: Jthaps. 
Theog. 704 ff.) that the line appeared in the oldest form of Orphic 
Theogony and was merely borrowed thence, like so much else that was 
ancient, by the Rhapsod. Theogony (i.e. the words, Zeds xedady KrA. 
which would be the oldest form, as Gruppe rightly remarks: kedady) = 
tedevty; cf. Pl., Ti. 69 B). Even the writer of the speech against 
Aristogeiton A ({Dem.] 25), an Orphic adherent, appears, as Lob. 
remarks, to allude to the words in § 8. 

24 Theokrasia must have belonged to Orphic theology from the 
outset: Lob. 614; though the most extreme examples of this may 
perhaps come from later poems: frrv. 167; 169 (Macr.) ; 168 (D.S.) ; 
201 (Rhaps.), etc., being probably derived from the “‘ Little Krater ” 
(fr. 160), in which Chrysippos seems to be imitated (Lob. 735 and fr. 164), 
and from the ArafFna, fr. 7 (J.M.) a forgery in Judaeo-Christian 
interests which nevertheless made use of many ancient pieces of Orphic 
literature (the fepds Adyos: Lob. 450 ff., 454).—Theokrasia is met 
with even in the orthodox poets of the fifth century, though they did 
not invent it; the “‘ theologoi’’ of the sixth century Epimenides and 
Pherekydes were as familiar with it as were the Orphics; cf. Kern, 
ae Theogon. 92. 

asec, Appendix 

26 It must have been chiefly the religious significance of the gods 
which caused the retention of their personalities and prevented them 
from fading into mere personifications of abstract ideas or elementary 
powers with which religion could have had nothing further to do. 

27 In the statements of the Neoplatonic writers this first Orphic 
Dionysos is regularly called Avdvucos simply (perhaps also Baxyos: 
fr. 192). Nonnus in recounting the Orphic legend calls him Zagreus : 
D. vi, 165; cf. Zaypéa yewapévy (of Perseph.) with clear allusion to 
Callim. fr. 171, via Avdvvcov Zaypéa yewapéevyn. Callim. here, as else- 
where, seems to have in mind the Orphic story. Tz. on Lyc. 356 
calls the god of the Orphic legend Avovucov tov kai Zaypéa Kadovpevov. 
Zaypevs the great Hunter is a name of the all-absorbing Hades: thus 
also the Alkmaionis fry. 3 Kink. Zagreus is identified with the 
Pionysos of nocturnal revelry in E., Kret. fr. 472, 10 (a reference 
\/in Ba. 1181 Kirchh.) ; and see above, chap. viii, n. 28. This Dionysos 
is regarded as a y@dvos (see Hsch. Zaypevs) and this must indubitably 
have been quite familiar to the poets who made him the son 
of Persephone: y@dwos 6 ths Ilepoepdvns Aidvucos (Harp. Aev«7n). 


NODES LO CHAP DER” OX 303 


They were as clearly conscious as was Herakleitos of the fact that 
autos ‘“Avdns Kai Avdvucos, whereas this consciousness was undoubtedly 
obscured in the public ceremonial of Dionysos-worship (to which, 
however, Hcl.’s saying refers). Zagreus-Dionysos was never identified 
with the ’’Iaxyos of the Eleusinia (to which Orph. fy. 215, 1. 2 refers) ; 
though Dionysos alone was often so identified. 

48 Ouranos casts the Titans into Tartaros: frr. 97, 100. Acc. to 
Procl. (fv. 205) and Arn. (196: prob. not from the Rhaps.) we should be 
fed to suppose that the Titans after they had torn Zagreus in pieces were 
cast down to Tartaros by Zeus. In Arn. this is set down side by 
side with the statement that the Titans were destroyed by the lightning 
of Zeus (9 Titdvwv Kepadvwors, Plu., Es. Carn. 1, 7, p. 996 C), though 
obviously incompatible with the latter statement, as it is also (even 
more so) with the origin of mankind from the ashes of the Titans which 
is known not only to Olympiodoros (ad Phd., p. 68 Finckh: Lob. 
566), but also to Proclus who got it from the ‘‘ Rhapsodiai’”’ (as also 
did Olymp.): Procl., im Rp. ii, 74, 29; i, 93 Kroll. It seems from 
this that Proclus (and perhaps Arn.) in error ascribed the xataraptrdpwats 
of the Titans to Zeus instead of to Ouranos. 

29 Nonn. vi, 173; O.,fv.195. Perhaps Proclusis right in explaining 
this doubling of the god’s figure in the mirror as meaning his entrance 
upon the pepior7) Sypiovpyia. A reference to a similar explanation of 
this Atov¥cov Katomrpov occurs even in Plot. 4, 3, 12 (Lob. 555)—? also 
in the strange statement made by Marsilius Ficinus as to the 
crudelissimum apud Orpheum Narcissi fatum (was Zagreus another 
Narcissus ?) fy. 315; cf. Plot. 1, 6,8. The entry of the one origin 
of the universe into the multiplicity of phenomena is first clearly referred 
to in the dismemberment of Zagreus, but it would be quite like this 
symbol-loving poetry to introduce the same motif in a different form 
with a passing reference earlier in the poem. 

SOS NONI) V1, 0197 i, 

Satis e Oo Oss. : 

SEE LOel nO ./7/27 190,198, 199) sin any case Nonn. v1, 169 ff. is 
following the Rhapsodiai. 

33 Callim. and Euphor. knew of the dismemberment of Dionysos by 
the Titans: Tz. ad Lyc. 208 (from the completer version in EM.). 
In any case it is not from the Rhaps. that this legend is also known to 
Mrowoe/o.4 Commute 30)p-.62, 10 Vang: Plu. £s. Carn. 1,7, p: 996.C ; 
Is. et Os. 35, p. 364 F ; Clem. Al. (see Orph. frr. 196, 200).—A roughly 
caricatured drawing on a hydria belonging to the early fourth century 
found at Rhodos and made probably in Attica appears in JHS. xi 
(1890), p. 243; where it is said to represent the dismemberment of 
Zagreus as conceived by Orphics. The picture, however, does not 
agree at all with the meaning thus attributed to it: the interpretation 
cannot be the right one. 

34 A true fepds Adyos, i.e. an account of the origin of ritual acts 
founded upon myth or legend. (The Orphics had such accounts, 
e.g. of the prohibition against being buried in woollen clothing: Hdt. 
iW, Si -fin. 

se That the tearing in pieces of the bull in the primitive Thracian 
manner occurred also in the Orphic d6pyra may perhaps be deduced 
from the fact that in the legend Orpheus himself is torn in pieces 
by the Mainads. The priest stands in the place of the god: what 
the god suffers in the ritual dpwpeva that the priest suffers too. 
This is frequently met with. ’Opdebs dre tdv Avovdcov_rederav 
Hyewav yevdpevos Ta dpora mabetv A€yerar TH oherépw Ves, Procl. im 

Aa 


354 NOTES lO? SOLAR TE Ite. 


Rp. i, 175 Kr. The ancients were fully aware that the bull torn in 
pieces in the Bacchic orgies represented the god himself (and this not 
only in Orphic ritual but from the beginning in the Thracian worship) : 
the idea is often expressed (see e.g. Firm. Mat., Evror. P.R. vi, 5), but 
nowhere more clearly than in the Orphic tepos Adyos. 

86 The introduction of the Titans from Hellenic mythology into 
the Thracian myth is clearly described as the work of Onomakritos by 
PAWS scr ame 

3? Tirfves Kexopqra, waépBiov Arop Exovtes, fr. 102. apetdArxov 
Arop €xovtes Kal dvow exvopinrv, fy. 97. As early as Hesiod the Titans 
are hated by their father as Seworaro: maidwv (Theog. 155). Titavny 
dvats is the evil character that cannot keep an oath: PIl., Lg. 701 C; 
Cic.,, Lgl, 25 amps tiands (ol... O43, 4,c4cn 

38 This explanation of the dayeAucuds of Zagreus is often put 
forward (though subtilized into a Neoplatonic sense) by those who use 
the Orphic Rhapsodiai: see Lob. 710 ff. But even Plutarch has 
something of the sort (E ap. D. 9, p. 389 A), and it cannot be doubted 
that this (apart from its Platonist wrappings) was the meaning of 
the legend in the mind of its first inventor. Nor can the conception 
that the separate existence (multiplicity) of things first came into the 
world by an act of impiety, have been strange to the theologoi of the 
sixth century : we must admit this at once on remembering the doctrine 
of Anaximander that the multiplicity of things which has arisen 
out of the original one dze:por is in itself an adcxia for which it must 
pay ‘‘recompense and punishment” (fy. 2 Mull., 9 Diels). Such 
personification of the processes of nature and the reading of an ethical 
sense into them, combined as it was with a quietist tendency, was much 
more likely to have arisen in the fanciful minds of semi-philosophical 
mystics than to have been given to them by the philosophers. 

69 See the accounts given in Lob. 565 f.: they come irommerase 
Rhapsodiai. The fact that the origin of men and the doctrine of 
Metempsychosis as well were dealt with in the Rhaps. follows from 
Procl. im Rp. ii, 338 Kroll. It must, however, have been from older 
Orphic poetry—at any rate, not from the Rhaps.—that the story was 
derived by D. Chr. 30, 10 f. Plutarch, too, does at least refer to it: 
TO €v Hutvy dAoyov Kal ataxTov Kat Blatov of madAatot Titavas wvdpacar, 
Es. Carn. 1, 7, p. 996 C; and possibly Opp., H. v, 9-10; Aelijamaes 
p. 230, 19 f. Herch. (Lob. 567 g). Even the words of Xenokrates 
(fr. 20, p. 166 Heinze) seem to allude to this Orphic myth. Thus the 
Rhapsodiai in this case also were following older Orphic teaching 
and poetry. Orph. H. 37 derives from alaterage. What Nic. Th. 8 ff. 
reproduces (mistakenly ?) as Hesiodic tradition was perhaps really an 
echo of Orphic poetry. Was the derivation of Man from the Titans 
suggested by still earlier fancies such as e.g. meet us in passages like 
h. Hom. Ap. 335 (137) f.: Tirfvés re Oeoi rv €& dvdpes te Oeot te—? This 
is not Homeric (for all the Homeric tarp avdpav te Oedv Te), though 
possibly it had a different sense from what it had for ‘‘ Orpheus”’. 

40 Dionysos is the ast of the divine rulers of the world: frrv. 114, 190. 
Hence deomdrns Ayudv, Procl. in Crat., pp. 59, 114 Boiss. (though 
Procl. also speaks of e.g. Hermes as 6 Seomdrns tudv in Cr., p. 73 B.). 
Dionysos is the szxth ruler; Zeus who came before him being the 
fifth; frv. 113 (85, 121, 122). The order given is: 1 Phanes, 2 Nyx, 
3 Ouranos, 4 Kronos, 5 Zeus, 6 Dionysos. This is definitely stated by 
Syrian. : fy. 85 (Proclus follows his master : fry, 85, 121), and confirmed 
by the fragments of the Rhapsodiai: frrv. 86, 87, 96, 113. It seems, 
however, as if Plato actually found this order (as Syrian. thought) 


NODES Om GIA PLR RY xX 355 


in the Orphic Theogony which he read. It is true that as their silence 
shows the Neoplatonists did not find the verse cited by Plato in the 
Rhapsodiai as they knew them. (Plato’s line is extn 8 ev yevej 
Katatavcate Kocpov dodys: Plu., E ap. D. 15, p. 391 D, has the 
meaningless @uyov instead of xédcporv—did he read @ecuov?) They 
were right, however, in deducing from the line that the ancient Orphic 
Theogony referred to by Plato also knew of six generations of the gods 
(following the Pythagorean réAevos dprOucds ?) and ended with the sixth 
generation. The verse was intended doubtless by Plato himself in 
rather a different sense and he only quotes it humorously (Gruppe 
differs: haps. Theog. 693 f.). This passage therefore provides 
important evidence of the harmony that existed between the Rhapsodiai 
and the oldest Orphic Theogony in the general outlines of their con- 


struction. It is, of course, quite a different question whether the six fi 


rulers in the poem referred to by Plato were the same as those given 
by the RKhaps.; nor can we tell whether Dionysos there occupied the 
last place, though the predominance held by Dionysos in Orphic belief 
makes it very probable that he did. 

41 The authorities who speak of the origin of mankind from the ashes 
(or the blood) of the Titans (Lob. 565 ff.) express themselves in such 
a way that we are forced to suppose that they regarded this as essentially 
the first appearance of men. This, however, cannot be reconciled with 
what Proclus, as usual following the Rhapsodiai, says of the golden 
and silver ages of mankind under Phanes and Kronos, which then, 
and not till then, are followed by the third and last race, 76 tiTavixév 
yévos: see fy. 244 and esp. im Fp. ii, 74 Kr. @vyroi in the reign of 
Phanes even occurs in the line quoted by Syrian. (2n Ar. Meta. 935a 
22 Us.) fy. 85. It is impossible to say whether this improvement upon 
the Hesiodic legend of the Ages of Mankind actually occurred in an 
ancient Orphic Theogony (the one used perhaps by Lactant.: O., 
fv. 243, 8; cf. 248), and was thence taken for the Rhapsodiai without 
being reconciled with the legend of the origin of men from the ashes 
of the Titans; or whether the two scarcely reconcilable accounts 
of the origin of men were somehow or other made to agree. (Fr. 246 
[Plu.] prob. comes from a picture of the long life enjoyed by the earliest 
generations of men: see Lob. 513. This picture does not necessarily 
presuppose a series of several yeveai before the Titanic race.) 

42 wépos avtod (tod Atov¥cov) éopuév, Olymp. (from Orphic doctrine) 
in Pl. Phd.,p.3 Finckh. o év qpitv vots Avovvatakds éatw Kat ayaApa 
é6vtws tod Avovdcov, Procl. in Crat., p. 82 Boiss. The Hellenes are 
accustomed to make use of the dismemberment, re-integration and 
resuscitation of Dionysos els tov mept THs wuxAs Adyov avayew Kat 
tpotmodoyetv, Orig., Cels. 4, 17, p. 21 Lo. 

43 of audi “Opdéa think that the soul has the body as a zepiBodov, 
Seapwtnplov eixova, Pl., Crat, 400 C. Certainly Orphic, too (as the 
Schol. also say), is 6 ev amopprrous Aeyopevos Adyos ws Ev Tie Ppovpa 
€opev of avOpwro KtrA., Pl., Phd. 62 B; see Lob. 795 f. 

44 fy. 221 (Phd. 62 B with Sch.). The similar saying of Philolaos 
is, as Plato’s manner of recording it shows (Phd. 61 E — 62 B) 
evidently derived from a saying of the Orphic amdppy7a (and Philolaos 
himself appealed to the wadaot Geordyou Te Kal pavtves in confirmation 
of the closely connected doctrine of the enclosure of the yvx% in the 
ojpa of the cHua: fr. 23 Mull. 14 Di.). The doctrine continued to be 
taught by Pythagoreans: see Euxitheos Pyth. ap. Klearch. in Ath. 
iv, 157 CD; Cic., Sen. 73. It had moreover some root in popular 
belief and in legal usage: see above, chap. v, n. 33. 


356 NOTE SPs DOV fOL A BIE haa 


a According to the ‘Op dixa én kahov neva, ap. Arist. de An” Toi 
p. 410b, 28 ff.: ray poyny ex rod 6Aov elovévar avamveovTwy Sepa aaa 
vUmTo TOY By eOr. (The ancient commentators add nothing fresh.) 
€x Tod oAod means simply “‘ out of space’’. The aveyor were regarded 
as daimonic powers subordinate and related to the Tpitomdtopes : see 
above, chap. v, n. 124. We cannot say how this conception was made to 
square with the other articles of Orphic belief (purgation of souls in 
Hades, etc.). It is plainly nothing but an attempt at such reconcilia- 
tion that (following the Rhapsodiai, fy. 224) makes the souls that pass 
in death out of the bodies of men, go into Hades, while those that have 
inhabited the bodies of animals fly about in the wind eiodxev adras 
/GAdrAo agapralyn piydynv avépo.o mvofow. Aristotle knows nothing of 


A any such restriction. Plato (Phd. 81 D; rather differently 108 AB) 


apparently making free use of Orphic ideas regards all the p7 Kafapds 
dmoAvbeica wvyxai as liable to the same fate as that allotted by the 
Rhapsodiai to the beasts. (Of course it is possible to suppose that 
the ypuvyai on being released from Hades for a new éevowpatwors first 
of all fly about in the wind round the dwelling places of the living and 
are then breathed into a new body. This would not prevent there 
being a predestined conjunction of a particular soul with the particular 
oD a corresponding to its state of purification.)—The establishment 
in later Orphic poetry of the theory that the %uyai dwelt in the air 
may have been assisted by the philosophic theory of the soaring-up 
of the mvevuara into their element the aether (of which more below). 
This theory, though not first put forward by the Stoics, was specially 
favoured by them: it almost attained the status of a popularly accepted 
belief. When the realm of the souls had thus been at least in part 
transferred to the air, late Orphic poetry began to regard one of the 
four rivers of the soul- world, ’Ayépwv, as the dyjp: frr. 155, 156 
(Rhaps.). -There is no reason to see in all this the traces of a supposed 
ancient conception in which Okeanos is really a river in the sky (in 
spite of Bergk’s fanciful speculations in Opusc. ii, 691-6). The eleva- 
tion of the soul-kingdom to the sky is in Greek thought invariably 
the result of comparatively late speculation. We might even 
ask whether there is not Egyptian influence at work in the 
transference of Okeanos (=the Milky Way ?) to the sky. Such 
influence would be late of course; but in Egypt the idea of the Nile in 
the sky was quite familiar. 

46 KUKAos Tihs yevécews, fr. 226; 6 THs potpas tpoxds rota fati et 
generationts : see Lob. Ths i) ff. 

$f of 5° avrot marépes Te Kal vides ev peydporow (aoAAdKts) 78’ dAoxor 
cepvat Kedval te Ovyatoes ... ylyvovt’ adrAnAwy petaperBoméevnar 
yevedAas, frr. 225, 222 (Rhaps.). Here, as Lob. 797 rightly remarks, 
there is an allusion to the dogma of the recurrence of exactly the same 
state of things in the world. The doctrine of complete madvyyeveota 
OF amoKxataats amdvrwy (see Gataker ad. M. Ant.!, p. 385) was closely and 
indeed indissolubly bound up with the doctrine of the migration of 
souls. (Illogicality belongs rather to the conception of the break in 
the circle caused by the secession of individual souls.) It was there- 
fore found among the Pythagoreans to whom it is ascribed by Eudemos 
fr, 51 sp. (see Porph., VP. 19, p. 26, -23 ff. N. >" uséd lateristiliaaaae 
Pythagorean sense by SVMS ALE e sae 62 f. Krab.).." Tt twas 
borrowed from the Pythagoreans by the Stoa (by Chrysippos esp.), 
which after its usual fashion pushed the rather bizarre fancy to pedantic 
extremes.” (After’the Stoic model is Plot: 5, 7, and perhaps also the 
genethliact spoken of by Varro ap. Aug., CD. 22, 28.) It is atteage 


INC PICS # eLOASCHAP TERE te 357 


probable in the extreme that these ideas were first held by the Orphics 
and not borrowed by them from the Stoics: there are even traces in 
Orphic tradition of the great World-year (which is always closely 
connected with the azoxardoracs THv andavrwv): Lob. 792 ff. 

48 KvKdAov Te AEat Kal avamvedoat KaKdTyHTOs Were the words Proclus 
probably had before him: (fv. 226) in Tim, 330 B. The forms 
av Anfat Kat avarvedvoar—thus rightly accented here by Schneider— 
come from Procl. himself, who accommodates the words of the original 
to the construction of his own sentence. We must therefore not write 
ad Afar with Gale and Lob. 800. In this case thesubject of the sentence 
is the praying soul; on the other hand, in the form preserved by 
Simp., xt«dAov 7” aAdGoct Kal avapbEau kaxdr7yTOs, the subject is the gods 
to whom the soul prays ; yuvx7# being object. Ineither form the freeing 
of the soul from the circle is regarded as a grace from the gods. 

pi) om s0-s Lhe tlines-of the Carmi vy. 55 fa (Nauck,ipa.207) pare 
probably modelled on the Orphic ov7’ dya@od wapedvros xrA. The 
point is: few are they who trouble about the salvation that Orpheus 
(or Pythagoras) brings them; the dovo. are always a small minority. 

5° fry. 208, 226. Ardvuaos Avaedvs, AVatos, Deol Adator; see Lob. 809 f. 
and cf. fy. 311 (Ficinus). 

51 *Opdéa 7 avaxr’ éxwv Baxyeve... E., Hp. 953 (N.B. dvaé not 
deomoTys, 1. 88). 

82 Op@ikos Bios, Pl., Lg: 782 C; Lobeck, 244 ff. 

53 The Pythagorean é€zouv Oe, dxodovbetvy 76 eG (lamb., VP. 137, 
from Aristoxenos) might also have been given to the Orphics as their 
motto. 

Eras ost popes Olathe, Orphics’: Ey) p2'952, Pl., Le. 782° CD = 
Lob., p. 246. This, too, is the meaning of Ar., Ra. 1032, ’Opdeds pev 
yap TeAeTds & Hpiv Katédecke Pdvwv 7 anéxeoOa, i.e. using slain animals 
for food. Hor., AP. 391 f.: silvestris homines ... caedibus et 
victu foedo deterruit Orpheus means to speak not of the ritual 
vegetarianism of ‘“‘ Orpheus ’’, but of the previous cannibalism of 
men which Orpheus had put an end to. As this is nowhere else 
mentioned of Orpheus we might perhaps regard it as mistaken allusion 
on the part of Horace to the passage of Aristoph. quoted above. It 
is not, however, impossible that Horace did in fact have in mind some 
Orphic verse which really reported something like what he himself 
says of Orpheus, The Orphic fragment [247] ap. S.E., M. ii, 31; 
ix, 15 (Lob., p. 246), may have arisen in the same way; see Maass, 
Orpheus, 77. (The well-known lines of Kritias [S.E., M. ix, 54 fr. 
25 Di.] and Moschion, p. 813 Nauck, can hardly have anything to do 
with Orphism and should rather be connected with the theories of 
the Sophists and Demokritos—followed later by the Epicureans— 
about the gradual evolution of human civilization from miserable and 
savage origins; and vot from a “ golden age’”’ of which the Orphics 
too spoke.) 

55 Prohibition to bury corpses in woollen garments: Hdt. ii, 81 (in 
each case in order that nothing Ovyceidiov might cling to the departed). 
Prohibition against eating eggs: Lob. 251 (eggs are part of the offerings 
to the dead and the food of the y@6vo1, and so forbidden: so rightly 
explained by Lob. 477). It was forbidden in Orphic poetry, as well 
as Pythagorean, to eat beans: Lob. 251; Nauck on Iamb., VP., 
p- 231 f.: the reason here, too, being that beans as part of the offerings 
to the dead, putantur ad mortuos pertinere (Fest.) ; see Lob. 254 and 
Crusius, Rh. Mus. 39, 165. The same or similar reasons are every- 
where at work to cause the eating of certain foods to be forbidden 


358 NOTH Saw bO Me LUAR Ie ae 


both by the Pythagorean ordinances and in the mystical cult of the 
x9ovcoc: it is because they are used as offerings to the beings of the 
lower world, mpos 7a wepidermva Kal tas mpokAnoes THY vexp@v, OF 
even because they have names which, like é€péBivAos or AdOupos, recall 
€peBos and A7On: Plu., OR. 95, p. 286 E. The purified state requires 
above all complete separation from anything connected with the realm 
of the dead and the divinities of the dead. 

ee Ci 7208: 

57 The soul is confined within the body (according to those dpd¢t 
Opdéa), ws Siknv Sidovons THs puxts dv 67 Eevexa dldwoww, Pl., Crat. 
400 C. The exact nature of this “‘ guilt’ of the soul is not explained 
in our remains of Orphic literature. The point, however, is chiefly 
that the life within the body is according to their doctrine not in 
accordance with but contrary to the proper nature of the soul. 

58 guumdaiov Tav daiwv, Pl., Rp. 363 C. dalovs pvoras, Orph., H. 
84,°3 34 seerabove, chap-s vi, 815; 

59 yuyas abavaras Katayes KvAdAjvuos ‘Epufs yains és KevOudva 
meAwpiov fr. 224 (it would be vain to look for an example of a@avatos 
used as adjective to yuyy in Homer). Hermes y@dmos leads the souls 
down into Hades and also upwards again (to fresh évowpatdcets) : 
Orph., H. 57, 6 ff. (For the Pythagorean Hermes see D.L. viii, 31.) 

60 Especially in the xaraBaois eis *“Avdov (Lob. 373; cf. above, 
chap. vii, n. 3). The descent lay through the chasm at Tainaron : 
see above, chap. v, n. 23, and cf. Orph., Arg. 41.—Other Orphic poems 
may also have dealt with such matters: aodAAd pepvboAdynra mepl 
tav ev ““Avdov mpaypdatwv 7 THs KadXorns, Jul., Or. vii, p. 281, 
3 Hertl. [216 D]. 

61 Avoers kat Kafappoi of the living and even the dead carried out 
by Orphic priests: Pl., &#p. 364 E. Reward of the initiated in Hades : 
cf. the anecdote of Leotychidas II in Plu., Apophth. Lac., p. 224 E; 
and of Antisthenesin D.L. vi, 4. Those who feared the bite of Kerberos 
or the water-carrying to the leaky cask (see App. iii) sought protection 
against such things in reXetal cat kaBappol: Plu., N.P.Q. Suav. Epic. 
27, p. 1105 B. Hope of immortality for the soul rests on the Dionysiac 
Inysteries acc..toeblu.. Cons. (adi U7. 10. py GlieD:; 

6 It is significant that the belief in a judgment and punishment of 
yuxai is based in [Pl.] Ep. vii, 335 A not on popular acceptance 
or the statements of poets but on wadAaol re kai fepol Adyor; cf. above, 
chap. vii, n. 13. 

88 fy. 154 (punishment in Hades of those guilty of crimes against 
their own parents ? fr. 281). 

sepecrabove, chap. Vil;i@to. 

8 Sewa mepipever: Pl, Rp. 365 A; cf. fy. 314 (Ficinus). 

86 fy. 208 (Rhaps.) épyid 7 exteA€covar (avOpw701), Avow mpoydvav 
adewictwv paropevor’ od (sc. Dionysos) S5é€ totow (dat. commodi), 
Exwv Kpatos, ovs x’ €0éAnoba Avoets Ex TE TOVwWY YareTaV Kal arElpovos 
otorpov (of continual rebirth). That this belief in the efficacy of 
prayers for the “ poor souls of the departed ”’ belonged to the earlier 
stratum of Orphism follows from Pl., Rp. 364 BC, E, 365 A, where he 
speaks of Avceis te Kat Kafappyot of the Orphics which promised to 
deliver living and dead from the aédicynpara adrot } mpoyover. (It 
has been wrongly attempted to fasten the same belief on Plato him- 
self, in the Phaedo.)—-For Gnostic and early Christian ideas of the 
same kind see Anrich, D. Ant. Mysterienwesen, 87, 4; 120 n. But 
even in the Rigveda (7, 35, 4) we may find the thought that the “* pious 
works of the pious’ can help others to salvation (Oldenberg, Fel. d. 


NOLES TOS OH AR PERS x 359 


Veda, 289). Religious pietism seems to produce the same effects 
everywhere. 

87 woAXolt pev vapOnxoddpor xtA. was an Orphic verse. Lob. 809, 
813. 

Smear yan lo e 

°° 6 Kexadappuévos te Kal TeTeMopevos exetce (eis ‘’AiSov) adduxdpevos 
peta Oedv oixyjoa, fr. 228 (Pl.). 

79 cuumoaov THv ociwy in Hades, pé0n aidmos their reward: Pl, 
Rp. 336 CD (cf. Dieterich, Nekyia, 80 n.). Plato there mentions 
Mousaios and his son (Eumolpos) as authorities for these promises 
and contrasts with them, by a oi 3€, others who made different promises ; 
perhaps referring to other Orphic poems (cf. fy. 227). But Mousaios, 
himself always closely connected in Plato with.Orpheus (Rp. 364 E, 
Prot. 316 D, Ap. 41 A, Jon, 536 B), here simply means “‘ Orphic poetry ”’. 
A literature of essentially Orphic character went under his name. 
So Plu., Comp. Cim, et Luc. 1 seems right in substituting simply 
tov ‘Opdéa for the Movoatos named in PI. 

1 Pl., Lg.870 DE; then in more detail for a special case but derived 
from same source: vouw... 7 viv dy (i.e. in 870 DE) dexbeévre 
872 DE, 873 A.—The idea of such a religio-juridical talio was popular 
also in Greece: see below (chap. xi, n. 44). Frequently for instance 
in curses of vengeance the wish is that the doer may suffer exactly the 
same thing as that which he has done to his victim. Exx. from Soph. 
(best is Tv. 1039 f.) given by G. Wolff inS., Azas, 839; cf. A., Cho. 309 ff., 
Ag. 1430.—As a Neoplatonic idea: Plot. 3, 2, 13; Porph. and Iamb. 
ap. Aen. Gaz., Theophr., p. 18 B. 

72 We may, however, suppose that the ideas of the Orphics corre- 
sponded with the statements of Empedokles, Plato, etc., about the 
series of births. 

73 g@pa—ofpua is Orphic: Pl., Crat. 400 C. 

74 Complete escape from the world of birth and death is distinctly 
anticipated for the pious Orphic in fr. 226, cv«Aov te Af~ar KrA. The 
other and positive side completing this negative promise is not clearly 
supplied for us by any fragment. (We never even hear distinctly 
of the return of the individual soul to the one Soul of the World ; 
though certain Orphic myths—probably of late origin—seem to suggest 
such a doctrine of Emanation and final Remanation.) 

75 fry. 1, 81. The moon was regarded as inhabited, like the world, 
by Pythagoreans too (esp. Philolaos) and also by Anaxagoras. 

76 This at least was the belief of Pythagoreans and later of Platonics : 
see Griech. Roman, 269; Wyttenb. on Eun. VS. 117. But the idea 
occurs as early as in the 77. of Plato, esp.in 42 B. It may have been 
long familiar to Greek popular belief (as to other peoples; cf. Tylor, 
ii, 70), and reached Orphics from that source. (Similar though not 
quite the same is the popular belief as dorépes yryvoped” orav tis 
am7o@avn, Ar., Pa. 833 f., which the Greeks shared with all the nations 
of the earth: cf. ‘‘Pythagoras” ap. Comm. Bern. in Lucan, 9, 9.)—No 
opinion can be built upon the statement of Ficinus (fr. 321). 

77 Orphic poetry must have varied in its account of what happened 
to the dismembered limbs of Zagreus-Dionysos. That the Titans 
tore the god limb from limb seems to have been common to all 
versions of the Theogonic poem (see nn. 28, 41; p. 341). But whereas 
according to one account the Titans then devoured the god (except 
the heart) and from the mixed Titanic and Dionysiac elements of their 
bodies after they had been destroyed by lightning the race of men 
had its origin (p. 341); according to others the mangled limbs 


360 NOTESS Om CHART i wes 


of the god were brought by Zeus to Apollo who buried them 
taking them ‘‘on to Parnasos’’, i.e. at Delphi: see Orph. fr. 200 
(Clem. Al.) and so, too, Callim. fy. 374. The Rhapsodiai gave the first 
version in detail, but also preserved an account resembling the second 
(see frr. 203, 204: the évilew ta pepiobévta tod Arovdaov péAn there 
refers probably to the reunion of the collected limbs for the purpose 
of burial and not for the restoration of the dead god to life. This is 
also possibly the meaning of the Auovdcov peAdv KodAdAjoes in Jul., 
Chr., p. 167, 7 Neum. But Or., Cels. 4, 17, p. 21 Lom., speaks of the 
yveanimation of Dionysos ovvrifepévov after the dismemberment). 
This second account, where it occurs alone, of course excludes the 
Anthropogony from the Titans’ ashes. The second version un- 
mistakably connects itself with the Delphic legend of the grave of 
Dionysos at the foot of Apollo’s tripod (see above, pp. 97 f.) 
as K. O. Miller observed, Intvod. Scient. Myth. 242. It does, in 
fact, accord in this instance, but apart from this it has no connexion 
whatever with the real Delphic legend about the disappearance of 
Dionysos into the underworld and his periodic return to this world. 
(See above, chap. vili, n. 28. The Orphic and Delphic legends are 
elaborately compared and worked in together as though they were 
separate fragments of a single whole in Ltibbert’s book, de Pindaro 
theologiae Orph. censorve: Ind. Sch. Bonn. Lib. 1888, p. xiii f.—with 
shocking results and no intrinsic justification.) Whether this second 
version was the one put forward by Onomakritos is uncertain. In 
any case, both accounts are much older than the Rhapsodiai, in which, 
it appears, they were included side by side and superficially harmonized 
(—only the limbs of the god not devoured by the Titans being buried 

\“ acc. to this version). Besides these two versions there may have been 
another Anthropogony differing from that given in the first account : 
the existence of something of the kind is perhaps to be deduced from 
what the Rhapsodiai themselves have to tell about the golden and 
silver generations of mankind (see above, n. 41). 

78 Of the Thracian Mysoi Adyer 6 Tocerdavios cal éupvywv améxecbar 
(which Pythagoras is said to have learnt from Zalmoxis, Str. 298) 
Kat’ evoéBevav, dia 8€ Toito Kai Opeppatwv* pédite S€ ypHaba Kal 
yaraxre kat TUP@, Cdvras Kal?” jovyiav’ dia dé TobTo Kadetabat Deoae Beis 
Te Kat KkamvoBaras (perh. xamvoBoras acc. to an ancient conjecture). 
eivat 5€ Twas THY Opakav ot ywpis yuvarxos Cdaw, obs xricras KadetoGat, 
aviep@abat te Sia Tiny Kal per abdeias Civ, Str. 296. The religious 
character of this asceticism is seen in the words xar’ edoéBerav and the 
name @eocefets; also in the word dwepdofar, which are all used of 
the xriorauas of amonastic order. Jos., AJ. 18, 1,5,says of the Essenes 
Cao 8’ oddév mapyAAaypevws ard’ dtu parcora éeudépovres Aakav (i.e. 
Opaxav, Ter&v: Getae, Dact Romanis dicti, Plin., NH. iv, 80) trois 
moXAvcTais Kxadovpévors. In any case the same Thracian ascetics are 
meant whom Poseidonios (literally translating a Thracian word) calls 
the xriora. Thus, they are said like the Essenes to live without 
women, eat no meat, and in the practice of various other asceticisms 
live together and have all things in common.—It cannot be certainly 
decided how old this Thracian asceticism was, its exact connexion with 
Dionysiac religion, and whether it could or did give any impulse in 
the direction of asceticism to the Orphics. (Following Hom., N 4 ff., 
many told similar stories of the nomadic Skythoi: see Ephor., frr. 
76, 78; or of the fabulous Argimpaioi, Hdt. iv, 23; Znb., Pr. 5, 25, 
p. 129, 1, etc. Griech. Roman, 203.—dzox% éuydywv occurred also 
among the Atlantes and certain Indian races: Hdt. iv, 184; iii, 100.) 


NO EE Se 1 OmGHA RBH Ke xX 361 


79 ii, 123. His words make it plain that the Greek teachers of 
transmigration of souls whom he has in mind (Pherekydes, Pythagoras, 
Orphics, Empedokles) had no idea of the Egyptian origin ofthat doctrine 
(th. Mus, 26, 556, 1). 

8° The Egyptian monuments show no knowledge of a general 
transmigration of souls, due to a law of nature or the decree of the gods. 
We can see very well, however, what it was in Egyptian traditions that. 
might seem like a doctrine of transmigration to Herodotos (cf. Wiede- 
mann, Frlavt. zu Herodots 2. B. p. 457 f.). 

81 Tt is sufficient to refer to Tylor’s collections : ii, 3 ff.—In antiquity 
the Greeks met with a doctrine of Transmigration, apart from Thrace, 
among the Keltic races (Caes., BG. 6, 14,5; D.S.5, 28,6; cf. Timagenes. 
ap. Amm. Marc. 15, 9, 8). This was the sole reason why Pythagoras 
was made the pupil of the Gallic Druids: Alex. Polyh. ap. Clem. Al., 
iV al,0p. 3090/6 Ps, etc. 

82 That it was not unnatural for the Greeks also to have the con- 
ception of the migration of the soul from its first body to some other 
suitable second or third body (entry of ris tuxovons puyfs els TO 
Tuxov o@pma acc. to Arist.) may be seen from the fact that in Greek 
popular tales of the transformation of men into beasts the idea regularly 
prevails that while the body changes in such cases the “‘ soul ’” remains 
the same as before. Thus, explicitly in Hom. x 240 (cf. Sch. there 
and 329) ; cf. also Ov., M. ii, 485; Nonn., D. v, 322 f.; Aesop., F. 294 
(Halm); [Luc.] Asen. 13, 15 init.; Apul., M. iii, 26 init.; Aug., CD. 
18, 18, p. 278, 11 ff. Domb., etc. (In all transformation stories this is: 
regularly implied and gives the point to the story.) This is true 
from the earliest times onward, down to Voltaire’s muleteer who was. 
turned into a mule et du vilain l’dme terrestre et crasse a peine vit 
qu’elle eut changé de place.)—The beasts also have a duyy : e.g. 
€ 426. 

83 Brahmins, Buddhists, Manichaean, etc. 

84 A fixed term for “‘ transmigration of souls’’ does not seem to 
have been offered by Orphic teaching. It was later called wadtyyevecia 
(a term which did not exactly fit the real meaning of the idea): this 
seems to have been its oldest name (cf. ai duyat madw ylyvovra éx 
tav teOvewtwv, Pl., Phd. 70 C), and remained its most ceremonious 
one. ‘* Pythagoras”? non perepiidxywow sed tadvyyeveciav esse dicit: 
Serv., A. ili, 68. perevowuarwors is not uncommon (frequent in 
Hippol., RH., p. 12,53 D.-S. ; 266, etc.). The word most commonly used 
among ourselves, peteuwsdywors, is among the Greeks precisely the least 
Peat eivoccirs c.enindso. OG. li Galwiv, /63/ Ko; Lertul, devA». 
31; Serv., A. vi, 532; 603; Suid. s.v. Depexvdns. pereppvyotola 
OcCUIS Il Ch. ALR. 1, 645; 


CHAPTER XI 
THE PHILOSOPHERS 


The Orphic teaching, in which a protracted movement 
of religion in Greece reached comprehensive expression, might 
seem almost an anachronism, appearing as it did in 
an age when a religious interpretation of the world and of 
mankind was hardly any longer admissible. Eastwards, on 
the coasts of Ionia, a new view of the world had arisen which, 
like a youth that has come of age, demanded the right to 
pursue its course without any guidance from traditional beliefs. 
The Ionic maritime cities were the meeting-place of all the 
collected wisdom and experience of mankind; and there all 
the more serious knowledge and study—both indigenous and 
of foreign origin—of ‘‘ Nature ’’, the earth, and the heavenly 
bodies, was gathered together in the intelligence of those 
ever-memorable spirits who at that time were laying the 
foundations of natural science, and of all science in general. 
This knowledge was now attempting to turn itself into 
an organized and all-embracing whole. Observation and 
constructive study combined with an imaginative vision to 
hazard a picture of the world and reality as a whole. 
Because it was impossible anywhere in this world to find any- 
thing completely and for ever fixed and dead, speculation 
inevitably pressed forward to the discovery of the undying 
source of Life, that perpetually fills, moves, and rebuilds this 
whole, and of the laws according to which it works and 
necessarily must work. 

This was the direction pursued by these earliest pioneers of 
philosophy ; and they pursued it unhampered by any sub- 
servience to mythical or religious modes of thought. Where 
mythology and the theology founded upon it saw a complete 
history of cosmic events each one of which was the result of 
the separate and unique action of divine personalities endowed 
with consciousness and the power of arbitrary choice—there 
the philosopher saw the play of everlasting forces which could 
not be completely resolved into the single events of any 
historical process, for, without beginning or end they had been 
ever in action, tirelessly fulfilling themselves in accordance 
with unchanging laws. In such a universe there seemed 


ieee ETBVOSORHERS 363 


to be little room left for divine figures created by man after 
his own image, and worshipped by him as the guiding and 
supreme powers of the world. And in fact, the foundations 
were now laid of that tremendous structure of free inquiry, 
which finally succeeded in weaving out of its treasure new 
worlds of thought, where even those who had quarreiled or 
were dissatisfied with the old religion (now inwardly falling 
into decay for all its outward appearance of being at the most 
brilliant zenith of its powers) might yet find a refuge if they 
would not fall back upon sheer nothingness. 

And yet Greece never saw a thorough-going opposition and 
conscious quarrel between science and religion. In a few 
special cases the religion of the state was forced to recognize 
its incompatibility with the openly expressed opinions of 
individual philosophers, and took steps to make its claims 
to universal supremacy respected. But for the most part, the 
two streams of influence flowed on side by side for centuries 
without ever coming into hostile contact. The propagandist 
temper was completely absent from philosophy from the 
very beginning. (Even when it appeared later as among the 
Cynics it produced very little effect on the supremacy of the 
state religion.) Religion on its side was not represented 
by any priestly caste which might have been led to take up 
arms for religion and for what it believed to be its own 
interest alike. Theoretic contradictions might the more easily 
remain unobserved when religion depended so httle upon fixed 
dogma or upon a world-embracing whole of opinions and 
doctrines; while Theology, wherever it accompanied the 
worship of the gods (ede¢Ber), which was the real core of 
religion, was, just as much as philosophy, the business of 
individuals and their adherents gathered together outside the 
limits of the official religion of the state. Philosophy (except 
in a few special and unrepresentative cases) never sought 
open war with religion—not even with the weakened and 
diluted religion of the masses. In fact the juxtaposition of 
philosophy and religion (with theology itself by their side) 
sometimes went beyond the external conditions of the time, 
and affected the private intellectual life of certain thinkers. 
It might seem as if religion and philosophy were not merely 
different but dealt with different provinces of reality, and 
thus even strict and philosophically minded thinkers could 
honestly and without imagining disloyalty to philosophy, 
adopt particular and even fundamental conceptions from the 
creed of their fathers, and allow them to grow up side by side 
and at peace with their own purely philosophical ideas. 


364 POR SE PHECOSO EH hes 
§ 2 


What the Ionic philosophers in connexion with the rest of 
their cosmology had to say about the soul of man did not 
for all its striking novelty bring ther into direct conflict with 
religious opinion. Philosophy and religion used the same 
words to denote totally different things ; it could surprise no 
one if different things were said about quite different objects. 

According to the popular view, which finds expression in 
Homer, and with which, in spite of their very different 
estimate of the relative values of body and soul, the religious 
theory of the Orphics and other theologi also agreed—accord- 
ing to this view the “ psyche”’ was regarded as a unique 
creature of combined spiritual and material nature that, 
wherever it may have cOme from, now dwells within man 
and there, as his second self, carries on its separate existence, 
making itself felt when the visible self loses consciousness 
in dream, swoon, or ecstasy (see above, pp. 6 f.). In the same 
way, the moon and the stars become visible when no longer 
obscured by the brighter light of the sun. It was already 
implied in the conception itself that this double of mankind, 
which could be detached from him temporarily, had a separate 
existence of its own; it was no very great step from this 
to the idea that in death, which is simply the permanent 
separation of the visible man from the invisible, the latter 
did not perish, but only then became free and able to live by 
and for itself. 

This spiritual being and the obscure manifestations of its 
existence in the living man, did not attract the observation 
of the Ionian philosophers. Their thoughts were all for the 
universe as a whole; they looked for the “ origins’ (dpyat) 
of all that is and becomes ; for the simple elements of multi- 
farious appearance and for the force which turns the simple 
into the multifarious while controlling, moving, and giving 
life to primeval matter. The power of life, the force which can 
set in motion both itself and all else that without it would be 
fixed and motionless—this force penetrates all being ; where 
it manifests itself most strikingly in separate individual 
beings, there it is what these philosophers call the “ psyche ”. 

Thought of in this way, the psyche is something quite 
different from the old psyche of popular belief, idly observing 
the life and activities of its body, as of some stranger, con- 
centrated in itself, and pursuing its own secret, hidden life. 
And yet the name given to these very different concepts 
remained the same. The application of the word “ psyche ” 


Drei eOSORHERS 365 


to the power which gives life and movement to the visible 
body—man’s power of life—might have been suggested to 
the philosophers by a manner of expression which, though in 
the strict sense of the words conflicting with Homeric con- 
ceptions, is occasionally observable in the Homeric poems, and 
seems to have become more and more frequent in late times. 
In more exact language, the “ psyche ”’ of these philosophers 
is a collective expression for all the powers of thought, desire, 
and will (vdos, pévos, pares, BovAy), and especially for the 
functions denoted by the untranslatable word @vp6s—powers 
which according to the Homeric and popular partition all 
belong entirely to the side of the visible man and his body.? 
According to that view, they are all expressions of the body’s 
natural powers of life—though they cannot indeed be awakened 
to real life before the arrival of the “ psyche ’’—and in 
Homeric usage are almost the exact opposite of the “‘ psyche ”’, 
for they perish at death, while the psyche leaves them behind 
to wander about in its separate shadow-life. 

But the soul, according to the view of the physiologists, 
has quite a different relation to the totality of life and living, 
and differs in this respect both from the Homeric psyche and 
the Homeric @vyés. The same force which manifests itself 
so strongly, as though specially concentrated there, in the 
psyche of man, works and rules in all matter as the general 
source of life that creates and preserves the world. Thus, 
the psyche loses the special singularity that distinguished it 
from all the other things and substances in the world, and 
made it incomparable and unique. Later reporters are wrong 
in attributing to these Ionic thinkers (for whom vital power 
and material substance seemed immediately and indissolubly 
united) the conception of a separate, independent “‘ World- 
Soul’’. Not as emanations from a single Soul of the World 
did they conceive the separate souls of men; but neither did 
they conceive them as simply independent, unique, and 
entirely incomparable essences. They are expressions of 
that force which everywhere in all the phenomena of the world 
produces life and is itself /ife. Attributing spiritual qualities 
to the primeval source of things, the physiology of the “ Hylo- 
zoists ’’ naturally could not assume any profound distinction 
between that source and the “soul”’. Deprived in this way 
of its separateness, the soul acquired a new importance in 
exchange; in another sense from that of the mystics and 
theologians it could still be thought of as something divine, 
for it was a participator in the one Force which builds and 
rules the world. It is not the abode of a single daimonic 


366 THE PHILOSOPHERS 


nature, but instead, the very nature of god is alive 
within it. 

The closer its inward connexion with the universal Whole 
the less, of course, will the soul be able to preserve its indi- 
vidual existence, which was only lent to it while it gave life 
and movement to the body, when that body, the sign and 
support of its separateness, is overtaken by death. These 
earliest philosophers whose view was almost entirely concen- 
trated on the broad outlines of the life of nature as a whole, 
would hardly have regarded it as part of their task to formu- 
late a deliberate opinion about the fate of the puny individual 
soul after the death of its body. In no case could they have 
spoken of an immortality of the soul in the same sense as did 
the mystics who regarded the soul of which they spoke as 
something which has entered from without into material exist- 
ence, and as a spiritual essence quite distinct from everything 
material. The latter were thus able to attribute to the psyche 
a capacity for separate and continued existence which was 
inadmissible in the case of a force of movement and sensation 
completely inhering in matter and in the shaping of matter. 
And it was such a force which the physiologists called the soul. 

Ancient tradition, nevertheless, asserts that Thales of 
Miletos, whose genius first began the philosophic study of 
nature, was the first “ to call the soul (of man) immortal ’’.3 
But Thales, who recognized a “soul”’ also in magnets and 
plants,* and thought of the material stuff and the motive force 
of the “‘soul’’ as inseparable, can only have spoken of the 
“immortality ’’ of the human soul in the same sense as he 
might have spoken of the immortality of all ‘‘ soul-forces ” in 
nature. Like the primal Matter which works and creates by 
reason of its own natural powers of life, so, too, the universal 
Force which permeates it > is imperishable and indestructible, 
as itis uncreated. It is entirely and essentially alive and can 
Nevclebeoumcea dau 

Anaximander said of the “ Unlimited” from which all 
things have been developed by separation, and by which all 
things are enveloped and directed, that it never grows old, 
but is immortal and imperishable.* This cannot be intended 
to apply to the human soul as a separate existence ; for hke 
all separate creations out of the “‘ Unlimited’ it must “in 
the order of the time ”’ pay the penalty for the “ offence ”’ of 
its separate existence,’ and lose itself again in the one 
primordial matter. 

Nor could the third in this series—Anaximenes of Miletos— 
have differed seriously from Thales in the sense in which 


tL Heer ELEPOSOR HERS 367 


he spoke of the soul as “immortal ”’ ;_ for him it was of the 
same nature ® as the one divine ® primal element of Air that 
is eternally in movement and produces all things out of itseif. 


§3 

In the teaching of Herakleitos of Ephesos the living power 
of the primal essence—the one?® and universal, out of 
which arises through change the many and the particular, 
which manifests itself in the union, regarded as indissoluble, 
of matter and motive force—received even greater prominence 
than with the older Ionians. By them matter itself—des- 
cribed as either limited or not limited in reference to one 
particular quality—is regarded as self-evidently in motion. 
For Herakleitos the origin of all multiplicity hes rather in the 
creative energy of absolute Life itself which is at the same time 
a definite material substance or analogous to one of the known 
substances. The idea of /ife, and that form of it which makes. 
its appearance in man, must have been more important 
for him than for any of his predecessors. 

This never-resting force and activity of becoming that 
has neither beginning nor end, is represented by the Hot and 
Dry and called by the name of that elementary condition 
which cannot be thought of as ceasing to move, namely, Fire. 
The ever-living (de¢{wov) fire, which periodically kindles itself 
and periodically goes out (Bywater, fv. 20), is formed entirely 
of movement and livingness. Living belongs to everything ; 
but living is becoming, changing, becoming something different 
without cessation. Every appearance brings forth from itself, 
at the moment of its appearance, the opposite of itself. Birth, 
life, and death, and fresh birth clash together in a single 
burning moment, like the lightning (/7. 28). 

That which thus moves itself in unceasing vitality and has. 
all its being in becoming ; which perpetually changes and “ in 
backward-straining effort ’’ finds itself again—this is some- 
thing endowed with reason, creative in accordance with 
reason and “ art’’; is Reason (Adyos) itself. In creating the: 
world it loses itself in the elements; it suffers its ‘‘ death ”’ 
(frr. 66, 67) when in the ‘‘ Way downwards ”’ it becomes 
water and earth (fy. 21). There are degrees of value in the 
elements decided by the relation which they hold towards the 
moving and self-vivifying fire. But that which in the multi- 
plicity of the phenomena in the world, yet preserves its god- 
like fiery nature—this is for Herakleitos “‘ psyche ’’. Psyche 
is fire. Fire and psyche are interchangeable terms.’? And so,. 
too, the psyche of man is fire, a part of the universal fiery 


368 THES PHILOSOPHERS 


energy that surrounds it and upholds it, through the “ inhala- 
tion ’’ of which it maintains itself alive ; 1% a portion of the 
‘World-Reason by participation in which it is itself rational. 
In men God is living.14. But god does not descend into man, 
as in the teaching of the Theologians, entering as a finite 
individuality into the vessel of the individual human life. 
As a united whole he surrounds men with his flood and reaches 
after and into them, as though with fiery tongues. A portion © 
of his universal Wisdom is living in the soul of man; the 
‘“‘ drier ’’, more fiery, nearer to the universal Fire and further 
from the less living elements he is, the wiser will he be (/rr. 74, 
75, 76). If he sundered himself from the universal wisdom, 
man would become nothing ; it is his business in thinking, as 
in acting and in moral behaviour, to surrender himself to the 
‘One Living essence that ‘‘ nourishes ’’ him and is the Mind 
and Law of the world (frr. 91, 92, 100, 103), 

But the soul itself is also a portion of the universal Fire 
that in the perpetual variation of its form of being has been 
encompassed by the body and become entangled in corpor- 
eality. Here we no longer have the rigid, unmediated con- 
trast between “ Body ”’ and “ Soul”’ such as it appeared from 
the standpoint of the theologian. The elements of the body, 
water and earth, have themselves arisen and perpetually 
arise out of the fire which changes into all other things, and 
into which everything else changes (fr. 22). So itis the soul 
itself, the creative fire, which creates the body. “Soul,” 
i.e. Fire, unceasingly turns itself into the lower elements ; 
there is no contrast between them, and it is but a continual 
flux of transition. 

While it is enclosed in the body the soul is still affected by 
unceasing change. In this it is like everything else. Nothing 
in the world can for a single moment preserve the parts 
which compose it unaltered; the perpetual movement and 
alteration of its being constitute its life. The sun itself, the 
greatest fire-body, becomes another sun every day (/r. 32). 
So, too, the soul, though distinct from the body and a self- 
existing substance, yet is a substance that never remains 
like itself. In unceasing alteration of its material substance, 
its contents are perpetually being transposed. It loses its fire 
of life in the lower elements; it absorbs fresh fire from the 
living Fire of the universe that surrounds it. There can be no 
question of the permanent identity of the soul, of the spiritual 
personality, with itself. What in the unbroken process of 
upward and downward straining seems to maintain itself 
as a single person, is in reality a series of souls and person- 


eee OoO PH ERS 369 


alities, one taking the place of another and ousting and 
being ousted in turn. 

Thus, even while it is in life, the soul is perpetually dying— 
but to live again; ever supplementing the departing soul- 
life or supplying its place with another. So long as it can 
recruit itself from the surrounding World-Fire, so long the 
individual lives. Separation from the source of all life, the 
living and universal fire of the world, would be death for it. 
The soul may temporarily lose its life-giving contact with the 
“common world ” : this happens in sleep and dreaming which 
enclose it in their own world (/rr. 94, 95), and this is already a 
partial death to it. Sometimes, too, the soul has a tendency 
to transform itself to a humidity not always made good by 
fresh fire ; the drunkard has a “ moist soul” (fy. 73). Finally, 
there comes the moment when the soul of man cannot any 
longer repair the loss of the living fire which is taken from it 
in the perpetual alteration of its matter. Then it dies; death 
carries off the last of the series of living fires which in their 
continuity made up the human soul.!® 

But in Herakleitos’ world there is no such thing as death 
in the absolute sense—-an end followed by no beginning, an 
unconditional cessation of becoming. ‘“‘ Death” is for him 
only a point where one condition of things gives way to 
another; a relative “ not-being ’’, involving death for one 
but simultaneously bringing birth and life for another (/rr. 25, 
[64], 66, 67). Death, just as much as life, is for him a positive 
thing. “‘ Fire lives the death of earth, and air lives the death 
of fire; water lives the death of air, and earth the death of 
water” (fr. 25). The One that is in all things is at once dead 
and alive (fy. 78), immortal and mortal (fr. 67) ; a perpetual 
“death and becoming ”’ agitatesit. So, too, the “ death ” of 
man must be the exit from one positive state of things, and 
the entry into another, also positive, condition. Death occurs 
for man when the “ soul’ is no longer within him. Only the 
body is then left ; alone and by itself it is no better than 
dung (fr. 85). But the soul—what becomes of that ? It must 
have altered ; it was fire, but now it has descended on the 
“Way downwards’”’ and become water—to become earth 
after that. So it must happen to all fire. In death the fire 
in man “ goes out”’ (fr. 77). “It is death for the souls to 
become water ’”’ says Herakleitos clearly enough (fr. 68).1” 
The soul must tread this path at last, and treads it willingly ; 
change is for the soul its delight and refreshment (fr. 83). 
The soul has then changed itself into the elements of the body, 
has lost itself in the body. 

Bb 


370 THEW PHIROSOPHERS 


But it cannot rest permanently in this transformation. 
“For the souls it is death to become water ; for the water it 
is death to become earth. And yet from earth comes water ; 
and from water, soul”’ (fy. 68). Thus, in the restless up and 
down of becoming, in the “‘ Way upwards ”’ the soul reconsti- 
tutes itself out of the lower elements. But not that soul which 
had formerly animated the particular individual and of whose 
complete self-identity in the midst of the influx of the Fire- 
spirit there could be no question even during the life of the 
body. The inquiry after an individual immortality or even 
a continued existence of the separate soul could hardly have 
had any meaning at all for Herakleitos. Nor can he have 
admitted it under the form of the “ transmigration of the 
soul ’’.18 It is quite certain that Herakleitos can never have 
distinctly asserted the changeless persistence of the individual 
human soul in the midst of the unbroken stream of becoming 
in which all fixity is nothing but an illusion of the senses. But 
it is also incredible that, in despite of his own fundamental 
principles, he even admitted the possibility of this popular 
view with an indulgence quite foreign to his nature.19 What 
could have tempted him to do so? We are told * that it 
was from the mysteries that he adopted this opinion which 
was one of their most important doctrines. Herakleitos, 
however, only casts an occasional glance at the mysteries 
and what might be called their “ doctrine ’’ (just as he glanced 
at other prominent manifestations of the excited religious life 
of his time #4) ; and he does so in order to harmonize their 
teaching with his own—a result which he achieves rather by 
imposing an interpretation than by patiently eliciting one. 
He demonstrates that the mysteries might be harmonized with 
his own doctrine,?? which seemed to him able to explain 
all the phenomena of the world; that contrariwise he ever 
sought to set his own teaching in harmony with that of the 
mysteries, or that the latter had shown him the way to his 
thought, or could ever have tempted him to set foot outside 
his own self-chosen path—of this there is not a scrap of 
evidence to be had. 

The individual in its isolation has, for Herakleitos, neither 
value nor importance: to persist in this isolation (if it had 
been possible) would have seemed to him a crime.?8 The Fire 
is fer him indestructible and immortal as a totality, not as 
divided into individual particles, but only as the one Universal 
Mind that transforms itself into all things and draws all 
things back again into itself. The soul of man has a claim to 
immortality only as an emanation of this universal Reason, 


THE PHILOSOPHERS ay 


and shares the immortality which belongs to 1t. So, too, the 
soul, even when it has lost itself in the elements, finds itself 
again. Between “want” and “ satisfaction’ (frr. 24, 36), 
this process of becoming has its perpetual being. A day 
will come when the Fire will “ overtake ” everything (fr. 26) ; 
God will then be utterly by himself-—all in all. But that 1s 
not the purpose of this world; here change, becoming and 
passing away will never end. Nor should they end; the 
“Strife ’’ (fr. 43) which has created the world, and ever 
fashions it anew, is the most inward nature of the All-living 
which it perpetually stirs to insatiable desire of becoming. 
For the desire and refreshment of all things is Change (/rr. 
72, 83), the coming and going in the interplay of Becoming. 

It is the precise opposite of a quietistic mood that speaks 
from the whole teaching of Herakleitos. His voice is a trumpet 
call that grows louder and louder as his lofty and majestic 
spirit with ever-increasing intensity proclaims prophet-like 
the last word of wisdom. He knows well that it is only 
labour that can give meaning to rest, and hunger to satis- 
faction ; only sickness can call forth the desire of health (/7. 
104). That is the law of the world which binds together the 
opposing contraries, each of which is engendered from the 
last, with an inward and complete necessity. He bows before 
it and assents to it. For him the fixity of the soul in a Blessed- 
ness that was without activity and without change-—even if 
such were thinkable *4—would not have seemed a possible 
goal of desire. 


§ 4 


Even before the days of Herakleitos the torch of philo- 
sophic inquiry had been borne from the coasts of Ionia to the 
West by Xenophanes of Kolophon who in a life of adventure 
had wandered as far as Southern Italy and Sicily. For his 
- fiery temperament the most subtle reflection was turned into 
life and experience, and the one enduring source of Being to 
which he ever directed his gaze became the universal Divinity 
that is all perception and thought, that tirelessly embraces 
all things in its thought and intelligence, and, without 
beginning or end, perpetually remains the same with itself. 
What Xenophanes had to say about this God which for him 
is the same as the world, became the basis for the elaborated 
doctrine of the Eleatic school which, in declared opposition to 
Herakleitos,25 denied all possibility of movement, becoming, 
alteration, division of the One into Many, to the one absolute 
Being that completely and entirely occupies Space, is raised 


372 THE. PHILOSOPHERS 


above all development, whether temporal or spatial, and 
remains perpetually enclosed in itself in absolute self- 
sufficiency. 

For this view the whole multiplicity of things that presses 
itself upon sense-perception is an tlusion. Deceptive also is 
the apparent existence of a multiplicity of animated beings, 
just as the whole of nature is anillusion. It was not “ Nature’’, 
the content of actual experience, that provided the starting- 
point of the philosophy of Parmenides. Without any assistance 
from experience, simply by the pure logical deductions to be 
made from a single fundamental concept (that of “ Being ’’), 
which was to be grasped only by the understanding, this 
philosophy claimed to arrive at the whole content of its 
teaching. For the philosophic scientists of Ionia the soul 
also had been a part of nature and the science of the soul a 
department of the science of nature ; and this inclusion of the 
psychical within the physical was the peculiarity in their 
doctrine of the soul which distinguished it from the ordinary 
popular psychology. When, however, the whole of Nature 
was to be ruled out of account as a subject of scientific 
knowledge, the derivation of psychology from physiology 
had to be given up as well. These aphysict 6 were logically 
debarred from holding any doctrine of the soul. 

With a complaisance that is remarkable in view of the 
uncompromising logical vigour with which they deduced their 
main theory and based it on abstract, super-sensual knowledge, 
the Eleatics conceded so much at least to the region of appear- 
ance and the pressure of sense-perception that, although they 
did not deduce from their own fundamental conceptions a 
physical theory of multifarious appearance and its develop- 
ment, yet, side by side with their rigid doctrine of being, in 
unjustified and unjustifiable relation with it, they did in 
fact put forward such a theory. Xenophanes, himself, had 
already in the same way offered a physical theory of limited 
and relative validity. .Parmenides in the second part of his 
doctrinal poem, developed, “‘1n deceptive adornment of words, ’ 
not an authoritative statement of the true nature of being, 
but “human opinions”’ of becoming and creation in the 
world of multiplicity. This, too, must be the standpoint of 
the physiological doctrines put forward by Zeno of Elea, the 
boldest dialecticlan who upheld the doctrine of the motion- 
less All-One. In the course of such a physiology, and with the 
same implied reservations, the Eleatic philosophers dealt 
also with the nature and origin of the soul. Their physical 
doctrine was framed entirely on the lines of the older type of 


THE. PHILOSOPHERS Byes: 


natural philosophy, and they regarded the relation of the 
spiritual to the corporeal from exactly the same point of 
view as their predecessors had done. For Parmenides (146 ff. 
Mull. = fv. 16 Diels) the mind (véos) of man depends for its 
existence upon the mixture of two ingredients of which 
everything, including its body, is composed. These ingredients 
are the “Light” and the “ Night” (the Warm and the 
Cold, Fire and Earth). What is intellectually active is, even 
in mankind, the “ nature of his imbs’’; the character of his 
thought is determined by the one of the two elements which 
preponderates in the individual. Even the dead man (because 
he still has a body) has feeling and sensation: but these 
powers are deserted by the warm and the fiery and given over 
to the cold, the dark, and silence. All that is has some 
capacity of knowledge.?’—It would be impossible to condemn 
the “ soul ’’ to corporeality more completely than is here done 
by the bold philosopher of abstract Reason, who at the same 
time denied so unconditionally all validity to sense-percep- 
tion. The soul is evidently no longer an independent substance 
but a mere resultant of material mixture, a function of elements 
in composition. For Zeno, too, the “soul ’’ in the same way 
was an exactly equal mixture of the four elementary properties 
of matter, the Warm, the Cold, the Dry, and the Wet.?° 

It is, therefore, startling, in the face of these utterances, to 
find that Parmenides also said about the “soul” that the 
deity that rules the world “ at one time, sends it out of the 
Invisible into the Visible, and at another time back again ’’.?° 
Here, the soul is no longer a condition arising from the mixture 
of material elements, but an independent being credited with 
pre-existence before its entry into the “ Visible ’’, i.e. before 
its entry into the life of the body, and also with a continued 
existence after its separation from the realm of visibility— 
and indeed, with a sojourn, several times repeated, in those 
two worlds. Did Parmenides distinguish between this 
independently existing soul and the being that perceives in 
the mixture of the elements and as mind (véos) thinks, but 
whose existence is bound up with the elements and the body 
they together compose ? It is obvious at any rate that in 
what he says of the psyche, and its alternate life in the visible 
and the invisible, Parmenides is not speaking as a physiologist, 
but as an adherent of the Orphic-Pythagorean theosophy. 
While reserving for himself his knowledge of “ Truth” and 
unalterable Being, he could select as he liked among the 
“opinions of men” when speaking only hypothetically. 
In his doctrine as a practical teacher with an ethical purpose 


374 THEA PRTICOSORMERS 


in view he preferred to adopt the conceptions of the Pythag- 
oreans with whom he lived in close association.?° 


§ 5 

Ionic physiology had fixed its attention on Nature as a 
whole, and on the phenomena of life displayed in every nook 
and corner of the universe; man, as a mere ripple on the 
surface of the ocean of becoming and taking form, was almost 
entirely neglected. A philosophy that made it its main effort 
to learn the nature of man, and, still further, with the know- 
ledge so acquired, to show man the way and purpose of his 
living, had to try other paths. 

This is what Pythagoras of Samos did. What he called his 
‘““ Philosophy ”’ 34 was in essence a practical effort. Plato 3? 
tells us that Pythagoras was so peculiarly honoured because 
he discovered a special mode of directing one’s life. A distinct 
way of living, formed on a religious and ethical basis, was his 
creation. How far his “ polymathy ’’,33 which indubitably 
contained already the substance of Pythagorean science, may 
have become a system in his hands, is not distinctly known. 
What is certain is that in Kroton he formed a society which, 
together with the strict rules in accordance with which he 
organized their manner of life for his associates, eventually 
spread far and wide among the Achzan and Dorian cities of 
the Italian “‘ great Greece’. In this society a profound con- 
ception of human life and its purposes was given practical 
and visible application, and to have brought this about must be 
regarded as the act and the special service of Pythagoras. 
The fundamental conception of this way of life, except in so 
far as it may have contained from the beginning a mystic 
philosophy of numbers, was by no means the special invention 
of Pythagoras ; the new and potent feature which he intro- 
duced was the force of personality which was able to give life 
and body to the ideal. What was apparently lacking in similar 
movements in ancient Greece was now provided by a great 
man who for his followers was a pattern and an example, 
a leader inspiring imitation and emulation. His personality 
became a centre to which a whole community was attracted 
by a sort of inward necessity. Before very long this founder of 
a community appeared to his followers as a superman, unique 
and incomparable among all other men. Some lines of 
Empedokles,*4 who did not himself belong to the Pythagorean 
society, bear witness to this fact, and to his followers 
Pythagoras became in memory a saint or even a god in human 
form, and they related legends of the miracles he had 


ia PARE OSOPHERS 375 


performed. For us it is difficult to form a connected picture or 
trace the real features of the man beneath the dazzling halo 
of the saint. 

The teaching which enabled him to knit together his 
followers in a far closer bond of fellowship in living than had 
been achieved by any Orphic sect, must still in the main have 
coincided with what in the Orphic doctrine immediately 
related to the religious life. He too pointed out the way of 
salvation for the soul and his doctrine of the soul formed the 
central feature of his philosophy. 

So far as our scanty and dubious evidence serves us, the 
substance of the Pythagorean doctrine of the soul may be 
stated as follows. 

The soul of man, once more regarded entirely as the 
“double” of the visible body and its powers, is a daimonic 
immortal being *° that has been cast down from divine heights 
and for a punishment is confined within the “ custody ”’ of 
the body.®® It has no real relationship with the body ; it is 
not what may be called the personality of the individual 
visible man : any soul may dwell in any body.?7 When death 
separates it from the body the soul must first endure a period 
of purgation in Hades °8 and then return again to the upper 
world. The souls invisibly swarm about the living; 3° in 
the tremulous motion of motes in the sunbeam the 
Pythagoreans saw the movement of the “ souls ’’.4° The whole 
air is full of souls.44 Upon earth, however, the soul must seek 
out another body, and this may be repeated many times. 
So it wanders a long way, passing through many bodies of 
men and beasts. Very ancient tradition *%said that Pythagoras 
himself remembered the earlier incarnations through which his 
soul had passed (and of which he gave information for the 
instruction and warning of the faithful). Here, too, the 
doctrine of the soul’s transmigrations took on an edificatory 
character in a religious and ethical sense. The conditions of the 
new incarnations and the character of the new lifetime are 
governed by the performances of the past life. What the 
soul has done in the past, that it must suffer in its own person 
when it becomes a man again.‘ 

It is thus of primary importance both for the present life 
and for future incarnations to know and to follow the methods 
of salvation delivered by Pythagoras to his followers. The 
society points out the way to its company of the faithful in 
purifications and initiations, in a “ Pythagorean life” ® 
entirely organized with the same purpose in view—to “ follow 
the god’’.48 Much of the old ritual symbolism that had been 


376 THE PHICGSOPHERS 


in use for ages must have been incorporated in this 
Pythagorean asceticism.4” The theological ethic of asceticism 
was essentially negative in character, and here, too, it meant 
nothing more than a protecting of the soul against the attacks 
of external evil that might come and pollute it.4® All that 
matters is to keep the soul pure: no need for moral 
reformation—only that it be kept free from external evil. 
The fact of immortality, the soul’s perpetuity, stands fast and 
unalterable ; as it was from the beginning so it must ever be 
and live.4® To lift it at last altogether from this earthly 
existence and restore it to a free divine state of being—that, 
at least, was the final goal.5° 

The practical philosophy of the Pythagorean school is 
founded upon a conception of the soul as absolutely distinct 
from “‘ nature ’’, and, in fact, opposed to it. It is thrust into 
the life of nature, but it is in a foreign world where it preserves 
its self-enclosed individuality intact and from which it escapes 
into independence to undergo ever-renewed incarnations. Its 
origin is supra-mundane, and so, too, when liberated from the 
shackles of natural life it will one day be enabled to return to 
a supernatural existence as a spirit. 

Not one of these ideas is achieved by a process of scientific 
thinking. Physiology, the science of the world and all the 
phenomena of the world could never lead to the conception of 
the soul’s separateness from nature and its life. It was not from 
Greek science, but neither was it, as ancient tradition would 
have us believe, from foreign lands, that Pythagoras got 
his belief in the fallen nature of the soul, descended from supra- 
mundane heights to this earthly nature, and in its long 
pilgrimage through many bodies on the completion of which 
it is to be free at last, through purifications and initiations. 
He may have owed much to his travels; from his stay in 
Egypt, perhaps, he may (like Demokritos after him) have 
derived the stimulus to his mathematical discoveries and 
much else besides of the “learning” which Herakleitos 
ascribes to him. His doctrine of the soul, on the other hand, 
simply reproduces in essentials the fanciful ideas of the old 
popular psychology, as it had been enlarged and transformed 
by the ¢heologt and the purification priests. Tradition was 
right in its estimation of his character, when it set him in this 
company and made him the pupil of Pherekydes of Syros, the 
theologos.*} 

It can hardly be doubted that Pythagoras himself laid the 
foundations of the Pythagorean science—the doctrine of the 
creation of the world and perhaps, too, the interpretation of 


DHE Pit TOSOPRHERS 377 


all being and becoming in the world as due to the action and 
relation of numbers, as the essential basis of all things—all 
this, at least in elementary outline, must have been handed 
on by him to his followers. After his death the two sides of 
his doctrine continued to develop for a period in loose con- 
junction side by side; the guidance of life by the mystica’ 
and religious philosophy (though this, indeed, was hardly 
capable of further development), and the scientific interest 
which grew into a fairly elaborate system. Indeed, with the 
break-up of the Pythagorean society and its bifurcation in the 
fifth century, the scattered members of the band now brought 
into touch with the scientific studies of other communities 
and cut off from the ideal of the Pythagorean life which could 
only be realized within the limits of the society, were forced 
to continue their scientific studies in solitude. Pythagorean 
science, evolving, as it did, a picture of the world as a whole, 
no less than Ionian physiology deprived the soul of the 
unique and, indeed, antagonistic relation to nature that 
Pythagorean theology had given it. Philolaos, conceiving it in 
a manner strictly conforming to the mathematical and musical 
theory, called the soul a Harmony of contrary elements united 
together in the body.*? If, however, the soul is only a binding- 
together of opposites to unity and harmony, then it must, 
when death breaks up the conjunction of the united elements, 
itself pass away and perish.5? It is difficult to imagine how 
the older Pythagorean faith in the soul as an independent 
being dwelling in the body and surviving it—in the immortal 
soul, in fact—could be accommodated to this conception. Can 
it be that the two conceptions were not originally intended 
to be brought into conjunction at all, or were not meant to 
exclude each other? Ancient tradition spoke of different 
groups among the followers of Pythagoras who had also 
different objects, methods, and aims of study; nor shall 
we be inclined to deny all credibility to this tradition when we 
observe how little, in fact, Pythagorean science and 
Pythagorean faith had to do with each other.** 

And yet we have to admit that the same Philolaos, who 
described the soul as a harmony of its body, also spoke of the 
soul as an independent and imperishable being. We may well 
doubt whether these two contradictory utterances can really 
come from the same man and apply to the same object ; 
though the same man might really speak in varying language 
about the one soul if he recognized different parts of the soul 
of which different truths held good; and this was, in fact, 
first suggested by the Pythagorean school.” 


378 THE PHILOSOPHERS 


§ 6 


Empedokles of Akragas did not belong to the Pythagorean 
school (it lost its external unity in his time); but he 
approaches Pythagorean doctrine so closely in his opinions 
and teaching about the soul of man, its problems and destinies, 
that there can be no doubt about Pythagorean influence upon 
the formation of his convictions on these points. His many- 
sided activities also included the study of natural science and 
he took up the researches of the Ionic Physiologists with zeal 
and a marked aptitude for the observation and synthesis of 
natural phenomena. But the roots of his peculiar in- 
dividuality—the pathos which moved and agitated him— 
lay in a practical activity far removed from scientific 
investigation and representing a brilliant resuscitation in a 
very different age of the character and practice of the 
mantis, the purification-priest and magical-physician of the 
sixth century. The introduction to his “ Purifications ”’ °° 
gives a picture of his triumphal progress from city to city, 
crowned with ribbons and garlands, adored as a god and 
questioned by thousands: “‘ Where is the road to healing ? ” 
He intends to give his disciple Pausanias the results of his own 
experience and to teach him all his remedies for disease and 
their virtues, the arts of stilling the winds and stirring them up, 
producing drought or rain, raising the dead from Hades.*? 
He himself boasted of being a magician and his pupil Gorgias 
saw him ‘‘ do magic’’.°® Through him those efforts of the 
Kathartes, the expiation-priest and seer, which an earlier 
and already distant-seeming time had honoured as the highest 
form of wisdom, at last achieved a voice and literary 
expression—an expression given them with the fullest personal 
experience of the truth of their claims by one who was con- 
vinced of their power to control nature and sure of the 
godlike status of the man who had reached these almost super- 
human heights of empire over nature. As a god, an immortal 
no longer subject to death, he passed through all the land— 
so Empedokles himself tells us.°® He may have won credit in 
many places. He did not, indeed, found an ordered society of 
disciples and adherents, a sect: this does not seem to have 
been his intention. But he alone as a unique and un- 
paralleled being, a self-confident personality of the greatest 
force and weight impressed himself masterfully both as mystic 
and politician upon the mundane affairs of his contemporaries 
and pointed the way beyond time and all things temporal to 
a blessed and divine state as the final goal of human life. He 


LHEayPHILOSOPHERS 379 


must have made a profound impression upon the men among 
whom he lived,®® though he disappeared from their midst 
like a comet, and left no permanent traces of his presence 
behind him. Many legends still witness to the astonishment 
that his appearance among men provoked, more especially. 
those legends that in varying form related his end.*! They 
are all expressions of the same belief: that he, as his own 
verses had foretold, in his departure did not have to suffer 
death ; he had vanished, ‘‘ translated’ body and soul together 
to an everlasting divine life, as once Menelaos had been and so 
many great figures of the ancient days, and even a few Heroes 
of more recent times.®? Once more the ancient conception 
shows in this story that it still lives on : immortal life can only 
be obtained by undissolved union of the psyche with its 
body. Such a legend hardly did justice to Empedokles’ own 
idea. When he claimed to be a god who would never die 
he certainly did not mean that his psyche would remain for 
ever bound to his body. On the contrary, he thought that in 
“ death ’’, as men ®8 call it, it would be freed from this last 
corporeal envelope ®¢ and never again have to enter into a body, 
but would live for ever in freedom and divinity. His conception 
of the conscious after-life of the psyche was as different as it 
was possible for it to be from the Homeric conception on which 
that translation legend was based. 

Empedokles united in his own person to an astonishing 
degree the most sober attempts at a study of nature 
that was scientific according to its hghts, and quite 
irrational beliefs and theological speculations. Occasionally 
the scientific impulse passes over to influence even the world 
of his beliefs ; ® but as a rule theology and natural science 
exist side by side in his mind quite independently. As a 
physiologist he inherited the already extensive and variously 
developed stock of ideas belonging to the older generations 
of inquirers and thinkers. He himself was able to unite 
conceptions derived from the most different sources into 
an original whole that satisfied himself at least. Becoming and 
passing-away, all qualitative change, were denied by him as 
by the Eleatics, but the permanent substance of Being is for 
him no single indivisible unity. There are four “ roots”’ of 
things, the four bodies of elements, which in this division 
are for the first time clearly distinguished. It is the mixture 
and separation of the essentially indivisible elements that 
cause the appearance of becoming and perishing ; and those 
two processes are caused by the two forces—clearly distin- 
guished from the elements—of attraction and repulsion, 


380 THE VPHIEFOSOPHERS 


Love and Hate, which in the creative process struggle and 
in turn overmaster each other until at last, in the final victory 
of one of the two forces, all things are either united or divided ; 
in either case an organic world ceases to exist. The present 
state of the universe is one in which “ Love’, the tendency 
to amalgamation of differences, is prevailing; when this 
tendency is completed, there will be an absolute levelling-out 
of all distinction ; a result which Empedokles, a quietist in 
his scientific studies as well, regards as the most desirable end. 

In this world, then, that experiences only mechanical move- 
ment and change, and from whose evolution Empedokles by 
an ingenious turn is able to exclude all idea of purpose, there 
are also to be found souls ; or rather psychical powers which 
grow up entirely within it. Sense-perception is expressly 
distinguished from the capacity of thought by Empedokles.*® 
The former takes place when each of the elements, from the 
mixture of which the perceiving being has its origin, comes 
into contact with, and so becomes aware of, the same elements 
in the object perceived, through the ‘“ passages’”’ that 
connect the interior of the body with the exterior.*’ “ Think- 
ing ’’ has its seat in the heart’s blood, where the elements and 
their powers are mixed most equally. Or rather this blood 
actually zs thinking and the power of thought ; ®8 the material 
substance and its vital functions thus also for Empedokles 
completely coincide. Plainly, nothing in the nature of a 
permanent substantial ‘“‘soul”’ is here intended by the 
thinking-power of the “mind”’, but rather a capacity of 
bringing together and unifying the individual sense-activi- 
ties ; ®° a capacity no less than the individual powers of 
sensation bound up with the elements, the senses, and the 
body.*® With the varying constitution of the body, they too 
vary.“' Both capacities, that of sense-perception, and that of 
thought, as vital expressions of the matter that is combined 
together in the organic creature, are present in all organisms ; 
in men, in beasts, and even in plants.” 

If we give the name of “soul” 73 to the sum of these 
psychical powers—a name generally reserved for the common 
permanent substratum of the changing psychical activities— 
we cannot avoid concluding, in accordance with the logic of 
this philosopher, that the “‘ soul’’ must be perishable. With 
the death and destruction of the individual the elementary 
parts that go to compose him are disunited, and the soul which 
in this case is nothing but the highest resultant of that com- 
position, must itself disappear with their dissolution—as it 
had come into being with their union.74 


THE PHILOSOPHERS 381 


It might seem as if Empedokles himself was as far as possible 
removed from drawing such conclusions from his own premises. 
No one speaks more distinctly and forcibly of the spiritual, 
individual beings that dwell in men and in other creatures of 
nature as well. They are regarded by him as Daimones 
fallen to the corporeal world, who have to pass through many 
different forms of life till they may at last hope for release. 

In the introduction to his poem on Nature, he describes, 
from his own experience, and the information of the Daimones 
who had once led his soul down to this earthly Vale of Grief,” 
how by an ancient decree of the gods and the compulsion of 
Necessity, every daimon that has “polluted” itself by 
drinking the blood or eating the flesh of living beings,?® or 
has broken its oath,’? is banished for a long period 78 from the 
company of the blessed. It is thrust down to the “ Meadow 
of Disaster ’’, into the realm of contradiction,’® the cave of 
misery upon this earth, and must now wander through many 
“ painful ways of life ’’ 8° in changing incarnations. ‘“‘ Thus, 
I myself was once a boy and also a maiden, a bush, a bird, and 
a voiceless fish in the salty flood’”’ (Il. 11,12=/y. 117). This 
daimon that in expiation of its crime must wander through 
the forms of men, beasts, and even plants, is evidently no 
other than what popular speech and that of theologians as 
well called the “ psyche ’’, the soul-spirit.*! In all essentials 
though perhaps in clearer language, Empedokles merely 
repeated ®* what the adherents of the doctrine of Trans- 
migration had long told of its divine origin, its fall and penal 
banishment in earthly bodies. So, too, when as teacher of 
the means that bring salvation, he tells how more gracious 
forms and conditions of life may be obtained in the series of 
births, till at last complete release from rebirth is achieved *3 
Empedokles follows in the footsteps of the purification- 
priests and theologt of old. It is a matter of keeping the 
daimon within us free from the pollutions that bind it fast 
to the earthly life. To this end the methods of religious 
purification are most efficacious ; Empedokles respects them 
quite as much as did the old Katharta1. It is necessary to keep 
the internal daimon far removed from every kind of “sin ’’,®4 
more particularly from the drinking of blood and the eating of 
meat which must necessarily involve the murder of kinsmen 
daimones which are dwelling in the slaughtered beasts.® 
By purification and asceticism (which here again dispenses 
with a positive form of morality aimed at reforming the man) 
a gradual process to purer and better births is achieved ; °® 
in the end the persons thus reborn in a purified condition 


382 DHE Pr COSORE Tas 


become seers, poets, doctors, and are the leaders of mankind.8? 
Finally, when they have emerged superior even to these highest 
steps of earthly life, they return to the other immortals, and 
become themselves gods released from human misery, escaping 
death, and now indestructible.8& Empedokles regards himself 
as one who has reached the last stage,8® and points out to 
others the way up to it. 

Between what Empedokles the mystic here tells us of the 
soul that was once living its divine life, but has since been 
plunged into the world of the elements, though it is not for 
ever bound to them ; and what Empedokles the physiologist 
teaches of the psychical powers that dwell in the elements 
and are bound to the body that is composed of the elements 
and perish with their dissolution, there seems to be a hopeless 
contradiction. And yet if we are to grasp the whole truth of 
what Empedokles means, we must neither leave on one side 
half of what he says,®° nor yet by well-meaning interpretation 
seek to bring the philosopher into harmony with himself,* 
when he clearly speaks with two different voices. The two 
voices say different things, and yet in the mind of Empedokles, 
there is no contradiction in what they say, for they are dealing 
with totally distinct objects. The psychical powers and 
faculties of feeling and perception which are functions of 
matter, born in matter, and determined by it, together with 
the thinking faculty that is no other than the heart’s blood of 
men—these neither make up the character and content of 
that soul-spirit which dwells in men, beasts, and flowers, nor 
are they expressions of its activity. They are entirely bound 
up with the elements and their combination, and in man they 
are joined to the body and its organs; they are the powers 
and faculties of this body, and not of a special and invisible 
entity, the soul. The soul-daimon is not made out of the 
elements, nor is it for ever chained to them. It enters as a 
stranger into this world in which the only permanent com- 
ponent parts are ®* the four elements, and the two forces of 
Love and Hate ; and it enters it from another world, the world 
of gods and spirits, to its detriment; the elements cast it 
about from one to another “ and they all hate it ”’ (fv. 115, 12, 
1.35 M.). This living soul, with its independent existence, 
that thus enters into foreign and hostile surroundings, only 
enters into such earthly creatures as already possess senses, 
feeling and perception, together with reason or the faculty 
of thinking, the crowning manifestation of their material 
union. It is, however, as little identical with these psychical 
faculties as it is with the mixture of elementary matter or, in 


Pe PU TROSORHERS 383 


the case of men, with the heart’s blood. It exists, unmixed 
and incapable of mixture, alongside the body and its faculties. 
which indeed only have life—‘‘ what men call life ’’--(fr. 15, 2, 
1. 117 M.) when united with it. When they are separated 
from it they fall into dissolution; not so the soul, which 
continues its journey and visits other dwelling places, and 
does not share in their dissolution. 

This peculiar dualistic doctrine reflects the two sides of 
Empedokles’ own mental activity. He probably intended in 
this way to unite the views of both the physiologists and the 
theologians. To the Greeks, such a twofold division of the 
inner life may have seemed less surprising than it does to us. 
The conception of a “ soul”’ that as an independent, unique, 
and self-contained spiritual being dwells within the body, while 
the body does not receive its intellectual faculties of perceiving, 
feeling, willing and thinking from the soul, but exercises these 
by its own power—this conception agrees at bottom with the. 
ideas of popular psychology that are as a rule described or 
implied in the Homeric poems.*? The only difference is that 
these ideas of poet and populace are elaborated and defined 
by the speculations of theologians and philosophers. How 
deeply impressed upon the Greek mind such conceptions, 
derived eventually from Homer, actually were, can be measured 
by the fact that a conception of the twofold origin of psychic 
activity, its twofold nature and sphere of action, closely 
related to that of Empedokles, is continually recurring in 
more advanced stages of philosophy. It occurs not merely 
in Plato, but even in Aristotle, who in addition to the “ soul ”’ 
that directs and expresses itself in the physico-organic nature 
of man, recognizes another being of divine descent that enters 
into man “‘from without’’, the ‘“‘mind”’ (vods) which is separable 
both from the soul and from the body, and is alone des- 
tined to survive the death of the man to which it was assigned. 
In the doctrine of Empedokles, too, it is a stranger-guest from 
the distant land of gods that enters into man to give him a 
soul. This being is indeed far below the “‘ mind ”’ of Aristotle 
in philosophic importance ; nevertheless, in the introduction 
of this Stranger into the world composed of the elements and 
vital faculties, a sense of the absolute uniqueness of spirit, 
its unlikeness to everything material, its essential distinctness 
from matter, finds expression, if only in a limited theological 
fashion. 

In the light of such theological considerations, the soul 
seems also to Empedokles something essentially distinct from 
its prototype, the Homeric psyche, which after its separation. 


384 THE | PHILOSOPHERS 


from the body passes to the twilight of a shadowy dream-life. 
To him, the soul is of divine race, too noble for this world of 
visibility, and only when it escapes from this world does 
it seem to him to begin its real and full life. Though confined 
within the body, it has its separate existence there ; it has no 
concern with the everyday business of perception and sensation 
—not even with that of thinking, which is nothing else but the 
heart’s blood. But itis active in the “higher ’’ mode of know- 
ledge, in ecstatic inspiration; ®° to it alone belongs the profound 
insight of the philosopher who is enabled to pass beyond the 
limits of mere experience and sense-perception, and behold 
the totality of the universe in its true nature.®® To it alone 
apply all the requirements of ethical and religious systems— 
duties in this higher sense belong only to the soul ; it 1s some- 
thing in the nature of a “‘ conscience’. Its highest duty is 
to free itself from the unhallowed union with the body, and 
the elements of this world; the rules of purification and 
asceticism refer solely to it. 

Between this soul-daimon that yearns after its divine home, 
and the world of the elements, there exists no inward bond 
or necessary connexion. And yet, since they have become 
implicated in each other’s existence, a certain parallelism 
exists between them in characterand destiny. In the mechanic- 
ally moved world, too, the separate and particular phenomena 
tend back again towards their starting point, the inwardly 
coherent Unity from which they once took their origin. A day 
will come when, after all struggle has been done away, *‘ Love ”’ 
alone will have absolute rule ; and this means for the poet— 
who in his description even of this world of mechanical 
attraction and repulsion interpolates half-realized ethical 
concepts *’—a state of absolute goodness and happiness. 
If there is no longer any world, then, until another one is 
created, no soul-daimon can be bound any more to the indi- 
vidual organisms of a world. Have they then all returned 
to the blessed communion of the immortal gods ? It appears 
that not even the gods and daimones (and so not the spirits 
enclosed in world as “‘souls’”’) are regarded by Empedokles 
as having everlasting life. ‘‘ Long-living ” is the name he 
repeatedly applies to them; he never distinctly ascribes 
eternal life to them.°& They, too, shall for a period enjoy “ the 
happiness of profoundest peace ”’ until, just as the elements 
and forces are drawn into the unity of the Sphairos, they, too, 
come together in the unity of the godlike Universal Mind, 
thence at a new world-creation to appear once more as 
individual separate being.?? 


Dib SPHILOSOPHERS 385 


§ 7 


Empedokles took a fully developed “ hylozoic’”’ system 
(which in itself, with its introduction of the motive forces 
of Conflict and Love, already betrayed a latent dualism) and 
attempted to combine with it an extreme form of spiritualist 
teaching. His attempt illustrates very clearly the observa- 
tion that a philosophic science of nature in itself could never 
lead to the establishment of the axiom that the individual 
“ soul ”’ after its separation from the body continues to exist, 
still less that it is indestructible. Any one who still felt it 
necessary to assert that axiom could find support for it only 
by allowing physiology to be either overwhelmed by theo- 
logical speculation, or else supplemented by it in the manner 
attempted by Empedokles. 

Such an attempt to reconcile the irreconcilable can have 
found few adherents among those who were accessible to 
scientific ideas, nor was it likely to tempt the physiological 
philosophy from the path which it had hitherto followed. 
Soon after Empedokles, and in essentials hardly influenced 
by him, Anaxagoras and Demokritos developed those doctrinal 
systems which were the last products of the independent 
speculation of Ionia. Demokritos was the founder and com- 
pleter of the atomic doctrine according to which there exist 
“in reality’ only the indivisible, minutest material bodies 
—which, while qualitatively indistinguishable, yet differ in 
shape, position, and arrangement in space as well as in bulk 
and weight—and empty space. He was obliged to seek for 
the “soul’’ (which to the materialist may easily present 
itself as being a separate, substantial, self-existent thing) 
among those minutest bodies out of which the whole fabric 
of the world of appearance is built up. The soul is that which 
confers movement upon the inherently motionless collections 
of bodies. It is composed of the round and smooth atoms 
which, in the universal condition of unrest that keeps all 
the atoms in agitation, are the most easily moved, for they 
offer least resistance to change of position, and can most 
easily penetrate others. These atoms compose fire and the 
soul. It is the soul-atom—one being inserted between every 
two of the other atoms !°°—which gives these their move- © 
ment; and it is from all the soul-atoms uniformly disposed 
throughout the whole body that the body gets its movement, 
whence also (though it must be admitted in an unintelligible 
manner) comes the power of perception, which equally depends 
on movement, and the thought arising thence, of this same body. 

cc 


386 THE--“PHILOSOPHERS 


During the life-time of the individual body, the continuance 
of the soul-atoms is secured by the breathing which continually 
replaces the smooth soul-particles that are as continually 
being expelled from the whole atom-complex by the pressure 
of the surrounding atmosphere. The breathing is always 
drawing in fresh soul-stuff from the air which is full of floating 
soul-atoms, and supplies it to the body. A time comes, 
however, when the breathing refuses this function, and death 
occurs, which is simply the insufficient supply of these moving 
and animating atoms.1®! With the coming of death, there 
is an end to the union of the atoms, whose amalgamation had 
formed the particular living organism. Neither the soul- 
atoms nor any of the other atoms are destroyed; they do 
not alter in kind; but from the loose state of aggregation which 
even in the living body hardly amounted to an absolute unity 
to which a single common name could be applied—tfrom this 
they now escape entirely. It is scarcely possible to see 
how, on this view of what essentially constitutes mental and 
vital phenomena, as a mere resultant of the separate and 
individual activities of individual and disconnected bodies, 
the unity of the living organism and the spiritual entity could 
ever come into being. It is even more evident that a unified 
“soul” could not possibly continue to exist after the disso- 
lution which takes place at death of the atoms that in their 
union made up the organism. And, in fact, the soul-atoms 
disperse ; 1°? they return whence they came into the restless 
mass of world-stuff. The human individual, in this view of 
the case, perishes in death entirely.1°° The materials out 
of which he was shaped and composed are indestructible, 
and reserved for future construction ; but his personality— 
the invisible personality, the ‘‘soul’’, just as much as the 
visible—has but a single existence strictly limited to its one 
appearance in time. The continued existence of the soul 
after death, an immortality in whatever manner the thing 
may be conceived, is here for the first time in the history 
of Greek thought, expressly denied. The Atomist, with the 
candid precision that distinguishes him, draws the necessary 
consequences of his premises. 

Anaxagoras strikes out a path almost directly opposed to 
this materialist doctrine. As the first decisive and conscious 
dualist among Greek philosophers, he takes the material 
substratum of being, the inexhaustible many of distinctly 
characterized and distinctly separate “Seeds” of things-— 
which are nevertheless indistinguishably intermingled with 
each other—and sets over against them a force which he 


Tot eOSOPHERS 387 


obviously did not mean to derive from them, to which he 
gives a name usually attached to the faculty of thought 
in man, and which in any case he thought of as analogous to 
that faculty.1°4 This “ Mind’’, simple, unmixed and un- 
changeable, is given such titles and adjectives that it is 
impossible to mistake the effort of Anaxagoras to think of it 
as something distinct from everything material, and in fact, 
absolutely immaterial and incorporeal.1® It is at once power 
of thought and force of will; at the creation of the world 
it gives the first circular impulse to the intrinsically motionless 
lump of matter; the creation of distinct forms in accordance 
with a conscious purpose is begun by it—though the carrying 
out of this purpose is indeed to be completed in accordance 
with pure mechanical laws without the interference of 
“ Mind’. This “‘ Mind” that plans and orders but does not 
make the world, that with the conscious insight of its om- 
niscient wisdom 1° influences matter without being influenced 
in turn, that moves without being moved; 1°? set over against 
the multiplicity of things as an indivisible unity,?°® “ having 
nothing in common with anything outside itself ’’ 1°® but entirely 
self-contained 14°—how shall we conceive of it otherwise than 
as an almost personified, transcendent divine power confronting 
the world of matter as something foreign to it, ruling the 
world from without by magical, not mechanical, means ? 
But this transcendent is also completely immanent. Where- 
ever in this world life and independent movement are found, 
there, too, the mind as the source of life and movement must 
be active. “ Mind rules all that has soul ”’ says Anaxagoras.™} 
In saying this he has not indeed asserted the presence of 
“Mind ” within the animated being nor yet identity of nature 
as between soul and mind. But when we hear that Mind 
“ goes through all things,! that in everything there is a part 
of all things, except of mind, and in some things of mind 
also’, 8 that must imply the penetration of many associa- 
tions of matter by mind (hardly any longer to be thought of 
as immaterial) whereby the previously asserted transcendency 
of mind seems to be given up. At any rate, as such associa- 
tions in which is “ Mind’, living and animated beings are 
regarded. It is in them that “ Mind ”’ is present in continual, 
equal creativeness, though in different degrees ; 114 indeed, 
Mind is or constitutes that very thing that we call the “ soul ” 
of a living being. Among these living beings, which exist 
upon the moon,!!6 as well as on earth, are not only men and 
beasts, but also plants.1!?_ In all these “ Mind”’ is active ; 
without losing any of its purity or unity, it is mixed with them." 


388 THE PHILOSOPHERS 


How we are to conceive the omnipotent Mind, whose oneness 
and self-containedness has been so emphatically asserted, 
as nevertheless entering simultaneously into the infinity of indi- 
vidual being—that certainly remains obscure. It is clear, 
however, that having thus derived all animated being from 
the single World-Mind, Anaxagoras could not speak of the 
continued existence of individual, self-existent “souls ”’ 
after the dissolution of the material concretions in which 
moving and animating “‘soul-force ’’ had once lived. The view 
is definitely ascribed to him that separation from the body 
is also“ the soul's death ’’.1!9~Nothing,-indeed,-of-the com- 
ponent parts that belong to the whole perishes, andno change in 
its nature takes place. So “ Mind ’’, whose manifestations the 
‘souls’? were, maintain’s itself unaltered and undiminished ; 
but after the dissolution of the united, which “ the Hellenes ”’ 
regard as its destruction,!?° though the component parts of 
the individual remain, yet not that particular mixture in 
which the peculiarity of the individual was inherent— 
“Mind ”’ remains, but not the soul... . 

Thus, the first distinct separation of the intellectual 
thinking principle from the material substance with which it 
was—not fused, much less identified, but—contrasted in 
sovereignty and independence, did not lead to the recognition 
of the indestructibility of the individual spirit. 

Shall we say that the mental, self-moved, life-giving principle, 
whether set over against the material and corporeal or indi- 
visibly united with it, is for the physiologist always something 
universal—that the essentially real is impersonal ? For him 
the individual, the personality conscious of itself and of the 
outer world, can be nothing but a manifestation of the 
universal, whether the latter is regarded as fixed and at rest, 
or as a living process that untiringly develops itself, recruits 
itself, and reconstructs itself in ever renewed creations. 
The only permanent, unchanging reality is the universal, the 
essential and fundamentally real Nature which appears in all 
individual things, speaks out of their mouth, and, in reality, 
only works and lives in them. The individual human soul 
has its indestructibility only in its identity with the universal 
that represents itself in it. The individual forms of “‘ appear- 
ance’, having no independence of their own, cannot per- 
manently abide. 

The view that imperishable life belongs to the individual 
soul could only be reached by a line of thought that took asa 
fact and held fast to it as something given that the individual 
spirit is a reality. (Its appearance and disappearance in the 


Pie PATE OSORHERS 389 


midst of the one universe was indeed for the physiologists 
the true miracle, the problem never satisfactorily solved.) 
Such a belief in individuality, the belief in an independently 
existent individual substance that had never had a beginning 
and could therefore never have an end, was the contribution, 
however fancifully it might be expressed, of the theologians 
and the mystics. For them immortality, the power of sub- 
stantive duration unlimited by time, was extended also to 
include the individual. The individual soul is for them a 
self-existent, individual, divine being, indestructible because 
it is divine. 

Greek philosophy underwent many changes in the course 
of its speculations during the following ages; but exactly 
in proportion as it, to a greater or lesser degree, accepted 
theological elements or on the other hand rejected such 
elements, did it give fundamental support to the view of the 
soul’s immortality, or grudgingly admit it, or absolutely 
reject it. 


NODES 2 LO a Gis Pai heel 


Le BGG 2 


i buxyn = — life, concept of life,” in Homer (though not indeed 
used to denote psychical powers during lifetime) : see above, pp. 30, 31. 
So, too, occasionally in the remains of the Jambic and Elegiac 
poets of the earliest period: Archil. 23; Tyrt. 10, 14; 11, 5; Sol. 
13, 463, Thgn, 568 f.,:730 ; (Hippon. 43; 17). wuyy = “life =~ in tie 
proverbial phrase epi puys tpexetv (see Wessel. and Valck. on Hdt. 
vii, 57 ; | Jacobs.on Ach. Tat,, p. 896.” weyy frequently =" lie sae 
the idiom of the Attic orators (see Meuss, Jahrb. f. Philol. 1889, p. 803). 
' ® See above, pp. 5, 30. Even the Homeric poems in one case show 
a slight uncertainty of language and of psychological conception 
when they use Ouyds, the highest and most general of the powers 
of life dwelling within the visible and living man, in the sense of 
yux7, the double of the man who dwells as a lodger in his body, 
separate and taking no partin the ordinary business of his life. The 
Ouuods (see above, chap. i, n. 57) is active during the man’s lifetime, 
is enclosed in the midriff (e€v ¢pect Pupzos) and when that is overtaken 
by death is itself overwhelmed (YW 104): on the arrival of death it 
leaves the body and perishes—while the Juy7% flies away intact. The 
distinction is clearly maintained, e.g. in A 220 f.: ‘“‘ fire destroys the 
body” émed xev mp@ta Aimy AEevK’ dotéa Ouuds, ux 8’ HUT Ovetpos 
atomTapevn meToTnTat. Ouuds and pvy% therefore leave the body of 
the slain man simultaneously (Ovpod kai puyjs cexadwv, A 334, ¢ 154) ; 
but in very different ways. The relation between them becomes, 
however, interchangeability in the single case when it is said of the 
Ouuos that 7¢in death will enter ao peAéwv Sdpov ’’Ardos elow—H 131 ; 
in reality this could only be said of that very different being, the 
yuxy. (When a fainting-fit has passed over we do indeed hear, 
not that the Juy7—though this it was that had left the man: see above, 
chap. i, n. 8—but that és dpéva Ouvpos ayépOn, X 475, € 458, w 349. 
This, however, is not a case of @uyos instead of guy7, but dupos 
is merely an abbreviated form of the whole statement which would be 
in full: both @vpos and vy have now returned into the man; cf. 
E 696. It is a kind of synecdoche.) In the line H 131 we really, 
then, do have @uyoés instead of wuyy, either as the result of a mis- 
understanding of the real meaning of the two words or merely through 
an oversight. But never (and this is the most essential point) do we 
have a case in Homer of the opposite exchange of significance: i.e. of 
yuxy used in the sense dupds (vdos, pévos, Hrop, etc.), as meaning the 
mental power and its activity in the living and waking man. Just 
this, however, and more than this, the sum and substance of all the 
mental powers in general, is what the word guvyy means in the language 
of the philosophers (except those affected by religious tendencies). 
They left out of account altogether that spiritual double of mankind 
whom the popular psychology called the vy, and were thus free 
to use the word to express the whole psychical content of the human 
individual. From the fifth century onwards we find the word dJuy7 
used commonly, and even regularly, in this sense in the vocabulary 
of non-philosophical poets and prose writers. Only theologians and 
poets, or philosophers of a theological tendency, continued to use the 


NOTE oa Oe CHAPTER VXI 391 


word in its ancient and primitive sense. Indeed, when the separation 
of a spiritual being from the body of a man in death was being spoken 
of, guy always continued to be the proper word for this sense 
even in popular language. (An extremely rare example of @uyds in 
thissense, comparable with H 131, is [Arist.] Pepl. 61 Bgk.: Ouvpov.. . 
al@np Aaumpos €xer. In the corresponding epigram, Epigr. Gr. 41, 
we have guynv.) 

3 évior, among them Choirilos of Samos: D.L.i, 24 (from Favorinus) : 
Bors. isp, 1,021; 

erArist., Am lp12, p. 405a, 20 f. ' “ Aristotle and Hippias’” ap. 
D.L. i, 24; Vors., p. 2,1. ra dura Eppvya CHa, Dox. 438a, 6, b, 1. 

® Metaphorical language: Oadfjs &y0n mavta wAnjpyn Oedv eivat, 
Arist., An. 1, 5, p. 41la, 8. rov xdopov (éppvyov Kat) Sarpovwv 
MAney wl) Lvi fede 02. OULD) 25 Vors, ps2, 20° Pl., Lg. 899 Byxis 
an allusion to the @edv mrAnpn mdvra (as Krische remarks, Theol. Lehr. 
d. Gr. Denker, p. 37). There is perhaps a half-mocking reference to 
the words in the saying attributed by anecdotal tradition to 
Herakleitos : elvat cal évtatda Geovs (i.e. in his own hearth) Arist., PA. 
1, 5, p. 645a, 17 ff. Hence Herakleitos himself was credited with 
the opinion of Thales in slightly altered form: aavra puyxdv eivar Kat 
Satwoverv tAnpy, D.L. ix, 7 (Vors., p. 68, 29), in the first (and valueless) 
of the two lists of the doctrines of Herakl. there given. 

© Arist., Phys. 3, 4, p. 203b, 10-14. Dox. 559,18. Vors., p. 17, 35. 

7 Anaximander, fr. 2 Mull. Vors., p. 15, 26. That Anaximander 
declared the soul to be “‘like air”’ is an erroneous statement of 
mheoderets: sce; Diels; Dox: 387b, 10, (Vors.< 21, 5). 

smeanacimenes in ov 2/84, 12: | b,.8' fh. fr.. 2 Diels. 

® Anaxim. calls tov dépa Oedy, i.e. it has divine power: Dor. 302b, 
5; 53la, 17, b, 1-2. Vors. 24,18. This at least is to be understood 
in the same sense in which Anaximander is said to have called ro 
ametpov, TO Oeiov (Arist., Phys. 3, 4, p. 203b, 13; Vors., p. 17, 35). 

10 €y mavra eiva, fr. 1 (Byw.); 50 (Diels). 

patisted ol, 28D. 40aa, 20 ft. iVors. 74, 30.1 Hk. is-also 
meant in p. 405a, 5. Dox. 471, 2 (Arius Didymus) ; 389a, 3 ff. 

MP ATisty ep. A05a0 2. fi) Hklefr.68.(36-D.). 

es Heil, 1 29-Gls) Vorse/5, 14 iff. 

14 6 Meds is both the Universal Fire, that transforms itself into the 
world, and at the same time its power (and Adyos: frr. 2 [1], 92 [2]) : 
fr. 36 (67). 70 mip Deov breiAndev, Herakl.: Cl. Al., Prot. 5, 64, p. 55 P. 
[Vors.n.8 A 8]. ip voepov tov Oeov (elvar €fOéyéaro), Hippol., RH. i, 
4, p. 10, 57 Mill.—‘* Zeus ”’ as metaphor for this universal fire (hence 
ovK eOéAer Kal €0éAe), the “‘ only wise one”’: fr. 65 (32). 

15 émgevwletca Tois ypuetépors cbpaow aro TOO TEpLexXoVTOS poipa 
(wepiex. = the universal Fire) is said of the soul and its reasoning 
faculty ap. S.E., M. vii, 130; Vors., p. 75,19; (cf. daoppoy Kai poipa 
éx Tod dpovodvtos, Plu., Is. et O.77, p. 382 B). This is fully Herakleitean 
in thought if not also in actual form of expression. 

16 That Herakleitos drew the conclusions affecting also the “‘ Soul soe 
the spiritual man—freely paraphrased in the text, arising necessarily 
out of his doctrine of the perpetual change in the material substance 
that excludes all possibility of lasting self-identity in any object 
(frr. 40, 41, 42, 81 = 91, 12, 49 a), is proved especially by the words 
of Plutarch in the eighteenth chapter of his treatise de E Delph. 
p- 392—a chapter which is entirely based on Herakleitos, who is twice 
actually cited in it, Not only does 6 véos die els Tov dx palovTa KTA., 
but 6 x0és (dvOpwaos) eis Tév ojpepov TéOvynKev, 6 S€ OnpEpoV Els TOV 


392 NOTES | TO) CHARTER XxX! 


avplov amobvicKer. pever 5° oddeis, 008’ Eat els, GAXa yryvopeba moAXot 
mept €v davracpa xtr.; cf. Cons. ad Apoll. 10, p. 106 E. Herakl. is 
also the origin of what is said in Plato, Smp. 207 D ff.: each man is 
only apparently one and the same; in reality, even while he is still 
alive, ‘“‘he continually suffers a new and different man to take the 
place of the old and departing one ’—and this applies, just as much to 
the soul as to the body. (Only from the standpoint of Herakleitean 
doctrine—here adopted in passing by Plato as suiting his chosen 
method of argument—is the conclusion he reaches justified; the 
conclusion is that it is only by the perpetual substitution of a new 
being like the old one that man has immortality, and not by the eternal 
preservation of his own proper being; for this advantage belongs 
peculiarly to the divine. This, of course, cannot possibly be under- 
stood as the serious teaching of Plato himself.)—-The Herakleitean denial 
of personal identity in men is alluded to by Epicharmos (or a pseudo- 
Ep. ?) ap. D.L. iii, 11, ll. 13-18; Vors., p. 118-19 (cf. Wytt. ad Plu., 
Ser. Num. V. 559 A = vii, p. 397 f. Ox. ;> Bernays, Rh. Musaviii; 
280 ff.); and cf. Sen., Ep. 58, 23.—It is instructive to compare with 
Herakl.’s doctrine of the instability of the psychic complex the very 
similar theory of the influx and reflux of the elements of the “ soul ” 
as described in the Indian doctrine of Jainism. The soul (in the Indian 
doctrine) continually transforms, re-arranges, and restores itself, 
just like the body. See Deussen, System d. Vedanta, 330. 

17 The apparently contradictory statement ypuyfor répyu, 
davarov, vyphot yevéoOa ap. Porph., Anir. Nymph. 10 (72 By., 77 D.), 
does not represent the words or real opinion of Hkl., but only of 
Numenios’ (fy. 35 Thedinga) arbitrary and personal interpretation 
of Hkl. doctrine (see Gomperz in Sitzb. d. Wien. Ak. 113, 1015 ff.). 

18 A doctrine of transmigration of souls is attributed to Hkl. by 
Schuster, Heraklit, p. 174 ff. (1873). The utterances of Herakleitos 
there quoted to prove this thesis (frr. 78, 67, 123 = 88, 62, 63) do 
not, however, imply anything of the kind and there is not the slightest 
indication in the whole of Hkl.’s doctrinal system upon which a theory 
of the transmigration of the soul might be founded. 

19 To prove that Herakleitos spoke of a continuation of the life of 
the individual soul after its separation from the body, appeal is made 
partly to the statements of later philosophers, partly to actual utterances 
of Herakl. (cf. in particular Zeller, Greek Phil. to Socr. ii, 86 ; Pfleiderer, 
Philos. d. Heraklit im Lichte der Mysterienidee, p. 214 ff.). Platonist 
philosophers do, of course, attribute to Herakleitos a doctrine of the 
soul which taught the pre-existence of the individual soul, “its fall in 
birth,” and its departure into a separate life of its own after death 
(cf=:Numenios: ap. Porph., Ant. 10; lamb., ap, Stob., Ech i375. 4 
38, 21 ff. W.; Aen. Gaz., Thphr., pp. 5, 7 Boiss.). These accounts, 
however, are plainly but private and arbitrary interpretations of 
Herakleitean sayings (weraBdddAov dvamavetat, Kdpatds €oTt TOs avTois 
aet poxbety kai adpxec@at) in the light of the conceptions current among 
those philosophers themselves ; they are homiletic, fancifully conceived 
expositions of very short and ambiguous texts, and can so much the less 
serve as witnesses of Herakleitos’ real opinions since Plotinos (4, 8, 1) 
openly admits that Herakl. in this matter has omitted cadq jpiv 
To.joat Tov Adyov. Others read into certain Herakleitean utterances 
the Orphic doctrine of c@ua—o7jua, the entombment of the soul in 
the body (Philo, Leg. Alleg. 1, 33,1, p. 65 M.; S.E., P.iii, 230), which 
cannot, however, be seriously supposed to be his teaching. The soul 
did not for Hkl., any more than for the Pythagoreans or Platonics, 


NO TR See TO CHAPTERS xX] 393 


come into existence at birth (substantially) out of nothing (which was 
the popular idea) ; it rather, as a portion of the universal fire (the 
universal psyche) is in existence from eternity. But it certainly does 
not follow, because later writers insisted on finding in him the idea 
so familiar to themselves, that Hkl. himself accepted the pre-existence 
of disembodied separate souls possessing complete and absolute 
individuality. A few enigmatic and highly picturesque expressions— 
typical of this philosopher’s favourite manner of expressing abstract 
ideas by clothing them in symbolic imagery—might tempt to such an 
interpretation. a@dvaro. Ovnroi, Ovntoit abavator, Cdvres tov éxelvwv 
Oavarov tov be éexetvwy Biov reOvedres (fy. 67 = 62)—that certainly 
does sound as if Hkl. had meant to speak of the entrance into the 
human life of individual divine beings (and this was simply substituted 
in inaccurate quotations of the saying: @eot 6vyrol, dvOpwro dbavaro, 
etc.; cf. Bernays, Heraklit. Briefe, 39 ff.). And yet Herakleitos can 
only have meant, in conformity with his whole position, that eternal 
and perishable, divine and human are alike and interchangeable; he 
has for the moment personified 76 @etov (also called 6 Oeds fr. 36 = 67 ; 
cf. fr. 61 = 102) as individual a@avaro., but he only means what he 
says in another place: ratvro ro Cav Kai teOvnkds (fr. 78 = 88), Bios 
and @avaros are the same (fr. 66 = 48). It seems to me impossible 
to extract from these words of this 67th fragment (62nd), or from 
no. 44 (= 53), a doctrine of the ascent to divinity of special great men 
(with Gomperz, Sitzb. Wien. Ak. 1886, p. 1010, 1041 f.). Nor would 
anything be asserted by such a doctrine about the immortality of 
such men. The striking phrase av@pwmovs péver teXevTHCavTas dooa 
ovx €Amovra (fy. 122 = 27) is certainly understood by Cl. Al. as 
referring to the punishment of the soul after death. But the same 
Cl. Al., Siv. 9, v, p. 649 P., is capable of explaining the Herakleitean 
é€xmvpwors (in which Herakl. actually speaks of a xpiats by fire: fr. 26 = 
66) as a dua updos Kabapats THY Kakas BeBiwKdtwv. In fact, he is giving 
to statements torn from their context a meaning that accords with 
his own knowledge and comprehension. The same _ sentence 
(fry. 122 = 27) is given a quite different and consolatory sense by 
Leiuveap. otob.,, £11207 8 hn’; ct. Schuster, Hevakizt, p. 190,°n. 1. 
Herakl. himself need have meant nothing more than the perpetual 
process of change that “‘ awaits men after death ’’.—Other utterances 
are no more conclusive for a doctrine of immortality in Hkl. (fv. 7 = 18 
belongs to quite another context). ‘‘ Those who have fallen in war 
are honoured both by gods (whose existence was not denied by Hkl. 
nor was it necessary that he should) and men,” fy. 102 = 24; that 
their reward was anything else but fame—for example, blessed 
immortality—is not suggested even by Cl. Al. (Sit. iv, 16, p.571 P.), and 
is certainly not to be extracted from H.’s words, fr. 126 = 5 (the 
fool) ott ywaoxwv Beods 035’ owas ottwés eiow simply shows that 
Hkl. did not share the popular ideas about gods and Heroes, but supplies 
nothing positive.—In fv. 38 = 98 we have ai pvyal dopdvra Kal? 
adnv. Are we really to deduce from this that Herakl. believed in a 
regular Homeric Hades? 4éns is a metaphorical expression for the 
opposite of the life on earth (just as it is used metaphorically for the 
opp. of ddaos by the Herakleitean [Hippocr.] de Victu, 1, 4, p. 632 
Kiihn = vi, 476 Lit.). For the souls dis means the 6d0s xarw and 
the sense of the dictum is: after disappearing in death the souls when 
they have travelled on the way downwards through water and earth 
will at last rise up again through water, and drawing in to themselves 
pure, dry “‘ fire’ will become “souls”? again. (dopavraris remarkable 


394 NOTES TO GiGr AP hha 


but not to be altered. oatodvrac Pfleiderer; but the connexion in 
which Plu. quotes the saying of Herakl. [Fac. O. L. xxviii, p. 943 E] 
shows that there is no reference to the purification of the souls in Hades, 
but merely of their nourishment and strengthening by the avafupiaas 
of the fiery aether; cf. also S.E., M. ix, 73, following Poseidonios. 
This dva@vyrav—and the becoming “‘ fiery’? again—is what Hkl. 
calls douao0ar.)—From the hopelessly corrupt fy. 123 = 63 nothing 
intelligible can be extracted.—Nowhere can we find clear and un- 
ambiguous statements of Herakleitos witnessing to his belief in the 
immortality of the individual soul; and it would require such state- 
ments to make us attribute to Herakleitos a conception that, as every- 
one admits, is in hopeless contradiction with the rest of his teaching. 
He says perfectly plainly that in death the soul becomes water; and 
that means that it, as the soul = fire, perishes. If his belief had been 
anything like that of the mystics (as the Neoplatonists supposed) 
he must have regarded death—the liberation of the soul from -the 
fetters of corporeality and the realm of the lower elements—as a 
complete issue of the soul into its proper element, the fire. Whereas, 
what he teaches is the opposite of this: the soul perishes, becomes 
water, then earth, and then water again, and finally soul once more 
(fy. 68 = 36). Only in this sense is it indestructible. 

20 e.g. by Pfleiderer, Philos. d. Heraklit, etc., p. 209, and frequently. 

41 The Sibyl fy. 12, = 92; the: Delphic Oracle 11 ==993 7) Khatharems 
practices| 1380 ==53 Bakchol,:etc., 124 <-.14. 

22 wutos ““Avdns Kal Avdvucos fr. 127 = 15 (and to that extent— 
as being reconcilable with the doctrine of Hkl.—may the Dionysiac 
mysteries be considered valid: this must be the meaning of the 
sentence). On the other hand, we have disapproval of the pvorijpra 
carried out dviepwort by men: fr. 125 = 14 (for the worshippers do 
not perceive the real meaning of the ceremonies). 

*3 In contrast to the Neoplatonic writers who attributed to Hkl. 
a doctrine of the soul like the Orphico-Pythagorean, the [Plutarchian} 
account in the Placita Philos. is again much nearer the real meaning 
of Herakleitos ; cf. 4, 7 (where the name of Herakleitos has fallen out, 
as can be seen from Theodoret; see Diels, Dowx., p. 392; Vors. 76, 1) 

. e€totcav (t7v avOpwrov puyxriyv) els THY Tob mavtos puxny 
avaxwpeiv mpos TO dpoyeves. Even this is not quite correct as expressing 
what Hkl. really thought as to the fate of the soul but it does at least 
show once more that the contrary views of the Neoplatonists are also 
only interpretations, not evidence. 

4 ‘HpdkAertos jpepiav Kal ordow ex TOv GAwY avyper* Eater yap 
rovTo Tav vexpav. Dox., p. 320; Vors. 73, 10. ordois and fpepia 
could never make a real “‘ life ’’’—-not even a blessed life far removed 
from the world—but are signs of what is “‘ dead ”’, i.e. of what is nowhere 
to be found in this world, in fact, Nothing. 

25 Parmenides’ polemic against Herakleitos: 1. 46 ff. Mull.; fr. 6, 
4 ff. Diels; see Bernays’ Rh. Mus. vii, 115 (cf. Diels, Parm. 68). 

26 Aristotle (acc. to 9.455 M. x, 46 ; Vors. 142, 33 ff.) agvatkous 
avtovs KéKAnKEr, OTL apxXT KIWHaEWs EoTW H Pats, Hv avetAov dPapevor 
pndev Kuwetabac. 

27 Thphr, ens. S74 ; Vors. 146, 13 c. 

* yeyev jada THY TOV mavT ov Aiee ex Jeppod Kat uxpod Kal Enpod 
Kal vypob, Aap Bay ovrwy ets addAnAa THY eta BorAnv, Kal pu xnv Kpapa 
Umapxew €K TOV mpoEeipnuevwv KaTad pNoEVOS TOUTWY emikpaTnaw, Zeno 
ap. D.L. ix, 29; Vors. 166, 14. The composition out of four elements 
instead of two as with Parmenides may have been arrived at by Zeno 


NOTES OVP CHAPTER EXT 395 


in imitation of the ‘‘ four roots’’ of Empedokles, each of which was 
distinguished by possessing one of the four. qualities Oepyov xr. 
The statement that the uy arises from the equal mixture of the four 
qualities reminds us of Empedokles’ account of dpovety (Vors. 218, 
]. = 220, 23; Thphr., Sens. 10,23). On the other side, Zeno takes over 
and applies to the vy what the Pythagorean physician Alkmaion 
said about vyleva (Vors. 136,15; Dovr., p. 442; cf. Arist., An. 408a, 1) : 
his point of view is almost identical with that of those Pythagoreans 
who regarded the “‘soul’’ as made up out of a dppovia of the Cold, 
the Warm, etc. (see below). He may have actually got his views from 
the acquaintance of Pythagorean physiologists (he was regarded as a 
“Pythagorean ”’: Str. 252). 

=>; Simpl. ad Arist., Ph., p. 39.D.;° Vors. 162,11; cf. Diels, Parm. 
FOS! f. -(1897). 

30 Parmenides pupil of Diochaites the Pythagorean and of Ameinias, 
also as it appears a Pythagorean: Sotion ap. D.L. ix, 21; Vors. 138. 
He was counted a Pythagorean by tradition which, however, was very 
free with itseattributions?of this'kind, Call. fr. 100d, 17 >-Str. 252 ; 
V. Pyth. ap. Phot., Bibl. 249, p. 439a, 37 Bk.; Iamb., VP. 267 (with 
Sch., p. 190 N.). The Pyth. influence on Parmenides may have heen 
essentially of an ethical nature: els jovxlav mpoetpany b7o ’Apeuvion, 
D.L. ix, 21. ITappevideros kai [Tv@ayopevos Bios as equivalent: [Ceb.]} 
Tab. 2 fin. Str., p. 252, connects the good government of Elea with 
the Pythagorean influence of Parmenides (and of Zeno). Parmenides 
law-giver of Elea: Speus. 7. dirAoodday ap. D.L. ix, 23. 

81 dirocodiav dé mpa@tos wvopace IIvbayopas kai é€avtov drAdcoodov : 
D.L., Proem. 12 (though the rest is from the fictitious dialogue of 
Herakl. Pont. see Cic., TD. v, .8-9). 

Sept erarp. OU0LAB; : 

33 roAupabin, icropin of Pythag.:  Herakl. frr. 16, 17 = 40, 129. 
mavrotwy Ta pdAvoTa coddv éemypavos épywy is said of Pythag. by 
Emped. (429 Mull.) fy. 129, 3.—The Pythagorean account of the 
construction of the world was known to Parmenides at the beginning 
of the fifth century and imitated by him in several points: Krische, 
Theol. Lehren d. gr. D. 103 ff. (To what extent Parmenides in other 
respects controverted Pythag. doctrine—-as has been recently asserted 
of him—may be left undecided.) Fanciful speculations about numbers 
are attributed to Pythag. himself by Aristot., MM. 1182a, 11 ff. ; 
Vors. 347, 3. 

84 Emped. 427 ff. Mull.; fr. 129 Diels. That this praeconium 
does really refer to Pythag. (as Timaeus and others supposed) and not to 
Parmenides (as the undefined of 6€ of D.L. viii, 54, thought) appears 
to be proved by 1. 4 ff., which allude to a remarkable power of ava wvyots 
which was certainly attributed by legend to Pythag., never to 
Parmenides. 

35 wuyai filling the whole air, not distinguished from daipoves and 
ypwes, Alex. Polyh. ap. D.L. viii, 32; Vors.*i, xliv (who in this section 
of his account—§$3lff.—is giving older Pythagorean ideas. 
Poseidonios expresses the same ideas ; but it does not therefore follow 
that he got them from the Stoics. Poseid. borrowed and elaborated 
many Pythagorean views). More subtly expressed: the soul is 
a@dvaros because it is eternally in motion like ra Oeta mavra, the moon, 
sun, stars, and heaven; Alkmaion ap. Arist., An. 405a, 29 ff. ; 
Vors. 133, 40; cf. Krische, 75 f. The perpetual movement of the 
wuxat was one of the older Pythag. beliefs: it is expressed in the old 
fable (known already to Demokritos) of the motes in the sunbeam, 


396 NODES BelOsSGHA PE Kaas) 


which, in their continual agitation, are, or enclose, swarming souls 
(see below, n. 40). In Alkmaion’s treatment of the doctrine there 
is the additional idea that the soul of man €oxe rots abavarors. 
The derivation of its immortality and divinity from its origin in the 
World-soul (this is often said to be a Pythagorean doctrine: Cic., 
ND; 27 539- Sene 78 DLE vii, 2855 S: EG ix0) 27) doesn ice 
suggest Stoic pantheism in the form of its expression but in substance 
it may very well go back to the older Pythag. teaching. (The genuine- 
ness of the frag. [21 D.] of Philolaos ap. Stob., Ecl. i, 20, 2 ff.; Vors. 
318, 13, remains, however, dubious.) The idea that the soul and 
votbs of man came to him from an impersonal @eior, an all-pervading 
ev T@ mravti dpdvynats, must have been widespread even in the fifth 
century. It finds expression in Xen., M. 1, 4, 8-17; 4, 3, 14, where 
it is certainly not an original fancy of Xenophon’s, but must have 
been derived by him from somewhere or other (not from Socrates, 
however, nor Plato). ; 

36 éy dpoupa, Pl., Phd. 62 B. This is traced back to Pythag. belief 
(though he misinterprets the meaning of the word dpovpa) by Cic., 
Sen. 73; cf. the Pythagorean Euxitheos ap. Ath. 157 C; Vors. 315, 19. 
See Béckh, Phi!ol. 179 ff. (Philolaos fy. 15 [16 Mull.] speaks of the World- 
soul or God who holds and contains all things ev ¢dpovpad without 
mentioning the human soul: see Bockh, p. 151.) The comparison of 
life in the body to a ¢povpad may very well be Pythagorean ; nor is 
this presented by the fact that it is also Orphic (see above, chap. x, 
n. 43). This comparison imphes the conception of the earthly life 
as a punishment. é&4 twas tipwpias the soul is enclosed in the body : 
Philolaos fr. 14 (23) appealing to aadawol OeoAdyor te Kai pavties 
(cf. Iamb., VP. 85, dyafov of wovor... emt Kodrdace yap e€rAPdvras 
det xoAao 0 fvac).—Espinas in Arch. f. Ges. d. Philos. viii, 452, interprets 
the é€v dpovpad of Pi., Phd. 62, as = ‘‘in the cattle-pen ”’ or “ sheep- 
fold ’’; the idea of God as the Shepherd of man would then be vaguely 
present even here (cf. Plt. 271 FE; Critt. 109 B). It remains, however, 
to be proved (to begin with) that dpouvpd is ever used in the sense of 
onkos OF eipxTn. 

SIPATISULW Ast 1, e0,np- 404 Dame oe 

38 of €v 7 traptapw terrified by thunder acc. to Pythag. belief: 
Arist., An. Po. 94b, 32 ff.; ovvodor rHv reOvewrwy in the depths of the 
earth, Ael., VH. iv, 17 (perhaps from Arist. 7. tév IIv@ayopetwr). 
Description of the condition of things in Hades givenin the Pythagorean 
KardBaots eis ddov. As in the case of the Orphics this purgation and 
punishment in the spirit-world must have belonged to the parts 
of the ITv@aydperor pido. that were quite seriously believed. 

89 éxpidbetoar (out of the body) adrjy (rHv duxnv) emt ys wAaleoba 
ev T@ aépt Opolay TH owpate (being a complete e/dwAoyr of the living) : 
miexseLOlyin apa). ler Vill,eo.e 

40 Arist., An. 1, 2, 4, p. 404a, 16 ff.;.Vors. 357, 1; many called 
the ev 7@ aépe EVopata themselves “‘souls*’, others 76 rafra xwvotv. 
This may rest on a real popular belief which, however, has already 
been partially elevated to a philosophical standing: the souls are 
compared to what is evidently itself in perpetual agitation (Arist., 
1,19 f.). This was undoubtedly Pythagorean (and old Ionic) teaching : 
see Alkmaion ap. Arist., An. 405a, 29 ff.; Vors. 133, 40. (States 
ment of Dox. 386a, 13 ff., b, 8 ff., is more doubtful.) 

4D Beavills iO cee GOrss ea ape iy. 

42 That the Pythagoreans believed in the entry of the soul into the 
bodies of animals also is implied in the satirical verses of Xenophanes 


NODES) POs CHAPTER XE 397 


(fr. 6) ap. D.L. viii, 36. All probability suggests that this was the 
reason for the injunction to abstain from flesh food among the older 
Pythagoreans themselves {and with Empedokles). (S.E., MM. ix, 127 ff., 
however, drags in the “‘ World-Soul ”? in a moment of untimely Stoicism. 
S.E.’s own quotation from Empedokles shows that the latter at any 
rate derived the dzoy7 éugvywv simply from the fact of Metamorphosis, 
and not at all from the fuyfs mvedua which rules in all life; though 
this last is attributed to him by S.E.) 

fea ee eA ppendixe x. 

44 According to the Pythagoreans TO Sixavov is nothing else than 
TO avtimemrovOds, i.e. d Tis emolnce TabT avtimabetv: Arist., EN..5, 5, 
p. 1132b, 21 ff.; MM. 1194a, 29 ff. (also given with fanciful numerical 
expression, MM. 1182a, 14; Sch. Arist. 540a, 19 ff.; 541b, 6: Br. ; 
{lamb.] Theol. Avith., p. 28 f. Ast). This definition of justice was 
simply taken over by the Pythagoreans from popular sayings such as 
the verse of Rhadamanthys ap. Arist., EN. about the dpacarvre radeiv 
and similar formulae: see collection in Blomfield’s Gloss. in A., Cho. 307 ; 
Soph. fr. 229 P. Compensatory justice of this kind we may suppose 
was manifested in the rebirths of men (in this respect the P. went 
beyond the commonplace sense of that tpryépwv piddos): we may 
assume this without further hesitation if we remember the completely 
analogous application of this conception by the Orphics (above, chap. x, 
Nerd1). 

45 TIvfaydpevos tpdmos tot Biov, Pl., Rp. 600 B. 

46 Gxodovbeitv TH Ged, Iamb., VP. 137 (following Aristoxenos) ; 
Vors. 362, 32; émov 0e@ Pythagoras ap. Stob., Ecl. ii, p. 49, 16 W. 
See Wyttenb. on Plu., Sev. Num. Vind. 550 D. 

47 Ancient testimony ascribes to the Pythagoreans: abstinence from 
flesh-food or at least from the flesh of such animals as are not sacrificed 
to the Olympians (the avOpamov fuyy does not enter into the @vo.ua 
Ca in transmigration: Iamb., VP. 85; Vors. 359, 13); from eating 
fish, particularly rpiéyAa and peddvovpo., and beans; from using linen 
clothing (or being buried in it: Hdt. ii, 81); and a few other forms 
of abstinence and measures assuring ritual purity. The whole apparatus 
of ritual ayveia is ascribed to the older Pythagoreans by Alex. 
Polyh. ap. D.L. viii, 33. This, as a general statement is certainly 
correct. It is customary to say that it began among the degenerate 
Pythagoreans after the break up of the Italian society (so esp. Krische, 
De Soc. a Pythag. cond. scopo politico, Gott., 1831). But when 
Aristoxenos, the contemporary of the later, scientifically-minded 
Pythagoreans, denies all such superstitious ideas and regulations 
to the original Pythagoreans, his evidence really applies only to those 
Pythagorean scholars with whom he was acquainted and who seemed 
to him to have preserved the real spirit of the older Pythagoreanism 
much more truly than the ascetic (and in any case degenerate) 
_ Pythagoreans of the same period. Everything, however, goes to show 
that the strength of the surviving community as it had been founded 
by Pythagoras lay in the religious and mystical elements of its doctrine ; 
and that what was oldest in Pythagoreanism was what it had in common 
with the faith and religious discipline of the Orphics. To this side 
belongs what we learn from tradition of the older Pythagorean 
asceticism. Much, then, that is of early Pythagorean origin (though 
certainly combined with other and later elements) is to be found in 
many of the adxovopara or avuBoda of the Pythagoreans, esp. in those 
of them (and they are numerous) that give directions of a ritual 
or merely superstitious kind. A fresh collection, arrangement and 


398 NODES lO m@CEAPL EP hemes! 


explanation of these remarkable fragments would be very useful: 
Gottling’s purely rationalist treatment of them does them less than 
justice. (Corn. Holk, De acusmatis s. symbolis Pythag., Diss. Kiel. 1894.) 

48 Efforts in a more positive direction may perhaps be seen in the 
practice of the musical form of xd@apors which Pythag. and the 
Pvthagoreans used in accordance with an elaborate system: cf. 
Iamb., VP. 64 ff, 110 ff.; Sch. V.on) X°391;° also, Quint. 9.343 
Porph., VP. 33, etc.--What Aristoxenos has to say about Pythagorean 
ethics, moralistic parainesis and edification—most of it of a purely 
rationalist kind—can scarcely be said to have historical value. 

49 Good formulation of Pythag. belief ap. Max. Tyr. 16, 2, 1, 287 R.: 
IIv@aydopas mpa@tos ev tots “EAXAnow éroApnoev eimetv, dte adT@ TO pev 
cdma teOvigeta, 7 Sé ux} avantaoca olxynoetar alavys Kal ayypws. 
Kal yap €ivat avTyy mply yKew Sedpo. i.e. the life of the soul is not only 
endless but without beginning; the soul is immortal because it is 
timeless. 

50 The withdrawal of the soul from the xv«Aos dvayxns and its return 
to an emancipated existence as a bodiless spirit was never so clearly 
held in view for the ‘“‘ Pure’’ by the older Pythagorean tradition as 
it was among the Orphics (and by Empedokles). It is, however, 
hardly thinkable that a system which regarded every incarnation of 
the soul as a punishment and the body as its prison or its tomb should 
never have held out to the true Bdaxyor of its mysteries the prospect 
of a full and permanent liberation of the soul, at last, from corporeality 
and the earthly life. Only so could the long chain of deaths and rebirths 
reach a final and satisfactory conclusion. Eternally detained in the 
cycle of births the soul would be eternally punished (this is e.g. the idea 
of Empedokles: 455 f., fy. 145 D.); and this cannot have been the 
real conclusion of the Pythagorean doctrine of salvation. Claud. 
Mamertus, de An. 2, 7 [Vors. 320, 12], gives it as a doctrine of Philolaos 
[fy. 22] that the (pure) soul after its separation from the body leads 
a “‘bodiless”’ life in the “‘ Universe’”’ (the xdopos situated above 
the ovpavés): see Béckh, Philol. 177. Apart from this the only 
evidence for the withdrawal of the soul is late: Carm. Aur. 70 f. 
(making use of the Empedok. verses, fr. 112, 4 f. = 400 Mull.), Alex. 
Polyh. ap. D.L. viii, 31 (dyec@at tas Kabapas [vyas] emt Tov ByoTov 
‘*‘in altissimum locum” Cobet: but an ellipse of téaov is hardly 
admissible. 6 dyiotos = the highest God would be a Hebraic form of 
expression, nor can it be a possible one here for Alex. Polyh.—we 
should also, with this meaning of tyuoros, expect mpos7. ¥. adsuperiores 
circulos bene viventium animae, secundum philosophorum altam 
scientiam, Serv., A. vi, 127—should we then supply ézl tov tyorov 
<KuUKAov> ? Orperh. ézi zo tyuorov ?)—-An escape of the souls after the 
expiry of their wepiodo. must have been known as a Pythagorean 
belief to Luc., VH. ii, 21. (Vergil, too, is speaking in a Pythagorean 
sense, A. vi, 744, pauci laeta arva [Elysii] tenemus.—i.e. for ever 
without renewed évowpdtwois—see Serv., A. vi, 404, 426, 713. It is 
true the line is out of its right place, but there can be no doubt that 
it reproduces the words and the—in this section Pythagorean—opinion 
of Vergil.) The idea that the cycle of births is never to be broken 
cannot be regarded as Pythagorean nor even as Neopythagorean. 
(A few isolated later accounts of Pythag. doctrine; e.g. D.L. viii, 14 
(from Favorinus), Porph., VP. 19, and also the cursory description in 
Ov., M. xv—with a good deal of foreign matter added—speak of the 
Pyth. doctrine of soul-transmigration without also referring to the 
possibility of xvKAov Ajfac; but they are not meant to deny that 


INO TEs DOCH A PTE Rea oc 399: 


possibility but merely leave it unmentioned as unnecessary in the. 
context.) There seems to be no example of a Greek doctrine of 
transmigration that did not also include a promise to the dovoe or the: 
diAdao for that they would be able to escape from the cycle of births 
(at least for a world-period: as Syrian. took it, though probably not 
Porph.). Such a promise, as the consummation of the promises of 
salvation therein made, could only be dispensed with in the case of 
a doctrine of transmigration in which being born again was itself 
regarded as a veward for the pious (as in the teaching which Jos., BJ. 
2,8, 14, attributes to the Pharisees). By Greek partisans of the doctrine: 
of Metempsychosis rebirth upon earth is always regarded as a punish- 
ment or at any rate a burden, not as a desirable goal for the life: 
of the soul. We must therefore presume that the promise of escape: 
from the cycle of rebirth was made also by the oldest Pythagorean 
teaching as the final benefit of its message of salvation. Without this. 
completing touch Pythagoreanism would be like Buddhism without. 
the promise of a final attainment of Nirvana. 

51 Pythagoras is called the pupil of Pherekydes as early as. 
muaron Ol EP phesos* (before Theoponipos): D.L.-1, 1197 Vors. 1, 
199, 18. Pherekydes was regarded as “‘ the first’? who taught the 
mamortality, Oi the “soul (Cic., TD. 1, 38) or more correctly 
metempsychosis (Suid. ®epex.) ; cf. Preller, Rh. Mus. (N.F.), iv, 388 f.. 
A hint of such teaehing must have been found in his mystical treatise 
(cf. Porph., Antr. 31; Vors. ii, 204, 12—Gomperz is rather too sceptical, 
Gk. Thinkers, i, 542). This teaching seems to have been the chief 
reason which tempted later writers to make the old theologos into the 
teacher of Pythagoras, the chief spokesman of the doctrine of the 
soul’s transmigrations.—It is, however, an untenable theory that. 
Pherek. illustrated his doctrine of transmigration by the example of 
Aithalides. What the Sch. on A.R. i, 645 [Vors. ii, 204, 24], quotes 
from ‘“‘ Pherekydes’’ about the alternate sojourn of the ywuyy of 
Aithalides in Hades and on earth, does not come from Pherekydes 
the theologos (as Gottling, Opusc. 210, and Kern, de Orph. Epim. 
Pherec., pp. 89, 106, think) but without the slightest doubt from the. 
genealogist and historian; this is the only Pherekydes who is used 
by the Sch. of Ap. Rh., and he is used frequently. Besides this, the. 
way in which the different statements of the various authorities used 
in this Scholion are distinguished, shows quite clearly that Pherekydes 
had only spoken of Aithalides’ alternate dwelling above and below the 
earth, but as still being Aithalides, and not as metamorphosed by the 
series of births into other personalities living upon earth. Pherekydes 
was obviously reproducing a Phthiotic local-legend in which Aithalides. 
as the son of (the chthonic ?) Hermes alternately lived on and below 
the earth, as an érepypepos—like the Dioscuri in Lacedaimonian legend 
(A 301 ff.: in that passage and generally in the older view—as held 
by Alkman, Pindar, etc.—both the Dioscuri change their place of 
abode together : it is not till later that the variant arose acc. to which 
they alternate with each other: see Hemst. Luc. ii, p. 344 Bip.). It 
was Herakleides Pont. who first turned the alternate sojourning of 
Aithalides into death and resurrection (he also made Aithalides one 
of the previous incarnations of Pythagoras: see Appendix x); but 
as a different person, so that A. thus became an example of 
metempsychosis. It is not hard to see why Aithalides was chosen as 
one of the previous incarnations of P., nor how the old miracle- 
story, preserved to literature by Pherekydes, was thus transformed to.. 
suit its new purpose. Plainly Pherekydes did ot say that Hermes. 


400 NG LES eh a CrP hae eL 


also gave Aithalides the power of memory after his death (otherwise 
the statement to this effect in Sch. A.R. would have stood under 
the name of Pherek.) ; and the privilege was rather meaningless until 
after Herakleides’ narrative. Perhaps it was Her. who first added this 
touch to the story. Ap. Rh. follows him in this point (i, 643 ff.), but 
not—or not plainly, at least: 646 ff—in what Herakleides had 
invented about the metempsychosis of Aithalides. 

52 Macr., Som. Scip. 1, 14, 19, attributes this view to Pythagoras 
and Philolaos, being certainly correct in the case of the latter; since 
the opinion that the soul is a xpdéais and appovia of the warm and the 
cold, the dry and the wet, which go to make up the body, is given 
by Simmias in Pl., Phd. 86B, as a tradition that he has received and 
not an invention of his own. But what else can this mean than a 
tradition handed down in Thebes by his teacher Philolaos (Phd. 61 D) ? 
(Hence ‘Appovias ris OnBaikyjs, 95 A.) It is true that Claud. Mam. 
de An. ii, 7, only attributes to Philolaos the doctrine that the soul 
is bound up with the body “‘in eternal and incorporeal harmony ”’ 
(convenientiam) : which would imply an independent substance of the 
soul side by side with that of the body. But this must have been a 
misunderstanding of the real meaning of Philolaos. Aristoxenos, too, 
can only have got his doctrine of the soul as a harmony from his 
Pythagorean friends. Perhaps, too, this was the influence which 
suggested to Dikaiarchos his view that the “‘ soul’ is a dppovia ta&v 
Tecodpwv oato:xeiwy (Dow., p. 387), and indeed rdv ev 7H odpate 
Geppadv kat puypav kati typdv cal Enpdv, as Nemes., Nat. Hom., p. 69 
Matth., tells us—thus exactly resembling Simmias in Plato (unless 
indeed the passage in Nemes. is a mere reminiscence of Plato strayed 
here by accident). See also chap. x, n. 27. 

53 See Pl., Phd. 86 CD. Pre-existence of the soul impossible if it 
is only an dppovia of the body: 92 AB. 

54 It was in itself almost unavoidable that a community founded 
like the Pythagorean mainly on a mystical doctrine but not ill-disposed 
to scientific studies, should, as it was extended (and still followed 
practical aims) split up into two parties: an inner circle of qualified 
teachers and scholars, and one or more groups, outside and attached 
to them, of lay members for whom a special teaching suited for popular 
comprehension would be provided. Thus the inner circle of Buddhism, 
the Bikshu, was surrounded by the common herd of ‘‘ worshippers ”’ ; 
and the same can be seen in Christian monastic organizations. A 
division, then, of the followers of Pythagoras into Akousmatikoi and 
Mathematikoi—Pythagoreioi and Pythagoristai—etc., is not in itself 
at all incredible. 

55 The division of the soul, or the dvvapers of the soul, into the 
Aoyitxov and the aAoyov was made, before Plato, by Pythagoras—-so we 
might have learnt, adrod rot Ilv0ayopou ovyypappatos ovdevos els Nuas 
owlopévov, from the writings of his followers, acc. to Poseidonios ap. 
Galen, de Plac. Hipp. et Pl. 5, p. 459 Mill. = v, 478 K.; cf. also 
425 K. (Vors. 34, 23). From Poseidonios evidently comes the same 
opinion in Cic., TD. iv, 10. And, in fact, a fragment of Philolaos 
nm. dvoews, fr. 13 Diels (Theol. Ar., p. 20, 35 A.), gives a division of the 
apxat tod Cwov Tod Aoyixod, which depends upon the idea that the highest 
living organism contains within itself and makes use of all the lower 
organisms as well (vods in the head, av@pw7ov apxa—wuxa Kal aiobnas 
in the heart, Cwov apxya—pilwors cal avddvars in the navel, durot apxa— 
oméppatos petafoda and yévyynats in the aidotov, Evvaravrwy apxa). 
Then in the psychical region we have a division between the Aoyixov 


NOT Boat DOs GHUART IR | x4 401 


and the dAoyor according to their nature and “seat” in man (Aoyixdv 
being made up of reasoning power, vods, specific to man, and sense- 
perception, ato@nos, which also belongs to the other f¢a, while the 
adAroyov = pilwois Kat avadvors and resembles the airiov rod rpédecbat 
kat av€ec0a, or the dutcxov, a part of the dAoyov rHs wuyFs in Arist., 
EN. 1, 13, p. 1102a, 32 ff.). This evidently represents an attempt 
at a division of the soul into Aoyi«ev and ddAoyov, such as Poseidonios 
must have found carried out by other Pythagoreans. A clear dis- 
tinction between ¢poveiv (€vrévar) and aicbdavecbar was made by the 
Pythag. physician Alkmaion, whose division was at least different 
from and more profound than that of Empedokles (with whom he is 
contrasted by Thphr., Sens. 25; Vors. 132, 20). Empedokles did 
indeed distinguish between thinking and perceiving, but thinking 
(voetv) was only a cwpyatikdv Te MoTep TO alcbavecOat and to this extent 
ravrov with it (Arist., An. 3, 3, p. 427a, 21). Alkmaion cannot, 
therefore, have made fuviévat cwyatixov. These Pythagoreans were on 
the way to separating from the soul as a whole a separate, thinking 
soul that required no sense-perception for its thought, the vois. To 
this latter alone would divinity and immortality be ascribed, as in 
later philosophy (and thus Dow. 393a, 10, though unhistorically and 
prematurely, gives to Aoyixov frHs Yuxqs] aPOaprov as a doctrine of 
““ Pythagoras ’’).—It is certainly difficult to see how Philolaos’ doctrine 
of the distinction between the dvOpumov apya, the vofis—an element 
of the soul belonging exclusively to men—-and the Cwov apya (confined 
to aic@nas and puyd, power of life) could possibly be reconciled with 
the older Pythagorean doctrine of the soul’s transmigration. Acc. to 
that belief the soul wanders through the bodies of animals as well as 
men, and the idea implies the view that the same soul could inhabit 
animals as well as men; that, in fact, wdvra 7a yevopeva Eupvya are 
opoyery)(Porph.. VP. 19:7) cis S.E.,, Mi-ix, 127); Philolaos, on the 
contrary, holds that the soul of man is differently constituted from the 
souls of animals—the latter lack vods (it is not merely that its efficacy 
is hindered in animals by the dvoxpacia rob odparos as is said wrongly 
to be the opinion of Pythag. by Dow. 432a, 15 ff.). The same difficulty 
arises again in the case of Plato’s doctrine of transmigration.—Alkmaion 
who ascribes gvviévar to man alone seems not to have held the trans- 
migration doctrine. 

665401 ff. Mull.; fr. 112, 5 Diels: 

P75 A624.) fv 114). 

58 Satyros ap. D.L. viii, 59; Vors. 195, 26.—Especially famous was 
his feat of driving away adverse winds from Akragas (cf. fy. 111, 3) ; 
see also Welcker, Ki. Schr. iii, 60-1.—The asses’ skins with which 
Emped. kept the north winds away from Akragas were at any rate 
intended as apotropaic materials—magic means of driving away spirits. 
In the same way protection against hail and lightning is obtained by 
hanging up the skin of a hyena, a seal, etc. (see Geop. i, 14, 3-5; 1, 16, 
and Niclas’ notes there). These skins €yovor dvvapw avtirab7: Plu., 
Smp. 4, 2, 1, p. 664 C.—-Other magic charms against hail—the 
xadalodidAakes, Plu., Smp. 7, 2, 2, p. 700 F; Sen., NQ. 4b, 6. 

59. . eyw 8 tyiv eds auBpotos, ovnétt Ovntos, mwAcipat pera 
mGot tetipevos KTA. AODO f. (fy. 112, 4 f.). 

69 A late echo is to be found in the inspired lines of Lucretius in 
praise of Empedokles, i, 717 ff. 

61 The well-known story of Empedokles’ leap into the crater of 
Mt. Aetna—intended by his complete disappearance to call forth the 
belief that he had not died (Luc., DM. xx, 4), but had been translated 


Dd 


402 NOTES) TO” CHAPTER 72x) 


alive—is a parody of a serious translation legend and presupposes the 
existence of one. The parodists’ version was contradicted early by 
Empedokles’ follower, the physician Pausanias: D.L. viii, 69 (this 
does not come from the fabulously conceived narrative of Herakleides 
Pont. It does not follow, from the epigram quoted by D.L. viii, 61, 
fr. 158; AP. vii, 508, that Paus. died before Emped.; the authorship 
of that ep. is uncertain and in any case it is not very worthy of credit). 
The seriously intended legend must then have arisen soon after the 
disappearance of Empedokles: it was founded upon the fact that 
no one did know where Emp. had died (@dvaros ddyAos, Timaeus ap. 
D.L. viii, 71), or could point to the grave which covered his remains. 
(This is expressly stated by Timaeus, who, in other respects, contradicts 
the translation-fable as well as the story of the leap into Mt. Aetna: 
D.L. viii, 72. In the face of this no importance need be attached to 
what some one—Neanthes apparently—states ap. D.L. viii, 73; that 
there was a grave of Emped. at Megara.) Free elaboration was given 
to the translation story by Herakleides Pont. 7. véowv: D.L. viii, 67-8 
(in return, his philosophic rivals contemptuously applied a malicious 
story of feigned translation to Herakleides himself, who in this way 
wished to legitimize his own claim to be god or Hero: D.L. v, 89 ff. - 
From other sources comes Suid. ‘Hpaxr. Evdvdpovos ; cf. Marx, Griech. 
Miarchen v, dankb, Thieren, p. 97 ff.). All kinds of stupid variations 
of the story of Empedokles’ end ap. D.L. viii, 74. 

82 See above, chap. ii, and p. 129. 

SSP CIALIS Mir aa 7 9s 

64 Gapkav xitwv, 414, fr. 126. 

65 His treatment of the woman who seemed to be dead (dzvous, 
D.L. viii, 60) has quite the appearance of a psychophysical experiment ; 
one, however, that was intended to prove the correctness of precisely 
the irrational side of his doctrine of the soul. 

66 yuiwy miors is distinguished from voeiy in v. 57 (fr. 4, 13), and 
vow dépxeobai from dépxeofar dppaow in 82 (fr. 17, 21); cf. ot’ 
emidepkta Tad’ avdpacw ovr émaxovaTd, otte vom meptAnnta, 42 f. 
(fr. 2, 7).—Elsewhere it is true that Emped. (who throughout avoids 
prosaic exactitude in the use of technical terms) uses vo7jjca as simply = 
sense-perception following epic idiom: e.g. 56 (fy. 4, 12; but it is not 
quite correct to say that Emped. 76 dpoveiv cai 76 aic@dvecbat tavTo 
pyot, as Arist: declares <Any 427a, 22), 

67 378 ff.; fr. 109: yaln pév yap yatay drumaper, etc. (pay is here 
used in its widest sense, efdo0s avri yévous, and = aia@dvecoba. Thus, 
vow dépxecOa in 82 [17, 21] = alcbavecAa, and very commonly words 
denoting one of the modes of perception are used instead of those of 
another eidos, or for the whole yévos of alo@nots. Lob., Rhemat. 334 ff.). 

68 372 ff. Mull.; fv. 105: aiparos év meAdyeoot. .. TH TE vOnpa 
padtora KuKXrAlcxerar avOpmmoow* alua yap avOpwmois mepixapdidv 
eoTt vonpa.—TLhe blood is the seat of 76 dpovetv* ev rovTw yap udAvoTa 
KexpGabat Ta ororxeta, Thphr., Sens. 10, 23 f. 

8° A kind of ovyyupvacia 7THv alcOyoewr as the physician Asklepiades 
defines the idea of the puy7 (Dox. 378a, 7).—It resembles what Arist. 
calls the mpdrov alc@yrHpiov.—This function which Emped. calls 
dpovety would probably be the é€vorodv of the perceptions which 
Aristot. found wanting in Emp. (An. 409b, 30 ff.; 410a, 1-10; b, 10). 

70 +6 voetviS cwyatiKov WoTeEp TO alabavecOa, Arist., An. 427a, 26. 

"1 Arist., Metaph. 1009b, 17 ff. 

72 298 Mull. ; fy. 110,10: mwavra yap tof: dpovynaw éxew Kal vw patos 
aicavy. The wdavra must be understood quite literally ; for it is the 


NOTES 1 OM CHAPTERS (xl 403 


elements in which the powers of perception inhere (€xaotov ray 
orotxeiwy wuynv elvar is the opinion attributed to Emped. by Arist., 
An. 404b, 12). But elements are present in the mixture of all things, 
and thus stones, etc., have ¢dpdvyors and a “‘ portion of mind ”’ in them 
(though the statement that it is afua that first produces dpdévynas will 
not square with this: Thphr., Sens. 23). Emped. attributed complete 
sensation and perception to plants, and even gave them vois and 
yy@ots (without blood ?): fArist.] Plant. 815a, 16 ff.; b, 16 f. That 
is why they, too, are capable of harbouring fallen daimones. 

73 Emped. himself does not use the word guy at all in the fragments 
that have been preserved to us; and it is hardly probable that he 
himself would have used the term of the psychical faculties of 
the body even if he regarded these as gathered together to a sub- 
stantive unity. Later authorities, on the other hand, in their accounts 
of the doctrine of Emped. give the name of uy precisely to these 
**somatic’’ intellectual faculties; thus Arist., An. 404b, 9ff.; 409b, 
23 ff.: alud dPnow elvar tiv puyyv, Gal., Hipp. et Pla. 2 = v, 283 K. ; 
mic tt). -1, 19 -rlerts, Am. cds 

et i3—19 Mull’;* frrs71 15°15, do not-(as: Plut, adv) Col. 12; pe 1l113iD; 
understood them) teach the pre-existence and persistence after death 
of the psychic powers within the world of the elements, but merely 
speak of the indestructibility of the elements that are the component 
parts of the human body, even when the latter has suffered dissolution. 

73 drns Aetpwr, fy. 121, 4 (21 Mull.; cf. 16) is the name given by 
Empedokles to the earth; and not to Hades (as has been supposed), 
of which—as an intermediate place of purgation between two births— 
there is nowhere any mention in his verses. That the drepmijs y@pos 
(fr. 121, 1) to which Emped. is cast down, the realm of ®évos xrd. 
(fr. 121) and the ’’Arns Aecpwyr, all refer to the earth, 6 éyyetos 76708, 
Ta mept yHv, is expressly stated by Themistios, Ov. 13, and Hierocl. 
in ©. Aur. 24 (fr. 121), p. 470 Mull. (FPG. i]; Synes. also implies it 
(Ep. 147, p. 283 C; Prov. i, 89 D); the same is distinctly implied for 
fr. 121, 4, and by Jul., Ov. vii, 226 B; Philo, ii, p. 638 M.—Procl., 
in Crat., p. 103 Boiss., connects fr. 121, 3, adxypunpat te vdcor Kal ones 
épya te pevora immediately with fy. 121, 2, and both lines acc. to him 
apply to ra bro THY ceAnvynv; i.e. not to any kind of underworld but 
to the region of the earth (cf. Emp. ap. Hippol., RH.i, 4; Vors. 210, 
Zim 04. 8009). Lhe-idea that) Hades is being spoken of in these 
lines is a view peculiar to moderns who have misunderstood the poet 
and set aside the clear testimony of Themistios and the rest. Maass, 
Orpheus, 113, speaks as though the interpretation in favour of Hades 
rested upon a tradition which I “‘ contradicted’. On the contrary, 
that interpretation is itself contradicted by definite tradition and by 
common sense (for Emp. falls from Heaven to earth and not, please 
God, to Hades!). The view is quite baseless (though Maass himself 
finds in the épya pevora of fr. 121 [20 M.]—the inconstant, transitory 
works of men upon earth—a support for his Hades-view : these “‘ fluid 
works ”’ or things are, he thinks, nothing else but the stream of filth, 
the oxwp aeivwv, in Hades of which pious invention rumoured : certainly 
an ingenious interpretation). Emp. is, in fact, the first to regard 
this earthly sojourning as the real Hell—the dovvyOys, arepmys x@pos 
(fr. 118, 121, 1, the latter a parodying reminiscence of A 94)—an 
avtTpov umoorteyov (fr. 120) filled with all the plagues and terrors of 
the original Hades (121). Stoics and Epicureans (see below) took up 
the idea after him and elaborated it in detail. The daimones that are 
shut up in this life here below—a fw1 duos (fr: 2, 3)—are as if dead: 


A04 NOLES SIO; CHAT IER esd 


fry. 125 (2), 35, 14. The Orphic idea of the odpua-ofjpa (see above, 
p. 345) was thus thoroughly and energetically carried out. (Macr., 
in S. Scip. 1, 10, 9 ff., attributed the idea that the infer are nothing 
else but the material world of earth to the old theologi (§ 17) who, he 
says, lived before the development of a philosophic science of nature.) 

76 3 Mull.; fr. 115, 3: ed7é tis (THY Satpdvwv) aumrakino Povw 
hida yvia punvn. He means Bpdars capkay kat adAndrogayia as Plu. 
paraphrases it, Es. Carn. 1, p. 996 B (for this must always imply acc. 
to Emp. the “‘ murder ”’ of a spirit of the same race: fr. 136). Even 
for God it is a crime to taste of a meat (“‘ blood ”’)-offering and, in 
fact, there were only bloodless offerings made in the Golden Age (which 
was described by Emp. not in the ®vo.xnd—the principle of which 
work denied that there had ever been such a period—-but in some 
other poem in which he left his philosophic doctrine out of account ; 
perhaps the Kafapyoi): 420 ff. M; fr. 128, 3 ff. 

77 fy. 115, 4. The earth then becomes the place of their banishment 
and punishment for gods that have broken their oath. This is a 
version of the impressive picture in Hes., Th. 793 ff. Det petevantes 
were punished for nine years (cf. Hes., Th. 801) in Tartaros : Orpheus 
(not Lucan in his “‘ Orpheus ’’) ap. Serv., 4. vi, 565. (To this also 
alludes the poet from whose elegiac verses came the frag. ap. Serv., A. vi, 
324: rod [sc. Mruyos datos] orvyvov mHpa xaladavarw: this is probably 
how the words should be read.) So that instead of the ‘* underworld ” 
or Tartaros, the world is for Emp. the worst place of sorrows. Irom 
Emp. is derived the conception that the realm of the infevt is our 
world, that inhabited by men, and that there is no other, nor any need 
of another a@dys—a conception often alluded to and improved upon 
by Stoic and other semi-philosophers (esp. clear in Serv., A. vi, 127, 
often only in allegorical sense: Lucr. iii, 978 ff. [See also Bevan, 
Stoics and Sceptics, p. 107.)). 

78 30,000 Spar: which means probably “‘ years ’’ (hardly “‘ seasons ”’ 
as Dieterich, Nekyia, 119, takes it). The figure 30,000 has no special 
meaning (e.g. 300 periods of a life-time each) : it is merely a concrete 
phrase for “‘innumerable”’ (and is frequent: Hirzel, Ber. sdchs. 
Ges. d. Wiss. 1885, p. 64 ff.). This enormous period of time is the 
divine counter-part, as measured by divine standards of time, of the 
peyas eviautos, the ennaéteris during which the earthly murderer had 
to fly from the land of his violent deed. The fiction of Emp. clearly 
shows the influence of this expiation of murder by ameviauticpos. 

He Tr A241 (22 i). 

80 dpyaréas Brdtovo KeAevOous . . . fr. 115, 8 (8). 

81 Emp. does not even use the word guy7 of these daipnoves confined 
within corporeality. They are so named, however, regularly and 
without qualification by the later authors who quote verses from the 
Prooimion of the ®voixd, Plutarch, Plotinos, Hippolytos, etc. 

82 Peculiar to Emp. is the attempt to give actual details of the 
crimes for which the spirits are condemned to évowyudtwors ; and also 
the extension of metempsychosis to plants (which is occasionally 
attributed, but by late authorities only, to the Pythagoreans as well). 
_ 83 The entirely unpurified seem not to have been condemned to 
everlasting punishment in Hades, of which in general he shows no 
knowledge, by Emp. (as by the Pythagoreans sometimes). He merely, 
it seems, threatens them with ever-renewed rebirth upon earth and 
the impossibility of ro xvxAov Aféa (until the complete ascendency 
of ¢iAta). This appears to be the meaning of fy. 145 (455 f.) from 
the way in which Cl. Al., Protr. ii, 27, p. 23 P., cites the lines. 


INO) Ts See Oaks GLA EUS Gok I 405 


84 As we may paraphrase—-though indeed here, too, only with reserva- 
tions—the xaxorns and kaxdrnres Of Emp. fr. 145 (454 f.). 

85 fyy, 136-7, 128, 9 f. (424, 440). Very remarkable in a thinker of 
such an early period is what is said (fr. 135) about the wovrwy vd pepov 
which forbids xreivew ro Eupvyov.—Apart from this we have other 
vestiges of kathartic rules: purification with water drawn from 
five springs: fy. 143 (see Append. v) ; abstention from the eating of 
beans (fy. 141) and of laurel leaves (fv. 140). The laurel is sacred as 
a magic plant, together with the oxidXa (see App. v) and pdapvos (see 
above, chap. v, n. 95). Cf. Gp. 11, 2, etc. Its special sacredness gives 
the laurel its importance in the cult of Apollo. Emp. (like Pythagoras) 
seems to have paid special honour to Apollo: it appears from something 
that is said ap. D.L. vili, 57, that he wrote a mpootmov els ’AroddAwva : 
the exalted conception of a divinity that is pure ¢p7y tepy in 
abstraction from all sense-perception, elaborated by Emp. in frr. 133-4, 
was regarded by him as applying particularly wept AmdAdkwvos (Amm. 
in Arist., Interpr. 249, 1 ed. Brand. 135a, 23). 

86 In fanciful ways: fr. 127 (lion, laurel), 448 Mull. 

87 fy. 146 (457) zpduor being used probably with intention as a vague 
term: regal power would hardly have seemed to possess special merit 
to the democratically minded Emp. He hardly knew it in any form 
but the tyrannis and to this he showed himself an energetic opponent 
(even though the violent language of Timaeus, the enemy of tyrants, 
is not to be taken quite literally). He himself was offered royal power, 
but he refused it with contempt as one who was zaons dpyfjs dAXAotpios : 
Xanthos and Arist. ap. D.L. viii, 63; Vors. 196, 10. He might all 
the same (and rightly) regard himself in political matters, too, as one 
of the mpopor; it is plain that in the enumeration of those who were 
eis rtéAos born as pavrers te Kal dpvomodrot Kat intpol, Kat mpdopot 
avOpwmovow éemuxPoviocos wéAovrar, and were never to be born again, 
he includes himself especially, and, in fact, takes himself as the model 
of this last and highest stage upon earth. He himself was all these 
things simultaneously. 

88 fry. 146-7 (459 ff.) evOev dvaBAacrotar Beoi Tinjoar déprator, adavaros 
GAAovow opéotiol, ev te rpaméelas (read ev te tpamelor—a tmesis, = 
evtpamelot Te) * evvies avdpeiwy ayéwy, amoKnpot, ateipets. 

89 Emped. perhaps described himself as “‘ god ’’ also in fr. 23, 11 (144) 
aAXAa Topas Tobr’ ta (he is speaking to Pausanias), Qeod mapa pido 
axovoas. See Bidez, Biogry. d Emp., p. 166 (1894)—unless these words 
would be better taken as an abbreviated comparison (with omission 
of ws): “as certainly as if you had received these words from a god.” 

eo eAS: Pliris inclined toido >) Exth xvii; p. 607. D. 

91 As several modern critics have attempted to do. 

maar ml # SO 92), 

pa See above, chap. 1, pp. 4 ff. 

®4 As late again as Plotinos, who speaks of the éirrov ev juiv: the 
o@jta Which is a @npiov CwwOev and the adnOys dv@pwaos distinct from 
Pome tC (got, LOM Ope G5}. 

95 At any rate Emp. spoke of the ekstasis, the fuvor which is an 
animt purgatio and to be entirely distinguished from that which is 
produced by alienatio mentis (dpoveiv dddota, fr. 108): Cael. Aur., 
Morb. Chron. i, 5, p. 25 Sich. = Vors. 223. A special ev@ovoractiKxov 
in the soul as its dedrarov (part): Stoics (and Plato) acc. to Dox. 
639, 25. A special organ of the soul which effects the union with the 
divine, being the dv@os zis ovatas yudv, is mentioned in Proclus 
peeller Phi. d. Griech.* iii,)2;.738). 


406 NOTES. Om CHAR LHI! 


96 +5 6Aov, the whole reality of Being and Becoming in the world, 
cannot be comprehended by man through his senses nor even with 
vods: fr. 2 (36-43). But Empedokles has in his own persuasion 
grasped it; he is situated aodins é€m’ dxpous. (fr. 4, 8), avriy 
emayyérAerat SwHcew THY adAjndecav (Procl., in Ti. 106 E). Proclus 
declares that the words oodins én dxpovor—and this is a further 
point—are meant to apply to Emped. himself. (I do not quite under- 
stand Bidez’ doubts about what is said here, and in what follows: 
see Archiv. f. Gesch. d. Phil. ix, 205, 42.) Whence, then, did the poet 
obtain this knowledge of the truth since it is revealed neither to the 
senses nor to the vois ? At any rate, the puyomopmol duvapers (Porph., 
Antr. 8), who conducted his soul-daimon out of the region of the 
gods, say to the soul (fv. 2, 8): od 8 odv émet Jd’ EArac Ons (i.e. “‘ since 
you have been cast up here—on the earth ’’—-not “‘ since you have so 
desired it”’, as Bergk, Opusc. ii, 23, explains: which would be a 
distorted idea expressed in distorted language)—zevceat od mdAéov 
ne Booreln Artis Omw rev (thus with Panzerbieter, for dpwpe). According 
to this we must suppose that his more profound knowledge (insight 
into the wikis re dradAa€is Te pryévtwy of the elements, together with 
knowledge of the destiny and purpose of the soul-daimones, etc.), 
which he cannot have got on earth or in his earthly body must have 
been brought with him out of his divine past-life. This knowledge 
is then peculiar to the daimon (or duvyy in the older sense) that is 
buried in the body; and Emp. presumably owes it to an dvdpyyots 
of his earlier life (a faculty that is only rarely active). From 
what other source could he have got his knowledge of his previous 
évowpatwoaes (fy. 117) 2? He has even farther and more profound 
knowledge than he dares communicate—fr. 4 (45-51), and says 
quite plainly that he is keeping back in piety a last remnant of wisdom 
that is unsuited for human ears (to this extent the authorities— 
dAXo. 8 Faav ot A€yovtes—of S.E., M. vii, 122—have rightly under- 
stood him).—The belief in a miraculous power of avduvnois that goes 
beyond the present life of the individual may have been derived by 
Emp. from Pythagorean doctrine or mythology. Emp. himself 
follows the legend of the Pyth. school and attributes such a power of 
recollection to Pythagoras: damote yap maono.. . fr. 129 [430 ff.]. 
See Append. x. The eager development—indeed, the cult—of the 
pviuy in Pythagorean circles is well known. The invention of the 
myths describing the fountain of Mnemosyne in Hades may also be 
Pythagorean (see below). Throughout the various évowpardoers of the 
soul it is the undying prjpyyn that alone preserves the unity of 
personality which (as the wuy7) lives through all these transformations 
and is bound together in this way. It is evident how important this 
idea was for the doctrine of transmigration (it occurs also in the teaching 
of Buddha). Plato, like Empedokles, seems to have got the idea of 
an avdpuvyots reaching beyond the limits of the present life from the 
Pythagoreans: he, then, it is true, developed the idea in connexion 
with his own philosophy to unexpected conclusions (cf. further, 
Dieterich, Nekyta, 122). 

®7 dtAta is for him (not indeed in his words but in his intention as 
Arist. understood him): airla rév dyabdv, ro S€ vetxos T&V KaKay, 
Metaph. 985a, 4 ff.; 1075b, 1-7. Hence the jmddpwv DidrAdryT0s 
dpeudéos duBpotos dopuy (fr. 35) is contrasted with Netkos pawdpevov 
(115, 14), odAdpevov (17, 19), Avypev (109). The odatpos in which 
only ¢tAia prevails while vetxos is completely vanquished, is called 
feovin mepinyet yaiwy, fr. 27, 28. 


NOTES TO CHAPTER XI 407 


% Geol dSorAtxatwves (frr. 20, 12, 23, 8), Exactly the same is said of the 
Saipoves otre Biovo AcASyyxace paxpatwvos (115, 5). In the face of these 
expressions, so definitely setting a period to the lifetime of the gods, 
we must suppose that the epithets which Emp. applies to himself— 
he is to be in the future deds auBporos odk ete Ovntds, 112, 4—are 
merely intended to assert that he shall not die any more in his incarna- 
tion as a man (the same thing must be meant when those who are 
delivered from the circle of rebirth are called daéxnpou, areipets (147) ; 
the gods are only called @#avaror by traditional convention). Plutarch 
also, Def. Or. 16, p. 418 E, distinctly states that the Sa/uoves of Emp. 
eventually die. That the gods (but not ro @eiov itself) were liable to 
extinction had already been the opinion of Anaximander and 
Anaximenes. Acc. to Emp. the individual dalpoves would be re- 
absorbed into the universal divinity, the odaipos (just as the individual 
deities of the Stoics are reabsorbed at the world-conflagration into 
Zeus who is alone indestructible). [=l. 131, 141, 461, 460 M.] 

99 Emp., frr. 133, 134 (389-96), speaks of a supersensual divinity 
that is entirely doy iepy: he gives to this divinity the name of Apollo, 
but the description is said to apply mept mavros rob Oeiov. Hipp., RH. 
vii, 29, p. 386 D.-S., refers the description to the odaipos. The adaipos, 
in which no vetxos is left was called by Emp. 6 @eds, 6 evdarpovéotatos 
Beds (Arist., An. i, 5, 410b, 5-6; Metaph. ii, 4, 1000b, 3). It is, 
however, certain that Emp. would not have regraded the odaipos as 
pure dpi tepy. It appears, in fact, that in the odaipos, in which 
everything is together and united, even the divine power thought of 
as supersensual is brought toaclose. In the world-state of multiplicity 
caused by vetxos divinity seems to be regarded as separate from the 
elements and the forces. ‘‘ Furious conflict’ (115, 14) then attacks 
even the divinity and divides it against itself; hence the origin of 
individual Saiuoves as a Self-caused division of the divine, a desertion 
from the One @etov—the individual Saipoves are duyddes Oedbev 
(115, 13). These individual daluoves are entangled in the world from 
its origin until at last, having become purified, they rise again to 
the heights of divinity; and when all individuality is again fused 
into one by d¢Ada they return once more into the universal divinity 
in order with it to enter into the odaitpos.—Thus we may perhaps 
reconstruct the Empedoklean fantasy. His lines do not supply 
sufficient evidence for the complete reconstruction of his picture of 
the perpetually recurring process. Weshould naturally expect a certain 
obscurity to cling to this attempt to fuse together physiology and 
theology. 

eeONIICT. ill, 370-3: cS 

101 All that is essential on the subject of Demokritos’ doctrine of 
the soul is to be found in Arist., An. i, 2, p. 403b, 31-404a, 16; 
405a, 7-13; i, 3, p. 406b, 15-22; Resp. iv, p. 471b, 30-472a, 17.— 
The air is full of the particles which Demokritos calls vofs and puy7: 
Resp. 472a, 6-8 [Vors. ii, 36]. The atoms hovering in the air become 
visible as ‘‘ motes in the sunbeam ’’; of these some are the soul-atoms 
(this must be the meaning of An. 404a, 3 ff.; Iamb. ap. Stob., Eel. i, 
p. 384, 15 W., is only drawing upon Arist.). This is a modification 
of the opinion held by the Pythagoreans (mentioned also by Arist. 
404a, 16 ff.) that the motes in the sunbeam are ‘souls’ (see above, 
chap. x, n. 34). Inhalation of the world-stuff as a condition of life 
in the individual is imitated from Herakleitos (see S.E., M. vii, 129). 

102 The soul acc. to Dem. éxBaiver pév rod odpartos, év 5€ TH ex Baivev 
Siadopetra: Kai di:acKeddvvuvra, lamb. ap. Stob., Ecl. i, p. 384, 16 f. W. 


408 NOTES TO: CHAPTER (XI 


103 Dem. dOapriv (elvar tHv puxyv) 7H cwpate avvdragplerpopevny, 
Dox. 393a, 8 [Vors. A 109]. Since the disruption of the soul-atoms 
is not effected at a single blow death may, in consequence, some- 
times be only apparent; i.e. when many but not all the soul-particles 
have escaped. For this reason also, with the possible re-assemblage 
of the soul-atoms, dvaBidcers Of the apparently dead may occur. 
Cases of this kind seem to have been treated in the work zepi ta&v ev 
‘‘AiSou: see Procl., in Rp. ii, 113, 6 Kr.; D.L. ix, 46; it is counted 
among the most famous, or at least the most popular of Dem.’s writings 
in the anecdote ap. Ath. 168 B; cf. [Hp.] Ep. 10, 3, p. 291 Hch. fix, 322 
Lit.]; Vors. 55 C, 2. This view of the retention of vitality, of course, 
only applies to the period immediately following the (apparent) death 
(it is fairly correctly represented by [Plu.] Plac. Ph. 4, 4, 4 [Dozx. 
390], it was probably attributed to Dem. on account of a similar 
observation made by Parmenides; see above, p. 373). Never- 
theless, out of it grew up the assertion, which was then attributed 
to Dem., that in fact ra vexpa TOv owpatwv alcOdverar: e.g. Alex. Aph. 
in Arist., Top. 21,21; [Vors. ii, 38, 8}; Stob., Bel. i, p. 477, FGIW, 
In the case, at least, of those that are really ‘“‘ dead ’’, i.e. of bodies 
that have been deserted by all the soul-atoms, Dem. certainly never 
taught the presence of aicfynos: against the vulgarization of his 
opinions that would attribute such a view as this to him (as Epicurus 
himself did) the Democritict spoken of by Cic. (J.D.1, 82) made their 
protest.—The work epi 7&v év *’Ardov can certainly not have confined 
itself to considerations of a purely physical nature; otherwise 
Thrasyllos (D.L. ix, 46) could not have classified it among the 
nOKa BrBrAla of Dem. [Vors. ii, 19]. It is, indeed, difficult to imagine 
what from Dem.’s point of view there could have been to say about 
“the things in the Underworld’’. It is hardly possible to suppose 
(as Mullach, Dem. fr., pp. 117-18, and Heyne do) that Dem. would 
think himself obliged either to answer or to parody the fabulous 
inventions of the poets about the realm of shadows. It is difficult to 
be certain that Dem. was really the author of the work: the forgery 
of later times was particularly fond of turning the most clear- 
headed of materialists into a mage and a jack-of-all-trades. (Dem.’s 
observations of the possibility of avafvody is in part at least the origin 
of the writing z. 7. év ddouv; it is also responsible for the anecdote 
that makes him promise to the Persian king that he will restore his 
dead wife to life again, etc.—a variation of an ingenious story widely 
spread both in the East and the West. See my Lecture on Greek 
Novel-writing: Verh. dev Philologenvers. zu Rostock, 1875, p. 68 f.)—- 
The “‘ fragmenta moralia ’’ of Dem. are with rare exceptions (e.g. Mull. 
frr. 7, 23, 48, 49, etc. = 146, 159, 147, 127 D.) wholesale fabrications 
of the feeblest kind. One of them, however (119 Mull., 297 D.), agrees 
at least with what Dem. may very well have said about the punish- 
ments in Hell (though in rather different words—he was incapable 
of quite such a monstrosity as pufomXaoréovtes, which sounds very late 
Greek. Vain efforts have been made to justify this pu@omAaoréw by 
reference to the older pu@omdAdorns. But pudomods, ddodvraé, 
apyupokomos, etc., are also old, and it is no secret that verbs derived 
by further extension from such composite verbal nouns are mostly 
late formations: thus pvdozoréw, ddodvAakéw, apyvpoxonéw, and 
again zetpoBodéw, iepodavréw, texvoxtovew, etc.). In another of these 
falsa no echo even of Dem.’s thought is to be found: fy. moval. 1 Mull. 
[171 D.] puxn olkyriHpiov daipovos. 

104 Dem., whose inquiries set out from the study of inorganic nature, 


NO DBs bOe CUP LiKe as | 409 


was led to predicate a mechanical obedience to law in organic nature 
as well. Anaxagoras starting from the study of organic nature and 
in particular of man, its highest development, derived from that study 
the concept of purpose—purpose consciously undertaken and carried 
out—-and this idea affected his outlook upon the whole of nature, 
including inorganic nature. This teleological system, regarded as 
of universal application, is made by him to depend on a Being 
modelled upon the human mind, the only source, in fact, from which 
he could have derived his experience of action carried out in accordance 
with pre-arranged purpose. 

105 Cf, here and on what follows, Heinze, Ber. d. Sachs. Ges. d. Wiss. 
1890, pp. 1 ff. 

106 yots must be omniscient if it yrdbpny mept mavrds toxe (fy. 6M. = 
12 D.). It has organized (8sexdopuyoe) not only what was and is but 
memewiat 3s to bes frr..6, 12 [12.14 D3). 

ce? Arist, PRe2oGb, 247 ff. 

108 6 yap vods (of Anaxag.) els: Arist., Metaph. 1069b, 31. On the 
other hand, ypypara dreipa wARP0s: Anaxag. fr. 1. 

109 "Avataydpas dyal tov voiv Kowov odbev odfevi T&v aAAWwY Exeu. 
Bist.) 2iits is 25° p.0405b.6 19 fia; ‘cfs 45 p. 429b,°23- f. 

110 Anaxag. fy. 6 [12]: ra wév dAAa <aavra> mavtos potpay peréexet, 
voos 6€ é€oTt ameipov Kal adtroxparés Kal pépextar ovdevt xpypatt, aAda 
podvos avtos é€d¢, EwuTot éort. (dmetpov does not seem to supply the 
required opposition to what preceeds: ? dmAdov. Anaxag. used the 
word of voids acc. to Arist., An. 405a, 16; 429b, 23. Zeller also 
suggests amAdov, Archiv S. G. d. Philos. v, 441.) 

111 goa puyry € EXEL, Kal Ta pele Kal Ta eAdoow, TAaVTWV VOOS Kparéee ; 
Kal THs TEpLxwpjavos THS oupmdons vOoS EKPATNOE, WOTE TEpLXwp Haat 
thy apxyy, fr. 6 [12]. This cparety at the beginning of the zeprywprnais 
cannot at any rate take place by the inter-mixture of voiés in the 
omépyuata or by the entry of vods into these. Because vofs is both 
amadys and apyys, it Kparoin av apryns dv, Arist., Ph. 256b, 27 ; 
cf. 429a, 18. Does this also apply to voids when it radv buy ny éxdvTwr 
kpareet ? And yet in this case it appears to be divided, as pei{wy or 
é€XdtTrwv in each case, in the (4a.—No one can help being reminded here 
of the insoluble aporiai raised in Aristotle’s own doctrine of the active 
vots which, in this case too, is dmaOis, auryys, ywptords from the body ; 
is also deprived of all attributes of individuality (which reside entirely 
in the lower psychical powers) and thus appears as a common divine 
spirit. And yet it is said to be a pépiov ris puyfs, present ev TF 
yuxH, dwelling inside the body yet having nothing in common with 
it, and in any case is thought of as an individual mind. In the case of 
Anaxagoras the same aporiai apply also to the nourishing, feeling, 
desiring, and moving soul (as it is called by Arist.) ; for all the ‘* parts ” 
of the soul are included almost indistinguishably by him under the 
conception of vofis.—The difficulty of reconciling the unity and inward 
continuity of the spiritual (immaterial, that cannot be thought of as 
divided)—with its individuation and distribution into the multiplicity 
of souls, is one which repeatedly occurs in Greek philosophy. 

112 $4 mavrwy tovra, Pl., Crat. 413 C. 

113 gy qavrl mavTos potpa éveott mAnv voov’ €ate ofa S€ Kal vdos 
éve, 7. 5 pal, 

114 ydos b€ mas Gpords e€aTt Kal 6 pélwy Kal 6 éAacowyr, fr. 6 [12]. 

ate Arist., AN als oes Pp. 404b, 1-7: Anaxag. often gives 7 Ov vobv 
as 70 aitLov Too KaAds Kal bp0as ° érépw Ot de (he says) TovTOV elvas THY 
pox’ év daa yap vmapyxew atrov rots Cdous, Kat peyddAots Kal piKpots 


A10 NO RESs SLOP GUAT iii! 


Kal Tulots Kal aTiporépors (in which case the vods that dwells within 
all the (6a cannot be any longer regarded as 6 xara dpdvnow Aeyopevos 
vods). Anaxag. had expressed himself indistinctly: #rrov dracadet 
mept avta@y (i.e. the relation between vods and puy%H). Cf. 405a,13f. In 
the sense of the words as used by Anaxagoras voés and wuyy were 
simply identified by Plato: Cyvat. 400 A. 

116 T).L. ii, 8 [Vors. 375]. Acc. to Anaxag. the moon has olxyoes 
(arAa Kai Addous kal ddpayyas). Fr. 10 [4] probably refers to the men 
and other €Ga in the moon (to whom yet another moon gives light). 
Anaxag. Tv oeAnvnv y iv dyolv eiva (i.e. an inhabitable heavenly body 
like the earth), Pl., 4p. 26 D; cf. Hippol., R.A. i, 8, 10, p. 22, 40 D.-S.— 
We are reminded of the Orphico- Pythagorean fantasies about life on 
the moon (see above, chap. x, n. 76). 

117 Anaxag. counted the plants as €@a and ascribed emotions to 
them: 7dec8at Kal Avretoba [Arist.] Plant. 815a, 18. Like Plato and 
Demokritos Anaxag. also regarded plants as (ga éyyera: Plu., ON. 
AEE Be 

te SHEL spite of its entry into ypypara, voos is yet said to remain 
‘unmixed’? and unaffected by them: adroxpdropa yap atrov évra 
Kal ovdevi pepuypevov mavta-dnolv av’tov Koopetv Ta mpadypata Ota 
mavtwy tovra, Pl., Crat. 413 C. We thus have at the same time dua 
mavrwy tovta and denial of mixture which is reiterated in stronger and 
stronger language. Thus vods even SO remains still é¢’ EwuTob (ed 12) 
yap ep eEwuTob HV, adrw Tew € LE LLKTO av * feetetxe be av amavrwy 
xpynpatwv ef é€uéuxto Tew * oH TavTt yap tmavTos poipa eveote KTA. SO 
perhaps we should read fr. 6 [12] restoring a completed syllogism. 
In the traditional text the clause ef éuépixrd Trew is superfluous and 
in the way). It takes no particle of the others into itself. 

119 Plu.] PlacecPiil.. 5,725, 12 Aét:, 0x2 437 *Vors. 239 feel eee 
the chap. morépou éoriv tmvos Kal Oadvatos buys 7 owpatos; Anaxag. 
taught: elvar d€ Kal puyqs Odvarov rov S:axywpropov. Nothing else 
can be meant by the words—the theme of the chapter alone shows it— 
than: the death of the soul (as well as of the body) occurs with its 
separation (from the body). tov dtaywpropov is subject and elvar 
THs Yuxijs Gavarov predicate of the sentence (not the other way round 
as Siebeck seems to think: Ges. d. Psychol. i, 285). The violent 
alteration proposed by Wyttenbach (de immort. anim1, Opusc. ii, 597 f.) 
has not the smallest justification : eifvar 5€ kal tov @avatov puxjs 
diaywpiapov Kal cwWpatos. There could have been no reason at all in 
appealing specially to Anaxagoras for a confirmation of the popular con- 
ception of death (it would be nothing more). Further, in this particular 
connexion such a definition of death is quite out of place; since the 
theme of the chap. is only to ask the question whether death also affects 
the soul, not what it is. ywuvy7 here must mean the individual soul, 
not the vois which is the basis of the individual souls. Anaxag. made the 
individual soul perish at death—so much is certain. It must be 
admitted that we cannot say for certain whether the Placita are 
referring to an actual utterance of Anaxag. or are only drawing con- 
clusions from his teaching. 

cn hay IMA EE 


GHAPTE Keex if 
THE Lay AUTHORS 


Theology and Philosophy, each in its own way attempting 
to go beyond inadequate popular belief, could only very 
gradually transcend the limits of those narrow communities 
within which their influence was first felt and reach the circles 
in which that popular belief held sway. During the earliest 
successes of the theological and philosophical spirit hardly 
a voice was raised that might have suggested that the belief 
in the imperishability and divine nature of the human Soul, 
of the inherence of all things spiritual in one imperishable, 
fundamental substance, might become something more than 
a mystery known to the wise and illuminated, and enter into 
the convictions of the people and the unlearned. “‘ After the 
death of the body, the Image of Life remains alive ; for that 
alone is descended from the gods ’’—such is the announcement 
of Pindar. But for all the confidence with which, as though 
anticipating no contradiction, he here proclaims the view of 
the soul’s immortality and bases it upon its divine nature, 
such an opinion can at that time have been no more than the 
persuasion of isolated communities formed and instructed in 
that particular doctrine. It cannot be merely accidental,! 
that in the fragments which have come down to us of the lyric 
and semi-lyric (elegiac and iambic) poetry—poetry intended 
for a wide and unspecialized public and expressing feelings 
and ideas in language that all could understand—hardly a 
trace appears of that enhanced conception of the worth and 
nature of the Soul. Reflexion does not linger over such 
dark subjects ; whenever they are illuminated for a passing 
moment, we discern the outlines of those figures from the 
spirit world just as the Homeric imagination had given them 
shape. 

Life and light are only to be found in this world ;? Death, 
to which we are all “‘ owing ’’,3 leads the soul into a realm of 
nothingness. Inarticulate, voiceless, the dead man lies in the 
grave like a statue.® Upon earth, and not in any shadowy 
hereafter, is completed that judgment ® which divine Justice 
passes upon the criminal himself, or upon his descendants 
in whom something of him stilllives on. It is the lack of such 
descendants that forms the bitterest pang, as he goes down to 
Hades, of the man who passes childless out of this life.’ 


412 THE SUAY aS eA UO ORS 


More distinctly and bitterly, in this age of advancing civiliza- 
tion and growing sensibility, sounds the wail over the pain and 
affliction of life, the obscurity of its ways, and the uncertainty 
of its outcome.® Silenos, the prophetic wood-spirit, so went 
the ancient legend, when captured by King Midas in his rose- 
gardens at Bermios earned his release with the judgment of 
melancholy wisdom that the Greek was never tired of repeating 
in ever-varying forms—not to be born is the best thing for 
men, but having been born, let him pray that he may return 
as soon as possible to the kingdom of Night,® and of Hades.?° 
The cheerful enjoyment of life is no longer so sure of itself as 
once it had been in the days of its naive confidence ; and yet 
there is no substitute attempted, no compensatory hereafter 
in a next world of justice and untroubled happiness. We rather 
hear the opinion expressed that rest is the greatest of all 
earthly blessings; and rest is brought by Death. Neverthe- 
less there is little demand for consolation ; a robust and virile 
sense of life that can put up with whatever may befall of 
evil or hardship in healthy indifference, is in the air, and 
speaks to us from many a page of this poetic legacy with 
unpretending veracity. No attempt 1s made to smooth over 
the hardship and cruelty of life. Man’s power is small, 
his efforts go unrewarded, one necessity after another besets 
his short life ; over all alike hangs the shadow of inevitable 
death. All things come at last to the awful chasm—the bravest 
virtue and the highest authority in the world." Yet life is 
good and death an evil; else, why do the blessed gods not 
die 2? asks Sappho !? with feminine naiveté; though indeed, 
her life’s path had lain through the deepest valley of the 
shadow. Even the dead man, if he wishes to be preserved from 
utter nothingness, must depend upon the world of the living 
as the only place of reality ; the fame of his virtues and his 
deeds is all that outlasts his death.4% Perhaps some dim 
perception of that fame reaches even to the dead.1* They 
themselves are for the living as though they had passed into 
nothingness ; we should not, thinks a poet, give them another 
thought after we have buried them. 

Here even the time-honoured conventions associated with 
the cult of souls seem to be perversely cast aside. In general, 
the poet with his wide-ranging observation of mankind had 
small occasion to be reminded of the cult of the soul that the 
narrow circles of family or city offered to their dead, or of the 
conceptions thereby encouraged of the continued life enjoyed 
by the departed. The omission is supplied by the Orators of 
the fifth and fourth centuries and by what they say—and do 


Ce AY AUTHORS 413 


not say—of the state of things hereafter. The greatest period 
of lyric poetry was by that time already fading into the past, 
and yet whoever wished in speaking before a citizen assembly 
to meet with general agreement and understanding was still 
obliged to refrain from speaking of the blessed immortality, 
the eternity and divinity of the soul. The Orators 1° never 
pass beyond the conceptions of the survival, power, and 
rights of the souls of the departed which were called forth and 
maintained in existence by the cult of the soul. The continued 
existence of the souls in the next world is not called in 
question ; but the opinion that the souls still preserve their 
consciousness and have any knowledge of what happens on 
this earth is only expressed with the most cautious avoidance of 
definiteness.1? What—apart from the sacrificial offerings 
of their relatives—still binds the dead to the life upon earth, 
is little more than the fame accorded to them among the 
living.18 Even in the elevated language of solemn funeral 
orations the consolations offered to the survivors omit all 
mention of any enhanced state of being, any thought of 
immortal life in fully-conscious blessedness, that might belong 
now to the glorious departed.!® Such high visions and hopes 
for the future were still, it appears, as little necessary or 
demanded for the comfort of the people as they had been in 
the times of the great wars of liberty.2° The beloved dead who 
had given their lives for their country in those wars, as well 
as many others of the time whom death had overtaken, were 
the recipients of the epitaphs composed by Simonides the 
master of brilliant and condensed inscriptions. Nevertheless, 
not once does he vouchsafe a word that might point forward 
to a land of blessed immortality for the departed. There isa 
vestige of life still remaining for the dead—but it is in this 
world : the memory of the living and their own great name 
honoured by after generations is all that can prolong their 
existence. 

It seems like an echo from another world when (about the 
middle of the fifth century) Melanippides the dithyrambic 
poet addresses a god in the words: ‘‘ Hear me Father, marvel 
of all mortal men, Thou that rulest over the everliving Souls.”’ 
The words must be addressed to Dionysos ;*! for such as 
entered into the magic circle of his nightly festival those 
visions of the imperishability of the human soul and its 
divine power acquired reality. Such wisdom received but 
partial assent from those who lived unaffected by the con- 
ceptions of isolated sects of the theologically or philosophically 
minded. 


414 THE, SLAY 7AUTHORS 
§ 2 


A peculiar position is taken up by Pindar. Two contrasted 
views of the nature, origin, and destiny of the soul seem to be 
combined in his mind with equal claim to authority. 

In the Victory Odes allusions predominate which imply 
an agreement with the popular view expressed in the sayings 
of poets and the presuppositions of the cult of souls and the 
worship of Heroes. After its separation from the body, 
the soul disappears into the underworld.** The piety and 
affectionate memory of relatives and descendants remains as 
a link between the dead and the living ; #2 whether the soul 
itself 1s still conscious of any connexion with the world of the 
living seems uncertain.?4 Its power is over and done with— 
it is certainly no condition of blessed happiness into which 
it has entered. Only the glorious name, the fame that is 
honoured in song, rewards the great deeds of the virtuous 
after death.” 

An exalted state of being, after their departure from this 
earth, is attributed to the Hevoes alone. The belief in the 
existence, importance, and power of these illuminated spirits 
holds complete sway ; 2° it emerges in lively reality from the 
words and narrations of the poet throughout all his work. 
Moreover, the ancient conception—in reality rendered 
untenable by the belief in Heroes—that only with the undivided 
union of body and soul is complete life imaginable, is dis- 
cernible in many allusions and stories of Translation that 
imply that conception. Amphiaraos, the most illustrious 
of those who have been translated to everlasting life, is 
specially dear to the heart of the Theban poet, and is glorified 
more than once in the language of unaffected faith in such 
miracles.27. But, further, even when death has occurred in 
the meantime, elevation to a higher life remains possible— 
even beyond the heights of the ‘“‘ Hero’’. Semele lives for 
ever, though she died under the crash of the thunder-bolt.?® 
The barrier between men and gods is not insuperable; we 
can distantly approach the immortals not only in greatness 
of mind, but in bodily vigour.?® One mother gave birth to 
both races, though the gulf between them is indeed a deep 
one ; man is nought—a shadow’s dream-image ; for the gods 
the brazen heavens remain for ever as an unconquerable 
stronghold.?® Only a miracle of divine interference with the 
lawful and normal course of nature, can raise the individual 
soul to the everlasting life of the gods and Heroes. 

Such visions as these could be indulged in by one who still 


Titer EAY; AUTHORS 415 


kept his feet firmly fixed upon the ground of popular belief. 
And yet side by side with them in Pindar’s works are to be 
found descriptions of quite another order in which is expressed, 
with elaborate fullness and dogmatic exactitude, a complete 
doctrine of the nature, destiny, and fate of the soul ; passages 
in which, in spite of some little poetic licence in detail, a well 
ordered and, in the main, consistent whole is pictured. 

The Soul, the “ Image of Life’, the other Self of the living 
and visible man, sleeps while the limbs of man are active ; 
when the individual is asleep it shows him dream-visions of 
the future.*4. This psyche ** which during the waking and 
conscious hours of the man is itself lying in the darkness of 
unconsciousness, is far from being the totality of mental 
powers gathered together in a single creature, or at any rate, 
in a single concept, such as the philosophers as well as the 
everyday use of the word at that period understood by the 
name “‘psyche’’. Here, again, the name once more denotes 
the double of mankind dwelling within the living man such as. 
it was known to primeval popular belief and to the Homeric 
poems. A theological meaning has, however, been added to it. 
This “ Image ”’ of man, we are told, “‘ is alone descended from 
the gods,’ and with this the veason also is discovered why 
the soul-image alone after the destruction of the body by death 
remains alive.*3 

Derived from the gods and therefore eternally exempt from 
destruction, everlasting and immortal, the soul is none the 
less condemned to finiteness; it dwells within the mortal 
body of man. This is the result of the “ancient guilt” of 
which, quite in the manner of theological poetry, Pindar 
also speaks.34 After the death of the body it is to await in 
Hades the stern sentence that “ One”’ shall pronounce over 
its earthly deeds.*° For the condemned there is in store 
“affliction past beholding ” °° in deep Tartaros, ‘‘ where the 
slow rivers of murky night spit out endless darkness,’ and 
forgetfulness encloses the victims.3? The just enter into the 
subterranean places of bliss where the sun gives them light 
when he has set upon earth.3® In flowery meadows they enjoy 
an existence of resplendent idleness, such as only the Greek 
imagination, nourished amid the artistic surroundings of 
Greek life, could describe without falling into emptiness and 
futility. 

But the soul has not even so found iis last resting place. 
It must again give life to a body and not until it has completed. 
upon earth a third faultless life can it hope for an end of its 
earthly course of being.8® The conditions of each new life 


416 THEW LAY SAULHORS 


upon earth depend upon the degree of purity that the soul 
has achieved in its previous lifetimes. When at last the 
Queen of the Underworld considers that its “ ancient guilt ”’ 
has been atoned for, she sends forth the souls after the ninth 
year *° of their last sojourn in Hades once more to live in the 
upper world, this time in happiness. Here they pass through 
one more lifetime as kings, mighty men of valour, and Wise 
Men.*! Then at last they escape from the necessity of earthly 
rebirth. As “ Heroes”’ they are honoured among men; * 
and they have therefore entered into a state of higher being 
which the popular belief of Pindar’s time ascribed not only to 
the souls of the great ancestral figures of the past, but also 
to many who had departed hence in more recent times after 
a life of valour and service.** Now they are beyond the reach 
of Hades as much as of the world of men. Faith seeks them 
in ‘‘Islands of the Blest’’ far out in Okeanos; thither, to the 
“Citadel of Kronos ’”’ they travel on the ‘‘ Way of Zeus” 44 
and enjoy, in company with the great ones of the past, under 
the protection of Kronos * and his assessor Rhadamanthys, 
a life of bliss for ever undisturbed. 

Such conceptions of the origin, fortunes, and ultimate 
destiny of the soul, the more they diverge from commonly 
held opinions, the more certainly must they be regarded as 
being part of the private and real persuasion of the poet him- 
self. The poet, who on other occasions when he makes 
passing and casual reference to the things of the next world 
accommodates himself to the traditional view, gives himself 
up willingly to such hopes and aspirations where the circum- 
stances of his song provided an opportunity of dealing at 
length with such matters—especially in hymns of mourning 
for the dead. He may have paid attention in such poems to 
the special opinions of those who were to be the first hearers 
of his song. Theron, the ruler of Akragas, to whom was dedi- 
cated the second Olympian Ode of Victory that deals so 
fully with the hope of bliss to come, was an old man whose 
thoughts might well be occupied with the life after death.*® 
In this case, therefore, we may presume perhaps the special 
interest of the person whose praises are sung in these reflec- 
tions that lead so far away from the commonly accepted view 
of the Soul.47 But that Pindar, proud and self-willed, con- 
scious of special knowledge and proud of that consciousness, 
should have given expression to strange doctrine so foreign to 
popular ideas simply out of complaisance to another’s will, and 
in subserviance to another man’s belief—that is quite unthink- 
able. It is rather the substance of what he believes himself 


THE LAY AUTHORS 417 


and has achieved by his own struggles that in a solemn hour 
he reveals for a moment to like-minded friends. 

The different elements out of which Pindar has composed 
his special view are not hard to distinguish. He is following 
theological doctrine in what he tells of the divine origin of 
the soul, its wanderings through several bodies, the judgment 
in Hades, the special place assigned tothe just, and that of the 
wicked. But it is layman’s theology that he is propounding ; 
it does not bind itself to a single unalterable formula, and 
betrays throughout that its exponent is a poet. Pindar, 
throughout the whole of his poetic activity, combines the office 
of singer with that of professional teacher, more especially 
where he has to speak of the things of an invisible divine 
world. But for all his didactic professionalism he remains the 
poet, for whom as depository and trustee of the Myth it is 
out of the question to abandon the traditional, whether in 
legend or belief. Histask is to keep pure what has been handed 
down to him, to make it more profound, perhaps to supple- 
ment and complete it, but with all this to justify it. Thus, 
poetic legend and popular belief enter even into his theolo- 
gian’s doctrine of the Soul; the Islands of the Blest, the 
elevation of man to Hero—these were things he could not 
give up. 

From what particular direction Pindar’s theological interests 
may have come to him we cannot say with precision or 
certainty. Orphic as well as Pythagorean doctrines may have 
come to his notice in Sicily whither he made repeated visits 
after 477 B.c.48 For both sects this country was the original 
nursery and breeding ground. 

There, too, the poet may perhaps have (even at that date) 
met with certain varieties of the Orphic mystical doctrine 
which, like his own views, were intermingled with elements 
taken from conventional mythology. Examples of this type 
of Orphic mysticism allied with foreign elements are the 
verses which, inscribed upon gold tablets, were found not 
long ago in graves near the ancient Sybaris.4® Three of these 
poems begin with phrases that are common to them all, and 
imply the same underlying conceptions ; after that they part 
company and represent two different views. Thesoulof the dead 
person *° thus addresses itself to the Queen of the lower world, 
and the other gods of the depths below: ‘‘I draw near to you 
purified and born of pure parents.” *! It belongs then to a 
mortal who, like his parents before him, has been “ purified ” in 
the sacred mysteries of a religious association.®* It claimsalso to 
be descended from the blessed race of the deities of the lower 

Ee 


418 THE “LAY AUTHORS 

world.®8 ‘Lightning robbed me of life,” so one of the ver- 
sions goes on,°4 “‘ and so I escaped from the Circle, the burden- 
some, the grievous.” In these words purely Orphic belief is 
expressed: the Soul has now at last escaped entirely from the 
“ Circle of Births ’’,®° and it enters as it tells us “ with speedy 
feet into the wished-for precinct ’’,°® and buries itself in the 
bosom of the Queen of the Underworld.*’ It is the latter, 
probably, who at the end greets the liberated soul with the 
words: ‘‘ Fortunate and to be called Blessed art thou; now 
shalt thou be, instead of a mortal—a god.”’ 

Much less exalted are the hopes expressed in the 
other two versions of the mystic document—two versions 
that resemble each other in most essentials. Here the soul 
asserts that it has done penance for unrighteous deeds ; now 
it appears before the “revered Persephoneia to implore her 
graciously to send it to the dwelling places of the pure and the 
holy.°8 

How are we to explain the discrepancy ? It would indeed be 
possible to explain the more restrained version as that of a 
sect whose members were less confident of their own divine 
origin and of the necessary return of the soul at last to its 
enfranchised divine state. It is much more probable, however 
—since in fact the presupposition of the divine nature of the 
soul and its kinship with the divine is really made in both cases 
and with the same words—that we here have to do with the 
beliefs of one and the same sect, and that the varying heights 
of felicity aspired to correspond to different stages of the 
process of redemption. He who through participation in the 
sacred mysteries has atoned for the ancient guilt, can be 
admitted by the goddess into the paradise of the blest in the 
midst of Hades. But he must still, in subsequent rebirths 
upon earth first complete the cycle before he can be fully 
released from rebirth and become once more what he was at 
the beginning, entirely a god. The dead man of the first 
tablet has reached the final goal of his pilgrimage ;_ the other 
two have only reached an intermediate resting place.®® 
Another inscription, found in a grave of the same neighbour- 
hood, ®° by its use of a mystic formula *! appended also to the 
first version of the above-mentioned poems, reveals itself as 
an expression of faith deriving from the same sect. Among 
a variety of disconnected instructions and appeals to the 
dead,® strung together with no particular arrangement, it 
contains the following statement: ‘‘a god hast thou become 
instead of a mortal.’ This then always remained the crown- 
ing point of the salvation promised by the sect. 


Pr beecAY eA LOORS 419 


In the cult and beliefs of this sect which thus with divided 
voice speaks to us in these verses, the worship of the ancient 
Greek divinities of the Underworld (among whom Dionysos 
is not this time included) was fused with the boldest concep- 
tion belonging to the Dionysiac mysteries: the confident 
assurance that the divine nature of the soul must in the end 
break through, purified and triumphant over the earthliness 
that obscured it. Pindar in another, but not very different, 
way has brought the same elements into conjunction. One 
would indeed like to be able to estimate the influence which 
_his doctrine, which lay so close to his own heart, may have 
exercised on the hearers and readers of his poems. He was 
at once something more and something less than a theological 
teacher. Never again among the Greeks did the blessed life 
of the sanctified soul receive such majestic expression, clothed 
in such ample and resplendent diction, as that which poured 
so freely from the heart of this richly gifted poet. But though 
the poet may have touched the heart of his hearer and tempted 
his imagination to stray along the path laid out for him, yet 
it cannot have been easy (and perhaps the greatness of the 
poet’s triumph almost made it harder) permanently to 
mistake the magic gleam of poetry for the sunlight of reality. 
~ One may doubt whether the poems in which Pindar recounted 
his dreams of future blessedness can have found many hearers 
in whom they awakened not merely esthetic satisfaction, but 
belief in the literal truth of the teaching, in the reality of those 
beautiful, dim, haloed figures. 


§ 3 


But perhaps by the expression of such doubts we do less 
than justice to the influence which a Greek poet might exercise 
upon the minds and dispositions of his hearers. Greek 
popular opinion was very much inclined to place the poet on a 
pedestal to which his modern representative would hardly 
care to aspire, and to which at any rate he could never attain. 
The purely artistic value and importance of a poem did not 
seem to be impaired by the demand that it should at the same 
time instruct and edify. The poet was to be the teacher of 
his people in an age when, in the conditions of Greek life, the 
people had no other instructor. He was to be a teacher in 
the highest sense of all when, speaking in the language of the 
most exalted poetry, he dealt with the doubts and certainties 
of religion and the relationship between religion and morality. 
In these matters he could supplement out of the wealth of 


420 PoE WAY sAUTHORS 


his own far-reaching reflection what was lacking in the public 
morality of the time through the absence of an official, 
authoritative religious Book. By giving them intelligible 
and memorable expression, together with greater cohesion 
and unity, he could strengthen the foundations of the common 
stock of moral ideas that had been evolved in the course of 
social and city life. He might also expand and give greater 
depth to the ideas of popular morality, tempering them in 
the fire of his own more rigorous thought and interpreting and 
refining them from the heights of a more elevated under- 
standing of the divine. What he thus gave back to the people 
stamped with the impress of his own very personal tempera- 
ment and outlook, no longer remained the casual opinion of a 
single individual, but took root in suitably constituted minds 
and became for many a valued possession, an enduring 
addition to their consciousness. 

It was not until the rise in later times of a fully developed 
philosophy extending its range of interpretation to the whole 
of life that poetry was deprived of its special office of instruc- 
tress to the aspiring minds among the people.®* Poetry had 
always been willing to exercise this function, but never so 
decidedly or with such fully conscious purpose as in the times 
of transition at the beginning of which Pindar lived—the 
transition from an unsophisticated faith in the traditional 
view of all things visible and invisible to a fresh stabilization 
of belief secured by, and resting upon, philosphic conviction. 
The need felt for the readjustment or verification of the 
ancestral or traditional forms of belief was vividly awakened, 
and it was still only poetry that could extend the light of its 
teaching to illuminate the minds of whole classes of the 
population. The influence of the poets must have increased 
in proportion as the numbers increased of those who were 
ready to receive the special bounty which they were able to 
offer. But if the influence wielded by Pindar, the Pan-Hellenic 
poet of the great Festivals, as the teacher of his people was, 
as we have seen, considerable, a very wide field indeed for the 
propagation of fruitful ideas lay open to the Attic tragedians 
in the huge concourse of the people which flocked together to 
hear their creations—a multitude which seemed all the greater 
for being confined within a narrower space. The poets them- 
selves frequently allow it to be seen how seriously they regarded 
themselves as the teachers of their public, and the people 
admitted their claims. All men expected and demanded 
instruction from the word of the poet—the highest instruction 
from the highest poetry.®4 We shall not be much mistaken 


Loe Ae AULHORS 421 


if we believe that the opinions and reflections to which Aeschylus, 
Sophokles, and not least Euripides, gave utterance in their 
tragic drama did not remain the sole property of those in 
whose minds they had first arisen. 


§ 4 


The Attic Tragedy of the fifth century must of its own accord, 
even 1f the conscious purpose of the dramatists had not tended 
in the same direction, have developed into an artistic product 
based on psychological interest. The real theatre of that 
drama must inevitably have become the interior of its hero’s 
mind. 

The tragic poet attempted something hitherto unknown. 
The characters and events of ancient legend or history which 
had passed shadowlike before the minds of the hearers or 
readers of all earlier poetry, at the mercy of those hearers’ 
own private and variously limited imagination—these same 
events and characters were now to take form and body and 
appear visibly before the eyes of all beholders alike in equal 
clearness. What had hitherto seemed a dream-vision of the 
imagination now visibly presented itself to the eyes of the 
beholder, unchanging, precise, independent of the limitations 
of intellect among the audience, a concrete and self-moving 
object of waking perception. Thus reawakened to a palpable 
and fully realized life, the myth was seen in a new light. What 
in it was mere incident became subordinated to the personality 
of the man who plays his part in these events before our eyes, 
and whose importance and content is not exhausted in the 
single particular action. The old legend in becoming drama 
has undergone an extension both spatial and temporal, 
and even in externals the plot that unfolds itself in a 
series of momentary acts plays the least part in the story. 
The speeches and counter-speeches of the hero and the 
other actors who take part in the story were bound to 
take up the greater part of the time. Motives of action, 
expressed, debated and fought out in words, become more 
important than their eventual outcome in passionate deed 
or mortal woe. With the advance of artistic skill the 
intellect seeks to grasp the permanent outlines of the character 
that in the given circumstances can be moved by particular 
motives to particular acts. Thus, the complete materializa- 
tion of the myth leads to its complete spiritualization. The 
eyes and mind of the beholder are directed less to the external 
events—these, being familiar from the ancient legend, could 


422 THE PANe eU LHe hs 


awaken little curiosity—and more to the inward meaning and 
import of what the hero does and suffers. 

And it was here that the dramatic poet was faced with his 
special and peculiar problem. What was to happen in his 
drama was settled out of hand by the course of the ancient 
legend (in a few cases by the course of historical events) and 
the lines along which his invention must move were planned 
out for him in advance. To give life to the personages of the 
drama, motivation and justification to the events of the 
drama—that was his particular business. But in this he was 
thrown entirely upon his own resources. Even if he could 
he was not permitted to derive the inner motive forces of the 
action from the real modes of feeling and thinking that had 
belonged to the distant past in which the myth had first been 
conceived. Such motives would have remained unintelligible 
to the audience, and his play would have been stillborn. But 
on the other hand, how was he to make plausible and intelli- 
gible to the vastly different mentality and changed feelings 
of the age in which he lived actions which really sprang from 
the habits and moral ideas of a long since vanished age ? It is 
open to him (if he is not content to be a mere annalist simply 
stringing together bare events) to take the actual incident 
given him by the mythical legend and set over against it the 
actor in the story whose emotions are those of a modern man, 
and upon whose shoulders the burden of the event is laid ; 
he may represent this opposition as beyond reconciliation, 
and so lead to the most simple and overwhelming of tragic 
conflicts. This simple opposition of character and destiny 
which places both the poet and his hero—another Hamlet— 
in a position of direct hostility to the mythological background 
can, however, never become the rule. Itis the business of the 
poet as far as possible to assimilate and make his own the 
spirit that actually called forth the dark and cruel legend of 
the past, while yet remaining true to the mode of perception 
proper to his own time. He must manage to leave undis- 
turbed the full primitive sense of the mythical story and bring 
it about that by its marriage with the spirit of a later age 
its meaning is not destroyed but deepened. He is committed 
to the search for an adjustment between the mental attitudes 
of an older and a newer age. 

Such an adjustment came most easily to Aeschylus and 
satisfied the needs of his temperament. As one who had grown 
to manhood in the Athens of the period before the Persian 
wars his own character had its roots in ancient and traditional 
modes of thought. These he built up under the guiding 


Poe AyerAGPHORS 423 


influence of his own special ways of thinking and feeling into 
a new and loftier whole: to corroborate this whole, which 
appeared to him as a law of the moral world, by reference to 
typical examples taken from mythology—examples chosen 
by him with deliberate care to serve as subjects of his 
dramatic poetry—this was one of the chief aims of his art. 
To the plot in its moral—nay, its religious—sense, all his 
thoughts are directed ; the characters of the actors themselves 
are only illuminated from the standpoint of this special 
interest ; their wider, independent existence outside the life 
of the drama which completely envelopes them is not meant 
to draw attention to itself. He himself gives us the right, in 
studying his plays, to leave out of sight for a moment the 
representational aspect of the particular and the personal— 
all that in fact makes them essentially works of art—in order 
to observe more closely the under-current of generalized 
belief which we may reasonably call the ethic and theology 
of the poet. 

Behind the living tissue of his artistic creation Aeschylus 
allows us to perceive pretty clearly the firm outlines of his 
own ethical and religious convictions. He fuses together 
elements prescribed to him from without with that which 
was dictated by his own spirit. What is prescribed to him 
by legend—which he allows to run its full course, in strictly 
dramatic form and by preference as a trilogy, a form in this 
case uniquely adapted to the subject—is a history that 
deals with the continued operation of the forces of evil and 
suffering upon several generations of a family, persisting 
from father to son and from son to son’s son. The belief also in 
such interconnexion of human destinies is prescribed to him 
from without. That the sins of the ancestors were visited upon 
their descendants here upon earth was an ancient article of 
faith especially strong in Attica. What Aeschylus contributes 
on his part is the unswerving conviction that the son and 
grandson of the sinner are punished for their own sin too. 
Suffering is punishment,®* and suffering would not have over- 
taken Oedipus, nor the sons of Oedipus, if Laios had been . 
the only guilty one—if their own sin had not deserved punish- 
ment. 

And yet it does not lie within their power to choose 
whether the guilt shall be theirs or not: they cannot escape 
the deed of sin. How, we may ask, can a guilty deed be 
necessitated, imposed upon the guilty one by the decree of a 
higher power, and yet at the same time the fault of the doer 
of the deed, as though he had acted of his own free will ¢ 


424 THE LCAY AUTHORS 


The question is a perplexing and a formidable one, and it was 
by no means unnoticed by the poet. Behind the external 
apparatus of myth he finds himself faced by the problem of 
the freedom or determination of man’s will, which, as civiliza- 
tion and culture advance, feels itself morally responsible for 
every decision. He finds a way out of the difficulty in the 
view that it is not merely the deed of wickedness itself, but 
the conscious decision that leads up to the deed that arises 
out of the family inheritance of crime. The conscious choice 
and decision, though regarded as necessary, seemed to 
demonstrate fully the personal guilt and responsibility of the 
doer.*” The cloud of evil that proceeds from the deed of the 
ancestor casts a dark shadow also over the minds of his son 
and his son’s son. Not from his own mind or character does 
the will to do wrong take its origin. The noble, pure and 
resolute Eteokles, the model of intelligent manhood, the 
shield and protection of his people, falls in a moment, a victim 
to ominous destiny ; his clear-sighted spirit is darkened, he 
gives himself up—his better self—for lost,®* and rushes upon 
his doom with awful resolve. The “sins derived from his 
ancestors ’’ ®° drive him on. Then, and not till then, is the full 
measure of penance at last paid for the crime done by the 
ancestor ; ’° his descendants are his representatives, and become 
guilty on his behalf and then, for their own guilt as well as his, 
they suffer retribution. Divinity, or a spirit of vengeance 
sent with a divine mission, drives the victims burdened with 
the inheritance of crime to the criminal deed. The divine 
guidance is actuated no longer, as in ancient and undying 
popular belief, by personal desire of vengeance, anger or malice,74 
but by divine justice, acting with “‘ just deceit ’’,’* that the 
measure of guilt may be fulfilled, and that the divine will to 
justice may have a means to complete satisfaction. The evil 
Spirit of the House assists Klytaimnestra to conceive the 
thought of murdering her husband: 7? God himself guides 
and urges forward Orestes to the act of matricide which he 
plans and carries out with fully conscious purpose—a crime 
that is also a duty. To the poet the old ideas of the duty 
of avenging murder are a very living reality. The right to 
worship and cult possessed by the souls, their claim to 
vengeance when they have been violently done to death, 
their ghostly influence exerted upon the life and destinies 
of their immediate kinsfolk upon whom the duty of taking 
vengeance rests—all these things are for him not the obsolete 
fancies of an older generation but true and awful realities.74 
Whole dramas, the Choephorai and the Eumenides, for 


DPHEPVEAYs AU LAORS 425 


instance, would appear as a meaningless beating of the air 
if they were not animated and made significant by unaltered 
faith in the right and the might of the souls, the reality and 
potency of the daimonic counsel, the Erinyes,”*> who appear 
on behalf of the murdered mother. And now at last 
light breaks through the dark and clouded sky of awful 
imagination : where Duty and Crime have become inextricably 
confused, divine grace, though yielding nothing of its rights, 
finds at last a solution. 

All these things, however—conflict and solution, crime 
and its expiation in ever-renewed crime and the suffering 
that arises thence—fulfil themselves in this world. Guilt 
is avenged always upon earth. The “ other’’ world is by 
no means an indispensable link in this chain of conceptions 
and fancies: the poet’s view is rarely turned in that direction. 
Speculation upon the state of the soul after death, upon 
a blessed life in the kingdom of the spirits,?® does not interest 
him. Only such portions of the eschatological imaginings 
of the theologians as might serve the purposes of moral 
inspiration or support, found favour with the poet. There 
are occasional allusions to the judgment that, in Hades, 
‘another Zeus ”’ holds over the deeds of earthly life,’” but they 
remain dark and vague. It is not explained in what relation 
this judgment in Hades stands to the complete equivalence 
of guilt and destiny that, here upon earth, Zeus and Moira 
bring to completion in the person of the criminal himself 
and, after his death, of his descendants. Side by side with 
the allusions to the judgment in the underworld implying 
the complete consciousness of the dead, stand expressions 
that call up a picture of the senseless, twilight existence 
of the souls in Hades like that described in Homer.’*® The 
poet, to whom every feature of the beliefs derived from the 
cult of the souls about the relations of the departed to the 
life of the dwellers on earth was intensely and vividly real, 
never cared to fix his attention for long upon the nature and 
condition of the dead in their separate other-world existence. 
In fact his chosen work of giving a moral significance and 
deeper meaning to popular and ancient faith was wholly 
derived from this faith itself ; and so also was the lofty and 
consistent idea of divinity which fills the background of 
his picture of life. The generation which had fought at 
Marathon, in spite of a profounder and even more sombre 
meditation upon life and destiny, could still dispense almost 
entirely with the assistance of the theological doctrines 
of the sects who sought refuge from the. dark and austere 


426 PAE VUAY*eAUL HORS 


realities of this unsatisfying world in thoughts of an imagined 
hereafter. § 5 


Towards the great problems of dramatic philosophy— 
the problems of the freedom or compulsion of the will, the 
guilt and destiny of man—Sophokles took up a position 
that differed essentially from that of his great predecessor. 
A maturer and calmer self-abandonment to the observation 
of life and its difficulties made him less able to rest content 
with simple or sweeping solutions of the complexities ; made 
him seek out other and more various modes of understanding. 
The individual man, stamped with the unique impression 
of his peculiar being, with him becomes more fully detached 
from the background of omnipotent might and universal 
law. The individual finds within himself the rules of his 
behaviour, the causes of his success, or his tragic failure. 
No petty, egotistical motive inspires the action of Antigone 
or Elektra: they are obedient to the old, unwritten laws 
of the gods. But the force that leads them to obey is derived 
solely from the special fashion and impulse of their own 
hearts. No one else could do what they do, suffer what 
they suffer. We realize the necessity and justification of 
what they do and suffer solely from the contemplation of 
the strength and weakness of their own characters as displayed 
for us in the action that takes place upon the stage. Indeed, 
the length to which Sophokles, in the ‘‘ Elektra’’, goes in the 
suppression of such universally recognized and _ binding 
motives as those derived from the duty of vengeance and 
the rights of injured souls, may well cause surprise. The 
special and individual case must for him carry its own 
justification within itself, and in fact it receives such justifica- 
tion so completely from the character and behaviour of the 
actors in the drama that, unlike the hero of Aeschylus’ 
tragedy, Orestes needs to have no qualm of doubt in the 
performance of his deed, and suffers no remorse after 
the murder of the wicked murderess. Once again as in the 
Homeric story, with Orestes’ “ righteous deed of blood ’’,” the 
circle of calamity is complete : no Erinys rises from the earth 
to demand his overthrow.®® 

So, too, when the suffering and calamity that befalls the 
mortal hero comes not from his own conscious decision 
and exercise of will, but from obscure decrees of fate it is 
still the special character of the hero which not only demands 
the greater part of our attention, but entirely conditions 
and sufficiently explains the course of events. The same 


Tote Cay SAUTHORS 427 


misfortune might overtake another man, but neither its 
inward nor its outward effects would be the same as they 
are for Oedipus or Aias. Only tragically extreme characters 
can have a tragic fate. 

And yet, in these as in other tragedies, what gives the 
first impulse and direction to the course of the story does not 
arise from the will or character of their heroes. The mind 
of Aias is not free but subject when he performs the deed 
that sends him to his death. Oedipus, Deianeira take 
vengeance upon themselves for the deeds of horror that they 
have brought about without knowing what they did. Not- 
withstanding the fact that the interest of the ‘“‘ Philoktetes ” 
centres so completely round the vividly contrasted characters 
of Philoktetes, Neoptolemos, and Odysseus, yet the situation 
which brings them into opposition is one which it was beyond 
the power or the purpose of man to bring about or to hinder. 
An obscure destiny plunges man into suffering, drives him 
to actions in the face of which easy and ready-made judgments 
about “ guilt ’’ and the relation between suffering and desert 
are silenced. It is not inherited family crime that here 
forces the son and the grandson to deeds that can hardly 
be called their own. The poet, it is true, knows of these 
conceptions *! that play so large a part in the poetry of 
Aeschylus, but they are mere historical tradition to him, 
not vital motives of his drama. Nor is it mere irrational 
chance, or impersonal fate working by necessity and without 
passion that directs the mind and guides the hand of the 
actor in his bondage. Clearly or obscurely moving about 
in the background of events the will of a divine power can 
be discerned that, inevitable as fate,®* guides the deeds 
and the fate of men in accordance with its own purpose. 

The divine purpose brings to maturity a plan in which the 
individual man and his destiny are mere instruments. To 
make plain the premeditated character of this purposeful 
direction of human affairs is the object of the prophetic 
anticipations of the future, the divine oracles and prophecies 
of seers of which we hear so much in the plays. If this divine 
purpose should involve the fatal act, the undeserved suffering 
of the individual, then that purpose will be fulfilled though 
human happiness may be destroyed in the process, and though 
pain, crime, agony, and violent death may overwhelm the 
mortal individual. The well-being of the individual does 
not enter into the question where the intentions of a divinity 
that sees far beyond this puny existence are concerned. 
An honest, simple-minded, good-hearted man, without 


428 HER SUAY SAUTHORS 


deceit or fault, like Philoktetes, is abandoned for many long 
years to every kind of suffering in order that he may not 
interfere prematurely in the development of the war against 
Troy with the magic weapons that are in his possession.** He 
is an involuntary martyr for the good of the whole community. 
In order that Herakles may be released from this life at 
the precise moment of time that has been fixed by divine 
foreknowledge, 84 Deianeira, the most devoted and womanly 
character in the whole of the Attic drama, must out of the 
goodness of her heart and the love she bears to her husband 
send him to the most awful of deaths and then perish herself. 
Simply because such is the will of heaven ®° must Oedipus, 
unknowing and blameless, slay his father, marry his mother, 
and plunge himself into.the deepest depth of misery. 

Thus, out of the darkness, the hand of divine superiority 
guides the destinies of humanity, the will and behaviour of 
men, according to its own purposes. The problematical 
in human life, the disparity between personal guilt and personal 
suffering, which daily experience brings before our eyes, 
seemed to the poet to be rendered more intelligible by this 
conception. He preaches dutiful submission to these 
dispensations of a higher power. He himself is one of the 
pious, in the specific sense of the word,®® for whom to perceive 
the will of the gods is sufficient to call forth adoration of 
the gods; who feel no need that this mighty will should 
justify itself to human ideas of morality and goodness.®? 
It may be right to call this will a holy will; but there is no 
need for it to prove itself such at the bar of human judgment. 
Nor does such piety find itself disturbed in its worship when, 
in order to assert the divine prerogative over humanity 
(whose first duty it is to recognize the limits of what is allowed 
and possible for it), divine inhumanity and cold lust of 
vengeance manifest themselves so clearly as in the Athene 
of the ‘“Ajax’’.88 It gives the measure of the peculias 
and unique character of Sophoklean art and the Sophoklean 
attitude to life—a quite personal character not to be explained 
on abstract grounds—that this attitude of awed submissiveness 
in matters of religion could exist side by side with the strong 
appreciation and justification of the unfettered action of 
free individuality. Rarely—only once or twice in the plays— 
is a cry of pain wrested from the lips of one of these uncom- 
plaining victims of a purpose not their own.®® As a rule, 
the eye shuns to behold, the judgment to criticize, the ultimate 
reasons of divine action. It is partly artistic restraint 
no doubt, but religious discretion, too, makes the poet leave 


Lt ee UL OKS 429 


such things in semi-obscurity.°° The majesty of divine 
power remains for the most part in the background and does 
not mingle familiarly with men or too notoriously interfere 
with human destiny. 

But the individual who with his sufferings must serve a 
purpose that is not his own, Humanity that lives under such 
bitter laws—what elevating and consoling thoughts are 
awakened by the contemplation of their fate. The poet 
employs all the resources of his overwhelming art to secure the 
profoundest sympathies of his hearers for the undeserved 
sufferings of the victim, for the delusions of well-intentioned 
but limited vision that must always stray from the goal at 
which it aims. The moral of the play is not lost even on the 
sufferer’s foe as he beholds the error and guilt of the noble 
but misguided heart.9? What thus overwhelms the strong 
and the wise, the good and the well-meaning, through no 
fault of their own, may descend upon any member of the 
human family. Thus the destinies of men are allotted. 
The lament over the vanity and the sorrow of life, its brief 
happiness, and the uncertainty of its joy, is poured forth 
in memorable lines.*? They end on a note of resignation 
which gives the keynote of the poet’s own character; but 
there is a bitterness which remains behind. 

It might have been supposed that one who thus abandoned 
all attempt to reconcile the worth and actions of men with 
their fate upon earth, would feel all the more need, for his 
own satisfaction and that of others, to prove the existence of 
a divine justice that should restore the balance in a future 
state of being. But the poet shows little sign of any such 
need. Thoughts of what may happen after death are never 
of very great moment to him. They never distinctly affect 
the behaviour of those whose deeds or suffering fill his plays. °4 

When, however, light is thrown for a passing moment 
on the unknown land beyond the grave the scene that imagina- 
tion reveals hardly differs at all from the picture that had 
once been present to the minds of the Homeric singers. 
The place that is in store for the departed is Hades,®> the 
unlovely country of the dead, °® whither the Soul flits powerless, 
shadowlike, little more than a nothing,®’ feeling no joy but 
no pain either ; 9° where it enters upon a state of insensibility 
that the grief-stricken sufferer on earth often longs for as 
a much-desired haven of rest.9% Plouton, Persephone, 
all the deities of the earth below,!°® there rule over the 
departed. But it is not grace nor kindliness that prevails 
there—only Justice: Hades demands equal justice for all.1 


430 THIGRUAY SAUTHORS 


Pious veneration of the gods continues also in the other 
world, and for the rest we hear nothing of either reward 
or punishment or of a final supplementing in the land of the 
Souls of the inadequacy of the justice that fulfils itself on 
earth. 

But though departed into Hades the dead have still 
a claim upon the upper world and on those who still are 
living there. Together with the Homeric picture of the 
lower world is united the cult of the souls and the ideas, 
connected with that cult, of the continued life of the dead. 
The next of kin owe to the departed the ceremonious burial 
that is the first expression of their pious solicitude for his 
soul’s welfare:t° «In two wplayssthe» © Ajaxij@vandmeune 
‘“ Antigone ’’, the love and loyalty of the survivors is obliged 
to fight for this right of the dead in desperate encounter with 
earthly authority and even with the sacrifice of their own 
devoted lives. Such instances serve to bring out clearly the 
fact that it is no empty convention or tradition that is thus 
defended and carried through to the end. Nor does the com- 
pletion of the burial mark the end of the dead man’s relations 
with the upper world: even after that he may be benefited by 
offerings made at his grave.'°4 Information of what happens 
on earth may penetrate to the dead ; 1° and he himself, under. 
the protection of the underworld spirits and of their assessor 
Diké, who take cognizance of his claims,1°® may interfere 
in the affairs of the living as a “ Curse-spirit ’’ upon those 
who disregard his wishes,?®? by sending threatening dream- 
visions upon his foes,1°® and as a very present help and 
unseen ally to his friends in their hour of need.}° 

As to an eternity of bliss awaiting the soul, the god in man, 
after its final release from the shackles of the body, the poet 
knows as little of such as he does of an eternity of damnation 
for the wicked. Only the quite special state of grace which 
is enjoyed by those who have been purified in the mysteries 
of the goddesses at Eleusis receives mention by him 120: 
he is frequently disposed to think of this supreme expression 
of Attic worship with patriotic pride.4! But itis only a minority 
of the good who thus achieve by the grace of the goddesses 
a privileged “‘life’’ in the kingdom of shadows. One and 
only one is lifted by the divine grace clear of the human 
fate of annihilation, and in the Grove of the Erinyes the 
sorely-tried Oedipus is translated without seeing death 
out of this earthly lfe.4* So living a reality to this poet 
of ancient piety is the conviction that the divine miracle 
of translation #48 is a literal truth, that he is even ready 


ieee Yea ULTHORS 431 


to make this strange circumstance serve as the sole aim and 
purpose of a whole drama: a miracle which all the other 
scenes serve not so much to prepare as simply to postpone, 
and thus heighten the expectancy with which the event is 
awaited. It is not supreme virtue that secures an immortality 
for Oedipus which others also who showed an _ equal 
degree of goodness might possibly attain. He reveals himself 
to us as an innocent sufferer indeed,"4 but also as obdurate 
in his rash and violent nature, vindictive, stubborn, and self- 
willed, not ennobled but rather brutalized by his sufferings.1!5 
Nevertheless, divine power elevates him to the state of 
immortal Hero less almost for the sake of the satisfaction 
and bliss to himself as in order that he may be the saviour 
of the Attic land, the country of humanity and kindness. 
that has taken into its protection ™® the unfortunate one, 
and desires to preserve for ever his power of blessing.12? 
Just as once it had pleased divine power to overwhelm the 
innocent victim in a sea of crime and suffering, so now it 
pleases the same divine power to raise the sufferer, without 
any new or special merit on his side, to a fate of superhuman 
bliss.48 In his case a divine miracle occurs, into the ultimate 
reasons for which it is not profitable to inquire. 

In his views, so far as he allows us to see them, of the things 
of the next world, Sophokles differs not at all from those who 
still saw life and worshipped the gods as their fathers had. 
done before them. The great poet of human, tragic destiny, 
the profound student of the divine government of this mourn- 
ful world, was unwilling to set by the side of it a brighter 
and more comforting picture of a spirit world of the imagina- 
tion. In this, too, he is modest and will not say much—he 
knows no more of these matters, and in no other fashion, 
than “ any other honest citizen of Athens ’’.119 


$6 

In the course of a long life Sophokles was able to make 
himself complete master of his art and grow up into strong and 
generous manhood without the guidance or support of either 
theological or philosophical learning. Theology he did not 
care to seek out in its hiding place, the obscurity of isolated 
sects. Philosophy, in the period of his impressionable youth, 
had not yet reached Athens, and when he had attained riper 
years his noble simplicity of temper had little to gain or to 
fear from the meditated wisdom or folly of the younger 
generation. In serene detachment he passed on his way 
through all the press and clamour of the market place. 


432 THE LAY WAUTHORS 


The moving impulse which since the end of the sixth century 
had collected together at Athens all the intellectual forces of 
Greece for a final expansion of their capacity now began, in 
the middle of the fifth century, to take hold of philosophy as 
it had long since done literature and the fine arts. Athens 
saw the last representatives of Ionian physiology gathered 
together within her walls. Some, like Anaxagoras, took up 
their residence there for a long period, and left the impress of 
their teaching upon the foremost minds of the city. The others 
who paid briefer visits were those who in conscious opposition 
to the recent trend of thinking, stoutly upheld the older 
principles of philosophic Monism or Hylozoism, such as 
Diogenes of Apollonia or Hippon of Samos; or who sought 
like Archelaos to reconcile the old and the new Ionic doctrine. 
Besides these, Athens was a headquarters of the wandering 
exponents of the newest wisdom, the Sophists. Nowhere did 
unfettered discussion find such cultivated appreciation of its 
daring ; nowhere was such an eager welcome given to the 
dialectical word-play that, seeming to be an end in itself, was 
destined to become the most fruitful nursery of native Athenian 
philosophy. All traditional beliefs and customs that had not 
their origin or their justification in reflexion were already 
doomed as soon as they, together with every conventional 
view of life and the world, were deprived of their natural 
protection of unchallenged self-evidence by the cold scrutiny 
of the sovereign tyrant Dialectic. The Sophists, those 
skirmishers of a new and as yet unrecognizable philosophy, 
scattered and put to flight the old guard of positive and 
doctrinal wisdom, but to the individual, who was bidden 
to depend upon his own resources, they offered stimulus to 
reflection in abundance but no permanent foothold in the 
shifting sands of opinion. It would be but a final assertion 
of the principle that there are no principles if by any chance 
the Sophists themselves should for a moment speak in the 
language of edification and, for example, lend the support of 
their eloquence to certain articles of doctrine that provided 
a positive teaching as to the nature and life of the soul.1?° 

If Sophokles remained quite unaffected by this whole 
movement which reached its flood tide in Athens, Euripides 
was drawn completely into its current. He sought out philo- 
sophers and sophists personally and in their writings. His 
was a spirit that urgently desired to know the truth and he 
followed every available guide to knowledge and wisdom for 
a stage upon their journey. But he was never able to con- 
tinue permanently in any one direction ; in the restlessness 


eee ye AUR HOTS 433 


and bewilderment of search and experiment he is the true son 
of his age. 

His philosophical and sophistical leanings were sufficiently 
marked to make it impossible for him to accept any part of 
the belief or tradition of his countrymen without trial. So 
far as it is possible within the limits of dramatic art, he 
instituted an unsparing and unhesitating criticism of all 
accepted things, and in the process felt himself immeasurably 
superior to the wit and wisdom of the past. And yet he never 
satisfied himself. He could never rest content with a merely 
negative position, for all onesidedness was foreign to his 
nature. The tremendous honesty of his nature made it im- 
possible for him to admit that element of frivolity which made 
the sophistic movement and the dialectical negation of all 
certainty so simple and attractive, and at the same time took 
away half its sting. But he could take nothing easily ; and 
so with all his sophistic enlightenment he was never happy. 
The pupil of the Sophists would hear every other side as well ; 
there were even moments when he longed to take refuge in 
the restful narrowness of old and traditional piety. But it 
was not given to him to settle down in any fixed set of opinions ; 
all his convictions were provisional, mere hypotheses adopted 
for the purposes of experiment. Afloat on a changeful sea, he 
let himself be driven hither and thither by every wind of 
intellectual excitement or artistic necessity. 

When all convictions were involved together in a state of 
perpetual change and instability, the conception of the nature 
and being of the soul and its relation to the powers of life and 
death could not alone remain in fixed and dogmatic certainty. 

Where the content and character of the fable chosen as the 
subject of his drama demand it, the poet frankly adopts 
the popular view of the nature and destiny of the departed 
soul, its power and claim upon the worship of the survivors 
upon earth. In the fairy-tale play of the “ Alcestis ’’ the whole 
apparatus of popular belief plays its part ; the God of Death 
and his awful office, the dwelling of the dead in the under- 
world, are spoken of as facts and creatures of experience and 
reality.#1 The elaborate funeral ceremonies owed to the 
dead are treated with the utmost seriousness and precision.1”? 
A whole drama, the ‘‘ Suppliant Women’, has as its real 
subject, or at least as its ostensible motive, the religious 
importance of a ritual burial,!23 nor is there any lack of 
isolated passages in which the importance of burial and the 
honour paid to graves is stressed.!24 The survivors on earth 
give pleasure to the dead by offerings at their graves, 

Ff 


434 ett See AY COLEEL OE 


and in this way obtain their goodwill and can count upon their 
support.12® Power and honour belong not only to the great 
ones of antiquity translated to a higher state of being ; 127 
not only ‘“‘ Heroes”’ can extend their influence beyond their 
graves and affect the course of earthly events :1#8 from the soul 
of his murdered father, the son expects assistance and succour 
in his time of need. The dread creatures of antique faith, the 
Erinyes, exact vengeance for the murdered mother.!?9 

But at this point it becomes apparent that the poet only 
associates himself for his own purposes with this circle of 
ancient and sanctified popular fancy—so long in fact as it 
suits the tone that he wishes to give to the drama and its 
characters. The Erinyes are excellent material for the play— 
that in reality their horrid figures only exist in the imagination 
of the mentally diseased is clearly asserted in the “ Orestes ”’.18° 
The whole series of beliefs and demands—murder ever calling 
forth fresh murder in accordance with the sacred duty of 
vengeance, the Erinyes, the bloodthirsty patrons of the 
murdered victim who leaves no proper avenger behind him— 
all these have ceased to have any validity for him. The 
“animal and bloodthirsty ” part of these figures of ancient 
belief call forth the loathing of the poet living in the days 
of organized justice and humaner manners.13!_ He does not 
believe in the souls’ right to blood ; the ancient legends which 
depend on this right are an abomination to him. In fact, he 
only seems to have written his plays about them in order, by 
the manner of his presentation, to have his revenge upon this 
material that was almost unavoidably thrust upon him by the 
tradition of the tragic stage. The duty of the living to offer 
a cult to the departed souls becomes doubtful in its turn. The 
Seriousness with which that cult is sometimes handled in the 
plays is compromised by such reflections as these: it is certain 
that it matters little to the dead whether rich offerings are 
placed in their graves or not; such things only satisfy the 
idle vanity of the living ; }8* honour and dishonour are of no 
further consequence to the dead.483 How should they be, if 
the departed no longer feel either pleasure or pain, are nothing 
at all, as is repeatedly declared even in the middle of the 
erAlcestismensss 

It is evident that only from an arbitrarily adopted point 
of view do the picturesque creations of popular belief in the 
soul and of the cult of souls seem real to the poet ; apart from 
this they disappear from his mind like the creatures of a 
dream.1*° The teachings of the theologians supplied him with 
no real substitute for popular faith ; at the most they were a 


DOE Eye AU LHORS 435 


momentary and passing stimulus. No doubt he did not 
shut his eyes completely to these manifestations of the 
spiritual life of his time. His plays contain allusions to Orphic 
poetry and he joins the asceticism of the Orphics to the cold 
virtue of his Hippolytos.436 The thought that the soul has 
fallen from a higher state of being and is enclosed within the 
body like the dead man in his coffin takes captive his imagina- 
tion for a moment. “‘ Who knows then whether life is not a 
kind of death,” so that in death the soul awakes to its real 
life ? 18” The gloomy view of human destiny upon this earth 
to which the poet so often gives expression, might seem to 
hint at a consolation to come in a more satisfactory hereafter ; 
but the poet has no longing for the consolation offered by the 
theologians. Among the many and various reflections of the 
poet upon the reality that may reveal itself when the curtain 
is drawn aside by death, we never meet with the conception that 
lies at the bottom of the assurances made by the theologians 
—the conception that the spiritual individual is certain of its 
immortality because in its individuality it is of divine nature 
and is itself a god.188 True, he is the author of the bold saying 
so often quoted and varied in later times, that God is nothing 
else but the mind that dwells in men.48° But this makes no 
allusion to the theological doctrine of the multiplicity of 
individual gods or daimones banished into the life of men ; it 
rather implies a semi-philosphic doctrine of the soul in which 
one may perceive for the first time the expression of a per- 
manent conviction on the part of the poet. 

In quite inapposite contexts Euripides sometimes introduces 
passing allusions to a philosophical view of the world and 
humanity, that is the more certainly to be regarded as the 
private conviction of the poet himself as the utterances fail 
to correspond fully with the character of the person in the 
play who makes them, and do not arise necessarily from the 
dramatic situation. Everything in the world has had its 
origin from Earth and “ the Aether of Zeus’ ; the Earth isthe 
maternal womb from which the Aether brings everything to 
birth.14° Both constituents combine to produce the multi- 
plicity of appearance; they are not fused together nor are 
they to be derived from a single common original element ; 141 
they remain in dualistic contrast side by side.14## It was pro- 
bably the dualism of this cosmological fancy that reminded 
the ancients of Anaxagoras ; but these statements cannot be 
regarded as simply a poetical version of the doctrine of 
Anaxagoras ; 148 for they derive the multiplicity of matter 
and things from the simple element of “ Earth” from which 


436 THE LAY “AUTHORS 


they arise only by a process of change and transformation, 
while in the “seedmixture ”’ of Anaxagoras, the unchangeable 
seeds of all things only separate themselves out from the 
whole and give rise by mechanical reassemblings to all the 
perceived appearances of the world. The “Aether” of 
Euripides in its relations with the “ Earth ”’ is besides being 
the active partner also the intellectual and animated element. 
The isolation of such an element from the rest of matter does 
indeed remind us of the procedure of Anaxagoras. But the 
poet’s Aether is still an element though it may be penetrated 
by mind and animated by spirit; it is not a mental being 
standing over against all the other elements in essential 
distinctness like the Nous of Anaxagoras. The fact that it is 
the element of the Aether, 1.e. the dry and hot air, in which 
intellectual capacity is said to inhere, may be regarded as 
having been borrowed from Diogenes of Apollonia, a philo- 
sopher who was held in considerable estimation at Athens at 
that time, and who was well known to Euripides.144 In his 
doctrine, the air (which indeed, in contrast to the view of 
Euripides, produces all other things simply out of itself) is 
expressly identified with the “Soul” and is itself described 
as “‘ having understanding ’’.1% 

-This view of the elementary forces and constitution of the 
universe, made up as it is from philosophical suggestions of 
a scarcely reconcilable character, in which the dualistic ten- 
dency is in fact finally predominant, suggests itself to the poet 
whenever in an exalted mood he speaks of the final destiny 
of the human soul. The soul on its separation from the body 
will depart to join the “‘ Aether’. But in such conceptions 
it is not always the imagination of the philosopher-poet that 
finds expression. On this subject it is accompanied or 
replaced by a more popular view that only distantly resembles 
it, but which led to the same result. When we hear now and 
again of the Aether, the luminous atmosphere above the 
clouds, as being the dwelling place of the departed souls,!46 
the view—more theological than philosophic in its character— 
seems to be implied that after death the liberated soul will 
float upwards to the seat of the gods1!47 which has long 
ceased to be situated upon Olympos, but is in “ heaven ”’ or 
in this same Aether. This, too, was the meaning of a saying 
traditionally ascribed to Epicharmos the comic-poet of 
Sicily who was himself versed in philosophy. In this saying 
the pious man is assured that for him death will bring no evil 
for his “‘ mind’ will dwell permanently in “ heaven ’’.148 
This conception, which appears so frequently in later epitaphs, 


THE EAY ~AULTHORS 437 


must have been familiar to popular imagination at Athens 
at an early period; at least in the grave-epigram officially 
dedicated by thestate to the memory of the Athenians who fell 
in the year 432 before Poteidaia, we find the belief expressed 
(as a commonly received opinion) that the souls of these brave 
men have been received by the “Aether ”’ just as the earth 
has received their bodies.449 Such official use implies a 
commonly accepted opinion and the fundamental ideas 
of the popular cult of the souls might have led to similar 
results. From the beginning popular belief had regarded the 
psyche, which got its name from the air or breath, as closely 
akin to the winds, the mobile air and its spirits. It would not 
be difficult for the idea to arise that the soul, as soon as it was 
free to decide for itself what should become of it, should go 
to join the elemental spirits that are its kinsfolk. Perhaps 
this, too, is what Epicharmos means when on another occasion 
he says that in death when the united are parted asunder each 
returns whence it came, the body to earth, but the soul up 
to the heights—its name, in which allusion is made to its 
perpetual mobility, being now after the example of Xenophanes 
derived from the breath of the wind, the moving air pein 
a usage which became very common in later times.)°? 3 
But perhaps the use of such a name is an indication that 
this poet also regards the soul as standing in a close relation 
and kinship with the Aether that is destined to receive it after 
its release from the body; so that from this side, too 4—in 
addition to the more popular conception just mentioned— 
Euripides may have received a hint for his peculiar version ‘of 
the physiological theory of Diogenes. In his view the soul 
participates in the nature of the Aether. But it is more 
important to notice that the Aether participates in the nature 
and true reality of the soul; it possesses life, consciousness 
and power of thought. They both belong to one family. The 
Aether according to the poet—and here the speculations of 
Anaximenes as revived by Diogenes are unmistakable °?— 
is a true vital atmosphere, an all-embracing psychic element, 
so that it becomes, not a mere vehicle of mind, but the All- 
Mind itself. The concept is even condensed and _ half- 
personified, it is called by the name of the highest divine 
power, Zeus,!°? and the poet as though speaking of a personal 
god, calls it ‘immortal ’’.454 The human mind, too, as akin to 
the universal god and the All-Mind, appears, as it had been in 
the teaching of Diogenes,!*° as a part of this God, this universal 
Mind. God is the mind, and the mind and understanding 
in us is God—so the poet clearly asserts.& In death, when 


438 THE LAY AUTHORS 


the separation of the mind from its earthly elements takes place, 
the Pneuma of man will ‘“‘ not indeed live ’’, as it had done in 
the separate existence of the individual man, but it will 
“preserve an immortal consciousness ’’, entering into the 
immortal Aether and fusing itself with the All-living and the All- 
thinking.’ None of the physiologists who conceived the 
same idea of an immortality excluding the personal im- 
mortality of the individual, of the universal spirit of life in 
mankind, has expressed his meaning with such distinctness 
as this philosophic layman. 

The poet may have wished to remain permanently upon the 
sublime heights of this Pantheistic vision; but he must, in 
his peculiar ali-embracing spirit that never held fast to any 
one view with enduring persistence, have experienced too 
often the truth of the saying of Protagoras that every state- 
ment calls forth its equally legitimate opposite,’ to have 
become an unswerving adherent of any single opinion. Death, 
and whatever may reveal itself after death, is beyond the 
experience of any man.!°® It may be that complete disappear- 
ance into nothingness follows death; that the dead man 
becomes simply nothing.1®° It may be that in the permanence 
of the human race the great name and the renown of glorious 
deeds lives on undying.1®! Whether there may remain besides 
a vestige of life in a spirit world, who can tell? Perhaps 
such a thing is hardly even to be wished.1® It is just what 
makes death such a comforting thing, that it puts an end to all 
feeling and therefore to all pain and every care. We should 
not lament over our fate if, like the harvests that follow each 
other in the course of the years, one generation of men after 
another flowers, fades, and is carried off. So it is ordered in 
the course of Nature, and we ought not to be dismayed by 
anything that is rendered inevitable by her laws.1® 


IN Obi ee Oa Ca bi Raed 


1 The learned and more particularly the philosophers of later ages 
paid special attention to utterances of the older poetry that gave 
expression to belief of a spiritualist tendency. Just as they selected 
and preserved passages from Pindar (and from Melanippides in the 
case soon to be mentioned), which bore witness to an advanced view 
of the soul, so they must also have given us similar passages from other 
melic or from iambic and elegiac poets—if such passages had existed. 
They must, for example, have been absent from the @p7vor of Simonides 
which were famous as the models of this kind of poetry. And so 
with all the rest. 

2 Hades puts an end to all pleasure for every man; hence the 
warning that man should enjoy his youth upon earth: Thgn. 973 ff. ; 
Gemos det, 1191efs; 1009 f..; 9 S0l.724:5 } Then. .719' ff: 

3 @avétw mavtes odecAdpefa—an ancient saying often repeated ; 
cf. Bergk on Simon. 122, 2; Nauck on Soph., Zi. 1173 [Blaydes 
ad loc. }. 

4 Hades himself plays the part of Thanatos and carries off the souls 
to the lower world. Thus as early as Semon. i, 13 f., rods 6’ “Ape 
dedunpevovs méurer pedaivns ’Atdns tao yOovdes. In metaphorical 
language ““Avdns for Gavaros is quite regular from the time of Pindar 
onwards. This, in turn, lent support to the use of the name of 
*““Atdns instead of the personified Odvaros. So esp. in Pi., O. ix, 33-5 ; 
cf. besides, Epigr. Gr. 89, 3-4. rovde... papas “Ardys ot 
akoTtias apdéeBarevy mrépvyas; cf. 201, 2; 252, 1-2. (And therefore 
in Eur., Alc. 261, we should not alter the mrepwros ‘’Avdas who is 
named instead of Thanatos—not even in favour of the otherwise 
ingenious BAézwy . . . ddav.) 

> Onpov évepbev ys oAécas uvynv Keloouar wore ALBos adboyyos 
Thgn. 567 f.—the condition of things in Hades is regarded exactly as 
in the Homeric pictures: Thgn. 704-10. 

Beseercsp. Sol, 13)°29 fi.; » Then. 731-42 3), 200.1; 

7 Mimn. ii, 13: dAdAos 8 ad raldwv émdeverar, dvte padtota (peipwv 
KaTa ys epxetar eis “Atdnv. Without children there can be no 
assurance that the cult of the soul will be carried on. But we may 
well believe that the attaching of so much importance to offspring 
was assisted by the natural human belief that the man who left 
children behind him on earth did not completely perish in death 
(hence devyeves eott kal abavatov ws OvnTe % yévynoas as in Plato, 
Smp. 206E). This alone gives a meaning and a reason for the wide- 
spread belief among the Greeks that the wicked man who is punished 
after his death in his children and children’s children himself feels 
that punishment. 

eeoemoni: len eS.e Vinn as. Ol glo, Go ttns) 11454 ‘Cheng 167 °f77, 
425 ff. We may also add here the expressions of resignation, Hdt. 
vii, 46; i, 31. 

®° Nux7rés Oadrapos [Ion] fr. 8, 2. 

10 On the story of Midas and Silenos see Griech. Roman, p. 204 f. 
As to the ancient and often repeated maxim dpyijv (or mdvrwr) pev 
py divar emexPoviotow dpiotov KrA., see Bgk., Opuss. ii, 214; PEGA; 
p. 155 f. Nietzsche, Rh. Mus. xxviii, 212 ff. (whose view that the 


440 NOTES? TOCHAPTE R wax?! 


beginning dpyyv...is old and original--but not his involved 
explanation of this—has been fully confirmed by the finding of the 
primitive form of the aydév: Mahaffy, On the Flinders Petrie Papyn, 
Les) e 

11 Simon, fy. 39; 38. 

12 fy, 137,—Usener, Gétternamen, 229, 13, says of Sappho that 
‘¢ she was possessed by the belief that as a poetess she would live again 
after her death among the gods, and would therefore become a -heroine ; 
see fry. 68 and 136”. But from these fragments of Sappho no such 
belief can be extracted without first reading into them a good deal 
that they do not say. 

13 Of the man who has fallen in glory on the battlefield Tyrtaios 
says, 12, 31 f.: od8¢ wore KA€os EaBAdv amdAAvTat OVS Gvop’ adtot, add 
i706 yas wep ewy ylyverat aOdvaros (i.e. in renown upon earth). Thgn. 
says to his Kyrnos, 243 ff., in your lifetime my songs will make you 
famous kat 6rav Svodepis bmo KevOeot yains Bis moAvKwKUTovs eis 
‘AiSao Sdpovs, oddéror 0ddé Bavev azmodreis KA€os aAda peAjoes 
ddiirov avOpwmmos atév €xwv dvona... ; cf Aesch., Epigr. ii, 3 
(241 Bgk. = 449 Di.), Cwov dé POipevwv méAerar KAéos. 

14 Even in Hades the dead perceive yfovia dpevi if they them- 
selves or the dperai of their descendants upon earth are praised : 
Pi., P. v, 98; ci. O. viii, 81 ff.; xiv, 20 ff.; [lon] Antho Pali wissee 
(to Eurip.), ic@ 8 b70 yOoves Br, dtu cou KA€os APOitov Eotar KTA.—In 
the expressions collected by Meuss, Jahrb. f. Philo]. 1889, p. 812 f., 
from the fourth century orators there only remains a very faint 
recollection of such a belief. 

15 Semon. 2, rod pév OBavovtos ovx av évOvpoipeda, et te dpovotper, 
mreiov Auépns puys.—Stes. 51 adreAdotrara yap Kal apdyava tods 
Oavovras KAateww. 52, Oavdvtos avdpds mao” amodAduta mot avOpamwv 

apts. 
fis This emerges at once if we review the material collected by 
H. Meuss upon “‘ the conceptions appearing in the Attic orators of 
existence after death”: Jahrb. f. Philol. 1889, pp. 891-15. For the 
cult of the soul and all that attaches to it the orators are our most 
authoritative witnesses and as such are frequently examined in the 
sections of this book that deal with the subject. 

17 et tues THY TeTEXACEUTHKOTwWY AdBotev THOT TIVE TOO VOY yLyvopmevo” 
mpaypatos aicoAnow and frequently in this style: cf. the passages 
quoted by Westermann on D., Lept. (20), 87; cf. also Lehrs, Pop. 
Aufs. 329 ff. The question is always whether the dead are capable 
in any way of apprehending what goes on in this world. The continued 
life of the dead is never doubtful but rather implied throughout ; for 
without such implication no possibility whatever would be left for 
that «i—. 

18 See Nagelsbach, Nachhom. Theol. 420. Meuss, p. 812. 

19 This is well brought out by Lehrs, Pop. Aufs. 331. Butethe 
statement holds good in an even more precise and exclusive sense than 
he there gives it. The words of Hyper., Epit. xiii, § 39, deal simply 
with the existence in Hades of those who have died for their country 
(with some traditional embellishments: see above, chap. vii, n. 5)— 
this much can hardly ever have been expressly doubted or denied by 
any orator. But it is wrong to say (as Lehrs does: p. 331) that Hyp. 
expresses, though in other words, what was afterwards laid down by 
{[D.H.] Rhet. vi, 5, as proper ‘‘ for such funeral speeches ’”’ (no, only 
for private funerals—which is quite another matter). It is true that 
the advice there given is to say that the soul is a@avaros and now dwells 


NOTE See bOe. CHAR lh Reax iT A4Y 


“with the gods”’. But it never enters into the head of Hyp. to say 
any such thing (nor in the frag. of the speech preserved by Stob., Fil. 
124, 36). In fact, the precept of this sophistic writer (still more the 
advice given by Men. Rhet., de Encom. 414, 16 ff.; 421, 16 ff. Sp.) 
rather reveals the enormous contrast between the style of the sophistic 
funeral oratory of a later period and the real characteristics of the old 
Attic funeral orations: a difference founded upon the difference of 
sentiment manifested by the public that listened to such speeches 
in two different ages. Even the statements of [Dem.] Epzt. (60) 34 
(adpedpor tots Katw Oeots together with the dyafol dvdpes of earlier 
times é€vy paxapwv vyaos) betray sophistic colouring though falling far 
short of the excesses of Ps.-D.H. and Men. Rhet. 

20 The only thing ay7pavros about those who have fallen in the 
wars of freedom is their evAoyin Simon. 100, 4; cf. 106, 4 (with Bgk.’s 
note). 99, 3-4 odd€ reOvaor Oavovtes eel oh’ apern Kaldmep bev 
Kvdaivouva’ avadyer Swpatos €€ ’Aidew (which is imitated in the epitaph 
of Thrasymachos the Kretan ov8¢ Oavwyv aperads dvup’ wr€oas, adda ce 
Papa xvdaivovo’ avayer dwpartos é€ ’Atda, BCH. 1889, p. 60). 

41 KAGOi por © matep, Oadua Bpordv, ras declwov pedéwv wWuyxas, 
Melanipp. 6. The words @atua Bpordv (modelled on the @atyua 
Bpototar. of Homer) can refer only to Dionysos (of the gods who enter 
into the question here): Ardvvoos, xdpua Bporotow, & 325. Further, 
it is natural to think of Dionysos in the work of a dithyrambic poet. 

22 The dead man apd’ ’"Ayépovre varerawy, Pi., N. iv, 85. This is the 
general-assumption: e.g. P. xi, 19-22; O. ix, 33-5; TI. viii, 59 f. ; 
fy. 207 Bek. 

23 gore O€ Kal TL Javovreccw pépos Kav VOpov epddopevov* KaTaKpUTTEL 
8’ od Kos suyyovwy Kedvav yap, O. vill, 77 ff. 

24 Something of the kind is adopted for the moment, e.g. in O. xiv, 
20 ff.; viii, 81 ff. A real belief in such a possibility appears perhaps 
mosteclcanyein Pr vy}. 9S. 1, 

25 For him who dies fighting for his country there is in store—not 
blessedness but only Fame, I. vii, 26 ff. He who comes xada ép£ais 
aovdds arep els "Atda oraOudv has little reward for his pains (his reward 
would, in fact, have been just the praise given in the do.da), O. x, 91 ff., 
cf. N. vii, 30-2. 

26 A strange expression is the Saiuwv yevePdos of O. xiii, 105 (in 
the same poem we also have Hevoddrros Saiuwv 28, which in this 
case at least is something more than “ destiny ’’, otherwise the normal 
meaning of Saéuwyv in Pindar, cf. P. v, 123, I. vii, 43). Italmost seems 
as if it were intended to describe the ancestor spirit that brings good 
luck to the house like the genius generis or jpws avyyevetas (See above, 
cHap.iv, nm. 132). ; 

27 Amphiaraos, O. vi, 14; N. ix, -24 ff.; x, 8 f. (Amph. from his 
underground cavern sees the fighting in the war of the Epigonoi, 
P. viii, 39-56. There is no suggestion that the ’Emiyovoe inquire at 
his oracle—as Dissen supposes; with this the }8 «ize papvapevw 43 
is inconsistent.)—Ganymedes translated to eternal life, O. i, 44; 
x, 104f. Apart from this there are temporary translations to the gods 
or from one place on earth to another, O. i, 36 ff.; ix, 59; P.ix, 5ff.; 
deevill,20;f. 

285 OM is ss 214 ef E, 

29 G\Ad te mpoodepopev Eumrav 7) péyav vdov row dvaw adavarots, 
N. vi, 4 f. 

30 gxids dvap avOpwros, P. viii, 95. év dvipdv év Oedv yévos, ex pas 
Sé mvdéopev patpos augdrepor’ Srelpyer 5€ maca Kexpipeva dvvapts, 


442 NOTESTILOs CHAPLE Rarach 


js TO pev ovdév, 6 &€ yddAKeos dodadrés aidvy €d0s péver ovpavds, 
INGVis aE: 

31 fy, 131 Bgk. 

32 Pindar in these lines speaks only of the ai@vos eidwdov; but 
that by this he means the y%vy7 is obvious in itself and is stated by 
Plutarch, who preserves the lines, Cons. ad Apoll. 35, p. 120 D (epi 
guys Aéywv; cf. Rom. 28).—wvx% in Pindar sometimes stands for 
what is otherwise called xapdia or dpyv, “heart’’ or ‘disposition ”’ 
e.g.iP. 1, 485 ivy1225.5N.lix, 395 a siv, o3by and=O 137 #eanday ee 
also P. iii, 41; ‘“‘ disposition,” N. ix, 32. The word is sometimes 
(as in Homer) equivalent to €w7, P. iii, 101, puyav ALwwv. It 
simultaneously = “‘life’’ and the alter ego dwelling within the living 
man, O. viii, 39, puyas Badov; cf. N.i, 47. But the poet knows also 
the full meaning of %vye in the older idiom and belief. Entirely in 
the manner of Homeric usage yuxa denotes the spiritual double of 
mankind, which survives the man himself, in those instances where 
the %uy7 of the dead is said to be still in existence: Puyav copiga, 
P. iv, 159; N. viii, 44 f.; odv "Ayapepvovia puyxa (is Kassandra sent 
into Hades), P. xi, 20 f. Persephone dvadid0t puyas mad (out of 
Hades), fr. 133, 3 (Bgk.); I. i, 68, fuyav ’Atda reAE€wv (in death).— 
yvyai is also used in the old idiomatic sense in fy. 132, 1: which is, 
however, spurious.—y%vya in Pindar never denotes the psychical 
powers of the living man inclusive of the intellect, much less the 
intellect, vots, alone. 

33 Kal oDua pev mavtwy éenetar Oavatw mepiacbevet, CaHov 6° Ere 
Aeimerat al@vos eldwrov* To yap €ote povov ex Deady, fr. 131 (96 Boeckh). 

34 ofa. dé Depoeddova mowav waXraod wévOeos dé€Eerar—fr. 133. What 
is meant is undoubtedly the ancient “ guilt”? of the soul for which 
Perseph. receives satisfaction. This guilt can only be called a zévéos 
if she who accepts the satisfaction is regarded as herself grief-stricken 
by the guilty dead; if, in fact, the deed has been the occasion of 
mourning for Persephone. That this can apply to the goddess of the 
underworld is startling, but it cannot be got rid of by artificial interpreta- 
tion (as Dissen would like to get rid of it). Pindar follows throughout 
the analogy of the ancient procedure of expiation in the case of blood- 
guiltiness. But this procedure seems to be familiar with the idea that, 
apart from the dyxyvoreia of the murdered man, the underworld gods 
themselves (as guardians of the Souls) are immediately injured by the 
deed and stricken by grief and must receive satisfaction on their own 
account. Hence in certain legends (typificatory of ritual) the murderer 
not only has to fly from the land but to undergo servitude to the 
x9ovor: Apollo, especially after the slaying of Python, has to serve 
*’Adpnros, i.e. Hades for an ennaéteris (more on this subject below, 
n. 40). Thus, the guilty soul banished from its proper home serves 
a “‘ great year’ under Persephone, and this is the zowa that it pays. 

3° O.ii, 63-5. Everything here refers to judgment and compensation 
im Hades. In the words @avovrwy prev éevOad’ abtix’? dmadapvor dpéves 
mowas ettcav the éevOade cannot possibly belong to the zowds éricap, 
as Aristarchos supposed, so that the words should refer to the 
punishment in the course of a new birth upon earth of crimes committed 
in Hades (in itself a remarkable conception). @avdvres alone would not 
be put for Oavovres cai avaBeBuwxores, and we can only understand by 
the word those who after a life-time upon earth have died and are 
now spending their time below in the underworld. Moreover, it is 
hardly likely (as Ty. Mommsen reminds us adnot. crit. ad Olymp. 24) that 
the exposition of the “‘ knowledge of the future ”’ (62) on the part of 


NOTE Ses. Or CHAPTER Re xil 443 


a man still living upon earth would begin with what may happen to 
man, not after his death, but in a second appearance upon earth 
that is to fall to his lot later on. We must first of all be told what 
happens after the conclusion of the present condition of life, viz. that 
upon earth. Finally, the use of adrixa is quite satisfactory if it refers 
to the judgment in Hades that follows immediately after death ; 
while it is meaningless in Aristarchos’ interpretation (hence 
Rauchenstein writes atrus—a mere conjecture and a superfluous one). 
The view that the wév—sé of 63-4 necessitates Aristarchos’ explanation 
is not convincing (as Liibbert thinks, Ind. Schol. Bonn. hib. 1887, 
p. xXvili—incidentally he quite unjustifiably introduces specifically 
Platonic fancies into Pindar, p. xix). The davévrwy pév of 63 is not 
answered till dao 5’ éroApacav . . . 75, just as the adrixa of 63 does 
not receive its contrast till we come to what happens much later— 
after the life on earth has been thrice repeated—described in 75 ff. 
The dé of 64 and 67 are subordinate (not adversative) to what is intro- 
duced by the pév of 63 and they continue the thought. The évéade 
of 63 might indeed, in accordance with an otherwise correct usage, 
be connected with amdadAapvor dpéves, as it is by one of the Scholiasts : 
“the dpéves which have committed crimes here upon earth.” But 
amdAapvos does not mean sceleratus, impius (nor does it in the passages 
adduced for this meaning by Zacher, Diss. Halens. iii, 237: Thgn. 
281; Sim. v, 3). The dmarapvor dpéves are simply equivalent to the 
apevnva kapyva of Homer, and are a very suitable expression for the 
yuyai of the dead (though not indeed for the g%uyai of the reborn as 
Aristarchos would have it). No alternative remains save to connect 
Oavovrwy and évéade: simulac mortui sunt hic, s. decedunt hinc 
(Dissen). The sentence ra 8’ évy 7@8e . . . must then either be a more 
exact description of what has been stated generally just before in 
mowas eticav (and this is Mommsen’s view supported by one Schol.), 
or else be subordinated—together with its contrasted toais d€ . . . 67 ff. 
—to zowds értcav. mowd in Pindar means regularly compensation, 
whether expiation for evil deeds or reward for good (cf. P. 1, 59; 
N.i, 70b). If we might suppose that by a brachylogy not beyond 
possibility in Pindar owas éricay is put for wowds eticav Kal ed€£avto, 
then the sense might be: after death the souls receive at once recom- 
pense for their actions—and then follows the division of the bad 64 ff., 
and the good 67 ff. But we may perhaps rest content with Mommsen’s 
explanation. 

Sam mal, / 4. 

SteLitl, edcelatavev.i7, p. 1130 Craiter:citing the lines of Pindar 
fr. 130 (95) adds: (the rivers of Erebos) Seydopevor kal droxpdmrovtes 
ayvola Kat AjOn Tovs KoAalopévovs. This might possibly be an addition 
made by Plu. on his own account—he had frequently spoken of ets dyvovav 
avTov euPadrety, etc., in his war against the Epicurean Adde Biwoas 
and here the same thing appears again from Erebos. But the words 
are more probably a paraphrase from Pindar. t any rate, what is 
said in Plu. about the pvfyar cal Adyor of the edcePets in clear contrast 
with the Ayn of the daeBets, comes from Pindar: this is shown by 
the allusions of Aristid. i, p. 146, 1 Dind. From this parallel it is also 
clearly proved that the A767 does not refer (as Lehrs, Pop, Aufs. 313 
thinks) to the forgetfulness of the xoAa{ devo: in the minds of the living, 
but forgetfulness of their previous life by the xoAa{dpevo. themselves. 
Accordingly we are to suppose that Pindar assigns retention of memory 
and complete consciousness only to the good in Hades, as their special 
privilege (cf. the position of Teiresias in « 494), while the punishment 


444 NOTES VIO" CHAPTERS eATt 


of the wicked is enhanced by A7On (cf. above, chap. vii, n. 21). Not to 
have fallen a victim to A747 in Hades—not to have drunk the waters of 
Lethe—is occasionally alluded to in poetico-religious utterances of 
later times as a special privilege of the good, e.g. Epigr. Gr. 204, 11 
(first century B.c.); 414,10. A7@ns and Mrnpoovvns mHyn in Hades 
(as in the sanctuary of Trophonios at Lebadea, Paus. 9, 39, 8): Epigr. 
1037 (cf. above, chap. vii, n. 21; chap. xi, n. 96; and see also below). 

38 roto. Adumrer prev péevos aeAiov Tav evOade vUKTa Kata, fr. 129. In 
this naive conception, what Helios only threatens to do in Homer, 
dvoopa ets ’Atdao Kal év vexvecor dacivw, he does in reality and 
regularly during the earthly night. The same idea must be referred 
to in O. ii, 61 ff., toov dé vixrecoww aiel icov ev auepars ddvov Exovtes 
(so Boeckh)—the éo@doi live in the ydpos evoeBSv in Hades: they 
have by night and day the same sun (as we: the azovéorepov of 62 
also implies this), that is to say, just as much of the sun as we 
have on earth only in reverse order of time. The sun only shines upon 
the evceBeis below; povors yap yutv yALos Kal déyyos tAapov éote sing 
the initiated in Hades in Ar.; Ran. 454 f. (but it is the same sun which 
shines upon them as shines on us, ¢@s KadAdorov daomep évOade 155. 
solemque suum sua sidera norunt is a subtlety of later excogitation). 
Helios shining by night in Hades occurs again in the late Greek Hymn 
ets ““HXtov (Orph., p. 291 Ab.), v. 11, Av yains KevOudva porns vexvwv 
Tt émt x@pov. Epigr. Gv. 228b, 7-8, Anroyeves, ad 5€ matdas ev npweoat 
puracaots, evoeBéwv adel y@pov emepxopevos. 

See Olle, Oat 

40 fr. 133 évarw érei. What is meant is beyond all question “‘ after 
the expiration of an ennaéteris’’ (period of 99 months, i.e. 8 years 
and 3 intercalary months), a period which besides being familiar as 
a cycle of religious festivals (Apolline specially but not exclusively) 
also occurs in the ancient procedure of atonement for murder as the 
period of self-banishment and servitude in a foreign land undergone 
by the murderer. Apollo after slaying Python serves péyav eis 
eviauTov (i.e. an ennaéteris) in the house of Admetos (i.e. the god of 
the lower world) and then returns purified (Miller, Dorians, i, 338) ; 
in the same way Herakles serves Eurystheus (at least a trace of this 
is found in [Apollod.] 2, 5, 11, 1; see Miller, Dorians, i, 445).—After 
the murder of Iphitos Herakles has to serve as bondsman to Omphale 
(peculiar in this case is the combination of this species of atonement 
for murder with the buying-off of the relatives of the murdered man 
[Apollod.] 2, 6, 2, 5; D.S. 4, 31, 5). “At the end’of this *perioqguas 
service he is once more “ pure” (ayvos fv S., Tvach. 258),.—Kadmos. 
after slaying the dragon and the X’zaproi serves Ares (the chthonic ?) 
for an évautos of eight years [Apollod.] 3, 4, 2, 1; Miller, Orchomen. 
213.—Hippotes after the murder of Mantis has to fly the country 
d€xa €rn [Apollod.] 2, 8, 3, 3.—On the analogy of this custom the gods, 
too, who have broken an oath sworn by the Styx are banished nine 
years from the rest of the Olympians (and confined to Hades, since 
menial service of the y&dévo. is the essential idea of all such azev- 
auvtiopos), Hes., Th. 793 ff.; Orph. fv. 157. With a reminiscence of 
this expiatory banishment Pindar makes the souls at the conclusion 
of their earthly pilgrimage (which is itself a banishment) undergo a final 
period of penance in Hades for an ennaéteris, at the end of which the 
mowy for the ancient crime is regarded as completely paid off.—The 
life on earth and the period in Hades which follows is regarded as 
an exile of the souls (on account of serious crime).—Such an idea was 
most natural if the real home of the soul was thought of as being 


3 


ING DH See LOM CHA RPK IT 445 


a divine (not earthly) country; the idea occurs quite clearly in 
Empedokles (certainly uninfluenced by the brief allusions of Pindar) ; 
see above, chap. xi, n. 75. 

41 fy. 133. The similarity to the promises made by Emped. fr. 146 
(457 f.) is immediately apparent, but is not to be explained by imitation 
of Pindar by Emped., but simply by the similarity of imaginative 
outlook which led to similar results in the two cases.—Elevation to 
the rank of Hero is the reward which next awaits the man who is born 
a king, according to this view. Very remarkable is the manner in 
which Pindar, O. ii, 58-62, effects the transition to his eschatological 
statement: the man who possesses mdAofitos dpetais dedardadApmevos 
knows the future, viz. what we are then told about the fate of the 
soul hereafter. This assertion, which seems to attribute to the virtuous 
Great Man at once a higher and a profounder knowledge, is perhaps 
best explained by the allusions of fy. 133. He who has reached this 
highest stage of earthly happiness must deduce from that very 
circumstance that for him now it is fated after another death to become 
a Hero. He therefore knows that everything, indeed, happens that is 
related in ll. 63-74, but that before him in particular hes that which 
follows in ll. 75 ff.; and this is to be regarded as the real import of 
what the man in question “‘ knows ’’, 62, while the rest, 63-74, is only 
added for the sake of completeness. Theron, therefore—for it is he 
who is alluded to throughout—may be assured beforehand that after 
death he will be gathered to the Heroes. This is what Pindar means 
to say here, or at least to give the ovveroi to understand 91 ff. As 
a matter of historical fact Theron was worshipped with 7pwikal trad 
aateranis death, .D:S. xi, 53,2. 

42 fy. 133. There is according to Dissen a contradiction between 
fr. 133 and O. ii, 75 ff.: in the latter three periods of life on earth 
are necessary before the final departure, in fy. 133 only two. This 
variation would be got rid of if we could adopt the interpretation given 
by Ty. Mommsen, adnot. crit. Olymp. 30, and assert that in O. ii also 
Pindar only speaks of two earthly lives with a single residence in Hades 
intervening. But the words és tpis éxarépwit petvavres, 75-6, can 
hardly bear any other interpretation than “‘ three times on each of 
the two sides’’ (not: ‘‘on both sides—once on that side, twice on 
this side: total three times’’). At the same time there is nothing 
in fy. 133 to prevent us taking the same number of lives (three as a 
minimum) to beimplied there too. Weare not there told that the birth 
as kings, etc., must always be the one to follow the first birth: in 
this case also two earlier lives may have gone before. 

fee ee) above, chap.:iv, § 8: 

44 érevAav Atos 6d0v mapa Kpovov tupav, O. ii, 77. What exactly 
is to be understood by the “‘ way of Zeus’? was presumably clearer 
to the ovverod versed in the mythology of mysticism for whom Pindar 
is here writing, than it is to us. It must mean (as Boeckh supposes) 
the way which Zeus treads in order to reach that Island, far to the 
West in Okeanos, inaccessible as the Land of the Hyperboreans to 
ship or traveller on foot; it is a special ad@avdrwy déds like that which 
leads to Homer’s grotto of the Nymphs, v 112. Acc. to Bergk, 
Opusc. ii, 708, it is “‘ certain’’ that Pindar means the Milky Way. 
Along this the gods travel to the house of Zeus, Ovid, M. i, 168; and 
Orpheus in the same way fr. 123, 17 Ab., speaks of the @edv cdot 
ovpav.wvwyv in the heavens. But the souls could only be made to travel 
along the Milky Way if their habitation was placed in the sky as it 
often was later. So, as Bergk points out, following Lob., Agi. 935, 


446 NOTES TO CHAPTER XII 


the Empedotimos of Herakld. Pont. calls the Milky Way oé0s puydv 
Tav Gdnv Tov ev odpavw Siamopevowéevwy ap. Philop. in Arist., Mete., 
p. 117, 10 Hayd.; see above, chap. ix,n. 111. But Pindar situates 
his paxdpwyv vnoos in the Ocean (78) : it is difficult to see how the souls 
could arrive there on the Milky Way from the place where they find 
themselves after death. (We may surely acquit Pindar of the later 
fancies about an Okeanos in the heavens.) Q.S. ii, 761 ff. (cited by 
Tafel) knows of a special way belonging to the gods which leads from 
heaven down to the ’Hdvaiov mediov. But the way by which the souls 
reach the paxadpwv vijoos does not, like that way, begin in heaven. 
We should rather think of some way only passable for gods and spirits 
leading from the inhabited world over the pathless Ocean to the latter’s 
*“sources ”’ far in the West. 

45 In O. ii, 84-5, it is certainly Kronos who is meant (as Didymos 
took it, though he gave an absurd interpretation of the passage) and 
not Zeus as Aristarchos imagined. The exceedingly corrupt and 
(owing to the intrusion of glosses) unmetrical lines are beyond certain 
restoration: the emendations of the Byzantine scholars give the 
required sense.—-What happened to the incorrigibly wicked? In 
accordance with the theory of the soul’s Transmigration two alternative 
views as to their fate were possible: they might be regarded as passing 
from body to body unceasingly (Empedokl.) or as doing penance by 
suffering eternal punishment in Hell (as with Plato and others). The 
circumstances in which he alludes to these matters do not give Pindar 
any special occasion to declare himself for either view. He has only 
to speak of the final condition of the just; the fate of the doeBets 
is left in semi-obscurity. Something about the matter is, however, 
said in fy. 1382: yuyal aoeBéwv hover under the vault of heaven that 
covers the earth (yaia either corrupt or grammatically bad Greek), 
while the pious above the vault of heaven (ézovpavior) sing to the “‘ Great 
Blessed One’’. Everything in this is un-Pindaric, the inadequacy 
and even incorrectness of the language (yodzais év tuvois), the un- 
concealed monotheism of the phrase paxapa péyay, the conception of 
the souls as having nothing else to do than sing to the One God, the 
whole idea that these blessed ones dwell “‘in heaven’’. This last is 
an idea familiar to Greeks of a later period, nor is the division of souls 
into drovpdvor and é€movpayvio. unknown to them; cf. Epigr. Gr. 650, 
9 ff. But Pindar cannot have written anything of the kind. It is 
even doubtful whether Clem. Al. who, Sty. iv, 640 P., names as the 
author of the lines rov pedAomordy, meant Pindar by the words: 
Theodoret. (Gv. Aff. C. vili, 599 C), who attributes the second half of 
the frag. to Pindar, had no other source but the same Clem. Al. But 
it may be doubted whether the whole is to be attributed to any Greek 
of the older faith. It has quite the appearance, as Zeller, Socr. and 
Socratics, p. 24, n. 3, strikingly suggests, of one of those Jewish 
forgeries in which Jewish monotheism and the ideas connected with it 
were to be fathered upon Greek antiquity. Welcker, Kl. Schr. v, 
252 ff.; Gétterl. i, 741 f., defends the fv. (and most unconvincingly 
connects the uyali drovparvio. and ézovpavor of the fv. with the quite 
different datpoves muy Povioe and doxAovor of Hes., OP. 123 and 141). 
He thinks he can defend the genuineness of the lines (which had already 
been declared spurious by Dissen) by pointing to the words of Horace 
about Pindar’s dpjvor (O. iv, 2, 21): flebili sponsae iuvenem raptum 
plorat, et vires animumque moresque aureos educit in astra nigroque 
invidet Orco. Even supposing that this referred to the transport 
of the souls to the stars the witness of Horace thus given would only 


NOTES lO>* CHAPTER Xt 447 


remove a single difficulty from a passage that has other overwhelming 
difficulties in profusion. But Horace says nothing of the transport 
of the “‘Soul’’ to the heavenly regions. vives, animus, mores, all 
these together refer not at all to the %uvy7 but to the 700s and the 
aperat of the dead. Pindar, Horace means, rescues the memory of 
the nature and merits of the youth from decay: only the fame which 
the poet secures for him is under discussion. educit in astva and 
invidet Orco mean nothing more than: he rescues the memory of 
the dead from oblivion, exactly as in the epitaph quoted above, 
n. 20: odd€ Aavay apetads dvup’ drecas aAdd ce Papa xvdalvovo’ avayer 
dwpatos €€ "Aida. Thus, it is least of all to be concluded from 
Horace’s words that Pindar transported the souls of the edceBets into 
the heavens (rather that in the @pfvor—as much as anywhere else: 
see above, n. 25—Pindar sometimes only recognizes the immortality 
of fame: of that alone does Horace speak). 

46 Q. ii celebrates the victory which Theron had won at Olympia. 
in Ol. 76, but was probably written some time after that victory. 
Theron died Ol. 77, 1, or 76, 4. 

47 Sicily was rich in cults of y@ovor, in which Gelon, Hieron and 
their ancestors were hierophants, Hdt. vii, 153; Pi., O. vi, 95. So, 
too, Akragas the city of Theron (and the home of Empedokles which 
also is not without its importance) was Depoeddovas Edo0s, Pi., P. xii, 2, 
having been given by Zeus to Persephone on her marriage, Sch. Pi., 
O. ii, 16 (as also had, in addition to other cities, Pindar’s native city 
Thebes, Euphorion, fy. 48; cf. Eur., Phoen, 684 ff. Theron’s family 
traced its descent from Eteokles the son of Oedipus). It is very 
possible that the hopes of a blessed immortality of the soul such as 
were fostered in many ways in the cult of the y@ovou and particularly 
in that of Persephone, should have been familiar to Theron from such 
a cult and attractive to him. 

48 The theological character of much of Pindar’s work makes 
knowledge of mystic doctrine not surprising in him. In fy. 137 he 
speaks of the Eleusinia (to which he otherwise owes nothing). In 
fr. 131, though the words are unfortunately most corrupt and probably 
contain lacunae as they have been transmitted, he speaks of the 
“releasing Initiations’’, 6\Bia 8 dmavtes aica vaimovov terXeTAv— 
this is the form of the words required by the metre (dactylo-epitritic), 
and thus (not reAevrav) they appear in Plu., Cons. A poll. 35, p. 120 D, 
and also in cod. Vatic. 139 (which I have collated). 

4957G.. xiv = JG. .Sic. et It.,) .641,. 1-2-3. , [Harrison-Murray, 
Prolegom. 661 ff.; Vovs. 66 B, 18, 19.]}—The inscription of the oldest 
of these poems belongs to the fourth century B.c. The verses can, 
however, be cited here because the original or rather the two originals 
upon which the poems are modeiled were older than the oldest of the 
three surviving inscr. (which itself shows serious corruption of the 
primitive text); and nothing prevents us from supposing that the 
original forms of these verses go back to the fifth century.— The common 
ancestor of versions 2 and 3 is not derived from version 1], even in the 
parts in whichit agrees with that version, but from a still older original. 
—Acc, to Dieterich, Nekyia 128 f., 135 f., the lines are taken from a 
poem of Orpheus’ descent to Hades; but of this they themselves: 
offer not the slightest suggestion. 

50 The feminine épyopar éx xabapav xabapa—and also viv 8 tkéts 
qxw (though this indeed is metrically impossible) JG. xiv, 641, 2, 1. 6— 
refers probably to the guy and not to the sex of the dead person 
as though a woman were speaking in all three cases. Moreover, in 


448 NOTES S LORMCHARIT Rich 


No. 1, 9, Persephone speaks as though to a man oAfie cal paxapiore, 
Beds 8° €on avti Bpotoio. 

51]. 1, é€pxopar ex Kabapdve Kabapa, xPoviwy BaciAea. This is 
certainly the right punctuation (and is given by the editors), and not 
Hofmann’s éx xafap@v, xafapa yO. B. ‘* Pure and born of the pure” 
(referring to the immediate parents of the dead : more distant ancestry 
would be expressed by amo); cf. Kaxioros Kak Kkaxka@v, etc. (Nauck 
on Soph., OF. 1397 ; Ph. 874); ayadoi é€ ayaddv dvres, Andoc., M. 109. 

52 The parents are xa@apoi, the soul of the dead xafapa, simply as 
being “‘ purified ’’, “‘ sanctified ’’, in reXerai of the y@owor. In the 
same way, elsewhere, the Mystai are dovo. “the pure’’: see above, 
chap.; Vi; nv718: 

53 kal yap eywv vuadv yevos GABiov evyopae eiwev—so in all three 
versions. 

54 adda pe potp’ eddpaoge Kal aotepomftra Kepavya@y (particip.): so 
in the original to which the readings of three versions point, as restored 
by O. Hofmann in GDI. 1654. aorepoBAfra is in No. 1—this might 
simply = dotepomoBAfra, but it may only have been substituted by 
mistake for dotepomfjra (= aotepomntrys Of Homer). The line in this 
form occurs in No. 1, 4. Versions 2 and 3 have eire pe protp’ édapaco’ 
€ir aotepomyta Kepavvav. But the dead had no choice between 
natural death (for this is what potpa must mean as contrasted with 
death by the thunderbolt) and death by being struck by lightning ; 
one or other of the two (or more) forms of death must in actual fact 
have occurred. In this embarrassment—for death by lightning is 
not a very frequent occurrence—the ancient verse was altered in such 
a way that it might refer also to one who had died a natural death. 
The attempt was indeed not a great success. Originally death by ~ 
lightning can alone have been mentioned (as in No. 1) and the original 
form of the lines must have referred to someone who had actually 
perished in this way. The dead person was then immediately regarded 
as sanctified simply on account of the method of his death ; he became 
a iepos vexpos translated to a higher and continued life: see above, 
chap. ix, n. 127, and Appendix i. This is the only interpretation 
of the lines which gives any point to the introduction here of this 
peculiar manner of death—one who has been thus translated out of 
life will certainly now be @eos avri Bporoto. 

55 kvKAos THS yevéoews, rota fati, etc. Lob., Agl. 798 ff. 

56 fueptod 8° éméBav oredavov moat KapmaXriporn, Aeomoivas 8’ bro 
KOAmov €dvuv xfovias Bactreias, No. 1, 6-7. The orédavos will probably 
be the sacred precinct, the enclosure that surrounds the realm of 
Persephone, as Dieterich, De hymn. Orph. 35, very plausibly suggests. 

Pee See eA PPenGise kd. 

58 Gs pe mpddpwv wéepibyn e€dpas és evayewv. The edpa edayewv 
correspond to the y@pos edoeBav of other poets and mythologists. But 
the strange phrase does also contain an allusion to the fact that this 
paradise of the ‘‘ pure”’ is specially reserved for the initiates of the 
mysteries. The evay7js, the man untouched by any ayos, is datos 
(dovos €otw Kai evayys law ap. And., M. 96): edvayetv = covofy in an 
ins. from Ialysos in Rhodos, JGM. Aeg.i,677. Ordinary non-religious 
‘language also preserves the original meaning of the word : it frequently 
means (in contrast to oxorwdns and the lke) ‘‘ bright, pure, clean ”’ 
(and in places, too, where it is customary to insert without good reason 
evavyns, following the ex. of Hemsterh. on Eur., Suppl. 662). 

5® The similarity with the stages of the reward given to the good in 
Pindar is obvious: y@pos edvoefBSv in Hades; then and not till then 


NOTES “TO CHAPTER «XII 449 


escape from the underworld and from human life as well. The only 
difference is that in Pi. the soul’s final end is to become a ypws while 
here it becomes Oeds. 

60 IG, xiv, 642. 

$1 id. 641, 1, v. 10, €pidos és yad’ Emerov. 642, 4, Beds eyevov ef 
avOpmmov. éepidos és yada Emeres. The conjunction of the two 
phrases in 642 shows that “ As a kid I fell into the milk ”’ is a condition 
of “‘I- became a God’’. We may certainly recognize in the phrase 
a ovvOnpa or otpuBodAov of the Mystai like those usual in other secret 
initiatory rites—éx tupmdvov éedayov xrA., Lob. 23 ff.—which refer to 
performance of symbolical actions in the initiation ceremonies. The 
precise sense of this ovv@yua cannot be made out (Dieterich’s efforts, 
H. Orph., p. 35, have not succeeded in clearing up the matter). 

6 Worth remarking is the instruction ddd’ omdtap buy mpoAiry 
daos deAtouo, deErov eiovevar medvAaypevos ed wara mavra (this or some- 
thing like it may have been the original form of the lines which have 
been thrown into confusion by the intrusion of the explanatory words 
def twa). Then at the conclusion (@) yatpe yxaipe, defiav ddormopav 
Aetua@vas Te tepovs Kal ddcea Depoedoveias. (kai: this and nothing else 
is probably concealed by the KAT of the inscription—xai long before 
a vowel in 3rd thesis is even in Homer not unheard of.) Here ata 
comparatively early date we meet with the legend of the Two Ways 
at the entrance to the underworld, of which that to the right leads 
to the y@pos evae Badr, the left to the place of punishment of the dé:xou. 
It may derive from the fancies of South Italian mystic sects. defcdv 
and dpiorepov in the Pythagorean table of Opposites—and in otontstike 
for a long time before that—mean the same as aya@ov and xaxop (Arist., 
Metaph. 1, 5, p. 986a, 24; cf. Iamb., VP. 156).—The Y Pythagoreum 
denoted the parting of the ways of life to the right (to virtue) and to 
CHeMeLLVICe ita DeLV, Aw Vi,-136-4ci, O, Jahn, Pers., p.1590 4, . Plato 
transferred the Two Ways to the underworld probably following 
Pythagorean example, Rp. 614 C; cf. rw 660, Gorg. 524 A; divorso 
ttinere, Cato ap. Sall., C. 52, 13, in a Platonist passage. To the right 
the fountain of Mnemosyne, to the left that of Lethe—grave-tablet 
from Petelia: Epigr. Gr. 1037 = IG. xiv, 638. The Two Ways in the 
underworld (of which that to the right hand regularly leads to salvation) 
are also spoken of by the zoinrH%s whose lines are quoted by Hippol., 
RH. 5, 8, p. 164, 80 D.-S. (perhaps ‘‘ Orpheus ” as Dieterich, Nek. 193 
thinks) ; cf. also Verg., A. vi, 540 ff., Hegesipp., AP. vii, 545, and 
the Jewish forgery under the name of Philem., Mein. 4, 67, 6 f. (ii, 
p. 539 K.).—Three Ways in the world of the spirits, which he takes 
as being in the sky, are seen by the Empedotimos of Herakld. Pont. 
(Seeravove, Chap. ixpin 41 l) oerve Ge i,e34.. sPlutarch also’ alludes 
to three Ways in the underworld, Lat. Viv. vii, p. 1130, for in giving 
his quotation from Pindar’s @pfvos fr. 129-30 he suddenly, without 
having previously said anything about the other two Ways, speaks of 
the rpity Ta&v avociws BeBiwkdtwv Kal mapdvopwy odes which leads 
into Erebos. We should suppose that he found these three Ways in 
Pindar whom he is making use of throughout the passage. Three 
Ways would seem natural to one who knew of three classes of souls ; 
the evdcoeBeis and the aoeBeis having in between them those who have 
not strayed seriously from either side of the middle way of ordinary 
morality and deserve neither reward nor severe punishment. To these 
then was probably allotted, instead of the bliss or sorrow of the two 
other classes, the indifferent state of the Homeric eidwAa KxapdvtTwy. 
So at least it appears from Lucian, Luct. 7-9. A similar triple 


Gs 


450 NOTES’ TO; CGHARTBRVEATI 


division occurs in a popular form ap. D.H. viii, 52 ad fin.: (1) a place 
of punishment, a kind of Tartaros; (2) rd Ay#@ns mwediov (which is here 
the indifferent state) ; (3) the ai@p which is the dwelling-place of the 
Blessed. Verg., too, has three classes, but he places the middling 
characters in the limbus infantium, beyond which the road first divides 
towards Elysium and Tartarus. Did Pindar then anticipate these 
and incidentally—he need not have been logically consistent about it— 
introduce such a triple division of the souls ? 

63 Plato’s violent attacks on poets and poetry—in which nevertne tas 
acc. to his own account odédev aomovdys yxapiv, adAa madtGs Evexa TavTa 
dparac—show once more clearly enough that in his time the old Greek 
view of the poets as the true teachers of their age was by no means 
a thing of the past. It was precisely as teachers, whether rightly or 
wrongly so regarded, that they seemed to him dangerous and worth 
opposing. 

64 Aristophanes is only formulating popular opinion—and in unusually 
naive language—when he says Ran. 1030 raira yap avipas xp%) mounras 
aoxety * oKéar yap am apyhs ws wdéAtwor THV ToLnTaYV ol yevvaior 
yeyevnvra xTA. And again 1053 ff. where he is referring particularly 
to tragic dramatists, amoxpUmtev yp7) TO TovnpoVv TOY ye TOLNTHY, Kal 
fq) Tapayew wndé diddoKew. Tots péev yap mardapiorow Eat. dida0Kados 
dots dpaler, tots HB@ow dé monral. 

65 This idea is alluded to as early as 4 160 ff. Then Hes., Op. 
282 ff. Itas established for Hdt.; cf. 1,91, vi,/8Ge. Hurther exam 
collected by Nagelsbach, Nachhom. Theol. 34. Thgn. 205 ff., 731 ff., 
is particularly definite. Among Attic authors; cf. Sol., fy. 13, 29 
(avaitior Epya Tivovaw) ; E., Hipp. 831 ff., 1378 ff. (where note tov 
ovdev dvr émainiov), fr. 980; [Lys.] 6, 20; Lycurg. 79. It is briefly 
alluded to as a commonly held opinion by Isoc. 11, 25; cf. Lys., 
fr. 53 Th. The case of Diagoras of Melos the a@eos may also be 
remembered ; cf. above, chap. vii, n. 16.—-This idea of the punish- 
ment of the son for the deeds of the father receives its justification 
acc. to Plu., Sev. Nu. Vi. 16, 559 D (quite in accordance with primitive 
ideas) in the unity that belongs to all the members of the same yévos— 
so that in the person of the son it is the father himself, though he may 
be dead, who is also punished. The idea arises from the deeply 
ingrained feeling of the unity, solidarity, and continuity of the ancient 
family cult-circle pre-supposed by the cult of souls. (This is primitive 
and meets us, e.g. in India as well: ‘‘ release us from the wrongs that 
our fathers have done; take away the sins of that we ourselves have 
committed ”’ is the prayer to Varuna in the Rigveda, 7, 86, 5. ra éx 
mpotépwv amAaknuatra are transferred also to the next generation 
““like a pestilence-breeding substance’’, Oldenberg, Rel. d. V. 289. 
Elsewhere the conception emerges that the guilty ancestor lives again 
in the descendant and is punished in his person: Robinsohn, Psychol. 
d. Naturv. 47.) 

86 Tt is precisely on this point, namely, that evil does not befall 
men without their own fault, that the Chorus, i.e. the poet, of the 
Agamemnon (757), acknowledges 8iya & dAAwv povodpwv ett. 

67 In this way, too, the Stoics saved the responsibility of men for 
their own deeds in spite of the unavoidable eiuapyévn. The deeds 
would not have come to fruition if the personal ovyxaradeots of the 
man had not been added to the original necessary cause conditioning 
the acts. The ovyx., though not itself “‘ free’’, yet always remains 
éf yutv and makes us responsible: Cic., Fat. 18; Nemes. Nat. Hom., 
p: 291 Matth. 


NOTHSr TOM CHAPTER “xIT ‘ABL 


4y Clearly so from l. 689 onwards. ns 

69 +a yap ex TOV TpoTepwv amAakypaTa viv mpdos Tadd’ (Tas ‘Epwsas) 
amaye, Eum,. 934, 

he Sea when Eteokles and Polyneikes have fallen in single combat 
Anse 3 aipwv, Sept. 956. - 

‘1 This idea is quite common in Homer (Nagelsbach, Hom. Theol. 
70 f., 320 f.), and in later times reappears frequently in the case of 
such authors as always, or on occasion, express popular ideas: Then. 
Hdt. esp. Eur. (cf: Fr. Trag. Adesp. 4, 55 N.), and the orators: see 
Nagelsbach, Nachhom. Th. 54 ff., 332 f., 378. ra? 

72 amdatns Suxaias ovdK amootaret beds, fy. 301S. This, too, must be 
the meaning of other expressions in which the poet refers less plainly 
to the righteous purpose of divine deception: Pers. $3 ff., 742 ; frr. 156, 
302 (cf. also Suppl. 403 f.).—-Aristoph. makes his Clouds speak quite 
in accordance with the Aeschylean ideas, Nub. 1458 ff. This grim 
idea must, in fact, have had considerable success and spread beyond 
the stage. Falsehood and deception for a good end presented no 
difficulty to the mind of the Greeks (even as applied to their gods). 
Hence Sokrates (in Xen.), Plato, and certain Stoics could quite openly 
approve of and recommend such falsehoods (and the author of the 
Avarégéers, c. 3 in defending the same theory also appeals to the lines 
of Aesch.). 

73 Ag. 1497-1508. Here there is a clear opposition between the 
popular view which attributed all guilt to an adAdorwo tempting to 
crime (a reminiscence of which appears in Soph., &/. 197 ff.), and the 
more elevated conception of the poet who holds fast to the view that 
though the adAdorwp may contribute to the result the agent of the evil 
deed is not avairvos. 

74 The dead man stands in need of the cult paid by his surviving kins- 
folk, Cho, 484 (his gravea Bwpos, Cho.106; yoaiyaprAcoe for him, 486 f.). 
As an appeasement of his easily aroused wrath yoal veprépwv pecAlypara, 
Cho. 15. The dead man is still conscious of events both past and 
present upon earth: dpdvnpa tod Pavdvros od dSapaler mupdos ptadrepa 
yvabos, Cho. 324f. Inthe song of awakening addressed to the departed 
and the invocations sung by Electra and the Chorus in Cho. the soul 
of Agamem. is similarly regarded as fully alive and accessible to the 
callers (though, indeed, é€& dpavpds dpevos 157) and addressed 
accordingly (cf. 139, 147f., 156 f.,479 ff.; Pevs.636). Itiseven expected 
that his soul, invisibly present in the upper world, will take an active 
share in the work of vengeance: dxovaov és daos podwy, Edv b€é yevod 
moos €xOpovs, Cho. 459; cf. 489. So, too, Orestes, Eum. 598, hopes 
in his extremity of need that dpwyas éx tddov mépyser twarjp. More 
especially the murdered man has a right to be avenged by his 
ayxvatets (otd’ am aAAwv, Cho. 472) and Apollo himself has commanded 
Orestes to take such vengeance, Cho. 269 ff., etc. Dread results of 
neglecting this duty, Cho. 278-96 (possibly an interpolated passage, 
but still an extension of the words of A. himself 271 ff. in a sense 
thoroughly in consonance with popular belief). 

7° The Erinyes only avenge the murder of a blood-relation and not 
therefore when one of a married pair is murdered by the other, Eum. 
210-12, 604 ff. But the opinion emerges that they are particularly 
charged with the vengeance of a mother “who has been murdered by her 
son (rather than a father who has suffered the same fate), 658 ff; 766i, 
(Reminiscences of such a view in S., El. 341 ff., 352 ff.; E., Ovest. 
552 ff., fy. 1064.) This may possibly be an old popular belief (not 
fully understood by A. himself) which need not, however (as is often 


452 NOTES TO CHAPTER oXxIl 


supposed), depend upon an ancient system of ‘‘ matriarchy ’’ for which 
there is no other evidence in Greece. It is simply explained by the 
fact that the father has plenty of men still living among his kins- 
folk who will avenge him (even against his own son), whereas the mother 
who is separated from her own family can expect no avenger from 
that side, while in the family of her husband there will be nobody 
yet old enough to take vengeance on her own son. For this reason 
it is for her most particularly and necessarily that the daimonic 
avengers of murder must intervene, and they are the Erinyes, who are 
always thought of as only active where no earthly avenger is available. 
—Of course, it could never be denied that there exists also marpos 
evxtatarv ’Epuiv, Sep. 783. 

76 Saiuwr, Deds, dtos avaxtwp, toodaipwv Baorrevs are titles given only 
to the dead Persian king, Pers. 620, 633,644, 651. They are, however, 
probably intended to characterize Persian and not Greek beliefs (the 
Greek king, too, is stilla king in Hades, but not a daiuwyv, Cho. 355-62). 

77 Kaxet Suxaler TapmrAakynpad’, ws Adyos, Zeds aAXos (cf. Ziva tHdv 
KexunKotwv 158) év Kapodow.votatas dSixas, Suppl. 230 f.; cf. 414 ff.— 
peyas yap “Ardns €oriv evOuvos Bpotdv evepfe xOoves, deAToypadw Se 
mavr émwmd ppevi, Lum. 273 ff. Not even in Hades do the Erinyes 
let the murderer go, Eum. 340. The punishment in Hades seems to 
be regarded as merely supplementary to the (perhaps delayed) punish- 
ment of crime on earth pow 8 émoxome? dixas Taxeta Tods pev ev dae, 
ta 8 ev petarypiw oKotouv péver xpovilovras axn, Tovs 8 aKkpatos ExeL 
vul, Cho. 61 ff. 

78 tovs Oavovras ef OéAets evepyetetv eit obv KaKkoupyety, audidefiws 
é€xeu TH pyre xalipew pyre Avzetaba vexpovs, fy. 266. This does, not, 
however, agree with Cho, 324 f., or with the frequently occurring 
expressions which presuppose consciousness and feeling (and so also 
xatpew and Avwetcfa) in the dead. Consistency in such matters 
must not, in fact, be looked for in a non-theological poet. The puy7 
of the dead man a shadow without the sap of life, fr. 229. Death 
a refuge from earthly suffering, fy. 255. The speedy death which the 
Chorus wish for themselves, 4g. 1449 ff., brings with it tov dei aréAevtov 
vmvov and therefore a condition of unconsciousness if not of complete 
nothingness.—The shadow of Dareios takes his leave of the Persian 
nobles in the foll. words: tyeis dbé€, mpéoBeus, yalpet’, ev KaKois 6uws 
huxny dvddvres HOovH Kal” juepar, ws Tots Pavotar wAodTOS OvdEeV WHEAE?, 
Pers. 840 ff. This view of life is perhaps intended to have an Oriental 
colouring (like the epitaph of Sardanapalus which is rightly quoted 
in illustration of this passage) ; the reason given ws rots Oavodcu xi. 
is perhaps to be similarly explained. 

7 évduxor ogayai, 37. Orestes is to his father’s house dix xabapris 
mpos Jedv wppnpévos 70. 

89 One reason why no Erinys pursues Orestes after he has murdered 
his mother is, indeed, the fact that Sophokles is treating the ‘“‘ Elektra ”’ 
in isolation as an independent drama and could not therefore introduce 
a fresh thread of interest at the end, if he was to bring it to a satisfactory 
conclusion. But the mere fact that he could so arrange matters shows 
that for him, in contrast with Aeschylus, the belief in the veritable 
reality of the Erinys and the necessary perpetuation of the idea of 
vengeance in the family was already obscured and almost obsolete. 
The ancient family blood-feud is less important to him than the 
rights of the separate and independent individual. 

81 Casual allusions, El. 504 ff.; OC. 965; Ant. 856; and cf. 584 ff., 
594 ff. 


NOTES) TO CHAPTERS EXT 453 


82 ov yap ldos av abpav Bporov darts av, et Beds dyot, exduyetv Svvatto, 
O.C. 252. drav € tis Dev BrAdnry, Sdvar’ dv ovd’ av 6 abévwv duyery, 
El. 696 f.  aiayn pév, d yvvaixes, 038 av els dvyot Bpordv mol @ nai 
Zevs (as the one who rules and ordains everything, cf. El. 175; O.C. 
1085) €fdoppjon kaka * vdcous 8’ avayKyn tas OenrAdTovs déperr, fr. 619 N. 

83 Phil. 191-200. 

84 It is fixed long before by an oracle: 821 ff.; 1159 ff. It is not 
exactly overpowering violence or heaven-sent madness that drives 
Deianeira to carry out the prophecy; it is rather an obscure force that 
transforms her purest intentions to an evil result. She herself is 
completely innocent: muapre xpnora pwpevy. 

8° The reason for this will of the gods is not revealed to us, either 
in OT. or in the subsequent treatment given in OC. The only thing 
that is made quite clear there is the complete innocence of Oedipus : 
as to the meaning of the divine purpose that has plunged him into such 
deeds of horror the sufferer can only say Qeots yap jv otrw ¢idrov, 
Tax av Te pnviovow eis. yévos mada (964 f.). This is a passage 
in which modern interpretation of the ancients finds the “ upholding 
of the moral order in the world ”’ clearly expressed as a motive of 
divine will. 

86 Kai yap hv Tav BeooeBeotarwr, Sch., El. 831. 

87 fr. 226N., aodos yap ovdets wAnv dv av Tina Beds. GAN eis Oedv 
a opa@vra, Kav €€w Sixns ywpetv KeXevy, Keto’ ddotmopety xpewy. aiaypor 
yap ovdev av tdnyotvra Geol. 

88 Aias has angered the goddess because he has boasted that he could 
do without her help. Thus he has drawn upon himself aorepy4 Oeds 
opynv, 776. The goddess makes him insane that he may recognize 77 
Gedv ioxdv oo7, 118. Thus, her superior power is shown and the folly 
of men who despise that power. But as for showing that the revenge- 
ful act of the goddess has any sort of moral purpose or meaning behind 
it, the pious poet makes no such attempt.—The interpolation of ideas 
more familiar in modern times does not make it any easier to under- 
stand the peculiar character of such antique edoéBera and derordarpovia. 
The same kind of fearful awe of the gods which we find here, runs 
through the whole of Herodotos’ historical writing (Hdt. was not without 
reason a friend of Sophokles) and meets us again in the character of 
Nikias and to a large extent in Xenophon, too. Thuc. and, on the 
whole, Eurip. (for he varies) calmly ignore it or else violently reject it. 
Its nature is shown (better than in the more usual evoéBera) by the 
phrase 7 mpos tovs Deods edAGBeva Which also occurs: [D.] 59 (Neaer.) 74. 

89 Trach. 1266 f.; 1272 (where, however, there remains a suspicion 
that the traditional text may be unsound); fy. 103 N. Parallels 
occur also in Phil, 

90 There exists a region of divine mystery that is not to be fathomed : 
ov yap av Ta eta Kpumrovtwy Dedv pabous av, odd’ ef mavr’ éemeédOors 
oxo7av, fr. 833; cf. OT. 280 f. and woAAa Kai Aadeiv Kaddv, fr. 80 N. 

91 The behaviour of Athene in the prologue of the Azas is an 
exception. 

92 Odysseus beholding the insane Aias: ézoixripw dé viv dvornvor 
évra Kaimep évta SvopevG, dOodver’ ary avyKaréleveTar KaKh, oddev TO 
rovTouv paAdrov 7} Tobdpov oxoT@v* Opa yap Huds ovdev dvtas dAdo mAHv 
eldm@d’ dooimep CSpev, 7 Kovdnv oxidv, At, 121 ff. 

93 id yeveat Bpordv «rAd. OT. 1186 ff.; sdotts tod mA€ovos pépous 
xpjte . . . OC. 1211-38; cf. frr. 12, 535, 536, 588, 859, 860. 

94 Nor is Antigone affected by such motives as might appear from 
a casual or isolated study of such lines as Ant. 73 ff. The whole play 


454 NOTES 2 TO, CHAPTER Ext 


shows that Antig. throughout follows the dypamra xacdadj Sedv 
voprya and the instincts of her own nature, without paying any 
attention to what may happen to her on earth and without a side 
glance at what may be the result in the world below of her “ pious 
GLiLe Me 

% We often have év “A:dou KexevOorwy (Ant. 911) pvxods Kixetv 
too xatw Oeod (Ai. 571) and other phrases = “‘ be dead ”’ (cf. to be an 
oixitwp of Erebos, Ai, 395 ff. Hades seems to be called zavddxos 
gevooraats fy. 252). The confusion of the idea of a kingdom of Hades 
with that of the grave is shown in the not infrequent expression 
ev “Ardov, wap “Ardy xeioba, El. 463; OT. 972; Ph. 861; didn 
per’ adrod Ketoopa dirov péra, Ant. 73; cf. fr. 518. 

96 tov admotpotov “Ardav, At. 608; fr. 275. 

91 The dead man a oxida, At. 1231. omodds Kal coxa avwdedrs, 
El. 1159a. pydév, El. 1166 ; Az, 1231.—In spite of this, in the Homeric 
manner, a definite shape and a measure of semi-conscious existence 
is presumed in the shades in Hades: OT. 1371 ff.—Doubt: e¢ ris 
€or” é€xet ydpis, E/, 356. : 

_.98 Pdavovrwy oddev dAyos amterat, OC. 955. tots yap Pavotor poxBos 
ov mpooylyvera, Tr. 1173. robs yap Oavevras odx Opa AvTovpevous, 
El. 1170, (All three lines are denied to Soph. by the latest criticism.) 

28 Ph.797 $.57A15854 : SOC. 1220 ffs fy. GS CLA 2 are 
Tr. Adesp. 360. ALunv caxdv 6 Odvatos, acommonplace of later moralists: 
see Wyttenb. Plu., Mor. vi, p. 720, was taken over from tragedy).—The 
converse fy. 64, 275. 

100 Collectively of véprepot, of véprepor Beoi, OC. 1661; Ant. 602. 
Hades in particular is often mentioned, and also IAovrwy: ‘’Ardns 
orevaypots Kal yoous mAoutilera, OT. 30; fr. 251. 6 mapa rov’Ayépovta 
(rav ’Aydpovtos axtav, Ant. 812. axrav €omépov Geos, OT. 177) 
Beds dvacowv, El. 184. Persephone and Aidoneus, OC. 1556 ff. 
Erinyes, Thanatos, Kerberos: OC. 1568 ff. aopzatos ‘Epps xb onos, 
A1,.832; and see El. 110 ff., etc.—‘’Avdns (here as often = Oavaros) 
desires to devour men: dalcac8a, El. 542, f.—a popular conception 
or.at least popular language: see above, chap. vii, n. 25. 

. 101 Hades 6s otre todmueckés otte THY yapw older, povnv 8 EoTepte 
THv. aTADs Sixny, fr. 703, i.e. the justice of absolute equality (for all 
earthly distinctions have passed away): 6 y’ “Avdns tovds vopous 
iaouvs moet, Ant. 519. 

1,10 4 yap edoéBera ovvOvyaKer Bpotots (it dies when the man dies to 
whom it belonged: i.e. it follows him, or his yuy7, into the lower- 
world. No textual corruption need be assumed here), xdv (@au Kav 
Aavwow ovK amodAduta, Ph. 1443 fF. 

103 Without ritual burial the dead man is r@v Kcatwhe Cedv dpotpos 
aKtTéptatos avoaios véxus, Ant. 1070 f. 

104 éyrddia ola Tots Kadtw vomilera, El. 326. xrepiopara, 434, 931. 
Aautpa, 84, 434 (cf. above, chap. v, nn. 106, 107), éuzupa, 405. xyxoai, 
440.—El. 452, prayer is made to the dead that he “‘ shall help us and 
Orestes”? 6mws 70 AotTOv adrov advewréepats xepalv orédwpev 7) TA VOV 
dwpovpeba (at present only a lock of hair and a girdle, 448 ff.).— 
Offerings to the dead made by foes and even the approach of such 
persons to the neighbourhood of the grave is displeasing and hateful 
to the departed who lies therein: Ei. 431 ff., 442 ff.; Az. 1394 f. 
(cf. above, chap. v, n. 109). In this case as in the cult of the soul 
generally the presence of the dead man in the grave, or else in its 
immediate neighbourhood, is presupposed—not his departure into an 
inaccessible land of the dead. The latter view, retained from Homeric 


NOTES lO. CTA Pike all 455 


poetry, is generally allowed to remain incongruously side by side 
with the former. 

gree ii; 10664, 

106 The god of the underworld is od« dzepizpomos of the murdered 
man: &/. 182 f. Hence all the gods and spirits of the lower world 
are summoned to take vengeance for the murder of Agamemnon : 
El. 110-16. We hear of Aikn 4 Edvoixos TOV Katw Oedv as the patron 
of the dead in their claim to justice: Ant. 451. 

107 Herakles in giving his last commands to Hyllos finally threatens 
the latter: e¢ d€ uy, pevd a” eyw Kal vépbev wy, apatos eis det Bapvs, 
Pye leUli. = Cl.eff.-o6/ > see above, chap: yn. 7148; 

108 Klektra thinks that Agamemnon himself may have sent the 
dvompdocomr oveipata to Klytaimnestra: El. 459 f. (There is no 
reason for altering the traditional text here—with Nauck—to make 
the gods the senders of the dreams instead of the dead man. j7pwes, 
too, can send nocturnal visions of terror: see above, chap. ix, n. 102.) 
Here Elektra supposes that by sending such harbingers of his wrath 
the unavenged victim of murder has signified his readiness to assist 
in the taking of vengeance. This makes perfectly good sense and is 
the only interpretation that suits the context of Elektra’s admonitions 
2oaher. sister. 

109 Gowyds, El. 454. Caaw of yds Katw Ketpevor. ataXipputov yap 
aia vmeEatpodor THv KTavevtTwy ot mada Gavevres, El. 1419 f. ‘‘ The 
dead man brings death to the lving,’’ Nauck on Ty. 1163. 

Oe Ue, 6000. 

sen OGwlO49 sit, <680.:) fre 736. 

112 Oedipus does not die but vanishes (is seen no more, 1649) ; 
the depths of the earth open and receive him: 1661 f., 1681. What 
is meant is tvanslation without death as in the case of Amphiaraos, 
etc. The poet only hints at the miracle in intentionally vague words— 
but they cannot refer to anything but translation. awdAero 1656, 
and é€@ave are therefore only inaccurate expressions to describe his 
departure (see also above, chap. iii, n. 2). The Messenger of 1583 f. 
refuses, however, to give a distinct answer to the question of the 
Chorus é6AwAe yap dvoTnvos ; he will only hint that Oedipus has indeed 
dAwdXe (1580), but has not simply died—he has instead been translated 
out of earthly life. The corrupt ws XeAourd7a Ketvoy Tov aei (this was 
already what the Alexandrians read) Biorov éfemisctaco may not 
therefore be altered simply into tov atvév, tov aBiov Biotov. It may 
perhaps have originally been something like rov éva, tov év yf, Tov 
avdpa@v Biorov (cf. Medea to her children és dAdo oyfjp’ amooravtes 
Biov, E., Med. 1039. A dead woman dmoxeywpynKe aldvidiov tod Kal” 
4uas Biov. Ins. from Amorgos, BCH. 1891, p. 576, ll. 9-10). 

113 A distinct act of precaution against disbelief in such a miracle: 
OC. 1665 f. (cf. épper S¢ ra Geta, OT. 906 ff. ; which refers esp. to the 
belief in the Oracle of Loxias, a matter of great importance to 
Soph.). 

114 The innocence of Oedipus and the fact that the awful crimes 
committed by him have been done in ignorance and against his will 
dedv aydvrwy, is stressed in order that his elevation to the position of 
Heros may not seem to be an honour done to a guilt-stained criminal. 
But the poet does not attribute positive virtues to him even in OC.— 
far less in fact than in OT. 

115 One has only to read the play without preconceived ideas to 
see that this passionate and savage old man, pitilessly heaping dreadful 
curses on his sons, gloating vindictively over the coming misfortunes 


456 NOTHS PIO GCHAPTE TR err 


of his own country, is quite ignorant of the ‘‘ deep peace from the 
gods ”’ or the “‘ illumination of the pious sufferer ’’ which conventional 
literary interpretation has been anxious to ascribe to him. The poet 
is not one to gloss over the harsh realities of life with trite phrases of 
vapid consolation, and he has clearly perceived that the usual effect 
of unhappiness and misery upon men is not to “illuminate ’’ but to 
enfeeble and vulgarize them. His Oedipus is pious (he was that from 
the beginning in OT. as well), but he is made savage, jypiwra, exactly 
like Philoktetes in his misery (Ph. 1321). 

116 Humanitarianism of Athens and her king: 562 ff., 1125 ff. 

117 It is emphasized over and over again that the settlement of 
Oedipus on Attic soil is meant to bring about the salvation of the 
Athenians and the discomfiture of the Thebans (Apollo’s oracle has 
thus decreed it): 92 f., 287 f., 402, 409 ff., 576 ff., 621 ff. The where- 
abouts of the valuable possession must therefore be kept secret (as 
frequently with the graves of Heroes: see above, chap. iv, n. 38) ; 
1520 ff. This elevation of Oedipus to be the owryp of Attica (459 f.) 
is evidently what makes the interest and importance for the poet of 
the whole mystery which he relates. 

118 yoy yap Beot a” dpBota1, mpdabe 8’ drAvaav, 394. The gods now 
feel jpav 7a for Oedipus, 386. After many aypata madw ode Saipwv 
Sixatos avfou (av), 1565 f. It is, in fact, an act of kindness after a long 
period of ill-usage: there is a reversal of fortune, but there is no 
reward or indemnification given in recognition of a just claim. It is 
all grace. 

119 In this, too, ws dv tis els TOY xpnotav “APnvaiwy (Ion ap. Ath. 
13, 604 D). 

120 Prodikos is, acc. to Welcker, Kl. Schr. ii, 497 ff., responsible for 
most of the theories propounded in the Ps.-Platonic Axiochus on the 
subject of the d@evacia tis puxfs, Ax. 370 B ff., the tendency of the 
soul to the heavenly at@%p (366 A), and even of the Platonizing fantasy 
at the end about the fate of the departed (371-2). Prodikos, if we 
adopted this attribution, would become less the “‘ forerunner of 
Sokrates ’’ (as Welcker calls him) than the forerunner of Plato. There 
is, however, no real reason to attribute to him any more share in that 
document than is asserted distinctly in it. The brief and carelessly 
composed pamphlet consists of a medley of the conventional ingredients 
of the usual Adyot mapapv@nrixol loosely strung together. To Prod. 
is assigned: the disquisition on the troubles of life in all its stages 
336 D-367 E; and the saying d7i 6 Odvaros otte mept tovs Cavtas 
€oTwv ovTE TEpt Tovs peTNAAaXOTas KTA., 369 B (cf. Buresch, Leip. Stud. 
ix, 8-9). These two passages put together would establish as the 
opinion of Prodikos just the opposite of what Welcker wishes to ascribe 
to him. He would show himself as a true me:ovOavaros (—éé éxeivov 
Gavara pov » puvx7, 366 C), who would make death a mere exit into a 
state of unconsciousness after the troubles of life, and thus seem an 
absolute nonentity. But the piece isin reality quite without authority ; 
it apparently puts forward the name of Prodikos, who is so often stated 
in Plato to have been the “ teacher’’ of Sokrates, merely in order 
to have a definite authority (like the fabulous Gobryes later on) for 
what the author does not wish to represent Sokrates as saying on his 
own account. One of the sayings attributed to the imaginary Prodikos, 
oTt 6 Oavatos . . . is, however, only too clearly asimple appropriation 
of Epicurus’ aphorism, 6 @dvaros oddév mpos Huds Kr. (p. 61, 6 Usen. ; 
cf. p. 227, 30; 391. Heinze also points this out, Ber. sdchs. Ges. d. 
Wiss. 1884, p. 332). The other passage (366 D ff.) agrees suspiciously 


NOTES, TO; CHAPTER XII 457 


with what Teles (p. 38 Hens.) has to say on the same subject apparently 
in entire dependence on Krates the Cynic. Itseems extremely probable 
that the author of the Axtochus also had Krates before him or 
even Teles (as Wyttenbach already suggested, Plu., Mor. vi, p. 41) ; 
and that he attributes what he has thus borrowed from extraneous 
sources to “‘ Prodikos”’ by a fiction that never came amiss to the 
composers of such dialogues.—It follows then that what Prodikos 
really said about the soul and its destiny is unknown to us; cf. on this 
recently much-discussed subject: Brinkmann, Rh. Mus. 51, 444 ff. 

121 In the Prologue Thanatos at once describes his claims and 
his office. He has to receive the departed and cut off the lock of hair 
from the forehead (75 f. probably as a sign that the dead enter into the 
possession of the underworld deities : in Verg., A. iv, 698 f. Proserpina 
in the same way dedicates the dead to Orcus). He then leads them 
to Hades, 871. Hecomesin person to the grave and enjoys the offerings 
laid there, 844 ff., 851 f. (like the dead man himself on other occasions, 
see above, chap. v, n. 108). Properly speaking he is only the servant 
of Hades; but just as the word déns was already common as = 
Oavatos, so Thanatos himself is also actually called “Avdns (268, see 
above, n. 4); only as identical with Hades can he be called dva& 
vexpayv, 843; cf. datudvwv Koipavos, 1140.—In the underworld are 
Charon 6 ¢uvyomopmos, 361, 254 ff., 458 f., and Kerberos, 360. Hades 
and Hermes y@odvos receive the dead. ei dé tt Kaxet wA€ov €or’ ayabots 
Alkestis will have the seat of honour next to Persephone: 744 ff. 
By the living who survive she is regarded on account of her incom- 
parable virtue as pdxa:pa datuwv and her grave is not the abode of 
a dead woman but a place of worship, 995-1005. Such facile elevation 
to the rank of ‘‘ Heroine’’ was supposed to be characteristic of Thessaly 
and Eurip. may in this also have intended to give his poem a touch 
of Thessalian local colour. (datywewy as an intermediate stage between 
Geot and dv@pwrmo; so frequently in Eur., e.g. Tvo. 55-6; Med. 1391 ; 
is this the meaning of the pécov in Hel. 1137 ?)—Thoroughly in keeping 
with popular belief is yatpe nav ‘““ArdSov Sdpors ed cor yévorro, 626 f. 
(such a yatpe is the last word with which ws vopiferar one addresses 
the dead éftofcav dararnv ddov, 609 f.). Similar also (but really 
implying the conception of the dead as resting in the grave and not in 
Hades) is: Kxotda cou xOWv erravwie réao, 463. 

122 The funeral dirge, 86 ff.; «xdéapuos buried with the dead, 618 ff. ; 
mourning ceremonies: the manes of the horses are cut short ; nosound 
of flute or lyre is to be heard in the town for twelve months, 428 ff. 
(zév0os érjocov is usual, 336). These extreme observances are probably 
taken from the mourning customs of the Thessalian dynastic families. 

123 Burial of the dead in accordance with vépos madaros Satudrar, 
Suppl. 563; véptpa dedv, 19; a general Hellenic custom, 526 f.— 
Burial of Polyneikes in spite of Kreon’s prohibition: Phoen. and 
probably ’Avriyovy. 

124 trois yap Oavotcr xpi tov od TeAvynKdTa Tipas SLddvTa xXIdrov 
evacBetv Oedv, Ph. 1320 f. ev edaeBet yodv vopipa pr KAemTEW vEexpav, 
Hel. 1277. The honour of the grave more important even than good 
fortune upon earth, Hec. 317 f. Lament over the dishonouring of 
the grave of Agamem., EJ. 323 ff. Request for the burial of Astyanax, 
Tro. 1133 ff., of Orestes, IT. 702 ff., of Makaria, Held. 588 ff. The 
shade of the murdered Polydoros prays especially for burial, Hec. 
47 ff. (31 f., 796 f.). Heis an example of the wandering of the drados 
upon the upper earth; he d@amros dAaivet, Tro. 1084 (see above, 
p. 163, and Append. vii).—Funeral ceremony for those who have 


458 NOTES MEOMGHAPIER Ix tl 


been drowned at sea, Hel. 1057 ff., 1253 ff.; though there the 
idea is only used as an excuse for the intrigue. 

125s voattor thecdéad; er On eli2at Ae. oli tie el oom 

126 yoat make the dead edyevf towards the givers of the offering, 
Or. 119. The children call upon the soul of the murdered father to 
help them, El. 676 ff., in the belief that wdv7r’ akxover rade marnp, 684. 
The soul of the dead man hovers above the living observing everything, 
Or. 674 ff. Invocation of the dead (striking both hands on the ground : 
see above, chap. iii, n. 10), Tvo. 1305 f. Expectation that the dead 
thus called on will o@oa his friends, Ov. 797, or help them, El. 679. 
Calling upon the departed in Hades apnéov, €rOe Kai oxra davnbi por, 
HF, 494 (though with the qualification ei tis dAdyyos elaaxovcetat 
Ovntav map’ ‘Ardy, 490). 

127 Translation miracles are touched upon by the poet with obvious 
pleasure; cf. transl. of Kadmos and Harmonia, Bac. 1330 ff., 1338 ff. ; 
of Peleus, Andy. 1257 ff.; of Helen, Ov. 1629 ff.; of Herakles, Held. 
910; of Menelaos (in unmistakable sarcasm), Hel. 1676 ff. So, too, 
in the spurious conclusion to the JA. there is a translation of Iphigeneia, 
1583 ff. (apos eos adinrato, 1608). 

128 Furystheus buried in the temple of Athene Pallenis will bring 
safety to Athens and evil to her enemies: Held. 1026 ff. Eurysth. 
SayS col peév etvous Kal moder owrypios pétotKos adel Kelocopat KaTa 
xGoves, 1032 f.; i.e. he will become a wows awryp of the land (just as 
Oedip. was to become owr%p for Attica, S., OC. 460, and Brasidas 
Heros owryjp of the Amphipolitans,.Thuc. 5, 11, 1). Heroic cult of 
Hippolytos, Hip. 1423 ff., fr. 446. 

129 The Erinyes are spoken of (apparently with real belief) in IT. 
79 fi.,and: elsewhere. 

130 Oy, 258 f., not very different, JT. 288-94. 

181 +4 Anpiddes ToitTo Kat puarddovov, Or. 524, Orestes instead of 
committing murder himself should have brought his father to justice, 
Orv. 500 f. Agamemnon himself if he could have been asked would 
not have desired this bloody vengeance, Or. 288 ff. It is only Apollo’s 
unwise counsel that has led Orestes to the murder of his mother, El. 
971 ff., 1296 f.; Ov. 276 ff., 416, 591. After the deed Orestes does 
indeed feel remorse but no veligious terrors, El. 1177 (in spite of which 
there is much about the pursuing Erinyes of his mother). How 
completely this whole series of ideas, the duty of vengeance, etc., has 
lost its meaning for the poet, is to be felt more especially in the 
sophistical frigidity with which the subject is treated in an aywv 
between Tyndareos and Orestes, Or. 491-604, and in the hair-splitting 
of the speech of Orestes himself, 932 ff. 

1382 Sox@ d€ Tots Javotor diadépew Bpayv, ef wAovalwy tis Tev§erau 
KTEplopaTwy * Kevov d€ yavpwp’ éoTi Tav Cavrwy rode, Tro. 1248 ff. 

B83 5 fy 176. 

134 oddev €of’ 6 KatOavwrv, Alc. 381. The dead are of odkér’ dvtes 
322. rots (the dead) peév yap otdév dAyos dwbetral more, moAAdv Se 
poxOwyv edxrens éemavoaro, 937 f. But even fame is nothing to the dead. 
Admetos says to his father in the scurrilous dialogue Oavet ye pévrou 
dvokdAens, Stav Odvns. To which the old man unconcernedly replies 
Kak@s axovev od pédAer Oavovte por (725 f.). 

1385 It might seem simpler to regard all the utterances of persons in 
the plays which correspond to conventional beliefs as being merely 
dramatic expressions of the character’s own (orthodox) view, and in 
no sense put forward by the poet as his own opinion. And certainly 
the separate and independently acting persons of the drama can only 


NO EES lOMEC ITA LK ExT 459 


speak and act in accordance with their own proper conceptions and 
springs of action—not in accordance with the poet’s. But in the 
antique drama this complete detachment of the creatures of the dramatic 
imagination from their creator, the poet of the drama, only holds good 
in a limited sense. The ancient dramatists exercised their office of 
judge much more vigorously than the greatest of the moderns. The 
course of his play showed clearly what acts and characters the poet 
disapproved of, but also which opinions he sanctioned and which he 
did not. We have only to remember the attacks of Oedipus and 
Iokaste upon the judgments of the gods in OT. (or the story of Sen., 
Ep. 115, 14; Eur. fr. 324). Accordingly we may take it that such 
utterances of dramatic characters as are not supplied with practical 
or spoken corrective are among those of which the poet did not dis- 
approve. Euripides so very frequently puts words into the mouth 
of his characters which can only express his own moods or opinions 
that we may also assume that when their language harmonizes with 
traditional belief then, too, the most subjective of the tragedians is for 
the moment expressing his own view. Thus, for example, we cannot 
doubt that the strain of piety running through the whole of the 
Hiketides (subjection of ¢dpdvnois to God’s wisdom, 216 ff., submission 
to the guidance of the gods, 592 ff., and to Zeus’ government of the world, 
734 ff.), and especially the whole-hearted elaboration of the picture 
of Theseus as a model of evoéBera, represent the actual opinion of the 
poet at that particular period (he clearly speaks of himself, 180-3). 
At other times, too (apart from the Bacchae), though generally for a 
short time only, he shows vague aspirations towards orthodoxy. 

Me Ale 968. siallipp. 952 ff.—Asceticism of the mystat of Zeus 
and Zagreus of the Mountain Mother and the Kouretes : Kpftes, 
fri 472. 

137 Polyid. fr. 638 ; Phrixos, fy. 833. It is usual (cf. Bergk, Gr. Litt. 
3, 475, 33) to see here a reminiscence of Herakleitos. But the latter’s 
abavator Ovytol, Ovyntolt aAavaror, C@vres Tov éxetvwv Odvatov, Tov de 
éxeivwyv Blov re Ovedres (fr.67 Byw. 62 D.)is clearly intended to express 
the view that “‘ death ’’ and “‘life’’ are purely relative concepts ; that 
death fof the one, i.e. Fire) and life (of the other, i.e. Water or Earth) 
are simultaneously present in the same object (see also frr. 68, 78 = 
36, 88). According to this view it would be strictly true that 
life on earth is not more life than it is death; but that is certainly 
not what Eurip. means to say. Philo and Sext. Emp. are mistaken in 
attributing to Herakl. the Orphic doctrine of the ‘‘ death ” of the soul 
which takes place when it is enclosed in the oda, as its ofa (see above, 
chap. xi,n. 19). Butitis precisely this Orphic doctrine that is present 
to the mind of Eurip. (and Plato, Gorg. 492 E, 493 A, brings it into 
immediate connexion with the verses of E.). He is speaking of the 
true ‘‘ death ”’ of the soul in the life of the body and of its release to 
a real (and not a merely relative) life after death; and thinks that 
‘life’ has no claim to the distinguishing name (cf. 6 67 Blotov kaAéovat 
Emped. 117 Mull. = fr. 15 D.). 

138 Palingenesia is alluded to once only and in jest as a desirable 
reward for the virtuous, AF. 655-68 ; cf. M. Ant. xii, 5. 

1389 6 yods yap Hudv éotw ev éxaotw Aeds, fr. 1018. 

BETS S39 (Chrystpp.) fully physical in fr. 898, 7 ff.—fr. 1023 ‘Albépa 
kai Tatav mavtwy yeveretpay aeldw. Cf, fr. 1004. > 

141 fr. 484 (Medav. % cod%)—os obpavds re yaia 7° jv popdy pta 
Kth. Here, too, the poet is speaking of a mere initial association of the 
elements afterwards to be parted, but thought of as always from the 


460 NOTES -lOMCHAP TER Bair 


beginning independent—there is no derivation of both from a single 
common original element, or of one out of the other. FEurip. may 
really have been thinking here of the éyov mavra xonpata jv of 
Anaxagoras (as the ancient authorities supposed), esp. as, with Anax. 
also, out of the general conglomeration two masses, ayjp and atOip, first 
emerge (though in this case vois is not included in the al@p as it is 
with Eurip.). Here, too, then the usual dualism of the Euripidean 
cosmogony is preserved. For the rest this fy. 484 allows us to perceive 
that in spite of all his physiological tendencies Eurip. can never quite 
get rid of the mythical element in his cosmogonical events. The 
reason why Ouranos and Gaia in particular recommend themselves 
to him as elemental forces (and xowvol amavtwv yoveis, fr. 1004) was that 
these figures had long been set at the beginning of the world and of 
the gods by cosmogonical poetry (at@yp is simply the more physio- 
logical term for what is half-personified as Odpavds). This probably 
explains why matter (or at least the more solid forms of matter as 
distinguished from the aifyo the Aerrotatov mavtwy xpynpatwr) is for 
him included in the description “earth’’. In this he is not following 
the old physiologists, none of whom had called “‘ earth ’”’ the original 
matter—at least not earth alone (see Ilberg, Quaest. Pseudohippocrat., 
p. 16 ff., 1883). ‘‘ Earth’? as describing the merely material, matter 
deserted by spirit, may have come to him from popular usage. As 
early as Q 54 the body deserted by soul and life is called nw} yata 
(cf. Eur. frr. 532; 757, 5). Thus for the poet the contrast between 
yj and aiénp almost amounts to that between “ matter ” and “ mind "Ss 
except that he either could not or would not think of a “ mind” 
without any material substratum and that for this reason his at@%p 
still preserves a remnant of matter. 

14eelhiSas esp.clearin f7aSa0o Hee oetnie disruption of the elements 
out of which zav7a are composed each of the two, y# and ald yp, preserves 
itself undiminished and unmixed. 6vizjoKxer 8’ oddév TOV yryvopéevwr 
dtaxptvopevov 8° dAXo pos adAAov popdryy idiav améderéev (restores itself 
in its independent being). Whereupon we feel ourselves irresistibly 
reminded of the saying of Anaxagoras—ovdev yap xpjua yiverar 
odd€ amdAXUTAL, GAN am’ edvTwY xpNnaTwv CupployeTai TE Kal StaKxpiverat, 
Kal ovTws av opbds Kadoiev TO Te yivecOat cvppioyerbar Kal TO amdAAVaBat 
dtaxptvecOa, fy. 17 Mull. [and D.]. 

143 That it was not Anaxagoras, or at least not he alone, who gave 
the decided direction to the philosophic ideas of Eurip. has rightly 
come to be held of late. We do not find a trace in Eurip. of the 
separation of vods from matter, at least not in the form in which 
Anaxagoras understood it. For E. the mind is bound to one of the 
two primal elements and quite foreign to the other, the earth. Thus 
he arrives at a dualism indeed, but in quite a different sense from that 
of Anaxag. Dimmler, Pvoleg. zu Platons Staat (Progr. Basel, 1891), 
p. 48, points out reminiscences in Eurip. of Diogenes of Apollonia— 
but it is not true to say that the poet’s views show the “‘ closest kin- 
ship ’’ with the monistic system of Diog., or with any Monism. 

144 Tro. 884 ff. The air, called by the name of Zeus, and identical 
with the voids Bpordv, can only be taken from the doctrine of Diog.: 
Diels; "hh us saz 12: 

145 Diog. Apoll., frr. 3, 4,°5 Mull. (= 8, 3, 4.D.).. The soulsistaams 
fepporepos Tot €€w, ev & é€opev, though it is colder than the air which 
is mapa T@ HAtw, fr. 6 [5]. The soul is therefore more akin to the 
at@np than to the ajp (ai@yjp and ap were at that time often confused:: 
e.g.in E., fv. 944, aiOp instead of anp). 


NOTES LOR GHAPTE RR. XIT 461 


146 Suppl. 1140 atOap exer vv 7Sn KrrA. Elektra expects to find her 
dead father in the Aither, £7.59. Of a dying man, mvedp’ adeis els 
aidépa, fr. 971 (differently, Or. 1086 f.) ; cf. also Suppl. 531-6 (imitated 
from Epicharm.), where again the ai@7p is only spoken of as the abode, 
and not as the original and consubstantial element of the soul, 

447 gidnp oixknois Avds, Eur., fr. 487 (Melanip.). 

See DICL,o/7-4/ a Dipcovie LOT = {70 200 eKaibel|: 

149 CIA. i, 442, aldjp péev puxds tredéEato, odlpara S€ xIwv] 
Ta@voe. ... 

150 GuvexptOn Kat dvexplOn, KamndrAbev d0ev FrAPEv TarAW, yauev es yar, 
mvedp avw* titavde xyaXre7rov ; oddé €v, Epich. ap. Plu., Cons. ad A poll. 
15, 110 A; Epich., fy. 8 [245 Kaib.]. mvedua as a general name for 
the ux occurs also in Epich., fy. 7 [265]. No earlier authority is to 
be found for this usage that became so common later (under Stoic 
influence) than Xenophanes who mp@tos amedyvato ote H puyn 
nvedpa (D.L. ix, 19). Epicharm. may have been actually following 
Xenophanes (whose writings he knew: Arist., Meta. 111, 5, 1010a, 6) in 
this use of the word. Eurip. then did the same, Suppl. 533. amvetpa 
is the name given to the ajp in so far as it isin motion. (imoAnmtéor, 
elvat oipa Tov aépa) yivera b€ mvedpa Kiwybeis. odfev yap €Tepov éorTt 
mved pa 7 KWWOvpEVos ajnp: Hero, pyyav. ovor., p. 121 (ed. Diels =i, p. 6, 
ed. Schmidt) after Straton. The soul is called a mveipa just because 
the soul is that which has continual movement from its very nature 
(and is the principle of movement): as such it had already been 
regarded by Alkmaion (and later by Plato), and even before that by 
Pythagoras (see above, chap. xi, n. 40); in a different way by 
Herakleitos and Demokritos also. The universal a7jp and the Soul- 
mvedpa, if we give the terms their proper meaning, are to be thought 
of as being of the same nature, so that the arp, too (still more the 
al@yp as a higher ap), is psychical and animated by soul. That at 
least was how Diogenes of Apollonia regarded it. (ayo = the outer 
air, mvetua the air which is inside men’s bodies: [Hp.] de Flatib. 
3 [vi, 94 L.], a section taken from Diog. Ap.) 

151 Numerous references in Eurip. to verses of Epicharm. are pointed 
out by Wilamowitz, Eurip. Herakles, i, 29. The fact that Eurip. 
knew the poems of Epich. and valued them for their philosophic 
contents is clearly made out by Wilamowitz’ study. But he goes on 
to assert that all the allusions of Eurip. refer only to the (or one of the) 
forgeries in the name of Epicharm., of which many were known in 
antiquity. The reason alleged for this statement-—‘‘ Euripides never 
quotes comedies ’’—is merely a petitio principii. It may be that 
Eurip. does not “‘ quote’’ contemporary Attic comedy, but whether 
he maintained the same attitude to the brilliantly original comic poet 
of Sicily, whom Aristotle and even Plato (Gorg. 505 E and esp. Tht. 
152 E) were not ashamed to notice, is the very point at issue ; nothing 
is gained by unproved denial of this main premiss.—Moreover, it 
would be a most unusual species of forger that preferred to publish 
gems like véde kai . . . (imitated by Eurip.) or vdos 6p7—under another 
man’sname. The fragments of the JJoXtre’a, which is really a forgery 
Satnlereq onl picharmos (ap,.Clem. Al. O17, p..719'P..==: Lor,,.p. 297), 
are of a very different character. 

152 Archelaos makes a less satisfactory model for Eurip. here. 
Arch. in his reconciliation of the doctrines of Anaxagoras and Diogenes 
did not separate voids from the mixture of the material elements (or 
from the a7jp), but he distinguished between them, while for the poet 
at@y4p and mind are the same. 


A62 NOTES ae lOre CCE LOL PR GaT 


153 gi€np = Zeus, fy. 941. alOnp.. . Leds ds avOpdmors dvopalera, 
fr. 877. Hence the al@jp is copudy bedv, fy. 919.—In the same way 
for Diog. Ap. the air is god (Cic., ND. i, 29) and Zeus (Philod., Piet. 
c. 6b, p. 70 Gomp. ; Dow. 536).—In E., fr. 941: tov dyob 76v8’ dzetpov 
atdépa Kal yhv méprE Exovl vypais ev ayxddAas the aldjp is not put 
instead of dnp (for tov dod only suits a’OHp in its proper sense), but the 
two are combined under the one word (dypais év ayxaXats-could not be 
said of the af@@7p in the strict sense), just as the amp of Diogenes includes 
the al@np (for the hot anp mapa 7H HAiw, fr. 6 [5 Diels] is, in fact, the 
atOyp, and so, too, essentially, is the warm a7p in our bodies). 

154 _ejs G@dvatov aidép’ éumecwv, Hel. 1016. 

155 § éytdos anp (which alone aio9averac—not the senses) puxpov 
uoptov av tod Beot, Diog. ap. Thphr., Sens, 42. 

156 The living air, or Zeus, is votds Bporav, Tvo. 886. And vice versa, 
the vods in each one of us is no other than God, fr. 1018. 

157 § yots Tav KaTtbavovtwy CA pév ov, yowpnv 8 exer aGavatov, ets 
afavatov aldép éuneowv, Hel. 1013 ff.—Ambiguity attaches to the 
passages in which a dying«person is said to depart els dAXo oxjua 
Biov (Med. 1039), és dAAas Bidtov popdas (Ion, 1068), to Erepov aidva 
kat poipay (IA. 1508). It is possible that in each case a personal 
existence continued in a land of the dead is understood—but if they 
mean no more than that they are remarkably pregnant in form. In 
reading them (esp. Med. 1039) one is reminded of the remarkable 
lines of Philiskos (pupil of Isocr.) ap. [Plu.] Vit. X Or., p. 243, 60 West. 
7@ yap €s dAdo oxjpa weGappocberte Kal dAdXots ev Kdopotor Biov odpa 
NaBove érepov—said of the dead Lysias. But here the idea of metem- 
psychosis seems really to be involved, which it can hardly be in the case 
of Eurip. 

158 Eur. adopts it for himself, fv. 189 (Antiope), and confirms it by 
so many Adywy adytAAac in which he allows the most contradictory 
opinions about a single subject to be given equally plausible expression. 

159 gretpoovvn dAXrov Bidrov, etc. Hip. 191-7. +o Cav yap toper, 
tod Oaveiv 8 ameipla mas tis doBetrar das Acwetv 708’ HAlov, fr. 816, 
10 f. (Phoinixz). 

160 The dead man is yf cal oxud—ro pndev els oddev perme, fr. 532; 
cf. 533, 534. 70 wy yevéobar TH Bavetv tcov * wanep odK tdotca dds 
the dead woman knows nothing of herself or her sufferings, Tvo. 636-44 
(a locus often initiated in ‘“‘ consolations *®: _Awxtoch: 365, D; Plas 
Cons. ad Apoll. 15, p. 110 A). 

161 dyun tov éeoOAov Kav puyxots dSeixvuor yas, fr. 865. dpern dé 
kav Odvn tis ode ameAdvTa, CH 8’ odKéT GvTos cedpatos, fr. 734; cf. 
Andy. 772. At the sacrifice of Makaria the chorus in Held. 621 ff. 
can only offer as consolation the fame which awaits her—ovd’ axAens 
viv Od€a mpos avOpwrav dmo0déseTa. 

162 Makaria voluntarily going to meet her death—el 7 67 Kata 
xOovds * etn ye pévtoe pndév. el yap €€opmev Kaxet pepipvas of Oavovpevor 
Bpot@v ovK 018’ Omot Tis TpeweTar* TO yap Bavetv KaxGv péeytoTtov dappwaKkov 
vopicerar, Held, 592 fi.; cf. fr. 916. 

163 fy. 757 (the metaphor of ll. 5° ff. is employed for homilet@ 
purposes by Epictet. ii, 6, 11-14); Andy. 1270 ff. 


CHAPTER XIII 
PLATO 


The belief in human immortality, construed in a 
theological or philosophical sense, had at this time hardly 
penetrated to circles of ordinary lay folk. Socrates himself, 
. when it came to such inquiries into the unknowable, never 
claimed to provide an answer that differed from that which 
would be given by the majority of his fellow citizens out of 
the accumulated wisdom of their ancestors. Where in the 
pages of Plato he is allowed to give undisguised expression to 
his natural and homely vigour—in the Afology—he shows 
little anticipation of an immortal life of the soul. Death, he 
thinks, either brings complete unconsciousness to men, like 
a dreamless sleep, or else it means the transition of the soul 
to another life in the realm of the Souls—a realm which, to 
judge by his allusions, has much more resemblance to the 
Homeric Hades than to any of the visionary countries. 
imagined by theologians or theologically minded poets.} 
Both possibilities he accepts with complete equanimity, 
trusting in the righteousness of the controlling gods,? and he 
looks no further. How should he know with certainty where 
everyone was ignorant ? 3 

With a like absence of concern it is possible that the majority 
of the cultured (who were just beginning to separate them- 
selves from the rest of the community) left unsettled the 
problem of the Unknown.* Plato assures us that it was in 
his time a widespread belief of the populace that the out- 
going soul-breath of the dying was caught up by the winds— 
especially if its exit took place in stormy weather—and was 
dispersed, blown away, into nothing.® In other ways, too, we 
may suppose that the orthodox Greek, when death approached, 
allowed his fancy to picture what might await his soul on the. 
other side of death’s threshold.® But it is certain that the 
belief in an unending life of the soul—a life with no end. 
because it had no beginning—was not among these thoughts. 
Plato himself lets us see how strange such a conception was 
even to those who were capable of following and under- 
standing a philosophical discussion. Towards the end of the 
long dialogue upon the best kind of State his Sokrates asks. 
Glaukon with apparent irrelevance “ are you not aware that. 


464 Ay SG) 


our soul is tmmortal and never perishes ? ’’ Whereupon, we 
are told, Glaukon looked at him in astonishment and said, 
“No, in truth, of that I was not aware: can you then assert 
any such thing?” ? 

The idea that the soul of man may be everlasting and 
imperishable seemed thus a paradoxical freak to one who was 
no adept in the theological doctrine of the soul. If in later 
times the case was altered, no one contributed more effectually 
or more permanently to bring that change about than the 
great thinker and poet who established the theological con- 
ception of personal immortality in the very heart of philo- 
sophy and then gave back the idea strengthened and made 
more profound to its parent theology, while he himself extended 
the influence of that idea far beyond the bounds of school or 
sect by the far-reaching power of his own unaging writings 
which belong, not to the schoolroom, but to the greatest 
achievements of literature whether of Greece or of mankind. 
It is beyond calculation what power has been wielded since 
their first appearance by the Platonic dialogues in the con- 
firmation, dissemination, and precise definition of the belief in 
immortality—a power that with all its alteration in the 
passage of the centuries has maintained itself unbroken into 
our own times. 

§ 2 


Plato had not always given his assent to the belief in 
immortality. At any rate, it must have remained very much 
in the background of his thoughts and his belief in the days 
when he still regarded the world from the point of view of a 
slightly more developed Socraticism. Not only at that period 
(in the Apology) does he make his Sokrates go to his death 
without the most distant approach to a belief in the undying 
vitality of his soul, but also in the first sketch of his Ideal 
State—a sketch made while the influence of the Socratic 
view of life still prevailed with him—the belief in immortality 
is omitted and even excluded.® It seems as if Plato did not 
reach the higher conception of the nature and value of the 
soul, its origin and destiny reaching out beyond all temporal 
limitation, until the great change which came over his philo- 
sophy had been completed. The world of ever-changing 
Appearance manifesting itself to the senses in perpetual flux 
and, efflux—this in its inessential, unseizable unreality he 
abandoned to the criticisms of Herakleitos. But above it, 
in accordance with his own deepest longings and, as it seemed, 
implied as its real object by the Socratic search itself after 


PLATO 465 


conceptual knowledge, stood a world of unchangeable Being 
without beginning or end, to which all the appearances of this 
lower world owed such reality as they possessed. ‘‘ Being ”’ 
itself, the totality of the Ideas, remained uncontaminated 
with “ Becoming” and passing away; remained the highest 
goal and supreme aim standing high above all that aspired to 
it, or felt a longing for its complete and unlimited fullness. 
This everlasting reality holds itself aloof from the stream of 
appearance and is not to be grasped within that stream ; it is 
not manifested in the deceitful ever-changing perception of 
the senses, nor yet in the Opinion that is based upon them ; 
it can only be apprehended, without any assistance from the 
senses, by the pure intuition of the Reason.!® This world of 
everlasting self-identical Being exists outside the thought and 
knowledge of man, but it first reveals itself to man in the 
activity of his own thinking ;™ and at the same time there is 
revealed to him a higher power than the mere capacity to 
abstract the unsubstantial general conceptions from the 
multiplicity of experience—a power that is the highest 
capacity of the soul, enabling it to voyage out beyond all 
experience and with infallible knowledge }* to soar of its 
own independent power upwards to a transcendental world 
of permanent and essential reality. The highest capacity 
that belongs to man, the soul of his soul, is not enclosed within 
this world that surrounds his senses in its restless flood. Like 
the objects that are the last goal of its study the soul itself is 
raised to where it can for the first time find a form of activity 
worthy of its natural powers. It achieves a new distinction, 
a priestlike dignity, as an intermediary between the two 
worlds to both of which it belongs. 

The soul is a pure spiritual essence; it contains nothing 
within it that is material, nothing of the “ place’’ where 
Becoming is shaped into a distant resemblance to Being.}8 
It is incorporeal and belongs to the realm of the “ invisible ”’, 
which in this immaterialist doctrine counts as the most real 
of all, more real than the most solid matter.!4 It is not one of 
the Ideas ; on the contrary it seems to partake in one of the 
Ideas—that of Life—only as other appearances share in their 
Ideas.° But it stands nearer to the whole world of the 
everlasting Ideas than anything else that is not itself an Idea ; 
of all the things in the world it is “ most like ” to the Idea.1® 

But it has also a share in Becoming. It cannot simply 
remain with the Ideas in unaltered other-world transcendence. 
It has its origin indeed in that other world beyond Appearance. 
It was from the beginning, uncreated 1” like the Ideas and like 


Hh 


466 PLATO 


the Soul of the World to which it is akin.18 It is “ older than 
the body ” 19 to which it must link itself ; it does not come 
into being at the same time as the body, but is only drawn down 
from its spiritual state of being into the realm of matter and 
becoming. In the Phaedrus this “ fall into birth” appears 
as the necessary result of an intellectual “ fall *’ which takes 
place within the soul itself.2° In the Tzamaeus, however, with 
its study of the general life of the whole world-organism, the 
animation of the living creature has now to be explained 
as arising out of the plan—not from a failure of the plan— 
of the Creator.2!_ The soul thus seems to be destined from the 
beginning to give life to a body. It is not only the knowing 
and thinking element in a world of inanimate things, it is 
also the source of all movement. Itself in motion from the 
beginning it bestows the power of movement upon the body 
with which it is associated; without it, there would be no 
movement in the world, and no life either.** 

But though enclosed within the body it remains a stranger to 
the body. On its side it has no need of the body and is not 
conditioned by it. It remains independently associated with 
it as its mistress and leader.*? Even in their united existence 
there is a great gulf fixed between the soul and all that is 
not soul; 24 body and soul never fuse into one, however 
closely they may be bound up with each other. And yet the 
body and its impulses have the power to influence profoundly 
the immortal being that dwells within it. By its union with 
the body the soul can be made unclean ; ‘diseases ”’ such as 
folly and unrestrained passion come to it from the body.** 
It is not beyond the reach of change like the Ideas, to which 
it is akin without being of their nature; on the contrary, it 
can degenerate entirely. The evil influences of the body 
penetrate to its inmost being; even in its everlasting, 1m- 
material, spiritual nature it can derive something “ cor- 
poreal ’’ 2 from such a sinister partnership. 

It is bound to the body by influences of a lower kind which 
attach themselves to the pure power of knowledge that alone is 
proper toit. At the outset of his speculations Plato, like other 
thinkers before him,?’ had thought of the different capacities 
of the soul, alternately in conflict or alliance with each other, 
as “‘ parts’ of unequal rank and value, bound up together 
within the soul of man.?® Even in the previous life of the 
soul, in the other world, the reasoning power of the soul is, 
according to the Phaedrus, already coupled with ‘‘ Temper ”’ 
and “‘ Desire’”’; it is these in fact which drag down the soul 
into the realm of the material; and the three parts still 


PLATO 467 


remain indissolubly united in the everlasting life which awaits 
the soul after its release from the body. 

But in proportion as the philosopher extends and elevates 
his conception of the soul, and as he becomes more convinced 
of its eternal destiny and vocation to a life of unending blessed- 
ness in a realm of unchangeable being, the more impossible 
does it seem to him that this candidate for immortality in the 
realm of the everlasting Forms can be a composite amalgam 
of elements capable of being resolved again by division and 
analysis ?®—that the reasoning faculty can be for ever united 
with Effort and Desire, which perpetually threaten to drag it 
downwards into materiality. The soul in its true and original 
nature is now for him simple and indivisible.3° Only with its 
enclosure in the body does the everlasting, thinking soul, 
whose tendency is towards the eternal, acquire impulses and 
desires *! that have their origin in the body and belong to 
the body,®* that only adhere to the soul during the period of 
its earthly life, that with their separation from their immortal 
associate will pass away, since they are themselves mortal 
and such as perish with the body. 

The soul, to which sense-perception,*? feeling, emotion, and 
desire are only added from outside, is in its own imperishable 
nature nothing but pure capacity of thought and knowledge— 
with which indeed the power to will that which is conceived 
in thought, seems to be directly associated. It is destined 
for the ‘“‘ other’’ world, for the intuition and undistorted 
reflection in its consciousness of the immaterial essences. 
Banished to this earth amid the restless change and alteration 
of all being, and not uninfluenced by the forces of bodily 
life, it must endure a brief exile here.*4 Not unscathed 
does it leave behind it, in death, its ill-assorted com- 
panion, the body. Then it goes into an intermediate 
region of bodiless existence in which it must do penance for 
the misdeeds of its life on earth, and free itself from their 
effects.2® After that it is driven away once more into a body 
and transported to a fresh life upon earth, the character of 
which it chooses for itself in accordance with the special 
nature that it had evolved in its earlier incarnation upon 
earth.3? Though no organic connexion exists between them, 
yet there is a certain ‘“‘ symmetry ” 38 between the individual 
soul and the body that is lent to it. 

Thus, the soul lives through a series of earthly lives °° of the 
most varied character ; it may even sink so low as the animals 
in the course of its incarnations.4° Its own merits, the success 
or failure of its conflict with the passions and desires of the 


468 PLATO 


body, decide whether or not its lives shall lead it upwards to a 
nobler type of existence. Its task is plain : it must /ree itself 
from its impure companions, sensual Lust and the darkening 
of the powers of Reason. If it can succeed in this it will find 
once more the ‘“‘ way upwards’”’ *! which at last leads it 
into complete immunity from renewed incarnation and brings 
it home again into the kingdom of everlasting untroubled 
Being. 
§ 3 


It is evident that in what he thus, clothing philosophy in 
the language of poetry, says of the origin, destiny, and 
character of the soul, which though beyond time is yet placed 
within time, and though beyond space is yet the cause of all 
movement within space—that in all this Plato is following 
in the track of the theologians of earlier times. Only in the 
poetry and speculative thought of theolog1, not in any physio- 
logists’ doctrine, did he find the conception, imaginatively 
expressed and pointing in the direction which he also followed, 
of a multiplicity of independent souls whose existence had 
been from all time and was not first begun in the material 
world with the creation of a living organism; of souls en- 
closed in the corporeal as though in a foreign, hostile element, 
which survive their association with the body, passing 
through many such bodies and yet preserving themselves intact 
after the destruction of each of those bodies, immortal, end- 
less (for they are without beginning),4## and alive from the 
very beginning of Time. The souls, moreover, have life as 
distinct, complete, and indivisible personalities, not as mere 
dependent emanations of a simple common Source of all life. 

The theory of the eternity and indestructibility of the 
individual souls, of the personal immortality of the souls, is 
difficult to reconcile with more specifically Platonic doctrine— 
with the doctrine of the Ideas.*3 And yet it is undeniable that 
from the moment that he first adopted this theory—and 
adopted it, too, precisely in connexion with the philosophy 
of the Ideas—he adhered to it steadfastly and without 
deviating from its essential meaning. The process by which 
he arrived at it is not to be found in the “ proofs’ by which 
he attempts in the Phaedo to establish the truth of the soul’s 
immortality in which he himself already believed. Those 
proofs in reality do not prove what they are intended to 
prove (and what considered as a fact of experience is unproved 
and as an axiom necessary to thought is beyond proof) ; they 
cannot therefore be the reasons that led the philosopher to 


PLATO 469 


hold his conviction. He has in fact borrowed this article 
of his faith from the creeds which already contained it. He 
himself scarcely conceals the fact. As authority for the main 
outlines of the soul’s history as given by himself he refers us 
almost apologetically, and as though excusing himself for not 
providing a philosophical proof, to the theologt and priests 
of the mysteries.44 And he himself becomes the philosophical 
poet, completely and without concealment, when in imitation 
of the poetry of edification he, too, gives a picture of the 
soul’s sojourn in an intermediate station of its pilgrimage 
or describes the stages of its earthly existence * that lead the 
soul down even to the anjmal. 

For such mythological expressions of the inexpressible the 
philosopher himself claims no more than symbolical truth.*® 
He is fully in earnest, however, with the fundamental con- 
ception of the soul as an independent substance that enters 
from beyond space and time into the material and perceptible 
world, and into external conjunction with the body, not into 
organic union with it; that maintains itself as a being of 
spiritual essence in the midst of the flux and decay of the 
material world, though at the same time its pure brightness 
is overshadowed through this conjunction and must purify 
itself from the effects; that can disentangle itself,4” even to 
the extent of complete severance from the embrace of the 
material and the perceptible. All that is essential in this 
conception he derives from the theologians, but he brings it 
into close relationship with his own philosophy which depends 
upon a conviction of the absolute opposition between Being 
and Becoming, and upon the dualistic division of the world 
into matter and mind—a dualism that applies also to the 
relations of soul and body and throughout the whole realm of 
Appearance. The soul which stands half-way between the 
unity and unchangeability of Being and the ever-varying 
multiplicity of matter has in this realm of fragmentary and 
subordinate validity, into which it is temporarily exiled, the 
power to reflect the Ideas and represent them in its own 
consciousness clear and unfalsified. The soul in its complete 
independence of sense-perception and of concepts derived from 
the senses is alone able to pursue the ‘‘ Quest of Reality ’”’.48 
In this pursuit the body with which it is associated is nothing 
but a hindrance and a serious one. The soul has a hard 
struggle against the tendencies of the body in spite of its 
independence and aloofness. Just as, in the creation of 
the universe, matter, though not a cause is at least a sub- 
ordinate cause which by its influence and exigencies gives 


470 PLATO 


various hindrances 49 to the “‘ Mind ”’ that shapes and orders 
the world, so, too, the soul finds in this ephemeral and in- 
constant Matter, with its stirring and tumultuous unrest, a 
serious obstacle to its own proper activity. This is the evil, 
or the cause of evil,®® which must be overthrown in order that 
the mind may win its way to freedom and final rest and security 
in the realm of pure Being. Plato often speaks of the kath- 
arsis, the purification, after which man must strive.*4 He 
takes both the word and the idea from the theologians, but he 
gives it a higher meaning while yet preserving unmistakably 
the analogy with the katharsis of the theologt and mystery- 
priests. It is not the pollution which comes from contact with 
sinister daimones and from all that belongs to them, that is to 
be avoided, but rather the dulling of the power of knowledge 
and of willing what is known (regarded as a simultaneously 
created power) due to the world of the senses and its fierce 
impulses.** Man’s effort must be directed not so much to 
ritual purity, as to the preservation of his knowledge of the 
eternal from eclipse through the deceptive illusions of the 
senses ; towards the concentration and gathering together 
of the soul within itself ; 58 its withdrawal from contact with 
the ephemeral as the source of pollution and debasement. 

Thus, even in this philosophic reinterpretation of ritual 
abstinence in terms of a spiritual release and emancipation, 
the effort after “ purity ”’ retains its religious sense. The world 
of the Ideas, the world of pure Being, to which only the pure 
soul can attain,®°* is a world of divinity. The ‘“ Good ”’ as the 
highest of the Ideas, the loftiest pattern, the supreme aim to 
which all Being and Becoming tend, which is at the same time 
more than all the Ideas—the first cause of all Being and all 
knowledge—is also God.®® The soul for which, in its desire 
and longing for the full being of the Idea, the knowledge of 
the “ Good ”’ is the “ supreme science ’’,5* enters hereby into 
the closest communion with God. The “ turning away ”’ of 
the soul from the many-coloured image to the sun of the highest 
Idea, is itself 7 a turning towards the divine, towards the 
luminous source of all Being and Knowing. 

Thus exalted, philosophic inquiry turns to enthousiasmos.* 
The way which leads upwards from the lower levels of Becom- 
ing to Being, is discovered by means of dialectic, which in its 
“comprehensive view’ 5° is able to unite the distracted 
ever-moving flood of multifarious Appearance into the ever- 
enduring unity of the Idea which is reflected in Appearance. 
Dialectic travels through the whole range of the Ideas, 
graduated one above the other, till it reaches the last and 


PLATO 471 


most universal of the Ideas. In its upward course it passes 
by an effort of sheer logic through the whole edifice of the 
highest concepts.®® Plato is the most subtle of dialecticians ; 
he almost carries subtlety to excess in his eager pursuit of 
every intricacy of logic—and of paralogism. But he com- 
bined to a remarkable degree the cold exactitude of the 
logician with the enthusiastic intensity of the seer; and his 
dialectic, after its patient upward march step by step from 
concept to concept, at last soars to its final goal in a single 
tremendous flight, in which the longed-for realm of the Ideas 
reveals itself in a moment of immediate vision. So the 
Bacchant in his ecstasy saw divinity suddenly plain, and so 
too in the nights consecrated by the mysteries the epoptés beheld 
the vision of the Goddesses in the torch-lit glare of Eleusis.® 

To this loftiest height whence a view is obtained of “ colour- 
less, formless Being, beyond the reach of every contact ”’, 
inaccessible to sense-perception, it 1s dialectic that shows the 
way ; and dialectic now becomes a way of salvation in which 
the soul finds once more its own divine nature and its divine 
home. The soul is closely akin to godhead and like it ®*—it is 
itself something divine. The reason in the soul is divine,® 
and comprehends everlasting Being immediately by its power 
of thought. “ If the eye were not sunlike, it could never see 
the sun ”’ ; 4 if the mind were not akin by nature to the 
good,® the highest of the Ideas, it could never comprehend 
the Good, the Beautiful, and all that is perfect and eternal. 
In its power of recognizing the eternal the soul bears within 
itself the surest proof that it 1s itself eternal.®® 

The “ purification’ by means of which the soul gets rid 
of 6? the defacement that has overtaken it during its earthly 
life reveals again the divine in man. Even on earth the 
philosopher is thus rendered immortal and godlike.’ As 
long as he can continue in a state of pure intellectual know- 
ledge and comprehension of the everlasting, for so long is he 
living, already in this life, “‘in the Islands of the Blest.” °° 
By expelling all traces of the corruptible and the mortal in 
and about himself, he is more and more to “ become like 
God ”’ ; 7° so that when it is at last set free from this earthly 
existence, his soul may enter into the divine, the invisible, 
the pure, the eternally self-identical, and as a disembodied 
mind remain for ever with that which is its kin.7 At this 
point, language that can only make use of physical imagery 
becomes totally inadequate.7!_ A goal is set before the soul 
that lies outside all physical nature, beyond time and space, 
without past or future, an ever-present now.” 


472 PLATO 


The soul can escape out of time and space and find its home 
in eternity, without at the same time losing its own self 
in the General and Universal that stands above time and 
space. We must not inquire what sort of personality and 
individual distinctness can yet remain with the soul when it 
has cast off all effort, desire, sense-perception, and every- 
thing related to the world of change and multiplicity, 
to become once more a pure mirror of the eternal. Nor must 
we ask how it is possible to think of a spirit removed above 
space and time and all the multiplicity of matter and yet 
personal and separate in its personality.”* For Plato the 
Souls live on as they had been in the beginning—individual 
beings conscious of themselves in a time that has no end and 
is beyond all time. He teaches a personal immortality. 


§ 4 

There is an “ other-worldly ”’ tone in this philosophy, and 
its doctrine of the soul. Far beyond the world in which 
life has placed man lies the realm of pure Being, the good, the 
perfect, and the unspoilt. To reach that realm at last, to 
free the mind from the unrest and illusion of the senses, to 
be rid of the desires and emotions that would “nail” “ it 
down here below, to sever its connexion 7° with the body and 
bodily things—that is the soul’s highest duty. The only 
reason why it is banished into this world is that it may all 
the more completely separate itself from the world. To die— 
to be dead inwardly to all that is visible, material, physical— 
that is the goal and the fruit of philosophy.’® ‘‘ To be ready 
and fit to die’ is the hall-mark of the complete philosopher. 
For such, philosophy is the deliverer that frees him for all 
time from the body **—from its desires, its restlessness, its 
wild passions *8—and gives him back again to the eternal 
and its silence. | 

To be pure, to be free from evil, to die already in this 
temporal world—these are the oft-repeated exhortations 
which the philosopher addresses to the immortal soul. Ascetic 
morality here again demands from man what is essentially a 
quite negative proceeding. But this denial of the world is 
only a step leading on to the most supremely positive behaviour. 
Katharsts is only the gateway to philosophy ; and it is philo- 
sophy which teaches man how to reach what alone is positive, 
the only true and unconditional Being ; instructs him how 
to reach the clear and perfect understanding of the only 
permanent good and how to merge himself utterly in that 
good.’® The soul of the thinker yearns after Reality ; °° 


‘ 


Beale 473 


death is for it not merely the annihilation of the chains of 
the body that impede it, but a very positive “‘ acquisition of 
intellectual knowledge ”’ §! to which it is urged on by its proper 
nature—which is therefore also a fulfilment of its proper task. 
So the turning aside from the physical and the ephemeral is 
at the same time and without transition a turning towards 
the eternal and the divine. The flight from the things of this 
world is in itself an entry into that other world, and a becoming 
like to the divine. ®? 

But the true realities are not to be found in this world. 
To grasp them plainly in its thought—to recover the untrou- 
bled vision of its spiritual eye—the soul must divest itself 
entirely of all the stress and distraction of the earthly. For 
this mundane world, the mirage that encompasses the senses, 
the philospher has nothing but denial. Because it gives no 
foothold for true knowledge the whole world of Becoming has 
no independent value for his science. The apprehension of 
that which is never more than relative, which simultaneously 
manifests contrary qualities in itself, can only serve as 
stimulus and invitation to the search for what is absolute.* 
In this realm of doubtful shadows the soul finds nothing but 
obscure reminders of that which it had once beheld plainly. 
The beauty of the physical world which is apprehended by the 
noblest of the senses, the eye, serves indeed to recall to the 
soul’s memory the Beautiful-in-itself, of which that other is 
but a pale copy, and to disclose to the soul what is really its 
own property, what it had brought with it ready made from 
an earlier existence beyond the bounds of all matter.84 But 
the observation of beauty here below must lead beyond itself 
at once and conduct the mind out of the world of mere appear- 
ance to the pure forms of the Ideal world. The process of 
Becoming tells us nothing about the nature of Being; the 
thinker learns nothing from this source—in fact he learns no 
new knowledge or wisdom of any kind in this world ; he only 
recovers what he had before and always possessed in latent 
form.®> The treasure, however, lies beyond the limits of this 
world. He must turn away his gaze from the shadow-figures 
upon the wall of the cave of this world, and direct it towards 
the sun of eternity.8® He is placed in this world of perpetual 
change; to it his senses and his understanding are directly 
referred; and yet he must disdain and rise superior to, and flee 
from, all that this world offers, giving himself up immediately 
and entirely to the unseen, and taking flight from this world 
to that where he will become like God, and be purified and 
justified by the power and might of his knowledge. ®’ 


474 PLATO 


Earthly life as it actually is will remain strange to him, and 
he a stranger in earthly life,8® despised as a fool for his in- 
aptitude in earthly affairs by the great majority of those who 
are so versed in such things.*® He has something higher to 
think about—the salvation of his own soul. He will not live 
for the community, but for himself, and his real task.°° Human 
interests seem to him hardly worth troubling about,*! the state 
itself hopelessly corrupt, founded as it is upon deception and 
passion and injustice. At the same time, he himself of course 
would be the real statesman,*? the leader who could guide his 
fellow citizens to their true salvation—acting not as the servant 
of their lusts, but as a doctor who gives help to the sick.” 
It is ‘‘ not ships and harbours and walls and taxes and such 
trivialities ’’ 94 that he would give the city, but justice and 
health and everything elSe which after this life can stand before 
the stern judgment of the other world.%° This would be the 
best mode of life,°* and he could show them the way to it ; 
no worldly power or greatness can do as much—none of the 
great statesmen of the past, Themistokles, Kimon, and 
Perikles, understood anything of all this; all their efforts were 
nothing but blind error and wandering.®’ 

At the climax of his life and of his philosophical develop- 
ment Plato completed an ideal picture of the State, drawn in 
accordance with the principles and the requirements of his 
own philosophy. It rests upon a broad foundation—the 
multitude of its inhabitants divided strictly into classes that 
in themselves and their manner of life are to display, like a 
beacon that can be seen afar, the virtue of Justice. At one 
period this had seemed to include all that was necessary for 
the completion of the ideal State; but now, far above that 
level, pointing upwards into the lofty aether above the earth, 
a final consummation reveals itself to him, to which all mere 
mundane things serve but as support and furtherance. A small 
minority of the citizens, the philosphers, form this last pinnacle 
of the building. Here on earth and in this state that is organ- 
ized in conformity with justice, they will serve the state, 
as in duty bound and not for their own satisfaction, and take 
part in government.9® As soon as duty is fulfilled they will 
return to the supramundane contemplation which is the aim 
and content of their whole life’s activity. To provide a place 
where these contemplatives may live, where they may be 
educated for their vocation, the highest there is; to allow 
dialectic as a form of living to take its place in the activity of 
worldly civilization as an object of men’s effort °®—to bring 
about all this the Ideal State is built up step by step. The 


PLATO 475 


bourgeois social virtues and their firm establishment and inter- 
connexion, which had once seemed the real and sufficient 
reason for the erection of the whole edifice of the state—seen 
from this elevation, these no longer retain their independent 
importance. ‘“‘ The so-called virtues” all pale before the 
highest capacity of the soul, which is the mystic beholding of 
the eternal.1°° The chief mission of the perfect wise man is 
no longer to fulfil his obligations to the others that stand with- 
out. To make his own inner life fit and ready for self-emanci- 
pation is now his real and immediate task. Mysticism aims at 
a personal salvation such as the individual can only obtain for 
himself. Good works are no longer necessary when the mind 
has no further connexion with earthly lfe and conduct. 
When it comes to dealing with practical earthly affairs he 
who possesses the highest virtue will have all these others 
added unto him.1®% Virtue belongs to him; it is his real 
condition of being; but the particular virtues he will rarely 
need to use. 

This lofty pinnacle is accessible to but a few. God alone and 
a small 1° company of mortals are able to approach in pure 
thought to the everlasting Reality, the sole object of certain, 
plain and unchanging Knowledge. The majority of men can 
never become philosophers.1° And yet, according to this 
philosophy, the crown of all life belongs to the philosopher. 
This is no religion for the poor in spirit. Science—the supreme 
knowledge of the highest Being—is a pre-condition of salva- 
tion. To know God is to become like God.1®* It is easy to 
see why such a message of salvation could not attract a wider 
community of believers. It could not have done so without 
being false to its own nature. To a few lofty spirits among 
mankind, it offers a reward that beckons from eternity. 
Freedom from life in the corruptible body is the prize it offers ; 
that and a never-ending union with true Reality—a return to 
what is everlasting and divine. A symbol of what the philo- 
sopher has achieved after his death will be provided by the 
community by whom the departed will be honoured as a 
Daimon,1® 

Such then is the ideal vision of a civilization in which the 
belief in the soul’s immortality and its vocation to an ever- 
lasting life in the kingdom of the gods was held with profound 
and serious conviction. The belief in immortality here 
becomes the corner-stone of a building, the architect of 
which regards all earthly things as only valid for the moment, 
and therefore of profound unimportance. For him only the 
Heaven of the spiritual world with its everlasting laws and 


476 PLATO 


patterns seriously matters. He discards without a regret 
the whole of Greek culture as it had expressed itself in state 
and society, custom and art—an art that will last as long as 
humanity itself. He demands an aristocracy, and an aris- 
tocracy measured by a standard of what is the “ best” that 
was quite beyond the reach of any possible human society even 
though it were as deeply impregnated with aristocratic ideas 
as Greek society always was. And the final aim and ideal 
sought by this organization of life on earth was to be the 
superseding of all earthly life . . 

The mind of Plato, equally ready to receive as to give, was 
not likely to become immobilized for ever in a mystic rapture 
of vision. Even when he had finished the Republic he did not 
cease to reshape his system at many points and in many 
directions, while some special problems were taken up again 
for further and repeatéd study. Even a second sketch of a 
political system was left behind by him in which he sought 
to lay down rules for the guidance of life among the multitude 
who are still regarded as completely shut out from the realm 
of the everlasting Forms. To this end the highest aims of 
human endeavour are almost left out of sight and practical 
rules for reaching the attainable ‘“‘ better”’ are supplied for 
the benefit of the majority. He had learnt resignation at 
many points. Nevertheless, the profound conviction of all 
his thoughts remained unchanged; the claims that he put 
before the world and mankind remained essentially the same. 
For this reason after generations have not been mistaken in 
seeing in him the priestly man of wisdom, who with warning 
finger points the immortal spirit of man on its way from this 
feeble world upwards to the everlasting life. 


MRO MU ee GHOL Clash MeN Dice SOR 


peel etpace o2at. e400 Grit.) 

fap; ALG D. 

A Dee hy, 37 3B. 

4 Xen., Cyrop. 8, 7, 17, makes the dying Kyros justify his faith that 
the soul survives the body rather on the lines of popular belief and the cult 
of souls than from would-be-philosophical considerations (§ 20; see 
above, chap. v,n. 178). In spite of this he allows the question to remain 
undecided—as though of little importance—whether, in fact, the soul 
then leaves the body and lives on or whether pévovoa 4 uy ev TH 
odpate cvvaTobvnoKxe, § 21. In either eventuality he will after death 
pnodev etc Kakov wabeiv, § 27.—Arist., SE. xvii, p. 176b, 16, adzepov 
pbapty 7 abavatos H Yux} TaV CeHwy, ot Siwprotar Tots woAAots—in 
this question they aydidofotar. 

5 Pl., Phd. 70 A, 77 B, 80 D. This belief of the woAAod and matdes 
looks indeed much more like a piece of superstition than a denial of 
the continued life of the yuyx7 (in which light Pl. represents it). We 
have already met with the soul as a wind-spirit more than once: when 
it leaves the body the other wind-spirits carry it off and away with 
themselves (cf. above, chap. i, n. 10), esp. when a high wind is blowing 
(cf. the German popular belief that when a man hangs himself a storm 
paises ceeGiimim, p.)630°> ci. Mannhardt, Germ: Myth. -270, 1... In 
other words, the ‘furious host’’, the personified storm-spirits— 
Grimm, p. 632; cf. Append. vii—come and carry away with them 
the poor unquiet soul). 

° Ci. Pl., Rp. 330 DE. There, is more about these matters in the 
speech against Aristogeiton, [D.] 25, 52-3. In spite of the popular 
form in which it is put such an opinion is not to be claimed at once 
as a popular and generally held belief: the author of this speech is 
a follower of Orpheus, a fact which he himself betrays in § 11. 

Cellet p.2 00S). 

8 It is probable that in the IToAureta two essentially distinct stages of 
Platonic doctrine are found side by side with only an external bond 
of union, and that in particular what is said in Bk. v, 471 Cff., to the 
end of Bk. vii about the ¢iAdcoda:, their education and position in the 
state (and outside politics), is an extraneous addition to the completed 
picture of the cadXimoXus which is given in Bks. ii—v, 471 C: an after- 
thought not originally included in the plan of the whole book and not 
anticipated in the beginning of it. This seems to me to emerge 
unmistakably from a careful and unprejudiced study of the whole work 
and to have been completely demonstrated by Krohn and Pfleiderer. 
That Plato himself regarded the first sketch of an ideal state as a 
separate work (which may even have been actually published separately : 
Gellius, 14, 3, 3), is shown by the beginning of the Timaeus. Here— 
with the implication of quite a different staging of the dialogue 
and a different introduction from what we now read in Fp., Bk. i, 
c.l—ii, c. 9—-we have an exact recapitulation of the subject of the 
inquiry in the JToA:reia from ii, 10, 367 E, to v, 460 C, with the 
definite statement (19 AB) that thus far and no farther had the discussion 
gone “‘ yesterday’. The stages in which the whole work was composed 
seem then to be divisible as follows: (1) Sketch of the state of the 


478 NOTES TOM CHARIE Keen tT 


dvAaxes (in brief) embodied in a dialogue between Sokrates, Kriton, 
Timaios, Hermokrates, and another companion: in subject matter 
agreeing (apart from the introduction) substantially with Fp. ii, 10, 
367 E, to v, 460 C. (2) Continuation of this sketch in the story of 
ancient Athens and the people of Atlantis. Its completion is transferred 
elsewhere because in the meantime the JTJoAureéa itself has been extended 
and into the empty framework of the T iy. thus left available the account 
of the creation of the world given by Timaios is very loosely inserted : 
the frame-narratives of the Tipaos and Kpitias never being com- 
pleted. (3) Continuation of the first sketch (still virtually along the 
lines originally laid down) in Rp. v, 460 D-471 C (in which 466 E ff. 
is a brief account of the behaviour of the state in time of war—a 
substitute for the longer and more detailed statement on the same 
subject in Tim. 20 B f.), and in vili, ix (the greater part), and x, second 
half (608 C ff.). (4) Finally the whole work receives its crown and 
completion in a section that was, however, not foreseen in the older 
parts of the design, for.it disturbs part of that original design’s 
independence and validity and does more than merely supplement it— 
the introduction of the ¢iAdcodor and their special type of “‘ virtue ”’, 
v, 471 C-—vii fin.; ix, 580 D-588 A; x, part 1 (to 608 B).—Then came 
the final editing of the whole: insertion of the new introduction, i, 1- 
ii, 9 (not necessarily left until the completion of the whole) ; necessary 
bringing into harmony of the divergent elements by a few excisions, 
qualifications, etc.; and probably a literary revision and polishing 
of the whole book.—The whole thus finally produced reveals its origin 
clearly enough in the outgrowing of a first plan and its replacement 
by a second that has naturally suggested itself in the course of the 
author’s own continued development. At the same time Plato could 
claim that the whole edifice, in spite of much extension and rebuilding 
in a different style of architecture, should be considered as a unity 
in the form in which he finally left it (as a noteworthy monument, 
too, of his own alteration of view). He himself in the sublimest 
moments of his mystic flight in Bks. vi and vii in no sense rejects the 
groundwork of the xaAAimoXs of ii-v (though not, indeed, designed 
originally as such), but merely reduces it to the position of a substructure 
which remains a necessary and sole foundation even for the mystic 
pinnacle and preserves its absolute validity for the great majority of the 
citizens who inhabit the caAAimoXs (for the duAdcodor are still regarded 
as very few in number) for whom itis a school for the exhibition of 
political virtue.—In the first sketch, then, there isno trace of a doctrine 
of immortality that can be properly so called, and the popular belief 
in a continued life of the soul after death has for Plato, at this stage 
at least, no serious weight or importance. The d¢vAaxes are not to 
trouble about what may follow death (iii, 1 ff.) ; the main purpose 
in view is to show that é:cavocvyy is its own reward, and the rewards 
which are anticipated for it after death are only ironically alluded to 
(ii, 363 CD; cf. 366 AB); Sokrates means to do without such hopes 
(366 E ff.). The a@avacia puyfs is only introduced as a paradox in 
x, 608 D (in the continuation of the first sketch) for which proof is 
sought ; whereupon the importance of the question as to what may 
await the soul after death emerges (614 A ff.) as well as the necessity 
of taking thought not for this short life but twép tod daavtos ypovov 
(608 C), of which nothing had been said or could have been said in 
uii-v. Finally in vi—-vii the indestructibility of the soul is implied in 
its sublimest form. It is evident that Plato’s own views on these 
matters had undergone changes in the course of time, and that these 


NOTE See lOm GHAR BE RES XLT 479 


changes are reflected in the various strata of the JToX\rela even after 
its final editing. (Cf. Krohn, Platon. Siaat, p. 265; Pfleiderer, 
Platon, Frage, p. 23 f., 35 ff., 1888.) 

® The Appearance fovAeTar, dpéyerar, mpoOvpetrar elvar what its Idea 
is: Phd. 74 D, 75 AB. The Ideas are thus teleological causes like the 
divine vods of Aristotle which, unmoved itself, xivet ws épdpevov (just 
as matter has a desire for form, potentiality for actuality). Plato it 
is true did not keep to this method of illustrating rather than explaining 
the relation between the Appearance and the unmoved Idea. 

° vonoe peta Adyou mepidAnnrorv, Tim. 27 D. 0d ovmor’ adv dArkw 
em:AdBoro 4 TH THs Stavotas Aoytop@, Phd. 79 A. adry 8 aitis 7H 
pux7n Ta Kowa daiverar mept wavtwv éemioxonetv, Tht. 185 D 

11 The prius in the case of man is really the perception of his own 
mental activity in vonoas peta Adyov as being a process essentially 
different from 60a per’ aicOjoews dAdyov. It is inference from the 
former alone that leads to the conclusion that the voovmeva exist : 
Tim. 51 B-52 A. It is the Ideas that we grasp in abstract thought : 
ae 7 ovola %s Adyov Sidopev Kal epwrdvres Kal amoxpwopevor, Phd. 
78 D 

12 The émorjun which dcadextixy alone can give (Rp, 533 DE) is 
avapaptyntos (ip. 477 E). 

13 Of the three efiy or yévn—the ov, the yuyvdpevov and the év & 
ylyvera (the ywpa), of Tim. 48 E f., 52 ABD—the third at any rate 
is quite foreign to the soul. Like the World-Soul (Tim. 35 A), along 
with which it is “‘ mixed ** (41 D), the individual soul also is a middle 
term between the duepes of the Idea and the xara ra oWpata pepioror, 
having a share in both. 

14 True, unalterable Being belongs only to the ae.dés and therefore 
also to the soul: Phd. 79 A f. 

18 Phd. c. 54-6 (105 B-107 B). 

16 Guordtepov wuyt) owpatos e€oTt TH aevdet (and that =7@ ael 
waavTws Exovri), Phd. 79 B. 7 Oeiw nai abavatrw Kal vont Kat 
povoecoe? Kal adtadiTw Kal WaavTws KATA TAUTA EXOVTL EAUT@ Oporotarov 
yoxy, 80 AB. 

17 Gyévyntov, Phdr. c. 24, 245 D (didios simply, Rp. 611 B). The 
creation of the souls in Tim. is only intended to represent the origin 
of the spiritual from the dyovpyds (not the coming into being of the 
soul in time) : see Siebeck, Ges. d. Psychol. i, 1, 275 ff. Still, it remains 
impossible to say whether Plato whenever he speaks of the pre-existence 
of the soul always means that the soul existed without beginning. 

18 Astothe relation of the individual soul to the soul of the universe, 
neither the mythical account in Timaeus nor the briefer allusion in 
Phileb, 30 A allows us to conclude that the soul of our body is “‘ taken 
from ”’ the soul of the c@ua rob mavrds. In reality the fiction of a 
“World-Soul’’ is intended to serve quite other purposes than the 
derivation of the individual soul from a single common source. 

fe-lime 34°G; Dg. 891 A—-896 C. 

20 Acc. to the account in Phdr. 246 C, the soul suffers its downfall 
into the earthly existence if 6 rHs Kans immos, i.e. the émuOupca in the 
soul, tends towards the earth—247 B. It must, therefore, be the 
result of the preponderance of the appetitive impulses. This, however, 
can only happen if the Aoyortxov of the soul has become too weak to 
drive the soul- chariot any longer asitsduty was. Hence the supporting 
wings, i.e. the vonars, of the soul-horse fall off. It is thus a weakening 
of the cognitive part of the soul that causes its downfall into materiality 
(just as it is the measure of their capacity for knowledge that determines. 


480 NOTEHSWelOM CHALLE RaaCiit 


the character of the évowpudtwors of the souls, and their return to the 
TOmos bmepovparios is equally determined by their recovery of the 
purer form of knowledge: 248 C ff., 249 AC). Thus it is not, as in 
Empedokles, a religio-moral transgression that leads to the incarnation 
of the souls, but a failure of intellect, an intellectual fall in sin. 

21 The soul is, acc. to the account in Tim., created in order that by 
animating and governing a body, it may complete the sum of creation : 
without the (ga the ovpavds (the universe) would be dreAjs, Tim. 
41 B ff. Acc. to this teleological motivation of the being and the 
évowpatwors of the soul, this latter, the évowyadrwors, would have 
belonged to the original plan of the dnprovpyds and there would be 
no purpose in the creation of the souls (by the dyprovpyds and the 
inferior gods) unless they were destined to the animation of the (@a 
and conjunction with odpara. But it is obviously inconsistent with 
all this that the object of the soul’s endeavour should be to separate 
itself as soon as possible and as completely as possible from the body 
and everything material in order to get back again to immaterial life 
without any body—42 BD. This is a relic of the original theological 
view of the relation between body and soul. In Phd. (and usually in 
Plato) it displays itself unconcealed; but it was far too closely 
bound up with the whole of Plato’s ethic and metaphysics not to make 
its illicit appearance even when as in Zim. he wished to keep the 
physiological side to the fore. 

#2 Phdy, 245 C-246 A. The soul is rd atro xuwoty, and indeed 
continually, decxivnrov, it 1s tots dAAots Goa Kiwetrar mHy? Kal apxy 
Kuvjnoews (the body only seems to move itself, but it is really the soul 
within which moves it—246 C). If the soul were to perish, ads 
ovpavos maoa Te yéveots Would be at a standstill. The conception of 
the “‘soul”’’ as the decxkivnrovy was already well and long established 
in Plato’s time (see above, chap. xil, n. 150). In the form in which 
he introduces it here (as a proof of the imperishability of the soul) 
he may have modelled his conception on that of Alkmaion (Arist., 
An. 405a, 29): see Hirzel, Hermes, xi, 244. But Plato here and 
throughout Phdr. is speaking of the individual soul (vy collective 
singular). So too in Lg. 894 E ff., 896 A ff. (Adyos of the soul: 
} Suvapevyn adT} adtnv Kiweiv Kivnos. It is the airéa and the issue of 
all movement in the world, the source of life ; for life belongs to that 
which atro atro xwet 895 C.) As distinguished from the yuvyx7 
€votkovoa év Gaul Tots Kivoupevors We Go not hear of the (double) World- 
Soul until 896 E. There is in fact xivyoi.s in plenty in the world 
besides that of the animated organisms. 

23 Phd. 93 B (c. 43) and often. 

24 Juy7 on the one side, wav ro axsvyov on the other. Phdr. 246 B 
and so generally. 

25 Tim. 86 B ff. (c. 41).—Imn brief: xaxds Exwv oddels, da dé movnpav 
eéw Twa TOO Gwpmatos Kal amaldevtov tpodyv (education of the soul) 
6 Kakos ylyverat kakos, 86 E. 

26 +0 cwyatoedés 6 TH WuxH 7 OptrAla TE Kal Evvovela Too cwpaTos 

. eveTroinoe Evpudutov xtrA.. Phd. 81 C, 83 D. 

27 Pythagoreans, see above (chap. xi, n. 55); hardly Demokritos 
(Dox., p. 390, 14). The trichotomy can exist very well side by side 
with the dichotomy (which also appears) into Aoyrorexdv and aAdyotor, 
the last being simply divided again into @uyds and émduyuia. 

28 In the first sketch of the Republic (ii-v). Here it is admittedly 
bound up with the three classes or castes of the state, but it has not 
been invented for the benefit of these classes. On the contrary, the 


NO UE See bOs GHA REE Rig XT 481 


trichotomy of the soul is original and the division of the citizen body 
into three parts is derived and explained from it; cf. 435 E.—The 
view that Plato was never quite serious about the threefold division 
of the soul but always spoke of it as something semi-mythical or as 
a temporarily adopted hypothesis, will not appear plausible on an 
unprejudiced study of the passages in the Platonic writings that deal 
with the threefold division of the soul. 

seer. tx, OllecA—EY(c.11), shows clearly that the reason which 
made Plato abandon his conception (given in the first sketch of the 
Rep. and still maintained in the Phaedrus) of the natural trichotomy 
of the soul into parts or divisions was the consideration of its immortality 
and vocation to intercourse with the @etov kat abavatov Kat det ov.— 
The emotions and passions by which the soul is “‘ fettered ’”’ io rot 
owpatos, explain its tendency to clothe itself in another body after 
death, Phd. 83 C ff. If the emotions and passions were indissolubly 
linked to the soul the latter could never escape from the cycle of 
rebirths.—On the other hand, if only the Aoyorexdv, as the only 
independently existing side of the soul, goes into the place of judgment 
in the other world there would seem to be no reason that should tempt 
this simple uncompounded soul to renewed éevowpdatwois, a process 
which implies materiality and desire. (This difficulty troubled 
Plotinos too.) Plato takes into view the possibility of an inner 
corruption of the pure and undivided intellectual soul which makes 
a future state of punishment and purgatory possible and intelligible 
and explains the existence (until a complete return to purity is achieved) 
of a tendency or constraint to renewed évowpatwcers even without 
a permanent association with the dupoerdés and the émOupnrixov. 

30 +9 aAnOeotarn dvce the soul is povoedés, Rep. x, c. 11 (611 B, 
612 A). Hence it 1s ro mapdmav adiadutos } eyyts Te TovTOv, Phd, 80 B. 

31 The intellect-soul addvarov apxnyv Ovnrod Cwov is the creation 
of the 8npovpyds; the other faculties of the soul, Oupos, émbupia 
(and atv@nors therewith), buys dcov Ovnrov (Tim. 61 C), are all added 
to the soul at the moment of its union with the body by the subordinate 
deities: Tim. 41 D-44 D; 69 A-70 D (c. 14, 15, 31). The same idea 
appears in Rp. x, 611 BC. 76 devyevés pépos rHs puyx7s is distinguished 
from the Cwoyerés: Polit. 309 C. 

32 +0 o@pma Kal at TovTov émOupia, Phd. 66 C. The soul moved 
by passion suffers i760 odparos, 83 CD. In death the soul is cafapa 
TavTwWY TOV TEpl TO GOwa KakO@v Kai éemOvurdv, Crat. 404 A. 

33 Tim.43 C. Itis only as a result of this violent and contradictory 
excitement through the physical perception of Becoming that the soul 
becomes dvovs (which is orginally foreign to it) drav els cpa evde0F 
Ovyrov, 44 A. (It will in time become €ydpwv once more and can 
become wise, 44 BC. In the case of the animals, which can be inhabited 
oe the same soul, it will remain always ddpwv—one may suppose.) 
. . OpiKpov xpdvov, ovdév pev otv mpos Tov admavta (yxpovor). 
Rp. 498 D. 

85 In accordance with popular thought (but obviously also in perfect 
seriousness and without any special concession) death is regarded 
as THs wuyas aod TOU awpatos amadAayyn, Phd. 64 C; Gorg. 524 B. 
Hence, it usually happens that the soul pydémore els ‘’Avdov xabapads 
adixéabat, aA aet Tod adpartos avamr€éa eftévar, Phd. 83 D. (—aei, 
i.e. with the exception of the few complete ¢iAdcodor that do not need 
further purification in Hades, and this is, in fact, the doctrine of the 
Phd, itself; cf. 114 C, 80 EF, 81 A.) 

36 Purgatory, punishment and rewards in the other world: Gorg. 


ti 


482 NO CES Wel OWE GHA Ell Ragen 


523. ff.; Rp. x; c. 13 ff., 614 A ff. (vision of Er, son of Arni¢nme 
in the continuation of the first version of the mwoAteia); Phd. 110 B- 
114 C. We must not here go into the details of the individual myths 
in which it is still perhaps possible to distinguish what parts Plato 
has taken out of ancient poetry and popular legend and what comes 
from theological and particularly Orphic doctrinal poetry——or even 
(Rp. x) from Oriental fables—-and how much he has added 
independently on his own account. (A few remarks will be found in 
G. Ettig, Acherunt., Leipz. Stud. xiii, 305 ff.; cf. also Déring, Arch. 
Ges. Phil. 1893, p. 475 ff.; Dieterich, Nekyia, 112 ff.) He usually 
distinguishes three classes among the souls (only apparently two in 
Phdr. 249 A): those who are affected with curable faults, the hope- 
lessly and incurable guilty (who are condemned to eteynal punishment 
in Tartaros without rebirth: Govg. 525°C ff.; Rb) G15sD rae 
113 E); and, thirdly the oalws BeBuwkdres, Sixator Kal dovor. This 
is the system of Gorg. 525 BC, 526C; Rp. 615 BC. (With these come 
also the dwpot, 615 C, who neither deserve punishment nor reward— 
of them Er said ddAda, otx d&ta pvipns. Perhaps older theologians 
had already concerned themselves with these, not being satisfied with 
the fate assigned by popular mythology to the dwpor—see Append. vii 
—it would have been a natural subject for the professional attention 
of these Schoolmen of popular superstition.) In Phd. 113 D ff. the 
question is even more minutely dealt with. Here we have (1) of 
uéaws BeBiwkores (che visser’ senz’ infamia e senza lode), (2) of dvatrws 
éyovrtes, (3) of doa HuaptnKdortes, (4) of dtadepdvTws dalws BeBiwkores, 
and (5) the élite of these dovo, the real philosophers, of ¢Aocodia 
ixav@s Ka0npapevor—these are not born again. To the other classes 
are assigned their appropriate purgation, reward or punishment. Here 
classes 2, 3, and 4 correspond to the three classes of Rp. and Gorg. 
(which may perhaps be modelled on the divisions popularized by older 
theological poetry—see above, chap. xii, n. 62). Novelties are the 
peows BeBiwkores and the true philosophers. Jor these last the abode 
upon the paxdpwv vicot (Gorg. 526 C), or, what comes to the same thing, 
upon the surface of the earth (Phd. 114 BC), is no longer sufficient. 
They go és paxdpwv twas evdatmovias (115 D), which means that they 
are really freed entirely from temporal existence and enter into the 
unchanging ‘“‘ Now” of eternity. (As far as the complete escape 
of the ¢iAdcogo: is concerned the account in Rp. x, c. 13 [614 A- 
615 C] does not contradict that of Phd. The only reason why this is 
not mentioned in Fp. is that these absolutely enfranchized souls could 
not appear upon the Aepouv there mentioned: 614 E.)—Of these 
various accounts that of Phd. seems to be the latest. In Lg. there 
is yet another indefinite allusion to the necessity of undergoing a judg- 
ment after death: 904 C ff. 

37 Choice of their new state of life by the souls in the other world, 
Rp, 617 E ff.; Phdr. 249 B. The purpose of this arrangementue 
made clear by Rp. 617 E: airia éXopévouv* Beds avairios (cf. Tim. 42 D). 
It is, in fact, a theodicy and at the same time secures the complete 
responsibility of every man for his own character and deeds (cf. 619 C). 
There is no idea of founding a determinist theory upon it.—The choice 
is guided by the special character of the soul (which it has developed 
in its previous life) and its tendencies (cf. Phd. 81 E; Lg. 904 BC). 
For the same reason there is no choice on the occasion of the soul’s 
first évowudrwos (Tim. 41 E): after that, in later births, a definite 
descent in well-marked stagesin peius, can be observed, each conditioned 
by the degree of corruption attaching to the soul (Tim. 42 B ff.). 


NOES Oe CH ARTH REX TIT 483 


All of which can very well co-exist with a choice of its own fate by the 
soul conditioned by its own nature. 

38 fuuperpia, Tim. 87 D. 

ea ercasveslitec asein: PiseOr ii,8/p afl. ec acc ton Phare 249, A* 
Between each two births there is an intervening period of 1,000 years 
(Rp. 615 A; Phdr. 249 AB). This cuts away the ground from such 
myths as that of the various “‘lives’’ of Pythagoras (see Append. x). 

40 Incarnation in animals, Phdr. 249 B; Rp. 618 A, 620 ff.; Phd. 
81E; Tim. 42 BC. That this part was any less seriously meant than 
any other part of his doctrine of metempsychosis is not in the least 
suggested by Plato himself. Acc. to Tim. 91 D-92 B, all the animals 
have souls that had once inhabited the bodies of men (see Procl., in 
Rp. ii, 332 Kroll; he is trying to harmonize Tim. and Phdr.). In 
fact, the idea that a man’s soul might inhabit an animal was precisely 
the great difficulty in Plato’s doctrine of the soul. If, as is said in 
Phdyr. 249 BC, a real animal-soul cannot enter into a human body 
because it does not possess vénais or the power of “‘ dialectic’? which 
constitutes the essential part of the human soul’s activity, how can 
a real human soul enter into an animal’s body when it is obvious 
that as an animal it can make no use of its vénois ? (For this very 
reason many Platonists—those who were not satisfied with ingenious 
or artificial interpretations: cf. Sallust., de Dis 20; Procl., im Tim. 
329 DE—denied the entrance of the human soul into animals; cf. 
Aug. CD.9x,.30,,and partic. Nemes), p. 116 Matth. © Lucr.: 11, :760, 
already seems to have such Platonists in mind.) The dAoyrorixdy of 
the soul seems to be absent from animels or to be present but 
undeveloped as in children: Fp. iv, 441 AB (or does it remain 
permanently bound in ddpootvn ? see above, this chap., n. 33. Just 
such a theory put forward by exponents of perepydywors Who would 
make the w%uvy7 always the same but not always equally active, is 
attacked) by -Alex.sAphr.. de 4n.,.p./27; Br.). - But acc, to’ the later 
doctrine of Plato the Aoy.o7rixdv comprises the whole contents of the 
soul before it enters a body; if the animals do not possess it then 
they do not strictly speaking possess a soul (fuyés and émOupia in them- 
selves are not the soul; they are only added to the soul when it first 
enters into a body). It seems certain that Plato adopted the view that 
the soul migrates into the bodies of animals from the theologians 
and Pythagoreans, while he still believed that the soul was not pure 
power of thought but also (as stillin Phdr.) included 6uyés and émOupia 
in itself. Later, because it was difficult to do without the migration- 
theory of the soul on account of its ethical importance, he allowed 
the idea, to remain side by side with his reorganized and sublimated 
doctrine of the soul. (On the other hand, metempsychosis into plants— 
which are certainly also €@a, though they only have 706 ém@upnrixor, 
Tim. 77 B—was never adopted by him from Empedokles ; cf. Procl., 
in Rp. ii, 333 Kr., and for the same reason : this idea was unimportant 
and indifferent from an ethical point of view.) 

41 rHv els TOV vonTOY TOTOYV THS WuyHs avodov, Rp. 517 B. 

42 ererdy dé ayévnrov €att, Kal adiadbopov adro avayKn elvat, Phdr. 
245 D—the ancient argument from the fact that the individual soul 
(and of this Plato is speaking) has no beginning to the conclusion that 
its life can have no end. 

43 This much may be conceded to Teichmiller’s observations. 
‘The individual, and the individual soul, is not an independent 
principle but only a resultant of the compounding of the Idea and the 
principle of Becoming *—though this is not how Plato regards the 


484 NOEES slOM GHAR TE heer ry] 


matter; hence in Plato-—‘‘ the individual is not eternal (i.e. not 
necessarily), and the eternal Principles are not individual’”’, Stud. z. 
Ges. d. Begr., p. 115, 142 (1874). But all that Teichmiller has to 
say under this head is in reality only a criticism of the Platonic 
doctrine of the soul and does not help us to determine what exactly 
that doctrine was. Plato speaks always of the immortality, i.e. the 
eternity, of the individual soul; nowhere does he confine 
indestructibility to the “‘common nature ”’ of the soul; and this fact 
is not even remotely explained by appealing as Teichmiuller does 
to an alleged ‘“‘ orthodoxy’ to which Plato is supposed to be 
accommodating his words. If from no other passage we should be 
obliged to conclude definitely from Rp. 611 A that Plato believed in 
the existence of a plurality of souls and in their indestructibility : 

ael av elev ai adrai (vyal). ovre yap av mov éXdrTOVs yévowTo pndepmias 
amoAAupevns, ovtTe ad mAeiovs. Here the predicate of the first sentence 
is indubitably efev only: it is affirmed that always the same souls will 
exist, not that ai adrai efev (“‘ the souls are always the same ones ”’) as 
Teichmiiller supposes, Platon. Frage, 7 ff., and it is asserted with all 
possible plainness that the plurality of indiy idual souls, of which a 
definite number exist, is indestructible. 

44 F.g. appeal made to TeAeTal, Tadatol Adyot ev amoppHTots Acydpevot, 
and particularly to Orphic doctrine, in those places where he is speaking 
of the inward difference between the soul and all that is corporeal, 
of the soul’s “ death’ in earthly life, of its enclosure in the odpa 
as its ofa in punishment of its misdeeds—of punishment and purifica- 
tion after death in ‘’Avdys, of the migration of the soul, its 
imperishability, dwelling of the pure in the neighbourhood of the gods 
(Phd. 61 BC, 63 C, 70 C, 81 A, 107 D ff. ; Gorg. 493 A; Crat. 400 BC; 
Men. 81 A; Lg.870 DE, 872 E). This also is the origin of the tendency 
to compare the highest philosophical activity, or the beholding of the 
Ideas before all time, with the é€zomreta: of the mysteries: Phdr. 
250 B; cf. Lob., Agi. 128. 

45 Nine (an ancient sacred number) stages from the prAdcodgos 
downwards to the rvpavvos, Phdr. 248 DE. 

46 This is frequently stated in individual myths; cf. also Phd. 
85 CD. 

<4 Phar. 250 C (dorpeov); Rp. 611 CD (Glaukos). 

frig TOU dvTOS Onpay, Phd. 66 C (6rav avr 7) Kal” adriy Tpay parev- 
nT ae 4 ux wept ta dvta, Tht. 187 A. adta 79 buxW Ocaréov attra ra 
mpayuata, Phd. 66 D). 

49 Evvairia, Tim. 46 C ff. vods nal avaynn, 47 E ff. (6 Beds is woAA@v 
avaitvos, namely Tov Kaxov, Rp. 379 AC). 

50 The cHpa with which the soul is bound up is a xaxdv, Phd. 66 B 
(Seopuoé of the soul, 67 D). The xaxd in the world are regularly said 
to come from matter until in Lg., side by side with the évepyéris 
yvx7 of the world, there appears an evil World-Soul that works evil. 

* Particularly in Phd., ReaD GpSUR tyr gel apcreggoe dirocodia tkavds 
KaOnpapevor in contrast with the axddapro. wuyal, 67 A ff., 69 BC, 
80 E, 82 D, 108 B, 114 C. Katharsis of the soul through ‘dialectic 
Soph. 230 C fi. Express allusion to the analogous requirement of 
Ka0apots by ot ras reXeTas Hutv KaTAOTHOAYTES, Phd. 69 C, 

‘3 xd Dapors elvac TodTO up Baiver, TO xwpivew 67Tt partora amo TOD 
ow maros THY wpuynv Kal €Bioa avtny Kad? avr ny mavraxobev €x Too 
ow LaTos ovvayeiper Bat TE Kat BDpoilecBar, Kal olKety kara To §uvatov 
Kal év T@ vov mapovre Kat €v TO émeuTa pLovny Ka’ avT hy, exAvopeéev nv 
wonep ex Secpadv ex tod owpatos, Phd. 67 C. Thus 8&xarootvn and 


NOTES) SLO > CHAPTER X1II 485 


avdpeta, and more particularly peewee: are xadappos zis, 69 BC. 
Atvous Te Kal Kalappos of drooodgia, 82 D 

Ag prrocodgia teaches the soul els avTiy ‘ev dréyeo bau Kal aDpoileaBba 
and to dvaywpetv from the azarn of the senses dcov wy} avayKy atrots 
xphoba, Phd. 83 A.—é€av kabapa 7, puxy anadddrr grat . . . devyovoa 
TO cua Kai ovvnPporopevn adr els abray, § 80 UE, 76 C. 

ee ; xaBapot Gmahrarropevor THS TOU ou jLaTos appoovyns A Poe 
yrwodpeba du’ mwav avTmv may TO eiAuKpivés, 1.7) KaVap@ yap Kabapod 
éedantecbar 7 od Oeyitov 7, Phd. 67 AB. 

55 For the ayaddv, 9 Tod ayabot ida, airia both of adAn@eva and of 
émorynun but identical with neither (they are only dya@oed4) and 
ért peclovws tinreov—cause of the yryypwoxdpeva and not only of 
yeyvwoKxeoOa, of both eva: and ovaia, od« otaias 6vtos Tob ayabot aA 
éTt é€méxetva THS ovolas mpecBela Kai Svuvaper dbrepéxovtos—see Kp. 
vi, c. 19 (508 A ff.),517 BC. Here ro dyaddv, as the reason and active 
cause of all Being is itself placed beyond and above Being (as it is 
regularly with the Neoplatonics) and identified with Godhead (the 
Qetos vobs, Phil, 22 C); this last is, however, in Tim. set side by side 
with the Ideas, of which 76 ayaéov is now the highest. 

56 » rod ayadod i8éa péytotov padnpa, Rp. 505 A 

57 The vepraywyy of the soul, Rp. vii init. 

eee ihe philosopher, Ere iee Tav avOpwrivwv oTovdacparwy Kat 


ampos TH Oelw yryvdpevos, évOovoralwy rA€Anbe Tovs moAXovs, Phd. 
249 D. 

59 § yap avvomtikos Sdtadextixds, Rp. 537 C. els pilav (déav 
auvop@vTa ayew ta ToAaxG Stecmappeéeva (and again kar’ etdy Tépve 
what is unified)—-this is the business of the dcadextixds, Phdr. 265 D. 
é€x moAA@v alcOnaewy els Ev Aoytap@ Evvatpovpevoy (iévar), Phdr. 249 B. 

69 Gradual ascent of dialectic upwards to atté 6 éatw ayabdr, 
Rp. 532 A f., 511 BC, 534 B ff.—to atdzd 76 Kaddv, Smp. c. 28-9 (211 B). 
Its aim is ézavaywy? tod BeAtiorov ev puy mpos Tob aptorov ev Tots 
ovat Odav, Rp. 532 C. 

61 The philosophic éepwrixds at the end of the dialectic ascent 
é€aidvyns Katoperat 7 Qavpaorov THY pvou | KaArov KTA., Smp. 210 E— 
exactly as in the réXea Kal émomtixa pvotypia, 210 A. odoKAnpa al 
am7AG Kat evddaipova ddcpata pvovpevol te Kal emomTEvovTEs ev avy Fh 
kafapa, Phdr. 250 C.—it is a visionary and a suddenly acquired 
apprehension of the world-order, not one obtained in discursive thought. 
We may compare the way in which Plotinos, with a recollection of 
such Platonic passages, describes the arrival of éxoracis—sérav 7 
fo éfaidvys pas AGB RINE Deon Lhe Clue) hose /) 

2 The soul EouKe 7@ Detep, Phd. '80 A. It is reign i ta@ TE Deiw 
Kal abavatw Kal T@ aet ovm, Rp. 611 E—ovyyévera beta of men; Lg. 
899 D. The eternal and immortal is, as such, divine. The real 
Ego of man, the a@davarov, Wuyi} emovopaldpevor, after death goes 
mapa Qeovs PW Uric dig. 959 42, 

63 The @eiov, adavdtots oucvupov, part of the soul is a Bdvaros apx7) 
Ovnrod $dov, Tim. 41 C,42 E. The dpovnas of the soul (its “ wing 
Phdr. 246 D) TH Oeiw Eorxev, Alc.t 133 C.—In Tim. 90 AC this 
KUPLTATOV Tis pox is efSos is actually called the Sa(uwv which man 
has €dvotxov év avTa@. 

Sam Neacveris 7 AoerS€aTarov Tav mept tas aiabyjces dpyavwv, Rp. 
508 B.—Goethe is alluding either to these words or to the phrase of 
Plotinos taken from them, 1, 6 (epi rod Kadod), 9. 

6 emoariun Kal dAnbea are both dyaboad47, Rp. 509 A—the soul 
something Oeoerdés, Phd. 95 C. 


486 NOTES TO .CHAPTER’ XIII 


66 From the d¢Aocodia of the soul and from the question dv dmrerat 

Kat olwv édierar durAcav its real nature can be discerned as one which 
is évyyevts TO Oelw Kal dbdavdtw Kal TH det ovr, Rp. 611 DE; Phd. 
79 D. With the évyyevés of the soul we achieve contact with the 
évrws év, Rp. 490 B. If the Ideas are everlasting, so must our soul 
be, Phd. 76 DE. By its power of ¢povety afavatra Kai Oeta the 
avOpwrivy dvos has itself a share xa? doov évdéxerar (i.e. with vois) 
in d0avacia, Tim. 90 BC. This thinking “part”? of the soul pos 
Tih ev odpave Evyyeveray amo yAs Buds atper, ws dvtas puTov ovK EyyELor 
aANr ovpaviov, Tim. 90 A. 
- 87 Nvew tiv pvyiv from the body and from sense-perception, Phd. 
83 AB, 65 A, 67 D. Avaus and xadappds of the soul by ¢tAocodgia, 
Phd. 82D. dAvdaus Kal (avis rdv Secpav (of the body) cal rHs adpoovyrys, 
Rp. 515 C. 

88 Metos els 76 Suvaror avOpwirw ylyverar—said of the true philosopher, 
Rp. 500 D; aédvaros, Smp, 212 A. The dtAdaogos is perpetually in 
contact with the dv ded and the @efov, which last is with difficulty 
recognizable by the eyes of tis 7&év modAdkOv fuxfs, Soph. 254 A.— 
Kal jou Soxet-Oeds pev (as e.g. Empedokles called himself) avjp oddapads 
elvat, Oetos nv *.mavras yap éyw Tods drrogddovs TorovTous Tpocayopevy, 
Soph. 216 B (where @etos is used in quite a different sense from that 
it has in other passages where Plato speaks of ypnopwsoi cat Jeoparress 
as Oeior, Men. 99 C, and of the insight and virtue of the unphilosophic 
as coming dela potpa avev vod). 

69 Rb. 519 C, 540 B.—rfs rod Gyros Das, otav Hdovny Exe, advvaToV 
aGAAw yeyetoba TAH TH firooddw, Rp. 582 C (cf. Philed.). 

70 The flight évévSe éxetoe produces d6potwow Oe Kata 76 Suvarov, 
Tht. 176 B. oporotcba 06d, Rp. 613 A (76 Katavoovpévw 76 KaTavoobv 
.e€opormoa, Tim. 90 D). 

704 The soul that has through philosophy become completely “* pure ”’ 
is withdrawn from the cycle of Rebirth and from the whole material 
world. Even as early as Phdr. the souls of the diAocodjoavres after 
a third évowparwors are exempt for the remainder of the aepiodos ot 
10,000 years, while the real and unwavering (ae‘) philosopher remains 
for evey free from the body. That at least must be the meaning of 
248 C-249 A. The subject is then treated in more detail in Phd.: 
Release of the diAocodia ixav@s Kabnpapevor for ever from life in the 
-body (dvev cwpatwrv CHor 7d rapamav els Tov émetta ypovov, 114 C)— 
entry of the pure soul to its kin (els 76 fuyyevés, 84 B) and its like 
(eis TO Opotov adTH, 76 aevdés, 81 A), and eis Bedv yévos, 82 B—and to 
the rot Jeiov te kai Kabapob Kai povoerdobds Evvovoia, 83 E. Still more 
mythologically expressed—-Tim,. 42 BD (6 r@v xaxdv xabapos Tozos 
Tht.177 A). Throughout we have the release theory of the theologians 
re-expressed in a philosophical and more elevated manner (Orphic: 
pepunmwevor, Phd. 81). : 

Le 200A Olov LON AGC Oime ER Oe ae 

72 To the aidsos odaia, 76 €oTt povov Kata Tov aAnOH Adyov mpoonKet 
Tim, 37 EF. 

73 It is true that not until it becomes associated with the body 
does the soul, by obtaining aicdnas, ériOuyia, @upds, and all the other 
faculties that bring it into touch with Becoming and Changing, obtain 
what can strictly be called its individual personality. The perfectly 
adequate comprehension in thought of the ever-Unchanging by the 
bodiless and free soul would have no individualized content. We 
must not, however (with Teichm., Pl. Fr. 40), conclude from this that 
Plato knew nothing of an immortality of the individual and of 


ING UE ae LO CHA PE Rex LL 487 


individuality. He did not distinctly raise the question of the seat and 
origin of individuality in the souls. He is content to suppose that 
a plurality of individual souls was living before their entanglement 
with Becoming, and to conclude from this that in eternity, too, after 
their last escape from yéveo.s, the same number of individual souls 
will still be living. Numerical distinctness (which affects in a scarcely 
intelligible manner the spaceless and immaterial) has to do duty with 
him for qualitative distinctness which would alone be able to account 
for the self-consciousness of this plurality. Acc. to the picture given 
in Tam. c. 14 (41 D ff.) the souls created by the 8yuovpyds are evidently 
all alike (hence also is yéveows mpa7Ty TeTaypéevn pia maou, 41 E), and 
only when they are in the o@uo, and bound up with mortal portions 
of soul, do they react in different ways to what affects them from 
without—and so become different. (This is so, however, in the pre- 
existent period, too, acc. to Phd.: but in that account @uvyds and 
émiOvpia are also bound up with the soul in pre-existence.) The in- 
fluence of the lower soul-partners and of the tpo¢17 maudevoews (Tim. 
44 B) makes the Aoy:orcxa also of the souls differ among themselves. 
This acquired individual characterization, the fruit of differing racéela 
kat tpody—something quite the reverse of the ‘“‘common nature ”’ 
of “‘soul’’ in general which Teichmiiller supposes to be meant here: 
Stud. 143—is taken with it by the soul to the place of judgment, 
i.e. Hades, Phd. 107 D. When, however, by the best rp047 mardevcews 
it has become completely pure and free from all the trammels of 
the physical and perishable and departs into bodiless existence in 
the aevdés—-then in truth all individual distinctness has been dissolved 
out of it. Still, it must endure for ever as a self-conscious personality ; 
for that this is what Plato meant cannot be doubted. 

Belted Hee patsy a Be, 

fe xwpilew 67. padiora amo Tob owpatos rHv puxiv, Phd. 67 C. 
avaxwpety, 83 A (quite in the manner of genuine mysticism—it is the 

“separateness ”’ of the man who is to behold god, ‘of which Eckhart 


speaks). 
RP 04 Ant. G7. 
77 Phd. 114 C. 


*8 rob ESS MTONOLS Kat pavia, Crat. 404 A. 

EIT) Suyyevet mnovdoas Kal peyels TH OvtTt OvtTws, Rp. 490 B. 

80 The soul edo yalpewv TO o@pa Kal cad’ dcov Svvatat ob Kowwvotca 
Opéyetar tod dvtos, Phd. 65 C. In the same way the Appearance 
yearns after the Idea; see above, this chap., n. 9. 

aes ppovycews KT HOLS, Phd. 65 A ff. 

ae meipao Bar xon evOdvde exetoe devyew Gti TAyLoTA. Puy de Opoiwas 
8e@ kata To duvarov, Tht. 176 APB. 

83 Rp. 523 A-524 D. 

84 Beyond all other things it is the xdAdos of the world of 
Appearance that awakes the memory of that which has once been 
seen in the world of Ideas: Phdr. 250 B, 250 D ff.; Smp. c. 28 ff. 
(210 A ff.). Plato gives a peculiar reason for this, but in reality it 
is due to a vigorous re-emergence of the fundamental artistic sense—- 
the aesthetic element in his philosophic speculation and enthusiasm— 
which the thinker had so violently suppressed in obedience to his theory 
that the aic@j#ces and all the arts are merely imitations of deceptive 
imitations of the only true Reality. 

85 Not pddyous—only dvdpurnos, Phdy. 249 BC; Men. c. 14 ff. 
(80 D ff.); Phd. c. 18 ff. (72 E ff.). (This theory occurs regularly in 
Plato in close connexion with the theory of the soul’s migrations ; 


488 NOTES 2s LOR CHA Pali Rac it 


and it appears that he did as a matter of fact derive it from the anticipa- 
tions and suggestions of earlier teachers of metempsychosis : see above, 
chap..x1, 02°96.) 

Rev Dee vitiinits 

87 Suotwots Sé€ Oe@ Sixarov Kat dovov peta Hpovyjcews yevecba, Tht. 
Poets: 

88 els dyopav otK taace THY Oddv KTA., Tht. 173 D ff. 

89 Tht. 172 C-177 C. The philosopher is unskilled in the life of 
the everyday world and its arts, and is quite indifferent towards them. 
Commonplace people, if he is at any time drawn into the affairs of 
the market place or the law courts, regard him as e«d7@ns, avontos, 
yeAoios. Sometimes Sdfav mapacyouwr av (of dvtws grAdcodot) ws 
mavTamacw E€xovTes pavikds, Soph. 216 D; Rp. 517 A—passages from 
the later writing of Plato. Even as early as Phdr. 249 D éfvordpevos 
Tav avOpwrivwr omovdacpatwy Kal mpos TO Oeiw yryvopevos vovbeTeEtrat 
b70 THY TOAA@Y ws TapaKiayv KTA. 

90 Wdtwreveww GAAA pH Sypooevery is the injunction made to the 
philosopher, Ap. 32 A; at least, in wdAeus as they are Rp. 520 B. 
After death comes the reward dvdpos dirAooddov ra attod mpa€avtos 
Kal ov oAumpaypovynaavtos év T@ Biw, Gorg. 526 C. wamep eis Anpia 
dvOpwros €umecwyv the true philosopher will jovyiay €xew Kai ra adtob 
mpatrew, Rp. 496 D. 

1 7a 7dv avOpHTwY TpaypLaTa peyarns pev oToVvdT Ss OdK aéta, Lg. 803 B. 

82 Gorg. 521 D. 6 ws adAndds xuBepyynrixds, Rp. 488 E (cf. also 
fenmoIet,eLO0eA): 

®3 Not Sudxovos Kai éemiOupidv mapacxevaorns but rather an latpos, 
Gorg. 518 C, 521 A; cf. 464 B ff. 

84 Gorg. 519 A. All these worldly matters seem to him ¢Avapia:: 
just as all the Appearances in the world of Becoming are for him but 
drvapia, Rp. 515 D. 

POM TOPE AC Silla Oleg ett.) 

86 odTos 6 TpOT0S dpiatos Tot Biov, Gorg. 527 E—(this is the real 
subject of the Gorg., viz. évriva xpi Tpo mov CHv, 500 C, and not the nature 
of pnropixj—and it is this which gives its special emotional tone to 
the dialogue). : 

87 Gorg. 515 C ff., 519 A ff. Summary: oddéva pets topev avdpa 
ayadov yeyovota Ta moXritiKa ev THOE TH WOAEL, 517 A. 

*8 ody ws KaXrdv TL GAN’ ws avayKatov mpatrovtes, Rp. 540 B. 

*9 It is now the cxomos év 7H Biw—inaccessible to the dmaidevtor— 
od oroxalopevous def dmavta mpatrew, Rp. 519 C. 

100 The dAAat dperai cadrovuevar (even including oodia regarded as 
practical shrewdness: Rp. 428 B ff.) as éyyds oboat THv Tob owpatos 
become of secondary importance compared with the virtue of 
dpovnas, i.e. of dialectic and the contemplation of the Ideas, Rp. 
518 DE. This alone is @edrepov, something peifov than those 
bourgeois virtues, Rp. 504 D—philosophy stands high above 8npotixy 
TE Kal TOALTLKH apeTH, E& EDous TE Kal peXeTHS yeyovuta advev drdocodias 
te kat vov, Phd. 82 BC.—This, too, rightly understood, is the real 
point of the inquiry in Meno. Explicitly, indeed, the dialogue only 
concerns itself with that dper7 which is commonly so regarded and is 
based on aAnO7s 66€a, coming into existence by instinct (@eia potpa) ; 
which, however, to the philosopher is not dper7 in the proper sense of 
the word ; that name he would only give to émorjuy, the only sort 
of knowledge that can be learnt and acquired as a permanent possession, 
depending as it does upon the doctrine of the Ideas. To émoeryyun 
he this time only makes distant allusion. 


NODE See LOSGHUAP TE Rumery 489 


101 RP, vii, c. 15 (535 A, 536 D) ; cf. vi, c. 2, 5 (485 B, 487B; 489 D, 
490 E). 

102 Kai rod pév (ddéns aAnbobs) mdvra avdpa peréxew daréor, vot 
dé Geovs, avOpmmuv Sé yévos Bpaxv m1, Tim. 51 E. 

103 dirdcodov ARIS advvatory <civar, Rp. 494 A. gvcers of a com- 
pletely philosophical kind, was juiv bpodoyjoe: ortyanis ev avOpamors 
dvecba Kai ddriyas, Rp. 491 B. 

104 “That into which I sink myself—that becomes one with me: 
when I think on Him I am as God that is the Fount of Being ’’—the 
true mystic note. For the mystics, knowledge of an object is real 
oneness with the thing known ; knowledge of God is union with God. 

105 Rp, 540 B. 


CHAPTER XIV 


THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD 
Ar hae 
PHILOSOPHY 


Plato and the Platonic account of the nature, origin, and 
destiny of the soul closes a period. It marks the end of that 
theological and spirittalist movement to the force and 
significance of which nothing bears clearer witness than 
the fact that it could have such a conclusion. After this 
point its development ceases—at least it disappears from 
the surface of Greek life: like one of those Asiatic torrents 
with which the ancients were familiar it buries itself under- 
ground for a long stretch of its course, only to reappear 
eventually, with all the greater effect, far away from the place 
of its origin. Even Plato’s own school almost immediately 
after the death of its master and directing spirit turned its 
attention in a direction quite other than that which he had 
given it.1 To have retained the Platonic outlook would have 
made his pupils even more isolated in their very different 
age than Plato himself had been in his own. 

Greece entered upon a new and final phase of her develop- 
ment. The ominous breakdown of the older political fabric 
at the end of the fourth century might have seemed likely 
to put an end to the natural vitality of the Greek peoples. 
With the conquest of the East by Macedonians and Greeks, 
however, new tasks were set before that people and with the 
new task they acquired new faculties. The folis, indeed, 
the purest expression of Greek constructive ability, could not 
be restored to hfe. Such of the old and narrow city-republics 
as had not perished completely in that stormy period only 
languished in a stagnant peace. Rare, indeed, are the 
exceptions in which (as particularly in Rhodos) a more 
vigorous and independent life asserted itself. The new and 
swollen cities of the Macedonian Empire, with their motley 
populations drawn from many nationalities, could not make 
good the loss. The Leagues in which Greece seemed to be 
making an effort to find a political organization of a wider 
compass soon broke down under the effects of inward 


BHLLOsOPE Ww 491 


corruption and external violence. Even in its deepest and 
most essential character the old national spirit of Greece, 
which had drawn its strength from its clear-cut individuality, 
seemed to be suffering damage through the unlimited 
extension eastwards and westwards of Greek life. It did 
not cease to be an immeasurable advantage to be a Greek, 
but a Greek now meant anyone who had a share in the one 
thing that still distinguished and characterized the Greeks, 
namely, Greek culture—and Greek culture was no longer 
confined to a single nation. It was no fault of this Greek 
humanism that not a single one of the vast populations of 
the East (and in the West at last Rome stood alone) was able 
to make their own this culture so generously offered to the 
whole world, so that there, too, all should become Greek who 
were capable of becoming free human beings. Nevertheless, 
from all countries and nationalities uncounted multitudes 
of individuals entered into the circle of this extended 
Hellenism. The way was open for all who could live without 
the need of a way of life and thinking modelled strictly upon 
national lines: for the culture which now united all Greeks 
and Greek communities was based upon science—and science 
knows nothing of national frontiers. 

The science which could thus present itself as the guiding 
principle of such a large and heterogeneous mass of cultured 
people, must at any rate have reached a condition of stability 
if not of completely rounded finality. After all the stir 
and controversy of the previous centuries it had at last 
arrived at a period of contented enjoyment of 1ts own resources: 
the long drawn-out struggle, the restless years of search were 
now held to have borne fruit. In philosophy at least there 
was a distinct slackening of the insatiable zeal and boldness 
of individual thinkers in posing new questions and wresting 
answers or in seeking for fresh solutions to old problems. 
A few great systems, formulated in accordance with the fixed 
tenets of the various schools of thought, still offered a refuge 
to those who demanded fixity and definition in their opinions ; 
for centuries they kept up their special traditions without 
serious alteration until they, too, fell in pieces at last. A 
greater measure of independence and variety was displayed 
by the special sciences which since they had now been 
completely released for the first time from the leading- 
strings of philosophy proceeded to develop freely in accordance 
with their own principles. Art, too, was by no means devoid 
as yet of originality and attractiveness, and in spite of the 
overwhelming achievements of the past refused to be driven 


492° THE LATER AGE OF ..THE GREEK WORKED 


into a position of subservience and imitation. But it was 
no longer, in conjunction with the peculiar customs and 
manners of a people, the mistress and dispenser of wisdom 
and knowledge of the world. Art becomes a plaything 
and an incidental diversion: it is science that determines 
the general character and content of culture. But this 
scientifically minded culture shares in the natural temper 
of all science. Science has its feet firmly planted in life 
itself : it keeps men’s minds actively employed in this world : 
it has small temptation to leave the firm ground of what is 
knowable and can never be too well known, to voyage out 
into the region of the intangible which can never be a subject 
of scientific inquiry. A cool rationalism, a calm adherence 
to the intelligible and thinkable, without any leanings to 
the gloomy terrors of a mysterious world of the unknown— 
such is the temper that marks the science and culture of the 
Hellenistic age and marks it more distinctively than any 
other period of Greek culture. Such mysticism as was still 
vigorous and effective kept itself timidly in the background 
at this time; in the everyday world it is rather the direct 
contrary of mysticism that we are made aware of: the 
unlovely results of the prevailing rationalism, a bleak reason- 
ableness, a knowing and prosaic common sense such as stares 
dully at us from the pages of Polybios’ History as the point 
of view of the narrator himself and of those of whom he 
writes. It was no age of heroes or of the heroic. A weaker 
and more delicate generation holds the field. The break- 
down of political life and the disappearance of its obligations 
made it more possible than it had ever been before for the 
individual to lead his own life in his own way. And he 
makes the most of his freedom, his culture, the treasures of 
an inward, private life enriched with all the brilliance and 
charm of an old and perfected civilization. All the past 
had thought and laboured on his behalf; he is not idle, 
but he is busy without ever being in a hurry, enjoying his 
heritage and taking his ease in the cooling sunlight of the 
long drawn-out autumn of Greek life. And he is little con- 
cerned to inquire what may follow when this brilliant, many- 
coloured world that surrounds him shall have vanished from 
his gaze. This world is all in all to him. The hope or fear 
of immortality has little effect upon the educated people 
of the age.? Philosophy to which in one form or another 
they are all more or less closely attached teaches them 
according to its particular mood to cherish that hope or 
calmly to set it on one side: in none of the popular sects 


BoLvOSORHY 493 


had the doctrine of the eternity or imperishable nature 
of the soul any serious significance as the central doctrine 
of a system. Natural science ruled the day, while theology 
remained in the background and could only obtain a doubtful 
hearing (if it was even listened to at all) for its proclamation 
of the divine origin and everlasting life of the souls. 


§ 2 


At the outset of this period, and illuminating a long stretch 

of it with the light of his genius, stands the figure of Aristotle. 
In what this master di color’ che sanno had to say of the soul’s 
nature and destiny two voices are distinctly audible. The 
soul, he instructs us, is that which in a living and organic 
physical body brings the potentially existing to actual 
existence. Itis the form to the body’s matter, the culmination 
of the capacities of independent life residing in the particular 
body. Bodiless and immaterial itself, it is not the outcome 
of the mixture of the various parts of the body; it is the 
cause, not the resultant, of the vital functions of its body 
which exists for the soul’s benefit as its “‘ instrument ’’.4 
It dwells within a natural organism and though it is itself 
unmoved it moves that organism as the source of its growth 
and nourishment, of its desires and locomotion, of its feeling 
and perceiving ; while in the higher organisms it acts as the 
combination of all these faces. It is as little to be thought of 
as separate from the body—its own body—as the power of 
vision is in separation from the eye or as its shape from the 
moulded waxen image.> Theoretically, indeed, it is possible 
to distinguish between body and soul, but actually and in 
the animated organism they cannot be distinguished. When 
the living creature dies the matter of which it was composed 
loses it special adaptation to a purposeful organism, and this 
adaptation was its life ; without it there can be no independent 
“ Substance ”’. (oto/a).6 The Form, the functional power 
of the once living organism, its “ soul’’, has no longer any 
independent existence. 

This is the voice of Aristotle the physicist when he is 
speaking from the standpoint of a physical doctrine which 
includes the study of the soul “in so far as it occurs not 
without matter’’.? Aristotle the metaphysician takes us 
further. In the soul of man, besides the vital powers of the 
organized individual, there lives a spiritual being of more 
than natural character and origin, the ‘‘ Mind ’’—“ that in 
us which thinks and conceives”. This thinking mind is 


494 THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD 


not bound to the body and its life. It does not come into 
being with the creation of the human organism which is 
completed by the addition of Mind. It has no beginning 
and was uncreated from eternity: 19 it enters into man at 
his creation “‘ from without ’’.1!_ Even while it lives within 
the body it remains unmingled with the body and its powers 
and uninfluenced by them.!* Enclosed within itself it lives 
its separate life as something quite other than the “ soul” 
(of which it is nevertheless called a “ part ”’ 18) and separated 
from it by a gulf. Comparable with the God of Aristotle’s 
world it transcends what might be called its “little world’’,™4 
the living human organism. It influences that organism 
without being influenced in turn. It is akin to God; it 
is called the “ divine-’’ in man.!* Its activity is the same 
as that of God.4® God—pure substance, unlimited, highest, 
everlasting actuality—is absolute and perpetually operant 
thinking.1? All practical activity, doing and creating, is 
far removed from God.18 So, too, the “ Mind ”’ is entirely 
occupied in thinking (though here there is some alternation 
perhaps between the potential and the actual).1® It grasps, 
in an intuition of the intellect that is beyond failure and 
error,7° the © unmediated ~ first’ principles, the “first same 
highest concepts, immediately certain and not deducible 
from still higher concepts, from which all knowledge and 
philosophy is derived.?! 

In its association with the body and its “ soul ”’ this thinking 
Reason lives as “the ruling’ 7? element over both—not, 
however, as the “ realization’”’ of this particular individual 
creature. The Mind is indeed said to be that which the 
individual man “‘is’’,?® and without the addition of Mind 
the man could not exist; but the special and personal 
character belonging to the individual is not to be found in 
this reasoning Mind.?4 Mind is totally devoid of distinguish- 
able qualities and is identical in every case where it appears ; 
it is invariably foreign to the separate and individual character 
of the man to whom it is added, and hardly seems to be 
his peculiar property. 

When death occurs the thinking “ Mind ”’ is not involved 
in the destruction which overtakes the human organism 
with which it was associated. Death does not affect it. 
Like everything that is without beginning it is indestructible.” 
It returns again to its separate existence. Like the great 
World-Mind, God, and in company with it—for it has not 
sprung from God and does not merge again into God—the 
individual Mind of man continues in unending life.?® It 


EHIEOSO REY 495 


disappears now into impenetrable darkness. The separate 
existence of the Mind is beyond not merely our perception 
but our conceiving as well—persisting for itself alone, Mind 
has no mental activity, no memory and no consciousness ; 
indeed, it is impossible to say what special qualities or activity 
can be attributed to it beyond the simple predicate of existence, 
of being.?7 

In the doctrine of this thinking Mind which is associated 
with the human soul “ from without” and never merges 
into it, of its pre-existence from eternity, its kinship with 
God and its imperishable life after its separation from the 
human organism—in all this Aristotle preserves a mythological. 
element taken from the dogmatic teaching of Plato. 

There was a time when he had been a complete Platonist 
precisely in his doctrine of the soul. In his youth, like other: 
members of the Academy, he had yielded 2° to the fascination 
of clothing in artistic and perfected language brilliant fantasies. 
about the origin, nature, and destiny of the soul—the divine 
daimon?® inhabiting the mortal frame of man. Later, 
however, it seemed inconceivable to him that “any soul 
may inhabit any body ’’.2® He could only conceive of the. 
“soul’’ of the individual man as a realization of the life of 
this entirely distinct and physical organism, to which it is. 
indissolubly bound as the purpose and form of the particular 
instrument. All the vital powers as well as appetite, percep- 
tion, memory, and reflective thought, appeared to him 
merely as the modes of activity manifested by the animated 
body which is itself unthinkable apart from its “soul”. 
And yet he still preserved a relic of the old dualistic opposition 
between the body and the independent substantial soul— 
the same conception of the soul, in fact, as that which Plato 
had himself, in the later period of his philosophical develop- 
ment, alone retained. This was as the contemplative Mind 
which is occupied in apprehending the highest truths in 
intellectual intuition; and this mind is, according to. 
Aristotle, not to be included in the “soul’’, but to be 
separated from it as a special being that has descended 
from the heights of divinity and has been coupled with 
the soul from without and for its limited period of life. The 
origin of this conception of a reduplicated soul is plain: 
it is derived from memories of Plato and beyond that from 
theological doctrine which was itself in the last resort but 
a spritualized restatement of primeval popular fancies of the 
psyche that dwells in the living body. But though he took 
over the doctrine he did not take over the special sense that _ 


496 THE CATER AGECOR THE GREEK WORER 


the theologians had given to it: he omitted both the con- 
clusions they drew and the exhortations they based upon it. 
We hear no more of the “ purification ’’ of the divine Mind 
within mankind. It has nothing impure or evil in it nor can 
any breath of pollution affect it from without. The effort 
towards the “ other world ” of purity, the denial and rejection 
of its earthly partner the living body, are foreign to the 
“Mind ” of Aristotle.24_ It has no impulse to “ deliverance ”’ 
or self-emancipation; it knows of no peculiar task that 
points beyond this world. The presence of this “‘ separable ”’ 
Mind in the living man is an assured fact, and nothing more : 
no purpose in life is deducible from it. The fact itself seemed 
to be evident from the power that man possesses of grasping 
immediately a highest. form of knowledge that is beyond 
demonstration, not as the result of the mental activity of 
his soul, for the apprehension is prior to the soul, but by 
means of a higher spiritual faculty, a special intellectual 
being that seemed to proclaim its presence and existence 
within man in this way. It is thus by way of a theory of 
knowledge not of a theological doctrine that we arrive at 
the distinction between “ Mind’’ and “Soul”. But the 
doctrine thus reasserted was in reality nothing but the old 
doctrine of the theologians. This “‘ Mind ’’, too, seems to 
the thinker to bea being akintoGod. The pure contemplative 
existence, a life consisting in the contemplation of the final 
objects of intuition is counted as a privilege of the divine 
and of all divine beings, as the true purpose of vital energy 
and of its manifestation ; and in the description of this state 
the sober reserve of his lecture style seems to be uplifted 
and almost illuminated with the warmth and brilliance 
imparted by a genuine glow of personal experience.** This 
pure activity of contemplation, finding its deepest satisfaction 
in itself, belongs to the divine in man—to the Mind; its whole 
life lies in this. This activity, however, the Mind performs 
and finishes in this life, while it is united with the body 
and the body’s “‘soul’’. There is nothing left that can be 
thought of as forming the content of the life and activity 
of the Mind in its separate existence after the completion 
of its period of life on earth. Mind and the man with whom 
it is associated can hardly have a very urgent desire for that 
emancipation in “ another world ’’ which is thus left blank 
and without content for our thought. The thought of 
immortality cast in this form could no longer possess any 
real value or ethical significance for man.** It arises from 
a logical deduction, from metaphysical considerations, not 


PHILOSOPHY 497 


from a demand of the spirit. It lacks not only the distinct- 
ness that might have appealed to the senses and given direction 
to the imagination, but the power (or the intention) of playing 
a leading part in the conduct or direction of life on this earth. 
There is no inspiration in this doctrine—not even for the 
philosopher, though it was to him and his activity and his 
efforts that the picture and panegyric of ‘“‘Mind’’, the 
philosopher in man, had really referred. 

It was quite possible to abide by the teaching and philosophy 
of Aristotle, directed as it was to the observation and inter- 
pretation of the things of this world, while abandoning the 
advanced post of the doctrine of Mind—that Being which 
has sunk to the level of this world from the other world of 
divinity, which separates itself, with the death of man, once 
more to everlasting divine life though hardly to a continuation 
of individual existence. On this point in particular free 
discussion of the master’s teaching maintained itself in his 
school: some, and by no means the weakest, of Aristotle’s 
successors denied altogether and in every form the doctrine 
of immortality.*4 


§ 3 


The dogmatic teaching of the Stoics on the subject of the 
human soul is closely bound up with the materialistic 
pantheism by means of which they explained all the 
phenomena of life, of being and becoming upon earth. 
God is All, and divinity is nothing outside this “all’’, 
which forms the world: the Universe is God. God is thus 
not only the matter but the form, the life and the power 
of the world. Divinity is the original matter, the etherial 
Fire, the fiery ‘“ breath ’’ which maintains itself or changes 
and in innumerable metamorphoses creates the world. God is 
also what supplies a purpose to this world and is the purposeful 
force—the reason and law of the world. The universal 
deity which is thus at once matter, mind, and formative 
principle sends out from itself at varying periods the 
multiplicity of Appearance and then again at another time 
takes back the multifarious and the divided into the fiery 
unity of its own breath of life. Thus, in everything that has 
shape, in everything that lives and moves, the content and 
the unifying form is God: he is and works as their “ state ”’ 
in inorganic things, as ‘“‘nature”’ in plants, as “ irrational 
soul’’ in the other living things, as rational and thinking 


soul in man,.® 
Kk 


498 THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD 


The soul of man, thus endowed with reason, is a fragment 
of the divine,?® and is itself divine like everything else in 
the world but in a purer sense than all other things. It 
has remained closer to the first and original essence of the 
divine, conceived as “creative fire”’ (mip rexvixév), than 
the earthly fire which has lost much of its original purity 
and refinement. It is closer?’ than the lower matter that in 
all its changeful forms degenerates progressively as it gets 
farther and farther away from the divine fire by gradual 
loss of the tension (révos) that had once been living and 
active in the primeval fire; closer even than the material 
of its own body in which it dwells and rules. As something 
essentially distinct from the body, then, the individual soul 
comes into being among the elements of its body when that 
body is conceived, and it develops its full nature after the 
birth of the individual.3®& But even in its individual, separate 
existence it remains incompletely detached from the universal 
life that is present in it ; it remains subject to the “ universal 
Law ” of the world, which is God, and fast bound by “ fate’, 
the “destiny’’ (aezpwpévn, eiwapuévn) which decrees the 
course of their existence for the totality of all Life and the 
individual lives.3® Nevertheless, the soul has its special 
gifts and special task—it is capable of self-determination | 
and is responsible for its own decisions and acts. Though 
it is a pure emanation from the universal Reason and bound 
down to no irrational elements, it has the power of irrational 
choice and can resolve upon what is evil. Though they have 
all sprung from one and the same original source the individual 
souls are of very different character, intellect, and propensity 
of will. Unreason in thought, will, and conduct is common 
in the world ; those who have real insight are few ; in fact, 
the Wise Man, the man who keeps his own will in complete 
harmony with the universal and divine direction of the world, 
is but a picture of imaginary perfection, nature humane 
exemplar, never fully and perfectly realized in actual life. 

Ethical interests demanded the freedom and independence 
of the moral personality and its will, which can only fulfil the 
requirements of duty by self-mastery and the overthrow 
of base impulses; but this independence was in conflict 
with the essential principles of Stoic metaphysics. The 
Stoics taught that the world (and the soul included in it) 
is only the necessary self-development of a single and absolute 
Being that excludes all independent and separate multiplicity. 
Nor could they recognize any principle of Evil, an anti-rational 
principle answering to the purity of divine power, working 


PHILOSOPHY 499 


evil and suggesting it, and making the individual capable 
of wilful disobedience to the laws of all-embracing divinity. 
Pure pantheism, uniting God and the world in indissoluble 
unity, cannot imagine a real conflict between humanity 
and divinity ; it cannot postulate a principle of Evil through 
the overthrow of which a lost unity with God is to be restored. 
Pantheism makes no claims of an ethical or religious kind. 
The ingenuity of the Stoic doctors was exercised in vain in 
the attempt to find a way out of this dilemma. ?° 

From the very origin of the school two tendencies were 
discernible in the teaching of the Stoa, derived as that teaching 
was from such different sources. On the one hand, the ethical 
doctrine of the Cynics, to whom the Stoics owed the greater 
part of their practical teaching, threw the individual back 
upon his own resources and made everything depend upon the 
determination of his own will. It thus pointed in the direction 
of the most self-sufficient individualism—to an _ ethical 
atomism. The physical doctrine derived from Herakleitos, 
on the other hand, merged the individual completely into the 
omnipotence and omnipresence of the All-One ; and therefore, 
as its ethical counterpart, demanded tHat-this relation of the 
individual to the universal Logos of the world should find 
expression in a life lived completely ex ductu rationis, in 
unconditional abandonment of the individual will to the 
Universal Mind that is the World and God.* In actual 
fact it was Cynicism that had the profounder influence in 
ethical matters. The universal Law and order of the world, 
embracing both universe and individual in its absolute 
decrees, threw its net too widely to be able to answer closely 
enough to the needs of narrow and individual existence. 
No practical ethics could possibly unite this distant and 
final aim with the individual man in a single nexus of ordered 
self-determination. The intermediate link between the 
universe and its laws, on the one hand, and the individual 
with his private will, on the other, had formerly been the 
Greek folis with its law and custom. But it was a cosmo- 
politan age, and for the Stoics as well as for the Cynics before 
them the city-state had lost most of its educative force. 
The individual saw himself more and more left to his own 
devices and forced to depend upon his own strength—his life 
had to be ordered on self-erected standards and guided 
by self-found rules. Individualism, which gave its tone 
to the age more decisively than in any past period of Greek 
life, began to win a footing even in this pantheistic system. 
The ‘‘ Wise Man” who is a law to himself in perfect self- 


500. THE LATER AGE OF THE) GREEK WOREBe 


determination,’ and feels himself bound only to those like 
himself,** is individualism’s fairest flower. 

But the soul, thus elevated to a height where it was capable 
of much that was impossible for or only incompletely within 
the reach of its weaker sisters, began more and more to seem 
like something rather different from a mere dependent 
offshoot of the One divine power that is the same everywhere. 
It is, in fact, regarded as an independent, divine, and self- 
enclosed creature in those passages where in Stoic literature, 
as in the older literature of the theologians, the soul is called 
a ‘‘daimon’’—the daimon dwelling within the individual 
man, and given to him as his associate.*4 Death, too, is 
regarded by this professedly monist system as a separation 
of soul from body * in accordance with what was really 
a naive or a conscious spiritualism. In death, then, this 
soul-essence whose independence had been so marked even 
in life, does not perish with the body—it does not even 
lose itself again in the One from which it had taken its origin. 
An infinitely extended individual life is indeed not attributed 
to the individual souls : only God, the one Soul of the World, 
is eternally indestructible.4® But the souls which have arisen 
by separation from the one and all-embracing divinity, 
survive the destruction of their bodies: until the final 
dissolution, in the Conflagration that will make an end of 
the present period of world-history, they persist in their 
independent life ; either all of them (as was the older teaching 
of the school) or, as Chrysippos, the master of Stoic orthodoxy, 
taught,the souls of the “ Wise” only, while the others have 
been lost in the general life of the Whole some time 
previously.47 The stronger ethical personality is held 
together in itself for a longer time.*® 

From the point of view of physical science and materialist 
doctrine 49 it was also hard to see why the soul, composed 
of pure fire-breath, which even in life had held the body 
together and had not been held together by the body,*°® 
should disappear at once when that body was disintegrated. 
As it had once held the body together, so it might well and 
all the more easily hold itself together now. Its lightness 
carries it upwards into the pure air under the moon, where 
it is fed by the breath that rises upwards and where there 
is nothing that can put an end to it.54_ An “ underworld ” 
region like that of popular imagination and theological 
teaching, was expressly denied by the Stoics.5? Their 
imagination preferred to exercise itself in an imaginary 
extension of life in the Aether, which was their region of 


BELROSORELY 501 


the souls ; °° but as a rule it appears that such flights of 
fancy were avoided. The life of the souls after death—that 
of the wise as well as of the unwise—remained indistinct and 
without content °* in the imagination of those whose life 
was still upon earth. 

Thus, the doctrine of the soul-personality and its continued 
existence (never simply expanded into personal immortality), 
which was in reality not required by the metaphysical 
principles of Stoicism, and could indeed hardly be reconciled 
with them, had in fact no serious significance for the general 
intention and substance of Stoicism—least of all for Stoic 
ethics and conduct of life. The philosophy of Stoicism 
is directed to the study of life, not of death. In this life on 
earth and only here can the purpose of human endeavour 
—the reproduction of divine wisdom and virtue in the human 
spirit—be fulfilled in manful contest with contrary impulses, 
fulfilled, that is, in so far as such a thing is possible for lonely 
and isolated fragments of divinity.® 

But virtue is sufficient in itself for the attainment of 
happiness—a happiness which loses nothing through the 
brevity of its duration and to which nothing would be added 
by the prolongation of its span.®°* Nothing in the doctrine 
of Stoicism points man, or the Wise Man, to another world 
beyond the life of the body and outside this earthly theatre 
of conflict and duty, for the fulfilment of his being and 
his task. 


§ 4 


The limited doctrine of immortality which, as we have 
seen, was not an essential part of the teaching of Stoicism, began 
to be called in question as soon as the rigid dogmatism of 
the school was subjected to the too-searching criticism of 
other schools of thought. In the clash of opinions Stoicism 
began to be doubtful of the absolute validity of its own 
teaching. The boundaries of orthodox doctrine once so 
firmly drawn now became more fluid; exchange and even 
compromise became common. Panaitios, the first writer 
among the pedantic professors of Stoicism to achieve a wider 
popularity for his writings, became the teacher and friend 
of those aristocratic Romans who found in Greek philosophy 
the impulse to a humanism that the barren soil of Rome 
could never have produced unaided. And Panaitios differed 
in more than one point from the strict orthodoxy of the older 
Stoicism. For him the soul is formed of two distinct 
elements ®°7—it is no longer simple and undivided, but com- 


502, THE LATER “AGE OR THE GREE KW Oia 


pounded of ‘‘ Nature ”’ and “ Soul ”’ (in the narrower sense).°° 
In death these two elements separate and change into other 
forms. The soul having had its origin at a particular point 
in past time now perishes in time. Being capable of grief 
and subject to the destructive influence of the emotions 
it falls a victim at last to its own pains. Panaitios, while 
remaining a Stoic, taught the dissolution of the soul, its death 
and simultaneous destruction with the death of the body.®® 

His pupil Poseidonios, who as a writer possessed an even 
greater influence than Panaitios with the great majority of 
cultivated readers who belonged to no special school of thought, 
returned to the older Stoic doctrine of the simple and 
undivided nature of the.soul as fiery breath. He distinguished 
three faculties but not three separate and independent 
elements in the human soul, and as a consequence of this 
view had no further need to believe in the dissolution of 
the soul into its component parts at death. He also denied 
the origin of the individual soul in time, from which the 
doctrine of its destruction in time had seemed to follow by 
a logical necessity. He returned to the old theological 
idea of the pre-existence of the soul, its life since the beginning 
of the created world; and could therefore go on to assert 
its continued existence after death—at least till the time 
of the next destruction of the World at the hands of omnipotent 
Hire 

It was not an inward and private necessity that led to this 
transformation of the old teaching of the School. Doubts 
and criticisms levelled at it from outside—from the Sceptics 
in particular—had necessitated the change. While some 
gave up the struggle, others sought refuge in a re-arrangement 
of the figures of the dialectical game and by the introduction 
of fresh characters.*t Immortality might be abandoned to 
criticism or reaffirmed in either case with equal indifference. 
The Platonic and poetic version of Stoicism provided by 
Poseidonios may have found a wider response among the 
readers of a highly cultivated society who felt the need 
of a doctrine of immortality more as a satisfaction to the 
artistic fancy than from any deeper or more temperamental 
causes. Cicero, the most eloquent representative of the 
Hellenized Roman culture of the time, may perhaps give 
us a picture of the refined and esthetic partiality with which 
these ideas were taken up. In the Dream of Scipio and the 
first book of the Tusculans, he gives an account, mainly 
based on Poseidonios, of the belief then held of a continued 
life of the soul in the divine element of the Aether. © 


PibeOsO RELY 503 
§ 5 


Stoicism had a long and vigorous life. More than ever 
during the first and second centuries of our era did it 
fulfil its real task of acting as a practical guide to conduct, 
not as a mere museum of dead erudition. It made good its 
claim to provide its adherents with the autonomous freedom 
and independence of a mind at peace with itself, whose virtue 
was proof against the tribulation and failure of life, and 
not corrupted by its plenty. It was not always blind 
imitation of a literary fashion or the love of displaying virtuous 
paradoxes that attracted the noblest of the higher Roman 
aristecracy to the doctrines of Stoicism. Not a few of them 
guided their lives in accordance with its principles and even 
died for their convictions. Not entirely ‘“‘ without tragic 
emotion ’’, as the Stoic Emperor would prefer it, but at any 
rate with conscious and deliberate purpose—not in mere 
unreasoning stubborness ®*—did these Stoic martyrs go 
to their death. Nor was it the unquestioned certainty of 
a continued life in a higher existence that made them so 
ready to give up life upon this earth.** Each in the special 
manner dictated to him by his own temperament and the 
circumstances of his life, they still speak to us, these leaders 
of Roman Stoicism—Seneca the philosophic director of the 
world’s conscience, Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, and those 
instructors and patterns of the aspiring youth of Rome, 
Musonius and Epictetus. The eager and unswerving effort 
of these wise men to educate themselves to the attainment 
of freedom and peace, of purity and goodness of heart, wins 
our admiration—not least in the case of Seneca in whom 
the struggle for self-mastery and philosophic calm must 
have been a continual war with his own too-receptive and 
imaginative nature. But just as they looked for no super- 
natural helper and redeemer but trusted to the power of 
their own spirit for the assurance of success, so they required 
no promise of a future crowning of their labours in an after- 
life of the soul. The whole scope of their endeavour lies 
within the limits of this world. The old Stoic belief in 
the continued life of the individual soul until the annihilation 
of all separate creation in the World Conflagration ® is 
regarded at the best as one possibility among many °°— 
it is perhaps but a “ beautiful dream ’’.67 But whether 
death is a transition to another form of being or a complete 
termination of individual life—to the wise man it is equally 
welcome, for he measures the value of life not by the number 


504 THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD 


of its years but by the richness of its content. At bottom 
Seneca is inclined to the view that death is the end of all 
things for man, after which “everlasting peace’’ awaits 
the restless spirit.®8 

The Stoic Emperor is uncertain whether death is a dissipa- 
tion of the elements of the soul (as the atomists teach) or 
whether the mind survives in a conscious or an unconscious 
existence that must yet disappear eventually in the life of 
the Whole. All things are in perpetual flux—so the Law 
of the universe has willed i1t—nor shall the human personality 
maintain itself untouched and unchanged. But even 
supposing that death isa “‘ putting out ”’ of his small individual 
candle, the wise man is not afraid: to the melancholy that 
is the prevailing mood.of his gentle, pure, and high-strung 
character Death, the annihilator, seems to beckon like a 
friend. ®° 

The tougher spirit of the Phrygian slave and freedman 
needed no conviction of personal survival to enable him to 
face the battle of earthly life with courage and intrepidity. 
What has been made must be unmade: without hesitation 
and without regret the wise man gives himself up to the laws 
of the rationally-ordered universe in which the present 
must make way for the future—not indeed to be lost entirely, 
but to be changed and to merge its individuality, its un- 
important self in new manifestations of the creative stuff 
of Life. The Whole does not perish, but its parts change 
and alter their relations among themselves.’9 The pantheistic 
principles of the school which had been taken over from 
Herakleitos and which made it permanently inconceivable 
that the diminutive individual spark of life could achieve 
a lasting separation from the central fiery mass, had become 
a settled conviction. The passionate abandonment of the 
personal, short-lived self to the everlasting Whole and One 
had become a fixed habit of mind. No longer did it seem 
intolerable that the individual existence should pass away 
after a brief span of life; it was possible to remain a Stoic 
and yet assert expressly, like Cornutus the teacher of Persius, 
that with the death of its body there is an end, too, of the 
individual soul.74 

§ 6 


The atomist doctrine renewed by Epicurus demanded in 
the most emphatic manner of its adherents that they should 
abandon the belief in personal survival. 

For the atomist the soul is corporeal, a compound made 


PHILOSOPHY 505 


up of the most mobile of the atoms which form the plastic 
elements of air and fire. It occupies all parts of the body, 
and is held together by the body, while at the same time, 
and in spite of this, holding itself in essential distinctness 
- from the body.’ Epicurus also speaks of the ‘“ Soul” as 
a special and enduring substance within the body, a “ part ”’ 
of the corporeal, not a mere “‘harmony”’ resulting from 
the association of the parts of the body.” He even speaks 
of two parts or modes of manifestation in the “soul”: 
the irrational, which holds the whole body in its sway as 
its vital force, and the rational, situated in the breast, which 
exercises will and intelligence and is the last and most essential 
source of life in living things, without the undivided presence 
of which death occurs.74 Anima and animus (as Lucretius 
calls them), distinct but not separable from one another,’ 
come into being in the embryo of man and grow to maturity, 
old age and decay, together with the body.’® If death 
occurs it means that the atoms belonging to the body 
are separated and the soul-atoms withdrawn—even before 
the final dissolution of the body, the separable “soul ”’ 
disappears. No longer held together by the body, it is 
blown away in the wind, it disappears ‘‘ like smoke” in 
the air.77 The soul, this soul that had animated the individual 
man, is no more.’8 The material elements of which it was 
composed are indestructible ; it is quite possible that they 
may at some future time combine together with the life- 
stuff to produce new life and consciousness of exactly the 
same kind as had once been joined together in the living 
man. But, if so, it will be a new creature that thus comes 
into being: the original man has been annihilated by death ; 
there is no bond of continuous consciousness uniting him 
with the fresh creation.?® The vital forces of the world are 
continuous, undiminished, indestructible, but in the formation 
of the individual living creature they are only lent temporarily, 
for this occasion and for a brief period, after which they are 
withdrawn for ever from the particular creature. Vitaque 
mancipio nullt datur, omnibus usu. 

After his death the individual is unaffected by the fate 
of his inanimate body ; ®° nor should he be troubled by the 
thought of what may happen to the atoms of his soul. 
Death does not concern him at all ; for he only is when death 
is not; where death is, he is no longer there.*! Sensation 
and consciousness have left him at the dissolution of 
body and soul; what he cannot possibly feel affects him no 
longer. Epicurean maxims are never tired of driving home 


906, THE’ LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WOREE 


this proposition: death is nothing to us.’ From every 
possible direction, from abstract principle and_ practical 
experience in actual life, Lucretius labours to demonstrate 
the truth of this view ®° as ardently as other philosophers 
seek to prove its opposite. Physical science has no more 
valuable service to render than that of convincing us of its 
truth.84 Just as the wisdom of Epicurus has no other purpose 
than to protect man, of all creatures the one most sensitive to 
pain, from distress and anguish—and even pleasure is but 
the removal of pain—so more particularly, in putting 
an end to the fear of death and the craving after unceasing 
life, it serves this finite life itself,8>° that is committed 
to us once and for all and never repeated.8* If a man has 
once succeeded in realizing that he will cease to be in the 
very moment of death’s coming, he will neither be oppressed 
with terror at the threatened loss of self-consciousness nor 
will the terrors of eternity §? or the fabulous monsters of the 
spirit-world below the earth 88 darken his existence by casting 
their dark shadow over all his life.8® He will devote himself 
to life without repining, neither fearing death nor seeking it.” 

He alone—the ideal Wise Man of the Epicurean faith— 
will know how to live as the true artist of his own life; % 
he will not waste the precious time in vain preparations 
for the future,®* but will cram every moment to the full 
so that his brief span of existence will have all that a long 
life could give. Long life, in fact, even life without an end, 
would not make him any happier or any richer. What life 
has to offer it has already offered—anything further must 
only be a repetition of what has gone before: eadem sunt 
omnia semper.*? The Wise Man has no reason even to look 
for an eternity of life.°* In his own personality, in this 
present “‘now’”’, he possesses all the conditions necessary 
to happiness. The very transience of this supreme happiness 
to which mortality can attain makes it seem the more valuable 
to him. To the development and the enjoyment of this, the 
only life that belongs to him he will devote himself exclusively. 
In ethical matters, too, the atomist doctrine holds good. 
There is no such thing in nature as an essential community 
of human beings—still less of humanity—there are only 
individuals.*® In associations entered into by free and 
unforced choice the individual may attach himself to the 
individual as one friend to another ;. but the political societies 
that men have invented and set up among themselves have 
no obligations for the Wise Man. He is himself the centre 
and indeed the whole circumference of the world surrounding 


PHILOSOPHY 507 


him. State and society are valuable, and indeed only exist 
for the protection of the individual and to make it possible 
for him under their enfolding care to develop his own 
personality in freedom.’*® The individual, on the other hand, 
does not exist for the state, but for himself. ‘“‘ It is no longer 
necessary to save the Hellenes or to win crowns of victory 
from them in contests of wisdom.” ®? Such is the decision 
reached with a sigh of relief by a civilization that has attained 
the highest point of its development and is now overcome 
by a lassitude in which it no longer sets itself new tasks, 
but takes its ease as age may be permitted to do. In its 
lassitude it no longer hopes, and in all honesty no longer 
cares, to extend the period of its existence beyond the hmits 
of this earthly life. Calm and untroubled it sees this life, 
dear though it may once have been, fade away, taking its 
leave and sinking into nothingness without a struggle. 


NOTES LOD CHAE UE Kies. BV 
PART I 


1 At first the philosophy of Plato’s old age lived on in spirit in the 
Academy. Just as his pupils carried on his Pythagorean speculations 
about numbers, reduced his imaginative suggestions as to a daimonic 
nature intermediate between that of God and man to pedantic system, 
and elaborated the theological strain in his thought to a gloomy and 
burdensome deisidaimonia (witness esp. the Epinomis of Philippos of 
Opos and in addition all that we know of Xenokrates’ speculations) — 
so too they retained and respected for a time the Platonic doctrine of 
the soul and the ascetic tendency in his ethical teaching. For Philipyos 
of Opos the aim of all human endeavour is a final and _ blessed 
emancipation from this world (which, however, is only pcssible for 
a few of those who are, in his special manner, “‘ wise ”—973 C ff., 
992 C). He is a mystic for whom this earth and its life fall away 
into nothing: all serious interest is confined to the contemplation of 
divine things such as are revealed in mathematics and astronomy. 
Again, the Platonic doctrine of the soul, in its mystic and world- 
renouncing sense, lies at the bottom of the fabulous narratives of 
Herakleides Pontikos (in the *“ABapis, "Eymedotipos, etc.). This, 
too, accounts for the youthful attempts in this direction of Aristotle 
himself (in the EvSnpos and probably also in the I]porpemztxds). 
This side of his doctrine was as it seems systematized from the stand- 
point of the latest stage of Platonism by Xenokrates in particular. 
It may be merely accident that we do not hear very reliably of any- 
thing indicating an ascetic tendency or an “ other—worldly ”’ effort 
after emanicipation of the soul in connexion with Xenokrates, 
Krantor (in his much-read book zept zév@ovs) was already capable 
of employing the Platonic doctrine of the soul and the imaginative 
fancies that could be attached to it simply as a literary adornment. 
And before him his teacher Polemon betrays a turning aside from the 
true Platonic mysticism. With Arkesilaos the last vestige of this 
whole type of thought disappears completely. 

2 trois €AevOépors wKioTa E€eoTw 6 Ti ErvxE Trovetv, GAAa TavTa H TA 
mietora réraxtat, Arist., Meta. 1075a, 19 (in maxima fortuna minima 
licentia est, Sall., C. 51, 13). Freedom in this sense indeed was a thing 
of the past. 

3 Not that such hopes or fears were entirely absent. The 
reader will remember the case of Kleombrotos of Ambrakia (Call., 
Ep. 25), who by reading the Phaedo of Plato (and completely mis- 
understanding the meaning of the prophet, as not unfrequently 
happens) was led to seek an immediate entrance into the life of the 
other world by a violent break with this one—and committed suicide. 
This is an isolated example of a mood to which Epiktetos bears witness 
as common in his own much later time—the desire felt by many young 
men of ardent temperament to escape from the distracted life of 
humanity and return as quickly as possible to the universal life of 
God by the destruction of their own individual existence: Epict. 
1, 9, 11 ff. But in the earlier period such violent manifestations of 
other-worldly fanaticism were of rare occurrence. Hedonism was 


NOTE See LO CHAPTER  mclV 509 


capable of leading to the same result as we may see from the 
"Amoxaptep@v of Hegesias the Cyrenaic, called 6 metovOavaros, whom 
Cicero mentions together with this same Kleombrotos: TD. i, 83-4. 

4 +0 cGud Tws Tis puxfs evexev (yéyover), aS 6 mpiwy THS mplcews 
évexa—and not vice versa: PA. 1, 5, 645b, 19. 

> The pux7 is related to the body as éyus is to the eye, i.e. as the 
effective power residing in the dpyavoy (not like épaas, the individual 
act of vision). It is the zparn evre Aé xeva of its body de An. ii, 1, 
412a, 27. There is no ovv9eas of cHua and guy; they are simply 

“ together ” like the wax and the ball formed out of the wax: Top. 
Poe Uaiie (4. ZOD woul en del An, 412b, 7. 

: dmedOovons yoov (ris bux fs) ovKeETL C@ov EOTLY, OVOE THY popliwv 
ovdev TO avTo AEimeTaL, TANY TH Ox HmaTL wovov Kabamep Ta pvOEVOpMEVa 
AvG9ovaba, PA. Pee 18. 

7 Meta. 1026a, 5 > mept bux iis evias Dewprjaat Tob pvarKod, don ra) 
dvev ths vARSs €oriv.—ovde yap Taca buxy puvats, aAAa ve Opiov avris, 
PA. 641b, 9. The subject of ro Kceywpiopévov of the soul is studied 
by 6 mp&ros giAdcodos: de An. 403b, 16. 

8 déyw de vodv, & Stavoeirat kal VrodAauPaver 7 Wuyy, de An. 429a, 23. 

® The vots and its Pewpnrixn Svvapis Eorxe uyts yévos erepov eivat 
kal TodTo povov évdexetar ywpilecbar, Kabamep TO atdiov Tod dbaprtod, 
Ta 5€ AotTa popta THs puxis ovK Eott ywprota xTr., de An. 413b, 25. 

10 There can be no doubt that Aristotle’s opinion was that rods 
was uncreated and existed without beginning from eternity: see 
Zeller, S1izb. Berl. Ak. 1882, p. 1033 ff. 

a Oupabev € TELOEP XETAL into the man as he is being made, GA. 736b, 
28; cf. 6 Ovpabev voos, 744d, 21, 

1? vobs is dmabis, apryys, ov pe WLKT AL TO od wari—it has no physical 
Opyavov, de An. ili, 4. ovdev adrod (rod vod) TH evepyeia Kowwwvel 
owpatixkn evépyeca, GA. 736b, 28. 

13 wdpiov ths wuyxts, de An. 429a, 10 ff. ux odx GAn, aAr’ 7 
vontiky, 429a, 28. 7 buy... wy maoa aAd’ o vots, Meta, 1070a, 26. 

14 The Cov a pixpos Kkdopos, Phys. 252b, 26. 

15 yots, Oevdtepov te Kai anaes, de An. 408b, 29.—rov votv Oetov 
elvac povov, GA. 736b, 28 (737a, 10). etre Oetov dv eite trav ev Huiv 
70 Oeadrarov, EN. 1177a, 15. vots is ro ovyyevéotarov to the gods, 
1179a, 26.—rd avOpdrwv yévos 7 povov petéxver TOO Delov Tav Auiv 
yrwpipwv Cawv h partora mavtwrv, PA. 656a, 7. 

16 Eoyov tov Gevorarou TO voeiv Kai dooveitv, PA. 686a, 28. 

SC 7 ad BP pe Bs & 

18 EN. 1178b, 7-22; Cael. 292b, 4 ff. 

19 So too é€muKadvmrerat 6 vois éviore mafer 7 voow H Umvw, de An. 
429a, 7. 

20 @yyavew is the term often applied to the activity of voids, ie. a 
simple and indivisible act of apperceiving the acvvfera. This act not 
being composite (of subject and predicate), like judgment, leaves no 
room for error: the act simply occurs or does not occur—adAnfés 
or weidos does not enter into the question with it. Meta. 105I1b, 
16—26 (Ouyety, 24-5), 1027b, 21. 

aor O, adn da Kal mpara Kal Gpeoa Kal YVWPLULOTEPA Kal mporepa kal 
aitta Tod oupmepdopatos, An, Po. i, 2. This adpuéowv emoaripyy 
dvam ddeKkTos (72b, 19) belongs to vods. There is only a vots—not an 
€MLOT HEN (as. being a €&is amodextixy, EN. 1139b, 31)—rav apxav, 
THs apxis Tob €mLoT TOD, EN. vi, 6. Thus also voos is €TLOT NUNS ap x7, 
An, Po. 100b, 5-17. ra&v dxwytwv 6pwr Kal mpudtwv vots €oTi Kat ov 


Adyos, EN. 1143b, 1 (cf. MM. 1197a, 20 ff.). 


510 NOTESWALO, CHAR TT KaCRy, 


22 +0 KUpiov, EN. 1178a, 3, and frequently. votds doxet apxeiv Kat 
nyetobat, 1177a, 14. It rules esp. over dpeéis (as 7 pvxyH does over 
the’ ca@jia); Pol! 1254b, 5 (cf. EN. 1102b,°29°f1.). 

23 A man is called éyxparis or axpatys, T@ Kpatetv Tov votdyv H pH * 
Ws TtovTov éxadotou dvros, EN. 1168b, 35. dogerce 8 dv kal elvar Exactos 
tovTo (vots), 1178a, 2. 7 avOpwrw 57 (KpaticTov Kai jdvoTov) 6 KaTa 
Tov voov Bios, eimep TodTo padtora av@pwros (here only in so far as the 
possession of vois distinguishes men in general from the other ¢éa), 
1178a, 6. 

24 Cicero makes a distinction of this kind between vatio and animus, 
Off. i, 107 (after Panaetius): intellegendum est, duabus quasi nos 
a natura indutos esse personis ; quarum una communis est ex eo quod 
omnes participes sumus rationis...; altera autem quae proprie 
singulis est tributa. 

ze dmavra Ta ywopeva Kat dbepopeva daiverar, Cael. 279b, 203 
TO yevojmevov dvdyKn TéXos Aa Beiv, Pitta 203 DOs ILE dmav TO det ov 
aTtAa@s agp Baprov. Opotws dE Kal dyevnror, Cael. 281b, 25. €f 706 ayevntov 
addaptov Kat TO addaprov ayevnrov dvayKn Kal 70 ““dtduov’”’ éxatépw 
uxodrovbetv, Kal elite Te ayévnTtov, alduov, eite TL. APOapTov, aidiov KTA, 
Cael. 282a, 31 ff. Thus too vots (awa@7s) as uncreated is everlasting 
and imperishable (see Zeller, Sitzb. B. AR. 1882, p. 1044 f.). It belongs to 
the imperishable odaia:, which as such are ripiat cai beta, PA. 644b, 22 ff. 

26 6 vots taopéver at the separation, Meta. 1070a, 25-6. More 
strictly this applies to the voids amabns (mrounreK ds). While the vois 
mafytixos (whose relation to the vois TOLNTLK OS: remains most obscure) 
is p9ap7os, we hear of the vots TOUNTLK OS that it is ywpiabeis pdvov tobTo 
OmEp €OTi, Kal TOUTO povov ddvarov Kat ald.ov, de An. 430a, 10-25. 

27 de An. 408b, 18 ff.: vots od dOeiperar, nor bro THs ev TH yHpa 
dpavpwoews ... 70 voetv Kal TO Oewpety papaiverac (in old age) 
adAXAov twos €ow Pbetpopevov (? nothing perishes within 706 voety—read 
ev @ aS in ]. 23 and understand: dAdov twos év & 70 voety = 6 vots, 
eveo7t, i.e. the whole living man), adro dé amabés eat (just as voids 
is always avaAXoiwrov, even its vénas is no Kivnos, and the Ajyus 
THS rien le makes no dAAoiwars for it: de An. 407a, 32; Ph. 247a, 
hay de’ Aeys ihe, PAB) ff.), TO be dcavoetofar (thinking and judging) Kal 
pedetv 7 puceiv ovK Ear éxetvou m7a0n, arAa Todd Tot EXOvTOS €KEtVvO, 
a éxeivo EXEL. 510 kat Ttovtov Pbepopevov ore pvnpovever ovre direl, 
od yap éxeivov nv, GAAG Tob Koivov (that which had once been associated 
with the vois), 6 dwoAwiev * 6 b€ vots tows Oevdtepov Tt Kal amabés 
eo7itv. In its separate existence vods has no memory—this at least 
is meant by od prnpovetopev, de An. 430a, 23, however we may be 
inclined to interpret the rest of the sentence. 

28 Particularly in the Evénpos (frv. 31-40 [37-44]), probably also 
in the IIpotpemzixkos. 

29 For this must be the meaning of fy. 36 = 44 (£v8.)—the daipar 
isethe soul itseli yy Cl. Oona bh). 

80 de An. 407b, 13-26; 414a, 19-27.—And yet it must be admitted 
that the vods of Aristotle is itself a tuydv within another ruydv—not 
indeed as a separate entity with any qualities set in a fortuitous vessel 
of perhaps discordant qualities that do not fit it (which acc. to the 
ITvbayopevos poibos was true of the %uy7 in the oHua)—but at any rate 
set within an animated individual with quite definite qualities as 
a stranger, itself devoid of all definite quality and therefore not capable 
of having a character specially fitting that individual in which it is 
placed. Thus, after all, the Aristotelian pifos about the vois betrays 
its origin from the piéo of old theology. 


NOE SOs GLA Pa Re axcLV 511 


31 It is only as an argumentum ad hominem that the view is 
suggested on one occasion, that BéAtiov TH vO pr) pera owparTos elvar 
(kabamep elwOé te AeyecAar Kal moAdois avvdoKet), de An. 407b, 4. 

82 EN. x, 7-9.—doxet 7 drdocodia Bavpaotas ydovas éxew Kabapid- 
TnTt Kal T@ PeBaiw. etdAovov d€ Tots efddor Tav CynrovvTwy Hdiw tiv 
Siaywynv elvat, 1177a, 26. The codds requires no ovvepyou (as the 
cwdpwv and the avdpetos do), and is adrapxéoratos in himself. The 
activity of vots is the most valuable as being fewpntixy and because 
map avTnv ovdévos éedierat tédAovs. A sufficiently long life of the 
theoretic activity of voids is reXela eddatpovia avOpwm70v—indeed, this 
is no longer an dvOpomuivos Bios, but rather xpeitzwv 7) Kar’ advOpwrov— 
a Beios Bios as vots Getdv ti ev avOpwarw brapxye. Therefore man must 
not avOpwmwa gpovety but ed’ daov evddyerar abavarilew (be immortal 
already in this life) cat mdvrta movety mpos TO Cqv Kata TO KpatLoTOY 
tov ev av7T®@ (1177b, 31 ff.). This rereia eddarpovia, as a Dewpntixt 
evépyeca, brings the thinkers near to the gods whose life does not consist 
in mpatrew (not even virtuous) or wovety but in pure Jewpia, and this 
can be so with the life of man (alone among the (da) éd’ 6oov 6polwpa 
TUTHS ToLavTyS (PewpnTiKTs) Eevepyeias Umapxet (1178b, 7-32). Nowhere 
do we meet with so much as the shadow of an idea that the evéatpovia 
of the @ewpntixos Bios can only become veAeda in “‘ another’ world, 
or is conceivable as existing elsewhere than in the life on earth. The 
only condition for reXela evdatpovia that is made is pHKos Bliov réXevov 
(1177b, 25)—nothing lying outside or beyond this life. The dewpnrixds 
Bios has its complete and final development here upon earth.— 
téAetos Bios is mentioned as necessary for the obtaining of evdatpovia, 
EN. 1100a, 5; 110la, 16. But edvda:povia is completely confined 
within the limits of earthly life; to call a dead man eddaipova would 
be wavreAd@s atomov, for he lacks the évépyera which is the essence of 
evdatuovia—only a mere shadow of sensation can belong to the 
KexpnKotes (almost the Homeric conception) 1100a, 11-29; 110la, 
22-b, 9.—Since it is impossible for the individual to enjoy an un- 
ending permanence and share in To aei kal Oetov, it follows that the 
continuation of the individual after death consists only in the con- 
tinuance of the ef$os—not of the atr6 (which perishes) but only of the 
otov avto which persists in the series of creatures propagated on earth : 
de An. 415a, 28-b, 7; GA. 73la, 24-b, 1. (Borrowed from the observa- 
tions OL biato, omp, 206 €-207 A; ‘cf. also Jeg. 721°C, 773°E; Philo, 
Incor. Mund. 8, ii, p. 495 M., after Kritolaos.) It was much easier for 
Aristotle to take this conception seriously than it was for Plato with 
his particular outlook: only for the passing requirements of his. 
dialogue does Plato adopt the Herakleitean view and expand it: see 
AbOVe. Cldapa Xi,.n, 16: 

33 ofuae d€ Tod ywwwoKe 7a dvTA Kal dpovetv adaipefEvros od Biov adrAa 
ypovov elvar tiv aOavaciay, Plu., Is. et Os. i, fin., p. 351 E. Origen 
(Cels. iii, 80, p. 359 Lom.) draws a clear distinction between the 
abavacta rhs wuxis of Platonic doctrine and the Stoic é€mdtapovy ris 
yuxjs on the one hand—and this Aristotelian doctrine of the rod 
vod dbavacia: ot mevabévtes rept Tod Bvpabev vod ws adavatov (Bavarou 
Edd.) kat pdvov (xawvod Edd.) dcaywynv (= Biov) €€ov7os (—this is how 
the passage should be read). 

84 Theophrastos discussed (by the method of dzopia: fashionable 
with the school) the obscurities and difficulties inherent in the doctrine 
of vos, particularly of the reduplicated vois, the zounrixds and the 
ma@yntixos. True to his character, however, he adheres to the fixed 
dogma of his school of the vois ywprords which éfwlev adv Kat Warep. 


512 NOTES TO CHAPTER XIV 


é€mifetos iS Guws otudutos with man and being ayévynros is also 
adOaptos: Frag. 53b, p. 226 ff.; 53, p. 176 Wim. (dewpia belongs 
to vots, Oyovte Kal olov apapéevw, and is therefore without azarn, 
fv. 12, § 26. The votis is Kpetrrov te pépos [THs WuxAs] Kal Devdrepov, 
fr. 53. To the vods and its Jewpia we must suppose the xara dvvapwv 
dpo.odcba: bem to refer—for this is the teaching of Thphr. also: Jul., 
Or. vi, p. 185 A.) Nowhere is there any indication that for him the 
immortality of rots had the slightest importance for this life and its 
conduct. Nor has it any in the ethical doctrine of the very theologically 
inclined Eudemos. Here the aim of life—the aper7 réAevos which is 
kadoxayabia—is said to be % rod Se0d Pewpia which is carried on by 
the vots, To év yutv Detov, 1248a, 27; in this process it is best yxvora 
alaBavecba rod adXrAov pépous ths wux7s, 1249b, 22. For the sake of 
TO yvwpifey man wishes Cv aei, 1245a, 9—but upon earth and in 
the body: there is no thought of the other world. (This would have 
been quite natural and to be expected of this semi-theological thinker 
who, e.g. speaks quite seriously of the separability of vots from the 
Adyos—the dAdo pépos tis wuxAs—in bodily life and of its higher 
intuition in enthousiasmos and veracious dreaming: 12l4a, 23; 
1225a, 28; 1248a, 40.)—To this first generation of Peripatetics belong 
also Aristoxenos and Dikaiarchos who did not recognize any peculiar 
substance of the “‘soul’’ apart from the “‘ harmony ”’ brought about 
by the mixture of bodily material. Dik. avyipnKe tiv 6Anv badoracw 
THs: bvyns: Atticus ap. Eus., PE. xv, 810 A. Aristox7 andeium 
nullum omnino animum esse dixerunt Cic. TD. 1, 51; 21; 41, etc. ; 
Dik. (in the AecBiaxot Adyor) expressly controverted the doctrine 
of immortality, TD. i, 77. (It remains very remarkable that Dik. 
who naturally knew nothing of a separabilis animus, TD. i, 21, 
nevertheless, believed not merely in mantic dreams—that would be 
just intelligible, éyec yap tua Adyov, Arist., P. Nat. 462b ff.—but also 
in the prophetic power of évfovotaguds, Cic., Div.i, 5; 113; Dox. 416a, 
which invariably presupposes the dogma of a special substance of the 
““ soul ”’ and its separability from the body.)—Straton “‘ the naturalist ” 
(ad. 270), for whom the soul is an undivided force, inseparable from the 
body and the aic@yoes, gave up completely the belief in the vots 
xwptotos of Aristotle: he cannot possibly have held any doctrine of 
immortality in any form or under any limitations.—Then follows the 
period of pure scholarship when the Peripatetic school almost gave up 
philosophy. With the return to the study of the master’s writings 
(from the time of Aristonikos) they gained a new lease of life. The 
problems of the parts of the soul, the relation of vots to the soul (and 
to the vods tafyrikos) were discussed once more. It became more and 
more common, however, to set aside the voids OUpadev érecowwy (cf. the 
definition of the soul given by Andronikos ap. Galen 7z. tr. ris puyqs 
HOa@Y, IV, 782 f., K.3' Themist., de An. ii, 96,115) 59, 6G. op))) eee 
meant the denial of immortality (which belonged to vods only): e.g. by 
Boéthos: Simp., de An. p. 247, 24 ff. Hayd. [Sto. Vet. iii, 267 Arn.]. 
A different view again, and one which even went beyond Aristotle, 
was held by Kratippos, the contemporary of Boéthos: Cic., Div. 
i, 70; cf. 5; 113. Alexander of Aphrodisias the great é&nynras 
absolutely banished the voids mounrexos from the human soul. (This 
is the divine voids, which is perpetually vois and vonrov évepyeia, and 
that, too, already zoo rod voetofar by the trArKos vods of man. It 
enters into the latter vpa8ev—though not locally, for it is incapable of 
change of place, p. 113, 18 f.—with the individual act of voety by 
the vots tArKos, but it never becomes a podpiov Kal dvvapyls tus TAS 


NOTESS TOV CHAPTER XTV bio 


Huetépas wuxijs: Alex. de An., p. 107-9; p. 90 Br.). For him voids is 
xwpotos and adavatos, amafys, etc., whereas the human soul exactly 
like the eZdos of its cua from which it is dywpiords perishes at death 
together with its vods tArxKdés, completely: cupdbeiperar 7H odpart, 
de An., p. 21, 22 f.; p. 90, 16 f. The individual soul thus perishes : 
the imperishable vots had not communicated itself to the individual. 
—The indestructibility of the individual vots of man (and this was 
indubitably what Aristotle himself taught), a doctrine derived not 
from experience but from pure logical inference, had in reality no 
serious significance for the general teaching of the Peripatetics so long 
as they preserved their independence. Finally, indeed, they too were 
swallowed up in the ferment of Neoplatonism. 

8° eis, pvats, droyos ux, ux Adyov éxovca Kal Sidvoray, Plu., 
Virvt. Mor. 451 BC and A. Through all these and all things in which 
these are—6éi7xet 6 vois, D.L. vii, 138 f. [ii, p. 192 Arn.}. 

%6 Our soul an azméomacpa of the éupvyos wkdcpos, D.L. vii, 143 
{ui, 191 Arn.}. We often find the soul of man called an daéomacpa Tod 
Beod (Acds), Beta amoporpa, amdppora (see Gataker on M. Ant., pp. 48, 
211; Ed. 1652)—and often even eds (see Bonhéffer, Epiktet u. d. 
>l0a,1p./6 i f:). 

37 (9 ux) aparorepov mvedua THs Pvcews Kal AETTOMEepecTEpov .. . 
Chrysipp. ap. Plu., Stoic. Rep. 41, p. 1052 F [ii, 222 Arn.]. ‘* Nature”’ 
is mvedua that has become moist, soul the same aveiua which has 
remained dry (Galen. iv, 783 f. K. [p. 218 Arn.]). 

38 The Bpédos is created as a dvrov, and only afterwards becomes 
a Cdov by mepibvérs (derivation of %uyy hence!). Chrysipp. ap. Plu., 
Stoic, Rep. 1052 F [p. 222 Arn.]. Thus comes éx dicews bvyy, Plu., 
Prin. Viet, pe 946 C: 

39 It would almost be possible to employ the semi-Stoic language of 
Philo to describe the soul as conceived by this Stoic Pantheism : 
THs Oeias puyfs ameomacua ov Srapetov (Tépverar yap ovdév Tod Beiov 
Kat amaptynow, adda povov éxteivetar), Q. Det. Pot. Insid., 24, i, 
p. 209 M. But in orthodox Stoic doctrine the idea prevails that the 
individual amoomdopara are completely detached from the universal 
Getov—but at the same time without denial of ultimate connexion with 
tice leaeand the One 7: 

40 Acc. to the older Stoicai doctrine as systematized by Chrysippos 
the soul is absolutely simple and unified, having sprung from the 
universal Reason of God which contains no ddoyov. Its impulses 
{opyai) must on this view be rational just as much as its willed decisions 
(xpices): it is affected from without by dvoas, which, being itself 
a development of the highest reason, God, can only be good and rational. 
It is quite impossible to conceive how, on the principles of the older 
Stoicism, erroneous judgment or excessive and evil impulses could 
arise. 7 THs Kakias yéveors is rendered unintelligible as- Poseidonios 
maintains in opposition to the subtle observations of Chrysipp. on 
this head (see Schmekel, Phil. d. mitil. Stoa, p. 327 ff.). 

41 dxodovdws 7H dvoer Cfv (but our dvaes are pépy THs Tob dAov), 
i.e. in harmony with the xowds dpos domep eoriv 6 dpOos Adyos. 6 dia 
mdvTwv epxopevos, 6 adtos Ov TO Aci, KaPnyewon tovTw Tis TOV OAwY 
dvockynoews ovtt, Chrysipp. ap. D.L. vii, 87-8 {iii, 3 Arn.]. This obedience 
to the rational order and governance of the world—the dewm sequere, 
ome Dello 2 p.el6,5) excaQae fects, pict: 1, 12; 5, etc.—is 
more often regarded as a passive attitude of self-abandonment adopted 
consciously and with ovykard@eois: xyp@ por Aowrov eis 6 av béXns. 
Opmoyvwpmov@ aot, ods eiue KTA., Epict. ii, 16, 42. OéAe yiveoPar ra 

el 


514 NOTES SlLOBCOUAR PE Rey, 


yidopeva ws ylverat, Kat edponoers (this sounds very like “ make God’s 
will your own will”), Ench. 8. Much the same idea occurs already 
in the lines of Kleanthes dyou 6€ w & Zed xai ov y’ 7 Ilempwpévy xri. 
fi, 118 Arn.1. But such “‘ affirmation of the universe ”’, understood 
in the full pantheistic sense (cf. Kleanthes r7v Kownv povnv éxdéxerat 
dvaw 7} det axorovbety, odKéte b€ Kal TV emi pépous, D.L. vii, 89 [i, 
126 Arn.]), could not lead to an ethical teaching of active character 
and concrete substance. 

42 The aodds is wovos eAevOepos* elvar yap tH éAevbepiav efovalay 
atrompayias, D.L. vii, 121. Laws and constitutions do not apply to 
him" WiGicwe Ac Leyte, ooo. 

43 Enemies and strangers are 7 o7ovdatoe to one another—wmoXiras 
Kat iro. Kat ofketor of omovdator povov. Zeno, ev 7H IToXrteia, ap. 
DD aic 32-3 Ti, 54 Arn.]. 

SPO map éxdotm daiuwv which one must keep in harmony zpos 
THhv TOO TOY dArAwY SdtorkynTod BovAnow, D.L. vii, 88, after Chrysipp. 
fiii, 4 Arn.]. In the later Stoic literature, the only part of it which 
has come down to us, we often hear of this daiuwy of the individual— 
sacer intra nos spiritus (Sen., Epict., M. Ant.: see Bonhdffer, Epikiet, 
83). It is generally spoken of in language that seems to regard it as 
something separable from the man Or his soul , including the TYE MOVLK OY 5 ; 
Zeus TapeoTnoev €miTpo mov ErZoTW TOV EKAOTOV daipova Kal TmapedwKe 
puddocery avr ov avT@ KTA., Epict. i, 14, 12. 6 datuwv 6v ExadoTw 
MpooTaTynv Kal HnyEewova Oo Asie EOWKED, M. Ant. v, 27. avaxpwov 76 
da:uoveov, Epict. iii, 22, 53 (one can ask questions of it, as Sokrates 
did of his darudvov, as something other and different from oneself). 
This daiuwv then does not seem to be simply identifiable with the 
“soul”? of man like the daimon in man of which the theologians speak. 
It is conceived and spoken of in language that suggests rather the 
“* protecting spirit’? of aman as known to popular belief (cf. now Usener, 
Gétternamen, 294 ff.). daavte Satpwv avdpi ovpmapiotrata evéds 
yevoumevw pvotaywyos Tod Biov, Menand. 550 K. (where the idea of two 
daimonic partners in the life of man is already rejected: Eukleides 
Socr. had spoken of such, cf. Censor., DN. iii, 3, and in a different way 
again Phocyl., fy. 15). Plato himself speaks (with a Aéyera:) of the 
daliuwv oomep COvra eiAnyec (and guides the departed soul into Hades) : 
Phd.107D. Theidea, however, must have been much older: it appears 
fairly clearly expressed in Pindar’s words, O. xiii, 28 (Zed mdrep), 
Bevodavros evduve daipovos otpov, where the transition to the meaning 
“fate”? for the word dSaipwv has not yet been completed. Later 
(with the Tragedians and other poets) this use became very common, 
but even then still presupposes the belief in such personal daimonic 
partners in the life of man: the use would have been quite impossible 
otherwise. (dSaiuwv = motpos, Pi., P. v, 121 f., and already in Thgn. 
161, 163. When Herakleitos says 700s avOpw7w daipwr, fr. 121 By., 
119 D. he uses dacéywy in the sense of fortune in life. The word means 
both #0os and condition of life at the same time in Pl., Rp. 617 E, 
ovx buds daiuwv Aneta, GAN bpets Saipova aipyoeabe, where the deriva- 
tion of the metaphorical use of the word déaiuwyr from a belief in a special 
daimon belonging to the individual man can still be seen plainly. See 
also [Lys.] Edit. (2), 78. But the metaphorical use comes as early 
as @ 166, mapos rot daipova Swow = métpov édjow.)—The personal 
existence of the daimon is still far removed from all danger of such 
abstraction in a very remarkable case: in Halikarnassos Poseidonios 
and his €xyovor decide that on the first day of the month they will 
offer Aaiporu ayad@ ITlocerdwviov ... Kprov (Gr. Ins. in Br. Mus. 


NOTES te LOR CHAPTERS Oh 515 


iv, 1, n. 896, p. 70, 1: 35. The inser. seems to date from the third 
century B.c.). Here then offering is made to the dya@és Saipwy (see 
above, chap. v_ n. 133) of the living, just as offering was made on birth- 
days, and at other times also, to the genius of Romans; ay. 8. is here 
clearly equivalent to genius. Apollo whose advice had been sought 
at his oracle had expressly enjoined (ib., 1.9)... repay cai fAdoxecOat 
Kal ayadov daipova ITocevdwviov Kat ease (the latter, B.'s mother, 
seems to have been already dead : 1. 34).—This special 8aiuwyv attached 
to individuals with whom it can be contrasted (as Brutus can be with 
his daiuwv xaxos: Plu., Brut. 36) is distinct from the individual’s 
yux7, though it is natural to suppose that it may have arisen from 
the projection of the yux7—conceived as very independent—outside 
the man himself, in which it would again resemble the Roman 
genius. (The daimonic dvAaxes of Hesiod [cf. above, p. 67 ff.], belong 
to quite a different range of ideas.) At any rate the Stoics had 
this analogous popular conception in mind when they spoke of the 
Tap exaoTw daiuwy as something different from the man himself and 
his #yepovrxdv. They use it, however, only as a figure of speech. 
The daiuwv of the individual really means for them “‘ the original, 
ideal personality as contrasted with the empirical personality” (as 
Bonhoffer very rightly puts it: Epikt. 84)—the character the man 
already is ideally but must become actually (yévou ofos éooi. . .). 
Thus the daiuwy is distinct from the puy7 (Sidvora) and yet identical 
with it. It is a semi-allegorical play upon the idea of the daipwv as 
individual genius and at the same time as crown or summit of the 
human personality—just as Plato had used the word already 
incidentally, Tim. 90 A. Finally—for the Stoics did not seriously 
wish to establish the existence of an independent protecting deity 
that enters man from without and rules over him—the 7yepovndy 
is the same as the datuwv. Thus in M. Ant. iv, 27, the daiuwy is 
completely identical with the amdomacpa Ards, and the €xdorov vots 
kat Adyos (cf. also iii, 3 fin.; ii, 13; 17; iii, 7, Tov éavrot vodv Kai 
Saiuova). The fact, however, that this daécmacua tod Oeod can 
be called a dafuwyv bears witness to a tendency to conceive the soul- 
spirit as something independent and more cut off and separated from 
the common and original source of divinity than was possible for 
Stoic pantheism of the stricter sort (to which the terms dmécznacuya, 
aGmdppova tod Beod were more apt). A decided approximation was 
thus made to the theological idea of the “soul” as an individual 
daimon which persists in its separate existence. To this view 
Poseidonios went over completely : he regards the individual 
daiuwv that lives in man as ovyyer7js @y TH Tov GAov KO Mov SrorKobvTe 
(Pos. ap. Gal. v, 469), and no longer as the dependent amédomacpa of 
the latter, but as one of many independent and individually 
characterized spirits that have lived from all time in the air and enter 
into man at birth. (See Bonhoffer, Epikt. 79-80, and also Schmekel, 
Phil. d. mittl. Stoa, 249 ff., 256.) 

45 6 Pdvatos €oTt yxwpiopos fuxfs ame awpatos ... Chrysipp. ap 
Nemes., NH., p. 81 Matth.; Zeno and Chrysipp. ap. Tert., An. 5 
Gop Oa Cle Magog B 

iv Everything | comes into being and perishes, es, the gods, 
6 8é Zeds rdvos atduds éort, Chrysipp. ap. Plu., Sto. Rep. 38, p. 1052 A ; 
Comm. Not. 31, p. 1075 A ff. [ii, 309 re air ig ae but not 
abavacia of the human soul fib., 223]. 

47 Kiedvdns pev ovv maaas (ras puxas) émdua pevelv (A€yer) péex pe 
Ths exnupwoews, Xptourmos S€ tas Tay coddv povov, D.L. vii, 157. 


516 NOTES’ TOS COUART EH Tock: 


A statement often repeated without mention of the two authorities : 
Arius Did. ap. Eus., PE. 15, 20, 6, p. 822 A (the puyai tay adpovwv 
Kat adoywv Cdwyv perish immediately with the death of the body, C) 
and others [ii, 223 Arn.]. Chrysippos’ doctrine comes also in Tac., 
Agr. 46, si ut sapientibus placet non cum corpore extinguuntur magnae 
animae (at peydAa pvyai, Plu., Def. Or. 18, p. 419 f.); cf. omnium 
quidem animos immortalis esse sed fortium bonorumque divinos, 
Ciclo Legall,, 2/,m0tequiteracculatelys put. 

48 The dabeveorépa puyy (atrn 8é€ éote THY arrardevTwv) perishes 
sooner, 9 d¢€ laoyuvpotépa, ota é€oTl epi tods codovs remains péyxpt THs 
éxmupwoaews, [Plu.] Plac. Phil., 4, 7 ap. Dox. 393a. 

49 The predominance of the materialistic point of view is remarkable 
in those Stotct who acc. to Seneca, Ep. 57, 7, existimant animum 
hominis magno pondere extriti permanere non posse et statim spargi, 
quia non fuerit illi exitus liber (which reminds us of the popular belief 
that the soul of one who has died in a high wind ed ds d:avedvanrar 
KatamoAwaAey, Pli, Phd. JM) A, 80.D, see above, chap.sxili,eu smo). 

50 o} Ta ompata Tas puxas ovvéxer GAN ai pvyal Ta GHpata, WoTeEp 
Kal 7 KOAAGa Kal €avTiV Kal Ta éxTOs Kparet, Poseidon. ap. Ach. Tat., 
Isag., p. 133\E Petav., borrowed\from Arist, (de dv. 1,15, 41D eae 
but a thoroughly Stoic idea as contrasted with Epicurean doctrine 
(see Heinze, Xenohkrates, 10), 1.): 

51 S.E., M. ix, 71-3. The naive but quite plain statements go back 
to Poseid. as has often been pointed out (e.g. by Corssen, de Pos. 
Rhod., p. 45, 1878, and others). So, too, do the similar remarks in 
Cic., TD. i, 42. Poseid. does not appear to be uttering heterodox 
opinions in this case, So far as we can see. 

52 Kal yap ovde Tas puxas EvVEOTLV Umovo jaar KaTw depopevas. 
Aemtopepets yap otaat els Tovs dvw padAdov tom0vs Kovdodopotaw, S.E., 
M. ix, 71. This physical reason was in itself enough to make it 
impossible for the Stoics to believe in a subterranean region of the 
souls: ovdels “’Ardns, 038’ "Axépwv, o08€ Kwxités xrr., Epict. iii, 
13,,19.. Itas the regular store doctrine: jsee, Bonhoter: Epikt. 56 tos 
cf. -Cic., "2D. i,.364.;4Sen.,1C.. ad, Marc. 19,,45) Whensoveicsucpe asm 
occasionally of infevi or ddys as the abode of the souls, they are only 
using metaphorical language. When the word is not a mere con- 
ventionalism, they mean the regions nearer the earth, the cloud regions 
and lower levels of the air, 6 maxupepéotatos Kal mpocyerdTatos anp 
(Corn., ND. 5, p. 4, 17 L; other exx, in- Heinze, ) Xenokragl4 see 
Here the ‘‘unwise’”’ souls (the moister, less buoyant ones) are supposed 
to remain after death (circa terram as Tert., An. 54 says, alluding to 
Stoic doctrine—and this is obviously where the zufevi mentioned at 
the end of the same chapter are situated). This ayjp (distinguished 
from the higher regions of the air) = a@$ns, must have been what Zeno 
referred to when he spoke of the loca tenebrosa where the souls of the 
unwise have to expiate their folly (quoted and varied by Lact., Insé. 7, 
7, 13, in a Platonic sense [i, 40 Arn.]). 

°3, Abode of the souls in the air; Sy.H., M. 1, 73>. Cic!, TDaiaa ee 
both probably after Poseid. Cf. sapientum animas in supernis 
mansionibus callocant (Stoici), Tert., dn. 54. Generally 3 eisuaae 
dépa peOlotacGa said of the departed souls, M. Ant. iv, 21. ev 7@ 
TMEplexXovTl . . . Slapevery Tas TOV aTrodavovtwy wuyds, Ar. Did. ap. Eus., 
PE. xv, 822 A [ii, 225 Arn.]. (Gradual ascent to ever higher regions, 
Sen., C. ad Marc. 25, 1—hardly orthodox Stoic doctrine).—The con- 
ception may possibly belong to the older Stoicism, and may underlie 
the opinion of Chrysipp.: odatpoevdets—as fiery perewpa—ras pvyas 


NOTE See lLOm CH ArT bh Ree 517 


peta Odvarov yivecOa, ap. Eust., JJ. 1288, 10 f. [224 Arn.]. Poseid. 
seems to have worked it out further, probably making use also of 
Pythagorean and Platonic fancies to which he was distinctly inclined. 
The Pythagoreans had fancies about the souls hovering in the air 
(see above, chap. xi, n. 35), of the sun and moon as places where the 
souls lived (chap. x, n. 76). Acc. to Poseid. the souls inhabit z6év 
to ceAnvnv tomov (S.E., M. ix, 73) as suitable for divine but not 
perfect creatures. It is the souls who are meant when people speak 
of daipoves (S.E. § 74), or qowes (Stoic in this use D.L. vi, 151 fii, 
320 Arn.]); cf. heroes et lares et genii, Varro using Stoic language 
(ap. Aug., CD. vii, 6, p. 282, 14 Domb.). The whole air is full of 
them: Pos. ap. Cic., Div. i, 64. Something very similar given as 
Pythag. doctrine by Alex. Polyh. ap. D.L viii, 32: see above, chap. xi, 
n. 35. But Poseidonios (esp. if he is really the source of the Ciceronian 
Somn. Scip.) seems to have emulated more particularly the imaginative 
efforts of Herakleides Pont. and his story of Empedotimos’ vision (see 
above, chap. ix, n. 111). Herakl. contributed largely to popularizing 
the idea that the souls inhabit the air and giving it shape; the 
interest with which his fancies were studied is shown by the quotations 
from his book so common from Varro down to Proclus and Damascius. 
He must have been led to make the souls, on being freed from the 
body, float upwards (and occupy the stars or the moon—which are 
inhabitable heavenly bodies: Dow. 343, 7 ff. ; 356a, 10) by the view— 
just as the Stoics after him were—that the soul is an al@épiov cpa 
(Philop.)—d¢wroedys, a lumen, Tert., An. 9. In this he is following 
an idea that had been common in the fifth century (held by 
Xenophanes, Epicharmos, Eurip.: see above, p. 436 ff.), and had 
even attained popular vogue. This idea from the very first led 
to the conclusion that the soul, when ready for it, enters els rov 
Opotov aifépa and ascends to the upper regions (of the aether). 
Herakleides carried this idea further and embellished it with philo- 
sophical and astronomical fancies. (On another occasion he seems 
to have denied substance and consistency to individual “‘ souls ’”’: 
Plu., Mor. v, p. 699 Wytt.—a view to which his doctrine of the 
é6yxo. might easily have led him.) VPoseidonios then took up this 
idea of Herakl. In this way, or at least not uninfluenced by this semi- 
philosophical literature, the belief in the abode of the “‘ souls’ in the 
aether attained the popularity that grave inscriptions witness for it 
(see below, ch. xiv, 2, n. 135). 

54 Cicero, following Poseid., imagines a blissful observation of the 
earth and the stars by the souls in the air: TD. i, 44-7 (cf. Sen., 
C. ad Marc. 25, 1-2); and similarly in Somn. Sci.; in both cases 
the idea certainly comes from Herakl. Pont. 

55 gaéomaupa Tob Oeod [i, 36 Arn.]. 

56 A frequently repeated Stoic dogma (stated with particular fullness 
by Senec., Ep..93): see Gataker on M. Ant. (iii, 7), p. 108-9. The 
happiness of the (Stoic) wise man does not require phKos Blov téXevov 
as Aristot. had maintained (see above, n. 32). In this point Stoic 
and Epicurean doctrine fully agreed: magni artificis est. clusisse 
totum in exiguo: tantum sapienti sua, quantum deo omnis aetas 
Datei mele). 00.1 1s and)see: below, 0:92); 

57 Acc. to Panaitios there are duo genera in the soul which he calls 
inflammata anima (Cic., TD. i, 42). It is at any rate very probable 
that Panaitios (and Boéthos—roughly contemporary with Pan.: 
see Comparetti, Ind. Stoic., p. 78 f£.—acc. to Macr., in S. Scip. 1, 14, 
20) regarded the soul as compounded of two elements, aey et ignis, not 


518 NOTES? TOSCHARTR REY 


as a single and uncompounded mveipa evfeppov as the older Stoa had 
taught (see Schmekel, Philos. d. mittl. Stoa, 324 f.). 

58 duos and puyy: Pan. ap. Nemes., NH., p. 212 Matth. This 
clearly shows a tendency to a psychological dualism: Zeller, Stovcs 
and Epicureans, p. 542 f. What further suggestions were made by 
Pan. about the division of the soul remains very problematical. The 
only more precise statement is Cicero’s, 7D. i, 80 (speaking of 
Pan.), aegritudines iras libidinesque semotas a mente et disclusas 

utat. 

Beso Panaitios denied not merely the immortality but even the d:apovy 
of the soul after death: Cic., 7D. 1, 78-9. Two reasons are there 
given: everything that has come into being (like the soul of man at 
birth) must also perish—the Aristotelian principle: see above, n. 25 ; 
what can feel pain (as the soul does) must become diseased and what 
is diseased must eventually perish. (Here the distruction of the soul 
from its own inward decay is asserted—not from the effect of external 
force at the world conflagration, the periodic occurrence of which Pan. 
at least called in question.) Acc. to Schmekel (mzttl. Stoa, p. 309) 
it follows from Cic., 7D. i, 42, that Panaitios also added a third 
argument: that the soul being composite must suffer the dissolution 
of its parts in death which change into other elements. This does 
not indeed at all follow from the passage, but such a view would 
almost have been inevitable with Panaitios’ doctrine of the soul 
and had already been suggested by Karneades in his polemic against 
the indestructibility of the divine and of every €gov—an argument 
to which Pan. on the whole yielded. 

60 Poseidonios distinguished in the human soul not three parts 
but three duvamers pds ovatas ex THs Kapdias oppwpevyns (Gal. v, 515), 
namely, the Platonic three, the Aoyrotixdv, Ovpoerdés, EmrOvpntiKov 
(Gal. v, 476). The last two are the dvvdpers dAoyor (they only give 
gavracias the special forms taken by their impulses: Gal. v, 474, 
399). The way are not judgments nor the consequences of judg- 
ment but the motions (xwwoes) of these duvdpers aAoyou (Gal. v, 429 ; 
cf. 378). In this way alone is it possible to understand how passion 
or wrong-doing can arise in man ; it is because soul is not (as Chrysipp. 
had taught) pure reasoning power (cf. also Gal. iv, 820). There exists 
then in man an ddoyov kal Kaxddatpov Kai a0eov in addition to the 
Saipwv ovyyevis TH TOv OArAov Kdopov. dtorxodv7t: Gal. v, 469 f. How, 
indeed, this is possible when the soul is a single ovo/a and in its nature 
nothing but divine zvedya it is difficult to say.—Pos. too was quite 
ignorant of an evil principle in the world, not the divine or contrary 
to the divine principle. The ethical teaching of Stoicism had always 
contained a dualism which is here transferred to the physical doctrine 
where it was originally unknown. From the time of Pos. there is 
an ever growing tendency to emphasize the contrast (which was, 
however, always familiar to the older Stoics as well) between “‘ soul ” 
and “body ’’, the imutilis caro ac fiuida, Pos. ap. Sen., Ep. 92, 10. 
In view of this contrast the “‘ soul”’ too is no longer said to come into 
being with the body or with the physical conception of the individual 
(cf. yeyovévar THv wuyny Kal pwetayeveotépay eivat [Tod ow patos], Chrysipp. 
ap. Plu., Sto. Rep. 1053 D fi, 222 Arn.]), but rather to have been 
living before that, in the separate life of the divine. It is no- 
where expressly or authoritatively stated that Poseidonios held the 

pre-existence’”’ of the “‘soul’’; but that view has been rightly 
attributed to him, fitting in as it does with his other ideas, and because 
it is often introduced and taken for granted in those passages where 


7 


NOAH S wlOy CHAT EE RIG XLV. 519 


Cicero or Seneca are following Pos. (see Corssen, de Pos. Rhod., p. 25 ff. 
But we may not read the doctrine of pre-existence into S.E., M. ix, 
71, as Heinze, Xenok. 134, 2, does). If the soul-dSaéuwv was in 
existence before its incarnation it can presumably only enter the body 
with the conception of the individual life Ovpafev, tractus extrinsecus 
as Cic. puts it, Div. ii, 119; a passage obviously related (as Bonh6ffer, 
Epikt. 79 remarks) to the statement in Div. i, 64, where he is speaking 
of the tmmortales animt of which the air is full—and there Pos. is 
mentioned by name as the authority. From its pre-existent life in 
the air the “‘soul’’ enters into man. The multitude of individual 
bodiless souls—not only the one impersonal soul-substance of the world 
—were thus living before their évowudrwors, and the Stoic pantheism 
thus turns into a rather questionable ‘“‘pandaemonism’’. On the 
other hand, Poseidonios in opposition to his teacher, Panaitios, adheres 
to the doctrine of the periodic extinction of all life in the one Soul of 
the World, the original Fire: cf. Dov. 388a, 18; b, 19. Holding 
this view he cannot very well have put the origin of each of the 
individual soul-daimones before the beginning of the particular world- 
period in which they live. Nor can the survival of the souls after their 
separation from the body be prolonged beyond the next éxavpwars 
(which makes Cicero’s tmmortales animi inexact: Div. i, 64, after 
Pos.). Thus, although the survival which Panaitios had denied is 
reaffirmed it does not go beyond the qualified doctrine of immortality 
which the older Stoics had held. At the same time Pos. could hold, 
with Chrysipp. and other Stoics, that there was a_ ~szeptodixy 
madvyyeveoia (M. Ant. xi, 1) after the world-conflagration and even 
that each individual man of the previous world-period would be restored 
again in precisely the same place (Chrysipp. ap. Lact., Inst. 7, 23, 3, 
etc, 01, 189 Arm. ; “cla the Orphico-Pythagorean fantasy: above, 
chap. x, n. 47). But this would not amount to an aéavaciéa for the 
individuai: the individual life has been interrupted and is separated 
from its dmwoxaraoracis by a long interval of time.—There is no 
satisfactory reason for assigning to Pos. the belief in a series of 
petevowpatwoes Of the soul—as Heinze does, Xen. 132 ff.—though 
such an idea would not have been hard to arrive at, even while holding 
fast to the doctrine of the final éxmvpwois. But the dubious 
accounts given by many dofoypador of Stoic teaching on the question 
of the petayyiopos wuy@v need not necessarily refer to Poseidonios : 
nor are we bound to draw this conclusion because they reappear in 
Plutarch. Plu. does indeed here and there follow Poseidonios, but he 
never hesitates to add Platonic ideas or fancies of his own invention, 
a fact which makes it most risky to attempt to fix an exact source for 
any particular detail in his variegated mosaic. 

61 Schmekel (Phil. d. mitil. Stoa, 1892) maintains convincingly that 
Panaitios was led to his view of the nature and fate of the soul chiefly 
by the polemic of Karneades against the dogmatic philosophers and 
particularly the Stoics. It is less certain that Poseidonios and his 
heterodox views are influenced by respect for Karneades. It is 
certain, however, that Pos. differs from Chrysipp., and still more 
from Panaitios. There is thus an indirect connexion between him and 
Karneades, to whose criticisms Panaitios had in the most essential 
points given way. 

62 That Pos. is being used in the first book of Tusc. Disp. is admitted 
on all hands (as to the extent of that use conjecture may indeed be 
various). It is at least very possible in the case of Somn. Scip. (see 
Corssen, Pos. 40 ff.).—The attraction of such theories of immortality 


520 NOES miiO RC HAN Bil hae cy) 


remained an aesthetic one with Cicero (and probably among all the 
cultured of his age and social circle). Where he is not speaking 
rhetorically or in pursuance of a literary pose—in his letters esp.— 
he shows no trace of the conviction that he defends at other times 
with so much ardour (see Boissier, Rel. rom. @ Aug. aux Ant. i, 58 £.). 

88 63 Kata wAjv mapataéiv, arAa AedAoyitopevws Kal cepvds though 
not always quite dtpayddws (M. Ant. xi, 3). 

64 Julius Kanus when condemned to death by Gaius only attempts 
to enguive whether there is any truth in the belief in immortality : 
Sen., Tv. An. 14, 8-9. De natura animae et dissociatione spiritus 
corporisque inquirebat Thrasea Paetus, before his execution, with 
his instructor Demetrius the Cynic: Tac., A. xvi, 34. They have 
no firm conviction in these matters that might serve to explain or 
account for their heroism (Cato reads the Phaedo before his suicide: 
Plu., Cat. min. 68, 70). 

65 nos quoque felices animae et aeterna sortitae says the soul of 
her father to Marcia: Sen,, C. ad Marc. 26, 7, in antiqua elementa 
vertemur at the éxmtpwots. 

SOP SCN AL Py OO, 104s 

67 bellum somnium, Sen., Ep. 102, 2. 

68 Where Seneca admits more positive conceptions of a life after 
death he never goes beyond a fortasse, si modo vera sapientium fama 
est (Ep. 63, 16); a deliberate concession to the consensus hominum 
(Ep. 117, 6) or the opiniones magnorum virorum tem gratissimam 
promittentium magis quam probantium (£p. 102, 3). Following the 
conventional style of consolatory discourses he gives such expressions 
a more vivid turn in the Consolationes: e.g. Marc. 25, 1 ff.; Helv. 
11, 7; Polyb. 9, 8. But even there the idea of personal immortality 
hardly seems to be taken seriously. In the same pieces death is com- 
mended simply as putting an end to all pain, and, in fact, to all 
sensation: Marc. 19, 4-5. In death we become again as we were 
before being born, Marc. 19, 5; cf. Ep. 54, 4, mors est non esse. id 
quale sit iam scio. hoc erit post me quod ante me fuit; and Ep. 77, 
11, non eris: nec fuisti. So that whether death is a fints or a transitus, 
(Prov. 6,6; Ep. 65, 24), it is equally welcome to the wise man who 
has made the most of his life, however short it may have been. 
Whether he goes then to the gods or whether on the other hand nothing 
is left of the mortal creature after death aeque magnum animum 
habebit (Ep. 93, 10); cf. nunquam magis divinum est (pectus 
humanum) quam ubi mortalitatem suam cogitat, et scit in hoc 
natum hominem ut vita defungeretur cet., (Ep. 120, 14); ipsum 
perire non est magnum. anima in expedito est habenda (QN. 6, 32, 5) ; 
to be ready is everything.—Of the old Stoic dogmas the only one that 
seems to remain certain for Seneca is that of waduyyevecia at the new 
creation of the world, Ep. 36, 10-11: mors intermittit vitam, non 
eripit : venit iterum qui nos in lucem reponat dies; but that is not 
in any way a consolation: multi recusarent nisi oblitos reduceret. 
Consciousness ceases with the coming of death in this world-period. 

69 Tt is very rarely that the utterances of the Emperor on the subject 
of what happens after death resemble those of a convinced Stoic of 
the old school. The souls are all parts of the one voepa puyx7 of the 
world which though extended over so many individual souls yet 
remains a unity (ix, 8; xii, 30). After death the individual soul will 
survive for a period in the air until it is merged into the universal 
soul efs tov t&v dAav omeppatixov Adyov (iv, 21). This implies 
the survival of the personal self for an undefined period, but it is 


NODE Ss LOM GH ART EH Raa TV. 521 


not a fixed conviction of M. Ant. As a rule he allows the choice 
between oféo.s 7 weTdoraats, i.e. immediate extinction and merging 
of the individual soul (Panait.) or its removal into a temporary abode 
of the souls in the air (at els tov dépa pebtoradpevar wvyai, iv, 21; cf. 
v, 53). Or else the choice is between oBéots, weraoracs (both in agree- 
ment with the Stoic doctrine of the €ywars of the soul) or oxedacpos of 
tne soul-elements, in case the atomists are right (vii, 325 viii, 25; 
vi, 24)—a dilemma which really comes down to oxedacpos or oBéats 
(= AndOjvat eis rods Tob Kdcmou omEppatiKods Adyous) ; and peradataats 
falls out. This is probably the meaning also of x, 7: rot oxedacpos 
oToLyetwy 7 Tpomy (in which ro mvevyarixdy disappears els TO depades) 
and zpomy only of the last mvevparixdy that man preserves in himself : 
for here (at the end of the chapter) the identity of the individual soul 
with itself is given up in the Herakleitean manner (see above, 
p. 370). Sometimes the choice is presented between dvacAnola or 
erepos Bios after death (iii, 3) or ata@ynots érepoia in an adAdAotov Cdov 
(viii, 58). This is no allusion to metempsychosis (in which the envelope 
into which the soul goes is another but its aio@nous does not become 
érepota) : it means the turning of the soul-pneuma, exhaled in death, 
to new forms of life united to the previous forms by no identity of 
soul-personality. In this case we can indeed say rod Civ od wavon: 
but there can be no idea of the survival of the personal ego. 7 Tv 
chav dvats exchanges and redistributes its elements; all things are 
changing (viii, 6; ix, 28). The Emperor never seriously thinks of 
the survival of personality ; he seeks rather to inquire why things 
are as they are; but he never doubts that as a matter of fact even 
the noblest of mankind must also “‘ go out’? completely with death 
(xii, 5). Everything changes and one thing perishes to make way 
for another (xii, 21); and so each man must say to himself per’ od 
mToAD ovdeis ovdapod é€aoy (xii, 21; viii, 5). The wise man will say it 
with calmness: his soul is €rotuos eav 78n amodAvOjvat én Tod cd paros 

. xi, 3. Living among men to whom his way of thought is strange 
(ev 7TH Stadwvia ris ovpfidcews) he sighs at times Oarrov Edfots, & 
Havarens ome ixs OF cts bonhoner, EL pint: usd. Stoa, 59 ff. 

70 T shall die without resisting God eldws 6te TO yevdopevov Kat 
P0apjAvar Set. od yap eiur atwy adrX dvOpwmos, pépos TOV TavTwWY ws 
wpa nuépas* evorhval pe det ws Tv Wpav Kat tapedOciv ws wpa, 
Epictet. ii, 5, 13. The present must make way for the future ty’ 
% meptodos avintat Tob Kdcpov, li, 17-18; iv, 1, 106. Death brings 
with it not complete destruction, odk dmdAccav, but THv mporépwv ets 
érepa petaBodads, iii, 24, 91-4. But the personality of the now living 
individual does indeed perish completely in death.—Cf. Bonhd6ffer, 
Epiktet, 65 f.; cf. also the same author’s Ethth des Epthtet, p. 26 ff., 
52 (1894). 

71 Cornutus ap. Stob., Ecl. 1, 383, 24-384, 2 W. 

72 The puyy a odpa (the only dowparov is empty space which is 
merely a passage way for the owyara), D.L. x, 67 [p. 21 Us.]. It is 
a o@pa AerTopepes, map’ dAov TO GOporcpa (i.e. Of atoms to a body) 
mapeatrappevov, mpoceudepeotatov de mrevpate Oeppod tiva Kpdow 
eVoutte eliaxs Oo.9°Gt. Lucr. lii9l 26a more precise is ii,, 231-46. 
It is the d@potcpa which tiv uy oreyaler, D.L. x, 64. vas quasi 
constitit eius, Lucr. iii, 440, 555. 

AMER iores SERCO ES haeey TUG) wae 

74 The ddoyov 6 év tO otrw@ mapéomapta owpartt, To S€ AoyiKov 
év 7® Odpaxit, Sch. D.L. x, 67 (p. 21 Us.), fr. 312, 313 Us. anima 
and animus, Lucr. iii, 136 ff. The anima, though it is diminished 


522 NOTES OAC04 Ea hia aly, 


when the man loses his limbs (in which it inheres), yet allows him to 
remain alive. The animus, however, vitat claustra coercens, must 
not be diminished otherwise the anima escapes as well and the man 
dies: Lucr. iii, 396 ff. The animus with its perceptions is more 
independent of anima and corpus than they are of it: Lucr. iii, 145 ff. 

7 Lucr. ili, 421-4. 

(eMIsUCKotiiieg 44 On tie 

77 The soul dcaumeiperat, Avopévov tod cAov abpofoparos and cannot 
retain any aicfnows apart from its a@po.cpa, D.L. x, 65-6. The 
winds disperse it: Lucr. iti, 506 ff. Kxazvod dixnv oxidvara, Epicur. 
fv. 337. ceu fumits, Lucr. iii, 446-583. 

78 radicitus e vita se tollit et eicit, Lucr. iii, 877. 

79 Lucr. iii, 854-60; 847-53. 

80 ode tadis dhpovtiety (tov ooddv) fr. 578. Cf. Lucr. iii, 870 ff. 
The way in which the body, deserted by its soul, is buried or disposed 
of is of no consequence: Phld., Mort., p. 41-2 Meki. 

$40) Le xe al 24=5;2 : 

82 6 Oavatos ovdév mpos Huds, TO yap Siartubev avarcOnret, ro Se 
avatoOnroty obdév moos Huds, Ep., Sent. ii; D.L. x, 139 (p. 71 Us.). 
Frequently repeated: see Usen., p. 391 f. 

83 dolor and morbus, leti fabricator uterque, affect the soul too, 
Lucr. lii, 459 ff., 470 ff., 484 ff. Nothing that can be broken up into 
parts can be eternal; 640 ff., 667 ff. The chief argument: qued 
cum corpore nascitur, cum corpore intereat necesse est, Ep., fr. 336. 
(They are identical in part with the arguments which Karneades 
directed against the theory of the eternity and indestructibility 
of the highest (gov, God. Karn. must have got them from 
Epicurus.) 

84. ChUEp., oct xt. pols) Laeus, 

85 To be able to see pndev mpos 7uads elvac tTdv Oavatov, amdAavoTov 
move? TO THS Cwhs Ovnrov, odk amEtpov mpoTiMetoa ypdovov aAda Tov TAS 
adavacias adedopéevy 7d00v, D.L. x, 123; cf. Metrod. (?), ed. Korte, 
Dp. 588, col Sax, 

86 veyovapev amag, dis d€ odk E€oTt yevéeoba xrA. hence carpe diem ! 
fr. 204; see also fr. 490-4. Metrod. fr. 53 K. 

Sl) Seog OL. 

88 Against the fear of torment and punishment in the underworld : 
fr. 340-1, cf. Lucr. iii, 1011 ff. (torments such as those fabled of 
Hades exist in this world: iii, 978 ff.). Cf. the letter ot the Epicurean 
Diogenes, Ith. Mus. 47, 428 . . . doBodpat yap oddév (sc. tov Cavaror) 
dua tovs Tirvods cat tods Tavradous ods avaypadovow év ‘’Aidsov tues, 
ovde ppitra THY wdnow (wHdnow the stone) krA. 

89 metus ille foras praeceps Acheruntis agendus, funditus humanam 
qui vitam turbat ab imo, omnia suffundens mortis nigrore neque 
ullam esse voluptatem liquidam puramque reliquit, Lucr. iii, 37 ff. 

9 D.L. x, 126. ridiculum est currere ad mortem taedio vitae, 
fr. 496. 

Pleat ivex witac.woel.. a pn OU see fe 

92 gb 8€ THs atptov odk Wy KUptos avaBadAn Tov Kaipov * oO de 
méavtrwy Bios weAAnou@ mapamddAAuTa . . . fr. 204. 

*§ Negat Epicurus ne diuturnitatem quidem temporis ad beate 
vivendum aliquid afferre, nec minorem voluptatem percipi in brevitate 
temporis quam si sit illa sempiterna, Cic., Fin. ii, 87; cf. Ep., Sent. 
xix (p. 75 Us.). xpodvov od rov pyKtorov aAAad Tov FdtoTov Kapmilerat 
(6 goddos): D.L. x, 126.—quae mala nos subigit vitai tanta cupido, 
Lucr. iii, 1077. eadem sunt omnia semper, 945. 


NOTH ome On CHAEL TREX: 523 


94 ¢ 8 t \ Mi , , \ vey ” a 
of] tavola . « »« TOV TAVTEAN Biov TTAPEOKEVACEV KQAL OVOEV ETL TOV 


ameipov xpovouv mpocedenOn, Sent. xx (p. 75 Us.). 

% ovK €oTe guotky Kowwwvia tots Aoytxots mpos aAAHAovs.—sibi 
quemque consulere, fr. 523. Aloofness from tats t&v mAnIadv aoxais 
frr. 554, 552, 9. 

96 ¢ / id ~A Cptinn. a ? eo X Ld “A LAN’ 

of vopor xdpw T&v cod@y xKeivrar, otx Omws pw} adiK@ov, a 
4 A 7¢ n 530 
Omws pr adixdvra, fr. : 
“ e > 5 \ / , 

87 odKkéte Set owlev rods “EAXnvas, 0b8’ e€mi codia atefavwy map 

avrots tuyxavey . . . Metrod. fr. 41. 


CA IVE gee olay 
jesawacih 1M! 


POPULAR BELIEF 


Philosophic teaching and the philosophic outlook were 
at this time by no means confined exclusively to the narrow 
circles dominated by particular schools. Never more widely 
or more effectively than in this Hellenistic period did 
philosophy in one shape or another provide the basis and 
common medium of a culture that no one of moderate wealth 
and leisure would willingly be without. Such ideas as educated 
people of the time generally possessed, dealing in a more 
connected and definite form with the things of this life and 
existence that lie beyond the scope of immediate perception, 
were all drawn from the teaching of philosophy. Toa certain 
extent this is true also of the current views as to the nature 
and destiny of the soul. But in the region of the unknowable 
philosophy can never entirely replace or suppress the natural 
—the irrational beliefs—of mankind. Such beliefs were in 
their natural element in dealing with such subjects. They 
influenced even the philosophically enlightened and their 
authority was supreme with the many who in every age are 
incapable of understanding the disinterested search for 
knowledge. Even in this supreme period of universal 
philosophic culture, popular beliefs about the soul still 
remained in force, unmodified by the speculations or the 
exhortations of philosophers. 

They had their roots—these beliefs—not in any form of 
speculative thought but in the practice of the Cult of Souls : 
and that Cult, as it has been described 1 for an earlier stage 
of Greek life, still went on unaltered and with undiminished 
vigour. This may be asserted with confidence, though 
we can produce no very important evidence from the literature 
of this later period. The character and content of that 
literature is such that we should hardly expect to find such 
evidence in it. But for the most part the literary evidence 
from which we were able to illustrate the Cult of Souls in an 
earlier period may be taken to apply equally to the age 
with which we are now dealing. Even in its final years 
Lucian’s pamphlet On Mourning bears express witness 
to the survival of the ancient and sanctified usages in their 
fullest compass. We hear again of the washing, anointing, 


POPULAR BELIEF 525 


and crowning of the dead, the ceremonious lying-in-state 
upon the bier, the violent and extravagant lament over 
the dead body, and all the traditional customis that are still 
in full force. Last comes the solemn interment of the body— 
the articles of luxury burnt together with the corpse of the 
dead man or buried with him in the grave—articles that had 
once belonged to him and which he is supposed to enjoy even 
in death—the feeding of the helpless soul of the dead with 
libations of wine and burnt-offerings—the ritual fasting of 
the relatives only broken, after three days, in the Banquet 
of the Dead.” 

The dead man must not be deprived of a single one of 
“the customary things ’’—only so can his well-being be 
fully secured.’ The most important of these is the solemn 
interment of the body. This is carried out not only by the 
family of the dead man, but in many cases also by the society 
to which he may have belonged.* In these times when the 
cities sought to make up for the loss of more serious interests 
in their life by an often touching care for the immediate and 
the insignificant, deserving citizens were frequently honoured 
with elaborate funeral processions in which the municipality 
took part ;*® the city fathers would then probably decree 
that representatives should be sent to the survivors and 
commissioned to express the sympathy of the city in their 
loss and distract their minds from their grief by a speech. 

The ritual act of burial, the object of so much pious zeal, 
was the very reverse of the indifferent matter that philo- 
sophy loved to represent it.? The sanctity of the place 
where rests the dead is also a matter of great importance, 
not only for the dead man himself but for the rest of the family 
which desires to be still united in the life of the spirit world, 
and so inhabits a common burial-ground (generally outside 
the city, very rarely within,® but sometimes, even yet, actually 
inside the house). The founder of a family-grave desires 
the members of it to be joined together in the same grave 
for at least three generations.!° Those who have a right to 
be buried there take steps—religious and legal or municipal— 
against the profanation of this family tomb and sanctuary 
by the burying in it of strangers or the pillaging of the vault— 
a practice that became increasingly common in the final period 
of the antique world" There are innumerable grave- 
notices threatening money penalties in accordance with the 
ancient law of the city, to be paid into the public treasury 
by those who violate the peace of the grave.” Noless common 
are the inscriptions which place the grave and its sanctity 


526°) THE (LATER VAGE* OP@THE GREEKS WOREE 


under the protection of the underworld deities, invoking 
at the same time the most shocking curses—torments and 
calamities both temporal and eternal—against profaners 
of the holiness of the tomb.® Especially the inhabitants 
of certain districts of Asia Minor, only very superficially 
Hellenized, give themselves free rein in the accumulation of 
such violent execrations. In their case the dark superstitions 
of ancestral and native worship of gods or spirits may 
have infected the Hellenes also—it is often the Greeks who 
become barbarian rather than the barbarians who are 
Hellenized in the history of Greek relations with these 
stubborn and barbarous native populations.14 But even 
in lands where the Greek population has maintained itself 
without admixture such- execrations are occasionally to be 
found in graves. 

As time went on and the sanctity and peace of the grave 
began to be more and more seriously threatened, measures 
of all kinds were taken for its protection. The grave is no 
mere chamber of corruption: the souls of the dead dwell 
there,!° and therefore is it holy; as a sanctuary it becomes 
completely sanctified when it has received the last member 
of the family, and is enclosed for ever.1® The family so long 
as it lasts continues to pay the regular Soul-Cult to its 
ancestors ;17 sometimes special foundations ensure the 
payment for ever !8 of the Soul-Cult of which the dead have 
need.19 Even those whose burial place lies far away from 
the graves of their own family?° are not entirely deprived 
of benevolent care and cult. 

The pre-supposition of all Cult of Souls—that the dead 
survive to enjoy at least a gloomy sepulchral existence in 
their last resting-place—is everywhere vividly implied. 
It speaks to us with archaic simplicity from those grave- 
stones upon which the dead, as though still accessible to the 
sounds of the human voice and able to understand the words 
of the living, are addressed with the customary words of 
greeting.“ Sometimes the dead man himself is provided 
with a similar greeting which he is supposed to address to the 
passers-by 7*—between him, confined to his grave, and the 
others who still walk about in the daylight a dialogue takes 
place.22 The dead man is not entirely cut off from the 
affairs of the upper world. He feels an access of fresh 
life when he is called by the name that he had once borne 
in his: life-time, and the memory of which is now preserved 
only by his gravestone. His fellow-citizens call upon him 
three times by name at his burial ; 24 but even in the grave 


FORGPAL BDETInE 527 


he is capable of hearing the precious sound. On a gravestone 
at Athens ®° the dead man enjoins upon the members of the 
actors’ guild to which he had belonged to call upon his name 
in chorus whenever they pass by his grave, and to gladden 
him with the sound of hand-clapping, to which he had been 
accustomed in life. At other times the passer-by “ kisses 
his hand” #6 to the dead man; a gesture which denotes 
the honour paid to a Hero.?” The soul is not merely alive ; 
it belongs now, as primitive and age-long belief expressed it, 
to the Higher and Mightier Ones.?8 Perhaps this exaltation 
of the wrath and power of the dead is the meaning of the 
custom by which the dead are called the Good, the Honest 
(xenorot). This usage must have become established at an 
early period,?* but it 1s not until these later days that it is 
first employed as an addition to the simple words of greeting 
addressed to the dead on gravestones. In this use it is not 
uniformly current: it is rare in Attica (at least, on graves 
of natives of that country) ; whereas in Boeotia, Thessaly, 
and the countries of Asia Minor it is frequent and almost 
universal.?® In fact it is natural to suppose *! that this mode 
of address, originally a euphemistic title addressed to the 
ghosts of the dead who were conceived as quite capable of 
acting in a manner the very reverse of that attributed to 
them by the word, was intended to suggest the power 
belonging to the personality so addressed as one who has. 
risen to a higher form of existence—and to venerate him with 
becoming awe.?? 


§ 2 


The conception of the departed spirit as one who has been 
raised to a higher state of dignity and power receives clearer 
and more conscious expression where the departed one is 
called a Hero. 

This class of intermediate beings standing on the border 
line between mankind and godhead—the world of the Heroes— 
was in no danger of extinction at this period of Greek religious. 
belief. The attitude of mind that could think of certain 
special souls as withdrawn from the limitations of visible 
existence and raised to a higher spiritual state remained 
still vigorous and was even able to give birth to new 
conceptions. 

In its original and proper sense the name Heros never 
indicated an independent and self-sufficient spirit. Archegetes, 
‘“leader’’ or ‘‘originator”’, is his real and distinctive title. 
The Hevos stands at the beginning of a series, taking its origin 


528 SHE CATE RS AGH 4Ole sD he Gk Bish. Pere 


from him, of mortal men for whom he is the leader and 
“ancestor ’’. The genuine Heroes are the ancestors, whether 
real or imaginary, of a family or a house; in the “ Heroes ”’, 
after whom they wish to be called, the members of a society, 
a clan, or even a whole race honour the archegetai of those 
groups. They are always men of power and influence, 
prominent and distinguished from other men, who are 
regarded as having thus entered into the life of Heroes after 
their death. And even in later times the Heroes of a more 
recent elevation, though they may no longer be the leaders 
of a train of descendants taking their origin from them, 
are yet regarded as distinguished from the people who worship 
them by: their peculiar virtue and dignity. To become 
a Heros after death was-a privilege reserved for a few great 
and uncommon personalities who even in their lifetime were 
not as other men were. 

The companies of these old and specially chosen Heroes 
did not suffer the fate of forgetfulness which would have 
been their second and real death. The love of country and 
city, undying among the Greeks, attached itself in reverent 
memory to the illuminated spirits of the past who had once 
protected and defended their native land. When Messene 
was refounded in the fourth century the Heroes of the country 
were solemnly called upon to become inhabitants of the city 
as they had been before—more particularly Aristomenes, 
the never-forgotten champion of Messenian freedom.%% 
Even at Leuctra he had appeared in the melée of the fight, 
doing -battle for the Thebans:** Betore ~theggbagies 
Epameinondas had secured the favour of the Heroines of 
the place, the daughters of Skedasos, by means of prayer 
and sacrifice.*° These were events of the last heroic age 
of Greek history, but the cult and memory of the local Heroes 
of the Greek countries survived into a much later age. 
Leonidas was worshipped by the people of Sparta for many 
centuries,?® and the champions of the Persian Wars, the 
saviours of Hellas, were worshipped by their remote 
descendants.3” Even in imperial times the inhabitants 
of the island of Kos still worshipped those who had fallen 
to secure their freedom centuries before.?8 Such individual 
cases allow us to see what was the general rule: the memory 
and cult of a Hero lived on as long as the community remained 
in existence whose duty it was to maintain his worship. 
Even those Heroes—-a class by themselves—who have 
secured their immortality through their fame in ancient 
poetry °° still retained their cult undiminished. The heroic 


Pe OMACD Es Mae o de desieg Moya! 529 


figure of Hektor still preserved life and reality for his 
worshippers in the Troad or at Thebes.4® Even in the third 
century of our era the district of Troy and the neighbouring 
coasts of Europe still kept fresh the memory and the cult 
of the Heroes of Epic renown.*4 Of Achilles, who had a 
special fate, we must speak in another connexion.‘ 

Nor did less splendid figures vanish from the memory of 
their narrower associations of worshippers. Autolykos the 
founder of Sinope retained his cult even in the time of 
Lucullus.*8 At a quite late period the relics of the specially 
popular Heroes of the Pan-Hellenic games were still the subject 
of many superstitions *4 that bear witness to their continued 
influence. Heroes to whom healing powers were ascribed 
continued to do works of healing and to be worshipped, 
and their number was even extended.* Mere local spirits, 
whose very names had been forgotten, nevertheless lost none 
of the honour that came to them from their beneficent 
miracles; such were, for instance, that Philopregmon of 
Poteideia who was celebrated by a late poet,*® or the Hero 
Euodos of Apollinopolis in Egypt who dispensed “ good 
journey’ to those who honoured him in passing by his 
monument.*? 

But all Heroes were not yet reduced to such casual saluta- 
tions from occasional passers-by. In many places 4% the 
regular festivals and sacrifices to Heroes still survived—even 
human sacrifice was still sometimes made to spirits who 
were held capable of special exhibitions of power.*? In 
a few cases the festivals of Heroes are the chief feasts in the 
annual calendar of a city.°° The names of Heroes quite as 
much as of Gods were used in oath-taking *4 at treaties made 
by Greek cities so long as they retained their independence. 
Foundations were dedicated to the honour of Gods and Heroes 
together.>2 Cult associations called themselves after the 
Heroes they met to worship.°? Special priests of certain 
Heroes were regularly appointed.°4 Even in the second 
century, in his book of travels, Pausanias is able to inform us 
of not a few Heroes whose cult, as he distinctly says, had 
gone on unbroken in their cities down to his own day.®° 
The annual festival of the Heroes who had fallen at Plataea 
was still celebrated with the greatest pomp in the time of 
Plutarch, who describes every detail of its archaic ceremonial.°® 
And at Sikyon, at the same time, the Heroic festival of 
Aratos, the founder of the Achzan League, was still celebrated, 
though here the centuries had robbed the occasion of many 
of its former glories.>7 

Mm 


530> THE LATER AGE" Ol "THES GRE RW Oli 


In all such ceremonies it was to a single and definite 
spirit-personality that the devotion of men was offered. 
Each of them received the cult that was due to him by the 
terms of some old-established and sanctified foundation. 
Nothing was further from men’s minds than the loose and 
vague conception, expressed sometimes by ancient writers, 
that all brave men of the past or all outstanding individuals 
of whatever time are to be regarded forthwith as Heroes.58 
It was still clearly and consciously felt that elevation to the 
rank of Hero was not a privilege that belonged as a matter 
of course to any particular class of mankind, but, wherever 
it occurred, was essentially a ratification of quite exceptional 
worth and influence displayed already in the lifetime of the 
Hero. Following this*conception even the Hellenistic age 
added to the number of the Heroes by drawing upon the 
great men of the present. A little earlier Pelopidas and 
Timoleon had been honoured in this way, and now the figures 
of Leosthenes, Kleomenes, and Philopoimen were raised 
to heroic glory.6® Even Aratos, the very incarnation of 
the sobriety of a too matter-of-fact age, at the end of a life 
devoted with ardour but without enduring success to the 
service of his country, was supposed by his countrymen 
to have passed over in a mysterious manner into the realm 
of heroic semi-divinity.© 

As in these cases whole populations honoured individuals 
so also did narrower and much humbler associations, even 
in this rationalist age, elevate their helpers and protectors 
to the rank of Hero and honour them as such. The slaves 
of Kos thus honoured their former comrade and _ leader 
Driniakos ; & at another place there was a Hero who protected 
all refugees who took shelter with him ; * at Ephesos there 
was a Hero who had been a simple shepherd.®* At the time 
of Augustus, a benefactor of his city, Athenodoros, the 
philosopher, had been made a Hero by grateful Tarsians 
after his death.** It sometimes happens that a Hero of 
the distant past may find himself confused with a descendant 
of the same name whom his contemporaries put in the place 
of his own ancestor and worship in his stead.® 

So little were men grown out of the ideas centred round 
the cult of Heroes that, accustomed to the ever-increasing 
adoration of the “‘ Mightier and Better ’’, every age was eager 
to add to their number from the men of the present. They 
did not always wait for the death of the individual so honoured 
before beginning to address him as Heros ; even in his lifetime 
he must enjoy a foretaste of the honour that was destined 


PORUVARKS BERIEE 531 


to be his after his departure from this life. Thus, Lysander 
was saluted as a Hero after his victory by the Greeks whom 
he had lberated from the despotism of Athens; and in the 
Hellenistic age many a fortunate army commander or mighty 
king received the same honour. Of the Romans Flamininus 
the friend of the Greeks was the first to receive it.6* This 
misapplication of the cult of Heroes to the living then became 
still further extended.®’ It may be that sometimes it was 
a real feeling of unusual merit that fired the impulsive 
temperament of the Greeks; but in the end the custom 
became almost a meaningless convention: even private 
individuals were thus called Hero in their lifetime ®8 and 
heroic honours—even the foundation of annual athletic games 
—were granted to living persons almost indiscriminately. °®® 

And at last when it was necessary to honour an individual 
whom the love and passionate regret of a monarch elevated 
to the rank of Hero after his death then, indeed, the age could 
hardly do enough in the hyperbole of pomp and ceremony. 
The funeral honours paid to the dead Hephaistion are an 
extravagant example of this.?° 

If in such cases the limits between the worship of a Hero 
and the adoration of a god seemed almost to have disappeared, 
we still have evidence of individual cases in which the 
survivors, without actually naming them Heroes, offer to their 
much-loved dead a memorial cult that hardly falls short of full 
heroic honours.’! Nor is it only in such cases as these that 
we perceive the signs of a tendency to exalt the Cult of Souls 
everywhere and to approximate it to the worship of ancestors 
in the ancient Cult of Heroes. It emerges clearly enough, 
for all the brevity of their language, from the multitude 
of epitaphic inscriptions in which members of simple citizen 
families are addressed with the title of Heros. At any rate, 
it betokens an increase in the importance and dignity of the 
dead when a tombstone expressly announces that an 
individual citizen has been “heroized”’ by the city after 
his death. And this is what not infrequently happened— 
early in Thera and later on-in many other places as well.” 
The same conclusion must be drawn when we hear of 
associations declaring a dead member to be a Heros; 7 
or when a society recognizes a dead man as Heros on the 
formal motion of an individual.”4 Families, too, become 
accustomed to giving the name to those of their number 
that have died before the rest ; and a son will thus speak 
of his father, parents of a son, and a wife of her husband 
—either informally or by a formal declaration naming 


532.) DEE VATE RAG HO 7 eb HaaG ix Bes vy Gee 


the dead one as Heros.7> A higher and mightier form of 
existence after death must be imagined for the departed 
when he is thus distinguished so explicitly from the 
ordinary multitude of the dead—still more so in those cases 
when the dead man, elevated to a mystic communion with 
higher forms of life, loses his own name and receives in 
exchange that of a Hero of long-standing honour, or even 
that of assodsé 

In every case that is known to us, the “ heroizing ”’ of 
a dead person by the city or a society or the family is carried 
out entirely on the independent authority of those bodies. 
The Delphic Oracle, without whose deciding voice it 
was hardly possible in early times for the company of the 
elect to receive any addition,’? was, in these days when the 
prestige of the oracle had sunk almost to nothing, no longer 
applied to for its sanction. The consequence was hardly 
avoidable that the licence thus accorded to corporations 
and families should widen still further the bounds of the 
Heroes’ kingdom. In the end, these boundaries broke down 
entirely. There were cities and countries where it became 
the custom to apply the title of “Hero” as an epithet of 
honour belonging to all the dead without distinction. It 
seems that this extension of “heroizing’”’ to all the dead first 
became common in Boeotia,’*® though here it was not quite 
universal—-Thespiai was an exception.?® Thessalian grave- 
inscriptions give the fullest evidence for the heroizing of 
the dead of every age and description. But the custom 
spread to every country populated by Greeks; 8° only Athens 
is less unrestrained *! in the bestowal of the title of Hero 
upon the dead—a title which retained no more of the old 
and essential meaning of the word (which perhaps survived 
longest in Athens) than to say that the dead were really 
now dead.* 

In spite of such indiscriminate application the name 
“ Hero ”’ still continued to be something of a title of honour. 
An honour, indeed, that was thus accorded to everyone 
without distinction was in danger of becoming the reverse 
of an honour. But isolated phrases of a naive and popular 
character make it clear that a difference was still felt to 
exist between the “ Hero” and those who were not 
honoured with this distinguishing epithet.s? When the 
name of Hero was thus applied to all the dead, not in excep- 
tional cases but as a rule, the glory and distinction of which 
the idea of the “ Hero’”’ was thus deprived must have 
fallen in some measure upon the individual dead, if they 


, 


BOPUEA RAVBELIET 533 


and the Heroes could meet on common ground. Thus, even 
the dissipation of the heroic honour and its indiscriminate 
application to all the dead is in reality but another 
indication of the fact that even in the decline of the ancient 
world the power and dignity of the departed soul had not 
declined too, but had, on the contrary, grown greater. 


§ 3 

The souls of the departed show their power and the fact that 
they are still alive more particularly in the effect that they 
have on this life and on the living. For the purposes of the 
Cult of Souls they are regarded as confined to the region of 
the inhabited earth ; they continue in the grave or near it, for 
a time or permanently, and can therefore be reached by the 
offerings or the prayers of their living relatives. There can 
be no doubt that at this time men still believed, as they had 
done since the earliest times, in a kindly relationship between 
the family and its departed members, an exchange in which 
offerings were made at the grave by the living and blessings 
vouchsafed by the Unseen. It is true, however, that we 
only have imperfect records of such calm and comfortable 
family belief in the survival of the departed and of the part 
they continue to play in the daily life of their descendants. 

But there is a more sinister variety of intercourse with 
the souls or spirits of the dead. They sometimes appear 
unsought to the living; they can be compelled by the force 
of magic to use their powers in the service of the living. 
Both these possibilities apply more particularly to those 
unquiet souls whom fate or their own hands have deprived 
of life violently and before their time; to those who have 
not been consigned to the peace of the grave by ceremonious 
burial.84 The enlightened of the time do indeed refuse 
to believe in ghosts and haunting spirits of the dead that 
wander without rest about the place of their tragic fate, 
and make their presence disagreeably felt by the living.® 
But the populace, even in such enlightened days, gave the 
fullest credence to stories in which the existence of a 
spirit-world seemed to reveal its sinister reality, trespassing 
at times upon the world of the living. Regular folk-tales 
of spectral apparitions, vagrant ghosts of unfortunate souls, 
vampire-like spirits of the grave,8® are preserved to us in 
some numbers—chiefly such as appealed to a perverted 
philosophy, the imsaniens sapientia of an outworn age, 
as seeming to confirm its fancies of an invisible world between 
heaven and earth. In Lucian’s Lover of Lies the grey-beard 


534 THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD 


philosophers entertain each other in portentous seriousness 
with such communications from the spirit world.’7 Plutarch 
himself is quite seriously convinced of the reality of some 
ghostly appearances.8& Philosophy, which at this time 
was going back to Plato, found in its system of demonology 
a means of making such old wives’ tales intelligible and 
credible to itself. 

Finally, the time arrives when the violent and arbitrary 
interference with the unseen world—sorcery and _spirit- 
raising—becomes a part of orthodox philosophy. The 
popular imagination of the Greeks did not have to wait for 
instruction from their barbarian neighbours, who had reduced 
the irrational to a system, before they could believe in the 
summoning of spirits from the deep. Magic in this sense 
was of extreme antiquity in Greece.®® But in the fusion 
and intermixture of Greeks with barbarians which marked 
the Hellenistic age similar and cognate superstitions from 
all the corners of the earth met together and acquired strength 
from their union. It was foreign sources rather than Greek 
which chiefly contributed to swell the turbid and noxious 
stream of sorceries and spirit-raisings, the practical application 
of an irrational theory of the nature and being of the soul 
in separation from the body. The lofty heaven of the old 
Greek gods was beginning to grow dim before the troubled 
vision of this later age; more and more their place was 
taken by a mob of idols and an obscure rabble of lesser devils. 
In this chaotic medley of Greek and barbarian demonology 
the companies of unquiet souls and ghosts of the dead easily 
found a place. The ghost was no longer an alien when the 
Gods themselves had become ghostly. When both Gods 
and spirits have to answer to the spells of the sorcerer the 
souls of the dead are seldom left in peace.?® We possess 
some relics of the art of spirit-raising in the Greco-Egyptian 
magic books ; and we can now see with our eyes specimens 
which illustrate the practical outcome of this delusion in the 
magic charms and exorcisms that were scratched on tablets 
of lead or gold and placed in the graves—as the natural 
abode of the spirits which were to be compelled—where 
they have been found in considerable quantities in modern 
times. Among the sinister influences that are thus conjured 
to do the work of vengeance, punishment, or destruction 
upon the conjurer’s enemy, the unquiet souls of the dead 
are also regularly mentioned. To them is attributed the 
power and the will to intervene with malevolence and obstruc- 
tion in the life of men, no less than to the other spiritual 


POPULAR BELIEF 535 


powers of heaven and hell in company with whom they are 
summoned. *! 
§ 4 


The Cult of Souls for all its expansion gave no assistance 
to the picturing of what might be the condition of the departed 
souls independently of their connexion with the living. 
Those who troubled themselves about such matters and 
sought further information were obliged to have recourse, 
if not to the systems of theologians and philosophers, then 
to the imaginative accounts and pictures of ancient poetry 
and legend. 

The idea of a distant realm of the souls into which the 
strengthless shadows of those who had departed this life 
disappeared had not lost its hold on the popular imagination 
even of these later ages—difficult as it might be to reconcile 
such an idea with the pre-suppositions of cultus with its 
customary worship and sustenance of the souls confined 
within the grave. The belief in a distant kingdom of the 
dead could not but continue to be current among men for 
whom the Homeric poems remained the earliest manual 
and school-book in the hands of youth and the source of 
instruction and entertainment to every age. The passionate 
indignation with which philosophers of the Stoic as well as 
the Epicurean faith attacked the beliefs resting on the teaching 
of Homer cannot be explained except by supposing that 
Homer and his picture had remained a guiding force with 
the masses who were uninstructed in philosophy. And, 
in fact, ancient writers use language which shows that the 
ancient conception of Hades was by no means discarded 
but on the contrary was still vigorously alive among the 
populace. * 

As to what might go on down below and the general 
appearance of the underworld—these were questions that the 
invention of theological and semi-philosophic fancy, each 
according to its special lights and preconceptions, strove to 
answer in eager competition.94 But such attempts to picture 
the condition of things in the kingdom of the souls—attempts 
which reached their highest point in the elaborate chiaroscuro 
of Vergil’s Hades—remained the exercises of ingenious fancy 
and rarely pretended to be anything else. A distinct and 
authoritative popular system of belief on these points was 
scarcely possible when the orthodox religion of the state 
formally and dogmatically rejected everything of the kind. 

It would, indeed, have been more natural if in connexion 
with the idea of the congregation of souls enclosed in the 


536. THE LATERVAGEVOESTHESGRERK WORE 


kingdom of the underworld deities a belief in a compensatory 
justice to be found in this after-life of the dead, had grown 
up and obtained popular currency. The oppressed and needy 
who feel themselves deprived of their share in this world’s 
goods think only too easily that somewhere there must be 
a place where they too will some day enjoy the fruits that 
others alone are allowed to pluck upon earth—and place 
that ‘“‘somewhere’”’ beyond the boundaries of this world 
and of reality. Pious belief in the gods expects to obtain 
the prize, so often denied upon earth, in a realm of the spirit. 
If indeed such a conviction of a compensatory justice to 
come *—reward of the virtuous and punishment of the 
wicked in a hereafter—was really more widely and seriously 
held in this age than it had been before,®* then the cult of the 
underworld deities as it was practised in the mysteries of 
the states and the various religious societies must have 
contributed in a large degree to bring this about. And 
contrariwise, the belef that the punishing and rewarding 
omnipotence of the gods would be felt in a hereafter must 
have brought an unbroken stream of adherents to those 
mysteries which in fact offered their help and mediation 
in the life to come. Those only could imagine that they had 
detailed knowledge of the enigmas that lie beyond the 
reach of all experience, who could surrender themselves 
entirely to the dogmatic teaching of a closed sect. We 
may in fact take leave to doubt whether the gruesome pictures 
of a place of torment in Hades, with its undying punishment 
in devouring flames, and the similar fancies that later authors 
sometimes express, were in reality anything more than the 
private imaginations with which exclusive and superstitious 
conventicles sought to terrorize their members.®?. The 
charming pictures of a “ Land of Arrival” to which death 
sends the much-tried children of men, may have been more 
widely accepted. Homer, the universal instructor, had 
stamped them upon men’s memories. For the poet the 
Elysian plain had been a place situated upon the surface 
of the earth to which the occasional favour of the gods was. 
able to translate a few of their dearest favourites, that they 
might there enjoy, without seeing death, unending bliss. 9& 
In imitation of the Homeric fancy, the poetry of the following 
ages had imagined the translation of many other Heroes 
and heroic women of the legendary past to a secret life of 
bliss in Elysium or in the Islands of the Blest.9® Later 
fancy, which saw in Elysium the Land of Promise to which 
all men who had lived in a manner pleasing to the gods 


POPULAR bE EIDE 537 


would be taken after their death,}°° now placed its Elysium 
or Islands of the Blest in the interior of the earth beyond 
the reach of all save disembodied souls. In later times this 
became the currently accepted view, but the subject remained 
undefined and subject to variation. Men must still, in 
fact, have imagined The Isles of the Blest, the abode of 
privileged spirits, to be situated upon the surface of the 
earth (though, indeed, far away beyond the limits of the 
discovered countries of the globe), when attempts could be 
made to find the way there and to bring back news to the 
living. The attempt attributed to Sertorius was only the 
most famous of such voyages of discovery.°! Why, indeed, 
should these magic Isles remain for ever undiscovered upon 
the borders of the inhabited world that yet offered so wide 
a field for discovery, when everybody knew of the island 
in the Black Sea, often visited by living men, where Achilles, 
the supreme example of miraculous translation, lived for 
ever in perpetual enjoyment of his youth? For centuries 
the island of Leuké, the separate Elysium of Achilles and a few 
select among the Heroes, was visited and reverenced with 
religious awe.!% Here men thought they could discern 
in immediate perception, and in actual physical contact, 
something of the mysterious existence of blessed spirits. 
The belief in the possibility of miraculous translation to an 
eternity of unbroken union of body and soul, thus palpably 
and visibly substantiated, could not completely die even 
in this prosaic age. The educated did indeed find this con- 
ception so strange and unintelligible that when they come 
to speak of translation legends of the past they profess them- 
selves unable to say what exactly the ancients had supposed to 
occur when such miracles took place.t°% But the populace, 
which finds nothing easier to believe in than the impossible, 
once more naively accepted the miracle. Did not the 
examples of Amphiaraos and Trophonios plainly establish 
the fact of translation to underground retreats? And to 
them as being still alive in their caves beneath the earth 
a cult was offered until an advanced period.1°* The transla- 
tion of beautiful youths to everlasting hfe in the kingdom 
of the nymphs and spirits was the subject of many folk- 
tales.1% Even in contemporary life the miracle of translation 
seemed not altogether impossible.1°* When the kings 
and queens of the Macedonian empire of the East began 
to receive divine honours in imitation of the great Alexander 
himself, it was not long before men ventured to affirm that at 
the end of his earthly existence the Divine Ruler everywhere 


538 "THE LATER AGE OF THEVGREEK WORE 


does not die but is merely ‘carried away’”’ by the gods 
and still lives on.1°? It is the peculiar property of 
divinity, as Plato clearly expresses it,1°8 to live for ever in 
the indivisible unity of body and soul. A court-bred theology 
could the more easily make such demands upon the belief 
of subject peoples in the Semitic East, and possibly in Egypt 
too, because native 1° legends had already told of the 
translation to immortal life of individual men dear to 
the gods and akin to the gods in nature; just as similar 
stories became common in Italian legends too,4° though 
possibly only under the influence of Greek models. Indeed, 
quite apart from obsequious courtliness, Greeks and _ half- 
Greeks were quite capable of entertaining the idea!" that the 
darlings of their fancy, such as Alexander the Great, had 
not suffered death but had been translated alive to the realm 
of imperishable physical existence. This is shown clearly 
enough by the success which attended the appearance, 
in Moesia at the beginning of the third century a.D., of another 
Alexander. This imposter travelled from land to land 
with a great train of Bacchants, and everywhere men believed 
in his identity with the great monarch.¥? A little earlier 
they had believed with equal credulity in the reappearance 
upon earth of the Emperor Nero,!3 who, it was thought, 
had not died but had merely disappeared. When Antinous, 
the beautiful youth beloved by the Emperor Hadrian, sank 
and disappeared in his watery grave he was at once regarded 
as a god who had, in fact, not died but had been translated.1!4 
The miraculous translation of Apollonios of Tyana is reported 
with the utmost seriousness; like the other marvels 
and mysteries in the strange and enigmatic existence of 
this prophetic figure, it found believers enough.1!6 

But such unbroken continuance of the united life of body 
and soul, begun upon earth and carried on in a mysterious 
abode of bliss (the oldest form taken by the idea of human 
immortality in the Greek mind), was never attributed to more 
than a few specially favoured and specially gifted individuals. 
An immortality of the human soul as such, by virtue of its 
nature and composition—as the imperishable force of divinity 
in the mortal body—never became a real part of the belief 
of the Greek populace. When approximations to such 
a belief do occasionally find expression in popular modes 
of thought, it is because a fragment of theology or of the 
universally popular philosophy has penetrated to the lower 
strata of the uninstructed populace. Theology and philosophy 
remained the sole true repositories of the belief in the 


BO RUA Kee biel lhe 539 


immortality of the soul. In the meeting together and con- 
junction of Greek and foreign ideas in the Hellenized Orient 
it was not Greek popular tradition but solely the influence 
of Greek philosophy, that, finding favour even outside the 
limits of Greek nationality, communicated to foreign nations 
the arresting concept of the divine, imperishable vitality 
of the human soul—upon the impressionable Jewish people, 
at least, it had the profoundest and most deeply penetrating 
Rien ce..t! 


§ 5 


All the various mcdes of conceiving the life enjoyed by the 
soul after the death of the body, as they had been explored, 
modified, and developed in the course of centuries, were 
admitted on an equal footing to the consciousness of the 
Greeks in this late period of their maturity. No formulated 
body of religious doctrine had by a process of exclusion 
and definition given the victory to any one conception at 
the expense of the others. But where so much was permitted 
and so little proscribed it is still possible to ask how these 
various formulations of belief, expectation, and hope stood 
in relation to each other. Were any more popular and more 
readily received than others? To answer this question it 
is natural to suppose that we have only to turn to the numerous 
inscriptions from the gravestones of the people. Here, 
especially in these later times, individuals give unhampered 
expression to their own feelings and thus reveal the extent 
and character of popular belief. But information derived 
from this source must be carefully scrutinized if it is not to 
lead to misconception. 

If we pass in imagination through the long rows of streets 
in which the Greeks placed the memorials of their dead, 
and read the inscriptions on the tombstones—they now form 
part of the accumulated treasures of Greek Epigraphy— 
the first thing that must arrest our attention is the complete 
silence maintained by the enormous majority of these 
inscriptions with regard to any hope—however formulated— 
or any expectation of a life of the soul after death. They 
content themselves with recording the name of the dead, 
adding only the name of the father and (in the case of a 
foreigner) the country of the deceased. At the most, the 
custom of some localities may add a “ Farewell ’’. Such 
stubborn silence cannot be satisfactorily explained simply on 
the ground of an economy practised by the surviving relatives 


540 THE LATER® AGE OF “THE GREE KW Ona 


of the deceased (though in some cases a municipal regulation 
against wordy inscriptions may have given countenance 
to such economies).48 The very silence of this people 
that was never at a loss for words to express its meaning 
whether in verse or in prose, is in itself expressive. Where 
so little need was felt to give utterance to hopes of comfort, 
such hopes cannot have been of very vital consequence 
or matters of much assurance. Men rescued from forgetfulness 
only what had been the exclusive property of the individual— 
his name: the appellation which had distinguished him from 
all others in his hfetime and has now become the barest 
and emptiest envelope of the once living personality. Inscrip- 
tions in which precise hopes of a future life are expressed 
form a very small proportion of the great mass of epitaphic 
records. And of these very few again are in prose. Not 
as simple records of plain and authentic fact do such provisions 
and announcements of a blessed and hoped-for futurity 
present themselves. They need the artistic pomp and 
circumstance with which poetic fancy and extravagant 
affection clothe their inspired voyagings beyond the region 
of cold and matter of fact reality. This is certainly significant. 
Even among the poetic epitaphs the majority allude only to 
the life which the deceased has now done with, looking 
back upon the circumstances of his lfe—his fortunes and 
activities and character; giving expression, often with 
the most convincing sincerity, to the regret and dependence 
of the survivors; fixing attention exclusively upon things 
of this world. Wherever, at last, allusion is made to a future 
life, the tendency is rather to let fancy roam far beyond 
the limits of experience and sober reflexion to a vague and 
visionary land of promise. Such lofty aspirations needed more 
than any others the elevated language of verse. But we 
should run the risk of falling into grave error if we concluded 
from the preponderance of such aspirations among the 
metrical epitaphs that these were the normal views of the 
city folk who were their contemporaries. 

The simple and archaic conception which perpetuates 
the old Homeric attitude and views without a complaint 
or a regret the disappearance of the soul of the departed 
into Erebos, is of the rarest occurrence among these sepulchral 
verses.49 More commonly we have the prayer that the 
departed may “rest in peace ’’, expressed in the traditional 
formula 1*°—a formula that really refers to the dead man 
lying in his grave but also contains a further allusion to the 
“soul” that has departed to Hades.1*! The idea is not yet dead 


LOPRUITA Re BELCIET 541 


that there is a realm of the souls which receives the departed— 
Hades, the world ruled over by the Underworld deities, the 
“Chamber ’’ of Persephone, the seat of primeval Night.122 
Here a state of semi-conscious existence is conceived to prevail, 
under the empire of “ Forgetfulness ’’, drinking of which 128 
the consciousness of the soul is darkened. Here “the 
majority ’’ #24 are assembled, and the dead man is visited by 
the reassuring thought that he may greet once more the 
souls of those who have gone before him.!*5 

But sterner conceptions also occur. There is occasional 
reference to a judgment 17° that separates the souls in the 
world below, dividing them into two and sometimes three 127 
classes in accordance with the deserts which they have earned 
on earth. There is no lingering over the pains of the 
damned,!?#8 in the description of which the theological 
imagination had indulged so frequently. A more simple- 
minded fancy did not need such pharisaical satisfaction in 
the misfortunes of sinners in order to heighten its own 
assurance of superiority. There is no trace of a sentiment 
of penitence and terror indulged in for its own sake. The 
soul hopes to come by its rights ; 12° to reach the “ Blessed ”’, 
to arrive at the Isles or the Island of the Blest—to Elysium, 
the abode of Heroes and demi-gods.!° Such hopes are very 
commonly expressed, but as a rule only in a brief phrase 
of confidence and hope. We rarely meet with any elaborate 
or alluring picture of the abode of the blessed.1%! That 
abode is generally placed within the hmits of the underworld 
kingdom of the souls,% and such anticipations, when 
particularized, refer commonly to a “ Place of the Good”, 
which in various forms is represented as the hoped-for dwelling- 
place of future life.1% 

But we also meet with the view that the company of the 
good is entirely removed from the region of underworld 
darkness.4%4 For many individuals the hope is expressed 
or the certainty announced that after death they will have 
their dwelling in the sky—in the shining Aether, among the 
stars. This belief in the elevation of the disembodied soul 
to the regions above the earth is so frequently repeated in 
various forms in this late period that we must suppose that 
among those who entertained precise conceptions of the 
things of the next world this was the most popular and widely 
held conviction.1%° This belief that the soul rises to the 
neighbourhood and even the community of the heavenly 
deities 186 has its origin both in religious aspiration and in 
philosophy. Its roots, indeed, stretch back to a much 


§42 THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD 


earlier period 13? and we may suppose that even in these 
later days it was derived from and very largely supported by 
the popular conception, disseminated by Stoic writers, of 
a living ‘“‘ breath ’’, which composes the human soul, and its 
effort upwards to the heavenly regions.1%8 

But such language is in many cases plainly nothing 
more than a conventional formula which has already lost 
all vital significance; it rarely goes further than the 
expression of a hope that the soul will mount upwards to 
the heavenly heights. Very occasionally, in the adjective 
“immortal ’’ 18° applied to the soul (which only sleeps in 
death),14° we may detect the influence of mixed philosophical 
and theological ideas. We soon come to an end of the 
inscriptions which give expression to the doctrines of theology 
and of theologically minded philosophy as to the divine 
nature of the soul, its brief pilgrimage through earthly life 
and destined return to its true home in a divine incorporeal 
existence.144_ There is no certain mention of a belief in the 
transmigration of souls.14# Of the specifically Platonic 
doctrine or its influence there is scarcely a trace.1*8 

Another type of belief derives its strength not from the 
teachings of philosophers but from the usage and popular 
practice of religion. This is the belief of those who hope 
to be conducted after death to a blessed life by the special 
care of a god, presumably the god to which in their life-time 
they have offered particular devotion. Such a god will 
lead them by the hand, they hope, and conduct them into 
the land of bliss and purity. One who has thus “ obtained 
a god as his leader ”’ 144 may face the future with equanimity. 
Together with Hermes the “‘ messenger of Persephoneia ’’,14 
Persephone herself is most frequently mentioned among 
these conducting deities.14® Perhaps in this we may see 
a reminiscence of the hopes awakened and cherished in the 
Eleusinian and other related mysteries 147—hopes otherwise 
expressed on these tombstones with striking rarity. On the 
epitaph—certainly a late composition—of a Hierophant of 
Eleusis who “ goes to the Immortals ’’, the dead man is made 
to commend, as a mystery revealed by the gods, the ancient 
opinion illustrated by stories ike that of Kleobis and Biton148 
“that death not only brings no evil to mortals, but is rather 
a blessing ’’.149 A gloomy philosophy has in these latter 
days of the old religion and worship of the gods taken hold 
of the mysteries themselves and given them an attitude 
of hostility to human life that was not originally theirs.%? 
We are reminded of the mysteries again when we find prayers 


POR hee bE , 543 


or promises that the dead shall not drink of the water of 
forgetfulness in the realm of the souls, but shall be given the 
“cold water” to drink by the God of the lower world ; that 
he shall be refreshed at the spring of Mnemosyne, the bath of 
immortality, and so preserve intact his memory and con- 
sciousness, the necessary conditions of full and blessed life.1>! 
Here there appears to be a reference to the promises made 
by particular secret cults in which the departed has specially 
recommended himself to the powers of life and death. This 
must plainly be the case when, instead of the Greek Aidoneus, 
there is mention of Osiris, the Egyptian Lord of Souls. ‘“‘ May 
Osiris give you the cold water’’ is a common prayer expressed 
in a formula that is of frequent and significant occurrence 
in late epitaphs.* Of the numerous secret cults of these 
later times that promised a blessed immortality to their 
adherents, there is but infrequent mention in the grave- 
inscriptions : occasionally at the most there is an allusion 
to the special favour, reaching even beyond the grave, which 
belongs to the initiated in the mysteries of Mithras.1*3 

No doubtful promises, but real and practical experience 
forms the basis of the belief of those to whom the dead has 
appeared visibly in a dream to assure them that his “ soul ”’ 
has not been annihilated by death.*4 The oldest proof of 
the continued existence of the soul remains 1n force the longest. 
The pupil hopes for something higher from the master whom 
death has taken away from his sight : he prays to him that, 
as he had once in life, so he will now continue to stand by 
his side, assisting him in the pursuance of his profession 
as a physician—‘ Thou canst, for now thou hast a more 
iicmnespdltue insite. te: 

Expectations of an energetic after-life of the departed soul, 
expressing themselves in many forms, are widely current ; 
but such expectations never achieve a unified, dogmatic 
form. Nor was anyone forbidden to cherish for himself 
and inscribe upon his grave-stone, unorthodox opinions of 
every kind——even though they should point to the very 
opposite of such expectations.!® 

A dubious “If’’ precedes on many epitaphs the anticipation 
of a conscious life of the dead in full possession of the senses, 
or a reward of the dead in accordance with their deserts: 
“if anything yet remains below’’. Such phrases are of very 
frequent occurrence.? Indeed the doubt itself is set aside 
when it is distinctly asserted that after death nothing of the 
man remains alive. All that men say of Hades and its terrors 
or its consolations is the fabled invention of poets ; darkness. 


544 \THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD 


and nothingness is all that awaits us below.!°8 The dead turns 
to ashes or to earth ; * the elements out of which he was 
created take back what is their own.1® Life is only lent 
to man and in death he restores the loan again.1# In 
death he pays tribute to nature.1®* The bitter outcry of the 
survivors against death, the savage beast of prey, loveless 
and pitiless, that has snatched away their dearest from their 
side, shows small hope of the preservation of the vanished 
life.46 Grief and complaint, say others, are vain both for 
the dead and for the living; no man returns; the parting 
effected by death is for ever.1®4 Only submission is left.1® 
“Take comfort, child, no man is immortal ’’—so runs the 
conventional phrase current among the populace and inscribed 
by many upon the graves of their vanished dead.1®* ‘“‘ Once 
I was not, then I was, and now I am no more: what more 
is there to be said ? ’’—so speaks the dead from more than one 
gravestone, addressing the hving who is soon to suffer the 
same fate.1®’ “Live,” he cries to the living, for thepems 
nothing sweeter granted to us mortals than this life in the 
daylight.’’ 18° A last thought reverts once more to the 
life that has been left behind on earth. The body dies, 
personality vanishes, nothing is left alive on earth but the 
memory of the deeds and virtue of the departed.1®* But there 
is a continuance in the life of others, more vital than in the 
empty sound of fame, achieved by him who leaves behind 
him on earth children and children’s children. There are 
many who, in these later ages too, are content, in the true 
spirit of Antiquity, with this blessing and desire no other 
consolation for their own annihilation.!’° 


§ 6 


But such reassertions of the antique temper were of rarer 
andrarer occurrence. The ancient world to which it had given 
such toughness and energy of purpose was on its death-bed. 
With the end of the third and the beginning of the fourth 
century it enters upon its last agony; a general failure of nerve 
had long threatened the loosely bound masses that shared 
in the Greco-Roman civilization. In the general atrophy 
that beset its old age the vigorous blood of the genuine and 
unadultered Greek and Roman stocks was flowing but feebly. 
Now the universal process of decay sets in irresistibly. It 
was its own inherent weakness that made the attacks of 
outside forces so ominous to the old world. In the West 
the old order vanished more swiftly and submitted more 


POPULAR BELIEF 545 


completely to the new forces, than in the Hellenized East. 
It was not that the old civilization was any less rotten in 
the East than in the West. The enfeebled hand and the 
failing mind betray themselves in every utterance—in the 
last spasms of vital energy that inspired the art and literature 
of moribund Greece. The impoverishment of the vital 
forces out of which Greece had once brought forth the flower 
of its special and characteristic spirit makes itself felt in the 
altered relation of the individual to the whole, and of the 
totality of visible life to the shadowy powers of the unseen 
world. Individualism has had its day. No longer is the 
emancipation of the individual the object of man’s endeavour ; 
no longer is he required to arm himself against all that is not 
himself, that is outside the region of his free will and choice. 
He is not strong enough, and should not feel himself strong 
enough, to trust to the self-conscious strength of his own 
intelligence. Authority—an authority that is the same for all— 
must be his guide. Rationalism is dead. In the last years of 
the second century a religious reaction begins to assert 
itself and makes itself felt more and more in the period that 
follows. Philosophy itself becomes at last a religion, drawing 
its nourishment from surmise and revelation. The invisible 
world wins the day over the meagre present, so grievously 
bound down by the limitation of mere experience. No longer 
does the soul await with courage and calmness whatever may 
be hidden behind the dark curtain of death. Life seemed to 
need something to complete it. And how faded and grey 
life had become !7!—a rejuvenation upon this earth seemed to 
Demouimol =the “question, -All).the more complete, in 
consequence, is the submission that throws itself with closed 
eyes and eager yearning upon another world, situated now 
far beyond the limits of the known or knowable world of the 
living. Hopes and a vague longing, a shrinking before the 
mysterious terrors of the unknown, fill the soul. Never in 
the history of the ancient world is the belief in an immortal 
life of the soul after death a matter of such burning and 
exacerbated ardour as in these last days when the antique 
civilization was preparing itself to breathe its last. 

Hopes of immortality, widely espoused by the masses and 
fed rather on faith than on reflexion, sought satisfaction in the 
brilliant ceremonial of religions that easily outshone the simple 
worship of every day officially undertaken by the city. In these 
new rites the worshippers united in the secret cult seemed to 
be placed more directly in the hands of the gods; and, 
above all, a blessed existence hereafter was assured to pious 

Nn 


546° THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD 


believers. In these days the ancient and hallowed mysteries 
of Eleusis awake to a new life and remain in vigorous activity 
till nearly the end of the fourth century.1”? Orphic conventicles 
must have attracted worshippers for ages ; 17 the Hellenized 
Orient was familiar with many such orgiastic cults. 

In the mixed populations of the East the new religions 
proved more attractive to the Greeks, too, than their old 
worship of the gods of Greece. Clear and definite obligations, 
fixed commandments and dogmas, holding the weak and frail 
individual in their stronger embrace, seemed to belong more 
peculiarly to these foreign worships than to the old beliefs 
of Greece. Rigid and unalterable maintenance of primitive 
ideas and practices seemed to give the former the stamp of 
sacred and certain knowledge. From all men they demanded 
perfect submission to the God and his priests; perfect 
renunciation of the world, conceived as dualistically opposed 
to the divine ; the purging away of the contamination of its 
lusts by purifications and sanctifications, ceremonial expiations 
and asceticisms. By these means the faithful prepared them- 
selves for the highest reward that piety could conceive ; 
an unending life of bliss far away from this unclean world 
in the realm of the holy and the consecrated. To the belief 
in a blessed immortality these foreign mysteries contributed 
their much desired support; and the populace welcomed 
their message of salvation with all the greater eagerness 
since their varied and impressive ceremonial contrasted so 
strikingly with the plain and homely worship of the Greek 
gods. In the symbolism of these exotic cults men seemed to 
discern a mysterious and secret knowledge ; and to the divine 
figures illuminated by such a halo were easily attributed 
strange and magical powers beyond belief or experience. The 
cult of the Egyptian deities had long been familiar both in 
the East and in the West, and they maintained and extended 
their influence down to the last days of the ancient religions. 
The Phrygian deities, the Thraco-Phrygian cults of Sabazios, 
Attis, and Kybele, and the Persian worship of Mithras were 
later comers, but they, too, took equally firm root and spread 
over the whole extent of the empire.174 

The higher culture of these last centuries, having become 
credulous and avid of marvels, no longer looked with contempt 
upon the means of salvation and sanctification which had 
once been left almost entirely to the lower orders of the 
population. The most cultivated and educated people of these 
times used their culture and their education simply to justify 
everything mysterious and incomprehensible in itself—even 


POPULAR BELIEF 547 


when it was expressed in the most physical symbolism. The 
newly awakened religious interest of the populace had 
coincided with a return on the part of philosophy to the 
teaching of Plato; a teaching which itself tended towards 
religion. Platonism had invaded the doctrine of other 
schools at many points, and it had already acquired a new 
home for itself in the restored Academy, where once an 
un-Platonic Scepticism had overthrown the teaching of the 
master. Now a new Platonism comes forward and overwhelms 
all the other schools of philosophy. Absorbing the doctrines 
of Aristotle and Chrysippos (which it fancied it could 
reconcile with Platonism), it weaved them into its own 
special teaching so that the whole presented a subtle and 
far-reaching system of thought. The speculative system of 
Neoplatonism, into which the old age of Greece, in spite of 
its weariness, contrived to introduce so much profundity, 
spirit, and ingenuity (together with a luxuriant mass of 
scholastic folly), fills the history of the last centuries of Greek 
thought. Its fundamental tendency is, once more, a turning 
away from the life of nature, and a determined invasion of a 
transcendent world of pure spirit ; and it was by this tendency 
that it satisfied the needs of its time. The Sole and First 
Cause, lying beyond all being and continually expressing 
itself in creative emanations, yet never troubled or impaired 
in its perfect and eternal transcendency ; the development, 
in an unbroken process from this One, of the world of thinking, 
of the Ideas and pure thought preserved in it—the world of 
Spirit and the world of Matter—until at last, in longing and 
desire,” all things created return to the origin of all Being : 
to describe and express all this is the single theme, persisting 
throughout all variations, of this philosophy. The whole 
fabric of reality, the interplay of cause and effect, depends upon 
the inherence of the thing caused in its Cause from which it 
takes its origin and to which it returns at last. That which in 
the evolution of nature takes its origin from the One, and 
degenerates more and more completely, in the darkness and 
corruption of Matter, as it gets further away from its source— 
now becomes Man and seeks in morality and religion a 
conscious return to the pure and everlasting and unfailing 
One. The divine does not descend to earth and man must 
reach upwards to the divine heights in order to unite himself 
with the One that is before all multiplicity. This union can 
be brought about by the pure exercise of the human reason, 
but also in the mysterious harmony of the individual life 
with the First Cause that is beyond all reason in the ecstasy 


548 THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD 


that is above all rationality. It can be achieved when at last 
the whole series of rebirths has been passed through, where- 
upon the pure soul, the divine in man, enters into the divinity 
of the Whole.*”® 

To fly from the world—not to work within the world to 
produce something better—is the teaching and injunction of 
this last Greek philosophy. Away from all separate, divided 
Being, upward towards the uninterrupted glory of the One 
divine life, the soul wingsits way. The world, this visible world 
of matter, is fair, says Plotinos, for it is the work and image 
of the divine, present and working init. A last gleam of the 
departing sunlight of Greek sensibility seems to break through 
the words in which Plotinos rejects the Christian-Gnostic 
hatred of the world.1?? The ugly, he says, is strange and 
contrary to God as well as to Nature.178 But the soul must 
no longer rest in the world of created beauty.179 The soul 
is so profoundly conscious of its derivation from the supra- 
sensual, of its divinity and eternity, that it must rise above all 
created being and reach out to the One that was before the 
world and remains for ever outside the world.1®° 

This philosophy, profoundly estranged though it was 
from the old Greek attitude to hfe with its enjoyment of 
the world, nevertheless felt itself called upon to oppose 
the rising tide of the new and irresistible religion. It took under 
its protection the ancient Greek culture and the ancient faith 
that was so inseparably bound up with that culture. Its most 
convinced supporters, with the last of the Emperors of the 
old faith at their head, threw themselves whole-heartedly into 
the fray. And before them rode the Genius of ancient Hellas, 
and the old beliefs of Greece. But when the battle had been 
fought and lost it became apparent to all the world that it 
was a corpse that rode before the exalted combatants, like 
the body of the dead Cid Campeador fastened upon his horse 
and leading his hosts against the Moors. The ancient religion 
of Greece, and with it the whole civilized life of the Greek 
world, faded and died at that discovery, and could not be 
recalled to life. A newer faith, very differently endowed and 
having power to crush the heavily laden soul and point it 
upwards in absolute submission to the divine compassion, 
held the field. The new world that was coming into being 
had need of it. 

And yet—was Greece quite extinguished and dead for ever ? 
Much—only too much—of the philosophy of its old age lived 
on in the speculative system of the Christian faith. And in 
the whole of modern culture so far as 1t has built itself upon 


BOLULAKS SELIEE 549 


Christianity or by extension from it, in all modern science and 
art, not a little survives of Greek genius and Greek inspiration. 
The outward embodiment of Hellas is gone; its spirit is 
imperishable. Nothing that has once been alive in the spiritual 
life of man can ever perish entirely ; it has achieved a new 
form of existence in the consciousness of mankind—an 
immortality of its own. Not always in equal measure, nor 
always in the same place, does the stream of Greek thought 
rise to the surface in the life of mankind. But it is a river that 
never quite runs dry: it vanishes, to reappear; it buries 
itself to emerge again. Desinunt 1sta, non pereunt. 


NODES hORCHAPDE Raa Ly, 


PART -Il 


1 See above, chap. v, p. 162 f. 

2 Lucian 50, De Luctu: washing, anointing, crowning of the dead 
body, mpo@eas: c. 11. Violent dirge-singing over the dead, 12; 
accompanied by the adAds, 19; and led by a special singer Opynvav 
cogtotys, 20. Special lament by the father, 13. The dead is before 
them with jaws tied up and so secured against unsightly gaping, 
19 fin. (a stronger form of the Homeric ovv ve orop’ épeiderv, A 426). 
For this purpose narrow bands are drawn round the chin, cheeks, and 
forehead of the dead man. .We sometimes see them represented on 
vases depicting a lying-in-state, and they have also been found some- 
times in graves in which case they have been made of metal (gold or 
lead) : see Wolters, Ath. Mitth. 1896, p. 367 ff. éoO1s, kdopos (even 
including horses and slaves) burnt or buried in company with the dead 
for his pleasure, 14. 6BoAds given to the dead, 10. The dead fed 
by yoai and xa@ayiopara, 9. The gravestone crowned; sprinkled 
with dxparos; burnt offering, 19. mepideumvoyv after a three days’ 
fast, 24. 

3 From a rather earlier period we hear that it is a bad thing to be 
dead 7) TuxovTa THY vowipwv—it is an infamous deed for the son to 
deny his father ra vowiloueva after death; Din., Aristog. viii, 18; 
cf. [D.] 25, 54.—The dead man says with satisfaction wav@ dca tots 
xpnatots POipévors vopos e€ort yeveoba Tavde TUXwWY Kayw TOVvdE TAdoY 
Kkatéxw, Epigr. Gr., 137; cf. 153, 7-8. 

4 ouorado. are mentioned among other associations as occurring in 
a Solonian law: Digest. 47, 22, 4. These would probably be special 
collegia funeraticia (at any rate societies of which the exclusive or 
essential bond of union consisted in 6yuod ra¢dqvari—and not, therefore, 
any of the ordinary @i/aco. or any “‘gentilician association’ as 
Ziebarth thinks, Gr. Vereinswesen, p. 17 [1896]). There are also traces 
(but not very frequent) of common burial grounds belonging to 
fiaon; e.g. in Kos, Inscr. Cos, 155-9. épavorai bury their dead 
member, CIA. ii, 3308; ouvuptora do the same, Ath. Mitt. ix, 35. 
A member contributes as rayias of the collegium out of his own means, 
for the benefit of dead members of an épavos, els tiv tad, Tod 
evoxnpovety avtovs Kal tereAcuTnKdTas KTA., CIA. ii, 621 (about 
150 B.c.). Another rapuias d€dwxev tots peradrrAdéaow (Otacwrats) TO 
tapikov mapaxphma ins. from Attica, third century B.c. CJA. iv, 2, 
623b> cf." ib.; 615b, J. 14-15 >" Rhod? “inscr in ew BCA tye ee 
Dionysiastai, Athenaistai in Tanagra é€@ayav rov dSetva: GDI. 960-2 
(IG. Sept. i, 685-9). The Iobakchai in Athens (third century A.D.) 
offer a crown and wine at the burial of a member: Ath. Mitt. 1894, 
261, 1. 158 ff. of @iacor mavres and even of EdyBor al of véor, 6 Sipos, 
) vepovaia erect the monument, C/G. 3101, 3112. (Teos) cvvodetrat 
bury together the members of their atvvodo., IPE. ii, 60-5. A 
gymnasiarch also undertakes trav éxxowidav émipédAecav, Inscr. Perg. 
ii, 252, 1. 16; noteworthy also is ti, 374 B, 1. 21-5. A few more exx. 
are given by E. Loch, Zu d. griech. Grabschriften (Festschr. Friedlander, 
1895), p. 288. 


NODE ae LOGE PDH R Soc LVacTT 551 


: dn uooia Tahy frequently, Resolution mavdynpet maparéppacbar 
TO o@pua Tod Seivos emi tHv Kndelav adrod, inscr. of Amorgos, BCH. 
1891, p. 577 (1. 26); p. 586 (1. 17 ff.). Resolution of the council and 
people of Olbia (first century B.c.) : when the body of a certain deserving 
citizen who has died abroad is brought into the city, all workshops 
are to close, the citizens wearing black shall follow his éxdopa; an 
equestrian statue of the dead man to be erected and every year at 
the immodpopiae of Achilles the golden crown granted to the dead 
man to be proclaimed, etc.: PE. i, 17, 22 ff.—Honour paid to a dead 
man by granting a golden crown, C/G. 3185; cf. Cic., Flac. 75. This 
example comes from Smyrna, where such honours were particularly 
common: see Béckh on C/G. 3216. Frequent on Asia Minor inss. : 
ad mOAs SC. orehavol, Efaiber, Tov deiva. 6 Samos TH Sein, sc. aveAnxe, 
om graves: see esp. .G. Hirschfeld, Greek Inscr. in Brit. Mus. iv, 1, 
Deotmelore. ap. Loch;op. cits) ¢p. 287. 

§ This seems to have been particularly common in Amorgos: cf. 
CIG. 2264b; four inss. from Amorgos, BCH. 1891, p. 574 (153-4 B.c.), 
577, 586 (242 B.c.), 588 f. The Council of the Areopagos and the 
people of Athens decree the erection of a statue in honour of a young 
man of rank (T. Statilius Lamprias) who has died zpo wpas in Epidauros, 
and also the dispatch of envoys to wzapapvénoacbat amo rot ris 
moAews dvopatros his parents and his grandfather Lamprias. In the 
same way the citizens of Sparta send an embassy of sympathy and 
consolation to other relatives of the same youth (first century A.D.), 
Fouil. @Epidaur. i, 205-9, pp. 67-70. Wonorific decree of council 
and people of Corinth for the same person, "Ed. ’Apx., 1894, p. 15. 
Yndicpatra mapauvntixa of two Lydian cities at the death of a man of 
rank (first century a.D.), duz. Wien. Ak., Phil. Hist. Cl., 16th Nov., 
1893 (n. 24) = Ath. Mitt. 1894, p. 102 f.; cf. Paros, CIG. 2383 (the 
council and people decree the erection of a stutue to a dead boy émi 
pépovs tapayvOnadspevoe tov marépa); Aphrodisias in Karia, CIG. 
277b, 2775b-d ; Neapolis, CIG. 5836 = IG. Sic. It. 758.—The grounds 
of consolation, so far as they are alluded to, are regularly independent 
of any theological teaching: ¢épew ouvppétpws ta THs Avmys €lddtas 
OTt ATapaiTnros cut H eml TavTwv avOpwrwy potpa and the like (dépew 
TO aupBeBnKkos avOpwrivas, F. d’Epid. i, 209). We are reminded of 
the mapapvOntixot Adyo. of the philosophers which are literary 
expressions of these consolations—the philosophers in fact were expected 
ex officio to offer such consolations to the mourners, cf. Plu., Superst. 
TSGRG. oe Dis Chrie27,, Se9a(ll,, 260,;Arn,). 

7 In spite of any brevity in the narrative the fact of ritual burial 
is regularly alluded to (as an important circumstance) in the romance of 
Xen. Eph. andin the Historia A pollonit: Griech. Roman, 391, 3; 413, 1. 

8 At Athens his friend vainly tries to obtain burial intva urbem for the 
murdered Marcellus: quod religione se impediri dicerent ; neque id antea 
cuiquam concesserunt (while in Rome people were occasionally buried 
in the city in spite of the prohibition of the XII tables: Cic., Lg. il, 
58): Servius to Cicero, Fam. 4, 12, 3 (45 B.c.). There it was permitted 
uti in quo vellent gymnasio eum sepelirent and finally his body was 
cremated and the remains buried in nobilissimo orbis terrarum 
gymnasio, the Academy. évrada kai Oéots Tod adpartos ev TH yupvaciw 
(of an aristocratic Roman) in Kyme: GDI. 311. Toa living benefactor 
of that city ovvexwp On Kai éevtadfvar (in the future) év 7@ yupvaci, 
CIG. 279b (Aphrodisias in Karia). As a special mark of honour 
paid to a benefactor of the city it is permitted that his body i in oppidum 
introferatur (into Smyrna: Cic., Flac. 75), evrada kata modw kat 


552 IN @ ER See OR Gri El Rech seer 


Tapa Snpogia, evrada Karta moXw €v TH ETLCALOTATW TOD yUpEVacioV 
tomw, Knidos, GDI. 3501, 3502 (time of Augustus). The city buries 
a youth yuprvados év tepever, Epigy. Gr. 222 (Amorgos).—Ulpian, 
Dig. 47, 12, 3, 5, implies the possibility that lex municipalis permittat 
in civitate sepeliri. 

® ofa, i.e. probably grave and monument, of Messia set up by her 
husband in his own house: Epigr. Gr. 682 (Rome). 

10 Thus Inscr. Perg. ii, 590, C@v 6 detva Kateoxevace TO pvynpetov TH 
(Ola pappn... Kal TO mannmw, €avtT@, yvvarki, Téxvows, eKydvois 
avefaXdAotpiwtroy €ws diadoxfs x7XA. Similar directions, ib., n. 591, 
and frequently. The series includes the old and traditional circle of 
the ayyioreis: see above, chap. v, nn. 141 and 146 (where péxpu 
avetiada@v mwaidwv should be read). 

11 There was even a Solonian law against violation and plunder of 
tombs: Cic., Lg. ii, 64. The specially invented word tupBuptyos 
shows that such practices were frequent at a quite early period ; 
cf. onuatwv dpa, Herond. v, 57. Complaint on account of the rifling 
of a tomb: Egypt. papyr. of 127 B.c., Notices et extvatts, xviii, 2, 
p. 161 f. Frequent rescripts of emperors of the fourth century against 
the profanation of graves, Cod. Theod. ix, 17. But even emperors 
of second and third centuries had to deal with the subject : Dzg. 47, 12, 
and cf. Paul., Sent. 1, 21, 4 ff.; sepulchrt violatt actio, Quint., Deel. 
299, 369, 373. Grave-thieves were a favourite character in romance : 
e.g. ap. Xen. Eph., Chariton and others. Epigram of Greg. Naz. 
on the subject of looted graves, Anth. Pal. viii, 176 ff. From the fourth 
century the Christians in particular seem to have been a danger to 
heathen burial places (cf. Gothofred., ad Cod. Theod. iii, p. 150 Ritt.)— 
in fact, ecclesiastics were specially given to grave-robbery: Novell. 
Valentin. 5 (p.111 Ritt.), Cassiod., Var. iv, 18; bustuarit latrones (Amm. 
Marc. 28, 1, 12), were then frequent. An Egyptian anchorite had 
at an earlier period become latronum maximus et sepulchrorum 
vioiator: Rufin., Vit. Pair. 9 (p. 446b Rossw.). 

12 Inscrr. indicating such sepulchral penalties are rare on the main- 
land of Greece, common in Thrace and the Greek cities of Asia Minor, 
but most frequent of allin Lykia. Most of them belong to the Roman 
period, but also appeal occasionally to rov ris aoeBelas vopov of the 
city (cf. also Korkyra, CIG. 1933) ; or refer to the éyxAnyua trupBwpvyias 
as though it were a local process of law which had perhaps been con- 
firmed by an Imperial ordinance (imevOuvos €oTw Tots diatdypact Kal 
Tots matpiots vopous, inscr. from Tralles: see Hirschfeld, p.121). They 
therefore cannot be simply borrowed from the Roman custom, but 
belong to the old law of the country esp. in Lykia where a similar 
prescription has been found dating from the third century B.c.: C/G. 
4529; see Hirschfeld, Kénigsb. Stud. i, pp. 85-144 (1887)—doubt is 
thrown on the legal validity of the penal clauses in such inscrr. by 
J. Merkel, Fesig. f. Ihering, p. 109 ff. (1892). 

18 Curses directed against those who bury unauthorized persons in 
a grave or damage the monument are rare in European Greece: e.g. 
Aegina, CIG. 2140b; Thessaly, BCH. xv, 568; Athens, CIA. iii, 
1417-28; among these is a Thessalian grave, 1427; a Christian, 
1428; 1417-22 are set up by Herodes Atticus to Apia Regilla and 
Polydeukion (cf. K. Keil, Pauly-Wiss. i, 2101), but his coquetting with 
the cult of the y@dvo. proves nothing for the common opinion of his 
fellow citizens. Sepulchral curses are particularly common in inss. 
from Lykia and Phrygia; also Cilicia, JHS. 1891, p. 228, 231, 267; 
a few also from Halikarnassian graves; Samos, CIG. 2260.—The 


NO EMS Om CHARTER XVe ar 553 


grave and its peace are placed under the care of the underworld deities 
in these inss.: apadidwpu tots KataxOoviois Beois totto To jpov 
duvdaccew xrr., CIA. iii, 1423-4. Cf. also a Cretan inscr. Ath. Mitt. 
1893, p. 211. Niicevet introduces a stranger into the grave or damages 
the grave aceBis €otw Oeots cataxPoviois (thus in Lykia, CIG. 4207 ; 
4290 ; 4292), aceByoes ta epi tods Beovs te Kal Beas macas xal 
npwas mavtas (from Itonos in Phthiotis, BCH. xv, 568). dpaprwrds 
€otw Oeois KataxBovios, CIG. 4252b, 4259, 4300e, i, k, v, 4307, 4308 ; 
BCH. 1894, p. 326 (n. 9)—all from Lykia. (The formula occurs 
already in a Lyk. inscr. of 240 B.c.; BCH. 1890, p. 164: adpaptwdroi 
€éotwoav—the archons and citizens who neglect to offer the yearly 
sacrifice to Zeus Soter—Oea@v mavtwy Kal amotwétw 6 apxwv Kd, 
which thus corresponds exactly with the oldest Lyk. inscr. with 
sepulchral penalty, CIG. 4259). éorw iepdavros Oeots ovpaviots Kai 
Kkataxovious, CIG. 4253 (Pinara in Lykia). This must mean: he 
shall be regarded as having transgressed the law against dcéBeva, 
iepoovAia (cf. of vopor ot wept iepoavAov, Teos, SIG. 523, 51), rupBwpvxia, 
having at the same time offended against the gods (see Hirschfeld, 
op. cit., p. 120 f.). More particular is another Lyk. ins.: dpaprwAds 
éotw OYeadv mavtwy Kat Anrots Kal Tav réxvwy (as the special gods of 
the country), CIG. 4259, 4303, (iii, p. 1138), 4303 e% (p. 1139). In 
Cilicia €orm noeBnkws és te tov Aia Kai rHhv LeAjvynv, JHS. xii, 231. 
Phrygian: xeyoAwpévov é€xoitro Miva xataxOdviov, BCH. 1886, p. 503, 
6; cf. evopxildpe0a Miva xataxPdvov els totto pynpetov pndéva 
eiaeAGeiv, Amer. School at Athens ili, 174. The same is intended by 
the peculiarly Phrygian denunciation €orw att@ mpos tov Oedv, mpos 
THY xetpa TOD Deo’, mpos TO péya Gvopa TOD Beod, CIG. 3872b (p. 1099), 
3890, 3902 f.o., 3963: Amer. School iii, 411; BCH. 1893, p. 246 ff. 
That these are Christian formulae—as Ramsay, JHS. iv, p. 400 f., 
supposes—is hardly likely. Equally unlikely in the case of 3902r 
(Franz rightly protests against the idea): é€ora: ait@ mpos tov Cadrvta 
deov (the same occurs again in a decisively non-Christian sense: BCH. 
1893, p. 241) Kai viv nal év 7H Kptoiuw Auepa (Kplots apparently = 
death in CJIG. 6731, from Rome, which, considering the words 
ayaAua eiur “HXiov, can hardly be Christian). THs Tob Beob pay 
uebe~erar, CIA. ili, 1427. Obscure threat: od yap ux ovveixn . 

C1G. 2140b (Aegina). The profaner of graves is cursed in more detail : 

TOUTW ay vy Barn, wn Addacca trAwTyH, GAAG experlwOyoeTar mayyevet 
(the dpat on the inss. of Herod. Att. agree so far at least in intention, 
CIA. iii, 1417-22). maou tots Kaxots metpay dwoe, Kat ppetkn Kal 
TUPETO@ ra TeTaptaiw Kal éAédavte x7X., CIA. iii, 1423-4 (similar curse 
on a lead tablet from Crete: Ath. Mitt. 1893, p. 211). The first half 
of this imprecation Tepresents the regular formula in such dpai and 
Gpkoi— pH yn Barn Krr.; cf. Wunsch, Defix., p. vii, and a Jewish-Greek 
inscr. from Euboea: Ed. "Apy., 1892, p. 175; it occurs also in CIG. 
2664, 2667 (Halikarnassos); 4303 (p. 1138 Phrygia). daceu Tots 
Karaxbovios | Deots Sik ny, 4190 (Cappadocia). épdava téxva AimoTO, 
xjpov Budv, olxov epnpov, ev mupi mavTa bdjorTo, KaK@yv Uo xetpas GAaiTO, 
3862, 3875, 400 (Phrygia). These are all peculiarly and originally 
Phrygian ; something similar seems to occur in inss. in the Phrygian 
language: see Zischr. vergl. Sprachf. 28, 381 ff.; BCH. 1896, p. 111 ff. 
Phrygian, too, is the curse otros 8 awpois mepimécoito avpdopais, 
Epigr. Grp 49m Ameyencch: Ath. li, 168—1.e. may his children 
die dwpo. (More plainly réxvwv adwpawv mepimécoiro ovpgdopg, BCH. 
1893, p. 272.) Sometimes the additional phrase is found Kal peTa 
ger hp dé Ad Bou Tovs vmoxOoviovs Beods Tiuwpods Kal KEexoAwpévous, 


554 NOTES S LOe CHA BT Eee SVegsrt 


CIG. 3915 (Phrygian). Besides the common imprecations we also 
have Bavdvre dé ovde 7 v4 mapéfer avtT® tadov, 2826 (Aphrodisias in 
Karia) ; pyre odpaves THY Yuxnv avTod mapadefato, Am. Sch. Ath. 
iii, 411 (Pisidia). Barbarous in the extreme is an inscr. from Cilicia 
(JHS. 1891, p. 267): €&e mavra 7a Deta Kexokwpéeva Kai Tas oTvyepas 
"Epewvas Kal tdlov Téxvov ymaros yevoerar.—With these grave-impreca- 
tions we may compare also the threats uttered against those who shall 
neglect the directions for the honouring of King Antiochos of Kommagene 
who lies buried in his fepoféatov (ib, 13; iiib, 3: hence correct iepo- 
@vovov in Paus. 4, 32, 1) on the Nemrud Dagh: elddras 671 yarern 
vépeots BaoiK@v datwovwr, TLwpos Opoiws apedias Te Kal UBpews, 
adaéBevay dwhKer KaNworwpevwrv TE Hpwwy atetmacbeis vopos avetAdtous 
éyel mowds. Ta pev yap oatov amav Kougov epyorv, THS b€ acePeEias 
omaboBapets avayxat (ilia, 22 ff., Ber. Berl. Akad. 1883). 

14 From the point of view of religion, at any rate, it is true, though 
with considerable reservations, that most of the Greeks and Macedonians 
scattered over Asia and Egypt in coloniae, in Syros Parthos Aegyptios 
degenerarunt, Liv. 38, 17, 11-12. The only non-Greek nation (apart 
from the Romans) which learnt anything from the Greeks or from the 
semi-religious Greek philosophy was the Jewish—at once the most 
stubborn and the most pliable of them all. 

15 At a quite late period, in order to explain the impiety of grave- 
robbing, Valentinian says (following the libri veteris sapientiae quite 
as much as Christian teaching) licet occasus necessitatem mens divina 
(of man) non sentiat, amant tamen animae sedem corporum relictorum 
et nescio qua sorte rationis occultae sepulchri honore laetantur (Nov. 
Valente p. 11 lL Ritt,): 

16 After the reception of the last person who has a right there 
amovep@aba Tov mAdtav, adnpwtoba To pynpetov, CIG. 2827, 2834. 
KopakwOnoera, i.e. it will be finally shut up: 3919. 

17 éteav 5€ Tots Kapovow éeyxyutAdowpev, Herond. v, 84 (i.e. at the 
end of the month: festival of the dead at the rpraxdades, see above, 
chap. v, n. 88. pépas Anyovons Kai wnvos POivorvtos eiHOaow evayilew 
ot moAAoi, Plu., Q. Rom. 34, p. 272 D). Offerings to the dead at the 
grave: see besides Luc., Charon, 22. 

1s Epiktetaz) see -above¥ chap say, mn. 1261) “Traces@olimam cinalas 
foundation on an inscr. from Thera ap. Ross, Inscr. Gr. 198 (ii, p. 81).— 
Otherwise the son will perhaps offer to his father rv radia Kat tov 
evaytaopov (CIG. 1976, Thessalonike; 3645 Lampsakos)—r0 pov 
KaTeokevacev els aliwviov pyaunv Kal TH peta Oavatov adwowwpery 
Opnoxeia (CIG. 4224d, iii, p. 1119 Lykia). A dead man has left the 
council of a city a sum of money for a oredavwrixov (CIG. 3912, 
3916 Hierapolis in Phrygia); i.e. in order that his grave may be 
crowned every year from the interest of the money: 3919. Another 
man leaves money to a society to celebrate his memory yearly by 
holding a edwyia with otvomocia illumination and crowns: 3028 
Ephesos. An annual feast in honour of a dead man’s memory on 
his yevé@Avos yuépa: 3417 Philadelphia in Lydia (this is the proper 
day for a feast of the dead: see above, chap. Vj 921 89). Annual 
memorial in the month ‘Yaxiv@ios for a dead apxvepaviarys in Rhodos, 
dvay dpevors of his crowns of honour and crowning of his wvnpctov, 
regular avayopevars Tav TLLay ev Tats ovvddas (of the €pavos) Kat rats 
€ntxvoeow (second century B.c.), {GM. Aeg. i, 155, 1. 53° ff.,° 67a 
Another foundation, in Elatea (BCH. x, 382), seems to have been much 
more elaborate in intention and to have included the sacrifice of a bull, 
as well as edwyia and an aywr. 


NOME SRL Om GEA HL lige Vie TI 555 


® rddos, Sevdpevos yepdwy, inscr. from Athens (second century A.D.) : 
Ath. Mitt. 1892, p. 272, 1. 6. Oédryew puxiv redvnkdtos avdpes by 
libations at the grave: Epigr. Gr. 120, 9-10. 

20 The AmOTAPoL : this is the name given to those dzeorepnpévor 
TaY mpoyouKay tadwy, EM. 131, 44. They even had a burial place of 
dae own : azotddwv ta4¢dwv on a marble vase from Rhodos, IGM. Aeg. 

, 656. 

21 This yatpe repeats the last farewell which accompanied the removal 
of the body from the house (Eur., Alc. 626 f.). Cf. yatpé por & IlatpoKde 
kal ely "Atdao Sdéporow, the words with which Achilles (Y 179) 
addresses his dead friend lying upon the funeral pyre. So too on 
tombstones yatpe must be intended to suggest the continued sympathy 
of the survivors and the appreciation by the dead of that sympathy. 
Does it also imply veneration of the departed as KpelTT wv ? Gods and 
Heroes were also addressed with this word: cf. xaip’ dvag ‘Hpannees, 
etc.—The passer-by calls out yatpe: yalpere ypwes. 6 mapdywv oe 
aanmatera, Ath. Mitt. ix, 263: and cf. Epigr. Gr. 218, 17-18; 237, 
Poo aClmzoch-s Op. Git.) 275.1, 

22 yalpere is said by the dead man to the living: Béckh on C/IG. 
3775 (ii, p. 968) ; cf. yapérw 6 avayvous, IG. Sic. et It. [IG. xiv] 350. 

23 yalpere Howes. yatpe Kal od Kal eddde, CIG. 1956 (more given 
by Béckh, ii, p. 50; see also on 3278) ; Inscr. Cos, 343; IG. Sic. et It. 
60, 319; BCH. 1893-4, 242 (5), 249 (22), 528 (24), 533 (36) ; specially 
noteworthy is p. 529 (28), AevKie Aikine yaipe. Ké ov ye @ mapodeita 
““ yaipois OTe ToUTO TO GEpvov | Eimas e€pol yalpety elvexev evaeBins’”’. To 
call upon the dead is an act of evdoéfeca. 

#4 At the burial of a woman who is being given a public funeral 
émeBoace 6 Samos Tpis TO dvopa adras, GDI. 3504 (Knidos; in the 
time of Trajan). In the same way the name of the ypws was called 
out three times at a sacrifice in his honour: see above, chap. iv, n. 62. 

25 Tombstone of Q. Marcius Strato (circ. second century A.D.), 
Ath. Mitt. 1892, p. 272, 1. 5 ff. rolyap 6001 Bpopiw Iladin te véor 
pepweAnobe, Sevdpevov yepawy urn papavetobe tadov' adda mapaortei- 
xovres  ovvoua KAcwvov opaptH Bworpéer 7 padiwas ovpmarayeire 
xépas. Those who are thus charged answer, mpocevvérw Ltpatwva 
Kal TLL@ KpoTH. 

26 Often represented on Attic lekytho1: Pottier, Les lécythes blancs, 

0/5 
i 27 The gods and their statues are honoured in this way: Sittl, 
Gebirden, p. 182. 

28 BeXrioves Kai Kpeitroves, Arist., Eudem. fr. 37 [44]. 

® ypnotovs movety euphemism for azoxtiwvivar in a treaty between 
Tegea and Sparta: Arist., fy. 542 [592]. They become ypnoroi 
only after death. This ancient and evidently popular expression gives 
far stronger grounds for believing that ypno7ds was applied to the dead 
than does the passage from Thphr., Ch. x, 16 (xiii, 3), for the opposite 
view (the mreplepyos writes on a tombstone that a dead woman and her 
family ypnorot joav, from which Loch concludes that the word really 
** denotes a quality of the living and not of the dead ’’, op. cit., 281). 
It is possible at the same time that those who used such words did not 
mean anything special by their ypynoré yaipe, and at any rate only 
thought of it as a vague adjective of praise. But that was not its 
real meaning. 

30 ypnoré yatpe and the like, with or without pws, are very commonly 
met with on epitaphs from Thessaly, Boeotia, the countries of Asia 
Minor (and Cyprus as well: cf. BCH. 1896, pp. 343-6; 353-6). On 


556 NOLES FIOYCGHAP LE Re echViaat 


Attic graves the use of the title ypnoros seems to be confined to 
foreigners and those mostly slaves (see Keil, Jahrb. Phil. suppl. 
iv, 628 >, Gutscher, Att. Grabinschr. i, pa 24; 1, pe 13): 

31 With Gutscher, op. cit., i, 24; ii, 39.—From the fact that in 
Attica this word does not seem to be given to natives no conclusion 
is to be drawn as to the opinions held by the Athenians about their 
dead (as though they thought of them with less respect). The word 
was simply not traditional in this sense in Attica. On the other hand, 
the word paxapirns was specifically Attic as applied to the dead (see 
above, ch. vii, n. 10), and this provides unmistakable evidence that 
the conception of the dead as ‘“‘blessed’® was current also in 
Attica, 

32 ypnotav Oedv, Hdt. viii, 111.—6 pws (Protesilaos), ypnoros wy, 
Evyywpet that people should sit down in his réyevos: Philostr., Her. 
p. 134, 4 Ks.—Other modes of address intended to mollify the dead 
are dAume, ypnote Kal addAume, dpiote, dpepmre, etc. yatpe (cf. Inscr. 
Cos, 165;2263,/279,,and®Loch, op. cit., 281): 

SSS Pais Ae dn Os 

34 Pans, 32,74; 

35 Paus. 9, 13, 5-6. Sacrifice (év7éuvew) of a white mare to the 
Heroines: Plu., Pelop. 20-2. The same thing is briefly referred to 
in Xen., HG. 6, 4, 7; see also D.S. xv, 54. Detailed account of the 
fate of the maidens ap. Plu., Narr. Amor. 3; Jerome, a. Jovin. i, 41 
(ii, 1, 308 D Vall.).—ai Aevxrpov Ovyarépes, Plu., Herod. Mal. ii, 
p..S56! EF; 

36 Aewvidera in Sparta (CIG. 1421) at which there were “‘ speeches ”” 
about Leonidas (even in Sparta not a surprising circumstance at this 
late period), and an aywy in which only Spartiates might take part : 
Paus. 3, 14, 1.—aywriodpevor tov émtadioly Aewvidov] cai ITavaavifou 
Kal TOv AotlTav ypwdwlv ay@val, CIG. 1417. 

3? At Marathon: crowning and évayiopds at the modvdvdpeov of 
the Marathonian Heroes carried out by the ephebot: CIA. ii, 471, 
26. Cf. more generally Aristid. ii, p. 229 f. Dind. Nocturnal fighting 
of the ghosts there: Paus. 1, 32, 4 (the oldest prototype of the similar 
legends told, in connexion with the story of the battle between the 
dead Huns and Romans, by Damasc., V. Isid. 63). 

38 dvdpas] €8’ jnpwas oéBetar marpis xrA., Inscr. Cos, 350 (beginning 
of Empire). 

39 Speaking of the Attic tragedians, D. Chr. thinks (15, p. 237M. =ii, 
235 Arn.) ods éxetvor amoderkvtovew jpwas tovtos daivovTar evayilovres 
(of “EAAnves) Ws pwow, Kal Ta Hpda éxeivors WKodopnpmeva ldetv E€arw. 
But this is only true in a very limited and qualified sense. 

40 “Exropu ett Qvovow év *Idiw, says Luc. (expressly speaking of 
his own times), D. Conc. 12. Apparition of Hektor in Troad: Max. 
Tyr. 15, 7, p. 283 R. Miracles worked: Philostr., Her. pass. Hekt. 
mp lhebes~) Lyc; 1204: i; 

41 In the ‘Hpawixds Philostratos gives plenty of evidence of this. 
Most of what he says about the Heroes of the Trojan war is entirely 
without traditional basis, but not all of it; and especially where he 
speaks (in the first part of the dialogue) of the appearances and displays 
of power attributed in his own day to the Heroes he is far from inventing. 
(His powers of invention are exercised particularly in what he says about 
the events of their lives where he is expanding or correcting Homer.) 
Acc. to Philostr. (Her. 681, p. 149, 32 ff. Kays., 1871) opavra:i—at least 
by the shepherds of the Trojan plain—the figures of the Homeric 
champions (gigantic in size, pp. 136-40 [667]; daivovra: in full armour, 


si | 


Di hose lO GHAR THR X1V4 “17 557 


p- 131, 1). Hektor in particular appears, works miracles, and his 
statue woAAa epydlerar ypnata Kows Te Kal és eva, pp. 151-2. Legend 
about Antilochos, p. 155, 10 ff. Palamedes appears, p. 154. On the 
south coast of the Troad opposite Lesbos he has an ancient temple in 
which @vova to him furedvres of tas axtaias olixobvtes modes, p. 184, 
21 (see also V. Ap. iv, 13). Sacrifice to Palamedes as a Hero, 153, 
29 ff.—Mantic power attributed to the jpwes, 135, 21 ff. ; 148, 20 ff. (to 
Odysseus in Ithaca, 195, 5 ff.) Hence Protesilaos in particular, 
who appears at Elaious in Thrac. Chers. to the vineyard-keeper into 
whose mouth Philostr. puts his story, has so much to say even about 
what he had not himself seen or experienced. Protes. is still fully 
alive (Cf, 130, 23) ; like Achilles (in Leuke, etc.) he has his fepot dpdpor 
ev ofs yuuvalerar (131,31). A vision of Protes. appearing to an enemy 
makes him blind (132, 9). (To meet a Hero often blinds a mortal, 
cf. Hdt. vi, 117, and the case of Stesichoros and the Dioskouroi.) 
He protects his protégé’s flelds from snakes, wild beasts, and every- 
thing harmful: 132, 15 ff. He himself is now év ‘’Acdov (when he is 
with Laodameia), now in Phthia, and now in the Troad (143, 17 ff.). 
He appears about midday (143, 21, 32; cf. Append. vi). At his 
ancient oracle at Elaious (mentioned already by Hdt. ix, 116, 120; 
alluded to by Philostr., p. 141, 12) he dispenses oracles more particularly 
to the champions of the great games, the heroes of the age (p. 146, 
13 ff., 24 ff., 147, 8 ff., 15 ff.; famous contemporaries are mentioned : 
Eudaimon of Alexandria, victor at Olympia in Ol. 237, and Helix well- 
known from the Ivpvaorixds). He heals diseases, esp. consumption, 
dropsy, ophthalmia, and ague, and he helps people in the pains of love 
(opei4A? 2305 t.)\.. Prot?falsoygives oracles, in, his, Phthiotic, home 
Phylake (where he pays frequent visits), 148, 24 ff.—It is the regular 
series of miraculous performances normally attributed to the 7owes 
of older legends, that Protesilaos carries out here.—On Mt. Ismaros 
in Thrace Maron (Evavééos vids, Od. « 197) appears and odpGrau tots 
yewpyots to whom he sends rain (149, 3 ff.). Mt. Rhodope in Thrace 
is haunted (olxet) by Rhesos, who lives there a life of chivalry, breeding 
horses, practising his weapons, and hunting; the woodland animals 
offer themselves willingly as sacrifices at his altar; the heros keeps 
the plague away from the surrounding kc@pa (149, 7-19).—The 
legendary details from Philostratos here selected for mention may be 
taken as really derived from popular tradition (cf. also W. Schmid, 
DaeAtticismus, iv, 572. ff.): 

42 Again in 375 a.p. Achilles preserved Attica from an earthquake 
(Zosim. iv, 18) ; in 396 he kept Alaric away from Athens; ib., v, 6. 

43 Plu., Lucull. 23; App., Mithr. 83. Lucullus was Roman enough 
to carry off from the inhabitants of Sinope their much-honoured statue 
of Autolykos, to which the elaborate cult was principally attached : 
éripwv Autol. ds Oedv. Hv 5€ Kal pavreiov adrob, Str. 546 

44 See above, chap. iv, nn. 119-20.—Heroon of Kyniska (sister of 
Agesilaos) in Sparta as victor at Olympos: Paus. 3, 15, 1. 

45 Hero-physicians: see above, chap. iv, § 10. Our knowledge of 
the cult and activity of these Heroes is chiefly derived from evidence 
from later times. — An evidently late creation is the Hero Neryllinos 
in the Troad, of whose worship, healing, and prophetic powers Athenag., 
A pol. 26, has something to say (Lob. Agi. 1171). 6 €€vos tatpds, Toxaris, 
in Athens: Luc., Scyth. 1; 2. (The special name of the éévos tarpos 
may be Lucian’s invention, but not what he tells us of his cult.) There 
was a permanent cult of Hippokrates in Kos in the time of Soranos : 
the Koans offered sacrifice to him (évayife.v) annually on his birthday 


558 NO TRESS LOMGIA PEE hee shy imerl 


(see above, chap. v, n. 89): Soran. ap. Anon., V. Hipp. 450, 13 West. 
(miracle at the tomb of Hipp. in Larisa: ib., 451, 55 ff.). The doctor 
in Luc., Philops. 21, makes an elaborate sacrifice (something more 
than évayifew) annually to his bronze statue of Hipp.—A good story 
thoroughly in the manner of popular folk-lore is that told of Pellichos 
the Corinthian general who was also worshipped as giving help in sick- 
ness and the magic tricks that he (simply as 7pws) was able to play 
on the Libyan slave who had stolen the gold pieces which used to be 
offered to him: Luc., Philops. 18-20. 

46 Anth. Pal. vii, 694 ("Addaiov, probably the Macedonian). 

47 CIG. 4838b (see above, chap. iv, n. 60). The name expresses the 
idea: eddder was the greeting which the dead man returned to the 
traveller, CIG. 1956. 

48 Another example: bulls are still sacrificed in Megara in the fourth 
century A.D. officially by the city to the Heroes who had fallen in the 
Persian wars, IG. Sept. i, 53. 

49 At the monument of Rhilopoimen, Plu., Philop. 21. 

50 €y tots ‘Hpwikots Kat év tats dAXats €opraits—in Priansos and 
Hierapytna in Crete (third century B.c.), C/G. 2556, 37. Annual festival 
of the ‘Hpdéa, in which were held edyapior prot aydves for Asklepiades 
and those who had fought with him in one of the city’s wars. A decree 
honouring the grandsons of this Asklep. has been found at Eski-Manyas 
near Kyzikos: Ath. Mitt. 1884, p. 33. 

51 In taking an oath they swore by the gods kal 7jpwas kal Apwdcoas 
(Dreros in Crete): Cauer, Delect.1 38 A, 31 (third® century > Biee 
Treaty between Rhodos and Hierapytna (second century B.c.), Cauer, 
44,3: evEacba 7H “AXliw nat Ta ‘Pddw Kal tots drAots Beots waat Kal 
maoais Kal Tots GpyayéTats Kal Tols Hpwot, door ExovTe TaV TOAW Kal 
tav xwpav tav ‘Podiwy ... Oath of citizenship from Chersonnesos 
(third century), Sitzb. Berl. Akad. 1892, p. 480: dpvdw .. . Hpwas 
Goo. TOAW Kal ywpav Kal TEevyn ExoVTL TA Xepoovaci.tay.—Similar exx. 
from earlier times: see above, chap. iv, n. 4 (and cf. Din., Dem. 64: 
papTupofat... Kal Tovs jpwas Ttods éyxwplovs KTA.). 

°2 e.g. inscr. from Astypalaia BCH. 1891, p. 632 (n. 4): Damatrios 
son of Hippias dedicates a fountain and trees @eots ypwoi te... 
abAodopov téxvas avTididovs yapita.—A grave is dedicated eots ypwor, 
CIG. 3272 (Smyrna), i.e. probably 9. Kat vpwar (cf. Beots Saipoa, 
DS2/,neLC:): 

53 Collegia of apworai: Foucart, Assoc. relig. 230 (49), 233 (56). 
CIA. ii, 630. In Boeotia, Ath. Mitt. 3, 299 = IG. Sept. i, 2725: 

54 e.g. inscr. on one of the seats in the theatre at Athens: lepéws 
"Avaxow Kal jpwos émteylov, CIA. iii, 290. 

55 Stapévovar S€ Kal és TO8e TH Alavte wap’ "AOnvaios tial, adT@ 
te kal Evpvodne, Paus. 1, 35, 3 (Alavreca in Salamis in first century 
B.c., CIA. ii, 467-71). évayifovar 8é Kal és yas ért TH Popwvei (in 
Argos), 2, 20, 3. xai of (Theras) kal viv éte of Onpatoe. Kar’ Eros 
évayifovaw ws olxioTH, 3, 1, 8. He also bears witness to the still 
surviving cult of Pandion as Hero in Megara, 1, 41, 6; Tereus in Megara, 
1, 41,9; Melampous in Aigosthena, 1, 44,5; Aristomenes in Messenia, 
4, 14, 7; Aitolos in Elis (évayiGer 6 yupvaciapyos ere Kal és éuée Kal? 
exaotov €ros T@ Aitwird, 5, 4,4; cf. the yuuvactapxos who looks after 
the éxxowrdai: above, this chap., n. 4); Sostratos the épwyevos of 
Herakles in Dyme, 7, 17, 8; Iphikles in Phenea, 8, 14, 9; the boys 
slain at Kaphyai, 8, 23, 6-7; the four lawgivers of Tegea, 8, 48, 1; 
the EvoeBets in Katana, 10, 28, 4-5.—Of course, it does not follow 
that when Paus. mentions other very numerous Heroes without so 


INO UH Se DOs CHAP PH Re eX V8 11 559 


expressly saying that their cult still survived, he means that those 
cults had died out. 

*SePlu., Avyistid.. 21: 

57 Aratos received from the Achaeans after his death @volav xal 
TLuas ypwixds in which he may take pleasure himself eizep cai zept 
TOVS ATOLKOMEVOUS EaTL TLS aiadAyots, Poiyb. 8, 14, 8. He was buried at 
Sikyon, as otxvorys Kal owrip THs TOAEws, iN a TOTS TEplomTos Called 
the *Aparevov (cf. Paus. 2, 8,1; 9, 4). Sacrifice was made to him twice 
a year, on the day when he had freed Sikyon, 5th Daisios, the 
Swrypra, and on his birthday; the former was carried out by the priest 
of Zeus Soter, the latter by the priest of Aratos. They included : 
Hymn by the Dionysiac reyvira:, procession of waides and édnBou 
in which the gymnasiarchoi, the boule wearing crowns, and the citizens 
took part. Of all this only defypara pixpa still survived in Plutarch’s 
time, at 8€ mActorat Tov Timpdv bad ypdvov Kal mpaypdtwv d&rAwv 
exAedoizaav, Plu., Avat. 53 (cwryp: cf. epigram in c. 14). 

°8 ravtes qpwas vopilovat tos aofddpa madraodts dvdpas, Kal éav 
pndev e€aipetov Exwor, du’ adrov olwae tov ypdvov. But only a few 
of them have regular reXeras Hpdwv: D. Chr. 31, p. 335 M. [i, 243 Arn.]. 
omnes qui patriam conservarint, adiuverint, auxerint become immortal : 
Cic., Som. Sct. 3, which also goes too far. 

59 Pelopidas, Timoleon, Leosthenes, Aratos become Heroes: see 
Keil, Anal. epigry. et onom. 50-4. Kleomenes Plu., Cleom. 39. 
Philopoimen, Philop. 21. tod@eou. trad annual sacrifice of a bull and 
hymns of praise to Philop. sung by the véo.: D.S. 29, 18; Liv. 39, 50, 
Jiao LG eco. See. Keilvop. citi, 9 eit. 

60 In Sikyon Aratos is held to be the son of Asklepios who had 
visited his mother in the form of a snake: Paus. 2, 10, 3; 4, 14, 7-8 
(favourite form of stories of divine parentage: see Marx, Mdrchen 
v. dankb. Thieren, 122, 2). 

61 The very charming and characteristic story of Drimakos, the 
leader and law-giver of the dpazéra: in Chios, is told by Nymphodoros 
(ap. Ath. vi, c. 88-90), as having happened prxpov mpo juadv. He 
had a yp@ov in which he was honoured under the name of ypws 
evpevyns (by the dpamérae with the firstfruits of their plunder). He 
frequently appeared to masters to whom he revealed the olxerdv 
é€muBovdAds. 

62 Hsch. Lafstadas* ypwos ovopa, 6s Kal rods Katadgevyorras eis 
avrov pvetat [Kal] Pavarou. 

63 Pixodaros, a shepherd of Ephesos, discovered in a strange fashion 
a very excellent kind of marble, a discovery which he communicated 
to the authorities (for use in temple-building). He was made a Hero 
and renamed jpws evayyedos: sacrifice was made to him officially 
every month, hodieque, Vitruv. x, 2. 

64 Luc., Macrob. 21 (for Athenod. see FHG. iii, 485 f.).—In Kos 
an exedva in the theatre was dedicated to C. Stertinius Xenophon 
(court-physician to the Emp. Claudius) jpar, Inscr. Cos, 93.—In 
Mitylene there was even an apotheosis of the historian Theophanes 
(the friend of Pompeius: cf. Iv. [opaijos ‘lepoita vies Oeodavns 
with full name, Ath. Mitt. ix, 87): Tac., A. vi, 18. Ocoddvns beds 
on coins of the city, and cf. LéEctov ypwa, AcoBdvak ypws véos, etc., 
on the same city’s coins (Head, Hist. Num. 488). 

65 On a stele in Messene there was a portrait of a certain Aithidas 
of the beginning of the third century B.c.; instead of whom a 
descendant of the same name is worshipped: Paus. 4, 32, 2, In 
the market place of Mantinea stood a hevoon of Podares who had 


560 NOTES ORCHAR IE heyosl\eamnt 


distinguished himself in the battle of Mant. (362). Three generations 
before Paus. visited the place the Mantineans had altered the inscrip- 
tion on the heroon and dedicated it to a later Podares, a descendant 
of the original one, who lived in the Roman period: Paus. 8, 9, 9. 

66 Ci. Keil, Anal; Epigr. +62. 

67 Cult paid to king Lysimachos in his lifetime in Samothrake, 
SIG. 190 (Archaol. Unters. auf. Samoth. ii, 85, n. 2). “* Heroizing ” 
of Diogenes phrourarchos of Demetrios ; in 229 B.c. he was bribed by 
Aratos to lead the Macedonian garrison out of Attica: see Kohler, 
Hermes, vii, 1 ff.—dmép tas Nexia tod dSdpov viod, drromatpidos, Apwos, 
evepyéta 5€ Tas motos, owrnplas a dedication Oeots warpwos, Inscr. 
Cos, 76. This is a decree made in the lifetime of the heros (or why 
ow7nplas ?), who is probably identical, as the editors suggest, with 
Nikias, tyrant of Kos in the Strabo’s time: Str. 658; Perizonius on 
Mes an te San Ty 40 

68 wows applied to a living person occasionally on inss. of the Imperial 
age, CIG. 2583, Lyttos, Crete; 3665 wpwis, living, Kyzikos second 
century ; Ath. Mitt. vi, 121 (Kyzikos again) tmmapyobtvros KAeopévous 
jpwos also certainly living. 

69 When Demetrios Poliorketes conquered and rebuilt Sikyon in 
303 the inhabitants of the city which is now called “‘ Demetrias ”’ offer 
to him while still alive, sacrifice, festival, and annual ay@ves as xriorn 
(a4AAa tabdra pev 6 xpdvos AKvpwoev): D.S. 20, 102, 3. Later this 
frequently occurred: Marcellea, Lucullea, etc., are well known. But 
the matter did not stop there. The inhabitants of Lete in Macedonia 
in the year 117 B.c. decree to a prominent Roman, besides other 
honours, tédec8at adtT@ ayava immxov Kat €tos év TH Aaroiw pyvi, 
Otay Kal Tots aAAols evepyérats of ay@ves éemiteA@vta (Arch. des miss. 
scientif. 3e série, iii, p. 278, n. 127). This implies that all evepyéra 
were by custom offered such games at this time. 

70 D.S. 17, 115. Alexander after inquiry at the oracle of Ammon 
commanded that he should be worshipped as ypws (the oracle having 
_granted in his case éevayifew ws jpar, but not ws Ged Ove) : Arrian, 
An. 7, 14, 7; 23,6; Plu., Alex. 72 (an ypdov was immediately set 
up to him in Alexandria Aeg.: Arr. 7, 23, 7). This did not prevent 
the superstition and servility which flourished together in Alexander’s 
empire from occasionally worshipping Heph. as ‘Hdaoriwy Qeds 
mapedpos.—D.S. probably only exaggerates the truth: 17, 115, 6; 
-cf. Luc., Calumn. 17-18. (The new heros or god immediately gave 
proof of his power by appearances, visions sent in dreams, iédpyara, 
pravtetat, ib. 17.)—Elaborate pomp at the funeral of Dem. Poliork. : 
Plu., Demeir. 53. 

71 Cf. the Testament of Epikteta and other foundations mentioned 
above, this chap., n. 18, and chap. v, n. 126. Or cf. the elaborate 
arrangements which Herodes Atticus made for the funeral], etc., of 
Regilla and Polydeukes (but ypws IloAvdevkiwy is only said in the 
weakened sense in which ypws had been current for a long time) : 
-collected by Keilin Pauly-Wiss. i, 2101 ff. The extravagant manifesta- 
tions of grief that Cicero offered to the memory of his daughter were 
modelled on Greek originals (and upon the certainly Greek auctores 
qui dicant fieri id oportere: Ad. 12, 81, 1). In Att. 12 he gives an 
account of their architectural side; he frequently calls the object 
that he meditates an amo@éwats ; cf. consecrabo te (Consol. fr. 5 Or.).— 
Cf. the Temple-tomb of Pomptilla, who like another Alkestis died instead 
-of her husband, whom she followed into exile as far as Sardinia: her 
-~death was caused by breathing in the breath of the sick man. Her 


NOs 1 Oe CHAPTERS XIV or 561 


temple is at Cagliari in Sardinia, and is adorned with many inss. in 
Latin and Greek: IG. Sic. et It. 607, p. 144 ff. (first century a.D.). 

7 6 Samos (occasionally also a BovdAd Kat 6 Sapos) adnpdige— 
Thera, CIG. 2467; Ross, Inscr. Gr. Ined. 203 ff. (and sometimes 
outside Thera: Loch, Zu d. gr. Grabschr. 282, 1) 6 8apos éripace 
(rov deiva) . . . yowa. Cf. also (Thera) Ath. Mitt. xvi, 166; Epigr. 
Gr. 191-2. 

3 gdpovriaat de tTovs opyedvas (the members of a collegium of 
Dionysiasts) omws adynpwiabe? Arovtctos Kal avarebe? ev TO lep@ mapa 
Tov Qeov, Gmov Kai 6 rarip adrod, va tmdpxer KaAoTOV bropvnua 
avTov eis TOV amavTa xpdvov, inscr. of Peiraeus, second century B.c.; 
CIA. iv, 2, n. 623e, 45 ff. In Argos a guild, apparently of tanners, 
puts up an inscr. 7@ det, xriora jpwi, CIG. 1134. 

™@ Like that Naulochos whom Philios of Salamis saw three times 
in a dream appearing in company with Demeter and Kore. The 
city of Priene thereupon ordered that he should be worshipped (jpwa 
oéBew, Epigr. Gv. 774). 

1S Kadpzos trav (diav yuvaica adnpwite (Thera) CIG. 2471. From the 
same place come many more exx. of adnpwilew by members of a 
family: 2472b-d, 2473; cf. ’Avdpocbévnv Dirwvos véov ypwa... 7 
uyntnp (Macedonia) Arch. miss. scient. iii, 1876, 295, n. 130.—This is 
probably how we should understand the matter when in sepulchral 
epigrams one member of the family addresses or refers to another as 
jpws: Epigr. Gr. 483, 510, 552, 674.—But pws avyyevetas, CIA. iii, 
1460, must have a fuller sense than the otherwise usual jows. It 
distinguishes a true dpynyéryns. Prob. this is also the meaning of 
XappvaAov ypwos tov Xappvaeiwv, GDI, 3701 (Kos). Something more 
than simple 7pws is also probably intended by the language of the 
Pergamene inscr. (specially distorted to suit the fcow%ndia) Inscr. Perg. 
ii, 587, “I. Nixddnpos, 6 kat Nixwv (aduy) ayabos elev av ypws (adty). 

76 It is true that it is difficult to find certain exx. of the identification 
of a dead man with an already existing and honoured heros of another 
name. Of the various examples generally quoted for this perhaps 
the only relevant is the Spartan inscr. ’ApioroxAfs 6 Kai Z80s, 
Ath. Mitt. iv, tab. 8, 2. Identification with a god is of frequent 
occurrence: cf. imagines defuncti, quas ad habitum dei Liberi 
formaverat (uxor), divinis percolens honoribus: Apul., M. viii, 7. 
(Cf. Lob., Agi. 1002, who also thinks of the example given in the 
IIpwrecitaos of Eur.; but the resemblance is only a distant one.) 
The dead man as Baxyos, Epigr. Gr. 821; Atovdcov dyadpa, ib. 705 ; 
cf. the dead man of CIG. 6731, dyaApa efpe ‘HAiov. Many similar 
exx. of the representation of the dead in accordance with the types 
of Dionysos, Asklepios, Hermes are given by Ross, Archdol. Aufs. 
i, 51; Deneken in Roscher, Lex. i, 2588. 

7 See above, ‘chap. iv, p. 128 ff. 

78 See: Keil, Syil. Inscr. Boeot., p. 153. 

79 In Thespiai the inss. do not show the addition of ypws to the 
name of the dead until Imperial times: see Dittenberger on IG. Set. i, 
2110, p. 367. 

89 Many exx. of yows, pws xpynote yatpe, etc., are collected and 
arranged by Deneken in Roscher’s Lex. s. Heros, i, 2549 ff. See also 
Loch, Gr.-Gvabschr., p. 282 fi. 

81 As Keil has already observed, loc. cit. [n. 78].—At any rate 
jpwivn still preserves its full sense when the council and people of 
Athens, in the first century A.D., so describe a woman of position after 
her death, C/A. iii, 889. Or again, when the Athenian as well as the 

foKe) 


562 NOTES! TOMCHAPIT HRS ic IVieat 


Spartan decree calls P. Statilius Lamprias expressly 7pws (see above, 
n. 6)—Fouilles @Epid. i, n. 205-9. 

82 It is curious how, much later, in Christian times, 6 ows is 
applied to one who has recently died (exactly synonymous with 
6 paxapirns): cf. 6 pws Edvddgios, 6 pws Ilarpixios, “IdpBAvxos in » 
Schol. Basilic. 

83 Smvos €xet ce paxap..., Kat Cis ws ypws Kal vexrvs odk eyévov, 
Epigr. Gr. 433; where it is evident that the ypws is something more 
living than the mere véxus. adomalec#’ pwa, tov ovK €dapdocaTo 
Adv (i.e. who has not been made nothing by death), ib., 296. The 
husband tipats lodporpov €OnKe Tav Opodextpov ypworv, 189, 3. The 
title ypws still has a stronger and deeper sense in inss. such as CI1G. 
1627 (referring to a descendent of Plutarch’s) and 4058 (. . . avdpa 
fiAddrAoyor Kal maon apeTH KeKoopnpérvoy evdaipova jpwa). Cf. Orig., 
Cels. 3, 80, p. 359 Lom.: of Buiodvres dof? ypwes yevéobar Kat peta 
Gedv éfew tas deatpiBas. In 3, 22, p. 276, he distinguishes between 
Beot, ypwes, amagamAds wvyxai (the soul can divina fievt et a legibus 
mortalitatis educi, Arnob. 11,,62; cf. Corn. Labeo.,ap. Serv.jaeee 
ili, 168). 

84 dwpot, Biobdvaro, atado. see Append. vii.—Odmrew Kat cdctodv 
74 I, significantly, Philostr., Her. 714, p. 182, 9. £.K. 

85 Plu., Dio, 2: some say that only children and women and foolish 
men see ghosts, daiuova movynpov év avrots Serordaruoviay €xovtes. 
Plu. on the other hand thinks that he can confound the unbelieving by 
pointing to the fact that even Dio and Brutus had seen ¢éopara shortly 
before their death. 

86 Cf. the story of Philinnion and Machates in Amphipolis: Phleg., 
Mivab. 1. Procl. in Rp., p. 64 Sch._[ii, p. 116 Kr. ; see Rohde in Kh, 
Mus. 32, 329 ff.]. The Erinyes in Aesch. are conceived as vampire- 
like: Eum. 264 f.; see above, chap. v, n. 161.—Souls of the dead 
as nightmare, éd¢idAtys, incubo oppressing a man’s enemy: Soran. 
ap. Tert., dn. 44; Cael. Aurel., Morb. Chron. 1, 3, 55 (ih. Mus. 37, 
467, 1). 

8? The Dirowevdys is a genuine treasure-house of typical narratives 
of apparitions and sorceries of every kind. Sdadpovas avayew kal 
vexpovs €wArous avaxadeiv is a mere bagatelle, according to these sage 
doctors, to the magician: c. 13. An example is given of this 
conjuration of the dead (the seven-months dead father of Glaukias) : 
14. Appearance of the dead wife of Eukrates whose golden sandals 
they had forgotten to burn with her: 27 (see above, chap. i, n. 51). 
As a rule the only haunting ghosts are ai rdév Braiws dzofavorvtwv 
yuyai not those of the xara potpav admobavevtwy as the learned 
Pythagorean instructs us, c. 29. Then follows the story of the ghost 
of Corinth (30-1), which must be taken from a widely known ghost- 
story, as it agrees completely in its circumstances with the story told 
with such simple candour by Pliny (Ep. vii, 27). datpuovas- twas elvat 
Kal ddopata Kal vexpa@v uyxds wepiTodetv Urép ys Kal daivecbar ols 
av eféAwow (29) is the fixed conviction of these philosophers. The 
living too can sometimes catch a glimpse of the underworld: 22-4, 
A man’s soul can be detached from his body and go down to Hades, 
and afterwards, again reunited to his body, relate its adventures. Thus 
the soul of Kleodemos, while his body lay in fever, is taken down to 
the lower world by a messenger but then sent back again since 
he had been taken by mistake for his neighbour, the smith Demylos: 
25. This edifying narrative is certainly intended as a parody of the 
similar story told in good faith by Plu. de An. fr. 1, preserved 


NOTES e LOs CHAPTERS XLV;.a1 563 


ap. Eus., PE. 11, 36, p. 563. It is certain that Plu. did not simply 
invent such a story; he may perhaps have found it in some older 
collection of miraculous dvefidcers such as, for example, Chrysippos 
did not disdain to make. The probability that Plu. got this story of 
mistaken identity from a collection of folk-tales is made all the likelier 
since the same story occurs again in a popular guise. Of a similar 
character is what Augustine has to say on the authority of Corn. 
Labeo: Civ. Det 22, 28 (p. 622, 1-5 Domb.). Augustine himself, Cur. 
pro Mort. 15, tells a story exactly like that of Plu. (about Curma 
the curialis and Curma the faber fervarius), which, of course, is 
supposed to happen a little before his time in Africa; and once more 
at the end of the sixth century Gregory the Great introduces a vision 
of Hell by the same formula: Dial. 4, 36, p. 384 AB Migne. The 
inventive powers of ghoststory-tellers is very limited: they keep on 
repeating the same few old and tried motifs. 

Seer iii 10, (29 552 Cimon el: Brut..36' 45-48. 

PLM abOves CHAD AVY, n:i2ocw chap: ix, nn. L05°f, 

°° wvxas Hpwwv avaxadety among the regular arts of the magician, 
Gelsiyape Orig 35 Gelse 15 68,9 p. 127 SLomm: 

#1 See Append. xii. 

*2 And in consequence we sometimes have the most surprising con- 
fusion of the two states of being. Lucian, e.g. (in D. Mort. frequently, 
cf. 18, 1; 20, 2, and Necyom. 15, 17; Char. 24) speaks of the dead 
in Hades as skeletons lying one upon another, Aiakos allowing them 
each one foot of earth, etc. (The Romans have the same confusion 
of ideas : nemo tam puer est, says Sen., Ep. 24, 18, ut Cerberum timeat 
et tenebras et larvalem habitum nudis ossibus cohaerentium. Cf. 
Prop. iv, 5, 3, Cerberus, . . ieiuno terreat ossa sono, etc.) There is also 
a confusion between the grave and Hades in such expressions as 
per evoeBéeoar ketabar: Epigr. Gr. 259, 1; oxivos viv cetpat IXovtéos 
€peAdOpors, 226, 4; cf. above, chap. xii, n. 95. Such a mixture 
of ideas was all the more natural seeing that ‘’Avdys also occurs as a 
metaphor for t¥pBos (see below, n. 135). 

93 6 aodAvs Gyudos ots tdudtas of codot Kadofow, ‘Opjnpw Kal 
‘“Hovddw Kal rots dAdots prvdomovots wept TrovTwv mevOopevot, TOTOV 
Twa b70 THY yHv Babdv “Ardnv trecAndact «rr, Luc., Luct. 2 (con- 
tinued to c. 9). Plu., Suav. Viv. 27, 1105 AB, thinks that od mavu 
moAXot are afraid of Kerberos, having to fill broken pitchers and the 
other terrors of Hades, as being pnrépwv Kal tiTO@v Sdypata Kai 
Adyous pvddders. And yet as protection against these things people 
are always seeking reAeTas kai kabappous. 

94 See Griech. Roman, 261, Ettig <Acheruntica (Leipz. Siud. 13, 
2047 ft.) 

23 Ue hopes that after death he will see rots viv dBpilovras imo 
mAovrov Kat duvdpews KTA. akiav Sikyv tivovtas, Plu., Suav. V. 28, 2, 
1105 C. Reversal of earthly situation in Hades: ee mpaymaTa €s 
Trovpmadw aveotpappeva * Hpuets pev yap of mévyntes yeAdpev, avedvTat 
de i olwdlovaty of mAovato, Luc., Catapl. 15; cf. DM. 15, 2; 25, 2 : 
icoTuila, conyopia in Hades and 6po.ot mavres. aequat omnes cinis ; 
impares nascimur, pares morimur, Sen., Ep. 91, 16—a favourite 
commonplace: see Gataker on M. Ant. vi, 24, p. 235 f. 

°6 How far indeed this really happened is of course not to be 
answered decisively. The Celsus against whom Origen wrote his 
polemical treatise looks at the matter from the popular point of 
view on the whole. (He is no Epicurean as Orig. supposes ; but 
neither in fact is he a professional philosopher of any kind, but rather 


564 NOTE Sas) OF GCIINE PERS ochy jail 


an (Sué7ns with inclinations to philosophy of all sorts and esp. to the 
semi-Platonism current at the time.) He distinctly says prre rovvros 
(the Christians) ein pyr éepot pir adAdrAw Twi avOpwHmwv anobéabat 
TO mEpt Tod KoAacOraccbat Tors adikovs Kal yepav akiwOycecbat Tovs 
dtxatouvs Soypa (ap. Orig., Cels. 3, 16, p. 270 Lomm.).—On the other 
hand, it is significant of the temper of the very “secular ’’ Graeco- 
Roman society which was at the head of affairs at the end of the last 
century B.c., that Cicero at the end of his work, de Nat. Deor. (iii, 
81 ff.), in discussing the various means of obtaining a balance between 
desert and punishment, virtue and reward, in the circumstances 
of human life, never even mentions the belief in a final balance and 
recompense after death. (He only mentions among other things 
the visiting of the sins of the father upon his descendents on earth— 
90 ff.—that old Greek belief [see above, chap. xii, n. 65] which really 
excludes the idea of an after life.) Between the days of Cic. and those 
of Celsus ideas had changed. We know this from innumerable indica- 
tions ; even the next world was looked at in quite a different light in 
the second century A.D. from what it had been two centuries earlier. 

” tynwplat alwviot bro yHv Kal Koracpol dprixwders are expected 
after death by many (while others regard death as merely an ayafav 
otépynats): Plu., Virt. Moral. 10, 450 A. MHorrible tortures in the 
KoAacrnpiov in Hades, fire, scourging, etc.: Luc., Necyom. 14 
(carried still further in Plu.’s pictures of Hades, Gen. Soc. and Ser. 
NV.). Fire, pitch, and sulphur belong to the regular apparatus of 
this place of torment; already in Axtoch, 372 A, sinners are scorched 
by burning torches aidious teuwpias (cf. Lehrs, Popl. Aufs. 308 ff.). 
How far such horrors really represented popular belief it is difficult 
to say for certain (they became quite familiar to Christian writers 
on Hell from classical tradition: cf. Maury, Magie et l’astrol. dans 
Vantiq. 166 ff.). But Celsus, for example, though he himself believes 
in the punishments of Hell (Orig., Cels. 8, 49, p. 180) only appeals in 
confirmation of his belief to the teaching of ¢énynrai teAeotai Te Kai 
pvotaywyoi of certain (not precisely defined) fepa: 8, 48, p. 178; cf. 
abovesachap® vVil.Sacn Chapa x, O2: 

e§imee above, chapmiien S71; 

99 Peleus, Kadmos, Achilles in the Islands of the Blest: Pi., O. 1, 
86 ff. (Peleus and Kadmos the supreme examples of eddatpovia : 
P. iii, 86 ff.). In Eur., Andr. 1254 ff. Thetis promises to Peleus immortal 
life Nynpéws év Sdpors. An ancient poem must have spoken to this 
effect of Kadmos (and of Harmonia his wife) ; both are transported 
pakdpwy es aiav Eur., Ba. 1338 f.; mornrad and pvdoypador ap. Sch. 
Pi., P. iii, 153 (this would be after their “death” in Illyria where 
their graves were shown, and the snakes of stone into which they had 
been changed : see Miller on Scylax, 24, p. 31). Achilles and Diomedes 
are viaois ev paxapwv acc. to the skolion on Harmodios: Carm. pop. 
fr. 10 Bgk. (Thus we often hear that Achilles is in the Is. of the Blest 
or in the ’HAvowov wediov which was regularly identified with them— 
cf. ’H Avowos Aetpwv in the waxapwv vijcos: Luc., Jup. Conf.17; VHA. 
1i,914—e.g: Pla., Smp.-199.E; A.R. iv, 811; [Apollod.] Ept7woeo: 
His special place of abode the island of Leuke is also a paxdpwv vijcos 
and an older invention than the common Is. of the Blest of which 
we first hear in Hes., Op. 159 ff. Diomedes in the same way after 
his ddaviaouos enjoyed immortal life in the island named after him 
in ‘the “Adriatic: Ibyc.-ap» Sch. Pi, N. x, 12; Str. 283-4) etcaaaeae 
the skolion transferred him to the common dwelling-place of the 
blessed Heroes.) Achilles, sometimes in Leuke, sometimes on the Is. 


NOPESSLOs CHAPTERS XLV. 11 565 


of the Blest, is accompanied by his wife Medea (in Elys. : Ibyc. Simon. 
Sch. A.R. iv, 814; A.R. iv, 811 ff.) or Iphigeneia who had once been 
betrothed to him (in Leuke: Ant. Lib. 27 after Nikand.; different 
version by Lycophr. 183 ff.) or Helen (Paus. 3, 19, 11-13; Conon, 18; 
Sch. Pl., Phdr. 243 A; Philostr., Her. 211 ff. Kays.).—Alkmene after 
her body had vanished from the sight of those who were bearing the 
coffin (cf. Plu., Rom. 28) was translated to the paxdpwv vfco.: Ant. 
Lib 33 after Pherecyd.—Neoptolemos is transported és Atvouov 
medtov pakdpwy emt yatar, O.S. ii, 761 ff.—Among the other Heroes 
there Agamemnon is also implied: Artemid. v, 16.—In all these 
fabulous accounts the Is. of the Blest (Elysion) remain invariably the 
abode of special and chosen Heroes (Harmodios’ translation there 
in the skolion is no exception; nor is Lucian’s jesting reference, 
VH.ii,17). It was only later imagination that, under the influence of 
theology, made this kingdom of bliss the common dwelling-place of 
almost all the edceBets. 

700 Fortunatorum memorant insulas quo cuncti qui aetatem egerint 
caste suam conveniant, Plaut., Tvin. 549 f. Menand. Rh., Encom. 414, 
16 ff. Sp., recommends the use in a zapapvOntikds Adyos of the words : 
metGopat Tov peTaoTavTa TO HAVovov TEdSlov olkety (—and even Kal Taxa 
mov padAdov peta THY Gedy Stairarae viv); cf. p. 421, 16-17 Sp. And 
much later, yapw apeipacba att ov evxopat Tors Oeots, €v paxdpwv vyoots 
7dn ovlfnv nétdbpevov, Suid. "Avrdvos *AdAcEavdpe’s (410 B Gaisf.) 
from Damascius. 

Eee eLtOliusmeehr, ser! S—Oceoalll, Ho Ie fr, 61.62). biors2.10 (Hors 
Epod. 16, 39 ff.). Some even thought that they had found (cf. Phoen. 
legends : Gv. Roman 215) the pak. vjo. off the west coast of Africa: Str. 
Pepe ill weo0 Mela ycili, 10 se Plin:, NA. vi, 20208) - Marcellus; 
Aifton. ap. Procl., im Tim., p. 54 F, 55 A, 56 B, etc. Islands inhabited 
by spirits in the north: Plu., Def. Ov..18, p. 419 F; fr. vol. v, 764 ff. 
Wytt. Procop., Goth. iv, 20 (the paxdpwv vioo are in the middle of 
the African continent acc. to Hdt. iii, 26; in Boeot. Thebes, Lyc. 
1204 with Sch.). Ps. Callisth. makes Alex. the Great reach the land 
of the Blest, ii, 39 ff. There may have been many such fables which 
have been parodied by Lucian in VH. ii, 6 ff., where he and his 
company é7u Cartes iepod xwpiov émBaivovory (ii, 10). It was always 
natural to hope that at the Antipodes (cf. Serv., A. vi, 532) such 
a land of the Souls and the Blest might some day be discovered—as 
indeed many have thought they had discovered it in the progressive 
geographical discovery of the Middle Ages and modern times. 

102 Leuke, to which already in the Aithiopis Achilles had been 
translated, was originally a purely mythical place (see above, p. 65), 
the island of the pallid shades (like the Aevxas mérpn of Od. 
w 11, at the entrance of Hades; cf. « 515. It is the same rock of 
Hades from which unhappy lovers cast themselves down to death, 
apbeis Sntr’ amd Acvxddos mézpyns x7A. Anacr. 17, etc. [cf. Dieterich, 
Nek. 27 f.]. AevKn, the white poplar, as the tree of Hades, was used 
to make the garlands of the Mystai at Eleusis; cf. Acuvx1) Kumaptoaos 
at the entrance of Hades, Epigr. Gr. 1037, 2).—It was probably 
Milesian sailors who localized this island of Achilles in the Black Sea 
(there was a cult of Ach. in Olbia and in Miletos itself). Alc. already 
knows of the champion as ruling over the country of the Scythians: 
fr. 48b, év Edéeiva meddyer daevvav ’Axireds vaaov (éxet), Pi., N. iv, 49. 
Then Eur., Andy. 1259 ff.; IT. 436 ff.; finally Q.S. iii, 770 ff. Leuke 
was particularly identified with an uninhabited islet rising with its 
white limestone cliffs out of the sea at the mouth of the Danube: 


566 NOTES 3LOM CHAE LEK SenLy pare 


KéXrov mpés éxBodaia, Lyc. 189 (probably the Istros is meant but 
the latest editor simply substitutes ’’Iorpov mpos éx.—a far too facile 
conjecture).—It stood, more exactly, before the yAov oTopa, 1.€. the 
most northerly mouth of the river (the Kilia mouth): Arrian, Peripl. 
20, 3H.; [Scylax] Pevipl. 68 prob. means the same island ; cf. Leuke, 
e000 ’’Ictpov, Max. Tyr. 15,7. It has been proposed to identify it 
with the ‘“‘ snake island ”’ which lies more or less in the same neighbour- 
hood: see H. Koehler, Mém. sur les idles et la course cons. a Achille, 
etc., Mém. acad. S. Petersb. 1826, iv, p. 599 ff. It was only by a 
confusion that the long sandy beach at the mouth of the Borysthenes, 
called ’AytAAéws Spdpos, was identified with Leuke (e.g. by Mela, 
ii, 98; Plin., NH.iv, 93; D.P. 541 ff.) ; legends of Achilles’ epiphanies 
may have been current there too (as in other islands of the same name : 
Dionys. of Olbia ap. Sch. A.R. ii, 658) ; the Olbiopolitai offer a cult 
to ’AytAdreds ITovrdpyns there: CIG. 2076-7, 2080, 2096b-f (IPE. 
i, 77-83). But asa settled abode of Achilles only Leuke was generally 
recognized (there was a Spdpos ’AytAA€ws there as well: Eur., JT. 437 ; 
Hesych. ’AyiAA. wAdwoa; Arr. 21—hence the confusion mentioned 
above). Strabo’s remarks on the subject are peculiar (vii, 306 f.). 
He distinguishes the "Ay. dpduos (which had already been mentioned 
by Hdt. iv, 55) from Leuke altogether ; and he places that island not 
at the mouth of the Istros but 500 stades away at the mouth of the 
Tyras (Dniester). But the place where sacrifice and worship was 
made to Achilles, as the abode of his spirit, was definitely 
fixed ; and this was, in fact, the island at the mouth of the Danube 
(xara tod ’’Iatpov tas éxBodds, Paus. 3, 19, 11), of which Arr. 23, 3, 
gives an account based partially on the evidence of eye-witnesses 
(p. 399, 12 Miill.). It was an uninhabited, thickly wooded island 
only occupied by numerous birds; there was a temple and a statue of 
Ach. on it, and also an oracle (Arr. 22, 3), which must have been 
an oracle taken by casting or drawing lots (for there were no human 
intermediaries) which those who landed on the island could make use 
of forthemselves. The birds—which were perhaps regarded as incarna- 
tions of the Heroes, or as handmaidens of the “ divinity of light ”’ 
which Achilles was, acc. to R. Holland, Heroenvégel in d. gr. Myth. 
7 ff., 1896—the birds purify the temple every morning with their 
wings, which they have dipped in the water: Arvz., p. 398, 18 ff. 
Philostr., Her. 746, p. 212, 24 Kays. (Cf. the comrades of Diomedes 
changed into birds on his magic island: Iuba ap. Plin., NH. x, 127— 
another bird miracle: ib., x, 78). No human beings dared to live 
on the island, though sailors often landed there; they had to leave 
before nightfall (when spirits are abroad): Amm. Marc. 22, 8, 35; 
Philostr., Her. 747, p. 212, 30-213, 6. The temple possessed many 
votive offerings and Greek and Latin inss. (IPE. i, 171-2). Those 
who landed there sacrificed the goats which had been placed on the 
island and ran wild. Sometimes Ach. appeared to visitors; at other 
times they heard him singing the Paian. In dreams too he sometimes 
appeared (i.e. if a person happened to sleep—there was no Dream- 
oracle there). To sailors he gave directions and sometimes appeared 
like the Dioskouroi (as a flame ?) on the top of the ship’s mast (see 
Arr., Peripl. 21-3; Scymn. 790-6; from both these is derived Anon., 
P, Poni. Bux? 64-63) Max. Tyr.:153:7,'p: 28142 Re) Paus3 lope 
Amm. Marc. 22, 8, 35. (The account in Philostr., Hey. 745, p. 211, 
17-219, 6 Kays., is fantastic but uses good material and is throughout 
quite in keeping with the true legendary spirit—esp. in the story also 
of the girl torn to pieces by ghosts: 215, 6-30. Nor is it likely that 


NOTES TO -CHAPTER XIV;-i1 567 


Phil. himself invented the marvellous tale laid precisely in the year 
163-4 B.c.). Achilles is not regarded as living quite alone here: 
Patroklos is with him (Arr. 32, 34; Max. Tyr. 15, 7), and Helen or 
Iphigeneia is given him as his wife (see above, n. 99). Leonymos of 
Kroton, sixth century B.c., meets the two Aiantes and Antilochos 
there’; Paus. 3, 19, 13; Conon 18; D:P. (time of Hadrian) says 
(545): Ket@e 8 ’AytrAfjos Kat jpwwv daris GrAAwWY Yvyas efAlocecOat 
epnuaias ava Brnooas (which Avien., Des. Orb., misunderstands and 
improves on: 722 ff.). Thus the island, though in a limited sense, 
became a true waxapwv rjcos—insula Achillea eadem Leuce et Macaron 
apPpelata; Pp linwe NV lis 1V, 2a: 

103 Cic., speaking of the “‘ translations ’’ of Herakles and Romulus, 
Says non corpora in caelum elata, non enim natura pateretur... 
(ap. Aug., CD. 22, 4); only their animi remanserunt et aeternitate 
fruuntur, ND. ii, 62; cf. iii, 12. Plu., Rom. 28, speaks in the same 
way of the oid translation stories (those of Aristeas, Kleomedes, 
Alkmene, and finally Romulus)—it was not their bodies which had 
disappeared together with their souls, for it would be zapa ro elkés, 
evOeraleww TO Ovntov THs dvaews apa Tots Delors (cf. Pelop. 16 fin.) ; 
cf. also the Hymn (represented as ancient) of Philostr. dealing with 
the translated Achilles: Her. 741, p. 208, 24 ff. K. 

104 Celsus and Plutarch both know and describe the ancient cult 
and oracular power of Amphiaraos (only at Oropos now) as still in 
existence ; the same applies to that of Trophonios (like that of 
Amphilochos also in Cilicia). An inscr. from Lebadeia (first half 
third century A.D.) mentions a priestess tis ‘Opovotas trav ‘EAAjvev 
mapa T® Tpodwviw, IG. Sept. i, 3426. 

105 *Aaraxidnv tov Kpira, tov atimddov, apmace viudn €& spéwv 
Kal viv tepos "Aoraxidns (he has become divine, i.e. immortal): Call., 
Ep. 24. Of a similar character is the legend of Hylas: adavis 
eyévero, Ant. Lib. 26; and of Bormos among the Maryandynoi 
(vunddorAnatros Hesych. Béppov, adavicdfvac Nymphis, fr. 9). The 
Daphnis legend is another example, and even the story of Odysseus 
and Kalypso, who detains him in her cave and would like to make 
him immortal and ageless for ever, is in reality based on such legends 
of the Nymphs. (Even the name of the Nymph in this case indicates 
her power: to xaddqmrew her mortal lover, i.e. ddavqi movetv.) Only 
in this case the spell is broken and the dma@avdtiors of the translated 
lover is never carried out. For other exx. of legends of the love of 
Nymphs for a youth see Griech. Roman, 109, 1; a Homeric ex. in 
Z 21 of the vyls "ABapBapén and Boukolion the son of Laomedon. 
The idea that a person translated by the nymphs did not die but lived 
on for ever, remained current: cf. inscr. from Rome, Epigr. Gr. 
570, 9-10: rots mapos obv pvOots morevoate* matda yap eobAnv ip macev 
ws tepmvnv Naides, 0d Oavaros. And again, n. 571: Nvpdat cpnvatat 
pe ouvnpmacay ex Rudtoto, Kal TaXa TOV TLL HS ElveKa TObT Emabov. 

106 In the extravagant and fanatical worship of Dionysos that was 
transplanted from Greece to Italy and Rome in the year 186 B.c. the 
miracle of translation was carried out in a very practical fashion 
(belief in its possibility was evidently firmly established). Machines 
were prepared upon which those whose disappearance was to be 
effected were bound; they were then transferred by the machine 
in abditos specus; whereupon the miracle was announced: rapios 
a dis homines istos: Liv. 39, 13. This only becomes intelligible in 
the light of such legends of the translation of mortals, body and soul, 
to immortality, of which we have been speaking. 


? 


568 NOTES TO CHAPTER XIVj01i1 


107 Plainly so in the case of Berenike the consort of Ptolemy 
Soter: Theoc. 17, 46. Theocritus addresses Aphrodite: oé6ev 
8 évexev Bepevixa everdys ’Ayépovta modAvatovov ovK éemépacev, adda 
puv apmdgaca mapol’ émt via KateAbeiv Kvavéavy kai oTvyvov det 
mopOuna KapovTwr, és vaov KaTtéOnKas, €as & ameddaccao Tiuas (as ea 
mapedpos or avvvaos: cf. Inscr. Perg. i, 246, 8). Cf. also Theoc. 
15, 106 ff. Asa rule, however, this idea is not so definitely expressed 
(though it is plainly implied that translation is the normal way in 
which deified princes depart this life, in the story indignantly 
rejected by Arrian, Anab. 7, 27, 3, that Alexander the Great wanted 
to throw himself into the Euphrates ws agaviys e€ avépwmmwy yevopevos 
muototépay 7THv dSdfav mapa Tots Emeita eyKataXeimor OTL Ex GeEod Te 
atT@ 9 yéveots avvéBy Kal mapa Beods 7 amoxwpynots—which is the 
regular and ancient idea of translation, exhibited e.g. in the story of 
Empedokles:. end: see above, chap. xi, n.. 61%, and) Christam 
pamphleteers transferred the fable to Julian and his end). The 
Roman Emperors also allowed such conventional miracles to be told 
of themselves, in which at least they were imitating the practice of 
the Hellenistic monarchs and the “consecration” fables usual at 
their death (they do not die but pe@laravrar €€ avOpwmwr, pel. eis 
Geovs, SIG. 246, 16; Inscr. Perg. i, 249, 4; inscr. from Hierapolis 
given by Frankel, ib. i, p. 39a). That the god is tvanslaied, his whole 
personality 7m caelum vedit, is implied as occurring at the death of 
an Emperor on the coins of consecration, in which the translated is 
represented as being carried up to heaven by a Genius or a bird (e.g. 
the eagle which was set free at the vogus of the emperor: D.C. 56, 
42,3; 74, 5,5; Hdn. 4, 2 fin.): see Marquardt, Rim. Staatsverw. 
3, 447, 3. Nor were there lacking people who maintained on oath 
that they had actually witnessed the translation of the emperor body 
and soul to heaven, as had once happened to Julius Proculus and 
Romulus. Thus at the end of Augustus’ life: D.C. 56, 46, 2, and that 
of Drusilla: 59, 11, 4. Sen., Apocol. 1. It was the official and 
only recognized manner in which a god can leave this life. 

108 Phdr. 246 CD. amdAarropev ... Gedv, abavardv te C@ov, Exov 
pev uyrnv, Exov 5€ cima, Tov del Sé ypovov tatra Evuteduxdta. In 
acc. with the will of the dyuiovpyds body and soul in the gods remain 
joined together (though in itself ro defév wav AuTdv. It is to this that 
Klearch. alludes ap. Ath. 15, 670 B, o7e Avtrov [Avetar the MSS.] pev 
mav ro dSedepevov): hence they are a@avatror, Tim. 41 AB. 

109 Hasisatra, Enoch: see above, chap. ii, n. 18. Moses, .too, 
was translated acc. to later legend, and Elijah (cf. after the battle of 
Panormos Hamilcar disappears and for that reason is worshipped 
with sacrifice: Hdt. vii, 166-7). In Egypt too: D.S. 1, 25, 7, speaks 
of the €€ av@pwmwv perdoraas, i.e. translation, of Osiris (for the 
expression cf. Kdotwp xat Ilodvdevnns é& avOpeimav ndavicdycar, 
Isoc., Archid. (6), 18, etc., frequently). 

110 Stories of the disappearance (non comparuit, nusquam apparuit 
= ndavioby) of Aeneas and Turnus, King Latinus, Romulus and 
others: Preller, Rom. Myth.*, pp. 84-5; 683, 2; 704. Anchises: 
Procop., Goth. iv, 22 fin. 

111 So too Caesar in deorum numerum relatus est non ore modo 
decernentium sed et persuasione volgi, Suet., Jul. 88. 

112 D.C. 79, 18.—It is natural to suppose that some prophecy of 
the return of the great Macedonian was current and encouraged the 
attempt to turn the prophecy into a reality and predisposed people 
to believe in it. This at least is what happened in the case of Nero 


NO Spe Os CLA PERO OC WVene Tr 569 


and the false Fredericks of the middle ages. This seems to have been 
at the back of the superstitious cult of Alexander particularly flourishing 
just at that time (cf. the story told of the family of the Macriani by 
Preps Poll sa77 11 yr, 1454-6)... Caracalla (Aur )Vict., (Epit, 21; cf. 
Hdn. 4, 8; D.C. 77, 7-8) and Alexander Severus actually regarded 
themselves as Avatars of Alexander reborn and incarnated in them- 
selves (the latter was first called Alexander at his elevation to the 
principate, certainly ominis causa, and was supposed to have been born, 
on the anniversary of Alexander’s death, in A.’s temple: Lamprid., 
Al. Sev. 5, 1; 13, 1, 3, 4: . He paid special honour to Alex., and: as 
we are expressly told by Lamp. 64, 3, se magnum Alexandrum videri 
volebat). 

118 The Christian anticipation of the return of Nero (as Antichrist) 
is well known: he was supposed to have disappeared and not to have 
died. They based their expectation, however, on a widespread belief 
of the populace which the various Wevdovepwres who actually appeared 
Pieicamoarheimadvantage (Suet, Nevso/ie Lac. to mig 2e 18h Suc, 
Indoct. 20). 

114 This was the idea lying behind the deification of Antinous 
commanded by the Emperor; as may be seen from the connexion in 
which Celsus speaks of the matter (ap. Orig., Cels. 3,36, p. 296 Lomm.) : 
he mentions the disappearance of Ant. in the same context as the 
translation of Kleomedes, Amphiaraos, Amphilochos, etc. (c. 33—4).— 
The language in which the deification of Ant. is spoken of on the obelisk 
at Rome gives no precise idea of what happened : see Erman, M1t. arch. 
Inst. vom. Abt. 1896, p. 113 ff.—In this case, then, we have a translation 
effected by a river-god: cf. the water-nymphs mentioned above, 
n. 105. Inthe same way Aeneas disappeared into the river Numicius : 
Serv., Aen, xu, 7/94; Sch. Veron.; Aénii, 259; D.H. 1, 64, 4: .Arnob: 
besor Ov ye xiv 00S toe Liv. 1, 2,0. clauthe fable: of/ Alex” the 
Great’s translation into a river: n. 107. Euthymos in the same 
way vanished into the river Kaikinos (supposed to be his real father: 
Paus. 6, 6, 4): see above, chap. iv, n. 116. 

115 Philostr., V. Ap. viii, 29-30 (not indeed from Damis as Ph. 
himself definitely asserts; but certainly from sincere accounts derived 
from the various adherents of Apoll.—none of the facts in the 
biography are Phil.’s own invention). Apoll. either died in Ephesos 
or disappeared (adavo@jva) in the temple of Athene at Lindos or 
disappeared in the temple of Diktynna in Crete and ascended to 
heaven att owpare (as Eus. adv. Hierocl. 44, 408, 5 Ks. rightly under- 
stands it). This was the legend generally preferred. His aganopdés 
was confirmed by the fact that no grave or cenotaph of Apoll. was 
to be found: Philostr. viii, 31 fin. The imitation of the legends about 
the disappearance of Empedokles is obvious. 

16 to6 “AmoAAwviov é& avOpwrov dyn dvtos, Oavyalopevov Se emt 
TH petaBoAH Kal pnd avtrAdEat Oappotvtos pndévos ws odK abavatos 
etn, Philostr. viii, 31. Then follows a miracle vouchsafed to an un- 
believing Thomas to whom Apoll. himself appears. 

117 Pre-existence of the soul, return of the souls of the good to their 
home with God, punishment of the wicked, complete a@avacta of 
all souls as such—all this belongs to the wisdom of Solomon. The 
Essene doctrine of the soul as described by Jos., BJ. 2, 8, 11, is also 
thoroughly Greek; it belongs to the Stoico-Platonic teaching (i.e. 
the Neopythagorean variety): see Schwally, Leben mn. Tode n. 
Vorst. alt. Isvaél, p. 151 ff., 179 ff. [1892]. The carmen Phocylideum 
is the work of some Jewish author who obscurely mixes up 


570 NOTES “TOW CHAPTERWIXDY, a1 


Platonic ideas with those of Greek theologians (cf. 104 where Bgk., 
PLG. ii, p. 95, rightly defends the MSS. @eoi against Bernays), and 
of the Stoics (108)—adding also ideas derived from the Jewish doctrine 
of the resurrection (115 at least is completely Greek: ypuyi 3’ 
aOdavatos Kat aynpws CH d1a mayrds). In Philo’s doctrine of the soul 
everything comes from Platonic or Stoic sources. 

18¢e.8. in sikyon as: it;appears: © Paus.)2;) 7/22: 

119 Perhaps in Epigr. Gr. ed. Kaibel (which will be referred to in 
this section as Ep.), 35a, p. 517 ; but this belongs to the fourth century 
p.c. 7A latevexampler(ins prose) BiG. otc: ebali 702; 

120 yatav exors eAadpav, Ep. 195, 4; cf. 103, 9; 538, 7; 551, 4; 
559, 35 1G. Sic. et It. 229; \Rhodian inscr., [Gi] Aegai, 13. 
(first-second century A.D.): dAAa av, datpov, TH POiuern Kovdnv 
yatav Umep0ev €xors.—Eur. already has something similar: Alc. 463 ; 
Seerabove, chap ..xibeaiel. 1: 

121 The confusion of ideas is evident, e.g. in Ep. 700, xoddov Exors 
yains Bdapos evoeBins evil xwpw, cf. 222b, 11-12.—The real meaning 
of such wishes is indicated by Luc., Luct. 18; the dead son says to 
his mourning father, Sé8:as poy cot dmomuyd Kataxreobeis ev TO 
[v7 Lare. 

122 @epoedovns OddAapos, Oarapor, Ep. 35, 4; 50, 2; 201, 4; 
231, 2; Anth. Pal. vii, 507-8 ‘‘Simonides’’. ¢Ocpévors aévaos 
Oadapos, Ep. 143, 2. Sdpos Nuxrds, AP. vii, 232. (We need not 
hesitate to use the grave-epigrams in the Anthology side by side 
with the actual sepulchralinss. The former are sometimes the models 
of the latter, sometimes modelled upon actual epitaphic inscriptions, 
but always closely related to the more literary epitaphs.) 

123 AnOns mavotmovoyv moma, Ep. 244, 10. Hv KxaraBas és mapa 
Anns, 261, 20. (NUE, AnOns SHpa dépovo” em’ epoi, 312.)  Moitpat 
kat A7nOn pe Katynyayov eis "Aidao, 521. (Cf. AP. vii, Anns dopo, 
25,6; Anns Aun, 498; AHnOAns wédXayos, 711, 716.) AdBas yAvOov 
eis Avwévas, Mysian inscr. BCH. xvii (1894), p. 532, n. 34. 

124 0 aAetous = the dead (like the Latin plures: Plaut., Trin. 291 ; 
Petron. 42): és mXedvwv in Hades, Ep. 373,4; AP. vii, 731, 6; xi, 
42. Already in Ar., Eccl 1073: ypais dvaornkvia mapa Tav 
mAevovwv. Call., Epigr. 5 (cf. Boisson. on Eunap., p. 309). Ancient 
oracle ap. Polyb. 8, 30, 7: wera trav mrcdvwy = TOV peTnAAaxoTwv 
(Tarentum). Even in the present day: ’orods zoAdovs, Schmidt, 
Volksl. d. Neugr. i, 235. 

125 Fp. 266, 1) pvpov, did dvep, we* Kal adtos éxet yap ddevoas 
evpyoes THY onv avyyapov Edruxinv. Cf. 558, 5 ff.; 397, 5. Phrygian 
inscr., Papers American School, iii, 305 (n. 427): a father addressing 
his dead son kai wodv tepoavéw rdre Sdxpvov Aika ceio Yuynv abpyow 
yiv vmodvadpevos. 

126 ef 8€ tis ev POpevors Kplows, ws Adyos audit Oavdvrwr, Ep. 215, 5. 
A mother boasts of the piety of her son to Rhadamanthys: 514, 5 
(cf. 559, 3f.). So too, in AP. vii there is little mention of a judgment 
(596 Agathias). 

127 The division of the dead into two classes is implied where the 
pious departed is said to be about to dwell év paxdpecaw, etc. But 
the distinct separation of the dead into two or three classes [see above, 
chap. xii, n. 62] is rare in the sepulchral inscr.: Ep. 650, 9 ff., is an 
exception (but there one company is émyfovin, the other in the aither 
—a Stoic idea).—A peculiar arrangement, implying the three classes, 
is given in [Socr.] Epist. 27, 1 (they are in the rdézos eto. and doeBav 
in Hades, and in the aither) : rod eite kata yqv év evoeBav xépw ovTos 


ING PE See Orme GH APL ik be 11 571 


elre Kat’ dorpa (Omep Kal para melPoua) Lwxpdrovs.—The same again 
in AP. vii, 370 (Diodor.) év Ads (i.e. in Heaven) 7 paxdpwv. 

128 There is perhaps no reference in the grave-inss. to the punish- 
ment of the aceBeis, and scarcely any in AP. vii (but cf. 377, 7 f. 
Erykios). 

129 Juyn O° és TO Oixatov EB, Ep. 502, 13; i.e. to the place to which 
it justly belongs. 

130 paiets paxapwr vyoouvs Badin evi moAAR, Ep. 649, 2; 366, 6; 
648, 9. vicov exerts paxdpwr, 473, 2; 107, 2; AP. vii, 690, 4. 
paxdpwrv mediov, Ep. 516, 1-2. ’Hdvatov mediov, 414, 8; 150, 6. 
media “Hidvora, 338, 2; 649, 3. y@pos HAvatos, 618a, 8. per’ 
evoeBéwy éopev ev *Hdvoiw, 554, 4.—vaiw 8 ypdwv iepov sdpor, 
ovk “Ayépovtos * Totov yap Bidtov téppa codotow ev, Ep. 228, 7-8. 
Hpwwyv x@pov éxors POipevos, 539, 4. Antoyevés, od 8€ maidas ev 
npweaor dvddcoos, evoeBéwy del y@pov éemepxopevos, 228b, 7 (p. 520). 
exer es nputléovs, 699 (col péev €dpy Getorot map’ avipaa, AP. vii, 

59, 3). 

131 Description of the charms of the paxdpwv vico and the Elysian 
fields where otd8€ modewds avOpmmwv ert Biotos, Ep. 649. More 
elaborate in the poem of Marcellus on Regilla the wife of Herodes 
Att.: Ep. 1046 (she is we? Apdvnow év paxdpwv vicoroww, iva Kpovos 
€uBactrdever, 8-9; Zeus had dispatched her thither with soft breezes, 
es wxeavov, 21 ff. Now she is od Ovn77, atap ovdé Ogawa but a Heroine, 
42 ff. In the yopdos mporepdwv urdedwy she serves aS an odmdwv 
vvudn Of Persephone, 51 ff.). 

132 Clearly e.g. the place where Rhadamanthys holds sway in Hades, 
Ep. 452, 18-19. 

133 The y@pos edoeBéwv clearly indicates Hades: “Aidew vuyioro 
pédas bredéEato KdATos, evoeBéwv 8 cainv etvacev és KALoinv, Ep. 
27, 3-4; cf. inscr. from Rhodos, IGM. Aeg. i, 141, of an old school- 
master —evoeBdv yadpos [cd Exer]* T]AovtTwv yap atrov Kat Kopy 
Kkata@Kioar, “Epuns te kat dadodxyos ‘Exatn, mpooditaAq] dmaow eivat, 
pvoTika@y Tt emotarny étragav avtov miatews maons xdpw.—Not in- 
frequently Elysion and the place of the edceBées are identified: e.g. 
Ep. 338, evdoeBées dé wuyny (sc. Exyovat) Kal mediwy téppoves ’Hdvaiwy. 
TovTo caofpoatyns EAaxov yépas, auBpooiny dé (the immortality of her 
soul) capmaros bBptotis odK émdtnoe xpovos. aAAd vén vdudyae (thus 
the stone: Ath. Mitt. iv, 17) per’ edoeBéeco. xabfrar.—lf there is 
a judgment in Hades olxyaets els Sdpov edoeBéwr, Ep. 215, 5-6. Kore 
conducts the dead y@pov én’ edceBéwv, 218, 15-16. Kdarw év evacBewy 
jv dua acwdpootyvny, 569, 12. edoeBéwv yadpos, 296. edo. dopos, 
222, 7-8. edoeBéwv vatois tepdv Sépov, IPE. ii, 298, 11. uy 8 
evoeBéwv olxerat els Oadrapov, Ep. 90 (CIA. ii, 3004). edo. els tepods 
Badrdpous, 222b, 12. edo. ev cxtepois Padrdpors, 253, 6. eabdAa dé vaiw 
ddipata Depoeddvas xydpw ev evoeBéewv 189, 5-6. per’ eboeBéecct 
Ketoba, avr’ aperis, 259. OAK’ ’Aldns és pvyov edoeBewv, 24la, 18. 
evoeBins 8 eivexev evoeBéwv ydpov éBn pOipevos, Ath. Mitt. xi, 427 
(Kolophon). Late Roman inscr., [G. Sic. et It. 1660: a wife says 
of her dead husband zepi od Séopat tods KarayPoviouvs Oeovs, THY Pux yy 
els tods evoeBets Karara€éat. 

184 The y@pos paxdpwr in the sky: wpuy7y 8 abavarwv Bovdats 
EMLOnpLOS E€aTLY daTpoLs Kal tepov ydpov Eyer paxdpwv, Ep. 324, 3-4. 
kal valeits pakdpwv viaovs... avyais ev Kabapaiow, "Oddprov 
mAngiov dvtws, 649, 2, 8. The Advovov mediov outside the POupevwy 
Sdpor, 414, 8, 6. Sometimes both the heavenly abode of the blessed 
and the Islands of the Blest occur together: [Luc.] Dem. Enc. 50. 


572 NOTES MEO MGA RTE hark Veit 


Demosth. is after his death either in the paxdpwv vyoots with the 
Heroes, or else in the ovpavés as an attendant daimon on Zeds 
°"E Nev Béptos. 

1385 Wuyi) mpos "Odvymov avyiAdato, Ep. 646a, 3. ux 8 ev 
"Od prw, 159, 261, 11. FAP 8 eis “Aidan Seas, puxy 8’ és 
’Odvptov, AP. vii, 362, 3. ("Aidns here = the grave as often; so 
too in Ep. 288, 4-5, Puy)... és aidepa... doréa eis "Aidny 
atpomos elAe vopos.) peta TOTMOV Op@ daos OdAvuTov0, AP. vii, 678, 5.— 
puxnv 6 éx pedéwv ovpavos evpds exer, Ep. 104b, 4. Frop 8’ odvpava 
petapovov, 462, 6. wuyn pot valer SWpar emovpava, 261, 10 (and 
frequently in this poem in various forms). és odpavias drapzovs 
yuxy tantaiver cap amodvoapevyn, AP. vii, 337, 7; cf. also 363, 3; 
587, 2; 672, 1 and ix, 207-8. aiéjp pév puyxas bredé~aro, Ep. 21 
(fifth century B.c., see above, chap. xii, n. 149). Evpupayxou buyny 
xal vmepdiddovs Sdravoias alfjp vypos exer, 41 (fourth century B.c. 
but the al@7p is not “‘ moist ’’—aléjp Aapmpos Exer is the more primitive 
version of the phrase given_in the corresponding epigr. of the ITém2os. 
The ayp would be typos: tiv poxnv amédwxev és a€pa, Ep. 642, 7). 
yoxn pev és alBépa cat Aros addrds, 288, 4. uy) 8 aiPeprov Katéxer 
modov, 225, 3. &€s aidpnv uxt EBn Evébev, 325, 5.—yux7 8 abavatwv 
Bovrats émdypros e€otw dorpots, Ep. 324, 3. From Thyatira, BCH. 
i887, p- 461: @apev 8 adeAdos "ApxéAaos odp’ éepov, yuya dé pev 
7 pos dotpa kat Beovs EXT (read €By). One company of the souls 
Teipecar avv aldeptovar Xopevet Hs oTpaTens els Elpt, Ep. 650, 11-12 
(Diogenes) viv d€ Bavwy aotépas oixov exer, AP. vii, 64, 4. 

136 uy 8 é€x pebéwv mrapéevn peta Saipovas Pew yAvbe on, 
vaiets 6° év paxdpwv Samédw, Ep. 243, 5-6. Kai pe Oedv paxdpwv 
KaTéxet Sdpos Gooov idvta, ovpaviots Te Sdporoe BrAETW Hados ’"Hpryeveins, 
312, 6.—r7v otverov bry paxdapwv eis dépa dotca, mpoabev pev Ovnrn, 
viv 5€ Dedv péroxos, 654, 4-5.—adda viv eis tovs Oeovs IG. Sic. et It. 
1420. ws d€ dias pév EXvoEv amd xOoves, aPdvator pev adrov Exovat 
Oeot cHpa d€ onKos 60€, AP. vii, 570; 61, 2; 573, 3-4. 

137 See above, chap. xii, p. 436 ff. 

188-See above, p. 500 f. avetpe, Ep. 250, 6; 613, 67" avepme 
AaBav davos odpavdbev tedécas yxpdvov avtanmédwxa (cf. mrvetpa yap 
eott Beod xpos Avytotot, Carvm. Phoc. 106). 156, 2: avoinv aidyp 
ober mad, domep €dwxev (third century B.c.; see Kohler on CIA, 

, 4135).—This conception having become popular frequently occurs 
in the theological poetry of later timesome... XP Mos ap. Stob., Ecl. 
1, 49, 46, 1, p. 414 W.: 70 peéev (70 o@ a) Avbév € €oTt Kovis, Wuyy ry m™pos 
Branne oKidvaTat, Seite HAGE, petnopos eis aifép’ amrobv (read aibép’ 
es ayvoév). Oracle of Apoll. Tyan. ap. Philostr., VA. vill, Sue 
abavaros puxy .. peTa o@pa papavbév ... pyrdiws mpobopotca 
KepavvuTat Hep. Kovdw. 

139 wuynv 8 abavatov Kowos €xet Gavatos, Ep. 35, 6 (CIA. ii, 3620, 
fourth century B.c.). IG. Sic. et It. 940, 3-4: abavarn ux pev 
€s aldépe Kat Aros avyais muwrara. ib. 942: ... evédde Ketpat, 
ovxt Bava * OvqoKeny Tay) Aéve tovs ayabovs (from Call., Epigr. 11, rade 
Lawv .. . lepov vavov KOLWaT at. BvdoKeuv a) reve Tovs cyadote aa 
ovk €Gaves, IITpwmrn, petéBns 8 és apetvova xy@pov, Ep. 649. 

140 This retains its full and original meaning (as in Call., Epigr. 
11); cf. Ep. 559, 7, rAéye TomAinv eddew dvep * ov Gepitov OvioKew 
Tovs ayabous, GAN bavov Fodv Exetv. More often as a mere conventional 
phrase: 433; 101, 4; 202, 1; 204, 7; o éxoiyrcev tmvos 6 AnOys, 
223,037 O02) 2 A Peeve 2 Olea OU e oe eu: 


141 Fp. 651: Ovnrov odpa... 70 8 abdvatov és pakdpwr avopovae 


NODS pa Osco ARTE Re NTVeurt 573 


Kéap * wuyn yap aeilws 7 70 Civ mapéye Kal Jedd xatéByn... cdpua 
xit@av wuxjs (cf. Emp. 414 M. = fr. 126 D., capkav repiorédAAovea 
xiTave Sc. THY wuxyv) * rov dé€ Geov céBe pov (the god in me, my Puy). 
261, 6, rav poyqv 8 abavarny EXayov * ev yain pev oda TO ovyyeves, 
ovpavios S€ jAvdev W buy SHpya Kat’ od DPOipevov xrr.; cf. 320, 6 ff.— 
594 (late epitaph of a doctor with philosophic leanings; found in 
Rome), 7 ff.: 088° dpa Ovntos Env, bm avaykns viipedovtos TUUBw eivarew 
metreOnjevos Nvucev oluov. ex pebéwy 8 dpa oteiywv cepvov EBn Ards 
olxov. No sense can be made of the passage if t¥yzBw is understood 
as the real grave and this has led to altering or straining the sense of 
eivaréw (elvardiw Franz, ovyadéw Jacobs). But the poet means: the 
dead man was (in his real nature, his soul) immortal, only the will 
of the gods had caused him (his soul) to be bound to the body and to 
complete his course of life in the body, after the end of which he will 
rise immediately (and return) to the realm of the gods. Read there- 
fore tupBw eiv arda@ merednpevos, fettered in the “‘dark grave”’ of 
the body: o@ua=ojua. (Exactly asin Verg., A. vi, 734, the animae: 
clausae tenebris et carcere caeco.)—603: he who les buried here 
Ovnrois puynv melcas éml owpaow éADetv THY adTod, péAr€Eos, OVK avéeTELCE 
peverv. Thatis: he has persuaded his (previously living and bodiless) 
soul to enter into the realm of mortal bodies (to occupy a body), but 
could not persuade it to remain there long—in this earthly life. 

142 Once at the most: ef maXdw €or yevéoOar ... ef 8 ovdK EaTW 
maw €AGeiv—Ep. 304 (cf. above, chap. xii, n. 138). 

143 The epitaphs quoted in n. 141 have a theological meaning but 
do not allude to any specifically Platonic opinion or doctrines. There 
is no need to see Platonic influence (as Lehrs would: Pop. Aufs.’, 
p. 339 f.) in the numerous epitaphs that speak of the ascent of the soul 
into the azther, the stars, etc. (notes 135, 136). It is true that Alexis 
158 K. inquires whether the view that the body decays after death— 
70 8 abavarov é&fpe mpos tov aépa—is not Platonic doctrine (raér’ 
od ox0A7 ITAdtwvos). But he has no real knowledge of Platonic teaching 
and calls Platonic that idea of the ascent of the souls of the dead into 
the upper regions which had long been popular in Athens—even 
before Plato’s time. In fact Plato’s doctrine has only the most distant 
resemblance to the popular one, and the latter originated and persisted 
without being influenced at all by Plato or his school. 

144/Fp. 650, 12. I belong to the company of the blessed which 
teipecat ovv alfepiovat yopever, Aaywv Oeov nyepovja. These last 
words must refer to a special relation of a pious kind to some god. 
We may note the conclusion of the Caesares of Julian (336 C): 
Hermes addresses the Emperor : follow the evtoAal of muTnp Mibpas 
in life, Kal qvixa dv evbévde amevat dén, wera Tis ayabys eAmidos Hyemova 
Oeov evdpevn Kabioras ceavt@. Cf. also the promise made in an 
Egyptian magic papyrus ed. Parthey, Abh. Berl. Ak. 1865, p. 125, 
1. 178 ff.: the ghost thus conjured up will after your death aot =e 
mvedua Baordéas eis a€pa afer adv avTa@, els yap Gdnv ov ywproer aéeprov 
mveda ovotadev (i.e. commended) xpara:é mapédpw. Cf. Pl., Phd. 
107 D ff.: the souls of the dead are conducted each by the daipwy 
domep Cavra eiAnyes to the judgment place: thence they go eis 
dou peta Hyepmovos exeivov od 81 mpooTétaxtar Tovs evbevde exeice 
mopedoa. Afterwards yet another, dAdos nyeuwv as it appears, leads 
them back again. A blessed abode hereafter is found by 7 xafapds 
‘TE Kal peTpiws Tov Blov de~eOotca Kai EvveTOpwr Kal Hyemovav Dedv 
tuxotoa, 108 C. The same idea occurs on the monument of Vibia 
din the Catacombs of Praetextatus in Rome): Mercurius nuntius 


574 NOTES* LO} CHAPTERS ex hveui 


conducts her (and Alcestis) before Dispater and Aeracura to be tried : 
after that a special bonus angelus leads her to the banquet of the 
blessed (CIL. vi, 142). There is nothing Christian in this, any more 
than in the whole monument or its inscriptions. (The “angel” 
as an intermediate being between gods and men had long been taken 
from Jewish religion by heathen belief and philosophy: they were 
sometimes identified with the Platonic daipoves: see R. Heinze, 
Xenokvat. 112 f. These intermediate natures, the dyyedo., have 
nothing to do with the old Greek conception of certain gods as 
““Messengers”’’ or of the Hero Evdyyedos, etc. [cf. Usener, Gdtternamen, 
268 ff.].) With the fanciful picture of Vibia we may compare (besides 
the Platonic passages mentioned above) what Luc., Philops. 25 
has to say of the veavias mayxados who leads the souls into the under- 
world (of dyayovres atrov less precisely in the parallel narrative of 
Plutarch ede Avviyeivap..hus "2b sl ta36 4p moGam)s 

145 Hermes the conductor of the souls as dyyeAos Depoedovys, Ep. 
575, 1. Hermes brings the souls to Eubouleus and Persephone, 
Ep. 272, 9.—He leads the souls to the paxdpwv HAvavov mediov, 414, 9; 
411; to the Islands of the Blest, 107, 2. He leads them by the hand 
to heaven, to the blessed gods, 312, 8 ff. 

146 Fb, 218, 15, adAAa ov, mapBacirera bed, moAvdvupe Kovpd, THVd 
ay’ én evoeBéwv ydpov, Exovoa yepos. 452, 17 ff. Of the souls of 
the dead man, his wife and children it is said: déyeo és “Avdov (Hades 
does not admit everyone: cf. the dead man who prays of orvy.ov 
x@pov vrovaiere Saipoves eabdoi, Sé€Eac0’ eis “Aidnv Kapeé Tov oik- 
tpotatov, 624), mora viudyn, Kat yuvyas mpotmeume, wa Eavbos 
‘Paddapavdus. To be thus received and conducted by a god or goddess 
is evidently regarded as a special favour. The abode of the edceBeis 
is reached by those who have honoured Persephone before all other 
deities: IG. Sic. et It. 1561. . Zeus too conducts the souls, Ep. 511, 1: 
avTl oe KvOaAtpas apeTas, moAunpate Kodpe, héev és "HXvovov adros ava€ 
Kpovidns (Beds, 516, 1-2). Speaking of a Ptolemy who has died 
young, Antipater Sid. says (AP. vii, 241, 11 ff.) od 5é ce wok ex VUKT OS 
edéEato * 81) yap avaxtas Toiovs ovK Aides: Zevds 8 és dAvpToOV aye. 
Apollo also: Parmenis buried by her parents says [viv peyadAlov 
(to be restored in some such fashion) 6€ p’ éyeu téwevos Ards, 6ppa 7 
"AmoAAwY [Aoty]o6 (doubtful completion) dpepev, édAw@v ex mupos 
afavatov, IGM. Aeg. i, 142 (Rhodos).—Tibull. is clearly imitating 
Greek poetry when he says (1, 3, 57) sed me quod facilis tenero sum 
semper Amori ipsa Venus campos ducet ad Elysios (the poet himself 
explains why it should be Venus: he has specially honoured her. There 
is no need to imagine a Venus Libitina). Phleg., Mivab. 3, p. 130, 
16 ff. West. [73, 1 Kell.]: GotBos "AmdrAdwv TTvOtos . . . poe €ov 
Kpatepov Jepamov7’ (the daimonic wolf) émméupas nyayev els paxdpwr 
te Sdpovs Kat Ilepoedoveins. 

147 Ysidote, hierophantis in Eleusis (grand-daughter of the famous 
sophist Isaios) is called by her epitaph (Ed. ’Apy. 1885, p. 149, 
eS at) EfoXov ev re (apetats é€v Te caodpoatvats * Hv Kal aperBopern 
Ane paKkapav él vicoous yyaye, mavroins exTos emwoduvins. (1. 20 Hr 
kal Anunrnp wracev abavarois.) 

Sa vatneir noble death the rene show ws dpewov etn dvOpdme 
reOvavat padAdov 7 Cwew, Hdt. i, 31; cf.-[Pl.] Axtoch. 367 C; Cie; 
PD; 0113 ee PlusyGouss ad Apoll. 13, 08" BeicieAmm: Marc. PA 
15.—The epitaph of Isidote alludes to the legend, 1.11: daxe (Demeter) 
dé of Oavarov yAvKepwtepov HSéos Umvov mdyxv Kal "Apyeiwy déprepov 
Hibewr. 


INO DE Seem GI APT BReexSlVes or 575 


149 Typadénv puyiy em axkpaiw awpate IAabxos Kat KaddAeu Kepdoas 
KpeltTova awhpoatryny, opyta mow Edawe Bpotois daeciuBpota Anots 
eivaetes, dexdtw 8 AGE map’ afavarovs. 7 Kaddv ex pakapwy pvaTrptorv, 
ov povov elvat Tov Odvatov Ovntots od KaKdv, GAN ayaddv, Ed. *Apy. 
1883, pp. 81-2 (third century A.D.). Below the statue of a daughter 
of this Glaukos, at Eleusis, there is an inscr., IAavxcov d€ yvwr?} 
Beoerdéos, 6s TE Kal adTos tepodarvTtnaas wyeT és aPavatous, Ed. *Apy. 
1594, p. 205, n. 26, 1.. 11 ff: 

150 As a conventional formula: [D.H.] Rhet. 6, 5: émi rédeu (of 
the funeral oration) epi wuyfs avayxatov eimetv, ote aOdvatos, Kal 
6Tt Tovs ToLovTOUS, ev Deois dvTas, aGpEtvov tows amadAdaTTewW. 

151 roy dbavaro. pireeokov* Tovvexa Kal mnyais Aodcav ev abavarors 
(we are reminded of the aé@dvatos anyyn out of which Glaukos 
drew a@avacia: Sch. Pl., Rp. 611 C), Kal paxdpwv vycovs Baddov 
és ad0avarwrv, Ep. 366, 4 ff. There are two fountains in Hades, 
that (to the left) of Lethe, and (to the right) of Mnemosyne, from 
which cold water flows (1. 5): from the latter the guardians will give 
the suppliant soul water to drink kal rdé7’ Ezeit’ dXrAowot pes’ Hpweoow 
avaéer; sepulchral tablet from Petelia (about third century B.c.), 
IG. Sic. et It. 638 (Ep. 1037; Harrison, Pyvoleg. 661 ff.). Mutilated 
copies of the same original have been found at Eleuthernai in Crete, 
BCH. 1893-4, p. 126, 629; cf. above, chap. xii, n. 62.—This, in 
fact, is the “* water of life’’ so often mentioned in the folk-lore of 
many countries; cf. Grimm, D. Mdrchen, n. 97, with Notes iii, p. 178, 
328 ; Dieterich, Abraxas, 97 f.; Nekyia, 94,99. This is the fountain 
from which Psyche also has to bring water to Venus (Apul., M. vi, 
13-14); and it is certain that in the original Psyche-story it was. 
not the water of the Styx that was intended (as Apul. supposes, 
but of what use would that be ?), but the water of the fountain of 
life in Hades. It is a speaking fountain, vocales aquae (Apul. vi, 14), 
and, in fact, precisely the same as that mentioned in a unique legend 
of Herakles given in [Justin.] mpos ‘“EAAnvas 3 (p. 636, 7, ed. Harnack, 
Ber. Berl. Ak. 1896); WHerakles is called 6 dpyn mndyoas (? mdvoas, 
‘(making it gush forth,’’ would be more acceptable) tva AaByn vdwp 
évapOpov dwvinv admod:dev. Herakles makes the mountain gush forth 
by striking the speaking water out of the rock. This is exactly 
paralleled in the modern Greek stories given by Hahn, Gr. uw. alb. 
Miirchen, ii, p. 234; the Lamia who guards the water of life (ro a@avaro 
vepo, the phrase often appears in these stories; cf. also Schmidt, 
Griech. Mdrchen, p. 233) “strikes with a hammer on the rock till 
it opens and she can draw the water of hfe’’. This is the same 
ancient fairy tale motif. The proper home of this water of life is. 
probably the lower world, the world of either death or immortality, 
though this is not expressly stated in the Herakles legend nor in the. 
fairy tale of Glaukos who discovered the a@davaros any (but probably 
also in the magic country of the West. Thus Alexander the Great 
finds the a@avatos mnyy at the entrance to the paxdpwr xwdpa acc. 
to Ps.-Callisth. ii, 39 ff.; his story shows clear reminiscences of the. 
Glaukos tale, its prototype, in c. 39 fin., 41, 2).—The Orphic (and 
Pythagorean) mythology of Hades (see above: chap. xi, n. 96 ; 
chap. xii, nn. 37-8; chap. vii, n. 21) then proceeded to make use of the. 
folk-tale for their own purposes. In Ep. 658 the prayer also refers to 
the Orphic fable (CIG. 5772) puypov ddwp Solty ao ava€ evepwv Aidwvres, 
and 719, 11, puoxf diubdon puxpov tiwp petados. They mean: may 
you live onin complete consciousness. (The same thing in the negative : 
the dead man dwells dpa mavai Gedy Kai AjOns odk Emev ALBada, 414, 10 ° 


576 NOTESC- LOS CHAP TE Re Och aes 


ov éemiov Andns ’Aidwvidos eaxyatov vdwp, so that I can perceive 
the mourning of the living for my loss, 204, 11. Kai OvjoKwy yap 
é€xw voov ovtwa Barov, 334, 5.—Poetical allusion in AP. vii, 346: 
ov & ef Oéuts, ev POtuevorct TOO AHOns em” Epol wy Te wins Bdatos.— 
Perhaps something of the sort already occurs in Pindar: see above, 
chap. xli, n. 37.) 

152 eddvyer Kupia Kal doin cor 6 *’Ooupis ro uypov vdwp, IG. Sic. 
et It. 1488; 1705; 1782; Rev. Arch. 1887, p. 201. (And once the 
line col dé ’Oaeipidos ayvov vdwp Eiots yapioaro,inscr. from Alexandria : 
Rev. Arch. 1887, p. 199.) edddyer peta rod ’Oceipidos, I. Sic. et It. 
2098. The dead man is with Osiris, Ep. 414, 5. Osiris as lord in 
the world of the blessed: defixio from Rome, I. Sic. e¢ It. 1047: 6 
péyas *'Oceipis 6 Exwv THY KaTegovaiay Kal To BaoiAeov THY veptépwr 
dedv.—It appears that the legend of the fountain of Mnemosyne 
and its cold water was independently developed by the Greeks and 
then associated subsequently with the analogous Egyptian idea or 
brought into harmony with it (certainly not as e.g. Bottiger, KJ. 
Schr., thinks, originally belonging to the Egyptians alone and thence 
imported into Greece from Egypt). Egyptian Books of the Dead 
often speak of the cool water that the dead enjoy (cf. Maspero, Et. de 
mythol. et @arch. égypt. 1893, 1, 366 f.), as well as of the water drawn 
from the Nile and preserving the youth of the dead man: Maspero, 
Notices et Extraits, 24, 1883, pp. 99-100. The formula, “ may 
Osiris give you the cold water ”’ (everlasting life), does not seem to occur 
on original Egyptian monuments. It is prob. therefore modelled by 
Egyptian Greeks on their own ancient Greek formula.—On Christian 
inss. we often have the formula: spinitum tuum dominus (or deus 
Christus, or a holy martyr) refrigeret: see Kraus, Realencykl. a. 
christl. Alterth. s.v. refrigerium. This is probably, as has been 
frequently suggested, an imitation of the heathen formula, like so 
many features of early Christian burial usage. 

153 On sarcophagi in Isauria the lion is sometimes represented on 
the lid with the inscr. describing the contents: 6 detva Cav Kai 
dpovav avéOnxev éavtov A€ovta Kal THY yuvaika avTod mporépay, etc. 
On another sarcophagus: Aovx.os avéornoe (three names) cal é€avTov 
aeTov Kat ’’Aupovxiw BaBdov tov matépa aetov Teruts yap, American 
School at Athens, iii, p. 26, 91-2. These expressions must refer 
to something quite different from the otherwise not uncommon practice 
of representing lions or eagles on graves. I can only explain them 
on the supposition that the dead persons represent themselves and the 
relatives named in the forms which had belonged to them in the 
mysteries of Mithras, in which lions and lionesses formed the fourth 
grade, and eagles, deroié (or f€paxes) the seventh (cf. Porph., Abst. 
iv, 16) ; these are elsewhere called zarépes. 

154 The soul of a dead son (who as it appears from Il. 1, 2, 6 ff. 
had been killed by a flash of hghtning and therefore removed to 
a higher state of being [see Append. i]) appears by night to his 
mother and confirms her own assertion, odx 7nunv Bpotds, Ep. 320. 
‘The soul of their daughter who has died dwpos and adaddpevtos 
appears to her parents on the ninth day (1. 35) after death, 372, 31 ff. 
(The ninth day marks the end of the first offerings to the dead: see 
above, chap. v, n. 84; cf. ‘“‘ Apparitions of the deceased occur most 
frequently on the ninth day after death’’: a German superstition 
mentioned by Grimm, 1812, n. 856.) It is significant that the daughter 
who thus appears in a vision has died unmarried. The dyapo, like 
-the dwpo., do not find rest after death: see Append. vii and iii. The 


NOTES el On CHARTER XIN 11 577 


soul of another unmarried maiden says distinctly that those like 
herself are especially able to appear in dreams: 7i0dous yap edwxe 
feos peta potpay dAE€Opou ws Cwovar AaXetv maaw emixOovios, Ep. 325, 
7-8.—It becomes more general, however, in 522, 12-13: odpara 
yap KkatéAvoe Aixn, bux d€ mpomaoa abavatos 5” dXov (thus the stone, 
Ath. Miit. xiv, 193) rmwatwpévn mavr’ émaxover (cf. Eur., Ovest. 667 ff.). 

155 uyy de—says his son and pupil to the dead physician 
Philadelphos—ex peOéwv mrapévn peta Saipovas aAdovs Ave on, 
vatets 8° é€v paxdpwv darédw, trad nal por dmale voowv aKos, ws TO 
mapo.lev, viv yap Oevorépnv potpav exerts Bidrov, Ep. 243, 5 ff. (Inscr. 
erg 11, 576). 

196 There is a striking conjunction of the most exalted hopes and 
the most utter unbelief on a single stone: Ep. 261. 

197 ef ye te €ott (€oTé) Katw, CIG. 6442.—kKara ys elmep xpnotots 
yépas eoriv, Ep. 48, 6; 63, 3. ei y’ ev dOtpevoral tis alcAnats, téKvor, 
éotiv—Ep. 700, 4. ef 8é ris eott voos mapa Taptapw 4 mapa AxjOn, 
722, 5. et yévos evocBéwv Cower pera téppa Bioww, AP. vii, 673.—CE. 
ZoOves chap. xii, mn. 172 

paeCall,, Pe pier..15 5 Ep. 646 % 646a (p. xv) 5 °372,: 1 ff. 

159 wuets d€ mavTes of KatTw, TEeOvnKdTeEs, doTéa, Tédpa yeydvaper, 
aXXo 8 ovde ev, Ep. 646, 5 f.; cf. 298, 3-4. ex yaias BAaotwyv yaia 
maXrw yéyova, 75 (third century B.c.); cf.438; 311,5: 7od@ 6 mor’ wy 
{the I that was once living has now become these things, viz.), or7An, 
tUpuBos, AiBos, eikwv. 513, 2, Ketrat dvaicOyntos domep ALOos (cf. Thgn. 
567 f.) né oldnpos. 551, 3, xetrar Aifos ds,  mavoodos, H mepiBwros. 

160 “’“KorynKkev pev “Epws (prob. on the monument) evdwv davor, 
éev dO pévors 5€ 0} 7d00s, od drddTys EaTt KaTOLXopEVaLs. GAN 6 Davey 
KetTaL TEdiw Aidos ota TET NY OS, elywpwv aTada@v odpKas aTmookedacas— 
€€ vdatos Kal yis Kal mvev patos (here evidently not in the Stoic sense, 
but simply = a7p) ha mapollev’ adda Oavev Ketpoar maar (all the 
elements) 7a may dro Sous. m@ow TovTo pevess ti b€ TO mA€ov; 
onmobev nAGev, eis tobdr’ adr’ é€AVOn ocHpa papawwopevoy (inscr. in 
Bucharest; Gomperz, Arch. epigr. Mitt. a. Oest. vi, 30). 

161 ryetua AaBwv Savos odpavdbev ter€aas xpdvov avrarédwKa, Ep. 
613, 6. (This is a commonplace of popular philosophy: “‘ life is only 
lent to man’: see Wyttenbach on Plu., Cons. ad Apoll. 106 F; 
Upton on Epict. 1, 1, 32 Schw.; cf. usura vitae Anth. Lat. Ep. ed. 
mucneler,s1..p--90, a1.) 183-) 

162 Epitaph from Amorgos: Ath. Mitt. 1891, p. 176, which ends: 
70 TéAos amédwxa. 

163 Saiuwv 6 mxpos KTArA., Ep. 127, 3 (cf. 59). dordpyou potpa Kixev 
Oavarov, 146,6. dicoa Sé téxva AtTodcav 6 mavToBdpns AdBe pw’ “Ards, 
akpirov aotopyov Onpos éxwv Kpadinv (Tyrrheion in Akarnania, BCH, 
1886,, 027178): 

164 Fatvoacbar dSewvod mévOous dewvob TE Kvdorpoo" ovdev yap mA€ov 
(NACIN the stone as stated) éa7l, Oavavra yap ovdéva (read ovdder) 
€yelper KTA., ins.) trom! Larisa, Ati itil, 2x1, 451. ~ et 8’ qv rovs 
ayabovs avayew mad, ins. from Pherai, BCH. 1889, p. 404. 

165 64 xaxos é€at °Aidns—comfort being derived from the fact 
that death is ‘‘ common je pe 2565891 0G 282 79292, 65 298% 

166 edudyer, Téxvov, oddeis aOavaros, IG. Sic. et It. 1531; 1536 
(cf. 1743 ad fin.); 1997 and frequent; CIG. 4463; 4467 (Syria). 
evpv yet "Araddvtn, doa yevvarar teAevta, IG. Sic. et ie epE ee, 
“Hpaxdfs ané0avev, 1806.—Even on Christian graves the formula is 
frequent: edypdyer (4 Setva), oddeis aOdvatos (see Schultze, Due 
Katakomben, 251). 


pe 


578 NOTESSIORGHAPTE Rac lVi ert 


167 odk unr, yevounv, odK oop’ od pédAe pot o Bios TabT a. 
IG. Ste. et it 2190 (the original form of the ending is probably ov« 
€gopar’ ti mAéov; see Gomperz, Arch. ep. Mitt. Oesterr. vii, 149 ; 
Zischy. f. Ost. Gymn. 1879, p. 437) ;\ cf. Ep. 1117, odk qyny, yevouny, 
AENYs ovK el pe * rocatta’ (this trooaira, or more commonly radra, 
is frequent in epitaphs as a formula of resignation—a summary of 
existence: ‘“‘all life comes to nothing but this, “s.See Loch, ZU ae 
griech. Grabschr. 289-95)—ei b€ TUs aAdo Epéet, pevoerar ; ouK Ego wat. 
CIG. 6265: edpuyd, doris odK munv Kai eyevopunr, ovK elpe Kat od 
Avrobpat (cf. also Ep. 502, 15; 646, 14; AP. vii, 339, 5-6; x, 118, 
3-4). Frequent also in a Latin form: Non eris, nec fuisti, Sen., 
Epist. 77, 11 (see above, chap. xiv, pt. i, n. 68). ‘Ausonius, p. 252, 
ed. Schenkl (ex sepulchro latinae viae): nec sum nec fueram ; genitus 
tamen e nihilo sum. mitte nec explores singula, talis eris (probably 
this is how it should be read) ; cf. CJL. ii, 1434; v, 1813, 1939, 2893 ; 
viii, 2885, etc.; Biicheler, Carm.. lat. epigr. i, p. 116. 

168 wyovs ws Ovarois ovdev yAvKepwrepov avyads Cb, Ep. 560, 7. 
Coarser admonitions to enjoy the passing hour, C/G. 3846 (iii, p. 1070). 
Ep. 362, 5. aatcov, tptdnoov, Cicov * amobavetv ce det, 439, 480a, 
7. An ins. from Saloniki, second century A.D., Ath. Muiit. 1896, 
p. 99, concludes—o Bios odtos. ti arik(e)is dvOpwme; taira BrAéETzwv 
YNAAOYSOY (azodAavoov ? or azoAavov ?). 

169 ¢{ Kat... dpoddov o@ya... adr apeta Biords aiev Cwotae 
peteatt, yuyads paviovo” evkrAda owdpootyvnrv, Ep. 560, 10 ff. capa 
uev evOad exer adv, Aidire, yata Oavevros, pvjpa S€ ons EXimES Tact 
dixacoovyvns (and elsewhere with variations): Ep. 56-8. Oronly:.. 
tédecev d€ Kal é€ooopévorat vonaa atHAnv, Ath. Mitt. 1891, p. 263, 3 
(Thessaly). Homeric: see above, chap. i, n. 88, and cf. cépa 700’ 
"Tdapeveds moinoa iva KAéws ein... ancient inscr. from Rhodos: 
Ath. Mitt. 1891, p. 112, 243 (IGM. Aeg. i, n. 737). 

170 From an earlier period (ca. third century B.c.), Ep. 44: qv o 
avvevvos €otepéev pev Caoav émevOncev 8 Bavotcav. dhs 8 EXT” 
evdalpwr, matdas matdwyv emidotoa. Fine also are 67 and 81b. But 
something like them appears even late: 647, 5-10. 556: a priestess 
of Zeus congratulates herself evrexvov datovdynrov Exet tTados’ od 
yap apavpas datpoves nuetéepnv e€BAeTov evoeBinv.—To recover for 
a moment the taste of the old robust spirit we may remind ourselves 
of Herodotos’ story of Tellos the Athenian, the happiest of mankind. 
He was born in a prosperous city, had fine children and saw the 
children of all these children, none of whom died. And his happy 
life was crowned by a noble end. Ina battle of the Athenians against 
their neighbours he was successful in putting the foe to rout and then 
he himself fell while fighting, so that his country buried him in the 
place where he fell and honoured him greatly. (Hdt.i, 30. Herodotos’ 
Solon does indeed assign the second prize of happiness to Kleobis and 
Biton and their fortunate end: c. 31. A changed attitude to life 
makes itself felt in their story.) 

171 Mundus senescens, Cyprian, ad Demetr. 3 ff. The Christians 
lay the blame for the impoverishment and decay of life on the heathen. 
The latter in turn blame the recently arrived and now dominant 
Christianity for the unhappiness of the time: Tertull., Apol. 40 ff. ; 
Arnob. 1; Aug., CD. It was already a vulgare proverbium—Pluvia 
defit, causa Christiani sunt, CD. ii, 3. The Emp. Julian found rv 
olkovpevny wamep AvTopvxotcay and wished r1jv dOcpav tis olkovperns 
orjoa, Liban., Ov. i, p. 617, 10; 529, 4.—The Christians returned 
the compliment: the reason why everything in nature and the life 


INCU See LOR OLR LE hah Vestry 579 


of men was going awry is simply paganorum exacerbata perfidia (Leg. 
Novell. Theodos. 11, i, 3, p. 10 Ritt.). 

72 We know of a certain Nikagoras Minuc. f. (significantly enough 
an ardent admirer of Plato) temp. Const. dadodyos tTa&v aywwrarwr 
’"EXevoive uvorypiwv, CG. 4770. Julian, even as a boy, was initiated 
at Eleusis: Eunap., V. Soph., p. 53 (Boiss.). At that time, however, 
in miserandam ruinam conciderat Eleusina, Mamert., Act. Jul. 9. 
Here again Julian seems to have restored the cult. Valentinian I, 
on the point of abolishing all nocturnal festivals (see Cod. Theod. 
111, 9, 16, 7), allowed them to continue when Praetextatus Procons. 
of Achaea represented to him that for the Greeks 6 Bios would be 
aBiwros, et péAdorev Kwdrvecbar 7a auvéxyovta 7d avOpmmevov yévos 
aylwrata pvoTHpia Kata Oecpov exteXdetv, Zosim. iv, 3. (Praetext. was 
a friend of Symmachus and, like him, one of the last pillars of Roman 
orthodoxy: princeps religiosorum, Macr., S.i, 11, 1. He was himself 
sacratus Eleusiniis, and hievcphavta there: CIL. vi, 1779; probably 
the IIpairéEtatos 6 iepodavtns of Lyd., Mens. 4, 2, p. 148 R. [p. 65 W.], 
is the same person.) In 375 a.p. we hear of a Nestorius (probably 
the father of the Neoplatonic Plutarch) as lepodavrety tetaypevos 
at the time (Zos. iv, 18). In 396 during the hievophantia of a marrp 
THS Mc@ptaxfs teAetHs (whose oath should have excluded him from 
that office) the temple of Eleusis was destroyed by Alaric, incited 
thereto by the monks who accompanied him (Eunap., VS., p. 52-3). 
The regular holding of the festival must then have come to an end.— 
Evidence of later celebration of the Eleusinia is not forthcoming. 
The expressions of Proclus, which Maass regards as “‘ certainly ”’ 
proving that the festival was still being held in the fifth century 
(Orpheus, 15), are quite insufficient to the purpose. Proclus speaks 
of various sacred ceremonies of initiation from which we pepabyKapev 
something; of a dyn, i.e. written tradition, of certain unspecified 
Eleusinian @eodAdyo.; of what the Eleus. mysteries tmoxvobvra to the 
mystat (just as we might speak in the present tense of the permanent 
content of Greek religion). These passages prove nothing: whereas 
the imperfects which he uses elsewhere clearly show that neither temple 
nor festival existed any longer in his time. (He speaks, 12 Alic., 
p-. 5 Crz., of what used to be in the temple of Eleusis and still more 
of what formerly occurred év trois *EAXevowwilots tepots—eBowv xrX., 
in Ti, 293 C.) The festival moreover cannot have gone on without 
the temple and its apparatus. 

173 The Orphic hymns in the form in which we have them all belong 
as it seems to one period, and that can hardly have been earlier than 
the third century A.D. They are all composed for practical use in 
the cult, and that presupposes the existence of Orphic communities 
(see Schdéll, Commun. et coll. quib. Graec. [Sat. Saupp.], p. 14 ff. ; 
Dieterich, de H. Orph.).—It must be admitted that they were not 
purely and exclusively Orphic communities for which the poems were 
written. These hymns, called ‘‘ Orphic ’’ a potiori, make use in parts 
of older Orphic poetry (cf. H. 62, 2 f., with [Dem.] 25, 11). 

174 Probably all these cults promised immortality to their mysiat. 
This is certain in the worship of Isis (cf. Burckhardt, Zeit Con- 
stantins d. G.*, p. 195 ff.). Apul., M. xi, 21-3, alludes to symbolic 
death and reawakening to everlasting life as the subject of the 
Spdpeva in the Isis mysteries. The initiated is thus venatus (21). 
In the same way the mystai of Mithras are said to be in aeternum 
venati: CIL. vi, 510; 736. Immortality must certainly have been 
promised. Acc. to Tert., Pv. Haer. 40, the mysteries of Mithras 


580 NOTES. TOS CHAPTER KT AC Vrn 


included an imago resurrectionis. By this the Christian author can 
only understand a real dvdoracis tis ocapxos. Did these mysteries 
promise to their dovor a resurrection of the body and everlasting life ? 
This belief in the dvaoraas vexpdyv (always a difficulty for the Greeks : 
Act. Ap. xvii, 18; 32;,Plotin. 3, 6, 6 fin.) is in fact ancient Pena 
(Theopomp. fr. 71-2 ; Huibschmann, Jb. Prot. Theol. v, p. 222 ff.), and 
probably came to the Jews from Persia. It is possible then that it 
may have been the essential idea of the Mithras mysteries.—Hopes of 
immortality as they appeared to the mystai of Sabazios are illustrated 
by the sculptures of the monument of Vibia (in the Catac. of 
Praetextatus), and of Vincentius: numinis antistes Sabazis Vincentius 
hicest. Quisacrasancta deum mente pia coluit (Garrucci, I've Sepolcri, 
etc., tab. ii, Nap. 1852).—It is difficult to see why Christian 
archeologists should regard this Vincentius as a Christian. He calls 
himself a worshipper of “‘the gods” and an antistes Sabazt1 (there 
cannot be the slightest objection to giving this meaning to numinis 
antistes Sabazis. The diffieulties raised by Schultze, Katakomben, 
44, are groundless: Sabazis = Sabazii is no more objectionable or 
doubtful than the genetives Clodis, Helis: see Ritschl, Opusc. iv, 
454-6. The arrangement of words, nv. a. Sab., is due to the exigencies 
of metre). 

175 » 6pekts TOO ayalod eis Ev dvTws ayet Kal é€ml TodTO omEeVdEL Taca 
dvo.s, Plot. 6, 5, 1. amdvra dpéyerar exeivov Kal édierar adtod dicews 
avayKn ... ws avev advtod ov dvvarar civat, 5,5, 12; 1, 8, 2. moet de 
mav To yevvijcav (the vots desires the mp@rov, the wuyy the voids) : 
Dls nO 

6 gi €Ew Tod alaOnrod yevopevat (Yvyxai), Plot. 3, 4, 6. In death 
avayew TO ev Hutvy Oetov mpos TO ev TH wavte Oetov, Porph., V. Plot. 2. 
Return eis warpida, Plot., 5, 9, 1. 

ee eee), esp. § 16 ff. 

178 +O pev yap aloxpov evar lov Kal TH dvoer kal TH Oe@, 3, 5, 1. 

179 Blight from the év owpare KaddXos to the ris bu yas cnn etc 
5, 9,2. And again in the fine treatise, 7. 706 xadod, 1, 6, 8. Though 
even here it is in a different sense from that in which Plato speaks > 
in the Symp. of the ascent from kada owpara to Kada émirndevpuara, 
etc. Plotinos protests energetically against the idea that his own 
sense of beauty makes him any the less devyew ro cdua than the 
hatred of beauty cultivated by the Gnostics: 2, 9, 18. He too waits 
here below, only a little less impatiently, for the time when he will 
be able to say farewell to every earthly habitation: ib. 

180, . . Kal ovtTw Oedv Kai avOpmHmwv Beiwy Kat evdatmovwyv Bios 
ete ta@v THe, Bios avydovos Tav THde, puyt povov mpos povor, 
Fics Soca ls Wee shal 


APPENDIX I 


In many legends death by lightning makes the victim holy and 
raises him to godlike (everlasting) life. We need only remember the 
story of Semele who now fader év "Odvpriots dmofavotca Bpdpw 
Kepavvod (Pi., O. ii, 27), or that of Herakles and his vanishing from 
the pyre of wood lighted by Zeus’ flash of lightning (see partic. D.S. 
4, 38, 4-5), or the parallel accounts of the translation or death by 
lightning of Erechtheus (above, chap. iii, n. 39). The primitive, 
popular belief finds unusually clear expression in the words of Charax 
ap. Anon: de Incred. xvi, p. 325, 5 ff. West., who says of Semele, 
Kepavvod Katackynwparvtos nhavicbn éxeivny péev odv, Omota emt Tots 
dioBAyros A€yerat, Betas potpas Aaxetv wHAnoav. (In this account 
Semele is immediately raised to heaven by the flash of lightning— 
a version of the story frequently given by later authors: Zeds rH 
SepéeAnv ex THs ys eis tov ’"'OdvpTov Kopiter Sta amvpds, Aristid. 1, 
p. 47 Dind. [O. 41, 3 K.]. Cf. Philostr., Imag. i, 14; Nonnus, D. viii, 
409 ff. The passage of Pindar quoted above would also admit of 
a similar interpretation.) Generally speaking, 6 Kepavywleis ws beds 
Tiara (Artem. 2, 9, p. 94, 26) as one i706 Auds retin pévos (ib. 93, 24). 
The belief in such elevation of a mortal through the disruption 
and purification of his body by the sacred fire of lightning (a zip 
KkaOdpo.ov of the highest kind—see chap. i, n. 41) need not be of late 
origin simply because it so happens that only late authorities speak 
of it in unmistakable terms (as Wilamowitz thinks, Ind. Schol. Gotting. 
hib. 1895, pp. 12-13). Such lofty conceptions were by this time no 
longer the product of popular imagination. Besides, it is quite clearly 
referred to in the above-mentioned story of Semele (see esp. D.S. 
5, 52, 2) and in those of Herakles, Erechtheus, Asklepios. In the same 
way lightning struck the tomb of Lykourgos (as afterwards that of 
Euripides) as feodirA€atatos Kal dovwtatos (Plu., Lyc. 31). When the 
statues of the Olympic victor Euthymos at Locri and Olympia are 
struck by lightning it shows that he has become a Hero: Pliny, NH. 
vii, 152. The body of the person struck by lightning remains un- 
corruptible: dogs and birds of prey dare not touch it: Plu., Smp. 
4, 2, 3, p. 665 B; it must be buried in the place where the lightning 
stiuckit (Artem:,p. 95, 6 act. Rest., p. 178b,;;21ff. ; Plin., NH. i, 145). 
Every detail shows plainly that the 8:dBAn7os was regarded as holy. 
This, however, does not prevent death by lightning from being regarded 
on other occasions as the punishment of crime—as in the cases of 
Salmoneus, Kapaneus, etc. ; though in some even of these cases the idea 
is occasionally present that the lightning’s victim is raised to a higher 
existence. This is distinctly so when Euripides in Suppl. makes 
a character call Kapaneus, who has been killed by lightning, a tepos 
vexpos (935) and his t¥pfBos (vogus) tepds too (981). tepos never means 


582 Dp LAND Exar 


‘accursed ”’ like the Lat. sacey: it is invariably a title of honour. 
Kapaneus is here called ‘‘ holy ” just as Astakides, on his translation 
to everlasting life, is fepds in Kallimachos; and as Hesiod speaks of 
the fepdv yévos abavatwy (with t¥yBos tepds cf. S., OC. 1545, 1763). 
We must not fail to observe that in this passage, where a friend of 
Kap. is supposed to be speaking, the latter is certainly not regarded 
by Eurip. as an impious person (as he is generally in Tragedy, and by 
Eurip. himself in Phoen., and evenin Suppl. the enemy so regards him 
(496 ff.), though acc. to this speaker Amphiaraos too is snatched away 
in atonement for his crime). Euripides in fact makes him highly 
praised by Adrastos (861 ff.) as the very opposite of a dBpiorys ; and 
it is obvious that Euadne’s sacrifice of her life which immediately 
follows is not intended to be offered for the benefit of a criminal 
and enemy of the gods. For these reasons Euripides ennobles the 
character of Kapaneus and, “consequently, the death of the Hero by 
lightning can no longer stand for his punishment, but is on the contrary 
a distinction. He becomes a tepdos vexpds. This, however, could not 
have been done by Eurip. unless the view that such a death might in 
certain circumstances bring honour on the victim and elevate him to 
a higher plane of being, had been at that time widespread and 
generally recognized. Eurip. therefore provides the most distinct 
evidence for the existence of such a belief in his time. (As one of 
the exalted dead Kapaneus is to be separated from the rest of the 
dead and burnt zap’ olxovs rovode: 935, 938, 1009—i.e. before the 
avakxtopov of the Goddesses at Eleusis: 88, 290.)—Finally Asklepios, 
in all the stories that are told of his death by lightning (and already 
in Hes. fr. 109 Rz.), is never regarded as entirely removed from this 
life: he lives on as Hero or god for all time, dispensing blessings. 
Zeus allows him to live on for ever immortal (Luc., DD. 13), and acc. 
to later versions of the story, in the constellation Ophiuchus (Eratosth. 
kataor. 6; Hygin., Astron, ii, 14); the real and primitive conception 
evidently being that he was transported to everlasting life by Zeus’ 
lightning-flash. So Min. Fel. 22, 7, says quite rightly: Aesculapius, 
ut in deum surgat, fulminatur. 


APPENDIX “II 
pacyadiopos 


€uacxadicbn is the word used by Aesch., Cho. 439, of the murdered 
Agamemnon. Soph., El. 445, says td’ As (KAvratpvynotpas) Bava 
aTtuos Wore Svacpevas €4acxadAicobn—also of Agamemnon. What par- 
ticular abomination was meant by this brief statement must have been 
immediately understood by the Athenian public of the day. A more 
detailed account is given by Phot. and Suid. pacyadiopara (cf. Hesych. 
s.v.; Apostol., Pr. xi, 4), and they give Aristophanes of Byzantium 
as their authority. (Not from Aristophanes—for they differ in many 
particulars—but from a closely related source come the two versions 


A PPRENIDEX sil 583 


of the Scholion to Soph., El. 446 and EM. 118, 22 f.) According to 
their authority paoxyadtopds is something done by the murderer (of 
povevoartes €€ emuBovAfs—Aristoph.) to the corpse of the murdered 
man. He cuts off the extremities of his victim, strings the severed 
parts on a chain and puts them on.—On whom? on himself? or 
the murdered man? Aristophanes’ words are undecisive: the Schol. 
Soph., E/. 445, speaks in the first version of ‘‘ himself ” (éavrots, p. 123, 
17 Papag.) and in the second of “‘ him ”’, i.e. the murdered man: epi 
THY pacxdAnv adrod expéualoy adra [ra dpa], p. 123, 23; cf. 124, 5. 
This too is probably the meaning of Schol. Ap. Rh. iv, 477; EM. 
118, 28-9, speaks distinctly of hanging the chain round the neck of 
the dead man. This is, in fact, the most probable version. The 
murderer hung the limbs, strung together on a rope, round the neck 
of his victim and then drew the rope under the armpits (pacyadAar) : 
a proceeding which is far from being ‘“‘ impossible ’’ (as has been said), 
as anyone may discover by trying it for himself. The murderer then 
crossed the ends of the rope over the breast of his victim and after 
drawing them under the armpits fastened them behind his back. 
From this process of drawing under the armpits the whole procedure 
is called pacyadtopos, and the podpta of the dead man thus fastened 
to his body are his paoyadiopuara (Aristoph.). 

Anyone who wishes to reject this description of wacyxadtopds (as some 
have done recently) must first of all show from what source Aristophanes 
of Byzantium—whom no one who knows him would accuse of 
improvizing such details or of concealing his ignorance by invention— 
can have got his information if not from actual report and historical 
tradition. The possibility that he arrived at it by straining the 
meaning and giving a private interpretation of his own to the words 
pacxadilew and pacyadtiopds is excluded by the nature of these words. 
They offer no hint whatever in the direction of the special meaning 
suggested by his account. We cannot indeed say (as Wilamowitz 
does on A., Cho. 439) that ‘“‘grammar’”’ forbids us to accept the 
explanation of what happened in pacyadAilew given by Aristoph. To 
say: é€pacyadtcbn, ““he had to suffer pacyadilew, pacxadtopds,” 
is equally correct whatever sense we give to the process of pacxyadtopos. 
But the word itself does not testify, by its mere form, to the absolute 
or exclusive correctness of Aristophanes’ interpretation: it denotes 
without distinction absolutely any proceeding in which the paoyddAat 
figure at all. Verbs in -:Cew, derived from the names of parts of the 
body, can denote according to the circumstances the utmost variety of 
actions done to or with the part of the body concerned: cf. cedadAtleuy, 
abxyevilew, tpaxnAtlew, Aatwilew, wpilew, paxilew, xerpilew, SaxrvAtlew, 
yaotpilew, oxeXdilew (and even mvyifew). What particular sort of 
activity applied to the waoyddAa is indicated by the verb pacyadtlew 
cannot be decided from the mere form of the verb. This only makes 
it the more necessary to adhere to Aristophanes’ interpretation, 
which must have been derived from some other source, i.e. from actual 
knowledge. It may be true that pacyadAilew, considered simply from 


584 APPENDIX II 


the point of view of its form, might conceivably mean to tear the arm 
from the shoulder at the armpits (as Benndorf suggests, Monument 
von Adamklissi, p. 182 A)—though such an éxpoxyXevew tov Bpaxiova 
€x THs pacyadAns should rather be azopacyadilew or expacxadtlenv. 
But that out of its many possible meanings the verb should have just 
this particular one is not suggested by anything: least of all by the 
sculptured relief on which the gods appear to be tearing out the right 
arms of their defeated enemies. Such scenes according to Benndorf 
represent pacyadtopes. But can the Greeks really have attributed to the 
gods this much execrated practice of cowardly murderers ? We are not 
told by anyone that this scene represents pacyadiopos—that is only 
a conclusion drawn from an apparent agreement between the 
representation and the view (itself as yet unproved) of what happened 
in pacyadile. Is the correctness of the meaning assigned to the 
word to be proved in its turn from its agreement with the representa- 
tion ? A most palpable argument in a circle ! 

There is no valid reason for rejecting the statement of Aristophanes ; 
and there must be very good reason indeed for so doing before we 
may discredit such an authority. He gives his information with no 
uncertain voice and no suggestion of hesitation, and it must be regarded 
as the simple account of well-established facts. It would receive 
additional confirmation—if it needed any—from the very meaning 
and conception of the word pacyaXtopa. pacxadicpara must be the 
product of pacyaXtoues; they are, in fact, the severed popia of the 
murdered man, with which too Aristophanes identifies them. 
LogoxAfs ev TpotAw amAnpn pacxadtcopatwv eipnKe TOV paoyadtopov 
(probably a mere oversight for tov tpaxndAov) : Suid. s.v. éuacyadricbn 
(Soph. fr. 566 = 623 P.). If pacyadifew had consisted in the dis- 
location of the arm from its socket, it would be impossible to say 
what such pacyaXicpara might be. They are without doubt identical 
with what are otherwise called, in descriptions of mutilations of the 
corpse of a murdered man, azadpyyara (Jason after the murder of 
Apsyrtos andapypata tapuve Oavovtos, A.R. iv, 477; cf. Schol. and 
EM. 118, 22 ff.), dxpwrnpidopata, toma (Ta admoTuHMaTA Kal 
akpwTynpidapata Tod vexpotd, Hesych.). These expressions allow us to 
conclude that the whole procedure is intended to offer the murdered 
man as a sacrifice to some sort of dmotpdémator. The pacyadAtcpara 
are the adzmapxai of this sacrificial victim. Indeed, Aristoph. of 
Byzantium, ap. Phot. [Suid.] pacyadicwara, definitely states that 
pacxaXdtopara was the name given to ta trois pnpois émrOépueva amo 
Tov Wuav (not @uwv as the edd. give; as also Nauck, Arist. Byz., 
p. 221) xpéa ev tats tOv Oedv Ovaolats. This refers—though it does 
not seem to have been remarked by those who have hitherto dealt 
with the passage—to the parts of the body which were cut off from the 
raw flesh of the tepeiov before the sacrifice, laid on the severed pnpoi 
of the victim, and burnt up completely with these: the wyodereiv 
in fact so often mentioned in Homer (A 460 f.; B 423 f.; y 456 ff. ; 
p 360 f.; &€ 427 f.). Tf these wpoberovpeva could also be called (in 


AE EEN DL ad 585 


a comparison) pacxyaXiopara, that again shows that at the pacyadtopds 
there was no tearing out of an arm from its socket, but that in reality 
the extremities of the murdered man (—édxpwrnpidoavtes pdpia 
tovrov) were hewn off and a piece cut off é« wavrds pépous Tod odparos 
as the grammarians following Aristophanes say. Only in this case 
is the proceeding like that which took place at the ®poderety when the 
sacrificers Exowav utxpov a0 mavTos pépous (Aristonic. in Schol. A 461 ; 
Apollon., Lex. Hom. 171, 8; Lex. Rhet. ap. Eust. A 461, p. 134, 36: 
wuobernaay’ 76 ad’ éxdotov pédAovs rod tepelov dmetéuovto Kat 
amnpéavto am’ wood [so the last word should be written here too, 
though Eustath. found—and was surprised—dpov] Kat évéBadov eis 
Ta npia Kata THY Ovatav). Sotooitis said of Eumaios: 6 8 dpodereiro 
ovBurns, mavrwy apEauevos peréwv, € 427 f. (this is the passage in which 
nppnvevoe [0 moinTys], Te €oTe TO Wpoberetv: Schol., B.L. A 461; 
it is this passage, and not A 461, which is meant by Hesych. too s.v. 
wpoberetvy, when he says éeEnyeira: 8 adros ‘Ounpos; cf. also Dion. 
PIONS 7 25" b5): 

aoxaXkitoues was then essentially an offering intended to avert evil 
or, what comes to the same thing, a kathartic offering (i.e. a symbol 
indicating such an offering). It was consummated by murderers 
€mt tais Ka@dpoeow (Sch. S., El. 445); dep rod tiv pihvw éxxdrivew 
as Aristoph. Byz. says (p. 221 N.); ro €pyov adoovovpevor aS we are 
told by Apostolius, Prov. xi, 4. All these mean the same thing. But 
besides these there may still have been another intention present in 
the minds of the superstitious. The mutilation of the murdered man 
took place according to Sch. S., E/. 445 (in the second version ; there 
is something similar even in the first, p. 123, 18 f.) va, dactv, dabevis 
yeévoito mpos TO avTiticacba Tov dovéa. The mutilation of the corpse 
was transferred to the fuxy7 that was leaving the body—such is the 
ancient conception to which Homer too is not a stranger (cf. e.g. 
A 40 ff.). If the dead man is mutilated he will not, for example, be 
able to hold or throw the spear which in Athens was borne before the 
murdered man at his funeral (if he left no kinsman as avenger behind 
him) and was then set up beside his grave ([D.] 47, 69; Eur., Tyo. 
1147-4. 3 Poll. vii; 653 Ister ap., £1. 354, 33 ff. ;. AB: 237, 30 f.)— 
certainly for no other purpose than that of supplying the dead man 
himself with a weapon with which to take vengeance on his own account 
since no one else would fonfet him. (Thus among the Tasmanians 
a spear was planted on the grave of the dead that he might have a 
weapon ready for fighting: Quatrefages, Hommes fossiles et hommes 
sauvages, p. 346.) Probably the Greek murderer when he éyvacyadler, 
calculated in exactly the same fashion as the Australian negro who 
cuts off the thumb from the right hand of his fallen foe in order that 
his soul may no longer be able to hold a spear (Spencer, Princ. of 
Sociol. i, p. 212). 

In Soph., El. 446, the murderer after the pacyadtopuds also wipes 
the bloody instrument of death on the head of the murdered man. 
Murderers did this womep dmotpomaldpevor TO pvoos TO ev TH Hovm 


586 APPENDIX III 


(Schol.). There are passages in the Odyssey which allude to the 
custom (péya épyov, 6 off KedadH avapa€ers, t 92) as well as in Herodotos 
and Demosthenes (see Schneidewin on Electva). Their meaning is 
quite correctly given in Eust. on Od. 7 92: as els xedadrnyv d70ev 
é€xelvois (Tots mehovevpevots) TpeTopéevov Tod Kaxod. Evidently a mimic 
version of els kedadnv oot. Something similar is intended when the 
murderer sucks the blood of the murdered man three times and spits 
it out again three times. Ap. Rh. describes such a scene (iv, 477 f.) ; 
and something similar occurred in Aesch. (fr.354; EM. refers to this 
in immediate connexion with pacyaXdtopes). Here too the object is 
the xafapors of the murderer, the expiation of the impious deed. 
(} Odurs abOévrnot SodoKtacias tAdacba, A.R.; adamonrvcat det Kal 
KaOypacbat ordpa, A.) Spitting three times is a regular feature in 
magic charms and counter-charms: in this case the blood of the 
murdered man and with it the power of vengeance that rises up out 
of the blood, is averted. (despuimus comitiales morbos, hoc est, 
contagia regerimus, Plin., NH. 28, 35.)—What ‘“‘ savage” tribe ever 
had more primitive ideas or a more realistic symbolism than the 
Greek populace —and perhaps not populace only—of classical times 
in the sinister backwaters of their life into which we have here for a 
moment descended ? 


APPENDIX III 


apvnToL, ayapor AND DANAIDES IN THE UNDERWORLD 


In Polygnotos’ picture of the underworld were to be seen the figures 
TV OV pELUnpevor, TOV Ta Spwpeva HXevaivi ev oddevos Vepevwv Aoyw— 
an old man, a vais, a young and an old woman, who bear water to 
a mifos in broken pitchers: Paus. 10, 31, 9-11. The myth is evidently 
founded upon an etymological play on words—those who have neglected 
the “‘ completion ” of the holy 7éAn and are dreXsis tepdv (h. Cer. 482) 
must perform the vain labour in the realm of Persephone of carrying 
water in broken vessels: the Aavatdwyv tdpeias areActs (Axioch. 371 E). 
It can only have been an oversight that made Pausanias forget to say 
that the wifos is terpynpévos, for this is essential to the story (see PIl., 
Gor. 493 BC; Philetair. ap. Ath. 633 F, 18 [2, p. 235 Kay; -Zenoby 
Prov. ii, 6, etc.), and certainly cannot, as Dieterich, Nekyia, 70, 
imagined, be replaced by the xarteaydéra éotpaxa. That the od 
pepunpevot, the auvynro, as the inscription on the picture called them 
(Paus. § 9), were in fact those who had neglected the Eleusinian mysteries 
is only a conclusion of Pausanias’ (or of his authority), as we see from 
the way he speaks in § 11; but it is probably the right conclusion. 
The Orphics took over the Eleusinian fable, but exaggerated it to 
the point of absurdity: they rods avociovs Kal adixovs Kookivw tdwp 
avayKkalovar dépew in Hades (Pl., Rp. 363 D; Gor. 493 BC). In this 
they followed a hint given by a popular proverb—representing one of 
the advvata—xooxivw tiwp dépew (which is also Roman: cf. Plaut., 


PM AASINIBIAS JAB 587 


ecuae 102; as an’ ordeal >: Plin;; NH;.28; 12). -It:is not until 
later (nor in surviving literature before the Axiochus, 371 E: though 
perhaps a little earlier on vase paintings from South Italy) that the 
story occurs in which it is the daughters of Danaos who are punished 
in Hades by having to fill the leaking vessel. The reason given for 
this punishment is their murder of the sons of Aigyptos in the marriage 
bed: but why did the punishment take this particular form ? Clearly 
in the case of the Danaides their non-fulfilment of an important 
téAos is requited in the ever aredets tdpetar. Their marriage union 
was uncompleted through their own choice (thus marriage itself was 
often called a réAos and the wedding was preceded by zporéAeva and 
compared with the réAy of the mysteries). In this itis certainly implied 
that their deed had not been expiated, and they themselves had not 
found other husbands, but had as it were immediately after their 
impious deed been sent down to Hades (cf. Sch. Eur., Hec. 886, p. 436, 
14 Dind.). The daughters of Danaos came to the underworld as 
dyapuot. To die before marriage was regarded as the height of ill-luck 
by the common people (cf. Welcker, Syll. ep., p. 49): the essential 
reason being that those who die thus leave behind them nobody who 
is called upon to keep up the cult of their souls (E. Tvo. 380). Other 
ideas may have been vaguely combined with this. Thus, on the graves 
of dyapot a Aovtpoddpos was set up—a figure of a mais or a Kdpy 
Aovtpoddpos, or a vessel called the Aovtpoddpos which has been identified 
with certain bottomless vases (see Furtwangler, Samml. Sabouroff, 
on Pl. lviii-lix; cf. Wolters, Ath. Mitth. xvi, 378 ff.). Can this 
have referred to a similar fate awaiting the dyayo: after their death, 
a fate such as was imputed to the Danaides in particular as mythical 
types of those who are ayayor by their own fault ?—an ever unsuccessful 
carrying of water for the Aovrpov of the bridal bath. (Dieterich, 
Nekyia, 76, with some probability takes this as the reason for the 
water-carrying.) 

Of these two myths, was the one which appears later in order of 
time—the story of the Danaids—merely a subsequent development 
out of the earlier one (even said to occur on a black-figured vase), 
which told of the vain water-carrying of the adyuvynror? I cannot be 
so sure of this as I once was. I cannot indeed admit (with Diimmler, 
Delphica, 18 ff., who, however, fails to prove an earlier date for the 
story of the Danaids’ jar) that it would be difficult to imagine how a 
special class of human beings came to be replaced later on by certain 
mythical representatives such as the Danaids were. But it is a very 
suspicious fact that the Danaids do not as a matter of fact represent 
the particular class of mankind—the ayuvnroi—whose place they are 
supposed to have taken as their mythological representatives. They 
are not duvnro at all, but dyaywo.. The dyayo. and their aredeis 
bdpetacin Hades must have been familiar in popular belief: in addition 
to this the mystical fable of the similar behaviour of those who had 
neglected the rédos of initiation may have sprung up, but certainly 
not as the model of the dyapo. story, more probably as a subsequent 


588 APPENDIX IV 


rehandling of it for the purposes of mystical edification. (The story 
of the dyapot has a much more primitive and popular flavour ; and it 
alone gives a definite relation between the special labour of water- 
carrying in Hades and the nature of their default on earth.) The 
mythical fate of the dyayo: was then forgotten owing to the competing 
interest of the story of the duvnrot, which, in fact, absorbed it, when 
a poet—fora poetit must have been—took up whatstill-surviving custom 
and its accompanying legend applied to the ay. in general and transferred 
it to the Danaides. This version of the myth was then victorious 
in the general consciousness both over the popular tradition about the 
dyapou and the mystery-fable of the auvyn7o..—It remains to be said 
that the Danaids (and the ayvyror too in a lesser degree) were supposed 
to be punished by their areXets ddpetar. This, so long as it was a matter 
of the dyapyo. simply, cannot have been the meaning of that fate of 
purposeless toil in their casé any more than it was in the case of Oknos. 
Even Xenophon, Oec. vii, 40, lets us see that the vain toilers are not 
as a matter of fact intended to inspire horror, as sinners, but rather 
pity. His words are: ody dpGs, of ets tov TeTpnpévov miPov avTreiv 
Aeyopevot ws olxTipovrat, 6TL waTnv Trovetv doxobar; vy A’, Edn H yury, 
Kat yap TAnpovds ela, Ef TOOTS ye ToLodaw. This gives us the attitude 
of mind from which the whole story originally grew up. 


APPENDIX IV 
THE TETRALOGIES OF ANTIPHON 


I ought not to have admitted the doubt suggested in chap. v, n. 176, 
as to the genuineness of the Tetralogies traditionally ascribed to 
Antiphon. I have examined more carefully the well-known linguistic 
variations between the Tetralogies and speeches 1, v, and vi of Antiphon, 
and also the recently noticed divergences (see Dittenberger, Hermes, 
31; 32) of the Tetralogies from Athenian law (for which the author, 
like the declamation-writers of later times, substitutes occasionally 
a “tus scholasticum ’’—a purely fanciful creation but one more suited 
to pleading 7” utramque partem). All these objections seem to me, 
on maturer consideration, insufficient to make us reject the identity— 
otherwise so well established—of the author of the Tetralogies with 
the author of the Speeches. 


APPENDIX “V 


RITUAL PURIFICATION EFFECTED BY RUNNING WATER, 
RUBBING WITH ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE SUBSTANCES 
(oxiAAa, Fics), ABSORPTION OF THE materia peccans 
INTO EGGs. 


For the purpose of ritual purification it is necessary to have water 
drawn from running springs or streams, or from the sea: @dadAacoa 
KAvCes mavta TavOpwmnmwv Kaxa, Eur., JT. 1193. (Hence in the exalted 


APPENDIX V 589 


semi-oracular language of bardic poetry 7 auéavtos = @adatra, Aesch., 
P. 578. Atasacrifice 6 tapeds dmoppaiverat Baracoa, sacrificial calendar 
from Kos: Inscr. Cos, 38, 23.) Various details on this point in Lomeier, 
De lustrat. c. 17. In the water thus drawn from running sources the 
power of washing off and carrying away the evil still seemed to be 
inherent. When the pollution is unusually severe it has to be purged 
by the water from several running springs: xpnvdwv amo meévrte, 
Emped. 452 M. = 143 D.; dao xpnvdyv rprdv, Menand., dew. 530, 
22 K.; Orestes se apud tria flumina circum Hebrum ex responso 
purificavit (from the stain of matricide), Lamprid., Heliog. vii, 7— 
or else at Rhegion in the seven streams which combine to form one 
Pivet oe Vatlo ap. Prop., ad. Vere., p..3,.4 Keil; Sch. Theoc., prot, p. 1, 
3 ff. Dub. (and cf. Hermann, Opusc. ii, 71 ff.). Even water from 
fourteen different springs might be used at a purification of murder : 
Suid. 476 BC Gaisf. (amo dis émra xupdtwv, conclusion of an iambic 
or trochaic line). In all this the remarkable persistence of Greek 
ritual performances is shown once more. Even in a late period the 
same kathartic rules prevail. An order of the Klarian oracle of about 
the third century A.D. (ap. Buresch, Klaros, p. 9) commands those who 
seek its aid awd Natddwv énra patevew Kalapov morov évtivecba, ov 
fJecdoat mpdocobev (taken from J/. Y 533, but understood in a temporal 
sense) éypfv Kal émecovpévws advcacba pivai re Sdpous xrrA. And 
in a magical papyrus (about fourth century), ap. Parthey, Abh. Berl. 
Ak. 1865, p. 126, 1. 234-5, instructions are given to collect vdwp 
myyatov amo C’rnya@v for magic purposes. (Then again in medieval 
superstition: for the purposes of hydromantia “ water must be taken 
from three running streams, a little from each’’, etc.—Hartlieb ap. 
Grimm, p. 1770—probably a survival from classical antiquity: cf. 
Plin., NH. 28, 46, e tribus puteis, etc.) Cf. also and in general the 
completely analogous use of water in old Indian ceremonies of purifica- 
tion: Oldenberg, Rel. Veda, 423 fi.; 489.—aepiparrew, amoparre : 
wiping-off of the uncleanness: see Wyttenb. ad Plu., Mor. vi, pp. 1006-7. 
In this use zwepisAv also occurs: in a transferred sense a gdappakods 
is called a wepibnua = mepixabappa, Ep. ad Cor. 1, 4,13. Washing-off 
with bran, earth, etc., is often mentioned. Otherwise the oxiAda is 
used or the bodies of sacrificed dogs: éxdOnpé Té pe kal amépake cal 
mepinyvice Sadiors (With mepinyv.) Kat oxiAAn, Luc., Necyom. 7. The 
Superstitious Man is accustomed (epelas xadéoas oxiAAn 7] oKvdrakt 
xeAcicat atdtov mepixaddpar, Thphr., Ch. 28 (16) fin. All sorts of 
medicinal properties were attributed to the oxiAda. (The idea is 
elaborated farcically in the pamphlet of ‘‘ Pythagoras ”’ wept oxiddAns 
[D.L. viii, 47 ? xnAns Cobet], an extract of which is given by Galen 
m. evmopiot. 3, vol. xiv, 576-9 K.) But above all it is regarded as 
xaOdpotos: Artem. iii, 50; Kadaptixyn mdons Kaxias, Sch. Theoc. v, 
121, and cf. Cratin., Xeiép. 232 K. Hence it is also dAegiuddppaxor, 
6An mpo Tov Dupdv Kpepapevny, Diosc. ii, 202 fin. (see Hermes, 51, 628) ; 
such also was the teaching of ‘‘ Pythagoras’’: Piin., NH. 20, 101 ; 
of it may be buried at the threshold: Ar. Aavaid. fr. 8 [255 H.-G.]. 


590 APPENDIZO GVit 


It is also AvKwv POaptixy: Artem. iii, 50 (cf. Gp. 15, 1, 6, with notes 
of Niclas). As being able to keep off daimones (in wolf-form) it was 
then used in religious “‘ purification ’’.—Figs are also used for the 
purpose of religious cleansing and scouring (black figs particularly 
inferum deorum et avertentium in tutela sunt, Macr. 3, 20, 2-3). 
Figs used év xafappots: Eustath., Od., p. 1572, 57 (? is this the meaning 
of the weptparrew of the eyes with figs in Pherecr. ap. Ath. 3, 78 D 
[132 K.]). Hence Zeds ovxdatos = xabdpotos (Eustath.). Figs the 
best adeétpdppaxov: Arist. ap. Jul., Ep. 24, p. 505, 7 ff. From the 
specially magic properties of the fig comes the idea that fig-trees are 
never struck by lightning-: Plu., Smp. 5, 9, p. 684 C; Gp. li Zee 
Theoph. Nonn. 260, 288 (and cf. Rh. Mus. 50, 584); Lyd., Mens. 
fr. fals. 1, p. 181 W.; 4, 4, p.69 W. The dappaxoi at the Thargelia 
(above, chap. ix, n. 26) wear strings of figs round their necks (Hellad. 
ap. Phot., Bzbi., p. 534a, 5 ff.), and are beaten with branches of the 
fig-tree (xpd8at) and with oxid\Aae (Hippon. frr. 4, 5, 8; sch. 
Kpadins vduos): here again the figs have a kathartic purpose (Miller 
mistakes this, Dorians, i, 346), as is shown also by the presence of 
oxirXat as well (cf. in general Theoc. vii, 107; v, 121). Before the 
gapuaxot were driven out of the city as scapegoats they were thus 
““ purified ’? with the above-mentioned xpdaSat and oxiAAa. The same 
thing is said in the story of the ravens which parodies this expiatory 
rite. The ravens are offered up to Aoumds as a sort of dappaxoi— 
meptkabaipovras emmdats adiéevar CHvras, Kal émAdyew TH Aorp@ 
pedy’ és xdpaxas (Arist. fy. 454 [496 Tbn.]; for a similar dzorpomacpos 
(els alyas dypias) see the commentators on Macar. iii, 59, Diogen. v, 49 ; 
cf. tiv vooor (regarded as a daimon), daciv, és aiyas tpéyat, Philostr., 
Her. 179, 8 Kays.).—Rubbing-off of the ‘‘impurity”’ was effected 
also with the dead bodies of puppies (oxiAAn 7 oxvAaxt, Thphr., Ch. 
28 [16]). Those dyvopod Sedpevor were rubbed down with the bodies 
of puppies (which had been sacrificed to Hekate): aepipdrrovrat, 
and this is wepioxvAakiopos, Plu., Q. Rom. 68, p. 280 C. 

It was believed that these materials (wool and the skins of animals 
were also employed) received into themselves the harmful and 
polluting substance. This is why eggs are also used as xafdpoia: 
e.g. in P. Mag. Lond., n. 121, 1. 522 ap. Kenyon, Greek papyri in 
BM. i, p. 101 (1893): ypade 76 dvopa eis wa SU0 appevixa Kal TH Evi 
mepixabaipers (Sic) ceavtov x7A. More in Lomeier, Lutstr. (ed. 2 Zutph. 
1700), p. 258f. They were meant to absorb the impurity. dveAapBavov 
Ta Tob mEepikabapbevros Kaka, Auct. 7. derard. ap. Clem., Si. vii, p. 844 P. 


APPENDIX VI 
HEKATE AND THE ‘Exarixa ddopata, GORGYRA, GORGO, 
MORMOLYKE, MorMo, BAUBO, GELLO, EMPOUSA, ETC. 


Hekate herself is addressed as Topyw kat Moppw xat Myvn xat 
modkvpophe: Hymn. ap. Hipp., RH. iv, 35, p. 102, 67 D.-S. Sch. A.R. 


AE REND IXY I 59 


iii, 861, says of Hek. Adyerar kal daopara émmépre (cf. Eur., Hel. 569 ; 
D. Chr. iv, p. 73 M. [i, p. 70 Arn.] ; Hsch. avraia), 7a kadovpeva ‘Exaraa 
(dacpatra ‘Exa7ixd, Marin., V. Procl. 28) cai moAddkis adr) petaBaddrew 
TO €ld0s 610 Kal *’Eyrovoav xaXretofa. Hekate-Empousa also in Ar. 
Tagen. fr. 500-1: Sch. Ar., fan, 293; Hesych. ’’Eyzovca. Thus 
Hekate is the same as Gorgo, Mormo, and Empousa. Baubo also is 
one of her names: H. Mag., p. 289 Abel. (Baubo probably identical 
with the BaBd mentioned among other y9dvor in an inscr. from Paros : 
"Adnvaiov, v, 15; cf. the male personal names BaBw, BaBeis. BavBpa 
can hardly be etymologically connected with BavBwy unpleasantly 
familiar in Herond. (though the mistake has been repeated in Roscher,. 
Myth. Lex. ii, 3025); one does not see how a female daimon could be 
named after a male 6d\icBos. The nature of Hekate makes its more 
probable that she got her name from fav the noise of the baying 
hound: cf. Bavxeiwv, P. Mag. Par. 1911.) Baubo, too, is elsewhere 
the name of a gigantic nocturnal spectre: Orph. fy. 216 Ab.; Lob.,. 
Agl. 823.—Elsewhere these émxArjoers, or forms in which Hekate, 
Gorgo, Mormo, etc., appear, are found as the names of separate 
infernal spirits. JTopytpa’ ’Ayépovros yuvy <Apollod. 7. Oedy ap. 
DtoD..6 2 Cl.a 1,549, p. 419,515 Wis cfs [Apoliod.]#1,75, .3..  Popyew* is 
probably only the shortened form of this daimon (she is alluded to 
as an inhabitant of Hades as early as Od. A 634; in the xaraBaots 
of Herakles [Apollod.] 2, 5, 12; xovia Topyw, Eur., fon, 1053). 
Acheron, whose consort she is, must have been regarded as the lord 
of the underworld. We also hear of a mother of the underworld god: 
in Aesch., Ag. 1235, Kassandra calls Klytaimnestra @vovcav ‘’Ardov 
untépa. In this very striking phrase it is impossible to take gédov 
in its generalized sense (as Lob. does: Aj.%, p. 292), and the whole 
phrase as merely metaphorical = alvouytopa. Why prnrépa in 
particular ? And, above all, what would be the point of @vovcayv ? 
Klytaimnestra, of course, it goes without saying, is only metaphorically 
called the “‘raging mother of Hades’’, i.e. a true she-devil; but 
the thing with which she is compared, from which the metaphor is. 
taken, must have been a real figure of legend. In exactly the same way, 
in Byz. Greek, rév Sarudvwv pyrnp is a figurative expression for 
a wicked woman: see KadAAip. cat Xpvcoppdn 2579 ed. Lambros ; cf. 
ib., 1306, trav Nynpynidwv pauun. In German too ‘the devils mother ’’, 
or grandmother, or the devil’s wife or bride, are of frequent occurrence 
in a metaphorical sense: Grimm, p. 1007; 1607. But in all these 
cases the comparison invariably implies the existence of real legendary 
figures to which the comparison refers ; and often enough in medieval 
and modern Greek folk-lore these creatures actually occur. We may 
therefore conclude that the @vovea ‘’A:dov pyrnp was a real figure of 
Greek legend. ‘‘ Hades” in this connexion cannot be the god of 
the underworld, common in Homer and a regular poetic character else-. 
where, the brother of Zeus and Poseidon. In that case his mother would 
be Rhea who certainly cannot be identified with the @vovca ‘’Ardov 
uyTnp. In local mythology there were numerous other underworld 


592 APPENDIX VI 


gods any of whom might be loosely called ‘’Avdys, the word being 
used as a general name for such deities. But the “‘ raging’? mother 
of the underworld god has the most unmistakable resemblance to 
Hekate who flies about by night on the wind (see above, chap. ix, 
p. 297 f.; below, App. vii) puyats vextvwyv péta Baxxevovoa (Reiss, Rh. 
Mus. 49, 181 n., compares her less well with the “’ huntsman of Hades’’). 
It seems almost as if the two were identical: local legend could quite 
well have made Hekate the mother of the underworld god (just as she 
was the daughter of Admetos, or of Eubouleus, i.e. of Hades). If 
she is the same as Mopypod (cf. the Hymn. ap. Hipp., RH. iv, 35) 
then she was also known to folk-lore as the foster-mother of Acheron. 
This title is applied to Moppodvkca* t184vy of Acheron in Sophron 
fy. 9 Kaibel. But Mopyuod is simply the abbreviated form of 
Moppodven as Topys is of Topyvpa, and cf. also Moyo Hsch., and 
with metathesis of p, MopuBpd id. (MopyoX. is mentioned together 
with Aapia, Topyd, ’EdiaArns, as a legendary creature in Str., p. 19, 
and see Ruhnken, Tim. Lew., p. 179 ff., Moppodvcecov.)  Mopya 
also in plural: womep popudvas mardapia (doBodvra), Xen., HG. 4, 
4, 17; Hsch. poppdvas: mAavynras Saipovas (i.e. ““ wandering ’’, as 
in Hesiod, and like the Erinyes in the Pythagorean ovpfodov, and the 
aXdotwe, the unquiet and wandering soul whose name is derived 
from aAécbar—so Lob., Paralip. 450). Besides this we have ‘Exaras 
too in the plural: Luc., Philops. 39 fin. (perhaps only generalizing) ; 
tptooav ‘Exarayv, P. Mag. Par. 2825 f.; *’Epaovoa (with dada efdwda), 
D.P. 725, etc., to say nothing of Iopydves. Mopyuw as a bogey to 
frighten children: Mopyw daxve, Theoc. xv, 40 (cf. [dva]KAnats 
Moppoldis], a theatrical piece, probably a farce: IGM. Aeg. i, 125g). 
So too is the monster Adwa that kidnaps children: Duris, fr. 35 
(2 FHG); D.S. 20, 41; Heraclit., Incred. 34, etc. Some detailemms 
Friedlander, Darstell. a. d. Sitteng.*, i, 511 f. (as a nickname Aapo: 
‘Sch. Ar., Eq. 62). Mormo herself is called Lamia, Moppois ris Kat 
Aapias, Sch. Greg. Nz. ap. Ruhnken, Zim. Lez., p. 182a. With 
Mormo and Lamia I’eAAw is also identified (Sch. Theoc. xv, 40), a 
ghost that kidnaps children mentioned already by Sappho, fr. 44; 
Zenob. iii, 3, etc. Kapxo, too, is the same as Ada (Hesych.). Lamia 
, is evidently the general name (see above, chap. iv, n. 115), while 
Mormo, Gello, Karko, and even Empousa, are particular Lamiai, 
who also merge into one another. Just as Mormo and Gello coincide, 
‘so also do Gello and Empousa: IeAAw eidwrov "Emovons, Hsch. 
(Empousai, Lamiai, and Mormolykai the same: Philostr., V. Ap. 
4, 25, p. 145, 16 K.). Empousa, who appears in continually changing 
shapes (Ar., Ran. 289 ff.), is seen by human beings at night (vuxrepivov 
pacpa 4 °’Eumovoa, V. Aeschin. init.; Philostr. V. Ap. 2, 4), but 
even more commonly at midday (like the Hekate of Lucian): 
peonufplas orav Tots Katotyopéevors éevayifwoaw, Sch. Ar., Ran, 293. 
She is, in fact, the daemonium meridianum known to Christian writers 
as Diana (Lob., Agi. 1092; Grimm, 1162). For devils appearing at 
midday see Rochholz, Glaube wu. Br., i, 67 ff.; Mannhardt, Ani, 


APPENDUX® VII 593 


Wald u. Feldc. 11,135 f.; Haberland, Ztschr. Volkerpsych. xiii, 310 ff. ; 
Drexler in Myth. Lex. ii, 2832 ff.; Grimm, 1661. Hekate, in‘ so 
far as she appears as an e¢6wAovin the upper world is identical with Emp. 
and with Borbo, Gorgo, Mormo, as well as Gello, Karko, Lamia. (Acc. 
to Sch. A.R. iv, 828 Stesichoros, év rH LKvAA2 etdouvs [ Eidots Bergk 
on Stes. fy. 13 quite unconvincingly] rivds Aaplas tiv LKvAXrav dyat 
Ovyarépa eivar. Here Hek. herself seems to be described as “‘ a kind of 
Lamia’’, for she was generally regarded as the mother of Skylla, e.g. by 
Akousilaos [73 B, 27 Vors.], in the Hesiodic Eoitat, 172 Rz. (Sch. A.R.], 
and even in A.R. himself who in iv, 829, explains the Homeric Krataiis 
{wu 124] as merely a name of Hekate.)—The vagueness of feature and 
confusion of personality is characteristic of these ghostly and delusive 
apparitions. In reality the individual names (in some cases 
onomatopceic formations to suggest terror) were originally the titles 
ot local ghosts. In the long run they all come to suggest the same 
general idea and are therefore confused with each other and are 
identified with the best known of them, Hekate. The underworld 
and the realm of ghosts is the proper home of these feminine daimones 
as a whole and of Hekate too ; most of them, with the possible exception 
of Empousa, give way entirely to Hekate in importance and are 
relegated to children’s fairy-tales. In the case of Gorgyra (Gorgo) 
and Mormolyke (Mormo) this fact is clearly attested. Jamia and 
Gello carry off children and also awpovs from this life, like other 
daimones of the underworld, Keres, Harpies, Erinyes, and Thanatos 
himself. The Lamiai rise to the light from their underground lairs— 
Aapias Twas toropodvres (the oldest writers of histories) é€v tras Kat 
vatrais eK ys avuepevas, D.H., Thuc. 6. Empousa appears on earth 
at midday because that was the time when sacrifice was offered to the 
dead (Sch. Ar., Ran. 293; sacrifice to Heroes at midday: above, 
chap. iv, n. 9). She approaches the offerings to the creatures of the 
lower world because she herself is one of their number. (In the same 
way the chthonic character of the Seivenes—they are closely related 
to the Harpies-——is shown by the fact that they too appear like Empousa 
at midday and oppress sleepers, etc., according to the popular 
demonology. See Crusius, Philol. 50, 97 ff.) 


BURL EL ING DADS ONE 


The Hosis of Hekate cause fear and sickness at night: €i7’ 
évurvov davtacpa foBh xOovias & ‘Exdrns cOpov €d€€w, Trag. Incert. 
fr. 375 (Porson suggested Aesch.). They form the vuxridavror 
mpomodAo *Evodias, Eur., Hel. 570. (These mpdmodAct tas Oeot are 
probably also referred to in the defixio CIG. 5773; Wiinsch, Tab. 
Defix., p. ixb.) They are nothing else than the restless souls of the 
dead wandering in the train of Hekate. Nocturnal terrors are pro- 
duced by ‘Exdrns émuBodai Kat jpdwv éfodor, Hp., Morb. Sacr. (vi, 
362 L.). Hence Orph., H. i, 1, calls Hekate puxais vextwv péra 
Baxyxevovoay. The souls which thus wander about with Hekate are 

Q4q 


594 ARE EN DIXemy Ol 


in part those of the awpou, i.e. of those who have died before the com- 
pletion of their ‘‘ destined ”’ period of life, awpiv potpav é€%jxew Biov, 
Soph., Ant. 896; cf. Phrynich. in AB, 24, 22, and mpdpotpos aprayy, 
Inscr. Cos, 322. Thanatos has acted unjustly towards them éy 
taxuTAtt Biov mavwv veonAkas axpas, Orph., H. 87, 5-6. The period 
of conscious existence on earth which they had left incomplete they 
must now fulfil as disembodied “‘souls’’: aiunt immatura morte 
praeventas (animas) eo usque vagari istic, donec reliquatio compleatur 
aetatum quas tum pervixissent si non intempestive obiissent, Tert., 
An. 56. (They haunt the place of their burial: pwes arvyets, ot ev 
T@ Seive TOTW avvéxecbe, P. Mag. Par. 1408; cf. CFG. 5858b.) For 
this reason it is often mentioned on gravestones (and elsewhere: Eur., 
Alc. 168 f.) as something specially to be lamented that the person there 
buried had died dwpos: see Epigy. Gr. 12; 16; 193; 220, 1; 221gaae 
313, 2-3: drexvos dwpos, 336, 2; and cf. 372, 32; 184,3; CIG. 5574 
(see also App. iii and chap. xiv, pt. ii, n. 155, dyapor). Gello who 
herself map0évos awpws éereXevtynoe then becomes a d¢avracpa, slays 
children and causes rods t@v awpwv Oavarovs, Zenob. iii, 3; Hsch. 
Tedd. The souls of the dwpo. cannot rest but must continually 
wander: see Plaut., Most. 499. They (dvéuwv etdwrov Exovtes, 
H. Hec.,1. 15: Orph., p. 290 Ab.) are the creatures which accompany 
Hekate in her nocturnal wanderings. The Hymn. to Hekate, p. 289 Ab. 
(cf. P. Mag. Par. 2727 ff.) addresses Hek. thus (10 ff.) : Seip’ ‘Exary 
tpiodiri, mupimvoe, dadopat Exovoa (ayovoa Mein.), 7 7’ éAayxes devas 
pev ddo0vs (devas 7 e€fddous ?) yaderds 7 emimopmds, Thy ‘Exarny ae 
KaA® adv amodbipevorcw awpois Kel Tives Hpwwv Oavov ayvatoi te (Kal 
Mein., but this position of ré is a regular Hellenistic usage; occurs 
frequently in Ovac. Sibyll.) dmatdes xrA. Thus the dwpo. became the 
typical haunting spirits car’ éfoy7jv. Just as in this Hymn. they are 
summoned (with Hek.) for unholy purposes of magic, so an dwpos 
is sometimes expressly invoked in the defixiones which were placed 
in graves (esp. in those of dwpor: see the instructions given in P. Mag. 
Par. 332 ff., 2215, 2220 f.; P. Anastasy, 336 ff.; 353) 3 Aévoura@ 
awpw TO Kata Tovrov Tov TOmopr, etc.1: Roman defixio, I. Sic. et It. 1047; 
efopkilw oe, vexvdatmov dwpe, leaden tablet from Carth., BCH. 1888, 
p. 299 (Tab. Defix., p. xvi); cf. also P. Mag. Par. 342°£.;, 1390s 
mapadore (the victim) dwpors, leaden tablet from Alexandria, Rh. Mus. 
9, 37, 1. 22; a lead tablet from Phrygia (BCH. 1893, p. 251) has: 
ypadw mavtas todvs éuol avtia movotvtas peta THY awpwv' ’"Enayaov 
Sapivav, etc. In the curses of Epigr. Gr, p. 149, the ‘Exarns 
peAaivns Saipoves alternate with dwpot cvupdopai ; see also Sterrett, 
Amer. Sch. Athens, ii, 168.—Everything that has been said of the 
awpo. applies also to the BratoPavaror (or Biacor, a term found in the 
magical papyri; cf. also Bioavatov amvetua, P. Mag. Par. 1950): 
they are a special kind of dwpo.: they find no rest, see above, chap. v, 
n. 147; Tert., An. 56-7; Serv., A. iv, 386, quoting the physict; 
cf. also Heliod., 2, 5, p. 42, 20 ff. Bk. A BracoPavaros, who has thus 
been deprived of his life, has to make special supplication for admission 


APPENDIX VIII 595 


into Hades: Epigr. Gr. 625; cf. Verg., A. iv, 696 ff. Such souls 
become adAdoropes, wandering spirits: see above, Append. vi, p. 592; 
wandering of a Biaofavatos, Plu., Cim. 1.—Finally the souls of un- 
buried persons who have no share in the cult of the souls or home 
in the grave are also condemned to wander (cf. Eur., Hec. 31-50) : 
see above, chap. v, p. 163. The drados is detained év@a8e: Soph., 
Ant. 1070, and wanders about the earth: ddaive, Eur., Tro. 1083: 
cf. Tert., dn. 56. Hence the souls of these atagot could be forced to 
appear and answer the sorcerer: Heliod., p. 177, 15 ff. Bk.; rite 
conditis Manibus the wanderings of the soul cease: Plin., Ep. 7, 27,11; 
Luc., Philops. 31 fin.—The art of the pavris and of the xaBaprHs (and 
of the azopaxrpia ypais, Plu., Superst. 3, p. 166 A) is supposed to keep 
off such nocturnal terrors; it is ‘‘ purification”’ precisely because 
it drives away such unholy beings. It is also a kind of xa@dpotov 
that is employed when dzopaydadlae (instead of to the dogs: Ath. 
409 D) are thrown out ey rots audddots ywwopevors vuxrtepwois pdfors 
(Harmodios of Leprea ap. Ath. 149 C), i.e. to Hekate and her rout 
which also appears as a pack of hounds. 


APPENDIX. VIII 


DISINTEGRATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS AND REDUPLICATION OF 
PERSONALITY 


In that period of extreme excitement the Greeks must have had 
frequent experience of the abnormal but by no means unusual psychical 
state in which a division of consciousness takes place and 
becomes apparent. The single personality splits up into two (or 
more) distinct centres of consciousness; and these give rise to two 
personalities (succeeding each other, or contemporaneous), with a 
double will and a double intellect appearing in one man. Even un- 
prejudiced psychological observers of our own time are unable to 
describe such phenomena, which appear (spontaneously or produced 
experimentally) in certain neuropathic conditions, except as a reduplica- 
tion or multiplication of personality. A second self comes into being, 
a second centre of consciousness following or by the side of the first 
and normal personality, which is generally unaware of the existence 
of its rival. (Probably the most complete and cautious account of 
these matters is that given by Pierre Janet in L’automatisme 
psychologique, Paris, 1889.) When such phenomena appear in con- 
, junction with marked religious or spiritualistic tendencies they are 
naturally explained in accordance with these intellectual preconceptions. 
The appearance in a man or woman of an intelligent will, unguided or 
unperceived by the normally dominant personality, is conceived as the 
entrance of a foreign personality into the individual ; or as the expulsion 
of the real soul of the individual by such a demonic or spiritual visitor. 
Nothing, however, is commoner, in all ages, than the religious or 
spiritualist preconceptions that lead to such an explanation; and so 


596 APPENDIX IX 


what the Greeks called éxoraats or KatéxeaOat ex Jeod has been a very 
frequent explanation of such mysterious occurrences from the earliest 
times (and in the present day). It has appealed just as much to the 
person affected by such “reduplication of personality *’ as to those 
round about him (unless they have been scientifically educated). 
The actual experience of such phenomena is generally a fact ; fancy 
begins only with the explanation offered. For the Greeks the Pythia 
was always the best known example of such “‘ possession ’’ of a human 
being by a foreign will or spirit which seemed to enter violently and 
from outside into the human individual, having little correspondence 
(as it usually happened) with the character or the intellect 
of the ‘‘ medium ”’ in his or her normal state of consciousness. The 
Sibyls, Bakides, Bdaxyor, the seers and priests of purification, 
Epimenides, Aristeas, and so many others, were further cases of the 
ascent of the soul to the divine or the entrance of a god into the soul. 
It was inevitable that the idea of an immediate relation between the 
soul and the divine, and of the divine nature of the soul itself, should 
grow up in connexion with such cases as these, and seem to be 
authenticated in them more than in any other way. Greece is not the 
only place where this has happened. 


APPENDIX IX 


THE GREAT ORPHIC THEOGONY 


The information about a coherent Orphic Theogonyand Anthropogony 
which has come down to us from the statements of Neoplatonic 
philosophers and their contemporaries, is derived, as Lobeck very 
rightly concluded, from the év rats pawwdlas "Opdixais Beoroyia, Hv 
Kat ot dtAdcodor Sdreppnvevovow (Damasc., Princ., p. 380 K.). This 
last statement means that they were explained in lectures given by 
the heads of the Platonic school since the time of Syrianos (’Opd¢ixat 
ouvvovolat Of Syrian.: Procl., im Tim. 96 B; Scholia of Proclus on 
Orpheus, ef kal pr els wdcas tas papwdias: Marin., V. Proci. 27). 
Written commentaries were also published, more particularly in order 
to prove the ovudwriav ’"Opdéws, ITvdayopov xai ITdXatwvos (Syrianos 
wrote a book with this title, wrongly ascribed to Proclus by Suidas : 
see R. Schéll on Procl. in Rp., p. 5. Probably the work of Syr. eis rHv 
*Opdéws Peoroyiav is the source of Orph., fvr. 123-4, which are traced 
back in the Qeocodia, § 50, to Lupiavos év Tots €avtod movypacw. From 
Syr. also probably comes the citation from Orpheus év 7 rerapry 
paywodia, ib., § 61). The older Neoplatonists before Syrianos took 
little notice of the Orphica. Plotinos gives no quotation at all (though 
perhaps an allusion in 4, 3, 12; see Lob., p. 555), Iamblichos quotes 
nothing from immediate acquaintance, Porphyrios, who read every- 
thing, gives a little (fyr. 114; 123 Euseb. from Porph.; 211) and 
what he does give certainly comes from the Rhapsodiai. In fact, 


APPENDIX IX 597 


the Neoplatonics as a whole when they quote Orpheus from their 
own knowledge (and do not, for example, simply write ‘‘ Orpheus ”’ 
instead of ‘‘ Pythagoras’’: see above, chap. x, n. 9) use the 
Rhapsodiai only, as Lobeck rightly maintains, p. 466 (Abel did not 
realize this, to the detriment of his collection of the frr.). The title 
of the poem they used can hardly have been Oecoyovia. (This seems 
to occur asa titlein fy. 188 [Clem. Al. from auct. 7. kAomjs]. In fr. 108 
it is only a description of contents; fry. 310 is spurious. In Suidas, 
Gaisford’s MSS., we do indeed read of a Oeoyovia, éxy “‘ ac’: but the 
figure indicating the number of lines corresponds most suspiciously 
with that of the previous dvouaoriKdv, and in any case would be in- 
sufficient for the great length of the pawwdia.), It seems extremely 
probable (as Lobeck already suspected, p. 716, 726) that the simple 
description: an Orphic poem divided into several Rhapsodiai, tepot 
Aoyou ev papwdias xd’ (Suid.), was the real title of the poem, which 
consisted of several paywdia. This fepds Adyos (the plural only means 
that there were several books) is, however a different one (Lobeck 
missed this, p. 716) from the fepds Adyos which Epigenes (ap. Clem. Al., 
Sty. i, 21, p. 144 P.) attributed to the Pythagorean Kerkops. (And 
again when Suid. attributes the 24 Rhaps. to the Thessalian Theognetos 
or to Kerkops he also means the old iepos Adyos not divided into Rhaps., 
and confuses this with the later and much extended fepos Adyos.) 
The older fepds Adyos is that alluded to by Cic., ND. i, 107, and prob. 
also by Plu., Smp. 2, 3, 2, p. 636 D (fr. 42); the quotation in EM. 
(fr. 44) from the 8th Bk. refers to the later fepds Adyos. But it is 
certain that the fepds Adyos in 24 Bks., the poem possessed by the 
Neoplatonists, from which by far the greater number of our fragments 
are taken, was not a work of the sixth century, written for instance 
(as Lobeck was inclined to think, 683 f.) by Onomakritos. It is even 
untrue—regrettably enough we might add—that as the Neoplatonists 
presumed (and Lobeck believed in consequence: p. 508, 529 f., 602, 
613) Plato knew and made use of the “‘ Rhapsodies”’. (This emerges 
with particular plainness from Gruppe’s study of the question in 
Jb. Philol. Supp. xvii, 689 ff.). And when this is gone no other evidence 
for the earlier date of the Orphic Theogony in this form is left. And 
in the very few passages in which a real coincidence (and not a doubtfully 
assumed one) exists between the Rhapsodies and Pherekydes, 
Herakleitos, Parmenides (see Lob., p. 532; Kern, Theogon., p. 52; 
Gruppe, p. 708) or Empedokles, the poet of the Rhapsodies is the 
borrower not the creditor. The age in which he lived cannot be 
precisely determined ; the fact that Neoplatonic writers are the first 
to quote him does not settle the question; it is uncertain whether 
he lived after (as I think) or before the (otherwise unknown) 
Hieronymos whose statement about an Orphic Theogony is quoted by 
Damasc., Princ. 381 f. K. In any case Gruppe (p. 742) has correctly 
appreciated the character of the bulky poem (equalling or even sur- 
passing the length of the Iliad), when he says that it consists in the 
main of a loosely connected patchwork of older Orphic tradition. 


598 APPENDIX X 


There are many points in which agreement between the Rhapsodies 
and older Orphic teaching and poetry is still demonstrable ; lines from 
older Orphic poems were taken over unaltered ; subjects from older 
Orphic Theogonies were combined, sometimes without regard for their 
divergent character; different versions of the same motif occur 
together. Thus we have the katdzoas (modelled eventually upon 
Hesiod) twice over: in the first version Zeus swallows Phanes, in 
the second the heart of Zagreus. Both mean the same thing; the 
devouring of the heart of Zagreus may perhaps belong to the older 
Orphic legendary material, the devouring of Phanes to the later. 
The personality of ®avyns, however, cannot have been unknown even 
to the older stratum:of Orphic poetry. D.S. 1, 11, 3, quotes a line 
of “‘ Orpheus ”’, which certainly was not taken from the Rhaps., in 
which @®dvys is mentioned.«(and identified with Dionysos). And in 
a gold tablet, folded up with the tablet bearing an inscription of 
Orphic character, J. Sic. et It. 642, and found in the same grave near 
Sybaris, there occurs in addition to other (illegible) matter a list of 
divine names which includes that of ®avyns (and also ITpwrdyovos 
here apparently distinguished from ®avyns with whom this figure of 
Orphic theology is generally identified): see Comparetti, Notizie 
degli scavt di antichit, 1879, p. 157; 1880, p. 156. This establishes 
the existence of this figure of Orphic mythology as early as the third 
cent. B.c. (the prob. date of these tablets).—-We may therefore employ 
the facts derived from the Rhapsodies with some confidence for the 
reconstruction of Orphic poetry and doctrine at those points at least 
in which coincidence with older Orphic teaching and the fantastic 
creatures of Orphic theology can still be proved. [I leave these remarks 
exactly as they stood in the first edition of this book, for they still 
fully correspond to my own opinion. Others in the meanwhile have 
expressed divergent views, esp. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, i, p. 539, 
But that Gruppe’s proof of the fact that Plato did not know the 
Rhapsodist Theogony is ‘‘ wholly unsuccessful ’’, is something which 
no one has yet sought to show upon intelligible grounds. Until such 
a disproof is forthcoming the belief in the early date of the Rhapsodies 
has no real ground on which to stand.] 


APPENDIX X 
PREVIOUS LIVES OF PYTHAGORAS. His DESCENT TO HADES 


Pythagoras’ miraculous power of remembering what had happened 
long ago in previous lives seems to be already alluded to in : 
the lines of Empedokles, 430 ff. M.= fy. 129 D. The legend in 
which it was related how Pythag. showed that he had once been 
Emphorbos the son of Panthous who had been slain by Menelaos in 
the Trojan war, must, at any rate, have been put forward at an early 
period. The story is often told or alluded to: D.S. 10, 6, 1-3; Sch. V. 


ERE ND Tee 599 


Prmeeco vax. byt, 16 (17287 f9R); Porph., V P226—7'> lambli,,VP: 
ee lOstin gt elu, il toe 8507504 3 Herve l7; pe 192A23. fa kss 
ceetieii Gee oe F101... ©. 1, 28) 10 2 Ova, 2 15,3160 fi: Hyem 2; 
Lact., Inst. 3, 18, 15; cf. also Call., fy. 83a (completely misunder- 
stood by Schneider) who even calls Pythag. ‘“‘ Euphorbos”’, as Hor. 
does and Luc., DM. 20, 3. The story is always told in such a way 
as to imply that no intermediate evowpatwoers of his soul had taken 
place between Pythag. himself and Euphorbos (they are definitely 
excluded in Luc., Gall, 17)—Why was Euphorbos in particular 
selected ? The fact that through his father Panthous he had a special 
connexion with Apollo, like Pythagoras (a true y~uy7 ’"AmoAAwvaky : 
cf. also Luc., Gall. 16), can hardly have been sufficient reason (as 
Gottling, Opusc. 210 ; Krische, Soc. Pythag. 67 f. suggest).—Euphorbos 
was taken up and made one of a whole series of previous incarnations 
(Aithalides—Euphorbos—Hermotimos—Pyrrhos the Delian fisherman 
—FPythagoras) by Herakleides Pont.: D.L. viii, 4-5 (with which 
pEtcOm Ippo seni wea, pels, O41: D.-S. >) Porph:,. Vir 45 o bert, 
An, 28, 31; Sch. Soph., E/. 62). Starting with Aithalides (to whom 
Herakleides was perhaps the first to ascribe the gift of miraculous 
memory in addition to other miraculous powers) the power of avapvnots 
in life and death was transmitted through all the links in the chain 
down to Pythag. himself. (The story of the shield of Euphorbos was 
now transferred to Hermotimos for obvious reasons.) According to 
D.L. Herakleides dnotv wepi adtod tad€ Aéyew (tov IIv@aydpav). It is 
very possible that the language is here inexact and Herakleides did 
not (as the words of D.L. would strictly suggest) appeal to a state- 
ment of Pythagoras (in a book) but represented him as saying all this 
{in a dialogue). If this is correct, apart from the incarnation as 
Euphorbos which he took over from the tradition, Herakleides invented 
all the rest, according to his own fancy. The fable was then taken up 
with variations by others: in Sch. A.R. i, 645, two versions derived 
from the fiction of Herak]. but diverging in some points are mentioned 
(one being supported by of Ilv@ayopixoi, the other by Pythagoras 
himself—in a book? TJ]v@aydpas ¢noiv are the actual words). 
What Gellius 4, 11, 14, has to say on the authority of Klearchos and 
Dikaiarchos differs (except in the matter of Euphorbos) entirely from 
Herakleides (and the names given should not be altered). But it 
may, nevertheless, be essentially the same fable over again, this time 
in the form of a parody of Herakl. (which is not very likely in the case 
of Klearchos but suits Dikaiarch. very well). Encouraged by these 
predecessors Lucian in the Cock (19-20) carried still further the parody 
of the fabulous tale. The story of Herakleides seems to be seriously 
used in the ypad7 in which Pythagoras adrds dnote bv Extra Kal Sunkoaiwy 
érav ée€ aiSew mapayeyevqaba és avOpamovus, D.L. viii, 14. As Diels, 
Archiv. f. Gesch. Philos. iii, 468 f., shows to be very probable, this 
was in the ps.-Pythagorean book written in the Ionic dialect, not 
before the third century and divided into three parts, WINtC med Jeles 
quotes and makes use of (viii, 6; 9; 14; cf. also Sch. Pl., Rp. 600 B). 


600 APPENDIX X 


Pyth. here states that he appears on earth from the underworld “ every 
207 years’’, and the calculation may possibly be based on the series 
of lives invented by Herakleides and the Chronology of Apollodoros 
(in which case it could not be before the last century B.c.), thus: 
Pythag. born 572, Pyrrhos 779, Hermotimos 986, Euphorbos 1193 
(in the first year of the Tpatxa acc. to Eratosthenes and Apollodor.), 
Aithalides 1490. It must indeed be admitted that this method of 
reckoning makes the gross error of calculating from birth to birth 
instead of from the death of A to the birth of B. (Other intervals 
are given in Theologum. Arithm., p. 40 Ast [216 = 63: D.L. viii, 14, 
should not be altered to snit this as I once proposed]; Sch. Bern. 
Lucan. ix, 1, p. 289, 12 Us. [462, ? an error for 432 = 2 x 2163mem 
Theol. Arith., p. 40, 30])—The existence of a Pythagorean writing 
belonging to the period before Herakleides, in which these previous 
lives of Pythag. were mentioned cannot be certainly proved. It might 
be supposed (as I once supposed: Rh. Mus. 26, 558) that the con- 
junction of the legend of Pythagoras’ previous lives with the descent 
of P. to Hades, which appears in Sch. Soph., El. 62, and Tert., An. 28, 
is ancient and original; in which case the previous lives would have 
been described in a Pythagorean karaBaois eis addov. But the con- 
junction is quite arbitrary and is not such as would be likely in a 
Pythagorean book on the descent: the descent is, in fact, told as 
a parody, the form which had been given to it by Hermippos, and 
with the implication that it is untrue. Nor is it very likely that the 
previous lives would be described in connexion with a descent to 
Hades, considering that Pyth. remembered them while alive on earth 
and not in a condition of ecstasy, and did not learn of them in Hades. 
It would be more natural that, vice versa, an account of the previous 
lives should also include something about ra év adov—the avdpvnas 
included that also: cf. D.L. viii, 4 fin. (see the decisive objections to 
my previous view raised by G. Ettig, Acheruntica, Leipz. Stud. 13, 
289 f.). This applies equally to the view of Diels! (Archiv, p. 469) 
that Herakleides (in his work 7. r&v év ddov) told of the previous lives 
of P. in connexion with the descent of P. to Hades and that Herakl. 
was the first to make P. go down to Hades. There is nothing to prove 
that Herakl. did this or to make it even probable. Without any 


1 What Diels, Parmenides, p. 15 (1897) says in support of his view 
might stand if we were willing to ignore the fact that Pythag., as has 
already been remarked, remembered his previous lives while he was 
still alive, and not in the ecstatic condition—not é€fw yevdpevos rod 
owpatos. But this is a fact, so that Diels’ view remains untenable.— 
I cannot see what there is of a “ rationalist ’? character (Diels) in the 
fact that Pyth. saw Hesiod and Homer in Hades undergoing punish- 
ment av@’ dv elaov wepi Oedv (D.L. viii, 21). This is, in fact, an anti- 
rationalist, priestly invention (and so I see Dieterich also understands 
it, Nekyia, 130). This fact certainly does not tell against the view 
that the Hades poem had its origin in the sixth (or the first half of the 
fifth) century B.c. 


APPENDIX XI 601 


grounds for doing so Diels supposes that what Pythagoras (acc. to 
Sch. Ambros. on a 371) “ dynoiv” + €&w yevdpevos Tob cHpmaros axhKoa 
€upéAous adppovias, was said by Pythag., not in a book going under 
his name, but in a dialogue by Herakleides (who is not even 
mentioned in that Schol.). There is no reason at all to doubt 
that these words (as Lobeck supposed, 944) came from a book 
ascribed to Pythagoras himself, in which he described his ekstasis 
and ecstatic visions (cf. Sch. Arist. 496b, 1 f., 13 ff. Br.). There is no 
further definite evidence for the existence of such a Pythagorean 
KaraBaas ets adov (for the ypady of D.L. viii, 21, has another and 
better interpretation, as already remarked). But a fairly early date 
for the origin of at least a legend about a descent of P. to Hades (and 
of quite definite statements about it with a propagandist aim) is attested 
by Hieronymos of Rhodos ap. D.L. viii, 21. (But we should not 
without more definite reason ascribe the invention of the fable itself 
to Hieron., as is done by Hiller, Hier. Fh. frag., p. 25. What reason 
could Hieron. have had for inventing anything of the kind ?) Further, 
the lines of the comic poet Aristophon ap. D.L. viii, 38 [fr. 12 K.], 
already suggest that such legends were in existence in the third century 
B.c. Whether the work on the subject of Pythagoras’ descent to 
Hades called forth the legend or whether the legend was already current 
and called forth the book, must remain undecided. But in any case 
the book included no account of the previous lives of Pythagoras : 
these (apart from the older legend of P. and Euphorbos) were first 
put forward by Herakleides Pont, (but not the Descent of P. to Hades). 


APPENDIX XI 
INITIATION CONSIDERED AS ADOPTION BY THE GOD 


The Mystes whose soul is speaking in the first of the gold tablets 
found at Sybaris (Diels, No. 18) says, 1. 7-8: tweprod 8 énéBav 
otedhavod moot KapmaAipon, Seamoivas § bao KddAmov Eedvv xOGovias 
BactAdetas. This b70 KdAmov édvy .. . can hardly mean anything else 
than: I seek (as ixérys) the protection of her maternal bosom (or lap). 
It would certainly be attractive to take this (with Dieterich, de hymn. 
Orph., p. 38) as referring to a symbolical act, corresponding to the 
ceremony in which in Greece and elsewhere, the adoption of a boy, 
his reception into a new yévos, was symbolically represented. (D.S. 
4, 39, 2, in particular records the process; see Wesseling’s learned 
note there ; cf. also Preller, Gr. Mythol.4 i, 702.) But such a symbolical 
proceeding if it was to bring about the association of the pvorns with 
the goddess must have taken place already in the dpyca once held upon 
earth—here we are in Hades, and it is to say the least of it difficult 
to believe that this 8:éAxeo@ar rod KdAmwov can have been supposed 
to occur in Hades in the neighbourhood of the goddess herself (a fact 
which made a merely symbolical act of the kind supposed quite 


602 APPENDIX XI 


unnecessary).—Apart from this the views of Dieterich are quite sound: 
the ceremony was essentially regarded as an adoption of the pvorns 
by the goddess or the god, as a reception of the initiated into the divine 
yévos. The Spaxwv (who represents the god himself) dveAKdpevos rob 
xdAmov in the Sabazia seems actually to have had this meaning. 
Further the pvorns is sometimes called renatus, or 1n aeternum 
venatus {Apul., -M; xi, 21; °CIL, vi, 510; 4736) ;" the day somes 
initiation is his natalis sacer (Apul., M. xi, 24, where natalem sacrum 
should be read): in these circumstances we may venture to recall 
that the above-mentioned solemn rites of adoption also represented 
a new birth of the eros vids from the womb of his new mother (see 
D.S. l.c. Hence Hera is called the devrépa texotoa of Herakles whom 
she adopted: Lycophr. 39; and hence also the adopted is called 
devTepomoTpmos, 1.e. reborn: MHsch. s.v. ad fin.) This conception also 
provides the simplest explanation of the fact that the pua@y, who 
has received the véos pvorns into the divine yévos to which he himself 
already belongs, can be called the pater or parens of the pvorns (Apul., 
M. xi, 25; Tert., Apol. 8; ad Nat. i, 7)—he effects the entrance of 
the new member into his own family. (In Greek the name for such 
a mystic “‘father’’ seems to have been aatpopvorns, CIG. 3173, 
3195.)—This conception of a new birth by initiation reminds us of 
the Christian idea of rebirth by baptism (which in its turn is 
developed from older Jewish ideas: see Anrich, Ant. Mysterienwesen, 
p. 111, n.). It is nevertheless one which the Greeks themselves had 
at an early date. The pvora: of the Eleusinia seem to have been not 
far from regarding initiation as an adoption into the divine yévos. 
In the ps.-Platonic Axiochus, p. 371 D, we read in the description 
of the y@pos evoeBdv: évtaiba Tots pepunpévors eoti Tis mpoedpia 
Kal Tas Oalovs aytoteias KaKeice avvTedobaL * amas otv ov col mpwTw 
jléreoTe THS Tihs, OvTe yervntn tov Oed@v; Kal rods mepi ‘Hpaxdréa 
te (perhaps dé would be better) kai Ardvucov Katidvtas els ‘’Ardov 
mpotepov Adyos evOdde (i.e. at Athens) punAFvac Kai 70 Odpaos THs 
exetae mopeias mapa ths "EAevawias évavoacba.—Here Axiochos (for 
it is to him that Sokrates is speaking) is plainly described as yevyyrns 
tav Oedv simply and solely because he belongs to the pepuypévor. 
According to Wilamowitz (Gétt. Gel. Anz., 1896, p. 984) he is called 
yevvaTns Tav Oedv only as a member of the yévos of the Edaarpidau 
to which he apparently belonged. But that anyone just on the 
strength of the by no means uncommon fact that he belonged to a yévos 
that happened to trace its earliest origin from a god (nor is it certain 
even that the Evzarpida did this)—that anyone on this account 
should have dared to call himself a ‘‘ member of the same family as 
the gods ”’ is to say the least of it difficult to parallel. In this case at 
any rate nothing of the kind can be meant. From the general principle 
that the initiated have a mpoedpéa in Hades it is deduced, simply as 
conclusion from premiss, with a “surely then’’—(zds odv ov—), 
that Axiochos too may hope to enjoy this same honour (rfs tiujs—). 
{t is then entirely impossible that, to account for this hope, a reason 


APPENDIX -. XIT 603 


should be implied and expressed which, like the supposed descent 
of Axiochos from the gods, had nothing to do with the mysteries and 
the privileges of the pvora. If it was the (alleged) descent of 
Axiochos from the gods which secured him tiy7 in Hades it would 
be quite meaningless to accompany the mention of the tiu7y thus 
secured to Axiochos with an allusion to the 7:47 obtained on quite 
different grounds by the pepunpevor (which yet is mysteriously 
equivalent to that obtained by right of birth). This allusion, moreover, 
is put in such a way that it quite unambiguously includes the special 
case of Axiochos in the common denomination of the pepunpévor of 
whom he is said to be one. The fact, indeed, that the privileges of 
the peyunpévor is the only subject alluded to throughout is shown 
also by the third and last sentence: the famous cases of the initiation 
of Herakles and Dionysos are only mentioned as emphasizing still 
further the importance of pun@fva for those els ddouv KartidvTas. 

Here then Axiochos can only be called yevytjrns tv Pedy in so far 
as he is weuunpéevos. Why, indeed, he zpa@ros, before other pepunpeévor, 
should have a claim to the honour of zpoedpia is something that our 
text does not say and that can hardly be extracted fromit. It certainly 
appears that Axiochos has a special privilege beyond that of other 
Mystai. Had he reached a specially high stage of the réAy which was 
not open to everyone and at which kinship with the gods was first 
fully assured ? Did the family of the Evaarpiéa: undertake some 
active part in the pvnois which gave them a closer relation to the gods ? 
In any case his claim to be regarded as yervyrns tHv Gedy must have 
depended on his having been initiated at Eleusis. 

Now this kinship with the gods to which he thus attains can only 
be made intelligible, if, in accordance with the analogies adduced 
above, we regard the uvnos (or perhaps only its highest stages) as 
a symbolic adoption by the divinities, suggesting or representing 
entrance into the divine yévos. No one will maintain that yevy2jrys 
Tay Oedv is a “ very unnatural phrase” (Wil.) for one who has been 
*‘ adopted ”’ by the gods, who will recall the fact that at Athens the 
adopted person was inscribed els rods yevvytras of the adopter (Is. 
7, 13; 15; 17; 43), or, which is precisely the same thing, els rods ovy- 
yeveits of the adopter (Is. 7, 27; 1). Thereby he becomes himself 
yevvyrns of the members of the yévos into which he thus enters; he 
is now their yevy7jrns, or, as it is once expressed in an absolutely 
equivalent phrase, their cvyyevis Kata THY motnow ([Dem.] 44, 32). 

Thus the fully initiated is yeyvyrns of the divine family, xara rH 
qoinaty. 


PORN Dla. UT 


MAGICAL EXORCISMS OF THE DEAD ON LATE xatadeopot, 
/ 
PluwTika, ETC. 


Invocations and conjurings of dwpo: and other vexvdaipoves of an 
earlier period are mentioned above (p.594 f.). Toa later period belong 


604 APPENDIX XII 


the defixiones found at Cyprus (Kurion) and edited in the Proc. of 
the Soc. of Bibl. Archaeology, p. 174 ff. The defixiones are there 
called mapadjxar, diywrikal tod avridixov (i, 39, and frequently), 
or diupwrika Katadépwata (iv, 15, etc.). dipotyv and gipwrixov in this 
rude Egypto-Syrian Greek are equivalent to the terms, otherwise 
usual for such magic charms, xaradetv, Kkaraddecpos (see above, chap. ix, 
n. 107). See also P. Mag. Lond. (Kenyon, Greek Pap. in BM., p. 114), 
1. 967 ff.: in an appeal to a god (deipd por Kal) pPipwoorv, dmdora€ov, 
KatadovAwoov Tov deiva TH Setve xTA.—ib., p. 97, 1. 396 ff. : dupwrexov 
Kal UTOTAKTLKOV yevvatov Kal KaToxos * AaBwv podvBov aro uypoddpov 
owrjvos molnoov Adpvav Kal émiypade yardAx@ ypadeiw (bronze is a 
magic metal), wWs dzoxeira, Kal Oés mapa awpov (see above, p. 594 f.): 
here follows the rest of the barbarous text.—On these Cypriote 
defixiones among the other invocations regularly appear those addressed 
to the souls of the unquiet dead, to the dalpoves moAvavdpior (vi, 17, 
adds memeXexiopevor kai eoltavpwuévor Or éeoxoAomopévor? cf. Luc., 
Philops. 29]) nat BroOdvaror Kat dwpou. Kat amopot tadajs (THs tepas 
tadjs, iv, 18): thusi, 30 f., and frequently. The daipoves mvAvavdproe 
were probably the souls of executed criminals whose bodies were thrown 
out into the common burial grounds—as at Melite in Athens: Plu., 
Themist, 22—the modvavépia (cf. Perizon. on Ael., VH. 12, 21). 
BroOavatror etre Sévou etre €vtdomiot are invoked, iv, 4. Invocation is 
made in common to: rvpPe ravdaxpute Kal xOdviot Deot Kat ‘Exarn xPovia 
Kal ‘Epuq xOove wat ITXovtwv Kal ’Epivtes tbroxPdvor Kat tyets ot 
Ode ckatwKnpévor Awpot Kat avavupor (see Rh. Mus. 50, 20, 3): i, 35, 
and frequently repeated with the same formula. What we have here 
is of frequent occurrence: a dead person is called upon to carry out 
a curse. An early example is CIG. 539: kxaradH avrods (the persons 
to be cursed) col, Ovyoime (Attica, fourth century B.c.). The tablet 
in Béckh, i, p. 487, admits the reading ’Ovyjoupe as well as "Ovjotpn. 
The latter (as a nominative) is preferred by Wunsch, Tab. Defix., 
p. ivb, p. 25 (n. 100), simply in order to expel every example of the 
invocation of a dead person to carry out a curse. But this is only 
a petitio principii; and if we accepted ’Ovyncipn (as the name of the 
curser) at least the addition of some word like éyw after adrovs coi would 
be necessary—for which there is no room on the tablet. It will be 
necessary to retain the generally accepted vocative "Ovjome (to 
which the coming aavras . . . typetv, 1. 5-8, is much better suited 
than to the following ‘Epy7, 1. 8, as in Wtnsch’s version). There is 
nothing remarkable in the invocation here of the individual vexvdaipnov 
by name (thus doubling the force of compulsion exerted: cf. Kroll, 
Rh. Mus., 52, 345 f.) to complete and carry out the curse: parallels 
are given above, p. 594 ff., and in the above-mentioned Cypriote 
gipwrika: cf. also CIG. 5858b, daiuoves cat mvevpara (i.e. “ souls ’’) 
ev T@ TOTM TOUTW OnruUKadY Kal appeviKdv, e€opKilw bas. 

The custom of burying such magic defixions was astonishingly wide- 
spread. Defigi diris deprecationibus nemo non metuit, Plin., NH. 
28,19. In the places where Latin was spoken such abominations were 


ELEN IDID GE DIB 605 


indeed even more common than in Greek-speaking countries. (The 
Latin defixiones are collected now by Witnsch, Tab. Defix. xxv f.) The 
practice had a long life and is not quite dead even to-day. On the Roman 
side examples from the seventh and eighth centuries are by no mears 
rare: see e.g. [Aug.] Hom. de Sacrileg.,§ 20. For a Greek example 
see e.g. the story ap. Sophronius, SS. Cyri etloannis Miracula (saec. vi), 
chap. 55, p. 3625 Migne: magical objects were buried under the door- 
step of the victim’s house ; were discovered and dug up; whereupon 
the death immediately followed of—not the victim but—the magician. 


12th August, 1897 (= 2nd German Ed.). 


tys 
’ 
a 
i 
o 
4 
ry 
a 
4 
eg * 
‘ 
’ 
‘ 
. 
« 
‘ 
4 
ee | 
‘ 
. 
: 
+4 


ts 


INDEX 


The figures indicate pages, excepi where they follow a Roman numeral, in which 
case they refer to the numbered notes. 


Abarbareé and SBoukolion, 
105. 

Abaris, 300. 

Abioi, 63. 

Abipones in Paraguay, i, 30; viii, 28. 

Academy, its doctrine of the Soul, 
xiv, l. 

Acheron, *Ayepovatas 
wi2o5 241. 

Acheron, god of Hades, 591. 

Achilles, i, 41; in Hades, 39; trans- 
lated, 64 f.; on the paxdpwyv vijoos, 
Biv, di. 99> on Leuke, xiv, ii, 102:: 
asmriero.. OL God, 66 75.1265)" iv,73; 
Stl spe X1Ve7 11,42. 

Admetos, xii, 40; ix, 90. 

Adonis, iii, 30. 

Adoption, 172; Ritual Act of Adop- 
tion in the Mysteries, 601 f. 


Xie elt. 


Atpvnssi,.cOd 3 


Aeneas translated, xiv, ii, 110, 114 
(ii, 4). 

Aeracura, xiv, li, 144. 

Pyecomyviliseclo/ >) <Vvil,~ 125° 422" i; 


Agam. 1235, 591 f. 

Aether, the element of the Souls, 
435 f.; dwelling place of Souls, 
P70 teeeexe 4 OF XIV, 105,/69,.-254 1; 

Acthiopians, 63. 

Ages, different, of Mankind (Hesiod), 
SJetese Golden Ages; 11495 vii, 18. 

Agamemnon translated, xiv, ii, 99. 

ayapo. after death, 586; xiv, ii, 154. 

Agathos daimon, v, 133. 

Agides in Sparta, iv, 53. 

Agon, see Funeral Games. 

Agriania, viil, 28; ix, 11-12. 

Agrianios, name of a month in Boiotia, 
We Oe. 

Aiaia, ii, 14. 

Aiakos, vii, 13. 

mias. lero, 126; 137; 
102 ; Sophokles’ Aias, 

aldeats, V, 151. 


XIV le, 
xii, 88. 


“Aidns = Oavatos, Odvaros, xii, 4; 
= the grave, xiv, li, 135; confusion 
of the two ideas, ib., 92; cf. Hades. 

els "Aidao, ’’Aidda5de, i, 32. 

“Avdov pyrnp, 591 Ff. 

atpakoupia, iv, 13. 

BIpy tos, |23er iv, oo; 

Air, see Aether. 

Aithalides, xi, 51; 599. 

Aithiopis, 64; v, 166; ‘xiv, ii, 102. 

Akrisios, i11, 43. 

Aktaion, 134. 

Akousilaos, 593. 

Alabandos, iv, 138. 

A laniceexivatisecs2: 

aAdotwp, v, 148, 178; xii, 73; 
095. 

Albanians in the Caucasus, i, 30. 

Aletes, ix, 66. 

Alexander the Great reaches the Land. 
of the Blest, xiv, i1, 101; translated, 
ib.; 107; Return of, and false 
Alexanders, ib., 112. 

Alexander of Aphrodisias, xiv, 34. 

Alexis, comic poet, xiv, li, 143. 

aAutyptos, V, 176, 178. 

Alkandros, iii, 56. 

Alkmaion Hero, iv, 1055 136 ; 
Physician, xi, 28, 35,40, 55; xii, 
LoUse silt. 22. 

Alkmatonis, v, 17, 40. 

Alkmene, iv, 134; translated, xiv, 1i,. 
99. 

Alkon, iii, 56. 

adAdabeades, v, 88. 

Allegorical interpretation of myths, v},. 


592,, 


Althaimenes, iii, 4. 

Ambrosia, 38. 

Ameinias (Pythagorean), xi, 30. 
Amelesagoras, ix, 58. 
adpuetaotpenri, 1x, 104. 


Ampelius, Lib. Mem., viii, 3; iti, 12. 


608 


Amphiaraos, translated, 89 f., 92-3; 
(ZeussAmphs 0 947 101 aloo ee (not 
originally a god), iii, 57; (later cult 
Gljyexiv, it 104, 

audrdpopta, ix, 72. 

Amphilochos translated, iti, 5, 13, 56 ; 
SSG IV LOS Se Xt, aig LO 4 sa LAs 

Amphilytos, ix, 59. 

Amphion, 238. 

apvyror, 586 f. 

Amyklai, 99 f. 

avaBidcers, xi, 103. 

Anesthesia, see Insensibility. 

Anagyros, Hero, 134. 

avapvyo as taught by Pythagoras, 
Empedokies; Plato, xi, Your oS 

Anaxagoras, vi, 23; 386; 432; xii, 
143.; > fr. 6 [12], xi, 110-11. 5 

Anaximander, x, 38; 366; xi, 98. 

Anaximenes, 366 ; xi, 98. 


Wncestor-cult, 10 ie lea eds ake 
(Hesiod) ; Ancestors in the cult of 
Heroes; GLL9“\ir. 2 1527, -f.) vofsathe 


yevn, etc., 124 f. (with nn.). 

Anchises translated, xiv, ii, 110. 

ayxvoreta (in the cult of souls), v, 42, 
Pa tel Gt xiv, (lige 0: 

avievat (Ta Kada, etc.), v, 120. 

Anima and animus in Lucretius, xiv, 
74. 

Animals in cuit of-the dead, v, 105; 
care of animals enjoined, vi, 395 
(and see Food); skin of, apotropaic 
USEWO!, XT, COS 4,761 G/ eee SOUL SROL. 
oe Chey oe ahh ot OE 

Andronikos (Peripatetic), 312. 

ave mot, X, 45. 

«ave wokotrat, ix, 107, 

Angekoks, off Greenland, »2620;sm1x, 
ae 

Angels, xiv, ii, 144. 

Anthropogony (Orphic), 
(Hesiodic) 67 f. 

Anios, iv, 102. 

Anthesteria, 168 ; ix, 11. 

Anthoiogia Palatina, xiv, u, 122. 

avipwodaipwy, li, 43. 

Antichrist xiv, i) oul 3s 

Antigone, 163; 426; xii, 94. 

Antilochos translated. =sxivem it. 
(p. 567). 

Antinous translated, xiv, ii, 114. 

Antiochos of Kommagene, his tomb, 
xiv, ii, 13 (p. 554). 

Antiphon (of Rhamnous, the orator), 
Ve L76 anOSS. 


34 Lats 


102 


INDEX 


Antipodes, xiv, ii, 101. 

awpoBavato, 594 (add Phryn. App. 
Soph. in Bekk. Anecd., 24, 22), 

awpot, xiii, 36; 533; 553; 594. eG0am 
X1Vy il. . bos 

awpoBopos Hekate, ix, 92. 

Apis, ix, 68. 

amoxatraoraas, X,47; 519. 

Apollo, 97 f.; 130; xu, 40> Sgoqiae 
expiation, 180 f.; as leader of the 
Souls, xiv, ii, 146; and Dionysos, 
287 f.; supplants Gaia, 92908 
Hyakinthos, 99 f.; ’Arvunos, etc., 
iv, 99. 

Apolline mantiké, 289 f. 

Apollonia in Chalkidike, v, 92. 

Apollonios of Tyana, ii, 18; xiv, ii, 
115. 

atrouaydaXla, 595. 

amopattev, 586, 590. 

amovippa, ix, 88. 

atoToum7 (datiovwr), v, 168. 

amotadot, V, 88, 158. 

amotpotator (feoi), v, 168. 

Apparitions of the departed, xiv, ii, 
154; see Ghosts. 

auvya trial held over, iv, 118. 

apatos (véxus, daipwv), v, 148; xii, 
107. 


Aratos as Hero, xiv, ii, 57 f. 
apxnyol, epxnyéra, iv, 51, 59; 
ev AT Kc 


Archelaos, the philosopher, 432; xii, 
to2: 

Archemoros Vase, v, 40. 

Archilochos, v, 173. 

Archon Basileus at Athens, 178. 

Areopagos, 162; v, 145;) 178. 

Argeios and Herakles, i, 35. 

Argimpaioi, x, 78. 

Arginousai, battle cf, 162. 

Aristaios, ili, 6. 

Aristeas of Prokonnesos, 300, 596. 

Aristogeiton and Harmodios in Hades, 
237. 

Aristogeiton, Speech against, vii, 15. 

Aristomenes as Hero, 528. 

Aristophanes Frogs, 240. 

Aristophon, comic poet, 601. 

Aristotle, 4383.3 «xiv, lb: 495mm 
4086, 18: xiv, 27). 

Aristoxenos, xi, 47, 52; 512. 

Aristophanes of Byzantium, 583. 

Arkesilaos, xiv, 1. 

Art of the Greeks, 157; Cult of Souls 
as represented in, v, 105. 


(An. 


INDEX 


Askesis (Asceticism), vi, 35 ; 302, 338 ; 
Mroilicw 64320) }UTAacian, = iX, 0/9. > 
Pythagorean, xi, 47; Empedokles, 
381; practised in foreign mystery- 
religions, 546. 

Asklepiades, doctor, xi, 69. 

Asklepios, iii, 13; chthonic, mantic, 
100 f.; his death by lightning, 582 ; 
Asklepiadai, iv, 92 f. 

Asphalt (bitumen), apotropaic virtue 
Ois,Vy 90: 

Bedése\ds sacred to the x domo, ix, 115. 
Associations: burial, xiv, ii, 4; 
religious, xiv, ii, 53. 
Astakides, xiv, ii, 105; 

Astarte, iii, 30. 

Astrabakos, 137. 

drago., restless wandering of, 
v, 148; 595 (i, 33). 

aréXeorot, uninitiated, lying in mud in 
the underworld, vii, 15; 586 f. 

aBavatos mnyy (in the underworld), 
Mivenisnl Ol, 

Athenaeus (139 E), iii, 48. 

Athenais, ix, 59. 

Athene azorpomaia, v, 168. 

Athenodoros, philosopher and Hero, 
530. 

Athens, 98; A. and Eleusis, 219 f. 

Atlantes, x, 78. 

Atomists, 385 f.; 506. 

Atonement in Plato (Purgation), 
36. 

Attis, ili, 30; viii, 55; 546. 

Augustine, xiv, 1, 87. 

Augustus, ascent to Heaven of, xiv, li, 
107; 

Aurelius, M. Antoninus, xiv, 44, 63, 
69; 504. 

Ausonius, xiv, ii, 167. 

Australian natives, religious dances of, 
viii, 55; 585. 

Autolykos, iv, 101; xiv, ii, 43. 

Authority, later Antiquity’s need of, 
545. 

Axiochos, the pseudo-Platonic dia- 
Logie erate) csi LAs O02 rt, 

mAVveEnoINe meSpirits |v, 1485) 1766. ‘ci; 
aAdotwp. 

Averting the eyes from the sight of 
spirits, ix, 104. 

Avoiding the sight of spirits, iv, 84; 
ix, 104. 


O82. 


163,° 


a thl 


Baal, ecstatic prophets of, viii, 43. 
ps tY are igen bs beeueted 


609 


Babylonia, i, 44. 

Sn in Rome, xiv, ii, 106 ; viii, 

Bakchiadai, iv, 46, 47. 

Bae yosums Viljoen Ome Soe 
Dionysos. 

Baxxou, viii, 31 f. 

Bakis, Bakides, 292 ; 
595. 

Banishment, 163; in expiation of 
MUUICCere Jota vl 42a). 

Banquet of the Pure (Orphic doctrine 
of), in the other world, vii, 18 ; x, 70. 

Barathron at Athens, v, 32. 

Barbarossa, legend of, iii, 16. 

BactAtda, iv, 47. 

Baocapevs (Bassarides), viii, 10 f. 

Batloka, viii, 30. 

Baubo, 591 f. 

Beans, see Food, prohibition of. 

Beer known to the Thracians, viii, 38. 

Bendis, Bendideia at Athens, x, 4. 

Berenike, translated, xiv, ii, 107. 

Bessoi in Thrace, 260; viii, 53-4. 

BratoPavaror (ProBdvaror, Genny Wine ee 
Vee 145281765 O94. fe: 

Birds (incarnations of Heroes), Nivea, 
102. 

Birth, pollution of, 295. 

Birthday as day of remembrance of 
the dead, v, 89; xiv, ii, 18, .45. 

Biton and Kleobis, xiv, ii, 148, 170. 

Black objects (trees, fruit, etc.) sacred 
to yAovor, and hence have kathartic 
DLO DEICSmaVs O L's ixes Olea Claaix, 
ZOsEOoU: 

Bigs mor tierdcad sl/l rac Vil, 10s) 8x1, 
ii, 31 ; 541 (cf. paxapirns and Islands 
of the Blest). 

Blindness follows the sight of a deity, 
xiv, li, 41. 

Bliss, life of, in Hades: 

Blood = thought, 380. 

Boccaccio, iv, 134. 

Boéthos, xiv, 34 (fin.), 57. 

Bones of Heroes, cult paid to, 122. 

Born, better not to be, xii, 10. 

Boukolion, xiv, ii, 105. 

Bovxodou Dionysiac, viii, 35. 

Bouselidai, v, 69, 129. 

Brahminism, 3027 exwoo. 

Brasidasmaseilelo,iiy,.20baeloo: 

Breathing out the soul, i, 25; 30. 

Bride, contests for the hand of a, i, 19. 

Bronze: see Noise, etc. 

Brotinos (Pythagorean), x, 7. 


1S Ve 


OODs mr Ci 


ix, 58, 63, 66 


see Utopia. 


610 


ISfULUS, cOLD eS El Vali gon. 

Buddhism, viii, 60; x, 83; xi, 54, 96. 

Burial, i, 34; oldest customs of, 22 f. ; 
coffinless, v, 61, 62; inhumation and 
burning in Attica, v, 58; within 
the house, at the hearth, v, 66; 
RIV mliph Oe mwitbine Lue: City ve Oos 


X1V, linc, 
Burial societies, xiv, li, 4. 
Burning and inhumation, 19 f.; 


burning the possessions of the dead, 
i, 30, Sie burning | the’ dead’; see 
Cremation, 

Butios of Antilles, 262. 


Cesar, deification of, xiv, li, 111. 

Calling home the Souls, 42. 

Canosa, vase from, vii, 27. 

Cannibalism, x, 54. 

Caracalla as an avatar of Alexander, 
ran aOreey NG eA. 

Cato of Utica, xiv, 64. 

Cave of Zeus in Crete, 96 f. 

Cave-deities, 89 f.; viii, 68. 

Caves, sleepin, 1x, 016, 

Catacombs, xiv, ii, 144, 166, 174. 

Celsus, xiv, li, 96. 

Celts, x, 81. 

Cenotaph, i, 88. 
Ceremonial of funerals restricted, 165, 
167 - Sv, 135757540. 
Cities, Founders of, 
apxnyot. 

Chains attached to a sacred statue, 
iv, 108. 

xyatpe on tombstones, 526 f. 

Chalkis, criminal] law of, v, 145. 

xdpropa, 292. 

Charon 2o/. 

Xapwviov, Vv, 23. 

Charon’s fare given to the dead, 18 ; 
162A evils: 

Children, importance of, 172; xii, 7. 

China, ancestor-worship in, v, 129. 

yoai, for the dead, v, 106, 120. 

Goes VA9o. ik, al Le 

xpnoroi of the dead, xiv, ii, 29 f. (vii, 
10) 


AD foo BSS ot Cea 


ie 

Christianity: ascetics and exorcists, 
2.92 “exivedic b/s) stl 7Oeeaise OLnword 
qpws, Xiv, ii, 82; violation of graves 
by. xiv, miso lip ilelle 2427 ei future 
rewards and punishments, xiv, il, 
96; rebirth, 602; Antichrist, xiv, 
i, 113, 

Christi. Russian sect of, vill, 57. 


INDEX 


Chrysippos, xiv, 40, 47, 60-1; xiv, ii, 
87. 


Chthonic deities, 158 f., 218 f. ; vi, 29; 
groups of x@dvo, v, 19; invoked at 
marriage and birth, 171; ix, 91. 

Chytroi, festival at Athens, 168 ; ix, 11, 

Cicero, vi, 22, 23; xiv, 64) aueme 
XIV, else 715-96, 

Chiff of ‘Leukas; xtv,.15 102% 

Closing the eyes of the dead, i, 25. 

Coffin-burial, v, 60. 

Collegia funeraticia, xiv, li, 4. 

Colonies, Greek, 27; 156. 

Comedy, Descents to Hades in, 240. 

Conscience, 294, 384. 

Consciousness division of, 595; see 
éxoTaats. 

Consolationes, xiv, ii, 6, 100. 

Corinth, criminal law of, v, 145. 

Cornutus, 504. 


Corpses devoured by a daimon 
(Eurynomos), vil, 25; (Hekate), 
be ere 


Cosmopolitanism, v, 34; 499 f. 

Cosmos, 29. 

Costume, see Dress. 

Coulanges, Fustel de, iv, 48; v, 131. 

Cremation, 8, 19 f.; 28; 1,°6G=aeme 
38 ; v, 33,58; and burial in@iages 
period, v, 58. 

Crete, cult of Zeus in, 96°f.; vV,enGee 
ix, 113-14 (mantic and kathartic 
reputation). 

Creuzer, 223. 

Crossways, 216; ix, 88. 

Crowning the dead body with garlands, 
v, 40. 

Crowns (of flowers) for the dead, v, 40. 

Crumbs, etc., left on the ground for 
the Souls, v, 114. 

Cult-societies, 221. 

Cure of diseases by prophets, 294 f. 

Curses against tomb-violators, 526 f. 

Curse-tablets : see Defixiones. ; 

Cycle, Epic, 34, 64 f:, 75, 90. 

Cyclic poetry, editing of, x, 17. 

Cynics, v, 34; 499: 

Cypress at funerals, v, 39. 


Daeira, Daira, Aaepiztns at Eleusis, 
vi, 8 

daemonium meridianum, ix, 96; 592. 

Daimones deities of second rank, i, 
56; distinct from Heroes, iv, 23; 
xii, 121: in Hesiod, ~ 70am 
Empedokles, 381; Stoics, 500. 


INDEX 


daiuwv, personal, of individual men, 
Biv 44 ue O7TLOs), Xl, 26% Sxiv, 
ads ayalos 6., V, 133 ;° cf. xiv, 
44; Saiuwv Ovnrds (avOpwrodaipwr, 
vekvoatuwyr), li, 43. 

Satpoves amotpomao, V, 168; apaitor, 
v, 148; pecAcxior, v, 168; mAdvates, 
592; smpoorpdmau, v, 148, 176; 
= Angel, xiv, u, 144; darpdvwr 
enTnp, S91. . 

Daites, Trojan Hero, iv, 3. 

Damon, ix, 19. 

Danaides, 242 ; 587. 

Dances, religious, 257 ; 
19. 

Dance, circular, in cult of Dionysos, 
wilt, 15. 

Dante, 33, 242. 

Danube, mouths of, xiv, ii, 102. 

Daphne, 100. 

Oagry, V, 38,95 ; ix,.46; xi, 85. 

Daphnis, xiv, ii, 105. 

Days, unlucky, v, 158. 

Dea Syria, viii, 55. 


Wall OOt nt ik, 


Dead, offerings to, 18 f.;. 165 f.; -v, 
TOpemeecitee for «the IS 164’; 
Patcdiuetss Ot, 4168 7) = Sacrifices.” to 
(Patroklos), 12 f.; in Mycenean 
etaves, 22 f.; in Od. A, 36 f.; else- 
where, 116, 164, 167 f.; Oracles 
Giuthe 4a 73 5) udges wob=the 


(Aesch, and Plato), 238 f.; (Pindar), 
Ki sae ee esc.) Xt, +775," (later), 
D4 lh classes of the, xii; 62): Xiv,u, 
127; imagined as skeletons, xiv, 
il, 92; exorcism, conjuration of, see 
Souls and Ghosts. 

earns eols- Superior to, life, 229, 
542; causing pollution, 295; of 
gods, iii, 30 ; Black Death, 284. 


We fixtones, © 1x, 92, urtO7 ~534, 594, 
603 f. 

Weifcation;* of, Rulers,” 637 “i. (ci. 
530 f.). 


Delos, purification of, ix, 119. 

Delphic Oracle, regulates expiatory 
frites, tv, 0t67.; 180: 1); authority of, 
am the cult-of Heroes, 128 ivy pives 
support to the cult of Souls, 174 f.; 
to the Eleusinian worship, vi, 5; 
to the worship of Dionysos in Attica, 
vi, 9; sources of oracular inspiration, 
289 f.; importance of D. in religious 
life of Greece, 157 ; grave of Python 
at D., 97; Delphic funeral ordinance, 
v, 45. 


611 


Delphinion at Athens, v, 172. 

Demeter (and Kore), 160 f.; v, 168; 
218 f 

Demetrios Poliorketes as Hero, xiv, 
ii, 69. 

Demetrios, Cynic, xiv, 64. 

Demigods (7lGeo), iv, 23. 

d7jjuoe called after yévy in Attica, etc., 
lvoe: 

Demokritos, xi, 35; 385 f. 3 xii, 150 ; 
Xili, 27; wept tadv ev Gdov, xi, 103 
(fragg. moral.). 

Demonassa, vi, 35. 

Demonology, 534. 

Demopho6n, i, 41. 

De mortuis nil nisi bene, v, 81; 170. 

Dervishes, vili,:15, 43; 262, 266; 

Devil’s Bride, ii, 7. 

Devil’s Mother, 591. 

Dexikreonsix, a1-118 

Dexion the Hero 
Tile 

Diagoras of Melos, 240; xii, 65. 

Diana = Empousa, 592 ; in the Middle 
NCES IX saL Gls st 

Diasia at Athens, v, 168. 

Dies nefasti, v, 158. 

Dikaiarehos.ox1, 922 012 6599. 

Dikte, Mt. in Crete, 96. 

Diochaites, Pythagorean, xi, 30. 

Diogenes, of Apollonia, 432, 436. 

Diesenes;) Cynicvi, 27 2239: 

Diogenes ‘Caertius (viii, ol), ca; 50" 

Diomedes, 67; on the paxdpwy vijcos, 
Kivi Oo: HSK 

Dionysos, the Thracian, 256 f.; Greek 
god, 282 f.; Greek (not Thracian), 
fame, ix, ler Orphic, oso°t.5 3401: 

Avovucos pawopevos, viii, 4; Lord of 
poulss 16Gr 2 Aloix ells: ate Delphi, 
Jisezo7, oOracles of Dionysos, )260, 
ZOOM ASS UL Valier TO 33s. OO xX, 
Jo hase BOUKOAOS EVI, 305 at 
Eleusis, vi, 9; #piphanies of, 258, 
279, 285; Worship of,-in’ Rome, 
viii, 54; xiv, ii, 106. 

Dioscuri, €rep7pepor, xi, 51; translated, 
Xiv, i, 109. 

Dipylon, cemetery at Athens, v, 58. 

Dipylon vases, 165._ 

Dirge, 164. 

Discovery, geographical, xiv, 1i, 101. 

Disease, origin of, in daimonic in- 
fluence, 294 f. ;- ix, 81-2. 

Division of consciousness, 595 f. 

Dodona, ili, 14; ix, 42. 


(Sophokles), iv, 


612 


Dogs sacrificed) to Hekate, 298, 
589-90 ; Hekate appears as a dog, 
ix, 99; 595; on grave reliefs, v, 105. 

Dorians in the Peloponnese, 27. 

Drakon, 115, 176. 

Drama, 280,042 15) in cult; 222,02585 
mystic drama at Eleusis, 227. 

Dreams, visions of the dead in, 7 
(proving survival) ; xiv, 1, 154; 1, 
55 ; see Incubation and Prophecy. 

Dress in Dionysiac worship, 257. 

Drimakos (Hero), 530. 

Driving out the souls, v, 99, 100. 

Druids, x, 81. 

Drusilla (ascent to heaven), 
107. 

Dryopes, v, 18. 

Avados, viii, 10. 

Duty, as conceived by the Stoics, 498 f. 


Kine ils 


Earth = Hell, xi, 75. 

Earth-deities : see Chthonic. 

Earth, Oracle of, at Delphi, 97, 160; 
ix, 46. 

Echetlos (Hero), 136. 

Echidna, v, 23. 

Eckhart, xiii, 75. 

ey xutTplorpiat, Vv, 77. 

Eggs, kathartic use of, x, 55; 590. 

Egypt, i, 5, 39; 242; 335; x, 8, 45; 
346 ; xiv, ii, 109, 152-3, 144. 

éexgopa of the dead body, v, 46, 50, 60. 

€xotacts (e€vOovotacpds, Katox7), 30, 
200 sa Vie Ae OO ey COtd ae CO Oe 
300% 2 5384597471. 547-4595: 

Eleatics, 371 f. 

Elements, the four, xi, 28; 379. 

Eleusinian Mysteries, 218 f.; secrecy 
at, 222; promises made by, 223; 
modern interpretations of, 223 f. ; 
symbolism at, 226; later mention 
and end of (fourth century), 542 ; 
Kivil, 1/7206 (a Lesser Mysteries. «at 
Athens, 220 ; and Morality, 228. 

Eleusis, v, 19, 21. 

Elijah, i, 18; xiv, ii, 109. 

€AX€Bopos kathartic effects of, ix, 26, 
oO: 


Elpenot, l/s, 29,233enl 9s 201 3G. 

Elysium; Dogis sO ati Dela al ls 
99 9741. 

Embalming in Egypt, i, 39 ; 
iv, 46. 

Empedokles, 378 f. ; 
34, 42, 50, 56 f. ; 
GSer xiv, lie O fe: 


in Sparta, 

Xiu 2 Eee Xt bo. 
sais. L ex, 40; 
597. 


INDEX 


Empedotimos, ix, 111-12; 
xivVeroo: 

Empousa, vii, 25; 591. 

éevayileuw, iv, 15, 86. 

évara, an offering to the dead, v, 82-3. 

Enemies of the gods in Hades, 238, 
241, 

évcavava for the dead, v, 81, 90, 92. 

évOeos (€vOovotacpuds) : see ExoTaats. 

évOvuov, 216. 

Enlightenment in Greece, 79, 115, 292. 

évvaerypis in expiation of murder, xi, 
78; xii, 34, 40; 180. 

Enoch} iiyvl8; “xiv; 133109; 

Eoiai, Hesiodic, 593. 

eraywyn (Sarovwy), ix, 106-7, 


xXli, 44; 


Ephialtes (daimon), ix, 102; xiv, ii, 
86; 592. 

Ephyrai in Thesprotia, v, 23. 

Epicharmos, vi, 5; 436 f.; xii, 159% 
XLV ,nOoe 


Epidauros, ili, 13, 54. 

Epidemics, religious, 284. 

Epigenes, 597. 

Epikteta, Testament of, v, 126; 
lip Ssa/4. 

Epiktetos, 504 ; xiv, 3, 41, 44. 

Epicurus, doctrine of the soul, 504 f. ; 
foundation for the cult of his soul, 
Vv, 112655137; 

Epigrammata Graeca, ed. Kaibel, xiv, 
ii, 119 f. (No. 594: 141). 

Epilepsy (see mental diseases), vili, 39. 

Epimachos, v, 19. 


Xiv, 


Epimenides, 301; . 111, 24; "\vjeeeee 
596 ; Theogony of, ix, 123. 

émidavera Of Dionysos, 258; viii, 68 ; 
285. 

EmtmopTrat (Satudvwv), v, 168; ix, 107. 


Epitaphs, 539 f. (see Anth. Pal.). 

é€mwoat, ix, 81-2, 107. 

Erechtheus (Erichthonios), 98 ; 581. 

Erinyes, ii, 6; v, 5, 97, 121; 173 
Vil, One Xl!) / On Ooms 

€pivverv, ix, 58. 

Erossavee ule. 

€oxapa, i, 53. 

Eskimo, manner of burial, v, 67. 

Essenes,' x, 78% -xXtv; 11, LIZ 

Esthonian cult of the dead, v, 99. 

CT ig, Ve LAL, 

Eteoboutadai, iv, 52. 

evayys, xii, 58. 

EdayyeXos Hero, xiv, ii, 63, 144. 

Euadne, 581. 

Evamayv, ix, 102. 


INDEX 


Eubouleus (Euboulos), god of the 
mncderworld..v, 7,519 57220 3 xiv; 1, 
145. 

Eudemos, Ethics of, 512. 

Euhemeros, iii, 28. 

Eukleides (Socratic), xiv, 44. 

Euklos, ix, 58. 

Eumolpos, Eumolpidai, vi, 6, 16 ; x,70. 

Eunostos (Hero), 134. 

Euodos (Hero), 529. 

Eupatridai in Athens, iv, 47; v, 139; 
602 f. 

Euphemistic names for y@dvor, v, 5. 

Euphorbos, 599. 

uctpides, 43251... Alcesits,, xii, 121); 
Bacchae, 286; Hecuba, viii, 70; 
orthodoxy of, xii, 135. 

Eurynomos, Hades-daimon, vii, 25. 

Eurypontidai, iv, 53. 

Eurysthenidai, iv, 53. 

evoeBav xpos, Vil, 15; xiv, li, 133. 

Huthykles, iv, 117. 

Euthymos, 135; 581. 

Evil, speaking, of the dead forbidden, 
Vemlio: 

Evil, nature of, 470 (Plato) ; 498; xiv, 
40, 60. 

Exegetai, their advice sought in 
questions relating to the cult of 
Souls, v, 139, 174. 

Exorcism, 604. 

Expiation, gods of, v, 168; sacrifices 
of, made to yédmor, v, 167; after 
murder, 180 f. 

Eyes of the dead, closing of, i, 25. 


Fainting (Ac7wopvyia), i, 9. 

Fame, all that is left to the dead, 
a Omelet 0, 2Oe X1Vs il, 169. 
Family graves in the country, v, 69, 

1037 O20: f: 

Fate and guilt, 423 f., 426 f. 

Fear of the dead, 16, 163, 169; of 
death, dispelled by Epicurus, 506; 
breaks out at the end of the classical 
period, 545 (xiv, 170). 

Feet of the corpse pointing towards the 
Goor, 11,26; 

Fetishism in Greece, iv, 118. 

Figs, kathartic uses of, 590. 

Hire. kathartic uses of, 4, 41 > ix, 127. 

Fish: see Food, prohibition of. 

Flaminius as Hero, 531. 

Folk-poetry, 25; belief about the 
souls, 524; legends about the 
‘translated 1 Xiv,.ii, 100. 


613 


Folketales (Greek); iv, 115.39 xiv,ou; 
Lol 

Food, Prohibition of certain foods 
(attributed to Eleusis), vi, 35; 
among the Orphics, x, 54-5; 
Thracian, x, 78: by Pythagoras, xi, 
42,47; Empedokles, xi, 76, 85. 

Fountains in Hades, xii, 62; xiv, ii, 
151; of Immortality, xiv, 11, 151. 

Fravashi (Persian), i, 5. 

Frederick, legend of the return of the 
IDyeteties PE Sem EY JNO 

Freewill: see Will. 

Friendship in the doctrine of the 
Epicureans, 506. 

Funeral rites, in Homer, 17 f.; in later 
times, 1623f 7.0 5245 fe) S01 princes, 
i, 17; of kings in Sparta, Corinth, 
Crete, iv, 46 ; at public expense, xiv, 
liso 3 TelusalOln Vv 402-0- 

Funeral feast in Homer, 18; later 
(mepidermvov), 167 ; games, in Homer, 
15.; for Heroes, 116'f. ; procession, 


16528-4260; 
Parious, Host; sits 7 c0o axilla OF 
(593). 


Fustel de Coulanges : see Coulanges. 


Gabriel, the Archangel, iv, 134. 

Gala, 160ml GS Vai 2 lewat @ Delphi. 
290. 

Gambreion, mourning period of, v, 
86. 

Games, 15, 116 f.; iv, 22; originally 
funeral ceremonies, 116 f. 

Ganymedes, 58. 

Garganus, mountain in Italy, iv, 92, 
96. 

Garlands for the dead, v, 40. 

Gatiice xwols 

Gello, 592. 

yevebAtos Saipuwr, xii, 26. 

Tevéova, private and public, v, 15; 
167. 

Genesis, ii, 18. 

Genetyllis, ix, 91. 

yévn, 124. 

Gens. 1) Ocarv, 132.3 

yevvityns TOV Oedv, 603. 

German tribes, i, 34; 22. 

Getai, 263. 

Glostss Oa lege 29 al Saray oo 104; 
LIA F534 xv, 11,01545566 209071. 

Fivwyv, viii, 10. 

Glaukos, xiv, ii, 151. 

Gnostics, xiv, ii, 179. 


xiv, 44. 


614 


Gods, in Homer, 25 f. ; Olympians and 
others, 11, 56; idea of divinity, xiv, 
ii, 107; Gods not immortal, 384; 
asleep or dead, iii, 30 ; buried, 96 f. ; 
birthdays of; .v. > S95 “in Shuman 
shape, iv, 134; visiting men, ii, 38 ; 
compared with men, 253 f., 414; 
periodically appearing, viii, 28; 
of expiation, v, 168; amours of, iv, 
134; conductors into the lower 
world, xiv, ii, 144 f.; unknown, iv, 
62; statues of, 1386; see Chthonic. 

Goethe, xiii, 13. 

Golden Age, 67 f.; ii, 49; 

yovets, iv, 49; v, 146. 

Gorgias, pupil of Empedokles, 378. 

Topyvpa, Topya, vii, 25; 591. 

Grace of the gods (salvation), 342. 

Grave and Hades confused, xiv, ii, 92. 


Babyy le 


Graves: see Burial, Family-graves, 
and fRock-graves; of Gods, 96; of 
Asklepios, 101; Erechtheus, 98; 


Hyakinthos, 99; Kekrops, ui, 41; 
Plouton, iu, 34; Python, 97; Zeus, 
OGrurot -tHeroess 12) =aculte Oli 2a, 


166 f.; silence at, v, 110; curses 
ALtACHEdUBCOse xt Vs ulis alos 
Grave-monuments, i, 28; v, 69 f. 


Grave-robbers, 526. 

Gregory the Great, Xiv, 11, 87. 

Grief, display of, disturbing to the 
dead, v, 49. 

Guardian spirit of individuals, xiv, 44. 

Guilt: see Sin and Fate. 


Hades, 26, 35 f., 159, 223, 236 f. ; 
RA eS oe 2p oO) ee OS Oma er O40) eat 
Picture of, painted by Polygnotos, 


241 f.; on vases from Southern 
Italy, vii, 27; cult of, 159; mother 
of, 591; entrances to (Ploutonia), 


v, 23; Ferryman of, vii, 9; Descents 
LO, gosil we hla: O2,500 5) Tlie SOO Re 
240 f.; (Epic), vii, 2-4; (Theseus 
and Peirithoos), vii, 3; (Herakles), 
591; (in comedy), 240 f.; (vases), 
vii,’ 275) (Orphic);-x,/60 3° (Pythag.); 
GOO TSA riversroioo,. Jose vai Os 
Judges in, 247. 

Hail: see Weathey-magicians. 

aipaxoupia, iv, 13. 

Hair, offering of, i, 14. 

Hallucinations, 259; 

Haloae 2225-371, 035, 

Hamilcar, translation of, xiv, ii, 109. 

Haokah dance of the Dakota, viii, 55. 


362. 


INDEX 


Harmodios, translation of, xiv, ii, 99; 
and Aristogeiton in the other world, 
vane a). 

Harmonia and Kadmos, xiv, ii, 99. 

appovia (of the soul), xi, 52. 

Harpocration on SINE i ix; LOS 

Harpies, 56; v, 124; 3. 

Hashish, 259. 

Hasisatra, 115118. Ye Rive eo 

Hearth, earliest place of burial, v, 66. 

Heaven (the sky), as dwelling place of 
the Blest, xii, 44, 62; xiv, i, 134; 
ascent to, of Roman Emperors, xiv, 
ii, 107; of Apollonios of Tyana, xiv, 
Lig: 

Hedonism, 492 (xiv, 1). 

Tievesias, ctVemu. 

Heirs, their duties to the dead, v, 
ed 

Hekahbe, ix, 99. 

Hekate, v, 5, 88, 168; 29722. SOUR 
(1. Hek., p. 289 Ab.), 594; Hosts Of 
593 f.; Banquet of,|-v, 97:333am 
ix, 88, 103. 

‘Exatixa daopata, 590 f. 

Hektor, as Hero, iv, 35; xiv, ij 
(still worshipped with sacrifice in 
the middle of the fourth century in 
the Troad: Julian, Ep. 78, p. 603-4 
EL); 

Helen, legend of her eféwdov, i, 79; 


translated, ii,|21; xiv, 11, 99,>1ae 
given heroic honours, 137. 

Helios in Hades, xii, 38. 

Hell, punishment in, 40. f.; 238508 


242, 344, 415, 536; credturesmem 
25, 590 f. (see Kerberos). 
Hemithea, iv, 103. 
niBeos, iv, 23. 
Hephaistion, xiv, ii, 70. 
Herakles in the Odyssean Nekyia, 39 ; 


his descent to Hades, v, 25; vii, 4; 
591; H. and Argeios, i, 35; H. and 
Eurystheus (Omphale), xu, 40; 
as Hero-God, 132; translated, 581 ; 
Xivjoi, 103: 

Herakleides Ponticus, ix, 58, 60 
(Sibyls), 108 (Abaris), 111, 96; xu, 


44 (Empedotimos) ; xi, 61 (Empe- 
dokles) ; xiv, i, 53 (souls in the air) ; 
999 f. (Pythagoras). 

Herakleitos, 367 f.:; xi, 5, etc: sie 


xii, 137, 150; 464; xiv, 325 eee 
504 ; 597. 
Hermes, conductor of souls, 9, 168; 


XIV; di,gl4o: 


en er eo ee aes 


“ 


ee DHE 


J OS aS 


+ ay 


INDEX 


Hermione, cult of y@dvcoz there, iii, 34 ; 
ete Osc. 

Hermippos, 600. 

Hermotimos, 300 f. 

Hero of Alexandria, xii, 150. 

Herodes Atticus, xiv, ii, 71, 131. 

Herodikos, of Perinthos, vii, 3; x, 7. 

Hieroes, 74, 97 f., 115 £.; 111, 46; 254; 
4165 xu, 1215 help in war, 136 f.; 


ptavest G1,, 1215 \v,., 685 . games 
for, 116 f.; bones of, transferred 
and worshipped, iv, 35-6; 529; 


as Birds, xiv, ii, 102; relation with 
Geot and dalpoves, iv, 25; become 
gods.5 1o2.:-' Homeric “Heroes 2’, 
ive Ot agit rresiod .< 744. 118: 
nocturnal sacrifice to, iv, 9; what 
falls to the ground sacred to, v, 114 ; 
in Pindar, 414 f.; legends of, 134 f. ; 
datersjo2/ ft. 

yows =a dead person, v, 110, 134; 
531; (Christian), xiv, 11,82 ; applied 
eOmthealiving 050 at. 7 ox1v,. 11,68 5 
nameless or adjectival Heroes, 126 f., 


DO wexiv, it; GIl=2 <> >. -iaTpos, hiv, 
94-5; xiv, li, 45; 7. ovyyevedas, 
Voth oon 


Heroized Kings and Lawgivers, 128; 
Kings of Sparta, Corinth, and Crete, 
iv, 46; Warriors of the Persian 
Wars, 528 ; prominent men of later 
times, 030; Heroizing easier in 
Boeotia, v, 134; in Thessaly, xii, 
121 ; 532.; becomes common, 531 f.; 
substitution of descendants for 
original Hero, xiv, li, 65. 

Hero-Physicians (Oracular), 133; xiv, 
li 40. 

qowes dvadpynto, V, 119. 

jyp@a at the doors, iv, 
v, 68. 

‘Hpwikds of Philostratos, xiv, ii, 41. 

Mawes, "pwd, six, 115, xiv, “ti, 50; 
Birthday festivals of H., v, 89. 

HpwisTat, XIV, li, 53. 

Herodotos, 115; xii, 8. 

Herophile of Erythrai, ix, 60. 

Hesiod, The Five Ages, 67 f.; Op. et 
Powe AA lee so4ie (i (LAT\ ee Als 
Theog. (411), ix, 95a. 

Hesychos, vii, 6. 

Hierapolis, its tAovrammov, v, 23. 

iepo0éauov, xiv, ii, 13 (p. 554). 

Hierophant at Eleusis, edvouvxyiopevos, 
arstel ie 

iAacpos, v, 167. 


105, 136; 


615 


ippoktates; Cultsofmy.ac0. 1 Sveti 
45. 

Hippolytos, iv, 38. 

Hippon of Samos, 432. 

Hippotes, xii, 40. 

Herdsman (shepherd), type of God, xi, 


36; (see divine apparitions), xiv, 
u, 41. 

Homer’ Zor fsnior: 

Homicide,#state trials ‘of; .176) f.: 


held over inanimate objects (in 
Athens), iv, 118. 

Horace (Odes, iv, 2, 21), xii, 49. 

Honey-cakes offered to the under- 
WOLldeiis 13 aay. 9S Sa Vilno: 

®pia, wpata Offered to the dead, v, 128. 

Horse in the cult of the dead, v, 105. 

Host shiriousS all. eis tee OS 7m x1. OF 
(593). 

House, earliest place of burial, v, 66. 

House-spirit, v, 132. 

Human sacrifice, ix, 87; 
Ose Dion ys0s,y 1295 7 OL ered a eDY: 
Epimenides, ix, 121;°> in >the cult 
of Heroes, xiv, ii, 49; replaced by 
animal sacrifice or zow7, v, 144; 
179-80. 

Humanity: see Mankind. 

Hunt: see Host. 

Hyades, iii, 45. 

‘Yaxivita, 99 f. 

Hyakinthides, iii, 45. 

Hyakinthos, 99 f. 

Hydromantic, 589. 

Hydrophoria at Athens, v, 98. 

Hylas, xiv, ii, 105. 

Hylozoism, 365, 385, 432. 

trofowa, v, 154. 


in the cult 


Iamblichos, Vit. Pythag., viii, 77. 

Iakchos, 220 f. 

Tanthe, iii, 3. 

Taso will noOOs 

Jatromantic, 133. 

Iatros, Hero, iv, 94-5; xiv, 11, 45. 

Iceland, i, 43. 

Tdaian cave in Crete, 96; 161. 

Images, cult of, 136. 

Immortal = godlike (becoming god}, in 
Homer, 57; = being a god, 253 f. 

Immortality, Belief in, connected with 


Dionysiac religion, 263 f.; among 
Orphics, 343 f.; in Philosophy, 
365: f.; 463 f.; 496; xiv, 60; in 


Popular Religion, 538 f. ; 542 ; 546; 
doubts#Otsex1Vs, bo 7. 


616 


Imprecations: see Curses. 

Tncasiriseou. 

Incense in temples, viii, 39; ix, 19. 

Incubation, ii, 8; 92; ix, 46; Heroic 
oracles of, 133. 

Indians, Burial customs, 10, 21-2; 
cult of the dead, i, 75; v, 84-6, 90, 
105 7el2G0e VY allasinatlades vila 
religious anesthesia, viii, 26 ; Yogis, 
viii, 43 ; kartharsis, ix, 78; Ascetics 
343; x 78; philosophy (Jainism), 
xi, 16; (South American) mutilation 
of corpses, i, 34; (North American) 
cult of souls, v, 136. 

Individualism, 117 ; 388 f. ; 499 f£.; 545. 

Inheritance, laws of, v, 146. 

Ino Leukothea, 58; iv, 104. 

Insanity : see Madness and Mental. 

Inscriptions (I.G. (xiv) Sic. et It. 641), 
MUO Oitace (4 Givin Coe aL Sex Ly 
ii, 146 ; (Ath. Mitt.), xiv, ii, 164, 168. 

Insensibility to pain, etc., in visionary 
states, vill, 43. 

Inspiration, prophecy of, 92 f.; (in 
Thrace), 260; (in Greece), 289 f. 
Intoxication, religious use of, viii, 39. 

Invisibility (in Homer), 56. 

Iolaia in Thebes, iv, 21. 

Toniaees (al: 

Iphigeneia, 64, 66; xiv, li, 99, 102. 

[phis sii, <3: 

Iron keeps away daimones and the 
ead (49 ay/ 2: 

Tsaeus, v, 129. 

Ischys, ili, 56. 

Sis; mysteries Of,exivs lise 74. 

Islands of the Blest (Hesiod), 68 f. ; 
(Pindar), 415 f.; translation of 
Heroes to, xiv, ii, 99;  dwelling- 
place of all the pious, xiv, ii, 100, 
130 f.; discovered by sailors, xiv, 
ii, 101; identified with Leuke, xiv, 
disso -m 1 U2 

Isodaites, 271. 

Tsokratessnvi,, 2006 i<4 3) 

Isthmian Games, iv, 22. 

Isyllos, iv, 2. 

Exion,) vital t? 


Jainism (see Indian), xi, 16. 
Japan, cult of dead in, v, 99. 
Jaws of the dead, binding up the, xiv, 
11,02. 
Jewish forgery of a Pindaric poem, 
Nil.e45: 
. Jews, influenced by Greeks, xiv, ii, 14. 


INDEX 


Jews influence Greeks, xiv, li, 144. 

Judaeo-Hellenistic doctrine of the soul, 
xiv, ii, 117. 

Judgment in Hades, 238 f., 
541; Orphic, 344 ; 
Plato, xiii, 36. 

Julian the Apostate, xiv, ii, 107, 144, 
yO 

Julius Kanus, xiv, 64. 

jus talionis, x, 71. 

Justin, apos “EAA., 3, xiv, iene 
(The emendation mdvoas is already 
mentioned, as I see too late, in the 
Mauriner edition of Justin Martyr. 


935. f., 
Pindar, 415; 


The apparently traditional dp7 
myndyoas is indeed possible on 
grammatical grounds [analogous 


constructions, otherwise peculiar to 
poetry, are not unknown in prose: 
see Lobeck ad Aiac.’, p. 69-70], but 
provides no satisfactory sense.) 


Ka of Egyptians, i, 5. 

Kadmos translated to Islands of the 
Blest, xiv, ii, 99. 

Kaiadas at Sparta, ii, 32. 

Kaineus, ili, 3. 

Kalchas, iv, 96. 

Kalypso, xiv, ii, 105. 

Kanobos, iii, 43. 

Kanus Julius, xiv, 64. 

Kapaneus, 581 f. 

Kaproa, 592. 

Karmanor, ix, 113. 

Karneades, xiv, 59, 61, 83. 

Kap7rovv, Vv, 126. 

Kassandra, vill, 52¢eixs 00s 

KaTadeiv, KaTaddecpos, KaTadects in 
magic, ix, 107; 604. 

ka0appata given up to the spirits, ix, 
88 (cf. 81). 

Kathartic practices, etc., v, 36; 180; 
vi, 18; vii, 15; 294 £.; S02ZG0 ee 
58257208) =) OOUes 

Ka0apots pavias (music), ix, 19; (of 
Pythagoreans), xi, 48; by Melam- 
pous, 287; Bakis, 294; Orphic, 
338 f.; 343; Empedokles, xijieam 
Plato, 470. 

Ka0édpat, festival of Souls, v, 86. 

Katoxos, Of magic, ix, 107. 

KdToxXOL,  KaToxy,  KatéxecOa, of 
““ possession ”’, viii, 24, 44. 

Kattadias (Devil-priests of Ceylon), 
Vill woo: 

Kaukones, v, 12. 


INDEX 


Kaunians, v, 99. 

Hausianol, vil, -75,° 77: 

Kekrops, ii, 41. 

Keos, funeral ordinance from, v, 42, 52, 
56, 74, 76-7, 87, 92, 135. 

Kerberos, vii, 6. 

Bypes — soulssweiOis cv, 100% ix, 92. 

Kerkops (Pythagorean), x, 7; 597. 

Kerykes, vi, 6, 16. 

Key, keeper of, in Hades, vi, 13. 

Kikones of the Odyssey, 42. 

Kimon as Hero, 129. 

Kirke, 32; v, 169. 

Kissing the hand to a grave, xiv, ii, 
26-7. 

Kleanthes, xiv, 41, 47. 

KAevdovxo0r Geol, 247. 

Kleisthenes, 124. 

Kleitos, 58. 

Kleobis and Biton, xiv, ii, 148. 

Kleombrotos, xiv, 3. 

WKWieomedes (Hero), 129; exiv,i1, 114. 

Kleomenes as Hero, xiv, ii, 59. 

Kivienos — Hades, v,; 8, 18; ire- 
duced to rank of Hero, iii, 34. 

Knossos, 96; iii, 25. 

inorceme LOU 3 V,.01 1°% 
He higy She a Tey 

Koronis, i11, 56. 

Korybantism, viii, 36, 52; 286 f. 

iOS {Ge)5-v,/16. 

Kotytto, 336. 

Kouretes, v, 167. 

KwAvpatra, Magic spells, ix, 81. 

Kragos, iu, 30. 

icrantor, xiv, 1: 

Krataiis, 593. 

Krates (Cynic), v, 34. 

Kratinos, vil, 17. 

Kratippos, 512. 

Kpeitroves = the dead, v, 65, 110, 117. 

Krinagoras, vi, 22. 

Kritias, Sisyphos, x, 54. 

Kritolaos, xiv, 32. 

Krobyzoi, viii, 65, 75. 

Krokos, iii, 43. 

Kronos, ruler in Elysium, 76. 

Krépea, KTepetlev, i, 20, 29. 

iy beley 207 7 vill, 32,43, 55’; 286 f.; 
ix,856 xiv; i, 174, 

Kychreus (xvxpetdns ddis), iv, 129. 

Kydas, ix, 66. 

Kyffhatiser, legend of, 93; xiv, ii, 112. 

Kylon, at Athens, ix, 120. 

Kyme, criminal law of, v, 145. 

Kypria, 64. 


219i h224: 


617 


Labyadai, their funeral ordinance in 
Delphiyiv, 52,855-128: 

Lamentation disturbs the dead, v, 
49, 

Lamia evil 2D ce ooze: 

Lanterns, feast of in Japan, v, 99. 

Laodike, iii, 6 

Lar familiaris and Lares at Rome, v, 
Ize 

Latinus, translation of, xiv, ii, 110. 

Laurel, drives away ghosts, v, 995. 

Law, unwritten, 163, 426; xii, 94. 


Lebadelay 90 ett 95% 111, #26 av nL, 
LSSeeexlve il. 04, 

Lectisternia, iii, 26; iv, 16. 

Lekythor, v,°35' 9) 169 = 01708 237. 


Lemnos, feast of the dead in, ix, 76. 
Lemuria in Rome, v, 99. 

Leonidas (as Hero), iv, 20; 528. 
Leosthenes (Hero), vii, 5; xiv, ii, 59. 
(emanix, SSse vill;.26: 


ether vitesse lf pati Pees | betes 
Mnemosyne, fountains of, xiv, li, 
| Va bs 

Leto, ili, 46. 

Leuke, I. of Achilles, 65,66; xiv, i, 


TOP Cliiizotsab: 

Leukothea: see Ino. 

Lie, justification of, xii, 72. 

Fite sa esl repudiationy Ole Villyadoe 
only lent, xiv, ii, 161; 505; Water 
OfiLifey xivi,tlol=2) ee Puture Lite, 
236 f.; see Hades and Ways. 

Lightning sanctifies its victim, iii, 39 ; 
LOR EV OSes ix L/h elise 4: : 
xiv, ii, 154; 581 f. 

Linos, iu, 43. 

Lobeck, 222. 

Local deities and their cults, 25 f.; 27. 

Adoyos 499; xiv, 69. 

Lokroi, criminal law of, v, 145. 

Lot, oracles received by means of 
(Delphi), 290. 

Aovtpo¢g dpat, 587. 

Lucian etlile 2S 2oOc ae = Luci, 
Nivse eon LE ULOPS SEXIV, 11.0750 144., 
xi, 96. 

Lucretius, 505. 

Lydia, v, 167. 

Lying-in-state of the dead, 165. 

iuykaios; Zeus, v, 1705 

Lykas (Hero), iv, 114. 

Lykia, imprecatory tablets from graves 
hele wedapes, 

Lykian language, iv, 99. 

Lykos (Hero), iv, 114. 


618 


Lykourgos, King of Edonians, ix, 3; 
in Sparta worshipped as Hero and 
God, 132; sanctified by lightning, 
581. 

bytic poetry, Ol Pthe Greeks, 5/7; 
All f 

Lysander as Hero, 531. 

Lysimachos (Hero), xiv, ii, 67. 

Avatos Atovugos, ix, 21; Avator Deol, x, 
50. 

Avats Of the soul, x, 61, 66; xiii, 67. 

Ma, worshipped with ecstatic cult, 
viii, 43, 55. 

Macedonians, viii, 31. 

Machaon and Podaleirios, iv, 92. 

Macriani, xiv, ii, 112. 

Madness cured by magic, ix, 19> 81; 
cf. Mental diseases. 


Magical papyri, xiv, ii. 144; 589; 
592 - GO45e5ct Defixiones. 

Magicians, among savage peoples, 
26hts Greeks 294 £5 ZOS sie axi os 5 
Hoop OU4. 

Mahabharata, iii, 3. 

wavas, 256. 

paxapitrns (of the dead), vii, 10; xiv, 
TE eae 

uakapwy vago.: see Islands of the 
Blest. 

Vanes; )v,099,- 133: 

pavia divine, 255 f.; 286 f.; in the 


worship of Dionysos, 282 f. 

Manichaeans, x, 83. 

Mankind, origin of, according to the 
Orphics, 341 £.5 generations (Ages) 
of, in Hesiod, 67 f. 

pavrers, ix, 41 ise as Magicians, ix, 
68. 

Manttké 
Uiobe Paik 

Marathon, iv, 84; 136 
Meads a Cried vs ibe Le 

Marjoram, kathartic,apotropaic uses of, 
Wi relee 

Maron (Hero), xiv, ii, 41. 

uaoxyedcpos, 181 ; 582 f. 

Massagetai, 259. 

Materialism, 385. 

“* Matriarchy,’’ not Greek, xii, 75. 


(inspired prophecy), 260, 


Grave of the 


Medea translation. of, xiv, ii, 99; 
(v, 169). 

Medicine men (North American 
Indians)\262 ix, 9638.0 Ll Jrmidance 


of the Winnebago, viii, 55. 
péyapa, iii, 3. 


INDEX 


petAcyiot Oeot, v, 168; Ardvuaos 
precAixtos, 1x, 21. 

Meilinoe, v, 5; ix, 96. 

Melampous, 89; 287. 

Melanippides, xii, 1, 21. 

Melesagoras, ix, 58. 

Memnon, 64 f. 

Menelaos (translation of), 55 f. ; 
Bie: a he 

Menestheus, iv, 100. 

Mental diseases, origin and cure of, 
2500s Sy IX, eh wets 

Metal, noise of, drives away ghosts, 
i, 72; ix, 83; see Lron, Bronze 

Metamorphoses, iii, 3; x, 82. $05, 


iV ce 


peteunpdywos, x, 84; see ALTrvans- 
migration. ¢ 
Metrodoros, allegorical interpretation 


of mythology, vi, 23. 

Metrodoros (Epicurean), xiv, 85, 86, 
O77. 

un povar, xii, 10. 

pynvipa Oedv, v, 148; 
176. 

filagpna,iy, 61763 

puudotwp, V, 178. 

Michael, the Archangel, iv, 96. 

Midas, 412. 

Mid-day, spectres appearing at, ix, 96 ; 

XIVs re Lee OG aes: 

Migrations, Greek, 27, 155, 161, 284. 

Milky Way (abode of the souls), ix, 111; 

xil, 44. 

Miltiades, as Hero, iv, 20. 

Mimnermos, xil, 7. 

Mind, 5, 29 f., 383, 387, 49346 

Mingrelians, i, 30. 

Minos (and Zeus, in Crete), 96; Judge 
in Hades, vii, 13. ! 

Minyas, viii, 3; 237, 238, 2823 

Miracle, 254; . xiv, ii, 40-1, 45; 
537; desire for in later agesmam 
antiquity, 546 f. 

Missions, sent out from Eleusis, 161. 

Mithras,. Mysteries of, xiv, ii, 144, 
ASS ALT2 a1 ite 

Mitylene, funeral ordinance of, v, 54. 

Mitys, iv, 118. 

py nen (Empedokles and Pythagorean), 


aXitnpiwv, Vv, 


Jive ley i 


xi, 96 ; and A707 in Hades (Pindar), 
Xl, 37 - Kihiioe tL 

Mnemosyne, babe 37 * XIV, dine 

peotpa, 29. 

Moon and stars inhabited by souls, 
Xoe7 0 xis 116 oxy 


Monism, A32s 500. 


INDEX 


Mopsos, iii, 5, 13; 133. 

Morality, 40; 228; 
376. 

Moppodrvncn, Moppa, vii, 25; 592. 

Moschion, x, 54. 

Moses, ii, 18; xiv, ii, 109. 

Motes in the sunbeam = Souls 
(Pythagoras), xi, 40; Emped. ix, 
101. 


DOA tat eer (B02 = 


Mountains, legends about, 263 ; 
68. 

Mourning, period of, 167. 

Mousaios, x, 70. 

pvxcor Oeoi, ili, 35. 

pvetv, vi, 16. 

Murderer, excluded from 
worship, vi, 17. 

Murder, action for, religious sense of, 
PovUmisowexpiation of; 174°1.5.138 ; 
xii, 34, 40. 

Murder trials: see Homicide. 

Music in Dionysiac worship, 257; as 
a cure for Korybantic frenzy and 
BtueteCiseCaSes;e256u1.5 1x, 2192. x1, 
48. 

-Musonius, v, 34; 503. 

Mutterrecht, not Greek, xii, 75. 

Mutilation of the dead, 582 f. 

Neycenae, 22; 27,9122: 

Mykonos (cult of Chthonic Zeus), v, 
ees 316, 

Myrtle sacred to yddmo, iv, 21; Vv, 
40, 61 

Mysians, x, 78. 

Mysteries: see Eleusinian M.; Orphic, 
pao ieee SSamothracian, ¢ Vi,.9-3o4: 
(see also Ists and Mithras). 

Piysricisin 225 1.,°204 1., 262,291 4, 
D4ae aii. 2, 104) xiv, 1s 

Myth, allegorical interpretation of, vi, 
23. 


viii, 


religious 


, 


Name, calling the dead by, 42, 527; 
of Hero used in sacrificing, iv, 62; 
in invocation of avenging spirits, 
604. 

Nameless Gods, iv, 62 ; Heroes, 126 f. ; 
O20 Erexive i; -615°63. 

Namnites in Gaul, viii, 55. 

Wareissus (Orphic’?); x, 29. 

vapOné, viii, 22. 

National Heroes: see apynyol. 

meNatare, “religion of; 223 f. 

Naulochos (Hero), xiv, 1i, 74. 

Nectar, 58. 

nefasti dies, v, 158. 


619 


Were tribes ipoteav. LO 2714 

Nekyia of the Odyssey, 32 f.; iii, 8; 
23/ {5,240 fj. 2nd: Nekyia, i, ‘62, 
G6ogeN:) in other epics; 237 1. '(see 
Descents) ; on vases, vii, 27. 

vexvata, V, 92. 

Nemea, iv, 22. 

vepecera, véweots, Népeos, iv, 91. 

Neoplatonic writers, x, 27, 29, 38; 

596 f. 

Neoptolemos, translation of, xiv, il, 

99. 

Nero, translated (Antichrist), xiv, ii, 

Liss 

Neurotic diseases, cure of, 286 f. 

New Zealand (method of burial), v, 67. 

INISLITHIALE, 1X5) 1020; exiv, 11850. 

Nine, sanctity of number, v, 

M111, 490s Ki Vsti D4: 

Noise of bronze or iron drives away 

SUOSES SE /ZE ay Oss coos 

Nostoi, 66 f. 

Novel (Greek, etc:); iv; 134; 
87. 

Novemdialia: festival in Rome, v, 84. 

VOUS mile A Max AlOlas.ye oo / iets ae iil 
WNTISTOUG.. 40 Get UCieoGG. 

Numbers (Pythagorean mystical theory 
Ohno: 

Nyktelios, Nyktelia, viii, 28; 285; 
1x5 368 

vupepodAnmros, 1x, 63. 

EK vuudev KaToxosS, 1X, 58. 

Nymphs, agents of Translation, xiv, ii, 
105. 


84 ; 


xiv i, 


Oath, religio-juristic significance of, 
ALM sern yh OOS ele Kio Ayes XLT, 
40. 

Oath-breaking punished in Hades: see 
Perjury. 

Oath taken by both parties in a suit, 
Vewloos 

Obolos for the ferryman of the dead : 
see Charon. 

Ocrisia ev. 132: 


Oreste Got emo Os, Meng e3Os 
2nd Nekyia, i, 62, 65. 
Odysseus, end of, ii, 30; oracle of, 


ive Of a) aS Hero; -xt¥; 1; 41 7:2 Os and 
Kalypso, xiv, ii, 105. 
Oedipus.4305 155 -xii,sSo,e) 1288. 
Oikistes, 127 f. 
Oinomaos, iv, 2. 
Oknos, 241. 
Olbia. xiv, 1027 


620 INDEX 


Olive, kathartic effects of, v, 36-7, 61; Paetus Thrasea, xiv, 64. 


Bie Fee Palamedes, xiv, 1i, 41. 
Olympos as dwelling-place of souls, Palaimon, ii, 38. 

rakigiehiy 3 betes maAapvaios, Vv, 178. 
Olympia, 1v; 22,162 121, 16077 iv, 93; madyyeveoia, 224; vii, 21; x, 47, 81, 
wpoberetv, 584 f. 84.3 519 xiv, 11, 68, 142 = Some 
éudards at Delphi, iii, 31. Pan, ix; 100: 
Onomakritos, 7 336-7; 338 f2;" (the ~Panaitios;:xiv, 24-0182: 

Lokrian), ix, 113. Pandaemonism, 519. 


Oracles of Heroes, 133 f.; of Earth, Pandareos, daughters of, ii, 5. 
160; see Delphi, Dodona, Incuba-  Pantheism, 261, 498 f.; xiv, 60; 504. 


tion. Panchatantra, iv, 134. 
Orators, Greek, 413. Paradise, imaginary, in Hades, vii, 18. 
Orators’ official speeches of consola- szapapvOyn7iKa Wyndioparta, xiv, ii, 6. 
tion, xiv, li, 6. Pardon for Homicide, v, 144, 151, 154, 
Orestes, iv, 35; 178; 424, 426. Parentalia in Rome, v, 90. 


Orgeones, 124. e Parmenides, 372; 408; 597. 
Orgiastic cults in Greece, ix, 56; in Parsley used in cult of the dead, iv, 22; 


Thessaly and Phrygia, 257. v, 40, 107. 
Orient influenced by Greece, 539. Pasiphae, iv, 104. 
Origen, c. Cels., iii, 80 ; xiv, 33. matpat, iv, 49; v, 131; in Rhodos, 
Orion, 39; 58. yin cep 
Oropos, 92; iii, 19, 56; xiv, ii, 104. Patroklos, Funeral of, 12 f.; Tranistas 
Orpheus, xcaraBaoas els ‘“Acdov, vil, 3, TION OL xivelie Oe 
276; ux, 00) sot Kamarina,?x, #7" “ararpopuetys, OU 2: 
oF Kroton,—x, 7, 11; Pausanias, Spartan King, v, 173; 
Orphics;sv,.-99 3 246" vi, 13 evil; Periegeta, 126; 529; (4, 32, 1) onam 
L521 SERS Soe ik fe x1 4A Doctor (pupil of Empedokles), 378 ; 
70a; 586; alleged influence in xisO1: 
Homer, x, 5. Pehuenchen Indians (S. America), i, 


Orphic cult of Bakchos, x, 1; poetry, 26. 
authorship of, x, 7; Khapsodical  Peirithods, vii, 3. 
Theogony, ix, 123; 339-40; 596f.; Pelasgians, v, 18. 
other Theogonies, x, 21; origin of Peleus, Translation of, xiv, ii, 99. 
mankind in;s339 cin gexs 7 /ceesI Xe ellICNOS xiv toe 
Rulers, (ot jethess world, seems 0 ce Pelopc.. ie sai vans 
Asceticism, 342 f.; kathartic Penates, v, 132-3. 
doctrine, 338; ideas of Hades, Penitents undergoing punishment in 
344 f.; doctrine of rebirth and Hades, '40 f., 238, 241¢3 vile 
Transmigration of souls, 345 f.; Pentheus, 283. 
— grave-tablets (Sicily), 417 f.; xiv,  aepidecmvov, 167. 
ii, 151; 598, 601; Hymns, xiv, ii, mepixabappa, 589. 
URS meptuatrev, 590. 
Orphica (fr. 120), x, 22; (fr. 226), x, 48. Perjury punished in Hades, 41 f.; 
Orphico-Pythagorean Hymnus_- on ¥; 1156 27238 Sex *7 7e ei ee 


Number, x, 9. Peripatetics, 512. 
‘Opruyin, il, 20. mepuphy, 589. 
Os resectum of the Romans, i, 34. Persephone, 158 f.; v, 5; 160 £.; 
oovor, the Pure, vi, 18; 343. 220; 222 f.; and seen isome 
OSiTISS Xi Veli, plo: Perseus and the Mainades, ix, 3. 
Ostiaks, religious dances of the, viii, Persian War, Heroizing of those who 
ints), fell in, 131. 
ofvOvua, 216; ix, 88. Persians, i, 5; 10; 22); °\3eeae 
OvUK HUNY, yevounyv KTA. ON epitaphs, xiv, kathartic practice among, ix, 78. 
ii, ; Persinos of Miletos, x, 8. 


Ouranos, x47 28: Persius, i, 31; 504. 


INDEX 


Personality, reduplication of, 595 f. ; 
cf. €xoraots. 

Peru, religious dances in, viii, 55. 

Pessimism, 412, 545. 

Petelia, grave tablet from, 417 f.,, 
601 f., 598. 

Phaeacians, 63; ii, 17, 46. 

Phaénnis, ix, 59. 

Phaéthon, iii, 35. 

Whanes, x; 9; 598. 

Pharisees, xi, 50. 

dappaxoi, ix, 87; 589 f. 

dacpata ‘Exatixa, 590 f. 

Pherekrates, comic poet, vii, 17. 

fenerekydes,,0ULi7e xX.7 9s xis.OL vi, 
Boos. 

Philippos of Opous, author of Epinomis, 
xiv, wl 

Philiskos, xii, 157. 

Philo Judaeus, xiv, ii, 117; (ap. Gal. 
xiii, 268), iii, 43. 

Philodamos of Skarpheia, his Hymn to 
Dionysos, vi, 9. 

Philolaos, x, 44; xi, 35-6, 50, 55. 

Philopoimen, as Hero, xiv, 1i, 49. 

Philopregmon (Hero), 529. 


Philosophy, 362 f.; 432 f.; 463 f.; 
490 f. 
Philostratos, Herotkos, xiv, ii, 41; 


V. Apoll., xiv, ti, 115. 

dipovy, dipwreKov, 604. 

Phokion, v, 66. 

Pseudo-Phokylides, xiv, u, 117. 

Phormion, of Sparta, ix, 111. 

Phratriai in Athens, 124 f. 

Phryeians,.Vv, 1675 6297); 
200. x1V, 011, 13; 174. 

Phylai in Athens, 124 f. 

Pig, in cult of the dead, v, 105. 

Pitch, kathartic property of, v, 95; 
bie, PR 

Piety of the Greeks, 28 f. 

Piety towards the dead, 16, 164, 169. 

eteta wey 62 UBL TWA Aig AR. OAs fet 
Aad At ey Oi 257) ae Xily 0 
OR > Ol X11, Gotti. O,0/) sive L100; 
item OOO EX O73) (/f-0 132) sexi, 
45; (jv. 133), xii, 34, 41: 

miOos retpnpuevos in Hades, 586 f. 

Pittakos of Mitylene, v, 54. 

Pixodaros (Hero), xiv, ii, 63. 

Pratoaix. 7 lU Jer oso . Xl, 90:74. 460.1.. 
XivgmeliemLOGhe 6 476.8 beauty. in 
473; influence of, on popular belief, 
Riv iiss !45:°  coctrine* oly, Ldeas, 
470 f.; different strata of the 


Vill; coz, 


621 


Republic, xiii, 84746) Laws xiii: 
36, 37 ; 476; Gorgias, vii, 13; xiii, 
36, 96; Meno, xiii, 100; Phaedo, 
xili, 36; 468 f. 

Plants«with souls, xi, 72, 82; 
Sieh L/meex isa, 

ot mAetous, the dead, xiv, ii, 124. 

Plotinos, 547 f. 

Plouton, iii, 34; 

mAoutwvia, V, 23. 

TATTALCINY O40 Vi vol Ew lle Lee eXLy,. 
li, 85, 87. 

Pluto, iii, 34; 160. 

mvedua = Soul, xi, 150; 498; 541 f. 

Podaleirios, iii, 13; 133. 

mown for homicide, in Homer, 175; 
forbidden, v, 154; and see Murder. 

Polemon, xiv, 1. 

Polemokrates (Hero), iv, 93. 

Politics, Epicurean withdrawal from, 
506 f. 

Pollution, 294 f. 

moAvavdptot daipoves, 604. 

Polyaratos, ix, 111. 

Polybios, 492. 

Polyboia, 100. 

Polygnotos’ picture of Hades, 241 f. ; 
586. 

Polynesians, v, 161. 

Pomegranate in the cult of the dead, 
vay Oey 

Pomptilla, grave in Sardinia, xiv, ii, 
vale 

Poplarun, the cult.oithe.dead av, 61; 
xi Ven er@ 22 

Popular belief about the dead, 524. 

Popular version of ‘“ Translation ”’, 
XLV wliee Oa: 

BOseid 0010S. .4 LOE Xi eOO sn Oe XLV; 
40, 44, 51, 53-4 ; 502; xiv, 60-2. 

Possession, 255; 595; see éxaraats. 

Possessions of the dead burnt with the 
body, i, 30, 51. 

Postponement of coming events by the 
gods, ix, 120. 

Poulytion, 222. 

Praetextatus, xiv, 1i, 172. 

Praise of the dead at the zepideczvor, 
Nie, PON 

Pre-existence : see Soul. 

Prophecy by Incubation (dream- 
oracles); 9241., 28917; aby Heroes, 
1333) ) in Thracian), worships.ot 
Dionysos, 260 ; two kinds of (rexvixy 
and dreyvos), 289 ; by “ inspiration”’ 
289 f.; at Delphi, 289 f.; in Greek 


382 ; 


160. 


622 


worship of D., 289 f.; wandering 
prophets, 292 f.; by means of lots 
AORWElPiing2Oo) in ace Kem xiv sei! 
LOZ 

Prodikos of Keos, vi, 23; of Phokaia, 
WilewOe WOTROATIION S Vil won wake se 

Pro€érosia, ix, 108. 

Proitides, 282, 287. 

PrOklidaieiy.noo: 

Prophecy: see Mantiké. 

Prophetic power of the dying, i, 69. 

mpoahay.ov, V, 46 

mpoatpomatos, V, 148, 176. 

Protagoras, 438. 

Protesilaos, iv, 98. 

Proteus in the Odyssey, 55. 

mpddeats of the corpse, 164 (v, 41 f.). 

Proverbs, Greek) vy, 120:>> xn, 3586. 

Prussia, cult of the dead in, v, 99, 114. 

yuxn in Homer, 4 f.; 30 f.; 364 f.; 
==ta LersegO.1O.g mill Pindar xiiwo2. 
in Philosophy, 364 f.; situated in 
6yCLOLs Mouth 1; 20 pean Le, Tu. 
Xie le 

buyaywyds, ix, 106. 

Psyche (of Apuleius), xiv, 11, 151. 

Psychology.) Homeric, 30 {ios or the 
philosophers, 364 f. 

yu yopavreta, V, 23. 

puxomoptreta, V; 23. 

wvyooracia, Vv, 100. 

Punishment of guilty through 
descendants, xii, 7, 65; xiv, li, 96. 

Purification: see Kathartic, xadapats ; 
after a funeral, v, 77; [after seeing 
a corpse : Jul, Ep. 77, p. Gol, 20'f. 
H.]; carried out by é&nynrai, v, 
IB9eawol emurderérs.s (79 tae 295 
(this not Homeric), v, 166; ritual, 
in daily life, 295; of the new-born, 
1D ae Dye DIOOd. a 2 00;, aD Vamtlt Omori: 
by running water, 588 f. ; removal of 
the polluting substance with figs or 
eggs, 589 f. 

Paiute ruhe, sevd, LO 4os 

Purgation in Plato, xiii, 36. 

Purple (Red) colour proper to the dead, 
sep ley 

Pythagoras, 374 f.; xii, 150; and 
Zalmoxis, vili, 68; and Abaris, ix, 
108, 122 ; his previous births, 598 f. ; 
descent to Hades, 600 f. 


Pythagoreans, suicide, v, 33; bury 
thes. body on wleayves v8 Olesmeand 
Orphicssin THerodotos, 636 xess 


in Athens, 337 ; psychology, xi, 55 ; 


INDEX 


Transmigration-doctrine, x, 79, 81 ; 
xi, 42; xiii, 40; ux (Alkmaion), 
xi, 28, 35; and Parmenides, xi, 30; 
Empedokles and P. dvduvnots, xi, 
96; Y Pythag., xii, 62; and’ Plage 
(divisions of the soul), xiii; )27a 
(transmigration of the soul), xiii, 40 ; 
and the Stoics (souls in the air), xiv, 
53. 


Pythia, viii, 52-3; 1x, 45; 2S9eaae 
596. 

Pythian Games, iv, 22. 

Python,-972 4180nn 


Quietism, 380. 


Ram, in cult of the dead, v, 105, 107; 
as expiatory sacrifice, v, 167. 

Rationalism among the Greeks, 29 f. ; 
12259492 5549: . 

Rebirth (see waduyyevecia), xiv, ii, 174; 
602. 

Recurrence, periodical, of everything, — 
Xa / eR OOF 

Red colour belonging to the dead, v, 61. 

Reduplication of Personality, 595 f. 

Regilla, wife of Herodes Atticus, xiv, 
ible le 

Relatives obliged to prosecute vendetta, 
v, 141 

** Release’? of man from fate, etc., 
342 fo x1 Us woos 

Religion, Homeric, 28 f. ; of ‘‘Nature”, 
22.3 f..;2SymDolicw1b- 

Relics; cult-of;iverd: 

Responsibility, moral, 
(Aesch.), 423 f. 

Resurrection of the body, xiv, ii, 174. 

Revenge and Vendetta, circle of those 
expected to carry it out (in Homer), 
v, 141; Vend. bought off (in Homer), — 
v, 143; this later forbidden, v, 154; 
Vend. in Tragedy, 424 f., 434. 

Rewards and punishments transmitted 
to descendants, xii, 65 (x, 47); 
exact equivalence, x, 71; xi, 44; 
in Hades, 40-1; 239 £.; 4670 
536. 

Right and left, significance of, in 
Hades, xii, 62. 

Rhadamanthys, 55 f.; ii, 17, 23; 247% 
XIV clipe LG?! 

papvos, kathartic uses of, v, 95; XI, 
85. 


121 f£.; 32m 
in Tragedy 


Rhea: see Kybele. 
Rhesos, iv, 36; 557. 


INDEX 


Rock graves, v, 62, 66. 
Rome, genius, i, 5; v, 132; marriage 
ceremonies, v, 95; Lares, v, 66, 


132.-* Lemuria;”'v, 99; Manes, :ib.: 
vw. vicoo; Novemdialia, v, 83-4; 
os resectum, i, 34; Parentalia, v, 
SU, eenates: ‘v, 132-3: Cult of 
Souls in, v, 114; Cremation, i, 37, 
39. 

Romans, admitted to  Eleusinian 


Mysteries, 226. 
Romulus, translation of, xiv, i, 103, 
et ies a whi 


Sabazios (Sabos), viii, 10. 

odBos, caPalvos, viii, 32. 

SLapBalia in Athens, x, 12. 

Sabazios Mysteries (late), xiv, ii, 174. 

Sacrifice at graves, 167, 169 ; made to 
EPeLOeS mi belore = “gods, | 1, 467% 
kathartic, 585. 

Salamis, 136 «f: 

Salmoneus, 58]. 

Samothrace, Mysteries of, vi, 34. 

Sappho, xii, 12. 

Sarpedon, 11,.28 ; iv, 99. 

Satialavill, oo. 

Scapegoat, ix, 87. 

Schelling, 223. 

scherié, ii, 46. 

Schol. Aristoph. Vesp. 1038, ix, 102. 

BOViuldis,) 200 paix, lo ex 78. 

Second sight, 260; 293 (see éxaraats). 

Second-sight of the dying, i, 69. 

Secret cults, 219. 

Sects, Orphic, 335. 

Seets, ecstatic : 
Prophecy. 

Seirenes, ix, 100; 4593. 

o€Xwvov sacred to the dead, v, 40, 107. 

L€XXou, iii, 14. 

Semele, 581. 

Seminoles of Florida, i, 25. 

Semitic influence on Greeks, 60; 96. 

Semonides (Simonides of Amorgos), xii, 
Ae Sold: 

Seneca, xiv, 41, 56,68; 503. 

Sertorius, his search for the Islands of 
the Blest, xiv, ii, 101. 

Severus Alexander, xiv, ii, 112. 

Servius ad. Aen. vi, 324 
ENON, \irexly 7 7 

Sex, changes of, in legend, i11, 3. 

Shamans, Vill,43/54 2024 

sheep (or Ram), v, 105, 107, 167. 

Sibyls, vill, 92);)°292 f. ; 596. 


see parvTers and 


(Poeta 


623 


Sicily; xu A 7 pe 417 sf. 

Sikyon (limitation on the length of 
epitaphs), xiv, ii, 118. 

Silenus, legend of, xii, 10 (viii, 15, 31). 

Silence in passing graves, v, 110. 

Simonides of Keos, xii, 1, 3, 11]. 

sin, 294 f., 343, 381, (Plato) 
consciousness of, 242. 

Sisyphos, i, 82; 241; vii, 27. 

Sit tibi terra levis, xiv, ii, 120. 

Sithon, ii, 3. 

Sitting (not reclining) at feasts in 
honour of the dead, v, 86. 

Skedasos, daughters of, xiv, ii, 35. 

Skeletons, the dead as, xiv, ii, 92. 

oxiddXa, kathartic property of, ix, 115 ; 
K1gOO GEO Go ste 

Skiron, v, 168. 

SKOtOS, 7val, 6. 

Skylla (daughter of Hekate), 593. 

Slaves admitted to initiation at the 
Mysteries, vi, 14; when freed, 
bound to keep up the cult of their 
dead master, v, 128. 

>lavonic cult of soulsive 161. 

Sleep and Death, 11,28; Death only 
Sleep a xlvails et t0 er or thesGods, 
jit Us emer CIT DLC-CLCC pa. mS eG 
Incubation. 

Snakes, form in which y@dwor appear, 
Lil nt 2 OOM OS Iie OO, Vn a oe 
VeelOS 2 eis plods L6St 4602. 

Societies :. see Associations. 

Sokrates, 463. 

SOON Gate) Ol sarchonship, 1x1, 20.5 
as wero; Viv;,, 38 > limits. funeral 
pomp, 4; 49; 57! 795 protects the 
memory of the dead, v,.l15; ‘his 
view of life, xii, 6; and Croesus, 
Xie ties / Cs 

Sorcery : see Magic and Conjuration of 
the dead. 


466; 


‘Sortilege, oracle of at Delphi, 290. 


Soul = breath (mvedua), 500 f.; xiv. 
ii, 138; represented on lekythoi 
as winged, 170; Pre-existence of, 
taught by Pythagoras, xi, 49; by 
Plato, 4652 f.:- *Anstotle, e495. i. - 
Stoics, xiv, 60 ; by Jews under Greek 
influence, xiv, ii, 117; Soul and 
Mind, in Aristotle, 496; ‘* Poor 
Soule ca Ven LL 4a exe OG eee SOULS 
becomes daimones (Hesiod), 67 f. ; 
etransition from Soul to daimon, v, 
EBS Yel48 0179", vy, MITC ee assist 
growth of crops, v, 120; called upon 


624 
at marriages, v, 121; appearances 
diterndcathest x, 1 OOn MOS Ms aEXLVe 


ii, 154; dissipated by wind after 
leaving the: body, ‘xii;°9; x1, 1027; 
xiv, 49, 77 ; of murdered men, 181 f.; 
kingdom of Souls in the air, in the 


Aether or in Heaven, 342; xi, 35; 
ASG cio = StOics O00 tana tae Ee, 
Hades ; in popular belief, xiv, i, 


142; in Neoplatonism, 547; parts 
of the soul, acc. to Pythagoras, x1, 
55°: Plato, (456 =4.%5" 7Peripatetics; 
912/59, Stoics,. xiv; 60% -Epicureans, 
505 ; conjuration of souls not known 
in stlomersa 24a laters Veco Is; 
106; xiv, ii, 87, 90; on Defixions, 
5940et oa G04ie ia OOUlS sul tenor: 
attera burial aoe tere et loa at. 
1G Sei see LGOweiee  Olat Oona 
Rudiments of, in Homer, 12 f.; 
in the family, 172 f.; represented 
on sepulchral reliefs, v, 105; Souls, 
Festival of, 168; in cult of Dionysos, 


1X lille oOULseoalvatiOnes cot tbe. 
M2: 
Souls: Transmigration of Souls— 


Greek names for, x, 84; Thracian 
belief in, 263 f.; Egyptian belief in, 
346; Orphic, 337; 342 f.; 346 f. ; 
Pythagorean 20310 ioe xl, OU mor 
in Pindar, 415 f.; Empedokles, xi, 


1D Aer Plato 4672 Stoics 

(Poseidonios ?), xiv, 60. 
o@pa—onpa: Orphic, 342; x, 73; 

Pythagoras, 375 ; xis OUR 


Empedokles, xi, 75 ; Euripides, xii, 
137; Plato, xiii, 44; in popular 
belief, xiv, ii, 141. 

Somnium Scipionis, xiv, 53, 54, 62; 
xiv, ii, 58. 

Sophists, 432. 

Sophokles, vi, 22, 26; 426 f.;. as 
FLErO; h1V5ee si) 6G mi COlmalLOo3, exits 
1H 

suTnHp (ypws), xii, 128. 

sparta :) funeral) o1gkings, fiv, -46:; 
DUTIals ICUStOMS; wayeresOl seeerciicis 
representing feasts of the dead, v, 
LO5286G8 critminalslasw. Of.2v-el+5,; 

Speaking ill of the dead forbidden, v, 
115. 

spell: see Magic: 

>DEUCCHy ELCLDCEL. TO. 

Spielhansel, folk-tale of, 1, 82. 

Spiritualism, 264 f.; 385; 500; 

Spirits : see Ghosts. 


595. 


INDEX 


Spirits, island of (Leuke), xiv, ii, 102; 
nocturnal battle of, xiv, “iija7e 
magical compulsion of, ix, 107. 

Spitting, apotropaic effect of, 586. 

Stars inhabited, xi, 116; by the souls 
of the departed, x, 75-6 ; myths, 58. 

State: see Politics; State Funerals; 
Xiv,1i, 5-6: 

Statues of Heroes, miracles performed 
by, 136. 

otédavos, iv, 21. 

Stertinius, C. Xenophon (Hero), xiv, ii, 
64. 

Stobaeus, Ecl. i, 49, 46: xiv, 1980 3e8 

Stoics, xi, 98; xii, 67; 497 4.952 

Stones (a soul attributed to), xi, 72. 

Stormclouds, shooting at, viii, 63; cf. 
W eather-magicians. 

Straton, xii, 150; xiv, 34. 

Striking the ground in calling on 
xP ovo, ili, 10. 

Sty xs vil 21? 

Subterranean translation among the 
Greeks, 89° f.; xiv, i, 10430 
Germany, 93; in Mexico and in the 
East, iii, 17. 

Sifis of Persia, viii, 60; 266. 

Suicide forbidden (Orphic), x, 
suicides refused burial, v, 33. 

Suidas on éuacyadXicbn, 582 f. 

Sulphur, kathartic property of, v, 95. 

Swoon (Acwoyvxia), i, 9. 

Syrians, xiv, ii, 174. 

Sybaris (Lamia), iv, 115; Orphig 
gold tablets from, 417 f.; 598; 601. 

Symbolism in religion, 224, 226 f. 

Symmachos, xiv, i, 172. 

Syncretism, 288; 534. 

Syrianos, 596 f. 

Syrie, 62 f. 


44; 


Tacitus, xiv, 47. 

Tahiti, funeral dirges of, v, 48. 
Talthybios, 134. 

Tantalos, 40 f., 241; vil, 27. 
Tarantism, ix, 19. 

Taraxippos (Hero), 127. 

Tarentum, v, 68. 

Tartaros, 76; vii, 6; 340 ieee 
Tasmania, cult of dead in, 585. 
Taira, rooabdra in epitaphs, xiv, ii, 167. 
Teiresias, 36 f., 41 ; iu, 3, 8. 
Telegoneia, 65, 90. 

Teleology in Anaxagoras, xi, 104. 
Tellos the Athenian, xiv, ii, 170. 
Temesa, the Hero of, 135 f. 


INDEX 


Temple-sleep : see Incubation. 

Tenes, iv, 138. 

Terizoi in Thrace, ix, 65. 

Thales, vi, 253° 366. 

Thamyris, 238. 

nanatos, xii, 4; 121; 
Fee 28: 

Thargelia, ix, 87. 

iheagenes (Hero), 136 ; iv, 119, 134: 

Thebais, 75, 90, 93. 

Jetos avno, xiil, 68. 

Themistokles as Hero, iv, 30. 

Theognetos (Orphic), x, 8; 

me mcognis, 413 f£.57 xi, 13. 

Theogony of Epimenides, ix, 123; of 
HiGsiod x, 35 Orphic, S39 )1..;2596. 

Theokrasia, x, 24. 

minenlogy. liomeric, 25 £2 31 tof 
the court in Hellenistic period, 538 
(see Orphics). 

Theophanes (Hero), xiv, ii, 64. 

Theophrastos, xiv, 34; Testament of, 
Veelos. 

Theopompos, on Abaris, ix, 108; 
Atisteas, ix, 109: Bakis, ix,’ 696; 
Epimenides, ix, 117; Hermotimos, 
ili 2 Phormion, xy 1 Ti. 

6 Beds, ) Gea at Eleusis, v, 19. 

Theosophy (Orphic), 336. 

Hheoxenia, 96; iv, 16, 71; 
at Delphi, iv, 82. 

Theron, 416. 

Theseus, transfer of his bones to 
Athens, 122; expiation of murder of 
Skiron,:.v, 168; Descent to Hades, 
Vito. 

Thesmophoria, 222. 

Oiacos, Dionysiac, Thracian, viii, 31. 

30,000 = innumerable, xi, 78. 

Aoror, iii, 31. 

Thorn: see White-thorn. 

Thracians, viii, 11; cult of Dionysos, 
256 f.; belief in immortality, 263 f. ; 
in Transmigration, 263 f.; Ascetic 
PIAClices, ks / Go. 

Thrasea Paetus, xiv, 64. 

Opdvov orpwvvvvae for a god, iii, 26. 

povwots (of mystai), ix, 19. 

Thunder clouds driven away by noise, 
CLC Vill 100. 

Avev, iv, 15. 

Thyme used in burial, v, 36. 

Oupos and bux, is yes Xi bs 

Thyrsos, viii, 22. 

Tii of Polynesia, v, 161. 

Timokles of Syracuse, x, 7. 


and Hypnos, 


597. 


festival 


625 


Timoleon as Hero, xiv, ii, 59. 

Litans (Or p nic) G40 maa ex Fer tc ie 
pin’ 6) 

Tithonos, 58. 

Tityos, 40 f. 

dragedy,. Greek,-421 1. 

Toddes, Thracian tribe of mercenaries, 
Nee eT 

Trallesin Karia, criminal law of, v, 150. 

Translation, in Homer, 55 f.; sub- 
terranean, 89° f.* in’ Pindar, 414 ; 
in) Huripides. x11,» 127: enti tic, 
GU Miva OOS = Germans oe 
Ttawaneexiy, tien Oer sitcom slands 
Of thes blest, xiv; 4,790 sto the 
Nymphs, xiv, ii, 105; into a river, 
X1Ve0 ll Lider bye Lehtning, 7533. 
Tr. of Achilles, 64 f.; Alkmene, 
xiv, 11, 99; Althaimenes, iii, 4; 
Amphiaraos, 89f. ; Amphilochos, iii, 
5; Antinous, xiv, ii, 114; Apollonios 
of [yana,. xiv,-i,, 1iG 3 PAristaios; 


lit,er OF Atisteass(aijeen ix. 109°; 
jatomoiliqey” Tiger whi, Aig Ie ps 
Diomedes, 1.267% R1Viedd tl eee: 


Emperors, xiv, 1, 107 ; Empedokles, 
xi, 61; Erechtheus, 98; Euthymos, 
136 ; Hamilcar, xiv, ii, 109; Helen, 
i lee rrerakleid fe Pont. x1, Ole 
Iphigeneia, 11, 26 ; Kleomedes, 129 ; 
Laodike, iii, 6; Memnon, 64; 
Menelaosso0, eile i OCdipus, ect, 
112; Phaethon, iii, 35; Rhada- 
Manthys,eiis5 175 lelegones and 
Penelope, eGo, —slrophoenios,, SO: 
Tr. no longer understood in later 
ages, XIV, iD 103; effected 
mechanically, xiv, ii, 106. 

Lrausians; ville eso: 

Trees planted round graves, i, 28; 
v, /3; sacred to the y@ovor, v, 61. 

Tptaxades, V, 86 f.; xiv, il, 17. 

Trieteric festival of Dionysos, 258, 
285. 

Triopion, ancient Greek cult there, ix, 
89. 

Triphylians, v, 11. 

dintptolemos, 1,415 220°; -vi,13573"-as 
Judge in Hades, vii, 14. 

tpira (sacrifice to the dead), v, 83. 

tpitomatopes, V, 123 f.; x, 49. 

Pireevenitee Cae A Ie b tib)e) 
11Gb Ve loos. Vill GO sivy 1), 04: 
ZeuUsmLropie, 1k, 1S, 

Trojan Heroes, xiv, ii, 41. 

Tronis in Phokis, iv, 34. 


Ss 


626 


Turning one’s back on spirits: see 
Avoidingsetc. 

Turnus, translation of, xiv, 1i, 110: 

tuuPwpvxos, Xiv, li, 11. 

Twelve Tabes influenced by Solon, v, 
47. 

Typhon, vii, 6. 

‘yrtaios, xi, (13. 


Underworld, pictures of on vases, vii, 
27; Polygnotos’ picture of, 241 f., 
SSG a. 

Unknown gods, iv, 62 ; Heroes, 127. 

Unlucky days, v, 158. 

Utopia in Hades, vii, 18. 


Vampyre,iv, 161 3. xiv, 115/86: : 

Vapour-baths used by Scythians and 
Indians to produce religious intoxica- 
tion, viii, 39. 

Vial rosie 2 beter to Lec Vi eo ak, leala 

Vendetta: see Revenge. 

Venus, conductress of souls, xiv, ii, 
146. 

WieTPI etoile my il; Oca Xl. UM xi1s00 200 
Doo: 

Vibia, tomb of, xiv, 11, 144, 174: 

Vine, cultivation of in Thrace, viii, 
38; branches used in burial, v, 37. 

Virbius, legend of, iv, 38. 

Visions, 30 f., 258 f. (and see €xaraats). 

Misits -of- Gods to men," 1157 38 jAiv, 
134). 

Voodoo, Negro sect in Haiti, viii; 55. 


Wanderings: see Migration. 

Water polluted by the neighbourhood 
Ol a Corpse, Vi 38 7 ix, 76% flowing) 
kathartic. properties of, 588 <1. 
cold water in the lower world, xiv, 
hielo lor -Litemingtolk-lore, to. 
speaking, ib. 

Ways, Two, Three, in the lower world, 
5711, 62 

Weather-magicians, viii, 63; ix, 107. 

Wereeild, (175 1..;) forbidden; -v, 154: 

Will, freedom of, 423 f.; 498 f. 


INDEX 


Wind = Soul, xiii, 5 ; Spirits of, v, 124; 
Bride of, 11, 7. 

Wine, belongs to later Dionysos, viii, 3. 

Wisdom of Solomon, xiv, ii, 117. 

White-thorn, v, 95. 

Witches, etc. (see also Hekate), ix, 
101. 

Works of ‘“‘ supererogation ” 
others, x, 66. 

World, different Ages of, in Hesiod, 
O7 ats 

World, withdrawal from, in later 
Greek life, 546 f.; enjoyment of, in 
early period, 1, 63; xiv, 11; 
hatred of, Christian-Gnostic, xiv, ii, 
179; periods of (Orphic), 342. 

Wolf-shape, of spirits, iv, 114; 590. 

Wool, kathartic properties of, 590. 


assist 


€evixot Oeol, x, 3. 

xXenokrates, vi, 35; x, 39 ;*> xivaee 

Xenophanes, 371 f.; xi, 42; xi, 150; 
Ri VemOoe 

Xenophon C. Stertinius (Hero), xiv, ii, 
64. 


Yama, Indian god of the lower 
world, vii, 6. 
Yogis of India, viii, 43. 


Zagreus, 340 f.; viii, 28; x, 9, 12; 77; 


598. 

Zaleukos, v, 145. 

Zalmoxis, iii, 13; vii, 10, 2835263 

Zeno (Eleatic), 372 f. 

Zeno (Stoic), xiv, 43. 

Zeus, in Crete, 97 f., 1613 
and Alkmene, iv, 134; 
ductor of Souls, xiv, 1i, 146. 

Zevs *Apdidpaos, iii, 19; x8drmos, 
159; v,. 167; 2203 | EvBowNenes 
Bovaevs, v, 7, 19; AvxKatos, v, 170; 
pecAcxyuos, v, 168; mpoorpdomatos, 
v, 148; didos, ii, 388; XaPalros, 
viii, 10; Tpoddros, ili, 18. 

ZOPYLOS, X, 7 aloe 

Zoroastrianism, 302. 


ix; O68 
as con- 


Printed tn Great Britain by Stephen Austin & Sons, Litd., Hertford. 


ty . ." 
tp. - 
> 
* hx 

« 

= 

oy 
>= 

. onal 


Ly “ 
tw Ae 
r 
at eae 

‘o 
4 2 
“ ‘ 3 
Mew 
C= 
a is ; 
~ 
x 
J 
hd r 


A ‘: - > fi ‘ e 5 2 > r 
mg waite \ d “ Ft * 
‘ ; or? - Ne > i 4 
. pl = = * a =<" 
ee 4 a 5 
aX ’ us caps *, ww 4. 
7 ~ - ~~, 4 . Lai 
oa % . ; ’ 
S - 4 ~ y 
* . o = i 
. : ; it > = 
bi s 7 re # 7 
= f cy r . 
’ 7 ae > . ra) * . - 5 
. ) , ‘ : 
~ 
ss x = = - a ~ 
¢ ‘ mn i rr 
x ’ N 2 it 
i ’ ja t 2 2s f 
© - - é : 
. ¥ 
‘ & As 
y > 4 vot 
: = ‘ - d 
‘ - . ; 
. “yh 7 . c i > 
- . r - - i 
: na aa - a ) 
ers J x F 
| - * " = = ~ * 
~ od * ‘ 
~ > > ~- 
> - 2 “4 . e - 
i = ~ — - ‘ ~~ . 
- | 
a < » ay ‘ . 
' ‘ 
- i - Ne 
. * 
oe p - t - Ee . G e « 
“ e 1 - 
‘ “ . as 
a Ps 
> r < _ ~- 
3 a = i" 
eA me 2 
~ ‘ ‘ Saad \ - > = 
= Jf ‘ =, ne 7 qs~* - £ ~ 
r = “ meee 9 s : 
- 4 , 
: / 
’ 4 ~ - 


OF 


foe at 1e@) Gaye rl LeOSOPRELRY. 


AND 


Soe eb he FV Er POD 


Edited by C. K. Ogden, M.A., of Magdalene College, Cambridge. 


Demy 8vo, dark-green cloth, Prices from 5s, to 25s. net. 


The purpose of the International Library is to give expression, 
in a convenient form and at a moderate price, to the remarkable 
developments which have recently occurred in Psychology and 
its allied sciences. The older philosophers were preoccupied by 
metaphysical interests which for the most part have ceased to 
attract the younger investigators, and their forbidding termin- 
ology too often acted as a deterrent for the general reader, 

The attempt to deal in clear language with current tendencies 
whether in England and America or on the Continent has met 

with a very encouraging reception, and not only have accepted 
authorities been invited to explain the newer theories, but it 

has been found possible to include a number of original 
contributions of high merit. The attention of Librarians is 
drawn to the comprehensive character of the forty volumes 

now available as a uniform series, and the standard maintained 

may be judged from the following list. 


LONDON 
ICEGANSPAUL, TRENCH TRUBNER & CO.,LTD. 
_ BROADWAY HOUSE: 68-74 CARTER LANE, E.C, 


INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY 


SSS TSS a a ae 


INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY OF PSYC 


ancl eee a 


HOLOGY 


ASCO MP PE ire eis: 


PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES. By G. E. Moore, Litt.D., author 
of ‘ Principia Ethica ”’, editor of ‘‘ Mind”, 

15/- net. 

“Students of philosophy will welcome the publication of this volume. It is 


_full of interest and stimulus, even to those whom it fails to convince ; and 
it is also very undogmatic. Dr Moore is always anxious to bring out the 


arguments against those in favour of the positions to which he inclines, 
and cares to refute not persons but false doctrines.’’—Ovford Magazine. 
“A valuable contribution to contemporary philosophy.’’—Spectaior. 
THE MISUSE OF MIND: a Study of Bergson’s Attack on 
Intellectualism. By Karin Stephen, formerly Fellow of 
Newnham College, Cambridge. Preface by Henmi Bergson. 
6/6 net. 2 
This is a book about Bergson, but it is not one of the ordinary popular 
expositions. It is very short; but it is one of those books the quality 
of which is in inverse ratio to its quantity, for it focusses our attention 
on one single problem and succeeds in bringing it out with masterly 
clearness. The problem is the relation of fact to explanation. So stated 
it may sound dull; but the moment its import is grasped, it is seen to 
deal with the fundamental difference between two rival methods in 
philosophy.” —Times Literary Supplement. 
CONFLICT AND DREAM. ByW.H. R. Rivers, M.D., Litt.D., 
FR IS? Preface by Professor G. Elliot Smith, FoR, 
12/6 net. 
“Jn his last book Mr Arnold Bennett claims for W. H. R. Rivers a place 
ainong great men. As traveller, healer, and experimenter Rivers had 
that kind of commanding vigour that is one of the marks of. genius. 


‘Nothing could be more fascinating than to watch him separating the gold 


from the alloy in Freud’s theory of dreams. His book is as different 


from the usual Freudian book on the same subject as is a book of 


astronomy from a book of astrology.’’—Robert Lynd, in Daily News. 


- PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS, and Other Essays. By W. H. R. 


Ravers; sEOR.S, Preface by. Professor” Gx Elon ama 
Appreciation by C. S. Myers, F.RS. 
12/6 net. 
‘““In all the essays in this volume one feels the scientific mind, the 
mind that puts truth first. Each of the essays is interesting and valuable ; 
perhaps the most arresting is that in which he discusses and defends, in 
the light of recent research, the conception of society as an organism,” 
—New Leader. “ This volume ts a fine memorial of a solid and cautious 
scientific worker.’’—Havelock Ellis, in Nation. 
MEDICINE, MAGIC, AND RELIGION. By W. H. R. Rivers, 
F.R.S. Preface by Professor G. Elliot Smith. 
FO] SI6t ao 
“It is principally an attempt to interpret the ideas that inspired primitive 
medicine. But the penetrating mind of a seeker such as Rivers inevitably 
went beyond that: it is disclosure of the principles by which primitive 
societies lived. No more important contribution to ethnological know- 
ledge has been made during the past twenty years.’’—Adephi. “Dr Rivers’ . 
book is one long array of fascinating illustration, linking up his subject 
with the most modern forms of neurosis, a contribution of quite excep- 
tional value to medicine and history alike.”—Northern Review. 


INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY OF PSYCHOLOGY 


Pe mia tdcce eee 


TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS. By Ludwig Wittgen- 
stein, Introduction by Bertrand Russell, F.R.S, 

10/6 net. 

“This is a most important book containing original ideas on a large 

range of topics, forming a coherent system which is of extraordinary 

interest and deserves the attention of all philosophers.””—Mind. “ Quite 
as exciting as we had been led to suppose it to be. As stimulating as 

Samuel Butler’s Notebooks and nearly as important as Principia 

Mathematica.’’—New Statesman. 

THE MEASUREMENT OF EMOTION. By W. Whately Smith, 
M.A, Foreword by Wiliam Brown, M.D., D.Sc. 

10/6 net. 

“No theory more devastating, more materialistic in its implications, has 

ever been enunciated ; it dismisses man as an automaton, and renders 

survival after death inconceivable. It touches the fundamental issues 
of both psychology and physiology, and the man who devises a meats 
of disproving it finally will render those sciences a great service.’’— 

Weekly Westminster. 

SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT: a Philosophical Analysis of Some 
of its Fundamental Concepts in the Light of Recent Physical 
Developments i. by-G.1 Ds broad Litt: D., & Lecturer in 
Philosophy at Trinity College, Cambridge. 

16/- net. 

“This closely-reasoned and particularly lucid book is certain to take 

a chief place in the discussions of the philosophical problem which at 

the present time is of central interest—that of the nature and import 

of the new concepts of the physical universe. The whole book is weighty 
with matter and marks an intellectual achievement of the highest order. 

It arrests our attention—a cursory reading of it is simply impossible—and 

interest is sustained from beginning to end.’’—Tzmes Literary Supplement, 

PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES: the Psychology of Individuation. 
By C.G. Jung, author of ‘The Psychology of the Unconscious.”’ 
‘Translated with a Foreword by H. Godwin Baynes, M.B. 

Second edition, 25/- net. 

“Among the psychologists who have something of value to tell us 

Dr Jung holds a very high place. He is both sensitive and acute ; and so, 

like a great writer, he convinces us that he is not inadequate to the im- 

mense complexity and subtlety of his material. We are conscious through- 

out of a sensitiveness, a wide range of understanding, a fair-mindedness, 
which give us a real respect for the author. The man who undertakes to 
discuss psychological types proposes to himself almost the most ambitious 
task a man could attempt. Among modern psychologists there is no 
one who seems to us more adequate than Dr. Jung.’’—Times Literary 
Supplement. eee 
CHARACTER AND THE UNCONSCIOUS : a Critical 


Exposition of the Psychology of Freud and Jung. By 
J. H. van der Hoop. 


10/6 net. 
3 His book is an admirable attempt to reconcile the theories of Jung 
and Freud. He shows that the positions taken up by these two psycholo- 
gists are not as antagonistic as they appear at first sight. The book con- 
tains a very adequate and simple account of Freud’s teaching in its 
salient features, and his treatment of both theories is clear and sympa- 
thetic.”—New Statesman 


[ INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY OF PSYCHOLOGY. |. 


rite MEANING OF MEANING : a Study of the Influence of 
Language upon Thought and of the Science of Symbolism. 
By C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards. Introduction by /. P. 
Posigate, Litt,D. Supplementary: Essays by B. Malinowskn, 
Ph.D.., D.Sc. and F. G. Crookshank, M.D., F.R.C.P. 
| 


12/6 net. 

The authors attack the problem from a more fundamental point of 
view than that from which others have dealt with it, and at last some 
light is thrown on the factors involved. The importance of their work 
is obvious. It is a book for educationalists, ethnologists, grammarians, 
logicians, and, above all, psychologists. The book is written with 
admirable clarity and a strong sense of humour, making it not only 
profitable but also highly entertaining reading for anyone who wishes to 
address any remark to a fellow creature with the intention of being 
understood.” —New Statesman. * 


SCIENTIFIC METHOD: an Inquiry into the Character and 
. Validity of Natural Laws. By dA. D. Ritchie, Fellow of 
Trinity College, Cambridge. 

10/6 net. 

“The fresh and bright style of Mr Ritchie’s voluine, not without a salt 
of humour, makes it an interesting and pleasant book for the general 
reader. Taken asa whole Scientific Method is able, comprehensive, and, in 

! our opinion, right in its main argument and conclusions.’’—Byvitish 
Medical Journal, ‘ His brilliant book.’’—Daily News. 

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF REASONING. By Eugenio Rignano, 


Professor of Philosophy in the University of Pavia. 
14/- net. 
“Professor Rignano’s elaborate treatise, which completely surveys all 
the chief types of reasoning, normal and abnormal, is a valuable con- 
tribution to psychological literature.’—Weekly Westminster. mgbtic 
theory is that reasoning is simply imaginative experimenting. Such 
a theory offers an easy explanation of error, and Professor Rignano 
draws it out in a very convincing manner.’—Times Literary Supplement. 
CHANCE, LOVE and LOGIC : Philosophical Essays. By 

Charles S, Peirce. Edited with an Introduction by Morris 


k. Cohen. Supplementary Essay by John Dewey. 
12/6 net. 
“It is impossible to read Peirce without recognizing the presence of a 
superior mind. He was something of a genius.’”’-—F. C. S. Schiller, in 
Spectator. ‘It is about the clarification of our ideas that Mr Peirce 
makes his most interesting remarks; it is here that one sees what a 
brilliant mind he had and how independently he could think.’’—WNation, 
SPECULATIONS : Essays on Humanism and the Philosophy 
of Art. — By 2; EE. Hulme- -Eedited\*by- Herber7 gncaa 


Frontispiece and Foreword by jacob Epstein. 

10/6 net . 

“With its peculiar merits, this book is most unlikely to meet with the 
slightest comprehension from the usual reviewer. When Hulme was 
killed in Flanders in 1917, he was known as a brilliant talker, a brilliant 
amateur of metaphysics, and the author of two or three of the most 
beautiful short poems in the language. In this volume he appears as the 
forerunner of a new attitude of mind, which should be the twentieth 
century mind.’—Criterion. 


ee ee a eee ee re ae ee ee ee 


—— 


INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY OF PSYCHOLOGY 


THE NATURE OF LAUGHTER. By /. C. Gregory. 

10/6 net. & 

“Mr Gregory, in this fresh and stimulating study, joins issue with all 
his predecessors. In our judgment he has made a distinct advance in 
the study of laughter; and his remarks on wit, humour, and comedy, 
are most discriminating. The writer’s own vivacity of style suits his 
subject admirably.’’—Journal of Education. 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MUSIC. By William Pole, F.R.S., 
Mus. Doc. Edited with an Introduction by Edward J. Dent 
and a Supplementary Essay by Dr Hamulton Hariridge. 

Second edition. 10/6 net. 

“This is an excellent book and its re-issue should be welcomed by all 

who take more than a superficial interest in music. Especially should it 

appeal to those of a musical or scientific frame of mind who may have 
pondered upon the why and the how of things musical. Dr Pole possessed 
not only a wide knowledge of these matters, but also an attractive style, 
and this combination has enabled him to set forth clearly and sufficiently 
completely to give the general reader a fair all-round grasp of his 


Alfred Adler. Translation by Dr Paul Radin. 

18/- net. 

‘Dr Adler is the leader of one of the more important schisms from the 
original Freudian school. He makes a valuable contribution to psychology. 
His thesis is extremely simple and comprehensive: mental phenomena 
when correctly understood may be regarded as leading up to an end 
which cousists in establishing the subject’s superiority.’’— Discovery. 
“Suggestive and stimulating.”—Morning Post. 


THE PHILOSOPHY: OF SAS) IF 7.) By Hans Vathinger: 
Translated by C. K. Ogden. M.A. 


25/- net. 

“The most important contribution to philosophical literature in a 
quarter of a century. Briefly, Vaihinger amasses evidence to prove that 
reality and thought are out of key. Reason was never an instrument, 
he holds, for the understanding of life. We can arrive at theories which 
work pretty well by ‘consciously false assumptions.’ We know that 
these fictions in no way reflect reality, but we treat them as i/ they 
did. Among such fictions are :—the average man, freedom, God, empty 
space, point, matter, the atom, infinity, the absolute. All abstracts, 
classifications, comparisons, general ideas, are fictions. All the sciences 
and arts depend upon fictions.’’—Spectator. 


THE NATURE OF INTELLIGENCE: a_ Biological 
Interpretation of Mind. By L. L. Thurstone, Professor of 
Psychology in the University of Chicago. 


10/6 net. 

ra Be Thurstone distinguishes three views of the nature of intelligence 
He names the first Academic; the second the Psycho-analytic ; the 
third the Behaviourist. Against these three views, though not in 
opposition to them, Prof. Thurstone expounds his thesis that conscious- 
ness is unfinished action. He contends that it is not inconsistent with 
any of the three views, while in a sense it interprets each of them. His 
book is of the first importance. All who make use of mental tests will do 
well to come to terms with his theory.”—Times Literary Supplement. 


| 
subject.’”’— Discovery. 
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY: its Theory and Practice. By 


oe 


INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY OF PSYCHOLOGY 


THE GROWTH OF THE MIND: an Introduction to Child 
Psychology. By Professor K. Koffka of the University of 
Giessen. Translated by Professor R. M. Ogden. 

Second edition. 15/- net. 
His book is extremely interesting, and it is to be hoped that it will be 
widely read.’”’— Times Literary Supplement. Leonard Woolf, reviewing this 
book and the following one in a Nation Leading Article, writes: ‘‘ Every 
serious student of psychology ought to read it [The Apes], and he should 
supplement it by reading The Growth of the Mind, for Professor Koftka 
joins up the results of Kéhler’s observations with the results of the study 
of child-psychology.”’ 


THE MENTALITY OF APES, with an Appendix on the 
Psychology of Chimpanzees. By Professor W. Koehler, of 
Berlin University. 

With 9 plates and 19 figures, 16/- * net. 

‘“‘ May fairly be said to mark a turning-point in the history of psychology. 

The book is both in substance and form an altogether admirable piece 

of work. It is of absorbing interest to the psychologist, and hardly less 

to the layman—especially the lover of animals. His work will always 
be regarded as a classic in its kind and a model for future studies,”’ 


—Times Literary Supplement. 


TELEPATHY AND CLAIRVOYANCE. By Rudolf Tischner, 
Preface by E. J. Dingwall. 


With 20 illustrations, 10/6 net. 


“Such investigations may now expect to receive the grave attention of 
modern readers. They will find the material here collected of great value 
and interest. The chief interest of the book lies in the experiments it 
records, and we think that these will persuade any reader free from 
violent prepossessions that the present state of the evidence necessitates 
at least an open mind regarding their possibility.””—Times Literary 
Supplement. . 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RELIGIOUS MYSTICISM. By 
Professor James H, Leuba, author of ‘ A Psychological Study 
of Religion,’ etc. 


15/- net. 
“The book is fascinating and stimulating even to those who do not agree 
with it, and it is scholarly as well as scientific.’’— Review of Reviews. An 


extension and development of the views outlined in James’s Varieties of 
Religious Experience with much new material. ~A section is devoted to 
mystical experiences produced by drugs. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY; OF | A™ MUSICAL’ S PRODIGY Sarpy 
G. fevesz, Director of the Psychological Laboratory, 
Amsterdam, 

With many musical tllustrations, 10/6 net. 

“Por the first time we have a scientific report on the development of a 

musical genius. Instead of being dependent on the vaguely marvellous 

report of adoring relatives, we enter the more satisfying atmosphere of 
precise tests. That Erwin is a musical genius, nobody who reads this 
book will doubt.’’—Times Literary Supplement. 


a 


INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY OF PSYCHOLOGY 


THE sPRINGIPLES OF ‘LITERARY - CRITICISM. “By J. A: 
Richards, Lecturer at Magdalene College, Cambridge. 


10/6 net. 


“A mine of really suggestive ideas. It has real originality.’’— Daily News. 
“An important contribution to the rehabilitation of English criticism— 
perhaps, because of its sustained scientific nature, the most important 
contribution yet made. Mr. Richards begins with an account of the 
present chaos of critical theories and follows with an analysis of the 
fallacy in modern aesthetics. The principles enunciated are pursued with 
clear zest and consequent elucidation. Parallel applications to the 
arts of painting, sculpture, and music form the subject of three chapters.”’ 
—Critevion. 


THE METAPHYSICAL FOUNDATIONS OF MODERN SCIENCE, 
with special reference to Man’s Relation to Nature. By 
Edwin A. Burt, PhD, 


14/- net. 

“This book deals with a profoundly interesting subject: the uncritical 
assumptions which were made by the founders of modern physics, and 
through them became part of the unquestioned apparatus of ordinary 
thought. The critical portion of this book is admirable. . .”’ 
Bertrand Russell, in Nation. ‘“‘ He has given us a history of the origin 
and development of what was, until recently, the metaphysic generally 
associated with the scientific outlook. This is what Professor Burtt 
has quite admirably done.’’—Times Literary Supplement. 


PHYSIQUE AND CHARACTER. By E. Kretschmer. 

With 31 plates,15/- net. 

“This volume of the steadily growing Library will bear comparison 
with any of its predecessors in interest and importance. It gives 
scientific validity to much ancient doctrine and folk-psychology. It 
professes to be merely a beginning ; but, even so, the author has estab- 
lished certain conclusions beyond reasonable doubt, conclusions of great 
significance and pregnant with possibilities of almost infinite extension.’’ 
—Weekly Westminster. ‘‘ His notable work (on) the relation between 
human form and human character.’—British Medical Journal. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF EMOTION: Morbid and Normal, 
By John T. MacCurdy, M.D. 

25/- net. 

“There are two reasons in particular for welcoming this book. First, 
it is by a psychiatrist who takes general psychology seriously. Secondly, 
the author presents his evidence as well as his conclusions. This is 
distinctly a book which should’ be read by all interested in modern 
psychology. Its subject is important and its author’s treatment inter- 
esting.”’—Manchester Guardian. ‘‘ A record of painstaking and original 
work in a direction that promises to illuminate some of the fundamental 
problems of psychiatry.’’—Lancet. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF TIME. By Mary Sturt, M.A. 
6 net. 

hae interesting book, typical of the work of the younger psychologists 
of to-day. The first chapter gives a clear summary of metaphysical 
views of time; later chapters describe practical experiments ; while 
the last chapter sets forth the writer’s view that time is a concept con- 
structed by each individual. The clear, concise style of writing adds 
greatly to the pleasure of the reader.’’—Journal of Education. 


7 


~ INTERNATIONAL LI LIBRARY OF PSYCHOLOGY 


PROBLEMS OF PERSONALITY : a Volume of Essays in 
honour of Morton Prince, Edited by Dr. A. A. Roback. 

18/- net. 

y iene we have collected together samples of the work of a great many 
of the leading thinkers on the subjects which may be expected to throw 
light on the problem of Personality. Some such survey is always a tre- 
mendous help in the study of any subject. Taken all together, the 
book is full of interest.”—New Statesman. Contributors include 
G. Elliot Smith, Bernard Hart, Ernest Jones, C. S. Myers, C. G. Jung, 
Pierre Janet, W. McDougall, William Brown, T. W. Mitchell, and 
numerous others. 


THE MIND AND ITS PLACE IN NATURE. By C. D. Broad, 


Litt, D., Lecturer in Philosophy at Trinity College, Cambridge. 

16/- net. 

4 After a discussion of the apparent differences between living and non- 
living matter, the author discusses the traditional views of Mechanism 
and Vitalism and the Relation of Mind and Body; then the sources of 
our knowledge of Matter and of our own and other Minds; _ Mnemic 
Phenomena and the “ Unconscious”; arguments for and against 
human survival of bodily death; and in conclusion the internal unity 
of the Mind and its position in ‘Nature. 


COLOUR-BLINDNESS : with a Comparison of different Methods 
of Testing Colour-Vision By Mary Collins, M.A., Ph.D. 


Introduction by Dr James Drever. 
With a coloured plate, 12/6 net. 
““Her book is worthy of high praise as a painstaking, honest, well- 
written endeavour, based upon extensive reading and close original 
investigation, to deal with colour vision, mainly from the point of view 
of the psychologist. We believe that the book will commend itself to 
every one interested in the subject.’—Times Literary Supplement. 


THE HISTORY OF MATERIALISM. By FA, “Lange. 
New edition in one volume, with an introduction by 
Bertrand Russell, F RS. 

i a net. 

‘ An immense and valuable work.’’—Spectator. ‘A monumental work, 
of the highest value to all who wish to know what has been said by 
advocates of Materialism, and why philosophers have in the main 
remained unconvinced. Lange, while very sympathetic to materialism 
in its struggles with older systems, was himself by no means a materialist. 
His book is divided into two parts, one dealing with the times before 
Kant, the other with Kant and his successors.’”-—From the /ntyvoduction. 


PSYCHE: the Cult of Souls and the Belief in Immortality 
among the Greeks. By Lvrwin Rohde. 
25/- net. 
This standard work, long esteemed by scholars, philologists, philosophers 
and all interested in the history of religion or mysticism, is at last made 
available to the English-speaking public. Part One deals with Beliefs 
about the Soul (Homeric Poems, Islands of the Blest, Cave Deities, 
Heroes, Eleusinian Mysteries, the Future Life, etc.);° Part Two with 
The Belief in Immortality (Dionysiac Religion, The Orphics, The 
Philosophers, The Poets, pages etc.) 


oe) 


ee RS A RE ES EE BC ES PT RY EES SE PEE SL I, SE ES 


ee ee VIBRAR Ys OF aeSYCHOLOGY 


READY SHO Ritay 
EMOTION AND INSANITY. By S. Thalbitzer, Chief of the 


| Medical Staff, Copenhagen Asylum. Preface by Professor 
H, Hoffding. 
About 7/6 net. 

‘In two respects in particular the author has, I feel, made important 
contributions to psychology. He shows that manic- depressive psychosis 
contains every kind of feeling, even the most complicated. Secondly, 
there is his description and analysis of ‘ mixed forms’, of those mental 

| 
| 


states in which different feeling-elements are in operation simultaneously 
and with opposite effects. »__From the Preface. 


PERSONALITY. By R. G. Gordon, M.D. 

About 12/6 net. 

An- examination of personality from the standpoint of the practising 
physician who, it is now recognized, must treat each patient as an 
individual case, and as a composite whole of mind and body. Chapters 
include Body and Mind, Principle of Emergence, Bodily Function, 
Temperamental Factor, Mental Function, Variations in Personality, 
Contribution of Freud, ‘of Jung, of Adler, of Kempf, the Neurotic, the 
Delinquent, Dissociated Personality, Retarded Personality, and Spiritual 
Aspect. 


BIOLOGICAL MEMORY. By Eugenio Rignano, Professor of 
Philosophy in the University of Padua. Translated, with an 
Introduction, by Professor E. W. MacBnide, F. RS. 

About 10/6 net. 

‘“We regard his theory as an astoundingly successful effort to analyze 

vital phenomena. It may be divided into two parts, biological and 

psychological. We cannot refrain from remarking that we consider 

Professor Rignano’s analysis of mental functions extraordinarily 

interesting and suggestive. In the biological portion he discovers the 

essential difference between living and non-living things to be that 
dead matter does not remember.’’—From the Introduction. 


COMPARATIVE PHILOSOPHY. By _ P. Masson-Oursel. 


Introduction by F. G. Crookshank, M.D°, F.R.C.P. 
About 8/6 net. 
‘He has undoubtedly succeeded in writing a book that cannot fail 
to excite interest, to attract attention, and to provoke discussion. 
This study appears to present us witha method of investigation, a mode 
of thought, that may well become useful, if not indispensable, to those 
who would pursue Science,” ——From: the ‘Introduction. 


EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY ; its Problems and Methods. 
By Charles Fox, M.A., Lecturer on Education in the Uni- 
versity of Cambridge. 


About 10/6 net. 
A consideration of the contribution made by experimental psychology 
to the study of educational problems during the last quarter of a century. 
Chapters include Mental Development, Vision and Hearing, Observation, 
Mental Imagery, Habit Formation, Memory, Training, Suggestion, 
Psycho-Analysis, Aesthetic Appreciation, Mental Tests, Mental Fatigue. 


“TINTERNATIONAC LIBRARY “Ob PS Cr@ lee) aay, 


INGER IPA RALLOW, 


THE LAWS OF FEELING , : ; by F. PAULHAN 
CONVERSION : : ? : my bY 5. DE SAINGIES 
JHOUGH TAN IY TH Bo BRAN ; by H. PIKRON 
bee VBS VCH OLOGY OPS LEE Wil Ole ; by K. KOFPKA 
LANGUAGE AND THOUGHT IN THE CHILD by Jee PLAGE 
PSYCHOLOGY Ole KUNST s by B, MALINOWSKIY Disc, 


REPRESSION IN SAVAGE SOCIETIES, by B. MALINOWSKI, Disc. 
THE ANADLYSIS:‘OF  MATIBRE -by BERIRAND KRUSSELIESEshe 


THE FOUNDATIONS OF MATHEMATICS by F. P. RAMSEY 
PSYCHOLOGY AND ETHNOLOGY, .° dycW. EL RAR LY Eh eeee 
SOCIAL LIFE IN THE ANIMAL WORLD. by’ EF. AL VERDES 


EMOTIONAL EXPRESSION IN BIRDS ° . by F. B. KIRKMAN 
SDALISTIOAL METHOD IN’ ECONOMICS: 2), 6y.P7 5, FEORBNGE 


THE PRIMITIVE MIND : ; oy P; RADING@ ER Gee: 
COLOUR-HARMONY “ ‘ ; : by JAMES WOOD 
ik LAO RYO RS ELBA ING =. , “by HH. HARTLRIDGES Disc 


SUPERNORMAL PHYSICAL PHENOMENA oy E, J. DINGWALE 
THEORETICAL BIOLOGY by J. VON UEXKULL 
INTEGRATIVE ACTION OF THE MIND by. E., MILLERS ibe 
PEAIOS LHEORY OPS KNOWLEDGE by F. M. CORNFORD 
PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOPATHOLOGY by Wen. BROWN, M.D_,D.Se; 
THEORY OF MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS by F. G. CROOKSHANK, M.D. 
LANGUAGE AS SYMBOL AND AS-EXPRESSION” '6)) Peano aes 
PaectiolORY «OR PLHIGAL STALE RY by M. GINSBERG, D.Lit. 
SOCIAL PHILOSOPILY, by M. GINSBERG, D.Lit. 


GO SPI LCOSO PEL O RE ANVes a by A. L GOODHAR 
PSYCHOLOGY, OF MUSICAL GENIUS : by Gr FREVESZ 
MODERN THEORIES OF PERCEPTION . bY Wee Oe dO 
THESBEHAVIOURISTEMOV EME Ns: ei bywA. A, ROBACK 


SCOPE AND VALUE OF ECONOMICS by BARABRA WOOTTON 
MATHEMATICS FOR: PHILOSOPHERS ‘(by G:. HY HARDY JE Ras. 
PHILOSOPHY. OF THE UNCONSCIOUS | by E. VON HARTMANN 
THESESYCHOLOGY.© Pais his bye Ge THIEL LOTS MLE ees 
THE PSYCHOLOGY: OF SMUSIC by EDWARD J. DENT 
PSYCHOLOGY OF PRIMITIVE PEOPLES by B, MALINOWSKE DSc: 
DEVELOPMENT OF CHINESE THOUGHT by LIANG CHE CHIAO 


10 


ee ee 


mf. yf any 
rey ya aoe / ‘ 
bhi a, pig) 


BL785 .R737 
Psyche: the cult of souls and belief in 


aneetan Theological Seminary—Speer Library 


INI i 


1 1012 00108 0938 | 


DATE DUE | 


GAYLORD PRINTED IN U.S.A. 


my i 
PT aad 
brea A 


ae 
ri My 


eh 


er 


ee 
Abe (She: 
Vy Win ee dine: 
Witenes 
wee ‘ee 


, . 4 
hed ‘ 


ise ae re 


nen Og FS paneer 


ete, ‘ page ME SS 5 A a Ea oS RS 
aot St iseeee, - os te Lue Sere we P a 
PA PF we wn et 8 RON “ 


aie wues 1 ey 


SSS ee BR 
eR Sp eri te Se SS Sa 
FUE nn ae a raed te area een 


2 seein oabeaewe Re pats 
‘ esteem ys a eee Deena eae! 


oad ees 
NOE I AM Gg NET 5B eet Ra 


ak a et 5 EDA yr i aS uty seg a 
Mi AE ee AED OE 


Sa ee tl eg a pe RN ge 

ieiciadeges aceite een ateat adanddees nein mammenctamiads eee ee 
ed pn ee a ae ha a — 

TO a IO REO IE gi MT OR LP pe OE IPT pte Om NE a A nl on SPO Lou ene a cate RCE E cen eee rea enes SSS 

el a Ee etl cc a ll tas “é c el So sein ied en ee es seater. gee Street se ome « “ See wees SERRE ESS a eS 

: LO M0 HR ty ES a, + 

Ot ees eis! Agr ino, 


‘ ttn a é ons ~ Aes > a ROS: er = 
roe eh AB et DEN apg Be pm 3 : F eet 3 Nin etn aah ah 


Sincere tame 
BF LR AO Fe FPO BP ET aitiaihatsie Se pS Sg NEEM ci itnam ge peut “. asa a a Palin I TES Ea, oo eee scion’ 

DM I BESS! wet cn tl NB gpd had my? paren senheo acl ae SEE ES ERED I ipodliandaerierrenctnpoeaicen chee aaa Gites ences etree anes apo aie Se ee re a 

SON UR PSR LP APOE LSPA LOE EOI APY CRS) ARO LESION SP < ‘ 

SI age SE > IPN Oat Apesnieici FA ROE REN ag P POE IA BERETS SS NN Mee POTN ER PE WLS LE OMEN GV Il Sa SEI AB OE a ae 
rs : hai Sit rae meaner e Riledchdielice nent 


a a ast ib AON a A BPE a yygrerst pes: 
POE 0 LIE A NEE eS 9 8 re 
AIL LA ORG BILL PE 
Parana tous een! GOP LENE MOLES OL G08 PAA LICL IO 


Waren ts See, enitien Sahowety rg EE Se eg SS SE, RN Ghee 
See A ee Re ie SEE 
zs SF ee Ey ae Si om 


Wie » c —— weigh n4: Seca ai aye CEP RDTA Nhat RS, se me ra 
LO a RS teh OS SPOS GA aR am ee ms mR n nee 3 ® Rea arn anata Bsc pase gina anata I a NN ay gs A 4 NE 

“ RIERA tite eae pS Sey persis re aN : f area Ah aie : ‘ 
le ee eed archos eres Pa SOR Pe a ~ = sins it BF ade ep Lee Aca PER i LT et ant pa Se 
LS Be di sod a ei Wt St MA er pw neon eee te it el ep reetan I ames 
PR Ce ONT a eel ol ae ed alld lial a adh as 9 et ans ty Sear eee estteopinsh “ bas Soke Faw eine om ise 3 

AB LPs Bt OOF PS BE LG LI DEPOT eres -— 


So om AS eof mew oy ca Grape raise hai aes i pec eee amie ease: Ne Bee 
Re eat ae ae eee ae Sat evita Zepnetoeet ene th Epcomeacomme ds ix 


Sig hi SEWN TSC et ne ORS Fagey Pare S: ee tie sigetiganey H3 S55 
li aie iene Se Wie oman a Se (a gay SSE eR eS Se en S. an rea 
= Ananya aS se SOI ENG tua thar GI SoS Lae LAS 
locas Rebeeoenaeats SEE IEE AES TEE IEEE OS EO Steno tceer oat ae Pier y 
% SS y 


se ey arenes ype Rao Senge EON, 
tel ntiel Serstecr eon ites ae Soa Satis Sea TRAE S ate ecarets DKK wee TS 


Suk tae eeatny youl aeNeven Se Se Ke seiegtene me! Rees
