Romanus Pontifex (papal bull)
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Wikisource <https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/European_Treaties_bearing_on_the_History_of_the_United_States_and_its_Dependencies_to_1648/Document_01>. Public domain.

The first such conflict concerned the Canary Islands, rediscovered in the latter part of the thirteenth century. In 1344, on the ground that he wished to Christianize these islands, Don Luis de la Cerda, admiral of France and great-grandson of Alfonso the Wise, obtained a bull of investiture from Pope Clement VI., and was crowned Prince of Fortunia<ref>The Canary Islands were believed to be the Fortunatae Insulae of the a
The second Castilian-Portuguese controversy concerned Africa, where Portugal was following up her conquest of Ceuta ( 1415) by other military expeditions in Morocco, and by sending caravels southward along the western coast and opening up a trade with Guinea. In 1441 slaves and gold-dust were first brought back to Portugal from beyond Cape Bojador. By 1454 trade with that region had greatly developed[8] so that Cadamosto, the Venetian, wrote that "from no traffic in the world could the like [gain] be had".[9]


The kings of Castile, basing their claims on the same grounds that they had employed in respect to the Canaries--possession by their ancestors, the Visigothic kings--asserted their right to the conquest of the lands of Africa[10] and to Guinea and the Guinea trade. They even imposed a tax upon the merchandise brought from those parts.[11]


The Castilian-Portuguese controversy over the Guinea trade began as early as 1454. On April 10 of that year the King of Castile, John II., wrote a letter[12] to the King of Portugal, Alfonso V., containing complaints and demands in respect to the Canaries, and also in respect to the seizure by a Portu­guese captain
It is probable that King Alfonso deemed the time especially propitious for a settlement of the dispute over the proprietorship of Morocco, Guinea, and the Guinea trade. In attempting to establish his claims, he would naturally seek aid from the Pope, for that potentate's independent position made him the arbitrator between nations, while his spiritual authority, in particular his powers of excommunication and interdict, gave weight to his decisions.[18] Moreover, as spiritual fathers of all the peoples of the earth, the Popes had long undertaken to regulate the relations--including the commercial relations--between Christians and unbelievers. The Lateran Council of 1179 prohibited the sale to the Saracens of arms, iron, wood to be used in construction, and anything else useful for warfare. Certain later popes prohibited all commerce with the infidels.[19] These prohibitions were, however, tempered by papal licenses to trade, which were on occasion granted to monarchs, communities, or individuals, or by the absolutions sometimes purchased by re­
On January 8, 1455, doubtless in accordance with the request of King Alfonso, Nicholas V. issued the bull Romanus pontifex, which marks a definite stage in the colonial history of Portugal. By the bull Rex regum, January 5, 1443, Eugenius IV. had taken neutral ground in the dispute between Portugal and Castile concerning their rights in Africa; by the bull Dum diversas, June 18, 1452, Nicholas V. granted King Alfonso general and indefinite powers to search out and conquer all pagans, enslave them and appropriate their lands and goods.[21] The bull Romanus pontifex, on the other hand, settled the dispute between Portugal and Castile in favor of the former, and, apparently for the first time,[22] granted Portugal exclusive rights in a vast southerly region. It confirmed the bull Dum diversas, specified the district to which it applied--Ceuta, and the district from Capes Bojador and Não through all Guinea, and "beyond towards that southern shore"--and declared that this, together with all other lands acquired by Portugal from the infidels before or after 1452, belonged to King Alfonso, his successors, and Prince Henry, and to no others. It further declared that King Alfonso, his successors, and Prince Henry might make laws or impose restrictions and tribute in regard to these lands and seas, and that they and persons licensed by them might trade there with the infidels, except in the prohibited articles, but that no other Catholics should trade there or enter those seas or harbors under pain of excommunication or interdict.


A grant by Pope Nicholas V. dated Jan. 8, 1450, conceding to Alfonso V. all the territories which Henry had discovered, has been said to be preserved in the National Archives at Lisbon, Coll. de Bullas, maço 32, no. 1, or no. 10. ( Santarem, Prioridade, p. 26, and Azurara, Guinea, ed. Carreira and Santarem, 1841, p. 92, note 1; and, in Beazley and Prestage edition, II. 318, note 67). The editor looked up both these manuscripts and found that one is the executoria of the bull of Jan. 8, 1455 (see below, note 43), and that the other is a bull issued by Paul III. toward the middle of the following century.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.


Text: MS. The original manuscript of the promulgated bull is in the National Archives in Lisbon, Coll. de Bullas, maço 7, no. 29.


Text: Printed. J. Ramos-Coelho, Alguns Documentos ( 1892), pp. 14-20; L. M. Jordão, Bullarium Patronatus Portugalliae Regum ( 1868), pp. 31-34; J. Dumont, Corps Diplomatique ( 1726-1731), tom. III., pt. I., pp. 200-202; O. Raynaldus (continuing Baronius), Annales Ecclesiastici ( 1747-1756), X. 17-20; and in various bullaria and other works.


Translation: English. William Bollan, Coloniae Anglicanae Illustratae ( 1762), pp. 117-136. Spanish. Boletín del Centro de Estudios Ameri­ canistas de Sevilla, año III., núm. 7 ( March-April, 1915).


References: Contemporary and early writings. Gomes Eannes de Azurara , Conquest of Guinea (trans. and ed. by C. R. Beazley and E. Prestage, Hakluyt Soc., vols. XCV. and C., 1896, 1899); Nunes de Leão (do Liam) , Cronicas dos Reys ( 1780), tom. IV., p. 222; B. de Las Casas , Historia de las Indias ( 1875), tom. I., c. 18, in M. F. de Navarrete et al., Coleccion de Documentos Inéditos para la Historia de España ( 1842-), tom. LXII.


References: Later writings. R. H. Major, Life of Prince Henry ( 1868); H. Schäfer, Geschichte von Portugal ( 1838- 1854), II. 477 ff., and III. 144-148, in Heeren and Ukert, Geschichte der Europäischen Staaten; H. Harrisse, Diplomatic History of America ( 1897), pp. 6, 7; H. Vignaud , Toscanelli and Columbus ( 1903), pp. 58-61; id, Histoire Critique de la Grande Entreprise de Christophe Colomb ( 1911), I. 200- 206; E. G. Bourne, Essays in Historical Criticism ( 1901), "Prince Henry the Navigator"; C. R. Beazley, "Prince Henry of Portugal and the African Crusade of the Fifteenth Century", American Historical Review, XVI. 11-23; id., "Prince Henry of Portugal and his Political, Commercial, and Colonizing Work", ibid., XVII. 252-267; J. P. Oliveira Martins , The Golden Age of Prince Henry the Navigator, translated, with additions, by J. J. Abraham and W. E. Reynolds ( 1914). For other references to the period of Prince Henry's voyages, see the "Critical Essay on Authorities" in E. P. Cheyney, European Background of American History ( 1904), in A. B. Hart, The American Nation.


TEXT.[23]


'ROMANUS PONTIFEX'
January 8, 1455


Nicolaus episcopus, servus servorum Dei. Ad perpetuam rei memoriam.


Romanus pontifex, regni celestis clavigeri successor et vicarius Jhesu Christi, cuncta mundi climata omniumque nationum in illis degentium qualitates paterna consideratione discutiens, ac salutem querens et appetens singulorum, illa propensa deliberatione salubriter ordinat et disponit que grata Divine Majestati fore conspicit et per que oves sibi divinitus creditas ad unicum ovile dominicum reducat, et acquirat eis felicitatis eterne premium, ac veniam impetret animabus; que eo certius auctore Domino provenire credimus, si condignis favoribus et specialibus gratiis eos Catholicos prosequamur reges et principes, quos, veluti Christiane fidei athletas et intrepidos pugiles, non modo Saracenorum ceterorumque infidelium Christiani nominis inimicorum feritatem reprimere, sed etiam ipsos


↑ The whole passage from Ruy de Pina, Chronica d'El Rei Dom Joaõ II., in J. F. Corrêa da Serra , Collecçaõ de Livros Ineditos de Historia Portugueza, pub. by the Academia Real das Sciencias, Lisbon, II. 178-179, is translated in a foot-note to the translation of the "Journal of the First Voyage of Columbus", in J. E. Olson and E. G. Bourne , The Northmen, Columbus, and Cabot ( 1906), pp. 255-256, in J. F. Jameson series of Original Narratives of Early American History.


↑ The treaty of Alcaçovas. See below, Doc. 3.


↑ According to Ruy de Pina, "that conquest" was the "islands of Cipango and Antilia". Vignaud points out ( Histoire Critique, I. 368 ff.) that there is no evidence that the Indies were mentioned in this interview, but, as Vander Linden remarks, Columbus placed the island of Cipango in the "sea of the Indies". American Historical Review, XXII. 12, note 30.


↑ Elmina, on the Gold Coast; known also as S. Jorge da Mina, or, in English, St. George of the Mine. In 1482 Diogo d'Azambuja, acting under royal orders, built a fort there to protect Portuguese commerce. J. de Barros, Da Asia, I. ( 1778), dec. I., liv. III., cc. 1, 2. Cf. Doc. 4, introduction.


↑ Journal of the First Voyage of Columbus, in Olson and Bourne, The Northmen, Columbus, and Cabot, p. 254. The royal letter prohibiting Columbus from going to the Mine is in Navarrete, Coleccion de Viages ( 1825-1837), tom. III., no. 11, pp. 483-484.


↑ An incomplete text of the bull and the letters from the kings of Portugal and Castile to the Pope are in Raynaldus, Annales Ecclesiastici, VI. 359-364. The full text of the bull is in C. Cocquelines, Bullarum Collectio, tom. III. ( 1741), pt. II. pp. 296 ff. A French translation (incomplete) is in M. A. P. d'Avezac, Îles de l'Afrique ( 1848), pt. II., pp. 152-153. A facsimile and transliteration of the letter of the King of Portugal to the Pope have been printed by Eugenio do Canto ( Lisbon, 1910). The sermon preached by Clement VI. on the occasion of the appointment of Luis to the lordship of the Canaries is extant, see L. von Pastor, Geschichte der Päpste, I. ( 1901) 91, note. For other references, see Ch. de La Roncière, Histoire de la Marine Française, II. ( 1900), 104-106.


↑ Summaries of the statement of the Bishop of Burgos at the Council of Basel, and of the bull of July 31, 1436, are in Alguns Documentos, pp. 3, 4. The article of the treaty of Alcaçovas by which the Canaries were awarded to Castile is to be found ibid., pp. 44-45, and see Doc. 3, introduction.


↑ Ch. de Lannoy and H. Vander Linden, L'Expansion Coloniale: Portugal et Espagne ( 1907), pp. 43, 44.


↑ Quoted in the introduction to Azurara, Guinea, II. xxii (ed. Beazley and Prestage, Hakluyt Soc., Vol. C., 1899).


↑ Bull of July 31, 1436, Algs. Docs., p. 4; bull of Jan. 5, 1443, ibid., p. 7.


↑ Navarrete, Viages, I. xxxvii-xxxix. Cf. Doc. 3, note 2.


↑ The letter is printed in Las Casas, Historia de las Indias, I. 141-151. A Portuguese translation made from the manuscript of the Historia is in Viscount de Santarem, Quadro Elementar ( 1842- 1876), II. 352-367.


↑ "La tierra que llaman Guinea, que es de nuestra conquista." Las Casas, op. cit., I. 150.


↑ Nunes de Leão (do Liam), Cronicas, p. 221.


↑ Nunes do Liam does not give the precise date of the sending of the embassy but places it after the beginning of the year 1454 and before June of that year. He names Juan de Guzman and Fernando Lopez of Burgos as the ambassadors, whereas the letter of Apr. 10, 1454, names Juan de Guzman and Juan Alfonso of Burgos as the am­ bassadors who will bear the letter to the King of Portugal. Fernando Lopez was sent by Henry IV. as ambassador to Portugal in Aug., 1454. Santarem, Quadro Elementar, I. 354.


↑ Nunes do Liam, Cronicas, p. 222.


↑ Santarem, Quadro Elementar, I. 353, 354.


↑ On the papacy as an international power, see R. de Maulde-la-Clavière, La Diplo­ matie au Temps de Machiavel ( 1892), tom. I., ch. 2.


↑ The canon law on the subject is in Decretal. Gregor. IX., lib. V., tit. VI., cc. 6, 11, 12, and 17; Extravag. Joann. XXII., tit. VIII., c. 1; Extravag. Commun., lib. V., tit. II., c. 1.


↑ On the relations of the Church to commerce, see E. Nys, Les Origines du Droit International ( 1894), pp. 284-286, and especially G. B. Depping, Histoire du Commerce ( 1830), ch. 10. Depping mentions a king of Aragon's attempt to persuade the Pope that his trade with the infidels was in the interest of the Christian faith. In 1485 the orator of the Portuguese embassy of obedience to Pope Innocent VIII. argued that commercial intercourse led to the conversion of the Ethiopians, and that the trade established with the Ethiopians at Elmina had prevented them from furnishing supplies to the Moors (see below, Doc. 1, note 30). An interesting passage in the bull Sedis apostolicae, issued by Julius II. on July 4, 1505, shows that the then King of Portugal was using the same kind of argument to persuade the Pope to absolve from excommunication such Portuguese as might have traded unlawfully in Guinea or India. L. A. Rebello da Silva , Corpo Diplomatico Portuguez ( Acad. Real das Sciencias, Lisbon, 1862), I. 59-61.


↑ The bull Rex regum is printed in Algs. Docs., pp. 7, 8. The entire bull Dum diversas is printed in Jordão, Bullarium, pp. 22 ff.; a part is printed below, Doc. 1. note 37.


↑ Barros states that upon petition of Prince Martin V. Henry ( 1417- 1431) granted to the crown of Portugal the land that should be discovered from Cape Bojador to and including the Indies. ( Da I. Asia, dec. I., lib. I., cap. 7.) No such bull is known, but cf. below, note 42.


↑ The text is from the original manuscript of the bull, preserved in the National Archives at Lisbon, Coll. de Bullas, maço 7, no. 29.


↑ Prince Henry the Navigator (b. 1394-d 1460).


↑ Alfonso V., surnamed "the African" from his conquests in Morocco, ruled from 1438 to 1481. He stood high in the favor of Pope Nicholas because, after the fall of Constantinople and in response to the Pope's summons, he alone, of all the western monarchs, seriously prepared to aid in resisting the Turks. In April, 1454, in recognition of his efforts, the Pope sent him the consecrated golden rose. L. von Pastor, Geschichte der Päpste, I. ( 1901), 608; Jordão, Bullarium, p. 35.


↑ John I., surnamed "the Great", the founder of the house of Aviz, ruled from 1385 to 1433.


↑ The conquest of Ceuta in 1415, in which Prince Henry played a leading part, marks the beginning of the colonial expansion of Portugal. An account of the crusade against the city is given in Major, Life of Prince Henry, ch. 3.


↑ The Madeira Islands were rediscovered in 1418- 1420; the Azores, in 1427 or 1432 or 1437. J. Mees argues for the last date in his Histoire de la Découverte des Îles Açores in Recueil de Travaux publiés par la Faculté de Philosophie et Lettres, University of Ghent ( 1901), fasc. 27. The Cape Verde Islands were discovered in 1456, shortly after the issue of this bull. Azurara, Guinea (ed. Beazley and Prestage), 11. ix, lxxxv, lxxxvi, xcii-xcvi.


↑ The early voyages sent out by Prince Henry along the west coast of Africa were connected with the crusade which after the conquest of Ceuta the Portuguese carried on against the Saracens in Morocco (see Beazley, "Prince Henrv of Portugal and the African Crusade of the Fifteenth Century", in the American Historical Review, XVI. 11-23). They were undertaken partly to learn whether there were any Christian princes in the interior who would aid the prince against the Moors, and because the infante desired to have knowledge not only of Guinea "but also of the Indies and the land of Prester John" ( Azurara, Guinea, chs. 7, 16; ed. Beazley and Prestage, I. 55). The " In­ dians who are said to worship Christ" are clearly the subjects of Prester John. The question where the Portuguese supposed these Christian Indians to dwell--whether in Abyssinia or Asia--has aroused a controversy, which is summed up in Vignaud, Histoire Critique, I. 195 ff. A bit of evidence, apparently not noticed hitherto but conclusive for its date, is in the oration of obedience, delivered on Dec. 9, 1485, before Innocent VIII., by the Portuguese ambassador, Vasco Fernandes de Lueena. A copy of this oration, printed at Rome, probably in 1485, is in the British Museum. The pas­ sage is as follows: "Accedit tandem hiis omnibus baud dubia spes Arabici sinus perscrutandi, ubi Asiam incolentium regna et nationes, vix apud nos obscurissima fama cognite, sanctissimam Salvatoris fidem religiosissime colunt: a quibus jam si modo vera probatissimi geographi tradunt paucorum dierum itinere Lusitanorum navigatio abest." This statement concerning the goal of the Portuguese is opposed to Vignaud's conclusion that up to 1486 the Portuguese were seeking the Indies of Prester John in Africa.


↑ Cadamosto, the Venetian, called the Portuguese caravels the best sailing ships at sea. "They were usually 20-30 metres long, 6-8 metres in breadth; were equipped with three masts, without rigging-tops, or yards; and had lateen sails stretched upon long oblique poles, hanging suspended from the mast-head. . . . They usually ran with all their sail, turning by means of it, and sailing straight upon a bow-line driving before the wind. When they wished to change their course it was enough to trim the sails." Beazleys introduction to Azurara, Guinea, II. cxii-cxiii.


↑ A vague knowledge of a land called Guinea ("Ganuya", "Ginuia "), south of the great desert, inhabited by negroes and rich in gold, existed in Europe long before the time of Prince Henry. The name "provincia Ganuya" appears on the mappemonde of the Medicean or Laurentian atlas of 1351, reproduced in facsimile in T. Fischer, Raccolta di Mappamondi, pt. V. ( 1881), and, with clearer lettering, in Santarem, Atlas de Mappemondes ( 1849- 1852), no. 24, and is fully discussed in T. Fischer, Sammlung Mittelalterlicher Welt- und Seekarten ( 1886), pp. 127-147. "Ginuia" is indicated on the Catalan mappemonde of 1375, of which an available reproduction is opposite p. 78 in S. Ruge, Zeistalter der Entdeckungen ( 1881), in W. Oncken, Allgemeine Geschichte.


↑ The Senegal, or Western Nile, or Nile of the Negroes. When this river was dis­ covered in 1445 it was believed to be a branch of the Nile. The maps referred to in the preceding note show a water connection between the Atlantic, Guinea., and the Nubian Nile. Hostium is for ostium.


↑ The first natives captured beyond Cape Bojador were brought to Portugal by Antam Gonçalves in 1441 or 1442. Azurara, Guinea, chs. 12 and 13.


↑ This word appears in this same form in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Decretal. Gregor. IX., lib. V., tit. VI., c 6, ed. E. Friedberg, who gives as variant forms lignamina and ligneamina.


↑ A royal charter, dated Oct. 22, 1443, forbidding any one to pass beyond Cape Bojador without a license from Prince Henry, is printed in Algs. Docs., pp. 8-9.


↑ The Papal bull of June 18,1452 ( Nicholas V.). The provisions of this bull areas follows:

". . . Nos igitur considerantes, quod contra Catholicam fidem insurgentibus, Chris­ tianamque religionem extinguere molientibus, ea virtute, et alia constantia a Christi fidelibus est resistendum, ut fideles ipsi fidei ardore succensi virtutibusque pro posse succincti detestandum illorum propositum, non solum obice intentionis contraire impe­ diant, si ex oppositione roboris iniquos conatus prohibeant, et Deo, cui militant, ipsis assistente, perfidorum substernant molimenta, nosque divino amore communiti, Chris­ tianorum charitate invitati, officiique pastoralis astricti debito, ea, quae fidei, pro qua Christus Deus noster sanguinem effudit, integritatem, augmentumque respiciunt nobis fidelium animis vigorem, tuamque Regiam Magestatem in hujusmodi sanctissimo pro­ posito confovere merito cupientes, tibi Sarracenos, et paganos, aliosque infideles, et Christi inimicos quoscunque, et ubicunque constitutos regna, ducatus, comitatus, princi­ patus aliague dominia, terras, loca, villas, castra, et quaecunque alia possessiones, bona mobilia et immobilia in quibuscunque rebus consistentia, et quocunque nomine censeantur, per eosdem Sarracenos, paganos, infideles, et Christi inimicos detenta, et possessa, etiam cujuscunque seu quorumcunque regis, seu principis, aut regum, vel principum regna, ducatus, comitatus, principatus, aliaque dominia, terrae, loca, villae, castra, possessiones, et bona hujusmodi fuerint, invadendi, conquerendi, expugnandi, et subjugandi, illorumque personas in perpetuam servitutem redigendi, regna quoque, ducatus, comitatus, princi­ patus, aliaque dominia, possessiones, et bona hujusmodi, tibi et successoribus tuis Regibus Portugailiae, perpetuo applicandi, et appropriandi, ac in tuos, et eorundem successorum usus et utilitates convertendi plenam et liberam, auctoritate apostolica, tenore praesen­ tium concedimus facultatem. . . ." Jordão, Bullarium, p. 22.

It will be noticed that this bull sanctions the enslaving of the infidels. Two interesting bulls respecting slaves from the Canary Islands, printed in appendix II. of Carácter de la Conquista y Coloni­ zación de las Islas Canarias: Discurios leídos ante la Real Academia de la Historia ( 1901) by Don Rafael Torres Campos, show that Eugenius IV., the immediate prede­ cessor of Nicholas V., not only wished to protect from slavery and annoyance those aborigines who had embraced the faith, but also expressed a fear that dread of captivity would deter others from conversion.


↑ The phrase motu proprio, etc., had long been a mere form, which exempted the recipient of the bull from the ordinary taxes. J. Haller, "Die Ausfertigung der Pro­ visionen", Quellen und Forschuttgen, II. (1), ( 1899), p. 3. "Eine päpstliche Verleihung erfolgt fast immer nur auf Grund einer eingereichten Supplik. Der Empfänger also hat die Initiative zu ergreifen auch da, wo es sich scheinbar um einen spontanen Act des Papstes, ein motu proprio handelt. Denn auch diese Art der Verleihubg ist schon früh eine blosse Form geworden, bestimmt, dem Empfänger Abgabenfreiheit und andere Vorrechte zu verschaffen."


↑ Cape Bojador, in 26° 7' N., was rounded by Gil Eannes in 1434. Azurara, Guinea (ed. Beazley and Prestage), II. x.


↑ During a long period prior to Prince Henry's expeditions, Cape Na or Nam was the southern limit of Portuguese coast navigation. This cape was therefore probably not the Cape Non situated to the north of the Canary Islands, in 28° 47' N., but must have been south of Cape Bojador, where, indeed, it is placed on some maps of the early fifteenth century. See the article on "España en Berbería" by M. Jiménez de la Espada in the Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de Madrid, tom IX. ( 1880), p. 316. The fact that throughout this and the following text Cape Nam is mentioned after Cape Bojador may indicate that it lay to the south of it.


↑ Probably no definite locality is intended.


↑ The reference is to the bull Praeclaris tuae, issued by Eugenius IV. on May 25, 1437, and summarized in Algs. Docs., p. 5. The bull of Martin V. here mentioned may have been issued in 1424 or 1425 in connection with the Spanish-Portuguese controversy over the Canaries. Such a bull is referred to in Cod. Vatic. 4151, f. 18 ( Kretschmer, Entdeckung Amerika's, 1892, p. 220 note) and in Algs. Docs., p. 3. Cf. above, note 23.


↑ The executory instrument (executoria) issued by Dom Jayme, archbishop of Lisbon, and Alvaro, bishop of Silves, as executors (juizes executores) of this bull, is preserved in the National Archives at Lisbon, Coll. de Bullas, maço 32, no. 10. The similar instrument issued by João, bishop of Ceuta, is in the same archives, Coll. de Bullas, maço 33, no. 14. Both instruments include the text of the bull.


↑ In the dating of Papal bulls, up to the Pontificate of Innocent XII. ( 1691-1700), the 25th of March was usually reckoned as the beginning of the year. A. Giry, Manuel de Diplomatique ( 1894), p. 696. According to our present reckoning, therefore, this bull dates from the year 1455.


↑ Pietro da Noceto was the private secretary and confidant of Nicholas V. L. von Pastor , Geschichte der Päpste, I. ( 1901), 365.

The bull bears the usual official endorsement "Registrata in camera apostolica".


↑ In this translation the editor has been aided by Bollan's translation, mentioned in the bibliography, and by valuable suggestions from C. G. Bayne, C. S. I.


↑ I. e., if we bestow these favors, in order that.


↑ It is probable that a viginti quinque annis should be translated "from twenty-five years [of age]", i. e., from 1419. Cf. Bourne, Essays, p. 178.


↑ Vignaud, Toscanelli, p. 61, translates "extending thence beyond towards the dis­ tant shores of the south".
