TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA
By Theodore Roosevelt, Jr. and Kermit Roosevelt — New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1929
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1929 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier trailinggiantpan0000kerm). The 1929 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete.

========================================================================

. 
VA eee Rent CC 


foes 20/9 F 


BY THE SAME AUTHORS 


BY THEODORE AND KERMIT ROOSEVELT 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 
EAST OF THE SUN AND WEST OF THE MOON 


BY THEODORE ROOSEVELT 
RANK AND FILE 


BY KERMIT ROOSEVELT 


THE HAPPY HUNTING GROUNDS 
WAR IN THE GARDEN OF EDEN 


CLEARED FOR STRANGE PORTS 


With Mrs. Theodore Roosevelt, Mrs. Kermit 
Roosevelt, and Richard Derby 


QUENTIN ROOSEVELT, A Sketch, with Letters 
‘Edited by Kermit Roosevelt 


CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS 


AILING THE GIANT PANDA 


~ 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/trailinggiantpan0000kerm 


NDA 


From a painting by Carl Rungius 


TRAILING THE 
GIANT PANDA 


BY 
THEODORE ROOSEVELT 
AND 
KERMIT ROOSEVELT 


WITH A FRONTISPIECE FROM A PAINTING 

BY CARL RUNGIUS AND ILLUSTRATIONS 

FROM PHOTOGRAPHS BY SUYDAM CUTTING 
AND K. R. 


CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS 
NEW YORK - LONDON 
MCMXXIX 


Copynricut, 1929, sy 
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS 


Copyright, 1929, By THE BELL SYNDICATE, INC, 


Printed in the United States of America 


TO 
OUR FRIENDS 


STANLEY FIELD 
AND 


WILLIAM V. KELLEY 


CHAPTER 


I. 


Il. 


Tit. 


VITI. 


IX. 


CONTENTS 


Ancuors AWEIGH. 


Over THE RancEs To YUNNAN 
KERMIT ROOSEVELT 


THEODORE ROOSEVELT 


. 


Tue Back Door or CHINA . 


SoutH OF THE CLouDS 
KERMIT ROOSEVELT 


Tue Kinepom or Muti . 
THEODORE ROOSEVELT 


Rounp AnD Asout TATSIENLU . 
KERMIT ROOSEVELT 


Pire Davin’s Country . 
THEODORE ROOSEVELT 


“Hicu, Low, Jack, AND GAME’’. 
KERMIT ROOSEVELT 


Tue Enp or THE TRAIL . 
THEODORE ROOSEVELT 


AppENDIx A 


AppENDIx B 


INDEX . 


THEODORE ROOSEVELT 


° 


e 


° 


PAGE 


93 


127 


158 


192 


231 


261 
269 
273 


He 


eat Nass 
Oren 
dt Aer 
ile y p 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


The Giant Panda .. . : . . . . . Frontispiece 


FACING PAGE 


T. R., C. S. C., and K. R. upon Their Arrival at Yunnan 


Chinese Beggar Cem PERE NT et ule hua Pate Ch Maes (ae ag Me fi 
Ragged Nashis Se EMER Dep eaN Se erectile Sie poe gaye See ig Pic's i 
Typical Roadside Inn SOM Pei fA fata d Cary coe ey ier eite| We crogi see 
CON earict a bouiKkiait eatin na rors Sean ene EC ne 
pe De Ep ManGS Or ey GNHAR i epee es ss sess wth es oe). ao 
RrCR er uVLAT Ke bee? ool emt Ka Sg a Ug gh pe ee ee ae OS 
Pe Veatinottcetaitey UNBAN Gat to i ines scl cocks Oat ve OD 
Am V alleveEhiittecoumie wat ake sromr aterm. net uly SV eee rete Oey Sucre TG 
AopicakcandeVindy: Camiploege hse se oc ye we sees Seed 
Sorcerers at Work Outside the Yungning Monastery. . . . 86 
Dr. Rock, K. R., the Tsong Kwan and the Abbot of eee 

ADSI aes ih edb Oi as Snag ee ede ae an er aE 87 
ihe tures Lamas of Bedung. 0... a a 2 88 
T. R., Jack Young, the Brother-in-Law of the King of Muli, and 

RE a a EEA RODE sae ae aoe a eh = OB 
An Tron-Link Suspension Bridge . . . . - . .. . 99 
Werrving Across the Yalung River): 0 4 Se ee vy LZ 
Swimming the Ponies Across the Yalung . . . . . . . 118 
Bedung Lamasery . 114 
Kymo Pass . AD 114 
One of the Lamaseries at Muli . . . «. - se ee 1 
A Village Near Chuilung in the Valley of the Stone Towers . . 116 


ix 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Through the Snowy Uplands 

Ab, the Woodchopper 

A Stone Dwelling in the Muli Country . 
Porters Crossing an Iron Suspension Bridge 
Mt. Koonka 

Luzon’s Assistants 

Yak Transport . RS Phy ine= b 
One of Our Muleteers Churning Buttered Tea 
Porters on the Trail in the Muping Country 
Brick Tea Bound for Tibet 

Fishing in the Muping River 

An Inhabitant of Tengchwan Takes the Road 
T. R. and Mokhta Lone with the Giant Panda 
A’Souza’s Cabin 

Hsuen with Several Lolo Friends 

Feeding the Pigs in Front of A’Souza’s Cabin . 
Vooka and Her Neighbors 

A Lolo Girl 

Alolo . 

In the French Mission at Ningyuan 

A Bridge of Wood Without a Nail . 


Route of theKelley-Roosevelt-Field Museum Expedition in Yun- 
nan and Szechuan Provinces of China, 1929 . 


FACING PAGE 


117 
117 
120 
121 
130 
131 
138 
139 
146 
146 
147 
147 
228 
229 
229 
238 
238 
239 
239 
252 
253 


At end of volume 


‘THE GIANT PANDA 


aS 


ar 


CHAPTER I 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


“Johnny Bowlegs, pack your kit and trek!” 
—Kipling. 

For some time after we got back from our last ex- 
pedition to the Pamirs, everything was as peaceful 
as a May morning. It did not seem as if there could 
be anything more delightful in life than Oyster Bay 
and our families. There was much to do for both of 
us, and days passed like scenes in a cinematograph. 

More than a year drifted by without our noticing 
it. Then strange but familiar voices began whisper- 
ing to me. Spirits of the high places of earth, from 
the barren boulders and snows, hinted of days when 
the driving storm caked the ice on beard and face; 
spirits from the desert sang of blowing sand and 
blinding sun. For a time I put them resolutely aside, 
—refused to listen to them. 

Then one evening Kermit and I were alone to- 
gether. I found he too had been hearing these voices. 
That was the beginning of our downfall. Soon we 
began to lunch more frequently with the brown lean 
men who drift quietly into New York, not those who 
go tourist-like across Africa in automobiles, camping 
each night in richly upholstered luxury, but fore- 

1 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


loopers, who trek to lonely places where food is scant, 
travel by foot, and danger a constant bedfellow. 

Almost without realizing it we started to discuss 
where we should go next. Naturally we turned to 
the blank spaces on the map, those fascinating white 
blotches with perhaps the dotted course of a sur- 
mised river marked and “unknown” printed across 
them. These are much fewer now than they were 
twenty years ago, but such as they are they beckon 
just as irresistibly. We thought of crossing Borneo, 
but just as we were setting on foot inquiries con- 
cerning it we heard that some one had been before us. 
We discussed collecting in Angola. 

Finally our eyes turned to that part of Asia north- 
west of Indo-China, where the rugged ramparts of 
the Himalayas gradually descend to the tropical 
coastal plains. Through this mountain wall five great 
rivers have forced their paths, the Brahmaputra, Ir- 
rawaddy, Salween, Mekong and Yangtze. 'Thou- 
sands of miles separate them at their mouths. The 
Yangtze runs into the Pacific by Shanghai, while the 
Brahmaputra rolls its placid muddy waters through 
India to the Bay of Bengal. Where they hurl them- 
selves tumultuously down their mountain passes, the 
deep mystery gorges that are their beds are some- 
times separated by but forty miles. 

Gradually our plans took shape. Kermit and I 
would strike north into this country either through 


Q 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


Tibet or by the old Bhamo-Talifu trail, which runs 
from Burma to Yunnan. Where we were travelling 
through uncharted country we would make a rough 
attempt to map it. After pressing in as far as possi- 
ble we would collect such of the animals as we could. 

The Golden Fleece of our trip was the giant 
panda. Atluropus melanoleucus is its scientific name. 
It lives in the dense bamboo jungles in Szechuan, 
and authorities seemed to agree that so far it had 
never been killed by a white man. Pére David, the 
French missionary scientist, discovered it sixty years 
ago when he got skins from the natives of Muping. 
The animal is the size of a bear and strikingly col- 
ored. Around its eyes are black spectacles. Its ears 
are black and there is a heavy band of black over its 
shoulders and front legs. The rest of its body is white. 
No one knew exactly how it should be classified, 
whether it was a bear, a panda or an entirely new 
species. From time to time such men as General 
Pereira, Ernest Wilson, Zappey, and McNeill had 
hunted it, but without success. We had slight hope of 
getting it. So slight in fact that we did not let even 
our close friends know what our real objective was. 
Our information was so scant as to its range and hab- 
its that our quest seemed even more doubtful than 
Jason’s. 

Besides the panda there are numerous other ani- 
mals of great interest, among them that strange crea- 


3 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


ture the takin, half goat, half antelope. It lives in 
the high mountains and is surprisingly active in spite 
of its clumsy build. Its hair is long and in certain 
species yellow. The Chinese call it Yea gnu, or wild 
cow. The scientific name of the species we hoped to 
find is Budocras taxicolor, as odd as the animal itself. 
Mason Mitchell, now living at Hollywood, was the 
first white man to shoot a specimen of the western 
race. 

Equal in interest with the takin is the golden mon- 
key. It lives in the forest in bitterly cold country 
where the snow lies deep for five months each year. 
The color, especially of the old males, is brilliant. 
The hair shades from yellow to rich russet and snow- 
white. As far as I know there is no group in any 
museum. 

Finally there are little-known deer, McNeill’s stag, 
and the most northerly representative of the sam- 
bhur. There are also burrhel, serow and ghoral, of 
which not a dozen specimens have ever been collected. 

Whatever we could get in the way of small mam- 
mals or shoot in the way of birds would also be of 
unquestioned scientific interest. In Szechuan there 
are numbers of brilliantly colored pheasant. One in 
particular, the Lady Amherst, looks as if modelled in 
silver. 

When we had finished we would swing around and 
strike south to the hills of Indo-China, where the first 


4 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


part of our expedition would end. There we would 
be in one of the finest game countries in the world. 
In the jungles are elephant, water-buffalo, sledang, 
banting, tiger, leopard and a variety of deer. It is 
rumored that somewhere in the back country may be 
found the Shomburgk deer that has never even been 
seen alive or dead by a white man. 

We decided also that it would be well to have in 
Indo-China a group of trained naturalists to make a 
thorough collection of the birds and small mammals 
of that region. 

Once the plans had taken shape the question arose 
of financing the expedition. Neither Kermit nor I 
have sufficient money to carry the expense necessary 
for such a trip. We decided to go to Chicago and 
tell our old friend Stanley Field, President of the 
Field Museum of Natural History, for whom we 
went in search of Ovis poli. 

The moment we mentioned it to Mr. Field he was 
enthusiastic. He gave us a dinner that night at his 
house. There we met William V. Kelly, a generous 
patron of the Museum. We broached the subject to 
kim and without a moment’s hesitation he told us he 
would stand behind us and finance the venture. 

Next morning the Kelly-Roosevelt-Field Museum 
Expedition was fact. There were many hurdles, how- 
ever, still to be taken. To begin with, there were our 
families to consult. It would be a gross overstate- 


5 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


ment to say that our wives were enthusiastic about the | 
idea. They were not, but both were game. Remem- 
bering the words in the marriage service “For better 
and for worse,” they eventually gave us their per- 
mission. 

As soon as our financing was arranged we asked 
Suydam Cutting to come with us. He had been on 
our last trip to Central Asia. Since then he had been 
on two expeditions of his own, one to Abyssinia, one 
to the Naga Hills in Assam. No one could wish for 
a stouter companion in hardship or danger. He is a 
man of undaunted courage. No matter how forlorn 
the hope he would always stand firm. 

Neither of us could get away before the middle of 
November,—Kermit because of his shipping business, 
I on account of the presidential campaign, during 
which I wished to do all in my power for Mr. Hoover. 
Nevertheless, though it was still six months away 
there was much we had to do. The first thing, of 
course, was to get permits to visit the various coun- 
tries. This was not easy, for the lands we wished to 
travel lay so far away that “the King’s justice” 
hardly ran that far. Now if there is one thing that 
embarrasses governments, it is to have an atrocity 
committed on a foreign national in some back-prov- 
ince where their control is shadowy. If it is a citizen 
of their own country that is scuppered, everything is 
easy of adjustment. It can be maintained, with a fair 

6 


T. R., C. 8S. C., AND K. R. UPON THEIR ARRIVAL AT YUNNAN 


STHSVN GHOOVa UVONdd ASANIHO 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


show of truth, that the victim was only enjoying the 
full privileges of citizenship. With a foreigner all is 
very different. His government asks questions. The 
press plays up the incident in flaring headlines, un- 
less some home murder or divorce of exceptional 
prurience has taken place. The end may have to be 
an expensive punitive expedition. 

At first, therefore, the governments with whom we 
dealt naturally refused our requests. In time, mainly 
through the kind offices of our friend Doctor Chao 
Chu Wu, the Chinese Government consented. The 
British Foreign Office then courteously agreed to 
forward our request to the Dalai Lama for permis- 
sion to cross Tibet. As everything in the East moves 
very slowly, we heard nothing of this for a long time. 

Meanwhile we had been actively organizing. We 
asked Herbert Stevens, a British scientist who had 
spent much time collecting in Assam and Indo-China, 
to be one of our party in China. We asked Harold 
Coolidge of Boston, a trained naturalist, to lead the 
group of scientists in Indo-China. To complete his 
party we got Russell Hendee from Brooklyn, Josslyn 
Van Tyne of the University of Michigan and Doctor 
Ralph Wheeler of Boston. 

All of these men had adventured in far lands. Cool- 
idge though only twenty-six had collected in the 
north and in Africa also. In the latter place he had 
been charged by a band of gorillas who came cough- 

7 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


ing and crashing through the undergrowth to his very 
feet. In the country where he was these animals had 
never been disturbed by white men, and had no fear 
of the naked, ill-defended natives. They would come 
down to the cornfields and if the farmer attempted to 
drive them away, would turn on him and tear him in 
pieces with their powerful hands. 

At the same time we had been purchasing supplies. 
There is little that is more delightful than purchasing 
equipment for an expedition. Every article suggests 
possible and delightful contingencies. We visited 
stores where the air was redolent with the smell of 
gun oil, and the blue barrels of rifles showed behind 
the glass of the cases like the spotless driving-shafts 
in the engine of a warship. We talked with countless 
men on the details of our supplies. We went to the 
American Geographical Society, and under the tute- 
lage of Doctor Isaiah Bowman studied means and 
methods of mapping unknown country. 

We finally decided on a battery of Springfield 
rifles, sporting model. They are sufficiently powerful 
for almost all game. Kermit had killed an African 
elephant with one. They are nearly fool-proof, even 
with natives. Their bolt action stands equally well 
the dust of the desert and the soaking rains of the 
tropics. Above all, they weigh only a little over 
seven pounds, which is a real consideration when it is 
necessary to carry your rifle yourself. It is surpris- 

8 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


ing how even an extra pound counts when you are 
hunting hard country. I never believed the proverb 
of the straw and the camel’s back until I found how 
much difference a little weight in a rifle makes. 

We also bought two 410-gauge shot-guns, as their 
ammunition is very light and it is possible to carry 
far more than for a larger gun. The small size of the 
bore makes no difference, for on an expedition we 
never take a wing shot if we can avoid it. Where 
every ounce of equipment counts there is no chance 
for sportsmanship in bird shooting. On trek we shoot 
our birds on the ground, preferably when they are 
standing still and huddled together. An old western 
friend of mine once shouted to me when I was ad- 
vancing on half a dozen partridges: “None of yer 
dam’ fancy shots! Shoot for the pot, man!” 

For emergency use we each bought a .38 Colt au- 
tomatic and an armpit holster. This way of carrying 
a pistol is particularly good. The weapon is concealed 
so that it does not offend a sensitive host. More im- 
portant still, it can be drawn with lightning rapidity 
should necessity arise. Many a man lies buried now 
because he could not draw his pistol in the split second 
of time that stood between him and death. 

We selected three lightweight tents, 6 feet by 9 
feet in size, with the floor cloth sewed in to keep out 
the bitter wind of winter. For bedding we took our 
veteran rolls of the last trip. 

9 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Anthony Fiala, an Arctic explorer of note who was 
with my father in Brazil, packed our food supplies in 
light but tough fibre cases. Each case when packed 
weighed fifty pounds. 

As clothes we took with us shorts, khaki shirts, 
heavy trousers, leather coats, and sweaters as we ex- 
pected to meet every kind of weather from the steam- 
ing heat of the tropics to the dry biting cold of the 
high mountains. For formal occasions, such as dining 
with or calling on native officials, we packed jodh- 
purs, the long tight-fitting riding trousers that origi- 
nated in India. 

One branch of our equipment to which we gave 
particular attention was an array of presents for the 
natives. Among our purchases were a dozen Hom- 
burg soft hats of a bilious green color, which are 
greatly prized in Tibet. We got mechanical electric 
torches that generate their own power, wrist-watches, 
trick steel measuring-tapes, knives, folding chairs and 
a dozen other oddments. 

As gifts for the most exalted, Suydam bought half 
a dozen turquoise rings. Among the mountain fast- 
nesses of the Himalayas the turquoise is the most 
treasured jewel. In some places it is customary for 
the women to wear a headdress with a long queue-like 
strip of cloth hanging down behind, on which they 
sew the turquoises that represent their dowry. 

Ceremony and swank count greatly in the hinter- 


10 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


land. If we had been able to stage the initiation cere- 
monies of certain American secret societies for some 
of the native chieftains we have met, I am sure they 
would have given us their daughters and half of their 
kingdoms. Knowing this Kermit and I cast about 
for some means of turning it to account. At last we 
hit on a plan. We recalled war days when the troops 
were formed, the band struck up and some officer or 
man marched forward. We remembered the stiffly 
approaching French general, resplendent in robin’s- 
egg blue and whiskers. We remembered the crimson 
ribbon that was thrown around the neck of the hero, 
and the embarrassing kiss on each cheek. Accord- 
ingly, I went to a New York theatrical costumer’s, 
and bought a dozen medals hung on ribbons as bril- 
liant and various as a desert sunset. 

A matter that was giving us serious concern was 
that of an interpreter. All of us speak Hindustani 
after a fashion, but that tongue loses much of its 
value beyond the borders of India or Burma. We 
none of us speak Chinese, which is the official language 
in most of the territory to which we were going. That 
is only half the story, for there are about twenty 
different dialects used by the natives on whom we 
would have to depend for guides and information. 
At first we tried to engage a man known, at least by 
sight, to literally hundreds of thousands of people, 
Kru, the hero of the film “Chang.” He is a Christian 


ll 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Shan, and was with Merion Cooper in Upper Siam 
for nearly two years. He speaks most of the dialects 
and is entirely fearless. We failed to get him, as the 
man to whom we cabled in Siam advised us that Kru 
was with a mission in Yunnan that was threatened 
by bandits, and was needed to help protect it. 

This was bad news, for there is nothing more help- 
less than a traveller in a strange country where he 
does not speak the language, and has no reliable in- 
terpreter. He is cheated right and left, he is told he 
cannot go where he wishes because there is no trans- 
port, whereas the real reason is that the interpreter 
does not want to go there. 

Just at this moment fate stepped in to aid us. A 
young Chinaman came with a letter from the Chinese 
Minister and asked to go with us. His name was 
Jack Young. He told us that though American- 
born he had worked as an engineer for the Chinese 
Government near the territory to which we wished 
to go, and spoke not only Chinese but many of the 
dialects. He was a slight, nice-looking boy about 
twenty years old. We closed with him at once and 
sent him to Chicago, where the Museum gave him an 
intensive course in skinning birds and small mammals. 
Then we put him on board one of my brother’s boats 
with instructions to meet us at Calcutta. 

By this time our plans were sufficiently definite for 
the Museum to announce them publicly. The day 


12 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


after this was done the reporters came to see us at 
the American Museum in New York, where we were 
brushing up our taxidermy by skinning some birds 
and mice. 

A scientist often lives in a little world of his own, 
which may seem very odd to the uninitiate. We were 
standing in a corridor talking to the newspaper men, 
when an old man with long white hair rushed up to 
me, saying, “Colonel, how I envy you going where 
those beautiful monkeys are!’ At once a reporter, 
scenting a possible story, asked, “What kind of mon- 
keys?” 

With a snort my scientific friend replied, “The 
Golden Snub-nosed Monkeys, of course! I have a 
case waiting for them downstairs,” and rushed off. 
With one accord the newspaper men turned to me. 
“Do they worship those monkeys there?” “Not there 
but here!” I answered. 

As soon as the press notices appeared letters began 
to stream into our offices. Every one seemed to want 
to go with us, regardless of sex or age. A troop of 
Boy Scouts volunteered as a body. Any number ap- 
plied as individuals. A small cousin of ours wrote to 
Kermit: 


Dear Cousin Kermit 
I have always wanted to go on an expedition for 
game or something and in the wilds, but I have never 


13 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


had a chance. I would like to go with you on one of 
your expeditions, and I saw in the papers that you 
are going on another one, so I thought I would see 
if I could go into the wilds for once in my life. I 
speak about them as the wilds because I don’t know 
what else to call them. I am 11 years old and my 
chief occupation is going to school gee its awful. I 
makes lots of huts and tunnels with other boys. 
Love from 
Daniel S. Roosevelt 
Coolidge Lane, 
Dedham Mass. 


One girl wrote: “I am eighteen, I have always 
wanted to see the world and this is my opportunity.” 
Another letter began, “Well, Colonel, when do we 
start?” Many seemed to feel that if they volunteered 
their services without pay there was no question but 
that they would be accepted. My secretary was kept 
busy typing answers to the effect that all the per- 
sonnel had already been selected and only trained 
scientists were going. 

Besides these there were a host who wished us to 
bring them presents when we returned. These ranged 
from those who asked for “Some small live animal as 
a memento,” to an enthusiastic angler who wanted 
bird feathers to make dry flies with which to fish for 
trout in Pennsylvania. One correspondent, a wo- 

14 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


man, modestly requested “A rare piece of Chinese 
porcelain.” 

Those who asked for presents were almost equalled 
by those who gave us presents. One man presented 
us with a coil of “unbreakable rope.” Then there were 
a multitude of medicines, many of them as weird as 
any that are found in Hippocrates. Some smacked 
of the witch doctor as much as of the licensed medical 
practitioner. I received a horse-chestnut, with the 
statement that if I carried it in my pocket while cross- 
ing the Himalayas I would not have rheumatism. 
The climax was reached when an acquaintance sent 
me a rabbit’s foot, saying it had carried his father 
“safely through two shipwrecks.” 

The last weeks were so crowded with work that 
they flashed by like an express train. I was speaking 
two and three times a day for Mr. Hoover, and often 
travelling all night as well. Kermit was finishing 
some business arrangements. Suydam was the only 
one who could devote his undivided attention to the 
trip. Before we knew it November 10th arrived, and 
we were on the Homeric bound for England with a 
rough passage ahead. Our wives had decided to go 
with us to Europe. Fortunately they are good sail- 
ors, for nearly every night the trunks and bags played 
tag about our staterooms. At meals the food and 
drink would leap from the table into our laps. Dur- 
ing the height of the storm we received a grim re- 

15 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


minder that great as modern science is it has not been 
able to make travel always safe. We got an S.O.S. 
from the ill-fated Vestris. Unfortunately we were 
too far away to be of any assistance. 

In London we stayed two days. I visited the South 
Kensington Museum, where they very kindly fur- 
nished me with such information as they had on the 
giant panda. Mr. Arthur Hinks, Secretary of the 
Royal Geographical Society, was most kind also, and 
took much trouble in looking up data for us in their 
records. One night Arthur Vernay, the big game 
hunter, gave us a dinner. The company was a de- 
lightful mixture of scientists and sportsmen. Two of 
them had been with Sir Francis Younghusband on 
the first British Expedition to Lhasa in 1905. One 
was a retired British Admiral who was a great au- 
thority on birds and fleas. 

In Paris we stayed two days more. There we saw 
M. Jean Delacour and had our final talk on the 
Indo-Chinese end of our expedition. We bought 
some colored plates of the animals we were seeking. 
Getting game is often largely a matter of finding the 
locality where it is. There have been animals that 
were considered so rare as to be almost non-existent, 
where the only skin in the hands of any museum had 
been taken in trade from natives. Then some one 
stumbled on their habitat and found they were plenti- 
ful but only in a restricted district. This happens for 


16 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


two reasons. The first is that in barbarous countries 
accurate information goes a very short distance. 
Tribesmen a hundred miles from the locality where 
an animal lives may not have the vaguest idea where 
it can be found. The second is that when there is no 
competent interpreter the natives may not know what 
the white hunter is asking. I have seen a white man 
laboriously explain a type of game to a group of pa- 
tiently waiting brown men, only to have a native arise, 
disappear, and return in triumph with a branch of a 
tree as his interpretation of the object sought. It 
was to cut this Gordian knot of misunderstanding 
that we bought the pictures. We could show them to 
the local inhabitants, and avoid the risk of making a 
week’s march only to find we were being guided to the 
wrong animal. 

We left our wives in Paris for they had to return 
to the children. On the 23rd we were in Marseilles. 
It is a fascinating city. Around it clings the romance 
of a long and adventurous existence. From it set 
forth Pytheas, that old Greek explorer who, in the 
fifth century B. C. sailed into the Baltic first among 
civilized men. Like many another before and since, 
his narrative was discredited when he came back, not 
because of the inaccuracies but because of the truth 
it contained. He spoke of Ultima Thule—the last 
land in the world. He spoke of a place to the north 
where there was neither land nor water nor sky, but 


17 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


a combination of all three which resembled a thick 
soup. All this his contemporaries accepted with grave 
nods. He told of the tides in the Baltic, which in 
many places flow in over the flat sands as fast as a 
man can walk, and rise ten feet or more, facts that 
any child knows to-day. That is where he made his 
mistake. Tides in the Mediterranean practically don’t 
exist. His listeners at once dubbed him a lar and 
discredited his entire story. He had piloted his vessel 
safely through the shoals of falsehood only to foun- 
der in the harbor of truth. 

Marseilles is like its history, various and colorful. 
As you walk its streets you often see the fragment 
of some medieval tower framed in the side of a mod- 
ern house as a fossil is bedded in a clay bank. The 
people who throng the streets are of every type. 
Here, a middle-aged French couple will be plodding 
along; there, a coal-black Senegalese with a red kepi 
will pass with the peculiar loose-jointed swagger of 
his race. Behind will come a rollicking group of sail- 
ors with swart skins and shining earrings, followed in 
turn by a Spahi riding a horse whose action shows 
the pride of the desert-bred. On the water-front the 
fish-wives are gathered. They are a thickset, power- 
ful lot. On their stalls lies the spoil of the Mediter- 
ranean, cuttle-fish, oysters, and shrimps; stream-line 
steel-blue mackerel, and great ugly bright red crea- 
tures with mouths like toads. Arms akimbo, they ped- 

18 


ANCHORS AWEIGH 


dle their wares with the stridency of barkers at a 
side-show. 

From there we sailed on the Narkunda of the P. 
& O. Line. After another rough passage we made 
Port Said where East and West meet. A few more 
days saw us passing through the Gate of Tears, as 
the Arabs call the straits which guard the southern 
end of the Red Sea. From the deck of his vessel the 
traveller can see Africa and Arabia on either hand, 
baking in the sun. In the old days it was a veritable 
Gate of Tears, for the ill-built, clumsy Arab dhows 
were helpless in a storm. Time out of mind they piled 
up on the coast. Even to-day it has its sinister his- 
tory. It was on Perim not long ago that a P. & O. 
liner crashed. 

After passing from the Red Sea I always feel that 
I am really East, where a European is a spectator, 
never an integral part of the deep-seated life. 

At Aden, where we stopped for a few hours, we 
went ashore and renewed old acquaintances. From 
there we bore northeast across the blue Indian Ocean, 
flying-fish flashing from wave to wave like bits of 
silver. Four lazy uneventful days passed and early 
one morning standing on deck we saw the low coast- 
line of India. 


19 


CHAPTER II 
OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


We had written to Kashmir in the hopes of secur- 
ing some of the Kashmiris who had served us so faith- 
fully in Central Asia in 1925. Avery, of Cockburn’s, 
cabled that he had engaged two new shikarries, Mo- 
khta Lone and Gaffar Sheikh, whom he would send 
to Bombay to meet us. Suydam wrote our old head 
cook, Jemal Sheikh, whom he had with him the pre- 
vious winter in Assam. Lusu, another old standby, 
was also with him in Assam, but had been left there 
with Captain Kingdon Ward, who was engaged on 
a botanical and geographical exploration of the Mish- 
mi Hills. I had written Ward asking him to send 
us Lusu if he could spare him, but had received no 
reply. 

We felt that it would make a great difference in 
the smooth starting of the expedition if we had a 
nucleus of retainers who understood our ways, and 
when we were drawing close to Bombay we spent 
time speculating as to which of our old friends would 
greet us. Both of the shikarries being new, Ted and 


I drew lots for first choice. He won and chose Gaf- 
far Sheikh. 


20 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


As we drew alongside Ballard Pier we were de- 
lighted to see old Jemal Sheikh and a somewhat 
emaciated Lusu waving to us. The former was quick 
to take possession of Suydam, who was more than a 
little embarrassed by his affectionate attentions, while 
the latter hurried over to ask about my wife, whose 
servant he had been in India and Nepal after our re- 
turn from Central Asia. 

We entrained for Calcutta after a day in Bom- 
bay spent in seeing old friends and admiring the 
progress the Bombay Natural History Society has 
made in its admirable programme, thanks to Sir 
Reginald Spence. 

Mervyn Morgan met us at the station and installed 
us in his delightful house in Ballygunge, where we 
stayed until we took ship for Rangoon. Our objec- 
tive being the border lands between the Chinese 
province of Szechuan and Eastern Tibet, we had 
hoped to obtain permission to enter either through 
Sadiya and the Mishmi country or up by way of 
Sikkim and Tibet. No reply to our petitions hav- 
ing been received from the Tibetan authorities, we 
adopted the alternative route, which we had always 
had in mind, passing through Burma and crossing 
into Yunnan, whence we could strike north to Sze- 
chuan. 

We were well on our way toward the heart of the 
province of Yunnan when word reached us from 


21 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Burma that permission had been accorded to us to 
go through the Mishmi country into Tibet and so 
across to Batang. Unfortunately it was too late to 
turn back and avail ourselves of the sought-for op- 
portunity. 

We found many old friends in Calcutta, among 
them Major Kenneth Mason, recently Gold Medal- 
list of the Royal Geographical Society for his nota- 
ble work in the Karakoram Himalayas. All the of- 
ficers of the Indian Survey were more than kind and 
helped us in every way possible. 

Jack Young had landed in Karachi from the 
freighter Egremont, carrying a large shipment of 
American mules for the Indian army. He reached 
Calcutta a couple of days before us, bringing with 
him the afterthoughts of equipment which we had 
gathered when the bulk had already gone forward on 
a freighter bound direct to Calcutta. 

The day before we left, Kingdon Ward arrived 
from Assam, showing very clearly the effects of short 
rations and long marches in the Mishmi Hills. I 
knew him first in Mesopotamia during the war, and 
he had taken part in our original plans for the ex- 
pedition on which we were starting. After some hur- 
ried consultations it was agreed that he should go to 
England and return during the winter to join us in 
the work along the Indo-China frontier. 

Bidding good-by to our most hospitable friend 

22 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


Morgan, we embarked for Rangoon on the 14th of 
December. Lusu had sent for a younger brother, 
Aziza, to join us. Through a misunderstanding he 
had gone to Bombay, whence he was due to arrive in 
Calcutta less than an hour before our boat sailed. 
Nevertheless, Lusu proudly produced him a few min- 
utes before the gangplank was hoisted, and we set sail 
with our five Kashmiri retainers. It was the first 
time that three of them had been on anything larger 
than a houseboat on Wolar Lake and they were pro- 
portionately impressed. They were duly enlightened 
by Jemal Sheikh from his store of nautical know]l- 
edge gained during his voyage from Constantinople, 
whence Suydam had returned him at the close of our 
Central Asian Expedition in 1925, and by Lusu from 
his shorter experience during a trip with me from 
Karachi to Bombay. 

Sir Charles and Lady Innes, friends of former 
days, invited us to stay with them at Government 
House, where we spent a few most pleasant days be- 
fore leaving for Upper Burma. Sir Charles had been 
of help in every way imaginable, among other things 
arranging for the purchase of thirty mules for us in 
Bhamo. 

In Mandalay we spent a night with O Ah Wain, 
one of the leading Chinese merchants in Burma, and 
the representative of the Burma Corporation, the 
huge mining company employing twenty-five thou- 

23 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


sand men, with which Mr. Hoover was at one time 
connected. Ah Wain had followed the campaign 
with great interest, for he had been well acquainted 
with the President. 

We wandered about the bazaars under the tutelage 
of a most energetic and self-sufficient Burman, 
Maung Wike, owner of a Chevrolet, and thoroughly 
endorsed Mr. Kipling’s soldier’s appreciation of the 
Burmese woman with her “whacking white cheroot,” 
six or eight inches long with a wrapper of what looked 
like bamboo fibre. 

The train journey to Katha was complicated by 
the action of wind and water in flooding a long sec- 
tion of track, but after numerous halts and changes 
we at length boarded a little stern-wheeler and 
chunked up-river to Bhamo. As companion we had 
Major Williams, returning from hospital in Man- 
dalay and still largely crippled with neuritis. He 
commanded a mixed battalion of Punjabis, Sikhs, 
and Jats. All through the cold weather they are back 
in the hills of Upper Burma on frontier service, and 
the life is far from uneventful. Last year eleven of 
his men were killed by tigers, five by one animal. One 
station brought back memories of sickness, for there 
he had lost seventeen men from cholera four or five 
months back. There are primitive problems still to 
be coped with in Burma. 

The village of Bhamo sits at the Burmese end of 


24 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


the old trade route across to Yunnan and China. Its 
European population consists of seven. Vivian Clerk, 
the Deputy Commissioner, had purchased thirty 
mules for us, and we hired some extra ones to take us 
across the border. 

Christmas Eve we dined with the Clerks, and after 
dinner three lots of men and boys came around from 
the missions and sang carols. The setting of palm 
and bamboo and the dark faces were remote indeed 
from all that we had hitherto associated with Christ- 
mas carols. The singing was earnest and whole- 
hearted, but it was at times difficult to determine 
either from word or tune whether it was to “Good 
King Wenceslaus” or “Once in Royal David’s City” 
that we were listening. Oyster Bay and our families 
and friends in Christ Church singing “Christmas Day 
on the River” seemed very far off. 

We spent a pleasant and interesting afternoon 
with Captain G. H. M. Medd, representative of the 
Irrawaddy Flotilla Company and for thirty-seven 
years resident in Burma. His great uncle was Ad- 
miral Cochrane, founder of the navy of Chile. Cap- 
tain Medd had many tales to tell of river adventure. 
Not long ago one of his stern-wheelers stopped to 
take on fuel after dark and turned the search-light, 
which is used to feel out the course, full upon three 
tigers which had come down to drink. The native 
boatswain in his excitement pulled the steam siren, 


25 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


and the beasts stampeded through the near-by vil- 
lage. The town elders laid before Captain Medd a 
solemn complaint of the boatswain’s action, asking 
that it never be allowed to occur again! 

The first seventeen miles on the road between 
Bhamo and Tengyueh is possible for motor trans- 
port, so on the day after Christmas we got our mules 
under way early, and ourselves followed with the bal- 
ance of our kit in motors. We got to our stage at 
noontime, and, armed with collecting guns, separated 
to start in on the natural-history work of the expedi- 
tion. 

Next morning there was the usual confusion inci- 
dent to the first few days of pack-train life. We had 
hired some mules to supplement those we had pur- 
chased, and had also arranged a riding-mule for each 
of us. It now developed that there would not be suf- 
ficient additional pack-mules to take up the slack, so 
we had to turn in half our riding-mules to lift the 
surplus loads. The system of packing the mules was 
new to me. It consisted of two skeleton saddles; one 
was placed upon the mule and was secured fore and 
aft by breastplate and crupper; there was no girth 
whatever. The second fitted neatly upon the first; to 
it was lashed the load, and lacking the support of a 
girth, it had obviously to be packed so as to nicely 
balance. To load the mules two men would lift up 
the second saddle and call to a mule, who would duck 


26 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


his head and run between them so that they could 
drop the load upon the base saddle. 

Our muleteers, and all those we met on the trail, 
were Yunanese. We had, as head man, a little fellow 
whose name, Chin Tso Lin, was easy to remember as 
closely approximating that of the defunct Manchu- 
rian warlord. Chin was a good man, but did not seem 
able to impress his authority sufficiently upon his fol- 
lowers. 

For our first march of fifteen miles Ted, Stevens, 
and I walked, leaving the others to share the mules. 
The trail wound in and about the mountains border- 
ing the Taping River. The jungle enclosed the path 
on either hand, a tangled mass of vines and creepers 
with great trees rising straight as a die without a 
branch for from eighty to a hundred feet from the 
ground. This trail, the principal trade route between 
Yunnan and Burma, was opened to Europeans only 
in the seventies, and such men as Cooper, Gill, and 
Baber have left us delightful accounts of their jour- 
- neyings. Cooper, after the eventful expeditions de- 
scribed in his “Travels of a Pioneer in Commerce” 
and the “Mishmi Hills,” during both of which trips he 
had more than one hairbreadth escape, fell a victim 
in Bhamo to the rifle of an Indian sepoy. Captain 
Gill, whose “River of Golden Sand” so vividly re- 
lates his adventures in Szechuan and Yunnan, met a 
tragic end through Arab treachery. Among more re- 


a7 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


cent accounts of travel and exploration in this remote 
corner of China none combines more happily a de- 
lightful narrative with information and deductions 
of value than Johnston’s “Peking to Mandalay.” 

Our first halt was at Khalongkha, and as I was 
walking through the village I caught sight of the 
head of a newly killed sambhur. Through the assis- 
tance of a shopkeeper who spoke Hindustani I finally 
found the hunter. He said that in the early morning 
and late evening both sambhur and barking deer came 
out to feed in the small clearings far up on the moun- 
tainside where the Kachins planted their crops. Ted 
and Suydam and I set off in different directions on 
the chance of coming upon either of these deer. The 
Kachin with whom I went started straight up through 
the trackless jungle and led me a merry chase be- 
fore we finally came to the upper clearings. All our 
climbing proved in vain, and neither of the others 
met with any better success. Next day Suydam 
passed two Kachins with a muntjac or barking deer 
slung between them. There is undoubtedly good 
shooting to be had in the neighborhood; but to prop- 
erly work it out time would be needed, and as our 
objective lay in the vicinity of far distant Tatsienlu, 
time to us was a most valuable commodity. 

The Chinese will go to vast expense and surmount 
great difficulties in order to bury their dead beside 
their ancestors. A very elaborate coffin had accom- 


28 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


panied Stevens and Jack on their river boat, and for 
the first four or five days it kept pace with our cara- 
van. A Chinese coffin is always expensive. It is built 
from hard wood, a huge cumbersome affair, some- 
what resembling a deep dugout canoe with a high 
prow. This was one of the heaviest. Suspended on 
poles, four men in front, and two behind, it swung 
along the bridle path; the coolies chanting antipho- 
nally to the corpse, advising it to lie quiet, and telling 
it that it was homeward bound. A brilliant barnyard 
cock was tied to the coffin’s lid to keep the spirit of 
the dead from rising. A few personal objects were 
also attached to the coffin. It was amazing that the 
coolies should have been able to carry their burden 
along our stages. We eventually left them behind 
when the trail became very difficult and rough across 
the China border. 

These marches through the gorge of the Taping 
were a delight. Suydam complained that the great 
height of the wall of jungle enclosed and oppressed 
us too straitly, but we had passed through it before 
I had time to sense that oppression, which we had all 
of us felt when similarly hemmed in by the forest 
during the exploration of the River of Doubt. 

Once Stevens and I made a long chukker up the 
mountainside after a band of gray langurs, twice we 
came up to them, but we failed to get a shot. At 
length they definitely eluded us and we turned back. 


29 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


We had not gone far before we heard a Kachin feud 
underway up the valley. We counted twenty shots, 
a goodly number to expend where rifles are hard to 
come by and cartridges almost as scarce. The British 
have made great strides in introducing the Pax Bri- 
tannica into the hills of Upper Burma, but the Ka- 
chins are a warlike race, and not yet prepared to 
arbitrate all their intertribal difficulties. 

As we came round a sharp bend in the trail we ran 
upon a Kachin with a rifle on his shoulder. Upon 
seeing us he jumped to one side and flung his rifle to 
aim. For a moment it looked as if we might be in 
for trouble, but the Kachin, although apprehensive, 
was apparently on the alert for some personal en- 
emy and a second later his face was wreathed in some- 
what sheepish smiles. 

We were making fairly long stages, and it was only 
by collecting birds along the route and setting out 
traps after dark that we were able to secure any of 
the small mammals and birds of the country through 
which we passed. ‘The skinning was carried on chiefly 
by lamplight. The difficulty lay in the fact that in 
order to reach the big-game grounds of Szechuan 
during the most advantageous hunting season we 
were obliged to make all haste possible, whereas for 
Stevens to obtain the collection of small game he 
sought for the Field Museum it was essential that 
he take easy marches, halting for a day or two from 


30 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


time to time where the country appeared propitious 
for his purposes. We knew all this before starting 
and had planned to split caravans at Tengyueh, leav- 
ing Stevens to follow along more slowly. He could 
join us at Tatsienlu, where we would return after 
hunting the hills to the north. This would enable him 
to spend a month or six weeks longer on his way to 
Tatsienlu and yet be there in time to meet us on our 
return from the hunting-grounds. 

We were very fortunate in having Stevens with us. 
In his capable hands we could feel safe in leaving 
the working out of the small-game collecting, know- 
ing that the Field Museum would receive as repre- 
sentative a faunal survey of this part of Yunnan and 
Szechuan as it would be possible to procure under the 
circumstances. Stevens had been a tea planter in 
Assam and Darjeeling for many years, during which 
he had made an intensive study of bird and mammal 
life. He has written a standard monograph on the 
birds of Sikkim. Not long ago he spent a year in 
Indo-China, but almost all his valuable collections 
were lost in a river shipwreck which came very close 
to costing him his life. Since then he has been at- 
tached to Lord Rothschild’s Museum at Tring. 

The fourth day out brought us to the Chinese bor- 
der. There was nothing to tell us that we were there 
except two Chinamen in the verandah of a grass hut, 
one lying down cooking himself an opium pill for his 

31 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


pipe, while the other tended a pot of greens boiling 
over a small fire. Neither so much as lifted his 
eyes as we passed. A better indication of the fact that 
we were in China lay in the condition of the trail. It 
was speedily evident that we had passed from the 
jurisdiction of the British Raj. A landslip or a fallen 
tree was left undisturbed so long as it was possible to 
get over or around without the labor of removing it. 
We soon passed out from the heavily forested coun- 
try into a long broad valley, checkered with paddy 
fields. The hills were all but denuded of trees. 
Chinese inns were substituted for the clean dak 
bungalows of the Burmese frontier. Although these 
inns were only occasionally clean, the innkeepers 
were invariably courteous and ready to do whatever 
lay in their power for our comfort and convenience. 
The villages through which we passed now were 
typically Chinese, consisting of a single long street 
paved with large irregular cobblestones. There were 
usually two or three caravanserais, large courtyards 
with sleeping quarters for the muleteers hived in be- 
neath the walls, and sometimes a tier of rooms above 
in which we laid out our bedding rolls. At night time 
the street was lined with the booths of meat and 
vegetable vendors, lit by the flickering wicks of oil 
lamps and tallow dips. Here the gossip of the day 
passed from group to group, and the chattering lasted 
far into the night. There was no need for an alarm 


32 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


clock in the serai. Cockcrow was a movable feast; 
there were multitudes of cocks and each had his own 
idea of time. Sometimes they would be perched 
right above us, and a hurried sally would be neces- 
sary to dispose of them. Cats also joined in, and 
dogs barked at intervals all night through, with an 
occasional bicker among the mules to vary the mo- 
notony. 

The greater number of the inhabitants were Shans, 
with an admixture of Chinese. It was difficult to 
say how many straight-bred Chinese there were. The 
Shans varied greatly in height, some were really tall, 
the high blue turbaned head-dress of the married 
women accentuating their height. We also saw a 
number of veritable dwarfs. The Chinese women 
were easily distinguished by their bound feet. It was 
difficult to understand how they were capable of the 
long day’s work in the fields and the heavy labor of 
water carrying with such very inadequate underpin- 
ning, for their legs seemed to have shrivelled in sym- 
pathy, and were no larger than match sticks. The 
new National Government, among many other ex- 
cellent reforms, has forbidden the binding of chil- 
dren’s feet, and in time their edict will surely take 
effect, although we saw many cases in which it was 
obviously being disregarded. 

Many of the Shan women would have been fine 
looking were it not for the disfiguring effects of 


33 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


betel-nut chewing. This concoction, composed of the 
nut of the arica palm mixed with lime, and wrapped 
in a leaf, stains the mouth a brilliant red and black- 
ens and wears away the teeth. The Chinese are not 
addicted to the use, and their white teeth stand out 
in sharp and pleasing contrast to the melanistic fangs 
of their Shan sisters. 

A market is held every fifth day in the principal 
towns; and we wandered about among the cheerful 
bargainers during a noonday halt. The Kachins had 
come down from their mountain fastnesses with loads 
of firewood strapped to their backs. The market was 
divided into quarters like a big bazaar. Here the 
sweetmeat sellers were segregated, there was the 
butchers’ row; next the vegetable vendors and the 
dealers in the gimcrack knives and petty ornaments 
that had found their way across from Burma. 

The old saying that the pig pays the rent seemed 
heartily indorsed by both Chinese and Shan. Pigs 
of all sizes swarmed in the villages and rooted about 
in the paddy fields. Great flocks of ducks and pon- 
derous water buffaloes shared their dominion in the 
fields, but all appeared a happy enough family on 
the live and let live basis. 

We owed our introduction to the ruling family of 
this valley to a misadventure of Stevens. He had 
dropped behind on the march, and in coming after us 
had mistaken the road. When he failed to appear at 

34 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


the noonday halt we organized ourselves into search 
parties. He had strayed far from the trail and had 
fallen in with a retainer of Philip Tao, the English- 
speaking brother of the Saw Bwa, the hereditary 
chieftain of the valley. In the late afternoon I came 
across Stevens and Tao about to embark on a small 
bamboo raft on which they were to be poled up- 
stream to our day’s destination. 

Tao asked Jack and myself to join them, and with 
some misgivings I did so, sending the mules on by 
road with Gaffar Sheikh. They were scarcely out of 
sight before I realized that my apprehensions were 
to be justified. The side stream up which we were to 
be poled shallowed rapidly and before we had gone 
three hundred yards we came to a definite halt and 
took to the shore. Traversing the ridges between the 
paddy fields offered no very formidable difficulties 
as long as the light lasted, but after nightfall you had 
need to be a lynx-eyed acrobat to avoid falls, and it 
was a weary and muddy group that stumbled into 
Kanai at half past eight. 

Tao invited us to breakfast with him in his house 
across the river next morning, so we sent the caravan 
on ahead to our next halting place, and accompanied 
our host over the broad rocky river-bed to old Ka- 
nai, on a hill overlooking which we were welcomed 
to the group of small buildings forming 'Tao’s home- 
stead. He took great pride in the garden, in which 

35 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


he had made miniature lakes and planted fruit trees 
of all kinds. We had an excellent Shan breakfast 
served in a summer house situated on an island on 
one of the lakes. The piece de résistance was drawn 
from an earthenware pot on the centre of the table. 
A. charcoal fire burned beneath the pot, which al- 
ready contained a basis of meat and vegetables when 
brought in. To it we added fresh greens and condi- 
ments from small plates placed before us. The re- 
sult, a close kin to the olla podrida of Argentina, 
was excellent. Unexpected treasures were occasion- 
ally revealed by the searching chopsticks, such as the 
duck’s head with which I presented Suydam, and the 
large rooster’s talons which Ted uncovered. 

Tao was of a modern progressive type that seemed 
out of place in this “Happy Valley” of Rasselas. He 
spoke workable English, acquired during several vis- 
its to Rangoon. He must have inherited many char- 
acteristics from his father, who had spent a number 
of years in Japan, served as Governor of Yunnan, 
and died in office in Peking. There were three other 
brothers, one, twenty years old, was born in Japan 
and left there by his father with some Japanese 
friends. He has never left Tokyo, where he is a stu- 
dent in the Imperial University. Our friend hoped 
that he would come home shortly. There is another 
younger brother who speaks no English and was clas- 
sified as “very old-fashioned.” The oldest brother, 

36 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


the hereditary chief, also speaks no English, and is 
addicted to opium. Philip Tao told us he had spoken 
to him three times, urging him to give up his bad hab- 
its, but had met with no encouragement, so he had 
given up his attempted reform as a bad job. 

Tao himself is no Ulysses; he briefly summed up for 
us his philosophy of travel, “Why spend much money 
to get very tired?” 

He was obviously the actual ruler. Here we were 
shown where he had to make a great bund to cor- 
rect the damages of a flood; there he had built a guest 
house in a village. He wished our opinion as to the 
possibility of adapting the valley paths to automo- 
bile traffic, for he had it in mind to bring a car 
across the mountains in parts on mule back. His 
hobby was firearms, both rifle and shot-gun. The day 
he met us he shot two geese and some ducks. There 
were swarms of cranes along the river and in the 
paddy fields, and once a great wedge of geese passed 
overhead; I counted twenty-six in the shorter side of 
the “V.” Tao did not confine himself to bird shooting, 
for in the hills he shot sambhur and barking deer, 
and once he had bagged a leopard by waiting up over 
a pig which it had killed. We regretted that we were 
unable to stop over a few days with him and try our 
luck in his hills. 

Times were not always peaceful in this “Happy 
Valley.” Twice in these last five years Chinese sol- 


37 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


diers from Tengyueh had appeared. The first time 
was apparently in connection with a general rebellion 
in Yunnan. The second must have been in the nature 
of a punitive expedition. The Shans retired to the 
hills and rolled down rocks upon the soldiers, killing 
some, both in that manner and by sniping, but the 
valley villages were looted and badly knocked about. 

We learned in Tengyueh that as a sequence Tao’s 
mother was captured by the Chinese and dragged 
about the streets in a cage. She apparently suffered 
no ill effects from this treatment. We were sorry not 
to have the opportunity of meeting her. The only 
member of the family we did see was Tao’s only son, 
a chubby baby a year old. The father explained he 
had not yet named him and asked us to choose a name. 
He wished one that began with W, so after some 
thought we made the somewhat prosaic choice of 
“Walter” as easy both to remember and to pro- 
nounce. Philip had been given his own Christian 
name by the Governor of Burma, when he was study- 
ing in Rangoon. The only book we saw in his posses- 
sion was the “Making of a Monarch,” a stalwart 
volume giving an account of Queen Victoria’s youth- 
ful training. 

We were sorry to bid our host good-by. He im-- 
pressed us as a kindly, intelligent man, very ener- 
getic, and I am afraid also very lonely, for there can 
be few to sympathize with him in his tastes and pas- 


38 


OVER THE RANGES TO YUNNAN 


times. On parting he presented us with a small gray 
pony, which accompanied us throughout the major 
part of the expedition and was left with the Fathers 
of the Mission Etrangére in Ningyuanfu. 

We were now only two days’ journey from Ten- 
gyueh. It is possible with a small caravan and good 
ponies to make the trip in seven days, but what with 
the process of shaking down, and various small de- 
lays, it was not until early in the morning of the 
ninth day that we rode into town. The last two days 
had been good going for the pack animals, and where 
hitherto we had only seen mules, we now came upon 
bullock trains. You could foretell them from a dis- 
tance, for usually each bullock carried a large bell, 
sometimes hanging above the saddle in a miniature 
belfry, at other times slung around the neck. Unlike 
our mules, the pack bullocks were girthed. 

The night previous to reaching Tengyueh we spent 
in a temple attractively set high up on a hill. China, 
with a broad tolerance, does not object to its temples 
being put to other uses. 

We had met Mr. Lawrence Peel, the Commissioner 
of Customs at Tengyueh, starting off on a short in- 
spection trip. Most hospitably he had asked us to 
stay in his bungalow, and given us a note to his as- 
sistant, Mr. Wilkinson, who helped us in every way. 
Through his aid it was possible for us to complete 
our preparations with only one day’s delay. 

39 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


We spent several hours with Chwin Yin Kyi, the 
leading banker, a fine-looking old fellow with a white 
beard. Through his banking house we opened credits 
in Talifu and arranged for the transfer of funds to 
Tatsienlu. 

There was a certain amount of purchasing to be 
attended to in the bazaar. The cook had to lay in 
supplies, and the muleteers to repair such of their 
gear as had suffered on the journey. Jack and I 
spent some time with Chin Tso Lin, wandering about 
the apothecary shops in search of a medicament that 
he told us would revive expiring mules. It is made 
from the horns of the muntjac and is very expensive. 
Twice we were offered small bottles of what pur- 
ported to be the medicine that we sought, but each 
time after smelling and tasting it Chin Tso Lin shook 
his head and proclaimed it to be unauthentic, so we 
were forced to remain unprovided for certain of the 
contingencies which our muleteers foresaw. 

On the 5th of January we bade good-by to Ste- 
vens, who was to follow us to Tatsienlu more slowly, 
stopping to collect at likely places, and headed our 
pack train toward Talifu. 


40 


CHAPTER ITI 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


For he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land.— 
Exodus 2: 22. 


AT six o’clock on the morning of January 5th we 
tumbled out of bed. It was still dark and a biting 
cold made our shorts seem wofully inadequate. Suy- 
dam said he felt as if he had on nothing at all. By 
the time we had breakfast day was breaking. Though 
mist still lay like a veil over the valley the peaks of 
the mountains that form the Sweli divide were bright 
with the rising sun. 

Soon the bedding was rolled and we stood shiver- 
ing in the compound, waiting for the muleteers whom 
we had told to be ready at seven. At eight not one of 
them had put in an appearance. 'Then came those we 
had just hired, but not a sign of Chin Tzo Lin and 
his men, who were handling our mules and going 
with us for the whole trip. Fifteen mimutes passed 
and our guard of honor arrived. It consisted of four 
chubby little soldiers looking for all the world like 
brown cherubs dressed in tattered linen. Unfortu- 
nately experiences in the past had taught us that this 
innocent expression often cloaks a very shady char- 
acter. | 

41 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


We told one of them to go at once to the serai 
where our muleteers were and tell them to bring the 
mules immediately. He disappeared and another hour 
passed. The sun was high in the sky, and Kermit and 
I decided we would go ourselves. At the serai all was 
confusion. The head muleteer was full of excuses of 
the flimsiest sort. We lined the men up and gave them 
a severe lecture. We told them we would turn them 
over to the magistrate for punishment,—the soldier 
standing at our elbow as an outward and visible sign 
of authority. Even after this matters did not go fast. 
There was a scandalous amount of shouting, but 
progress was slow. The East in a hurry is much like 
the West in a day dream. 

Finally we got them started and went back to the 
bungalow. There more trouble was waiting. While 
we had been away the door of the stable had been left 
open, and the gray pony given us by Philip Tao had 
run away. As usual no one was to blame. The fact 
remained that the pony was gone. With Jack Young 
and the two shikaris I ran through narrow, muddy, 
village lanes and splashed across paddy fields in a 
vain endeavor to find the animal. At last we had to 
give it up. 

We got back about eleven and found the caravan 
just starting. 

After the loss of the gray pony we all rode mules. 
They are not our large American mules, but litile 


42 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


shaggy creatures about the size of a Welsh pony. 
They have surprising strength and stamina, and will 
carry a man or a hundred and twenty pound load 
all day over the roughest kind of roads. We had our 
McClellan saddles and bridles which had been made 
particularly small for this reason. Even so they were 
too large. It was impossible to girth our mounts 
tightly enough. As a result, when we tried to ride up 
hill the saddle slid back to the mule’s hips. Going 
down hill was even worse, for then the saddle slid 
forward until it seemed as if it were held on only by 
the mule’s ears. It is hard work dismounting on a 
very steep rocky hill, especially when the saddle is out 
of place. The way we generally did was to reverse 
the process and throw one leg over the head. Such 
is the nature of mules that they never would stop 
when this occurred. As a result we generally slid off 
in an undignified heap. All our mules led badly. It 
would have tried the patience of Job to try to lead 
them up a rocky mountain road. The day we left 
Tengyueh, Suydam twice pulled the bridle over his 
animal’s head. 

For the first couple of hours we wound across the 
Tengyueh plain, passing clustered huts and paddy 
fields. An occasional clump of bamboo creaked in 
the wind. The graceful tops looked like ostrich 
plumes as they nodded. 

Soon our path led up a steep hill. It was the usual 


43 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Chinese “road,” made of rough ill-fitted rocks, much 
like the bed of a mountain stream. The Chinese prov- 
erb runs that a road is good for one year and bad for 
ten thousand. Personally I doubt the truth of its 
condition for the one year. 

At evening we passed over the divide and saw 
stretching before us the valley of the Sweli. Except 
where a few evergreens clung, the deforested hills 
were painted bright red by the setting sun. Just be- 
yond the crest we came on a rough stone tower, on 
which we were told beacons were lighted when there 
was war in the land. 

In the quick twilight we wound down a rugged 
trail by the little town of Hsiangpo, or Elephant’s 
Neck, to Hsmushu, where we spent the night. Our 
quarters were in the inn. A Chinese country inn does 
not in any way resemble what we mean by the word. 
It generally consists of a square surrounded by mud 
walls, with rough sheds for animals. On one side 
there is a ramshackle wooden building of perhaps two 
rooms, each with four or five board frames on which 
are lying dirty straw mats. There are no windows, 
but the walls are so poorly made that not only every 
wind but every noise and smell comes through them as 
if they were not there. The floors are usually mud. 
The only attempt at decoration are Chinese proverbs 
or sayings on tattered paper tacked here and there. 

It was in such a room that we put up for the night. 


4A 


TYPICAL ROADSIDE INN 


THE MARKET AT LIKIANG 


NVNNDA JO SGNVWIHDIN AHL 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


We were tired and did not have the straw mats re- 
moved. We thought that the cold weather must have 
killed the vermin, so we had our bedding rolls placed 
on them. We were wrong, as we found out later in 
the night. When we first came into the room we 
heard a faint squeaking under one bed. “It must be 
mice,” said Kermit. He was mistaken. On flashing 
a light in that corner we saw a hen, seven chickens 
and a large red rooster. With the aid of an incredibly 
old woman with bound feet, who nevertheless was 
quick as a cat, we got rid of our poultry. It was only 
temporary. Our room was evidently their ordinary 
roost. ‘They continually found their way back through 
holes in the wall, whereupon the old woman would 
dart in and remove them again. 

Supper over, we crawled into our bedding and set- 
tled down for the night. All we heard was the sooth- 
ing gurgle of our Kashmiri servants’ hookahs in the 
courtyard. Suddenly the most appalling squealing 
started in one corner. It was a cat. Suydam got up 
and chivied it away. Again we settled to sleep, but not 
for long. Two pie dogs started a battle which, from 
the standpoint of noise at least, resembled a slaugh- 
ter house where a hundred pigs were being killed at 
once. The victor settled himself at our door, and for 
the rest of the night barked at anything and every- 
thing he saw or heard. When we chased him away he 
came back. At four-thirty the muleteers were up 


45 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


feeding and watering the mules, with much shrill 
side-comment. 

We crossed the Sweli and started up the Salween 
divide. At first the country was thoroughly culti- 
_ vated. Sometimes the small fields were divided by 
hedges of candelabra-like cactus, which cannot be in- 
digenous, for I did not notice any on the surround- 
ing hills. Soon we came to dense forest. At a small 
town we found a caravan and some coolies waiting. 
They told us there were bandits on the pass ahead 
and asked to join us for protection. We were sure 
they were wrong but slipped on our Colt automatic 
pistols, for it is better to be safe than sorry. We filed 
up through the pass without incident and down into 
the Salween valley. The Chinese call it the “Valley 
of Death,” and it is supposed to be haunted by evil 
spirits. At this time of the year nothing could be less 
death-like, though in the rainy season it must be rot- 
ten with fever. Only Shans live in the bottom, which 
they have cultivated and largely deforested. 

Next morning we saw some animals, in size much 
like otters, wandering in a marshy field. I shot at 
one with a .22 rifle but missed, so I doubt if we ever 
know what they were. An excellent bridge spans the 
Salween River, which is a beautiful, turbulent stream 
of the deepest sapphire blue. 

In the afternoon we crossed a small mountain 
stream on a bridge that bore the significant name of 


46 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


“Washed Away by Waters.” Just beyond as we were 
winding up the hillside there was great excitement. 
A man came running back to say that bandits had 
attacked the caravan ahead of us. Inquiry developed 
that they must have been of a very milk-and-water 
variety, a sort of “Pirates of Penzance,” because all 
they had stolen was one mule. Our soldiers became 
much excited, evidently inspired by their duty of en- 
forcing order, and started to scramble up the hillside 
in the direction the mule had been taken. In a short 
time they returned, having recovered the mule, a di- 
lapidated gray animal which looked hardly worth the 
trouble. Then another phase of the plot developed. 
The soldiers did not return it to the owner, saying 
that now it was theirs. Apparently it was simply a 
question as to which bandit got it. 

The following day we were up before daylight, as 
we had decided to make a double march in order to 
reach Yungchang in time to spend a day there and 
make some necessary changes in our caravan. Dur- 
ing the night bullock trains had been constantly 
passing our serai. These animals, besides mules and 
ponies, are used for packing. Many of them have a 
large soft-toned bell hung from a little cupola on 
their back. The head driver uses a gong to hold them 
together. The sound of the bells punctuated by the 
deeper tone of the gong blended pleasantly. 

As day dawned we were riding along a ridge that 

AT 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


rimmed a broad plain. A white mist frosted the land- 
scape. Plain, ridge and hill seemed engraved in sil- 
ver. A bird was calling with a note like our peewee, 
only more sustained and louder. We wound up a 
barren valley. The slopes on either side were covered 
with a coarse grass. Soon the sun rose, slanting 
through the hills ahead. By nine it was full day. 
Overhead arched the changeless blue of the dry sea- 
son, with hardly a cloud. Indeed, the very name 
Yunnan means “South of the Clouds.” My enjoy- 
ment of the scenery was marred by one of our Chinese 
soldier escort, who sang continually in a pea-hen voice 
which would make a slate pencil melodious by com- 
parison. 

We had a stiff hard climb up an abominable trail. 
Occasionally coolies passed us. Often they carried 
two bell-shaped wicker cages filled with chickens, 
slung at either end of a long pole. These serve a 
double purpose, for with the bottom out they are used 
in the villages as portable coops. We halted at noon 
in the gut of the pass. A cold breeze searched it with 
the all-pervasiveness of the mountain winds and we 
could find no sheltered nook. We were drenched with 
sweat and soon were shivering. 

Our head muleteer turned up to tell about some 
trouble with one of the animals. He was a swart, 
finely built Yunanese named Ma, rather appropri- 
ately, as ma means horse in Chinese. The muleteers 


48 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


as a whole are a hardy, happy lot, generally smiling. 
Each man has charge of four or five mules. They 
rarely use their whips but shout at their animals or 
throw rocks at them. Their command of language is 
notable. Even our army mule-skinners would envy 
their ability. I have often watched a muleteer hurl- 
ing rocks and talking a steady stream of Yunanese 
Billngsgate, while struggling up an almost perpen- 
dicular hill. 

Yungchang, where we spent the night and rested 
one day, is quite a big town with a magistrate. Marco 
Polo tells of a great battle that took place here be- 
tween Chinese and Burmese. It is surrounded by high 
battlemented stone walls that have withstood many a 
siege. Now they are crumbling and the roots of bush 
and tree are prizing the gray stones apart. There are 
beautiful stone gates carved in intricate and fantastic 
designs with weird animals standing on their cornices. 
These too are mellowed by time and weather. On 
the top of one a big cactus was growing like a cockade. 

We wandered through the bazaar picking up trifles 
and watching the natives. Of course it was filthy as 
all bazaars are, but it was fascinating as most bazaars 
are. There were butchers’ booths where duck, dried 
and flattened like pancakes, hung from beams with 
entrails and other noisome pieces of flesh swarming 
with flies; confectioners with clotted, bilious-looking 
candy; apothecary shops where each medicine was a 

49 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


charm and the horns of deer as a sovereign remedy 
were displayed; junk shops with odds and ends rang- 
_ ing from old opium pipes to old military buttons, and 
the thousand and one other merchants that go to 
make up trade in the Orient. Around them wandered 
dropsical hogs, snarling dogs of every size and color, 
chickens, of which an astonishing number were roost- 
ers because the Chinese are too economical to kill 
any bird for food until it has its full growth. Over 
all was the smell of the East, indescribable and un- 
forgetable. 

Naturally the people are most interesting. Here 
in Yunnan they are dark of color,—much darker than 
the Chinese we see in our cities. Unquestionably 
they are blended with the original natives, such as the 
Shans. They dress very generally in blue cloth. It 
is home made. The traveller may see the women weav- 
ing and dyeing it by the road as he rides by. The 
poor wear a blouse and trousers much the color of our 
overalls. The better class generally wear gaberdines. 
Girls are cleanly and rather prettily clothed, some- 
times with a bright-colored headdress. The little boys 
have blouses, but their trousers resemble Gunga Din’s 
as far as the rear is concerned. 

There seems to be much eye trouble. We con- 
stantly saw men, women and children either totally 
blind or with but one eye. Many were wearing the 
spectacles which are sold casually by the junk deal- 

50 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


ers. I tried a few and could not see they contained 
anything but ordinary glass. 

The older women hobbled about on pathetically 
inadequate bound feet. The younger ones, particu- 
larly the girls, have abandoned this foolish and bar- 
barous custom. Credit for this goes in large measure 
to the National Government. China has suffered 
greatly from intellectual inbreeding. Now that she 
is able to marry her thoughts to those of other peoples 
there should be a great change. 

The National Government is striving to this end 
through obstacles that would discourage most west- 
ern statesmen. Many of their national decrees are 
simplicity itself to conceive, but to promulgate and 
put them into effect against the dead weight of preju- 
dice and tradition accumulated through the centuries 
requires courage and ability beyond the ordinary. 
Such a one is that against the binding of feet. An- 
other is the law against the deforestation which has 
destroyed and is destroying so much of the country. 
Another and even more important is that against the 
use of opium. Practically every town we have passed 
has had posters on this subject, yet the first thing we 
saw on crossing the border into China was a soldier 
lying on his side, his head on a stone, cooking his 
opium pill. Every bazaar has numbers of dealers in 
opium pipes who are well patronized. In half of the 
inns the unmistakable fumes drifted into our rooms. 


51 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Among the magistrates we had already met, two had 
the yellowish whites to their eyes and black teeth of 
the opium addict. The law seems at present to be hon- 
ored in its breach, as Jack Young said, “like prohi- 
bition in the United States.” 

While wandering through the bazaar at Yung- 
chang we came on four Tibetans, wild-looking moun- 
tainy men. Dressed in their felt boots and ragged 
heavy coats with flint and steel hanging from their 
belts, they formed a sharp contrast to the patient, 
peaceful looking lowland peasants and merchants. 
We tried to speak to them. They could not under- 
stand, but smiled and shook their heads. It was like 
a breath from the high mountains to see them, and 
carried us back to days spent in the fastnesses of the 
Himalayas. 

A little later a native rushed up to us and began 
talking excitedly, smiling all the while. He was 
clearly overjoyed to see us. He was not a Chinese. 
Jack Young spoke to him but failed to make him un- 
derstand. Then in succession we used Hindustani, 
Turki and Arabic, without avail. At last in despera- 
tion we tried French in the hope he might have been 
brought up at some French mission. That exhausted 
our accomplishments and he eventually left us rather 
sadly. He had evidently come from some country 
where there were whites and was now in a strange 
and lonely land. He had thought when he saw us 


52 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


that here were people who would understand him. 

It was in these bazaars in the back country that we 
felt most keenly our lack of knowledge. Unques- 
tionably there were really good bronzes and china in 
some of the booths, but it is impossible for the un- 
learned to tell the valuable from the worthless. Ker- 
mit and I saw in the medicine shops row after row 
of Chinese porcelain jars, filled with potions and pow- 
ders. We knew some must be good, but separate the 
sheep from the goats we could not. 

At Yungchang we paid a call on the magistrate, 
as our soldier guard was to be relieved and another 
substituted. He told us that the road to Talifu 
was much safer than it had been, as the soldiers had 
recently broken up the bandit Chang’s followers, who 
numbered two thousand. 

That night we had one of those experiences that 
always threaten in lonely lands. Kermit was taken 
with violent cramps. Something in food or water 
had poisoned him. For a time it looked very serious. 
At length with the aid of the medicine chest we re- 
lieved him. During the moments when things looked 
blackest we sent Jack Young in search of a Chi- 
nese doctor, who we heard had studied at Rangoon. 
When he came the worst was past. He carried his 
medicine in a small tin box with a brilliantly colored 
picture on the cover and he spoke a little, a very little, 
English. He shed no light on the trouble whatsoever, 


53 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


but had at least learned in his studies the medical 
creed, ““When in doubt say nothing and look preter- 
naturally grave.” 

Kermit recovered rapidly and next morning, 
though a bit shaky, was able to march. 

In the plain after Yungchang we saw three dif- 
ferent types of water mill. One, the most primitive 
of all, was a beam with a trough at one end and 
a mallet at the other. The water running into the 
trough tilts up the mallet. Then it runs out and the 
mallet descends on the grain. Another was two 
wheels on a central shaft which rotated around a 
track on which the grain was strewn. The last was a 
development of the first but much more complicated, 
for a series of levers ran a number of mallets in dif- 
ferent pestles. All three mills possessed the virtue 
that they required little attention and their power 
cost nothing. 

We also saw natives threshing. They use a flail 
much like those that were used in our country forty 
years ago, and that may be found now in the lumber 
rooms of old farmhouses. There was one real dif- 
ference,—their tail piece was of rope, not of wood, so 
they must be much less efficient. 

It was market day and the roads were thronged 
with people bringing their wares to the city. There 
were vegetables and garden truck of all sorts, chick- 
ens, ducks, wood, boards for coffins, and cloth. Pony 


54 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


caravans were jingling along laden with salt which 
comes from salt-mines eleven days’ journey away. It 
is carried in solid cubes perhaps ten pounds in weight. 
It is not white like our salt, but a dirty drab color. 

A number of times we saw enormous pigs being 
carried in baskets. Sometimes one man would be 
struggling under the weight. At other times two 
would have the animal slung between them on a pole. 
‘Once we came on two natives panting up a hill with 
a basket from which a huge boar gazed placidly, for 
all the world like a fat Mandarin making a journey. 
Why this was the custom we could not find out. Per- 
haps the pigs refused to lead or drive. If they were 
going to market they at least went in such state as 
none of our American pigs enjoy. 

On the 11th of January we crossed the Mekong. 
Its gorge at this point is far more rugged than that 
of the Salween. The mountains that form it are very 
steep and there is little of any cultivation. It looks 
what it is, one of the desolate places of the earth. The 
river itself was not as handsome as its sister stream 
to the west. It was green and rather sluggish. 

One of our Kashmiri servants, Lusu, who had 
been with us in Turkestan three years ago, told us 
that in the Mekong there was a Crim. The only time 
we ever heard of this fabulous monster before was 
near Maralbashi, thousands of miles away, where our 
shikaris were much worried because we insisted on 


55 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


taking a bath in the river, which they said was haunted 
by one. A Crim, incidentally, is a creature that lives 
in a deep pool. It eats people and cattle, some even 
say whole caravans. Naturally descriptions of it are 
vague, but all agree on one point,—that it is 


“More o’ horrible and awful, 
That e’en to dream wad be unlawful.” 


Incidentally, Baber in the account of his journey 
mentions this fable of the Mekong, but, not being as 
learned as our Kashmiri, he merely calls it a blanket 
fish. 

That night we spent in the town of Shayang. Here 
we got our first glimpse of the scourge the bands of 
robbers have been to the inoffensive small folk of the 
countryside. The main street was a line of ruins. 
House after house was bare blackened mud walls and 
piles of débris. In corners of their former homes the 
natives had put together rude hovels of bamboo and 
mud. The yamen was destroyed. The scene was as 
desolate as the devastated area in France. We asked 
what had happened, and were told that a year ago the 
bandits had descended and given the town to fire and 
sword. The leader had been a man named Yung. I 
am glad to say that since then he was killed by his 
followers in a dispute over the division of spoils. 

On the next day, after a stiff two hours’ climb, we 
came into the first really wooded country we have 

56 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


seen since just after we left Burma. The mountain 
crests and upper slopes were covered with forests of 
pine and rhododendron. Of the latter none were in 
bloom but one species. Its blossom was a living scar- 
let and formed a vivid contrast to the sombre green 
of the foliage. Flaming on the hillside it seemed like 
Moses’ burning bush. 

For some reason our mules were very fond of the 
green pine needles, snatching mouthfuls of them con- 
tinually,—a taste I have never seen even in mules be- 
fore. 

The following day we got a further reminder of 
the bandits. As we passed a few huts some people 
ran out and chatted excitedly at our escort of six sol- 
diers. It developed that they were warning us that a 
band of robbers were lying in wait on the main trail. 
Accordingly we turned off and took a mere track to 
the right, and the afternoon passed without incident. 

The whole country had made me think of the words 
of Deborah, “The highways were unoccupied, and 
the travellers walked through the byways.’ I hope 
that as a result of the labors of the present Central 
Government the people may be “delivered from the 
noise of archers in the places of drawing water.” 

We were now travelling through a real wilderness. 
As far as the eye could reach in every direction for- 
ested peak succeeded forested peak. The population 
was very scanty. Every hour or so we would come on 


57 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


a hut or two by a small hard-bought clearing on a 
steep hillside, but no villages worthy of the name. 

At sunset we arrived at the little town of Lachu- 
di; in English, “The Place of the Candle-Makers.” 
It was a miserable village, with half a dozen houses 
and a serai. Its only resources seemed to be fierce 
dogs and pigs. These two animals, indeed, are the 
commonest in this part of China. The pigs are the 
most numerous. They are all sizes and shapes and 
live in or out of the houses indiscriminately. 

By this time the weather was getting raw and cold. 
Every night the temperature went below freezing. 
Our heavy bedding-rolls, trusted companions of for- 
mer days, stood us in good stead. In the morning be- 
fore sunrise it was very difficult to leave their warm 
folds for the frost-covered icy world that lay outside. 
This morning, when I did get out of my blankets, I 
walked to the top of a near-by ridge. Though the vil- 
lage I had left lay in the bitter twilight, a pale cold 
sun had lighted the country before me making it seem 
even more melancholy and desolate. 

Again that day we were reminded of the outlaws, 
for the first village we passed, Huanglinpu, was 
nearly levelled to the ground. About a year before it 
had been sacked, but not satisfied with this the ban- 
dits had returned only three weeks ago, and destroyed 


the feeble attempts of the remaining people to re- 
build it. 


58 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


The following day all the natives agreed we would 
go through the worst of the bandit country when we 
climbed a pass and descended to Yungpeh. We got 
up particularly early. There was no sunrise. For the 
first time during our march the sky was covered with 
clouds. Soon it began to sleet and rain. Kermit, Suy- 
dam and I walked and carried our rifles. The trail 
was glassy with mud and slime-coated rocks. We 
slipped and scrambled up the steep mountain side. 
Two or three times I came a cropper, landing among 
the rocks, rifle and all, with as loud a clang as the 
Great Lord of Luna under the sword of Horatius. 
The mules fared no better, sliding around under their 
loads like the proverbial hog on ice. We had adopted, 
with modifications, the approved military formation 
for guarding a baggage train. I formed the ad- 
vance guard with two soldiers. Kermit protected the 
centre with a couple more, while Suydam brought up 
the rear with the remaining two. I walked about fifty 
yards ahead of the lead mule, largely because I 
thought that the sight of a fully armed white man 
with two soldiers might discourage any one with de- 
signs on the caravan. My two soldiers were as active 
as crickets. They ran this way and that in spite of 
the wretched going, ranging over the front like bird 
dogs. Soon it became impossible to see anything, for 
mist, drifting and eddying through the trees, flowed 
up the valley and engulfed us. I had to drop back to 


59 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


keep contact with our train. The stumbling drivers 
and mules swathed in the white fog looked ghost- 
like. 

In the early afternoon we dropped down a steep 
slope to a broad valley. We had not seen a sign of 
a bandit. Probably they were too sensible to go out 
in such weather. 

We spent that night in the little walled town of 
Yungpeh. When we arrived we were thoroughly 
drenched. The serai where we stopped had been made 
into a veritable cesspool by the wet. We stripped and 
put on our pajamas. Suydam, for evident and prac- 
tical reasons, wore a coal-black pair. Probably the 
most striking garment we had with us was his extra 
pair. They were purple silk. His other clothes did 
not maintain this standard. He had forgotten his 
good coat for state occasions, so when we made any 
formal call he wore a light brown ready-made hunt- 
ing coat with an extremely large oil spot. It bellied 
out in the back like a bag. 

Next morning it was still raining, so we got out 
from our baggage some large black umbrellas in- 
tended for use much later when the rainy season be- 
gan. Under these we plodded along the road looking 
like Robinson Crusoes, beards and all. At noon we 
sat around a very small fire, and while the rain 
dripped off my umbrella I worked on this chapter. 
That night we stopped in the usual little bandit- 


60 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


ravaged town. We had the usual number of false 
alarms. Once one of the caravan men rushed in to 
say bandits were looting the next village. 

Next morning we marched up the rough gorge of 
the outlet of Tali Lake. By noon we reached the 
walls and fort of the city of Siakwan. It lies on the 
shores of the lake and is the real business centre of 
the district. 

Here we stopped to arrange our money transfers. 
This is a most complicated matter as the different de- 
nominations, though ostensibly dealing in the same 
medium, the cent, have entirely different relative 
values. The standard, of course, is the dollar “Mex,” 
worth about fifty cents of our money. The half-dollar 
piece is the most valuable,—the paper dollar the least. 
One dollar in half-dollar silver pieces is worth many 
dollars in paper. The twenty-cent pieces stand in be- 
tween. It takes some 120 cents in them to equal 100 
cents in the half-dollars. This is because certain en- 
terprising officials had them coined in brass outside 
of the country. To make matters worse, the values 
are different in most places and in certain districts 
paper and small coin are not accepted at all. The final 
straw is added by the practice of separate coinage for 
the different provinces. Making out an income tax 
in America is simple compared with figuring ex- 
change in China. 

While we were in the city we bought some furs for 


61 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


presents. They were not very numerous and of course 
either raw or poorly tanned. We picked up half a 
dozen pelts of the small panda, a little creature of a 
bright reddish color with a ringed tail like a raccoon. 
The Chinese call it the ho hu, or fire fox. 

In the afternoon we marched north along the shores 
of Tali Lake. The water was a deep blue. A number 
of small junks dotted it. On our left lay the moun- 
tains capped with snow. Over them hung a heavy 
bank of clouds. From time to time chilly gusts carry- 
ing spurts of rain swept down from them. 

At dark we made the city of Tali, and after a half- 
mile walk over slippery cobbles came to the China 
Inland Mission. There we were most hospitably re- 
ceived by Mr. W. J. Hanna and his wife. During 
the time we spent in the city they did everything for 
us, from looking out for Kermit, who had a return 
of his Yungchang trouble, to engaging additional 
muleteers and a helper for our cook. This latter had 
long been a problem. ‘Twice before we had apparently 
succeeded in hiring a Chinese boy, but both times 
when our caravan moved in the morning he had de- 
serted. This helper, of course, spoke no language 
known to the rest of our servants, but a satisfactory 
system was devised by a series of signs and grins. 

There are but four Kuropeans in Tali, the Hannas 
and two French priests. Though all are friendly their 
intercourse is limited. Periodically they all dine to- 


62 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


gether and converse in Chinese, the only language 
they have in common. 

We spent two days here making arrangements 
and resting the men and mules. It is an interesting 
city. Once it was a far greater place than it now is, 
but the wars incident to the Mohammedan rebellion 
some fifty years ago partially destroyed it. There are 
the remains of heavy gray stone outer walls, but much 
of the land within is waste. In the mornings the city 
was lovely. The sun shining on the white pagodas 
made them look like pillars of snow. Behind was the 
mountain with tier on tier of graves climbing its side 
and frowning clouds on its frosty summit. 

Mr. Hanna was a mine of information. He had 
spent more than twenty years in the country and 
spoke the language like a native. Much of his time 
he has spent ministering to bodies, as well as souls, as 
always must be done with primitive people. The great 
twin curses of the land are opium and poverty. Each 
breeds the other. He told us fully 80 per cent of the 
men are drug addicts. The French priests at Ning- 
yuanfu later testified to the same proportion. The 
taxes that the people pay are grinding and leave lt- 
tle to them but a bare existence bought by ceaseless 
labor. There are no public improvements. Education 
is practically non-existent. ‘The women have the worst 
time. In the lower classes they do much of the por- 
terage. The streets and roads are lined with them, 


63 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


ranging from girls to grandmothers, bending under 
loads that would tax the strength of a strong man. 
They bear from eight to twelve children, but rarely 
more than four survive. Mr. Hanna said that one 
of the commonest cases he had was opium poisoning, 
generally among women. Life held nothing but gray 
days for them and they wished to end it. Naturally 
the people know very little of anything beyond their 
immediate surroundings. As far as other nations go 
they live in as fantastic a world as that of Sir John 
Mandeville. They believe in a nation of women, a 
race with tails, and, strangest of all, a people with 
a large hole through the centre of the stomach. When 
one of these people, who literally might be said to 
have no bowels, wishes to go somewhere, he gets two 
coolies who thrust a pole through the hole, take it on 
their shoulders, and trot off with him suspended be- 
tween. 

Mr. Hanna also told us that in his medical work he 
often had cases due to the bandits. Men came to him 
with hands and arms severed or great gashes in head 
or body, the wounds untended and generally crawl- 
ing with maggots. The Chinese authorities make war 
on the outlaws with equal ferocity. Some months ago 
it was discovered that certain robber chiefs lived in a 
village not far from Siakwan. The local troops 
marched on it, formed a cordon around it, and then 
fired it. Not a living thing was allowed to escape. 

64 


THE BACK DOOR OF CHINA 


Man, woman and child either perished in the flames 
or were shot down by the soldiers. 

During the two days we were in Tali Mr. and Mrs. 
Hanna gave us the most delicious food to eat. Only 
those who have lived for weeks on a series of chickens 
muscled like professional athletes, cooked by a jun- 
gle Mohammedan, can appreciate what a good din- 
ner means. One day we had roast beef. It was tough, 
but we ate every scrap. Mr. Hanna apologized for it 
by saying that the Yunnanese never kill a cow except 
to save it from dying. 

The evening before we left we were saying good 
night to the Hannas when we heard a commotion in 
the courtyard and saw in the flicker of the lanterns 
Azizo, the Kashmiri we had left with Stevens. 
Wreathed in smiles he announced, “Stevens Sahib 
idar hai.” We trooped out into the street and saw his 
caravan clattering along over the cobbles. In a mo- 
ment he appeared riding on the gray pony which had 
run away at Tengyueh. We were delighted to see 
him as we had been worried at the thought of his go- 
ing alone through the supposedly bad bandit country 
that lay between us and Likiang. That very evening 
we arranged for additional mules to take him with us, 
and turned into our sleeping bags much relieved. 


65 


CHAPTER IV 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


Own the morning of the 20th we sorted out our 
loads, and getting the combined caravans into some 
semblance of shape set off along the lake on our first 
day’s stage to Likiang. If you halt for even a day 
it is invariably difficult to get under way again with 
any despatch, and our situation was further compli- 
cated by hiring additional mules for Stevens. It was 
therefore late when we started, and it was comfort- 
ing to think that we would have an early moon to help 
us on the march, which, it took no prophet to fore- 
tell, would not be terminated until after dark. 

Tali Lake is about twenty-five miles long, but no- 
where more than three miles across. There is a good 
deal of produce transported to and fro in small junks, 
whose owners further eke out a livelihood by fishing. 
The lake fish which we tested were no great delicacy, 
but we were told that there are two sorts, one de- 
scribed as something in the nature of a trout, which 
are well worth a place on the table. As we reached 
the upper end of the lake we saw ducks and cranes, 
and had we made an earlier start we might have 
added a welcome variation to our bill of fare. Ste- 
vens collected a number of birds and two squirrels. 


66 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


The muleteers groaned and complained about the 
moonlight march, but we explained to them that it 
had been entirely with them to obviate it, and that 
we had warned them that a late start spelled a late 
arrival. No amount of experience could impress this 
simple fact upon our grasshopper muleteers. 

When we reached Tengchwan, the small walled 
town which was to be our night’s halt, we found the 
gates closed, and a lengthy parley ensued, termi- 
nated by our passing through the crack one of our 
visiting-cards. The gates were thereupon flung open. 
These visiting-cards, which we had each had printed 
in Chinese, proved most useful upon all sorts of occa- 
sions, and secured passage for messengers and grain 
for our mules, often when undecipherable to the re- 
cipients. The only available serai was both small and 
dirty, and soon the patio was a confused jumble of 
kicking and squealing mules, shouting muleteers, and 
toppling pack-saddles. It was late before we evolved 
a sort of order out of the chaos. 

Next day we rode for some distance along the bank 
of the large canal through which flows the river that 
feeds Tali Lake from the north. It was market day, 
and through the stream of traffic our mules buffeted 
a passage. Sturdy donkeys and ponies laden with 
firewood bore down upon us, sheering off at the last 
moment. Stocky peasants carried newly fashioned 
chests of drawers on their backs; above the women’s 


67 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


heads towered great baskets of vegetables. Most 
colorful were the loads of red peppers; bundles 
heaped on top of baskets, with peppers bursting 
through the seams. Next came. two youths with a 
pig in a pannier slung between them on a pole, its 
head sticking out with a foolish uncertain expression. 
Three types of carrying gear were in use, the shoul- 
der straps of the Adirondack guide, the tump line 
across the forehead worn by certain American In- 
dians, and a wooden yoke fitting around the neck. 
Sometimes these last two methods were combined. 

Niukai, Ox Village, was our night’s halt. There 
are some hot springs near by, and when we got in we 
were greeted by the information, retailed through our 
Kashmiris, that there was a hamman, a Turkish bath, 
in town. Jack and I went off to investigate; we 
found that a wooden shed had been built over a rock- 
edged tank which was fed by a water channel run- 
ning from the hot springs. There was also an outlet, 
but the men and boys grouped around the pool, and 
the quantity of foreign matter visible floating in it 
did not render it a tempting bath to any one who had 
been able to indulge himself as lately as three days 
previous at Talifu. 

The bugaboo of brigandage was never far distant. 
The General from Talifu with his entire army (we 
never could learn even approximately of what this 
consisted) was encamped not far off, engaged in an 

68 


GOING TO MARKET 


“MAIN STREET” IN YUNNAN 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


expedition against some particularly militant ban- 
dits. The magistrate had told us that the General 
would provide us with some regular soldiers to escort 
us on our next day’s march, which led through what 
was regarded as a special hunting-ground of the out- 
laws. We sent the magistrate’s letter to the General 
and he replied that he had no regulars to spare, and 
advised us to go another and roundabout way. At 
length, while still admonishing us not to proceed, he 
provided us with a dozen militia. 

The country through which we passed on our first 
stage to Tienwei was indeed admirably suited for 
a field of operations for brigands. High, pine-clad 
hills enclosed us, and through them the trail wound 
its smuous way, often so deeply cut that it was no 
more than a channel three or four feet wide with 
walls ten or twelve feet high on either hand. A swarm 
ef men and women with burdens of grain and vege- 
tables and household goods had availed themselves of 
the protection of our passage. They were dotted 
about here and there among the mules, but got so 
much in the way that we eventually segregated them 
in the rear. 

The long winding ascent brought us to grass up- 
lands, with pine-clid hills hemming them in. We 
passed a small hamlet where a handful of soldiers 
stood aside to watch us. They were regulars, better 
armed and clad than our ragged draft. We later 

69 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


learned. that they had made an unsuccessful attempt 
to extract tribute from our muleteers. Four or five 
miles further on we heard shots behind, which our 
retinue interpreted as a brush between the bandits 
and the soldiers we had passed. 

I was acting rearguard. As we made our way 
down from the plateau we trooped through a village 
out of which buzzed an irate inhabitant with an an- 
tique gun in his hands. His endeavor to halt our foot 
followers met with only partial success. His fury 
rendered him so inarticulate that it was some time be- 
fore I could discover his grievance. It developed that 
he wished to collect money for having afforded a safe 
passage, although in just what way he had been re- 
sponsible was hard to say. Our soldier escort had 
probably already received something of the sort, for 
they took an active part in the altercation and left the 
impotent villager furiously gesticulating. 

The inhabitants of the country through which we 
were passing are known to the Chinese as Minchia, 
which means simply “dwellers.” This part of Yun- 
nan is a rich field for an ethnologist, but probably, 
owing to the lack of written records, much will ever 
remain guesswork, no matter how extended the re- 
search may be. There has been a great deal of specu- 
lation as to whether any trace of the so-called original 
inhabitants remains. Possibly all the different tribes 
now living in the lands are remnants of immigration 

70 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


and invasion. In a comparatively small area may be 
found Mozos, Lolos, Mantzu, Minchia, and Nashi. 
With all of them the Chinese have to a greater or less 
extent mingled and intermarried, but as yet not suf- 
ficiently to make any real impression, and as far as it 
is possible to foresee there is very little chance of their 
doing so for a long time to come. 

The young Minchia girls whom we met along the 
trail had fine features and rosy cheeks; if their Sat- 
urday baths came around more often, they would cer- 
tainly have been both attractive and good to look at. 
In many cases the apple cheeks were of artificial ori- 
gin, and pigments must have been cheap and plen- 
tiful. 

Both men and women wore coats and jackets of 
untanned skins, usually of domestic animals. We 
passed one young fellow with a fine coat made from 
a black bear’s hide. The hair was always left on, and 
usually worn outside. 

We were scattered about throughout the length of 
the caravan for better protection against a possible 
raid, and some of our Kashmiris were detailed to 
special loads of value. One of the latter, Gaffar 
Sheikh, when far separated from 'Ted, Suydam, and 
myself caught sight of a black bear above him on the 
mountainside, within what he described as long rifle- 
range. 

Tienwei we found to be an attractive village close 


71 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


by a largish lake. Just on entering it a temple stands 
amid a grove of chestnut trees; the conventional lions 
of China guard its entrance, and its enclosure is dotted 
with stone arches and pillars and minor shrines, all 
leading to the main temple with its columned entrance 
and courtyard and altar. Even in its autumnal trap- 
pings it was a temple of romance, and made one wish 
for a sight of it when the leaves of tree and bush are 
young and when flowers stud the grass. 

Our fourth day’s march from Talifu took us 
through a good-sized walled town, Kienchwanchow. 
In contrast to the pillaged and razed villages of which 
we had seen so much, this town seemed unusually 
prosperous; the walls were in excellent repair, and 
many houses were in process of construction. The 
long main street with busy shops on either side 
stretched out indefinitely. Kienchwanchow is prob- 
ably an excellent haven from bandits and real-estate 
values must be soaring. As we walked on hundreds 
of coolies with pine boards on their backs swarmed 
past us toward the town. A whole squad was loaded 
with heavy coffin boards of the conventional design, 
and calculated by their cost to plunge the family of 
the deceased into hopeless debt. 

The valley through which our march lay was eight 
thousand feet in altitude, and its wintry appearance 
and the snow-covered mountains that surrounded it 
made the groves of fish-tail palms about the farm 


72 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


houses and villages seem very much out of place. 
Many of the brier hedges and groups of almond trees 
were in bloom. Occasionally a flowering cherry tree 
added a splash of additional color. 

We passed an unusual number of wayside shrines; 
beside a stone bridge stood an altar with an image of 
a cheerful, fat, laughing god, corresponding to the 
familiar Hotei of Japan. 

Stevens brought in two Brahminy ducks and a fal- 
cated teal, a species peculiar to Asia. Aside from their 
scientific interest we found them a pleasant addition 
to the larder. 

Next day we reached Likiang, after a lovely 
march among rolling pine-clad hills with snow moun- 
tains in the distance. We walked through patches of 
snow for the first time. The weather was that of a 
brisk day in late October on Long Island. After a 
short halt for lunch among the pines we crossed a last 
valley and over the final ridge from which we de- 
scended to Likiang. Behind it towered Mount Sat- 
seto, more than twenty-one thousand feet high. 

Mr. Andrews, of the Pentecostal Mission, rode out 
to meet us. His birthplace was Somerset, but his 
wife proved to be a fellow countrywoman, hailing 
from Cleveland. Our protests were overruled and 
the hospitality of the Andrewses prevailed, so that in- 
stead of going to a serai we stayed with them in the 
Mission compound. Such a welcome to an unkempt 


73 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


ragged outfit must, we felt, be attributed to the ex- 
treme scarcity of foreigners, for Andrews could count 
on the fingers of one hand those who had passed 
through during the six years since he first came to 
the post. No one could have been more kind nor 
taken more trouble than Mr. and Mrs. Andrews. 

We sallied forth immediately with Mr. Andrews 
to make the various arrangements with regard to fi- 
nances and food and mules. We were fortunate in 
finding a merchant who agreed to give us a credit of 
four thousand five hundred Chinese dollars (equiva- 
lent to about one thousand eight hundred dollars) in 
Tatsienlu. Next day the merchant asked if we would 
let him send two mules with us. We agreed, provid- 
ing there was a muleteer with them. Later the two 
loads arrived at the compound without mules or 
driver, but with a present of Chinese cakes and con- 
densed milk in gaudily painted wooden boxes. Be- 
fore long it dawned upon us that our friend proposed 
sending the cash for our credit with us on our own 
mules and in our own care! We reiterated our origi- 
nal agreement, but neither pack animal nor man ap- 
peared, and we left the loads in the compound. 

Mr. Andrews proved indefatigable. He was ob- 
viously intimately known and liked by the adults of 
Likiang, but it was the children whose hearts he had 
completely won over. The night we spent with him 
there were two hundred and seventeen gathered to 


74 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


sing hymns, and listen to a short talk. At times he 
shows them lantern slides and tells them the story of 
the pictures. Wherever we walked there was invari- 
ably a group of children about us, like porpoises 
sporting around an ocean liner. Some were looking 
after Mr. Andrews’ dog and seeing that it got into no 
bickerings with the town mongrels. Others were 
ready to run messages or warn merchants that we 
were about to call. With each and all he chaffed and 
joked, and we might have been part of the procession 
of a benevolent Pied Piper. 

Jack had gone with our cards to the Magistrate 
and brought back the disquieting news that the au- 
thorities said there was a band of eight hundred Ti- 
betan marauders hovering in the offing, and we would 
not be allowed to go on. We heard that the troops 
had gone forth to drive back these bandits, but had 
themselves been routed. This complication caused a 
day’s delay before we were able to secure our permits 
and a bodyguard of five soldiers. 

The day was not wasted, for through Mr. Andrews’ 
aid and energy we exchanged for ponies some of our 
mules that were too evidently showing the weariness 
of travel. In addition I got from him a sturdy white 
riding pony, admirably adapted to the work before 
it. We hired a subsidiary caravan of Tibetans, great 
stalwart fellows with finely chiselled wild features. 
Luzon was their headman. A cheerful Nashi, A-ju, 


75 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


with two mules, also joined us, and most important 
of all, Hsuen, born in Likiang of Tibetan parents, 
and speaking many dialects, was added. He had 
learned some English at the mission—the only man 
we met in Likiang who could speak a word. He was 
hired as caravan head, to take the responsibility from 
well-meaning, hard-working little Chin Tso Lin’s in- 
competent hands. 

Likiang is a busy town. On a central square there 
each day congregates a throng of buyers and sellers. 
Everything to fill the wants of the inhabitants was 
ready for purchase. It was a lively gathering—a 
cheerful crowd to rub elbows with. 

As we trailed about the narrow streets Mr. An- 
drews pointed out the serai where General Pereira 
stayed when passing through on his last tragic jour- 
ney. 

On the 26th of January, after the usual delays in- 
evitable to starting a newly composed caravan on its 
initial stage, we moved out up the valley. During 
the next five days we would be marching through the 
mountains enclosed in the great bend of the Yangtze. 
The river, although invisible, would be only a short 
distance to our left and to our right. 

Our first halt we bivouacked beside a rocky out- 
crop in the valley, close below the snowy peak of 
Mount Satseto, rearing its twenty-one thousand foot 
summit thirteen thousand feet sheer above us. Ti- 


76 


LOH AGTIVA V 


ALIS dNVO AGNIM CNV MVATE V 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


betans seem impervious to wind, and were uncon- 
cerned at the blasts that nearly blew us out of our 
bedding rolls and permeated everything with fine dust 
particles. 

The morning proved a dismal awakening. Half 
our own caravan had strayed, in addition to a few 
mules and ponies from the hired caravan. After a 
long search and a wait filled with gloomy forebod- 
ings, all but two of our mules were found, and the 
Tibetans were missing but one. Jack’s pony also 
failed to put in an appearance. Adjusting our packs 
anew we set out and made a short march, camping in 
a sheltered dell with a noisy brook beside us and the 
glaciers of the white peaks straight above. We put 
up our tents and fared well. Ted and Jack Young 
set out lines of traps and caught four mice of two 
species. 

Next day we did some stiff “up going,” as our 
Kashmiris called it. We were now amid snow, ard 
camped that night near a lonely Lolo hut in a very 
exposed hollow. The men left behind to look for the 
strays returned, reporting no success. It was bit- 
terly cold, and preparing yesterday’s haul of mice 
with numb fingers was not an agreeable task. Dur- 
ing the night the Kashmiris’ tent blew down several 
times, and we were constantly expecting to be buried 
in the folds of our small tents. They held firm, how- 
ever, but it was a cold, uncomfortable night, and we 


V7 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


each made mental reservations that no matter how 
late we reached our halting-place we would in the fu- 
ture bend every effort to securing some sort of shelter 
from the blasts that came roaring down the moun- 
tainsides. We could hear them thundering through 
' the tree-tops some little time before they struck— 
quite sufficiently in advance to allow us the full dread 
of anticipation. 

Each day it snowed a little with occasional flurries 
of hail. Our way led through great forests of fir and 
pine and hemlock and spruce, with occasional groups 
of oak. This part of the world is the happy hunting- 
ground of the botanists, and with it are associated 
such names as Rock and Forrest and Kingdon Ward. 
Reginald Farrer’s: delightful accounts in the “Rain- 
bow Bridge” and the “Eaves of the World” deal 
with his travels in the province of Kansu, for his work 
was always north or south of this country, and it 
was in Burma that he made his last expedition and 
met his death. Our fellow countryman, Joseph Rock, 
I had last seen when he lunched with me at India 
House in New York just before returning to Yun- 
nan. At Likiang we heard the good news that we 
should find him at Yungning. 

The fauna of this region has been but little worked. 
Roy Andrews and Edmund Heller made a compre- 
hensive survey of parts of Yunnan, their farthest 
north being Likiang. Both Rock and Forrest in their 


78 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


spare moments collected birds and turned in exceed- 
ingly valuable collections, but their best efforts were 
quite naturally turned to botany. 

Stevens was very keen at the prospect of entering 
what in many respects must prove a virgin territory, 
and we were in much the same situation as regarded 
the large game. If anybody has hunted big game 
here he has certainly left no record of it. This not 
only applies to a comprehensive study of the district, 
but even to sporadic hunting. From Rock we had 
heard rumors of stag and takin and serow and goral, 
but he was always careful to add that he never car- 
ried a rifle, and his interest being in the flora of 
the country he paid little or no attention to the big 
game. : 

For the last three days of January we continued 
to march through these glorious wooded mountains. 
Looking forward from some pass such a maze of 
towering mountain ranges would fill the horizon that 
it would seem impossible that there should be a way 
to weave through them. The patient trail, however, 
wound along ridges, down into valleys, and around 
mountain shoulders, tracing a tortuous course, always 
in the same general northeasterly direction. 

Our Bhamo muleteers, with the exception of Chin 
Tso Lin, were useless. Always lazy and worthless, 
they now gave in completely with the unaccustomed 
cold and snow. The trail at times was very difficult, 


79 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


particularly where the sun could reach it but for a 
few hours and partially melt the snow and ice. Leop- 
ards were reported plentiful and savage, but all 
we saw of them were some fresh tracks along the 
path. 

One bitterly cold night two more of our horses got 
loose and were never found. That afternoon saw us 
embarked on our stiffest climb, to a pass over fifteen 
thousand feet from which we would drop, with one 
more ascent, down into the valley of the Yangtze. 
One of our Bhamo mules gave out completely, and 
five or six others, even though unloaded or with very 
light packs, caused us much anxiety. They had not 
only come a long distance, but in addition the incom- 
petence and carelessness of the muleteers had added 
to their hazards. Chin Tso Lin and Tsao, Forrest’s 
former servant whom we had picked up at Talifu, 
both suffered from the altitude and lay down fre- 
quently in the snow. Their comrades were callous to 
their sufferings, and had not Ted realized Tsao’s 
plight the poor fellow might well have been left be- 
hind on the trail to die of exposure. 

Our first view of the Yangtze showed it a thin 
silver thread far below us. Valley there was none, it 
appeared to run through a deep narrow gorge, the 
walls rising precipitously on either hand. 

The night before crossing the river we stopped at 
the Lolo hamlet of Fengkow. The villagers streamed 


80 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


out to review us and our accoutrement. Great and 
small, all wore the old familiar pigtail. Hitherto we 
had seen none, save those of our Tibetan muleteers, 
for the Chinese had cut them off, following the cus- 
tom and edicts of the new order. 

Next morning Ted and I took Lusu and four 
mules and went on in advance in order to reach Yung- 
ning ahead of the caravan and start in on arranging 
for the hire of mules and purchase of supplies for the 
three weeks’ journey to Tatsienlu. An hour and a 
half’s descent brought us to the river’s bank, here 
at an altitude of four thousand feet above sea level. 
The ferry reminded Ted of the craft in which the 
Jumblies put to sea. After each trip it was necessary 
to bale furiously before again embarking. The mules 
scrambled over the high sides without difficulty or 
fuss, but Ted’s pony was unaccustomed and went 
through a course of gymnastics, during which it 
seemed inevitable that he would put a foot through 
the bottom of the boat. 

An hour’s distance from the farther bank we halted 
at the village of one of our muleteers. He was a fine 
looking fellow that we had met on the trail. His 
outfit had been travelling without loads so we had 
engaged a few of his mules to spare our weary ones. 
The cost was light enough, less than thirty cents a 
day a mule. 

Our host’s residence proved him a man of substance 


81 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


and consequence. It was built around a courtyard. 
In the lower story the principal apartment was a 
spacious kitchen, the rafters blackened with the soot 
of generations of cooking. Hung around the walls 
were riding gear and swords and ancient blunder- 
busses. In niches were the Familiar Gods of the 
house. The great copper pots shone in the obscurity. 
We had our lunch upstairs on a balcony in front of 
the family shrine, a well-built altar ornamented with 
figures of the deities and with brazen incense bowls. 
On either side were shelves with volumes of the Bud- 
dhist Bible bound in old carved wood, a collector 
might well say “in the original boards.” 

When we came out to resume our journey we 
found Ted’s pony suffering from a colic brought on 
by a “surfeit of green peas.” Our host proved equal 
to the occasion. From the folds of his robe he pro- 
duced a small silver box. Extracting a pinch of 
snuff-like powder he blew it, through a long metal 
tube, up the nostrils of the pony. Twice he did this, 
each time taking care not to let the pony sneeze the 
powder out. The effect was undeniably good. 

During the afternoon we climbed up a stiff ascent 
to spend the night in a mountaineer’s hut. While 
climbing we several times heard “the thunder of Ti- 
betan drums” and passed groups of native priests 
gathered together performing upon drum and cym- 
bal. As far as we could learn they were not orthodox 


82 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


Lamas, but more in the nature of native witch doctors. 
One gathering that was close by a house was engaged 
in curing a sick man. 

Next morning we were off at six-thirty, with a 
series of stiff climbs ahead of us. It is easy to tell a 
principal trail by the wealth of worn-out grass san- 
dals with which it is strewn. The rougher and rockier 
the path, the greater the number of sandals. The 
snow lay deep in the hollows and the horses we led 
behind us struggled and slipped on the icy ascents 
and descents. Eight hours’ steady marching took us 
to the Lamasery of Yungning. A struggling line of 
huts outside the walls formed the village. Inside the 
enclosure there were a large temple, several lesser 
ones, and many houses, both great and small, in which 
the Lamas lived. 

We received a friendly welcome from the Abbot, 
who told us that Doctor Rock was on an island in a 
lake, distant three hours’ ride. We despatched a mes- 
sage to him, and set to work on the necessary ar- 
rangements for securing new mules and supplement- 
ing and augmenting our equipment. My only coat 
had been burned by blown embers from the camp- 
fire; the Abbot kindly let me have some of the Ti- 
betan-made cloth of his yellow robes with which to 
patch it, so that I became in part a yellow Lama. An 
excellent native dinner was prepared for us, with yel- 
lowed ivory chop-sticks to take the place of knife and 


83 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


fork. We were housed in the Abbot’s residence, a 
three-storied stone affair built around a large court- 
yard. Outside the Abbot’s door a monkey was 
chained, rather an evil-tempered little rascal who de- 
lighted in sinking his sharp teeth into the clothes of 
' an unwary passer-by. 

We had hoped to find some sort of bazaar, but 
there was none, and the only shopping to be had was 
in the private houses. We managed to get some heavy 
boots for Tsao and Chin Tso Lin, but our shikarries’ 
feet proved larger than those of the natives, so it was 
impossible to better their footgear. Had we known 
what was ahead we would have made fuller use of 
the bazaar at Likiang. 

Next morning we borrowed a couple of riding 
mules from the Lamas, so as to allow our ponies a 
full day’s rest, and rode out to meet Rock. The Chi- 
nese type of saddle was in use here, with the heavy 
round-based stirrup in which either heel or toe may 
be placed indiscriminately. Sometimes you see a 
rider with his heel in one stirrup and toe in the other. 

A couple of hours out we met Doctor Rock. I had 
written him four or five months since, from New 
York, telling of our plans and saying that our trails 
might cross, but he had had no mail since early No- 
vember, so our advent came as a complete surprise. 
His first question was as to the result of the Presi- 
dential election; and we brought him up to date, as 


84 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


far as our own ancient information permitted, with 
other world affairs. 

On our return to the Lamasery we found Suydam 
and the balance of the caravan awaiting us. A num- 
ber of our Bhamo mules were too travel-worn to un- 
dertake the cold mountain trek to Tatsienlu, so we 
set about exchanging them for fresh ones. Even- 
tually we engaged a Lama to accompany us with 
fifteen mules. He was a fine strapping fellow of dis- 
tinguished connections, for his father was a bandit 
and his brother, known as Balung Chu Dje, is the 
reincarnation of a fearsome deity. When possessed 
of this god’s spirit, he ties steel sword blades into 
knots, and is a dangerous companion. The Lamas 
whose duty it is at such times to seek prophecies from 
him not uncommonly suffer at his hands. His prede- 
cessor had killed one of them, and our muleteer’s 
brother had not been chary of his buffets. In the 
temples we were shown a sword he had bent while in 
his trances. Of course at these times he is not held 
accountable for his actions. 

It was necessary to wait over a day to complete our 
caravan transactions, so we took the opportunity of 
riding out with Doctor Rock across the valley to see 
the swarms of duck and of crane with which the val- 
ley abounded. We shot one of each with our Spring- 
fields. Suydam was having his first ride on a pinto 
pony which we had exchanged for one of our mules. 


85 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


It was a spirited little animal, but without an ounce 
of viciousness, an ideal mount for steady marching. 
Our Kashmiris adopted certain English words, whose 
orthography they altered to permit easier pronuncia- 
tion. Thus a stew or any dish of varied contents was 
~ known as a “mickus” (mixed). Suydam’s mount 
was speedily christened “the Mickus.” 

Returning to the Lamasery we came upon a group 
of Nashi sorcerer priests at work just outside the 
walls. They had built a small altar in front of which 
was set a pig’s head; prayer flags formed an alley. 
One man held a wooden ruler on which were engraved 
weird figures of man and beast. With the ruler he 
imprinted the figures upon wheaten cakes which he 
tossed to the evil spirits. Four or five men beat great 
and small drums and clashed cymbals. The ceremony 
was in the interest of a sick man. There seemed to be 
a friendly live and let live spirit in existence between 
the Lamas and these irregulars. With a Lama’s help 
I succeeded in purchasing the ruler and one of the 
small drums. 

The Abbot showed us through the various temples. 
None contained any especially fine figures or paint- 
ings, but neither were any of them tawdry. The “dim 
religious light” was impressive, and the wooden floors 
had received a rich tone from the yak butter with 
which they had been polished, although the rancid 
smell was not particularly agreeable. In one of the 


86 


SORCERERS AT WORK OUTSIDE THE YUNGNING MONASTERY 


hjavo0g nydniboas) [nu0I20N aYT fig 7YSuwhdog 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


lesser temples, where an old Lama sat in prayer, 
there were quantities of ancient weapons; old blunder- 
busses of every vintage all the way down from the 
matchlocks which one man supported and another 
fired—the repercussion knocking down both members 
of the crew. 

We were not long in learning from Doctor Rock 
how disturbed the country was, and what anxiety the 
safeguarding of his collections gave him. Lesser 
raids were of frequent occurrence. Some Lolo ma- 
rauders had recently carried off sixty-five Yungning 
peasants, whom the Lamas were making every effort 
to ransom. More disturbing were the reports of the 
larger bands. Chang Chi Pa, which signifies Chang 
the Stutterer, had been hovering in the offing. A 
former muleteer, he enjoyed a peculiarly sinister rep- 
utation. Rock quoted as common belief, to which he 
gave partial credit, that Chang each day ate a human 
heart. A Lama friend of Rock’s had been hung by 
Chang to a tree, his feet weighted down by stones. 
Although cut down before dead, he had been left a 
hopeless cripple for life. Other tales of the bandit’s 
cruelty were legion. Many had been confirmed by a 
Catholic missionary who had been his prisoner. At 
times he had a horde numbering five thousand fol- 
lowing him. Latest reports proved him to have joined 
the Tibetan raiders of whom we had heard near Li- 
kiang. The original objective of the joint band had 


87 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


been the sack of Yungning, but now their plans had 
altered in favor of first taking Likiang. As Rock’s 
collections were divided between the two places he 
was not in a happy predicament. 

Thanks to Rock’s help our pack-animal difficulties 
~ were satisfactorily solved. We sent back our Bhamo 
muleteers. They had proved both lazy and inefficient, 
Chin Tso Lin, the head man, doing all the work. Him 
we had found extremely conscientious and hardwork- 
ing. He expressed himself as eager to go along with 
us so we placed him in charge of the riding animals, 
with general supervision over the balance of our orig- 
inal pack-mules. When we told him that we would 
take him he was overjoyed and to each in turn he in- 
sisted on making the formal kowtow, touching his 
head to the ground three times in succession. 

On February 5th we left our comfortable quarters 
in the Lamasery. The question of presents to our 
hosts had been one of considerable difficulty. One is 
always uncertain what to bring on an expedition, for 
tastes vary greatly even among similarly situated 
peoples, and what may be a great success in one place 
may be a total failure in another. The most welcome 
gift here we found to be an automatic self-generating 
flashlight. Knives were also invariably appreciated, 
and the same may be said of pocket tool-kits. Our 
McClellan saddles were always greatly admired; and 
we were offered a pony with a Chinese saddle thrown 


88 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


in for one of these saddles. We regretted not having 
brought extra ones for our retainers that might later 
have been used as gifts. 

Doctor Rock rode out the first half day with us. 
He had told us of a mountain two days farther along 
where he knew that sambhur were to be found, and 
sent with us two of his Nashi servants. The ride 
through the valley was lovely but somewhat chilly. It 
seemed incongruous to see water buffalo at this alti- 
tude, close upon ten thousand feet. I had always as- 
sociated them with the paddy fields of the Philippines 
or the blazing heat of the Calcutta streets. The Ab- 
bot was unable to tell us whence they came or who 
first had brought them to the mountain-rimmed plain 
of Yungning. 

The peasants we passed on the trail were almost 
painfully polite, stepping to one side and kowtowing 
low to the ground. It was only within the last few 
days that we had come across the Tibetan method of 
friendly and respectful salute by protruding the 
tongue and scratching the ear. 

At a Lolo village we picked up three native hunt- 
ers, for we wished to hunt separately. Each Lolo 
was armed with an antiquated matchlock. The one 
who went with Ted always lighted his portefeu when 
they were following a fresh trail. These old weapons 
must have been highly inaccurate; they were tightly 
bound about the barrel with rawhide as a precaution 


89 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


against bursting. After leaving the Lolo village we 
crossed into the Muli King’s territory, and when we 
attempted at a hamlet to get additional guides we 
were told that the King allowed none of his subjects 
to hunt. 

We camped about halfway up the mountainside, 
reaching our mountain meadow in time for the after- 
noon hunting. We tossed coins for first choice of di- 
rection, Suydam winning. There was no scope for 
intelligent choosing, but we each set out with a stiff 
climb ahead of us. Immediately upon leaving the 
meadow I was in a magnificent pine forest, with the 
snow lying deep beneath the trees. Mokhta Lone 
and I followed the Lolo up along a ridge where we 
soon came on fresh sambhur tracks. Following these 
we continued our climb for an hour or more, seeing 
nothing but a couple of pheasants that whirred out 
from a covert of scrub oak beneath us. 

Gradually the trees grew smaller and sparser, until 
we came out upon all but barren ridges, separated by 
deep gullies. As we climbed cautiously to a vantage 
point the Lolo, who was ahead, hastily motioned us 
on, and indicated, with hoarse whispers, a serow 
standing among the rocks a hundred and fifty yards 
away across a deep ravine. It was not an easy shot, 
but my third bullet finally settled the business, and 
the serow rolled over and over down into the bed of 
the gorge. It was a smallish male. The serow is a 


90 


SOUTH OF THE CLOUDS 


mountain antelope, with horns much like our Rocky 
Mountain goat. He is not so clumsily built, however, 
and the pelt of this particular species is very dark 
brown. 

Ted’s native hunter had evidently not come to any 
very clear understanding with mine as to a division 
of territory, for we had not got our quarry far on our 
way to camp before we were joined by Ted and his 
men. They had heard the shooting and a few minutes 
later Gaffar Sheikh had sighted two sambhur disap- 
pearing over a ridge far ahead. Ted had also been 
following a fresh trail, but it was impossible to say 
whether the sambhur seen were those that he was fol- 
lowing or the ones which I was tracking. 

We gralloched the serow, and between them the 
Lolos brought it to camp, not, however, without much 
encouragement. It was long after dark when we got 
in, so I put off preparing the skin until the following 
morning. We had determined to stay over and have 
a full day’s hunting, so next morning at half-past five 
we reluctantly crawled out of our bedding rolls, and 
after a hasty breakfast Ted and Suydam set off up 
the mountain. I did not get as early a start, for first 
of all I had to prepare the serow. It was frozen 
stiffer than any Argentine steer in cold storage. My 
duties over I embarked on a long day’s climbing, dur- 
ing which I saw nothing save a mountain partridge, 
which I brought in for the pot. Having shot it with 


91 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


the Springfield its skin was unfortunately past saving. 
Neither Ted nor Suydam had seen anything, and 
though we all had found a good many tracks, some 
of which were recent, we felt that there was not a 
great deal of game in the country, and that we would 
not be justified in delaying longer. Early the fol- 
lowing morning we therefore packed up, and leaving 
Mount Gibboh set out on our march into Muli. 


92 


CHAPTER V 
THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


“And down the loaded air there comes 
The thunder of Tibetan drums 
And droned,—‘Om mane padme hums.’ ” 
—Kipling. 

On the morning after our hunt we broke camp 
early and started on our double march for Muli. A 
stiff climb brought us to the top of the pass of Mount 
Gibboh. The snow lay deep on the ground and the 
wind snarled around us, tearing at the scraggly 
branches of the few pines that struggled up the steep 
slope. As far as the eye could reach lay rough moun- 
tains and hills. So rugged was the country there 
seemed hardly enough level ground to pitch a tent. 
By our trail on the crest was the usual pile of stones 
with bits of rag floating from it,—an altar to the gods 
of the pass. 

All over the world I have seen these little wayside 
shrines, shrines for the consolation of travellers. I re- 
member in France marching by them, neat white 
stones sheltering the image of the Virgin or some 
saint. There are shrines by the bad passes in the 
Alps. In the Himalayas rude piles of rock to which 
each traveller adds a stone are raised on the high 
passes and by the dangerous fords in the rivers. In 


93 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


India I have seen them resplendent in Oriental col- 
ors, perhaps containing a figure of Ganesha, the ele- 
phant-god. Here in China, in the low country, weird 
and savage looking gods in little temples often stand 
by the bridges. It is certain that few need protec- 
tion more than those who go on journeys to far lands, 
even in these days when travel is so much safer than 
in the past. 

After leaving the top of the pass we wound down 
by zigzag trails into the valley. To our left on top of 
a hill we passed a square brownstone tower. The head 
muleteer, who was walking behind me leading my 
horse, pointed to it and said, “Mu Tien Wong.” 
Later I asked Jack Young what this meant. He told 
me it was the name of an esthetic immortal who 
travels through China putting up a house wherever 
the scenery is particularly beautiful. This tower was 
one of his building. 

Now we caught sight of Muli, clinging to the slopes 
of Mount Mitsuga. It was across a gorge not more 
than a couple of miles away as the crow flies, but 
hours by marching. A dark grove of evergreens lay 
above. Just below them was the city, a cluster of 
white buildings ringed by a white wall. 

The Kingdom of Muli is one of those small, only 
partially assimilated principalities that are found in 
Western China. It is only lately, through the pic- 
tures and articles of Doctor Joseph Rock, that it has 


94 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


become known to the outside world. Church and 
state are one, for its temporal king is also the spiritual 
chief. Its people are Buddhists, and he might be 
called the Prince Abbot. Naturally, as the yellow 
lamas are celibate, the crown goes to a brother or 
nephew. The powers of the throne are absolute. The 
present family is of Manchu descent. Of course they 
are in mortal terror of China’s encroachment. Not 
long ago a Chinese general heard of gold in the rivers 
of the Kong-lin tribes that live in the mountains 
southwest of Muli. He sent a messenger proposing 
that he should pay them a visit. Partially inspired 
by Muli influence, the reply of the wild mountain- 
eers was to cut off the miserable ambassador’s ears. 
Doctor Rock found him lying in a swoon on the 
Yungning plain. 

All afternoon we travelled. Two or three times 
we passed caravans. They were led by lamas dressed 
in red Tibetan cloth, with yellow caps to show that 
they belonged to the yellow or reformed sect. Most 
of them wore necklaces decorated with silver, tur- 
quoises, and a heavy ivory ring. On the trail half a 
dozen times we saw branches of green leaves, rhodo- 
dendron or pine, with a rock placed on top of them. 
I thought they were some pateran, a signal from one 
caravan leader to another, and was much surprised 
when I was told they were placed there in honor of 
Chinese New Year, which was but a few days away. 

95 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Just as night fell we reached the city. It was quiet 
and deserted. The white temples were ghost-like in 
the frosty dark. We found our main caravan had ar- 
rived early in the day and was comfortably housed. 
Hardly had we dismounted when the two head lamas 
came to see us. They were fat jovial men. One of 
them wore a little pointed black mustache. With 
them came a messenger from the King of the Mulis, 
who was at Kulu. Doctor Rock’s note had reached 
him and he sent a letter asking us to visit him there. 
The messenger also presented us with dried yak and 
goat meat, and leather bags of grain for horses and 
men. We thanked them with much ceremony and 
presented each with a mechanical electric torch and a 
turquoise ring. A few questions elicited the fact that 
a visit to Kulu would cost us four days. We could 
not spare the time, so we wrote a very polite letter 
explaining our problem. 

Next morning we started the caravan, but waited 
behind ourselves to see something of the city. We got 
the two lamas to act as guides and went to the tem- 
ple of their big Buddha. It is an impressive figure, 
well carved in wood and hung with handsome draper- 
ies. The building which houses it has a stone court- 
yard where justice is administered,—not justice un- 
der the law as we know it at home, but the will of the 
King. Muli is an Oriental despotism and the divine 
right of kings has never been questioned. 


96 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


Standing on either side of the entrance to the court 
were bundles of switches and paddles. The latter are 
about three feet long and an inch thick, with the end 
shaped like the blade of an oar. The wretched culprit 
is stripped and stretched on the ground. The man 
who wields the paddle must break it at the second 
stroke or he in turn is beaten. This does not finish 
the punishment, for another man with another pad- 
dle then takes his place. Often the victim dies or is 
crippled for life. 

In this building we saw, in one tiny room so thick 
with smoke that we choked, a lama placidly reading 
his holy book and sipping buttered tea. On the 
ground floor they showed us a magnificent porcupine, 
property of the King, which rattled its quills like cas- 
tanets when we touched it with our sticks. 

The next temple we visited had a multitude of gods. 
The idols, half-seen in the gloom, suggested all the 
mystery and evil of the back country in the East. 
Some of them were carved to represent grotesque 
fury, their faces twisted, their open mouths fanged 
with huge teeth. Some had the expressionless placid 
look that personifies Nirvana. 

The two lamas enjoyed themselves. They beat the 
great ceremonial drums for us and roared with laugh- 
ter. They turned a big prayer-wheel to show us how 
it was done, chuckling as though they thought it a 
great joke. 

97 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


After bidding them good-by we started with a 
lama guide on our day’s march. We had arranged to 
spend the night at the house of the King’s brother- 
in-law. All day we walked and rode. Toward eve- 
ning we climbed a steep gorge. As we progressed the 
sides drew closer. We thought many hours of travel 
still lay before us, as we could not believe we would 
find the house until we had crossed the pass. Sud- 
denly the trail bent sharply to the right and a broad 
valley opened up before us, nearly on the crest of the 
mountain. In it stood the house of the Prince. It 
was a three-storied building with windows shaped 
like triangles with the apex cut off, and was sur- 
rounded by rough wood palisades. As we approached 
our guide dismounted. A throng of feudal retainers 
trooped out, bowing and sticking out their tongues in 
Tibetan fashion. ‘They took the bridles of our horses 
and led us over a stone-paved road toward the house. 
Great black dogs, as large as calves, were chained to 
a wall. As we passed they foamed, barked and tore 
at their massive fastening in a most disquieting 
fashion. 

At the door our host met us and led us to a little 
room on the third floor, charmingly decorated with 
wall paintings and comfortably heated with a glow- 
ing brazier of coals. There he left us and in a mo- 
ment servants came with trays of food. The dinner 
was excellent,—bowls of steaming rice, boiled bacon, 


98 


THE THREE LAMAS OF BEDUNG 


T. R., JACK YOUNG, THE BROTHER-IN-LAW OF THE KING OF MULI, 
AND K. R. 


AN IRON-LINK SUSPENSION BRIDGE 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


strangely fried eggs, bits of broiled chicken, and but- 
tered tea. The last named I like, especially when hot, 
but it in no way suggests our tea. It is more like a 
soup. 

Of course we had nothing but chop sticks. These 
did very well for Kermit and me, but Suydam has 
never learned to handle them. As a result we got the 
hon’s share of the feast. 

_ As soon as we were through we sent a message to 
our host, Chang Ta Li, asking him to join us at tea 
at 7.30. He arrived at about 6.30, for time is merely 
a matter of personal preference in Muli. He was a 
sturdily built Mongol with a cropped, deeply scarred 
head. He wore a round cap and a long red silk robe. 
He is guardian of the eastern border of Muli, Lord of 
the Marches, or Marquis,—for that is what that title 
originally meant. 

We politely gave him a cigar and some cherry- 
brandy in a tin cup. Then we presented him with a 
mechanical flashlight, a collapsible travelling-chair, 
and a 410 shotgun with some ammunition. After that 
we conversed in the labored fashion necessary when 
interpreters are used. “How many children have 
you?” “Ts the road good from here to the Yalung?”’ 
“What a nice house you have,—is it new?” etc. 
Among other things, with an ulterior motive, we 
greatly admired a painting of the Buddhist Wheel of 
Life that hung on the wall. At one time, when con- 


99 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


versation seemed trickling out, I went to my bedding 
roll and took out photographs of my family. These 
interested him greatly, especially one taken some 
thirteen years ago of Father, my son Teddy then a 
baby, and me. In some vague way he had heard of 
Father. At last with many politenesses we parted for 
the night. It was long past our bedtime, fully half- 
past nine. 

Next morning all was bustle and confusion. The 
dogs barked, the mules brayed, and all the natives 
ran hither and yon shouting. It was Chinese New 
Year. In honor of the day, we divided the King’s 
gifts of dried flesh and grain among the muleteers of 
our pack train. Just as the caravan was getting 
away, Jack Young brought us news that our host 
wanted to see us in his room. When we got there we 
found not only him, but his wife, a handsome woman, 
and their three-year-old son, a cunning, brown, 
chubby little fellow. 

We sat down on a divan covered with rugs and he 
gave us each four oranges. Then a servant brought 
him a flask. He picked up three cups from a table. 
Two were small, one nearly as large as a finger bowl. 
He poured them full of a liquid that looked like 
water. Kermit and I were not deceived. We had 
seen it before. When the tray was passed we firmly 
selected the little cups for ourselves, leaving the large 
one for Suydam. We were right. When our host 

100 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


called for a toast, the liquid that we tasted was so 
strong it nearly burned our lips. 

After an hour’s conversation centring largely on 
rifles, in which he was much interested, we got up 
to go. Then he brought out his presents to us,—the 
Wheel of Life we had admired, and a handsome wave- 
line steel, silver-embossed sword captured by his 
grandfather in some long-forgotten battle with the 
Tibetans. 

He and his three-year-old son came down to the 
gateway to see us off. We were really sorry to leave, 
and regretted that circumstances made it impossible 
to accept his oft-repeated invitation to stay longer 
with him. 

The last we saw of the Lord of the Marches was 
just as we turned toward the pass. He was still 
standing, a tiny red dot, in front of his house. 

Under the guidance of the genial red lama who 
had brought us the message from the King, we set 
out to overtake our caravan. We thought we should 
do so before noon. In this we reckoned without our 
host, for though a jovial individual, our lama was a 
poor guide and took the wrong trail. It was only by 
chance, and the eagle eyes of a dweller in a small 
stone cottage, that we were set right. He told us he 
had seen our pack train on the crest of a neighboring 
mountain. We made almost an about-face, and by a 
very bad path climbed down into a valley and up an- 

101 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


other mountain. Finally just at nightfall we found 
our men camping in a pretty little hollow. The only 
drawback to the site was that it was dry. Its local 
name told the story, “One cupful of water.” 

The evening was brisk but not toocold. Our mule- 
teers as usual built themselves low walls with the 
packs. These serve to break the force of the wind, 
which otherwise would whirl away their fire. Within 
these half-shelters they gossip and cook their tsamba 
and buttered tea. Each particular group has a fire 
and shelter of its own. When they first get to a camp 
they turn their animals loose to graze. Later they 
gather them for a feed of grain, generally Indian 
corn. This is done by calling them much the way a 
farmer’s wife calls the chickens. The mules gather 
from all sides, dim shapes in the flickering firelight. 
Sometimes if the grazing has been good they are then 
tied up for the night. A braided horse-hair picket-line 
is used, to which a forefoot of each animal is fastened. 

That night, as there was plenty of wood and little 
wind, blazing fires were started by all. The red light 
climbed until it lost itself among the tall trunks of the 
trees. The dried meat we had given the men was 
cooked, and every few minutes one of them would 
start a shrill Asiatic song with its monotonous ca- 
dences. It was very picturesque, but after we were 
tucked in our bedding rolls we would have gladly dis- 
pensed with the singing. 


102 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


As we were getting up next morning a well-fed 
man in yellow rode into camp. He was the King’s 
secretary and came with another letter asking us to 
change our plans and come to Kulu. He also brought 
a present for us, a powerful brown riding horse, 
looking in its winter coat rather like a moth-eaten 
Teddy bear. We asked our visitor to breakfast and 
politely explained that we did not have the time 
to turn aside, much though we should have liked to 
do so. We gave him the usual mechanical electric 
torch and a small pocket tool-kit and he went back 
quite happy to the King. 

All day we travelled at high altitudes. The drifted 
snow lay thick in the valleys and the strength of the 
lead mules was taxed breaking trail through it. The 
hilltops were barren and wind-swept. Once we passed 
through a rhododendron forest where the tracks of 
wild animals criss-crossed the snow, but the wind had 
blurred them so much it was impossible to read them 
with accuracy. 

Toward evening we picked a camp site that suited 
no one but our Tibetans. It was a treeless gut, fif- 
teen thousand feet high, between two bare peaks. It 
was covered with snow, save where the wind sweep- 
ing through it had blown bare spots. ‘The moment 
the sun sank it became very cold. We huddled around 
the fires that eddied and flared in the wind, showering 
us with sparks. One side would be cooked and the 


103 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


other frozen. Finally we crawled into our bedding 
rolls and lay there shivering. Not so the Tibetans. 
They were as merry as grigs. They were only reason- 
ably well clothed and have no blankets, but cold 
meant nothing to them. 

Next morning we reluctantly crawled out of our 
eight mules and Suydam’s horse. Leaving five Ti- 
ing. We had spent a restless night because of the 
cold and altitude, for whenever we got warm enough 
to drop to sleep we woke choking for lack of oxygen. 
Our Kashmiris had suffered from the same reason. In 
the shadowy half-light the muleteers came to us. A 
third of the mules had strayed and two of the riding 
horses, Suydam’s and Jack Young’s. Personally I 
did not blame them. Lying in blankets or huddling 
by a fire was bad enough. Standing unsheltered in 
the wind and driving snow must have been unbear- 
able, even for a salted mountain mule. 

We organized search parties and recovered all but 
eight mules and Suydam’s horse. Leaving five Ti- 
betans behind we piled our baggage on the animals 
we still had. Over the tops of the mountains we 
wound our way. The wind blew with such force it 
was possible to lean against it. The snow stung our 
faces like birdshot. Dodging the deepest drifts we 
broke our way. Every now and then a mule would 
fall in a drift or on glazed ice. All hands worked un- 
ceasingly, pounding down snow to make a trail, lift- 


104 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


ing the packs off the animals which went down, driv- 
ing the strayed back into line. A mule will sometimes 
seem to try deliberately to kill itself by leaving the 
trail near a precipice. Not the least useful in all this 
was the large black Tibetan dog belonging to one of 
the muleteers. I had always thought of these cara- 
van dogs as valuable mainly for guarding the goods 
from thieves. This one, however, did far more. On 
the march he acted as a sheep-dog. If a mule lagged 
he snapped at its heels. If it strayed he followed it 
and drove it back. Bob, Son of Battle, never han- 
dled a flock with more skill. 

Just at dark we made camp at a slightly lower level. 
We were in a rhododendron forest that had been 
killed by blight. Ash-white gnarled trunks and limbs 
were moonwashed and goblin-like against the back- 
ground of snow. It was still very cold, but the trees 
broke the wind and it had stopped snowing. Toward 
ten o’clock there came the sound of singing, and after 
a few minutes in came the men we had left behind to 
find the remaining mules and Suydam’s horse. From 
early morning to late night they had tramped over 
that bleak snow-swept waste, and they came in sing- 
ing! 

Suydam was in his bed when they arrived, but he 
crawled out to see his pony. He had been very down- 
cast over its loss. It was a ridiculous little animal, 
piebald, with a mane as stiff as a scrubbing brush, and 


105 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


a tail that nearly trailed on the ground. It was so 
small it seemed almost able to run along under the 
larger horses like a coach-dog beneath a coach. The 
pony was named “‘Mickus” because of its color. Our 
Kashmiris when they gave us stew called it “mickus,” 
under the impression they were using the English 
word “mixed.” 

Getting out of bed for Suydam did not mean walk- 
ing around in night-clothes. Night-clothes in cli- 
mates like this are the same as day-clothes. All Ker- 
mit and I do is to take off our boots and put on an- 
other pair of socks. 

Next morning when we woke we saw for the first 
time the splendor of the view. In the clear light of 
the early sun a great mountain lay before us. Its cap 
of snow was circled by a dense evergreen forest. At 
the eastern end this was broken by a huge dome-like 
monolith of gray rock to which the snow clung in oc- 
casional white patches. 

We gathered our head men together and told them 
we must make a particularly good march to make up 
the time we had lost. Outside of our Kashmiris, the 
three most interesting characters in our train were 
Luzon, the Tibetan who handled our hired mules, 
Chin Tzo Lin, the Yunnanese who took charge of 
the animals we brought from Bhamo, and Hsuen, the 
Tibetan who interpreted and did odd jobs of every 
sort. 


106 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


Luzon was a fine figure of a man. Even though 
he wore an odd jumble of skins and rags, the grace 
of his proportions was unconcealed. He was never 
tired. All day he strode ahead of the caravan pick- 
ing the way, in his hands a rosary whose beads he 
was constantly telling. At his heels trotted his dog, 
a short-legged, long-bodied animal with black and 
white hair singed off one shoulder from lying too 
close to the fire. In the evening he superintended 
every detail of the care of his animals. In the morn- 
ing he was first up and about. His face was battered 
and twisted by weather until it looked like a black- 
thorn. He was always happy and I rarely saw him 
without a smile on his face. 

Chin was entirely different. He was a little fel- 
low with a serious look on his brown face. Some- 
times I wondered that a frame so slight could stand 
the work he did, which was prodigious. Coming from 
the comparatively warm climate of Yunnan, he still 
insisted on wearing his light blue cotton clothes and 
cartwheel hat, though we had given him more suitable 
clothes. As a compromise he wrapped his shoulders 
and head in a bright red blanket. At first when he 
had charge of the muleteers for our thirty animals he 
was lost, for he was no executive. He let his men 
malinger while he vainly tried to do the work of all. 
When time and hardship had thinned the ranks of our 
animals to ten, and the worthless drivers were gone, 


107 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


he acted as general veterinary and groom of the rid- 
ing horses. To him fell the task of shepherding the 
rear of the caravan. It was a common sight to see 
him trudging in herding a weak mule a couple of 
hours after the rest had reached camp. Practically 
all natives steal. I do not think Chin did. Though 
we had not two words in common we were all fond of 
him. 

Hsuen was a man of varied attainments. The mis- 
sionaries told us he was an evangelist, but I gravely 
doubt it. When we got near Muli he asked us to get 
him a red Jama’s robe to wear, which shows at least 
a wide religious tolerance. His interpreting was oc- 
casionally marred by the fact that we sometimes could 
not make him understand English. One day he asked 
to borrow the 410 shotgun, “To shoot birds on trail.” 
We lent it to him and gave him some cartridges. 
Our confidence in him as a sportsman was rather 
shaken when he came to Kermit with the gun, which 
is of the ordinary double-barrel pattern, and asked 
how many cartridges he could put in. An hour or so 
later he brought gun and shells back, saying, “Think 
not shoot birds after all.’ Thus finished the mighty 
hunter. 

That day we followed the beds of the streams. 
They were choked with snow, with not a sign of water 
save an occasional choked gurgle beneath the ice. At 
noon we reached a village,—of three huts. Here 


108 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


what is called a village may have only ten people. 
The huts were built of rough logs, the roofs of hand- 
hewn board held down by rocks. On top of each roof- 
tree was a rod with a bit of rag attached to it and a 
trident at its peak. The trident is the symbol of the 
Trinity of God. The flag says a prayer every time 
the wind blows. It is known as Jong Tsen. 

In Asia the idea seems to be to do your worshipping 
with as little trouble as possible. It is apparently the 
number of prayers offered that counts, not the attitude 
of mind of the supplicant. Quantity, not quality, is the 
aim. Hundreds of Buddhist texts written on scraps 
of paper are stuffed into metal cylinders. Sometimes 
these containers are fitted with handles so that a de- 
votee may whirl them while walking. Sometimes the 
cylinders are as large as a hogshead and fixed on up- 
right axles in some building. These are turned by 
hand like a primitive grist mill. Each turn automati- 
cally offers the prayers for the benefit of the turner, 
no matter what iniquity he may be planning. We saw 
prayer-wheels attached to water wheels to save even 
the slight labor of turning them by hand. Texts are 
carved on slabs of stone which are piled in low walls, 
called manes. The traveller passing by on their left 
receives their benediction even if he be a bandit riding 
on a raid. Besides these there are the flags I have 
mentioned, whose efficiency merely depends on a windy 
day. 

109 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


It was still very cold, so we went into one of the 
houses. It consisted of one room with an open fire 
in the centre on a hearth surrounded by three stones 
set on end. Pots and pans were standing on and 
near it. Around it were squatted the owners and some 
of our escort eating tsamba and drinking buttered 
tea. The smoke was suffocating, the houses in Muli 
have no chimneys, and the inside of the room was 
black with the soot of years. The only attempt at 
decoration was a series of rough white blotches on 
the walls. There was a pile of blankets and skins in 
one corner. Suydam sat down on the edge of it and 
started to light his pipe. At once a man called to 
him. Suydam, believing it was merely an invitation 
to make himself more comfortable, said, “Yes, yes, 
I'll sit in the centre as soon as this pipe is lit.” A 
woman rushed from the other side of the fire and a 
half-suffocated baby was rescued from imminent dan- 
ger of being crushed to death under him. 

In the afternoon we wound our way along a ridge. 
Toward evening we passed through a forest of spruce. 
The great trunks towered skyward like the columns 
at Karnak. Wisps of pale green moss drooped from 
branch and twig. The rotting trunks of fallen trees 
lay on either side. There was an atmosphere of pri- 
meval melancholy and loneliness. 

Just at dark, after leaving the white monastery of 
Watto to our right, we reached the town of Reddu, 

110 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


where we spent the first comfortably warm night we 
had known since we entered the Muli country. We 
took off our clothes and slept well, outside of a diver- 
sion caused by a mule knocking down our tent. 

Next day we dropped five thousand feet in two 
hours’ march and found ourselves in the valley of the 
Yalung. The river at this season is crossed by a 
ferry. In the wet season a rope bridge is used, for 
then it is a torrent in which no boat could live. At the 
ferry we found a caravan of Tibetans with furs. 
They came from the country northwest of Atunza. 
On the sand in the warm river bottom they were tak- 
ing the only type of bath a Tibetan knows,—a sun 
bath. Some of them had let down their hair, which 
stood out from their heads in wiry black mops. Others 
had stripped to the waist and were trying to kill their 
vermin. They had their packs built up in the usual 
wall-like enclosures. Kermit and I sat down with 
some of them there. We showed them our rifles, 
which interested them very much, and bought a couple 
of their tsamba bowls. I also purchased a small bar- 
rel-like bottle hooped with silver for about $1.20. 
With great ceremony they made signs that I might 
also keep its contents of vile and rasping native spirits. 

The ferry boats that took us over the river were 
each made of two medium sized logs hollowed and 
fastened together. The baggage was piled in the mid- 
dle and the passengers sat astride it, one foot in each 


111 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


log. The paddles the boatmen used were merely 
straight staves of wood. I doubt if there was a man 
there save Kermit, Suydam and me who could swim, 
yet no one seemed in the least afraid. 

Of course the animals could not go in any such 
frail craft. They were herded into the river with 
blows and yells and made to swim. After they were 
in the water they were directed by the drivers on one 
shore throwing stones at them, while those on the 
other called to them. Some of the mules swam with 
their tails partly out of the water crooked in a bow, 
which made them look as if they had a handle behind. 
When we got over the three of us took the first bath we 
had had since I began this chapter. Though the air 
was warm the water was numbingly cold and it re- 
quired more character than getting out of bed on a 
winter morning. 

At the ferry we noticed platforms of loose rock 
decorated with green branches. Thinking it was an 
offering to some local river god I asked particulars, 
and was told they were there in honor of the lama 
who was guiding us. Metilong, the town we were ap- 
proaching, was where he was born. We stopped at his 
family house. He had not been there for five years, 
during which time his father had died without his 
knowledge. 

When we got there and turned in the gate, a num- 
ber of little naked children scattered like a flock of 


112 


YUAAIN ONONIVA AHL SSOUOV ONIAUYTH 


— ae => $n —— = a en ee eee eee Se 


ONOIVA GH SSOUOV SHINOd HHL ONINWIas 


OS ae ee ee ae ha — 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


quail. Later they became quite friendly and crowded 
around us with wide solemn eyes. There were a num- 
ber of small goats in the courtyard. A woman gave 
them water by squirting it from her mouth into theirs. 
The people seemed a miserable lot, poor both in goods 
and physique. The women wore a few ornaments. 
Principal among: these were big silver or brass ear- 
rings which dragged the lobes of their ears an inch or 
two out of shape. 

Next day after a short march we camped under 
two beautiful cedar trees on a small upland meadow. 
They were quite by themselves. We saw hardly half 
a dozen in the valley. They were not like our east- 
ern cedars but rather like those Hiram must have 
rafted down from Lebanon for Solomon’s Temple. 

Next day we started for an unnamed pass on an 
unnamed mountain. In a few hours, looking back, 
I saw Reddu not more than two miles away as the 
crow flies, but two days’ journey for us up and down 
the sides of the canyon. For seven hours we climbed 
through pine woods, through live-oak forests, through 
scrub, through dried grass and finally out on the slide- 
rock and snow. When we reached the pass, over 17,- 
000 feet in altitude, it was afternoon. Luzon as usual 
had led the way, fumbling his beads and mumbling 
a prayer. Two of the men, Hsuen and Chow, had 
quite bad attacks of mountain sickness. 

At the crest was the usual pile of stones. One of 


113 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


our muleteers thrust a stick in it, and another pulled 
from the folds of his jacket a red rag which he fast- 
ened there. It was, of course, some sort of magic, 
but not such as required reverence, for the man 
laughed and joked while doing it. 

That evening after dark we reached the tiny mon- 
astery of Bedung, which is huddled in a lonely corner 
of these remote mountains. We were the first white 
men that had ever been there. The clergy were but 
three lamas. Passing the small gate in the stone wall 
that enclosed the lamassary, we saw through the black 
a faint glow from one dimly outlined building. We 
walked in and found it to be the temple. It was lt 
by the pale flame of candles. At the rear were the 
gods in a solemn row, their brilliantly colored faces 
and garments half concealed, half revealed. The walls 
and pillars were decorated with mythological scenes, 
dragons, strange animals, warriors on _ horseback. 
From the rafters hung silk banners. On the altars 
and arranged on two stands, one like a pyramid, the 
other like a big candelabrum, were myriads of small 
figures made of butter, for it was the butter festival. 

At the right, seated cross-legged in a row before a 
low board table, were the three lamas. The two at 
the right and left were middle-aged men, plump and 
well-fed, with sparse black beards. In the centre sat 
a very much older man, evidently the abbot. His 
long red robes muffied his figure. On his head was 


114 


KYMO PASS 


ITOW LV SHLYUSVNVT AHL JO ANO 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


a yellow peaked cap with strange triangular flaps,— 
but dwarfing the mystery of the temple, the grotesque 
colored gods and his robes, was his face. It was old 
and smooth of hair. He had a hawk nose. His eyes 
were deep sunk. Every wrinkle that showed shadowy 
in the soft light told of asceticism and long knowledge 
of power. 

The three of them were conducting a service. We 
sat down opposite and watched. They intoned from 
their scriptures in a melodious monotone. The two 
younger read from holy books propped in front of 
them. The older man in the centre knew the verses 
by heart and chanted without the aid of the text. 
At intervals they would stop and blow on handsome 
bronze-mounted conches or engraved trumpets. Then 
they would clash their cymbals, and punctuate their 
singing with the sonorous boom of two great Tibetan 
drums that hung in front of them. 

From time to time an acolyte would take two cop- 
per ladles full of wine from an earthen bowl, and 
walking to the door, throw them into the courtyard, 
crying meanwhile with the quavering shriek of a ban- 
shee. These were for the dead who had no relatives 
to care for their memory. Other acolytes fed the 
singers with small bowls of tsamba and cups of but- 
tered tea, which they consumed without interrupting 
their devotions. In most of the services we had seen 
before there was a touch of levity, a suggestion that 

115 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


worship was with the lips, not the mind. Here there 
was no hint of anything but solemn reverence. 

After a half-hour we left them and went to the 
other side of the court where our servants had pre- 
pared supper. When we were through, we returned 
to the temple with three brown-colored slouch hats 
with colored hat-bands. These we presented to the 
lamas in a pause in the service. 

Next morning early they returned the compliment 
by coming to our room. We were sleeping in the 
larder among sides of dried meat and bags of rice. 
They presented us with yak butter and eggs. We 
saw that our gifts were appreciated, for each of them 
was wearing a hat. 

We went with them to the temple. There we first 
presented them with a knife each, and then very tact- 
fully opened negotiations through our lama guide 
for a conch, a bronze trumpet, and two old wood- 
bound Buddhist Bibles with beautifully written texts 
on loose leaves, rich brown from generations of fin- 
gers greasy with buttered tea. After much talk in 
which we took no part, we were told that these articles 
were very holy, and that therefore they were very ex- 
pensive. That the price was $30 Chinese,—$9 in our 
money,—for them all. Of course we closed. With 
our treasures in our hands we bade our friends good- 
by. In their new hats they stood in a row on the 
temple steps, and smiled best wishes for our journey. 


116 


SYGMOL ANOLS AHL dO AATIVA AHL 


I ONOTINHO UVAN AOVITIA V 


RR i 


es 


AB, THE WOODCHOPPER 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


That day we passed a small river and left the King- 
dom of Muli with its strange mixture of barbarous 


cruelty and hospitality behind us, probably forever. - 


Just before crossing its border we came on a solitary 
wood-chopper. Never in my life have I seen such a 
simian type. His figure was squat, with promise of 
enormous strength. His arms hung from his shoul- 
ders nearly to his knees. In his face there was hardly 
a suggestion of what we call humanity, only a sullen 
savagery. Kermit got off to take a picture of him. 
With a quick turn of his head he glanced at us, al- 
most snarling with the furtive ferocity of a wild ani- 
mal. Had we been anthropologists in search of the 
ape man we could have called our quest ended. 

Next morning we travelled up the river valley. It 
was sparsely cultivated. On either side were moun- 
tains belted with woods, above which grassy slopes led 
to slide-rock and snow. Here we got our first news 
of some of the game we were seeking. A native whom 
we questioned said he believed there were yellow wild 
cows in the mountains not far away. We realized he 
must be speaking of takin. 

On the following day we crossed a 16,000-foot 
pass and dropped down into a valley. For the first 
time we saw clusters of villages. They were very 
small, not more than half a dozen houses each, but 
compact and well built of gray stone. Each village 
had one or more big stone towers. Some of these 


117 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


were shaped like six-pointed stars, others were square. 
They were mostly in ruins. The few still standing in- 
tact often had a cant like the leaning tower of Pisa, 
and gave a very unsafe appearance to the houses 
clustered beneath. Questioning the natives as to their 
use or origin brought little results. No one knew when 
they had been built. They had just “always been 
there.” Some said they had a religious purpose, 
’ others that they were designed for defense. Of one 
thing I am sure, the tribesmen who live in the valley 
now could not have raised them. 

After camping, encouraged by the news of game 
we had received, we sent out to the near-by towns to 
find a hunter. Soon three turned up. Two were 
partly Chinese, one a pure-bred Lolo from the back 
country. They squatted around the fire and we got 
out the portfolio of pictures. One by one they ex- 
amined them. Generally in a second they would iden- 
tify the animal and give us the local name, which we 
jotted down. When we came to the panda none had 
seen it. After studying it awhile they said there were 
bears near by (the panda looks like a bear), but that 
they were all either black or brown, and moreover 
were “sleeping” now. We had much better luck when 
we showed them the takin. At once they said, “Yea 
gnu! Yea gnu!” (Wild cow.) They told us there 
were very few near by but that seven days’ journey 
away there was a mountain named Yung Shuei Tung, 

118 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


“Salt-water Well,” where there were many. Some- 
how game is always over the next divide. They said 
they were very fierce and often charged hunters. The 
trail to the mountain was so bad that no pack-animals 
could use it. The Lolo said he would go with us if 
we would promise to protect him from the Lolos near 
the mountain, who belonged to a hostile tribe. 

Next morning after the shortest of marches we 
reached Chiulung, the seat of the first Chinese mag- 
istrate. It had seemed to us, when on trail, that a 
town with such a functionary must be quite a place. 
As a matter of fact it was nothing but a few ram- 
shackle buildings, surrounded by a rectangular stone 
wall with towers at the four corners. 

The village might be poor, but our reception made 
up for it. The Chinese official came out in person 
to welcome us. He was an active, bright little fellow 
with no chin at all. He told us that he had received 
word from the Central Government that he might 
expect us, and led us to a reception room, a dingy, 
cheerless small tank on the second floor. There he 
plied us with weak tea, and we plied him with nu- 
merous questions. 

He was an extremely well-informed man, having 
been an inspector in Szechuan and kept his eyes open 
while he was travelling. We asked him about dis- 
tances and got a wealth of information. Then we 
turned to the subject of game. I got out my folio 

119 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


of pictures and he sent for a native hunter. For an 
hour we went over them,—one animal at a time. It 
developed that there were sambhur, serow, ghoral and 
musk deer in the wooded valleys near by, burrhel one 
or two days’ journey away, and takin at the place of 
which the Lolo had told us. The let was that neither 
magistrate nor hunter had even heard of the giant 
panda. That decided us. We could not stop and go 
to the salt-well mountain. We must hold it in reserve 
for our return trip. Slight as our chance might be, 
we felt that we must make every effort to get to a 
country where the panda existed. All news we had, 
though of a very inconclusive type, pointed to the 
Muping district and the upper Min River. 

We compromised by deciding to send the caravan 
half a day’s march ahead while we hunted in the near- 
by valleys. The magistrate at once offered to help. 
Here it is customary to use dogs to start the forest 
game. He ordered the three best native hunters to 
get everything ready for the next morning. 

Meanwhile the three of us walked to a village a 
short distance away, where Suydam took pictures 
and Kermit and I poked about. Of course the whole 
population turned out to see us. I suppose they had 
never seen a white man before. The crowd numbered 
about thirty. They were very evidently not racially 
Chinese. Their complexions were dark brown, not 
yellow, and their features aquiline. They were crusted 


120 


AULNNOO ITAW AHL NI ONITIAMG ANOLS V 


AOdIud NOISNHdSNS NOU! NV ONIS YO SUaALYOd 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


with dirt and ragged. Withal they were a cheery 
lot. They had the usual Tibetan form of salute we 
had noticed ever since Yungning—sticking out the 
tongue. The last time we had seen it was in Ladak, 
nearly four years ago and thousands of miles away. 
It is most disconcerting to see a man smiling in the 
friendliest fashion and at the same time sticking out 
a very large tongue. Among the people was one in 
particular who attracted our attention, an old, old 
woman, wrinkled and wizened almost beyond human 
semblance, who wandered around whirling a prayer 
wheel. 

In addition to the usual ruined tower there were 
three temples, square, solidly built of gray stone, 
three stories high. The first floors were dark and 
filled with small lumps of dried clay, modelled like 
squat vases but solid. These were the cremated dead 
of the village and explained why we saw none of the 
stone graves that had covered the hillsides in Yun- 
nan. Indeed, these temples were in a literal sense 
graveyards. From this dark lower room a notched 
beam led to the next story. There in each case we 
found the temple proper. Images of the gods were 
on an altar at one end. In only one did we find a 
statue of Buddha, or Song Ja, as they call him. 

All three temples were dirty and shabby. Some 
of the statues were scattered indiscriminately over 
the floor. Each had, however, a number of Bud- 


121 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


dhist holy books on a shelf at one side. They were 
big volumes, handsomely bound in stained wood and 
beautifully written in silver and gold wash. Every- 
thing was so ill-kept that Kermit and I thought 
we might be able to buy a couple of these voiumes. 
Through our lama we offered the man we were told 
had them in charge $50 Chinese. He readily agreed 
and we had them carried to our camp. 

That evening we dined with the magistrate. He 
had lunched with us. Dinner was served in a dark 
little upper room. His small son, aged eight, was 
one of the party and watched us with saucer-like eyes. 
The meal was excellent, but for some reason there 
was no rice and we missed it. Toward the end he pre- 
sented us with some dried calf’s legs, and Jack Young 
with a dried Tibetan pheasant, delicacies for use on 
the trail. 

Next morning the hunters came for us. The head 
man was a Lolo. He wore the red turban which the 
tribesmen here use to distinguish them from the Chi- 
nese. His gun was as primitive as his native hills. 
Its barrel was a heavy tube of steel without rifling or 
sights. The butt was simply a curved piece of wood 
with no flat surface to rest against the shoulder. Of 
course it was a muzzle-loader. It antedated even 
flint-locks, for it was fired by a fuse applied to a 
touch-hole. Strung on a cord around his neck were 
a variety of appliances,—small horns for powder, a 


122 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


pouch for bullets, and a flint and steel to light the 
fuse. 

On our way to hunt we went through the village 
where we had bought the Buddhist books. There we 
found every one much excited. It seemed that the 
man with whom we had dealt did not own them. They 
belonged to the whole village. The previous evening, 
when the people found what had happened, they held 
a meeting and told the guilty man to return us the 
money and bring back the books, or leave the village 
forever. We tried our best then to buy them from 
the village, without success. Though they were prob- 
ably rarely opened and certainly not really rever- 
enced, they were regarded as a fetish. Of course, 
under the circumstances there was nothing to do but 
give them back, which we did with much regret. 

All this took time and it was ten o’clock before we 
got started again. We were unable to speak any lan- 
guage which our hunters could understand, but with 
the aid of our Kashmiris, who are experts at sign 
language, we finally gathered that the dogs had gone 
ahead and were ranging the upper slopes of the moun- 
tain. We were taken to a central point from where 
we could go in any direction. There we sat down to 
wait. Time passed and nothing seemed to be hap- 
pening. We sat in the sun and fidgeted. At last we 
turned to our books. We always carry them when 
hunting. Kermit read Burton’s “Pilgrimage to 


123 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Mecca’; I read Dickens’ “Great Expectations.’ At 
twelve we had abandoned all hope of sport and were 
blaming ourselves for having wasted a day. 

Suddenly from nowhere two natives appeared. 
One of them seized my horse and led it to me. We re- 
alized game was afoot and, though we could not tell 
what or where, mounted and followed them. ‘Down 
the steep side of the hill we scrambled at breakneck 
speed, over a river and up a valley. Guffer Sheikh, 
my Kashmiri shikari, had in some miraculous way 
divined where we were going and ran ahead shouting 
“Jaldi, Sahib!’ After ten minutes fast going we 
came to a spot on the hillside where two villagers were 
standing pointing to the opposite side of the ravine. 
There in the scrub some two hundred or more yards 
away I made out a large animal, evidently a sambhur, 
trotting slowly uphill. At the moment I was some 
yards ahead of the rest. I jumped off my horse at 
once and wrenched my rifle from its sling. Neither 
Guffer Sheikh nor I could tell whether it was a buck 
or doe, as it was too far away to see horns with the 
naked eye and there was no time to use field glasses. 
That made but little difference, for though I wanted 
a stag, either would be welcome to the Museum. 

My first shot was too high, as a puff of dust told 
us. Holding lower I hit it with my second. The 
sambhur fell, but was up in an instant and trotted 
into a clump of trees. In the next three shots I reg- 


124 


THE KINGDOM OF MULI 


istered another hit. Then a dog appeared from the 
scrub and began to chivy the wounded animal. I ran 
into the ravine with the two shikaris to get closer and 
finish it. Half-way down the slope I got a clear view 
and did so with one shot. Then the three of us scram- 
bled to the stream bed. Like many a clear mountain 
brook, its depth was deceptive and we had to strip to 
the waist before we could wade it. The water was 
snow-cold and when I got out on the far side my legs 
looked as if they had been parboiled. 

A short climb brought us to where the deer was 
lying. It was a doe. A number of the local hunters 
were already there. They were greatly excited. We 
started skinning it at once and cut off some chunks 
of meat for the Lolos. They immediately lit a fire 
and after scorching, rather than broiling, the slices, 
ate them. 

By this time some of the dogs had gathered. They 
were not the big, long-haired, powerful animals we 
had seen with the caravans, or guarding the houses, 
but little, lean, black pariah-like creatures. They 
were extraordinarily efficient nevertheless. As the 
skinning proceeded the hunters scooped up blood 
with their hands and gave it to the dogs to drink. I 
asked why, and was told it made them fiercer. An- 
other incident I noticed was the Lolos taking the tear 
ducts for medicine, just as the Kirghiz had done in 
the Tian Shan mountains thousands of miles away. 


125 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


As soon as the skin was off we loaded it and some 
of the meat on a shaggy little mountain pony. Giv- 
ing the rest of the carcass to the hunters we started at 
once after our caravan. On the trail we met the mag- 
istrate and his little son waiting to say good-by. We 
had no interpreter, but bows and smiles answered the 
purpose. A short march brought us to our camp in an 
attractive valley sheltered by a splendid grove of 
spruce. The tents had been pitched, the fires were 
burning brightly, hot tea was waiting. 

Our old white-bearded Kashmiri cook held my 
horse as I dismounted. “Salaam Sahib,—Sab chiz 
thikhai.” Even if my kill was only a female sambhur 
it was a specimen the Museum wished, and the fresh 
meat would be welcome to all. 


126 


CHAPTER VI 
ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


THERE were many signs to tell us that we had left 
Muli and were back in territory administered by the 
Chinese. In every hamlet there were a number of 
Chinese-appearing inhabitants and the country seemed 
deforested by man, in addition to the devastation 
caused by fire and blight. 

We had secured the best maps obtainable, but we 
found none to be of much use. Occasionally we could 
identify a name recorded, but even then it was usually 
incorrectly located. Most names meant absolutely 
nothing to the natives. Probably some of them signi- 
fied “I don’t know” or “What did you say?” in the 
native dialect, for it is frequent that an unwary voy- 
ager records as a place name some such phrase with 
which his query has been met. The whole region 
would prove a very rich field for an enterprising car- 
tographer. 

At Chuilung we had to replace the few mules 
which we had hired at Metilong, and were obliged 
to make the best of the relay system. It was exceed- 
ingly inconvenient, for the changes usually occurred 
at irregular intervals during the course of our day’s 
march. The transport varied in nature, pony or mule 


or yak. 
127 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


There were a number of dogs accompanying our 
Likiang and Yungning caravans. They were a cheer- 
ful, amusing lot, and on the most friendly and in- 
timate terms with their owners. It was an agreeable 
change from Mohammedan and Hindu countries, 
where contact between man and beast is usually any- 
thing but pleasant. All but one of the dogs played 
together continually during the march. The misan- 
thropic member of the tribe was a smallish whitey 
brown nondescript belonging to Luzon. He had 
started from Likiang with a limp which he never 
shook off, but it seemed not to interfere with his prog- 
ress. Lying near the camp-fire he caught fire from 
a spark, which we vainly hoped might have the effect 
of blistering to his lameness. Although most affec- 
tionate to his master he resented any familiarity on 
the part of his fellow canines. 

The dogs in the villages were anything but 
friendly, sometimes they were small, at other times 
huge, but they were always fierce. In isolated houses 
a great brute was usually chained in a dark, gloomy 
room underneath the main floor. As far as we could 
learn they were always chained, and this form of ex- 
istence may have accounted for their evil dispositions. 
Once when we were filing past a forbidding-looking 
stone building an unusually savage-looking black 
brute of Homeric proportions burst forth and bore 
down upon the caravan. Our dogs took refuge among 

128 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


the mules, and the muleteers picked up stones. When 
our adversary, looking, if possible, more forbidding 
as he drew near, came within range one of the men 
let fly, grazing the animal. To our amazement the big 
dog squatted down uttering the most ridiculous and 
pathetic squeaks and moans in such a minor and 
plaintive key that it seemed impossible they could be 
issuing from his huge frame. 

We were drawing close to Tatsienlu, passing 
through what we had hoped would prove a good hunt- 
ing country. For two days we marched up a long 
valley, on either side of which towered great barren 
mountains, the whole reminding us of the Turkestan 
Pamirs. Enquiries failed to bring forth reports of 
any game other than burrhel—the so-called blue 
sheep, a few horns of which we saw in the villages. 
The inhabitants possess herds of yaks, great, power- 
ful beasts, but however handsome, one would not be 
inclined to follow Hilaire Belloc’s advice and com- 
mend them “as a friend for the children.” In this 
valley for the only time we saw native tents; they 
were not the yourts of Central Asia, but more closely 
resembled the black tents of the Arabs. 

Early one morning we got our first glimpse of 
mysterious Mount Koonka, rising high in white ma- 
jesty. At Yungning, Rock had told us of his am- 
bition to put in three or four months studying its 
flora, and once more we regretted the lack of time 


129 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


that made it impossible for us to make a reconnais- 
sance of its fauna. The altitude of this mighty 
peak is unknown, but there are those who claim 
that it rises more than thirty thousand feet and is 
the highest in the world. A geologist from Chengtu 
made a special expedition to establish Koonka’s 
height, but after he had taken his observations he re- 
fused for some entirely unaccountable reason to di- 
vulge them. When any one questioned him he merely 
imitated the beaver and “looked unaccountably shy.” 
Presumably some slip had occurred in his calculations 
and he was unwilling to dwell upon the error. 

It was a bitterly cold country and only the stout- 
est of poshteens could withstand the wind that came 
sweeping down from the barren snow-covered moun- 
tains. 'The pass that led into the next valley was close 
to seventeen thousand feet high, and we dropped 
down three thousand feet to where the caravan en- 
camped near a magnificent frozen waterfall. 

In order to reach Tatsienlu next day Luzon told 
us that a night march would be necessary. He an- 
nounced himself prepared to undertake it with his 
ten mules, and Aju likewise agreed to go on; so leay- 
ing the balance behind with Young, the three of us 
started out again at half-past eight. We should have 
had the benefit of a full moon, but the mist lay heavy, 
and before we had gone far the snow, which had fallen 
intermittently all afternoon, threatened to assume the 


130 


VUNOOM “LIN 


LNVLSISSV §.NOZNT 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


proportions of a blizzard. The going was abominable. 
In daylight and in fair weather it would not have 
been easy to pick one’s way among the jagged boul- 
ders forming the trail, but in the dark with snow and 
ice coating the rocks it seemed impossible for the 
mules to get through whole in limb. 

Luzon had two assistants; one was a smiling fine- 
featured young Tibetan to whom he paid a yearly 
salary the equivalent of less than three dollars, with 
clothing and food included. On one of his hands he 
had a sixth finger. The other man was older and 
had lost the greater portion of his teeth, a severe 
misfortune to a Tibetan muleteer who depends upon 
them for tightening the rawhide thongs with which 
the packs are secured. To see them run up beside an 
animal and without checking him grab the thong 
with their teeth and strain with all their might to 
draw it taut, called for both admiration and incredu- 
lous amazement. Our friend who was thus handi- 
capped was of a mixed disposition. He always em- 
ployed a great part of each march droning out 'Ti- 
betan prayers, the balance he spent in hurling what 
must have been the most frightful invectives at his 
charges. One word that constantly recurred with 
stinging emphasis was a counterpart of the name of 
the Dominion to our north, with the last syllable 
stressed: “Canada!” 

Until midnight I followed on the heels of our pious 


131 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


muleteer, really enjoying the march in spite of the 
difficulties of locomotion. We bivouacked for the re- 
mainder of the night in a hollow amid a grove of 
spruce. 

Next morning we continued our way down the val- 
ley, but it was not until after three hours’ marching 
that we came upon the first habitation. Much of the 
country through which we had passed since leaving 
Likiang was a howling wilderness. For several days 
at a time we would meet with no inhabitant nor see 
anything but the tumble-down abandoned cabin of 
some wood-cutter or yak herd. It was now not until 
we were within eight or ten miles of Tatsienlu that 
we came upon any signs of cultivated land. The town 
most unexpectedly revealed itself to us, tucked deep 
down in the valley at the junction of two rivers. It 
seemed to have changed but little since the days of 
Abbé Huc. He tells us that Tatsienlu means the 
Forge of the Arrows, a name given it because in A.D. 
234 General Wu Hou, when leading his armies against 
the Southern Countries, sent ahead one of his lieu- 
tenants to establish an arrow forge here. 

Doctor and Mrs. Cunningham, of the China Inland 
Mission, most hospitably took us all in, and faced 
with Christian resignation all the inconvenience and 
confusion that followed in our train, particularly 
when we started dividing and rearranging our grimy 
kit. Both of the Cunninghams are Scotch and have 


132 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


spent the greater part of their lives in China. They 
were of inestimable help to us, and all we could hope 
was that it would some time be in our power to re- 
turn, in a small way, some of their many kindnesses. 

Cunningham had gathered three local hunters, who 
paraded in his compound the morning after our ar- 
rival. With them we went over the pictures of the 
possible game of the region. They were suspiciously 
glib in their responses, and unduly emphatic as to the 
quantity in which each of the species existed. Giant 
pandar and takin were those in which we were par- 
ticularly interested. The former has, so far as we 
could learn, never been shot by a white man, and we 
were confident that it only existed in very small num- 
bers, and that our chances for securing one were ex- 
ceedingly remote. The hunters, however, declared 
that although they hibernated, as do bears, some were 
already up and about, and if we waited until June 
we would see any quantity of them. These remarks 
did not give us much confidence in the balance of the 
information, but as the hunters claimed that the coun- 
try of which they spoke was only two days distant 
we agreed to start off with them after a day’s halt in 
which to replenish our supplies and take care of the 
multitudinous caravan wants. 

Takin have rarely been shot in this region. Mason 
Mitchell, when he was American Consul in Chung- 
king, was the first white man to shoot takin of this 


133 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


race. It was in May, 1907, that Mr. Mitchell made 
the expedition and secured his takin two days’ travel 
north of Tatsienlu. He sent skins to the American 
Museum and to Rowland Ward in London. Mr. 
Ward wrote him in May, 1908, that the takin proved 
to be a new species and had been named in Mr. 
Mitchell’s honor. 

Since then several Europeans have shot the takin 
of this district and Roy Andrews has shot them in 
Kansu. Wallace, in his exceedingly interesting “Big 
Game of Western China,” is able to add to his text 
the immeasurable advantage of excellent sketches 
made in the field from life studies of the Kansu takin. 

Tatsienlu is the great meeting-mart of trade and 
travel between Tibet and this western section of 
China. The population amounts to about twenty 
thousand, of which half are Chinese, a quarter Ti- 
betan, and the remainder either a mixture of the two 
or representatives of border tribes. Three or four 
bridges connect the transfluvial portions of the town. 
In most Chinese villages it is to the bridges that one 
must go if seeking the junk-dealers and the possibil- 
ity of “finds.” There the peddlers will be found 
squatting during the middle hours of the day with a 
varied assortment of odds and ends spread out before 
them. Old bronzes and bits of ivory, pieces of jade 
and ancient sets of dominoes are scattered among 
cheap gimcracks, glass bottles, and tin biscuit-boxes. 

134 


ROUND, AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


Tatsienlu, perhaps because of the mixed nature of 
its inhabitants, was an exception, and the junk-deal- 
ers lived in the depths of grimy booths, from which 
we extracted a few items of interest, as well as some 
useful sausage-like rawhide bags, smelling strongly of 
yak butter and tsamba, in which to carry the quantity 
of silver coin it was necessary to take with us. 

As soon as word spread that we were interested in 
old things, lamas began, singly or in groups, filing 
into the Cunninghams’ compound. From the folds of 
their robes they produced every sort of temple orna- 
ment and accessory, bells, drums, gongs, braziers, tea- 
pots, horns and casks for wine, pictures, robes, and 
cooking and eating utensils. A few of them were 
somewhat gruesome, such as the bowls made from hu- 
man skulls and the trumpets from thigh bones. We 
selected such things as combined interest with a de- 
gree of bulk and weight commensurate with our trans- 
portation facilities. Bargaining of the most intricate 
and advanced sort lasted often all day, with many 
comings and goings and a great display of total lack 
of interest. 

Suydam spent a busy morning with his moving- 
picture camera in the caravanserais. He was par- 
ticularly interested in photographing a great pack- 
train of shaggy yaks; several times it seemed as if his 
zeal to secure just the angle or view he wished would 
cause him to fall a victim to the savage dogs that 


135 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


were guarding the loads. From Tatsienlu the yak 
trains turn back, for the big beasts cannot work at any 
lower altitude. The market here is supplied not only 
with yak butter and cheese, but with yak beef, which 
we found to be excellent. 

One evening we dined with the Magistrate. All the 
foreign population had been invited, consisting of 
Cunningham, Doctor Andrews of the Seventh Day 
Adventist Mission, and the French Fathers. Dur- 
ing the afternoon we called upon Pére Girandeau, 
dean of the colony, completing his fifty-first year of 
residence. As is the custom, his coffin was already 
built and held in readiness. These Fathers come out 
for life, and usually do not return to France, even on 
leave. The old Father was hale and strong; a most 
delightful type of French priest, as indeed we found 
each and all to be. 

The mission was represented at the dinner by F'a- 
thers Valentin and Pasteur, the former of twenty-five 
years’ residence, and the latter a last year’s arrival. 
The single Tibetan present was the head of the Ti- 
betan Board of Trade. His Chinese counterpart 
had only recently been released from solitary confine- 
ment, where the Magistrate had held him incomuni- 
cado because of his objection to the raising of a 
substantial levy from the Chinese merchants for mag- 
isterial purposes. Upon what grounds his release 
was effected we did not learn, but the greatest bon- 


136 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


hommie appeared to exist between the Magistrate 
and his erstwhile prisoner, and they pledged each 
other continually in bowls of fiery rice wine. 

The dinner was the customary succession of dishes 
of pork and duck and vegetables. The two we found 
best were a first course of vermicelli with condiments 
spread over it, and a mess of excellent Tibetan mush- 
rooms. In one corner of the room was a divan ar- 
rayed with all the appurtenances of opium smoking. 
Several of the guests left the table for a pipe during 
the course of dinner. It is difficult to see how any 
great advance can be made in this part of China to- 
ward the eradication of the use of opium. In spite 
of edicts and proclamations the drug is everywhere in 
open use, and seems to be a particular curse to the 
wretched coolies, the greater part of whose earnings 
are dissipated in “black smoke.” 

The Magistrate we found a pleasant, intelligent 
man, ready to be of whatever assistance possible. 
From the missionaries we learned that he was a great 
improvement on some of his predecessors, one of 
whom in particular had a choleric and bloodthirsty 
disposition, which had caused the death of many a 
petty offender by the firing squad or drowning in the 
river. This man had had a cook, who had been with 
him many years, beheaded because of a conflagration 
in the kitchen which caused damage to the Magis- 
trate’s property. At length he was driven out, and 


137 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


when last heard of was living in great poverty in 
Peking. 

After two days devoted to having bedding rolls 
and boots repaired, and purchasing sugar and tea and 
flour, we were ready to start. Bidding good-by to 
our friends Luzon and Aju we loaded up a ula or 
corvée caravan. This system of forced transportation 
is much in use in this region when Magistrates or 
officials are travelling. Theoretically a village is 
obliged to supply transport gratis for a certain stage, 
but practically you pay them about twenty-five cents 
a day for an animal, or its equivalent in coolies. A 
confusion of yaks and donkeys and porters gathered 
in the compound, and in course of time our loads were 
assimilated. For those who can afford to hire a 
straight yak or mule pack train ula can scarcely be 
recommended, but we were glad to have the oppor- 
tunity of trying it out where our destination lay suf- 
ficiently close to render impossible any considerable 
loss of time. During some of the marches from 
Chuilung our scratch caravan had been managed by 
women muleteers, and now more than half our por- 
ters were girls and women. 

Finances caused the usual difficulty. Yunnanese 
half-dollars were readily accepted in the town, but 
twenty-cent pieces were not. The currency in general 
use was what was known as the Tibetan rupee; oc- 
casionally an old “John Company” rupee turned up. 


138 


LYUOdSNVUL MVA 


VAL CGHYaLLNG ONINYONAO SUAALATAW UNO AO ANO 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


A simple method was in vogue for making eight-anna 
pieces; the rupees were merely clipped in two bits. 
Shanghai dollars and silver ingots were also in cir- 
culation; the latter varied slightly, but were worth 
roughly fourteen rupees. Copper cash and two hun- 
dred cash pieces were used for smaller purchases. As 
may be imagined prices and methods for calculating 
them varied greatly, but it was still more difficult 
when leaving this polyglot centre to discover what 
coins would be acceptable in the smaller towns, where 
cosmopolitanism was not so far advanced. 

Our route took us through the north Lhasa Gate. 
Beside it were two stone columns with heads carved 
upon them. They represent a sort of local Saint 
Christopher to whom caravans make offerings and 
address a prayer when starting out on a journey. 
Half a mile beyond the gate lies the Catholic ceme- 
tery, where the pedestrian explorer, General Pereira, 
is buried. Close to his grave is that of Pére Davenat, 
who never recovered from his barbarous treatment at 
the hands of the lamas. He was stationed at a lonely 
post six or seven days’ journey from Tatsienlu. 
During the uprising among the Lamas in 1911 he 
was overpowered, stripped, and tied to a post in front 
of a temple. Each lama on entering or leaving 
plucked a hair from his long beard. This happened 
in January and it was eleven days before Pére Dave- 
nat was rescued. 

139 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


It was late in the day before we got started, so 
were able to make but a short march to a dirty little 
village, where we were hospitably put up by the head 
man. Our trail had led up along a river. One little 
hamlet we passed was known for its warm sulphur 
springs. Some of these were roofed over, but three 
good-sized ones lay open to the air, and in them, in 
spite of the bitter cold, were crowds of men and boys. 
When we came back it was even colder, with a light 
snow falling, and this time it was evidently Ladies’ 
Day, for the pools were filled with women and girls, 
not in the least abashed at bathing in Eve’s costume 
by the roadside. 

In order to develop as speedily as possible the po- 
tentialities of the valley as a game country, we ar- 
ranged to split, and after tossing a coin for locations 
Suydam won the farthest down-stream. Accord- 
ingly at our noonday halt on the following day we 
left him behind in an unusually dirty stone house. All 
the way up the valley we inquired of each person met 
concerning panda and takin. Ted had taken the en- 
gravings from Milne Edwards’ “Mammiféres de 
PAsie Centrale,” and kept them in a portfolio to 
show them for identification purposes. The informa- 
tion which we drew was eminently unsatisfactory; no 
one had ever encountered a panda or would admit 
having even seen the skin of one. Takin they knew 
about, but said that they were a long way off, and 


140 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


that the deep snow rendered them inaccessible from 
this valley. 

To further fortify our distrust of our Tatsienlu 
hunters Hsuen produced a small wiry man with an 
ancient matchlock on his shoulders. He hailed from 
a district fifteen days distant, but claimed to have 
often hunted in this region. He said that we could 
find burrhel and stag and musk-deer; in another 
month the bear would be out too, but takin were too 
far away and inaccessible, and panda he had never 
seen. 

This definitely discredited our original informa- 
tion, but as we were close to my destined village, we 
agreed that Ted should stop over with me, and that 
as long as we had already lost so much valuable time, 
we would put in a day’s hunting, each taking one 
side of the valley in the hopes of picking up stag or 
burrhel. We spent a rather disconsolate evening, for 
we had clearly been led on a wild-goose chase in spite 
of the glowing accounts at Tatsienlu. All three 
men had claimed to have seen panda; Suydam’s 
hunter said he had killed one, but added that he had 
performed this feat four or five days’ march further 
up the valley. 

It snowed during the night, so our hunters made 
the plea that it was not hunting weather, and that we 
had better stay indoors. This we overruled, and I 
crossed the river and started abruptly up the moun- 


141 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


tainside. The newly fallen snow made a fairyland of 
the bush and tree-clad lower slopes, but the going 
was far from easy. Four hours’ plodding brought us 
well out on top. We had seen no fresh sign, although 
in the old snow we came upon occasional tracks of 
stag. 

As we were studying the country for game, we 
heard Ted, across the valley, shooting. I had with 
me the native hunter we had met on the previous day; 
he said that Ted was on burrhel ground, and had run 
into a herd. It was cold work spying out the coun- 
try, and our labors went unrewarded. The only fresh 
tracks we came upon were those of musk-deer; aside 
from this we saw some pheasant and partridge, and 
a troop of the Tibetan eared pheasant—Crossoptilus 
Tibetenum—a white and gray bird the size of a small 
turkey. Before reaching Tatsienlu we had run into 
these birds and had shot some with our Springfields. 
They did not prove much of an addition to the pot. 

I got back to the village after dark. Ted was not 
yet in. He had sighted burrhel shortly after starting 
out. A very long stalk brought him into range, and 
at a hundred and fifty yards he shot two fine rams of 
these “blue sheep.” He then bagged a young male, 
under the impression that it was a ewe and would 
complete the group. He had sent in for yaks to bring 
in the skins and meat, but they were slow in coming 
out, so that he and Guffer Sheikh had already 

142 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


stripped the hides off, and staggered part way down 
the mountain with their burdens before they met the 
yaks. 

My Tatsienlu shikari made heavy weather of 
the climbing, but he was a pleasant, cheerful fel- 
low. Ted’s had proved utterly useless. Shortly after 
leaving camp he became ill, and announced he could 
go no further. Ted thereupon put him in front and 
poked him along. The hunter periodically fell upon 
his knees and prayed to be allowed to go back. 
Eventually he gave out completely, and was sent in 
for the yaks. 

Jack Young had put in a busy day and had an in- 
teresting squirrel and some birds, all neatly prepared, 
as witness to his efforts. 

There were four or five houses in the village. Each 
had one room which could serve as a chapel, with 
altar, holy books, drum and gong. We were domi- 
ciled in one such, and in another house an itinerant 
lama was holding a special service. Far into the 
night he droned out his texts, and clashed his cymbals. 

Next day, the 4th of March, we turned back to 
Tatsienlu. I had written Suydam, telling him of 
our change of plans, but the messenger had been in 
no hurry, arriving only a few minutes ahead of us, 
instead of on the previous evening. Suydam had, 
therefore, already gone off hunting, and did not get 
into Tatsienlu until the following morning. His 

143 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


local hunter had proved the worst of the three; Suy- 
dam had started off for a brief hunt on the afternoon 
we left him, and at the end of half an hour the hunter 
became violently sick, disappeared, and that was the 
last that was seen of him! In spite of this Suydam 
three times saw game, each time sambhur or stag, but 
never succeeded in getting a shot. Once he came upon 
what were probably fresh leopard tracks. 

The messages we had sent on in advance to Ta- 
tsienlu to speed our transportation arrangements 
met with no better success than that to Suydam. One 
of them, with twenty-four hours start, arrived several 
hours after us. We now wished to head toward Mu- 
ping, inaccessible by animal transport, so we arranged 
to send Jack Young and much of our kit by the main 
road to Yachow while we hired coolies to take our 
necessities with us. 

In spite of the combined efforts of Cunningham 
and the Magistrate things moved slowly. Part of 
the delay we employed most satisfactorily in accept- 
ing the Andrews’ invitation to use the Japanese bath- 
tub which they had installed. The last bath I had in 
one was after a strenuous shooting trip in Korea. A 
small stove is built under the wooden tub, so that the 
water continues to become hotter, and instead of be- 
ing driven out by increasing tepidity, one is eventu- 
ally forced to choose between flight and scalding. 

Further ambling through the bazaars revealed lit- 


144 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


tle new. Among the delicacies for the table were deer 
legs, such as the Magistrates at Chuilung had given 
Suydam, with the sinews and remnants of meat that 
clung to them hanging loose in shreds. Also there 
were gruesome appearing monkey’s paws or fore- 
arms. A number of roe deer horns in the apothecary 
shop interested us. 

Lamas continued to appear in the Mission Com- 
pound and we bought a few odds and ends from 
them. I met a Tibetan in the bazaar with a skin- 
covered wooden wine-cask slung over his shoulder. 
At first he resolutely refused to sell, but some amus- 
ing and good-humored chaffing, in which all by- 
standers joined, induced him to part with it. 

On the afternoon of the 6th of March we eventu- 
ally succeeded in getting our coolies and starting 
down river. The fall in altitude is very noticeable. 
In the twenty-odd miles to Waszekow one drops bet- 
ter than three thousand feet, and from winter we 
found ourselves in early spring. The first night we 
spent at a filthy little roadside hostelry, where we laid 
our bedding rolls in the loft. The wind howled and 
roared all night as if it were about to uproot the 
house. The noise below us was continuous, and the 
rather pleasant smell of opium smoke soon yielded 
place to far less agreeable odors. Early in the morn- 
ing a most appalling row started up. At first it 
sounded as if several women were being murdered; 


145 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


then men’s voices were raised in acrid anger; the 
babel of indescribable and shrilly demoniacal impo- 
tent Asiatic wrath rose and fell below us as we break- 
fasted. Through Hsuen we learned that it was a 
family fight between the landlord and his wife and 
their daughter. The last named had “not been very 
kind to people, she call her parents very bad words,” 
a sort of “revolt of modern youth” in far Szechuan. 
The sounds of carnage had not entirely died down 
when we left. 

The next day’s marching was beneath a glorious 
sunny sky; the fruit trees were in bloom, and the 
mountain fields, heaped and fenced with the stones 
that had been laboriously cleared from their surfaces, 
showed a faint fresh green. Cactus hedges put in an 
appearance, and palm trees rose gracefully among 
the peach and plum blossoms. More than all, the 
lazy, indolent feeling of Spring was in the air, and 
after the long weeks in the high altitudes of biting 
cold we all felt relaxed and uninclined to effort. 

The traffic which we met along the road was in the 
main long lines of coolies with towering loads of brick 
tea bound for Tibet. The loads are of impossible 
weights, ranging all the way up to four hundred 
pounds. The coolies would put to shame Kurdish 
hammals in Stambul. They are of all ages and both 
sexes, the packs graduated according to the strength 
of the very old and the very young. The day’s march 
is short, rarely exceeding ten miles, but although the 

146 


BRICK TEA BOUND FOR TIBET 


THE MUPING COUNTRY 


‘Ss 
4 
_ 
= 
[en] 
GH 
ica] 
jan) 
ial 
Gq 
() 
ie 
aa 
ica) 
H 
(eet 
fe) 
Ay 


avOu HHL SAMVL NVMHOONGL FO LNVLIAVHNI NV UAATY ONIGNOW AHL NI ONIHSIA 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


trail here on the main road was not too bad, after it 
turned off across the mountains it changed radically 
in character, and was difficult to negotiate without 
any burden and with the aid of a khud stick. 

The tea is packed in slender rolls of matting three 
and a half to four feet long; a load will measure as 
high as six feet, and all roadside accommodations are 
built with these measurements in view. Occasional 
stone walls along the trail are made a suitable height, 
and in the inns a bench of appropriate distance from 
the ground runs along the walls. Each coolie car- 
ries a stout stick with a crosspiece on which to rest 
his load at intervals and take the weight off his weary 
back. The shod point of the stick wears round holes 
in the rocks along the trail. 

Thirty miles below Tatsienlu we first saw river 
craft, three coracles made of rawhide, one of which 
bobbed gracefully through the rapids with two pine 
logs in tow. Close to Lutingkiao we passed a large 
scow, perhaps used as a ferry. Near by a man stood 
on a rock, fishing in the rapid water. He used a sec- 
tion of bamboo as a reel, and would cast far out into 
the stream, and then by a deft movement of the wrist 
wind the line round and round his primitive reel. 
What at first we took for a fly proved to be a bit of 
feather used as a float. The fish were bottom feeders 
and a lead sinker was attached to the line. Upon the 
fisherman’s back hung a bamboo creel. 

From Lutingkiao we turned abruptly up across 

147 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


the mountains. We got started at six-forty-five and 
plodded up-hill all morning, stopping for an hour at 
noon in a small mountain hamlet. Continuing our 
climb, no longer in the balmy air of the valley, we 
reached the crest of the pass at three o’clock. Along 
the trail were many shrines, some neglected and tum- 
ble-down, others well tended and popular. Some- 
times our coolies stopped to burn a joss stick. Larger 
shrines were fitted with a gong so that the god’s at- 
tention could be attracted before the offering was 
made and the prayer was said. Sometimes there were 
only tablets in the shrines, but more frequently there 
were representatives of Shang Shen, the God of the 
Mountains, and his wife Tu Dei, Goddess of Earth. 
The god was usually portrayed as an old man with 
a long white beard. It was difficult to understand 
why the fickle coolies had allowed some of the shrines 
to fall into decay. At one spot a most benevolent and 
well executed representative of the god was seated 
in an arm-chair with his back to the path, the rotted 
rafters of his shrine tumbling about his ears. 

Over the top of the pass billowed a cold thick mist, 
which soon shut from sight everything beyond the 
radius of ten feet. The trail was deep in snow, and 
the rocks were coated in ice. A woman and a man 
had started from Lutingkiao with us. The former 
was a cheerful, pleasant looking personage who plod- 
ded along the trail unconcernedly. The latter, a 


148 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


young official, rode on a coolie’s back whenever the 
going permitted. He arrived at the top of the pass 
with his head drooped over the coolie’s, and his arms 
dangling over the coolie’s shoulders. Among the 
Nhambiquara Indians in South America it was the 
custom to carry their pet monkeys on their heads. At 
first sight it looked as if they were wearing a cap of 
monkey skin, and the effect was startling when the 
monkey with a sudden movement raised its head. 
The coolie-back official reminded me forcibly of 
Nhambiquara land. 

We had started from Lutingkiao at an altitude of 
four thousand eight hundred feet, the top of the pass 
was ten thousand one hundred feet, and we dropped 
again to six thousand four hundred feet for our 
night’s lodging. As we descended the mist changed 
to a persistent rain which soon drenched us. Our 
path lay down a narrow gorge, with the glimmer of 
frozen waterfalls on either side. Darkness found us 
stumbling about among the rocks. Suydam and I 
were with one competent coolie. At a mountain hut 
he got a bamboo torch, which lighted us well until the 
rain extinguished it. Thereafter, until we reached the 
rambling cabin that was our destination, we from time 
to time got a new torch to help us on, and the balance 
of the distance found our way by feel and fall. It 
was quarter-past nine before the tail of the caravan 
arrived. 

149 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Next morning we were off at seven-thirty, and 
made a raw, bleak march down the valley. In the 
village we saw an ancient takin skin and at our night’s 
halt we found an old man who said he had hunted five 
years before, beyond Muping, and had shot takin and 
trapped a panda in a pitfall. He said that he had 
the skin of the latter in his house, a day’s march dis- 
tant. We agreed to purchase it if he would bring it 
to Tienchuan for us. His accounts sounded fairly 
authentic. He insisted that the panda did not hiber- 
nate, thus supporting Pereira’s report and contradict- 
ing that of Ernest Wilson. We were inclined to give 
credence to this report, for our informant was careful 
to point out in contradistinction that the black bear 
did sleep. 

Ted bought a long brown animal that he saw a 
man skinning in a house near which we passed. It 
looked to be something in the nature of the honey 
badger or ratel of Africa. Ted finished the skinning 
at the night’s halt. 

Next morning we awoke to sleet and snow, and the 
head man came in to report bandits ahead and ask 
permission to lie over a day. On the previous day 
we had passed an outlying house burned down by 
raiders a week or ten days past. Our futoh explained 
that the trail turned off from the river and climbed 
over a snowy and well-forested mountain, joining the 
river again as it emerged from a gorge. Three men 


150 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


who had started with an early caravan had come trail- 
ing back to say that they had been attacked and fired 
at near the top of the pass. 

We took our two spare rifles out and armed our 
shikarries, trusting that they would in case of need 
live up to the expectations of one of the missionaries’ 
wives, who had said she “supposed that hunting was 
difficult, but that our shikarries must be very good 
shots, and could secure the game for us.” The flip of 
a coin put Ted and Suydam at the head of the col- 
umn, while I brought up the rear. Hsuen, who since 
his adventures with the 410 had been known as the 
Wildgrave, announced that he did not wish to kill a 
bandit, but that he was not afraid, for if he were 
killed, being a Christian, he would go home to Heaven. 
Three members of the loca! militia accompanied us, 
and acquitted themselves well. As we toiled along 
through the snow on our fifteen hundred foot climb, 
they kept darting ahead reconnoitring. Twice they 
fired shots at what they reported to be the forms of 
robbers. 

The newly fallen snow weighing down pine and 
larch was as lovely as it always is, but the descent to 
the river was trying in the extreme. The laden por- 
ters fell far less often than we did; Suydam took one 
particularly disagreeable header, filling his rifle with 
mud. Leaving out the night marches, I saw but five 
falls on the part of our coolies. 

151 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Upon reaching the village on the river bank we 
learned that the head man of our last night’s halt had 
sent ahead to ask that militia be sent to meet us at 
the head of the pass. Five men had been despatched. 
They had fallen in with the bandits, twenty in num- 
ber, and had been carried off by them, rifles and all. 
Unfortunately it was beyond our power to do any- 
thing to remedy the situation. 

The valley now opened, and cultivated fields and 
gardens stretched out on either bank. The small iso- 
lated fields of tea bushes became more numerous, and 
the tall yellow mustard converted whole hillsides into 
“fields of the cloth of gold.” Fruit trees, apricot, 
plum, and cherry, were in bloom, and graced the 
courtyards of an ancient temple by which we passed. 
In former days it must have been a popular place of 
pilgrimage, now it was falling into decay. 

The great lichened stones withstood the inroads of 
time and weather more successfully than the rafters 
and columns of the buildings. A veritable galaxy of 
gods stood in rows about the walls. Between the feet 
of the principal deity in the centre temple, stood the 
wooden image of a dog, a wistful, homelike canine, 
that gave a very human feeling to the assemblage of 
strange gods and goddesses. 

There are coal mines in this valley; sometimes we 
saw coal in use as fuel, and often we met women car- 
rying basket loads on their backs. In strong contrast 


152 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


to Yunnan, we here saw no women with bound feet. 
Rope bridges were in constant use for crossing the 
stream. A heavy bamboo or grass cable was stretched 
across, with a smaller rope strung along it through 
bamboo rings. The passenger seated himself astride 
a crosspiece of wood, which was attached by a stout 
cord to a concave bit of tree trunk, five or six inches 
in length. This piece of wood slid along the cable as 
the man pulled himself across by the rope line. Coolies 
were at work rafting pine trees and clearing log jams, 
lightening their labors with shanty choruses. 

In the stream I saw wild cormorants, here appar- 
ently not in use for fishing as they are in more settled 
parts of China. Ted saw some ducks, among which 
he thought that he distinguished that excessively rare 
bird, the wild mandarin. 

On the twelfth we reached Tienchuan, a large ram- 
bling town, where we put up at the native Baptist 
Mission. Foreigners must be an unusual sight, for 
the universal curiosity of China we here found raised 
to the nth power. Swarms surrounded us if we poked 
our noses out of our room, and the paper windows 
were changed to sieves by the fingers that were stuck 
through them to produce peepholes to secure a view 
of the strange bearded people eating or reading or 
undressing. 

It seemed incongruous to find such a large town 
having no connections with the outside world either 


153 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


by land or water. Everything that was brought in 
or taken out travelled on man’s back. As we wan- 
dered through the long crowded streets we saw no 
four-footed beasts of burden, and in none of the 
shops were there pack saddles or horseshoes or any- 
thing that has to do with caravan trade, and which 
one is accustomed to see in all villages, however 
small. 

Tienchuan means Complete Heaven, but to Oc- 
cidental eyes, at any rate, there was much to belie the 
name. As in so many of the crowded Chinese towns 
dire poverty stared you in the face and the halt, the 
maimed, and the blind were omnipresent. There was 
less goitre than in many other places, but it here 
seemed to take a particularly aggravated form; fear- 
ful diseases were perambulating the streets, and a 
dead boy lay stretched out near a temple gate with 
the flies on his eyelids. There is no need to mention 
the smells. 

Instead of consisting of a single long street, there 
were several other large streets and many branching 
alleys. Intricately carved arches spanned the roads, 
and more than one spacious temple courtyard, with a 
glimpse of tall trees and stone balustrades, invited 
the passer-by to enter. In the small shrines at the 
street turnings the faces of the gods had been smeared 
with opium, to which stuck the feathers of the chick- 
ens that had been sacrificed. 


154 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


Our next day’s march was to be very long. On 
engaging the porters we had asked the futoh or head 
man how long it would take us to reach Muping if 
we travelled fast. He replied ten days, and we then 
offered substantial baksheesh to him and to each 
coolie for every day saved. This caused the futoh to 
work out a revised schedule, reducing the marches to 
eight. We paid this caravan for the weight carried, 
so much per pound, a most satisfactory method that 
I have rarely seen in use. It does not then concern 
one how many men are employed or how the loads 
are divided. The head man works it out so that those 
carrying the heaviest weights receive the most money, 
and when loads are exchanged on trail it is all taken 
into consideration. 

We got under way early, our trail leading through 
the China of the illustrations from the books of the 
early missionaries, or the old-fashioned school geog- 
raphy,—a broken countryside whose hills were ter- 
raced with paddy fields and planted from top to bot- 
tom with tea and grain. Weaving about among them 
the ancient footpath threaded its way. Busy men and 
women toiled in the fields. Occasionally a temple 
crowned a knoll, embowered in tall shade trees. Farm- 
houses dotted the hollows. Near one, amid much beat- 
ing of gongs and loud singing, a funeral was taking 
place. 

Our noonday halt was in an old millhouse where 


155 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


they were grinding cornmeal between enormous mill 
stones. Spring was in the valley, and not only were 
the fruit trees in bloom, but wild flowers bedecked the 
grassy sides of the trail. 

In the afternoon we climbed up a steep hill, and em- 
barked upon an abrupt descent over slippery stones 
embedded in deep mud in which we all of us more than 
once found ourselves floundering. Darkness fell be- 
fore we reached the bottom and it was not until 
another hour had passed that we entered the long 
single street of Lingkwan. The scene might have 
been the original of a Japanese color print. At the 
entrance to the town we passed four or five smithies 
with the clang of hammers upon molten iron and the 
sparks flaring like brilliant fireflies in the darkness. 
The street was lit with a long row of paper lanterns, 
casting in dim relief the entrance to shop and resi- 
dence. 

The inn where we took refuge was neither spa- 
cious nor clean, but after the long day’s tramp we 
wanted only sufficient space in which to lay our bed- 
ding rolls. Late as it was, an inquisitive crowd gath- 
ered and it was not until we had plunged the room in 
darkness that a shuffling of feet outside the windows 
and from behind the cracks in the wall announced that 
our spectators were dispersing. 

Next day brought us to Muping. The coolies were 
a weary lot, but only one stayed behind, a weedy little 


156 


ROUND AND ABOUT TATSIENLU 


man who seemed to suffer more than the rest from the 
effects of opium smoking. Apparently all used the 
drug to a greater or less degree. After a long march, 
much of which led through a narrow gorge from the 
rocky sides of which the path was built out on worn 
and broken logs, we reached the little town of Mu- 
ping, from which we planned to initiate our hunt for 
panda and takin. 


157 


CHAPTER VII 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 
“And the Gods of the east made mouths at me.”—Kipling. 


Murine was one of those strange little semi-inde- 
pendent feudal kingdoms that fringe Tibet. From 
time immemorial it had owed some shadowy allegiance 
to whomever might be its nearest powerful neighbor. 
Close as it is to Chengtu, which has been a great 
Chinese city since long before the days of the three 
kingdoms, it is remarkable that it retained its indi- 
viduality so long. Its annals are a continuous record 
of struggles against outside aggression. The curtain 
dropped on the drama only last summer. The ruling 
family was Tibetan. The last prince died some years 
ago, leaving a wife and one daughter. A match was 
arranged with a prince of the Chalu family of Ta- 
tsienlu, who came to Muping. About a year ago he 
was killed, either by his own vassals or the Chi- 
nese,—reports differ. ‘To-day there is a Chinese mag- 
istrate in Muping, and all that remains of its tribal 
chieftains are three women living in poverty and se- 
clusion. 

Meanwhile the Chinese people who, rather than 

158 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


their rulers, are the real invaders, have seeped into the 
country. They have intermarried with the natives. 
Now the larger towns are mainly Chinese, and even 
the smaller are composed almost entirely of a mixed 
race. ‘The pure-blood tribesmen are found only in the 
fastnesses of the mountains. 

The magistrate at Muping was a genial old fellow. 
The evening we arrived we sent him our letters, ac- 
companied by gifts of a turquoise ring and a foun- 
tain pen. The response was immediate. Our envoy 
Hswen returned to report that the magistrate was 
following hard on his heels to pay us a call. We were 
in the Chinese Christian Mission. When he arrived 
we showed him into a room where we had set up our 
roorkie chairs, and gave him a cup of tea, some fig 
newtons, a glass of blackberry brandy, and a mechan- 
ical flashlight. Then we developed our wishes. He 
was as kind as could be; he knew of takin and panda, 
and told us he would be glad to help us get native 
hunters. He was not very encouraging about the 
panda, saying that it was shot only rarely. We asked 
if we could see a skin but were told there were none 
in town. He agreed, however, to send to the outlying 
villages and try to get one. 

He showed the most astonishing lack of informa- 
tion in unexpected ways. He said he did not know 
the name of the river that flowed by the town, ex- 
plaining that he had only been here “one year.” We 

159 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


parted with much ceremony and good feeling, to meet 
at lunch at his yamen the next afternoon. 

Our day of rest was delightful. We had what our 
Kashmiri servants call a “Europe morning,” lying 
abed till seven. Then a rather slimy small wooden 
tub was produced and we soaped off what our old 
Irish nurse used to call “the biggest of the dirt,’— 
that is to say Kermit and I did. By the time Suydam 
started his bath a buzzing crowd of little boys had 
gathered to watch, so he modestly retired to the dank 
cellar-like inner room. 

A half-hour’s stroll in the warm sun took us, and 
an escort of 80 per cent of the population, from 
one end of the town to the other. There were the re- 
mains of past glories in the shape of a tumbled stone 
lamassary,—now the soldiers’ barracks,—an old fort 
crowning a near-by hill, and the ruined footings of 
what had been the king’s palace, with two big stone 
lions guarding the entrance. We stopped at the 
largest temple in town. It was Chinese. On each 
side of the court there were stall-like recesses where 
grouped figures represented scenes from hell. The 
figures were modelled in clay on a base of straw. They 
were rude but brightly colored and full of action. 
Black devils acted as jailors and torturers and were 
burning, dismembering, and hanging various sinners. 
At the far end of the court the major gods were 
grouped. They too were of clay, and differed in lit- 

160 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


tle but size from the others. Like most Chinese tem- 
ples I have seen, everything was dilapidated. One 
god lacked an arm, another a head. They seemed 
but little reverenced. The people who followed us 
swarmed among them, chattering and gesticulating 
like a crowd of children at an exhibition of waxworks. 
I noticed one discarded deity negligently rolled on his 
side beneath the seat of another. Perhaps the Chi- 
nese are discovering that these idols of theirs have feet 
of clay in more than one sense. 

Dinner at the magistrate’s was the usual affair,— 
rice wine, dishes of chopped meats, and greens. The 
guests besides ourselves were the head-man of the 
district where we hoped to get local hunters, the head 
of the local militia, and a keen-faced young fellow 
who commanded the regular troops. This latter soon 
monopolized the conversation. He asked about the 
number of troops in the United States Army, their 
rifles, their artillery, and a number of other military 
questions. Then he switched to more general matters. 
Three of his questions particularly interested me. 
They were: “What does the United States think of 
Doctor Sun Yat Sen and the Chinese republic? Will 
the United States be able to stop another European 
war? Why are Japan and England unfriendly to 
China?” 

When the bowl of rice which finishes a Chinese 
feast was brought us, the magistrate presented us with 


161 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


four dried birds. They were all shot in the surround- 
ing mountains. One I recognized as the Lady Am- 
herst pheasant. One was very large with coal-black 
breast, shading to iridescent blue and green on the 
back. One was the size of a goose with dust-brown 
plumage varied only by a patch of white on the rump. 
The last was the smallest, only the size of a Guinea 
hen. Its colors were particularly lovely, rich orange 
shot with gray. It had an orange crest. That eve- 
ning the head-man arrived from the village where we 
were to go. He told us he had shot both panda and 
takin within the past four years. We arranged to go 
with him next day. 

A pathetic incident of our day at Muping was a 
visit from the widow of the Tibetan prince from Ta- 
tsienlu. She came with her daughter, a girl of eleven. 
The woman was plain, middle-aged, and rather stupid 
looking. The purpose of their visit was to ask us to 
intercede for them with the Chengtu government. 
They were afraid that the government might have 
them executed. I am persuaded that their fear was 
groundless, but it was very real to them. They 
brought us gifts of dried meat. We gave them in re- 
turn a silk scarf. On leaving us they stopped at our 
kitchen to beg an empty tin can from the cook. 

Next morning we were packed and ready early. 
Of course the porters did not come. After waiting an 
hour I went out with Hswen to get them. We found 


162 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


they were scattered all over the town, sleeping, so we 
sent out Chinese Paul Reveres to rouse them. When 
they finally did gather they were an oddly assorted 
lot,—“Andy Hartigan’s bobbery pack.” They ranged 
from boys not much older than my own children to 
men whose beards were turning white. Only about 
half a dozen were strong full-grown coolies. With a 
scandalous amount of talk and confusion the packs 
were sorted and made up. We started down the street 
in a long straggling line, with frequent halts. First 
they had forgotten to buy food. Then they wanted to 
get more opium. 

When we had passed the massive stone gate mat- 
ters went better. The weather was fine. With just 
a touch of spring in the air. The sun shone warm- 
ly. The river droned soothingly over its rocks. Tier 
on tier of little fields lined the sides of the hills 
on either side. Our path was excellent. At times it 
ran where galleries had been hewn in the solid rock. 
They were a great contrast to the flimsy platforms of 
poles on which we had crossed the face of similar cliffs 
on our way to Muping. We were told that for pur- 
poses of defense the old rulers of the kingdom made 
access to their country as difficult as possible, and 
travel within it as easy. Sometimes in these galleries 
we came on gaily painted gods set in niches. 

Once we saw a couple of fishermen. They were 
using the usual bamboo poles with twisted wire guides 


163 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


for the line, but they were not bait-fishing. Each 
man had three hooks firmly fastened by the shank to 
the end of his line. These, with a lead to hold them 
below the surface, he cast into the rapid water. With 
a series of sharp jerks he then tried to snag such fish 
as his hook might touch. Below the rapids a half- 
dozen more natives were throwing stones into the 
stream to frighten the fish into the swift water. 

One of the fishermen wound his line on the simple 
bamboo spindle we had noticed before. The other 
used a small wheel fixed to the side of his rod by a 
wooden pin, much the same arrangement as preceded 
the modern reel in England. Both had large bottle- 
shaped creels woven of bamboo fibre. Incidentally, 
though very primitive in most things, they were both 
ultra-modern in one respect. Their hooks were barb- 
less. From time to time they would sharpen them on 
a small whetstone, much the way a trout-fisher dries 
his fly. They had just caught a couple of fish. Both 
had the trig lines of good swimmers but the fleshy 
underhung mouths of suckers. The natives said there 
were no other fish in the stream. 

Soon it became dark. As we stumbled along the 
trail there loomed a vague shape to our left which the 
clamor of some dogs stamped as a house. A dim light 
was glowing through a ramshackle door and from 
within came a droned chant, something like a sea- 
chantey, punctuated by thumps. Kermit and I 

164 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


stopped and saw, in the light of a half-dozen oil-dips, 
four men with a big tree-trunk which they were using 
as a battering-ram. They were driving wedges be- 
tween the ends of two heavy slabs of wood. When 
they saw us they stopped and smiled. We walked in 
and found they were operating a primitive press, with 
which they were squeezing out the mustard oil that is 
so generally used in this part of China. 

We finished our march by the pale light of a cres- 
cent moon,—the caravans straggling in some time 
later. We stopped at the house of the hunting head- 
man in Luchingsha. Right after our arrival he 
showed us a skin of the little panda,—fire-fox, as the 
Chinese call it because of its flaming red skin. 

On the trail we had discussed the best way to enlist 
the active aid of this head-man. We decided, guided 
largely by the advice of Hsuen, to promise him, if 
we got a giant panda, the .38-calibre pearl-handled 
Colt automatic that I carried. We asked him to come 
to the room where we slept, and first presented him 
with a mechanical flashlight. Then through Hswen 
we broached our plan. As soon as he saw the pistol 
his eyes lit greedily. When I showed him how quickly 
it could be drawn from an armpit holster, he became 
more excited. In the dim light of the lanterns his 
lean yellow face looked as fierce as that of a Tong 
hatchet-man. Several times while we explained the 
conditions governing the gift he abruptly got up, 

165 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


darted to the door, and looked through a crack to 
make sure no one was listening. By the time he left 
he had promised to get us native hunters and dogs, 
and to go with us himself. 

He then took us into the courtyard and showed us, 
by the light of an oil-dip, some horns nailed on either 
side of the door to his house. Two pairs were takin 
and the others serow. He said all four animals had 
been shot in the country to which he was going to 
take us. He asked us to wait a day at his house, while 
he gathered the best hunting-men from the neigh- 
boring villages and make other preparation. As we 
crawled into our bedding rolls we felt that the pros- 
pects for good hunting were much brighter. 

When we woke we saw our surroundings for the 
first time by daylight. We were in a small valley with 
rough mountains rising wall-like on every side. The 
house itself was a collection of buildings of brown 
hand-hewn lumber grouped around a flagged court- 
yard. The windows were of lattice-work partly cov- 
ered with tattered colored paper. At the main gate- 
way stood a wooden cage with a brown watch-dog in 
it. As the dog could not get out to attack robbers, and 
barked so continually at everything that no one paid 
any attention to him, it was hard to see what purpose 
he served. Just opposite the dog was a large manure 
pile like those in France, the smell of which was car- 
ried by the breeze into every corner of the buildings. 


166 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


Of course we were at once established as a side- 
show which charged no price of admission. Crowds of 
curious Orientals gathered around us. Some of the 
time they would talk, more often they would stand in 
solemn silence regarding us with rapt attention while 
we wrote, read, or ate. Two of our most constant at- 
tendants were little boys about three years old, clothed 
above the waist in parti-colored rags and from there 
- down in brown skin and dirt. 

During the morning the hunters and their dogs be- 
gan arriving. By afternoon some thirteen men had 
come, and we held a joint conference. They were a 
wild-looking group, mixed Chinese and Tibetan, as 
is most of the population of the valley. One that im- 
pressed us at once was a well-built, light-colored fel- 
low with a small tuft of about six hairs at the point of 
his chin. His name was Huan. He looked bright, 
but I for one distrusted his ability because he chat- 
tered so much. Another was a stocky, dark-skinned 
man with a goitre, and an astonishingly deep voice 
which contrasted strangely with the shrill Oriental 
tones of his fellows. 

Hsuen acted as spokesman for us and did excel- 
lently. We questioned them in detail about game, es- 
pecially the giant panda and the takin. It developed 
that the panda had been shot by only three of the 
thirteen and these three had shot only two all told be- 
tween the three of them. One had been killed ten and 


167 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


the other three years ago. None of the other men had 
even seen the animal. We asked how they hunted it 
and were told with dogs,—indeed, the last one killed 
had been treed. Though the cold facts of the case 
were not encouraging, the hunters were so enthusias- 
tic that we were infected and became more hopeful 
than we had been. Next we turned to takin. At first 
it seemed as if every man present was in the habit of 
going out once a week and killing a couple. Careful 
questioning, however, sadly reduced this until event- 
ually we decided that not more than half had either 
killed or even seen the animal. Again we were in- 
formed that the only way to get it was with dogs. 

We then told the natives that we wished to shoot 
the animals ourselves. This always surprises and 
grieves the jungli hunting-man. He has no particu- 
lar feeling of pride in getting in the first shot. What 
he wants is the game. Their grief was nothing to that 
of the head-man. It turned out that he always hunted 
by proxy, and that when he had told us he had killed 
animals he really meant his hunters had killed them 
for him. It had never occurred to him that we would 
do otherwise. To the best of his knowledge no impor- 
tant men did. He had thought we would camp com- 
fortably in a valley while the native hunters scattered 
over the mountains. He saw the chance of his reward 
diminishing, and lodged a violent protest. We were 
adamant, and finally issued a decree that none of the 
villagers with us should even carry their guns. 


168 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


In order to cheer them after this dictum we turned 
to the subject of rewards. We promised them, in ad- 
dition to their pay, double the price for which they 
could sell the skin of any animal we might kill. We 
also offered prizes in the shape of cheap field-glasses 
to the men who would first show us takin or panda, re- 
gardless of whether they were within range. 

Next the pack of hounds, nine in all, were paraded 
for our inspection. They were an odd assortment. 
The dominant type was medium sized, black in color 
with trimmings of brown, and long hair. One dog, 
however, was a rangy brown beast, and another was 
black and white, which made me think he might be in 
danger at dusk, for those are the markings of the 
panda. All of the dogs showed a tendency to begin 
the hunt by fighting each other on the spot. 

After this the men left to make ready their rations 
of cornmeal for the journey. We arranged te start 
early next day. 

Everything so far had raised our spirits, and we 
went to bed early to get a good night’s rest. In this 
we were reckoning without our host. Apparently it 
was spring-cleaning time in Muping, and spring- 
cleaning took the form of a religious ceremony. It 
being very evidently impossible to banish the dirt, 
they attempt at least to banish the evil spirits of 
winter. Three men officiated,—circuit-riding priests. 
Two of them clashed cymbals, the third chanted 
prayers. Each part of the house was visited in turn, 

169 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


and the ceremony repeated. Even the kitchen and 
the kitchen gods came in for attention. When I finally 
dropped off to sleep at midnight it was to the sound 
of the cymbals. 

The house hummed like a beehive as the prepara- 
tions for starting were completed. We had cut our 
kit to the bone. All we took beyond food and ammu- 
nition were our bedding-rolls, with a few extra clothes 
stuffed in them. By this time we had been on the 
trail for three months, and our clothes were torn and 
travel-stained. Kermit’s corduroy coat had been 
burnt by a spark from the fire, and patched in a ba- 
zaar with the brilliant yellow cloth used by the yellow 
lamas. Our beards had grown to formidable dimen- 
sions, and bristled out from our faces. Suydam said 
that Kermit and I looked like wild animals peering 
out of a bush. I did not realize how rough we seemed 
until Hsuen, on seeing me reading the Bible one day, 
asked in polite surprise, ‘““Are you Christian?” 

This day we were in fine fettle. It seemed that the 
end of our long quest was ahead. We passed a small 
shrine built of slabs of slate, a crude wooden image 
within of a tiger with a man standing on his hands on 
its back. We asked what it was and were told the god 
of hunting. We hoped he might smile on our efforts. 

Soon the trail became rougher and led into a gorge. 
The sides that towered steeply to a dizzy height were 
covered with a tangle of vegetation. Ferns draped 


170 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


the rocks. I counted a dozen different kinds of wild 
flowers,—blue, white, mauve, and pink. The only fa- 
miliar face among them was the violet. Streams fell 
in floating mist from the cliffs. Beneath, the river 
roared among the boulders. Though the day was well 
advanced the sun had not touched our path, and the 
air blew coldly off the water. The whole scene was so 
savage and enchanted that I half-thought I heard in 
the tumult of the waters “woman wailing for her 
demon lover.” 

Our path led over the flimsiest of branch platforms 
skirting a sheer cliff with the rapids fifty feet below. 
It is said these are never repaired unless some one 
breaks through and falls into the stream. 

By evening we reached a bit of partially level 
ground where a couple of houses formed a village. 
This Suydam was to make his base while Kermit 
and I went south into the hills. Here we spent the 
night. We put up our tents, for the houses were so 
verminous it was impossible to stay in them. There 
were some small patches of cultivation and two 
scrawny cows browsing on the hillside. The principal 
occupations of the natives seemed to be woodchop- 
ping and bee-keeping. Around both houses were bat- 
talions of hives made out of hollow tree-trunks, and 
the bees buzzed everywhere. 

Next morning we went up the valley, while Suy- 
dam started for the neighboring hills with his hunters. 

171 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


After we had scrambled through thick undergrowth 
for an hour, we came to a solitary lean-to of branches. 
Within was an old fellow carving solid wood ladles 
and scoops out of beech-wood from the hills. He told 
us that a few hours before while wandering in the jun- 
gle he had seen a troupe of monkeys. We knew that 
whatever they might be they would be either very rare 
or unknown. Perhaps they might be the golden 
monkey. 

We sent the porters ahead with the kit and, taking 
our two Kashmiris and a couple of natives, we plunged 
into the forest. The undergrowth was dense,—a tan- 
gle of vines and dead wood. The slope was steep. 
Soon we were in a bamboo jungle where the dust 
from the dried leaves choked us as we gasped for 
breath. For better than an hour we stumbled up- 
ward without seeing a thing. Then we reached a 
razor-backed ridge down which we threaded our way, 
peering from side to side through blanket-like foliage. 

It seemed an almost hopeless mission when a native 
suddenly shrieked with excitement and pointed to- 
ward the tree-tops. We could see nothing, but started 
scrambling ahead. Kermit was in front. When my 
eye caught motion among some branches to the right 
I stopped, and a second later glimpsed a yellow shape. 
It was impossible to get a shot with a rest, as the 
jungle was neck-high, so I whipped up my rifle and 
fired offhand. I was in luck, for the monkey fell 


172 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


crashing through the branches. It was a splendid 
dog-ape, with a mane of long, grayish-yellow hair 
down its back and the most brilliant orange on its 
belly. It was as big as an eight-year-old child. A sec- 
ond later I saw another and brought it down with two 
shots. Then Kermit started shooting just beyond me, 
and for a few minutes it sounded like a miniature 
battle as we fired at half-seen shapes flitting through 
the tree-tops. 

When we gathered and counted our trophies we 
found we had a beautiful group of nine, fine animals 
for mounting in the museum. What is more, they 
were the golden monkey, and these animals would 
form the only complete group in any museum in the 
world. 

Meanwhile we had heard some firing on the slope 
beneath us. We were much disturbed for we had ar- 
ranged to have all the natives leave their guns behind. 
When we reached the trail below we found that three 
of our hunters still had guns. Between them, and at 
the cost of about twelve shots, they had killed one 
monkey and caught a tiny new-born one. We gave 
them a lecture upon never shooting while with us. 
The little monkey we tried to keep alive, but it was 
too young and died within twenty-four hours. 

With our game we tramped a few miles more up 
the valley and pitched camp on some partially level 
ground. All we had besides our bedding-rolls was a 


173 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


very small single tent in which we could just lie side 
by side. The natives built themselves a shelter of 
branches by the side of a big boulder. 

We were much encouraged by our first day. The 
country was as wild and remote as we could wish. 
Our valley was cupped by heavily wooded hills lead- 
ing up to snow-covered mountains. All that worried 
us was that the jungle seemed very dense. 

We skinned the monkeys,—work at which I am not 
nearly as good as Kermit. Though our Kashmiris 
would not eat them the native hunters did, so we gave 
them all the carcasses. Then we had supper. It was 
cooked by Hsuen. As one of our cooks had been left 
with Jack Young and the other with Suydam, Hsuen 
had volunteered to undertake the work himself. Con- 
sidering the circumstances our meal was very good,— 
great heaping plates of rice and beans, with some 
rather tough, thoroughly fried chicken. Hsuen had 
proved better and better as the trip progressed. As 
an interpreter his value increased as we became able 
to understand and speak what passed with him for 
English. He was as tough as hickory and finished 
the longest day with no sign of fatigue. He would 
turn his hand to any work, and without embarrass- 
ment played the most astonishingly different réles, 
for he would sit as guest with us at the magistrate’s 
table and then a week later act as our cook. 

This evening as soon as we had finished eating we 

174 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


sent for the head man and the hunters. They came 
and squatted around the camp-fire. In the flicker- 
ing light with their tattered clothes they were a wild- 
looking lot. Hsuen dropped his réle of chef, resumed 
that of interpreter, and we started to develop our 
plans for next day. We wanted if possible to get our 
game without dogs. Conversations like this are 
lengthy. Kermit would say, “Hsuen, ask if they ever 
hunt takin without dogs.” Hsuen would turn to the 
Chinese and then would ensue ten minutes of what 
seemed like the most impassioned debate. All would 
talk at once, their tones rising shriller and shriller. 
Any attempt to interrupt would be as useless as try- 
ing to dam the Mississippi in flood. Finally there 
would come a pause. We would be all attention for 
what we expected would be a long and detailed ac- 
count. Hsuen would say, “Chinamen say no.” The 
final result of an hour or more talk was that we would 
go still-hunting in different directions and that the 
dogs would be left in camp. 

We both felt that if we saw a panda it would be 
but once. We therefore decided that if we were to- 
gether we should give up our old custom of matching 
for the first shot, and fire if possible simultaneously. 
We wanted to be full partners in the first panda, 
should the gods permit. 

Early next morning we started. My party was led 
by Huan, the man who had killed a panda ten years 


175 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


ago. After walking a couple of miles down the valley 
we turned into the mountains. At once we found our- 
selves in the densest jungle I have ever known. It 
was of bamboo six to eight feet tall, interspersed with 
hemlock and beech. The slope was forty-five degrees. 
We had to climb up on hands and knees. Deadfall 
blocked us every few feet. The dust from the dried 
bamboo leaves got into our lungs and eyes. The stems 
and matted vines through which we had to force our 
way tripped and clung to us like the tentacles of an 
octopus. The sweat ran in streams and caked the 
dust. It was impossible to see twenty feet. 

Soon we came on panda sign. It was old, but at 
least it indicated that the animal had been there. 
Then we came to snow and found the track of a takin. 

On we toiled. We passed much deer droppings 
and found an old serow’s horns lying on the ground. 
It was impossible to move quietly. We made a noise 
like a regiment of cavalry charging through a wheat 
field. We could see nothing unless we were almost 
able to touch it, while any animal could hear us hun- 
dreds of yards away. From time to time my head- 
man would climb a tree and gaze over the tops of the 
bamboo. What he hoped from such an action I could 
not imagine, as no game smaller than an elephant or 
rhinoceros could have been seen above the tall grass. 
I kept hoping I was being led to some clearing where 
a still-hunter would have some chance of sighting 
game and making a stalk. 


176 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


On we toiled for another couple of hours through 
the same country. Realizing then that we would cer- 
tainly spend most of the day in this type of jungle I 
explained by signs that I did not want the hunters 
following me in single file but spread out on the 
flanks. I hoped if they were there they might start 
some animal that would run near me in its fright. 

The sun was high overhead now, for it was noon. 
We had been going steadily for six hours. We had 
seen no water since early in the morning, and I had 
had nothing to drink since my tea at breakfast. I 
was parched with thirst and the handfuls of snow that 
I occasionally swallowed hardly helped. Higher and 
higher we worked until at last I caught a glimpse of 
an open grass slope above me. 

It was now three o’clock in the afternoon. At this 
moment the native hunters motioned that it was time 
to turn back to camp. I told them I wanted to go to 
the meadow. They protested, telling me by signs we 
would not be able to get back if we did. I was firm. 
It was the first place I had seen all day from where 
I could get any view. We pushed ahead and reached 
it a little before four. I was much disappointed for 
not only could I see no animals, though I searched 
the open places carefully, but I could find no tracks 
anywhere. Very much discouraged I turned toward 
camp. It was as rough a road as I have ever trav- 
elled. When we finally got off the mountain slope we 

177 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


struck the bed of a stream coated with ice and choked 
with boulders. I had worn shoes with crépe-rubber 
soles in order to walk softly. Every step I slipped. 
Every three steps I fell. We hurried as fast as we 
could, but it soon became dusk. My Kashmiri shi- 
kari, Gaffar Sheikh, was completely done in, and long 
before had given my rifle to a native hunter to carry, 
who took a header and bent the rear sight. 

The moon was up when I saw the camp-fire twin- 
kling. Of all welcome sights that I have seen, none 
was ever more welcome. Altogether it was the hard- 
est day’s hunting I had ever spent. Kermit, who had 
got back before me, had had much the same sort of 
time. We at once agreed that still-hunting in that 
country was impossible, and that next day we would 
go out with the dogs. 

The following morning we started off together with 
all the dogs and all the natives. We went to another 
place which differed merely in its location from those 
we had travelled the day before. Each hunter led 
his dog. Why those animals survived I do not see. 
They were dragged through the undergrowth as a 
plough is dragged through a furrow. I am sure that 
two or three times, by disentangling its hind legs 
from the clinging vines, I saved the dog just in front 
of me from being pulled in two. We soon came on 
panda sign in abundance, but all of it old. We found 
where one had furrowed the trunks of trees with its 


178 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


claws. We even found some coarse white hair caught 
in the bark of a hollow tree where one had slept. 

At this moment the dogs were loosed and disap- 
peared. We expected every moment to hear them 
pick up a trail. We did not. Occasionally we would 
hear a yelp, but it was generally one dog fighting an- 
other. All day long we scrambled up over the hill- 
sides. As one of the two pandas killed by our hunters 
had been found in a tree, our men studied carefully 
every tree that might by any chance be strong enough 
to hold the animal. Dusk was falling when we reached 
camp. 

We were both much discouraged and, after they 
had had something to eat, called the natives together 
for another conference. As we were sure we had seen 
reasonably fresh panda sign we wished to know why 
the dogs had not run his trail. To our surprise we 
were told the dogs would not trail a panda. Appar- 
ently it was simply a case of coming on it by chance, 
and then if the panda became frightened before the 
dogs it might climb a tree. 

This discouraged us a good deal. We asked more 
questions. Huan came forward with the suggestion 
that the panda he had killed ten years before had 
come near his camp after he had been cooking pig’s 
bones. He asked permission to send for some. Of 
course such a theory was the rankest folly, but it is 
always unwise to discourage natives when their sug- 

179 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


gestions are harmless. We told him to get the bones. 

It then developed that we had hunted on a “bad 
day,”—a day the hunting gods did not like. We 
found there was a trilogy of them. Uru Chang Yeh, 
the bareback rider on the tiger, was the most impor- 
tant. His second in command was Gao Chang Ta 
War, about whom we could find out little. The third 
was not a god, but a demi-god, a man who “died 
long while ago.” He was called Low Yih Wen, the 
king of the lofty mountains, and Orpheus-like, could 
call the animals from their hiding places. 

It was feared that these gods might not be well 
disposed toward us. A small temporary altar had 
been built by the men’s camp, and they were offering 
a hen. We said we would be glad to pay for the hen, 
or for a small goat or pig. We were told that the 
gods did not like pigs or goats, but that hens were 
acceptable. Incidentally the gods are not wasteful, 
for the chicken, after being killed in their honor, is 
eaten by their votaries. 

We were told that the dogs trailed takin, even if 
they would not trail panda, so we told the natives 
that next day we would make that animal our main 
objective. Again we started off with all the men and 
dogs. The day was merely a repetition of the days 
before. Never had I seen stiffer jungle. My stout 
Fox puttees were torn to rags. Again we saw panda 
sign. Once we came to fairly fresh takin tracks by a 


180 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


small muddy spring. We were puzzled when the dogs 
paid no attention to them. Evening found us back 
in camp, tired and discouraged. A note from Suydam 
told us that he was having the same experience. When 
we asked why the dogs did not trail, we were told they 
only did so “in the early morning and evening.” 

As the only value of the dogs was to trail, we left 
them and nearly all of the natives behind and spent 
next day trying to still-hunt. It was impossible. Do 
what we could it was impossible. Once we sent 
Mukta Loom, one of our trained shikaris, to look at 
a hollow tree near by. Going as carefully as he could 
he made a terrific noise. What was more, though we 
were standing on a tree-trunk we could not see him 
after he had gone twenty feet away. In a vain at- 
tempt to get where we could see something, we scram- 
bled to above the tree line. There in the coarse grass 
we found no game trails, and though we searched the 
surrounding country with our field-glasses we saw 
no sign of animals. 

The Kashmiris suggested that they spend the night 
there and watch the country in the early morning. If 
the game ever did come into the clearings to feed, that 
would be the time. If they did not, it would be pretty 
conclusive proof that game rarely if ever left the 
jungles, for both shikaris were trained men with high- 
power binoculars. 

It was long after dark when we stumbled into 


181 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


camp, and slept the heavy sleep of thorough exhaus- 
tion. 

The Kashmiris, when they came down next day, 
said they had not seen a thing. By this time our hopes 
had sunk very low. For a couple of days more we 
hunted with men and dogs for panda. Each day was 
a repetition of the former,—ceaseless struggling 
through dense jungle, without hearing or seeing any- 
thing, until we felt that the panda resembled the 
“snark” more than any living animal. The hunter 
who had gone for the pig’s bones returned with them. 
They were cooked with much ceremony and of course 
no results. We made up our minds that to stay longer 
would be a waste of time, and that it would be better 
for us to go to the Lolo country where we had heard 
there were takin. 

Before we definitely decided to go, however, we 
had the head-man and all the hunters assembled again. 
We thought possibly we might hear of some other 
place near by where we would at least have a fighting 
chance. Careful questioning brought forth nothing. 
All country was the same. Only three men among 
the thirteen native professional hunters had ever shot 
panda. The rest had never even seen one. No one 
they knew had shot panda. More illuminating still, 
we found what had been concealed from us,—we 
found that the takin was only shot in winter when 
the deep snow made it possible by trailing to over- 
take it. 

182 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


My opinion is that the giant panda is not very 
scarce in the Muping country. In the valleys we were 
hunting there may be four or five. But, on account of 
its habits and the nature of the country, it is the 
merest luck for a man to get a shot at one. 

Of course this does not mean that some one might 
not go there and kill one on his first day, but that 
same man might also hunt steadily for years without 
seeing one. It would be possible to get them with a 
well-trained pack of bear-hounds, but no dogs we 
saw or heard of in the country are competent. The 
pack would have to be brought from the United 
States. 

Personally I am sure the panda is not a bear. It 
does not hibernate in Muping, whereas the black bear 
does. All testimony of the natives was to this effect, 
and our own observations confirmed what they said. 
We hunted in March when the bear was sleeping. At 
least three times we saw traces of panda not many 
hours old. Besides these we saw quantities of signs 
ranging from a month to a few days in age. It is 
possible the panda may hibernate in other places, but 
I do not believe it likely. I think the mistake made 
in this respect by certain authors is due to the fact 
that natives whom they have asked have mistaken the 
animal. At Tatsienlu the hunters brought us a red 
bearskin saying it was panda. 

The Chinese name for the panda is Bei Shung, or 

183 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


white bear. It lives in Muping in the dense bamboo 
jungles on the steep hillside. We could not find, from 
questioning the natives or from the signs, that it ever 
left them. Its diet is in main bamboo, but as it does 
not hibernate it cannot confine itself simply to the 
new shoots as some state. The droppings we exam- 
ined, which were numerous, were oval and from four 
to seven inches in length and two to three inches thick. 
They were composed, as far as we could see, of bam- 
boo leaves and stalks only slightly digested. It sleeps 
in hollow trees or beds down in the bamboo, evidently 
turning around like a dog for the stalks were twisted 
into the semblance of a nest. We found a number of 
places of this kind with panda hairs attached to 
branches and twigs. It has, as I have said, the bear’s 
habit of measuring itself against a tree and scoring 
the bark with its claws. The natives testified that it 
climbed trees. They also said that it went singly ex- 
cept for mother and young, or in spring, when the 
male and female are supposed to stay together but a 
few days. At this latter time it is said to roar, but 
we never heard it. 

So much for the panda. It was with regret we 
turned our backs on it. May the fates give us the 
chance to match our wits against it again before the 
windows be darkened. Once having made up our 
minds we acted quickly, for we wished to get to the 
Lolo country as rapidly as possible. We sent a note 


184 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


to Suydam telling him of our plans, and arranged to 
break camp early next morning for a double march 
to Luchinsha. 

We had hunted for six days as hard as we could 
from daylight to dark. We had had fourteen native 
hunters with us, besides our trained Kashmiri shi- 
karis. During the entire time not one of the party 
had seen a wild animal of any sort. Our disappoint- 

-ment was tempered by the fact that a runner came in 
from Yachow bringing cables,—the first news I had 
of my family for more than three months. Even at 
that it was not all it may seem. It takes a cross be- 
tween Sergeant Cuff and Le Clerc to decipher an 
English telegram sent over Chinese lines. The fol- 
lowing is an exact copy of one I received at this time: 

“State Chenry Stimson Treasury melmon wsa 
assd justice william Mitchell mines sota pestmaster 
Welter browa navy Charles francis Adsmo Massa- 
chus Ctts interior ray Wilbur agriculture Cyde Mis- 
souri Lalar davis Commecr nnawnon Ced.” 

The translation is this: “State Henry Stimson 
Treasury Mellon War Good Justice William Mitch- 
ell Minnesota Postmaster Walter Brown Navy 
Charles Francis Adams Massachusetts Interior Ray 
Wilbur Agriculture Hyde Missouri Labor Davis 
Commerce unannounced.” It was the news of Presi- 
dent Hoover’s new Cabinet. 

When we arrived at Luchinsha we found Jack 


185 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Young waiting for us. We had sent ahead for porters 
to take us to Yachow, and had told the head-man 
that if he would get good men we would give him the 
pistol, even though he had not got us a shot at either 
takin or panda. All evening we spent paying off 
hunters and rearranging our kit. The head-man as 
an appreciation of our presents brought us as a gift 
the skin of one of the two panda shot by his men, 
and also a takin and black bearskin. 

Next morning we were on the road again, retrac- 
ing our steps to Muping. It was astonishing what a 
difference the eight days that had passed made in the 
valley. When we had trekked up spring was hesitat- 
ing on the threshold. Now it had flooded in. The 
trees were in leaf. Insects droned over the grain 
fields. Butterflies hovered over the flowers that had 
miraculously sprung into being where but a few days 
before there was little hint of their advent. Our heavy 
woollen clothes were a burden and we thought long- 
ingly of our cool shorts in our boxes at Yachow. 

When we arrived at Muping the friendly little 
Magistrate came around to call. While we were away 
he had sent messages to the headmen of the various 
villages asking for panda skins for us. As a result 
we got two, one shot ten, the other two years before. 

Next morning as we passed out of Muli we came 
to a temple of the old régime which I had noticed on 
the way up. As I wandered through it I saw in a 


186 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


corner a couple of beautifully carved wooden gods. 
It occurred to me I might be able to buy them as 
they looked neglected. I called Hsuen and told him 
what I wanted. At once he assumed an owl-like look 
of solemnity and called the head man of our caravan, 
who was Huan, our ex-hunter. Together they chat- 
tered in a corner and then both went to see the priest. 
In a short time they were back and whispered to me 
that I could have them at a cost of three dollars, 
which I paid. Then, with as much stealth as if they 
were robbers, they packed them in a basket. Next 
Huan stripped to the waist and wrapped his blue 
cotton coat around the basket so that no one could 
see them. I asked Hsuen why, and he replied enig- 
matically, “Perhaps trouble.” Of course there was 
no trouble. When our Kashmiri servants saw them 
they were much interested. “Kali Bhutnis” they 
called them, or “Black female devils.” 

The Kashmiris are always amusing in their outlook 
on other nations. Being good Mohammedans they 
regard pig-flesh with horror. They confided to us 
once that one could expect nothing of a nation of 
Hindoos, i. e., the Chinese who ate pig. Early on this 
expedition they enquired for “Jori Sahib ka Kah- 
wah,”—literally, George the Gentleman’s coffee. It 
took some time before we realized they were asking 
about George Washington coffee. 

The following day I went into a very large build- 

187 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


ing which was called the Temple of Hell, because it 
showed sinners in torments. I was puzzled at first by 
the buzzing of a myriad of bees. Suddenly I noticed 
that these insects had made holes through the outer 
clay of the images and were hiving in the straw in- 
side. The Chinese of this temple will find honey, not 
in a lion’s carcass like Samson, but in the bodies of 
their gods. Most of the statues I had seen had their 
mouths smeared with some black substance so that 
they looked like children who had been at the treacle 
pot. I asked Hsuen, who was with me, what this 
was and found that it was opium. Devotees to the 
drug were giving the gods their share. 

Another thing that had puzzled me was the ex- 
traordinary dilapidation of many of the deities, who 
lacked heads or arms like a careless child’s doll. When 
Hsuen was questioned on this his eyes twinkled and 
he said, “People ask god for something. Kill chicken 
for him. God not do it. Break his arm off.” : 

On the march that day we passed through country 
where there had been bitter fighting between bandits 
and the local troops. The result had been inconclu- 
sive and the hill towns were still held by the outlaws. 
In the towns in every prominent place placards were 
posted dealing with the treatment of these robbers. 
I had one translated and was given this Chinese bull: 
“All proved bandits must have their heads cut off 
without trial.” Jack Young, when he stopped at 


188 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


Yachow on the way up, saw two executed. It is a 
sad commentary on conditions that at the same time 
three high-school boys, ranging from sixteen to nine- 
teen, were shot because they had been making speeches 
against the fiscal exactions of the local soldiery, levied 
under the guise of anticipated taxes. 

When we started through this no-man’s-land I was 
walking at the head of the column. Two shots were 
fired far away in the hills. The porters behind came 
up on me hike a stampede of buffalo. It was remark- 
able to see the way they ran over the rough ground 
carrying a seventy-pound pack. Our road led 
through a beautiful gorge. In the river below I no- 
ticed several cormorants fishing. Just before we 
reached the plain one of the shikaris saw five ghoral 
feeding on the crest of a near-by mountain. We 
studied them through our glasses for a while, but 
they were little animals and it did not seem worth the 
loss of a day to stop and hunt them. 

That evening we reached the city of Lushan. Now 
abruptly we had changed from a rough wild country 
to one of the earliest settled parts of China. Long 
before the seacoast was conquered the nation was 
established in eastern Szechuan. During the Chinese 
Age of Chivalry, the time of the three kingdoms, 
Szechuan played an important part. It was the last 
stronghold of the Han dynasty. It produced Gen- 
eral Kuan Pu, as far as I know the only Chinese sol- 


189 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


dier who has been deified. We saw many temples to 
him along the road. He is always represented as wav- 
ing a sword. To him one tradition ascribes the nam- 
ing of Tatsienlu (The Place of Making Arrows), 
for it was there he halted his troops on one of his 
campaigns. 

Lushan is a very old city. A mossgrown wall sur- 
rounds it, which is supposed to have been built under 
the Hans and repaired under the Mings. It still 
serves its purpose, for we were told that not long be- 
fore it helped in the repulse of bandits. The pave- 
ments are good but rutted and worn by myriads of 
bare feet. Beyond the town is an inscribed sand- 
stone slab dating from the Hans. 

Next day was warm and sunny. The country was 
just what I, as a boy, had always imagined China. 
Valley and hillside were cultivated. The greens of 
the various crops formed a patchwork of color. 
Enormous wooden water-wheels for irrigation were 
slowly turning in the river. Fruit trees were masses 
of blossoms. There were delicate mauve lilies bloom- 
ing by the roadside. Every little while we passed 
memorial arches or tablets beautifully carved from 
red sandstone. Even in the tiny farming villages 
there were often delicately carved stone ornaments 
on either side of the doors. To add a final touch we 
passed a number of graceful white pagodas silhou- 
etted against the sky. 


190 


PERE DAVID’S COUNTRY 


The river broadened and turned from a turbulent 
mountain brook into a stream with deep still stretches. 
On it floated bamboo rafts and sampans. Toward 
the end of the march we crossed it in a heavy board 
scow filled with tea coolies, soldiers, farmers, and 
small merchants, who showed a most lively and 
friendly interest in us. A few lis beyond we came to 
the walled city of Yachow. We walked up broad 
well-paved streets, through the most active bazaar 
we had seen, until we found the Baptist Mission and 
Hospital, where Doctor Crook and his associates wel- 
comed us in the most friendly of fashions. Mail and 
hot baths were waiting, and to travellers in strange 
places such a combination comes close to forming that 
“perfect bliss” of which the hymn speaks. 


191 


CHAPTER VIII 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


Yacuow proved the best and largest bazaar that 
we had encountered since setting out from Burma. 
Mr. Lovegreen, of the Baptist Mission, although 
now a resident of Kiating, had formerly put in a 
number of years at the mission here, so he kindly 
offered to pilot me around. Everywhere we went he 
was sure to encounter some acquaintance of former 
days. We first made some purchases for the kitchen 
and bought two Dietz lanterns to replace ones that 
had been stolen. Throughout the Orient the Dietz 
lantern, of New York manufacture, is everywhere in 
evidence, and, particularly in out of the way places, 
gives one a feeling of home, almost what in Portu- 
guese would be called “saudade da terra.” 

Along the main street were a number of shops 
where opium was being distilled, and the pungent 
and not to be forgotten odor filled the air. It is said 
that the men who do this work become, from con- 
stantly inhaling the fumes, among the most enslaved 
addicts of the drug. 

In a small grocery-store I came upon two fly- 
blown bottles of a French vin mousseux. They were 


192 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


the only two bottles of wine in town, and how they 
ever found their way up along the weary stages from 
some ocean port remained unexplained. We, how- 
ever, thoroughly appreciated their presence. 

The Chinese are proverbially incorrigible gamblers. 
A stroll through the bazaar of any town is sure to 
reveal one or more games in full swing. In Likiang 
an old man set up his table on one of the bridges, and 
spread out a cloth with a set of dominoes printed on 
it; any one wishing to play put a coin over the domino 
he chose, and the old man shook three dice in a bowl. 
If the combination of numbers on the dice could be 
made to conform with those of the domino chosen, 
the player won the equivalent of his stake. A form 
of dice-throwing that I saw in Tsalo resembled our 
native game of craps; and the players encouraged 
their dice to turn up the proper numbers as eagerly 
and fluently as any Georgia negro. 

Dominoes were much in vogue; sometimes the 
pieces were of buffalo horn, or of ivory, but more 
often they were of glazed pasteboard. The game was 
always played for money. Mah-jong was by no 
means uncommon. I first saw it played at Talifu 
and afterward in many towns. Usually there were 
stray pieces to be seen among the wares of the junk 
dealers. Chess was the only game I saw played with- 
out money passing hands. You did not often see a 
game in progress in the streets, although in Tatsien- 


193 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


lu, Muping, and Yachow I watched keen contests 
taking place. In the last-named town I got a fine 
set of old ivory chessmen, of the round checquer- 
like type, with the names of the pieces carved upon 
them. 

At Yachow we left with our friends at the Mission 
a few volumes from our library, among them Wal- 
den, Jane Eyre, The White Company, and Great 
Expectations—an oddly assorted group but typical 
of the whole. Our reading matter varied greatly in 
nature, and because of that filled its niche well. 
With a few exceptions we brought only those books 
that could be found in the Everyman’s Library or in 
volumes of no greater bulk. “Revolt in the Desert” 
was an exception, but when we had read or reread it 
we found a welcome home for it with Doctor Hanna. 
Doughty’s “Arabia Deserta,” which we had in the 
thin-paper single-volume edition, although larger 
than we could have wished, was still not altogether 
too bulky. Well fortified with literature dealing with 
Arabia, we also had Burton’s “Pilgrimage to Medina 
and Mecca.” The introduction to this last had been 
contributed by Stanley Lane Poole, and I was 
amused at a lapse he made, clearly showing that he 
would have done better to have refreshed his memory 
of the text before undertaking the task. In referring 
to certain apocryphal accounts of Burton’s adven- 
tures on the pilgrimage he brands them as impossible 

194 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


because he states that Burton never carried firearms. 
Throughout both volumes there are many references 
to a particular pair of pistols which the pilgrim usu- 
ally kept under his pillow at night! 

Among the other volumes which we read and left 
behind were “Pride and Prejudice,” “Sense and Sen- 
sibility,” ‘The Moonstone,” ‘Green Mansions,” 
“Omoo,” and “The Old Curiosity Shop.” My edi- 
tion, in two volumes, of Abbé Huc’s “Voyage dans 
la Tartarie” was too old a friend and companion to 
discard after rereading. The volumes left behind 
were all bought merely to serve their purpose on the 
trip. 

We regretted that our stay in Yachow must be 
so brief, but every day counted if we were to reach 
Indo-China in time to collect certain of the big game 
that we would no longer be able to obtain once the 
rainy season set in. We were now well down in alti- 
tude, and spring was far advanced. On either hand 
stretched the familiar terraced paddy fields with 
water buffalo ploughing through them, belly deep in 
liquid mud. A single small grove of plantains added 
a tropical touch. Long trains of coolies passed us 
with loads of stag horns. The antlers were coming 
from Tibet by way of Tatsienlu. Many were evi- 
dently pick ups that had been cast, but some had been 
cut from the skull. Horns are highly valued by the 
Chinese for medicine when they are in the velvet. 


195 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Our first march lasted until aften seven at night, 
for we had got off to a late start, as was invariably 
the case when we passed through a good-sized town, 
and doubly so when we had to change our caravan. 
Indeed it was only due to indefatigable work on Ted’s 
part and the very efficient aid of Doctor Crook that 
we got off at all on the 30th. 

Next day Hsuen proudly produced two small 
birds in a cage which he said that he had bought be- 
cause they sang so pleasantly in the morning, and 
would awaken us with their music. The birds remain- 
ing silent, Hsuen shook the cage, when, evidently 
realizing what was expected of them, they burst into 
song. 

We passed many roadside shrines and noticed that 
the wayfarers did not fail to kowtow in front of them, 
repeating a prayer the while. The Gods and God- 
desses were newly furbished up; some had an entire 
fresh coat of paint, and offerings of grain were laid 
in front of them. This was all evidently due to the 
delay of the early rains. For this same reason we had 
been unable to purchase meat in Yachow, it being 
considered unlucky to pursue the butcher’s trade while 
waiting for the fulfillment of these petitions. 

We passed through Jungking, a bustling town 
built along the banks of a river. Iron mines in 
the close vicinity gave importance to the town and 
explained the quantity of forges and the roughly 

196 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


fashioned pots and implements of cast iron. The main 
street was thronged with merchants and purchasers, 
and the ancient temples attested to the antiquity of 
the place. 

The prayers for rain were answered, for it poured 
all night, and on the morning of April 1st it was still 
raining hard when we set off to climb over a ten-thou- 
sand-foot pass. Four and a half hours brought us to 
the summit. The rain had degenerated into a heavy 
Scotch mist, at times so dense that it was impossible 
to see further than a few yards. Snow lay on the 
trail, and the tea coolies bound for Tatsienlu were 
making heavy weather. They thronged the rude way- 
side hostelries which we passed from time to time. 

Descending the further side we passed two palan- 
quins halted before an inn. One only was occupied 
and its occupant was obviously much wrought up, but 
we were unable to understand his troubles until we 
later met him at the Magistrate’s at Tsingkihsien, 
and learned that his companion had been plucked by 
bandits from the other palanquin. They had carried 
him and all his belongings off into their mountain 
haunts. All this had occurred only a few hours be- 
fore we passed, so we considered ourselves fortunate. 
We had received no warning of bandit activities and 
were straggling along in the rain and mist in no very 
good form to protect our goods. The eager questions 
with which we were hailed while coming down the 


197 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


trail into town, and which had been completely un- 
intelligible to us, were now explained. We never 
learned what success the disconsolate Chinaman met 
with in retrieving his friend. 

Tsingkihsien must have once been a town of con- 
siderable importance. Seen from the mountainside 
it resembles one of the medieval walled towns of 
France. It has sadly shrunken within its walls, and 
even the main street, descending through the centre 
with steep stone steps, shows many vacant shops and 
houses. We were fortunate in locating a fairly clean 
serai, but the supreme difficulty is the finding of a 
room unaffected by the close proximity of primitive 
toilet facilities. 

Hsuen sadly displayed a cage containing the 
corpses of his two small birds. The cold and sleet en- 
countered in crossing the pass had proven too much 
for the songsters. 

The main road from Yachow to Tatsienlu turned 
off here, striking directly north, while we continued 
our southerly course. Hereafter we saw no further 
caravans of tea coolies, but the trail was thronged 
with laborers and merchants. Since leaving Yachow 
we had met with several lots of lightly built Lolo 
hunting-dogs; one man with as many as a dozen on 
leash. We noticed that there were no bitches, but 
were unable to learn whether this was because the 
Lolos sold only dogs so that the market would con- 


198 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


tinue. One of the owners told us that he was taking 
his batch of dogs to sell in Chengtu, the capital of 
Szechuan. Some of them looked only half grown, 
but he assured us that all were thoroughly trained for 
hunting. 

Gates and archways are often erected as a memorial 
to some influential personage. Many are handsome, 
but one under which we passed that morning stands 
out far above any that I have ever seen. I was un- 
able to learn its age, but it had unquestionably passed 
the century mark, and the stone had mellowed with 
the years. It was in perfect repair; on its graceful 
columns were carved in bas relief vivid scenes bu- 
colic and martial, interwoven with allegories and his- 
tories. 

The poppy fields were a mass of color, some solid 
white, others purple, others red, and still others a 
combination pink and white. Stretching out on either 
side of the road, and smiling in the sun, it was not 
easy to recall the sinister purpose hidden beneath 
their beauty. They had usurped the fields where corn 
and beans had previously thriven, and in time of scant 
crops they brought on famine. Even under the best 
of circumstances they would cause untold misery and 
suffering. Doctor Crook told us that many opium 
addicts came to him to be cured, undergoing the dras- 
tic treatment necessary. When I was looking through 
his hospital I heard the delirious ravings of one such 


199 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


wretch. Doctor Crook hesitated to hazard even a 
rough guess as to the percentage of cases in which the 
cure proved permanent. 

On April 2d we reached Fulin, a busy market- 
town, with more than its share of filth and smells. 
We lodged in a peculiarly dirty serai. We had bought 
a cheap European type saddle in Bhamo for the shi- 
karies, but found that either their method of riding 
or something in the cut of the saddle made it pecu- 
liarly fatal to the mules’ backs. It now served a good 
purpose, for we sent it as a much-appreciated gift to 
the militia officer in charge of the town. From him 
we hoped to secure advice and assistance, for we had 
here to leave the main road and turn off to Tzetati, 
two days distant up the Tung River. 

In spite of everything, the Yachow muleteers and 
some replacements we here arranged for all indulged 
in an orgy of opium and feasting which made our 
morning start a difficult and dilatory affair. In the 
face of our representations and warnings they wished 
to avoid the penalties of a late start by halting at a 
town only twelve miles out, thereby adding a day to 
the usual two-days’ journey to Tzetati. We forced 
them to go on and reached a small hamlet after dark 
on a rainy overcast night. The true rainy season does 
not commence until May, but we encountered an 
ominous number of itinerant umbrella repairers. 
These peddlers wander about the country with a 


200 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


quantity of defunct umbrellas, and will either repair 
one of these or mend your own for you. They ply a 
busy trade, for the Chinaman is very partial to the 
use of an umbrella, and they seem as necessary a part 
of his equipment as they are of that of the London 
business man. 

Next day a twenty-five-mile march took us to Tze- 
tati. Our muleteers being accustomed only to well- 
travelled trails found difficulty in places which such 
men as Luzon or Aju would have regarded as plain 
sailing. The valley was well cultivated, and there 
were many orchards of mulberry trees, for the silk- 
worm plays an important part here. The pan trees 
were numerous, and petals of their white and yellow 
flowers carpeted the fields. From the nut they pro- 
duce is derived one of the components that goes to 
make up the betel-nut chewer’s equipment. 

The head man at Tzetati should have been in a po- 
sition to supply all the information we wished about 
his district, for instead of, as is usual, coming from a 
distant part of the province, he represented the fourth 
generation to be born in the town. His knowledge, 
however, proved scanty, and he could only tell us 
that if we wished to hunt takin we could probably 
secure better information at Tsalo, a little Chinese 
town on the borders of the Lolo country. The road 
beyond, he added, had been closed to travel for many 
years, because of the uncertain temper of the inhabi- 


201 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


tants. He had never heard of the giant panda, and 
was positive that none existed in his country. 

We decided to split up, Ted and I going into the 
Lolo country to see whether we could come across 
panda or takin, while Suydam and Jack took a short 
cut back to the main road to Ningyuan, where we 
agreed on a rendezvous for the 16th of the month. 
This would give Cutting a chance to put in four or 
five days hunting in what was reported to be an ex- 
cellent game country. 

While we were busy making the division of kit, 
Suydam drew from his bedding roll one of the sau- 
sage-like Tibetan money-bags we had bought in Ta- 
tsienlu. It was unusually strongly impregnated with 
rancid yak butter and Cutting remarked he would be 
glad to have it no longer in his bedding, referring in no 
uncertain terms to its odor. Whereupon, Hsuen, who 
was standing by, instantly took up the cudgels for his 
fatherland. “That good smell, that like my brother.” 

Our first day’s march was to take us to Tsalo, but 
on the road a recurrence of the curious poisoning 
which I had first had in Yungchang obliged us to 
take time out, so we only reached a little hamlet 
called Sinchang. Here we were pleasantly sur- 
prised to find two French priests from the Catholic 
Mission at Fulin, Fathers Bocat and Flahntez. The 
former has spent eighteen years in China, the latter 
is but newly arrived. They were on a tour of inspec- 
tion of their native Catholic congregations. 


202 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


We had with us a flask of Benedictine which we 
had brought to drink with local headmen when open- 
ing relations. It was a genuine pleasure to share 
some of it with these French priests, to whom it could 
recall pleasant evenings in their far-distant France, 
a land which neither would in all probability revisit, 
for these Fathers come out to dedicate their lives to 
their work, and renounce all thought of ever re- 
turning. 

They both gave rather depressing accounts of the 
Lolo country, saying that it was greatly disturbed, 
and that they never travelled there and did not con- 
sider it safe. One of their Chinese priests had been 
captured not many months since on the borderland 
of the very country toward which we were headed, 
and his rescue had only been brought about after 
many difficulties and much negotiating. We assured 
them that we would take every precaution before en- 
tering the uncertain territory. Neither could give us 
any encouragement about the existence of the giant 
panda, and one of us sadly quoted, 


“Till instead of the Kalends of Greece, men said, 
When Crook and his darlings come back with the head!” 


We had not been long on the road before one of 
our mules Jost his footing and went spinning down 
the mountainside. Fortunately he brought up in a 
clump of thick bushes before any serious harm had 
been done, and half an hour later we had him back on 


203 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


the trail. By native wireless we learned that Suy- 
dam’s caravan had met with a similar accident, but 
with a less fortunate outcome. The mule had rolled 
down into a stream. It was killed by the fall, but the 
load was salvaged. Throughout this trip we had 
found the “native wireless” very deficient, often learn- 
ing nothing of people and events about which in 
Africa or Mesopotamia I would have been informed 
with speedy certitude by that unexplained method by 
which in the negro quarters in the South the results 
of the battles of the War of the Rebellion were known 
long before their masters in the Big House had heard. 


“The wind from the brier-patch brought him news 
That never went walking in white men’s shoes 
And the grapevine whispered its message faster 
Than a horse could gallop across a grave, 

Till, long ere the letter could tell the master, 
The doomsday rabbits had told the slave.”* 


We passed through several Lolo hamlets, and in 
one of them picked a fine-looking Lolo, Mooka, as a 
guide. He belonged to the serf class and we had to 
obtain the consent of his master. Slavery is still in 
full force among the Lolos, but there is not the rela- 
tionship between master and man that we commonly 
associate with the condition. Instead, there is a 
friendly companionship, and the sharing of food- 
bowl and wine-cup is often seen. 


*«John Brown’s Body.” Benet. 


204 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


At one village in which we made enquiries we met 
with a rather cold reception. Our questions regard- 
ing game were parried with demands to be told what 
were in our loads and how many rifles we had with us. 

The little Chinese outpost of Tsalo lies in a fertile 
valley among fields of corn and wheat and poppies. 
The head man was busy in his fields gathering poppy 
pods. He was evidently an opium addict. He knew 
little or nothing of the country ahead, although he 
said he understood that takin were to be found in the 
neighborhood of a Lolo village a day’s march distant. 
Of the panda he could give us no word. 

We were unfortunate in our choice of a lodging, 
for no sooner had we crawled into our bedding rolls 
than we heard the moaning of several sick people, and 
Hsuen came in to ask if we had any medicine for 
small-pox. He explained that there was an epidemic 
in the village and that in the next and only other 
room there was a poor woman who had lost one child 
and was now caring for her baby who was down with 
the disease. It is indeed distressing to hear the plaints 
of a sick child whom one is unable to help. There are 
times when any traveller, called upon for help in a 
hopeless case, may give a harmless pill in the hopes it 
may cause a fictitious relief or comfort, but with a 
dying infant such a procedure seems only heartless. 
A wretched woman in the next house and separated 
only by a thin partition was moaning and calling out 


205 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


in her delirium. The smell which drifted in from the 
courtyard beggared description. To add to Ted’s dis- 
comforts he was suffering from the effects of bad 
food or water. 

Altogether, when morning came we were more than 
ready for an early start. The Chinese headman had 
asked us to write him, taking any responsibility for 
our journey upon our own shoulders. We were afraid 
that to do so might cause him to pass on the word that 
we were any one’s prey; we therefore refused, telling 
him that while we didn’t require an escort, he might 
send one if he wished. Eleven militia turned up; two 
returned after accompanying us five or six miles, but 
the remainder proved a good lot, always ready to 
help or do any little odd job when called upon. We 
gave each man fifteen cents wine money a day. Just 
as we were leaving a man came along with a pony he 
wished to sell; an upstanding little bay, a four-year- 
old. We bought it for nine dollars, 

Three hours out Hsuen, who was indefatigable in 
his wayside enquiries for news of game, came up in 
great excitement. Only last night, he said, a man had 
come to a house we had just passed asking the loan 
of a rifle to protect the beehives of his village from 
the raids of a beishung, or white bear, the native name 
for the panda. It appeared that a month ago this 
animal had paid a visit to the apiary, and he had 
wounded it. Now it had returned. Unable to bor- 

206 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


row the rifle the villager had only just left to return 
to his house. Having been unable to secure even the 
vaguest news of the beast since leaving Muping, we 
had almost abandoned hope that there were any bei- 
shung in the country. This, therefore, certainly re- 
quired looking into, and after verifying the report we 
made arrangements to follow up the trail. 

We continued along for a couple of hours to a few 
houses known as Kooing Ma. We found that name 
usually referred to a group of hamlets scattered about 
within a radius of several miles. Here we got in 
touch with the local head man and converted suspicion 
into friendship through the presentation of an axe 
and a Homburg hat, followed up with a leisurely 
gossip over a glass of Benedictine. It was decided 
that we should leave our mules here, for porters only 
could negotiate the trail to the panda village. Ten 
villagers were drafted in to depart early in the morn- 
ing. 

We had gathered unto us at Tsalo a nondescript 
and rather shady appearing individual whom Hsuen 
explained to us as a “brother-man.” He was really 
a sub species of the genus entrepreneur, so common 
throughout China. They live from the proceeds of 
acting as intermediary in dealings of every descrip- 
tion. This particular “brother-man” was a Lolo who 
lived among the Chinese, and, it was suspected, added 
to his liaison work the distasteful post of spy. At 


207 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Kooing Ma he was on his mettle to secure informa- 
tion of all sorts for us, and the first bit of news he pro- 
duced was to the effect that the Lolos regarded the 
giant panda as a supernatural being, a sort of demi- 
god. This was discouraging, particularly since he 
added that he did not believe that they would take us 
hunting, for he was certain that the villagers them- 
selves never attempted to kill a panda, except in de- 
fense of their beehives, and even in that case they 
tried only to wound the marauder and frighten it off. 

This situation was not as disheartening as it might 
have been, for I had already had experience among 
natives, who, while owing to religious scruples unwill- 
ing themselves to kill a particular animal, were ready 
enough to aid a foreign hunter. We determined to 
approach the subject cautiously and to carefully 
avoid offending any native sensibilities. 

We were quartered in a clean native hut, filled with 
enormous bowls of grain. The sides were made of 
split bamboo and the roof was tiled with pine slabs, 
which failed to make it completely waterproof to the 
heavy rain that fell during the night. At half-past 
three we were awakened by a rooster that thought he 
had discovered daylight and would not let the matter 
drop. He seemed to be sharing our hut, so Ted 
crawled out of his blankets and after a short search 
announced he had found a hen in a basket sitting on 
some eggs. I protested that a hen could not crow, 

208 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


but he disregarded my protest, and quoting the line 
about “crowing hens” to bear him out, he deposited 
the vainly complaining hen, basket and all, outside in 
the rain. All was quiet for a time, and then the crow- 
ing recommenced. Both of us hopped up, and our 
search was rewarded by discovering two roosters hid- 
den away behind a mountainous pile of baskets. With 
my stick I rooted them out, while Ted directed them 
through the door, expediting their passage. Once 
more in our blankets we prepared for the few remain- 
ing hours of sleep, when a mournful but none the less 
loud crowing announced that the disconsolate fowls 
had taken refuge under the eaves within a few feet 
of Ted’s head. There was nothing further to be done. 

In the morning we gathered eleven villagers to 
serve as porters. Unaccustomed to the work, they 
could only carry very light ioads, and even so would 
go but a short distance before sitting down for a 
rest and a smoke. All the Lolos we met were invet- 
erate smokers. They hollowed pipes out of stones; 
some were white, others green, and many were 
made from a red stone which closely resembled the 
red pipestone used by the American Indian. I 
bought specimens of the different sorts, and once was 
the innocent cause of what threatened to be a riot. A 
woman had brought me a rather well-made green pipe 
with a brass stem; I had agreed to purchase it, when 
a man pounced upon it, and started haranguing the 


209 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


woman. The excitement became general, each party 
gathering vociferous adherents. It was some time 
before things were sufficiently quieted down for me 
to learn that the man claimed that the pipe had been 
stolen from him. At length it was sifted down to the 
statement that he had lost the pipe a year ago on the 
trail, and the woman had found it. Finders were 
adjudged keepers, and the sale was concluded. 

The distance from Kooing Ma to Kooing Hai is 
but a short one as the crow flies, but the trail wound 
round and about, and there were rivers to cross and 
steep ravines to negotiate, so that it was not until two 
in the afternoon that we came to the first of the group 
of houses that go to make up Kooing Hai. We had 
taken four soldiers, leaving the balance with the 
mules. We also had Mooka and the son of a neigh- 
boring head man. 

The mountainsides were glorious with rhododen- 
drons, varying in hue from deep purple to white. 
Pink was the prevailing color. In places the ground 
was sprinkled with a small blue member of the orchid 
family. Blue lilies, forget-me-nots, primroses, and a 
diminutive yellow flower dotted the path side. We 
were climbing up a valley, and as the altitude in- 
creased the crops were noticeably less advanced. 

At moments it did not look as if we would meet 
with a friendly reception. As we reached the hamlet 
farthest up the valley, designated as our halting 


210 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


place, the inhabitants took to the mountainside, and 
one man was very visible levelling a rifle at us. Our 
conductors succeeded in smoothing things out, but 
only with a good deal of difficulty, and it was not a 
friendly appearing delegation that dropped down to 
talk things over with us. I think it was the Chinese 
soldiers that were largely responsible for the distrust. 
Hsuen told us that among the Lolos we were usually 
taken for what he translated as “holy fathers,” as 
they call Catholic priests. This honor was due to our 
beards. 

Throughout the expedition we found that it was 
impossible to tell what sort of gift would prove a suc- 
cess. The knives and axes which had been a flat fail- 
ure in Muping were now of the greatest service, and 
went a long way to clear the horizon. On the other 
hand, the cheap field-glasses from which we had ex- 
pected much were firmly rejected. The ceremony of 
a glass of Benedictine stood us in good stead. The 
headman of the village was won over, but his tall, 
handsome old father did not appear to yield quite so 
readily to our attempted blandishments. It was evi- 
dent that except in defense of their property they did 
not care to attack the giant panda. We verified yes- 
terday’s story of the raid on the apiary, which stood 
close to the headman’s hut and was protected by a 
strong fence. It had taken place a month previous. 
We were also told that six years ago a beishung had 

211 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


been killed during a honey raid. This was the only 
record they could give us of one being killed. 

All afternoon and throughout the night it rained. 
In the morning the skies were overcast, but no rain 
was falling. Ten Lolo hunters with an equal number 
of dogs gathered outside our tent, which we had 
pitched close to a hut. We set out at half-past six for 
the mountains. A couple of hours’ climbing took us 
up among the bamboos, and we were soon drenched 
to the skin and shivering with the cold. Remnants of 
the winter snows lay in patches. The Lolos, shrouded 
in the brown or black capes they weave from sheep’s 
wool, seemed happy enough. They appeared to feel 
that there was a very good chance of bagging a pan- 
da, although we could not share in their optimism. 
As we made our way through the dense jungle along 
a ridge, we twice heard the dogs running something 
below us. In neither case did it come to anything. A 
halt was called and a fire was lit with much difficulty. 
One of the Lolos took a handful of moss into the 
centre of which he placed a bit of smouldering tinder. 
By dint of incessant blowing, undertaken in relay, a 
flame was eventually produced. 

Several of the Lolos had kept to the valley on 
either side of our ridge, and we had not been warming 
ourselves for long before a series of unintelligible 
shouts informed our companions that the dogs were 
running a sounder of swine. We did not want to 


212 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


shoot pig, but after a hurried debate we decided that 
it would be better for our future chances, in keeping 
our hunters keyed up, if we shot game for them when 
an opportunity arose that did not conflict with our 
beishung hunting. Such was very obviously the pres- 
ent situation, for with their dogs off after wild pig 
our Lolos could no longer hunt anything. 

The scramble down into the valley was most pre- 
cipitous; it was bad enough in the forested spots, but 
when we came to bare spaces it became all but im- 
possible. Our hopes of finding the going better along 
the bed of the torrent were quickly dashed. The 
stream thought nothing of a forty-foot drop, but to 
clamber down the slippery perpendicular rock slides, 
securing a precarious toe hold in a fissure or grasp- 
ing the doubtful root of some plant, proved a very 
different problem for us. The results of several falls 
entailed nothing more serious than abrasions and 
bruises and sprains, and we thought ourselves lucky 
on emerging on a native trail where the ravine dé- 
bouched out into the main valley. Rain and sleet 
were now falling, and most of the dogs had aban- 
doned the pursuit of the pigs. After some further fu- 
tile climbing our hunters decided to call it a day, and 
we returned to our tent with a practical working 
knowledge of the country and its difficulties. 

The headman had by now become definitely 
friendly, and we sat about the fire discussing ways 


213 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


and means of securing game, drifting now and then 
into more general topics. Hsuen’s choice of words 
and tournure de phrase were a constant delight and 
capable of cheering the most gloomy moments. The 
subject had as usual turned to sickness and to the 
medicine of which it required a constant well-balanced 
and calculating effort to preserve any of our small 
stock. Hsuen translated, “Headman say he got ghost 
in head. Ghost make head itch all time. Other peo- 
ple’s head not itch, so headman know he got ghost.” 
Ted, with great ceremony, presented a small box of 
cold cream, saying that if well rubbed in, it would lay 
the ghost. We were next told of a ghost that every 
January caused great mortality among the children. 
This was undoubtedly pneumonia, and a more diffi- 
cult apparition to deal with. 

The rain fell continuously all night, and several 
holes in the tent made it an uncomfortable residence, 
but there was no room in any near-by hut, so we had 
to make the best of it. Dawn broke cold and gray, 
with no pause in the rain. We thought it extremely 
unlikely that any Lolo would stir from his hut, but 
we were soon undeceived, for during the next hour no 
less than thirty-two men straggled in, each leading a 
dog on a string. The dogs were identical with those 
that we used in the Muping country. A good deal of 
rain had found its way into the tent during the night 
so that we were a bedraggled lot, even before start- 

Q14 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


ing; not that it made any difference, for half an hour 
would have sufficed to thoroughly saturate us with 
mud and water. 

Before setting off for the mountains our hunters 
“made medicine.” The Lolos carve no likenesses of 
their gods. To cure a sick man they hold services and 
beat drums, or burn holes in the scapular bone of a 
sheep, but nowhere did we see idols of any descrip- 
tion. Two of our hunters took sticks and whittled 
notches, muttering the while. As far as we could 
gather the main purpose was the determining of a 
propitious locality for the hunt. Hsuen looked sagely 
on. Turning to us he remarked, “They pray God,” 
then shrugging his shoulders, “Perhaps it do good, 
I not know.” 

Aside from the fact that we burrowed our way 
through a different bamboo jungle along a different 
ridge, there was little to differentiate this day’s hunt- 
ing from the previous. The dogs separated and pre- 
sumably hunted the valleys on either side. On each 
day we came across beishung sign, but in neither case 
did we feel that there was more than one animal 
indicated. From our observations we were certain 
that there were very few panda about, far less than 
in Muping. At noon we built a fire and from the 
folds of their cloaks the Lolos drew forth round 
lumps of bread liberally studded with beans. Among 
the hunters one old fellow particularly interested us. 


215 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


He must have been in the late sixties, and was looked 
upon by the others as a mine of hunting lore. His 
counsel weighed heavily in the decisions regarding the 
disposition of our forces. Somewhere en route he had 
gathered some white fungus which he roasted in the 
embers, and appeared to greatly enjoy. 

Once or twice the dogs picked up the trail of some 
animal, but they never held it for long. Aside from 
beishung signs of questionable age, all we saw were 
some musk-deer tracks, and a number of places where 
wild hogs had been rooting. 

The result of the evening conference was a deter- 
mination to put in a final hunt on the following morn- 
ing, and if nothing came of it to move further on to 
where we had been told takin were to be found. We 
paid our Lolo hunters from fifteen to thirty cents a 
day, offering a large reward to the man who could 
first point out a panda, and lesser rewards to any 
others who should really have had a part in the suc- 
cessful hunt. 

The villagers enriched themselves in other ways 
through us. We bought a sheep and eggs and some 
wine bowls and many stone pipes. One of the hunt- 
ers had a curious bamboo musical instrument which 
he played by holding it against his teeth and blowing 
upon it, while he snapped the taut bamboo slivers 
with his fingers. We asked Hsuen to get us a couple, 
and he wagged his head and said, with a twinkle in 
his eye: 


216 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


“That very bad thing, I tell you story some day all 
about it. It kill many people, oh, seven hundred.” 
Pressed to continue, he explained: “This country, 
same as everywhere, Father Mother he say I got son, 
I find him wife. He find wife. Girl’s mother, he 
find wife. Perhaps son see other girl he like. He 
play music her like this. She play music him. He 
say ‘My Father Mother say marry girl I no like.’ 
She say, “My Father Mother say I marry man I no 
like.’ He say, ‘I like you. You like me?’ She say, ‘I 
like you.’ He say, ‘We go top big mountain.’ They 
go top big mountain, they play music, they tie to- 
gether big knot round both necks, they both hang to 
tree. Oh, many people, seven hundred, die. That 
very bad.” 

Our next morning’s hunt was a repetition of those 
of the two previous days. Again we climbed a ridge. 
This time instead of rain and sleet we had snow, but 
the effect was much the same. We found no beishung 
sign. Ted saw a pheasant, and I caught a fleeting 
glimpse of a large squirrel. 

We had sent Hsuen ahead with our kit to Kooing 
Ma, telling him to gather the mules and go on to 
Litzaping, a village near which we had been told that 
takin were to be found. We followed at the termina- 
tion of our hunt, and reached Litzaping just before 
dark. 

Four headmen gathered to greet us. We first gave 
each a liqueur glass of Benedictine. We then bought 


217 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


some native wine which we poured into bowls that 
circulated among the headmen and their dependents. 
They were a fine, stalwart lot, and very friendly. We 
had heard that the Lolos were heavy drinkers, but we 
saw no indications of their being so. Their wine is 
usually made from corn. It varied greatly in qual- 
ity, though none of it could really be called an agree- 
able beverage. 

Our friends were unanimous in saying that there 
were very few takin about. We had heard there were 
many near a mountain named Tsumei Kwa. This 
they denied; one and all advising us to go on to 
Yehli, where they said there were many takin and an 
occasional giant panda. It was decided that we 
should send back the Chinese soldiers and take with 
us a son of each of the headmen. The Lolos said that 
with the soldiers accompanying us we might find our- 
selves in difficulties, but that without them we would 
be safe. Hsuen was by now thoroughly sick of the 
“brother-man” to whom he referred sarcastically as 
“our dear brother,” but he was afraid he might do us 
harm if sent back, and for several more days we gave 
way to Hsuen’s judgment. All of us were heartily 
glad when we eventually arbitrarily forced him to 
turn back. 

On the 12th of April we set out for Yehli. A per- 
sistent rain was falling, which added to the difficulties 
of the trail. Our pack animals consisted of four 


218 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


mules and two ponies. One of the latter missed his 
footing and started down the mountainside. A mule- 
teer pluckily grabbed his head stall and went rolling 
over and over among the boulders until long after it 
had seemed impossible for him to hold on further. A 
most convenient dense clump of sturdy bushes pre- 
vented pony and pack from taking the final sheer 
plunge into the river that would have definitely ended 
the career of both. We were delayed half an hour in 
lugging the pony back to the trail. 

Twice during the march a halt was called while the 
muleteers turned into road-builders to counteract the 
work of a landslide. At length the valley opened up, 
and we had easy going. The country became more 
and more lovely; giant pine trees grew beside the 
path, and we finally rode out onto a great mountain 
meadow, with a wide grassy valley, hemmed in by 
well-forested mountains terminating in barren snow- 
clad peaks. We felt that we might almost be back in 
the paradise of the Tian Shan. 

The hamlet at which we halted formed a part of 
the Yehli group. The cabins were large, and the 
ground about them was trampled with the feet of cat- 
tle and sheep. A heavy rain was falling and a dense 
fog soon shrouded the valley, making most welcome 
the pine-wood fire in the centre of the cabin. 

We started immediately on our hunting bundo- 
bust. Two self-styled experts were summoned. One 


219 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


was obviously a hunter, the other gave rise to doubts. 
The former had shot takin, and produced a head in 
proof. Both said that it was not too difficult to ob- 
tain them, and both agreed that there were a few 
beishung about, but that it would be almost impos- 
sible to get a shot at one. So far so good. Next a 
unanimous opinion was volunteered to the effect that 
it was impossible to hunt in this weather. When asked 
when an improvement might be looked for, both an- 
nounced that rain and sleet were in order at this time 
of year, and it was not possible to foretell a clearing 
up. This was indeed desolating, but Hsuen threw 
himself into the breach, bringing every argument to 
bear. The difficulty was increased by the absence of 
the headman of the valley. He had gone away on a 
journey, and the date of his return was uncertain. At 
length Hsuen made it clear that we could not await 
a change in weather, and all chance of a golden egg 
would vanish unless we were taken hunting on the 
morrow. Reluctantly the Lolos yielded. A new dif- 
ficulty was encountered when we tried to secure four 
hunters so that we could separate. The hunter with 
the aura of doubt said that he would substitute his 
son for himself. He told us the boy was eighteen, 
but when we had him paraded he was obviously no 
more than twelve. After skilful sifting it developed 
that his sole qualification as a takin hunter lay in his 
having once eaten takin meat. 


220 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


A shepherd brought in a very small wild pig, which 
he had found while tending his flocks in the hills. It 
was striped and spotted with white, and could not 
have been more than a few weeks old. It was dead, 
and conjured up visions of roast suckling pig at 
Thanksgiving dinners at Sagamore. We bought it 
for fifteen cents, and Hsuen’s culinary efforts re- 
sulted in an undeniable success. 

It was late before we had at long last straightened 
things out, and felt reasonably certain that four Lolos 
would be on hand in the morning. We then crawled 
up into a hay loft where we slept with the four heirs 
apparent of Litzaping who had come along with us as 
bodyguard. 

Saturday, the 13th of April, dawned cold and over- 
cast. It had snowed during the night and the floor 
of the valley was covered and the pine trees on the 
mountainsides were in conventional Christmas garb. 
We set off with four hunters, the takin-eating boy, 
and five slim black dogs. A thin misty rain set in. It 
was a cheerless beginning for what was destined to 
become our red-letter day. Four porters were to fol- 
low with our bedding rolls and those of the shikaries, 
for the programme called for a night or two a la 
belle étoile on the mountain where takin were re- 
ported. 

Three or four miles took us past the clump of 
cabins belonging to A’Souza, the absent headman. 


221 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


At an equal distance further up the valley we turned 
off into a ravine. It was only a short way further on 
that we came upon giant panda tracks in the snow. 
The animal had evidently passed a goodish while be- 
fore the snow ceased falling, but some sign that one 
of the Lolos found proved to be recent enough to 
thoroughly arouse all four natives. We had taken 
our ponies to ride until we should enter the jungle 
or the going become too difficult, and Mooka had 
come along to lead them back. It was now that he 
rose to the occasion and reached the high water- 
mark of his value. The Lolos hesitated to follow the 
beishung both for religious scruples and because of 
the very definite instructions that we wished takin. 
We could gather that a conference was under way, 
but believed that it concerned ways and means only, 
and there is no telling what might have resulted had 
not Mooka, as we afterward learned, stepped into the 
breach and explained that above all else we wanted 
beishung. 

This brought the conference to a close and we 
started off on the trail of the panda. It was not 
long before the dogs definitely demonstrated their 
utter futility. We passed some rat burrows in a small 
hollow. Four of our dogs lost all interest in any- 
thing beyond, and devoted their entire attention to 
the pursuit of the rats. The one that still remained 
with us trotted along at our heels baying until Ted 


222 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


caught it a shrewd clip with his stick. It retreated 
yowling into the forest and that was the last we saw 
of it. 

We now settled down to the steady business of 
tracking. Only three of the Lolos continued with us. 
The beishung appeared to be travelling along in lei- 
surely fashion, browsing on the bamboos as he went. 
The amount of sign that he left made us realize that 
we had been correct in making a conservative esti- 
mate of the number of beishung inhabiting the coun- 
try beyond Muping, in which we hunted. Soon we 
came upon a boar’s tracks superimposed on those of 
the giant panda. This continued for a mile or more 
Our quarry had evidently been in no hurry. For a 
while he followed up the rocky bed of a torrent, then 
he climbed a steep slope, through a jig-saw puzzle of 
windfalls. The fallen logs were slippery with snow 
and ice. Here we could crawl through and under; 
there we had to climb laboriously around and over. 
The bamboo jungle proved a particularly unpleasant 
form of obstacle course, where many of the feathery 
tops were weighed down by snow and frozen fast in 
the ground. Drenched by rain and soaked by snow, 
whenever a moment’s halt was called we alternately 
shivered and panted. For a few minutes the sun 
came out, and we were in dread that it would melt 
the tracks, but after a brief interval the murky clouds 
hid it again. 

223 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


We had been following the trail for two and a half 
hours when we came to a more open jungle. Tall 
spruce trees towered their giant bulk above the bam- 
boos. Lichen-covered alders were dotted about. An 
occasional blue or yellow flower poked its head up 
where the snow lay lighter. Here the panda had 
turned his attention more seriously upon provender. 
Under one tree he had made himself a nest of bam- 
boos. His claw marks scored the bark, and we lovcxed 
eagerly among the sturdy branches to see whether we 
could distinguish a black and white form crouching 
on a limb. His tracks led in many directions. The 
tough fibrous bamboos seemed to offer but an unin- 
viting dehydrated repast at best, and to judge from 
the droppings they were difficult to digest. Below 
us in the valley we heard the dogs yawping on the 
trail of some animal, probably a hog. We earnestly 
wished them elsewhere, for we felt sure that the bei- 
shung had not gone much further before seeking some 
accustomed haunt to spend the sleepy daylight hours. 

It was difficult to straighten out the trail. We cast 
first in one direction, then in another. Unexpectedly 
close I heard a clicking chirp. It might have been 
a bamboo snapping or the creaking of the interlock- 
ing branches of two trees swayed by the wind. I re- 
membered the eager interest of the Muping hunters 
at hearing just such a sound. In that case the noise 
had really been made by trees. One of the Lolo 


224 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


hunters was now close to Mokhta Lone and me. 
Noiselessly he darted forward. He had not got forty 
yards before he turned back to eagerly motion to us 
to hurry. 

As I gained his side he pointed to a giant spruce 
thirty yards away. The bole was hollowed, and from 
it emerged the head and forequarters of a beishung. 
He looked sleepily from side to side as he sauntered 
forth. He seemed very large, and like the animal of 
a dream, for we had given up whatever small hopes 
we had ever had of seeing one. And now he appeared 
much larger than life with his white head with black 
spectacles, his black collar and white saddle. 

Ted had started in a different direction with an- 
other Lolo, so Mokhta Lone and I eagerly signalled 
him. Though in reality only a short time, it was a 
nerve-wracking wait. The giant panda, dazed by 
sleep, was not really aroused, and was walking slowly 
away into the bamboos. If frightened it could vanish 
like smoke in the jungle. As soon as Ted came up 
we fired simultaneously at the outline of the disap- 
pearing panda. Both shots took effect. Not know- 
ing where his enemies were, he turned toward us, 
floundering through the drifted snow that lay in a 
hollow on our left. He was but five or six feet from 
Mokhta Lone when we again fired. He fell, but re- 
covered himself and made off through the densely 
growing bamboos. We knew he was ours, so al- 


225 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


though the Lolos had all along told us that a beishung 
was not an animal to be feared, we used caution in 
following the trail. A couple of the dogs that had 
been hunting in the valley below now came bounding 
by us, but they very evidently did not share their 
masters’ opinions as to the innocuous character of the 
beishung. They trailed, howling, behind us and noth- 
ing could induce them to go ahead. No help, how- 
ever, was needed, for the chase ended in seventy-five 
yards. He was a splendid old male, the first that the 
Lolos had any record of as being killed in this Yehli 
region. 

The shikaries, the Lolos, and ourselves held a mu- 
tual rejoicing, each in his own tongue. Our great 
good fortune could only with much effort be credited. 
We had hunted hard and long, usually in the face of 
every adverse circumstance. The previous evening 
conditions had been at their blackest, and it did not 
look as if we would be able to stir the Lolos from their 
homes. Now all was changed, and after so long hold- 
ing aloof, the Hunting Gods had turned about and 
brewed the unusual chain of circumstances that alone 
could enable us to shoot a giant panda, trailing him 
without dogs and with the crowning bit of luck that 
permitted us to fire jointly. 

When the enthusiasm had subsided sufficiently to 
allow us to think of anything beyond the immediate 
results of the chase, there were other plans to be 


226 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


worked out. In the face of the rain and sleet, and 
handicapped by a badly burst case, I had packed my 
camera in my bedding. My first thought was to get 
it, so Ted stayed behind to struggle with transporta- 
tion difficulties while I hurried down to the valley. As 
we slithered and slipped and barked our shins and 
knees, we kept up a running recapitulation of the de- 
tails of the chase. When Mokhta Lone paused for 
breath I broke in and took up the tale. I later learned 
that Ted and Gaffer Sheikh had been similarly em- 
ployed. Mokhta Lone insisted that the panda was a 
sahib, for unlike the bear it did not ery out when shot. 

At length we reached A’Souza’s lodge, where we 
hoped to find Hsuen and the mules. There was no 
sign of them. It was a blow, for it further dimmed 
any chance of successful photography. While trying 
to learn of Hsuen’s whereabouts we sat for a few brief 
minutes at the hospitable hearth of Vooka, A’Souza’s 
wife, who acted in his stead during his absence. She 
was a tall handsome woman, wearing the conventional 
hooded head-dress of Lolo women. She was smoking 
a long-stemmed pipe with a heavy stone bowl, that 
she later told us had belonged to her mother and 
grandmother before her. Filling it with tobacco she 
thrust it into the fire to top the bowl with a pyramid 
of embers. Then she handed it ceremonially to me, 
reminding me of a Red Indian passing the peace 
pipe. One of her daughters brought half a dozen eggs 
in a bowl made of takin hide. 

027 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


There was, unfortunately, no time to be lost, so we 
hurried back to our last night’s halting-place. There 
we found Hsuen, and hastily started the mules for- 
ward to A’Souza’s. It was not until half past four 
that I again found Ted and the beishung. My pur- 
suit of the camera had taken me on a fourteen-mile 
jaunt. It was raining and sleeting, and numbed fin- 
gers made but clumsy work with the camera. These 
Lolos were unaccustomed to carrying loads, and Ted 
had had a weary and discouraging time of it. For a 
while he tried to float the panda down the stream; 
but after struggling in the ice-bound water for a short 
time he abandoned the attempt and gralloched the 
animal. He had hoped to avoid doing so until after 
the camera should have arrived. He found no trace 
of the panda having varied its bamboo diet. 

Great were the celebrations held that night at 
A’Souza’s. Vooka ordered a sheep to be slaughtered, 
and resolutely refused to allow us to foot the bill. In- 
termingled with it all, there was strongly pervading 
an element of superstition. The beishung was at first 
not permitted in the compound, and we were afraid 
that we would have to skin it in the rain and snow and 
mud. Religious scruples were at length so far re- 
laxed as to permit the shikaries to carry it into an 
isolated hayloft. A deeply interested group sur- 
rounded us at our work, but not an omnivorous Lolo 
of the lot would touch a morsel of the flesh. Hsuen 


228 


VONVd INVID AHL HLIM ANOT VISMHOW GNV “UL 


A’SOUZA’S CABIN 


HSUEN WITH SEVERAL LOLO FRIENDS 


“HIGH, LOW, JACK, AND GAME” 


told us that after we left a priest was to be sent for 
and an all-embracing ceremony of purification would 
be held, to cleanse the house and its surroundings 
from any shadow that the death of the giant panda 
might cast upon it. 

The feasting lasted late. The sheep was quartered 
and plunged into a huge cauldron that was raised on 
three tall stones above the fire. A little later the par- 
boiled meat was fished out and hacked into smaller 
pieces. These were thrust back into the boiling water. 
A silent ring of expectant Lolos lined the walls of the 
big raftered building. They were shrouded in their 
long capes, and it was as well, for there were many 
chinks in the roughly shingled roof, and the rain fell 
ever faster. When the sheep was ready, Vooka’s ser- 
vants ladled great chunks into wooden bowls, and 
adding rice from a smaller cauldron, handed them 
around among the guests. Soon wine was poured 
into a wooden beaker and circulated through the 
throng. It was in the main a silent gathering, lit by 
the flickering fagots of pine that were thrust from 
time to time upon the fire. With Vooka seated beside 
the fire, smoking her long pipe and directing her re- 
tainers, the whole might well have fitted a feudal 
feast in Europe in the Middle Ages. Ted and I 
mixed a hot toddy from the last of our flask of brandy 
and drank the health of every one, starting with Gen- 
eral Pereira, whose attempts to shoot panda, made 


229 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


in the face of so many difficulties, had not been fa- 
vored by fortune with our lucky termination. 

It was late when we crawled up into the hayloft 
where our bedding was laid out. Never were the 
sleeping bags more gratefully welcome. Although we 
were past the age when “visions of sugar plums” 
could “dance through our heads,” black and white 
beishungs were never long absent from our dreams 
that night. 


230 


CHAPTER IX 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


“In twenty years they all came back, 
In twenty years or more, 
And everyone said, ‘How tall they’ve grown, 
They’ve been to the lakes and the torrible zone 
And the hills of the Chankley bore.’ ” —Leer. 


Suppose that you had, by the hardest sort of work, 
unexpectedly broken the world record for the mile 
run. Suppose that, tired but jubilant, you were sit- 
ting on the sidelines. Then suppose that at that mo- 
ment some one came up and said, “You must get up 
and run that mile again!” That is just the way Ker- 
mit and I felt when, after getting the giant panda, 
we realized that we must resume our interrupted 
takin hunt. We could not afford to take even a day’s 
rest, because we had to be in Indo-China for the hunt- 
ing as early as possible, since the summer rains make 
the low-lying jungles an almost impenetrable morass. 

Next morning early, when we sent for the native 
hunters, we found them far from keen. The feast the 
night before, and the bowls of corn wine, had made 
them feel more like gossiping in the courtyard than 
going again into the snowy mountains. Finally, after 

231 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


a good deal of urging we got them started about 
seven, which is very late when on the trail. The bed- 
ding and supplies for the two shikaries and ourselves 
were made into four bundles to be brought after us by 
porters. 

Fortunately the day was clear, and occasional 
bursts of sunlight lit the white snow with dazzling 
brilliancy. Soon we had passed the place where the 
day before we had come on the panda’s trail. The 
ravine got more steep and rugged, the jungle denser, 
and the going increasingly difficult. The snow lay 
deep on the ground. It had caught the tips of the 
bamboo grass, bent them down, and frozen them solid. 
Struggling up through them was like walking through 
croquet hoops. The Lolos were as usual as good- 
natured and shiftless as children. Every hour or so 
they would squat down in the snow and, grinning 
ruefully, rub their aching heads. It was hard to make 
them carry even Kermit’s camera. 

Once as we were plunging through a thicket we 
flushed a flock of jungle fowl. I was unable to get 
a clear view of them but, judging from a glimpse of 
one that I caught as it hurtled through a tree, they 
were as large as blackcock and of a dark color. 

We kept constantly on the watch for signs, as an 
animal that passed would leave a clear trail in the 
snow. We saw nothing but the delicate footprints of 
a barking deer until, well on in the afternoon, Mokhta 


232 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


Lone picked up with the field-glasses half a dozen 
trails running parallel across the snowy summit of 
a mountain. We asked the natives what they were 
and were told Yea Gnu (takin). None of us thought 
them large enough, but we felt we would chance a 
mistake. Leaving three of the local hunters behind, 
we started toward the mountain with the fourth. 
Soon he wished to sit down and let us go on alone. 
After a rather sharp argument we convinced him his 
plan would not work. 

It did not take us long to realize why he had wished 
to wait behind. The first part of our way lay through 
the usual bamboo thicket, but this time it was grow- 
ing among rocks covered with snow. Every ten yards 
some one’s leg would slip into a crevasse between 
two boulders, and down he would come with a thud. 
The snow had drifted into the valley up which we 
were climbing, and sometimes we floundered armpit- 
deep. After nearly an hour of this work we came out 
on the barren mountainside. It was very steep but 
still held the snow and ice in a glacier-like formation. 
At this moment the sun came out, and soon we were 
dripping with sweat and half-blinded by the glare. 
At length after climbing a particularly steep shoulder 
we reached the trails. They were not takin but wolf. 
As we sat panting, our main consolation was that one 
of the native hunters who had given us the wrong in- 
formation had suffered with us. 

233 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Undoubtedly two of the natives who were with us 
had at some time killed takin, but it was most difficult 
to get anything approaching accurate information 
from them. They told us the animals were at times 
savage. They feared them, particularly when in 
herds, and said when they found a number together 
they always climbed a tree before shooting. 

Half-scrambling, half-sliding, we reached the val- 
ley again in a fraction of the time it had taken us to 
climb up. A walk of a quarter of a mile brought us 
to our three hunters, squatting around a fire that they 
had built in the snow under a gnarled old tree. They 
explained by signs that this was where we were to 
camp. Soon the four porters joined us with our 
equipment. We had brought two single tents, each 
weighing twelve pounds. One we gave to our Kash- 
miris. The other we kept for ourselves. We soon had 
them pitched and our bedding unrolled within on the 
snow. 

Neither Kermit nor I eat much when we are hunt- 
ing hard, but at that we felt we were cutting ourselves 
fine when we found we had rationed ourselves each 
per day at the rate of one-fourth of a small tin of 
cornbeef, half a tin of U. S. Army emergency ration, 
and a few graham crackers. The best part of our fare 
was the hot cup of soup-like chocolate made from the 
iron ration. After supper we dried our socks before 
the fire and then turned in. 


234 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


Toward morning it became bitterly cold and neither 
of us could sleep. In the first faint light we decided 
that the day had begun, and hobbled stiff-legged to 
the fire. It took no time to get breakfast as there 
was nothing to cook, and before the sunrise we were 
going up the valley which led into the main ranges. 

After an hour and a half hard going we found our- 
selves near the salt spring on which the natives had 
pinned their faith. Very cautiously we approached, 
careful lest a twig should snap. At last we got where 
we could see it. There was not an animal anywhere. 
Not only that, but when we walked up to it we could 
see no tracks in the snow, which was a great disap- 
pointment as it meant that no takin had been there for 
many days. The spring itself bubbled from the 
ground in tiny spurts. I tasted the water and found 
it rather warm and brackish. 

The Lolos were very much discouraged and ex- 
plained that there could be no takin in the country, 
for if there were they visited the spring every few 
days. They wanted to turn back at once. Kermit 
and I felt that we did not want to leave until we were 
sure we had no chance. We split the party and fol- 
lowed up the various ravines, stopping wherever we 
could get a good view and combing the surrounding 
mountains with our field-glasses. After covering much 
country and failing to see even a track, we reluctantly 
decided that wherever the takin might be they were 
not in this place. 

235 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Our minds made up, we started back as rapidly 
as possible. Stopping just long enough at the place 
we had spent the night to break camp and start the 
coolies, we pushed on. The bright sun of the last two 
days had melted much of the snow, especially in the 
lower part of the valley. Peeping through their 
white coverlid were leaves with the fresh green color 
of early spring. 

When we reached the home of our host, the Lolo 
chief, it was mid-afternoon. We went into the com- 
bined living-room, bedroom and kitchen, and told 
Hsuen we had made up our minds to leave next day 
for Ningyuan. Our caravan men were glad to get 
this news, for as they were part Chinese they were 
far from popular in Lolo Land. Then we said we 
wanted to give a feast for the people of the valley. 
Our host, A’Souza, had not yet returned, but Vooka, 
his wife, at once protested. She said they would give 
the feast. The household was feudal in the best sense. 
They were generous to a fault and regarded hospi- 
tality as an obligation of their position. 

We never saw the Lord of the Manor, as he was 
away, but Vooka, his wife, pictured him fairly to us. 
She was accustomed to power. She had a pleasant 
low voice, a great contrast to the usual acrid shrill- 
ness of Asiatic women. Of only medium height, she 
looked tall. One of her eyes was terribly injured by 
some disease. Her clothes were voluminous, dirty 


236 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


and torn. Nevertheless, even when squatting by the 
fire smoking the old stone pipe which was her con- 
stant companion, there was an air of unconscious 
dignity about her that would have shamed many the 
grand lady. Once we tried to give her a gold ring 
set with a turquoise. She refused, with the statement 
that she greatly liked the idea because she knew it 
meant “our hearts were good,” but that she was an 
old woman and had no use for gewgaws. 

It was only when we insisted that we too felt the 
obligation of dispensing hospitality, that Vooka at 
length consented to let us buy food for the festivities. 
We purchased a sheep and rice. We tried also to buy 
some native wine to have served. It is an interesting 
witness to the general sobriety of these mountain folk 
that none was to be found. 

Kermit and I then set about packing and going 
over the loads, so as to have all in readiness for an 
early start next day. 

Meanwhile the feast was in course of preparation. 
A sheep was brought in from the hills and slaughtered 
in the courtyard. Without an instant’s delay it was 
carried into the house, skinned and quartered,—for 
animals are not kept but eaten immediately. The 
great iron pan-shaped pot was rested on the stones 
that surrounded the fire, and filled with rice and 
chunks of mutton. 

Soon the people of the neighboring houses began 


237 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


to arrive. Kermit and I sat in our rhoorkee chairs on 
one side of the fire. Around in a deep circle were 
ranged the natives squatting on the floor. Each had 
a bowl into which he continually dipped rice and mut- 
ton from the cauldron. There were no knives or — 
forks. Every one ate with his fingers. The only light 
came from the fire on which the cauldron was sput- 
tering. Once the unmarried daughter of the house 
told Hsuen to ask us if we could give her a cake 
of our soap. I happened to have an extra piece of 
Pear’s soap done up in its paper wrappers, which we 
gave her much to her delight. Gradually the sheep 
meat disappeared and the bones were thrown to the 
dogs. One by one the guests, thoroughly stuffed, 
drifted out into the night and their houses. By nine 
o’clock the festivities were finished. 

When they had all gone we presented the son and 
heir of the house, vice his father, with Kermit’s 32 
Colt automatic. His mother was really embarrassed. 
She explained that she had no valuable present for 
us, saying they had lost most of their family treasures 
when they were driven into this valley from their old 
home near Tachow. 

Next morning when we bade her good-by she had 
her family and many of the guests of the previous 
evening around her. I believe they were sorry to 
have us leave, and I know we were sorry to go. It 
seemed almost unbelievable that this kindly old wo- 


238 


VOOKA AND HER NEIGHBORS 


A LOLO 


A LOLO GIRL 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


man and these smiling natives were the savages we 
had been told would rob us. Nevertheless the fact 
remains that the route through Yelhi, though a short 
cut from Tatsienlu south, had been closed to cara- 
vans for many years. 

A bodyguard of sons of some of the local head men 
accompanied us as we struck east along the valley. 
The sun had just risen. The surrounding mountains 
were capped with snow and girdled with dark for- 
ests. The level floor of the valley was dotted with 
sheep and goats. Through the centre flowed the small 
stream that had its source where we had hunted takin. 
The rocks around which its water rippled were bril- 
liant red from some bright-colored lichen that cov- 
ered them. 

By ten we had crossed a small divide and dropped 
into a mountain meadow surrounded by splendid old 
spruce trees. Here we lost our faithful companion, 
Mokhta, who had been at least in part responsible for 
our chance at the panda. He told us this was as far 
as he wanted to come. We paid him his wages and 
gave him a sheath knife. The last we saw of him he 
was striking into the mountains on a short cut to his 
home. 

As the hours passed the valley broadened and be- 
came less rugged. We saw houses and cultivated 
fields. From the hillsides would rise groups of Lolos, 
wild-looking fellows with their black turbans and 


239 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


great capes. They streamed down on our caravan, 
far from friendly until they saw our escort. One 
mountaineer had his hair cut in a scalp-lock like 
an American Indian. Outside of two or three old 
smooth-bore, fuse-fired guns I saw no weapons, but 
probably the folds of the cloaks concealed some. 
Much of the march we had from ten to twenty walk- 
ing along with us. Like our friends at Yelhi, once 
confidence was established they were most friendly, 
smiling at us and looking with interest at our equip- 
ment. 

Looking down the trail ahead I saw moving white 
dots a mile or so away. For a moment I thought 
they were animals,—then I realized they were natives 
carrying coffin-boards to market. As we drew closer 
I could make out the outline of the coolies, who 
looked like industrious ants moving their eggs across 
the garden walk. These coffin-boards are enormous, 
three or four inches thick, between two and three feet 
broad, and six or seven feet long. It is this demand 
for large solid timbers that has contributed greatly 
to the deforestation of China. Not only that, but the 
cost to the living is tremendous. Respect for one’s 
ancestors is excellent; but when it is perverted to 
mean burying much of the family’s sorely-needed 
means with the deceased, and spending most of the 
balance on senseless formalities at the funeral, it is 
criminal folly. 


240 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


At three o’clock our Lolo escort gathered around 
us and Hsuen said they wished to bid us good-by, 
as Tachow was but twenty li distant and they dared 
go no further. We gave them “wine money” and 
they smiled and bowed their thanks. Gathering on 
a near-by ridge they watched until we disappeared 
from sight. 

Coming down the valley the seasons shifted with 
kaleidoscopic rapidity. On the top of the pass it was 
still winter. A few miles lower we were treading on 
the heels of spring. The poppy-fields were in full 
bloom. Still further on it was almost summer, for 
the blossoms had finished and the pods were being 
gathered. Soon we came to signs of Chinese occupa- 
tion. The types of people who stared at us from the 
fields were more Chinese. 

We decided to push ahead faster. The muleteers 
hurried their animals. Glancing back while we were 
jogging along one level stretch I saw an example of 
everything that should not be done in riding. Gaffer 
Sheikh was coming behind. He had dropped the reins, 
which flapped loosely around his pony’s neck. With 
both hands he was grasping the saddle pommel. He 
shook from side to side like a piece of corn in a pop- 
per. Most remarkable of all, he neither considered 
that he was in difficulties nor that he was riding badly. 

Of all bad riders, and I have seen many, I con- 
sider the Kashmiris in a class by themselves. No horse 


241 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


or mule that breathes can last long under them. At 
the end of about a week there is a sore on the back 
or a swelling in the mouth, and the same plaint, 
“Sahib, hamara ghora na thik hai” (Sir, my horse is no 
good) ,—for no native will ever admit that he is by 
any chance to blame for anything that may go wrong. 

It was evening when, after crossing and recrossing 
a little river by numerous fords, we came to the small 
walled town of Tachow. An open-mouthed crowd 
gathered at the gate and watched our battered train 
file in. We knew we were objects of unusual interest 
but could not tell why as we had no means of speak- 
ing to any one. Hsuen, the faithful, had stayed be- 
hind on the road to make sure the beishung bones 
which were carried by a porter were not lost, for “It 
make too much sadness if lose.” 

When Hsuen appeared we sent him at once to the 
magistrate with our cards, the letter from the Central 
Government, and the pair of oft-rejected field- 
glasses. As Kermit said, “He can’t very well send 
them back if Hsuen leaves them.” 

In a comparatively few minutes the “evangelist” 
returned beaming with smiles. The unexpected had 
happened. The stone which the builders had rejected 
had become the headstone in the corner. The field- 
glasses had produced a sensation. “He suspicious. 
He ask what we want for give such valuable present. 
I say nothing but make happy. He come quick.” 

242 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


So said Hsuen, and almost at once the local of- 
ficial appeared. He was a nice looking, spare young 
fellow of about thirty. With him came another young 
fellow who was a local headman. We made them 
join us in the black den which was our bedroom in 
the back of the inn. There by the light of a guttering 
oil lamp we offered them each a liqueur glass of bene- 
dictine, the last drop of anything we had. 

Then we started the usual formalities. We found 
the magistrate had been born in a village near by. 
He asked what we had been doing. We told him 
hunting and showed him a picture of the panda. 
Neither he nor any of those who had come with him 
had ever heard of the animal. It was another 
puzzling and discouraging instance of the extreme 
localization of information in Western China. Here 
was an intelligent man, born in this place, who did 
not even know of the existence of the beishung though 
we had killed one but twenty-five miles away. 

Preliminaries finished, we came to the matters that 
really interested him and the explanation of the rea- 
son we had been regarded with such enthralled inter- 
est. He wanted to know where we had been, and 
how we had come in so peacefully, unrobbed and un- 
troubled, from hostile Lolo Land. He said never in 
his knowledge had a white man been there, and that 
for many years no Chinese had ventured there. It 
was as if in the tenth century a party of Kuropean 


243 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


Christians had turned up healthy and unharmed at 
Constantinople, explaining they had just come from 
Mecca. 

We were now on the borderland between the Lolo 
country and China. Like the border between Scot- 
land and England it was the scene of practically con- 
tinuous warfare. Raid and reprisal succeeded each 
other in an interminable procession. Tachow itself 
was a frontier outpost, always under arms. Raiders 
had broken in a few months before and burnt a num- 
ber of the houses. Only that morning the magistrate 
told us a village not a mile from the town walls had 
been sacked by the men from the hills, and one of his 
soldiers had been killed in the action. The population 
of the town and its surroundings was mainly Chinese, 
with a mixture of valley Lolos who stood to their 
mountain kinsmen much as the lowland Scots stood 
to the highlanders. 

When he asked what he could do for us, we said 
we wanted him to help us get to Ningyuan as rapidly 
as possible. He was much pleased at this very mod- 
erate request, and said he would not only send an 
escort of soldiers to see us safely to the first big town, 
some twelve miles away, but would lead the party him- 
self. 

Next morning, in spite of the promises the mule- 
teers had made, they did not appear. Kermit went 
to hurry them, and I asked Hsuen to buy a small 


244 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


image we had seen in the front room of the inn. It 
was a delightful little carved wood figure mellow 
with the gloss of ages. The people did not wish to 
sell, but made this obvious in an odd fashion. They 
hid it, put another in its place, and to the end insisted 
it had never been there. 

The pack-train ready, the fatisisate appeared 
with our escort. It consisted of thirteen Chinese sol- 
diers and twenty-two Lolos. The magistrate had 
given the latter a wine and mutton feast the previous 
evening on the condition that they would come. 

In the usual noisy eastern confusion, we clattered 
and slipped over the grimy paving stones. Pigs 
grunted and scrambled out of our way, dogs barked, 
women and children screamed and chattered. As we 
passed the old gray stone gate the sun had just risen, 
and the country had that fresh cleanness of new sun- 
light. Behind and around us lay the black hills and 
mountains of the Lolos. To the west was a particu- 
larly beautiful snow-mountain. We were told it was 
called the Golden Mountain, and indeed its snow- 
fields did not look unlike gold quartz as they sparkled 
in the sun. 

As we filed along I glanced back. Our caravan 
was certainly a jungle outfit. Kermit and I, with our 
ragged beards and worn hunting clothes, were as wild- 
looking as any of the mountaineers. Behind us came 
the Lolos with their black turbans and rifles of every 


245 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


type and age. Then came the ponies with our kit. 
Such American-made boxes as we still had were bat- 
tered beyond semblance of their former selves. The 
rest of the things were in native skin-bags. For ex- 
ample, we carried our basins and toilet articles in 
Tibetan goatskin-bags, tanned with hair on and the 
feet sewed outside. The few pots and pans that 
formed our kitchen were black with smoke and dented. 
In a few minutes we passed a small village which, 
the magistrate explained, was the one which had been 
sacked the day before. Then we came to a forest. 
Apparently this was the point where danger was first 
expected. Our escort doubled forward and scattered 
left and right through the woods. It was not done 
clumsily for show, as is so often the case when Chi- 
nese soldiers are anxious to give you the impression 
that they are guarding you from danger where none 
really exists, but with the careful efficiency of men 
who mean business and know what they are doing. 
The magistrate himself dismounted, took a rifle, and 
went forward with the advance guard. Whether due 
to the excellent screen that enveloped us, or because 
no robbers were there that day, we climbed the hill 
and without incident wound our way down the other 
side. At the foot the Lolos gathered and we were 
told they were leaving us. We gave them a few dol- 
lars wine money and left them happy. The magis- 
trate and the thirteen real soldiers stayed with us. 


246 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


The country became more open. Grain and poppy 
fields alternated. The men and women working there 
straightened up, and gazed at us with the awestruck 
look of country children watching a circus parade. It 
was still morning when we reached the gray moss- 
draped walls of Mienning-hsien. It was a busy, dirty 
trade-centre where caravan trails from a half dozen 
places met. The crowds almost blocked our way as we 
pushed through the bazaar. We stopped for a mo- 
ment to say good-by to the nice little official from 
Tachow, and fee his soldiers. Then, leaving Hsuen to 
make our excuses and give our cards to the magis- 
trate of the city, we trotted on to join the caravan, 
which was already on its way downstream. 

We had travelled steadily for eleven hours when 
we reached the village of Lokow. There we had luck, 
for we found a Chinese Catholic Mission and had 
clean rooms in which to sleep. Of course with our 
long beards we were taken for French Fathers. For- 
getting this, I explained by signs to one of the local 
Chinese that each of us had four children. He took 
it in good part, however, evidently feeling that we 
were merely some different type of Holy Father. 

Here we got news from Suydam and Jack Young. 
At first we were able to find out nothing but that they 
had passed through some four days ago. The post- 
office, where they were supposed to have left a letter 
for us, denied any knowledge of it. Knowing Chinese 

Q47 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


post-offices, however, we would not take no for an 
answer. Finally, we wormed out of them the infor- 
mation that some days ago a letter had been left ad- 
dressed in a foreign tongue, and that they had sent it 
to a Catholic Mission fifteen li away. ‘The postmas- 
ter said he would try to get it for us if we would pay 
him in advance. We said he had the cart before the 
horse. He would get his backshish when he brought 
the letter. He did, and we were glad to hear that all 
had gone well with the other echelon of our party. 

Both Kermit and I were sick. Kermit had a re- 
turn of his poisoning and I had an infected leg and a 
go of fever coming. We had seen on the map where 
the Amning river ran from Lokow to Ningyuan and 
decided to try to get a boat. We hired one to meet 
us at a place about twelve miles from town, and offered 
to take the loads with us but, for some reason which 
we were never able to fathom, the caravan men pre- 
ferred to go the entire way by the road. 

As we were riding out next morning we passed a 
foundry where iron pots were being smelted in clay 
moulds. There was one remarkable innovation,—a 
bellows run by water power. It was made of a cylin- 
der cut from the log of a tree in which a piston was 
operated by an eccentric crank attached to a hori- 
zontal water-wheel. It impressed me greatly, for it 
was the first time I had seen anything in western 
China suggesting a competent labor-saving device in 
industry. 


248 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


When we came to the boat we found it the usual 
clumsy barge built of ill-fitting planks. Of course it 
leaked and an inch or more of dirty water swashed 
around the bottom. Two natives handled it with great 
sweeps,—one at the bow, one at the stern. Kermit 
and I made ourselves comfortable on the bottom and 
I started at once writing this chapter. We drifted 
with the current down the winding muddy stream. 
On each side low-lying green rice fields stretched. 
Unwieldy, nearly hairless water-buffaloes slowly 
tugged ploughs through the black mud, or turned to 
stare at us with mild incurious eyes. On the sand- 
bars gray and white cranes were standing. Snipe 
rose and flickered off. Occasionally as we rounded a 
bend we startled a flock of Brahmini ducks which 
rose with a splatter of water. The sun was blister- 
ingly hot. It seemed impossible that only three days 
before we had been in rough forests waist-deep in 
snow. Kermit and I had bought a couple of big 
straw cartwheel hats to act as sunshades. When he 
put his on he looked, with his ragged beard, like a 
disreputable medizval saint with a halo. 

At noon the boatmen brought our craft to the bank 
and disappeared toward a cluster of huts. Hsuen 
told us they had gone to their homes to get “things 
to eat.”? This seemed reasonable, but, when they did 
not return in forty-five minutes, we sent him to tell 
them we had engaged them to take us downstream, 
not to feast. 

249 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


It was four o’clock when we reached the place, some 
twenty-five li from Ningyuan, where they were to 
land us. Our road now led us across the paddy 
fields. For the last hour or so a storm had been ris- 
ing. Soon a wind blew from the mountains in gusts 
that constantly grew in violence. Trees were bent 
like blades of grass. A branch was broken off as we 
passed through a village and nearly killed a little boy 
who was running across the street. Then came the 
rain. Soon we were soaked and chilled to the bone. 
The rubber soles on our shoes made it nearly im- 
possible to stand. We slipped and slid about like a 
dog on a frozen pond. We had Hsuen ask the few 
draggled people we passed the distance to the city. 
We got the usual answers. A born optimist would 
say ten li. Then we would plod along for half an hour 
and inquire again, only to be told fifteen. It was the 
longest twenty-five li I ever walked. The city was 
hidden by trees, rain, and mist. We came on it sud- 
denly. Even then we were not through, for the Mis- 
sion was at the other end of town. Nothing ever 
looked better than its courtyard, with Suydam and 
one of the Fathers coming forward to greet us. 

The caravan was there, so we went upstairs at once 
and put on dry shirts. Then we came down to dinner, 
which had been kept waiting. Soon we were seated 
in real chairs around a real table eating potage and 
drinking red wine. 


250 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


There were three priests. The Bishop, Mon- 
seigneur Baudry, was a slight, kind-faced man, a 
Rochellese by birth, but it had been thirty-five years 
since he had left China. Pére Le Mercier was a thick- 
set, jolly man of thirty-six, typical of the France he 
loved. Pére Le Bouetté came from Breteuil, and had 
served in China fifteen years. All three had long 
beards and wore the black gown of their order, Les 
Missions Etrangéres. 

This French Mission is a most remarkable organi- 
zation. It has branches all over the world,—Africa, 
Ceylon, China. The aspirants are sent to a seminary 
in Paris where they study for six years. Then one 
day comes an order, “You will go to Ceylon,” or 
maybe, “China”—and they go, often the next day. 
What is more extraordinary, the man does not know 
a word of the language of the land to which he is be- 
ing sent, for languages are not taught in the semi- 
nary. He is expected to learn when he gets to his 
destination. The members of the Mission for the most 
part never see France again. A very, very few, such as 
Monseigneur de Guébriant, the great explorer, rise to 
the head of the order and return to Paris. An equally 
small number, I know of one case only, are afflicted 
with some incurable and totally disabling disease, such 
as paralysis, and are sent home. The rest live their 
lives and die in the country to which they are sent, 
without ever leaving it. There has been only one ex- 


251 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


ception,—the Great War. During those days when 
France was fighting for her life the members of the 
Missions Etrangéres came home and joined the army. 

All three of the Fathers at Ningyuan were de- 
lightful. They were cultivated, and kept thoroughly 
in touch with what was happening in the world. There 
was a library of many hundreds of volumes. Mon- 
seigneur remarked, when I complimented him on it, 
that it had been burnt three times during the civil dis- 
orders. 

Chatting over the wine we heard many interesting 
side-lights on their daily lives. Pére Le Mercier had 
been a sergeant in the army. He had been captured 
by the Germans and twice had all but escaped. He 
joined the Mission after the war, and was sent to 
China. The day he left Yunnanfu he was captured 
by bandits, robbed of everything, and turned loose on 
the country without being able to speak a word of 
the language. Once Baudry, when sick with fever, 
had been attacked by twenty outlaw Chinese soldiers 
and an officer. He was mounted at the time and fled. 
They fired on him and pursued him. He distanced 
them on the level, but when he had to climb a hill they 
gained. The chase ended when some Lolos, who were 
friendly, gathered and killed all the soldiers and the 
officer. The ride cost Monseigneur the sight of one 
eye, for the strain greatly aggravated the fever. 
Fourteen years before Monseigneur Baudry had been 


252 


SIoyEY OY} AQ OurIazOg pousystiyo useq sey MOTI[Ay plo ayy, 
NVNAONIN LY NOISSIW HONGUA AHL NI | 


A RNDDINMNLD OD WUIOHM rr ym rr 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


back to the same part of Lolo Land, where we had 
hunted. He said he believed that he was the only 
other white man who had ever been there. 

Besides the Fathers there were two Sisters who 
devote most of their attention to care of the sick. 
They were very kind to me and it was largely due 
to them that my attack of fever was broken so quickly. 

One of the most interesting characters in the Mis- 
sion was the catechist, Chow Tze Kow. He was a Man- 
chu. His family had lived in Ningyuan for ten genera- 
tions. He was a tall handsome man with a long white 
beard. Originally he had made his living as a scribe, but 
had taken opium to such an extent that he could not 
work, and his father had turned him out of the house. 
Thereupon, entirely without aid, he decided to stop 
the drug. He did, though for fifteen days he hung 
between life and death. Then he joined the Mission. 
He had a small room within the Mission walls. It 
was like a curiosity shop. Every corner was piled 
with odds and ends,—old native books, musical in- 
struments, bits of old watches, pictures of the Holy 
Family and the saints. His professions were all-in- 
clusive. He cobbled shoes. He mended clocks and 
watches. He cut blocks for Chinese calling cards for 
me. One day he took an old Chinese astrolabe and 
took the time by the sun for us. There was nothing 
he could not and did not do. Above all, he was a mu- 
sician. 

253 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


One evening he gave us a concert, bringing his or- 
chestra with him. His orchestra was almost as re- 
markable as he was. There were three of them,—the 
interpreter of the Mission, a little, old, typical 
Chinaman, very thin, with his brown skin drawn tight 
over his cheeks. Another had a kindly, wrinkled face 
like an old apple, and was professor in the local gov- 
ernment school. The third was a tall, handsome Man- 
chu who was in the local customs service. All of them 
played stringed instruments. The catchist, at the 
head of the table around which they were gathered, 
pulled the stroke oar. He played on a harpischord. 
They gave selections from old Chinese operas, each 
taking a part and singing in turn. The music was in 
a minor key and monotonous to a European ear. 

Another day he alone played to us, this time on 
a lute. The very names of the selections were pic- 
turesque. “Swans Flying Over the Rapids,” ‘“Con- 
fucius Studying,” “The Foreign Mandarin Leaving 
for His Home with Music.” 

The city of Ningyuan was administered by Gen- 
eral Chao, a big, handsome man. He had been orig- 
inally a leader of free companions, but now was firmly 
aligned with the government. He neither smoked 
opium nor drank. He was Christian,—though of 
what denomination I never knew,—and perhaps be- 
cause of this he had his headquarters in the defunct 
Baptist Mission. 


254 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


While strolling through the bazaar, we had an il- 
lustration of the fact that China is composed of back 
eddies where almost anything may collect. We 
stopped at a silk-shop and there on the wall, yellow 
with age, was a sheet from a New York daily fifteen 
years old, giving the photographs of men who were 
attending the first Plattsburgh Camp,—Robert Ba- 
con, John Purroy Mitchel, etc. In a grocery store we 
saw the china figure of a woman with a skirt trail- 
ing the ground and a muff and a boa, evidently made 
in Germany in the seventies. 

It was three days before we were able to get a mule 
caravan. The morning that we left all the Fathers and 
the catechist came out to wish us Godspeed. Our stay 
at Ningyuan had been a delightful interlude and we 
knew we had made three good friends. 

Although we felt, when we reached the French 
Mission, that we were in civilization and a part of the 
outside world again, this was really far from being the 
case. There was no telegraph in the city, and even 
mail took between ten days and two weeks to get to 
the nearest railroad. 

Our aim now was to get to Yunnanfu in the most 
rapid time possible. Day after day we travelled from 
dawn to dark. At first our road led us down the broad 
valley of the Amning Ho. The country was lovely. 
The hedges were a mass of wild-rose, not the wild- 
rose of America, but full-bodied pink and white blos- 


255 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


soms. The cacti were tipped with a saffron-colored 
bloom. Pomegranate trees were gay with orange 
flowers. By the irrigation ditches we saw young girls 
acting duck-herds for flocks of goslings. They kept 
their diminuitive charges from straying by sweep- 
ing them together with light, long-handled bamboo 
brooms. 

One night at Kungtuying we were awakened by 
the beating of a gong. When we inquired what was 
happening we were told that robbers had looted a 
house on the outskirts and had taken “‘a horse, a mule 
and a goat.” 

On the fifth day of hard travel we reached Hweili- 
chow. There we went at once to the French Mission, 
where we were met with the bitterest disappointment. 
There was no mail. Through some error everything 
had been sent north to Tatsienlu. Some letters had 
gone only a few days before, according to the post- 
master. It was four months since we had letters, as 
the last we had received were dated the end of Decem- 
ber. Father Andren did his best to cheer us, but, 
under the circumstances, with no success. 

Our trail now led us through a rough, uncultivated, 
sparsely settled country. On the second day we 
crossed the Yangtze, a broad, swift-flowing stream, 
red with silt. In spite of the fact that theoretically 
we were still in the dry season, it had rained contin- 
ually. The day we crossed the river we finished our 


256 


THE END OF THE TRAIL 


march after dark by climbing one of the slipperiest 
clay hills it has ever been my misfortune to meet. 
Men, mules, and horses slipped and fell every few 
steps as they struggled up in the face of a blinding 
storm. I was very glad to see the dark little flea- 
infested hole where we were to spend the night. 

Day followed day in rapid succession. The marches 
of the mule train were remarkable, averaging nearly 
thirty miles. We started in the gray dawn, and dark 
would find us filing into some small town to spend the 
night. One of the villages had the delightful name of 
Shih Mah Lung Kai, or “Market Place for Horses 
and Dragons.” We found none of the latter, but on 
the following day, with the aid of a dozen small boys, 
killed a large snake,—the first we had seen on the 
trip,—in the mud wall of a house. 

Once while we were climbing a hillside we met a 
member of the Chinese Inland Mission, Mr. Hinks, 
who was travelling north to his post with his wife and 
baby. Much to our surprise he greeted us by name. 

The morning of the seventh day we started even 
earlier than usual. Five hours fast going brought us 
to the crest of a low ridge. Before us lay the city of 
Yunnanfu, with beyond the placid waters of the lake. 
We were back at the railhead again after two thou- 
sand miles of travel by boat, on foot, and on horse- 
back. 

Mr. Chamberlain, the American Consul, was most 


257 


TRAILING THE GIANT PANDA 


kind, and with his aid and that of Messrs Page and 
Hoyt of the Standard Oil Company, we succeeded in 
getting our arrangements made to leave the follow- 
ing day. 

Then came the really sad part of the expedition— 
saying good-by to both men and animals of whom 
we were really fond. Our three ponies we gave to 
friends, who promised they would always have a good 
home. We paid the men in the evening, but they 
were all at the train next morning to see us off. They 
had been with us for long months. Together we had 
shivered in the bitter winter cold of the high moun- 
tains and sweltered in the damp heat of the semi- 
tropics. ‘Together we had passed through troubles 
ranging from lost mules to bandits. Now in all prob- 
ability we would never meet again. As the train rat- 
tled out of the station, our last glimpse showed the 
three mute figures of Hsuen, Chin and Chow. 

So ended our expedition in China. The hunting in 
Indo-China is another story, for mischance or sickness 
split our original party. 


258 


APPENDICES 


APPENDIX A 


ZOOGRAPHICAL NOTES ON THE SINO 
TIBETAN BORDERLANDS 


Berore starting on the expedition we visited many 
libraries specializing in books of travel and exploration 
and studied the catalogues of numerous old booksellers, 
but we could find very little that dealt in any way with 
the big and small game of the country to which we were 
going. We found, as usual, that the shelves of Francis 
Kdward’s bookshop in London had the most to offer, but 
even there we were unable to obtain much of the informa- 
tion we sought. It has seemed, therefore, that a short 
résumé of the country from a hunter’s standpoint might 
not be amiss. 

The parts of Yunnan and Szechuan through which we 
passed can by no stretch of the imagination be termed a 
big game paradise. It is no country for the inexperi- 
enced hunter nor for one who wishes to secure a large bag 
without undue expenditure of time and effort. An ex- 
perienced hunter, who is not obliged to hurry, can, how- 
ever, secure a varied bag, and be certain that practically 
every animal he collects will prove of great interest, with 
a very definite possibility of finding it a new species or 
sub-species. 

The first prize is the giant panda, whose scientific name 
is Hluropus melanoleucus. The natives know him as the 
beishung or white bear. T’o the best of our judgment he 
has a fairly wide area of distribution but is to be found 
only in pockets, and is never abundant, even in these 
pockets. He lives in the bamboo jungles in altitudes va- 


261 


APPENDIX A 


rying between six and fourteen thousand feet. We came 
to the conclusion that it could be safely assumed that 
where there were no bamboo jungles, there were no bei- 
shung. Native information required careful checking, 
for even after a detailed description of the animal, accom- 
panied by showing a plate depicting it, we could not rely 
on a native’s word as to its presence in a district. Some- 
times this was due to very hazy notions of coloration and 
the assumption that the white crescent on the black bear’s 
chest entitled it to be called a beishung. At other times 
misinformation was wilful, either with the common im- 
pulse to give pleasant and agreeable news or because the 
native counted on earning some money as guide before his 
deception could be discovered. We took no one’s word as 
guarantee of the presence of beishung. Where he actually 
exists, his droppings are frequent and easy to find, and 
even easier to identify. They are egg shaped, from five 
to seven inches in length (for the adult) and composed 
of partially digested bamboo shoots. The Muping and 
Yehli districts were the only places where, after diligent 
and unceasing inquiry throughout the trip, we could be 
convinced of the presence of giant panda. Doctor Rock 
told us that he had heard of them at Tangpu in Kansu. 
While he had neither seen skins nor had time to look for 
sign, he was convinced from the detailed description given 
him that beishung were actually to be found. Owing to 
their scarcity and the nature of the country in which 
they live the prospects of getting a shot at one still hunt- 
ing are very slender. With a pack of good bear hounds 
they should not be difficult to secure. 

The beishung does not hibernate. We found fresh sign 
in regions where the brown and black bears were hiber- 
nating, and the one we shot was living in a locality where 
the black bears had not yet awaked from their winter’s 
nap. We came upon his tracks one morning in the newly 


262 


APPENDIX A 


fallen snow. They were partly obliterated, for four or five 
hours had passed since he went by. Three hours’ trailing 
through dense jungle brought us to the spot which he had 
selected for his siesta. We caught sight of him emerging 
from the hollow bole of a giant fir tree, and fired simul- 
taneously. 

The giant panda, from all we could learn, is not a say- 
age animal. After the shooting our Kashmiri shikaries 
remarked that he was a sahib, a gentleman, for when hit 
he had remained silent, and not called out as does a bear. 
In the nearest Chinese village, perhaps twenty-five miles 
distant, no one had ever heard of a giant panda, nor seen 
the skin of one. Other incidents of this nature contin- 
ually confirmed our belief in the giant panda’s scarcity. 

In Northern Yunnan and in Szechuan both brown bear 
(probably some sub-species of Ursus arctos) and black 
bear (Ursus torquatus) are to be found. The latter are 
known locally as gho shung (dog bear). They are very 
numerous in a number of districts through which we 
passed. They were hibernating at the time, and we were 
told that they holed up in December and did not come out 
until May or June, according to the locality. We saw 
much old sign and were ready to credit the native hunters’ 
statements that they were not difficult to get. Gaffer 
Sheikh either saw or thought he saw one near Tienwei 
on January 22d. The hunters were unable to explain its 
being out so late. We often saw bearskins used for coats 
and rugs. In the Lamaseries masks made from bears’ 
heads were frequently to be found. The Lamas use them 
in their devil dances. 

The brown bear, known by the natives as ma hsiung, 
or horse bear, is by no means as numerous as the black, 
but we saw masks made from their head skins in several 
Lamaseries, and were told by the Lamas that the animal 
lived in the neighboring forests. We also saw a number of 


263 


APPENDIX A 


hides. As far as we know it has never been collected. It 
is not mentioned in such accounts of the animals of the 
district as we have read. As well as we could determine it 
does not exist south of Szechuan. It is much feared by 
the natives, and is unquestionably a disagreeable cus- 
tomer for a woodcutter to meet. It seems possible that 
there may be more than one variety. A good series would 
be of great value to a museum, and would deserve careful 
scientific study. They vary markedly in coloration, some 
being so light a brown that it was to these that the na- 
tives thought we referred when inquiring for beishung 
(white bear). It may be remarked, however, that of two 
bears we shot in the Tian Shan in 1925, one was dark and 
one straw colored. 

Takin (Budorcas tibetanus) existed in a number of the 
localities in which we hunted. They are known by the 
natives as yeh niu (wild cattle). Doctor Rock saw one in 
the mountains west of Kienchwan-chow in Yunnan. The 
first time we personally got any reliable information con- 
cerning them was not until four days after we had crossed 
the Yalung River at Metilong. At Tatsienlu we saw both 
heads and hides. Near Muping they are not common. 
We felt that February would probably be the best month 
in which to hunt them, for they would then be more easily 
trailed in the snow. At Chuilung we met a wandering 
Lolo who said that he knew of a mountain which he called 
Yung Shuei Ting, meaning Salt Well Mountain, where 
takin were to be found in great numbers, and where we 
could get them for a certainty. He said that this moun- 
tain was seven long marches away, but he was ready to go 
with us if we would guarantee him protection against un- 
friendly Lolos. Lack of time prevented our taking ad- 
vantage of this opportunity, which we bitterly regretted 
missing. As far as we could determine his mountain must 
have been somewhere in the neighborhood of Yehli. 


264 


APPENDIX A 


We felt that Yehli was the best takin country through 
which we passed, and given time, a good shikarry should 
be able to count upon takin as a certainty. We invariably 
found the natives to have great respect for the takin’s 
fighting qualities, and to regard them as no mean ad- 
versary. 

Sambhur (Cervus unicolor Dejeani) have a very wide 
range, and from the time we left Bhamo until we reached 
Ningyuan we were rarely out of sambhur country. All 
large deer are known as malu by the Chinese. Almost 
any sambhur from this region should prove most inter- 
esting to the scientist, for from the greater part few if 
any specimens have been brought out. We found sambhur 
signs at altitudes varying from four to fourteen thousand 
feet. Many of the horns we saw were both long and ex- 
ceptionally massive. The sambhur is irregular in shed- 
ding his horns. The female we shot was exceptionally 
dark in color, almost black. 

There are undoubtedly large stag in parts of the coun- 
try. There have been so few of them collected that it is 
not definitely known what they are. Indeed as far as we 
know only females have been shot by Europeans. Their 
range does not extend as far south as that of the sambhur. 
The natives say there are two varieties, but this may be 
merely because there is a wide range in color. At times 
they have been classed as wapiti, at times as a sub-species 
of Kashmir barasingh. 

Wapiti (Cervus songaricus). We first heard of them 
when not far south of Tatsienlu, and it was in that town 
that we saw the greatest quantity of horns. They are 
known in the Tatsienlu region as ghwar. It was difficult 
to determine the exact locality from which these came. 
Many probably were brought from many marches back 
in Tibet. The Chinese set such store by stag horns for 
medicinal purposes that it is amazing that any deer should 


265 


APPENDIX A 


survive. The natives track them in the snow, or organize 
drives for them, or hunt them with dogs. The horns are 
of greatest value when in the velvet. We never felt that 
we were where wapiti were abundant. At Kooing Hai 
when we were hunting panda there was an old man who 
was regarded as the best local hunter, and we were told 
as witness to his prowess that each year he got a stag. 
This certainly did not point to their being plentiful. Here, 
as elsewhere, they appear to be absolutely regular in shed- 
ding their antlers. Those we saw in Tatsienlu must have 
represented a number of variants or sub-variants. There 
is much pioneer work to be done in classifying the Szech- 
uan and neighboring stags. 

We saw roe deer (Capreolus pygargus) horns in Ta- 
tsienlu but could not learn the definite locality from which 
they came and never heard of them in any place where we 
were hunting. This roe should be akin to the roe that we 
shot in the Tian Shan. They are there abundant. 

Musk deer (Moschus moschiferus) have a very wide 
distribution, and in spite of the fact that they are every- 
where assiduously hunted they are plentiful in many lo- 
calities. In their pursuit the local hunters almost invaria- 
bly use dogs. Musk commands a good and ready market 
and the tushes of the deer are in common use as orna- 
ments. They are called chau by the natives. 

Barking deer (Muntiacus lacrimans) are also of very 
frequent occurrence. Not having any particular com- 
mercial value, they are not molested to the same extent as 
the musk deer. During the entire journey we were rarely 
out of muntjac country. The native name is hwang ya tze. 

Burrhel or blue sheep (Pseudovis nahoor) we first heard 
of when we were leaving the Muli territory. They are 
known locally as pan yang. We saw heads and skins, and 
were told that if we wished to trek from a day to two days 
away from the trail we would find them plentiful. They 


266 


APPENDIX A 


live at about fourteen thousand feet elevation. Besides 
those shot two days north of 'Tatsienlu, we heard of them 
near Muping. They should also live in the mountains near 
Yehli, but we there saw neither hide nor horn. 

Serow (sanlu) and ghoral (iyang) were reported in all 
the mountain ranges through which we passed. We often 
saw heads and skins. We only once saw a live serow, and 
twice saw live ghoral. The natives use dogs to chase them. 
Both being mountain animals the dogs often bring them 
to bay in a corner of rock or an unscalable precipice. 
They are able to give a good account of themselves with 
their horns and dogs are not uncommonly badly gored or 
killed outright. 

The cat family is well represented, running from large 
handsome leopards (pao) to spotted cats no larger than 
a house cat. Here, as everywhere, they are rarely seen, 
and to get them recourse must usually be had to hounds 
or trapping. 

There are wolves in the higher country, though we never 
saw anything but their tracks. The wild pig is found in 
almost all the wild country through which we travelled. 

Methods of transport vary. A good muleteer, and one 
accustomed to the country, can take mules many places 
where a poor muleteer would insist that only porters could 
be used. Unless going into a territory where mules are 
unattainable and where there is a danger of being 
stranded it is better to hire, rather than buy. Of course 
it is sometimes essential to own your own pack train, but 
it is exceedingly difficult to get mule men who will take 
as good care of the animals as if they were their own. 
You are also almost sure to pass out of the territory where 
they are accustomed to travelling and then find that a 
local man would be infinitely preferable. Besides this it 
is almost invariably cheaper to hire than to buy. Prices 
vary in different parts of the country and under different 


267 


APPENDIX A 


local conditions. Our hired mules cost us from thirty to 
sixty cents gold a day. 

It goes without saying that the lighter the equipment 
the better. A few mules can be readily obtained where it 
is impossible to secure a larger number. 

It is easier to get a small caravan started, and halts 
can be made in many places where fodder and accommo- 
dations for a large train are not to be had. Most mule- 
teers, quite naturally, prefer to halt in a village when- 
ever it is possible, so that much of the time one does not 
use one’s tent, but a small strong tent is of very great 
value when in the actual hunting country, or crossing the 
barren ranges. Muleteers and native hunters can often 
manage to do without one where the foreigner would find 
conditions far from agreeable. 

We regretted no part of the trip, for the country had 
always much of interest to offer, but had we been able to 
know in advance much that we could learn only from ex- 
perience, we felt that we could have put in our time to 
better advantage had we come in by Yunnanfu and gone 
straight to Yehli. The man who could not afford to go 
further would find a most interesting hunting ground 
there. It would, however, be most worth while to then 
cross the unexplored territory between Yehli and Chui- 
lung, hunting on the way, and spending a week or so at 
the latter place. From there one could go to Tatsienlu 
and to Muping, coming out down the Yangtze by way of 
Chengtu or Kiating. This would seem to offer a maxi- 
mum of interest and chance to obtain results in a mini- 
mum of time. It would be a trip affording an abundance 
of hard work. The months between November and May 
would be the best. Travel is difficult and disagreeable dur- 
ing the rainy season, and hunting in most instances offers 
less prospects of success. 


268 


APPENDIX B 
ROTEIRO 


In reading the following itinerary it must be borne in 
mind that the distances are only approximate, arrived at 
by estimation and by inquiry. There is of necessity room 
for so much variation in transposing Chinese place names 
into English that we have adopted the spelling employed 
in (1) Postal Guide of China, Shanghai, 1921; (2) 
1:4,000,000 map of Asia, British War Office, 1926. When 
the names do not appear on either of them we have adopt- 
ed the form given by our interpreter, Jack Young, who 
is well acquainted with both languages. 


MILES HALT DATE ALTITUDE 
15 Little Bhamo December 26 
15 Khalongka i 27 
17 Nawphra Yang fy 28 
17 Manhsien a 29 
18 Hsiahsinkai oe 30 
17 Kanai ix 31 
24 Nantien January 1 3,400 
17 Hsiao Hoti x 2 
8 Tengyueh eo 3 
17 Kanlanchai 7 5 5,300 (pass 8,100) 
16 Humushu 6 
15 Fangmachang es ui 
19 Yungchang 8 5,500 
18 Hsuichai i 10 
10 Shanyang x 11 
18 Yungping 4 12 
19 Lachudi & 13 
18 Taipingpu if 14 
14 Yungpeh iS 15 
18 Hochiangpu _ 16 
24 Talifu - avid 


269 


A 


APPENDIX B 


HALT 
Tengchwan 


Niukai 
Tienwei 
Paochiao 
Likiang 
Camp 
Camp 
Camp 
Camp 
Camp 
Fengkow 
Mountain Hut 
Yungning 
Lijudsa 
Gibboh Mountain 
Muli 
Shikang 
Yuanhsueh 
Taiye 
Nokchu 
Reddu 
Metilong 
Erh Ar 
Bedung 
Paumong 
Camp 
Kymo 
Chuilung 
Wupaoni 
Erh Tar 
Sambagah 
Camp 
Camp 
Tatsienlu 
Village 
Dzongju 
(Return) Tatsienlu 
Small Inn 
Waszekow 
Lutingkiao 


Small Inn 


DATE 


February 


270 


1 
2 


ALTITUDE 


7,100 


10,500 
10,300 
12,200 
6,100 
10,250 
9,500 (pass 12,300) 


11,500 


12,000 
12,800 
14,800 
14,400 
12,300 

7,500 
9,400 

(pass 17,500) 
10,500 
14,000 

(pass 16,000) 


13,400 


13,600 
14,400 


4,800 
6,400 (pass 10,500) 


HALT DATE 

Schwi Taping March 10 
Shinshitau eat By 
Tienchuan cea Eo 
Lingkwan boro 3 
Muping sorta 
Kaiyang uate. 
Camp “<coets 
Luchingsha 2 119 
(Return) Muping eG 
Lingkwan CeO 
Lushan <5 O28 
Yachow Sl BG 
Maliuchang Series () 
Wanglipu Seog H 
Tsingkihsien April 1 
Fulin cs 2 
Susimbah A 3 
Tzetati Os 4 
Sinchang Se Oa 
Tsalo e 6 
Kooing Ma Bh 7 
Kooing Hai eS 
Litzaping ees Ta 
Yehli A 
Tachow cose 1G 
Lokow Con lira 
Ningyuan ies ¥ 3 
Hwangshuitang ora 
Hsiaokaochiao cages. 
Kungtuying ae ee 
Paikuowan ie E2e 
Hweilichow eae 
Tunganchow Gees 
Tsalashu 28 
Tsibanlo eee 
Lohaitan , ey 8) 
Shihmahlungkai May 1 
Village 5 miles beyond 

Fumin Se 2 
Yunnanfu se a 


APPENDIX B 


271 


ALTITUDE 
4,400 
(pass 6,800) 
2,800 
2,500 
3,500 
4,500 
6,700 
8,000 


2,400 


4,000 
(pass 9,600) 


2 


4,300 
7,200 


7,800 
7,000 


INDEX 


Ea the Prince, 83, 85, 86; residence 

ot, 

Abyssinia, Suydam Cutting in, 6 

Aden, stop at, 19 

/Hluropus melanoleucus; see ‘Panda ’”’ 

Africa, 204; ratel of, 150; French Mission 
in, 251 

Aju, 180, 138, 201 

A-ju, a cheerful Nashi, 75 

Alps, the, 93 

American Consul, Mr. 
the, 257 

American Geographical Society, the, 8 

American Museum in New York, inter- 
view at the, 13 

Amning Ho, valley of the, 255 

Amning River, location of the, 248 

Andren, Father, 256 

Andrews, Doctor, 136 

Andrews, Mr., of the Pentecostal Mis- 
sion, 73 ff.; birthplace of, 73; hospi- 
tality of, 73 

Andrews, Roy, 78, 144 

“Andy Hartigan’s bobbery pack,” 163 

Angola, considered for trip, 2 

“Arabia Deserta,’? Doughty’s, 194 

Arabs, the, 129 

Argentina, the olla podrida of, 36 

Asia, 2; worshipping in, 109 

A’Souza, 221, 236; lodge of, 227, 228; 
celebration at lodge of, 228 

Assam, Naga Hills in, 6; Suydam Cut- 
ting in, 6; Herbert Stevens in, 7 

Atunza, 111 

Aziza, brother of Lusu, 23, 

Azizo, 65 


Chamberlain of 


Baber, 27, 56 

Bacon, Robert, 255 

Ballard Pier, arrival at, 21 

Ballygunge, 21 

Bepest Mission and Hospital of Yachow, 
191 


Baptist Mission, the, 254; expedition put 
up in Tien Chuan at, 153 

Baudry, Monseigneur, 252; a Bishop, 251 

Bedung, expedition in, 114; worship in, 
115, 116, 


co Caen, Chinese name for panda, 183, 

Beishung, a, 211, 222, 223, 224 

Belloc, Hilaire, 129 

Benedictine, 203, 207, 211, 217 

Bengal, Bay of, 2 

Bhamo, 106, 200; 
roads to, 26 

Bhamo-Talisfu trail, location of the, 3 

“Big Game of Western China,” Wal- 
lace’s, 134 

Bocat, Father, 202 

Bombay, 23; day spent in, 21 

Bombay Natural History Society, prog- 
ress of the, 21 

Borneo, considered for trip, 2 

Boston, Doctor Ralph Wheeler of, 7; 
Harold Coolidge of, 7 

Bowman, Doctor Isaiah, 8 

Brahmaputra River, the, 2 

Brazil, Anthony Fiala with President 
Roosevelt in, 10 

Breteuil, 251 

British Foreign Office, the, 7 

Brooklyn, Russell Hendee of, 7 

Buddha, Statue of, 121 

Buddhist Wheel of Life, painting of the, 
99 

Buddhists, 95 

Budocras taxicolor, see ‘“Takin ”’ 

Burma, 3, 34, 57, 78, 192; expedition pass- 
ing through, 21 

Burma Corporation, the, 23, 24 

Bwa, San, 35 


Calcutta, 12; expedition entrains for, 21; 
Jack Young in, 22 

“Canad4!’’ 131 

Central Asia, 129 

Central Asian Hxpedition in 1925, 23 

Central Government, the present, 57 

Ceylon, French Mission in, 251 

Chalu family, of Tatsienlu, 158 

Chamberlain, Mr., the American Con- 
sul, 257 

“Chang,” Kru as hero of film, 11 

Chang Chi Pa, 87 

Chang Ta Li, as Lord of the Marches, 99 

Chang the Stutterer, 87, 


location of, 24, 25; 


273 


INDEX 


Chengtu, 130, 158; government of, 162; 
capital of Szechuan, 199 

Chess, popularity of, 193, 194 

Chicago, Jack Young takes course at 
Museum in, 12 

Chile, Navy of, 25, 26 

Chin, 258 

Chin Tso Lin, 76, 79, 80, 84, 88, 106; de- 
scription of, 107, 108 

China, 161; eye trouble in, 50, 51; general 
improvement through National Govern- 
ment in, 51; gods in, 94; French Mis- 
sion in, 251 

China Inland Mission, the, 62, 132 

Chinese Age of Chivalry, Szechuan dur- 
ing the, 189 

Chinese, as official language, 11 

Chinese Catholic Mission, in Luku, 247 

Chinese Christian Mission, the, of Mu- 
ping, 159 

Chinese Inland Mission, the, 257. 

Chinese inns, 32 

Chinese New Year, 100 

Chinese Paul Reveres, 163 

Chinese women, description of, 33, 34 

Choo, General, 254 

Chow, 258 

Chow Tze Kow, a catechist, 253 

“Christmas Day on the River,’ 25 

Chuagking, Mason Mitchell as American 
Consul in, 133, 134 

Chuilunf, 127, 138, 145; 
reaches, 119 ff.; 
chuan, 119 

Clerk, Vivien, Deputy Commissioner of 
Bhamo, 25 

Cleveland, 73 

Cochrane, Admiral, 25 

Coffins, elaborate Chinese, 28, 29 

Complete Heaven, meaning of Tien 
Chuan, 154 

“Confucius Studying,”’ 254 

Constantinople, 244 

Coolidge, Harold, 
Africa, 7, 8 

Cooper, Merion, 27; in Upper Siam, 12 

Crim, a, in the Meking, 55; description 
of a, 56 

Crook, Doctor, 191, 199; aid of, 196 

Crossoptilus Tibetenum, 142 

Cuff, Sergeant, 185 

Cunningham, Doctor and Mrs., 132, 133, 
135, 136, 144 

Cutting, Suydam, 21, 23, 28, 36, 41, 45, 59, 
60, 71, 85, 86, 92, 99, 100, 104 ff.; 110, 112, 
120, 185, 140, 143 ff.; 151, 160, 171, 174, 
181, 202, 204, 247, 250; in Abyssinia, 6; 
in Assam, 6; gifts taken by, 10 


expedition 
as inspector in Sze- 


selection of, 7; in 


Dalai Lama, the, 7 
Davenat, Pére, grave of, 139 


David, Pére, 3 

de Guébriant, Monseigneur, 251 
Deborah, quoted, 57 

Delacour, M. Jean, 16 

Dje, Bolung Chu, 85 

Doe, Theodore Roosevelt shoots, 125 
Dogs, fierceness of, 128, 129 


Eastern Tibet, 21 

“Waves of the World,” the, 78 
Edwards, Milne, 140 

Egremont, freighter, 22 

Elephant’s Neck, or Hsiang Po, 44 
England, 161 

Everyman’s Library, the, 194 

Eyre, Jane, 194 


Farrer, Reginald, 78 

Fengkow, 80, 81 

Fiala, Anthony, 10 

Field Museum of Natural History, 5, 30 

Field, Stanley, 5 

Flahntez, Father, 202 

Forge of the Arrows, the, 132 

Forrest, botanist, 78 

France, 136 

French Fathers, the, 136 

French Mission, the, branches of, 251 

Fulin, arrival at, 200; Catholic Mission 
at, 202 


Ganesha, 94 

Gao Chang Ta War, 180 

Gate of Tears, the, 19 

George the Gentleman’s coffee, 187 

Gill, Captain, 27 

Girandeau, Pére, 136 

God of the Mountains, Shang Shen as 
the, 148 

Goddess of Earth, Tu Dei as, 148 

Golden Monkey, the description of, 4 

Golden monkeys, nine shot and skinned, 
173, 174 

Golden Mountain, the, 245 

“Good King Wenceslaus,”’ 25 

Gooral, scarcity of, 4 

Great Expectations, 194 

“Great Expectations,’ Dickens, 124 

Great Lord of Luna, 59 

“Green Mansions,’ 195 

Gunga Din, 50 


Han dynasty, Sczechuan as stronghold of, 
189 

Hanna, Doctor, 194 

Hanna, Mr. and Mrs. W. J., 62, 65; in- 
formation given by, 63, 64 

“Happy Valley,” of Rasselas, 36; Chi- 
nese soldiers from Tengyuth in, 37, 38 

Heller, Edmund, 78 

Hendee, Russell, selection of, 7 

Himalayas, the, 93; rivers in the, 2 


274 


INDEX 


Hinks, Arthur, 16 

Hinks, Mr., of the Chinese Inland Mis- 
sion, 257 

Hippocrates, 15 

Hiram, 113 

Ho Hu, the, 62 

Homeric, expedition on the, 15 

Homushu, night spent at, 44 

Hoover, Herbert, Colonel Theodore 
Roosevelt, during presidential campaign 
of, 6, 15; news of new Cabinet by cable 
to expedition, 185 

Horatius, sword of, 59 

Hotei, 73 

Hou, General Wu, 132 

Hsiangpo, 44 

Hsuen, 76, 106, 141, 146, 159, 162, 165, 170, 
174, 175, 187, 188, 196, 202, 206, 207, 211- 
220; 228, 236, 241-244; 249, 250, 258; de- 
scription of, 108; as the Wildgrave, 151 

Huan, 176, 179, 187 

Huanglinpu, 58 

Huc, Abbé, 132; “Voyage dans la Tar- 
tarie’ by, 195 

Hweilichow, 256 


Imperial University, Tao at, 36 

India, 94 

India House, 78 

Indian Survey, kindness of officers of, 22 

Indo-China, 2, 195; Herbert Stevens in, 
7, 31 

Innes, Sir Charles and Lady, 23 

Interpreter, difficulty in finding an, 11 ff 

Irrawaddy Flotilla Company, the, 25 

Irrawaddy River, the, 2 


Japan, 161; Hater of, 73 

Jats, battalion of, 24 

“John Company,” rupee, 138 
Jong Tsen, 109 

Jumblies, the, 81 

Jungking, iron mines in, 196, 197 


Kachins, as warlike race, 30 

“Kali Bhutnis,”’ or ‘“Black female devils,” 
187 

Kanai, arrival at, 35 

Kansu, province of, 78; 
shot takin in, 134 

Karachi, 23; Jack Young in, 22 

Karnak, 110 

Kashmiris, 65; as Mohammedans, 187 

Katha, train journey to, 24 

Kelley-Roosevelt-Field Museum Expedi- 
tion, organization of, 5, 6; volunteers 
for, 13 

Kelley, William V., 5 

Khalongkha, stop at, 28 

Kiatingfu, 192 

Kienchwanchow, prosperity in, 72 

Kirghiz, the, 125 5 


Roy Andrews 


Kong-lin tribes, the, 95 

Kooing Hai, beauty of, 210 

Kooing Ma, 207, 208, 210, 217 

Korea, 144 

Kru, attempt to enlist as interpreter, 11, 
12; with mission in Yunnan, 12 

Kulu, 96, 103 

Kungtuying, 256 

Kurdish hammals, 146 

Kyi, Chwin Yin, 40 


Lachudi, arrival at, 58 

Ladak, 121 

Lady Ambherst, a species of pheasant, 4, 
162 

Lamas, 83-86; 135, 139 

Lamasery, the, of Yungning, 83, 86, 88; 
return to the, 85 

Le Bonetti, Pére, 251 

Le Clerc, Sergeant, 185 

Le Mercier, Pére, 251, 252 

Lebanon, 113 

Les Missions Etrangéres, 251; 
in Great War, 252 

Lhasa, British Expedition in 1905 to, 16 

Lhasa Gate, the north, 139 

Likiang, 65, 66, 73, 78, 84, 87, 128, 193; 
Hsuen born in, 76 

Lin, Chin Tso, 27, 40, 41 

Lingkwan, expedition reaches, 156; de- 
scription of, 156 

Litzaping, arrival at, 217 

Lokow, 248; arrival at, 247; 
Catholic Mission in, 247 

Lolos, 71, 89, 117, 118, 198 

London, expedition in, 16; Rowland Ward 
in, 134 

Lone, Mokhta, 20, 90, 181, 225, 222, 233, 
277 

Lord of the Manor, the, 236 

Lord of the Marches, Chang Ta Li as, 
99, 101 

Lord Rothschild’s Museum at Tring, 31 

Lovegren, Mr., of the Baptist Mission, 
192 

Low Yih Wen, 180 

Luchingsha, 165, 185; arrival at, 185, 186 

Lushan, arrival at, 189; description of, 
190 

Lusu, 55, 81; at Ballard Pier, 21 

Lutingkiao, 147, 148, 149 

Luzon, 75, 106, 113, 128, 130, 188, 201; de- 
scription of, 107; assistants of, 131 


Ma, the head muleteer, 48 

Magistrate, the, of Tatsienlu, 136, 137, 
144 

Mah-jong, popularity of, 193 

“Making of a Monarch,” the, 38 

“Mammiféres de l’Asie Centrale,’ Milne 
Edwards’, 140 


members 


Chinese 


275 


INDEX 


Mandalay, visit with O Ah Wain in, 23, 
24 

Mandeville, Sir John, 64 

Mantza, 71 

Maralbashi, 55 

Marco Polo, 49 

“Market Place for Horses and Dragons,” 
or Shih Mah Lung Kai, 257 

Marseilles, expedition in, 17, 18; descrip- 
tion of, 18 

Mason, Major Kenneth, 22 

MeNeill, 3 

Mecca, 244 

Medd, Captain G. H. M., 25, 26 

Mekong, expedition crossing the, 55; 4 
Crim in the, 55 

Mekong River, the, 2 

Members of party, selection of, 7, 8 

Mesopotamia, 204 

Metilong, 112 

“Mex,” 61 

“Mickus,’”’ a song, 106 

Mienninghsien, 247 

Minchia, 70, 71 

Min River, the, 120 

Mishmi Hills, Captain Kingdon Ward in 
the, 20 

“Mishmi Hills,” the, 27 

Mission Etrangére, in Ningyuanfu, 39 

Mitchell, John Purroy, 255 

Mitchell, Mason, 4; as American consul 
in Chingking, 133, 134 

Mohammedans, the Kashmiris as good, 
187 

Mooka, a Lolo guide, 204, 210, 222 

Morgan, Mervyn, visit at home of, 21 

Mount Gibboh, 92, 93 

Mount Koonka, first glimpse of, 129, 130 

Mount Mitsuga, 94 

Mount Satseto, 73 

Mozos, 71 

“Mu Tien Wong,” 94 

Mukta, 239 

Muli, 96, 99, 186; double march for, 93; 
description of Kingdom of, 94; expedi- 
tion leaving, 117 

Muping, 144, 150, 155, 163, 215; arrival at, 
156, 157; description of, 158 ff.; Chinese 
magistrate in, 158; Chinese Christian 
Mission of, 159; Chinese temple in, 160, 
161; visit with widow of Tibetan prince 
from Tatsienlu, 162; method of fishing 
in, 163, 164; panda in, 183; return to, 
186; chess played in, 194 


Narkunda, expedition on the, 19 

Nashi, 71 

New York, India House in, 78 

Nhambiquara Indians, in South Amer- 
ica, 149 

Ningyuan, 236, 244, 248, 250, 254, 255, Fa- 


thers at, 252; Sisters at, 253; Manchu’s 
family in, 253 
Ningyuanfu, Mission Etrangére in, 39 
Niukai, Ox Village, 68 
Nirvana, 97 


“Omoo,” 195 

“Once in Royal David’s City,” 25 

Ovis Poli, 5 

Oyster Bay, 1; Christmas Eve reminis- 
cences of, 25 

Ox Village, Niukai, 68 


P. & O. Line, the, 19 

Pamirs, last expedition to the, 1 

Panda, the giant, 133, 141; description of, 
3; scientific name of, 3; original dis- 
covery of, 3; diet of, 184; sighted and 
shot, 225 

Paris, expedition in, 16 

Pasteur, Father, 136 

Pax Britannica, attempt to introduce in 
hills of Upper Burma, 30 

Peel, Lawrence, 39 

Peking, 138 

“Peking to Mandalay,’ 28 

Pentecostal Mission, the, 73 

Pereira, General, 3, 76, 150; 
health of, 230 

Pied Piper, 75 

“Pilgrimage to Mecca,’”’ Burton’s, 123, 124 

“Pilgrimage to Medina and Mecca,”’ Bur- 
ton’s, 194 

“Pirates of Penzance,” 47 

Pisa, Tower of, 118 

Poole, Stanley Lane, 194 

Port Said, arrival at, 19 

“Pride and Prejudice,’’ 195 

Pu, General Kuan, 189, 190 

Punjabis, battalion of, 24 

Pytheas, old Greek explorer, 17 


“Rainbow Bridge,” the, 78 

Rangoon, 21, 58 

Rasselas, ‘““Happy Valley’’ of, 36; Chi- 
nese soldiers from Tengyueh in, 87, 38 

Reddu, 110, 111, 113 

“Revolt in the Desert,’ 194 

River of Doubt, the, 29 

“River of Golden Sand,’ 27 

Rock, Dr. Joseph, botanist, 78, 83 ff.; 129; 
meeting with, 84 

Rocky Mountain goat, 91 

Roosevelt, Daniel 8., letter from, 138, 14 

Roosevelt, Kermit, 1, 5, 8, 11, 42, 45, 53, 
59, 62, 99, 106, 108, 111, 112, 117, 120, 
122, 160, 164, 170 ff., 202, 232, 235-238, 
244, 245, 248 

Roosevelt, Theodore, 36, 71, 81, 89, 92, 
140 ff., 150 ff., 196, 202, 214, 222, 225-299 

Royal Geographical Society, The, 16; 
Gold Medalist of, 22 


drink to 


276 


INDEX 


Rupee, “John Company,” 138 


Sadiya, 21 
Sagamore, reminiscences of, 221 
Saint Christopher, 139 
“Salt-water Well,’ 119 
Salween, the, 55 
Salween divide, 46 
Salween river, the, 2 
Salween valley, description of, 46; the 
Shans in, 46 
Sambhur, McNeill’s stay in the, 4 
Satseto, Mount, 76 
Senegalese, in Marseilles, 18 
“Sense and Sensibility,’ 195 
_ Serow, scarcity of, 4 
Seventh Day Advent Mission, 
Andrews of the, 136 
Shan, Christian, Kru as a, 11, 12 
Shang Shen, the god of the Mountains, 
148 
Shans, the, 50; description of, 33 
Shayang, expedition in, 56 
Sheikh, Gaffar, 20, 35, 71, 91, 124, 143, 
178, 227, 241 
Sheikh, Jemal, 20, 21, 23 
Shih Mah Lung Kai, or ‘‘Market Place 
for Horses and Dragons,’’ 257 
Shomburgk deer, location of, 5 
Siakwan, 61, 64 
Sikhs, battalion of, 24 
Sikkim, 21; birds of, 31 
Sin Chang, 202 
Solomon’s Temple, 113 
Somerset, 73 
Song Ja, a statue of Buddha, 121 
South America, Nhambiquara Indians in, 
149 
South Kensington Museum, visit to the, 
16 
“South of the Clouds,” or Yunnan, 48 
Spence, Sir Reginald, 21 
Springfield rifles, chosen, 8; description 
of, 8 
Stambul, Kurdish hammals in, 146 
Standard Oil Company, the, 257 
Stevens, Herbert, 65, 73, 79; selection of, 
7; as tea planter in Assam and Dar- 
jeeling, 31; search parties organized for, 
35; expedition says good-by to, 40 
Sun Yat Sen, Doctor, 161 
Supplies, purchase of, 8 ff 
“Swans Flying over the Rapids,” 254 
Sweli divide, the, 41, 44, 46 
Szechuan, 21, 146; giant panda in, 3; 
pheasant in, 4; Captain Gill’s adven- 
tures in, 27; during Chinese Age of 
Chivalry, 189; as stronghold of, 189; 
Chengtu as capital of, 199 


Doctor 


Tachow, 238, 241; arrival at, 242, 247 


Takin, the, 133, 141, 233-235; description 
of, 4; scientific name of, 4; in Ameri- 
can Museum, 134; shot in Kansu by 
Roy Andrews, 134 

Tali Lake, 61, 62, 67; description of, 66 

Talifu, 40, 72, 80; the General from, 68, 
69; mah-jong in, 193 

Tao, Philip, 35, 37, 42; family of, 36, 37; 
at Imperial University, 36; habits and 
description of, 37 

Taping River, the, 27 

Tatsienlu, 31, 40, 74, 81, 85, 130, 132, 135, 
139 ff., 183, 190, 195, 198, 202, 239, 256; 
expedition near, 129; as meeting-mart, 
134; population of, 134; the Magis- 
trate of, 136, 137; currency in, 138; 
Ladies’ Day in, 140; river craft below, 
147; Chalm family of, 158; chess played 
in, 193, 194 

Temple of Hell, the, 188 

Tengchwan, expedition in, 67 

Tengyueh, 31, 65; roads to, 26; Commis- 
sioner of Customs at, 39; expedition 
two days from, 39 

“The Foreign Mandarin Leaving for His 
Home with Music,’’ 254 

“The Mickus,” 86 

“The Moonstone,” 195 

“The Old Curiosity Shop,’”’ 195 

“The Place of the Candle-Makers,” 58 

The White Company, 194 

Tian Shan, 125, 219 

Tibet, 3, 134, 146, 158; requests for per- 
mission to cross, 7; Eastern, 21; antlers 
from, 195 

Tibetan Board of Trade, the, 136 

Tienchuan, 150; expedition reaches, 153; 
meaning of name, 154 

Tienwei, 69; description of, 71, 72 

Tokyo, Imperial University in, 36 

“Tori Sahib ka Kahwah,’’ 187 

“Travels of a Pioneer in Commerce,” 27 

Tring, Lord Rothschild’s Museum at, 31 

Tsalo, 201, 207; description of, 205; dice- 
throwing in, 193 

Tsao, 80, 84 

Tsiemei Kwa, 218 

Tsingkihsien, 197; importance of, 198 

Tu Dei, as Goddess of Earth, 148 

Tung River, the, 200 

Turkestan Pamirs, the, 129 

Tzetati, 200; march of, 201 


Ultima Thule, 17 

United States Army, Magistrate of Mu- 
ping inquiry about, 161 

University of Michigan, Josslyn Van 
Tyne of the, 7 

Uru Chang Yeh, 180 


Valentin, Father, 136 


277 


INDEX 


“Valley of Death,” the, 46 

Van Tyne, Josslyn, selection of, 7 

Vernay, Arthur, dinner given. by, 16 

Vestris, SOS from the, 16 

Vooka, 227-229, 236, 237 

“Voyage dans la Tartarie,”” Abbé Hue’s, 
195 


Wain, O Ah, visit with, 23, 24 

Walden, 194 

Ward, Captain Kingdon, 20, 78 

Ward, Rowland, 134 

Waszekow, 145 

Water mills, description of various, 54 

Watto, monastery of, 110 

Wheel of Life, 101 

Wheeler, Doctor Ralph, selection of, 7 

Wike, Maung, 24 

Wildgrave, Hsuen as the, 151 

Wilkinson, Mr., assistant to Lawrence 
Peel, 39; aid from, 39 

Williams, Major, 24 

Wilson, Ernest, 3, 150 

Wolar Lake, 23 

Wu, Doctor Chao Chu, 7 


Yachow, 144, 186, 194, 196; cables from, 
185; Jack Young at, 188, 189; regret at 
leaving, 195, 198 

Yachow Fu, arrival at, 191; Baptist Mis- 
sion and Hospital in, 191; chess played 
in, 194 


Yalung valley, expedition in the, 111 

Yangtze river, the, 2, 76; crossing of the, 
256 

Yangtze valley, the, description of, 80 

Yea gnu, see ‘‘Takin’”’ 

Yelhi, 239, 240; advice to go to, 218; start 
for, 218 

Young, Jack, 22, 42, 53, 54, 94, 100, 104, 
130, 143, 174, 202, 247; description of, 
12; accepted as interpreter, 12; takes 
course at Chicago Museum, 12; wait- 
ing at Luchinsha, 185, 186; at Yachow, 
188, 189 

Younghusband, Sir Francis, 16 

Yung, 56 

Yung Shuei Tung, 118, 119 

Yunanese, as muleteers, 27 

Yunanese Billingsgate, 49 

Yungchang, 54, 62, 202; effort to reach, 
47; description of, 49, 50; description 
of Tibetans in, 52; call on magistrate 
in, 53 

Yungning, 78, 121, 129; the Lamasery of, 
83; peasants of, 87 

Yungpeh, 59, 60 

Yunnan, 3, 78, 153; Captain Gill’s adven- 
tures in, 27; expedition in province of, 
21, 22 

Yunnanfu, 252, 255, 257 


Zappey, 3 


278 


DS 793 .Y8 R66 1929 

Roosevelt, Theodore, 
1887-1944. 

Trailing the giant panda 


DATE DUE 
MAY 2 2 2010 


3 
oO 
77) 
a 
c 
a 
o 
co) 
S 
2 
< 
oO 


+ 
Py 
N 
3} 
& 
v 
o 

® 
oe) 
s 
v 
o 


81Z00 IZ€6 €
