"CO
CO
CO
TWENTY-FIVE  YEARS
IN  EAST  AFRICA
CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
C.  F.  CLAY,  MANAGER
LONDON :  FETTER  LANE,  E.G.  4
NEW  YORK  :  THE  MACMILLAN  CO.
BOMBAY \
CALCUTTA  I  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.
MADRAS )
TORONTO :  THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF
CANADA,  LTD.
TOKYO :  MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA
ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED
DAUDI  CHWA,  KABAKA  (KING)  OF  UGANDA  WITH
HIS  MOTOR  CAR
WA
TWENTY-FIVE  YEARS
IN  EAST  AFRICA
BY
JOHN  ROSCOE,  M.A.
RECTOR  OF  OVINGTON,  NORFOLK,
FORMERLY  OF  THE  CHURCH  MISSIONARY  SOCIETY
CAMBRIDGE
AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
1921
TO
MY  WIFE
WHO  SHARED  WITH  ME  THE  EARLY  TRIALS  AND
DANGERS  OF  LIFE  IN  EAST  AFRICA  AND  WHO
LATER  UNDERTOOK  ALL  THE  DUTIES  AND  RE-
SPONSIBILITIES OF  OUR  HOME  AND  FAMILY,
LEAVING  ME  FREE  TO  CARRY  ON  THIS  WORK.
PREFACE
THIS  little  work  was  prepared  with  several  objects  in  view.
In  the  first  place,  I  have  endeavoured  to  bring  together
and  set  down  in  a  popular  form  some  facts  of  anthropological
and  social  interest  relating  to  Central  Africa,  which  otherwise,
owing  to  the  rapid  spread  of  civilization,  might  soon  be  lost
for  ever.  At  the  same  time  it  occurred  to  me  that,  in  view  of
the  great  changes  which  have  taken  place  since  the  British
Government  took  over  the  Uganda  Protectorate,  some  account
of  life  in  Africa  in  the  early  days  of  European  settlement  might
be  welcome  both  to  my  own  friends  and  to  others  interested
in  that  Continent.  As  a  rule,  companions  and  colleagues  who
might  not  perhaps  care  to  be  referred  to  by  name  have  not
been  so  mentioned ;  but  there  are  some  whose  activities  are  so
inseparably  woven  into  the  life  and  history  of  the  time  that
it  has  been  impossible  to  follow  such  a  rule  in  all  cases.  The
reader  must  not,  however,  forget  that  the  writer  was  only  one
of  a  band,  and  that  all  that  he  experienced  and  endured  was
shared  by  others,  every  one  of  whom  went  out  prepared  to
face  discomfort  and  danger,  and  even  to  lay  down  his  life  in
a  far  country.  Another  object  has  been  to  give  to  those  who
may  possibly  settle  in  our  East  African  Protectorate  a  timely
word  of  guidance  and  even,  perhaps,  of  warning.

Again,  readers  will  find  a  certain  amount  of  criticism  of
Government  action  and  also  of  missionary  methods.  This  is
intended  in  no  unfriendly  spirit ;  my  aim  has  been  to  point  out
how  absolutely  essential  it  is  that  those  who  desire  to  govern
or  assist  primitive  peoples  should  be  sufficiently  versed  in  the
science  of  anthropology  to  be  able  to  regard  them,  their  cus-
toms, and  their  religion  with  intelligent  sympathy.  With  the
vastly  increased  facilities  for  studying  the  subject  there  is
now  no  reason  why  any  one  should  undertake  work  in  such
a  country  without  some  previous  study  of  anthropology.

The  anthropologist  will  probably  find  this  work  unsatisfac-
tory and  scrappy,  as  many  details  have  already  been  published


Vlll


PREFACE


in  my  other  books,  The  Baganda  (Macmillan  and  Company)
and  The  Northern  Bantu  (Cambridge  University  Press).  Here,
however,  certain  theories  and  suggestions  which  may  be  of
interest  are  put  forward,  and  I  have  recorded  various  in-
cidents worthy  of  attention  which  befell  me  in  the  early  days
before  I  seriously  took  up  the  study  of  anthropology,  and
which  were  simply  jotted  down  in  my  ordinary  diaries  of
passing  events.  These  incidents  are  mostly  connected  with
the  country  through  which  I  passed  from  the  coast  to  Lake
Victoria,  and  may  be  of  interest  and  value  to  others  following
this  route  under  present  conditions.

There  is,  however,  an  extensive  field  of  enquiry  which  is
not  touched  upon  in  this  book.  I  have  lately  been  enabled
to  enquire  far  more  fully  into  various  matters  of  the  utmost
anthropological  importance  through  the  generosity  of  Sir  Peter
Mackie  seconded  by  the  interest  and  assistance  of  the  Royal
Society.  The  information  here  given  in  the  shape  of  a  popular
account  of  travel  and  enquiry  forms,  therefore,  the  prelude  to
the  fuller  and  more  scientific  work  which  I  have  thus  been
enabled  to  do.

It  is  now  a  good  many  years  since  I  collected  the  material
which  this  book  contains,  and  I  had  just  made  up  my  mind  to
put  it  into  shape  and  enlarge  it,  when  I  was  asked  to  revisit
Africa  as  leader  of  the  Mackie  Ethnological  Expedition.  On
my  departure  I  sent  the  manuscript  to  a  friend  for  safe  keeping
and  for  publication  in  the  event  of  my  not  returning.  There
was,  however,  some  misunderstanding,  and  on  my  arrival  in
England  I  found  the  book  already  in  the  printer's  hands.  I
must,  therefore,  ask  my  readers  to  look  upon  the  book  as  a
rough  draft  of  what  I  intended  it  to  be.  There  is  plenty  of
material  in  it  of  both  scientific  and  human  interest,  but  style
and  arrangement  could  have  been  greatly  improved  had  there
been  a  possibility  of  revising  the  manuscript  before  it  went
into  print.

As  the  material  which  I  left  behind  me  was  in  a  very  rough
state,  the  revision  of  the  proofs  has  been  a  task  of  considerable
magnitude,  and  I  am  very  deeply  indebted  to  the  Rev.  G.  A.


PREFACE  ix

Schneider,  Librarian  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cam-
bridge, who  has  given  much  of  his  valuable  time  and  unsparing
energy  and  care  to  this  difficult  work,  and  to  the  Rev.  W.  A.
Cox,  Fellow  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge,  who  has  been
always  ready  to  give  advice  and  help.  The  photographs  used
in  the  volume  have  to  a  large  extent  been  supplied  to  me  by
friends,  and  I  must  here  express  my  grateful  thanks  to  these
donors,  and  especially  to  the  late  Rev.  E.  Millar,  the  Rev.
R.  H.  Leakay,  and  Mr  C.  V.  Hattersley.

J.  R.

OVINGTON  RECTORY,
THETFORD.

21  May  1921.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER  I

Experiences  on  the  Voyage — A  storm — Zanzibar — Preparations  for
the  journey — Native  porters — Camp  life — The  traveller's  difficulties
— Experiences  on  the  march — Crossing  unbridged  rivers — Arabs  and
the  slave  trade — Hints  for  travellers  .  .  .  pages  1-15

CHAPTER  II

Native  dwellings  in  Unyamwezi  and  Usagara — The  Wamegi — In-
dustries— Food — Marriage  customs — Government — Initiation  cere-
monies— Women's  work — Treatment  in  sickness  and  burial  customs —
Rain-making — Clothing  and  ornaments — Tribal  wars — Morality —
Other  tribes  of  Usagara— The  "gentle  Masai"  .  .  16-32

CHAPTER  III

The  Masai — Terror  of  the  Swahili  porters — Arab  and  native  rising
against  the  Germans — Murder  of  a  missionary — Swahili  escort  to  the
coast — Prisoners  in  the  Arab  fort — A  serious  situation — The  Germans
and  our  ransom — Illness  and  return  to  England  .  .  32-41

CHAPTER  IV

The  Ugogo  plains — Difficulties  of  the  march — The  Wagogo,  their
houses  and  lives — Road  and  water  taxes — Further  characteristics  of
the  Swahili  porter — Wagogo  highwaymen — The  waterless  plains —
Effects  of  cattle  plague — The  Wanyamwezi  and  Wasakuma  tribes —
The  Watuturu  partly  nomadic — Lake  Victoria  Nyanza  .  42-56

CHAPTER  V

Lake  Victoria— The  rival  kings — The  Ripon  Falls — The  Island  tribes
— Canoes — Trading — Travelling  by  canoe — Uganda — Native  hos-
pitality— A  Lake  storm — Canoe  versus  steamer — Sleeping  sickness —
Heroism  of  native  Christians  .....  57-74

CHAPTER  VI

Effect  of  the  railway — Uganda — Social  conditions  and  culture —
Physical  features — Houses  and  roads — Nubian  and  Arab  influences —
Traces  of  early  invaders — Marriage  laws — Burial  customs — Origin  of
the  kings — Associations  with  early  Egypt — Ownership  of  land — The
royal  family — The  royal  residence — The  army — Survival  of  the  fittest
— Government — Taxation — Marriage — Ivory — Making  of  bark-cloth

75-100


xii  CONTENTS

CHAPTER  VII

Missionaries  in  Uganda — King  Mutesa — The  Arabs  and  the  mission-
aries— Difficulties  under  King  Mwanga — Arab  rebellion — Islamic
persecution — Return  of  Mwanga — War  between  French  and  British—*
Introduction  of  Sudanese  troops — Mwanga  and  the  Mission  stores —
Character  of  Mwanga — A  royal  visit  ....  101-121

CHAPTER  VIII

Return  of  Islamic  Baganda — Peace  and  Prosperity — Sir  Gerald  Portal
and  the  formation  of  the  British  East  African  Protectorate — Native
Christians  and  their  slaves — Mutiny  of  Sudanese  troops — Defeat  by
loyal  Baganda — Re-distribution  of  land  .  .  .  122-133

CHAPTER  IX

Baganda  beliefs  and  ceremonies — Deities  of  the  Lubare  worship —
The  Hero  Gods — Religious  festivals — Relics  and  fetishes — Priests  and
mediums — Burial  customs  and  ghost  worship — Nature  gods — Means
of  communication — Fetishes — Medicine-men  and  surgery — Deifica-
tion of  the  king — His  ghostly  retinue — Human  sacrifices — Ceremonial
drums — The  god  of  plague — The  power  of  magic  .  .  134-160

CHAPTER  X

Sociology  of  the  Baganda — Clan  membership — Blood  relationships —
Totemism — Communism  in  offspring — Marriage  customs  and  morality
— The  king's  wives — Evil  results  of  enforced  monogamy — Ability  and
courage  of  natives — Sir  Apolo  Kagwa's  improvements — The  native
hospital — Second  rising  of  the  Sudanese — Mwanga  joins  the  rebels —
Death  of  Mwanga 161-178

CHAPTER  XI

Education  and  life  of  the  women — Native  government — Clothing —
Duties  of  a  chief — Hospitality — Trial  and  Punishment — Thieves  and
their  methods — Chiefs'  dwellings — Road-making  and  currency — Re-
adjustment of  chieftainships  by  British  Government  .  179-194

CHAPTER  XII

The  journey  to  Toro — Baganda  porters — Swamps  and  bridges — Water
spirits — Incidents  with  elephants — Toro — The  king — The  inhabitants
— Cannibals  in  the  Semliki  valley — Salt-making — Hot  springs — Pigmy
tribes — The  Barega — The  Banyoro — Morality — Agricultural  clans —
Herdsmen  and  lions — The  River  Semliki  195-206


CONTENTS

CHAPTER  XIII

Journey  to  Ankole — The  Bahima  and  Baheru — The  king  and  his  chi< -f ,
— Baganda  chiefs — The  kind's  courts — Polygamy  and  polyandry —
Morals  of  the  women — Death  of  the  king — Royal  lions — Sacred
leopards  and  pythons — Inheritance — Herdsmen — Cow  kraals — Koki
— Pastoral  and  agricultural  people — The  king's  successor — Iron
smelters — Budu — Bark-cloth  and  basket-making  .  .  207-222

CHAPTER  XIV

The  Mpologoma  River — Bantu  Lake  dwellers — Lake  and  river  huts —
The  Bateso,  a  Nilotic  people — Bateso  huts  and  customs — Ornaments
—Present  conditions — Musoga  robbers — Morality  .  .  223-233

CHAPTER  XV

Wanderings  among  the  Bageshu — The  Baganda  as  British  agents —
Caves  on  Mount  Elgon — Ceremonial  cannibalism — Initiation  cere-
monies— Religion  and  magic — The  use  of  the  caves — Clan  hatreds —
Peace  for  the  beer-drinking — Journey  to  Busoga — Scenes  of  famine —
Causes  of  the  famine — Errors  in  British  government — Baganda  rule
— Busoga  customs — Luba  and  the  murder  of  Bishop  Hannington —
Robbers  and  their  methods 234-249

CHAPTER  XVI

The  Banyoro — The  agricultural  serfs — Encroachments  of  Baganda
— Conquest  of  Bunyoro — Kings  of  Bunyoro — Ghosts — Accession  of  a
new  king — Milk  customs — The  problem  of  labour — Morality — Bunyoro
as  a  cattle-rearing  district — Life  of  the  people — Government — Salt-
making  250-261

CHAPTER  XVII

Nilotic  Kavirondo — Worship  and  beliefs — Difficulties  of  spreading
civilization — The  Nandi  and  the  Masai — Nairobi — Climate  and  pros-
pects— The  Wakikuyu  and  Wakamba — Early  train  journeys — Mom-
basa 262-276

INDEX  277


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

PLATE

I Daudi  Chwa  Kabaka  (king)  of  Uganda  FRONTISPIECE

TO  FACE  PAGE

II Shields  and  spears  from  Buganda,  Busoga, . . 16
Bukedi,  Semliki  Valley  and  Kavirondo

III  Woman  of  Uganda  in  bark-cloth  dress  with  her  child 17
Baby  with  long  hair  before  having  been  admitted  into

the  clan

IV  Graves  of  Bishop  Parker  and  A.  Mackay  at  Busam-

biro,  Lake  Victoria .... . .48

Thatched  fetish  rock  in  Busoga

V  Uganda  fetishes ....... 49

Uganda  fetish  necklet

VI  Buffalo  shot  by  F.  A.  Knowles,  Esq.  ... 80

VII Ankole  grain  store . . . .  81

Ankole  ghost  shrine

VIII  Waist  band  and  necklets  of  Uganda  girls  . . . 112
Elephant  hair  necklets  as  worn  by  cow-keeping  people

IX  Natives  of  Mt.  Elgon 113

Lady  embarking  in  her  canoe
Disembarking  from  canoes  on  Lake  Victoria

X  Site  where  human  sacrifices  were  offered  in  Uganda . 144
Hastily  built  hut  for  servants'  shelter  for  night

XI  The  Mukama  (king)  of  Bunyoro  with  his  wife  and

daughters ........ 145

XII Masai  women  in  ordinary  cow-skin  dress . . . 146
Uganda  drummers

XIII  The  court  house  of  the  King  of  Uganda . .  147

Uganda  children  having  a  meal
Native  of  Mt.  Elgon  in  full  dress


xvi  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

PLATE  TO  FACE  PAGE

XIV  Uganda  potters  at  work 208

Making  bark -cloth  in  Uganda

XV  Counting  cowry-shells,  the  original  currency  of  Uganda 209
Extracting  salt  from  sand,  Bunyoro

XVI Husband,  wife  and  child  in  Uganda  .... 240
Child  carrying  water  in  gourd

XVII Ghost  shrine  on  Lake  Kioga 241

Homestead  with  canoe  and  ghost  shrine,  Lake  Kioga

XVIII House  construction  in  Uganda  .... 272

Dug-out  canoe  in  process  of  being  built

XIX  Ankole  pastoral  huts 273

European's  house  and  garden


MAP

The  Country  around  Lake  Victoria . BETWEEN  pp.  32  &  33


CHAPTER  I

EXPERIENCES IN TRAVELLING— NATIVE PORTERS-
AMUSING INCIDENTS  AND MISTAKES— LIFE ON A
LONELY  HILL  MISSION  STATION— SLAVE  TRADE

TO  understand  the  subject  of  this  chapter  aright  the
reader  must  go  back  in  thought  some  thirty  years  to
what  was  a  much  more  primitive  condition  in  East  Africa
than  that  of  the  present  time.  Now,  even  though  the  man
accustomed  to  modern  English  life  may  state  the  contrary,
or  the  "globe  trotter"  make  unfriendly  remarks  about  the
uncivilised  native  and  call  him  a  "dirty  nigger,"  the  East
African  on  the  coast  is  comparatively  civilised  and  has
shrewd  ideas  as  to  what  he  may  or  may  not  do  in  the  presence
of  a  white  man.  This  part  of  the  story  has  to  do  with  the
state  of  affairs  as  they  were  in  the  year  1884,  when  Sayid
Bargash  still  lived  and  ruled  in  Zanzibar,  and  Sir  John
Kirk,  H.B.M.'s  Consul,  was  judiciously  gaining  an  influence
over  the  Arab  and  African  mind,  which  was  to  have  such
far  reaching  effects.  It  was  probably  due  to  Livingstone
that  the  Consul  went  to  Zanzibar,  and  also  that  other  Euro-
peans began  to  travel  into  the  interior  of  Africa  and  open
up  the  country,  and  that  slavery  was  rigorously  attacked;
yet  England  none  the  less  owes  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  Sir
John  Kirk  for  the  noble  work  which  he  did  in  Zanzibar.
By  his  wise  regime  he  laid  the  foundations  for  British  rule,
and  by  his  gentle,  attractive  manner  he  won  the  Arabs  so
that  they  believed  in  him,  relied  upon  the  word  of  an
Englishman,  and  trusted  the  British  nation.

The  first  journey  by  ship  which  a  man  takes  is  always  full
of  interest,  and  as  it  was  deemed  advisable  in  our  case  that
we  young  missionaries  should  sail  to  Zanzibar  round  the  Cape,
because  of  the  heat  in  the  Red  Sea  at  this  season,  the
lengthened  journey  added  considerably  to  our  interest  and
our  geographical  knowledge,  affording  splendid  opportunities

R.U.  I


2  A  SEA  VOYAGE  [CH.

for  visiting  many  ports  along  the  east  coast  of  Africa.  On
a  first  voyage  there  are  many  things  on  board  ship  to  be
investigated,  from  the  captain's  bridge  to  the  stoke-hole,  and
new  experiences  have  to  be  gained,  even  to  a  distant  bowing
acquaintance  with  sea-sickness.  I  say  a  bowing  acquaintance,
because  in  my  own  case  the  acquaintance  was  broken  off  through
the  timely  though  unintentional  intervention  of  a  fellow  pas-
senger. It  happened  thus :  we  had  proceeded  very  comfortably
from  London  Docks  down  the  Channel  in  the  R.M.S.  Drum-
mond  Castle  and  had  entered  the  Bay  of  Biscay  which,  though
said  to  be  calm,  was  rough  enough  to  give  the  ship  an  uneasy
motion,  at  least  for  a  "landsman."  When  dinner  was  an-
nounced, we  bravely  took  our  seats  and  began  well,  but  one
or  two  of  us  found  it  necessary  to  leave  the  table  hurriedly
as  though  something  had  been  forgotten,  and  the  writer  was
one  of  those  who  made  a  rapid  exit  from  the  saloon  to  his
cabin  with  most  uncomfortable  feelings,  though  fortunately
they  were  not  too  strong  to  make  him  forget  his  desire  to
hide  the  cause  of  his  speedy  flight.  Such  indisposition  is  so
often  considered  a  weakness,  and  is  so  often  a  theme  for
amusement,  that  most  men  strive  to  keep  their  fellow  pas-
sengers ignorant  of  their  condition.  To  conceal  any  sign  of
sickness  when  in  his  cabin,  the  poor  sufferer  popped  his  head
out  of  the  open  port  hole,  when  to  his  surprise  he  saw  his
neighbour  pursuing  the  same  course  with  great  success;
whereupon  the  ludicrous  side  of  the  picture  presented  itself
to  him  so  forcibly,  that  he  laughed  outright,  regained  his  equi-
librium, and  returned  to  dinner  quite  cured  from  sea-sickness.
In  due  time  we  sighted  Table  Mountain  and  entered
Cape  Town,  which  was  to  end  the  first  stage  of  the  journey.
We  had  on  that  pleasant  voyage  the  games,  concerts,  and
amusements  common  to  sea  voyages  and  very  little  serious
reading.  From  Cape  Town  to  Zanzibar  there  was  the  ex-
perience of  a  small  coasting  vessel  with  frequent  calls  at  the
ports  along  the  coast,  and  change  of  ship  took  place  at
Mozambique  to  a  third  vessel,  The  Bhagdad  of  the  B.I.S.N.
Co.,  a  comfortable  boat  with  a  genial  officer  in  command,


I]  EXPERIENCES  OF  A  STORM  3

Captain  Frohawk.  My  next  experience  in  the  same  ship  with
the  same  captain  some  years  later  travelling  from  Aden  t<.
Zanzibar,  was  not  favoured  with  the  same  placid  sea,  but
\\as  in  the  teeth  of  the  monsoon;  fortunately  on  this  occasion
there  were  only  three  passengers  on  board,  two  of  whom  kept
their  beds  for  several  days,  deeming  bed  safer  and  more
comfortable  than  to  be  thrown  about  on  deck  or  in  the
saloon.  The  experience  gained  was  useful;  it  gave  us  an  idea
of  some  of  the  difficulties  which  seamen  meet  with  in  rough
weather.  For  a  few  days  shoes  and  socks  were  abandoned,
because  water  was  to  be  found  everywhere ;  even  in  the  saloon,
which  wore  the  appearance  of  a  house  undergoing  spring
cleaning,  there  was,  in  addition  to  the  general  discomfort  of
disordered  furniture,  a  plentiful  supply  of  water  which  was
being  churned  to  froth  by  the  pitching  and  rolling  of  the  boat.
To  take  a  seat  in  another  part  of  the  saloon,  or  to  walk  about,
it  was  necessary  to  hold  on  to  some  object  that  was  a  fixture,
until  the  ship  assumed  a  fairly  level  position,  and  then  to
dart  forward  to  another  fixed  object,  and  so  on  until  the
destination  was  reached.  How  the  cook  managed  to  cook,
and  how  stewards  managed  to  carry  food  to  the  saloon,  still
remains  a  mystery.  During  those  days  the  captain  and  the
chief  officer  were  the  only  persons  beside  the  writer  who  came
to  table,  and  we  three  had  our  food  served  in  basins,  which
we  held,  because  nothing  could  remain  on  the  table  owing  to
the  rolling  of  the  ship  and  the  list  which  she  frequently  had.
The  captain  was  most  kind  and  had  a  chair  lashed  for  me
under  the  lee  of  the  deck-house,  where  only  an  occasional
wave  broke  over  it,  and  where  it  was  possible  to  get  fresh
air  and  also  to  gaze  on  the  wonderful  seas  and  read  a  little.

But  I  must  return  from  this  digression  to  Zanzibar  and
give  an  account  of  my  arrival  there.  It  has  been  said  of
that  Island  that  there  is  only  one  good  view  to  be  had  of  it,
which  is  obtained  when  you  are  finally  leaving  it.  Zanzibar,
however,  has  its  good  points,  and  for  me  it  has  pleasant
memories,  though  there  is  much  to  be  said  against  the  trying
heat,  which  is  as  great  by  night  as  by  day,  and  which  prevents


4  AT  ZANZIBAR  PREPARING  FOR  THE  JOURNEY  [CH.

most  people  from  obtaining  good  refreshing  sleep.  Beside
the  discomfort  of  the  great  heat,  there  are  the  mosquitoes
which  hum  round  your  bed  during  the  night,  seeking  a  place
of  entrance  through  the  mosquito  net  and  making  you  pay
heavily,  should  they  discover  any  hole  or  inlet,  or  should
you  throw  out  a  hand  or  a  foot  against  the  net,  where  they
can  settle  and  gorge  themselves.  To  compensate  for  the  evils
of  the  place,  there  was  in  my  own  case  a  warm  welcome  and
kindness  shown  by  all  the  resident  English,  and  especially
by  the  members  of  the  Universities'  Mission,  who  seemed
to  consider  nothing  too  great  a  trouble,  if  only  they  might
add  to  the  comfort  and  enjoyment  of  the  visitor,  and  make
his  visit  pleasant  and  happy.

In  those  early  days,  when  the  success  and  comfort  of
a  traveller  going  into  the  interior  of  Africa  depended  largely
upon  the  health,  strength,  and  uprightness  of  the  porter,  much
time  had  to  be  devoted  to  securing  the  necessary  human
burden  bearer,  who  was  the  sole  means  of  transport ;  further
time  had  to  be  spent  in  looking  over  the  goods  from  England,
and  arranging  them,  so  that  the  cases  or  packages  did  not
exceed  sixty-five  pounds  weight  apiece.  The  presence  of  kind
friends  in  Zanzibar  was  indeed  a  boon,  and  from  them  I  ob-
tained much  valuable  advice  concerning  the  treatment  of
natives  and  many  hints  as  to  travel.  Furthermore  barter
goods  such  as  unbleached  calico,  prints,  brass-,  copper-,  and
iron-wire,  beads  of  various  kinds,  with  other  articles  for
currency  to  be  used  to  obtain  food  on  the  journey  instead  of
money,  had  to  be  purchased  in  Zanzibar.  When  the  tedious
process  of  selecting  and  engaging  porters  was  completed,  they
had  to  undergo  a  medical  examination,  which  often  reduced
their  number  considerably,  because  many  of  them  were  unfit
for  the  hardships  of  a  journey;  and  then  fresh  men  had  to  be
sought  to  fill  the  gaps  of  those  rejected,  which  again  caused
delay.  When  the  men  were  finally  engaged  and  their  agree-
ment had  been  signed,  there  came  the  trying  task  of  satisfying
them  in  regard  to  advance  pay,  because,  though  their  wages
were  fixed  at  a  given  rate  per  month,  yet  each  man  tried  to


I]  THE  AFRICAN  PORTER  5

-  much  as  possible  before  he  commenced  his  work,
and  would  not  consent  to  move  without  at  least  one  month's
pay  in  advance.  Crowds  of  people  usually  awaited  these  men
when  they  were  being  paid  and  made  great  demands  upon  the
waives  they  received  and,  if  left  to  carry  out  their  avaricious
schemes,  they  would  leave  the  porters  with  only  a  few  coppers.
The  latter  had  therefore  to  be  guarded  and  kept  in  a  locked
1  after  they  were  paid,  until  they  could  be  marched  to
the  beach  and  shipped  to  the  mainland,  the  point  from  which
the  journey  was  to  begin.  If  these  precautions  were  neglected,
the  unfortunate  men  were  left  without  money  to  purchase  the
numerous  small  comforts  which  they  wished  to  take  with  them
on  the  journey.

Another  reason  we  had  for  guarding  and  quickly  shipping
the  porters  off  to  the  mainland  was  to  ensure  their  fulfilling
their  contract ;  because  if  allowed  their  freedom  in  Zanzibar,
some  of  them  would  abscond  with  a  month's  pay,  or  stay
so  long  with  their  friends  that  they  would  be  left  behind,
and  thus  both  men  and  money  were  lost.  The  only  means
of  crossing  to  the  mainland  was  by  dhow,  the  small  smelly
craft  of  the  Arabs,  which  was  always  ready  to  be  hired  to
ply  between  the  Island  of  Zanzibar  and  the  mainland.
Under  favourable  circumstances  these  vessels  would  run  over
in  four  hours,  but  if  the  wind  fell  or  was  contrary,  two  or
three  days  might  elapse ;  a  traveller  related  that  he  once  took
a  week  to  cross  and  suffered  considerable  discomfort  from
want  of  provisions.  We  were  favoured  by  fortune,  and
reached  Sadaani  on  the  mainland  before  it  was  dark,  though
\\r  did  not  start  until  noon.  We  were  then  able  to  pitch  the
tents  and  settle  down  outside  the  Arab  town,  which,  like
most  Arab  towns  in  Africa,  was  very  dirty  and  an  un-
desirable place  for  health  or  comfort.  This  was  my  first
night  with  Africans,  severed  from  all  English  friends,  alone
on  the  shore  of  the  "Dark  Continent."  There  were  all  kinds
of  new  sounds  from  insects,  birds  and  animals,  which  called
for  some  explanation  before  one  could  go  calmly  to  sleep.
It  took  time  to  accustom  the  mind  to  them,  and  then  it  was


6  THE  FIRST  NIGHT  OF  CAMP  LIFE  [CH.

not  easy  to  settle  down  to  sleep  in  the  tent,  especially  as  the
porters  were  close  at  hand  sitting  round  their  fires  and  talking.
After  a  time  the  hum  of  the  porters'  voices  died  down  as  one
by  one  they  fell  asleep,  and  later  sleep  came  to  the  relief  of
the  inexperienced  traveller,  and  the  camp  was  wrapped  in
the  calm  of  slumber.  To  a  man  newly  arrived  from  England
it  is  a  strange  sight  to  see  men  lie  down  on  the  hard  ground
with  no  covering  beyond  their  scanty  loin-cloth  of  three  or
four  yards  of  unbleached  calico,  with  no  roof  over  them  but
the  sky,  and  no  other  protection  from  wild  animals  save  the
embers  of  a  smouldering  fire  occasionally  drawn  together  as
one  or  other  of  the  sleepers  pushed  the  logs  of  wood  into  the
fire  and  caused  it  to  burst  into  flame.  Yet  these  men  sleep
soundly  and  rise  as  fresh  as  though  they  had  passed  the  night
on  the  most  comfortable  bed.  Experience  of  African  life
teaches  the  traveller  that  there  is  no  real  hardship  in  spending
the  night  in  such  a  manner,  his  sympathy  is  uncalled  for  and
wasted.  The  Swahili  porter  is  as  a  rule  too  idle  to  build  any
hut  or  covering  for  himself,  such  as  is  built  by  men  of  inland
tribes  when  travelling,  and  should  a  shower  of  rain  catch  him
by  night,  he  will  sit  and  shiver  over  his  fire  unless  he  can
crawl  into  the  hut  of  some  more  energetic  fellow  porter.

The  first  morning  of  a  journey  is  inevitably,  for  an  African
traveller,  the  most  tiresome  of  all  the  days  of  his  journey;
giving  out  loads  to  the  porters  is  trying  to  temper  and
strength,  especially  because  each  man  wants  to  take  the
lightest  and  most  convenient  package ;  and  unless  some  care
and  thought  is  exercised,  the  weakest  men  will  be  pushed
aside  to  the  last  and  left  with  the  heaviest  and  most  tiresome
loads  to  carry,  while  the  strong  men  will  make  off  with  the
lightest  and  nicest  burdens.  This  task  of  apportioning  loads
requires  both  care  and  tact  in  order  to  assign  the  right  loads
to  the  right  men;  another  cause  of  trouble  is  the  headman
who  is  not  to  be  relied  upon,  because  he  usually  has  favourites
among  the  porters  whom  he  will  seek  to  benefit.  There  is
often  another  great  trial  awaiting  the  traveller  when  doling
out  loads,  for  he  will  find  that  several  of  his  men  have


I]  MARCHING  EXPERIENCES  7

decamped  during  the  ni^hl,  and  that  he  is  left  with  a  scarcity
of  porters1.  Local  men  have  to  be  employed,  and  high  prices
paid  to  them,  in  order  to  have  the  loads  carried  on  for  the
next  few  days,  until  some  of  the  loads  of  calico  goods  have
been  distributed  for  the  purchase  of  food,  and  thus  some  of
the  porters  have  been  set  free  to  carry  the  loads  of  the
deserters.  In  most  cases  a  few  extra  men  are  engaged  before
leaving  Zanzibar  to  meet  this  difficulty,  and  also  to  be  ready
in  case  of  sickness  or  any  other  emergency,  and  these  may
possibly  suffice  to  carry  on  any  excess  loads.  By  the  time
these  trials  are  ended  and  everything  smoothed  out  for
travelling,  the  sun  is  high  and  the  heat  has  become  excessive
for  a  march  of  twelve  miles  to  the  next  camp,  but  since  a
start  must  be  made,  if  only  of  a  few  miles,  in  order  to
accustom  the  men  to  their  loads  and  to  get  them  away  from
the  baneful  influences  of  the  coast,  a  short  march  is  under-
taken.

The  first  two  or  three  marches  test  the  physical  strength  and
powers  of  endurance  of  the  new  and  inexperienced  traveller;
he  does  not  know  how  to  keep  his  men  together  in  single
file,  nor  how  much  control  the  headman  ought  to  take ;  again
the  narrow  uneven  path  with  its  concave  surface  is  trying
to  walk  along,  it  is  in  some  respects  worse  than  walking  in  a
furrow  of  a  ploughed  field.  The  hot  sun  tries  him,  and  he  does
not  realise  how  beneficial  it  would  be  for  him  to  rest  by  the
way  and  have  some  refreshment,  he  is  anxious  to  reach  his
camping  ground  and  will  try  to  go  the  whole  way  with  the
slowly  moving  porters  without  food  until  noon,  forgetful  that
his  breakfast  was  hastily  swallowed  at  an  early  hour  and  is
insufficient  for  a  long  morning's  march  in  tropical  heat.  As
a  rule  he  soon  falls  in  with  the  regular  routine  of  life,  and
begins  on  the  second  or  third  day  to  enjoy  the  marches  and
finds  amusement  as  he  goes  along.  There  are  many  new
interests  in  scenery,  birds,  and  flowers,  as  well  as  new  animal

1  To  hunt  for  the  missing  men  in  the  nearest  village  is  to  waste  precious
time,  and  it  seldom  happens  that  the  injured  traveller  obtains  redress,
though  he  notifies  his  agent  of  the  desertions;  the  men  are  experts  in
decamping  and  evade  capture.


8  AMUSEMENTS  BY  THE  ROAD  [CH.

life,  with  here  and  there  glimpses  of  village  life,  methods  of
cultivation,  and  a  thousand  and  one  things  to  keep  him  from
being  dull  or  lonely,  even  though  he  has  no  companion
beyond  the  natives  who  travel  with  him  and  carry  his  goods,
whose  language  he  does  not  know.  His  boys  who  walk  with
his  water  bottle  and  light  refreshment  will  entertain  him,
and,  if  he  is  a  sportsman,  they  are  ready  with  his  gun  when
game  appears.

The  average  Swahili  porter  will  travel  from  twelve  to
fifteen  miles  each  day  so  that,  by  starting  at  daybreak  and
marching  in  the  cool  morning,  camp  is  reached  soon  after
ten  o'clock,  and  the  day  can  be  given  to  any  pastime  which
takes  the  fancy  of  the  traveller.  Some  men  like  to  give  the
rest  of  their  day  to  hunting,  and  if  one  is  a  good  marksman,
he  will  be  able  to  appeal  to  the  tenderest  part  of  the  Swahili
porter  by  the  good  bag  he  brings  into  camp.  Other  men  may
prefer  botany  or  the  collecting  of  butterflies  or  new  insects
and  what  not.  Rivers,  if  they  are  in  flood,  afford  amusement
and  also  scope  for  ingenuity  in  crossing  them;  some  rivers
which  during  the  dry  season  are  either  dry  sandy  beds,
or  at  most  small  streams  of  one  or  two  inches  deep,  rise
rapidly  during  the  rains  and  assume  gigantic  proportions
being  some  twenty  or  more  yards  wide,  with  a  deep  surging
current  far  too  strong  for  the  strongest  expert  swimmer  to
negotiate.  Such  streams  have  either  to  be  crossed,  or  the  men
have  to  sit  on  the  bank  and  wait  until  the  waters  subside.
Such  waiting  never  causes  the  porter  any  anxiety  if  he  has
food,  on  the  contrary,  he  will  patiently  sit  for  a  week  or  longer
and  exhibit  no  sign  of  weariness.  Possibly  a  temporary  bridge
can  be  thrown  over  the  river  by  felling  a  tall  tree  on  the  bank
so  that  it  falls  with  its  branches  resting  on  the  opposite
bank ;  the  upper  branches  can  then  be  lopped,  and  a  passage
made  for  the  porters  to  walk  over;  sometimes  a  rope  bridge
has  to  be  made  from  a  tree  on  one  bank  to  another  tree
on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river1.  As  a  rule  the  Zanzibar

1  Creepers suitable for  ropes  are  well  known  to  the  natives  and  ar
invariably  to  be  found  in  the  vicinity  of  rivers.


I]  CROSSING  UNBRIDGED  RIVERS  9

porter  is  competent  to  deal  with  such  difficulties  and  soon
IS  means  for  crossing  a  river  if  he  wishes  to  move
on ;  the  chief  difficulty  is  to  create  the  desire  to  proceed.  A
<  nvper  or  rope  bridge  is  a  favourite  method  for  spanning
large  rivers  and  when  once  made  it  is  kept  in  repair  by  th<
people  living  in  the  district,  who  find  it  useful  for  crossing
near  their  homes  instead  of  making  a  round  of  some  miles
by  a  ford.  Such  a  bridge  consists  of  three  or  four  strong
creepers  upon  which  to  walk;  these  are  securely  fastened  to
stout  trees  on  each  bank,  and  then  side  ropes  to  form  hand
rails  on  either  side  are  secured  to  the  main  creepers  and  so
are  kept  in  position.

The  Zanzibar  porter  or,  as  he  is  commonly  called,  the
"Swahili  porter,"  is  of  mixed  nationality;  the  race  of  the
so-called  Swahili  is  most  cosmopolitan;  the  men  belong  to
all  tribes  and  nations  to  which  the  Arab  slave-trader  has  in
time  past  had  access.  Where  the  Arab  could  with  safety
penetrate,  he  raided  towns  and  villages,  the  results  of  his
raids  being  the  carrying  off  of  the  inhabitants  as  slaves,  male
and  female.  The  porter  is  often  a  son  of  such  slaves  or  he  may
be  the  original  slave;  he  is  usually  versed  in  all  the  vices
and  cunning  of  his  master,  and  shows  all  his  obsequiousness
when  he  thinks  this  characteristic  to  be  profitable.  The
Arab  slave-trader  has  been  on  the  coast  of  Africa  for  many
years;  it  is  indeed  probable  that  he  arrived  before  the  Portu-
guese, though  the  latter  has  left  traces  of  very  early  residence,
such  as  may  be  seen  in  the  old  fort  of  Mombasa,  with  its
stone  ruins  and  carefully  carved  staircase  in  the  rocky  cliff
affording  a  covered  passage  down  to  a  boat  on  the  beach
below,  or  the  Mozambique  forts  and  other  ruins  on  the  east
coast.  Before  these  early  European  navigators  found  their
way  along  the  east  coast,  the  rude  Arab  dhows  are  said  to
have  been  plying  to  and  fro,  carrying  their  human  freights  of
slaves  to  various  Arabian  market  places.  Slaves  were  taken
from  the  mainland  to  Zanzibar,  where  a  slave  market  was
established  at  an  early  date;  from  that  market  they  were
carried  by  dhow  to  different  ports  of  Arabia,  often  undergoing


io  ARAB  SLAVE  TRADE  [CH.

terrible  experiences  on  the  voyage.  In  later  days  when  the
British  appeared  in  East  Africa,  the  Arab  had  established
himself  firmly  in  Zanzibar  as  his  headquarters,  while  at
the  most  favourable  points  along  the  east  coast  important
Arab  chiefs  were  settled,  who  acknowledged  the  suzerainty
of  the  Arab  sultan  in  Zanzibar.  Slave  markets  were  common
in  most  of  these  Arab  towns,  where  men,  women,  and  children,
were  exposed  for  sale,  as  each  expedition  returned  from  the
interior.

Judged  from  our  Western  standard,  the  mode  of  treating
these  unfortunate  slaves  was  revolting,  diabolical,  and  in-
human. The  Arab  who  engaged  in  such  traffic  soon  lost  the
small  amount  of  feeling  or  pity  which  he  ever  possessed,  and
regarded  his  human  prey  as  personal  chattels;  hence  his  only
object  in  showing  mercy  was  in  order  to  carry  his  victims  alive
and  in  as  good  a  condition  as  possible  to  market,  in  order  to
secure  better  prices  for  them.  These  slaves  when  sold  at  the
coast  were  destined  to  become  household  slaves,  or  to  be  sent
to  the  clove  plantations  on  Pemba  Island,  or  to  be  shipped
off  to  ports  of  Arabia,  where  they  were  chiefly  required  for
household  purposes  or  as  agricultural  labourers.  When  they
became  domestic  slaves  in  Zanzibar,  they  were  not  treated
badly;  women  often  became  concubines  of  their  masters  and
were  kindly  treated,  while  men  became  trusted  slaves  and
lived  in  comparative  comfort ;  the  latter  frequently  had  slaves
of  their  own,  and  sometimes  they  lived  like  free  men,  though
they  were  always  liable  to  be  sold  again  at  any  moment  if
their  masters  became  tired  of  them,  or  there  were  other
reasons  for  parting  with  them1.

Boys  and  girls  were  eagerly  sought  and  purchased,  to  do
work  on  the  clove  plantations  on  Pemba  Island,  where  the
dust  from  the  cloves  with  the  insanitary  conditions  of  their
homes  soon  brought  on  lung  diseases,  and  carried  off  numbers
of  them  annually,  so  that  fresh  supplies  were  constantly

1  The  Zanzibar  Cathedral,  the  headquarters  of  the  Universities'  Mission,
stands  on  the  original  slave  market.  This  site  was  procured  by  Bishop
Steere,  and  the  beautiful  Cathedral  was  built  on  it  as  a  witness  to  Christian
liberty  and  freedom.


I]  BRITISH  WARSHIPS  AND  SLAVERY  u

needed.  Owing  to  the  influence  of  early  travellers,  who  n.
known  to  the  British  Government  the  horrors  of  slav
British  men-of-war  were  sent  into  this  part  and  were  actively
engaged  in  suppressing  this  slave  traffic.  This  was  at  an  early
date  in  our  knowledge  of  East  Africa.  The  trade  was  cruel  in
the  extreme,  the  sea  voyages  adding  new  kinds  of  torture ;  men
and  women,  boys  and  girls,  regardless  of  age  or  sex,  were
packed  into  dirty  dhows  with  no  room  to  lie  down  or  even  to
sit  in  comfort,  in  fact  some  were  so  closely  packed  that  they
had  to  stand  until  they  disembarked.  The  food  on  such  voyages
was  boiled  rice  handed  round  in  pots,  and  a  scanty  supply
of  fresh  water  was  allowed  them  daily.  My  personal  experi-
ence of  this  side  of  slavery  has  fortunately  been  limited,
though  I  have  seen  large  numbers  of  people  when  rescued
from  dhows  by  men-of-war,  and  I  have  taken  charge  of  a
few  of  those  rescued  captives  and  trained  them  as  servants.
The  majority  of  Zanzibar  porters,  as  already  stated,  are
men  who  were  slaves  of  Arabs,  but  were  allowed  to  become
porters  and  take  service,  even  for  two  or  three  years'  duration,
under  travellers  going  into  the  interior  of  Africa.  For  such
men  the  worst  part  of  the  thraldom  of  slavery  was  at  an  end,
their  training  had  in  most  cases  reduced  them  to  a  low  state
intellectually  and  morally.  It '  is  largely  due  to  the  Arab
influence  that  comparatively  little  success  has  been  obtained
by  those  who  have  tried  to  educate,  Christianise,  and  raise
the  Zanzibar  slaves  from  their  degraded  condition.  Some  of
the  worst  cruelties  ever  perpetrated  in  slave-raiding  have
been  carried  out  by  slave-raiders  who  were  drawn  from  this
class.  The  raiders  were  either  slaves,  or  sons  of  women  who
had  been  slaves  and  had  been  taken  to  wife  by  their  masters;
their  sons  had  then  been  placed  in  positions  of  trust  such  as
the  leading  of  slave  expeditions.  The  past  experience  of  these
men,  who  had  been  through  the  mill  of  slavery,  instead  of
softening  them  and  making  them  tender  and  sympathetic
towards  sufferers,  had  made  them  harder  and  more  cruel
than  their  masters;  and  their  own  sufferings  seemed  to
have  given  them  new  ideas  for  torturing  their  fellow  men  in


12  THE  HORRORS  OF  SLAVERY  [CH.

a  more  diabolical  manner  even  than  that  practised  by  their
masters.  When  possible  these  men  would  raid  a  district
by  night  and  capture  the  inhabitants,  shooting  down  those
who  resisted  or  made  a  stand  for  life  and  freedom.  When
such  raids  were  impossible  owing  to  the  tribes  being  too
powerful,  the  traders  would  purchase  slaves,  giving  in  ex-
change barter  goods  such  as  calico,  prints,  iron  wire,  brass
wire  or  copper  wire,  guns,  gun-powder  and  percussion  caps1.
As  slaves  became  scarce  nearer  the  coast,  the  traders  had  to
go  further  afield  to  obtain  them,  and  then  began  those  trying
journeys  for  slaves  through  waterless  tracts  of  country  with
fearful  loss  of  life,  journeys  which  have  marked  slave-
raiding  as  the  most  cruel  and  debasing  occupation  on  earth.
It  was  to  the  advantage  of  the  trader  to  carry  as  many  as
possible  of  his  victims  to  the  coast  in  a  saleable  condition,
but,  as  he  wanted  to  make  as  much  profit  as  possible  out
of  them  on  the  way,  they  were  laden  with  ivory,  horns,  food
for  his  caravan,  and  any  other  goods  which  he  might  have.
The  captives  were  chained  together  in  gangs  of  ten  or  twelve;
each  slave  had  an  iron  collar  on  his  neck  with  an  eye  through
which  the  chain  ran;  one  end  of  the  chain  was  secured  to
an  iron  collar,  and  a  lock  at  the  other  end  of  the  chain
prevented  it  from  being  withdrawn  from  the  collar,  and
made  it  impossible  for  any  slave  to  escape  without  the  whole
gang  being  loosed.  The  journeys  to  the  coast  were  in  many
cases  too  terrible  for  description;  when  a  mother,  carrying
her  infant  in  addition  to  some  load  for  her  master,  staggered
under  her  burden,  she  would  be  lashed  on  with  a  rhinoceros
whip  which  cut  through  her  flesh  at  each  stroke,  or  perhaps
her  child  would  be  torn  away  from  her,  dashed  against  a
tree  to  kill  it,  and  the  body  flung  by  the  roadside  and  left
for  the  wild  beasts.  Sometimes  a  weary  captive  fell  sick
and  was  unable  to  keep  pace  with  others,  but  there  was  no
mercy  shown,  the  whip  was  the  medicine  administered  to

1  For  years  the  discarded  service  rifles  from  European  armies  have  been
bought  up  by  merchants  who  shipped  them  to  Africa  and  sold  them  at
great  profit  to  Arab  and  other  traders,  to  be  used  as  barter  goods  in  the
interior.


I]  THE  TAMING  STICK  13

help  the  patient  into  camp;  should  this  f;iil,  the  tnul«-r
would  strike  off  the  head  with  his  sword  rather  than  release
the  poor  wretch  from  his  chains  and  give  him  a  chance  of
recovery;  the  gang  was  then  ordered  to  pass  on  and  catch
up  the  other  captives.  Such  cruelty  was  said  to  inspire  the
others  with  dread  of  a  like  fate,  should  they  fail  to  keep  the
necessary  pace.

It  sometimes  happened  that  some  captive  who  was  healthy
and  strong  resented  the  treatment  he  received  at  the  hands
of  his  captors  and  refused  to  carry  an  allotted  load;  pos-
sibly he  had  been  a  chief  or  a  man  of  position  in  his  village
community  and  accustomed  to  marks  of  respect;  the  slave
driver  under  such  circumstances  said  he  must  "tame"  the
man  and  break  his  spirit.  To  effect  this,  the  man's  neck  was
secured  in  the  fork  of  a  long  heavy  tree  branch,  so  that  he
could  not  withdraw  it,  and  during  a  march  some  person
appointed  carried  the  other  end  of  the  branch  to  enable  the
man  to  walk  and  carry  his  load  in  addition  to  the  weight
of  his  tree.  At  night  his  hands  and  feet  were  bound  to  the
tree  branch,  named  "the  taming  stick/'  thus  causing  cramp
and  pain ;  often  the  thongs  cut  into  the  flesh,  causing  blood
to  flow.  I  once  came  upon  a  slave  in  camp  thus  bound;  he
must  have  been  lying  there  for  some  hours,  before  his  groans
reached  me  and  guided  me  to  the  hut  in  which  he  lay  or
rather  squatted.  He  was  lashed  with  leather  thongs  so
tightly  to  the  tree  that  the  flesh  had  swelled  over  them  and
they  had  cut  through  the  flesh,  and  blood  was  dripping  from
his  wrists  and  upper  arms  and  also  from  his  legs.  It  was
difficult  to  cut  the  thongs  without  hurting  the  poor  fellow ;
his  gratitude  was  great  when  he  was  enabled  to  stretch  himself
and  to  rest  his  weary  limbs.  The  slave-trader  protested  when
I  went  to  release  the  poor  man,  and  said  he  would  escape,
but  he  was  silenced  on  my  threatening  to  hand  him  over  to
the  British  authorities  at  the  coast.

England  did  a  noble  thing  for  Africa  when  she  set  her
face  against  slavery,  and  worked  so  indefatigably  to  suppress
the  abominable  traffic.  Livingstone  did  an  excellent  work


14  CAMPING  GROUND  [CH.

in  exposing  this  trade  and  stirring  up  a  greater  spirit  of
enquiry  into  the  atrocities.  Now  England  in  conjunction
with  other  European  powers  has  made  the  slave  traffic
impossible  on  the  East  Coast,  and  only  the  milder  form  of
household  slavery  is  possible.  The  Uganda  railway  has  done
away  with  the  long  trying  marches  for  porters  and  abolished
the  last  excuse  for  using  slaves  as  beasts  of  burden.  Christian
missions  did  great  things  for  the  amelioration  of  slaves;  but
the  work  of  suppressing  slavery  was  beyond  the  powers  of
individuals,  it  needed  the  aid  of  the  Government  to  deal  with
Arab  traders,  and  this  has  been  freely  given.

In  closing  this  chapter  it  may  be  permissible  to  give  one
or  two  hints  in  regard  to  marching  and  camping,  which  ex-
perience has  taught  me,  since  they  may  be  of  value  to  some
future  traveller.  Zanzibar  porters  always  strive  to  camp  on
old  sites,  chiefly  because  there  are  old  huts  there  into  which
they  can  enter  and  where  they  can  obtain  shelter  from  the
heat  by  day  or  the  cold  by  night ;  but  such  old  camps  should
be  avoided,  because  they  are  insanitary.  Further,  should
previous  inhabitants  have  been  suffering  from  the  common
complaint  of  smallpox,  some  porter  almost  invariably  catches
the  disease  and  spreads  it  to  his  companions,  thus  doing
untold  harm  to  the  party.  Even  apart  from  the  horrible
disease  of  smallpox,  there  are  other  reasons  for  avoiding  old
camps,  such  as  dysentery  and  tick-fever,  both  serious  dangers
to  the  European,  beside  filth  and  stench.  The  choice  of  a
new  and  clean  camping  ground  will  always  pay,  though  it
may  give  a  little  more  trouble  to  find  a  new  site  suitable  for
pitching  the  tent  and  building  huts  for  the  porters.  I  have
known  of  two  or  three  deaths  of  Englishmen  which  were
traced  to  the  effects  of  disease  taken  from  old  camping
grounds.  When  the  ground  has  been  chosen,  the  tent  should
be  pitched  on  the  smoothest  and  most  level  part.  The  tent
should  have  its  openings  north  and  south,  to  prevent  the
sun  from  streaming  into  it.  Most  travellers  like  to  have
a  waterproof  ground  sheet  for  a  carpet,  but  if  that  cannot
be  obtained,  newly  cut  grass  should  be  laid  down,  the


I]  SETTING  A  GUARD  15

straws  being  arranged  straight  as  in  thatching,  not  thrown
in  anyhow.

A  most  important  point  in  camp  life  is  to  see  that  all
boxes  and  wooden  articles  are  raised  from  the  ground  and
laid  on  stones  or  on  branches,  to  save  them  from  the  ravages
of  the  white  ants,  which  will  eat  through  wooden  boxes  and
destroy  goods  in  a  single  night  if  they  are  left  undisturbed.
The  general  goods  should  be  stacked  in  front  of  the  tent,
raised  up  as  described,  and  the  porters  should  encircle  them
with  their  huts  or  places  of  rest  for  the  night.  This  pre-
caution will  lessen  the  chances  of  thieves  coming  during  the
night,  and  lighten  the  duties  of  the  guard,  which  should  be
stationed  as  soon  as  the  goods  are  stacked.  It  is  always
advisable  to  appoint  men  to  guard  the  goods,  and  each
porter  will  take  two  hours  of  this  work  during  the  day  or  the
night  without  grumbling.  Possibly  no  attempt  will  be  made
to  steal,  but  on  the  other  hand  something  may  be  stolen,
and  then  there  is  not  only  the  annoyance  of  loss,  but  also
serious  inconvenience  and  even  disastrous  consequences  may
arise  to  the  traveller.  I  have  only  once  been  robbed  during
the  night,  and  that  was  near  the  end  of  my  long  years  of
experience,  at  a  place  where  I  thought  it  would  be  safe  to
relax  my  usual  custom.  I  was  assured  that  no  one  would
steal,  but  I  lost  everything  in  the  way  of  personal  outfit
except  one  suit  of  clothes;  money,  medicines  and  clothing,
all  disappeared,  owing  to  my  neglect  to  place  a  guard.


CHAPTER  II

TRIBES MET WITH IN USAGAR A— TRIBAL  WARS— THE

DREADED MASAI— STRICT MORALITY AMONG THE

WAMEGI— BURIAL  AND  OTHER  CUSTOMS  AMONG

THE  WAMEGI— DRESS  AND  ORNAMENTS

FROM  the  coast1,  where  the  natives  had  for  years  been
under  Arab  rule  and  where  that  rule  was  acknowledged
until  the  German  occupation  in  1887,  there  was  little  more
than  a  nominal  suzerainty,  for  there  was  no  ruler  nor  any
administrative  body.  When  Unyamwezi  was  reached,  there
was  tribal  authority.  Many  small  tribes  are  found  there,
almost  all  of  them  belonging  to  the  Bantu  stock  and  each
speaking  a  dialect  of  the  Bantu  language  in  the  coast  belt.
The  people  live  in  communities,  which  consist  of  clusters  of
huts,  varying  in  number  from  four  to  one  hundred,  enclosed
in  a  stockade  seven  to  eight  feet  high  made  of  rough  stakes
planted  side  by  side  and  tied  together  with  strong  creepers ;
round  the  outside  of  these  stockades  thorny  shrubs  are
encouraged  to  grow,  to  make  them  more  formidable  to
the  approach  of  any  foe.  There  is  one  entrance  with  a
gate  consisting  of  four  or  five  roughly  cut  planks;  through
each  plank  a  hole  is  bored  at  one  end,  and  a  strong  wooden
bar  is  passed  to  form  a  hinge  on  the  upper  end ;  these  planks
are  then  raised  during  the  day  to  allow  people  to  pass  in
and  out  at  will,  but  at  sunset  they  are  lowered  and  secured
on  the  inside.  The  sanitary  conditions  of  the  approaches  to
these  villages  are  dreadful;  for  three  or  four  hundred  yards
on  either  side  of  the  entrances  the  grass  and  shrubs  are  allowed
to  grow,  and  the  place  is  used  by  the  inhabitants  for  the  relief
of  nature,  and  human  excretions  lie  about  in  all  directions,
making  a  foul  smell;  no  steps  are  taken  to  cleanse  the  place,

1  Until  Unyamwezi  was  reached,  a  distance  of  four  hundred  miles,  there
was  not  any  chief  commanding  the  respect  of  an  entire  tribe.  Arabs  claimed
to  rule  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  inland.


I'IMI II


SHIELDS  AND  SPEARS  FROM  BUGANDA,  BUSOGA,  BUKEDI,
SEMLIKI  VALLEY  AND  KAVIRONDO


PLATE  III


S5


CM.  ii]  NATIVE  BUILDING  17

it  is  left  until  the  tropical  rains  come  to  wash  the  ground  and
cleanse  it.  If  it  were  not  for  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  the  rarity
o!'  the  atmosphere,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  typhoid  or
enteric  fever  would  carry  off  hundreds  of  victims  each  year1.
When  Usagara  is  reached  a  new  phase  of  life  and  of  lan-
guage meets  the  eye  and  ear  of  the  traveller;  the  physical
features  also  differ,  for  the  country  is  hilly  to  mountainous,
whereas  he  has  been  travelling  through  comparatively  smooth
country.  Again,  the  round  huts  with  conical  roofs  built  on
stakes  four  or  five  feet  long,  driven  a  few  inches  into  the
ground  and  lashed  together  with  creeper  cords  or  strips  of
bark,  and  the  interstices  filled  with  clay  thrown  with  force
from  the  inside,  and  the  wall  smoothed  with  the  palm  of
the  hand,  are  left  behind;  and  a  new  kind  of  architecture
meets  the  gaze.  The  huts  of  Usagara  are  built  in  squares
with  flat  roofs,  the  walls  are  stakes  driven  into  the  earth
as  mentioned  above,  but  they  are  six  or  seven  feet  long  and
bound  together.  The  rooms  inside  measure  from  eight  to
nine  feet  wide.  From  the  top  of  one  wall  to  the  top  of  the
opposite  wall  stout  timbers  are  laid  to  form  rafters,  then
smaller  timbers  are  laid  crosswise  to  these  and  covered  with
grass  with  a  thick  layer  of  clay  on  the  grass  and  beaten
hard.  These  houses  may  be  of  any  length,  according  to  the
number  of  families  about  to  live  in  them.  They  are  built
to  form  a  square,  leaving  a  courtyard  in  the  middle  for
the  cattle.  Each  family  has  two  rooms,  a  common  room
and  an  inner  sleeping  room;  a  door  leads  from  the  common
room  into  the  courtyard.  There  is  one  gateway  only  leading
into  the  courtyard,  it  passes  under  the  roof  between  two  of
the  houses,  and  is  guarded  by  the  chief  of  the  community,
who  is  also  the  guardian  of  the  peace;  all  other  doors
open  into  the  courtyard.  Should  there  be  an  increase  in

1  Though  the  people  may  belong  to  the  same  tribe,  it  is  seldom  that  more
than  one  village  acknowledges  the  authority  of  the  same  chief.  Each
village  has  its  own  ruler  and  lives  independently  of  the  next  village;  it
is  only  when  threatened  by  war  that  they  combine  to  meet  a  common  foe.
In  one  or  two  of  these  villages  I  found  women  the  acknowledged  rulers;
these  were  the  only  cases  met  with  in  Africa  where  the  men  of  a  tribe
allowed  a  woman  to  rule  them.

R.U.  2


18  MILK  CUSTOMS  [CH.

this  community  and  some  other  person  wishes  to  come  to
live  with  them,  a  conical  hut  will  be  built  near  the  flat-
roofed  houses;  and  in  time,  when  several  such  huts  have
been  built,  the  chief  may  decide  with  the  community  to
add  a  new  court  to  the  old  one  and  form  another  square
with  the  flat  roofs,  abolishing  the  round  huts.  Such  huts
with  flat  roofs  of  earth  betoken  an  unsettled  country,  they
are  intended  to  protect  against  the  weapons  of  the  adver-
saries, or  from  incendiaries  and  night  attacks.  They  were
proof  against  the  weapons  which  the  people  then  possessed,
such  as  spears,  bows  and  arrows.

These  flat-roofed  houses  are  built  either  on  the  tops  of
hills,  or  on  some  level  place  high  up  the  sides  of  the  hills,
for  safety,  with  the  object  of  being  out  of  reach  of  the
Masai  whom  the  people  fear  because  of  the  raids  frequently
made  for  cattle,  and  for  avoiding  raids  made  to  obtain
slaves.  The  people  in  Usagara  who  live  in  these  flat-roofed
houses  call  themselves  Wamegi ;  the  Wagogo,  whose  country
is  further  inland,  adopt  the  same  plan  of  building  their
houses,  but  they  live  on  the  plains.  The  Wamegi  combine
agriculture  with  cattle  rearing;  they  appear  to  have  been  a
pastoral  people  who  have  settled  down  to  an  agricultural
life,  but  who  dearly  love  to  possess  a  few  cows.  The  cows
are  a  small  breed  with  humps ;  they  are  mountain  cattle,  and,
like  most  African  cows,  give  very  little  milk.  A  calf  is  never
taken  from  its  dam,  and  should  it  die,  the  cow  soon  ceases
to  give  milk,  until  she  has  another  calf.  Milk  is  preserved
in  long  gourds  and  is  drunk  after  it  has  turned  sour;  it  is
put  into  the  gourd  vessels  when  obtained.  The  vessels  are
seldom  washed,  and  the  dregs  from  the  previous  milk  soon
cause  new  milk  to  turn  sour ;  in  this  condition  it  is  partaken
of  if  not  too  thick.  A  bowl  of  clotted  milk  is  given  to
any  honoured  guest  as  a  mark  of  esteem.  An  Englishman
finds  a  bowl  a  large  amount  to  drink,  even  though  he  may
be  thirsty.  A  common  sized  bowl  contains  two  pints.  I  have
often  been  presented  with  a  bowl,  and  have  been  compelled
to  make  excuse  for  favouring  a  child  of  the  family  with  the


II]  GOAT  REARING  19

unfinished  luxury.  Goats  and  sheep  are  reared  in  large
numbers;  they  are,  as  a  rule,  lacking  in  the  chief  respect
we  consider  to  be  a  mark  of  good  feeding,  namely  fat.  They
uiv  wonderfully  active  and  agile  in  climbing  the  hills.

Goats  and  sheep  sleep  in  the  houses  by  night,  tethered
to  pegs  in  the  floor  near  the  walls,  in  the  inner  circle  of  the
round  hut,  or  against  the  walls  of  the  square  hut.  In  the
morning  they  are  turned  out  when  the  dew  and  mist  have
evaporated  from  the  grass.  Experience  has  taught  the
people  that  the  wet  grass  causes  goats  to  have  skin  disease
which  makes  the  hair  fall  from  the  legs,  leaving  ugly  sores.
Cows  sleep  in  the  open  in  the  courtyard  within  the  square
formed  by  the  flat-roofed  houses.  Young  people,  boys  and
girls,  herd  the  cattle;  goats,  sheep  and  cows  being  herded
together,  while  the  children  play,  from  time  to  time  giving
a  little  attention  to  the  animals;  the  pastures  are  usually  on
the  hills  well  above  the  valleys.  The  villagers  have  their  fields
in  the  valleys,  because  the  land  there  is  more  productive  and
better  watered,  and  the  warmth  is  more  suited  for  growing
crops  such  as  maize  and  millet.  Men  and  women  work
together  in  the  fields,  hoeing,  preparing  them  for  seed  and
sowing  the  seed.  Women  undertake  the  weeding,  thus  freeing
the  men  to  attend  to  other  work  such  as  the  repair  of  their
houses,  and  enabling  them  to  visit  and  help  their  other  wives,
who  live  at  a  distance,  with  their  fields1.  When  the  corn  is
ripe,  the  men  again  assist  the  women  to  reap  it  and  to  gather
it  into  the  store-houses.

1  During  the  weeks  that  the  corn  is  growing  some  people  sleep  in
small  hastily  built  huts  in  the  fields,  to  guard  them  against  ravages
from  wild  pigs  and  to  protect  the  crops  against  incursions  of  wild  animals
in  the  mornings.  When  the  corn  is  ripening,  children  are  employed  to
frighten  off  birds  and  keep  away  monkeys.  These  young  people  devise
various  methods  to  save  their  throats  and  their  legs.  Often  a  tree  is
selected  in  which  they  build  a  platform  where  they  sit  and  use  rudely
made  wooden  clappers.  On  one  or  two  occasions  I  have  seen  long  cords
passing  from  one  tree  to  another  tree  at  a  distance.  To  this  cord  small  bells
were  attached,  and  the  ingenious  child  sat  with  his  clappers  in  the  tree  and
jerked  the  cord,  causing  the  bells  to  ring  and  frighten  off  the  birds.  The
work  of  Christian  Missions  suffers  during  this  season,  schools  are  deserted,
and  the  only  way  to  carry  on  any  missionary  work  is  by  visiting  the  people
in  the  fields.

2—2


20  CROPS  OF  VEGETABLES  [CH.

These  crops  of  maize  and  millet  form  the  staple  food  of  the
people,  though  sweet  potatoes  are  grown  to  supplement  the
grain,  and  also  a  limited  amount  of  beans,  vegetable  marrows
and  pumpkins  for  a  change  of  diet.  Marrows  and  beans  are
grown  by  a  few  people,  but  more  as  luxuries  than  necessaries.
In  this  part  of  Africa  the  rain  falls  at  regular  intervals.
The  small  rains  begin  in  September  and  continue  for
three  to  four  weeks,  when  there  is  a  hot  season  lasting  from
November  to  March.  The  heavy  rain  then  falls,  this  rainy
season  lasting  some  six  weeks.  From  June  to  September  rain
seldom  falls.  There  is  no  attempt  made  at  cultivation  during
the  long  period  of  drought,  except  in  small  gardens  on  the
hill-sides  through  which  a  stream  fiows  so  that  irrigation  can
easily  be  secured.  The  dry  season  is  a  time  of  rest  from
agricultural  pursuits  and  is  the  more  usual  time  for  festivities
and  general  relaxation;  marriages  take  place,  and  dances  are
given,  first  in  one  village  and  then  in  another,  which  often  last
two  days  and  a  night,  while  drinking  is  freely  indulged  in,
though  there  are  few  cases  of  drunkenness.  At  harvest  the
corn  is  gathered  into  large  baskets  and  stowed  away  in  the
huts.  The  granaries,  when  such  are  used,  are  rudely  formed
upper  stories  in  the  conical  roofs,  or  are  shelves  made  in
the  flat-roofed  houses  over  the  fire.

Maize  is  the  favourite  grain  for  food.  It  is  pounded  in  large
mortars  with  hard  wooden  pestles;  the  corn  is  first  soaked
for  several  hours,  which  causes  it  to  husk  readily,  it  is  then
dried  and  ready  for  pounding.  When  pounding  grain,  two
women  stand,  one  opposite  the  other,  with  a  large  wooden
mortar  between  them,  and  with  their  pestles,  which  are  made
some  four  feet  long  and  three  inches  thick,  they  pound  away
until  the  flour  is  quite  fine.  From  time  to  time  the  flour  is
emptied  from  the  mortar  into  a  shallow  basket  and  shaken,
to  separate  the  fine  flour  from  the  coarse,  the  latter  being
returned  to  the  mortar  for  further  pounding.  When  the  flour  is
pounded  to  their  satisfaction,  it  is  dried  in  the  sun  and  is  then
ready  for  use.  Millet  is  not  pounded,  but  is  ground  between
two  stones  and  is,  as  may  be  expected,  very  gritty ;  it  requires


II]  CUSTOM  OF  TAKING  MKAI.S  21

a  person  with  strong  and  robust  digestive  organs  to  oat  ii
without  suffering  considerably  from  the  grits.  In  either  case,
whrthrr  tlu-  flour  is  obtained  from  millet  or  from  mai/<  ,  it  fa
made  into  thick  porridge,  by  boiling  a  quantity  of  water,
adding  flour,  and  stirring  it  constantly  as  it  boils,  until  it
attains  the  desired  thickness.  The  family  gather  round  the
pot  and  take  the  food  from  it  with  their  hands.  If  the
weather  is  fine  they  sit  outside  near  the  door,  but  inside  if
the  weather  is  wet.  Usually  husband  and  wife,  with  their
children,  sit  round  the  same  pot,  though  in  some  instances
young  men  are  given  their  meals  in  a  pot  apart  from  their
parents.  There  is,  as  a  rule,  one  meal  only  in  the  day.  This
is  eaten  about  sunset.  During  the  earlier  part  of  the  day  any
member  of  the  family,  when  pressed  by  hunger,  may  bake
a  sweet  potato  or  a  cob  of  maize  in  the  hot  embers  of  the
fire  and  eat  it,  but  there  is  no  attempt  made  to  provide  a
regular  meal.  Both  boys  and  girls  are  fond  of  trapping
small  birds  and  rats,  which  they  cook  over  fires  in  the  fields,
and  eat  as  they  play  or  herd  their  cattle.

Children  are  allowed  great  freedom  until  they  are  initiated
into  the  tribe.  Before  they  are  old  enough  for  initiation,  their
chief  duty  is  that  of  herding  the  flocks,  and  numbers  of
children  assemble  for  this  task,  to  keep  one  another  company
and  while  away  the  hours,  which  would  otherwise  be  tedious.
They  enliven  their  duties  by  playing  and  hunting  small
game,  and  with  the  produce  of  their  hunting  they  lay  up
a  store  for  the  make  believe  housekeeping,  imitating  their
elders  in  domestic  life.  The  boys  often  make  toy  weapons  for
playing  at  soldiers  and  become  experts  at  throwing  clubs
in  their  sham  battles.

The  Wamegi,  and  indeed  all  the  coast  tribes,  are  poly-
gamous. When  a  man  marries,  he  does  not  remove  his  wife
from  her  old  home,  but  builds  a  house  for  her,  attached  to
that  of  her  father,  or  a  conical-roofed  hut  near  the  flat-
roofed  house,  and  resides  with  her ;  when  he  marries  another
wife,  he  leaves  the  first  wife  for  a  time  and  lives  with  the
second  at  her  village.  It  thus  often  happens,  when  a  man


22  FAMILY  LIFE  [CH.

has  six  or  seven  wives  living  in  different  parts  of  the  country,
that  he  is  absent  for  months  from  his  first  wife,  as  he  makes
his  tour  of  visits  to  his  other  wives  and  helps  them  to  dig
their  fields  and  to  sow  and  reap  their  crops.

When  children  are  born,  they  remain  with  the  mother  and
look  to  her  as  their  principal  authority  and  guardian.  The
husband  assists  his  wife  to  obtain  the  necessary  clothing  for
herself  and  children,  and  any  implements  she  requires  for
the  garden,  and  cooking-pots  for  the  house;  he  also  gives
her  presents  of  goats  and  sheep,  and  when  possible  he  adds
a  cow.  As  might  be  expected  under  such  circumstances,
the  children  scarcely  know  their  father  and  have  little
affection  for  him,  but  their  affection  for  their  mother  is
marked.  Should  the  father  do  anything  which  a  son  dislikes,
e.g.  abuse  his  mother,  he  will  take  her  part  against  his  father.

Marriage  is  seldom  the  outcome  of  love.  It  is  considered
by  both  men  and  women  to  be  the  natural  procedure  for
a  youth  who  has  attained  adolescence  to  marry,  and
the  proper  course  for  a  woman  to  Become  a  wife  and  a
mother.  Girls  are  usually  betrothed  in  infancy,  or  during
tender  years,  and  are  claimed  by  their  husbands  when  they
are  old  enough  to  marry.  It  often  happens  that  a  man  who
is  many  years  the  senior  marries  a  young  woman  and  she
sees  nothing  incongruous  in  having  for  her  husband  a  man
who  may  be  older  than  her  father.  When  an  engagement  is
made,  the  man  gives  the  girl's  parents  two  or  three  goats
or  sheep,  and  the  girl  is  from  that  time  guarded  by  her
mother,  who  regards  her  as  betrothed,  until  she  is  marriage-
able. As  soon  as  a  girl  shows  signs  of  womanhood,  she  is
secluded  for  a  period  of  twelve  months.  During  this  time
she  is  never  allowed  to  go  out  of  the  house,  and  no  man,
not  even  her  brother,  is  admitted  into  the  house,  nor  may
any  man  see  her.  Some  elderly  matron  guards  her  and
instructs  her  in  the  mysteries  of  married  life,  and  tells  her
how  to  treat  her  husband  and  how  to  manage  children.
Before  marriage  the  bride  elect  undergoes  an  operation,  which
is  analogous  to  the  circumcision  of  the  male.  This  is  performed


n]  MARRIAGE  23

by  a  few  old  women.  After  the  maid  has  recovered  from  her
operation,  a  feast  is  given  to  women  only.  At  this  feast  the
bride  appears  bedecked  in  all  the  finery  of  her  tribe  with
beads,  brass  and  copper  ornaments,  and  a  large  supply  of
iron  bangles ;  above  all  she  is  well  oiled,  so  that  she  is  dripping
with  fat,  usually  with  vegetable  oil  extracted  from  the
castor-oil  plant  seeds.  After  this  feast  the  husband  may
come  and  claim  his  wife  and,  if  he  is  an  industrious  man,  he
will  build  her  a  house  at  once ;  or  he  may  leave  her  with  her
parents  or  in  the  house  of  a  friend  in  her  village.  If  the
husband  is  already  a  married  man,  he  will  see  his  new  wife
settled  in  a  house,  before  he  leaves  her  to  visit  another  wife.
He  will  also  assist  her  to  dig  a  new  field.

The  principal  chief  of  a  district  is  usually  a  man  who  has
shown  special  ability  in  warfare,  and  is  on  this  account
acknowledged  to  be  the  leader,  when  there  is  combined
rising  to  meet  a  common  enemy.  Such  an  office  places  a
man  at  the  head  of  the  local  headmen,  makes  him  a  superior
judge  with  the  right  to  hear  cases  of  appeal  and  to  reverse  a
judgment  of  the  local  courts,  and  above  all  it  makes  him  the
representative  of  his  own  people  when  there  is  a  case  to  be
tried  in  which  some  person  from  another  tribe  is  concerned.
The  office  carries  no  power  or  right  to  levy  taxes  or  to  control
arable  land;  but  the  chief  of  each  community  arranges  all
questions  as  to  boundaries  of  fields  in  his  neighbourhood,  and
there  are  no  taxes  or  tribute  of  any  kind.  There  is  no  difficulty
in  securing  a  field,  the  only  restriction  in  occupying  land  is
that  of  previous  occupation.  No  chief  lays  claim  to  un-
cultivated land  in  his  neighbourhood,  and  a  man  may  look
round  and  select  any  plot  that  he  wishes,  provided  it  is  not
already  claimed  by  some  other  person.  Fields  in  the  valleys  are
chosen  near  those  of  other  people  from  the  same  village,  for
the  sake  of  companionship  in  working  hours,  and  also  for  safety
from  the  men  of  other  villages,  who  are  ever  watching  for
opportunities  to  seize  women  and  carry  them  away  to  become
their  wives,  or  to  hold  them  as  hostages  for  the  settlement  of
some  old  debt.


24  INITIATION  CEREMONY  [CH.

All  boys  when  about  twelve  years  old  are  expected  to  under-
go the  tribal  ceremony  of  initiation.  Generally  boys  dread  the
ordeal,  not  only  because  of  the  physical  suffering  which  they
have  to  endure,  but  also  because  of  all  the  mystery  and  the
responsibilities  which  the  ceremony  entails1.  The  number  of
boys  assembled  at  a  time  for  the  ceremony  varies  from  six  to  as
many  as  eighteen,  and  the  ages  vary  from  twelve  to  twenty.
The  boys  are  taken  away  into  a  forest  or  to  some  isolated
spot  near  a  forest,  where  huts  are  built,  and  an  old  man,  who
is  regarded  as  a  wise  doctor  and  learned  in  the  lore  of  the
tribe,  attends  the  youths  and  gives  them  a  course  of  daily
instruction.  It  is  the  duty  of  this  man  to  tell  the  boys  all
their  tribal  customs,  to  instruct  them  in  the  secrets  of  worship,
to  lay  upon  them  all  old  outstanding  feuds,  and  to  charge
them  to  seek  satisfaction  on  behalf  of  their  fathers2.  Each
day  the  mothers  cook  their  sons'  food,  and  carry  it  in  the
evening  to  some  appointed  place  at  a  distance  from  the
camp,  but  retire  without  any  attempt  to  communicate  with
them.  The  food  is  carried  into  the  camp  after  the  women  have
left.  At  the  end  of  about  six  weeks  the  boys  are  all  cir-
cumcised by  a  skilled  man,  in  the  presence  of  other  elderly
men,  who  are  there  to  assist  and  are  also  to  witness  the  boys'
promises  to  be  faithful  to  their  tribal  customs.  After  the
ceremony  the  boys  remain  in  camp,  until  they  are  healed  and
strong.  When  they  return  home,  they  are  decorated  in  all
the  finery  of  young  warriors,  with  head-dresses  of  feathers,
leg  bells,  red  clay  painted  over  their  bodies,  and  a  plentiful
smearing  of  oil.  They  carry  spears,  shields,  and  clubs,  while
those  who  can  display  them,  carry  quivers,  bows  and
arrows.

For  several  days  the  boys  march  about  from  village  to
village  and  receive  presents;  most  of  them  plait  or  twist  their

1  The  ceremony  is  held  annually,  though  not  always  in  the  same  district,
and  boys  are  brought  from  various  villages,  according  to  the  power  of
persuasion  possessed  by  their  elders,  who  urge  their  sons  to  undergo  the
rites.

2  Loyalty to their clan  is enjoined,  and they  are  taught  to  regard
fighting  as  a  duty  which  they  owe  their  relatives,  especially  when  there  is
need  to  avenge  the  murder  of  any  relative.


II]  WOMEN'S  WORK  25

long  hair  into  small  cords  like  string,  and  add  fibi  rs  to

each  twist  of  hair  to  make  it  ten  or  twelve  in<  in >  in  length.
The  hair  is  worn  hanging  down  to  the  shoulders,  but  some
youths  prefer  the  cords  to  be  tied  into  bunches  and  wrapped
round  with  ribbon  like  the  horns  of  a  buck,  so  that  they  taper
and  stand  off  the  head  in  front,  and  form  a  tail  at  the  back.  The
hair  is  well  oiled  and  daubed  with  red  clay.  Everything  that  is
taught  the  boys  during  their  initiation  is  of  a  secret  character,
and  women  never  enter  into  tftese  secrets.  When  the  youths
return  home  again,  they  no  longer  mix  with  the  small  boys  as
before,  nor  do  they  play  games  with  them.  They  now  mingle
with  the  men  of  the  place,  and  sit  in  their  councils,  and  take
part  in  discussing  the  important  affairs  of  their  tribe.  They  are
now  men  with  the  right  to  speak,  and  they  are  supposed  to  be
able  to  give  an  opinion  worth  hearing  upon  any  subject.

Though  the  heavier  share  of  manual  work  falls  upon  the
women  both  at  home  and  in  the  fields,  for  they  claim  the  fields
as  their  own,  still  the  men  take  part  in  the  heavy  digging  and
sowing,  and  again  at  harvest  time,  The  women,  however,  are
always  at  work,  either  in  the  fields,  gathering  fire- wood,  carry-
ing water  and  preparing  flour,  or  engaged  in  cooking,  though
no  family  has  more  than  one  meal  in  the  day.  The  many
household  duties  keep  a  woman  busy  from  morning  until
night1.  When  all  is  well,  and  the  people  are  in  good  health,
they  enjoy  life;  and  so  long  as  nature  favours  them  with
a  plentiful  rainfall,  and  the  seasons  are  regular,  and  food
plentiful,  they  think  little  of  any  higher  power ;  there  is  then,
they  suppose,  no  need  to  trouble  any  god.  Old  age  has  its
trials  and  disadvantages,  because  little  respect  is  paid  to  an
aged  person  past  work.  He  is  a  burden  to  his  friends  and  a
drudge,  until  death  mercifully  carries  him  off.

Sickness  the  people  attribute  to  magic;  and  certain  wise
men,  who  profess  to  be  able  to  diagnose  a  case  of  sickness  and

1  Men  on  the  other  hand  often  spend  entire  days  sitting  in  counsel  or
idling  about.  They  collect  the  materials  for  building  or  repairing  houses,
and  help  one  another  to  build.  Again,  they  enter  readily  upon  any  dispute
which  may  take  them  to  some  other  village  to  have  the  subject  discussed.
Hence  they  are  frequently  called  away  from  work  in  the  fields.


26  EXORCISING  GHOSTS  [CH.

to  prescribe  remedies,  are  called  in  to  give  advice.  These  men
are  always  paid  a  fee  in  kind,  either  a  fowl  or  a  goat,  to  dis-
cover the  cause  of  the  sickness.  There  is  a  firm  belief  in  spirit
possession,  and  the  medicine-man  is  expected  to  exorcise  a
ghost,  should  the  oracle  point  to  possession.

A  woman  whom  I  knew  was  said  to  be  possessed  by
a  ghost.  The  medicine-man  who  was  called  to  exorcise  it,
allowed  me  to  be  present  during  the  ceremony,  which  was
as  follows:  he  had  the  patient  laid  near  the  door  of  the  hut,
began  to  sing  a  doleful  chant  and  to  rattle  two  wooden  rattles
over  her  for  several  hours,  and  at  length  commanded  the  spirit
to  come  out.  The  woman  certainly  recovered  from  serious  fits
and  became  quite  strong  shortly  afterwards.  Previously  she
had  suffered  from  loss  of  appetite  and  was  thin  and  listless.

When  a  death  occurs,  the  body  is  buried  in  the  house,  and
the  family  continues  to  live  in  the  same  room  and  mourns
daily  for  the  dead  for  several  months.  As  might  be  expected
in  an  agricultural  tribe,  favourable  conditions  of  the  elements
are  highly  prized,  and  medicine-men  seek  to  control  rain  and
sunshine  and  to  procure  suitable  weather  according  to  the
tribe's  requirements1.  I  remember  an  occasion  when  a  human
offering  was  made  because  the  rains  did  not  come  to  time.
There  had  been  no  rain  for  several  months,  and  the  people
began  to  fear  famine,  their  food  stores  were  low,  and  the  young
crops  were  dying.  The  rain-makers  busied  themselves  with
their  magical  arts  in  vain,  and  at  length  announced  that  a
human  sacrifice  was  necessary.  A  young  girl,  who  for  some
months  had  been  a  regular  attendant  at  the  mission  school,
was  selected  as  the  victim.  She  was  taken  to  a  particular  hill
some  miles  distant  from  her  village,  where  she  was  made  to
sit  while  her  head  was  placed  between  two  strong  poles,  two
ends  being  tied  together  to  form  tongs,  and  the  other  ends
being  brought  together,  crushing  the  head  flat.  The  body
was  left  exposed  to  wild  animals  on  the  hill-top.  For  several
months  the  only  news  which  I  could  obtain  concerning  the
child  was  that  she  was  on  a  visit.  At  length  the  truth  that
1  Hence  the  "rain-maker"  is  an  important  personage.


n]  CLOTHING  27

she  was  dead  leaked  out,  and  later  the  cause  of  her  death
was  told.  This  instance  is  given  to  show  that,  though  the
native  ideas  are  very  imperfect,  and  their  worship  is  cf  a  most
primitive  character,  still  they  have  the  belief  in  a  Supreme
Being  who  needs  some  offering  to  please  him,  so  that  he  will
let  the  rain  fall  at  the  right  time.

Until  the  introduction  of  cotton  goods  by  the  Arabs,  the
clothing  of  both  men  and  women  consisted  of  goat  skins  or
sheep  skins  prepared  by  being  dried  in  the  sun,  and  afterwards
worked  soft  by  rubbing  them  in  the  hands.  These  were  tied
round  the  waist  as  loin-cloths.  Women  rarely  had  any-
thing on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  though  men  often  tied
the  legs  of  a  goat  or  sheep  skin  together  and  slung  it  round
their  neck  to  act  as  a  cape.  In  the  hilly  part  of  the  country
the  mornings  and  the  evenings  are  cold,  heavy  mists  often
hanging  over  the  hills  until  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning.  At
such  times  the  people  remain  near  their  fires,  and  only  those
leave  them  who,  through  important  business,  are  compelled  to
do  so.  The  herds  are  kept  grazing  near  to  a  place  where  the
boys  stand  by  a  fire  kindled  outside  the  village  gate,  until
the  sun  breaks  through  the  mist.  Boys  and  girls  until  they
are  four  or  five  years  old  run  about  quite  nude.

Both  men  and  women  are  fond  of  ornaments,  and  wear
bracelets  and  anklets  of  brass,  copper,  and  iron  wire.  Women
often  have  bracelets,  which  are  coils  of  brass  wire,  bound
round  the  arms,  extending  from  the  wrists  to  the  elbows,
and  bangles  extending  from  the  ankles  to  the  upper  part
of  the  calf  of  the  leg.  They  are  also  fond  of  brass-  or  copper-
wire  collars,  which  are  made  like  huge  clock-springs  and  are
worn  resting  on  the  shoulders,  projecting  in  front  and  behind.
In  addition  to  these  ornaments  they  are  fond  of  small  beads
and  work  patterns  worn  on  leather  aprons,  and  they  also  make
bands  for  their  necks  and  wrists.  They  pierce  the  lobes  of  the
ears  of  both  sexes  at  adolescence,  and  extend  the  holes  by
putting  in  discs  of  wood.  The  size  of  the  discs  is  increased  as
the  person  can  bear  to  have  the  holes  extended,  until  at  times
they  have  them  fully  two  inches  in  diameter.  I  have  seen


28  TRIBAL  WARS  [CH.

men  carrying  a  half-pint  bottle,  which  was  used  as  a  snuff  box*
in  the  lobe  of  the  ear.

These  ornaments  were  forms  of  currency  and  they  could
be  removed  and  exchanged  for  food  or  barter  when  desired,
though  in  more  recent  times  a  woman  did  not  part  with
any  ornament  given  her  by  her  husband,  or  which  she  had
otherwise  managed  to  obtain,  the  possession  indicating  wealth
and  prosperity,  and  the  absence  of  ornaments  being  a  sign  of
poverty.

The  Wamegi  are  a  quiet  inoffensive  people;  they  love
peace  and  dread  war;  yet  seldom  did  a  month  pass  in  those
early  days  without  some  tribal  dispute  ending  in  a  fight
between  two  villages,  and  in  almost  every  case  it  was  due  to
some  man  having  kidnapped  a  woman.  It  was  the  custom
for  one  branch  of  the  tribe  to  seize  the  women  of  another
clan,  such  an  action  invariably  causing  a  call  to  arms,  and
this  often  led  to  a  fight,  in  which  someone  was  slightly
wounded,  though  seldom  was  anyone  killed.  The  kidnapping
of  the  women  frequently  proved  to  be  due  to  some  old
debt  which  had  not  been  paid  within  the  allotted  time,
or  to  some  other  offence  which  had  been  given  and  which
was  thus  brought  to  public  notice.  In  the  majority  of  cases
of  dispute,  such  as  the  capture  of  a  woman  for  a  debt,
suitable  terms  were  proposed  for  settlement  and  were  at  once
accepted,  and  the  woman  was  restored  to  her  people  and
home.  If  the  cause  happened  to  be  an  old  feud  in  which
a  man  had  been  killed,  a  longer  time  was  needed  to  settle
the  matter,  because  it  was  more  complicated,  and  a  larger
sum  was  demanded  than  for  smaller  offences.  Hence  the
woman  might  be  kept  fully  a  year  till  the  sum  was  paid.

As  already  stated,  there  is  no  paramount  chief  over  the
whole  tribe  to  whom  cases  must  be  referred  for  settlement ;
but  each  small  chief  governs  his  own  village,  and  with  the  co-
operation of  a  few  elders  settles  any  dispute.  These  men  act
as  magistrates  and  judges  in  cases  calling  for  arbitration,  and
fines  are  the  only  punishment  which  they  inflict.  There  are
no  prisons  nor  are  there  any  places  of  detention,  and  there  is


ii]  i;i;i:ix  DRINKIM;  29

seldom  any  sentence  of  death  pronounced.  Should  any
person  become  notorious  in  causing  trouble  in  a  village,  In-
is  warned  and  fined;  and,  should  this  fail  to  bring  about  the
desired  effect,  he  is  expelled  from  the  community.  The  more
serious  cases  for  trial1  are  taken  to  the  principal  chief  of
the  district,  as  stated  above,  but  his  services  are  not  often
sought.  Still  this  custom  indicates  that  the  chief  is  regarded
as  the  head  of  the  tribe.

There  is  a  high  code  of  morality,  theft  is  almost  unknown,
and  houses  are  never  secured  by  day  or  by  night  except
against  an  enemy  or  wild  beasts.  A  girl's  honour  and  her
future  husband's  rights  are  everywhere  respected,  and
adultery  is  almost  unknown.  During  my  residence  of  several
years  in  this  district,  when  I  visited  the  villages  regularly  and
stood  in  intimate  relations  with  the  people,  I  did  not  hear  of  a
single  illegitimate  child  being  born.  During  the  month  follow-
ing harvest  there  is  general  rejoicing,  holiday-making,  and
dancing,  when  beer  is  brewed  in  large  quantities  and  drinking
takes  place  in  first  one  village  and  then  in  another.  Still
there  is  little  drunkenness;  indeed  I  never  saw  a  person  the
worse  for  drink,  and  certainly  there  are  no  habitual  drunkards.
The  people,  though  industrious  and  inoffensive,  are  not
intelligent,  but  are  dull  wit  ted  and  not  in  the  least  desirous
to  receive  either  religious  or  secular  instruction  or  to  improve
their  social  position.  After  I  had  for  months  tried  to  induce
young  people  to  come  and  learn,  a  few  children  only  were
brought  together,  who  consented  to  learn  and  to  attend
school ;  but  at  the  end  of  a  month  they  asked  for  wages  for
attendance,  and  refused  to  come  again  unless  they  were  paid.
It  took  months  of  patient  waiting  and  of  visiting  in  their  homes
and  in  the  fields  before  I  could  induce  them  to  return  and  get
them  to  understand  that  they  would  benefit  by  instruction.
Their  ideas  of  books  were  amusing,  they  regarded  them  as  a
means  of  magic.  On  one  occasion  when  some  packages  were
missing  from  a  caravan  at  a  certain  village,  the  list  of  the
contents  was  brought  and  was  read  in  public.  The  accuracy

1  Where  members  of  different  clans  are  concerned.


30  THE  WAHUMBA  [CH.

of  the  list  of  contents  created  such  a  deep  impression  that
the  people  confessed  who  had  taken  the  goods.  They  thought
that  the  papers  which  could  tell  what  was  in  each  case,  could
also  tell  who  were  the  thieves,  and  cause  some  calamity,
should  they  refuse  to  produce  them.

Besides  these  harmless  Wamegi  who  live  on  the  hills,  there
are  other  tribes  in  the  same  district,  though  generally  the
villages  of  the  immigrant  tribes  are  on  the  plains.  Each
of  these  villages  has  its  own  chief  who  is  independent  of
the  Wamegi  chiefs.  In  the  north-east  of  the  district  of
Usagara  are  the  Wakamba — a  tribe  stretching  away  into
what  is  now  British  East  Africa.  Among  the  Wamegi  may
also  be  found  villages  of  the  semi-pastoral  people  Wahumba,
who  are,  I  think,  an  offshoot  of  the  Masai.  The  Wahumba
have  settled  down  to  agriculture,  though  they  still  retain  large
herds,  and  the  young  men  adhere  strictly  to  pastoral  customs.
Instead  of  the  poor  temporary  huts  of  nomads  they  have
built  villages,  and  near  them  they  cultivate  small  tracts  of
land.  Milk  still  forms  an  important  part  of  their  diet.  Young
men  and  women  of  the  tribe  live  together  promiscuously  and
lead  a  life  free  from  the  restraints  of  marriage,  until  they
attain  a  greater  age  than  is  usual  for  marriage  among  men
of  the  tribes  around  them,  who  marry  at  puberty.  During
their  early  years  they  devote  themselves  to  a  pastoral  life,  and
are  regarded  as  warriors,  though  they  do  little  fighting.  After
marriage  they  settle  down  to  an  agricultural  life,  and  the
women  become  most  chaste  characters  and  fond  mothers.

Further  inland  are  the  great  plains  stretching  from  the
Usagara  hills  away  to  the  north,  where  the  Masai  roams  with
his  large  herds  of  cattle.  From  these  plains  the  young  warriors
were  accustomed  to  make  their  raids,  wherever  they  heard
of  any  cattle  to  be  captured.  The  name  of  the  Masai  acted  like
magic  upon  Swahili  caravans  in  the  past,  causing  the  greatest
consternation,  and  the  Wamegi  lived  in  constant  fear  lest
their  cattle  should  be  raided  and  carried  off  by  them.  To
escape  the  Masai  and  other  warlike  tribes,  the  Wamegi  very
seldom  allowed  their  cattle  to  be  taken  into  the  valleys  or  on


n]  CATTLE  RAIDERS  31

to  the  plains  to  graze,  but  herded  them  on  the  sides  of  the
hills,  away  from  the  main  paths  which  crossed  the  country.

The  Masai  were  ever  on  the  watch  to  carry  off  these  cows ;
and  one  morning  they  managed  to  secure  a  herd  of  some
forty  cows  from  a  village  near  the  mission  station,  under
cover  of  a  heavy  mist.  The  boys  in  charge  of  the  herd  had
lighted  a  fire  under  a  projecting  rock  and  were  warming
themselves,  when  these  daring  warriors  came  and  quietly
drove  off  the  herd  unseen  by  anyone.  By  the  time  they
reached  the  valley,  in  which  their  path  lay,  the  church  bell
began  to  ring  for  morning  service.  The  sound  was  new  to
the  Masai,  who  whispered  to  one  another  that  it  was  the  call
of  the  white  man's  war-god.  This  so  unnerved  them  that
their  usual  courage  forsook  them.  At  the  same  time  a  young
man  who  was  crossing  the  valley  from  a  village  on  the
opposite  side,  utterly  unconscious  of  what  was  happening,
encountered  the  Masai,  who,  taking  him  to  be  the  leader  of
an  army,  turned  and  fled  in  terror.  The  youth,  who  was  as
much  startled  and  afraid  as  the  invaders,  raised  the  war-
cry  and  prepared  to  defend  himself,  but,  seeing  the  men
turn  and  run,  he  hurled  his  spear  and  brought  down  one  of
the  Masai.  The  party  rushed  away,  throwing  down  their
weapons,  in  order  to  increase  their  speed  and  to  enable  them
to  escape.  The  villagers  ran  to  arms  and  pursued  the  fleeing
Masai,  but  could  not  capture  them;  still  they  recovered  their
cattle  and  secured  some  five  or  six  shields  and  a  few  spears.
A  few  months  later  a  chief  from  the  Masai  visited  the
Mission  with  the  peace-offering  of  a  fine  sheep,  and  asked  to
see  the  war-god  and  to  hear  his  call.  He  was  sure  that  the  god
must  be  powerful  who  could  strike  such  terror  into  the
hearts  of  his  men.  His  request  was  not  granted,  nor  was  his
curiosity  satisfied,  but  he  was  admonished  never  to  let  his
men  raid  cattle  in  the  neighbourhood  again.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  intellectual  superiority  of
the  Masai  to  the  tribes  with  whom  they  came  in  contact  gave
them  an  advantage,  and  that  they  were  soon  able  to  establish
a  name  for  bravery,  and  by  a  few  daring  exploits  to  cause  all


32  BARTERING  [CH.  n

the  people  for  many  miles  around  to  respect  and  fear  them.
The  Wamegi,  as  already  mentioned,  are  a  timid  people  with
few  resources,  who  find  it  difficult  to  learn  anything  beyond
the  elementary  duties  of  cultivation.  They  have  also  adopted
the  habit  of  hemp-smoking,  which  tends  to  deaden  their  small
mental  faculties.  At  the  end  of  seven  years'  work  among
them  I  left,  without  having  made  much  progress  with  their
spiritual  welfare;  possibly  I  shook  some  of  their  beliefs  in
their  old  customs,  and  slightly  warmed  their  affections  towards
Englishmen;  I  also  got  one  or  two  boys  to  take  an  interest
in  Christianity.

The  art  in  which  the  people  mostly  excelled,  was  that  of
making  small  offerings  of  flour  or  of  potatoes  to  Europeans,
in  the  hope  of  getting  a  larger  present  of  some  kind  in  return.
Someone  would  bring  a  small  basket  of  flour  and  refuse  to
sell  it,  saying  that  it  was  a  present,  and  after  forcing  it  upon
the  Englishman  would  wait  about,  until  a  return  present  was
made.  The  flour  would  be  worth  fourpence,  and  the  giver
would  expect  a  return  present  of  not  less  value  than  a  shilling.
The  missionary,  who  was  anxious  to  retain  the  friendship  of
these  people,  was  thus  placed  in  a  difficult  position,  because
the  refusal  of  a  proffered  gift  gave  offence,  and  on  the  other
hand  he  could  not  accept  the  gift  without  following  the
custom  of  giving  a  return  present,  and  in  his  case  it  had
to  be  of  greater  value.  This  tribe  of  the  Wamegi  is  one  of  the
poor  tribes  in  Africa,  which  leads  a  meagre  existence,  without
ever  becoming  wealthy  or  great.  The  amount  of  cultivation
done  is  only  sufficient  to  supply  the  needs  of  the  family
through  the  months  of  drought  until  the  following  harvest.
Should  any  mishap  befall  the  crops,  or  should  there  be
prolonged  drought  and  the  crops  fail,  famine  is  sure  to
follow,  and  at  times  there  is  a  serious  difficulty  in  pro-
curing a  supply  of  seed  for  resowing  the  fields.


M  \P  O  R  0/R  O


s  a  m  b  i  r
V  Z  1  N  Z  A\


UN YAM W-E


GERMAN E  A  ,
(TANGANYIKA


THE  COUNTRY  AROUND L.  VICTORIA

Route  from  Sadaani  to  the  Lake


EAST A  P  ft  M \
P  R  O  T  E  C  T  ORATE


MASAI

AFRICA
I  T  O  R  Y  )


Cambtid£t  University  Prttt


CHAPTER  III

THE  SWAHILI  PORTERS  AND  THE  MASAI— CRAVEN  SPIRIT

OF  THE SWAHILI-THE  ARAB  RISING  AGAINST  THE

GERMANS-EXPERIENCES  AS  A  PRISONER-GERMAN

INDIFFERENCE— GRAVE  DANGER  OF  DEATH

TF  we  accept  the  common  account  given  by  pastoral  tribes
•L  as  to  their  origin  and  their  former  dwelling  place,  we  shall
agree  that  in  early  ages  there  was  a  migratory  stream  of
pastoral  people  which  travelled  from  north-east  Africa  in  a
south-westerly  direction,  leaving  as  they  went  portions  of
their  tribe  to  settle  in  various  places.  These  parties  may  be
the  ancestors  of  the  tribes  known  as  the  Nilotic  tribes  all  of
whom  have  many  features  in  common.  When  a  more  careful
study  of  these  tribes  has  been  made,  and  we  are  able  to  com-
pare them  with  one  another,  we  shall  probably  find  that  there
are  closer  marks  of  affinity  than  appear  to  us  now  with  our
limited  knowledge, and  that  there  has  probably  been  a
mixture  of  Hamitic  and  Bantu  blood.

The  Masai,  whose  pastoral  habits  made  them  indifferent  to
any  settled  locality,  and  whose  herds,  since  they  supplied
them  with  food  and  clothing,  made  them  independent  of
foreign  associations,  had  no  pressing  needs  that  could  make
friendship with outside tribes necessary. The introduc-
tion of  iron  spears  and  knives,  with  ornaments  of  copper
brass,  and  beads,  was  the  only  means  which  outside  tribes
possessed  of  gaining  intercourse  with  them  by  bartering
But  these  articles  were  more  of  the  nature  of  luxuries  and
1  not  really  affect  their  mode  of  life.  The  nomadic  life
the  Masai  thus  provided  for  his  needs,  separated  him
from  the  settled  tribes  of  the  land,  and  gave  him  the  appear-
ance of  being  a  foe  to  the  peaceful  settlers. Add  to  these
characteristics  the  Masai  contempt  for  men  who  toiled  on
land,  and  did  things  which  to  his  mind  were  not  only

1  The  Masai  had  no  metal-workers.


R.U.


34  THE  DREADED  MASAI  [CH.

derogatory  and  degrading,  but  also  injurious  to  pastoral
life,  and  the  Masai  readiness  to  risk  life  in  obtaining  cattle,
and  you  have  what  appeared  to  the  agricultural  Bantu  a
formidable  foe,  who  must  be  guarded  against  by  every  possible
means.  The  language,  habits,  and  religious  life  of  the  Masai
also  separated  him  from  the  tillers  of  land  of  the  Bantu  stock.
Stories  of  these  Masai  were  recounted  to  the  Swahili  porters,
and  soon  became  magnified  to  such  an  extent,  that  the  Masai
were  regarded  as  formidable  warriors,  never  to  be  encountered
by  agricultural  people  if  it  was  possible  to  avoid  them.

An  amusing  incident  happened  on  a  journey  when  we  came
into  contact  with  a  party  of  Masai,  which  illustrates  the  fear
of  the  porters  and  their  respect  for  the  Masai.  We  had  com-
pleted our  march  for  the  day,  when  travelling  in  Usagara,
and  were  encamped  in  a  belt  of  forest  near  a  small  stream,
quite  comfortably  settled  for  the  night,  when  towards  sunset
a  few  Masai  came  to  the  river  for  water  and  saw  our  encamp-
ment. They  began  at  once  to  sing  war-songs,  which  one  of
the  porters  professed  to  translate  into  Swahili  as  tales  of  their
prowess,  saying  how  successful  they  had  been  in  their  last
expedition  and  how  they  feared  no  man.  We  also  dis-
covered that  they  had  encamped  with  a  large  herd  of  cattle
at  a  short  distance  from  us.  The  porters  wished  to  strike
camp,  and  to  move  on  to  another  spot  some  six  miles  distant,
but,  as  it  was  nearly  dark  and  we  were  tired,  I  decided  to
remain  where  we  were.  The  porters,  however,  seemed  far  from
comfortable;  so  I  suggested  going  over  to  the  Masai  camp
and  making  friends  with  them,  and  I  requested  the  man  who
had  been  interpreting  the  songs  to  accompany  me.  He  refused
to  go,  pleading  ignorance  of  the  language,  and,  as  no  volunteer
could  be  found,  I  was  forced  to  abandon  the  idea.  We  there-
fore remained  in  camp,  and  I  went  to  bed  early,  being  tired.
I  could  hear  that  the  porters  had  gathered  near  my  tent  and
were  whispering  as  they  watched.  They  had  extinguished  their
fires  to  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  Masai  to  locate  their
whereabouts,  if  they  made  an  attack,  as  was  evidently  expected.
The  night  was  dark  and  still,  but  shortly  after  eight  o'clock


in]  PORTERS  AFRAID  OF  MASAI  35

a  lion  visited  the  Masai  camp  and  killed  a  cow,  and  a  battle
bri^in  between  the  men  and  the  beast.  The  lion  u.is  ultimately
driven  away  from  the  animal  which  it  had  killed,  and  the
carcase  was  rescued,  and  soon  the  warriors  were  busy  cooking.
This  disturbance  in  nowise  allayed  the  fears  of  the  porters,
who  drew  nearer  to  my  tent,  whispering  in  abject  fear,  and
whom  I  had  to  tell  to  keep  quiet  and  go  to  sleep.  Towards
midnight  I  was  again  disturbed  by  the  cry:  "We  are  dead,
the  Masai  are  upon  us!"  and  before  I  could  light  a  candle,
there  was  a  stampede  and  a  loud  cry,  and  men  came  falling
over  the  ropes  into  the  tent.  Then  there  was  silence.  By  this
time  my  candle  was  lighted,  and  there  lay  the  men  before  me
trembling  and  speechless  with  fear.  When  the  cause  of  the
disturbance  was  investigated  it  was  found  that  a  rhinoceros,
or  perhaps  two,  running  to  the  water,  had  tripped  over  the
tent  ropes,  making  a  noise,  and  the  already  terrified  porters
mistook  the  animals  for  Masai.  It  was  a  great  relief  to  find
that  no  one  was  hurt,  but  it  convinced  me  that  there  would
be  no  rest  in  the  place,  so  I  consented  to  move  on,  at  the
repeated  request  of  the  porters,  and  I  told  them  to  make  me
some  coffee.  The  alacrity  with  which  the  coffee  was  made,
and  all  the  loads  prepared  for  a  start,  showed  the  anxiety
of  the  men  to  move  from  the  vicinity  of  the  Masai.  By  the
time  the  meal  was  ended,  the  moon  had  risen  and  was  shining
brightly,  and  we  made  our  way  in  silent  procession  along  the
dry  bed  of  a  river,  leaving  the  Masai  with  a  roaring  lion  near
them,  and  marched  some  miles  from  the  river  camp  until  it
was  broad  daylight,  when  we  rested  for  breakfast.  After
resting  we  went  on  a  little  further  to  a  suitable  spot,  where
we  camped  and  obtained  the  much  needed  sleep.  The  Swahili
porter  of  that  period  was  convinced  that  one  Masai  was  equal
to  six  other  men.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  while  such
exaggerated  ideas  prevailed,  ten  Masai  would  have  been  equal
to  an  entire  army  of  such  cowardly  porters.

Another  experience  of  the  Swahili  character  which  I
encountered  when  living  near  the  coast,  should  be  mentioned
here :  it  shows  how  he  can  domineer  over  others  when  he  has


36  A  MISSIONARY  MURDERED  [CH.

the  upper  hand  and  feels  safe  from  punishment. In  the  year
1888,  when  the  German  Government  began  to  occupy  1
coast  belt,  which  had  for  many  years  been  claimed  by  the
Arabs  as  belonging  to  the  Sultan  of  Zanzibar,  the  natives
resolved  to  help  the  Arabs  to  resist  the  German  invasion
and  to  try  and  prevent  them  from  landing.  The  Germans
found  that  they  would  have  to  resort  to  arms  and  enforce
submission  from  the  troublesome  Arabs,  and  accordingly  they
began  hostilities  at  Bagamoyo,  which  was  one  of  the  due
towns  occupied  by  the  Arabs  on  the  mainland  opposite
Zanzibar. We  who  were  in  the  interior,  and  yet  within  reac
of  the  coast,  realised  at  an  early  date  of  the  rising  the
seriousness  of  our  position.  We  could  obtain  no  supplies,  an<
our  lives  were  threatened  by  the  Arabs. Accordingly  we
communicated  with  the  British  Consul  in  Zanzibar  and  asl
for  assistance.  He  sent  a  runner  with  a  scrap  of  a  note,  which
the  bearer,  by  stitching  it  into  the  hem  of  his  outer  garment,
managed  to  bring  to  us  through  the  Arab  lines.  The  not
stated  that  it  was  impossible  to  send  supplies,  but  that  an
escort  would  be  sent  in  a  few  days,  and  that  we  must  trui
ourselves  to  this  escort  which  would  conduct  us  safely  t

coast.

Before  the  escort  arrived,  a  missionary  named  Brookes,  o
the  London  Missionary  Society,  reached  the  mission  station
from  the  interior  on  his  way  to  England.  We  told  him  of
the  serious  trouble  on  the  coast,  how  the  Arabs  had  decic
to  kill  every  European  whom  they  could  find,  and  we  strongly
advised  him  to  await  the  escort  and  go  with  us  to  the  coast.
He  consented  to  do  so,  but,  finding  that  we  were  very  short
of  food,  and  having  only  a  limited  supply  himself,  he  decKle<
to  go  to  a  less  populous  district  and  to  shoot  some  game.  1  wo
days  afterwards  one  of  his  boys  returned  to  tell  us
Mr  Brookes  was  dead. His  tent  had  been  surrounded  in  t
early  morning  of  the  previous  day  by  Swahili  under  some
Arab  leaders. He  was  speared  to  death,  and  his  porters  wei
killed,  except  the  boy  and  one  or  two  men,  who  feignec
death  and  crawled  away  afterwards,  though  wounded.


in]  SHORTNESS  OF  FOOD  37

In  due  course  the  party  of  Swahili  arrived  as  our  escort,
but,  as  they  had  brought  no  supplies,  and  we  had  neither
supplies  nor  any  barter  goods  with  which  to  buy  food,  we
were  in  a  miserable  state  to  undertake  the  journey.  To  add  to
our  trouble,  the  party  sent  to  escort  us  to  the  coast  refused
to  carry  any  of  our  belongings  for  us.  We  were  thus  required
to  start  without  food  or  clothing.  After  some  time  had  been
spent  in  reasoning  with  the  two  headmen,  they  agreed  to
allow  six  men  to  carry  Mrs  Roscoe,  and  three  more  to  carry
a  small  tent,  her  clothing,  and  any  provisions  that  we  could
scrape  together.  We  thus  started  for  the  coast,  a  distance
of  some  two  hundred  miles  which  we  were  obliged  to  walk.
A  piece  of  a  Buzzard  wedding-cake,  a  few  pounds  in  weight,
was  all  the  food  we  could  secure  for  myself  and  another  man,
and  we  were  without  any  change  of  clothing.  A  small  tin
of  sardines  and  a  one  pound  tin  of  finger-biscuits  was  the
only  suitable  or  indeed  available  food  for  my  wife,  who  was
to  be  carried  in  a  hammock.

The  party  consisted  of  us  three  Europeans,  who  had  to  leave
everything  behind,  and  start  on  this  journey  to  the  coast  in
the  rainy  season,  marching  daily  through  swamps  and  rivers,
and  sleeping  in  wet  clothes  on  the  ground.  Mr  D.  Hooper,  our
companion,  shared  with  me  a  slice  of  wedding-cake  each  day,
until  it  was  finished.  With  economy  we  managed  to  make  the
cake  last  some  ten  days,  and  then  we  were  without  food.  To
our  surprise  and  joy  a  native  came  forward  and  presented  us
with  a  small  basin  of  uncooked  rice,  which  we  used  sparingly,
taking  a  small  tea-cupful  each  night  to  boil  for  the  evening
meal,  and  leaving  some  for  breakfast  the  next  morning.  It
was  a  poor  diet,  without  seasoning  of  any  kind;  still  it  kept
us  alive  and  enabled  us  to  reach  the  coast.  The  porters  were
most  insolent  and  treated  us  with  scant  respect,  and  the
headmen  would  not  restrain  them  or  make  them  do  their
work.  The  men  carrying  the  hammock  often  let  it  fall,  or
threw  it  down,  saying  that  they  had  slipped,  when  they  might
really  have  saved  Mrs  Roscoe  from  falling.  At  length  I  was
obliged  to  walk  behind  the  last  porter,  holding  on  to  the


38  PRISONERS  WITH  THE  ARABS  [CH.

hammock  pole  to  steady  him  as  he  walked,  and  I  often  took
the  hammock  myself  when  crossing  swamps  or  slippery
places  and  rivers,  because  on  two  occasions  my  wife  had
fainted  after  the  fall.

The  rivers  were  flooded,  and  the  low-lying  ground  was
marshy.  Sometimes  we  walked  for  several  miles  through  water
a  foot  deep,  and  then  through  water  up  to  our  waists  and  at
times  almost  to  our  necks  when  crossing  the  streams.  It  was
a  trying  j  ourney,  without  any  change  of  clothes  and  with  in-
sufficient food,  and  that  of  a  very  inferior  quality.  The  bad
roads  delayed  our  progress,  and  each  night  we  had  to  lie  on
the  wet  ground  without  bedclothinij,  using  our  boots  for  our
pillows,  and  trusting  to  the  strength  of  our  constitutions
to  carry  us  through  safely.  The  porters  grumbled  freely  at
having  to  carry  anything  at  all  for  the  white  men  whom
they  said  they  hated.  They  treated  the  poor  invalid  lady
with  disrespect  and  even  cruelty,  jolting  her  and  knocking
her  against  tree-trunks,  in  addition  to  letting  one  end  of  the
hammock  drop  on  the  slightest  pretext.  It  was  an  aggrava-
tion of  our  annoyance  at  the  behaviour  of  the  porters  to
discover  that  some  of  them  had  returned  to  the  mission-
house  after  we  left,  and  had  taken  much  of  our  property,
such  as  clothing,  which  they  thought  they  could  sell  at  the
coast,  and  that  they  were  carrying  it  with  their  own  goods,
though  they  had  refused  to  carry  anything  for  us,  even  with
the  promise  of  good  pay.

When  the  party  reached  the  Arab  fort  at  the  coast,  we
thought  that  our  troubles  were  ended,  but  to  our  surprise  we
were  taken  into  the  inner  stockade  where  escape  was  im-
possible, and  were  told  that  we  must  not  attempt  to  go  out,
until  the  sum  promised  as  ransom  money  had  been  paid.
This  fort,  which  was  a  hastily  constructed  fortification  more
like  a  town  with  a  stockade  than  a  fort,  had  been  built  two
or  three  miles  from  Bagamoyo,  to  be,  as  was  thought,  out
of  reach  of  the  German  guns.  Crowds  of  people  lined  the
road  and  stared  as  we  entered.  They  wanted  to  see  the
white  men  who  were  prisoners,  and  it  was  necessary  to  push


in]  TELLING  STORIES  TO  SAVE  LIFE  39

them  aside,  in  order  to  secure  a  passage  for  the  hammock.
No  food  was  given  us  on  arrival,  nor  could  we  obtain  any
through  our  servants,  who  had  accompanied  us  to  the  coast.
At  sunset  I  discovered  that  a  house  near  to  us  belonged  to  the
Arab  chief  Bushiri,  and  accordingly  I  pushed  my  way  into
it  and  found  that  worthy  gentleman,  who  was  very  stout,
being  prepared  for  bed  by  two  or  three  women.  Bushiri
was  rather  surprised  at  my  intrusion,  and  asked  what  was
wanted.  To  this  question  I  replied  that  I  had  come  to  talk
with  him  as  his  guest.  He  scorned  the  idea  of  my  being  his
guest,  and  said:  "You  are  a  prisoner."

There  was  nothing  to  be  done,  but  to  make  the  best  of
the  trying  position  and  to  treat  his  remarks  as  a  joke  and
obtain  what  I  could  in  some  other  way.  I  therefore  began
to  talk  about  the  position  of  the  Arabs,  their  chances  of
success,  about  the  strength  of  a  man-of-war,  the  methods
of  European  warfare,  and  so  forth,  and  when  Bushiri  be-
came interested,  I  stopped  and  pretended  to  be  too  hungry
and  faint  to  proceed.  The  plan,  fortunately,  succeeded.
Bushiri  presented  me  with  a  large  tin  of  Huntley  and  Palmer
biscuits,  and  with  the  promise  to  tell  him  more  about
European  warfare  on  the  morrow,  I  left,  carrying  the  treasured
biscuits,  which  enabled  us  to  have  a  good  meal.  My  promise
to  tell  him  more  about  the  methods  of  warfare  was,  as  it
happened,  an  excellent  idea,  because  it  enabled  me  to  retain
a  hold  over  the  Arab  chief,  when  the  ransom  money  failed  to
arrive  on  the  next  day.  Instead  of  the  money  a  note  came
saying  that  our  friends  hoped  to  obtain  the  money  on  the
following  day,  and  trusted  that  we  should  be  safe  and  comfort-
able for  one  day.  This  news  greatly  annoyed  the  Arabs,  who
held  a  council  and  suggested  putting  us  to  death.  Bushiri
came  to  inform  us  of  the  Arabs'  decision.  I  had  to  treat  it
lightly  and  to  assure  him  that  the  money  would  come,  and
again  interest  him  in  military  tactics.  Thus  appeased,  he
returned  to  the  Arabs  and  was  able  to  quiet  them,  and  we
were  left  unmolested  for  another  day,  and  made  our  meals
upon  the  few  remaining  biscuits.


40  AWAITING  OUR  RANSOM  MONEY  [CH.

The  third  day  came,  and  still  no  ransom  and  no  message.
The  situation  was  hourly  growing  more  difficult.  I  dared  not
tell  my  wife  and  companion  how  serious  the  situation  was,
and  that  the  Arabs  wanted  to  kill  us  and,  as  they  said,  let  our
deaths  serve  as  a  message  to  the  Germans  that  they  meant
business.  It  required  tact  and  an  assumption  of  intimate
knowledge  of  the  methods  of  European  warfare,  to  make  these
angry  men  think  it  worth  their  while  to  spare  the  lives  of
their  victims;  and  at  the  same  time  I  had  to  preserve  a  calm
and  hopeful  appearance  before  the  others.  In  the  afternoon
of  the  third  day  two  men  belonging  to  a  cannibal  tribe  came
and  sat  in  front  of  the  little  tent,  and  began  to  talk,  saying
that  they  had  been  short  of  meat  for  some  time  and  adding :
"Why  does  not  Bushiri  give  us  one  of  these  white  people  to
eat?  That  woman  would  make  us  a  good  feast/'  My  wife
asked  me  what  they  were  saying,  and  I  told  her  that  she  was
being  admired,  whereupon  she  began  to  smile  and  asked  them
a  few  simple  questions  in  Swahili,  much  to  their  annoyance.
So  they  got  up  and  walked  away.  She  was  not  told  till  some
months  afterwards  how  she  had  been  the  theme  of  a  con-
versation about  a  meal,  and  had  been  admired  in  a  different
way  to  what  she  thought.

On  the  fourth  day  the  Arabs  decided  that  they  would  only
wait  until  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  for  the  ransom  money,
and  if  it  was  not  paid  by  that  time,  our  party  should  be  put
to  death.  At  noon  two  friends  from  the  Mission  arrived  and
were  admitted  into  the  fort.  They  came  to  explain  how  it  was
that  the  money  had  not  been  paid.  They  said  they  had  placed
the  money  on  board  the  flagship  for  safety,  and  could  not  get
it  back.  The  German  Admiral,  in  reply  to  their  request  to
have  the  money  repaid,  said  that  he  meant  to  fight  the  Arabs,
and  why  then  should  he  pay  them  a  sum  of  money?  When
told  of  our  position  and  of  the  short  time  left  us,  our  friends
hurried  back  to  the  beach,  and  communicated  with  the  German
Flagship,  whereupon  the  Admiral  reluctantly  forwarded  the
money,  which  was  sent  in  haste  by  special  runners.

Eventually  it  was  deposited  in  the  fort  an  hour  before  the


Ill]  FREED  FROM  PRISON  41

appointed  time  for  killing  us.  When  it  was  paid,  Bushiri  turned
to  us  and  said,  "You  are  free,  you  can  go  at  once,  but  your
friend  (D.  Hooper)  is  not  one  of  the  party  we  consented  to
bring  to  the  coast,  therefore  he  must  stay.  We  require  a
further  ransom  for  him."  It  was  useless  to  protest.  We  had  to
make  the  best  terms  we  could  for  him,  and  nothing  but  the
exchange  of  a  political  prisoner  in  Zanzibar  would  suffice.
The  Arab  who  was  demanded  in  exchange  for  Hooper  was  a
prisoner  in  Zanzibar  for  a  political  offence — the  murder  of  an
English  officer.  We  had  to  leave  our  companion  in  this  dread-
ful place  without  food,  while  we  crossed  to  Zanzibar  to
intercede  with  the  British  Government  for  the  exchange  of
prisoners.  Had  it  not  been  for  Hooper's  boy,  who  as  a
Sudanese  and  a  Mohammedan  was  allowed  to  eat  with  the
better  class  of  Arab  servants,  and  was  able  to  secrete  a  little
food  in  his  dirty  loin-cloth  and  carry  it  to  his  master,  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  Hooper  would  have  died  from  hunger.
The  French  missionaries  in  Bagamoyo  very  kindly  enter-
tained us  during  the  evening  and  lodged  us  for  that  night,  and
on  the  next  day  a  British  gun-boat  carried  us  to  Zanzibar,
and,  after  we  had  taken  our  message  concerning  Hooper  to  the
Consulate,  took  us  on  to  Mombasa.  The  British  officers  and
sailors  must  have  thought  us  a  strange  couple.  We  had  no
clothing  but  the  rags  in  which  we  had  travelled,  and  were
unfit  to  appear  among  civilized  people.  We  arrived  in
Mombasa  on  a  Sunday  morning  at  six  o'clock;  my  wife
was  put  to  bed  at  once,  and  at  eight  o'clock  our  daughter
was  born.  Half  an  hour  later  I  was  found  unconscious  on
the  floor  of  the  bedroom,  having  fallen  down  with  sun-fever.
For  a  month  we  lay  in  different  rooms,  both  of  us  seriously
ill.  At  the  end  of  that  time  we  were  carried  on  board  a
passenger  ship,  in  the  hope  that  a  journey  to  England  might
be  the  means  of  saving  our  lives.  Thus  ended  our  African
troubles  for  a  time.  The  voyage  proved  to  be  the  best  remedy
for  our  illness.  We  met  with  the  kindest  treatment,  and  daily
gained  strength,  until,  on  our  arrival  in  England,  we  could
pace  the  deck  without  the  assistance  of  a  friendly  arm.


CHAPTER  IV

MARCHING THROUGH THE UGOGO PLAINS— CONFLICT
WITH  HIGHWAYMEN— WATERLESS  TRACTS  WITH TRY-
ING EXPERIENCE— BUYING  WATER— CATTLE PLAGUE—
A  PASTORAL  PEOPLE— GLIMPSES  OF  LAKE  VICTORIA

FROM  the  coast  to  the  border  of  the  Ugogo  plains  the
worst  danger  which  the  traveller  has  to  encounter  is  that
of  malarial  fever.  He  passes  through  districts  with  belts  of
forests  and  with  rivers,  and  in  such  low-lying  moist  regions
there  is  always  a  testing  of  the  physical  powers  of  one  who
has  newly  arrived  in  Africa.  There  is  little  to  be  feared
from  the  natives.  They  are  on  the  whole  timid,  inoffensive,
and  kindly  disposed.  When,  however,  he  has  passed  through
Usagara,  he  enters  upon  new  features  both  of  country  and
people.  In  the  past  Ugogo  was  for  many  reasons  a  difficult
country  to  pass  through.  Not  only  were  there  dangers  from
its  inhabitants,  which  were  no  inconsiderable  or  light  risks,
but  also  it  was  in  the  rainy  season  swampy  and  unhealthy,
and  walking  in  the  mud  and  slush  was  heavy ;  while  in  the
dry  season  it  became  so  parched  and  dry,  that  it  necessitated
long  forced  marches  from  one  camping  ground  to  another,  in
order  that  water  might  be  found.  These  forced  marches  were
undertaken  at  the  risk  of  considerable  physical  suffering,  and
sometimes  with  loss  of  life.  After  the  rains,  indeed  during
the  rains,  these  long  arid  plains  rapidly  become  beautiful  with
flowering  shrubs,  ground  orchids,  grasses,  and  the  most  ex-
quisite plants,  where,  before  the  rains  set  in,  the  eye  met  with
nothing  but  leafless  shrubs  or  burnt  up  grass  roots,  so  dry  that
they  broke  off  with  a  touch  of  the  foot.  Or  again  there  met  the
gaze  long  stretches  of  dazzling  sand,  glittering  in  the  tropical
sun,  extending  mile  upon  mile,  unless  the  heat  haze  raised  a
barrier  to  the  vision.  There  was  no  sign  of  life  on  these  plains
during  the  drought.  Even  birds  and  insects  seemed  to  have
deserted  the  district,  leaving  it  without  sound,  except  for  the
rustling  wind,  and  exposed  to  the  fierce  rays  of  the  pitiless  sun.


CH.  iv]  THE  PEOPLE  OF  UGOGO  43

The  dry  season  was  a  1  \\avs  chosen  as  the  best  time  for
travelling,  because  it  had  been  proved  to  be  the  health,
and  also  because  goods,  carried  in  packages  on  the  heads
of  porters,  suffered  less  damage  from  heat  than  from  rain.
On  the  borders  of  these  deserts,  and  indeed  in  one  or  two
places  in  the  plains  where  water  was  permanently  found,
there  were  encountered  a  few  scattered  villages  of  Wagogo,
who  are  of  the  Bantu  stock,  and  build  flat-roofed  houses
similar  to  those  mentioned  above,  and  who  keep  large  herds
of  cattle  in  their  compounds.  They  also  grow  crops  of  millet
during  the  rainy  season,  which  they  grind  into  flour,  and  boil
into  a  coarse  porridge  as  their  chief  article  of  diet.  The
crops  are  grown  in  sufficient  quantities  to  provide  them
with  food  during  the  months  of  drought  until  the  following
rainy  season.  These  people  have  no  form  of  joint  govern-
ment in  a  district.  Each  village  or  community  looks  to  an
elderly  man,  who  is  called  the  father  of  the  village,  to
settle  any  disputes  and  difficulties  which  arise  among  its
members.  In  most  instances  when  difficulties  arise,  they
are  due  to  women  being  stolen,  to  cattle  being  lifted,  or  to
the  rights  to  portions  of  arable  land  being  infringed  upon  by
a  neighbour.

The  men  are  polygamous,  and  are  not  strict  about  the
conduct  of  their  wives.  Jealousy  is  rarely  shown,  if  it  is  not
quite  unknown.  Should  a  woman  have  children  by  other  men,
her  husband  merely  claims  them  as  his  own  children,  and
seldom  finds  fault  with  his  wife  for  her  faithless  conduct,  the
addition  to  the  family  being  welcome  and  affording  a  com-
pensation for  the  lack  of  morals.  The  homes,  if  they  can  be
termed  such,  are  scarcely  more  than  shelters  from  the  weather.
There  is  little  done  to  promote  personal  comfort.  They  con-
sist of  a  square  room,  with  a  fire  on  the  earthen  floor  in  the
middle.  Round  this  the  family  sit  during  the  day,  if  the
weather  is  wet  or  cold,  and  here  they  lie  by  night.  They  use
any  scrap  of  clothing  they  may  possess  for  a  covering,  or  in
its  absence  they  trust  to  the  warmth  of  the  fire  and  to  contact
with  one  another,  if  the  weather  is  cold.  The  floor  consists


44  NATIVE  HOME  LIFE  [CH.

of  the  earth  beaten  hard,  and  is  swept  occasionally  with  a
bundle  of  grass  used  as  a  broom.  Any  goats  or  sheep  which
the  family  may  possess  are  tied  to  short  pegs,  and  at  times  a
calf  or  two  may  be  added  to  the  number  of  the  inmates  and
secured  to  some  part  of  the  wall,  in  order  not  to  trouble  the
family.  Here  the  calves  are  safe  from  wild  animals  by  night
and  from  rain  and  cold,  and  are  unable  to  take  their  mother's
milk,  before  she  has  supplied  the  family  with  their  portion.
There  is  no  attempt  made  to  ventilate  or  to  light  the
dwelling,  and  smoke  from  the  fire  which  burns  continuously
on  the  hearth,  has  to  find  its  way  out  through  any  crevices
between  the  roof  and  the  walls,  or  through  the  doorway.  This
smoke  hanging  about  soon  colours  the  rafters  a  shining  black,
while  festoons  of  smoke  hang  from  rafter  to  rafter.  The  people
themselves  become  accustomed  to  the  smell,  and  suffer  little
inconvenience,  whereas  any  European  finds  his  eyes  and
throat  smarting  in  a  few  moments.  The  people  are  satisfied
with  one  meal  a  day,  which  is  provided  in  the  evening.  It
consists  of  millet  porridge,  as  in  Usagara,  and  is  eaten  from
the  pot  in  which  it  is  cooked.  Round  this  the  family  gather,
and  they  take  the  food  from  it  with  their  fingers.  They  are
not  clean  in  their  habits  and  do  not,  as  a  rule,  trouble  to
wash  their  hands,  either  before  or  after  meals.  They  deem  it
sufficient  to  wipe  them  on  their  heads  or  to  rub  them  on  their
naked  stomachs  after  eating.  The  lack  of  cleanliness  is  not
limited  to  their  personal  habits,  but  extends  to  their  entire
life.  Thus  the  women  do  not  wash  out  their  cooking-pots
except  on  rare  occasions.  A  woman  considers  that  she  has
done  all  that  is  necessary  for  the  cleansing  of  her  cooking
vessel,  when  she  has  scraped  any  remains  from  the  inside  of
the  pot  with  a  stick.  The  Wagogo  are  fond  of  clotted  milk.
It  forms  a  favourite  dish  and  is  often  eaten  in  the  daytime
as  an  addition  to  the  solid  meal  of  the  evening.  Should  any
member  of  a  family  feel  hungry  during  the  day,  he  satisfies
the  craving  by  baking  a  sweet  potato  or  a  cob  of  maize  in  the
embers  of  the  fire,  and  this  he  eats,  often  sharing  it  with  some
friend.  When  it  is  possible,  the  millet  porridge  is  supplemented


iv]  NATIVE  ORNAMENTS  45

by  sweet  potatoes  and  pumpkins  or  by  a  coarse  kind  of
vegetable  marrow.  These  vegetables,  with  dwarf  beans  and
a  limited  amount  of  maize,  are  grown  by  many  women.
Women  indeed  are  the  principal  workers  of  the  land,  though
men  assist  them  during  the  busy  seasons  of  sowing  and
harvest.  The  principal  work  of  the  men  is  to  build  the  houses,
to  provide  weapons,  clothing,  implements  and  so  forth,  and
to  protect  the  community  against  raids  from  foes.

Both  men  and  women  are  fond  of  ornaments,  especially
bracelets  and  anklets  of  brass,  copper,  and  iron  wire.  Women
also  love  large  collars  of  brass  wire,  these  being  their  chief
ornaments.  The  wire  forms  the  chief  article  of  barter,  and
together  with  beads  may  be  said  to  be  the  currency  of  the
country.  In  recent  years,  since  Arab  and  Swahili  traders
have  found  their  way  into  the  interior,  coarse  calico  and
prints  have  been  added  to  the  articles  of  barter,  and  are
taking  the  place  of  the  skins  of  animals  for  clothing.  The
lobes  of  the  ears  are  pierced  and  enlarged  as  in  the  case  of
the  Wamegi,  and  large  discs  of  wood  are  worn  in  them,
though  a  more  common  and  favourite  custom  is  to  thread
a  small  spiral  wire  coil  one  or  two  inches  long  into  the  lobe,
and  to  attach  to  the  spiral  coil  short  pieces  of  chain  an  inch
long,  which  hang  like  a  fringe  from  it.  In  other  instances  the
people  wear  two  or  three  coils  of  fine  iron  chain  round  their
neck,  and  also  pass  them  through  the  lobes  of  the  ears.

The  bracelets  of  women  are  often  made  so  as  to  extend
from  the  wrists  to  the  elbows,  and  the  anklets  from  the  ankles
well  up  the  calf  of  the  leg.  Neither  men  nor  women  are
striking  for  stature  or  for  beauty,  and  their  scant  clothing  of
dirty  goat  or  sheep  skin  girdles,  or  ragged  and  smelly  calico
loin-cloths,  does  not  improve  their  appearance.  They  are  in
the  habit  of  rubbing  rancid  vegetable  oil  on  their  bodies,
which  makes  their  dark  skin  darker  than  it  otherwise
would  be,  and,  as  they  seldom  wash,  their  presence  is  not
very  agreeable,  especially  if  they  are  warm  from  exertion.
The  hair  is  short  and  frizzly,  though  the  men  often  allow
it  to  grow  long,  and  rub  red  clay  mixed  with  oil  into  it,


46 CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  WAGOGO [CH.

twisting  it  to  look  like  black  cords,  and  leaving  it  until  it  is
so  infested  with  lice  that  it  becomes  unbearable,  and  has  to
be  shaved  off  to  give  relief  to  the  wearer.  Their  lips  are  thick,
and  their  noses  broad,  lacking  any  pretension  to  a  bridge.  Still
the  lower  jaw  seldom  protrudes  like  the  West  African's,  and
the  features  are  on  the  whole  pleasing  because  of  their  happy
disposition  and  their  readiness  to  be  amused  and  to  laugh.

Women  become  mothers  at  an  early  age  and  are  old  at
forty-five.  They  seldom  live  to  any  great  age,  doubtless  owing
to  the  hard  life  they  lead,  and  to  the  coarse  food  which  is  not
suited  to  sustain  life  in  old  age.  They  are  a  peaceable  people.
They  seldom  wage  war  upon  any  tribe.,  though  in  the  past  they
were  frequently  called  upon  to  make  a  stand  and  protect  their
cattle  against  raids  of  the  Masai,  and  sometimes  they  have
had  to  fight  in  order  to  recover  a  woman  who  had  been  seized
by  some  neighbouring  clan.  On  these  occasions  they  have
shown  that  they  are  no  cowards  and  can  do  deeds  of  courage
and  bravery.  They  are  not  an  intelligent  tribe,  but  they
adhere  tenaciously  to  their  tribal  customs,  especially  to  their
initiation  rites.  Their  fields  and  cattle  provide  them  with
sufficient  food  and  clothing,  while  the  care  of  the  cattle
and  the  cultivation  of  the  crops  supply  men  and  women  with
mental  and  physical  exercise.  They  have  proved  a  difficult
people  to  interest  in  religious  matters,  and  they  have  resisted
past  attempts  to  educate  them.  Such  were  the  people  of  one
of  the  most  important  tribes,  whom  travellers  in  those  early
days  had  to  meet,  and  from  whom  they  had  to  obtain  food
for  themselves  and  their  porters,  as  they  passed  through  the
Ugogo  plains  into  the  interior  of  Africa.

The  chiefs  of  Ugogo  soon  learnt  that  they  could  make  con-
siderable profits  by  taxing  the  travellers  who  passed  through
their  districts.  Missionaries,  even  more  than  traders,  became
profitable  prey,  because,  owing  to  their  calling,  they  could
not  make  their  way  by  force.  Traders,  such  as  Arabs  and
Swahili,  realising  their  dependence  upon  the  villages  for  food
and  water,  preferred  to  pay  for  permission  to  pass  through
the  districts,  rather  than  to  fight,  for  this  might  have  caused


IV]  WATER  TAX  47

the  people  to  leave  tin-  neighbourhood  through  which  tln-ir
path  lay.  Water  was  scarce  in  the  dry  season.  The  water-
holes  depended  upon  the  people  of  the  villages  for  their
( -K MIIMII^  and  for  the  clearing  out  of  the  sand,  which  blows
during  the  long  dry  season  and  soon  fills  them.  Hence  the
maintenance  of  water-holes  depended  upon  the  presence  of
resident  villagers,  who  soon  learned  how  necessary  they  were
to  caravans  passing  through  these  deserts,  and  began  to
exact  a  toll  from  the  leaders  of  parties,  before  porters  were
allowed  to  draw  water.  When  these  people  found  that  the
•toll  was  readily  paid,  they  took  a  further  step  and  demanded
a  tax,  varying  according  to  the  number  of  the  party,  for
permission  to  pass  through  the  country.

This  taxation  made  a  journey  through  Ugogo  very  expen-
sive, and  also  delayed  a  party  considerably,  because  chiefs
would  often  detain  them  for  four  or  five  days,  striving  to
obtain*more  goods  for  hongo,  as  the  road  tax  was  termed,  than
the  leader  was  prepared  to  give.  When  travellers  arrived  at
a  village,  the  water  supply  was  guarded,  and  no  person  was
allowed  to  draw  from  it,  until  the  chief  had  received  a  suit-
able gift,  usually  of  cotton  and  print  goods.  Such  a  gift  would
remove  all  restrictions  in  regard  to  water,  even  though  the
party  remained  for  several  days.  Should  the  chief  consider
the  amount  insufficient  for  the  number  of  men  belonging  to
the  party,  he  would  demand  more,  refusing  permission  to
the  thirsty  men  to  draw  water  until  his  demand  was  met.
Some  travellers  have  lost  porters  at  some  of  these  village
wells,  because  the  men  refused  to  wait  for  the  water  toll  to
be  paid.  Indeed  one  or  two  Europeans  have  themselves  lost
their  lives  through  the  indiscretion  of  porters,  who  ran  to
draw  water,  before  arrangements  had  been  made  with  the
chief.  In  one  case  the  porters  were  speared,  and  a  free  fight
followed,  in  which  the  natives  treacherously  killed  the  leader,
a  missionary,  who  was  trying  to  make  peace.

After  the  water  tax  had  been  settled,  there  remained  the
further  question  of  the  road  tax,  hongo,  for  the  necessary
permission  to  travel  forward.  Several  days  would  be  spent


48  WAGOGO  HIGHWAYMEN  [CH.

haggling  over  the  amount  to  be  paid.  Even  then  the  road-
tax  paid  to  a  chief  sufficed  only  for  the  district  of  that
particular  chief,  and  had  to  be  renewed  with  the  next  chief
through  whose  district  the  party  passed.  Bundles  of  calico
were  spread  out,  those  kinds  selected  which  were  thought
most  suitable,  and  appropriate  quantities  taken  to  the  chief,
who  would  in  all  probability  ask  for  more.  It  was  therefore
wise  to  offer  as  little  as  possible  in  the  first  instance,  and
then  grudgingly  add  to  the  amount,  until  the  avaricious
chief  was  satisfied.  It  seldom  happened  that  a  chief  accepted
the  amount  first  offered  to  him.  Thus  a  day  or  two  would
be  spent  sending  messages  and  doling  out  a  few  more  pieces
of  print,  one  at  a  time,  until  the  chief  accepted  the  amount
and  allowed  the  party  to  proceed.

Porters  were  never  in  a  hurry  to  accomplish  a  journey.
They  received  their  daily  rations,  and  were  happy  to  remain
on  the  road  as  long  as  possible,  because  they  were  paid  by  the
month.  Hence  their  wages  accumulated,  and  they  were  sure
to  be  paid  when  they  returned  to  the  coast  with  their  time-
bills  which  they  could  present  to  the  agent.  It  was  difficult  to
make  them  complete  full  daily  marches.  They  would  stop  in
an  inhabited  district  on  the  slightest  pretext,  and  propose  to
camp,  even  though  they  had  been  marching  for  only  a  few
miles,  or  they  would  urge  what  they  deemed  good  reasons  for
remaining  in  camp  an  additional  day,  if  food  was  plentiful.

The  people  of  the  country  soon  discovered  the  craven
character  of  the  Swahili,  and  how  easily  he  could  be  robbed
of  his  load,  especially  if  a  straggler,  and  they  were  not  slow
to  take  advantage  of  this  knowledge.  On  a  march  it  always
required  tact  and  skill  and  a  firm  hand  to  keep  the  porters
together.  Otherwise  first  one  and  then  another  would  fall
out,  under  one  pretext  or  another,  and  sit  down  to  rest,
never  realising  the  danger  of  being  robbed  or  killed.  Before
a  party  left  the  vicinity  of  a  village  in  the  early  morning,
some  warriors  would  not  unfrequently  go  off  to  some  lonely
place  favourable  to  highwaymen,  and  would  lie  in  hiding.
They  would  then  spear  any  straggler  and  carry  off  his  load


GRAVES  OF  BISHOP  PARKER  AND  A.  MACKAY  AT  BUSAMBIRO,
LAKE  VICTORIA


THATCHED  FETISH  ROCK  IN  BUSOGA


PLATE  V


iv]  HIGHWAY  ROBBERS  49

into  the  forest  and  hide  it,  without  attracting  the  notice  of
any  member  of  the  travelling  party.  The  absentee  would  not
be  missed  for  several  hours,  and  then  it  would  be  too  late  to
render  him  assistance. It  was  therefore  necessary  to  keep  the
men  well  together,  to  march  in  an  unbroken  line  in  single
file,  and,  if  any  man  needed  to  stop  for  any  reason,  to  call
upon  the  whole  party  to  halt,  then  ascertain  the  cause  for
delay,  and  once  more  move  on  together. Even  this  pre-
caution did  not  wholly  remove  the  danger  of  an  attack. In
one  case,  after  paying  the  water  and  road  taxes,  we  were
proceeding  slowly  on  our  journey,  because  the  men  were
feeling  tired  after  walking  for  four  hours. The  path lay
through  a  long  plain  with  only  a  few  tufts  of  long  grass  on  it,
and  all  seemed  safe,  when  suddenly  two  or  three  gun  shots
rang  out,  and  bullets  passed  over  us.  A  halt  was  called,  and
the  order  given  to  stack  loads  rapidly  and  to  lie  behind  them.
Some  of  the  men  had  already  dropped  their  loads  and  were
about  to  rush  off,  and  it  was  only  by  the  prompt  order  to
stack  loads  and  lie  down,  that  the  whole  party  was  kept
from  running  away. This  prompt  action  restored  the  con-
fidence of  the  men,  who  then  returned  the  fire  in  the  direction
of  a  clump  of  grass,  from  which  the  shots  had  come,  as  could
be  seen  from  the  smoke.  Our  attitude  showed  the  highwaymen
that  we  were  not  going  to  run  away  and  leave  our  goods;  so
they  fled,  and  we  were  able  to  resume  our  march  after  a  short
delay,  and  reached  camp  without  further  incident.  No  one
had  been  hurt,  which  was  fortunate.  Usually  these  highway-
men pick  out  some  man  and  with  unerring  aim  bring  him
down.  Owing  to  the  suddenness  of  the  attack  and  the  panic
caused  by  the  death  of  the  man,  they  are  often  able  to  carry
off  one  or  two  of  the  most  valuable-looking  loads.

On  another  occasion  the  party  was  passing  along  a  narrow
winding  path  through  a  belt  of  scrub.  We  had  turned  a  bend
in  the  path  which  hid  some  of  the  men  from  view,  when  a
sound  like  that  of  a  galloping  horse  was  heard.  A  halt  was
called,  and  some  of  us  ran  back  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  the
noise,  when  we  encountered  some  of  the  porters  making  a

R.U.  4


50  UGOGO  PLAINS  [CH.

stampede  and  dropping  their  loads.  This  was  the  noise  which
we  had  heard.  The  hindermost  men  were  attacked  by  a  small
party  of  highwaymen,  who  used  their  spears,  seized  the  loads,
and  dragged  them  quickly  along  the  ground  into  the  scrub.
It  appeared  that  several  spears  had  been  thrown  and  had
struck  loads  which  men  were  carrying,  whereupon  they  threw
them  down  and  bolted  for  their  lives.  Our  return  prevented
some  of  the  loads  being  carried  off,  and  we  were  able  to  rescue
several  more,  which  were  abandoned  by  the  robbers  in  the
bushes,  when  they  saw  us  coming.  Such  occasions  need  a  calm
bearing  and  prompt  action  to  inspire  the  men  with  confidence
and  save  the  party.  Highwaymen  will  retreat  when  they  see
a  European  coming  forward,  but  they  always  expect  to  see
porters  flee  and  leave  their  loads.  Our  losses  on  this  occasion
were  restricted  to  barter  goods.  Six  bales  of  these  were  carried
off,  but  again  fortunately  no  porter  was  wounded.  The  Swahili
porter  is  always  ready  to  throw  down  his  load  and  flee,  when
there  is  the  appearance  of  danger;  and  it  is  necessary  for  the
leader  to  be  in  the  rear  of  the  party,  where  he  can  see  all  his
men  and  control  their  actions.  This  craven  fear  of  the  Swahili
may  possibly  be  due  to  his  former  experience,  when  he  was
captured  by  the  Arabs  and  made  a  slave,  or  to  the  harsh
treatment  which  he  commonly  receives  from  his  masters.

In  Ugogo  there  are  two  long  waterless  plains,  which  in
the  past  were  the  most  dreaded  portion  of  the  entire  journey
of  eight  hundred  miles  from  the  coast  to  Lake  Victoria.
Why  some  other  way  had  not  been  discovered,  with  water
at  easy  stages,  it  is  difficult  to  say.  True,  time  was  saved
by  the  straight  path  through  the  desert;  but  the  waterless
tracts  were  on  the  route  usually  followed,  and  they  had  to  be
faced  and  crossed.  In  the  longer  of  the  two  plains  there  are
two  deep  wells.  It  is  said  that  they  were  dug  by  a  pastoral
people  (Wataturu)  who  once  inhabited  that  part  of  the
country  with  their  herds,  but  who  have  retired  to  some
more  congenial  district,  leaving,  as  a  great  boon  to  travellers
the  deep  wells,  which  have  never  been  known  to  run  dry.  The
desert  in  each  case  consists  of  sandy  soil  on  which  are  clumps


IV]  WATERLESS  MARCHES  51

of  scrub  with  leafless  branches,  and  acacias  with  their  thorny
spikes.  On  all  sides  there  is  parched  ground  with  nothing  but
glittering  sand.  Even  the  dry  blades  of  grass  are  in  most
cases  broken  off  and  blown  away  by  the  hot  winds.

The  first  plain  cannot  be  more  than  forty  miles  across,
but  is  more  than  porters  attempt  to  accomplish  in  one  march,
and,  as  the  heat  is  intense,  they  prefer  to  do  most  of  the
walk  in  the  cool  of  the  day  or  by  night.  When  parties  enter
this  waterless  tract,  it  is  usual  to  make  a  stop  and  rest  on
the  border  where  there  is  water,  until  two  or  three  o'clock  in
the  afternoon,  when,  after  a  good  meal,  the  men  fill  their
gourds  with  water,  shoulder  their  loads,  and  step  out  briskly
for  the  long  walk.  In  our  case  we  had  been  delayed  an  hour
or  two  by  a  native  from  the  interior,  who,  with  his  wife  and
one  male  companion,  had  joined  our  party  near  the  coast,
and  wished  to  accompany  us  through  the  plains.  He  had
journeyed  with  us  in  safety  through  Ugogo,  and  was  anxious
not  to  be  left  behind.  At  one  o'clock  he  came  to  ask  whether
we  could  wait  a  little  longer  as  his  wife  had  just  been  confined,
but  he  said  that  she  would  be  ready  to  go  on  in  an  hour's  time.
To  our  surprise  she  not  only  walked  on  these  trying  marches,
but  also  carried  her  baby  and  a  small  load  of  camp  goods  for
her  husband,  while  he  carried  her  load  together  with  his  own.
We  commenced  our  journey  about  two  o'clock  in  the  after-
noon, and  continued  to  march  until  it  was  too  dark  to  go  on.
The  men  were  by  that  time  so  tired  that  they  dropped  their
loads  and  lay  down  beside  them,  to  get  what  rest  they  could.
We  Europeans  had  a  brief  meal,  made  tea  from  the  water  which
we  carried,  and  lay  down  on  the  sand  to  sleep,  until  the  call
for  renewed  marching  awoke  us,  when  the  party  scrambled  to
their  feet  and  set  off  again  in  the  dim  light  of  the  moon.  We
followed  the  leader  who,  more  by  instinct  than  by  sight,
seemed  to  know  the  road  over  the  waste  of  sand,  and  managed
to  lead  us  towards  the  inhabited  country  over  the  desert.
When  morning  broke,  there  was  still  some  distance  to  be
traversed  before  we  should  reach  our  camp  and  water.  So
after  a  short  rest,  and  a  little  more  refreshment  with  hot

4— «


52  DEATH  FROM  THIRST  [CH.

coffee,  we  began  the  most  trying  part  of  the  journey.  It  was
the  worst  part,  because  the  strength  of  the  men  had  begun
to  give  out;  they  drank  their  water  and  wanted  to  rest
frequently,  and  some  of  them  begged  to  be  left  behind  to
die,  as  they  felt  unable  to  continue  the  march.

Sickly  and  feeble  porters  surfer  dreadfully  during  these
forced  marches.  Some  of  them  are  so  imprudent  as  to
commence  the  march  across  the  desert  without  any  water,
and  others  soon  drink  the  little  which  they  have  taken  at
the  outset.  On  these  dreary  marches  the  European  leader
needs  to  keep  a  sharp  watch  over  his  headmen,  as  they  will
sell  small  cups  of  water  for  exorbitant  prices.  On  one
occasion  a  porter  was  offering  to  pay  a  whole  month's  wages
for  a  gourd  containing  two  pints  of  water,  and  on  another
occasion,  when  the  headman  had  refused  to  sell  the  water
which  he  had,  a  porter  tried  to  sell  himself  as  a  slave  for  one
drink  from  a  gourd  which  he  carried.  The  most  satisfactory
method  we  found  was  to  pay  two  or  three  of  the  best  walkers
a  small  sum  to  hurry  on  to  the  wells  with  their  loads,  to
deposit  them  in  charge  of  one  of  their  number,  and  to  return
with  water  for  those  who  had  failed  through  thirst  to  make
progress.  This  plan  undoubtedly  saved  several  lives.  It  was
no  uncommon  sight  to  see  skeletons  of  men  lying  on  the  path
where  they  had  fallen  down  and  died  from  want  of  water.
At  one  place  we  saw  a  dead  man  lying  with  his  load  of  cowry-
shells  only  two  or  three  miles  from  water.

The  most  pitiable  sight  was  by  the  wells  known  as  the
Watuturu  wells,  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  larger  desert.
Hither  porters  and  travellers  had  dragged  themselves,  and
then  had  found  no  means  of  drawing  the  water  which  was
some  twelve  or  more  feet  below  the  surface.  Thus  they  had
died  from  thirst  close  to  the  wells.  On  one  journey  through
these  deserts,  when  we  reached  these  wells,  we  discovered  the
body  of  a  man  in  the  water,  and  as  the  wells  are  connected  by
a  tunnel,  all  the  water  was  contaminated.  Evidently  the  man
had  fallen  into  the  well  when  trying  to  reach  the  water.  We
were  forced  to  drink  the  foul  liquid  or  to  go  without.  It  was  too


iv]  CATTLE  PLAGUE  53

smelly  to  bathe  in,  but  by  boiling  it,  and  disguising  it  with
tea,  we  were  able  to  swallow  it.  Some  cows  travelling  with  us
refused  to  drink  the  water.  People  little  realise  what  they  can
drink,  until  sorely  pressed  by  thirst  in  a  tropical  country.
On  another  occasion  the  only  water  obtainable  at  a  camping
ground  was  so  thick  and  muddy  that  only  half  a  tea-cupful
dripped  through  a  piece  of  cambric,  through  which  it  was  left
to  filter  during  the  night.  Sometimes  a  slimy  green  growth
had  to  be  pressed  down  to  obtain  water  from  a  water-hole.
These  are  extreme  cases,  which  fortunately  do  not  often  occur
and  then  only  at  the  end  of  the  dry  season.  Generally  there  is
water  enough  for  every  man;  food  also  of  a  kind  can  be
obtained,  though  it  may  not  be  the  most  palatable  to  the
refined  English  taste.

It  is  a  matter  of  interest  and  wonder  to  an  observant
traveller  to  see  the  large  herds  of  cattle  which  the  Wagogo
and  Wasakuma  possess,  looking  so  well  and  in  such  excellent
condition  during  the  dry  season,  when  there  is  no  pasturage  to
be  seen  but  burnt  up  grass.  It  may  be  that  there  are  other
grounds  for  pasturage,  where  the  animals  can  find  more  to  eat
than  on  the  plains  near  the  villages.  The  people  say  that  there
is  nothing  but  the  same  dry  grass  in  the  district.  All  the  wild
animals  leave  these  regions  when  the  water  dries  up,  and  make
for  the  well-watered  land,  where  green  grass  can  be  obtained.

In  the  year  1890  the  cattle  plague  was  by  some  inadvertence
introduced  into  this  part  of  Africa,  and  spread  with  alarming
rapidity  into  the  interior.  Within  a  short  time  there  were
thousands  of  dead  cattle  lying  about  in  Ugogo  and  Usakuma,
far  too  numerous  for  the  wild  scavenger  animals  to  devour,
and  no  attempt  was  made  by  the  people  of  the  districts  to  bury
or  destroy  the  decaying  carcases.  The  smell  near  any  village
wherever  animals  had  crawled  and  died  and  had  been  left  by
the  natives  to  decompose  was  beyond  description.  It  was
horrible  to  have  to  pass  such  places.  The  wonder  was  that
the  people  did  not  suffer  from  an  epidemic  of  typhoid.  For
years  afterwards  bones  lay  about,  bleaching  and  crumbling
in  the  sun,  marking  what  had  been  the  chief  cattle  centres.


54  THE  UNYAMWEZI  COUNTRY  [CH.

It  was  this  cattle  plague  that  reduced  the  Masai  to  want,
and  broke  their  haughty  spirit.  All  pastoral  peoples  were
forced  to  resort  to  vegetable  diet,  or  to  die,  and  the  Masai
endeavoured  to  make  friends  with  agricultural  peoples  whom
they  had  previously  despised,  in  order  to  obtain  from  them
the  means  of  existence.  A  few  cows  were  saved  in  different
places,  and  these  became  a  stock  for  replenishing  the  country,
which  is  again  fairly  well  supplied.  Even  of  wild  animals
numbers  died  from  the  plague,  and  for  several  years  after
it  had  ended  there  were  few  buffaloes  to  be  found.

When  the  Ugogo  plains  are  left  behind,  two  new  tribes  of
people  are  encountered,  the  Wanyamwezi,  who  inhabit  the
country  from  Ugogo  to  the  south  of  Lake  Victoria,  with
their  cousins  the  Wasakuma,  who  occupy  the  country  on
the  east  shores  of  Lake  Victoria.  Both  these  large  tribes
are  pure  Bantu.  At  one  time  they  were  governed  by  the
powerful  king  Mirambo,  who  lived  near  Lake  Tanganyika,
and  in  whose  country  Livingstone  died.  On  the  death  of  king
Mirambo  the  two  tribes  separated,  and  they  have  since  been
governed  by  local  chiefs,  who  have  no  power  outside  their
limited  spheres  of  country.  From  these  two  tribes  the
strongest  and  best  porters  of  East  Africa  are  to  be  obtained.
For  many  years  past  large  numbers  of  men  and  women
have  carried  heavy  loads  of  ivory  to  the  coast  and  driven
down  herds  of  fat  cattle  for  sale,  bringing  in  return  bales  of
calico  and  prints,  together  with  firearms  of  a  primitive  kind,
and  ammunition.  Travellers  must  often  have  thought  that
the  obsolete  firearms  of  every  European  nation  were  sent
over  for  these  people.  Here  could  be  found  the  earliest  kind
of  firelock  and  of  percussion  cap  guns ;  and  in  later  times  new
batches  of  breech-loading  guns  arrived,  as  one  particular  type
was  superseded  by  some  other  kind,  and  the  former  were
discarded  by  the  military  authorities  of  European  nations.
For  many  years  firearms  were  the  principal  article  for  barter
used  by  Arabs  f 01  the  purchase  of  slaves ;  and  in  some  parts
of  the  country  a  peaceable  traveller  could  not  obtain  food  or
any  other  needful  article,  unless  he  had  ammunition  for  sale.


IV]  THE  PEOPLE  OF  USAKUMA  55

Lit  t  lc  is  known  of  either  the  Wanyamwezi  or  the  Wasakuma
tribes  beyond  their  great  power  for  carrying  loads.  Many
of  the  men  would  comfortably  carry  two  of  the  largest  ever
carried  by  Swahili  porters,  and  march  along  at  the  head  of
the  party,  singing  cheerfully.  The  villages  in  which  these
people  live,  are  much  larger  and  appear  more  prosperous
than  those  nearer  the  coast.  Their  houses  are  round  huts
with  conical  roofs.  They  are  clustered  together  within  a
strongly  fenced  compound,  obviously  intended  for  protection
against  hostile  tribes.  The  people  are  kindly  disposed;  they
are  pleased  to  see  visitors,  and  welcome  porters  to  whom  they
can  sell  food.  Their  mode  of  life  is  simple;  they  live  almost
entirely  upon  grain  foods,  meat,  whether  of  wild  or  domestic
animals,  being  a  luxury  not  often  enjoyed.  They  are  the  most
musical  of  all  the  Bantu  tribes  met  with  from  the  coast  to
Lake  Victoria.  Their  music  is  vocal,  instruments  of  any  kind
being  rarely  found.  When  on  journeys  as  porters,  they  are
fond  of  singing  round  songs,  as  they  sit  by  their  fires  in  the
evening.  The  effect  is  most  pleasing,  and  in  the  distance  it
sounds  as  though  they  were  well  trained,  bass  and  tenor
voices  being  found  among  the  performers.

On  the  borders  of  Usakuma,  and  often  intermingling  with
the  Wasakuma,  are  to  be  found  the  pastoral  people,  Watuturu,
who  also  grow  a  little  corn,  though  their  chief  food  is  milk,
and  their  herdsmen  are  nomadic.  The  elderly  men  and  women
have  settled  homes  and  carry  on  a  little  agriculture,  especially
the  cultivation  of  millet.  In  appearance  the  Watuturu  are
more  like  the  people  of  Ankole.  It  is  possible  that  they  are  a
branch  of  those  pastoral  tribes.  They  are  said  to  wander  about
the  south  end  of  Lake  Victoria,  where  there  are  many  springs
of  water,  and  the  grass  is  good  and  abundant  for  their  herds.

The  Victoria  Nyanza  can  be  seen  some  miles  before  it  is
reached.  In  the  distance,  viewed  from  a  hill  ten  or  twenty
miles  away,  it  looks  somewhat  like  a  white  cloud  owing  to  the
bright  light  reflected  from  it.  No  doubt  many  people  have
mistaken  its  dazzling  waters  for  mist,  as  they  glittered  in  the
bright  sunshine.  Near  the  shores  of  this  mighty  inland  sea,


56  LAKE  SCENERY  [CH.  iv

on  its  eastern  side,  there  is  to  be  found  a  belt  of  green  grass
and  of  trees  always  in  leaf,  which  abounds  with  animal  life,
from  the  elephant  and  hippopotamus  to  the  mouse,  and  from
the  huge  eagle  and  swan  to  the  tiny  humming-bird,  more
like  a  butterfly  than  a  bird.  There  are  land-birds  and  water-
birds,  as  there  are  land-  and  water-animals,  and  reptiles,  both
the  most  beautiful  and  the  most  loathsome ;  and,  as  the  variety
of  birds  and  beasts  is  great,  so  also  is  their  food  supply.  At  one
camp  overlooking  the  lake  we  saw  a  cow  hippopotamus  dis-
porting herself  in  the  water  with  her  calf  standing  on  her  back.
She  was  rising  and  spouting  up  the  water,  and  then  sinking
from  sight  for  a  time,  soon  to  reappear  and  snort.  Anon  lazy
crocodiles  floated  about  on  the  surface  of  the  water  or  basked
at  full  length  on  some  rocky  island.  After  the  weary  waterless
tracks  through  which  we  had  marched,  it  was  most  refreshing
and  delightful  to  gaze  upon  so  much  water  and  life,  to
breathe  in  long  draughts  of  fragrant  air  after  the  scorching
atmosphere  from  the  Ugogo  plains,  or  to  lounge  comfortably
in  our  tents  and  hear  the  hum  of  insects,  the  notes  of  birds,
and  the  ripple  of  water.  It  certainly  needed  the  dark  figures
of  the  men  and  boys,  to  keep  the  mind  from  thinking  that
it  was  some  beautiful  spot  in  Europe  seen  in  fancy — a  picture
of  a  summer's  day.


CHAPTER  V

TRAVELLING  BY  CANOE  ON  LAKE  VICTORIA— A  STORM-
WRECKED CANOES— HOSPITALITY OF  THE BAGANDA—
RAVAGES  MADE  BY  SLEEPING  SICKNESS

FEW  travellers,  perhaps  it  is  safe  to  say  none  who  have
not  traversed  it,  have  any  idea  of  the  vast  extent  of
the  waters  of  Victoria  Nyanza.  As  an  expanse  of  water  its
dimensions  surpass  those  of  a  lake ;  it  is  really  an  inland  sea.
Under  normal  conditions  it  is  smooth  and  calm,  with  scarcely
a  ripple  on  its  surface;  but  when  strong  winds  blow,  and
gales  sweep  over  its  surface,  waves  rapidly  rise,  which  make
even  the  large  steamers  of  these  later  days  roll  and  pitch
in  an  uncomfortable  manner.  A  friend  who  had  spent  many
years  of  his  life  in  the  Navy,  said  that  he  never  knew  what
sea-sickness  was,  until  he  came  to  travel  in  his  steamer
on  Lake  Victoria  and  was  in  a  storm.  The  size  of  the  lake
has  been  well  compared  to  that  Scotland,  and  this  com-
parison gives  a  good  idea  of  its  area.  It  is  certainly  a  large
sheet  of  water  with  many  interesting  and  picturesque  islands
in  it.  In  former  years  these  were  thickly  peopled,  but  the
ravages  of  sleeping  sickness  have  cleared  off  almost  the  whole
population.

Some  of  the  islands  are  five  miles  long  and  nearly  as
wide,  while  one  island  in  the  north  of  the  lake  is  more  than
double  that  length  and  breadth ;  others  are  merely  pointed
rocks,  jutting  out  of  the  water,  without  a  blade  of  grass  or
as  much  earth  on  them  as  would  grow  a  mustard  seed.  Such
rocks  are  resting  places  for  water-birds,  especially  for  fish
eagles  and  ducks;  other  islands  are  the  homes  of  crocodiles
and  large  water-lizards.  The  water  is  beautifully  fresh,  and
appears  most  pleasing  to  the  eye  of  the  traveller  after  the
long  stretches  of  desert  sand.  It  is  also  sweet  to  the  taste,
especially  after  the  muddy  pools  from  which  he  has  had
to  drink,  at  times  even  paying  large  sums  of  money  for  a  pail


58  HOSTILE  KINGS  [CH.

of  dirty  slush.  The  lake  is  an  attractive  sight,  as  it  flashes
and  ripples  in  the  warm  sunshine,  with  its  fringe  of  never
fading  trees  with  their  shades  of  green  lighted  up  with  the
bright  colours  of  tropical  flowers,  or  the  beautiful  water  plants
and  lilies  floating  gracefully  in  shallow  water.  There  is  also
the  charm  of  the  music  of  many  birds  as  they  flit  about,
brightening  the  scene  with  their  exquisitely  coloured
plumage;  and  the  larger  birds,  as  they  stand  on  rocks  or
branches  of  trees  with  extended  wings,  dry  their  feathers
after  a  spell  of  work  in  the  water,  and  at  times  give  a  drowsy
call  of  encouragement  to  their  more  energetic  brethren  who
are  still  engaged  in  fishing  near  by.  The  past  weary  marches
through  wastes  of  sand  seem  more  like  a  bad  dream,  as  this
lovely  scene  floats  before  the  gaze  of  the  traveller;  or  he  may
think  that  this  is  the  dream,  and  the  other  the  reality  to  be
again  endured,  and  he  needs  to  rouse  himself  and  realise  that
he  is  not  sleeping,  and  that  things  are  really  what  they  appear
before  his  eyes.

When  Mutesa  was  king  of  Uganda  in  the  year  1870  and
afterwards,  and  Mirambo  was  king  of  Unyamwezi,  this  huge
lake  formed  a  natural  barrier  which -kept  two  of  the  most
powerful  and  ambitious  potentates  of  Central  Africa  apart;
the  one  never  invaded  the  kingdom  of  the  other.  Though
threats  were  often  uttered,  the  lake  proved  to  be  a  safe
barrier.  In  his  most  prosperous  days  Mutesa  is  said  to  have
shaken  his  fist  over  the  waters  at  his  rival,  and  to  have
threatened  him  with  invasion;  but  it  ended  with  a  shake  of
the  fist  and  a  wag  of  the  tongue,  for  neither  king  ever
attempted  to  send  an  expedition  round  the  lake  to  invade  the
territory  of  the  other,  and  it  was  too  great  a  task  to  furnish
canoes  to  carry  an  adequate  army  across  miles  of  water.

The  lake  on  the  western  and  north-eastern  sides  is  sur-
rounded by  hills  and  high  land,  though  there  are  spots  with
gently  rising  plains,  which  give  the  impression  of  being  almost
level  with  the  surface  of  the  water.  The  water  itself  stands
4300  feet  above  sea  level.  In  some  places  the  hills  run  down  to
the  shore,  and  end  abruptly  in  sheer  precipices  with  rocky  faces


v]  THE  RIPON  FALLS  59

rising  over  a  hundred  feet  from  the  water.  These  are  oft.  n
covered  with  green  moss,  while  ferns  and  plants  with  beautiful
foliage  find  root-hold  in  places  where  water  trickles  down  to
the  lake.  The  lake  is  fed  by  several  large  rivers  and  numbers
of  smaller  streams.  Of  the  larger  rivers  the  Katonga  on  the
west  and  the  Nzoia  in  the  north  may  be  said  to  be  the
greatest.  Each  of  these  drains  large  tracts  of  country,  and  is
ever  pouring  volumes  of  water  into  this  mighty  lake.  Here  too
we  find  the  source  of  the  Nile,  its  beginning  being  the  rocky
overflow  of  the  lake  known  as  the  Ripon  Falls.  These  falls
are  disappointing  to  anyone  who  visits  them  expecting  to
see  water  dropping  from  a  vast  height  into  a  ravine.  There
is  nothing  of  the  kind  to  be  found.  But  the  falls  are  most
wonderful  and  interesting  owing  to  the  volume  of  water
which  rushes  over  the  rocky  outlet,  and  boils  up  in  the  huge
stone  caldron  below,  with  a  deafening  roar,  as  the  water  rises
nearly  to  the  height  of  the  overflow  itself,  and  then  falls  away
in  its  stony  path  on  its  passage  to  Egypt.

The  width  of  the  outlet  from  the  lake  is  about  half  a  mile.
It  is  divided  into  four  parts  by  mighty  rocks  standing  out  of
the  water,  looking  as  though  they  might  some  day  be  washed
over  into  the  pool  below.  The  water  above  the  falls  looks
smooth  and  calm,  and  it  is  difficult  to  realise  that  the  current
is  at  all  strong,  indeed  its  strength  can  only  be  judged  by
objects  on  the  surface  when  near  to  the  rocks,  where  the  water
can  be  seen  to  be  rushing  at  a  great  speed  over  the  falls.  The
actual  drop  of  the  water  can  be  little  more  than  a  hundred
feet,  because  it  is  churned  up  in  the  rocky  basin,  and  rises  to
a  considerable  height  as  it  meets  the  torrent  from  the  lake.
Birds  and  fishes  are  fascinating  at  this  spot.  Shoals  of  trout
may  be  seen  under  the  lee  of  the  projecting  rocks,  making
frantic  efforts  to  gain  the  upper  waters,  jumping  up  the  rocks
and  being  washed  back  again.  Sometimes  one  of  them  by  a
mighty  bound  reaches  the  upper  waters,  and  begins  its
struggle  with  the  current,  and  is  lost  to  sight;  or  again  some
large  fish  may  be  seen  in  the  stream  of  the  upper  water,  making
desperate  efforts  to  escape  from  the  rushing  current,  leaping


60  LIFE  AT  THE  RIPON  FALLS  [CH.

from  the  water  and  trying  to  regain  the  lake,  but  being
carried  surely  nearer  the  falls  and  finally  being  washed  over
into  the  seething  mass  and  possibly  stunned  or  killed  as  it
falls.  Besides  this  deeply  interesting  study  of  fish,  diver  birds
may  be  seen  hovering  over  the  turbulent  waters.  One  will
make  a  rapid  plunge  into  the  boiling  water.  This  appears
to  the  onlooker  to  be  certain  death,  but  in  a  few  minutes
it  may  be  seen  coming  up  in  the  far  distance  with  a  fish
in  its  beak,  while  it  is  rocked  about  on  the  waves  and  carried
down  stream  like  a  small  cork  on  the  troubled  surface.  Again
a  hovering  diver  will  make  a  plunge  into  the  current  above
the  falls,  and  be  carried  over  into  the  rough  water;  and  the
onlooker  thinks  its  career  must  be  ended,  but  it  comes  up
below  the  falls,  oblivious  of  the  current,  with  its  prey,  and
gracefully  rides  to  one  side  of  the  stream  into  calmer  water,
or  rises  and  calmly  flies  to  some  tree  near  by,  to  eat  its  meal
and  rest,  before  making  another  descent  into  the  rough
waters.

It  is  indeed  a  picturesque  scene  with  ever  changing  life
of  the  most  fascinating  character.  The  observer  finds  it
entrancing  on  a  warm  day  to  sit  in  the  shade  and  look  on.
The  roar  of  the  water  can  be  heard  two  or  three  miles  away
during  the  night,  more  especially  when  one  is  in  bed,  and
everything  is  quiet.  There  were  formerly  a  number  of  Baganda
fishermen  at  these  falls,  who  made  a  living  by  catching  the
fish  that  came  over  the  falls  and  were  killed.  With  the  ever
increasing  rush  of  Western  activities  into  Uganda,  these
fishermen  seem  to  have  been  carried  away  into  the  whirlpool
of  a  more  lucrative  trade,  and  have  left  this  peaceful  life  and
the  thunder  of  the  many  waters.

The  inhabitants  of  the  islands  are  a  distinct  race  from  the
people  on  the  mainland.  They  divide  themselves  into  three
distinct  groups:  the  people  on  the  islands  in  the  northern
waters  of  the  lake  are  known  as  Bavuma,  those  occupying
the  islands  and  the  shore  of  the  central  and  greater  part  of  the
lake  are  known  as  Basese,  and  those  in  the  south  are  known
as  the  people  of  Karagwe.  In  many  respects  these  people


v]  ISLAND  TRII;

are  closrlvallird  to  each  other,  and  at  one  fun  tin  -y  may  have
been  members  of  the  same  tribe,  who  were  isolated  from  each
other  through  difficulties  of  travel  and  communication,  but
I  am  unaware  of  any  careful  investigation  on  this  subject
having  Ixvn  made.  The  Basese,  after  they  were  subjugated
by  the  Baganda,  became  enemies  of  the  other  inhabitants  of
the  islands.  They  are  all  fisherfolk,  those  in  the  north  and
midlake  being  experts  in  canoe  building,  while  as  sailors  they
also  possess  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  geography  and
physical  features  of  the  lake,  most  valuable  in  navigating
the  waters.  For  many  years  after  Europeans  had  settled  in
Uganda,  the  Bavuma  held  aloof  from  all  efforts  on  the  part
of  the  English  to  reach  them  and  to  make  friends  with  them.
They  resented  any  attempts  made  to  land  on  their  islands.
This  attitude  was  doubtless  due  to  former  attempts  on  the
part  of  the  Baganda  to  subdue  them  and  to  rule  over  them.

Mutesa,  king  of  Uganda,  made  several  futile  efforts  to
take  the  island  of  the  Bavuma,  and  sent  one  or  two  large
expeditions  against  it,  but  the  Bavuma  were  successful  in
each  case  in  preventing  the  canoes  from  landing.  The  natives
stood  on  the  heights  to  defend  their  island.  Some  concealed
themselves  in  bushes  near  the  water,  and  cast  stones  from
slings  with  such  great  accuracy  and  damaging  effect,  that
they  drove  the  canoes  away  with  many  of  their  occupants
wounded.  It  was  not  until  the  British  had  been  resident  for
some  time  in  Uganda,  that  this  large  island  was  subdued,  and
the  inhabitants  learned  to  regard  the  British  as  friends  and
not  foes.  Previously  to  their  subjugation,  it  was  never  safe
for  canoes  to  travel  in  the  vicinity  of  the  island,  but  they
were  always  subject  to  attacks.  For  many  years  the  Basese
have  been  regarded  as  belonging  to  Uganda,  though  they  are
inferior  to  the  Baganda  in  physique  and  in  intelligence.  The
Baganda  are  inclined  to  despise  these  fisherfolk,  and  marriages
between  the  two  tribes  have  been  few  in  number.

The  Basese  have  kept  themselves  to  the  immediate  neigh-
bourhood of  the  lake.  A  journey  to  the  capital  was  until
recently  with  some  of  the  inhabitants  the  event  of  a  lifetime;


62  LAKE  CANOES  [CH.

many  had  never  been  more  than  a  mile  inland  for  any  purpose ;
while  numbers  of  them  had  not  even  visited  the  mainland,  and
these  had  most  extraordinary  ideas  of  the  king  and  his  court.
They  lived  and  died  on  islands  three  or  four  miles  long  and  two
miles  wide,  and,  with  the  exception  of  visits  to  neighbouring
islands,  never  left  their  homes.  It  was  from  the  Basese  that
the  Baganda  obtained  their  canoes  and  crews,  and  it  was  by
the  skill  of  these  fishermen  in  the  navigation  of  the  lake,
that  they  were  able  to  subdue  the  people  on  the  more  distant
islands,  and  to  convey  their  warriors  rapidly  against  their
foes  on  the  southern  shores  of  the  lake.  The  Basese,  Bavuma,
and  Basoga  build  the  largest  and  finest  canoes  of  all  the  people
in  the  lake  district.  They  also  build  the  largest  and  best
"  dugout "  canoes  in  this  region  for  the  ferries  of  the  Nile  and
of  the  arms  of  the  lake.  In  the  south  of  the  lake  the  people
on  the  large  island  Karagwe  are  more  of  the  type  of  the
Wasakuma  than  of  the  Basese.  Their  knowledge  of  the  lake
is  limited,  and  their  canoes  are  small  and  poorly  built,  while
all  their  trade  and  intercourse  have  been  with  the  Wasakuma.
The  scarcity  of  good  timber  on  the  eastern  shores  of  the  lake
may  possibly  be  a  cause  of  the  smallness  of  the  canoes.

The  canoes  of  the  Basese  are  built  in  sections;  a  large
tree  forms  the  keel,  so  shaped  that  it  is  hollowed  on  the
upper  side  with  thin  edges  and  fitted  to  join  on  to  the  side
boards,  while  the  under  side  is  rounded.  This  keel  projects
beyond  the  bows  about  four  feet  so  as  to  form  a  ram.  There
are  two  boards,  one  above  the  other  on  each  side  of  the  canoe,
each  board  being  fourteen  or  more  inches  wide.  These  are  kept
in  position  by  stout  stretchers  placed  across  the  canoe;  the
boards  rest  one  on  the  other  and  are  stitched  together.  The
stretchers  are  used  by  the  paddlers  as  seats.  No  iron  is
used  for  nails  or  bolts  in  building  a  canoe;  stitching  is  the
only  means  used  to  secure  the  boards.  All  the  joints  are
made  watertight  by  caulking  them  with  tow  and  thin  strips
of  wood.  The  king  of  Uganda  kept  some  six  or  eight  large
canoes  at  a  port  four  or  five  miles  distant  from  his  capital.
This  landing  place  was  known  as  the  King's  Port.  Leading


v]  ROYAL  BEARERS  63

to  it,  he  had  a  private  road  along  which  none  but  the  most
privileged  of  his  subject ^  \v«  r<  allowed  to  pass  on  pain  of
death.  He  was  thus  enabled  to  go  at  pleasure  to  the  lake
and  spend  some  time  on  the  water,  without  attracting  the
attention  of  any  of  his  duels,  and  without  their  even  knowing
that  he  was  absent  from  his  capital.

The  king  never  walked  when  outside  his  enclosure.  He
was  carried  on  the  shoulders  of  a  strong  man,  and  he  had
always  a  number  of  such  men  near  him.  They  lived  in  the
royal  enclosure.  The  king  would  call  for  several  of  these
men,  when  he  wished  to  visit  the  lake,  and  they  would  carry
him  off  at  a  rapid  rate,  first  one  and  then  another  taking
turns,  as  they  grew  tired  of  carrying  his  Majesty.  They  would
change  bearers  without  allowing  the  king's  feet  to  touch  the
ground.

The  Basese  are  the  fishermen  of  the  kingdom  of  Uganda.
Each  Muganda  chief  had  certain  estates,  either  on  the  shore
of  the  lake,  or  on  one  of  the  islands,  attached  to  his  chieftain-
ship, and  his  tenants  on  these  estates  supplied  his  table  with
fish,  either  fresh  or  dried.  The  fish  thus  supplied  was  given
instead  of  the  taxes  which  other  tenants  had  to  pay  each  year.
In  olden  times  the  chief  duties  of  the  Basese  were  to  carry
troops  from  one  part  of  the  country  to  another,  and  to  supply
fish  for  their  over-lords;  but  as  soon  as  king  Mutesa  opened
up  the  trade  with  the  south  shore,  and  Arab  and  Swahtli
traders  began  to  enter  Uganda,  canoes  were  used  to  convey
these  men  and  their  goods  into  the  country.  This  method  of
travel  saved  a  long  journey  round  the  lake  through  the
territory  of  hostile  tribes.

The  Icing  made  the  traders  pay  for  the  use  of  the  canoes
and  also  charged  an  import  duty  on  the  goods  which  they
sold.  Suna,  the  father  of  Mutesa,  was  the  first  king  to  send
a  few  canoes  to  the  south  shore  of  the  lake;  but  during  his
reign  calico  and  cotton  goods  were  not  allowed  to  be  worn  by
the  common  people,  and  the  Arab  trade  was  limited  mainly
to  cowry-shells,  firearms,  and  ammunition.  In  Mutesa's  time
the  restrictions  were  removed  from  cotton  goods,  and  any


64  CANOE  EXPERIENCES  [CH.

person  was  allowed  to  wear  them.  This  occasioned  a  brisk
trade  in  such  goods,  and  in  addition  there  began  a  consider-
able trade  in  slaves  and  ivory  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining
firearms  and  ammunition.  My  personal  experience  in  the  use
of  canoes  began  at  the  south  end  of  the  lake,  when  I  first
entered  Uganda.  Twelve  canoes  were  sent  to  convey  the
goods  of  a  party  of  missionaries  over  the  lake  into  Uganda.
King  Mwanga  had  heard  that  the  party  had  reached  the  lake
and  needed  canoes  to  convey  them  into  his  country.  The
canoes  were  of  various  sizes,  most  of  them  small,  though
they  were  intended  to  carry  several  Europeans  with  their
goods.  Some  of  the  party,  however,  had  previously  left  by
other  canoes,  and  one  friend,  the  Rev.  R.  P.  Ashe,  preferred
to  journey  round  the  lake  and  take  as  many  of  his  goods  as
possible  with  him.  Thus  the  fleet  of  twelve  canoes  came  to
be  at  my  own  disposal.  The  larger  canoes  carried  from  twelve
to  fourteen  loads  each,  while  the  smaller  ones  carried  only  four
loads,  each  load  being  from  sixty  to  seventy  pounds  weight.

It  was  a  pleasant  experience  at  first  to  have  nothing  to  do
but  to  sit  and  look  about  and  note  the  wonders  of  the  lake;
however,  it  became  somewhat  tedious  after  several  days  to
be  seated  in  a  cramped  position  in  a  canoe  for  ten  or  twelve
hours  at  a  time.  As  a  rule  the  canoes  kept  together  during  the
early  part  of  the  morning,  but  afterwards  the  stronger  crews
left  the  weaker  ones  behind.  Each  steersman  guided  his
canoe  from  one  point  of  land  to  another,  seldom  losing  sight
of  land,  and  never  daring  to  strike  out  across  any  long  stretch
of  the  lake,  but  steering  a  course  close  to  the  shore,  and  ready,
when  necessary,  to  make  for  shelter,  if  a  storm  arose.  The
daily  rule  was  to  make  a  start  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning
and  to  paddle  steadily  at  the  rate  of  four  miles  an  hour  until
noon,  or  perhaps  until  two  o'clock,  and  then  to  camp  for  the
night.  The  men  knew  their  camping  grounds,  and  accordingly
steered  their  canoes  to  them.  When  they  reached  camp,  they
removed  their  cargoes,  and  dragged  their  canoes  well  up  the
beach  out  of  the  water,  to  ensure  their  safety  from  any
hostile  persons  and  to  prevent  them  from  drifting.  They  had


v]  TRAVELLING  BY  CANOE  65

their  huts  higher  well  out  of  the  reach  of  tin-  \\  i!<  i ,  .UK!  \vln-n
tin y  had  stowed  away  their  loads  and  goods,  they  lay  about
smoking  or  went  away  fishing.

Many  of  the  camps  were  made  on  small  uninhabited
islands;  the  men  chose  these  in  preference  to  the  mainland,
because  they  were  afraid  of  night  attacks  from  the  inhabitants
who  were  unfriendly  owing  to  their  having  frequently  carried
troops  in  the  past  into  the  country.  Canoemen  never  require
to  buy  food  when  on  these  journeys,  for  they  carry  their  own
store  of  provisions  and  are  also  able  to  cook  while  still  on
the  water.  When  a  meal  is  required,  a  man  is  told  to  make
the  fire  in  an  old  cooking  pot  carried  in  the  bows  of  the  canoe,
and  to  bake  the  plantains  for  the  party ;  as  they  are  baked,
he  hands  them  round,  and  each  recipient  rests  from  paddling
while  he  eats,  and  in  this  way  the  men  have  their  meal  while
the  canoe  is  kept  moving.

For  the  first  few  days  the  voyage  was  a  delightful  change
from  the  constant  walking  through  parched  country;  every-
thing was  new,  and  the  canoe  songs  were  fascinating,  as  one
man  chanted  a  refrain,  and  the  chorus  was  taken  up  by  the
crew  who  kept  time  to  the  song  with  their  paddles.  There
were  new  birds  and  insects  flitting  about  every  island  and
near  the  coasts  which  engaged  the  attention,  and  sometimes
a  crocodile  splashed  from  a  rock  into  the  water,  or  near  the
land  some  animal  might  be  seen  to  dart  away  into  cover,  so
adding  to  the  interest  of  the  ever  changing  scenery.  When
the  canoes  were  near  the  mainland,  monkeys  might  be  seen
in  the  trees  swinging  from  branch  to  branch  or  performing
gigantic  leaps  from  one  tree  to  another,  while  their  chattering
could  be  heard  as  though  they  dared  their  companions  to
follow  them  in  their  wild  romps  and  rash  leaps.  In  Speke
Gulf  there  were  fully  twelve  crocodiles  floating  about  like
logs  of  wood  on  the  surface  of  the  calm  water;  the  canoe-
men  did  not  fear  them,  considering  them  powerless  when  in
deep  water,  and  only  shaped  their  course  so  as  to  pass  them
without  making  any  alteration  in  their  main  direction.
Paddlers  are  sometimes  too  bold  when  near  crocodiles,  and


66  TRAVELLING  BY  CANOE  [CH.

I  have  met  one  or  two  men  who  may  be  still  alive,  who  lost
an  arm  by  being  seized  by  a  reptile.  It  bit  off  the  arm  when
trying  to  drag  its  prey  into  the  water ;  the  victim  had  time
to  grip  his  canoe  and  hold  on  until  his  arm  was  bitten  off.

Paddlers  sit  facing  the  bows  of  the  canoe  and  spoon  the
water  with  leaf-blade-shaped  paddles,  and  one  man  sits  in
the  stern  with  a  paddle  and  steers  the  canoe  by  putting  his
paddle  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other,  or  sometimes
by  vigorously  paddling  until  he  brings  the  canoe  into  the
direction  he  wishes  it  to  go.  When  racing  another  canoe
the  steersman  usually  paddles  first  on  one  side  of  the  canoe
and  then  on  the  other,  but  at  other  times  he  may  hold  the
paddle  in  the  water  and  pull  the  canoe  into  course.  On  the
voyage  from  Usakuma  to  Uganda  there  are  two  or  three
long  stretches  of  water  in  which  the  islands  are  so  far  apart,
that  it  takes  from  ten  to  twelve  hours  to  paddle  across ;  to
coast  round  the  shores  in  these  parts  of  the  lake  would  add
several  days  to  the  journey  and  be  fraught  with  danger  to
the  canoemen  from  hostile  natives  on  the  mainland.  These
long  stretches  of  water  are  often  troublesome  for  canoes  to
navigate,  and  are  also  most  dangerous,  should  a  storm  break
upon  the  paddlers  when  they  are  too  far  from  land  to  seek
shelter.  The  canoes  are  excellent  craft  when  the  water  is
smooth,  but  they  will  not  bear  the  strain  of  a  rough  sea;
the  long  keels  will  break  if  they  are  made  to  ride  the  waves,
and  there  is  the  danger  of  being  swamped  if  one  is  running
broadside  to  them.  The  canoes  must,  however,  be  allowed
to  ride  broadside  to  the  waves  for  safety,  and  consequently
large  quantities  of  water  are  shipped,  and  unless  several  men
work  hard  at  baling,  the  canoe  is  soon  water-logged  and
sinks.  It  is  usually  the  duty  of  one  man  to  keep  a  watch  on
the  water  in  the  middle  of  the  canoe  and  to  keep  it  baled  out
with  a  wooden  ladle ;  when,  however,  water  pours  in  over  the
side,  this  soon  becomes  a  difficult  task,  and  then  the  men  lose
heart  and  resign  themselves  to  their  fate,  and  are  drowned,
unless  they  can  be  stimulated  to  work  and  bale  while  others
paddle.


v]  EXPERIENCES  OF  CANOES  <>;

Before  the  journey  over  a  long  stretch  of  water  is  under-
taken, the  paddlers  make  a  survey  of  the  sky,  and  they  do
not  start  should  there  be  any  appearance  of  a  storm;  they
also  take  the  precaution  to  call  upon  Mukasa,  the  god  of  the
lake',  to  ask  for  a  good  passage  over  what  they  term  a  sea.
Much  depends  upon  the  weather;  hence  if  there  is  any  sign
of  a  storm  coming,  the  men  will  not  start,  or  should  the  lake
look  as  though  it  \vould  be  rough,  they  defer  their  journey  for
a  day.  When  there  is  a  head  wind,  paddling  becomes  heavy
work,  and  a  choppy  sea  is  both  unpleasant  and  makes  the
work  much  harder,  whereas  a  favourable  wind  helps  the  men
considerably.  It  is  strange  that  these  canoemen  have  never
invented  sails;  though  ingenious  in  other  ways,  they  have
not  sought  labour-saving  means  in  sailing,  but  are  content
to  rely  upon  their  strength  of  arm.  On  two  or  three  occasions
during  this  journey  we  were  out  all  day;  we  did  not  reach
our  camping  ground  until  well  after  dark,  with  the  paddlers
tired  out.  It  was  pleasant  when  nearing  a  camping  ground
after  a  long  journey  to  see  the  small  fires  flickering  in  the
distance,  and  to  hear  the  welcome  sound  of  voices,  and  to
be  helped  to  land  by  the  friendly  hands  of  men  who  had
already  arrived  and  settled  down  for  the  night.

There  was  one  long  journey  which  we  were  forced  to  make
by  night,  because  the  prevailing  wind  was  against  making  it
by  day,  and  the  wind  usually  changes  round  in  the  evening.
We  commenced  this  journey  at  half-past  two  in  the  afternoon
and  paddled  until  dark,  and  thus  far  the  men  worked  well,  and
we  made  good  progress ;  we  then  however  lost  touch  with  the
other  canoes,  and  the  men  became  weary  and  fitful  in  their
work.  It  was  a  dark  night  with  little  to  beguile  the  time  after
sunset;  the  spasmodic  efforts  of  the  tired  men  with  an
occasional  attempt  at  a  song  failed  to  break  the  monotony,
so  that  the  time  dragged  heavily  until  midnight,  when  the
paddlers  said  we  were  nearing  an  island  on  which  we  should
camp;  the  announcement  of  a  prospective  camp  revived  the
flagging  spirits  of  the  men;  they  began  to  put  more  effort
into  their  mechanical  strokes,  causing  the  canoe  to  redouble

5—2


68  A  CANOE  BY  NIGHT  [CH.

its  speed.  As  we  drew  near  the  dark  outline  of  land,  one  of
the  men  called  out  that  there  was  a  hippopotamus  in  front ;
the  head  of  the  canoe  was  quickly  turned,  and  the  men  began
to  paddle  with  their  utmost  strength,  causing  the  canoe  to
bound  along  and  thus  escape  what  was  thought  to  be  a
dangerous  animal  which  would  probably  attack  and  smash
the  canoe,  and  in  all  probability  kill  some  of  the  paddlers.
After  a  few  strokes  at  this  rapid  rate  there  was  a  slight  grating
sound,  and  then  we  stopped  dead  still,  and  the  canoe  began
to  rock  gently:  we  had  run  on  a  submerged  rock  and  were
helpless.  All  the  strength  of  the  paddlers  and  their  skill  to
move  the  canoe  forwards  or  backwards  proved  of  no  avail ;  the
men  peered  into  the  gloom,  and  soon  ascertained  that  the
object  which  they  had  taken  to  be  an  animal  was  a  rock  over
which  the  water  was  gently  playing.  When  satisfied  that  they
were  safe  from  a  savage  beast,  the  next  thing  the  paddlers
sought  to  do  was  to  devise  some  plan  for  escaping  from  that
trying  position:  so  poles  used  for  punting  in  shallow  water
were  brought  out  from  the  bottom  of  the  canoe,  but  it  was
then  discovered  that  we  were  in  deep  water,  and  that  the
rock  on  which  the  canoe  was  hung  was  a  straight  column
which  could  only  be  felt  with  the  poles,  but  which  afforded
no  fulcrum  from  which  to  lever  the  canoe.  We  swung  about
for  two  hours  in  this  helpless  condition,  when  to  our  joy  we
heard  the  sound  of  paddles,  and  after  a  time  we  were  able  to
hail  the  canoe  which  was  coming  in  our  direction,  •  and  we
found  it  to  be  one  of  our  own  belated  fleet.  The  men  in  this
canoe,  though  very  tired,  kindly  came  to  our  aid ;  they  first
tried  to  tow  us  off,  but  we  were  too  firmly  fixed  to  be  moved ;
so  it  proved  necessary  to  tranship  men  and  cargo  and  thus
lighten  the  canoe,  before  it  could  be  moved  and  refloated.
After  the  cargo  and  most  of  the  men  had  been  transhipped,
the  rest  of  the  men  went  into  the  stern;  this  caused  the  bow
to  rise,  and  by  towing  and  paddling  the  canoe  was  got  off,  and
we  paddled  round  the  island  to  the  camp,  which  was  not  far
distant.  It  was  about  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  when  we
arrived  in  camp,  so  after  a  light  meal  I  retired  to  bed  and


v]  FIRST  GLIMPSE  OF  UGANDA

slept  until  ri^ht  oVInrk.  The  men  were  ready  by  about  nun-
o'clock  to  resume  the  journey  by  which  time  1  had  hi
lasted,  and  we  continued  our  way.

A  few  more  canoe  journeys  after  the  above  experience
brought  us  to  the  shores  of  Uganda,  with  a  decided  change  of
scenery  from  that  of  Usakuma  and  the  islands  in  the  southern
part  of  the  lake.  Here  in  Uganda,  as  far  as  the  eye  could
reach,  there  was  lovely  green  grass  upon  hill  and  plain,  with
trees  in  full  leaf,  and  plantain  groves  looking  fresh  and  beauti-
fully cool  dotted  about  on  the  hill-sides.  Soon  after  we  reached
our  first  camp  in  Uganda,  people  began  to  bring  us  cooked
food,  which  was  a  novel  and  delightful  experience,  and  the
headman  told  us  it  was  a  gift  for  which  we  were  not  expected
to  pay;  when  we  expressed  our  gratitude,  the  donors  thanked
us  for  accepting  their  gift,  and  were  quite  pleased  to  have
a  little  notice  taken  of  them.  To  have  food  cooked  and
brought  to  us  was  so  unexpected  that  we  were  quite  prepared
to  pay  heavily  for  the  luxury,  while  to  obtain  vegetable  food
with  fruit  after  eating  nothing  but  biscuits  and  meat  was  a
most  agreeable  change.  The  coast  boys  with  me  also  noticed
the  change  in  the  manners  of  the  people,  and  remarked:
"These  are  a  polite  people,  they  are  the  first  we  have  met
since  we  left  the  coast  who  have  a  word  for  thanks  in  their
own  language."

Though  the  great  lake  has  no  tide,  yet  we  noticed  on  the
Uganda  shore  that  the  prevailing  wind  was  from  the  lake
during  the  day  and  to  the  lake  during  the  night,  and  that
this  wind  caused  the  water  to  run  up  the  shore  during  the
day  and  to  recede  some  distance  during  the  night,  which
gave  the  appearance  of  a  tide.  Some  Baganda  who  once
visited  the  coast  were  much  surprised  by  the  waves  on  the
sea  shore,  and  still  more  so  when  they  tried  to  drink  the  water
and  found  it  salt ;  their  surprise  was  complete  when  they  saw
the  rising  tide  covering  the  wide  stretches  of  sand,  for  they
had  been  accustomed  to  the  fresh  water  of  the  great  lake
with  no  tide.  Some  Masai  who  visited  the  coast  accounted
for  the  ebb  tide  by  saying  that  the  water  was  taken  out  to


70  LAKE  STORMS  [CH.

pasture  during  the  day  and  brought  home  in  the  evening  as
cows  are.

We  had  now  reached  Southern  Uganda  and  were  able  to
skirt  the  lake  shore  continually  and  to  camp  on  the  mainland ;
this  shore  was  bright  with  beautiful  scenery,  woods,  hills  and
valleys,  with  here  and  there  a  higher  hill  towering  above
the  rest.  Sometimes  we  crossed  an  arm  of  the  lake  that
could  be  seen  to  run  far  inland  and  end  in  papyrus  grass,
with  trees  rising  above  and  extending  up  the  hill-sides,  making
a  pretty  picture.  We  were  not  yet,  however,  out  of  the  region
of  danger  from  storms  on  the  lake,  and  were  not  to  reach
our  destination  without  a  little  more  unpleasant  excitement.
One  day,  as  we  were  paddling  along  and  quietly  crossing  an
arm  of  the  lake,  the  men  suddenly  announced  that  a  storm
was  coming  upon  us,  and  began  to  paddle  with  all  their  might
to  reach  land ;  we  had  barely  time  to  reach  a  place  of  safety,
when  gusts  of  wind  began  to  blow  and  torrents  of  rain  came
down.  We  were  glad  to  shelter  under  a  clump  of  trees,  and
then  to  run  into  a  native  hut  which  we  discovered  near  by,
until  the  storm  passed.  Others  less  fortunate  than  ourselves
had  to  paddle  as  best  they  could  to  the  shore,  in  the  teeth  of
the  storm.

A  few  days  later  we  were  not  so  fortunate  in  reaching
shore,  but  were  well  out  at  sea,  when  a  storm  burst  upon  us
with  such  suddenness  that,  before  we  could  reach  the  land,
the  waves  were  lashed  up  into  mountains  of  water  so  high  that
even  when  standing  up  in  the  canoe,  it  was  impossible  to  see
land  over  them.  The  steersman  said  he  dared  not  keep  the
canoe  heading  the  waves,  for  they  would  break  the  keel ;  we
had  therefore  to  lie  broadside  on  in  the  trough  and  trust  to
make  land  by  paddling  in  the  hollow  of  the  waters.  The  men  on
the  windward  side  of  the  canoe  kept  their  paddles  ready  to
break  the  force  of  the  waves  from  coming  into  the  canoe,  but
in  a  short  time  we  were  water-logged,  and  the  men  began  to
cry,  "We  are  dead  men,"  and  to  drop  their  paddles.  It  was
a  critical  time,  I  saw  that  our  safety  depended  upon  action,
for  nothing  but  hard  paddling  with  ceaseless  baling  out  of  the


v]  A  CANOE  IN  A  STORM  71

water  could  avail:  as  I  did  not  know  more  than  two  or  tin. •«•
words  of  their  language,  and  the  paddlers  did  not  know  mini-.
I  picked  up  a  paddle  and  ran  along  the  canoe  from  seat  to
scat,  slapping  each  man  on  the  shoulders  with  it  and  calling
out  "Vuga"  (paddle),  as  I  passed  up  and  down.  The  men
responded  with  alacrity,  and  my  boy  began  to  work  hard
to  bale  out  water,  using  the  only  ladle  there  was  in  the  canoe;
to  help  in  this  work  I  used  my  sun  hat,  and  we  worked  away
to  keep  the  canoe  afloat.  The  men  began  to  gain  confidence
with  their  exertions,  and  we  crept  slowly  nearer  the  shore
and  into  less  troubled  water.  In  half  an  hour's  time  we  had
reached  a  creek  where  a  crowd  stood  watching  our  progress
on  the  shore,  and  some  of  the  men  ran  into  the  water  up  to
their  necks  and  seized  the  canoe  and  soon  dragged  it  high
on  to  dry  land.  The  water  was  boiling  and  lashing  itself  into
fury  over  a  rocky  entrance  of  the  bay  into  which  we  had
run,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  ready  help  of  the  natives
from  the  shore,  we  should  have  sunk  in  the  surf  and  lost  our
cargo.  The  natives  shook  us  by  the  hand  as  we  landed,  and
congratulated  us  on  our  escape,  as  though  we  were  their
relatives ;  it  was  most  refreshing  to  find  people  so  interested
in  our  welfare.  When  we  were  safe,  we  waited  anxiously  for
the  other  canoes  to  come  in.  They  had  a  terrible  struggle;  we
could  see  them  being  lifted  up  on  the  crests  of  the  waves,
and  then  for  a  few  moments  they  would  be  lost  to  sight  in
the  hollows  of  the  water,  but  the  men  stuck  manfully  to  their
work,  and  one  after  the  other  the  canoes  came  slowly  to  land.
The  waves  seemed  to  resent  the  canoes  entering  the  small
bay  in  which  we  lay;  they  swept  across  the  mouth  in  great
fury,  throwing  themselves  in  mad  anger  upon  the  rocks,  then
roaring  like  fiends  at  having  lost  their  prey,  they  fell  back
into  the  gulf  below.  Two  canoes  were  swamped  at  this  point
and  sank,  but  the  men  were  rescued,  and  only  a  poor  goat,
which  was  tied  in  the  canoe,  was  drowned.  I  feared  that
all  my  goods  in  these  two  canoes  were  lost,  but  when  the
water  became  calm  towards  evening,  some  of  the  men  went
out  in  another  canoe;  one  man  dived  and  secured  lines  to  the


72  CANOE  RACING  A  STEAMER  [CH.

sunken  canoes;  paddlers  then  dragged  them  into  shallow
water  and  rescued  the  goods.  The  goods  which  were  in  the
canoes  were  chiefly  cotton  barter  goods,  so  we  were  able  to
open  the  bales  and  to  spread  the  goods  on  the  sands  in  the
sun,  and  when  dry  to  make  them  up  again  into  bales,
which  were  but  little  worse  for  the  wetting.  A  few  personal
objects  such  as  books  and  a  camera  were  spoiled.  The  canoe-
men  made  a  meal  of  the  poor  goat,  and  were  perfectly  happy
over  their  feast  after  their  trying  experience.  The  rest  of  the
voyage  passed  happily,  we  had  made  a  fairly  quick  passage,
having  travelled  two  hundred  miles  by  water  in  twelve  days,
which  was  two  days  under  the  usual  time  taken.  Thus  my
first  journey  on  the  great  lake  ended.  Many  lake  journeys
have  been  undertaken  since  that  time,  but  none  has  been
so  full  of  adventures.

When  steamers  were  introduced  on  the  lake,  the  natives
thought  that  such  "canoes"  could  not  make  the  same  progress
as  their  smaller  canoes,  and  were  incredulous  when  we  tried
to  explain  that  the  speed  with  which  they  travelled  was  more
than  twice  as  great ;  they  said  they  would  soon  prove  that
they  could  outstrip  a  steamer,  and  prepared  for  a  race.  This
opinion  of  superiority  of  speed  was  shared  by  some  of  the
chiefs  and  even  by  the  king  of  Uganda,  who  had  a  secret
belief  that  his  men  could  not  be  beaten.  The  Commissioner
kindly  invited  King  Mwanga  to  visit  and  inspect  the  steamer
when  it  arrived  in  Uganda,  and  the  captain  arranged  a  race
with  the  Uganda  canoes.  When  all  was  ready  for  the  race,
King  Mwanga  had  his  best  canoe  and  a  picked  crew  waiting ;
he  took  his  place  on  the  steamer  to  watch  the  fun  and  also  to
see  the  wonderful  working  of  the  engines ;  he  quite  expected
to  see  his  crew  dart  ahead  and  leave  the  steamer  in  the  far
distance.  The  canoe  was  manned  by  twenty-two  strong
paddlers,  and  both  canoe  and  steamer  started  at  the  same
moment.  At  first  the  canoe  shot  away  while  the  steamer
picked  up  her  anchor  and  got  under  weigh ;  this  delighted  the
paddlers  and  Mwanga,  the  latter  giving  expression  to  his
delight  and  cheering  his  canoemen,  who  shouted  defiant


v]  RAVAGES  OF  SLEEPING  SICKNESS  73

messages,  Their  surprise  was  great  when  the  steamer  began
to  move,  and  when  it  easily  caught  up  the  canoe  and  then
l<-it  it  behind;  the  paddlers  worked  bravely  for  a  short  time
to  try  to  catch  up  the  monster  canoe,  but  soon  gave  way
and  acknowledged  themselves  beaten.  King  Mwanga  re-
turned to  land,  expressing  his  astonishment  at  such  a  marvel
that  could  so  easily  overtake  and  leave  behind  his  most  rapid
canoe,  and  he  gave  the  English  credit  for  working  great
wonders  in  ships.

During  the  past  few  years  the  best  canoes  have  had  to
be  destroyed,  and  the  people  on  the  islands  of  the  lake  have
been  removed  to  places  inland,  owing  to  the  prevalence  of
sleeping  sickness;  it  was  found  necessary  to  destroy  the
canoes  in  order  to  prevent  the  people  from  returning  to  their
old  homes  on  the  islands  where  it  was  found  that  the  greatest
number  of  deaths  from  the  scourge  was  taking  place.  The
disease  is  spread  by  the  bite  of  a  small  fly,  not  unlike  a  house-
fly in  size  and  shape,  which  lives  in  the  grass  and  reeds  along
the  shores  of  the  lake ;  this  fly  is  particularly  noxious  and  is
the  principal  medium  for  transmitting  the  microbe  which
causes  the  disease ;  it  has  infected  birds,  monkeys  and  many
other  kinds  of  warm-blooded  animals  in  the  lake  region.  By
the  expulsion  of  the  natives  from  the  lake  districts,  industries
such  as  fishing,  canoe  building,  and  navigating  the  waters  of
the  lake  have  ceased,  while  the  fisherfolk  live  the  life  of  exiles
on  the  mainland  and  long  for  permission  to  return  to  their
old  haunts  and  birthplaces,  even  though  they  would  thereby
run  the  risk  of  contracting  the  disease  and  of  dying.  To  many
of  these  fisherfolk  the  inland  life  is  more  like  banishment  and
imprisonment  than  anything  else,  and  they  frequently  beg
to  be  allowed  to  return  to  die  in  their  own  land.  In  the
meantime  the  art  of  canoe  building  is  fast  dying  out,  and
unless  some  means  are  taken  to  preserve  the  knowledge,  the
art  will  be  lost  altogether.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  doubtful
whether  the  germs  of  the  disease,  which  has  worked  such
havoc  in  the  land,  will  ever  be  eradicated;  no  remedy  has
been  found,  though  the  greatest  skill  of  medical  science  has


74  NATIVE  HEROISM  [CH.  v

been  and  still  is  hard  at  work  seeking  it.  The  only  course  at
present  seems  to  be  that  of  allowing  nature  to  fight  the  battle,
and  to  hope  that  the  survivors  will  in  time  become  immune
to  the  effects  of  the  disease,  and  will  raise  up  a  strong  or  at
least  an  immune  progeny  to  inherit  the  land.

Many  stories  of  heroism  could  be  told  on  the  part  of  teachers
who  gave  up  home  and  life  to  go  to  help  the  sick,  how  they
faithfully  laboured  and  died  for  their  fellow  men ;  both  men
and  women  have  gone  to  this  work,  knowing  the  risks  they
ran  of  contracting  the  disease,  and  in  many  cases  they  have
died  at  their  posts.  These  cases  of  voluntary  help  are  the
more  remarkable,  because  previous  to  the  introduction  of
Christianity  no  native  would  render  assistance  to  any  man
of  another  clan.  In  the  early  years  of  missionary  work  I  have
seen  men  and  women  being  left  to  die  by  neighbours,  when
a  little  attention  might  have  saved  their  lives  and  when  no
member  of  their  own  clan  was  at  hand  to  nurse  them.  The
influence  of  Christianity  has  been,  arid  is  being,  shown  in
the  lives  of  many  of  these  natives  who  have  embraced  the
Christian  faith.


CHAPTER  VI

THE  COUNTRY  AND  PEOPLE  OF  UGANDA

THE  construction  of  the  Uganda  railway  has  done  much
to  improve  the  conditions  of  the  interior  of  Africa.
It  has  made  slavery  impossible,  not  only  by  enabling  the
Government  to  have  a  sufficient  number  of  troops  taken  into
the  interior  in  order  to  enforce  sound  laws,  but  also  by  re-
moving one  of  the  greatest  reasons  for  slavery,  namely  the
desire  to  use  human  beings  as  beasts  of  burden  and  machines
for  labour,  costing  little  beyond  the  necessary  food.  It  has
also  opened  up  the  country  and  placed  new  ideas  of  life  before
the  people.  By  reducing  the  toil  and  weariness  of  travel  to  a
minimum,  it  has  enabled  numbers  of  people  to  go  to  the  coast
and  given  them  a  fresh  outlook  upon  the  world ;  it  has  changed
the  aspect  of  native  life,  giving  nobler  motives  for  living.
As  for  the  journey  to  Uganda,  it  has  become  a  pleasure  trip
instead  of  a  long,  tedious,  and  dangerous  journey.  The  railway
has  removed  the  many  risks  to  health  and  the  bodily  dangers
to  which  each  traveller  was  exposed;  it  has  changed  what
was  a  serious  undertaking  into  a  pleasure,  and  it  has  opened
up  some  of  the  grandest  scenery  of  the  world,  and  given  access
to  some  of  the  finest  specimens  of  animal  life  that  can  any-
where be  found.  All  this  can  be  seen  from  the  comfortable
railway  carriage,  as  the  train  passes  on  its  way  into  the
interior.

The  journey  from  the  coast  to  Uganda  now  takes  fewer
days  than  it  took  months  in  the  past.  It  is  possible  to
reach  Uganda  from  London  within  a  month,  whereas  it  used
to  be  thought  smart  work  if  the  destination  was  reached
within  six  months;  the  usual  period  was  eight  or  nine
months.  Another  great  boon  is  the  regular  monthly  mail  and
the  telegraphic  communication;  in  early  days  there  was  an
interval  of  three  or  four  months  between  the  mails,  and


76 NEWS  OF  QUEEN  VICTORIA'S  DEATH [CH.

letters  were  often  eight  months  old  when  they  were  received.
There  is  now  a  telegraph  which  makes  known  within  an  hour
important  events  occurring  in  Europe,  whereas  it  used  to  take
two  months  to  send  a  message  by  special  runner  to  the  coast
to  be  cabled  to  England.  The  news  of  the  death  of  the
late  beloved  Queen  Victoria  reached  Uganda  soon  after
it  was  announced  in  London.  The  effect  of  the  news  on  the
natives  was  strange;  within  an  hour  after  it  had  reached
the  country,  the  announcement  was  made  in  the  market
place,  where  a  brisk  trade  was  being  carried  on,  and  the
value  of  British  coinage,  rupees  and  pice,  dropped  to  nil;
rupees  were  immediately  sold  for  two  or  three  cowry-shells,
the  regular  value  being  a  thousand  cowry-shells  for  a  rupee.
It  required  some  explanation  to  enable  the  people  to  realise
that  there  was  no  depreciation  of  coinage  through  the  death
of  a  European  sovereign.  They  had  been  accustomed  to  think
that  everything  changed  when  the  king  died,  and  that  even  all
reforms  might  change  or  end  with  the  king,  and  lawlessness
reign,  until  the  new  king  acceded  and  began  a  new  order.

The  ease  and  the  rapidity  with  which  the  traveller  moves
through  the  vast  regions  from  the  coast  to  the  lake  have  how-
ever their  disadvantages,  if  he  wishes  to  study  native  customs
and  character,  and  to  explore  the  country;  it  is  impossible  to
know  anything  about  the  many  tribes  through  whose  country
he  is  passing,  and  he  obtains  mere  glimpses  of  the  physical
features  of  the  country;  he  also  misses  the  adventures
common  to  the  past  mode  of  travel.  Still  there  are  few  men,
if  any,  who  will  not  give  unqualified  praise  to  British  enter-
prise, and  render  honour  to  the  men  who  so  energetically
and  successfully  overcame  the  difficulties  of  constructing  the
railway,  and  made  the  change  which  has  given  to  Central
Africa  the  rapid  means  of  progress,  and  has  done  so  much  to
make  slavery  a  thing  of  the  past.  It  has  brought  within  the
reach  of  the  natives  of  the  interior  some  of  the  better  things
of  the  world,  civilisation  with  its  advantages  of  education,
and  safety  of  life  and  property.

In  the  early  days  of  travel  the  remarkable  spectacle  of


vi]  BAGANDA  GENTLEMEN  77

social  progress  and  order  which  burst  upon  the  gaze  of  the
traveller  when  he  entered  Uganda,  caused  him  the  utmost
astonishment.  After  passing  through  country  after  country
of  semi-clothed  barbarians  who  lived  and  acted  in  a  manner
little  removed  from  the  wild  animals  around  them,  a  worse
condition  of  affairs  might  reasonably  have  been  expected
in  the  far  interior,  and  not  a  change  for  the  better;  yet
here  he  was  suddenly  confronted  with  men  and  women
clothed  and  clean,  with  polished  manners  and  becoming  de-
meanour. He  was  prepared  for  a  lower  stage  in  morals  and
culture,  and  to  find  gentlefolk  with  the  courtesy  and  manners
of  highly  educated  people  was  indeed  a  surprise.  To  the
present  day  there  has  been  no  adequate  explanation  given
for  their  state  of  culture.

Both  sexes  in  Uganda  are  well  clothed,  for  an  edict  was
issued  by  a  former  king,  ordering  both  men  and  women  to
wear  clothes,  and  fining  any  who  went  out  naked ;  the  men
in  those  early  days  wore  bark-cloths  in  the  toga  fashion,
while  the  women  had  beautiful  terra-cotta  coloured  bark-
cloths  wrapped  round  their  bodies,  passing  under  the  arms
and  extending  to  their  feet;  these  they  secured  round  the
waist  by  a  neat  girdle  of  the  same  material,  but  of  a  lighter
colour;  their  soft  dark  skin  was  beautifully  clean,  and  their
heads  with  short  curly  hair  were  well  kept ;  their  faces,  ears,
and  mouths  were  free  from  mutilations  or  tribal  marks,  so
different  from  the  tribes  which  the  traveller  meets  on  all  sides
of  Uganda.

As  a  nation  the  Baganda  are  clean  in  their  habits  and
most  particular  about  their  person,  dress,  food  and  general
appearance;  the  floors  of  their  houses  are  neatly  carpeted
with  sweet-smelling  grass,  upon  which  the  inmates  sit,  while
a  mat  or  rug  is  spread  upon  it  for  the  visitor,  because  stools
and  chairs  were  forbidden;  it  was  regarded  until  quite
recently  as  an  immodest  act  for  a  woman  to  sit  upon  any
raised  seat.  There  are,  it  is  true,  among  the  poorer  people
some  few  homes  where  the  wife  is  found  to  be  untidy  and
the  house  dirty,  but  these  houses  are  happily  the  exception,


78  PLANTAIN  GROVES  [CH.

not  the  rule.  These  signs  of  cleanliness  and  order  at  once
attract  the  attention  of  the  most  casual  observer,  and  he
further  learns  that  the  people  are  superior  to  their  neighbours
in  almost  every  other  respect.  The  sanitary  arrangements,  it
is  true,  were  not  in  keeping  with  the  cleanliness  described
above,  and  it  took  some  years  to  work  the  necessary  reform
until  the  people  consented  to  use  cesspools  about  their  homes.
The  physical  features  of  Uganda  differ  considerably  from
the  flat,  dry  country  of  Ugogo  and  Usakuma;  it  is  hilly  and
well  watered,  and  almost  every  valley  is  swampy  ground,
while  some  valleys  contain  deep  water  held  up  by  papyrus
growth  extending  from  hill  to  hill  often  a  mile  across.  The
country  is  almost  always  green  with  numberless  evergreen
trees ;  and  with  grass  even  in  the  hottest  season  of  the  year
there  is  suitable  pasturage  for  the  large  herds  of  cattle  and
the  flocks  of  goats  and  sheep  which  wander  over  these  public
lands.  There  are  large  tracts  of  country  under  cultivation;
sometimes  the  main  road  from  the  capital  to  the  home  of
some  important  chief  winds  through  miles  of  plantain  groves
well  cultivated,  looking  fresh  and  green,  and  delightfully
cool  after  the  heat  in  the  plains  and  open  country;  the
amount  of  water  is  undoubtedly  the  secret  cause  of  the
fertility  and  wonderful  growth  of  plantains.  The  swamps  are
not  an  unmixed  blessing,  for  they  are  the  breeding  places  of
mosquitoes,  and  the  homes  of  dangerous  animals.  The  huts  of
the  people  are  hidden  away  among  these  plantain  groves  and
are  often  invisible  from  the  outskirts  or  neighbouring  hills
because  of  the  height  of  the  trees;  they  are  often  enclosed  by
high  reed  fences  with  neat  courtyards  in  front,  thus  giving
the  impression  of  comfort  and  privacy.  The  sloping  sides
of  the  hills  are  favourite  sites  for  the  building  of  huts;  the
architect  invariably  excavates  a  level  place  upon  which  he
builds  his  hut.  A  notable  feature  of  these  huts  is  that  the
doorway  always  looks  to  the  side  of  the  hill ;  this  shuts  out
the  view  which  there  might  have  been  of  the  landscape.  The
only  reason  for  this  arrangement  seems  to  be  that  storms
would  drive  into  the  house  if  the  door  faced  the  exposed  side;


VI]  UGANDA  ROADS  79

and  it  is  certainly  wise  to  avoid  undue  exposure  in  a  hut
whore  the  doorway  has  to  serve  the  duties  of  window,
chimney,  and  also  inlet  and  outlet  to  the  home.

The  roads  are  striking,  especially  when  compared  with
the  narrow  tracks  in  other  parts  of  Africa;  they  are  kept
free  from  weeds  and  grass ;  even  the  private  path  leading  to
some  small  single  hut  from  the  main  road  is  kept  free  from  the
growth  of  weeds  and  is  at  least  three  feet  wide,  while  public
roads  from  the  capital  to  the  dwellings  of  important  chiefs  are
often  from  twelve  to  fourteen  feet  wide.  Where  a  road  crosses
a  swamp,  a  bank  of  earth  is  raised  well  above  the  water  and
four  or  five  feet  wide  to  form  the  path ;  openings  are  left  in
it  where  there  is  a  stream ;  the  bank  at  the  opening  is  faced
with  piles  driven  into  the  mud  and  bridged  with  trees  so  that
pedestrians  can  cross  it  without  wetting  their  feet.

These  roads  and  bridges  are  indications  of  a  superior
people,  and  they  strike  the  pedestrian,  who  has  travelled  from
the  coast  through  less  civilised  countries  along  narrow  tracks,
with  agreeable  surprise ;  in  districts  even  near  the  coast  a  tree
falling  across  the  path  is  left  where  it  falls,  it  is  no  man's
duty  to  remove  it;  so  the  traveller  has  to  walk  round  or
climb  over  it.  These  advanced  qualities  and  marks  of  civilisa-
tion of  the  Baganda  are  not  the  result  of  any  outside  influence
being  brought  to  bear  upon  them,  they  are  of  much  earlier
date  than  the  time  of  their  contact  with  either  the  Nubian
or  the  Arab.  There  are  to  be  found  a  few  traces  of  Nubian
and  of  Arab  influence,  particularly  in  dress,  in  mat-making,
and  soap-making,  which  are  of  much  later  date  than  the
wearing  of  the  bark-cloth  toga  or  the  finely  dressed  skin  of
animals ;  the  chief  influence  of  the  Arabs  is  seen  in  ways  of  little
credit  to  them,  such  as  the  introduction  of  firearms  and,
worse  still,  of  venereal  diseases  and  lax  morals.  The  principal
trace  of  contact  with  the  Nubians  is  to  be  seen  in  the  loose
cotton  breeches  and  the  sandals,  which  were  copied  by  some
Baganda  who  visited  Khartoum  during  the  time  that  Gordon
Pasha  was  there;  these  men  also  brought  back  cotton  seed
and  started  the  growth  of  an  inferior  kind  of  cotton  tree.


8o  HAMITIC  INFLUENCE  [CH.

A  most  interesting  study  which  especially  concerns  the
anthropologist  is  to  account  for  the  great  progress  which  the
people  have  made  in  social  and  political  life;  they  have
advanced  from  the  degraded  barbarity  of  primitive  nations  to
a  stage  approaching  very  nearly  to  that  of  civilised  govern-
ment. An  explanation  of  this  wonderful  progress,  which  still
retains  striking  inconsistencies  in  social  organisation,  may  be
found  in  an  early  immigration  of  a  superior  people  who  settled
in  the  country,  conquered  the  aborigines,  and  brought  in  a
higher  grade  of  social  customs,  but  who  allowed  certain  old
practices  of  the  conquered  people  to  continue  side  by  side
with  their  own  more  cultured  customs.  The  aborigines  were
doubtless  raised  by  these  invaders  to  a  level  above  that  of
their  barbarous  neighbours,  while  they  received  new  in-
centives to  attain  to  higher  ideals.

A  striking  instance  for  thinking  that  a  new  and  powerful
race  entered  the  country  is  to  be  found  in  the  totemic  rules
for  royalty,  where  the  totems  of  the  mother  become  those
of  the  children;  that  is  to  say,  we  find  traces  of  matrilineal
descent  among  royalty  still  in  force,  whereas  among  common
people  children  take  the  paternal  totems,  and  patrilineal
descent  is  strictly  followed.

Again,  according  to  the  marriage  laws  of  Uganda,  it  is  a
criminal  offence  for  any  man  to  marry  a  woman  of  the  clan  of
his  father  or  of  his  mother;  each  child  of  his  father's  brother
he  regards  as  his  own  brother  or  sister;  he  also  regards
all  children  of  any  male  member  of  his  father's  generation
as  brothers  or  sisters.  All  members  of  his  father's  clan  a
generation  above  him  he  regards  as  parents ;  members  of  his
own  generation  as  brothers  and  sisters,  and  those  of  a
younger  generation  as  his  children,  therefore  they  are  all
of  the  forbidden  degree  of  consanguinity.  The  brothers  and
sisters  of  the  mother  are  regarded  by  her  children  as  parents,
and  so  they  too  come  within  the  forbidden  degree  of  marriage.
The  kings  of  Uganda,  however,  have  always  married  their
sisters,  indeed  the  queen  must  be  the  king's  sister.  It  is  true  that
a  half  sister  rather  than  a  full  sister  is  sought  for  this  marriage,


PLATE  VI


BUFFALO  SHOT  BY  F.  A.  KNOWLES,  ESQ.


PLATE  VII


vi]  BURIAL  RITES  OF  KINGS  8l


still  iiKirna^v  with  .1  lull  sistrr  is  |>rrmi>siblr  ;  in  rither  case
king  and  queen  h;i\v  the  totems  of  their  father  in  common,
but  these  are  not  used,  it  is  those  of  the  mother  which  they
ordinarily  follow.  Only  when  the  king  and  queen  have  dif-
ferent mothers,  can  they  be  said  to  be  of  different  clans.

Another  custom  of  royalty  which  differs  considerably  from
the  custom  of  the  common  people  is  that  of  the  disposal  of
the  dead.  Kings  are  not  buried  in  the  earth,  but  they  have
large  mausoleums  built,  in  which  the  body  is  laid  after  it  has
been  carefully  embalmed  by  a  lengthy  process  which  lasts  at
least  six  months.  The  jawbone  of  a  king  is  removed  from
the  body,  and  the  tomb  is  sealed  and  not  cared  for,  but  allowed
to  fall  into  decay.  The  jawbone  is  removed,  cleaned,  decorated,
and  preserved,  with  the  stump  of  the  king's  umbilical  cord;
these  are  preserved  in  a  well-kept  temple  and  are  deified.

Common  people  are  buried  in  the  earth  in  burial  grounds
belonging  to  the  clan  on  the  day  of  death  or  during  the  next
day,  and  there  is  no  process  of  embalming  them.  The  graves
of  men  are  guarded  by  one  or  more  of  the  widows  of  the
deceased;  the  body  must  be  buried  near  others  of  the  same
clan,  though  it  must  not  rest  in  the  same  grave  with  any
other  body;  the  grave  is  kept  in  perfect  order  for  a  period
of  two  or  more  years,  but  as  after  this  period  the  ghost  may
be  reincarnated,  the  grave  is  left  to  crumble  away,  and  all
traces  of  it  disappear.  During  the  time  that  the  ghost  still
remains  in  the  spirit  world  the  grave  is  guarded,  because
the  relatives  of  the  deceased  fear  that  they  may  have  some
hostile  visit  from  the  ghost,  should  they  be  negligent  in  their
care  of  the  grave.  Though  the  people  do  not  expressly  teach
a  doctrine  of  reincarnation,  still  they  believe  that  spirits  are
reborn  after  a  period  of  about  two  years.  Reincarnation  may
take  place  at  any  time  after  a  period  of  two  years  ;  whether
it  has  taken  place  is  decided  by  members  of  the  clan  at  a
ceremony  which  is  performed  over  an  infant  to  discover
which  clan  spirit  animates  the  child.  It  is  never  said  that
kings  die;  there  is  only  a  change  of  existence,  and  there  is
therefore  no  reincarnation  for  them;  they  are  deified.  The

R.U.  6


82  ORIGIN  OF  THE  BAGANDA  [CH.

fact  that  the  customs  for  kings  are  so  contrary  to  those  for
the  common  people  gives  reason  for  thinking  that  the  kings
were  an  outside  conquering  race  who  subdued  the  primitive
people,  and  as  far  as  possible  fused  two  religions,  the  result
being  what  is  commonly  known  as  Lubare  worship.

Tradition  relates  that  the  first  king  came  from  the  north-
east. The  people  who  most  nearly  answer  to  the  characteristics
of  these  kings  are  the  Gallas,  and  there  is  some  evidence  of
an  early  migratory  stream  of  these  Gallas  into  the  Nile
Delta,  where  some  prehistoric  skulls  have  been  found  which
are  said  to  be  of  Galla  type.  It  is  therefore  possible  that
king  Kintu  was  either  a  descendant  of  one  of  those  early
Gallas  who  entered  Egypt,  or  he  may  have  been  a  member
of  the  original  migration  who  severed  himself  from  the  rest
and  settled  in  Uganda  with  his  followers.  They  have  not
only  left  traces  of  their  existence  in  stone  implements  and
vessels,  but  they  also  appear  to  have  formed  the  tribes  which
we  call  Nilotic,  and  most  probably  they  gave  kings  to
Uganda,  Bunyoro,  and  Ankole.

Presuming  the  royalty  of  these  kingdoms  of  Central  Africa
to  be  of  Gallic  origin,  this  would  account  for  the  similarity
of  customs,  still  followed  in  Uganda,  with  those  of  early
Egypt.  There  are  also  some  marks  of  similarity  in  primitive
art,  such  as  pottery  and  harps,  though  there  is  no  record
nor  tradition  of  any  relations  with  Egypt.  We  may  also
mention  the  similarity  between  the  sacred  obligation  for
Egyptians  to  marry  their  sisters  and  for  the  Uganda  kings
to  take  a  sister  as  their  queen ;  again  they  have  in  common
embalming  of  the  dead  and  the  retaining  of  the  umbilical
cords.  The  similarity  of  the  umbilical  cord,  so-called  Twin,
of  the  Baganda,  bears  a  close  resemblance  to  the  royal
standards  of  Egypt  (see  Man,  vol.  xi,  No.  n:  Note  upon
Early  Egyptian  Standards,  C.  G.  Seligman,  M.D.,  Margaret
A.  Murray).  Until  quite  recently  it  was  customary  for  the
king  of  Uganda  to  have  his  Twin,  that  is  the  stump  of  the
umbilical  cord,  brought  in  solemn  procession  to  him  each
month  when  the  new  moon  was  first  visible,  by  an  important


vi]  BURIAL  GROUNDS  83

rhief  who  ranked  second  to  the  prime  minister,  and  whose
duty  it  was  to  be  guardian  of  the  I  win  and  of  royal  fetishes.

But  we  must  return  to  our  study  of  the  people  and  country,
though  we  might  go  further  in  the  comparison  of  Egyptian
customs  with  those  of  the  Baganda.  There  are  members  of
clans  who  state  that  their  forefathers  were  in  the  country
before  the  arrival  of  king  Kintu,  and  these  clan  members  say
that  they  held  land  in  their  own  right,  that  it  was  freehold,
and  that  each  chief  was  independent  of  the  others.  They
were  gradually  subjugated  by  the  powerful  conqueror  king
and  amalgamated  into  the  present  nation.  Chiefs  responsible
to  the  king  were  set  to  rule  over  large  districts,  and  new
chieftainships  were  created  as  the  land  was  conquered.  The
old  clan  chiefs  were  still  given  a  share  in  the  affairs  of  the
government,  even  though  there  were  new  chiefs;  the  old
chiefs  were  allowed  to  choose  members  from  their  clans  to
fill  offices  connected  with  their  freehold  property,  as  they
became  vacant,  and  were  responsible  for  the  taxes  on  their
estates.  The  only  freehold  lands  were  the  clan  burial  grounds
and  they  remained  such  until,  through  ignorance  of  the
importance  of  the  customs,  the  British  Government  abolished
these  grounds.  Events  have  proved  that  it  would  have  been
beneficial  for  the  country,  had  these  freehold  burial  grounds
been  preserved,  and  the  British  Government  would  have  been
saved  both  trouble  and  expense  by  allowing  the  rights  of  the
clans.  Apart  from  the  clan  freehold  burial  grounds  the  king
was  the  sole  possessor  of  the  land  which  he  distributed  to
his  chiefs  to  be  held  by  them  during  his  pleasure ;  he  never
sold  or  gave  away  land,  and  though  a  favourite  might  be
given  possession  of  an  estate  to  be  held  during  the  king's
life,  still  the  latter  retained  such  rights  that  at  his  death  the
estate  reverted  to  the  crown,  and  his  successor  began  his  reign
in  full  possession  of  the  kingdom.  On  the  death  of  the  king
every  chief,  even  the  prime  minister,  went  out  of  office,  leaving
the  vacancies  to  be  filled  by  the  new  sovereign.  The  old
chiefs  retained  their  titles,  and  were  given  small  estates  near
the  temple  of  the  deceased  king,  who  was  never  admitted  to


84  LAND  TENURE  [CH.

have  died,  but  to  have  entered  upon  a  new  existence.  The
duties  of  these  former  first  grade  chiefs  were  now  connected
with  the  temple  of  the  late  king,  and  they  were  under  the
direct  control  of  the  dowager  queen,  who  removed  her
residence  so  as  to  be  near  the  temple  of  her  late  brother  and
husband  and  to  manage  the  temple  services  and  the  estate
connected  with  the  temple.

Though  the  king  held  entire  possession  of  the  land,  he  was
most  careful  not  to  molest  or  unduly  interfere  with  clan
burial  grounds.  In  each  burial  ground  there  was  a  temple
for  the  clan  god,  with  accommodation  for  priests  and  medium ;
the  chief  priest  was  invariably  the  bead  of  the  clan  who  also
stood  to  the  clan  in  the  relation  of  father.  It  was  the  universal
belief  that  the  clan  burial  ground  was  the  home  of  the  ghosts
of  departed  members,  and  that  they  remained  there  until
they  were  reincarnated  in  the  form  of  some  child  of  the  clan.
These  ghosts  resented  interference  with  the  burial  ground
and  especially  with  the  bones  of  the  dead,  and  this  belief
made  the  king  hesitate  to  interfere  with  members  of  a  clan,
or  to  expel  them  from  their  freehold  property.  The  office  of
chief  of  a  clan  was  an  influential  position  and  carried  many
responsibilities  with  it,  more  especially  that  of  keeping  in
touch  with  each  member  of  the  clan,  seeing  that  he  was
treated  fairly  under  all  circumstances,  and,  when  necessary,
avenging  the  death  of  a  member.

The  nation  has  ever  been  proud  of  its  royal  family,  and
has  been  most  careful  when  selecting  a  new  king  that  no  one
but  a  prince  should  reign,  and  further  that  the  prince  chosen
should  be  the  son  of  a  former  king;  princes,  who  were  sons  of
a  king's  brother,  were  rejected  as  ineligible  for  the  throne;
princes  who  did  not  reign  were  called  peasant  princes.  The
number  of  children  that  a  king  had  was  great,  and  formerly
the  princes  were  a  menace  to  the  throne,  because  leading  chiefs
sought  to  have  the  upbringing  of  such  princes,  and  frequently
raised  rebellions,  seeking  to  depose  the  sovereign  and  to  place
his  son  whom  they  had  brought  up  on  the  throne.  Apart
from  such  disloyalty  chiefs  were  anxious  to  be  trusted  with


vi]  THE  CHOICE  OF  KING  85

the  care  of  a  prince,  for  they  realised  how  important  they
would  be,  should  the  prince  under  their  care  be  selected  to
rri^n  after  his  father;  hence  there  was  always  a  good  deal  of
rivalry  to  secure  a  prince.  It  was  to  save  the  country  from
constant  war  that  young  princes,  sons  of  the  king's  brothers,
were  excluded  from  the  list  of  legitimate  heirs  to  the  throne.
In  more  recent  years  the  king's  brothers  were  imprisoned  and
starved  to  death,  after  the  proclamation  of  a  king,  by  the
new  king's  mother,  with  the  object  of  removing  all  rivals  and
of  avoiding  future  risings  against  the  newly-crowned  king.

No  princess  has  been  known  to  reign,  though  such  ladies
received  great  honour  from  all  classes  of  men ;  even  leading
chiefs  stooped  low  or  knelt  when  about  to  speak  to  one  of
them;  in  all  other  cases  women  knelt  when  speaking  to
men,  whereas  chiefs  stooped  to  a  princess.  During  one  of
the  recent  civil  wars  when  the  king  was  expelled,  and  the
princes  were  few  in  number,  some  Mohammedan  Baganda
became  alarmed  owing  to  statements  made  by  the  Arab
traders;  they  feared  that  the  so-called  English  party  might
appoint  a  queen  to  reign,  as  was  the  case  at  the  time  in
England;  they  therefore  captured  as  many  princesses  as
could  be  found,  shut  them  up  in  native  huts,  and  burnt  them
to  death.

With  the  exception  of  the  princesses  whom  the  king  took
to  wife,  princesses  were  not  allowed  to  marry;  but  this  restric-
tion led  to  gross  immorality  among  these  ladies,  because  the
princesses  did  not  strive  to  set  an  example  of  virtue,  but
yielded  to  their  worst  passions  and  took  men  of  all  ages  and
ranks  to  be  their  paramours,  even  though  they  knew  that
they  ran  the  risk  of  being  put  to  death  for  their  actions.

The  licentiousness  on  the  part  of  some  princesses  was  one
of  the  chief  causes  of  the  early  spread  of  venereal  disease.
Princesses  were  the  only  women  who  enjoyed  perfect  liberty;
there  were  no  restrictions  placed  upon  them,  but  they  might
go  where  they  wished  without  asking  anyone's  permission,
and  in  later  years,  when  traders  were  admitted  to  Uganda,
they  made  use  of  their  freedom  to  visit  Arab  and  Swahili


86  BURNING  ROYAL  PERSONS  [CH.

traders.  These  traders  were  in  many  instances  men  of  gross
passions,  suffering  from  horrible  diseases;  they  quickly  dis-
covered that  they  could  secure  the  princesses  to  act  as  their
wives  during  their  stay  in  Uganda,  and  that  such  friendships
were  of  value  in  enabling  them  to  secure  greater  advantages
in  trade,  and  they  therefore  made  presents  of  cotton  goods
and  other  trifles  to  these  ladies ;  such  presents  were  new  and
attractive,  especially  cheap  mirrors.  The  result  of  these  friend-
ships and  alliances  was  the  contraction  of  disease,  which  was
passed  on  by  the  princesses  to  their  own  countrymen  whom
they  commandeered  at  times  to  satiate  their  lust.  In  all  cases
of  illegal  alliances  princesses  took  care  to  have  no  children,
because  the  penalty  was  death,  though  there  were  occasionally
such  births ;  if  a  child  was  expected,  the  mother  would  visit
a  friend  and  remain  in  some  distant  part  of  the  country  until
the  child  was  born.  In  some  cases  the  child  would  be  killed,
but  there  were  other  mothers  who  would  secure  some  foster
mother  for  their  child,  and  leave  it  to  grow  up  without  the
king's  knowledge.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  object  of
this  stringent  law  was  to  end  the  old  and  regular  law  of
succession  through  the  female  line,  when  the  sister's  son
inherited  the  throne,  and  not  the  king's  son.

The  practice  of  executing  princes  and  princesses  by  burning,
or  by  starvation,  was  introduced  to  overcome  the  old  pro-
hibition which  made  it  a  criminal  offence  to  shed  royal
blood.  It  sometimes  happened  that  during  a  rebellion  a
warrior  would  slay  a  prince  who  was  fighting  against  the
king;  in  such  cases  the  king  would  praise  the  man  at  the
time,  and  he  would  be  rewarded  for  his  deed,  but  after  a  few
months  he  would  be  taken  prisoner  and  executed  for  shedding
royal  blood,  because  the  ghost  was  said  to  be  causing  trouble
and  to  be  calling  for  expiation.  The  only  safety  for  a  man
who  had  slain  a  prince,  was  to  flee  the  country  and  remain
in  exile.  The  practice  of  executing  a  man  who  had  shed  royal
blood  was  due  to  the  strong  belief  in  the  hostility  of  the
injured  ghost.  Some  calamity  or  sickness  that  occurred  would
be  attributed  by  a  priest  to  the  ghost  of  a  slain  prince,  and


VI]  KILLING  HEIRS  TO  THE  THRONE  87

the  king  would  be  told  that  he  must  execute  the  man  who
had  been  the  perpetrator  of  the  deed,  before  the  disease  could
be  arrested.  Underlying  the  custom  of  burning  people  there
appears  to  be  the  idea  of  annihilation  for  the  ghost  is  supposed
to  be  destroyed  with  the  body,  and  all  fear  of  further  trouble
from  it  ceases.  Formerly  when  princes  were  allowed  to  re-
main alive  after  their  brother  was  made  king,  it  was  incum-
bent on  the  monarch  to  be  always  prepared  to  repel  any
attempt  made  by  one  of  his  brothers  to  dethrone  him  and
secure  the  throne.  This  custom  not  only  saved  the  country
from  a  feeble  and  decrepit  king,  but  also  made  the  king  alert
and  warlike.  In  more  recent  years  all  princes  were  starved  to
death  by  the  mother  of  a  newly  elected  king,  in  order  to
save  her  son  from  rivals.  With  this  object  of  saving  her  son
from  attacks,  the  king's  mother  was  no  sooner  raised  to  her
new  position  of  power  as  queen  mother  than  she  captured  all
her  husband's  sons  and  had  them  taken  to  some  secluded  spot,
where  they  were  enclosed  in  a  high  stockade  without  food
or  water  and  guarded  until  they  died  from  hunger  or  thirst.
Several  ruins  of  such  places  still  exist,  with  the  remains  of
the  moat  which  surrounded  the  stockade,  and  inside  may  be
found  the  bones  of  the  dead  princes.  Though  this  custom
safeguarded  the  king's  life,  it  became  to  him  an  occasion  for
arrogance  and  idleness  and  led  him  into  habits  of  debauchery
and  vice,  to  which  he  dared  not  have  yielded,  had  he  been
called  upon  to  guard  his  throne  from  rivals.

The  wife  of  a  king,  who  has  been  raised  to  the  high  dignity
of  queen  mother,  in  her  early  years  may  have  been  only  the
daughter  of  some  peasant,  and  during  her  husband's  lifetime
may  not  have  been  an  honoured  wife  nor  a  woman  of  any
especial  ability.  The  fact  of  her  son  becoming  king  gave  her
a  position  of  great  honour,  and  her  first  public  act  was  to
safeguard  the  position  of  her  son  and  thus  through  him
make  her  own  place  secure.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  in  the  early  reigns  of  the
kings  the  sovereign  was  expected  to  reign  only  so  long  as
he  enjoyed  all  his  faculties,  and  when  his  powers  began  to


88  ENDING  THE  KING'S  LIFE  [CH.

fail,  he  was  expected  to  put  an  end  to  his  life  or  to  have  it
taken  from  him  either  by  one  of  his  brothers  or  by  one  of
his  wives.  There  is  one  instance  recorded  when  a  king  who
was  ill  is  said  to  have  been  smothered  by  his  wives.  By
instituting  the  custom  of  killing  all  princes  eligible  for  the
throne,  the  queen  mother  ensured  her  son's  reign  with
peace  and  freedom  from  rebellion,  though  it  deprived
the  people  of  the  excitement  of  warfare  which  was  dear  to
them.

The  king  lived  upon  a  hill  situated  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  lake.  The  summit  of  the  hill  was  levelled,  and  the  most
commanding  site  overlooking  the  country  was  chosen  for  the
king's  dwelling  houses,  court  houses,  and  shrine  for  fetishes,
and  for  the  special  reception  room.  Round  these  buildings  on
the  lower  slopes  of  the  hill  other  houses  were  built;  in  front
were  huts  for  the  guards  and  retainers,  and  the  many  houses
for  the  wives,  their  maids  and  slaves,  were  built  on  the  sides
and  at  the  back  of  the  royal  houses.  The  whole  of  the  royal  en-
closure was  divided  up  into  small  courtyards  with  groups  of
huts  in  them;  each  group  was  enclosed  by  a  high  fence  and
was  under  the  supervision  of  some  responsible  wife.  Wide
paths  between  high  fences  connected  each  group  of  houses
with  the  king's  private  enclosure.  In  the  reign  of  the  famous
king  Mutesa  there  were  several  thousand  residents  in  the  royal
enclosure ;  he  had  five  hundred  wives,  each  of  whom  had  her
maids  and  female  slaves ;  and  in  addition  to  the  wives  there
were  fully  two  hundred  pages  and  hundreds  of  retainers  and
slaves.  A  high  fence  built  of  elephant  grass  surrounded  the
royal  residence,  so  that  it  was  impossible  for  an  enemy  with
the  ordinary  primitive  weapons  to  enter.  At  intervals  round
the  outside  of  the  enclosure  guard  houses  were  built ;  there
were  four  or  five  entrances  which  were  strongly  guarded ;  both
inside  and  outside  were  huts  with  soldiers  always  on  duty,  to
prevent  any  person  except  the  slaves  and  wives  from  entering.
Again  inside  the  enclosure  near  each  of  the  gates  were  other
guard  houses  with  soldiers  on  duty,  who  had  instructions  as
to  what  persons  were  to  be  admitted  by  the  gate-keepers.


vi]  THE  KING'S  RESIDENCE  89

Tin-  main  entrance  in  front  of  the  royal  residence  was  the
only  way  by  which  the  public  were  allowed  to  enter  or  leave
the  court.  All  the  land  between  the  royal  residence  and  the
lake  was  retained  for  the  king's  wives,  and  here  they  grew
tlu>ir  plantains.  It  has  always  been  customary  for  women  to
dig  the  fields  and  to  grow  plantains  in  Uganda,  and  even
princesses  were  diligent  workers  in  their  plantain  groves.
Two  or  three  private  roads  ran  from  the  king's  enclosure  to
the  lake,  approaching  it  at  different  points;  on  these  roads
no  man,  unless  he  had  a  special  permit,  might  be  found  on
pain  of  death ;  and  along  these  roads  the  king  could  pass  to
the  lake  without  the  knowledge  of  his  subjects,  whenever  he
wished  to  take  exercise  or  amusement.  The  private  land  was
cultivated  by  the  king's  wives  and  their  slaves;  it  enabled
the  king  to  pass  to  and  from  the  lake  without  the  knowledge
of  anyone  except  his  own  immediate  followers,  and  it  was
regarded  as  a  back  door  of  safety,  should  the  king  need  such.
On  the  lake  shore,  at  the  inlet  known  as  the  king's  landing
place,  there  were  several  royal  canoes  kept  ready  for  im-
mediate use,  and  crews  of  paddlers  were  in  attendance,  in
case  they  should  be  called  upon  in  an  emergency.  If  there
was  any  rising  in  the  capital,  and  a  sudden  attack  was  made
upon  the  king  before  he  had  time  to  collect  his  army,  he
made  his  escape  to  an  island  of  the  lake,  where  he  could
gain  time  to  make  preparations  to  meet  the  foe.

The  person  of  the  king  has  ever  been  regarded  as  most
sacred;  he  was  never  allowed  to  walk  outside  his  own  en-
closure, but  was  carried  on  the  shoulders  of  chosen  men,
and  even  these  men  were  each  supplied  with  a  piece  of
bark-cloth  to  place  over  their  heads  and  shoulders  for  the
royal  seat,  lest  their  flesh  should  come  in  contact  with  that
of  the  king.  The  shoulders  of  these  men  were  sacrosanct,
and  no  man,  not  even  a  friend,  was  allowed  to  place  his
hand  upon  them  in  a  familiar  manner;  any  breach  of  this
rule  was  punished  by  a  fine.

There  was  no  standing  army,  though  there  were  always  a
large  number  of  retainers  and  followers  about  the  royal


90  THE  STANDING  ARMY  [CH.

residence  and  many  slaves,  all  of  whom  were  ready  to  take
up  arms  and  protect  their  lord  the  king  if  necessary.  When-
ever an  army  was  required,  each  district  chief  was  expected
to  present  himself  before  the  king  with  a  number  of  followers.
The  king  in  consultation  with  two  or  three  leading  chiefs
decided  how  many  soldiers  each  chief  should  supply  for  any
punitive  expedition.  If  a  sudden  demand  was  made  for
the  protection  of  the  king,  each  loyal  chief  took  every  man
he  could  command  at  the  moment.

In  his  later  years  king  Mutesa  kept  a  number  of  soldiers
always  on  duty  in  the  capital  under  the  command  of  chiefs ;
these  chiefs  were  given  estates  in  each  district  in  lieu  of
regular  pay.  The  estates,  or  tracts  of  land,  were  intended  to
provide  the  troops  with  the  necessaries  of  life  instead  of
money;  currency  was  then  unknown  except  in  the  form  of
cowry-shells,  and  these  were  limited  in  number.  Each  soldier
chief  was  called  a  Mutongole,  that  is,  a  soldier  chief ;  he  was
expected  to  supply  a  number  of  men  according  to  his  rank,
to  guard  the  royal  residence  and  to  act  as  a  police  force  to
the  king  for  a  set  period  each  year ;  the  time  for  service  was
arranged  by  rotation  by  the  soldier  chiefs  and  their  leader.
At  times  when  there  was  a  punitive  expedition,  the  general
was  chosen  from  the  ordinary  chiefs  or  civil  servants,  and  to
him  all  men  looked  for  orders,  and  the  soldier  chiefs  of  the
regular  army  were  under  him.

It  has  been  customary  for  some  generations  for  kings  to
take  for  the  army  some  portion  of  land,  to  call  it  by  their
own  name,  and  to  place  over  it  one  of  their  favourite  soldier
chiefs.  The  chiefs  who  govern  these  estates  take  as  their
official  title  the  name  of  the  king  after  whom  the  land  is
named,  and  the  estates  henceforth  bear  the  king's  name,
thus  there  is  found  to-day  the  estate  of  the  famous  king
Mutesa,  called  Kitesa,  and  that  of  his  son  Mwanga,  called
Kiwanga,  and  many  other  estates  of  older  kings.

Men  who  became  soldiers  and  gave  evidence  of  soldierly
qualities  were  raised  to  these  military  chieftainships  from
civil  posts,  but  it  was  seldom  that  a  man  was  promoted  to


vi]  SOCIAL  ORGANISATIONS  91


any  civil  office  or  transferred  from  a  military
to  a  civil  chieftainship.  Chiefs  and  common  people  alike
with  each  other  to  gain  favour  with  their  king;  bravery  in
war,  ability  in  managing  estates,  or  skill  in  working  iron  or
wood  were  noted  by  the  king,  and  were  causes  for  promotion
and  wealth,  which  came  to  the  most  successful  and  usually
the  most  deserving.  This  fact  doubtless  tended  to  increase  the
alertness  and  the  activity  of  the  young  men,  and  brought  to
the  front  those  of  the  greatest  ability.  Another  cause  which
doubtless  made  for  national  intelligence  and  physical  sound-
ness, was  their  religious  system,  which  constantly  demanded
victims  for  religious  purposes  ;  so  the  physically  feeble  and
mentally  incapable  people  would  be  taken  prisoners  and  put
to  death  to  propitiate  gods  or  ghosts,  leaving  the  clever  and
more  shrewd  subjects  to  propagate  the  nation.

Again,  as  there  were  no  prisons,  there  were  many  difficulties
in  detaining  offenders.  So  it  became  the  custom  to  execute
vicious  persons  rather  than  detain  them  in  the  stocks,  which
necessitated  constant  guarding,  though  it  was  the  ordinary
method  of  detaining  accused  persons.  Vice  was  thus  to  a
great  extent  kept  down  by  combing  out  notoriously  immoral
people.  Those  who  were  left  to  propagate  the  nation  were
men  of  ability  and  of  good  character,  able  to  restrain  them-
selves from  grossly  evil  living.

The  government  was  monarchical,  with  many  survivals  of
feudalism;  the  king  was  an  autocratic  ruler  with  power  to
appoint  or  to  depose  chiefs  at  will,  though  he  seldom  used
this  power  without  seeking  the  advice  of  his  leading  chiefs.
When  once  a  chief  was  appointed,  he  had  great  freedom  in
exercising  his  discretion  in  the  district  which  he  governed.
The  principal  chief  of  a  district  could  legally  only  use  his
authority  over  subchiefs  in  state  affairs,  such  as  road  making,
the  building  of  royal  houses,  and  the  collection  of  taxes  ;  in
ordinary  affairs  a  subchief  was  expected  to  manage  his  estates
independently,  being  responsible  to  the  king  only.  Thus  a
leading  chief  of  a  district  could  not  force  any  of  his  subchiefs
to  build  him  a  house  for  his  private  use,  or  a  fence  on  his


92  CHIEFTAINSHIPS  [CH.

private  land ;  he  had  to  rely  upon  his  own  immediate  followers,
his  freemen,  serfs,  and  household  slaves  for  such  work.  As
a  rule  a  chief  surrounded  himself  with  men  belonging  to  his
own  clan,  who  were  responsible  to  him  for  their  behaviour;
to  these  he  looked  for  assistance  in  times  of  war  and  for  the
carrying  out  of  any  private  building  or  the  performing  of  other
duties.  The  wisdom  of  having  men  of  his  own  clan  around
him  was  frequently  proved  by  a  chief;  he  was  their  near  rela-
tive, and  his  interests  were  theirs,  hence  when  the  chief  was
accused  by  the  king  for  any  breach  of  order,  they  were  always
ready  to  set  him  free  from  the  accusation,  or  to  extricate  him
from  any  difficulty.  They  were,  moreover,  able  to  assist  their
chief  in  keeping  secret  any  matters  which  might  tell  against
him  at  court,  and  especially  to  keep  from  publicity  any  tokens
of  wealth  or  greatness  likely  to  excite  the  cupidity  of  the  king.
Each  chief  was  a  magistrate  in  his  own  district,  but
litigants  had  the  right  of  appeal  to  a  higher  court  if  they
were  dissatisfied  with  a  magistrate's  decision.  A  freeman  who
wished  might  leave  one  chief  and  join  another  at  will,  and  he
would  be  sure  of  a  welcome  wherever  he  went;  chiefs  were
always  anxious  to  receive  men  into  their  employ  as  tenants
on  their  estates,  because  the  more  men  a  chief  had,  the  easier
it  became  to  fulfil  his  state  duties  without  unduly  taxing  his
followers.  The  amount  of  work  allotted  to  a  chief  was
in  proportion  to  his  official  rank,  not  to  the  number  of  the
retainers  he  had;  hence  the  number  of  retainers  was  an  im-
portant matter,  and  the  labour  of  each  man  was  increased  or
decreased  by  the  number  or  paucity  of  his  retainers.  Taxes
were  paid  in  kind  by  tenants  to  their  chief,  who  passed  them
on  to  the  representatives  of  the  king  sent  for  the  purpose;
they  were  divided  into  herds  of  cattle,  flocks  of  goats  and
sheep,  bundles  of  bark-cloths,  iron  hoes,  and  cowry-shells.
From  these  taxes  paid  to  the  king  each  chief  received  back
a  portion  as  his  rent  for  the  year ;  peasants  further  paid  a
rent  for  land  to  their  over  chief  in  pottery  and  labour,
while  smiths  worked  in  iron  for  their  chiefs,  and  supplied
them  with  hoes,  knives,  and  spears.


vi]  DOMESTIC  SLAVES  93

Besides  his  freedmen  a  chief  had  on  hU  estate  many
retainers  from  his  own  clan,  as  we  have  already  mentioned
above,  and  in  his  enclosure  many  pages  and  also  many
domestic  slaves  of  both  sexes,  some  of  the  women  becoming
his  concubines;  all  these  followers  who  lived  within  the  chief's
enclosure  were  dependent  upon  his  table.  The  slaves  were
obtained  chiefly  through  raids  upon  neighbouring  tribes,  but
some  might  have  been  purchased,  or  they  might  be  the  off-
spring of  slaves  who  had  married  fellow  slaves  with  their
master's  consent.  Any  woman  slave  who  was  married  to  a
chief  and  had  a  child  was  no  longer  considered  a  slave,  but
was  given  her  freedom.  There  was  no  formal  declaration,  but
it  was  an  understood  rule.  There  was  an  interesting,  though
peculiar,  custom  followed  by  peasants,  of  placing  a  wife  or
a  child  in  pawn,  when  they  could  not,  or  would  not  begin
some  particular  work  which  a  chief  had  ordered,  and  they
were  fined  by  the  overseer  for  the  delay.  Such  a  person  would
give  his  child,  or  failing  a  child,  his  wife,  to  be  held  until
he  could  pay  the  fine.  The  person  in  pawn  could  be  redeemed
at  leisure  by  the  owner;  the  wife  or  child  did  not  appear
to  object  to  such  treatment,  but  went  willingly,  and  waited
with  the  utmost  patience  for  her  redemption,  whether  it  was
a  matter  of  a  few  days  or  of  months.  Sometimes  they  were
not  redeemed  at  all,  but  became  nominal  slaves.

A  form  of  taxation  which  often  caused  a  peasant  trouble,
was  that  of  being  required  to  pay  a  sum  of  money  to  the
overseer  or  foreman,  before  he  was  allowed  to  begin  the  task
allotted  to  him,  especially  state  building  or  road  making.
A  peasant  would  be  set  to  do  some  work,  and  when  he  had
been  instructed  as  to  the  amount  to  be  done,  he  would  be
told  how  many  cowry-shells  or  bark-cloths  and  how  many
pots  of  beer  he  must  bring  to  the  overseer  within  a  set  time,
before  he  would  be  allowed  to  commence  his  work.  The
amount  was  not  great,  indeed  it  seldom  exceeded  a  few
pence,  but  it  might  be  impossible  for  the  man  to  obtain  the
particular  article  in  the  given  time,  and  as  he  was  not  per-
mitted to  start  work  until  he  had  paid  the  sum,  he  was  fined


94  TAX-GATHERERS  [CH.

for  failure  in  his  work.  When  the  amount  of  the  fine  was
settled,  he  was  given  a  further  time  in  which  to  obtain  the
whole  amount,  that  is,  the  original  amount  plus  the  fine,  and,
unless  he  managed  to  pay,  his  fine  was  increased.  The  com-
pound interest  in  such  a  case  was  ever  increasing,  and  this
made  a  man  anxious  to  come  to  terms ;  so  in  despair  a  peasant
would  often  borrow  the  necessary  amount  at  an  extravagant
rate  of  interest,  or  again,  in  order  to  escape  the  fines,  he
would  pawn  his  wife  or  child  and  then  set  to  work.  A
diligent  man  would  soon  be  able  to  raise  the  amount  needed,
and  redeem  his  wife  or  child,  whereas  a  slothful  man  would
leave  his  wife  in  pawn  for  months;  during  her  time  of
detention  the  woman  would  work  for  her  new  master  in  his
fields  and  behave  as  though  she  were  a  slave.

The  amount  of  taxation  apportioned  to  each  chief  or  sub-
chief  was  fixed  according  to  the  number  of  tenants  on  each
estate.  The  country  was  divided  by  the  king  and  his  prime
minister  into  two  or  three  parts,  and  men  responsible  for
collecting  the  tax  were  sent  to  each  part.  Each  tax-gatherer
went  with  crowds  of  followers  to  the  residence  of  some  local
chief  to  make  that  his  headquarters;  he  assumed  the  title  of
king,  he  set  about  to  learn  the  number  of  huts  in  a  district,
and  in  consultation  with  the  leading  chiefs  he  settled  the
amount  of  the  tax  per  head.  In  addition  to  this  tax  the  king
made  a  further  demand  upon  the  boys  and  girls  in  the  country
to  become  pages  at  his  court  or  maids  waiting  upon  his  wives.
There  was  a  vast  amount  of  abuse  and  corruption  exercised
by  the  tax-gatherers;  they  extracted  large  sums  over  and
above  the  amount  which  they  carried  to  the  king,  and  this
was  the  reward  for  their  services.  The  amount  which  the
king  paid  them  was  trifling  in  comparison,  and  it  was  quite
well  known  that  they  were  enriching  themselves.  Men
frequently  ingratiated  themselves  with  the  king  by  gifts,  in
order  to  be  appointed  tax-collectors.

The  polygamous  habits  of  the  people  placed  women  at  a
premium,  and  wealthy  people  possessed  many  wives,  whereas
peasants  found  it  difficult  to  obtain  even  their  one  wife,


vi]  MARRIED  WOMEN  95


to  the  large  sum  which  they  had  to  procure  for  the
marriage  fee.  This  fee  was  fixed  by  members  of  the  woman
clan,  who  were  anxious  to  obtain  as  much  as  possible  for
tlu-ir  relative;  it  was  of  changeable  value,  and  as  love  seldom
entered  into  a  marriage  contract,  a  woman  was  always  proud
to  command  a  high  price.  Each  man  made  an  effort  to  marry,
and  to  have  children,  because  he  thought  that  his  happiness
in  the  future  world  would  depend  upon  the  existence  of
children  who  would  offer  sacrifices  to  his  ghost;  the  honour
given  him  at  his  funeral  also  depended  upon  his  children  ;  if
he  had  grandchildren  at  his  funeral,  the  honour  was  con-
sidered to  be  all  the  greater.

At  marriage  a  wife  went  to  live  among  the  clan  of  which  her

husband  was  a  member;  she  could,  however,  visit  her  home

on  obtaining  her  husband's  consent  and  on  being  provided

with  a  suitable  escort. If  such  a  visit  lasted  more  than  one

day,  the  husband  was  expected  to  take  a  present  of  a  goat

and  a  large  pot  of  beer  to  his  wife's  family,  before  he  could

bring  her  home. At  marriage  a  wife  was  given  her  own  house

and  garden,  and  she  was  expected  to  dig  the  land,  cultivate

plantains  and  other  kinds  of  vegetable  food  sufficient  for  the

needs  of  the  house  ;  she  had  also  to  do  all  the  cooking,  carry

water,  supply  fire-  wood,  and  keep  the  inside  of  the  house  tidy.

Thus  the  general  comfort  of  a  man  largely  depended  upon

marriage. A  diligent  wife  would  grow  all  the  food  that  was

necessary  and  would  cook  for  her  husband,  whereas  an  idle

wife  would  leave  her  husband  short  of  food.  If  a  woman  failed

in  any  one  of  these  duties,  she  was  considered  an  imperfect

wife,  and  her  failure  would  in  all  probability  be  the  cause  of

friction  and  domestic  trouble.  The  law  of  the  land  did  not

give  a  woman  any  help  to  obtain  a  divorce  ;  but  a  man  might

put  away  his  wife  whenever  he  wished,  he  might  also  chastise

or  even  kill  her  for  a  small  fault;  this  was  his  right,  for

which  he  had  paid  the  dowry.  There  could  be  no  redress,  in

fact  no  members  of  the  woman's  clan  would  seek  to  obtain  any

redress  ;  they  might  go  so  far  as  to  call  upon  the  husband  to

explain  his  conduct,  and  this  he  would  readily  do. If  a  wife


96  TREATMENT  OF  WOMEN  [CH.

appealed  to  her  clan  because  of  unkind  treatment,  they
would  call  for  an  explanation,  and  should  it  be  proved  that
the  woman  had  failed  in  some  respect  in  her  household  duties,
nothing  more  would  be  said.

On  the  other  hand  a  man  would  be  fined  by  his  wife's
clan  if  she  died  in  childbirth;  her  death  would  in  all  proba-
bility be  attributed  to  adultery,  and  this  was  regarded  as
due  to  negligence  on  the  part  of  her  husband,  or  failure  to
guard  his  wife  and  to  protect  her  from  other  men.

If  a  wife  found  it  impossible  to  please  her  husband,  and
was  confident  that  she  was  in  the  right,  she  would  escape
from  her  home  and  go  to  some  relative  who  she  knew
would  take  her  part.  The  husband  would,  in  such  a  case,
be  summoned  to  appear  before  a  representative  body  of  men
belonging  to  the  wife's  clan,  and,  unless  he  could  satisfactorily
explain  his  conduct,  he  would  be  fined,  and  be  called  upon
to  give  his  wife  a  present  and  to  promise  to  treat  her  better
if  she  would  return  to  him.  But  could  he  prove  reasonable
cause  for  his  conduct,  for  example,  negligence  on  her  part
in  keeping  the  garden,  or  bad  cooking,  his  wife  had  to
promise  amendment;  the  husband  would  then  pay  a  pot
of  beer  and  a  goat  to  the  wife's  relatives  for  her  visit  to
them,  and  would  take  her  away.  There  were  however  cir-
cumstances when  a  woman's  relatives  realised  that  she  was
suffering  from  her  husband  more  than  could  be  endured
and  decided  to  help  her;  they  would  therefore  take  the
extreme  measure  of  restoring  the  original  marriage  fee  to
the  husband,  and  declare  the  woman  to  be  free  from  the
marriage  tie.  This  was  the  only  possible  way  in  which  a
wife  could  secure  a  divorce  from  her  husband:  it  required
the  co-operation  of  the  witnesses  who  had  acted  at  the
time  of  the  marriage,  together  with  the  leading  members  of
her  clan,  to  carry  the  matter  through  the  civil  courts,  if  the
husband  appealed  against  them.  The  woman,  when  freed  from
her  husband,  returned  to  her  clan,  where  she  might  again
be  sought  in  marriage;  any  children  born  previous  to  the
divorce  belonged  to  the  former  husband.  There  were  cases


vi]  UGANDA  CURRENCY  97

when  her  relatives  wished  to  help  a  wife,  but  the  court
decided  against  her,  and  they  had  to  reluctantly  send  her
back  to  her  husband.  If  her  unhappy  condition  continued,
she  sought  opportunity  to  run  away  and  hide  with  some
friend,  until  all  her  husband's  efforts  to  trace  her  should
be  abandoned,  when  she  would  be  able  to  come  out  of  close
hiding,  and  live  in  seclusion  in  some  remote  part  of  the
country  where  she  would  not  be  recognised.

Previous  to  the  advent  of  the  Arab  trader  with  goods
from  civilised  countries,  the  Baganda  found  they  could  live
comfortably  with  the  articles  of  food  and  clothing  produced
in  their  own  country.  But  the  Arabs  aroused  the  desire  for
other  products  such  as  cotton  goods,  and  they  also  created  and
then  gratified  the  longing  of  the  people  for  firearms,  which
they  affirmed  would  place  them  in  a  superior  position  to  their
neighbours  in  military  operations.  The  native  spirit  had  for
years  been  striving  after  more  knowledge  and  power,  and
the  superiority  of  the  Arabs  created  a  desire  among  the
better  class  of  people  to  imitate  them,  both  as  regards  clothing
and  firearms ;  some  people  also  adopted  Mohammedanism  and
learned  to  read  and  write  Swahili  in  Arabic  characters.  The
common  currency  of  cowry-shells  had  been  in  use  for  many
years  before  the  Arabs  arrived;  they  had  superseded  beads,
because  only  a  limited  number  of  the  latter  had  reached  the
country  from  Egypt ;  ivory  discs  had  also  fallen  into  disuse
after  the  introduction  of  glass  beads.  When  larger  sums  of
money  were  wanted  than  a  load  of  cowry-shells,  the  amount
was  reckoned  by  cows;  even  slaves  were  purchased  by  the
standard  of  the  cow.  Cowry-shells  were  carried  from  the  east
coast  by  native  traders  to  the  south  shores  of  the  lake,  and
worked  their  way  round  the  lake  along  the  western  shore;
these  cowry-shells  were  pierced  and  threaded  on  plantain
fibre  string,  a  hundred  on  a  string.  For  convenience  in
counting  large  numbers,  ten  strings  were  tied  together,  and
ten  thousand  cowry-shells  were  called  a  load.  The  value  of
ivory  increased  when  Arab  traders  entered  the  country  and
created  the  demand  for  it;  before  that  time  few  people

R.U.  7


98  TRADE  IN  IVORY  [CH.

troubled  to  acquire  it,  and  the  principal  use  to  which  it  was
put  was  the  making  of  bracelets  and  anklets,  that  is  after  the
use  of  ivory  discs  as  money  had  ceased.  Ivory  was  found
to  be  of  great  value  after  the  Arab  advent,  because  it  was  a
form  in  which  riches  could  be  buried  and  be  safe  in  a  country
where  there  were  no  banks,  and  where  the  wealth,  even  of  a
powerful  chief,  might  be  the  cause  of  much  jealousy  and  the
subject  of  flimsy,  idle  tales  and  reports  taken  to  the  king,
who,  when  his  cupidity  was  aroused,  would  plunder  any
rich  man  for  his  goods.  Often  a  rich  man  had  a  false  charge
trumped  up  against  him,  which  enabled  the  king  to  fine  him,
and  in  some  instances  a  man  would  be  condemned  to  death
because  of  his  wealth,  which  was  then  confiscated.  For  many
years  the  use  of  ivory  was  one  of  the  royal  prerogatives,  as
also  were  lion  and  leopard  skins.  When  any  animal  of  either
of  these  species  was  killed,  the  skin  was  taken  to  the  king  for
his  use.  So  it  was  with  ivory;  when  an  elephant  was  killed  the
tusks  were  taken  to  the  king.  Elephants  were  killed  in  former
years  only  when  they  became  troublesome  and  destructive
to  crops  or  other  property.  Natives  tell  stories  of  how  elephants
at  times  became  bold  and  mischievous  and  during  the  night
would  come  and  lift  a  small  hut  by  its  pinnacle  and  deposit  it
in  another  spot,  leaving  the  occupants  shelterless  and  terrified.
When  a  regular  trade  with  Arabs  sprang  up,  tusks  of  ivory
were  secretly  obtained  by  chiefs  who,  in  view  of  the  demand,
kept  professional  hunters.  Under  the  cover  of  night  they
had  the  ivory  brought  to  the  capital,  and  buried  it  either
in  their  huts  or  in  some  marked  place  in  their  gardens,
where  it  would  remain  until  it  could  be  passed  on  to  an
Arab  trader;  by  this  secret  method  chiefs  avoided  exciting
the  greed  of  the  king  and  the  jealousy  of  a  superior  chief.
In  early  days  no  regular  hunters  were  kept  by  chiefs,  but
only  a  few  belonging  to  the  king  followed  the  chase;  when,
however,  ivory  became  of  market  value,  and  a  regular  trade
sprang  up,  certain  peasants  made  hunting  a  profession,  and
found  employment  either  in  the  service  of  the  king  among  his
hunters  or  in  that  of  important  chiefs.  The  ivory  obtained


vi]  BARK-CLOTH  AND  ITS  USE  99

by  the  king  and  the  chiefs  was  exchanged  for  cotton  goods,
firearms,  and  ammunition.

Calico  and  cotton  goods  soon  began  to  take  the  place  of
the  bark-cloth  garment,  which  for  many  years  had  been  the
national  dress  and  had  supplanted  the  skins  of  wild  and
of  domestic  animals.  Bark-cloth  is  the  inner  bark  of  a
species  of  wild  fig  tree;  every  peasant  was  expected  to
plant  a  number  of  these  trees  in  his  garden,  and  in  two  years
from  the  time  of  planting  the  trees,  the  man  could  strip  off
the  bark  for  use.  The  mode  of  making  the  cloth  was  as  follows :
the  tree  trunk  was  stripped  to  a  height  of  eight  or  ten  feet
according  to  the  height  at  which  the  branches  forked  out;
where  the  trunk  was  stripped,  it  was  smeared  with  cow-
dung  and  wrapped  round  with  plantain  leaves,  and  a  new
bark  soon  formed  which  after  ten  or  twelve  months  was  ready
to  be  used  for  bark-cloth.  The  third  and  fourth  barks  thus
grown  were  of  the  finest  quality,  though  the  tree  might  yield
eight  or  more  barks.  The  bark  which  was  removed  was  scraped
in  order  to  free  it  from  superfluous  sap,  and  was  beaten  on  a  log
with  a  round  wooden  mallet  which  had  grooves  round  it,  until
it  was  of  about  the  thickness  of  strong  brown  paper.  It  was
spread  in  the  sun  to  dry,  and  the  exposed  side  took  a  darker
colour,  brick  red  or  terra-cotta,  according  to  the  quality  of
the  bark-cloth.  When  bark-cloth  became  the  national  dress
in  the  reign  of  King  Semakulu,  about  a  hundred  years  ago,  he
made  a  law  that  each  peasant  should  plant  a  number  of  trees
on  his  land,  and  that  every  man  and  woman  should  be  clothed.
Hitherto  men  and  women  had  been  careless  about  clothing,
and  it  had  been  more  common  to  go  naked  than  to  wear
clothes ;  from  that  time,  however,  every  nude  person  was  fined,
and  people  came  to  regard  nudity  a  disgrace.  The  cost  of  bark-
cloth  lay  in  the  labour  of  growing  the  trees,  stripping  them
of  their  bark,  and  beating  it  out  to  the  required  thickness;
this  was,  after  all,  trifling  in  a  land  where  time  is  of  little  value.

Compared  with  other  tribes  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
great  lakes,  the  progress  made  by  the  Baganda  in  civil,
political,  and  social  matters  is  remarkable;  they  are  much

7—2


ioo  CHAIRS  NOT  ALLOWED  [CH.  VI

in  advance  of  all  tribes  near  them,  or  with  whom  they  could,
under  the  old  tribal  travelling  restrictions,  come  in  contact
in  the  past.  Custom  forbade  the  use  of  stools  or  of  chairs,  and
it  was  not  until  a  small  child  was  raised  to  the  throne,  and
had  to  be  placed  upon  a  raised  seat  in  order  to  be  seen,  that
the  king  sat  upon  a  chair;  previously  kings  had  mounds
of  earth  beaten  hard  with  a  smooth  surface,  upon  which  grass
was  laid,  and  over  this  a  royal  rug  was  spread,  upon  which
the  king  reclined  in  sight  of  the  people.  With  the  introduc-
tion of  the  chair  a  new  office  of  chair  supporters  arose  among
the  pages  of  the  king;  two  young  men  had  to  kneel  behind
the  chair  and  hold  it,  lest  it  should  topple  over,  or  lest  the
king  should  fall  from  it.  During  any  functions  when  the
king  sat  in  state  these  two  men  knelt,  one  on  each  side,
holding  the  chair,  and  they  retired  when  the  king  rose  to
leave  the  room.  WTien  the  king  used  to  sit  on  a  rug,  it  was  the
duty  of  two  of  the  greatest  chiefs  to  sit  at  the  corners  of  the
mound  and  hold  the  rug  on  their  knees,  in  order  to  prevent
any  man  from  brushing  by  it  or  from  stepping  over  it.  It  was
a  capital  offence  for  any  passer-by  to  touch  the  king's  rug,
hence  the  office  of  sitting  with  it  on  the  knees.  When  the  king
used  a  chair,  the  rug  was  spread  beneath  the  chair,  and  the
chiefs  still  retained  their  office  of  holding  it  on  state  occasions.
Chiefs  and  peasants  sat  on  rugs  or  mats  until  quite  recently,
when  the  king  gave  permission  for  chairs  and  stools  to  be
introduced  into  the  court.  For  some  years  longer,  though
men  used  chairs  and  stools,  women  were  forbidden  to  sit
on  any  raised  seat,  but  even  that  restriction  has  vanished
since  English  ladies  have  entered  the  country.  Alas!  the
beautiful  bark-cloth  dress  of  the  women  has  also  given  place
to  tawdry  blouses  and  skirts  introduced  by  Indian  traders,
which  have  greatly  spoilt  the  stately  appearance  of  the
women,  and  which  hide  the  graceful  carriage  for  which
they  were  noted,  in  addition  to  taking  away  one  of  the
most  beautiful  and  picturesque  dresses  ever  worn  in  the
east  by  coloured  women.


CHAPTER  VII

KING  MWANGA— CIVIL  WARS— TEACHING  THE  KING

ENGLISH  missionaries  arrived  in  Uganda  during  the
reign  of  the  famous  King  Mutesa,  in  response  to  an
appeal  made  by  the  great  explorer  Stanley  in  the  daily
papers,  and  they  were  welcomed  to  the  court  of  Uganda.
For  a  time  they  were  the  only  Christian  teachers,  but  later
French  missionaries  were  tempted  to  follow.  These  latter
did  not  remain  for  many  months  in  the  country,  but  after
a  short  stay  retired,  from  what  they  considered  an  un-
favourable situation,  to  their  mission  station  at  Bukoba,
and  here  they  remained  until  they  deemed  the  country
and  people  of  Uganda  ready  and  safer  for  their  teaching.
The  Englishmen  were  left  to  bear  the  brunt  of  Arab  and
native  opposition,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  Christianity.
Previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  missionaries,  the  Arab  traders
had  taught  a  few  people  to  read  Ki-swahili  in  Arabic
characters.  The  Baganda  have  ever  been  anxious  to  learn,  and
the  Arabs  consented  to  teach  a  few  of  the  king's  pages  to
read  and  write.  Before  this  no  Muganda  knew  any  system
of  transmitting  his  thoughts  to  writing  or  of  making  any
permanent  records,  but  sticks  were  used  to  represent  subjects
or  messages,  so  as  to  aid  a  bearer's  memory  as  to  the  number
of  subjects  which  he  had  to  relate.  Counting  was  well
understood,  and  men  could  readily  count  into  thousands,  but
they  always  spoke  of  ten  thousand  as  a  load,  because  it  was
the  number  of  cowry-shells  which  a  man  could  carry.

King  Mutesa  would  not  give  the  missionaries  permission
to  go  freely  about  the  country  to  teach,  but  restricted  them
to  a  special  locality;  they  were  expected  to  visit  the  royal
residence  on  stated  days  and  to  walk  along  one  particular
road  to  the  royal  enclosure.  There  a  number  of  youths,  with
orders  to  learn  to  read  and  write,  were  presented  to  them.


102  NATIVE  ASTUTENESS  [CH.

Mutesa  was  a  shrewd  man  who  wished  to  keep  everything
within  his  own  power  and  knowledge;  hence  only  a  few
youths  were  granted  permission  to  learn  from  the  mis-
sionaries, lest  there  should  be  a  number  of  men  wiser  than
their  king.  There  is  a  good  story  told  of  the  acuteness  of
King  Mutesa  in  dealing  with  an  Arab  trader  who  thought
to  make  capital  of  the  king's  ignorance.  The  Arab  had  some
choice  beads  which  took  the  king's  fancy,  and  he  wished  for
more;  the  Arab  on  being  questioned  as  to  how  beads  were
obtained,  replied  that  they  grew  from  seed,  and  further  stated
that  he  had  a  few  seeds  of  the  particular  kind  of  beads  by
him.  Mutesa  asked  the  man  if  he  could  give  a  few  lessons
to  some  of  his  men  if  he  purchased  them,  and  if  he  would
instruct  them  how  to  sow  and  attend  to  the  cultivation  of
the  beads;  the  Arab  consented  on  the  understanding  that
for  his  trouble  he  should  be  paid  a  high  sum  in  ivory  in
addition  to  the  payment  for  the  seed.  King  Mutesa  bought
the  beads  and  had  his  land  prepared ;  the  beads  were  duly
sown  under  the  Arab's  supervision,  who  then  thought  his
duties  at  an  end,  and  asked  for  his  pay  and  for  permission  to
leave  the  country  with  his  ivory.  The  king,  however,  gravely
informed  the  man  that  he  had  appointed  him  to  be  superin-
tendent of  the  field  of  beads,  and  that  he  required  him  to
watch  the  crop  until  it  was  ready  for  harvest,  when  he  would
ha  veto  instruct  the  reapers  and  also  superintend  the  threshing.
For  many  years  the  Arab  was  kept  a  prisoner,  waiting  for
the  seeds  to  grow;  his  life  was,  however,  spared,  because  it
was  said  he  would  be  a  greater  example  to  others,  if  he
were  sent  away  to  the  coast  a  poor  man,  after  years  of
imprisonment,  than  if  he  were  killed  and  forgotten.

When  the  missionaries  arrived  in  Uganda,  they  were  given
a  site  to  build  upon,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Arab  and
Swahili  traders,  in  the  district  that  was  assigned  to  foreigners;
they  had  permission  to  take  exercise  along  one  road  only,
and  few  people  were  permitted  to  visit  them.  Though  they
had  been  invited  into  the  country  as  teachers,  the  king
regarded  them  with  considerable  suspicion  and  jealousy,


vn]  MISSIONARIES  AND  ARABS  103

and  this  was  increased  by  the  lying  tales  told  him  by  the
traders,  who  disliked  the  presence  of  the  English,  because  they
knew  that  their  slave  trade  was  doomed,  and  that  they  would
be  compelled  to  deal  more  honestly  in  all  their  trading  transac-
tions. Mutesa  had  been  under  the  impression  that  he  was
the  greatest  monarch  on  earth,  until  Stanley  had  told  him
about  Queen  Victoria;  and  the  missionaries  unwittingly
added  to  the  king's  jealousy  by  enlarging  upon  the  theme
of  her  Majesty's  greatness,  and  they  also  emphasised  the
extent  of  her  kingdom,  which  it  is  needless  to  say  the  king
did  not  believe.  Until  Europeans  made  their  appearance
in  Uganda,  both  Arab  and  Swahili  traders  had  striven  to
impress  Mutesa  with  the  greatness  of  his  own  kingdom  and
power,  in  the  hope  of  getting  presents  from  him  by  this
flattery  and  of  obtaining  better  terms  in  their  bargains.
Mutesa  soon  realised  the  hostility  between  the  Arabs  and
the  missionaries,  and  began  to  play  off  one  against  the
other;  in  religious  matters  especially  he  delighted  to  pit
one  against  the  other,  and  enjoyed  hearing  their  arguments.
He  soon  discovered  that  the  English  were  far  more  clever
than  the  Arabs,  and  he  also  found  that  he  could  extort  large
sums  from  them  in  the  form  of  cotton  goods  on  the  most
trivial  grounds.  The  missionaries  had  brought  large  stores
of  things  such  as  Mutesa  wanted,  and  they  could  be  made
to  part  with  them  when  they  wished  to  build  a  house,  or
when  they  wanted  to  teach  a  few  boys,  or  again  when  they
wished  to  go  to  the  lake  for  stores  or  letters.  He  quickly
learnt  to  make  demands  upon  their  generosity  for  all  kinds
of  purposes.

Frequent  interviews  were  granted  to  the  missionaries  by
the  king  when  he  wished  to  extort  goods;  he  also  professed
to  be  impressed  by  their  religion  whenever  he  desired
presents  from  them.  The  patience  and  persistence  of  these
men  in  carrying  on  their  religious  work  is  beyond  praise;
their  diligence  in  teaching  youths  under  the  most  trying
circumstances  remains  on  record  as  an  example  to  be  followed
by  missionaries  of  all  times.  They  never  spared  themselves


104  NATIVE  PRIESTS  [CH.

by  day  or  by  night  if  there  was  an  opportunity  to  teach,
and  they  won  their  way  into  the  affections  of  the  youths
who  attended  the  mission,  to  such  an  extent  that  it  is  not
to  be  wondered  at  that  men  who  are  now  growing  old
still  talk  in  the  highest  terms  of  praise  of  their  early  teachers,
especially  Mackay  and  Ashe,  nor  that  they  have  their  children
named  after  them  in  baptism.

When  Mwanga,  Mutesa's  son,  came  to  the  throne,  there  were
many  youths  under  instruction  at  the  English  mission.  This
alarmed  the  Lubare  priests,  who  therefore  brought  pressure  to
bear  upon  the  new  king  to  prohibit  people  from  visiting  the
missionaries.  When  it  was  found  that  numbers  of  young
people  continued  to  attend  the  mission,  more  stringent
orders  were  issued  to  capture  and  execute  those  who  either
attended  instruction  or  who  could  read.  Many  youths
who  escaped  detection,  continued  to  visit  the  missionaries
by  night,  because  they  could  not  go  by  day.  The  mis-
sionaries had  to  work  by  night  when  the  country  was
slumbering,  and  to  rest  by  day.  In  this  manner  numbers
of  boys  were  taught  by  the  two  missionaries  mentioned
above,  and  later  by  Gordon  and  Walker,  the  two  missionaries
who  followed  them  when  Mackay  and  Ashe  left  the  country
under  the  cloud  of  persecution.  These  were  the  men  who  laid
the  foundation  of  what  has  proved  to  be  the  most  wonderful
mission  of  modern  days.

It  was  difficult  for  a  man  even  of  Mutesa's  qualities  to
realise  that  missionaries  had  no  ulterior  motives,  and  that
men  should  give  time  and  pay  money  to  be  permitted
to  teach  was  to  him  inexplicable;  he  had  his  own  Lubare
priests  and  gods,  and  he  knew  by  experience  that  it  was
the  custom  of  priests  never  to  work  without  pay.  Arabs
also  worked  upon  the  king's  credulity  so  as  to  make  him
distrust  these  Englishmen,  saying  that  the  missionaries  wanted
the  country,  and  that  they  were  the  forerunners  of  an  army  of
white  people  who  would  come  to  seize  his  kingdom.  Thus
they  strove  to  poison  the  mind  of  Mutesa  and  to  make
him  look  with  suspicion  upon  his  guests  and  question  their


vii]  PEOPLE  WHO  DELIGHT  IN  WAR  105

motives.  With  Mwanga  they  were  still  more  successful  and
they  effected  a  rising  of  Lubare  priests  against  the  followers
of  Christianity.  The  most  favourably  disposed  Muganda  in
those  early  days  believed  that  the  Englishmen  came  to
Uganda  in  order  to  obtain  plantains  for  food,  because  the
fruit  did  not  grow  in  England.

Punitive  expeditions  and  warfare  have  always  been  the
most  loved  occupation  of  the  Muganda;  they  were  like  the
breath  of  life  to  him,  indeed  he  was  born  to  fight;  his  birth
was  dated  from  some  war  when  the  king  was  fighting
against  some  adjacent  tribe,  and  his  death  was  marked  in  a
similar  fashion.  He  was  happy  when  there  was  civil  war;  and
sorry  when  the  custom  arose  of  putting  princes  to  death
at  the  accession  of  a  new  king,  and  thus  ending  the  numerous
civil  wars,  so  far  as  struggles  for  the  throne  on  the  part  of
rival  princes  were  concerned.  By  the  loss  of  princes  who  might
head  rebellions,  the  lower  orders  were  deprived  of  a  great
amount  of  excitement,  for  secret  plottings  no  longer  took  place,
and  the  nation  was  reduced  to  wars  against  surrounding
tribes.  Accordingly  to  be  able  to  pit  English  against  Arabs
afforded  constant  pleasure.  The  amusement  that  King
Mutesa  and  his  chiefs  derived  from  the  differences  between
the  Arabs  and  the  English  was  immense,  and  they  looked
forward  to  their  disputes  with  considerable  relish.  Indeed
these  encounters  afforded  pleasure  to  all  classes,  though  the
religious  contentions  carried  little  weight  of  conviction  to
the  majority  of  the  hearers.  It  will  be  readily  understood
that  at  a  later  time  the  excitement  caused  by  the  arrest  and
execution  of  Christians  roused  the  morbid  curiosity  of  such
a  bloodthirsty  set  of  pagans.

When  King  Mutesa  died  in  1884,  and  the  wise  control  which
he  had  exercised  over  the  country  ended,  the  Arabs  made  a
vigorous  attempt  to  obtain  ascendency  over  the  English.
They  worked  upon  the  feelings  of  the  old  people  who  were
devoted  to  their  Lubare  worship,  and  these  in  turn  worked
upon  the  weakness  of  the  young  king.  Mwanga,  who  had
some  knowledge  of  the  Christian  faith,  was  a  weak  youth.


106  A  VACILLATING  KING  [CH.

He  had  often  been  to  the  mission  house  as  a  scholar,  he
knew  much  of  what  was  done  there,  and  how  diligently
the  missionaries  taught  each  boy ;  but  he  lacked  the  moral
strength  of  his  father  to  follow  his  convictions  in  the  face  of
opposition.  When,  therefore,  the  priests  began  to  warn  him
that  his  country  would  be  ruined  if  he  permitted  this  new
teaching  to  continue,  and  the  Arabs  told  him  false  stories
about  the  purpose  of  the  missionaries,  he  became  alarmed,
and  promised  to  try  to  stop  young  men  from  visiting  the
mission  house.  He  was  not  like  his  father,  who  fearlessly
in  defiance  of  the  Lubare  priests  broke  away  from  customs
of  his  forefathers,  and  who  was  feared  to  so  great  an
extent  that  his  commands  concerning  his  funeral  rites
were  obeyed.  His  body  was  buried  with  the  jawbone
attached,  and  he  was  not  deified,  as  had  been  the  earlier
kings.  This  breach  of  custom  alarmed  the  people  and  the
priests,  and  the  latter  determined  to  make  a  struggle  to
reinstate  their  dishonoured  gods ;  accordingly  they  attributed
all  kinds  of  sickness  and  misfortune,  which  occurred  at  the
time,  to  the  wrath  of  the  dishonoured  gods,  and  at  length
they  succeeded  in  making  Mwanga  afraid.  Under  the  insti-
gation of  these  priests,  systematic  persecution  commenced  in
which  hundreds  of  Readers,  as  the  Christians  were  called,  were
captured  and  put  to  death.  Though  Mwanga  yielded  in  this
matter  to  the  wishes  of  the  Arabs  and  the  Lubare  factions,  he
had  not  a  friend  among  them,  for  each  party  distrusted  him.
The  Christians  had  no  faith  in  him  because  of  the  persecutions
which  he  had  sanctioned,  and  also  because  he  wished  to  stem
the  tide  of  progress  and  reform ;  the  Islamic  party  would  not
trust  him,  because  he  would  not  submit  to  the  outward  pro-
fessions of  their  faith  and  be  circumcised;  and  the  heathen
section  distrusted  him,  because  theyknewhe  was  not  a  believer
in  the  old  Lubare  system.  Thus  Mwanga  stood  alone,  and  he
realised  his  precarious  position  and  was  continually  making
bids  for  friends  and  followers.  Instead  of  becoming  a  sincere
follower  of  one  party  or  the  other,  he  sought  to  play  off  one
against  the  other,  until  all  alike  rejected  him.  He  retained


vn]  RELIGIOUS  PERSECUTION  107

his  throne  only  because  of  the  difficulty  which  the  people
had  in  finding  a  substitute,  owing  to  the  Baganda  rigid
belief  that  the  king  must  be  a  prince  of  the  blood  royal,
whose  father  had  reigned  before  him.

The  Arabs  waited  until  they  saw  an  opportunity  to  act
with  decision ;  meanwhile  they  won  the  favour  of  two  young
princes,  brothers  of  Mwanga.  One  of  these  they  then  put
forward  as  king,  telling  their  followers  that  he  was  a  superior
man  and  therefore  qualified  to  reign.  They  secured  a  large
following  of  people  anxious  for  reform,  and  even  many  of
the  Christians  followed  them,  after  being  promised  religious
toleration.  A  rebellion  was  thereupon  raised,  and  Mwanga  was
expelled  and  fled  to  the  lake,  where  he  went  by  canoe  to  one
of  the  Roman  Catholic  stations  in  Bukoba.  There  he  remained
until  some  months  later,  when  he  was  recalled  by  the  Christian
community,  who  soon  learnt  how  they  had  been  deceived  by
the  Islamic  party.  After  helping  to  dethrone  Mwanga  in
the  hope  of  obtaining  religious  freedom,  they  had  been
persecuted  far  more  than  before.

In  the  meantime  the  Arabs  showed  their  intention  to  make
Uganda  a  Mohammedan  country  by  trying  to  induce  Kiwewa,
the  new  king,  to  submit  to  the  rite  of  circumcision.  When
he  steadily  refused  to  become  a  full  member  of  the  faith,
he  was  deposed,  and  his  brother  Kalema  was  raised  to  the
throne.  Kiwewa,  after  his  brother  had  undergone  the  rites
of  the  Islamic  faith,  was  burnt  to  death  in  the  house  in
which  he  had  been  imprisoned.  This  was  done  lest  he  should
escape,  and  secure  a  following,  and  fight  to  regain  his  throne.
The  Islamic  party  soon  proved  itself  to  be  intolerant  towards
the  Christian  party;  promises  solemnly  given  were  ruthlessly
broken,  and  the  Christians  were  again  severely  persecuted.
Thereupon  they  fled  the  country,  some  crossing  the  lake  to
Busambiro  in  the  south  and  joining  their  friend  the  famous
missionary  Mackay,  who  had  been  allowed  to  leave  Uganda,
in  order  to  build  a  steamer  and  was  then  engaged  on  this
work ;  others  going  into  Ankole  to  the  west  of  Uganda,  others
again  to  Busoga  in  the  north,  while  the  rest  fled  to  Bunyoro —


io8  A  REIGN  OF  TERROR  [CH.

anywhere  to  escape  from  the  Islamic  persecution.  The  dis-
turbed state  of  the  country  prevented  people  from  carrying  on
any  systematic  cultivation  of  the  land ;  according  to  custom  it
was  illegal  for  any  person  to  follow  his  ordinary  agricultural
duties,  while  the  country  was  unsettled.  The  term  Mirembe,
which  is  applied  to  a  country  during  the  reign  of  a  king,
signifies  the  peace  which  the  country  enjoys  while  there  is  a
settled  government,  and  is  the  opposite  of  anarchy  and
robbery,  which  arise  when  a  king  dies  or  flees  his  country.
Any  person  who  attempted  to  cultivate  the  land  or  to  trade
during  such  a  time  of  unsettlement  would  have  been  put  to
death  for  so  doing.  Hence  the  country  ran  wild,  and  famine
appeared.  The  Islamic  leaders  soon  attacked  the  heathen;
the  Lubare  priests  had  to  flee  or  were  killed  by  these
zealots;  every  temple  which  they  found  was  destroyed,  and
all  the  sacred  objects  they  could  lay  their  hands  upon  were
burnt.

Another  fear  now  seized  the  Islamic  party  and  brought
about  a  new  phase  of  persecution  in  Uganda  which  was
contrary  to  all  the  old  customs.  It  was  said  that  princesses
were  dangerous  and  might  become  aspirants  to  the  throne.
The  Arabs  told  their  party  that  in  England  a  woman  ruled,
and  that  the  Christians  would  undoubtedly  make  a  princess
the  ruler,  and  so  they  urged  them  to  kill  all  the  princesses.
In  consequence  every  princess  who  could  be  found  was
either  shut  up  in  a  large  stockade  and  starved,  or  was  shut
up  in  her  house  and  burnt  to  death;  only  a  few  of  the
hundreds  of  princesses  who  were  in  the  country  when  the
sentence  was  put  into  force  had  time  to  escape.

Kalema,  the  new  king,  redistributed  the  land  among  his
followers,  appointing  new  chiefs  to  rule  the  districts.  The
people  who  remained  in  the  country  were  now  under  a
million  in  number;  for  a  few  months  a  Mohammedan  king
was  the  nominal  sovereign,  while  the  country  was  really
ruled  by  Arabs  and  by  Swahili  traders.

While  these  events  were  happening  in  Uganda,  the
scattered  Christians  entered  into  communication  with  the


vn]  ARAB  INFLUENCE  109

exiled  king  Mwanga,  who  was  still  with  the  Roman  Catholics
in  Bukoba.  He  promised  to  give  religious  freedom  in
the  future,  if  they  would  assist  him  and  enable  him  to
regain  his  throne.  In  view  of  these  promises  the  Christians
agreed  to  support  Mwanga,  so  active  preparations  were
made,  the  scattered  men  were  called  together,  and  Mwanga
with  his  following  prepared  to  enter  Uganda  and  fight  for
the  throne.  The  Islamic  party  were  attacked  on  the  lake  shore
some  distance  from  Mengo,  the  capital,  and  after  several
battles  they  were  driven  back,  and  Mwanga  was  enabled  to
land  and  to  return  to  his  old  capital.  From  there  he  drove
the  Mohammedans  to  the  north-west  towards  the  Bunyoro
confines,  where  they  settled.  From  this  time  onwards  the
banished  party  were  known  in  Uganda  as  the  Baislamu.  The
country  again  became  moderately  quiet,  and  life  was  tolerably
safe;  new  chiefs  were  appointed  as  governors  of  districts,  and
everything  pointed  to  a  prolonged  period  of  peace.  Hundreds
of  people  had  died,  either  from  famine  or  from  plague  following
upon  famine,  during  these  civil  wars,  so  that,  though  most  of
the  fugitives  had  returned  to  their  homes,  the  population
can  have  been  but  little  more  than  a  million  and  a  half.
Mwanga,  when  still  at  Bukoba,  had  given  the  most  strongly
worded  assurances  of  religious  liberty;  he  was,  however,
still  under  the  influence  of  the  Roman  Catholic  priests,  who
thought  that  the  country  was  leaning  too  much  to  the  English,
and  who  therefore  urged  King  Mwanga  and  their  converts  to
inaugurate  a  new  policy,  which  would  give  many  advantages  to
Roman  Catholics.  This  caused  dissatisfaction,  and  sides  were
taken,  in  which  one  party  called  themselves  Bafransa,  that
is  French,  and  the  other  Bangareza,  that  is  English.  This
new  trouble  has  often  been  described  as  a  religious  war
between  two  Christian  parties,  but  the  actual  facts  show
such  a  description  to  be  erroneous.  There  was  no  distinctive
doctrinal  teaching  given  at  the  English  mission,  and  those
who  were  anxious  to  learn  would  go  sometimes  to  one  and
sometimes  to  the  other  mission,  without  knowing  that  there
was  any  difference  between  the  religious  bodies.  Further,


no  CIVIL  WAR  [CH.

when  the  parties  were  formed,  it  was  found  that  there  were
baptised  Protestants among the French adherents who
joined  because  of  their  desire  to  belong  to  the  king's  party.
By  conviction  these  men  were  well  disposed  to  the  English,
and  it  was  only  because  the  French  party  had  the  king
among  them, that they  followed  the latter. The whole
rising  was  political,  and  not  religious;  the  question  of  a  creed
was  with  the  people  a  secondary  consideration. For  some
months  there  were  no  open  hostilities,  but  later  on,  owing  to
political  questions  chiefly  concerned  with  land,  the  differences
began  to  assume  rather  dangerous  dimensions.  It  was  during
these  unsettled  times  that  I  made  niy  way  into  Uganda  itself,
having  for  some  years  been  resident  in  what  was  afterwards
known  as  German  East  Africa,  and  found  King  Mwanga
playing  a  false  game  with  the  English  party. The  main
difficulty  arose  from  the  action  of  the  king,  who  at  the
desire  of  his  people  had  sent  a  party  of  chiefs  to  the  coast,
and  had  invited  the  representatives  of  the  Imperial  British
East  Africa  Company  to  come  to  Uganda  to  help  him  to
drive  out  the  Islamic  party,  and  then  to  stay  and  assist  him
in  governing  the  country.  Members  of  the  I.B.E.A.  Co.  had
arrived  with  a  number  of  Swahili  troops  under  the  leadership
of  two  or  three  officers  of  the  Company. King  Mwanga  had
assured  these  gentlemen  before  they  entered  the  country  of
his  wish  that  they  should  stay  and  had  agreed  to  sign  a  treaty
to  hand  the  country  over  to  the  British.  The  French  priests,
however,  did  not  want  the  country  to  become  English,  and
induced  their  party  and  the  king  to  make  a  secret  treaty
with  Germany  represented  by  Dr  Peters.

After  some  months  of  unsettled  government  the  two
parties  became  more  hostile;  daily  acts  causing  much
irritation  were  committed  by  members  of  first  one  party  and
then  the  other,  and  there  were  constant  misunderstandings.
At  length  matters  came  to  a  head  by  a  murder  com-
mitted in  the  capital;  a  man  passing  along  a  road  to  visit
his  master  was  shot  dead  by  someone  hidden  in  the  en-
closure of  a  leading  chief  of  the  French  party.  When  this


vn]  CIVIL  WAR  ill

chief  was  requested  by  the  British  representative  of  the
I.B.E.A.  Co.  to  surrender  the  culprit,  that  he  might  be  tried,
he  firmly  refused,  and  the  French  party  armed  themselves  to
resist  any  attempt  to  seize  the  murderer.  Sembera  Mackay,
one  of  the  most  trusted  native  Protestant  Christians,  by
birth  a  Musoga,  was  asked  to  visit  King  Mwanga,  and  to  try
and  make  peace  by  persuading  the  king  to  order  the  chief
to  give  up  the  culprit.  It  was  thought  by  the  leaders  of  the
English  party  that  the  nationality  of  Sembera  Mackay  would
induce  the  French  party  to  enter  more  readily  into  negotiations.
Sembera  was,  however,  cruelly  shot  down  when  on  his  errand
of  peace,  as  he  was  passing  the  residence  of  a  French  chief.
This  additional  murder,  unprovoked  as  it  was,  irritated  the
English  party  intensely,  and  it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty
that  the  chiefs  restrained  their  men  from  attacking  the  French
party.  The  European  Resident  was  indefatigable  in  his
exertions  to  keep  the  peace,  and  he  even  risked  his  life  by
passing  through  hostile  groups  of  armed  men  to  interview
Mwanga,  endeavouring  to  secure  his  intervention  and  thus
bring  the  murderers  to  justice.  It  was  in  vain ;  the  French  party
were  determined  to  prosecute  their  plans  and  secure  their  end
by  force  of  arms,  and  war  broke  out  again,  this  time  between
the  two  Christian  parties.  The  officers  of  the  I.B.E.A.Co.  con-
sidered the  English  party  to  be  in  the  right  and  joined  forces
with  them,  and  after  a  sharp  battle  the  French  party  was
driven  from  the  capital;  Mwanga  fled  by  lake  to  southern
Budu,  where  he  was  joined  by  his  army.

This  first  battle  took  place  on  a  Sunday,  and  instead  of
conducting  our  regular  services,  we  missionaries  had  to  go  to
the  British  fort,  and  to  remain  there  all  day,  ministering  to  the
wounded.  We  were  allowed  to  return  to  our  houses  the  same
night,  because  the  enemy  had  been  driven  from  the  capital;
but  for  weeks  we  never  felt  safe  by  night,  because  of  hostile
natives,  who  went  about  after  sunset  setting  fire  to  houses.
Three  English  missionaries  had  a  narrow  escape  from  the
enemy;  they  were  in  Budu,  ignorant  of  the  events  in  the
capital,  and  the  defeated  French  party  were  making  their  way


112  NATIVES  DESTROY  A  BICYCLE  [CH.

to  them,  when  news  reached  them  of  what  was  happening,  and
they  had  to  flee  from  the  mission  station,  leaving  everything
behind.  The  chief  of  the  district,  Nikodemu  Sebwato,  whose
title  was  Pokino,  assisted  them  in  their  flight  and  conducted
them  by  a  circuitous  route  to  the  capital;  he  also  supplied
them  daily  with  native  food  and  attended  to  their  comfort  at
each  resting  place.

For  most  of  us  who  lived  in  the  capital  it  was  a  time  of
short  rations.  The  fresh  supplies  of  English  stores,  which
we  were  expecting  were  delayed,  and  this  disturbance
increased  our  difficulty  in  getting  them.  Among  the  goods
which  had  to  be  abandoned,  when  the  missionaries  fled  from
Budu,  was  a  bicycle.  The  Rev.  R.  P.  Ashe  had  brought  out
a  machine  to  see  whether  it  would  be  of  service  in  his
missionary  work;  it  was  the  first  bicycle  which  the  natives
had  seen,  and  their  delight  in  watching  Ashe  ride  was  intense.
When  the  mission  was  looted  by  the  French  party,  some  of
the  young  men  carried  off  the  bicycle  in  triumph,  thinking
that  they  could  ride  it  at  once.  One  after  another  tried
and  failed;  at  length,  in  anger,  they  brought  out  hatchets
and  hacked  it  to  pieces.  Some  months  afterwards,  when
peace  was  restored,  we  made  inquiries  about  the  bicycle  and
were  told  of  its  fate,  the  narrator  adding  the  words:  "We
cut  it  up,  because  it  knocked  down  every  man  who  tried
to  ride  it."

As  stated  above,  we  were  short  of  provisions.  There  was
no  butcher's  meat  to  be  obtained  in  the  markets,  for  they
were  all  closed;  and,  as  we  had  run  out  of  English  provisions,
we  had  to  live  upon  a  vegetable  diet  of  mashed  plantains  with
boiled  wild  tomatoes  as  a  sauce ;  even  salt  could  not  be  pro-
cured. Fortunately  the  health  of  our  party  was  good  during
the  weeks  when  we  could  not  obtain  supplies;  and  later,  when
the  market  opened,  and  we  were  able  to  get  fresh  meat,  it
was  an  immense  relief  to  add  this  to  the  previous  mono-
tonous diet  of  unseasoned  vegetables.  At  the  beginning  of
the  hostilities  most  of  the  peasants  had  killed  their  domestic
animals  and  eaten  them,  because,  they  said,  the  possession


PLATE  vril


M

Sjsj

w  -

J  o
^  X.
-  I

5  S
-n  •


H


PLATE  IX


NATIVES  OF  MT.  El  GON


LADY  EMBARKING  IN  HER  CANOE


DISEMBARKING  FROM  CANOES  ON  LAKE  VICTORIA


vii]  MWANGA  REVOLTS  113

of  such  wealth  involved  risks.  Besides  obtaining  the  luxury
of  meat,  we  were  supplied  by  a  chief  with  fresh  milk,  which
more  than  compensated  us  for  the  lack  of  English  food,
such  as  biscuits,  tea,  and  sugar;  bread  was  an  unknown
luxury  at  that  period  in  Uganda.  About  this  time  the
Representative  of  the  I.B.E.A.  Co.  brought  some  troops
belonging  to  Emin  Pasha  into  Uganda;  they  had  been  left
near  Lake  Albert,  when  Stanley  took  Emin  to  the  coast,
and  they  seemed  to  be  exactly  the  force  which  the  country
needed,  to  enable  the  British  officers  to  make  a  stand
against  the  native  forces  and  to  put  down  wrong  doing  and
establish  justice.  We  now  know  that  it  was  a  mistake  to
introduce  these  Sudanese  troops;  for  later  on  they  caused
greater  trouble  and  more  deaths  of  British  and  of  loyal
Baganda  than  all  the  previous  Uganda  risings.  These
Sudanese  troops  were  the  offscouring  of  Gordon's  troops  in
Khartoum,  and  had  been  found  so  unreliable,  that  they
were  sent  into  the  interior,  in  order  to  be  out  of  the  way,
and  to  be  brought  under  discipline.  For  a  time  after  entering
Uganda  they  were  happy  with  their  new  surroundings,  but
after  a  few  years  they  broke  into  rebellion  and  gave  endless
trouble.

In  the  year  1891  King  Mwanga  revolted  against  the
British  authority  and  fled  to  the  south  of  Budu,  where  he
remained  for  some  months,  fearing  that  he  might  be  im-
prisoned or  punished  for  his  foolish  conduct  during  the
recent  war.  It  took  weeks  before  the  British  official  could
induce  him  to  return  to  his  capital.  During  his  stay  in
southern  Budu  he  had,  with  the  assistance  of  the  French
priests,  taken  possession  of  the  private  stores  of  several
missionaries  at  the  German  station  of  Bukoba.  These  stores
had  been  left  behind  by  Mr  Ashe,  when  he  was  coming  into
Uganda  before  the  outbreak  of  the  French  and  English  war,
and  the  principal  articles  were  books  and  English  provisions;
the  books  were  burned,  the  scientific  instruments  were  de-
stroyed, and  the  provisions  were  used.  Some  days  after
Mwanga 's  return  to  the  capital  Mr  Ashe  accompanied  me  to

R.U.  8


114 MWANGA'S  DESIRE  TO  LEARN  TO  READ [CH.

call  on  the  king,  as  I  had  not  been  able  to  make  his  acquaint-
ance before  he  fled;  finding  that  he  spoke  Swahili  fluently,
I  dismissed  the  interpreter,  and  we  talked  together.  This
gave  me  an  opportunity  for  plain  speaking,  and  I  tried  to
make  him  realise  the  wrong  he  had  done  in  taking  our  stores.
Mwanga  confessed  that  he  had  used  the  stores,  and  he  was
accordingly  told  how  dishonourable  he  had  been.  Mr  Ashe,
who  spoke  Swahili  less  fluently,  supposed  that  Mwanga  was
being  plainly  told  of  his  misdeeds,  and  he  feared  the  wisdom
of  such  candour,  for  he  remembered  the  old  times  when  the
king  had  unrestrained  power,  and  would  probably  have  put
any  man  to  death  who  opposed  him  or  who  told  him  un-
pleasant truths.  He  was  therefore  rather  anxious,  and  said
to  me:  "In  the  olden  times  the  king  would  have  executed
you  for  what  you  have  said."  Mwanga,  however,  took  the
rebuke  in  a  good  spirit,  and  he  put  out  a  limp  hand,  saying :
"You  are  my  friend;  you  are  the  first  white  man  who  has
spoken  so  freely  to  me  and  told  me  what  he  thinks  of  me."
This  straightforward  conversation  was  the  means  of  bringing
about  a  good  understanding  between  us,  and  it  formed  a  link
of  friendship  which  lasted  until  Mwanga  died.

Some  months  later  Mwanga  became  displeased  with  the
French  Fathers.  He  saw  that  his  country  was  settling  down
quietly  under  the  increasing  influence  of  the  British  Govern-
ment ;  so  he  asked  to  be  taught  to  read  the  Bible.  The  task
of  teaching  him  fell  to  me,  and  two  evenings  of  each  week
were  devoted  to  reading  and  to  the  study  of  the  New
Testament,  which  he  seemed  to  enjoy.  He  soon  became
most  friendly  with  me,  and  even  confidential,  and  he  talked
to  me  freely  about  his  past  life  and  all  that  he  had  done
during  his  wanderings  in  Budu.  He  would  sometimes  talk
about  his  early  years,  and  say  that  he  had  sanctioned  the
execution  of  young  people  who  were  Christians;  he  always
added  that  this  was  due  to  the  influence  of  the  Lubare
priests.  He  did  not  like  to  speak  about  Bishop  Hannington's
murder;  that  was  a  subject  he  always  sought  to  avoid.
There  were  times  when  he  seemed  on  the  verge  of  becoming


vnl  A  ROYAL  PUPIL  115

a  sincere  Christian,  but  he  feared  to  take  a  step  which  would
bring  him  into  direct  conflict  with  some  of  his  worst
passions.  So  far  as  it  was  possible  to  gather  from  scraps
of  information  gleaned  from  these  conversations,  he  was
sorry  for  the  part  he  had  taken  in  the  persecutions  and
especially  for  the  murder  of  Hannington.  Fear  of  the  Lubare
priests  and  dread  lest  he  should  lose  his  country  had  caused
him  to  consent  to  the  executions.  The  Lubare  priests  had
reminded  him  of  an  old  tradition  that  the  conquerors  of  his
country  would  approach  through  Kavirondo  and  Busoga  by
a  way  which  they  termed  the  "back  door";  his  superstitious
fears  had  been  roused,  and  he  had  yielded  to  the  wishes  of
his  advisers.

As  a  pupil  Mwanga  was  quick  and  intelligent,  he  had  a
retentive  memory,  and  he  soon  read  fluently  and  also  took
a  deep  interest  in  the  New  Testament,  which  we  read
through  at  least  twice.  His  knowledge  of  his  country  was
remarkable ;  from  descriptions  which  he  had  obtained  from
his  subjects  he  could  give  detailed  accounts,  and  often
describe  the  physical  features  of  some  locality  so  accurately
that  it  was  difficult  to  believe  that  he  had  not  been  there.
When  free  from  the  effects  of  vice,  especially  from  the  effects
of  Indian  hemp  smoking,  he  was  amusing,  having  a  fund  of
stories,  and  enjoying  a  joke.  At  one  time  he  was  a  regular
attendant  at  the  Sunday  morning  service  in  the  cathedral,
and  he  was  also  present  at  the  funeral  service,  when  the
remains  of  Hannington  were  buried  on  Namirembe  Hill  near
by  the  cathedral.  Much  of  Mwanga's  so-called  bloodthirsty
nature  was  doubtless  due  to  Indian  hemp  smoking;  this
vice  to  which  he  had  become  addicted  shattered  his  nerves.
The  drug  had  an  injurious  effect  upon  him,  his  moral
character  was  undermined,  and  he  yielded  to  the  worst
passions  of  nature,  while  his  powers  of  self-restraint  were
weakened.

There  was,  however,  much  good  feeling  and  even  tender-
ness in  his  character  when  he  could  be  kept  from  his
bad  habits  and  was  free  from  evil  influences.  Whenever  he

8—2


n6  A  ROYAL  GIFT  [CH

fell  into  habits  of  vice,  he  would  give  way  to  terrible  passions
being  unable  to  restrain  his  lusts  towards  his  page  boys
Afterwards  he  would  suffer  torture  mentally  and  physically,
and  be  more  like  an  irresponsible  person  than  a  sane  man.
He  struggled  feebly  against  these  passions,  and  was  always
most  grateful  for  any  help  or  sympathy.  It  was  during  one
of  these  falls  at  a  time  when  I  was  absent  from  the  country,
that  he  fled  from  Mengo  his  capital,  and  revolted  against
the  British.  This  cost  him  his  throne,  for  he  was  captured
while  still  in  open  revolt,  and  was  deported  to  Seychelles,
where  he  died.  After  his  capture  it  was  pathetic  to  hear  him
say  sadly:  "Ah,  Roscoe,  if  only  you  had  been  there,  I  should
not  have  revolted,  but  someone  told  me  that  I  was  going
to  be  imprisoned."  His  yielding  to  evil  influences  and  his
foolish  actions  showed  how  unfit  he  was  for  the  high  office
of  a  king.

There  are  some  amusing  incidents  which  remain  fixed  in
my  memory  in  connection  with  Mwanga  and  these  it  may
be  permissible  to  record,  as  they  show  something  of  native
character,  and  also  give  an  idea  of  the  manner  in  which
the  kings  travelled  and  of  the  etiquette  of  the  country;  they
also  show  how  overbearing  the  pages  were  towards  ordinary
people  when  the  king  was  travelling.  On  one  occasion
Mwanga  was  disposed  to  give  me  a  cow  and  calf;  so  he
sent  a  splendid  animal  which  was  a  favourite  with  his
herdsman.  When  the  chief  herdsman  learnt  what  had  hap-
pened, he  went  to  the  king,  and  begged  him  to  ask  for  the
return  of  the  cow  and  to  send  another  in  its  place.  The  cow
had  already  reached  me  and  had  been  sent  to  the  kraal  near
by,  when  a  messenger  came,  saying  there  had  been  a  mistake,
and  asking  that  the  animal  might  be  returned.  I  replied
that  it  was  quite  satisfactory,  and  that  I  had  thanked  the
king  for  it,  so  that  there  need  be  no  further  trouble.  After
a  short  time  another  messenger  came,  saying  that  two  cows
with  their  calves  would  be  given  me,  if  this  particular  cow
were  returned.  A  polite  refusal  was  sent  with  assurances
that  I  was  satisfied,  and  that  the  king  need  not  trouble  to


vii]  A  ROYAL  VISITOR  117

exchange  the  cow.  Later  on  came  a  third  messenger,  saying
that  the  king  would  give  me  a  woman  slave,  if  the  cow  were
returned.  The  answer  to  this  proposal  was:  "The  English-
man has  no  use  for  slave  women  and  disapproves  of  slavery."
Finally  two  slave  women  were  offered,  but  in  vain ;  the  cow
remained  and  proved  to  be  an  excellent  animal  which  lived
to  see  its  great  grandchildren.

Another  amusing  incident  was  occasioned  by  a  visit  from
the  king  to  take  afternoon  tea.  In  those  days  English
provisions  were  scarce,  for  they  could  only  be  obtained  by
the  caravans  sent  up  each  year,  and  the  cost  of  carriage
made  them  great  luxuries;  and  in  this  case  there  was  the
fact  to  be  remembered  that  the  stores  were  low,  and  that
it  would  take  months  to  have  a  fresh  order  executed  and
goods  sent  out.  Former  experience  had  taught  how  unin-
teresting food  can  be  when  it  consists  of  mashed  plantains
only,  and  this  experience  counselled  care.  At  this  period
there  was  no  bread  in  the  country  and  even  ship's  biscuits
were  a  luxury;  still  when  a  king  proposes  to  pay  a  visit,
it  is  right  that  he  should  have  the  best  placed  before
him.  When  Mwanga  proposed  coming  to  tea,  we,  that  is
my  companion,  Mr  Millar,  and  I,  had  but  two  tins  of  Osborne
biscuits;  we  had  to  manage  with  these  until  other  stores
could  arrive,  and  there  was  no  news  of  these  having  been
despatched  from  the  coast.  Only  men  who  have  been  reduced
to  native  food  can  tell  how  delightful  it  is  to  sit  down  in
the  afternoon  and  enjoy  tea  with  cow's  milk  and  a  cabin
biscuit  or,  as  an  extra  treat,  an  Osborne  biscuit  added;  it
changes  the  monotony  from  goat  mutton  with  mashed
plantain  three  times  each  day.  Salt  was  a  luxury,  and  not
a  grain  was  allowed  to  remain  on  the  plate  after  a  meal;
it  was  carefully  restored  to  a  bottle  for  future  use  and
stoppered  to  keep  out  any  damp;  a  bottle  weighing  two
pounds  was  worth  any  sum  from  ten  to  twenty  shillings.
As  for  jam,  sugar,  preserved  fruits,  and  such  like  goods,
they  were  only  produced  to  tempt  the  appetite  of  a  patient
recovering  from  fever  or  from  some  tropical  complaint.


Ii8 A  KING'S  METHOD  OF  TRAVELLING [CH.

To  return  from  this  digression  to  Mwanga's  visit:  the
king  duly  came  with  his  retinue  on  that  ever  to  be  remembered
afternoon,  and  sat  at  the  table  with  Mr  Millar  and  myself.
In  those  days  no  person  of  note  could  move  even  to  visit
his  friend  without  a  following  of  from  forty  to  a  hundred
men,  and  the  king's  followers  always  numbered  hundreds.
Before  his  Majesty  arrived,  a  number  of  pages  were  sent
according  to  etiquette  to  announce  his  coming.  These  youths
came  one  after  the  other  in  quick  succession;  the  first  was
despatched  when  the  king  left  the  royal  enclosure,  and  as
soon  as  he  was  well  off,  a  second  was  sent,  and  so  on,  boys
being  sent  every  few  yards.  They  ran  to  my  house  and  then
returned  to  their  master,  thus  keeping  up  a  stream  of  youths
running  backwards  and  forwards  until  the  king  reached  the
house.  When  the  first  messenger  reached  me,  he  knelt  down
and  said:  "The  king  has  sent  me  to  ask  how  you  are;  he  is
on  the  way";  to  which  the  reply  was  :  "I  am  well,  how  is
he?  go  and  tell  him  I  am  well  and  waiting  for  him";  this
had  to  be  repeated  as  each  page  came.  The  fashion  at  the
time  was  to  wear  white  cotton  knee-breeches,  with  a  sheet  of
calico  three  yards  square  tied  by  two  ends  round  the  neck
and  the  other  two  corners  round  the  waist  and  loose  in  the
middle.  This  white  flowing  garment  filled  with  wind  as  the
pages  ran,  and  looked  most  imposing,  like  a  white  balloon,
adding  to  the  glory  of  the  procession  which  came  along  at
a  good  pace,  the  king  sitting  upon  the  shoulders  of  one  of
his  bearers,  with  attendants  upon  each  side;  while  peasants
and  other  folk  made  way  for  the  royal  party,  some  kneeling
by  the  road  side  to  greet  the  king  as  he  passed,  others
running  into  gardens  or  down  side  roads  for  fear  of  being
roughly  handled  by  the  guard,  and  flutes  were  played  in
front  by  some  of  the  pages,  making  marching  music  for
the  procession.

It  was  a  custom,  when  the  king  went  either  to  visit  in
the  neighbourhood,  or  on  longer  journeys  into  more  remote
parts  of  his  kingdom,  for  his  followers,  especially  the  page
boys,  to  rob  and  plunder  wherever  they  went;  houses,


vn]  A  KING'S  LOVE  FOR  BISCUITS  119

gardens,  herds  of  goats  and  sheep,  all  they  could  lay  tln-ir
hands  upon,  were  appropriated,  and  if  any  pedestrian  tried
to  pass  them  in  the  road,  he  was  roughly  handled,  and  at
times  maimed  or  even  killed  for  not  giving  place  to  the  royal
procession.

The  flutes  and  drums  announced  to  us  the  approach  of
the  king,  and  he  was  carried  on  the  shoulders  of  a  strong
man  to  a  mat  near  the  door;  then  his  bearer  kneeled  down,
and  the  king  stepped  on  the  mat  and,  walking  into  the  room,
took  his  seat  at  the  table  after  shaking  hands.  Tea  was  at
once  brought  in,  and  one  of  the  two  precious  tins  of  biscuits
was  placed  on  the  table;  at  that  time  we  did  not  possess
any  more  tea  ware  than  was  needed  for  use,  and  that  was  all
enamel  ware.  The  king  tried  a  biscuit  and  approving  helped
himself  to  several  more.  In  the  meantime  as  many  of  his
more  select  followers  as  could  do  so,  had  crowded  into  the
room  and  were  sitting  on  the  floor  in  every  available  place.
The  king  next  asked :  "  Who  made  these  biscuits? "  When  told
"Messrs  Huntley  arid  Palmer,"  he  replied:  "They  shall  be
my  bakers  in  the  future/'  and  with  that  he  began  to  dole
out  the  biscuits  to  his  favourite  followers,  in  order  that  they
might  verify  his  remarks  as  to  their  good  quality.  We  two
missionaries  looked  on  with  anxious  eyes,  as  our  precious
store  was  thus  demolished,  but  respect  for  the  royal  guest
kept  us  from  making  any  remark.  When  tea  ended,  there
remained  less  than  half  a  tin  of  biscuits.  Mwanga  talked
freely  and  pleasantly  for  fully  an  hour  and  then  rose  to  go,
and  as  he  did  so,  he  took  the  tin  of  biscuits,  put  the  lid  on  it,
and  handed  it  to  one  of  the  pages,  saying:  "Take  this  home
for  me."  So  ended  the  first  royal  visit  which  I  received  from
Mwanga,  and  with  it  ended  one  of  the  two  tins  of  biscuits.

The  next  story  is  told  in  order  to  warn  young  people  against
rashly  accusing  natives  of  wrong-doing  even  in  jest ;  it  also
shows  how  readily  men  accepted  a  poison  trial  in  olden
times.  It  has  no  bearing  upon  the  king,  but  illustrates  the
character  of  cowmen,  who  in  the  early  days  of  the  mission
were  said  to  be  inseparable  from  their  cows.


120 EXTORTING  TRUTH  BY  ELECTRICITY [CH.

It  was  commonly  said  by  the  natives  that  cowmen  were
the  greatest  thieves  in  the  country.  There  was  also  a
proverb  to  the  effect  that  nothing  but  death  would  de-
prive a  cowman  of  his  cows.  There  was  a  time  when
such  a  remark  might  have  been  justified,  especially  if
it  referred  to  cows  belonging  to  either  an  Englishman  or
a  Muganda.  Cowmen  were  certainly  adepts  in  stealing  cows.

One  morning  after  lectures  in  the  theological  school  were
ended,  I  was  engaged  in  opening  a  box  containing  drugs
which  had  just  arrived  from  England,  and  my  companion,
Mr  Millar,  was  fitting  up  a  battery  which  had  been  sent
to  help  to  cure  him  from  an  attack  of  facial  paralysis.
As  we  were  thus  busy,  a  cowman,  the  servant  of  a
friend  who  had  gone  to  England,  walked  into  the  room
and  squatted  down  looking  on.  Jokingly  I  said:  "Well,  you
old  scamp,  how  many  cows  have  you  stolen  since  your  master
left  for  England? "  The  man  protested  that  he  would  not
steal  a  single  cow;  for  what  would  his  master  do  for  milk
on  his  return,  if  he  took  them,  and  so  forth.  I  still  pro-
fessed doubt  of  such  honesty,  when  the  man  suddenly
turned  the  tables  on  me,  and  asked  what  there  was  in  the
bottle  which  I  held  in  my  hand.  I  told  him  poisonous  medi-
cine, to  which  he  replied:  "Give  me  a  little,  and  I  will
swallow  it  to  prove  my  innocency."  Of  course  I  was  obliged
to  refuse,  whereupon  the  man  said:  "You  accuse  me  of  dis-
honesty, and  deny  me  the  means  of  proving  my  innocency,
so  I  will  ask  the  prime  minister  to  help  me/'  I  was  in  a
dilemma;  I  durst  not  give  the  drug,  because  it  would  certainly
have  killed  the  man,  and  I  did  not  like  to  be  thus  put  in  the
wrong;  fortunately  a  happy  thought  struck  me,  and  turning
to  Millar,  I  asked  whether  his  battery  was  ready  for  use.
Receiving  a  favourable  reply,  I  said:  "Then  let  this  cowman
try  it " ;  and  turning  to  the  man,  I  said :  "  If  you  can  hold  these
two  handles  without  shouting  you  are  innocent,  but  if  you
shout  or  call  out,  you  are  guilty."  He  consented  and  seized
the  handles  with  great  readiness.  Millar  put  on  cell  after
cell,  as  he  saw  the  man  could  bear  it,  until  his  face  changed


vn]  CONFESSION  OF  THEFT  121

colour,  and  his  hands  began  to  shake,  and  presently  he
twisted  them  up  against  his  chest  with  a  shout  and  cried:
"I  have  the  cows;  let  me  go,  and  I  will  bring  them."  The
battery  was  stopped,  and  the  man  not  only  confessed  his
guilt,  but  produced  two  cows  and  two  calves  which  he
had  stolen.


CHAPTER  VIII

DEATH OF THE MOHAMMEDAN PRINCE KALEMA— RE-
TURN  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  BAGANDA  TO  THEIR  COUNTRY-
SUDANESE  REBELLION— LOYAL  BAGANDA—
REDISTRIBUTION  OF  LAND

DURING  the  first  year  of  Mwanga's  reign,  after  his  return
from  southern  Budu,  news  came  to  the  capital  from
the  southern  district  of  Bunyoro,  announcing  the  death  of
Kalema  who  had  been  the  Mohammedan  king.  It  was  to
southern  Bunyoro  that  the  Islamic  party  fled  when  they
were  defeated  in  Mengo;  there  they  settled  and  formed
a  small  colony ;  and  from  this  district  they  made  occasional
raids  upon  their  brethren  in  the  more  isolated  districts  in
Uganda,  to  plunder,  and  to  enslave  any  one  whom  they
captured.

The  British  officer  representing  the  I.B.E.A.  Co.  sent  to
the  Islamic  Baganda,  inviting  them  to  return  to  their  own
land  when  Kalema  died,  and  promising  them  estates  to  settle
upon,  and  safety,  if  they  would  for  their  part  be  loyal  to
King  Mwanga  and  his  chiefs.  The  chiefs  in  Uganda  with
Mwanga  had  given  their  approval  to  this  message.  The  offer
was  accepted,  and  in  due  course  the  Islamic  party  returned
and  settled  in  two  small  districts  which  were  given  them ;  at
the  same  time  the  French  party,  which  were  settled  in  Budu
under  their  old  leader  Mugwanya,  were  granted  an  extension
of  country  and  special  laws,  which  made  them  responsible
to  the  king,  but  otherwise  free  from  the  governing  body  in
Mengo.  The  country  thus  again  at  peace  became  prosperous;
the  old  markets  which  had  been  deserted  for  months  were
again  opened  by  people  who  brought  their  wares  for  sale,
and  it  was  possible  to  buy  meat  and  fish,  with  other  native
products  suitable  to  supply  the  daily  need,  in  addition  to
many  useful  articles  and  wares,  such  as  agricultural  imple-
ments and  household  pots.  Land  that  had  fallen  into  disuse


CH.  VIII]


A  SEASON  OF  PEACE


123


was  reoccupied,  and  plantain  groves  which  had  become  wild
and  overgrown  with  creepers  were  recovered  and  soon  began
to  bear  fruit,  while  food  became  daily  more  plentiful.

With  this  prosperity,  and  the  assurance  that  the  British
officers  would  stand  by  those  who  remained  loyal  and  kept
the  laws,  chiefs  felt  it  safe  to  return  to  their  country  estates;
their  peasants  began  to  build  new  huts,  and  peasant  women
began  to  work  their  fields,  and  all  seemed  to  promise  a
period  of  happiness.  Roads  that  had  fallen  into  disuse  and
become  overgrown  during  years  of  war  were  reopened,  and
people  were  to  be  found  traversing  them,  going  to  the  capital
from  their  homes  in  the  country,  as  in  olden  times,  carrying
food,  either  for  sale,  or  for  their  chief's  use,  in  accordance  with
the  old  feudal  system.  There  was,  however,  a  difference  in
the  populations  that  reoccupied  the  districts,  because  many
people  who  by  birth  belonged  to  particular  districts,  and
who  had  never  left  their  old  surroundings  before  the  war,
were  now  living  in  new  places  under  the  altered  conditions;
there  were  those  from  Budu  who  had  fled  with  their  former
chiefs  and  were  now  in  Kyagwe,  while  those  from  Kyagwe
had  gone  into  Budu  with  their  chiefs  belonging  to  the
French  party.  Many  of  these  older  inhabitants  never  really
settled  down  in  their  new  homes,  and  it  was  known  that
they  would  return  to  their  old  localities,  as  soon  as  they  felt
they  could  do  so  with  safety.

It  was  when  there  seemed  to  be  every  prospect  of  continued
peace  that  word  came  to  the  officers  of  the  I.B.E.A.  Co.,
recalling  them  from  Uganda ;  they  were  ordered  to  leave  and
to  return  to  the  coast  because  of  the  increased  expense  to
the  Company's  finances.  With  the  nobility  of  character
for  which  officers  of  our  army  are  famous,  Captain  Williams,
R.A.,  the  officer  commanding  Kampala,  determined  to
remain  in  Uganda  and  to  be  responsible  for  the  Sudanese
troops  and  their  pay  and  for  the  general  expenditure  necessary
for  the  British  occupation  of  the  country,  rather  than  to  leave
the  people  to  anarchy  and  bloodshed.  He  appealed  to  the
missionaries  to  help  him  out  of  their  allowances  to  make  up


124  UGANDA  BECOMES  BRITISH  [CH.

the  sum  which  he  knew  would  be  required  for  his  stay,  but
when  he  heard  what  small  stipends  they  received,  he  realised
that  this  would  be  of  no  material  value  tohim.  Nevertheless  he
resolved  to  hold  on  and  to  appeal  to  the  British  public,  for
he  knew  that  his  presence  was  necessary  for  law  and  order.
During  these  troubled  months  it  was  quite  customary  for
men  to  carry  firearms  for  protection  daily;  even  when  going
to  church,  guns  were  carried,  which  were  stacked  near  the
entrance,  where  guards  were  set  during  the  time  of  service,
because  the  two  parties  had  not  learned  to  trust  each
other  as  yet.  It  was  a  great  relief  to  all  concerned  when
a  few  days  after  the  order  had  come  to  the  British  officers
to  leave,  a  second  cable  arrived  telling  them  to  remain,  as
funds  had  been  provided  for  them  to  continue  to  rule  the
country  for  a  longer  period.  A  week  or  two  later  the  explana-
tion came,  namely  that  through  an  appeal  of  Bishop  Tucker
at  a  missionary  meeting  the  sum  of  £800  had  been  raised,
in  order  to  retain  Uganda.  A  few  months  later  a  party  of
Royal  Engineers,  who  were  surveying  the  country  for  a
railroad  from  Mombasa  to  Lake  Victoria,  entered  Uganda;
the  leaders,  Captains  Macdonald  and  Pringle,  had  duties  to
carry  out  in  connection  with  their  work  of  survey,  which  de-
tained them  some  months  in  Uganda.  In  1893  the  Consul-
General  of  Zanzibar,  Sir  Gerald  Portal,  arrived  with  a  party,
to  make  inquiries  into  the  state  of  the  country,  with  the
object  of  reporting  to  the  British  Government,  whether  or
not  it  would  be  advisable  for  England  to  take  over  Uganda
as  a  Protectorate.  The  result  of  Sir  Gerald  Portal's  visit
and  inquiry  is  well  known;  England  took  over  Uganda  and
also  the  country  from  the  lake  to  the  coast,  which  is  known
as  the  East  African  Protectorate.  With  the  new  treaty  the
Imperial  East  African  Protectorate  Company  ceased  to  exist,
and  the  British  flag  began  to  fly  over  the  old  fort  on  Kampala
hill.  These  stirring  times  of  civil  wars  had  not  been  without
their  excitements  and  dangers;  one  of  the  worst  conflicts
between  the  two  parties,  French  and  English,  had  revealed  to
us  how  bitter  people  could  become  in  their  desire  to  be  the


vin]  FEARS  FROM  INCENDIARISM  125

dominant  party ;  clans  and  even  brothers  were  divided  and
took  opposite  sides.  Such  a  state  of  clan  animosity  would
have  been  inconceivable  before  the  people  began  to  take
political  sides;  the  old  tiesof  primitive  customs  had  now  broken
down,  and  there  was  nothing  to  bind  the  families  as  before.
The  chief  cause  for  anxiety  which  we  missionaries  had  during
this  time  was  from  incendiarism;  our  houses  were  built  of
reeds  and  grass,  and  would  have  burned  down  in  a  few  minutes,
had  they  been  set  on  fire  by  the  enemies  who,  for  weeks,  were
going  about  by  night,  setting  fire  to  native  houses  belonging
to  men  of  the  opposite  party  to  their  own.  Later  in  my
Uganda  experience,  I  had  my  house  burned  down  accidentally
by  a  workman,  who  carelessly  set  fire  to  his  own  hut  when
burning  out  biting  ants;  the  wind  then  carried  some  burning
grass  from  the  hut  to  my  house,  and  it  caught  fire.  It  was
at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  hottest  part  of  the  day,
and  in  a  few  moments  the  house  was  reduced  to  ashes.  Though
I  was  in  the  house,  I  had  no  time  to  bring  out  my  possessions
such  as  clothing,  I  could  only  save  the  mail  which  had  arrived
for  the  mission,  and  then  I  fled  just  as  the  burning  roof  was
falling  in  on  me.  Friends  kindly  supplied  me  with  food,
clothing,  and  shelter,  until  other  things  could  be  obtained.
Owing  to  the  fierceness  of  this  fire,  and  the  blowing  of  a  strong
wind,  another  mission  house,  some  fifty  yards  distant,  caught
fire  and  was  also  burned  down,  and  two  men  like  myself  were
rendered  homeless  and  lost  their  belongings.  When  a  native
hut  catches  fire,  the  inmates  first  see  that  their  children  are
carried  out  of  danger,  and  afterwards  throw  out  as  much  of
their  property  as  possible  before  the  flames  become  too  fierce
for  them  to  remain ;  they  seldom  try  to  extinguish  the  flames,
but  only  endeavour  to  save  other  houses  near;  this  they  do
by  mounting  the  roof  and  beating  off  the  sparks  as  they
fall  upon  the  thatch.  The  men  who  mount  the  roofs  are
armed  with  leafy  branches,  and  they  sweep  off  the  sparks
as  they  fall;  there  are  often  showers  of  sparks  from  these
fires,  and  as  huts  are  usually  built  rather  closely  together,
the  work  of  the  men  coping  with  the  fire  is  at  times  difficult


126  EMANCIPATION  OF  SLAVES  [CH.

and  rather  dangerous.  On  one  occasion  I  arrived  at  a  house
which  was  on  fire;  the  woman  had  thrown  out  most  of  her
goods  and  was  watching  the  fire,  when  she  realised  that  she
had  overlooked  her  baby;  she  was  beside  herself  with  frenzied
grief  and  had  to  be  held,  lest  she  should  rush  into  the
flames  to  try  to  rescue  the  child.  When  the  fire  burned  out,
the  remains  of  the  dead  baby  were  found,  wrapped  in  the
bark-cloth  in  which  it  had  been  sleeping;  according  to  native
fashion  its  head  and  face  had  been  covered  over  with  bark-
cloth  when  it  fell  asleep,  and  it  was  doubt  less  quickly  suffocated.

A  striking  incident  took  place  during  the  visit  of  Sir
Gerald  Portal,  which  will  give  an  idea  of  the  depth  and  reality
of  the  influence  of  the  Christian  religion  upon  the  people.
The  chiefs  of  the  two  Christian  parties,  French  and  English,
who  were  now  reconciled,  went  to  Sir  Gerald  Portal  and  told
him  that  they  wished  to  sign  a  treaty,  giving  freedom  to  all
slaves  in  their  country.  He  hesitated  to  accept  the  request,
because  he  feared  that  the  people  had  not  given  so  important
a  matter  the  consideration  which  it  deserved;  he  therefore
asked  them  to  reconsider  their  request,  after  giving  them  a  few
ideas  as  to  the  vastness  and  costliness  of  such  an  undertaking.
It  really  meant  a  great  deal  to  the  people,  and  we  who  had
been  in  constant  touch  with  the  homes  of  all  classes  knew  that
in  some  places  the  women  would  keenly  feel  the  loss  of  their
domestic  slaves;  still,  when  the  matter  was  fully  explained  to
them,  the  chiefs  and  peasants  answered  that  slavery  was
contrary  to  the  spirit  of  their  Christian  faith,  and  they  were
prepared  to  suffer  loss.  Eventually  the  papers  were  signed  in
the  presence  of  Sir  Gerald,  and  all  slaves  were  proclaimed  free.

The  leading  chiefs  were  not  satisfied  with  merely  pro-
claiming the  freedom  of  slaves,  but  they  assisted,  as  far
as  they  could,  all  slaves  to  return  to  their  relatives  in  the
adjacent  countries.  Responsible  persons  were  sent  with
parties  of  slaves  to  see  them  safely  home,  much  to  the  joy
of  both  slaves  and  their  relatives.

When  Sir  Gerald  Portal  had  completed  his  task  of  drawing
up  the  treaty,  and  of  having  it  signed  by  the  king  and


vmj  THE  TROOPS  MUTINY  127

>nsible  chiefs,  lie  left  Major  Macdonald  as  British  R<-[
sentative  in  command  in  Uganda,  while  he  hurried  away
from  what  was  to  him  a  place  of  sadness.  During  his  visit  he
had  lost  his  brother,  who  died  from  fever  contracted  when
alone  in  an  unhealthy  part  of  the  country;  the  sick  man  was
carried  with  all  speed  to  the  capital,  but  it  was  too  late  to
help  him,  and  he  arrived  only  to  die.

Soon  after  Sir  Gerald  Portal's  departure  the  Sudanese,
who  for  months  had  been  diligently  drilling  and  practising
rifle  fire  and  were  a  formidable  army,  became  unsettled;  they
were,  as  has  already  been  stated  above,  an  unsatisfactory  set
of  men  when  under  Gordon  in  Khartoum.  It  is  true  that  there
were  arrears  of  wages  due  to  them,  but  they  knew  that  these
were  safe,  and  would  be  paid  to  them  in  a  short  time ;  the  delay
was  due  to  imperfect  transport  in  getting  goods  from  the
coast ;  moreover  they  were  not  in  need  of  any  comforts.  They
changed  their  cause  of  complaint,  however,  from  deferred
pay,  and  demanded  a  higher  rate  of  wages,  mentioning  first
one  reason,  and  then  another  for  their  discontent.  The  true
cause,  namely  that  they  had  rebellious  intentions,  leaked  out
through  some  loyal  Baganda,  who  were  in  close  touch  with
them,  and  who  informed  us  that  there  would  probably  be  a
mutiny  among  the  troops  in  a  few  days,  as  a  rising  was  being
planned,  with  the  intention  of  first  killing  the  Europeans,  and
afterwards  forming  Uganda  into  a  Sudanese  province.  These
same  friends  advised  us  to  escape  to  some  place  of  safety  before
the  troops  had  time  to  mature  the  scheme.  Major  Macdonald
was  informed  of  the  intended  rising,  but  naturally  could  not
believe  such  a  report,  which  certainly  seemed  incredible  at  the
time.  We  afterwards  learnt  that  the  Mohammedan  Baganda
had  planned  with  the  Sudanese  troops  to  murder  the  European
Resident  and  as  many  missionaries  as  possible,  and  then  to
place  Mboga,  the  brother  of  the  famous  King  Mutesa,  and
uncle  to  King  Mwanga,  on  the  throne,  who  was  to  have  Selim
Bey,  the  Sudanese  general,  as  his  prime  minister.

According  to  Uganda  custom  it  is  impossible  for  a  prince
who  is  appointed  to  the  office  of  Elder  Brother  (Kiwewa)  of


128  SUDANESE  REBELLION  [CH.

a  king,  and  has  the  oversight  of  all  the  other  princes,  to  reign,
but  the  Mohammedans,  being  at  this  time  without  a  prince,
wished  to  brush  aside  this  difficulty  and  were  about  to  make
the  old  man  king.  Fortunately  for  us,  the  Sudanese  troops  had
been  divided  into  two  sections  for  military  reasons ;  and  half
of  them  were  twenty  miles  away  from  the  capital  at  Entebe,
a  fort  on  the  lake,  where  the  new  European  headquarters
were  being  established.  This  fact  made  it  more  difficult  for
the  two  parties  to  act  rapidly.  To  add  to  this  difficulty,  the
Baganda  Mohammedans  were  some  fifteen  miles  away,  and
could  not  readily  communicate  with  their  leaders,  or  make
preparations  for  war,  without  creating  suspicion.

The  Resident,  though  slow  to  accept  the  report  of  disloyalty
among  his  troops,  acted  with  caution,  watching  closely  every
movement,  and  making  secret  investigations  into  matters
which  at  other  times  would  have  escaped  notice.  Two  or  three
days  later  he  called  at  the  mission,  to  tell  us  that  he  had  dis-
covered that  there  was  truth  in  the  rumour  of  a  rebellion  and
wished  us  to  know  this,  so  that  we  might  either  escape  to  some
place  of  safety,  or  stand  by  him  and  try  to  quell  the  intended
rising;  naturally  every  Englishman  remained.  It  was  on  a
Saturday  morning  when  the  missionaries  were  warned,  and
at  noon  the  members  of  the  two  missions,  French  and
English,  met  at  Fort  Kampala,  where  the  Resident  ordered
the  troops  "to  fall  in "  and  explained  to  them  that  he  knew  of
their  intended  rising.  To  a  man  the  troops  swore  on  the  Koran
that  they  were  faithful,  and  denounced  the  report  as  utterly
false.  There  was  no  other  course  open  to  us  but  to  accept  their
word,  so  the  missionaries  returned  home  for  the  night.  Very
early  on  the  following  morning  we  were  again  summoned  by  the
Resident  to  the  Fort ;  he  sent  word  that  he  must  disarm  the
troops  at  once,  if  the  place  were  to  be  saved,  so  no  time  must
be  lost.  We  went  in  haste  to  the  Fort,  though  it  was  only
seven  o'clock,  and  were  told  by  the  Resident  that  an  attempt
had  been  made  during  the  night  to  murder  him,  and  that  he
had  been  on  guard  until  daylight,  when  he  sent  his  private
servant  to  summon  us.


VIII]


THE  TROOPS  MUTINY


129


The  French  fathers  discredited  the  word  of  the  troops  the
day  before,  and,  under  cover  of  night,  took  their  departure
to  Budu  on  their  way  to  Bukoba,  their  station  in  German
East  Africa,  leaving  a  few  servants  with  instructions  to  guard
their  houses  and  property  as  long  as  possible,  and  then  to  flee
if  necessary.  There  was  therefore  only  a  small  party  of  English
left  to  stand  by  the  Resident.  We  numbered  eight  Englishmen
and  a  few  Swahili  porters,  most  of  whom  were  lame  from
jiggers  in  their  feet,  and  could  only  stand  with  pain,  using
their  guns  as  crutches  to  hobble  to  their  posts.  Still,  as  we
were  told  by  the  Times'  correspondent,  Mr  Gedge,  who  was
travelling  and  who  came  in  time  to  be  with  us  for  this
event,  it  was  satisfactory  to  know  that  these  men  could  not
run  away.  The  Resident  briefly  related  to  us  on  arriving
at  the  Fort  the  events  of  the  night,  and  said  it  was  a
difficult  position  and  most  grave,  because  the  troops  were  in
possession  of  the  best  rifles  and  had  secured  large  quantities
of  ammunition  from  the  store;  the  rifles  left  in  the  store
were  miserable  weapons,  only  fit  for  porters  to  make  a  show
with  when  journeying  through  districts  where  the  natives
were  armed  with  spears  only.  The  plan  of  operations  sug-
gested by  the  Resident  was  for  the  Europeans  to  mount
guard  at  set  distances  along  the  Fort  stockade;  then  the
troops  were  to  be  drawn  up  under  the  Fort,  and  he  (the
Resident)  was  to  go  to  them  and,  after  telling  them  his
decision,  to  disarm  them  by  quickly  commanding  them  to
lay  down  their  arms;  in  the  event  of  their  disobeying  the
order,  we  were  to  fire  upon  them,  regardless  of  his  safety,
and  to  fight  for  our  own  lives.

After  these  instructions  had  been  given,  we  shook  hands  and
took  our  positions  around  the  Fort,  feeling  that  it  was  a  hope-
less cause,  and  that  there  was  nothing  for  us  but  death ;  still  we
determined  to  make  the  best  of  it  and  to  sell  our  lives  as  dearly
as  possible.  In  the  gateway  was  placed  an  old  maxim  gun
which  had  belonged  to  Stanley;  it  was  known  to  jam  after
firing  four  or  five  rounds;  nevertheless,  it  made  a  show  and
might  possibly  be  of  use,  and  all  we  did  that  morning  was


R.U.


130  DISARMING  THE  TROOPS  [CH.

merely  show,  for  our  trust  was  not  in  our  own  strength  or
weapons.  When  we  were  ready,  the  troops  were  called  and
fell  into  line  on  the  slope  of  the  Fort,  as  though  there  were
no  mutiny  planned,  and  the  Resident  marched  out  smoking
a  cigarette,  and  took  his  stand  some  thirty  yards  from  the
Fort  gate.  We  could  catch  an  occasional  word  he  said,  as  we
stood  with  every  nerve  strung  to  the  highest  pitch  of  expecta-
tion, wondering  what  would  happen.  The  few  moments  taken
by  the  Resident  to  explain  to  the  troops  the  situation  and
his  determination,  seemed  hours  to  us;  then  the  sharp  clear
command  rang  out  to  ground  arms,  and,  to  our  intense
relief,  down  went  the  rifles  of  all,  except  that  of  one  man  whom
the  Resident  at  once  covered  with  a  revolver  from  his  side
pocket,  till  the  man  dropped  his  rifle.  The  next  order  to
turn  and  march  came  quickly,  and  the  troops  moved
a  few  yards,  leaving  their  rifles  on  the  ground,  where  the
orderly  with  a  porter  promptly  stacked  them  and  mounted
guard,  while  the  Resident  continued  his  task  and  ordered
the  troops  to  remove  their  bandoliers.  It  was  found,  when
these  were  examined,  that  each  man  had  a  large  supply  of
cartridges  ready  for  use.  The  troops  were  thereupon  dismissed
to  their  quarters,  and  we  were  safe  for  the  moment.

By  his  calm  prompt  action  the  Resident  had  taken  the
men  off  their  guard,  and  they  had  in  a  mechanical  manner
obeyed  his  order  and  left  their  rifles  behind,  before  they
realised  what  they  had  done;  it  seemed  to  them  so  much
like  a  part  of  their  drill  routine.  The  relief  to  us  who  were
standing  on  guard  was  for  a  few  moments  too  great  for  words,
then  we  showered  congratulations  and  praise  upon  Major
Macdonald,  who  had  thus  saved  both  us  and  the  Baganda.

There  had  been  no  time  to  communicate  with  the  loyal
natives  in  the  early  morning  when  we  were  called  to  the  Fort,
and  we  had  given  them  no  intimation  that  we  were  leaving  the
mission.  It  was  therefore  a  surprise  to  us  to  see  an  army  of
these  men  rising  from  the  grass  and  coming  from  all  manner
of  places  when  the  Sudanese  were  disarmed.  They  had  been
secreted  in  all  kinds  of  places  as  near  as  they  could  come>


vni]  THE  NATIVES  FIGHT  131

ready  to  assist  us  and  fight  for  us,  had  the  troops  disob'
the  order  to  disarm  when  given  by  Major  Macdonald.  The
Prime  Minister  now  came  forward  with  an  army  of  several
hundreds  of  loyal  men  fully  armed  and  ready  for  action.  He
told  the  Resident  that  Selim  Bey  was  reported  to  have  left
Entebe  with  his  troops  and  was  marching  on  Kampala,  and
that  the  Mohammedan  Baganda  were  coming  in  from  their
district  in  the  north-west  and  would  arrive  in  about  two  or
three  hours.  We  were  therefore  only  just  in  time  to  save
ourselves  and  the  country,  and  steps  had  to  be  taken  promptly
to  meet  the  next  emergency.

Scouts  were  sent  in  each  direction  to  watch  the  approaching
armies.  It  was  soon  learnt  that  the  Sudanese  had  been  warned
of  what  had  happened  by  a  runner  from  the  disarmed  troops,
and  that  Selim  Bey  had  at  once  turned  and  hurried  back  to
Entebe;  on  the  other  hand,  the  Mohammedan  Baganda  were
reported  to  be  within  four  miles  of  the  capital.  The  loyal
Baganda  undertook  to  meet  their  own  countrymen  and  deal
with  them;  so  they  moved  off  under  the  leadership  of  the
Katikiro  along  the  road  on  which  these  Mohammedans  were
reported  to  be  advancing.  Shortly  after  nine  o'clock  the  first
shots  were  heard,  and  for  fully  an  hour  the  sound  of  rapid  firing
continued;  then  wounded  men  were  carried  into  the  Fort  to
be  treated  by  the  Europeans,  and  we  were  kept  busy  assisting
them  and  doing  all  that  we  could  to  dress  wounds  and  to
relieve  the  dying.  By  twelve  o'clock  the  Mohammedan  party
was  defeated  and  in  full  retreat,  being  pursued  by  the  loyal
Baganda,  who  followed  them  some  miles  out  of  the  capital
into  the  country,  and  left  them  a  disorganised  body  of  men,
fleeing  away  to  the  west  singly  or  in  parties  of  two  or  three.

The  missionaries  were  unable  to  return  to  the  mission
station  that  day ;  their  presence  was  needed  for  several  days  to
share  in  garrison  duties  at  the  Fort.  Even  if  they  had  not  been
wanted  for  these  duties,  it  would  have  been  unwise  to  have
gone  back  until  the  capital  was  rather  more  safe  from  spies
and  stray  members  of  the  hostile  parties.  The  following  day
the  Resident  set  off  to  Entebe  with  a  Muganda  chief,

9—2


132  LOYAL  BAGANDA  [CH.

Nikodemu  Sebwato,  and  a  following  of  Baganda  to  disarm  the
troops;  there  he  found  Selim  Bey  professing  to  be  loyal  and
pretending  that  he  knew  nothing  of  the  rising.  The  troops
were  ordered  to  fall  in  and  were  disarmed,  and  Selim  Bey  was
removed  for  safety  to  an  island  of  the  lake,  until  arrangements
could  be  made  to  conduct  him  to  the  coast.  Only  a  few
friendly  natives  were  taken  by  the  Resident  to  Entebe,  but
it  proved  that  they  were  quite  sufficient  for  the  purpose,
because  the  troops  to  a  man  laid  down  their  arms  and
remained  submissive.  After  a  few  days  had  elapsed,  the
missionaries  were  able  to  return  to  their  homes  and  to  their
work,  while  the  natives  returned  to  their  labour  of  building
houses  and  of  renovating  their  gardens  and  plantain  groves.
The  mission  suffered  no  harm  during  the  absence  of  the
missionaries,  because  the  Prime  Minister  had  sent  a  guard
which  kept  everything  in  perfect  order  during  their  stay  at
the  Fort.

The  Mohammedan  Baganda,  by  their  folly  in  rising  against
the  Government,  again  lost  their  homes  and  the  district  to
which  they  had  been  allotted,  and  were  scattered  over  the
country.  Mboga,  their  old  chief  and  leader,  the  brother  of
Mutesa,  was  sent  to  the  coast,  to  be  out  of  the  way  in  the
event  of  any  further  rising,  and  also  that  the  people  might
forget  him  as  a  possible  candidate  for  the  throne.  Later  on
Selim  Bey  was  sent  to  the  coast;  however  he  never  reached
it,  but  died  on  the  way  down  from  an  old  internal  trouble.
For  the  next  four  or  five  years  the  country  remained  quiet,
and  rapid  strides  were  made  in  all  matters  of  government,
in  social  life,  in  building,  and  in  road  making.

When  the  Arab  and  Swahili  traders  were  allowed  to  settle
in  Uganda,  they  introduced  the  building  of  square  houses,
which  were  in  some  respects  an  improvement  upon  the  old
beehive  huts  of  the  Baganda,  especially  as  regards  sanitary
conditions,  and  because  they  had  windows  and  could  be
ventilated.  The  king  and  the  chiefs  soon  adopted  the  new
style  of  house,  and  other  needful  sanitary  reforms  were  made,
such  as  the  adoption  of  cesspools,  whereas  previously  people


vmj  THE  BENEFITS  OF  PEACE  133

had  retired  into  the  gardens  for  the  relief  of  nature.  Useful
arts  were  also  learnt,  such  as  making  soap  from  the  fat  of
animals  with  the  ashes  from  burnt  plantain  peelings,  and
making  mats  from  the  fronds  of  wild  palm  trees.

A  further  distribution  of  chieftainships  took  place  at  this
time,  and  the  French  party  were  given  more  land,  and  en-
couraged to  be  more  sociable.  The  Budu  district  in  which  the
Roman  Catholics  had  settled,  and  which  they  had  kept
closed  against  all  so-called  English,  became  an  open  district,
and  a  state  of  friendship  began  between  the  parties.


CHAPTER  IX

(^

SOME  BAGANDA  BELIEFS  AND  CUSTOMS— GODS  OF  THE

LUBARE  WORSHIP— GHOSTS  AND  REINCARNATION—

HUMAN  SACRIFICES

IN  the  year  1880  a  traveller  marching  the  eight  hundred
miles  from  the  east  coast  of  Africa  into  the  interior  to
Uganda,  would  have  found  little  to  suggest  that  the  tribes
through  which  he  passed  had  any  religion ;  there  was  little  or
nothing  to  betoken  that  the  people  had  any  thoughts  of
another  world  or  an  after  life.  We  now  know  that  all  these  tribes
have  some  form  of  worship,  and  are  armed  with  either  fetishes
or  amulets  on  their  persons,  which  are  supposed  to  protect
them  from  ghostly  enemies  and  from  all  forms  of  magic,  and
also  to  preserve  them  from  danger  from  wild  animals  or  from
hostile  tribes.  By  the  ordinary  traveller  who  has  had  no
previous  training,  and  who  has  taken  little  interest  in
primitive  religions,  these  objects  worn  by  natives  might  be
easily  overlooked,  or  regarded  as  rude  ornaments;  indeed
many  objects  which  are  held  in  great  veneration  by  natives,
and  are  of  intense  ethnological  value,  might  escape  notice.
In  Uganda,  however,  it  was  different,  for  before  the  civil
wars  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter  there  were  abundant
traces  of  religion;  temples  and  shrines  abounded,  because
the  Baganda  have  for  generations  been  a  devout  people.
Religious  ceremonies  began  with  the  birth  of  a  person
and  continued  throughout  life  until  his  death,  when  there
was  an  elaborate  funeral  ceremony,  after  which  the  ghost
of  the  departed  was  worshipped.  Each  day  in  a  house
began  with  certain  ceremonies  for  ridding  the  family  or
the  individual  from  magic  and  unwholesome  spells,  and
it  closed  with  some  form  of  worship  to  protect  the  sleeper
during  the  night.  Almost  every  person  had  some  kind  of
fetish,  on  which  he  laid  his  head,  and  some  people  asked
it  to  protect  them  during  the  night.  Many  of  the  hills


CH.  IX]  NATIVE  GODS  AND  SHRINES  135

had  a  temple  or  shrine  upon  their  summit,  and,  though  the
people  had  not  learned  the  art  of  constructing  permanent
buildings,  these  gigantic  conical  huts,  built  at  considerable
cost  and  labour,  were  kept  in  beautiful  condition,  were
dedicated  to  the  gods,  and  were  guarded  and  kept  by  priests
and  mediums,  who  ministered  in  them,  and  to  whom  the
people  resorted  when  they  wished  to  consult  the  god  who
was  supposed  to  abide  there.

A  simple  way  of  classifying  the  gods  which  most  people
will  readily  understand,  is  to  say,  that  one  class  were  hero  gods
and  the  other 'nature  gods,  though  the  natives  themselves
classified  the  gods  as  national  and  private  or  clan  gods.
National  gods  had  temples  to  which  members  of  any  clan
might  go  to  seek  assistance,  and  the  emblems  of  these  gods
were  taken  periodically  to  visit  the  king  and  to  bestow  their
blessing  upon  him ;  they  were  accompanied  at  such  times  by
mediums  and  priests,  who  went  dressed  in  special  garments
intended  to  make  a  display,  so  as  to  obtain  popular  honour
and  esteem.  The  temples  of  these  national  gods  were  built
and  kept  in  repair  by  the  state,  and  there  were  special
ceremonies  and  functions  when  they  were  rebuilt.  The  other
class  of  gods  belonged  to  individual  clans,  and  according  to
the  wealth  of  the  clan  and  its  numerical  greatness  so  the  temple
and  the  god  varied  in  honour  and  esteem.  It  will  be  necessary
to  say  more  about  the  origin  of  these  two  classes  later;  here
we  need  only  say  that  the  national  gods  were  in  all  probability
the  more  recent  addition  to  the  religion  of  the  country,  the
clan  gods  being  the  original  deities.  Emblems  of  clan  gods,
when  they  existed,  were  not  taken  before  the  king,  and  were
only  consulted  by  members  of  the  clan.

It  was  customary  for  the  king  to  send  presents  of  slaves,
male  and  female,  to  these  national  gods  in  return  for  favours
received,  and  offerings  of  cattle  in  order  to  ward  off  evil.  The
king  was  regarded  as  superior  to  the  priests  by  most  of  his
subjects;  indeed  he  was  commonly  believed  to  be  equal  in
power  to  the  gods,  though  during  his  lifetime  he  was  not
expected  to  grant  any  spiritual  blessings,  nor  was  he  called


136  NATIONAL  GODS  [CH.

upon  to  produce  rain,  as  was  customary  among  most  of  the
nations  surrounding  Uganda.  The  king  at  times  sent  men  to
rob  and  plunder  the  estates  of  the  temples,  if  he  was  annoyed
by  any  action  of  the  priests,  or  was  jealous  of  their  wealth;
this  was  more  than  ordinary  persons  dared  do,  for  they  feared
too  much  the  vengeance  of  the  god.  Other  nations  asked
their  chiefs  to  bring  rain  or  fine  weather,  as  circumstances
demanded.  In  Uganda  it  was  the  duty  of  a  nature  god  to
regulate  the  weather;  and  famine  from  lack  of  rain  was
thought  to  be  caused  by  the  indiscretion  of  some  person,
which  needed  to  be  atoned  for  by  offerings.

To  the  national  gods  all  men  had  access;  it  was  only  a
question  of  paying  a  higher  rate  of  fees  to  the  priests  and  of
making  a  suitable  offering  to  the  god,  and  they  could  obtain
the  oracle  through  the  medium.  Private  gods  were  attached  to
each  clan  and  were  only  available  to  members  of  the  clan.  The
king  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  these  gods  except
possibly  with  the  god  of  his  mother's  clan;  indeed  members
of  a  clan  frequently  sought  the  aid  of  their  clan  god,  to  thwart
the  designs  of  the  king,  or  to  protect  themselves  against
attacks  of  the  king's  anger,  or  to  influence  the  king  in  some
particular  way  to  their  advantage;  or  again  they  might  seek
the  god's  assistance  against  some  powerful  chief.

Both  the  popular  national  gods  and  the  clan  gods  were  hero
gods,  that  is  to  say,  at  some  remote  period  the  deities  had  been
human  beings,  who  for  some  reason  had  been  venerated  and
afterwards  deified.  According  to  tradition,  however,  these
gods  were  direct  descendants  of  the  Creator;  they  were  sons  of
God  who,  after  appearing  on  earth  in  human  form  for  some
time,  returned  to  God.  Man  was  also  believed  to  be  the
direct  descendant  of  God;  the  first  parents  came  from  God
and  would  have  remained  immortal,  had  not  woman  trans-
gressed by  breaking  the  command  of  her  father  the  Creator,
and  so  brought  death  into  the  world.  The  supreme  God  named
Creator,  Katonda,  never  came  to  earth,  nor  had  he  any
active  part  in  ruling  the  earth,  but  he  left  the  ordering  of
the  cosmos  to  the  gods,  his  sons,  for  detailed  management.


IX]  NATIONAL  GODS  137

The  Creator  received  but  little  worship,  and  his  temple  was  a
small  hut,  much  inferior  to  those  of  the  god  of  plenty  and
the  god  of  war.  To  the  temple  of  the  Creator  the  king  sent
annually  a  gift  of  an  ox  and  a  milch  cow,  and  he  worshipped
him  on  behalf  of  his  people  and  country.  A  common  saying
of  the  people  was  that  the  Creator  had  done  his  work,  and
there  was  no  need  to  disturb  him,  therefore  they  made  no
offerings  to  him ;  the  work  of  carrying  on  the  world's  routine
had  been  deputed  to  other  gods,  whose  duty  it  was  to  see
that  all  went  on  smoothly.

The  heaven,  that  is  the  sky,  was  called  Gulu,  a  god  said
to  be  the  son  of  the  Creator.  Of  his  sons  one  was  named
Kintu,  the  first  man  who  came  to  earth,  while  another  son,
Musi  si,  came  to  earth  as  a  god,  and  was  the  father  of  the
principal  national  gods.  Through  Gulu  we  reach  the  anthropo-
morphic deity,  a  theory  which  the  native  cherishes,  for  he
repudiates  stoutly  the  suggestion  that  his  gods  were  ever
ordinary  men,  though  he  admits  that  they  took  human  form
and  submitted  to  the  ordinary  means  of  increase  by  marriage
and  birth ;  human  beings  supplied  the  gods  with  wives  who
became  the  mothers  of  the  gods.  The  relics  of  the  god  of
war,  which  had  been  buried  during  the  Mohammedan  reign,
have  recently  been  discovered;  they  are  certainly  human
remains,  which  have  for  many  generations  been  worshipped  as
divine  and  were  believed  to  be  something  superhuman.  The
war  god,  Kibuka,  was  said  to  be  a  son  of  Musisi  and  brother
of  Mukasa,  the  god  of  plenty,  who  ruled  the  great  Lake
Victoria;  he  (Kibuka)  was  credited  with  the  power  of  flying
and  of  hurling  weapons  upon  his  foes  from  the  clouds.  It
was  when  fighting  that  he  was  discovered  in  his  dark  cloud,
and  mortally  wounded  by  an  arrow  shot  by  one  of  the  foe,
whereupon  he  fled  away  and  died.  He  was  buried  in  a
particular  district  on  a  hill  where  his  temple  afterwards
stood,  and  where  his  relics  were  recently  found.

These  national  gods,  in  almost  every  case,  at  all  events  in
the  case  of  those  whose  ceremonies  it  has  been  possible
to  trace,  had  annual  festivals,  when  crowds  of  people  were


138  NATIONAL  GODS  [CH.

drawn  from  every  part  of  the  country,  who  remained  in  the
vicinity  of  the  temple  some  nine  days.  To  these  festivals  every
person,  even  the  smallest  child  in  arms,  took  an  offering
which  was  presented  to  the  priest,  who  placed  it  before
the  god  and  afterwards  added  it  to  the  temple  property.
The  chief  feature  of  the  ceremony  was  dancing  and  feasting,
which  was  continued  by  day  and  by  night  incessantly.  All
the  food,  meat  and  wine  was  provided  by  the  people  them-
selves, who  gave  according  to  their  means.  Strict  rules  of
chastity  and  sobriety  were  observed,  drunkenness  was  not
allowed,  while  any  yielding  to  lust  and  passion  would  have
been  an  offence  against  the  god  arid  punishable  by  death.
At  the  close  of  the  festival  the  priest  dismissed  the  people
with  the  blessing  of  the  god,  promising  them  prosperity
and  every  other  material  blessing.

It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  cult  of  this  particular
class  of  god  came  from  the  region  of  the  Lake  Victoria  into
Uganda.  Mukasa  was  the  god  of  the  lake  and  had  his  chief
temple  on  an  island  bearing  his  name.  Of  all  the  gods  the
god  Mukasa  alone  had  more  than  one  temple.  In  every  case
a  god  had  his  temple  situated  on  a  hill,  and  his  power  was
limited  to  the  particular  locality,  so  that  his  worshippers
and  suppliants  went  to  this  temple  for  any  purpose  with
which  he  was  concerned.  Mukasa,  being  the  god  of  benefi-
cence, had  various  temples,  in  each  of  which  was  the
emblem  of  the  god,  a  canoe  paddle;  this  had  been  brought
from  the  chief  temple,  and  was  supposed  to  convey  divine
power,  of  which  the  medium  partook  when  giving  the  oracle ;
the  chief  temple  was  on  the  Island  Bukasa.  These  the
principal  national  gods  of  this  class  have  their  origin  through
Bukulu  from  Gulu,  the  son  of  Katonda.  Gulu  was  also,  as
we  have  seen,  the  father  of  Kintu,  the  first  man;  thus  man
was  closely  related  to  the  gods.  Both  Kintu  and  Bukulu
are  said  to  have  come  to  the  earth  together.  There  is
another  interesting  tradition,  namely,  that  the  kings  came  to
Uganda  by  lake,  and  for  years  lived  on  the  shore  of  the
great  lake  in  the  vicinity  of  Jungo  near  their  first  landing


IX]  DEIFIED  KINGS  139

place.  These  stories  agree  with  the  traditions  of  other  pastoral
tribes,  who  state  that  their  forefathers  came  from  the  north-
east, and  that  they  have  a  common  ancestry.  Such  an  account,
if  authentic,  would  leave  room  for  aborigines  with  religious
ideas  of  their  own  concerning  deified  ancestors  or  clan  ghosts,
and  would  point  to  a  time  when  the  clans  were  independent
tribes,  each  with  its  own  form  of  worship  and  its  clan  chief.
The  national  gods  had  no  fetishes,  but  had  their  special
emblems,  or  rather  relics  as  we  now  believe  them  to  be,
judging  from  the  case  of  Kibuka,  the  war  god;  these  were
preserved  in  their  temples  and  never  taken  away  from  the
sacred  precincts.  Clan  gods,  on  the  other  hand,  supplied
fetishes  to  members  of  the  clan.  Fetishes  have  been  made
a  subject  of  much  enquiry  and  of  careful  research.  I  now
believe  the  solution  of  the  problem  to  be  bound  up  with  the
explanation  that  fetishes  belong  to  clan  gods  and  therefore
vary  considerably  in  names,  in  shapes,  and  in  their  specific
duties.  The  medicine-man  of  the  particular  clan  is  the  maker
and  vendor  of  the  fetish  belonging  to  his  own  clan  god,  and  is
accordingly  a  rival  of  all  other  manufacturers  and  vendors,
his  aim  being  to  supply  an  article  of  superior  power  to  that
of  any  other  clan.

The  kings  from  very  early  times  have  been  deified  at
death,  and  their  jawbones  with  a  portion  of  the  umbilical
cord  have  been  preserved  in  temples;  these  relics  corre-
spond with  those  discovered  and  attributed  to  the  war  god
Kibuka.  Some  twelve  years  ago  a  report  was  current  in
Uganda,  which  reached  the  principal  chiefs  in  the  capital,
who  were  Christians,  that  a  bundle  in  the  temple  of  King
Kintu  contained  some  writings  or  papyrus  sheets ;  the  chiefs
became  somewhat  excited,  because  they  hoped  it  would  prove
that  writing  had  been  known  at  an  early  date.  The  bundle  was
opened  and  examined,  and  though  they  found  no  writing,  they
discovered  some  relics  of  the  first  king,  which  were  similar
to  those  of  the  god  Kibuka.  This  investigation  afforded
further  interesting  testimony  to  the  belief  that  the  gods  were
men,  because  the  tradition  concerning  King  Kintu  is  that,


140  LUBARE  WORSHIP  [CH.

like  the  chief  gods,  he  disappeared  from  the  earth  and
returned  to  the  Creator.

Investigation  of  the  Lubare  worship  leads  to  the  supposi-
tion that  these  gods  belonged  to  the  invaders  who  intro-
duced the  improved  form  of  government,  the  higher  grades
of  art,  and  the  marks  of  a  higher  code  of  civilisation  and
politics;  it  will,  however,  be  found  that  there  has  been  an
amalgamation  of  a  primitive  form  of  worship  with  this  higher
order.  In  the  clan  gods  we  find  what  is  probably  the  older
order  and  more  primitive  form  of  worship  in  Uganda.  The  gods
of  a  clan  were  in  most  instances  hero  gods,  and  there  is  seldom
any  attempt  made  to  hide  this  fact;  they  were  originally
members  of  the  clan,  and  in  some  few  casesrelics  exist  which  are
carefully  guarded  by  the  clan  members.  These  relics  are  the
links  between  the  living  and  the  dead,  in  other  words  they
are  the  tangible  objects  to  which  the  ghost  is  said  to  cling,
and  form  the  sacred  emblems  for  worship.  In  each  clan
there  was  the  worship  of  a  particular  god,  who  might  or
might  not  possess  relics.  There  were  clans  possessing  no
relics  or  objects  of  veneration,  though  there  was  a  priest  and
a  medium ;  in  other  clans  the  priest  was  also  the  medium  and
he  gave  the  oracle  from  the  god.

In  the  chief  temple  of  the  god  Mukasa  the  object  of
veneration  is  said  to  have  been  a  meteoric  stone,  which  was
turned  about  first  in  one  direction,  and  then  in  another,
according  to  the  phase  of  the  moon.

In  almost  every  case  the  person  nominated  to  hold  the
office  of  Father  of  the  clan  became  the  priest,  and  in  some  few
instances  he  was  also  the  medium;  in  other  cases  there  was  a
medium  in  addition  to  the  priest;  in  the  latter  cases  the
priest  took  offerings  and  requests  before  the  god,  the  medium
then  became  possessed  and  gave  the  oracle.  Requests  made
to  clan  gods  were  of  a  limited  range  and  were  applicable
to  clan  members  only;  the  offerings  were  chiefly  goats  and
fowls,  though  sometimes  a  chief  would  send  a  cow,  and  on
rare  occasions  a  slave;  large  supplies  of  beer  were  also  taken
by  each  suppliant.  Animals  devoted  to  a  god  were  usually


IX]  CULT  OF  GHOSTS  141

females;  they  were  kept  alive  in  the  shrine  or  temple,  and
any  offspring  they  might  have  increased  the  wealth  of  the
god.  If  a  slave  was  offered,  as  sometimes  happened  when  a
wealthy  person  had  escaped  death  or  recovered  from  a  serious
illness,  a  male  would  be  employed  in  supplying  firewood
for  the  temple  fire,  and  for  general  work  about  the  temple
and  buildings,  whereas  a  female  would  be  set  to  cultivate
the  temple  estate  and  to  take  charge  of  the  sacred  fire  and
vessels  in  the  temple.

It  was  usual  for  a  man  after  marriage  to  ask  the  blessing
of  the  clan  god  upon  his  union,  that  there  might  be  children,
and  also  to  seek  his  aid  for  cultivation  of  the  land,  increase
of  cattle,  and  general  prosperity.  Again,  in  cases  of  sickness,
the  clan  god  was  consulted  before  any  national  god,  and  he
either  gave  advice  by  oracle  as  to  the  remedies  to  be  used,  or
he  sent  the  enquirer  to  some  national  god,  where  the  patient
could  receive  the  necessary  aid.  Beyond  these  special  times
when  the  assistance  of  the  god  was  sought,  no  stated  periods
for  worship  were  fixed,  except  the  annual  gathering  when
members  of  the  clan  came  together  to  seek  blessings  for  the
year  and  which  lasted  about  nine  consecutive  days.  As  a  rule,
however,  annual  gatherings  were  held  only  at  the  temples  of
the  more  important  gods ;  most  of  the  clan  gods  were  restricted
to  small  gatherings  and  the  smaller  rejoicings  of  the  clan.

The  cult  of  ghosts  formed  an  important  part  in  the
life  of  the  people  because  of  their  conviction  that  ghosts
were  able  to  help  or  to  harm  the  living.  The  ghost  world
was  no  far-off  land  separated  from  this  world,  but  it  was
part  and  parcel  of  it;  indeed  each  garden  was  the  play-
ground of  these  unseen  visitants,  who  in  the  noontide  sun-
shine might  be  heard  rustling  among  the  leaves  of  the  trees
Accordingly  it  behoved  the  living  to  be  careful  how  they  acted,
and  especially  how  they  treated  the  body  which  the  ghost  had
inhabited,  and  also  the  grave  in  which  the  body  was  laid.
This  belief  in  ghosts  had  no  part  in  the  deification  of  kings,
who  had  a  special  form  of  worship  which  will  be  mentioned
later,  but  the  belief  in  ghosts  and  the  worship  of  them  affected


142  BELIEF  IN  GHOSTS  [CH.

the  rank  and  file  of  the  nation,  and  was  in  all  probability  a
part  of  the  aborigines'  belief  and  of  an  earlier  date  than  the
introduction  of  the  national  gods,  which  appears  to  date  from
the  time  when  the  royal  clans  invaded  the  country  and
amalgamated  the  other  clans.  When  it  became  known  that
the  spirit  had  left  the  body,  that  is  that  death  had  taken  place,
wailing  began,  and  part  of  this  consisted  in  reciting  the  good
deeds  of  the  deceased,  and  in  the  widows  recounting  the  gifts
which  they  had  received.  The  ghost  was  supposed  to  be  in
the  vicinity  of  the  body,  to  hear  and  understand  what  was
said,  and  to  be  gratified  by  the  eulogies.  The  ghost  still  retained
the  limited  powers  and  possibilities  of  the  living  person,  and
could  know  only  what  was  taking  place  in  the  locality  in
which  it  happened  to  be ;  hence  relays  of  mourners  kept  up  a
constant  cry  in  the  house  in  which  the  body  lay  until  burial.
The  mourners  who  were  relieved  from  the  task  of  lamentation
left  the  house,  and  were  allowed  to  enter  into  the  most  trivial
and  apparently  thoughtless  conversation  or  occupation  in
another  building,  because  the  ghost  did  not  see  or  know
what  they  were  doing,  and  could  not  be  affected  by  their
levity  or  want  of  reverence.  The  elaborate  proceedings  in
the  ritual  of  funeral  rites  had  in  view  the  welfare  of  the
ghost ;  so  also  had  the  relatives  in  making  choice  of  a  site  for
the  grave,  which  had  to  be  in  the  clan  burial  ground.  The
offerings  also  which  were  laid  with  the  body  in  the  grave  were
for  the  use  and  comfort  of  the  ghost.  The  honour  of  having
a  son  present  at  the  funeral  was  great,  but  it  was  surpassed
by  the  further  presence  of  a  grandchild. In  the  person
of  these  descendants  the  ghost  was  assured  of  a  continued
remembrance  and  of  its  future  welfare,  which  depended  upon
the  living. For  the  future  the  ghost  looked  to  the  grave
with  a  shrine  near  it  as  its  abode;  the  shrine  built  at  the
head  of  the  grave  added  considerably  to  its  comfort,  while
in  the  larger  hut,  built  by  the  more  wealthy  for  the  shrine,
with  a  slave  to  keep  a  fire  burning,  and  a  pot  of  beer  always
ready  for  its  use,  the  ghost  existed  in  regal  state,  and  the
relatives  might  rest  assured  of  its  ghostly  favour.  To  retain  the


ix] THE  GRAVE  THE  HOME  OF  THE  GHOST 143

good  offices  of  the  ghost,  offerings  of  clothing,  that  is  of
bark-cloth,  and  also  of  cattle,  fowls,  slaves  and  beer  were  made.
The  chief  needs  of  the  ghost  were  thought  to  be  caused  by  the
two  extremes  of  heat  and  cold;  hence  clothing  and  drink  were
provided,  while  cattle,  slaves,  and  fowls  were  added  thereto
and  formed  the  wealth  of  the  ghost.  A  widow  was  installed  to
take  care  of  the  grave,  her  special  duty  being  to  keep  it  free
from  weeds  and  to  preserve  the  mound  intact.  When  a  grave
was  deserted  and  neglected,  so  that  the  mound  over  it  crumbled
away,  or,  if  it  had  been  thatched  instead  of  having  a  mound,
when  the  thatch  had  rotted,  exposing  the  grave  and  allowing
weeds  to  grow  and  rain  to  fall  upon  it,  the  ghost  felt  the
discomfort;  it  also  felt  the  lack  of  offerings  on  the  part  of
relatives  and  became  annoyed  and  visited  them  in  anger,
causing  sickness  or  some  other  trouble.  It  continued  these
aggressive  methods  until  the  grave  was  restored  to  order
and  offerings  were  made.  It  was  in  the  power  of  the  medicine-
man to  discover  which  ghost  was  causing  trouble  in  a  clan,
and  to  give  the  right  advice  for  removing  the  cause.  When  a
ghost  was  reincarnated,  the  necessity  of  making  offerings  or
of  guarding  the  grave  ceased ;  the  latter  was  allowed  to  crumble
away,  and  the  site  was  dug  over  and  planted  with  ordinary
plantain  trees.  No  two  bodies  might  be  laid  in  the  same
grave,  even  a  mother  and  her  babe  had  separate  graves,
though  they  might  be  side  by  side.  It  was  this  same
belief  that  the  ghostly  abode  was  the  grave  which  restricted
the  number  of  bodies  interred  in  a  grave,  and  limited  it  to
one,  lest  the  ghosts  should  quarrel  for  the  right  of  the  home.
In  like  manner  one  or  more  widows  were  allotted  to  care  for  a
grave  of  the  husband,  to  live  near  it,  and  keep  it  from  falling
into  decay,  lest  the  ghost  should  have  cause  for  annoyance.

Children  were  liable  to  suffer  from  female  ghosts,  chiefly
those  of  the  father's  sisters,  which  resented  neglect  or  slight
of  some  kind  by  their  brother,  and  therefore  would  afflict  one
or  other  of  his  children  with  some  illness  peculiar  to  children.
A  brother  was  responsible  for  the  burial  and  mourning,
and  also  for  providing  the  heir  to  the  office  and  property  of


144  NATURE  GODS  [CH.

a  deceased  sister.  Even  when  a  woman  was  married,  her
brother  was  the  chief  mourner,  and  -had  to  watch  over  the
burial  and  mourning  ceremonies,  to  see  that  they  were
properly  conducted;  he  also  supplied  another  sister  to
become  the  wife  of  the  bereaved  husband,  and  this  new
wife  became  heir  to  any  property  of  the  deceased  wife  and
had  charge  of  her  sister's  grave.

The  cult  of  nature  gods  seems  to  have  been  of  later  intro-
duction and  not  to  have  been  developed,  or  more  probably
to  have  failed  from  lack  of  knowledge.  In  the  case  of  hero
gods  and  of  ghosts  the  worshippers  had  an  idea  of  what  the
god  or  the  ghost  would  like;  this  idea  was  based  upon  what
people  liked  or  disliked  in  their  present  life,  and  was  trans-
ferred to  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  world.  In  the  case  of
nature  gods  the  people  appear  to  have  had  no  idea  as  to  their
nature,  and  therefore  not  to  have  known  what  would  be  their
likes  or  dislikes.  These  nature  gods  belonged  to  the  same  class
as  the  god  of  heaven,  Gulu,  and  Katonda  the  Creator,  and
required  other  means  of  reaching  them  than  the  gods  who  had
been  men.  Nature  gods  had  no  temples,  nor  were  there  any
priests.  The  most  important  of  those  to  whom  the  people
resorted  were  the  god  of  rain  and  the  earthquake  god,  the
Creator  being  utterly  beyond  the  reach  of  the  ordinary  man.
In  no  instance  was  the  worship  of  a  nature  god  developed,
and  no  requests  were  made  directly  to  them.  The  gods  were
males,  and  were  married  to  human  wives  who  were  members  of
the  nation;  and  it  was  through  these  wives  that  the  gods  were
reached  and  moved  to  compassion;  in  other  words,  the  super-
human being  was  reached  by  means  of  the  ghost  of  the  human
wife.  The  wife  of  each  god,  at  death,  became  a  goddess;  a
temple  for  her  relics  was  built,  and  a  medium  with  priests
and  full  ritual  for  worship  was  established;  the  goddess
could  then  be  approached  and  asked  to  intercede  with  her
husband,  who  was  out  of  reach  of  any  direct  communication,
having  neither  temple  nor  medium.

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  hero  gods,  previously
mentioned,  were  restricted  to  particular  localities,  and  the


N.AI


SITE  WHERE  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  WERE  OFFERED  IN  UGANDA


HASTILY  BUILT  HUT  FOR  SERVANTS*  SHELTER  FOR  NIGHT


PLATE  XI


THE  MUKAMA  (KING)  OF  BUNYORO  WITH  HIS  WIFE
AND  DAUGHTERS


IX]  FETISHES  145

worshippers  had  to  visit  the  place  when-  th< tcinj>l< was
built,  in  order  to  obtain  any  assistance  from  the  god.

Next  to  the  gods  in  value  in  religious  matters  were  fetishes,
which  are  objects  supposed  to  convey  the  power  of  a  god  to
the  home  or  to  the  individuals  possessing  the  fetish,  and
especially  to  warriors  and  travellers,  who  thus  remain  under
the  protection  of  the  god.  One  or  two  fetishes  were  said  to
approach  very  nearly  to  equality  with  the  gods  themselves :
Mbaj  we,  for  example,  one  of  the  most  important  of  all  fetishes,
was  held  in  great  awe,  and  had  a  temple,  medium,  and
priests,  and  to  him  the  king  sent  periodically  offerings  of
human  beings.  He  was  represented  as  a  serpent  with  the
phallus  in  his  mouth.  In  Budu  a  living  python  was  wor-
shipped, which  had  a  temple  with  a  medium  and  priests,
while  its  special  guardian  was  a  woman  who  lived  in  the
temple  near  the  spot  on  which  the  python  lay.  Multitudes
of  barren  women  went  to  this  reptile,  as  each  new  moon
appeared,  carrying  offerings,  in  order  to  make  supplication
for  the  power  to  become  mothers.  As  stated  above,  no
national  god  had  a  fetish ;  all  the  fetishes  which  the  people
possessed  were  connected  with  clan  gods.  The  emblems  of
the  national  gods  were  not  taken  away  from  the  temples,
except  some  from  the  war-god.  The  latter  sent  his  repre-
sentative, a  priest,  to  accompany  the  leader  of  an  expedition
with  an  emblem  so  that  the  priest  could  consult  the  oracle
wherever  they  might  be,  and  tell  the  general  what  line  of
action  he  should  take,  or  warn  him  as  to  the  whereabouts  and
designs  of  the  enemy.  Each  warrior  carried  his  particular
fetishes;  one  was  slung  round  his  neck,  while  another  was
fastened  to  the  handle  of  his  shield,  to  enable  him  to  parry
missiles  of  the  enemy,  or  to  make  his  own  weapons  effective,
and  also  to  make  him  brave  in  battle.  In  addition  to  these
fetishes  which  a  warrior  carried  with  him,  his  home  was
supplied  with  fetishes,  and  his  chief  wife,  named  "little  slave
of  the  gods,"  had  the  daily  duty  of  making  offerings  to  them;
this  duty  she  regarded  as  the  making  of  offerings  to  the
gods,  because  she  thought  of  the  beings  represented  by  the

R.U.  10


146  VESTAL  VIRGINS  [CH.

fetishes,  and  not  of  the  mere  materials.  She  prayed  for
her  husband,  that  he  might  be  protected,  and  for  the  family
in  general;  thus  she  brought  about  good  results  both  for
herself  and  for  her  absent  lord  and  for  the  nation.  Fetishes
were  supplied  to  clients  by  special  vendors,  who  alone  knew
the  secret  of  making  them  and  dedicating  them  to  the
particular  god.  These  men  were  to  be  found  in  each  clan;
they  were  clever  and  made  large  profits  by  their  skill;  they
were  venerated  by  every  class  of  society,  and  might  go
wherever  they  wished,  and  do  practically  whatever  they
liked;  their  object  in  life  was  to  surpass  in  skill  their  fellow
craftsmen  of  other  clans.

The  first  wife  whom  a  man  married  was  caretaker  of  his
fetishes,  but  in  addition  to  this  wife  many  of  the  more
important  chiefs  had  young  girls  living  in  their  families,  who
held  an  office  resembling  that  of  Vestal  Virgins  in  the  temples.
These  were  always  maids  who  had  been  born  in  answer  to
requests  made  to  a  god  by  their  parents,  especially  by  women
who  feared  that  they  might  be  childless;  the  girls  were
dedicated  to  the  particular  god  at  their  birth  and  bore  some
form  of  his  name.  These  young  maids  were  sacrosanct,  and
men  were  most  respectful  to  them  and  never  took  any
liberties  with  them.  Their  duties  in  a  household  were  to
carry  fetishes  to  the  master  from  his  wife,  when  he  might
wish  to  have  them,  and  also,  under  the  supervision  of  the
chief  wife,  to  watch  over  the  household  gods.  It  was  because
of  her  important  position  in  the  household  as  caretaker  of
the  fetishes,  that  it  behoved  the  chief  wife  to  be  faithful  to
her  husband;  any  unfaithfulness  on  her  part  was  supposed
to  cause  the  god  to  remove  his  protecting  care  from  her
husband,  and  to  expose  the  latter  to  innumerable  dangers.
Hence,  if  a  warrior  was  wounded  or  fell  in  battle,  his  chief
wife  was  tried  by  ordeal,  to  discover  whether  she  was  the
cause  of  her  husband's  misfortunes.

Medicine-men  who  made  fetishes,  though  they  were  an
influential  body,  were  not  attached  to  any  temple,  but
visited  the  sick  who  sought  their  assistance.  They  gave


IM.ATI MI


MASAI  WOMEN  IN  ORDINARY  COW-SKIN  DRESS


UGANDA  DRUMMERS


PLATE  XIII


THE  COURT  HOUSE  OF  THE  KING  OF  UGANDA


UGANDA  CHILDREN  HAVING  A  MEAL


NATIVE  OF  MT.  ELGON  IN  FULL  DRESS


ix]  SURGICAL  SKILL  147

oracles  by  means  of  the  examination  of  the  entrails  of  anini.i  I
and  fowls;  discovered  the  cause  of  any  sickness,  whether  it  was
due  to  magic  or  to  ghostly  possession;  they  prescribed  the
remedies  to  be  used  in  sickness,  and  gave  the  necessary
instructions  to  any  man  who  wished  to  work  magic  upon
another.

Surgical  skill  had  reached  a  high  standard,  though  we  may
be  sure  that  it  had  cost  an  immense  number  of  lives  to  reach
this  proficiency ;  even  a  bone  pressing  upon  the  brain  could  be
removed,  and  the  patient  saved.  This  operation  was  performed
when  the  skull  had  been  crushed  in  by  stones  flung  in  battle
or  by  the  blow  of  a  club;  the  person's  reason,  if  not  his  life,
depended  upon  a  successful  operation.  There  were  horrible
wounds  made  by  spears  and  arrows,  in  later  years  by  gun-
shots, and  also  many  mutilations  performed  in  anger  by  the
king  or  the  chiefs  upon  followers  or  slaves  for  trivial  offences;
and  the  surgeons  gained  experience  and  skill  in  treating  their
patients.  Mutilations  consisted  chiefly  of  the  gouging  out
of  eyes,  the  amputating  of  hands,  the  breaking  of  legs  and
cutting  off  of  ears  and  lips.  The  surgeons,  who  were  chiefly
medicine-men,  were  themselves  at  times  called  upon  by  some
official  to  perform  mutilations,  at  other  times  they  were
required  to  treat  a  case  after  mutilation  had  taken  place.
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  loss  of  life  must  have  been
great  before  these  surgeons  were  able  to  perform  their
operations  with  the  success  which  they  obtained  later.
Natives  do  not  suffer  much  from  nervous  shock,  which  is  so
often  the  cause  of  death  after  an  operation  performed  on
Europeans,  so  men  whose  stomachs  had  been  ripped  open
with  the  bowels  protruding,  had  a  piece  of  gourd  shell  placed
inside  to  keep  the  stomach  in  position,  and  the  flesh  was
then  stitched  over  it.  Again,  the  idea  of  passing  into  the
unseen  world  of  ghosts  without  a  limb,  or  in  any  wise  muti-
lated, was  terrible  to  the  native  mind,  and  this  made  men
anxious  to  retain  a  limb  whenever  possible.  In  battle  men
preferred  to  die  with  a  shattered  limb  rather  than  to
have  it  amputated  and  live.  The  fear  of  magic  was  the


148  SACRIFICIAL  VICTIMS  UNBURIED  [CH.

most  severe  nervous  strain  which  the  surgeon  had  to  guard
against;  if  the  patient  could  be  convinced  that  there  was  no
magical  influence  at  work,  he  would  endure  horrible  pain
and  might  recover  from  the  most  ghastly  wound,  whereas  if
he  received  only  a  slight  wound,  and  thought  it  was  due  to
magic,  he  would  die,  unless  counter-magic  could  convince
him  that  all  was  well.

Ghostly  possession  was  a  common  form  of  sickness  which
the  medicine-men  declared  to  be  the  result  of  a  ghost's
anger;  they  affirmed  that  some  hostile  ghost  was  the  cause  of
this  sickness.  Such  possessions  were  attributed  to  the  influence
of  members  of  other  clans,  who  induced  a  ghost  of  their  own
clan  to  afflict  a  person,  because  of  some  injury  done  to  them-
selves or  to  one  of  their  number.  Children  were  more  often
possessed  by  female  ghosts,  and  seldom  by  any  male  ghosts.

When  human  victims  were  offered  for  sacrifice,  either  to
gods  or  to  deified  kings,  the  bodies  of  the  victims  were  never
claimed  by  their  relatives  for  burial,  but  belonged  to  the  gods,
and  their  clan  membership  ceased.  They  passed  into  the
ghost  world  as  retainers  of  the  particular  god ;  such  persons
were  never  reborn,  and  in  consequence  their  bodies  were
never  claimed,  but  left  to  decay  or  to  be  eaten  by  wild
beasts  and  birds  at  the  sacrificial  place.  In  the  early  days
of  Christian  missions  an  attempt  was  made  to  have  the
Christian  dead  buried  in  the  churchyards,  to  distinguish  them
from  the  heathen  by  having  a  religious  burial  according
to  Christian  custom,  and  to  disregard  the  clan  custom  and
burial  grounds.  A  few  Christians  agreed  to  this  rule  and
had  their  dead  buried  in  the  common  church  burial  grounds,
but  after  a  time  the  clan  members  of  those  who  had  died
begged  leave  to  remove  all  the  male  dead,  and  took  their
bodies  to  their  own  clan  burial  grounds,  leaving  only  a  few
graves  of  women.  It  has  always  been  the  rule  for  a  husband
to  bury  his  wife  near  his  house  where  she  died,  and  after  her
burial  to  destroy  this  house;  there  was  therefore  no  particular
reason  for  removing  the  bodies  of  women.  It  was  customary
to  attribute  success  in  life  to  the  influence  of  some  ghost,


ix]  DEATH  CEREMONIES  149

and  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  it  when  any  good  fortune  attended
a  man;  the  offering  had  a  public  character,  and  relatives
and  friends  assembled  to  partake  of  the  sacred  meal  near
the  shrine  built  for  the  ghost.  An  animal  was  killed  near
the  shrine,  the  blood  was  allowed  to  flow  upon  the  ground
and  to  run  into  the  shrine,  the  meat  was  then  cooked  and
eaten  on  the  spot;  thus  the  relatives  partook  of  a  sacred
meal  in  the  presence  of  the  ghost  and  with  it,  thus  giving  it
credit  for  the  good  received.

The  ceremony  at  the  death  of  a  king  was  entirely  different
from  that  at  the  death  of  an  ordinary  person;  indeed  it  is
never  allowed  that  a  king  has  died;  the  "fire  is  extinct"  is
the  usual  phrase  employed  to  express  his  death;  the  king
may  be  said  to  have  gone  to  the  world  of  his  forefathers,
but  he  is  not  dead.  The  ceremony  at  his  death  is  fuller  than
any  which  takes  place  even  for  the  most  noted  chief,  and  it
bears  a  different  character  quite  apart  from  the  practice  of
embalming  the  body.  A  number  of  people  were  appointed  to
die  when  the  burial  of  a  king  took  place,  because  they  were
office  bearers  whose  duties  were  of  the  utmost  importance/
to  the  comfort  and  welfare  of  the  king;  these  people,  bothj.L
men  and  women,  were  put  to  death,  in  order  to  set  theirj  *
spirits  free  to  continue  their  ordinary  duties  to  the  king
in  the  ghost  world.  The  people  selected  for  death  never
shrank  from  their  doom;  their  future  estate,  they  thought,
ensured  such  an  honourable  position  as  to  compensate  them
for  the  cutting  short  of  their  earthly  career;  indeed  some
widows  went  so  far  as  to  beg  for  the  honour  of  dying,  and
welcomed  death,  in  order  to  accompany  the  man  who  gave
them  an  honourable  position.  A  large  number  of  slaves  and
other  persons  were  also  despatched  at  the  same  time;  they
too  were  required  for  the  retinue  of  the  royal  ghost,  and  they
did  not  murmur  because  of  their  fate.  Another  important
point  to  remember  is  that  the  ghosts  of  kings  were  never
reincarnated;  the  kings  were  deified  and  therefore  did  not
return  to  this  life.  Hence  the  office  given  to  any  person  to
attend  a  departed  king  was  permanent,  and  took  away  all


150  TEMPLE  OFFICES  [CH.

hope  and  desire  of  a  return  to  earthly  life.  In  addition  to
the  number  of  persons  executed  to  occupy  offices  in  the
ghost  world,  there  were  also  permanent  offices  at  the  temple
given  to  old  servants,  and  these  were  kept  from  dying  out
by  the  members  of  the  clan  to  which  the  first  holders  of
the  office  belonged.  Take  for  example  the  highest  office,
that  of  the  queen ;  at  the  death  of  her  husband  the  widowed
queen  removed  from  her  old  home  to  a  new  house,  built
for  her  near  the  temple  in  which  the  relics  of  her  late  hus-
band were  deposited;  there  she  was  installed  with  full  power
over  the  officers  and  servants  connected  with  the  temple.
There  were  certain  widows  who  were  appointed  to  live  in
the  temple,  and  in  houses  near  it,  and  in  the  courtyard  in
front  of  the  temple.  When  the  queen  died,  the  reigning  king
appointed  another  princess  to  take  her  office,  to  be  her  heir,
and  also  to  be  wife  to  the  dead  king.  In  like  manner,  whenever
any  widow  in  the  temple  or  temple  courts  died,  it  was  the
duty  of  her  clan  members  to  appoint  another  woman  of
their  clan  to  take  her  office,  thus  preserving  it,  and  retaining
every  obligation  which  the  king  during  his  life  had  required
of  her.  Each  chief  who  became  a  retainer  of  a  temple  was,
at  his  death,  replaced  by  another  man  of  his  clan,  and  thus
the  office  was  perpetuated,  and  any  peculiar  duty  with  its
traditions  was  retained.  These  chiefs  lived  near  the  temple,
and  held  office  under  the  queen  whose  title  was  Nalinya.
When  one  of  them  died,  his  clan  appointed  another  person
to  take  his  place,  thus  perpetuating  the  office  and  retaining
any  traditions  connected  with  it.  A  widow  in  the  temple
might  be  released  from  her  office  and  marry,  but  on  one
condition  only,  namely,  that  of  obtaining  the  consent  of  the
clan  to  which  she  belonged,  who  then  elected  some  other
woman  to  take  her  place.  She  was  removed  from  the  temple,
and  married  from  her  old  home,  and  not  from  the  temple,
as  an  ordinary  member  of  the  clan.  It  should  be  remem-
bered that  these  women  in  the  temple  were  not  called  widows,
nor  considered  as  such,  but  were  wives  of  the  departed  king,
who  was  spoken  of  as  still  living.  The  reigning  king  supplied


ix]  TEMPLES  AND  MEDIUMS  151

an  estate  for  each  temple,  which  amply  provided  for  the
needs  of  all  the  officers  connected  with  it.

In  a  royal  temple  daily  interviews  were  given  to  people
by  the  deceased  king;  his  court  was  arranged  as  though  he
were  alive,  and  the  assembled  crowds  sat  in  front  of  the
royal  dais  where  the  king  was  said  to  be  invisibly  present.
Food  was  taken  to  the  temple  for  the  king,  with  fowls,
animals,  and  beer,  and  was  handed  over  to  the  wives  for
use.  There  were  times  when  the  medium  gave  some  special
message  to  the  nation,  but  the  regular  oracles  were  reserved
for  the  king  alone,  because  they  concerned  the  state  and
government.  The  medium  first  chosen  for  office  was  a  man
who  had  been  in  the  deceased  king's  service,  and  who  there-
fore knew  many  of  his  peculiarities;  this  man  was  found  to
have  the  spirit  of  the  king  upon  him,  causing  him  to  act  as
the  king  had  done,  to  speak  as  he  used  to  speak,  and  to
imitate  his  gestures  and  mode  of  walk;  this  was  the  sign
that  he  was  possessed  by  the  ghost,  arid  he  was  then  set
apart  for  this  work  of  a  medium  and  lived  in  the  temple.
He  was  not  always  under  the  influence  of  the  ghost,  nor  was
he  restricted  to  the  temple  enclosure;  there  were  periods
when  he  moved  about  in  his  natural  way;  but  when  he  was
required  to  give  an  oracle,  he  went  through  a  form  of
preparation:  he  sat  near  a  fire  in  the  sacred  chamber  of
the  temple,  smoked  a  special  pipe,  and  gazed  into  the  fire,
until  at  length  he  began  to  speak  in  the  tones  of  the  late
king  and  to  utter  the  words  of  the  oracle;  he  was  then  said
to  be  under  the  influence  of  the  spirit  of  the  king.

The  king  had  a  shrine  of  his  immediate  predecessor  in  his
own  compound,  to  which  he  frequently  went  to  obtain  an
oracle,  and  the  medium  visited  this  place  to  give  it.  On  two
or  three  occasions  during  his  reign,  the  king  would  visit  the
temple;  each  occasion  was  one  of  great  display  and  called
for  great  preparation  and  attracted  thousands  of  people.
The  relics  of  the  former  king  were  displayed,  and  the  king
sat  before  his  predecessor  and  had  the  decorated  umbilical
cords  of  various  past  kings  handed  to  him.  The  priest  in


152  BIRTH  CEREMONIES  [CH.

charge  explained  each  relic,  as  he  handed  it  to  the  king,
who  took  it  and  examined  it  and  handed  it  back  to  the
caretaker.  During  this  visit  there  were  drums  beaten  and
dances  performed  and  songs  sung.  When  the  king  was
returning  home,  he  gave  the  order  to  capture  and  to  lead
back  to  the  temple  a  certain  number  of  people  from  his
followers.  These  men  were  either  speared  or  clubbed  to
death  at  the  temple,  and  thus  sent  to  join  the  retinue  of  the
former  king  in  the  ghost  world.

At  the  time  of  the  deification  of  the  king,  whose  tomb  was
visited,  it  was  necessary  to  produce  the  stump  of  the  um-
bilical cord  and  to  place  it  in  the  temple  with  the  jawbone,
because  each  object  had  its  ghost;  by  this  union  of  objects
the  two  ghosts  were  brought  together  and  a  perfect  deity
obtained.  The  so-called  twin  of  royalty,  that  is  the  stump
of  navel  cord,  was  carefully  preserved,  though  in  the  case
of  a  peasant  it  was  seldom  kept  after  the  naming  ceremony
mentioned  above.  The  reason  for  the  care  taken  of  the
umbilical  cord  of  a  prince  was  that,  when  a  prince  came  to
the  throne,  his  umbilical  cord  was  required  for  a  monthly
parade  during  his  life,  and  after  his  death  for  his  deification;
whereas  that  of  a  peasant  was  not  needed  after  the  naming
ceremony  had  been  performed.  It  was  usual  to  place  the
stump  of  umbilical  cord  of  a  peasant  with  the  placenta  at
the  root  of  a  plantain  tree  after  the  naming  ceremony.  This
plantain  tree  was  for  years  guarded  as  sacred  by  the  mother,
who  considered  it  to  be  vitally  connected  with  the  child
whose  cord  was  buried  there,  and  the  fruit  might  only  be
eaten  by  specially  chosen  members  of  the  family.  If  the
flowers  from  such  a  plantain  tree  fell  upon  the  back  of  a
woman,  they  were  said  to  indicate  that  a  child  spirit  was
entering  her,  and  she  invariably  became  a  mother  shortly
afterwards.

Reference  has  been  made  to  the  ceremony  of  offering
human  beings  to  the  ghosts  of  kings;  it  remains  now  to
explain  further  upon  the  religious  idea  in  connection  with
offerings  to  the  gods,  and  to  state  the  precautions  taken  to


IX]  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  153

prevent  the  ghosts  of  the  victims  offered  from  haunting  the
living.  Human  sacrifices  were  made  at  the  instigation  and
under  the  instructions  of  the  priest  of  the  temple  of  the  war
god,  who  stated  that  he  had  received  instructions  from  the
god  to  tell  the  king  to  capture  and  offer  a  number  of
human  beings.  These  sacrifices  were  demanded  for  various
reasons,  either  because  some  person  was  said  to  be  about  to
rebel  and  cause  civil  war,  or  because  they  were  required  to
ward  off  sickness  or  some  calamity  threatening  the  nation.
The  victims  to  be  offered  were  described  by  the  priest;
there  might  be  pointed  out  some  particular  colouring  of  the
flesh  or  some  deformity,  or  they  might  be  known  by  the
manner  in  which  they  carried  some  article;  whatever  was  the
distinctive  feature,  it  was  made  known  to  the  king,  and  by
him  given  secretly  to  the  men  who  were  to  effect  the
capture.  It  was  incumbent  upon  the  king  to  send  his  secret
police  to  various  places  commanding  the  roads  which  led  to
the  capital  and  were  in  consequence  more  frequented,  in
order  to  capture  the  victims  in  accordance  with  the  instruc-
tions given;  as  the  people  were  captured  they  were  taken
to  the  royal  residence  and  detained  there  until  the  number
required  was  complete.  The  god  was  informed,  and  he  then
gave  the  order  as  to  where  and  how  the  victims  were  to  be
sacrificed,  to  appease  the  god  and  stay  the  calamity.  The
orders  given  to  the  police,  who  went  to  arrest  the  victims,
were  secret,  and  they  hid  themselves  near  the  roads,  and
carried  out  their  instructions  regardless  of  sex  or  rank,  and
in  as  unostentatious  manner  as  possible.  The  victims  never
raised  any  cry  of  protest  when  they  discovered  the  object
of  their  arrest,  and  it  was  useless  to  fight  for  freedom  when
captured,  though  flight  was  permissible,  if  the  police  failed
to  seize  a  man  when  they  sprang  out  upon  him.  Clan
members  used  every  effort  by  petitions  and  bribes  to  the
king  to  rescue  their  relatives,  but  if  these  failed,  they  yielded
to  the  inevitable.  The  nation  never  resented  such  a  number
of  people  being  captured  and  removed  at  a  stroke,  while
the  calm  manner  and  almost  indifference  with  which  the


154  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  [CH.

victims  went  to  their  death  was  remarkable.  Men  who  have
seized  and  executed  numbers  of  such  victims  testify  to  their
calm  acquiescence,  since  they  believed  that  they  were  giving
their  lives  for  the  salvation  of  their  country. It  was  only  on
the  most  rare  occasions  that  a  man  would  raise  a  protest
when  being  led  to  death,  and  declare  that  he  would  take
vengeance  from  the  ghost  world.  The  victims  were  given
medicated  wine  to  drink  before  they  were  executed,  but  this
was  not  to  allay  the  pain  or  suffering  at  execution,  but  to  give
the  king  and  the  priest  power  over  the  ghost,  to  prevent  it
from  returning  to  cause  trouble  to  the  living.  Each  sacrificial
place  had  its  shrine  in  which  was  a  sacred  pot  for  holding  the
medicated  wine,  and  the  shrine  was  guarded  by  a  medicine-
man who  made  the  special  drink ;  from  this  pot  each  captive
was  requested  to  drink,  and  if  he  refused,  a  little  of  the
wine  was  poured  over  him,  and  was  said  to  have  the  same
effect  as  if  he  had  drunk  the  wine,  namely,  that  of  binding
the  spirit,  so  that  it  could  not  return  to  molest  the  living.
The  clothing  of  the  captives  was  removed  from  them  at
this  place,  and  they  were  taken  naked  to  death.  The  bodies
of  such  victims  were  never  buried,  nor  was  there  any  offering
made  to  the  ghost  at  the  time  of  death;  the  only  offering
made  was  the  clothing  of  one  or  at  most  of  two  of  the  victims,
which  was  taken  from  them  before  death,  and  hung  upon  a
tree  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  site  of  execution.  Relatives
often  tried  to  bribe  the  king  so  as  to  obtain  the  release  of  a
victim,  before  the  order  was  given  to  take  him  to  the  sacrificial
place;  and  it  was  sometimes  possible  to  bribe  the  chief  of
the  executioners  to  allow  a  captive  to  escape  when  going  to
the  place  of  execution.  This  was,  however,  only  possible  at
certain  places,  most  of  the  sacrificial  places  were  regarded
with  such  awe,  that  no  hope  of  escape  was  held  out  to  relatives.
The  king  has  also  been  known  to  relent  when  some  favourite
of  his  was  captured,  and  to  send  after  the  executioner  and
direct  him  to  spare  the  victim,  especially  when  the  latter
was  a  favourite  page,  or  some  chief  who  had  rendered  special
services  to  the  state  and  stood  high  in  royal  esteem  and


IX]  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  155

favour.  Such  a  released  prisoner  was  known  as  "The  one
who  was  spared,"  Kawonawo.  He  made  the  king  a  present
of  a  white  fowl  immediately  on  his  return  and  afterwards
brought  a  worthy  offering  of  cattle  and  slaves  for  the  king,
and  also  made  offerings  to  his  god.  Wives  were  permitted
to  take  leave  of  their  husbands  before  they  started  on  this
last  journey  to  the  place  of  death,  but  these  farewell  meetings
and  partings  were  marked  by  what  to  us  appears  as  stolid
indifference  on  the  part  of  the  husband.  The  wife  carried
the  water-pot  and  cooking-pot  which  she  had  used  for  the
husband,  to  some  place  near  the  royal  enclosure,  where  the
meeting  took  place,  and  broke  them  before  him,  in  token
that  she  would  have  no  further  use  of  them  for  him.

The  office  of  executioner  was  eagerly  sought  after  by  the
members  of  the  king's  body  guard.  The  men  destined  for
death  were  sent  off  in  batches  under  the  charge  of  large
numbers  of  warriors,  who  marched  with  songs  and  drums,  as
though  going  to  a  dance,  and  the  victims  often  took  part  in
the  songs.  The  hope  of  gain  seems  to  have  been  the  cause
which  moved  men  to  seek  the  office  of  executioner,  rather
than  the  desire  to  carry  out  the  ghastly  sentence  of  death  or
to  satisfy  morbid  feelings  for  the  sight  of  blood.  Victims,
when  going  to  the  sacrificial  places,  were  often  induced  to
make  over  cattle  and  other  valuables  to  their  executioners,
in  order  that  they  might  be  spared  unnecessary  pain  at
death,  and  sometimes  they  were  able  to  buy  their  lives  and
were  given  a  chance  of  escape.  At  some  of  these  sacrificial
places  the  methods  of  execution  were  of  a  cruel  and  revolting
nature,  and  must  have  involved  untold  suffering  for  the
victims;  for  example  some  were  taken  to  an  island  of  the
lake  to  become  offerings  to  crocodiles;  they  had  their  arms
and  legs  broken,  and  were  placed  in  rows  to  await  the  coming
of  sacred  crocodiles  who  carried  them  off  and  ended  their
pain;  yet  these  tortures  were  thought  to  be  pleasing  to  the
gods.  The  victims,  though  pagans,  were  of  opinion  that  their
deaths  were  beneficial  to  the  country,  they  went  to  execution
calmly  for  the  good  of  the  community,  and  were  buoyed  up


156  HUMAN  SACRIFICES  [CH.

by  the  idea  that  they  would  be  with  the  gods  as  their
followers  and  retainers.  Another  kind  of  sacrifice  which
involved  prolonged  suffering  was  made,  either  to  stay  small-
pox, or  to  remove  some  imagined  evil  which  adhered  to  an
army  returning  from  some  punitive  expedition,  and  to  the
spoil  taken  in  war.  It  was  thought  necessary  to  find  a  means
of  removing  the  evil  or  plague,  and  returning  it  to  the  land
from  which  it  had  come.  A  woman  with  her  baby,  a  cow,
a  goat,  a  fowl,  and  a  dog  were  selected.  The  sickness  or  evil
was  removed  from  the  army  and  the  spoil  of  war  by  the
priests,  who  rubbed  a  bunch  of  special  leaves  of  herbs  over
the  people  and  animals  to  be  cleansed;  these  were  then  tied
round  the  necks  of  the  victims,  men  were  chosen  to  lead
them  back  to  the  border  of  the  country  whence  they  had
come,  where  they  broke  their  limbs,  and  left  them  to  die,
with  the  sickness  or  evil  upon  them.  A  similar  ceremony
was  performed  when  the  king  was  about  to  be  crowned,  after
he  had  completed  the  mourning  ceremonies  for  his  pre-
decessor; a  human  victim  was  chosen,  to  whom  any  evil
that  might  be  resting  upon  the  king  was  transferred,  and
he  was  taken  over  the  frontier  into  an  adjacent  country,
maimed  as  mentioned  above,  and  left  to  die  with  the  evil
from  the  king  upon  him.  This  freed  the  king  from  magic  or
other  ill  that  might  be  clinging  to  him,  and  enabled  him  to
begin  his  reign  in  full  strength.

The  ceremonial  use  of  drums  needs  a  little  further  notice,
because  drums  held  an  important  place  both  in  secular  and
in  religious  life.  There  were  special  drums  for  the  sole  use  of
the  king,  in  which  were  fetishes  of  a  particular  kind;  these
drums  were  thought  to  increase  the  vigour  of  the  king,
when  they  were  beaten,  and  the  sound  reached  the  ears  of
his  majesty.  Human  offerings  were  made  to  them  when  the
king  was  crowned,  and  the  blood  of  the  victims  was  run  into
them.  Some  of  these  fetishes  which  have  been  examined  are
of  phallic  origin.  Such  drums  were  regarded  as  sacred  and
were  used  at  special  times  by  day  or  by  night  for  the  benefit
of  the  king;  the  fetishes  also  were  restricted  to  the  king's


IX]


DRUMS  AND  THEIR  USE


157


use  and  were  never  allowed  to  be  used  by  other  people.
There  were  other  drums  in  the  royal  enclosure  for  more
ordinary  purposes;  there  was  also  a  special  band  of  drums,
graded  from  small  to  large,  reserved  for  the  king's  use.

The  use  of  drums  was  much  more  extensive  than  is  likely
to  be  believed  by  people  who  use  the  drum  for  little  more  than
to  regulate  the  rhythm  of  a  band.  Not  only  had  each  temple
its  drum  with  distinctive  rhythmical  beats,  but  the  king
had  a  number  of  drums  for  his  private  use  with  special
rhythms.  Again  when  the  king  presented  a  chief  with  any
office  or  chieftainship,  he  conferred  upon  him  a  drum;  so
general  was  this  custom,  that  it  was  said  when  a  chief  was
given  a  new  office,  that  he  had  "eaten  a  drum/'  meaning  he
had  been  promoted.  There  were  literally  several  hundred  dif-
ferent beats  for  drums,  and  each  rhythm  was  known  by  the
people,  and  conveyed  a  definite  meaning  to  them,  as  the  waves
of  sound  do  to  the  wireless  telegraphist.  One  rhythm  con-
veyed to  the  hearer  the  fact  that  some  particular  chief  was
passing,  another  that  a  dance  was  taking  place,  another  was
a  call  to  war,  another  indicated  a  fire  alarm,  and  so  forth.
The  drum  was  thus  equivalent  to  wireless  telegraphy,  carrying
messages  far  and  wide  and  as  quickly  as  sound  travels.  In
the  case  of  any  urgent  call  or  claim,  it  was  the  duty  of  the
first  person  at  a  distance  who  heard  the  rhythm  to  repeat
the  message,  and  thus  in  a  few  minutes  a  claim  or  call  was
carried  hundred  of  miles.

Before  we  pass  on  from  the  gods  and  worship  to  another
subject,  the  god  of  plague  needs  to  be  mentioned.  This  deity
is  said  to  have  taken  a  human  body  which  was  merely  a
human  trunk;  a  child  born  without  arms  and  legs  was
believed  to  be  the  incarnate  god.  The  circumstances  under
which  this  child  was  born  are  briefly  as  follows:  a  prince
married  a  woman  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  his  brother  the
king,  and  against  the  advice  of  the  priests.  The  outcome  of
this  marriage  was  the  birth  of  a  child  without  limbs,  which
was  declared  by  the  priests  to  be  the  god  of  plague.  The
mother  with  her  child  was  summarily  banished  from  the


158  THE  PLAGUE  GOD  [CH.

country  by  lake  to  Busoga;  but  the  poor  hunted  woman  was
not  permitted  to  remain  there,  and  wandered  from  place  to
place,  seeking  a  home,  but  meeting  with  expulsion  in  each
country  to  which  she  went,  until  at  length  she  took  up
her  abode  upon  a  hill,  on  the  frontier  of  Uganda  and
Bunyoro,  a  kind  of  no  man's  land,  where  she  lived  and  where
she  died.  After  the  death  of  her  son  he  was  deified,  and  the
house  in  which  he  lived  and  died  was  turned  into  a  temple,
where  his  nurse  became  the  medium.  A  hole,  probably  the
open  grave  in  the  house,  was  said  to  be  the  god's  place  of
abode;  it  was  covered  with  a  rug  made  from  the  skins  of  a
species  of  small  wild  cat,  which  was  kept  in  place  by  stones
round  the  edges.  Whenever  plague  appeared  in  the  country,
it  was  said  that  the  god  had  escaped  from  his  residence  and
had  caused  the  calamity.  The  hole  was  then  examined,  and
any  defect  made  good  by  the  addition  of  a  new  cover  of  skins;
and  priests  were  sent  from  the  temple  to  deal  with  the  plague
stricken  centre  and  to  treat  the  sick.  If  anyone  died,  the
widow,  the  children,  and  all  the  property  in  the  hut  of  the
deceased  were  confiscated  and  taken  to  the  temple  of  the
god  of  plague,  and  no  mourning  for  the  dead  might  begin
until  the  relatives  had  redeemed  the  widow  and  children.  The
priests  treated  any  sick  whom  they  found,  and  purified  the
place  where  there  had  been  plague;  after  this  the  people  were
permitted  to  return  to  their  homes.  Whenever  the  people
saw  dead  rats  in  or  about  their  houses,  they  fled  away  from
the  place,  and  sent  offerings  to  the  plague  god,  and  asked  the
priests  to  come  and  purify  their  abode;  they  had  learnt  by
experience  that  dead  rats  indicated  a  plague.

About  eighteen  years  ago  a  child  was  born  in  Mengo  with-
out any  limbs,  and  the  relatives  and  friends  fearing  that  it
was  the  plague  god  who  had  returned,  wished  to  strangle  the
child.  The  chief  of  the  district,  however,  who  was  a  Christian,
saved  it  and  brought  it  to  the  mission,  and  asked  advice
what  to  do  with  it ;  he  was  told  to  save  its  life  and  to  have
it  nursed.  The  boy  is  still  alive,  he  has  learnt  to  read  and  is
a  Christian.  It  is  a  strange  sight  to  see  this  youth  when  he


IX]  MAGIC  159

wishes  to  move  about  in  a  room;  he  rolls  over  and  over,
until  he  reaches  the  desired  place,  when  he  sits  up.  He  is
carried  to  and  from  his  home  by  a  hired  attendant.

The  fear  of  magic  is  intense;  all  classes  alike  dread  its
power,  and  never  feel  sure  that  they  are  free  from  its  influence.
In  former  times  the  most  trivial  circumstances,  such  as  the
walking  over  broken  sticks,  or  a  bone  in  the  path  would  arouse
suspicion;  a  thoughtless  remark  in  conversation  would  throw
a  man  into  a  nervous  condition,  and  he  would  lose  all
interest  in  his  surroundings,  go  home  in  a  listless  mood,  fall
sick  and,  unless  the  medicine-man  could  induce  him  to  believe
that  the  evil  or  magic  had  been  removed  or  overcome,  he
would  die.  It  was  useless  to  try  to  persuade  such  a  man  that
he  need  not  be  afraid ;  his  belief  in  the  power  of  magic  was  far
too  strong  to  enable  him  to  cast  it  aside  and  treat  the  matter
lightly;  nothing  but  more  potent  magic  sufficient  to  nullify
the  effect  of  the  former  would  satisfy  his  imagination,  and
unless  this  was  forthcoming,  he  would  succumb  to  fear.

A  definite  case  of  the  dread  of  magic  recurs  to  my  mind,
that  of  a  man  who  was  wounded  by  a  leopard.  A  leopard
fought  a  large  dog  against  the  door  of  my  house  about  ten
o'clock  one  night,  giving  me  an  uncomfortable  ten  minutes,
because  I  had  no  weapons  in  the  room.  I  feared  that  the
flimsy  reed  door  would  not  bear  the  pressure  of  two  large
animals  against  it.  After  a  brief  struggle  the  poor  dog  was
killed  and  carried  off  by  the  leopard.  On  the  next  morning
I  sent  to  the  prime  minister  to  request  him  to  organise  a
hunt  and  kill  the  beast,  as  I  did  not  care  to  have  it  secreted
in  my  garden.  The  hunt  duly  took  place,  because  (as  I  was
informed)  a  woman  had  been  carried  off  during  the  same
night  a  little  lower  down  the  hill  than  my  garden,  and  her
remains  were  placed  in  the  forked  branches  of  a  tree  by  a
leopard  after  it  had  feasted  upon  her.  Both  leopards  were
hunted  out  and  were  killed  within  a  short  time  of  each  other,
but  not  before  some  of  the  beaters  had  been  clawed.  The
mode  of  hunting  wild  beasts  of  this  type  is  to  call  together
hundreds  of  beaters,  who  assemble  with  clubs  and  encircle


160  LEOPARD  HUNTING  [CH.  IX

the  ground  in  which  the  animal  is  known  to  be  in  hiding.
Drums  are  beaten  and  songs  sung,  as  the  men  with  their
heavy  clubs  beat  down  grass  and  bushes  in  their  advance,
drawing  in  their  circle,  until  at  length  they  come  upon  the
terrified  animal  and  club  it  down.  No  guns  or  spears  are
allowed  to  be  used  during  these  hunts  because  of  the  danger
to  the  beaters  in  the  circle.  In  this  particular  hunt  a  leopard
sprang  upon  the  beaters  and  clawed  three  of  the  men  on
their  heads.  The  wounded  men  were  brought  to  me  to  have
their  scratches  dressed;  the  worst  case  was  that  of  a  man
clawed  on  his  scalp,  which  was  badly  torn ;  the  second  man
had  wounds  on  the  head,  face,  and  shoulder,  v/hile  the  third
had  one  claw  wound  in  the  neck.  The  first  two  men  were
cheerful,  while  the  third  was  depressed.  I  told  them  to  come
again  the  next  day,  but  the  third  man  replied:  "I  won't
come  again,  I  am  going  to  die/'  I  tried  to  cheer  him  and
told  him  that  the  wound  was  not  serious;  he,  however,  said
that  it  was  magic  and  that  he  would  die,  and  he  actually
died  during  the  night.  The  others  came  on  the  following  day
and  told  me  that  their  companion  was  dead.  It  was  a  case
of  death  from  fright  and  the  belief  in  the  power  of  magic
which  we  occasionally  meet  with.


CHAPTER  X

SOCIOLOGY  OF  THE  BAGANDA— A  SECOND  RISING
OF  THE  SUDANESE

THE  sociology  of  the  Baganda  people  is  deeply  interesting,
though  to  an  Englishman  there  is  much  that  is  perplex-
ing. He  is  likely  to  misunderstand  many  of  the  customs,  or
to  attribute  much  that  is  done  to  wrong  causes,  until  he  has
been  long  enough  in  the  country  to  be  able  to  understand,
according  to  native  mode  of  thought,  the  reasons  for  a  par-
ticular action.  The  Englishman  must  recognise  the  fact  that
most  of  the  customs  and  relationships  are  different  from  his
own.

Clan  membership,  with  its  wide  range  of  relationship  and
binding  conditions,  has  been  of  the  greatest  service  to  men
and  women,  and  it  is  a  pity  that  the  system  is  breaking  down
under  the  influence  of  Western  culture.  Blood  relationship
is  patrilineal,  with  the  great  and  most  interesting  exception
to  be  mentioned  later  of  the  royal  family,  in  whose  case  it  is
matrilineal;  the  father's  clan  becomes  the  clan  of  his  children,
irrespective  of  any  maternal  claims.  Relationship  under  this
system  is  reduced  to  five  grades  of  age  limitations;  thus  a
man  has  two  generations  above  him,  that  is  to  say,  his  father
and  the  men  of  his  father's  age,  all  of  whom  he  calls  father,
and  his  father's  father  with  the  men  of  that  generation,
whom  he  calls  grandfather.  The  women  of  these  generations
have  also  their  particular  terms  of  recognition,  which  are
equivalent  to  aunt  and  grandmother.  In  the  man's  own
generation  all  men  are  his  brothers,  and  all  women  his  sisters,
who  are  of  the  same  clan.  In  the  generation  below  him  they
are  all  his  children,  and  in  the  generation  below  that,  they
are  his  grandchildren.  A  man  may  not  marry  those  who  are
his  cousins  on  his  mother's  side,  that  is  the  daughters  of  his
mother's  brothers,  all  of  whom  he  calls  mother,  but  his  grand-
children may  marry  the  mother's  brother's  grandchildren.  A

R.U.  II


162  CLAN  RELATIONSHIP  [CH.

man  calls  also  his  mother's  sisters  mother,  and  her  parents
grandparents,  but  the  relationships  on  the  female  side  are
much  more  elastic  and  are  sooner  forgotten  than  those  on  the
male  side,  and  it  is  on  the  father's  side  that  the  relationship
continues  rigid,  especially  in  regard  to  marriage.  It  was
obligatory  for  a  man  who  wished  to  marry  a  second  wife,  to
marry  a  woman  from  the  clan  of  his  father's  mother,  and  all
the  women  of  that  clan  stood  to  him  in  the  relationship  of
grandmother.  As  a  rule  he  sought  out  a  young  woman  from
his  grandmother's  clan,  and  she  stood  in  the  relationship  of
mother  to  his  father,  though  through  this  marriage  she  be-
came the  latter's  daughter-in-law.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing
for  women  to  speak  in  strange  terms  of  these  extraordinary
relationships ;  for  example  a  woman  may  be  heard  to  say  that
she  is  the  mother  of  a  man  who  has  been  dead  for  a  hundred
years;  by  which  she  merely  means  that  a  woman  of  her  clan
was  the  actual  mother  of  the  man ;  yet  to  herself  the  relation-
ship is  so  intensely  real  as  to  enable  her  to  disregard  the
lapse  of  time  and  to  speak  of  it  as  though  it  were  present.

These  relationships  were  of  the  greatest  value  in  deciding
questions  of  marriage,  and  clan  membership  also  gave  a  man
the  right  to  claim  help  from  the  most  distant  relative,  who
we  might  have  said  was  no  relative,  but  whom  the  native
claimed  through  his  totemic  bond  as  a  real  blood  relation.

Nothing  new  could  be  ascertained  from  the  clans  respecting
the  origin  of  totemism;  what  seems  to  have  been  a  fact  is
that  each  clan  claims  a  particular  person  as  its  father  and
retains  his  name;  in  some  instances  this  father  is  recorded
to  have  had  more  than  one  wife.  Where  there  is  more  than
one  totem  observed,  the  second  seems  to  have  been  the
totem  of  the  mother  and  this  became  the  secondary  object
of  veneration  for  the  children,  the  father's  being  the  chief
object.  Each  of  these  families  held  its  own  lands  and  for
a  period  of  many  years  held  aloof  from  its  neighbours,  to
this  extent  that  no  one  occupied  lands  claimed  by  members
of  another  family,  nor  permitted  any  person  to  settle  upon
its  estates.  From  tradition  and  from  the  acknowledged


X]  CLAN  EXOGAMY  163

rights  of  clan  burial  grounds,  there  is  no  reason  for  thinking
otherwise  than  that  the  clans  had  each  their  own  districts,
which  were  ruled  by  their  head  man  whom  they  called
father,  and  that  the  family  owned  no  other  authority  than
his,  and  paid  taxes  to  him  only.  These  clans  lived  on  friendly
terms  with  each  other,  and  were  exogamous,  that  is  to  say
no  man  might  marry  a  woman  bearing  the  same  totems  as
his  own.  The  marriage  relations  kept  the  clans  friendly,
and  sufficiently  intimate  to  enable  them  to  wish  to  live
together  amicably,  and  to  seek  each  other's  welfare.  The
national  food  has  been  that  of  plantains  from  prehistoric
days;  there  is,  however,  a  tradition  that  their  forefather,  who
was  the  first  man  in  existence,  owned  a  cow  and  lived  entirely
upon  the  milk  which  the  animal  gave.  No  reliance  can  be
placed  upon  this  story  as  pointing  to  a  period  when  the
aborigines  were  pastoral,  because  the  supposed  forefather
belonged  to  the  princely  caste,  and,  according  to  other
traditions,  the  members  of  this  caste  were  invaders  and  were
most  probably  allied  to  the  great  family  of  pastoral  people.
The  original  inhabitants  of  the  country,  on  the  other  hand,
were  all  agricultural  people,  and  their  freehold  lands  are
situated  on  hills  thickly  covered  with  plantain  groves,  whereas
the  pastoral  peoples  love  the  plains  and  grass  lands,  and  avoid
cultivation  and  all  manual  labour  as  being  deleterious  to  their
herds.

There  are  various  theories  propounded  by  the  different  clans
as  to  the  origin  of  their  totems,  but  a  careful  investigation
shows  that  the  totem  agrees  with  the  life  calling  or  occupation
of  the  family ;  pastoral  people  had  a  predilection  for  the  cow,
for  milk  and  dairy  produce,  and  cows  at  different  periods  of
their  existence  as  totems,  while  agricultural  people  have  a
wide  range  of  vegetable,  animal,  and  insect  life,  and  by  no
means  limit  their  totemic  objects  to  articles  used  as  food.
People  living  near  the  shores  of  the  Victoria  Nyanza  include
among  their  totemic  objects  reptiles  and  fishes  and  birds.
Thus  in  the  region  of  Uganda  we  find  inedible  birds,  animals,
reptiles,  and  plants  used  as  totems,  and  this  precludes  the


164  THE  BENEFITS  OF  CLANS  [CH.

old  idea  that  the  totem  had  to  be  guarded  by  a  particular
family,  because  it  was  a  kind  of  food  needing  the  protection
and  care  of  that  family.  Whatever  the  origin  may  have  been,
the  social  benefits  were  great,  for  not  only  were  the  marriage
relations  regulated  by  means  of  the  totemic  beliefs,  but  the
numerous  calls  made  by  a  member  of  a  family  upon  others
who  bore  the  same  totems,  the  financial  help,  the  sympathetic
assistance  in  sickness,  and  the  communal  rites  were  a  great
boon  to  the  family.  Claims  for  protection,  for  resisting  un-
just oppression  or  robbery,  and  especially  punishment  for
murder,  were  enforced  by  the  clan.  Again  the  funeral  ob-
sequies and  subsequent  rites  for  the.  welfare  of  ghosts  fell
to  the  care  of  the  clan  in  general,  though  the  details  belonged
to  the  relatives  more  immediately  concerned.  Totemic  rules
bound  the  members  together,  and  made  the  clan  a  family
with  rights  and  ties  common  to  all.  The  possession  of  the
totems  showed  who  were  the  members  of  the  clan;  and  the
fear  of  the  clan  ghosts  caused  the  members  to  obey  the  rules
and  regulations  of  the  clan.  The  gods  whose  anger  they
feared,  for  any  irregularity  in  the  clan,  were  not  the  national
gods,  but  the  clan  gods.

Women  at  marriage  moved  from  the  surroundings  of  their
own  clan  and  entered  the  clan  of  their  husband;  they  were
guarded  and  nursed  previous  to  their  confinement  and  for
some  time  afterwards  in  the  enclosures  of  their  husband
by  females  of  his  clan,  whom  he  called  sisters  or  mothers.
The  relationship  of  cousin  is  unknown;  hence  when  a  father's
sister  marries  and  has  children,  they  are  reckoned  as  of
another  clan,  and  in  the  second  generation  come  within  the
permitted  degrees  of  marriage.

Communism  is  still  at  work,  both  in  regard  to  property,
and  also  in  the  case  of  offspring.  Children  are  the  property
of  the  clan,  and  until  quite  recently  it  was  the  custom  to
remove  children  when  weaned  from  their  parents,  and  to
place  them  with  a  member  of  the  clan,  who  was  responsible
for  them,  not  indeed  to  the  parents,  but  to  the  clan.  It  is
doubtless  due  to  this  custom  that  a  woman's  eldest  brother


X]  CHILDREN  NEVER  ORPHANED  165

and  her  uncle  (father's  brother)  are  the  persons  who  on  beh.i  1  i
of  the  clan  arrange  all  her  matrimonial  affairs;  these  two
men  may  act  independently  of  her  parents,  if  they  wish
to  do  so.  Again,  after  death  the  property  of  the  deceased  is
divided  by  the  members  of  the  clan,  and  is  not  necessarily
given  to  his  children;  the  elder  of  the  clan  seeks  out  the
most  suitable  member  of  the  clan  for  inheriting  the  property.
Children  are  never  orphaned  in  our  sense  of  the  term;  they
are  never  homeless,  nor  are  they  left  without  a  guardian.
It  often  happens  that  the  death  of  a  parent  makes  little
difference  to  a  child  in  regard  to  its  surroundings,  if  it  has
been  weaned,  while  the  death  of  the  man  whom  we  should
call  its  uncle,  but  whom  the  child  calls  father,  and  with  whom
it  lives,  entails  greater  changes,  such  as  being  moved  to  some
other  home.

According  to  an  old  custom,  the  members  of  a  woman's
clan  have  the  right  to  every  third  child  to  which  she  gives
birth,  and  claim  it ;  it  is  held  by  them  as  a  slave,  unless  it  is
redeemed  by  the  father  or  some  other  member  of  his  clan.
The  custom  has  already  been  mentioned  which  compels  a
man  to  take  as  his  second  wife  a  woman  from  the  clan  of
his  father's  mother,  and  that  she  stands  to  him  in  the
relationship  of  grandmother;  this  does  not  mean  that  the
woman  must  necessarily  be  an  elderly  person;  she  may  be,
and  usually  is,  a  girl,  but  she  claims  by  clan  relationship  to
be  mother  to  her  husband's  father.  The  duties  of  this  second
wife  are  to  shave  her  husband's  head  and  cut  his  nails,  and  to
take  care  that  the  clippings  do  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  an
enemy  who  might  use  them  for  magical  purposes.

In  the  households  of  important  chiefs  with  large  harems
there  were  often  men  and  women  who  found  opportunities
to  meet  and  to  become  enamoured  of  each  other;  it  was
therefore  customary  to  keep  a  strict  guard  over  the  wives,
and,  as  each  wife  had  her  own  hut,  to  enclose  these  huts
in  strongly  fenced  compounds.  The  care  thus  taken  greatly
reduced  the  number  of  cases  of  adultery,  while  the  severe
punishment  meted  out  to  any  couple  found  guilty  caused


166  IDEAS  OF  MORALITY  [CH.

both  men  and  women  to  restrain  their  passions.  If  a  man
became  enamoured  of  any  woman  and  wished  to  visit  her,
he  generally  preferred  to  do  so  by  night,  reaching  the  house
by  some  cunning  device,  sometimes  by  scaling  the  fences,  at
other  times  by  crawling  along  the  water  gutters  under  the
fences.  He  went  armed,  and  if  he  was  disturbed  when  in  the
house,  he  took  the  offensive  and  speared  down  any  man
who  entered  where  he  was.  A  man  who  thus  visited  a
married  woman's  house  was  not  called  an  adulterer,  but  a
murderer;  in  like  manner  an  unfaithful  wife  was  called  a
murderess.  In  the  case  of  the  man  the  term  was  used,
because  he  was  ready  to  kill  the  husband  if  he  appeared  on
the  scene,  and  in  the  case  of  the  woman,  because  by  her
conduct  she  alienated  the  gods  from  her  husband,  and  exposed
him  to  every  misfortune,  in  addition  to  bringing  in  a  man  who
might  possibly  attack  and  kill  him.  Death,  with  tortures  of
a  terrible  nature,  was  the  punishment  exacted  upon  the  guilty
parties  when  they  were  discovered.

Until  the  reign  of  Mwanga  it  was  the  custom  for  one  or
two  of  his  wives  to  accompany  the  king  into  court,  and
frequently  several  princesses  also  sat  behind  him.  These  ladies
had  special  duties  assigned  to  them,  for  they  were  present
as  the  particular  guards  of  their  lord;  one  held  his  shield,
another  had  charge  of  his  spears,  others  had  his  drinking
cups  and  wine,  but  one  and  all  had  to  keep  special  watch
over  the  crowds  of  men  in  court,  to  see  that  no  attempt  was
made  upon  his  life.  They  were  ready  to  warn  him  and  to  help
him,  should  he  need  assistance.  In  like  manner  a  chief  in  his
own  household  with  his  daily  assemblage  of  friends  or  ser-
vants imitated  the  court  fashion,  and  had  his  wives  to  sit
by  him.  These  ladies  were  the  cause  of  constant  trouble  to
menservants,  for,  when  a  wife  spoke  to  them,  they  would
glance  at  her  and  so  rouse  jealous  suspicions  in  the  hus-
band's heart,  with  the  result  that  he  often  had  the  men
mutilated.  When  a  man  came  to  speak  with  his  master,  he
knelt  down  in  front  of  him,  to  tell  him  his  business  or  to
receive  orders;  if,  during  this  time,  he  allowed  his  eyes  to


X]  ROYAL  DESCENT  167

wander  towards  these  ladies,  he  would  be  accused  of  UIK  1
motives,  and  would  have  his  eyes  gouged  out  for  this  cai  >
behaviour. Protests  of  innocence  were  in  vain  under  such  a
charge;  the  chief  was  too  powerful  to  be  resisted,  and  the
minions  of  the  powerful  lord  were  all  too  ready  to  carry  out
any  such  command;  hence  the  words  of  the  servant  were  of
little  avail.

We  may  here  conveniently  introduce  the  subject  of  the
royal  descent.  It  was  stated  above  that  royalty  did  not
adhere  to  the  custom  followed  by  the  ordinary  people  of
taking  the  totems  of  their  father.  This  statement  needs
further  explanation,  because  on  the  one  hand  the  royal
totems,  the  lion  and  leopard,  were  widely  used,  and  these
were  transmitted  from  the  king's  father,  but,  on  the  other
hand,  every  prince  or  princess  was  known  among  the  people
by  his  or  her  mother's  totems.  A  few  clans  were  prohibited
from  giving  their  daughters  in  marriage  to  the  king ;  if  any
woman  from  such  a  clan  was  taken  by  the  king  in  marriage
(and  sometimes  he  used  his  kingly  power  to  marry  such  a
woman),  any  child  whom  she  might  have  was  strangled  at
birth,  or  possibly  the  woman  might  say  that  she  belonged  to
another  clan.  Apart  from  these  few  prohibited  clans,  all  clans
frequently  gave  wives  to  the  king,  and  were  glad  to  send
their  daughters  to  the  royal  residence,  hoping  that  they  would
become  mothers,  and  that  their  son  might  be  the  future  king,
and  thus  be  able  to  help  the  clan  in  material  things.  The
official  marriage  of  the  king  took  place  at  his  accession;  he
might  indeed  have  several  wives  before  this  time,  all  of  whom
would  be  women  from  the  clans,  that  is  to  say  commoners;
but  the  official  wife  had  to  be  a  daughter  of  the  king's  father.
In  other  words  the  queen  had  to  be  a  princess,  and  if  possible
a  daughter  of  the  king's  father  by  a  different  mother,  that  is
his  half  sister.  The  queen  was  not  expected  to  have  children,
though  she  sometimes  became  a  mother.  She  had  her  own
residence  built  at  a  short  distance  from  the  royal  enclosure,
and  separated  from  it  by  a  running  stream.  She  also  held  the
same  title  as  her  husband,  that  of  Kabaka,  which  is  commonly


168  THE  KING'S  HAREM  [CH.

translated  "king,"  but  is  really  a  word  of  neuter  gender,  and
is  applied  to  the  king,  the  queen,  the  dowager  queen,  and
the  king's  mother,  the  last  named  woman  being  a  commoner
who  is  raised  to  the  position  of  Kabaka  when  her  son  be-
comes king.  This  word  Kabaka  is  often  used  by  peasants
when  speaking  of  any  person  who  is  freed  from  state  labour
and  taxation,  and  a  man  of  whom  we  should  say  that  he  was
given  the  freedom  of  a  city  becomes  a  Kabaka.

The  king  might  take  any  of  his  sisters  into  his  harem  in
addition  to  the  queen,  but  in  their  cases  there  were  no
marriage  ceremonies;  they  came,  as  did  other  women,  by
mutual  agreement  to  be  his  wives.  All  other  princesses  were
forbidden  by  law  to  marry  or  to  have  children,  and  the  penalty
of  death  was  inflicted  for  any  transgression.  This  prohibition
of  marriage  to  princesses  led  to  gross  immorality,  and  prin-
cesses were  commonly  regarded  as  the  most  immoral  class  of
women  in  the  country,  a  belief  which  had  good  ground  for
its  universal  acceptance.  The  young  women  from  the  various
clans  who  were  taken  by  the  king  as  wives  were  treated  with
great  respect  by  the  whole  community,  and  when  one  of  them
became  a  mother  the  event  added  to  her  dignity,  her  clan
members  being  particularly  proud  thereof.  Most  of  these
ladies  had  titles  given  to  them  by  the  king,  and  were  placed
in  good  houses  of  their  own,  with  maids  and  slaves  to  wait
upon  them.  There  were  three  of  these  women  who  were  held
in  special  honour,  the  chief  of  them  being  the  wife  who  had
charge  of  the  fetishes  and  other  religious  emblems;  she  was
known  as  the  "little  slave  of  the  god,"  Kadulubare.  The
other  two  women  were  Nasaza,  whom  we  might  call  "hair-
dresser," and  Kabeja,  "little  princess."  This  latter  wife  was
always  a  favourite;  she  was  chosen  for  her  good  looks  and
general  bearing;  but  the  difficulty  of  her  position  was  that
she  was  liable  to  be  displaced,  if  she  offended  her  lord  in
any  trifling  matter.  The  wife  Nasaza  was  always  chosen  from
the  clan  of  the  king's  father's  mother,  and  was  a  woman  to
whom  he  gave  the  name  grandmother,  as  was  frequently
done  by  the  common  people.  The  son  of  any  woman  whom


X] PREDOMINANCE  OF  FEMALE  BIRTH  169

the  kin,!;  married  was  eligible  for  the throne,  unless  she
belonged  to  one  of  the  prohibited  clans.

According  to  the  most  reliable  information  obtainable,
the  females  outnumbered  the  males;  the  birth-rate  is  said  to
have  been  two  females  to  one  male.  In  addition  to  this
difference  in  the  birth-rate,  men  had  a  much  harder  life  than
women,  and  they  ran  many  more  risks  of  death,  both  from
warfare,  and  also  from  being  captured  as  victims  for  sacrificial
purposes,  though  this  latter  risk  was  not  limited  to  men,  but
affected  women  also.  Women  were  thus  left  in  the  majority,
and  polygamy  seemed  to  be  the  only  means  of  providing
them  with  husbands,  and  the  only  safeguard  against  pro-
miscuous sexual  habits.  For  the  common  necessaries  of  life
a  woman  did  not  require  a  man  to  provide  for  her,  on  the
contrary  a  woman  provided  food  for  the  males  of  a  house ;
one  woman,  with  an  ordinary  garden  of  plantains,  could  in
olden  times  provide  food  for  three  men  without  undue  exer-
tion. When  Christianity  introduced  monogamy  and  broke
down  the  old  social  customs,  hundreds  of  women  were
rendered  husbandless,  without  the  former  rigid  restrictions
to  protect  them  against  their  sexual  desires;  and  when  th<
new  hut  taxes  imposed  by  the  British  Government  made  i1
impossible  for  chiefs  to  provide  homes  for  their  clan  relatives,
hundreds  of  women  were  left  to  face  the  problems  of  life
without  any  special  guardian.  This  freedom  of  women  led  to
terrible  immorality,  and  up  to  the  present  no  solution  has
been  found  to  heal  the  dreadful  sore,  though  various  remedies
are  being  tried.  On  the  other  hand  the  conditions  of  married
life  are  better,  because  under  the  new  customs  a  wife  holds
a  more  honoured  position  in  the  home  than  formerly,  and
further  the  birth-rate  of  children,  the  offspring  of  married
women,  has  increased,  while  the  proportion  of  males  and
females  among  the  infants,  we  are  assured,  is  becoming
equalised.  Not  only  is  this  so,  but  with  the  more  enlightened
methods,  and  the  care  given  at  the  mission  hospitals  during
the  "lying-in"  periods,  the  death-rate  of  infants  has  been
greatly  reduced.


170  SOCIAL  DIFFICULTIES  [CH.

A  dreadful  evil  has  entered  the  country  in  the  form  of
venereal  disease,  brought  by  a  low  class  of  Indian  traders
and  shopkeepers  who,  having  left  their  wives  behind,  or^it
may  be  having  never  been  married,  have  taken  Baganda
women  as  wives  during  their  stay  in  Uganda.  These  men
have  passed  the  sickness  on  to  the  women  whom  they  induced
to  live  with  them,  and  the  latter  have  spread  it  with  terrible
results;  the  disease  is  working  great  havoc  and  undermining
the  constitution  of  the  natives.  Another  evil  which  appeared
with  the  decline  of  the  old  customs,  has  been  that  of  the
cessation  of  cultivation  of  large  areas  of  country.  Every
woman  had,  under  the  old  regime,  a  plot  of  land  assigned
to  her  at  marriage,  which  she  diligently  worked  for  her
husband,  and  which  she  looked  upon  as  her  own  in  right  of
her  marriage;  she  would  not  appeal  to  her  husband  for  help
in  cultivating  this  plot,  but  would  leave  him  free  to  carry
out  his  own  duties  for  the  state,  such  as  building  in  the  royal
enclosure,  road-making,  and  fighting  in  the  frequent  wars  of
the  country.  Tilling  the  land  was  considered  to  be  woman's
work  and  unsuitable  for  a  man,  especially  the  management
of  the  plantain  plot.  When  women  ceased  to  live  in  com-
munities as  the  wives  of  chiefs  or  other  free  men,  or  as
dependents  upon  rich  relatives,  they  also  ceased  to  till  the
land;  thus  large  tracts  of  country  which  had  been  under
cultivation  ran  wild;  while  the  women  gave  themselves  up
to  idleness  and  the  gratification  of  their  worst  passions.

In  the  early  years  of  Christian  missions,  no  special  study
had  been  made  of  the  native  customs,  and  little  was  known
of  the  inner  native  life,  hence  no  missionary  thought  that  any
serious  evil  would  result  from  enforcing  monogamy  upon  a
pagan  nation  which  had  practised  polygamy.  The  numerous
social  difficulties,  also  the  physical  condition  of  the  women,
and  the  paramount  desire  of  a  woman  to  become  a  mother,
were  elements  not  considered  by  the  missionaries.  They
realised  that  a  woman  need  not  be  destitute  because  she
remained  unmarried,  but  this  was  only  one  factor  among
many  which  should  have  been  carefully  considered  before


X] PROBLEMS  FOR  CHRISTIANITY  TO  SOLVE 171

the  old  customs  were  cast  aside.  It  is  quite  certain  that,
could  it  have  been  foreseen  what  the  results  of  the  policy
adopted  would  be,  the  missionaries  would  have  hesitated,
and  have  sought  some  other  method  for  bringing  about  the
necessary  reforms.  The  Christian  Church  has  to  face  a  difficult
problem  to-day,  namely  to  lead  the  remnant  of  the  nation
from  the  morass  of  evil  to  the  sure  ground  of  purity  and
progress;  yet  there  is  every  reason  for  thinking  that  all  will
come  right  in  time.  The  Baganda  are  good  material  to  work
upon,  and  much  may  be  expected  from  such  a  nation,  though
the  difficulties  to  be  faced  are  enormous,  and  call  for  the
wisest  leaders  and  men  with  dauntless  courage.

It  is  from  material  such  as  has  been  described  above  that
some  of  the  most  devoted  workers  in  modern  days  have
been  found  for  the  work  of  native  missionaries;  men  whose
ancestors  for  generations  have  been  ready  to  die  for  what
they  considered  the  good  of  their  country,  and  have  never
hesitated  to  give  themselves  over  even  to  horrible  forms  of
death  for  the  furtherance  of  the  cause  of  their  nation.  So  far
as  the  youths  of  the  land  have  been  tested  educationally,  they
have  shown  abilities  equal  to  those  of  English  schoolboys,
while  in  learning  trades  or  other  ordinary  callings  in  life  they
have  been  quite  equal  to  the  average  man.  In  their  religious
principles  they  have  proved  themselves  to  be  superior  to
others;  their  willingness  to  undertake  a  long  and  wearisome
sojourn  among  people  of  other  tongues  and  different  customs,
with  little  or  no  provision  made  for  them,  and  without  sup-
port from  their  base,  to  live  with  men  of  decidedly  inferior
abilities,  and  to  give  up  home  and  country,  prove  the  genuine-
ness of  their  Christian  profession.  Further,  they  have  risked
their  lives  in  the  cause  of  humanity,  and  many  of  them  have
died  owing  to  their  dauntless  courage  in  trying  to  help  their
fellow  men  who  were  suffering  from  one  of  the  terrible  con-
tagious diseases  which  have  swept  over  the  country,  such  as
sleeping  sickness.  They  have  accepted  trying  conditions  in
order  to  help  those  who  a  few  years  ago  would  not  have  called
forth  their  sympathy,  because  not  of  their  own  tribal  clan.


172  EFFECTS  OF  CHRISTIANITY  [CH.

But  it  is  not  only  these  men  who  have  made  it  their  life's
work  to  serve  their  country  as  teachers  whom  we  must  credit
with  the  wonderful  progress  and  development  of  Uganda;
we  must  also  think  of  hundreds  of  chiefs  of  sterling  quality,
who  have  worked  together  nobly  for  the  good  of  their  fellow
men  and  their  country.  Conspicuous  among  these  Sir  Apolo
Kagwa,  the  prime  minister,  stands  out  as  a  leader,  not  only
in  religious  matters,  but  also  in  civil  and  political  life;  he
has  been  a  wise  guide  and  faithful  leader  in  everything  that
would  lead  to  progressive  development.  He  has  ever  been
ready  to  take  an  active  share  even  in  menial  work  that
would  be  for  the  good  of  the  country;  after  hours  spent  in
court  with  the  consideration  of  complicated  questions  of
government,  he  would  be  found  writing  the  minutes  of
meetings  with  the  results  of  their  discussions,  or  possibly
building  a  house,  making  a  staircase,  or  fashioning  windows
and  doors.  He  was  also  able  to  fit  his  house  with  electric
bells,  he  learnt  to  ride  a  bicycle,  and  he  introduced  habits
of  progress  and  comfort  into  the  small  matters  of  daily  life,
while  during  business  hours  in  court  he  was  introducing  en-
lightened measures  for  governing  the  country,  under  the
guidance  of  British  officers.  In  more  recent  years  he  has
obtained  a  printing  press,  and  has  issued  various  booklets,
giving  the  history  of  the  country,  with  many  valuable  details
concerning  former  kings  and  clans  with  their  peculiarities,
together  with  other  useful  information  In  addition  to  these
booklets  he  has  published  official  pamphlets  and  papers  for
the  guidance  of  chiefs  and  other  persons  in  authority  who  in
the  heart  of  the  country  may  be  cut  off  from  the  help  and
guidance  of  the  British  officials.  From  the  same  press  sug-
gestions on  cotton  growing,  rubber  cultivation,  the  treatment
of  cattle  diseases,  and  so  forth,  have  gone  into  every  district,
written  by  Sir  Apolo  from  information  supplied  by  the
Government  authorities,  or  drawn  up  under  his  supervision,
and  sent  by  him  to  every  chief  who  could  help  the  people  to
carry  out  these  instructions.  Yet  in  spite  of  all  these  labours
he  has  ever  been  studying  new  ideas  for  his  personal  improve-


X]  MEDICAL  MISSIONS  173

ment,  has  collected  information  about  his  own  people  and
his  ancestors,  and  has  found  leisure  to  show  attentions  to
travellers  and  friends,  and  not  least  to  attend  to  family
worship,  Bible  study,  and  religious  services.

Sir  Apolo  was  in  England  for  the  coronation  of  King
Edward  VII,  and  was  the  worthy  recipient  of  knighthood,
an  honour  which  both  he  and  his  people  value  highly.  For
years  this  valued  friend  placed  a  room  in  his  house  at  my
disposal,  where  every  evening  I  could  meet  old  people  who
were  best  able  to  impart  knowledge  of  the  past,  and  to  give
me  information  concerning  the  secrets  of  primitive  worship
which  they  would  not  have  divulged  under  other  circum-
stances. While  Sir  Apolo  deservedly  stands  at  the  head  of  his
nation,  he  is  wisely  and  ably  supported  by  a  large  number  of
capable  men,  whose  lives  will  bear  the  closest  inspection,  and
who  will  become  more  illustrious  the  better  they  are  known.

One  of  the  greatest  boons  to  Uganda  has  been  the  native
hospital,  so  efficiently  managed  by  the  brothers  Drs.  A.  R.  and
J.  H.  Cook;  by  their  zeal  and  personal  efforts  a  building  with
eighty-five  beds  for  natives  suffering  from  general  diseases,
and  a  building  with  thirty-nine  beds  for  sufferers  from  con-
tagious diseases,  also  a  block  for  Indians  with  twelve  beds,
and  another  for  Europeans  with  ten  beds,  have  been  raised.
The  beds  in  these  blocks  of  buildings  are  constantly  full,  and
it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  hundreds  of  lives  are  saved
yearly  by  the  skill  of  these  indefatigable  men  and  their  staff.
The  amount  of  suffering  that  has  been  relieved  by  these  de-
voted men  has  been  immense,  while  most  difficult  operations
have  been  skilfully  carried  out  by  them,  and  scientific  in-
formation, the  result  of  their  research  work,  has  been  given
to  the  medical  world.  In  addition  to  the  hospital  there  is  a
large  dispensary,  where  some  two  hundred  patients  daily
seek  and  receive  assistance.  This  new  and  useful  dispensary
was  built  through  the  munificence  of  Mr  Wellcome  (of  Messrs
Burroughs  and  Wellcome),  who  is  doing  so  much  for  Africa.
It  is  not  only  doing  wonderful  things  for  suffering  humanity,
but  is  also  undertaking  the  most  painstaking  research  work


174  FEAR  OF  SURGICAL  OPERATIONS  [CH.

in  tropical  diseases,  so  that  medical  science  throughout  the
world  is  being  benefited.  Yet  with  all  this  work  so
methodically  carried  on,  the  spiritual  side  is  never  over-
looked, but  is  always  first;  the  medical  staff  is  pre-eminently
a  missionary  staff.

The  reputation  of  these  men  has  deservedly  spread  far
and  wide;  the  fear  and  superstitious  dread  of  the  natives
have  been  broken  down,  and  now  men  and  women  are  brought
long  distances  in  search  of  treatment.  The  one  great  need
is  workers  who  might  set  the  leaders  free  to  train  the  natives
for  the  profession.  It  is  only  a  few  years  since  amputations
have  become  possible,  for  the  native  idea  was  that  the  loss  of
a  limb  involved  a  similar  loss  to  the  ghost,  and  that  such
mutilation  debarred  the  ghost  from  joining  its  clan  members.
This  belief  made  more  terrible  the  frequently  inflicted
punishment  of  mutilation  for  various  offences,  such  as  theft
and  adultery.  The  person  whose  hand  was  hacked  off  was
known  as  a  thief,  the  person  whose  eye  was  gouged  out  was
known  as  an  adulterer,  while  the  loss  of  an  ear  was  the
mark  of  stubborn  disobedience.  These  marks  gave  the  un-
fortunate person  pain  and  inconvenience  in  this  life,  cutting
him  off  from  all  chance  of  promotion  and  degrading  him  to
a  low  social  position,  while  in  the  next  world  his  ghost  was
expelled  from  the  society  of  his  relatives.  These  beliefs
hindered  surgical  work,  because  men  preferred  to  die  with  a
limb  intact  rather  than  to  live  without  it;  and  patience,
sympathy,  and  Christian  perseverance,  were  necessary  to
overcome  such  prejudice  and  superstition.

We  now  pass  to  the  second  rising  of  the  Sudanese  which
had  far  more  serious  consequences  than  the  first,  in  that  it
not  only  resulted  in  greater  loss  of  native  life,  but  also  in  the
loss  of  a  number  of  Englishmen.  This  rising  also  took  place
owing  to  the  discontented  spirit  of  the  Sudanese  troops,  who
had  gradually  returned  to  their  old  position  as  government
troops,  after  having  been  degraded  for  some  time.  My  own
part  in  this  rising  was  but  small,  as  I  only  returned  to  the
country  towards  the  end  of  the  trouble,  having  been  on


X]  SECOND  SUDANESE  RISING  175

furlough  in  England,  and  I  was  journeying  up  country  when
the  fighting  was  at  its  height.  On  our  arrival  at  Mombasa
the  report  reached  us  that  there  was  a  rising  in  Uganda;
with  difficulty  a  few  porters  were  secured  for  the  small  party
which  accompanied  me,  and  we  left  hurriedly  for  the  interior,
before  orders  were  issued  to  stop  travellers  from  proceeding
up  country.  The  route  we  were  to  take  was  through  the
country  occupied  by  the  Masai,  commonly  known  as  the
northern  route,  through  which  the  railway  now  runs.  Only
one  or  two  incidents  worthy  of  note  happened  during  the
journey,  and  these  showed  the  unsettled  state  of  the  country.
The  first  incident  occurred  when  we  were  near  Kavirondo;
here  we  came  upon  a  tribe  in  arms,  but,  after  we  had  seen
the  chief  and  administered  a  little  medicine  to  him  and
dressed  a  bad  ulcer  on  his  leg,  he  not  only  gave  us  liberty  to
pass  through  his  country,  but  also  supplied  all  our  needs,
giving  us  food,  fire- wood,  and  water;  and  his  enmity  against
the  British  was  removed,  and  goodwill  restored.  The  second
trouble  came  when  we  reached  the  British  fort  in  Kavirondo,
where  all  our  porters  were  pressed  into  the  service  of  the
troops  for  the  assistance  of  transport  into  Busoga.  We,  how-
ever, were  taken  down  to  Lake  Victoria,  and  left  stranded  on
the  shore  in  a  deserted  fort,  to  try  to  secure  canoes  or  other
means  for  reaching  Uganda.  The  place  was  new  to  me,  and
I  found  that  none  of  the  tribes  near  us  possessed  canoes,  nor
would  they  act  as  porters;  to  add  to  our  trouble,  we  dis-
covered that  our  barter  goods  were  not  acceptable  to  these
people.  Fortunately  for  us,  after  a  few  days  a  small  steamer
came  from  Uganda,  bringing  a  sick  missionary  and  his  wife,
who  were  going  down  country;  so  we  gladly  availed  ourselves
of  the  opportunity  of  a  passage  in  the  steamer  to  cross  to
Uganda.  We  thus  reached  the  capital,  Mengo,  in  less  time
than  we  should  have  taken,  had  we  travelled  round  the  lake
on  foot  with  our  original  party  and  experienced  no  delay.

In  this  Sudanese  rebellion  the  Baganda  lost  heavily.  On
one  occasion  they  tried  to  rush  a  fort  in  Busoga,  in  which
the  rebels  were  lodged.  The  Sudanese  who  possessed  a  Maxim


176  EFFECTS  OF  WAR  [CH.

gun  waited  until  the  Baganda  were  within  short  range,  when
they  opened  fire,  and  mowed  down  some  hundreds  of  these
brave  warriors  before  any  could  escape.  The  British  suffered
terribly  from  the  want  of  ammunition  and  arms,  as  the  rebels
had  secured  a  large  part  of  the  supplies  before  they  mutinied.
My  friend  and  co-worker,  G.  L.  Pilkington,  famous  for  his
linguistic  abilities  and  for  his  translation  of  the  Bible  into
Luganda,  fell  in  this  rising;  he  was  acting  as  an  interpreter
and  helping  the  forces  generally.  The  brother  of  Macdonald
also  fell  on  the  same  day,  almost  at  the  same  hour;  both
these  men  lie  side  by  side  in  the  cathedral  ground  at
Namirembe,  whither  their  bodies  were  brought  some  time
after  the  rising  was  quelled.  It  was  during  this  Sudanese
rebellion  that  Mwanga,  the  king  of  Uganda,  fled  and  joined
the  rebels  in  the  district  of  Budu  in  southern  Uganda;  here
the  rebels  consisted  mainly  of  Baganda  who  wished  to  throw
off  the  restraints  of  the  British  Government  and  join  the
Sudanese.  For  several  months  this  part  of  the  country  had
been  known  to  be  unsettled,  before  the  Sudanese  rose.  But
this  disturbance  could  not  be  dealt  with  efficiently  owing  to
the  greater  rebellion,  and  measures  had  to  be  delayed  until
the  Sudanese  rising  had  been  suppressed.  At  length  the  rebel
troops  were  overcome,  and  the  Baganda  forces  were  free  to
deal  with  their  own  countrymen.

Under  the  leadership  of  two  or  three  British  officers,  the
natives  then  began  to  attack  Mwanga  and  his  followers,  who
had  by  this  time  joined  Kabarega,  the  rebel  king  of  Bunyoro
in  the  Nile  region.  There  was  no  serious  fighting  between
these  two  kings  and  the  loyal  Baganda;  it  was  rather  a
series  of  skirmishes,  by  means  of  which  the  supporters  of  the
kings  endeavoured  to  keep  back  the  loyal  troops  when  they
had  discovered  the  hiding  places  of  the  fugitives,  until  the
kings  could  escape  to  some  further  place  of  safety.  At  length
the  rebel  kings  were  brought  to  a  stand,  and  were  no
longer  able  to  escape,  their  place  of  hiding  having  been
made  known  by  some  of  their  followers  who  turned  traitors.
In  a  battle  which  followed  the  king  of  Bunyoro  fought


x]  NATIVE  EVANGELISTS  177

bravely,  until  one  of  his  arms  was  shot  through  and  so
shattered  that  he  could  no  longer  hold  his  gun;  afterwards
the  arm  had  to  be  amputated.  Both  the  kings  were  captured
and  taken  to  Mengo,  and  from  thence  were  exiled  to  the
Seychelles.  Mwanga  died  there,  but  Kabarega  is  still  living  on
these  islands.  He  is  now  a  Christian,  having  been  taught  by
some  of  his  people  who  went  to  minister  to  him  in  exile.

At  the  time  of  Mwanga's  flight  one  of  his  wives,  who  was
left  behind,  gave  birth  to  a  son,  and  this  child  lived ;  he  was
the  first  child  of  Mwanga  who  lived  for  more  than  a  few
hours.  Another  wife  of  Mwanga  gave  birth  to  a  son  later
on,  and  this  child  is  also  living.  These  two  sons  of  Mwanga
are  now  grown  up,  the  eldest  having  been  elected  by  the
Government  as  king.  The  chiefs,  Sir  Apolo  Kagwa,  Zakiriya
Kisingire,  and  Silasi  Mugwanya,  were  appointed  regents  to
administer  the  country  during  the  king's  minority  under  the
supervision  of  the  British  Government.  Daudi  Chwa,  the
prince  chosen  by  the  British  Government  as  king,  has  been
educated  by  an  English  tutor  appointed  by  the  Government.
In  Bunyoro  a  grown-up  son  of  Kabarega  was  appointed  to
succeed  his  father,  but  he  soon  showed  that  he  was  not  a  fit
person  to  rule;  he  was  therefore  deposed,  and  another  son
was  placed  on  the  throne  who  still  reigns.  It  was  during  these
troublous  times  that  the  natives  of  Uganda  began  to  show
that  they  were  really  anxious  not  only  to  advance  their  own
countrymen  in  religious  and  secular  knowledge,  but  also  to
carry  Christianity  into  other  countries  where  previously  they
had  never  been  except  to  fight,  plunder,  and  raid  the  people.
The  few  men  chosen  to  begin  the  work  of  evangelists  had  a
very  uphill  task,  because  the  people  to  whom  they  went  only
knew  the  Baganda  as  their  old  foes,  and  naturally  distrusted
them ;  and  they  also  put  every  possible  obstacle  in  their  way,
firmly  believing  that  their  real  object  was  to  obtain  informa-
tion and  to  betray  them  to  their  enemies.  They  would  have
killed  them,  but  they  feared  to  do  so  under  the  new  regime;
they  refused,  however,  to  house  them,  they  tried  to  starve
them,  and  they  boycotted  them;  yet  all  in  vain:  the  teachers

R.U.  12


178  EDUCATIONAL  WORK  [CH.  x

remained  and  slowly  won  their  way  and  gained  the  confidence
of  the  people.  This  work  of  evangelisation  is  still  going
forward,  the  number  of  workers  having  grown  from  a  few
men  into  thousands.  In  addition  to  the  evangelists  there  are
secular  schools  with  masters,  all  of  whom  are  supported  by
the  native  church  independently  of  European  help.  Mis-
sionaries are  lent  to  them  for  special  duties  of  supervision
or  education.  The  elementary  schools  are  at  work  in  the
country  districts,  while  in  the  capital  there  is  an  excellent
secondary  school  which  has  done  much  to  give  better  class
boys  a  more  thorough  education.  More  recently  a  still  higher
school  for  boys  has  been  opened,  and  is  conducted  on  the
principles  of  an  English  Public  School.  There  is  a  great  future
before  this  institution,  which  has  already  proved  itself  useful
to  the  Government  in  supplying  interpreters,  clerks,  and
other  trustworthy  servants,  besides  having  educated  the
numbers  of  young  chiefs  and  secretaries  to  chiefs.  The  girls
of  the  country  are  also  being  cared  for,  and  have  a  High
School,  where  they  are  taught,  not  only  to  become  efficient
wives,  able  to  assist  their  husbands  and  to  take  their  place
as  educated  women  in  a  family,  but  also  to  know  useful
domestic  arts,  such  as  cooking,  housekeeping,  and  needle
work,  while  they  are  also  kept  in  touch  with  their  old  work
of  cultivation.  In  time  past  women  were  never  expected  to
use  a  needle  or  to  know  how  to  make  any  garment;  their
work  was  to  cultivate,  to  cook  in  a  rude  way,  and  occasion-
ally to  sweep  out  the  house  and  recarpet  it  with  sweet-scented
grass.  It  was  the  work  of  the  men  to  prepare  bark-cloth,  and
to  stitch  the  pieces  together  for  a  woman's  mantle.  When
calico  and  cotton  goods  were  introduced,  the  men  still  made
the  garments  at  first,  and  the  only  new  occupation  which
women  learnt  was  mat-making  and  some  new  kinds  of
basketry.  Some  of  the  old  baskets  were  of  fine  texture,
neatly  woven  with  coloured  strands,  which  were  worked
into  artistic  patterns.


CHAPTER  XI

NATIVE  GOVERNMENT— REDISTRIBUTION  OF  LAND

IN  the  last  chapter  we  noticed  some  of  the  unfortunate
effects  which  were  caused  by  the  changes  in  social  insti-
tutions; the  sudden  change  from  a  polygamous  to  a  mono-
gamous life  had  not  been  sufficiently  thought  out,  nor  had  /
adequate  provision  been  made  to  meet  the  break-down  of  /
the  old  laws,  which  restrained  society  by  fear  ensuring  moral
conduct.  Women,  for  example,  were  not  strong  enough  in
the  faith  of  their  new  religion  to  resist  sensual  desires;  they
were  not  prepared  to  live  pure  and  upright  lives  without  thec/
support  of  the  strong  arm  of  primitive  custom  and  law,  or
the  fear  of  the  husband  whom  they  had  lost,  and  since  no
other  provision  had  been  made  for  them,  they  fell  away  into
unchaste  habits.  When  they  were  liberated  from  the  old  status
of  drudgery  and  slavery  of  a  heathen  wife,  and  an  attempt
was  made  to  raise  them  to  a  higher  level  as  wives  of  Christian
men,  in  accordance  with  Christian  ideas,  they  took  unfair
advantage  of  their  freedom.  In  some  cases  a  wife  became  a
burden  and  a  source  of  worry  to  her  husband,  and  instead
of  being  a  help  to  him,  she  became  extravagant  in  her  dress,
aping  Western  ideas,  while  in  other  cases  where  husbands
had  set  free  their  wives  to  remarry  according  to  Christian
rule,  and  husbands  could  not  be  found  for  them,  they  yielded
to  their  worst  passions,  and  proved  a  scourge  to  the  nation.
One  of  the  great  aims  of  the  missionaries  has  been  to  give
the  people  some  idea  of  the  happiness  of  home  life ;  parents
have  been  induced  to  keep  their  children  at  home  instead  of
sending  them  away  to  relatives,  in  conformity  with  the  old
heathen  custom  of  handing  them  over  to  their  clan  elders;
and  they  have  been  advised  to  train  them  according  to
Christian  principles.  This  task,  utterly  foreign  to  the  nation,
is  still  being  urged,  and  it  is  beginning  to  show  good  results
in  certain  directions;  it  has,  however,  many  disadvantages


12 — 2


i8o WOMEN  EAGER  TO  LEARN  TO  WRITE [CH.

which  time  alone  will  overcome.  In  many  Christian  homes,
as  in  all  heathen  homes,  the  education  of  girls  has  been  looked
upon  with  distrust  and  disfavour ;  it  has  taken  years  to  make
parents  realise  their  duty  to  their  daughters  in  this  respect,
for  it  was  thought  that  boys  alone  had  mental  ability  and
needed  to  be  educated,  whereas  girls  were  incapable  of  thought
and  needed  no  mental  culture.  There  were  some  remarkably
clever  women  with  natural  abilities,  who  quickly  mastered  the
art  of  reading  and  writing,  as  soon  as  the  authorities  per-
mitted them  to  learn;  these  were,  however,  the  exceptions,
the  vast  majority  being  lazy  and  ignorant,  except  in  purely
domestic  matters  in  which  respect  they  showed  considerable
skill.  The  writer  well  remembers  one  of  Mwanga's  wives
sending  a  little  girl  to  him  with  the  request  that  he  should
write  a  letter  to  herself.  The  request  seemed  strange,  and
was  unwillingly  granted,  perhaps  mainly  in  order  to  be  freed
from  the  child's  presence.  After  some  three  or  four  months
the  same  child  appeared  again  with  a  letter  said  to  have  come
from  her  mistress;  this  letter  was  a  puzzle  to  me,  and  I  sup-
posed that  it  was  my  former  letter  returned.  The  child,  how-
ever, persisted  in  saying  that  she  saw  her  mistress  write  it ;  and
after  further  questioning  it  became  evident  that  the  mistress
had  in  the  first  instance  wanted  a  letter  from  me  as  a  copy,
in  order  to  learn  to  write.  For  weeks  she  had  been  diligently
writing  and  rewriting  that  letter,  until  at  length  the  copy  was
so  perfect  that  it  might  be  taken  for  the  original.  Some  women
were  very  diligent  and  painstaking  in  their  desire  for  mental
culture,  while  others  only  wished  to  learn  to  read,  though
in  other  respects  they  were  exemplary  wives,  diligent  in
household  duties.  On  the  other  hand,  many  women  whose
husbands  desired  to  raise  them  above  the  old  level,  tried  to
dress  extravagantly,  brought  their  husbands  into  debt  with
Indian  shopkeepers,  and  mismanaged  their  homes.  A  severe
trial  which  awaited  many  women  and  caused  discontent
among  them,  arose  from  the  isolation  to  which  they  were
exposed  by  being  left  unprotected  in  distant  parts  of  the
country  during  the  enforced  absence  of  their  husbands,  who


xi]  NATIVE  GOVERNMENT  181

were  taken  to  some  labour  station,  to  fulfil  a  term  of  work
for  the  Government.

Owing  to  the  wars  and  rebellions  during  Mwanga's  reign  \
the  male  population  was  greatly  reduced,  and  when  the  king
fled  the  country,  he  further  diminished  the  number,  and  left  V£;
the  land  with  only  a  child  for  its  king.  About  this  time  new
tracts  of  country  had  been  added  to  the  kingdom,  and  a
number  of  new  chieftainships  had  been  established,  which
demanded  an  increased  number  of  peasants  for  the  cultiva-
tion of  these  lands,  but  they  were  not  forthcoming;  and  not
only  so,  but  there  were  fewer  women  available  than  had  ever
been  in  the  past.  The  abolition  of  slavery  had  already  con- I
siderably  reduced  the  number  of  women  on  the  land,  and  now j
the  disorganisation  of  the  old  polygamous  system  reduced  v>
the  number  of  workers  still  further,  and  that  at  a  time  when
there  was  a  need  of  an  increase  rather  than  a  decrease  of
labourers.

To  understand  how  the  new  land  regulations  affected  the
country,  it  is  necessary  to  give  a  brief  account  of  the  govern-
ment.

Before  the  British  came,  the  king  was  in  reality  an  autocrat,
though  his  usual  policy  was  more  democratic  than  it  is  often
thought  to  have  been.  For  example,  the  principal  chiefs  were
usually  consulted,  and  were  also  allowed  in  almost  every  in-
stance, when  necessity  arose,  to  nominate  a  man  for  any
vacant  office.  This  body  of  principal  rulers  was  in  some
respects  like  our  House  of  Lords;  their  official  position  gave
them  the  right  to  sit  in  council,  to  discuss  the  most  private
questions  of  the  day,  and  submit  their  decisions  to  the  king,
who  rarely  rejected  them.

In  public  meetings,  held  either  in  the  prime  minister's
court  or  in  the  royal  courts,  to  discuss  social  problems,
peasants  did  not  hesitate  to  stand  up  and  give  their  opinions
in  the  matter  under  discussion;  the  humblest  person  had
the  right  to  be  present,  and  to  make  himself  heard  when
an  important  question,  which  would  affect  him,  was  being
considered.  In  all  these  meetings  of  the  various  courts  a


182  CLOTHING  [CH.

certain  etiquette  was  followed  which  no  man  dared  infringe;
thus,  no  man  ever  sat  on  a  raised  seat,  but  always  on  a  rug
or  mat,  while  nearness  to  the  king  was  reserved  for  the  more
important  chiefs.  Again,  no  man  would  dare  to  step  upon  the
king's  rug  or  even  to  brush  against  it,  for  then  he  would  have
incurred  instant  death.  Further,  no  man  dared  sneeze  or
blow  his  nose  in  court ;  such  acts  indicated  colds,  which  were
infectious,  and  a  danger  to  the  life  of  the  sovereign ;  any  in-
fringement of  these  rules  was  punishable  by  fine  or  even  by
death.  The  king  alone  sat  on  a  raised  seat,  which  in  early
days  was  a  mound  of  beaten  earth,  and  was  later  surmounted
by  a  stool  covered  with  a  beautifully  dressed  rug  composed
of  lion  and  leopard  skins,  these  being  the  skins  of  the  royal
totemic  animals.  Chiefs  sat  on  cow-skin  or  on  antelope-
skin  rugs,  which  were  well  dressed  and  supple ;  in  later  days
prettily  woven  mats,  made  by  women  from  the  fronds  of
palm  leaves  and  dyed  red  and  black,  were  introduced  into
the  country  by  coast  traders,  and  used  by  chiefs  to  sit  on.
The  art  of  dressing  skins  had  reached  a  high  standard;  there
were  men  who  gave  the  whole  of  their  time  to  this  work
and  to  the  making  of  sandals  from  buffalo  hide ;  these  sandals
were  worn  by  royalty  and  chiefs  alone,  while  poorer  people
went  bare-footed.

A  variety  of  materials  for  dress  were  used.  The  custom
of  wearing  clothes  had  advanced  from  the  small  skin  of
the  goat  worn  round  the  waist  by  married  women  when
away  from  home,  to  the  mantle  of  skins  stitched  together;
the  bark-cloth  robe  was  next  introduced  and  enforced  upon
all  classes,  and  later  the  use  of  calico  and  fine  linen  garments,
with  hand  embroidery  on  them,  like  the  smocking  on  farm
labourers'  smocks,  became  the  clothing  of  the  better  classes
of  society.  There  was  a  time,  little  beyond  the  memory  of
those  now  living,  when  neither  sex  wore  clothing,  the  only
article  worn  being  an  apron  for  men,  used  especially  for  sitting
upon,  while  the  women  went  about  naked.  Clothing,  that  is
to  say  the  bark-cloth,  was  not  introduced  so  much  from  a
sense  of  decency,  as  because  it  became  a  source  of  revenue


xi]  IDEAS  OF  MORALITY  183

to  the  state.  A  former  king  ordered  the  people  to  plant  trees
of  the  kind  from  which  bark-cloth  is  made,  and  appointed
them  a  set  time  when  they  were  to  begin  to  wear  clothing,
and  any  infringement  of  this  order  was  punished  by  a  fine.
The  bark-cloth  has  from  that  date  onwards  been  one  of  the
chief  national  assets  in  the  annual  taxation  of  the  country,
and  has  also  supplied  the  needs  of  the  nation,  both  for  wearing
apparel  and  for  bed  clothing.  We  must  not  forget  the  fact
that  the  possession  of  clothing  in  primitive  countries  is  no
guide  to  the  state  of  morality,  though  as  civilisation  enters
any  place,  clothing  is  introduced.  It  is  the  social  and  religious
customs  of  a  nation  with  their  concomitant  beliefs  which
regulate  morality.  Thus,  in  some  parts,  it  may  be  said  that
the  people  are  most  careful  about  clothing,  and  yet  are  im-
moral. Again,  the  code  of  morality  differs  considerably;  in
some  places  there  is  free  and  unrestrained  sexual  intercourse
between  unmarried  people,  whereas  a  married  woman  is
strictly  confined  to  her  husband,  and  death  is  the  punish-
ment for  any  breach  of  the  rule;  in  other  tribes  young  women
are  carefully  guarded  against  intercourse  with  males  until
their  marriage,  but  from  that  time  restrictions  are  removed,
and  a  wife  is  expected  to  welcome  her  husband's  guests  to
her  couch.  In  each  case  it  will  be  found  that  the  religious
ideas  of  the  tribe  regulate  the  standard  of  morality,  defining
what  is,  and  what  is  not,  a  legitimate  moral  act,  and  the  fear  of
ghostly  punishment  for  a  transgression  has  greater  effect  than
any  punishment  which  the  government  may  inflict.

This  brings  us  to  the  period  of  evolution  in  Uganda,  when
skins  of  animals  ceased  to  be  articles  of  clothing,  and  came
to  be  used  as  rugs  to  sit  upon ;  now  both  men  and  women  are
carefully  clothed,  either  in  bark-cloth  or  in  calico  garments,
and  the  body  is  covered  to  an  extent  which  would  satisfy
Western  ideas  of  decency.

Whenever  the  king  took  his  seat  in  the  court,  there  were
two  men  seated  behind  him,  whose  duty  it  was  to  support
his  chair  and  to  steady  it,  lest  it  should  topple  over;  and
behind  these  men  two  or  three  wives  of  the  king  sat,  listened  J


184  ROYAL  RECEPTIONS  [CH.

to  all  that  was  said,  and  kept  an  eye  upon  all  present,  to
warn  their  lord,  if  necessary,  of  any  danger.  The  presence  of
these  women  was  a  survival  of  the  barbarous  days  when
the  wife  was  the  most  natural  person  to  guard  her  husband,
and  to  warn  him  of  any  approaching  danger,  should  there
be  any  cause  for  suspicion.  The  king  had  two  royal  spears,
one  made  of  copper  and  the  other  of  brass,  placed  within  his
reach,  ready  for  any  emergency;  it  is  related  that  in  former
days  he  did  not  hesitate  to  use  them,  if  he  was  contradicted
or  crossed  by  any  person  in  court.  In  later  days  it  was,
however,  seldom  necessary  for  the  king  to  assert  himself,  for
few  men  would  dare  to  utter  a  word  against  their  lord;  and
had  any  man  done  so,  he  would  have  been  struck  down  at  once
by  some  of  the  retainers,  or  by  one  of  the  royal  bodyguard
stationed  about  in  the  hall.  During  the  sitting  of  the  court
there  were  numbers  of  this  special  police-force  or  bodyguard
standing  about  among  the  assembled  crowds;  they  were
armed  with  spears,  and  had  a  coil  of  rope  twisted  round  their
heads  like  a  turban ;  the  rope  was  intended  to  bind  any  man
whom  the  king  might  order  them  to  seize.

At  these  public  sittings  every  kind  of  business  was  dis-
cussed, and  the  meetings  were  enlivened  by  amusing  accounts
of  current  events,  or  stories  of  huntsmen  who  had  escaped
death  from  some  animal  in  the  chase,  and  also  by  the  exhi-
bition of  any  peculiar  growth  of  vegetables.  Six  to  eight
hours  was  the  usual  time  for  a  meeting  to  last ;  the  people
began  t.o  assemble  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and
remained  in  council  until  about  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,
when  the  king  rose  and  ended  the  meeting.  The  royal  brewers
supplied  a  quantity  of  plantain  beer  for  these  gatherings ;  it
was  placed  ready  for  the  gathering  in  a  hut  near  the  reception
hall,  and  guarded  by  special  attendants,  who  doled  it  out  to
the  chiefs  and  to  their  retainers,  whenever  they  wished  to
refresh  themselves  during  the  hours  when  the  court  was
sitting.  In  these  meetings  the  king  learnt  about  his  kingdom,
and  gained  such  accurate  knowledge  of  the  country  that  he
could  describe  distant  places' with  minute  detail;  this  enabled


xi]  A  CHIEF'S  REPRESENTATIVE  185

him  to  rule  with  great  wisdom,  and  to  decide  matters  con-
cerning places  which  he  had  never  visited;  it  also  gave  him
an  intelligent  interest  in  the  country,  advantageous  to  the
needs  of  the  people.  He  also  learnt  in  these  meetings  to
gauge  the  feeling  of  the  country  accurately,  and  if  any  chief
absented  himself  for  more  than  two  meetings  in  succession
without  special  permission,  the  cause  had  to  be  made  known  ;
it  was  an  old  custom  to  regard  as  a  rebel  any  chief  who
absented  himself  from  a  meeting;  the  latter  was  called  to
account  for  his  absence,  and  even  if  he  was  pardoned,  he  had
to  pay  a  fine  for  his  discourtesy.  Absence  from  court  assem-
blies in  the  days  when  princes  were  allowed  to  remain  alive,
invariably  pointed  to  some  plot,  or  some  rebellion  which  was
being  hatched  by  the  chief  in  connection  with  one  of  the
princes.  The  more  influential  chiefs  were  obliged  to  lead  the
greater  part  of  their  lives  in  the  capital,  so  as  to  be  near  the
king,  to  help  in  case  of  need,  and  to  take  part  in  the  govern-
ment, leaving  their  estates  to  the  care  of  some  trusted  relative
or  friend.  The  man  who  managed  the  estate  of  a  chief  took
the  title  of  the  master  during  the  period  he  acted  for  him;
he  tried  and  decided  cases  unless  they  were  of  a  serious  nature,
in  which  case  he  sent  them  to  the  chief.

When  it  became  necessary  for  a  chief  to  go  into  the  country,
he  first  obtained  the  king's  permission  to  absent  himself
from  court,  and  next  appointed  his  representative  in  the
capital,  who  appeared  at  any  gatherings  of  the  court  in  his
stead,  bearing  his  title  and  watching  over  his  interests.
Many  amusing  mistakes  have  been  made  by  Englishmen
who  did  not  know  this  custom  of  a  chief  appointing  a  repre-
sentative, and  sometimes  the  mistakes  became  serious.  For
instance,  on  one  occasion  when  certain  carriers  who  had  been
employed  by  a  British  Government  official,  represented  to
him  that  part  of  their  pay  had  been  withheld  by  an  important
chief,  whereas  they  meant  the  representative;  the  officer  was
naturally  annoyed,  because  the  work  done  had  given  him
satisfaction,  and  he  had  sent  special  pay  for  the  men.  The
accused  chief  was  called  and  questioned,  and  he  truthfully


186  NEW  MOON  CEREMONIES  [CH.

said  that  he  did  not  know  anything  about  the  deduction,
but  that  he  would  investigate  the  matter.  Thereupon  the
officer,  not  understanding  the  custom  of  appointing  a
representative  who  bore  his  master's  title,  denounced  the
chief  as  a  thief  and  a  liar,  and  it  required  some  explana-
tion to  reinstate  him  in  the  officer's  confidence  and  good
opinion.  In  another  instance,  where  an  officer  thought  that
he  had  complete  evidence  of  a  chief's  guilt  in  some  particular
matter,  he  wished  to  have  the  man,  though  he  was  really
innocent,  deposed  from  his  chieftainship,  because  the  latter
truthfully  said  that  he  did  not  know  anything  about  the
offence  with  which  he  was  charged,  and  the  officer  did  not
understand  the  custom  of  representatives.  Fortunately  the
incident  was  related  to  a  person  who  understood  native
customs;  he  suggested  further  enquiries  being  made,  with
the  result  that  the  chief's  representative  was  found  to  be
the  culprit.

Let  us  retrace  our  steps  to  the  king's  court  and  his  recep-
tions, which  were  held  at  short  intervals  of  a  few  days.
There  were  no  divisions  of  days  into  weeks;  the  new  moon
alone  served  to  divide  the  year  into  months,  and  the  year  was
marked  by  the  rains,  which  came  at  the  end  of  six  months,
so  that  a  year  consisted  of  six  moons,  and  a  moon  of  twenty-
eight  days.  At  the  appearance  of  each  moon  there  was  a  rest
of  at  least  one  day,  though  in  some  places  it  lasted  for  several
days,  and  at  one  or  two  temples  it  was  marked  by  a  cessation
of  work  for  nine  days  while  special  worship  was  enacted.
The  new  moon  was  the  time  for  special  ceremonies,  the  most
important  being  the  meeting  of  the  king's  officers,  when  many
royal  fetishes  were  presented,  and  the  particular  fetish  called
the  "twin,"  the  stump  of  the  umbilical  cord  of  the  king,
was  brought  before  his  majesty  in  solemn  procession  and
presented  to  him  by  the  guardian  of  the  sacred  relics.  In
these  monthly  ceremonies  the  king  showed  himself  to  be  the
head  of  the  whole  religious  worship.

Apart  from  the  general  receptions  it  was  difficult  for  any
one  to  see  the  king;  even  the  most  important  chiefs  had  to  go


xi]  NATIVE  HOSPITALITY  1*7

through  a  tedious  process  of  waiting  and  being  announced,
and  sometimes  the  waiting  lasted  a  whole  day,  before  they
were  taken  into  the  royal  presence;  while  unimportant  chiefs
and  peasants  might  go  day  after  day,  and  wait  from  early
morning  until  evening,  hoping  to  receive  the  necessary  invita-
tion to  be  allowed  to  lay  some  private  matter  before  his
majesty.  The  only  comfort  these  waiting  visitors  had  was  the
society  of  other  companions  in  waiting,  for  they  were  seldom
alone,  and  there  were  generally  several  others  on  similar
errands,  with  whom  they  might  converse.  It  was  easier  and
on  the  whole  more  satisfactory  for  people  to  see  the  prime
minister,  and  lay  theii  matters  before  him,  and  leave  him
to  take  their  cases  to  the  king;  there  were,  however,  times
when  men  preferred  to  wait  and  present  their  petitions  to
the  king  personally,  when  they  hoped  to  gain  royal  favour
by  some  gift.  When  any  person  of  note  was  admitted  to  the
king,  a  man,  who  was  a  special  drummer,  beat  a  peculiar
rhythm  on  his  drum,  and  made  a  deep  growling  noise,  like
that  of  a  lion,  as  the  visitor  entered  and  passed  in  to  the
king.  I  have  never  been  able  to  discover  the  purpose  of  this
drum,  though  I  still  think  that  it  had  some  ceremonial
significance.

People  visiting  the  prime  minister  were  sure  to  receive
a  meal,  if  they  were  detained  until  the  meal  hour,  because
it  was  one  of  the  features  of  his  office  to  keep  open  house
and  to  serve  meals  to  all  who  came  into  his  enclosure;
and  servants,  even  the  most  menial,  received  a  meal  as  well
as  their  masters.  One  of  the  most  pleasant  phases  of  Uganda
life  in  those  old  days  was  the  hospitality  of  all  classes ;  every
family  was  expected  to  receive  even  the  passing  stranger  and
to  provide  him  with  food,  so  that  no  one  ever  went  away
hungry;  no  matter  in  what  part  of  the  country  he  was
travelling,  a  man  was  always  sure  of  a  meal,  and,  if  necessary,
of  a  place  in  which  he  might  pass  the  night.  It  was  impolite,
indeed  positively  rude,  to  stand  and  gaze  upon  people  when
they  were  at  a  meal,  and  it  was  not  polite  or  customary  to
salute  a  family  or  to  ask  them  how  they  were,  while  they


188  A  CHIEF  AT  HOME  [CH.

were  eating.  The  proper  course  was  to  approach  the  party,
when  the  host  would  at  once  invite  the  visitor  to  share  the
meal,  and  when  it  was  ended,  the  guest  would  salute  the  host
and  the  other  persons  present.

When,  therefore,  litigants  went  to  the  prime  minister  and
were  kept  waiting  while  other  cases  were  being  tried,  they
would  not  be  forgotten  at  meal  time.  The  inevitable  change
which  has  taken  place,  owing  to  the  country  having  become
a  Protectorate,  and  through  advancing  trade  and  commerce,
has  obliterated  the  pleasant  old  custom  of  hospitality.  Chiefs
now  have  their  meals  in  private,  when  only  friends  can  ap-
proach them;  and  they  seldom  ask  anyone  except  special
friends  to  share  their  meal.  Again,  chiefs  have  now  to  buy
food,  and  they  find  it  difficult  to  supply  even  those  dependent
on  them  with  the  necessary  daily  provisions,  so  that  hospitality
is  perforce  limited.  In  the  enclosures  of  chiefs  the  men  had
their  meals  apart  from  the  women,  though  the  wife  of  a  chief
usually  acted  as  waitress  and  dished  up  the  mashed  plantain
food;  sometimes  she  would  divide  it,  and  give  a  portion  to
each  person,  and  add  to  it  if  necessary,  and  if  there  was
butcher's  meat,  she  would  cut  it  up  and  hand  it  round ;  she
also  provided  sponges  for  washing  the  hands  before  and  after
the  meal.  Every  chief  was  a  magistrate  in  his  own  district,
even  if  his  chieftainship  was  of  little  importance,  and  he  was
only  raised  above  the  status  of  an  ordinary  free  man  by  having
a  small  estate  with  four  or  five  tenants.  The  more  important
chiefs  were  accorded  great  honour  when  they  visited  their
country  residences;  they  sat  daily  in  their  court  houses,  and
received  visitors  from  every  part  of  their  district;  men  of
every  rank  with  all  kinds  of  business  came  to  visit  them,
reported  the  progress  of  the  district  and  talked  over  small
news.  When  there  were  no  cases  to  be  tried,  the  chief  sat
with  his  guests  and  talked  over  the  news  of  the  country,  or
told  his  people  the  affairs  of  the  capital.  As  writing  was  un-
known, everything  was  committed  to  memory,  and  both
historical  and  geographical  facts  were  remembered  and  re-
told with  great  accuracy;  besides  having  a  retentive  memory


xi]  FORMS  OF  PUNISHMENT  189

these  people  were  gifted  with  rhetorical  powers,  which  made
their  conversation  interesting  and  instructive.

The  cases  for  trial  were  chiefly  confined  to  matters  con-
cerning property,  magic,  matrimonial  disputes,  and  theft;
in  a  large  district  there  was  always  some  person  wanting  to
go  to  law.  In  most  cases  chiefs  had  the  power  of  life  and
death,  hence  it  behoved  the  relatives  of  an  accused  person
to  use  all  the  influence  and  power  of  the  clan  at  his  trial,
because,  should  a  chief  condemn  a  man  to  death,  and  the
sentence  be  carried  out,  he  would  seldom  be  called  to  account
for  his  action.  Still,  any  man  who  was  tried  in  any  inferior
court  had  the  right  to  appeal  to  a  higher  court,  and  it  was
the  imperative  duty  of  the  relatives  of  a  condemned  person
to  take  prompt  steps,  if  they  wished  to  avail  themselves  of
any  such  right  of  appeal,  and  save  the  prisoner  from  death.
There  were  court  fees  to  be  paid  before  a  case  would  receive
a  hearing.  The  punishment  inflicted  by  inferior  courts  was
invariably  a  fine,  which  was  graduated  according  to  the
gravity  of  the  offence;  the  successful  litigant  received  the
greater  part  of  the  fine  imposed,  the  remainder  went  to  the
state.  There  were  no  prisons,  and  therefore  fines  were  the
easiest  method  and  also  the  most  remunerative  form  of
punishment ;  there  were,  however,  occasions  when  men  were
put  into  the  stocks,  for  instance,  when  they  failed,  either  from
inability  or  from  disinclination,  to  pay  the  fine,  in  which  case
they  were  detained  until  the  amount  was  paid.  In  more
serious  cases,  especially  for  the  crime  of  adultery,  mutilation
or  death  was  the  summary  punishment.  The  common  stocks
were  made  by  boring  a  hole  through  a  log  of  wood  large
enough  for  the  foot  of  the  culprit  to  be  thrust  through  it,  and
he  was  prevented  from  withdrawing  it  by  a  peg  being  driven
through  the  log  at  right  angles  to  the  hole,  thus  narrowing
the  aperture,  so  that  the  foot  could  not  be  removed  until  the
peg  was  cut  out.  When  a  prisoner  thus  detained  wished  to
move,  he  had  to  carry  the  log  by  means  of  a  string  tied  to  it,
thus  relieving  his  foot  of  some  of  the  weight.  This  method  of
detention  lessened  the  amount  of  close  watching  to  prevent


190  THE  POWER  OF  MAGIC  [CH.

a  prisoner  from  escaping  which  otherwise  would  have  been
required.  During  the  period  of  detention  a  prisoner  had  to
find  his  own  food;  it  was  part  of  his  punishment  to  do  this^or
go  hungry.

An  interesting  feature  frequent  in  cases  of  imprisonment
was  that  men  could,  and  often  did,  bribe  their  custodian  to
release  them  for  some  hours;  the  prisoner  would  then  visit
some  relative  or  friend,  with  the  object  of  securing  assistance
to  effect  his  permanent  release.  He  would  be  released  by  his
keeper  at  dusk  and  would  make  a  rapid  visit,  under  cover  of
the  darkness,  to  one  or  other  of  his  relatives  and  ask  for  help,
and  would  return  before  daylight  and  be  in  his  place  in  the
morning,  awaiting  the  result  of  his  night's  work.  Not  a  single
instance  is  known  of  the  leniency  of  the  guard  having  been
abused  by  the  non-return  of  the  prisoner.

Burglary  was  not  common;  there  were,  however,  adept
thieves  who  sometimes  visited  houses  where  it  was  known
that  numbers  of  goats  or  sheep  were  kept.  These  burglars
were  believed  to  make  magic  which  rendered  the  inmates
helpless,  and  caused  them  to  sleep  heavily  while  their  house
was  being  plundered.  Such  burglaries  took  place  by  night
when  a  district  was  asleep.  The  burglars  have  been  known  to
enter  a  house,  kill  a  goat  in  the  hut,  cook  the  meat,  and  eat
a  hearty  meal,  while  the  owner  lay  looking  on,  utterly  unable
to  move  or  to  call  for  help ;  he  asserted  afterwards  that  it  was
not  fear,  but  the  power  of  magic  which  held  him  spell-bound.
In  the  morning  the  skin  of  the  animal  and  the  remains  of  the
meal  were  found  lying  there,  all  the  goats  and  sheep  having
been  driven  away.  Sometimes  other  property  was  stolen ;  as
the  native  currency  was  placed  between  bark-cloths  on  which
the  owner  lay,  the  thieves  would  sometimes  lift  the  sleeping
person  from  the  bed,  deposit  him  on  the  floor,  and  carry  off
the  money.  The  owner  would  awake  to  the  fact  of  his  loss  in
the  morning,  when  the  thieves  were  clear  away.

Most  houses  were  protected  by  fetishes  placed  near  the
door,  and  a  bundle  of  powerful  magical  objects  over  the  door,
which  were  supposed  to  prevent  thieves  from  entering.  If  they


XI]


PUNISHMENT  OF  THIEVES


191


entered,  the  magic  would  work,  and  they  would  become  power-
less to  leave  the  house,  and  would  be  captured.  Houses  were
never  secured  during  the  daytime  when  the  owner  was  absent
in  the  fields,  and  property  was  seldom  missed  from  a  home
during  such  absence,  the  code  of  honour  among  the  residents
of  the  village  being  too  high  to  stoop  to  such  base  actions.
Thieves  stealing  either  from  a  house  or  a  garden  might  be
killed,  without  any  fear  of  the  blood  avenger,  as  no  relative
would  seek  to  avenge  such  a  death;  the  theft  was  quite
sufficient  to  estrange  the  guilty  person  and  to  cut  him  off
from  all  clan  claims  of  protection.  The  most  frequent  form
of  theft  was  to  take  food,  and  it  was  quite  a  common  custom
to  spear  a  thief  when  he  was  stealing  plantains  from  a  garden,
and  then  to  tie  the  food  which  he  gathered  round  his  neck,
and  cast  the  body  from  the  garden  on  to  the  nearest  road
side.  The  body  of  a  slain  thief  would  be  left  unburied,  for
wild  animals  to  devour,  the  thief  being  regarded  as  an  out-
cast from  society,  discarded  by  his  clan,  and  his  ghost,  it
was  thought,  would  find  no  welcome  in  the  ghost  world
among  its  own  clan  members.

The  business  of  the  day  was  done  by  the  chiefs  in  the  early
morning  hours,  and  after  the  duties  were  ended  a  plentiful
supply  of  plantain  beer  was  brought,  enough  for  a  convivial
gathering  lasting  several  hours.  Though  not  very  intoxicating,
it  was  strong  enough  to  muddle  the  brain  before  night.  It
was  drunk  through  tubes  which  were  not  unlike  straws,  only
more  durable ;  during  the  drinking  ordinary  conversation  was
carried  on  until  afternoon,  when  most  of  the  visitors  left  for
their  homes.  In  the  evening  at  sunset,  that  is  about  half-past
six,  the  smouldering  logs  in  the  fireplace  in  the  centre  of  the
hut  were  blown  into  a  blaze,  and  as  the  darkness  increased,
a  torch  of  elephant  grass  was  used  to  light  up  the  hut,  and  the
conversation  continued  until  late  in  the  evening.  The  visitors
who  lived  near  and  wished  to  stay,  partook  of  the  evening
meal,  and  remained  with  the  chief  until  nine  o'clock  or  later.

The  prime  minister  seldom  visited  his  property  in  the
country;  as  his  presence  was  required  in  the  capital,  he


IQ2  A  CHIEFS  TOWN  RESIDENCE  [CH.

could  not  spare  time  to  take  holidays  on  his  estates;  and  he
rarely  gave  way  to  excessive  drinking,  his  duties  being  of  such
a  character  that  he  could  not  afford  to  yield  to  the  temptation,
and  needed  his  faculties  for  the  many  political  problems  with
which  he  had  to  deal.  A  chief,  resident  in  the  capital,  would
expect  to  be  readily  admitted  to  the  prime  minister's  resi-
dence, and  would  often  remain  there  until  nine  or  ten  o'clock
at  night,  if  there  were  any  reason  for  prolonged  discussion.

The  capital  was  divided  up  into  a  number  of  sites  corre-
sponding to  the  country  districts;  every  leading  chief  was
surrounded  by  the  minor  chiefs  from  his  district,  and  a
portion  of  uncultivated  land  was  left  on  which  peasants
could  build  temporary  huts  when  they  were  required  to
reside  in  the  capital  for  state  work.  By  this  plan  all  the
people  from  a  particular  district  were  kept  together,  and
the  sites  remained  the  official  residences  of  the  chiefs  of  the
districts  to  which  the  sites  belonged.  Chiefs  built  high  fences
of  reeds  round  their  estates  in  the  capital ;  the  fence  bordering
on  the  main  road  leading  to  the  capital  was  always  neatly
finished,  and  the  space  in  front  of  the  gate  was  kept  swept  and
free  from  weeds.  Within  the  enclosure  there  was  a  con-
siderable amount  of  land  cultivated,  with  plantain  trees  which
were  well  cared  for ;  and  the  fruit  of  these  trees  supplemented
the  food  which  was  brought  up  from  the  country  estate,  and
also  supplied  the  table  in  any  emergency.  Every  chief  built
a  number  of  houses  within  his  enclosure,  not  only  for  his  own
use  and  that  of  his  wives,  but  also  for  slaves  and  retainers,  and
a  supply  too  for  casual  visitors  who  might  wish  to  stay  with
him  for  a  day  or  two.  When  a  chief  was  promoted,  or  deposed,
he  had  to  leave  the  site  on  which  he  had  been  living  within  a
few  hours;  this  was  so  ordered  to  prevent  chiefs  from  using  all
the  food  on  the  site,  and  from  causing  destruction  to  the  pro-
perty. In  the  country  a  chief  built  many  huts,  and  enclosed
them  within  a  high  strong  fence;  he  also  surrounded  himself
with  relations,  male  and  female,  and  with  retainers  and  slaves,
in  addition  to  his  many  wives.  The  women  cultivated  extensive
plantain  groves  and  supplied  the  chief's  table  with  ample  vege-


XI]


ROAD  MAKING,  AND  CURRENCY


193


table  food,  so  that  he  could  entertain  his  assistant  chiefs
and  visitors  on  a  large  scale,  and  secure  their  good  (will.
Vegetable  food  was  sent  almost  daily  from  the  country
estate  to  the  capital  when  the  chief  was  in  residence  there.
His  estate  in  the  capital  was  not  nearly  large  enough  to  keep
his  household  in  food,  and  he  was  therefore  dependent  upon
his  country  estate  and  especially  upon  the  good  will  of  his
retainers.

From  a  chief's  residence  to  the  capital  a  road  ran  which
was  as  straight  as  it  was  possible  to  make  it ;  the  worst  hills
were  skirted;  swamps  were  bridged,  and  a  clear  path  of  three
yards  was  kept  free  from  overgrowth.  From  a  chief's  residence
to  that  of  the  next  important  chief  a  similar  road  was  built,
while  the  last  named  chief  kept  in  repair  a  road  to  his
neighbour,  so  that  the  country  was  covered  with  a  network  of
roads  and  paths,  which  were  kept  clear  and  passable.  State
labour  was  employed  to  keep  these  roads  in  order,  and  formed
part  of  the  yearly  taxation  of  the  country;  peasants  from  each
district  were  called  upon,  whenever  necessary,  to  repair  the
roads,  and  it  was  the  chief  work  in  which  men  were  to  be  found
digging,  using  hoes  and  working  side  by  side  with  women.  In
addition  to  supplying  this  labour,  people  paid  taxes  either  in
kind  or  in  the  currency  of  the  country.  Though  the  currency
has  for  many  years  been  constantly  changing,  there  always  has
been  some  form  of  portable  currency ;  it  consisted  formerly  of
ivory  discs  made  from  elephant  tusks,  while  a  few  pearl  discs
found  their  way  into  this  currency;  afterwards  came  glass
beads,  possibly  from  Egypt ;  and  later  came  cowry-shells  from
the  coast.  When  Arab  slave-traders  began  to  penetrate  into
the  interior,  they  introduced  cotton  goods,  firearms,  and
ammunition  for  bartering,  but  cowry-shells  still  remained
the  common  currency,  and  the  price  of  the  cow  fixed  the
value  of  the  cowry-shell.

Each district chief employed his own smith, potter,

carpenter,  and  thatcher,  whose  labours  were  rendered  free  in

lieu  of  rent  and  taxes. State  building  and  road  making  also

formed  part  of  the  taxation,  and  further  every  man  was

R.U.  13


IQ4 REED  HUTS  BEST  SUITED  FOR  NATIVES  [CH.  XI

expected,  and  indeed  loved,  to  give  his  services  in  accom-
panying any  punitive  expedition.

Buildings  were  of  perishable  materials;  reeds  of  elephant
grass,  with  stout  poles  to  support  the  conical  basket  work
frame,  and  overlaid  with  grass,  formed  the  houses,  and  these
buildings  required  constant  repairs.  The  duration  of  a  well-
built  house  seldom  exceeded  four  years;  so  multitudes  of
men  were  continually  employed  for  house  building  in  the
capital,  and  indeed  all  over  the  country.  This  type  of
architecture  was  excellent,  and  well  suited  to  the  country,
because  the  ventilation  was  good  in  spite  of  the  houses
having  no  chimneys  or  windows;  and  as  the  buildings  were
frequently  renewed,  and  the  old  materials  destroyed,  disease
arising  from  poor  sanitary  conditions  and  unwholesome
atmosphere  was  prevented.  Goats  and  sheep,  fowls,  and
sometimes  a  cow  slept  in  the  house  with  the  family;  the
odour  can  therefore  be  better  imagined  than  described.

With  this  picture  of  the  country  and  its  social  organisation
before  us,  we  may  be  able  to  understand  the  constant  fluctua-
tions in  particular  districts,  and  how  necessary  it  was  to
readjust  the  chieftainships  when  King  Mwanga  fled  with  a
number  of  followers  who  were  chiefs,  and  when  subsequently
he  was  captured  and  deported  with  those  followers.  The
British  Government  extended  the  north-western  boundary
of  Uganda,  taking  a  portion  of  Bunyoro  and  giving  it  to  the
Baganda,  in  recognition  of  services  rendered  in  assisting  to
put  down  the  recent  rebellion.  The  important  chieftainship
of  Kimbugwe  had  ceased  when  the  country  became  Christian,
but  with  the  increase  of  the  country  the  title  was  revived
without  the  duties  and  was  given  to  a  district  chief,  who  was
placed  over  a  newly  created  chieftainship.  Fetishes  and
Twin  have  gone,  so  that  the  title  Kimbugwe  alone  remains  as
a  relic  of  the  past,  which  is  rather  misleading  to  anyone  who
knew  the  office  of  old.


CHAPTER  XII

TORO— THE  PEOPLE  AND  COUNTRY—MOUNT  LUENZORI

—HOT  SPRINGS,  AND  THEIR  USE  BY  THE

NATIVE  POPULATION

WE  may  now  turn  our  attention  to  some  of  the  countries
around  Uganda,  and  try  to  gain  an  insight  into  the
habits  of  their  population,  and  learn  a  little  about  each
country.  For  some  months  it  was  my  lot  to  reside  in  Toro
near  the  great  snow-capped  mountain,  Luenzori,  well  known
by  the  name  "Mountain  of  the  Moon."  Though  the  house
I  lived  in  was  built  on  one  of  the  ridges  or  lower  slopes  of  the
great  mountain  range,  it  was  only  at  special  times  that  the
clouds  and  mists  lifted  from  the  high  peaks,  and  revealed  the
mountain  in  its  white  beauty  of  glittering  ice  and  snow.

Leaving  Mengo,  the  capital  of  Uganda,  and  travelling  in  a
north-westerly  direction,  we  reached  Toro  after  ten  days'
steady  marching.  The  mode  of  progress  was  again  by  walking,
while  the  goods,  as  on  previous  journeys,  were  carried  on  the
heads  of  native  porters.  There  was,  however,  a  marked  differ-
ence between  the  carriers  employed  here  and  those  from  the
coast ;  the  former  were  Baganda  and  they  carried  heavier  loads
and  made  longer  marches  each  day  than  the  Swahili  had
done ;  the  average  distance  travelled  being  twenty  miles  a  day
which  was  cheerfully  accomplished.  The  journey  from  the
residence  of  one  chief  to  that  of  another  living  in  some  other
district  was  reckoned  as  a  stage  or  march;  we  camped  either
at  the  entrance  or  just  inside  the  chief's  enclosure ;  the  carriers
and  I  were  treated  as  guests,  and  we  were  supplied  with  ample
quantities  of  cooked  food  in  the  evening  and  again  in  the  early
morning.  The  people,  both  men  and  women,  seemed  glad  to  see
us,  and  crowded  around  us,  eager  for  us  to  hold  a  service  and
teach  them ;  they  often  begged  us  to  remain  for  a  few  days  to
instruct  them,  and  when  we  left  in  the  early  morning,  they  would
accompany  us  some  distance  on  the  way.  It  must  be  remembered

13—2


196  CROSSING  SWAMPS  [CH.

that  I  was  known  by  name  at  least,  if  not  by  face,  to  all
these  people.  Thus  travelling  among  these  hospitable  people
in  the  early  days  of  mission  life,  before  there  were  frequent
excursions  of  officers  and  traders  with  large  parties  of  men
passing  along  the  roads,  was  more  like  paying  a  round  of
visits  to  friends  than  making  a  journey  in  a  strange  country.

There  were  many  rivers  to  cross,  and  sometimes  swamps
fully  a  mile  wide,  with  black  slush  smelling  horribly,  and  dirty
water  varying  from  one  to  three  feet  deep;  the  carriers,
however,  never  allowed  me  to  get  my  feet  wet,  but  raised
me  on  the  shoulders  of  some  strong  man,  who  carried  me
across  with  glee,  so  that  I  had  not  to  wade  through  any
swamp.  Swamps  are  a  great  feature  in  Uganda,  and  are
found  in  the  valleys  winding  round  the  hills  in  every  part
of  the  country;  the  water  is  held  up  by  the  dense  growth
of  vegetation,  especially  papyrus,  which  is  known  to  many
people  as  sud  of  the  Nile.  These  swampy  valleys  in  Uganda  are
the  true  home  of  the  papyrus,  and  here  it  flourishes,  covering
acres  of  land  and  growing  to  a  great  height.  People  have
spoken  about  the  necessity  of  draining  these  blocked  valleys.
It  is,  however,  to  be  hoped  that  the  matter  will  receive  the
attention  of  experts  in  agricultural  and  other  branches  of
science,  before  the  water  is  run  off  from  these  regions,  lest
the  land  should  become  dry  and  barren,  and  so  useless  for
the  cultivation  of  plantains  and  other  water-loving  plants
which  form  the  principal  support  of  the  native  population.
The  moisture  in  the  air  in  Uganda  is  doubtless  due  to  these
belts  of  water,  and  they  play  a  most  important  part  in  the
fertility  of  the  land.

On  one  occasion  an  amusing  incident  occurred  while  we  were
crossing  a  swamp.  I  was  seated  on  the  shoulders  of  a  man,  and
had  been  carried  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  through  dirty  black
water,  when  the  man  slipped  into  a  hole,  made  by  the  foot
of  an  elephant  which  had  crossed  before  us.  He  was  up  to
the  waist  in  water  and  unable  to  get  out  of  the  hole ;  so  he
suggested  that  the  only  way  out  of  the  difficulty  was  for  me  to
be  dropped  into  the  water  and  to  walk,  because  we  were  behind


xii]  CROSSING  A  DANGEROUS  RIVER  197

the  carriers,  and  there  was  no  one  near  to  help  us.  Of  course  I
objected  to  this  procedure  and  called  lustily  to  the  men  in
front ;  fortunately  they  heard  me,  and  several  of  them  ran  back
to  our  rescue.  By  getting  a  man  on  either  side  of  him  and
placing  one  hand  on  the  head  of  the  man  on  the  right,  and  the
other  on  the  head  of  the  man  on  the  left,  and  with  a  third  man
behind  to  assist  in  raising  my  weight,  my  bearer  was  able  to
extricate  himself  from  theholeand  to  proceed  with  me  in  safety
to  the  other  side.  This  bearer  was  an  amusing  man,  who,  when
he  had  me  at  his  mercy  in  a  swamp,  mischievously  threatened
on  more  than  one  occasion  to  drop  me  into  the  dirty  slush.

One  of  the  larger  rivers  to  be  crossed  when  going  to  Toro,
named  the  Mayanja,  had  proved  too  deep  and  wide  for  the
natives  to  bridge  according  to  their  usual  method,  which  is  to
make  a  bank  of  earth  across  the  river,  leaving  openings  for  the
water  to  pass  through,  and  to  place  wooden  poles  across  these
openings.  This  particular  river,  however,  had  to  be  crossed  by
means  of  a  precarious  bridge  of  stems  of  papyrus,  which  are
cut  and  placed  from  root  to  root ;  for  a  few  days  the  stems  will
bear  the  weight  of  a  man,  but  they  soon  rot  and  become
dangerous.  When  we  crossed  the  river,  the  bridge  was  in  a  bad
condition,  and  we  had  to  jump  from  tuft  to  tuft  of  the  papyrus
roots;  a  bad  jump  or  a  slip  might  have  proved  fatal,  because
few  natives  can  swim,  and  there  is  in  many  places  a  strong
current  running  under  the  roots  of  the  papyrus  which  would
carry  the  unfortunate  man  who  slipped  away,  and  he  would  be
drowned.  Here  I  had  the  unpleasant  experience  of  testing  the
current,  owing  to  my  cowman  having  followed  me  too  closely
with  a  calf  on  his  shoulders  and  passed  me  in  mid-stream  ;
the  cow  followed  the  man,  anxious  for  the  safety  of  the  calf ;
and  as  she  passed  me,  she  swam  against  a  root  of  papyrus  on
which  I  stood  watching  the  men  cross,  and  tipped  me  into  the
water;  fortunately  the  current  was  not  strong  at  that  place,
and  I  was  able  to  scramble  on  to  another  root  and  cross  to
the  other  side  with  nothing  worse  than  a  wetting.

Before  Christian  teaching  enlightened  the  natives,  they
firmly  believed  in  a  water  spirit  residing  in  the  river,  which


198  BELIEF  IN  WATER  SPIRITS  [CH.

was  supposed  to  take  special  interest  in  fords;  hence  when
people  wished  to  cross  a  river,  they  made  an  offering  to
the  spirit  by  throwing  a  few  coffee  berries  into  the  water,
hoping  thus  to  propitiate  the  spirit  and  cross  safely.  When
any  native  slipped  into  the  water  and  got  into  difficulties,
no  friend  dared  help  him,  for  it  was  thought  that  the  man
had  been  caught  by  the  water  spirit  who  would  resent  any  help
being  given  him  and  would  capture  the  helper  either  then,  or
at  some  future  time  when  crossing;  consequently  the  poor
man  would  be  left  to  drown.  Before  any  large  riverwas  crossed,
it  was  the  custom  to  address  the  spirit  and  make  an  offering
to  ensure  a  safe  crossing.  On  the  banks  of  some  rivers  there
were  shrines  to  which  the  people  took  beer  and  fowls,  but  the
usual  offering  consisted  of  a  few  coffee  berries  which  were
thrown  into  the  water  with  a  request  for  a  safe  crossing.

In  most  of  the  big  rivers  the  hippopotamus  resides,  and
is  dangerous  if  disturbed.  On  one  occasion  a  chief  was  passing
along  a  road  by  night  with  a  few  of  his  boys  and  was
about  to  cross  a  bridge  over  a  river,  when  a  cow-hippo-
potamus gave  chase;  he  ran  with  his  boys  into  the  grass  to
escape,  but  the  animal  was  too  quick  for  him,  caught  him,
and  literally  bit  him  in  two,  and  then  returned  to  the  river,
leaving  the  rest  of  the  party  to  cross  in  peace.  In  one  place
on  a  small  hill  where  we  camped  for  Sunday  when  on  one
of  these  journeys,  a  herd  of  elephants  appeared  on  the  plain,
and  remained  feeding  for  hours  below  us  near  a  river.  It
was  an  interesting  sight ;  for  there  were  forty  or  more  animals
roaming  about,  grazing  and  knocking  their  huge  tusks
together,  as  they  fed  from  the  same  tree,  causing  a  sharp
ringing  sound  to  be  heard.  On  the  day  following  we  had  to
cross  this  wide  river  near  the  place  where  the  elephants
had  been  feeding.  We  crossed  by  a  papyrus  bridge  which,
though  safe  enough  while  the  men  kept  moving,  was  in  many
places  a  few  inches  under  water  and  the  grass  on  which  we
trod  gave  way  and  sank  at  each  step.  When  we  reached  the
opposite  bank,  a  carrier  who  had  crossed  in  the  forepart  of
the  caravan  and  had  been  looking  round  while  his  com-


XII]  INCIDENTS  WITH  ELEPHANTS  199

panions  were  crossing,  came  running  to  say  that  there  w;i
elephant  dying  in  the  river;  we  ran  to  the  spot,  with  vi
before  our  minds  of  fine  tusks  which  would  enrich  us,  but  when
we  reached  the  place,  we  soon  found  that  it  was  not  a  dying
animal  with  its  legs  in  the  air,  according  to  our  informant's
description,  but  that  the  herd  which  we  had  watched  the  day
before  was  crossing  the  river.  What  the  man  had  taken  to
be  the  legs  of  a  dying  animal  were  the  trunks  of  the  elephants ;
the  rest  of  their  bodies  were  under  water  as  they  waded  across
the  river.  Needless  to  say,  we  did  not  wait  for  the  elephants
to  come  to  the  bank;  we  had  no  firearms,  so  we  made  off,  and
the  carriers  did  not  rest  until  they  had  run  fully  a  mile  from
the  spot.

On  another  occasion,  as  we  were  passing  through  a  belt
of  forest  in  this  same  neighbourhood  in  the  early  morning,
I  was  walking  in  the  rear  of  the  men,  when  suddenly  they
rushed  back  past  me,  and  to  my  enquiries  as  to  why  they
were  running  back  they  only  answered,  "animals."  There
were  only  a  few  seconds  to  think  and  try  to  discover  the
meaning  of  the  word,  when  there  was  a  terrific  stampede
in  front  of  me,  and  young  trees  and  bushes  were  broken  down
like  straw,  as  a  herd  of  elephants  crossed  my  path  a  few  paces
in  front  of  me  at  right  angles,  and  were  soon  lost  in  the  distance.
They  left  behind  them  a  track  some  ten  yards  wide,  carrying
everything  before  them  in  their  flight.  It  was  fortunate  that
they  took  the  direction  they  did,  and  that  I  escaped  injury,
for  they  passed  at  a  short  distance  of  a  few  yards  from  me.
Most  probably  they  had  scented  the  men  who  had  turned
back,  and  being  startled  they  had  made  off  to  some  quieter
place  for  feeding.

Toro,  according  to  old  traditions,  is  a  part  of  Bunyoro.  It
was  originally  governed  by  the  king  of  Bunyoro,  until
Captain  Lugard,  when  representing  the  Imperial  British
East  African  Company,  placed  Kasagama  on  the  throne  and
made  it  a  separate  kingdom.  Captain  Lugard  went  to  Lake
Albert  to  bring  into  Uganda  some  troops  of  the  Sudanese
army  left  by  Emin  Pasha.  Kasagama  rendered  him  valuable


200  THE  INHABITANTS  OF  LUENZORI  [CH.

assistance,  and  it  was  in  return  for  this  help  that  Toro
was  made  an  independent  state  with  Kasagama  as  its  first
ruler.

The  royal  family  of  Toro  belong  to  the  stock  of  the  pastoral
princes  of  Bunyoro.  In  the  past  a  prince  was  the  nominal
head  of  this  province.  Kasagama 's  father,  who  had  been  sent
there  as  ruler,  revolted  and  lived  in  open  hostility  with  his
father  and  brothers.  The  new  King  Kasagama  chose  a  site  on
the  slopes  of  Luenzori  for  his  capital,  and  he  still  follows
most  of  the  pastoral  customs,  though  he  has  no  sacred  cattle
nor  does  he  adhere  to  any  of  the  more  stringent  milk  rules  of
the  Bunyoro  kings.  The  aborigines  belong  to  the  agricultural
tribes;  they  are  short  in  stature,  with  woolly  hair  and  broad
noses,  more  likely  to  have  affinity  with  the  dwarf  tribes  of
the  Congo  than  with  their  taller  neighbours  who  are  pure
Bantu.  These  agricultural  tribes  on  Luenzori  have  a  few
goats,  sheep,  and  fowls,  but  seldom  keep  cows;  they  are  a
timid,  inoffensive  people  who  prefer  to  flee  into  the  cold
uplands  of  the  mountain  for  safety  rather  than  meet  a  foe  in
the  plains  and  fight.  When  a  foe  appeared,  the  inhabitants
were  warned  by  the  blowing  of  horns,  whereupon  they  fled
higher  up  the  mountain,  and  hid  themselves  in  the  woods,
or  climbed  some  high  peak  into  the  cold  air,  where  it  was
too  severe  for  their  adversary  to  follow  them.  Whatever
the  vernacular  of  the  people  was  in  the  past,  they  have  now
acquired  a  dialect  of  Lunyoro,  though  it  is  far  from  pure,
when  compared  with  the  language  spoken  near  the  Bunyoro
capital.  As  a  race  the  Toro  people  are  a  poor,  feeble  set,
and  they  seem  to  be  lacking  in  mental  qualities  just  as  they
are  in  physical  strength.

When  making  a  journey  on  one  occasion  into  the  region
bordering  upon  the  Congo  Forest,  we  camped  near  some  native
huts  in  the  Semliki  Valley,  and  my  porters  warned  me  to
be  careful,  because  the  people  were  debased  cannibals,  who
not  only  eat  the  dead  of  their  own  tribe,  but  also  buy  dead
bodies  from  other  tribes  around  them.  This  is  said  to  be  due
to  a  depraved  desire  for  human  flesh  which  they  have  come  to


XII]  HOT  SPRIN

prefer  to  that  of  animals.  Both  men  and  women  file  th<  ir
teeth  to  a  point,  all  their  incisors  being  pointed  like  the  canine
teeth ;  this  is  frequently  practised  among  cannibal  tribes.  The
occupation  of  these  people  is  salt  making  and  fishing;  the
women  do  the  former,  and  the  men  the  latter.  The  salt  is
extracted  from  sand  taken  from  the  bed  of  the  river  which  is
formed  by  the  water  from  the  hot  springs  in  the  neighbour-
hood. The  sand  is  scraped  up,  and  put  into  large  pots  with  small
holes  in  the  bottoms;  these  are  then  placed  on  a  stand  with
a  second  pot  beneath,  water  is  poured  over  the  sand  in  the
upper  pot,  and  filters  through  into  the  under  one.  The  water  is
evaporated  over  slow  fires,  leaving  a  cake  of  salt  at  the  bottom
of  the  pot ;  in  this  impure  form  the  salt  is  greatly  sought  after
by  various  tribes  for  seasoning  vegetables  and  meat.

On  the  western  slopes  of  Luenzori  there  are  some  large  hot
springs,  which  flow  over  their  rocky  brims  and  run  into  a
common  channel;  one  of  them  is  well  known  to  the  natives
for  many  miles  around ;  it  is  some  twelve  feet  in  diameter,  and
is  always  bubbling  over  and  steaming  like  a  huge  caldron.
The  steam  from  it  has  an  unpleasant  odour  as  though
charged  with  sulphur.  The  water  from  this  caldron  forms
the  chief  stream  of  the  river  flowing  into  the  Albert  Lake,
and  it  is  from  its  banks  and  bed  that  the  natives  of  the
district  gather  the  sand  for  salt  making.  I  paid  a  visit  to
this  spring  and  was  carried  over  the  stream  to  reach  the
edge  of  the  caldron  and  so  obtain  a  better  view  of  the
boiling  spring.  The  water  of  the  stream  was  so  hot  that  it
scalded  the  feet  of  the  men  as  we  crossed.  Near  the  huge
caldron  people  were  cooking  their  food  in  small  holes  in  the
rock  under  which  the  hot  stream  passed.  The  rock  appears
to  be  a  thin  shell,  in  places  only  a  few  inches  thick;  under  this
a  stream  of  water  passes,  so  hot  that  food  can  be  cooked
in  it  in  a  short  time.  The  method  of  cooking  which  the  people
adopt  is  to  tie  their  food  to  strings,  and  lower  it  through
a  hole  in  the  rock  into  the  water  and  hold  it  there  for  a
few  minutes  until  it  is  cooked ;  the  water  being  brackish  also
seasons  the  food.  We  bought  a  few  sweet  potatoes  from


202 THE  TRIBES  OF  THE  SEMLIKI  VALLEY [CH.

the  people,  cooked  them  in  this  manner,  and  ate  them  on
the  spot,  in  order  to  test  the  method  of  cooking.  It  is  ap-
parently the  custom  of  the  inhabitants  to  gather  at  this
spot  daily  at  meal  hours,  to  prepare  and  cook  their  meals,
and  then  to  eat  them  under  a  tree,  after  which  they  return  to
their  labours  or  go  home;  this  saves  fire  and  also  the  labour
of  carrying  water.

In  the  Semliki  Valley  which  borders  on  the  Congo  Forest,
the  people  belong  to  several  tribes;  dwarfs  are  to  be  found
there  and  also  men  fully  six  feet  tall,  with  others  of  various
degrees  of  stature  between  these  two  extremes;  some  of  the
people  give  themselves  up  entirely  to  fishing  and  they  barter
the  fish  for  any  vegetables  they  require,  others  cultivate  the
ground  and  rear  cattle,  while  all  seem  to  have  their  salt  pans
in  their  villages.  Pigmies  abound,  but  they  live  almost  entirely
upon  meat  from  the  chase,  and  have  no  settled  locality;
where  there  is  game,  they  follow  the  chase,  and  when  successful
they  settle  down  for  a  time  to  eat  the  meat  so  long  as  the  supply
lasts;  when  the  meat  is  finished,  they  move  with  their  families
to  some  new  locality,  where  a  member  of  their  community
may  have  secured  some  animal.  Chiefs  of  the  district  often
hire  these  pigmies  to  assist  them  in  their  tribal  wars,  because
they  are  excellent  shots  with  their  poisoned  arrows,  and  are
also  skilled  in  spiking  paths  with  needle-like  spikes,  which
pierce  the  feet  of  their  foes  and  are  scarcely  visible  to  any
ordinary  pedestrian,  so  skilfully  do  they  conceal  them.  The
tribe  known  as  the  Barega  are  the  most  important  in  this
region;  their  district  borders  on  the  Albert  Lake,  they  are
a  fine  stalwart  race  and  noted  for  bravery.  During  our  visit
to  the  district  they  would  not  admit  us  into  their  country,
because  they  were  at  war  with  a  neighbouring  tribe,  and  they
thought  we  might  increase  their  difficulties.

One  of  the  most  striking  physical  features  in  this  part  of
the  country  is  the  number  of  extinct  volcanoes.  In  many
cases  the  cavities  contain  water,  in  others  there  are  trees
growing  from  their  depths,  or  they  have  a  mass  of  rich
vegetation  clothing  their  sides.  In  various  places  round  the


XII]  WOMEN  OF  PASTORAL  TRIBES  203

base  of  Luenzori  there  are  hot  springs  esteemed  among  the
natives  for  healing  different  kinds  of  sickness,  especially
fever ;  but  this  use  of  hot  springs  is  better  known  among  the
people  living  to  the  east  and  north  of  the  mountain.  The
better  class  of  the  Toro  population  are  the  Banyoro,  as
already  mentioned;  they  have  large  herds  of  cattle  with
some  of  the  finest  cows  in  the  Uganda  Protectorate;  the
pasturage  is  good,  and  there  is  an  abundance  of  salt  which
is  said  to  keep  the  cows  in  good  condition.  The  women,  who
are  by  their  pastoral  customs  prohibited  from  manual  work,
are  ungainly  in  appearance  owing  to  their  enormous  fleshy
size  and  inability  to  walk.  They  consider  obesity  a  feature
of  beauty,  and  vie  with  one  another  in  accumulating  adipose
deposit.  There  is  a  natural  disposition  among  the  women  to
practise  lax  morality,  and  a  desire  for  sexual  relations;  this
tendency  is  increased  by  the  life  which  they  are  by  custom
forced  to  live.  A  married  woman  is  expected  to  entertain  any
guest  of  her  husband  and  to  invite  him  to  her  couch ;  this  is
a  mark  of  hospitality  shown  by  all  married  men  to  their
visitors.  Again,  the  custom  of  polyandry,  which  is  common,
tends  to  destroy  feminine  modesty,  when  a  woman  no  longer
regards  one  man  as  the  only  person  to  whom  she  may  speak
frankly,  and  in  whom  she  may  confide  private  matters.
Among  the  men  this  custom  destroys  all  notion  of  the
sanctity  of  a  wife,  for  it  degrades  woman  to  a  low  social
scale,  leaving  her  a  mere  creature  to  satisfy  animal  passions
and  lust.

An  energetic  English  lady  has  started  an  industrial  school
for  these  women,  who.  used  to  fill  up  their  time  with  idle
and  unchaste  talk  and  deeds;  they  are  now  taught  to  make
lace,  to  spin,  and  to  engage  in  other  useful  and  profitable
occupations  which  are  compatible  with  their  ideas  of  women's
duties.  Such  kinds  of  employment  are  not  derogatory  to
these  women,  though  they  belong  to  the  pastoral  tribes,  and
they  should  prove  a  real  boon  in  keeping  them  occupied
mentally  and  physically  and  filling  up  the  hours  which  they
used  to  find  so  tedious.


204  HERDSMEN'S  SCORN  OF  LIONS  [CH.

The  agricultural  clans  of  Toro  are  reduced  to  a  serfdom
which  is  little  more  than  slavery;  they  are  given  the
heavy  work  of  building,  road  making,  and  of  supplying
plantains  and  corn  for  beer-making;  they  also  supply  food
for  domestic  slaves  attached  to  households.  They  are  a
dull  unintellectual  people  whom  it  has  been  found  uphill
work  to  interest  and  educate.

When  Kasagama  became  king,  the  country  was  divided
into  small  states,  each  having  a  superior  chief  to  rule  it,
who  took  a  title  similar  to  the  title  of  a  chief  in  Bunyoro.
The  soil  of  the  country  is  not  very  rich,  the  population  is
small,  and  the  natives  have  little  ambition  beyond  supplying
their  own  immediate  necessaries ;  the  agricultural  clans  do  not
cultivate  enough  land  for  their  own  needs,  and  consequently
live  in  constant  poverty.

Elephants  abound,  and  there  are  quantities  of  large  game,
including  numerous  lions  and  leopards ;  there  are  parts  where
it  is  scarcely  safe  to  travel  alone  during  the  daytime  because
of  these  wild  animals,  and  people  are  frequently  caught  and
killed  by  thoughtlessly  going  about  alone  and  unarmed.
Herdsmen  do  not  consider  it  an  act  of  special  bravery  to
chase  away  a  lion  from  a  herd  of  cows;  my  own  cowman,
when  driving  two  cows  with  their  calves  on  a  journey,  was
met  by  a  lion;  he  was  armed  with  a  spear  and  had  a  boy
with  him ;  when  the  lion  appeared,  he  stood  his  ground  and
drove  it  away.  He  did  not  even  mention  the  episode  for  a
day  or  two,  and  then  referred  to  it  in  a  casual  manner  when
talking  of  wild  animals,  with  no  intention  of  boasting.

On  another  occasion,  when  camping  near  a  small  chief's
residence,  we  were  warned  that  there  were  lions  in  the  neigh-
bourhood, and  the  cowman  was  told  to  take  necessary  pre-
cautions ;  in  the  evening  he  shut  the  calves  in  a  hut  near  to  us,
while  the  cows  were  outside  by  a  watch  fire  in  front  of  the  tent.
There  was  no  noise  to  lead  me  to  suppose  that  a  lion  came
into  our  camp  during  the  night,  and  the  watch  fire  was  kept
burning  before  the  tent.  In  the  early  morning  soon  after
five  o'clock  I  looked  out  of  the  tent,  and  all  was  quiet;  the


xii]  THE  NATIVES  OF  LUENZORI  205

cows  lay  back  to  back  chewing  their  cud,  as  I  walked  to  tin:
hut  and  called  the  cowman.  I  received  no  reply  from  him,
and  the  boys  who  were  awake  said  that  he  had  slept  outside,
so  as  to  be  near  the  cows  in  case  of  need.  This  was  rather
alarming,  we  therefore  waked  the  porters  who  were  lodged
near  by,  to  assist  in  the  search.  But  all  was  in  vain,  and  for
a  time  the  man  could  not  be  found.  After  looking  about,
some  of  the  men  called  out,  but  at  first  received  no  reply,  and
we  came  to  think  that  a  lion  had  carried  him  off,  when  to  our
amusement  and  relief  the  man  awoke  from  sleep,  called  out
from  between  the  cows,  and  scrambled  out  from  beneath
their  heads.  He  had  gone  to  sleep  between  the  animals,  so  he
said,  to  be  near,  should  any  wild  beast  appear.  If  any  such
had  appeared,  the  cows  would  have  stood  up  and  waked  the
herdsman,  who  could  then  have  defended  them.

The  aborigines  of  Toro  are  a  poor  class  with  little  intel-
lectual capacity  and  of  miserable  appearance;  they  live
crowded  together  in  badly  built  huts  on  the  slopes  of  Mount
Luenzori,  with  small  plots  of  land  under  cultivation  in  the
valleys,  barely  large  enough  to  supply  their  needs.  On  these
plots  they  grow  a  kind  of  small  millet,  like  bird  seed,  and
sweet  potatoes;  the  millet  is  ground  into  a  coarse  flour
between  two  stones  and  made  into  porridge,  which  forms
their  staple  food.  Most  of  these  villages  have  stores  of  grain
hidden  in  wells  in  secret  places,  so  that  the  inhabitants  can
leave  their  homes  at  a  moment's  notice,  if  they  are  attacked
by  a  superior  force,  and  still  be  sure  of  their  corn  supply.
In  former  times  whenever  they  were  attacked  by  an  enemy,
they  fled  into  the  thick  forest,  and  waited  there  until  the  enemy
disappeared;  from  these  retreats  they  were  able,  under  the
cover  of  night,  to  visit  their  stores,  and  obtain  food  as  they
required  it.  The  clothing  of  both  men  and  women  consists
of  roughly  dressed  skins  tied  round  the  waist.  They  are
unkempt,  all  classes  alike,  and  they  do  not  appear  to  take
any  thought  of  washing.

On  the  western  banks  of  the  River  Semliki  the  ground
is  higher  and  less  subject  to  floods  during  the  rains,  hence


206  THE  RIVER  SEMLIKI  [CH.  xn

there  are  more  people  to  be  found  there;  these  have  come
over  into  British  bounds,  since  the  river  has  become  the
boundary  of  the  Congo  and  the  British  territory,  and  have
settled  in  various  places  on  the  slopes  of  the  great  mountain.
The  river  is  not  more  than  twenty  yards  wide  at  the  ferry
generally  used  by  people  going  into  the  Congo  district,  but
there  is  a  strong  stream  flowing,  and  only  experienced  canoe
men  understand  the  current  well  enough  to  ensure  a  safe
crossing.  It  is  also  infested  with  crocodiles,  and  a  big  creature
had  to  be  disturbed  before  we  could  cross  with  our  cattle.
When  in  flood  the  water  spreads  over  a  large  area,  fully  a
mile  wide,  from  the  river  bank  on  the  eastern  side;  this
flooded  country  forms  the  great  fishing  ground  of  the  resident
fishing  community.


CHAPTER  XIII

THE  PASTORAL  PEOPLES  OF  ANKOLE  AND  KOKI—
A  JOURNEY  INTO  BUDU

THE  visit  which  I  paid  to  Ankole  was  a  brief  break  in
the  busy  routine  of  my  teaching  in  Uganda.  The  men
chosen  by  the  Uganda  Church  Council  to  become  ordination
candidates  and  catechists,  were  placed  under  instruction  in
the  school  of  which  I  was  principal,  and  had  two  terms  in  the
year  lasting  five  months  each,  and  then  at  the  end  of  each
term  a  break  of  a  month. During  these  vacations  it  was
possible  for  me  to  arrange  for  a  clear  month  to  visit  some
district.  By  making  preparations  before  the  break  in  the  school
life,  I  was  able  to  start  on  the  day  following  the  cessation  of
lectures.  On  this  journey  to  Ankole  my  bicycle  played  an
important  part  and  enabled  me  to  accomplish  each  day's  stage
of  the  journey  not  only  more  quickly,  but  also  with  comparative
ease. A  man  carrying  a  small  store  of  provisions  for  lunch,
with  a  spirit  lamp  and  kettle,  was  able  to  keep  fairly  near  me
and,  when  it  was  required,  he  would  carry  my  bicycle  over
streams  and  swamps,  then  return  and  carry  me  too  over  these
bad  places.  Twenty  miles  were  thus  completed  in  three  hours,
and  the  rest  of  the  day  from  about  nine  o'clock  onwards  could
be  spent  reading  or,  when  possible,  interviewing  natives.  When
the  carriers  came  up,  the  tent  was  speedily  pitched,  and
according  to  tropical  custom  a  bath  was  provided,  while
a  more  substantial  meal  was  being  prepared.  The  few  carriers
with  the  tent  and  necessary  kit  had  their  packages  made
up  into  light  loads,  and  seldom  took  more  than  four  and  a
half  to  five  hours  for  the  twenty  miles  usually  covered.
These  carriers  were  always  most  cheerful  and  ready  to  do
all  that  they  could  to  make  the  tours  pleasant  and  interesting;
they  were  men  who  were  willing to  work  for  the  small
remuneration  which  I  could  give,  and  glad  to  be  enabled  to
see  something  of  other  lands  than  their  own.  On  this  journey


208  A  FOLLOWING  OF  LIONS  [CH.

a  friend  caught  me  up,  and  we  travelled  together  for  two
days;  we  decided  to  try  and  combine  the  last  two  marches
into  one,  and  so  reach  our  destination  a  day  earlier  than  would
otherwise  have  been  possible,  and  enjoy  a  day  longer  in  Ankole.
As  there  was  moonlight,  we  determined  to  make  an  early  start
at  three  o'clock  and  to  complete  the  first  stage  in  the  cool ;
we  found  that  we  could  use  our  bicycles,  riding  slowly  along
the  paths  dimly  lighted  by  the  moon.  As  we  were  passing
through  a  belt  of  forest,  we  came  upon  a  few  men  with  a
number  of  cows,  who  had  fires  burning  brightly  around  the
animals;  they  told  us  that  several  lions  had  attempted  to
capture  the  cattle,  as  they  were  driving  them,  and  at  last
they  were  compelled  to  stop  and  light  fires  for  protection.
We  went  on,  but  saw  nothing  of  the  lions;  our  men,  who
followed  later  by  daylight,  said  that  there  were  footprints  of
the  lions  for  some  distance  along  the  path  from  the  cattle  camp,
showing  that  the  beasts  had  left  the  cattle  and  followed  us.
We  had  passed  on  not  aware  of  having  royal  followers.

The  Banyankole  or  Bahima,  as  the  pastoral  people  of
Ankole  are  commonly  called  by  the  tribes  around  them,  are
closely  allied  to  the  Banyoro  and  the  dominant  people  of
Toro,  though  they  differ  from  them  in  many  respects,  both  as
regards  government  and  some  important  pastoral  customs.
Their  affinity  in  milk  customs  and  their  similarity  in  personal
appearance  point  to  a  common  origin,  while  the  differences
as  regards  other  customs  make  it  clear  that  they  have  for
many  years  held  aloof  from  other  pastoral  peoples.

Ankole,  by  which  name  the  country  is  known,  is  so  called
after  a  former  king;  it  lies  to  the  south-west  of  the  Victoria
Nyanza,  and  is  bounded  by  the  kingdom  of  Uganda  on  the
east,  Bunyoro  on  the  north,  Lake  Albert  Edward  on  the
west,  and  Mpororo  on  the  south.  It  is  a  small  state,  but
it  is  wonderfully  suited  for  cattle  rearing;  it  is  here  that  the
long-horned  cattle,  so  famous  in  the  central  regions,  thrive,
indeed  all  cows  seem  to  thrive  here,  and  to  surpass  those  of
any  other  country,  while  the  long-horned  kind  rarely  do  well
out  of  Ankole.


'I VII


UGANDA  POTTERS  AT  WORK


MAKING  BARK-CLOTH  IN  UGANDA


PLATE  XV


COUNTING  COWRY-SHELLS,  THE  ORIGINAL  CURRENCY  OF  UGANDA


EXTRACTING  SALT  FROM  SAND,  BUNYORO


xin]  CHIEFTAINSHIPS  IN  ANKOLE  209

Hie  country  has  the  same  undulating  character  as  that
of  Uganda,  though,  as  the  valleys  are  not  so  overgrown
with  papyrus  grass,  the  water  drains  off  more  quickly,  and
the  land  is  drier.  There  is  in  this  country  an  agricultural
tribe,  as  in  Toro  and  Bunyoro,  who  are  to  all  intents  and
purposes  slaves  to  the  pastoral  people  and  live  in  a  servile
condition.  These  agricultural  classes  cultivate  a  small  kind  of
millet  and  a  few  plantains,  the  latter  being  grown  in  small
clumps  and  carelessly  tended,  the  people  depend  almost
entirely  upon  their  grain  and  sweet  potatoes  for  food,  and
upon  the  rearing  of  goats  for  trading  purposes,  such  as  the
purchase  of  wives  and  payment  of  fines.  They  seldom  kill
animals,  but  depend  upon  small  wild  game  for  their  frugal
supply  of  this  kind  of  food.  Salt  is  procurable  from  their
neighbours  on  the  lake  shores  near  by.  Here,  as  in  Bunyoro
and  Toro,  the  agricultural  people  are  the  acknowledged
aborigines,  who  have  been  conquered  and  reduced  to  serfdom;
the  pastoral  people  call  the  agricultural  people  Baheru,  which
is  their  word  for  slaves.

A  feature  exists  here  in  the  method  of  government  which
does  not  appear  to  be  followed  by  any  other  of  the  pastoral
tribes  of  Central  Africa,  at  least  not  to  the  same  extent;
namely  the  king  claims  the  cattle  throughout  the  country  as
his  own,  and  appoints  his  chiefs  to  their  offices  according  to
the  number  of  cattle  allotted  to  them;  the  rank  of  a  chief
is  thus  reckoned  not  by  territory,  but  by  the  number  of  cattle
which  he  possesses.  The  land  is  only  of  secondary  importance,
though  it  is  marked  out  into  districts,  and  each  chief  is
ruler  over  the  pasturage  of  an  assigned  area;  his  cattle  and
those  of  his  subchiefs  roam  over  it  at  the  discretion  of  the
herdsmen.  The  British  Government  has  to  some  extent
abolished  the  arrangement  which  gave  the  king  the  sole  right
of  possessing  cattle,  and  his  chiefs  are  now  said  to  possess  cattle
of  their  own,  which  would  have  been  impossible  in  former  years.
The  king  and  almost  all  the  chiefs  have  become  Christians,  and
the  country  is  being  developed  along  lines  laid  down  by  British
officers ;  indeed  there  are  a  number  of  chiefs  in  charge  of  the

R.U.  14


210  BAGANDA  AS  CHIEFS  IN  ANKOLE  [CH.

agricultural  districts,  seeking  to  develop  the  land,  but  these
men  are  Baganda  who  have  been  brought  into  the  country
to  superintend  the  cultivation  of  cotton  and  rubber.  This
innovation  that  chiefs  should  have  an  interest  in  agricultural
pursuits  militates  against  all  the  sacred  rites  of  the  pastoral
people.  Cultivation  under  the  pastoral  customs  could  not  be
undertaken  without  prejudice  and  injury  to  milk  institutions;
the  latter  forbade  any  man  keeping  cows  to  dig  or  to  grow  vege-
table food,  because  it  was  considered  detrimental  to  the  health
of  the  herds.  The  introduction  of  Baganda  for  this  purpose
may  possibly  be  the  method  which  ttie  people  have  adopted  to
overcome  what  appeared  to  be  an  insurmountable  difficulty.

There  is  no  question  about  the  country  being  suited  to
cattle,  for  they  are  in  splendid  condition,  sleek  and  fat,  but
the  great  demand  for  cotton,  rubber,  coffee,  and  cocoa  has
prompted  the  British  Government  to  test  every  part  of  the
Protectorate  as  to  its  suitability  for  growing  these  profitable
export  products,  and  accordingly  Ankole  is  also  being  tried.
Chiefs  belonging  to  pastoral  clans  were  unable  to  supervise
agricultural  pursuits,  and  so  capable  Baganda  have  been  placed
in  charge  of  certain  districts  to  supervise  the  labours  of  the
agricultural  clans.  Some  fifteen  years  ago  the  king  of  Ankole
would  not  have  tolerated  any  Muganda,  as  a  chief,  in  his
kingdom,  but  would  have  been  afraid  of  the  influence  over
his  people ;  now,  however,  he  welcomes  them,  to  instruct  his
peasants  in  the  art  of  cotton  and  rubber  growing,  in  order
to  satisfy  British  officers,  who,  alas !  know  little  of  the  pastoral
prejudices  and  superstitions.

The  office  of  king  is  restricted  to  a  man  of  the  blood  royal;
the  king  is  highly  revered  by  the  people,  who  look  upon  him
as  a  person  quite  removed  from  their  level.  Yet  the  king
is  obliged  to  marry  daughters  of  his  own  subjects,  and  not
women  from  another  nation,  in  order  to  secure  an  acceptable
successor  to  the  throne.

Sons  born  to  princesses  by  husbands  belonging  to  the
ordinary  ranks  of  society  were  called  princes,  but  they  were
not  eligible  for  the  throne.  The  education  of  a  prince  differed


xni]  SUPREME  COURTS  211

in  no  wise  from  that  of  an  ordinary  herdsman;  he  had  to
learn  how  to  manage  cows,  and  lived  exactly  as  did  the
son  of  a  herdsman  in  every  respect;  the  only  difference
being  that  he  was  dressed  in  a  mantle  of  coloured
cow-hides;  this  mantle  was  made  of  long  strips  of  red,
white  and  black  cow-hides  stitched  together — a  regular,
Joseph's  coat.  Chiefs  wore  robes  of  well  dressed  cow-skins,
but  the  poorer  classes  of  the  male  population  wore  little
clothing  other  than  a  small  cape  of  skin  over  their  shoulders.
Women  were  more  particular  in  their  dress,  and  never
allowed  even  their  faces  to  be  seen  when  they  went  abroad;
they  wore  an  ample  dress  of  cow-skin  wrapped  round  the
body,  and  put  a  second  mantle  over  their  head  when  they  left
the  house.  The  king  lived  in  a  hut  in  his  kraal  in  a  manner
similar  to  his  chiefs,  and  had  his  favourite  cows  about  him;
his  courts  were  held  in  the  open  under  a  shady  tree;  a  rug
of  cow-hides  well  dressed  until  they  were  quite  soft,  was  spread
on  the  ground  for  him  to  sit  on;  behind  him  sat  a  few  of  his
wives  and  his  special  guard,  and  in  front  of  him  chiefs  and  other
persons  assembled  for  business  transactions,  or  merely  to  listen
to,  and  take  part  in  the  discussions.  No  one  was  permitted
to  bring  any  weapon  into  an  assembly,  but  everyone  who
approached  the  king  laid  his  arms  down  at  a  distance,  and
left  them  there  until  the  meeting  ended ;  to  have  retained  any
weapon  would  have  occasioned  suspicion,  and  have  rendered
the  man  liable  to  be  seized  and  punished  as  a  person  with
evil  intentions  on  the  king's  life.  It  was  believed  that  any
man  who  had  been  deprived  of  his  cows  for  any  reason  was
likely  to  attempt  the  king's  life  out  of  revenge  for  his  loss,
and  on  this  account,  if  there  was  a  reason  for  taking  cattle
from  a  man,  or  deposing  a  chief  from  office,  he  was  almost
invariably  executed  and  thus  removed  out  of  the  way,  lest
he  should  try  to  revenge  himself  on  the  king ;  if  his  life  was
spared,  he  was  never  permitted  to  carry  weapons  in  the
presence  of  the  king.

As might be expected, these assemblies were chiefly
occupied  with  matters  concerning  cattle ;  chiefs  came  to  give

14—2


212 POLYGAMY  AND  POLYANDRY [CH.

accounts  to  the  king  of  the  increase  and  of  the  health  of
their  herds,  they  also  had  to  assure  him  that  the  animals
were  being  well  treated,  and  that  their  number  was  not
diminished  by  any  fault  of  the  herdsmen.  A  chief  had  a
certain  amount  of  freedom  in  the  disposal  of  the  herd  under
his  control,  he  might  exchange  a  number  of  cows  with  a
person  of  another  clan  for  a  wife,  but  he  might  not  sell  any
to  a  person  belonging  to  another  tribe,  nor  might  he  kill
any  cows;  and  only  a  limited  number  of  bulls  might  be  killed
during  each  year  for  sacrifice  or  food.  Among  the  poorer
members  of  pastoral  people  a  man  found  it  difficult  to  obtain
the  means  to  purchase  a  wife  and  still  to  retain  enough  for
milk  to  support  himself  and  his  wife.  Families  were  obliged
to  follow  the  tribal  customs  concerning  the  milk  diet,  hence
vegetable  food  might  not  be  eaten  by  a  man  who  had  drunk
milk  on  the  same  day.  To  overcome  the  difficulty  of  both
obtaining  food  and  marrying,  several  men  who  were  clan
brothers  would  combine  and  marry  a  woman,  who  was  shared
by  all  these  men;  if  there  was  any  family,  the  children
belonged  to  the  eldest.  There  appears  to  have  been  no
difficulty  in  obtaining  a  woman  as  the  wife  of  several  men,
nor  were  there  any  quarrels  or  unhappiness  among  the  men  in
such  marriages.  The  more  wealthy  people,  however,  did  not
confine  themselves  to  one  wife,  for  they  could  afford  to  marry
several  and  support  them,  and  there  were  no  rules  forbidding
polygamy.  This  is  one  of  the  few  tribes  of  Africa  in  which
polyandry  worked  side  by  side  with  polygamy  in  perfect
harmony.

Every  chief  was  free  to  divide  and  subdivide  the  herds  over
which  he  had  charge  for  the  king ;  this  was  a  private  matter.
Again,  every  important  chief  was  the  over-lord  of  smaller
chiefs  appointed  by  the  king ;  over  these  latter  the  leading  chief
acted  merely  as  the  king's  representative  to  see  that  all  went
well,  and  that  due  care  was  exercised  over  the  king's  property;
he  had  no  power  to  depose  a  chief,  nor  to  appoint  a  chief  to  any
vacancy  that  might  occur:  this  was  the  king's  prerogative.

When  a  man  wanted  to  buy  weapons,  or  to  enter  into  barter


XIII]  MORALS  OF  PASTORAL  WOMEN  213

transactions  with  a  person  of  another  tribe,  as,  for  instance,
to  have  a  house  and  kraal  built,  he  might  do  so  by  selling
butter  or  hides,  but  not  by  selling  cattle  or  milk.  Pastoral
people  had  few  wants  which  needed  to  be  supplied  by  members
of  other  tribes,  beyond  the  purchase  of  weapons;  ornaments,
or  milk  vessels,  hence  they  were  not  often  drawn  into  barter
transactions.

Women  were  careful  to  guard  their  daughters  against
having  undue  familiarity  with  men  before  marriage;  it  was
a  great  reproach  to  the  mother,  and  derogatory  to  any  girl
to  commit  an  immoral  act  before  marriage ;  indeed  so  grave
was  the  offence  that,  if  any  young  woman  had  a  child
before  marriage,  she  became  an  outcast  whom  no  man
would  marry.  Such  cases  of  immorality  were  most  rare  owing
to  the  strength  of  public  opinion,  and  men  paid  a  high
tribute  to  the  honour  of  young  women.  Dutiful  obedience
from  a  wife  was  expected  by  her  husband;  if  any  woman
used  unbecoming  language  to  her  husband,  she  laid  herself
open  to  trial  in  the  public  court.  Should  she  be  proved  to
be  of  a  quarrelsome  turn,  the  court  sentenced  her  to  be  taken
to  a  priest  who  lived  on  the  shore  of  a  particular  lake,  because
she  was  considered  to  be  suffering  from  a  physical  complaint.
The  priest  treated  the  woman  medically;  to  cure  her  disease
she  was  given  a  purgative  and  an  emetic,  and  when  these  had
operated,  she  was  washed  in  the  lake,  and  sent  home  to  her
husband,  a  chastened  and  humbled  wife.

Women  were  particular  about  their  dress;  no  woman  would
think  of  leaving  her  house  without  covering  her  head  and
face,  so  that  her  features  could  not  be  seen.  It  was  not
etiquette  for  a  woman  to  walk  any  distance  without  resting
frequently,  and  indeed  most  women  had  lost  the  ability
to  go  more  than  a  few  yards  without  a  pause;  they  were
carried  in  litters,  when  there  was  a  journey  to  be  made.
When  out  visiting  friends  near  home,  they  walked  for  a  short
distance  and  then  stopped  to  rest,  placing  their  hands  upon
their  knees;  in  this  attitude  they  looked  peculiar  objects
with  their  persons  covered,  more  like  animals  than  human


214 BELIEF  IN  TRANSMIGRATION  OF  SOUL [CH.

beings.  Their  milk  diet  and  indolent  mode  of  life  gave  the
women  rather  flabby  flesh,  which  caused  them  to  move
slowly  and  with  difficulty.

When  the  king  died,  he  was  not  spoken  of  as  dead,  because
his  spirit  was  supposed  to  pass  into  the  form  of  a  lion,  nor
might  his  name  be  mentioned  under  any  circumstances.  The
body  of  the  king  was  taken  to  a  sacred  forest,  where  it  was
kept  for  some  time,  and  it  was  considered  to  be  undergoing  a
process  in  which  the  swelling  and  subsidence  of  the  stomach
was  said  to  be  the  sign  of  rebirth;  when  the  swelled  body
collapsed  a  lion's  cub  was  produce^  by  the  priest,  who  stated
that  it  was  the  reborn  king.  During  the  period  of  waiting
for  the  cub  the  priest  daily  washed  the  body  of  the  king
with  milk,  but  after  the  lion-cub  was  produced,  the  body  was
buried  and  the  grave  received  no  attention.  The  lion-cub  was
cared  for  and  nursed  with  the  utmost  tenderness,  and  fed
on  beef  as  soon  as  it  was  able  to  eat.  Animals  from  the  royal
herd  were  freely  supplied  for  this  purpose.  The  priest  who
lived  in  the  forest  had  charge  of  a  number  of  lions  said  to  be
the  kings  of  past  generations;  he  was  expected  to  hold
communication  with  those  departed  kings  and  to  give  the
message  to  the  reigning  king.

When  the  lion-cub  was  old  enough  to  run  about,  it  was
turned  into  the  forest,  and  was  free  to  mingle  with  the  other
partly  tamed  beasts.  From  this  time  the  newly  elected  king
sought  information  from  his  predecessor  through  the  priest,
who  became  the  means  of  communication  with  the  dead.

The  spirit  of  the  wife  of  a  king  was  supposed  at  death  to
enter  into  a  leopard,  unless  she  had  been  childless,  in  which
case  she  was  buried  without  any  care.  The  spirits  of  princes
and  of  princesses  entered  into  pythons,  and  these,  together
with  the  sacred  leopards,  had  their  special  place  of  residence,
and  priests  whose  duty  it  was  to  feed  them  and  to  act  as
mediums  with  the  spirits  in  them.

Common  people  were  buried  inside  the  kraal  in  which  the
death  had  taken  place ;  a  grave  was  dug  in  the  dung  heap,  and
after  the  proper  mourning  ceremonies  had  been  completed,  the


xni]  THE  POSITION  OF  WIDOWS  215

relatives  left  the  place,  and  built  a  new  kraal  and  near  if
a  shrine  for  the  ghost  of  the  departed  relative.  Widows
frequently  sought  opportunity  to  commit  suicide  by  drinking
poison  at  the  graves  of  their  husbands;  relatives  guarded
them,  and  restrained  them  by  force  from  this  act.  There  were,
however,  times  when  relatives  were  willing  to  give  the  ghost  of
the  deceased  greater  honour  by  allowing  one  or  more  of  his
widows  to  accompany  him  by  death  in  order  to  be  with  him
in  the  spirit  world.  The  future  presents  no  dread  to  these
simple  minded  people,  with  their  beliefs  of  a  future  life  lived
under  conditions  not  unlike  those  of  the  present,  and  where
therefore  the  husband  would  be  ready  to  care  for  his  wife,
whereas  life  without  a  husband  is  full  of  terrors  for  a  widow.

A  childless  widow  had  the  right  of  becoming  the  wife  of
a  brother  of  her  deceased  husband  according  to  levirate
custom,  and  her  first  born  son  became  heir  to  the  property  of
the  deceased  and  was  called  his  child.  A  widow  who  had  a
son  had  no  fear  of  her  position  not  being  secured,  because
her  son  would  care  for  her,  and  she  was  anxious  to  see  him
grow  up  to  manhood;  this  restrained  her  from  trying  to
commit  suicide  at  her  husband's  funeral.  In  other  parts  of
Africa  the  levirate  rule  also  exists;  the  deceased  man's  brother
takes  the  widow  to  wife  if  she  is  childless,  and  the  first  son
she  bears  becomes  the  son  of  the  deceased,  while  children
born  later  are  the  sons  and  daughters  of  the  second  husband.
The  first  child,  when  old  enough,  inherits  the  property  of  the
deceased  father.  In  some  instances  where  the  cows  have  been
divided  among  clan  members,  the  first  calf  from  each  cow  is
given  to  the  levirate  son.  In  the  Ziba  country  this  custom  is
certainly  still  practised.

WTien  our  short  visit  to  Ankole  ended,  we  were  able  to  take
a  southern  route  back,  passing  through  Koki  instead  of
returning  by  the  more  direct  road  to  Uganda.  The  path  lay
almost  due  south  from  Mbarara,  the  capital  of  Ankole,
through  tracts  of  country  used  entirely  for  pastoral  purposes,
though  at  intervals  of  some  twenty  miles  there  were  small
settlements  of  agricultural  people.  Most  of  the  district


2i6  HERDSMEN  [CH.

through  which  we  passed  was  wild,  uncultivated  land,  with
hills  beautifully  clothed  with  small  timber  and  shrubs,  and
valleys  with  abundant  grass  suitable  for  cattle.  The  few  small
settlements  which  we  encountered  were  almost  entirely  occu-
pied by  Mohammedan  Baganda,  who  had  settled  in  these
places,  when  they  were  forced  to  flee  from  their  own  country
during  the  rising  which  they  had  unsuccessfully  instigated.
At  different  places  as  we  travelled  we  caught  glimpses  of  the
Koki  Lake ;  though  this  is  only  a  small  sheet  of  water  when
compared  with  the  other  great  lakes,  it  is  a  beautiful  and  useful
lake,  being  several  miles  long  and  in  places  over  a  mile  wide.
It  was  interesting  to  come  upon  large  herds  of  cattle  on  this
journey,  and  to  see  members  of  the  pastoral  clans  living  their
natural  pastoral  life;  they  were  bands  of  men  who  devoted
themselves  to  the  care  of  their  herds,  ready  to  move  their
home  to  some  new  site,  when  they  considered  a  change
of  pasturage  necessary  for  the  health  of  the  cows.  In  this  kind
of  life,  living  as  they  do  with  their  cows  from  morning  until
night,  the  men  get  to  know  each  cow  with  all  its  peculiarities
of  temper,  and  they  notice  any  change  in  its  health ;  the  cows
also  learn  to  know  the  voices  of  the  men,  and  respond  to  each
call,  and  do  as  they  are  told.  The  kraal  seldom  consists  of  more
than  a  few  thorny  shrubs  placed  between  the  huts,  which
are  built  at  intervals,  to  encircle  a  space  into  which  the  cows
are  driven  every  night,  thus  being  kept  from  straying.
Usually  a  man  is  on  guard,  though  he  does  not  necessarily
stand  outside,  but  from  his  hut  he  keeps  watch,  and  should
any  wild  beast  approach,  he  is  warned  by  the  cows  becoming
restive  and  snorting,  and  is  thus  able  to  rouse  his  companions
to  assist  him  in  protecting  the  herd.

The  huts  in  such  a  kraal  are  simple  structures,  beehive
huts  placed  at  intervals  along  the  fence  which  encircles  the
kraal;  they  are  scarcely  high  enough  to  allow  a  man  to  stand
upright  inside  at  the  highest  point,  and  scarcely  wide  enough
to  enable  him  to  make  his  bed  and  stretch  his  limbs  by  night ;
few  of  them  have  a  pole  to  support  the  roof.  The  frame  consists
of  stout  sticks  dug  into  the  earth  in  a  circle,  bent  inwards,


xni]  COW  KRAALS  217

and  tied  together  at  the  apex;  such  a  frame  is  strong  enough
to  support  the  thatch;  the  doorway  opens  into  the  knt.il,
and  between  the  huts  the  thorny  shrubs  are  placed  to  form
a  fence.  If  any  herdsman  is  married,  his  wife  is  the  person
upon  whom  devolves  the  right  to  wash  the  milk  pots,
and  to  churn  the  butter  and  make  it  up  into  packets  to
be  sent  to  the  chief;  when  there  is  no  woman  in  a  kraal,
the  men  manage  these  duties  themselves,  and  fumigate  the
pots  with  scented  grass.  The  number  of  men  attached  to  a
kraal  depends  upon  the  size  of  the  herd;  there  may  be  as
many  as  twelve  men  for  a  large  herd,  and  only  three  or  four
for  a  small  one.  Two  or  three  men  only  are  necessary  to
guard  a  herd  of  even  a  hundred  cows  when  grazing;  the  other
herdsmen  remain  behind  to  clear  the  kraal  of  dung,  to  spread
in  the  sun  any  dung  required  for  fuel,  and  to  prepare  water
for  the  herd  at  night,  should  it  be  necessary  to  draw  it.  In
some  places  there  are  deep  water-holes  from  which  the  water
is  drawn;  it  is  then  emptied  into  clay  troughs  for  the  cows  to
drink  from,  before  entering  the  kraal.  The  men  who  remain
in  the  kraal  also  have  charge  of  the  calves,  and  they  carry  milk
and  butter  to  their  masters.  Herdsmen  receive  no  pay  for
their  labour,  but  are  expected  to  take  a  certain  amount  of
milk  and  butter  to  their  masters,  and  to  use  the  remainder  of
the  milk  and  butter  from  the  herd  for  their  own  requirements.
This  milk  and  butter  is  their  pay;  but  a  good  master  some-
times allows  a  herdsman  to  have  a  cow,  to  assist  him  to
purchase  a  wife.

A  fire  is  kept  burning  in  each  kraal  near  its  entrance
by  day  and  by  night ;  the  fuel  for  this  fire  consists  of  dung,
prepared  by  being  dried  in  the  sun,  and  stored  by  the  men
who  remain  at  home,  while  their  companions  herd  the  animals
at  pasture.  A  site  for  a  kraal  is  sought  near  water,  when
it  is  possible  to  procure  such  a  place,  so  that  the  herds  can
drink  before  they  enter  their  place  of  rest  for  the  night ;  no
food  is  given  to  the  animals  during  the  night,  they  fast  until
morning,  when  they  are  milked,  and  turned  out  to  graze  near
the  kraal;  they  feed  their  young  before  they  go  away  for


2i8  CYCLING  AMONG  MOUNTAINS  [CH.

the  day.  It  was  impossible  for  us  to  remain  for  a  night  with
any  of  these  herdsmen  at  a  kraal,  as  there  were  no  facilities
for  porters  to  obtain  provisions,  and  we  had  no  food  with
us;  we  had  therefore  to  move  on  to  the  nearest  village,  which
in  every  case  was  some  miles  distant  from  the  kraal.

On  this  journey  to  Koki  I  had  an  unpleasant  experience,
when  riding  down  a  rather  steep  hill  into  a  valley.  It  was
quite  early,  about  six  o'clock,  and  the  valley  was  still  shaded
from  the  bright  sun.  I  ran  into  a  stream,  which  had  been
bridged  but  where  there  was  a  break  in  the  middle  of  the
bridge,  hidden  by  overhanging  grass;  the  bicycle  ran  into
this  at  a  rapid  rate,  and  I  was  thrown  some  feet  from  the
bicycle  on  to  my  shoulder  and  was  slightly  stunned,  but
after  sitting  up  and  examining  my  bruises,  I  found  that
no  bones  were  broken.  I  scrambled  to  my  feet  and  went
back,  dragged  the  machine  from  the  stream,  and  was  glad
to  find  that  it  was  little  the  worse  for  the  accident.  Though
most  of  the  hills  were  much  too  steep  to  ride  up,  and  some-
times all  the  strength  at  my  command  was  needed  to  push
the  bicycle  to  the  summit,  I  had  a  rest  while  riding  care-
fully down,  with  both  brakes  on,  keeping  a  watch  for  sharp
dips  or  breaks  in  the  track,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  fall  over  into
the  grass  when  I  might  save  the  machine  from  damage  and
my  bones  from  being  broken.  This  is  possible  when  one  is
alone,  but  it  is  sometimes  difficult  when  another  rider  comes
behind  down  a  hill  and  loses  control  of  his  machine.  I  had  an
unpleasant  experience  of  this  on  one  occasion  when  a  chief
riding  behind  me  called  to  me  to  give  him  the  path ;  there
was  barely  time  for  me  to  drag  my  bicycle  into  the  grass,
when  he  shot  past  and  was  hurled  into  an  acacia  bush  lower
down  the  hill,  from  which  he  was  extricated  looking  more
like  a  pincushion  full  of  pins  than  a  human  being.  The  chief
had  lost  control  of  his  machine  and  was  unable  to  turn  at
the  bend  in  the  road;  fortunately  no  bones  were  broken,  and
his  boys  soon  picked  the  thorns  from  his  body.

Koki  is  a  small  state,  which  a  few  years  ago  was  an  inde-
pendent kingdom,  but  since  the  British  Protectorate  has


xm]  KOKI  AND  ITS  PEOPLE  219

been  established,  it  has  become  a  state  of  Uganda.  In  the
time  of  King  Mutesa  and  during  Mwanga's  reign  Koki  was
tributary  to  Uganda,  paying  a  yearly  amount  in  cows  and
iron  spades.  Though  the  area  does  not  exceed  that  of  one
of  the  smaller  districts  in  Uganda,  the  people,  as  they
governed  themselves,  naturally  valued  their  independence.
The  people  are  now  only  partially  pastoral,  formerly  they  were
entirely  so.  The  introduction  of  agricultural  pursuits  may
be  due  to  intermarriage  with  members  of  agricultural  tribes
and  the  incorporation  of  these  persons  into  the  tribe.  The
pastoral  people  of  the  tribe  are  related  to  the  pastoral  tribe
of  Bunyoro,  and  have  a  royal  family  of  which  they  are
proud.  In  recent  years  some  of  the  better  class  women  and
princesses  began  to  imitate  the  Baganda  women  in  tillage,
especially  in  the  cultivation  of  plantains.  Women  do  the
work  in  the  fields,  and  men  build  the  houses,  and  also
are  the  herdsmen.  The  royal  family  still  retain  most  of  the
milk  customs  and  habits  of  pastoral  people,  and  abstain
from  a  vegetable  diet,  unless  they  are  in  urgent  need  of  food,
in  which  case  they  refrain  from  drinking  milk  until  they  have
fulfilled  the  prescribed  conditions  of  milk  taboo.

The  country  is  marshy  and  has  a  small  lake,  upon  which
there  are  a  few  dug-out  canoes  used  to  ferry  people  across
the  water,  thus  saving  the  time  and  labour  of  walking  some
miles  round  the  lake  to  their  homes.  It  is  the  custom  with  the
royal  clan  that  the  firstborn  child  of  a  king  shall  be  a  girl;
should  a  male  be  born,  he  is  killed  at  birth,  and  the  midwife
says  that  the  child  was  born  dead.  The  present  ruler  is  an
exception  to  this  custom,  for  he  was  the  firstborn  child  of
his  father,  but  escaped  death  owing  to  the  introduction  of
Christianity.  In  the  course  of  developing  its  work,  the  Uganda
church  sent  a  catechist  to  Koki,  who  was  successful  in  reaching
numbers  of  the  better  class.  Among  the  early  converts  was  the
king  Kamswaga;  after  his  baptism  he  was  informed  of  the
existence  of  his  son,  and  he  allowed  him  to  be  brought  to  his
capital.  The  child  had  been  taken  into  the  country  at  the
time  of  his  birth  and  placed  with  some  of  the  royal  herdsmen,


220  IRON  WORKING  [CH.

and  the  father  had  been  kept  in  ignorance  of  his  existence,
and  told  that  the  child  was  still-born,  according  to  their  old
custom.  There  are  instances  on  record  of  princes  having
been  thus  taken  away  and  cared  for,  when  there  was  little
hope  of  there  being  a  successor  to  the  king,  and  of  men
having  come  forward  at  the  king's  death  to  prove  the  prince's
legitimate  claim  to  the  throne.  In  this  case  the  introduction
of  Christianity  removed  the  difficulty,  and  the  father  acknow-
ledged his  son,  and  received  him  back  in  the  capital  during
his  own  lifetime.

The  capital  of  Koki  is  surrounded  by  high  hills  which  are
full  of  iron  stone;  from  these  hills  in  olden  times  a  great
part  of  the  iron  which  was  smelted  and  worked  for  weapons
and  implements  of  domestic  life  used  to  be  quarried.  This
part  of  the  country  was  the  chief  source  from  which  Uganda
obtained  its  iron,  and  here  special  smiths  lived  who  forged
iron,  which  was  then  sent  in  small  bars  to  the  country  smiths.
An  old  Uganda  legend  says  that  Kalimera,  the  son  of  an
early  king,  Chwa,  went  on  a  visit  to  Bunyoro,  and  there
learnt  the  art  of  a  smith  and  sent  the  first  iron  implements
into  Uganda.  It  is  quite  probable  that  a  prince  did  learn
the  art,  because  every  king  for  many  years  past  has  had
his  smithy  in  the  royal  enclosure  and  learnt  to  work
iron  as  a  hobby,  but  another  fact  must  be  remembered  in
connexion  with  the  introduction  of  iron,  namely  that  this
part  of  Uganda  once  belonged  to  Bunyoro,  and  the  Baganda
who  understand  smelting  belong  to  clans  which  were  left  in
this  part  of  the  country  when  the  Baganda  annexed  it.  The
clans  which  were  in  the  country  when  it  was  conquered
have  been  included  in  the  Uganda  nation,  and  are  free  to
marry  into  any  clan;  this  is  the  strongest  national  bond.
These  iron  smelters  are  not  of  the  same  race  as  the  people  of
Koki,  but  are  a  class  distinct  from  the  pastoral  people,  and
live  on  a  vegetable  diet;  still  they  pay  taxes  to  the  king  of
Koki,  and  are  his  subjects,  working  in  his  country.

Koki  is  one  of  the  districts  most  troubled  with  mosquitoes,
which  abound  during  the  daytime. In  most  places  it  is


xni]  BARK-CLOTH  TREES  221

safe  to  disregard  these  pests  during  the  daytime,  but  in  Koki
even  during  the  bright  sunshine  they  seem  to  take  no  rest
themselves  and  give  their  victims  but  little.

Passing  on  through  Koki  into  the  western  part  of  Uganda,
Budu,  we  come  into  what  was  one  of  the  most  important
and  wealthy  districts.  Besides  having  iron  ore,  Budu  has
also  some  of  the  best  trees  for  making  bark-cloth  and  is
an  excellent  cattle  country.  King  Semakokiro,  who  lived
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  is  said  to  have
compelled  all  his  people  to  cultivate  the  tree  which  yields
the  bark,  from  which  the  so-called  cloth  is  made.  In  the
district  known  as  Sango  in  Budu  trees  are  grown  which
produce  the  finest  kind  of  bark  in  Uganda,  of  a  better
quality  and  a  richer  colour  than  any  other;  these  particular
trees  do  not  grow  freely  in  other  places.  The  use  of  bark-cloth
is  fast  disappearing  owing  to  the  introduction  of  unbleached
calico,  which  is  of  a  stronger  texture,  more  durable,  and
capable  of  being  washed.  The  better  class  Baganda  were
glad  to  obtain  cotton  goods  which  could  be  washed,  because
of  vermin;  bark-cloth  encouraged  this  pest,  to  the  great
discomfort  of  the  native.  For  the  purpose  of  cleansing  it  was
customary  to  fumigate  the  bark-cloth;  it  was  spread  over
a  basket  framework,  under  which  a  small  fire  was  lighted
and  grass  was  slowly  burned,  giving  off  volumes  of  smoke,
the  heat  of  the  sun  meanwhile  causing  the  creatures  to  drop
off.  The  smell  of  the  burnt  grass  on  the  garment  was  as
pleasing  to  the  native  as  that  of  newly  washed  garments
is  to  an  Englishman.

It  is  a  pity  that  the  bark-cloth  industry,  which  was  so
extensive  and  so  useful,  should  be  allowed  to  die;  if  only
some  other  use  could  be  made  of  the  bark-cloth,  it  would  be
an  advantage  to  the  natives,  who  would  reap  some  benefit
from  the  trees  on  their  estates.  The  trees  grow  readily  and
rapidly,  and  yield  annual  barks  of  good  quality  for  some
seven  years;  they  require  no  cultivation.

In  Budu  the  finest  kind  of  basketry  was  also  practised,  the
baskets  being  made  from  the  young  leaves  of  the  wild  palm


222  BASKETRY  [CH.  xm

trees.  This  industry  needs  protection  and  encouragement,
otherwise  it  will  also  disappear.  Basket  making  was  confined
almost  entirely  to  women,  and  was  a  means  by  which  poor
women  were  able  to  obtain  the  many  little  things  which
otherwise  they  could  not  have  procured.  Visits  to  these
distant  parts  of  Uganda  were  made  by  me  during  vacations,
and  the  men  who  acted  as  my  carriers  were  teachers  resting
from  their  studies,  who  turned  these  journeys  to  profit;  they
earned  money  thereby  for  their  clothing  and  other  purposes,
and  they  were  useful  too,  as  these  tours  were  opportunities
for  preaching  and  teaching.  The  ability  and  the  fidelity  of
these  men  were  unsurpassed,  and  many  of  them  are  still
doing  noble  work  as  teachers,  while  not  a  few  have  become
native  pastors.


CHAPTER  XIV

LAKE  DWELLERS,  A  BANTU  TRIBE,  AND
THE  BAKEDI,  A  NILOTIC  TRIBE

THE  next  tribes  whom  I  will  mention  among  those
encountered  in  the  short  journeys  which  I  made  into
countries  adjacent  to  Uganda  are  two,  one  belonging  to  the
group  of  tribes  in  the  north  and  the  other  to  those  in  the
north-east  of  Uganda,  the  one  set  being  Bantu  lake  dwellers
and  the  other  Nilotic.

Where  the  River  Nile  is  crossed  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Lake  Kioga  in  Bunyoro,  there  are  to  be  found  many
smaller  streams  which  wend  their  way  into  that  great  river,
and  though  they  are  for  the  most  part  insignificant  when
compared  with  that  mighty  stream,  yet  each  adds  its
quota  to  the  volume  of  water,  and  is  of  great  value  to  the
country  through  which  it  passes.  Some  of  these  rivers  widen
out  in  places  and  form  pretty  lakes;  we  should  consider
them  large  were  it  not  for  the  greater  Victoria  Nyanza,
Albert,  and  Albert  Edward  Lakes  in  the  same  region,  which
dwarf  some  really  fine  sheets  of  water.  Among  the  smaller,
though  extremely  pretty,  lakes  we  must  place  Kioga;  it  is
a  wide,  open  expanse  of  the  Mpologoma  River,  which  empties
itself  into  the  Nile  near  Lake  Albert.

The  Mpologoma  River  rises  on  the  southern  slopes  of  Mount
Elgon,  and  rapidly  assumes  wide  proportions  owing  to  the
amount  of  papyrus  which  grows  in  it  and  which  retards  the
water  from  draining  off  rapidly  into  the  Nile.  In  few  places
does  the  water  exceed  more  than  eight  or  ten  feet  in  depth,
but  it  is  everywhere  wide,  in  many  places  fully  a  mile  in  width,
and  it  has  a  rich  black  deposit,  which  is  constantly  being
increased  as  the  heavy  rains  carry  into  it  the  surface  earth
from  the  hills.  The  water  is  seldom  a  visibly  flowing  stream,
though  it  is  never  quite  still ;  it  has,  however,  a  slow  movement
which  is  rarely  noticeable,  and  it  is  only  in  the  places  where  the


224  LAKE  DWELLERS  [CH.

channel  narrows  down  to  a  width  of  a  few  yards  and  is  deep,
that  the  current  is  at  all  perceptible.  In  most  places  papyrus
rises  to  a  height  of  some  fifteen  feet,  and  extends  from  bank
to  bank  and  up  and  down  the  river  for  miles,  so  that  when
it  is  viewed  from  any  eminence,  the  eye  rests  upon  a  sea  of
green  with  feathery  tufts  of  brownish  coloured  seeds,  pretty
to  look  upon,  but  terrible  to  encounter  when  crossing  the
river.  In  this  forest  of  papyrus  numbers  of  busy  people  live;
their  huts  are  constructed  upon  the  floating  roots  of  the
papyrus,  and  hidden  by  the  tall  grass  from  being  seen  at  any
point  on  the  river  bank ;  the  principal  material  used  in  building
the  huts  is  this  same  papyrus  grass.  The  foundation  of  a
house  is  formed  by  a  large  root,  or  interlaced  roots  of
papyrus;  the  strong  stems  of  the  grass  are  cut  down  and
laid  on  this  layer  upon  layer  crossed  and  recrossed,  until  a
firm  floor  several  feet  deep  is  formed,  into  which  the  stakes
of  the  framework  can  be  inserted.  The  hut  frame  is  more
like  a  huge  inverted  basket  than  anything  else  that  I  can
picture;  this  is  thatched  with  common  grass  brought  from
the  shore.  Inside  a  hut  the  floor  is  made  smooth  and  com-
fortable with  small  papyrus  stems,  and  a  slab  of  thick  mud
to  serve  as  a  fireplace  is  plastered  in  the  middle  of  the  floor.
The  bedstead  is  a  wooden  frame,  often  raised  four  or  five  feet
high,  to  ensure  its  being  above  the  water  line,  because  a  heavy
fall  of  rain  on  the  hills  may  cause  the  water  to  rise  several
feet  in  a  few  hours,  and  should  that  happen  during  the  night
when  the  inhabit  ants  are  asleep,  there  would  be  a  danger  of  their
being  drowned  before  the  papyrus  could  rise  to  the  new  level.
The  inhabitants  say  that  sometimes  during  the  night,  when
there  is  a  heavy  storm,  the  water  will  rise  until  it  is  as  high
as  the  doorway,  too  high  for  them  to  get  out,  and  they  have
to  cut  a  new  opening  and  crawl  from  the  bed  into  the  canoe,
which  is  always  secured  near  the  door.  Such  inundations  do
not  disturb  the  placid  temperament  of  these  people,  for  they
know  that  the  water  will  rapidly  subside,  leaving  their  home
little  the  worse  for  the  wetting.  They  go  about  their  fishing  and
calmly  wait  for  the  water  to  fall  to  the  normal  height;  they


xiv]  FLOATING  HOUSES  225

do  not  trouble  to  change  their  home  or  to  alter  the  arrange-
ments of  the  interior.

In  shallow  water  papyrus  often  becomes  rooted  and  will
not  float  with  the  rapidly  rising  water,  which  is  the  reason
why  houses  are  swamped;  whereas  in  deep  water  the  roots
are  pendent*  and  rise  or  fall  with  the  water.  On  the  lakes
the  huts  are  often  carried  about  by  the  wind  or  any  current.
Thus  on  Lake  Kioga  papyrus  tufts  may  be  scattered  about
on  the  surface  or  gathered  into  one  mass;  they  may  be  seen
one  day  on  one  side  of  the  lake,  and  the  next  day,  after
a  strong  wind,  they  will  be  found  carried  a  mile  or  more
away  to  the  other  side.  The  people  build  their  huts  on
large  tufts  of  papyrus,  so  matted  together  that  there  is
no  fear  of  their  being  divided  or  split  up  by  wind,  and  they
are  carried  about  in  their  floating  homes  without  any
feeling  of  insecurity.  In  the  rivers  the  huts  are  always  in
fixed  locations  owing  to  the  immense  growth  of  grass  which
extends  for  many  miles;  the  only  movement  of  these  latter
huts  is  in  altitude  with  the  increase  or  decrease  of  water.
These  huts  on  the  rivers  are  usually  built  some  distance
from  the  fords  and  are  invisible  from  the  banks;  they
have  long  waterways  to  them  and  can  only  be  reached
by  canoe.  The  chief  of  a  district  has  his  own  special  street
or  waterway  with  his  huts  for  his  wives,  and  the  home  of
each  peasant  has  its  own  short  alley  branching  off  from  the
main  waterway.  In  one  place  we  visited  the  chief  of  a  small
community,  who  had  his  private  waterway  leading  from  the
main  way;  over  the  entrance  to  this  way  was  an  arch
made  of  papyrus  stems,  tied  together  at  the  top,  and  hung
with  fetishes,  to  protect  him  from  the  danger  of  hostile
invasion.  The  main  waterway  to  the  chief's  house  was  a  fine
course  some  ten  or  twelve  feet  wide,  and  we  passed  many
side  branches  with  huts  in  them ;  at  some  of  the  huts  women
were  sitting  in  the  doorways,  while  children  were  playing
about  in  small  canoes  looking  peaceful  and  happy.  The  side
way  in  which  the  chief  lived  was  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile
long.  The  door  of  the  hut  opened  upon  the  water,  so  that
R  u.  15


226  HOMES  OF  THE  BAKENE  [CH.

there  was  only  one  step  upon  which  to  land  and  enter  the
hut.  When  a  man  has  more  than  one  hut  in  the  same  locality,
he  usually  has  a  path  built  upon  papyrus  roots  connecting
them  together,  so  as  to  enable  him  to  pass  from  one  to  the
other  without  the  use  of  a  canoe.

The  old  chief  whom  I  visited  was  most  communicative  and
friendly,  ready  to  tell  me  about  his  people.  He  said  that  his
parents  told  him  that  their  forefathers  had  come  in  the  first
instance  from  Busoga;  they  originally  lived  on  the  banks
of  rivers,  but  because  they  were  frequently  robbed,  and
also  owing  to  some  of  their  relatives  having  been  captured  and
enslaved,  they  decided  to  build  their  houses  upon  papyrus
in  the  river,  and  from  that  time,  many  generations  ago,  they
had  lived  in  floating  houses.  There  may  be  some  truth  in
this  tradition,  though  it  does  not  seem  possible  to  recognise
these  people  as  being  closely  related  to  the  Basoga;  the  great
differences  of  totems  and  also  of  many  customs  combat
such  an  idea.  Most  of  the  Bakene  whom  we  met  spoke
Luganda  freely,  but  this  may  readily  be  accounted  for  by
their  contact  with  Baganda  traders  who  cross  the  ferries
on  their  trading  expeditions.

The  chief  was  having  a  new  hut  constructed  a  few  yards
distant  from  his  old  one;  the  frame  of  it  was  complete,  so
that  it  was  possible  to  gain  an  idea  of  their  method  of
building.  The  description  given  of  an  inverted  wicker  basket
fully  describes  the  framework.  One  interesting  feature  in
the  construction  of  the  hut  was  a  hole  in  the  roof  at  the  apex
to  let  out  the  smoke;  this  is  the  only  tribe  I  have  observed
in  Africa  who  make  any  outlet  in  a  hut  for  smoke.  The
river  abounds  with  mosquitoes,  which  are  active  even  during
the  day,  but  these  people  do  not  seem  to  mind  them,  nor
do  they  suffer  from  their  bites;  possibly  the  flies  are  at
present  innocuous.  It  was  interesting  to  see  some  goats
living  in  these  huts;  they  were  feeding  near  the  chief's  hut,
walking  on  the  papyrus  roots,  and  picking  creepers  from  the
stems  of  the  growing  papyrus;  they  are  taken  to  graze  on  the
land  during  the  day,  and  brought  back  to  rest  at  mid-day


xiv]  MODE  OF  LIFE  ON  LAKE  KIOGA  227

and  to  sleep  at  night;  they  appeared  perfectly  satisfied  and
happy  on  their  floating  home.  The  food  of  the  people  consists
chiefly  of  fish,  though  they  exchange  sun-dried  fish  for  millet
and  have  a  meal  of  porridge  once  a  day  when  possible ;  their
chief  occupation  is  fishing,  though  a  few  of  the  people  give
some  time  to  cultivating  small  plots  of  land  near  their  homes.
Fish  traps  bring  in  the  greatest  supply  of  fish,  but  the  people
know  the  use  of  lines  and  hooks,  and  to  a  limited  degree
these  are  used ;  large  quantities  of  fish  are  dried  in  the  sun
and  smoked  over  wood  fires  for  market — they  often  carry
them  some  miles  to  favourable  markets.

On  Lake  Kioga  we  were  fortunate,  when  crossing,  to  see
some  of  the  homes  and  also  many  of  the  people  who  were  busy
fishing.  In  most  cases  a  house  occupied  its  own  separate  clump
of  papyrus  roots  and  was  independent  of  other  houses;  the
house  floats  about  with  every  change  of  wind,  but  the
inhabitants  are  indifferent  as  to  the  locality  of  the  home,
because  the  canoe  is  their  means  of  traversing  the  lake,
and  it  is  always  secured  to  the  house  door  ready  for  any
emergency,  and  can  be  drawn  up  to  the  door  when  wanted.
It  was  a  pretty  sight  to  see  young  children  as  happy  on  the
water  as  other  children  are  on  land.  A  child  learns  to  love  its
watery  surroundings,  and  seems  to  become  amphibious;  it  can
paddle  its  canoe  and  it  can  also  swim  about  almost  as  well  as  it
can  walk.  Some  of  the  canoes  used  were  very  flimsy  craft,
little  more  than  a  plank,  on  which  the  occupant  sat,  the
water  passing  over  his  limbs  as  he  paddled  about.  The  most
that  can  be  said  for  these  craft  is  that  they  save  the  oc-
cupant the  slight  exertion  of  swimming,  otherwise  there  is
little  gain  in  their  use.  On  this  lake  there  are  many  shrines
built  on  small  tufts  of  papyrus,  presumably  for  the  ghosts  of
relatives.  Our  time  did  not  permit  of  a  lengthy  stay,  so  we
had  to  leave  these  people,  after  gathering  a  few  ideas  of  their
habits  of  life;  we  hope  for  some  future  opportunity  for  a
further  study  of  their  social  life.  They  naturally  would  not
tell  a  stranger  much  about  themselves,  and  like  other  Bantu
tribes  they  were  both  suspicious  and  reticent.  These  lake

15—2


228  SOME  NILOTIC  PEOPLE  [CH

dwellers  are  said  to  reside  in  numbers  on  various  small  lakes
in  this  region,  but  there  was  not  time  to  venture  farther
afield  to  hunt  them  out.

Bakedi,  as  the  Bateso  are  more  commonly  called  by  their
neighbours,  means  naked  people ;  they  are  so  named  because
both  men  and  women  of  all  ages  live  in  a  nude  state;  they
belong  to  the  Nilotic  tribes  of  the  people,  but  form  quite  a
distinct  group  from  the  Bantu,  who  live  among  them,  but  keep
separate  from  them  in  religious  and  social  life.  In  many  respects
they  are  more  primitive  than  the  Bantu  tribes,  and  in  religious
matters  they  are  decidedly  behind  their  neighbours.  It  was  im-
possible tofind  whether  they  had  any  knowledge  of  the  Creator;
not  even  a  term  for  a  superior  being  could  be  discovered,  though
there  were  traces  of  worship  of  the  dead,  which  worship
appeared  to  be  the  only  form  of  cultus  among  the  tribe.  In
the  custom  followed  for  rain-making  a  form  of  magic  is
practised  with  what  may  be  a  trace  of  worship;  it  is  as  follows :
a  place  is  chosen  for  making  a  feast  in  the  neighbourhood,
the  chief  provides  animals  for  the  feast,  and  a  dance  is  held.
The  dance  and  feast  are  thought  to  influence  the  elements  in
some  way,  there  being  an  indistinct  and  hazy  belief  in  a  rock
spirit.  Though  there  is  this  form  of  magic  in  rain-making,
and  a  rude  form  of  worship  of  the  dead,  still  there  seems
to  be  a  lack  of  any  idea  of  a  supreme  being.  A  Muganda
teacher  who  had  spent  some  years  among  the  people  and
had  been  able  to  translate  parts  of  the  Gospels  into  the
Teso  language,  said  that  he  had  not  found  any  term  used  for
the  Creator  or  for  a  supreme  being,  and  had  been  obliged  to
adopt  a  term  from  his  own  language.

Among  this  particular  Nilotic  tribe,  the  Bateso,  there  are
two  or  three  superior  chiefs,  each  of  whom  rules  a  large  district
and  acts  as  magistrate  to  his  own  people.  The  land  belongs
to  families  who  hold  it  as  their  freehold  property;  they  base
their  claim  upon  the  fact  that  they  have  tilled  it  for  years,
and  that  as  it  passed  to  them  from  their  forefathers,  so  they
are  to  pass  it  on  to  their  children.  Millet,  sweet  potatoes,
cereals,  such  as  peas,  beans,  and  marrows,  are  the  chief


xiv]  HOMES  OF  THE  NILOTIC  PEOPLE  229

foodstuffs  cultivated,  and  many  villages  also  possess  cattle,
goats,  sheep,  and  fowls.  The  dwellings  are  round  huts,  with
walls  of  stakes  from  three  to  four  feet  above  the  ground.  The
stakes  are  driven  a  few  inches  into  the  earth;  the  builder
marks  out  a  circle  on  the  ground,  cutting  a  shallow  trench  in
a  circle  which  is  fairly  accurate,  considering  that  he  uses
nothing  but  his  eyesight ;  into  this  circular  trench  he  drives
or  inserts  his  stakes  three  or  four  inches  deep,  leaving  a  space
for  the  doorway.  In  the  centre  of  the  hut  a  stout  pole  is
erected;  it  is  sunk  two  or  three  feet  into  the  ground,  and
is  tall  enough  to  give  the  necessary  angle  for  the  roof
pitch.  From  this  central  pole  the  rafters  radiate  to  the  walls;
they  are  bound  to  the  pole  by  strips  of  bark,  and  are  like  the
ribs  of  an  umbrella.  Across  these  rafters  smaller  pliable
sticks  are  tied,  running  at  equal  distances  from  the  wall
circle  and  diminishing  in  size  as  they  near  the  central  pole.
The  thatch,  which  consists  of  grass  cut  in  lengths  and
tied  in  small  bundles,  is  laid  on  the  roof  from  the  eaves,  and
has  the  ends  kept  even  and  secured  to  the  rafters  beneath.
After  the  first  layer  of  grass  has  been  put  on  the  roof  at  the
eaves,  a  second  layer  is  laid  a  few  inches  higher,  and  its  ends
form  a  ridge  as  it  rests  on  the  lower  layer;  this  arrangement
looks  neat  and  has  somewhat  the  appearance  of  slates  over-
lapping each  other  on  a  roof.

Families  live  in  groups  of  huts  clustered  together,  without
any  attempt  to  form  roads  between  them,  inside  a  growing
fence,  which  forms  a  cattle  kraal.  There  are  often  twenty  or
more  families  living  in  one  of  these  enclosures,  and  the  cows
wander  about,  unless  they  are  confined  in  a  small  square  to  one
side,  leaving  the  children  room  to  play.  There  is  no  rule  for
restricting  the  number  of  inmates  in  a  hut;  age  alone  causes
the  bigger  girls  to  marry  and  to  leave  the  parental  roof.  The
people  till  plots  of  land  near  by,  and  also  claim  any  timber
to  be  found  in  the  vicinity  of  their  fields.  Timber  for  fuel  and
for  building  purposes  is  scarce  in  this  particular  part  of  the
country,  and  the  utmost  care  is  exercised  in  cutting  it  for
any  purpose  whatever.


230 STRANGE  IDEAS  OF  ORNAMENTATION [CH.

There  is  a  strange  custom  of  ornamentation  among  the
women;  they  pierce  the  tip  of  the  tongue  and  thread  a  small
ring  of  iron  or  brass  through  it,  and  the  presence  of  this  ring
does  not  appear  to  impair  speech  nor  to  cause  discomfort  when
eating.  I  was  informed  that  this  was  done  for  purposes  of
ornament  only,  and  that  it  was  not  ceremonial,  but  I  am
myself  inclined  to  think  that  it  belongs  to  initiation  cere-
monies, and  is  therefore  ceremonial.

The  lower  lip  is  also  pierced  by  many  women  to  admit
a  stone  some  two  inches  long  and  half  an  inch  thick,  tapering
slightly  to  a  blunted  end;  the  stones  are  generally  white
granite,  rubbed  smooth  with  a  slight  taper,  and  they  fit
tightly  into  the  hole  in  the  lip  and  stand  horizontally  to
the  mouth.  Many  women  pierce  the  ears  with  numbers  of
small  holes  round  the  helix  and  wear  a  small  ring  of  iron
threaded  through  each  hole.  -Another  method  of  decoration
is  to  pierce  the  flesh  on  the  chest  by  pinching  it  up  and
boring  a  small  hole,  and  to  thread  a  small  iron  or  brass  ring
through;  the  rings  are  kept  bright  by  the  frequent  applica-
tion of  oil  to  the  body,  rubbed  in  with  the  palm  of  the
hand.

The  features  of  the  country  are  very  different  from  those  of
Uganda;  here  there  are  large  rocky  hills  with  enormous  boulders
lying  in  all  manner  of  positions,  as  though  they  had  been  cast
up  by  earth  eruptions,  or  dropped  from  the  crest  of  a  wave.
Some  of  the  stones  weighing  several  tons  seem  to  be  resting
on  others  in  the  most  precarious  positions,  especially  those  on
hills,  which  look  as  though  they  must  topple  over  with  a  breath
of  wind.  The  country  is  not  so  moist  as  that  of  Uganda,  the
drainage  is  more  rapid,  and  there  is  a  more  denned  tropical
rainfall ;  the  ordinary  grass  is  not  so  rich,  there  are  few  forests
of  any  size,  and  trees  almost  disappear  when  the  water  courses
are  left  behind  for  the  higher  undulating  land.  The  country
presents  on  the  whole  a  much  less  inviting  appearance  than
most  parts  of  Uganda,  and  is  suited  for  a  different  kind  of
cultivation.  The  British  Government  placed  Baganda  chiefs
over  these  Bateso  some  years  ago  when  the  country  was  occupied


xiv]  VISITED  BY  A  THIEF  231

by  the  English,  and  a  more  systematic  form  of  government
was  established  by  these  chiefs.  It  was  the  task  of  the  principal
Muganda  chiefs  to  bring  the  country  into  peace  and  harmony
with  other  parts  of  the  Protectorate,  and  they  have  done
their  work  well.  They  have  gained  the  confidence  of  the
people  and  made  friends  with  them,  while  they  have  taught
them  to  cultivate  cotton  and  rubber,  to  make  roads,  and  to  do
other  work  for  the  civilisation  of  the  district,  thus  uplifting
a  tribe  and  redeeming  a  country,  in  addition  to  bringing
about  a  sound  system  of  government,  and  making  it  safe
to  pass  through  a  people  hitherto  wild.

During  my  visit  to  this  province  I  was  robbed  of  both
clothes  and  money  one  night ;  it  was  the  first  and  only  time
that  I  have  been  robbed  during  my  many  years  of  African
travels  and  life.  I  was  staying  in  a  Government  rest-house
which  had  neither  doors  nor  windows,  but  only  three  bare
rooms  and  an  open  space  on  the  fourth  side ;  I  had  been  told
by  the  missionary  living  in  the  place  that  there  were  no  thieves,
and  I  had  relaxed  my  usual  precautions  against  any  attempt
to  be  robbed.  During  the  evening  as  I  suffered  from  a  cold
and  was  a  little  feverish,  I  took  a  sleeping  draught  and  went
early  to  bed.  I  was  disturbed  at  half-past  ten  by  a  noise
which  I  thought  came  from  a  dog  in  my  room;  for  a  few
moments  I  tried  to  drive  the  dog  away  without  getting  out
of  bed  or  lighting  a  candle,  but  after  a  few  futile  efforts
I  got  up,  when  to  my  surprise  the  box  on  which  my  candle
stood  was  snatched  away,  the  candle  and  matches  were
thrown  under  the  bed,  and  before  my  boys  could  be  roused
and  could  respond  to  my  call,  the  thief  had  dragged  the
box  out  of  the  room,  and  was  running  off  in  the  distance
with  some  confederate,  who  had  been  waiting  outside.  The
boys  were  in  the  next  room  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  house,
but  natives  sleep  soundly  and  require  a  vast  amount  of
waking,  and  then  a  little  time  to  collect  their  thoughts;  and
this  gave  the  thief  a  start.  Fortunately  one  suit  of  clothes
was  left  in  another  part  of  the  room,  and  enough  money  in  the
pockets  to  enable  me  to  continue  my  journey  of  some  two


232  A  DANGEROUS  THIEF  [CH.

hundred  miles,  and  to  visit  several  mission  stations.  The  chief
of  Ngora  and  all  his  people  expressed  their  great  regret  the
next  day  when  they  heard  of  my  loss,  and  they  sent  men  in  all
directions  to  try  to  discover  the  thieves,  but  all  that  could  be
found  was  the  empty  iron  box  thrown  away  in  the  swamp,
and  a  little  farther  a  few  odd  garments,  which  had  been
discarded  as  useless,  together  with  some  drugs.  Some  months
later  the  thief  was  caught  in  Busoga  in  possession  of  some
of  the  stolen  goods;  he  turned  out  to  be  a  notorious  Musoga
robber  who  was  wanted  for  murder ;  and  after  being  tried  by
the  British  Government,  he  was  condemned  to  death  and
hanged.  It  was  perhaps  a  fortunate  circumstance  that  I
could  not  get  out  of  bed  in  time  to  grapple  with  the  man,
for  he  would  most  probably  have  used  his  knife,  as  he  had
done  before  when  house-robbing,  and  as  he  did  later  when  he
entered  houses  to  steal  and  was  disturbed  by  the  inmates.

The  Bateso  are  not  addicted  to  theft,  and  did  not  expect
to  be  saddled  with  thieves  and  burglars  from  other  countries.
As  a  nation,  they  are  a  quiet,  inoffensive  people  and  seldom
fight  or  go  to  war.  Their  past  records  recount  only  tribal
wars,  which  have  arisen  from  women  having  been  decoyed
or  captured,  when  going  to  work  or  returning  from  their
fields;  another  cause  for  fighting  was  that  land  had  been
appropriated  which  they  claimed  as  family  property,  and
as  they  failed  to  obtain  their  rights  peaceably,  they  resorted
to  arms.  In  such  fights  the  women  are  said  to  have  taken  a
part  by  bringing  pots  of  beer,  and  standing  in  the  rear  of
the  battle,  whence  they  encouraged  their  husbands,  and  also
ministered  to  their  wants.  These  sudden  calls  to  arms  to
contest  the  claims  of  justice  were  usually  settled  within  a
day,  rarely  with  more  serious  casualties  than  a  few  bruises
or  spear  wounds.  After  such  a  display  of  force  the  offenders
would  pay  a  fine,  and  settle  the  strife,  with  the  necessary
compensation  for  causing  such  trouble.

A  word  may  be  said  about  the  nudity  of  pagan  tribes  of
Africa.  We  who  live  in  Western  countries  are  apt  to  think  such
people  utterly  immoral;  but  this  is  a  mistake,  for  the  lack


xiv]  IDEAS  OF  MORALITY  233

of  clothing  does  not  mean  that  the  tribes  are  depraved,
though  it  points  to  a  primitive  condition.  Morality  depends
rather  upon  the  standard  with  which  these  people  regard
marriage  and  sex  relations  and  upon  their  ideas  of  purity.
We  must  study  their  social  customs  before  we  can  gauge
their  moral  condition.  In  most  cases  we  shall  find  that  men
pay  great  respect  to  married  women,  and  seldom  try  to
encroach  upon  their  rights;  on  the  other  hand  among  a  few
tribes  young  women  live  a  free  life,  without  any  restraint  on
their  sexual  relations  with  men,  until  marriage  takes  place.
Previous  to  marriage,  nothing  which  a  girl  does  short  of
becoming  a  mother  is  considered  improper.  In  other  tribes
the  real  anxiety  is  to  ascertain  who  is  the  father  of  a  child,
and  to  get  him  to  take  charge  of  the  expectant  mother  until
the  child  is  born;  there  is  no  shame  or  blame  cast  upon  the
girl.  Men  invariably  take  a  girl  to  wife  under  these  circum-
stances, and  the  young  woman  suffers  no  reproach  from  her
parents  or  friends  for  her  conduct.  Even  when  a  man  refuses
to  marry  a  woman  who  has  a  child  which  he  acknowledges  to
be  his  own,  he  provides  for  the  woman  until  the  child  is
weaned,  when  he  pays  her  parents  a  sum  of  money,  and  she
goes  back  to  them,  leaving  the  child  to  the  care  of  some
member  of  his  clan.  The  young  woman  is  free  to  marry,  and
is  not  disgraced  by  having  had  a  child,  nor  does  she  feel  any
grievance  against  the  man  who  has  not  taken  her  to  wife.
Once  again,  in  other  parts  of  the  country,  as  has  been  noted
above  concerning  Ankole,  girls  are  carefully  guarded  until
their  marriage,  but  after  that  has  taken  place,  the  married
woman  is  expected  to  welcome  her  husband's  guests  to  her
couch.  Before  Christianity  had  established  new  rules  of
morality  in  accordance  with  its  faith,  there  were  only  a  few
tribes  in  East  Africa  who  restrained  girls  from  having
sexual  intercourse  with  men  before  marriage;  these  tribes
were  chiefly  pastoral.


CHAPTER  XV

>

WANDERINGS  AMONG  THE  BAGESHU  AND  THE
BASOGA  TRIBES

IN  past  years  before  the  British  occupation  of  the  Nile*
Province  it  was  unsafe  to  travel  in  districts  inhabited  by
Bageshu  without  an  armed  escort.  The  tribes  in  those  parts
could  only  think  of  the  white  man  as  a  foe,  and  it  was  a
laudable  action  to  attack  and,  if  possible,  to  kill  him.  Reports
had  gone  forth,  spread  chiefly  by  the  Banyoro,  that  white
men  only  sought  to  conquer  countries  for  purposes  of  plunder
and  profit;  hence  tribes,  shut  off  from  the  old  trade  routes,
and  only  able  to  gain  information  from  neighbours  nearer
Uganda,  formed  wrong  impressions  about  Europeans,  and
tried  to  prevent  them  from  entering  their  country.  When  we
passed  through  the  Bateso  country,  this  state  of  affairs  was
changed,  and  it  was  possible  for  me  to  go  on  alone,  riding  my
bicycle,  in  front  of  my  carriers,  without  fear  of  attack;  indeed
we  were  all  of  us  unarmed.  There  were  two  or  three  long
marches  through  deserted  tracts  of  country,  where  wild  animals
abounded,  which  were  said  to  be  dangerous  to  men  travelling
alone ;  lions,  buffaloes,  and  elephants  were  said  to  be  a  menace
to  any  single  pedestrian.  But  in  none  of  these  places  did  I,  or
my  special  runner  who  carried  my  light  refreshments,  suffer,
though  we  were  often  separated  from  the  carriers  and  indeed
from  each  other  by  some  miles.  The  carriers  could  not  keep
pace  with  the  special  runner,  and  he  could  not  keep  pace  with
the  bicycle  for  twenty  miles  while  carrying  the  necessary
packet,  containing  a  few  utensils  for  cooking  a  meal  and  the
provisions.  Yet  the  runner  was  seldom  more  than  a  mile  behind
me,  and  there  was  little  to  be  gained  by  leaving  him  far  behind,
hence  I  often  cycled  at  a  rate  of  only  six  miles  an  hour,  so  that  he
could  keep  near  me  at  his  steady  trot.  The  peaceable  state  in
the  country  has  been  brought  about  through  British  occupa-
tion ;  a  wise  and  tactful  Muganda  chief,  Kakungulu,  was  placed


en.  xv] BAGANDA  AS  BKIIIMl  AGENTS  235

over  the  country,  and  without  resorting  to  a  single

instance  he  has  been  able  tobi  ii iff  into  happy

relations  with  the  Government.  Roa  nun  If  into  every

part  of  the  district  from  one  chief's  residence  to  anotlx  r,  and
Baganda  chiefs  were  established  in  each  district  to  rule,  collect
taxes,  and  organise  cotton  and  rubber  plantations.  Most  of  the
chiefs  appointed  were  Christian  Baganda,  who  built  their  lit  t  If
mud  and  wattle  churches,  and  began  a  system  of  daily  services,
to  which  numbers  of  the  Bateso  youths  went.  These  youths
proved  apt  scholars,  and  soon  began  to  learn  to  read  and
write;  as  I  passed  through  the  country,  I  found  in  various
places  boys  who  assembled  daily  for  reading  and  general
instruction,  and  at  some  of  the  places  there  were  boys
studying  to  become  catechumens.

Fortunately  for  me  the  weather  was  good  during  the
journey,  for,  as  stated  above,  I  had  lost  all  my  clothing;
I  did  not  once  suffer  from  wet  clothes,  and  consequently
escaped  colds  and  fever.  Mount  Elgon  was  reached  without
further  adventure  after  my  escapade  with  the  thief;  and  there
at  Ngora  I  met  an  old  friend,  Mr  Ormsby,  the  District
Commissioner,  who  has  since  died  from  haematuria.  He  was
one  of  those  quiet,  unassuming  Englishmen,  who  do  much
good  work  without  any  ostentation,  and  pass  away  scarcely
known  to  the  outer  world,  and  yet  sadly  missed  by  those
who  know  them.  Mr  Ormsby  did  a  splendid  work  among
the  wild  tribes  round  Elgon  and  beyond  to  the  border  of
Abyssinia,  he  gained  the  good  opinion  of  the  natives,  and
instilled  in  them  such  confidence  of  the  English,  that  they
welcomed  English  rulers  to  govern  them  and  their  states,
and  became  loyal  British  subjects.  While  he  was  a  capable
administrator  in  his  office,  he  was  also  a  sympathetic  friend
to  the  native;  he  would  sit  in  the  evening  over  a  wood  fire,
and  talk  to  the  poorest  peasants,  enter  into  their  difficulties,
and  explain  away  their  fears  and  perplexities.

The  Bageshu,  the  tribe  now  encountered  on  Mount  Elgon,
were  said  to  be  treacherous,  so  that  it  was  inadvisable  for  me  to
leave  the  beaten  tracks  and  hunt  for  information  respecting  the


236 CAVES  ON  MOUNT  ELGON [CH.

people  and  their  customs;  in  fact  my  friend  Ormsby  asked
me  not  to  go  among  the  people  at  all.  He  gave  me  all  the
information  he  could  concerning  social  customs,  and  helped  me
especially  in  the  matter  of  the  caves  which  were  reported
to  be  on  Elgon.  The  caves,  mentioned  by  former  travellers  as
having  been  inhabited  by  natives  in  the  past,  were  an  object
of  interest  to  me,  and  it  was  my  intention  to  visit  them;  but
my  friend  assured  me  nowhere  in  his  district  were  there  any
caves  of  note  or  of  value  to  science,  so  far  as  he  had  discovered,
and  that  he  had  been  over  the  mountain  several  times  and
had  frequently  camped  on  it,  for  the  purpose  of  making
investigations.  He  further  stated  that  snow  did  not  lie
continually  upon  the  summit,  and  that  the  many  waterfalls
which  dash  down  the  rocky  sides  for  some  hundreds  of  feet,
looking  magnificent,  are  the  outlets  from  springs  upon  the
mountain  top,  where  there  are  several  pools;  and  are  not  due
to  melting  snow.

It  did  not  take  long  to  discover  that  the  Bageshu  were
cannibals;  this  fact  was  ascertained  from  a  description  of
death  and  the  disposal  of  the  dead  given  me  by  a  man  who
was  an  authority  in  his  clan.  He  said  that  no  burial  ever
took  place  among  them,  and  that  if  any  person  attempted
to  bury  the  dead,  the  body  would  soon  be  dug  up  during
the  night  by  animals.  The  description  which  he  gave  of  the
powers  and  astuteness  of  wild  animals  aroused  my  suspicion,
especially  when  I  noticed  the  undisturbed  grave  of  a  white
man,  so  that  when  a  second  man  on  being  questioned
gave  a  different  account,  and  when  asked  the  direct  question
admitted  that  the  members  of  the  next  clan  ate  portions
of  the  dead,  it  became  comparatively  easy  to  obtain  fuller
information  as  to  the  ceremonial  nature  of  cannibalism.  The
members  of  one  clan  accused  another  clan  of  cannibalism;
the  members  of  the  accused  clan  professed  their  ability  to
explain  the  custom,  though  they  denied  practising  it
themselves,  and  accused  the  members  of  the  first  clan.
They  would  not  say  more  than  that  old  women  went  out
after  dark,  cut  up  the  dead  body,  which  had  been  placed


XV]  CEREMONIAL  CANNIBAL!  237

on  waste  ground  near  the  village  at  sunset,  ;md  returned
with  special  portions  of  it.  They  carried  these  portions  into
the  village  and  cooked  thtMn  during  the  night,  whereupon
a  feast  was  made,  to  which  only  special  members  of  the  clan
were  admitted;  the  object  of  the  meal  was  said  to  be  the
pacification  of  the  ghost.  The  remains  of  the  body  were  then
left  to  the  wild  animals  and  carnivorous  birds,  which  soon
devoured  them.

From  this  account,  as  it  was  related  to  me,  and  confirmed
by  different  men,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  these  feasts
are  ceremonial  feasts  in  honour  of  the  dead.  The  ghost  is
believed  to  remain  in  the  locality,  and  large  stones  are  placed
on  the  small  verandah  near  the  door  of  the  hut  in  which
the  deceased  lived,  and  are  regarded  as  the  dwelling-place
of  the  ghost ;  beer  and  at  times  a  little  food  is  placed  near  by
in  some  vessel  for  its  use.

Married  women  wear  a  grass  girdle  which  passes  between
the  legs;  it  is  a  mere  pretence  of  clothing,  more  a  token
that  the  woman  has  entered  the  estate  of  matrimony  than
anything  else;  unmarried  women  go  nude.  The  men  are
allowed  to  wear  a  goat  skin  mantle  slung  round  the  neck,
and  hanging  down  in  front,  after  they  have  performed  the
initiation  ceremonies  and  have  been  admitted  into  full
membership.  Women  also  undergo  a  special  initiation  cere-
mony at  puberty,  while  those  of  either  sex  who  refuse  to  pass
this  test  of  initiation  become  outcasts,  disowned  by  their
clans.  Young  women  scarify  their  chests  and  foreheads  at
puberty,  and  the  process  of  initiation  for  a  girl  is  a  long  and
painful  undertaking,  often  resulting  in  dreadful  sores  which
suppurate  for  months.  I  did  not  discover  that  a  woman  makes
any  public  profession  of  adherence  to  ancient  tribal  customs.
Men  refuse  to  marry  a  woman  who  has  no  scarifications,  and
a  woman  refuses  marriage  with  a  man  who  has  failed  to
undergo  the  initiation  test.  The  performance  of  these  cere-
monies is  watched  by  hundreds  of  people,  and  any  sign  of
fear  brands  the  person  a  coward.  A  man  who  has  failed
in  fortitude  will  commit  suicide  rather  than  endure  the


238  INITIATION  CEREMONIES  [CH.

contempt  of  his  companions.  Those  members  of  a  clan  who
refuse  to  undergo  the  initiation  rites  are  liable  to  be  ill  used
or  even  killed,  without  protest  from  any  other  member
of  the  clan.  Both  men  and  women  pierce  the  lower  lip
for  the  insertion  of  a  lipstone,  which  is  about  two  inches
long  and  half  an  inch  in  diameter;  the  stone  is  only  worn
by  the  person  when  fully  dressed  in  all  the  finery  of  crude
ornaments  and  bangles,  but  at  other  times  the  hole  in  the
lip  is  left  exposed.

The  huts  of  these  people  are  clustered  together  in  groups,
and  such  a  cluster  forms  a  village;  they  are  inhabited  by
men  of  the  same  clan  who  call  themselves  brothers.  Members
of  different  clans  seldom  live  in  close  proximity  to  each
other;  they  are  unable  to  exist  side  by  side  in  the  same
village.  Each  hut  has  its  own  store-house  at  the  back  or
near  by ;  these  are  small  huts  built  on  large  stones  or  wooden
pillars,  and  thus  raised  one  or  more  feet  above  the  ground,
to  be  free  from  damp  and  from  the  ravages  of  insects  or
animals.  They  are  of  basket  work,  plastered  inside  with  mud
and  cow-dung,  and  are  covered  by  a  movable  roof  like  a
large  umbrella,  which  can  be  tilted  to  one  side,  to  enable  the
owner  to  take  out  grain.

There  are  frequent  quarrels  between  the  clans,  indeed
they  are  always  ready  to  fight  whenever  they  meet,  having
always  some  grievance  calling  for  settlement.  In  these
quarrels  men  are  often  wounded,  sometimes  severely.  If  a
man  dies  from  his  wounds,  it  becomes  the  duty  of  all  women
relatives,  even  of  those  who  are  married  to  men  of  the  hostile
clan  responsible  for  his  death,  to  go  to  the  place  of  mourning,
leaving  their  husbands  for  the  time  being.  As  the  clans  are
exogamous,  that  is  to  say  men  and  women  belonging  to  the
same  clan  are  not  allowed  to  marry,  it  sometimes  happens
that  the  wife  of  the  man  who  caused  the  death  is  a  sister  of
the  dead  man;  this  circumstance  does  not,  however,  prevent
her  from  going  to  the  place  of  mourning,  and  she  goes  readily,
and  acts  as  though  her  husband  were  in  full  sympathy,  even
though  he  may  have  deliberately  murdered  the  man.  The


xv]  BELIEF  IN  M  \M<  239


women  are  more  masculine  than  most  of  thru  M-X  amon^
Bantu  tribes; they  do  not  take  rh.i  tisemenl n :  ,
husbands  so  meekly  as  do  women  <>i  othrr  tnl><^(  indeed
there  are  reports  that  women  have  stood  up  to  th-
bands,  to  assert  their  equality  if  not  their  superiority,
have  settled  their  disputes  by  free  fight,  in  which  the  women
proved  superior  to  their  husbands.

The  homes  of  these  people  are  crude,  lacking  any  attempt
at  comfort;  they  are  only  shelters  from  the  cold  nights  and
climatic  changes.  Men,  women,  and  children  lie  on  the  floor
without  any  covering,  and  with  no  attempt  to  make  a  bed;
the  only  warmth  is  that  from  the  wood  fire  and  that  which
they  obtain  from  contact  with  each  other.  Though  lacking
any  very  definite  religious  ideas,  they  are  superior  to  their
neighbours  the  Bateso,  for  they  have  at  least  a  belief  in  a
supreme  being  and  in  numbers  of  spirits  dwelling  in  trees,
rocks,  and  water.

Magic,  especially  in  connexion  with  rain-making,  is
universally  practised  and  believed  to  be  of  great  value;  it
is  in  the  hands  of  the  rain-makers  who  are  an  important
body  in  the  community.  At  the  time  of  our  visit  to  Elgon
there  had  been  some  months  of  drought,  and  the  chief  rain-
maker of  the  district  had  been  called  to  account  because
of  its  continuance.  The  people  did  not  think  that  this  rain-
maker was  powerless  to  bring  the  needed  rain,  but  that  for
some  reason  he  was  putting  them  off;  after  first  begging
him  to  bring  the  longed-for  showers  and  praying  him  to
cause  rain  to  fall,  they  proceeded  to  complain  that  their
crops  were  dying;  next  they  used  strong  language,  threatening
him  with  serious  bodily  injury,  unless  he  used  his  influence
with  the  god  of  rain.  It  was  all  in  vain;  the  rain  did  not  come,
the  people,  therefore,  marched  out  against  the  unfortunate
rain-maker,  caught  him,  and  so  belaboured  him,  that  they
broke  his  leg,  robbed  him  of  all  his  possessions,  and  burned
down  his  hut.  The  man  was  lying  in  a  hut  near  the  mission
station  when  I  arrived,  and  was  being  nursed  by  some  lady
missionaries,  who  set  the  leg  and  ministered  to  his  needs.


240 SEVERE  TREATMENT  OF  RAIN-MAKER [CH.

After  the  people  had  taken  these  summary  measures,  they
relented;  they  did  not  obtain  rain,  and  now  they  thought
that  they  had  overstepped  the  bounds  which  their  needs
warranted,  and  that  the  gods  would  be  angry  with  them  for
their  action;  they  accordingly  restored  all  the  rain-maker's
property,  and  made  him  an  offering  to  compensate  for  his
broken  limb.  Having  pacified  the  rain-maker,  they  urged
him  to  take  some  immediate  steps  to  procure  rain.  As  the
man  could  not  move  owing  to  his  broken  limb,  he  had  to
act  by  deputy,  and  his  assistant  had  to  take  an  offering  up  the
mountain  to  the  rain-god.  We  saw  this  man  as  he  was  on  his
way  with  a  companion;  he  was  carrying  two  black  fowls  as
his  offering  when  he  renewed  his  request  for  rain.  Strangely
enough,  rain  fell  the  next  day;  and  this  coincidence  confirmed
the  opinion  of  the  people  that  the  man  could  bring  rain,  when
he  really  wished  to  do  so.

The  old  people  say  that  they  lived  at  one  time  on  the
higher  slopes  of  Mount  Elgon,  and  that  they  have  gradually
worked  their  way  down  into  the  plain  in  search  of  better
plots  for  agricultural  purposes,  but  even  now  they  like  the
higher  slopes  better  than  the  lower  hills.  These  same  old
people  remember  the  time  when  they  kept  certain  caves  in
the  upper  part  of  the  mountain  provisioned  and  ready  for
immediate  use,  in  case  they  were  attacked  by  any  strong
enemy ;  every  year  with  unfailing  regularity  there  were  raids
made  upon  them  by  a  tribe  from  the  north,  presumably  Abys-
sinians,  who  carried  off  everything  before  them,  killing  men,
and  enslaving  women  and  children.  During  these  visits  of
raiders  the  people  fled  into  the  caves,  which  were  difficult  to
approach,  and  could  be  defended  by  a  small  force.  Cattle
and  sheep  were  taken  into  the  caves,  where  they  were  hidden
by  day  and  herded  by  night  upon  the  upper  part  of  the
mountain.  From  the  valleys  these  people  would  be  invisible
during  the  day,  and  from  their  vantage  ground  they  would
be  able  to  watch  the  movements  of  their  adversaries.  It  is
possible  that  these  caves,  which  afforded  shelter  for  the  people
during  unsettled  times  when  their  country  was  overrun  by


>•


PLATE  XVII


xv]  BAGESHUCLAN ANIMOSITY  241

foes,  have  occasioned  tli  :>< made  tli

were  permanent  cave  dwellers  in  these  part cm  the  r>;
hand  there  may  well  have  been  a  time  win-n  people  resided
permanently  in  the  caves  and  sallied  forth  to  culti\;it. i
plots  of  land  and  herd  their  cattle.  Or  again,  there  may  be
tribes  who  still  live  in  caves  in  parts  of  the  country  which  I
was  unable  to  visit;  the  enmity  which  exists  between  clans  is
a  sufficient  reason  for  one  clan  being  ignorant  of  the  d<>
of  another  clan  only  a  few  miles  distant;  communication  is
limited,  and  travel  impossible  to  them.

The  bitterness  which  exists  between  the  clans  of  the
Bageshu  is  strong;  no  man  is  safe  going  about  alone;  they
have  even  to  visit  friends  in  companies  of  two  or  three  to
be  sure  of  meeting  with  no  violence.  Once  a  year,  however,
for  a  period  of  some  five  weeks,  there  is  amity;  all  strife  is
put  away,  and  there  is  perfect  goodwill;  it  is  then  possible
to  exchange  visits  without  any  fear.  This  season  comes
after  harvest,  when  an  abundance  of  beer  is  brewed  from
millet,  and  men  and  women  give  themselves  up  to  regular
saturnalia;  the  gatherings  are  held  in  different  villages  in
succession,  according  to  pre-arranged  plans  for  accumu-
lating pots  of  beer,  and  they  continue  until  the  beer  is
consumed.  During  this  time  men  and  women  disregard  all
matrimonial  rights,  and  old  and  young  of  either  sex  yield  to
the  most  debased  forms  of  licentiousness  and  animal  passion.
As  a  rule  these  feasts  are  held  when  young  men  and  women
have  fulfilled  the  initiation  ceremonies,  and  for  the  first
time  are  able  to  take  their  part  in  the  feasts  as  fully  qualified
members  of  the  clan.  No  one  is  allowed  to  carry  any
weapon  during  this  period;  they  go  about  with  bamboo
staves  six  or  seven  feet  long,  but  these  are  the  holders  of
the  long  beer  tubes,  through  which  they  suck  their  beer  from
a  common  pot.  The  mode  of  drinking  is  to  place  a  large
pot  in  an  open  space,  where  there  is  sitting  room  for
twenty  or  more  people  round  it;  every  man  then  places
his  tube  in  the  pot,  and  sucks  the  beer  while  he  talks
freely.  Singing  and  dancing  take  place  at  the  time  of

R.U.  16


242  SCENERY  IN  BUSOGA  [CH.

drinking,  and  the  revelry  continues  by  day  and  by  night
until  the  beer  is  ended,  when  the  party  moves  on  to  the
next  village,  where  a  further  supply  of  beer  is  provided.
There  is  no  quarrelling  during  this  time  of  drinking,  but
disputes  and  old  feuds  are  carefully  kept  aside;  any  mis-
understandings arising  from  the  effects  of  the  beer  are  settled
quickly  by  the  majority,  and  all  meet  on  the  common
ground  of  friendship  and  goodwill.

The  journey  from  Mount  Elgon  to  Busoga  is  a  pleasant
run  for  a  cyclist  in  fair  weather,  for  the  road  passes  through
some  beautiful  stretches  of  country  with  clumps  of  wood;
and  often  these  contain  splendid  specimens  of  ferns,  tropical
flowers,  and  grasses.  The  undulating  character  of  the  country
lends  picturesqueness  to  the  ever  varying  scene;  sometimes
the  traveller  is  on  an  eminence  overlooking  a  wide  expanse
of  grass  and  scrub,  or  again  he  is  on  a  fairly  level  tract  of
land,  ending  with  a  sharp  dip  through  a  woody  dale  with
fine  trees  and  flowering  plants,  and  also  full  of  animal  and
bird  life,  while  insects  abound,  each  with  its  peculiar  interest
calling  for  special  investigation ;  again  plant  life  new  to  his
eye,  and  possibly  to  science,  arrests  the  attention  of  the
traveller  at  every  turn.  The  cyclist  dismounts,  enchanted
with  these  scenes,  as  he  gazes  first  over  an  expanse  and
then  on  some  coppice;  he  longs  for  time  and  leisure  to  study
these  beauties  of  nature,  and  for  knowledge  to  understand
them.  He  may  perhaps  be  tempted  to  pick  some  new
flower,  while  he  longs  to  be  able  to  penetrate  into  the
unknown  depths  of  the  wooded  belt,  but  he  is  forced  to  put
aside  these  allurements  and  to  press  onward  to  his  camp  and
follow  his  own  particular  line  of  research.  Should,  however,
the  journey  be  undertaken  in  wet  weather,  and  in  a  hurry,
it  becomes  a  wearisome  task;  the  paths  are  slippeiy  in
some  places  and  sticky  in  others;  both  for  the  pedestrian
and  the  cyclist  it  means  heavy  work;  there  are  indeed  places
on  the  road  where  the  wheels  of  the  bicycle  clog  so  quickly,
that  it  is  impossible  to  ride,  and  the  machine  has  to  be
carried,  which  is  a  heavy  and  formidable  burden  in  a


xv]  FAMINE  INCIDENTS  243

tropical  country,  especially  \vh<>n  tin-  t Livelier  is  alone  and
in  u  huny  to  reach  a  distant  locality.  We  were  fortunate
in  this  respect,  for  the  weather  was  charming.  I  had  visited
Busoga  before,  and  had  lived  some  months  in  Luba's  country ;
at  that  time  food  was  plentiful,  and  the  country  prosperous;
it  was  therefore  distressing  on  the  present  occasion  to  see  the
people  reduced  to  a  state  of  want  and  starvation.

We  had  not  passed  far  into  Busoga,  before  we  began  to
meet  with  tokens  of  famine:  men  and  women  dead,  or  dying
by  the  roadside;  they  perished  in  the  attempt  to  reach  the
Government  relief  camps  which  had  been  opened  in  different
places.  The  scene  at  the  Central  Relief  Camp  was  a  sight
never  to  be  forgotten,  especially  the  emaciated  forms  of  the
people,  many  of  them  so  weak  that  they  had  to  be  treated
medically,  but  even  among  these  there  were  numbers  dying
daily,  who  had  reached  the  camp  too  late  to  be  able  to  benefit
by  the  kind  treatment.  Other  cases  were  painful  to  watch:
mothers  seemed  to  have  lost  all  feeling  of  affection  and
responsibility  for  their  children;  they  snatched  the  food
from  them,  and  ate  it  greedily  themselves,  and  they  fought
like  beasts  for  the  supplies  of  food  doled  out  daily  to  them
by  the  officers.  Our  stay  was  made  as  brief  as  possible,  as  we
carried  food  for  two  or  three  days  only,  and  therefore  could
not  remain,  it  being  impossible  to  obtain  fresh  supplies;  nor
was  our  further  presence  of  value,  since  we  could  do  nothing
to  help  the  efficient  staff  of  workers,  and  on  the  contrary
might  become  a  burden  by  giving  them  additional  work  in
entertaining  us.  When  going  to  Bukedi  a  few  weeks  pre-
viously, we  had  passed  through  the  northern  part  of  Busoga,
and  there  had  learnt  something  of  the  people  and  their
customs,  before  the  famine  had  become  severe.  But  here  in
Luba's  country  the  chiefs  were  all  busy  at  the  relief  camps,
assisting  the  Government  officers  and  the  missionaries  in
distributing  food  to  the  famine  stricken  peasants.  It  was
impossible  to  find  anyone  able  to  give  us  information  con-
cerning the  customs  or  the  history  of  the  tribe,  and  we
therefore  resumed  our  journey.

16— a


244  CAUSES  OF  FAMINE  [CH.

South  Busoga  suffered  most  from  the  famine,  but  the
people  were  in  many,  if  not  all,  instances  themselves  to
blame,  though  they  attributed  it  to  the  Government.
When  the  men  were  called  away  for  state  labour,  such  as
road  making,  carrying  burdens,  and  other  Government
work  or  building,  the  women  refused  to  continue  cultivation
in  their  plantations,  and  allowed  them  to  run  wild,  so  that
they  ceased  to  bear  fruit;  this  was  because  the  men  had,
according  to  old  customs,  been  responsible  for  the  heavier
work  of  digging  and  tilling  the  land.  The  women  under  the
altered  labour  conditions  would  not  move  a  hand  to  keep
their  plots  of  land  cultivated,  but  demanded  the  help  of
their  husbands,  before  they  would  bestir  themselves.  When
the  husbands  returned  from  their  work  at  a  distance,  after
being  absent  in  some  cases  for  a  month,  many  of  the  wives
refused  to  cook  for  them,  and  left  their  men  folk  to  manage
as  best  they  could  for  themselves.  These,  who  had  been
taken  from  home  for  work  against  their  will,  naturally
resented  such  harsh  treatment  from  their  wives,  became
sullen  in  their  homes,  and  refused  to  help  them,  and  this
discord  soon  produced  a  harvest  of  trouble  in  the  shape
of  famine.  Things  went  from  bad  to  worse,  until  the  plantain
trees  ceased  to  bear  any  fruit,  and  the  plantations  ran  wild.
The  land  famous  for  the  abundance  of  its  plantains  became
barren  and  unproductive  through  neglect.

The  plantain  is  the  staple  food  of  the  Basoga;  no  grain  is
grown  except  a  kind  of  bitter  millet  used  for  fermenting
beer;  hence  famine  and  death  had  to  be  faced  when  the
plantations  ceased  to  yield  fruit.  In  some  of  these  famine
stricken  districts  there  were  small  settlements  of  Baganda,
who  had  ample  food  for  their  own  needs,  but  could  not
supply  markets,  or  satisfy  the  starving  people;  indeed  they
had  to  guard  their  fields  by  day  and  by  night  against
determined  attempts  by  the  starving  neighbours  to  rob  them.
Still,  the  presence  of  these  Baganda  owning  trees  bearing
ample  fruit  proved  that  the  famine  was  not  due  to  climatic
causes,  such  as  lack  of  rain,  but  was  owing  to  the  discontent


xv]  BUGANDA  RULE  IN  BUSOGA  245

among  the  women  and  tli«-jr  n-lx-lh  i,  caused

tlu'in  i<>  retrain  from  cultivating  llu-ir  plantations  because  of
the  forced  labour  question.  Before  the  British  occupation
Busoga  was  ruled  by  Baganda  chiefs,  but  for  various  reasons,
especially  because  of  an  accusation  made  against  the  Baganda
by  the  Basoga,  that  the  former  plundered  their  land  every
time  they  came  to  collect  state  taxes,  Busoga  was  taken  from
the  Baganda,  and  administered  by  a  British  officer.  The
Baganda  very  naturally  resented  this  large  tract  of  country
being  taken  from  them,  but  they  were  unable  to  convince  the
British  authorities  of  their  intention  to  reform  and  to  prevent
any  unjust  taxation  or  robbery  in  the  future;  so  the  land
passed  into  other  hands.  But  the  British  Government  came
to  realise  that  their  regime  had  not  been  the  best,  and  that
they  had  been  deceived  by  the  Basoga  chiefs;  hence  it  was
decided  to  return  to  the  old  custom  of  rule.

When  the  famine  ended,  a  Muganda  chief  was  placed  over
the  Basoga,  who  was  to  endeavour  to  reform  the  country,  and
to  prevent  any  similar  disaster  occurring ;  for  a  time  he  was
successful  in  bringing  about  a  better  state  of  affairs,  but  after-
wards he  became  dissatisfied,  because  he  was  not  sure  that
he  had  the  support  of  his  superiors,  the  British  officers;  he
therefore  asked  to  be  relieved  from  his  office.  There  is  no
reason  to  doubt  the  complaint  made  by  the  Baganda  that  the
Basoga  are  indolent ;  they  need  to  be  restrained  from  idleness
and  encouraged  to  labour.  No  doubt  there  were  instances  of
excessive  taxation  when  the  Baganda  ruled  them,  and  the  Icing
sent  his  minions  to  collect  the  yearly  tax.  Still,  the  Baganda
knew  the  people  and  their  tendency  to  idleness,  and  they
understood  how  to  deal  with  them,  so  that  there  might
always  be  an  abundance  of  food.  The  British  officer  gave  the
chiefs  too  free  a  hand  in  managing  their  country,  and  the
people,  who  did  not  respect  their  own  chiefs,  took  advantage
of  the  kindness  shown  by  him.

Busoga  is  divided  into  three  states,  each  with  its  tribe  of
people  differing  in  various  respects  from  their  neighbours,
though  retaining  common  characteristics;  in  remote  times


246  BASOGA  VISITS  TO  BUGANDA  [CH.

each  state  was  tributary  to  an  adjacent  race.  The  state  known
as  Luba's  country  has  for  many  years  belonged  to  Uganda;
another  state  belonged  to  Bunyoro;  while  the  third  was  more
or  less  independent,  but  sought  help  from  the  Bateso  or  Bukedi,
whenever  a  chief  died,  and  there  was  a  difference  of  opinion
as  to  the  new  ruler.  For  many  years  the  Baganda  have  ruled
these  three  states  and  have  maintained  harmony  between
the  different  tribes.  The  Basoga  used  to  send  their  repre-
sentatives to  the  Uganda  court,  whenever  they  had  any
business  to  lay  before  the  king,  and  these  visits  often  lasted
for  a  period  of  several  months.  For  this  reason  a  site  in
Uganda  was  apportioned  to  the  Basoga  near  the  capital,  with
land  and  plantain  groves,  which  supplied  them  with  food
during  these  prolonged  visits.  Retainers  of  the  Basoga
chiefs  lived  on  these  estates  and  kept  them  cultivated.  There
were  usually  several  Basoga  lads  among  the  royal  pages,
learning  court  etiquette,  and  being  taught  how  to  rule;  they
were  generally  the  sons  of  important  chiefs.

Whenever  there  was  any  disturbance  in  Busoga,  sub-
chiefs,  sent  by  their  superior  chiefs,  visited  the  king  of
Uganda  to  report  the  trouble  and  obtain  advice.  When
these  messengers  went  to  the  king,  they  took  with  them  a
worthy  present,  either  of  ivory  or  women  and  cattle;  and
also  a  present  to  the  chief  through  whose  country  they  had
to  pass;  this  chief  was  their  Uganda  representative  and  had
to  introduce  them  to  the  king  of  Uganda.  When  the  king
was  in  need  of  slaves,  or  wished  for  more  cattle,  he  would
send  to  Busoga  and  would  be  given  ample  to  satisfy  his  desires.
The  loss  of  this  district  was  therefore  a  serious  matter  to  the
Baganda.  The  king  did  not  tax  the  Basoga  yearly,  as  he  did  his
own  people  in  Uganda,  but  sent  his  representatives  whenever
he  thought  it  was  time  that  they  should  give  him  a  present.
There  were  undoubtedly  cases  of  oppression  which  called
for  investigation,  and  there  was  need  of  a  more  carefully
organised  method  of  raising  the  taxes,  but  nevertheless  the
Baganda  understood  the  Basoga,  whom  they  really  helped
and  governed  wisely  on  the  whole.  It  is  impossible  to  think


XV]  BISHOP  H  ANN!  5( \|-|i i  247

of  the  country  sul't'crin^  I'nun  l;imiiie  or  in  nth.-r  ways  in.
the  old  regime,  to  the  extent  th.r  K-C  it  became

a  separate  state  under  the  lenient liritNi rule. With th«-
accession  of  native  Christian  rulers  in  Uganda,  wise
equitable  laws  were  being  made,  which  would  have  bron
about  the  necessary  reform  in  regard  to  taxation  in  Busoga,
and  would  also  have  put  right  the  oppression  which  had  been
caused  by  untrustworthy  chiefs  sent  by  the  king.

Many  of  the  Busoga  customs  are  similar  to  those  of
Uganda,  and  for  many  years  the  people  have  adopted  a
dialect  of  Luganda,  but,  owing  to  the  Busoga  custom  of
extracting  some  three  of  the  front  teeth,  the  people  speak
with  a  lisp  which  considerably  alters  the  sound  of  words.
Left  to  manage  for  themselves,  they  are  not  so  capable  as
the  Baganda,  though  a  few,  who  in  past  years  have  been
trained  in  Uganda,  have  shown  great  mental  abilities,  and
have  been  in  no  way  inferior  to  the  Baganda  in  scholastic
attainments.  The  Basoga  houses  are  neatly  built,  and  the
floors  of  the  huts  are  better  made  than  those  of  the  majority
of  huts  in  Uganda.  The  enclosures  of  chiefs,  however,  are  not
kept  in  such  a  neat  state  as  those  of  chiefs  of  corresponding
importance  in  Uganda.

The  old  chief  Luba,  who  was  the  man  who  arrested  Bishop
Hannington,  and  carried  out  king  Mwanga's  orders  to  execute
him,  was  a  fine  specimen  of  a  Musoga  chief.  My  first  visit
to  his  country  and  first  meeting  with  the  old  chief  took  place
some  seven  years  after  the  Bishop's  death,  when  I  went  to
open  a  mission  centre  among  the  Basoga  people.  Luba,  who
was  in  full  power  at  the  time,  used  to  hold  his  councils  under
a  tree,  with  two  or  three  of  his  chief  wives  sitting  behind  him ;
one  of  these  carried  a  gourd  of  beer  and  his  special  drinking
cup,  so  that  he  might  refresh  himself  when  the  burden  of
business  became  tedious;  another  carried  his  shield  and  spear,
while  the  third  had  charge  of  the  rug  on  which  he  sat ;  all  three
watched  the  gathering,  and  if  there  were  any  signs  of  unruly
conduct  or  disorder,  the  chief  was  warned,  and  his  weapons
were  placed  in  his  hand,  ready  to  strike  if  necessary.  Many  of


248  THE  CHIEF  LUBA  AND  HIS  COURT [CH.

the  chiefs  who  attended  the  gathering  also  carried  pots  of  beer,
and  most  of  the  meetings  ended  with  Luba  and  his  chiefs
becoming  too  intoxicated  to  transact  further  business.

Busoga  has  to-day  become  nominally  Christian,  though
there  are  still  numbers  of  people  living  in  heathenism,  and
the  education  of  the  Christians  is  far  from  complete.  As
warriors  the  Basoga  were  never  noted  for  their  prowess,
though  they  were  at  times  called  upon  by  their  chiefs  to
settle  tribal  disputes  by  force.  Slings  for  casting  stones  were
then  used  with  great  skill  and  accuracy,  and  ugly  dents  in  the
skulls  of  some  of  their  opponents  testified  to  their  accuracy
of  aim  in  this  method  of  warfare.  For  years  past  Busoga  has
been  noted  for  its  large  plantain  groves  and  the  abundance
of  vegetable  food ;  but  since  the  demand  for  labour  was  made
by  the  British  Government,  the  food  supply  has  fallen  off,
and,  as  mentioned  above,  the  women  have  refused  to  work
the  fields  without  the  men,  and  this  has  had  disastrous  results
on  the  splendid  plantations.

Luba's  country,  which  lies  upon  the  great  Lake  Victoria,  is
noted  for  its  canoes  and  canoemen;  in  the  past  there  were
no  better  canoes  on  the  lake  than  those  of  Busoga,  though
the  men  seldom  paddled  far  from  their  own  shores,  except
to  visit  the  islands  of  the  Bavuma  where  markets  were  held,
and  whither  they  carried  vegetable  food  to  exchange  for  fish,
pottery,  and  fish  nets.

In  certain  quarters  in  England  Luba  bears  the  stigma  of
having  been  the  murderer  of  Hannington,  and  most  people
think  of  him  as  a  cruel  old  savage.  But  the  old  man  was  not
a  ruffian  even  when  he  committed  the  murder,  for  he  merely
carried  out  his  instructions  and  did  his  duty  to  his  king.  From
our  point  of  view  it  was  a  horrible  murder,  but  Luba  looked
upon  the  deed  as  an  act  of  duty,  and  as  he  was  a  pagan
with  superstitious  ideas,  and  moreover  a  man  who  frequently
had  to  put  people  to  death  for  trivial  offences,  it  was  not  such  a
shocking  deed  for  him  and  his  people  to  kill  an  intruder  like
Hannington;  indeed  he  felt  he  was  rendering  his  country  a
service.  To  me  personally  Luba  was  most  kind,  and  when  I


xv] CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  BASCx.A

visited  him  to  open  a  mission  in  his  country,  he  wan  t
me  a  large  present  of  ivory.  When  this  was  refused,  he  was  dis-
appointed and  could  not  understand  why  I  would  not  accept
his  present ;  he  then  asked  me  to  accept  twenty  milch  cows  and
several  goats,  and  when  I  told  him  that  I  did  not  desire  any  such
present,  he  said  he  was  unable  to  understand  the  purpose  of  my
visit ;  when  it  was  explained  that  my  purpose  was  to  teach  him
and  his  people,  he  replied :  "  I  have  never  before  found  people
refuse  ivory  and  cows/'  He  was  not  satisfied  until  I  made  a
compromise,  and  took  two  cows  and  their  calves  for  milk,  and
two  or  three  goats  for  meat.  From  that  time  to  the  end  of  his
life  Luba  remained  a  constant  friend  to  me,  and  frequently  sent
a  servant  to  visit  me  in  Uganda  with  a  present  of  two  or  three
goats.  Though  the  old  man  learned  a  good  deal  about  Christi-
anity, he  never  became  a  pronounced  Christian,  but  died  with-
out making  any  profession  of  faith  in  Christ,  so  far  as  I  know.

The  Basoga  are  addicted  to  smoking  Indian  hemp,  and
this  makes  them  stupid  and  often  stubborn ;  apart  from  this
vice  and  that  of  drinking  beer  to  excess,  the  people  are  equal
to  the  average  African  in  intellect.  For  years  they  have
been  notorious  for  their  tendency  to  kleptomania,  which
has  developed  into  a  system  of  robbing  houses  by  digging
under  the  walls  and  entering  by  a  tunnel.  It  is  said  to  have
been  a  common  thing  to  hear  a  man  digging  his  way  under
the  walls  of  a  house,  coming  up  inside,  and  carrying  off
such  goods  as  he  considered  valuable.  So  common  was  this
method  of  theft,  that  the  better  houses  were  built  with  a  layer
of  stones  embedded  round  their  walls  some  two  feet  deep,  so
as  to  hamper  thieves  in  digging.  As  I  passed  through  Luba's
district,  a  teacher  told  me  that  his  house  had  been  dug  into  a
few  nights  previously,  but  fortunately  he  was  awake  and  heard
the  thief,  and  waited  for  him  to  come  up  inside.  When  what  he
mistook  for  the  man's  head  appeared,  he  speared  it  with  all
his  force,  but  soon  found  that  the  thief  had  pushed  up  a  bundle
of  bark-cloth  before  him,  tomake  sure  of  his  safety,  and,  finding
the  inmate  ready  for  him,  he  had  left  the  bark-cloth,  withdrawn
from  the  tunnel,  and  escaped  before  the  door  could  be  opened.


CHAPTER  XVI

/  .

THE  BANYORO  AND  THEIR  AGRICULTURAL
DEPENDANTS

WHAT  has  been  written  above  concerning  the  pastoral
tribe  of  Ankole,  has  to  some  extent  anticipated  what
we  shall  have  to  say  of  the  Banyoro,  who  form  one  of  the
most  important  pastoral  tribes  of  East  Central  Africa.  There
was  a  time  when  the  king  of  Bunyoro  was  the  most  influential
of  all  the  Central  African  kings,  when  he  ruled  the  greater
part  of  Uganda,  and  his  kingdom  stretched  far  down  into
Southern  Uganda  and  included  also  much  of  the  Northern
part  of  that  country.  The  kingdom  of  Toro  did  not  then
exist,  for  the  wide  domains  of  Bunyoro  extended  to  the
borders  of  the  Dark  Forest.  The  people  of  Ankole  lived  in
fear  of  their  cousins  the  Banyoro,  and  maintained  peace
with  them  by  frequent  gifts  of  cattle.  To  the  north  and
away  to  the  north-west  and  the  north-east  of  Bunyoro,
the  tribes  felt  it  wise  to  maintain  friendly  relations  with  the
Bunyoro  kings,  and  sent  annual  presents  of  slaves  and  cattle.
The  extent  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  honour  in  which  the
king  was  held,  will  be  the  more  readily  understood,  when  we
learn  how  essential  it  was  for  the  king  to  be  a  warrior,  and
also  to  prove  his  prowess,  before  he  could  mount  the  throne.
Pastoral  tribes  did  not  set  great  value  upon  the  extent
of  land  they  owned,  but  were  satisfied  so  long  as  they  were
able  to  pasture  their  cattle ;  the  serfs,  who  were  an  agricultural
tribe,  were  at  liberty  to  settle  in  any  part  of  the  country
where  they  pleased,  and  were  never  severely  taxed  except
to  render  labour,  while  when  vegetables  or  goats  were
demanded,  it  was  as  voluntary  gifts  rather  than  as  payment
of  taxes.  These  agricultural  people  were  in  all  probability
the  original  possessors  of  the  soil,  who  had  been  reduced  to
serfdom  by  the  stronger  warriors;  they  settled  in  any  place
where  they  wished,  and  gave  as  much  or  as  little  vegetable


CH.  xvi] LAND  AS  VALUED  BY  COWMEN

food  or  grain  to  king  or  chief  as  tin  -v  I'll  in<lm<rl  I  h«-
pastoral  Banyoro  had  no  care  for  agriMiltm.il  l.md,  but
only  wanted  good  pa^tun  land,  and  gardens  were  not  con-
>idrred  so  important  by  them  as  they  would  have  been  by
the  Baganda,  who  combined  cattle  rearing  with  ;i-n<  uh
and  who  meted  out  every  yard  of  land  to  some  chief,  who
was  expected  to  people  and  cultivate  it,  and  who  would  be
deposed,  if  he  failed  in  these  respects.  Hence  large  tracts
of  country  were  wrested  from  the  Banyoio  by  the  Baganda
with  little  expenditure  of  force,  before  the  former  people  really
felt  the  loss  of  their  land.  Another  reason  which  caused  the
king  of  Bunyoro  to  overlook  the  importance  of  land,  was  the
custom  of  estimating  greatness  and  wealth  according  to  the
number  of  cattle  which  a  man  had.  So  long,  therefore,  as
the  herds  escaped  the  punitive  expeditions  of  the  Baganda,
little  heed  was  paid  by  the  Banyoro  to  encroachments  into
their  land ;  thus  the  Baganda  yearly  pressed  back  the  Banyoro
herdsmen,  settled  in  large  numbers  upon  the  newly  acquired
land,  and  extended  their  boundaries.

Readers  who  wish  to  know  more  of  the  early  state  of
Bunyoro,  judged  from  a  traveller's  point  of  view,  will  do
well  to  consult  Sir  Samuel  Baker's  account  of  his  visit  to
the  country  and  of  what  he  found  there.

Cattle  were  the  chief  object  and  end  of  life  for  a  man
who  belonged  to  a  pastoral  tribe,  and  even  the  life  after
death  was  believed  to  be  influenced  and  regulated  by  pastoral
customs.  The  king  and  his  people  not  only  enjoyed  cattle
here  on  earth,  but  expected  to  have  the  pleasure  of  owning
herds  in  the  spirit  world.  Pasture  land  was  so  common
and  abundant,  that  the  thought  does  not  appear  to  have
entered  into  their  minds  that  anyone  would  contest  their
right  to  pasture  their  cattle  where  they  liked.

My  personal  contact  with  the  people  did  not  begin  until
the  British  had  established  their  rule  in  Bunyoro.  Previously
it  had  been  impossible  to  enter  the  country,  owing  to  the
fierce  and  determined  opposition  of  Kabarega,  the  former
king,  who  strongly  condemned  the  king  of  Uganda  and  his


252 KABAREGA  RESISTS  BRITISH  RULE [CH.

subjects  for  having  invited  the  British  into  Uganda.  To  make
his  strong  disapproval  more  acutely  felt,  king  Kabarega
began  a  series  of  petty  invasions  into  the  states  of  Uganda
bordering  on  Bunyoro.  These  invasions  had  to  be  resisted  by
Baganda  troops,  who  endeavoured  to  police  the  frontier  and
stave  off  marauding  armies ;  but  at  length  the  raids  became
so  persistent,  that  the  British  took  up  the  cause  and  organised
an  expedition,  in  which  the  king  was  driven  from  his  capital
and  became  a  fugitive.  After  months  of  wandering  he  was
captured,  and  was  deported  to  Seychelles,  where  he  still  lives.
For  some  months  after  he  had  vacated  his  capital,  he  was
able  to  evade  all  the  efforts  made  to  capture  him,  and  he
might  have  continued  a  free  man  for  some  time  longer,  had
not  some  of  his  agricultural  followers,  whose  duty  it  was  to
act  as  porters  and  to  help  him  to  move  from  place  to  place,
owing  to  war-weariness  and  scarcity  of  food,  betrayed  him.
Even  when  brought  to  bay,  the  old  warrior  was  not  captured
before  he  had  made  a  good  stand  and  fought  for  liberty;
he  lost  an  arm  through  a  bullet  shattering  the  bone,  and
this  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  hold  his  rifle  any  longer.
When  a  fugitive  he  was  able  to  obtain  his  daily  food,  which
consisted  of  milk,  because  his  herds  could  be  kept  at  no
great  distance,  and  milk  could  be  carried  to  him  wherever
he  went;  it  was  otherwise  with  the  agricultural  peasants,
they  were  unable  to  grow  their  crops  or  obtain  vegetable
food,  and  were  beginning  to  feel  the  pinch  of  hunger,  as  their
supplies  of  corn  gave  out,  hence  they  betrayed  the  hiding  place
of  their  lord.  With  the  fall  of  Kabarega  a  new  mode  of  govern-
ment began  in  Bunyoro,  which  continues  to  the  present.

The  British  Government  elected  a  son  of  Kabarega  to
follow  his  father  upon  the  throne,  but,  as  he  soon  proved  to
be  incompetent,  he  was  deposed,  and  his  brother  was  placed
on  the  throne,  who  has  proved  more  capable.

In  Bunyoro  the  customs  that  decided  which  prince  should
succeed  a  deceased  king  differed  considerably  from  those  fol-
lowed by  the  Baganda,  or  by  any  of  the  tribes  round  Uganda.
The  king,  they  thought,  must  not  grow  old  nor  become


xvi]  A  KING'S  COMPULSORY  srinDE  253

feeble  through  age  or  sickness  and  nnal>l<-  to  carry  on
regal  duties,  nor  again  must  he  <li<  a  natural  <l« -atli,  u
it  be  sudden.  When  he  found  himself  unable  to  fulfil  his  office,
it  was  his  duty  to  end  his  life,  while  still  in  possession  ol
full  powers,  by  drinking  a  dose  of  poison.  It  may  strike  us
with  wonder  that  no  king  should  have  tried  to  evade
step,  but  we  are  told  that  the  king  was  always  ready  to
perform  this  act,  if  he  felt  indisposed;  and  no  doubt  the
belief  he  had  of  the  next  life  was  the  cause  of  his  readiness
to  depart  from  the  present  one.  It  was  commonly  believed
that  the  king  at  death  began  his  life  in  the  ghostly  world  in
royal  estate,  and  reigned  with  his  predecessors.  Cattle,
servants,  slaves  and  retainers  formed  his  retinue  and  wealth,
and  were  the  manifestation  of  his  greatness;  hence  it  was
considered  right  to  execute  a  large  number  of  people  and  to
kill  many  cattle  at  the  open  grave  of  a  king,  when  the  funeral
took  place,  so  that  the  ghosts  of  the  people  and  the  cattle
might  accompany  him  into  the  new  world.  This  following
of  retainers  and  slaves  and  cattle  gave  the  king  honour,  as
he  entered  into  the  presence  of  his  ancestors,  while  the  lack
of  it  would  have  been  a  cause  of  shame.  It  therefore  depended
upon  the  living,  whether  a  king  went  with  honour  and  wealth,
or  with  poverty  and  shame  to  the  other  world.  The  execution
of  hundreds  of  people  and  the  sacrifice  of  large  numbers  of
cattle  were  performed  at  the  grave,  because  it  wasbelievedthat
it  pleased  the  departed,  while  the  accompanying  ghosts  placed
him  in  a  position  of  power,  and  made  him  willing  to  assist  the
living.  Malevolent  ghosts  who  injured  the  cattle  might,  it  was
thought,  be  those  of  royal  persons,  who  were  vexed  with  the
living  either  for  neglecting  to  keep  up  a  supply  of  animal
sacrifices  to  them,  or  for  sending  too  small  a  number  of
people  for  their  retinue  at  the  time  of  burial.

Ghosts  of  common  people  remained  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  living,  and  became  hostile,  if  they  were  not  given  offerings
of  cattle  at  their  funeral  and  afterwards  from  time  to  time.
Apart  from  these  ghosts  the  Banyoro  had  no  conception  of
spirits  either  good  or  bad;  the  spirit  world  they  thought  was


254  THE  KING'S  SUCCESSOR  [CH.

peopled  by  the  disembodied  souls  of  the  living.  In  every
instance  men  have  greater  honour  paid  to  them  than  women,
who  receive  little  or  none,  either  during  life  or  in  death.  In
the  other  world,  it  was  believed,  there  were  social  conditions
similar  to  those  of  this  world,  that  is,  men  and  women
marry  and  live  with  families,  much  as  they  do  here,  and
cattle  are  necessary  to  the  pastoral  people,  while  the  agricul-
tural clans  have  their  fields  and  crops.  With  such  beliefs,
it  was  merely  the  process  of  leaving  this  world,  often  through
suffering,  which  caused  the  people  a  moment's  fear;  they
were  anxious  not  to  die  from  a  painful  lingering  illness,
especially  if  that  illness  was  caused  by  some  unfriendly
person  who  was  working  his  spite  through  magical  means.
The  mutilation  which  caused  pain  and  inconvenience  in  the
present  life  and  also  debarred  the  ghost  from  future  happi-
ness was  even  more  dreaded.

When  the  king  ended  his  life,  the  question  arose  who  should
be  his  successor ;  this  was  decided  by  the  princes  taking  arms,
each  securing  what  following  he  could,  and  fighting  with  his
brothers,  until  all  the  princes  were  killed  but  one,  and  he
claimed  the  throne.  In  these  wars  only  the  peasants  were
allowed  to  take  an  active  part  by  bearing  arms  and  fighting
under  the  princes,  while  the  chiefs  were  neutral,  and  formed
a  guard  to  protect  the  body  of  the  deceased  king,  and  to
prevent  any  prince  from  carrying  it  away,  before  a  true
decision  had  been  arrived  at  by  the  superiority  of  arms.  The
prince  who  buried  the  deceased  king  was  regarded  as  the
victorious  prince  who  had  the  right  to  reign.  During  these
wars  fires  were  extinguished  throughout  the  country,  and
were  only  lighted  when  needed  for  cooking  purposes,  and
put  out  after  the  meal  had  been  prepared.  Fire  for  this
purpose  had  to  be  obtained  by  friction  from  the  fire-sticks.
Cultivation  was  at  a  standstill;  no  man  or  woman  was
allowed  to  attend  to  his  field  until  the  new  king  was
enthroned;  to  meet  any  such  emergency,  the  agricultural
classes  kept  a  reserve  of  grain  hidden  away  in  some  spot,
where  a  pit,  like  a  well,  was  dug  from  six  to  eight  feet  deep,


xvi]  SOME  MILK  CUSTOMS  255

the  grain  stored  in  baskets,  and  the  place  covered  and
concealed  as  far  as  possible. No  person  was  all
any  work  beyond  cooking  food  and  carrying  fire- wood  and
water,  until  the  new  king  was  proclaimed. The  land
in  a  state  of  warfare  and  anarchy,  so  that  the  stroi
took  food  and  cattle  from  the  weaker  with  impunity,  indeed
no  property  was  secure. On  this  account  animals  were
hurried  away  when  the  king's  death  was  announced,  and  kept
for  safety  in  remote  places,  while  all  food  stores  and  other
possessions  were  hidden  away  until  the  restoration  of  peace
and  order.  A  prolonged  war  crippled  all  agricultural  pursuits,
and  caused  shortness  of  food,  if  not  famine.

The  milk  customs  of  the  pastoral  clans  are  most  interesting,
and  a  knowledge  of  them  is  necessary  in  order  to  understand
why  it  is  so  difficult  for  a  stranger  travelling  in  some  parts
of  the  country  to  obtain  milk,  or  again  why  it  is  so  difficult
to  introduce  new  industries  among  the  people.  Many  an
Englishman  when  he  first  came  into  contact  with  tribes
owning  cows,  could  not  understand  why  it  was  that  the  owners
refused  to  sell  him  a  little  milk,  and  made  feeble  excuses  for
withholding  it,  when  articles  which  they  prized  and  wanted
were  offered  them  in  exchange.  A  slight  knowledge  of  their
customs  soon  sets  the  mind  at  rest  in  this  respect;  we  learn
that  no  one  is  allowed  to  give  milk  to  any  person  outside  the
tribe,  without  first  ascertaining  what  food  the  man  has  been
eating,  and  also  to  what  purpose  the  milk  is  to  be  put,  lest
his  herd  should  suffer  from  infection,  caused  by  milk  coming
in  contact  with  other  food  in  the  stomach,  or  by  being  used
in  some  unlawful  way,  such  as  being  boiled,  or  poured  into
hot  tea,  or  into  iron  vessels.  Even  among  themselves  a  visitor
will  be  kept  for  some  hours  from  eating  other  food,  in  order  to
be  prepared  for  a  milk  diet,  because  he  may  have  been  eating
vegetable  food,  or  drinking  beer  and  eating  beef  a  short  while
before  his  arrival;  and  to  drink  milk  while  such  food  is  in  his
stomach  is  considered  detrimental  to  the  animals.  In  the  case
of  an  Englishman  there  is  not  only  the  danger  of  the  food
which  he  may  have  been  eating  but  also  the  risk  that  in  all


256 PASTORAL  OBJECTION  TO  CULTIVATING [CH.

probability  he  will  put  the  milk  into  vessels  which  the
cowman  regards  as  hurtful  to  his  cows,  or  use  it  in  some  way
which  may  cause  the  flow  of  milk  from  the  herd  to  stop,  and
may  bring  sickness  among  them.  These  and  many  other
milk  customs  make  it  impossible  for  the  members  of  a  pastoral
tribe  to  sell,  or  to  give,  milk  to  any  person  whose  habits
they  are  not  familiar  with,  lest  by  so  doing  they  should  ruin
their  herd  of  cows.

A  difficulty  among  pastoral  peoples  which  has  not  yet  been
overcome  by  the  British  Government  is  that  of  labour;  no
man  or  woman  of  a  pastoral  tribe  is  allowed  to  do  manual
labour,  and  digging  or  working  on  the  land  is  considered
especially  detrimental  to  their  calling  as  pastoral  people.
Hence  no  woman  may  do  any  work  other  than  that  of
washing  the  few  milk  vessels  or  churning,  and  by  their  tribal
habits  women  are  idle  for  the  greater  part  of  the  day  and  ready
for  any  excitement  or  doubtful  amusement  which  comes  in
their  way.  A  man,  even  the  poorest  person  among  the  pastoral
tribes,  is  allowed  to  do  little  more  manual  labour  than  that  of
building  a  grass  hut  for  himself  or  making  a  hole  for  water
for  drinking  purposes  for  his  cattle;  his  duties  are  limited  to
the  care  of  the  cows;  to  carry  loads,  to  dig,  or  to  cultivate
is  to  his  mind  most  baneful,  and  likely  to  cause  sickness  in
his  herd.  These  are  real  difficulties,  as  they  present  themselves
to  the  minds  of  the  pastoral  tribes;  and  without  some  know-
ledge of  these  customs  and  beliefs  Europeans  are  disposed
to  consider  the  men  lazy  and  wish  to  force  them  to  work.

Missionaries  have  found  it  difficult  to  discover  some  kind
of  work  which  women  may  do,  to  employ  their  hands  and
occupy  their  minds,  and  so  keep  them  from  an  idleness  which
too  often  leads  to  immoral  conduct.  There  is  also  the  strange
custom  of  polyandry  which  has  to  be  dealt  with  in  con-
nexion with  these  women.  This  custom  entirely  reverses  the
ideas  of  morality  which  are  common  to  most  tribes  in  the
Uganda  Protectorate,  and  it  raises  many  difficult  matrimonial
questions.  Girls  and  young  women  previous  to  marriage  are
most  chaste;  they  are  kept  strictly;  no  mother  of  any  civilised


xvi] CATTLE  SICKNESS  AND  CIVILISATION 257

nation  could  be  more  careful  as  to  h< -r  <1  lour.

When,  however,  marriage  has  been  conti acted,  the  laws  of
hospitality  are  of  a  peculiarly  binding  nature  and  remove  all
the  ties  of  matrimonial  honour,  as  it  is  understood  by  most
people.  A  man  is  obliged  to  welcome  his  guest  to  his  wife's
couch,  and  must  not  cherish  any  jealousy  as  to  his  wife's
behaviour.  Such  customs  have  far  reaching  effects  upon  the
tribes  concerned,  and  they  need  to  be  carefully  studied  by
men  who  know  the  natives  and  their  mode  of  life.

It  will  readily  be  understood  how  heavy  the  work  in  such
countries  must  be  for  the ,  serfs  belonging  to  the  agricultural
class  when,  in  addition  to  having  their  home  duties  to  fulfil
and  houses  to  build  for  their  masters,  they  have  to  undertake
all  the  labour  consequent  upon  British  rule  and  progress,  such
as  the  making  of  roads,  and  the  carrying  of  all  kinds  of  material
for  Government  purposes,  in  a  country  just  opening  up  to
Western  civilisation.  In  addition  these  same  persons  are
expected  to  cultivate  cotton,  rubber,  and  coffee,  to  meet  the
standard  set  by  some  official,  who  knows  little  about  the
people  or  their  customs.  Agriculture  is  of  all  things  the  most
objectionable  kind  of  work  which  pastoral  people  can  con-
ceive, and  their  inbred  and  rooted  objection  to  it,  the  result  of
generations  of  rigid  teaching,  makes  them  resist  to  the  last
all  attempts  to  force  them  to  undertake  manual  labour.  The
wonder  is  that  they  have  not  risen  in  a  body,  and  killed  many
of  their  so-called  benefactors,  whom  they  consider  their
oppressors.  Can  we  be  surprised  that  there  are  many  pagans
who  still  think  that  cattle  disease  is  the  direct  result  of  the
constant  disregard  of  their  old  customs,  or  who  say  that
sleeping  sickness  is  due  to  the  anger  of  offended  gods,  who  are
taking  revenge  by  killing  large  numbers  of  people  for  indignities
heaped  upon  them?  Natives  require  time  to  learn,  and  need
instructors  who  will  bear  patiently  with  them,  who  will
study  their  difficulties,  and  not  try  to  enforce  new  rules
and  methods  which  they  do  not  understand,  and  which
their  past  training  has  taught  them  to  resist  with  all  their
might.  It  is  comparatively  easy  to  make  them  sceptical

R.U.  17


258 PASTORAL  INDUSTRIAL  PROBLEMS [CH.

regarding  their  old  customs,  but  that  does  not  convince  them
that  the  new  methods  are  right;  and  as  a  member  of  the
pastoral  tribes  has  never  been  taught  to  do  manual  labour,
it  is  hard  upon  his  convictions  to  force  him  to  begin  work
which  he  finds  fatiguing,  and  which  brings  a  remuneration  for
which  he  has  no  use.

The  physical  features  of  Bunyoro  are  much  the  same  as
those  of  Uganda.  There  is  more  humidity  in  Uganda  than
in  other  parts  of  Equatorial  Africa,  owing  to  the  lakes  and
rivers  which  supply  so  much  moisture  to  the  atmosphere,
and  in  this  peculiarity  Bunyoro  shares  to  a  considerable
extent.  This  moisture  naturally  makes  it  a  green  land;  trees
are  always  in  leaf,  most  of  them  being  evergreen,  and  grass  is
always  green;  the  humidity  is  also  favourable  for  agriculture,
but  no  pastoral  tribe  wish  to  see  their  grass  land  turned  into
fields;  they  want  as  much  grazing  land  as  possible  for  their
large  herds.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  attempt  has  been  made
to  utilise  in  any  way  the  skill  and  love  which  the  pastoral
tribes  have  for  cattle,  nor  to  make  this  part  of  Africa  a  cattle-
ranch  for  supplying  milk,  cheese,  and  tinned  meat.  This
could  be  done  profitably  and  would  provide  not  only  for  the
immediate  needs  of  Africa,  but  also  for  increased  shipping
demands,  whilst  quantities  might  be  exported  to  Europe.
Such  an  industry  might  prove  to  be  an  outlet  for  a  vast
amount  of  latent  skill,  while  it  would  also  bring  thousands
of  people  under  willing  subjection  to  the  British  rule.  Again
the  milk  from  the  vast  herds  of  goats  might  easily  be  utilised
for  the  purpose  of  making  cheese,  whereas  at  present  it  is
never  used,  and  though  in  recent  years  the  skins  have  found
a  market,  the  carcases  have  been  discarded  or  sold  at  a  loss
or  given  away;  there  is  room  for  considerable  development
in  these  respects.  Such  industries  would  be  congenial  to
several  large  tribes  in  the  Uganda  Protectorate,  while  at
present  they  groan  and  writhe  under  the  attempts  to  make
them  turn  to  agricultural  pursuits  and  manual  labour  of  a
distasteful  nature.

The  houses  and  homes  of  the  pastoral  people  are  of  the
poorest  possible  kind;  they  are  merely  shelters  from  changes


xvi]  THE  ROUGH  LIFE  OF  HERDSMEN  259

of  climate,  from  cold,  heat,  or  rain,  and  they  afford  a  little
more  safety  for  sleep  during  the  night  than  can  be  secured
when  lying  in  the  open,  exposed  to  wild  animals.  There  is  no
attempt  to  make  the  hut  of  the  poor  man  comfortably
only  high  enough  to  enable  the  inmates  to  stand  upright  in
the  centre,  and  wide  enough  to  allow  them  to  spread  out  at
night  a  roughly  dressed  cow-hide,  upon  which  they  sleep,
stretching  themselves  near  the  fire  for  warmth,  with  little  or
no  covering.  As  milk  is  their  chief  diet,  no  provision  is  made
for  cooking;  but  should  they  obtain  any  beef,  it  is  cooked  upon
wooden  spits  stuck  into  the  ground  round  the  fire;  no  other
method  of  cooking  meat  is  used,  and  there  is  no  desire  to  learn.
Meat  is  obtained  when  an  animal  dies,  or  when  it  is  accidentally
killed  by  falling  into  some  pit,  or  when  it  is  attacked  by  wild
beasts  and  maimed,  and  it  becomes  necessary  to  kill  it ;  other-
wise an  animal  is  seldom  slaughtered.  No  matter  what  the
cause  of  death  may  be,  the  meat  is  cut  up  and  eaten  by  the
poorer  class  of  herdsmen.  No  sanitary  arrangements  are  made
by  these  nomads  to  keep  their  homes  healthy;  the  ordinary
dung  heap  in  the  kraal  is  used  for  all  purposes  of  sanitation ;
hence  it  is  well  that  they  have  to  move  on  from  place  to  place
after  a  short  time  of  residence,  and  that  both  huts  and  kraal
soon  disappear  before  the  tropical  rain  and  sun;  and  so  the
place  is  cleansed  by  atmospheric  influence.  The  grass  fires
which  take  place  annually  with  unfailing  regularity  are  a
boon  to  the  people  in  many  ways,  for  not  only  is  the  old
vegetation  removed,  but  also  many  kinds  of  insects  are  de-
stroyed and  the  ground  is  made  ready  for  the  rains  to  wash
the  surface,  and  cause  the  beneficial  chemicals  from  the  burnt
grass  to  sink  into  the  ground  and  fertilise  the  new  grass  for
the  cattle.  Reptiles  are  also  kept  down  by  these  fires,  and
many  kinds  of  cattle  ticks  and  lice  are  cleared  off,  which
would  otherwise  make  the  land  unbearable.

The  agricultural  clans  are  naturally  wedded  to  localities  near
their  plots  of  arable  land;  these  build  more  durable  huts  than
do  the  pastoral  clans,  but  even  their  houses  are  very  inferior
to  those  of  Uganda  and  Busoga.  These  serfs  are  also  of  a
lower  type  than  the  Basoga  and  live  in  a  miserable  condition;

17—2


260  THE  PEOPLE  OF  BUNYORO  [CH.

they  are  not  unlike  the  serfs  on  Luenzori.  Their  staple  food  is
small  millet,  which  they  grind  into  flour  by  rubbing  the  grain
between  stones,  and  then  they  make  the  flour  into  porridge.
They  rear  herds  of  goats,  which  are  especially  used  for  the
purchase  of  wives;  they  seldom  slaughter  one  of  them  for
food,  except  upon  some  ceremonial  occasion,  such  as  a  wedding,
or  when  they  are  obliged  to  honour  some  ghost.  Both  men  and
women  work  in  the  fields;  they  hoe  the  ground  with  short
handled  hoes  having  iron  blades;  they  turn  it  up  into  rough
clods,  leaving  it  to  be  pulverised  by  the  sun  and  rain.  Millet
is  dropped  into  holes  made  by  digging  the  hoe  into  the  earth
and  lifting  a  little  soil  out,  two  or  three  grains  of  millet
being  then  dropped  into  each  hole,  and  covered  by  pushing
back  the  earth  with  the  foot.  When  land  ceases  to  bear  well,
it  is  left  to  rest  for  a  period  of  two  or  three  years,  during  which
time  another  plot  is  cultivated.

The  pastoral  tribes  are  particular  about  the  clothing  of
their  women,  though  the  men  are  indifferent  to  dress  and  wear
only  a  small  cape  over  their  shoulders ;  the  women  are  covered
from  head  to  foot,  and,  like  their  Bahima  sisters,  they  are
careful  not  to  expose  their  faces  when  they  go  abroad.  Among
the  agricultural  clans  in  this  country  the  custom  of  clothing
is  different ;  both  men  and  women  wear  merely  a  loin-cloth,  or
a  garment  which  is  frequently  only  the  skin  of  a  goat  tied
round  the  loins.  Betore  the  advent  of  the  European  govern-
ment there  were  no  roads  in  Bunyoro,  but  only  tracks  leading
from  one  part  of  the  country  to  another,  and  the  grass  was
kept  trodden  down  by  people  passing  with  their  herds  to
and  from  the  capital.  The  king  with  his  leading  chiefs  had  a
settled  place  of  abode  which  was  termed  his  capital;  it  was
merely  a  collection  of  poorly  built  huts  with  rude  elephant-
grass  fences  round  them;  outside  this  enclosure  the  principal
chiefs  were  desired  to  build  their  huts,  in  order  to  be  the  better
able  to  guard  their  king  from  the  attacks  of  any  foe.  The  huts
of  the  chiefs  were  inferior  to  those  of  the  king,  and  were  always
untidy  owing  to  the  presence  of  cattle  and  the  litter  which
the  animals  made;  even  the  huts  of  the  king  were  inferior
to  those  of  the  peasants  in  Uganda.


xvi]  BUNYORO  SALT  MINES  261

The  country  was  divided  into  districts  with  nomin.il
boundaries;  each  district  had  a  chief  who  ruled  over  it  and
was  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the  peasants.  The  land
valuation  differed  from  that  in  Uganda:  there  the  arable
land  was  chiefly  prized,  whereas  here  the  pasturage  was  the
more  valued.  The  serfs  paid  no  pre-arranged  rent,  but  gave
a  yearly  present  of  corn  to  the  over-lord,  as  much  or  as  little
as  they  chose.  The  value  of  having  a  district  lay  in  the  fact  that
every  chief  was  able  to  keep  his  cattle  separate  from  those  of
his  neighbour,  and  was  also  able  to  regulate  his  pasturage
within  his  own  boundaries,  and  to  provide  for  a  continual
supply  of  food  for  his  large  herds  by  burning  off  the  coarse
overgrowth,  while  the  herds  pastured  in  another  place.  There
was  no  taxation  of  a  fixed  nature,  though  people  living  near
the  salt  districts,  as  being  the  richest  in  the  country,  were
asked  by  the  king  for  salt  for  the  use  of  his  household.  Bunyoro
has  for  many  years  been  the  great  salt  producing  country  of
this  part  of  Africa,  and  has  supplied  most  of  the  markets  for
miles  round  with  this  valuable  commodity,  so  eagerly  sought
after  by  every  class.  The  craving  for  salt  among  peoples
who  are  almost  entirely  vegetarians  is  great,  and  high  prices
used  to  be  paid  to  retailers,  who  made  up  small  packets  of  salt
and  sold  them  in  the  market  places.  Salt  was  obtained  from
certain  rivers,  and  from  one  of  the  Jakes,  where  the  brine
encrusts  on  the  edge  of  the  water,  and  is  gathered  with  a
quantity  of  sand,  washed,  and  boiled  down  by  the  women  of
the  district.  The  railway  has  now  made  it  possible  to  obtain
a  much  better  quality  of  salt  from  the  coast  at  small  cost,
and  this  has  to  a  large  extent  taken  the  place  of  the  native
salt,  which  is  of  a  poor  quality,  and  full  of  grit  and  soda.
The  time  may  come  when  some  enterprising  company  may
start  salt  works  in  these  regions;  and  possibly  it  may  also
discover  some  valuable  drug  in  the  waters  of  the  volcanic
springs  which  produce  the  salt  water.  Until  then  the  native
must  be  satisfied  with  his  primitive  and  inexpensive
methods  of  winning  the  salt  and  supplying  the  needs  of
his  brethren.


CHAPTER  XVII

NILOTIC  KAVIRONDO— GLIMPSES  OF  TRIBES  ON

THE  WAY  TO  THE  COAST— MOMBASA  WITH  ITS

NEW  ENVIRONMENTS

SOME  day  when  the  migrations  of  the  tribes  of  Africa
shall  be  known,  we  may  be  able  to  unravel  the  mystery
of  the  Nilotics,  as  to  who  they  are  and  whence  they  came,
and  to  show  the  relation  of  one  tribe  to  the  other;  at  present
we  can  only  make  surmises  and  rough  guesses,  from  certain
common  features  and  customs  which  point  to  relationship,
and  from  the  affinity  of  the  languages.  The  Nilotic  Kavirondo,
about  whom  I  wish  to  say  a  little,  live  in  the  hills  near  Lake
Victoria,  but  differ  almost  in  every  respect  from  the  Bantu
Kavirondo,  who  live  in  the  plains  and  on  the  shore  of  the
lake.  These  Nilotic  people  are  absolutely  nude  and  think
clothing  indecent ;  when  a  Christian  mission  was  started  among
them,  and  some  youths  who  had  been  staying  at  a  boarding
school  went  home  wearing  clothes,  their  parents  scolded
them  for  doing  so,  and  told  them  they  were  to  put  their  clothes
away  until  they  went  back  to  school,  and  not  to  bring  disgrace
upon  their  village  by  wearing  them.

In  these  mountain  homes  the  mornings  and  evenings  are
cold,  yet  the  people  do  not  seem  to  feel  the  changes  of
temperature ;  they  move  along  happily  in  the  early  mornings
in  the  sharp  air  as  though  they  enjoyed  it,  making  journeys
to  their  fields  in  the  valleys.  The  young  men  often  use  oxen
as  riding  animals;  one  particular  sight  I  well  remember,
which  was  as  amusing  as  it  was  interesting.  A  number  of
young  men  were  to  be  seen  riding  about  on  oxen  which
trotted  along  at  a  good  pace.  Each  animal  was  guided
by  a  rod,  held  first  on  one  side  of  the  head,  and  then  the
other,  to  turn  it  as  the  rider  wished  it  to  go.  The  animals
were  evidently  accustomed  to  the  task,  and  I  learned  that
these  youths  used  them  for  riding  when  making  journeys  in


CH.  xvn] KAVIRONDO  NILOTIC  PEOPLE  263

thrir  neighbourhood.  The  people  are  fond  of  personal  t>\
merits  and  of  decorating  themselves  with  paint;  they  make
\v  hats  which  are  in  size  and  shape  like  dolls'  hats,
quite  imsuited  for  any  useful  purpose;  these  tiny  hats  are
fastened  on  the  head  with  a  string  passing  under  the  chin.
One  young  man  who  visited  me  was  particularly  impressed
by  my  spectacles,  and  followed  me  about,  unable  to  tear
himself  away  until  he  had  satisfied  himself  that  they  were
artificial  and  no  growth,  though  at  the  time  I  was  unconscious
of  the  cause  of  his  attentions.  On  the  following  day  he  appeared
with  a  pair  of  straw  rims  round  his  eyes  in  imitation  of  my
spectacles,  and  solemnly  sat  in  front  of  me  without  a  word,
until  he  had  been  noticed  and  commended  for  his  ingenuity
in  making  these  spectacles,  and  for  fastening  them  on  so
cleverly  with  fine  string.

There  appears  to  be  no  regular  form  of  worship  of  gods,
and  they  know  little  or  nothing  about  working  magic;  they
have,  however,  a  form  of  worship  of  the  dead;  for  other
purposes  they  employ  a  medicine-man  from  an  outside  tribe
to  be  their  priest  and  rain-maker,  and  pay  him  in  kind  for  his
work,  in  addition  to  making  him  a  regular  allowance  of  food,
providing  a  house  and  giving  him  honour  in  their  midst.  The
medicine-man  whom  I  saw  was  a  member  of  one  of  the  Bantu
tribes,  and  his  special  art  was  in  accordance  with  the  customs
of  his  own  people.  Apart  from  this  borrowed  priest  and  his
religion,  the  people  follow  their  own  rites  of  the  worship  of  the
dead;  they  believe  in  a  world  of  ghosts,  and  take  elaborate
precautions  to  pacify  them.  When  a  man  dies,  he  is  buried
beneath  the  floor  of  his  house,  and  his  widow  continues  to  live
in  it,  separated  from  other  women;  she  has  to  be  particularly
chaste  during  the  months  of  mourning,  and  has  to  keep  a  pot
of  beer  standing  on  the  grave  for  the  ghost,  and  to  keep  the
hut  tidy.  Her  girdle  of  grass,  which  is  the  mark  of  a  married
woman  in  this  district,  is  taken  off  and  placed  over  the  door
on  the  roof,  as  a  token  to  any  visitor  that  the  man  is  dead,
and  that  his  widow  is  mourning  for  him.

There  is  a  belief  that  ghosts  can  be  detained  by  the  living;


264  KAVIRONDO  PEOPLE  AND  THEIR  BELIEFS [CH.

indeed  all  ghosts  are  detained,  until  certain  ceremonies  have
been  performed  by  the  relatives,  in  order  to  release  them
from  their  old  haunts  and  enable  them  to  go  to  the  ghost
world;  should  these  ceremonies  be  neglected,  the  poor  ghost  is
detained,  and  is  angered  and  becomes  dangerous  to  the  com-
munity. In  like  manner  when  a  man  murders  another,  or
wounds  him  so  that  he  dies  from  the  wound,  or  when  in  battle
one  man  kills  another,  the  warrior  or  the  murderer  has  to
perform  certain  ceremonies,  which  release  the  ghost  from  the
person  of  him  who  killed  him,  and  until  he  consents  to  do  so
the  ghost  is  captive,  though  it  longs  to  go  away.  Should  a
man  refuse  to  perform  the  rites,  it  is  believed  that  the  ghost
will  eventually  seize  and  strangle  him.  When  a  man  has  killed
another  either  wilfully  or  accidentally,  he  is  secluded  for  a
time  from  his  companions  and  lives  in  a  hut  built  at  the
entrance  of  the  village,  where  he  is  fed  by  an  old  woman,
because  he  must  not  touch  food  with  his  hands,  since  they
are  contaminated,  and  might  convey  death  to  him.  At  the  end
of  the  appointed  time  of  seclusion  the  taboo  man  is  washed  in
running  water,  and  partakes  of  a  feast  cooked  by  his  guardian,
and  after  the  meal  he  may  return  home  to  his  usual  life.  This
belief  of  being  able  to  detain  a  ghost  is  not  in  agreement
with  the  general  teaching  concerning  ghosts  in  this  part  of
Africa;  ghosts  are  usually  thought  to  be  free  to  do  much  as
they  like,  and  it  is  a  common  desire  of  the  living  to  be  rid
of  them  as  quickly  as  possible.  Yet  this  custom  relating  to
ghosts  in  Kavirondo  is  not  an  isolated  instance,  for  in  Busoga,
at  the  funeral  of  a  chief,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  principal  wife
to  catch  two  handf uls  of  the  earth  which  is  being  cast  into
the  grave,  and  to  throw  it  over  the  nearest  tree,  saying:
"If  anyone  has  detained  you,  go  free."  The  supposed  captor
is  thought  to  be  the  man  who  by  some  actual  deed  or  by
magic  has  caused  the  death;  and  this  action  of  throwing  a
ball  of  earth  from  the  grave  over  the  tree  is  supposed  to  be
stronger  than  the  strongest  magic  intended  to  detain  a  ghost
from  going  to  the  place  of  the  departed.  Among  Nilotic  Kavi-
rondo the  chief  purpose  of  the  mourning  duties  of  the  wife


xvn]  NATIVE  CUSTOMS  INFRINGED  265

is  to  enable  the  ghost  to  go  free  and  reach  its  home,  with
the  satisfaction  of  believing  that  it  is  missed,  and  wanted  by
those  whom  it  has  left.  When  the  mourning  ends,  and  th<
widow  is  purified,  she  is  free  to  seek  remarriage ;  but  before
these  ceremonies  end,  and  the  final  purificatory  ceremony  has
taken  place,  the  widow  still  belongs  to  the  ghost  and  has  to
act  for  its  benefit  in  the  hut  in  which  the  body  lies,  for  she  is
considered  to  be  still  the  wife  of  the  deceased.

There  are  several  Nilotic  tribes  to  be  found  in  a  district
extending  some  miles  near  the  south-east  coast  of  the  Lake
Victoria  Nyanza;  they  seem  to  be  immigrants  who  have
worked  their  way  through  Bantu  tribes,  and  have  settled  in
their  midst,  though  they  keep  free  from  intermarriage  with
them,  and  also  retain  their  own  language  and  customs.
Physically  they  are  quite  as  strong  and  robust  as  the  Bantu
people,  but  in  their  religious  customs  they  take  a  lower  place,
though  we  may  possibly  find,  when  we  know  them  better,  that
strong  religious  beliefs  exist  which  at  present  we  do  not  under-
stand. Several  of  these  Nilotic  tribes  in  the  past  were  fierce
and  warlike,  and  had  to  be  reduced,  before  they  would  submit
to  British  rule.  Some  of  the  troubles  have  arisen  through  our
infringing  their  laws,  injuring  their  feelings,  and  violating  their
superstitions  owing  to  ignorance  of  their  customs;  we  failed  to
respect  certain  rites,  thus  making  enemies  by  persisting  in
a  line  of  conduct  which  we  should  not  have  followed,  had  we
understood  their  religious  scruples.  On  this  account  it  would
be  wise  to  give  every  European  some  training  in  the  customs
and  beliefs  of  primitive  people,  before  allowing  him  to  go  to
their  country;  it  would  make  him  careful  not  to  form  hasty
conclusions  in  matters  on  which  they  hold  firmly-rooted
opinions.  Such  knowledge  would  save  the  individual  much
trouble,  and  in  some  instances  would  also  save  the  Government
much  money  and  loss  of  life,  not  to  speak  of  the  loss  of  the
goodwill  of  the  natives,  when,  for  example,  some  resistance
is  made,  and  a  punitive  expedition  has  to  be  undertaken.
When  the  railroad  was  first  built,  and  the  telegraph  wires  were
laid,  the  people  in  certain  localities  were  greatly  incensed  at


266  SOME  NATIVE  SUPERSTITIONS  [CH.

the  presence  of  these  wires,  because  they  were  sure  that  these
innovations  would  cause  trouble  with  their  gods;  and  when
there  was  a  scarcity  of  food  in  Busoga  owing  to  lack  of  rain,
the  people  attributed  it  to  the  telegraph  wires;  so  they  cut
and  carried  off  long  pieces  of  the  wire,  thinking  thus  to  please
their  gods  and  secure  the  necessary  rain  for  their  crops.
Other  tribes  dug  up  the  rails  of  the  railroad,  because  they
felt  sure  that  these  things  were  the  cause  of  drought  and  of
sickness.  In  later  times  many  of  the  dwellers  on  the  islands
of  Lake  Victoria  have  attributed  sleeping  sickness  to  the
introduction  of  European  methods  into  the  country,  and
especially  to  Christianity.  Because  the  gods  have  been
neglected  and  are  angry,  they  send  sickness  and  death :  so  the
old  priests  tell  the  people.  To  reason  out  clearly  cause  and
effect  in  cases  of  disaster  may  be  too  difficult  for  the  native,
still  he  has  reason  for  associating  sleeping  sickness  with  the
European.  There  was  no  such  sickness  in  the  country  until
men  coming  from  the  Congo  with  Stanley,  or  following  him,
introduced  it.  Again,  the  removal  of  tribal  barriers,  and  the
safety  with  which  one  tribe  can  visit  another  has  been  the
cause  of  introducing  many  new  diseases  and  other  ills  utterly
unknown  in  ages  past.  Smallpox  was  in  the  past  attributed
to  armies  invading  other  countries  and  bringing  back  some
one  afflicted  with  the  disease.  Now  that  people  are  able  to
make  long  journeys  into  other  states  without  danger  to  life,
such  journeys  are  often  undertaken,  and  the  intercourse
of  tribes  with  one  another  has  introduced  new  risks  of
infection.  Another  disadvantage  of  this  free  tribal  inter-
course among  pastoral  tribes  has  been  the  introduction  of
cattle  diseases ;  tribal  barriers  used  to  prevent  the  passage  of
animals  and  goods  from  one  tribe  to  another  for  trading
purposes,  and  wild  animals  were  never  known  in  the  past  to
have  spread  cattle  disease  over  any  wide  area  in  Africa.

The  warlike  Nandi  have  almost  disappeared  from  the  con-
fines of  the  railway;  they  proved  to  be  so  troublesome  that
they  were  eventually  driven  by  a  force  of  British  troops
from  their  old  homes,  and  they  are  now  restricted  to  a  corner


xvii]  THE  MASAI  AS  POLICEMEN  267

of  their  former  fair  land.  The  far-famed  Masai,  the  i
dreaded  warriors  of  olden  times,  have  become  so  docile,  that
it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  they  were  ever  a  scourer  in  East
Africa.  Numbers  of  them  may  now  be  seen  dressed  in  the
uniform  of  British  troops,  shouldering  modern  rifles,  and
acting  as  police  along  the  railway.  Though  much  of  the  present
peaceful  condition  of  the  Masai  is  due  to  British  occupation,
and  to  the  tact  shown  by  the  District  Commissioners,  it  is
not  entirely  the  work  of  our  countrymen;  the  terrible  cattle
plague  mentioned  above  carried  off  the  large  herds  of  the  Masai,
reducing  them,  not  only  to  poverty,  but  almost  to  starva-
tion, and  they  were  forced  to  adopt  a  vegetable  diet  or  to  die.
Many  of  this  fine  race  died  during  those  hard  times,  leaving
to  the  most  sturdy  young  members  the  task  of  building  up
their  tribe  to  its  former  greatness.  There  can  be  little  doubt
that  they  would  have  recovered  their  old  spirit  of  inde-
pendence, had  not  the  British  arrived  on  the  scene  at  the
time  of  their  extreme  need  and  given  them  new  motives
in  life,  while  they  were  still  in  a  pliable  condition,  needing  a
helping  hand  to  raise  them  from  poverty.  They  have  now  been
made  to  understand  that  they  can  no  longer  raid  cattle
or  murder  people  as  before,  hence  their  warlike  instincts  find
an  outlet  in  acting  as  police  and  as  soldiers  for  the  Govern-
ment. There  are  to  be  found  places  where  herds  of  cattle
are  reared  and  tended  by  Masai  as  before;  but  how  far
the  old  rigid  milk  customs  are  observed  I  have  had  no
opportunity  of  testing,  and  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  other
works  on  the  habits  of  the  Masai.  There  are  many  miles  of
grass  plains,  where  the  Masai  formerly  roamed  as  lords  with
their  large  herds  of  cattle,  which  are  now  being  turned  to
agricultural  purposes  by  settlers.  To  these  fertile  regions
numbers  of  Englishmen  are  being  attracted,  and  they  have
begun  to  grow  many  kinds  of  crops  well  known  in  England ;
over  and  above  these  are  the  crops  peculiar  to  tropical
countries,  particularly  cotton,  rubber,  and  cocoa,  which  are
giving  great  promise.  The  long  rolling  plains  with  here  and
there  lovely  mountain  scenery,  which  at  one  time  were  the


268 NAIROBI,  CAPITAL  OF  EAST  AFRICA [CH.

undisputed  haunts  of  the  Masai,  who  only  shared  their  right
to  these  magnificent  lands  with  the  wild  beasts,  are  now
being  used  for  the  benefit  of  the  world.

Midway  between  the  coast  and  Lake  Victoria  is  the  large
town  of  Nairobi,  which  has  sprung  up  with  amazing  rapidity.
It  is  the  headquarters  of  the  Government  of  British  East
Africa,  and  the  railway  works  are  also  established  there.
The  first  Government  of  the  East  African  Protectorate  was
established  on  the  island  of  Mombasa,  and  for  some  years
the  railway  headquarters  were  on  the  coast.  This  was  found
to  be  unhealthy,  while  the  highland  in  the  interior  was  com-
paratively healthy,  and  gradually  the  whole  machinery
for  working  the  Protectorate  has  been  moved  to  the  Nairobi
plateau.  This  change  affords  space  to  the  Government  to
build  a  town  on  an  approved  plan,  as  well  as  in  a  healthy
locality.  Moreover  the  town  can  be  built  on  scientific
principles  for  width  of  streets,  drainage  and  supply  of  water,
which  was  impossible  in  Mombasa,  unless  one  did  violence
to  the  rights  of  native  residents,  whose  forefathers  for  centuries
had  lived  and  died  there.  When  I  first  knew  Nairobi,  only
a  few  years  ago  (it  was  during  the  rainy  season),  the  place
seemed  to  be  a  marshy  spot,  with  one  hut,  in  which  were
stored  the  parts  of  the  first  steamer  destined  for  Lake
Victoria.  Owing  to  the  breakdown  of  transport,  the  parts  were
housed  and  guarded  there,  and  were  awaiting  a  fresh  supply
of  porters  from  the  coast.  Now  there  are  hundreds  of  houses
of  all  kinds  of  structure  and  material,  from  the  well  built
stone  houses  of  the  Governor  and  the  chief  members  of  the
Government  to  the  small  grass  hut  of  the  native;  there  are
also  water-works,  and  large  works  for  carriage  and  locomotive
building,  and  for  repairing  the  rolling  stock  of  the  railway.
Roads  have  been  constructed,  and  places  of  amusement
built  in  addition  to  those  for  business  and  instruction.
It  is  the  great  centre  of  East  Africa,  and  there  are
stores  and  shops  supplying  all  manner  of  goods,  to  satisfy
the  needs  of  hundreds  of  people  and  of  the  many  farmers
in  the  vicinity.  It  is  the  high  table-land  of  East  Africa,  where


xvn] NAIROBI  AS  A  SETTLER'S  COUNTRY

Europeans  may  live  in  comparatively  good  In -a  1th,  if
are  careful  to  follow  the  ordinary  rules  of  life  in  the  tropics.
Land  has  been  purchased  by  numbers  of  Englishmen,  who
hope  to  be  able  to  settle  there  for  life,  without  ever  returning
to  England.  In  the  neighbourhood  there  is  land  suited
almost  all  kinds  of  farm  produce  that  will  grow  in  tropical
and  semi-tropical  countries;  and  fruit  and  plants  which
require  a  temperate  climate  seem  also  to  thrive.  Cotton
plantations  are  being  cultivated  with  considerable  success,
and  cattle  farming  is  being  given  a  fair  trial,  indeed  almost
all  kinds  of  farming  are  being  tested.

This  high  table-land  is  indeed  a  land  of  promise,  but  it
needs  the  right  men  to  make  it  a  success  and  a  place  upon
which  the  British  nation  can  look  with  pleasure  and  pride.
Whether  the  country  will  ever  be  suited  for  Europeans  as
a  permanent  home,  where  they  can  live  without  returning
to  Europe  for  periodical  change  on  account  of  health,  still
remains  to  be  proved.  Most  Europeans  who  have  lived  in
the  tropics  for  long  find  that  they  need  change  to  a  cold
climate  every  few  years  to  brace  them  up  and  restore  their
shattered  nerves,  and  the  benefits  of  the  English  winter  enable
them  to  return  to  their  duties  with  the  zeal  necessary  for
success.  For  settlers  the  highlands  near  Nairobi  are  un-
doubtedly the  most  suitable  country  in  East  Africa,  having
cool  nights,  and  days  which,  though  hot,  yet  in  the  shade
do  not  exceed  the  heat  of  an  English  summer  day.  Time  alone
will  prove  whether  the  settlers  will  find  the  place  suitable
for  continued  residence,  where  their  children  can  live  and
thrive.  Before  the  question  can  be  settled,  many  hardships
will  have  to  be  endured,  many  risks  run,  and  probably  lives
laid  down.  The  lonely  life  which  many  of  these  farmers  are
compelled  to  lead  makes  it  necessary  to  find  men  who  are
prepared  to  live  without  social  intercourse  with  their  fellow
men  for  long  periods  at  a  time.  They  need  to  be  men  of  some
character,  who,  when  they  go  into  towns,  are  able  to  with-
stand the  temptations  of  evil  associates,  for  men  are  to
be  found  there,  who  have  yielded  to  the  excessive  use  of


270  THE  KIKUYU  TRIBE  [CH.

alcohol  and  to  gambling;  these  men  have  thrown  away  their
own  chances  of  success,  and  now  seek  to  drag  others  down
to  their  own  dreadful  plane  of  life.

In  Uganda  there  is  every  prospect  of  cotton  growing
becoming  a  remunerative  occupation,  while  rubber,  coffee,
cocoa,  and  grain  will  be  found  to  be  profitable,  though  there
may  not  be  the  same  facilities  for  exporting  these  crops.
The  land  will  grow  the  crops  mentioned,  but  whether
they  can  be  grown  and  carried  to  the  markets  at  a  cost
which  will  enable  the  growers  to  compete  with  other  districts
nearer  to  railroads  and  to  the  coast  is  still  a  question  which
time  and  fair  trials  will  settle.  Tea  has  not  been  given  sufficient
trial  to  permit  a  sound  and  reliable  opinion  being  formed.
The  chief  agriculturists  in  Uganda  are  the  natives  themselves,
who  sell  their  farm  produce  to  European  middlemen  in
the  raw  state;  it  has  then  to  be  prepared  for  market;
cotton  is  jinned,  pressed,  and  bound  in  bales  for  exporta-
tion. Though  the  native  will  sell  his  raw  cotton  for  a  com-
paratively small  amount,  the  export  merchant  has  to  consider
the  long  railway  journey  to  the  port  for  exportation,  which
his  neighbour  near  the  coast  escapes.

The  district  stretching  from  Nairobi  away  to  Mount  Kenia
is  thickly  populated  by  the  Kikuyu  tribe,  who  in  many
respects  seem  to  resemble  the  Masai,  though  they  differ  from
them  in  almost  every  detail  when  more  closely  studied.  Still,
to  the  casual  observer  there  is  a  similarity;  they  are  tall,
well-built  men,  attired  much  after  the  style  of  the  Masai,  with
small  capes  round  their  shoulders  and  a  heart-shaped  piece  of
skin  hung  behind  them  from  the  waist,  which  forms  a  seat
when  they  wish  to  sit  down.  They  use  copious  supplies  of
vegetable  oil  and  the  fat  of  domestic  animals  to  rub  upon
their  bodies,  they  paint  themselves  with  red  and  white  clay
in  peculiar  figures  which  appear  to  be  tribal  designs,  and
they  also  carry  long-bladed  spears  as  do  the  Masai.  A  passing
acquaintance  did  not  enable  me  to  discover  their  points  of
difference,  and  the  only  books  written  about  them  have  not
dealt  with  these  subjects.  Though  the  tribe  possesses  large


xvn] WAKIKUYU  AND  WAKAMBA  TRIBES 271

herds  of  cattle  and  goats  and  flocks  of  sheep,  they  are  a  s«
agricultural  tribe  of  the  Bantu  stock,  whereas  the  Masai  are
not  Bantu,  and  are  pastoral.  The  Wakikuyu  are  a  settled
people,  not  nomads,  as  is  the  case  with  the  Masai ;  agricultural
pursuits  preclude  a  wandering  life.  The  people  build  ii,
communities,  often  on  the  summits  of  hills  or  on  higher
ground,  enclosing  a  number  of  houses  in  a  strong  stockade,
intended  to  be  a  protection  against  theft  and  night  raids,
which  used  to  be  commonly  made  by  the  Masai  for  the
purpose  of  stealing  the  cattle.  Among  the  Wakikuyu  there
are  to  be  found  men  with  primitive  ideas  of  working  iron
and  also  wood;  they  are  quite  capable  of  fulfilling  all  the
requirements  of  their  tribe,  and  are  able  to  supply  the
people  with  the  necessary  implements  for  domestic  purposes
and  also  with  weapons  of  war.  The  material  used  for  dress
consisted  only  of  the  skins  of  domestic  animals,  with  a  few
from  wild  animals  taken  in  the  chase;  these  they  roughly
dressed  by  oiling  them  well  and  working  them  soft  and  pliable.
When  cotton  goods  came  to  them  from  the  coast,  together
with  Western  ideas,  the  old  dress  of  skins  began  to  fall  into
disuse,  and  so  have  many  of  their  former  customs.

As  we  pass  along  the  line  to  the  coast,  we  next  encounter
the  Wakamba,  who  are  not  unlike  the  Wakikuyu  in  many
respects.  They  also  belong  to  the  Bantu  family;  their  dress
is  as  scanty  as  that  of  the  Wakikuyu;  and  their  love  of
smearing  oils  and  fat  upon  themselves  from  head  to  foot  and
rubbing  on  coloured  clay  is  quite  as  great.  For  many  years
I  have  known  these  people  to  be  a  tribe  of  successful  hunters.
In  following  the  chase,  in  addition  to  their  skilful  use  of  the
spear,  they  use  a  strong  bow,  and  the  best  manufactured
arrows  in  this  part  of  Africa  are  to  be  found  among  them.
They  are  experts  in  bringing  down  game  with  their  poisoned
arrows,  and  in  time  of  war  these  weapons  render  them
formidable  foes.  Most  of  the  large  villages  are  built  among  the
hills,  usually  on  the  hill-tops,  to  make  them  more  difficult
for  the  Masai  to  reach,  when  they  are  raiding  cattle,  than
they  would  be  if  on  the  plains.  Fertile  valleys  are  chosen


272  SCENERY  ON  MAU  ESCARPMENT  [CH.

for  the  cultivation  of  maize,  millet,  and  the  sweet  potato,
because  these  people  are  agricultural,  though  possessed  of
numbers  of  cattle.  The  villagers,  men  and  women,  descend
to  their  fields  every  morning,  and  work  steadily  until  the  sun
tells  them  it  is  noon,  when  they  return  home  carrying  food,
fire-wood,  and  often  a  water-pot.  The  cattle,  goats,  and  sheep
are  herded  on  the  hill-sides,  where  they  are  less  liable  to  be
captured  by  their  enemies  than  they  would  be  in  the  valleys,
where  the  paths  and  roads  run  from  one  part  of  the  country
to  another.

The  country  from  Lake  Victoria  to  the  Mau  escarpment
is  of  an  undulating  character  with  here  and  there  some  fine
hills.  During  the  months  of  dry  weather  the  grass  becomes
dry,  and  most  of  the  trees  become  leafless,  except  in  the
regions  of  water,  where  the  grass  and  trees  are  evergreen.  The
engineering  difficulties  in  building  the  railway  from  the  coast
to  Lake  Victoria  were  great,  especially  in  the  Mau  district,
where  the  land  seems  to  rise  like  a  huge  wall  from  the  plain.
To  obtain  the  necessary  gradient  in  ascending  the  escarp-
ment, the  railway  takes  a  spiral  course  of  the  most  interesting
character,  and  the  traveller  looks  down  upon  tracts  of  land
which  he  has  passed  through,  sometimes  with  a  feeling  of
incredulity,  as  he  sees  fresh  objects  of  interest  which  he  failed
to  notice  when  near  them.  In  descending  the  escarpment  the
scenery  is  even  more  picturesque  than  in  ascending,  with
wooded  hills  and  ravines  with  cascades  of  water,  which  dash
down  deep  gorges  containing  the  most  beautiful  tropical  vege-
tation and  ferns  of  all  kinds.  When  the  railway  was  being  con-
structed, before  the  line  which  nowwends  its  way  down  the  hills
to  the  plain  on  the  side  nearer  to  the  Victoria  Lake  was  open  for
passenger  traffic,  we  had  to  climb  the  escarpment  on  foot,  while
our  goods  were  sent  up  in  a  lift.  On  one  occasion  my  goods
were  detained  owing  to  a  rain-storm,  and  the  train  left  me  be-
hind ;  for  I  preferred  to  remain  with  my  baggage  than  to  go  on
without  it.  I  was  informed  that  there  would  be  no  other
passenger  train  to  Nairobi  for  some  days,  but  I  obtained
permission  to  travel  by  goods-train  in  a  covered  iron  truck.


m

IfNilp  {?  M  i


HOUSE  CONSTRUCTION  IN  UGANDA


DUG-OUT  CANOE  IN  PROCESS  OF  BEING  BUILT


PLATE  XIX


ANKOLE  PASTORAL  HUTS


EUROPEAN'S  HOUSE  AND  GARDEN


xvn] RAILWAY  VERSUS  TRAVELLING  ON  FOOT  273

I  lived  in  this  with  my  boys,  cli  the  tin-  k  into  throe

rooms  by  hanging  tent  and  tent  awning  across,  and  using  one
part  as  a  bedroom  and  t  he  middle  part  as  ;room,  while

the  boys  used  the  third  part  as  a  kitchen  and  their  slcrj
room.  With  the  doors  open  on  one  side,  and  a  deck-< !
placed  near  the  opening,  I  had  a  novel  experience,  and  on
the  whole  it  was  a  comfortable  run  to  Nairobi,  two

days  and  one  night.  When  we  arrived  at  Nairobi,  we  had
to  wait  three  or  four  days  for  a  train  to  the  coast/  but  through
the  kindness  of  the  traffic  manager  I  was  allowed  the  use  of
a  guard's  van  for  a  house,  instead  of  having  to  pitch  my  t
and  my  boys  cooked  my  meals  near  by  at  the  side  of  the
railway.

When  the  train  leaves  Nairobi,  it  crosses  the  Athi  plain
which  is  full  of  game ;  this  is  indeed  one  of  the  greatest  shows
of  wild  animals  which  the  world  can  produce.  There  are  zebras,
and  many  kinds  of  antelopes,  with  here  and  there  a  lion,  wild
boars,  ostriches,  and  other  kinds  of  animals  peculiar  to
Africa,  which  have  now  become  so  accustomed  to  the  railway
trains,  that  they  do  little  more  than  trot  to  a  safe  distance,
or  merely  raise  their  heads  to  look,  and  then  go  on  grazing,
while  the  trains  run  past.  Herds  of  these  animals  may  be
seen  from  the  railway  carriage,  which  must  often  number  a
hundred.

Now  that  the  railway  is  finished,  it  is  possible  for  trains
to  run  by  night,  whereas  at  first  they  only  ran  by  day,  when
the  driver  could  see  that  the  line  had  not  been  washed  away
by  a  sudden  rain-storm  and  subsequent  flood.  The  comfort
of  the  railway  is  great,  when  compared  with  the  former
laborious  and  slow  method  of  walking;  there  are  places  we
pass  with  some  well  remembered  land-mark,  where  in  those
old  days  of  journeying  on  foot  we  camped,  or  again  where
some  difficulty  had  to  be  overcome  with  porters,  or  where
there  was  lack  of  food  or  scarcity  of  water.  These  are
things  of  the  past,  now  the  traveller  sits  in  luxury,  and
the  train  stops  at  regular  places,  where  he  alights  for  a  meal
prepared  for  him;  by  night  he  sleeps  in  comfort,  free  from

R.U.  l8


274  THE  ISLAND  MOMBASA  [CH.

worry;  danger  from  some  night  attack  of  robbers  or  wild
beasts  is  unknown,  the  only  inconvenience  being  a  coating  of
dust,  which  has  penetrated  into  his  carriage  and  covered  his
bedding  during  his  sleep.

The  advent  of  the  railway  in  Mombasa  has  made  great
changes.  The  small  island  has  passed  through  a  variety  of
experiences  since  the  early  days  of  the  Portuguese.  At  one
time  it  was  the  home  of  the  pioneer  missionaries  Krapf  and
Rebmann;  the  former  arrived  in  a  dhow  in  1844  and
established  himself  in  the  Arab  town,  and  later  was  joined
by  Rebmann,  who  went  to  the  mainland  and  settled  at  Rabai.
By  these  two  men  the  snow-capped  mountain  Kiliman-
jaro was  discovered,  and  they  also  gave  to  the  world  the
first  intimation  of  the  great  inland  seas,  which  led  to  the
discovery  of  Lake  Victoria.  A  small  cemetery  containing  the
graves  of  the  wives  of  these  pioneers  on  the  mainland  at
Frere  Town  is  the  silent  memorial  of  their  labours.  Many
people  come  and  go  to  Mombasa  without  ever  hearing  of  the
quiet  resting-place  of  these  brave  women,  or  of  the  labours  of
the  men  who  endured  so  much,  and  rendered  such  invaluable
help  in  the  opening  up  of  Africa  to  civilisation.  The  cemetery
is  off  the  track  trodden  by  visitors,  and  known  only  to  a
few  residents  in  Mombasa.

For  a  time  after  these  men  had  left,  the  island  was  without
any  resident  European;  then  came  the  influx  of  Europeans
for  the  purpose  of  building  the  railway,  and  both  Govern-
ment officers  and  railway  officials  lived  here  for  a  time.  The
houses  of  these  officers  were  built  at  some  distance  from  the
dirty  native  town,  on  the  highest  part  of  the  island,  in  order
to  obtain  the  most  healthy  conditions  of  Mombasa;  roads  were
also  cut  and  gardens  laid  out.  When,  however,  the  railway
opened  up  the  highlands  of  Nairobi  with  its  wonderful
climate,  the  Government  and  railway  officials  moved  there;
and  gradually  Mombasa  has  been  deprived  of  the  greater
part  of  its  European  population,  and  retains  those  only  whose
business  is  connected  with  shipping  and  so  forbids  their
prolonged  absence  from  the  coast,  and  the  missionaries


xvn]  FRERE  TOWN  275

who,  with  the  Bishop  of  Eastern  Africa,  have  their  head-
quarters on  the  island.  The  place  is  vastly  unproved,  and
it  has  been  of  much  more  importance  since  it  became  the
terminus  of  the  railway,  and  its  new  harbour  on  the  s<
side  of  the  island,  with  a  good  entrance,  and  deep  water
sufficient  for  ships  of  the  deepest  draught  to  enter  or  leave
at  any  time  regardless  of  the  state  of  the  tide,  was  opened.
Formerly  ships  arriving  at  ebb-tide  had  to  anchor,  or  cruise
about  until  there  was  sufficient  water  for  them  to  get  over
the  reef  which  runs  across  the  entrance  of  the  old  harbour;
this  reef  made  the  port  dangerous  and  difficult  for  navigation.
The  railway  now  runs  down  to  a  sea-wall,  to  which  ships
can  come,  and  this  circumstance  saves  time  and  expense  in
loading  and  discharging  cargoes  from  large  ships.  The  old
town  continues  much  as  it  was,  with  its  Arab  craft  lying  at
anchor  before  it ;  but  few  Europeans  pass  through  the  narrow,
dirty,  smelly  streets,  now  that  the  hotels  and  port  lie  away
from  it.  Arabs,  Swahili,  and  various  mixed  people  from  India
continue  to  inhabit  this  town,  living  happily  in  Eastern
squalor.

The  Bishop  of  East  Africa  lives  on  the  island  in  a  nice
stone  house,  near  the  Hannington-Parker  Memorial  Church
which  is  now  the  Cathedral ;  there  are  also  some  good  schools
worked  by  the  missionaries  belonging  to  the  Church  Mis-
sionary Society.  The  old  freed-slave  quarters  at  Frere  Town,
called  after  Sir  B.  Frere,  who  did  so  much  for  the  suppression
of  slavery  in  East  Africa,  have  dwindled  almost  to  nothing.
The  mission  for  the  freed  slaves  was  on  the  mainland  opposite
Mombasa,  but,  as  was  to  be  expected,  their  children  have
grown  up,  and  the  slave  trade  has  died  down,  so  that  there
are  now  no  more  slave  children  to  be  taught  in  the  old  school
there.  In  the  past  much  good  was  done  in  the  place,  and
there  are  some  godly  men  and  women  still  living  in  Frere
Town,  who  passed  through  the  schools  as  freed  slave  children.
A  link  with  the  past  is  to  be  found  in  Archdeacon  Binns,  who
is  still  at  work  in  Mombasa  and  Frere  Town,  after  some  forty
years'  residence,  with  a  noble  record  of  faithful  service.  Of

1 8— 2


276  AFRICA  A  LAND  OF  PROMISE [CH.  xvn

the  released  slaves  who  belong  to  the  early  days,  the  Rev.  I.
Semler  still  lives;  he  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Hannington,
before  the  latter  undertook  his  fatal  journey  into  the  interior.
Thus  we  leave  the  bright  sunny  shores  of  Africa,  with  the
interests  and  difficulties  of  the  country  opening  a  new  page
of  its  history;  no  longer  the  almost  unknown  land,  but  a  land
attracting  with  its  irresistible  charms  and  claims  the  eyes  of
many  nations,  and  now  known  to  almost  every  school  child.
It  is  indeed  a  veritable  land  of  promise,  a  land  of  adventure,
and  a  land  which  will  throw  much  light  on  many  of  the  still
unsolved  scientific  problems  of  life.


INDEX


Ability  of  native  women,  180
Abode  of  god  of  plague,  158
Aborigines,  agricultural,  250;  inToro,

200,  205

Absence  from  public  meetings,  184
Abyssinian  raiders,  240
Accidents,  bicycling,  218
Admission to Barega  country re-
fused, 202

Admitting  a  visitor  to  the  king,  187
Adultery,  punishment  for,  166,  189
Africa  a  land  of  promise,  276
Agricultural  aborigines,  250

—  clans,  in  Toro,  204

—  people,  clothing  of,  260;  huts
of,  259

—  tribe,  in  Ankole,  209;  in  Bun-
yoro,  250

—  tribes,  taxation  of,  250;  work
of,  257

Agriculture,  and  milk  customs,  210;
ceases  in  war-time,  108;  in  Koki,
219;  pastoral  tribes  and,  257;
Wakamba,  272;  Wamegi,  19

Ammunition  introduced  by  Arabs,

193

Ancestry  of  pastoral  tribes,  139

Animals,  and  the  trains,  273;  in
Toro,  204

Ankole,  agricultural  tribe  in,  209;
Baganda  in,  210;  belief  in  trans-
migration in,  214;  boundaries  of,
208;  cattle  in,  ib.;  Christianity
in,  209;  Christians  flee  to,  107;
cotton  growing  in,  210;  in  fear
of  Bunyoro,  250;  journey  by
bicycle,  207;  ordinary  burial,
214;  origin  of  name,  208;  physi-
cal features,  209;  polygamy  and
polyandry,  212;  princes  of]  210;
royal  court,  211;  rubber  growing,
210

Appeal,  by  Bp.  Tucker,  124 ;  right  of,
189

Appearance  of  Wagogo,  46

Appointing  chiefs,  212

Apportioning  loads,  6

Arab,  and  English,  hostility,  103,
104,  105;  influence  among  Ba-
ganda, 79,  97 ;  influence  on  archi-
tecture, 132;  rebellion  against
Mwanga,  107;  rising  against  Ger-


m;i;  slave-traders, 9;

slave-traders  and  curn

town,  an,  5 ;  traders,  teaching  of,

101

Arabs,  depose  Kiwewa,  107;  intro-
duce cotton,  firearms,  and  am-
munition, 193;  murder  Baganda
princesses,  108

Architecture,  Arab  influence,  132

Arms,  British  lack  of,  175

Army  land,  Baganda,  90

Arranging  the  march,  7

Arrival  of  Sir  Gerald  Portal,  124

Arrows,  poisoned,  202,  271

Artisans,  chief's,  193;  Kikuyu,  271

Ashe,  Rev.  R.  P.,  64,  104,  112,  113,
114

Athi  plain,  273

Attempts  to  promote  home  life,  179

Attendants,  king's  spirit,  149;  on
king  in  court,  183

Avoiding  enemies,  205

Bafransa,  the  French  party,  109
Bagamoyo,  imprisonment  in,  38—40
Baganda,  and  Sudanese  rising,  127;
Arab  influence,  79,  97;  army,  90;
Army  land,  ib.;  belief  in  rein-
carnation, 81;  burial  customs,
ib,  \  burial  grounds,  83, 84 ;  chairs,
100 ;  chiefs  in  Busoga,  245 ;  chiefs
in  Teso,  231,234;  Christians,  171;
civilization,  80;  cleanliness,  77,
78;  clothing,  77;  counting,  101 ;
currency,  97 ;  distribution  of  land,
83 ;  ending  the  king's  life,  87-88 ;
evangelists,  177;  famine  dis-
tricts, 244;  government,  91;
Hamitic  influence,  80;  hospita-
lity, 187;  huts,  78;  in  Ankole,
210;  in  Koki,  216;  killing  of  royal
persons,  86;  king's  carriers,  89;
king's  roads,  ib.;  losses  against
Sudanese,  175;  love  of  war,  105;
marriage  laws,  80,  94,  95 ;  mental
qualities  and  courage,
method  of  promotion,  90;
hammedan,  defeat  of,  131;  Nu-
bian influence,  79;  offenders,  91 ;
politeness,  69;  porters,  195;
princesses,  85, 86 ;  Queen-mother,
87;  rebels  in  S.  Uganda,  176;


278


INDEX


religion,  134;  return  of  Islamic,
122;  rights  of  peasants,  181;
royal  enclosure,  88;  royal  suc-
cession, 84,  85;  sanitation,  78;
seize  Banyoro  land,  251;  slaves,
93;  social  order,  77;  taxation,
93;  Totemic  rules,  80;  use  of
ivory,  98

Bageshu,  234;  cannibals,  236;  clan
rules,  238;  clothing,  237;  danger-
ous to  white  men,  234 ;  huts,  238 ;
initiation  ceremonies,  237;  said
to  be  treacherous,  236;  stores,
238;  try  to  keep  out  Europeans,

234

Bahera,  209
Bahima  (orBanyankole),  208;  allied

to  Banyoro,  ib.;  clothing,  211;

morality,  213
Baislamu, Mohammedans called,

109
Bakedi,  help  Basoga,  246;  or  naked

people,  228
Bakene,  speak  Luganda,  226;  hut,

building,  ib.
Baker,  Sir  Samuel,  251
Bangareza,  the  English  party,  109
Bantu,  lake  dwellers,  223;  tribes  in

Unyamwezi,  16;  tribes  on  Lake

Victoria,  54

Banyankole  (or  Bahima},  208
Banyoro,  the,  203 ;  Bahima  allied  to,

208; clothing, 260; food, 259;

idea  of  spirit  world,  254;  land,

Baganda seize, 251; morality,

203,  256;  only  want  pasture  land,

251*  people  of  Koki  related  to,

219;  sanitary  arrangements,  259
Barega,  the,  202
—  country, admission refused,

202

Bargash,  Sayid,  i

Bark-cloth,  99,  221 ;  cleansing,  221 ;
for  clothing,  182;  fumigating,
221 ;  in  Sango,  ib.

Barter  goods,  4,  12

Basese,  the,  60,  61,  63;  canoes,  62;
fishermen,  63

Basketry,  221

Basoga,  at  Uganda  court,  246;
dwellings,  247;  extract  three
teeth,  ib. ',  indolence  of,  245 ;  seek
help  from  Bateso,  246;  speak  Lu-
ganda, 247

Bateso,  a  Nilotic  tribe,  228;  at  war,
232;  help  Basoga,  246;  huts,
228;  land,  ib.',  religion,  ib.',
youths,  teaching  of,  235

Bavuma,  the,  60,  61;  markets,  248;
Mutesa  and  the,  61


Beer-drinking,  191;  gatherings  for,
241

Beer,  ends  council  meetings,  248;
for  public  meetings,  184

Beer- tubes,  241

Behaviour  of  king's  pages,  118

Bicycle  journey,  207

Bicycling,  accidents,  218;  by  moon-
light, 208 ;  in  Teso,  234

Binns,  Archdeacon,  275

Birth-rate,  169

Bishop  of  East  Africa,  275

Bitterness  of  political  hatred,  125

Boundaries  of  Ankole,  208

Bribing  prison  guards,  189

Bride,  Wamegi,  22-23

Bridges,  rope,  9;  Uganda,  78-79  '

Bridging  rivers,  197

Britain,  takes  over  Uganda,  124

British,  drive  away  Nandi,  266 ;  Ka-
barega  and,  251 ;  lack  of  arms  and
ammunition,  175

—  Government, abolish king's
ownership,  209;  readjustment  of
chieftainships  by,  194

—  Mission,  teaching  at,  109

—  officer,  Busoga  under,  245
Brother,  duties  of,  144
Budo  python  worship,  145

Budu,  221;  iron  in,  ib.;  opened  up,

133

Building,  Bakene  hut,  226;  mater-
ials, 194

Buildings,  duration  of,  194

Bukoba,  French  mission  station,  101

Bukulu,  138

Bunyoro,  agricultural  tribe  in,  250 ;
Ankole  in  fear  of,  ib.;  cattle  in,
203;  Christians  flee  to,  107;  go-
vernment, 261 ;  iron-working
learnt  from,  220;  king  of,  177;
native  capital,  260;  old  kingdom
of,  250;  people  of ,  203 ;  physical
features,  258;  rebel  king  of,  176;
roads,  260;  salt  in,  261;  state  in
Busoga,  246;  Toro  a  part  of,  199

—  kings, tribes pay tribute to,
250

Burglary,  190

Burial,  Christian,  148;  of  Hanning-
ton,  115;  of  human  sacrifices,
148;  of  king,  252;  of  Mutesa,  106;
of  women,  148;  royal,  149

—  customs,  142,  148;  Ankole,  214;
Baganda,  81; Kavirondo, 263;
Wamegi,  26

—  grounds,  Baganda,  83,  84;  clan,
148

Busambiro,  Christians  flee  to,  107
Bushiri,  the  Arab  chief,  39


INDKX


279


it  public  nx-.'tings,  184
,.i. H;iK.uid.i
Bunyoro  state  in,  246 ;  (  1
lire to, 107; famine in,
journey from Elgon to,
plantations,  248;  releasing  ghost,
264;  river  dwellers  came  from,
226;  robber  from,  232;  state  of
Christianity in, 248; taxation,
246; three states, 245; under
British  officer,  ib. ;  under  Uganda,
247;  women  refuse  to  cultivate
land,  244

Calico,  introduction  of,  221

Camp  guard,  the,  15

Camping  ground,  14

Cannibal  Bageshu,  236

—  custom  of  filing  teeth,  201

Cannibalism,  ceremonial,  236

Cannibals,  in  Semliki  Valley,  200

Canoe,  aground  on  Lake  Victoria,
68;  journey  by,  64;  v.  steamer,
72

Canoes,  248;  Basese,  62;  in  a  storm,
66;  native,  62;  on  Kioga,  227

Cape  Town,  2

Capital,  of  Bunyoro,  native,  260;
of  Uganda,  192

Care,  of  fetishes,  146;  of  graves,  143

Carrying  weapons  in  assembly,  211

Cattle,  all  belong  to  king,  209;  and
herdsmen,  216;  disease,  257,  266;
guarding  the,  216;  in  Ankole,
208;  in  Bunyoro,  203;  in  future
life,  251;  -kraals,  216;  must  not
be  sold,  212;  must  not  leave
tribe,  ib.;  prospects  of  rearing,
258;  transactions,  212;  Wamegi,
18,  19;  wealth  estimated  by,

251

-  plague,  53 ;  and  the  Masai,  267
Causes  of  famine,  244
Caves  on  Elgon,  236;  use  of,  240
Cemetery  at  Frere  Town,  274
Central  Relief  Camp,  243
Ceremonial  cannibalism,  236
Ceremonies,  New  Moon,  186
Cessation  of  cultivation,  170
Change  from  polygamy to  mono-
gamy, 179

Changes  in  Mombasa,  274
Character  of  Mwanga,  115,  116
Chief,  artisans  of,  193;  enclosure  of,
192; managers  of, 185; repre-
sentative of,  ib. ;  visits  his  estate,
1 88;  waterway  of,  225
Chiefs,  appointing,  212;  at  famine
relief  camps,  243;  deposing,  212;
duties  of,  91,  92;  dwellings  in  the


country, 192;  execution  ol  de-
pos<  .M  wars  o!

-,4;  power  of,  1 88,
212;
Child  ..ut  limbs,  158.  •

•  l.iiin.-d  1^5

Childless  \\idow,  215
Children,  lake,  227;  of  the  clan,  164;

nt  \V. un-
Christian  burial,  148
Christianity, and Luba, 24-.
Ankole,  209;  in  Busoga,  248
Christians,  Baganda,  171;  dispersal
of, 107; flee to Busambiro,
Ankole,  Busoga,  Bunyoro,  107;
Mwanga's  promise  to,  109;  per-
secution under Mwanga, 106,
114;  support  Mwanga,  109
Church,  problems  before  the,  170
Circumcision,  Kiwewa  refuses,  107
Clan,  burial  grounds,  148;  children
of  the,  164;  enmity,  241;  father
of  the,  140;  members,  rights  of,
162;  membership,  161,  162,  164;
third  child  claimed  by  mother's,
165;  women  join  husband's,  164

—  gods,  135,  136,  139;  consulting,
141;  offerings  to,  140,  141

—  rules,  Bageshu,  238

Clans,  king  and  prohibited,  167;
origin  of,  162,  163

Classification  of  gods,  135

Cleanliness,  Baganda,  77-78

Cleansing  bark-cloth,  221

Climate  of  Nairobi,  260

Climbing  Mau  escarpment,  272

Clothing,  182;  and  morality,  183;
Baganda,  77;  Bageshu,  237;
Bahuma,  211;  Banyoro,  260;
considered  indecent,  262;  intro-
duction of,  182;  Kikuyu,  271;
morality  of,  233;  of  agricultural
tribes,  260;  Wamegi,  27

Clove  plantations,  10

Cocoa,  210,  267,  270

Coffee,  210,  270

Collecting  taxes,  245

Communism,  164

Consulting  clan  gods,  141

Conversion,  of  Kabarega,  177;  of
Kamswaga,  219

Cook,  Dr  A.  R.,  173

Cook,  Dr  J.  H.,  173

Cooking  food  in  hot  springs,  201

Cotton,  267,  270

—  gcods, introduced by Arabs,
193

—  growing,  in  Ankole,  210;  inTeso,

231
Council,  Luba's,  247


280


INDEX


Council  meetings,  beer  ends,  248

Counting,  101

Courage  of  Baganda,  171

Court  of  dead  king,  151

Courts,  royal,  211

Cowry-shells,  as  currency,  193

Creator,  136,  137

Crocodiles,  65;  sacred,  155

Crossing,  rivers,  8;  swamps,  196

Cultivation,  cessation  of,  170;
methods  of,  260;  not  allowed
during  wars,  254

Currency,  193;  Baganda,  97;  cowry-
shells,  193 ;  glass  beads,  ib. ;  ivory
discs,  ib.\  pearl  discs,  ib.

Customs  of  early  Egypt  and  Uganda,
82

Danger,  from  wild  animals,  234;  of
Missionaries  in  Budu,  112;  of
rapid  change  from  old  customs,
170

Daudi  Chwa,  education  of,  177;
king  of  Uganda,  ib.

Dead,  worship  of,  263
—  rats  and  plague,  158

Dealing  with  natives,  mistakes  in,
265

Death,  of  Kalema,  122;  of  Kibuka,
137;  of  the  king,  2 1 4 ;  of  Kiwewa,
107;  of  Mutesa,  105;  of  G.  L.
Pilkington,  176;  of  Queen  Vic-
toria, 76;  of  Selim  Bey,  132;
from  fear,  160

Defeat,  of  Kabarega,  252;  of  Mo-
hammedans, 109;  of  Moham-
medan party,  131

Deification,  of  god  of  plague,  158;
of  kings,  139,  149

Departure,  of  French  missionaries,
129;  of  Sir  Gerald  Portal,  127

Deposed  chiefs,  execution  of,  211

Deposing  chiefs,  212

Descent,  patrilineal,  161;  royal,
167

Deserting  porters,  7

Difficulties,  of  native  labour,  181;
surgical,  174

Disarming,  rebel  troops,  130;  troops
in  Entebe,  132

Disease  and  tribal  intercourse,  266

Dispensary,  the  Wellcome,  173

Dispersal  of  Christians,  107

Disposal  of  umbilical  cord  and
placenta,  152

District  Commissioner  on  Mt.  Elgon,
235

Division  of  land,  209 ;  in  Toro,  204
-  of  the  year,  186

Draining  swamps,  196


Dress,  materials,  182;  of  a  prince,

21 1 ;  women's,  213
Dressing  skins,  the  art  of,  182
Drum,  eating  a,  157;  fetishes,  156;

to  announce  visitor,  187
Drums,  156;  sacred,  ib.
Dung,  fuel  of,  217
Dung  heap,  grave  in  the,  214
Duration  of  buildings,  194
Duties,  of  a  brother,  144;  of  chiefs,

93; of herdsman's wife, 217;

of  men,  170;  of  Prime  Minister,

191 ;  of  a  second  wife,  165
Dwellers,  on  Elgon,  240;  on  Lake

Kioga,  227
Dwellings  of  chiefs  in  the  country,

192

Ear-rings,  230

Earthquake,  god  of,  144

East  Africa,  bishop  of,  275

Eating  a  drum,  157

Education,  of  a  prince,  211;  of
Daudi  Chwa,  177

Egypt,  customs  of  Uganda  and,  82

Elephants,  198-9

Elgon,  caves  on,  236;  dwellers  on,
240;  journey  to  Busoga  from,
242;  Ormsby,  District  Commis-
sioner, 235 ;  use  of  caves  on,  240

Emblems  of  Mukasa,  138

Emin  Pasha,  113;  troops  of,  199

Engaging  porters,  4

Enmity  between  Bageshu  clans,  241

Equality  of  sexes,  239

Escape  of  sacrificial  victims, 153,

154.  155

Etiquette  of  public  courts,  181
European  rifles,  12
Europeans,  Bageshu  try  to  keep  out,

234

Exchange  of  prisoners,  41
Executioner,  155
Executions  of  deposed  chiefs,  211
Exile  kings  at  Seychelles,  176
Exogamy,  163,  238

Famine, causes  of, 244; districts,

Baganda  in,  ib.',  in  Busoga,  243
Fat  women,  203

Father,  of  the  clan,  140;  totem,  162
Fear, death  from, 160; of  magic,

147,  159,  160;  of  mutilation,  254
Feeding  royal  lion,  214
Female  ghosts,  143
Fertility  of  Uganda,  196
Fetish,  Mbajwe  the  great,  145
Fetishes,  134,  139,  145,  190;  care  of,

146;  drum,  156;  makers  of,  139,

146;  of  warriors,  145


INDEX


281


Fighting, between Christian and
Mohammedan  Baganda, i  ,i

—  fires,  125
Fines,  159

Fire  in  the  kraal,  217

Firearms  introduced  by  Arabs,  193

Fire-sticks,  254

Fires,  fighting, 125;  grass,  259;  in

grass  houses,  125 ;  put  out  during

wars,  254
First-born,  of  Kamswaga  lives,  219;

of  king  must  be  a  girl.  ib.
First steamer for Lake Victoria,

268

Fishermen,  Basese,  63
Fishing,  methods  of,  227
Flight,  fromMengo,  of  Mwanga,  116;

of  Mwanga  to  Budu,  176
Followed  by  lions,  208
Food,  Banyoro,  259;  for  prisoner,

189; of river-dwellers, 227;

shortage  of, 112; Wagogo,  44;

Wamegi,  21

Forms  of  clan  worship,  140
Freeing  the  slaves,  126
French,  and  English,  parties,  109;

party,  in  Budu,  122;  priests,  rob

mission  stores,  113

—  missionaries, 101 ; departure

of,  129

Frere  Town,  275 ;  cemetery  at,  274
Fuel  of  dung,  217
Fumigating  bark-cloth,  221
Future  life,  215;  cattle  in,  251;  king

in,  252;  king's  retinue  in,  253

Gallic  origin  of  kings,  82
Gatherings  for  beer-drinking,  241
German  occupation,  16,  36
Germans,  Arab  rising  against,  36;

keep  ransom  money,  40
Germany,  secret  treaty  with  Mwan-
ga, no

Ghost, and mutilation, 254; of  a
thief,  191;  pacification  of,  142;
precautions  against  return  of,  154
-  worship,  134,  237
Ghostly  possession,  148

—  punishment,  fear  of,  183
Ghosts,  141,  144;  can  be  detained,

263;  female,  143;  of  common
people,  253;  releasing,  264;
royal,  253

Gifts  from  Luba,  249
Girl,  king's  first-born  must  be  a,  219
Girls,  High  School  for,  178
Glass  beads  as  currency,  193
Goats,  of  river-dwellers,  226;  use  of,

258
God  of  earthquake,  144


of l.;ik.- Yi '

—  of  plague,  157;  abode  of,  158;
banished t«. Buioga,

of,  157;  deification  of.

of,  i  ij>  of,  158

—  of  plenty,  137

—  of  rain,  144

—  of  war,  137

Gods,  clan,  135,  136,  139;  classifica-
tion of,  135;  cause  sleeping  sick-
ness, 257;  maids  of  the,
Musisi  father  of,  137;  national,
J35»  136,  139;  nature,  135,  144;
on  earth,  137;  origin  of,  135,  136,
137,  138,  140

Goods  train,  travelling  by,  273

Gordon,  104

Gospels  in  Teso  language,  228

Government,  Baganda,  91 ;  Bun-
yoro,  261;  headquarters  of,  268;
move  to  Nairobi,  274;  native,
181;  Wagogo,  43;  Wamegi,  23,
28-29

Grain  stores,  254

Grass  fires,  259

—  houses,  fires  in,  125

Grave,  in  the  dung  heap,  214;  of

king,  ib.

Graves,  care  of,  143
Guardians  of  a  woman,  164
Guarding, the cattle, 216; the

harem,  165
Gulu,  the  heavens,  137

Hair  and  nail  clippings,  165
Hairdresser,  168

Hamitic  influence  on  Baganda,  80
Hannington,  Bishop,  247 ;  burial  of,

115;  murder  of ,  114,  248;  Semler

ordained  by,  276
Hannington- Parker Memorial

Church,  275

Harem,  guarding  the,  165
Hats,  263

Headquarters  of  Government,  268
Hemp,  smoking  Indian,  249
Herdsman,  and  his  favourite  cow,

116;  wife  of,  her  duties,  217
Herdsmen,  and  cattle,  21 6;  and  lions,

204;  pay  of,  217;  work  of,  ib.
Hero  gods,  I35-I41
Heroism  of  Maj.  Macdonald,  130
Highwaymen,  49-50
High  School  for  girls,  178
Hippopotami,  198
Home  life,  attempts  to  promote,  1 79
Honour  not  paid  to  women,  254
Hooper,  Mr  D.,  41
Hospital,  native,  173
Hospitality,  Baganda,  187;  change


282


INDEX


in  custom  of,  188;  laws  of,  257;
to  missionaries,  195

Hot  springs,  Luenzori,  201 ,  203

Houses,  Wagogo,  43

Human  sacrifice,  26;  burial  of,  148;
methods  of,  154,  156;  occasion
of,  152,  153

Hunters,  Wakamba,  271

Huntley  and  Palmer,  royal  bakers,
119

Hut,  Bakene,  226

Huts,  Baganda,  78;  Bageshu,  238;
Basoga,  247;  Bateso,  228,  229;
Kikuyu,  271;  native,  216;  of
agricultural  people,  259 ;  of  papy-
rus, 224 ;  of  pastoral  people,  258 ;
on  lakes,  225;  on  rivers,  ib.;
Unyamwezi,  16;  Usagara,  17

Imperial  British  East  Africa  Coy.,

in  Uganda,  no;  bring  Sudanese

troops,  113

Imprisonment  in  Bagamoyo,  38—40
Inaccessibility  of  the  king,  186
Indecent,  clothing  considered,  262
Indian  hemp,  smoking,  115,  249
—  traders,  and  venereal  disease,

169

Indolence  of  Basoga,  245
Industrial  school  for  women,  203
Influence of Lubare priests, on

Mwanga,  114,  115
Inheritance  of  property,  165
Initiation  ceremonies,  Bageshu,  237;

Wamegi,  24-25

Intellectual  superiority  of  Masai,  31
Introduction,  of  agriculture  in  Koki,

219;  of  calico,  221;  of  clothing,

182;  of  monogamy,  169
Iron,  in  Koki,  220;  ore,  in  Budu,  221
Iron  workers,  in  Koki,  220
Iron  working,  learnt  from  Bunyoro,

220

Islamic  persecution,  107
Ivory  discs,  as  currency,  193
Ivory,  use  of,  98

Jawbone  of  Mutesa,  106
iggers,  129
ourney,  by  canoe,  64 ;  from  Ankole
through  Koki,  215;  from  Elgon
to  Busoga, 242;  to  Ankole  by
bicycle, 207; to  Toro, 195;  to
Uganda,  75
Jungo,  138

Kabaka,  167

Kabarega,  rebel  king  of  Bunyoro,
176;  and  the  British,  251;  at
Seychelles,  252;  betrayed,  ib.;


conversion  of,  177;  defeated,
252;  raids  Uganda,  ib.

Kabega,  little  princess,  168

Kadulubare,  little  slave  of  the  gods,
145,  168

Kagwa,  Sir  Apolo,  the  Prime  Minis-
ter, 172,  177

Kakungulu,  Muganda  chief  in  Teso,

234

Kalema,  King,  107;  and  the  land,
1 08;  death  of.  122

Kalimera,  220

Kamswaga,  conversion  of,  219;  his
first-born  lives,  ib.

Karagwe,  60,  62

Kasagama,  King  of  Toro,  199;  his
capital,  200

Katikiro,  131

Katonda,,  the  Creator,  136,  137

Kavirondo,  262;  burial  customs,
263;  paint  themselves,  ib.;  rain-
maker, ib.;  worship  of  dead,  ib.

Kawonawo,  the  one  who  was  spared,

155

Khartoum, Sudanese  troops  from,

H3

Kibuka,  god  of  war,  137;  death  of,  ib.

Kikuyu,  270;  artisans, 271 ;  clothing,
ib.;  huts,  ib.;  semi-pastoral,  270

Kilimanjaro,  discovery  of,  274

Killing  thieves,  191

Kimbugwe,  revival  of,  194

King,  admitting  a  visitor  to,  187;
and  prohibited  clans,  167;  deifi-
cation of,  139, 149;  equal  to  gods,
135;  Gallic  origin,  82;  has  to
marry  subject,  210;  head  of
religion,  186;  inaccessibility  of
the,  ib.;  in  future  life,  252;  must
be  a  warrior,  250;  must  end  his
life,  252;  must  not  be  ill,  ib.;
never  dies,  149;  owns  all  cattle,
209;  rebirth  of,  as  lion,  214

—  god,  temple  of,  150

—  of  Bunyoro,  177;  new,  252
King's attendants in court, 183;

bodyguard,  184;  burial,  149;
burial,  sacrifices  at,  252;  carriers,
63,  89;  death,  214;  first-born
must  be  a  girl,  219;  grave,  214;
knowledge  of  his  kingdom,  184;
life,  ending,  87,  88;  mother,  168;
ownership  abolished  by  British
Government,  209;  pages,  teach-
ing of,  101;  Port,  63,  89;  relics,
139;  retinue,  118;  retinue  in
future  life,  253;  roads,  89;  rug,
181;  seat,  182;  special  shrine,
151;  sons  all  eligible  for  throne,
1 68;  spirit  attendants,  149;  twin


INDEX


283


at  New  Moon  ceremonies,  186;

it to temple, 152; \vi(.
comes  leopard,  214;  wives,  \(>j,
1 68

Kintu,  the  first  man,  137,  138;
relics,  139

Kioga,  Lake,  223;  canoes  on,  227;
dwellers  on,  ib.

Kirk,  Sir  John,  i

Kiwewa,  deposed,  107;  position  of,
128;  refuses  circumcision,  107;
death  of,  ib.

Koki,  agriculture  in,  219;  and  Ugan-
da Church,  ib.;  iron  in,  220;  iron
workers  in,  ib.;  journey  through,
215;  Mohammedan  Baganda  in,
216;  now  a  State  of  Uganda,
218;  people  of,  related  to  Ban-
yoro,  219

-  Lake,  216
Kraal  fire,  217
Kraals,  216

Krapf,  arrival  of,  274

Labour,  difficulties  of  native,  181;

pastoral  tribes  and,  256
Lake  children,  227

-  huts,  225,  227
—  shrines,  227

Land,  Baganda  distribution  of,  83;

Baganda seize Banyoro, 251;

Banyoro  only  want  pasture,  ib.;

Bateso, 228; division  in  Toro,

204; division  of, 209; pastoral

tribes  and,  250;  women  till  the,

170

Laws  of  hospitality,  257
Learning  to  write,  180
Leopard,  a  royal  totem,  167;  hunt,

159;  king's  wife  becomes  a,  214
Levirate  custom,  215
Life,  in  the  future,  215;  of  settlers,

269
Lion,  a  royal  totem, 167;  feeding

royal,  214;  rebirth  of  king  as,  ib.
Lions,  and  herdsmen,  204 ;  followed

by,  208;  priest  of  the,  214
Lipstones,  230,  238
Livingstone,  i,  13
Loyal  natives,  130
Luba,  247;  and  Christianity,  249;

and  murder  of  Hannington,  248;

his council, 247; his country,

243; his country belonged to

Uganda,  246;  his  gifts,  249;  his

wives,  247
Lubare priests, and missionaries,

104,  106;  and  Mwanga,  114,  115
Luenzori, 195; hot springs, 201;

serfs  like  Bunyoro  serfs,  260


Lugand.i

K;I  speak,  247
Lugard,  Captain,  199
Lunyoro,  S].I.].:«-M  m  Toro,  200

Macdonald, Major,  and the  rebel-
lious troops,  128,  130;  as  Hi ;
representative,  127;  heroism  of,
130;  in  Entebe,  132

Mackay,  104,  107

Magic,  fear  of,  147,  159,  160

Magistrates,  188

Maids  of  the  gods,  146

Maize,  20

Makers  of  fetishes,  139,  146

Man,  origin  of,  136

Managers,  chief's,  185

March,  arranging  the,  7

Markets,  248

Marriage,  customs,  Wamegi,  21-23;
forbidden  to  princesses,  168;
laws,  Baganda,  80,  94,  95;  of
king,  210;  of  temple  widows,  150;
restrictions,  161,  162

Masai,  34;  and  cattle  plague,  267;
become  docile,  ib.;  intellectual
superiority,  31;  raiders,  30-31;
troops  guard  railway,  267

—  country,  settlers  in,  267
Mat-making,  133
Materials  for  dress,  182

Mau  escarpment,  272;  climbing,  ib.

Mayanja,  the,  197

Mbagwe,  the  great  fetish,  145

Mbarara,  capital  of  Ankole,  215

Mboga,  brother  of  Mutesa,  127

Meaning  of  Mirembe,  108

Medicine-men,  146;  Wamegi,  26

Mediums,  136,  140;  royal,  151

Memory  of  natives,  188

Men's  duties,  170

Mental  qualities  and  courage  of
Baganda,  171

Meteoric  stone,  138,  140

Methods,  of  cultivation,  260;  of
fishing,  227;  of  human  sacrifice,
154-156;  of  robbery,  249;  of
selecting  human  sacrifices,  153;
of  thieves,  190

Military  service,  193

Milk,  and  vegetable  food,  212;  diet,
ib.;  taboos,  255;  tradition,  163

—  customs, 219, 255; and agri-
culture, 210;  Wamegi,  18

Millet,  20,  205,  244,  260;  planting,

260;  porridge  from,  235
Mirambo,  king  of  Unyamwezi,  58
Mirembe,  meaning  of,  108
Mission  Schools,  275
Missionaries,  and  Lubare  priests,  1 04 ,


284


INDEX


106;  and  Mwanga,  104,  106;  ar-
rival in  Uganda,  101,  102;  attend
wounded,  1 1 1 ;  French,  in  Ugan-
da, 101;  in  Budu,  112;  Stanley's
appeal  for,  101;  workby  night,  104

Missionary,  murder  of  a,  36

Mistakes  in  dealing  with  natives,  265

Mohammedan  Baganda,  in  Koki,
216;  join  the  Sudanese,  127

Mohammedans,  defeat  of,  109

Mombasa,  268;  changes  in,  274;
fort,  9 ;  native  town,  275 ;  railway
from,  124

Monogamy,  change  to,  179;  intro-
duction of,  169;  results  of,  169

Moon,  the,  186

Morality,  among  Bahuma,  213;
among  Banyoro,  203, 256;  among
Wagogo,  43;  among  Wahumba,
30;  among  Wamegi,  29;  and
clothes,  183,  233;  in  different
tribes,  233;  standards  of,  183

Mortality,  reducing  infant,  169

Mosquitoes,  220,  226

Mother,  king's,  168;  totem  of,  162

Mount  Kenia,  270  .

Mountain  of  the  Moon,  195

Mpologoma  River,  223

Mugwanya,  122

Mukasa,  the  god  of  the  Lake,  67;
emblems  of,  138;  temples  of,  ib.

Murder,  of  a  missionary,  36;  of
Hannington,  114;  of  Hanning-
ton,  Luba  and,  248

Murderer  made  taboo,  264

Music,  native,  55

Musisi,  father  of  gods,  137;  god  of
plenty,  ib.

Mutesa,  king  of  Uganda,  58;  and  the
Arab  trader,  102;  and  the  Ba-
vuma,  61;  and  missionaries,  101,
1 02,  103;  and  soldier  chiefs,  90;
and  traders,  63;  burial  of,  106;
death  of,  105;  jawbone  of,  ib.;
jealousy  of,  103

Mutilation,  147,  166,  174;  and  the
ghost,  254;  fear  of,  ib.

Mwanga,  and  the  Bible,  114;  and
the  biscuits,  119;  and  Hanning-
ton, 247 ;  and  mission  stores,  113;
and  missionaries,  104,  106;  and
the  hostile  parties,  106;  as  a
pupil,  115;  character  of,  115,
1 1 6 ;  Christians  persecuted  under,
106,  114;  Christians  support,
109;  deported  to  Seychelles,  116;
flees  from  Arabs,  107;  flees  to
Bukoba,  109;  flight  from  Mengo,
116;  flight  to  Budu,  176;  his
guard  of  wives,  166;  his  promises


to  Christians,  109;  in  Budu,
in;  influence  of  Lubare  priests,
114,  115;  invites  I.B.E.A.  Co.
into  Uganda,  no;  plain  talk  to,
114;  return  of,  109,  113;  Roman
Catholic  influence  on,  109;  second
flight  of,  in;  secret  treaty  with
Germany,  no;  sons  of,  177;
weakness  of,  105,  106

Nail  and  hair  clippings,  165
Nairobi,  268;  climate,  ib.;  Govern-
ment move  to,  274
Nalinya,  the  widowed  queen,  150
Nandi,  driven  away  by  British,  266
Nasaza,  hairdresser,  168
National  gods,  135,  136,  139
Native buildings, sanitary condi-
tions, 194

—  capital  of  Bunyoro,  260

—  government,  181

—  huts,  216

—  Mombasa,  275

—  music,  55

—  schools,  178

Natives,  mistakes  in  dealing  with,

265;  training  of,  257
Nature  gods,  135,  144;  wives  of  the,

144

Neglect  of  plantains,  244
New  king  of  Bunyoro,  252

—  Moon  ceremonies,  186
Nikodemu  Sebwato,  112,  132
Nilotic  Bateso,  228

—  Kavirondo,  262

—  tribe,  223

—  tribes,  34;  on  Victoria,  265
Nomination  for  offices,  181
Nubian  influence  among  Baganda,

79

Occasion  of  human  sacrifice,  152, 153
Offerings  to  clan  gods,  140,  141
Offices,  nomination  for,  181
Open  house  kept  by  Prime  Minister,

187

Oracle,  preparation  of,  151
Ordeal,  trial  by,  120
Origin,  of  clans,  162,  163;  of  gods,
135,  136,  137,  138,  140;  of  man,
136;  of  totems,  163
Ormsby,  D.  C.  on  Elgon,  235
Ornaments,  230;  Wagogo,  45;  Wa-
megi, 27

Outlet  for  smoke,  226
Oxen,  riding,  262

Pacification  of  ghost,  142

Pacifying  a  tribe,  175

Paint  themselves,  Kavirondo,  263


INDEX


285


Papyrus, 223, 22.\: bridge, 197;

home  of  the,  196;  huts,  224
Pastoral  country,  215

—  customs,  in  Toro,  200

—  people,  huts  of,  258

—  tribes, ancestry of, 139; and
agriculture, 257; and labour,
256;  and  land,  250

Pasture, Banyoro  only  want  land

for,  257

Paths,  spiking,  202
Patrilineal  descent,  161
Pay  of  herdsmen,  217
Paying  porters,  4
Peace,  season  of,  241
Pearl  discs  as  currency,  193
Peasants  betray  Kabarega,  252
Pemba  Island,  10
Penalty  for  a  sneeze,  182
Perpetuation  of  temple  offices,  150
Perseverance  of  missionaries,  103
Physical  features,  of  Ankole,  209;

of  Bunyoro,  258;  of  Teso,  230;

of  Uganda,  78

Pigmies,  202 ;  as  warriors,  202
Pilkington,  death  of,  1 76
Plague,  dead  rats  and,  158;  god  of,

157

Plain  talk  to  Mwanga,  114
Plantains,  neglect  of,  244
Plantations,  clove,  10 ;  inBusoga,  248
Planting  millet,  260
Plenty,  god  of,  137
Poisoned  arrows,  202,  271
Politeness,  Baganda,  69
Political  dissensions,  no

—  hatred,  125
Polyandry,  203,  212,  256
Polygamy,  212
Porridge  from  millet,  205

Portal,  Sir  Gerald,  arrival  of,  124;
departure  of,  127

Porters,  Baganda,  195;  deserting,  7;
engaging,  47  of  Wanyamwezi
and  Wasakuma,  54;  paying,  4;
Swahili,  6,  9,  37,  48,  129;  taken
for  troops  in  Kavirondo,  175

Position  of  Kiwewa,  128

Power  of  chiefs,  188,  212

Precautions  against  return  of  ghost,

154

Preparation  of  an  oracle,  151
Priest  of  the  lions,  214
Priests,  135
Prime  Minister,  duties  of,  191 ;  keeps

open  house,  187
Prince,  education  of  a,  211;  dress

of,  ib.
Princes, fight  for  throne,  254;  become

pythons,  214;  of  Ankole,  210


must  be  a.

I 'illnesses, Baganda, 8s

bidden  b  i'>K;  murdered

by  A

bribing,  189

l'ii(  niers,  exchange  <

Problem  before  the  c  him  h,  170

Products  of  Uganda,  270

Progress  under  Sir  Apolo  Kagwa,
172

Promise,  Africa  a  land  of,  276

Property,  inheritance  of,  165

Prospects  of  cattle-rearing,  258

Prosperity  in  Uganda,  123

Protecting  houses  against  robbers,
249

Protection  against  thieves,  190

Protestants  in  the  French  party,  109

Public  courts,  etiquette  of,  181
—  meetings, 181; absence from,
185;  beer  for,  184;  business  at,
ib. ;  value  of,  ib.

Punishment,  fear  of  ghostly,  183;
for  adultery,  166,  189;  for  look-
ing at  a  chief's  wife,  166;  of
quarrelsome  wife,  213

Punishments,  189

Purchasing  a  wife,  212

Python  worship,  145

Pythons,  princes  become,  214

Quality  of  salt,  261

Quarrelsome  wife,  punishment  of  a,

213

Queen  must  be  a  princess,  167
—  Victoria,  death  of,  76
Queen's  residence,  167

Rabai,  Redman  at,  274

Raiders,  from  Abyssinia,  240 ;  Masai,

30-31

Raids  on  Uganda,  252

Railroad,  the,  266

Railway  from  Mombasa,  124

Rain,  god  of,  144

Rain-maker,  Kavirondo,  263 ;  treat-
ment of  unsuccessful,  239

Rain-making,  228,  239;  Uganda,
136;  Wamegi,  26

Rains,  the,  186

Ransom  money  kept  by  Germans,  40

Readjustment  of  chieftainships  by
British  Government,  194

Rebels,  disarming,  130;  in  S.  Ugan-
da, 176

Rebirth  of  king  as  lion,  214

Recall  of  I.B.E.A.  officers,  123

Redman  at  Rabai,  274

Reducing  infant  mortality,  169

Regents  for  young  king,  177


286


INDEX


Reincarnation,  143;  belief  in,  81
Relationships,  161,  162
Releasing  ghosts,  264
Relics,  of  kings,  139;  of  Kintu,  ib.
Religion,  Baganda,  134 ;  Bateso,  228 ;

king  the  head  of,  186
Religious  ceremonies,  134

—  festivals,  138

Removal,  of  Mboga,  132; of Selim

Bey,  132

Removing  evil  from  the  king,  156
Representative  appointed  by  a  chief,

185

Residence,  queen's,  167
Results  of  enforced  monogamy,  169
Return,  of  Islamic  Baganda, 122;

of  Mwanga,  113;  of  Selim  Bey  to

Entebe,  131

Revival  of  Kimbugwe,  194
Rhetorical  power  of  natives,  188
Riding  oxen,  262
Right  of  appeal,  189
Rights, of  clan  members, 162; of

peasants,  181
Rings  in  chest,  230
Ripon  Falls,  59-60
Rising  of  Sudanese,  174
River  crossings,  8

—  dwellers, came from Busoga,
226;  food  of,  227;  goats  of,  226

—  huts,  225
Rivers,  bridging,  197
Road-making  as  taxation,  193
Roads,  193;  Bunyoro,  260;  Uganda,

78-79

Robbers,  methods  of,  249 ;  protecting
houses  against,  ib.

Robbery,  231

Roman  Catholic  influence  on  Mwan-
ga, 109

Rope-bridges,  9

Royal  brewers,  184

—  burial  ceremony,  149

—  courts  in  Ankole,  211

—  descent,  167

—  enclosure,  Baganda,  88

—  Engineers  enter  Uganda,  124

—  family  of  Toro,  200

—  ghosts,  253

—  marriage,  210

—  mediums,  151

—  spears,  184

—  succession,  Baganda,  84,  85

—  totemic  animals,  182

—  totems,  167

—  visit,  118
Rubber,  267,  270

—  growing  in  Ankole,  210;  in  Teso,
231

Rug,  the  king's,  182


Sacred  crocodiles,  155
—  drums,  156
-  plantains,  152

Sacrifices,  at  king's  burial,  252;  oc-
casion of  human,  152,  153

Sacrificial  wine,  154

Sadaani,  5

Salt,  209 ;  a  luxury,  1 1 7 ;  in  Bunyoro,
261 ;  quality  of,  ib.

Salt-making,  201,  261

Sandals,  182

Sango,  bark-cloth,  221

Sanitary  arrangements  among  Ban-
yoro,  259

—  conditions  of  native  buildings,

194

—  improvements,  132
Sanitation, Baganda, 78; Unyam-

wezi,  1 6

Scarcity  of  English  provisions,  117

Schools,  mission,  275;  native,.  178

Season  of  peace,  241

Seasons,  Usagara,  20

Seat  of  the  king,  182

Second  flight  of  Mwanga,  in

Secret  treaty  between  Mwanga  and
Germany,  no

Selim  Bey,  127,  131;  death  of,  132;
removal  of,  ib.;  returns  to  En-
tebe, 131;  threatened  attack  by,
ib.

Selling  cattle  and  milk  prohibited,
213

Sembera  Mackay,  murder  of,  in

Semler,  Rev.  I.,  276

Semliki,  west  side,  206

—  river,  206

—  valley,  cannibals  in,  200 ;  tribes
in,  202

Serfs  in  Bunyoro  like  Luenzori,  260

Service,  military,  193

Settlers,  life  of,  269;  in  Masai
country,  267

Sewing  done  by  men,  178

Sexes,  equality  of,  239

Seychelles,  Kabarega  at,  252 ;  Mwan-
ga at,  116;  rebel  kings  at,  176

Shortage,  of  food,  112;  of  women  on
the  land,  181

Shrine,  king's,  151

Shrines,  on  Lake  Kioga,  227

Silasi  Mugwanya,  177

Sites  in  native  capital,  192

Skins,  the  art  of  dressing,  182

Slaves,  9,  95;  Baganda,  93;  chains
for,  12;  the  taming  stick,  13;
freeing,  126;  treatment  of  freed,
ib.

Slave-market,  Zanzibar,  9

—  markets,  10


INDKX


Sl.iv.-  i,  12

-  ships,  IO

—  trader,  12.

—  traders,  Ar.il>.  <»
Sleeping  licknen,  73;  due  to

of  gods,  257,  266;  introduced  1>\
Stanley's  followers,  266

Siii:-s  for  stone-throwing,  248

Smallpox. I5'>.

Smoke,  outlet  for,  226

Smoking  Indian  hemp,  249

Sneeze,  penalty  for  a,  182

Soap-making,  133

Social  benefits  of  totemism,  164

—  order,  Baganda,  77
Sons  of  Mwanga,  177
Spears,  royal,  184
Spectacles,  263
Spiking  paths,  202
Spirit,  water,  197

-  world,  Banyoro  idea  of,  254
Standards  of  morality,  183
Stanley's appeal for missionaries,

101; followers bring sleeping
sickness,  266;  maxim  gun,  129
State  labour,  244

-  of  Christianity,  in  Busoga,  248 ;
of  country  during  war,  255

States  of  Busoga,  245

Steamer  for  Lake  Victoria,  268

Steere,  Bishop,  10

Stocks,  189

Stone-throwing,  slings  for,  248

Stores,  Bageshu,  238;  for  grain,  254

Stranded  on  shore  of  Lake  Victoria,

i?5

Succession,  wars  of,  254
Sud  of  the  Nile,  196
Sudanese,  Baganda  losses  against,

175;  rising, 127;  second  rising,

J74

—  troops, 113; from Khartoum,
ib. ;  on  Lake  Albert,  199

Suicide  of  widows,  215

Suna  and  trade  restrictions,  63

Surgery,  147

Surgical  difficulties,  174

Survey  for  railway  from  Mombasa,

124
Swahili  escort,  37

-  porter,  6,  9,  37,  48

—  porters, 129; and the Masai,
34-35 ;  and  the  Wagogo,  48

Swamps,  crossing,  196;  draining,  ib.

Taboo  of  murderer,  264

Taboos,  milk,  255

Taxation, Baganda, 93; Busoga,

246;  of  agricultural  tribes,  250;

road-making  as,  193


-lien
i"  i  logo,  ,7-48

270

109;

Bat

29.
I  "tli, I'-isoga  extract  three,  247;

r.-mnikil  ;>  201

Telegraph  wires,  266
Temple  funds,  151

—  of  King  god,  150

—  offices,  perpetuation  of,  150

—  widows,  marriage  of,  150
Temples,  135;  of  Mukasa,  138
Terrible  journey,  a,  37-38

Teso,  Baganda  chiefs  in,  231,  234;
bicycling  in,  234 ;  cotton  gro -..
in,  231;  physical  features,  230;
rubber  growing  in,  231

—  language,  gospels  in,  228
Thank-offerings,  149,  155
Thief  from  Busoga,  232
Thieves,  killing  of,  191 ;  methods  of,

190;  protection  against,  ib.
Threatened  attack  by  Selim  Bey,  131
Threats  of  Sudanese  rising,  127,  128
Throne,  king's  sons  all  eligible,  168;

princes  fight  for,  254
Times'  correspondent,  129
Tongue  rings,  230
Toro,  a  part  of  Bunyoro,  199;  abori-
gines, 200, 205 ;  agricultural  clans,
204;  animals,  ib.;  capital,  200;
division of land,  204; journey
to,  195;  pastoral  customs,  200;
royal  family,  ib.

—  language,  200

Totem,  of  mother,  162;  of  father,  ib.
Totemic  animals,  royal,  182

—  rules,  Baganda,  80
Totemism, 162;  social  benefits  of

164

Totems,  origin  of,  163;  royal,  167
Traders,  Mutesa  and,  63;  Suna  and,

ib.

Training  natives,  257
Transactions  with  cattle,  212
Travelling  by  goods  train,  273
Treatment,  of  freed  slaves,  126;  of

unsuccessful  rain-maker,  239
Trial  by  ordeal,  120
Trials,  188
Tribal  disputes,  Wamegi,  28

—  intercourse  and  disease,  266
Tribe,  cattle  must  not  leave,  212
Tribes,  in  Semliki  Valley,  202;  pay

tribute  to  Bunyoro  kings,  250
Tribute from tribes to Bunyoro

kings,  250
Troops,  Masai,  267


288


INDEX


Twin,  king's,  at  New  Moon  cere-
monies, 1 86;  of  royalty,  152

Uganda,  69 ;  arrival  of  missionaries,
1 01,  102;  Britain  takes  over,  124;
Busoga  under,  247;  fertility  of,
196;  journey  from  the  coast,  75;
Kabarega  raids,  252;  Luba's
country  belonged  to,  246 ;  native
capital,  192;  native  hospital,
173;  physical  features,  78;  pro-
ducts of,  270;  railway,  14,  75-76;
rain-making,  136;  roads  and
bridges,  78,  79;  R.E.  in,  124

—  Church,  and  Koki,  219

—  court,  Basoga  at,  246

Ugogo,  plains,  42,  50-53;  taxes  on

travellers,  47-48
Unyamwezi,  16;  Bantu  tribes,  ib.;

huts,  ib. ;  sanitation,  ib.
Usagara,  17;  seasons,  20
Use  of  goats,  258

Value  of  public  meetings,  184

Vegetable  food  and  milk,  212

Venereal  disease,  169;  Indian  traders
and,  ib.

Victoria  Nyanza,  55,  74;  Bantu
tribes  on,  54;  discovery  of,  274;
first  steamer  for,  268;  god  of,
137;  islands,  57;  Nilotic  tribes
on,  265;  storms,  57,  70—72;
stranded  on  shore  of,  175

Victorious  prince  buries  king,  254

Villages,  Wakamba,  271

Volcanoes,  extinct,  202

Wagogo,  43;  appearance,  46;  food,
44;  Government,  43;  houses,  ib.;
morality,  ib.;  ornaments,  45;
Swahili  porters  and,  48

Wahumba,  30;  morality,  ib.

Wakamba,  30,  271 ;  agriculture,  272;
hunters,  271;  villages,  ib.

Walker,  104

Wamegi,  18-30;  agriculture,  19;
burial  customs,  26;  cattle,  18, 19;
children,  21;  clothing,  27;  food,
21 ;  Government,  23,  28-29;  ini-
tiation, 24-25 ;  marriage  customs,
21-23;  medicine-men,  26;  milk-
customs,  18;  morality,  29;  rain-
making,  26;  teaching  the,  29,
32;  tribal  disputes,  28;  women's
work,  25

Wanyamwezi,  54

War,  agriculture  during,  108;  Ba-
ganda  love  of,  105;  Bateso  at,


232;  between  French  and  Eng-
lish, in;  god  of,  137;  state  of
country  during,  255

Warrior,  king  must  be  a,  250

Warriors,  fetishes  of,  145;  pigmies
as,  202

Wars,  cultivation  not  allowed  during,
254;  fires  put  out  during,  ib.;  of
succession,  ib.

Wasakuma,  54

Watuturu,  55;  wells,  52

Water  spirit,  197-8

Waterway  of  chief,  225

Wealth  estimated  by  cattle,  251

Weapoas  in  assembly,  211

Wellcome  dispensary,  173

White  ants,  15

Widow,  childless,  215

Widows,  suicide  of,  215

Wife,  duties  of  a  second,  165;  of
herdsman,  duties  of,  217 ;  punish-
ment for  looking  at  chief's,  166;
punishment  of  a  quarrelsome,
213;  purchasing  a,  212;  waits  at
meals,  188

Wild  animals,  danger  from,  234

Williams,  Captain,  R.A.,  123

Wine,  sacrificial,  154

Wives,  as  guardians,  183;  king's,
167,  1 68;  Mwanga's  guard  of,
166;  of  Luba,  247;  of  the  nature
gods,  144

Woman,  the  food  provider,  169;
guardians  of  a,  164

Women,  ability  of  native,  180;
burial  of,  148;  cannot  walk  far,
213;  dress  of,  ib.;  industrial
school  for,  203;  in  Bunyoro,  ib.;
join  husband's  clan,  164;  receive
no  honour,  254;  refuse  to  culti-
vate land,  244;  resting,  213;
rulers,  17;  till  the  land,  170;
work  of  pastoral,  256;  work  of
Wamegi,  25

Work,  of  agricultural  tribes,  257;  of
herdsmen,  217;  of  native  chiefs,
171 ;  of  pastoral  women,  256

Worship,  forms  of  clan,  140;  of  dead,
228;  of  dead,  Kavirondo,  263;
of  god  of  plague,  158

Writing  unknown,  188


Year,  division  of  the,  186

Zakiriya  Kisingire,  177
Zanzibar, 3; Cathedral, 10;

market,  9
Ziba  country,  215


slave


CAMBRIDGE:  PRINTED  BY  j.  B.  PEACE,  M.A.,  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS


3


I

d ft

oi •£

§


i  «
-  •=


University  of  Toronto
Library

DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket

Uftdtr  Pmt  "Ref.  Udn  FU«-
Made  bj  LIBRARY  BUREAU
