A Voyage of Discovery and Research in the Southern and Antarctic Regions, Vol. I
James Clark Ross, 1847
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Ross's 1847 Erebus-and-Terror narrative, Vol. I — discovery of the Ross Sea, the Ross Ice Shelf, and the first Antarctic mainland landing debate. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/avoyagediscover02rossgoog). This 1847 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



Preservation facsimile 

printed on alkaline/buffered paper 

and bound by 

Acme Bookbinding 

Charlestown, Massachusetts 

2002 




HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



VOYAGE 



OF 



DISCOTERT AND RESEARCH 



m TBS 



SOUTHERN AND ANTARCTIC REGIONS, 



DX7BIKO THS TSAB8 1839 — 43. 



BT 

CAPTAIN SIR JAMES CLARK ROSS, RN- 

KKT., D.C.Ii« OXON>9 7Jl.8.f STC« 



WITH PLATU, MAPS, AND WOODCUTS. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 

VOL. L 



LONDON: 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 

1847. 




77^^ 



^^oj ^oo3. 3<j 




LOKDOM t 

SPOTTtswooDi and Sbaw, 
N«w-atrMC- Sqturt. 



MICROFILMED 
ATHARUltfV) 



TO 
THE BIGHT HONOOBABLB 

THE EARL OF MINTO, G.C.B. 

LOBD FBIVr SEAL, 

LA.TB FIRST LOBD OOMXIBaiONXB OF THE ADlOBALTTy 

UUDXB WH08B AU8PICB8 

BZPXDITION OF SCUOITIFIC BXSXABCB TO TBB ABTABCTIC BXGIOH8 

WAS SBirr FOBTH, 

THIS NARRATIVE OF ITS PROCEEDINGS 

m 

WITH GBATITUDB AHD BBSPBCT, 
BT PBBMnaiOB, 

BT BU LOBOmiP'f OBEUtm AMD WAnBWVh aMMJAHn, 

JAMES CLARK ROSa 



la JtciM, 1847. 



JNTRODUCTION. 



At the eighth meeting of the British Association 
for the Advancement of Science, held at Newcastle, 
in Augost, 1838, the attention of the physical sec* 
tion of that body was directed to the number and 
importance of desiderata in that great practical 
branch of science called Terrestrial Magnetism, by 
Lieutenant-Colonel Sabine of the Royal Artillery ; 
and a Committee was appointed, consisting of Sir 
John Herschel, Mr. Whewell (now Master of Trinity 
College, Cambridge), Mr. Peacock (now Dean of 
Ely), and Professor Lloyd, of Trinity College, 
Dublin, to represent to Her Majesty's Government 
a series of resolutions adopted by the British Asso- 
ciation ; and as these resolutions exhibit the general 
outline of objects sought to be attained, they are 
inserted here, as pointing out clearly the causes 
in which the Expedition to the Antarctic re^ons 
originated. 

^^ Resolved — 1. That the British Association 
views with high interest the system of simulta- 
neous magnetic observations which has been for 
some time carried on in Germany and various 

A 3 



VI INVUODUCnON. 

parts of Europe, and the important results to 
which it has already led; and that they con- 
sider it highly desirable that similar series of ob- 
servations, regularly continued in correspondence 
with, and in extension of these, should be instituted 
in various parts of the British dominions. 

** 2. That this Association considers the follow- 
ing localities as particularly important : — Canada, 
Ceylon, St. Helena, Van Diemen's Land, and Mau- 
ritius, or the Cape of Good Hope ; and that they 
are willing to supply instruments for their use. 

^^ 3. That in these series of observations the 
three elements of horizontal direction, dip, and in- 
tensity, or their theoretical equivalents, be insisted 
on, as also their hourly changes, and, on appointed 
days, their momentary fluctuations. 

^^ 4. That the Association considers it highly 
important that the deficiency, yet existing in our 
knowledge of terrestrial magnetism in the southern 
hemisphere, should be supplied by observations of 
the magnetic direction and intensity, especially in 
the high southern latitudes between the meridians 
of New Holland and Cape Horn ; and they desire 
strongly to recommend to Her Majesty's govern- 
ment the appointment of a naval expedition ex- 
pressly directed to that object. 

^^ 5. That in the event of such expedition being 
undertaken, it would be desirable that the officers 
charged with its conduct should prosecute both 
branches of the observation alluded to in Resolu- 
tion 3., so fisir as circumstances will permit. 



INTRODUCTION. Vll 

^^ 6. That it would be most desirable that the 
observations so performed, both at the fixed sta- 
tions and in the course of the expedition, should be 
communicated to Professor Lloyd. 

" 7. That Sir J. Herschel, Mr. Whewell, Mr. 
Peacock, and Professor Lloyd, be appointed a Com- 
mittee to represent to Government these recom- 
mendations." 

A memorial was addressed to the Government 
by the Committee above named, embodying the 
chief arguments for taking up the cause as a na- 
tional concern, and specif3ring more particularly 
the objects proposed to be accomplished, and the 
means of their accomplishment. This memorial, 
on its presentation to Lord Melbourne, was not only 
supported by the personal arguments of the eminent 
philosophers by whom it was framed, but on its 
being referred by the Government to the President 
and Council of the Royal Society, (its acknowledged 
advisers upon all points of scientific inquiry,) by 
similar and even more urgent representations on 
their part, ^^who, on this occasion, in a manner 
most honourable to themselves, and casting behind 
them every feeling but an earnest desire to render 
available to science the ancient and established 
credit of their institution, threw themselves un- 
reservedly and with their whole weight into the 
scale, with immediate and decisive effect." * The 

• Quarterly Review, No. CXXXI. p. 297. June, 1840. 

A 4 



VIU INTRODUCTION. 

BtTong interest taken in the cause by their Pren- 
dent, the Marquis of Northampton, on all occa- 
sions a warm and zealous friend to science, contri* 
buted, without doubt, not a little to this result. 

The following Report of a joint committee of 
physics and meteorology, adopted by the Council of 
the Royal Society, on the propriety of recommend- 
ing the establishment of fixed magnetic observa- 
tories, and the equipment of a naval expeditiofn for 
magnetic observations in the antarctic seas, to Her 
Majesty's Government, was presented to Lord Mel- 
bourne by the deputation named in the appended 
resolutions of the Council : — 

'' The subject of terrestrial magnetism has re- 
cently received some very important accessions 
which have materially affected not only the point 
of view in which henceforward it will be theoreti- 
cally contemplated, but also the modes of observa- 
tion which will require to be adopted for completing 
our knowledge of the actual state of the magnetic 
phenomena, and furnishing accurate data for the 
construction and verification of theoretical sys- 
tems. It was for a long time supposed that the 
changes in the position assumed by the needle at 
any particular point on the earth's surface, might 
be conceived as resulting from regular laws of 
periodicity, having for their arguments, first, a 
great magnetic cycle of several centuries, depend- 
ing on unknown, and perhaps internal movements 
or relations ; and, secondly, on the periodic alter- 



INTRODUCTION. IX 

nations of heat and cold, depending on the annual 
and diurnal movements of the sun. The discovery 
of the affection of the needle by the aurora borealis, 
and of the existence of minute and irregular move- 
ments, which might be referred either to unper- 
ceived aui^ras or to other local and temporary 
causes, sufficed to show that the laws of terrestrial 
magnetism are not so simple as to admit of this 
summary form of expression; and the important 
discovery, first announced, we believe, by Baron 
von Humboldt, that those temporary changes take 
place simultaneously at great distances in point of 
locality, (a discovery which has since been re* 
markably confirmed and extended to very great 
intervals of distance, so as to include the whole 
extent of the European continent, by Gauss and 
Weber, and their coadjutors of the German Mag* 
netic Association,) has sufficed to show that the gist 
of the inquiry lies deeper, and depends upon rela- 
tions far more complex, while at the same time 
the dominion of what might previously have been 
regarded as local agency, would require, in the 
new views consequent on the establishment of 
these facts, to be extended far beyond what ordi- 
nary usage would authorise as a just application of 
that epithet. 

<« For a long time in the history of terrestrial 
magnetism the variation alone was attended to. 
The consideration of the dip was then superadded ; 
but the observation of this element being more 



X INTRODUCTION. 

difficult and delicate, our knowledge of the actual 
and past state of the dip over the earth's surface is 
lamentably deficient. It has lately appeared, how- 
ever, that this element can be observed with con- 
siderable approximation, though not with nicety, 
at sea, so that no reason subsists why materials for 
a chart of the dip, analogous to that of variation, 
should not be systematically collected. Lastly, 
the intensity has come to be added to the list of 
observanda ; and from the great facility and exact- 
ness with which it can be determined, this branch 
of magnetic knowledge has in fact made most rapid 
progress. 

^^ These three elements, the horizontal direction, 
the dip, and the intensity, require to be precisely 
ascertained before the magnetic state of any given 
station on the globe can be said to be fully deter- 
mined. Nor can either of them, theoretically 
speaking, be said to be more important than the 
others, though the direction, on account of its im- 
mediate use to navigators, has hitherto had the 
greatest stress laid upon it, and been reduced into 
elaborate charts. A chart of the lines of total 
intensity has been recently constructed by Major 
Sabine. 

^^ All these elements are, at each point, now as- 
certained to be in a constant state of fluctuation, 
and affected by those transient and irregular 
changes which are above alluded to ; and the in- 
vestigation of the laws, extent, and mutual rela- 



INTRODUCTION. XI 

tions of these changes, is now become essential to 
the successful prosecution of magnetic discovery, 
for the following reasons : — 

'' 1st. That the progressive and periodical being 
mixed up with the transitory changes, it is impos- 
sible to separate them so as to obtain a correct 
knowledge and analysis of the former without 
taking express account of and eliminating the 
latter, any more than it would be practicable to 
obtain measures of the sea-level available for an 
inquiry into the tides, without destroying the ir- 
regular fluctuation produced by waves. 

^' 2ndly. That the secular magnetic changes 
cannot be concluded from comparatively short 
series of observation, without giving to those ob- 
servations extreme nicety, so as to determine with 
perfect precision the mean state of the elements at 
the two extremes of the period embraced, which, 
as already observed, presupposes a knowledge of 
the casual deviations. 

" 3rdly. It seems very probable that discord- 
ances found to exist between results obtained by 
different observers, or by the same at different 
times, may be, in fact, not owing to error of obser- 
vation, but may be due to the influence of these 
transitory fluctuations in the elements themselves. 

^^ 4thly and lastly. Because the theory of these 
transitory changes is in itself one of the most in- 
teresting and important points to which the atten- 
tion of magnetic inquirers can be turned, as they 



Xll INTRODUCTION. 

are no doubt intimately connected with the general 
cauBes of terrestrial magnetism, and will probably 
lead us to a much more perfect knowledge of those 
causes than we now possess. 

^^ Actuated by these impressions, on the occasion 
of a letter addressed by Baron von Humboldt to 
His Royal Highness the Duke of Sussex, P.R.S., 
the Council of this Society, on April 13. 1837, 
resolved to apply to Government for aid in pro- 
secuting, in conjunction with the German Magnetic 
Association, a series of simultaneous observations; 
and in consequence of an application founded on 
such their resolution, a grant of money was ob- 
tained for the purchase of instruments for that 
purpose. By reason, however, of the details and 
manipulations of the methods then recently intro- 
duced into magnetic observations by Grauss being 
at that time neither completely perfected, nor 
their superiority over the old methods fully esta- 
blished by general practice, the precise apparatus 
to be employed in these operations was not at the 
time agreed upon, and was still under discussion, 
subject to the report of the Astronomer Royal on 
the performance of an instrument on Gauss's prin- 
ciple established at Greenwich, at the time when 
the subject in its present more extended form was 
referred by the Council to this Joint Committee, 
so that the grant in question has not, in point of 
fact, been employed or called for. The Committee 
consider this as in some respects fortunate, as in 



INTBODUCTION. XUl 

conBequenoe of the delay time has been given for a 
much matorer concdderation of the whole subject ; 
and should it now be taken up as a matter of 
public concern, they consider that it will be ne- 
cessary to provide for a more continuous and 
qrstematic series of observations, by observers 
r^ularly appointed for the purpose and provided 
with instruments and meaus considerably more 
costly than those contemplated on the occasion in 
question. 

^^On the general advisableness of calling for 
public assistance in the prosecution of the exten- 
sive subject of terrestrial magnetism, in both the 
modes referred to them for their consideration, 
(viz. by magnetic observatories established at 
several stations properly selected on land, and by 
a naval expedition expressly directed to such ob- 
servations in the antarctic seas,) your Committee 
are fiilly agreed. They consider the subject to 
have now attained a degree of theoretical as well 
as of practical importance, and to afford a scope 
for the application of exact inquiry which it has 
never before enjoyed, and which are such as {uUy 
to justify its recommendation by the Boyal Society 
to a revival of that national support to which we 
are indebted for the first chart of variations con- 
structed by our illustrious countryman Halley in 
A.D. 1701, on the basis of observations collected 
in a voyage of discovery expressly equipped for 
that purpose by the British government. 



XIV INTRODUCTION. 

^^Ab regards the first branch of the question 
referred to their consideration, they are of opinion 
that the stations which have been suggested to 
them, viz. Canada, St. Helena, the Cape, Van 
Diemen's Land, and Ceylon (or Madras), are well 
selected, and perhaps as numerous as they could 
venture to recommend, considering the expense 
which would require to be incurred at each, and, 
that in each of these stations it would be desirable, 

1 St. That regular hourly observations should be 
made (at least during the daytime) of the fluctu- 
ations of the three elements of variation, dip, and 
intensity, or their equivalents, with magnetometers 
on the more improved construction, during a period 
of three years from their commencement. 

<< 2ndly. That on days, and on a plan appointed, 
agreed on in concert with one another and with 
European observatories, the fluctuations of the 
same elements should be observed during twenty- 
four successive hours, strictly simultaneous with 
one another, and at intervals of not more than five 
minutes. 

^^ Srdly. That the absolute values of the same ele- 
ments shall be determined at each station, in refer- 
ence to the fluctuating values above mentioned, 
with all possible care and precision, at several 
epochs comprehended within the period allowed. 

" 4thly. That in the event of a naval expedition 
of magnetic discovery being despatched, observa- 
tions be also instituted at each fixed station, in 



nrraoDuCTioN. xv 

correspondence with, and on a plan concerted with 
the commander of, such expedition. 

" As regards the second branch of the subject 
referred to them, ^ viz., the proposal of an antarctic 
voyage of magnetic research, they are of opinion, 
as already generally expressed, that such a voyage 
would be, in the present state of the subject, pro- 
ductive of results of the highest importance and 
value ; and they ground this opinion on the fol- 
lowing reasons : — 

^^Ist That great and notorious deficiencies 
exist in our knowledge of the course of the varia- 
tion lines generally, but especially in the antarctic 
seas, and that the true position of the southern 
magnetic pole or poles can scarcely even be con- 
jectured with any probability from the data already 
known. 

*^ 2ndly . That our knowledge of the dip through- 
out those regions, and the whole southern hemi- 
sphere, is even yet more defective, and that even 
such observations of this element as could be pro- 
cured at sea, still more by landing on ice, &c., 
would have especial value. 

^^ Srdly. That the intensity lines in those regions 
rest on observations &r too few to justify any sure 
reliance on their courses over a large part of their 
extent, and over the rest are altogether conjectural. 
Nevertheless, that there is good reason to believe 
in the existence and accessibility of two points of 
maximum intensity in the southern as in the 



XVI INTBODUCTION. 

northern hemisphere, the attainment of which 
would be highly interesting and important. 

4thly. That a correct knowledge of the courses 
of these lines, especially where they approach their 
respective poles, is to be regarded as a first and, 
indeed, indispensable preliminary step to the con- 
struction of a rigorous and complete theory of 
terrestrial magnetism. 

^^ 5thly. That during the progress of such an 
expedition, opportunities would of necessity occur 
(and should be expressly sought) to observe the 
transitory fluctuations of the magnetic elements 
in simultaneous conjunction with observations at 
the fixed stations and in Europe, and so to furnish 
data for the investigation of these changes in locali- 
ties very unlikely to be revisited for any purposes, 
except those connected with scientific inquiries. 

" Your Committee, in making this Report, think 
it unnecessary to go into any minute details rela- 
tive to the instruments or other matiriel required 
for tlie proposed operations, still less into those of 
the conduct of the operations themselves. Should 
such be required from them, it will then be time to 
enter further into these and other points, when the 
Committee will most readily devote themselves to 
the fullest consideration of the subject. 

"J. F. W. Herschel, 

*' Chairman of the Joint Physical and 
" Meteorological Committee." 



INTRODUCTION. XVll 

RESOLUTIONS OP THE COUNCIL. 

1. That this Report be received and approved. 

2. That the Council, deeply impressed with the 
importance of the scientific objects which might be 
attained by an antarctic expedition, particularly 
by the institution of magnetic observations in 
southern regions, do earnestly recommend that Her 
Majesty's Grovemment be pleased to direct the 
equipment of such an expedition. 

3. That the imperfect state of our present know- 
ledge of the amount and fluctuations of the mag- 
netic elements, renders the establishment of fixed 
magnetical observatories, for a Umited time, at 
various points of the earth's surface, highly de- 
sirable, particularly in Canada, St. Helena, Van 
Diemen's Land and Ceylon, and at the Cape of 
Good Hope ; and that the Council do earnestly re- 
commend Her Majesty's Government to cause such 
observatories to be established. 

4. That a deputation, consisting of the Presi- 
dent, Treasurer, and Secretaries of the Society, Sir 
John F. W. Herschel, the Chairman, and Major 
Sabine and Mr. Wheatstone, the Secretaries of the 
joint Committee of Physics and Meteorology, be 
requested to communicate the above Resolutions to 
Lord Melbourne, and to urge on the Government 
the adoption of the measures therein proposed. 

Thus urged upon the Government by the most 
illustrious philosophers of our country, the request 
VOL, I. a 



• •• 



XVm INTRODUCTION. 

was acceded to by Lord Melbourne; and the 
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty being 
pleased to honour me with the command, I re- 
ceived my commission for Her Majesty's ship 
Erebus, on the 8th of April, 1839, and their Lord- 
ships' directions to proceed with the equipment of 
the expedition upon the most liberal scale, to be 
provided with all requisite means to carry into full 
execution the several points suggested, and obser- 
vations recommended, by the two learned bodies, 
in the most complete manner. The Erebus, a bomb 
of three hundred and seventy tx>ns, like all others of 
her class, was of strong build and with a capacious 
hold. The second vessel appointed for the service 
was the Terror, of three hundred and forty tons ; 
she had been originally strengthened for contending 
with the ice of the arctic seas, upon the occasion 
of the detention of so many of our whale ships in 
Baffin's Bay, during the winter of 1836, and em- 
ployed in the subsequent summer under the com- 
mand of Sir George Back, upon his arduous but un- 
successful attempt to reach Repulse Bay. The 
damages she sustained during that voyage had 
already been repaired, and her fortification being 
considered perfectly sufficient, she was not commis- 
sioned until a month later, by my trusty and tried 
friend and messmate. Commander Francis Rawdon 
Moira Crozier ; and from the numerous applicants 
for the service, the following officers were selected 
and appointed to the Erebus and Terror: — 



INTRODUCTION. 



XIX 



Capiain. 



BBXBUfl. 

James Clark Ross. 
Edward Joseph Bird. 
John Sibbald. 
James F. L. Wood. 
Charles T. Tucker. 
Robert M *Cormick. 
Thomas R. Hallett. 
Alexander J. Smith. 
Henry Oakelej. 
Joseph Dayman. 
Surgeon. Joseph D. 
Hooker. 
Second Mauter. Henry B. Yule. 



Moiter. 
Surgeon, 
Purser, 
Mate. 



TBBSOB. 

Commander, FrancisR.M.Crozier. 
Lieutenant Archibald M^Murdo. 
Charles G. Fhillips. 
Joseph W. Kay. 
Master. Pownall F. Cotter 

(acting). 
Surgeon. John Robertson. 
Clerk in Charge. George H.Mou* 

bray. 
Mate. Peter A. Scott. 

Thomas E. L. Moore. 
William MoUoy. 
Assistant Surgeon. Dayid L^alL 
Second Master. John £. Dayis. 



The complement of each ship amounting to 
sixty-four persons. 

Every improvement that former experience could 
suggest in preparing the ships for the service, and 
contributing to the health, comfort, and safety of 
their crews, was granted by the Admiralty.; and 
from Mr. Rice, of Chatham Dock Yard, to whom I 
am indebted for the memorandum of the fittings of 
the Erebus at Chatham Dock, inserted in the 
Appendix, I received that zealous and able assist- 
ance which, from his high abilities, but, I regret to 
say, unrewarded merits, I had reason to expect. 

As opportunities might not occur of replenishing 
our stores and provisions, it was desirable to carry 
with us as much as we could possibly stow away. 
Preserved meats, according to Donkin's invention, 
in consequence of their portability and excellence, 
formed a large proportion of our provisions ; these 
were chiefly furnished by John GiUon and Co., of 
Leith, and proved most excellent of their kind. 
I would, however, suggest to them and others 



a 2 



INTRODUCTION. 



engaged in this branch of trade, that for voyages of 
several years' duration it would be better that 
the canisters in which the meats are preserved, 
should be of a much stouter tin, equal at least to 
those originally used by Messrs. Donkin and Co., 
their canisters being liable to rust through 
when long on board a ship and in hot climates. 
The following is a list of the quantities supplied by 
different firms : — 





Umt$, 


Vfffct^ct. 


Soapt. 


Cooemt 
Scop; 


ToUl Wsicht. 


Gillon . 
Gmmble - 
Cope - - 
Nieol- . 
Cooper - 
Wells- - 

Total- - 


lbs. 
14,188 
4802 
4324 
3480 
3732 
2958 


lbs. 
1512 
4300 
1700 
850 
5398i 
1244 


pints. 

230 
2000 

4K2 
2400 
1028 


) pints. 
8217 
1651 
2000 
1160 
3400 
2806 


lbs. 
McttU- - 3.3,484 
Vegetables 1 5,004 ( 
Soups (equal 

to) - - 6140 
GraTy - 4808} 


Total - - 59,437 

Tout Cwt. Qn. Lbs. 
or 26 10 2 14 


33,484 


15,004) 


6140 


19,234 



and the relative proportion of each of the several 
kinds is given in the following table, from which it 
will be seen that no pains or expense were spared 
to provide the expedition with such provisions as 
should be most likely not only to preserve the 
health of their crews, but add greatly to their com- 
fort ; nor would the liberality with which our 
ships were supplied be ill bestowed, if extended to 
the whole of our navy ; indeed, in the end, I 
believe there would be a considerable saving of 
expense, and the subject is well deserving the 
attention of our rulers, if it were upon the score of 
humanity alone, when the great amount of suffer- 



INTEODUCTION. 



ing, disease, and death, that might be averted by 
famishing our ships with a large supply of the 
preserved meats and vegetables is taken into con- 
sideration. 



A LIST OF ABTICLES SUPPLIED FOB THE USE OF THE 
ANTABCTIC EXPEDITION IN THE TEAB 1839. 



ntBSSBYSD MBAT8, SOUPS, AND 



Matton, boiled 


3740 lbs. 


n roasted 


8924 „ 


„ seasoned - 


12 „ 


n and Yegeta- 




bles - 


184 „ 


Beef, boiled • 


4005 „ 


„ roasted - 


4282 „ 


„ seasoned 


3937 „ 


„ and YC^tables 
Veiil, roasted - 


4158 „ 


3000 „ 


„ boiled - 


986 „ 


n seasoned 


22 n 


„ and rotables 


14 „ 


Ox-cheek 


2872 „ 


„ andy^reta- 




bles - - - 


336 „ 


Soup and bouilli 


2062 „ 


Concentrated gravy 




soup - 


290 pints 


Ditto ... 


2898 1 „ 


Ditto . - - 


12278 J „ 



PESSSBYSD, MEATS, SOUPS, AND 
VXGSTABLBS. 



qts. 

A)8. 



Vegetable soup - 2618 pints 

Ditto - - 

Carrots and graTT 

Turnipe and gn^ 

Dressed cabbage 

Table Tegetabies 

Mixed yegetables 

Carrots • 

Farsneps 

Beet-root 

Onions - 

Turnips 



1761 

- 528 

- 436 

- 366 

- 471 
. 200 
- 10,782 

- 1201 

• 480 

• 300 

- 180 



n 



n 
n 



n 



n 



MEDICAL COMF0BT8. 



Cranberries - 

Fickles, mixed 
walnuts 
onions 
„ cabbage 

Mustard 

Pepper - 



n 

99 



- 2690 lbs. 

- 2493 
2453 

- 2511 

- 2398 

- 624 

- 120 



n 
n 
ft 



n 



n 



Warm clothing of the best quality was also 
furnished to both ships, to be issued gratuitously 
to the crews whilst employed amongst the ice, to 
protect them from the severity of the- climate, and 
every arrangement was made in the interior fitting 
of the vessels that could in any way contribute to 
the health or comfort of our people. 

As soon as our preparations were completed, I 
received my final instructions from the Lords Com- 
missioners of the Admiralty, which, in accordance 
with custom, are here inserted : — 

a 3 



XXU INTRODUCTION. 

By the Commissioners for executing the office of Lord 
High Admiral of the United Eangdom of Great 
Britain and Ireland, &a 

Whereas it has been represented to us that the science 
of magnetism may be essentially improved by an extensive 
series of observations made in high southern latitudes, and 
by a comparison of such observations with others made at 
certain fixed stations, and whereas practical navigation 
must eventually derive important benefit from every im- 
provement in that science; we have, in consideration of 
these objects, caused Her Majesty's ships Erebus and 
Terror to be in all respects prepared for a voyage for carry- 
ing into complete execution the purposes above mentioned : 
and from the experience we have had of your abilities, 
zeal, and good conduct, we have thought fit to entrust 
you with the command of the expedition, and to direct 
Commander Crozier, whom we have sppointed to Her 
Majesty's ship Terror, to foUow your orders for his pro- 
ceedings. 

You are therefore required and directed, as soon as both 
vessels shall be in all respects ready, to put to sea with 
them, and on your way to your ulterior destination, you 
will touch at the Island of Madeira, in order to obtain the 
sea-rates of the several chronometers with which each 
vessel has been supplied. From thence (but making a 
short series of observations at the Eock of St. Paul) you 
will make the best of your way to the Island of St. 
Helena, where you are to land the observers and the in- 
struments for the fixed magnetic observatory intended for 
that station. 

In approaching that island, and in proceeding from 
thence to the Cape of Good Hope, you will endeavour to 
ascertain at what point you cross the curve of least 
magnetic intensity ; the interest attached to the place of 
which is set forth in the herewith inclosed Report of the 
council of the Koyal Society; and this Report having been 



• •• 



INTBODUCTION. XXUl 

drawn up at our eepedal request, and containing the several 
objects of scientific inquiry recommended to your attention 
by that body, you will follow their suggestions, and carry 
out their views, as fieur as may be in your power, consist- 
ently with the safety of Her Majesty's ships, and with the 
means we have placed at your disposal 

At the Cape of Oood Hope the instruments and ob- 
servers for the second fixed magnetic observatory are to 
be carefully hmded; and having completed your water, 
and replaced the stores which you have expended,, you are 
to proceed to the eastward, touching at Marion and Crozet 
Isles for observations, if the weather and other circum- 
stances should be favourable for that purpose. 

As we have provided the expedition with invariable 
pendulums, and all the necessary apparatus for determin- 
ing the figure of the earth ; and as it is desirable that 
these observations should be made at several points, more 
especially in high southern latitudes, it is probable that 
Kerguelen Island will be found well suited to that pur- 
pose, as well as to an extensive series of magnetic and 
other observations ; but the selection of these stations is 
freely confided to your judgment. 

If the operations at Kerguelen Island, or at such other 
places as you may select, should be completed before the 
end of February, 1840, you will possibly find the sea 
sufficiently open to proceed directly to the southward, to 
examine those places where indications of land have been 
noticed, and to make the requisite observations on any out- 
lying islands that you may be able to discover ; but, at that 
advanced period of the season, you are cautiously to avoid 
being beset in the ice, as your early arrival at Van Diemen's 
Land is of far greater importance to the great object of 
the expedition than any results you could hope there to 
obtain. 

Should your observations at Kerguelen Island detain 
you beyond the above specified period, you will have an 
opportunity of touching at the Islands of St. Paul and 

a 4 



XXIV INTRODUCTION. 

Amsterdam^ and of prooeeding to Van Diemen's Land by 
whatever course shall appear to you best calculated for in- 
ferring the position of the magnetic pole. 

At Van Diemen's Land you are to communicate with 
Lieutenant Governor Sir John Franklin^ who will have 
been instructed to prepare instruments for the third mag- 
netic observatory, which you are to establish in the most 
advantageous position, and to place in charge of an officer, 
with a sufficient number of assistants, to enable him to 
continue uninterruptedly the observations proposed to be 
made during the period of your absence, making such 
provision for their victualling and lodging as appears to 
be most convenient, and not inconsistent with the Naval 
Regulations. 

Having brought this observatory into active operation, 
you will lose no time in proceeding to Sydney, which, 
according to the views contained in the before-mentioned 
Report, will be a station eminently fitted for the deter- 
mination of all the magnetic elements, and which will 
hereafter be the centre of reference for every species of 
local determination. 

The remaining winter months may be advantageously 
employed in visiting New Zealand and the adjacent 
islands, and in obtaining there as many series of observa- 
tions as the time will allow, in order to enable you to 
judge with greater precision of the course to be adopted 
in the following summer ; but taking care to return to 
Van Diemen's Land by the end of October, to refit Her 
Majesty's ships, and to prepare them for a voyage to the 
southward. 

In the following summer, your provisions having been 
completed and your crews refreshed, you will proceed 
direct to the southward, in order to determine the position 
of the magnetic pole, and even to attain to it if possible, 
which it is hoped will be one of the remarkable and cre- 
ditable results of this expedition. In the execution, how- 
ever, of this nnluous part of the ser^-ice entrusted to vour 



INTRODUCTION. XXV 

enterprise and to your resources^ you are to use your best 
endeavours to withdraw from the high latitudes in time to 
prevent the ships being beset with the ice ; but if> not- 
withstanding your efforts, they should be cut off from a 
timely retreat, you are to select the safest inlet you can find 
for the security of Her Majesty's ships during the winter ; 
and you will house- in the ships, and further take every pos- 
sible precaution for the health and comfort of the officers 
and crews, which your former experience in the northern 
expeditions may suggest to you, and for which you have 
been supplied with abundant means. Ebiving provided 
for these two most important objects, you will endeavour 
to turn your detention there to the best account, by sedu- 
lously pursuing the different series of observations which 
the fixed observatories will, at that time, be carrying on in 
concert with yours. 

Should the expedition have been able to avoid wintering 
in a high latitude, you will return to Van Diemen's Land, 
availing yourself of every opportunity you can seize of 
pursuing there, or in such other places as your deliberate 
judgment may prefer, those series of observations and ex- 
periments best adapted to carrying out the leading objects 
of the expedition. 

On the breaking up of the succeeding winter, you will 
resume the examination of the antarctic seas in the 
highest latitude you can reach, and proceeding to the 
eastward from the point at which you had left off the 
preceding year, you will seek for fresh places on which 
to plant your observatory in all directions from the pole. 

In the event of finding any great extent of land, you 
will, as far as may be practicable, lay down the prominent 
parts of its coast line ; and you will endeavour not only 
to correct the positions of Graham Land and Enderby 
Land, and other places which have been seen only at x 
distance, but to obtain some knowledge of the nature of 
those yet unvisited tracts for geographical research ; and 
the magnetic objects of your voyage may be so conducted 



XXVI nrrRODUCTioN. 

aa mutually to aflsUt each other. With this view we have 
directed the hjdrographer to furnish you with such parts 
of the instructions usually given to surveying vessels as 
may lead to the more clear and satisfactory expression of 
those shores which you may have to examine. 

The South Shetlands, or the Orkneys, or perhaps the 
Sandwich Islands, and lastly, the Falklands, wiU probably 
terminate your magnetic labours in the antarctic seas; 
and if at those latter islands you should not receive further 
orders from us, you will return to England by such a 
route as you may think most conducive to the ruling ob- 
ject of the expedition. 

In an enterprise of the nature which has been briefly 
stated in these orders, much must be left to the discretion, 
temper, and judgment of the commanding officer ; and we 
fully confide in your combined energy and prudence for 
the successful issue of a voyage, which will engross the at- 
tention of the scientific men of all Europe. At the same 
time we desire you constantly to bear in mind our anxiety 
for the health, the safety, and the comfort of the officers 
and crew entrusted to your care. 

We also caution you against allowing the two vessels 
to separate ; and we direct you to appoint, not only a 
sufficient number of well-chosen rendezvous, but to keep 
up the most unreserved communication with the Com- 
mander of the Terror, placing in him every proper confi- 
dence, furnishing him with a copy of these orders, and 
acquainting him from time to time with all your views 
and intentions for the execution of them; so that the 
service may not only have the full benefit of your united 
efiSorts in its prosecution, but that in case of unavoidable 
separation, or of any accident to yourself, he may have the 
advantage of knowing, up to the latest period, all your 
ideas and intentions. 

We also recommend that a frequent change should take 
place of the observations made in the two ships, in order 
that any scientific discovery made by the one, should be 



INTBODUCTION. XXYU 

qoicklj communicated to the other, as well for their ad- 
vantage and guidance in making their future obeervations, 
as for the puxpoee of more certainly ensuring their pre- 
servation. 

In the event of any irreparable accident happening to 
either ship, and the removal of the crew to the other, the 
officers and men are hereby authorised to perform their 
several duties in their respective ranks and stations, in the 
vessel to which they may be transferred ; and should the 
Erebus be the one disabled, you are in that case to take 
command of the Terror. 

In the event of any fatal acddent to yoiurself. Com- 
mander Crozier is hereby authorised to take command of 
the expedition, either on board the Erebus or Terror, as 
he may prefer (placing the senior lieutenant in command 
of the other ship), to carry these instructions into exe- 
cution. 

In the event of England being involved in hostilities 
with any other power during your absence, you are clearly 
to understand tiiat you are not to commit any hostile act 
whatever; the expedition under your command being 
fitted out for the sole purpose of scientific discoveries, and 
it being the established practice of all civilised nations to 
consider vessels so employed as exempt from the operations 
of war. Confiding in this general feeling, we trust that 
you would receive assistance from the ships and subjects of 
any foreign power with which you might fall in ; but, if 
the case should arise, special application to that effect will 
be made to the respective governments. 

While employed in the services stated in these orders, 
you will take every opportunity of acquidnting our secre- 
tary, for our information, of your progress ; and on your 
arrival in England, you are forthwith to repair to this 
office in order to lay before us a full account of your pro- 
ceedings, taking care before you leave the ship to demand 
from the officers and all other persons on board, the logs 
and journals they had kept, and the charts, drawings. 



• •• 



XXVm INTBODUCnON. 

and obeeirationfl which they had made, and which are all 

to be sealed up ; and you will iflsue similar directions to 

Commander Croader and his officers, &c. ; the said log^ 

journals, and other documents to be thereafter disposed of 

as we may think proper to determine. You will also 

receiye our future directions for the disposal of all such 

specimens of the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms 

as in the course of the voyage may have been collected by 

any person on board of either of the ships, and which you 

are to endeavour to preserve, as far as may be done 

without inconvenience. 

Given under our hands, the 14th day of September, 

1839. 

(Signed) Minto. 

S. John Brooke Pechell. 

To James CUrk Rofs, EMoire, 
Captain of H. M. S. Erebos, at Cl 

Br Command of their Lordahipe, 
(Signed) C. Wood. 

The Report of the Council of the Royal Society 
alluded to in my instructions, contained a detailed 
account of every object of inquiry which the dili- 
gence and science of the several committees of that 
learned body could devise. It occupies a small 
volume of one hundred pages, so that it is only 
possible to insert in this place their instructions 
upon the subject of Terrestrial Magnetism, which 
is described as the most important, and which is 
considered as the great scientific object of the 
expedition. 

REPORT. 

The president and council of the Royal Sodetj having 
recommended to Her Majesty's government the equip- 



unRODUcnoN. xxix 

ment of an antarctic expedition for scientific objects, were 
informed by the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty 
that it had been determined to send out Captain James 
Ckrk Boss on such an expedition, and the council were at 
the same time requested to communicate to them, for 
their information, any suggestions on those subjects, or on 
other points to which they might wish Captain Boss's 
attention to be called, in preparing the instructions to that 
officer.* The council, having due regard to the magnitude 
and importance of the question submitted to them, consi- 
dered that they would best fulfil the wishes of Her Ma- 
jesty's Government by a subdivision of the inquiry into 
different parts, and by referring the separate consideration 
of each part to distinct committees, consisting of those 
members of the society who were especially conversant 
with the particular branches of science to which each divi- 
sion of the inquiry had relation. These several com- 
mittees, namely, those of physics, of meteorology, of 
geology and mineralogy, of botany and vegetable physio- 
logy, and of zoology and animal physiology, after bestow- 
ing much time and great attention in the investigation of 
the subjects brought under their notice, have each drawn 
up very full and complete reports of the results of their 
labours. These reports have been considered and adopted 
by the coimdl, and have been incorporated in the follow- 
ing General Beport, which the council present as their 
opinion on the matters which have been referred to them 
by Her Majesty's Government. They take this opportu- 
nity of declaring their satisfaction at the prospect of the 
benefits which are likely to accrue to science from the 
expedition thus liberally undertaken by the government 
on the representations made to them by the Boyal Society 
and other scientific bodies in this country, and in con- 
formity with a wise and enlightened policy. They also 
desire to express their grateful sense of the prompt atten- 

^ This request wis oonvejed in a letter from Sir John Birrow, ad- 
dressed to the secretary of theRojal Societj, and dated Jane 13. 1839. 



XXX INTBODFCnON. 

tion which has been unifonnlj paid to their euggeBtions, 
and of the ample provision which has been made for the 
accomplishment of the yarious objects of the expedition. 

Rojal Societj, 8th August, 1839. 

Sbctiok 1. — PHYSICS AND METEOROLOGY. 

The Council of the Royal Societj are very strongly impressed 
with the number and importance of the desiderata in physical 
and meteorological science, which may wholly or in port be 
supplied by observations made under such highly fsTourable and 
encouraging circumstances as those afforded by the liberality of 
Her Migesty's Government on this occasion. While they wish 
therefore to omit nothing in their enumeration of those objects 
which appear to them deserving of attentive inquiry on sound 
scientific grounds, and from which consequences may be drawn 
of real importance, either for the settlement of disputed ques- 
tions, or for the advancement of knowledge in any of its branches, 
— they deem it equally their duty to omit or pass lightly over 
several points which, although not without a certain degree of 
interest, may yet be regarded in the present state of science 
rather as matters of abstract curiosity than as affording data 
for strict reasoning ; as well as others, which may be equally 
well or better elucidated by inquiries instituted at home and at 
leisure. 

1. Terrbstrux Magkbtisk. 

The subject of most importance, beyond all question, to which 
the attention of Captain James Clark Ross and his officers can 
be turned, — and that which must be considered as, in an em- 
phatic manner, the great scientific object of the Expedition, — is 
that of Terrestrial Magnetism ; and this will be considered : Ist, as 
regards those accessions to our knowledge which may be supplied 
by observations to be made during the progress of the Expedi- 
tion, independently of any concert with or co-operation of other 
observers ; and 2ndly, as regards those which depend on and 
require such concert ; and are therefore to be considered with 
reference to the observations about to be carried on simul- 
taneously in the fixed magnetic obserTstories, ordered to be 
established by Her Migestjr's Government with this especial 
view, and in the other similar observatories, both public and 



INTBODUCTION. ZXXl 

priyatey in Europe, India, and elsewhere, with which it is 
intended to open and maintain a correspondence. 

Now it may be observed, that these two classes of obseryations 
naturally refer themselves to two chief branches into which the 
science of terrestrial magnetism in its present state subdivides 
itself and which bear a certain analogy to the theories of the 
elliptic movements of the planets, and of their periodical and 
secular perturbations. The first comprehends the actual dis- 
tribution of the magnetic influence over the globe, at the present 
epoch, in its mean or average state, when the effects of temporary 
fluctuations are either neglected or eliminated by extending the 
observations over a sufficient time to neutralise their effects. 
The other comprises the history of all that is not permanent in 
the phenomena, whether it appear in the form of momentary, 
daily, monthly, or annual change and restoration, or iir pro- 
gressive changes not compensated by counter changes, but 
going on continually accumulating in one direction, so as in the 
course of many years to alter the mean amount of the quantities 
observed. These last-mentioned changes hold the same place, 
in the analogy above alluded to, with respect to the mean 
quantities and temporary fluctuations, that the secular variations 
in the planetary movements must be regarded as holding, with 
respect to their mean orbits on the one hand, and their per- 
turbations of brief period on the other. 

There is, however, this difference, that in the planetary theory 
all these varieties of effect have been satisfactorily traced up to 
a single cause, whereas in that of terrestrial magnetism this is 
so far from being demonstrably the case, that the contrary is 
not destitute of considerable probability. In fact, the great 
features of the magnetic curves, and their general displacements 
and changes of form over the whole surface of the earth, would 
seem to be the result of causes acting in the interior of the earth, 
and pervading its whole mass ; while the annual and diurnal 
variations of the needle, with their train of subordinate periodical 
movements, may, and very probably do, arise from, and corre- 
spond to electric currents produced by periodical variations of 
temperature at its surface, due to the sun's position above the 
horizon, or in the ecliptic, modified by local causes ; while local 
or temporary electric discharges, due to thermic, chemical, or 
mechanical causes, acting in the higher regions of the a^mo- 



XXXU INTRODUCTION. 

sphere, and relieviDg themflelvesirr^olArlj or at intervala^ maj 
Berre to render accoant of those nnceasing, and as they seem to 
us casual movements, which recent observations have placed in 
so conspicuous and interesting a light The electrodTnamic 
theory, which refers all magnetism to electric currents, is silent 
as to the causes of those currents, which may be various, and 
which only the analysis of their effects can teach us to regard as 
internal, superficial, or atmospheric 

It is not merely for the use of the navigator that charts, giving 
a general view of the lines of Magnetic Declination, Inclination, 
and Intensity, are necessary. Such charts^ could they really be 
depended on, and were they in any degree complete, would be 
of the most eminent use to the theoretical inquirer, not only as 
general directions in the choice of empirical formulsB, but as 
powerful instruments for facilitating numerical investigation, by 
the choice they afford of data favourably arranged ; and above 
all, OS affording decidedly the best means of comparing any given 
theory with observation. In fact, upon the whole, the readiest, 
and beyond comparison the fairest and most effectual mode of 
testing the numerical applicability of a theory of terrestrial 
magnetism, would be, not servilely to calculate its results for 
given localities, however numerous, and thereby load its apparent 
errors with the real errors, both of observation and of local 
magnetism ; but to compare the totality of the lines in our charts 
with the corresponding lines, as they result from the formuls 
to be tested, when their general agreement or disagreement will 
not only show how far the latter truly represents the facts, 
but will furnish distinct indications of the modifications they 
require. 

Unfortunately for the progress of our theories, however, we 
are yet very far from possessing charts even of that one element, 
the Declination, most useful to the navigator, which satisfy these 
requisites; while as respects the others (the Inclination and 
Intensity) the most lamentable deficiencies occur, especially in 
the Antarctic regions. To make good these deficiencies by the 
continual practice of every mode of observation appropriate to 
the circumstances in which the observer is placed throughout 
the voyage, will be one of the great objects to which attention 
must be directed. And first — 
At sea, — We are not to expect from magnetic observations 



nrntODUCTiON. xxxm 

made at sea the precision of which thej are susceptible on land. 
Nevertheless, it has been ascertained that not onlj the Declina- 
tion, bat the Inclination and Intensitj, can be observed, in 
moderate circumstances of weather and sea, with sufficient cor- 
rectness, to afford most useful and valuable information, if 
patience be bestowed, and proper precautions adopted. The 
total intensitj, it is ascertained, can be measured with some 
considerable d^;ree of certainty hj the adoption of a statical 
method of observation reoentlj devised by Mr. Fox, whose 
instrument will be a part of the apparatus provided. And 
when it is recollected that but for such observations the whole 
of that portion of the globe which is covered by the ocean must 
remain for ever a bUnk in our charts, it will be needless further 
to insist on the necessity of making a daily series of magnetic 
observations, in all the three particulars above-mentioned, when- 
ever weather and sea will permit, an essential feature in the 
business of the voyage, in both ships. Magnetic observations 
at sea will, of course, be affected by the ship's magnetism, and 
this must be eliminated to obtain results of any service. To 
this end, 

First. Every series of observations made on board should be 
accompanied with a notice of the direction by compass of the 
ship's head at the time. 

Secondly. Previous to sailing, a very careful series of the 
apparent deviations, as shown by two compasses permanently 
fixed, (the one as usual, the other in a convenient position, con- 
siderably more forward in the ship,) in every position of the 
ship's head, as compared with the real position of the ship, 
should be made and recorded, with a view to attempt procuring 
the constants of the ship's action according to M. Poisson's 
theory; and this process should be repeated on one or more 
convenient occasions during the voyage ; and, genenally, while 
at anchor, every opportunity should be taken of swinging 
round the ship's head to the four cardinal points, and executing 
in each position a complete series of the usual observations. 

Thirdly. Wherever magnetic instruments are landed and 
observations made on terra Jirma^ or on ioe^ the opportunity 
should be seized of going through the regular series on ship- 
board with more than usual diligence and care, so as to establish 
by actual experiment in the only unexceptionable manner the 

VOL. I. b 



XXXIV INTEODUCTION. 

nature and amoont of the corrections dae to the ship's action 
for that particular geographical position, and bj the assemblage 
of all such obserrations to afford data for concluding them in 
general 

Fourthlj. No change possible to be avoided should be made 
in the disposition of considerable masses of iron in the ships 
during the whole voyage ; but if such change be necessary, it 
should be noted. 

ilfUilj. When crossing the magnetic line of no dip it would 
be desirable to go through the observation for the dip with the 
instrument successively placed in a series of different magnetic 
azimuths, by which the influence of the ship's magnetism in a 
vertical direction will be placed in evidence. 

On landjoran tee. — As the completeness and excellence of 
the instruments with which the expedition will be furnished 
will authorise the utmost confidence in the results obtained by 
Captain Ross*s well-known scrupulosity and exactness in their 
use, the redetermination of the magnetic elements at points 
where they are already considered as ascertained, will be scarcely 
less desirable than their original determination at stations where 
they have never before been observed. This is the more to be 
insisted on, as lapse of time changes these elements in some 
cases with considerable rapidity; and it is therefore of great 
consequence that observations to be compared should be as 
nearly cotemporary as possible, and that data should be 
obtained for eliminating the effects of secular variations during 
short intervals of time, so as to enable us to reduce the observa- 
tions of a series to a common epoch. 

On the other hand it cannot be too strongly recommended, 
studiously to seek every opportunity of landing on points (mag- 
netically speaking) unknown, and determining the elements of 
those points with all possible predsiou. Nor should it be neg- 
lected, whenever the slightest room for doubt subsists, to deter- 
mine at the same time the geogn4>hical position of the stations 
of observation in latitude and longitude. When the observa- 
tions are made on ice, it is needless to remark that this will be 
universally necessary. 

With this general recommendation it will be unnecessary to 
enumerate particular localities. In fact it is impossible to 
accumulate too many. Nor ean it be doubted that in the course 



INTRODUCTION. 

of antarctic exploration^ manj hitherto nndiflooyered points of 
land will be encoontered, each of which will, of course, become 
available as a magnetic station, according to its accessibiUtj and 
conyenience. 

There are certain points in the regions aboat to be traversed 
in this voyage which offer great and especial interest in a mag- 
netic point of view. These are, first, the south magnetic pole 
(or poles), intending thereby the point or points in which the 
horizontal intensity vanishes and the needle tends vertically 
downwards ; and secondly, the points of maximum intensity, 
which, to prevent the confusion arising from a double use of the 
word poles, we may provisionally term magnetic /oct. 

It is not to be supposed that Captain Boss, having already 
signalised himself by attaining the northern magnetic pole, 
should require any exhortation to induce him to use his en- 
deavours to reach the southern. On the contrary, it might 
better become us to suggest for his consideration, that no 
scientific datum of this description, nor any attempt to attain 
very high southern latitudes, can be deemed important enough 
to be made a ground for exposing to extraordinary risk the 
lives of brave and valuable men. The magnetic pole, though 
not attained, will yet be pointed to by distinct and unequivocal 
indications ; vis. by the approximation of the dip to 90^ ; and 
by the convergence of the magnetic meridians on all sides 
towards it If such convergence be observed over any con- 
siderable r^on, the place of the pole may thence be deduced, 
though its locality may be inaccessible. 

M. Grauss, from theoretical considerations, has recently as- 
signed a probable position in Ion. 146^ £., lat 66^ S. to the 
southern magnetic pole, denying the existence of two poles of 
the same name, in either hemisphere, which, as he justly re- 
marks, would entail the necessity of admitting also a third 
point, having some of the chief characters of such a pole inter- 
mediate between them. That this is so may be made obvious 
without following out his somewhat intricate demonstration, by 
simply considering, that if a needle be transported from one 
such pole to another of the same name, it will begin to deviate 
from perpendicularity towards the pole it has quitted, and will 
end in attaining perpendicularity again, after pointing in the 
latter part of its progress obliqudy towards the pole to which ii 

b 2 



INTBODUCnON. 

it nuwmfff a sequence of things impossible wiUioot an inter- 
mediate passage through the perpendicular direction. 

It is not improbable that the point indicated by "ML Grauss 
will prove accessible ; at all events it cannot but be approachable 
sufficientlj near to test bj the convergence of meridians the 
truth of the indication ; and as his theory gives within very 
moderate limits of error the true place of the northern pole, 
and otherwise represents the magnetic elements in every ex- 
plored region with considerable approximation, it is but 
reasonable to recommend this as a distinct point to be decided 
in Captain Ross's voyages. Should the decision be in the 
negative, t. e. should none of the indications characterising the 
near vicinity of the magnetic pole occur in that region, it will 
be to be sought ; and a knowledge of its real locality will be 
one of the distinct scientific results which may be confidently 
hoped from this expedition, and which can only be attained 
by circumnavigating the antarctic pole compass in hand. 

The actual attainment of a focus of maximum intensity is 
rendered difi&cult by the want of some distinct character by 
which it can be known, previous to trial, in which direction to 
proceed, when after increasing to a certain point the intensity 
begins again to diminish. The best rule to be given, would be 
(supposing circumstances would permit it) on perceiving the 
intensity to have become nearly stationary in its amount, to 
turn short and pursue a course at right angles to that just 
before followed, when a change could not fail to occur, and 
indicate by its direction towards which side the focus in ques- 
tion were situated. 

Another, and as it would appear, a better mode of conducting 
such a research, would be, when in the presumed neighbour- 
hood of a focus of maximum intensity, to run down two parallels 
of latitude or two arcs of meridians separated by an interval 
of moderate extent, observing all the way in each, by which 
observations when compared, the concavities of the isodynamic 
lines would become apparent, and perpendiculars to the chords, 
intersecting in or near the foci, might be drawn. 

Two foci or points of maximum total intensity are indicated 
by the general course of the lines in Migor Sabine's chart in 
the southern hemisphere, one about long. 140^ R, kt. 47^ S^ 
the other more obscurely in long. 236^ £., lat. 60^ S. or there- 



INTaODUCnON. XXXYU 

abouts. Both these points are certainly accessible; and as the 
coarse of the expedition will lead not far from each of them, 
thej might be visited with advantage bj a course calculated 
to lead directlj across the isodjnamic ovals surrounding them. 

Pursuing the course of the isodjnamic lines in the chart 
above mentioned, it appears that one of the two points of 
minimum total intensity, which must exist, if that chart be 
correct, may be looked for nearly about lat 25^ S., long. 12^ 
W., and that the intensity at that point is probably the least 
which occurs over the whole globe. Now this point does not 
lie much out of the direct course usually pursued by vessels 
going to the Cape. It would therefore appear desirable to pass 
directly over it, were it only for the sake of determining by 
direct measure the least magnetic intensity at present existing 
on the earth, an element not unlikely to prove of importance in 
the farther progress of theoretical investigation. Excellent 
opportunities will be afforded for the investigation of all these 
points, and for making out the true form of the isodynamic ovals 
of the South Atlantic, both in beating up for St Helena, and in 
the passage from thence to the Cape ; in the course of which, 
the point of least intensity will, almost of necessity, have to be 
crossed, or at least approached very near. 

Nor is the theoretical line indicated by Gauss as dividing the 
northern and southern regions, in which free magnetism may be 
regarded as superficially distributed, undeserving of attention. 
That line cuts the equator in 6^ east longitude, being inclined 
thereto (supposing it a great circle) 15^, by which quantity it 
recedes from the equator northward in going towards the west 
of the point of intersection. Observations made at points lying 
in the course of this line may hereafter prove to possess a value 
not at present contemplated. 

As a theoretical datum, the horizontal intensity has been 
recommended by Gauss, in preference to the total, not only as 
being concluded from observations susceptible of great precision, 
but as affording immediate facilities for calculation. As it can- 
not now be long before the desideratum of a chart of the hori- 
zontal intensity is supplied, the maxima and minima of this 
element may also deserve especial inquiry, and may be ascertained 
in the manner above pointed out. 

The maxima of horizontal intensity are at present undeter- 

b 3 



• •• 



XXXVlll INTRODUCTION. 

znined bj any direct observation. Thej must of necessitj 
however, lie in lower magnetic latitudes than those of the total 
intensity, as its minima mast in higher, and from such imperfect 
means as we have of judging, the conjectural situations of the 
maxima may be stated as occurring in 

20*» N. 80** E. I. 

7 N. 260 E. n. 

8 S. 130 E. UL 
10 S. 180 E. IV. 

Observations have been made of the horizontal intensity in 
the vicinities of IL and IIL, and are decidedly the highest 
which have been observed anywhere. 

In general, in the choice of stations for determining the abso- 
lute values of the three magnetic elements, it should be borne 
in mind, that the value of each new station is directly propor- 
tional to its remoteness from those already known. Should any 
doubt arise, therefore, as to the greater or less eligibility of 
particular points, a reference to the existing magnetic maps 
and charts, by showing where the known points of observatioa 
are most sparingly distributed, will decide it. 

For such magnetic determinations as those above contem- 
plated, the instruments hitherto in ordinary use, with the addi- 
tion of Mr. Fox*s apparatus for the statical determination of the 
intensity, will suffice ; the number of the sea observations com- 
pensating for their possible want of exactness. The determi- 
nations which belong to the second branch of our subject, — 
viz. those of the diurnal and other periodical variations, and of 
the momentary fluctuations of the magnetic forces, — require, 
in the present state of our knowledge, the use of those more 
refined instruments recently introduced. Being comparative 
rather than absolute, they depend in great measure (and as 
regards the momentary changes, wholly) on combined and 
simultaneous observation. 

The variations to which the earth's magnetic force is subject, 
at a given place, may be classed under three heads, namely, 
1. the irregular variations, or those which apparenify observe 
no law ; 2. the periodical variations, whose amount is a function 
of the hour of the day, or of the season of the year ; and 3. the 
secular variations, which are either slowly progressive, or else 



INTRODUCTION. XXXIX 

return to their former values in periods of very great and 
unknown magnitude. 

The recent discoveries connected with the irregular vari- 
ations of the magnetic declination^ have given to this dass of 
changes a prominent interest. In the year 1818, M. Arago 
made, at the Ohservatory of Paris, a valuable and extensive 
series of observations on the declination changes; and M. 
Kupffer having about the same time undertaken a similar 
research at Cazan, a comparison of the results led to the dis- 
covery that the perturbations of the needle were iynehronoui 
at the two places, although these places differed from one 
another by more than forty*seven degrees of longitude. This 
seems to have been the first recognition of a phenomenon, which 
now, in the hands of Gauss and those who are labouring with 
him, appears likely to receive a full elucidation. 

To pursue this phenomenon successfully, and to promote in 
other directions the theory of terrestrial magnetism, it was 
necessary to extend and vary the stations of observation, and to 
adopt at all a common plan. Such a system of simultaneous 
observations was organised by Yon Humboldt in the year 1827* 
Magnetic stations were established at Berlin and Freyberg: 
and the Imperial Academy of Bussia entering with zeal into 
the project, the chain of stations was carried over the whole of 
that colossal empire. Magnetic houses were erected at Peters- 
burgh and at Cazan ; and magnetic instruments were placed, 
and regular observations commenced, at Moscow, at Sitka, at 
Nicoliyeff in the Crimea, at Bamaoul and Nertschinsk in 
Siberia, and even at Pekin. The plan of observation was defi- 
nitely organized in 1830 ; and simultaneous observations were 
made seven times in the year, at intervals of an hour for the 
space of forty-four hours. 

In 1834, the illustrious Gauss turned his attention to the 
subject of terrestrial magnetism ; and having contrived instru- 
ments which were capable of yielding results of an accuracy 
before unthought of in magnetic researches, he proceeded to 
inquire into the simultaneous movements of the horizontal 
needle at distant places. At the very Outset of his inquiry he 
discovered the fact, that the synchronism of the perturbations 
was not confined (as had been hitherto imagined) to the larger 
and extraordinary changes ; but that even the minutest devi- 

b 4 



xl nrrRODUcnoN. 

ation at one place of obserration had its counterpart at the 
other. Graiiss was thus led to organize a pUn of sixnaltaneous 
obsenrations, not at intervals of an hour, but at the short inter- 
vals of five minutes. These were carried on through twenty- 
four hours six * times in the year ; and magnetic stations 
taking part in the system were established at Altona, Augs- 
burg, Berlin, Bonn, Brunswick, Breda, Breslau, Cassel, Copen- 
hagen, Dublin, Freyberg, Gottingen, Greenwich, Halle, Kazan, 
Cracow, Leipsic, Milan, Marburg, Munich, Naples, St Peters- 
burg, and Upsala. 

Extensive as this plan appears, there is much yet remaining 
to be accomplished. The stations, numerous as they are, 
embrace but a small portion of the earth's surface ; and what 
is of yet more importance, none of them are situated in 
the neighbourhood of those singular points or curves on the 
earth's surface, where the magnitude of the changes may be 
expected to be excessive, and perhaps even their direction 
inverted. In short, a wider system of observation is required 
to determine whether the amount of the changes (which is 
found to be very different in different places) is dependent 
simply on the geographical or on the magnetic co-ordinates of 
the place ; whether, in fact, the variation in that amount be 
due to the greater or less distance of a disturbing centre, or to 
the modifying effect of the mean magnetic force of the place, 
or to both causes acting conjointly. In another respect also^ 
the plan of the simultaneous observations admits of a greater 
extension. Until lately the movements observed have been 
only those of the magnetic declination^ although there can be 
no doubt that the inclination and the intensity are subject to 
similar perturbations. Recently, at many of the Gennan 
stations, the horizontal component of the intensity has been 
observed, as well as the declination ; but the determination 
of another element is yet required, before we are possessed of 
all the data necessary in this most interesting research* 

The magnetic observations about to be established in the 
British colonies, by the liberality of the government, wiU (it is 
hoped) supply in a great measure these desiderata. The stations 
are widely scattered over the earth's surface, and are situated at 

• Reoentlj reduced io/aur. 



INTBODUCnoN. xll 

poinffl of prominent interest with regard to the laodynamic and 
Isoclinal lines. The point of maximum intensity in the northern 
hemisphere is in Canada ; the corresponding maximum in the 
southern hemisphere is near Van Diemen's Land ; St. Helena 
is dose to the line of minimum intensity ; and the Cape of Good 
Hope is of importance on account of its southern latitude. At 
each observatory the changes of the vertical component of the 
magnetic force will be observed, as well as those of the horizon' 
tal component and declination ; and the yariations of the two 
components of the force being known, those of the inclination 
and of the force itself are readily deduced. The simultaneous 
observations of these three elements will be made at numerous 
and stated periods, and we have every reason to hope that the 
directors of the various European observatories will take part 
in the combined system. 

But interesting as these phenomena are, they form but a 
small part of the proper business of an observatory. The regu- 
lar changes (both periodic and secular) are no less important 
than the irregular; and they are certainly those by which a 
patient inductive inquirer would seek to ascend to general laws. 
£ven the empirical expression of those laws cannot fail to be of 
the utmost value, as furnishing a correction to the absolute 
values of the magnetic elements, and thereby reducing them to 
their mean amount 

The hourly changes of the declination have been frequently 
and attentively observed; but with respect to the periodical 
variations of the other two elements, our information is as yet 
very scanty* The determination of these variations will form 
an important part of the duty of the magnetic observatories ; 
and from the aoauracy of which the observations are susceptiblci 
and the extent which it is proposed to give them, there can be 
no doubt that a very exact knowledge of the empirical laws will 
be the result. 

With respect to the secular variations, it might perhaps be 
doubted whether the limited time during which the observatories 
will be in operation is adequate to their determination. But it 
should be kept in mind that the monthly mean corresponding to 
each hour of observation will furnish a separate result ; and that 
the number and accuracy of the results thus obtained may be 
such as fully to compensate for the shortness of the interval 



Xlii INTBODUCnON 

through which thej are followed. A beautiful example of such 
a result, deduced from three years' obserration of the dedina- 
tion, is to be found in the first volume of Gauss's magnetical 
work, of which a translation is published in the fifth number of 
Taylor's Scientific Memoirs. 

It remains to say a few words of the instrumental means 
which have been adopted for the attainment of these ends. 

The magnetic instruments belonging to each obsenratorj 
and in constant use, are, 1. a declination instrument; 2. a hori- 
lontal force magnetometer; 8. a vertical force magnetometer. 
These instruments are constructed after the plan adopted by 
Professor Lloyd in the Magnetic Observatory of Dublin. The 
magnet, in the two former, is a heavy bar, fifteen inches long, 
and upwards of a pound in weight In the declination instru- 
ment the magnet rests in the magnetic meridian, being sus- 
pended by fibres of silk without torsion. In the horicontal 
force magnetometer, the magnet is supported by two parallel 
wires, and maintained in a position at right angles to the mag- 
netic meridian by the torsion of their upper extremities. In 
both instruments the changes of position of the magnet are read 
off by means of an attached collimater having a divided scale 
in its focus. The magnetometer for the vertical force is a bar 
resting by knife edges on agate planes, and capable of motion 
therefore in the vertical plane only. This bar is loaded so as 
to rest in the horizontal position in the mean state of the force ; 
and the deviations from that position are read off by microme- 
ters near the two extremities of the bar. 

In addition to these instruments, each observatory is fur- 
nished with a dip circle, a transit with an azimuth circle, and 
two chronometers. Each vessel also is supplied with a similar 
equipment Should therefore the ships be under the necessity 
of wintering in the ice, — and generally, on every occasion 
when the nature of the service may render it necessary to pass 
a considerable interval of time in any port or anchorage, — 
the magnetometers should be established, and observations nuule 
with all the regularity of one of the fixed observatories, and 
with strict attention to all the same details. 

The selection of proper stations for the erection of the mag- 
netometers, and the extent of time which can be bestowed upon 
each, must in a great measure depend on circumstances which 



INTBODUCnON. xliii 

can only be appreciated after the expedition shall have aafled. 
The obserratory at St. Helena (the officers and instruments for 
which will be landed bj Captain Boss) will in all probability, — 
and that at the Cape (similarly drcnmstanced in this respect) 
may possibly, — be in activity by the time the ships arrive at 
K^gnden's Land, which we would recommend as a very in- 
teresting station for procuring a complete and as extensive a 
series of corresponding observations as the necessity of a speedy 
arrival at Yan Diemen*s Land for the establishment of the fixed 
observatory at that point will allow ; taking into consideration 
the possibility of obtaining during the intermediate voyage a 
similar series at some point of the coast discovered by Kemp 
and Biscoe. In the ulterior prosecution of the voyage, a point 
of especial interest for the performance of mmilar observations 
will be found in New Zeidand, which, according to the sketch 
of the voyage laid before us by Captain Boss, will probably be 
visited shortly after the establishment of the Yan Diemen's 
Land observatory. The observations there will have especial 
interest, since, taken in conjunction with those simultaneously 
making in Yan Diemen's Land, they will decide the important 
question, how far that exact correspondence of the momentary 
magnetic perturbations which has been observed in Europe, 
obtains in so remote a region, between places separated by a 
distance equal to that between the most widely distant European 
stations. 

In the interval between quitting Yan Diemen's Land and 
returning to it again, opportunities will no doubt occur of per- 
forming more than one other series of magnetometer observa- 
tions, the locality of which may be conveniently left to the 
judgment of Captain Boss, bearing in mind the advantage of 
observing at stations as remote as possible from both Yan 
Diemen's Land and New Zealand. 

The research for the southern magnetic pole and the explo- 
ration of the antarctic seas will afford, it may be presumed, 
many opportunities of instituting on land hitherto unknown, or 
on ton ice when the vessel may be for a time blockaded, observ- 
ations of this description ; and in the progress of the circum- 
navigation, the line of coast observed or supposed to exist under 
the name of Graham's Land, or those of the islands in that 
vicinity, South Shetland, Sandwich Land, and finally on the 



Xliv INTRODUCTION. 

homewmrd TOjige the Uand of Tristan d'Acunha, will aflTord 
stationfl each of its own particnlar interest 
. A programme will be furnished of the days selected for 
simultaneous observations at the fixed obserratories^ and of the 
details to be attended to in the obserratioDS themselves as 
above alluded to. These dajs will include the terms or stated 
dajs of the Grerman Magnetic Association, in which, by ar* 
rangements already existing, every European magnetic observa* 
tory is sure to be in full activity. These latter days, which 
occur four times in the year, will be especially interesting, as 
periods of magnetometrical observations by the expedition, 
when the circumstances of the voyage will permit For the 
determination of the existence and progress of the diurnal 
oscillation, in so far as that important element can be ascer- 
tained in periods of brief duration, it wiU be necessary to con- 
tinue the observations hourly during the twenty-four for not 
less than one complete week. At every station where the mag- 
netometers are observed, the absolute values of the dip, hori- 
sontal direction, and intensity will require to be ascertained. 

Sydney, for a station of absolute determinations, would be 
with great prc^rie^ selected, as there can be no doubt of its 
becoming at no distant period a centre of reference for every 
species of local determination. 

The meteorological particulars to be chiefly attended to» as a 
part of the msgnetic observation^ are those of the barometer, 
thermometer, wind, and especially auroras^ if any. In case of 
the occurrence of the latter indeed, the honriy should at once 
be exchanged for uninterrupted observation, should that not be 
actually in operation. The aflfections of the magnetometers 
during thunder-storms, if any, should be noticed, though it is 
at present believed that they have no influence. 

During an earthquake in Siberia in 1829, the direction of the 
horisontal needle, carefully watched by M. Brmin, was unin- 
fluenced} should a similar opportunity occur, and drcumstaooes 
permit, it should not be neglected. 

Should land or secure ice be found in the neighbourhood of 
the magnetic pole^ every attention will of course be paid to the 
procuring a complete and extensive series of magnetometrie 
observations, which in such a locality would form one of the 
most remarkable results of the 



INTRODUCTION. xlv 

The Other objects of inquiry recommended by the Com- 
mittee of Physics and Meteorology are enumerated in the 
following summary of the Beport : — 

1, Magnetic obsenrationB of the inclination, declination^ and 
intensity at sea, throughont the voyage, daily in both ships, 
wheneyer the motion of the vessel will permit. 

2. Precise determinations of the same particulars wherever 
the expedition may land, or disemhark on ice. 

S. Most careful series of magnetometric observations, in cor- 
respondence with those to be made at the fixed observatories, 
according to a plan concerted with the officers of those observa- 
tories, and with Professor Lloyd, the particulars of which will 
be furnished to each party concerned, and distributed to all the 
European and other observatories. 

4. A circumnavigation of the Antarctic Pole, with a view to 
affording opportunities and proper stations for magnetic and 
other observations. 

5. An inquiry into the actual position of the southern mag- 
netic pole or poles, and the points or foci of greatest and least 
total and horizontal intensity, and into the course and figure of 
the isodynamic ovals presumed to occupy the area of the South 
Atlantic 

6. The determination of the length of the invariable pendulum 
at several stations in high south latitudes. 

7« Observations of the tides, i. e. of the heights and times 
of high water, made at such stations at which the ships may 
remain long enough, and at which the correct establishment is 
unknown. 

8« The keeping of a regular meteorological register in both 
ships during the whole voyage, and the paying attention to the 
phenomena of solar and terrestrial radiation, and generally to 
all phenomena bearing on the subject of meteorology. 

9. The temperature of the sea at the surface and at stated 
moderate depths should be observed as frequently as possible, 
and whenever opportunity may occur, also at the greatest depths 
attainable ; and attention should be directed to the temperature 
of currents and shoals, as well as to its variation on approach- 
ing land. The temperature of the soil at various depths 
should be taken on landing, as well as that of springs, wells, kc 



Xlvi INTRODUCTION. 

10. Soundings should be attempted in deep seas, and speci- 
mens of the water brought up be preserved for future exami- 
nation. 

1 1. Observations should be collected of the aurora in high 
south latitudes ; and attention directed to meteors and shooting 
stars on those occasions when experience has shown that thej 
occur periodicallj in great abundance ; as well as to the appear- 
ance of the sodiacal light, and other phenomena of a similar 
occasional nature. 

12. Observations of the comparative brightness of southern 
stars should be procured, and especiallj of the variable stars a 
HjdrsB and ti Axgt^s. 

13. The amount and laws of horizontal refraction, both 
celestial and terrestrial, in high south latitudes, should be in- 
vestigated. 

14. The phenomena of eclipses should be attended to. 

The Geological, Zoological, and Botanical Com- 
mittees also drew up catalogues of desiderata, with 
full instructions for the collection and preservation 
of specimens of the animal, vegetable, and mineral 
kingdoms; and the Admiralty furnished us with 
ample means for carrying out their several recom- 
mendations. ^ 

The two former collections were undertaken by 
Mr. M'Cormick and Mr. Robertson, in addition to 
their duties as chief medical officer of each ship ; 
and for the diligence and zeal with which they per- 
formed their task, my thanks are especially due ; 
as also to Dr. Joseph D. Hooker and Mr. Lyall, 
whose unceasing exertions in the botanical depart- 
ment have contributed several thousand new genera 
and species to the catalogues of the Southern 
Flora. 



INTRODUCTION. xlvii 

To Mr, M^Gormick and Dr, Hooker I am besides 
indebted for several very interesting notices of the 
geology and botany of the places visited by the 
Expedition, which are inserted either in the narra- 
tive or the Appendix. 

The drawings and vignettes contained in these 
volumes were principally furnished by Mr. Davis ; 
those of Christmas Harbour, Nine Pin Rock, and 
deep soundings, by Lieutenant Dayman ; and some, 
which bear his name, by Dr. Hooker. 

I have also to express my deep obligations to 
Dr. Sir John Richardson, of Haslar Hospital, and 
J. E. Gray, Esq., of the British Museum, for under- 
taking, gratuitously, the publication of an account of 
the zoological collection formed during the course 
of our voyage ; and to those gentlemen of the 
British Museum who have assisted them in the 
laborious task ; and to Dr. Hooker, for the elabo- 
rate manner in which he is describing the extensive 
botanical collection in the beautifully executed 
" Flora Antarctica." 

For the illustration of these two great works, 
which are now advancing towards completion, the 
government, at the recommendation of the Lords 
Commissioners of the Admiralty, granted the sum 
of two thousand pounds ; and I hope that natural- 
ists will at once appreciate the liberality of this 
measure, and acknowledge that the money has been 
advantageously employed. 

It has been impossible, in the course of the nar- 
rative, to do more than glance at some of the im- 



Xlviii INTRODUCTION. 

portant scientific results of the expedition ; but the 
whole of the observations are in course of publica- 
tion, chiefly in the Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society. Under the able supervision of 
Colonel Sabine, nearly all relating to terrestrial 
magnetism, which were transmitted by me, as 
opportunities offered, to £ngland, have already 
appeared ; and the magnetometric portion of them, 
in a separate volume, is in a forward state of pre- 
paration. The expense of these publications has 
been also defrayed by the government. 

I am also indebted to Admiral Beaufort for the 
kind assistance he has given me in the construction 
of the plans and charts contained in these volumes ; 
to Mr. Davis, of the Terror, by whom they were 
dra%vn from my original documents ; and to the 
Messrs. Walker, for the accuracy and beauty with 
which they have been engraved. 

Indeed, I am unable to express the gratitude I 
feel to those gentlemen who have so generously 
come forward to afford their gratuitous assistance 
in the publication of the accumulated labours of 
the Expedition : in their hands I feel assured that 
full justice will be done to the several subjects 
under their discussion, and that when all shall have 
been completed, I think it will be acknowledged 
that the Expedition has accomplished the more 
important objects for which it was sent forth. 

JAMES C. ROSS. 

AttoD House, Ajlesbarj, 
Jane 1. 1847. 



CONTENTS 



or 



THE FIRST VOLUME. 



CHAPTER L 

Leaye Chatham. — Experiments at Gillingham. — Margate 
Roads. — Departure from the Lizard. — Height of Waves. — 
Bay of Biscay. — Maderia. — Pico Ruivo. — Phenomenon.— 
Tea Plantation. — Touch at Santa Cruz. — Port Praya. ^- 
Quail Island. — Observations. — Enter the Variables. — Plane 
of Vapour. — St Paul's Rocks. — Geological Remarks. — 
Cross the Equator. — Magnetic Equator. — Rapid Change of 
Dip. — Point of least Intensity. — Island of Trinidad. — 
Local Magnetic Influence - - • - . Page 1 

CHAPTER IL 

Tropic of Capricorn. •— Deep Soundings. — Arrival at St. 
Helena. — Land Observers and Instruments. — Magnetic 
Observatory. — Powerful Magnetic Effect of the Island. — 
Sail from St. Helena. — Direction of line of least Magnetic 
Intensity. — Its Change of Position as compared with former 
Observations. — Water Spouts. — Sudden Gusts of Wind 
and heavy Rain. — Height of Waves. — E[attendyk ShoaL — 
Second Experiment for deep Soundings. — Current of cold 
Water. — Great Change in Temperature of Air and Sea. — 
Its probable Cause. — Arrive at Cape of Good Hope. — 
Replenish Stores and Provisions .... 25 



VOL. I. 



I CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER ni. 

Sail from Simon's Bay. — The Cape Current. — Aguilhas Bank. 
— Soundings. — Currents. — Change of Climate. — Prince 
£dward*8 Island. — Penguins. — Soundings. — Anchorage.— 
Crozet Islands. — Possession Island. — East Island. — America 
Bay. — Sealing Partj. — Elephant Fishery. — Anchorages. — 
East Island. — Dark Head. — Remarkable Rocks. — Iceberg 
seen. — Oceanic Birds. — Bligh's Cap. — Cape Francois. — 
Erebus Bank. — Terror Reef. — Sperm Whales. — Arched 
Rock. — Christmas Harbour • . • - Page 39 

CHAPTER IV. 

Kerguelen Island. — Cook's Visit. — Christmas Harbour. — 
Table Mount. — Fossil Trees. — Seams of Coal. — Greological 
Notice of the Formation of the Land in the Vicinity of 
Christmas Harbour. — Cumberland Bay. — Botanical Notice 
of Kerguelen L^lnnd. — Zoological Notice. — Magnetic Ob- 
seryations. — Violent Gales. — Surveys. — Geographical 
Position • - - - - - 63 

CHAPTER V. 

Terror Reef. — Beds of Seaweed. — Current — The Ships part 
Company. — Hurricane. — Boatswain drowned. — Iceberg 
seen. — Succession of Gales. — Magnetic Force. — Obserra- 
tions. — Line of no Variation. — Make the Land. — Driven 
off by a Storm. — Anchor in the Derwent. — Magnetic Ob- 
servatory. — Term day Observations. — French Expedition. 
— French Discoveries. — American Expedition. — Selection 
of Route. — Van Diemen's Land. — Society of Hobart Town. 
— Proposed College. — Magnetometricd Observations. — 
Situation of Observatory • - • - 95 

CHAPTER VL 

F!reparations for Sea. — Storm Bay. — Auckland Islands. — 
Black Head. — Bristow Rock. — Enderby Island. — Rendezvous 
Harbour. — French Expedition. — United States Brig Por- 
poise. — Magnetometric Observations. — Local Attraction. — 



CONTENTS, li 

Rendezvous Harbour as a Penal Settlement, — Laurie Har- 
bour. — Meteorological Abstract, — Formation of Auckland 
Islands. — Botanical Notice. — 2k>ological Notice. — Wild 
Hogs. — Animals landed. — Tree Fern. — Result of Observa- 
tions. — Campbell Island. — Botanical Notice. — Albatross 
Nests. — Sealers' Graves ... Page 128 

CHAPTER Vn. 

Departure from Campbell Island. — Midsummer Daj. — Christ- 
mas Daj. — First Iceberg. — Whales. — Deep Soundings. — 
Cross the Antarctic Circle. — New Year's Day — View of 
the Pack. — Refraction. — Enter the Pack. — False Appear- 
ance of Land. — Progress through the Pack. — Penguins.— 
Beset in the Pack. — Temperature of the Ocean. — Observa- 
tions on the Ice. — Get into a clear Sea. — Land discovered. 
— Cape Adare. — Admiralty Range. — Mount Sabine. — Cape 
Barrow. — Bellinghausen. — Land on Possession Island.— 
Southerly Grale. — Great Number of Whales. — Whale 
Fishery. — Mount HerscheL — Mount Lloyd. — Chain of 
Islets. — Soundings. — Harbours. — Stormy Weather. — 
Coulman Island. •— Lr^ular Soundings. — Dredge in deep 
Water. — Corals. — Cape Wheatstone. — Current. — Mount 
Melbourne. — Land Ice. — Marine Invertebrata - 165. 

CHAPTER Vni. 

High Southern Latitude. — Heavy Pack.- — Mount Melbourne. 
— Approach Magnetic Pole. — Land on Franklin Island. — 
Active Volcano discovered. — Parry Mountains. — Cape 
Crozier. — Cape Bird.— Great Icy Barrier. — Meteorological 
Abstract — Bank discovered. — Magnetic Point. — Enter a 
Pack. — Farthest South. — The Great Penguins. — Close 
the Barrier. — Examination of the Pack. — Chain of Bergs. 

— Steer for the Magnetic Pole. — The Warm Air Stove. 

— Coloured Ice. — Eruptions of Mount Erebus. — South 
Magnetic Pole. — Albert Moyntains. — Victoria Land. — 
Sailing through young Ice. — Doubtful Island. — Bear 
away to the Northward. — Cape Adare. — Examine North 
Coast. — Smith Inlet and Yule Bay. — Mount Elliott. — 



lii CONTENTS. 

Barrier from Capo North. — Oreat Change of Variation. — 
Cape North. — Proceed to the Northward. — Narigation of 
the Antarctic Seas. — Last Sight of Victoria I^md.— Aurora 
Aostralis. — Meteorological Abstract - Page 209 

CHAPTER IX. 



Aurora Australia. — New Land discovered. — Russell Peak. — 
Ballenj Islands. — Cdte Clarie. — Balleny's Discoveries. — 
Antarctic Continent. — Wilkes's Discoreries. — Recross Ant- 
arctic Circle.— Wilkes's Land Ballenj Islands.— Chain of 

Bergs. — Perilous Situation. — * Examination of the Pack. — 
Search for supposed Land. — Facts connected with the DiA 
corerj of Wilkes's Land • • - • 265 

CHAPTER X. 

Magnetic Pole of M. Gh^uss. — Delayed hj adyerse Winds.— 
Great Fall of the Barometer. — Sailing along the Pkck Edge. 
*- Magnetic Observations.— * line of no Variation. — Aurora 
Australia. — Great Flight of Petrels. — Icebergs. — Mean 
Temperature of the Ocean. — Meteorological Abstract — 
Focus of greatest Intensity. — Enter the Derwent. — Satis- 
factory Conclusion of the Voyage ... aoi 



LIST OF PLATES AND MAPS 

IN 

THE FIRST VOLUME. 



Christinas Harbour, Eirguelen Island {Frontispiece.) 

Chart of Victoria Land ..... Fage 1 
Nine Pin Rock, Trinidad. Chap. I. 

St Paul's Rocks (Map) p. 17 

Entrance to Christmas Harbour. Chap. II^ 

Arched Rock, Christmas Harbour. Chap. IV. 

Christmas Harbour (Map) - - ... p. 90 

Rossbank Obserratory, Chap. V. 

Mount Minto and Mount Adam. Chap. VI. 

Rendezvous Harbour (Map) - - - • p. 153 
South or PerscTerance Harbour (Map) « - p. 156 

Possession Island, Victoria Land. Chap. VIL 

Mount Sabine and Possession Island - - - p. 183 

Coulman Island - p. 199 

Cape Crozier and Mount Terror. Chap. VIII. 

Beaufort Island and Mount Erebus - - - p. 216 

South Polar Barrier p. 232 

Wilkes's Discoveries (Plan) - - - - p. 352 



VOL. I. <l 




^ Mnrfhiirx>n 



I C T <> R 1 A 



L A X D 



VICTORIA LAN 1> 

DiKciw«TfHl in 

H.M.S.KKFJU'S Ir TERKOK 

I'uilrr Uh* Coutttijuul of 

CAI'T* JAMr.S t'UkHK M»SS lOT THX 
AMU COMS>IUNl'Bilia.*fU*<UCM It V 

JAXr 1R41. 









^>* 



"/^^m^h 



-i=^ 



J^C 



yf 



VOYAGE 



or 



H.M.S. EREBUS AND TERROR 



TO THB 



ANTARCTIC OCEAN, 



1839—43. 



CHAPTER I. 



The fortification of the Erebus being at length 1899. 
complete, she was warped out of dock on the 1 5th AttgTiir 
of August, and, by the united efforts of both ships' 
crews, her equipment proceeded rapidly. 

On the 2d of September, the Right Hon. the Earl Sept 2. 
Minto, Vice- Admiral Sir Charles Adam, and Rear- 
Admiral Sir William Parker, the three Senior Lords 
Commissioners of the Admiralty, inspected the 
Erebus, and were pleased to express their satis- 
faction at the complete manner in which she had 
been fitted for the intended service. 

On the 16th I received their lordships* final Sept le. 
instructions, and on the 19th the Erebus and 
Terror moved down the river to the moorings off 
Gillingham. Here the remainder of our stores and 

B 



MARGATE ROADS. [Chap. I. 

1889. provisions was taken on board, and observations 



for the determination of the effect produced on the 
compasses by the iron of the ship were obtained. 
This operation, so simple and desirable at all times, 
became more important and essential in ships 
destined to navigate the more interesting regions 
of magnetic power, and to penetrate to the highest 
attainable magnetic latitude. 

The Commander in Chief, Sir Robert Waller 
Otway, and his family, from whom, during the 
period of our fitting out under his immediate com- 
mand, we had experienced many instances of kind 
consideration and assistance, honoured our ships 
by a visit on the 24th. On the morning of the 
Sept. 25. 25th Captain Superintendent Clavell and the pay 
clerks came on board, and paid the crews three 
months' advance, in addition to the wages then 
due to them ; soon after noon the moorings were 
slipped, and we sailed down the river, followed by 
the Terror. As we passed Sheemess a pilot came 
on board, but not having sufficient depth of water 
over the flats, we were obliged to anchor near the 
buoy off the Mouse until the next morning, when, 
towed by her Majesty's steam vessel Hecate, we 
proceeded to Margate Roads, where we anchored 
at 2h. 2(hn. p. m. The Terror joined us the follow- 
ing evening, and many people from Margate visited 
the ships during their stay at this anchorage. We 
were here supplied with a bower anchor from the 
dock-yard at Deal, to replace a damaged or defective 
one that had broken whilst we were in the act of 



Cbaf. L] departure FROM THE UZARD. ^ 

heaving it up, fortunately at a time that no harm ^^^' 
could result from the gross negligence of those 
whose duty it was to ascertain the soundness of 
that on which, under different circumstances, the 
ship, and lives of all on board, might have mainly 
depended. 

A prevalence of westerly wind detained us in Sept so. 
Margate Roads until the evening of the 30th Sep- 
tember. It suddenly shifted to the eastward at 
six P.M., when we weighed, and beat round the 
Foreland; before midnight, we hove to for a few 
minutes in the Downs, to discharge our pilot, and 
to enable the Terror to join company. 

We made good way down Channel until after Oct. 8. 
noon of the 3d October, when, abreast of the Start 
Point, we encountered a strong south-westerly gale ; 
but, being unwilling to lose more time by entering 
any of the Channel ports, we kept the sea, and were 
gratified to find our ships behave well throughout 
the gale, although much deeper laden than we con- 
sidered desirable. During the night of the gale 
the Terror parted company; but, as our run to 
Madeira, the first appointed rendezvous, was so 
short a distance, we proceeded without delay on 
our voyage alone. 

On the morning of the 6th we were off the Oct 5. 
Lizard, tiie last point of tiie coast of England seen ^ 
by us, and from which therefore we took our de- 
parture. It is not easy to describe the joy and 
lightheartedness we all felt as we passed the en- 
trance of the Channel, bounding before a favourable 

n 2 



BAY OF BISCAV. [Chap. I. 

1839. breeze over the blue wave8 of the ocean, fairly 
embarked in the enterprise we had all so long de- 
sired to commence, and freed from the anxious and 
tedious operations of our protracted but requisite 
preparation. 

The daily, almost hourly, observations of various 
kinds, from which so large a measure of useful 
and important results were expected, were now 
reduced into a practical system, and inmiediately 
entered upon with eager zeal and diligence by the 
officers of the Expedition. 

During our passage across the Bay of Biscay we 
had no favourable opportunity of determining the 
height of its waves, as we experienced no violent 
storm : we had, however, a very rough and awkward 
sea, occasioned by a strong south-westerly breeze, 
and mixing confusedly with the long rolling north- 
westerly swell peculiar to this bay. The highest 
waves we measured scarcely exceeded thirty-six feet 
from their base to their summit; the velocity of their 
motion and their distance apart could not be deter- 
mined without the presence of another vessel. 

We availed ourselves of every opportunity of try- 
ing for soundings, but without finding the bottom 
with from three to six hundred fathoms of line. The 
specific gravity of the water we found to be 1'0278 
at the surface, and the same to the depth of three 
hundred fathoms, although it was from ten to fifteen 
degrees colder than at the surface. In lat. 48"* 2(y N. 
and long. 8"* 0' W. we passed through one of those 
very remarkable luminous patches that have been 



CuAP. 1.] MAD£IKA. 

frequently before observed. It was about sixty or ^^^' 
seventy feet in diameter, and much brighter in the 
centre than at the edges. It consisted of aggre- 
gated myriads of animalcul®, which emit a beautiful 
phosphorescent light when agitated by the vessel 
passing through their mass. 

In the evening of the 19th, having reached the Oct 19. 
assigned position of the shoal called ^^the Eight 
Stones," we hove to, and tried for, but could not 
obtain, soundings with three hundred fathoms of 
line, adding another to the many proofs of the non- 
existence of that supposed danger. 

At daylight the next morning Madeira island Oct 20. 
was seen, and we anchored in Funchal Roads in 
the afternoon. By the kind and prompt attention 
of Mr. Stothard, the English consul, we were en- 
abled at once to commence the necessary obser- 
vations for rating our chronometers, and for the 
magnetic desiderata of dip, variation, and intensity, 
— the principal objects of our visit to this delight- 
ful spot. Some uncertainty still existing as to the 
exact altitude of Pico Ruivo, the highest moimtain 
of the island, above the level of the sea, a party of 
officers was despatched to its summit, with two 
mountain barometers, for the purpose of its deter- 
mination : this service was entrusted to Lieutenants 
Wilmot and Lefroy of the Royal Artillery, and 
corresponding observations were made with the 
standard barometers of the Erebus and Terror, 
near high-water mark, by the officers of the ships. 

The result of these operations gave, for the height 



PICO BUIVO. [Chap. I. 

^^^^' of Pico Ruivo, 6097-08 or 6102-90 EngUsh feet, 
axjcording as Gay Lussac's or Rudberg's mea«ure be 
taken for the expansion of air by heat. The result 
is computed by Bessel's tables*, in which the hy- 
grometric state of the atmosphere at the two stations 
is taken into the account. This elevation is some 
hundred feet greater than the height which was 
assigned by Lt.-Colonel Sabine from barometrical ob- 
servations made by the late Captain Clavering, R. N., 
and himself, in the winter of 1 82 1-22. It is probable 
that this difference has been occasioned by the fre- 
quently practised deception of the guides: when 
fog conceals the highest peak from view, they halt 
at a station they call the ^^ Homme a pied^^ which, 
under such circumstances, may be easily mistaken 
for the summit, having a steep descent on every 
side. By this artifice the guides save themselves 
and the travellers the trouble and fatigue of de- 
scending into a deep ravine, and of thence ascend- 
ing the most toilsome portion of the journey to the 
peak. 

Since this was written, the result of Lieutenant 
Wilkes's observations has been published in his 
Narrative of the United States' Exploring Expe- 
dition. His computations assign an elevation to 
Pico Ruivo above half-tide of six thousand two 
hundred and thirty-seven feet : a difference of 
nearly one hundred and forty feet from our ob- 
servations, and much greater than we should expect 

* Scientific Memoirs, toL ii. art. xyi. 



\ 



Chap. L] PHENOMEKOK. 

from the perfect and accurate instruments employed ^^^' 
on both occasions. 

The details of our observations are given in the 
Appendix, together with a letter I have received 
on the subject from Colonel Sabine, as it contains 
a useM caution and suggestion on barometrical 
measures. 

The pile of stones erected by Lieutenant Wilkes's 
officers^ pointed out to our party by the guides; 
but the notice left there by the Americans of their 
visit had been removed by some persons last year, 
and used by them, as the guides informed our 
officers, to light their fire. We did not learn the 
names of those who had been guilty of this un«* 
gracious act. 

The day was splendidly beautiful, and our officers 
obtained a most magnificent view from their ele- 
vated position, overlooking the whole of the island : 
a circumstance of but rare occurrence, owing to the 
almost constant mist which encompasses the higher 
parts of the mountain, occasioned by the condensa* 
tion of the vapour with which the atmosphere of 
this island is so fuUy charged. 

On the evening of the 22d a remarkable phenome- Oct 22. 
non was witnessed by us from thQ anchorage. We 
observed a very faint appearance of a pale rose colour 
rising behind the hills, to the left of Loo island, and 
twenty degrees west of the polar star : it increased 
in brightness and extent, until in twenty minutes 
it attained the altitude of thirty-three degrees, 
and bearing from N. W. to N. by E. by compass. 

B 4 



8 PHENOMENON. [Chap. I. 

^^^^' At 7h. 45m. p.m., when it had risen to forty-three 
degrees, the colour became generally more deeply 
red, but much fainter near the edges, and by a few 
minutes after eight entirely disappeared. At half- 
past nine the same portion of the heavens was again 
illumined in a similar manner. Two coruscations, of 
a paler colour and yellowish tinge, were at this time 
distinctly visible, radiating from the point of first 
appearance; they were what might be termed 
about one foot broad, and ten feet apart at the 
altitude of twenty-five degrees, where they blended 
with the other light. At half-past ten the whole 
graduaUy passed away. 

The wind was N. by W. ; the compass was not at 
aU affected during its continuance ; the stars were 
seen through it, and the moon, which was for some 
time behind a cloud, seemed to produce only a com- 
paratively slight change, when she afterwards shone 
forth with great brilliancy. 

Much anxiety was expressed by the inhabitants 
of the island at this unusual phenomenon : various 
and absurd were their conjectures as to the cause. 
The more prevalent were, either that a new volcano 
had burst forth, or that some very large vessel had 
been destroyed by fire. Both these suppositions 
were proved erroneous on the arrival of the Terror 
at 8 A. M. on the 24th. She was about two hundred 
miles to the northward of Madeira at the time of 
its occurrence, and the description given of it by 
Commander Crozier and the officers of that ship 






Chap. L] TEA PLANTATION. 

agreed so exactly with our own observations, that i^^^- 
no doubt could remain of its identity. 

From the circumstance of the Terror being so 
many miles nearer to it than we were, and from its 
being observed Still to the northward of her, without 
any material difference in its altitude, there can be 
no doubt that its region must be considered far 
beyond the limits of our atmosphere ; but I must 
leave it to those more conversant with these matters 
to assign its cause. 

During our stay at this island we were much in- 
debted to Mr. Stothard for the liberal hospitality 
with which he placed his residence in Funchal 
entirely at the service of Commander Crozier and 
myself, and for affording us every facility in there 
maldng our observations: and also to the Mend- 
ship and kind attentions of Mr. Yeitch, late Consul- 
general ; particularly for the gratification and ad- 
vantage we derived from inspecting with him his 
celebrated " Jardin " of the mountain, where he has 
successfully cultivated several kinds of the tea, and 
other Chinese plants. The garden, or tea planta- 
tion, contained three or four hundred shrubs, and 
aU our party considered the infusion of some of the 
species which we tasted to have such an excellent 
flavour as, in our opinion, to justify his expectations 
of eventually making it an article of commercial 
importance; provided the cost of labour in its 
preparation would not here, as at Rio, be found 
an obstacle. 



10 TOUCH AT SANTA CBUZ. [Chap. I. 

1889. Bananas, dates, figs, spices, and all the choice tro- 
Oct.81. pical fruits, grow abundantly in the gardens about 
the town : and the quantity of coffee raised in the 
island, and which is of a very good quality, is suffi- 
cient to supply the wants of the whole population. 
Our magnetic and other observations were only 
just completed, when a strong westerly breeze and 
heavy south-westerly swell, attended with such 
indications as to the experienced islanders predicted 
a coming storm, obliged us hurriedly to depart at 
4h. P.M. on the 31st. At daylight on the 2d of 
November we saw the lofty peak of Teneriffe, dis- 
tant about sixty miles : our object being to land our 
letters, we steered for Santa Cruz, the chief town of 
the Canary Islands ; but, baffled by calms and light 
winds, it was not until the evening of the 4th that 
we were enabled to accomplish our purpose, and to 
bear away for the Cape de Verd Islands. 

Not. 6. ^^ S^* *^^ ^' '^' t^ad^ wind on the 6th, in lati- 

tude 27® N., and passed the tropic of Cancer on the 
evening of the 8th. We met with large numbers 
of flying-fish, attended by their persecutors, the 
bonito and dolphin ; and thus early on our voyage 
we began the collection of natural history, by pre- 
serving as many different kinds of these creatures 
as we could procure, and by means of towing nets 
and other devices, gathered numerous curious and 
entirely new species of animalculaB, which, like the 
grass of the meadows to land animals, constitute 
the foundation of marine animal subsistence ; and 
by their emitting a phosphorescent light upon dis- 



Cbap.I] FOHT PRATA. 11 

torbance, render the path of the ship through the ^^^- 
waters on a dark night surprisingly brilliant. 

On the 13th St. Jago Island was seen, and the ^oy. is. 
next morning, at ten o'clock, we anchored in Port 
Praya. 

By permission of the Governor we landed our 
tents and instruments on Quail Island, and our 
observations were immediately commenced. The 
island, being of volcanic origin, is by no means a 
desirable position for magnetic determinations ; but 
we had by this time learned to place more reliance 
on those taken on board our ships than on any 
made on shore, even under the most favourable cir- 
cumstances. Our observations were here confined 
to the rating of our chronometers, and the spot 
selected for this purpose is close to a small beach 
on the west side of the island, and quite convenient 
to the anchorage. 

Some of our officers, whose time and duties ad- 
mitted of their making excursions to a distance 
from the shore, described the country, particularly 
the valley of St. Domingo, where was the ancient 
capital of the islands, as far more beautiful and 
fertile than they could have supposed from the 
desolate aspect its coasts present. Not far from the 
town we saw a fine specimen of the giant tropical 
tree of Africa, the Baobab (Adanaonia digitaid) : its 
short, pear-shaped trunk, not more than ten feet 
high, exceeded thirty-eight feet in circumference, 
and at this period its frxiit was forming. 

The heat was most oppressive, and the sickly 



12 KNTEK THE VARIABLES. [Chap. 1. 

^^^^' season being scarcely over, I was glad to leave as 
soon as possible. A few days were sufficient to 
complete our observations, and procure a supply of 
live stock, fresh fruit, vegetables, and water ; all of 
which, except water, are of excellent quality and 
moderate price. 
Not. 20. We saUed from Port Praya on the morning of 
the 20th, and on that day the hourly register of 
the height of the barometer, and the temperature 
of the air and surface of the ocean, was substituted 
for the three-hourly observations hitherto recorded, 
chiefly for the purpose of marking the progress of 
barometric depression in approaching, and re- 
ascension in receding from, the equator, a pheno- 
menon represented as being of the greatest and 
most universal influence, as it is in fact no other 
than a direct measure of the moving force by which 
the great currents of the trade winds are produced; 
so that the measure of its amount and the laws 
of its geographical distribution lie at the root 
of the theory of these winds. 

In lat. 8^ N., and long. 26*^ W., we entered the 
Variables, as the space between the N.E. and S-E. 
trades is called : here violent gusts of wind and 
torrents of rain alternate with calms and light 
baffling breezes, which, with the sufibcating heat of 
the electrically-charged atmosphere, render this part 
of the voyage both disagreeable and unhealthy, 
especially in a flush-decked vessel, where the ne- 
cessity of keeping the hatchways covered prevents 
the free circulation of air. 



\ 



CuAF.T.] ]*LANE OF VAPOUB. 13 

As opportunities offered, experiments were made ^^^• 
to determine the height of the plane of vapour, 
a desideratum of great meteorological importance, 
connected with all the most interesting questions 
regarding the distribution of aqueous vapour over 
the globe and the irrigation of the continents. The 
results of these experiments differed so widely from 
each other, owing chiefly to the great difficulty of 
any thing like exact determination in observations 
of this nature, and probably in some degree from 
an actual difference of its altitude, imder various 
conditions of the atmosphere, ranging from one 
thousand two hundred to nearly three thousand 
feet, barely entitle them to be esteemed more than 
a rough approximation, giving an elevation of about 
two thousand feet as its mean height in the tropical 
regions. 

On the 27th, the sky being very clear, the planet Not. 27. 
Venus was seen near the zenith, notwithstanding 
the brightness of the meridian sun, and was an 
object of much admiration to us all. It enabled us 
to observe the higher stratum of clouds to be 
moving in an exactly opposite direction to that of the 
wind, a circumstance which is frequently recorded 
in our meteorological journal, both in the N. E. and 
S. E. trades, and has also been observed by former 
voyagers. Captain Basil Hall witnessed it from 
the summit of the Peak of Teneriffe ; and Count 
Strzelecki, on ascending the volcanic mountain of 
Eirauea, in Owhyhee, reached, at 4,000 feet, an 
elevation above that of the trade wind, and ex- 



14 ST. Paul's eocks. [Chaf. i. 

^^^* perienced the mfluence of an opposite current of 
air, of a different hygrometric and thennometric 
condition ; facts which tend in some degree to ex- 
plain the means by which the eqnilibrimn of the 
atmosphere under certain conditions is maintained 
in those regions. Count Strzelecki further informed 
me of the following seemingly anomalous circum- 
stance, — that at the height of 6,000 feet he found 
the current of air blowing at right angles to both 
the lower strata, also of a different hygrometric 
and thennometric condition, but warmer than the 
interstratum. 

Our approach to St. Paul's Rocks, for which we 
were steering, was indicated by the appearance of 
the sea-birds which inhabit them, and at nine the 
next morning their two Hgher points were seen 
like specks on the horizon, at a distance of three or 
four leagues : the lower and smaller rocks gradually 
rose into view on nearing them, but our ships hav- 
ing been carried during the night so far to leeward, 
by a strong westerly current which we found to 
prevail here, we could not fetch them until late in 
the evening. 
Nov. 29. We landed early the next morning, but not with- 
out difficulty, owing to the surf and swell which 
broke through the several channels into the central 
basin. We found the steep north-eastern side of the 
cove the most practicable point, and near it we 
obtained our observations. 

These remarkable rocks, which lie in lat. 0*^ 66' 
N. and long. 29*^ 20' W., and more than five hun- 



Chap. I.] GEOLOGICAL REMARKS. 15 

dred miles distant from any continent, appear to ^^^^' 
have been raised from the bed of the ocean by vol- 
canic agency, and not in any part exceeding seventy 
feet above its surface, present the form of an oblong 
crater, the longer axis lying in a N. E. and S. W. 
direction. Mr. Darwin, however, considers them 
not to be of igneous origin, and, in this parti- 
cular, unlike all the other detached islands of the 
Atlantic. 

The following geological remarks upon them are 
by Mr. M^Cormick, surgeon of the Erebus, who 
attended to that branch of natural knowledge : — 

^^ Situated nearly on the equator, in latitude 
0*^56' N., and longitude 29^ 20' W. ; they consist of 
a group of rocks, altogether scarcely exceeding half 
a mile in circumference. The four largest form 
a kind of bay on the N. W. side, in which there is 
a considerable swell, from the surf breaking heavily 
through the three channels by which these rocks 
are separated from each other. The highest rock 
is on the N. E. side of the bay, rather sharply 
peaked, seventy feet above the level of the sea. 
The next in height, and the most remarkable, from 
its uniform white colour, is sixty-one feet, and 
situated on the S. W. or opposite side. This rock 
is composed of a very hard kind of homstone, 
readily affording sparks under a blow of the ham- 
mer, and coated over with a thin layer of cal- 
careous matter, evidently produced frt>m the ex- 
crement of the numerous birds which have selected 
this spot as a breeding-place. 



16 

1839. 



GEOLOGICAL BEMARKS. [Cuap. L 

" The Pdecantis Sulaj and Sterna stolida^ are 
the only species inhabiting these rocks, together 
with a fierce and active crab, which appears to be 
a destructive enemy to their eggs. 

" Not a vestige of vegetation of any kind is to 
be found, excepting a solitary species of Conferva^ 
scantily distributed on the rocks, near the surfsice 
of the sea, and with which the noddies and boobies 
build their nests. 

" The homstone rests upon a very singular- 
looking rock, of a white colour, and meagre earthy 
feel; adhering slightly to the tongue, resembling 
kaolin^ or decomposed felspar, beautifully streaked 
with thin veins of what appears to be serpentine, 
hard and vitreous as glassy felspar. 

" These are the two prevailing rocks, occurring 
in various states of decomposition ; where they are 
exposed to the spray of the sea, in many places 
much honey-combed, and intersected by masses of 
conglomerate, and very curious veins, from half an 
inch to half a foot in diameter, formed of two 
thin black plates of rock, much hardened and 
brittle, with a ringing sound, bearing all the 
marks of having been subjected to intense heat: 
frequently the space between the plates, or sides 
of the veins, is filled by a deposit of carbonate of 
lime ; in others, by a calcareous-looking substance, 
which does not efl^ervesce with acids, while some 
are empty. 

" At low water, the sea-face of the rocks presents 
a band of pale red, the work of the coral insects. 



CsAJt. L] FEBIL OF ONE OF OUB PABTT. 17 

against which the surf is continually breaking. ^^^^' 
These rocks haying been considered remarkable, 
as not being of a volcanic nature, I made a full 
collection of specimens*; and although, certainly, 
no lava or igneous rocks have made their way to 
the surfiice, in evidence of their true origin, yet 
the whole group presents, at a single glance, the 
most strikinfi: effects of the afi^ency by which they 
have been foLd up^rds. le conW mass ^ 
mingled together without the slightest approach to 
stratification ; in many places, the altered appearance 
of the rocks, from the effects of heat, prove them to 
have been volcanic, differing from other volcanic 
islands in the Adantic, only from the melted mat- 
ter not having reached the surface, but remaining 
as it were capped by the bed of the ocean/' 

Our observations here gave for the magnetic dip 
27"* 8' N., and the variation 13"* 2(y W. 

We judged it to be low water this afternoon at Nov. 29. 
three o'clock, and to have fallen between five and 
six feet ; but owing to the surf we were unable* to 
determine these points with the desired accuracy. 
The annexed sketch by Mr. Dayman will serve to 
convey a good idea of the size and arrangement of 
tiiese rocks. 

One of our party, in attempting to wade across a 
narrow channel, was taken off his feet by a heavy 
wave, and was for some time in imminent peril. 
Frequentiy he regained the margin of the shore, and 

* A list of these specimens is given in tl^e Appendix. 

C 



18 CROSS THE EQUATOR. [Chap. I. 

1889. vgtj^ggi^ iQ maintain his hold, but was as fre- 
quently carried back by the retiring wave ; whilst, 
unable to afford him the least assistance, we coi^d 
only look on from the opposite side with the most 
painful apprehensions of seeing him taken away 
by one of the numerous sharks that were playing 
aLt the cove ; however, being an expert s^m^^ 
he at length succeeded in crawling up the rocks, 
greatly weakened by his long-continued exertions, 
though fortunately without other injury than a few 
bruises. 

As we pulled off to the ships in the afternoon, 
we were led to believe, from the discoloration of the 
water, that it is probably shallow to the distance of 
a quarter of a mile from the shore. During our 
absence soundings had been obtained with three 
hundred fathoms on a rocky ground, and some 
small black stones came up with the lead, the islets 
bearing then S. 57 E., distant two-thirds of a mile ; 
but they failed to reach the bottom with five 
hundred fathoms, when they bore S. 67 E. at twice 
that distance, so that the ascent of the submarine 
mountain of which these peaks form the summit 
must be very steep. 
Dec. 3. We crossed the equator about midnight, the 3d 
of December, in long. 30 W., and the ceremony of 
shaving those who had not done so before was 
perpetrated the next morning with as much amuse- 
ment and good-natured fun as usual on such occa- 
sions. Some difference of opinion prevails as to 
the proper meridian in which to cross the line ; but 



Chap. L] MAGNETIC EQUATOB. 1 9 

having to visit St. Paul's Rocks, we were obliged to ^^^- 
run thus far to leeward, or I would have preferred 
the longitude of about 26"* or 27'' W., for the strong 
westerly current is liable to carry ships with a 
scant trade too near to the coast of Brazil. 

This current we found to diminish in strength as 
we proceeded to the southward, and in the 8th or 
9th degree of latitude it gives place to a feeble 
northerly set. 

The Magellhanic clouds and the beautiful con- 
stellation of the Southern Gross now became appa- 
rent ; and although in my estimation the latter is 
inferior in beauty to several of our northern con- 
stellations, yet marking, night after night, by its 
gradually increasing altitude in the heavens, our 
advance upon our course, and becoming hencefor- 
ward the pole-star that was to guide us throughout 
our researches, even as we hoped, to the utmost 
navigable limits of the Antarctic Ocean, we could 
not behold it without sanguine anticipations of the 
future. 

In this part of the tropics we observed large 
patches of the splendid Pyrosoma^ exhibiting a 
beautiful pale silvery light as we sailed past them : 
when taken out of the water the light is discon- 
tinued, until on irritating any particular part of the 
creature it again shows itself at that point, and 
soon pervades the whole animal mass. 

As we approached the magnetic equator, or Dec 7. 
line of no dip, our observations relative to this in- 
teresting question were more frequent ; and in order 

c 2 



20 AfAGNBTIC EQUATOR. [Chap. I. 

^^^^' to secure a faithftil record of those of each ship, as 
well as to detect the cause of any differences in 
either, it became our practice every day at 1 p. m. 
to communicate by signal the results of all that had 
been obtained up to that time. So much advan- 
tage was derived from this measure, that I would 
strongly recommend its adoption by any expedition 
that may be employed on a service of this nature. 
We had watched the progressive diminution of the 
dip of the needle, and steering a course as nearly 
south as the wind permitted, in order to cross the 
line of no dip at right angles, we found the change 
so rapid as to be ascertained with great precision ; so 
much so that the signal for our being on the exact 
point of no dip, where the needles, being equally 
poised between the northern and southern magnetic 
systems, assumed a perfectly horizontal position, 
was being hoisted from both ships at the same 
instant of time. Nothing could be more satisfac- 
tory than the perfect accordance of our observa- 
tions in a determination of so much importance : 
nor could it fail to be of more than ordinary 
interest to me to witness the needle thus affected ; 
having some years previously, when at the north 
magnetic pole, seen it in a directly vertical posi- 
tion : nor was it unnatural, when we saw the south 
pole of the needle beginning to point below the 
horizon, to indulge the hope that ere long we might 
be permitted again to see it in a similar position at 
the south magnetic pole of the earth. 

The regularity, as well as the rapidity, with which 



Chap. L] POINT OP LEAST INTENSITr. 21 

the alterations of dip occur, is also worthy of notice. ^^^' 
At two hundred and eighty miles north of the 
magnetic equator, the dip was 9^ 36V showing 
about 2*05 minutes of change for every mile of 
latitude ; at two hundred and ninety-two miles to 
the south, the dip was 9*^ 52', or about 2*03 mi- 
nutes for every mile of latitude. It is to be remem- 
bered that this large amount of change is limited to 
the region of the magnetic equator; near the poles, 
it requires an approach of about two miles to pro- 
duce an alteration of a single minute of dip. 

The geographical position of the magnetic equa- 
tor where we crossed it was lat. 13^ 45' S, long. 
30^ 41' W. Here we again felt the influence of a 
westerly current of nearly a mile an hour. 

The next matter of " great and especial interest in 
a magnetic point of view, " to which my attention 
was directed in the instructions drawn up for my 
guidance, at the request of the Lords Commis- 
sioners of the Admiralty, by the Committee of 
Physics of the Royal Society, was that of the situ- 
ation of the point of minimum total intensity, or 
that point where the intensity is the least which 
occurs over the whole surface of the globe. It may 
be proper first to explain that, in passing from the 
north to the south magnetic hemisphere, there is 
upon every meridian a point at which the intensity, 
after having gradually diminished, again begins to 
increase as you advance to the higher magnetic 
latitudes. 

These several points united form a circle round 

c 3 



22 ISLAND OF TRINIDAD. [Chap. L 

1889. the earth similar to the magnetic equator, or cirde 
of no dip, like it dividing its circumference into 
two nearly equal portions, and with which it was 
until lately erroneously considered to be identical. 
Upon this circle there is a spot where the intensity 
is at a minimum, now to be the particular object of 
our investigation, together with the direction of 
that circle, and the form and extent of the lines 
and ovals of isodynamic or equal intensity. 

In order to accomplish these several objects, it 
became necessary to pursue a course widely different 
firom that usually followed by vessels bound to St. 
Helena, and imposed upon us the tedious operation 
of beating up to that island against the trade wind, 
an experiment seldom, if ever, attempted, and in our 
dull-sailing ships could only be effected by the sacri- 
fice of a considerable portion of time. As we stood 

Dec. 16. to the southward we crossed the circle, or equator 
of less intensity, in lat. 19^ S. and long. 29* 15' W., 
two hundred miles more to the northward than 
previous observations had led us to expect. 

i>ec 17. On the morning of the 17th December, the island 
of Trinidad was seen ; and at 7h. 30m. a. m. Com- 
mander Crozier and I, accompanied by several 
officers, left the ships. After pulling along the lee- 
side of the island, we at length landed in a small 
cove, a short distance to the northward of the 
Nine Pin Rock, of HaUey, the surf on aU other 
parts being too great to admit of it without hazard- 
ing the destruction of our boats. The island is a 
mass of volcanic matter, and rises abruptly on 



Chap. L] LOCAL MAGNBTIC INFLUENCE. 23 

its leeward side to an elevation of about two i®39. 
thousand feet in some parts. The trap rocks of """"""" 
which it is composed assume most extraordinary 
shapes : the more remarkable of these are the Sugar 
Loaf Hill, near the southern, and the Nine Pin 
Rock, at the north-western part of the island. 
This latter projected to the height of eight himdred 
and fifty feet, almost perpendicularly from the sea, 
in the form of a beautifolly proportioned column, 
is attached at its inner side to a ridge of hills two 
or three himdred feet high, which, like the moun- 
tains that present an insuperable barrier between 
the short beach of large rounded pebbles on which 
we landed, and the interior of the island, is chiefly 
composed of greenstone. 

As a magnetic station, our observations here were 
utterly valueless, but the results may be useful by 
pointing out, in a striking manner, the great 
amount of error to which those made on shore are 
liable. Three dipping needles placed at only just 
sufficient distance apart to ensure their not influ- 
encing each other, indicated as much as three 
degrees difierence of the dip, and all of them con- 
siderably less than that corresponding to the geo- 
graphical position. To as large an amount also were 
the observations of variation vitiated by the local 
disturbing magnetic influence ; whilst those taken 
on board our ships were perfectly free from these 
errors. # 

Horsburgh mentions that the island abounds with 
wild pigs and goats ; one of the latter was seen. 

c 4 



24 ISLAND OF TRINIDAD. [Chap. L 

1889. With the view to add somewhat to the stock 
of useful creatures, a cock and two hens were 
put on shore; they seemed greatly to enjoy the 
change, and, I have no doubt, in so unfrequented a 
situation, and so delightful a climate, wiU quickly 
increase in numbers. We returned to our ships at 
7 P.M., and made all sail to the southward. Tri- 
nidad was still in sight the next morning, at a 
distance of nearly fifty miles, and might be seen 
still fiirther imder more favourable circumstances. 



25 



CHAPTER n. 

On each side of the tropic of Capricorn, which we im9. 
crossed on the evening of the 19th, we experi- Dec 19. 
enced sharp squalls regularly between 8 a. m. and 
noon, and sometimes they occurred about 3 a. m. 
The cumulostratus clouds, of which Sb John Hers- 
chel has given so admirable a description, were in 
all cases the origin of these sudden gusts of wind. 
The cumuli, like beautiAil rolls of wool, were first 
seen to windward, at the height of 3® 46', resting 
upon an ill-defined misty-looking cloud, about one 
degree high. They formed an irregular arch as 
they rose ; and driven towards us by the wind, we 
could see the rain falling abundantly. When it had 
attained 35^ of altitude, the squall struck the ship, 
and compelled us to lower the topsails, and take in 
all the sails but the foresail. They generally 
occurred three or four times in the forenoon. During 
their continuance the wind always veered more to 
the northward, and they were always preceded by 
a very perceptible increase of the short sea that 
obtains in this part of the ocean. 

A curious phenomenon was witnessed by many Dec 20. 
of the officers at 8h. 30m. this evening. It was a 
beautiful clear night, not a cloud to be seen in any 



26 DEEP SOUNDINGS. [Chap. IL 

^^^^' part of the heavens, yet we had a light shower of 
rain of more than an hour's continuance. The 
temperature of the dew-point by Darnell's hygro- 
meter being 72*^, that of the air 74*^. 

In addition to our almost daily experiments on 
the temperature of the ocean to the depth of six 
hundred feithoms, we had made several fruitless 
attempts to obtain soundings as we passed through 
the tropics. These repeated failures were princi- 
pally occasioned by the want of a proper kind of 
line, but they served to point out to us that which 
was most suitable. I accordingly directed one to 
be made on board, three thousand six hundred 
fokthoms, or rather more than four miles in length, 
fitted with swivels to prevent it unlaying in its 
descent, and strong enough to support a weight of 
seventy-six pounds. 
1840. On the 3d of January, in latitude 27*^ 26' S., 
longitude 17^ 29' W., the weather and all other 
circumstances being propitious, we succeeded in 
obtaining soundings with two thousand four hun- 
dred and twenty-five fathoms of line, a depression 
of the bed of the ocean beneath its surface 
very little short of the elevation of Mount Blanc 
above it. 

As I shall nave occasion hereafter to enter more 
fully into the general question of the maximum 
depth of the sea, I shall take that opportunity of 
describing the method by which the soundings 
were obtained, and the accuracy with which the 
several depths were determined. We were at this 



Jan. 3. 



Chaf. n.] ABBIVAL AT ST. HELENA. 27 

time only forty-five miles to the north-west of a ^^^' 
spot where a shoal is marked on the chart as haying 
been discovered in 1701. The great depth of water 
would seem to throw some doubt on the reality of 
this suppo^d danger, but being exactly to leeward 
of the assigned position we were unable to ascer- 
tain the fact. 

In latitude 21'' S., and longitude 16"* 30' W., we J«b. 8. 
recrossed the line of least magnetic intensity. By 
taking advantage of every change of the wind, 
which we found to vary from S.S.E. to E.S.E. 
at different periods of the day, we advanced on an 
average between twenty-tiiree and twenty-four 
miles each day, and eventually anchored in St. 
Helena Roads at 3^ 30^ p. h. on the 31st January. Jan. si. 

The chief purpose of our visit being to establish 
a permanent magnetic observatory, and to land 
Lieutenant Lefroy of the Royal Artillery, and the 
party under his command, together with all the 
instruments intended for their use, I obtained per^ 
mission from His Excellency Lieutenant-General 
Middlemore to make an examination of the lands Feb.8. 
belonging to the crown; and having selected a 
spot near the house that had been erected for the 
residence of the Emperor Napoleon, but which had 
never been occupied by him, as a site for the 
observatory, it was immediately granted by the 
governor. All tiie arrangements for tiie lease of the 
premises, and tiie contracts for tiie necessary build- 
ings, were completed in a few days by tiie diligent 



28 MAGNETIC OBSEBVATORT. [Chap. U. 

^^^' and ready co-operation of the Board of respective 
Officers, consisting chiefly of Lieut.-Col. Trelawny 
of the Royal Artillery, and Captain Alexander of 
the Royal Engineers, to whom I am more especially 
desirous to express thus publicly my thanks for the 
prompt and effectual means they adopted to forward 
the service with which I was charged. 

Here as invariably on all volcanic islands, it was 
found quite impossible to obtain correct measures 
of the magnetic elements, by reason of the large 
amount of the disturbing influence of the rock 
itself. So powerful indeed was it in this par- 
ticular instance, that even at the distance at which 
our ships were anchored it produced such anomalies 
in the results of our observations for the deviation 
of dip, variation, and intensity, as to mask the 
ordinary effects of the ship's iron. The compa- 
risons of our magnetic instruments were just as un- 
satisfactory, for no two places could be found, how- 
ever near to or distant from each other, where 
accordant results could be obtained even with the 

Feb. 9. same instrument. The importance, therefore, of 
St. Helena as a magnetic station will be manifested 
more by the detection of the momentary, irregular, 
and secular changes than by absolute determina- 
tions; and for meteorological purposes it cannot 
fiedl to be of essential advantage. Taking leave of 
our kind friend the governor, Col. Trelawney, Capt. 
Blackwell, and the officers of the 91st regiment, to 
whom we are all indebted for their attentions and 



Chap. IL] LEAVE ST. HELENA. 29 

many acts of friendship, we weighed on the mom- ^^^' 
ing of the ninth, after sending our letters and de- 
spatches on board the " Bombay *' for conveyance 
to England, and proceeded on our voyage. 

The trade wind prevented our fetching so &r to 
the eastward as I wished, so that we crossed for a 
third time the line of least magnetic intensity in 
lat. 21*^ S. and long. 8*^ W. . Our slow progress 
through this, magnetically speaking, very inter- 
esting region afforded us the opportunity of 
obtaining a vast number of observations, which 
having been transmitted to England from the Cape 
of Good Hope were placed in the hands of Lieut.- 
Colonel Sabine of the Royal Artillery, and pub- 
lished, under his supervision, in the Philosophical 
Transactions • of the Royal Society, to which I 
must refer the scientific inquirer for the observations 
themselves, and also for a more detailed account of 
the results. It is enough to state here, in the words 
of Col. Sabine, " that the determination of the posi- 
tion of the line of least intensity is easier, and in 
some respects more sure, than that of an isodyna- 
mic line, because it is independent of the correctness 
of an assumed intensity at a base station. It is 
therefore to be expected that the position of this line 
will become in future years the subject of frequent 
examination, seeming to mark, from time to time, 
the progress of the secular change in its position. 
This may be done with the more interest and ad- 

♦ Part L for 1S42. 



30 LIKE OF LEAST INTENSTTT. [Cbap.IL 

1840. vantage, because there is reason to believe that its 
' position is changing rapidly in the space referred 
to, particularly in the eastern meridians ; and that 
the southern magnetic hemisphere, in so far as its 
boundary may be indicated by this line, is in that 
quarter of the globe gaining rapidly on the 
northern." 

He further states, that whilst the general direc- 
rection of the line of least intensity, drawn from 
observations * of Dunlop, Erman, and Sulivan, cor- 
responding nearly to the epoch of 1825, is con- 
sistent with that deduced from our observations in 
1840, yet its earlier position is every where three 
or four degrees south of that which would be in- 
ferred from the later determinations. Its average 
northerly movement therefore, during the last fif- 
teen years, appears to have rather exceeded an- 
nually thirteen miles. 

Feb. 15. A water-spout of small size, seen on the morning 
of the fifteenth, was followed by a heavy shower in 
the afternoon of an hour's continuance. The rain 
which fell at a temperature of 67*^, in a few minutes 
reduced that of the air from 79** to 73.** 

In lat. 26° 10' S. and long. 12** 50' W. we made 
another attempt at deep sounding, but failed, owing 
to the line being accidentally checked and breaking 
at twelve hundred and sixty fathoms. 

Feb. 22. This evening, soon after dark, a number of cuttle 
fish sprang on board over the weather bulwark, fif- 

♦ See Phil. TranB. 1840. Plate V. 



Chap, n.] SUDDEN OUSTS OF WIND. 31 

teen or sixteen feet high ; several passed entirely ^wo. 
across the ship, and altogether not less than fifty 
were found upon the decks. We could not on this, 
as on a former occasion, ascribe their visit to the 
sea washing them into the vessel, the water at 
the time being quite smooth, and only a moderate 
breeze blowing. 

Whilst running before a strong northerly breeze, ^®^- ^• 
we observed heavy clouds gathering to the S. W., 
and could scarcely reduce our sails before we expe- 
rienced a most violent squall firom that quarter, 
which was almost immediately succeeded by a calm 
of short duration. These sudden gusts of wind are 
not at all indicated by the barometer and are 
not unfrequently the cause of the loss of masts, when 
not prepared for in time. The northerly wind re- 
sumed its power until about noon, when it again 
shifted suddenly to the southward, so that we 
seemed to have got into another region of the vari- 
ables. Before and during the heavy torrents of rain, 
which poured down for the next twenty hours 
with but little intermission, we were surprised that 
both the barometer and s3anpiesometer rose stea- 
dily. The temperature of the rain (as noticed also 
on the fifteenth) being 67*^, again reduced that of 
the air from 74*^5 to 69^ 

In lat. 31*^ 2(y S. we crossed the meridian of Feb. 27. 
Greenwich on our eastward course. 

Although the south-westerly breeze of the pre- Feb. 29. 
ceding day hardly amounted to a moderate gale, we 
found that this morning we had run into a heavy 



32 HEIGHT OF WAVES. [Chap. H. 

1840. swell from that direction. The result of several 
experiments gave only twenty-two feet for the en- 
tire height of the waves, or eleven feet above and 
below the general level of the ocean ; the velocity 
of the imdulations eighty-nine miles per hour, and 
the interval between each wave nineteen hundred 
and ten feet. 

Steering for the shoal, called Kattendyk on our 
charts, in lat. 33*^ S. and long. 4° 62' E, we kept the 
lead constantly going, but could not get soundings 
with from one hundred and twenty to one hun- 
dred and fifty fathoms, although we passed exactly 
over its presumed position ; and the next day, in 

March 1. lat. 33*" 10' S. and long. 5*" 5(y E., we could not 
reach the bottom with five hundred and eighty 
fathoms. 

March 8. At 9h. 30m. A. M., when in lat. 33^ 21' S. and long. 
9^ E., being perfectly calm, we lowered the boats 
down and again succeeded in obtaining deep soimd- 
ings : on this occasion, in two thousand six hundred 
and seventy-seven fathoms, and at a distance of 
about four himdred and fifty miles west of the Cape 
of Good Hope. The current was setting to the 
westward, at the rate of a mile per hour ; and for 
several days previously we had experienced its in- 
fluence fully to that amount. 

March 7. This evening we observed a gradual diminution 
of the temperature of the air and the sea, as we ap- 
proached the coast of Africa ; and before midnight 
we entered a cold mist, which prevented our seeing 
to any considerable distance : the water appearing 



Chap. IL] ALBICAN C0A8T. 33 

discoloured, we tried for, but did not obtain, sound- i^^- 
ings, with one hundred and thirty fathoms of 
line. 

By 1 p. M., the next day, the temperature of the ^•«* «• 
sea had £allen from 70^ to 56^5, that of the air 
being 65^, and the mist unpleasantly cold to our 
feelings. We were at this time in lat. 32^ 2V S. 
long. 17® 6' E., therefore about forty-five miles 
from Paternoster Point, when we struck soundings 
in one hundred and twenty-seven fathoms, on a bed 
of fine dark sand. We had expected to have foimd 
an elevation in the temperature both of the air and 
sea on our approach to the Afirican coast, by reason 
of the radiation of heat from its shores ; but the 
cause of the depression became evident on the 
morning of the 9th, when, having sighted Cape March 9. 
Paternoster at daylight, we found we had to con- 
tend against a current increasing in strength and 
coldness of temperature as we neared the land. 
The existence of a body of cold water rushing 
from the eastward, round the Cape of Good Hope, 
has long been suspected ; but, its extension so far 
to the northward has not, I believe, been before 
noticed. As we were several days beating up to 
the Cape we collected the following curious facts 
respecting it. Thus on the 7th, when distant one 
hundred and twenty miles irom the coast, and be- 
fore we perceived the effects of the current, the 
temperature of the air was 71®, that of the sea 70®, 
and the depth of water more than four hundred 

D 



34 



COAST CUBRENT. 



[Chaf. n. 



1840. 



fathoms ; which being placed in order will serve to 
explain the arrangement of the following table. 







DitUnce 


Temperature. 


Depth 


No. 


Date. 


off 


A • 




of 


Remarks. 






Shore 


Air. 


Sea. 


Water. 








Mild. 






Fms. 




1 


7 


120 


71*^ 


70*^ 


400 


No soundings. 


2 


8 


90 


65 


63 


130 


No soundings. 


3 


— 


45 


65 


56 


127 


Temp, at that depth, 45^. 


4 


.. 


10 


59 


54 


65 




5 


9 


10 


59 


54 


47 




6 


10 


60 


64 


61 


200 


Temp, at that depth, 43^5. 


7 


.» 


20 


61 


55 


130 




8 


11 


52 


67 


64 


203 




9 


_ 


32 


60 


54 


142 




10 


12 


51 


69 


66-5 


313 




11 


mm^ 


36 


67 


67 


202 




12 


-_ 


27 


58 


54-5 


72 




13 


13 


7 


63 


55 


58 




14 


_ 


4 


59 


51-5 


48 




15 


14 


27 


62 


57-5 


115 




16 


15 


6 


55 


51 


76 


W.N. W. from Cape. 


17 


16 


11 


66 


62 


190 


W. S. TV. from Cape. 


18 


17 


4 


65 


60 


37 


In False Baj, S. K frx>m 
Cape. 



By a careful examination of the above experi- 
ments it will be manifest that the distance to which 
the cold water extends from the coast depends ma- 
terially upon the depth of the soundings. It barely 
reaches forty miles firom the shore, where the sea 
is more than three hundred feithoms deep, but 
spreads over double that distance in the shallower 
parts. At forty-five miles firom the land, and at a 
depth of one hundred and twenty fathoms, the tem- 
perature was found to be 45^ that of the surface 



Chat. U.] ANCHOR IN SIMON'S BAT. 35 

being 56^ ; and at sixty miles off the land, at two ^^^' 
hundred fethoms, it waa 48^5, the surfexje being 61^ 

All these circumstances combine to show that 
a northerly current of very limited extent, but 
of considerable force, exists from the Cape of Good 
Hope, along the western coast of Africa ; which, in 
general terms, may be represented by a volume of 
water sixty miles wide and two hundred £Eithoms 
deep, averaging a velocity of about a mile an hour, 
and of the mean temperature of the ocean, running 
between the shores of Africa and the waters of the 
adjacent sea. The cloud of mist which hangs over 
this stream of cold water is occasioned, of course, 
by the condensation of the vapour of the superin- 
cumbent atmosphere, whose temperature is gene- 
rally so many degrees higher than that of the 
sea. It is sufficiently well defined to afford useful 
notice to seamen of their near approach to the 
land. 

We anchored on the evening of the 17 thin Simon's March i7. 
Bay, and immediately commenced the necessary 
comparisons of our magnetic and other instruments, 
the sandstone formation of the coimtry being more 
favourable for the purpose than that of any other 
place we had touched at since leaving England. 
Observations for the effect of the ship's iron on 
the various instruments employed were made in 
both ships, as also, by the kind and ready assistance 
of Captain Puget, on board of the "Melville," 
the first two-decker on which I had ever had an 

j> 2 



86 MAGNETIC OBSERYATORT. [Chaf. IL 

iS4a opportunity of experimenting, and in which it 
proved to be of very small amount. 

We here found no diflBiculty in replenishing our 
stores and provisions, for by an especial order to 
that effect from the Commander-in-Chief, Rear- 
Admiral the Honourable George Elliot, C. B., and 
the active exertions in our favour of J. Deas 
Thompson, Esquire, the naval storekeeper, every 
want was promptly and liberally supplied, and 
every thing done for us that a cordial interest in 
our undertaking could suggest. 

To His Excellency Lieutenant-Greneral Sir George 
Napier I am also much indebted for offering me 
any portion of the crown lands that might be re- 
quired for the site of the Magnetic Observatory, 
which I was directed to establish here, and leave 
under the superintendence of Lieutenant Eardley 
Wilmot, of the Royal Artillery, who, with his party 
of three assistants, and all the necessary instru- 
ments, were now disembarked from the Erebus. 
In making a selection of so much importance I 
gladly availed myself of the judgment and local 
knowledge of Mr. M^Lear, at present and for 
several years past the resident astronomer, and by 
his advice decided on a spot adjoining the Cape 
Observatory ; thereby securing to Mr. Wilmot the 
co-operation of practised observers when long con- 
tinued series of observations should render their 
aid desirable, and at all times relieving him from a 
considerable amount of labour, by rendering the 



Chap.il] magnetic obsebvatobt. 37 

astronomical obsenrations of the observatory avail- ^^^' 
able for his purposes. I am truly obliged to Mr. 
M^Lear for his kindness on that occasion, and for 
the alacrity with which he offered and has given 
every assistance in his power to promote the erec- 
tion of the necessary buildings, and forward the 
views and wishes of Mr. Wilmot in the discharge 
of his arduous and responsible duties. 



D 8 



39 



CHAPTER IIL 

We weighed on the morning of the 6th, and as we isio. 
stood out of Simon's Bay the " Melville " manned .^ g 
her rigging, and gave us three encouraging cheers, 
which we as cordially returned. Light baffling 
airs from the S. E. delayed us, but just before 
dark we succeeded in clearing the breakers of the 
"Bellows" rock, by about a quarter of a mile. 

The Terror was obliged to make another tack, so 
we shortened sail to wait for her ; but, soon after 
midnight, the wind changed suddenly, and the wea- 
ther became so dark and thick, with violent squalls 
and much thunder and lightning, that we parted 
company, and at daylight, not seeing her, we pursued 
our course alone towards Prince Edward Islands, 
where I was desirous of landing to obtain observ- 
ations. 

We found the temperature of the surface of the 
sea to increase rapidly after leaving Cape Point, 
where, as well as in Simon's Bay, it was at 58^ ; 
half a mile from the Cape it was at 58^.5 ; at 8h. 
p. M., within a quarter of a mile of the " Bellows," 
it was 59^ ; at 9h. p. m., only two miles and a half 
ftirther to the south, it was up to 64^ ; at which time 
we were probably in much deeper water : at mid- 
night it was 66^, as was also that of the air ; and 
from which it did not afterwards differ materially, 

D 4 



*0 THE CAPB CURRENT. [Chap. HI. 

^^^' showing that we had got to the southward of the 
cold water ctirrent that runs along the west^ and 
perhaps the south, coast of Africa. 

It is evident, therefore, that this current does not 
come down directly from the south, as it only ex- 
tends to seven or eight miles from the Cape, and be- 
yond that distance we have to descend to more than 
six hundred fathoms before we can find water of so 
low a temperature as 43°.5. It may be that if the 
whole body of the sea is moving from east to west, as 
some suppose, that in passing over the shoal bank 
off Cape Aguilhas, the waters belonging to a greater 
depth, and of consequently a colder temperature, may 
thus be brought near to the surface ; but at ninety 
and one hundred and twenty miles to the S. E. 
of the Cape, and near the edge of the bank, we 
found the temperature at seventy-seven fathoms 
55^.2, and at one hundred fathoms 54^ ; so that the 
current which runs close along the shore must be 
of a much lower temperature if that of the west 
coast is supplied from this source. I will continue 
to notice in detail all that came within our observ- 
ation bearing upon this question, or that may assist 
the further investigation of these strange and un- 
explained currents. The frequent changes in their 
direction, their various velocities, and the broad 
belts of cold water we passed through, are all separ- 
ately deserving of more attention of the navigator 
than we had time to bestow on them ; and a more 
strict inquiry into their causes might prove highly 
advantageous to ships passing the Cape, by point- 



CiLAF. m.] AQUILHA8 BANK. 41 

ing out the best parallel in which to profit most by ^^^' 
them, or, in stormy weather, how to avoid them. 

After blowing from ahnost every point of the 
compass the wind settled in the north, and in order 
to -get clear of the Aguilhas bank, on which we 
foimd a harassing jobble of a sea, we ran before it 
to the southward until midnight, when a calm of 
several hours' continuance was succeeded by a light 
southerly wind. At 1 p. m., when eighty-four April s. 
miles S. by E. from the Cape, we had no soundings 
with six himdred fathoms. In tr3dng the tempera- 
ture of the sea, at various depths, we unfortunately 
lost two of our self-registering thermometers by the 
line breaking, which is the reason that these expe- 
riments were afterwards less frequently made than 
might have been desirable in the course of our 
voyage to Van Diemen's Land. 

The southerly wind obliged us to stand to the 
eastward, and the whole of this and the following 
day we experienced a heavy swell, indicative of 
a past gale; but this, about midnight of the 9th, April 9. 
was changed into a short, irregular, breaking sea, 
which we considered to be probably occasioned by 
our fiedling down upon the western edge of the 
Aguilhas bank, for it continued throughout the 
night, and the next day we found ourselves in 
seventy-seven fathoms ; some pieces of dead coral 
and broken shells came up with the lead. Both 
yesterday and to-day we passed through many 
long lines of brown-coloured animalculae : they were 
about five or six feet broad and several miles in 



42 AGUILHAS BANK. [Cbap. UI. 

18^- length, lying in the direction of the wind: on exami- 
nation they proved to consist of a species of gre- 
garious mollusca, the animals having no organic 
connection together; but there were always two 
fixed points of contact, and they moved simulta- 
neously in wavy lines. 

Besides these we found many kinds of curious 
marine a.nimalft amongst the long leaves of the 
floating sea-weed (Macrocystis pyrifera) that 
aboimds in every part of this ocean. The gigantic 
albatross (Diomedea exulans) was seen in great 
numbers, and many of them taken by means of a 
fishing-line, as were also some of the prettily 
speckled Cape pigeon {ProceUaria capensis\ and 
several other kinds of petrel, which in these regions 
seem to take the place of the beautiful varieties of 
gulls which inhabit our northern seas. . 

AprQ u. This morning the wind shifting to the S. £. we 
wore and stood to the southward, being still on the 
Aguilhas bank. In the afternoon we obtained 
soundings in one hundred and twenty-five fathoms, 
dark sand and shells; but after sailing seven 
miles on that course we could not reach the 
ground with three hundred and twenty fitthoms of 
line : thus marking the southern limits of this 
extraordinary and extensive bank in the longitude 
of 21"* 20" E. to be between the latitudes of Se"* 37' 
and 36^ 44' S., and about a hundred and thirty 
miles from the Cape whose name it bears. 

April 12. To-day the temperature of the air was up to 74*, 
that of the sea was 69*. 



Chap. IH.] CUHSBNT8. 43 

Although we were not above forty miles firom i®^- 
ye6terda3r's position, we had no soundings with 
six hundred fathoms, so suddenly does the depth 
of water increase, to the south, upon leaving the 

The variation of the compass was observed to April is. 
have increased to 30^ W. It fdl calm towards mid- 
night, and by our observations at noon we found that 
we had been carried away by a current above thirty 
miles to the southward of our supposed position, and 
the following day, to the south-westward, above fifty Apnl u. 
miles. We had some rain during the night, and 
flashes of lightning were seen to the south-eastward. 
Steering in that direction we approached the storm, 
and shortly got into the midst of the heaviest rain I 
ever witnessed. It came down literally in sheets of 
water, accompanied by very violent squalls firom 
various quarters, alternately with perfect, but 
almost momentary, calms. The temperature of the 
rain which fell being 61^ brought down that of the 
air firom 67^ to 64*, whilst the surface of the sea 
rose to 73^5 fix)m 71^ 

Heavy thimder and the most vivid lightning 
occurred during this great faU of water, which 
lasted without intermission for more than ten hours, 
and it required the utmost vigilance in the officers 
and crew to manoeuvre the ship during the rapid 
changes both in the strength and direction of the 
wind, and the extraordinary bubbling of the sea 
produced by these fierce contending gusts. But 
before noon it blew fresh from the eastward, gra- 



44 CURBENTS. [Chap. UL 

^^^' dually veering round to the northward, and in the 
evening increased to a strong north-westerly breeze, 
with so heavy and irregular a sea that we spent 
the night in great anxiety, and in momentary 
expectation that our boats would be washed away 
by some of the broken waves that fell on board, or, 
that from the frequent shocks the ship sustained 
when the seas struck her, we should lose some of 
the masts, although we had taken every precaution 
to secure them. This dangerous commotion we 
attributed to the current by which for several days 
we had been carried to the south-westward, but 
which had during the last day changed its course 
to the north-westward, and which was running at 
the extraordinary rate of sixty-eight miles per 
diem, or nearly three miles an hour, in direct 
opposition to the wind. 

April 15. The temperature of the rorface of the sea fell so 
rapidly from 73° to 61**, that I concluded we were 
approaching a body of ice, and some indications in 
the sky favoured this belief. We did not however 
see any, and before midnight the temperature had 
again risen to 67°, so that, if its fall were occasioned 
by ice, we had probably passed it in the dark. 

April 16. At noon we were in lat. 41° 24' S. and long. 25° 
E., and detected another change in the current, it 
having carried us N. 75 E., twenty-two miles during 
the last twenty-four hours; and again we found a 
gradual depression in the temperature of the sea 
from 68° at Ih. A. M. to 58° at noon, without any 



Chap, m.] CHANQE OF CLIMATE. 45 

other cause than that of the air £EklIing to 52^ as the i®^- 
wind shifted to the southward. 

We were now south of that stream, which, 
taking the direction of the Natal coast, is known to 
extend £Etr out to sea ; and had got into a counter 
current, setting to the eastward at the rate, on an 
average of several days, of about a mile an hour. 
We had no soundings to-day with six-hundred 
fethoms, the temperature at that depth being 43^8. 

In the course of the past week a change of thirty 
degrees of temperature, both of the air and of the 
sea, took place, which, to those who had passed the 
previous months in a tropical climate, was likely to 
be productive of serious injury to their health, 
unless carefully guarded against. This alteration 
of climate in so short a time was at first very sen- 
sibly felt, and it was necessary to issue positive 
regulations about the clothing of our people, 
amongst whom severe colds were beginning to make 
their appearance. 

Rimning before a strong westerly wind, and April 21. 
rapidly nearing Prince Edward's Island, from which 
at noon we were distant only about twenty miles, 
we were not surprised to see many penguins ; but 
the weather was so hazy, that we could not perceive 
the land until we found ourselves within two or 
three miles of its southern point. Sailing close 
along its south-eastern side, and at about one mile 
south of the East Cape, we sounded in eighty-six 
fathoms, fine sand, coral, and corallines. This line 
of coast is composed of black, perpendicular, volcanic 



46 PBiNCE Edward's island. [Chap. m. 

1840. cliffs, much worn away by the action of the waves. 
"""""^ We observed two or three conical hillocks, like the 
small craters of a volcano, of a deep red colour, 
whether arising from an oxide of iron, or vegetable 
matter, we could not discern. The South Cape has 
a perpendicular fEice, the termination of a long 
terrace-like projection from the foot of the hills. 
The mountains in the centre of the island rise to 
a considerable height; but their summits being 
enveloped in mist, we could not determine their 
elevation, although we could see they were partially 
covered with snow. We imagined we could distin- 
guish small trees, still of this there is considerable 
doubt : Captain Cook, although at a much greater 
distance, asserts that he saw trees and shrubs, but he 
was assuredly mistaken. Long lines of sea-weed 
extended two or three miles from the shore beyond 
the East Cape, whilst strong eddies of tide, occa- 
sioned probably by their meeting at this point, 
seeminfic to indicate concealed dan^rs, and darkness 
now coling on, we hauled off forThe night, having 
first seen a small cove a short distance to the 
northward, where we hoped to be able to land the 
next morning. This part of the coast was popu- 
lated by vast numbers of penguins, in groups of 
many thousands each, and other kinds of sea-birds 
were abundant. Some seals that were plajing in 
the surf about* the small detached rocks were pro- 
nounced to be of the fur species {Arctocephalua Folk- 
landicu8)y by those well acquainted with them : it 
is not improbable that on the western coast some of 



Chap m.] PRINCE BDWARD'8 ISLAND. 47 

their haunts, or, as the sealers term them, " rook- ^^^' 
eries," might be found. 

The soundings during the night were very irre- 
gukr. A dredge put overboard for a short time in 
ninety-five &thoms, at about five or six miles east 
of the island, came up quite full of a small white 
coral, and between thirty and forty different kinds 
of marine animals, corallines, flustrse, and sponges. 
At daylight in the morning we found that we had 
been carried so fiEU* to leeward by a strong tide, or 
more probably a current, and so heavy a swell 
prevailed from the westward, the forerunner of the 
coming gale, that I reluctantly gave up my inten- 
tion of landing, rather than lose any more time in 
hopeless endeavours, and bore away for the Crozets. 
There did not seem to be any bay along the north- 
eastern or south-eastern coast where a ship could 
find anchorage, unless it be just to the northward 
of the East Cape, where we supposed we saw a 
small sandy beach between two extensive patches of 
sea-weed ; nor did Commander Crozier see any as he 
passed along the north shore the next day, in the 
Terror. He mentioned a remarkable detached 
tower-shaped rock, at some distance off the North 
Cape. This promontory he found, by good observ- 
ation to be in lat. 46*" 53' S. and long. 37'' 33' E., 
agreeing very nearly with Cook in the latitude, but 
differing considerably in the longitude. In the 
Erebus we were unfortunate in not getting observa- 
tions near the southern part of the isJand: nor could 
we approach the smaller north-eastern island suffi- 



48 PRINCE £i)WARD's ISLAND. [Chap. HI 

1840. ciently near to see any creeks or bays; but I 
"""""""^ was afterwards told that sealers sometimes anchor 
at a place called Cave Bay, on its east side, in lat. 
46^ 40' S. with the N. E. point bearing N. E. by E. ; 
the Cave, W. N. W ; and Mary's Point, S. W. ^ S. 
in eight to ten £Etthoins water. The larger island, 
though discovered by a French navigator in 1772, 
was named by Captain Cook, some years afterwards. 
Prince Edward's Island, in honour of the late Duke 
of Kent, the father of our most gracious Queen. 
April 22: The westerly gale continued throughout the 22d 
and 23d, but early on the 24th it veered to the 
north, and increased to a violent storm, with its 
usual accompaniment of heavy rain, fortimately of 
only a few hours' duration, for the heavy cross sea 
the change of wind occasioned washed away our 
hammock nettings, and swept several things off our 
decks : towards evening the wind moderated, and 
backed round to the westward. During this run 
we passed many large patches of sea-weed, which 
had probably been torn from the shores of Prince 
Edward's Island, and as we did not see any as 
we approached it from the westward, it would 
seem to show that a westerly current prevails in 
these parts of the ocean, although, from the 
accordance of the dead reckoning with our observ- 
ations, it is probably of inconsiderable strength. 
April 25. A comparatively fine day : we continued to pass 
many large patches of sea-weed, and although 
arrived near the position on our charts of Crozet's 
group of islands, we could see nothing of them, and 



CHAF.m.] CBOZBT ISLANDS. 49 

I should have lost much time in the search, i^^- 
had I not, fortunately, before leaving the Cape of """""""^ 
(jood Hope, obtained a more accurate account of 
their situation from a merchant of Cape Town, at 
whose request I undertook to convey some provi- 
sions to Possession, or to East Island, for a party 
of seamen employed there in the capture of the 
sea elephant {Morunga Elephantina). 

Land was seen at daylight this morning, bearing April S6. 
E. by S. at the distance of ten miles. It proved to 
be Penguin, or Inaccessible Island, and well de- 
serves either of the names it bears, for it was 
literally covered with penguins on all the ledges 
of its rugged shores, nor could we any where see a 
point on which it would be possible to land. Like 
. all other volcanic islands, its summits terminate in 
curiously shaped pinnacles, and not the smallest 
appearance of vegetation was perceptible. The 
great quantities of sea-weed and numerous water- 
fowl we met with would have given us timely notice 
of our approach to land. 

^^ Pig Island" of the sealers was soon afterwards 
seen to the northward. It is the westernmost 
island of the group, and presented a much more 
agreeable aspect, but the weather being un&vour- 
able, and its eastern, or lee side, having many dan- 
gerous reefs and detached rocks off it, we did not 
venture nearer than two or three leagues ; but after 
passing close to Inaccessible Island, we shaped a 
course for the southern extreme of Possession 

E 



50 POSSESSION ISLAND. [Chap. m. 

1840. Island, which we had been informed extended as 
far as the 47th degree of latitude. 

During the night the wind increased to a strong 
breeze from the westward, with thick weather, and 
we were oMiged to cany a heavy press of sail to 
clear the land under our lee, which we had scarcely 
accomplished when a south-westerly gale came on. 

April 27. Although Still veiy foggy at times, we were en- 
abled to bear away at 10 a. m., and having passed 
over the assigned position of Possession Island, we 
saw the land at 5 p. m. through the haze, five or 
six miles distant, but daylight was now almost gone ; 
we nevertheless stood towards it, until darkness 
closed the scene, when the ship was hauled off for 
the night. 

April 28. The morning was more clear, when, as the day 
broke, between six and seven o'clock, we perceived 
the lofty mountains of East Island four or five 
leagues directly to windward of us, so much had we 
been carried to the eastward during the night. 
The whole day was spent in beating up against the 
current and strong westerly breeze, and at sunset 
we were still several miles firom the shore. 

I could not but regret this serious loss of time, 
but having appointed Possession Island our first 
rendezvous, until the end of this month, in case of 
parting from the Terror, I wished to communicate 
with one or other of the sealing parties, to ascertain 
whether they had seen her off the islands. I was 
still more anxious to land the provisions which I 
had on board for the winter stock of those people 



Crap, m.] EAST ISLAND. 51 

who might have been in much wont of them. We iMa 
therefore continued beating to windward all night, April 29. 
and at daylight, the fog having cleared away, we 
had a good view of this perfect mountain mass of 
volcanic land ; it« shores bold and precipitous with 
many projecting rocks, which seem to have been 
formed by the unceasing action of the waves cut- 
ting away the softer parts, and with the exception 
of a single beach of some extent, on the north-east 
part of the island, affording no place where either 
a habitation could be built, or a boat land. 

This beach appearing to us the only fiEivourable 
spot for the sealing party, we fired several guns 
as we stood dose in to the shore, and by these 
means attracted their notice, for we soon afterwards 
observed with our glasses a large fire on the east 
side of the bay, which the people had made to point 
out to us their location. We were still too £Ar to 
leeward for them to venture off to us, and aft;er 
beating to windward imtil 2 p. m., when just as 
we could have fetched into the bay, the wind sud- 
denly increased to a strong gale, and the violent 
gusts that rushed along the almost perpendicular 
coast line, raising the spoondrift in clouds over us, 
reduced us to a close-reefed main-topsail and storm 
staysails, under which, when within half a mile of 
the shore, we wore and stood off again, seeing the 
utter hopelessness of communicating with the party 
until the return of more moderate weather. 

We were greatly disappointed at being thus de- 
feated ; but these frequent repulses only made us 

m 2 



£2 AMERICA BAT. [Chap. Ill 

1840. more determined to do our utmost to effect the ob- 
jects we had in view : and although we were driven 
by the gale and current fiir away to leeward, yet, 
towards evening, when it abated, we began to main- 
tain our ground, and, by carrying a heavy press of 
sail throughout the night, we found ourselves the 

April 30. next morning several miles to windward of East 
Island, and had Possession Island distinctly in sight 
on our weather bow. Knowing the greater fiwjility 
of communicating with this land by reason of the 
shelter its extent affords firom the strong westerly 
gales that blow almost continually except at this 
period of the year, and as the larger establishment of 
sealers was on this island, I preferred beating up to 
it as the weather was fine and we were making good 
way, rather than run down to the leeward party 
at the risk of being again unable to land at their 
station. 

Soon after noon it fell quite calm; and, after 
firing a few guns, we observed a white flag hoisted 
on a pole by the party in America Bay : we were, 
at this time, about five miles from the shore and 
directly between Possession and East Islands ; the 
weather was still too unsettled for a boat to come 
off to us. While lying becalmed in this passage 
we obtained soundings in eighty-five fathoms, on a 
bank of sand, shells, and corallines. At dusk, on a 
breeze springing up firom the north-west, we stood 
off to sea for the night. 

Majr 1. It blew hard from the north-westward with so 
dense a haze that it was only during a partial 



Cbap. m.] SEALINQ PABTT. 53 

clearing, and when within four miles of Dark Head i^^- 
we had a glimpse of the high perforated rock that ~ 
stands out more than a mile from the coast to the 
westward, and is an unerring mark, by which the 
Cape may always be distinguished : — as we bore 
away close along the shore we got into smooth 
water, but, passing " Windy Bay," the squalls that 
came down the valley compelled us to lower our 
topsails and keep them down until we had passed 
the opening. 

The remarkable ^^ Red Crag," near which the flag 
had been displayed yesterday, came in sight and 
guided us to America Bay, where we saw the party 
on the beach launching their boat. Mr. Hickley, their 
leader, came on board, and he, as well as his boat's 
crew, looked more like Esquimaux than civilized 
beings, but filthier far in their dress and persons than 
any I had ever before seen. Their clothes were lite- 
rally soaked in oil and smelt most offensively ; they 
worebootsof penguins' skins with the feathers turned 
inwards. They told us that the weather had been 
so tempestuous that until yesterday they had not 
been able to launch a boat for five weeks ; they had 
therefore been very unsuccessful at the Sea Elephant 
fishery, and were disappointed to find that they were 
not to be removed to " Pig Island " for the winter ; 
which they describe as being so overrun with 
these animals, that, to use their own words, ^^ you 
can hardly land for them." The breed was left 
there by Captain Distance, in 1834, and in less 
than six years have increased in an almost incre* 

B 3 



64 POSSESSION ISLAND. [Chaf. m. 

^^^ dible manner, although great numbers are every 
MajI. year killed by the sealers, not only for present 
subsistence, but salted down for supplies on their 
voyages to and from the Cape. Some goats had 
been landed from an American ship some years ago 
on Possession Island, and were also thriving on the 
long coarse grass with which it abounds, but still 
maintained their domestic state, under the protec- 
tion of the sealers. The party consisted in all of 
eleven men, one of whom had been on the island 
for three years : they seemed to have no wish to 
return to the Cape of Good Hope and were quite 
contented, having plenty of food. The tongue, 
flippers, and part of the carcase of the Sea Elephant 
are eaten by them, and they get a great abundance 
of a species of rock-fish (probably a Cottas or NoUh 
ihenia)j about the size of a small haddock, with a very 
large head, which they preserve by drying upon the 
rocks. The eggs of sea-birds in the breeding season 
may be collected by boat loads, and are said to be ex- 
cellent |pod, particularly that of the albatross, which 
averages above a pound in weight, and the yoimg 
birds, when first taken firom the nest^ are described by 
them as being quite delicious : it is possible, however, 
they may have acquired the Esquimaux taste as well 
as their habits. They described the soil as being good, 
but they have never planted potatoes or other vege- 
table, although they have no doubt of their thriving 
here as the temperature is never very low. Wild 
ducks are so numerous in a lake on the top of the 
Red Crag that dogs, trained for the purpose, get 
them any number whenever they are wanted. 



Chap, in.] ANCHORAGSS. 55 

They had no plan of the island, and their inform- '^^' 
ation on this subject was vague and unsatisfactory ; Maj i. 
they stated it to be twenty miles long and ten 
broad ; having three bays on its east side, in which 
ships may anchor, but the western coast is quite 
unapproachable by ships of any size, on account of 
the heavy swell that constantly rolls in upon its 
shores : a boat belonging to this party and all the 
crew were lately lost there, whilst in search of sea 
elephants. 

In America Bay, Lively Bay, and Ship Bay, ves- 
sels at anchor are well protected from the prevailing 
winds, but must leave the two latter immediately 
on the springing up of an easterly breeze, as Ame- 
rica Bay is the only one where there is room for 
a ship to beat out. These winds are said to be 
of rare occurrence, so much so that the French 
frigate Heroine, which was sent in 1834 to survey 
this group of islands, remained the whole period of 
her stay, above five weeks, moored in Ship Bay ; 
since then, however, two English whalers were 
wrecked in the same bay, by trying to ride out an 
easterly gale. 

Mr. Hickley told us that there was every indi- 
cation of an easterly wind, which is more frequent 
just at this time of the year, and the height of the 
barometer seemed to confirm his opinion, or I should 
have anchored for a few hours to have examined 
the bay; but convinced from the nature of its 
formation that it could be of no use as a magnetic 
station, and, being anxious to rejoin the Terror as 

B 4 



56 DARK HEAD. [Chaf. IIL 

^^^- soon as possible at our next rendezvous, we bore 

MtLj 1. away with the intention of laying down as much of 

the coast line of the island as we could before dark. 

Like the rest of the group it is evidently of 
igneous origin ; near the tops of some of the hills 
we could perceive short basaltic columns, and two 
or three appearances of extinct craters: the coast 
is high and precipitous at the north end and sin* 
gularly stratified ; along its eastern shore it is more 
broken into small bays, and we observed several 
cataracts issuing from the more extensive green 
patches upon the hill-sides, and dashing over the 
black cliflTs into the sea beneath. 

The remarkable ^^ Dark Head," at the northern 
extreme of the island, is in lat. 46^ 19^ S., long. 
5V 63' E. ; the southern point is in lat. 46"" 28' S., 
and long. 51^ 56' E. ; the variation of the compass 
85'' 13' W. The centre of East Island is in lat. 
46^ 27' S., and long. 52^ 14' E. 

These results, though sufficient for all the pur- 
poses of navigation, were not obtained with ex- 
actness, owing to the unfavourable state of the 
weather for observations. 

Leaving the south end of Possession Island at 
4 p. M. we steered close along the southern coast of 
East Island. Though not more than three or four 
miles in diameter its loftiest pinnacles attain a 
height of at least four thousand feet, and the preci • 
pices of its shores in some places rise several hun- 
dred feet perpendicularly from the sea. Nearly 
every cape has its detached rock extending off it, 



Chjlp. m.] BElfABKABLB BOCKS. 57 

from half a mile to two miles : one of these near ^^^ 
Bull Bay lies still further off, and being consider- Maj i. 
ably inclined, in one point of view, resembles a ship 
under a press of sail ; hence its appellation, ^^ Ship 
Rock." Another, near the south-eastern extreme, 
is called ^^ Church Rock," from another fancied 
similarity ; but the most remarkable of them all is 
the perforated rock to the westward of the North 
Cape of Possession Island, through which we were 
told a small vessel might sail. 

Favoured by a strong north-westerly breeze we 
advanced rapidly towards Eerguelen Island. On 
the morning of the 3d, when in lat. 47^ 17' S., May a. 
long. 58^ 5(y E., the first piece of Antarctic ice was 
seen by us, though so smaU as scarcely to deserve 
the name of an ice-berg, being not more than 
twenty feet high and evidently fast dissolving, yet 
it was sufficiently solid to injure seriously any 
vessel that might run against it. We passed several 
beds of floating sea-weed, and were accompanied 
on our course by many of the great albatross, and 
the large dark petrel, and still more numerously by 
the speckled Cape pigeon and stormy petrel, of two 
- or three different kinds. These birds added a de- 
gree of cheerfulness to our solitary wanderings, 
which contrasted strongly with the dreary and 
unvarying stillness of the tropical region, where 
not a sea-bird is to be seen, except only in the vi- 
cinity of its few scattered islets, which is the more 
remarkable where the ocean abounds so plentifully 
with creatures fit for their food. 



58 bligh's cap. iCwLT. m. 

I84a X sperm whale, a seal,* and a shoal of porpoises 

%Ulj5. were seen. Blowing a strong breeze, almost a gale, 
from the north-west, with thick weather, and at 
5 p. M., being within twenty miles of an islet called 
" Bligh's Cap " by Cook, we rounded-to, under close- 
reefed topsails, to wait for daylight and clearer 
weather to make the land. At 7h. 30m. p. m. we 
struck soundings in one hundred and fifteen £Ek- 
thorns, on a bank of fine black sand and small 
stones; and, during the night, the depth varied 
from one hundred and twenty to one hundred and 
forty-five fathoms. 
ifftjB It was nearly nine o'clock the next morning 
before the weather cleared up so as to admit of our 
running for the islet, and before noon it again 
became so thick that we could not see more than 
two or three miles ; yet such was our confidence in 
the accuracy of the positions assigned by our great 
navigator to all the places "he discovered or visited, 
that we unhesitatingly pursued our course, and at 
a quarter past twelve the high and apparently 
inaccessible little rock was seen directly ahead of 
us ; we passed very close by it, steering for Cape 
Fran9ois of Eerguelen Island. When we had run 
the distance to within half a mUe, the fog was so 
dense that we could scarcely see twice the length 
of the ship, and darkness coming on, we were 
obliged to haul ofi^ for the night, under easy sail. 
The soundings were in from seventy to eighty 
fiithoms, rocky bottom ; and in the morning Cape 
Fran9ois was in sight five or six miles on our 



Chap. IIL] BBEBUS BANK. 59 

weather bow, but the wind had by that time fresh- ^^^' 
ened considerably, and the sea running high, we Ma/ 7. 
were unable to maintain our ground; so that, 
although we carried a heavy press of sail throughout 
the day and night, we found that we were drifted 
away twenty miles to leeward of the Gape when 
day broke the next morning. 

We beat back in the course of the day, and at ^^J *• 
11 P.M. hove to, within two miles of our port, 
awaiting daylight to enter it : again we were disap- 
pointed. It was beautiful weather at midnight, with 
very little wind, and a perfectly smooth sea ; so 
suddenly, however, do gales come on in these stormy 
regions, that in less than three hours it blew so 
hard as to reduce us to dose-reefed topsails, and a 
heavy sea arising, we were driven away from the 
land. The storm, which increased in fury, conti- 
nued to blow violentiy the next day, and until nine 
the following morning, when it began to moderate, 
and we again made sail as the wind gradually 
abated. The remainder of this, and the whole of ^^7 ^i lo- 
the next day, were occupied in regaining the land, 
and in obtaining a connected series of soundings on 
a bank of black sand and rock, which we found to 
extend above a hundred miles from the Cape. The 
discovery of this great bank, so likely to be of 
important advantage to the numerous vessels that 
occasionally visit the dangerous shores of this 
island, by warning them of their approach to the 
land, could not fail to remove every feeling of 
regret at the delay and fatigue to which we had 



60 TERROR REEF. [Chaf.UI. 

^^^' been exposed. I have called it on the chart the 
^^ Erebus Bank;" and a dangerous reef of rocks, 
E. by S. from Cape Fran9oi8, distant between fifteen 
and sixteen miles, upon which the sea broke vio- 
lently, received the name of " Terror Reef." The 
position and extent of this reef were accurately 
determined by Captain Crozier and the officers of 
the Terror; and together with such surveys as 
we were able to make during our stay in this neigh- 
bourhood, and such information as I have been 
able to obtain from the Hydrographic Office, by the 
permission of Captain Beaufort, serve as the founda- 
tion of a general plan of the island; but much 
remains yet to be done, and carefully minute exa- 
mination will be necessary before any thing like 
an accurate map of the nimierous harbours, reefs, 
rocks, and other dangers, can be accomplished. 

Many sperm whales were seen during the several 
days we were beating about upon the Erebus Bank, 
and large flocks of sea-birds hovered over the 
patches of sea-weed we met with, whether floating 
detached, or stiU fixed to the rocks. 
Maj 12. This morning being close in with the remarkable 
" A.rched Rock" which forms the south cape of 
Christmas Harbour, and favoured with moderate 
weather we got fairly between the heads soon 
after noon ; the wind, however, was directly against 
us, and rapidly increasing in strength, threatened 
to drive us out once more to sea. As we reached 
the narrows, which form the inner harbour, so 



Chap. IH] CHBISTlfAS HABBOUB. 61 

yiolent were the squalls, and so contracted the ^^^' 
channel (not quite one third of a mile), that we 
were beating for three hours without losing or 
gaining a ship's length ; darkness coming on put 
an end to the laborious struggle, and compelled us, 
at six o'clock, to anchor in twenty-three fathoms, 
fine sand and stones. Although not exactly where 
we desired to be, we were thankful to have found 
so good an anchorage, for it almost immediately 
began to blow a complete gale, which lasted the 
whole night. 

The Terror arrived the next morning, but, owing Ukj is. 
to the unsettled state of the weather, it was not 
untU the 15th that we could warp up to the head of 
the harbour, and secure the ships in positions con- 
venient for easy and frequent communication with 
the shore. The remainder of this and the whole of 
the following day were occupied in getting the ship 
to rights, and landing the observatories. 

The 17th, being Sunday, our people had a day of Mtj 17. 
rest after their labours. I may here mention that 
it was our invariable practice every Sunday to read 
the Church service, and generally a short sermon 
afterwards ; and it is remarkable how very seldom 
during the whole period of our voyage, that either 
the severity of the weather, or the circumstances of 
the expedition, were such as to interfere with the 
performance of this duty. Few could have had 
more convincing assurances of the providential 
interpositions of a merciful God, and I do believe 



63 CHBISTHAS HABBOUB. [Cbaf. IIL 

1840. there was not an individual in either of the ships, 
" who did not regret when we were unavoidably pre- 

vented assembling for the purpose of ofiering up 
our prayers and thanksgivings to our Ahoighty 
Guide and Protector. 



63 



CHAPTER IV. 

Eebguelen Islands were discovered in 1772 by 
M. Eerguelen, a lieutenant of the French navy. 
He first observed two small islands on the 13th of 
January, which he named the " Isles of Fortune,^ 
after the ship he commanded, and afterwards came 
in sight of the main island, but being driven off by 
tempestuous weather he was unable to approach 
its shores and returned to the Mauritius. 

From the exaggerated account he gave of the 
extent of this new discovery, it was very generally 
believed that the great southern continent which the 
philosophers of that time considered necessary to 
maintain the balance of our earth was at length 
found : and M. de Kerguelen, in command of the 
Holland of 64 guns, accompanied by L'Oiseau fri- 
gate, was sent again to examine more fiilly this 
interesting land. 

His second expedition was hardly more fortu- 
nate than the former. In December, 1773, he 
again came in sight of the principal island, and 
gave the name of Cape Fran9ois to a fine bold pro- 
montory, which forms at once the northern head- 
land of one of its best harbours, and the north 
extreme point of the main island. His ship was 
driven off the coast by strong westerly gales, and 



64 cook's visit. [Cmaf. ra. 

was unable to regain it : but on the 6th of Janu- 
ary, 1774, M. de Rosnevet, in the firigate L'Oiseau 
arrived off the harbour, near the head of which 
one of his officers landed, and '^ took possession of 
the bay and of all the country, in the name of the 
King of France, with all requisite formalities,'' but 
it does not appear that any further knowledge of 
the extent and capabilities of this land was ob- 
tained. 

Captain Cook was preparing for his third and 
last voyage, when the news of this discovery 
reached England, and he was directed in his in- 
structions from the Admiralty to search for it on 
his way to Van Diemen's Land. Accordingly, on 
the 24th of December, whilst sailing along the 
parallel of its latitude, he observed, through the 
fog, two islands of considerable height, and eight 
or nine miles in circumference ; these he named 
Cloudy Islands. A remarkable elevated rock which 
he recognized as that named the Isle of Re-union 
by M. Kerguelen, was soon afterwards seen, and by 
him called Bligh's Cap, by which name it is now 
distinguished. And on Christmas day the Reso- 
lution and Discovery anchored in the Bale de 
L'Oiseau, and although not the discoverers of this 
extensive island they were the first ships that ever 
anchored in any of its numerous harbours. Cap* 
tain Cook named it Christinas Harbour, not know- 
ing at the time that it had been previously named 
by its French discoverer. 

An accurate survey of the harbour and a general 



CsAP. IV.] KBBOUELBN ISLAND. 65 

examination of the eastern coast of the island from ^^^^ 
Cape Fran9ois to Cape George, near its southern 
extremity, resulted from the visit of this great 
navigator ; and the illusion which had taken pos- 
session of men's minds of its being a part of the 
great southern continent was dispelled by a refer- 
ence to the log-book of the Adventure, in which 
ship Captain Fumeaux, the companion of Cook on 
his second voyage, crossed the meridian of this land 
about fifty miles to the southward of Cape Greorge 
in February, 1773, after separating from the Reso- 
lution, thus proving that no part of this land 
extends to the southward beyond the fiftieth 
degree of latitude. 

In March, 1799, many of its numerous and 
secure harbours were examined and surveyed by 
Captain Robert Rhodes, when in command of the 
ffiUsborough, employed in killing sea-elephants, 
seals, and whales, in the southern hemisphere ; and 
the following extracts relating to some of the more 
accessible and convenient anchorages for vessels 
employed in the southern fishery are taken from a 
manuscript memoir written by him, and will serve 
to elucidate the chart of these islands, which I have 
constructed from the best materials I could collect, 
in addition to the surveys of the several harbours 
at the northern part of the island that were made 
by the officers of the Expedition. 

Captain Rhodes states, that ^^ aftier our arrival in 
the Great South West Bay, I foimd the season had 
expired for killing sea elephants and seals, but in 

F 



66 EEBGUELEN ISLAND. [Csaf. IV. 

1840. the course of the same month we perceived the 

""""""" right or black whale to set into the diflferent bays 

and harbours in great quantities. Our success was 

commensurate to my most sanguine expectations, 

and we remained here until October following." 

During the time (nearly eight months) they were 
at Winter Harbour, in lat. 49"* 20' S., and long. 
69"^ 24' E., he explored not less than fifty inlets 
or coves in the boats of the Hillsborough, where 
ships of any tonnage might ride in perfect safety 
in the most tempestuous seasons. He gave names 
to these several harbours, and intended to have 
published a chart of his labours, " as " (he writes) 
" an unerring guide to future navigators, and to 
have thus discharged a duty, which is as pleasing 
to my own feelings as I trust it will be found im- 
portant to the commercial interests of the British 
Empire ; " but it does not appear that either the 
chart or the memoir was ever published. 

" K bound into Hillsborough Bay, leave the 
islands off Christmas Harbour on the port hand, 
and steer S.E. by S. by compass along the land 
at a distance of about three or four leagues. 
This course will carry you between the beds of 
kelp and sea-weed that lie off the coast, and when 
you have run the distance of seventeen miles from 
Cape Fran9ois, Howe's Foreland will bear S.W. by 
compass, distant seven or eight miles : at the same 
time a ledge of rocks may be seen from the deck 
bearing N.E. distant five or six miles. You 
may then steer South to S. by W. by compass 
until you have run about fifteen miles, leaving se- 



Chav. IV.] KBRQUELEN ISLAND. 67 

veral small Islands on your port hand; you will ^^^' 
then open the Bay in which Port Palliser is 
situated, which may be known by a small round 
island off Penguin Cove, which forms the harbour. 
Leave this island on the port hand, and the course 
in is W. by N. by compass, where there is good 
anchorage in from seven to nine £Eithoms water. 

" Between Port Palliser and Howe's Foreland is 
an extensive bay, with two branches that run in 
W.S.W. and W.N.W. at a distance of fifteen or 
sixteen miles. This bay is separated from Whale 
Bay by a narrow isthmus not exceeding three 
quarters of a mile in breadth, where a boat may 
be occasionally hauled across, and this will save a 
distance of upwards of fifty miles if going into 
Hillsborough Bay." There are also several good 
harbours in this bay, which I have called Rhode 
Bay in compUment to this diligent investigator. 

" From Port Palliser to Cape Henry, the north 
head of Hillsborough Bay, the course is S. by W. 
and the distance twelve or thirteen miles. On 
leaving Port Palliser steer E.S.E. until you are 
beyond all the beds of kelp, and then the above 
course will carry you clear of all dangers until you 
arrive off Cape Henry. This Cape is on an island, 
and forms a high bluff headland, and there are 
several smaller islands and rocks both north and 
south of the Cape. Between Port Palliser and 
Cape Henry there are seven different bays of con- 
siderable extent with coves that form good har- 
bours, all tending in from West to W.N.W. 

r 2 



68 KEBOUELEN ISLAND. [CiukF. IV. 

<^^' " From Howe's Foreland or any of the projecting 
points or headlands that form the several bays and 
inlets between it and Cape Henry, Mount Camp- 
bell may be seen, as also the low land of Cape 
Digby. The mountain has a round top, is of a 
moderate elevation, and may be seen, in clear wea- 
ther, at fifteen or sixteen leagues' distance. In 
running down the coast Mount Campbell will be 
discovered some time before you raise the low land 
of the Cape, which forms its termination at a mile 
and a half from it ; it is distant from any other 
mountain seven or eight mUes, and bears from 
Howe's Foreland S. E. by compass. Mount Camp- 
bell and Cape Digby are the best guides into 
Hillsborough Bay. 

" When arrived off Cape Henry, you will open 
Whale Bay, so named from the great numbers of 
whales that frequent the place at a certain season 
. of the year. In the mouth of this bay is a small 
reef, which always shows itself, and lies about six 
miles S. by W. from Cape Henry. You may go 
on either side of the reef; but if intending to enter 
Hillsborough Bay steer for the group of islands 
which lies to the S. S. W. of the reef, and about 
three miles fr*om it. You may anchor within those 
islands, in any depth from twenty to seven fathoms, 
on good holding ground. There are here several 
inlets and coves, which afford good harbours. Keep 
those islMids on the starboard hand, and you will 
soon shut in Mount Campbell, and Seal Island will 
be on with Cape Daniel and the south head of 
HiUsborough Bay : then steer S. W. until you raise 



Craf. IV.] KEBQUELEN ISLAND. ' 69 

a small reef which lies in the middle of the bay, 1840. 
near the entrance of Hunter's Sound. Here you 
will have from thirty-six to forty-two fSathoms on 
a soft muddy bottom. 

" Leave this reef on the port hand, and steer W. by 
N. by compass ; this course will carry you to AVinter 
Harbour, which is distant from the group of islands 
fourteen miles. You will here find a safe and good 
harbour, where you may anchor in from seven to 
nine fathoms." 

^' When the western extreme of the islands bears 
north by compass, you will then be shut in and 
entirely land-locked; here you will have from 
fifteen to twenty-five fathoms on a soft muddy 
bottom ; but when you advance four or five miles 
further up the sound, you will find from seventy to 
one hundred fathoms near the Raven and Duck 
islands. 

^^ Whale Bay, to the northward of Hunter Sound, 
affords several good harbours. 

" Irish Bay lies to the southward of Winter Har- 
bour, and likewise affords some very good harbours. 

^'Foundery Branch, so named from the great quan- 
tity of iron ore and limestone found there, contains 
many inlet8 and coves, in which ships may anchor 
protected from all winds and weather. This branch 
lies S.E., about thirteen miles from Winter Harbour. 

"Elizabeth Harbour bears E. by S. from Winter 
Harbour; there is good anchorage in it, in from 
four to nine fathoms water. There is a reef in the 
mouth of it, which you may pass on either side in 

F 8 



70 CHRISTMAS HARBOUB. [CHJLr.IV. 

1840. perfect safety, and will not find less than nine or 
ten fJEithoms until well within the reef. 

"Betsy Cove, which lies in the head of Accessible 
Bay, is an excellent harbour, and has from five to 
seven fathoms water over a tough blue clay. It is 
the southernmost harbour in the coast north of 
Cape Digby, and is about eight miles from it. 

" In passing Cape Digby, it will be necessary to 
give it a birth of three miles, to clear the spit of 
land that runs out from it to nearly that distance.'' 

Christmas Harbour, situated at the northern 
extremity of the island, has an entrance of nearly 
a mile wide, between Cape Franfois on the north 
and the " Arched " Point on the south, on which 
side is a small bay that somewhat increases the 
breadth for nearly half the depth of the inlet, 
when it suddenly contracts to less than one-third 
of a mile, and thence gradually diminishes to the 
head of the bay, which terminates in a level beach 
of fine dark sand, extending quite across, and of 
about four hundred yards in length. 

The shores on each side are steep, and rise in a 
succession of terraces to the height of more than 
a thousand feet. The highest hill, which is on the 
north side of the harbour, attains an elevation of 
thirteen hundred and fifty feet : from its form it 
received the name of Table Mount. Its summit is 
a very distinctly formed oval-shaped crater, about 
one hundred feet across its major axis. On the 
north side of this hill are some perfect basaltic 
columns, very beautifully arranged, and numerous 
fragments of the same prismatic structure are 



Chaf. IV.] FOSSIL TREES. 71 

strewed about and piled around the sides of the IMO. 
cone. From this point we obtained a most com- """"""^ 
manding and extensive view of the neighbouring 
country, of a considerable portion of its north- 
western coast, and of the adjacent islands. 

On the south side of the harbour is the extra- 
ordinary rock noticed by Cook, and which forms 
so conspicuous an object in his accurate drawing 
of this place. It is a huge mass of basalt much 
more recent than the rock on which it rests, and 
through which it seems to have burst in a semi- 
fluid state. It is upwards of five hundred feet 
thick, and rests upon the older rock at an elevation 
of six hundred feet above the level of the sea ; and 
it was between these rocks of different ages that 
the fossil trees were chiefly found, and one exceed- 
ing seven feet in circimiference was dug out and 
sent to England. Some of the pieces appeared so 
recent that it was necessary to take it in your hand 
to be convinced of its fossil state, and it was most 
curious to find it in every stage, from that of char- 
coal lighting and burning freely when put in the 
fire, to so high a degree of silicification as to scratch 
glass. A bed of shale, several feet in thickness, 
which was found overlaying some of the fossil trees 
had probably prevented their carbonization when 
the fluid lava poured over them. A still more ex- 
traordinary feature in the geology of this ishtnd is 
the numerous seams of coal, varying in thickness 
from a few inches to four feet, which we found 
imbedded in the trap rock ; the positions of two of 

F 4 



72 CHRISTMAS HARBOUR. [Cbjjp. IV 

1840. the larger of these seams are marked on the annexed 
plan. Whether the coal is in sufficient abundance 
ever to be of commercial importance we had not the 
opportunity of ascertaininfif : but at the present day, 
Z. .teai ve^el, ^ t,Sve™i»g eve^ portion S 
the ocean, it may not be unworthy a more extended 
examinationi for in no situation would it be more 
desirable to have a coal dep6t than at this island, 
lying, as it does, immediately in the high road to all 
our Indian and Australasian colonies, abounding 
with excellent harbours, and at a convenient dis- 
tance from the Cape of Good Hope. For many in- 
teresting geological details respecting the formation 
of the land in the vicinity of Christmas Harbour I 
must refer to the following report of Mr. M'Cormick, 
who was most indefatigable in its examination : — 

" The northern extremity of the island, visited by 
the expedition, is entirely of volcanic origin : the 
bold headlands of Capes Cumberland and Fran9ois 
present a striking appearance from the sea; the 
trap rocks, of which they are composed, form a 
succession of terraces nearly horizontal, which, on 
first making the land, have a very striking resem- 
blance to stratified sandstone or limestone. 

^^ Basalt is the prevailing rock, assuming the pris- 
matic form, and passing into greenstone, and the 
various modifications of amygdaloid and porphyry. 
The general direction of the mountain ranges in- 
clines to the S.W. and N.E., varying in height 
generally from 500 to 2500 feet. Many of the hills 
are intersected by trap dykes; these dykes are 



V 



Cbaf. IV.] geological NOTICE. 73 

of very frequent occurrence, and are usually of i840. 
basalt. 

" Several conical hills, with crater-shaped sum- 
mits, have evidently once been volcanic vents. 
Three or four very singular isolated hills, composed 
of an igneous kind of arenaceous rock which occur 
in Cumberland Bay, present a very smooth outline ; 
they consist of pieces of broken fragments, through 
which the mass protrudes in places in prismatic 
columns. 

^^ The vast quantities of debris which have accu- 
mulated at the base of the hills, in many places to 
the height of 200 or 300 feet and upwards, afford 
strong evidence of the rapid disintegration which 
this land is undergoing from the sudden atmo- 
spheric vicissitudes to which it is exposed. 

" The whole island appears to be deeply indented 
by bays and inlets, the surface intersected by nu- 
merous small lakes and watercourses. These be- 
coming swollen by the heavy rains which alternate 
with the frost and snow, accompanied by violent 
gusts of wind, rush down the sides of the moun- 
tains and along the ravines in countless impetuous 
torrents, forming in many places beautiful foaming 
cascades, wearing away the rocks, and strewing 
the platforms and valleys below with vast frag- 
ments, and slopes of a rich alluvium, the result of 
their decomposition. 

^^ Quartz, in beautiful crystals, forming drusy ca- 
vities in the trap rocks in Cumberland Bay, occurs 
in great abundance, whilst zeolites predominate in 
the rocks about Christmas Harbour. 



74 CHRISTMAS HARBOUB. [Chap. IV. 

1840. « The most remarkable geological feature in the 
island is the occurrence of fossil wood and coal, 
and, what is still more extraordinary, imbedded in 
the igneous rocks. The wood, which for the most 
part is highly silicified, is found enclosed in the 
basalt, whilst the coal crops out in ravines, in 
close contact with the overlying porphyritic and 
amygdaloidal greenstone. 

CHRISTMAS HARBOUR, 

" In which the ships were moored during the 
period the expedition remained at the island, 
is bounded on the south side by a ridge of ba- 
saltic rocks, disposed in terraces and platforms, 
dipping slightly to the N. W., and surmounted 
by a remarkable block of basalt, rising to about 
1000 feet above the harbour. It has in some 
places a conglomerate structure, the enclosed frag- 
ments being excessively hard and ponderous. It is 
beneath this rock that the fossil wood is found, I 
having discovered the first firagment whilst ascend- 
ing the hill on the day after the ships were secured 
in the harbour, and on a further search it was 
found in considerable abundance, both imbedded 
in the basalt and in the debris below, or scattered 
on the surface amongst the fragments of rock. A 
portion of the trunk of a large tree, seven feet in cir- 
cumference, and much silicified, was dug out of the 
soil immediately below the rock. About 400 feet 
from the summit is a bed of shale, nearly horizon- 
tal, averaging six feet in thickness; but in some 



i 



Chap. IV.] GEOLOGICAL NOTICE. 75 

places it is exposed to a much greater extent. No ^^^' 
remains of leaves could be discovered in it, although 
the wood occurs in the basalt near it. 

" The * Arched Rock ' at the entrance to the har- 
bour terminates this ridge to the southward. It is 
about 150 feet high, the base of the arch 100 feet 
across, and is composed of the same kind of basaltic 
rock. Several fragments of wood, much twisted, 
softer, and more recent in appearance than the 
hard silicified wood above described, occur enclosed 
in the basalt in the inside of the ^ arch.' 

^^ In the small bay inside of ^ Arched Point,' a 
bed of coal, four feet thick and forty feet in length, 
appears above the debris, thirty feet above the sea, 
and covered by basalt, which rises about 500 feet 
above it. The coal is slaty, of a brownish-black 
colour, and the fracture like wood coal: the bed 
takes a northerly direction. 

" On the north side of the harbour, near the centre 
of the small bay formed by Cape Fran9ois, a thin 
vein of coal, not more than two or three inches in 
thickness, again makes its appearance in a cave ex- 
cavated in the shale. The coal is covered by a kind 
of ^ slag,' and underlies the shale, above which the 
basalt rises to about the same height as on the 
south side of the harbour. The cave is thirty feet 
wide at the entrance, twenty feet deep, and twelve 
feet in height. 

" From the centre of the terraced ridge termi- 
nating in Cape Fran9ois rises a conical hill, its 
crater-shaped summit being 1200 feet above the 
level of the sea. A shallow lake (covered with ice 



76 CUBfBEKLAND BAY. [Chaf.IV. 

^^^' at the time), thirty yards in length jBrom N. to S., 
and contracted in the centre to six yards, occupies 
the depression at the summit, round which piles of 
fragments of prismatic basalt arise on the east and 
west to about fifty feet, sloping towards the north 
and south, where gaps are left. Perfect basaltic 
colunms, some of them ten and twelve feet between 
the joints, being generally five or six angled prisms, 
are inclined round the acclivity of the cone, inter- 
mixed Yrith piles of broken fragments, exhibiting 
the same prismatic structure. At a deep gorge, six 
feet wide, on the north side of the mountain, these 
columns are beautifully arranged. The narrow 
isthmus between the head of Christmas Harbour 
and the N. W. coast, scarcely a mile across, consists 
of low ridges, with intervening swampy ground, 
and two lakes: the rocks are amygdaloid, with 
superincumbent basalt. 



CUMBERLAND BAY AND THE N. W. COAST, ETC. 

" The primary objects of the two expeditions up 
this bay in boats having been to explore the N. W. 
or weather shore by an overland journey across 
the Isthmus, at the head of Cumberland Bay, the 
rapid movements of the party, amidst the most 
unfavourable weather, seldom afibrded an oppor- 
tunity for more than general remarks on the geo- 
logical structure of the country passed through. 

" On leaving Christmas Harbour two bays were 
passed, — * Foul Haven,* and ^Mussel Bay;' the 



CsAP.IV.] GEOLOGICAL NOTICB. 77 

headland dividing these presents a perpendicular isio. 
escarpment of basalt. Approaching Cape Cumber- ■ 

land, the sea breaks upon a low black rugged ledge 
of basalt, backed by a swampy green bog, two miles 
in length, and half a mile in breadth, beyond which 
rises a range of trap hills. 

" A remarkable rock, called the * Sentry Box,* 
faces the entrance to Cumberland Bay ; it was not 
landed upon, but the succession of terraces, nearly 
horizontal to its summit, sufficiently indicated its 
basaltic structure to be the same as the main land. 

^^ The range of mountains flanking Cumberland 
Bay on each side generally present the same trap 
terraces as in Christmas Harbour. Six miles and 
a half up the bay are two inlets nearly opposite to 
each other ; the one on the south side is a mile and 
half deep, a mile broad at its widest part, and one- 
third of a mile at the entrance. The trap rocks 
surroxmding this bay differ from the others in con- 
taining drusy cavities of beautiful quartz crystals, 
many fine fragments of which were scattered about 
the surface of the rocky ledges. 

^^ At the top of the bay is a remarkable hill, be- 
tween 300 and 400 feet in height, constituted of an 
igneous arenaceous slate, confusedly intermingled 
with greenstone and basalt, having a crater-shaped 
summit, filled by a lake 200 yards long, and 150 
broad, three feet deep near the margin, and the 
centre covered with thin ice. It is surrounded by 
an irregular wall of greenstone, from five to twenty 
feet in height. 



78 CUICBBRLAND BAT. [Chap. IT. 

1840. " The water finds an outlet by a watercourse 
""~"~^ down the S. E. side of the hill, forming a small 
cascade in its first descent from the lake. 

" The ascent of the hill on the S. E. side is by a 
narrow gorge, three feet vride, nearly perpendicular, 
and through a mass of hard arenaceous rock, having 
a tendency to the prismatic form. On attaining 
the sunmiit, a quantity of loose fragments of slate 
strew the surface. Near the centre, a basaltic dyke, 
three feet wide, and having a direction S. E. and 
N.W., divides an amorphous mass of arenaceous 
slate from the greenstone on the north side; the 
latter rock contains much hornblende, with a fer- 
ruginous-coloured surface. The base and sides are 
scattered over vrith loose pieces of slate, intermingled 
with masses of trap. There are three other gorges 
by which the hill may be ascended. The irregular 
structure of this hill, with its large ^ crater-shaped' 
sunmiit, and the confused intermingling of the trap 
and singular slate rock, which latter seem to be of 
an ^ arenaceous ' composition, indicate vast disturb- 
ance at the period it was thrown up from below. 

" A little to the southward of this hill a bed of 
coal, one foot in thickness, and ten feet in length, 
breaks out in a cleft at the base of a hill along a 
watercourse having a S. E. and N.W. direction. 
The coal is very light and friable, with a beautiful 
black glossy fracture, and, like cannel coal, does 
not soil the fingers. It is covered by a porphyritic 
amygdaloid and greenstone rock, and not a vestige 
of shale or slate is to be found in the same hill. 



Chap.IV.] geological NOTICE. 79 

In the adjacent hill, south of this, another bed of ^^^- 
coal appears at the surface for about twenty feet, 
also in a deep cleft in the mountain, about twenty 
yards up a watercourse, and fifty feet above the 
sea : the direction the same as the last. The coal, 
however, is very different, having a slaty fracture, 
and dull brownish-black colour : it burnt very well, 
the boat's crew having cooked their provisions with 
it. The bed is two feet in thickness, and appears 
again on the opposite side of the watercourse, which 
is twelve feet across, and traversed by a small dyke 
of basalt three inches in breadth. The superin- 
cumbent rock, as in the last instance, is amygda- 
loidal greenstone. 

^^ In a S. E. direction from the head of the bay is 
an opening between the mountain ranges, foxmd to 
terminate in a part of ^ White Bay ;' the Isthmus, 
five miles across, consisting of a few low ridges, 
and a valley of the usual trap formation. A large 
dyke of basalt crosses the latter in an £. N. £. ^ £. 
direction, forming a wall from three to four feet in 
height. 

" At the S. W. end of the bay a creek runs up, 
beyond which is a swampy valley ; and two miles 
from the head of the creek is a lake one mile and a 
half long, and nearly half a mile broad, filling up 
a pass in the mountains, which rise above it to the 
height of about 2500 feet, the highest land met 
with. This range presents the same trap formation 
of basalt, greenstone, and amygdaloid. Veins of 
homstone, and an indurated claystone, were, how- 
ever, first found in situ here, about a foot in thick- 



80 CUMBERLAND BAT. [CaAP.IV. 

1840. ness, although numerous fragments frequently oc- 
' curred scattered about the watercourses. I found 

a solitary piece of fossil wood, highly silicified, at 
the upper margin of the lake— the only vestige met 
wiih. in Cumberland Bay and its vicinity. A small 
lump of coal was also found near the lower end of 
the lake, but neither could be found in situ. The 
valley continued in a S. S. W. direction, between 
the same range, for four miles above the lake. 

^^ In the small bay on the N. side of Cumberland 
Bay is a smooth undulating hill, covered with loose 
fragments of slate, piled up to 150 feet in height, 
and completely insulated from the greenstone range 
at the back. Some of the fragments of this re- 
markable looking ^ arenaceous slate^ with red mark- 
ings, bore a striking resemblance to the impressions 
of sea-weed. On the opposite or west side of the 
bay another ^ slate hiU ' forms a kind of belt in the 
trap range, 600 feet high, covered with loose frag- 
ments from the summit to the base, through which 
amorphous masses protrude in places. At the line 
of junction with the basalt, where a watercourse 
runs down, it assumes a prismatic tendency. About 
two thirds up is a vein of friable slaty kind of slag, 
a foot deep, and ten feet in length, covered by the 
basalt, and in all probability a bed of coal exists 
beneath. The slaty fragments were not marked 
with the sea-weed-like impressions, as in the hill on 
the opposite side. On the south side of Cumber- 
land Bay, near the upper end, is another of these 
remarkable hiUs, having a smooth marbled appear- 
ance at a distance, the light colour forming a great 



Chap. IV.] QEOLOGICAL NOTICE. 81 

contrast with the dark trap ranges. The southern i84o. 
extremity rises to nearly 300 feet, gradually sloping """"""^ 
down towards the north. Prismatic columnsi mostly 
five and six angled, appear in places through the 
pUe of loose fragments with which the hill is co- 
vered. The fragments of slate on this hill are 
much marked by red concentric lines, apparently 
caused by oxide of iron. In crossing over the 
Isthmus from the head of Cumberland Bay to the 
N. W. coast, several pieces of coal occurred scattered 
about a watercourse, but none in situ, although, 
had circumstances permitted its being followed up, 
a bed would no doubt have been discovered not far 
distant. 

^' On this coast, being the weather shore, the quan- 
tity of debris at the base of the hiUs is enormous, 
forming a steep slope of 300 to 500 feet, down to 
the black ledge of basalt on which the sea breaks. 
The whole is covered by a carpet of vegetation, 
intersected by numerous watercourses and cascades, 
rushing down frx>m the trap range of moxmtains 
above, rendering it an almost impassable bog, in 
which the party sank knee-deep at every step. A 
bay was found to bound it, and all further progress 
to the westward." 

The vegetable productions of this island cannot 
fail to be of more than ordinary interest to the 
botanist. So remote from any shores from which 
birds of passage might convey the seeds of their 

Q 



82 BOTANICAL NOllCE. [Chap. IV. 

1840. productions, it seems to have but a small number 
"""~"~ of plants, and some of these peculiar to the island ; 
showing that since the successive overflowings of 
volcanic matter destroyed the forests which at one 
period clothed this land, of which the fossil trees 
and^numerous beds of coal afford abundant proo^ 
it appears to have remained in a state of almost 
vegetable desolation, and well deserves the name 
bestowed on it by Captain Cook. When he visited 
it in the height of summer, the land was covered 
with snow, and only five plants in flower were 
collected. In the depth of winter the climate 
seemed to be but little different — the thermometer 
during our stay seldom descending below the 
freezing point, and the snow never remaining on 
the lower grounds beyond two or three days at a 
time. 

The following observations are by Dr. Hooker, 
the Assistant Surgeon of the Erebus, an able and 
zealous botanist, and to whom science is indebted 
for the very important and valuable work he is 
now publishing, under the title of " Flora An- 
tarctica," of which several numbers have already 
appeared, and which, when complete, will comprise 
an account of all the plants collected during the 
expedition. The liberal grant of 1000/. from the 
Government will enable him to give drawings and 
dissections of all the hitherto undescribed plantSy 
amounting to upwards of five hundred. To this 
work I must refer the scientific botanist for any 
further information he may require. 



Chap. IV.] BOTANICAL NOTICE. 83 

^^ Though Eerguelen Island is situated in com- isio. 
parativdy a low latitude, the vegetation is de- """"""" 
cidedly antarctic both because the majority of its 
native plants are peculiarly abundant in the same 
or higher parallels of the southern hemispherCi 
and from the mass of its vegetation being composed 
of comparatively few species. 

^^ At a little distance, the island presents the ap- 
pearance of absolute sterility, and when the voyager 
draws nearer the land, the scenery scarcely im- 
proves. A narrow belt of green grass runs along 
the quiet shores of the harbour, mixed with, and 
succeeded by, large rounded masses of a dirty 
green or rusty brown colour, due to the predo- 
minance of a curious umbelliferous plant, allied 
to the Bolaxj or ^^ Balsam Bog" of the Falkland 
Islands. Higher on the hills vegetation only ex- 
ists in scattered tufts, the plants being the same as 
inhabit a lower level, and it almost ceases at an 
elevation of 1000—1200 feet. 

" Even the description given in Captain Cook's 
voyage falls short of the cheerless truth, when, 
quoting Mr. Anderson's journal, he says, ^ Perhaps 
no place hitherto discovered in either hemisphere, 
under the same parallel of latitude, affords so scanty 
a field for the naturalist as this barren spot ;' for he 
might assuredly have added ten degrees to its own 
latitude in southern re^ons, and upwards of 
twenty in the north, as the limits upon which such 
a paucity of species exists ; for even in Spitzbergen 



84 BOTANICAL NOTICE, [Chap. IV. 

184a there are nearly three times as many flowering 
""~"""^ plants as here. 

" The number of species detected during Cook's 
stay in the island was eighteen, including Crypto- 
gamia; these, with the exception of one Lichen^ 
were refound during the visit of the antarctic ex- 
pedition, when the flora was increased to about 150 
in all ; namely, eighteen of flowering plants, three 
ferns, twenty-five mosses, ten Jungermannice^ one 
fungus, the rest lichens and seaweeds. 

" Of the flowering plants, the two great Classes 
were in the proportion of 1 to 2, the lowest ratio 
which has yet been recorded ; the nearest approach 
to it being seen in Melville Island, where Mr. Brown 
(in his remarks on the plants collected there by the 
officers of Captain Parry's first voyage) states the 
proportion to be as 2 to 5. The large propor- 
tion of monocotyledonous plants here arises, as in 
Melville Island, from the increased ratio which 
the grasses bear to the other phsBuogamic plants. 
In the latter bland, according to Mr. Brown's list, 
it is as 1 to 3*7, or, as that botanist remarks, ^ nearly 
double what has been foimd in any other part of 
the world.' In Eerguelen Island the disproportion 
is ftirther increased, being as 1 to 2*6, a third greater 
than that of Melville Island, and the maximum 
hitherto observed, except in the South Shetlands, 
where a solitary grass composes all the flowering 
vegetation. 

^^ Two phsenogamic plants, out of the eighteen, 
belong to genera apparently peculiar to the island ; 



Chap. IV.] BOTANICAL NOTICE. 85 

one of them, the curious Cabbage-plant (Pringlea 1840. 
anii8carbutica)y and the other a Portulaceous plant. ""^"^ 
Of the remaining sixteen, four are probably new 
species of antarctic American genera; ten are 
species actually inhabiting the latter country; 
six of these, also inhabitants of Auckland and 
Campbell Islands, and two are conunon through- 
out the whole southern and northern temperate 
and cooler zones. Of the cryptogamic plants, most 
are abundant in the higher southern latitudes, 
though many are hitherto undescribed, and, per- 
haps, twenty peculiar to this island. Many are 
natives of the European Alps, and more particularly 
of the north polar regions. 

^^ Though Eerguelen Island is remote and com- 
paratively bare of vegetation, there are several pecu- 
liarly interesting points connected with its Botany. 
Though now destitute of even a shrub, the abun- 
dance of fossil remains proves that many parts were 
for successive ages clothed with trees. The propor- 
tion of the surface that is covered with plants is 
about equal to that in Spitzbergen and Melville 
Island, yet the relative number of species to indivi- 
duals falls strikingly short ; for whilst the Flora of 
Melville Island boasts of sixty-seven species of 
flowering plants, and Spitzbergen of forty-five, Ker • 
guelen Island contains but eighteen, and of these 
only eight cover any considerable amount of surface. 
The climate of the island is such, that, though rigor- 
ous, it supports a perennial vegetation ; and scarcely 

a 8 



86 BOTANICAL NOTICE. [Chap IV. 

1840. any of the plants, even the grasses, can be called an- 
• nnals. Of the five plants found blossoming during 
December by Captain Cookj four were observed in 
the same state in May, and three of them continued 
so until the twentieth of July ; and in the month of 
June twelve out of the eighteen species were col- 
lected in flower. The repeated snow-storms had 
little influence in checking the verdure, and the 
umbelliferous plant was the only one actually 
frost-bitten by severe weather of three days* con- 
tinuance. 

^' The more general features of the vegetation 
being thus cursorily noticed, there remains one 
plant which demands particular attention, the 
famous Cabbage of Eerguelen Island, hitherto un- 
published, first discovered during Captain Cook's 
voyage. Specimens, together with a manuscript 
description, under the name of Pringlea^ were de- 
posited, in the collection formed by Mr. Anderson, 
in the British Museum, where they still exist. 
To a crew long confined to salt provisions, or 
indeed to human beings under any circumstances, 
this is a most important vegetable, for it possesses 
all the essentially good qualities of its English 
namesake, whilst from its containing a great abun- 
dance of essential oil, it never produces heartburn 
or any of those disagreeable sensations which our 
pot-herbs are apt to do. It abounds near the sea, 
and ascends the hills to their summits. The leaves 
form heads of the size of a good cabbage-lettuce, 
generally terminating an ascending or prostrate 



Chaf. IVJ zoological NOTICE. 87 

stalk, and the spike of flowers, borne on a leafy 1840. 
stem, rises from below the head, and is often two ~""""""^ 
feet high. The root tastes like horse-radish, and 
the young leaves or hearts resemble in flavor coarse 
mustard and cress. For one hundred and thirty 
days our crews required no fresh vegetable but 
this, which was for nine weeks regularly served 
out with the salt beef or pork, during which time 
there was no sickness on board. 

^^ Two species of grass may also be mentioned, 
as a£fording a nutritious fodder for goats, sheep, 
and pigs." 

Of land animals we saw none ; and the only 
traces we could discover of there being any on this 
island were the singular footsteps of a pony or ass, 
found by the party detached for survejdng pur- 
poses, under the command of Lieutenant Bird, and 
described by Dr. Robertson ^' as being three inches 
in length and two and a half in breadth, having a 
small and deeper depression on each side, and 
shaped like a horse shoe." It is by no means im- 
probable that the animal has been cast on shore 
from some wrecked vessel. They traced its footsteps 
for some distance in the recently fallen snow, in 
hopes of getting sight of it, but lost the tracks on 
reaching a large space of rocky groimd which was 
free from snow. 

There is, however, abimdance of food for cattle. 
The sheep we landed from our ships throve won- 
derfully on the grass, and soon got into good con- 
dition ; they also became so very shy that we were 

Q 4 



88 ZOOLOGICAL NOTICE. [Ckap.IV. 

1840. obliged to shoot them when wanted for our tables ; 
one of mine managed to evade our most active 
sportsmen, and was left there when we took our 
departure. I regretted I had not brought with me 
some useftil animals from the Cape of Good Hope, 
to have stocked the land. 

Of marine animals, the sea elephant and several 
species of seals were formerly in great abundance, 
and annually drew a number of vessels to these 
shores in pursuit of them; They have now, after 
so many years of persecution, quite deserted the 
place, or have been most completely annihilated. 
One very fine specimen of the sea elephant was 
shot at Christmas Harbour during our stay, as 
also were a few seals. These are described in the 
" Zoology of the Voyage," now in progress of pub- 
lication, by Dr. Richardson and I. E. Gray, Esq., of 
the British Museum, with the assistance of 1000/., 
granted by the Government, at the recommenda- 
tion of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, 
for the necessary illustrations and dawings of the 
unknown animals that were collected during the 
voyage. 

Some whales were seen at the entrance of the 
harbour, and by the parties employed in surveying 
the coast. These creatures appear still to be found 
in great numbers, so that in 1843, when we re- 
turned to the Cape of Grood Hope, we heard that 
there were between five and six himdred whale 
ships fishing along the shores or in the immediate 
neighbourhood of this land; that most of them 



Chap. IV.] ZOOLOGICAL KOnCB. 89 

were nearly jfiiU ; that from their great numbers iMO. 
constant accidents were happening in the thick """"""^ 
fogs which prevail, by running foul of each other ; 
and several vessels arrived at the Cape in a very 
shattered state. This fishery might be most suc- 
cessfully pursued from the Cape of Good Hope, but 
it is now chiefly carried on by American, vessels. 

Several kinds of fish were seen, and a large col- 
lection was made, amongst them were many new 
species. In the account now publishing by Dr. 
Richardson, he has described two new genera, 
under the names Notothenia^ of which three species 
were found here, and ChoBmetkySj of which there is 
yet only one known species, Rhinoceraius ; it has a 
general resemblance to the gurnards and prianotes : 
all the species of these two genera inhabit the kelp 
weed of the shores of the harbour ; they were taken 
by the hook, and proved acceptable to the table, 
being some of them a foot and a half long ; they 
feed on Entomostraca, and small shell-fish that live 
amongst the weed. 

Fifteen different species of sea-fowl were shot in 
the harbour, or foimd along its shores; amongst 
these, several species of petrel, three kinds of pen- 
guin, two species of gull, a duck, a cormorant, a 
tern, and a curious ^^chionisj* different in some 
particulars from that first described by Forster, 
and probably a new species. 

Of the sooty albatross (Diomedea fuliginosa)^ 
which appeared to have selected this as a breeding 
station, several young birds were still to be met 



90 ' ZOOLOGICAL KOnCB. [Chaf. IV. 

1840. withy although so late in the season, fully fledged, 
' and ready to commence their long flight over the 
Antarctic seas. 

The duck was obtained in abundance, and formed 
a delicious addition to our table. It is like the 
teal of England, and lives chiefly on the seeds 
of the cabbage, before mentioned, which is pro- 
fusely scattered over all parts of the island. 

The penguins, notwithstanding the disagreeable 
dark colour of its flesh and extreme fatness, were 
found to make excellent soup, which from its 
colour and flavour so much resembled hare soup, 
that it was always called by that name. 

Of insects, only three or four specimens were 
found, viz. a curculioj amongst the umbelliferous 
plants ; a small brownish moth, and two flies ; but 
probably in the summer time many others would 
make their appearance. 

The level beach at the head of the harbour 
afforded us convenient sites for our observatories, 
which were immediately erected; that for mag- 
netic purposes being placed at the north extreme, 
under the protection of the hill to the north, which 
effectually prevented the sun's rays deranging the 
temperature, and within a few feet of high-water 
mark ; that for the astronomical and pendulum ob- 
servations on nearly the same level, at more than a 
hundred yards distant from it towards the centre 
of the beach ; and close by this two small huts were 
erected for the convenience of the officers and men 
employed at the observatories. 



Cbav. IV.] MAGNBnC OBSERVATIONS. 91 

The ships were warped up to the head of the imo. 
harbour, and moored in a situation convenient for *"'*''"""^*' 
ready intercourse with the observatories; and al- 
though our operations were much impeded by fre- 
quent violent gales, we were enabled to get all the 
magnetometers placed and adjusted in time to take 
our part in the simultaneous observations made on 
the previously agreed on term-days of the 29th and 
30th May in all the foreign and British observa- 
tories that constitute the great system of magnetic 
co-operation. It happened most fortunately to be 
a time of unusual magnetic disturbance, so that 
our first day's simultaneous observations proved 
the vast extent and instantaneous effect of the dis- 
turbing power, whatever it might be, affecting the 
magnetometers at Toronto in Canada and at Eer- 
guelen Island, nearly antipodal to each other, 
simultaneously and similarly in all their strange 
oscillations and irregular movements, and thus im- 
mediately afforded one of the most important facts 
that the still-hidden cause of magnetic phenomena 
has yet presented. 

A most interesting and valuable series of hourly 
magnetometric observations was continued night 
and day throughout the whole period of our 
stay at this island, with such exactness to time, 
and so much zeal and imwearying perseverance, by 
the officers of the Erebus and Terror, under the 
more immediate direction of Commander Croader, 
that not a single break occurred, nor was a single 
hour's observation lost. 



92 VIOLENT QALBS. [Chap. TV. 

1840. The astronomical, tidal, and pendulum observa- 

tions occupied my attention exclusively; and in 
these I was also assisted by Commander Crozieri 
both of us living in one of the compartments of the 
observatory, only going off to the ships on Sunday 
to read the church service and inspect the vessels. 

The senior lieutenants had charge of the ships, 
and occupied the crews in refitting the rigging, 
and the more toilsome operation of frequently re- 
setting the anchors; for although these and the 
cables were of a weight and size usually supplied 
to ships of double our tonnage, they were unable 
to withstand the ahnost hurricane violence of the 
gales that prevail at this season of the year, some- 
times laying the ships over nearly on their beam 
ends, and the sheet anchor was constantly resorted 
to. On one occasion the whole body of the astro^ 
nomical observatory was moved nearly a foot ; and 
had not the lower framework fortunately been sunk 
to a good depth below the level of the ground, it 
would have doubtless been blown into the sea. 

The gusts occur so suddenly that I have fre- 
quently been obliged to throw myself down on the 
beach to prevent being carried into the water, and 
one of our men, whose duty it was to register the 
tide-gauge, was actually driven in by one of the 
squalls, and very nearly drowned. 

During forty-five of the sixty-eight days the 
ships were in Christmas Harbour it blew a gale of 
wind, and there were only three days on which 
neither rain nor snow fell. 



Chaf. IV.] SUBVEYS. 98 

It was this extremely tempestuous weather which i84a 
prevented a more extensive survey of the island. """"""" 
Lieutenant Bird, with two boats under his com- 
mandf examined White's Bay, and with the assist- 
ance of "Mr. Tucker and Mr. Davis surveyed several 
of its harbours. Lieutenant Philips examined Cum- 
berland Bay, and crossed from the head of it over 
to the west coast, but was unable to trace it beyond 
a few miles, owing to the swampy nature of the 
land. Mr. M'Cormick and Mr. Robertson accom- 
panied these expeditions to examine the geological 
and zoological productions of the country. But 
the severe weather they experienced kept us all in 
a state of anxiety about them the whole time of 
their absence, and the little they could accomplish 
was but too dearly purchased by so much suffering 
and exposure, and deterred me from permitting 
any further prosecution of their labours. 

The anchorages in Cumberland Bay are much 
superior to those of Christmas Harbour, and are not 
exposed to such violent winds ; they are, however, 
not of so ready access, and could only be entered 
in clear and moderate weather. 

There are also several good harbours in White's 
Bay, of which accurate plans were made by Mr. 
Davis, and will be published by the Admiralty, with 
the chart of Eerguelen Island. 

The rise and fall of tide in Christmas Harbour 
is remarkably small, not on any occasion amounting 
to more than thirty inches, and the usual spring 
tides are generally less than two feet ; the neap tide 



94 GEOQRAPHICAL POSITION. [Ciuf. IV. 

1840. varies from four to twelve inches, and the diurnal 
~""~^ inequality is, comparatively, very considerable. The 
height of the tide was registered every quarter of 
an hour between the dd of June and 4th of July ; 
and the time of high water at full and change of the 
moon was exactly at two o'clock. 

Our observations gave the latitude of the obser- 
vatory 48^ 41' S., and its longitude eS"* 3' 35" E. 
The mean dip of the magnetic needle 69^ 59' 4" S., 
and the variation 30^ 33' 85" E. 

The term-day observations for the month of June 
bemg completed, and the absolute determinations 
obtained, the instruments and houses were em- 
barked, and the ships got ready for sea by the 
middle of July, but adverse weather detained us 
stUl a few days longer, and we were not able to 
leave this most dreary and disagreeable harbour 
until the 20th July. 



95 



July 20. 



CHAPTER V. 

Fresh breeze, N. W. ; unmoored at daylight, i84o. 
weighed at 8h. 15m. A. m., and stood out to sea, 
passing close along Terror Reef, over which the 
sea was breaking, sufficiently indicating the danger, 
although, owing to the haziness of the weather, we 
had lost sight of the land, and at two or three 
miles from it we could not get soundings with 
fifty fathoms of line. 

In the afternoon the freshening breeze reduced 
us to close-reefed topsails, and the Terror £Edling far 
astern about the same time, obliged us to haul the 
foresail up. We were before night well dear of 
the land, and the numerous rocky patches that lie 
a considerable distance from its shores. Upon 
some of these there is not less than thirty or forty 
fathoms, but in others the rocks are very near the 
surface, and imless there be a high sea running, so 
that it may break over these treacherous shallows, 
the navigation amongst them is hazardous, more 
especially as there is usually no anchorage near 
them, owing to the great depth of water. 

A shoal of porpoises was seen, and we passed 
many floating beds of sea-weed, some of them more 
than a mile in breadth. The wind had increased 



96 CUBRSNT. [Chap. V. 

1840. to a gale, which continued to blow with frequent 
Julj 21— snow-squalls throughout the 2l8t, 22d, and 23d| 
^' which, together with the long dark nights of this 
season of the year, rendered it difficult, notwith- 
standing the constant firing of guns and burning 
of blue lights, to keep the ships in company with 
each other. 

During the snow-squalls the temperature of the 
air invariably fell several degrees, and on one occa- 
sion was as low as 27^ although the sea maintained 
an uniform heat of about 36^ ; the vapour which 
rose from water of that temperature almost as 
speedily froze before it attained any considerable 
altitude, and kept us continually enveloped in haze 
and snow. We should have felt some alarm at 
meeting such large quantities of sea-weed had we 
not before observed that the masses which had 
been torn away from the shores of Prince Edward's 
and the Marion and Crozet's groups were met with 
only to the eastward of those islands, whilst scarcely 
any were seen as we approached them from the 
westward. Meeting with it now in such abundance 
confirmed me in the belief that there is a general 
tendency of the sur&ce water in these parts to the 
eastward, most probably occasioned by the westerly 
winds, which, at this season, at any rate, prevail 
almost as steadily as do the trade winds in the 
equatorial regions. 

We also found ourselves every day from twelve 
to sixteen miles by observation in advance of our 



Chaf. v.] cubbent. 97 

reckoning, as may be seen by referring to the table ib40. 
in the Appendix, where our daily position is given ; """"""" 
and the effect of the current is noted whenever 
observations for both latitude and longitude were 
obtained. 

Several kinds of petrel were the only birds seen ; 
but these, particularly the Cape pigeon, were very 
abundant. 

Wind more moderate, still from the westward. Juij^i. 
The temperature of the sea rose from 37^ at 1 p.m. 
to 46^ at 11 P.M., that of the air at the same time 
haying fallen from 33^ to 31^. This unaccountable 
increase of temperature of the sea, which had for 
several previous days averaged about 35^.5, con- 
tinued until 7 p. M. the next day, extending over a 
space of eighty-six miles ; it then fell to 40^ the 
air being at 29^, with a strong south-westerly gale 
blowing, and frequent snow showers. 

By our observations at noon we found ourselves Jul/ 26. 
fifty-eight miles to the eastward of our reckoning, 
showing the greatest amount of current during the 
last two days that we had experienced since leaving 
Kerguelen Island. 

The rise of the barometer to thirty inches, re- 
markably high for these latitudes, was followed, at 
8 p. M., by a gale from the north-west of twelve 
hours' duration. We continued to see many patches Jul/ 27. 
of sea-weed, and again at night the north wind 
freshened to a gale : the Terror had dropped far 
astern, so that at daylight we could scarcely see 

H 



98 PABT COMPANY. [Chaf. V. 

1840. her, although we had purposely kept under mo- 
julj 28. derate sail, to our great inconvenience, the ship 
rolling heavily in consequence of not having suffi- 
cient sail to steady her. Towards noon she closed 
with us, and continued to keep better company 
until the increasing gale reduced our sails to the 
close-reefed main topsail and foresail, which had 
now become necessary to keep the ship before 
the high following sea, when, owing to the great 
difficulty they had in steering her, we passed 
ahead, and her light was only dimly seen during 
the early part of the afternoon. The gale continued 
all night with a heavy cross sea : there was much 
lightning to the eastward ; meteors in great num- 
bers were seen darting about in all directions, and 
the whole aspect of the sky proclaimed a convulsion 
or disturbance of the atmosphere of an unusual 
character; the barometer descended rapidly, and 
at 4 A.M. stood 28-88. 
Julj 29. For several hours the Terror had ceased to an- 
swer our night signals, and when day broke we 
could not see any thing of her. At this time, the 
sea having become more regular, we hauled the 
fore-sail up, and rounded to under a close-reefed 
main-topsail, to enable her to rejoin, supposing 
that she had broached to during the night, or that 
they had found it impossible or imprudent to scud 
before the gale. We remained hove to as long as 
daylight lasted, when we gave up all expectation 
of again meeting her until our arrival at the next 



Chap. V] HURRICANE. 

rendezvous. The barometer continued to fidl until i84a 



99 



3 p.m., when, at its lowest (28-29.), there was 
nothing in the sky to indicate more than an ordi- 
nary storm, indeed the gale had abated consider- 
ably ; but so great was our reliance on the baro- 
meter, that we kept the ship under snug sail, and 
every way prepared for whatever might happen; 
and soon the dense accumulating clouds gave 
notice of the tempest which shortly followed. We, 
however, escaped it with but little damage, by the 
steadiness of our men that were steering, and by 
keeping the vessel directly before the wind; although 
the seas broke into our ship over both quarters, 
flooding our decks to a depth of more than two feet, 
and obliged us to knock out the ports to let the 
water run off and relieve her of its weight. The 
mountainous sea, before which we had been scud- 
ding was quelled, for the time, by the force of the 
wind, whilst the tops of the waves were driven 
completely over us in sheets of water; but the 
violence of the hurricane was such as soon to ex- 
pend itself. Beginning at N.N.W., in an hour and 
three quarters the storm had abated to the strength 
of a common gale from the west, and in that short 
space of time the mercury in the barometer rose 
nearly half an inch. 

During the night the wind and sea subsided, Juljso. 
and we had a comparatively fine morning. We 
were all anxiously looking out for the Terror, 
and wondering how she had weathered the breeze, 

■ s 



100 



BOATSWAIN DROWNED. [Chap. V. 



^^^' when a wooden hoop of a cask was seen close to us. 
By this we felt certain that she had run past us 
during the time that we were hove-to for her, and 
was now probably far ahead ; we therefore pressed 
all sail on the ship to endeavour to overtake her. 
The day being very favourable, we seized the op- 
portunity of drying our sails and clothes, which 
had been most thoroughly drenched, and of re- 
pairing the damages we had sustained. 

In this and many other respects we felt the fine 
weather to be a great advantage to us : but this after- 
noon it pleased God to visit us by an unlooked-for 
calamity, — Mr. Roberts, the boatswain, whilst en- 
gaged about the rigging, fell overboard and was 
drowned. The life-buoy was instantly let gOj and 
two boats lowered down; they reached the spot 
where we saw him sink only a few seconds too late ! 
The gloom which the loss of one of our small party, 
at the outset of our voyage, occasioned, was for a 
time merged in feelings of painful anxiety, and 
afterwards of heartfelt gratitude, for the merciful 
preservation of the whole crew of one of the boats, 
who, in their humane endeavours to save the life of 
our unfortunate shipmate, very nearly sacrificed 
their own. Mr. Oakley, mate, and Mr. Abemethy, 
the gunner, had returned to the ship with one 
boat, when the other, still at a considerable distance 
from us, was struck by a sea, which washed four 
of the crew out of her. Mr. Abernethy immediately 
again pushed ofi^ from the ship, and succeeded in 



Chap. V.] ICEBERG SEEN. 101 

saving them from their perilous situation, com- 1S40. 
pletely benumbed and stupified with the cold. The 
boats were, with much difficulty, owing to the sea 
that was running, hoisted up, and not until after 
one of them had been again swamped alongside. 

We resumed our course under all sail, although 
this calamitous detention of some hours frustrated 
all our expectations of overtaking the Terror. A 
small iceberg, seen at a considerable distance just 
before dark, warned us to be vigilant during the 
night, which at this season being fifteen hours 
long obliged us to run at all hazards, or to delay 
our voyage to a ruinous extent. It has at all times 
a good effect upon those whose duty it is to look 
out, and an advantageous stimulus even to the 
most diligent, occasionally to see real dangers ; but 
they were, in this instance, the cause of several false 
alarms, from the impression left upon our minds. 

The weather continued fine all night and the July si. 
greater part of the next day. Numerous birds of 
the petrel kind, which were flying about, seemed 
to enjoy the short-lived tranquillity, and were 
eagerly employed searching the patches of floating 
sea-weed for small fish and marine insects, which 
find a precarious security amongst its densely in- 
terwoven branches from the persecutions of their 
enemies. 

Barnacles, and a beautiful species of Serpuloj 
were found attached to the stems of some weed 
that was hooked up as we sailed along. 

H 6 



102 SUCCESSION OF GALES. [Chap. V. 

184a Two small icebergs were seen in the course of 
the day ; and from the low temperature of the air 
and sea these last two days, we were in constant 
expectation of meeting a large body of ice. We 
found also that we had been carried forward thirty 
miles to-day by the easterly current. 

Gale followed gale in quick succession for several 
days, and indeed with only brief intervals of more 
moderate weather. Whenever the wind veered to 
the northward of west it was invariably accompa- 
nied by thick weather and snow showers; cold 
weather and a clear sky as certainly prevailed 
with the south-westerly gales, — the barometer also 
always rising with the latter, and descending with 

Aug. 4. the former. On the fourth, at 8 p. m., it was down 
to 28*433, with only a fresh breeze ; but a gale, 

Aug. 5. which followed throughout the next day from the 
south-west, raised it more than an inch before it 

Aug. 6. abated, at 8 A. M. of the sixth, when we were again 
favoured with a few hours of pleasant weather. 

At every opportunity we continued our mag- 
netic observations, notwithstanding the general 
inclemency of the weather: we were the more 
anxious to obtain them, owing to the utter defi- 
ciency of all such knowledge in these parts. We 
had been led to expect that one of the magnetic 
foci of greatest intensity would be found in about 
the latitude of 47'* S. and longitude 140*" E. We 
therefore pursued that parallel of latitude as nearly 
as possible ; and by means of the admirable con- 
trivance of Mr. R. W. Fox were able, in tolerably 



Chap. V.] MAQNBTIC FORCE. 103 

moderate weather, to determine the three magnetic ^^^* 
elements with even more precision on board our 
ships than they are susceptible of on shore, on ac- 
count of the unknown and indeterminable amount 
of local attraction ; and even in the heaviest gales, 
after a little practice with his instrument, they 
may be observed with sufficient exactness to afford 
very useful and important information. Through- 
out the whole distance of between three and four 
thousand miles, from Eerguelen Island to Van 
Diemen Land, we could not have derived a single 
satisfactory result with the instruments in com- 
mon use ; and this portion of the ocean, at least, 
must for the present have remained a blank upon 
our charts. But, with Mr. Fox's apparatus, the 
dip and intensity observations were accomplished 
in an almost uninterrupted series of daily expe- 
riments. 

By reference to the annexed table, Ae progres- 
sive increase of intensity, after leaving Eerguelen 
Island, and the points at which we successively 
crossed the isodynamic lines of 1*5, 1'6, 1'7, &c., 
until, on the sixth of August, in lat. 46** 44' S., Aug. 6 
and long. 128^ 26' £., we found it to attain its 
greatest amount in this parallel of latitude, being 
there 2-034, and thence again as gradually dimi- 
nishing to l'U24 at Van Diemen Land. The wea- 
ther did not admit of our attempting to deter^ 
mine the actual position of the focus of maximum 
intensity, which, from our observations, we con- 
sidered to be far to the southward of the course 

II 4 



104 



MAGNBTIC OBSEBVATIONS. 



[Chap. V. 



1840. 



Aug. 8. 



we had pursued, and beyond what it was possible 
to follow at this time of the year. 

Obseryations on the Magnetic Force, Dip, and Variation, on 
board H. M. S. Erebus, during her Paasage from Christmaa 
Harbour, Kerguelen Island, to Hobart-town, Van Diemen 
Land. 



Date. 


Lat 


Log. 


Intantity. 


Dip. 


Variation. 


Raiuaf'U* 

• 


June 


/ 

48-41 


/ 

68-54 


1-465 


69-596 


30-34 W. 


Chrtotaai 


July 22 


48-29 


76-55 


1-539 


70-55 


— 


nsBiMm. . 


23 


48-17 


80-15 


1-574 


71-50 


— 




24 


47-55 


83-31 


1-601 


72-34 


— 




25 


47-46 


86-18 


1-575 


73-33 


— 




26 


47-12 


89-45 


1-565 


73-35 


—. 




27 


47-3 


93-0 


1-712 


74-37 


27-89 W. 




28 


47-13 


97-7 


1-712 too much 


motion 




80 


47-39 


102-42 


1-855 


74-28 


_ 




81 47-35 


106-26 


1-863 


74-31 


21-39 W. 




Aug. 1 47'45 


1 10-39 


1-815 


75-8 


— . 




2 


47-34 


114-15 


1-970 


75-26 


14-47 W. 




4 


47-41 


121-30 


1-992 


76-4 


12-50 




5 


47-34 


124-43 


1-996 


76-40 


—. 




6 


46-44 


128-26 


2-034 


75-41 


— 




7 


46-13 


132-0 


1-980 


7517 


2-41 W. 




8 


45-59 


135-38 


1-989 


73-48 


0-55 E. 




9 


45-17 


139-19 


2-005 


7328 


4-26 




10 


44-24 


141-39 


1-976 


72-37 


5-56 




11 


44-16 


142-38 


1-934 


73-3 


11-38 




Hobart-toTv 


^n, Van Diemen's 1 


i^md. 




42*52 


147-27 


1-824 


70-40 


10-24 





The observations of the variation of the compass 
during this run were also of more than ordinary 
interest ; the westerly variation gradually diminish- 
ing in amount until the eighth of August, when, in 
lat. 46** S. and long. 134^** E., we crossed the line 
of no variation, and then as rapidly increased the 
easterly variation. This position of the line of no 



Chaf. v.] magnetic variation. 105 

variation is rather further to the eastward than^ i84a 
former observations would have placed it, and in 
opposition to the generally assumed progressive 
movement of the isogonal lines, from east to west 
in the southern hemisphere. It is, however, re- 
marked by Professor Barlow, in his laborious in- 
vestigation of this matter, in the Philosophical 
Transactions (for 1837, p. 671.), that this line of 
no variation, which passes through Australasia, has 
imdergone very little change of position during 
these last sixty years ; and it seems probable that 
the variation about this spot is as fixed as that on 
the coast of America. It would, however, be de- 
sirable, under favourable circumstances of weather, 
to repeat experiments on the variation at regular 
intervals of time, in order to ascertain whether a 
retrograde movement of the isogonal lines in these 
parts may not have begun, as our observations 
would seem to show ; and as is well known to have 
occurred with those in England between twentv 
.nd thirty ye.™ .go. 

We have also full reason to beheve that at the 
Cape of Good Hope, where the westerly variation 
had been regularly increasing ever since about the 
year 1600, when the line of no variation passed 
through it, at the average rate of between seven 
and eight minutes annually, attained its TnftyiTnnm 
in 1840. By our observations in April of that 
year it amounted to 29^ 14^ W., and those made at 
the Magnetic Observatory, since its establishment 
there by me at that time, and afterwards by my- 



106 MAKB THB LAND. {Chap. V. 

^^^' self, on revisiting it in April, 1848, concur to show 
that it has diminished to 28"* 58'. 

The perfection to which the making of chrono- 
meters has attained has rendered general magnetic 
charts almost unnecessary for nautical purposes ; 
but there are some meridians where the change of 
variation is so rapid, that in cases where chrono- 
meters cannot be depended upon, or are altogether 
wanting, the longitude may be determined with a 
considerable degree of exactness by such means ; 
especially to the southward of Australasia, on the 
usual track of aU vessels going from England to 
her colonies, as also on the meridian of the Cape of 
Good Hope, and is well worthy the attention of 
those in charge of our merchant ships. 

Aug. 10. The 10th was a beautiful moderate day,' and 
afforded us an opportunity, during the afternoon, 
of trying the temperature of the ocean in various 
parts, to the depth of six hundred fathoms, but 
without striking ground. At 10 h. 50 m. p. m. a burr 
was observed round the moon, the inner circle 
being 0^ 53', and the outer 1** 50' distant from her 
disc, exhibiting brilliant prismatic colours. 

Aug. 12. ^t noon the south-west cape of New Holland 
was observed, bearing N. E. by N., distant nine or 
ten leagues, and some other parts of the coast soon 
afterwards became visible. But just at this time 
the wind increased so suddenly and violently, 
that we could hardly take in our sails quickly 
enough, and in a few minutes were reduced to a 
close-reefed main-topsail : at 8 p. m., when blowing 



Chaf. v.] driven off the land. 107 

a perfect hurricane, the lee main-topsail sheet ^^^' 
gave way, and in an instant the sail was rent 
into numberiess ribands, and soon entirely disap- 
peared. The only sail then left on the ship, a new 
main-staysail, was soon afterwards blown away, — 
no canvass could stand against such a storm. At 
10 p. M. the barometer stood at 28*16; and al- 
though it then began to rise, we could not perceive 
the slightest abatement of the hurricane imtil after 
midnight, when it gradually moderated, and, at the 
same time, shifted from north to west. It conti- 
nued to blow a storm of ordinary violence, with 
only occasional furious squalls, throughout the 
13th, 14th, and 15th; when, having been driven a August 
great distance to the southward, we again stood in ^ ' ' 
shore, and struck soundings at 11 p.m. in ninety 
fathoms. By the assistance of a bright full moon, 
we saw the land of Tasmania directly ahead of us 
at 3 A. M. ; and after beating up into Storm Bay, Aug. 16. 
we anchored at eleven o'clock the same night, off 
the light at the entrance of the Derwent, in thir- 
teen fathoms, to wait for daylight, and get a pilot 
for the river. 

As soon as the tide suited we weighed the next 
morning, and with a strong breeze beat up into the 
river, where a pilot came on board, and gave us the 
gratifying news of the arrival of the Terror the 
day before us, and bringing with him a number of 
newspapers, which, although of not very recent • 
date, contained much that was new to us. 

It was a very fine day, and we aU greatly en- 



108 ANCHOR IN THE DEBWENT. [Chap. Y. 

1840. joyed the rich and beautiful scenery on both sides 
of the expansive and placid waters of the Derwent ; 
perhaps making a more powerful impression on our 
minds from the contrast which they presented to 
the desolate land and turbulent ocean we had so 
recently left. 

We anchored at five in the afternoon off Fort 
Mulgrave, when Captain Crozier came on board 
with satisfactory accoimts from the Terror. I 
immediately proceeded to Government-house, and 
received the most kind welcome from our warm- 
hearted friends Sir John and Lady Franklin. 

Anxious to get the permanent observatory at 
work as speedily as possible, I was rejoiced to learn 
from the Lieutenant-Governor that the materials of 
which it was to be constructed had been prepared 
several months, according to a plan sent from 
England, and ready to be put together as soon as 
the site should be determined upon ; I therefore ac- 
companied Sir John Franklin the next morning to 
examine several places which he thought likely; 
and having selected that which appeared to me the 
most unexceptionable for the purpose, a party of 
two hundred convicts were the same afternoon set 
to work to dig the foundation, prepare the blocks 
of freestone which were to form its base, and the 
solid pillars of the same materials, which were to 
be the supports for the instruments, and bring the 
prepared timbers fit)m the government store. 

The spot selected for the building is in the go- 



Chaf. v.] magnetic observatobt. 109 

vemmeiit demesne, near the site of the proposed ^^^' 
new Grovemment-house, and commands a delightful 
view of the beautiful river Derwent and surround- 
ing country. Its chief advantage, however, as a 
magnetic station, arises from its being placed 
over a thick bed of sandstone, which having been 
quarried to the depth of thirty or forty feet pre- 
vents all doubt as to the geological character of 
the substratum, a circumstance of first importance 
in all magnetic operations, and more especially so 
in a country where are to be found such manifest 
indications of its igneous origin. 

The ships were warped further up the river, and 
securely moored in a small cove off the government 
grounds, in a situation convenient for ready com- 
munication with the Observatory, and out of the 
bustle and confusion of the general commerce of 
the colony. I strongly recommended this anchor- 
age for the use of vessels of war visiting Hobart- 
town, as being in every respect the most desirable ; 
and I am glad to find it has been very generally 
resorted to by those of her Majesty's ships that 
' have touched there lately. During the stay of our 
vessels at this place it was called, in almost ironical 
compliment to them. Yacht Bay, but I perceive, in 
the more recent plans that have been published, it 
bears the name of Ross Cove. 

The examination and refitting of the rigging, 
and the necessary caulking, repairing, and painting 
the ships, were proceeded with under the most 



1 10 MAGNBTIC OfiSERVATOBT. LChjlt. V. 

1B40. fiivourable circumstances, every facility and assist* 
ance being most cordially afforded to us by the 
gentlemen at the head of the various public offices ; 
and I feel under especial obligations to the Assistant 
Commissary-general, George McLean, Esq., for his 
ready compliance with every demand made upon his 
depit. en, the unmediaJTremoval of eve-T^iiii- 
culty, and the personal interest and trouble he took 
to obtain for us the unusually large supplies we 
required, and all of them of the very best kind, to 
our very great comfort, as well as real benefit to 
the service. 

Under the daily personal superintendence of Sir 
John Franklin, the zealous co-operation of Major 
Eelsall, of the Royal Engineers, and the able and 
indefatigable exertions of Mr. Howe, the clerk of the 
works, the building of the Observatory proceeded 
most rapidly, and the whole was completed and 
roofed in, the stone pillars fixed upon the solid sand- 
stone rock, the instraments placed on them, and all 
their delicate adjustments fulfilled, a few hours be- 
fore the term-day observations of the 27th of August 
were to be commenced. Thus the erection of this 
Observatory was accomplished in the brief period of 
nine days, — an instance of what may be done where 
the hearts and energies of all are united to promote 
the common object of their endeavours. I should be 
doing injustice to my own feelings were I to neglect 
to express my admiration of the cheerful enthusiasm 
which the convicts employed in the building dis- 



•^ 



Chap. V.] TEBM-DAY OB8BBVAT10N8. Ill 

played throughout the work ; as an instance of this, ^^^' 
I may mention that after they had been labouring 
from six o'clock on Saturday morning until ten at 
night, seeing that a few more hours of work would 
complete the roofing in, they entreated permission 
to finish it before they left ofl^; but as it would 
have broken in upon the Sabbath morning, their 
request was very properly refused : this is only one 
of several such instances of their disinterested zeal 
in the cause, for, from their unfortunate situation, 
they could not derive any benefit fix)m their addi- 
tional labour, and must have, on the occasion above 
mentioned, sufi^ered much fatigue from their im- 
usually prolonged exertions. 

By these means we were enabled to begin the 
observations at this station some months earlier 
than we could have done under ordinary circum- 
stances, and much sooner than I could have possibly 
anticipated. The ships' portable observatories had 
also been put up at convenient distances from the 
permanent observatory; and by the aid of some 
volunteer assistants we obtained a very complete 
and satisfactory series of observations throughout 
the 27th and 28th of August, with two sets of 
magnetometers, in which the three instnmients of 
each were simultaneously recorded at every interval 
of two and a half minutes throughout the twenty- 
four hours. 

The great advantage of obtaining the readings 
of all three instruments at each interval over the 



112 TERM-DAT OBSEBVATIOKS. [Chap. Y. 

1840. method proposed in the instructions with which I 
""""""""" was furnished, and pursued by many of the foreign 
observatories, in which only one of the instruments 
was noted at each interval, was so manifest on 
looking over the series, that I resolved to continue 
this method throughout the remainder of our voy* 
age ; it was subsequently adopted at my earnest 
recommendation at the observatories of St. Helena^ 
Cape of Good Hope, and Toronto, and by all those 
established by the liberality of the Russian govern- 
ment throughout its extensive dominions. 

As soon as the August term-day observations 
were obtained, the instruments belonging to the 
permanent observatory were removed to allow the 
fitting up of the interior of the building, and to 
line it throughout, in order to prevent as much as 
possible great changes of temperature. The build- 
ing, which is forty-eight long by sixteen broad, 
is entirely of wood, and care was taken that not 
the smallest particle of metal of any kind was uscfd 
in its construction, the whole of the fastenings being 
of wooden pegs. The instruments are placed on pil- 
lars of sandstone, fixed in the solid rock, of the same 
formation, and defended from any influence the heat 
of the body of the observer might have upon them 
by the intervention a closely-fitted deal partition ; 
the observer reading off^ the instrument by means 
of a telescope also fixed on a smaller piUar of the 
same kind, through a small aperture in the wooden 
partition several feet distant from the instrument. 



Chap, v.] FRENCH EXPEDITION. 118 

In the astronomical observatory the tAnsit in- ^^^ 
strument was properly adjusted, the clocks fixed 
in their places, and observations with the invariable 
pendulums for determining the figure of the earth 
commenced by myself; Commander Crozier having 
under his more immediate superintendence the 
magnetometric observations, which were now con- 
tinued uninterruptedly every hour throughout the 
day and night, and afforded full occupation to all 
the officers of the Expedition who had not other 
duties to perform. 

These several buildings were all included within 
the boimdary palings of the government grounds, 
and formed a pretty-looking little village ; and here, 
without interruption or annoyance, the gratifying 
and unceasing round of observations proceeded 
most comfortably and satisfactorily. The results 
of these operations are already in part published 
in '^ The Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society," and the remainder are in course of pub- 
lication, at the expense of government, under the 
superintendence of Lieutenant-Colonel Sabine, of 
the Royal Artillery. 

The most interesting news that awaited us on 
our arrival at Van Diemen's Land related to the 
discoveries made, during the last summer, in the 
southern regions by the French expedition, consist- 
ing of the Astrolabe and Zelee, imder the command 
of Captain Dumont D'Urville, and by the United 
States expedition, under Lieutenant Charles Wilkes, 
in the frigate Vincennes. 

I 



114 FRENCH DISCOVEKIES. [Cbap. V. 

1S40. Xhe accounts published, by the authority of Cap- 
" tain D'Urville, in the local papers stated, that the 

French ships sailed from Hobart-town on the 
1st of January, 1840, and discovered land on the 
evening of the 19th; on the 21st some of the 
officers landed upon a small islet lying some dis- 
tance from the main land, and procured some spe- 
cimens of its granitic rock. D'Urville traced the 
land in a continuous line one hundred and fifty 
miles, between the longitudes of 186^ and 142^ 
east, in about the latitude of the antarctic circle. 
It was entirely covered with snow, and there was 
not the least appearance of vegetation : its general 
height was estimated at about one thousand three 
hundred feet. M. D'Urville named it " Terre 
Adflie." Proceeding to the westward, they dis- 
covered and sailed about sixty miles along a solid 
wall of ice one hundred and fifty feet high, which 
he, believing to be a covering or crust of a more 
solid base, named ^^ C6te Clair^.^ It must have 
been extremely painful to the enterprising spirit of 
D'Urville to be obliged to relinquish a more ex- 
tended exploration of this newly-discovered land ; 
but the weakly condition of his crews imperatively 
demanded of him to discontinue their laborious 
exertions, and return to a milder climate to restore 
the health of his enfeebled people, upon finding 
that the western part of the C6te Clairee turned 
away suddenly to the southward. He accordingly 
bore away on the Ist of February, and reached Ho- 
bart-town on the 1 7th of the same month, after an 



Chap, v.] AMERICAN EXPEDITION. 115 

absence of only seven weeks. Although the western ^^^ 
point of C6te Clair^ had been seen by Balleny in 
the preceding summer, it was mistaken by him 
for an enormous iceberg, and the land he at first 
imagined he saw behind it he afterwards thought 
might only be clouds. These circumstances are 
mentioned in the log-book of the Eliza Scott, but 
are not inserted here ^th the least intention of 
disputing the unquestionable right of the French 
to the honour of this very important discovery. 

The result of the American expedition was, in 
compliance with the instructions of the govern- 
ment, kept profoundly secret on their return to 
Sydney, and nothing appeared in the local papers 
respecting their extensive operations but uncertain 
conjectures and contradictory statements. I felt 
therefore the more indebted to the kind and gener- 
ous consideration of Lieutenant Wilkes, the distin- 
guished commander of the expedition, for a long 
letter on various subjects, which his experience had 
suggested as likely to prove serviceable to me, imder 
the impression that I should still attempt to pene- 
trate to the southward on some of the meridians he 
had visited; a tracing of his ori^al chart ac- 
companied his letter, showing the great extent of 
his discoveries, pointing out to me those parts of 
the coast which he thought we should find most 
easily accessible. These documents would, indeed, 
have proved of infinite value to me, had I felt my- 
self compelled to follow the strict letter of my in- 
structions; and I do not the less appreciate the 

1 *2 



116 AMERICAN EXPEDITION. LCbap. V 

1840. motives which prompted the commonication of 
those papers, because they did not eventually prove 
so useful to me as the American commander had 
hoped and expected : and I avail myself of this 
opportunity of publicly expressing the deep sense 
of thankfulness I feel to him for his friendly and 
highly honourable conduct. 

The arduous and persevering exertions of this 
expedition, continued throughout a period of more 
than six weeks, under circumstances of great peril 
and hardship, cannot fail to reflect the highest credit 
on those engaged in the enterprise, and excite the 
admiration of all who are in the smallest degree 
acquainted with the laborious and difficult nature 
of an icy navigation: but I am grieved to be 
obliged to add, that at the present time they do 
not seem to have received either the approbation 
or reward their spirited exertions merit. The 
narrative of their comprehensive labours is now in 
the hands of the public : I need, therefore, make no 
further remark here on the subject ; but as I shall 
have occasion hereafter to refer to the documents 
I received from Lieutenant Wilkes, they are printed 
in the Appendix. 

That the commanders of each of these great 
national undertakings should have selected the 
very place for penetrating to the southward, for 
the exploration of which they were well aware, at 
the time, that the expedition under my command 
was expressly preparing, and thereby forestalling 
our purposes, did certainly greatly surprise me. I 



Chaf. v.] selection OP ROUTE, 117 

should have expected their national pride would i84a 
have caused them rather to have chosen any other 
path in the wide field before them, than one thus 
pointed out, if no higher consideration had power to 
prevent such an interference. 

They had, however, the unquestionable right to 
select any point they thought proper, at which to 
direct their eflForts, without considering the embar- 
rassing situation in which their conduct might have 
placed me. Fortunately, in my instructions, much 
had been left to my judgment under unforeseen 
circumstances ; and impressed with the feeling that 
England had ever led the way of discovery in the 
southern as well as in the northern regions, I con- 
sidered it would have been inconsistent with the 
pre-eminence she has ever maintained, if we were to 
follow in the footsteps of the expedition of any 
other nation. I therefore resolved at once to avoid 
all interference with their discoveries, and selected 
a much more easterly meridian (170** E.), on which 
to endeavour to penetrate to the southward, and if 
possible reach the magnetic pole. 

My chief reason for choosing this particular me- 
ridian in preference to any other was, its being that 
upon which Balleny had in the summer of 1839, 
attained to the latitude of sixty-nine degrees, and 
there found an open sea ; and not» as has been as- 
serted, that I was deterred from any apprehension 
of an equally unsuccessful issue to any attempt we 
might make where the Americans and French had 
so signally failed to get beyond even the sixty- 

I 3 



1 18 VAN DIEMBN'S LAND. [Chap V. 

1840. seventh degree of latitude. For I was well aware 
^ how ill-adapted their ships were for a service of 
that nature ; from not being fortified to withstand 
the shocks and pressure they must have been ne- 
cessarily exposed to had they ventured to penetrate 
any extensive body of ice, they would have equally 
failed had they tried it upon the meridian I had 
now chosen, for it will be seen we met with a broad 
belt of ice, upwards of two hundred miles acroaSy 
which would have been immediate destruction to 
them to have encountered ; but which, in our forti- 
fied vessels, we could confidently run into, and push 
our way through into the open sea beyond ; with- 
out such means it would be utterly impossible for 
any one, under such circumstances, however bold or 
persevering, to attain a high southern latitude. 

The colony of Van Diemen's Land was in a most 
flourishing condition at the time of our visit ; al- 
though, in common with all the other Australasian 
settlements, it afterwards sufiered severely from the 
ruinous system of over-trading, but not to any 
thing like the same extent. Under the wise and 
judicious government of Sir John Franklin the re- 
venue of the colony had so greatly increased, that 
although involved deeply in debt when he arrived 
in the country, by prudent and well-arranged mea- 
sures, the debt had been liquidated, and a super- 
abundant income produced. A great amount of 
statistical information which I collected during our 
stay at Hobart-town, by the kind permission of Sir 
John Franklin, from Mr. Forster, acting as colonial 



Chap. V.] SOCIBTT OF HOBABT-TOWN, 119 

secretary, during the temporary absence of Mr. ^^^ 
Montague, and Mr. Henslowe, the govemor^s pri* 
vate secretary, being now but of little general in- 
terest, from much later information on the various 
subjects haying already been published (showing a 
fer less prosperous state of aflfiairs, owing to the sad 
mismanagement of our colonial legblators in Eng- 
land) ; but more especially because of the admirable 
work lately published by Count Strzelecki, whose 
opportunities of traversing the country, and by 
whose fidelity and ability a far better account has 
been laid before the public than I could give, I con* 
sider it unnecessary for me to enter at all upon the 
subject of the present condition of the colony. 

Constant occupation at the observatory prevented 
my seeing much of the interior of this most interest- 
ing and valuable country; two short excursions 
only, which I made with Sir John Franklin after the 
pendulum observations were completed, served to 
confirm all I had heard of its great resources ; and 
to prove to me that, unlike the more northern colo- 
nies of these regions, its climate has not the efiect 
of deteriorating the British character or constitu- 
tion of the rising generation. 

The society of Hobart-town is most perfectly En- 
glish, and therefore most agreeable to visitors from 
the mother country. The houses even of the 
wealthier colonists are smaller and more unpre- 
tending in appearance than those of persons of 
more limited means in England; but there is no 
want of the characteristic substantial comforts of 

I 4 



1 20 HOSPITALITT. [Chap. V. 

1840. an English residence bordering often on elegance 
and luxury ; whilst the true open-hearted hospitality 
we experienced during our prolonged residence 
amongst them was the best proof to us that this 
precious peculiarity of our country thrived as 
vigorously here as in any part of the British em- 
pire ; and the pleasing remembrances of the many 
happy hours we passed amongst them will long be 
cherished by us with deep emotions of gratitude 
and warmest sentiments of regard. To Lieutenant- 
Colonel Elliott, and the officers of the 51st Regi- 
ment, we were all greatly indebted for their kind 
hospitality, and the friendship which grew up be- 
tween the officers of the regiment and those of our 
ships will long continue amongst the more pleasur- 
able recollections of our voyage. The constant^ frank, 
and cordial intercourse between the barracks and 
the vessels proved a gratifying kind of united-ser- 
vice amalgamation, nowso happily manifested, under 
all circumstances, between the army and navy. 

There is one serious evil, however, which I cannot 
forbear adverting to, but too evident in every house 
you enter, and which will require prompt and inmiedi- 
ate attention to prevent its baneful effects extending 
more widely and permanently, — I mean the want 
of sufficient means of education for the rising ge- 
neration. It was quite distressing to witness the 
contrast between the English educated parents and 
their grown-up children, whose manners and ideas 
seemed barely equal to those of the lower unedu- 
cated order of society at home. 



Chap, v.] PROPOSED COLLEGE, 121 

This evil the worthy governor had set his heart ^^o* 
upon remedying, and had made great exertions to 
obtain from the home government a charter for a col- 
lege to be formed on a liberal scale ; the legblative 
council of the colony also went so far as to vote a sum 
of 25002. for the purpose. At the recommendation 
of the late Dr. Arnold, of Rugby, the Rev. J. P. Gell 
was sent from England to organise such an institu- 
tion as should meet the wants of the people. After 
much deliberation, a site for the building was chosen 
on part of the government land at New Norfolk ; 
and on the 7th November, 1840, the foundation- 
stone was laid with great ceremony by Sir John 
Franklin, in the presence of the members of the 
executive and legislative councils, and a large as- 
semblage of the inhabitants of the district; but 
thus it remains, I believe, to this day,- through the 
opposition and intrigues of the defeated but influ- 
ential parties, whose interests required that it should 
be built in Hobart-town, whilst the claims of the 
different religious denominations of all classes of 
Christians to have a voice in its councils, occasioned 
such violent disputes that the colonial office at 
home abandoned the measure; and thus the benevo- 
lent intentions of the governor have been, for the 
present, frustrated. 

But just at this time the Bishop of Tasmania has 
resumed the endeavour with great earnestness, and is 
making strenuous efforts to have formed a ^^ collegiate 
body possessing property (by royal charter, when it 
can be obtained, till then a trust), to be the source 



122 PROPOSED COLLEGE. [Chap. V. 

^^^* of education to the colonists, in the principles of 
the Church of Christ, and in all useful knowledge," 
by means of private subscription ; and the Venerable 
Archdeacon Marriott, of Hobart-town, is in England 
for the purpose of carrying the views of the bishop 
into effect upon this as well as some other points 
connected with the welfare of the church in Tas- 
mania. 

It is calculated that 50002., raised in England, 
may, together with landed and other endowments 
in the colony, produce such an annual income as 
will enable the bishop to proceed at once to orga- 
nise the college : as the payments of the pupils will 
supply what may further be needed for obtaining 
the lease of suitable premises, for the general ex- 
penses of the institution, and for the accumulation 
of a fund for the erection of college buildings at a 
future time. 

The bishop will, with the advice and assistance 
of proper persons in the colony, " hereafter to be 
named, invest the funds, and the property will be 
held in trust for the college, and made over to it in 
the event of its being incorporated ; and from the 
yearly income provision will be made for the warden 
and fellows, and for scholarships, exhibitions, and 
other expenses." 

We cannot doubt that a design so calculated to 
promote the well-being of the church in that colony, 
and to extend the blessings of a sound religious 
education to a population of sixty thousand souls, 
so greatly requiring it, will meet with ready sup- 



Chap. V.] PK0PO8ED COLLEGE. 123 

port and assistance £rom the mother country. Sir ^^^^ 
John Franklin, the late Lieutenant-Gk)yemor, has 
manifested his undiminished interest in the welfiekre 
of those over whom he for several years presided (and 
during whose period of government so much moral 
benefit was diffused through the society of the place 
as to secure for him the lasting gratitude and attach- 
ment of all right-minded people), by a donation of 
five hundred pounds; and his amiable lady, on 
leaving that country, made over four hundred acres 
of land which she had purchased in the neighbour- 
hood of Hobart-town, with an elegant museum 
she had built upon it, to trustees for the benefit 
of any collegiate institution which might be 
founded with the approbation of the bishop of the 
diocese. These acts of munificence we may hope 
will be followed by the charitable and wealthy; and 
by thus furnishing an adequate means of religious 
instruction and general education, afford the most 
efficient means of counteracting the existing evil, 
which however can only be rendered effectual by 
the persevering efforts of good and pious men, and 
by the blessing of Almighty Grod on their labours. 
The completion of Rossbank observatory pro- 
ceeded satisfactorily, and long before the second 
term-day arrived the magnetometers were replaced, 
so that again on the 23d of September we had two 
complete sets of instruments observed at the same 
place, forming a most perfect comparison between 
them. 



] 24 MAGNETOMETRICAL OBSERVATIONS. [Cmap. V. 

^^^- To eflfect this desirable object we had again to 
avail ourselves of the aid of volunteers under Sir 
John Franklin, who, in his zeal for the advancement 
of science, took his share of the duties of that day, 
which, as on the previous occasion, amounted to 
twelve of the twenty-four hours' observations, at in- 
tervals of two and a half minutes. The observations 
in the ships' observatory were made by Captain 
Crozier, the officers of both ships, and myself : those 
in the permanent observatory by his Excellency, 
and the following gentlemen, who had devoted some 
time to acquire accuracy in reading off the instru- 
ments, — Rev. John Philip Gell, M.A., Trin. Coll., 
Cambridge ; Rev. Dr. TumbuU, Mr. Henslowe, Lieut. 
Bagot, A. D. C. 51st ; Mr. Cracroft, Mr. Naime, Lieut. 
Kay, of the Terror, and two mates. I had thus the 
satisfaction of witnessing the effectual working of 
the observatory on those days on the enlarged plan 
of observation I contemplated, and which, by the 
unabated zeal of the volunteers, continued with- 
out interruption, on every succeeding term-day. 

Tlie regular hourly observations were next com- 
menced by Lieutenant Blay, whom I had selected to 
conduct the magnetic and meteorological experi- 
ments at this important station, in co-operation 
with the numerous observatories established in dif- 
ferent parts of the globe, and who had shown great 
diligence and application in making himself ac- 
quainted with the instruments to be employed in 
these investigations, and the various and delicate 
adjustments and corrections necessary to ensure 



Chap, v.] MAQNETO^IETRICAL OBSEBVATIONS. 125 

accuracy ; the result has most fully justified my ^^^' 
confident expectations. Mr. Scott, mate of the 
Terror, and Mr. Dayman, of the Erebus, were ap- 
pointed as his assistants, and a marine fix)m each ship 
completed the establishment of the observatory. 

In order that a more complete comparison might 
be instituted between the observations at Hobart- 
town and those to be made in more southern sta- 
tions to be visited by the Expedition, the expanded 
system of observation we had hitherto used was to 
be continued by Lieutenant Elay; but as these 
periods of exact comparison occurred so seldom, 
and seemed to me scarcely sufficient to detect many 
of the curious phenomena that might be expected 
to present themselves on more frequent comparisons 
of even shorter intervals, I considered it advisable 
to arrange that one additional hour of continued ob- 
servation should be made every night ; and the time 
selected for this purpose was that most favourable 
for seeing the aurora, which has been known to exer- 
cise so powerful an influence on the magnetometers, 
and most suited for watching its several phases. I 
especially directed the attention of Lieutenant Eay 
and his assistants, during our absence, to notice the 
frequency, direction, form, altitude, and all the 
changes in the appearance of aurorse, as they would 
also have formed, had we been so fortunate as to have 
found a place in which to pass a winter in the Antarc- 
tic regions, circumstances of corresponding and con- 
tinual observation, and perhaps serve to account for 
many irregularities that might appear in the summer 



126 SITUATION OF OBSBBVATOKY. [Cmip. V. 

^^^' observations in those latitudes, where the continual 
presence of the sun would prevent the detection of 
the aurora. Although, imfortunately, we had no 
opportunity of makmg any corresponding observa- 
tions in high southern latitudes, those additional 
hours of labour to Lieutenant Kay's party have 
not been in vain, for by the ready zeal evinced by 
Mr. Galdcott, the superintendent of the magnetic 
observatory at Trevandrum, simultaneous observa- 
tions were made at that place, and their comparison 
will, I have no doubt, afford very valuable results. 

In addition to the magnetometric and meteorolo- 
gical instruments^ some others were supplied to 
Lieut. Kay for astronomical purposes ; and before we 
left Hobart-town arrangements were made for the 
erection of a more suitable and comfortable building 
for the party to reside in, and at a convenient dis- 
tance fix)m the observatory. The observatory was 
. named Rossbank by His Excellency Sir John 
Franklin. It is in lat. 42^ 52' 27-4'', long. 147** 27' 
30''; and is situated one hundred and five feet 
above the level of the sea at mean tide. The mean 
magnetic dip, 70'' 40' S. and the variation (in May, 
1841), 10** 24' 24" E. 

As the proper season for our southern voyage 
drew near, the ships were made ready for sea. All 
defects had been repaired, and when we bent sails 
we had the great happiness to feel assured that our 
ships and crew were even more effective than the 
day we sailed from England. We had to lament 
the loss of one of our best men, Edward Bradley, 



Ckap.V.] GOVEBNMENT HOUSE. 127 

on the 24th of October, by an accident; and, 1840. 
before our departure, were under the necessity of """""^ 
invaliding Mr. Molloy, mate of the Terror, whose 
constitution was considered unequal to the hard- 
ships and severity of dimate he would have been 
exposed to, and whose present state of health ren- 
dered his return to England necessary. On the 
5th of November the ships were dressed with 
flags, and a salute fired on the occasion of His 
Excellency Sir John Franklin laying the foundation- 
stone of the new Government House, within sight 
of the vessels. The want of a building suitable to 
the advanced importance of the colony, and the 
comfort and dignity of the Gk>vemor, had long been 
felt and acknowledged. 



VOL. I. *! g 



129 



CHAPTER VI. 

The remaining few days were spent in completing i840. 
our preparations for sea ; and adverse winds and """""^ 
weather continued to detain us at our anchorage 
until the morning of the twelfth, on which day we 
weighed at daylight, and stood down the river 
under favourable circumstances. Sir John Franklin 
and some other friends came on board to accompany 
us as far as the mouth of the river, and the govern- 
ment tender followed. 

Soon after noon we passed the lighthouse on the 
east point of the entrance of the river, and being 
fairly out to sea by 1*30 p.m., our warm-hearted 
friends took leave of us, giving us three cheers at 
parting, which were most cordially returned from 
our ships, as we stood out of Storm Bay. If the 
deep-felt gratitude of thankful hearts be any grati- 
fication to our excellent friend Sir John Franklin, 
who not only evinced the most anxious desire, but 
sought every opportunity of promoting the objects 
of our enterprise, and contributing to the comfort 
and happiness of all embarked in it. I am sure 
there is not an individual in either of our ships 
who would not most heartily wish to express those 
sentiments towards him, and also to every member 
of his family, for their great kindness to us during 
our prolonged stay at Hobart-town. 



130 STEER FOR AUCKLAND ISLAND. [Chap. VI. 

^^^- The evening was squally, with rain; but the 
wind still so favoured us, that we cleared the land 
before dark, and shaped our course for Auckland 
Island — distant between eight and nine hundred 
miles fipom Hobart Town. 
Not. 13. The favouring breeze continued, and we carried 
all sail, the Terror keeping company with difficulty. 
Several beds of sea-weed were passed ; and the alba- 
tross as well as several other kinds of petrel were 
seen in considerable numbers. The cloudy weather 
that prevailed during the nights, pointed out in 
my instructions for observing " falling stars," pre- 
vented our witnessing any of those remarkable ex- 
hibitions of almost regular periodical occurrence 
14. Being nearly calm at 9 A. m., we tried for sound- 
ings with six hundred fathoms of line, without 
success, and obtained the temperature at various 
depths: that of the surface being 51**; at 160 
fathoms 49''-8 ; at 300 fathoms 48"" ; at 450 fathoms 
46^*5, and at 600 fathoms 45^*6 : the indices of the 
thermometer having been set to 51**, showed, on 
each occasion, they had passed through a stratum 
of water at the higher temperature of 52^*5, and 
certainly at a less depth than 100 fathoms; but 
a strong breeze arising from the eastward, pre- 
vented our ascertaining its depth and breadth with 
accuracy. 

At noon we were in latitude 45***33' south, and 
longitude 152**'45' east, and found we had been set 
by a current thirty miles S. 60® E., in two days: 
the wind after noon veered to the southward, and 



15. 



Chap. VI.] AUCKLAND ISLANDS. 181 

between 11 p. m. and midnight, we observed some ^^^' 
faint coruscations of Aurora Australis ; but no ^^ fall- 
ing stars " were seen, although carefully looked for 
throughout this remarkably dear night. 

During this, as well as the following three days, Not. i6. 
we observed much sea- weed, although four hundred 
miles from any land ; numerous luminous patches in 
the water were also passed. At eight o'clock in the 
evening of the nineteenth, being within twenty miles 19. 
of the land, and blowing a strong westerly gale, we 
rounded to on the port tack to wait for daylight, and 
tried for soundings occasionally throughout the 
night with from 140 to 200 fathoms, but without 
striking ground. 

At 3*30 A. M. we bore away to the south-east, and 20. 
soon afterwards North-west Cape was seen directly 
a-head of us; a thick fog almost immediately 
again concealed it from our view, so that had we 
not fortunately got sight of it just at the time we did 
we should have had no other opportunity of making 
the land during the whole day. The wind in- 
creased to a strong gale, attended with fog and 
rain, and kept us in some anxiety, until the cape 
again appeared through the haze at less than a 
mile from us, and we were enabled to run along 
the northern side of the island under its protec- 
tion. The north-west cape is a very remarkable 
headland, with a rocky islet and a curious conical 
rock off it ; just to the eastward of it is a dark- 
looking promontory, called Black Head, with a deep 
cavernous indentation at its base : this we after- 



132 AUCKLAND ISLA5D6. [Giup. YL 

^^^ wards foand to be only a short distance from the 
westernmost part of Laurie Harbour ; it was 
reached by Mr. MHIlormick and some other officers, 
by following the course of the stream that empties 
its waters into the head of the harbour, and whose 
source is in the hills above Black Head: these 
hills are from eight to nine hundred feet high. 

Bristow Rock, which is reported to lie between 
eight and nine miles due north from Enderby 
Island, and level with the water's edge, we did not 
see, but is a danger to be carefully avoided by 
ships approaching the northern harbour. I may 
also mention that there is a narrow entrance to the 
harbour between the west end of Enderby Island 
and Rose's Island, which is only a channel fit for 
boats. The sea was breaking right across the open- 
ing when we passed it; but in calm weather it 
might be mistaken by strangers as a safe passage. 

On rounding the N. E. cape of Enderby Island, 
we passed through some strong whirlpools, occa- 
sioned by the meeting of the tides off this point ; 
and although we did not find soundings with our 
ordinary hand lines, it is by no means improbable 
that some shoals or rocky patches may have some 
influence in producing these strong and dangerous 
eddies. 

As we opened the harbour, the squalls came 
down from the western hills with much violence, 
threatening to blow us out to sea again ; and it re- 
quired the utmost vigilance and activity of the 
officers and crew in beating up, at times, to main- 
tain the ground we had gained. There is, however. 



Chap. VI.] RENDBZ-VOUS HAEBOUB. 133 

ample space, and no concealed dangers, the belts of ^^^' 
sea-weed, Macrocystus and Laminaria^ which line 
the shores and rocks, point out the shallow or dan- 
gerous parts. After five hours of hard contending 
with the fierce westerly squalls, we anchored at 
1 p. M. in a small cove on the western shore, in ten 
fathoms. 

Two painted boards, erected upon poles in a 
conspicuous spot, attracted our attention, and an 
officer was immediately sent to examine them. 
They proved to be records of the visits of the 
French expedition under D'Urville, and of one of 
the vessels of the American exploring expedition. 
The first, a white board with black letters, as fol- 
lows : — " Les corvettes Fran9oises L' Astrolabe et 
la Z61^e, parties de Hobart Town le 25 F^vrier, 
1840, mouill^es ici le 11 Mars, et r^parties le 20 
du dit pour la New Z^land. Du 19 Janvier au 1 
F^vrier, 1840, d^couverte de la Terre Ad^lie et 
determination du p61e magn^tique Austral !" 

The second, a black board with white letters, 
stated, — " U. S. brig Porpoise, 73 days out from 
Sydney, New Holland, on her return from an ex- 
ploring cruize along the antarctic circle, all well ; 
arrived the 7th, and sailed again on the 10th 
March, for the Bay of Islands, New Zealand." 

A paper was also found inclosed in a bottle, which 
had been so imperfectly corked that some water had 
got into and so obliterated some parts of the writ- 
ing, that we had difficulty in deciphering it. Its 
purport was, that the Porpoise had touched here for 

K 3 



134 UKITED STATES BHIG FOBFOISE. [Cmat. YI. 

1840. water, and that during their cruize they had coasted 
along the Icy Barrier, and had touched here for 
water. We were all much surprised that no mention 
was made of the ^^ Antarctic Continent" discovered 
by Lieutenant Wilkes, but supposed that secrecy 
had been enforced upon him, as to any discoveries he 
might make, or that having parted from the Yin- 
cennes, his track had been more northerly, and 
therefore less fortunate than his commodore. I 
have reason now to believe the latter to be the 
more correct conjecture. 

By the side of a small stream of water, and on 
the only cleared spot we could find, the ruins of a 
small hut was discovered, which I have since learnt 
formed for several years the wretched habitation of 
a deserter from an English whale ship and a New 
Zealand woman. 

The ships being securely moored in a well-shel- 
tered anchorage, on the west side of the harbour, the 
observatories were landed, and all hands employed 
clearing away the trees and digging for a founda- 
tion; the upper surface was a complete mass of 
peat bog, and the deeper we dug down the softer it 
became, so that we had great difficulty and labour in 
making a foundation sufficiently firm for our pur- 
pose: this was, however, accomplished by filling 
the deep holes with large blocks of stone, and 
after they had settled, placing casks filled with 
sand upon them; the instruments being then 
secured upon the casks. The term-day was so nigh 
at hand, we had not time to seek for a more suit • 
able place, and we now felt the great advantage of 



Cb^p. VI.] MAONETOMETBIC OBSEBVATIONS. 185 

being able to form three small houses of the mate- i^^- 
rials of the second observatory ; for there was not 
sufficient level space to have put it up as one house. 

By the twenty-fifth the instruments were all Not. 25. 
fixed and adjusted, and we had the satisfaction of 
finding, during three days' preliminary observa- 
tions, that the foundation remained perfectly steady, 
and the results were most satisfactory. 

The term-day observations were made on the 
twenty-eighth, and afforded, as we afterwards found, 
a most interesting comparison with those made at 
the Rossbank observatory. Van Diemen's Land, 
sho>ving the same instantaneous movements of the 
instruments as occur in the northern regions ; and 
thus our principal purpose of coming here was ftil- 
filled to our wishes. 

Hourly and additional observations agreed upon 
before we sailed from Hobart Town were continued 
until we had obtained seven days of uninterrupted 
results, when we considered the magnetometric 
operations complete : the absolute determinations 
were next to be attended to ; but in these we found 
very considerable difficulty. The place proved to 
be a most remarkable corroboration of what I have 
already said respecting the uncertainty and inac- 
curacy of magnetic observations made on land. In 
our course from Van Diemen's Land we found a 
gradual increase of dip, in exact proportion to the 
distance we sailed during each day towards these 
islands, from which we could determine with verv 
great accuracy the amount of dip due to their geo- 

K 4 



186 

1840. 



LOCAL ATTRACTION. [Cmat. VI. 

graphical position; but the first obseryatioiiB 
we obtained here gave us too small a dip by 
more than two degrees. The cause I of course 
immediately attributed to local attraction, and di- 
rected observations to be made at several different 
stations. At a position only thirty yards distant 
from the first station the dip, with the same in- 
strument, was found to be nine degrees less, and 
therefore eleven degrees in error. The rocks at 
this point had a peculiar ferruginous appearance, and 
on presenting some of them to a delicate compass 
they turned it round and round as swiftly as the 
hand could move ; and moreover were found to 
possess a powerful degree of polarity, the north and 
south pole of the fragments depending entirely 
upon the direction in which they were found lying 
with reference to the magnetic meridian. They 
were not however loose stones, as those of a beach, 
but taken from the laminated rocks of which the 
land consists, so that we may esteem the whole 
mass to be one great magnet. Mr. Smith, whom I en- 
trusted with this service, made many observations 
on various parts of the harbour, all of which are 
recorded, and will prove an useful lesson to mag- 
netic observers. At the point where we had placed 
the magnetometers we found the dip accordant 
with our computations ; but this was purely acci- 
dental. The dip obtained from observations on 
board the Erebus, sufiiciently removed from the 
pernicious influence of the land, was that upon 
which we were obliged to depend, and was pro- 



Cbaf.vi.] local attraction. 137 

bably very near the truth ; and the variation at ^^^' 
these two places also accorded very neariy. The 
observations on board the Terror were vitiated by 
her proximity to Shoe Island, so much so as to 
mask the local attraction of the iron of the shipi and 
to render useless their observations to determine 
its amount, when they swung the vessel for that 
purpose. Numerous specimens of the rocks from 
other parts of the island were brought to me by 
Mr. M'Cormick, proving how extensively this mag- 
netic power was distributed over it. It is not at all 
improbable that considerable effects might be pro- 
duced upon this magnetic island by the action of the 
sun upon a surface so constituted, and therefore even 
differential observations cannot be depended fully 
upon under a frequent change of dear or cloudy 
weather, or great differences of temperature of the 
land, whether occasioned by the absorption or radi- 
ation of heat. 

Auckland Islands were discovered by Abraham 
Bristow, commander of the ship Ocean, a southern 
whaler belonging to Messrs. Enderby, on the 18th 
of August, 1806, during a third voyage round the 
world, and is recorded in the log-book, from which, 
by the kindness of C. Enderby, Esq., of Greenwich, 
I am permitted to make the following extract : — 
^^ Moderate and clear : at daylight saw land, bear- 
ing west by compass, extending round to the north 
as far as N.E. by N., distant from the nearest 
part about nine leagues. This island or islands, 
as being the first discoverer, I shall call Lord 



138 RENDEZ-VOUS HARBOUR [Chap. YI. 

1840. Auckland's (my friend through my fiEither), and is 
"""""""^ situated according to my observation at noon in 
lat. 50^ 48' S., and long. 166^ 42' E., by a distance 
of the Sim and moon, I had at half-past 10 A.ic 
The land is of a moderate height, and from its ap- 
pearance I have no doubt but it will afford a good 
harbour in the north end, and I should suppose 
lies in about the latitude of 50^ 2V S., and its 
greatest extent is in a N. W. and S. £. direction. 
This place I should suppose abounds with seals, 
and sorry I am that the time and the lumbered 
state of my ship do not allow me to examine." 

Captain Bristow again visited these islands in 
1807, in the ship Sarah, also belonging to Messrs. 
Enderby: he then took formal possession of them 
and landed some pigs, which have increased in 
numbers in a surprising manner. 

1 have not been able to refer to the log-book of 
the Sarah : but the names on the annexed survey 
are taken from a plan of the Island published by 
the Admiralty in 1823, from information derived 
from Captain Bristow. 

The group consists of one large and several 
smaller islands, separated by narrow channels. The 
largest island is about thirty miles long, and its 
extreme breadth is about fifteen miles. It con- 
tains two principal harbours, whose entrances are 
both from the eastward, and whose heads or ter- 
minations reach within two or three miles of the 
western coast, and only five or six miles from each 
other. Rendez-vous Harbour, which is at the north 
extreme of the island, contains several secure an- 



CBAV.VI.] AS A PENAL SBTTLE1CE5T. 139 

chorages. The outermost of these, though con- ^^^' 
venient for stopping at a short time only, is a small 
sandy bay on the south side of Enderby Island, 
and about a mile and a half from its N.£. cape. 
It is well protected from all winds except those 
from the south-eastward, and the holding ground 
a good tenacious clay. It is probable that there 
may be found good anchorage also to the west of 
Enderby Island. After passing Ocean and Rose's 
Islands, a ship may anchor in perfect safety in any 
part, but the most convenient will be found to be 
between those islands and Erebus Cove, where 
abundance of wood and water may be obtained, as 
also at Terror Cove. The upper end of the inlet, 
called Laurie Harbour, is the most suitable for 
ships wanting to heave down or to undergo any ex- 
tensive repair. It is perfectly land-locked, and the 
steep beach on the southern shore affords the great- 
est facility for clearing and re-loading the vessel. 

I was so struck with the many advantages this 
place possesses for a penal settlement, over every 
other I had heard named, to which to remove convicts 
from the now fi^e colonies of New South Wales, 
New Zealand, and Van Diemen's Land, that I ad- 
dressed a letter on the subject to Sir John Franklin 
on my return to Hobart Town, recommending its 
adoption. This letter was forwarded to the Secre- 
tary of State for the Colonies; but I believe 
Chatham Island, as being seated in a milder climate, 
has been preferred, although I am not aware of any 
other advantages it possesses; whilst the want of 



140 LAUBIB HARBOUB. [Gup.VL 

^^^- good harbours will be foirnd a great drawback, and 
the two tribes of New Zealanders from Port Ni- 
cholson, who took possession of it in 1835, after 
eating the half of the aborigines they found there, 
and making slaves of the other half, will prove 
a difficult people to dispossess of the land they have 
gained by conquest. 

The southern harbour of Auckland Island is 
said to be capacious, but the water too deep over 
the greater part of i^ for anchoring : there are se- 
veral coves on either side of it, where good anchor* 
age may be found, and well protected ; but as we 
did not visit that inlet, I cannot answer for the ac* 
curacy of these statements, which I received from 
masters of whalers. Laurie Harbour is well calcu* 
lated for the location of an establishment for the 
prosecution of the whale fishery : many black and 
several sperm whales came into the harbour whilst 
we were there; and from such a situation the 
fishery might be pursued with very great advan* 
tage. I am rejoiced to hear that the enterprising 
merchant, Charles Enderby, Esq., is making appli- 
cation to the government for a grant of the Islands 
for that purpose, and from the circumstance of their 
having been discovered by the commander of one 
of his ships, he may with some justice claim to 
be entitled to greater privileges than others. 

We arrived there in the spring of the year, 
November being equivalent to April of the northern 
latitudes ; and although less than eight degrees to 
the southward of the latitude of Hobart Town, we 



HKTEOBOLOOICAL ABSTBACr. 



Ul 



AMtmAOt or THM HXTXOBOIOOIOAL JODBMAl. Or HI 
imp EBKBCft. — HOTUIBEB, 1940. 



K«aT 


'T.'""""' 


Hw 


WiB4i. 




i 














-~^ 


r^. 


pelpt. 




DlrMln. 


F««. 


WmUiw. 


1 








iDCtw. 










1 S7-0 


S4-5 


47 


30-139 


N.W. 


8 


Sb.ct 


J 




aa-0 


60 


073 


W.N.W. 




4t>. c 










(AM. N.W. 1 




r*.«.4b.c 

l.r.ii.Sb.c.i 

7bCT. 


^' 


a 571 

* S4-B 


56-0 
S5-9 


SI 
45 


OOS 


''&-• ' 


3 

1 


li 


5 M-0 




4S 


019 


WeiUrly 


9 


S b.O.T. 


6 »-6 
7J Sl-3 


sI-6 


4S 


loa 

89-9BS 


EutrrW 
fi-M, N.W. 1 
If-m-S-E. } 


I 


7 b.C.T. 

7 b.c.. 


P 
P 


n S7-4 


57-7 


S8 


788 


S.E. 




4b.c. 


s' 531 


38-0 


8S 


699 


8.E. 


1 


rA.M. StLcp.r. 
\p.M.Og.p.r. 


10 4S-B 


36-0 


•49 


688 


8oath.rir 


1 


Og.T. 


3 


n\ 4B-G 


S3-8 


•43 


680 


&W. 


S 


r4.».0q.r. 
tp.M.3b.c 


1 


"l *' ^ 


34 8 


•50 


S79 


8.W. 


[iil] 


3 bx.K.p.r. 




13 53-7 


S2-a 


•63 


755 


Wwwrlj 


5 


{^:::3'i:. 




U 46-B 


49-7 


•47 


BOB 


Eaderiy 


(;::;} 


Od.r. 




IS tt* 


48-9 


47 


70B 


SowhertT 


a 


8 b.c.B.d. 


t 


16 SO-6 


498 


48 


941 


WeMerly 


3 


rA.-.6b*T. 
l.P.>l.ab.(J.g.p.r. 


17' sia 


47-4 


60 


4«S 


N.W. 




iii.f. 




ib; *o-o 


44-4 


4B 


833 


S.W. 


5 


r*.«.lb.c.g.p.r. 
l.p.ll.3b.cq. 
a b.c.g.q.p-r. 




19 M* 


442 


4e 


399 


W.N.W. 


5 




SO 44'6 


48-7 


43 




W.b,3. 
W.N.W. 


5 


3 b.CM-r- 




11 47-0 


4B'S 


•47 


468 




Oq.r.^ 




31 471 


4S-0 


« 


305 


Wm 


6 


r*.».Og.q.r. 
lp.«.4S.cq. 




13 4B-9 






553 


W.N.W. 


S 


8 b.cD).q. 
3 b.r.q.r.a. 


•4«S 


14 43'4 


48-7 


45 


331 


W«*rly 




1^ 


as 40-0 


40-1 


•40 


051 


N.S.W. 


3 


3 b.e.q.r.1. 


ae wi 


39-4 


36 


984 


saw. 


8 


3 b.c.q.r.*. 


P 


37 424 


4a-4 


•40 


563 


Wert*rly 




g.rl 


IB 46'a 


44-5 


"48 


481 


W.byS. 


3 


0|.r.n. 


1^ 


"i "■• 


4S-6 


40 


MS 


W«rt«rlj 


9 


f *-■. 1 b.C.lIl. 
t i-.».Sb.cg.d. 


30^ 4B-4 


4S-S 


45 


639 


K.8.W. 


a 


41,.cp.b. 




'4B-S3 


49-38 


46^ 


89-S4T3 




8'i7 





• Rain falling, f For th« kej- to tbeae BTmbob, see Appendix. 



METBOBOLOGICAL AB8TBACT. 



ABSTUCT or TBB UETEOROLOOICAI. JODBMAI. OT SXm IUJiaTT*« 
8HIF KBSBUS. — DrCBXBER, 1B40. 



" 


M-ii-r 


Um 


Maui 


Wlub. 


WMUxr. 


1 


s 


.tiit |.2r: 


hIbC. 


'z:z'. 


DlrartWi. 


Puns 


*3°a 

«S'4 


43-0 
43-7 


37 


iBckn. 

89899 

865 


8.W. 
WMieriy 


8 


1 '■»■ g.p.r. 




s 

! 

e 

7 


44-9 

471 
471 
47-9 


44-3 
43 ■« 

4S-3 

48-1 
46-0 


39 
46 
45 

39 


757 
698 
941 

738 


S.W««eriy 
8.We«erij 

w.aw. 

8.W. 
W.byS. 


8 

5 
3 

S 


A.1I. 3 b.e.g. 
PK-Og-q-p-r. 

4 b.cq.g. 
4b.c8. 

5 b.c.q.d. 
f^«.3bc<».f. 
lPlLOq.r. 


J 

1 

1 


s 

'1 


47-9 
501 

47-fl 


46-3 

48-4 
47-1 


45 
•8! 
•50 


838 
453 

840 


a We»Wfl7 
W.N.W. 

3.£uMri; 


3 
8 

1 


rA.M.Of[jn.r. 

lp.-.og. 


I 


" 


46-7 


45-7 


48 


541 


W.S.W. 


k:i 


9 b.e.q.r. 


11 


48-B 


46-6 


49 


S39 


N.W^erij 




rA.H. 3 b.«.g. 




IS 

u 


48-8 
48-9 


46-4 
47-0 


47 
•49 


830 
653 


W.N.W. 
W.N.W. 


8 
8 


{r.» 1 b.^?.i 


lii 


IS 
IS 


46-7 
44-3 


4S-S 
43-6 


4t 
38 


649 
963 


8.W. by W. 
W.S.W. 


3 


i^t"- 


it! 46-7 


45 -B 


•48 


B3B 


Wwierly 


0,Ar. 


63-44 


18 


41-4 

41-4 


40-6 
39-7 


41 


756 
417 


&W. 
We«wly 




sb...g. 

gq- 1 

0=..r J 


5411 

55-S6 


10 


39-0 


37-3 


38 


179 


S.W. by W. 


&] 


9 l.a,.p.t. 


56-44 


11 


39-0 


36-4 


36 


300 


W.8.W. 


4 


S t>.cp.<L 


57-47 


IS 
18 

U 


37-4 
88-1 
85-J 


34 '3 
34 -fl 

33-4 


80 
•85 
3S 


133 
88-996 
89-435 


f4.«.8.W. 
lp.«.H.hIy. 

EEuUrly 

8.W. 


3 


I.tp.d. 

1 b.&|ij. 1 
3b.c^.jij. J 


59-0 
59-41 
60-33 


IB 


se-i 


83 4 


■3S 


089 


N.N.W. :(--J 


g-r-i. 1 
Otn-r. J 


68-10 


H 
17 


3«'S 
Sl-S 


34-3 

ns 


f9 


667 

784 

38 ■934 


W. by N. 

8.W. 

EMteriy 


5 
\_,.U. 8 

8 


Om. 

1 lL«.q.i>^ 1 


681 
■8-43 
68-40 


» 


an 


at\ 24 


39-119 


S.Eulerty 


{;;! 


Oj. 


•4-« 


M 


91-S 


SOB 


St 


SS'991 


lp....W.Uy. 
E.8.B. 


8 


1 b.«.o.p.t 


64-88 


II 


90 


M-8 


t9 


886 


{tV. 


1 Ikcpj. 1 


66-0 




41-es 


40'1S 


.19-S 39-5173 ' 


3-39 







> Rain falling. f For the key to these Kjmbola, see Af^ndix. 



Chap. YL] FORMATION OF AUCEXAKD ISLANDS. 148 

found a- very great difference in the temperature, ^^^- 
amounting to about ten degrees of the thermo- 
meter, but still greater to our feelings, owing to 
the increased humidity of the atmosphere, the tem- 
perature of the dew point being nearly the same 
in both places notwithstanding so great a differ- 
ence of temperature. Abstracts of the Meteoro- 
logical Journal of the Erebus for November and 
December are annexed, to show the differences of 
climate of Auckland and Campbell Islands, from 
that of Van Diemen*s Land. The temperature 
cannot be considered severe, when we remember 
that in England, which is very nearly in the same 
latitude, the mean temperature for April, the corre- 
sponding month, is 46^.* Our stay was too short to 
justify any further remarks on the dimate of these 
islands ; but a series of well conducted observa- 
tions, continued for two or three years, could not 
fail to prove highly interesting and important to 
the advancement of meteorological science. 

Mr. M^Cormick, who remarks that the formation 
of these, as well as Campbell Islands, is volcanic, 
and constituted chiefly of basalt and green-stone, 
especially calls attention to ^^ Deas' Head," a pro- 
montory of* Auckland Island, as being of great 
geological interest, exhibiting fine columns, three 
hundred feet high, which are highly magnetic. 
The loftiest hill. Mount Eden, to the S.W. of our 
anchorage, attains an elevation of thirteen hundred 
feet, is rounded at the top, and clothed with grass 

* Greenwich ObaerrationSy 1841, p. d?., and 1842, p. 84. 



144 AUCKLAND ISLANDS. [Gup. VI. 

1S40. to its summit. Another hill in the west rises to 
nearly one thousand feet. 

The following observations on the v^etable pro- 
ductions are by Dr. Hooker : — 

^^ Perhaps no place in the course of our projected 
voyage in the southern ocean promised more 
novelty to the botanist than Auckland Islands. 
Situated in the midst of a boisterous ocean, in a 
very high latitude for that hemisphere, and fitr 
removed from any tract of land but the islands of 
New Zealand, it proved, as was expected, to con- 
tain, amongst many new species, some of peculiar 
interest, as being antarctic forms of genera other- 
wise confined to the last-mentioned group. 

^^ Possessing no mountains rising to the limits 
of perpetual snow, and few rocks or precipices, the 
whole land seemed covered with vegetation. A 
low forest skirts all the shores, succeeded by a 
broad belt of brushwood, above which, to the 
summits of the hills, extend grassy slopes. On 
a closer inspection of the forest, it is found to be 
composed of a dense thicket of stag-headed trees, 
so gnarled and stunted by the violence of the gales, 
as to afford an excellent shelter for a luxuriant 
under-growth of bright green feathery ferns, and 
several gay-flowered herbs. With much to delight 
the eye, and an extraordinary amount of new 
species to occupy the mind, there is here a want of 
any of those trees or shrubs to which the voyager 
has been accustomed in the north ; and one cannot 
help feeling, how much a greater pleasure it would 



Chap. VI.] BOTANICAL NOTICE. 145 

be to find new kinds of the pine, the birch, willow, ^^^' 
or the oak, than those remarkable trees which have 
no allies in the northern hemisphere, and the 
mention of which, suggesting no £Etmiliar form to 
compare them with at home, can interest few but 
the professed botanist. 

"The woods consist entirely of four or five 
species of trees, or large shrubs, which are here 
enumerated in the order of their relative abun- 
dance. 1. A short and thick-trunked tree {Me* 
trosideros lucida)^ which branches at top into a 
broad crown; this is more nearly allied to the 
classical myrtle than to any other European plant. 
2. Dracophyllum longifolium^ (Fl. Antarct. * Tab. 
xxxi. and xxxu.), a black-barked tree, with slen- 
der erect branches, bearing grassy leaves at the 
ends of the twigs. 3. Panax simplex, a tree allied 
to the ivy. 4. Veronica eUipticaj this is the V. 
decussata of our gardens, a Tierra del Fuego plant, 
but which was originally detected in New Zealand, 
during Cook's second voyage. 5. A species of 
Coprosma (C.foetidissimaj Tab. xiii.), whose leaves 
emit when bruised, and especially in drying, an 
intolerably foetid odour. Under the shade of these, 
near the sea beach, about fifteen different FetTis 
grow in great abundance, the most remarkable of 
which is a species of Aspidium (A. venustum, of 
the French South Polar Voyage), with short trunks 



* The Plates quoted all refer to those published in the Baiany 
of the Antarctic ExpeditUnu 



146 AUCKLAND ISLANDS. [Chap. VI. 

^^^' 2-3 feet high, crowned with a tuft of spreading 
feathery fronds, each 3-5 feet long : this is one erf 
the most graceful and ornamental productions of 
the group. The Aralia polarisy Homb. and Jacq.*, 
and the Pleurophyllum criniferum (Tab. xxiv. and 
XXV.), are two highly remarkable plants, very 
common near the sea ; the former is allied to the 
ivy, but has clusters of green waxy flowers as 
large as a child's head ; and its round and wrin* 
kled leaves, of the deepest green, measure a foot 
and a half across. They form the favourite food 
of the hogs which run wild on these islands. 

** It is upon the hills, however, that the more beau- 
tiful plants abound ; amongst which the most strik- 
ing is a liliaceous one, allied to Anthericum ( Chty* 
aobactran Rossiiy Tab. xliv. and xlv.), whose con- 
spicuous racemes of golden flowers are often a span 
long, and many specimens have three or four such 
spikes. The Pleurophyllum spedoaum (Tab. xxii. and 
xxiii.), resembles a large Aster ^ bearing numerous 
purple flowers, the size of a large marigold. The Cd^ 
misia vemicosa (Tab. xxxi. and xxxii.), has linear 
glossy leaves, spread out on the ground like the 
spokes of a wheel, and pure white flowers, with a 
purple eye, as large as those of the last-named 
plant. Finally, the Veronica Benthamix (Tab. 
xxxix. and xl. ), may be mentioned ; it is of shrubby 
growth, with spikes of flowers of a deep ultra- 
marine blue. Amongst those of humbler stature, 

* Figured in the Botany of the French South Polar Expe- 
dition. 



Chaf.vio botanical noticb. 147 

several European genera occur, as species of Car- imo. 
damine^ Ranunculus^ Plantain^ Geranium^ and Epi- 
lobiunij two beautiful white and red-flowered Gen- 
tians (Tab. XXXV. and xxxvi.), and a Forget-me- 
not (Tab. xxxvii.), with flowers much larger than 
those of any English species. 

^^ The vegetation is characterised by a luxuriance 
of these fine species, and the absence of such weeds 
as grasses and sedges, &c. Eighty flowering plants 
were found, a small number, but consisting of species 
more remarkable for their beauty and novelty than 
the flora of any other country can show, no less 
than fifty-six being hitherto undescribed, and one 
half of the whole peculiar to this group, or Camp- 
bell Island, as far as is at present kndwn. 

" The ships of Captain Vancouver's expedition 
touched at the southern extremity of New Zealand, 
from whence the naturalist attached to that voyage, 
the late venerable Mr. Menzies, brought a richer 
store of cryptogamic plants than had ever before 
reached Europe. Nor did Lord Auckland's group 
prove less productive, having afibrded no less than 
upwards of two hundred species of mosses^ lichens^ 
HepaticcBj and sea-weeds^ &c. ; of which a very 
large proportion are new to science. 

^^ A few botanical remarks on the flora of this 
group are best incorporated with those on the 
vegetation of the island next visited. It may here 
be remarked, however, that probably nearly all of 
the native plants were collected ; that the vegeta- 
tion is characteristic of New Zealand, but contains 

L 2 



148 BOTANICAL NOTICE. [Cbaf. VL 

^^^' many new forms typical of the antarctic regions. 
The proportion which the smaller division of flower- 
ing plants (Monocotyledones) bears to the greater 
{Dicotyledone8)j is very large, being as 1 to 2*2 ; in 
either hemisphere this division increases on attaining 
a high latitude ; but that of Melville Island must 
be reached in the north, to meet with a similar 
ratio. It is worthy of notice that this large pro 
portion does not depend on an increased number of 
grasses^ which form a smaller item in this flora 
than they do in that of the Falklands or of Mel- 
ville Island ; but is due to the number of CyperaceoB 
and OrchidecBj both of which equal the grasses ; and 
probably also to the small amount of Composites 
amongst the Dtcoiyledones" 

Respecting the zoology of these islands, Mr. 
M*Cormick observes : — ** There is no species of 
land animal, with the exception of the domestic 
pig, introduced several years ago, and now in a 
wild state. The birds are all New Zealand spe- 
cies, from which country these islands have 
unquestionably been colonised by the feathered 
tribe. Of land birds there are not more than 
seven or eight species, and of these the beautiful 
" Tooe " bird of New Zealand, and a small olive- 
green species allied to MeliphagidcBj are the chief 
choristers of the woods, which are in many places 
almost impenetrable, the trees and underwood 
forming dense thickets. The water birds consist 
of a New Zealand species of duck (feo/), a mer- 
gus {Merganser)^ a species of phalarocrocorax, 



Chaf. VI.] ZOOLOGICAL NOTICE. 149 

(cortnarant)j a snipe, a penguin, and two kinds of ^^^^ 
gull, the black-backed, and small ash-backed, fre- 
quenting the bays in great abundance. The alba- 
tross (Diomedea exulana) was breeding in considera- 
ble numbers on the tops of the cliffs to the north- 
westward of the harbour. Their nest is formed, 
upon a small mound of earth, of withered grass and 
leaves matted together, above six feet in circum- 
ference at the base, and about eighteen inches in 
height; it is the joint labour of the male and 
female birds. Like most of the petrel tribe, the 
albatross lays only one egg, of a pure white, 
varying in weight from fifteen to twenty-one 
ounces. In one instance only, out of above one 
hundred nests that were examined, were two eggs 
found in the same nest. 

^' Its greatest enemy is a fierce raptorial gull, 
very strongly resembling the Skua gull, both in its 
predatory habits and general aspect, and is pro- 
bably an undescribed species. 

^^ Several kinds of petrel were breeding in holes 
imderground, and on the sides of the cliffs bound- 
ing the bays ; a solitary ring-plover was seen, but 
no specimen was obtained." 

Of insects we observed a great variety, and a 
large collection was made. The sand-flies were 
very troublesome during the heat of the day, and 
their stings painful. 

The party employed cutting fire- wood found a 
cat's nest with two kittens in it, still blind : they 
were of course destroyed, but the old cat escaped. 

L 3 



150 WILD HOGS. [Chaf.VL 

^^^' The pigs that were left on the island by Captain 
Bristow have become very numerotis. Their food 
consists of the Arabia polaris, ^^ one of the most 
beautiftil and singular of the vegetable productions 
of the island it inhabits, growing in large orbicular 
masses on rocks and banks near the sea, or amongst 
the dense and gloomy vegetation of the woods ; its 
copious bright green foliage, and large umbels of 
waxy flowers, have a most striking appearance.* 
The whole plant has a heavy and rather disagree- 
able rank smell, common to many of its natural 
order. But it is, nevertheless, greedily eaten by 
goats, pigs, and rabbits." And more especially the 
PleurophyUum criniferumfy a very common and 
striking plant, often covering a great extent of 
ground, and according to Dr. Hooker, forming the 
larger proportion of the food of the hogs which now 
run wild upon the main island of this group. It is 
indeed so abundant in the marshy spots, that these 
animals frequently live entirely amongst it, parti- 
cularly where it grows near the margins of the 
woods, where they form broad tracks through the 
patches, grubbing up the roots to a great ex- 
tent, and by trampling down the soft stems and 
leaves, make soft and warm places for them, to 
litter in. 

One of these animals was shot by Mr. Hallett, 
the purser, and although in poor condition its flesh 

* Flora Antarctica, p. 20. 
t Ibid. p. 32. Plates 24, 26. 



Cbat. VIJ animals LANDED. 151 

was considered well-flavoured, though by no means i®^- 
equal to that of our own well-fed pigs. "~"^~* 

In order to increase the stock of useful animals, 
I directed a ram and two ewes, which we had 
brought from Hobart Town in the Erebus for the 
purpose, to be landed on the western side of the 
harbour ; and a ram and two ewes brought by the 
Terror were taken several miles inland to the 
southward. Besides these were landed from our pri- 
vate stores some pigs, poultry, and rabbits. These 
last, together with a quantity of cabbage, turnip, 
mustard and cress, radish, and other seeds, were 
sent to me by Mr. Anstey, of Hobart Town, as well 
as a pair of goats, but one of them unfortunately 
died the day before we arrived at the Aucklands. 
Some seeds of each kind were sown in the small 
place we had cleared ; and a great many goose- 
berry and currant bushes, and raspberry and 
strawberry plants, with which Sir John Franklin 
had directed us to be supplied from the Govern- 
ment garden, were distributed over various parts 
of the island by Dr. Hooker, and I have no doubt 
will for the most part thrive, and may hereafter 
prove a benefit to vessels calling there. The hens 
had formed nests in well-concealed situations, 
and had laid several eggs before we left the place. 
We found some small roots of potatoes and some 
plants of Siberian kale that had been left by some 
of our predecessors, and we planted some more of 
the former. 

Whilst the magnetic observations were being 

I. 4 



152 TREE FERN. [Cbaf. VI. 

1840. made on shore, the other officers and crew of the 
ships were engaged procuring firewood, completing 
the water, and making the necessary preparations 
in the vessels for our voyage to the southward. 

Mr. Tucker and Mr. Davis were employed under 
my directions surveying and sounding the har- 
bour. Mr. Oakley was sent to examine Enderby 
Island, where also he landed some rabbits, and 
brought back with him the nests and young birds 
of several small kinds of petrel he found there. 
The medical officers having fortunately no sick to 
attend to^ zealously devoted themselves to increase 
our collections of natural history in all its branches. 
Dr. Hooker brought on board a tree fern be- 
tween three and four feet high, with fronds between 
four and five feet long : this and Campbell Island 
are the highest south latitudes they have yet been 
found in ; and many curious and beautiful sea-weeds 
were gathered along the shores of the inlet. The 
seine was hauled, but with very indiflTerent success. 
A seal was seen with a good-sized fish in its mouth, 
proving their presence ; but only two or three were 
taken, — a small flat-fish, near the head of Laurie 
Harbour, and the others about nine inches long, are 
described by Dr. Richardson under the name of 
Notothenia * , of which genus he remarks the de- 
signation has reference to its high southern habitat, 
where it is probably represented by one or more 
species in almost every degree of longitude. 

* Zoology, by Dr. Ricbardaon, p. 5. Plate 3. 



Chaf.VI.] BE8ULT OF OBSERVATIONS. 153 

Some of our officers finding it very laborious 1840. 
walking through the dense brushwood in their way 
to the western hills, opened a road by setting fire 
to the dried grass and sticks, which being fanned 
by a strong breeze, spread with great rapidity in 
all directions, burning a great part of the wood 
near which our Observatory was fixed ; but for- 
tunately did not approach to within half a mile of 
it. The whole country appeared in a blaze of 
fire at night. The scene as viewed from our ships 
was described as one of great magnificence and 
beauty. It was nevertheless a thoughtless prank, 
and might have been productive of great mischief, 
besides destroying so much valuable wood. 

The result of our observations gave for the lati- 
tude of the spot, marked + on the plan, where the 
Observatory stood, 50''32' 30'' S., the longitude, 
166** 12' 34" E. The magnetic dip 73** 12', and the 
variation 17*" 40' E. High water at the full and 
change of the moon took place at twelve o'clock, 
and the highest spring tides scarcely exceeded three 
feet. A remarkable oscillation of the tide when near 
the time of high water was observed ; after rising to 
nearly its highest, the tide would fall two or three 
inches, and then rise again between three and four 
inches, so as to exceed its former height rather 
more than an inch. This irregular movement 
generally occupied rather more than an hour, of 
which the fall continued about twenty minutes, 
and the rise again upwards of fifty minutes of the 
interval. The time here given as that of H. W. at 



154 FBOCEED TO CAMPBELL ISLAND. [Cmap.VL 

1840. full and change, is that of the last or greatest 
height of tide recorded. 

Dec 12. Our observations being completed, we re-em- 
barked the instruments and observatories, and 
having repeated our experiments for determining 
the amount of deviation produced on the compass 
and dipping needle by the iron of the ships, we 
weighed on the morning of the 12th, and stood out 
to sea. As we passed Shoe Island at a distance of 
about fifty feet, the compasses were deviated nearly 
two points from their proper direction ; showing in 
a striking manner the very extraordinary magnetic 
power of its component rocks. Three or four 
miles to the eastward of Ewing Island we found a 
very strong tide ripple ; when, being well clear of the 
land, we shaped our course for Campbell Island, 
distant about one hundred and sixty-three miles. 
The weather throughout the day continued mode- 
rate and favourable, but a dense haze over the 
Auckland Islands soon concealed them from our 
view. 

13th. Campbell Island was seen at 7h. 50m. A.M., four 

or five leagues distant. I had been recommended 
before we left Van Diemen's Land to take the 
ships into the harbour near the north-east point of 
the island, but from the entrance it appeared so 
exposed to winds from that quarter, we bore away 
for the southern harbour. At lOh. 30m. A. m., 
when we entered the heads, we were compelled to 
reduce our sail to double-reefed topsails and courses 
by the strong gusts of wind which came down from 



Chat. VI.] CAMPBELL ISLAIO). 155 

the high lands to the westward, with astonishing 1840. 
force; the more dangerous from succeeding the — "~""" 
light and baflUng winds that occupy the intervals 
between the squalls. This occurrence of sudden 
and violent rushes of wind is a remarkable charac- 
teristic phenomenon of all the islands in about this 
latitude. We observed it at Eerguelen Island, at 
Auckland Island, and at Campbell Island ; and the 
trees of the latter island especially indicate, by 
their prostrate position, the prevailing power of 
the westerly storms. The harbour is about four 
miles in depth, running for more than two miles 
in a W.N.W. direction, and thence after passing 
a shoal point, with a warning bed of sea-weed 
oflF it, about W. S. W. to its head. In the outer 
part of the harbour the water is too deep for con- 
venient anchorage, but in the upper part, which is 
completely land-locked, there is abundance of room 
for a hundred ships to lie in the most perfect secu- 
rity, and where wood and excellent water can be 
had in any quantity. After four hours of hard 
work, beating through the outer arm of the harbour, 
we stood up to the head of it, and were just about 
to let go our anchor, when we perceived the ship 
stirring up the mud, and she soon after stuck &st. 
Some hawsers were run out to the trees on the 
shore ; the ship warped off, and anchored in five 
and a half fathoms. At this time we observed the 
Terror aground on the shoal point above-men* 
tioned, and immediately sent our boats to her as- 
sistance ; but the tide was falling so fast that all 



156 CAMPBELL ISLAND. [Cup. VI. 

1840. their efforts to get her off were ineffectual ; she had 
*""~"""^ struck upon the shoal at the top of high water. 
On going on board of her I found Captain Crozier 
had made every preparation for heaving her off 
when the tide again flowed, having lightened the 
vessel as much as possible by starting the water, 
and landing the stores. As soon as the tide began 
to rise I returned to the Erebus with our boat's 
crews, and warped her near to the Terror, the more 
readily to afford her assistance, should it be re- 
quired: but she floated off before high water 
without having sustained any damage, and anchored 
to the eastward of the point in six fathoms. Our 
boats were now employed refilling her water-tanks, 
whilst her own crew were re-embarking and stow- 
ing away the stores and provisions that had been 
landed to lighten her. Assisted by Mr. Tucker and 
Mr. Davis, T obtained the annexed survey of the 
harbour, and it employed those officers two entire 
days to complete the soundings. Our observations 
were made on a small beach near the shoal point, 
and is marked + oi^ the plan of the harbour. It is 
in latitude 52** 33' 26'' S., longitude 169^ 8' 41" E., 
the magnetic dip 73*^ 53', and the variation 17^ 54' 
E. The few days' observation of the tides, reduced 
to the times of full and change of the moon, gave 
high water at twelve o'clock; presenting also the 
same irregularities as were observed at Rendez- 
vous harbour, Auckland Island. The amount of rise 
and fall at dead neap tides was forty-three inches. 
The dip and variation above recorded are those 



Crap. YI.] BESULT OF OBSEBYATIOKS. 157 

made on board the ships, for here also we found a 1840. 
great amount of local attraction ; the same instru- 
ment in different places giving widely different re- 
sults, and proving how very liable to error all surveys 
made by compass must be, and especially so upon 
lands of volcanic formation ; for, although so very 
remarkable in these islands, it may here be observed 
that there is scarcely any position on shore entirely 
free from this source of confusion; and even in 
our own country serious errors have been detected 
in surveys where the compass alone had been used. 

Campbell Island was discovered in 1810, by Fre- 
derick Hazelburgh, in command of the brig Perse- 
verance. He states that ^^ the island is thirty miles 
in circumference, the country is mountainous, and 
there are several good harbours, of which two on 
the east side are to be preferred." The southern 
harbour of these two, in which we anchored, he 
named after his brig, " Perseverance Harbour." 

The highest hill seen from the harbour is on its 
north side, and has an elevation of fifteen hundred 
feet. The shores on either side are steep, and rise 
abruptly to between eight and nine hundred feet. 
They are skirted by a belt of sea-weed, and the har- 
bour is quite free from any danger except the shoal 
point on which the Terror grounded ; so that a ship 
may run in or beat up with perfect confidence and 
safety. The hills from being less wooded have a 
more desolate appearance than those of the Auck- 
land Islands, and although there is abundance of 
wood in the sheltered places, the trees nowhere 



158 CAMPBELL ISLAND. [Cbap. VI. 

1840. attain so great a height as at the Auckland Islands. 
""""""^ The seine was hauled on two promising-looking 
places near the head of the harbour, but without 
success. A rich collection of marine insects and 
shell-fish were obtained, and had our time per- 
mitted I think we should have found fish in a lake 
that some of the officers discovered by tracing a 
small stream to the southward, which emptied its 
superabundant waters into the upper comer of the 
inlet. 

Those officers whose duties did not confine them 
to the vicinity of the ships made several excursions 
across the island, in various parts, especially Dr. 
Hooker, pursuing his botanical researches, and 
whose remarks on that department of natural 
science are here entered. 

^^ Although Campbell's Island is situated 120 
miles to the southward of Lord Auckland's group, 
and is of much smaller extent, it probably contains 
fully as many native plants. This arises from its 
more varied outline, and from its steep precipices 
and contracted ravines, affording situations more 
congenial to the growth of grasses, mosses, and 
lichens. Its iron-bound coast and rocky moun- 
tains, whose summits appear to the eye bare of 
vegetation, give it the aspect of a very desolate and 
unproductive rock, and it is not until the quiet har- 
bours are opened, that any green hue save a few 
grassy spots is seen. In these narrow bays the scene 
suddenly changes ; a belt of brushwood, composed of 
some of the trees mentioned as inhabitants of the 



Ch4p. vl] botanical notice. 159 

last-visited island, but in a very stunted state, form 1840. 
a verdant line close to the beach. This is sue- *"~""""^ 
ceeded by bright green slopes, so studded with the 
Chrysobactron as to give them a yellow tinge, visible 
a full mile from the shore. Most of the beautiful 
plants of Lord Auckland's group, including the 
elegant caulescent ferns, are equally abundant here, 
and from many of them growing in this higher 
latitude at a proportionally lower elevation, their 
beauty strikes every one on first landing. 

^^ The stay of the expedition here was necessarily 
very short, and though two days sufficed to collect 
between 200 and 300 species, the island cannot be 
considered as sufficiently explored to justify any 
rigid numerical comparison between its Flora and 
that of the Aucklands ; still some few relative ob- 
servations may be offered. Sixty-six flowering 
plants were detected, of which fourteen were not 
seen in the neighbouring group. Thus, in two 
degrees of latitude, thirty -four species had disap- 
peared from the Flora of this longitude, and been 
replaced by at least twenty other plants, pro- 
ducing as great a concomitant change in the pro- 
portions of the two groups of flowering plants as 
was to be expected from the higher latitude. The 
new species are almost all typical of an antarctic 
climate, and consist both of species confined to 
the island, and of others hitherto considered pe- 
culiar to Antarctic America. The proportion of 
monocotyledonous plants is increased from being 
1 : 2*2, to 1 : 1*4. The grasses, instead of bearing 



160 BOTANICAL NOTICE. [CmiiP. VL 

1840. the small ratio of 1 : 14, which they do in Lord 

"~""""~ Auckland's group, here appear as 1 : 4*5. Cyperacem 

and Orchidece have proportionally decreased, and 

the Campositce^ which were to all Dicotyledonea as 

1 : 10*4, are here as 1 : 5'6. These are not the signs 

of the vegetation of a more rigorous latitude alone, 

but of one differing more widely from that of New 

Zealand than Lord Auckland's group did, where 

only one-seventh of the plants were common to 

other antarctic regions, whilst in Campbell's Island 

fully one-fourth are natives of other longitudes in 

the Southern Ocean. 

^^ Considering the aggregate of the plants in the 
islands to the southward of New Zealand as com- 
posing one Flora, a comparison of it with those of 
other countries is not out of place here. The 
flowering plants amount to one hundred species, or 
about the same number as have been collected in 
the whole group of arctic islands to the northward 
of the American coast. Of these one-fourth have 
been found in New Zealand, whilst many of the 
others belong to genera whose abundance is charac- 
teristic of that country. Only one-thirteenth of 
the whole are known to be Tasmanian, and one- 
sixth are common to Tierra del Fuego. Since there 
is no other country with which these islands possess 
any marked botanical features in common, their 
Flora may be considered a continuation of that of 
New Zealand, differing only in that it is more 
tjrpical of the antarctic regions. 

^^The remarkable points of resemblance to 



Chap. VI.] BOTANICAL NOTICE. 161 

the last-named group with which we have com- i840. 
pared this Flora, are the preponderance of Ru- ""~~~* 
biacecBy Araliacece^ EpacridecB^ OrckidecBj and Myr- 
ainecB ; the small amount of surface occupied by 
CompositcBj CaryophyUecBj CrucifercBy and Ericece; 
and the entire want of SaxifrageoB^ LeguminoaoBi 
LabiatcB, and AmentacecBj all scantily represented 
in New Zealand. The more striking points of 
difference are the increased proportion of ManO' 
cotyledonesy which are there* as 1 : 8*2, and in 
these two islands as 1 : 1 *8 ; of grasses, which bear a 
proportion there to other flowering plants of 1 : 13, 
and here of 1 : 6*8 ; and of CompositOB^ which there 
appear as 1 : 8, and as 1 : 4*4 here. This Flora 
ftirther departs from that of New Zealand in possess- 
ing none of its numerous species of pine or beech, 
of which latter genus five are now known to grow 
there, and this is the more remarkable because all the 
beeches and several of the pines are alpine, both in 
New Zealand and in Van Diemen's Land, only 
reaching the level of the sea in the southern parts of 
those islands. The pines of the southern hemisphere 
are, however, exceedingly local, nor are they so ant- 
arctic as some of those in the northern hemisphere 
are arctic. Of the ten New Zealand species it is not 
certain that more than two or three are natives of 
the middle island, or that any of them are peculiar 



^ The calculations relating to tlie New Zealand Flora are 
founded on the Prodromus of Mr. Cunningham, and the results 
must be considered as probable approximations only. 

M 



162 BOTANICAL NOTICE. [Chaf. VI. 

^^^' to a latitude south of 40"^. Not only do Lord 
Auckland's group and Campbell's Island exhibit no 
inconsiderable number of Fuegian plants, consider- 
ing the immense intervening tract of ocean (up- 
wards of 4,000 miles), but in all the particulars in 
which their Flora differs from that of New Zealand^ 
it more closely approximates to that of Antarctic 
America. Strong though the resemblance is in 
the numerical proportions of the orders, and in 
the similarity of many of the smaller plants, the 
trees and shrubs of the one differ in every respect 
from those of the other locality ; for beeches ex- 
tend from a latitude in the American continent 
which corresponds to their principal parallel in 
New Zealand beyond the latitude of Lord Auck- 
land's group, as far south as Cape Horn itself, in 
the 57th degree. 

" The relation between the Flora now under con- 
sideration and that of the northern regions is but 
slight ; and the same may be said, though not to an 
equal extent, of any two countries in the higher lati- 
tudes of the opposite hemispheres. This group lies 
in the latitude of England, yet we recognise in it 
only three indigenous plants of our own island, — the 
Cardamine hirsuta^ Montia^ and CaUitriche. Of the 
sixty genera twenty-two are English, and twenty- 
eight natives of a more northern latitude than 
England. Hardly any of these belong to the divi- 
sions Calycijloras^ CompositcBj or to the higher 
orders of the Monocotyledones ; while, on the other 
hand, they include the whole of the ThalamiflorcPj 



Cdap. YL ] BOTANICAL NOTICE. 163 

Monochlamydeoe and grasses, and most of the 1840. 
CyperacecB. Such genera as Sieversia^ Trisetum^ ""^""^ 
and Hierochlce have their analogues chiefly in the 
arctic regions ; whilst MyosoHa^ RanunctdtLs^ Carda- 
minej Stellariay Veronica^ Lazula^ Juncus, and all 
the grasses, are predominant in the arctic Flora. 
There are, however, slight points of resemblance, 
rendering the want of a larger amount of their 
congeners more remarkable, and also of others 
which in the north generally accompany them, as 
saxifrages, heaths, and Vaccinia, LeguminoaaSj pines, 
beech, and especially oak, birch, and willow ; for 
most of which no representative has hitherto been 
found in the high southern latitudes." 

The geology of this island is very similar to that 
of the Aucklands, except in the total absence of 
land-birds, of which the Aucklands possess seven 
or eight species. The albatross had formed their 
nests on the tops of the north-western cliffs of 
the island, and a great many of their eggs were 
obtained, but none of the young had yet appeared. 

The remains of some huts were found on each 
side of a cove to the north of the Erebus anchorage, 
as also the graves of several seamen who had evi- 
dently been employed on the seal-fishing, and 
amongst them that of a French woman who had 
been accidentally drowned by the upsetting of a 
boat in the harbour. There had also been an 
establishment by the side of a stream in the north- 
west comer of the harbour, but its situation was 
not so good for the purpose as that of the cove. 



164 FBBPABE FOR SEA. [Cur. VL 

>^^' During the 15th and 16th we were busily en- 
gaged completing wood and water, and making all 
necessary preparations for our southern voyage, 
which may be considered to have conunenced on 
leaving this harbour. I now communicated to 
Commander Crozier my intention of proceeding 
direct to the southward upon the meridian of this 
island rather than upon that of Hobart Town, and 
was gratified to find he entirely concurred with my 
views upon this subject. He received his final 
orders, and a complete list of rendezvous, contain- 
ing instructions how to act in case of the ships 
unavoidably parting company, so as to ensure our 
meeting again without loss of time. And by 
the evening of the 16th, the day having been un- 
usually favourable, we had foUy accomplished all 
the purposes of our visit to this place, and the 
ships were ready for sea. 



165 



CHAPTER Vn. 

With a moderate breeze frora the westward, we i840. 
weighed at 9 A. M., and stood out of the harbour, "j^^^fj^ 
As soon as we had cleared the land we shaped our 
course directly south; and the wind soon fresh* 
ening to a strong gale, with thick weather and rain, 
we lost sight of Campbell Island about noon. 

The fifteen months which had elapsed since we 
took our departure from England had in no degree 
diminished our eagerness for the southern voyage ; 
and now that we had at length the prospect before 
us of entering upon those labours from which we 
aU hoped the most remarkable and important re- 
sults of our voyage might be fairly anticipated, 
joy and satisfaction beamed in every face; and 
although I could not but look forward with much 
anxiety of mind to the issue of our exertions, yet 
this was greatly diminished by the assurance that 
we were in possession of the best of human means 
to accomplish our purposes. Our ships were in 
every respect most suitable for the service, with 
three years' provisions, and stores of the best kind, 
and supported by officers and crews in whom I 
had reason to entertain the utmost confidence that 
they would endure every trial and hardship with 
credit to themselves and the country. I felt that 
we had nothing to desire but the guidance and 
blessing of Almighty God throughout the arduous 

Al 3 



166 MIDSUMICEB DAY. [Cdap. VII. 

^^^' duties we were about to commence, and without 
which all human skill and courage must prove 
utterly unavailing. 
Dec. 18. It i)ie^ a strong gale from the south-west, so 
that we could not maintain a direct course. At 
noon we were in lat. 54'' 22' S., long. 169' 12' E., 
having completed a distance of one hundred miles 
to the southward. At midnight a bright appear- 
ance was observed in the clouds, between south- 
east and south, resembling the difiused light of 
aurora australis, at an altitude of 12'. 

Stormy weather continued throughout the 1 9th 
and 20th, during which time we had no opportU'- 
21. nity of sounding; and on the 21st were so unfor- 
tunate as to lose two of our self-registering ther- 
mometers by the line breaking. By Commander 
Crozier's experiment the temperature at two hun- 
dred and thirty fathoms below the surface was 
39''5, that of the surface being 42'. We were at 
that time in lat. 57^ 52'. S., long. 170^ 30' E. 

Although Midsummer-day of the southern re- 
gions, and in so low a latitude, the temperature of 
the air was at no time during the day above 40*, 
having very gradually declined as we advanced to 
the southward. The smaller kind of petrel be- 
came much more numerous ; several patches of 
seaweed were seen during the day ; and we were 
kept in expectation of meeting with some new 
land, of which these, and the numbers of penguins 
of two or three kinds we saw, were considered to 
be indications. 



Chap. VH.] CHBISTBIAS DAY. 1 67 

The next day it was nearly calm in the after- ^•^• 
noon, and some interesting experiments on the Dec 22. 
temperature of the sea were made : at the surfiu^e 
it was 37^, at one hundred and fifty fathoms 38^*5, 
at three hundred fathoms 39^*5, at four hundred 
and fifty fathoms 39^*7, at six hundred fathoms, 
39^*7; showing that since yesterday we had crossed 
the point of uniform temperature of the ocean 
throughout its whole depth; and that the effect 
of the radiation of its heat from the surface ex- 
tended to below three hundred fathoms. Our lat. 
59^ S., long. 171^ E. 

Snow and sleet accompanied a moderate south- 23. 

easterly breeze, and reduced the temperature of 
the surface of the sea to 32^. The elegant little 
blue petrel passed us in large flocks, going to the 
southward. The albatross and smaller petrels ho- 
vered about in considerable numbers ; and a few 
bottle-nosed whales were seen. 

During the last three days we had felt the in- 
fluence of a current, drifting us to the north, be- 
tween ten and eleven miles each day. 

Christmas-day was passed by us in a strong 25. 

gale, but it did not prevent our enjoying the usual 
festivities of the joyous season. Constant snow 
and rain, which as usual attended the northerly 
gale, and the expectation of meeting with ice, as 
well as the possibility of passing new land, deterred 
me from running during the continuance of such 
unfavourable weather ; we therefore hove-to under 

M 4 



168 FIBST ICEBERG. [Chaf. VIL 

^^^' the close-reefed topsails. At noon we were in 

lat. 62^ 10' S., and long. 170' 24/ . E. 
Dec. 26. "^^^ wind veered to the westward, but the wea- 
ther was still so thick that we continued hove-to 
until 2 p. M., when we wore round, and stood to the 
southward. 
27. On the 27th we had a strong south-westerly 
gale, with clear weather, violent squalls, and fre- 
quent snow-showers. The temperature of the sea 
fell to 29' at 5 a. m., at which it remained all day, 
and led us to expect soon to meet with ice. 

The gale moderated early. the next morning, and 
was succeeded by a calm between 5 and 9 A. m., 
when an easterly breeze sprang up, and enabled 
us to resume our southerly course, having been 
driven back to the northward very considerably by 
the late storm. 

A great many whales were seen during the 
afternoon ; and at 4 p. m., when in lat* 63' S. and 
long. 174' S(y E., we tried for soundings, with six 
hundred fathoms, without striking the ground. 
The temperature at the surface was 30', at one 
hundred and fifty fathoms 35''5, at threq hundred 
fathoms d8'*2, and at six hundred fathoms 3i0''7, 
at which xlepth the mean temperature of the ocean 
^va8 reached by the thermometers. 

At 7 20 p. M. the first iceberg was seen, in lati- 
tude 63' 20' S. ; several others came in sight shortly 
afterwards, and before eight o'clock fifteen were 
counted from the deck. Unlike the icebergs of the 
arctic seas, they presented very little variety of 



Chat. VII] WHALES. 169 

form, but were generally of large size and of very 1840. 
solid appearance, bounded by perpendicular cliffs """"""""* 
on aU 8i^ thdr tabular suSte, varied from 
one hundred and twenty to one hundred and eighty 
feet in height, and several of them more than two 
miles in circumference. As we passed through this 
chain of bergs we observed large masses continu- 
ally falling from them, giving proof of their rapid 
destruction, even in this high latitude, and forming 
long streams of heavy loose fragments to leeward 
of them. 

We continued our course to the southward, Dec. 29. 
amongst numerous icebergs and much drift ice. A 
great many whales were seen, chiefly of the com- 
mon black kind, greatly resembling, but said to be 
distinct from, the Greenland whale : sperm, as well 
as hunchbacked whales, were also observed ; of the 
conmion black species we might have kiUed any 
number we pleased : they appeared chiefly to be 
of unusually large size, and would doubtless yield 
a great quantity of oil, and were so tame that our 
ships sailing close past did not seem to disturb 
them. During a short period of calm in the 
afternoon many marine invertebrata were taken, 
amongst them the Clio borealis and beautiful little 
Argonauta arctica, upon which, doubtless, the 
whales were feeding, as it is well known that these 
creatures constitute the whale's food in the northern 
seas. 

A light southerly breeze brought with it almost 
constant snow-showers and thick weather, so that 



170 DEEP 80UKDIKG. [Chaf. VIL 

'^^' we were compelled to shorten sail and keep close 
to the wind during the night, being amongst a great 
many bergs, which we could not see until almost 
touching them, and expecting also that the main 
pack was not far distant : there was also a heavy 
swell amongst the bergs, which rendered our situa- 
tion one of no small anxiety. The roar of the waves 
against their precipitous faces was generally the 
first knowledge we had of our proximity to them. 

The next morning, at 7 a. bi., we bore away to 
QQ^ the southward, the wind having changed to the 
westward, with more favourable weather. The 
bergs and loose pieces of ice became gradually less 
numerous, so that throughout the day we seldom 
had more than ten or twelve of the former in sight 
at a time, and generally not so many. 

Soon after noon we crossed the track of the 
Russian navigator, Bellinghausen, in lat. 64^ 38^ S. 
and long. 173'' lO' £. ; and, being becalmed at 
2 p. M., we had a good opportunity of trying for 
deep soundings. Five thousand fathoms of line 
had been prepared for the purpose, but only one 
thousand five hundred and sixty fathoms had run 
off the reel when the weight struck the bottom. 
The temperature at the surface was 31**', at one 
hundred and fifty fathoms 35**'2, at three hun- 
dred fathoms 37''*2, at four hundred fathoms 
38**-8, and at six hundred fathoms 39**'8. I 
regretted that the thermometers constructed to 
sustain the pressure at a great depth, which I had 
written to England for, had not arrived at Hobart 



Chap.vil] cross antarctic circle. 171 

Town before our departure. The specific gravity i84o. 
of the water at the surface and that taken up from 
six hundred fathoms was exactly the same, being 
1*0272, in both cases at a temperature of 32^ 

The current was found to be setting to the 
E.S.E., at the rate of eight miles per diem. 

At 6 P. M. a fine breeze sprang up from the east- 
ward, and we carried a press of sail all night, 
passing a great many bergs, and much loose ice in 
long narrow streams, as we advanced to the south- 
ward. A beautiful white petrel was seen in the 
evening, giving notice of our approach to a large 
body of ice, although we were not at the time 
aware that these birds never wander far from the 
main pack. 

At noon the next day we were in lat. 66® 0' S. Dec. si. 
and long. 17 1*' 50' E. At this time the weather 
was beautifully clear, and a strong ice-blink in the 
sky, from S. W. to S. E., pointed out the situation 
of the pack. The streams of ice became more nu- 
merous, but fewer bergs were seen during the day. 
At 9 p. M. a line of ice was seen from the masthead, 
from E. by S. to S. by E., which proved to be the 
pack edge; but falling perfectly calm soon after- 
wards, we were not able to approach it until 8 A. m. J*n. i« 
the next morning, when a light northerly wind 
sprang up, bringing thick weather and snow- 
showers. We steered to the southward, passing 
great quantities of drift ice; at ten o'clock we 
crossed the antarctic circle, and came to the edge 
of the main pack, of which, however, we could only 



172 NEW year's day. [Chaf. vil 

^^^' see a very small extent, owing to the thick weather; 
we were therefore obliged, after running a short 
distance along the edge of it, to haul off to the 
northward, to prevent getting entangled amongst 
the loose ice, with a considerable swell, and too 
little wind to make any way through it. At noon 
we were in lat. 66^ 32' S. and long. 169° 45' E. 
The magnetic dip 82*35, and the variation 28*21. 

Jan. 1. Being New-Year's-day, an additional allowance 
of provisions was served to the ships' crews, as was 
the practice on aU the arctic voyages *, and a com- 
plete suit of warm clothing was issued gratis to 
each individual; this had been provided by the 
liberality of the government, and on our entering 
the icy regions, could not but prove to be as useful 
and acceptable a new-year's gift as they could have 
received. Mutual congratulations passed between 
the officers and crews of the ships, and the day 
was kept, as in old England, in conviviality and re- 
joicing. Being amongst numerous icebergs and 
Iiaving a great deal of loose ice about us, added 
greatly to the interest of the day to those who had 
never been amongst it before ; and those who had 
could not but share in some degree the excitement 
and delight of their companions. We had, indeed, 
met with the pack in a much lower latitude than 
we had anticipated; but from the little we had 
seen of it we were by no means dispirited by the 
early appearance of so serious an obstruction to our 
progress, for it presented none of those evidences 
of impenetrability we had been led to expect. 



Chap. VH.] VIEW OP THB PACK. 173 

Several whales were seen, and the white petrel ^^*^' 
(Procellaria nivea) was &ying about in great num- jan.i. 
bers. In the evening a boat was lowered down, 
and several good specimens of this beautiful bird 
were added to our collection : a seal was also seen. 
During a partial clearing of the weather we had a 
good view of the pack, which extended as far as 
the eye could discern to the southward* Some 
large holes of water were seen beyond the edge, 
which, as usual, consisted of the heaviest pieces 
closely set together, but afforded us a confident 
hope of being able to make our way through it 
whenever circumstances should admit of the at- 
tempt: at that time it was perfectly calm, with 
a considerable swell from the northward, so that 
our ships were for several hours nearly unmanage- 
able. 

At 5 A. M. a berg was observed at a short dis- Jan. 2. 
tance, with a large piece of rock upon it, and nearly 
covered with mud and stones. It had much the ap- 
pearance of a small island ; and Mr. Smith was sent 
to examine and bring specimens of the rock. It 
proved to be of volcanic origin, and must have 
been of many tons weight. At 8 a. if. a fresh breeze 
sprang up from the eastward, with thick snow- 
showers ; the barometer also falling fast, led me to 
expect bad weather : we therefore stood off to the 
northward, to get into more clear water, and to 
wait a favourable opportunity of entering the pack. 
Thick weather prevailed throughout the day, and 
accompanied by a strong breeze and high sea, ren- 



174 VIEW OF THE PACK. [Cbap. VH. 

'^^^' dered our situation critical and anxious. As we 
stood away from the pack the temperature of the 
sea rose from 28** to 30® at the distance of seven or 
eight miles ; when, having got into a much clearer 
space, we kept the ship under easy sail all the next 
Jan. 3. day, waiting for more favourable weather. Several 
whales, a few seals, and many white petrel, were 
seen during the day, also three penguins. 

Towards midnight the barometer began to rise, 
and other indications of the weather improving, 
we wore round and stood to the southward; we 
carried all sail, passing through several narrow 
streams of heavy ice, formed of the fragments of 
broken-up bergs, which rendered the greatest vigi- 

Jan. 4. lance necessary during the thick snow-showers that 
passed over us in quick succession, and were some- 
times of long continuance ; nor was it until the after- 
noon that the clear blue sky was again seen and the 
sun shone forth in all its splendour, — the numerous 
bergs, of strange and curious forms, reflecting its 
brilliant rays in every beautiful variety of colour, 
and forming, as our ships pursued their devious 
way amongst them, a scene of much interest and 
grandeur. 

At noon we were in lat. 65** 22' S., long. 172® 
42' E. ; the magnetic dip 81® 40', variation 25® 1'. 
By a remarkable, and of course in some degree 
accidental coincidence, exactly the same dip and 
variation were signalled firom both ships. 

The power of the sun's radiation was measured 
at 9 p. M., by means of a thermometer whose bulb 



Chap. VIL] REFRACTION. 1 75 

^vaa blackened with Indian ink: it rose from SS** to 1841. 
40** '2, the sun's altitude being at the time only four ~^ 
degrees. Heavy clouds were soon afterwards ob- 
served rising both at east and north-west : those in 
the latter direction were of a peculiarly threatening 
appearance, witii hard rugged outlines, like the 
cumulus clouds of the equatorial regions, with 
bright reflections of light £ix)m their more promi- 
nent points, affording a strong contrast to the ex- 
treme darkness of the frowning mass. The setting 
sun was also a very remarkable object, being 
streaked across by five datk horizontal bands, of 
nearly equal breadth, and flattened into a most ir- 
reguL form by the greater refraction of its lower 
limb as it touched the horizon, at ll"* 56" 61'; 
skimming along to the eastward, it ahnost imper- 
ceptibly descended untU its upper limb disappeared 
exactly seventeen minutes and thirty seconds after- 
wards. The difference of the atmospheric refrac- 
tion at the upper and lower limb of the sun was 
carefully determined by several measurements of 
the horizontal and vertical diameter, and found to 
amount to h' 2V\ the horizontal diameter being 
32' 31'', and the vertical diameter only 27' 10", 
that given in the Nautical Almanac being 32' 84"; 
thus showing also that the flattened appearance of 
the sun was not produced in the least degree by the 
elongation of the horizontal diameter, as some have 
supposed. We also remarked the peculiar purple 
colour that the vapour of very low altitudes exactiy 
opposite to the setting sun reflects so constantiy in 



176 ENTEB THE PACK. [Cbap. VH. 

1841. the arctic regions, and sometimes even in our own 
' country . It did not exceed two degrees of altitude 

when the sun's centre was on the horizon. 
Jan. 5. In approaching the pack we had passed a great 
many bergs, but after midnight comparatively few 
were seen. The wind freshened to a strong breeze 
from the north-westward, and carried us rapidly to 
the southward. At 8 a. m. we again came in sight 
of the main pack, and ran several miles along the 
edge of it to examine it. From the mast-head it 
seemed sufficiently open to admit of our penetrating 
as far as we could see to the southward ; and al- 
though other circumstances were not so favourable 
for taking the pack as I could have wished, owing 
to the unsettled state of the weather and the wind 
blowing so directly upon the ice as to preclude 
our regaining the open water if thought desirable, 
I nevertheless determined to make the attempt, and 
push the ships as far into it as we could get them. 
The signal was made to the Terror, and we bore 
away before the wind, selecting the most favour- 
able point to break through the outer edge of the 
pack, which, as usual, was formed of much heavier 
ice than the rest, and which we accomplished with- 
out sustaining any serious injury, although neces- 
sarily receiving some very heavy blows. 

After about an hour's hard thumping, we forced 
our way into some small holes of water, con- 
nected by narrow lanes, for which we had pur- 
posely steered ; and, closely followed by the Terror, 
we found the io^ much lighter and more scattered 



Chap. Vn.] FALSE APFEABAKCE OF LAND. 177 

than it appeared to be when viewed from the dis- ib41. 
tance. It consisted chiefly of small floes of ice, of ""~"^ 
last winter's formation, with a quantity of hmn- 
mocky ice of much older date, formed by great 
pressure into very heavy masses ; but it was by no 
means of so formidable a character as we had been 
led to expect from the accounts we had received 
of the southern barrier in those parts where the 
American and French expeditions had encountered 
it. 

At noon we were in latitude 66^ 55' S., and Ion- 
gitude 174^ 34' E. The clear sea was no longer 
discernible from the masthead ; with nothing but 
ice around, and fortunately a dear sky above us, 
we pursued our way through the pack, choosing 
the clearest ^4eads," and forcing the interposing 
barriers as they occurred ; the way continued, if 
not to open before us, still sufficiently so to enable 
us to navigate freely amongst the ice, without 
danger or difficulty as we proceeded, at times sus- 
taining violent shocks, which nothing but ships 
so strengthened could have withstood. 

A remarkable appearance of land was reported in 
the evening, and, continuing for many hours with- 
out any alteration of figure, several of the officers 
imagined it was really land they saw, assuming the 
appearance of many pointed hills perfectly covered 
with snow, apd so calculated to deceive the inex- 
perienced eye, that had we been prevented pro- 
ceeding further, they would doubtless have asserted 
on our return to England that we had discovered 

VOL. I. N 



178 FROOBBSS THROUGH THE PACK. [Cbap. YII. 

^^^^' land in this position. This appearance of land was, 
however, nothing more than the upper part of a 
doud, marking, by a well-defined but irregular 
line, the limit to which vapour can ascend in these 
latitudes ; below is vapour in every degree of con- 
densation, above, the clear cold space which vapour 
can never attain. It is always near the margin of 
the ice that these appearances of land are most re- 
markable and most deceptive. It proved a useful 
lesson to some of our new hands, who could not be 
persuaded it was not land until we had actually 
passed over the place of their baseless mountains. 

We saw many seals, as we sailed along, basking 
on the ice, and several penguins; these curious 
birds actually followed our ships, answering the 
call of the sailors, who imitated their cry; and 
although they could not scramble over the ice so 
fast as our ships sailed past it, they made up for it 
when they got into the water, and we soon had 
quite a flock of them in our wake, playing about 
our vessel like so many porpoises. 

The elegant white petrel was also very numer- 
ous, and a single stormy petrel, of a difierent and 
larger species than our European procellaria pela- 
gica, was seen. 

The wind gradually moderated as we got far- 
ther into the pack, and had declined to quite a 
gentle air at midnight, by which time we were 
between sixty and seventy miles from the pack 
edge; there was, however, still so much motion 
amongst the ice, that I have no doubt it was blow- 



CHiLP. Vn.] BESET IN THE PACK* 179 

ing a strong gale in the open sea to the north¥rard ; ^^i* 
the clouds drifted swiftly over our heads, and thick 
showers of snow fell, but we had, at intervals, an 
extensive view fix)m the croVs nest, which ena- 
bled us to pursue our southerly course with confi- 
dence, though under diminished sail, throughout the 
night. 

Early the next morning the ice became much jui. a. 
closer, compelling a more varying course, and 
greatly retarding our progress ; a strongly marked 
"water-sky," which was seen to the south-east- 
ward, raised our hopes of being able to reach an 
open sea at no great distance, and all our means 
were employed to force the ships onward through 
the ice in that direction ; but early in the afternoon 
we found it so close as to baffle all our exertions, 
and we were obliged to heave to in a small hole of 
water, out of which we could find no way to the 
southward, and wait until the ice opened. 

We saw great numbers of penguins of a different 
species from those we had met with at Eerguden 
and Auckland Islands, and a boat being sent in 
pursuit of them, several were procured and added 
to our collection. 

Commander Crozier came on board in the evening, 
and we had the satisfaction to hear that all on 
board the Terror were in the same good health and 
spirits as we were, not an individual being on the 
sick list of either ship. One of his boat's crew fell 
overboard, and although quite unable to swim, he 
floated on the surface without an effort until picked 

H 2 



180 TEMPERATURE OF OCEAN. [Chap.VIL 

1841. up by one of our boats, no worse for his cold 
immersion. 

Some whales were seen, but not in such numbers 
as near the pack edge. At noon we were in lat. 
68*" ir S., long. 175*" 21' E., and found we had been 
driven by a current twenty-six miles to the S. E. dur- 
ing the last two days ; another proof to us that there 
Jan. 7. must be open space in that direction. But the ice 
remained so close until the afternoon of the following 
day, that we could not make any way through it ; 
and whilst thus detained we tried for soundings, 
but without reaching the ground with 600 fathoms. 
The temperature at that depth, 39***8; at 450 
fathoms, 39''-2 ; at 300 fathoms, 38'''2; at 150 
fathoms, 37**'5 ; at the surface, 28*^. 

Late in the evening the ice slackened a little, 
and we bored through it seven or eight miles to 
the south-east, towards the encouraging dark water- 
sky, that we had never lost sight of, and which we 
appeared to have approached very considerably, 
since it was first observed. 

At 11 p. M. a thick fog came on, and the ice 
being much too compact for us, we were obliged to 
heave to for several hours. 
Jul 8. At 4 A. M. we recommenced our labour, aided by 
a light south-westerly wind, and succeeded in forc- 
ing the ships several miles through the pack by 
noon, when it fell perfectly calm. Our observa- 
tions to-day showed that the whole body of ice had 
during the last two days been carried fourteen 
milos to the northward by the late southerly winds- 



CRAr.Vn.] OBSBBVATIONS ON THE ICB. 181 

I availed myself of the opportunity the calm 1841. 
afforded me of making some magnetic observations 
upon a large piece of ice near the ship, well suited 
to the purpose. The dip and intensity observa- 
tions agreed exactly with those we had previously 
obtained on board our vessels, satisfactorily proving 
that the corrections we employed for the effect of 
the ship's iron on the instruments continued to 
give accurate results. We were then in lat. 68** 28' 
S., and long. 176** 31' E. Dip 83** 36' S., and 
variation 34*^ 39' E. 

A new species of seal was killed by some of the 
crew of the Terror, differing from all others hitherto 
known, in the total absence of ears ; not the smallest 
orifice could be detected where they usually are 
placed in these animals ; and this remarkable pecu- 
liarity was afterwards confirmed on its being dis- 
sected by Dr. Robertson. 

A great change in the ice was produced by the 
calm opening it out in all directions, as we always 
found to be the case in the Arctic Seas ; and a 
breeze springing up from the northward at 8 p. m. 
we made some way through the pack, pressing for- 
ward under all sail towards the south-east water. 
We sustained many severe shocks in breaking 
through the interposing barriers of closer ice. 
Thick weather and snow prevented our seeing to 
any distance before us or selecting our way, whilst 
the increasing breeze impelled us rapidly onwardr 
So that at 5 A. M. the next day we had accomplished j^q. 9, 
the object of our exertions, and found ourselves 

M 3 



182 GET INTO A CLEAR SEA« [Chap. VIL 

1841. again in a dear sea. The northerly breeze soon 
' ' after increased to ;w> strong a gale as to reduce us 

to close reefed topsails, which, with the continuous 
snow and thick weather, compelled us at noon to 
haul to the wind aft;er having run about thirty miles 
to the southward since leaving the pack. 

At noon we were in lat 69^ 15' S., and long. 
176M5'E. 

The wind veered round gradually to the east- 
ward, so that we continued to make some progress 
to the southward notwithstanding the fog and 
snow being so thick that we could seldom see more 
than half a mile before us, and sometimes not so 
far ; but as we met with no icebergs, and only a 
few straggling pieces of ice and a heavy sea having 
arisen, we felt assured that we had gained an open 
space of great extent. 

The storm blew with great violence from the 
eastward until 2 a. m. the next day, when it began 
Jan. 10 ^ abate, and by nine o'clock had moderated so 
much as to admit of our setting reefed courses. 
The fog also began to disperse about that time, and 
at noon we had a most cheering and extensive 
view ; not a particle of ice could be seen in any 
direction from the mast-head. Our observations 
gave us a lat. 70*" 23' S., long. 174'' 50 E. and the 
magnetic dip had increased to 85^. 

We now shaped our course directly for the 
Magnetic Pole, steering as nearly south by compass 
as the wind, which soon afterwards veered to the 
south-east, admitted. Our hopes and expectations 



Chap. Vn.] LAN|> ^ filSCOVEIlED. 1 83 

of attaining that interesting point were now raised ^^^i* 
to the highest pitch, too soon, however, to suffer as 
severe a disappointment. A strong ^^ land-blink" 
made its appearance in the horizon as the ships 
advanced, and had attained an elevation of several 
degrees by midnight. All of us were disposed to Jan. ii. 
doubt that which we so much apprehended, owing 
to its much paler colour than the land-blinks we 
had seen in the northern regions, but soon after 
2 A. M. the officer of the watch. Lieutenant Wood, 
reported that the land itself was distinctly seen 
directly ahead of the ship. 

It rose in lofty peaks, entirely covered with per- 
ennial snow; it could be distinctly traced from. 
S. S. W. to S. E. by S. (by compass), and must have 
been more than one hundred miles distant when 
first seen. 

The highest mountain of this range I named 
after Lieutenant-Colonel Sabine, of the Royal Ar- 
tillery, Foreign Secretary of the Royal Society, 
one of the best and earliest friends of my youth, 
and to whom this compliment was more especially 
due, as having been the first proposer and one of 
the most active and zealous promoters of the expe- 
dition. 

At noon we were in the highest latitude 
(71*" 15') attained by our great navigator in 1774, 
during his several attempts to penetrate to the 
south. We had by this time run fifteen leagues 
directly towards Mount Sabine, and still it appeared 
to be very distant : more land came in view as we 

11 4 



184 CAFE ADABE. [C^af. VII. 

1841. advanced, mountainous ranges extending to the 
"~""""** right and left of that we first discovered. 

At 6 P. M.y when we had closed the land seventy 
mileSi we were about two leagues from the shore, 
which was lined with heavy pack-ice. We steered 
close along the edge of it towards a small bay, 
where we hoped to effect a landing, but the wind 
being on the shore, and a high sea beating hea« 
vily along the pack edge, we found it quite imprac* 
ticable. We therefore stood to the S. E. for the 
purpose of rounding the eastern extreme of a close 
body of ice, and of getting to leeward of a project- 
ing point of the coast, off which we observed seve- 
ral small islands, that we expected would afford 
such protection as to admit of our landing with 
less difficulty. 

The cape which formed the southern promontory 
of the bay was, at the request of Commander 
Crozier, named Cape Downshire, after his kind and 
lamented friend, the late estimable marquis. Its 
northern point was called Cape Adare, after my 
friend Viscount Adare, M. P. for Glamorganshire, 
who always evinced a warm interest in our un- 
dertaking. It is a remarkable projection of high, 
dark, probably volcanic, cliffs, and forms a strong 
contrast to the rest of the snow-covered coast. 
Some rocks, that were observed to lie several miles 
to the north and west of Cape Adare, showing their 
black summits conspicuously amongst the white 
foam of the breakers, were named Dunraven rocks. 
We obtained soundings in one hundred and sixty- 



Chaf.VIL] 'aDMIRALTT RANGE. 185 

five fathoms, and several small black stones, which ^^^' 
came up with the lead, tended to confirm my con- 
jectures of the volcanic origin of the newly-disco- 
vered land. Cape Adare at the time bore N. 52 W., 
distant about five or six miles. 

It was a beautifully clear evening, and we had 
a most enchanting view of the two magnificent 
ranges of mountains, whose lofty peaks, perfectly 
covered with eternal snow, rose to elevations vary- 
ing from seven to ten thousand feet above the 
level of the ocean. The glaciers that filled their 
intervening valleys, and which descended from near 
the mountain summits, projected in many places 
several miles into the sea, and terminated in lofty 
perpendicular cliffs. In a few places the rocks 
broke through their icy covering, by which alone 
we could be assured that land formed the nucleus 
of this, to appearance, enormous iceberg. 

The range of mountains extending to the N. W. 
was called Admiralty Range, of which the higher 
and more conspicuous were distinguished by the 
names of the Lords Commissioners of the Admi* 
ralty under whose orders I was serving. Mount 
Minto, Mount Adam, and Mount Parker were 
named after the Right Honourable Earl Minto, the 
first Lord ; Vice- Admiral Sir Charles Adam, E.C.B., 
now Commander-in-Chief in the West Indies ; and 
Vice- Admiral Sir William Parker, Bart., 6.C.B., 
and Commander-in-Chief in the Mediterranean, 
the two senior naval lords ; and I cannot forbear 
here expressing the deep gratitude I must ever feel 



186 



MOUNT SABIN£. [CiUF. VH. 



^^^' to them for the efficient manner in which our ships 
were fitted out under their auspices ; for the ample 
means we were provided with by their liberality ; 
and for the encouragement we received previous 
to our departure, by witnessing the warm, personal 
interest they took in perfecting the equipment of 
the expedition ; as well as for the many instances 
of friendship with which they honoured me ; the 
remembrance of which often, during the voyage, 
proved a powerful stimulus to renewed exertion. 
Mount Troubridge, Mount PecheU, and Mount 
Dalmeny were named after Rear- Admiral Sir 
Edward Thomas Troubridge, Bart., C. B. ; Oaptain 
Sir Samuel J. Brooke Pechell, Bart., C.B., E.C.H.; 
and the Right Honourable Lord Dalmeny; the 
three junior lords. The positions of these moun- 
tains are given in the Geographical Table in the 
Appendix to this volume. Mount Dalmeny formed 
the western extreme of the Admiralty Range, as 
also the westernmost land in sight, and was distant 
from us between seventy and eighty miles. The 
height of Mount Sabine was found, by means of 
several measurements, to be rather less] than ten 
thousand feet, and about thirty miles from the 
coast. The elevations of the other mountains were 
not determined with accuracy, but we judged them 
to vary from seven to nine thousand feet ; and alto- 
gether they presented as grand and magnificent a 
view as can well be imagined. A cape to the west- 
ward of Cape Adare, having a deep bay between 
them, was named after Charles Wood, Esq., 



CHAF.Vn.] CAPE BABBOW. 187 

First Secretary to the Admirally; and another m^- 
cape, still further to the westward, sunnoxinted 
by a remarkable conical hill, was distinguished by 
the name of Sir John Barrow, Bart., the fitther of 
modem arctic discovery, by whose energy, zeal, 
and talent our geographical knowledge of those 
regions has been so greatly increased; and we 
may hope, by God's guidance and blessing attend- 
ing the exertions of the expedition that has so 
recently left our shores, he may live to see the 
great object of his heart, the discovery of a N. W. 
passage through Barrow Straits to the Pacific 
Ocean, accomplished. 

The dip had increased to eighly-six degrees, and 
the variation amounted to forty-four degrees. 
These observations place the magnetic pole in lat. 
76*" S., long. 145^ 20' E., therefore in the S. W. 
(true) £rom us, and distant above five hundred miles. 
But the land interposed an insuperable obstacle 
to our direct approach to it, and we had to choose 
whether we should trace the coast to the north-west, 
with the hope of turning the western extreme of 
the land, and thence proceed to the south ; or follow 
the southerly coast line round Cape Downshire, 
and thence take a more westerly course. The latter 
was preferred, as being more likely to extend our 
researches into higher latitudes, and as afibrding a 
better chance of afterwards attaining one of the 
principal objects of our voyage : and although we 
could not but feel disappointed in our expectation 
of shortly reaching the magnetic pole, yet these 



188 LAND ON POSSESSION ISLAND. [Ouf. VIL 

^^^^' mountains being in our way restored to England 
the honour of the discovery of the southernmost 
known land, which had been nobly won by the in- 
trepid Bellinghauseo, and for more than twenty 
years retained by Russia. 

Favoured by very fine weather during the night, 
we succeeded in approaching within two or three 
miles of the small islands lying a short distance 
from the main land by nine o'clock the next morn- 
ing, at which time, accompanied by several of my 
officers, I left the ship in charge of Lieutenant 
Bird, and pulled towards the shore, followed by 
Commander Crozier and some of the Terror's 
officers. 

We found the shores of the mainland completely 
covered with ice projecting into the sea, and the 
heavy surf along its edge forbade any attempt to 
land upon it ; a strong tide carried us rapidly along 
between this ice-bound coast and the islands amongst 
heavy masses of ice, sa that our situation was for 
some time most critical ; for all the exertions our 
people could use were insufficient to stem the tide. 
But taking advantage of a narrow opening that ap- 
peared in the ice, the boats were pushed through it, 
and we got into an eddy imder the lee of the largest 
of the islands, and landed on a beach of large loose 
stones and stranded masses of ice. The weather 
by this time had put on a most threatening appear- 
ance, the breeze was freshening fast, and the 
anxious circumstances under which we were placed, 
together with the recal-flag flying at the ship's mast- 



Chap. VIL] POSSESSION ' ISLAIID. 189 

head, which I had ordered Lieutenant Bird to hoist ^^^' 
if necessary, compelled ns to hasten our operations. 
The ceremony of taking possession of these 
newly-discovered lands, in the name of our Most 
Gracious Sovereign, Queen Victoria, was imme* 
diately proceeded with ; and on planting the flag of 
our country amidst the hearty cheers of our party, 
we drank to the health, long life, and happiness of 
Her Majesty and His Royal Highness Prince 
Albert. The island was named Possession Island. 
It is situated in lat. 71^ 56', and long, in*" 7' E., 
composed entirely of igneous rocks, and only acces- 
sible on its western side. We saw not the smallest 
appearance of vegetation, but inconceivable myriads 
of penguins completely and densely covered the 
whole surface of the island, along the ledges of the 
precipices, and even to the summits of the hills, 
attacking us vigorously as we waded through their 
ranks, and pecking at us with their sharp beaks, dis- 
puting possession ; which, together with their loud 
coarse notes, and the insupportable stench from the 
deep bed of guano, which had been forming for ages, 
and which may at some period be valuable to the 
agriculturists of our Australasian colonies, made us 
glad to get away again, after having loaded our 
boats with geological specimens and penguins. 
Owing to the heavy surf on the beach, we could 
not tell whether the water was ebbing or flowing ; 
but there was a strong tide running to the soutii, 
between Possession Island and the main land, and 
the Terror had some difficulty to avoid being car- 



190 SOUTHERLY QALE« [Chap. Vn. 

^^^' ried by it against the land ice. Future navigators 
should therefore be on their guard in approaching 
the coast at this place. 

After a long and heavy pull we regained our 
ships only a short time before so thick a fog came 
on, with a strong northerly breeze, that to have 
been a few minutes later, would have rendered our 
return to the ships impossible, and compelled us to 
have borne away for the shore again, to take up our 
quarters with the penguins, until the ships could 
have again approached it with safety. The wea- 
ther obliged us now to stand out to sea. At night 
we had high winds with constant snow, and not 
meeting with any icebergs or loose ice, we kept the 
ships under easy sail, waiting a change of weather. 

Some few whales and large flocks of Cape pigeons 
were seen; but the elegant white petrel, which 
seldom goes to any distance from the main pack, 
had, to our great satisfaction, quite deserted us. 

The next morning a southerly gale came on, 
which reduced us to close-reefed topsails, and storm 
staysails ; the weather also being very thick, we 
stood to the eastward, uncertain what we might 
meet with and were kept throughout the day and 
night in a state of great anxiety and watchfulness: 
but we were not sorry to find the ship labouring 
in a heavy sea, a sure indication of a great space 
of open water to windward, in the direction we 
were now most anxious to get. 

At noon we were in lat. 72** 3' S., and long. 
172** 9' E. Although blowing a hard gale with a 



Chaf. VH] great NUMBEB OF WHALES. 191 

high sea, we were enabled, by means of Mr. Fox's i84i. 
instrument, to obtain observations for the dip, "~""""^ 
86'' 25' in both ships. 

The land was seen several times during the day ; 
the same we had before discovered, and we carried jm. is. 
all sail to prevent being driven back to the north- 
ward. In the evening we wore and stood towards 
the land, hoping for fEurer weather by the time we 
closed it ; but the storm continued with unabated 
violence, so that when we were by our reckoning 
within ten or twelve miles of the shore, and unable 
to see to any distance on account of the almost 
uninterrupted snow-showers and thick foggy wea- 
ther, we were obliged again to stand off to sea, still 
struggling under all sail to maintain our ground. 

At noon we were in lat 71® 60', and long. 
172'' 20', which, under the circumstances, we con- Jan- 14. 
sidered more favourable than we expected, having 
lost only eighteen miles during this violent gale. 

In the course of the day a great number of 
whales were observed ; thirty were counted at one 
time in various directions, and during the whole day, 
wherever you turned your eyes, their blasts were to 
be seen. They were chiefly of large size, and the 
hunch-back kind : only a few sperm whales were dis- 
tinguished amongst them, by their peculiar manner 
of " blowing," or " spouting," as some of our men 
who had been engaged in their capture called it. 
Hitherto, beyond the reach of their persecutors, 
they have here enjoyed a life of tranquillity and 
security ; but will now, no doubt, be made to con- 



192 WHALE FISHEBT. [Csap. YII. 

'^^' tribute to the wealth of our country, in exact pro- 
portion to the energy and perseverance of our 
merchants ; and these, we well know, are by no 
means inconsiderable. A fresh source of national 
and individual wealth is thus opened to commercial 
enterprise, and if pursued with boldness and perse- 
verance, it cannot fail to be abundantly productive. 
We observed great quantities of molluscous and 
other minute marine animals, on which, no doubt, 
the whales were feeding ; and large flocks of the 
young of the Cape pigeon were pla3dng about, and 
feeding with them. In the evening the wind rather 
moderated, and the weather becoming more dear 
we were induced again to try and approach the 
land. The barometer also had risen to nearly 
twenty-nine inches, which we had now learnt to 
consider to indicate fine weather in these latitudes, 
although in England such a depression would be 
regarded very differently. 
Jan. 15. Early this morning we had a fine view of the 
magnificent chain of mountains that we had seen 
stretching away to the southward some days before, 
but then more imperfectly. With a moderate 
southerly wind we had beautifully clear weather, 
and we now saw them to great advantage ; and as 
we stood towards them, we gazed with feelings of 
indescribable delight upon a scene of grandeur and 
magnificence far beyond anything we had before 
seen or could have conceived. These mountains 
also were completely covered to their sharply- 
pointed summits with snow, and the elevation 



Chap. VII.] MOUNT HERSCHBL. 193 

that were measured roughly, varied from twelve to ^^^* 
upwards of fourteen thousand feet. These were jm. 15. 
named after the eminent philosophers of the Royal 
Society and British Association, at whose recom- 
mendation the government was induced to send 
forth this expedition. I had great satisfaction in 
having it in my power thus to record the names of 
those distinguished gentlemen from whose exer- 
tions in the cause of science these discoveries re- 
sulted. Herschel, an imperishable name, rendered 
stiU more illustrious by the scientific labours 
and achievements of the greatest philosopher 
of our own time, was given to the most con- 
spicuous of the mountains, after Sir John F. W. 
Herschel, Bart., President of the British Association ; 
by whom, in the double capacity of Chairman of the 
Committee of Physics of the British Association, as 
well as of the Royal Society, the recommendations 
of those scientific bodies were communicated to 
Her Majesty's government. Mount Northampton 
was named after the Most Noble the Marquis of 
Northampton, President of the Royal Society, who 
took a personal and active interest in promoting 
the great system of magnetic co-operation through- 
out the civilised world, and in recommending a 
voyage of magnetic research to the antarctic seas. 
Cape Roget and Cape Christie, which are formed 
by the terminations of Mount Herschel and Mount 
Lloyd, to seaward, were named after Dr. Peter 
Mark Roget, Secretary of the Royal Society, and 

VOL. I. o 



194 CHAIN OF ISLETS. [Chaf. VII. 

1841. his colleague. Professor Samuel Hunter Christie, 
Jan. 15. of the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. 

Cape Wheatstone was named after Professor 
Wheatstone, the inventor of the electric telegraph ; 
and Cape Daniell after my much-lamented friend 
the late Professor of Chemistry of Song's College, 
and Foreign Secretary of the Royal Society. 

Mount Peacock, Mount Whewell, Mount Lloyd, 
and Mount Robinson were named in compliment 
to the Very Reverend Dr. Greorge Peacock, Dean 
of Ely ; the Reverend Dr. William Whewell, Master 
of Trinity College, Cambridge ; the Reverend Dr. 
Humphry Lloyd, of Trinity College, Dublin; and 
the Reverend Dr. Robinson, of Armagh ; the more 
zealous and active promoters of magnetic research 
in the antarctic regions, and who, together with Sir 
John Herschel and Colonel Sabine, constitute a Com- 
mittee of the British Association for the purpose 
of conducting the magnetical and meteorological 
co-operation, and for the reduction of meteorolo- 
gical observations. 

Contending with a strong southerly breeze, we 
beat to windward close along the chain of islets 
which extends about ten miles to the southward of 
Possession Island. It consists of eight dark- 
coloured rocks of small size and curious shapes : 
an arched perforation was observed in one of 
them, through which the coast of the main land 
was seen; another was considered to resemble a 
ship's capstan. 



CRAP.Vn.] SOUNDINGS. 195 

At noon we were in lat. 7V 66' S., Possession ^^^' 
Island bearing (true) west of us, distant seven or jaa. iff. 
eight miles. Whenever we approached the land 
we found ourselves attended by shoals of penguins, 
which kept playing about our ships and alongside 
of them, much as porpoises do in our own seas, 
probably attracted by the shining copper. Whales 
also were seen in considerable numbers during the 
day ; and they who may hereafter seek them in 
these latitudes will do well to keep near and under 
the lee of extensive banks of ice to protect them- 
selves fix>m the heavy sea they will have to encounter, 
and from which we experienced much inconve- 
nience whenever we tacked off to the eastward, the 
ship pitching her bowsprit under very frequently, 
nothing but the great care of the officers of the 
watches prevented our losing some of the spars. 
We nevertheless made progress to the southward, 
assisted by a strong tide, or more properly a cur- 
rent, since it had been setting us to windward for 
more than twelve hours. We sounded always as 
we approached the land, and found from sixty to 
ninety-two fathoms, when at two and a half to four 
miles' distance. 

Whilst measuring some angles for the survey, 
an island I had not before noticed appeared, 
which I was quite sure was not to be seen two or 
three hours previously. It was above one hundred 
feet high, and nearly the whole of the summit and 
eastern side perfectly free from snow. I was much 
surprised at the circumstance, and on calling the 

o 2 



196 HARBOURS. [Chap. VII. 

^^^' attention of some of the officers to it, one of them 
Jan. 15. remarked that a large berg which had been an object 
of observation before, had disappeared, or rather 
had turned over unperceived by us, and presented 
a new surface, covered with earth and stones, so 
exactly like an island that nothing but landing on 
it could have convinced us to the contrary had not 
its appearance been so satisfactorily explained ; and 
moreover, on more careful observation a slight roll- 
ing motion was stiU perceptible. 

I was very desirous to find a harbour in which 
to secure the ships and obtain magnetometric ob- 
servations on the 20th of this month, being one of 
the term days agreed upon for simultaneous observ- 
ations ; well knowing the great interest and import- 
ance that would attach to a complete series of such 
experiments, within 500 miles of the south mag- 
netic pole ; and for this purpose I had closely exa- 
mined every indentation of the coast that presented 
itself. These were, however, all filled with drifted 
snow from the mountains, and formed a mass of 
ice several hundred feet thick ; and thus we found 
it impossible to enter any of the valleys or breaks 
in the coasts where harbours in other lands usually 
occur. Still we hoped to meet with lower land, or 
amongst some of the islands to find a place of shelter 
for our ships and suitable for our purpose ; therefore 
we kept as close to the shore as circumstances would 
admit throughout the day, and in the evening stood 
out to sea, as we then found the tide near the land 
had turned, and was carrying us fast to leeward. 



Chap. VH.] STOBMY WBATHBB. 



197 



At 10 p. M., when distant between twenty and ^^^' 
thirty miles from the land, it presented a remarkable Jan. is. 
appearance ; a bank of dense clouds concealed the 
lower parts of the mountains, and their snowy 
pointed summits alone appeared above the cloud, 
contrasting strongly with the beautifully clear blue 
sky, and conve3dng to the mind the idea of an im- 
mensity of elevation beyond their measured height. 

Our operations were retarded by a strong south- 
west gale, against which we struggled in vain, the 
whole of the next day, under our storm-sails. Such 
a continuance of stormy weather in the middle of 
summer we were not at all prepared to expect, and 
we could not but feel anxious as day after day of 
the brief season of navigation passed away without 
any material advance in the desired direction. At Jan. 16. 
noon we were in lat. 72** 12' S., but were driven 
back to the northward by the violence of the storm, 
which continued until noon of the following day, 
about twenty-five miles. 

As the wind moderated the reefs were shook out Jan. 17. 
of the topsails and courses, and we increased the 
sail with good effect, the wind having veered to the 
westward, so as to admit of our steering a more 
southerly course. New portions of land opened to 
our view as we proceeded to the southward. The sun 
shone forth with great brilliancy, the more accept- 
able to our feelings, perhaps, from having been so 
long concealed by unceasing showers of rain ; and 
its beams were reflected from the now distant 
mountains in every variety of tone and modification 

o .s 



198 8T0BMT WEATHSB. [Cbap. TU. 

^^^' of light which the different forms of their icy cover- 
Jaii.17. ings exhibited; and which, whilst attracting the 
admiration, and delighting the eye, could not &il 
also to improve the mind ; for how was it possible 
thus to admire the stupendous and magnificent 
fabric, without our thoughts rising in adoration of 
the Author, and Maker, and Preserver of all ? 

The fine afternoon proved a source of real enjoy- 
ment after so much bad weather, and a proof of the 
extraordinary clearness of the atmosphere occurred 
worthy of notice. We had been sailing directly off 
to the eastward during the whole of the late gale, 
and on the fog and snow clearing away, both the 
angles and observations concurred in placing us at 
a distance of ninety miles from the mountains, which 
we still saw so clearly that many, unaccustomed to 
the deceptive appearances and uncertainty in esti- 
mating distances from land, would have supposed 
we were not more than thirty or forty miles from 
them. Mount Herschel subtended an angle with 
the horizon of thirty-six minutes, and might 
have been seen under equally favourable circum- 
stances at thirty or forty miles further off. A 
heavy stream of ice, about a mile broad, lying in 
the direction of the wind, and extending to the 
north and south beyond the reach of vision from 
the mast-head, was passed through without diffi- 
culty, and with only a few severe blows as we 
forced our way amongst it. The temperature of 
the sea had fallen to 28^ and we naturally expected 
soon to meet with the main pack, of which a strong 



Chap. VU.] COULMAN ISLAND. 199 

ice-blink to the eastward appeared to give us warn- i94i. 
ing ; but in this we were mistaken, it proved to be 
only a fog-bank. 

During the afternoon an unusual degree of refrac- Jan. 17. 
tion was remarked to the south-westward, which 
had the effect of bringing, at times, clearly into 
view land we had not before seen, and then again 
removing it from our sight. This land having 
been thus discovered at a distance of more than 
one hundred miles on the birth-day of a lady to 
whom I was then attached, and whom I have now 
the happiness of calling my wife, I gave her name 
to the extreme southern point — Cape Anne ; and 
the land afterwards proving to be an island, was 
named Coulman Island, after her father, Thomas 
Coulman, Esq., of Whitgift Hall, Goole. The 
northern point of the island was named Cape 
Wadworth, in compliment to her unde, Robert 
John Coulman, Esq., of Wadworth Hall, Don- 
caster ; a spot of many happy associations. 

Moderate breeze from the S. W. and fine weather : Jan. I8. 
we stood away to the S.S. E. on the starboard tack 
until we lost sight of the land, at a great distance 
from us; but we were sailing in an unexplored 
space, perfectly free fromi either bergs or loose ice. 
A few whales, penguins, cape-pigeons, and stormy 
petrel were our only companions. We were also 
increasing our southing, and at noon were in 72^ 57' 
S. long., 176** 6' E. At 1 p.m., having run three 
miles S.S. E , we hove to, and obtained soundings 
in two hundred and thirty fathoms. Small stones 

o 4 



200 IRRBGULAB SOUNDINGS. [Cbap. Vn. 

1841. and shells, with some pieces of coral and a cras- 
jan. 18. taceous animal (nymphon gracile)^ common in the 
Arctic Seas, came up with the lead. The tem- 
perature at that depth was 34''' 6 ; at one hundred 
and fifty fathoms, 33^*8 ; that of the surface being 
30**, and of the air 31**; the specific gravity of water 
brought up from various intermediate depths was 
the same as at the surface, 1'0277, at a temperature 
of 35**. This experiment was repeated with exactly 
the same result, in consequence of the Terror, which 
was less than a mile distant from us, having found 
only one hundred and seventy-four fathoms on a 
sandy bottom, showing a very remarkable irregu- 
larity in the bed of the ocean at this part. At 
5 p. M., when in lat. 73** 3' S., we tacked and 
stood towards the land ; at 8 we sounded in one 
hundred and ninety, and at midnight in one hun- 
dred and eighty fathoms, on a bottom of sand and 
broken shells, having at that time run twenty-four 
miles true W. by N. The land was again seen 
soon after 9 p.m. W.N.W. true, at one hundred 
and twenty miles' distance, the sky of course being 
beautifully clear in that direction : we considered 
Jan. 19. it a curious circumstance finding the water so 
shallow at so great a distance from such high land. 
Numbers of the young pintado were flying about*, 
and one shot by Mr. M'Cormick fell on board ; it 
was the first specimen of the kind we obtained. 

At four o'clock in the morning, we had one hundred 
and seventy fathoms, at eight o'clock two hundred 
and ten fathoms, and at noon had increased the 



CHAP.Vn.] DRBDGE IN DEEP WATER. 201 

depth ofwater to two hundred and seventy £atlioin8, '^^' 
although we had closed the land more than forty Jan. 19. 
miles since midnight. Coulman Island, which we 
had only before seen by refraction, now formed the 
southern extreme point in view, and a new range 
of mountains was observed stretching away to the 
south-west from Mount Northampton, forming a 
kind of crescent-shaped ridge. A remarkable conical 
mountain to the north of Mount Northampton was 
named in compliment to the Rev. W. Yemon Har- 
count; one to the southward of it, after Sir David 
Brewster, the joint-founders of the British Asso- 
ciation, which has so eminently contributed to the 
advancement of science in Great Britain. Mount 
Lubbock, to the southward of Mount Brewster, was 
named after Sir John Lubbock, Bart., treasurer of 
the Royal Society ; and two other mountains, still 
further to the southward, were named after Sir 
Roderick Impey Murchison, the general secretary, 
and Professor Phillips, the assistant secretary, of 
the British Association. 

Becalmed for two or three hours after noon, the 
dredge was put over in two hundred and seventy 
fathoms water, and after trailing along the ground 
for some time was hauled in. It was found to con- 
tain a block of grey granite, composed of large 
crystals of quartz, mica, and felspar, with appa- 
rently a clean and recent fracture, as if lately 
broken off from the main rock, and had probably 
been deposited by the agency of an iceberg. Be- 
sides this there were a great many stones of van- 



202 



CORALS- [Chaf. Vn. 



^^*' ous kinds of granitic and volcanic structure J but 
Jan. 19. the most remarkable circumstance was drawing 
up from so great a depth beautiful specimens of 
living coral, which naturalists and geologists have 
hitherto concurred in believing unable to work 
beyond the pressure of a few fathoms below the sur- 
face. Corallines, Flustrse, and a variety of marine 
invertebrate animals, also came up in the net, show- 
ing an abundance and great variety of animal life. 
Amongst them I detected two species of Pycno- 
gonum ; Idotea Baffini, hitherto considered peculiar 
to the Arctic Seas ; a chiton, seven or eight bivalves 
and univalves, an unknown species of GammarWj 
and two kinds of Serpula, adhering to the pebbles 
and shells. I am indebted to the kindness of Charles 
Stokes, Esq , for some remarks on the very in- 
teresting species of corals obtained by us on this 
occasion, which will be found in the Appendix to 
this Volume, and the beautiful drawings he has 
made will appear in the zoology of the voyage now 
publishing. 

It was interesting amongst these creatures to 
recognise several that I had been in the habit of 
taking in equally high northern latitudes; and al- 
though contrary to the general belief of naturalists, 
I have no doubt that from however great a depth 
we may be enabled to bring up the mud and stones 
of the bed of the ocean we shall find them teeming 
with animal life ; the extreme pressure at the greatest 
depth does not appear to affect these creatures; 
hitherto we have not been able to determine this 



CHAF.Vn.] CAPE WHBATSTOOTJ. 203 

point beyond a thousand fiBtthoms, but from that ^^^' 
depth several shellfish have been brought up with Jan. 19. 
the mud. 

At 3 p. M. a favourable breeze sprang up, and 
we made all sail to the south, steering direct for 
Coulman Island, which still formed the eastern 
extreme of land in sight, having a broad pas- 
sage between it and the main land. A deep bight 
was observed to the southward of a remarkable 
cape, high, black, and cloven at the top ; further to 
the north, Cape Wheatstone, the right-hand point 
of an apparent inlet, had the whole of its precipitous 
face quite clear of snow, though it thickly covered 
its rounded summit. The evening continued beau- 
tifully fine; but we well knew that a northerly wind 
would most assuredly bring over us fog and snow, 
its never-faiUng accompaniments; and the barometer 
falling fast warned us to make the best of the brief 
period of fine weather. All sail was crowded on both 
our ships, and once again we had all the studding 
sails on both sides set, and were running directly 
before a fine breeze. The scene was most animating 
and cheering; the harassing, tedious, and laborious 
work of contending against adverse winds and 
weather were forgotten in the full expectation we 
now enjoyed of soon passing into a higher latitude Jm. 20. 
than had ever before been attained; and few on 
board either of the ships closed their eyes that 
night, so great were their anxiety and excite- 
ment. Soon after three o'clock the next morning 
thick fog and snow limited our view at times to 



204 CURRENT. [Chaf. VIL 

^^^' Iftss than a quarter of a mile, and we could seldom 
Jan. 20. see beyond a mile; we, however, continued our 
course under all sail until six o'clock, when, during 
a partial clearing, we saw a great body of ice ex- 
tending across our bows, fortunately in time to 
enable us to haul off to the eastward, and dear the 
point of it, passing through only a small quantity 
of scattered pieces at its outer edge. Soon after- 
wards we perceived that the ice extended from the 
north cape of Coulman Island (Cape Wadworth) 
several miles to the northward, and the whole space 
between it and Cape Jones, named after my friend 
Captain William Jones, R. N., was filled with a 
solid field of ice that appeared as if it had not yet 
broken up this season. We resumed our course to 
the southward, after clearing some loose streams off 
the main body of the ice, and at noon were in lati- 
tude, by dead reckoning, IS"" AT S., long. ITl"" 40' 
E., the sun not affording us an observation for 
latitude, for which we now most anxiously wished. 
Penguins, white and stormy petrel, were seen in 
abundance, as also were several seals. Falling 
calm at 1'30 p. m. we sounded in 320 fathoms, the 
deep-sea clamms coming up ftdl of a stiff green 
mud, sand, and small stones, some fragments of 
starfish, and pieces of coral. A strong ripple indi- 
cated a tide or current ; and we found the ship was 
drifting to the south by the lead and bearings of 
the land, at the rate of three quarters of a mile per 
hour. At this time. Cape Anne, the high, perpen- 
dicular, extreme point of Coulman Island, bore 



Chap. VU.] MOUNT BfELBOURNE. 205 

W, N, W. twenty-five miles. Light baffling winds ^^^' 
prevailed for several hours, but eventually settled 
in a stiff breeze from the southward. We stood to 
the S. W. to close the mainland, which we observed 
had taken a considerable turn to the westward, but 
without being able to get sight of it, owing to the 
thickness of the weather, until 4 a.m. : when being Jta. 21. 
close in with the main pack edge we could observe 
the land ice stretching round to the southward, a 
finn unbroken mas8, with a considerable quantity 
of loose ice off its edge, which seemed to have been 
recently broken away from the main body. 

We tacked and stood off to the eastward to wait 
for clear weather, and on standing in again the 
land was distinctly seen : a high-peaked mountain, 
bearing true west, was named Monteagle, after 
the Chancellor of the Exchequer ; and one of very 
great elevation, the highest by estimation that we 
had yet seen, but which we had not the opportu- 
nity of measuring accurately, was named Mount 
Melbourne, after the Right Honourable Lord Vis- 
count Melbourne, Prime Minister of England when 
our expedition was proposed to her Majesty's go- 
vernment, and upon whom and his colleagues the 
representations of the great philosophers of the day 
had their due influence. The form of Mount Mel- 
bourne had so general and striking a resemblance 
to Mount MtnsLj that for distinction's sake it went 
by that name for several days amongst the officers 
of both ships ; but its elevation must be very much 
greater than that of the Sicilian mountain. 



206 LAND ICE. [CsAP. vn. 

1841. The land ice, although not more than five or 
Jan. 21. six feet above the surface, and therefore probably 
not more than forty feet in thickness, blends so 
imperceptibly with the snow which descends from 
the mountains at this part and extends far into 
the sea, that it was almost impossible to form any 
idea of the exact position of the coast line ; thus 
from the edge of the land ice, it seemed at no 
great distance from its margin gradually to ascend 
unta it reached the summits of the highest moun- 
tains. To the N.W. the space between Coulman 
Island and the main land was occupied by a similar 
kind of land ice that appeared not to have been 
broken away for many years: in this particular more 
like the barrier described by Lieut. Wilkes, as ex- 
tending from the shores of the lands discovered by 
him near the Antarctic Circle. It was sufficiently 
evident that it was impossible to penetrate this mass 
of ice to the westward, as there was not even a 
crack or hole of water to be seen in any part of it. 
I therefore made up my mind to proceed along its 
edge to the southward, hoping to be able after- 
wards to pursue a westerly course to the Mag- 
netic Pole, which we still continued to approach 
very considerably, the dip now amounting to 
87^ 39'. 

At noon we were in lat. 74** 15' S. by our reckon- 
ing, but the observation gave only 74**, showing 
that we had been driven to the northward by a 
current, which was the more mortifying as we had 
already begun to congratulate ourselves in the 



Chap.vil] marine invbbtebrata. 207 

belief that we had reached as high a south latitude ^^^* 
as had ever before been attained, and with every 
prospect of being permitted to extend our researches 
very much further. In spite of all our exertions 
we found the ships unable to contend against the 
combined influence of the southerly wind and north- 
erly current, which still carried us back to the 
northward, and when it fell calm in the afternoon, 
we could do nothing but watch the gradually re- 
trograde motion of the ships. 

It was the most beautiful night we had seen in 
these latitudes, the sky perfectly clear and serene. 
At midnight, when the sun was skimming along Jan. 22. 
the southern horizon at an altitude of about two 
degrees, the sky over head was remarked to be 
of a most intense indigo blue, becoming paler in 
proportion to the distance firom the zenith. 

We got soundings in three hundred fathoms, and 
the dredge being again put over, and allowed to 
trail along the bottom for two or three hours, 
brought up many animals, some corallines, and a 
quantity of sand, mud, and small stones. Amongst 
them we found several entirely new forms of crea- 
tures, of which accurate drawings were taken by 
Dr. Hooker, which, together with their descriptions, 
are now in course of publication, and consti- 
tute one of the more interesting features of our 
researches. It is well known that marine inverte- 
brate animals are more susceptible of change of 
temperature than land animals ; indeed they may 
be isothermally arranged with great accuracy. It 



208 MARINE INVEBTBBRATA. [Chap.VIL 

^^^' will, however, be difficult to get naturalists and 
philosophers to believe that these fragile creatures 
could possibly exist at the depth of nearly two 
thousand fathoms below the surface: yet as we 
know they can bear the pressure of one thousand 
fathoms, why may they not of two? We also 
know that several of the same species of creatures 
inhabit the Arctic, that we have fished up from 
great depths in the Antarctic, Seas. The only way 
they could have got from the one pole to the other 
must have been through the tropics ; but the tem- 
perature of the sea in those regions is such that 
they could not exist in it, imless at a depth of nearly 
two thousand fathoms. At that depth they might 
pass from the Arctic to the Antarctic Ocean without 
a variation of five degrees of temperature ; whilst 
any land animal, at the most favourable season, 
must experience a difference of fifty degrees, and, 
if in the winter, no less than one hundred and fifty 
degrees, o&Fahrenheit's thermometer — a sufficient 
reason why there are neither quadrupeds, nor birds, 
nor land-insects common to both regions. 



CuAP.ym.] MOUNT MELBOUSNE. 211 

success. Observations at noon placed us in lat. i^i- 
74^ U\ long. 169 ^30', dip 87^ 54' S., var. 67^ 13', UTaT 
firom which we deduced the place of the magnetic 
pole to be distant two hundred and forty-nine miles. 
We had penetrated the pack as far as the ice ad- 
mitted to the westward by half-past eight in the 
evening, when we tacked and obtained observations 
by which we found we had approached so much 
nearer the Pole that the dip had increased to 88^ 10'. 
We tried for soundings with three hundred fathoms 
line, but it did not reach the bottom. Mount Mel- 
bourne and Mount Monteagle were here seen to 
great advantage ; the immense crater of the former, 
and the more pointed summit of the latter, rose high 
above the contiguous mountains ; and they form two 
of the more remarkable ^objects of this most won- 
derful and magnificent mass of volcanic land. 

Whilst struggling to get through the pack, we 
found it drifting, under the influence of the wind 
and current, rapidly to the northward, which seemed 
to encourage a hope, that, if defeated in our attempt 
to pass round its southern extremity, we might be 
able, at a later period of the season when more of 
the land-ice should have drifted away, to penetrate 
to the shore, and find some place wherein to secure 
the ships for the winter. For several days past we 
had seen very few whales, which was the more re- 
markable on account of the very great numbers we 
met with not more than sixty or seventy miles to 
the northward. There must be doubtless some 
cause for their absence from this spot, which 

p 3 



210 HEAVY PACK. [Chap. Vni. 

1841. The gale, which rather freshened during the night, 
Jan. 23. gradually veered more to the eastward ; we therefore 
wore round and stood towards the land on the port 
tack ; but, owing to the continuance of thick and 
snowy weather during the whole of Sunday, we did 
not get sight of it until 7 p. M., when it was indis- 
Jan. 24. tinctly seen ahead of the ship. At midnight we 
were in lat. 74"* 29' by observation. We carried all 
sail, and both wind and sea abating, we approached 
the land rapidly; the barometer which had been 
rising throughout the gale, reached the unusual 
Jan. 25. height of 29*33 at 4 A. m. the next morning ; the line 
of coast was at this time distinctly seen, but at a great 
distance : a heavy pack extended at least forty or 
fifty miles from the shore, into which we stood 
amongst the loose ice as far as we could without 
getting beset ; this I did not think proper to hazard, 
as it would assuredly have occasioned considerable 
loss of time without any equivalent advantage, and 
every hour at this period of the season was of 
much importance to us. I have no doubt that, 
had it been our object, we might have pene- 
trated it several miles further, for although 
heavy-looking ice, it was not very densely packed, 
nor any thing like the solid land-ice we had 
seen further to the northward, and we should 
certainly have made the attempt, had not the land 
imposed an insuperable barrier to our reaching the 
Pole, which we still hoped to accomplish by a more 
circuitous route ; and we were not then in a condi- 
tion to be content with any thing short of complete 



CuAP.Ym.] MOUNT MELBOUSNE. 211 

success. Observations at noon placed us in lat. i^i* 
74^ U\ long. 169 ^30', dip 87^ 54' S., var. 67^ 13', "jITaT 
from which we deduced the place of the magnetic 
pole to be distant two hundred and forty-nine miles. 
We had penetrated the pack as far as the ice ad- 
mitted to the westward by half-past eight in the 
evening, when we tacked and obtained observations 
by which we found we had approached so much 
nearer the Pole that the dip had increased to 88° 1(/. 
We tried for soundings with three hundred fathoms 
line, but it did not reach the bottom. Moimt Mel- 
bourne and Mount Monteagle were here seen to 
great advantage ; the immense crater of the former, 
and the more pointed summit of the latter, rose high 
above the contiguous mountains ; and they form two 
of the more remarkable ^objects of this most won- 
derful and magnificent mass of volcanic land. 

Whilst struggling to get through the pack, we 
found it drifting, under the influence of the wind 
and current, rapidly to the northward, which seemed 
to encourage a hope, that, if defeated in our attempt 
to pass round its southern extremity, we might be 
able, at a later period of the season when more of 
the land-ice should have drifted away, to penetrate 
to the shore, and find some place wherein to secure 
the ships for the winter. For several days past we 
had seen very few whales, which was the more re- 
markable on account of the very great numbers we 
met with not more than sixty or seventy miles to 
the northward. There must be doubtless some 
cause for their absence from this spot, which 

p 3 



212 AFFBOACH ICAQKETIC POLE. [CaAP.VIIL 

1841. perhaps future observation may supply; for it is 
desirable to know where they are not to be found 
as well as where they are, that valuable time may 
not be thrown away by those who go in pursuit 
of them. 
Jan. 26. On reaching the dear water, we found a short 
irregular sea, in which the ships pitched heavily 
under the easiest sail we could prevail on ourselves 
to carry, which seemed to indicate a change of tide 
to windward. As we pursued our way along the 
pack edge to the southward, we saw a great many 
of the beautiful snowy petrel, and some penguins. 
The temperature of the air varied only one degree 
during the twenty-four hours, from 25® to 26®, 
which was sufficiently low to freeze into ice the 
sprays that fell on board, the ship, and soon accu- 
mulated such a load about our bows as to keep the 
watch continually at work clearing it away, and 
beating it off the running ropes. At noon we had 
increased the dip to 88® 83^ so that the magnetic 
pole was now only one hundred and seventy-four 
miles from us in a W. by S. (true) bearing. Mount 
Melbourne bore W. by N. eighty miles. 

In the afternoon, as we got further from the 
pack, the uneasy irregular sea subsided, and the 
wind becoming more westerly enabled us to stand 
direct for the east extreme of the " land blink,*' 
which bore S. W. by S. (true) from us ; and at this 
time some strong indications of land appeared, 
which we all hoped would prove a " Cape Fl3raway,'* 
as many others had done before. As we increased 
our distance from the pack, the temperature of the 



Chap. Yin.] FRASKLDSf JSLAND. 213 

sea at its surfaoe gradually rose from 28"" to 31^ at i^^- 
about twelve miles off, although the air was at the 
time at 25®'5, 

Light baffling winds, which prevailed for two or j^^l 27. 
three hours, were succeeded by a moderate breeze 
from the eastward ; all sail that the ships could 
spread was immediately set ; and although the fog 
and rain came on so thick as to prevent our seeing 
more than half a mile before us, we continued to run 
with studding-sails on both sides set to the south- 
westward until nearly eight o'clock, when we were 
suddenly taken aback by the wind shifting to that 
quarter, and on the fog clearing away, we found 
that we had been steering into a deep bight of the 
main ice, which we now saw stretching across £rom 
the extreme point of the main land to an island 
bearing (true) south of us, and thus preventing 
our proceeding any further to the westward in this 
part ; after closely examining the pack, in which 
no opening was to be seen, we stood away to the 
southward to endeavour to land on the island. 

At noon we were in lat. 75® 48', S. long. 168® 
33' E., dip SS"* 24', variation SO'' 50' E. At 3 p. m. 
we sounded in 200 fathoms, on fine black sand 
and small black stones, about twelve miles north 
of the island. At five o'clock when we were 
within two or three miles of it, I left the ship, 
accompanied by several officers, and soon after- 
wards followed by Commander Crozier, and a party 
from the Terror, we pulled towards the shore. A 
high southerly swell broke so heavily against the 

p a 



214 LAKD ON FBANELIN ISLAND. [Chap.YIIL 

^^^' cliffs, and on the only piece of beach we could see as 
Jan. 27. we rowed from one end of the island to the other, as 
almost to forbid our landing ; a mortification not to 
be endured if possible to be avoided : the Terror's 
whale boat being more fit for encountering such a 
surf than the heavy cutter of the Erebus, I got into 
her, and by the great skill and management of the 
officers and crew I succeeded, by watching the op- 
portunity when the boat was on the crest of the 
breakers, in jumping on to the rocks. By means 
of a rope, some of the officers landed with more 
feu^ility, but not without getting thoroughly wetted ; 
and one having nearly lost his life in this difficult 
affiftir, I was obliged to forbid any more attempting 
to land, to their very great disappointment. The 
thermometer being at 22®, every part of the rocks 
which were washed by the waves .was covered with 
a coating of ice, so that in jumping from the boat, 
he slipped from them into the water, between her 
stem and the almost perpendicular rock on which 
we had landed, and but for the promptitude of 
those in the boat, in instantly pulling oflT, he must 
have been crushed between it and the rocks. It 
was most mercifully ordered otherwise, and he was 
taken into the boat witLout having sufiered any 
other injury than being benumbed with the cold. 
We proceeded at once therefore to take possession 
of the island in due form ; and to the great satis- 
faction of every individual in the expedition, I 
named it ^^ Franklin Island ;" in compliment to His 
Excellency Captain Sir John Franklin of the 



CBAP.Vm.] FRANEXIN ISLAKD. 215 

Royal Navy, to whom, and bis amiable lady, I ^^^' 
have already bad occasion to express the gratitude Jan. 27. 
we all felt for the great kindness we received at 
their hands, and the deep interest they manifested 
in all the objects of the expedition. Having pro- 
cured numerous specimens of the rocks of the 
island, we hastened our departure, in consequence 
of the perishing condition of our imlucky compa- 
nion, and succeeded in embarking without any 
further accident ; we gained the ships before nine 
o'clock, all of us thoroughly drenched to the skin, 
and painfully cold. 

Franklin Island is situate in lat. 76^ 8' S., long. 
IGS"" 12^ E. It is about twelve miles long and six 
broad, and is composed wholly of igneous rocks ; 
the northern side presents a line of dark precipitous 
cliffs, between five and six hundred feet high, ex- 
posing several longitudinal broad white, probably 
aluminous, bands of several feet thickness ; two or 
three of them were of a red ochre colour, and gave 
a most strange appearance to the cliffs. We could 
not perceive the smallest trace of vegetation, not 
even a lichen or piece of sea-weed growing on the 
rocks ; and I have no doubt from the total absence 
of it at both the places we have landed, that the 
vegetable kingdom has no representative in ant- 
arctic lands. We observed that the white petrel 
had its nests on the ledges of the cliffs, as had 
also the rapacious skua gull; several seals were 
seen, and it is by no means improbable that the 
beach on which we in vain attempted to land may, 

p 4 



216 MOUNT EREBUS DISCOVERED. [Chap.TUL 

^^^' at the proper season, be one of their places of 
Jan. 27. resort, or " rookeries^^ as they are termed by the 
seal fishers. 

At between two and three miles distance from 
the land, the soundings were regular, in thirty- 
eight to forty-one fathoms, on a bed of fine sand 
and black stones, and probably good anchorage 
might be found near the shore with southerly 
winds. A high cliff of ice projects into the sea from 
the south and south-west sides, rendering it there 
quite inacessible, and a dangerous reef of rocks 
extends firom its southern cape at least four or 
five miles, with apparently a deep water passage 
between them and the cape; several icebergs of 
moderate size were aground on the banks to the 
northward and westward of the island. At mid- 
night the bearings of eight separate islands are 
given in the log of the Erebus ; but as these after- 
wards proved to be the summits of mountains, at 
a great distance, belonging to the mainland, they 
do not appear upon the chart as islands. With 
a favourable breeze, and very clear weather, we 
stood to the southward, close to some land which 
had been in sight since the preceding noon, and 
which we then called the ^^ High Island ;'' it 
proved to be a mountain twelve thousand four 
hundred feet of elevation above the level of the 
sea, emitting flame and smoke in great profusion ; 
at first the smoke appeared like snow drift, but as 
we drew nearer, its true character became mani* 
fest. 



a ft, 

.%. J 



Chap.VIIL] moukt tebbob« 217 

The discovery of an active volcano in so high a ^^^* 
southern latitude cannot but be esteemed a circum- jan. 28. 
stance of high geological importance and interest, 
and contribute to throw some further light on the 
physical construction of our globe. I named it 
'* Mount Erebus," and an extinct volcano to the east- 
ward, littie inferior in height, being by measure- 
ment ten thousand nine hundred feet high, was 
called " Mount Terror." 

A small high round island, which had been in 
sight all the morning, was named ^^ Beaufort Island," 
in compliment to Captain Francis Beaufort, of the 
Royal Navy, Hydrographer to the Admiralty, who 
was not only mainly instrumental in promoting the 
sending forth our expedition, but afforded me much 
assistance, during its equipment, by his opinion 
and advice : and it is very gratifying to me to pay 
this tribute of respect and gratitude to him for 
the many acts of kindness and personal friendship 
I have received at his hands. At 4 p.m. we were 
in lat. 76^ 6' S., long. 168^ 11' E. The magnetic 
dip 88"* 27' S., and the variation 95"* 31 'E. : we 
were therefore considerably to the southward of 
the magnetic pole, without any appearance of being 
able to approach it on account of the land-ice, at a 
short distance to the west¥rard, uniting with the 
western point of the " High Island," which, how- 
ever, afterwards proved to be part of the main 
land, and of which Mount Erebus forms the most 
conspicuous object. As we approached the land 
under all studding-sails, we perceived a low white 



218 PARBT MOUNTAINS. [Chap. VIIL 

^^^' line extending fipom its eastern extreme point as 
Jan. 28. ^^ fts the eye could discern to the eastward. It 
presented an extraordinary appearance, gradually 
increasing in height, as we got nearer to it, and 
proving at length to be a perpendicular cliff of ice, 
between one hundred and fifty and two hundred 
feet above the level of the sea, perfectly flat and 
level at the top, and without any fissures or pro- 
montories on its even seaward face. What was 
beyond it we could not ima^ne ; for being much 
higher than our mast-head, we could not see any 
thing except the summit of a lofty range of moun- 
tains extending to the southward as far as the 
seventy-ninth degree of latitude. These moun- 
tains, being the southernmost land hitherto dis- 
covered, I felt great satisfaction in naming after 
Captain Sir William Edward Parry, R. N., in grate- 
ftd remembrance of the honour he conferred on 
me, by calling the northernmost known land on the 
globe by my name * ; and more especially for the 
encouragement, assistance, and friendship which he 
bestowed on me during the many years I had the 
honour and happiness to serve under his distin- 
guished command, on four successive voyages to 
the arctic seas ; and to which I mainly attribute the 
opportunity now afforded me of thus expressing 
how deeply I feel myself indebted to his assistance 
and example. Whether " Parry Mountains " again 
take an easterly trending, and form the base to 

• Parry's Polar Voyage, p. 121. 



CH4P.yilL] CAFB CBOZIEB. 219 

which this extraordinary mass of ice is attached, must i84i. 
be left for future navigators to determine. K there jta^^^s. 
be land to the southward, it must be very remote, or 
of much less elevation than any other part of the 
coast we have seen, or it would have appeared 
above the barrier. Meeting with such an obstruc- 
tion was a great disappointment to us all, for we 
had already, in expectation, passed far beyond the 
eightieth degree, and had even appointed a rendez- 
vous there, in case of the ships accidentally sepa- 
rating. It was, however, an obstruction of such a 
character as to leave no doubt upon my mind as to 
our future proceedings, for we might with equal 
chance of success try to si^l through the Cliffs of 
Dover, as penetrate such a mass. When within 
three or four miles of this most remarkable object, 
we altered our course to the eastward, for the pur- 
pose of determining its extent, and not without the 
hope that it might still lead us much further to the 
southward. The whole coast here from the western 
extreme point, now presented a similar vertical cliff 
of ice, about two or three hundred feet high. The 
eastern cape at the foot of Mount Terror was named 
after my friend and colleague Commander Francis 
Rawdon Moira Crozier, of the Terror, to whose zeal 
and cordial co-operation is mainly to be ascribed, 
under God's blessing, the happiness as well as suc- 
cess of the expedition : under the circumstances we 
were placed in, it is impossible for others fully to 
understand the value of having so tried a friend, 
of now more than twenty years' standing, as com- 



220 CAPB BIRD. [CAiP.Vm. 

1841. mander of the second ship, upon whom the har- 
Jan. 28. mony and right feeling between the two vessels so 
greatly depends. I considered myself equally for- 
tunate in having for the senior lieutenant of the 
Erebus, one whose worth was so well known to me, 
and who, as well as Commander Crozier, had ever 
shown so much firmness and prudence during the 
arduous voyages to the arctic regions, in which we 
sailed together as messmates, under the most suc- 
cessful arctic navigator; in compliment to him, I 
named the western promontory at the foot of 
Mount Erebus, ^^Cape Bird." These two points 
form the only conspicuous headlands of the coast, 
the bay between them being of inconsiderable depth. 
At 4 P. M. Mount Erebus was observed to emit smoke 
and flame in unusual quantities, producing a most 
grand spectacle. A volume of dense smoke was 
projected at each successive jet with great force, in 
a vertical column, to the height of between fifteen 
hundred and two thousand feet above the mouth 
of the crater, when condensing first at its upper 
part, it descended in mist or snow, and gradually 
dispersed, to be succeeded by another splendid 
exhibition of the same kind in about half an hour 
afterwards, although the intervals between the erup- 
tions were by no means regular. The diameter of 
the columns of smoke was between two and three 
hundred feet, as near as we could measure it; 
whenever the smoke cleared away, the bright red 
flame that filled the mouth of the crater was clearly 
perceptible ; and some of the officers believed they 



Chap. VIIL] QBEAT ICY BABRIEB. 221 

could see streams of lava pouring down its sides I84i. 
until lost beneath the snow which descended from jgn^28. 
a few hundred feet below the crater, and projected 
its perpendicular icy cliff several miles into the 
ocean. Mount Terror was much more free from 
snow, especiaUy on its eastern side, where were 
numerous little conical crater-like hillocks, each of 
which had probably been, at some period, an active 
volcano ; two very conspicuous hills of this kind 
were observed close to Cape Crozier. The land 
upon which Mount Erebus and Terror stand com- 
prised between Cape Crozier and Cape Bird, had the 
appearance of an island from our present position ; 
but the fixed ice, not admitting of our getting to 
the westward of Cape Bird, prevented our ascertain- 
ing whether it was so or not at this time. 

The day was remarkably fine ; and favoured by a 
fresh north-westerly breeze, we made good progress 
to the E. S. E., close along the lofty perpendicular 
cliffs of the icy barrier. It is impossible to con- 
ceive a more solid-looking mass of ice; not the 
smallest appearance of any rent or fissure could we 
discover throughout its whole extent, and the in- 
tensely bright sky beyond it but too plainly indi- 
cated the great distance to which it reached to the 
southward. Many small fragments lay at the foot 
of the cliffs, broken away by the force of the waves, 
which dashed their spray high up the face of them. 

Having sailed along this curious wall of ice in ^^' ^* 
perfectly clear water a distance of upwards of one 
hundred miles, by noon we found it still stretching 



222 GREAT ICr BARRIER. [Chap. VIIL 

^^^- to an indefinite extent in an E. S. E. direction. We 
Jan, 29. were at this time in lat. 77*" 47' S., long. 176** 43' E. 
The magnetic dip had diminished to 87" 22' S., and 
the variation amounted to 104** 25' E. The wind 
fell light shortly before noon, but we fortunately 
had time to increase our distance from the barrier 
before it fell calm ; for the northerly swell, though by 
no means of any great height, drifted us gradually 
towards it without our being able to make any 
efibrt to avoid the serious consequences that must 
have resulted had we been carried against it. We 
had gained a distance of twelve or fourteen miles 
from it, and as the Terror was getting short of water, 
I made the signal to Commander Crozier to collect 
some of the numerous fragments of the barrier that 
were about us; whilst in the Erebus we were 
engaged making observations on the depth and 
temperature of the sea. We sounded in four 
hundred and ten fathoms, the leads having sunk 
fully two feet into a soft green mud, of which a 
considerable quantity still adhered to them. The 
temperature of three hundred fathoms was 34*' 2', 
and at one hundred and fifty fathoms, 33*^ ; that of 
the surface being 31*^, and the air 28*.* So great 
a depth of water seemed to remove the supposition 
that had been suggested, of this great mass of ice 
being formed upon a ledge of rock, and to show 
that its outer edge at any rate could not be resting 
on the ground. 

* Current S. by £. twelve miles per diem. 



Ch4F. Vm.] GREAT ICY BARBIEB. 223 

We had closed it several miles during the calm, ^w*- 
but all our anxiety on that account was removed Jan. 29. 
on a breeze springing up from the south-east. I 
went on board the Terror for a short time, this after- 
noon, to consult with Commander Crozier, and com- 
pare our chronometers and barometers*, and on my 
return at half-past four, we made all sail on the star- 
board tack to the eastward; but not being able to 
fetch along the barrier, and the weather becoming 
thick with snow, we lost sight of it before nine o'clock 
in the evening. Several gigantic petrel were seen, 
and one that was badly wounded by Mr. Abemethy 
falling at too great a distance for us to send a boat 
after it, was immediately attacked by two others of 
the same kind, and torn to pieces. Many white 
petrel, stormy petrel, small penguins, and some of 
the Skua gull were also seen. The breeze freshened 
very much, and drew more round to the eastward. 
The barrier was occasionally seen between the fr^ 
quent snow-showers ; and as we made but slow 
progress along it, we could quite clearly determine 
its continuity. At midnight we had gained the lat. 
of 78"" S., in 1 80'' of E. long. At this time the wind 
was blowing fresh fr*om £. S. E., bringing a consi- 
derable swell along the £Etce of the barrier, to which 

* After an absence now of nearly three months from Van 
Diemen's Land, the chronometers of the two ships were found 
to differ onlj 4^' of time, equal to a mile of longitude, or in this 
latitude less than a quarter of a mile of distance ; a sufficient 
proof of the excellence of the instruments with which we were 
furnished : — the agreement of the barometers was perfect. 



224 GREAT ICT BABBIEB. [CnAP.Vin. 

1841. our ships pitched heavily, and greatly retarded our 
"""■"* progress ; but it was a gratifying evidence to us that 
there was still much clear water in that direction. 

Jan. 30. The wind and sea had increased so much that 
our dull-sailing ships could no longer gain any 
ground by beating to windward ; making two points 
of leeway, they could only sail again and again 
over the same space upon each successive tack. I 
thought it therefore advisable to make a long board 
under all sail to the north-east, so as to pass over 
as great an extent of unknown space as possible 
during the continuance of the adverse wind, and 
resume the examination of the barrier from the 
point we had last seen whenever the circumstances 
of wind and weather became favourable for doing 
so. The whole aspect of the sky indicated a very un- 
settled state of the atmosphere, whUst heavy clouds 
of snow drifting frequently over us obscured every 
thing from our sight, I therefore considered it de- 
sirable at any rate to get a greater distance from 
the barrier, in case of a change of wind making it 
a lee shore to us of the most dangerous character. 
The intervals of clear weather between the showers 
afforded us opportunities of seeing sufficiently far 
ahead to prevent our running into any very serious 
difficulty, so that we could venture to proceed with 
confidence. Several heavy pieces of ice were passed, 

/ f - evidently the fragments of the barrier or broken-up 
bergs, of which it was very remarkable we had not 
seen one during a run of one hundred and sixty 
miles along the barrier; from which, no doubt, 



Chap. Vm.] DISRUPTION OF ICEBERGS. 225 

some must occasionally break away. But a little is4i. 
reflection soon furnished an explanation: in summer """"""■" 
the temperature of the atmosphere and of the ocean 
seldom differ more than three or four degrees, the 
BIT being generally the colder, but never more than 
eight or ten degrees : it is therefore probably of rare 
occurrence that any great dbruption should occur 
at that season of the year, the whole mass being 
then of so uniform a temperature. But in the win- 
ter, when the air is probably forty or fifty degrees 
below zero, and t^e sea fit>m twenty-eight to thirty 
degrees above, the unequal expansion of those parts 
of the mass exposed to so great a difference of tem- 
perature could not fail to produce the separation of 
large portions. These, impelled by the prevailing 
southerly winds, drift to the north as soon as the 
winter breaks up, and are met with abundantly in 
the lower latitudes, where they rapidly melt away 
and break in pieces. We have often in the arctic 
regions witnessed the astonishing effects of a sudden 
change of temperature during the winter season, 
causing great rents and fissures of many miles ex- 
tent ; especially on the fresh-water lakes of those 
regions, where the ice being perfectly transparent, 
affords better means of observing the effects pro- 
duced : a fall of thirty or forty degrees of the ther- 
mometer immediately occasions large cracks, tra- 
versing the whole extent of the lake in every variety 
of direction, and attended with frequent, loud explo- 
sions ; some of the cracks opening in places several 
inches by the contraction of the upper surface in 

VOL. I. Q 



HBTBOBOLOOICAL ABSTRACT. [Cur. VUI. 



abbtbjLOT of the metxobolooioal jocbxal kspt oh BOASD 

BBB IUJBSTT'S SHIP EBEBT19> — JAJtUART, 1841> 



Pv- 


P««loa 


iNwin. 


Trap. 


™Bhlie. 


,...„» 


'SS 


■tatp.jt 


Lu. S. 


Loni, E. 


Mu. 


MID. 


Uun. 


-y 




66-32 


16S-4S 


31 


o 


28-9 


SB'S 


38 


. 




se-SB 


170-14 


sa 


26 


29-7 


39-1 


31 


3) 




65-39 


17U'48 


30-5 


!9-S 


30-0 


30-0 


31 


81 




ss-aa 


17a-40 


33 


30 


31-2 


30-6 


sa 


ai 




66-55 
flS-17 

68-31 
68-28 
69-lS 


174-31 

i7s-ai 

IJS-37 
176-31 
176-14 


32 

30-5 

3B 

41-5 

30-5 


89 
24-8 

24-5 
29-5 
38'8 


30-3 

28-2 
37-8 

34 -a 

29-6 


39-3 
38-7 

27-4 
29-8 
288 


at 

38 
30 


SB 
S4 
94 

33 


10 


70-a3 


174-48 


31 


38 


29-5 


98-8 


80 


SO 




71-15 
71-« 
78-07 


17219 


40-5 
30-5 


29-5 

29 

29 


32-4 
30-2 
29-2 


30-8 
30-0 
29-6 


31 
33 
30 


99 
S9 




71-81 


172-40 


30-8 


88-a 


39-6 


S9-6 


30 


30 




71-86 


171-51 


31 


28-8 


39-6 


as-s 


aa 


99 




7a-ia 


173-IS 


39'5 


27 


37-6 


aj-9 


as 


87 




72-09 


173-38 


31-5 


26-5 


38-9 


28-3 


89 


S9 




73-88 


176-06 


31 


28-8 


39-7 


28-6 


30 


85 




73-31 


173-39 


39-5 


ae-s 


SI 


8 


29-8 


30 


33 


90 


73-47 


171-80 


31 -S 


37-5 


38 


8 


39-4 


31 


89 


SS 

ss 

84 
SS 

as 


74-00 
73-58 

7«-a3 

7*35 
7444 
75-03 


1-0 43 

i7a-ao 

178-35 
i 73-01 
169-43 
169-04 


34-2 

38 

31 

29-5 
29 


38 

28-5 

37-8 

26-5 

25-5 

35 


39 
31 
39 
27 
87 
28 


9 

8 
6 
-6 

7 


27-7 
29-9 
29-7 

27-9 

29-3 


39 I 88 
38 33 
31 1 31 
38 1 • 
89 » 
97 1 38 


S7 


75-47 


168-59 


30 


24 


36 


3 


29-9 


36 1 33 


» 


76-S7 


169-as 


S3 


23 


37 


9 


29-9 


30 1 IS 


S9 


77-47 


176-43 


31 


23-6 


36 


4 


29-4 


30 


39 


30 

ai 


77-38 
77-06 


lei-ao 

189-04 


39 
36 


26 

lB-3 


87 
33 


8 

7 


30-4 
29-3 


39 

as 


24 








41-8 


19-8 


29-02 


39-18 







CoAP. Vm.] MBT£OBOLOOICAI. ABSTRACT. 



ABSTKACr OF THE UTXOBOLOanUI. JODBMAI. KIPT OS BOABD 
Hra MUXflTT'B BHIP XBXBOa. — JAXCABT, 1841. 







BuoOHUr 




Wlw). 






o«- 












W«lhB-. 


Hu. 


Kin. 


Haa. 


o,™«.. 


Fs« 


, 


29-079 


38-888 


39017 


W.N.W. 


3 


r^^-'lC 


s 


•057 


■4S3 


28747 


S.EMtTlj 


3 


tA.ll. 5 b,c 


3 


ae-Gsi 


■43a 


-4GS 


Wert 


4 


Cm... 


4 


a9-iei 


■563 


•886 




3 


{".SK 


5 


■180 




-999 


W.8.W. 




4b.c 


S 


28-9S2 


■789 




W.S,W. 


3 


5b.e.T. 


7 


29073 


-905 


■958 


Soolherly 


2 


Og. 


a 


■179 


39-OTS 


S9-134 


aaw. 




og- 


B 


■MS 


38-446 


ee-6G4 


E.K.E. 


S 


oq.4.. 


10 


■349 


-553 


'983 


EmMtIj 


Ip « 3} 


Oq.i. . 


11 


■38B 


29183 


39-386 


W.8.W. 


3 


?t.T. 


19 


■373 


-138 


-27a 


W.N.W. 


3 


Og.m. 


13 




!S'688 


38-890 


S,E. 


6 


Og.q.px, 


14 


33'990 


-699 


■850 


S.E. 


6 


r4.*.0g.q.i. 


IS 


asi4B 


29-003 


!9'094 


S. Ewterly 


4 


IS 


■las 


■010 


■068 


'■^ 


6 


("SUp.. 


17 


■167 


■030 


■103 


Sontli 


f"" 


;r. 


18 


■359 


■1S7 


■188 


SoDth 




4b.c 


19 


■310 


■154 


-2SS 


fi-M. a.aE. 

P.M. N.N, W. 


3 


Sb.c 


ao 


■133 


28-937 


■oos 


*.i«.N.N.E. 
P.-. 8.E. 


3 


Og.n.. 


31 


■09B 


■999 


-036 


E.aE. 


2 


1 b.ao.g. 




OBS 


39-041 


■063 


S.E. 




B bO-T. 


23 






88-987 


8.aE. 




g.q.i. 


24 


•339 


39-033 


39-164 


E-byS. 




q, 1. 


as 


■333 


■16S 


■301 


3 


5b.c. 


ae 


■14B 


-015 


-086 


Soathcrl; 


3 


Sb-c 


87 


■oao 


38-903 


38-950 


8.&W. 


S 


r A.M. 3 b.G,p.l. 

1 p.«.4b.t 


as 


38-959 


■841 


■873 


S.W.byW 




Sb-CT. 


39 


39-093 


•951 


39-049 


Euterly 


3 


r*.«.3Ec.g. 

tP.M. Og.pi. 










N.E. 




q,g.». 


— 


-006 


■911 


■943 


&.bf S. 


a 


3b.U 


39-386 


38 '433 


39-06I 




3-48 





■ Fm th* aspUiuttaa of tlxn cjinboli, im Appandi*. 



228 BANK DISCOVERED. [Chap. VIII. 

^^^^' contact with the extreme cold of the atmosphere. 
In those regions we have also witnessed the almost 
magical power of the sea in breaking up land- 
ice or extensive floes of from twenty to thirty feet 
thicky which have in a few minutes after the swell 
reached them, been broken up into small fragments 
by the power of the waves. 

But this extraordinary barrier of ice, of probably 
more than a thousand feet in thickness, crushes the 
undulations of the waves, and disregards their 
violence : it is a mighty and wonderful object, far 
beyond any thing we could have thought or con- 
ceived. 

Thick squally weather, with constant snow pre- 
vailing, we stood away to the E.N.E. all day, with- 
out meeting either land or ice until 8 p.m., when, 
the snow clearing ofl^, we could discover the strong 
iceblink of the barrier to the southward, and soon 
afterwards several icebergs were seen ahead of us : 
they were chiefly of the tabular form, perfectly 
flat on the top, precipitous in every part, and 
from 150 to 200 feet high: they had evidently at 
one time formed a part of the barrier, and I felt 
convinced, from finding them at this season so near 
the point of their formation, that they were 
resting on the ground. The lines were immedi- 
Jan.31. ately prepared, and when we got amongst them 
at 3 A. M. the next morning we hove to, and 
obtained soundings in two hundred and sixty 
fathoms, on a bottom of stifle green mud, leaving 
no doubt on our minds that all the bergs about us, 



CHAF.Vra.] MAGNETIC POINT. 229 

after having broken away from the barrier, had i84i. 
grounded on this curious bank, which being two "~^""^ 
hundred miles from Cape Grozier, the nearest 
known land, and about sixty from the edge of the 
barrier, was of itself a discovery of considerable 
interest. 

We continued our course to the eastward, 
sailing amongst many large bergs and much loose 
ice. Whales were again seen during the day, 
but in no great numbers ; white petrels were very 
numerous, and a king penguin of unusual size was 
seen on a piece of ice. At noon we were in lat. 
77** 6', long. 189^ 6'. The dip had diminished to 
86^ 23^; and although the compasses again began 
to act with more precision, we here observed an 
unaccountable decrease of variation from 96 E. to 
77 E., and then again an increase of sixteen de- 
grees. The observations were numerous and very 
satisfactory, so that I have no doubt we had passed 
one of those extraordinary magnetic points first 
observed during Sir Edward Pany*s second voy- 
age* to the Arctic Seas, near the eastern entrance 
of the Hecla and Fury Straits, but either of much 
less power or at a greater distance. These obser- 
vations should not be employed in determining the 
position of the magnetic pole, as they would tend 
to throw it very considerably to the southward of 
the truth. At 1 p.m. we sounded in three hundred 
fathoms; but here there were no bergs in sight 

• See p. 297. 
Q 3 



230 ENTER THE PACK. [Cmap. Vm. 

1941. even from the mast-head. A strong ice-blink to the 
eastward led us to expect to find the barrier in that 
direction, but it proved to be occasioned by a heavy 
loose pack, which we enteced at half-past four 
o'clock, and penetrated about twelve or thirteen 
miles, when it became too close for us to venture 
further. We were at this time in 192*^ east lon- 
gitude, when we tacked to get back into the open 
water ; this, however, we found more difficult, for 
the ice had closed so much since we entered the 
pack that it was not without receiving many severe 
blows, and losing some of our copper, as we bored 
through the heavier streams, that we regained a 
more open space. A boat was sent after a small 
seal that was seen asleep on the ice, and brought it 
on board; it was of the common kind, and very 
prettily marked with dark spots : its stomach was 
full of small red shrimps. Several whales were 
also seen at the edge of the pack : young ice was 
observed to be forming in every sheltered situ- 
ation under the lee of the larger pieces of ice, the 
temperature of the air being 1 9*^. The wind con- 
tinued too strong from the southward for us to 
make any way by beating to windward : we there- 
fore stood back to the westward during the night 
upon nearly the same line as we had sailed during 
the day, but in the opposite direction. 
Feb. 1. A calm of three hours' duration was followed 
at 9 A. M. by a gentle breeze from the north-west- 
ward, which again enabled us to stand towards the 
barrier. At noon, in lat. 77^ 5' S., long. 188** 27' E., 



Chaf.VIII.] farthest SOUTH. 231 

we obtained soundings in two hundred and fiffy i84i. 
fathoms, on soft green mud and small stones. We 
also found the temperature of the sea at that depth 
33^ 2\ and at one hundred and fifty fathoms 33^, 
the surface being 32° ; the current was setting to 
the northward at the rate of three quarters of a 
mile per hour, its strength being greater no doubt 
over the shallow bank than in the deeper water. 
In the evening, whUst running with all studding 
sails set, the wind suddenly shifted to the south- 
eastward, and the Terror being between two and 
three miles astern, we shortened sail to wait for her. 

During a snow shower of four or five hours* con- Feb. a. 
tinuance, and variable winds and squalls, we kept 
company by firing muskets every quarter of an 
hour, the ships not being more than an eighth of 
a nule from each other, but perfectly concealed 
by fog and snow. These cleared off at 5 A. m., 
but the whole morning was lost to us by alternate 
calms and light baffling winds. At noon, in lat. 
77** 46' S., long. 187** E., we got soundings with two 
hundred and eighty fathoms, greenish mud and 
clay. The top of the barrier at the time was dis- 
tinctly visible from the deck, just rising above the 
horizon. We now made all sail to a light breeze 
from the north-east directly towards it ; the loose 
ice became closer as we proceeded to the south- 
ward, and at a quarter past nine stopped our 
further progress. We were about ten or twelve 
miles from the barrier, but the whole of the 
intervening space was filled with packed heavy 

Q 4 



282 FARTHEST SOUTH. TCBiU*. VIU. 

^^^' ice; we therefore wore round, hove to, and 
sounded in two hundred and sixty fathoms. I 
made the signal for Captain Crozier to come on 
board, who concurring in opinion with me of the 
utter impracticability of penetrating the dense pack 
between us and the barrier, I determined to devote 
a few more days to tracing its extent to the east- 
>vBrd ; for although we could not hope to be able to 
get much further to the southward so late in the 
season, yet we knew the land-ice must still be 
clearing away from the shores at the most probable 
place of our being able to approach most nearly to 
the magnetic pole. Our dead reckoning since noon 
placed us in latitude 78*" 3', the Terror's 78** 5'; we 
therefore assumed 78^ 4^ as the true latitude, which 
proved to be the highest attained this season; 
the face of the barrier at this part was therefore in 
78^^ S. ; it was about one hundred and sixty feet 
high, and extended as far to the east and west as the 
eye could discern, continuing in one unbroken line 
from Cape Crozier, a distance of two hundred and 
fifty miles. 

At 10 p. M. we made sail to the northwest, 
to get clear of the pack, and by midnight were 
again in open water. I obtained an observation 
of the sun at 28 minutes after midnight, which 
gave the latitude 77** 56' S., agreeing with the 
reckoning of the preceding and subsequent noon in 
placing our point of furthest south in latitude 
78** 4' ; at the same time an observation was made 
in the Terror, which, also, when reduced back to 



CukP. Vm.] FARTHEST SOUTH. 233 

our position at 9*15 P. M., agreed exactly with the ^^^' 
former determination. 

With a moderate breeze from the north-eastward, Feb. s. 
we stood to the N. N. W. to gain an offing, as we 
were prevented by the pack making any way to 
the eastward, and the barometer falling gradually 
seemed to indicate the approach of unfavourable 
weather. But the wind veering to the south- 
east in the afternoon, and late in the evening to 
south, the weather, contrary to our expectations, 
continued clear, and the breeze freshening we 
made way to the eastward, having got to the 
northward of the pack, and having the barrier still 
in sight to the southward. We passed through 
several streams of loose ice, and saw a great many 
whales of small size ; several of them marked with 
large white patches. In the evening a cask was 
put overboard in lat. 77*^ S. and long. 187** 
24' K, containing a brief account of our proceed- 
ings, and with a request that whoever might 
find it would forward the paper to the Secretary 
of the Admiralty. It was my practice to throw a 
bottle over almost every day containing a paper 
with our latitude and lon^tude marked on it, for 
the purpose of gaining information respecting the 
joint eflfects of the prevailing ^nnds and currents 
in these parts; but amongst ice, and in so tur- 
bulent an ocean, I fear but few of them will ever 
be found to subserve the intended purpose. 

The next day we had a strong breeze from the Feb. 4. 
southward, and pushed our way through loose ice 



234 THE GREAT PENGUINS. [CaAF.Vm* 

^^^* and amongst numerous bergs to the eastward ; at 
noon we were in lat. IT" S., and long. 192*^ 15' E., 
when the ice appearing more open, with smooth 
water, we began to beat up to the southward to 
endeavour to close the barrier: many seals and 
penguins were seen on the ice. At 8 P. m. we had 
reached lat. 77** 18' and long. 193**, where we found 
the ice so close in every direction that we were 
unable to proceed any further, and were obliged to 
dodge about in a hole of water two or three miles 
in diameter to wait for a favourable change. We 
obtained soundings in two hundred and seventy 
fathoms, muddy bottom, at four o'clock the next 
Feb. 5. morning. The ice was so closely packed to the 
eastward and southward that we could make no 
way in either direction, so we continued beating 
about in the small hole of water in which we were 
shut up by the closing of the ice. We saw several 
of the large penguins, and three were brought on 
board : they were very powerful birds, and we had 
some difficulty in killing them : each of the two 
larger weighed sixty-six pounds, and the smallest 
fifty-seven pounds: their flesh is very dark, and 
of a rank fishy flavour. In the evening we made 
fast with warps to a heavy floe piece^ and employed 
all hands in collecting ice to replenish our water, 
which was now getting rather short. Two seals 
were also captured to furnish us with oil for the 
winter. We cast ofl^ again at 10 P. m., having taken 
on board a sufficient quantity of ice, and stood out 
through a narrow opening we had watched forming 



Chap.viil] globe TH£ babbixr. 235 

to the westward. We passed through much closely iwi. 
packed ice to gain the dear water, which was seen 
from the mast-head early in the morning, and which Feb. 6. 
we succeeded in accomplishing by noon, in lat. 
TT'^l'S., long. 188^ 26' E. ; the remainder of the 
day was spent in beating to the south-west to get 
away from the pack edge, on which the wind was 
blowing, and threatening to drive us down upon 
it. 

It moderated during the next morning, and Feb. 7. 
the wind getting to the westward enabled us to 
steer a more southerly course amongst loose ice, 
passing only a few bergs, and occasionally through 
a sheet of newly-formed ice : it fell calm at mid- 
night, and continued so for several hours. 

At 1 A. M. sounded in two hundred and eighty- Feb. 8. 
eight fathoms, muddy bottom. We passed a berg 
which had a large rock upon it. At 8 A. H. a 
steady breeze sprung up from the northward, 
when we made all sail before it, nmning along 
the pack edge in clear water: at noon we were 
in lat. IT" 39', and long. 187^ 5' E. After pass- 
ing through several streams of young ice the 
barrier was seen right ahead of us at 5 p. m. The 
main pack now trending more to the south-eastward, 
we hauled up along its edge, to run between it 
and the barrier, the whole of the surface of the sea 
being covered with ^^ pancake " ice. At midnight, 
when about seven miles from the barrier, we ob- 
tained soundings in two hundred and seventy-five 
fathoms. 



236 CLOSE THE BARRIEB. [Chap.VIIL 

1841. The low temperature of the air aod the smoothness 
Feb. 9. of the water combined to favour the rapid forma- 
tion of young ice, which greatly retarded us, and 
rendered the attainment of our purpose of more 
than ordinary difficulty ; although the heavy pack 
to the north of us was fast closing the barrier, it 
was still fourteen or fifteen miles distant, and 
favoured with a commanding breeze, we stood on 
between the pack and barrier towards a remarkable 
looking bay, the only indentation we had perceived 
throughout its whole extent ; and as clear water 
was observed even to the foot of the barrier, I 
could not permit myself to relinquish so favourable 
an opportunity of getting quite close to it, although 
I must confess the hazard was greater than a due 
degree of prudence would have ventured to en- 
counter. At 5 40 A. M., being within a quarter of 
a mile of its Icy Cliffs, we tacked and sounded in 
three hundred and thirty fathoms, green muddy 
bottom. We had now a better opportunity of mea- 
suring the elevation of this perpendicular barrier, 
which, far overtopping our mast-heads, of course 
limited our view to the cliffs themselves, and these 
we considered to be much lower than at other 
points of it which we had previously approached : 
our angles gave them an elevation of one hundred 
and fifty feet. The bay we had entered was formed 
by a projecting peninsula of ice, terminated by a 
cape one hundred and seventy feet high ; but at 
the narrow isthmus which connected it to the 
great barrier it was not more than fifty feet high, 



CuAF. Vm.] CLOSE THE BARRIER. 237 

affording us the only opportunity we had of i84i. 
seeing its upper surface fix)m our mast-heads: """""""^ 
it appeared to be quite smooth, and conveyed to 
the mind the idea of an immense plain of frosted 
silver. Gigantic icicles depended from every pro- 
jecting point of its perpendicular cliffi^ proving 
that it sometimes thaws, which otherwise we could 
not have believed ; for at a season of the year equi- 
valent to August in England we had the ther- 
mometer at 12^9 and at noon not rising above 14^; 
this severity of temperature is remarkable also when 
compared with our former experience in the northern 
seas, where from every iceberg you meet with, 
streams of water are constantly pouring off during 
the summer. 

Young ice formed so quickly in this sheltered 
position, and the whole space between the barrier 
and the main pack which was driving down upon 
us being occupied by pancake ice, we found our- 
selves in a situation of much difficulty, the ice 
becoming so thick from being pressed fold over 
fold, as to render it for some hours a question of 
doubt whether we should be able to force our way 
through it to the open water which we could 
not at this time see from the mast-head; but 
fortunately for us the breeze maintained suffi- 
cient strength to enable us, with the assistance of 
great exertions of the crews in breaking up the ice 
before the ships, to regain a clearer space ; and then, 
when we required its aid no longer, the wind came 
directly against us from the westward, so that had 
we lingered longer near the barrier, or had the 



238 EXAMINATION OF THE PACK. [Gmap. Vm. 

^^^' wind shifted half an hour sooner, we should cer- 
tainly have been frozen up in a most dangerous 
situation between the barrier and the pack ; and 
had we eventually escaped without more serious 
consequences, we should at any rate have lost 
some of the few remaining days of the navigable 
season. A thick fog which prevailed for several 
hours added to the embarrassment of our situation, 
and rendered it the more difficult to keep the ships 
together, by obliging us to carry more moderate 
sail whilst amongst so much heavy ice and so many 
bergs. 

At noon we were in lat. 77*" 56' S., long. 190* 15' 
E. At 4 p. M. the fog cleared away, and we 
were again enabled to press all sail on the ships, 
running to the westward close along the edge of 
the main pack; the wind freshening from the 
northward drove it quickly down upon the 
barrier; and soon the channel by which we had 
escaped was filled by heavy ice closely pressed 
together, so that not the smallest hole of water 
could be seen amongst it. I was most anxious to 
examine as great an extent of the barrier to the 
eastward as possible, in order to leave less to be 
accomplished the following year; but the season 
was now fast drawing to a close, and the present 
state of the pack rendered any attempt to penetrate 
it quite hopeless. I determined, however, to devote 
two or three days to seeking a passage through it 
further to the northward, and accordingly the 
whole of the tenth and eleventh was passed 
examining the pack edge, but without our being 



CHAF.Vm.] EXAMINATION OF THE PACK. 239 

able to get so far to the eastward as we had ^^*^* 
been on the fourth and fifth by seventy or eighty peb-ii. 
miles. 

At noon we were in lat. 76*" 1 1'S., long. IST^'SS'E., 
and were very much hampered by the newly 
formed ice, which was so thick, and extended so 
far from the main pack, as to render our efforts to 
examine it quite fruitless, and the fatigue and 
labour excessive. We continued, however, to coast 
along its western edge seeking for an opening; 
but the severe cold of the last few days had com- 
pletely cemented it together, and the thick cover- 
ing of snow that had fallen had united it, to 
appearance, into a solid unbroken mass : although 
we knew quite well that it consisted entirely of 
loose pieces, through which only a few days before 
we had sailed upwards of fifty miles, yet we 
could find no part of it now in which we could 
have forced the ships their own length. 

We had further evidence of the approach of 
winter in the very great thickness of young ice 
we had to pass through as we ran along the 
pack edge, in many places between three and four 
inches thick, and entirely covering the sur&ce of 
the sea for many miles around us : had we not 
been favoured with a strong breeze of very pre- 
carious duration, which enabled us to force our 
ships through it, we should certainly have been 
frozen in ; and I could not but feel that the ob- 
ject we were pursuing was by no means of suffi- 
cient importance to justify the hazard of thus 



240 CHAIN OF BEBGS. [Ciup. Vm. 

^^^' sacrificing the accomplishment of far more im- 
portant purposes. 

In the afternoon, whilst running before this 
favouring breeze, the main pack was reported in 
every direction of us except directly to windward ; 
and we soon found that during the thick weather we 
had run down into a deep bight of it. The ships 
were instantly hauled to the wind, and it was 
with the greatest difficulty they were extricated 
from their dangerous situation before the wind 
increased to a violent gale that reduced us before 
midnight to a close-reefed main-topsail and storm 
stay-sails, under which we barely weathered a 
great number of very large bergs clustered together 
under our lee, and most probably aground; but 
we could not venture to try for soundings, being 
uncertain whether we might not be driven down 
amongst them: it was no doubt this chain of 
bergs that had arrested the main pack in its north- 
erly course and spread it out so far to the west- 
ward. One of the bergs was nearly four miles long, 
though not more than one hundred and fifty feet 
high. For some hours we were in a state of con- 
siderable anxiety, not knowing how far to the 
westward the chain of bergs might extend, the 
thick falling snow preventing our seeing to any 
distance before us ; the waves, as they broke over 
the ships, froze as they fell on the decks and rig- 
ging, and covered our clothes with a thick coating 
of ice, so that our people suffered severely during 
the continuance of the gale. Wc passed many- 



Chap. Vni] STEBR FOR THE MAGNETIC POLE. 241 

bergs and loose pieces of ice during tbe early part i84i. 
of the next day, and were frequently obliged to Yeh. is. 
bear away to clear them. In the afternoon the 
storm began to abate, and on the weather clearing 
up for a short time, we found ourselves in a more 
open space. 

I now became convinced of the necessity of at 
once relinquishing any attempt to penetrate to the 
eastward, and of deferring the further examination 
of the barrier to the following season ; and the 
wind having shifted to the eastward, we bore away 
before it for the purpose of making another attempt 
to reach the magnetic pole, and of seeking a harbour 
in its vicinity in which we might pass the winter. 

Thick fog and constant snow, which prevailed 
during the remainder of this and greater part of 
the following day, obliged us to run imder mode- 
rate sail, to prevent the ships separating, and to be 
in readiness to avoid any danger that might sud- 
denly arise ; we, however, were in a perfectly clear Feb. 14 
sea, not a single piece of ice to be seen during the 
whole time, and the temperature of the air had risen 
to the freezing point. 

At noon we were in lat. 76'' 22' S., long. ITS'" 16' 
E. ; the dip had again increased to 87^ as we ap-» 
preached the pole, now distant from us about three 
hundred and sixty miles, and the variation being 
91**, showed us we were very nearly in its latitude : 
we continued, therefore, to steer direct south by 
compass. The mildness of the day, notwithstand* 
ing the constant snow, was much enjoyed by us, 

VOL. I. R 



242 THE WARM AIB STOVE. [Cbaf. Vm. 

1841. as it allowed us to open the hatches, which had 
" been closely battened down during the late gale 

of three days' continuance. The condensation of 
vapour between decks had been so great as to run 
down the ship's sides in small streams. I therefore 
directed the warm-air stove to be put into opera- 
tion, which speedily and effectually removed every 
appearance of damp, driving the vapours up the 
hatchways, and circulating in its place a dry, pure 
air. The admirable performai]^ce of this most in- 
valuable invention of Mr. Sylvester cannot be men- 
tioned in adequate terms of praise. 

Towards evening the swell had greatly subsided, 
but there was still a strong wind blowing, and the 
snow falling so thick, that we could seldom see a 
mile before us : running down upon a lee shore under 
such circumstances was a measure of some anxiety, 
but the barometer was rising fast from its very low 
state, and promised an improvement of the weather. 

We were still a hundred mUes from Franklin 
Island, for which we were steering, and I was un- 
willing to lose the advantage of the favourable 
breeze, even at some degree of hazard ; for I felt 
we had but a few days to do much that we still 
hoped to accomplish. 

On the 27th of January we had not been able to 
approach the pole nearer than about eighty leagues, 
but during the time we had spent in examining the 
barrier, a period of nearly three weeks, we could 
not but hope that so much more of the land ice 
would have broken away as to admit of our getting 



Chap. VIIL] COLOURED ICE. 248, 

very close to, perhaps even complete the attauiment ^^^^ 
of the pole. 

The wind veered to the southward, and the snow 
ceased ; several pieces of ice with rock on them 
were passed, and at 11 a. m. Franklin Island was Feb. 15. 
seen at a distance of seven leagues ahead of us. 
We ran to leeward of it at 3 P. M., and when five 
miles N. N. W. from it we sounded in fifty fathoms, 
rocky bottom. Some streams of ice appearing soon 
afterwards, we hauled more to the southward to 
avoid them ; and as we closed the main land we 
got in amongst a great quantity of brash ice of a 
brownish yellow colour ; some of it was collected 
and placed under a powerftd microscope, but we 
were unable to ascertain the true nature of the 
colouring matter*; by most of us it was believed to 
be the fine ashes from Mount Erebus, not more 
than eighty miles south of us. 

At 11 P. M., being nearly calm, we sounded in 
three hundred and eighty fathoms, greenish-co* 
loured mud and clay : Beaufort Island at the time 
bearing true south. 

The wind was so light and variable, and the 
sludge and pancake ice so thick, we could scarcely 
get the ships through it. Mount Erebus was seen 
at 2 30 A. M., aod the weather becoming very dear, Feb. 16. 
we had a splendid view of the whole line of coast, 
to all appearance connecting it with the main land, 
which we had not before suspected to be the case. 

* See M. Ehrenberg's account of the minate fonns of oi^nic 
life of which this substance is composedy in the Appendix. 

s 2 



244 ERUPTIONS OF MOUNT EBEBUS. [Chaf-VIIL 

1841. A very deep bight was observed to extend far to the 
"*"■"""■"" south-west fix)in Cape Bird, in which a line of low 
land might be seen ; but its determination was too 
uncertain to be left unexplored ; and as the wind, 
blowing feebly from the west, prevented our making 
any way in that direction through the young ice that 
now covered the surface of the ocean in every part, 
as far as we could see from the mast-head, I deter- 
mined to steer towards the bight, to give it a closer 
examination, and to learn with more certainty its 
continuity or otherwise. At noon we were in lat. 
76*^ 32' S., long. 166^ 12' E., dip 88^ 24', and varia- 
tion 107^ 18' E. 

During the afternoon we were nearly becalmed, 
and witnessed some magnificent eruptions of Mount 
Erebus, the flame and smoke being projected to a 
great height; but we could not, as on a former 
occasion, discover any lava issuing from the crater ; 
although the exhibitions of to-day were upon a 
much grander scale. 

A great number of whales of two different kinds 
were seen, the larger kind having an extremely long, 
erect back-fin, whilst that of the smaller species 
was scarcely discernible. The Skua guU, white 
petrel, penguins, and seals were also about us in 
considerable numbers. 
heh. 17. At 10 p. M. we sounded in three hundred and 
sixty fathoms, green mud. Soon after midnight a 
breeze sprang up from the eastward, and we made 
all sail to the southward until 4 A. M., although 
we had an hour before distinctly traced the land 
entirely round the bay connecting Mount Erebus 



Chap. YIIL] SOUTH MAGNETIC POLE. 245 

with the main land. I named it M^Murdo Bay, i84i. 
after the senior Lieutenant of the Terror, a compli* 
ment that his zeal and skill well merited. The 
wind having shifted to the southward enabled us to 
resume our endeavours to approach the magnetic 
pole, and we accordingly stood away to the north- 
west, sailing through quantities of tough newly 
formed ice perfectly covered with the colouring 
matter I have before noticed. When the melted 
ice was filtered through bibulous paper, it left a 
very thin sediment, which on being dried became 
an impalpable powder, seeming to confirm our 
belief of its volcanic origin. 

At 2 P.M. we had penetrated the pack so far as to 
have got within ten or twelve miles of the low coast 
line, when our further progress was stopped by 
heavy closely packed ice. To the north-westward 
we observed a low point of land with a small islet 
off it, which we hoped might afford us a place of 
refuge during the winter, and accordingly endea- 
voured to struggle through the ice towards it, 
until 4 P.M., when the utter hopelessness of being 
able to approach it was manifest to all ; the space 
of fifteen or sixteen miles between it and the ships 
being now filled by a solid mass of land ice. We 
therefore wore round and hove to for Commander 
Crozier to come on board ; and as he quite concurred 
with me in thinking it impossible to get any nearer 
to the pole, I determined at once to relinquish the 
attempt, as we could not hope at so late a period of 

the season that any more of the land ice would break 

»8- 



246 SOUTH MAGNSnC POLE. [Chap. Vm. 

1841. away. The cape with the islet off it was named 
after Professor Grauss, the great mathematician of 
Grottingen, who has done more than any other phi- 
losopher of the present day to advance the science 
of terrestrial magnetism. 

We were at this time in latitude 76® 12' S., lon- 
gitude 164® E. ; the magnetic dip 88® 40', and the 
variation 109® 24' E. We were therefore only one 
hundred and sixty miles from the pole.* 

Had it been possible to have found a place of 
security upon any part of this coast where we 
might have wintered, in sight of the brilliant burn- 
ing mountain, and at so short a distance from the 
magnetic pole, both of those interesting spots might 
easily have been reached by travelling parties in 
the following spring ; but all our efforts to effect 
that object proved quite unsuccessful; and al- 
though our hopes of complete attainment were not 
realised, yet it was some satbfaction to know that 
we had approached the pole some hundreds of miles 
nearer than any of our predecessors ; and from the 
multitude of observations that were made in so 
many different directions from it, its position may 
be determined with nearly as much accuracy as if 
we had actually reached the spot itself. 

It was nevertheless painfully vexatious to behold 

* Professor Barlow's formula, tan 9=2 tan x, has been em- 
ployed in this deduction ; but as all the magnetic obserrations 
made on board both our ships are published in the second part 
of the Philosophical Transactions of the Rojal Society for 1848^ 
those who desire to use any other mode of computing the place 
of the pole will there find ample materials. 



Chaf.VIIL] VICTORIA LAND. 247 

at an easily accessible distance under other circnm- i84i. 
stances the range of mountains in which the pole ^ 

is placed, and to feel how nearly that chief object 
of our undertaking had been accomplished : and 
but few can understand the deep feelings of regret 
with which I felt myseif compelled to abandon 
the perhaps too ambitious hope I had so long 
cherished of being permitted to phmt the flag 
of my country on both the magnetic poles* of our 
globe ; but the obstacles which presented themselves 
being of so insurmountable a character was some 
degree of consolation, as it left us no grounds for 
self-reproach, and as we bowed in humble acqui- 
escence to the will of Him who had so defined the 
boundary of our researches, with grateful hearts we 
offered up our thanksgivings for the large measure 
of success which he had permitted to reward our 
exertions. Some amongst us even still indulged 
a feeble hope, that to the westward of the Admiralty 
Mountains, which we knew trended so suddenly to 
the westward, we might find the coast there turn 
to the. southward, and by following it we might 
yet approach the pole more nearly ; but we could 
not conceal fix)m ourselves that from the late period 
of the season and the early setting in of the winter, 
we were in this case hoping against hope. 

The range of mountains in the extreme west, 
which, if they be of an equal elevation with Mount 
Erebus, were not less than fifty leagues distant^ 

* For some remarks relating to the diBOOverj of the north 

magnetic pole. Bee the Appendix to the aeoond Tolome. 

» 4 



248 SAILING THBOUGU TOUKG ICE. [Chap. YIU. 

1841. and therefore undoubtedly the seat of the southern 

"~""""^ magnetic pole, was distinguished by the name of 

His Royal Highness Prince Albert, who had been 

graciously pleased to express a warm interest in 

the success of our expedition. 

The whole of the great southern land we had 
discovered, and whose continuity we had traced 
from the seventieth to the seventy-ninth degree of 
latitude, received the name of our Most Gracious 
Sovereign Queen Victoria, as being the earliest and 
most remote southern discovery since Her Majesty's 
accession to the throne. 

As soon as we had completed all the necessaiy 
observations at this interesting spot, we commenced 
the laborious work of retracing our way through 
the pack to the eastward ; but the young ice had so 
greatly increased in thickness, that this was a mea- 
sure of great difficulty, and for a long time we had 
great doubts whether it would not prove too strong 
for us, and that in spite of our utmost exertions 
we might be frozen fast ; for when we got clear of 
the heavy pack, the whole surface of the sea pre- 
sented to our view one continuous sheet of ice, 
through which, when the breeze freshened up, we 
made some way, but were sometimes more than an 
hour getting a few yards ; the boats were lowered 
down, and hauled out upon each bow, and breaking 
up the young ice by rolling them, we found the 
most effectual means; for although it was suffi- 
ciently strong to prevent our ships sailing through 
it, yet it was not strong enough to bear the weight 



Cbaf.VIIL] doubtful ISLAND. 249 

of a party of men to cut a passage with saws. The i84i. 
whole night was passed in this fiEttigaing work, and 
it was not until ten o'clock the next morning that 
we regained the clear water, and were enabled to 
bear away to the northward. 

Notwithstanding my anxious wish to keep dose 
along the shore, that we might complete the exa« 
mination of that portion of the land which we had 
but imperfectly seen on our way to the southward, 
yet we were obliged to stand off so fieur to the east- 
ward to prevent gettbg entangled in the ice, and 
the weather not proving favourable for our pur- 
pose, we found it impossible to distinguish the 
coast line between Cape Gauss and a fine headland 
to the south of Mount Melbourne, which I called 
Cape Washington after my friend and brother 
officer of that name, for several years the able 
Secretary of the Royal Geographical Society, and 
a zealous promoter of geographical research. The 
continuity of the land and its leading features were 
however clearly ascertained : it is of less elevation 
than any other part of Victoria Land, and the 
mountainous ridges appeared to recede much farther 
from the coast. An island or a large berg with 
much earth and rocks upon it, which was passed in 
the afternoon, is marked on the chart ^^ Doubtful 
Island/' as it was quite impossible to know which 
it really was. Several stars were observed about 
midnight, the first we had seen since entering 
the pack, and warning us of the approach of the 
winter. 



26Q BEAR AWAY TO THE NOBTHWARD. [CniF. VIIL 

1841. Mount Erebus was in sight until 3 30 a.m. at 
Feb. 19. A distance of fifty leagues, and would probably 
have been seen at a greater distance had not some 
clouds passed over it at that time. 

At noon we were in lat. 75*" 3' S. long., 168''40'E., 
Cape Washington and Mount Melbourne bearing 
(true) N. W. by W. In the afternoon we got much 
closer to the shore, and observed a deep bay formed 
between Cape Washington and another fine bold 
cape, which I named Cape Johnson, after Captain 
Edward John Johnson of the Royal Navy. The 
bay between Cape Johnson and Cape Washington 
was called Wood's Bay, aft;er the third lieutenant 
of the Erebus, whilst the north extreme cape re- 
ceived that of the second lieutenant, now Com- 
mander John Sibbald. Late in the evening we 
observed the land ice extending from Cape Sibbald 
to the north extreme of Coulman Island, which 
obliged us to stand out to the north-east to dear 
it ; at the same time some islets were seen that had 
not before been noticed, to which I applied the 
name of Lieutenant Eay, director of the Rossbank 
observatory at Van Diemen's Land, and third lieu- 
tenant of the Terror. 
Feb. 20. Soon after midnight the breeze freshened to a 
gale. As we stood out of the bight to the east- 
ward, we passed through a great quantity of newly 
formed ice, and amongst heavy pieces of pack ice ; 
and it was not until 9 a.m. we got clear of it, when 
having rounded Cape Anne, at a few miles' dis- 
tance, we again bore away before the gale under 



Chap. Vm.] CAFE AHASB. 251 

close-reefed topsails and reefed foresail. At noon i^^- 
we were in lat. 73"* 1(K S., and long. 171^ 26' E., 
and nearly abreast of a high cape, the projecting 
base of Mount Lubbock, which I named Cape Jones, 
after my friend Captain William Jones of the 
Royal Navy. Cape Phillips, at the foot of Mount 
Brewster, was named after Lieutenant Charles Ger- 
rans Phillips ; and I had much satisfaction in now 
bestowing the names of the other officers of the 
expedition, by whose exertions these discoveries 
were made, upon the several capes and inlets we 
passed in our run close along the land to the north- 
wardi Much haze in the afternoon concealed the 
tops of the mountains, but the line of coast, with 
whose features we had become so familiar whilst 
contending against the southern gales we expe« 
rienced in January, was very plainly in sight. 
Tucker Inlet was named after the master of the 
Erebus, as was Cape Cotter after that officer of the 
Terror ; Cape Hallett after the purser of the Ere- 
bus, and Moubray Bay after the clerk in charge of 
the Terror; Cape M^Cormick, abreast of Posses- 
sion Island, after the surgeon of the Erebus, and 
Robertson Bay, between Cape Adare and Cape 
Wood, after Dr. Robertson of the Terror. 

I was desirous of making another attempt to 
land on the coast near Cape Adare, and with that 
object in view we stood towards the cape early 
the next morning, passing through many streuns Feb. «. 
of loose ice, until we at length came to a solid pack 
extending eight or nine miles from the ehorei and 



252 EXAMINE NOBTH COAST. [CnAP. VIII. 

1841. 80 cemtoted together by the late severe frosts as 
*""""""" to defy every attempt to penetrate it. We there- 
fore steered to the north-west, keeping as close to 
the shore as the pack and heavy streams that lay off 
it would permit. Smith Inlet, Cape Oakeley, and 
Cape Dayman, were named after the three mates of 
the Erebus : Cape Scott and Cape Moore after those 
of the Terror : Cape Davis and Yule Bay after the 
second masters ; and Cape Hooker and Lyall Islets 
after the assistant surgeons. Beyond Cape Davis 
the northern extreme of land appeared; it was 
called Cape North. A low point, with three pro- 
jecting knobs like the tops of mountains, was ob- 
served at a great distance beyond Cape North, 
whence the land trends considerably to the south- 
ward of west ; but a dense body of ice interposed 
between us, and prevented our following the coast 
any further; and as the night was getting very 
dark, and we were surrounded by numerous ice- 
bergs, at 9 P.M. we hauled off to the eastward on 
the starboard tack, to wait for daylight, to renew 
our operations : hopeless as they at that time ap- 
peared to be, they were not the less necessary. 
Feb. 23. Early next morning we wore round and stood 
towards the land, in order to examine more 
narrowly whether any way might be made along 
the coast to the westward between it and the 
pack. I was also very anxious to find a place 
of security for the ships, where observations on 
the approaching term-day might be made, and 
in which we might pass the winter in safety, for 



CHiip.yilL] SMITH INLET AND TITLE BAT. 23& 

although winteriDg in so low a latitude could be of ^^^* 
no advantage to our next season's work, yet the 
meteorological, magnetical, and other observalions 
in such a situation could not fail to afford much 
valuable and interesting information. But here, as 
on the eastern coast of Victoria Land, as &r as we 
had traced it, we found the indentations of the 
coast completely filled with solid ice of many hun- 
dred feet in thickness. Smith Inlet and Yule Bay 
appeared two more promising places until we got 
close to them, when we found them equally im- 
practicable as all the other places we had examined. 
The line of coast here presented perpendicular icy 
cliffs varying from two to five hundred feet high, 
and a chain of grounded bergs extended some 
miles from the cliffs: they were all of the tabular 
form, and of every size, from one mile to nine or 
ten in circumference. 

Soon after 6 a. m., when within half a mile of 
this chain of bergs, the weather came so thick, 
with heavy snow, and the wind failing us. Lieu* 
tenant Bird, whom I had left in charge of the con- 
duct of the ship, being ihyself unable to remain 
on deck any longer from excessive fifttigue, very 
judiciously recommended that we should stand off 
again until more favourable weather for our pur* 
pose should arrive; fortunately we did so, and 
had gained an offing of six or seven miles, when 
it fell perfectly calm, and the ships were left 
entirely at the mercy of a heavy swell fix)m the 
S.E. 



254 MOUNT ELLIOT. [Oii^. YIIL 

1^1* At noon we were in lat. 70"* 27' S., and long. 

*"^"""" 167® 32' E., and about this time the snow cleared 
off for two hours, so as to give us a view of a fine 
range of mountains whose summits we had not 
before seen; the loftiest of the range I called 
Mount Elliot after Rear Admiral the Honourable 
George Elliot, C. B., Commander-in-Chief in the 
Cape of Grood Hope station, whose great kindness 
to us, and warm interest he took in our enterprise 
I have already had occasion to mention. 

A breeze from the north-east at 6 p. m. enabled 
us to stand out of a deep bight of the pack 
into which the swell had driven us; and the 
barometer standing at 28*5 inches, we could not 
but expect a storm and dirty weather: I was 
therefore glad to get some distance to the S. E. 
before it came on. At noon it shifted to the east, and 
we tacked to the N. N. E. for the night, expecting 
it would blow hard from the quarter in which the 
wind seemed now to have settled, which made us 
the more anxious to get as clear of bergs and as 
far from the pack as possible; but, contrary to 
our expectations, after blowing only a strong breeze 
for a few hours, it again declined to a light air, 
which after midnight was attended with thick 
weather and snow showers, rendering our course 
amongst the bergs and heavy loose ice somewhat 
difficult and hazardous, and requiring the utmost 
vigilance of the officers and crew. 

Feb. 28. The uncertain state of the weather, the light 



Chap, ym.] BABRIBB FBOM CAFE NORTH. 255 

and Yoriable winds, and thick falling snow defeated 1S41; 
my intentions of examination, and compelled us to 
keep off to the eastward the whole day, although 
we occasionally got glimpses of the land between 
the snow showers. 

About noon it fell perfectly calm ; we were fortu- 
nate in being in a space less encumbered by ice 
than usual. Commander Crozier took advantage 
of the opportunity of increasing his supply of 
fresh water by collecting some of the fragments of 
bergs about us, not without great hazard to their 
boats, during so much swell, but fortunately with- 
out any serious accident. We sounded in one 
hundred and eighty fathoms, in greenish clay and 
coral ; we inferred from the shallowness of the 
water that all the bergs in sight were aground, as 
none of them were less than one hundred and sixty 
feet high. 

Early in the morning a steady breeze blew from ^«^* ^* 
the westward, which increased so much in strength 
as it veered to the north-west at noon, as to reduce 
us to treble-reefed topsails, reefed foresail, and 
staysails: we had been endeavouring all the day 
to close the land, and at 4 p. m., when preparing 
to run to leeward of what we considered to be a 
monstrous iceberg, it became evident to us that it 
formed a part of a body of ice which we could dis- 
tinctly trace as a continuous mass descending frt>m 
near the tops of the mountains several miles into 
the sea, and terminated by stupendous cliffe; a 
deep bay was formed in these extraordinary clifb 



256 GBEAT CHANGE OF VARIATION. [Chap. VIIL 

1841. into which we were standing, and which we could 
perceive was bounded by cliffs of a similar cha- 
racter ; but it came on to blow a gale of wind by 
the time we had got within a mile of the south- 
east Cape of the Bay ; and as we were quite near 
enough to see that there could be no place in it 
that would suit our purpose, we wore round and 
stood away from this dangerous coast for the 
night. 

We had a very good view of Cape North whilst 
dose in with the icy cliffs, and observed that a 
high wall of ice, of a similar character to that 
which extends from Cape Crozier, forming the 
great barrier of 78** ^ S., and which prevented 
our further progress to the southward, stretched 
away to the westward from the Cape, as far as we 
could see from the mast-head, and probably formed 
a coast line of considerable extent ; a close, compact, 
impenetrable body of ice occupied the whole space 
to the northward and westward. 

Our magnetic observations here were of very 
great interest, showing an extraordinary change in 
the variation from 114® W. to 40® W., amounting 
to no less than 74® in a space of about three hun- 
dred and sixty miles ; the dip had also diminished, 
as might have been expected, to 86®. 
Feb. 25. Still blowing hard from the westward. We wore 
before daylight, and stood towards the ice, to con- 
tinue the examination of it ; in a few hours we 
got close up to the pack edge, which filled the 
whole space between us and the wall of ice pro- 



CHAF.Vra.] CAPE NOBTH. 257 

jecting to the westward from Cape North, and iMi. 
without the appearance of any water amongst it, 
so firmly was it packed together : from this posi- 
tion several small islands appeared to the right of 
Cape North, which will probably prove to be the 
tops of momitains connected with it, but from their 
great distance we could not ascertain their conti- 
nuity, nor could we get any nearer to them owing 
to the solid intervening pack. 

We had in the afternoon a good view of the 
coast. The whole of the land being perfectly free 
from cloud or haze, the lofty range of mountains 
appeared projected upon the clear sky beyond them 
beautifully defined; and although of a spotless 
white, without the smallest patch of exposed rock 
throughout its whole extent to relieve it, yet the 
irregularities of the surfiice, the numerous conical 
protuberances and inferior eminences, and the 
deeply marked valleys, occasioned many varieties of 
light and shade that destroyed the monotonous 
glare of a perfectly white surface, but to which it 
is so very difficult to give expression either by the 
pencil or description. It was a most interesting 
scene to us, as it was truly the best view we had 
of the northern shore and mountains of Victoria 
Land, and of which the western extremity was by 
no means the least remarkable feature. 

The prospect now before us, and the but too 
evident approach of winter, impressed upon my 
mind the necessity of abandoning any further 
attempt to penetrate to the westward, and as there 

VOL. I. 8 



268 PROCEED TO THE NORTHWARD. [Chap. VHL 

1841. was no measure left untried to find a harbour to 
winter in without success, I determined to make 
the best of our way to the northward in search of 
any lands that might lie between Cape North of 
Victoria Land and Balleny Islands, as it was most 
important to ascertain whether these were connected, 
and how far the space between them might be 
navigable. And although I could not but feel how 
great was the hazard of detaining the ships any 
longer in these dangerous regions, and how great 
must be the anxiety of those upon whom the care 
of the ships devolved during the long dark nights 
that prevailed, and the difficulty we might expe- 
rience in recrossing the pack of two hundred miles 
in breadth, which we had passed through near the 
antarctic circle ; yet I considered the object to be 
accomplished of sufficient importance to justify 
some further degree of risk, and had some hopes 
that we might find the pack had driven so far to 
the northward as to leave us a clear pasi^ge be- 
tween it and the easternmost point of the American 
discoveries. 

In pursuance of this determination we made all 
sail, beating to the N. TV., close along the edge of 
the main pack, until late in the evening, when the 
wind shifted to the south, and increased so sud- 
denly, that before midnight it blew a violent 
stonn ; to prevent passing any land in the night, 
as well as on account of the great danger of run- 
ning during the gale, we rounded the ships to on 
the starboard tack under close-reefed topsails. The 



CHAF.Vm.] NAVIGATION OF THE ANTARCTIC SEAS, 259 

gale was, however, of only a few hours' duration, iMi. 
but at daylight the fog and snow were so thick Feb. 26. 
that we could not see beyond a mile at any time, 
which, together with the very light and vari- 
able winds and occasional calms, effectually pre- 
vented our making any progress during the day, 
which closed in upon us during a perfect calm ; the 
heavy swell, and unceasing heavy snow, rendered 
the darkness of the night so much more perplex- 
ing, and our situation most anxious, as we could 
not tell one minute what might happen the next. 
An easterly breeze succeeded, and the snow ceased, 
so that at daylight the next morning we made sail Feb. 27. 
to the northward, just able to fetch along the edge 
of the main pack under our lee : ^t noon we were 
lat. GT" 27' S., long. UT" 49' E., and here we tried 
for but did not obtain soundings with two hun- 
dred and ten fathoms of line: the light easterly 
winds, which had prevailed for some hours, was 
followed by a strong breeze from W. N. W., which 
freshened up to a gale before dark, and continued 
to blow with great force throughout the night; 
these sudden changes of wind, and frequent alter- 
nations of gales and calms, occasion the navigation 
of these regions so late in the season to be a cause 
of continual anxiety of mind: attended, as they 
almost invariably are, by thick weather, constant 
snow showers, and a heavy swell, it is difficult to 
say whether the gales or the calms are the more 
embarrassing and dangerous. In the calms it is 
true you are less likely to meet with dangers, on 

t 2 



260 LAST SIGHT OF VICTORIA LAND. [Chap. VUI. 

1841. account of passing over less space during their 
continuance, but in the event of drifting down 
upon the pack or a chain of bergs, you are left 
totally at the mercy of the waves, the high sea 
generally preventing the use of boats to tow you 
clear of them, and defeating every effort to take 
advantage of any feeble air of wind that in smooth 
water might prove effectual; and it is this con- 
stant heavy swell that renders the navigation of 
the antarctic seas so much more hazardous than 
that of the arctic ocean. 
Feb. 2S. At daylight we wore and stood towards the pack ; 
the land was reported at 6 20 a.m., the same abrupt 
western termination we had before seen, and the 
pack soon afterwards appeared. We were close in 
with the edge of it by noon in lat. 69® 57' S. and 
long. 167® 5' E., when it appeared £ix)m the north- 
ward One unbroken mass of ice with many large 
bergs amongst it, and so firmly cemented together 
by the late severe cold, (the thermometer during 
the night having been down to 14®, and at noon 
only reached 22®,) that not the smallest hole of 
water could be perceived amongst it : we therefore 
wore round and stood to the northward ; and 
as we ran close along the pack edge we passed 
through several long streams of young ice, which 
being broken up the heav}^ swell offered but little 
obstruction to our progress ; whales were seen in 
great numbers coming out from under the ice to 
"blow," and then returning under it again to 
feed or for protection. At six o'clock in the 



Chap. VIIL] AURORA AUSTRALIS. 261 

evening we got the last glimpse of Victoria Land ; i84i. 
Mount Elliot could be discerned dimly through 
the mist at a distance of seventy miles; it was 
blowing a strong gale at the time, but we con- 
tinued our course until midnight, having seen far 
enough a-head before dark to ensure not running 
into danger. At 11 30 p.m. we saw forthe first 
time the Aurora Australis bearing (magnetic) west. 
It consisted of two segments of a broken arch, at 
an altitude of 15^, from which bright coruscations 
shot upwards to the altitude of about 60^; the 
upper points of these rays were more beautifully 
attenuated than I ever remember to have seen 
those of the Aurora Borealis : the vertical beams 
had much lateral motion, and frequently dis* 
appeared and reappeared in a few seconds of 
time: we could not perceive any exhibitions of 
colour. 



8 3 



262 METEOROLOGICAL ABSTRACT. 

1841. ABSTRACT OP THX METEOKOLOOICAL JOURNAL KEPT OH BOARD 

—^■^— BSB uajhstt's «II1F ekebcs. — pebrCabt, 1841. 



Dv. 


Poiltiiia 


«n™.. 


Ghule 


U...M„ 


-K. 


TfOp-U 


Lu. S. 


w. 


H». 


HId. 


Men. 


u Scuba. 


Alrlo 

tua* 


Br* 
polnu 


1 


7T-06 


188-37 


3\ 


19-S 


3°7-0 


MI-7 


SB 


81 


8 


7T-*5 


187-00 


3! 


34-5 


38-8 


304 


31 


S4 




77-17 


1B3-3S 


89 


33 


SS-4 


304 


36 


93 




77-00 


198-18 


83-5 


15 


30-7 


38-7 


83 


aa 




7711 


19348 


18-7 


13 


15-1 


88-7 


16 


15 




77-01 


188-28 


S3 


U 


lS-7 


BB-S 


17 


15 




77-01 


186-35 


19 


19 


34-6 


S9-S 


37 


18 




77-39 


18705 


38 


33 


86-4 


89-S 


89 


84 




77-56 


180-15 


18 


16 


31-0 


S8-9 


38 


83 




77-38 


166-38 


17 


19-5 


S8-6 


88-5 


SS 


80 




76-11 


187-53 


38 


IS 


19-8 


38-7 


SO 


16 




76-51 


184-58 


36 


30-9 


33-6 


89-0 


S4 


84 




76-94 


183-16 


31 


16 


39-6 


30-5 


SI 


31 




76-53 


178-15 


33 


39 


30-8 


30-1 


30 


30« 




76-03 


170-15 


39 


36 


37-3 


as-6 


38 


38 




T6'3a 


166-12 


38 


36 


38-0 


38-e 


39 


38 




:6-35 


165-ai 


39-5 


as-9 


37-9 


3B-9 


89 


84 




76-06 


16611 


30 


31-5 


36-3 


38-9 


38 


83 




7503 


168-45 


37 


31 


S3-9 


S8-9 


36 


85 




73-10 


171-36 


34 


31 


aa-a 


as-1 


38 


19 




71-05 


16B-58 


36 


S3 


34-7 


89-4 


19 


18 


99 


70-S7 


166-40 


16 


38-9 


34-1 


89-0 


84 


84' 


!3 


70-17 


167-31 


34-5 


38 


33-3 


38-9 


as 


»V 


I* 


7015 


167-35 


87-5 


101 


84-0 


39-0 


87 


S7 


IS 


70-06 


167-87 


15 


19 


8t'3 


88-9 


83 


19 


SO 


69-53 


167-33 


31 


33 


39-0 


89-4 


3D 


30- 


a: 


69-M 


167-S5 


39 


16 


84-8 


sa-9 


38 


88 


IS 


69-ST 


167-OS 


36 


14 


90-8 


S8-9 


Si 


89 








34 


la 


84-36 


39-18 







METEOROLOGICAL AB8TKACT. 



ABSTBICT OF 


THR 


MBTfiO&OLOfllCAl, J0I;BNAL KZPT OK BOUD 


HEB majesty's SH 


P EREBC8.— FEBBC4BT 


1S4I. 






ltar.i.«« 




WlndJ, 






D^. 












WHlhu. 


«„. 


HlB. 


H««L 


b,tMUm. 


ranm. 


1 


39-088 


99-025 


39-009 


a.Weitalj 




S 1..CB.' 


S 


■360 


■095 


■301 


Northerly 




lP.lL3b.C. 


3 


■23a 


38-888 


■059 


fA.m. N.W. 
Vp.m, H.E. 


^ 


06- 


4 


aS'Boo 


■Baa 


28^85B 


E.8.E. 




l;:::Ur 


S 


■918 


-869 


■898 


S.E. 




f *.M. 3 b.c.in. 


e 


39'076 


-879 


■899 


S-R 




I.P.M. I b.C.g.p.». 
5 b.O. 






39-077 


29-184 


3.S.E. 




4b.cK. 


8 


■263 


■233 


■247 


fi-Jl. N.Ely. 
ip.».N.WIj. 




(■*.» 3 b.cp.fc 


« 


-293 


■364 


■278 


/A.K.WMter1y 
tp.H-N.E. 




«b.e.m. 


10 


■4S8 


-259 


340 


N.N.E. 




Ip.h. I b.c.D.g. 


11 


■M8 


-146 


■393 


N.N.E. 


{i-..l} 


f A.K. 3 b.C.p.fc 

\p.n. Og.q.p.1. 


IS 


■las 


2B-577 


38-867 


N.E. 


Oni.qj. 


13 


a8-S34 


-284 


■372 


E.N.E. 


{i:.n 


ni.q .. 


M 


■847 


-403 


■638 


N.H.E. 




m.p.i. 


IS 


29-171 


■852 


39^013 


East 


I'-''] 


OR- 




■210 


39-151 


■178 


S.Weiter1y 


Ip.M.a/ 


3 b.c.g. 


n 


■17J 


-054 


■106 


tp.»E«t 




18 


■048 


38-907 


■008 


aEutnly 




4 b.c'g. 


19 


-014 


■841 


98^»4e 


I.F.K. Eut 




Sb.cg. 


10 


■OM 


-816 


■910 


S.8.E. 




(-*.«. I b.cg. 
I.P.IC. 4 h.c.q. 

Og... 


ai 


■067 




870 


■994 


EMt 




33 


28-646 




478 


■531 


rA.M.Eftit 

t p."- North 


' 


33 


■7S3 




S«3 


■681 


NortlwHy 




OgJ. 


24 


-647 




SSS 


■605 


W.8.W. 


!"'•! 


[SU 


IS 


-777 




S89 


•668 


W.byS. 


(jiSl 


b^: 


26 


-613 




487 


'553 


N.W. by N. 




1 


■819 
S9-S0B 




568 
680 


■704 
■820 


r*-» E. bj N. 




Vj... 1 kMg. 
S b.c,.,. 


SS-S84 


"■""'1 


4-39 






• F 


ortl 


t.«» 


iMUbm 


•fthMfrmboli, 


nil. ill 


ipMil. 



265 



CHAPTER IX. 

The Aurora Australia continued to appear at in- i84i. 
tervals in bright colourless coruscations, reaching "^jJfj^i^Y" 
from the horizon to 30® of altitude in a W. by S. 
(magnetic) direction, until 1 30 A. M., when it 
was concealed from our view by light clouds 
which rose in that quarter. 

With a strong breeze from the westward, and 
fine clear weather, we continued the examination 
of the pack edge, passing through great quantities 
of pancake ice, which formed rapidly under the 
protection of the pack, at a temperature of 20®, at 
which the thermometer stood with trifling variation 
the whole day. A heavy swell throughout the 
pack proved to us that it consisted of loose pieces, 
although to the eye at a little distance it appeared 
as one unbroken mass, and we occasionally ran the 
ships in amongst it as far as we could venture with- 
out hazard of getting frozen in or beset. I have 
no doubt that in the summer season it might be 
penetrated to a great distance, and it is very pro- 
bable that eventually the south magnetic pole will 
be attained by persevering to the S. W. through 
this vast tract of ocean, which separates Victoria 
Land from the Balleny and other islands or lands 
discovered near the antarctic circle by Biscoe, Bal- 
leny, Wilkes, and D'Urville. We saw a great 



266 AURORA AUSTRALIS. [Cbaf. IX. 

1841. many whales whenever we came near the pack 
^dg^y chiefly of a very large size ; and I have no 
doubt that before long this place will be the fre- 
quent resort of our whaling ships, being at so 
convenient a distance from Van Biemen's Land, 
which affords every means and facilities for their 
equipment ; and thus we may also hope to become 
by degrees, through their exertions and enterprise, 
better acquainted with this part of the antarctic 
regions, which the setting in of the winter so much 
earlier than we expected had prevented our accom- 
plishing so satisfactorily as I wished. 

At night the aurora was again seen. It was 
different from those exhibitions I have seen of it in 
the arctic regions, in the greater length of the ver- 
tical beams, and the frequency and suddenness of 
its appearances and disappearances, more like 
flashes of light ; it was agidn also perfectly colour- 
less, had considerable lateral flitting motion, and 
formed an irregular arch about thirty degrees high, 
whose centre bore west (magnetic). From this it 
would seem that, as in the northern regions, the 
principal seat of the aurora is not in the higher 
latitudes, and probably in the latitude of 68 S. it 
will be found principally to obtain. 

In passing through the streams of ice that lay off 
the pack edge during the night, our ships sustained 
some very heavy blows ; and soon after midnight 
March 2. the shacklc of the Terror's bobstay was thus broken : 
as soon as they made the signal we hove to, that 
they might replace it. This operation, however, 
was one of great difficulty, owing to the darkness 



Cb4F. IX.] NEW LAND DISCOTEBBD. 267 

of the night; the ships' bows and rigging being i^^i- 
thickly encrusted with ice, and so much swell as to 
endanger the lives of the brave fellows that were 
engaged for nearly two hours, slung over the bows, 
up to their necks in water at every plunge the ship 
took, before they could accomplish it; and this 
with the thermometer at twelve degrees below 
freezing. We made all sail at daylight along the 
pack edge to the north, with a light breeze from 
the westward ; and at noon were in lat. 68^ 27' S., 
long. 167^ 42' E., the dip Sb"" 19', and variation 
34'' 32' E. We had no soundings with four hun- 
dred fathoms line, the temperature at that depth S6^; 
the surface 28*" 2', and the air 27^. We met with 
fewer streams of ice off the pack, and were favoured 
with very fine weather, the thermometer having 
risen to a more comfortable temperature. 

At 5 p. M. land was seen, bearing N. 62^ W., of March s. 
which before dark we could clearly distinguish the 
features. It had the appearance of two islands 
nearly joining, and the whole subtended an angle of 
seventeen degrees, of great height, and very distant : 
the centre of the northern island terminated in a 
high peak. I named it Russell Peak. The south- 
ernmost I named Smyth Island, after my friend 
Captain William Henry Smyth, of the Royal Navy, 
President of the Royal Astronomical Society. Al- 
though I believe these islands to form a part of the 
group discovered by Balleny in February 1889, yet 
it is not improbable they may prove to be the tops 
of the mountains of a more extensive land. 

We stood towards the land, passing through 



268 RUSSELL PEAK. [Chap. IX- 

^^^' streams of heavy ice, until 10 50 p. m., when we 
found the newly-formed ice so thick, and the heavy 
pack also so close, that we had some difficulty in 
wearing round to get out again, and this not with- 
out sustaining some severe shocks : after an hour's 
struggling we got into a more open space, and hove 

Mwch 3. to for daylight. As soon as it appeared we wore 
round and again stood in towards the land, which 
we saw at 6 30 a. m., bearing W. N. W., but 
was soon after covered by clouds, and completely 
shut out from our view. At 8 A. M. we were 
obliged to steer more to the north, the pack being 
too close for us to proceed any further to the west- 
ward, and soon after noon we were much embar- 
rassed by light variable winds, with thick snow and 
a heavy swell ; so that it was difficult to keep the 
ships so close together as to ensure our not sepa^ 
rating and at the same time not to endanger their 
falling on board of each other, being at times 
quite unmanageable. And although we took ad- 
vantage of every light breeze to draw off towards 
the open water, we were frequently unable to 
keep the ships' heads in the desired direction ; and 
we were now also surrounded by many bergs and 
heavy pieces of pack ice that were difficult to 
avoid. 

At 10 30 p. M. a fresh breeze arose from the east- 
ward, and as the night was tolerably clear we con- 
tinued our course to the N. W. under easy sail. 

March 4. Land was again seen at daylight bearing S. 88^ W. 
to S. 68"* W., and from this point presenting the ap- 
pearance of three distinct islands, and distant, by 



Chaf. IX.] BALLEN7 ISLANDS. 269 

estimation, between thirty and forty miles. By i84i. 
the peculiar form of Russell Peak we knew it to 
be the same land we had seen on the two previous 
days ; but owing to thick weather coming on, we 
did not get observations, and are therefore unable 
to assign its exact position; approximately it 
is in lat. 67^ 28' S., and long. 165^ 30' E. The 
third island was named Frances Island. We con- 
tinued our course until 8 a.m., when we found we MMch4. 
had run into a deep bight of the main pack, and a 
high sea was getting up ; so we hauled off to the 
N.E. At this time we observed strong appearances 
of land directly to the westward, high and broken 
into islands ; but it soon after became quite thick 
with snow, so that we lost sight of them, and the 
breeze freshening to a gale we were obliged to 
carry a heavy press of sail to weather the lee point 
of the bight we had got into. The deep plunges 
the ship gave frequently brought her bowsprit into 
violent contact with heavy pieces of ice that it was 
impossible to avoid, and our dolphin striker was 
carried away. The Terror's bobstay and bowsprit 
shrouds were also carried away, but fortunately we 
had at that time gained a more open space, where 
we hove to for her to repair her damage and to 
secure her bowsprit. 

At noon we were in lat. 66'' 44' S., long. 165"* 45' 
E., so that without doubt the land we saw in the 
morning was that discovered by Balleny, to which 
his name was given by Captain Beaufort, the hydro- 
grapher to the Admiralty ; and I think it right to 
publish here the extract from the Log of the Eliza 



270 BALLENY ISLANDS. [Chap. 

^^^' Scott, the ship in which Balleny made his dis- 
coveries (belonging to Mr. Charles Enderby and 
some other gentlemen), with which I was furnished 
from the Hydrographic Office before leaving England 
in September, 1839, Balleny having arrived only a 
few days before our departure. 

Feb. 9. " At 8 A. M. clear weather. Steering west by 
compass in latitude 66^ 46' S. got sights for my 
chronometers, which gave the ship in longitude 
164'' 29' E. At 11 A.M. observed a darkish ap- 
pearance to the S.W. At noon the sun shone 
brightly ; observed the latitude to be 66** 37' S. ; 
saw the appearance of land to the S.W., extending 
from west to about south ; ran for it ; at 4 P. M. 
made it out distinctly to be land ; at 8 p. m. got 
within five miles of it, when we saw another piece 
of land of great height. At sunset we distinctly 
made them out to be three separate islands of good 
size, but the western one the longest: lay to all 
night off the middle island, and at 2 a.m. of the 

Feb. 10. 10th bore up for it. Ran through a considerable 
quantity of drift ice, and got within half a mile, 
but found it completely icebound with high per- 
pendicular cliffs. I wished to run between the 
middle and western island, but was compelled to 
come out again to the eastward, as from the 
western island to the eastern one, on the west or 
rather south-west side, the ice was in one firm 
and solid mass without a passage. The weather 
at sunrise was very threatening ; at 6 it came on 
thick, since when we have been compelled to 
stand off. I make the high bluff western point 



Chaf. IX.] BALLENT ISLANDS. 271 

of the middle island to be in lat. 66^ 4:4f S. and 1S39. 
long. 163® 11' E. A lunar at two o'clock agrees '""~"~*' 
with the above longitude by chronometer. The 
weather continued moderate, but very thick to the 
end. 

'^ Thick weather. At 1 A. H. had to hoist out a Feb.ii. 
boat to tow the vessel clear of an iceberg, which 
we were close to, but could not see, and no wind. 
At 1 1 A. M. cleared, and we saw the land bearing 
about W. S. W., and of a tremendous height, I 
should suppose at least twelve thousand feet, and 
covered with snow. We are inclosed with large 
icebergs in eveiy direction. 

" At noon we had a very indifferent observation, 
which gave the latitude 66® 30^ S., and it imme- 
diately came on thick. 

'^ This morning the weather thickens and clears Feb. 12. 
occasionally. At 2 a.m. saw the land, bearing 
S.S.E. about ten miles. The west point of the 
west island bore W.N.W. At eight o'clock the 
land completely icebound. 

'' At noon tacked, and worked in-shore to look 
for harbours or beach. At 4 p. H. abreast of the 
small island ; the eastern island, now on a different 
bearing, appeared a large one. At 6 p. m. went on 
shore in the cutter's (Sabrina) boat, at the only 
place likely to afford a landing ; but when we got 
close with the boat it proved only the drawback of 
the sea, having a beach of only three or four feet 
at most. Captain Freeman jumped out and got a 
few stones, but was up to his middle in water. 
There is no landing or beaches on this land ; in 



272 c6tb clarie. [c 

1A39. &ct, but for the bare rocks where the icebergs had 
broken fix)m we would scarce have known it for 
land at first, but as we stood in for it we plainly 
perceived smoke arising from the mountain tops. 
It is evidently volcanic, as specimens of stone, or 
rather cinders, will prove; the cliflEs are perpen- 
dicular, and what in all probability would have 
been valleys and beaches are occupied by solid 
blocks of ice. I could not see a beach or harbour, 
or any thing like one. Returned on board at 7 p. m., 
and got the vessels safely through the drift ice 
before dark, and ran along the land." 

Indications of land are frequently mentioned in 
the Log of the Eliza Scott during the following 
fortnight as she sailed to the westward along the 
parallel of the sixty-fifth degree of latitude, and on 
Feb. 26. the 26th, when in lat. 64*^ W S., and long. ISl"" 35' 
E., and therefore only a few miles to the westward of 
the high barrier of ice seen by D'Urville on the 
30th of January of the following year, and named 
by him C6te Clarie*, the Log states, " that at 
8 A. M. it cleared off a little, and we thought we 
saw land to the eastward, tacked, and stood for it. 
At 11 30 A. M. made it out to be fog hanging over 
some icebergs." Thick weather, with snow and 
sleet, followtjii, which prevented a further examina- 
tion of this part of the coast. From nearly this 
position Lieutenant Wilkes says, " On the 7th 
(February, 1840) we had much better weather, 
and continued all day running along the perpen- 
dicular icy barrier, about one hundred and fifty feet 

• Voyngc au Pole Sud, tome viii. p. 177. 



Ch4p. IX.] ballent's discoveries. 273 

high. Beyond it the outline of high land could iMi. 
be well distinguished. At 6 p.m. we suddenly """""* 
found the barrier trending to the southward, and 
the sea studded with icebergs. I now hauled off 
until daylight, in order to ascertain the trending of 
the land more exactly. I place this point, which I 
have named Cape Carr, after the first lieutenant of 
the Vincennes, in long. 131^ 40' E., lat. 64^ 49' S."* 

There can therefore be no doubt that it really 
was land Balleny saw; and which will probably 
prove to be a continuation of D'Urville's Terre 
Adelie, discovered by him on the 19th of January, 
and approached so near on the 21st as to enable 
some of his officers to land on a small islet off its 
shores. This land was seen by Lieutenant Wilkes 
just a week afterwards, but he was then uncon- 
scious of its having been previously visited by the 
French navigator. 

^^ Appearance of land " is mentioned again in the 
Log of the Eliza Scott on the 2d of March, when in 
lat. 65'' S., and long. 122"" 44' E., and the last point 
where Balleny saw land with certainty is thus re* 
corded in the Log. 

^' March 3 — At 4 a. m. found the ice so close, and 
getting more compact, we tacked in hopes of getting 
between it and the land ; but the weather was so 
thick we soon lost sight of it. At 8 it cleared off: 
found ourselves surrounded by icebergs of immense 
size, and to the S. W. the ice was completely fisist, and 

* Narratiye of United Sutes Exploring Expedition, toL iL 
p. 321. 

VOL. I. T 



274 BALLENT's discoveries. [Chap. IX. 

1841. every appearance of land at the back of it, but no 
"""""""* getting through the ice to it ; we were obliged to 
steer to the N. by E. along the edge of the pack. 
Another proof of its being land was the fact of the 
rapid increase of the variation, which on this day 
was 44** 11' W. At noon we were in latitude by 
observation 65^ 10' S., and longitude by account 
118^ 30' E." 

The vessel had run fifteen miles to the northward 
since 8 a. m., and was therefore in lat. 65^ 25' S., 
when they saw the land to the southward. It was 
named Sabrina Land, after the cutter which accom- 
panied the Eliza Scott throughout this bold and 
hazardous cruize. 

According to Lieutenant Wilkes's chart, the 
Yincennes must have passed this land, in nearly 
the same latitude as Balleny did, during the night 
of the 1 0th, or the thick snowy weather of the fol- 
lowing day, and without seeing it, as no mention is 
made of it in the narrative. I suppose, therefore, 
he has placed it on his chart on the authority of 
Balleny, but under a different name. He has called 
it " Totten's high land." 

I have inserted these several extracts with the 
view to do justice to the exertions and courage of 
Captain Balleny and his companions, and to prevent 
their being deprived of their due share in the honour 
of a discovery, for the priority of which the Ameri- 
cans and French are contending with each other, 
and to which, should this land eventually prove to 
be a continent extending to Eemp and Enderby 



CHAP. IX.] ANTARCTIC CONTINENT. 275 

Land, as they suppose, it follows that neither of them i84i. 
have the smallest claim whatever ; although equal " 

praise is due to them for their exertions and 
perseverance as if they had really been the dis- 
coverers, for at that time they could not have 
known that Balleny had been there the year be- 
fore them. 

There do not appear to me sufficient grounds 
to justify the assertion that the various patches of 
land recently discovered by the American, French, 
and English navigators on the verge of the Antarctic 
Circle unite to form a great southern continent. 
The continuity of the largest of these " Terre Adelie'' 
of M. D'Urville has not been traced more than 
three hundred miles, Enderby's Land not exceeding 
two hundred miles : the others being mostly of in- 
considerable extent, of somewhat uncertain determin- 
ation, and with wide channels between them, would 
lead rather to the conclusion that they form a chain 
of islands. Let each nation therefore be contented 
with its due share, and lay claim only to the dis- 
covery of those portions which they were the first 
to behold. But if fixture navigators should prove 
those conjectures about a continent to be correct, 
then the discoveries of Biscoe in the brig Tula in 
January 1831, and those of Balleny in 1839, to 
which I have so fiilly referred, will set at rest all 
dispute as to which nation the honour justly belongs 
of the priority of discovery of any such continent 
between the meridians of 47® and 163® of east 

T 2 



276 Wilkes's discoveries. [Chaf. ix. 

I84I. longitude, and those of our immortal Ck>ok in the 
meridian of 107*" W., in January, 1774 ; for I 
confidently believe with M. D'Urville, that the 
enormous mass of ice which bounded his view 
when at his extreme south latitude was a range of 
mountainous land covered with snow-* 
March 4. But to resume our narrative. As soon as our 
damages were repaired, we made all sail to the 
N. E., on account of the wind having increased to 
a gale from E.S.E., placing our ships in a very 
critical situation ; for on the chart< which Lieute- 
nant Wilkes was so good as to send me of the 
discoveries of the expedition under his command, 
entitled a " Tracing of the Icy Barrier attached to 
the Antarctic Continent discovered by the United 
States Exploring Expedition," is laid down a 
range of mountainous land extending about sixty 
miles in a S. W. and N. E. direction ; its centre 
being in lat. GS"" 4(y, and long. IBS'" E., with the 
eastern extreme of the barrier in 167^** E., and thus 
presenting a formidable lee shore in our present 
position. We were therefore in a state of con- 
siderable anxiety and uncertainty for some hours 
as to whether the ships could weather the land and 
barrier. We pressed all the canvass on them they 
could bear, but lost much ground in the frequent 
necessity that occurred to bear away to leeward 
of the numerous icebergs we met with during the 
thick weather which prevailed. In the evening we 

* Voyage an Sad Pole, tome ii. p. 7. 



Chap. IX.] RBCR088 ANTABCnC CIBCLB. 277 

recrossed the Antarctic Circle, having been to the mi* 
southward of it since the Ist of January, a period 
of sixty-three days. 

As night advanced, the cry of the penguin was 
heard above the storm, which, added to the in- 
creasing quantity of heavy loose ice we met with, 
contributed to increase our apprehensions of drop- 
ping down upon the land or barrier under our lee, 
although we have frequently met with these birds 
at several hundreds of miles from any known 
land. 

The extreme darkness of the night, and the 
thick weather preventing our seeing to any dis- 
tance before us, kept all hands in a state of anxious 
vigilance throughout the continuance of the gale. 
Fortunately it began to moderate, and shifted to 
the southward before midnight, and the weather 
became so much clearer, that we could see bergs or 
loose ice in time to avoid them without difficulty ; 
and thus relieved of all our anxieties, we kept 
under easy sail until daylight. The barometer, 
which had been so low as 28*4 inches, as usual 
gave notice of the approach of this favourable 
change of weather ; and when day broke it was a 
very fine morning. We were now desirous of 
sighting the land which had been the occasion of so Mardi 6. 
much fatigue and uneasiness to us during the 
stormy night we had passed, and our course was 
shaped accordingly. 

By observations at noon we found ourselves in 
latitude 65"* 34' S., and longitude 167"* 40' E., and 

T 3 



1 

f 

4. 



278 Wilkes's land. [c 

184L therefore as nearly as possible in the latitude, and 
MBxch6. between forty and fifty miles distant from the N. E. 
extreme of Lieutenant Wilkes's land : we were also 
twenty-two miles to the northward of our reckoning; 
but I ascribe this error less to the effects of a current 
than to the uncertainty of our reckoning, occasioned 
chiefly by running to leeward of the many bergs 
we had to avoid during the gale. In our dull saiUng 
vessels we dared not attempt to weather the bergs 
during a fog, for if they were close enough to 
be seen, we had no chance of passing them to wind- 
ward ; and from the great strength of our ships, 
we did not apprehend any damage from the streams 
of fragments that are ahnost invariably found 
under their lee ; but in vessels not so well prepared 
to encounter ice, it is always the safest plan to pass 
to windward of the bergs when practicable. 

We had a moderate breeze from the eastward, 
and a beautifully clear day, so that land of any 
great elevation might have been seen at a distance 
of sixty or seventy miles. As we advanced on 
our course in eager expectation of ^^ making the 
land," our surprise and disappointment may be 
imagined when no indications of it were to be seen 
at sunset, although we were not more than twelve 
or thirteen miles from its eastern extreme, as laid 
down on Lieutenant Wilkes's chart ; and we began 
to suspect that from having had but little expe- 
rience of the delusive appearances in these icy 
regions, he had mistaken for land some of the 
dense well-defined clouds which so continually 



CHAP.IX..1 BALLENT ISLANDS. 279 

hang over extensive packs of ice, — a mistake which i^^- 
we had ourselves, on many occasions, to guard 
against, when appearances were so strong, for 
several days in succession, that few in either ship 
could be persuaded that it was not really land until 
we actually sailed over the spot. It being a fine 
moonlight night, we continued our course, with a 
Ught easterly wind, and before midnight gained 
the position of the eastern point of the supposed 
land, and shaped our course to the S.W. under 
moderate sail, along the mountain range. 

At day-break, as we had a most extensive view March 16. 
in every direction, the sky and horizon being per- 
fectly clear, the mast-heads of both ships were 
crowded with officers and men anxious to get the 
first glimpse of the anticipated shores, but neither 
mountains nor barrier were to be seen. 

An ^^ appearance of land" was, indeed, reported 
to me by Lieutenant Sibbald, the officer of the 
forenoon watch, at 10 A. M., but it was so feeble 
when I went to the mast-head, that I was quite 
unable to distinguish any thing but a dark misty 
appearance. It is inserted by him in the log-book 
as bearing from S. S. W. to S. W. by W., and being 
in the exact direction of Balleny Islands, which 
had been seen by us on the morning of the 4th, 
it is by no means impossible that he was right, 
although they must have been at a distance of 
between seventy and eighty miles. There is no 
mention of any appearance of land in the log- 
book of the Terror. 

T 4 



i 



280 WILKES's LAND. [CoAP. IX. 

1841. At noon our observations placed us in lat. 

64^ 51' S., long. 164^ 45' E., dip 83^ 30', variation 
29** E. We were therefore very nearly in the 
centre of the mountainous patch of land laid down 
in Lieutenant Wilkes's chart as forming a part of 
the " antarctic continent." 

The wind soon after this time falling light, we 
rounded to and tried for soundings, but could not 
reach the bottom with six hundred fathoms of line, 
beyond which we could not determine with any 
degree of certainty, on account of the ship having 
considerable drift. The temperature at that depth 
was 37''-2, that of the surface 29''-2, and that of 
the air having risen to 31^, felt quite warm to us. 
It was indeed a perfect Mediterranean day, and the 
remainder of it was passed in continuing our 
search after the supposed land, steering a course 
now more to the westward, and then north-west-, 
until darkness put an end to our search. 

At 1 P. M. the wind increased from the north- 
east, with the appearance of thick weather, dense 
clouds rising quickly in that direction; our top- 
sails were double-reefed, and sail otherwise reduced 
so as to admit of the ship being more easily man- 
aged by the watch, in case of suddenly meeting 
with any quantity of loose ice, of which a bright- 
ness in sky to the westward gave us reason to 
suspect the presence in that quarter. We had seen 
sufficiently far before dark to remove any idea of 
finding land, but as pack ice can never be seen more 
than ten or twelve miles from the mast-head, we 



Chap. IX.] CHAIN OF BEB08. 281 

were obliged throughout the darkness of night to ^^^* 
proceed at a slow pace, steering to the north- 
west. 

Early in the morning, whilst running before a liueh r. 
strong easterly breeze, we found ourselves embayed 
in a deep bight of the pack, which was seen stretch- 
ing across our bows, as far as the true north. We 
were also at this time much hampered by extensive 
fields of pancake ice, which at this period of the 
season always form near the margin of a pack ; we 
immediately hauled to the wind, but had great 
difficulty in extricating the ships, although still 
favoured by a fresh breeze. 

At noon we were in lat. eS"* 31' S., long. 162'' 9'E., 
and again in clear water, but it soon after fell quite 
calm, and the heavy easterly swell was driving us 
down again upon the pack, in which were counted 
from the mast-head eighty-four large bergs, be- 
tween S. and N. N. W., and some hundreds of 
smaller dimensions. 

We found we were fast closing this chain of 
bergs, so closely packed together that we could 
distinguish no opening through which the ships 
could pass, the waves breaking violently against 
them, dashing huge masses of pack ice against the 
precipitous faces of the bergs; now lifting them 
nearly to their summit, then forcing them again 
fi\r beneath their water-line, and sometimes rend- 
ing them into a multitude of brilliant fragments 
against their projecting points. 

Sublime and magnificent as such a scene must 



282 PERILOUS SITUATION. [Chaf. IX. 

^^^^' have appeared under different circumstances, to us 
it was awful, if not appalling. For eight hours we 
had been gradually drifting towards what to human 
eyes appeared inevitable destruction: the high 
waves and deep rolling of our ships rendered 
towing with the boats impossible, and our situa- 
tion the more painful and embarrassing from our 
inability to make any effort to avoid the dreadful 
calamity that seemed to await us. 

In moments like these comfort and peace of mind 
could only be obtained by casting our cares upon 
that Almighty Power which had already so often 
interposed to save us when human skill was wholly 
unavailing. Convinced that he is under the pro- 
tection and guidance of a merciful God, the Chris- 
tian awaits the issue of events firm and undismayed, 
and with calm resignation prepares for whatever 
He may order. His serenity of mind surprises and 
strengthens, but never forsakes him; and thus, 
possessing his soul in peace, he can with the greater 
advantage watch every change of circumstance that 
may present itself as a means of escape. 

We were now within half a mile of the range of 
bergs. The roar of the surf, which extended each 
way as far as we could see, and the crashing of the 
ice, fell upon the ear with fearful distinctnesS| 
whilst the frequently averted eye as immediately 
returned to contemplate the awful destruction that 
threatened in one short hour to close the world and 
all its hopes and joys and sorrows upon us for ever. 
In this our deep distress " we called upon the Lord, 



Chap. IX.] EXABflNATION OF THE PACK. 283 



and He heard our voices out of His temple, and i84i. 
our cry came before Him." 

A gentle air of wind filled our sails ; hope again 
revived, and the greatest activity prevailed to 
make the best use of the feeble breeze : as it gra- 
dually freshened, our heavy ships began to feel 
its influence, slowly at first, but more rapidly 
afterwards; and before dark we found ourselves 
far removed from every danger. "0 Lord our 
God, how great are the wondrous works Thou hast 
done ; like as be also Thy thoughts, which are to 
US-ward ! If I should declare them and speak of 
them, they should be more than I am able to 
express." * 

After a day of such fatiguing anxiety we passed 
a peaceful night, running to the westward under 
moderate sail, favoured by a fresh south-east breeze 
and the bright light of the full moon, increased at 
times by brilliant exhibitions of the Aurora Aus- 
tralis. 

Approaching the main pack early in the morning Mwdi s 
to resume its examination, we had to make oxir 
way through extensive fields of pancake ice, too 
tough to be penetrated except by the assistance of 
the strong breeze that aided us. Our course along 
the edge of the pack was governed by the direction 
it took, and which led us much more to the north- 
ward than we wished ; but any attempt to penetrate 
to the westward would have been quite in vain, 

* Psalm zL 6, 7. 



284 SEARCH FOR SUPPOSED LAND. [Chaf. DC. 

1841. and sometimes in the course of this examination, 
when having during thick snowy weather got into 
some of the deeper indentations of the pack, we 
were compelled to run back to the eastward. A 
halo was seen round the sun at 9 15 A. m. with a 
parhelion on each side, at a distance of 23^ 16', 
the altitude of the sun's centre being 24^ SC/. 

At noon in lat. 64^ 39' S., long. 162^ 47' E., we 
had no soundings with six hundred fathoms of line ; 
the temperature of the sea was taken at that and 
several intermediate depths below the surface, as 
was also the specific gravity of the water brought 
up from those depths. 

In the afternoon the wind veered to the north- 
ward, and the snow which had been falling at times 
during the day was by the immediate increase of 
temperature turned into rain ; to us a very agreeable 
indication of our having reached a milder climate. 

As our proximity to the pack prevented our 
making any progress to the westward with a north- 
erly wind, I took advantage of the opportunity of 
stretching to the eastward ;' as by this measure we 
not only extended our researches for land, but got 
into a space more free from bergs and loose ice, and 
therefore during the continuance of such unfavour- 
able weather were in a situation of comparative 
safety. 
March 9. By noon the next day we were in lat. 64® 20' S., 
and long. 164"* 20' E., and therefore about seventy 
miles north of the land laid down by Lieutenant 
Wilkes, and not far from the spot from which he 



285 



Chap. IX.] SEARCH FOR SUPPOSED LAND. 

must have supposed he saw it; but having now 1841. 
searched for it at a distance varjdng from fifty to *""""" 
seventy miles from it to the north, south, east, and 
west, as well as having sailed directly over its as- 
signed position, we were compelled to infer that it 
has no real existence. 

I have entered thus minutely into the details of 
our search for this land as recorded in my journal 
at the time, and in accordance with the report I 
made to the Lords Commissioners of the Admi- 
ralty on the subject immediately after my return to 
Van Diemen's Land. 

It becomes my duty now in justice to Lieutenant 
Wilkes to give his explanation of the circumstances 
which led to his placing this range of mountains on 
the chart of his discoveries which he sent to me ; as 
also to repel the assertion he has made, that we had 
sailed over land said to have been discovered by our 
own countryman, Balleny ; although it cannot but 
be a matter of surprise that after so much discus- 
sion, and by no means a very temperate one, he 
has not entered upon the question, nor in any way 
alluded to the discoveries of Balleny in the Narra- 
tive of the United States Exploring Expedition, 
which has been published by the American govern- 
ment under his direction, but has merely removed 
the land from his chart of the antarctic continent, 
with no other notice of it than that " Lieutenant- 
Commandant Ringgold thought he could discern 
to the south-east something like distant moun- 
tains," and which I should have believed had been 



286 WILKES'8 LAin>. [Chap. IX. 

1841. the authority upon which Lieutenant Wilkes had 
originally placed the land on his chart, had he not 
asserted to the contrary ; because Lieutenant Ring- 
gold in his report to his Commodore, as quoted by 
him in his defence at the court-martial, states, that 
" very lofty ridges of ice, and the loom usual over 
high land, were visible along the southern horizon 
over the barrier ; " and he adds in evidence, " I 
made no positive report that it was, nor mentioned 
in the log, because I was not positive that it was 
land, though I have very little doubt about it."* 
And this assertion was made after he knew we had 
sailed over the spot. But Lieutenant Wilkes dis- 
avows this discovery of Lieutenant Ringgold, and 
states in his ^^ Synopsis of the Cruise of the United 
States Exploring Expedition," delivered by him 
before the National Institute, on his return to 
America in 1842, p. 21 — ^^ During our cruise, as 
we sailed along the icy barrier, I prepared a chart, 
laying down the land, not only where we had 
actually determined it to exist, but those places in 
which every appearance denoted its existence, 
forming almost a continuous line from 160^ to 
97^ East longitude, I had a tracing-copy made of this 
charts on which was laid down the land supposed to 
have been seen by Bellamy [Balleny], in 166** E., 
which, with my notes, experience, &c. &c., was for- " 
warded to Captain Ross through Sir George Gipps 
at Sydney, and I was afterwards informed was 

^ Defence of Lieut Charles Wilkefl, p. 28. 



Chap. IX.] WILKES'S LAND. 287 

received by Capt^n Ross on his arrival in Hobart iMi. 
ToTm, some months previous to his going south." 

The first few lines of this passage would have 
afforded me another proof that the land on Wilkes's 
chart was that seen by Lieutenant Ringgold, being 
precisely in that position, and certainly not near 
that seen by Balleny. The letter and an exact 
copy of his tracing will be found in the Appendix. 
On this chart I have placed Balleny Islands in their 
proper position, in order to show how impossible it 
must have appeared to me that Ringgold's Moun- 
tains could ever have been intended for them ; and 
the track of our ships along the range of moun- 
tains ; and these are the only additions or altera- 
tions I have made.'* 

Again, p. 26, he observes, "As I before re- 
marked, on my original chart I had laid down the 
supposed position of Bellamy Islands or land in 
1 64^ and 165^ East longitude, and that it was traced 
off, and sent to Captain Ross. I am not a little 
surprised that so intelligent a navigator as Captain 
Ross, on finding that he had run over this position, 
should not have closely enquired into the state- 
ments relative to our discoveries that had been 
published in the Sydney and Hobart Town papers, 
which he must have seen, and have induced him to 
make a careful examination of the tracks of the 
squadron, laid down on the chart sent him, by 
which he would have assured himself in a few 

^ The originals are deposited in the Hydrographic depart- 
ment of the Admiraltj> and may be readilj referred to. 



288 Wilkes's land. [Chaf.ix. 

1841. moments that it had never been laid down or 
claimed as part of our discovery, before he made 
so bold'* an assertion to an American officer, that 
he had run over a clear ocean where I had lidd 
down land ; and I am not less surprised that that 
officer should have taken it for granted, without 
examination, that such was the fact." 

These two extracts contain all the explanation 
that I have seen, except a letter addressed to the 
editors of the " Spectator," in reply to that of Cap- 
tain J. H. Aulick, the American officer above alluded 
to. I had the pleasure of meeting him at New Zea- 
land, and, in justice to him, I consider it proper to 
insert the following extract from his letter. After 
quoting the above paragraph from Lieutenant 
Wilkes's Synopsis, he says, " From the above state- 
ment, and in the absence of any explanation, it might 
well be inferred that both Ross and myself must be, 
to say the least, very shortsighted and dull of com- 
prehension, not to have been able to see that it was 
Bellamy's (Balleny's) and not Wilkes's land that he 
(Ross) had run over. But in the statement above 
quoted, Mr. Wilkes has done us injustice, by omitting 
to mention one very important fact in this con- 
nexion, namely, that in laying down the land of 
Balleny on the chart he sent Captain Ross, he neg^ 
lected to affijo thereto the name of its discoverer^ or to 
distinguish it in any way from his own land, there 
traced out, and almost connected with it. He also 

* He elsewhere calls it an unfounded ttatement : p. 18. 



. -Al 



Cbap.ix.] wilkes'b LAin>. 289 

sent Captain Ross a letter with his chart; but ^^^' 
unfortunately the name of Balleny or his land is 
neither mentioned nor even hinted at in this letter.* 
In short, no intimation in any manner whatever 
was given Ross by Lieutenant Wilkes that he did 
not claim the discovery of aU the land marked on 
his chart ; and to this cause alone is to be ascribed 
the error into which Captain Ross was, I think, 
unavoidably led. 

^^ Mr. Wilkes says Ross ought to have examined 
the accounts of his discoveries published in the 
Sydney and Hobart Town papers, before he made 
so bold an assertion to an American officer. But, 
with such evidence as the chart and letter of Mr. 
Wilkes in his hands, I apprehend it could hardly 
have been seriously expected that he should search 
the newspaper accounts (which probably he never 
saw) for other or better information on the 
subject. 

^^ On my visit to Captain Ross on board the 
Erebus, he spread this chart before me in the pre- 
sence of Captain Crozier and two of my own officers. 
It was distinctly drawn out on tracing paper ; the 
whole appearing to be, so fSEur as I observed, one 
connected operation, representing nothing but the 
result of his own (Wilkes's) explorations. Ross, 
beUeving it to be such, had transcribed it at length 
on his chart, which he also placed before usf, 

^ See Appendix. 

f Upon which Ballenj laUnds were laid down in the post* 

VOL. I. U 



290 WILKEB'S land. [Cbat.IX. 

^^^' and pointed out the tracks of his vessels marked on 
it in red ink, and passing directly over the spot o^- 
signed to the land ; which we all considered as laid 
doAvn by Lieutenant Wilkes to represent the north- 
eastern limit of his supposed antarctic continent, and 
where he (Ross) said they had a clear sea as far as 
the eye could reach. Such was the evidence on 
which my belief of his report was founded. To my 
mind it was conclusive, and I cheerfully leave it to 
the judgment of others to determine whether or not, 
under all the circumstances here stated, it be just 
cause of ' surprise' that Captain Ross should have 
boldly asserted that he had run over a clear ocean 
where Lieutenant Wilkes had laid down the land ; 
and that I should have taken it for granted, without 
further examination^ that such was the fact. 

'* In making this statement, I can say, with per- 
fect sincerity, I am actuated by no unkindness of 
feeling towards Mr. Wilkes ; but, fully persuaded 
as I am that the erroneous statement for which he 
publicly censures Captain Ross, and shows a little 
temper towards me, was the result of his own neg- 
ligence alone, I considered it due to that distin- 
guished navigator, as well as to myself, that the 
matter should be publicly explained. 

(Signed) " J. H. Aulick." 

I cannot sufficiently express my thankfulness to 
Captain Aulick for his honourable and generous 

tion usigned hy the discoverer, and the date of their diaooTcrj, 
1889. 



Cbap.ix.] Wilkes's land. 291 

defence of my conduct during my absence ; and I ^^^* 
have quoted thus largely firom this letter because 
his very clear and candid testimony gives so much 
weight to the few additional remarks which I must 
here make, in order to show that I did not make 
any " erroneous statement " whatever. I must first 
refer to the only passage that bears on the subject 
in Mr. Wilkes's answer to the above letter.* 

He says, " On my arrival at Sydney irom the 
antarctic cruise, I was introduced to Captain Biscoe, 
the discoverer of Enderby Land, and believe he 
gave me the first information of the English dis- 
covery, and its position, which I placed on my 
chart, marking it * English Discovery.' My im- 
pression is, that the copy which I ordered to be 
made (from my own original) was a perfect one ; 
and on the original chart the English discovery is 
detached and separate from ours, and stands alone. 
At the time I sent my letter to Captain Ross, I 
did not know the English discoverer's name ; but 
whether the English discovery was so marked or 
not, is of but little consequence, for Captain Boss 
knew of Balleny's discovery before he left England, 
and therefore must have seen at once the latitude 
and longitude to be identically the same with those 
of Balleny ; and I am satisfied the only erroneous 
conclusion Captain Ross could have been led into 
by it was, that I had verified Balleny's discovery." 

In the tracing copy of his original chart, which 

* Both letters are printed in full in the Appendix. 

u S 



292 Wilkes's land. [Ciup.ix 

^^ ^' Lieutenant Wilkes sent me, the whole of the land, as 
stated in Captain Aulick's letter, ^^ was drawn out 
as one connected operation, representing nothing 
but the result of his (Wilkes's) own exploration." 

There was no land laid down where Balleny had 
discovered it ; nor could I ever have supposed he 
had verified that navigator's discovery, because I 
could perceive by his track that he was never within 
one hundred miles of it. 

The several passages which I have quoted from 
the writings of Lieutenant Wilkes might lead some 
to the impression that, from want of proper con- 
sideration, or of common sense, or from feelings of 
rivalry or jealousy, I had endeavoured to injure 
the reputation of a distinguished officer, and to 
underrate his valuable labours. But, conscious of 
having taken every pains to arrive at a just conclu- 
sion, before I asserted that we had sailed over some 
land which, to all appearance, was laid down on 
his chart as his discovery, I must detain my read- 
ers for a few minutes in order to explain distinctly 
the grounds of that conclusion ; so that aU may 
have an opportunity of judging of the groundless- 
ness of the imputation, and that I may fully exo- 
nerate myself not only in the eyes of my brother 
officers of the American and British navies, but of 
all who have taken an interest in the question. Li 
addition to the statement of facts made by Captain 
Aulick, to which I must be permitted especially 
now to refer, there are only three points with 
which he could not have been acquainted when he 



Chap.DL] WILKES'S LAND. 293 

replied to Lieutenant Wilkes, to which I need ad- ^^^* 
vert; namely — 

1. The true position of Balleny Islands, as given 
by Balleny himself. 

2. Lieutenant Wilkes's knowledge of their true 
position. 

3. That the land in question was not laid down 
in that position, and therefore could not pos- 
sibly have been meant for it. 

These three points will be discussed under one 
general head. Lieutenant Wilkes in his last quoted 
letter states that ^^ Captain Ross knew of BaUeny's 
discovery before he left England, and must have 
seen at once the latitude and longitude were iden- 
tically the same with those of Balleny." Had the 
latitude and longitude of the land on his chart been, 
as he states, identically, or even nearly the same 
with those of Balleny Islands, I should feel that 
the blame of making an ^^ unfounded^^ statement 
would justly rest upon me for not having de- 
tected their identity. But this statement of Lieu- 
tenant Wilkes, made so long afterwards, when he 
must have been fully aware of the real position 
of Balleny Islands, shows that he confuses two 
distinct portions of land. He is alluding to that 
which he says he marked in his original chart as 
*' English discovery," and of course in the posi- 
tion Balleny assigned to it ; but this land he did 
not put upon the tracing he sent to me. The land 
that we sailed over is laid down upon his chart 
at least seventy miles from them, and is exactly in 



i 
i 



294 Wilkes's land. [Chap. IX. 

1841. the position of the mountains said to have been 
""""""" seen by Lieutenant Ringgold ; and it is therefore 
probable that when he became acquainted with Bal- 
leny's discovery he had some doubts of the exist- 
ence of these mountains, and removed them from 
his ori^al chart, but omitted to do so in the copy 
of it which he sent to me. This is the only way I 
can account for the mistake; for at the time he sent 
me the chart I knew that he had authentic informa- 
tion of the true place of the Balleny Islands ; as, on 
my arrival at Sydney, I was told by Mr. M^Leay, 
the late colonial secretary, and also by his son, 
Mr. W. S. M*Leay, that, meeting Lieutenant Wilkes 
soon after his return from the antarctic cruise, they 
told him of Balleny's discovery. He seemed to 
doubt their statement; but the next day they called 
upon him, and placed in his hands No. 629 of the 
" Athenaeum," published in November, 1839, and 
pointed out to him the account there given of the 
discovery : on reading which, in their presence, he 
exclaimed, " Then all our labour has been in vain.^^ 

The following is a copy of the paragraph alluded 
to : — "In July, 1838, two small vessels belonging 
to Messrs. Enderby and other merchants sailed 
from London on a voyage to the South Seas, with 
special instructions to push as far as possible to the 
southward in search of land. Touching at Am- 
sterdam Island, Chalky Bay, in New Zealand, and 
Campbell's Islands, the vessels proceeded to the 
southward, and reached their extreme south lati- 
tude 69^ in 172"* 11' E. longitude, full two hundred 



Chap. IX.] WILKES'S LAND. 296 

and twenty miles further to the southward than ^^^' 
the point which Bellinghausen, in 1820, had been 
able to reach in this meridian. Continuing to the 
weatioard, on February 9(A (1839), in lat. %&" iif S.j 
and long. 163^ 11' E.^ they discovered jive ialanda^ 
since named BaJleny Islands^ from the name of the 
master of the Eliza Scott." 

Now, knowing that Lieutenant Wilkes was in 
possession of this exact information soon after his 
arrival at Sydney, and that his chart and letter 
were forwarded to me nearly a month after he had 
the Athenaeum in his possession, from New Zealand, 
I cannot understand how he could possibly have 
intended a mountainous reef of land, extending 
between fifty and sixty miles in a S. W. and N. E. 
direction, and placed in lat. 65^ 40' S., and long. 
l^b"" E., to represent the five small islands of Bal- 
leny, which lie in lat. 66"* 44' S., and long. 163"* 1 r E., 
and which we saw on the 4th March in the position 
assigned to them by their discoverer. 

Nor have I since heard of or seen any statement 
that could assist me in coming to a different opinion 
from that I have above expressed : on the contrary, 
all I have heard since, more especially the state- 
ments of Lieutenant Ringgold before the court 
that tried Lieutenant Wilkes, in endeavouring to 
justify their claim to the priority of discovery over 
the French navigators, ^^ that on the 13th January 
(1840), when in lat. 66^ 8' S., and long. 168^E.," as 
quoted in Lieutenant Wilkes's narrative * \ ^^ from 

• Vol ii. p. 291. 
u4 



[ 



296 WILKES'S LAND. [Chap. IX. 

i94t. the numerous sea-elephants, and the discoloration 
""~""*" of the water and ice, they were strongly impressed 
with the idea of land being in the vicinity ; but 
on sounding with one hundred fathoms no bottom 
could be found: Lieutenant Commandant Ring- 
gold felt convinced, from the above circumstances 
and the report that penguins were heard, that land 
was near, and thought hecoxdd discern to the south-east 
something like distant mountainsj** just in the position 
of the mountainous land laid down in Wilkes's chart, 
over which we sailed, but not near that of Balleny 
Islands, cannot but tend to confirm the conclusions 
I had before arrived at ; for I can hardly understand 
how, professing as he does to have ^^ prepared a 
chart, la3Hbig down the land, not only where we 
had actually determined it to exist, but those places 
in which every appearance denoted its existence," 
could have omitted to place on such a chart the 
land which Lieutenant Ringgold thought he saw, 
and who has since declared himself ^^ to have very 
little doubt about it," and therefore I can have no 
doubt that the land must have been placed upon 
the chart on this authority, or upon none whatever. 
I trust, at any rate, so far as I am concerned, 
that I have clearly shown that I could not be ex- 
pected to suppose, — for no one who has read these 
statements can even now suppose, — that the land 
marked on Lieutenant Wilkes's chart which we 
sailed over in the Erebus and Terror could have 
been intended to represent Balleny Islands : first, 
because of its being placed at least seventy miles 



Chap. IX.] WILKES'S LAND. 297 

from their real position ; second, because it is placed ib41. 
so near the tracks of the American expedition as to """"~^ 
have been well ipnthin sight from their ships, as 
near as many other portions of their antarctic con- 
tinent, and therefore would lead to the belief that 
it actually was s^n from them; third, from its 
being included in the map of the exclusive opera- 
tions of that expedition, involved in the same bar- 
rier (which also has disappeared), without any mark 
to distinguish it from their other discoveries, and 
that it was sent to me, together with them, to 
show the extent of land that Lieutenant Wilkes 
claimed as the discoveries of the expedition under 
his command. 

Having now fulfilled my task of exculpating 
myself from any blame on this to me very painful 
transaction, I leave others to judge whether the 
^' unfounded " epithet which Lieutenant Wilkes has 
applied to my statement may not be applied to his 
with more propriety. I have endeavoured also to 
do justice to the memory of a brave and enterpris- 
ing British seaman, by showing how completely 
the results of our researches have verified the dis- 
covery he announced to the world, and in some 
degree removed any false impression that may have 
resulted from the statement which has been circu- 
lated in America, that we ^^ had sailed over land 
discovered by our own countryman, and not over 
any part of the antarctic continent of the American 
expedition." 

I cannot refrain from observUig that the practice 



898 Wilkes's land. ICmaf.ul 

^^^* of " laying down the land, not only where we had 
actually determined it to exist, but in those places 
also in which every appearance denoted its ex- 
istence/' is not only entirely new amongst navi- 
gators, but seems to me likely to occasion much 
confusion, and even to raise doubts in many minds 
whether the existence of some portions of land that 
undoubtedly were seen might not also be of an 
equally questionable character with those laid down 
from appearances only, unless some distinctive mark 
were Jven by which they could be known from 
each other. 

I had never entertained the smallest doubt that 
every portion of land laid down on Lieutenant 
Wilkes's chart (with the exception above alluded 
to) had been clearly and distinctly made out to be 
land without the possibility of a question on the 
subject until I read that paragraph, and I must 
confess that after a very careful perusal of his nar- 
rative, and with his chart before me, I feel myself 
quite unable to determine in a satisfactory manner 
how much of the land was really seen by him with 
the degree of certainty that gives indisputable au- 
thority to discovery ; and lest I should make any 
mistake on a point of so much importance, I have 
only placed the discoveries made by D'Urville, Bal- 
leny and ourselves in those parts on the general 
South Polar Chart, and must refer the reader for 
those made by Lieutenant Wilkes to the chart sent 
to me, which will be found in the Appendix, and 
his own narrative ; and I may here further remark, 



Chap. DC.] WILKES's LAND. 299 

once for all, that the whole line of coast laid down i84i. 
as our discovery, was reaUy and truly seen, and its """"""^ 
continuity determined in such a manner as to leave 
not the smallest doubt on the mind of any officer 
or man of either of the ships, and that no part has 
been laid down upon mere appearances or denota- 
tions except in those places where it is distinctly 
marked '' appearance of land." 



301 



CHAPTER X. 

In the instructions drawn up for my guidance by i84i. 
the CJommittee of Physics of the Royal Society, t^^^^^q 
it is stated, that ^^ M. Gauss, from theoretical con- 
siderations, has recently assigned a probable posi- 
tion in lat. 66'' S. and long. 146^ £. to the Southern 
Magnetic Pole, denying the existence of two poles 
of the same name, in either hemisphere, which, as he 
justly remarks, would entail the necessity of admit- 
ting also a third point, having the chief character- 
istics of such a pole intermediate between them ; " 
and again, '^ it is not improbable that the point indi- 
cated by M. Gauss will prove accessible ; at all events 
it cannot but be approachable sufficiently near to 
test by the convergence of meridians the truth of the 
indication ; and as his theory gives within very mo- 
derate limits of error the true place of the northern 
pole, and otherwise represents the magnetic ele- 
ments in every explored region with considerable 
approximation, it is but reasonable to recommend 
this as a distinct point to be decided ; " and al- 
though our researches had proved that the result of 
M. Gauss's theoretical considerations was not so 
correct with respect to the situation of the South 
as it was to that of the North Magnetic Pole, pro- 
bably owing to the want of a sufficient number of 
trustworthy observations from which to draw his 






302 POINT INDICATED BT M. GAU88. [CflAP. X. 

^^^' deductions ; and although we knew the true posi- 
tion of the South Magnetic Pole to be nearly in 76* 
instead of 66^ S., yet as observations at the point 
indicated by M. Grauss might prove to be of more than 
ordinary magnetic interest, I determined to devote 
a few days to endeavour to approach it as nearly as 
possible, although, from the very late period of the 
season, I could not entertain the smallest hope of 
attaining to the spot itself; nor was it of so much 
importance to do so now, as both the American and 
French expeditions had at a more favourable pe- 
riod of the season made magnetic observations in 
its neighbourhood, concurring to show that the 
Magnetic Pole is situated much further south than 
he had supposed. 

The wind was blowing so strong from the north- 
ward, with a high sea running, that we could hardly 
maintain our ground ; we had constant snow and 
thick weather, but were fortunately in a space more 
clear of bergs and loose ice than usual, so that we 
felt ourselves to be in a position of comparative 
comfort and security, at noon we were in lat. 
64^ 2(y S., long. 164^ 24' E. 

In the afternoon a shoal of porpoises, several 
white and many blue petrels and Cape pigeons were 
seen, as were also two whales. The snow ceased, 
the weather became clear, and as we approached the 
pack a strong blink indicated its position before 
Much 10. dark; but we stood on through the night until 
3*30 A.M., when, meeting with broad streams of ice, 
consisting of very heavy pieces, and many bergs, 



Cbat. X.] DELATED BY ADYEBSB WINDS* 803 

we wore and stood off agahii our object now ^^^' 
being merely to contend, as well as our dull sailing 
ships could do against the adverse wind which 
continued to blow with considerable violence the 
whole day, during which we passed many bergs, 
much worn away by the long continued action of 
the waves, and in consequence presenting more 
variety of figure than any we had before met with 
in the southern ocean : with the thermometer very 
little below the freezing point, we greatly enjoyed 
the high temperature of a milder climate, not- 
withstanding the occasional showers of snow that 
fell during the day. At 3 p. m. we again wore, and 
stood to the S. W., expecting the wind from that 
quarter, the barometer, at the same time, indi- 
cating the approach of fine weather. But still the 
westerly swell prevented our making any consi- 
derable progress, and the whole of the next four 
days was spent struggling with but small effect 
against the strong westerly and south-westerly 
wind that prevailed, taking advantage of every 
slight change of wind to attain our object, and 
occasionally getting sight of the main pack when 
we stretched to the southward of the 64th degree 
of latitude. 

At noon the 14th, we were lat. 62^ 42', long. Maroh 14. 
156^ 51' £. The mercury in the barometer at 
that time had attained the unusual height, for these 
latitudes, of 29*5 inches, at which it stood stea- 
dily until midnight, (the wind then shifting to the 
north, accompanied by a very thick fog,) when 



304 GBBAT FALL OF THE BABOMETEH. [Cbap.X 

^^^' it again fell, as rapidly as it had risen, until at noon 
March i^. the following day it had reached 28-8 inches. We 
had so often before this time experienced such sud- 
den oscillations of the barometer, that we were in 
consequence prepared to expect the sudden and vio- 
lent squall which, however, came on so furiously as 
hardly to afford us sufficient time to close reef our 
top-sails, and furl all the other sails. It was of only 
four or five hours' duration, and had the good effect 
of driving off the fog. We had for several dajrs 
seen only a very few bergs ; a circumstance that 
surprised us greatly, as great numbers were met 
with in these parts by the American expedition 
during the preceding summer. They must have 
either been destroyed by the violence of the winter 
storms, or drifted away to the northward without 
their places having been supplied by others from the 
southern lands. It was a comfortable circumstance 
for us, and rendered the service less hazardous and 
anxious than it otherwise would have been, for 
had we found them here in any considerable num- 
bers during the long dark nights that now pre- 
vailed, with a constant succession of storms and 
foggy weather, it would have been utterly imprac- 
ticable to have persevered in the navigation, and 
have obliged us to relinquish our present object. 
We made sail as the wind gradually abated ; but it 
had raised a high, short, irregular sea, in which 
the ships rolled and pitched uneasily : with diffi- 
culty we kept their heads in the right direction 
untU 8 P.M., when it fell perfectly calm, and the 



M 



Chap.X.] sailing along THE PACK EDGE. 305 

swell took complete command of them, carrying ^^^^' 
us away, during the whole night, upon a course 
directly opposite to that we wished to go. 

At four the next morning we had a light wind Mwcb 16. 
from the north-eastward, which gradually freshened 
to a pleasant breeze, veering to the southward as it 
increased in strength ; once more we had all stud- 
ding sails set, running to the westward, but not 
within sight of the pack, although a strong blink 
to the southward clearly indicated that it was at 
no great distance in that direction: we passed 
many straggling pieces of ice, and several bergs, 
but they were by no means numerous ; and at noon 
were in lat. 64^ 14' S., long. 154^ 40' E. Again, as 
on the previous evening, we had a calm from eight March 17. 
o'clock until four the next morning, the breeze 
following the same course as yesterday, beginning 
in the north-east, veering to the south-eastward 
about noon, and declining to a light south-westerly 
wind at midnight. We sailed through a great 
quantity of young ice as we closed the pack, and at 
length it became so thick, where there was much 
heavy ice amongst it, that we could not get within 
two or three miles of the pack edge, and 
owing to the heavy swell, and difficulty of steering 
amongst the ice in which the ships were involved, 
they received some very heavy blows, but fortu- 
nately without doing any other injury than remov- 
ing some of the copper : the pack presented much 
the same appearance as that we bad sailed along in 
our way from Cape North of Victoria Land to 

VOL. I. X 



306 SAILING ALONG THE PACK EDGE. [Chap.X. 

^^^^' Balleny Islands ; for although at a distance it 
seemed to be a compact solid-looking mass, still on 
closer inspection we could make out that it also was 
composed of heavy loose pieces, amongst which the 
undulations of the ocean could be perceived, as far 
as we could discern from the mast-head ; and the 
rolling motion of the larger pieces clearly showed 
that the frost had not yet been sufficiently severe to 
perfectly bind them together into an unbroken 
field : we continued to run to the westward, as close 
along the edge of the pack as the strong pancake ice 
permitted, until dark, when we hauled off into 
clearer water for the night. The Aurora Australia 
was seen for about a quarter of an hour, about 11 
p. M. bearing west by compass, shooting up bright 
coruscations to the altitude of forty-five degrees : in 
some parts it appeared in a difiused light along the 
edges of the clouds. 
March 18. Being Calm at noon, when in lat. 63*^ 5 1' S., long. 
151*^ 47' E., we tried for soundings, but could not 
reach the ground wth six hundred fathoms. The 
temperature at that depth, 39*2 ; at 450 fathoms 
38-5 ; at 300 fathoms 375 ; at 150 fathoms, 35-5 ; 
at the surface 30*4 ; and the specific gravity of the 
water throughout 1*0272 at the temperature of the 
freezing point. With a moderate breeze from the 
north-east, we made good way to the westward 
during the afternoon and evening ; and although it 
became thick with snow towards midnight, we 
continued our course through the night under 
moderate sail, and by keeping a vigilant look-out 



CHiLP.X.] MAGNBTIC OBSERVATIONS. 307 

avoided the bergs and heavy ice we were sailing i^^- 
amongst. 

As we were now approaching the meridian of 
the pole indicated by M. Gauss's theory, although 
in a somewhat lower latitude, such magnetic 
observations as depended not on the weather were 
made in uninterrupted succession, and the vari- 
ation of the compass was observed wh^iever 
the sun was to be seen between the clouds 
which covered the sky nearly the whole day. At 
noon we were in lat. e*"" 2(y S., long. 148'' 45' E., 
dip 84^ 27' S., var. 16^ 46' E.: standing to the 
S. W. under all sail, direct for the point we were 
seeking, we made the heavy pack edge at 8 p.m., 
and bore away along it to the westward, through 
streams of young ice and loose pieces from the 
pack ; the sky was overcast, but there was suffi- 
cient light from the moon to enable us to run 
without hazard during the night. 

At seven the next morning, when in lat. 65^ March 20. 
15' S., and long. 144^ 53' E., and therefore only 
forty-five miles north of the spot, our obser- 
vations gave a dip of 85** 5', but the variation 
could not be observed, owing to the clouded 
state of the sky, between the evening of the 1 9th, 
when in lat. 64^ 24', and long. 148* 27' E., 
it amounted to 16^ 41' E., and the evening 
of the 20th, in lat. 65^ 4', and long. 142^ 49', 
when it was 1 2^ 37' E. ; the main pack prevented 
our nearer approach to the interesting point, but 
our observations perfectly corroborate those we 

X 2 



308 MAGNETIC OBSEBVATIONS. [Chaf. X. 

1841. made in the highest southern latitudes, as to the 
""~""~" real position of the magnetic pole, although we 
were here about six hundred miles from it, and 
will therefore not have been made in vain : they 
differ, however, more than I expected from those ob- 
tained by Lieutenant Wilkes the preceding sununer, 
making due allowance for the difference of our geo- 
graphical positions ; thus, in lat. 67^ 4', long. 147^ 
30' E., his observed dip amounted to 87'' 30' ; whilst 
ours, in nearly the same meridian, 147^ 15' £., 
and in latitude 64^ 56', was only 85'' 3', being at 
least a degree of difference greater than our dis- 
tance apart would justify. In his letter to m^ it 
had been first written 86'' 30', and then altered to 
87^ 30^, so that I may be mistaken which he meant 
it to be, especially as 86^ 30' would be a very near 
accordance with our observations. I have not been 
able to ascertain the dip observed by the French 
Expedition at this spot. 

One only object now remained for us to accom- 
plish before seeking a milder and more congenial 
climate : on our voyage between Eerguelen Island 
and Van Diemen's Land, we had crossed the line 
of no variation in latitude 46" S., and longitude 
1 34^^ 30' E. * ; it appeared to me desirable to ascertain 
its situation in as high a latitude as circumstances 
admitted, and to recross it in our way to Hobart 
ToAvn in an intermediate latitude, and by thus 
determining its place at three distinct and nearly 

* See page 104. of this Volume. 



Chap. X.] LINE OF NO VARIATION. 309 

equidistant points, the nature of the curve by which i84i. 
it reaches the magnetic pole might be computed. ""^""""^ 
As we found the easterly variation to be diminish- 
ing rapidly, we might expect, if favoured by cir- 
cumstances of wind and weather, to accomplish our 
purpose without any very considerable expense of 
time : and as our crews continued to enjoy the same 
good health they had preserved during the whole of 
the severe season of antarctic navigation, I felt the 
less hesitation in prolonging their labours in these 
latitudes a few days longer for so important a pur- 
pose. 

A fresh south-easterly breeze favoured our 
wishes, and we had a good run to the westward 
before the darkness of night compelled us to reduce 
our speed as we sailed along the margin of the 
main pack. 

At daylight we again made all sail, but the Much si. 
wind had shifted to the S. W., so that we could not 
maintain so high a latitude as we desired; at 
noon we were in lat. 64'' 7', and long. liO"" 22' E., 
in which position we could not get soundings 
with six hundred fathoms of line; the temper- 
ature at 600 fathoms was 38*7 ; at 450 fa- 
thoms 38; at 300 fathoms 36*5; at 150 fathoms 
34 ; at the sur&ce 30-8 ; that of the air 27"". 
Many large icebergs were passed during the 
day ; penguins, cape pigeons, and the blue petrel 
were about us in great numbers, and a large shoal 
of porpoises was seen going to the westward. 



X 8 



310 



MAGNETIC OBSERVATIONS. 



[CUAF. X. 



1841. 



Observations of the Dip and Variation, made on board H.M.S« 
Erebus, between the 18th of March and 6th of April, 1841. 



Date. 


Position. 


I>ip& 


^r._- 


* A* 


^^ • 






VAnanon. i 






Lat & 


Long.R 












o / 


/ 


1 




/ 




Mar. 18 


63-52 


151-50 


84-06 


— 


20-15 


The sign — de- 


19 


6416 


14915 


84-20 


—— 


16-40 


notes easterlj. 


20 


64-56 


147-14 


85-03 




— 


and + de- 




65-15 


144-53 


85-05 




— 


notes westerly 




65-04 


142-46 


— 




12-37 


variation. 


21 


64-26 


140-46 


84-55 


■H^B 


6-57 




22 


63-20 


139-43 


84-05 


— .- 


5-58 






62-42 


138-20 j 84-00 


— 


4-05 




23 


62-20 


136-26 : 83-45 


— 


1-12 






6206 


136-07 • 83-80 

1 
1 


— 


0-27 


Cross line of no 


25 ! 60-23 


131-38 ; 83-10 


+ 


809 


variation. 


1 26 


59-10 


130-00 ' 82-36 


•f 


8-82 




28 


57-20 


127-49 1 81-45 


+ 


8-47 




29 


56-16 


iS&46 


81-00 


-f 


5-46 




30 


5510 


131-30 


80-20 


+ 


1-34 






55-07 


132-40 80-00 


+ 


1-05 


Re-cross lino of 


31 


54-05 


134-30 79-30 


.— 


1-44 


no variation. 


Apr. 1 


52-56 


135-24 78-50 


— 


1-03 


Anomalous ob- 


2 


51-12 136-55 i 77-40 1 — 


4-39 


servation. 


5 


44-52 143-38 i 73-20 


—^ 


6-00 




6 


44-06 


145-42 71-40 

1 


^■^ 


1006 





The above table of Magnetic Observations is in- 
serted here to show how rapidly the easterly variation 
diminished, until we crossed the line of no variation 
during the night of the 23d, in latitude 62^0^8., and 
longitude 135** 60' E. ; thence how quickly the 
westerly variation increased until the 28th, when 
in lat. 57** 20' and long. 127*' 49' E., it amounted 
to S"" 47' W. ; and again, how regularly it dimi- 



Chap. X.] AURORA AUSTRALI8. 311 

nished until we recrossed the line of no variation ^^^i. 
in lat. 54* 30' S., and long. 133* (/ E. 

The Aurora Australis was seen at 2 A. m., a broad March 22. 
band of yellowish light in the north-east. It was 
again visible at night from nine till near midnight, 
bearing from N. W. to E. (magnetic), at an altitude 
of ten degrees, shooting long narrow streamers of 
colourless light towards the zenith. In the course 
of the day we passed several bergs of large size ; 
and in the evening we were fortunate in getting 
good azimuth by means of Sirius and Procyon, by 
which we found the variation had decreased to 
4* 5' E. 

Pursuing our course to the N. W. with a favouring March 28. 
breeze, our latitude at noon was 62* 12', longitude 
136* 18'; and late in the evening we crossed the 
line of no variation in latitude 62* (K S., and lon- 
gitude 135*50' E. At 7* 20' p.m. observed a bright 
arch of the Aurora Australis, W. N. W. and E. S. E., 
extending across the zenith, of a yellow colour, its 
edges tinged with a purple hue : in a quarter of 
an hour the centre of the arch gradually declined 
to the N. N. E., and disappeared ten degrees above 
the horizon : a succession of similar arches formed 
at an altitude of about ten degrees in the S. S. W., 
their extreme points being alsoW. N. W. and E. S. E. ; 
the centre of each arch gradually rose towards the 
zenith, which several of them passed before they 
disappeared ; but generally they became more 
faint at the altitude of 45*, no longer preserved a 
regular form, but broke up into small streamers, 

X 4 



312 AURORA AUSTRALIS. [Chap.X. 

1841. and disappeared on reaching an altitude of 70^, the 
lustre of the larger stars was much dimmed as it 
passed over them, but they could be distinctly 
seen through it ; some of the smaller stars were 
totally obscured by the brighter and denser por- 
tions of the Aurora ; this splendid display was, as 
usual, followed by a fall of snow, and bright dif- 
fused auroral light illumined the edges of the clouds 
from which the snow fell. 

March 24. Still running to the north-west to increase the 
westerly variation, we were unfortunate in not 
obtaining observations ; throughout the day it blew 
a strong gale of wind from the eastward, with 
thick falling snow, so that we could seldom see a 
distance of half a mile before us, and most provi- 
dentially we did not meet with any bergs. The 
barometer fell rapidly, and at 10 p.m. stood at 
28*33 inches ; the gale at that time had con- 
siderably abated, and the wind shifted to the 
north ; the snow had given place to a thin mist, 
slightly lighted up by the Aurora, which only occa- 
sionally peeped through in obscure patches, but 
afforded us as much light as would the moon 
at quadrature, and which was to us of great advan- 
tage. 

March 25. At 4 A.M. two iccbergs were seen directly ahead 
of us, but fortunately we had time to avoid them ; 
three others were seen soon afterwards, when the 
weather was clearer : being becalmed at noon, inlat. 
60** 22' S., long. 131'' 28' E., we tried for soundings 
with six hundred fathoms: the temperature as indi- 



Chap.x] aurora australis. 313 

cated by the thermometer at that depth, 40*5^, i84i. 
nearly one degree higher than the mean temper- 
ature of the ocean, may have been occasioned by a 
sudden jerk in hauling it up; the thermometer 
was, as usual, compared with the standard before 
and after the experiment, and found to have a 
small unvarying correction. At 450 fathoms, the 
temperature was 39*5^: at 300 fathoms, 38^: at 
150 fathoms, 37^ : at the surface, 35^ : several ice- 
bergs were in sight at the time, but none within 
five or six miles. 

The Aurora again afforded us considerable light 
at night, in the absence of the moon, but did 
not break through the clouds which obscured the 
sky, and from which very fine snow was constantly 
falling until nearly 8 P. M., when it appeared from 
E. N. E. to N. W. of a yeUow colour, forming an 
arch twenty degrees high, and at times exhibiting 
vivid flashes of a bright pink colour : it dispersed 
in a quarter of an hour. We continued to make 
good progress to the north-west during the two 
following days. In the evening of the 27th we Mwch27. 
witnessed a most brilliant exhibition of Aurora 
Australis, which I shall here insert in detail from 
the copious notes made at the time by myself and 
the officers, only first remarking that the constant 
but light snow of the morning was turned into 
small rain by the temperature rising at 1 1 a. m. to 
36^: the rain ceased at 7 P. M., after a calm of two 
hours, and a breeze from the S.W. that followed 
partially cleared the sky. " At 7 50 p. m. bright 
coruscations of the Aurora appeared in the west ; 



814 AURORA AUSTRALIS. [Chap. X. 

^^^'' the streamers rose from a base at 20** above the 
horizon to an altitude of 70**. At 8 15 it formed 
a double arch from W. S. W. to E. N. E. at the 
horizon, the altitude of their centres in the S. S. E. 
being 38** and 53**; they continued visible forty- 
five minutes, descending slowly to the S. S. W. 
At 9 1 5 p. M. it again appeared W. N. W. and 
E. S. E. in concentric arches of difinsed light, with 
apparently a rapid internal motion, like a current 
passing through and lighting up thin mist. The 
centres of these concentric arches first became 
visible in the S. S. W. at an altitude of 30**, rising 
in succession slowly to the zenith, and thence de- 
clining in the N. N. E. to an altitude of 50** at 9 60, 
when the S. S. W. semi-hemisphere was perfectly 
clear, and the Aurora was very dimly seen to the 
N. N. E. At 9 53 a bright difi'used light suddenly 
appeared from behind a dark cloud, and two or 
three minutes afterwards pink and green colours of 
considerable intensity were seen amongst it, prin- 
cipally at the edges, and before 10 o'clock bright 
streamers darted upward from the cloud to the ze- 
nith, forming coronsB, and exhibiting bright flashes 
of all the prismatic colours, green and red being the 
more frequent and conspicuous : this Aurora had 
much motion, darting and quivering about the sky 
in rapid flights, and in every direction. It sank in 
a few minutes beneath the horizon to the S. S. W., in 
the contrary direction to the series of successive 
concentric arches of difinsed light before mentioned. 
Some very thin clouds now covered the E.S.E. 
portion of the sky, and a deposit of very fine snow 



Jb«^- 



Chap. X.] GREAT FLIGHT OF PETRELS. 315 

followed. Heavier clouds soon after rose in the i®*^- 
west (to windward), and although we observed 
no more vivid exhibitions of the Aurora, it con- 
tinued faintly visible until midnight. Between 10 
and 11 P.M., when the sky was very clear in the 
S. W. quarter of the hemisphere, only one falling 
star was detected, although carefully watched for. 

It blew a strong breeze from the northward all March 28. 
day, so as to prevent our making much way to the 
N. W. ; and finding from good observations during 
the forenoon that we had increased the westerly 
variation to 8** 47', I did not consider it necessary 
to stretch any further to the westward. We there- 
fore wore round at 11 15 a. m. for the purpose of 
recrossing the line of no variation, and of visiting 
the spot assigned, in my instructions, to one of the 
foci of greater magnetic intensity, which I had been 
prevented doing on our way to Van Diemen's Land 
from Kerguelen Island. At noon we were in 
lat. bT" 21' S., long. 1^7^ 35' E. : during the day 
we observed several large flocks of a small dark- 
coloured petrel, which we took to be the young of 
the Cape-pigeon proceeding to the northward: by the 
length of time they took to fly past us, we estimated 
some of those flocks to be from six to ten miles 
in length, two or three miles broad, and very densely 
crowded together, literally darkening the sky during 
the two or three hours they were passing over and 
about us. A few stormy petrel were also seen. 

At 10 30 p. M. a single flash of forked lightning 
was seen in the N . N. E., and at the same time an 
arch of Aurora extended across the zenith from the 



316 ICEBERQS. [Chap. X. 

1841. horizon W.N.W. and E.S.E. ; it was then blow- 
March 29. ing a strong north- westeriy gale. Between mid- 
night and 1 A. M. eleven falling stars were observed 
in the S. W. quarter, and the Aurora was seen and 
described in the Log-book by the officer of the watch, 
Lieutenant Sibbald, as follows : '^ 30 to 2 10 a. m. 
observed bright coruscations of the Aurora, forming 
a succession of arches bearing from west to south 
at the horizon, passing gradually over to the N. £., 
each being visible from four to six minutes. At 
3 A. M. observed bright coruscations directly over 
head in the form of a crescent, and of all the 
colours of the rainbow, visible four minutes." 

The gale lasted throughout the day, with violent 
squalls ; but we made good way under dose-reefed 
topsails and reefed courses. Several large flocks 
of the dark-coloured petrel were again seen to-day, 
and some large shoals of porpoises, all going to the 
northward. 
March 30. At I 30 A. M.we passed two narrow lines of heavy 
ice, the fragments of the numerous bergs about us, 
and dangerous to merchant vessels keeping so high 
as the 56th parallel of latitude at this period of the 
year, on their way to Van Diemen's Land. 

The Aurora Australis wa^ visible throughout 
the night, but without exhibiting any very striking 
features, generally appearing in a white, difiused, 
sometimes arched light. 

Soon after noon, when in latitude 55^ 9' S., and 
longitude 132^ 28' E., we hove to, and tried the 
temperature of the ocean at various depths, as 
we knew from our observation of the 25th, that 



Ch^. X.] MEAN TEMPERATURE OF THE OCEAN. 317 

we were getting very near to the line of equal iS4i. 
temperature throughout its whole depth, which 
encircles the globe between the fiftieth and six- 
tieth degree of south latitude. The temperature 
at 600 fathoms was 39*8 : at 450 fathoms, 39-8 : 
at 300 fathoms, 39*5 : at 150 fathoms, 39* : and 
at the surface 38*5 : so that no doubt a few 
weeks earlier we should have here found the mean 
temperature to prevail, although at this season of 
the year it was still a short distance to the north- 
ward; but we had no opportunity of determining 
its place more accurately. 

During the 30th and 31st we pursued our course March soi 
to the north-eastward, favoured by a moderate 
north-westerly breeze and fine weather. Between 
the periods of our observations on the evening of 
the 30th and evening of the 31st we again crossed 
the line of no variation, and having been fortunate 
in getting numerous azimuths, the point where we 
passed over it may be deduced with great exact- 
ness.* The Aurora appeared in great brilliancy 
during the night of the 30th ; its various phases 
are minutely noted in the Log«book, and will be 
found of great value whenever the reduction of the 
magnetometrical observations at Van Diemen's Land 
shall be proceeded with. A few icebergs were seen, 
but not in sufficient numbers to give us any un- 
easiness. 

Just before midnight of the 3 1 st the wind shifted 
to the S.W., and we made all sail before it. 

^ See Table of ObservatioDa, page 810 of thia Volume. 



318 MKTBOROLOGICAL ABSTRACT. 



1841. IBSTK&CT OF THE METEOROLOQICAI. JOORITAL KEPT OK BOABD 
HEB majesty's 8H1P EREBUS. HARCH, 1841, 



Dk- 


Poritlon 


«N«n. 


T«.p* 


nlun of (b« Air In 

3b>d>. 


W Surface. 


r.^." 


LU.S. 


Urn,. It. 


Mu. 


NIa. 


M«B. 


^^X. 




O f 

69-04 


167-49 


21 


19 


20-a 


28-8 


32 ' IS 




58-27 


167-43 


37 


16-B 


21-9 


28-9 


94 1 34* 




87-« 


187-01 


15S 


11-7 


13-7 


883 


14 


13 




6B-*4 


165-49 


37 


16 


23-6 


38* 


23 


33* 




»■„ 


167-47 


27 


93 


2S-1 


88-B 


27 


18 




69-Sl 


164-45 


3t 


24-5 


36-6 


36-8 


30 


99 




69-29 


168-10 


39 


34 


SS-T 


38-8 


39 


99 




64-3B 


163-99 


38-5 


33-9 


38-8 


39-3 


88 : 34 1 




M-20 


16415 


33-5 


30-9 


321 


30-9 


„ 


33» 


10 


6«-06 
G-l-03 
B4-ia 


16320 

163-09 
161-20 


31-9 
32-5 
33 


3B-9 
39 


39-7 
30-1 

38-S 


30-0 
30-0 
39-4 


31 
31 
33 


Sl- 
ag 

98 


la 


68-28 


199-35 


32 


35 


SB'7 


30-2 


31 


31 


u 


63-42 


196-31 


30 


36-S 


37-9 


29-4 


38 


S9 


ta 


64-01 


199-97 


33 


31 


26-7 


39-3 


33 


S3* 


16 


64-10 


1S4'40 


33 


gO-9 


21-6 


98-8 


24 


32 


17 


64-Sl 


151-58 


as 


31-3 


33-0 


28-8 


94 


S4' 


IS 


63-SI 


151-47 


„.. 


34 


38'3 


30-1 


S9 


86 


19 


64-3! 


14845 


3t'8 


31 


37-5 


30-0 


31 


31» 


21 


69' IS 
64 07 


143-45 
140-32 


23 

37-5 


17-9 
21-9 


30-6 
23-3 


38-7 
29-0 


90 
84 


17 
30 


13 


62'3a 


laa-ifl 


33-5 


97 


31-2 


31-1 


33 


9T 


13 

i* 

!5 
36 


Ba-12 
6MI 
60-22 
59-24 


136-18 
133-52 
131-28 

130-03 


35-9 
33-9 
39 
37-5 


33 
33 


33-5 
33-1 
34-4 
34-4 


33-3 

34-3 
34-7 


34 

S6 
36 


S4» 

a* 

SB 
3S 


a? 


58-03 


128-40 




33 


34-4 


35-5 


33 


SS" 


SB 
39 
30 


57-31 
56-38 
95-09 


137-46 
139-57 

133-38 


39 
39 
44 


3S-9 

39 

36-5 


37-2 
37-3 

39-7 


36-.1 
36-6 
38-0 


89 


3» 
39 
88 


31 


54-04 


134-51 


41 


38 


39-6 


38-5 


— 


jl 








~**~ 


11-7 


28-69 


31-13 



* Sdow or nin hlling. 



Cbap. X.] 



MBTEOBOLOGICAL ABSTaACT. 



ABSTRACT OF TBB MITEOIIOIOOICAL JOCHKAl. KMT ON BOABD 
HEB KAJXSTt's 8HIP EMBUfl. — llAHCH, 1841. 



















BUOIDMH (miTHUd). 


Wind. 






Dtf. 












WhUw,. 


Hu, 


UlD. 


M«a. 


ninwUoo. 


Tonm. 




iDchd. 


lDch«. 


lochu. 










a8-S97 


88^711 


as 789 


8.W. bj W 




6 b.cr.' 




■7»4 


■seo 


■638 


8.W. 




[flult 












[th 




■740 


■58S 


■666 




Bl^cq. 
Og.p* 




■678 


■86S 


■478 


Eait 


{^::;) 


ob-p* 




■9S7 


■696 


-873 


S.E. 




r*JL4b.eB.p... 
U.K. 3 b. eg. 
5b.cT. 




a»-ooi 


■871 


■967 


Eaii 






■038 


■754 


■8sa 


S.Euutij 


r*-M-4 


SK,. 




■167 


■913 


39-059 


H.Wettrtlj 


fl.M.3 
1p.«.4 


8b.cS.. 
Od^. 




ae-sso 


-615 


aB'73e 


N.W. 


r*«. 5 


Om.(. 




■69fl 
■807 


■i88 


■623 

■707 


WMieriy 


r.x.3 


1 b.cg. 
8-q-p-i.^ 

3 b.c.g.p... 
Bb.cg.pa. 




■S74 


-4S3 


■sas 


W„«rlj 






SB'S 11 


-457 


■796 


South 


[iil] 


OM-p.t 




■338 


aa-sai 


■441 


S.W. 




8 b.e.g. 




■aes 
sa-9es 


38-848 
■793 


'989 

■B44 


8.W.il*rl7 
S-Euter); 




r*.«.o^™* 

U.M. C 

ob- 




as-ooa 

■144 


■739 
•976 


■B78 
89^0<7 


Eatterij 
rA.if.S.W.-l 
Um. Eut J 




f *.«. g.p.fc 
lP-lf.Og. 




■061 
■014 


■71B 
■817 


88-835 
•905 


Eutcrlr 
8.E.bjE. 


(4' 


g.p.«. 




■as* 


89'030 


B9-I64 


S.W. 




IS 
33 


143 

■IBB 


388S4 
■953 


-OCB 

■034 


Esrt 




rA.«.8b.c* 

Ip.». Ib.«L.g.p* 

Om-p.*. 
3b.c.g.p^ 




■OBS 




38-898 


E.N.E. 




as 


ae'7a6 


-430 


-6U 


E.K.E. 




S6 


a9']S6 


■74a 


89-083 


S.W. 




27 aaa 


■819 


■Oil 


E.N.E. 


' 


fA.H.OtB.pj. 

lr.tt. S b-cq-d. 
3 kcq.d. 


SB 


■a4a 


■738 


a8'S»7 


N.H.W. 




as 




■7SB 


89088 


M.W. 




30 


■683 


as-3i8 


■445 


N.W. 




31 


■741 


■158 


■640 


N.K.E. 


3 
















_ 


89-741 


a8'a65 


88-8808 




3-64 





319 

1841. 



* For ibe cNpluiMicM of tkew iTMbota Me a* Appcadli 



320 MEAN TEMPERATURE OF THE OCEAN. [Cha». X. 

1841. Favoured by a moderate breeze from the south- 
April 1. west, we shaped our course for the focus of maxi- 
mum total intensity, as indicated by the general 
course of the isodynamic lines in Colonel Sabine's 
chart of the southern hemisphere, lying in about 
lat. 47"* S. and long. 140** E., a position which we 
had not been able to attain during our run from 
Kerguelen Island to Van Diemen's Land, but which 
we now had in our power of approaching with 
greater advantage, by a course directly across the 
isodynamic oval surrounding it. The last iceberg 
was seen from the mast-head this morning when 
in lat. 53^ 30' S. : it was of small size. 

The wind increased to a strong breeze, and we 
had a good run during the night. 
April 2. Being nearly calm in the forenoon of the next 
day the boats were lowered down, and soundings 
were obtained in one thousand four hundred and 
forty fathoms : our latitude at the time being 
52^ 10' S. and long. 136^ 56' E. The weight em- 
ployed on this occasion was 336 lbs., and the in- 
stant of each hundred fathoms passing off the 
reel was taken as usual, and is given on the fol- 
lowing page, by which the increased friction of 
the line throughout the descent of the weight may 
' be observed. The observations of the temper- 
ature which follow serve to show we had crossed 
the line of mean temperature since our experiments 
on the 30th March, and that the influence of the 
sun's heat was here felt to the depth of 460 fa- 
thoms. 



2d 


45 


48 


24 


54 


- 69 


26 


10 


- 76 


27 


31 


81 


28 


55 


84 


dO 


27 


- 92 


82 


7 


- 100 


33 


48 


. 101 


35 


36 


- 108 


37 


31 


. 115 


39 


29 


- 118 


41 


31 


. 122 


43 


34 


- 123 


45 


40 


- 126 


46 


48 


- 68 



Chap. X.] TEMPERATUBB OF THE OCEAN. 32 1 

TIME BT CHBONOMETEE. 1841. 

Let go at - 3»» 22« 19«. 

100 fathoms passed out at 22 57 occapied 38" running out 

200 . . 

300 

400 . . 

500 

600 . - 

700 - - 

800 . - 

900 
1000 
1100 
1200 
1300 
1400 
1500 
Struck ground in 1540 at 46 

1540 fathoms passed out in 24 29 

The boat was kept moored to the bottom some 
time to ascertain if there was any current, but it 
was not perceptible. The line was then cut, not 
being sufficiently strong to draw the weight up 
again. 

In the afternoon the temperature and specific 
gravity of the sea at various depths was tried. The 
temperature of the surface at the time being 43^ ; 
at 150 fathoms, 42"" ; at 300 fathoms, 41'' ; at 450 
fathoms, 40^ and at 600 fathoms, 39*8'': the 
specific gravity being the same throughout the 
whole depth as at the surfieu^ 1 *0274, at 43^. A 
piece of sea-weed, the first we had seen since 
leaving the antarctic seas, was passed duri^lpkhe 
afternoon. 

VOL. I. Y 



322 FOCUS OF GREATEST INTENSITY. [Chap. X. 

iwi. In the evening the breeze freshened to a gale 

from E.S.E., with thick weather and rain, which 
obliged us to reduce our sail to close-reefed top- 
sails and reefed foresail. 

April 3. The gale continued throughout the whole of the 
next day. with frequent squalls and a hiirh sea 
runBiDgf «> th« 2 n>«gnetie oUen^ w«e 
not made under favourable circumstances, which 
was the more to be regretted, as we were now £Gtst 
approaching the focus of greatest intensity. 

In the evening, at 10 p.m., we were in lat. 47^41' 
S. by an observation of the moon's meridian altitude, 
and must have passed over the point we were in 
search of about eight o'clock the next morning. 

April 4. The gale was still blowing with great force, and 
the sea was running so high as to wash away one 
of our quarter boats. Very satisfactory observations 
of the magnetic force were, however, obtained by 
means of Mr. Fox's invention, and are published in 
the Second Part of the " Philosophical Transac- 
tions of the Royal Society for 1843." They tend 
to show a smaller relative amount of magnetic 
force than had been anticipated, and to prove that 
the focus of greatest intensity lies very much far- 
ther to the southward than the spot indicated 
in my instructions, and probably not far from 
" Terre Adelie" of M. D'Urville. At noon we were 
in lat. 46° 34' S. long. 140° 36' E., and having now 
completed all that remained to be done, we steered 
direct for Van Diemen's Land, which we came in 
April 6. sight of at 10 30 A. m. of the 6th, and late in the 



Chap. X.] BNTEB THE DBRWENT. 323 

evening entered Storm Bay. The light at the en- i84i. 
trance of the Derwent was seen soon after mid- April 6. 
night, and at nine the next morning the pilot came 
on board. The wind was blowing fresh down the 
river, so that it took us until late in the after- 
noon to beat up. Soon after noon the (jovemor's 
barge was seen standing towards us ; and our kind 
friend, who was the last to leave us on our depar- 
ture for the south, was the first to greet us with 
his warm and affectionate congratulations on our 
return. He was received with three hearty cheers 
from both ships. The vessels were moored in their 
former berths off the government gardens, conve- 
nient to the Rossbank Observatory, after an ab- 
sence of five months. 

In concluding the narrative of our first season's 
navigation of the Antarctic Seas, I will only 
further observe, that, amongst the many events 
which had occurred to caU forth our gratitude to 
God for his guidance and preservation during the 
arduous and hazardous operations in which we had 
been engaged, it was a source of no ordinary grati- 
fication to me to reflect that the execution of the 
service had been unattended by casualty, calamity, 
or sickness of any kind, and that every individual 
of both ships had been permitted to return in per- 
fect health and safety to thb our southern home. 



T 2 



APPENDIX. 



tS 



APPEXDIi InjlL 




the qomer pieees sad 
aD imik izftd 

Hie kziee of tke had beng 
mrnated br fttingt or 
dooe at the iOm. Booien^or 
for that onfimtxlj oaed, esUadmg iloag the bodj at the 
line of flopUtioBy aid e iuiieij c uteMag die bow dovm to 
thekeeL 

^ithm-hwd, the apaeea between the bands at the floor 
heads, &c., are itted m with n-iadi oak pkak ; die entire 
sorface in die hold besag fanlkfd, two thifhacays of 1| 
inch Africaa Uwrd ar« then worked AagonaUj orer die 
bands, &C. at rii^ht angka to each odier, each l^er being 
aUo caulked. TW thwartiUp bnlkfarada of the fore, main, 
and afurr hr>ld« ar* wffMiffigi djagonslly of two thifkngaara 
of 1 4 inch Afmaa bMfd at fi|^ »i^ to each other, the 

f 4 



r 



328 FORTIFICATION OF THB EBEBUS. 

upper ends rabbetting into the lower deck beams, and the 
lower ends into four-inch plank, wrought upon the doubling. 
The bulkheads are caulked on both sides, and rendered 
water-tight. The wing bulkheads are similarly wrought. 
The limber boards are likewise caulked down and doubled 
by a fore and aft plank. Penstocks are introduced in the 
limbers at the bulkhead, allowing a communication, when 
required, from one compartment to another, leading to the 
welL The fore hold is provided with two common pumps, 
to work on the weather deck ; and the weU is furnished 
with four of Massey's excellent pumps. 

The bow, internally, is fortified with a solid mass of 
timber eight inches moulded, canting from abreast the fore- 
mast to the stemson, square to the body. Between the . 
upper and lower decks, and also between the lower and 
orlop decks, thick shelf pieces are wrought, terminating 
under the transom abaft, and meeting at the middle line 
at the deck hooks forward. 

The central planks of the weather deck are mx inches 
thick, laid fore and aft ; the remainder of the deck is 
wrought double ; the lower planks, three inches thick, are 
laid fore and aft; the upper planks, three inches thick, 
diagonally, having feamaught dipped in hot tallow, laid 
between the two surfaces. The beams of this deck Are 
connected by pointers, or diagonally-lopped carlings, from 
the catheads forward. 

Additional crutches and sleepers have been introduced 
abaft, and diagonal trusses worked between the chocks 
under the lower deck beams. The ship is otherwise very 
strongly built, having diagonal iron riders, iron hooks and 
crutches in the bow, and iron sleepers abaft. 

Filling timbers have been introduced in the stem, with 
an inner transom, kneed to the stem post and ship's side, 
double-planked inside and out, thus rendering the counter 
as strong as the bow, to meet the shocks which the extre- 
mities are most likely to encounter in the ice. 

Cbathun, 
19th September, 1839. 



329 



APPENDIX, No. 11. 

ELEVATION OF PICO RUIYO IK THE ISLAND OV 

MADEIBA. 

Four barometers were employed in this measurement, 
viz. the two standard marine barometers of the Erebus 
and Terror, and two portable barometers ; the latter were 
of Newman's constraction, with iron cisterns, numbered 
respectively 94 and 103. The standards were numbered 
19 and 20. The corrections for capillarity, the ratio of 
the capacities of the tube and cistern, and the neutral 
points, or heights of the mercury, at which no correction 
was required for capacity, were respectively as follows : — 

19. Capilltfy + -013 ; C^wcity ^; Neutral Ft 29-922 ; Ten^K 65<*. 

20. + -012; ^; 29*922; W. 

94. -f-0«2; ^; 80180; M^ 

103. -f -062; ^; 80*084; 60**. 



COMPARISON OF THE BABOMXTEBS. 

The mean of eight readings, taken simultaneously at 
intervals of ten minutes, gave as follows: — 



Memn Height. (No. 19.) 90*172; (No. 2a) S0*1M ; (No. 94.) SO'091 ; (No. I OS.) 90*142 
Capillary. +1)12 •ft)12 -f 052 -f 052 

Capacity. + -012 •¥ t)12 — ^^)01 + <001 



Reduction to 399. 


(fi'S) --lis 
90-078 


(71*6) --116 


(690)-O99 (72«)— lis 




90072 


90O4S 90O77 
•1- *032 Indei. — <00* 



Mean of Standardi, 90-075 

90-075 90O75 



330 PICO Ruivo. 

ObseryationB were made at the summit of Pico Raivo, 
at intervals of ten minutes, during 1^ hoursv viz. from 
i past 7 to 9 A. M., simultaneously with those of the 
standards on the shore, six feet above mean tide. 

On Um Shore. Samalt of Cbo Pwk. 

Mmn Height. (No. 19) 30^47; (No. 90 ) SO-SS? ; (Na 94 ) 24-265; (No. lOS.) 94<SSi 

Cq>ilJmry. +t)I2 +018 +052 +«a5! 

Capceity. +OI6 +016 -•117 -101 

Reduction to S2<' (70<>) -112 {7(fi) -112 (460) --OSS (469) — <» 

Index. — O03 +-003 +-032 —•005 



90160 S0-15S 24-194 24*19( 



Metn eorrteted heighU - - 301565 24*1960 

Detached Tbennoroeter • • 70^ - - 44® 

Dew Ptoint - 699 - - 42*' 7 (S obeer?itioiis) 

Humidity .... -63 - - - -90 (Setnratioo «1) 

Whence by Bessel's Tables {Scu Menu voL iL art xvL) 
we find the height equal 6089*08 English feet, if -00375 
(Ghiy Lussac's determination of the volume of ur at 
0^ C.) be taken as the measure of its expansion for each 
d^;ree of the centigrade thermometer, and 6094*90 feet, 
if *003648 (Budberg's determination) be taken. 

The cisterns of the standard barometers were 6 feet 
above the sea; therefore 6 feet is to be added for the 
height of the summit of the peak, making the above 
numbers 6095*08 and 6100*90 feet 

'' My dear Boss, 
** Mr. Bow(Utch was, I believe, the first to notice that 
the height which I had assigned to the Pico Buivo, from 
the barometrical observations which were made by Captain 
Clavering and myself during our short stay at Madeira 
in the winter of 1821-1822, was some hundred feet less 
than the true height of the peak, as measured by himself a 
few months after we had visited the island. A similar 
notice has recently been made by Lieutenant Wilkes, the 
American navigator ; and the observations of Wllmot and 
Lefroy, which you are about to publish, bear fiill testi- 



PICO BUIVO. 

mony to the same fact. If I reooUeot right, Mr. Bowditch 
ascribed the error into which we had fallen to our guides 
having conducted us to one of the summits less elevated 
than the peak ; an imposition which it is well known thej 
frequently attempt to practise, for the purpose of saving 
themselves the fktigue of a part of the ascent. The day 
on which our excursion was performed was certainly oni 
on which such an attempt was likely to be made, and not 
unlikely to be successfiiL It was mid-winter, the paths 
scarcely discernible from the depth of snow, and the sum- 
mits for many hundred feet enveloped in cloud. We had 
been cautioned, however, both by Mr. Yeitch and Mr. 
Blackbume, that the guides were not to be relied on ; and 
the appearances of the ground and of surrounding objects 
on the Peak itself had been carefully described to us, that 
we might not be whoUy at their mercy. Twice they did 
attempt deception, and twice the description which had 
been given to us enabled us to detect and defeat it. The 
third summit to which they conducted us, and which was 
considerably higher than either of the others, corresponded 
80 well with the description, that, influenced also in some 
degree possibly by the solemn protestations of the guides, 
we believed ourselves to be really at the Peak ; and we 
were confirmed in this opinion on our return to Funchal 
by Mr. Yeitch, who, though he had predicted failure on 
account of the season of the year and the state of the wear 
ther, believed, from our description, that we had actually 
succeeded. We therefore ourselves entertained no doubt 
on the subject. 

*< It is very possible, nevertheless, that Mr. Bowditoh's 
surmise may be the true explanation. There is, however, 
another mode of accounting for the erroneous height which 
we assigned, which it may at least afford a useful caution 
to others to mention. The barometer which I employed 
was one of Newman's, with an iron cistern, enclosed in a 
circular wooden case having an opening by which a few 
inches only of the upper part of the column of mercury 



331 



332 



PICO RUIVO. 

could be seen, the lower part of the column bemg alto- 
gether concealed from view. Using the same barometer a 
few months afterwards, in the mountains of Jamaica, I 
was not a little surprised to find that the barometer on one 
occasion stood higher than it had done when examined three 
or four hundred feet lower down. Lnmediately suspecting 
the cause, and having a fine tumscrew with me, I detached 
the case altogether from the tube and dstem, and then 
perceived that a separation had taken place in the column 
of mercury, low down in the tube, arising doubtless fixnn a 
small quantity of air which had made its way in, in spite of 
the usual precautions. It was of course soon tapped out, 
and the barometer being replaced in its case, gave its 
proper indication. After this experience, on my return to 
England, I had a barometer made in which the case was so 
arranged as to permit the whole column of mercury to be 
inspected, from the cistern upwards, at every observation; 
and I have always used it since. 

'' Now it is certainly possible that a similar occurrence 
may have taken place on Pico Buivo. It is true that on 
the return to Funchal the barometer agreed with its indi- 
cation at the same place before our departure ; but this 
does by no means preclude the possibility that the column 
may not have been perfect on the Peak. The escape of 
air in travelling might be more easy than its introduction. 
It may be a very rare occurrence when the proper precau- 
tions are not omitted, and I dare say it is sa I do not 
remember an instance of the kind taking place in the baro- 
meter which I have since used, and in which I always 
examine the whole column. But it would appear undoubt- 
edly preferable to have portable barometers so constructed 
as always to admit of this examination. 

" Believe me, dear Bosef, 

" Sincerely yours, 

" Edward Sabikx.'' 



388 



APPENDIX, No. III. 

TABLB BinBRKD TO PA.QB 97., SBOWIHO TBB DAILT AMOUNT 
or SAaTKSLT CUBREDT OB8KBTID BETWItn KKKOUBLBK 
ISLASD AMD TAM DIKKBx'a I.A1ID, JUI.T 20 TO ATIQUST 5. 
1840. 













^ss- 








DU- 


- 


U»|. 




t™- 




Du*. 


Couth. 


nm. 






CBmot. 
















IUI« 


So«K. 


KiH. 




a 


i 




jDlr 90 hJM fRiB ChrUBH Huboor. 








N.B6E. 


149 


48 -S* 


79-37 




M 


is 






N. 8BE. 


157 




76 55 


a 40 E. 10 mUn 


3095 




33 


N. B5E. 


IBS 


48-17 


80-15 


a 80 E. n . 


3(^37 




24 


N. B8 E. 


139 


47-55 


83-41 


N. 3 E 8 „ 


^■^ 


TJt 


25 


N. BSE. 


106 


47-46 


86-16 


No obNrntioD. 


"^ 


'■^ 


86 


N. 77 E. 


141 


4719 


89-45 


N. 68 E. 5B „ 


B54i 




97 


N. 87 E. 


133 


47-18 


93-0 


S. 10 E. IS „ 


4343 




98 


& 88B. 


169 


47 98 


97-7 


8, 67 ESS 


4243 




39 


S. 7SE. 


131 


48 -0« 


100-17 


No currant. „ 


37 38 




30 


N. 77E. 


lOS 


47-39 


102-43 


N. 83 E 10 ., 


3036 




31 


N. 89E. 


150 


47-36 


106-26 


a 86 E. 32 n 


3736 




Aug. t 


a 87 E. 




47-45 


110-39 


a 76 R. 8 „ 


3649 




"» B 


N. 86E. 


14S 


47-35 


114-16 


N. 65 E. S3 „ 


4042 




3 


S. S4E. 


156 


47-51 


118-08 


a 66 E. 15 „ 


3941 






N.86E. 


136 


47-42 


131 '31 


N. 30 E. 1 1 „ 


35^40 






N. 87 E. 


129 






No cumaC 


35 44 




Avenge rata ofcuirent- I5B milci dulj. 



334 



APPENDIX, No. IV. 

REMARKS ON SOME CORALS OBTAINED FROM ORRAT 
DEPTHS IN THE ANTARCTIC OCEAN^ IN A LSTTXB 
FROM CHARLES STOKES, ESQ., F. R. 8., F. O. 8., &C. TO 
CAPTAIN SIR JAMBS C. ROSS, R.N. 

** VeralMn Bwildiny, 
'' 36 Feb. 1846. 

'* My dear Sir James, 

'< I have found much interest in the examination of the 
specimens you have sent me which were obtuned by 
soundings, and the use of the dredge at gpreat depths, ai^ 
have to apologise both for delaying so long to send yon 
some observations upon them, and for aendhig them now 
in so imperfect a state. 

<< The fragments obtained by soundings from 400 fiuhoms^ 
lith August, 1841, lat 33'' 31' S., long. 107<> 40" E., 
consist of pieces of shells and small corals, none of which 
appear to have been brought up in a living state, with 
small angular pebbles very little rounded by attrition. 
Among them I find two joints of stems of a small fossil 
pentacrinite. 

** Among the small sand taken up by the soundings in 
400 fathoms, August, 1841, Professor Forbes finds portions 
of spines of echinus and of spines of cidaris. 

'^ Of shells, a small broken cerithium, mouth of a Besida, 
a Pteropod allied to Peracle, and a fragment of Cleodonu 

'^ Of Annelides, Spirorbis on the stones. 

'' Many foraminifera, among which are Teztularia, 
Nodosariae, and several of orbicular and renoidal forms in 
abundance. 

** The corals brought up by the dredge from 270 fathoms, 
19th Jan. 1841, lat 72<> 31' S., long. 173"" 39'E., consist of 
three species of Lepralia : Retepora cellulosa — a small piece 
in a perfectly fresh and living state : a Retepora or Homera, 



CORALS. 335 

much resembling the Homera frondiculata of Lamouroux 
in similar fresh condition. The polype cells are salient 
only at the extremities of the branches. The cells appear 
also on all sides of the branches, which must distinguish 
it from the species mentioned. The absence of the open- 
ings of polype cells from the exterior side of the branches 
is made a generic character of Homera by Liamouroux, but 
probably is only of value to distinguish species. 

I name this Homera lateralis. — The genus Homera was 
established by Lamouroux for a division of Setepora, of 
which B. frondiculata is the type^ but it was not well 
defined by him. The generic character, as given by Milne 
Edwards, is, * Polyparium branched, composed of tubular 
cells united together throughout nearly their whole length, 
with terminal circular openings. The cells all opening on 
one surface.' 

The cells of the present species are not so decidedly 
elongated as those of H. frondiculata, and it may be said 
to occupy an intermediate place between Homera and 
Betepora, but this is one of the ordinary difficulties in 
arranging species in genera. An instance of such diffi- 
culty is seen in the species B. versipalma, which Lamou- 
roux says {Expos. Method^ p. 41.), <est tres voisin des 
Horn^res,' which De Blainville places in the genus 
Homera^ and of which Milne Edwards says, {Afiinu $an$ 
Vertebres, Second Edition, voL iL p. 279.) ' Nous sommes 
port6 a croire que ce Polype ne doit pas Stre rang^ dans 
le genre Homdre, ainsi que le veut M. de Blainville ; il 
nous pandt se rapprocher davantage des vrais Betepores." 

** The present species differs from all that are described 
in the opening of the cell which, as is shown in fig. 3*, is 
placed laterally inunediately below the pointed summit of 
the cell. It is only at the unbroken ends of the branches 
that this can be seen, as the ends of the cells seem soon to 

* Plates of the beantifbl dnwingi will be Iband in the ** Zoology of the 
Voyage,** now being pabliahed nnder the loperintendence of Dr. Richard- 
ton and J. E. Gray, Eeq. 



336 CORALS. 

wear away^ and on the general surface of the branches 
only circular openings are leA^ which are hardly at all 
prominent 

'^ In examining into the relations of this species, we have 
another proof of the necessity of good figures to deter- 
mine species. The description given of B. versipalma is 
as follows: — "B.. nana, ramosissima; ramis ramuloe»- 
pahnatis ; palmis brevibus varid versis ; interna superfi<de 
poris prominalis scabra; externa subbevigata.'' 

^' This description might do for the present species if 
taken from a specimen of which the summits of the 
branches were not quite perfect, but as the lateral position 
of the openings of the terminal cells is not mentioned, 
there is good reason to believe that the present is a different 
species. It is to call attention to this point that the name 
* lateralis' is given to this species, though it is at the 
risk of finding this character common to others, when 
specimens are found in a perfect state. It is to be ob- 
served also that the cells of H. frondiculata have not, 
strictly speaking, circular openings, although the tube of 
the cell is cylindrical. The end of the tube of the cell 
is in the perfect specimens much higher on one side than 
the rest, so that the opening becomes elliptic by being 
oblique to the line of the elongated tubular celL 

*^ A new species of Primnoa, which I name P. Bossii. 

" A Melitoea, nov. sp. — M. australis. 

" A Madrepora ? nov. sp. — M. fissurata. 

'^ This is hardly to be considered a true Madrepora, but ' 
I am unwilling to make a genus for it. 

** I send herewith drawings of the three corals last men- 
tioned, which are perhaps the most interesting of the whole. 
These drawings are carefully and correctly made, and I 
will say little of the description of them, as the figures will 
be more useful than words. Although we have long known 
that a Primnoa from Norway, (of which I will speak pre- 
sently,) is found at a great depth, and some other corals 
have been taken at from 70 to 100 fathoms ; yet it is rare, 



COHALS. 337 

as far as our present knowledge instnicts ub, to find any 
corals, except perhaps some of the celleporsB at gpreat 
depths, and I am not aware of any previous instance of a 
Melitcea or a Madrepora at all resembling those here repre- 
sented having been found except at a small depth, and in 
a warm climate; from which I had concluded that they re- 
quired more of the solar light and warmth than they could 
obtain at the depth from which you took those specimens. 
Your Primnoa is, however, to me the most interesting 
among them. The genus Primnoa was first established by 
Lamouroux for the single species previously called Gorgo- 
nia lepadifera, which is that found in Norway above alluded 
to. Ehrenberg (in his " Corallenthiere des rothen Meeres'') 
was the first to include in it other species, and he properly 
added to it the G. verticillaris : he describes also a thii^ 
species under the name of P. flabellum, but I am not quite 
satisfied that this species is established. The locality given 
for P. verticillaris by Ellis and Solander, and by Marsigli, 
is the Mediterranean. I have good specimens of this spe- 
cies from the West Indies, where they were collected by 
the late Rev. Lansdown Guilding. I have met with no 
statement of the depth at which it grows, but have reason 
to believe that Mr. Guilding did not use means to obtain 
his specimens (of which I have many) at great depths, and 
Ellis and Solander would certainly have told us if they had 
known of their occurrence at a gpreat depth. 

'^ Primnoa lepadifera is found, I bdieve, only on the 
coast of Norway. I have specimens nearly two feet in 
height, which were presented to me by Sir Arthur de Capell 
Brooke, Bart who collected them there in 1820. He re- 
ceived accounts of their growing to a much larger rize. 
They are found at great depths, varying from 150 to 300 
fathoms. At these depths they grow in company idth a 
large branching Alcyonium of a red colour (A. arboreum), 
and it is in fishing with lines for the red fish that the spe- 
cimens are obtained. This fish frequents the places where 
these corals grow, and the lines getting entangled with the 

VOL. I. Z 



338 CORALS. 

branches of the coralci frequently bring up spedmens of 
them, and sometimes the size and strength of the corals is 
such as to break the lines. 

" The drawings represent your species — Primnoa BossiL 
Fig. 1. of natural size : fig. 2. portion magnified : 3^ 4. 
polype cells more magnified: 5, 6, 7. polype cell of P. 
lepadifera. 

^^ The polype cells of Primnoa are membranaceous and 
covered with calcareous scales, the forms of which are ac- 
curately represented in the drawings, and are useful in 
forming specific characters, as they differ in form and num* 
ber in each species. These scales do not cover the whole 
surface of the cells ; on the inner side, next to the stem, 
there is a part devoid of scales, as if being less exposed 
their protection was not needed. This is shown in the 
figures of both species. The substance of the cells being 
membranaceous they are movable in all directions, as is 
shown by the different positions in which the cells of P. 
lepadifera have dried, and hence a mistake was made by 
Ellis, who described the cells as " reflexed,^ that is, idUi 
the mouth downwards, which must have arisen from the 
position in which his specimen had been hung up to dry* 
as the weight of the cells would make them fall. 

^* I will not go fnto further remarks respecting the dif- 
ferent species, but have said thus much because the Prim- 
noas are a rare form of coral, and there is an additional 
interest in the Norway species occurring at a gpreat depth, 
as is the case with your new species of the genus.* 

" Very truly yours, 

"C. Stokes.** 



* I learn from Profesior Forbes that be hat got ftom Capt 
another new species of Primnoa from near SCaten Land, in 878 fittfaoms. -~ 
1st August, 1846. 



L^ 



339 



APPENDIX, No. V. 



££[BSKB£BQ*8 PBBLIMIKABT NOTICE OF THS MINUTB 
FOBM8 OF OBGANIC LIFB IK THB OOEAK, THE AKT- 
ABOTIC SEAS, AND AT OBEAT DEPTHS ; WITH A DE- 
SCBIPTION OF SEVEN NEW OBNEBA AND 8EYENTT-ONE 
NEW SPECIES. 



At the Berlin Academy of Science, May, 1844 : — 

23rd May. M. Ehrenberg oommonicatee to the 
Academy some of the results of his examination of 
Materials received by him from Captain Boss's Antarctic 
Voyage. 

Page\. Section I. South Polar Voyage^ 1841—1843. 

Captain Boss's Antarctic Voyage in 1841 — 1843 has 
materially advanced our knowledge of those minute forms 
of organic life which are invisible to the naked eye, and 
the author of this communication feels it incumbent upon 
lum to lay some of the general results at once before the 
Acadmy, although the complete scientific examination of 
the materials cannot be concluded for a long time. 

The Boyal Society of London having in 1840 appointed 
a Committee to prepare a list of physical and meteor* 
ological queries and desiderata of special scientific interest, 
for the intended Antarctic Voyage and Magnetic Obser- 
vatories, M. de Humboldt, in a communication to the 
Committee printed by them in their report (p. 96.), called 
attention to the important bearing of those minute forms 
of organic life on the great questions of modem geology, 
and described the easy methods of collection and pre- 
servation reconmiended by myself. 

% 2 



340 MINUTE FORMS OF ORGANIC LIFB. 

By the scientifio zeal of Dr* Hooker (son of the weD* 
known botaniBt), who waa one of the voyagers on boaid the 
Erebus, a large collection has been formed and presenrady 
and forty small packets and three glasses of water from 
different parts of the ocean from Ciq>e Horn to Victoria 
Land have been transmitted to me. 

I received almost at the same time a similar quantity of 
materials of the same nature from other parts of the g^be 
from Mn Darwin. 

It seemed right to examine without delay the oontenta 
of the water brought from the Polar Sea in 75^ to 78^ Sw 
lat. 162^ W. long. : as another such opportunity caa 
hardly be looked for. Of the dried materials, only a few 
have yet been examined, chiefly from the most interesting 
localities, such as samples of deposits from melted Polar 
ice, and others taken from the bottom of the sea in latitudes 
from eS^ to Td"" South, and at depths from 190 to 270 
fathoms. The results show, as I had anticipated, that in 
high Southern as well as in high Northern latitudes, and 
great oceanic depths, the minute forms of oiganic life are 
intensely and extensively developed. 

The following details of the preliminary inve8tigati0a 
(which are well assured in essential respects) may not be 
unwelcome to the Academy, and will at the same time 
convey the thanks of science to the enterprising voyagers 
who have brought home the materials. * 

It may be remarked in general, that those materials are 
very rich in whoUy new typical forms, particukrly so in 
new genera, with sometimes numerous species, forming 
generally the whole of the mass, though sometimes mixed 
with a little mud and fragments of small Crustacea. The 
new genera and species are distinguished in the subjoined 
account. The Asteromphali are quite peculiar and very 
beautiful stellated forms. 



■k A a 



MINUTE FOBBfS OF OBGANIC LIFE. 



341 



Analysii of (he different MateridU sent by Dr. Hooker from 

the Antarctic Voyage, 

1. Deposit from mdted Pancake Ice from the Barrier in 78^ W S. 

latitade, 162*' W. longitade. 

A. SiiJcsou8-naLi.BD PoLTOAaniCA. 



1. 


Aethiopijfekui bitertiariut. 


27. Diet^foeha omamentnm. 


2. 


Abtekomphalus HookerU, 


28. aeptenaria. 


8. 


22oMtt. 


29. speculum. 


4. 


Bvckii. 


80. JTMlireflid ooncentrica. 


5. 




81. FragiUaria acuta. 


6. 


HumboUUU. 


82. Amphiceroa. 


7. 


Cwfierii, 


99. GaOUmOa ptUata. 


8. 




84. BulcaU? 


9. 


opoUimM, 


85. Hauohtx Mnortiif. 


10. 


cingulatiu. 


86. dModemariMM. 


11. 


ecoentricus. 


37. HxMiAULus onftircCidct. 


12. 


f^CMKnfigr* 


^, Hxmzoam te6tt2tMiiff. 


13. 


limbatuB. 


89. LUhohotryi deiUieMlata. 


14. 


lineatoB. 


40. IMoean^ atutraiig. 


15. 


luntB. 


41. i^xuUema wnitete. 


16. 


oculus Iridic 


42. heUenica. 


17. 


radiolaiuM. 


48. Rkizoiolema CafypttL 


18. 


subtiliB. 


44. onutkogioaa. 


19. 


Telatofl. 


45. Synbdapkora Mierotriat, 


20. 


Didadia antefmaia. 


46. TeiroM. 


21. 


buRxna. 


47. PlnUtti. 


22. 


Dicijfocha aculeata. 


48. Hexoi. 


23. 


binocaluB. 


49. SynedraJJloMf 


24. 


biiemaria. 


50. TneeraiiKm POeobu. 


25. 


Epiodon. 


51. Zngoeerot tautralis. 


26. 


octanaria. 






B. SlUCSOUS-JUBTHT PBTTOXlTBAmXA. 


52. 


Amphidiieiu agaricns. 


64. S^jHmgoHAiM keteroeormt. 


58. 


claTatus. 


65. infleza. 


54. 


HdveOa. 




55. 


LithotterUeui Indbanu. 


67. meaogongjla. 


56. 


SpongoUikU acicolaris. 


68. Keptunia. 


57. 


aspera. 


69. raiaia. 


58. 


hrachiata. 


70. trachelotyla. 


59. 


caput aerpentis. 


71. TVvd^jftwnm. 


60. 


cenooephala. 


72. Triamckara. 


61. 


davuB. 


78. vagmaia. 


62. 


collaris. 


74. Tertioillata. 


68. 


fuftis. 





B 8 



342 MINUTE F0BM8 OF OBOAmC LIFE. 

C CALCABBOUS-SHaLUa) ToLTTHALAMLk. 

76. Ofummottomum divergent. 78. Botdia ErM. 

77. BoiaiHa atUarctiea, 79. iS^nrohetJina 

Several forms of the genus coscinodiscus have been re- 
cognised with their green ovaries, and must certainly 
therefore have been collected in a living state. 

2. Deposit from melted ice while the thipe were sailing through 

broad strips of brown panciike ice. 

(Materials from 75 S. latitude, 170 W. longitude.) 

A, SlXJCIOUS-SHZLJLID PoLTQASTBXCA. 

1. AsTXBOMPHALus BvchH. 8. Dict^ockia acnleata. 

2. AoMft. 9. Etmoaa gibberula. 

3. Casdnodiseui lineatus. 10. FragUaria acuta. 

4. bma, 11. piwmUata. 

5. oculus Iridis. 12. rotundata. 

6. radiolatus. 18. Hbmiaulus on&iroCieirt. 

7. subtilis. 14. 'Hmmoobtwm htbrnUmu. 

B. Sdjcxous-baetht FIbttoijthabia. 
15. SpangoUthisfiutiif Fragment. 

These and the preceding mass were sent over in water 
in the same sealed glass vessels in which they were col- 
lected in 1842. Hemiaulus antarcticus was the pre- 
vailing form found in the first smaller bottle, which has a 
rich sediment, almost all the separate atoms of which 
are independent siliceous-shelled creatures. The larger 
bottle was only about a quarter full, the lai^r portion 
having exuded through the sealed cork : almost the whole 
of the mass of sediment arrived in Berlin in 1844 in a 
state which I do not hesitate to call a living state, thought 
all were forms having little or no motion. The Frag^- 
larias predominated (Fragilaria pinnulata) ; these, though 
rarely hanging together in the form of a chain, still 
preserved for the most part their green ovaries in the 
different natural arrangements. Coscinodisci and Hemi- 
aulus also showed in many cases groups of grains still 
green in their inside. No motion. 

The following Nos. were sent dry : — 



MINUTB FOBBfS OF OBOAKIC LIFE. 



848 



8. Taken up bj the lead from 190 firthoms depth, in 78® lO" S. lati- 
tude, 162'' W. longitude. 

A. Snjcaous-nuLLiD Poltoastbxca. 



1. Abtxbomfbalus HookerU, 

2. Bvckii. 

8. Humboldtu. 

4. Cwrierii, 

5. Coicinoducui ApoQims. 

6. gemndftr, 

7. limbatua. 

8. lineatuB. 

'9. IWMt, 

10. radiolatus. 

1 1 . Dicfyocha septenaria. 

12. speculum. 

18. FragUana Amphiceroe. 



14. FragUana al. sp. 

15. OaOiondlaioi. 

16. Hkmiaulus oMiaretieMi, 

17. LUkobairjfi deiUieukUa, 

18. Mesoeina tpomgoUtku, 

19. P^xidieukL. 

20. i2Aisa«o2niia onitttiJgioMa. 

21. J^fiiMtipAofti illtero£ria«. 

22. Tetroi. 
28. Pmto. 

24. HexoM. 

25. Tbiaui^cias Irigiiflra. 

26. TWenoewm P»0O&w. 



B. SlUCXOUS-JUBTHT FHTTOUTHAmiA. 

27. Amphidueus polyditeuM, 

28. SpongoUihii acicularis. 

29. aspera. 

30. hrachiata, 
81. caput lerpentiB. 

32. cenocephala. 

33. clamu. 

4. From snow and ice taken from the sea in 76^ S. latitude, 165^ W. 

longitude, near Victoria Land. 



84. ^ 


wmgobtmi futas. 


85. 


Keptnnia. 


36. 


^& ^0^w wW^^W^WW^W^^W^^w 


87. 


Triamchora. 


88. 


vagimata* 


89. 


undnata. 



SlUCSOUS-SHZIiLU) POLTQASTBICA. 

1. CoscinodUcuM lineatus. 

2. luntB. 
8. subtilis. 



4. 
5. 
6. 



rotundata. 
aL sp. 

The mass consists prindpally of thicklj crowded Fngi- 
laria pinnulata with Coecinodisci, which, when softened in 
water, allow for the most part their green, perhaps origi- 
nallj brown, oyaries to be recognised. 

5. Contents of the stomach of a Salpa, 66^ S. latitude, 157^ W. 

longitude, 1842. 

SiLICBOUS-SBBLLBD PoLTOASTBICA. 



1. Actiniscut Laneearhu, 

2. Co9einodi9Cut ApoOimis. 



8. 
4. 

B 4 



g^WUK^fiUTm 



344 MIMUTfi FORMS OF ORGANIC LIFE. 

5. CofcmocfiftfUf lineatoB. 10. Fragilana BcatMu 

6. hauB, U. gramdata. 

7. BubtiliB. 12. rotundato. 

8. Diebfocha aculeata. 18. Haltohtz duodenarias, 

9. speculum. 14. Pyxidiada. 

This contains so very much larger a proportion of Die- 
tjochas than arc found in other samples^ that they must 
have been selected by the Salpa, with whom therefore they 
are apparently a favourite kind of food. 

6. Floating spots fh>in the surface of the open sea, 64^ S. latitude, 

160® W. longitude. 

Small loose-texturedj tender-threaded masses (similar 
to the Oscillatorias of our waters) interspersed with small 
grains. They consist principally of the siliceous, very 
tender and long side tubes of the quite new and very 
peculiar genus Chsetoceros. The nature of the gndns is 
still obscure. The other forms are interspersed in the 
loose mass; they all still show their dried ovaries, evi- 
dencing that they were collected alive. 

SlUCXOUS-SHELLBD PoLTQASTaiCA. 

1. AsTxaoMPHALUs Dorwinii. 10. Didyocha aculeata. 

2. Hookerii, 11. Binocolus. 

8. Rosiii. 12. Didyoeha omamentuni. 

4. Buchii. 18. speculum. 

5. Humboldtii, 14. FragUaria Amphiceroe. 

6. Chjetocxbos dichaeia. 15. gtxmulaia, 

7. tetraehaeia, 16. Hxioaulus obtunu. 

8. CoscinodiieuM Uneatiu, 17. LUhobatryi dtnUeidata, 

9. 9ubtai9. 

7. Taken up bj the lead from 207 fathoms depth, in the Golf of 

Erebus and Terror, 68"^ 40" S. latitude, 5$'^ W. longitude, 
among apparently inorganic sand, were found with scmietimei 
distinctly recognisable ovaries: — 

A. SlLICEOUS-SHBLLBD PoLTOASTaiCA. 

1. Amaulus <ca/am. 6. CatctnodwcM subtilis. 

2. Biddulphia urtina. 7. velatus. 

8. CoMcinodiscut ApoUinis. 8. Fragilaria rotundata. 

4. cingulahu. 9. OaUionMisoL 

5. luna. 10. tjfmpamm. 



MINUTE F0BM8 OF OBQANIC LIFE. 345 

11. GfYBRiiiaftpAora panlleU. 18. Bkofhomna /atdolaJta. 

12. HsmAuiiUB OHiaretieuM* 14. Zygoeeroi f aauiralu. 

B. SHJCXOUS-XABTHSD FtaTTOUTHABZA* 

15. SpangoUthii acicolarii. 16. i^9<nigoiitkii faBtu. 

8. Taken up bj the lead from 270 fkOionis, 68*40 S. latitude, 56^ W. 

longitude. 

A. SnJCIOUS-tHBIXXD POLTQASTBICA. 

1. AchmaUhes toTgesDB, 21. (ToflumeflSd sulcata. 

2. Amphora libjca. 22. Orammatophara afrkana. 
8. Ahaulus tealarii. 28. parallela. 

4. Bidddphia unma, 24. ietpenHna, 

5. Campglodiscui cljpeus. 25. Hbmiaulus aniarclietu. 

6. Co9einodi$cu» ApoUims. 26. LiAocampe noT. sp. 

7. gemmifer, 27. Mesocena spangoUtkU. 

8. lineatus. 28. NameiUa MpHoa, 

9. luna. 29. PodiMpAtfiiia cwuato. 

10. oculufl Iridis. 80. PyxitUcuUi hellenica ? 

11. radiolatuB. 81. BhaphomeU fatcioUda, 

12. subtilis. 82. Rhixo9oUma eaiyptra, 

13. DentieeUa ktvis. 99. omitkoglotUL 

14. Diicoplea Bota, 84. Stauroptera aspera. 

15. Baiida. 85. SifnMopkara Mieroinat. 

16. FhutrtUa oonoentrica. 86. TVfrat. 

17. FragUaria Amphiceroa. 87. PeaAw. 

18. pinmdala. 88. jETesof. 
18. OaXUtmeOa oaibu. 89. 5yiiedra Ulna. 
20. <o/. 

^. SlUCXOUa-XAmTHXD FlITTOLITHaBIA. 

40. Amphidiicui claTatus. 47. Sp<n^^olUhi$ HHeroeamu. 

41. SpongoUihii acicularia. 48. uigem. 

42. aspera. 49. Keptunia. 
48. hmchiaia, 50. obtusa. 

44. caput serpentis. 51. vaginaia. 

45. clavus. 52. uncinata. 

46. Fustis. 

C CaLCAJOOUS PoLTTHATiAMTA. 

58. OramwiottomMm Hvergetu. 

9. Samples from Cockbum Island, the extreme southern limit oi 

T^etation. 

SlUCaOUS-SHXLLID POLTOASTBICA. 

1. Eimoiia Amphiozjs. 4. Bha^homeii scHfoAni. 

2. Piliiitilarui borealis. 5. Siamropiera eapUaiiL 

3. peregrina? 



846 LIBUTSNANT WILKSS'S LBTTBB. 

Two of these forms are new ; two have also been ob- 
served in the North, and one is distributed extensivelj 
over the earth. 

The distinguishing characters of the seven new genera 
collected in the course of the voyage, viz. Anaulus, Aster- 
omphalus, Chastoceros, Halionyx, Hemiaulus, Hemicoeter 
and Triaulacias are given in pages 19, 20, and 21, <^ 
Professor Ehrenberg's communication to the Academy of 
Science at Berlin : and those of the seventy-one new spedea 
in eight following pages, to which I must refer the enquir- 
ing naturalist for further information. 



APPENDIX, No. VI. 

L£TT£B FROM LIEUT. CHABLES WILKES, COMMAHDIKO 
UNITED STATES EXPLORING EXPEDITION, TO CAPTAIN 
JAHE8 0. ROSS, H. B. M. & EREBUS. 

•« U. a Flag Ship ViiieMiM% New ZMlrad, 
«< B«7 of Idandi, 5tb April, IS4a 

« My dear Sir, 
'' I need not tell you how much I feel interested in 
your cruise. From the interest you took in the outfit of 
our expedition, I am sure you well know the interest it 
excites, and how much this feeling is heightened by a 
knowledge on my part of what you have undertaken, and 
have to go through. This prompts me to a denre to be 
useful to you if possible, and to give you my experience of 
the last season among the ice, whither you are bound* 

'' Your cruise will be an arduous one, no matter how 
you may be enlightened in your course ; but you have so 
much knowledge of the ice, and the manner of treating it, 
that it appears almost presumptuous in me to sit down to 
give you any hints relative to it. But, believing as I do 
that the ice of the antarctic is of a totally difierent oha- 
racter from that of the arctic, I venture to oflbr you a few 



LIBUTENANT WlLKES'S LETTEB. 347 

hints that may be useful to you in your undertaking : and 
although my instructionB are binding upon me relative to 
discoveries^ I am, nevertheless, aware that I am acting as 
my Gt)vemment would order, if they could have antid- 
pated the case, knowing how deeply it feels the liberal 
assistance and great interest evinced by all the societies 
and distinguished men of Great Britain, to promote and 
aid this, our first undertaking in the great cause of science 
and usefulness ; and I must add, the pleasure it gives to 
me personally to be able to return, though in a small 
degree, the great obligation I myself feel under to you and 
many others, the promoters of your undertaking. 

'' Winds. — The winds for the first fortnight of our time, 
to the eastward of 140'' east longitude, were from the 
northward and westward, light generally, accompanied 
occasionally with clear weather for hours, and again with 
dense fogs of short duration, with a long swell from the 
same quarter. 

" After passing 140'' eas^ or to the westward of it, we 
experienced fine weather, with south-east winds and occa* 
sional snow squaUs, lasting but ten or fifteen minutes, and 
a dry healthy atmosphere. 

'^The barometer, during our stay on the coast, was 
always indicative of wind by its depression, and was a true 
guide. Its mean standing was 29*023 inches, and in a 
snow-storm it once fell as low as 28*390 inches. The 
temperature surprised me ; we seldom, if ever, had it above 
30^, even in the sun at mid-day, or below 22^; and I do 
not think that three times it was found above 35^ 

** Grales come on very suddenly, and are always attended 
with snow, sleet, and thick fogs, rendering it extremely 
hazardous ; for one must be found, when they do come, 
more or less surrounded with ice islands : they sometimes 
last for thirty-six hours. After they set in, you may cal- 
culate that they will blow strong for at least half that 
time. The nearer you are to the land the more violent 
they are, though not of such long duration. Fine weather 



348 LIEUTENANT WILKES'S LETTEB. 

usually precedes them, and we found them to happen, and 
the weather to be more changeable, near the full and 
change, although I am no believer in the lunar influences 
upon the weather. 

^* Currents. — During the whole of our stay along the 
icy coast, we found no perceptible current by the reckon* 
ing and current log : during a gale of wind I was induced 
to believe that some existed, from the short sea that was 
formed, thinking there was more than was to be expected. 
THdes on such an extent of coast there undoubtedly must 
be, but of little strength, or we should have perceived 
them. 

'^ In many of the icy bays we were stationary for a suffi- 
cient time to perceive them if they had been of any magni- 
tude, and where the current was repeatedly tried. 

^* The winds have their effect upon the loose drift ice, or 
that which is detached from the icy barrier. From a 
change of wind from south-east to north, with a fresh 
breeze, the Peacock became embayed, and the ice forced 
in upon her, which brought about her accident. The 
northerly winds are always accompanied with a heavy 
swell, and her escape was a miracle, combined ivith good 
seamanship and perseverance. If Captain Hudson's ship 
had been as strong as adamant itself, he is of opinion she 
would have been ground to atoms by a longer exposure; 
her stem suffered to within an inch and a half of the wood- 
ends. This was one of the places in which the barrier is 
within the floe ice several miles. 

" The temperature being so low in the summer months, 
there is but little chance of the ice melting or disappearing, 
as from accounts frequently takes place in the Arctic 
Ocean. Your time being unlimited will allow you to wait 
some days in a situation to make experiments. 

"I conceive that the ice of the permanent barrier 
changes very little from year to year : along the line of 
our exploration it looks too solid and fast to be moved by 
any thing short of a continued temperature. 



LIEUTENANT W1LK£S*S LETTER. 349 

''I firequentlj found myself so closely beset that I 
thought it next to impossible to escape, and if the wind 
had not been extremely constant in its direction, I should 
have been shut up or much injured ; as it was, I escaped 
with scarcely a scratch, although we took some heavy 
thumps. 

" The chart will show you the track of my ship and the 
state of the barrier, and the localities of seeing the land 
and approaches to it I have not had time to insert on 
it the tracks of the other vessels, but they very nearly 
agree with ours, and their reports of the weather is very 
similar to what I have described ; it was constructed as I 
went on, and your copy is a tracing from it. The ice 
islands are all laid down as we found them ; I made the 
officer of the deck during his watch keep a diagram of 
them, and they were transferred by me to the chart ; this 
I found gave me more confidence in proceeding among 
them, and facilitated and rendered comparatively safe my 
return, if rendered necessary, (I must guard you against 
supposing they were only as numerous as there represented 
on the chart ; it contains about one sixth ; frequently up- 
wards of a hundred were counted from the deck, of large 
size) ; I would by all means recommend a similar course to 
be pursued. They undoubtedly change their positions, but 
not to signify in the time you will be among them. 

'^ Magnetic Pole. — I consider we have approached 
very near to the pole. Our dip was 87^ 3(K S., and 
the compasses on the ice very sluggish ; this was in 147^ 
3(y E., and 67^ 04' S. Our variation, as accurately as it 
could be observed on the ice, we made 12^ 3(y £. It was 
difficult to get a good observation, on account of the slug- 
gishness of our compasses. About one hundred miles to 
the westward we crossed the magnetic meridian, and as 
rapidly increased our west variation as we had diminished 
that of the east. 

" The pole, without giving you accurate deductions, I 
think my observations will place in about 70^ S. latitude, 
and 140 E. longitude. 



350 LIEUTENANT WILKES'S LETTER. 

'' On the meridian of HO"" E., latitude ee"" 45' 8., you 
will find a small bay^ partly formed by ice ialands and 
rockSj which I have named Piner's Bay, and I think among 
the rocks you may find a snug little harbour. I was 
driven out of the bay by a gale of wind, sounding about 
one and a half miles firom the shore in thirty fiithoma. 
The icebergs being aground formed a good shelter to it 
from seaward ; I would have been much exposed to have 
anchored off it, and I had not time to examine it in my boats; 
a gale came on that lasted thirty-six hours, and a most 
providential escape we had of it. My object was to tiaoe 
the land to the westward, and I have done so ; a sketch of 
its position you will see on the chart I r^ret being 
unable to furnish you a more perfect one, but you will be 
able to decipher it, I hope, and will have information of 
the points where you may penetrate. 

'^ We had delightful and clear weather ten days or a 
fortnight along the coast, with the wind at from south-east 
to south-south-west; the two latter points particularly. 
The drift ice is in large pieces, so large as to give a ship 
an awkward thump ; but when I found it tolerably open 
I have run through it to get to clear water, and in hopes 
of making the land, but our progress was soon stopped by 
the firm barrier, impenetrable, through which there is no 
passing. On this point you will, I have little doubt, agree 
with me. 

^' I am of opinion that there is little movement of the ice 
during the season. Strong gales may change its position a 
little, but I think not materially. 

*^ The only prospect of nearing the land is through a sea 
well studded with laige icebergs, nearly thirty or forty 
miles in width ; and I generally found that we got nearer 
to the shore in those places than elsewhere. One thing I 
must tell you, as respects filling your water. You will 
sometimes find a pond of delicious water on the top of an 
old iceberg, frozen over, but on cutting through it you will 
get a supply sufficient for a navy. It will save you fuel. 



LIEUTENANT WILKBS'S LETTER. 351 

and diBOomfort and cold to 70a, your yeflflds and their 
crews. 

^* I was very fortunate in the weather the greater part 
of the time ; and indeed altogether I was scarcely a day 
without some observation, (except during the gales, of 
which we had three, occupying about eight days)^ and ge- 
nerally half a dozen. 

" My time for six weeks was passed on deck, and having 
all daylight, I, of course, had constant employment, and 
with the many assistants, I could make rapid progress : 
and you will find that no opportunity ought to be lost in 
this navigation, if one is to do any thing. One's ship is 
in constant danger, and the Vincennes, a first-class sloop 
of seven hundred and eighty tons, it requires all the fore- 
sight and activity one is possessed of to look out for her. 

^' I consider that I have had a most providential escape, 
and if this ship had not been enabled to do every thing 
but talk, I should not have been where I now am ; but 
she had inspired me with so much confidence among the 
coral reefs last summer, that I could put faith in heir doing 
her duty. 

'' I should have mentioned that in 1838 and 1839 I went 
south in the brig Porpoise, in order to trace Palmer's Land 
on its eastern side, (but too late for any trial to reach high 
latitudes), and hoping that the lateness of the season would 
enable me to run some distance along it. I got within 
three miles of the coast, and saw it trending to the south- 
south-east about thirty miles ; but it was so blocked up 
with ice as to render it impossible to get through ; and 
after other unsuccessful attempts to the south-eastward to 
get in with the land, I concluded to virit some of the South 
Shetlands : we had but one day in which we got observa- 
tions to be relied upon out of ten. If I had been earlier 
in the season, I should have followed Weddell's track, or 
coasted the ice of Palmer's Land as fiur as it could be done. 
I firmly believe it may be done in favourable seasoni, not- 
withstanding what the Frenchmen may say to the con- 



I 



352 LIBUTBNANT WILKES'S LBTTBR. 

trary. I know the currents are strongs and plenty of wind 
must change the ice rapidly, as I then witnessed ; I could 
not afford the time to be frozen up, as my other duties were 
paramount to passing the nine months in such a torpid 
state. You are differently situated, and I should advise you 
by all means to try to penetrate between 35*^ and 50^ west 
longitude ; if you get nothing more, we shall have a chart 
of the ice, which I should think worth the trouble. Two of 
the vessels went to 105'' west, and met the barrier solid in 
TO*'. It was my intention that they should have gone 
east from that longitude to Biscoe's Range ; they explored 
several degrees, and had wretched weather, gales attended 
with very thick fogs and snow. I should very much like to 
have met you, for I am well aware one can give more infor- 
mation in a few minutes, than an hour's writing will com- 
municate. I hope you intend to circumnavigate the antarc- 
tic circle : I made 70 degrees of it, and if my time would 
have permitted, I should have joined on to Enderby's 
Land ; it is extremely probable that land will be disco* 
vered to the eastward of 165*^ east, and I have no doubt it 
extends all round, with the exception of 30 or 40 degrees 
east of 50 west : where there is no land there will be no 
icy barrier, and little drift ice will be met with ; although 
there will always be found plenty of ice islands, there is 
plenty of space for them and a ship toa Wishing you all 
success, 

** I am, &c &c, 

(Signed) ^'Chables Wilkes. 

** To Capt. James C. Ross, 
H. B. M. Ship Erebos.** 



353 
APPENDIX, No, Vn, 

GAPTAIK AULICK'S LSTTBB. 

''To the Editors of the Spectator, 

'' OenUemen, — Lieutenant Wilkes^ in his ' Synopsui of 
the Cmise of the Exploring Expedition^' which I have but 
recently seen, having made some statements calculated to 
produce erroneous impressions in regard to myselfi I deem 
it proper they should be explained and corrected^ and with 
that view I ask the iavour of you, who I know take a 
lively interest in all that concerns the character of the 
navy, to give this conmmnication a place in the colnnms of 
your highly respectable paper. 

'' In the first place, at page 18. of his Synopsis, Lieute- 
nant Wilkes says, 'In speaking of this cruise to the 
Antarctic, it will be necessary for me to go more into detul 
than I intended, not only to substantiate our country's 
claim to the discovery, but in consequence of the un- 
founded statement that seems to have been made by Captain 
Ross to a commander in our navy^ and gioen currency by 
him, viz. that Captain Boss had actually run over a part 
of the ocean where I had reported the existence of land** 

'' I am doubtless the commander here alluded to ; and the 
words I have underscored seem to be intended to convey 
the impression that I was the onfy, or at least Jbrst person, 
to whom Captidn Boss made this statement, and through 
whose report alone it obtained ' currency.* Such is not 
the fact The truth is, that Boss's statement was pub-> 
lished in the Sydney Herald of the 10th of August, eight 
days before I met that officer at New Zealand. From that 
paper it was copied into the ' Madisonian,' of tins dty, of 
12th March last It had also reached Mazatlan, on the 
coast of Mexico, whence it was taken to the Sandwich 
Islands by Captain Bissell, of the Cayuga, and published 
in the ' Polynesian' of the 2d of October, seven days 

VOL. I. A A 



864 CAPTAIN AULICK*8 LETTER. 

before my arriyal there.* The account I recdved from 
Caption Boss was not matter of secrecy, and was of oonrse 
spoken of by me without reserve at Honolulu. Thus, and 
through no other agency of mine, it found its way into a 
subsequent number of that paper; not, howeyer^ as an 
original article, but expressly as a mere confirmation of 
what had been previously published*! This Lieutenant 
Wilkes might have learned, if he did not, when he last 
touched at Oahu, a few days after I left there. 

" In the next place, at page 20., he says, ' On my ori- 
ginal chart I had laid down the supposed position of Bd- 
lamy's Island or land in 164deg., 165 deg. E. longitude, 
and that it was traced off and sent to Captun Ross. I am 
not a little surprised that so intelligent a navigator as 
Captain Boss, on finding that he had run over this position, 

* "^ To the Editor of the Pdfyneeian. — Captain Rom, in the 
Erebus and Terror, had been as fkr south as 78 deg. 4 nun., in long. 
186 deg. 40 min. W. He made the south magnetic pole to be in hU. 
76 deg^ 154 deg. long. east. He discovered an actiTC volcano, which 
he called Mount Erebus, in 77 deg. 81 min. S., 167 deg. 10 min. £. 

^ This information was brought to Magadan from Sjdnej bj an 
English vessel ; the writer had it from Dr. Wilej, of the Englkh nsTy, 
who was a passenger on board, and who stated to him that he took this 
memorandum from Capt Ross, who was at Sydney when he left. 

"^ He further verbally stated that Captain Ross had sailed over the 
spot where land is supposed to have been seen bj the American sor- 
vejing vessels. Thej (the English vessels) saw vast numbers of seal 
and manj whales. 6. W. P. Busbll.'* 

''Samlwich Islande, September 20, 1841.** 

f Captain Aulick, of the Torktown, confirms the intelligence in 
regard to Captain Ross's discoveries, published in No. 17. of our paper. 
He met that celebrated navigator a few months unoe at the Bay of 
Tf Unl^M^ and from him learned the discovery of two volcanoes as ftr 
south as 77 deg. One of them, which he named Mount Erebos, was 
12,000 feet in height, and at the time he saw it in active qperadoiiy 
affording a most magnificent spectacle to the crews of both vessels : 
the other, whose altitude was 10,000 feet, was named after his coo- 
sort, the Terror. Captain Ross had received the chart sent him by 
CH>tain Wilkes, and had cruised over a space of 50 miles in extent in 
either direction, where land had been laid down by the latter navi* 
gator, and found nothing but clear sea. — PofyneeioMf Oct 151ft, 1841. 



CAPTAIN aulick's lbttbb. • 355 

Bhould not have cloeely inquired into the statements rela- 
tive to our discoyeries, that had been published in the 
Sydney and Hobart Town papers^ which he must have seen, 
and have induced him to make a careful examination of the 
tracks of the squadron laid down on the chart sent him, by 
which he would have assured himself, in a few moments, 
that it had never been laid down or claimed as part of our 
discovery, before he made so bold an assertion to an 
American officer (meaning myself), ' that he had run over 
a clear ocean where I had laid down the land; and I am 
not less surprised that that officer should have taken it for 
granted, without examination, that such was the fact.' 

*^ From the above statement, and in the absence of any 
explanation, it might well be inferred that both Boss and 
myself must be, to say the least, very shortsighted and dull 
of comprehension, not to have been able to see that it was 
Bellamy's, and not Wilkes's Land, that he (Boss) had run 
over. But, in the statement above quoted, Mr. Wilkes 
has done us injustice, by omitting to mention one very 
important fact in this connexion : namely, that in laying 
down the land of Bellamy on the chart he sent Captain 
Boss, he neglected to affix thereto the name of its diseoverer, 
or to distinguish it in any way from his own land there 
traced out, and almost connected with it. He also sent 
Captain Boss a letter with his chart,^ but unfortunately 
the name of Bellamy, or his land, is neither mentioned nor 
even hinted at in this letter, (as may be seen from the copy 
of it published with his Synopsis). In short, no intimation, 
in any manner whatever, was given Boss by Lieutenant 
Wilkes that he did not claim the discovery of all the land 
marked on his chart, and to this cause alone is to be 
ascribed the error into which Captain Boss was, I think, 
unavoidably led. 

" Mr. Wilkes says. Boss ought to have examined the 
accounts of his discoveries, published in the Sydney and 
Hobart Town papers, before he made so bold an assertion to 
an American officer. But with such evidence as the chart 

A A S 



356 CAPTAIN aulick's lbtteb. 

and letter of Mr. Wilkes in his hands, I iq>prehend it oonld 
hardly have been seriously expected that he should search 
the newspaper accounts (which probably he never saw) for 
other or better information on the subject. 

'' On my visit to Captain Boss on board the Erebus, he 
spread this chart before me in the presence of Captain 
Crozier and two of my own officers. It was distinctly 
drawn out on tracing paper — the whole appearing, so fisur 
as I observed, one connected operation, representing nothing 
but the result of his own (Wilkes's) explorations. Boes^ 
believing it to be such, had transcribed it at length, on his 
chart, which he also placed before us, and pointed out the 
tracks of his vessels marked on it in red ink, and jhum^ 
ing directly over the spot assiffned to the land, which we all 
considered as laid down by Lieutenant TVllkes to represent 
the north-eastern limit of his supposed antarctic continent, 
and where he (Boss) said they had a dear sea as far as the 
eye could reach. Such was the evidence on which my 
belief in his report was founded. To my mind it was con- 
clusive ; and I cheerfully leave it for the judgment of others 
to determine whether or not, under all the circumstances 
here stated, it be just cause of 'surprise' that Captain 
Boss should have boldly asserted that he had run over a 
dear ocean where Lieutenant Wilkes had liud down the 
land, and that I should have taken it for granted, toithout 
further examination^ that such was the fact. 

<^ Li making this statement, I can say, with perfect sin- 
cerity, I am actuated by no unkindness of feeling towards 
Mr. Wilkes ; but, fully persuaded as I am that the erro- 
neous statement for which he publidy censures Ciq>tain 
Boss, and shows a little temper towards me, was the result 
of his own negligence alone, I considered it due to that 
distinguished navigator, as well as to myself, that the 
matter should be publicly explained. 

" I am, very respectfully, &a 

« J. H. AULICK.'' 



■ y 



367 



APPENDIX, No. VIII. 

LETTER FROM LIEUTENAKT WILKES IN REPLY TO 

CAFTAIK AULICK. 

'To the Editors of the Spectator. 

** Gentlemen^ — The editorial notice in the columns of 
your paper, in which the remarks of Captain Aulick are 
inserted, is so full as respects the discoyery of the Expe- 
dition, that I should not have thought it necessary to say 
another word relative to the subject, if Captain Aulick's 
remarks might not ^ve the idea, that the chart and letter 
sent Captun Boss by me were disingenuous, in so far 
that I had attempted to claim a greater extent of discoyety 
than the Expedition was entitled to, and that I had taken 
occasion to show some little temper towards himself, and 
pass ' public censures upon Captain Boss, while my oum 
negligence was the cause alone to which is to be ascribed 
the error into which he thinks Captain Boss was unavoid- 
ably led.' 

*^ It will, I think, be sufficiently shown, that I had the 
warmest feelings towards Captain Boss and the English 
Expedition, by the simple perusal of my letter to him, 
giving him tbs information I did. The whole was pre- 
pared in much haste, and when my time was much occu- 
pied, and I doubt not all will perceive the candour and 
frankness with which it was written ; and it ought 
certainly to go to prove that I was not afraid of rivalry, for 
every one knew that Captain Boss was about to explore 
our very track, and thus would test our operations. I am 
well aware that many have blamed me for sending him 
any information; but I have not changed my opinion, 
that it was proper for me to do so. As the Commander 
of a great undertaking in the cause of sci e nce, I was in 
duty bound to forward that of another Expedition of a 

A A S 



358 UECTESAST WILKES'S 



foragn natioDy siimlarly engaged, every wmj in mj power, 
even at a sacrifioe to my8el£ 

" On mj arriTal at Sydney from the antarctic cnuaey I 
was introdoced to Captain Briscoe (Bisooe). tliediacoyerer 
of Enderby's Land ; and I belieye he gaye me the first 
information of the English diacoyery * and its pontioUf 
which I placed on my chart, marking it ' English dis- 
coyery.* 

'< My impression is that the copy which I ordered to be 
made (from my own original) on tracing paper, and sent 
to Captain Boss, was a perfect one, and on the original 
chart the English discoyery is detached and separate from 
ours, and stands alone. At the time I sent my letter to 
Captain Ross, I did not know the English discoyerer^s 
name ; but whether the English discoyery was so marked 
or not, is of but little consequence, for Captain Boss 
knew of Bellamy's discoyery before he left England, and 
therefore must have seen at once the longitude and lati- 
tude of that on the tracing were almost identically the 
same with those of Bellamy's ; and I am satisfied that the 
only erroneous conclusion Captain Boss could haye been 
led into by it, was, that I had verified Bellamy's dis- 
covery. 

" That I felt and expressed surprise relative to Captain 
Aulick having taken Captain Boss's assertion on a point 
(without a full examination of all the data) in which not 
only the credit of the Expedition, but the country and 
navy were concerned, is very natural, and I believe all 
who consider the subject will agree with me. 

*^ I cannot suppose that the words in the Synopsis, ^pivem, 
currency by him,^ can be tortured into that he (Captain 
Aulick) was the * only or at least the first person ' to 
whom Captain Boss made the statement; but I think and 
suspect it will strike all, that coming, as it did, from an 
officer of rank in our navy, it would obtain currency, 
and be generally believed, from that fact alone. 

* Bellamy B Land. — Editobs. 



BEFLT TO CAPTAIN AULICK. 359 



€€ 



My authorities are the inhabitants of Oahu, who> on 
our arrival there, a few days after Captain Aulick left, 
told us of the report ; one and all gave Captain Aidick as 
the author of it, ^ihai it mtut be so, for Captain Aulick 
had said it, and that there tocu no continent hftfor us.^ 

''On my return to the United States, Captun Aidick's 
name was again attached to the report, and being an officer 
of high standing, gave it weight and currency throughout 
the Union that otherwise it would not have had. I was 
desired by a number of gentlemen of high standing, friends 
of the Expedition, to state the facts for the credit of the 
Expedition aod country, which I haye done in my Synopsis. 

'' I never, myself, thought enough of tins attack on the 
Expedition to have any feeling on the subject as regards 
Capt^ Aulick; nor did I intencl any thing personal 
towards him in the remarks in my Synopsis, as I told a 
mutual friend, some days since, who spoke to me on the 
subject. 

'' My language is erroneously quoted when I am made 
to say, that Captain Boss * ought ^ to have examined, 
whereas I only express surprise that he should not closely 
have inquired into the statements, as I think any one would 
have done similarly situated. 

'' As for Captain Aulick's charge oinegUgenee against me, 
as an apology for Captain Ross's error, I am well assured, 
from the personal acquaintance I have had with the latter, 
he never would have made it himself. I can truly say 
that I rejoice in his success. With Captain Boss, as an 
individual, lam not at issue; but when an unjust attack 
is made on the Expedition and the results of our hard 
labours, which belong to the country, I feel it my duty to 
defend them. 

" I am, very respectfuUy, 

'* Your obedient servant, 

''Charles Wilkes. 

" Nov. 19th, 1842.'' 



A A 4 



360 



APPENDIX, No. IX. 



TABLES ILLUSTRATING THE ABSTRACTS FROM THE METEOROLO- 
GICAL JOURNAL KEPT ON BOARD HER MAJESTY'S SHIP EREBUS, 
PRINTED WITH THE NARRATIVE. 



Figures — To denote the Force of the Wind. 



QdenoteiCalm. 



1 

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 
12 



If 



n 



»f 



f» 



»f 



n 



n 



n 



f* 



Light Air - 

Light Breese 

Gentle Breese - 
Moderate Breese 
Fresh Breese - 
Strong Breese - 

Moderate Gale - 
Fresh Gale - - 
Strong Gale 
Whole Gale 

Storm - - - - 
Hurricane - - 



just iniBelent to 
glT« . . . . 

1 with whleb a weO- 
oooditlootd man- 
of.war, under all 
•ail, and dean 
full, would ffo In 
•nMoch water, 
lironi • • . - 



in wblcb the tame 
•hip could Just 
carry dose hauled 



with which she 
could only bear - 



with which the 
would be reduced 
to 

to which she could 
•how - - • • 



Steerage way. 

1 to 2 knots. 

3 to 4 knots. 

5 to 6 knots. 

Royals, &c. 

Single-reefs and top-gallant 

sails. 
Double-reefs, jib, &c. 
Triple-reefs, courses, &c. 
Close-reefs and courses. 
Close-reefed main topsail 

and reefed foresail. 
Storm stay-sails. 
No canvas. 



361 

Lettebs — To denote the State qfthe WnUher. 

* b denotes Blue sky. — Whether with oleir or hasj ftliiiot|ih«r«. 
Cloudy. — t. e. Detached opening doadt. 

Drizzling rain. 
Fog — f thick fog. 

Gloomy dark weather- 
Hail. 
Lightning. 

Misty or hazy. — So m to intcrmpt the irkir. 

Overcast. — t. e. The whole ikj carered with mm hy w tteii 
cloud. 

Passing showers. 
Squally. 

Bain. — t. «- Cootiiiiiofit rein. 

Snow. 

Thunder. 

Ugly threatening appeanoce in the wcstfcer. 

YLsQiility of distant (AjjecU. — WuAtr ike 4ff 1m 

„ Wet dew. 



c 


»1 


d 


II 


f 


II 


g 


II 


h 


II 


1 


II 


n 


II 





II 


P 


II 


q 


II 


r 


II 


s 


II 


t 


II 


u 


n 


V 


w 




Bj ti«e frMJMitiMi ^ Hmm klt«r% al Hm 



ban doiiiifli fiki^ dhf, wM fl rt ^efc^ i 4fiiiiif A a i i ^ tt 







\ 



APPENDIX X. 

OBOGBAPHICAL TABLE. 



N*ii» and DcHription <J FUo. 


LMitada 
South. 


•^ar 


Adun, Mount • • - - 


7°! 2^ 


lg8 56 


Adaw, Capo .... 


71 18 


170 45 


Anne, Cape .... 


78 48 


170 10 




76 00 


160 00 


Bidlen; bluls 


66 44 


163 11 


Bktow, Cape .... 


71 12 


168 56 


Bay, M'Murdo (centre) - 


77 20 


165 00 


Mowbraj .... 


72 11 


170 30 


Robertson .... 


71 22 


170 25 


Wood .... 


74 28 


165 30 


Tnle . . . . 


70 89 


166 80 


Beaufort Island . . . - 


76 ii 


166 68 


Bird, Cape .... 


rt 09 


166 40 


Brewster, Mount 


72 53 


169 80 


CapeAdare . . . . 


71 18 


170 45 


■^Anne . - . . 


78 48 


170 10 


Barrow .... 


71 12 


168 58 


Bird .... 


77 09 


166 40 


Cbristie .... 


72 17 


170 42 


Cotter .... 


72 39 


170 50 


Croder .... 


77 25 


169 10 


DanieU .... 


72 53 


170 00 


Davis .... 


70 82 


166 06 


Dayman .... 


70 40 


170 58 


Downshire 


71 85 


170 58 


Gausa .... 


76 09 


162 52 


HalleH .... 


72 28 


170 48 


Hooker .... 


70 36 


166 28 


Jobnson .... 


74 16 


166 20 


Jones .... 


78 OS 


169 16 


M'Connidt 


71 65 


170 68 


Moore .... 


70 49 


167 27 


Nortb .... 


70 31 


166 28 


OaUey .... 


70 56 


167 46 


Phillips .... 


78 00 


169 55 



GEOORAimCAL XABU. 



N»> ud OwtvtM ar FhM. 


9Mh. 


"£* 


Cq«Boge« - - . . 


^A 


ihjo 


Seott . . . . 


na 


168 09 


avbM - . . . 


74 06 


166 47 


Wadwvth 


7j n 


169 55 


WMhinglon 


74 »7 


165 10 


WbeaMMie 


7» 4S 


170 48 


Wood . - - . 


71 19 


169 69 


Ctrirtie. C«pe - - - - 


78 17 


170 49 


Comr, Cape . - - . 


7» » 


170 50 


Coalman Uaod - . - - 


7S M 


170 a 


CroiierCape . . - - 


77 !5 


169 10 


ConicslHiU . . . . 


71 14 


166 56 


DalmeoT, Uoant 


71 05 


167 08 


D»iu«ll,CWpe - - - - 


7» M 


170 00 


D»Tis,C»pe . . . . 
Daymin, Capo .... 


70 »» 


166 06 


70 40 


166 50 


Doabtfol laUnd (1) * 


7S 44 


166 10 


Doubtful laknd (2) 


71 43 


171 06 


Downahire, Cape ... 


71 M 


170 58 


Dunraven Reck a 


71 15 


170 40 


Elliot, HooDt . - . . 


70 50 


166 35 


Erebus, Mount .... 


77 SJ 


166 58 


Frances IsUnd .... 


67 SO 


164 90 


GauM,Ckpe . . . . 


76 09 


169 59 


Hallett, Cape - . - - 


71 95 


170 45 


Harcourt, Hoont ... 


79 89 


170 04 


Hemhell, Mount 


79 04 


170 08 


Hill, Conical - . - . 


71 14 


168 58 


Hooker, Cape .... 


70 W 


166 98 


Inlet, Smith - . . . 


70.55 


167 88 


Tucker - . . . 


79 46 


169 45 


Island, BaUeoT - . . . 


66 44 


163 11 


Beaufort 


76 55 


166 58 


Coulman 


7a 56 


170 09 


DoubtftUfl) . 

Doubtful m • 


75 44 


166 10 


71 49 


171 06 


Fnmcet - - . . 


67 90 


164 90 


Franklin 


76 07 


166 90 



QEOORAFHICAL TABIA. 



Nuu ■Dd DMcripliMi <rf Fttt» 


LuituiU 
Boa±. 


U.^^ 


Idud, PoiKUioii 


ft« 


ifi lb 




67 36 


166 00 


l!leli,K«r . . . - 


74 00 


169 40 


Ljjl . . . . 


70 46 


167 20 


Pouemioii 


72 00 


171«bo« 


JohnMn, Cm>6 - - • • 


74 16 


166 20 


JooM, Cape . . . - 


78 08 


169 15 


Kay Islets . . . . 


74 00 


169 40 


LyaUWets . . . . 
Lloyd, Mount .... 


70 46 


167 20 


7! 19 


170 07 


Lubbock, Mount 


73 04 


169 00 


Magnetic Pole . - - - 


75 U 


154 08 


M'Cormick, Cape 


71 55 


170 68 


M'Murdo, Bay . 


77 20 


166 00 


Melbourne, Mount ... 


74 25 


164 10 


Minto, Mount .... 


71 83 


169 16 


Monteagle, Mount 


74 00 


166 12 


Moore, Cape .... 


70 49 


167 27 


Mount Adam .... 


71 23 


168 56 


Albert (centre) - 


76 00 


160 00 


Bremrte;- 


72 58 


169 30 


Dalmeny 


71 05 


167 06 


EUiot .... 


70 60 


166 35 


Erebui .... 


77 33 


166 58 




72 32 


170 04 


HemheU 


72 04 


170 08 


Lloyd .... 


72 19 


170 07 


Lubbock 


73 04 


169 OO 


Melboarne 


74 26 


164 10 


Minto - - . . 


71 33 


169 16 




74 00 


166 IS 




73 25 


166 56 




72 40 


169 15 


Parker "- . . - 


71 18 


let 24 


Parry ... to 


79 00 


169 00 


Peacock 


72 11 


170 06 


Pechell .... 


71 06 


167 80 


Phillipa .... 


78 06 


168 15 


Robinson 


71 44 


170 25 


Sabine . ■ ■ ■ 


71 42 


169 66 



OXOOBAFHICAL TABLB. 



365 



Name and DMeripdoo of Flaot. 



Mount Terror - 
Troubridge 
Whewell 
Mowbray Bay - 
MurchisoDy Mount 

North, Cape 
Northampton, Moont 

Oak]ey> Cape - 

Parry Moantains 
Parker, Mount - 
Peacock, Mount 
Peak, BuBsell - 
Pechell, Mount 
Phillips, Cape - 
Phillips, Mount 
Pole, Magnetic - 

Robertson Bay - 
Robinson, Mount 
Rocks, Dunrayen 
Roget, Cape 
Russell Peak - 

Sabine, Mount - 
Sabrina Land - 
Scott, Cape 
Sibbald, Cape - 
Smith Inlet 
Smyth Island 



Terror, Mount - 
'I'roubridge, Mount 
Tucker Inlet 

Wadworth, Cape 
Washington, Cape 
Wheatstone, Cape 
Whewell, Mount 
Wood, Cape 
Wood Bay 

Yule Bay 



Latitoda 
800th. 



- 



to 



Iioiigiiuda 



7^ 80 
71 12 

71 55 

72 11 

78 25 

70 81 
72 40 

70 56 

79 00 

71 18 

72 11 
67 26 
71 06 
78 00 
78 06 
75 05 

71 22 
71 44 

71 15 

72 06 
67 26 

71 42 

66 00 
70 59 
74 06 

70 66 

67 86 

77 80 

71 12 

72 46 



78 27 
74 87 
72 42 
71 55 
71 19 
74 25 

70 89 



168 84 

168 05 
170 18 
170 80 

166 56 

165 28 

169 15 

167 45 

169 00 
167 24 

170 06 
164 80 

167 80 

169 55 

168 15 
154 06 

170 26 
170 25 
170 40 
170 50 

164 80 

169 55 
120 00 
168 02 

166 47 

167 SS 

165 00 

168 84 

168 05 

169 45 

169 66 
165 10 

170 48 
170 18 
169 82 
165 80 



166 80 






366 



APPENDIX, No. XL 

(Re/erred to in p. 17. of Narrative.) 

A LIST OF ROCK SFECIMBNS, FBOM ST. PAUL'S 

BOCKS. 

No. 1. Homstone — from summit of white rook, south- 
west side. 

2. " Kaolin," veined with serpentine, from side of 

do. 

3. The latter rock, from the base, where exposed to 

the spray of the sea; in progress of decompod^ 
tion. 

4. Altered Homstone — from the rock on the north- 

east side. 

5. Veins — intersecting the base of the rook, like small 

dykes, black and much hardened. 

6. The same, filled with calcareous deposit, &c. 

7. Masses of conglomerate, confusedly intermingled 
with the last four kinds. 



END OF THE FIRST TOLUME. 



LoifDOic : 

SpomiwooDi and Shaw, 
Ntw-«tr«eC-8qiurc. 



,-. -o 



Mc: 



I I 






» r " 



i.iy'\' 



(.2 h 






iX 



u 



\ 



\\. 



II 




3 2044 037 298 460 




