Mona Antiqua Restaurata (Henry Rowlands, 1723)
=======================
Rowlands's Anglesey antiquities (this text from the 1766 second edition) — the first druid-centered archaeology of Mona, founding the 'druidical temple' reading of megaliths. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/monaantiquarest00rowlgoog).

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web


at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/


J


9


*•-


v*


V


Mona Antiqua Reftaurata.

A N

ARCHiEOLOGICAL DISCOURSE

O N T H E

ANTIQUITIES,

NATURAL and HISTORICAL,

O F TH E

ISLE of ANGLES E Y,

The Ancient Seat of the Britifti Druids.

In TWO ESSAY S. •(>>- /

•- <&'j


WITH AN

APPENDIX,

CONTAINING

A Comparative Table of Primitive Words, and the Derivatives of theni

in feveral of the Tongues of Europe * with Remarks ju^pn them.

• . ' *

TOGETHER WITH

Some Letters, and Three C^ta^oques.

By HENRY ROWLA Ny^> S,: ,
Vicar of Llanidan, in the Ifle of Anglesey'/


^*— * "■ - ■ ■* ■ -- * •' * - ~ - •" " — - - — --• - •"-' •


The Second Edition, Corre&ed and Improved.


•••-"••— .... . . ^ .


LONDOK:

Printed for J. Knox, near Southampton-Street in the Strand.

MDC£LXVI.


•/••• .%•% -. #


• • *• • •


•• •. •


«• ••• ••


Tt>THE RIGHT HONOURABLE


RICHARD,


Lord Viscount Fitzwilliam of Merion,


Baron of Thorn-Castle,


Knight of the Bath, &c. &c.


PERMIT me, my Lord, to ufher into the
. world ithjis Second Edition of Mr. Row-
lands' Account of Anglesey — an Ifland which
you well know — under the favour of .your JU>rd-
(hip's Patronage. It may be, perhaps;; ' f6me
pleafure to you to travel the country over again,
and view the Curioiities of it, by the light and
dire&iori of this learned antiquary. It is, I am

fore,


IV


DEDICATION.


(lire, great pleafiire to me, that I have it in my
power thus to acknowledge your kindneis and
friendwip, and publicly to declare with how great
efteem and true regard, I am,

My Lord,

Your Lordftiip's moft obedient,

and moft humble Servant,


Henry Owen.


• • « •


-• •••■


ADVER,


ADVERTISEMENT.

AS this Book, notwithstanding the inaccuracies of the
Firft Edition *, met with a favourable reception from
the world ; we thought it a duty incumbent upon us, not
only to clear it of thofe typographical errors, but alfo to ren-
der it ftill more worthy of public regard by the following
improvements; viz.

i. By revifing and correcting the language throughout,
fb far as was confident with the refolution. of preferving the
Book the fame.

2. By rectifying the miftakes which our author had com-
mitted in relation both to Facts and Inscriptions,, and adding
explanatory notes, where they were thought neceflary.

3. By inferting a new and correct Map of the Ifland,. in-
Head of that ridiculous, imaginary one, that difgraced the
former edition.

4. By continuing the Catalogues of Members of Parlia-
ment, &c. to the prefent time. And by feveral other im-
portant additions.

For moft of thefe improvements the public is indebted to<
the late ingenious Mr. Lewis Morris - y whofe Work, entitled,.
Celtic Remains, whenever it is published, will exhibit a
noble and curious fpecimen of his great abilities and know-
ledge of antiquity.

* The Firft Edition, printed at Dublin A. D. 1723, for want of fome proper-
< >erfon to revife the fheets, came out very incorredt. The author died before itr
•as published..


>

t n m


AUTHOR'S PREFACE.


ARCHEOLOGY, or an Account of the Origin of
.1 Nations after the Universal deluge, admits of two-
ways of ienquiry,-*— -either beginning at Babel, the
place of mankind's difperfion, and tracing them downwards
to our' own times by- the light of records, which is Hiftory,,
and of natural reajbn, which is' Inference and Conje&ure;.
or elfe beginning from our own time, and winding them up-
wards, by the fame helps, to the firft place and origin of their
JDragrefiion ;——^ both which ways are ufually taken by Hifto-
iians and>Genealogifts, and are equally to be allowed in their
manner of proceeding. 1 By the former of thefe methods I
have in the following Sedions adventured through fome of the
datkeft tracks of time, tp calculate the Archaeology, and to*-
fetch out and put together fome rude 1 ftrokes and lineaments
of the Antiquities of the Isle of Anglesey, from its-firft
planting to the time of the Roman Conquer!, moftly in an>
hypothetical way, or a rational fcheme of enquiry.


*


A method, I cdnfefs,. very unufual; viz. to trace the foot-
fteps of hiftorical actions any other way, than by that of an-
cient memoirs and records. But where thofe lights, are want-
ing, what mail we do? Shall we lie down with our forefathers
in the general flumbeiy blaming the paft ages for leaving , us

im


viii The AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

in the dark ; or like the men of Egypt, {hall we only confine
our view to the preterfluent ftream of Nile, and refblve to
look no higher, becaufe, it is faid, its fountain-head lies hid
beyond the mountains of the moon? No; that were to t&
unfaithfully with the defigns of nature : Knowledge is her gift
from God t6 us j and we ought to employ all the means and
helps (he affords, to improve and enlarge it.

The main and principal help* M guide, us through the dark
recefles of time $ are the teftimonies of. unexceptionable records,
and fuch confequences, as are naturally deducible from them*
Thcfe are like the folar rays;^ where-ever they fhinc, there is
fure and perfect light j and the motion guided by them ia
even, fteady and regular.

There are other things, as analdgy.of ancient: names and
Words; ancient laws, conftitutions, and cuftoms j' coins and
medals ; erections, monuments;) and ruins ; edifices and in*
fcriptions j the appellations of places ; the genius, tempers, in*
durations, and completions of people ; and a variety of . fuch
remarks, which afford here and there ' little, ftrearning lights to
be ca^tioufly and warily ruade ufe of, and which we ought
likewife to fcan and examine jointly and feveralJy, and from
them extract fuch fecqndary fupplies and afiiftances, as may
help to fill up and enlighten thofe obfeure chafms an<f inter-
lincary fpaces of lime, which interrupt the brighter ftrokes,
and more undeniable certainties of records. And in this man*
per, by a juft proportionate difpofal of the lights and fhadows
of Truth, we may undertake to reprefent the accounts and
tranfaclions of the remoteft time, though not as certain, yet
what is next to it, as highly probable, coherent and intelligible.

By


The AUTHOR'S PREFACE- ix

By the firft of thcfe, viz. the unexceptionable teftimonies
of Records, divine and human, and the confequences I could
juftly draw from them, I was afTifted to lay down the main
draught and ground- work of this rude Eflay. Here I had fure
footing ; and I have been careful all along, to conclude no-
thing with affurance and certainty, but what is built on this
evidence.

The other collateral helps I make ufe of, according to the
degree and quality of their evidence, to complete and fill up
the vacuities of this draught with fhadows of conjectures and
probabilities ; and what conclufions I draw from that fort of
evidence, I. always propound as uncertain and only probable ;
leaving every one at his own liberty, either to judge them fo,
or to make (if he pleafe) better guefles ; preferving always a
juft and ftrict regard to the due proportions and meafures be-
tween caufes and effects, and effects and caufes, as they come
in my way.; which I ever reckon the main concern of hypo-
thetical difcourfes.

And indeed I muft confefs I could never yet fee a reafon
why in fome cafes an hypothetical difcourfe or a conjectural
way of accounting, when it is performed with caution and due
regard to peculiar circumftances, fhould not be as applicable to
the hiftory of places and actions, as it is allowed to be to that
of nature ; and that in fome cafes it is fo, 1 (hall in a proper
place endeavour to evince.

I own that This now offered to public view was at firft only
defigned for the exercife of private thoughts and the perufal of
a few friends j and that it is at beft but a weak teftimony of

b the


x The AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

the ftrong defires I* had of retrieving the almoft-loft accounts
and antiquities of my Native Country, out of the deep ob-
fcurities of time and prevailing oblivion ; towards which if my
poor endeavours can but contribute the fmalleft mite, I have
my aim ; and do wifh that fome abler hand, better qualified
for fuch a performance, would undertake to give the world an
ample (atisfaclory Account, from the Nature of Things, from
Records, Traditions, remaining Monuments, and from fuch
other lights and evidences as occur, of the Antiquities of this
Iiland ; which I find hath been effected in other parts of the
nation, with no fmall acceptance and (atisfaction. ^

This I £hall yet farther premife, that where I have been
inclined to derive many ancient names of things, appertain-
ing to religion and other ancient ufages, from the primitive
Hebrew tongue, I would entreat the reader not to determine
in prejudice thereto, till he fees the accounts I give, relat-
ing to that matter, in my Remarks on the Comparative Ta-
ble towards the end of the book ; where I hope he will
upon perufal find good grounds for what I did, and therein
to his doubts, if he has any, a reafbnaHe fatisfadtion.

As to the origin of nations, and many things depending
upon it, it is very prefumptise that the raoft ancient me-
moirs of things, the Sacred excepted, were at firft built on
this foundation j viz. on Inferences and Conjectures ; yet,
when recorded v and tranfmitted to pofterity, their credit ad-
vanced as they grew in age, and they foon came to be what
they called Authentic Hiftorks ; as if being recorded had been
a fuflcient pledge of their authority, and the beft title to truth
and certainty ; and a farther reafoning into things, never after

to


The AUTHOR'S PREFACE xi

to be attempted ; whereas upon a juft confideration of this
affair, it will (I prefume) appear, that it is the beft fervice and
the greateft juftice done to hiftory to have its foundations well
afcertained $ and where they are not, no age is too late, by ill
the means and helps that reafon and nature can afford, to en-
deavour their being fo, which is the aim of thefe EfTays j and
where thofe nieans appear to be earlier and clearer than fuf-
pe&ed records, I hope the reader will be more juft and candid
than to defpife and reject them ; the reafons whereof fhall be
more fully explained in the Introduction to the Second Eflay.

To conclude, whatever is offered to the public of this kind
muft undergo variety of cenfures : Every one there has a right
to judge, though few have the abilities to judge rightly. Cri-
ticifm is an undefined thing, under no fettled rule, often go-
verned by prejudice or paflion, by humour or fancy ; whence
it frequently comes to pafs, that what is agreeable to one
tafte is difpleafing to another. To pleaie All is impoflible;
to have Faults is unavoidable.


•Vitiu nemo Jine nafcitur: optimus ilk eft,


2>yi mittimus urgetur. Hor. lib. I. fat. iii.

" To have no errors is a privilege above the condition of
humanity j under it, happieft is he who has kwcfi of them."


b 2 THE


THE


CONTENTS.


Page

TH £ terraqueous globe t

Menai river 4

Pwll-Cerifc ibid

New banks of beach made 6

The univerfal flood demonftrated f

Alteration on the face of the globe 8

The Productions of marfhes, meadows, low-lands and turberies it

The declivity of the Ifland 12

Carreg y forwyllt 13

Malltraeth 14

Aber Breint 16

Llanddwyn xy

Mon, why fo called 20

Porthaethwy and Tyndaethwy, why fo called 23

Ynys Dowyll 24

Dinas, why fo called 25

Rhofydd 26

CyttieV Gwyddlelod * 27

The etymology of Gwyddel ibid

Tyranni, whence derived $8

Bods Tref and Caer accounted for 28, 29

Brttifh Caer Edris and Iriflb Mur-Oflavan the lame in fignification jo

Cwmmwd, whence called note, 31

The firft language ufed in the Ifle of Anglefey s 2m ^Z6

The Britilh language aboriginal 36

The laws and religion of the firft inhabitants 39, &fr.

Derivation of the names of the Titans or Heathen gods note> 42

Cromlech^ what and whence the naiqe 47

Carneddau, what and whence the name 4 8

Coel-


THE CONTENTS.


Paae


O"


Coel-ceithie 49

Meini-Gwyr, what - _ 2

Druids


53

55
ibid


Why To called
Brachmans

Graves, the firft templet " 5§

Why the Druids chofe the lfle of Mona for their eftablilhment " 5 8

Their improvements in fciences 6

Their philolbphy <j,

Their difcipline 5*

Their diftinftions and characters 64, fcfr.

Their authority and jurifdiction 5jj

Their religious groves and facrifices gg

Mifieltoe, Pren-awyr 69

Gorfcddau ibid

M6n Mam Gymru 71

Anglefey and the lfle of Man fuppofed to be the tw6 Fortunate Iflands ibid

The Ifles of the Heroes 75

Hyperborean Iflands 76

Abaris the Druid 77

Humph. Lloyd and Polydore Virgil 78

Gauls came to Britain to perfed their ftudies, &c. 75

Drudati, Offywr and Beirdd 84

Caer-Idris and Cerrig-Brudyn ibid

Copper weapons, what they feem to be mte> B6

Bryn-Gwyn,, a druidical temple 90

The great druidical temple 91, (£c.

Our Saviour's medal go

Druidical monuments ibid

The conftrudtion of thofe monuments 9*

Anglefey called Ynys Von, Ynys Dowyll, and Ynys y Cedeirn noU^ 97

Anglefey facked by Suetonius Paulinus 97, & Cm

Anglefey facked by Julius Agricola jo ^

BocUjor, Prefaddfed and Caftelljor lC j

The Druids efcape to (he lfle of Man, to Ireland and Scotland 108

The Irilh Druids 109

The old Irifti alphabet called Beth-luis-nion no

The diivifions of Anglefey 114

The extent-books 120

Cylchaft ^ • 128

Copper coins 136

6 Jofeph


THE CONTENTS,

Page

Jofeph of Arimathea 139-

The Second Sight, arelift of the Druids mle % 141

Bangor-ls-Coed 143

Cafwallon-law-hfr 147

Parifiies firft eftablUhcd - 4 . *5&

The building of churches ia Anglefe/ 1 54

Old inscriptions ^55, &fr.

Gildas, his charge anfwercd 161

The line of our Britilh princes 169

The Cornwal family 16&

Roderic the Great defcribed • 1 Jf 3, £sf^

An^lefey, a place of refuge to the diftreffed iy€

Gwyl Mab-Sant, whence fo called 184

Menau, whence fo called 185

The ftory of Brutus* how far true 196

The names of the patriarchs, a prophecy of Chrift 204

Cromleche accounted for 206

Carnedde accoanted for 210

Meini Gwyr accounted for £15,

The etymology of the word Druid 237

The etymology of Bodowyr 239

Old Britilh habits and manner of living 245

The fpeech of Boadicea note* 247

The fpeech of Galgacus 248.

The fpeech of Cara6tacus 252

A Specimen of the Druids way of inftru&ing and communicating their

knowledge \ 253-;

Adam's great knowledge of nature 255

The poflibility of its being derived and communicated to the Druids 2 5$
Rules to direft the reconciling the various diale&s of the Celtic language 261

The Comparative Table ' 264

Proportions relating to the firft language 972

The nature and origin of that language 273,
The houfe and family of Heber preferved among them that original language 275

Nimrod the builder of Babel 278:

The difperfion of nations and the divifion of the earth. 280

The confufion of tongues 2821

The laws and ftatutes of the patriarchal age 290

The Gomaritae and the Gomarian tongue 29*

The countries inhabited by them „ 292"

The Titan empire, its extent and power 293,

The


THE CONTENTS.

Page
The Ifle of Creta dedicated to religion, and poflefled by the Curttes, or

Celtic priefts 294

The Titan empire diflblved, and their language diverfified into abundance

of dialefts 295

Of the laudable endeavours of Monfieur Pezron and Mr. Edward Lhwyd,

in tracing the origin and prefcrving the remnants of that language 296

Of our Saviour's medal 297

The etymology of feveral Britifli names 301

The Greeks eafy voyage to the Ifle of Mona 307

Mr. Lhwyd's letters to the author 310

The Bride Stones 319

A catalogue of parliament men 311

A catalogue of the (heriffs of Anglefcy 326

A catalogue of the clergy of Anglefey 333


O B S E R V A-


O BSERV ATI ONS

ON THE

ANTIQUITIES

© F T H E

ISLAND of ANGLESEY.

THE FIRST ESSAY.

SECTION L

Of Ijlands in general.

ANGLESEY, anticntly by Latin writers called Mona, is an
ifland, and one of the counties of North Wales according to the
-prefent divifion, feparated from the main land hy a narrow arm of the
fez. It is feated in a temperate air, enlivened by a benign fun, and
enriched with a good and* bountiful foil. But to account for its pri-
mary and natural originatiop, I muft beg leave* from the confideration
of fo fmall a fpot of ground, to make fome refearch into the original
ftate of things, and lay down the phyiical immediate caufes of all
iflands in general 5 which I fhall endeavour to unfold by thefe propo-
rtions following i and then cftablifh a particular conclusion relating to
*his ifland.

First, The creation of this terreftrial globe, both by the word of
Crod and the light of nature, feems to fuppofe two diftind conflftencies
in the inferior chaos, viz. Earth and Water ; at firft commixed and
huddled together in one formlefs blepd or fluid, 4till the Almighty Spirit,
moving upon the face of that deep or fluid, made the diftind parts o£
it exert their peculiar tendencies and gravitation: which parts fo moved
and agitated by the Creator's hand, and then purfuing the mechanical
«ra&s of motion, at length formed and brought forth fhofe reparations,
* B which


a MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA,

which the Holy Scriptures call " the gathering together of the waters,
and the appearing of the dry laad J*

Secondly, Then it follows that the grofs and heavy particles of
the arid or dry earth, the fediment of that fluid, by the mechanical
law of motion they were obliged to purfue, gravitating and finking,
lowermoft, by clofing and uniting together, comprefled and fqueezed
out the more thin and fluid ones, i. e. the watry particles : the former
by their tenacity knitting together fof med one folid but uneven and chan-
nelled round ; and the latter more light and voluble ones, feekingalfe •
the center of gravity, but being borne off by the denfe orb, flawed ,
about ; and by filling up the depths and bottoms of the earth's uneven 1
and channelled furface, left the protuberant and more elevated tra£ts .
thereof to be habitable Land, and the depreffcd and Lower regions, .
covered with thefe waters, to be that which is called Sea or Ocean..

Thirdly, This watry heap, being held up by the indifibluble den*.
fity of the earth, and being every where of it* o.wi nature a ponderous :
lubric fluid, and as a confequent of that, of the like diftance from every .•
part of its fuperficies to thje center of gravity,* I fay,. this watry heap n
muft therefore neceflarily keep up in all parallels of the terraqueous .
globe to a conftant exalt altitude $ and. the arcb.or altitude being (as is
faid) every where equidiftant from the central. point, it will hence
neceflarily follow that the univerfal" furface of the water, .confidered in.
its intire and fpreading bulk, muft be exadly globous ; as when lines
of equal length are drawn fron* one point or,, center, their ends muft
neceflarily terminate in a perfedl circle.

Fourthly, This has been the approved and ^ftablUhed, theorem of
the rotundity of the terraqueous globe, but is naw\of late indeed fome-
what (hocked by the new notion of the fpheroidal figure of the eacth^
and confcquently of the incumbent fluid: which is the hypothefis of.
Huygens, Sir Ifaac Newton, Dr. Burnett, and others. . But aa to th^
ftrefs of my argument, viz. that there muft be allowed a given arch
or altitude of the watry furface from the common center always con-
ftant and certain, in refpedfc to the central point ; that hypothefis affefta
it not : it may indeed a little alter the form, but not the force of the
reafon. For fuppofing the fpheroidalnefi (whether oblate or oblong
it matters not in this cafe) of the terraqueous globe to be undeniably,
demonftrated (which as yet is not *) by thefe pcrfons j and that . tha

• Since the publication of this book in 1723, the fpheroidical figure of the earth has- b*err
tmdeniably demonftrated by the menfurattons of the French academicians. But this affect nqfc
«ur author's hypothefis*

diuraal


MONA ANTIQLUA RESTAl/RATA. j

diurnal rotation of the earth and water about their common axis fhould
in fome part contract, and in another part dilate the convex furface of
the globe, fome what out of an exa£t fpherical roundnefs ; yet this ro-
tation being always determinate and uniform, the arch or furface of the
fluid, though it be not exa&ly fpherical, muft keep to a conftant exadl
altitude ; that is, it muft have a diftance from the furface to the cen-
ter always equal to itfelf in every particular parallel ; which in effect
amounts to the fame thing as if it were perfectly globous.

And therefore from thefe proportions it is plainly demonflrable, that
the cavernous and furrowed parts or regions of the earthy furface,
which lay beneath this determined arch or altitude, the flowing Ele-?
ment (wanting proper bounds) if it finds a way irrefiftibly breaks in
and covers ; I fay, if it finds a way ; for there may be fome depreflions
of the earthy furface, occafloned perhaps by earthquakes or other ac-
cidents, which are even below that altitude, and yet remain dry ; be-
caufe the fea may be either artificially banked and kept out, or na-
turally defended from flowing in : but it is rarely that any continues
long fo, without an inlet opened by Nature's own hand ; that is, gulphcd
or furrowed at the original formation of the earth, or forced and broke
open by the impetuous aflaultings of this furious element to run in and
|)oflefs its own limits.

Of this Jatter particular Geography iupplies us with fome inftances,
aiamely, that of Gibraltar; whene the narrow Gut {whether naturally
or adventitioufly fo is uncertain) lets in the whole Mediterranean fea to
all that tradt.it now poffefles, and unites it to the ocean.

Thus we find the whole globe to be but one heap of earth and water,
lodged and fettled within their appointed iimits* And though upon
this fame globe, the largeft tra&s of earth, becaufe fomewhere fur*-
rounded, may be called iflands j yet thofe lefler circuits of land, thofe
fmaller wens and protuberances of the folid round are more properly fo
called, to diftinguilh them from the greater, which are more fitly called
continents.: as Britain from Europe, Anglefey from Britain., &c.

On thefe grounds therefore I conceive the fret or channel of Menai*
whiqh divides the ifle of Anglefey from the adjacent continent and makes
it an ifland, to have been originally (at Leaft the greateft part of it) be-
neath .that arch or global point before fpecified; and confequently that
the great fluid or running bulk of water, finding accefs at both ends of
it to flow in, made that trail in the beginning, or foon after, an ifland
environed by the fea.

B* SECT.


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA,


SECTION II.

Of the river Menai, and whether Anglefey <was originally divided by it

from the continent..

I WILL not affirm that this fpot of ground was an iflahd from the
creation. For it is highly probable that the univerfal deluge made
great and remarkable alterations on the face of the globe, raifing fbme
places which had been fea into dry land, and deprefling others that were
knd beneath the irruptions of that liquid element, made them feas*
Yet it is not altogether unlikely, that there was for fome fpace of time
after the divulfions of the deluge, an arm of land joining the country of
Anglefey to that of Caernarvon(hire. If any fuch there was, it muft have
been near Portbaetb-huy ; where there is ftill to be feen a trace of fmall
rocks jetting out in a line and crofling the channel, with other great
fplinters of rocks fallen and tumbled down, and appearing as if the fea
had confumed and eaten away the foil in which they had been origi-
nally fixed, leaving the rocks bare and rugged, and the ftones and
broken fhivers of the rocks in the bottom of the channel fallen and
tumbled one upon another.

In the hollows and cavernous interftices of thefe fallen and broken'
tocks the fea for an hour or two at the beginning of flood (two cur-
rents feparated by a rock conjoining and ftrongly clashing in that place)
violently boils and fluctuates, making it for that time a very dangerous
paflage ; and giving it the name of Pwll-Ceris *, I conceive, as being
the loweft ftream or current, Cer-iffa : There being (as I faid) a divi-
ded current in that place.

But if there was a fmall ifthmus or ridge of land blocking the cur-
rent in that place, as indeed thefe rocks feem to have been the natural
foundation fupporting an arm of land that extended from one fide to
the other > if fuch there was, yet the fea with its unruly furges daily
coming up at both fides of it in an uninterrupted channel* foon eat
away the foft ouzy foil that landed and made up the intervals of thefe
rocks, and by its repeated irruptions and frequent overflowings quite
confumed it in a fhort time ; and forced a paflage fo as to become one
continued channel from one end to the other.

* It ftiouLd hare been Kent, and not Ctris. In Mr. Vaughan of Hengwrt's MS. of Ncnqius*
it is PwJl Kirifi. Ctr-iJ/a is only a fanciful derivation*

It


MONA ANTIQJL7A RESTAURATA. 5

Xtmky weii'tbe affirmed, *Kat this fret or river of Menai to ; this men-
tioned middle place is *H$ original work of nature ; or a great crack
or fciffure in the internal ftrata- of the earth, at' what time foever that
happened. And though thfs-chanh el might become one entire dividing
arm of fea between thofe two lands in a : few years after the flood,, yet
it may in no iwife be granted to be then-hear fo broadband fo deep as it
is naw : for we muft allow the force and agitaStroh of ftorms, the floi
and reflux of tides, to have beaten and walhed upon, worn and funk
away, a. great deal tff the foft and earthy banks on each fide of it $ and
the bottom alfo to hgve teen donfbmed and hdllowed bythe.fea's fharp
acrimonious quality *j fo that it muftbe now-much' deeper and wider
than at firft we can imagine it to have been; '

To this alfo we may add the quarrying and carrying off ftones from
the rocky, banks of it, for building public and private edifices 5 which
eafe of digging and conveniency of water-cdrriage invited men to, and
which did ! no* a little enlarge -and widen the boundaries of it. And
whoever does but obfcrve and take exadt notice of the natural defcents
and declivities of fome grounds on each "fide of it, and withal takes a
proportional eftimate of what was ♦ torn and wafted away of the banks,
from the lower part now of thofe defcents to the ftrffkee of the wateiV
fiippofing (as it is very reafonable fo to do^ tftofe cfefcefats'to have been
equal and uniform to the brink of the channel, will find reafon to think
this channel at the beginning to have been very -harrow, and in fomd
places perhaps not very deep*

I have obferved on fome coafts along this river's fide long fows of
large ftones lying in a line one by another many yards belbty thfc ho\y
full fea- mark, as if they had been antieritly t'&fynan 9 fences or boun-
daries between the land arid fhore. Arid in' fome places you 3 rriay ob-
ferve another fcries of ftich ftones rtening parallel t6 r the lowcfrmoft
row, and lying between <t and the hfrd, is if tharfifcewfcftT in fome
ages after had been made boundary : of which I eari'gtfe'nb either ac-
count than that the lowermoft row was thi firft and moft antient boun-
dary, fixed on a deep earthy foil ; which the fea uncfermrning and per-
petually confuming and washing «away, the ftones fixed thereon funk by*
degrees lower and lower, one row after another, till they became as we .
now find them. And there is little doubt but that thofe walls op rows)

. • Salt water wears the bottom of rivers whete the tide comes no more than frefli water ; and
therefore we can allow this affeition but littk weight*

<* of.


6 MONA ANTJQU/A RE8TAURATA.

of flones which lye now as prefent boundaries between Tea and land on
deep earthy foils, future ages will behold alfo .like others fallen and
tumbled, funk and covered under water.

And as the depredations of the fea, on the foft, yielding, earthy
fliores, on the ifland's fide of this channel, has undermined, funk, and
fwallowed fome quantities of land j So the fcouring off and throwing up
of the fmall ftoncs and pebbles from-thofe raviftied banks in to great beds
6f beach, on fuch places and jetts as moft oppofe the direct currency
and undulation of the water along the channel, has gained fome, and
barred it up from fwallowing more; as. may be obferved, Firft, At
Abermenaiy where a formed bank of beach extends from * lwyn
Ceinwen to the ferry ; and being broke there by the channel reaches on
the other fide to Dinas Dinllow f^ as a pier or bulwark to Dinllow-
.mar(h. Secondly, At Pw/Jy Funvcb by Portbamel f where a bank df
beach has hemmed in and recovered a large field from the fea. Third-*
ly, At Moely Den* the JPenrfyn, where the ferryboat rides, feems
to have been anciently an ifland, at leaft at full fea* where a bank of
beach to the S.W. and an accumulated bed of fand at the back of the
beach, .has now filled up the interval, and made it one continued point
of land. And, laftly* Near Beaumures % the Point called Ojmond's h\t
and the Green by the town are a mere collodion, of {mail pebbles landed
there by the undulating teropeftuous force of the fea; though between
thofe two beaches, a confiderable .piece of land was, in lieu of what
it ftored up there, raviihed and £onfumed away by the infulting element
*o the very walk of the town*

Now, as t to thefe inundations and demolifhings of the fea that have
happened here as well as in many other places, they are not to be
afcribed to any increafed elevation of the watry body in one age more
than anothec^ut rather to fome accidental deprefTion of the earth in
fome place?; though chiefly andmoft frequently tp this depredation of the
fea upon a Jax diflblvable foil/ which it inceflantly tears and confumes
without refiftance. As to the* elevation of the fea in fome ages above
others, which fome fancy, it has no foundation in ordinary nature (fox
the approaches and attraction of cometSj if there are fuch things to be

* The word is Tjivjtt and not T<wyn. It is derived -from tjw$4 and giiyn, \. t. white fand y
' -being hillocks of white fand blown together by the wind. • -

f We have no authority to write this DinJlnv; for in all our MSS. it is fpelled Di*llt % as itfe
commonly pronounced. This Di**t Is an anciept fiinuner camp on the marih near the edge of
the fea, and was doiibtlefc intended to defend the entrance of the river Menau

' % granted


MONA ANTIQJ7A RESTAu'RATA. 7

granted, are extraordinary, and therefore not to be urged as any proof). .
Ffay, it has no foundation in nature; for the fea (excepting its daily
and monthly fwellings, which yet make no variatipn in the whole bulk)
makes of itfelf, as far as it extends and continues fluid, one round and
globous furfaqe 5 and what it depredates of the earth in one part, it
throws up into another ; and therefore, without addition of new matter,
which is naturally impoflible, this body of water, in the aggregate
bulk of jtr is'incapable of augmenting or diminifhihg- its given arch'
and determined altitude. As to local Deluges,, concerning which hif-
fory is not to be difereditcd, they may be very well accounted for an-
other way 5 as proceeding- from greats unufual rains and land-floods* ,
and other particular caufes..

But that of the untverfal deluge, if it be objected as an inftance of
/bch augmentation,' isofn© force in this particular; For that was di-
vine and miraculous';. .and as it did not-depend upon; fo it cannot be ac-
<5cunted for* and* explicated from,, the Jtnown power .and* operation o£
any- natural principles^.

Xhis-bekig Cettkdf Fmay itow conclude that the channel of Menai t \
though at firft. narrow and fitted only to* difchafge and carry ^ off: the
many frefh brooks that fall into it, might in a long, continuance of
time, , by the conftant motion -of the water wearing and confuming its
earthy banks and bottoms, become as broad and as deep as it now is.
Ahd.undoubtedly where the (horesaKe flat and earthy, foft and yielding, .
as they .are in many places;, the fea will daily enlarge its encroachments,
and purfue oppofition as they give, way, v till it meets with unpaflable re-
finance. For although the Almighty has afligned to this liquid element
its bounds over . which ordinarily it (hall not paffr; yet ' when thefe :
bounds drill and moulder away, it will inevitably break in and lean upon
others : its very nature obliging itv.as to feek its bounds, fo to reft no
where without them* .

Now, it being in my way toexplicate feme things that will' occur in
this difcourfe by that great phcenomenon, the deluge; I am obliged be-
fore I can build any conclufions upon it, to prove the univerfality of it; ;
and confequently that it< reached* not only here* , the place I undertake to
aecount for, but equally round the globe; -which fome would very ftre-
iwioufly deny, contending that a topical one fufficiently anfwers the ends
of that divine judgment. To prove this, I (hall only ufe this one ar-
gument, which I hope willclcarthe pointy or at teaft give ftrength 5 to <
what Iih^ll afiort in the next fodtionin relation to this ifland :

It:


It is agreed by all that the earth and water, as they conftitute ob*
globe, have one and the fame center of gravity ; and as a confequent of
this, that the great bulk of water, however .raifed <?r depreifcd* will
naturally formitfdf into a fpherical* or at Uaft, into a fph^roida] fur-
perficies ; it being a fluid body, and having every where an equal ten-
dency to tHe common center. Now, I fay, if they allow (as fome do)
a local deluge, they muft allow it to be fuch as did actually over-top
and cover all the mountains of that place where that deluge happened ;
elfe it coatradi&s the exprefs words of Mofes, and de/eats the; .great de-
cree of .drowning all mankind but tbofc in the ark. Now, if it bo
granted that this local flood did by fame cubits overflow the higheft
mountains of Afia (as the fcripture plainly fays it did) which are ibme
of thejcnoft afjpiring mountains in .the world j then it follows that the
global archj.or qircle of that.elevafed water, kept the fame height and
distance froox its center round the globe ; for beiqg r a ijiuid body it natu^
rally flowed to all declivities, and confequently muil overflow, all the.
mountains of the earth within that circle ; and therefore upon this
granted -fuppofition it muft be universal, or at leaft deeply cover thefe
lpwer regions, which is all I contend for.

SECTION III.

Cjf the Original Form of this Ifiand, the alterations which the universal
Deluge wrought on the fact and borders, of it, and other accidents and
effeBs of that [prodigious mafs of Water. - •

NOW,, fince it is no lefs than mathematically widest, that Noah's'
flood juniverfally overflowed the face of the earth to a height
.equal .to the; hijjhefl mountains of Afia ; and fince we have natural prin-
ciples to afford us evidence, that that overflowing made great changes
.and .alterations on the furface of the globe ; it may well become a ques-
tion, Whether this ifland was fea or land before that univerfal catacly fm ?
To which I anfwer, That although the furface of it be. for the moil:
part,flat, i and not many perches higher than the ambient fea; and
though feveral are of opinion, that many more elevated *egions were
formerly under water, and no other than the bottoms of feas ; yet, we
have flrong inducements to affirpa, that this was never fince the creation
under any, favethat of the flood. For as, on the one hand, we find
no fymptonas of fuch a fubmerfipo* no indication of fo_ longileeping\
a under


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 9

tinder Water, and as a nefccflary confequence of that, no marine remains,
properly ibch, - interfperfed in our inland foil ; fo on the other hand, we
find in many places of it fome evidences of its being land before the
deluge. We find great bulky trees buried in flutch and mud, which
in all likelihood the deluge laid along, and found growing on or near
th6 places where' we now find 4 them. And if they grew near the places
where they are found, as ihert are many figns they did, then there is no
queftion but it was terra firma before that deluge.

Now it being fuppofed to be land, and probably an ifland, before the
flood, it is impoflible to determine what addition, diminution, and
other fuperficial alterations it fuftained under that mighty preflure of
waters during the continuahce of them ; yet fomething may be faid
and rationally accounted for in regard to thefe particulars. And there-
fore in the explication of them, I (hall wave the ungrounded hypothefes
of our late theorifls in relation to the deluge and the confequences of it,
and (hall rather chufe to rely on more indubitate certainties ; that is, on
the divine authority and the vifible effefts of things, that there was a
deluge, and that it was univerfal. And confequently, in order to fet
forth the natural circumftances of this itland fince that epocha, I (hall,
from the common and moil undeniable affections and properties of that
mafs of waters, fubmerging and furrounding the terreftrial globe, af-
fiime fuch plain and eafy principles as will be very intelligible in them-
selves, and fufficiently refponfible for thofe phcenomena that will fall
under the confideration of thefe premifed particulars ; which I (hall fet
down generally in a few Theorems explicating the natural efforts of
thofe waters j and particularly in a few Corollaries neceflarily refulting
from thofe caufes, with refpe^t to the place I account for.

First* therefore, whatever divinity or philofophy may warrant us to
affirm of the prodigious rife and increafe of thefe waters two or three
miles at lead above their prefent level, we may well conceive that the
weight and force of fo huge a heap of water, fo long preffing upon and
(baking the whole faQe of the earth, which was probably then not fo
much petrified as now it is, muft needs loofen, difiblve, and take afun-
der the foft, earthy, and claiy mould and furface of it to a confiderable
depth } and with its weight and preflure lay flat and bear down all that
grew on that broken and diflevered foil.

Ail this may be concluded from the natural and ordinary efFe&s of
fuch a mighty weight 6f water, waving and prefling on the foft and
yielding furface of the globe* But befides, it is very probable that

C this


zo MONA ANT1QJJ/A RESTAURATA.

thie prodigious piafs of water was* attended vqithi extraonknaf)* oputfiio*-
tiqnsi and violences ; which indeed, ist up* only fofoble t;b the nature
of the, things but the letter of the text feeaas alfq to point out fome-
thiflg oif that kind to us. Mofcs, (it feems) not cpntentiog hiotfelf
with a, word that might only exgrefs the rife and inereafc qf the watery
but to lhew us that there was, fomewhat more in the matter, fata it
forth with an energy : Vehamajim gabru meod mod, G$n. vii. *$> vi«&
** The waters grew robuft and violent-more and more," The wond
$ahar» which hs. there makes, ujfe, ofv, peculiarly implying a, vaft gigau-
tic ftrengjb; cev gigas aliquid firojlerntre, zp fpme ; ejKgo&ocs eommsnt
upoa it j to ravage and deftroy all things befbrs it, Nqw the ipow
fliong and violent the rife andinpreafe of thefe- waters were,, tfcet more
havoc they made, and the more they broke and.dilacerated; of thft fofc
and yielding, fprface of the earth,

SscoNJ>LXt The continuance and loag : ftay of this heavy mafo of
water* fb.long prefling and penetrating the, porpH? fpwigy Wth^foakad,
Uiollifed* and diflblved the fupetfjciaicruft.qr cover of ifo. i» th^mate
flat and level places, to a very foft, ouzy, and fluid confiftence $ and
that tqo, wheje it. was not ftony and rocky, to a dep^proportipn^hJe
to thq weight anddurafcipn of the incumbent fluid* And) tht$ foffy
qua^gy^ and much, diflblvedt and loofened) futfa^fr of the ground*. &
long fte^ped' and bpmpflated, rendered it very apt andeafy to be moved*
ferqkep* and furrowed* wherever the motion, weight, and, current o£
the water drove, and prefled it. And we may alio, conceive,, thafcno
fmall proportions of the fineft and rooft diflevered part? of; the: loo&ned
earth*, being taken up and fuftained in the fwelling fluids made it to; a
confiderable height very thick, feculent, and muddy; and that oasto
fequently in that float of things the trees of the lighter fort fw.am aloft,
and the heavier ones either (luck in the quag or trailed in the. bot-
tom *•

Hence it is that the earthy mould, falling off from the fides of the
more eredt and elevated fituations, left the more hard and petrified
portions thereof, as we now. find, to be craggy, precipitous rocks. And;
when the outer coat or ftratum, which before, in all probability,, covered,
thofe heights, Aid down into the adjacent bottom*, a-grjeat deal of the,
more loofe and crufty parts of thefe rocks, being then left naked- awfe
unfupported, fell off and tumbled in many places in great fplinters.and

• Trees of the lighter fort, as fir, willows, and alder, are found anjongft the oak in MjnyM
Paris, near Tryfglwjn> in this iiland.

6 frag-


MONA ANTlt^jLTA KfcSTAtJRATA. it

ffagtoents one Upon another ; as may be fceft on the verge and borders
of all rocks and rocky precipices* So that from hence it is mechani-
cally evident, that what was foft and earthy on the hilk and mountains,
by the weight and. preflore of this water Aiding dtfwnwards, ftuck in
and filled, on the lower grounds, all unevenneffes and hollows : and
what alfo on thefc lower gronnds was before uneven and rugged, by
having their holes, chaps, and crannies filled up with the defcending
filt and fseculency, became more plain and level : infotouch, that What
Was thereby abraded and waflied off from the hills and emitttenees, Wa'sJ
by the tumbling of that water, ftrewed and levelled on the plains and
bottoms.

Ehivie mons eft diduBus in aquor. Ovid, Mttdtrt. XV. 267.
Thirdly, in the fell and decrcafe of thefe waters, whfen the higher
grounds and hills began to appear, arid the Almighty had ordered the
outrageous element to fall and couch within its own limits ; we may
naturally conceive, that as thefe waters fell lower arid lower to th6
lefler hills, they defcended ftill with greater and greater violence and
impetuofity towards their original channel, efpecially where the grounds
were uneven and (helving ; carrying along with them their muddy filths
and floating!, and making hideous eruptions in their paffagfe, wherg
they were any wife flopped and retarded, until they had lain all thty
carried along with them in the loweft bottoms, and rtfeated and lodged
themfelves within their appointed allotments.

Some idea of this we may form in our minds froth fhtt great and
frequent excavations which extraordinary land-floods effect, when they
run headlong over grounds of a lbofe yielding confiftdncy.

Thus when with haftc and precipitancy, thefe recoiling waters rolled
arid tumbled, through the great gaps and outlets of the earthy furfttce,
to their peculiar channels ; it is cafy to imagine, how their impetuous
force and violence broke and furrowed the univerfal Quag* or diflblved
and loofened furface of the earth, into guts and dingles ; and that with
various windings and turnings, at the foil broke and yielded to th£
force and violence of thofe furious eruptions, arid as the difpofition of
the rocky ftrata of the earth gave way to them : and hdW they threw up
and lodged here arid there, as they defcended, in the deprefled cavities and
receptacles, vaft proportions of ouze mixed with treris and other rub-
bifli i which afterwards condenfed and grew up in fiich plices to be
what we call moors, fens, turberies, dales, and meadow-lands. ■

C 2 And


12 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

And befides that quantity of this miry fediment and eluvies, which
ftuck in the larger bottoms to become dales and meadow-lands, and
in the lefler and deeper cavities to become moors and turberies j we may
likewife conceive, that vaft and mighty heaps of it, overflowing and
trailing with this retiring element to its own great receptacle, the
ocean, ftuck and accumulated there in the great bays and oftiums ;
where the. fea having recovered its wonted motion repelled and hoarded
It up : whereby that muddy eluvies having, after fome time, fpent its
pioifture, and been confolidated, it became in after ages (as the vaft
plains of Egypt, a great part of the Netherlands, and fome of our
marfhes of England, &c.) the richeft and moft fertile foils. For thefo
plains are, in my opinion, with .better appearance of reafon to be re-
ferred to that great and mighty deterration and eluvies of the univerfal
deluge, th^n* as Mr* Ray, and others would have it* to the floods and
fcourings of great rivers; though fomewhat may be alledged that way
of the formation of fuch flat and level lands as are juft in the oftiums,
or the places where fuch rivers difcharge themfelves into, the fea.

Thefc general Propofitions being thus far .premifed, and being in
themfelves unexceptionable, and but the ordinary and cotfftant refults
of nature in thefe circumftances ; I ihall now attempt to draw fuch
Corollaries frQm them as will eafily and intelligibly account for many
phenomena that will occur in the consideration of the original ftate and
appearance of this ifland, both before and immediately after the uni-
verfal deluge, or at leaft when it was inhabited.

Now if the queftion were put, what was the form of this ifland,
and what figure did it reprefent at that time ? I do confefs it to be very
hard to determine. But what fhape foever it was then of, I have great
inducements to affirm it was neither before nor immediately after the
flood, of the fame form and dimenfions as now we find it.

For it i$ very probable, nay, almoft demonftrable, that the fea on
the fouth-weft fide of this ifland, before the deluge, came up at many
places in little bays and angles very far into the inland part. And to
reduce what I faid to a particular application, I ihall affirm from the
foregoing Theorems,

First, That the fouth-weft indented fide of this ifland being a
little lower and more deprefled in its fituation than the oppofite one,
by that declivity, the deluge at the ebbing muft needs bear down and
carry with it into thofe bays and angles on the fouth-weft fide, what-
ever the weight and preflureof the waters had eraded and broken off from

the


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. t 3

the loofened furface ; and that in the trailing and rowling down of the
dreggy fediments of the retiring fluid, fome proportions of that elu-
vies ftuck here and there, both in the more extended depreflions, which
formed our flats and meadow-lands, and in the deeper cavities, which
became our moors and turberies.

Secondly, in this receflion of the recoiling waters, the furface of
the ifland being fomewhat flat and levef, though a little (helving to the
fouth-weft fide, we may imagine that great proportions of that water
were (lopped, pent up, and as it were, land-locked, in many places y
till the force, weight, and overflowings of it tore and opened it a vent
and paflage through the foaked and foftened ground from one bottom
to another ; and thofe vents and irruptions made our narrow gullets, or
nentyddi of which that at Llangefni is a remarkable inftance ; where
a great fofs gr gullet of confiderable length and depth is broke through
a large ridge of land, to give vent and paflage to a large extended bot-
tom which lies behind it, and which otherwife had been all to this day
under water \ in which place it is obfervable, how the impetuous ele-
ment, after fome windings as the ground gave, at laft broke out its*
paflage through a heap of rocks, which, perhaps, from that perceived
efFedt, was, and is,, to this day, called Careg y forwyttt, or the erup-
tion rock. And I dare appeal to any man's obfervation, if ever he hay
feen any large extended bottoms without either a natural opening *> or
a forced breach and paflage, made by this rapid element, to difcharge
and carry off what collections of water may be otherwifc conceived to
fwell and ftagnate in thofe bottoms ; and to attribute thefe breaks and
excavations to the conftant drilling of brooks and gutters, will not be
fo much as fuppofed by any that (hall diligently obferve the pofition and*
circumftances of thofe places.

Thirdly, that the bent and Aiding of the etuvies of the dehige onr
the face of this ifland was to the fouth-weft fide of it, is evident ; firft,
from the hills, rocks, and precipices of the north-eaft fide, which are
confiderably higher and mote elevated from the fea than any on the op-
pofite fide ; and, fecondly, from the conftant courfe and running of the
greateft and longeft of our brooks -f- from the north-eaft to the fouth-
weft of the ifland ; the dope and declivity of the ground directing, as it
does thefe brooks now, fo that eluvies then,, to fix its repofe and fettle-


• Are not all lakes formed in bottoms by the want of fuch openings ?
f The rivers Brain/, Jlaw, Ktint, tffc.


xnent


X4 MONA ANTIQJUA RESTAURATA.

incnt on 'the fouth-weft borders of it ; yet fome proportions of the elu-
vies flan ted alfo to the north-eaft fide, where fome little defcents fa-
voured its motion.

Fourthly, with regard to fuch parts of this eluvies as ftuck not
here and there in holes and cavities producing our moors and turberie$,
or in the large and extended bottoms and depreffions becoming our flats
and meadow-lands, but trailed and followed the receding waters to the
fhore& of the fea; wo may imagine that that reftlefs element, having
then recovered its wonted pofition and motion, foon repelled and threw
back that earthy tilt and mixture, the fpoils of the higher grounds, and
therewith filled up thofe bays and inlets of the weftcrn fide of the illand,
forming there thofe moors and marfhes which we now find at New-
borough, Malltraeth, Aberffraw, Trewin *, and in other leffer angles
of that cloven indented fide.

Fifthly, in this eluvies and miry floatings of the deluge, thus car-
ried down to the fea, and thrown up again into thofe bays and inlets,
we may fuppofe two forts of fubftahces that had their different place
and pofition in that fettling mafs :

Firft, the earthy parts, by their weight and more clofe adhefion in
that accumulated mixture, ftatically fubfided and kept to the bottom,
and made, next this fea, a more loofe and quaggyf-, and to the land*
ward, a more firm and compact, body of fand. The fea- water at every
flood, cribrating through that feaward portion of it, which was probably
very loofe and pervious, repelled and kept back the more flimy and ouzy
part of the mixture ; which being fo feparated and driven back, after
fome fettling, conglutinated and hardened ther# into a firm fandy clay,
fpph as we generally find the under foil of our marfhes to confift of.

Secondly, the more light and voluble portions of this eluvies, being
a medley of all floating fubftances, as grafs, roots, leaves, trees, &c.
pofTeffing the upper part of the aggregate maff, were, by the fea's agi-
tation, driven yet furtheft off to the landward, and there fettling, grew
into a turfifh matter, or black fpungy peat -, fuch as is generally found
behind our fandy marfhes in this and other countries.

Sixthly, this laifc mentioned fcurfy floating part of the eluvies, ftuck
ever uppermoft in all the places where it fixed and fettled; unlefs it
happened in fome places to be expofed to, and covered with, drifts of

* It ihould be written Tjwjn Tn Owain, it being the townfliip's name.

t Matt-trattb.

fand


RTONTA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. t s

fend hueried by. ftarm* and winds ;. which is the reaftm that peat and
turf are not feldom dug up in fomc fknds and marfhes under a layer of
fand :. and fometimes in inland turberies they find a layer of marie,
clay, or gravel* fpread over that peaty fibrous matter ; which feems to
lktve happened either from fome after-eruptions of the pent and flag-
nated fluid, burfting and overflowing it with a new fediihent ; or it may
have come to pafs from ordinary floods wafhing and carrying down the
offals of the higher grounds,, and ftrewing them upon thefe already
formed and grown turberies: and hence thofe ftreaks of clay, marie,
gravel, and* the like,, that arc ufually found in peat and turf, or the
layers of that ftuff ovcrfpreading and lying upon them, are eafily ac-
counted for.

Seventhly, in this peaty turfifh matter we frequently, and almoft
every where, find trees of all fizes buried and lying along in thte midft
of it ; and fometimes trees of another ipecies than are ufually growing
near the places they are found. Thefe mull be lodged there by the in*-
undation of the univerfaJ flood m. for if they had been there cut down, or
fallen of themfelves, thereby forming the peat and turfifh matter that
now grows over them, as fame would feem to objeft, they mull hare
been all found lying on the very ground and loweft bottoms of thofe
peats, and not difperfed throughout the fubftance of that mafs : where*
as they are found to lie in deep turberies feveral yards above the bottom; ,
lbme with their roots uppermoil, and others in other pofitions, and
that too on our highefl mountains*; which furely nothing but an.
univerfal deluge could eflfed;, leaving them with the recoiling waters^
one above another,, according to their fpecific gravities, difperfed and
buried in that dutch and mud which ftuck in thefe cavities, and in after-
ages, conftituted and formed thofe peats and turberies wherein they are
found.

This is what I find moil confonant to the works of nature, with re-
gard to all flats arid.level grounds, and confequently to the original form-
ation of thofe trafts of land or marfhes, that now fill up thofe arms and;
branches of the fea, which on the fduth-weft fide of this iftand, Lfuppofc
to have at firft run up a confiderable way into the land, and are now
firm ground, making that fide of the ifland more ftraight and uniform
than originally it feems to have been.

Now to prove what I affirmed, that the fea did really come up at firft'
in thofe bays and inlets, which are now firm land and turberies, to the

• Particularly on Mynydd Paris near Tryfghoyn*.

very


16 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

very edge and borders of the rifing grounds, on each fide and at the ends
of them, I (hall offer thefe inftances :

First, the under-ground and lowcrmoft bottoms of thofe mentioned
fandy marfhes, that is, the uppermoft coat of the true folid earthy
mould or foil under thofe plains ; and that in fome places very far from
the fea, is found to be lower than the full fea level ; and confequently,
before the fand and Hutch crowded in and filled the places, the fea muft
naturally overflow and cover it, as I have before demonftrated.

Secondly, at Mall-traeth marih, about the middle place between
the fea and the fartheft inland points of it> and very near the land, they
find, by digging for coals, a perfect fea- fh ore with all its fymptoms, as
pebbles, {hells, &c. under five or fix yards of pure fand, as I have been
credibly informed by an intelligent perfon concerned in thofe coal-
works -, and yet the furface there is very little above the level of the fea,
as appears by its frequent flowing up to that place ; and if the channel
was originally fo deep there, fo near the (hore of it, any one may pro-
portionably conjecture, not only how deep the whole bay was, but a!fo
how far the fea flowed up to the adjacent rifing grounds towards Keint
and Kefenny ; two brooks difcharging themfelves into that marfh.

Thirdly, at Towyn Ceinwen* near Aber-Menai % at a place called
now Diyyran* the very utmoft point to the landward of that bay, juft
where the river Breint goes into the marfh $ I have found that place in
fome ancient records called Aber-Breint, as if fometime the river made
its entrance into the fea, which is now a mile from it, at that place;
which though it might be an argument rather that that bay was landed
many ages after the deluge, becaufe fometime feen and then called
an Aber ; yet it is a fufficient evidence to (hew that once it was fea to
that very place>

Further, it is to be confefled, that thefe mentioned clefts and inter-
spaces on the fouth-weft fide of this ifland, being thus filled with the
filt and foeces of the deluge, had alfo in after^ages confiderable additions
of pure fand thrown up by the fea, and blown and fcattered by the
winds, gradually ftrewing and covering the whole furface of them : for
it is demonftrably true, that the fea, by its inceflant eating and wafting
away the earthy yielding fhores it beats upon, quickly converts what it
ravifhes away from thofe banks into fand and flutch ; which it throws
up again and lodges in fuch nooks and angles as are moft expofed to its

• It fhould be Tywym Kciirwtn,

rage


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA; i>

cage and commotion ; and likewife that fuch portions of thofe fands, fo>
difcharged and thrown up on the. fhore, as arc light and voluble/: the
winds take aw^y, when they .are dry, an vaft drifts and. (bowers, blowt
and difperfe them over the whole plains, thereby not only augmenting
tfye exjtenfion of thofe flats -and 'levels,., but alfo raifing .the futface' of
them,, especially near the fea ; where gerierally thofe plains feem vtiotd
advanced and higher than towards the inland parts of them. "

, Tfye greatest accumulation and incroachment of tbefc volatile fands or*
the borders of this ifland, was about the fouth angle of it near Aber~
Menai\ at which place' the fea. threw up, and the winds, frequently
blowing from that quarter, drove, vaft fhowers of theft flying fands; not
only enlarging the fandy plains, but covering alfo .with the drifts of them*
*a;great neck -of land k < palled Lknddwyn, all over.

Thefe prodigious heaps of fand fo thrown up, which have totally ruined
the habitation of that place, I conceive the fea, in the manner I. men-
tioned, took ofF from the fhores of Caernarvon/hire ; from Dines Din~
Haw * all along to the fartheft point of Lfyn $ whence, undoubted!/,
great quantities of land, efpecially from Caer-Anrb&wd to the Rh/e,
were taken away by the fea. And the winds, as,Ifaid, frequently
blowing from that coaft; forced the tumultuous waves to discharge and
unburthen themfelves of thofe fpoils upon that part of this ifland that
was directly oppofite to thofe vaftations t>f the fea on the other fhore,
which was this. LJanddwyn y though feme proportions of thofe fands
were hi like manner alfo difcharged andidifperfedion the other plains bf
Aberfraw and Trtfyin -f. Neither is it unreafonable to ' imagine, that
a great part of Llyq likewife, tolwards the .middle and the furtheft en<l
qfjt,. being gepefajly pure fand under the upper foiLor ftratUm>"< wa»
fometime covered with Jfuch drifts of fand from the fea on the fbu them
fide of it. For we h^ye feme memorials of a vaft triad. of flat land there*
called Cantref ff^ai^% $ all confunued and eiten up by the inceflaftt
beating of the fea upon it. And, in all probability, the fand of it be-
ing carried by* the : waves on the ihore, and thence difperfed by ftormS
and wind pver the face of that country, made it for fomfe whiles defin
late region, as now our Lknddwyn is, till that encroaching {tack of
fand was exhaufted, and the fur/ace of the land, after long fettling, by
the new growth of vegetables, by plowing and manuring, and by the

# Dmm DhUt. f Tn pivot*.
X Catrtf-GvoathJ, i. e. a totfm or hw lend, containing formerly a hutirtd Tttft or manfions,
now all fwallowed up by the fea.

D operation


18 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTA-URATA.

operation of the fun, and air, and rains upon it, was rendered habit*
able;, and came at length, by degrees, to be converted to a good arable
foil and plentiful pafturage ; as now for many ages it has been known
to* be.

The two other fides of this ifland (for it is fomething triangular) *
have, it feems, undergone little or no alterations, either in addition or
diminution, to this day. The north and rtorth-eaft fide of it, being,
for the greateft part, precipitous and rocky, were liable to the leaft al-
teration.

And the fbuth-eaft verge and border of it, fince the river Menai had
made out its pafTage in an uninterrupted channel from one end to an-
other, is much the fame as originally it may be prefumed to have been ; #
only the ground from Biaumaret to Penmen, being a deep earthy foil,
has fuffered . feme diminution ; efpeciatty the place where Beaumares
{lands. But what the fea, by wafhing and undermining the marly foil*
of that (bore, ravifhes and fweeps away, it flores up and accumulates on
the fandy (helves on the other fide.

As to the inland part of the ifland, this method of furveying effeda
fey (heir known and certain caufes only warrants me to fay, that as the
great weight of thofe waters of the nniverfal deluge levelled a great deal
qf (he uneven and rugged face of it, leaving the rocks bare and naked,
sjnd filling all die chinks, pits, and hoHows of it with the earth that
formerly dad and covered thofe rocks $ (6 alfo the great pregnancy and
fertility, which the foil had then acquired from the remaining filts and
JHt&in.efs of the receding water, quickly invigorated the face of the land
to germinate and put forth frefh and lovely growths of trees, fhrubs,
a&d vegetables of all forts, whofe feeds lay difperfed and covered in the
^fended .foil ; it being in thdfe climates a little after autumn, by thebeft
accounts* when the flood began. And to confirm that the more, it is
mo( unufual to take up nuts *from the bottoms of turf-pits, with all the
figns pf pexfed ripenefs upon them; which is a great and vifible argu-
ment of Providence ; which as it fecured the race of animals in an ar-
tificial ark* £0 it wifdy contrived to preferve a Jeminary, a new fucceflion
of all, the kinds and fpeciea of vegetables, to refit and furnifh the earth
in; the natural ruins of that ftnpendous cataftrophe.

• Null are taken up from die bottom of D*Iai fauds* and mod boggy grounds.

SECT.


tyQHA ANT1QUA K.$$l>AU|LrA , SA: H


•SECTION IV.

' . * ' ' *

Of thfirft Inhabitants of this Ifiandt When % tow, and fy tobom kwat
firjl pknPed* and why called Mdir, or Mona.

AN T I QUI T.Y recorded), and* the confcnt of nations cekbrat»th#
the fons of Japhet to havp bep? the firft planter? of Europe, Qur>
commonly received ftories make our Britain to be peopled by th$femcn*
very foon after the flood. Bur* Jt is not eafy to i|nagi*e» h^^ fe> lafge
and remote a territory ihould become thoroughly planted and peopled in
(q fjxort a time.

For though eight pp rfons did then multiply, In a (mall time, to an.
iqcredibl^ nymbcr j yet, confidering the great dtiiatfce pf this place
£rpm the piddle point or center of mankind's progr^flipn, vis. Armenia
or Caucafus, and the tedious difficulties thofe people met with *A ex*
tending their colonies through huge defarts and over dreadful rocks and
mountains ; and having two fea$ to pafs over, if they did not march
about the Euxine and the Palus Maoris, together with their conftidusl
toil of hewing down the woods and hunting of be^s^ $U {ho. land i>c-
fore them being one great continyecji waft* or wtidernefs.s c&lfidefing
thefe things* I fay, all which they muft, have done* except paffing
round the Euxine, we cannot but conclude that they mi*ft nave con-
fumed a Jong ipaqe of tijpe before they could fix and eAabftfh thcm&lves
here a dtftin^ft fettled nation.

#ut probable it is* , ?nd yre have nothing bjut probabilities md eon*
J£&wes ,to gpi4* u* nMWng* pf4fe%t rqtpoteaeis and ohfeurity, I fay*
pfpbaWe it is, that when thofe peep)*, who flfioypd ft> $he wejtw*fd*,bad
.extended their ctfonifg to the ftrigK or iQ,4Ufc- flw*** jod fad thence
taken a view of the gneat 4Mi*P or i& of SfitfWfi tfeey 4ow> Rafted
over; and being entered in<te, ^nd pqffefled of (fh*t rich and Jpftcious
l^nd, their multiplied families proceeded qn in the like manner, hewing
apd hunting (the work of that time) until they caiqe to the end or ut-
jpqft corner of the land, whiph, x>n the weftern jide *f jfe was this
ifland I am accounting for. When thefe prime colonizers came into iti
and found it the hindinoft ifland, or the utmofl corner of the land that
way, we may well prefume that they might then properly call it, y Fon

• What Dr. Pezron relates from hiftoiy coiicertn the Titan conquefts of thefe countries, and not
the firft planting of them

P ^ Ttyi


** MGNA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

Tnys % that is, " the hindermoft or furthermoft ifland," or y F6n Wlad>
viz. " the lowermoft country :" BSn being in the Britifh ftrudture the
radical of M6n % and fignifying in the ancient Britiih, as alfo in the
Irifli, the fame as Caudex, or Pars inferior, docs in the Latin tohgue.
Neither is it unlikely that the Latin Finis (labial founds being promif-
cuoufly pronounced in ancient times) might be owing to the fame de-
rivation a little varied} that is, frhat we call Von or F6n-> the Latins
called Ffa or Finis j as Finis-Ter, the utmoft cape or point in Spain ;
the fame with I'ir-MSn * in fignification.

' . That- the relative fite and pofition of this ifland gave it firft that
Aame, will appear the more probable, in that : the ancient Celts or
Britons frequently denominated themfelves (or were by others denomi-
nated) from the fituation of their territories, and fuch other comparative
refpedts. For what were the ^fattiucblani^nd Dobuni, fo named in
Romftn authors, but the upper and lower inhabitants of that part of
Britain where they refided ? What were the Ordovices and Silures, but
gwyr ar Dbyvi and Iffebwyr, viz. the men inhabiting above Dyvi, and
the men below it, or towards the fea ; which is ftill in our dialed:
reckoned loweft or lowermoft ?

And we have this farther to obferve, that as Kyn or Cyn 9 in the
ancient Britiih tortgue (and is ftill retained in the Irifh) betokens bead
properly; as ^Gynwy and* Gynvelyn, bead-river and yeHow-head>> and
improperly or metaphorically, firft or foremoft; as Cyntav, Jirfl ; Cyn,
before* &tc. So in the fame manner is B6n properly taken in that lan-
guage for tail, ftump, butt-end \ but improperly for lafl or lowermoft.
Awl we may alfo take. notice, that thofe regions or countries in this ifle of
Britain,* tohich border on, and lie next to, the continent-land (which
countries were probably firft inhabited, as having the ftiorteft cut to
come into them from the main-continent) do (eem to have anciently re-
tained' the found Kyn, in the compofition of their names, as betokening
firft or foremoft, though diftinguiflied by their ref^edive fites and : pofi-
tioiw. Thtis We have Kyn or Cynta§, by the Romans called Cantium,

' .'. " •' •' , h *

• Tir-M$*, i. «.• Ultima Terra, by the anticnt poets called Ultima Tbuh, which Statius takes to
be a Brifif^^fle. ■
, . • . t f CatuwblaniaidzxiA Djfmaid , J Tal Kjn, Forehead.

CCynta. \ cCyniatJ, f

§ ?TOm)Ucbej*ta t i cdme. } UcbcymhiJ, ii. 4. the firft inhabitants.
{^Qbr'tcynta^ [obritjniaid J

f Caatii %
Expreffed by the Romans, < Ikm or lam, 4

1 . L Brigades. IweH


MONA iANTlQjJ'A-^llESTAUUATA # . ,*x

by us Kent. A little tideway* of' that, -we have XJcb+Kyn % L e. jfcro*-
r»/» U*gw by the Romans, now Norfolk and- Suffolk. And beyond that,
down towards the north, is Obri-Gyn, or Obrigantwn ; Brigantium Re-
git by the Romans. And thefe, with fubmiflion, I take to have been
theftjf, the upper, and farther Rents, or lands which were firft ar*
rived unto and inhabited ; they all lying along oppofite to the Gallic and
Belgic flborcs.

And as thefe countries, being the mod eaftern parts of the ifle of
Britain and next to the main continent, were originally, as it {ecms to
mej called* by names importing firft or forewq/i; fo it may feem very
agreeable; from the then manner of impofing names, and the allowable
rudentft of cxpreflion at that time, to call this loweft, utmqft> and one
of the moil we/lern provinces of the Britons, in refpeft of thofe firft
inhabited countries, y Ftin-JWdd, or Gwyr ym MSny wldd. On which
accojmt, I thinks that, hot only this ifle 6f Mona was fo called in ref-
pedfc of its fite and pofition, but, for more confirmation of this conjec-
ture, one may trace the found Mon in many other corners of this and
other countries, where we may prefume the ancient Celts to have ar-
rived ; as if *he firft inhabitants of thefe weftern regions called thofe
faribeft points pr enda d£ land, which. put a ftop to their prog reffion*
M4n or B4n.. Thus we <£nA Corntwol , called by. the Romans Dan-
monium'fi and the furtheft point of it is, to this day, called Pen-von-
Mz 9 or ivfdd. The ifle of .May,' Moneda. And in Ireland, the far-
theft part of k to the weft is called Momenta or Mown.- So>likewife is
one i of the Orcadis (the -fartheft Hies of Scotland) called Fomonax
Nay, ithree T o£ the krgeft* rivers in the fartheft end of Spain, and*
indeed, of all the weftern world, feem to have in their name, at this
day; fome vefitmblance of a Ceitifb origin. Two of them have appa-
rently thk found; viz* Lisbon aid Monday and the third, to {hew its

. I wtfl knowrfh^t the laft of thefe*, ». *.. # the Brigjmtts,, b^re an historical accost and derivation,
paflable enough, In good writers ; neither do I of>pofe ft : but this obfervation naturally occuring*
I could not but My hol<f on it, and, as- fiich, ofer it to the reader ; yet conildering that the names
of places, and consequently of people denominated from them, often continue, from the firft im*
Doujig of them through many generations among the f^me people, and in the feme language,
1W>iJ Itf and wide loever thofe people may have thread their, colonies/ it? is not unreafonable to
Xfcrito this,- th cpafortj #th thjB .other tw?,, to thaj: *rigia»; the diftin^Son^rkftn^from die refac-
tion the two 4 la£ have to jtent, or Cjtta, i. e. the .ficft and greatcft landin^place of the whole
Wand. ' •■" ' •" "* ' } •".■'' •"

f. Some, rod fr£>4**«rf*w, from.ftie BritSfli JDjfiv**, which is Pevonihire,. . Bitf tfce yon Idz or
Wa/, at the land's end, makes it probable that Danmtnium is the true word for Cornwal, andi
Damnomum for Devonfliire or Djfnant\ botji th,efc < njunes occurring in the Roman geography*
I The Cornifli pronounce and write d as a *. * P(n*<v$n-lax with them, b A»-vw-/a/with us.

''! " extraction.


as M0.KA ANTIQJJA fLtf.STAU * ATA-

extraction,; is called Dwri, from the Cefcjfli [Dtfor i Jhe Geltfbeptant

hiring anciently inhabited that part of Spain..

• Now thefc ancient names, «greeable to the propriety of thing** be-
ing thus taken and '.fettled:* they open a way not onlyio aoofonrf for
the nomination of this ifleof Mona> but may alfo ferve to cobfifci whfec
is generally conceiyed to be woft coherent and rtafctfal in tbia particular*
viz. that iflands were fir ft arrived into and inhabited in tho(eLp%rt£_of
them which border neareft to other adjacent iflaads or continents.
This is what I take to be fufficipnt in order to. account for fthis ifland*$
ancient name Mont*, and it* prefent, Mm* rFor if it d*fdrye$ *q be
granted that Cantium, Brigmtium* and Icenorum Regia, afry h4ye re-
lation to the Celtic or ancient Britiih word Kyn+ as it hetotans .firfi
or foremofti it is, I think, but fair to conclude, that the furtkefi and
utmofi places of the land (hould he callpd by. names importing BUn &4
Mfois for being correlatives they muft mutually plead for and prove
each other.

3 E C T I O N V.

Oftbejhfl planting of this IJland; the manner of peopling it, xmd the ap*
propriaihg the divided ports of it to particular properties and poffeffions.

THESE, the faid progeny of Japhet, having once patied over the
Gallic and . Belgic ftreights, and in greet numbers colonized
ourfroitfbl Albion in the caftcrn and fouthern parts of it; it is, I
think, natural to fuppafc, that, as the numbers of thefc men multi-
plied and increafed, the neceffity of enlarging their bounds, and a va~
grant curiafity, would ftrongly ftimuiatc and pufli them on to make
farther fcarch and. enquiry, ami to find out the utmoil end and borders
6f this rich 'and fpacious land.

' The huge ftupendous mountains, intermixed with dreadful amazing
dens on the weftern fide, now Wale*, difcouraged not thefe bold ad*
venturers from accompliftiing that difcovery. The rtftlefs unbounded
defires of thofe who attempted wefterly to find an end or utmoft, and t$
poffefs new acquefts, it is natural to imagine, carried them through all
difficulties and dangers, tin at laft they pafied over that great chain or
ridge of mountains * which croflfes that angjle of land faom tea to fea >

* Th« $fyi.

arid


IVfOJJA ANTICLUA RE ST A'U It AT A/ i 3

and from which, by the intcrpofition of a fmall arm of the fea, catted
by them perhaps Mamau*, or narrow water, now Menai, this iflatid is
feparated.

This great ledge of mountains, their heights and fummits being
capped with fhow for the mod part of the year, they might then, or -
foon after, call Eifyri in their language -, as it is faid that others called
thofe between Prance and Italy, Alios or Afpes $ as being the Tifual re-
pofitories of that meteor.

From, the lofty fides of thefe hills, > taking a wide and bouftdkfs vie w
of the weftem &as there expoied before them, they could foon defcry
a narrow fret or channel, fevering and dividing them from another re-
gion, which Teemed to them more flat and level, but overfpread ynth
tali aqd {lately wood * and concluding it, in all probability, a more'
rich and fruitful < foil than that they ftood on, that consideration, to-
gether wid\ the grateful profpedfc it yielded them, will beealily to*--
fefled very prevailing and natural, to give them ftrong inducements and
iimtatron to defcend and fedk out the narrowed paffage and (horteft cut
to that fevered and divided land*

This fhotteft arid narrow^ft paffage appeared to them about the mid-
dle of tfettt ihterpofing channel; where ad arm of fmall rocks oft the 1
ifiand's tide elbowing <*lt, makes it narrower in that plaee than ih anyi
other, Thii befog obferved, thfcfe iheri, it is moft probable, repaired
thitbuv ihd in their wicket-ctrnaebs, or other expedients of that time, '
wafted qwt fit take their' premie* pofifeflion of this <V6n-wlAd> or utmo/l 1
land, on whichi by their fifil footing was feaied utito, them the beft-
daim* right, and title.

Now, fuch of thefe men as came not at firft over, but repaired and
followed after, we may very w$ll conceive, fought and enquired for the
forth or< pipage which thof* before them had gone over, fhall I veiw
Cure to add ? by the name of Portb-aeth^bwy. They are three very an->
cicnt original Words ; and it is certain the place is fo called to, this day,
ic. ** the patfage which fome before had paired oven"

I will not fay* Chat Portus Itius, or Iceius* near Calais in Normandy/
was anciently called fo on the like account, that is, from the firft
coming over of people into Britain at that place ; yet it is manifeft that,
fome fuch name as this it had in the Gaulifh or British language ; per-
haps Portb-eitba, if Itius be the word, viz. u the utmdft paffage."

z For


24 tyfQNA ANTI'QlUA RT;Q SrT:A\U R A^TA-:
For it is certain thatCaefar, who firft mentions it by tJWat hatnc* brfly-
latinized the ahciewt Gaulifh or $ritijh names, tie fomtd am6ng us ; aiql
leaves us to feek their etymons, not in the Roman, but in (bur owm
language.. * ! , • : , ' •. : -l i •».. r , •

• But that this place, here mentioned, was called B*ttJ£-4ttb+&icy 9
from fome mod noted and remarliAbtei entrance into the ifland* and
what more remarkable than that of the firft planters? I think is hot
improbable, For it is certain, that the region or part of t he ifland ad*i
J9jnipgit h»s bden very anciently called -Tyridattb-bwy^ that is, " the
part dc territory they came injto;" Tyn ou 7&in* fpme.time fo fignify-.
ing: both names referring to fome famed paffage in the different terms
of a quo & ad quern, as any one thit is converfant in the Wclfti ftruc-
ture will readily grant. And to deduce it ftooi Aitbwy, as a proper or.
an. appellative name, is to run counter to the genius of' the /language ;;
for then the region or ,lapd adjoining would have been call^Tyn+Attbwy,*
which it never was. But, to let that pafs,

: Thefe prime invaders having got on land, it is eafy to imagine that
their firft attempt was to top the little neighbouring hilla. And when
from tkofe riling grounds they beheld the Und before then^jw one: con-
tinued grove* on every fide dark anddifnhal,. they could not chufe, fup^
pjofing it an ifiand, but call it Tny't Dcwy/f, the Shady Ijland. This:
Britith name it had of old f-: and might- give hints to the ©the of the
Greeks, and the Tbule of th? Romans j which yet might; well, enough
bethisifle of Mena, ultima Tbule, i. e, XFfoDtwyUi taking BSnov
Fvntev Jurtbeft, <*nd Tboule or Tbuie% for ^«y//^:notwithftanding
later geographers miftook another for it, when further iflands than it

were difcovered. ,, .

Now* fuppofing thefe men to have planted themfelvea on the tops
of thefe little hills and rifing grounds* i% is next, to.be imagined, that a
cautious regard and confederation of their own welfane and fafety, obliged
them to dynejju, to approach, and keep clofe together on the brows and
fummits of thofe hilly grounds* where they built little holds and fences,
of (lone and other materials that were found readied at hand, to fecure

• From Tony fpreading, fo Tain, Tama, a region, as Bri-tania, Aqui-tanla % Mauri -t am a } and
Lufihxnia. '"

f The ancient poets call it Ynji D*vhU % not Dowyll.
X Statius took Tbult to be a Bxitiib iflc, as appears by this paflage of his, viz;

Cacrulus baud aliter cum dimicat incola Tbults,
Agmina falcifero circuravenit a$a Covino.

. . and


MONA ANT1QJ7A RESTAURAf^ a£

and accommodate themfelves during their ftay there. For it was p*f- r
haps dangerou6 to defcend in hafte to the neighbouring vallies, which
were then, as in all other uninhabited countries, the range of wild and
ravenous beafts. This the antient names of fbme places bordering on
thofc hillocks feem to atteft, as * Cars yWibtr^^Cors y Bleiddiau, % Rod~
lew, || Lids-lew, &c. And thefe primary holds and fences on thofc'
commanding grounds, from their dine/it, (from men's aflbciating and-
bandying together) they might properly call Dines or Dinas ; as the
Latins called Civitas a coeitndo for the like reafon. And very many of
fuch places* and two or three in this ifland §, are called Dinas to this
day.

Thus I prefume the firft planters almoft in every country (ought, for
fome while after their firft arrival, (and it is recorded by authors of
great antiquity that they did fo) fuch topping grounds aad eminences.:
And where they, fdtind fuch, with convensency of Hones and other ma-
terials, they built them little holds or fences to dwell in; feeding them- 1
felves for the while upon flaughtered wild beafts, roots and wild fruits,
and what elfe they could cater from the adjacent bottoms.

And I have oft obferved on fuch grounds in many places of this
ifland, and in other countries, clufters of little round and oval founda-
tions, wbofe very irregularities fpeak their antiquity-; and particularly'
on the very hills I now mention near Portbaetbwy there is prodigious
plenty of them : two places, feeming the mod principal and cmineht,
retain, as I faid> the name of Dinas to this day, And this laft parti-
cular, I muft cOnfefs, is an argument to me fufficiendy demonftrative,
that, the firft: inhabitants of this ifland not only landed ne&r thefe hill3,
but alfo dwelt and aflbciatcd themfelves upon them for fome confidera-
ble time — at le*ft while they # were .clearing and unwooding the adja-
cent borders* JFor indeed, I think it may be eaixly determined, that
nothing bat the want of better places could have induced any people

* Cors j Witer^ i. e. The 'Serpents Den. f C*rs y BltiMau, i. e. The Wolves Den. \ BfJ-
Jew, i. e. The Lions Den. ( Lids-Jew, i. e. The Place where a Lion was killed, whkh the

word Lids or Liddd imports.- If it be objected that lions did not breed in thefe countries, I anfwer,
that it does not at all follow, becaufe they breed not at this time here that they did not d)en \
for nothing hindered that prince of beafts from coming and propagating here as well as in other
countries,, as we fiod (by tfceir bones) that elephants once did. But as to the lions, their mis-
chievous voracity and deftru&ivenefs to men and beafts engaged the firft people to make a total
deftraftion of them in thefe countries where fewer of them were, which could not be done in
other parts of the world, where vaft wildernefles and uninhabited deiarts continued their race,
and made it impracticable utterly to deftroy them.

§ There are four; viz. X* Dinas near Trsutb fychmr, a. ft* y Dims. 3. &>*/ near Porth-
attkwy. 4. Dinas near Btd&n.

£ to


2* MONA ANTIQJJA RBSTAURATA.

to chufe their living on fuch barren, bleak, unfertile grounds. And the
very make and figure and other circumftances of thefe rude mifliapcn
holds (as much as may be gathered from what now appears of them) feem
to indicate, that they were the retreating pkces of thofc firft people,
when they began the work of clearing and opening the country : and
their forry unfortified flightnefs feems alfo to (hew they were rather
fences againft be arts than men.

From thefe holds and rocky fences we may alfo very reafonably ima-
gine, that when the men had once opened and cleared the neighbouring
borders, and had flaughtered and tamed multitudes of their wild inhabi-
tants, they defcended in diftindt tribes and families — Tylwytbau — to af-
fume their dividends ; — firft to bound, then to improve and cultivate
them: which fort of bounds or Terfynau, running great lengths and com-
pares, are in many places to this day vifiblc

And having fent abroad the more ftrong and able of them to cut
down and deftroy the wood, and to clear the country, it is probable
thefe men, fo fent and employed, pitched upon and chofe up and down
the opened air and -cleared grounds \ which were the more moid and
fhrubby lands* now our heaths and * Rbojydb. For thefe, on account of
feveral advantages, were the bed places for them to live and abide upon
while they were clearing and reducing the drier and better grounds for
their future tffe and fervice.

On thefe fhrubby heaths or Rbojydb -f then, as they proceeded oit
with their iftfes and mattocks in felling down the cumberfome crop,
which the earth theii every where bore, they pitched their little tents
and cabbins, railing thereon here and there little oval banks of earth/
timbering them with boughs of trees it is likely, and covering them with
fods find parings of that tough foil, reeds or the like, to lodge them at
nights and to fafe-guard their necefiaries, while they continued their
work of clearing the ground, and fitting it for a more orderly and re-
gular habitation. The mod ancient memoirs of Ireland give the like
account (and it is indeed but what was natural enough) of the firft work
pf fome of the prime rulers of that country, when they were employed
in deftroying the wood and reducing the wildernefles thereof into habi-
table plains ; which plains, to ftiew the agreement of their primitive
language with the Britifh, they called May's, or Mecb's, as we do the like,
Maes , to this day.

• Kbit, Rut with the Latins, #.#. Habitable lands. + As Rtei Ligwj, y Rt»s fa<wr %

Rbos Ore Hwfa, Rhos y Nttgir, &c.

This


MONA ANTIQJLFA JIESTAURATA. ly

This "manner of living in tents and cahhins k warranted by divine*
and human records to have been the ancienteft practice of mankind in
extending their colonies ; very neceffity obliging thofe people then, as
cuftom does fome at this day, to chufe and make ufe of fuch moveable
abodes ; which it is probable thefe firft people here perfevered in until,
and no longer than, their labour and induftry had provided them a more
agreeable fettled habitation.

That what i fay now may not appear to be a vain groundlefs furmife*
though the cuftom of other nations, and the then neceffity of the thing
may be fome evidence of it — there are to this day vifibte upon ouf
heaths and Rbofydb the marks and footfteps of thofe booths and cab-
bins, in the oval and circular trenches, which are feen in great plenty
difperfed here and there on fuch grounds.. No one can well deny them
to have been little dwellings and houfes ; and their being only on thofe
barren heathy grounds is fome argument that they were fo ufed be*
fore the better grounds were reduced and cultivated. And that fuch
marks and tokens of them, as we find; might well remain undefaced
on fuch grounds from that time to this day, is not, I think, difficult
to be imagined; becaufe thefe barren heathy grounds, on which thefe
little trenches are, haye generally their glebe or upper mould and Sur-
face of a claiy, firm, unvvaftable texture, not to be worn and flatted
with rains and weather; and are alfo generally fo barren and defpicable,
that the plough and fpadc cannot be fufpedted to have had ever any thing
to do. with them*

It is true, they are called CyttiSr Gwyddetod, viz. the triflittiert scot -
tages. •. But that muft be a vulgar error, if by Gwyddelod be meant the
inhabitants, of Ireland,' who never inhabited this ifland fo as to leave any
remains of their creats and cottages behind them. For thofe Jrith that
are laid to rob and pillage this ifland feldom ftaid long in it ; .and if
they had, they cannot well be fuppofed to leave thofe marks behind
them ; for they found here good houfes to lodge themfelves in for the
time they ftaid, and were in no need of ufing that Irifli cuftoni, where
they could .not failof being better provided. But if by Gwyddehd -be
meant .the Aborigines-*— the. firft inhabitants— as it is not unlikely ifi
may ; for the two words that make up that name are purely Britifh,
V*£. * Gw/dd and Hda, i. e.. Wood-Rangers, which was perhafps the

common

'• GwjMhtlcJ, SjUueflrn Homhis.] The propriety of that Britifti appellative is fo very agree*
abfe, that if a colony of Britons were at this time in fome parts -of America, the* original natives
of 4he place, who live there by ranging and hunting in the woods, could be called by no fitter

fi a tiamc


26 MONA ANTIQJTA RESTAURATA.

common appellative of the Aborigines, loft with us, and retained only
by the Irifh, then the objection falls to the ground ; and the inftance
confirms the conjecture, that they are the remains of the firft planters'
habitations, while they were deftroying the woods and cultivating the
country.

Now on the whole matter— It being thus fuppofed that thefe origi-
nal planters, after they had defcended in their tribes and Llvoytbau from
their upland holds, and difperfed themfelves over the country, led a
moveable life in their rural huts and cabbins, while they continued im-
proving and bounding their particular allotments ; this, I fay, being
fuppofed, it is I think but very reafonablc to imagine, that when thefe
people had accomplifhed their works and effected their improvements,
they no longer continued moveable and vagrant, but began to fix and
eftablifli their dwellings in the moil chofen and convenient place of
the colony > and each dwelling being then become a ftanding and per-
manent building, it was very proper to call it Bod f that is, a fixed and
fettled being, or way of living ; as this very ancient word Bod ever im~
ports— -#nd for diftin#ion-fake among themfelves, with the addition per-
haps of the founder's name, as B6d-Eon, B6d-E<wryd 9 Bod-Edern f names
very ancient and barbarous-— or of fome accident, as B6d-Cylcbed, Bod*
Tchtn, BSd-Fiiog, &c.

Thefe Bids were, it feems, the chiefeft and principal manfions of
every particular colony. But as the colonies increafed and multiplied
into lefler and fubdivided families, they were, it is natural to think, ob*
liged to Tir-rbannu— to affign to each of thofe fubdivifions their pecu-
liar lots and portions of land to manure and hufbaod. And the rulers
and principal affigners in each colony, they might properly enough
call, from that aft of fharing and apportioning of lands, * Ttr-rban*
wyr. i. c. Land-Jharers. And fhall I venture to deduce the rvgctyvoi of
tfce Greeks, and Tyranni of the Latins from this origin ? Greece and
Italy being countries thefe people came into before they arrived here,
the word naturally leans to this etymology.

Now thefe fmaller portions or parcels of land, afiigned and cantoned
out in this manner to each lefler houfhold in the Bed or colony, might


very


MONA ANTIQUA REStAURA'TA. £9

very properly, from the, particularity of fuch ^affignments, be called
Tir-ef 9 or Tref, that is, " Such a one's land ;" for we find the fame
fort of affignments among the ancient Saxons called Hamlets, (from
Ham, Signifying in the ancient Saxon language, Dwelling and Let r
Jetting forth or affigning) importing the very fame thing ; as feveral
different nations in many of their fundamental conftitutions do oftefr
agree.

So alfo, when thefe inferior owners of fuch allotted portions of land,,
fo afligned to them by their heads and chiefs, had enclofed a fpot of
k for their own defence and commodity of dwelling; that fmall eir-
clofure, whether of wood or ftone, might be called Caer, from the
Celtic or old Britiflh word Cau ; and that perhaps from the Hebrew
word Gaiapb, tojenceand encloft — which, with fubmiffion, I rather take
to be its true etymon than Kir or Kiriab % a Wall or City. Tho* after-
wards, I confefs, in fome ages following, when towns and cities were
built, the word Caer with us, and Kiriab with them, came to be trans-
ferred, and generally attributed and applied to thofe greater and ftronger
holds and defences ; yet with us fome of thofe fmaller entrenchments
retained the name of Caer and keep it to this day, with the ufual addi-
tion of the founder's name; as Caer-Elen, Caer-Eneon ; or of fome acci-
dent, as Caer-dbu, Caer-nen.

• And as the word Caer* in this primary original denomination, re-
lated to Tir-ef, viz* " Such a one's land;" fo I fiippofe it came to
be called Caer-tir-ef, or Cartref, that is, " Such a one's home;" or
the fort, hold, qr the inclofed dwelling- houfe on fuch a land* But
now, fince good laws and conftitutions are become the defenfible en-
clofures of every man's houfe, the word Cartref or home has been
proraifcuoufly ufed and applied to every particular habitation or
dwelling.

And fo^ the fame reafon, it feems, the ancient inhabitants of Ire-
land, when they enclofed about their principal feats and manfions (to ?
fhew another congruity of language as well as of practice with us)
called fuch places Mbuir or Mur, as we did Caer. For both Mur and.
Caer, in the Britifli tongue, are words equally fignifying an enclofed
place. Thus the city of Tara in that kingdom was firft called Thea
Mbuir or Mur, i. e. the city of Tea, one of their queens. And when
their druids had made it their chief feat and refidence, by ^refting
therein a great fchool or college of learning, anno 927, before the birth.

of


3 o MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

.of ChrHV *s their * memoirs have it, they then began to call it Mut-
Qlkrvan* i. e. Tbe City cf the Learned. And Caer-Edris with us im-
. ports the very fame thing ; Edris, a name attributed to Enoch for his
# great .knowledge in ,the fciences of. ancient times, being a derivative of
the original word urn Darajh, Invcjtigavit, perquifivit, jiuduit, Arabice,
do£tus 9 eruditus: In which refpedt, our Caer-Edris may equally with
their Mur-O/Iavart, and with as good propriety, be called The City *f
fix Learned \ and perhaps was fo, and more anciently too, if our druids,
near whofe principal town it was feated, had been fo juft as to trans-
mit to us an account of it. This Edris or Idris, a Syro-Pbanician word,
might very probably (name and thing) be from thofe countries, toge-
ther with fome of the earlieft communications of. knowledge, brought
and conveyed to us— of which name we find remains yet, as Bod-
Edris, Cader-Edris, &c. in other places among us. Alfo their Dun-Oi-
lavan, or Dun-Lavan was probably another college > where it is ob-
servable, that our Dun or Dinas, another ancient word in the Britilh
tongue for City, is taken by them into the compofition. I mention
this here to Ihew the original agreement between the ancient Irifh and
the Britons in caftorn and language, greatly betokening their being at
firfl one and the fame people, that is, the one a colony of the other.

* The Jrifh memoirs are undoubtedly in many things of good repute and credit, Supported by
the many weighty reafons given in defence of them.' That the Iriih people had early learning
,a nong them, fuch at lead as related to family-hiftories, and rhc like, and that they made thebett
ufe of it, is not to be queftioned. Their druids, having lefs power and authority among the peo-
ple, became thereby, as more tradable, fo more obliging, and kinder to poilerity than the Bri-
tish druids were, as will appear hereafter ; who humoroully bigotted in their way, by their haughty
djfdain of letters and contempt of writing, treafured all in their own -noddles, whereas tfee Iriih
druids, lefs ftrift in the ancient rules of their proteflion, fcrupled mot to record in writing, and
thereby tranfmitted to Succeeding times the many hiftories of their monarchs and princes, the ge-
nealogies of their chief tribes and families, and. other occurrences of note, many of which are to
tfiis day to be feeri among them. * All which helps the Britons in a great meafure wanted, by rhc
inexcusable pride and folly of our Brittth druids, who fuperftirioufly avoided that way of commu-
jnuaicating. But how learned and knowing foever they, were in many things, they buried all
with them, to the exceeding lofs of poilerity, except what the learned in other nations took no-
tice of, and left in their account of them. This unhappy temper of the Britifh druids has left
our nation fo much inihe dark, that daring their time we have very little to depend on, but what
the names of places, and other footfteps of ancient things, will give us room to make the beft
ufe we can of guefles and conjectures, But though our Britifh druids did religiouffy abftaiu from
the ufe of writing ; yet it is not unlikely, but that our bards and genealogists were men of greater
Jatitude, and took the liberty to record in writing the names and defceats, and fome accounts alfo,
of our Brijifh kings and princes j for it is owned by Cxfar himfelf, that they had letters among
tihem, and that they fbmetimes ufed them in their public and private affairs, though in things, ap-
pertaining to religion they very ftrictly forbore the ufe of them, and communicated their fyitems,
trt ttnuj, in rhythmical odes and verfes* to their hearers.

This


MONA -AWFIQUA R&S.TAURATA. ^

This % is what naturally occurs to my thoughts, of the original divi-
fions and iubdivifions of* lands, and of the denomination of them in
our ancient Britith language ; I infift not in the lead on it, farther than
probable;' who will, may rejedr it ; and though I think the names "of
Bod 9 Trg/J'and Caer, in that original impofitioa might import one and
the fame thing, but in different refpedts and degrees of fubordination— .
that is, that every principal, divided and fubdivided allotment or tenure, *
in refpedk of its manfion or dwelling-place, might be called Bod ; in re-
fpc<a of its defence and enclofure, Caer > and in refpeft of the lands an-
nexed and appropriated to it, Tref— yet in fucceedihg ages, when the
greater Bods came to be multiplied and dwindled into numbers of fe-
parate hou (holds, and when fome entrenchments grew to the ftrength
and bignefs of towns and caftles* then* fome of thofe minute and letter
families affumed the name of B6d> and fome retained the name of Trefy
but the name of Caer was generally taken up by greater, forts, and after-
wards applied to towns and caftles. Though I muft confefs fome of our
moft ancient entrenchments, that have been once confiderable, are to
this day frequently called Caer, ibmetimes with: and fome times without
any addition to it.

Hence the names of * Bod and T'ref are very frequently to be found
among us ; but rarely Caer, except when applied to towns and cities or
fome noted entrenchments. And I make no doubt, but fuch Englifh
names of places as end in bams, hees, and tons, as Nottingham, Ap-
plebee* and Watlington, and many more, are no other than thefe very
Bods, Trefs and Caers, exprefled fo in the Saxon tongue. And I am in-
formed that in ail Wales and Cornwall there are no names of places
more common than thefe; except in South -Wales, where the name
Bod is not fo frequent. And whether they are fo in Armorica, Ireland,
and in the Highlands, or whether they have other ancient names of the
fame fignification, I yet want information. From thefe original divi-
fions and diftributions of lands we have now our manors, townfliips/

and hamlets.

■ _ t

* From this BU\ conceive we have Hsfodj Civmbod or CwmwM, and from tbenqe CW^&wk^
or Civmydog, Cymmadi and Cj/mm^. s


SECT.


3* MONA ANT1QUA RE3TAURATA.


SECTION IV.

Oftbtfrjl language Jj^oke in this ijk of Mona, and whether itJe the fame

with the prefent Weljh.

THE iirft beginnings of nations having fo little footfteps in hiftory,
no wonder if that of this little fpot of earth in fo obfcure a
corner* as to true matter of fad:, be as dark as we can imagine then
the ifland. But in thefe inextricable recefTejs of antiquity we muft bor-
row other lights to guide as through, or content ourfelves to be without
any. Analogy of ancient names and words, a rational coherence and
congrliity of things, and plain natural inferences and deductions
grounded ^hereon, are the belt authorities we can rely upon in this fub«
je6t, when more warrantable relations and records are altogether filent.
in tbe matter.

What language was firft fpoken in the weftern parts of Europe, it
is not e*fy to determine ; neither doth antiquity decide the point* All
that it tells us is, that the ancienteft names in feveral parts of the
kingdom of France, and throughout the ifle of Great-Britain* are by
the be£b congruity of found and reafon of the thing, as our learned Cam-
den and the French Bochart have made appear in feveral inftances, re-
folded to our prefent Wehh and Britifli etymons ; which muft be an ar-
gument that this language at firft gave them thofe names— which names
generally betokening the nature or fome eminent property of the places
•or things fo named (as the firft impofed names that were compounded
of two or more founds expreffing different ideas generally did), conti-
nued on them without any great alteration to this day.

But whether this language that beftowed at firft thofe names upon
them made any long flay in thofe regions fo remote from us, "wherein
it has left fome marks and footfteps of its once being there ; or whe-
ther thofe firft nations and confequently the original languages, at the
firft peopling of the world after the univerfal deluge, like the billows
of the fea, ju filed and tumbled out one another, cannot indeed be cer-
tainly affirmed. Though, on cbnfideration of the paflions of human na-
ture, fuch a procedure may appear very probable; yet it looks true upon
very good grounds that that language, which firft came over to the ifle
vf Albion or Great- Britain, was the fame that continued in it for many

2 9 ages


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 33

agC6 after} and/confequently muft be the firft language ufed and fpokcn
jn this part of it, the Iflc of Anglefey.

This language* call it Celtic or British, or what you will, was un-
doubtedly one of the primary vocal. modes and expreffions of mdnkiAd
after thft.difperfioh at Babel. And indeed to trape this affair to the v v$ry
root, to fpecolate this fubjeft after the true and natural idea of it, w$
muft conceive all languages fince the corifufion at Babel to be paerely ar-
tificial and invented ; excepting the facred Hebrew, which was infpired r
or at leaft the refult of the fupernaturai knowledge of the firft man be-
fore the fall, an<L communicated to hi? pofterity. ,

For though God had originally implanted in the very efience of nian
the power and faculty of fpeaking, and communicating to others the
inward conceptions of his mind, by certain audible notes and marks of
things— -which notes and marks are made up of an infinite variety of the
modulation of the voice and turns of pronunciation, which are words ;
yet for all this, the ufe and exercife of this power, as to the modification
' of thofe marks and choice of words to exprefs the inward ideas and Con-
ceptions, is altogether arbitrary and ele&ive ; that is, in fhort, althb' it
,be natural to fpeak, yet to fpeak this or that tongue or language is plainly
artificial and voluntary.

This being the very cafe and . circumftance of all mankind at that
time, when they were juftly deprived of the ufe and memory of the
firft univerfal tongue, excepting the houfe and family of Heber 1 their
former radicated habits and acquired arts of elocution being by that
condign judgment taken away from them to the very bare power and
faculty : the cafe being fol fay, it is very reafonable .to ftrpppfe, (the
happinefs of focieties confiding io .mutual afiiftance, and that in un-
demanding one another) that the feveral focieties of thofe people who ~
* departed from Babel, as they banded and aflbciated themfelves together
.to replant and inhabit again the face of the earth, made it their firft and
chiefeft bufinefs to put in aft, and exercife that power and faculty of
fpeaking, which only was left to .them ; by the exercife and practice
of which power they might frame and sjceogitate words to carry out and.
communicate their thoughts and apprehenfions to each other, as the im-
portance and exigencies of their various affairs called upon them to do.

Utilitas exprejjit nomtna rerum. Lucret. lib. v. 1028.

• 1 1 la that work and labour of inventing new ways and forms of cxpref-
'"firig' their thoughts to one another (their former modes of utterance
■..'*.*"'• F being


3t MO^A'ANTIOUA RfefifAUAlTIt

feeing fcr * *twe4#thfir * confounded than quite oblcmalbed irjntka* «u-t
raculous ftupor) they could not chule, having their ether fenfo (coooept
the ltoctotfiy, which jfeer&ed toJ&avefceen grievaafly Adwefted) left to
«hem -entire aftd mvtolate, tut hit now and then, in cloathing Jkdcnno*
t»ns "with new founds, upon fsa»e reikis .and pieces of their olid' and
Ironed language; and from thefc rdids and rains tbc primitive
ttmgues Arrowed and built their different -and ^various ftrudures &nd
compofkions. Whence is it that mfcft of the ancient languages of *h*
world have more or Jefs in them, according as ibey more or Jleft dege*
nerated from their atocient forms, words *hat -bib Hebrew <or very tittle
fcifcftred from it.

Thus *he nations of -the earth, as they divided themfekes into Sepa-
rate communities and plantations, fo«ach of.thefc, falling upon a diftrnd
fetdf words, improved their itack, and cultivated ;in;a tixortftime their
rade, ]gr^fs, nrtfliapen forms cf fpeech by* conftant daily pra&ice inuy
various and di&nft languages.

And fo that language which diffused itfelf into this weftern part of
Europe, and arrived in tfbe iflc of »Oreat Britain, and at laft crept into
This ^corner erf it, -the Jfle of Mona, being one df thofe primary tongoee,
we cannot but conceive it at its firft coming here to be very -poor and
t>arren, «s tdl mother tongues then of the fame >rifetand ;progrcfs generally
*were. For in thofe circumftanccsof a vagrant, loofe, unfettled life, ds
the -notions df people weretfat and vulgar, bufied only, it feeras, abotft
obvious rufticities -and the more urgent concerns of life ; fo :may vet
jfiiagine their eocpreffions to have been very much xontraded zn&
ibanty, rude and barbarous; confifting for ahe moil part perhaps of a
-gmfs heap of moRofyllabtes, and a few general words -and, compound
names of things.

iBttt when thefe people had in this ifle of Britain, as in other places of
the world, fixed andfettled thenrfelves here*nd there in feveral planta-
tions and ectknies ; and when, eafc and opportunity by enlarging the
object of their knowledge had made them more ipecnlative and
thoughtful, they Toon began to cultivate .and augment their way and
-manner of fpeaking— by daily inventing and adding new words— by

# The Scripture lays, that God confounded the firft tongue, Gen. xi. 9. we may note the word'
confound, £^t/irt&e original, properly implies d£/fo*rand r^«^wr 5 and' thereiweX^od in that
aft did not form any new languages, as ibmc imagine, but deftrcyed and confounded the old^ leav-
ing mankind, from theirinwrte power of ipeaking, *o frame Jiew ones, *s:tae^hartikid together
into feveral focieties and^orernments ; 'which is an £afy~and .natural account of thatjqpcedifle*.
* Without recurring to miracles, and creating new languages inftead of the okL

poltfhing


MONA ANTIQJJA RE S T AUil AT A. 3$

polHhtng and compounding 1 the old, as- freih and unwonted occafioat
offered and prefcntcd themfelves, and a* the overtures of affairs (lined
and. quickened their imaginations to give life and vigour to the per.
fbrmance. .

And this improvement of language might ft far proceed, in the fe-
veral parts of one and the feme nation and people, as to run itfelf into
very diftin& idioms and diakds* according as the differences of tem-
per and remotenefs of places gave occafion* And hence the mightjf
differences at this day ia the diale&a of the Sclavoo* Teutonic, and qui
own ancient Britifh tongue do procced> and are moft rightly to he ac-
counted for.

Now the language of the firft inhabitants of the Ifle of Angleiey*
though agreeing in root and fobftance with that of the reft qf the na-
tion, as evidently appears by the ancient common appellations of towns*
of mountains, of rivers, and the like, throughout the whole ifle of Bri-
tain j yet the particular .improvement they made in the feid ifle of An*
glefey, and its neighbouring borders, in enriching and pplifhing the
tongue, might fo far differ from other improvements made » the .other
provinces .of the Hie of Britain*. as plainly to idiverfify their firft and com-
mon language ihto unlike and different dialefts, as they were, observed
to be in the days of Cfefar ; and yet every one of thofe idioms and dif-
ferent forms of fpeaking, arriving to different degrees of politure and
perfe&ion* might in after-ages, as that of Gae&r's was, appear to Gran-
gers is feveral different languages* as the WeUh and Corniih, Highland*
Scotch* Bretoon and Iri(h now do, though all proceeding from one com-
mon head or fountain* viz. the ancient Celtic or Britifh tongue ; and
^s of late the Roman Latin was the mother of the Italian, French, and
Spanish tongues, and each of thefe of their fubdivided dialed Thus
lahguages from one common root will naturally branch themfelves int»
vaiiety of divifions and improvements.

In the progrefe of this improvement, fome languages went on by
borrowing ftrange and foreign words* advantaged by thek mutual
commerce and frequent intermixtures with other nations : Aad ipme
others, perhaps more out of ncceflity and choice, fet up on their proper
ftock and furniture.~Of which laft fort I conceive the language of the
Ifle of Mona and of its neighbouring borders to be ; and on that account
may be concluded the oidtft and pureft of all the Britifh dialelts. For
this place, being the fartheft weftern point of the whole region, the
people of it moft be prcfumed to have had the leaft commerce with

. . ! F2 • exotic


$6 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

exotic forms and manners, and confequently the language to be more
free from the taint of foreign mixtures, than it was in the remoter parts
of the nation, where its ancient purity muft of neccflity be expofed to
more frequent novelties and alterations.

* And as it appears by this way of reafoning, that the fpeech and idiom
of this ifland was the moft pure and uncorrupted of all the Briti(h dia-
lers; fo like wife it may feem to have been, in its due ripenefs and
perfection, the moft copious and politp one of the whole nation. The
Ifle of Mona is, by warrantable fuffrage of antiquity, celebrated for
one of the flrft and moft ancient nurferies of the firitifh druids ; from
whom, no doubt, the profound myfterious theorems of that learned
fed flowed in the choiceft and moft elaborate language of the time.
And their language htrt being vernacular, the vulgar tongue of the
place; that very vulgar tongue, under the influence and corredion of fo
great matters of it as thcfe druids may be prefumed to have been, muft
needs participate very much of the copioufnefs and clearness of thefe
fountains; and by doing fo, muft expatiate and unfold itfelf in nume-
rous variety* of well chofen fitted words, and, which is its property, I
may fay its excellency, to this day, in exalt fignificancy and compre-
hend venefs of expreffion.

Now that the prefent WeHh, at this time fpoken in die Itfc of An-
glefey and her neighbouring countries, is that very language brought in
by her firft inhabitants, enlarged and polifbed by the learned druids,
modulated and fweetened by the ancient bards (fo that no poetry in the
world is more various and artificial), and kept up and cultivated to this
day by the enamoured votaries of the Britiih mufes^ is evident princi-
pally from thefe two reafons.

First, There are very many ancient Britifli words which have no
refemblance to, no coherence in found and fignification with, the
words of any other language in the world except the Hebrew, fo as to
t>e in any poffibility of being derived from. them, as far as could be yet
perceived. This evinces that the Britifti language is, in its radical
: parts at leaft, plainly aboriginal : no footfteps of it any where appear-
ing, but in thofe places where it is allowed the antient Celts for fome
while inhabited, or their Gaulifh and Britifh offspring had fent their
colonies. For, if this language of ours, had come here, and had been
derived from the language of any other part of the world, its fpring
and origin might be traced out. But fincc it cannot be done, among
any nation or people, but within its own territories, it is a Dure argu-
ment*


MON.A/ANTIQJJA-REISTAURATiV:. 37

ment, thit it wholly depends upon its national origin and founda-
tion j arid corifequently that it is in fubflance the language of the firfl "
•planters of this Britifh ifle and nation, and therefore the firfl in this -
Ifle Mona. * ;

* Secondly, If it appears, that the fame nation continued in this Ifle
of Mona, in a conftant uninterrupted fucceffion of people, from the
"" £rft planting of it to this day ; it follows that the fame language thefi
people ufed. aad praftifed (being fo very good, and expreffiye, as I have
already (hewn) muft continue hsre as uninterruptedly as thofe people
whofe language it was.. r For no reafon can be given, why, by what
means, and in what periods of time, this fame language, the fame peo-
ple continuing, fhould be exterminated or utterly ceafe arid perifh. '
.It is true r new people generally do introduce new languages, or
very much corrupt and alter the old ; but here we had no~ftfch thing. !
There are n? records, no authentic .marks of antiquity, to fhew us,
that amidft the various mutations of people, tongues, and nations, ia
the other parts of the world, the inhabitants of this little ifland have
been ever diffeifed, or fo outed of their piimier pofleffion of ity as that
.any other nation or people took up,their place, and kept themfelves pof T
fefled of it. ^

The Irifh under Sirig the Rover, who once indeed drove the inhabi-
tants out of the ifland, were focxa after themfelves outed and expelled
by Melirion ap Miircbkn* and his coufin Cafwalhn /aw bir y who killed
the faid Smg at a /place called Cappel GwyddiU as tradition has it. And
when at other times thefe Irifh, pillagers came by ftealth into the ifland,
they were foon routed and driven out* fo that they could not much pre-
judice the former ancient fpeech ufed here, much lefs abolifh it No other
nation ever attempted our expuifionv The Romans, Saxons, Danes and .
Normans fought only our fubmiffion, and had it ; but never •any of them
fought to difleminate and enforce their, language upon us **

Now all this being confidered, it is abfurd to imagine that a people
ever remaining in their generations one and the fame, in one and the
.fame ifland, as thefe had done, and alfb fo well qualified with prompu
aefs and facility of expreffion,- as thefe were* fhould univerfally forfake
and abandon their native language, without the appearance, of any rea.-
fonable caufes inclining them to it. Yet, though it fhould appear be-
yond denial, that this ancient language fhould and did keep perpetual


f See this aflcrtion.cofltradiftfd in the preface to Dr. Davk&'s Grammar*


tefideEce


*cfiderice froth firff to laft hi this little HIand, It cannot Be doubted Pnrt
ihajt in the long fpace of fotfire thoufands of years, this language, though
*h& fo complete and polifhed, trtttft after very- much in its mode antf
propriety of fpeaking, according to the variety of times and htomours df
jteople ; and To like a- long Cbritintrtcf river take in many -Branches, and %
probably lofe a few, in its conftatit flux and current.

Thus the Romans added fome Wards, and the D#te$ and Saxons a few
dlfoi to our Btitifh di&ionary $ while defucttfdfc and ollivion fwallowed
a great many of the ancient founds of it, whtfri new onfes were entertained
ahdeherifhed. And of late, fincefthd heighhburingEriglrfchiithfamuch
*nc*dached upon it, md is bccctfne the gritted ahd fafhionabte tongue
among us^ many mote words lie by usf obfolete and tkfelefs, which were
Before perhaps the flowers and ornaments of our language; -and more
iKH would have done, if the commeridabld hrduftry rf fome,- affedSon-
ateiy* devoted to the ancieht language, hadridt by trirfous indefatigable
methods, bppofed its diffipation and rdin.

The words that have been thus neglefted, and by difttfe have pc-
HfixeA, were for the mbft part,* I fappofe, certain adje&ives and tynoni*-
Indus redundancies of* the tongue; or terttts relating \cr the laws, refi* .
jgicwi^ and other fuperannuated rites and methods of ancient times; For
the people, I ddre affirin, pfeferved entire arid uncorrupted the more
iubftafttia] notations of things, from their fit ft footing here to this day ;
as thfe fariginal cxprtffive names of the riiott known and remarkable ob-
jects among them, aife, to any orife that confiders their true dtymoris,or
thofe moft ancient founds and dibnofyHables dut of which they have been
compounded, plain and undeniable fevtdentes. fPydd+va, MaH-trbetfi>
Moe)-fre 9 Cors-ddigat, Ptn-Maen> Corn-wy, fyryri, and • innumerable
others, whofe firft driginally impofed names we have all feafon in the
Hporid to Believe were never altered, by the feme people, tetaining the
fame language, asthefe have done. And this we may fafely conclude,
becauTe fuch compound names as exprefs the perpettial natures of the
things they fignifyi as the firft impofed names generally did, may bfe
Well fuppofed to be original. And indeed fuch names we now find t6
be fb fignificative, 'and fo patly refolvable to our Welfh etynions, that,
granting thofe names to have been originally impofed, and allowing
the parts of them to be purely Welfh, as certainly they art j if we were
now to new-name them, we could fcarcie give them fitter names, and
more expfeffive of their peculiar properties and natures, than thofe
we find originally impofed on them. And thofe names being in
.."■"-: their


mom a ;a-Ntt r<^u a i b st^u k ktaz &.

i^fftrilsflitf cuspo^ what is Jafflc proi»Ma*lJwoK

^at /£•* w» the £rft» nay the tandy powailing iaogiiage, tedcftor liad
among .os? .' /-..;-;:.*;

Ali this, vith the. guttural proannciation x>f iaqpe^of bur <fyttafcfes r
the *xefemManoe of many of our .modern fronds,, aridf the near affinity .
of our pbrafe arid dyntax widi the iraocft. ancient Wehrew tongue, is:andi
will be a cofKrinciag.afgumept, that >our prefect language in the more?
radical illcokes itif it, is one of the primary iflues of that footed fountain
— 4hatis, is the chief remains of the ^ancient Celtic >or British tongue*
which, with oar nation, liath fcept its ground i(.whatrfewor no: o the*
tongues .or nations in the world ihare done] £w iifcout the ;fpace of diced,
thottfond and five ^hundred years,.

*

SEC T I O N. VJl . '

Tho Laws and* Religion of the Jirjl inhabitants of this IJlani*.

WHEN the Ilk of Mona, as the other pans of the Britifli ides*
became thoroughly improved and inhabited, and thofe inhabit
tants had fixed and fettled their Abodes *nd colonies* in the feveral cfi*
vifions of it j for their mote fecure enjoyiijetft of what they poiftfled*-
and for a future eftablifhment of a peaceable and regular courfe of life,,
we may well conceive, that human nature, under the conduct and au-
thority of their prime le^de^s or deputed foveteigns, fben prompted:
them:to the copfideration of twothings y viz. Laws- and Religion.— .
Their ftrofig unbridled paflions and interfering appetites tieceflarify
forcing them to the ufe of the one; and their innate faculties, deeply
impreffed with the fenfe of a deity, and: of the immortality of their
fouls, fe?onded by the precepts and traditional documents of their elders,,
putting them inevitably on the performances of the other. Ufutxigente
*(as Juftinian ob&fves) £f hunank.ne€^tatibus Rentes hutoana quadamjtih
juraconjlituerant. - •

Of what. form and mode of inftitution either of fbeife at firtt were*
♦we want dire* authority to inform us. But, firft, as- to th*ir laws and
-form of government in their divided 'and fubdmdfech clairt tod finii**
dies, 4iere and in other* countries, invthofe firfl raig^tkms^ <^,pco^J*>.
-we-havc gireat inldueeh^nt to believe, *h*t'fheir Iktk cantons and.eeco-

I • ?


4o MONA ANTIQ3JA RESTAURATA^

nomies were altogether under the, rule! and government of, and frayed
and direded by, the eldeft living anceftor of the tribe or coldhy, by
right of primogeniture (which we find very anciently aflerted and
claimed in the exprefs cafe of Jacob and Efau),_ with fubmiffion and
deference nevertheiefs in matters of appeal or recognition to more an-
cient fuperior ' fovereigns ; fuch as no doubt they had at thofe times
(men then living to a great age) prefiding and reigning over many fo-
cieties of people defcending from them : as Noah for inflance and his
three ions, while they lived (and they lived many years, > one of them,
five hundred years after the deluge) reigned over all the tribes of man*
kind. For it muft be allowed that the moral law, which God had writ-*
ten in the hearts of men, was of force enough to influence and difpofe
the communities of people in all countries to pay fubmiffion and obe-
dience to, and thereby to eftablifh ibvereignty and regal authority in,
thofe perfons who were the chief heads of them, and out of whofe loins
they ifiued.

And indeed no lefs than this comes to feems to me to be hinted at
by'Mofes in the tenth chapter of Genefis; where accounting for thefe
diviflons under the fori* and grandfons of Noah, he fays, they were di-
vided or feparated, after their tongues, after their families, orru3 bego-
jebem, in their nations > implying that though their communities and
Separated governments, over which their more immediate chiefs or
heads of families prefided, were many, and far and wide extended; yet
it is there exprefly faid, that however they were divided after their
jtongues and families, and how far foever they were difperfed in plant-
ing their colonies, they were nevertheiefs comprehended, and remained
incorporated in their peculiar nations, as the particle s there plainly in-
• timates ; where the words expreffing tongues and /amities have the parti-
ble * before them, viz. juxta, fecundum ; differencing the import and
meaning of the laft from the two former— And that difference, not OQce
butthree or four times repeated,, add? ibn>e weight to the obfervation I
have made on this paffage.

• Now thefe nations being thus diftinguiflied by the holy penman, and
jthe heads apd rulers of thefe nations. there exprefly named and recorded,
J>y whom they Wprg folded ; -tafrg* every. P^ioa of them, thenatu-,
t ral pregepy and dcfcenifonts'.oC tkafe fovind.erSj.aS,/^; were of Nogh,
whp -was the father of ^hetji all ; a»d /by tl«t paternal right, while he
lived (and he lived three hundred and fifty years after the flood) fole
monarch of the univerfe— it frill ftllow undeniably, that as Noah was
%-.. -.: i w by


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAU.RATA. ^i

fey divine inftitution* grounded on the moral law, the fupreme mo-
narch of the wofld ; fo that power and governing authority, which
he bequeathed and tranfmitted to his fons and grandfons (founded on
the fame paternal right, and fo from them, in all the branches of it,
to the iinalleft colony) was the fame ; that is, was purely * regal — and
fo. continued, till Nimrod in the Eaft and the Titans in the Weft, by
ufurpations and conquefts deformed the original fcheme, and founded
new empires, *

And as this authoritative part of government, from which laws take
their life and fandlion, was apparently from the divine right which pa-
rents have to rule and govern the families iffuing from them, when no.
fuperior right overfways ; fo in our part of the world; which I am now
accounting for, the laws and orders which were then made, being rules

h« u/Wh tW^ families under fuch governor'* ra«» ^^-fv^J,,* »™*,./i
. , ...««.«.*« „*-~. w w w w... w u.m AiiipcLLion were

to adt, and conform themfelves to; muft bear the ftamp and lie under
the regulation of this authority. Yet as to the matter and import, as
to the forts and qualities of thefe laws, we muft conclude them not to
be unifoimin all places; for that is not to be imagined — but very various
and different, according to the different ends and caufes of them, in fe-
veral colonies, '

And on this account it will feem very probable, that in thofe earlieft
ages, when people were juft fixing themfelves, and their rulers or 7yr«*
rbannwyr were diftributing them into clans and focieties ; I fay it feems
very likely then, that juftice and civility, that is, a ftridt inviolable re-
gard of permitting every one to live fafely, and to enjoy his own with-
out difturbance or opprefiion, made up the only legal padts and regula-
tions among them ; agreed to by the obeying people, and equally ad-
jufted to the honour, fupport, and fervice of their chiefs, and to the
welfare and fafety of every particular perfon. And in that cafe and to
that end, there is little doubt to be made, but that thefe deputed chiefs
and proprietors of new fettlements, which they and their offspring were
to poffefs and inhabit, having the fame authority over their defendants
as their elders had over them in the like circumftances, took great care
in the diftribution of Bods and tribes, not only to affign their bounds

# If mankind fprang from one man, then the original power was one and monarchical; if from
many, as the heathen opinion was, then it was democratical ; the arguments on either fide will
hold, and are convertible : for if the original power was democratical, then mankind originally
fprang out of many ; if regal and monarchical, then all people derive their origination from one
man, of which the Scripture is a fure warrant.

G (from


42 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

(from which adt of affignment I take thi name Tyr-rbannwyt with us,
and fyranni, ruoctvvoh in other nations to come) but alfo to eftablifh fuch
laws and provisions in every affignment or Rhandyr> which name we ftill
retain, as <abliged every perfon within the diftridt to live peaceably on
his own; and alfo to contribute according ,to certain ftated rules — which
it is not to be expected can be now determined—towards the fupport of
the ftate and dignity of fuch as had authority to protedt and govern them
in their particular colonies.

And alfo, if it (hould happen that any of thefe chiefs and rulers
flaould fo far exceed the power of a father, by which he was to govern
juftly and mildly, as to encroach over-much on his people's rights
and pojfleflions, and thereby occafion the abufe of that, at firft, laud-
able name Tyrannus to be what we now call Tyrant; it is not to be
imagined, but that fuch a c^fe, fo ot^oi^s tQ ^ e forefeen, was eon-
(ulted and provided againft by their v(\fe progenitprs in. the firft diftri-
bgtion of thofe powers— who might either appoint a league or union
aoiong feveral, neighboring colonies, pr n^aks forn^ hea,d or chief, in-
h?r^ting, by. primogeniture the fuperior rights of fome common axjee-
(lor, to be refponfible .unto^ as having a paramount authority and ppwer;
vefted in him to corredt exorbitances, and to rectify what might hap-
pen- acpifs. •

And fuch i;ules and overtures lj>eing very neceflary among the encreaf-
in^* colonies to avoid confufion and rebellion, w^ cannot think that
Np.ah, Ja^xeXh, and Gpmer, from, whom our natkm defcencjled, Yfouldf
be wanting in fupplying us with (uch political documents as tended to,
maintain peace and regularity in all our fcttlements. Nay, for feme
proof of tfyis,. among thofe rules which go under the nanie of the Sta-
tutes of the Sons ofljJoah, the credit of whi^h i$ indeed by fome difputed,
fyut ftrongly defended by our learned Selden * and others, we find one,
of thqnfi to be, De jadiciis, viz. of making d^cifions and giving judg-
ments* which in aty probability related to this particular,.

T^is wffl (ff governing in the firft ages of the wprl^^-for I pijily
undertake here to account for the firft planting of thefe, couptyrieft, be-
fore. th f q Titap princes, ^vho were of our own race apd language, as ap-
pears by the \ names of feveral of them, overfpread Europe with their

conquefts

* De Jpr. Nat & Gent. lib. i. cap. 10.
f Achmqn, u e. fyn-atb ox Acbau ; probably fo called by his posterity, as being head of their,
lineage.
Vranus, i. e. Vttnin, wr m (vir fupreznus) Achmon's Ton.

i Saturnus,


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAyRATA, 43

concjuefts — feems to be croft warrantable in itfelf ; : as being fouftded oil.
the divine right of paternal authority, and alio agreeable to the word
of God. For as that word informs us that all power is from God K
who created one man to people, and miraculoufly preserved another
with his family to re-people the world ; fo it plainly points out fcp U3 :
the courfe and conveyance of this power, and as plainly &eft6 v&
the form and manner of it. And though, by the neceffity of times and
plapes and other exigencies of human affairs, this authority and power
became afterwards divided into abundance of little lordfliips and prin->
cipalities, and confined within very fmall territories and jurifdi#ions 1
yet as to the nature of it, in the moil diminutive colonies, where;
people obeyed one lord or chief, it was as monarchical as in the largeft
kingdoms.

I need not wade far in thefe deep obfeurities of time to trace this af-
fair of laws and government, and how they were firft conftituted. Hi-
ftory fooa relieves me ; proving what I faid to our hands, by making
its firft accounts of kings and princes reigning not only here, but in
every part of the world it touches upon. It fhews how great empires
were foon after the difperfion eredted, partly by conquefts, and partly
by refuming to the furviving heirs of fome of the firft apceftors of na-

Saturnus, i. e. Saf-teyrn (imperator flabilis) the firft fixed and fettled monarch; fon of Vranus,

Jupiter, Jovis, i. e. J*va*c (juvenis princeps) Saturn's fon..

Hercules, i. e. Rrtbjti (horrendus) a noted tyrant and deftroyer of people.

Vulcanus, i e. Maelgyn oi Maelgynta (MproV, ut facpe in vocib. Brit.) the inventor, or firft
wearer of fteel armor. »

Mars, Mayors, i.e. Mawr-rvoyfci powerful, warlike; now JAaurict or Mms*

Mercurius, i.e. Marcb-*wr> horftman, or a fpeedy meflenger ; hence the Britons called him
Teutatrs, Duiv-taitb, the traveller's deity.

Neptunus, i.e. N<rf ddyjn (fupcr aquas natans) a fea-raring prince. •

Triton, i. e. Tr<wydon (per undas vagans) another fea-captain.

Apollo, i.e. ap Haul ; Apollinis, ap Htulyn (filius fblis).

Rhea, Jove's mother, i. e. Rbies, a lady or pflheefs.

Juno, i. e. Gain or Cain, fair ; now G at nor.

Venus, i e. Given, white.

Diana, i. e. Di ana/; fpotlefs, chaile, unharmed.

Minerva, i. e. Min-Arfau ; as if, among other arts, inventrefs of tempering and fharpening of
mechanical tools and weapons.

Now, if the fignification of (bunds, whereof names confift, will be allowed to give good evidence
what language they were taken from and derived, I think none can make a better claim to the
etymology of thefe Titan names, agreeable with the known circumflances and quality of the per-
fons fo named, than what the ancient Celtic or Britim tongue evidently doth; and how this caine #
to pafs, and on what account thofe Titans,, who were afterwards made heathen gods, came to have
thefe Britiih names, there being undeniably more of Britim than of any other language in them,
I mall hereafter have occafion to mention. More of their names may have the fame origin, but
many of our old words, and by them the way of finding it, being loft, thefe I have now produced
will ferve to prove that we and they were then one and the lame nation*

G 2 tions


44 MONA ANT1QJJA RESTAURATA,

tions the power, or at leaft the (ubmifllon, of thefe little princes, who
perhaps owed them, on that right of primogeniture, what we now call
homage and dependance. See Gen. xxvii. 29. where the patriarchal right
df difpofing fovereigntics by birth-right is exemplified. But yet that
right is in fome cafes forfeitable; as in the cafe of Efau in the cited text,
and of Reuben in the firft of Chron. v. 1 — by which it appears that he-
reditary right is not in ail cafes indefeafible.

But thefe mighty hunters, as the Scripture calls them, did not long
prevail in thefe weltern parts of the world. Theraviftied power, wrong-
fully wrefted and infulted upon, foon returned to its ancient channels,
except in a few places, where that irregular ambition reverfed its courfe,
and crept into private breads, ejecting kings and fetting up republics.
Thefe of old were wens that grew out of the corruption of kingly go-
vernment : But from the beginning it was not fo.

• It fliews us alfo, that on the mighty encreafe of the Roman empire,
all Germany, Gallia, Spain, and Britain fwarmed with vaft numbers of
petty kings and fovereigns ; and thofe alfo had many lords and rulers
of people under them, who governed their own vaflals with fovereign
authority.

* In Britain thefe little lords and rulers confederated together into
formed communities of feveral denominations : Trinobantes, Brigantes,
Iceni, Silures, Ordovices, and many more. Some of thefe had kings:
Others on occafion chofe captains and leaders to manage their warfare ;
of which laft fort I take the Ordovices to have been ; under which
name the inhabitants of this Ifle of Mona, when the Romans invaded
us, were reckoned.

This Cornelius Tacitus fomewhat plainly intimates, when defcribing
the war againft the Silures and Ordovices over whom Cara&acus was
general, he reprefents him ftyling himfelf Plurium gentium imperator>
captain-general of many nations *. And yet thefe could be but the Or-
dovices and Silures, divided into many fepts and tribes, which he calls
nations. Hence alfo it was, that Tacitus fays of the Ordovican army
in that expedition, " The leaders of every nation went about ex-
horting and encouraging their men." And giving further account of
thofe mens courage and refolution, he fays, t€ They bound thcmfelves,
every one by oath [Gentili religione] according to the religion of his coun-
try;" which fliews that the body of this Ordovican army confifted of

# Com. Tacit. Annal. lib. xii*

petty


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAUHATA. 45

petty lords and toparchs, whofe little dominions or Llwytba&MiA their
feveral laws and ufages. A refemblance of which we find at this day in
the highlands of Scotland ;♦ where, notwithftanding the laws of the king-
dom, the heads and chiefs of colonies, which corruptly they call Clans,
have or pretend to have as much commanding right over their vadfals,
as any German prince has over his lawful fubjedts. And what of this
law and government remained with the Britons in Wales I fhall hereafter
have another occafion to -mention.

Secondly,. As we find but little of thefe peoples firft laws and civil
conftitutions, fo alfo the firft religion of the original colonies of tin*
Ifland cannot now be particularly determined from any fchemes of it
delivered to pofterity. All therefore that we can judge of the matter is
cither a priori, from the natural grounds and caufe of it $ or a pofieriori y
from the vifible effects and confequences of k \ as each of thefe occur*
and are difcoverable to us.

From the firft of thefe methods, viz. a priori, I have this to fay; that
the moft ancient of thofe people who came firft into this ifland,' were,
as may be well prefumed from the calculation of the enereafe of man-
kind after the flood, within four or five defcents at fartheft from Noah
or one of his fons. It is therefore highly reafonable to think, that that
great leffon of omnipotence, juftice, and mercy, which God taught thofe
eight perfons in the ark, muft have been well remembered and contem-
plated in thofe early periods of time ? and muft needs have wrought in
the minds of thofe people dear and vigorous appreh^nfions of the ado-
rable attributes of God j and thereby have difpofed them to a juft fenfe
in themfelves of their own meannefs and inconfiderablenefs, and of their
neceflfary and abfolute dependance on the fupreme beneficent Being they
adored and venerated.

This folid foundation of true religion and worship, wc may well fup-
pofe, was fo deeply laid and fettled in the minds of men for fome cen-
turies after the flood, that many people in their feveral fettlements and*
colonies, at thefe earlieft times, raifed upon it acceptable adorations of
the true, only, fupreme God. And confequently I may prefume to af-
firm, that fome of the firft planters of this Ifland, being fo near in de-
fcent to the fountains of true religion and worfhip as to have one o£
Noah's fons for grandfire or great-grandfire, may be well imagined to
have carried and conveyed here fome of the rites and ufages of that true
religion, pure ajid untainted in their firft propagating of them : though
I muft confefs they foon after became, as well here as in other countries;

abominably


46 MONA ANTIQJJA RBSTAURATA.

abomiaabiy corrupted, and perverted into the grafted beatheniih fi&ieos
and barbarities.

If we conlider the ancient ftate of true religion, we (hall find it, in
the primitive and natural impreflions of it, to have been very concife and.
central— feated only in the heart, and aimed and direQed thence to God,
its true and only fovereign ; and therefore exerting itfelf in vtry few ex-
ternal rites and performances, viz. only in thofe of oblations and facri-
fices ; wherein the fincere worshippers of God, in thofe external a#s,
both fubmifsly recognized and adored the divine majefty, and at the
fame time propitiated and atoned for their own acknowledged guilts and
delinquencies.

Now as this (hort contra&ed fcheme of their firft diyinity was foon
learned, and as eafily communicated, fo we may charitably think that
very many of our firft planters fincerely kept to it, in the fevend ad-
vances of their colonizing progreffions, until they came to fix and fettle
themfelves. But when that happened, as conftant toil and labour lcrved
before to kindle and unite their zeal and devotion towards Heaven, fo
then eafe and opportunity, ever the corrupters of the minds of men,
gave them way to bend and fport with that facred lamp of religion,
which at firft blazed and, as I may fay, coned diredly upwards, fo as
to diftort it into almoft infinite varieties of idolatrous modes and in-
ventions*

It being granted that oblations and facrifices were the chief public
and vifible ads of the religion and worfhip of thofe ancient times ; we
may next conceive, that at that time the warmth and light of that re-
ligion, when in its purity and candor, had a very apt and natural ten-
dency to move and dirett thofe people, at every place they fixed and
chofe to dwell in, to raife up altars to the great deity ; on which they
offered and fent up to Heaven their thanks and praifes for its manifold
bleffings on their attempts and adventures, in their oblations and faerie
fices of fuch good things as the places they were in afforded. And in
fuch afts and devotions it feems they wanted not rules and precepts for
thofe performances, inculcated and communicated to them from Noah
himiclf, that great preacher of righteoufnefs ; or at leaft they might be
led and guided to them by his great example, (Gen. viii. 20.) who no
fooner was out of the ark, but his firft work was to eredfc an altar, and
offer facrifice unto the Lord.

Thus it is warrantable to think, that this great example, together with
the force and influence of Noah's exhortations, prevailed on many of his

defcendants,


M6NA ANTIQUA RESTA tJRATA. 47

defcendants, as they proceeded on in peopling the earth* to ere& altars
either of ftone or earth, for of both forts they had, in every country
they came into, to offer to God their adorations and moft foleirfn and
grateful acknowledgments of his goodnefs unto, and of his fbvereignty
over, th6 fons of men.

And therefore it is (to proceed to my fecond argument in this me-
thod, viz. a pojieriori) that frorh the effedts and viable monuments
of this firft religion, we are left to guefs at the caufe and quality of
it. Of this fort of evidence we have one great altar of ftone, of con-
fidcrable bignefs, upon the bank of the river Menai, now in the parifli
of Llan Edwen, which may feem to have been, as the biggeft, fo the
firft and chiefeft one of the whole ifland ; whereon the firft-fruits of
the place might be x>ffercd to God by thofe very firft men who came
into it- Though afterwards other fuch altars were ereded for the reli-
gious worftiip and the performances of oblations and facrifices in the k~
veral colonies of it, of which not a few remain Handing here and there
to this day.

Thefe altars of ftone (where ftone ferved to raife them up) were huge
brpad flattifh ftones mounted up and laid upon other ereft ones, and lean-
ing, with a little declivity in fome places, on thofe pitched fupparters?
which pofture, for fome now-unaccountable reafons, they feem to have
afFedted. Thefe altars were and are to this day vulgarly called by the
. name ofCrom-leck; either from their bending pofition, which is generally
believed 5 or rafher (that bending pofture being not always to be found
in every one of thofe qionuments, nor indeed applicable to the idea and
notion of Crom in our language) that thefe firft men — I (hall adventure
to guefs — carried the name with them from Babel, as they did feveral
other words, ^nd (railed it C<xrctm-kch y from the Hebrew mVenn i. e*
Ctcrem-luac^ a devoted ftone or altar.

It is not ^mprob^ble neither, but that they did fometimes prefix the
word Carem oj Qrem to other things belonging to their facrifices befides
ftone-altars, though now fuch names be quite difufed and utterly loft
and forgotten; fave in one or two places, which are called Crem-lwyn %
or Cremfyn, as generally pronounced; in one of which places there are
fome ftone-monuments and a ftanding Cromlech near it (as if it had been
one of their Cremhvynau, or facrificing groves) (hewing tokens of fome
extraordinary celebration of that place.

I have paade freq,uent[ encfuiciea into the traditions of places concern-
ing the original of tshefe Qrmkcbe> and only found them by fome called

Cjoctitie


48 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

Coetene Arthur, i.e. Arthur's Quoits. Others would have them to be
the fepulchres of fome renowned commanders, or great men of yore,
who fell and were interred in thofe places. Of the firft, it is ufual with
the vulgar to afcribe all uncouth gigantic things to king Arthur, the
great hero of our Britifli fables. In the latter, I deny not but there
may be fome appearance of truth, and yet confiftent enough with what
I have faid of them. For they might be both fepulchres and altars in a
different fenfe, I mean thofe of latter ereftion; becaufe when the great
ones'of the firft ages fell, who were eminent among the people for fome
extraordinary qualities and virtues, their enamoured pofterity continued
their veneration of them to their very graves — over which they probably
ere&ed fome of thefe altars or Cromlecbe ; on which, when the true reli-
gion became depraved and corrupted, they might make oblations and
offer facrifices to their departed ghofts. From %h\* p-£icc, it is ]±z\j,
grew the apotheofis of the firft heroes, and from thence the grofs idola-
tries of the. Gentiles.

There are alfo huge coped heaps of ftones in many places, as well in
this iflahd as. in other countries, to be yet feen ; which I take to be the
relics of fome ancient modes and ceremonies of that firft (but by that
time perverted) religion. And thefe heaps they generally call Carnedde,
perhaps from *w pp i, e. Keren Nedh, a coped heap.

It is believed alfo, that thefe too are the burial-places of fome emi-
nent commanders, who falling and being interred in thofe places, their
admiring foldiers, as a fignal fpecimen of their love and refpeft to their
memory, and to make {hew of their numbers, carried each one his
ftone to lay upon their graves, as they carried earth in their helmets, in
other countries, to raife up a famulus or a lafting monument and me-
morial of them. But the latter part of this furmife is not like to be the
true reafon of thefe Cumuli. For there are fome of thefe heaps fo large,
that they required a more numerous army than ever was in this ifland to
bring every one his ftone to raife it up. And befides, there are certain
kinds of ftones to be found in fome of thefe Carnedde % that have been car-
ried there, as will appear by the quality of them, from very diftant parts of
the country ; which will feem rather to infer that they were the cffe&s
of fome kinds of facrifice, where every family, or perhaps every parti-
cular perfon, either at fome peculiar feftivals, or occafionally as they
chanced to pafs by, brought and offered each one his ftone ; of which
we have fome glimmering in the ancient compound word Coel-Faen ufed
to this day ; by which is exprefled what is good and valuable. And we
8 have


. MONA ANTIQJLTA RESTAURATA. 49

have moreover fome fhadows and remains among us of the very a&ion
-in ouf Cvel-ceitbie, which perhaps were originally private facrifices, kin-
-died any where about the houfe to the Penates or houfhold-gods, as tho
othe? was public and local, Fiar into thefe Coet-ceithk^tofa ufe, ; eveh
to this day, to throw and offer each one his ftone, though they know ncft
for what. The Iri(h alfo have thefe anniverfary firings, and call them
Breocval, i. e. Breocb Cual, whether from Caell know not. And they
call an oath Mionna f perhaps from this word Maen. For it is certaih
that people in ancient times fwore and made covenants upon ftones ;
which might be- the feafon the ancient Britons put the word Maen in
-their form of fwearing — as Maen Jaco, Maen Elian, corruptly Myn :
and the Greeks have fomething like it, when they fwear Ma A/a, by
their great Jupiter.

It may be obje&ed here, that our Coel-ceithte, celebrated on. the laft
of 0<ftober, werte rather continued memorials either of fome notable vic-
tories obtained by the ancient Britons againft, or of fome fignal deliver-
ances from, their enemies; which indeed is what is generally conceived
of them. But the word CW, of which it is compounded/gives ftrbnger
grounds of probability that it really was fome folemn appurtenance* of re-
ligion, though now quite forgotten— as Cod-bren, Coel-grefydd, and Coelh
feem to intimate ; being all words exprefling fome rites andufages of re-
ligion. But whether the word be Coel-Gertb, a difficultate impetrationis ;
or Coel-Coetb, a peccatorum purgatione\ or Coel-Ceitb, ab oblatorum ujlione,
I will riot pretend to determine *. • '

Thefe Carnedde are in fmaller proportions in feveral parts of this Hlandi
though not taken notice of, becaufe generally the lefler heaps are hid
out of fight by a covering of fhornsand bufhes, and fometimes a grafly
mould or earth growing over them. And of thefe leffer heaps of ftones
I take the common tradition to be right, in making them originally the
graves of men, fignal either for eminent virtues or -j- notorious villanies:
on which heaps every one probably looked upon himfelf obliged; as he
paffed by, to beftow a ftone, in veneration of his good life and virtue,
or in deteftation of his vilenefs and improbity. And this cuftom, as to
the latter part of the conje&ufe, is fttll pradtifed among us. For when
any unhappy wretch is buried in biviis, on our cro'fs-\yays,' out of Chri-
"ftian^burial,' the paflengers for fome while throw ftones on his grave,
till they raife there a confiilenrble heap j which his made -it a proverbial

* h is written Cotkath, CotUcb, nn&CciUakb f- Joflma .-vil i6 v t . •

"" '• II curfc.


curfe, in feme parte of Wales, to fay, Kurn ardyfari** that is, I/iM-
tide thee. I have caufed one of thefe leffer Cumuli to be opened, and found
; itt)der it a very carious urn. . An 4 ll *s wejl known to ht*c -hsefi the an-
cient .pRa&ice of many Mh$r natioos to wife fcpulchi^al hoi'pia on the places
of tfrp intermqtt of their de?4* . '■■

3ut of the larger Carneddt* fuch as ^re in (bittf places to this day, of
confiderable bulk and circumference) I cannot affirm them to be any
otkpr th^an the remains and mpnuments of ancient facrifices, the pofitive
rites of religion and vvorrt>ip at thofe types. And though the particular
manner and circumftances of that fort pf wor&ip, viz. by throwing and
heaping of ftones, are found extant in no records at this dty> except what
we have of the ancient way of worfhipping Mercury in th*t i&anner;
yet fome hints there are of it in the moft ancient hiftpry qt M^fes, par-
ticularly in* that fbl^mn tranfa&ion between Iiaban $&& Jatob* which
. may he fuppofed to be an ancient patriarchal cufton}* urijverfaily fpread
in thofe coarfe unpolifhed times} and confeqqently might and did, a$
the viiible remains of it ftill witnefs, prevail in remoter countries alfo,
and even in this I ait) now fpe^king of.

The paflage I offer for it is very plain and full to the purpofe, as to
. thofe countries which Mofes mentions. And while our monuments agree
. cxa<21y with thofe defcriptions, I take it not unreafonable to afcribe them
to the fame caufes*

" And Jacob faid unto his brethren, Gather ftones; and they brought
ftones, and made a heap 1 and they did eat there ijpon the heap/' Qei|.
pqcxi. 46.. Now the defign of this whole affair was to corroborate the
pad: -f- and covenant mutually entered into by thefe two perfbns, Jacoh
iflid Laban, with the moft binding formalities and obligations. Thefe
obligatory ceremonies being then, I fuppofe, their law of nations 5 and
fhefe forms univerfally applied to by perfons of different interefts and par-
ties, as the moft folemn fan&ion of that law* The whole tenor of it rqns
thus : " Moreover Laban laid unto Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold
this pillar* which I have fet between me and thee* this heap (hall be a
witnefs, and this pillar (hall be a witnefs, that I will not come over this
heap to thee, and that thou (halt not come over this heap and this pillar
to me, for evil." Ver. 51, 52;

This whole affair has na fembknee of a new institution, but is rather
a particular application to a general pra&ice ; becaufe concluded by t a

* Literally, 4 btaf on thy bead. \ TlOV Ammi fignifies a pillar; from whence pro-

kably out word Jmaud for a tmtnmtt might be derived. - *

4 facrifice,


**fO#A ANTlQVA RESrT>AUfcA»TA. $t

facriflce, "the fcigheft a&of their religion, atfdaor to be attempted by
every private fancy $ and not only concluded by a facrifice, but that fa*-
cfed a&ion feems to have been a main part of it, and the chief end for
which it was . inftituted j and together with the other circumftances,
made up one folemn religious ceremony. ic £nd Jacob offered facrifkc
upon the mount,** that is, the heap, c# and called his brethren to eat
bread." Gen. xxxi- 54.

Now by what appears from the content, this whole transaction was
a religious ceremony, inftituted to adjuft and determine rights and pof-
feffions in thofe times between different parties and colonies* And as it
feems to have been one of thofe NoacJxdum Jiatuta-~of the ftatuies of the
fons of Noah, as thtiy called them ; fo it is likely that the colonizing
race of mankind brought and carried with them fo neceffary an appurte-
nance of their peace and fecurity of living, as this inftituticw was, where*
ever they came to fix and fettle themfelves;— -that they carried at lead:
the febftance of the ceremony, though they might here and there: vary
in fome rules of application ; or perhaps pervert it to other u&s than
what it was defigned and intended for. And hence we conclude that
our larger heaps and Carnedde, with their (landing pillars by them, which
they generally have, are no other than the remaining marks and evidences
of that religious ceremony and cuftom, recorded only hy Mofes in the
cafe of Jacob and Laban, but pradfcifed alfo in other countries, particu-
larly in this ifland, as will appear not improbable by the reafons which I
(hall prefume to offer.

First, The adjuftment of perfonal and provincial rights and proper-
ties, by fo binding and facred an eftabiiftimen* as this feems to have been,
was as neceftary, and confeqnently as likely, to have been conveyed and
made ufe of here among our communities and fettlemehts, as in thofe
countries where Mofes has fo particularly defcribed it.

Secondly, Why fhould our heaps and Carnedde agree fo cxadly in
their make and pofition with the defcription which Mofcs gives of thofe
in the land of Haran ? And,

Thirdly, How fhould our columns and pillar-ftones come to be ge-
nerally placed near our heaps, as thofe defcribed by Mofes were, if it
was not, that both that cuftom there and this here proceeded from one
origin, the patriarchal pra&ice.

This confidered, it will remain probable that our Carnedde, agreeing
in their make and circumftances with thofe heaps, are no other thin
the remaining monuments of that moft ancient religious ceremony $

H 2 taught


52 m6na ANTIQUA RESTAURATA,

taught perhaps by the ions of Noah, if not derived from antediluvian pre*
cedents— though it happened to be mentioned only by Mofes in that cir~
cumftante of Jacob and Laban in the land of Haran. Agreement and
congruity of make, pofition, and peculiar circumftances, generally be-
token identity of ufe and pradice.

Bdides thefe Cumuli* we have alfo long pitched ftones or great rude
columns, ftanding fometimes fingly, fometimes many together, fome*
times in good order, and fometimes without any, in many places of this,
as well as of other countries; and commonly called by the inhabitants
Mewi-Hirion, Meim-Gwyr, Llecbe> or the lijce, as they pleafe to fancy)
which I have prefumed to conjecture alfo to have been memorials of fome
of our firfl: planters? original cuftoms and ceremonies*

I will not fay they were ere&ed on the fame account with that of Ja-
cob in Bethel, Gen. xxviii. 18. But if it be allowed us to giiefs in this

atter, they feeni to me rather to have taken their origin from that ge-
neral bent; and ambition of mankind to perpetuate, and as far as they
could to immortalize, their otherwife frail and periihing names, in thofe
lading and durable monuments. Of which the tower of Babel was a great
and general fpecimen: " Let us make us a name/* Gen. xi. 4,, And the
pillars of Rachel and Abfalom are full and pregnant particular iniiances*
Gen. xxxv. 2Q. 2 Sam. xviiL 18.

Thefe rude erected, pillar-ftones,. though at firft perhaps fct up for
good and warrantable purpofes,, might, and we may well believe, did be-
come afterwards in thefe countries (as we find the like fort of pillars to
have been in other countries about Syria and* Paleftine) the obje&s of
idolatrous worfliip. For whether they clad and d re fled up the pillars
here into the fhapes of men, or made them fupporters of thofe twiggen
images C«far mentions, at fuch times as they were worftiipped,. is un*-
certain. Yet fure we are, that the ancient Jews in thofe mentioned
countries made idols of them, and frequently worfhipped them 5 as ap-
pears plainly in 2 Kings xvii. iq. " They made them images," i.e.. dandl-
ing pillars, fays the Sacred Hiflory, " and groves upon every high hill,
and under every green tree." For it is evident the original word in this
text, however the Seventy and fubfequent tranflators came to render it
Images, i&Matzeiab, i.e. a. rude unhewn, uneffigiated pillar->flonc, juft
the fame fort as thofe of Jacob, Rachel, and Abfalom were ;. every one
of which, is exprefled in Scripture by the fame word Matzebab, from
Jatzab to pitch or ere&— Tzelom, Pezef, Seraph being in the original
tongue the conftant appellatives of a true Image. From whence it is

manifest


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTA0RATA, &

ipanifeft that thtfe rude, unfliapen pillars, fuch as Jacob's, Rachel's, and
Abfalom's arc defcribed to have been, were by thofe apoftatizing Jews
undoubtedly worshipped*

Now all this confidered, it will appear probable, fince we have fuch
plenty of thefe pillar-ftones among us,, exa&ly correfponding to the de-
scription given by infallible authority of thofe in Syria and Paleftine, which
were undoubtedly worshipped by the idolatrous Jews ; I fay it will ap-
pear probable that ours were fo too, and that wicked cuftom and ufage
of adoring them at length prevailed with them and us too, from a refpe®
and veneration afr firft given to them as fymbols and memorials of facred
things; which, it feems, ourpriefts and druids foon learned from their
neighbours, or rather found conveyed here by the firft planters, and then
improved them with their other fymbols of heaps and altars into a cons-
iderable part of their religious fyftem. Of whom, and of which I (hall;
next proceed. to treat..

SECTION VIII.

Of the ancient Druids -, of their choice of the IJk of Monaj^r their prin-
cipal feat and habitation ; of their philofophy and difcipline ; and of the
IJk of Mona being anciently called Mam Gymru.

I MUST begin here a priori, as I did in the laft fedtion ; that is,,
from the neceflary grounds and rcafons of mankind's firft actions in
colonizing the earth, I (hall endeavour to eftablifti fuch pofitions as are
moft coherent with, and conformable to nature, under fuch and fuch.
circumftances, and moft agreeable to the truth of records and appear-
ances of things. By which method I am obliged to lay down as a firm
foundation, Firft, that a- fet form of fpeech ; Secondly, that a deter-
mined fcheme of laws; and* Thirdly, that a fettled fyftem of religion,,
jointly and naturally adhered to and accompanied the divided knots and.
"focieties of mankind, in the various advances of their progreffion and
travels; and were conveyed vfrith them into thofe countries they fixed,
and fettled in.

This being fuppofed, it will in the next place be very obvious and
natural to think, that each of thefe primary acquifitions, viz. Language,,
Laws, and Religion, as they were at firft more rude and contracted, more
rough and unpolifhed* only proportioned and adapted'to the mere necef-
fities ; o£ life,, and to the then. narrow and concife performances of divine;

worfhipjj


54 MONA ANT1QJJA R E $ T Al/R AT A.

worftiip; fo when the feveral tribes and clafleg of people began to fi#
and fettle themfelves into formed and regular focieties— then I fay thefe
acquisitions, thefe rational ails of human life began to open and difplay
fhemfelves, to fcour off their original rudenedes, and to appear here
and there more prompt, ufeful, and comprehenfive. The languages in
a Ihort time became more trim and copious. The laws more nervous
.aod vigorous, juftly fuited to the advantages of communities. And reli-
gion, the naiftrefs of all, variegated and &t herfelf off in multitudes of
pompous (hews and appearances.

Together with thefe firft acquifitions of mankind grew up the ktfiirely
improvements of ^natural and mctaphyfical knowledge* though thefe f
confefs have been much influenced and dire&ed by the traditional Cabala*
chiefly cherished gnd preferved in feboid patriarcbali — in the patriarchal
reppfitory — with which the prime fophi of many of the firft nations, it
is allowed, had frequent intercourfes and communication.

Now towards this improvement of natural and fupernatural know-
ledge in thefe early ages of the world, we may obferve many helps
and advantages to accrue naturally to thefe firft eftablilhers, as well
of arts as of empire, in the many regions and countries they came
into.

First, Their moft important indefatigable endeavours in arte Jigno-
rum~—in framing, enlarging, and polifhing of languages, gave them oc-
cafion to make ample difcoveries into the nature, habitudes, and conca-
tenations of things, to which their excogitated founds and new-formed
words were, in a regular flrudture of ipeech, to Ijaye an agreeable refer-
ence and proportion.

Secondly, Their profound elaborate diiquifitions int;o the grounds
and reafons of laws and governments, which they were then every where
forming, gave them occasionally f onfiderable in$ght in(o the manners,
inclinations, and tempers of men, and into the natqres and differences
of human pafiions.

Thirdly, Their ferious warmth and concern for the pflfairs of re*
ligion prompted and railed their thoughts to more divjpe contempla-
tions, gave them profpe&s of a future being, and at lepgth put them
upon many clear and diftinft ideas of divine and fupernatural ob-
jects. And as thefe three particulars, namely, Language, Laws, and
' Religion, have been the earlieft and moft applied to, as being of the
moft important confederation to mankind ; fo they have, among other
advantages to the happinefc of people, been the freftieft and earlieft

grounds


MO N* AN T I QUA R E $ T A V R ATA. $£

grounds that gave growth and improvement to natural, moral, and me-
taphyiical feibnees, ,

Tfrtsf th$ grwwg fl*c<5 of mankind having no fooner fate tJjemfelvfti
down \n 4*ftin& fettled natfons— rwbieh Stf aboi out of Epborus, branches
at firft intp thefe four, viz. Scythe, Indi, t jEthiopes, and Celtjts^
but a fet of men in each of thefe divifions, we may well imagine, put
their heads to work, arid began to cherifh the feeds of knowledge ;
partly Qfttursd and latent in them, and partly acquired by oral traduc-
tion from the patriarchal Cabala; in the latter of which the antedilu-
vian knowledge in all its branches was carefully preferved, and emi-
nently flourifhed.

Thefe men of thought and fpecufation, whofe chief province was to
en|ai#e the bounds of knowledge, as their fellows were to do thpfe of
empire, into what cpuntry pr climate Ijbever they came ; as they werQ
generally curious themfelves in impofing names agreeable to the nature**
and properties of things and actions, fo they themfelves like wife came
to be named arid diftingijifhed by others by appellations peculiarly agree-
able to, and figntficative of, fame moft noted and remarkable circum-
fiance of their public tranfa&ions and appearance.
. On this- account* I take it, the Indians called their great promoters
of civility and humanity Bracbmans, probably from a primitive word
they might carry with them, Baracb, to praife and celebrate. And
no doubt the ^Ethiopians and Scythians gave to theirs alfo fuitable ap-
pellatives at that time, though now forgotten. And thus it was that
we the Celts came to call our firft mafters of knowledge Druids,
from the Celtic word Derw *, as it is generally thought j and that be-
caufe thefe men feemed paflionately fond of that tree, under which it
is certain they frequently appeared in every folemn and public tranf-
a&ion.

It is indeed acknowledged on all hands, that the ancient druida had
their name from Derw, whether from the Greek or Celtic, which differ
not much in found, is not, material to enquire. But that their cuftom
of celebrating the Qak.and ufing formed groves for their public miniftra-
tions and folemn performances, proceeded from the example and imita-
tion of Abraham, doing the like under the oaks of Mamre, Gen.xviii. i»
though it be the general opinion, yet I {hall take the liberty to differ
from it, and to fuppofe farther, that both Abraham and they took up

• OsdL

this


*...**


56 MONA ANT1QTJA RESTAURATA.

this cuftom from a more ancient pattern, viz. the antediluvian practice.
I have already hinted how the ancient heathens did many things relating
to religion, according to, and agreeing with, the recorded cuftbms of
theiprimitive Jews; not that they took them up from thofe Jews by way
of example and imitation, but as they both, as well thofe Jews as the
ancient Gentiles, followed a more ancient copy, the Mitzotb, or facred
patriarchal rubric.

It is known that a tree was of very facred ufe in Paradife. It was a
free, Gopher* which God peculiarly defigned for the building of the
ark. And on a tree the falvation of the world was to be accomplithed.
A tree therefore being thus celebrated by Almighty Providence, we may
ceafe to admire that devout antiquity placed fo much facrednefs on it,
as to make groves their firft and mod ancient temples and places of di-
vine wor(hip. And fince it is uncertain of what (pedes that tree was,
which was fo remarkably diftinguifhed by Providence, we may as well
take here the word of antiquity, and fuppofe that they pitched on the
oak, paid their greatefl veneration to it, and fome of them, if the com-
mon fentiments be right, took their name and character from it, upon
very prevailing reafons, now unknown to us.

The truth of all this is very apparent both in divine and human re-
cords, that the oak of all the trees in the world hath been of moft fpe-
tial regard and veneration with devout antiquity in their facred religious
performances. Of which, to clear the way to the unfolding the grounds
and reafons of the ancient druidical inftitution among us, I {hall proceed
on with the following inftanccs.

FiksT, The facred Scriptures aflure us, that the firfl: temples or lo-
cal confecrations were groves of oak, under which God himfelf ap-
peared, angels were entertained, covenants were formed, -oblations and
Sacrifices offered. Aod whatever elfe belonged to the. dignity of God's
houfe, and to the facrednefs of divine worfhip, under the patriarchal
ceconomy, were vilible in groves and oak-holts. " And Abram (fays
Mofes) pafled through the land to the place of Sichem," mto pte ny pd
allon Morehj to the oaks or oak-grove of Moreh, " where the Lord ap-
peared unto him, and faid, Unto thy feed will Igive this land. And
Abram builded there an altar qnto the Lord," Gen. xii. 6.

Alfo we read, that «f All the men of Sichem. gathered together, and
ail the men of Millo, and went and made'Abimclech king, by the oak
pi the pillar." Judges ix. 6. Nay, in tbat very place, and of that very
piljar, the author of {he book of Jofliua fays, that " Jolhua took *

great


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 57

great flone, and fet it up there," that is, ii\ Sichem under the oak>
which was to be taken for the fan&uary of the Lord. Jofh.ua xxiv. 26.
On thefe luculent teftimonies of divine Scriptures the learned Dickinfon
breaks out,

— — En primos facer dotes querms ! en patriarchas druidas!

Diatr. de Orig. Druid.

Secondly, That the heathens pra&ifed the fame, in whofe moft
celebrated authors we find facrajovi quercus, is evident beyond difpute.
Nay, they were not only the Britifh and Gaulifli Druids who admired
and venerated that prince of trees ; but the heathens about Syria and
Palefline retained alfo the fame fondnefs to it. For when the apoftatiz-
ingjews forfook the law of their God Jehovah, and abandoned them-
felves to the idolatrous practices of their heatheni(h neighbours, what
did they do? " They facrificed (fays the facred text) upon the tops of
mountains, and burnt incenfe upon hills, under oaks, and poplars, and
elms." Hofea iv. 13, €t Under every thick oak they did offer fweet fa-
crifice to all their idols." Ezek. vi. 13.

To reduce what has been faid to the place and fubjedt of my en-
quiry, I (hall affirm from the foregoing evidence, that this prime cele-
bration of oak-groves already mentioned, being of patriarchal, if not
of divine inftitution ; and our weftern Celtse being fo refolutely tena-
cious of it, and fo zealoufly devoted to it, that their Corypbtei — their
firft and chiefefl matters of knowledge, the Druids — took their diftinc-
tioaand character from it : The cafe I fay being fo, we may well con-
ceive that thefe venerable religionifts of the age (religion in its general
idea being the chief concernment of mankind, and knowledge its rule
and direction ; to both which thefe religious Druids eminently laid
claim and title) had charms enough in their fkill and knowledge, in
their addrefs and con verfation, to obtain to themfelves the chief pofts
of management wherever they refided ; and when obtained, to fecure
their credit and reputation ; and thereupon to bear up a port and autho-
rity (no hard thing for them to do in that eafy obfequious age) in order
to maintain the chief ftroke in the condudt of all public and private
affairs among their fellow-citizens, wherever they happened to fix and
fettle.

Upon this bottom thefe infinuating priefts, we may well imagine,
foon wound up themfelves to fuch a reputation and power as to be able
to prefcribe and give laws to others ; and when they arrived to this

I emi-


58 MONA ANT.IQJJA RESTAURATA,

eminence, their next ftep was to provide for and eftablifh themfelves.
And eafily perceiving that the propagation of knowledge was beft up-
held and continued (they being no men of letters) by fixed and fettled
foundations and focieties, they looked about, we may fuppofe, for the
mod commodious place to eftablifh their model; and might quickly find
and obferve the Ifle of Mona to furpafs all other places in the Britifh ter-
ritories in thofe advantages they fought for. And when they found it
out, their authority might foon prevail to get themfelvcs pofTcfled of it,
and eftablifhed in it.

The advantages they might jchiefly feek for were to be of thefe two
forts : Firft, natural, fuch as were moft agreeable and ferviceable to
the defigns -, and, fecondly, political, fuch as beft fecured the ends of
their intended eftabliihment. And all thefe prefented themfelves emi-
nently confpicuous in this corner of the land, the Ifle of Mona, now
called Anglefcy.

First, Its natural appearance and profpeft might well enough en-
dear to them the choice of it for their. feat and habitation. It was an
ifland, and therefore fitted: of any place (as being more foiitary and
lefs incommoded with the afFrightments of war and tumults) to give
firft fuck tQ the infant mufes ; and to afford the earlieft ftrokes and li-
neaments to the growth of knowledge. It was a pleafant ifland ; and
every thing, as the quality of the foil and temperature of its air incline
us to fuppofe, was in the flower and vigor of nature. It breathed a
chearful quickening air. It was a more plain and level country than
any of its neighbouring regions, and yet variegated into a pleafing di-
verfity of hills and vallies. It was plentifully purled with fprings,
and fprinkled with rivulets. It had a benign enlivening fun, a preg-
nant fruitful foil ; enriched on all fides with the bounties of the fea ;
and adorned with the wealth and beauties of the land. And above all
(as the nature of the foil makes us believe alfo) they found it ftored
with many fpacious groves of their admired and beloved oak. In
fhort, whatever contributed to maintain the body in a found athletic
ftate ; to enliven the foul in her brifkeft operations ; or to inform her
with variety of obje&s, was not wanting here, Nature having made
(it feems) this little place the model, as it were, of the great ifl^ of
Britain. Whatever (lie has delineated there in greater draughts, her
pencil has epitomized, has contraded here in parvo. There is no-
thing hardly in the work of nature to be found in the great ifle of
Britain, but may. be fampled, as near as nature can admit, with fome-

thing


MONA A^TIQUA RESTAURATA. 59

thing of the kind, even in her greateft fcope of varieties, within thd Ifl'e
of Mona.

Secondly, Apolitical confideration likewife of the advantages of
its fite and pofition, we may well fuppofe, did no lefs oblige thefe menf
of thought and retirement, and in a manner force them to that choice,
than thofe laft-mentioned beauties of nature might allure them to it*
The advantages were thefe :

Firft, it wa$ an ifland defended by the fea on every fide, and there-
fore beft fortified and fecured againft the alarms and occurfions of pre*
vailing aggreflbrs, at that time frequent in inland countries : Thofepaf-
fions as yet crawling on land, having not then learned to fwim on the
feas. And though it was divided from the continent by an arm of the
fea, able to fafeguard them from all approaches of danger; yet they were
near enough to it to receive their friends, or communicate with them
any hour in the year.

Secondly, it was of a juft proportion and latitude within itfelf, futt-
able to the ends intended, that is, folitude and fafety. It was not too
big and of too large an extent, wheie it might nourifti parties and fac-
tions, which might endanger its repofe and tranquillity. It was not
too (mall and fcanty, to enfeeble and ftarve itfelf 5 but was, as I faid,
of a juft bignefs and proportion, to fupport and maintain itfelf in
plight and vigour, in fafety and fecurity from all accidents, and
particularly fitted to have its rule and government moulded to a
fort of monaftic (Economy, which thefe druids were now introduc-
ing. Thefe fpecious advantages both of quality arid fituation, fo for-
tunately confociating and forting with the defigns and genius of thefe
men, might probably, by the eulogies abroad of it, give the firft hints
to antiquity of bolting their hyperboles of Elyfian Fields and Fortunate
1 (lands.

Having fet down the grounds and reafons of the origin and inftitu-
tion of thefe heathenifh priefts, and of their eftablifliment in the Ifle
of Mona, before I proceed to account for their philofophy and difci-
pline, and other particulars of their eftablifhments, there is one objec-
tion which I am obliged to remove. It is this.

Although the hypothefis of the original of druidifm, and of their

choice of the Ifle of Mona for their principal feat and habitation, as

here aflerted; may be granted to be coherent and rational ; yet as to

reality of exiftence and truth, of fadt, the whole may be a nunquatncon-

Jians, a mere chimera*— unlefs proper proofs can be produced to evince

I 2 the


60 MONA ANTIQJJA RE3TAURATA.

the historical certainty of it, at leaft of the latter part of it ; that is, of
their fixing and eftablifliing themfelves in this ifland ; which is all that is
requifite in this matter. That point, therefore, I (hall endeavour to prove
bythefe evidences; Firft, by ancient uncontradidted traditions; Secondly,
by the teftimony of unexceptionable authors ; and, Thirdly, by certain
marks and footfteps of antiquity to this day extant in many places.
Thcfe three forts of evidence concurring together, and being fairly eftab-
Hlhed, encourage me to hope that I (hall take away the force of this
objection with unprejudiced men ; whom I defire to take it 6ere for
granted, that there were fuch perfons, and that they chofe (on what
grounds and motives it is no great matter) their chief feat and refidence
in this Ifle of Mona or Anglefey.

Referring therefore our aliurancc of the thing to what will in the
next fedion appear on the proofs of faft and evidence, I may here with
better warrant proceed to fome other circumftantial confiderations of the
point in hand. And, Firft, I (hall give fome previous hints of thefe
religious perfons' firft fteps in the progrefs of their improvements in the
way of knowledge ; and then proceed, Secondly, to obferve and account
for their philofophy and difcipline ; Thirdly, for their diftindt orders
and focieties ; Fourthly, for their authority and power ; and, Fifthly,
for their facred things and places. In fome of which particulars, namely,
in their philofophy and morality, we may obferve thefe religious Druids
to have fignalizcd themfelves, in that great and folemn work of railing
and improving the faculties of mankind, and of advancing and fuiting
to proper ends all the parts of true, folid, and inftru&ive knowledge, in
thefe weftern parts of Europe; not only before others, but alfo above and
beyond the then ordinary means and meafures. And here let no one
defpife, and think the accounting for the affairs and tranfattions of thefe
men, to be vain and frivolous, who have in their time deferved fo well
of the world, and whofe characters and adtions were efteemed worthy to
be recorded and tranfmitted to our hands, even by the greateft of ancient
authors.

First, therefore,, we are to conceive, according to the hypothefis
already laid down, that the firft ftep in the improvement of human fa-
culties, and the application of them, in the way of knowledge and
pradtice, to ufeful and inftriuSive ends and purpofes, was in this weftern
part of the world begun and fet on by a few thoughtful perfons here and
there ; who afterwards, confociating and aflembling together, proceeded
to fettle principles,;and to form their little platforms and inftitutions, in a,

verbal


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 6r

wrta/difcurfive way; to which they ever after cleaved, neglecting the
ufe oi4ttters 9 as an innovation inconfiftent with their more ancient
eftablifhments. And this may be one argument of the feniority of this
learned fedt to all thofe' other people, who have fet up by the help of
letters ; beyond which, excepting the ancient Druids, I think there arc
few pretenders.

Although they made no ufe of books, yet by what we read of them,
we find that their fchemcs extended to all the ufeful parts of learn-
ing; which they couched under apt fignificant words, and depofited in
rhythmical compofitions with a peculiar clafs of their fociety, whom
ihey call Beirdd (from the original word * Pared, to divide and di-
itinguifh) that is, men feparated and diftinguifhed from the reft, for
jheir extraordinary talent of memory, to that peculiar work — *f Cof-
iv eh hie or Cof-wydde — of recording and reciting on occafions the various
theorems and explications of their whole fyftem of knowledge.

Plurima fecuri fudijlh earmina bardi. Lucan. Pharfal. lib. i. 449.

Secondly, The delivered and taught philofophy and learning of
this druidical fedt feemed, in the general air of it, to be moftly fym-
bolical and enigmatical, efpecially the moral part of it; agreeing in?
that with the traditional Cabala of the Jews. In imitation of which the
moft ancient things among the heathen philofophers have been (hrouded
in veils and obfcurities. Kal <px<ri rd$ Apufrccs aiviyfjLci&Sw$a7r<j$eyfQiJLev*$
•<piKo<ro<pwaii> fays Diogenes Laertius of thefe Druids, " They affirm that
they taught obfcurely and enigmatically their points of philofophy."
From hence it is likely other fedls and parties, as Clemens Alexandrinus
(Strom. 5) obferves, ufually couched the graved parts of their learning.
iv wftGohou, under thefe involutions and fhadows : which Pythagoras
afterwards advanced to the higheft improvement that way* from whom
the imitating Greeks took it into vogue, and amufed the world with
their mythologies and riddles.

But in particular, as to the parts and divifions of that philofophy,.
it was, as others generally are, either an cxpofition or a regulation of
nature ; that is, it was chiefly aimed and directed either to the unfold-
ing the abftrufities of her phcenomena, or to the regulating the obliqui-
ties and diforders of her operations. The firft being fpeculative, and^

* Pared, a Wall or Separation, we retain, ftill. in our tongue. f Ccfaaitb or Co-wydd,

properly


6a MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

properly philofophy ; the other practical, and properly difcipline. Of
which in their order.

FyisT, Of their philofophy properly fo called. They firemed, if
we credit antiquity, to have taken a full draught of the theory of
nature, according to the gauge of that time. They made quick re-
learches into her principles and operations. Eos prater nataraiem
etiam tnoralem exercuifle philojopbiam. fays Strabo; " Befides the natu-
ral, as if that had been their chief province, they profefled alfo moral
philofophy." >

But in the management of the natural, whether the principles on
which they generally explicated things wey corpufcularian, or complex
and elemental, I cannot determine ; but am inclined to believe them to
have been the former, as more agreeable to the Sidonian philofophy*
which was plainly atomical ; and with which our celebrated Druids, on
account of our moft ancient commerce and traffic with the Phoenicians,
mutt, have had no fmall acquaintance and communication.

They deeply confidered nature, in her largeft extent, in her fyflems,
in her motions, in her magnitudes and powers. In all which they
feemed to cabalize j for Caefar, who beft knew them, gives us this ac-
count of them — Mult a praterea de Jideribus at que eorum motu, de mundi
ac terrarum magnitudine 9 de rerum naturd difputant. " They difpute
much of the ftars and their motions, of the magnitude of the world,
and of the parts thereof, and of the nature of things.'' De Bell. Gall.
lib. vi. fecft. 13. To the fame purpofe Pomponius Mela, lib. iii. cap. 2.
fpeaks of their acute difcourfes of the fyftem of the world, and of their
deep infight into natural caufes; to which he adds geography, as Pliny,
lib. iii. cap. 1. does magic and medicine. All which were acquifitions
very neceflary to uphold the dignity and power which thefe Druids had
obtained over the people through a great part of Europe.

Now their phifiology being fo comprehenfive as to take in, with the
theory of nature, aflronomy, geometry, medicine, and natural magic ;
and all this upon the corpufcularian hypothefis, as it may (ccm very
probable* from their ancient frequent commerce, by means of the
Tyrian and Sidonian traders, with the Phoenician philofophy — particu-
larly with the placits of Mochus the Sidonian, whom our learned
Selden takes to be Mofes. I fay, befides thefe noble parts of natu-
ral knowledge, their metaphyfics likewife made ftrong flights, partly
on the ftrength of their own ratiocination, as in the unity of the
deity, the immortality of the foul of man, and other confequent dog-

x mata •


MONA ANTIQJ7A RESTAURATA. 63.

mata j and partly alfo from Cabaliftic traditions, as in that of the con-
flagration of the world, the pre-exiftence of fouls, and transmigration
of them from one' vehicle to another, the propitiation of facrificcs,
and many more particulars of that fort, which they ftrongly profefled
and. taught ; though indeed as to that one, of the unity of the god-
head, the ftream of idolatry towards the latter end of their time bore
ftrong upon them, and deflected them from their profefled Monotheifm,
to give divine worfhip to Medioxumate gods : to Tar ants, or Jupiter;
Hefus, or Mars; Be/us, Belatucadrus, i. e. Bcly duw Cadarri ; Teutates;
Beiin, i.e. Ap heulin> or Apollo * Diana, and Andrajies % or Victoria*.
i. e. Dwwies yr Anrhaith \ and fome fay that Mercury, who likely was
this Teutates or Duw-taitb, the great conductor of travels and expedi-
tions, was of chief refpecft among them. But thefe errors crept late
among them, or they worshipped the one God under thefe fcveral titles
and appellations.

That thefe eminent parts of philofophy, both natural and metaphy-
seal, acquired, as I faid, by the early acquaintance they had with tha
Phoenician learning, flourifhed for fome time among our ancient Druids*
we may well take for granted on the word of thofe excellent authors I
have now mentioned. But of what fort their notions and explications
of things were, though among us all remains and footfteps of them are
quite loft and periftied, yet we have much to guefs ; and it fhould feem-
that they were the fame or very near a-kin with what Pythagoras Sa-
mius fometime after, about the fixtieth Olympiad, fetched alfo from the
difciples of the faid Mochus (as Jamblichus affirms in the life of Pytha-
goras) and left recorded in his Italic fchool > or at leaft the faid Pytha-
goras might well have borrowed the chief points of his philofophy from*
his nearer neighbours, the Gaulifh Druids, who had had them before
from Phoenicia, and conveyed them that way to Italy. And what it was
that made up the greateft part of the philofophy of Pythagoras, befides
what we have recorded and preferved to us by his own fcholars, Demo-
critus and Leucippus of old, Galileo and Gaflendus of late, have fuffi-
ciently taught us*

Secondly, As to the difcipline of thefe Druids, or that pradical
part of their philofophy which referred to and concerned either their
own eftablifhment and fociety, or the people over whom they pre-
fided and governed ; I find it chiefly confided of, and exerted itfelf in,,
thefe three particular^ : Firft, in the condudl and management of
themfelves $ Secondly, in ads of public decifions and judicature ; and,.

Thirdly.


€ 4 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

Thirdly, in the folcmn rites and performances of religion. Which
brings me to the third obfervation propofed, that is, their orders and
focieties.

First, then, as to the regulation of themfelves, and the prime estab-
lishment of their focieties and orders; their politics fcem to have been
very cautious and extremely provident in the uniform plot and model of
their conftitution. They Submitted themfelves to one, whom they were
implicitly to obev, and to be folely guided by, in the weightieft condudt
of affairs. And then they divided their whole body into diftindfc claffes
and fraternities, fuited and proportioned to the feveral parts and employ-
ments of their fundion and office. And in matter of (Economy and
claffical regiment, they were forted in an agreeable fubordination and
dependanpe of one order and fociety upon another, and of all upon one
chief or metropolitan, if I may fo call him.

This chief or head Druid had a fupreme metropolitical power, not
only over their own collegiate focieties, but alfo over the feparate com-
munities and governments of people through the whole nation, as
Caefar exprefly affirms : His omnibus praecft unus, qui Jummam inter eos
habet auttoritatem. " Over all thefe," meaning the whole order of
them, " there is one fupreme head and governor, to whofe jurifdic-
tion and authority they were to pay obedience and fubmiffion, in all
matters relating to their cognizance," &c. And that all people did
yearly bring their appeals from all places of the land to his tribunal
or court of audience in Gallia, as their dernier re/ort, their laft plea of
juftice, Caefar is exprefs : Confidunt certo anni tempore in loco confecrato.
Hue omncs undique, qui controverjias Aabent, conveniunt ; eorumque judiciis
deer etifque parent, i.e. " Thefe high pontiffs with their afleflbrs, the
heads and prefidents probably of their inferior orders, met yearly in a
certain confecrated place ; at whofe tribunal all that have any private
fuits or controverfies make their laft appeals, and ftand for ever obliged
to fubmit to their decrees and fentence."

This indeed Caefar fpeaks of, as it was pradtifed in Gallia in his
time ; but withal he fays before, that their difcipline, of which this
practice was a main part, came into Gallia from Britain. And fince he
affirms it came from Britain, we may very well conclude, that the fame
courfe and method as was ufed in Gallia was alfo pradtifed in the Bri-
tish ifle ; and that the place of their fupreme judicature (as I fhall in
the next fe&ion endeavour to uaake appear) was in this Ifle of Mona or
Anglefey.

4 That


Tla*I.


r<w* #£


&/U GUSJ&rmtk


iT^mjhfy


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.: *p

That head Druid, for the emineocy of his place and the Angularity
of his office* was called Drew* that is, The Druid. He wa$* whert
dead, prefeptly fucceeded by another; *rho troubled into that dignity,
either by his Angular virtue and merit, of, if on account of equality a
competition arofe, by the fuffrage and ele&ion of the inferior *r«*'
ders. Hoc mortuo> fays Caefar, meaning the chief Drfeid, Jfuis ajr>
reliquis excellit dignitate, fucceSt \ at fi funt piures pares, fuffragio dru-
idutp adlegitur. i. e. " When the prefulary dignity becomes vacant bf
the head Druid's death, the next in dignity and reputation Succeeds *
but when there* are equals in competition, election carries it.* In
thefe elections fometimes fuch heats and broils, and intereft of parties,
raged among them, that wars and bloodshed have often concluded the
conteft.

The inferior orders were, as before is intimated, diftmguifhed among
themfelv$s into different claffes and fraternities ; which, a* Strabo
reckons*, were three; that is, Agvlfai, Drudau or Drudioni Qu/ttih,
Ofi'wyr or Offyddion -, and Btg^a, Beirdd. Am mi an us M^rcellmus gives
the fame reckoning *f\ Per bac iota btmmikus pauMatm excultis^ <vigueri
Jtudia laudibiliumdoSrinarum, incboata per Bardos* & Eubages, & Dmidas.
i.e." In thefe places, among the rude unpolHhed people grew up the
knowledge of arts and feknees, begun and fet up by Bards, Euvates, and •
Druids." Then he proceeds to account for thefe three orders, as Strabo
, had done before him,

Diodorus Si cuius and Ckero mention another order of them* called
' Sarronides. But Bochart and other critics have already cleared that;
point, by Shewing that Druids and Sarronides, being Greek Jynonma 9
were taken by antiquity to exprefs one and the fame thing. Of thefe,
fays Strabo, the Bardi were fingers ; the Quvates, pricfts and phyfiolo-,
g0rs; and the Druids* to . phyfiology added ethics and moral learning.
And Ammtanu? Maccellinus gives much the fame character of them |.
Bardi quidem fortia virorum illitftrium faBa 9 beroicis empofita verfibus*
cum dulcibus lyra modutis mntitirunt ; Eubages vero fcrutantes ferhem, &\
fublimux natura pander* canabantur. Inter bos Druid* ittgeniis cel/iores, ut
avtborifafi Pytbagora decreviti fodakciis ajlrifti confer tilt, qneftvombtu-
occult arum reruns aitarumque ereSi funt* & dejpe&antes bumana ftonun-
cidrunt ammas immortales* That is, " The fiords fung in well-made
compofitions, # on their harps, the heroic adts of men; the Euvates or-

* Gcogr. Ub.i^ . + lib, a*. ..:... .: j. fcoe. citato,

K Eubate*


66 M'ONA ANTIQJUA RESTAURATA.

Eobates, more deeply confidering nature, made attempts to difcovcr Iicr
higheft arcana, and mod fecret workings i And among thefe the Druids,
ru^tt of more poliflied parts, by the rules of Pythagoras, affe&ing
fonpcd focieties, gave themfelves wholly to the contemplation of di-
vine and hidden- things, and defpifing all worldly enjoyments, confi-
dently affirmed the fouls of men to be immortal." In fhort, by- all
thefe evidences we may colledt, and warrantable fay, that their Bards
were their fingers and recorders of things ; for in fongs and metrical
competitions they treafured up all their knowledge of things and per-
fons ; 'that the Euvates were their priefts and phyfiologers ; and that the
Druids were their moft profound theologers and interpreters of their-
laws, and judges in all capital matters. On which account the Druids
being more taken notice of by ftrangers, and being perhaps men of-
more general convcrfe and negociation towards their latter days than the
other orders, all the orders of them came to be generally called by the •
name of Druids.

Secondly, Their pra&ical learning in reference to others confided
chiefly io a&s of judicature and public decifions ; towards which they
feem to have been well ftudied in the rules and proportions of juftice
and equity, and fufficiently informed of the nature of right and wrong.
Hereby the Druids, their civilians and cafuifts, maintained great fway,
and commanded infinite refpedt and obfervance in every province they
came into ; and wherein they had their feparate precin&s and allot-
ments, with peculiar powers and- jurifdidtions to exercife the authority
of their fundtion.

The extent of their authority and jurifdi&ion, as to exercife and ad-
miniftration, inafmuch as it reached to all places of the nation ; fo as to
cognizance and power, it took up almoft every cafe and circumftance
whether civil or criminal. Nam fere de omnibus controverjiis, fays their .
great conqueror *, fublicis privatifqu4 9 confiituunt : & fiquodejl admijfum*
f acinus ; Ji cades faBa, Ji de bareditate, Ji de finibus controverjia eji 9 iidem-
decernunt. Pramifl panafque confiituunt. i.e. " They determine in al-'
moft all controverfies, both public and private ; and if any great criirte
be perpetrated, if any murder or manflaughter be committed, if any.
quarrels arife about bounds of land and inheritances, thefe Druids give*
judgment in the matter, and decree rewards and punilhments, as the*
cafe deferves."

* CaeTar de Bell. GalL lib. vL ubi fiipra.

Now


M'ONA ANTJQJJA'fcES'f AUfcATA. '67

Now though this decretori&l power extended even to life. and death,
yd the execution of it (they being a fort of ecclefiaftics)- was, for all!
can find, wholly transferred to the fecular power of the city or province
they belonged to. The fame likewifc I conceive of their decreeing re-
wards and punifhments being merely declarative, pronouncing juridi^
cally who were" fit, hfc\v far, and perhaps in what manner, to' be re-
warded or punched. Yet one thing there was that ftruck a general ter-
ror, with which they might awe and over-rule their laics to almofl any
thing they pleafed ; and that- was what thefe Druids took the greateft
care! and pains to inculcate ori the people, viz. the peoples' indifpenfable
obligation to the necefiary rites and duties of oblations and facrifice, to-
gether with their own iftdifputable power 6f defigning and appointing
what perfons or things they pleafed for the cruel vidtims and immola-
tions of their altars — making them believe, as Caefar fays *, S^ubd pro
vitd.homimsj nijivita honrini* redditur, non poffe dttrum immortalium numeri
placari. i. e. " That for the fife of a man, nothing but the death of an-
other man, offered a facrifice on their altars, could appeafe the wrath-
ful immortal gods, and make due atonement for the evil committed^ or
the puni£hment threatened. 11

. This, indeed, was. rheir great engine to* put the abufed people into
what pofture they pleafed ; and was the chief prop of their authority/
which it feemS thdy kept up here to the very laft. And on which
depended, their other machine of terror among the inferior laity,
which was their anathemas and excommunications. With this they
quickly diffipated all contempts and difobediences. ' And ih that opi-
nion, which, they.had induftrioufly cultivated in the vulgar, of their in-
difpepfable neceflity of facrificing and of frequently attending the fo-
femnities of their altars* there was no greater and more dreadful ftroke,
except death itfelf, that could be inflidled on a poor mortal, than to'
be inlcrdified and excommunicated from the rights and privileges : of
feicrifice.

And as the firft, viz. the general awe which they carried over all
forts of perfons, from their being able to appoint and- order -whom they
would to the llaughter, gave them the great authority of commanding;
fo this latter, viz. the power of interdi&ing and excommunicating,' fe-
cured them the fpecdy and effe&ual execution of whatever they com- '
commanded. Srquir aut publicus aut prfoatus, fays Caefar, eorum decreto

/* Loc. citato.

K 2 non


6* MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

nonftcttritfacrificus interdicwU ; bac fxna apud m gravtfima ? quibm it*
inter di&um ejt f u numero impiorum ac JceUraterum babentm y ab us omnes
decedunt, aditim eorumfermonemque defugiunt. " This is their grcatcft pu-
niflimcnt upon thofc who refufe to fubmit to the Druids decrees and fen-
tence, to debar them* the ufe and folemnities* of facrifice* And thofe
who are (o imerdidfccd are accoiAted the mod wicked and profligate of
all people^ to be tiiunned and efchewed by all honed men/' Nay, to fliew
the farther congruity of this fcheme with future methods,, or what cam*
to be afterward praftifed in the true Chriftian hierarchy~iSfcy** eis fe~
Untibus jus rtddUur % neque bono* ullus cemmu*ic*tur, fays Cac&r of thence
who were excluded and anathematized for their contempt and delin-
quency, and debarred the common rights and privileges of religion.
They were not only vile and abominable in the account of all men, hot
alfo, while they continued interdicted^ were as out- la wed wretches, ex-
cluded and rendered incapable of all benefit of law ; no place of traft
or honour was ever to be conferred upon them. Thus we may ohferve
the guiltof contempt and disobedience to juft authority^ As it was in*
all the difpenfations of the true religion* fo in the eye of nature itfclf
it has ever been reckoned the fouled and moft unaflbciable crime, and
qonfequently branded with the moft odious marks, of both divine and
human, indignation.

Thirdly, Of the Druids difcipline, in relation to adfc and exereiie*
of religion, I (hall only touch, as I did in the reft, on what is mofe
obvious and remarkable. That they had times and places* Acred and
Separated to holy, ufev it is natural to think : but what prccife deter*
mined portions of timp thofe were, bo author mentions. It is probable:
they had* one day in feven, as the generality of mankind had, ap-
pointed and fet apart: for; divine worihip ; and that that was, ss in moft;
other nations* the day of the fun, it is as probable. What other feftivals^
or annivcrfary folemnities they had, we know not* Yet. it is not un-
likely,, but that they had fet times and peculiar celebrations of their dei*
fied he/oes..

As for their fet and appropriated places* we are fofficiently told that
they were, groves of oak. Jam ferjk roborum e/igunt lucos ; neqtte ulla
Jpcrajuu ea frondc conjkiunt, fays Pliny *f of thefe Druids; L c. €€ They
drefs and cultivate groves of oak $, for without that tree* or thofe groves, .

v * Clem. Alex. Strom, lib. j. -where he vouches the authorities of Hefiod, Homer, Callimachus, .
sad others, ,for the facred obfervation of the Jeventh day, as a general prallkc*
f 4 Hilt Nat. Ub.xvi, cap, 44, fob fin.

they/


MONA ANTIQJJA RES TA U R AT A. 6^

diey never celebrate any part of their facred fundtions." They placed fc
very high myftery in the mifleltoe of that tree, the Pren+Awyr as they
call it ftill in fome parts of Wales 5 which they ever-cut down in great
folemnity with a confecrated golden instrument ; received it on their
fagum or white garment* and preferved it as Jove's greateft gift, with the
higheft veneration and worfhip.

Ad vifcum druida, druida cantarefdlebant.

They had thefe groves, one may conje<fture, in many places of the
country ; which they called Lhyn 9 probably enough from the original
word Allan. Thence I take it that Llan had its denomination, which
Ghriftianity retained, and the Chriftians applied to their own confecrated
places and public oratories. Thefe groves were great fepts and enclofe-*
ments of tall and fpreading oak, ever furrounding their moil facred
places. And from that ancient notion of Llan or Llwyn, as betokening
a fence and endbfure, I take the compound words, Pef-llan, Gwin-Han,
Yd-lan> Cor+lan* and Gtyn or Glan> a valley enclofed with wood, to have
been originally denominated.

In thefe groves they had their facred erections and apartments * that*
k, either their mounts and hillocks, which they called GorfeddaH, from*
tfeeir fitting aloft upon them when they pronounced their decrees arid
ientences, and made their folemn orations to the people. Mult a de de~
srum immartaKum vi ac potefiate difputant, & juvetttuti tradunt, fays Cgj&r
*f them. i. e. " They difcourfe much of the power and perfedtions of
the immortal gods, which they preach to the younger people." Or
they had m thefe grovel their ereded pillars and idols, to which fome
think they attributed divine honours, as the memorials of their deified
heroes. Or they had in them their heaps or Carnedde, on which they
had a peculiar mode of worfhip by throwing and heaping of ftones.
Or they had their altars or Cromlech*, on Which they performed the fo- .
lemnities of fccrifice, and- their facred rites of arufpicy and divination.
Or, laftly, in fome larger and more eminent groves they had many of
thefe together, as pillars and heaps of (tones were commonly within one
grove and enclofemenf ; for to this day they fiand (b clofe together in
many places, that I cannot foppofe thenr to have had different enclofe-
ments. And in one remarkable place, where J prefume one of thefe great
groves to have been, thene are the remains of all'thefe, except a Croni~
kebe, together on one fmall fpot of ground;* where in all probability'
they, were comprehended within the verge of one great g^ove, which I

&alli


, 7 o MONA ANTIQUA RESTAUR AT A.

fliall mention in its proper place* the' marks of thofe erections being ftHl
extant there, though the trees enclofing them have been gone away thefe
•many ages.

Now granting thefe mounts, pillars, heaps, and altars to have been fo
engroved about and ihaded as I have conjectured, the particular ufes of
them, for all that, mull be very difficult to determine. Yet that all thefe,
whole remains are to this day among us, are monuments of Druidilm,
peculiarly adapted to the particular rites and ceremonies of their reli-
gion and worfhip, will I think by very few be denied. For certainly
ibmethings thefe oelebrated religionifts had of a (landing compofure and
erection for the miniftration of their fun&ion and fervice of their reli-
gion ; and what they were I would fain be informed, if they were not
thefe. Altars we are fure they had ; and conlidering the unbounded zeal
and fervency which people generally had to immolations and facrifices,
thefe altars muft be alfo very numerous. And therefore one may be in-
clined to believe, that befides the CromlecJbe, thefe heaps and columns
muft have had alfo their groves about them : for without thefe there were
tio facred ceremonies, as Pliny affures us. And fo we may fuppofe that
thefe groves wanted not their ara or fmaller altars, to which people re-
ported with their trivial oblations. However that was, it is certain that
-fornc flattilh ftones like kltars are ufually ibund Jying not far from tbefo
heaps and columns.

Thus I conceive this ancient famous fed of philofophers, politicians,
and divines, came to fix their metropolitical feat and chief feminary in
the Ifle of Monaj and from thence to plant and eftablifh their hierarchy
through the whole Britifh nation. Thefe men having. formed and per-
fe<fted their fyftem, partly on their own flock of knowledge originally
conveyed here with the firft planters, and partly, as I faid before, by
their early intercourfe with the people of the Eaft, continued fole ma-
ilers of the ifle of Mona, and of Jier fitter the ifle of Man; both which,
as is very probable, they held in demeihe, and governed by a fort of
monaftic polity, till they came to be diffeifed of them and outed by the
conquering Romans.

In all that long fpace of time, from their firft eftabliihment to their
expulfion, we may reafonably imagine, thefe learned perfons maintained
their authority at home and their reputation abroad in confiderable luftre
and eminence; every community and government of the whole* nation
being, it feems, conftantly fupplied, for their information of knowledge,
and their neceffary miniftration of laws and religion, with a new fet of
* 2 thefe


MOKA ANTIQJJA REsAuRATA.' 7 f

thefe Druids, from this pregnant nurfery the Ifle of Mona, as their old
ones died. Which indeed might quickly give her the appellation of a
Mother; as we fee now Canterbury has in refpedc of her fuffragan dio-
cefes, and other places have in regard to their refpe&ive fons and vota-
ries. She was therefore very anciently called Man Mam Gymru, * Cwm—
bre, i.e. Regio Vallicofa ; or Cyn-bre, i.e. Regio Primaria, being a word
then of larger extent than it is now; though in after ages I confefs, as
Giraldus Cambrenfis obferves, this ifland came to enjoy that title, and
well deferve it, fropi the great provifion of corn it yielded, and the plenty
of other things it afforded.

Now under thefe extraordinary advantages of foreign >correfpondencies
and domeftic encouragements, no wonder if this wary fe<5t grew up to
that great refpedt and reputation in the opinion of all their neighbours,
(nor, by the way, were the fortunate armfrof the valiant Brennus any
of the lcaft helps to enlarge their fame) that many of thofe foreign
neighbours feem to have taken fome of their fchemes and modes of •
worfhip from thefe Druids y as may be fomewhat perceived in the ac-
counts which Cornelius Tacitus and other authors give of the religion
of fome of the northern nations. Nay, it is certain the Pythagoreans
agreed with them in many-things, not only in point of dodrine, but
alio in matters of ceremony and pradtice ; as hath been obferved by
many authors, both ancient and modern. Which it is not to be doubted,
they had from the Druids, and not the Druids from them ; becaufe thefe
Druids were their feniors in time, if not of a higher clafs in learning.
And it is allowed, that the propagation of •iriftituted knowledge is al-
ways— ab antiquiortbus — derived from the more ancient. And befides
that, Pythagorifm was but the profeflion of a petty fchool in Italy, when
the Druidith doftrine was entertained and celebrated over a great part of :
Europe. .

I (hall here, before I clofe this fedtion, fubjoin a paffage relating
to this affair, which I lately met with in an anonymous author,- who
would fain make Anglefey, with her fifter the ifle of Man, to have been
thofe two Fortunate Iflands fo much talked of by the ancients* HiV-
words are thefe :

" The twofcFortunate Iflands, fo much talked of and celebrated by
the ancient poets, have been for many ages laftpaft. utterly loft and not;

• There are vallies among the Helvetic alps called Cocm$ to this day. The Latin Camput feems
to he derived from it. There is alfo a high hill-ia Cumberland which retains the name of Black-
C$m, probably from the black valley below it*

to


7 4 MONA A*TIQJJA RESTAURATA,

to be discovered. Among many fuppofals let us add fome. They were
two, and fo are thtfe: they went both by one general name, and (• did
thefe j being called Mw* % that is, the one Mon, the other Mana<w> die
one the bigger, the other the lefier; the one the nearer, the other. the
more remote*

" The ancient philosophers and poets were great celebraters of virtue,
and thereupon for encouragement of men did affirm there was * place of
pkafure or reft, whereto airer this life they were carried who had lived
regularly : and that place was fometimes called the Elyfian Fields, as at
other times the Fortunate iflands.

" They did farther fancy, that though there were other delights, yet
above all, the pleafure of converfe with the juft, and a relaxation from
care, was mod valuable; they might therefore conceit the better of thefe
iflands above other places, becaufe of the ftri& life of the Druids, a reli-
gious people here dwelling, fequeftered from the cares of the world, and
doubtlefs of a great name and virtue, at their firft fitting down.

." Their name Mm* imports alfo a folitary place, as onnaftical
among the religious has the like fignification from the Greek language.
The two Fortunate Iflands were, in the judgment of the beft writers,
generally, by the report of Natalis Comes, a noted mythologift, feattd
upon the weftern coaft of Britain ; they were in the Atlantic Ocean by
common confent ; and thefe are there alfo ; for in ancient time that
tra<5l of fea lying beyond the coaft of Africa and Europe to the Weft,
was called from the mountain Atlas (probable enough) the Atlantic
feas ; the ftreights thereby being the outlet of them to the Grecian and
Roman countries, who fuccefiively lorded it over this part of the world.

M The Elyfian Fields or Fortunate Iflands were (aid to be full of
ihades; the Druids here nourished many woods to perform their fiipeiv
ititious rites in; Anglcfey was called YnysDowyl!*, a dark and fhadowy
ifland, from the wood there growing; the Greek and Latin poets an-
piently reckoned the North their right hand, and the South their left,
from their way of looking to the Weft, towards the Elyfian Fields. Move
might be faid (fays the author) to this purpofe, which I omit. I will
add in the clofe the opinion of fome few of note : Homer thought they
were on the coafts of Britain; Ifacius Tzetzes* a Greek author of ae-
cQunt in Caijiden's opinion, reports they were with the Britons: and the
ftory of Plutarch, in the life of Sertorius, I will repeat, which methinks
is not diilant from what we are now fpeaking of*

4 " Sertorius,


€<


MONA ANTIQJLJA ftESf Ati'RATA. 73

Sertorius, upon his retreat out of Spain, was forced to take the
Tea* and being there in little quiet alfo, hot allotved to land peaceably
. on the Spanifh or African coafte, he being then in the Mediterranean*
at laft he pafled the Streights 6f Gibraltar, and turning on the right to-
wards the Spanifh fhore again, he met with divers failors, who ware
coming from the Fortunate Iflands* feated not far one from another,,
about fen thoufahd furlongs from the coaft of Africa; SertQrius hear-
ing thereof, was fo taken with a refolution of going to live there fe-
. tired from the wars, that had not the pirates of CiHcia forfakert him,
upon hearing of thefe his determinations, it is likely he had attempted
to go there. Now thefe iflands are much about the fame diftance; and
if they be not thefe, I will give over my enquiry with Dr. Heylin, wll0
having fearched diligently for them in all remarkable place* of the world;
feems at lift- to leare his hopes in the plain fields, as out of expe&ktiori
to find out where they' are) fori think not of any fuch probable two,
on our coafts, where it was in ancient time ftrongly reported they were;
if they be not thefe/' So far the feid author in his book entitled,
Hijioria Brit annua Fragmentum.

Now to refleft in a word or two on the probability of thefe argu-
ments. It is indeed, as~bifhop Stilfingfteet retorts on'Ohus Rudbeck's
Atlantis, fome degree of inhumanity not to fuffer any one td think
beft of, and even tb magnify if he pleafe his own native country,
whatever it be. . Yet when the arguments one produces are of weighty
let him be of what country he will, their due refpeft and deference
ought to be paid them* 1 eafily forefee what objections are at hand to
\ this gentleman's opinion. Alas ! they'll fay, are not thefe iflands too

1 coarfe a place, tdo bleak, cold, and rugged to bfe thofe fweet delicious

habitations ? I anftver, perhaps indeed they are fo ; and that thofe £ly T
fian Fields and Fortunate Iflands might be fomewhere elfe, if they ever
had any other exiftence than in the poets' fancies. Rut to profecute
the objedion a little farther—Let fuch as would infift on it confide/,
tfyat at thofe early times, when thofe notions were cherifhed, the face
of the earth had no greater paint and varnifh on it in one place than
another ; appearing then, as well in thofe countries where that opinion
reigned, as in thefe countries which are not now to be compared tq
them, in its own native drefs and fimplicity. And in that condition
and circumftancel would fain afk any one Who underfhnds the climates
of the globe, whether the fancies of the people of thofe hotter coun-r
' L tries,


/


74 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

tries, who were frequently annoyed with the fun's fcorching vifits, were
not more elevated, and their affe&ions and fenfes touched with a greater
gout and relifh of pleafure, at the reprefentation of a country more cool
and breezy, and yet warm enough, than of any other equally hat or
hotter regions, however garnilhed and pleafantly fituatdd. In a word,
whether a country by nature removed from the noife and tumults of
the world* equally free from the annoyances of heat and cold, fur-
niftied with all the ncccflaries of life, full of delicious groves, pleafant
{hades, bubbling fprings — Their woods refounding with nature's rau-
fick; curioufly cut into various forms, into theatres and temples-
Here running out into pleafant walks, and there extended in flhady
villa's and apartments— And above all, a company of divinely infpired
fouls, walking and meditating here, abounding with inftrudive docu-
ments of virtue and profound difcoveries of nature— I fay, whether a
country thus advantaged and qualified, being reprefented to the ge-
nius of a ftudious Greek or Phoenician, would not with him complete
the idea of a wiflied Elyfium ? And this ifland being, at that time, un-
der the culture of thefe learned thoughtful Druids, in all probability
fuch, I (hall leave the anfwer to aflbil the objection ; and {hall now from
this hint out of Plutarch proceed to relate another that comes more to
the purpofe.

This learned Greek in his Trad of '* The Ceflation of Oracles/* fpeak-
ing of the Genii or thofe gods of the Gentiles, whom they pretended
to have informed and a&uated thofe idols by whom, before the incar-
nation of Chrift, thefe oracles were delivered, gives us a ftory of a cer-
tain peifon, fent with, fome (hips by the Roman * emperor, who by
probable circumftances feems to have been Claudius, with directions to
difcover the weftern coafts of Britain. The relation Plutarch gives of
that expedition is this :

" There are many iflands which lie fcattered about the ifle of Bri-
tain after the manner of .our Sporad.es. They are generally unpeopled,,

• Though I have referred this difcovery by.Demetrius of the weftern ities of Britain to the em*
peror Claudius, brcaufe foon after the Ifle of Mona came to be poflefled by the Romans ; antf a
little after that, the other weftern ifles were thoroughly difcovered by the Roman fleet under Julius
Agricola ; fo that there was no need of another in the time of Adrian the emperor, to whom fome
would afcribe this a&ion. Yet I find that Tacitus fays in the life of Agricola, that Caligula had
entertained a defign to attack Britain, and to that end it is not unlikely but that he fent this De-
metrius on that expedition, and that he returned not to Rome with the account of his voyage till
the beginning of Claudius's reign, who performed that deflgn in perfon, and fettled colonies in
' the fouther n parts of the ifland.

and:


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA, 75

and Tome of them arc called the * Iflands of the Heroes. One Deme-
trius was fent by the emperor to difcover thofe parts, and arriving at
one of the iflands, next adjoining to the ifle of Britain before-men-
tioned, he found it inhabited by fome few Britons, but thofe heldyZr-
tred and inviolable by all their countrymen. Immediately after his
arrival the air grew black and troubled, and ftrange apparitions were
feen : the winds raifed a tempeft, and fiery fpouts and whirlwinds
appeared dancing towards the earth. " When thefe prodigies ceafed,
the iflanders informed him, that fome one of the aerial gods or Genii,
fuperior to our nature, then ceafed to live. For as a taper while burn-
ing (fays Plutarch) affords a pleafant harmlefs light, but is noifome and
offensive when extinguifhed ; fo thofe heroes fliine benignly upon us
and do us good, but at their death they turn all things topfy-turvy,
raife up tempefts, and infeft the air with peflilential vapours.*'

This ftory, though the learned Camden took it to be fabulous, is
very remarkable ; and if the author had but named the ifland, it would
be the earlieft acGouiit, excepting one that will juft now follow, that
has to any purpofe been made of it. But though he named it not, yet
any one may fee that the defcription which Demetrius gave of that in-
habited ifland he had entered into, does, next naming it, abundantly
fatisfy any impartial man, that it was this very Ifle of Mona. .

For, First, his difcovering it in the time of Claudius (for before
then Plutarch came not to Rome to be in a way to have this intelligence)
fhews it was one of our weftern iflands ; the fouthern and eaftern ifles
having been difcovered by other emperors fome years before j and its
being inhabited* when he found other of thofe iflands unpeopled, as
many of the lefler ones then undoubtedly were, fhews alfo that it was
an ifle of fome extent : and his defcribing the fituation of it, as nearefl
to the continent of Britain, confirms the more its being the Ifle of Monaj
for there is no other ifle I know of but this, that comes fo properly under
that circumftance.

Secondly, The inhabitants of it, he fays, were but few. Perhaps
mod of the priefts were abroad in the provinces, exercifing their func-
tions in their particular diftrifts, which thefe Druids were wont to do,
as I have (hewed before. But fuch as were at home in the ifland, he
exprefly fays, were by all the people held facred and~ their perfons «r-

• Y*j$ j dJyrn, as this was anciently called ; and on that account probably Tacitus gives it the
charader of InfuUhtilu valtfa. Annal. lib. xiv.

L 2 violable*.


76 MONA A N T I QJLF A RESTAUR AT A,

vhhkfa This character goes as far as any one can wifih to prove the*,
inhabitants of the ifle he mentions to have been the religious Druids ;
and that they were among the people of that great refpeft and authority,
as we find indeed thofe men were, that none durft in the leaft moteft or
control them,

TmKDtY, He gives account of a difcourfe he had with fome of
thofe holy men about the caufe of unufual ftorms and tempefts, upon
the. occafion of a very prodigious one that happened when he was
?mong theoa. Thefe men account not for it from natural caufes, it
being looked' upon by them as a prodigy of a very remarkable and un-
ufual appearance, ; and therefore they determine of it in a fupernatu-
ral way, agreeable to the principles of that fet of menr who, as ap-
pears in the laft feftion, generally entertained the Pythagorean hypo-
thefis, and the ancient theology of the Phoenicians and Egyptians ;_
whofe opinion of the mortality of the Genii, or aerial detfions, drift-
ing from one vehicle to another, which they reckon to be the dying
of thefe inferior gods, is very well known *. And th«fe ttien giving.
a Specimen of their knowledge that way intimates, that they were
thefe religious Druids which the perfon mentioned converfed with in*,
that ifland* So that upon the whole it may be, I prefume, well con-
cluded, that thofe two relations, from PI march, fairly hint at thia Jfl8 of
Monai tad its religious Druids j and that he is only wanting in not:
naming it. But fince he does not name it, I (hall lay no great ftrefs upon
it,, but take has a collateral evidence to fupport other more expxefs tefti-
monies ; which I fuppofc will be of force to make it appear, 'that thi$
Ifle of Mona was the prime feat and chief refidence of th* celebrated
ancient Druids.

There is another account in Diodorus Siculus -f- out of Hecataeus* of a :
northern ifland of confiderable bignefs, little le£ than Sicily, fituated
ovter-againft the Ccltse, (which I fhall mention here only on theicore
of probability) inhabited by the Hyperboreans; which name the Greeks
at firft gave to all the northern' nations. He defcribes it as a fruitful
pleafant ifle, dedicated to Apollo ^ and that moft of the inhabitants of
it were prie/ls and fongfters. They had in it a large grove and a tern-
pie of a round form, to which thefe priefts frequently reforted with
their harps, to chant and celebrate the praifes of* and to fing hymns
to, Apollo their great deity. He fays, they had a language of their

• See Dr. Henry More's Immortality of the Soul, lib. iii. cap. 4, .5. + Lib. iii. cap. ii.

own j


.M.O.'NA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 77

own ; and that feme Greeks had been in it, and prefented valuable
gifts to their temple, with Greek inscriptions on them j and that one
Abaris * came from them to Greece, and contra&ed Friendship /with
the Delians. He adds, that for the fpace of nineteen years their god
Apollo ufed to come and converfe with them : And which is the mpre
reniarkable, they could, as if they had the ufe of telcfcopes, flicw the
moon very near them ; and difcover therein mountains and heaps of
rocks, which that inftrumcnt alone can do. Then he concludes,' that
,over their facred town and temple there prefided a fort of men called
I^rWrf-— -called ib at that time and by the then Greeks— who were their
.priefts and rulers.

. Now to make a juft reflection on this paflagc—There being no ifland
of that fize northward of Greece in the Euxine fea, or any place of
that coaft ; and the pofition of this being exprefty faid to be oppofite
to the Celtae, who were the inhabitants of Britain atfd Gallia ; with
other agreeing circumftances* excepting the §zc of it compared with
Sicily, which tefit cifcumftance (the geography x>f places in thofe early
times being uncertain) might be mifreportcd ; it .may, I fay, with thefe
circuxnftances appear highly probable that the Ifle of Mona was meant
in that relation. And if fo> this is the earHeft account we meet with of
it, in any hiftory. For Abaris -f was contemporary with, add;a fcholar
of Pythagoras, about the fifty- fourth Olympiad, and five hundred and
ftxty-threc years before the birth of Chrift, as Porphyry and Jamblicus
mention. And this Abaris, By the account of thefe authors, was a great
magician, as fome of the Druids were known to-be. All which toge-
ther may add credit to this, though, a Greek ftory. And to* confirm it the
more, it is well known that the Britifh ifles held-great correfpondence
and familiarity, by means of the Phoenician traders, with the Grecian
iflands ; and that the learning of Pythagoras was in great repute with
the Eritifli Druids; fome of whom, as this Abaris did, might frequently
copic to vifit and converfe with the Greeks in thofe iflands, and, leave
tills charadter of it among them. However it was, I urge this ftory no
farther than the foundation it is built upon will bear* on which let the
reader pafs his own judgment.,

* Suraamed perhaps apjbes. The Greeks and Romans took BritiQi Surnames with their pre-
fixes, as one name ; as Prafulagus and Arviragus were probably but ap Rttt Ug and ap Mejric.
t Sec biihop of Worcefler** Letter to Dr. Bentley, p. 45, 55, 'and Chroabl. 7.

»

SECT.


7« MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA,

S E C T I O N IX.

T'hat the Druids rejided originally and metropolitically in the IJle of Mona :
Of the Romans conquejl of the i/land, and the confequences of that con-
quejl ; with a conjecture of the removal and departure of tbefe Druids.

IT is generally allowed that univerfal confent and tradition, where
evidences to the contrary are wanting, are in all cafes of confider-
able weight and prevalence to infer a conclufion ; and though in the
cafe before us it be I confefs at this time of day of no great moment,
•whether thefe fuperannuated Druids feated themfelves in this place or
no; yet as the matter relates to a point of hiftory, any one that is con-
cerned in it is obliged to give it what light he can, and the nature of the
thing will bean

I think I may take it for granted, that it is the generally-received
account among all forts of people in Wales, who pretend to any thing
of antiquity, that the Ifle of Mona orAnglefey was anciently the feat
of the BritHh Druids. Nay, there is not a book lately written of hiftory
or geography, which touche6 the Ifle of Anglefey, but gives the fame
account ; though the opinion for all I could yet fee, rather feemed to
have been taken upon trufl» palling from hand to hand among thofe
authors who have lately mentioned it, than well fettled upon its due
foundation and evidence. It is to no purpofe to recite instances, which
are too many ; and which only ferve to prove a confent, and that it has
not been till of late years contradicted, which is all I propofe in this
part of the proof.

It is true, there has been fome competition between the Ifle of An-
le/cy and the Ifle of Man for that pre-eminence, managed with fome
heats between the Welfh and the Scottifh antiquaries. But that differ-
ence was not fo much about the thing* in which they all concurred, as
about the name 9 viz. whether Anglefey or the ifle of Man was the true
Mona mentioned by Tacitus. But that point our countryman, Mr.
Humphrey Lloyd, has cleared beyond all difpute againft the equally falfe
as frivolous fuggeftions of He&or Boetius and Polydore Virgil. Yet it
may well appear that the Scotch were not altogether out in one refpeft:
and I muft, with fubmiffion, profefs my concurrence with them fo far
as to believe' it very probable, that the ifle of Man was alfo called
Mona, and did anciently, as well as Anglefey, belong to the religious

Druids.


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 79

Druids — nay farther, and that the Druids after their expulfion from
Anglefcy by the Romans, did moft of them retreat to Manaw * or the
far theft Mon ; and being fettled there, did thence maintain their jurif-
dt&ion over the u neon que red Caledonian Britons. So that indeed upon
this fuppofal, both fides of the difpute may be true and tenable, but
in different times; that is, Anglefey might be and probably was the me-
tropolis to the time of the Roman conqueft, and the ifle of Man like-
wife from that conqueft to the time of Chriftianity. And their being
truly fo, might well occafion thofe two different traditional accounts ;
efpecially as they were both of one and the fame name, and thereby
gave ftart to thefc difputcs about them; which I fhall anon more largely
make appear.

The authorities of Csfar and Tacitus confidered together, though they
do not exprefly affirm, yet, by a confequence that any one may rationally
gather from their words, they plainly and pofitively point — *nd that
witty as much evidence as any proof of that fort can admit of — on this
Ifle of Mona, as at that time, the capital feat and academy of thefe reli-
gious Druids.

For fir ft Julius Gaefar, in his, " Commentaries of the Gallic Wars,"
makes frequent and ample mention of thefe Druids, and of their orders
and difcipline ; having it feems more than ordinary curiofity to inform
himfelf of fundry particulars relating to their origin and inftitution. In
Britannia difaplina corum refer ta, atqueinde in GaUiam tranflata ejfe exijii*
matur. i. e. " Their order and difcipline, it is thought, was firft found
out in Britain, and thence was conveyed into Gallia. 1 '
. Now Caefar is exprefs that their origin and firft inftitution, as he
was informed, was in Britain. By whom was he informed ? by common
report and tradition. Exi/limatur, it was then believed and thought fo*
Nay more, Caefar not only fays by report that their original was from
Britain; but farther adds, that at that very time when he was writing
his Commentaries, which is probably conceived to have been when he
was on his Gallic expeditions— at that very time thefe Druids had. their
chiefeft fchools and their beft and moft accurate learning in fome place
in Britain. For, fays he, fpeaking of their learning, Et nunc (meaning
that very time) qui diligentius earn rem cognofcere wlunt* plerunque illo
(meaning Britain) difcendi caufd froficifcuntur* i. e. €t And now thofe

* Manaw a Mon & aw, i. e, Aqua, As if one fhould fay, the watery Mob, or Mon in the great
•cean*

perfbn&


So MONA ANTIQUA RE6TAURATA*

pcrfons here (meaning Gallia) who would arrive to any excellency and
perfection in that druidical learning, frequently go over to Britain to
complete and accomplish their ftudtes."

By this it is apparent, that their primary place of knowledge, or
head univcrfity, was then fomewhere in the ifle of Britain; where they
reforted from all parts, even from beyond the fcas, to obtain the beft
and choked learning of the time; and where, no doubt, their num-
bers were great, aud the place considerable which entertained thofe
numbers. But what that place was, or where it lay, no extant Ro-
man authors-— though in their relations of other things, places, and
perfons of far lefs account, they are very minute and particular—ever
mention onefyllable of it, except what is related by Cornelius Tacitus
of the Ifle of Mona or Anglefey. And therefore I take it to be in fome
meafure conclufive, that fince they mentioned not in any other place
the appearance of this religious fed:— which appearance if they had
found but the lead account or notice of, lean fcarce believe they
would have failed in the mention of it-— it mail be therefore in the Ifle
of Mona. Nay, Tacitus himfelf, who is the only author I know of that
makes particular mention of this place, does not {a much as name a
Druid in any other part of the Britifti territories, though he be alio very
exalt in recording things of far lefs moment, till he corpes to defcribe
the expedition to Anglefey under Suetonius Paulfeuis, where he makes
very particular mention of thefc Druids, of their groves, ceremonies,
and worihip.

It is probable indeed that thefc Druids, who before were every wher«
fucking- the fweets of the land, upon the approach t>f the Roman ftorm
were fain like bees to rally home* and to withdraw to their hive, to fe+
cure themfelves while they were able in their defended ifland, as theit
fafeft fau&uary* And good. reafon they had fo to do. For Strabo affures
us they were all extremely hated by the Romans, who gave them no
quarters wherever they met with them* Ob nefania bac facrificia. om+
nem Druidum fuperfiitiamm tellere tentarunt Romania Jed fru/lra. i. a
" By reafon of the horrid fuperftitious facrifkes of thefc Druids, the
Romans ftrongly endeavoured todeflxoy their religion, but could not."
And hence it is no wonder, that no Roman author takes notice of them
in any other place, when they were not to be feen there, but had all
retreated to their head-quarters, their laft place of refuge, this Ifle of
Mona.

6 ~ But


MONA ANTIQJJ.A RESTAURATA. 8r

But here in this ifland, when the Romans knocked at their very doors>
were ready to break up their neft, and unmercifully fall upon them,
then it was no longer time for them to ftand upon privileges, and cry
immunes bello, that they were no votaries of Mars, no men of v»-ar : no,
they muft now to their arms i and, if poflible, defend themfelves, their
groves, temples, and altars. And here indeed Cornelius Tacitus comes
to the point ; where, defcribing the manner and event of this battle, he
(hews us the place, which Caefar before had intimated was fomewhere
in Britain. They had one Arcblprajul or chief Druid among them
>—His praeji unus, fays Caefar. And where was he, but where they all
flocked to him ? And where did they flock, but to the ifle of Mona ?
Where Tacitus fays they were feen in great numbers.

Here indeed* Tacit us finds them oftt ; as if his pen, having taken the
hint from Caefar, had travelled all the conquered provinces of Britain in
qucft of thefe Druids, and of the place of their abodes and ftudies.
And at laft, by tracing the fteps of Suetonius Paulinus over a fmall arm
of the fea, he fell on the very fpot and place before hinted ; and there
at the firft dafh gives us an army of them. For mentioning there the
Britains refilling the landing of the Romans in the ifland, he fays, their
army (meaning the Britons) was furrounded by another army (for he
defcribes them no lefs) of Druids ; of both kxcs p men and women ;
for they had, it feems, their nuns and fifterhood in that order. Dru~
idaque circum % intercurfantibus famtnis, are his words *. And thefe too
appeared in fuch numbers that he calls them muliebre &fanaticum agmen*
i. e. " a fquadron of virago's and madmen."

The men Druids fhewing here, no doubt, fome part of their ufual be-
haviour at their facred ceremonies, i. e. Sublatis ad ccelum manibus diras
preces fundendo f in pouring out vollies of execrations and curfes, with
their hands lifted up to heaven, on the infuhing Romans ; as the wo-
men did theirs alfo, viz. In modum furiarum> vejie ferali t crinibus de~
jettis, faces praferendo 9 u e. in running about like furies with burning
firebrands in their hands, clad in fearful habits, with their hair waving
and dangling behind them.

This very paffage of the hiftorian will, with unprejudiced men, ren-
der it highly probable, that this was the very place, and thefe the very
perfons of the famous Druids ; and that that may appear yet to any one
more plain and evident, let me only afk, if thefe Druids 9 chief feat and

• Annal. lib. xir.

M rclidcnce


82 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

refidencc had been in any other part of the then conquered Britairt— and
indeed what part of it had not the Roman army one time or other
reached ?— how it came to pafs that we had not fome account, in fome
author, of fuch an appearance of thefe Druids, playing their laft game,
pro arts & Jbcis, as we have it by Tacitus in this ifle of Mona ? I need
not prefs the queftion ; it is fo unlikely, that I think no fatisfattory an*
fwer can be given it.

We find no where* elfe bat plain British fighting. But here in this
ifle of Mona, the hiftorian gives a very different account of things. By
what he relates of that paflage r we may perceive the whole action to
have had more of a grand religious ceremony in it, than a battle ; very
fuitable to fuch a religious place; very agreeable to fuch a rabble of im-
potent cloiftered bigots. When the Romans were joft landing, what did
the iflanders do ? Where was the accuftomed firitifh refiftaoce ? To
fhew us what fort of difcipline they were under among that befotted re-
ligious crew, the firft onfet, we find, was begun with the fpiritual
weapons, dirarum precum, of curfes and anathema's; whilft the laics
Rood— -ftabat pro IHore (fays Tacitus) diver/a if i&r— ready to execute the
Druids* commands on the fierce undaunted Romans ; who, to confirm
yet my argument the more, that is, that thefe Romans had never be-
fore feen fuch an encounter, nor in any place fuch a fort of people,
novitate afpeftus milites perculfi, were more ftricken with, the novelty and.
'ftrangenefs of the fight, than with any part of the fighting.
• But when the fpiritual fword proved too fhort, and the British arms
too weak, to facrifice— in which thefe Druids feemed only fkilful— —
thofe hardy Romans ; they themfekes, I mean theBritifh people, priefts
and Druids, immediately fell a lamentable facrifice to the Romans cx«-
tremeft outrage and cruelty ; who, to (hew us yet more plainly, the fa-
cred furniture of the place, threw the poor Britons with their religious-
leaders into their own facrificing fires— 4gni fuo invo/vunt—deftroying
their beloved groves — exctfique Luci, favis fuperjtitionibus Jacri—jof old
.accuftomed to moft inhuman barbarities ; and trampled down and de-
molifhed their altars, on which by their mangling the bodies of men
they u fed to coafult and appeafe their incenfed infernal gods. Nam
cruore captho adolere uras, & bdminum jibris cmfulere dees, fas babebant.
In a word, what Casfar fays in general of thefe Druids, Tacitus afiures
-us in fhort, but fully enough, was pra&ifed by them in this ifle of
Mona.

This


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 83

. This racthinks is fo unexceptionable a teftimohy of the .matter, to
any one who views that paffage of Tacitus with impartial attention,
that this ifland was at that time.the chief feat and refidence of thefe fa-
mous priefts, that next his faying in exprefs terms, that it was fo, it is
a clear moral evidence to oblige the aflent of any one, that rightly con-
siders the liberty of an hiftorian. And if it be demanded, why he did
not exprefly fay fo ? I anfwer, it was a common affedtion of his pen to
exprefs things vulgarly known, as that was, moft likely, at the time,
under the umbrage of more important chara&ers. For what Tacitus
fays of thefe Druids in that particular, was as intelligible an intimation
then of this place's being their chief feat and habitation, as it would
be now in any French hiftorian, who fays that the duke ,of Bourbon
bpfieged the Pope and his cardinals in St. Angelo, or that Rome is the
Pope's head city.

Now having (hewed the undeniable confent of ancients and moderns,
the joint authority of Cajfar and Tacitus, which were enough of them-
felves to evince what I urge, without any farther proof; yet I will not
reft here, but (hall go one ftep further, by (hewing fuch ancient re-
mains and monuments, as both by the agreeablenefs of their names, and
coherences of things and circumftances, make evident demonftration,
as much as things of that nature can bear, of their being the relics of,
and anciently belonging to, the before-mentioned rites and cuftoms of
the ancient Britifti Druids.

First, In refpedt of names— Though time, the great devourer both
ef names and things, hath made almoft as clean work here as in any
other place $ yet it hath left us (bme, and by good fortune fuch too, as
plainly anfwer the chief paffages delivered of them in Greek and Roman
authors ; which I prefume no other place, either in Britain or Gauli
can produce.

I have before hinted, how apartments and divifions of places here
were moft anciently diftinguifhed into Bods, Caers, and Trevs. And that
thofe names were promifcuoufly ufed and applied to particular precin&s
and allotments. Now in the chief part of this ifland, called Cwmrnwd
Mane, in the very centre of that divifion, we are able to (hew fome of
the ancient apartments of Caers, Trevs, and Bods, which have retained
and kept to this day the appellation of all the forementioned orders of
the Druids. Nay, not only the names retained, but alfo the orderly and
regular pofition of the places which bear thofe names, fo nearly ad-

M 2 joining

1


8 4 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

joining and bordering one upon another, may contribute no fmall evi-
dence to the truth of the conje&urc.

To inftance ; They had, it is allowed by all, one Arcbipraful or head
Druid, called Dryw, propter excellentiam ; and there, in that precindt,
even in the middle of it, is a Trev or townfhip called Tre'r Dryw, the
Druid's town. This head Druid was in all probability nearly attended
by the other orders, and his dwelling accommodated by the vicinity of
thofe feparate conventual focieties ; and thefe orders and focieties you
have fctn before diftinguifhed out of Strabo and Ammianus Marcellinus
into Drudau, Offwyr % and Bcirdd. Now for the Drudau, we have 2W-
drudaui for the Offhvyr, we have Bodowyr\ and for the Beirdd, we have
7*re*r-Beirdd. All thefe not only adjoining to, but almoft furrounding
Trer Dryw, th? head Druid's fuppofed feat and manfion.

Befides thefe more fubftantial notes of Druidifm, that preferve the
memory of their whole fyllem ; there are in that precinct to be taken
notice of, other circumftantial memorials of the more obfervable parts
of their difcipline and worfliip ; deducible out of the remaining extant
names of thefe places. Of which take thefe instances.

Gildas the Briton intimates that they had in the time of the Druids
confecrated rivers and mountains. And there runs through the middle
of thefe divifions the river Br tint > i. e. the Chief or Royal River. The
river Brenta in Italy perhaps was fo called on that account ; and I know
not but Havren might be originally called * Awhraint or Avraint, that
is, the Royal or Confecrated River. Csefar mentions their fupreme con-
fiftorial court or tribunal. There is in this place a great circular bank
of earth, mounted on a plain piece of ground, and called to this day
Brein-Gwyn, i. e. the fupreme court or confiftory. As the ancients
deciphered aftronomy by the name of -f~ Edris, a name attributed to
Enoch, whom they took to be the founder of aftronomy ; fo there is
juft by, a fummit of a hill called Caer-Edris or Idris ; and not far off,
another place called Cerrig-Brudyn* i. e. the aftronomers ftones or cir-
cle. Thefe religious priefts above all things affedted walks and foli-
t*des ; and there is bordering on one of their townfliips a fmall villa
called Myjyrion, i. e. a place dedicated to ftudies and contemplation.
It was their exceeding care and concern to nourifli and cultivate groves
of oak, as is teftified by many authors ; and hard by thefe townfhips

• jhvy being the ancient word for a river. f Vide TheophiL Galeum, de Generali

FhifeJbpb. p. 12.

aforefaid,


• <w ***•»>. *■•*.*


-/to g—

7/v V Dn/rw
Bri/n- irnyn
Caer-lcb

I 77v >• Jirrrdd

Ire fir Tiydd
H&t&myr
3Tu/yriarL
Jiw€r Brat/it

G-nrudruns
Tre'Ifon,


2*04*-


IF


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA; 85

aforefatd, that retain the names of their orders, is a fmall precindt, or
townftiip called Trev-ir-wydd, i. e. the townfhip of young trees, or
the nurfery of their facred oak. There is alfo juft by, a place called
Myffogiariy perhaps from Vifcus or Mijfeltoe, ^and M being' promifcu-
oufly ufed in ancient times) a plant they highly venerated ; and an-
other called Cefn y Verwen y i. e. the juniper- tree's hillock, a tree of
facred ufe alfo in antiquity, as may fomewhat appear by the prophet's
taking it for his tabernacle (1 Kings xix. 4, 5) under which the angel
of the Lord appeared to him. All whicli places, as the analogy of
their names fpeaks fomething of Druidifm, fo they lie bordering on
thofe precindts which bear the names of all their orders, as reprefented
in plate II. fig. 1.

There are alfo in other places of this ifland fome fcattered relics of
thefe names. There is Bodowyr in Bodedern parifti ; jUawW Beirdd in
L/anvacbretb; Maeny Dryw in Llan Elian; and Llanvibangel Tre'r Bardd;
but in no place fuch a ikeleton, fuch a regular and orderly pofition of
the remains and ruins of Druidifm, as I have obferved and picked up in
the parifh of Llanidan and its neighbouring townfhips.

I muft own that fome of thefe names might with fome colour and
likelihood be afcribed to other caufes than what I have here affigned
them ;• as Trev-ir-wydd might be fo called from Merioydd-bert, who was
indeed fome time tenant of that land ; and Caer-Edris alfo might have
its name from /Eneas ap Edris, who was free tenant, there likewife.
But for all this, whoever confiders how ufual it was with the Britons
to give names to their children from the names of certain places, to
which they had fome particular relation, as Tegyd, Teganwy $ &c. will
find reafon to believe, that thefe names were rather conferred on them
on that account, than that thofe places fhould be fo called from the
perfons that bore thofe names ; efpecially fince it is evident that other
places of the names I now mentioned in this diftridt were very ancient
as Moel-Edris> Cader-Idris or Edris; and there is a place in the parifh
of Llanddeniolen in Caernarvonfhire called Caer-irwydd, probably on the
fame account.

Secondly, From the names I fliall defcend to the things themfelves;
and of thefe I may fay there are fuch too, as that there are hardly any
particulars of note to be accounted for in their whole adminiftration
and worfhip, but one may, in the places I mention, (hew fome tokens
and footfteps of every point of the relations of Caefar, Tacitus, and
others.

I will


86 MONA &NTIQJJA RE3TAURATA.

I will here begin with the whole paflage of Tacitus in relation to
this ifland, and the inhabitants of it. He fays, when Suetonius's army,
eroding that arm of the fea which divides this ifland from the land ad-
joining, had got near the fhore on the ifland's fide, Stabat pro litore
diver/a acies. I take his meaning to be, that there flood nigh the fhore
the mingled Britons, natives and foreigners, to oppofe the invaders
landing. Now in that place where it is traditionally reported thefe Ro-
mans landed, about a bow-fhot from the water* fide, is a large field called
to this day Maes Mawr Gad, or as fojne call it, Maes Hir Gad, viz.
€€ The great or the long army's field ;" from which to the fhore of the
xiver Menai there yet appear fome remains of little works and entrench-
ments. A little to the Eaft of that, juft on the fhore, there is a place
Called the Rbiedd, i. e. Nobilium Jiatio, " the chief mens poftj" on which
place the other day were taken up from under a (tone near the fea-fhore
a parcel of Britiih * weapons, a fort of thofe jacula amentata, or fuch
like (as appears probable from their loop-holes and fockets) in ufe
among the ancients. See plate II. fig. 2.

* Thefe brafs or copper weapons are frequently found in the Hie of Anglefey, as indeed they
aTe in all Wales, as well as in England ; which implies, whether Roman or Britiih, that they were
very common and of general ufe with one or both of thefe people. That they were chuTels to
cut and model (tones, though contended for by fome learned men, I cannot aiTent to : ^and what
virtue foever thefe may imagine the ancients confidered in that metal, fure it is that it is utterly
unfit for that purpofe, by being of too lax and foft a texture, and its parts not ftiff and rigid
.enough to take a hardening as fteel and iron will do ; neither can it be (aid that brafs was harder
then than now, or thut they had an art of tempering it which is now loft, becaufe the very metal
itfelf remaining in thefe hatchets, plainly (hews the contrary ; many of them being rather copper
than brafs, which is a foftcr metal.

I have feen feveral of them, and one I have in my own pofleflion, which is frefti and (hews no
tokens of being much ufed. It has no hollow in the back part as others have, but a blunt tail
deprefled on each fide, fitted to fatten fomething to it : It is fouc inches and a half long, and
two and a half broad at the edge. In wood perhaps fomething might be done with it, but it is
far too foft to (lice and batter any hard ftones. I have often thought that if they gave this tool
a good edge, fattened one end of a twifted thong or ftrap to the loop- part, and the other end,
like a nail, to the head of a lance or a long ftaff, accommodating the hollow part or focket with
a ftern or tail of long fpread feathers, or fome light thin plate or leather fly-back, like that of a
weather-cock, fet parallel to the edge of the weapon, to balance and guide the motion of it, to
: fall always like an arrow or a winged dart, on its point and edge, and managed with a ttrong '
arm, at the ttrap's length, and well laid on, it would be capable, by quick repeated ftrokes, of
doing considerable damage and execution. Now that the ancient Britons, in their driving cha-
riots, or in any other pofture of fighting, amidtt (howers of darts, did ufe thefe fling-hatchets, if
I may fo call them (which, with a dexterous arm, from one blow given, would quickly return to
give another) to annoy and gaul their approaching enemy, is more than I will pretend to fay ;
• only, that as thefe are very capable of bein£ made ufe of in that manner, fo it is prefumed their
being really ufed fo will have leave to pafs with others, as no unreafonable conje&ure ; and more
than conjecture we have little now to affirm of the ancient Britiih fighting ; much lefs will I (ay
that this was the only ufe they made of this ready tool, it being perhaps ferviceable in many others,
in their military expeditions.

Next,


MONA ANTIQJtfA RESTAURATA. fl 7

Next, as Tacitus fays they had, meaning the Britons; huge facri-
ficing fires near at hand, into which they were thrown by the conquer-
ing Romans i fo now on that very fpot, where it is fuppofed the bat-
tle was, there appears a great fquare Tumulus made up of earth and
ftones. Nay, I have been an eye-witnefs of a great quantity of allies
intermixed with pieces of bones taken out of the ground a yard deep not
far from this place, with a fmall copper-coin of Claudius, Caefar, taken
up very frefh and undecayed-

Lastly, He fays,, excifique Luci favis fuperftitionibus facri. i. e.
They had their groves,* the till then infeparable concomitants of the
Druidifh priefthood,, which the facrilegious Romans immediately cut
down and demolifhed^ And to this day here are places retaining the an-
cient name of Llwynau or groves, as * Llwyn Llwyd, 'f Llwyn Moel^
Llwyn On, % Llwyn Ogan, and Llwyn y Coed } in or near every one of
which may be remarked fome remains of Druidifh worfrup ; either
broken altars, pillars, or remains of a Carnedd* And no doubt there-
were many more groves, whofe names are loft and quite forgotten.

It being now made fomewhat apparent on the evidences produced,,
that the chief Druidical refidence was in the Ifle of Mona, and particu-
larly in and about the place now called Llanidan pari ft ; it may then be
expedted that that place of all the ifland* muft be at that time moil plen-
tifully adorned with variety of formed groves, containing in theov
mounts, pillars, heaps, altars, and other appurtenances of their fuper-
ftitious wor(hip~ And that although the groves furrounding them be
now quite gone and perifhed, and the ancient names of them be utterly
loft, yet it may be juftly expedted that many of the more lafting erections
(on the fuppofall offer) fhould remain there, as (landing monuments of
their long forgotten fuperannuated ufes. And indeed in that refpeft
there are of fuch enough to anfwer the end, and to give fufficient fatif—
faction to a juft and reafonable enquirer*

But I muft confefs, that although I have found and obferved many
% foch remains in and about the parifli of Llanidan > yet it is too difficult
a tafk for me to adjuft and put them fo together, as to be able to fettle
" a right determinate judgment of the true ufes of them ; which I am far'
from pretending to do. Neither after fo long an oblivion do I think it
likely to be done by any. Only this I fhall prefume upon, that if I give
a reafonable account of thofe remains, in relation to thofe ancient ufes

* BfytCtUL -J- . Plat nt<wjdd% £ Ogau vtl Dir-6gan t Le, Vatkinium><vtl Augurium


88 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

of them difcovcrablc in authors of antiquity, and partly before-men-
tioned, I (hall perhaps contribute fome light to that point of hiftory v
fo far as thefe evidences will extend ; and not difpleafe thdfe who out of
a juft affe&ion to the antiquities of their native country, are willing to
take up with coherent probabilities and reafonable gucfles, where more
clear and undoubted certainties and hiflorical evidences are altogether
wanting and filent in the matter*

First, Since it is fufficiently evinced that the Druidical feat and re-
fidence was in the Ifle of Mofia ; and fince thofe aqcient betokening
names and evidences, do principally determine and fix it in this territo-
ry ; it will be then expeded that I (hew fome extant remains, in this
place, of their habitation and other folemnities of their facred office and
authority ; which I (hall attempt to do by prefenting to my reader's view
the particulars following.

It is fcarce to be doubted, but that the head Druid, agreeable to his
dignity and character, had his capital feat ormanfion, furpafiing all
others of the inferior orders and focieties in what was then reckoned
magnificence and grandeur. But the Britifh buildings being at that
time generally of timber, except- their ground-works and foundations,
which were of ftone and entrenched earth; all we can now trace of thofe
palaces and greater ftrudtures muft be from what are left remaining and
vifible of thofe ground-plots and foundations. And by this way of
fearch we are diredted to obferve, in this mentioned territory, even in
the middle of the place called the Druids-Town, on a fair extended
plain, a raifed fquare of about fifty paces over, doubly entrenched, and
moated round ; and fo fituated, that the river Breint might be, and
probably was, brought in to fill the ditches of it, which were very deep,
and are now all choaked up with mud. The innermoft banks of the
entrenchment are yet of fome height, the angles a little elevated and
rounded. The area or green plot within the banks are very even and
Jevel, (hewing as if it had been the ground-floor of an eredted wooden
palace, having near the middle of it the foundation of a round tower of
ftone or flair-cafe. That this was no warlike entrenchment is demon-
ftrable from its fituation, it being fo difadvantageoufly (heightened on
each fide by rifing grounds fo nearly commanding, that it could afford
no defence. And that it had a grove of oak fometime furrounding it
(which may be one argument that it was a Druidical ftrudnre) the very
mud taken out of the ditches of it difcovers ; which near the bottom of
the ditch feems to be all one mafs of rotten oak-leaves : the whole plain

8 with


./%» JZ71


MONA AttTIQUA RESTAUR AT A- fy

♦with the entrenched foundation, called now Caer-kh* is reprefented in
plate III. fig. i.

Near this lafKmsntioned place, on a piece of ground called < Trev r 'wry %
there are a, great many -circular ftone-foorrclattons on the fide of the? ri-
*ver Breint. And alfo on another fpot of ground hard by, called Tan
-ben y Cevn f there are wo large quadrangles lying almoft contiguous
*on ore fide *. Their ftone-foundations, which were very thick,
•appear of foroe height above ground. In each of thefe fquares there
are feveral vety large circular foundations, formerly of great ftreftgth
and capacity, far furpaffing the ordinary Britifh ruins* which are not un-
likely to be the remains of fome extraordinary British building in that
•townfhip. I give only their form, but am not exa& in their fituation,
which is of no great moment.

The chief Druid ! s principal feat and manfion being fuppofed to be
in this precindt* we may alfo exped to find here fome remains of hjs
,great temple and fupreme tribunal, where we are told were adted the
higheft performances of his fkered office. And herein indeed we {hall
^not be far to feek. For in the other end of this townfhip of Trer
X)ryw> wherein all thefe ruins already mentioned are, there firft appears
-a large cirque or theatre, raifed up of earth and ftones to a great height,
refembling a horfe-fhoe, opening directly to the Weft, upon an eyen
fair fpot of ground* Secondly, about a furlong farther, diredly Weft
«of this round bank, there appear the remains of a ring or coronet of
very large eredted columns or ftone-pillars ; three whereof are yet Hand-
ing, together with the ftump of a fourth, broken a little belbw the
middle 5 by the pofition and diftances of which, one may eafily calcu-
late their number and order to have been eight or nine great pillar-
ftoncs, pitched in a circle about an included area of about twelve or
(fourteen yards diameter ; both thefe and the cirque laft mentioned be-
ing conceived to lie included within one great grove, exhibit the repre-
sentation in plate IV. fig. u

The round cirque or fuppofed theatre at the Eaft-end is all made of .
earth and ftones, carried and heaped there to form the bank; for taken
up there they were not, becaufe the bottom within and without lies level
with the furface of the ground on which it is raifed. It is within the
circumvallation about twenty paces over, and the banks, wTiere whole
and unbroken, above five yards perpendicular height.

• Sec plate III. fig. 2 and 3.

N It


?o MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

It is called Bryn-Gwyn or Brein-Gwyn, i. c. " the fupreme or royal
tribunal ;" Brein or Breiniol fignifying in the British, fupreme or royal ;
and Cwyn, properly fuit or adion, and metaphorically court or tribu-
nal. And fuch the place rauft have been, wherever it was, in which
a fupreme judge gave laws to a whole nation. No one can reafbnably
imagine it to be properly Bryn-Gwyn 9 i. c. €€ a white hillock " it be-
ing a low fituation, and the foil about it, which fometimes denomi-
nates places, being not of a white but of a reddijh completion ; neither
is there any hillock of that name near it, from which it might be fo
called.

And now though this place, and the ancient name and celebrity of
it be altogether forgotten, and quite out of mind ; yet the compofi-
tion of the name taken from Britifli etymons, Brein and Cwyn, and its
pofition fo near the places which bear the names of all the Druidical
orders, may well juftify the conjecture of its having been once the
fupreme confiftory of the Druidifli administration. And for a farther
confirmation of this particular, we may yet obferve that the ancient
ufe and meaning of that name was not altogether fo forgotten, but
that our language (as names and words of general concernment in any
language will not eafily be forgotten) has till of late preferred fome
footfteps of it. The Britifli people, it feems, having (till continued to
apply the name of Brein-Gwyn to fuch places as were of fupreme and
fovereign judicature, wherever they happened to be ; as appears by
the remains of fome, both of our late and ancient Britifh poets, who
took the word Bryn-Gwyn in that acceptation, always applying it to
fome fupreme tribunal.

Pan fo tri Brenhin

Ar Orfedd y Bryn Gwyn

Gwynjyd y Rhian.

Taliefin.

Here Gorfedd y Bryn Gwyn is plainly applied by Taliejin, or fome
other ancient poet, to a royal throne or tribunal. Neither is it un-
likely but that Taliejin, or whoever was author of that ancient ode,
might take the word in its Druidifli acceptation, as having it in that
fenfe from more ancient records and tradition, where it was applied in
the wild prophetic way to any fovereign tribunal. And fo I find it was
by the later poets, viz.

• Tr


MONA ANTIQJLTA RESTAURrATA. 91

Tr budd gwrol, bardd gorwyllt,
leigion eiff y Werddon wyllt
Daw eilwaith oi daitb i dir
(Tr Bryn gwyn braw jowngirj
JCr budd warcberir ar byn
Braw anghofyn y Bryn gwyn.

Dafydd Lhwyd ap Llewelyn,
ynghowydd yr Wylan.

In this Cowydd of the poet, the word Bryn gwyn is undoubtedly ap-
plied to the great council of the nation. But to this purpofe moft
plain is that of AddaFrds; who almoft graphically defcribes the parlia-
ment-houfe or Weftminfter-Hall by the name of Bryn gwyn. Both he
and the laft-mentioned poet threatening Henry the Fourth with I know
not what Briton, to poflefs himfelf of the Britifh fceptre, thus defcribes
his motion, viz.

Ac yngbajtell y * Follallt yr ymguddia
Tn Hwnjlo Hetb y bydd cadarna
Ac yn Siring Crofs yr ymgadarnbd
I Jynd tr Bryn gwyn i gael eijieddfa.

Adda Fr&.

In the firft of thefe poets we may obfcrve it called Gorfedd y Bryn
gwyn 1 Gorfedd always denoting a tribunal or judicature ; and in the fe-
cond, the braw angbofznd brawjowngir implying a great condensation,
muft alfo imply a great aflembly. But the lad paflage is more plaia
ftill, where the poet defcribing the motions of his feigned conqueror,
brings him through Hounflow-Heath to Charing-Crofs, and thence tr
Bryn gwyn i gael eijteddfa, viz. to the great aflembly or the parliament-
houfe at Weftminfter, where the throne or place of inauguration then
only was. It is true, Mr. Camden fays the Britons anciently called the
Tower of London by the name of Bryn gwyn $ but the flate aflemblies
being in thofe ancient times there kept, they might on the fame reafon
then call it by that name.

Thefe things being premifed, Iihall now venture to reprefent this
great druidical grove or temple, as it then confided, or at lead might
be conceived to confift, of a cirque, carnedd> columns, and altars, an4

• r ftbft. qu, - -*

N 2 furroundcd


*j*


92 MONA ANTIQJL T A RE8TAURATA.

furrounded with nquercetwn or a round enclfcfement of tall and. fpcead*-
ing oak, in the manner defcribed in plate IV. fig. 2.

That this great grove or temple was exactly as I reprefent it, no one-
will expe<ft I (hould pofitlvcly atfirm. For in things of that remote dif-
tance and ambiguity* a fbber guefs> grounded on probability of circum—
fiances and a juft coherence of things, muft be allowed to determine and
fix particulars. When we fuivey the fcattered ruins of a royal palace,
may not one adjuft the parts of it, and take the freedom to reprefent a&
probable idea of the whole ? This is all I attempt in this particular.
Firft, the cirque or theatre, at the one end,, the name and pofilion of
it, gives me warrant to determine the ufe. Secondly, the Carnedd in-
the middle, the great quantities of ftones there, now fcattered into
hedges and applied to other ufes $, and having obferved many other
^Carnedds fo difpofed, induced me to take them alfo to have been one..
Thirdly, the great {landing columns at? the weft end, three of then*
whole and entire, and the ftump.of a fourth taken. notice of and adjufted
to the reft, will difcover to any one the pofition and range of them to*
be fomewhat above a third of a. circle* in a regular order ; who by a
view of them* letting his fancy fupply the wajit of thofe that have been,
broken or carried away, and of fuch as lye in pieces ftragling there,, with
imagwary ones, will ealily find that the whole fet of them,, when {land-
ings made a ring or coronet of eight or nine pillars,, with a large area-
m the middle. Fourthly, the collateral pillars j four of them {landing,
as Ldefcribed them, but of the other four next the cirque there is but.
one now ftanding, to which indeed for coherence fake I took the- liberty,
to add three attendants to anfwer their oppofite.ones : And truly who-
ever confidcrs the kind and quality of thefe ftones, being planks of lime-^
ftone eaftly diflblved and broken, will foon judge that there were more;
once eredled there ; and therefore what I have added to the now {land-
ing columns was (ex pede berculem) merely for coherence iake, to pur-
foe the order the reft were in, and to reprefent the complete idea of
what without it would be irregular and defective. Fifthly, for giving
them altars, the Dfcuidical difcipline was my warrant. And fiace I
was aflured they had altars, I could not more fitly place them than be*
tween their columns. Laftly, and the impaling of all within- a round
quercetum or grove of oak, the nearnefs of the parts to one another,, and
the cbngruity of « the whole in faeh a form (for ibrely if thefe beathenijk
priefts ufed groves, of oak as fepts and enclofements about all their cele-
brated and facrcd places, as Pliny and others aflure us they did, nature

3 itfelf


_F/afrW.


j%&v.


MONA ANTTIQJJA RESTAURAT^t ^

itfelf would didfcate to them to form and model them in tha moft auguffc
and becoming manner) perfuaded me to it.

I (hall only add, that at or near thefe mentioned monuments have been*
taken up fome remains of antiquity * which r being well confidered, will
I preftrme fomewhat favour, if not add confirmation to, the accounts I
hare here given of them.

Near the mentioned quadrangle at Caer-lkb r I have been credibly in-
formed there have been taken up fome years paft, great copper-clafpfr
Uke door-hinges, all rufty, out 4>f one of the ditches furrounding.
it. And not far from that, among the circular foundations that are in
great numbers there* a curious enamelled copper-piece, knotted with
various colours* of the bignefs of a milled half crown, with apeduncu-
lus or little fqpjare foot to it on one fide. At the round cirque at Bryn
Gwyn- was taken up, the other day, a * medalium of our Saviour, with;
the figure of his head and face on the one fide, exatfly anfwering the
defcription given of him by Publius Lentutos ; and on the reverfe, a fair
Hebrew fuperfcription bearing this purport, viz. "This is Jesus Christ
the Reconciler :" of which fee more in the Addenda. The dots in one
•f the letters reprefent a hole which was at that place fretted through it.

In the other townfhips likewife, and on the borders of them, there
are to be feen either ftanding or thrown down, divers monuments of
Druidifh worfhip* There is a pretty Cromlech ftanding at the top of a.
hillock at Bodowyr r fig. 2. There is alfo on arifing part of the ground,
there, the high-way leading through it, the remains of a fmall cirque,,
fig. 3. And on another part of the ground there appear the marks of &
Garmdd,. the Hones of which in. times paft have been difpofed of into
walls and buildings.

There are near Llyjlew Barn, in the fame townfhip, the tokens o£
a Carneddi and a well-fhaped f pillar of great length, thrown flat oiv
the ground. There is alfo a fhapely Cromlech on the lands of Blocbty
io the townfhip of Tre'r Beirdd* now thrown down and lying flat on itff
fcipporters, fig. 2* And not far from this kft- mentioned, there appears*
another demoliftied Cromlech, now called Carreg-y-frdn, which feemS
to have been a double one; the two larger incumbent flat floras, With
many leffer fupporters lying diforderly, leaning on one another, fig* 3. •

There are alfo the ruins dE a frfcall Cromlech not far from the laft-
mentioned at a place called Barras. A large demoliihed one at Tyddyn

• See plate V. fig. i#. f See plate VL %. t.

Cafar>


94 MONA ANT IQU A RESTAUR AT A.

Cafar, in the parifli of Llan Edwen. Another ruined one at RbSsy Cer-
rig, in Llanddetniel parifh. The remains of one nzzxCarregWydrin. There
are alfo up and down many remains of pillars and ereded columns in all
theie precin&s ; fome (ingle, and fome ranged in circles ; mod of them
broken and cad down, probably by the conquering Romans, or by the
zeal of fucceeding Chriftians; to both of whom the vile cuftoms of the
Druidifh priefts, and the appurtenances of their, barbarities, were equally
hateful.

But of fuch Cromkcbe as remain yet undemolifhed, there is but one be-
fides that at Bodowyr to be feen in all thefe precinds ; and that a very
large one, before mentioned, (landing near Plds newydd, formerly Llwyn
MoeI 9 where it is probable one of their larger groves was. It is a dou-
ble * Cromlech, a larger and a fmaller contiguous together. , There is alfo
at Plds newydd wood one of the largeft Carnedds in the Ifle of Anglefey ;
yet fcarce difcerned and di(lingui(hed from a mount of earth, the (lones
being overgrown with earth and mofs, and great trees growing thick
upon it. It lies in a dry bottom, without any pillars now (landing by
it, fig. 2. There are alfo in Llanddetniel parifh, at a place called formerly
Llwyn Llwyd y now Bryn Kelli, the remains of two Carnedds, within a
few paces of one another; the one, fig. 3. is fomewhat broken and pitted
into on one fide, where the (lones have been carried away ; the other,
fig. 4. having had its (lones almoft all taken away into walls and build-
ings, with two (landing columns eredled between them.

There are alfo great numbers of (ingle columns up and down the fields
in this part of the ifland; fome of large fize, and fome of letter, which I
pafs by. But one thing I mud take notice of, which is fomething re-
markable, or at lead fuch as I never obferved before : and that is, on the
top of a riling ground near Bodlew in the parifh of Llanddetniel, a deep ex-
cavated area, of confiderable length and breadth, very flat and level at
the bottom, of the form of a pear, in piano, edged about with (lones and
a bank of earth ; and the entrance into it is in the fmaller narrow end : it
is commonly called Hen Fonwent, having the ruins of a chapel in the
middle called Capel Cadwaladr, fig. 5.

The building in the middle of the plot feems by the fituation
and form of it to have been a Chriftian oratory; the name, viz. Capel
Cadwaladr attefting the fame. But what the place was anciently I
know not-

• Ste plate VII. fig.t.

It


P*t;?t* * )4.


***~ < -~- "^" ;7T « A


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 95

It is a matter of aftonifhment to fome people, how thefe mighty ftones,
fome of them ten, twenty, or thirty ton weight, could be carried in
thofe rude times fo great a way, and raifed up to the height they are,
either fingly (landing, as our columns ; or leaning upon fupporters, as our
Cromlecbe. But the wonder will foon vanifh, if we confider that wheel
and pully- engines were invented in the earlieft ages of the world ; and
that the ufe of the lever is as ancient as that of building. With
which levers, by the helps of counterpoising weights at one end, and
the other end fixed and placed under thofe ftones upon fitted fu la-
ments, they might heave up the greateft of them to a confiderable ,
height with great eafe and fecurity. The almoft incredible things
which antiquity performed of this fort, have been defervedly the won*
der of fucceeding ages ; and what the right application and practice of
mechanic knowledge is able to efFed of this kind r may be as juftly
the wonder of this, to any who confiders not the extent and efficacy of
thofe mechanical powers. See Biihop Wilkins's book on that fubjedh
And our anceftors here having early communication with the Egyp-
tians and Phoenicians, thofe great matters in that knowledge (witnefs
the pyramids and obelifks of the one, and the great architecture of the
other) that they fhould arrive to fome degree of that knowledge is no
hard thing to imagine. I prefume it will not be unacceptable if I fub-
join here a mechanical demonftration of the railing and eredting of fome
of our largeft ftone-monuments by the application and practice of thofe
powers.

The powers of the lever and inclined plane, being fome of the
firft things underftood by mankind in the ufe of building, it may be
well conceived, that our firft anceftors made ufe of them. And in or*
der to eredl thofe prodigious monuments, we may imagine they chofe
where they found, or made where fuch were not ready to their hands,
fmall aggeres or mounts of firm and folid earth, for an inclined plane,
flatted and levelled at top ; up the Hoping fides of which, they might
with great wooden levers upon fixed fulciments, and with ballances at
the ends of them to receive into them proportionable weights and coun-
terpoifes, and with hands enough to guide and manage the engines; I
fay, they might that way, by little and little, heave and roll up thofe
ftones they intended to ereft, to the top of the hillock; where laying
them along, they might dig holes in that earth, at the end of every ftone
intended for a column or fupporter, the depth of which holes were to
.be equal to the length of the ftones ; and then (which was eafily done)

8 let


9* MOKA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

let flip the {tones into thefc holes ftreight on end ; which ftones fo funk
and well clofed about with earth, and the tops of theft appearing level
to the top of the mount, on which the other flat ftones lay ; it was only
placing thoie incumbent flat ft ones' upon the tops of the fuppoiters,
duly poifed and fattened, and taking away the earth from between them
alraoft to the bottom of the iupporters * then there appeared what wo
now call Stonebenge, Ro/Irici 9 and our Cromlech j and where they lay
po incumbent ftones, our (landing columns and pillars. This being
the eafieft and moil natural way we can imagine for the ere&ing of
them, we may probably conclude it was fo done.

Hitherto having reprefented the ftate and tranfoftions of this ifland
under the command and government of the ancient Druids, and given
Ibme accounts of their eftabliflament, authority and religion; I come
now to confider how thefe religious Jbcieties came to be diflblved and
rooted out of the ifland by the conquering Romans, under whole
iceptre it continued fome hundreds of years. In which time the light
of the gofpel plentifully fhined upon it ; its darkuefies and (hades of er-
ror, together with its heathenilh groves and barbarities, being by
thefe grand inftruments of Providence, the Romans, utterly razed out
and exterminated*

Wherefore the Druidifli government being now a breaking and ap-
proaching to its period (to aHume the Roman part of the hiftory of this
ifland) we have not much more of recorded matter of fad to build
upon, than what we have out of Cornelius Tacitus ; which indeed is
brief enough, but, according to the charaiSter of that writer, very
pithy and comprehenflve ; and may be well relied upon as an Riftorical
. truth. He being himfelf, fome while after things were tranfa&ing here,
Oi>ue/lor in Belgium, could from thence eafily inform himfelf of all he has
fet (jown in writing, by fuch perfon6 as had been eye-witnefles of the
matter ; which he might take up and carefully put in his notes from
the relation of fuch as he might fee pafs by in their way to Rome, who
had been upon the place, and feen all that he has recorded of it. And
we have rcafon to think that our author had a more than ordinary eye
upon the place, and took the more exa& and particular account of it
from fuch relations, becaufe it added fo much to the fame of his much
admired father-in-law Julius Agricola, who completed the conqueft
of this ifland.

He tells us # that in the fucceffive governments of P. Oftorius, Didius,
apd Ver^nnius, Claudius's lieutenants in Britain, after the defeat of Ca-

ra&acus't


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 97

Ta£lacus*s party, and fending him prifoner to Rome, the Ordovices, or
North-Wales men made frequent and bufy attempts to (hake off the
gauling yoke of a fevere and unaccuftomed fubjedtion. And it feems
the Ifle of Mona being near at hand, and always a place of refuge, and
at that time of ftrength and fafety to the poor harrafled Britons ; many
of the better fort of them retreated thither with what of their effe&s and:
fubftance they could carry with them, to be themfelves in more fafety,
and at liberty to confult their friends, and to determine what mcafures
were to be taken to recover their loft eftates and pofTeffions. Here no
doubt they took care to convey what was for military ufe and fervice,
and were ever ready from hence to help their friends on occafion with
their beft fupplies of council and affiftance. The truth of which might
be that which moved the pen of the hiflorian to call it, Infulam xncolis*
yalidam & perfugarum receptaculum, viz. " the ifle of heroes, and the
refuge of the diftrefTed who fled into it."

This very thing, with the exceeding wealth of the place, we may
well conceive, provoked the greedy Romans to fall on the mufes feat,
and to ufe extraordinary efforts to feize and ravifh it, with the reft of
the Ordovican territories. At this time appears Suetonius Paulinus, go-
vernor of Britain, a man of wife condudt and refolution. He plainly
faw there was no quelling and keeping down the reftlefs fpirits of thefe
bold and daring Ordovices, while this ifland, the very fountain of their
life and courage, remained untouched; and therefore he haftes to fet
things in order in the provinces, and immediately attacks thefe merx
with a refolute army on the brink of the river Menai. While this briflc
and refolute general was getting ready a fmall fleet of plank- boats, as
Tacitus defcribes them, to waft his infantry over ; thefe cunning Druids,
we may imagine, were as bufy on the other fide in providing them-
felves fuch boats and corraghs as they then ufed, to be at hand, if ne->
cefiity required, to carry them over to the ifle of Man or to Ireland,
their next places of fafety.

Here we muft not think too mean of our Rritifh governors, that they
turned their backs* before they faw the face, or could difcern the frowns

* Anglefcy feems to have had three names given to it by antiquity ; viz. Tnys Fox, from its filia-
tion ; Tnys Dowyll, from its groves ; Tnys *y CeJeirn, from its heroes, or its powerful and cele-
brated priefts and Druids. So that it is proverbiafl with us to this day to fay, when any thing
appears wonderful or Angularly remarkable, Ni bn trioedy fatb betb yn ynys y CeJeim ; viz. «* Ne-
ver was the like In the ifle of the heroes/ 9 which, according to Plutarch, -muft be the Ifle of
Anglefey.

O and


$8 MONA ANTIQJUA RESTAURATA.

and menaces of the enemy. No, that would too much difhearten the
zealous multitude, who had taken their laft fan&uary under the power-
ful charms of their holy rites and invocations. That motive might pre-
vail with thefe unwarlike leaders to (lay a while, to try the event of
things, and to fee what the infernal powers would do in defence of
their Sacraria, their groves, idols and altars. And therefore we may
believe that they ftood to it, and marflialled their men in their beft ar-
ray to ftand the brunt, while they were preparing their dreadful artil-
lery of curfes and execrations. In this order we may conceive they
came, and encamped themfelves in that place before- mentioned, to
watch the enemies motion, and to make what refinance they could in
cafe they landed.

Here was an appearance, by what * Tacitus reports of them, able
to have given a much greater (hock to the adventuring Romans in their
landing, than we find it did. But we muft not expedt them here to
a& as true Britons, but rather as a befotted crew (though many of
them perhaps of the prime Ordovican gentry) which had wholly con-
figned themfelves over to the guidance and conduft of infatuated tnonkilh
Druidsj who, it is like, made them believe, that the deities of that fa-
cred place, once well pacified, and engaged by repeated oblations and
facrifices even of their beft things and deareft relations, would be highly
concerned to ftand by them, to protect their perfons, to fight their bat-
tles, and to exert fomething more than human means, in defending
that facred ground and thofe holy things from the impure hands and
polluting feet of thefe hateful mifcreants.

And therefore for fome days, while the Roman general was fitting
out his little armado, and expe&ing tide and feafon for his fwimming
cavalry, we can expedl in this Ifle of Mona nothing but loud invoca-
tions and curfes $ and difmal fcreams of dying viftims, ccchoing one
another from the hollow refounding groves : in every corner, altars
fmoaking with the horrid miferable burnings of the bodies of men, wo-
men, and children 5 of rogues, profligates, and captives. — — Crepi-
tant que preces, alt aria fumant : when prefently the Romans make to the
boats, put in their foot, and fwim their horde at a convenient tide with-
out the lead (lop or opposition.

Lo here the unlucky fruit of befotted bigotry ! The Britons if well
difciplined might have bitterly annoyed the difordercd Romans at their

• Cornelius Tacitus, Annal. lib.. 14*-


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 99

firft landing; But what did they do? Stabat pro liter e droerfa acies*
fays Tacitus. Shall I render it, " They fought for the fhore and their
country ?" Or rather, u They ftood ftill," expecting, belike, the ar-
tillery of the'Druidical curfes to make greater execution on the daring
aflailants, than the fharpeft of their Britifh darts and weapons. And
in this indeed they were not quite out ; for it was bravely acknowledged
by the Romans, that the very fight of their road ceremony, ftupified
the Roman foldiers more than all the blows they received from their
unfteady mifguided enemies : JJt quqfi barentibus tncmbris % immobile
corpus vulueribus praberent, as the hiflorian words it ; i. e. they (mean-
ing the Romans) flood alfo flock ftill, and fixing their eyes on the fur-
prizing ftrangenefs of the encounter, expofed their bodies for fome time
to be the open unguarded mark of the enemies fury ; till their a&ive
general at laft with fome paflion called them on, to drive away that
madded foolifh multitude, that with vain imprecations and filly geftures
thought to put a flop to the progrefs of thofe arms, which by good
manhood and difcipline had already conquered the greateft part of the
then known world.

Now the enraged Romans having got to land, and the conquering
fword having taken its fill of Britifh blood, thefe giddy Druids who
durft not engage in, but flood without the array of battle — Druifaque
circum, as Tacitus remarks upon them— feeing their facrifices and ob-
lations, on which they moft depended, prove ineffectual on thefe fear-
lefs Romans, nimbly fKpt away, we may fuppofe, to their woods and
coveits, leaving their people to be raiferahly cut down and flaughtered
by the advancing Romans ; Infer unt Jigna, fiernuntque obvios & igni Jut
involvunt, are Tacitus's words, " who without pity or moderation
hacked and hewed down on all fides the unfortunate Britons, augment-
ing the flame of their unhappy facrifices with the fuel of their flain and
wounded bodies."

As for the place of their landing, and of their routing this religious
army, we have no exadt account of it. But there are probable grounds
to conclude that it was near Portbamel, betwixt a place called Pivll y
fuweb and Llanidan. For Tacitus fays that the horfe vadofecuti — fwam
it at the ford : And that ford or (hallow is juft under Llanidan. Anfl
it feems their foot landed in their flat-bottomed veflels near the faid
Pwll y fuweb 5 where there is a place called Pant yr yfcraphie to this
day; the Romans calling fuch boats Scapba, and we from them
Tfcrapbie, with an addition of one letter, as is.ufual in thefe changes.

O 2 And


ioo MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA,

And indeed the mount or Tumulus in one of the fields adjoining, about
three bows (hot from the fea, feems to be the place of that great facri T
fice : whence the Druids took up fircbraads in their hands, brandishing-
them like furies about the army ; and where the Romans involved the
taken and flain Britons in the devouring flames of their own facrifice.

Now when the prevailing Romans had reaped the fruits of conqueft,.
and the retreating Druids, the heads of them who had efcaped untaken
in the flight, had flipped to fea, leaving the reft of their crew to fculk.
and fliift for themfelves j we may conceive that the Romans' next work
was to demolish and proftitute under their infulting feet their moft facred:
things and places, then devoted to moft grofs inhuman barbarities :
And when that was effected, to fix and fettle a garrifon over the fepa-
rate diftri&s and townfliips of the ifland.. Pnefidium imj>ofuit vJcis, as*
the hiftorian renders it.

There are the ruins of two or three fmall Britiffi towns, near this
jplace of battle : one near Bryn fienkyn, called Hendre; another on the
top of Bryn Givydryn, called Caer Ldrisi and the third on the top oP
a bill near Portiamel houfe, whofe name is loft ; which- in all likelihood
were all then demolished*. In one of thefe, namely, Caer Idris, on the
top of Givy dry n-hill 9 it is probable the Romans built a fort (it being a:
place of Strength,, and confpicuous to the whole ifland) to plant in a.
garrifon tp fecure themfelves and eftablifh their conqueft.

Thefe conquering Romans mattering the ifle, and fetting fome where
a garrifon, as Tacitus plainly tells us, there feems none likelier than
this ; for it is a Roman work, of a half moon form, guarded by a treble:
wall, and defended on the back by a precipice. It feems to have been
built on the ruins of one of thofe Britifh towns ; for fome of the round
foundations appear yet about the fkirts of it. It was a well fortified
place and well fituated, in the fight of a great part of the ifland, to keep*
them in awe and hold them in due fubjedtion and obedience. See figure
6. in plate VII..

But although it was conveniently fituated and ftrongty fortified at that'
time, yet it feems it did not continue long undemolifhed by the native
Britons ; who,, upon a fiidden turn of affairs in a fhort time after, quitted
their fubjeftion and returned to their former liberty and pofleflions.

For Suetonius Paulinus the Roman general, before he had finiflied,
the abfolute conqueft of this ifland, and hunted out the fcul king Druids,
that remained from their holes and receptacles, was fuddenly recalled
to aflift the Veterans and Roman garrifons at Verulam, London and
7 Camelodunum ; ;


B LemtA 6F*etJb*aj&$ .Feel,


J\W *QQ<


Ji.The even side % o paces (


<* *., *^frW&Sft^&XL**


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. ior

Catnehdunum ; who were at that time in very great and apparent danger
from a general revolt of the Britons of thofe provinces.

Now the general being thus in hafte called away, and the affairs of
the ifland being yet crude and not digefted into any (landing order and
regularity at his quitting of it ; it may now become a queftion, whe-
ther he left any forces in his new prafidium to keep things in a tolera-
ble order, till a more favourable opportunity would prefent itfelf to
fettle and complete the conqueft. It is moft likely he did npt leave any;:
for the hartafled Britons, being at laft overcome with moft unfupportaf
ble injuries and provoking hardfhips, made at this jundture ftrong and
violent (hakings and convulfions in the very heart and bowels of the
inland provinces, which muft oblige this wary foldier to contradt his
whole ftrength to fecure the main ftake ; and therefore it is moft pro-
bable, that he then took up every where (fo great a flaughter having
been made in thofe provinces of the Veteran Romans) the few Cohorts
and Legionaries he had, whom in that cafe he could only truft, and with
them made a fpeedy march to quench the then open flame of a great
and terrible rebellion.

In this interim, the Roman forces being all gone from the ifland, or
if any were left, they were here as in a pound, and would be foon
knocked on the head ; the lurking Druids r upon that welcome funfhine
after fo terrible a ftorm, might fafely peep out ; and forfaking their
dens and coverts might come once more in view to contemplate the fate
of the pkee, and to put their heads together to concert the beft and
fitted meafures to difpofe and order themfelves and their affairs for the
future. They faw every where the deplorable effedts of fire and Tword.
They beheld in every corner the marks of the Romans implacable ha-
tred to them and their religion,, wounding their fouls- with ghaftly pro-
ipe&s of ruins and defolations.. Their groves deftroyed y their altars,
pillars and other facred inftruments and objedts of their worfhip laid
level with the ground;-, and their ereded ftru&ures and habitations de-
moliftied and funk into afhes and ruins. This muft needs exceedingly
afflidt and grieve thofe diftrefled people, .already extremely intenerated
by the difappointments of their adored powers, to find themfelves and
their facred places configned and abandoned by their gods (whom in
vain they fought to appeafe with their profufeft adorations) to. the rage
and fury of their incenfed wrathful enemies, under whofe lafh they had
lately fo feverely fmarted..

Thefe:


rra TVIONA AttTIQTJA RESTAURATA.

Thefe or the like reflexions, it is natural to conceive, wrought in
<the minds of thefe religious people when their thoughts began to clear,
and determined them to quit the ifland and get to their brethren, who
3iad gone over before to the ifle of Man and Ireland. For although un-
der the charms and infatuations of their fuperftitious religion they gave
ipecimens of very abfurd and unpolitic carriage, which muft on that
account be excufed them ; yet in other refpedts they muft be allowed
to be a fober intelligent fort of people. And in that circumftance we
*nay be fure they could not chufc but confider, that although the Ro-
mans were now gone, yet they well knew the way, when their affairs
were fettled, to make them, if they ftayed here, another vifitj for
which indeed they could have no great relifli, having been the laft time
fo feverely treated by them.

They faw their groves cut down and deftroyed ; they confidered that
a fhort interval of peace, if they fhould have any, would be too little a
time to replant and repair them : They were not ignorant in geography
and navigation, after the mode of that time : And they well knew
there were many large territories to the northward, which the Romans
had never feen ; and they were not altogether unprovided of means and
ways of going thither. And therefore we may well fuppofc they might
conclude it their beft and wifeft courfe, to get themfelves over to the
ifle of Man and to Ireland— being the next countries to then?, and places
of more fafety and lefs fubjedt to invafion, than the place from whence
theytahre; and where, with their fellows who had gone over there
tftrfbre, they might re-fettle their Druidifli government and jurifdidtion
tomlfefend and the unconqucred Caledonian Bri tains. And fo I think
it probable thefe fearful flippery Druids quickly left the Ifle of Mona,
where they had fo long prefided, and cunningly tranfported themfelves,
and what they could carry with them, from the conquered to the un-
c on que ted M6n or Manaw.

Thefe things being fo at that time, as wc may ;probably think, what
ihzSL we then conceive of the cafe and circumftance of this defolated,
deferted ifland ? No doubt its late Druidifli magiftrates, though now
all gone, left yet their beft advice and directions behind them to fupport
its peace and welfare whilft it might enjoy them. And if on that fbd-
den diflblution of its government, it will be thought to groan for fome
time under the direful effects of confufion and anarchy, in being ex-
pofed to the tumults of the bufy and to the luft and rapine of every
fcrambler ; yet we may think that even in that cafe, the very thoughts

4 of


MONA ANTIQJJA KESTAURATA. 103

of another defcent of die enemy, which they knew not how foon might
happen, together with that natural defire all people have of the fecu-
rity and prefervation of their'lives and liberty, was a ready fuggeftion
to prompt and animate the remaining natives of the place tQ confult and
meditate all poffible means to protect themfelves, an4 to defend their
country, from the unjuft ufurpations of thofe lawlefs aggreffor$. They
muft have confidered that all this in fuch apparent danger was only to
be effe&ed by a firm refolution of abandoning all private diigufts and x
animofities, and of maintaining aipong themfelves a ftri& inviolable
unanimity, peace and concord, which in all likelihood they clofely ad-
hered to and cultivated.

Thus in a little time, it is probable, animated by the advice and ex-
ample of their neighbours, they put themfelves in a pofture to receive
the enemy with a fecond brufh whenever they came upon them. But
the Roman general, having his hands full of work with the fouthern
Britains, gave them time to repair their defolations, and to fortify
themfelves here and there after the mode and example the Romans had
lately given them. The footfteps of which little works and fortifica-
tions are to this day vifible in many places along the banks of the river
Menai. They had opportunity by what they had ken and wofully felt
of the Roman way of fighting (their fuperftitious matters being now
gone) to form themfelves to more regular methods, and to train their
men to that way againft the time that occafion fhould call them to it.

But that was not foqn ; the Roman diftradtions encreafing, the poor
iflanders continued free — populus fui juris — perhaps a longer time than-
they expefted. The death of Nero, the pro-fr<etors being fuddenly and
frequently changed, and the affairs of the provinces being very various
and fluftuating, this ifland enjoyed fomc calm and refpite (unlefs a few
inward dorms interrupted it) from the middle of Nero's reign to the
eighth year of Vefpafian ; which was at leaft fifteen years. But this
Vefpafian, who had formerly himfelf ferved in Britain, knowing bet-
ter than any of the former emperors the ftate and genius of the Briiifli
people, fent over one Juliup Agricola, bis pro-f>rator or lieutenant-ge-
neral, to reduce and fettle the tumultuous wavering ftate of the Britifh.
provinces.

This Agricola, no ways inferior to any of his predeceflbrs in martial
abilities and conduct, wifely confidered, as Suetonius had done before,
that the Ordovices, who had been all along a vexatious thorn in the Ro-
mans' fides,, and had lately cut in pieces a whole party of them, were

to


104 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

to be firft quelled and fubdued before any enlargement of the conqueft
could be eflfe&ed, or any lading tranquility fettled in the provinces.
And therefore though this General came not over to Britain till it was
late in the fummer, yet he quickly difpatched affairs, and immediately
transferred the whole weight of the war to the Ordovices country ; and
inarching down there, ufed the moft brutifli barbarities on all that
came to his hands, fparing neither age nor fex ; and as the chief end
and defign of his coming there, he fuddenly appears with a numerous
army on the fouthern (hore of the river Menai.

The ftation he took before the Ifle of Mona was in all probability
near the place called Crig in Llanvair ifcaer ; which retains, methinks,
fomething of his name. The iflanders on the other fide were, no doubt,
extremely perplexed and furprized at fo fudden and unexpe&ed an ap-
proach of the enemy. They had almoft lulled their fears afleep in that
Jong interval, and had well nigh perfuaded themfelves, that the Roman
eagle had forgot his little prey, till they faw him, to their great afto-
nifhment, fpread his wings on the farther banks of the river Menai.
And though they were not a little daunted at the fight of fuch an army,
ftanding at their doors ; yet being fome, as we may fuppofe, of the
nobleft x>f the Ordovican Britains fled thither, we may believe they
wanted not a flock of valour, though of ftrength and arms they did, to
{hew the ftouteft and moft obflinate refiftance againft the attack of an
injurious enemy.

They faw that the Romans that threatened to invade, were enraged
againft them, who perhaps were the men that had maflacred and cut to
pieces a party of the Romans a little before, and were now to expedi
avengement ; and therefore they eafily forefaw that if the Romans land-
ed aod took by force the ifland, there were no quarters to be expe&ed j
thefe Romans ufually puniftiing what they called rebellion with fharpeft
feverity, tho* ufing their conquefts with great mildnefs and clemency.
Thefe thoughts or the like might difpofe the Britains in the ifland, tho*
otherwife their hearts were big and haughty enough, to propofe, in
cafe the Romans landed, terms of fubmiffion and obedience. Yet
they might leave that to the laft; they might truft to their natural en-
dbfure, their liquid fence and rampart. And befides, obferving that
the year was pretty far advanced, and that the Romans, to make an at-
tack, wanted boats ; they might therefore conceive it would be too
late e'er they could furnifli themfelves with boats and other neceflaries,
for an attack that year- And perhaps they were not out of hopes, if

the


MONA ANTIQJJARES TAURATA. 105

the Romans continued there a confiderable time, that the Ordovic'es
from the hills, unfeafonable weather, or fome other accidents would in-
terpofc to give the enemy a diverfion.

But the great Agricola, when he found neither boats, nor materials
for them ready at hand, to carry his infantry over (as Suetonius had
done) to the ifland, determined to tranfport them by another method ;
and being told, it feems, that there were places of no great depth, at
low water, in that interpofing channel, refolved with all poflible fpecd
to ford and fwim it over. To that end, one may prefume that he caufed
diligent fearch to be made of all the (hallows and fordable places of
the channel ; and enquiring into the ufual way pradifed in pafling with-
out boats fuch fords and (hallows, and having been well informed of
the way and manner of doing it, and apprehending it very fuitable to
his defign and purpofe, he committed the whole a&ion and the ma-
nagement and guidance of the achievement to a choice band of auxilia-
ries ; §>uibus nota vada £3? patrius nandi ufus, are Tacitus's words, i. e.
" who were well acquainted with the fords and the country method of
fwimming."

Having fecured the fidelity of thefe men, as it is reafonable to fup-
pofe, and having all things in readinefs, and at that time of the year,
(being about the middle of September by Tacitus's account) meeting
with the opportunity of very low ebbs, which are then ufual ; they fet
forward the aftion, I conceive, by tacking together horfes, men, and"
arms, in a certain ufual way ; they took the advantage of a movelefs
tide, fair weather, and a very low ebb, and by the help of poles, pikes
and launces (perhaps bearing up the footmen where the water was deep,
and guiding the motion of the horfes along the turnings of the chan-
nel) they got firm and folid footing on the (here of the ifland ; which
is what I can make of that account of Tacitus, %uq fmutfeque &
arma & equos regunt, i. e. by which (meaning their country way of
fwimming) they managed themfelves, their horfe and armour in their
paffage ; and that it was a fwimming pofture they were to ufe there
and govern themfelves in, Tacitus is exprefs, calling it patrius nandi ufus,
the ufual ferriage and way of paffing over fuch fords.

The place they paflfed over muft be where thefe (hallows are, that
is, juft from Llanvair-point on CaernarvonJhire-C\dc to a little fouth-
weft of Lfanidan-church on the other fide, where the water now at
loweft ebbs is not above a fathom or two deep where it is deeped. And

P when


io6 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

when the faods, which remove to and fro with the winds and tides,
bank and lodge at the edge of a rock, which crofles the channel in that
place, as now fometimes they do, and probably did fo at that time, it
is except in few places fordable without much difficulty. And I have
been credibly informed it was about forty years ago fo (hallow there at
fome ebbs, that very fmall boats for fome while ftuck a -ground in paf-
ling along the channel ; and that two men approached fo near on each
fide, that they came within a pole's length to one,another.

At this place, and in this manner, I prefume the induftrious Gene-
ral, as Tacitus fays, Repent} immijit, fuddenly difpatched his hor£e and
foot over upon the aftonifhed yielding Britons ; who it feems expedted
nothing lefs, than to fee the Romans all of a fudden firft conquer their
fea, and then enflave their country. ObJlupefaSi boftes qui claffem, qui
naves, qui mare expeflabant, i. e. '* The affrighted Britons, who ex-
pedted a fleet of boats to attack them," as they found Suetonius before
to have done, " were half dead with terror and amazement, to fee them
item their liquid fence and channel in that manner ; and they immedi-
ately concluded," fays my author, Nihil arduum & inviSlumJic ad beUum
venientibus, " That nothing could be too hard and impracticable to thofe
who entered battle in that manner j" and therefore without more ado.
petitioned for peace, and yielded up the ifland.

Here it may appear fomewhat plain, that the Druids, at leaft the
chief of them, were all gone ; no appearance of them, no uncouth ce-
remony, no amazing fcene of invocations and odd geftures (which at
the firft taking of the ifland by Suetonius Faulinus took fo much of the
foidier's eye and of the hiftorian's pen) now at all prefenting themfelves.
For undoubtedly if the Druids, the common incendiaries of the people
at that time againft the Romans' religion and government, had been then,
in the ifland, they would have here (hewed themfeLves — pro oris &'
jbcis— doing fomething remarkable in the defence of them. For it may
be very probably fuppofed, that the quarrel was moftly againft the
Druids; who if they had been here, it cannot well be imagined, the
hiftorian would have omitted the mention of them— they being fo prin-
cipal a part and character of the adtion he records. Neither is it alfo to.
be thought, that the iflanders would have fo tamely petitioned for peace
and fo eafily obtained it, if thefe men (the obje&s of -the Romans' im-
placable indignation and hatred) had been then among them ; who be-
ing
I


MONA ANTIQJLJA RESTAURATA. io 7

ing now gone probably bore the blame of all that was part, and the
ifland relumed to its former fubjccftion and obedience.

Now the Romans having got once more pofleffion of this ifland, we
may reafonably gupfs they took all effedual means to rivet their con-
queft, and irrevcrfibly fatten it, with the whole Ordovican territory, to
the weftern province. The Roman General now. in all likelihood,
traverfed and viewed the country, and perhaps left fome monument of
his name, at or near the furtheft weftern point of it, called * Grkcilf,
as the Britons probably called him, i. e. Agricola ; and eftabli/hed gar-
rifons in two feparate places of the ifland, viz. at the two Cajlelliors—
Dominorum cqftra~as the name imports ; Cajiell originally importing a
Roman Fort, and lor being the ancient Brijifh word for Lord or Go-
vernor ; the one part of the name being Roman and the other Britifh,
gives me grounds to guefs that they were his firft prefidiary garrifons,
the one being near Griccill, that bears fome umbrage of his name.
And to confirm my conjecture, there is not far off there a place called
Bodior, i. e. the Governor's Habitation ; and another called Prefeddfod,
or Prejaddfed, Prafidii Locus, the President's Habitation $ and the other
place was, I take it, in the other end of the country, near Portbaetbwy,
in the parifh of Llanfadwrn, called Cajlellior, where do yet appear the
marks of an ancient fortrefs ; and whether there be the like at the other
Cajtellior I cannot fay, having never been upon the place. Both thefe
Cajlelliors may be conceived, as being at two ends and territories of the
country, to have ferved very conveniently to over-awe the feveral Bods
and townfliips of the ifland, and to enure their necks to continue fled*
faft for the future under the yoke and fubjedtion of the Roman authority
and government.

Thus the poor, and late famous Ifle of Mona — incolis valida—nzvzv
before that we hear of conquered by an enemy, was fain to put on the
Roman fhackles ; under which it continued to groan fome hundreds of
years. But yet in this to be comforted, if there be any comfort in the
lofs of liberty, that (he had her fetters put on by the two greateft Ro-
mans, next Julius Caefar, that had ever trod on Britifli ground ; the for-
mer of them, viz. that Suetonius Paulinus who well deferred, and went
once well nigh (if we believe Tacitus) to be chofen emperor ; and the

* Near that place is Rbu Colyn or Cekfn : The Romans ufually eredting columns at the utmoft
bounds of their victories, as Dion. Caffius relates.

P 2 latter,


108 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

latter, viz. this Julius Agricola appeared fo brave in all his a<5Hons,
that he was equally feared and envyed by Domitian; as if his lau-
rels had fpread and mounted fo high, as to caft an umbrage on Caefar's
diadem.

In this condition I mufl now leave this poor ifland, when thofe
grand inftruments of Providence, the Romans, having now chafed away
her fuperfutious Druids, and unmaflted her face of her ancient fhades
of heathenifm, made thereby a happy undefigned way for the light of
the gofpel to fhine upon it ^ and byfubjugating the bodies, lives and
fortunes of the Britons to Caefar's fceptre, gave them an opportunity,
which was fliortly after taken, of bringing their fouls to the obedience
of Chrift.

Now to add a few words of thefe Druids, before I conclude this
fe<5lion. If it be demanded, what became of them, of their orders and
focieties, when they were obliged to withdraw from the Ifle of Mona ?
I anfwer, It may be well fuppofed, that having quitted this place where
they fo long prefided, on account of the eager perfecutions of the infult-
ing Romans, thefe religious orders fixed and eftabliffied themfelves in
fome other place unconquered by the Romans, which muft be Ireland,
the north of Scotland^ and the Scottifh Ifles ; yet fo, as that their chief
feat and reiidence was in the Ifle of Man, as the Scottifh authors una-
nimoufly affirm : From whence, as before from the Ifle of Mona, they
extended their authority and exercifed their jurifdidtion over fuch of
thofe Britons as would and could yield it fubmiffion and obedience.
That they did withdraw themfelves to fome places out of the Romans'
reach (and where could they in hafte but to the places now mentioned ?)
is very plain from Strabo, an author of that time ; who affirms, that
the Romans endeavoured with might and main to chafe rfforay, andcrufli
the religion of thefe fuperilitious Druids, but could not; they having
cunningly flipped away and efcaped their fury.

Now that this is no groundlefs opinion, but that it is fo far true,
that for many years after this time, thofe religious Druids and their or-
ders were, numerous in Ireland and Scotland, is apparent from many
. Iriffi and Scottifh authors. Firft, in Ireland, their religion was in
mighty vogue among the people, and their three mentioned orders were
called Druids, Sanachies, and Bards. They were fo numerous there in
the days of St. Patrick, . that it is faid by their hiftorians that he burnt

three


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 109

three hundred of theif books. * Mr. Roderick Flaherty fays the Druids
made one of the three orders of the kingdom, and were fignalized with
a mark of honour on their garments, next that of kings and princes -j~.
Nay farther, for more certainty in this matter, that they had been very
numerous and common in that kingdom, the name of Druid is there
ftill applied to a cunning fellow or wizard, whom they call in the Irilh
tongue Draoi or Druid. And it is as certain that O-Donnel in his tranf-
lation of the New Teftament into Irilh, calls the wife men of the Eaft,
Matth. ii. 1. Draoitbe, i. e. Druids j by which it appears that the
Druids, before the Chriftian religion gave them another remove, were
eftabliflied, and of great authority in Ireland.

I own indeed that the Irifli, even from remoteft antiquity, had a fet
of Druids among them, planted there with fome of the firft Britifli co-
lonies ; but by the accounts which the Irifli antiquaries give us of them,
they differed in many particulars relating to power and jurifdidlion, and
the ufe of writing, from the Gaulifli and Britifli Druids. Whether the
Milefian colony which greatly prevailed in that kingdom, altered their
primitive inftitution, or whatever elfe it was that wrought that change,
I cannot fay. However, their agreement in many things with our
Britifli Druids, and the very pame of them,, was encouragement enough
' to many of thofe who were expelled by the Romans from the Ifle of
Mona, to refort thither, and perhaps to incorporate with them ; the
Irifli Druids by the bounty of their princes being then plentifully pro-
vided with lands and revenues, whereby they were well enabled to give
thefe their old friends and new guefts, a reception fuitable to their cafe
and circumftance, and what in their diftrefs and calamity they mod
wanted, that is, fubfiftence and fecurity.

So likewife in Scotland and in the ifle of Man, He<£tor Boetius hath
given large defcriptions of the government and orders of thefe Druids,
which many Scottifli authors followed. The main of what he fays, I
lhall deliver in the words of the reverend and learned bifliop Spotfwood,
in his Hiftory of the Church of Scotland. " Cratylinth, fays he, king
of Scotland, coming to the cfown in the year 277, made it one of his
firft works to purge the kingdom of heathenifti fuperftition, and to ex-
pel the Druids, a fort of people held in thofe days in great reputation.
— They ruled their affairs very politicly ; for being governed by a prefi-
dent who kept his refidence in the ifle of Man, which then was under

• Ogygia, p. 58. | Matthew Kennedy, p. 19.

the


no MONA ANTIQJLJA RESTAURATA.

the dominion of the Scots, they did once every year meet in that place,
to take counfel together for the ordering of affairs j and carried things
fo politicly and with fuch difcretion, that Cratylinth found it difficult
enough to expel them, becaufe of the favour they had amongft the peo-
ple. — In this Me king Cratylinth, after the expulfion of the Druids,
erc&ed a ftately church to the honour of our Saviour, and called it
Sodorenfe Fanum, i. e. our Saviour's Church." So far he. Mr. Martin
alfo in his late book of the Weftern ifles of Scotland, very much confirms
this opinion, both by tradition and monuments, and by feveral cuftoms
in thofe ifles, ftill favouring of Druidifh rites and practices; and pro-
duces variety of inftances betokening their being and refiding in ancient
times in thofe iflands.

I cannot but obferve here, that the Iriih Druids had a form of letters
very Angular, which they ufed, as their antiquaries fay, before the pre-
fent ones : The alphabet whereof they called Bctb-luis-nion, from the
firft three letters of it, B, L, N; in which every letter, to the number
of twenty-fix, was called by the name of fome tree, in the wood, very
agreeable to the mode and profefiion of that fort of men, fo much con-
vcrfant with groves and woods as the Druids were ; and the letters or
chara&ers they called Feadda, which with them fignifies Wood, and the
writing Ogum, of which they fay they have many remains ftill extant
among them. An occult and myfterious way of writing it was, pecu-
liar to thefe Druids, by certain rods or virgular chjratters, and other
marks and figns for fyllables and whole words, diftindt from the ordi-
nary known letters, which required a particular ftudy, fo that the vul-
gar could not at all understand it. Mr. Roderick Flaherty, from the
book of Lecan, explains the whole fet of them. And whether our
Ognvyddor or Egwyddor, i. e. Alphabet, perhaps compounded from
Ogum and Wydd, which is Wood, the fame with their Feadda, the other
word Ogum being loft in our Britifh tongue, may have any relation to
this Iriih form, I will not pretend to fay. Or whether the Ira letur,
Irlandorum litem, mentioned by Arngrim Jonas, in his Runick alpha-
bets, be the fame with this Betb-luis-nion, having not (ten them, I want
information. However that be, we are pretty fure that the Gaulifh
Druids ufed in their private affairs the Greek letters, for Caefar exprefly
fays fo ; which Greek letters, it is not unlikely, might in time and
among our people degenerate into what we call the Irifh or Saxon letters.

To conclude this whok matter. All I have faid of thefe Druids,
from firft to laft, will, I prefume, fairly refolve itfelf into thefe three

parti-


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. nr

particulars. Firft, that thefe Druids had their chief feat and refidence
fomewhere in Britain, of which Caefar is a potent witnefs. Secondly,
that this feat or principal refidence was in the Iflc of Mona or Anglefey,
Tacitus and a ftrong tradition do fairly intimate. Thirdly, that after
their expulfion by the Romans, they fpread and eflahlifhed their hie-
rarchy in the ifle of Man, Scotland, and the Scottifh ifles, the Scottiflv
authors unanimoufly agree, and amply confirm. And, laftly, that
their removal out of the Ifle of Anglefey to the Ifle of Man was between
the two dcfoents of Suetonius and Agricola on this ifland* This laft I
gather chiefly out of the before cited paflage of Tacitus in the life of
Agricola ; where the hiftorian does not mention one fyllable of thefe
Druids, who when they were here, as in the other paflage of Suetonius
Pauiinus, took fo much pains in defcribing them. And though I
am as cautious as any other in laying too much ftrefe on a negative ar-
gument ; yet I muft confefs, considering the punctuality of that hifto-
rian's writing— never omitting principal chara&ers, which undoubtedly
thofe perfonages would have been, if they had been here — his faying
nothing of them, is as much with me, as if he hadfaidin exprefs terms*
that they had withdrawn, or were driven away by the Romans. Efpe-
cially fince I find it fo taken by the learned billiop * Stillingfleet ; who
obferves that the Areh-Flamens and Flamens in Britain under the Ro-
man government, could be no part, as was generally believed, of the
Druidi(h hierarchy ; they being before gone* and their ways and me-
thods mortally hated by the Romans : But rather as that learned and
worthy prelate ftrongly proves* the Flamens and Arch-Flamens were a
later invention of pagan Romans here, calculated by them after the form
-and model of our primitive church government, which they feemed for
fome reafons to have aflfe&ed*

But to purfue our expulfed religious countrymen one remove further-
When Chriftianity made a clofer purfuit of them than the Roman fword
was able to do—captivated fome to the laws of Chrift, and put the
reft on a fecond voyage, to find once more a place of reft and fafety, to
lay down one other new foundation of their ancient plat-form— -I know
not where to find them, unlefs it be in the Schaldry of Iceland, and
their dependant clafles and orders of old in the territories of Norway,.
Denmark, and other Northern countries. Thefe not only in name, in,
which there is fome congruity, iffd-dry> the " lower or northern DTruids""

* Orig. Brit. p. 79,

periiaga *


U2 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

perhaps ; but alfo in their * Ira letur and in their Edda IJlartdorum, as
they call it, i. e. the poetical memoirs of their bards; and efpecially
in their extant remains and monuments of antiquity, which have a very
confiderable aflinity and coherence with whati have already defcribed
of our remains and monuments of Druidifm. They have their Crom-
leche like ours : There is a temple in Kialernefs in Iceland, not much
unlike ours wt Bryn Gwyn : Their eredled altars, pillars, mounts, and
burying-places, and ours, are much of a fort. And whoever would
be more informed in thefe particular inftances and parallels, may con-
fult the books of Olaiis Wormius and Tho. Bartholine, of the Danifli
antiquities, and he will find fufficient fatisfadtion on that head.

Let not the mention of thefe Danifli and Icelandilh inftances in-
vert the tenor of my argument, and turn the force of it againft what I
before affirmed in this matter; that is, give grounds to objedt, that if
our monuments and theirs be fo exaftly alike, that it may then be as
probable, that the Danes ereded them when they lorded over us ; and
confequently that they are rather the marks of tbeir religion and cuf*
toms, than the remains of Druidifm, which is indeed the opinion of
fome obfervers of late.

But in anfwer to this, I {hall offer it to be confidered, Firft, how
very probable it is, that thefe Druids, who were expelled by the Chri-
.ftians from Ireland and Scotland, fhould repair to fome of thefe nor-
thern countries, and there propagate their cuftoms and forms of wor-
fhip among thefe ruder heathens. For where fhould they go but thither?
What other reafon can be given of the congruity of many placits of the
Runick religion with thofe recorded of Druidifm, than that they had
them originally from the Britifli ifles ? None can doubt of the facility
of their paflage thither, who confiders how the northern nations of old
abounded with boats \ and rovers. And this being granted, it will eafily
follow, that the rites or cuftoms which thofe heathen Danes and Saxons
brought hither of that kind, were but what their fore-fathers had be-

* The ancient inhabitants of thefe northern countries called #pe of their Runic alphabets, Ira
four* viz. Irhli letters, as if they had had them from Ireland, whence our Druids were laft
expelled.

fit is not unlikely but that the Britons, with other northern nations, being flrengthened and
driven by the Romans into Iceland, and other ifles of the North, might then pafs over in thefe
boats from thofe ifles into Greenland, and thence into North America, and fo people that conti-
nent, it being but a fhort cut over from Iceland to that continent, not above two or three days
fail ; and Mr. Jofeph Mede, in one of his letters to Dr. Twifs, gives reafons of the probability of
the peopling of America about this time, and in this manner.

fore


MONAANTIQJLJA RE3TAURATA; tig

fore taken from hence—** fitde mixed indeed, and metamorphofed in
another drefs. And then no wonder they eredted here rings or coronets
of pitched ftones, for their public inaugurations -, or rather applied thofe
old ones they found here to that ufe and purpofe. Might not Stoncheugi*
and Roll-rick coronets be very well the relics of ancient Druidifm, and
yet fall in fuitably enough with the ufe and performance of Danilh con-
secrations ? And after ages might well be fuppofed to miftake that fecond
edition of their original ufes for the firft publication of them.

Secondly, in England there may be, I confefs, fome colour for
a&ribing thofe remains of antiquity to the Daniih confecrations and cuf*
toms. But in Wales, in the midft of fome of the mountains of it,
where not a few of thefe monuments are, and where it is not likely the
Danes ever were, Who can reafonabiy attribute thofe erections to them ?
That elliptical ring or -coronet of pitched ftones between two great
mountains near CefailGyj lurch in Caernarvonftiire— in number forty-two— -
is as likely to have been let up by the Danes, as are the pillars of Tad-
mor, or the pyramids of Egypt.

Thirdly, let any one confider alfo what hath been before inftanced
of the undeniable analogy, and agreeablenefs of the ancient Britiih
names of fome of our monuments, with what is recorded of the rites
and ufages of the Druids, in authors of much ancientier date than the
time of the Danifh depredations. Cromlecb % Carem-luQcb, and Bryn
Gwyn, Brein Gwy*,.are words of more ancient composition, than is con-
fiftent with the notion, that the parts of them were fetched from Syria,
and here fodered together to exprefs a late Danifti barbarity.

But particularly let this very IGe of Mona be a convincing inftance of
the improbability of that opinion which would afcribe many of thefe
erections and monuments to the Danilh cuftoms. The groves in it ftili
retain their old Britifh names ; and alfo the many places before-men-
tioned betoken the diftkift names and orders of the Druids, agreeable
enough to the relations given of them by Strabo, Ccefar, Tacitus, and
others. And together with thofe groves and precin&s, we have multi*
tudes of monuments in thofe very places which bear the names of
thofe fooieties and orders. Thefe places fo named, and thefe monu-
ments co-exifting arid bearing mutual relation to one another, as every
one that knows them wiH grant they do, On what grounds can any
man pretend to afcribe fome parts and appurtenances of thefe places
to Danicifm, and not the reft ? For if thofe groves and thofe places,
in which thefe monuments are erected, and which evidently bear the

Q_ names


ii4 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

names of all the orders of that ancient fed, be Druidical, as thofe
names do greatly import they arc ; then it will follow by a very reafon-
able confequepce, that thofe monuments are fo toa: And at the fame
time evince the improbability, not to fay more, of that opinion, which
would afcribe them to a Danifli original. I find now what I have of-
fered in this particular very much confirmed by the late author of the
Hiftory of the Weftern Ifles of Scotland, who avouches names and tra-
ditions in many of the Scottish ifles, exprefly agreeing with what I have
here conjectured ; where many circular ranges of eretted ftones are to this
day by the common people called Druin-Crunney, the Druids Circles,
and generally believed to be their temples ; and feveral antient rites and
cuftoms conformable to their ufages and pra&ices before-mentioned, he
there lays down, as undoubted matter of fad, and generally believed fo *
to whofe book, for more fatisfa&ion in this affair, I recommend and
refer the reader.

SECTION X.

Of the divifwns andfub-divifions of the IJle of Anglefey ; and of the laws
and cujloms of it, at the latter time of the Britijb princes.

ANGLESEY is, and has been of very ancient time divided prin-
cipally into three Cantrefs, and each of tliefe into two Comots •>
viz. Cantref RboJJir, Cantref Aberffraw* and Cantref Cemaes. The
firft contains Menai and Tiindaetbwy : The fecond» Malldraetb and
Llifon ; And the third, Twrcelyn and Talybolum^

I (hall, Firft, begin with the etymology of the names of thefe divi-
fions. Secondly, I ihall account for the antiquity, ufe and applica-
tion of th*m to the ancient firiti(h adminiftration and government.
And, Thirdly, for the quality and condition of thofe fub-divifions of
< Trefs % Rbandirs and Gafets.

. As to their names; Firft, Cantref RboJSr is variously denominated.

Some would call it Rbos-fair, from a little church fo dedicated* which

. ftfinds near the head of the manor $ and fome call it Rbof-Aur or Rbof-

jfair, from a Rbos near it, where it is faid the fair was anciently kept :

But to me it feems more probable that the true name was Rbos-btr,

more anciently than any of the fore- mentioned names, proceeding from

the natural propriety of the place, as original names generally did*

■ that long Dorfum or ridge of land* running from Newborougb to Mynydd

Llwydiart*


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA! 115

Llwydiart, ten miles in length, being on the top of it all heath or Rbos
tin and when the country was generally woody, might be then all
one bleak and barren Rbos or heath, of that length ; and this heath
running through the two Comots, was probably called TlbSs-bir, and
thence gave name to the whole territory or Cantref The two Comots
contained under this Cantref* are Hindaetbwy and Menai ; of the former
I have before accounted, and of the latter I fhall give fome account in.
the laft fedion.

The fecond Cantref is called the Cantref of Aberffraw, and was (o
called from the OJiium or entrance into the fea of a fmall brook of that
name, and called Aberffraw ; where the latter princes of North Wales
chofe their principal refidence 5 and has under it the Comots of Mall-
traetb and Lltfon. The Comot of Malldraetb is undoubtedly fo called
from the formerly quaggy and very dangerous fands bordering upon it ;
but the Comot of Lltfon has its name derived from a more obfeure ori-
gin. I find it written in fome ancient records Lie won, and am apt to
think it was given at firft to this territory, becaufe it was the mod
weftern part of the ifland ; the Weft being called in the ancient Britifh,
Gorllewon, or Gorllewin, as it is to this day.

The tmrd Cantref is called Cantref Cemmaes, I take it, from Cefn-
faes, i. e. ridged or arable land > and the part of that Cantref, particu*
Jarly called by that name, is the beft corn-land in the whole country ;
and many other little territories in Wales, excelling in bearing corn, are
called by the name of Cemmaifes* This Cantref has under it the Comots
of Twrcdyn and Talybolion.

The Comot of Twrcelyn, I have . obferved in ancient manufcripts to .
be called Tir Cyhelyn ; which yet may not perhaps be its firft and moft
ancient name, becaufe not betokening (as the ancienteft names gene-
rally did) any natural or local propriety, but the pofleflions of one
Cyhelyn, who was probably lord of thofe lands. And fome think that
Talybolion, the other divifion of it, had fome reference in the found of
the word, to Suetonius Paulinus, who firft conquered this ifland, and
brought it to the Roman fub/eftion ; it being very probable that the
Brkons {railed, this Paulinus, Pol-lion 5 as is obferved by Mr. Edward
Uiwyd, of a place called Pant y Polion, near which he took up the in-
scription of one Paulinus, who probably was (lain or buried at that place.
And though it muft be confefled, that Tdl in the old Britifli properly
.imports a region or territory, and this Suetonius Paulinus, or in the
language of the Britons, Polion, m having fignalized his name in this

Q^2 ifland,


n6 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

ifland, might very well have appropriated to himfclf the pofleflion of
fomc part of it ; and thereby have given occafion to its being called ever
after, Regio Paulini % i. e* Tal-Polian ; yet that great perfon having had
no long time here to enjoy the fruits of his conqueft, and the place be-
ing too inconfiderable for fo great a man* I am rather inclined to be-
lieve, that as certain territories in Cumberland are called Cope-land, air
acuminatis collibus, as Mr. Camden obferves, fo this name might be dep-
rived from the many bleak and coped hills which are in that territory
called Moelion or Moelyddx of which one or two retain the appellation
of * Moel to this day. On which account I think it probable (fuck
bare- top t hills being called Median) that therefore this Gemot abound-
ing with thofe hillocks might then be called Ta/y Moelion ; and confe-*
fequently that (the letters M and B being of ooe organ, eafiiy convertible
one to another, and promifcuoufly pronounced in our tongue) it might
fo come to pafs in trad of time, that Taly Moelion came to be called;
Tal y Bolion-y as Moel y don is now commonly pronounced Bol y don*
And for further confirmation of it,, we have one bleak hill in this coun-
try called y Fo*l> and the territory adjoining it, is called Tal y Foel to
this day.

Now as thefe Cantrefs are divided into fix Comots f fo th?fe Comots.
contain each of them about fixty Trefs or town (hips ;. which were
alfo, divided towards the latter end of the Britifh government, into about
five thousand tenures, i. e. Gafefs^ Weles and Rbandir's.

Secondly, As to the antiquity, ufe and application of thefc divifions ;
it cannot be denied but that the general partition of Wales, and con-
fequently of the Iflc of Anglefey, into Cantrefs and Comots is very
ancient. Aad if that reading in Tzcituz—Prafidium imfojuit wc/V^be
the right one, and means our Trefs or toWnfhips ; I can fcarce forbear
concluding our Cantrefs or hundreds (they being but numeral deno-
minations of our Trefs and townfhips) to have been ia ufe among:
the aboriginal Britons, long before- the coming of the Romans into thefe
countries.

For though that ibrting and ranging of Trefs and townftiips inta
hundreds and Cantrefs may foem with fome probability to owe its ori-
gin to the Roman model, as being but a copy or imitation of their
ancient claffical distributions into tribes and centuries % yet on the other

• ft feeooft that the land here was all woody, when they called and dUtinguUhed ibme eminence*
that had $o wood upon them by the name of AW 3 i, cu bald-tops or hillocks*

fide*


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURAtA. 117

fide, who knows but the Aufonii and Hetrufcbi, the anceftors of the Ro-
mans, did rather derive and borrow that mode and platform of dividing
their land from our anceftors the Celta ; and that their Tribus and Cen-
turia are the fame with our Trtfs and Cantrefs. And I dare appeal to
any critick id thofe antiquities to judge, if the Latin Tri&us, both' in
found and figriification anfweringour Tref(B and F or F being labials of
promifcuous ufe in our ancient words) can in its own, or any other
language fix on fo proper aad agreeable a derivation, as from the Ctltijb
or Gaulijh Tir-efot Tref. But however that be, we may juftly con-
clude, that thofe were reckoned and called fo, before the Romans had
any thing to do with our conftitution and government ; and that priiw
cipally on thefe reafons.-— »

First, Becaufe it is in itfelf a very natural and juft diftribution, for
fo many lefler houfholds to make one Tref, and fo many Tfefs to make
up one feparate and diftinft divifion or Cantref. And as this is a moft
fit and accommodate proportion, for a plebeian administration* fo it
may be concluded to be very ancient, if not to have been the very firft
and original conftitution amongft u*. Secondly, we find the ancient
Irifh, who were branches of our Britifh origin, and among whom the
Roman power never prevailed, to have had the fame fort of divifion of
their country as we have* i. e. into Can't refs and Carrachts. Thirdly,
we meet with fome paflages in Caefar and Tacitus, which give account;
of fuch centurial divifions among the Gauls and Germans, before ever
the Romans got footing in any part of their country ; and therefore
what our next neighbours, efpecially the Gauls, ufed of this fort, may
be juftly prefumed to have been pradifed alfo, among the ancient Bri-
tons. And* Fourthly* it is fufficiently known that the Roman policy
very feldom or never attempted the alteration of the original and ancient
forms and ufages of th?ir conquered provinces, except where great pro*
vocations made them root out the natives and eftablifh colonies of their
own. Which alteration of our moft ancient laws and cuftoms having
not, by any thing that appears, been ever enforced by the prevailing Ro-
mans in this Ifle of Mona ; one may very well conclude that our divi-
lions of Cantrefs and Comots, are of a much older date, than the Roman
government. And altho' this distribution of lands into Cantrefs and
Comots may be of much ancienter date,, than tfct of the Roman or per-
haps of the Druidical government ; yet it is probable, the victorious
Romans made ufe of it, not only in their civil and martial administra-
tion, afrit is made ufe of to this day, but alfo in their distinguishing of

feudal


/


m8 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAUR'ATA.

feudal rights and proprieties; as it continued to be ufed after the Ro-
mans forfook us, thro* the whole time of the Britilh government.

Now to conceive rightly the nature and ufe of thefe divifions, and the
parts of them, we are to obferve, that as Cantref or hundred in the
right notion of the word, betokens an aflbciated union and confederation
of as many Trefs or townfliips as the word imports j fo for a more re-
gular difpatch of affairs and conveniehcy of aflembltng together, thefe
Cantrefs are each of them fub-divided into two or more Gemots : And
thefe Comots 9 as they are themfelves but parts and divifiorts of the (aid
Ganttefs, arc commonly (but very improperly) called hundreds, as
the hundred of Men at > the hundred of Malldraetb. Yet as they confift
of fo toany Trefs, Bods and townfliips, as are comprehended within
one common precindt, fo have they held from very ancient time, as fo
many petty lordfhips, their feparate courts and jurifdi<ftions : And
as fuch> they may be well faid to have been the prefervers and con-
veyers down of our moft ancient ufages to this day ; and to be the very
channels wherein the many ftreams of our national cuftoms were thro'
a long tradt of time carried to us from their original foutftainsj and
which now, fince the union of the Englifli and Britifh governments,
have met together and united into one body of our common and mu-
nicipal laws.

And thefe ancient laws and ufages of ours thus conveyed to us, hav-
ing in their frame and compofition fo little affinity with the Roman
iaw, and having alfo in the adminiftration and execution of them, fo
neceflary a depeftdance upon, and connexion with thefe centurial pre-
cinds and divifions, may feem to give good warrant to conclude, that
thefe ancient laws and cuftoms (o conveyed down, as well as thefe little
precindls and hundreds in which they were conveyed, were long before
the Roman government among us ; and fo continued without much al-
teration, till they came to be fwallowed up and incorporated into the
Englifh laws and government.

But as to the poffeflionary part of thefe ancient divifions ; as they
were originally in themfelves feparate precindts andjurifdittions ; fo un-
der the Roman admirtiftration they might become very ufeful and ac-
commodate proportions and dividends, to be as the government thought
fit, difpofed into feveral feudatory rights and poffeffions. And fuch indeed
we find them to have been, that is, the inheritances bf princes and no-
bles during the continuance of the Britifh government ; as is obvious to
any one, who is acquainted with the trail fadtions' of the Britifh hiftory.

Thus


frfONA ANTIQJLJA RESTAURATA. 119

Thus the victorious fons of Cunedda Wledig, a Cumbrian prince,
came to be poffefled of feveral Cantrefs in Wales, and left their names
©n them to this day ; which undoubtedly were thefe mentibned feparate
prccindts before, and called afterwards by other names. Thus Roderick
the Great divided all Wales by a diftribution of thefe Cantrefs^ into
three provinces, viz. Gwynedd, Debeubarth and Powys, and difpofed of
them to his three fons. And we may reafonably prefume that the late
Britifli princes have thus created their nobles, by giving them the feudal
poffcflions of Cantrefs and Cornots with their jurifdidtions and powers,
on tef ms of homage and fubje&ion.

Thirdly, To underftand the quality and condition of thefe ancient
divisions in the Britifli ftate and government, it will be necefiary to lay
down a fummary reprefentation of the fundry forts and different pro-
prieties of thefe Trefs and Villa 's, of which the. Cantrefs confift j that
is, to fee on what terms of fubje€tion and dependance on their imme-
diate lords and princes, thefe particular tenures were eftabliflied ; and
how they were difpofed and managed to the fupport and fafety of the
Britifli government. Which being well feen into and confidered, may
give us fome glimmering light into die form and model of our ancient
Britifli adminiftration.

Now here it muft be confeflfed, that in the long fpace of fome hun-
dreds of years, fince the diflblution of the Britifli government, our
nation being inexcufably remife and incurious for the information of po-
fterity, the memory of the true ftate and condition of that government,
efpecially of the more popular part of it which relates to thefe mentioned
divifions, might for us have been utterly loft and perifhed.,

But as a juft reproach to our wretched ofcitancy and remiflbefs,. what
our own carelefs negledt omitted, the covetoufnefs of our more watch^-
ful conquerors took care to record and prelerve for us ; that is, the Eng-
lish monarchs when they got themfelves feized of the laft remains of
our Britifli royalties, and found or made themfelves in titled or in<-
terefled by defcent or conqueft, to the ancient revenues of our Britifli
•princes; thefe Englifli monarchs, I fay, as well to inform themfelves of
the ftate of thefe revenues, as to fecure the utmoft benefit of their con*-
queft, judged it advifeable then to iflue out commiftions of inquiry under
their royal feal to every Cotnot of North- Wales, with commiflioners ap-
pointed to fearch into, and examine the true ftate of the ancient Britifli
tenures, and the former cuftoms and ufages thereof..

Thde


?


120 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA!

Thefe commifiioners by the authority of the power they were intruded
with, fummoned and impannelled juries of the moil fubftantial men
in every hundred or Comot, and gave them in charge to make due re-
turns in writing, upon oath, of the true ftate andcircumftance of every
tenure; as thofe tenures ftood bound to the prince, and had not before
been granted over, in Frank- Almoine or otherwife, to other proprietors %
as indeed many tenures in feveral Comots were, of which therefore
we have at prefent very little account. At the fame time, or little af-
ter the firft commiflion of this fort, the Bilhop of Bangor took out ano-
ther commiffion in like manner, to enquire into the tenures of the
biflioprick ; which extent I have feen with Dr. Humphreys, late bifhop
of Banger.

Now thefe juries having faithfully difcharged their duties, by what
light and information was then produced before them in thofe particu-
lars ; and the returns and verdifts made by them, being of record, and
fairly written, were taken by the commiflioners in every Comot j and
in this part of North* Wales were fent and delivered up by them into
the prince's exchequer at Caernarvon, to be there carefully and fafely
kept and recorded. From thefe verdi&s it is that we now have the beft
lights into fome parts of the frame and conftitutiotl of the Britiih polity,
and other particulars of that government, which otherwife would have
for ever lain in the dark ; or at leaft we (hould have been far to feek
for thenu And indeed for what light we have from thefe records, we
ought to be much obliged to the generous rare and induftry of that
.very worthy and defervedly celebrated perfon, Sir William Grujfjdd
of Penrbyn^ knight, and chamberlain of North* Wales j who pre»-
ferved thefe records from periftnng, by collecting fo many of them
as he could retrieve from moth and corruption^ and then caufing
thofe fcattered rolls tod fragments which he could meet with, to
he fairly written by one jfen&yn -Gwyn f in two large books of parch-
tnent, for the information of pofterity. One whereof is that book,
Jtcpt always in the ChamberlainVoflice, called by the name of the Ex-
tent of North- Wales ; and the other he tranfmitted into the AuditorV
office at London, where it is preferved to this day. Of this book there
have been many entire-copies written, which are yet in many hands 5
and fome in parcels, of particular counties 5 which deferve to be more
narrowly fearched into and examined than generally they arc ; out of
which, and a few other remains of antiquity, in order to account for

the


MION'A ANTIQUA RESTAUR AT A; as*

the ancient divHions of this ifland, I have taken qp and cblle&ed thefe
obfervations following.

First, We have thence to obferve, that the * Britifli princes and
*)ther lords of particular territories, were owners in capite of all their
lands, and fovereign lords of all their fubje&s and bondmen; unto whom
.thefe princes and fovereign proprietors distributed feveral townfhips and
hamlets, or particular tenures or Gavels of thofe faid townfhips and
hamlets ; which Gavels they generally called Wele's, i. e. feats or dwel«-
lings : Th^fe,. I fay, they distributed to their bondmen and fubjetfs, by
way of martial difpofure, to be enjoyed by thefe vaffals and fubjefts on
:fuch terms and conditions, as thofe lords and princes who bellowed
them thought fit to impofe ; and with fuch privileges and degrees of
right and liberty, as they found thofe men, either by defcent or merit,
to deferve* And thofe men they called either freeholders or vaffals, and
the lands and tenures fo given, either freehold or villanage; being all
-equally tenants to their l<?rd or prince, but in regard of thefe privileges
difpenfed to them in the firft difpofal, they were in different degrees ^of
freedom or vaffaUge.

Secondly, We have thence to obferve, that thefe towrrfhips were
diftinguifhed by them, m refpe& either of quality or quantity. In re-
ipedt of quality, we find that thefe vills or town(hij>s were either wholly
free or wholly bond; or partly free or partly bond. And we may
.obferve alfo, that of the bond and native townfhips— Terra Nativa the
Extent-book calls them — there were fom? lands of greater freedom and
ibme of lefs, or of none at all ; and their poffeflbrs or tenants, I mean
of tke firft fort of villanage, called themfelves Nativi Libert, i.e. Free
.Natives, or the better fort of vaffals ; as the others of the fecond fort
were called Puri Nativi, Perfedt Slaves. .In Ireland, much the fame
divifion of tenants, viz. free and bond, fubfifted; as is mentioned by
Sir James Ware and others in their accounts of that Jringdom*

But the wholly free townfliips and freeholds were in themfelves from
-their original , constitution, fuch as gave their poffeffors a rank above
-other tenants ; qualified them, it feems, for offices and employments,
and gave them feats and voices in courts of judicature ; from which pri-
vilege of fitting aloft, higher .than the other tenants in their Gorfeddau,
and of affifting in pafiing of judicial decrees and fentences, the tenants

* Y Bnnbin biefydd sir y dtyrnti *//. See Hovtd Jfeh,


laa MONA ANTJQJJA fcESTAURAtA.

t>f thofe freeholds were generally called UcMuyr, that is, men of prin-
cipal rank in the Tref or townfhip.

On the other fide, we find that the tenants of bond-lands and vil-
lanages, as they were of a quality below and inferior to freeholders, (b
they were obliged to greater drudgeries, and employed in more fervile
works, and were to be difpofed of in many things as their lords and
princes pleafed to ufe them. And of thefe, fome (as I obferved before)
were free natives and fome pure natives. The free natives I take to be
thofe who had fome degree of freedom, who might go where they would,
might buy and fell, and had many immunities ; but the pure natives
(as they were called) were the peculium of their proprietory lords and
princes, to be difpofed of as they lifted. And I remember to have met
in Sir William Grutfytb's book, with an extract of a deed, where the na*-
tives of the town (hip of Portbaetbwy, many years after the time of the
British princes, wefe fold as part of the eftate of thofe lands they be-
longed to ; and of which, and others of that fort, I have given elfewhertr
large inftances. And I have by me a copy of injunction iflued out by
Henry the Seventh, king of England, commanding efcheators and all
Dthef ministerial officers to fee that the king's native tenants kept with-
in their common limits ; and if any of them were found to ftray and
waftdcr from their home, to drive them back, like beads, to their pin-
folds, with the greateft feverity.

Thirdi r* In regard of extent and quantity ; thefe lrefs were fbmfc
of them entire and undivided ;. and fome disjointed and fevered into
parcels and hamkts. Some Trefs were large and capacious, con lifting
t>f many WeL% feats *nd families ; as thefe again of Rbandirs and (Hovels*
meafured out by B</oiats and Carucats. And fome Trefs were narrow
mndicanty, confiding of fewer of thefe divifions * as thefe did of fewer
Carucats and Boviafs.

It is obfervable aHb, that thefe Trefs thus qualified and diftinguiflied,.
and likewife the feveral partitions and fub*partitions» of them, as they
happened by gavel-kiftd, efcheats, the gift of princes, or any other
•ways to be divided, were all of them obKged to the prince, or under
-him,' or by derivation from him* to their immediate lord 6r chief pro*-
.prietor* by certain fixed and determined ties and conditions, rated and
eftabttfhed, it feems, at the firft difpofal of thefe tenures by the prince
or other lords of the fee; and to be punctually obferved and per-
formed by thofe tenants and their fucceflbrs^ to their fucceeding lords
and mailers.

Now


MONA ANTIQUA RBSTAtTRATA. isj

Now all thefe bonds and ties whereby all holders of land in the Britifh
ftate, were indiipenfably obliged to the 'prince their landlord, were, as
we may obferve out of thefe records, of divers forts, which I reckon tOi
be thefe, viz.

~ Firft, RENTS,
. Secondly, SERVICES.
Thirdly, DUTIES.
Fourthly, MULCTS.
Fifthly, ATTENDANCES.

. By thefe the prince's wants in every refpeft were fupplied* aftd the
people had enough to make a plentiful fubfiftence : By thefe too the peo-
ple engaged the love and enabled the protection of their prince : And by
thefe the prince fufficiently fecured the people's loyalty and obedience.

RENTS.

First, Rents ; Some of thefe were paid in ready money, and fbm*
in good? and cattle. What were paid in ready money, were paid either
at fixed and certain times, as the four quarterly payments, and the two
half yearly oiles ; or were paid uncertainly, and by cafualty, as Releefs x
and Herrhts : Thefe were fmall fums of money now, though great then,
afcertained and rated on all thofe particular tenures that were conditioned,
to pay them.

What alfo were paid in goods and cattle, are eithet certain quantities
of corn, at certain times in the year, as a fet quantum of wheat, barfcy>
oats, &c. which very often occurs in the Bifliop's Extent-book ,• or.
Staurum Principis* which many Trefs were obliged to pay ; and that
was a certain number of oxen and^cows, at the end of the year : As it
frequently occurs in the King's Extent.

As for what they called 7i(w-rent, it is properly referrible to thofe
fums paid to the prince at times limited and certain ; it often occurs
in the Prinze's Extent, and feldom or ever in the Bifhop's Extent-book.
It was a fum payable by four villain-toiynfhips in every Comot> five
flulKngs ^rr annum on thofe Trefs f ceflable on every Gave/ or tenure,
and collected by the Goftegwr or ferjeant of the manor. And fo Efcuage,
when it was rated and certain, was a fort of Soccage-rent ; but when
uncertain and cafual* it was no other than military or knight-fervice,
a* I found it obfer vcd in * Gwy^r-copy, among other ufeful remarks
o& the Extent of North-Wales.

• Sir John Wynn's copy of the Extent of North-Wales.

R2 It


i2 4 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

It is to be obferved ip this place, that as originally fomc rents* were-
fixed and rated on all tenures whether free or bond, and on all tenants*
whether freeholders or vaffals ; and that thofe were of that fort which*
the Englifh laws call foccage-rent or tenures; fo the difference lay
chiefly in the different grants of the fupreme difpofmg power which the
prince had over thofe lands and tenants. As to the freehold-lands, the
tenants or freeholders of them bad a legal right thereto, on the before-
mentioned conditions, but forfeitable in certaii> cafes (as I obferved ;
before) to the prince or lord of the fee. But a* to the villanages, the
bopd-tenants thereof, whom they commonly called Villains or Kaffdls,
had no property in the lands affigned to- them, but merely occupancy*
and poffeflion during the prince's or lord's pleafure; and they were but.
as. (laves, to be placed, here and there, as it plcafed their lords and ma—
fters to difpofe of them ; yet rooftly with this regard, that the rents .
charged on thofe Villain- tenures were fixed and certain, and payable,
as the rents of freeholds were, on fixed and certain days of payment, .
which appears in every part of the prince's Extent-book, On this ac--
count- it was that when t\\t Englifh monarchs pofleffed the rights and :
revenues of the Britifh princes, they could not without manifeft wrong
difpoffefs the freeholders, . becaufe upon our fubmiffion to the Englifh »
iceptre it was otherwife ftipulated-; but as to the villanages and lands-
of Vajfalsy they foon made bold to take them into their own hands;*
becaufe to (laves, that is, to fuch as have no right, no wrong can be
done : And then they let out thofe lands on leafts, as they did their •
other crown-lands ; (till confining themfelves to the old rents ; but en-
hancing their benefit from them, by augmenting their tenants' fines as*
they fa w occafion.

And thefe forts of tenure were they* which afterwards came to be*
called King's-Lands : All which, with other lands that accrued to the
crown by efcheats, forfeitures, and di Ablution of religious houfes, &c.
are now almoft all fold here to private families; I mean the improved <
rents of them; but the old rents of them, being unalienable are ftill*
paid yearly by the prefent proprietors at the Auditor's-offiee ; as the*
other freehold-rents are or ought to be annually collected, in every
townfliip by itfelf, by fome one deputed by the Auditor to receive them;-
and in order thereunto, to give acquittances in difcharge of what they*
fo receive, upon the collectors {hewing their warrant and the roll or
record of the hundred fubferibed by the jury thereof on the laft furvey
7 made *.


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 125

made ;, by which roll it was to appear what every tenant was to pay,
and on what lands they were to levy it.

Here give me leave to make one further remark, not unufeful on this
fubjedt ; which is, that fome may be apt to wonder that two or three
fhillings may, with any propriety of fpeaking, be called the rent of fo
much land as they are ufually paid for. But that wonder will foon va-
nifh, when they confider that two or three (hillings were, at the time
thefe lands were fo rated, in intrinfic value, more than fo many pounds
fterling in thefe days; as I want not clear evidence to demonftrate*
And though I am as unwilling as any to advance a propofition that may
feem ftrange, yet in this matter, it is not fo ftrange as true, that if golcf
and filver come to appear above ground yearly in fuch prodigious quan-
tities, during the two next centuries, as they have done the two laft —
the property of thofe metals being to laft for a long time, and in the
ufing not eafily waftable— the intrinfic value of fo much gold or filver
as makes two or three pounds fterling now, will dwindle and diminiflr
one half; that is, will buy no more goods at two hundred years hence,
than what half the fum of thofe metals will now do. The reafon wiir
hold good on both fides : For if there* be now twenty times more filver
and gold in Europe than w&s two hundred years* ago; as we prefumc
there is, and provided the encreafe of thefe metals advances proportion-
ably during the next two hundred years in thefe countries, it will follow
that the intrinfic value thereof muft decreafe, for the next two hun-
dred years in the fame proportion ; fo that twenty fhillings then will
be but as ten fhillings now : Becaufe the gold and filver of Europe, if
it comes up* and be imported here in the fame proportion, and the ex-
portation of it prevented by law, will be forty thnes more at that
time, than it was two hundred years ago; and therefore it comes down
to hdf the value ; for it is apparent that the intrinfic value of all goods
rife and fall in proportion to the plenty and fcarcity of them. It mat-
ters not in this cafe, whether thefe metals in a kingdom or ftate be coined
or not ; for when the ftate or kingdom is poflefied of it, it is eafily on
occafion made current, and is fo to be reckoned the cafh of that ftate
er kingdom ; and the value of lands and goods muft ratably increafe, as
the intrinfic value of gold and filver falls and diminifhes.

SERVICES.

Secondly, Services : Under this head is to be reckoned a great deal
•f what the feveral Trefs, or the particular Gavels and tenures of every

manor


ia6 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

manor were obliged to do. To the well conceiving whereof it will be
neceflary to premife, that in every Cantref, generally, th* prince had
a manor-houfe, his chapel, mills, offices, and other conveniences ; to
everyone of which, and that in feveral forts, the fervices of tenants
were feverally adapted.

The head-manor, or the place where the manor-houfe or Llys ftood,
was ufually comportioned into feveral Gavels, laid out to tenants for
private and domeftic fervices. The tenants or poffeflbrs of fuch lands
were in many places called, (jwyr Mael, Gwyr tir y porib, and Gwyr
gwaith. The tenants of the reft of the Comot were fome of them obliged
to repair the walls, fome the hall, fome the chapel ; and fome of them
to do other ncceflaries and appendages of the prince's palace, or the
chief manor-houfe of the Cantref

Befides thefc alfo, there were in every Cantref fome tenants who
were tied by their tenures to carry ftones, fome to carry corn, fome to
repair the roof, fome the walls, fome the watcr-courfe of this mill, and
fome others of that mill ; fome to carry the Mabere, as it is there ex-
prefled ; by which, I take it, they meant the great ftones *, and the
great timber, of this or that mill. Some alfo were obliged by their te-
nures to repair weirs, fome to carry wattles and brufh-wood, fome to
hedge warrens, and fome to attend the offices of the larder and kitchin,
as every where occurs in the prince's Extent-book.

As to the mentioned diftindlion of Gwyr Mae/, Gwyr Gwaith, and
Gwyr tir y forth ; I take Gwyr Mae^ to be either the prince's local
guard, obliged to arm themfelves, to watch and ward about the palace,
anfwerable to the caftle-guard-tenure among the Englifli ; or perhaps
they were only fuch as had fome fmall wages allowed them for their
work, as there occurs the mention of feveral tenants in the prince's
Extent-book, who had a penny per diem allowed them. The Gwyr
gwaith were fuch as were to work on their own cofts. And the Gwyr
tir y forth were fuch as were obliged to do, on the prince's corn-land,
the ulual work and fervice incumbent on them. Of this laft fort the
Bishop's Extent makes frequent mention, but not by that name.

Now tir y port h I take to be terra pqftus in its true fignification ; that
is, fuch lands — and generally they were the beft — as the princes re-
ferved in every manor for the corn-provifion ; and fuch in many places
have been called Cemmaes or Cefn-faes, as I before obferved, viz.r idged

* The great timber, not the great ftones. Afatnmium, or Mal*umium t is an ol<t law tetm
for any fort of timber fit for building, derived from the French Mirefmt.

i or.


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA* i%j

or ploughed land : Which diftin&ion was very proper, when the conn-
try wfts generally wild and woody. And thele Cemmae/s, of which
there are feveral in Wales, are always reckoned the beft conv-lands in
their territory.

Thus in the manor of Rhojir, the dividend or portion of land affigned
to that ufe was the townfhip of Celleiniog, alfo called Maes y forth, as
one part of it is fo called to this day ; which Llewelyn ap Iorwerth*
prince of North-Wales, beftowed as provifion-land, as he did alfo
Bodgedwydd or Hrefod Qedwydd in the Cantref of Aberffraw, on the ab-
bey of Conway* Both which places were afterwards by the monks of
that houfe called, the one Squirt or §{tfart grains, and the other ^uirtau^
they being both applied and made ufe of by that convent, with fome dif-
ference of condition, to the fame ancient end and purpofe*

DUTIES.

Thirdly, Duties : Under this head I comprehend the feveral fuitr
«nd courfes, which many of their tenants, both free and bond, were
•obliged to perform :

Firft, Se&a ad Curiam, i. e. appearance, when fummoned, at the
•prince's court ; which without great peril none durft rcfufe.

Secondly, Se&a ad Hundredutn, i. e. to appear, when fummoned, at
the court of the Hundred or Comot where they lived.

Thirdly, Sefta ad Comitatum* i. e. appearance at the County Court.
This was formerly their great court of Common -Pleas, and of great au-
thority, whofe jurifdi&ion extended over the whole county; And is to
this day under, the king's fubftitute, the fheriff of the county, of confe-
rence ; wherein matters of the greateft moment, relating to the county,.
are tranfa&ed.

Fourthly, SeEla ad Molendinum, that is, to grind at fuch and inch a
mill, paying grift-toll, ad trige/imttm vas, the thirtieth part, which was
then very confiderable, when the repairs were all upon thefe tenants,.
who yet were obliged to pay that toll. And fome of thefe tenants who
were not concerned with the repaifs, were yet obliged to make 3nd clear
water-courfes, and to carry feveral things thereunto, efpccially the
prince's own corn.

Fifthly, Seffa ad gwerram ; they were obliged to array and follow the
prince to the war : This was a general duty, where the nobility and com-
xnonalty were to attend, when called upon. And the fame in that cafe,.
Was the duty of every tenant to his immediate lord or nobleman ; ire

' cum


12* MONA ANTiQJJA tRESTAURATA.

cum domino ad gwerram fumptibus propriis; that is, to attend their lord,
engaged in the war, fome for a limited time, and to a limited place, but
fomc indefinitely to any place, at their own proper cofts and charges.
This latter duty, where it was fo peremptory and indefinite, was then
called Gwaitb Milwyr., that is, a fort of 4cnight-fervice.

Secondly, under this head I reckon alfo the Cylchau or the courfes
thefe tenants were bound to. undergo. la this I muft confefs there is at
this time no fmall difficulty to give a determinate account what they all
were, and how by the prince orliis officers they were ufed and managed*
They are in .the Extent of North- Wales thus expreffed and reckoned.

i. Cylcb Stalon.

2. Cylcb Rbaglon.

3. Cylcb Hebogyddicn.

4. Cylcb Greorion.

5. Cylcb Dowrgon.

Thefe were duties incumbent on particular tenures, to be performed
by the tenants or pofTeffors of them at certain turns and courfes, accord-
ing as thofe lands were originally ftipulated for, and conditioned to un-
dergo. On fome, one or two of thefe duties ; on others, more were
incumbent. Towards the explanation of thefe courfes, I (hall offer .the
following conjectures.

Pirft, it feems to me very probable, .that in thofe ancient tumultu-
ous times, when buildings were very mean, and frequently demolifhed
by the rage of wars j— that in thofe unfettled times, I fay, provifion
was every where made, when hnds were to be difpofed and cantoned
into Gavels and tenures, for the fupport and maintenance of the nu-
merous retinue that was of neceflity to ferve the prince and to attend
Jiis court.

On this provifion, and in this manner eftablifhed, the prince's offi-
cers and fervants were to fubfift. And as our prince's court was then
rather ambulatory and fhifting from manor to manor, than fixed and
fettled to any certain place ; fo into what Cantrefov manor foever he
came, and for fome time refided, the tenants of that manor, by a re-
ferved power as before- mentioned, were particularly to take in and pro-
vide for fuch and fo many of the prince's officers and fervants, as their
Gavels and tenures of lands., fo given out to them and to their anceftors,
obliged them to do.

And


MOKA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 129

And thus I conceive that Cylcb Stalon was the receiving and entertain-
ing of the prince's grooms, and feeding fo many of his horfes, for fuch
and fuch a time, ^mong fuch and fo many of the tenants of the manor
he redded in, as were particularly ijound to the performance of that duty.

So likewife it is probable, that Cylcb Rbagbn * was the entertaining
the prince's Senefcbalox fteward, among fuch and fo man^of the tenants,
(for we muft N know that as well freeholders as bondholders were te-*
aants) who were obliged to receive them, each in his turn. And this
is exprefs in the Bi(Eop's Extent-book, where you may find that his
Senefchal was to be entertained, for fo long a time as their cuftom ob-
liged them to do ; and alfo the bifhbp's horfes or Garreons, fo called
there, to be fed and provided for, during the fame, btf feveral of the
bifhop's tenants.

That Cylcb Hebogyddion was, after the fame manner, the entertain-
ing and providing for the prince's falconers and his hawks. This is
eaflly to be gathered out of the King's Extent-book of North -Wales, in
villa de Pennartb in Comitatu Carnarvon & paffim alibi. So it is alio to
be gathered out of thofe records,, that Cylcb Greorion, as it is called, was
the providing for and entertaining by turns (every tenant for a limited <
time) the keepers of the prince's live* (lock and cattle; fuch I fuppofe
as were defigned for the daughter, for the provifion of his family, when
he refided in their manor. And this duty, it feems, came afterwards to
be commuted into certain payments of money, called Arian-Greorion>
which often occur in the Prince's Extent.

But laftly, with refpe£t to that Cylcb Dorgon or Cylcb Dowrgon,
which occurs very often in the Prince's Extent-book, and incumbent .
on very many free *frefs and Gafels ; what is meant by it, I think is
not eafily determinable.

It feems with fome likelihood to relate t6 the prince's huntfmen, and
his dogs ; which the tenants were likewife obliged to take in and pro-
vide for by turns, as often as the prince made any flay, or came to hunt
in any Trefov manor* -This I think is made out fomewhat plain from
a paflage in that fragment of the Moelmutian Laws mentioned in Howel
Dda's book, in the latter part of it, where Trefs are diftributed into
Maenols ; of which the author of that writing affirms twelve ought to
be in every Comet: Whereof four, fays that old law, ought to |>e, I
feibion eilliori ; that is, as Dr. Davies explains the word, in villainage or

• Rb*gt>* i Rhagkw.

S vaffal-


i 3 o MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

vaffal-tenure f. And the ufe of thofe townftiips was, as it is there ex-
preffed, I bortbi Cwn, a Metre b, a CbfycA, a Dofraitb, viz. to receive
and provide for the prinoe's dogs, his horfes, his hawks; and by
Dofraitb, we are to underftand all fervile drudgeries which thefe Tre/j
were bound to do. And fo that old law concludes, that in that manner
the prince was'to order his court, and to difpofe of his retinue and fer-
vants in every Cantrefox Comot he came into ; which I take to be the
meaning of thofe words in that law— yfc yn y M6dd bynny y dyle y
Brenbin ivejtfa bob b/wyddyn, u e. and in that manner was the prince to
go about or vifit his manors or Cantrefs every year.

Neither is it unreafonable to think, confidering the fmallnefs of the
prince's manor-houfes and buildings, which be had generally in every
Cantref> and which were but forry habitations then ; I fey, it is not at
all unreafonable that his great houfhold and retinue fhoold be thus dis-
tributed by turns and changes amongft his tenants. But how long
thefe turns continued at a time, or how oft they returned, I cannot fay :
But do fuppofe that when the prince's court came to any Cantref* hu
having a manor-houfe for the mod part in every one, the tenants of that
manor were, as before-mentioned, obliged to keep and maintain the
prince's fervants, while he mad? his ftay in the faid manor ; and when
he removed to another manor, it is likely the tenants of the laft manot -
he refided in were eafed of their guefts. And it is probable that when
the prince did not, or could not come at the ufuai times among fuch
tenants, that they were then obliged to pay in lieu of it, a fum of money,
which was therefore called Aria* Gvttjlfa ; which Dr. Davies on the
word Gwijifa explains thu$~-Swnm* pecuniarum quas fubditi fohebant
principi, pro eo quod ipfum &fms 9 in tranfitu-, fud qui/que vice in hojpitium
excipere tenebantur ; that is, " A fum of money which the tenants paid
to the prince, inftead of entertaining him and his court by turns, as he
went about on his progreis."

It is remarkable here, that the ancient Irifh laws feem to have been
much of a fort with ours in this cafe, by their Bretons and Bonacbts*
their Coigne and Liveries, their Cofherings and Cejfes, and their Cuttings
on their tenants, claimed and exacted by their lords and princes ; as
appears at large in Sir John Davies's book of the State of Ireland^
Which is a further argument of the original agreement between the
Irifh and old Britons, in their forms of government, as wella s in their.

f It lhould rather be translated—" Sons of aliens or Anmgers.*

Ian-


MONA ANTIQJTA RESTAURATA. 131

language, and many other particulars; betokening their being once
one people, or having at leaft a great intercourfe and communication be-
tween them,

MULCTS.

Fourthly, Mul&s : Of this fort we find not many incomes to the
prince, fixed and rated upon any particular tenures ; only Gober, Amober,
and Obediw. The other mulds, whereof there were a great many,
as may be obferved out of the books of Howel Dda, were cafual and
not local penalties, inflitfted but in particular cafes, on a fewperfonal
tranfgrcflions.

Amober, or Am-vx>br f Ammobrogium in the Bifliop's Extent-book,
was a muldfc payable on certain Trefs and Gafels. It was generally ten
(hillings, and on fome places but five, Pro foeminarum Scor tat tone 9 for"
womens 9 incontinency. And there are fome who affirm, that it was
anciently a fine paid to the prince or lord of the fee, at the marriage of
a vaflal's daughter. See Dr. Davies's quotations on that word.

Obediw * was a fum of money rated on fcveral Trefs, and payable to
the prince or chief lord, as the mortuary for the death of a tenant ; and
l!his was fometime called Obediw Dietifedd, where a fum of money was
payable to the prince or lord for a tenant dying without iflue. This is
fometimes called Relevium or relief-money, paid to this day to the prince
by the tenants of fcveral lands ; though it be exprefly remitted in the
charter of North-Wales.

But for Gober, I have good grounds out of the Extent of North-
Wales to affirm, that it was that which was paid to the prince or lord
for the marriage of a vaflal's daughter ; which was moft commonly ten
Shillings. See the Ex tent- book in Villa Treddeftennydd ft* Anglefey. A
relic, it feems, of ancient heathenifli barbarity, commuted in time of
Christianity to a fum of money, and therefore called Am-<wobr\ ; being
a fuppJetory mulft, payable to the chief lord of the place, inftead of
that barbarous cuftom of deflouring his vaflal's bride. Many of thefe
payments are now remitted by the charter of North- Wales, granted to
the WeMh by king Henry the Seventh.

• This is the fame with Ab«fi<w, Ebtdlnu, and Detrei, in Angfefey, Hatred, where the beft
bead of the tenant's at his death, is due to the lord : Jngtict, Herriot.

t GoStr and Am$ber are two diftinft mul&s ; the former being a fine paid to the lord on the
marriage of a tenant's daughter, or on her committing the a A of incontinency: The latter, 'a
payment made to the bride's father or guardian, for his confent.

Sa * AT-


i 3 2 moka antiqjja restaurata.

ATTENDANCES.

Lastly, Attendances : Thefe were an obligation on the great one*
to their fovereign prince. I call it attendance, becaufe it was the con-
dition of a fee or honour, as fervice was the condition of inferior tenures.
And this attendance was of fundry forts, according to the fcveral occa*
lions of the prince, both in peace and war.

The perfons thus obliged were generally the prince's nobles, lor^s
and bartons, and therefore this attendance of theirs is fome times called
baron-fervice. And thefe lords and great men hadlikewife under them,
both tenants of freeholds and vaffals, over whom they were lords in fee*
And it is here a queftton, perhaps worth enquiry, whether there was
before Edward the Third, any fuch thing as fec-fimple in Wales, except
only in thefe noble and feudatory pofleflions ? Of this fort was Llowarcb
ap Bran of Portbamel\ Hwfaap Cynddel of Prefaddfed; legerin ap
Carwedd of Llwydiartb j Eneon ap GwaJcbmai of Irefeilir ; Cadrod
Hwrdd of Bodafon, and others in their time of this country, who had
trufts and offices both martial and civil conferred upon them, and alio
titles, honorary and minifterial ; all depending on thefe conditions*

Thus * Hwfa ap Cynddel of Prefaddfed held his cftatc in fee, by. at-
tending on the prince's coronation, and bearing up of the right fide of
the canopy over the prince's head, at that folemnity. And the bifhop*
they fay, held fomewhat by his peculiar office of crowning him, and
by being his capellanus primarius, his principal chaplain. Mod of the
^prince's lords and nobles were bound to particular attendances by thofe-
- land-conditions, befides what they were in general obliged to, as fub»»
je&s by homage and fealty ; which conditions under pain of baniffit-
ment (which fort of punifhing was then moft in ufe) and forfeiture of
their eftatcs, they were bound to perform* whea duly fummoned and
called thereunto.

On this account, I conceive, it was that the three fona of "Tudur afr
Cronw of tfrecqftelli viz. Ednyfed of frecaJteU* Gronw of Penmynydd, and
Rhys of Arddreiniogt were in their time called the three temporal lords
of Anglefey ; as the Penclas of Ho/y-Head—L c Pencolas or prefidenjt
of the collegiate church there j— the arch-deacon of Anglefey ^ and tha
prior of Ptnmon % were the three fpiritual lords. Their tenures,, it fcenos*

^ Tr Hnvfa bwn aU Etiftddion bynaf a nmfianty Dalaitb am btn y Trwjfig* gyda at Efetb Bangor;.
m ar y djdd ejnraf y tyftgrid y Tywyfigym y Dalaitb 9 yr mdd i Hwfa y par diliad a fat am y f>-
mttyfig, wtb nvi/t* y Dalaitb am ii bi» 9 abyn mid vfofamuth Hwfaap CynddfL Vide Linmi Dam,
-Ghddaitb ?opy, p. 53*

being


MO-NA A^TIQJJA RESTAMaTA. 133

being baron or knight-fervices, and anciently in titled -to Tome of thofe

. martial of minifterial attendances, encouraged them, for prefervation of

< their ancient rights and cuftoms, to take on them thofe titles and call

.themfelves knights or lords;, as the flory of one, who indeed was father

of thefe mentioned temporal lords, is remarkable* in Mr. Robert

Vaughan's book concerning that particular., Thefe forts of Welrti lords

were they that paid homage for their lands and eftates in fee, to Edward

prince of Wales, at Chefter, in the time of Edward the Fifft. See

• Camdocus Lancar. Mr* Wynnes edition, p. 310.

There were in Anglefey, and in other countries* certain tenures and,
lands,, which were held o&neither prince nor lord, but of certain faints*
or patrons of churches ; where we find* as appears in the Prince's Ex-

. tent-book, the teqants of thofe lands call themielves abbots. Of which,
feints or church-patrons* there were feven in Anglefey that were in-
titled in capite to feveral tenures, viz. St. Beano 9 St. Cybi 9 St. Cadwaladr,
St. Peirio, St. Cyngar, St. Macutus or Mecbeti, and St. Elian. The laflr

, of thefe, viz. St. Elian* had a great deal of lands beftowed on him and
his church for ever by Cafwallon haw-birr fometime prince of thefe
countries, as appears by an ancient charter under the name of Cafwalhn*
but how authentic I cannot fay - r which yet has been infpe&cd and con-

> firmed by feme of the kings of England. Moft of thefe churches, as I
obferved in* an ancient manufcript, had in ancient times their Nawddfaaw
or fanftuaries eftabliihed in them : Which gives me grounds to guefs N
that one of the conditions of thofe tenures fo beftowed on them, was

• to maintain and fupport thofe places of refuge, and the perfons pro-
tected in them ; and to fee that their privileges and immunities, with

.other rights thereunto belonging, were from time to time preferved and
kept inviolate.

To conclude this fe&ioiv; I here take leave to fey, that the reafon-

. which induced me to colled thefe brief remarks on the ftate and con-
dition of our Cantrefs, Comots and townfhips, with their fubordinate:

. divifions in this ifle of Anglefey, was, that by them we might have feme
light and infpedion — ex Ungue Leonem — into the frame and conftitu-

• tion of our. ancient Britifti government. And what I have gathered out
of thefe mentioned verdi&s, I take to be unexceptionable teftimonies.
and evidences of what I have offered in relation to thofe fmaller divi-
fions; being the reports of the moft fubftantial men in every Qpmot*
made upon oath, and taken out of the be ft a flu ranees, of ancient meri v
records, and tradition— and that too in the very clofe and letting of thafe

ancienfc


i 3 4 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

ancient British government ; which (at all other fublunary dungs have
their determined fates and periods) was forced to lay down her ancient
claims and pretenfions, and fubmitto the more peaceful and happy forms
of a well -tem p e r ed EnglUh eftablHhment, under which it has now for
fome ages happily continued.

SECTION XL

The mofi remarkable occurrences in the Ifle of Mona, from the time it was
fubdued by the Romans, and the Druidijh hierarchy was dtjjbhed in it,
to the time the Britijh fovereignty was efiablijhed at Aberfraw, where
the hiflory of Wales begins, to which I refer the reader for further ac-
counts oj it, during the reigns of its fucceffive princes, to the time it was
madefubjeSl to the crown and laws of England*

HA VI NG in fome of the foregoing fe&ions accounted for the firft
planting and poffefling of this Ifle of Mona by the ancient Druids,
and the furrendering of it afterwards into the hands of the prevailing
Romans ; and in the lift, for its ancient divifions, and the diftribution
of them into, fundry forts of rights and pofleffions ; it will not be, I
prefume, unufeful, if I briefly touch in this on fome of the rnoft re-
markable events and overtures relating to this Ifle, from the conqueft of
it by the Romans, to the time it was made again the feat of fovereignty
under Roderick the Great. Of which time, the overtures I flndl take
notice of will be of two forts, civil and ecclefiaflical ; and will be diftin*
guifhed under two periods* Firft, from the Romans 9 conquering the
Ifle of Mona, to their deferting it, and with it the whole ifle of Britain.
And, Secondly, from that defertion, to the time when the Britifh fcept«
was eftablithed at Aberfraw \ which in fome meafure may clear the way
to the Welfh hiflory, which commences. about that time, and gives
. many accounts of this ifland of Mona.

In the firft interval, hiftory indeed affords us very little certainty in
relation to this ifle, fave only that as a principal part of the Ordovican
territory, it had a garrifoft of Roman foldiers eftablifhed in it by Sueto-
nius Paulinus~Pngft£iM0 impofuit vicis, as Tacitus reports—which was
£bon ruined by the Britons, as I have before-mentioned. Yet this ifle
being a place of confiderable confequence, as being the chief retreat of
the Ordovices or North- Wales men, we may well prcfume that fome
time after, when Julius Agricola had retaken and compleated the con-

queft


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAUfcATA. i 3 $

queft of it, he likewife eftabliflied garrisons in it* And though hiftory
be filent, as to the particulars of that tranfadtioh, yet the propriety and
import of the names of certain places, may be juftly taken to fupply
that defeft. By the evidence of which we may guefs the two Caftelliors,
lituate near the two ends of the ifland, to have been the feats of thofe
Handing garrifons. And not far from each tif thefe we find alio two
places called Pen Efcyns, importing chief afcents, with fome analogy
to our Gorfedds ; as if in thefe two prccindts were then eftablifhed alfo
their ufual pnefidiary courts of juftice, for the adminiftration and go-
vernment of the ifland. And Prefeddfod, i. e. Prafidis Manjio, novy
called Prefaddfed, may feem to have been the refidence of the Prafes
or its chief governor. For it is probable, being an ifland, that it had
a feparate government of its own, for fome time at leafh

Whatever thefe Roman eftablifliments at that time were, we are fure
this Ifle of Mona, with the whole Ordovican territory, became after-
wards part or member of that province, which in the general divifion
of Britain by the Romans was called Britannia Secunda ; and had a pre-
fident of its own to govern the affairs of the province ; and had alfo two
legions eftabliflied on the borders of it; viz. one at Chefter, called
Valens or Vi&rix Vigejima, which title of that legion might give occa-
fion to the Britons to call that place Caer LJecn Gawr * ; that is, the
Ration of the mighty and valiant Legion, as by the many and great feats
it had done here and elfewhere, it deferved to be called : — And another
at the other end of this province, feated on the river Wijk, called Britan-
nica Secunda Augufia. Both thefe legions were advantageoufly feated to
awe and keep under the Ordovices, the Si/ures, and the Dimeta (which
were fo many unions and confederacies of petty lords and fovereigns,
who at firft had given the Romans work enough) and to hold them ia
to their due obedience and fubjedtion.

As a part of this weftcrn province of Britain, called, as I faid before,
Britannia Secunda, this Ifle of Mona— having now fubmitted to the Ro-
man yoke — muft be believed to have had the fame fate with other coun-
tries that were members of it, in paying of tributes, and fending what
levies of men it could afford, to ferve abroad in the Roman armies and
garrifons. And perhaps in refpedt of this latter or perfonal thraldom*
the inhabitants of this ifland were a little happier than many of their

• Our author runs here, after' Mr. Camden, into a miftake* . For this place, according to all

our Britifh writers* was fo called from its firft founder Uuu Gawr, the foa of Brutus Dananim.

I fellow-


136 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.:

fellow- vaflals in the more inland parts of the country; where draining,
of marfhes, paving of boggs, railing of c*ufe-ways, levelling of port-
ways, building of caftles, palaces, temples, public edifices, and other
fervile drudgeries, employed the hands and wafted the ftrength of abun-
dance of poor wretches : As the noble Ga/gacus, in his pathetic fpeech
to his Caledonian af my (recorded by Tacitus) fays they were in many
places compelled with (tripes and hardships to undergo.

For indeed in all this Ifle of Mona we find no tokens of that fort of
flavery * no remains of palaces, baths, temples, great caftles, and other
Roman works, that may be thought to employ the natives of it ; except
we reckon tinder that head, the great caufe-way or bridge near Holy-
Head, called Pont RbydPont, and the many liberies or thofe enclofures
of great ftones 9 raifed in many nooks and angles in the fea round the
ifland, efpecially on the fliore of the river Menai. And this fort of work
I take the more probable to be Roman, for that I frequently find thofe
jlone-weirs in our ancient * deeds to have been called Gurgites, a name
undoubtedly the Romans gave them— -as being generally made in creeks
and eddies that draw and fwallow in, and therefore called by them
Gurgites, arid corruptly by the Britons, Gorgit or Goret, a name they
retain to this day — as having been firft built at the command and by
the dire&ion of the Romans, fome of them with great toil and labour.
Yet this ifland fbems to have been a placQ of fome confiderable repute,
efpecially m the more peaceful times of the Roman empire, as appears
by the many medals that were from time to time taken up in this ifland,
and from the abundance of their coins, gold, filver, copper, brafs,
that were and are daily here and there dug up in it. Not to mention
the probability of greater quantity of thefe Roman coins being taken up
in former ages, when more of them were to be found; I have myfelf
feen (of the number of fuch as we may well prefume were taken up-
lately) coins of many of the emperors, and of fonje of the Caefars, from
Caligula to Valentinian the Second, taken up in this ifland, which com*
prehends all the time the Romans governed here. And of fome of them
whole pots full were lately found, and great numbers of Caraufius's,

* Johannes Hammond, Sec. dedi 13 eoncejp Willimo ap Giy/fyth ap Gwilim nnsem ttnemtntttm menm
turn omnibus terris mis in Villa de Bodva in Comit. Angltfy % Sec. at ttiam quart am partem Eiconemiat
HtDiminio Epifcopi & Capituli Bangor in Comotis Mene % Malitrattb 14 Llewen in Comitatu Jngh/ey: nee
non partts nuas in Gurgitibm five pi/cariis Villa de Treworion in Comitatu Carnarvon, pro Sexaginta
fol/dis SterHngerum 9 pra/ato IV. G. G. Joint, ana? qnidem Tenem* tere. Eiconomia? partes in Gnrgitibns Jive
pi/cariis mibi dtvenerint tx parte Manured nxoris meaj ana? /nit uxor Einj/ed ap Tudor, Sec* Dot apod
Bodva, xx. He Septemb. June Hen* 4. Prime*

Alleftus,


MONA ANTIQJLJA RESTAURATA. 137

Alle&us, Conftantius, Conftantine — father and fon, Conftans, and of
Helen the emprefs. All which muft needs argue that the place was
Very much frequented by the better fort, when it had fuch quantities of
Roman coins loft and buried in it.

All this wealth of the place, of which thefe coins are fo many tefti-
monies, proceeded either from the plenty of corn and other provifions
it afforded ; or from the Angularity and pleafiires of the place, and other
conveniencies of it, inviting perhaps many of the Roman gentry of the
neighbouring countries, and not unlikely many of the officers of the le-
gion at Chefter, to come and divert themfelves in proper feafons, with fifh-
ing, hunting, and catching of wild fowl, which may well be fuppofed to
have brought this money into it. And if it abounded with corn, fifh,
and wild fowl, as we have rcafon to prefume it then did ; we may as
juftly prefume, that when affairs began to be fettled, and laws to be ob-
ferved, it grew again wealthy and confiderable : It being near enough to
Vend its commodities by fea to the legion at Chefter, whofeconfumption of
provifions muft be much more than this fmall ifland could afford ; and
yet far enough from it, not to be harrafTed, abufed and pillaged, as their
too near neighbours frequently were, by the infolent foldiery. On
which account, and by its being removed out of the way of oppreffion,
this ifle may be well thought, after the firft devaftation was over, to have
enjoyed great plenty ; and to have borne its yoke, when once accuftomed
to it, with greater eafe and fecurity, than many of its fellow-fubje&s
in the more expofed parts of the nation.

In this interval alfo, this ifland enjoyed the greateft blefling it ever
had fince it was an ifland. Almighty Providence was now in mercy
pleafed to difcover to it the knowlege of Chrift crucified ; whereby tho'
for the punifhment of their fins he had fubje&ed the bodies of thofe
poor natives to the dominion of the Romans, yet for the glory of his
great name, he at the fame opened them a way to releafe their fouls
from the vaflalage and tyranny of Satan, under which they had fo long
groaned during the darknefs and errors of Gentilifm.

Now in accounting for this great affair, I cannot with others, forbear
lamenting here the misfortune of our nation, in having the precious re-
cords that were to convey to pofterity the memory of this great work,
all deftroyed by the ravages of the barbarous Saxons, when we had the
good fortune to have the Gofpel preached to us in the earlicft years of
Chriflianity, even before Rome itfelf. And our complaint herein is
the more juft, in that it is too much to be fufpedled, that this execra-

T bis


138 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

ble villainy was perpetrated by the inftigation of Romifti agents, envious
of our earlier converfion, after the coming over of monk Auftin, to per-
vert our purer faith, and to lay on the ruins of our ancient church the
foundation of the papal grandeur and tyranny.

For a little before the arrival of this monk Auftin, we find Gildas,
the mod ancient Britifh author we have now extant, pofitively affirm-
ing it of his certain knowlege. And what knowlege, properly fo called,
could he have, but from undoubted records preferved to his time, and
perufed by him, probably at Bangor-mona&ry, where he ftudied, and
was a member of it ? * Which place, with all its books and records,
it is too well known, was burnt and ruined, and about one thoufand
and two hundred of its monks inhumanly butchered by the Saxons, on
the perfuafion (as it is much to befufpe<fted,fromhis having before threat-
ened in a fly prophetic way our bifliops with it) of that wicked Auftin.
The lofs of other records he bemoans indeed; but of thofe relating
to the affairs of the church, he is pofitively fure. Tempore ut fcimus
fummo Tiberii Cafaris — " We know" — he does not fay it is reported,
there is a tradition or the like ; but upon aflured warrant, the records be-
ing full and certain, their authority not in the leaft queftioned, but owned
by all. He fays, " We know that in tha latter end of Tiberiu6 Caefar's
reign, when this ifland lay frozen by its diftance from the vifible fiin,
Chrift the fun of righteoufnefs, the true fun, not from a temporal, but
from an eternal firmament, was firft pleafed to communicate his rays,
that is, his precepts, to our inhabitants, held faft, by fome with more
or lefs fervency, to the hot days of Dioclefian."

Who it was that was meant by Gildas, by whofe coming the light
of the gofpel (hone in Britain in the latter end of Tiberius's reign, is
' quite loft from the memoirs of the Chriftian church. And whether the
ancient tradition of Jofephof Arimathea, who might then well tranf-
port himfelf to Britain in one of the Phoenician (hips that frequently
traded for tin, and fo carry with him the firft tidings of Chrift, has any
foundation in truth, (not heeding the Glaftenbury ftory of it) is equally
uncertain. Yet it fcems very probable, that that honourable perfon,
foon after the afcenfion of Chrift, conveyed himfelf away from the Jewifli
fanhedrim, of which he was a member, to fome remote .country, for
fear the Jews ftiould queftion him about Chrift's body, which he had
buried, but had rofe up from the grave he had laid it in : Which muft

* We have no authority at all to fay that Gildas was a member of Bangor monaftry.

be


MONA ANT1QUA REStAURATA. 139
be a fear well grounded, and a juft occafion of his withdrawing himfelf
fomewhere out of their reach ; and that he did fo is very likely. For
a perfon of his character and merit, if he had ftaid in Judea during the
ten fucceeding years after the refurredtion, would in all probability have
met with an eminent mention even in the fcripture, either for his death
or his conduit in propagating the gofpel. For though the firft propa-
gators of it did not turn to the Gentiles for the fpace of ten years, after
that, yet I fee not how it can infer, or what fhbuld hinder, that the
light of the Chriftian do&rine, even in the time which Gildas mentions,
could not be conveyed and difcovered to us ; fince it is lure that their
great commiffion from Chrift's own mouth was, " Go ye and teach
all nations/' without any limitation of time or place, only beginning at
Jerufalem, which might be done at any time. To this may be added,
that what was tranfafted at the Pentecoft feems to warrant the doing it,
at any time after, efpecially in remote countries where no Jews were,
and where any one of the difciples of Chrift did arrive, in order to do
it. But whether Jofeph of Arimathea or fome other perfon did it,-
Gildas in his way of writing feems pofitive it was done before the death
of the emperor Tiberius. By which account, if granted to be true, it
will appear that the gofpel was brought to and preached in Britain,
even before it was at Rome itfclf by fome years ; which is a point not
to be given up by us, without an evidence as early and exprefs at leaft
againft it as this of Gildas is for it, which has not yet appeared. For it
is not fo much as pretended by the Romanifts that St. Peter; who, they
own, brought firft the faith of Chrift to Rome, arrived there before the
fecond year of Claudius's reign, which was at leaft five years after the
death of Tiberius, and after it was brought to Britain: Which ferves
to (hew that the Britifh church in its firft rudiments, was fenior to that
of Rome by fo many years. And as fome evidence of the truth of this
mentioned tradition, it is well known that the kings of Britain and
their bifhops challenged and were allowed precedency in great fynods
and other folemn conventions by many of their neighbouring king-
doms, on account of their having received the Chriftian faitb before
others in thefe weftern parts of the world ; by which it appears it was
no groundlefs tradition upon which they built that claim.

Now beiides what Gildas hints to us in this paflage, and was no
doubt well known in his time ; we have other teftimonies that corne
near it in foreign authors (which neither the malice of Rome, nor the
burbarity of heathens could deftroy) left yet remaining ; which probably

T 2 were


i 4 o MONA ANTIQUA RE8TAURATA.

were but what thofe foreign authors collected out of our British records j
or rather received from the mouths of fome of our British clergy at Aries
and Nice, where fome of them rcforted to fynods * f and might be well
prefumed to give the other bifhops there an account of the primitive ftate
and planting of the British church, agreeable to the records we pre-
ferved of it. By which teftimonies in general it appeared, that the
evangelical light was brought to the iflcs of Britain, and to the utmoft;
bounds of the Weft, by fome of the apoftles themfelves, and others fent
by them.

First, By fome of the apoftles : It is reported that St. James, the
fon of Zebedee, with his mother Salome, came into Britain to give
tidings of Chrift about fix years aftfcr the refurre&ion : And alfo that
Simon Zelotes came to Britannia about four years after, teaching Chrift,
till he was taken up and martyred by the magiftrates or Druids, who
were then of great authority among the people. Some fay that St.
Peter was alfo in Britain, to which Gildas feems to allude in his Sedem
Petri, &c.

Secondly* By apoftolical men, or men fent by the apoftles. It is
affirmed by thofe teftimonies that Ariftobulus, the brother of St. Bar-
nabas, was fent by St. Paul and St. Barnabas to Britannia to be their
bifhop about the year of our Lord 51. Of the twelve companions of
Jofeph of Arimathea, the monks of Glaftenbury have fo deformed that
tradition with their abfurd fables, that their ftory of it deferves little
or no credit. But of all the foreign teftimonies we have of that affair,
the ftrongeft and beft grounded, and on which I chiefly tnfift, is that
which tells us St. Paul travelled to the Britifh ifles and eftablifhed a church
therein : Which implies that he ordained prefbyters and deacons hereun-
der Ariftobulus, or fome other, whom he appointed bifhop over them*
in order to fet forward that important work of converting the Britifh
people to. the faith of Chrift, which indeed in a little time gained con-
fiderably upon them.

This coming of St. Paul to the Britifh ifles, and as Eufebius men-
tions (though he names him not) to the utmoft corners of the Weft, is
owned on all hands to have been after the fourth year of Nero,. at which..
time he was fet at liberty in Rome. And being to make his journey
weftward, it is not unlikely that he was influenced and engaged by that,

* There were out of Britain at the council of Aries three bifhops, one prieft, and one deacon*
The bifhops of York and London, and the bifhop of a colony, probably of Can It on. Lloyds Hift*
Chun p. 72.

noble.


MONA ANTIQJJA RE8TAURATA. i 4 x

noble British lady ClaiicRa Rufina, his convert, and at whofc houfe he
was entertained, to proceed diredfcly to Britain to her countrymen and
relations to preach unto them the word of life ; which it is probable
he arrived at, Anno 59. For it is foppofed that St." Paul came into
Britain feme time before Suetonius Paulinus was fent to be governor of
Britain ; which was Anno 6p or 61 . Of which comiAg of St. Paul to
the Britifh Ifles an ancient Chriftian poet writes thus ;

Uranfiit Oceanum, vef quafacit Infula portum,
2>uafque Britannus habet terras, quafque Ultima 'T6ule.

Venantitts Fortunatus, lib. 3.
de vita Martini.

Now fince we are pretty fure from the beft foreign authorities, that
St. Paul came himfelf to Britain about thq time now mentioned; and
if he came, no doubt is to be made but that he planted a church in it
(if none hadWn planted before) as he did in the many countries he
came into ; and if he planted a church in it, it is as doubtlefs that he
ordained a bifhop, prefbyters, and deacons, who, together with other
devout converts, were inftrudted by him to proceed in carrying on the
work of the gofpej to the ytmoft corners of the land, if he did not him-
felf go there : Then, I fay, it may come well to be enquired, whether
fome of thofe prefbyters at lead, or fome other holy men before, did
not travel to the Me of Mona before it was conquered by Suetonius
Paulinus, and preached the gofpel in it. This is indeed what no one
can pofitively affirm : But if we confider that the Ifle of Mona was the
utmoft weftern ifle of Great- Britain, to which utmoft weftern bounds
the gofpel is faid to have been preached by him ; that it was alfo the
principal feat of the Britifh Druids -, that thofe Druids governed the
confeiehces of the people ; were great moralifts and adorers of one God ;
and confequently that the gaining them, or fome of the chiefeft of them,
was a ready way of converting the whole nation -> and indeed, except-
ing their human facrifices and diabolical * magick, they were, as to

life

• Thi6 magick of the Druids, or one part of it, feems to have remained among the Britons *
even after their converfion to Chriftianity, and is called Taijh in Scotland ; which is a way of pre-
diaing bv a fort of vifion they call Second Sight : And I take it to be a relic of Druidifm, parti-
cularly from a noted ftory related by Vopifcus, of the emperor Dioclefian, who, when a private
foldier in Gallia, on his removing thence, reckoning with his hoftefs, who was a Druid woman,
fhc told him he was too penurious, and did not bear in him the noble foul of a foldier ; on his
reply that his pay was fmall, (he looking ftedfaftly on him, faid thathe needed not be fo fparing


i 4 2 MONA ANTIGUA RESTA'URATA.

life and converfation in many points, almofV lialf Chriftians to their
hands — Confidering all this, I fay, we have fome grounds to think that
the firft fteps of fome of thofe holy men were bent towards it 9 and made
no long flay till they came into it : Confidering alfo a little farther, that
the power of life and death, in point of law. and judicature, was vefted
in thefe Druids * that one of the feats of judgment whereon /they exer-
cifed that power by acquitting or condemning, as 1 have before (hewed,
was in the Ifle of Mona ; that a medal of our Blefled Saviour was taken
up out of the rubbifti of that very mount or tribunal, where their fen-
tences and judgments were pronounced; that feeing it was taken up in
fo obfcure, unfrequented, and defolate a place as now it is, and I be-
lieve ever fince was, none can well doubt of its being true and genuine,
the circumftances of thing and place -cpnfidered; that bearing on it a
Chriftian infcription, importing, •' This is Jesus Christ the Media^
tor," it mud be fuppofed to have been brought there by fome Chriftian ;
that the Druids' authority was quite diflblved here, and their perfons
routed away by the Romans at the conqucft of this ifland, and confe-
quently no further judging and condemning of criminals at this mount
or confiftory ; all this will fliew that that medal muft be dropt there
before the demoli(hing of it by Suetonius Paulinus. And laftly, the
conqueft of this Ifle of Mona happening about feventeen years after
Simon Zelotcs is faid to have preached the gofpel in Britain, and about
two years after St. Paul planted a church in it, we may on thefe confi-
derations be inclined or at leaft have room to think, that one or other
of thofe holy men, thofe devout planters of Chriftianity, did come to
this Ifle of Mona, preached or offered to preach the gofpel in it, and

of his money, fcr after he mould kill a boar, ihe corifidently pronounced, he would be emperor of
Rome, which he took as a compliment from her : But feeing her ferious in her affirmation the
words ihe fpoke ftuck to him, and he afterwards took much delight in hunting and killing of boars,
often faying when he law many made emperors, and his own fortune not much mending, " I
kill the boars, but it is others that eat the*flefh " Yet it happened that, many years after, one
Arrius Aper, father-in-law of the emperor Numerianus, grafping for the empire, traitorou fly flew
him, for which facl being apprehended by the foldiers and brought before Diocle/lan, who being
then become a prime commander in the army, they left the traytor to his difpofal, who afking his
name, and being told that he was called Aper, i. e. a boar, without further paufe, he fheathed
his fword in his bowels, faying, Et bum Aprum turn C*tcri$ y i. e. " Even this boar alfo to the reft •"
which done, the foldiers, commending it as a quick extraordinary a& of juftice, without further de-
liberation falutcd him by the name of emperor.

I bring this ftory here in view, as not improper on this hint, nor unufeful to be obferved, be-
caufe it gives fair evidence of the antiquity of the Second Sight, and withal (hews that it defcended
from the ancient Druids, as being one part of the diabolical magick they are charged with ; and
upon their difperQon into the teiritories cf Denmark and Swcdeland continued there, in the moil
heathenifii parts, to this day, as is fet forth in the ftory of the late Duncan Campbel.

« perhaps


. MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. .143

perhaps loft his life, with this medal, at the place it was taken up, be-
fore ever the Romans fet foot upon it; verifying in part what Tertul-
lian, an age after, relates of the fudden progrefs of the Chriftian faith
among us, viz. Brjtannorurn /oca Romania inaccefla, Cbrijio vera fubdita —
i. e. " The Chriftian dodlrine anticipated the Roman fword in the ce-
lerity of its conquefts, and reached where that had not." So much fwifter
were the wings of the dove, carrying the joyful tidings of peace on
earth and good will towards men, than of the Roman eagle bringing
war and defolation among them.

But after the fubduing of this ifland by the. Romans, there is no
room to doubt that the word of life was plentifully . beftowed upon it ;
it being by the wife adjuftment of Providence the fignal advantage of
propagating the Chriftian faith, in having the minds of people, at the
feafon of offering it to them, extremely diftrefled and intenerated, as they
were then, by a world of calamities apd oppreffion— ^#?/0 dat intel-
leftum — than which nothing could more fit and prepare them to receive
and embrace it. Add to this, the Druids being then on a fudden all
driven away or deftroyed, or not daring to appear, the minds of people
were left free and at greater liberty to take in the comforts of the;g.ofpd»,
which ate always welcome to the grieved and. afflicted.

On this opportunity, we may well conceive, the gofpel foon took
footing, and by degrees prevailed in this- ifland, as it did in all this
weftern province ; which we find in about an, hundred and fifty years
after almoft all Chriftian,. and majcing an ecclefiaftical province, with an
archbifhop at Caer Llion on IViJk, and fuffragans under him. Having,
had many years before then, that is, Anno 182, as the learned Primate
Ufher affirms, a fchool of Chriftian learning, to fupply the province
with clergymen*, founded at Bangor ifcoed.m Flintihire, which became
afterwards that fo much noted and famous mpnaftry of Bangor.. But
what number of biftiops the faid archbifh.op of Cfier Leon had at firft
under his jurifdi&ion,. or. to what diocefe the Ifle of Mona belonged is
uncertain : Bangor and St. Afapb diocefes, the neareft to it, being not
founded till after the Romans deferted Britain,* and the Saxons had driven
the Southern Britons to Wales. It is indeed generally conceived that
after the manner of the Eaftern churches, there were feven bifhops un-
der the archbi{hop in this province. And it is not unlikely that the
feven-partitions or clafles of clergymen, which venerable Bede mentions
to have been in the renowned monaftry of Bangor, were fo many dif-
tirift communities peculiarly appertaining to thofe fcwtn fuffragan.

churches 5/


144 MONA A NT I QUA RE ST AU RATA*

churches; whereof fome had biflwps with feats endowed, and fome had
-theirs confecrated^t' Tituh \ as we findSampfon the difciple of Iltudus
and abbot of hlangarmon to have been fo ordained by archbiftiop Du-
britius, as Primate Ufher obferves. And indeed the fame learned pre-
late alfo fays, that in this interval, viz. Anno 364, one Cebius, fon of
Solomon duke of Cornwal, was confecrated bifhop by St. Hilary of
Poidtiers, and was feated in this Ifie of Mona as bifhop thereof, at a place
called from him Caer Cybi to this day. But I fear *, if the genealogy
we have of our Britifh faints may deferve any credit, that that great and
learned perfon was out in placing him fo high in time, as to be con-
temporary with St. Hilary bifhop of Poi&iers. For the faid genealogy
makes Solomon the father of Cebius or Cybi, to be great grandfon of
Conftantine duke of Cornwal, who next fucceeded king Arthur in the
Britifh throne, and who was contemporary with Gildas Badonicus about
the year 550. But whether of the two is in the right, John Tinmouth,
from whom the archbifhop fcems to have had his account, or the ge*
nealogy 1 mention, I (hall not pretend to determine j only I (ball obferve
here, that our St, Elian, firnamed Cannaid \, i. e. the Bright, by
Latin .writers called Hi/arius, who was contemporary with Cafwallon
law Mr, who ruled in this Ifie of Mona about the year 450, hath been
often miftaken by many for St. Hilary bifhop of Poiftiers.

As it does not appear that the bifbops of North-Wales (unlets we
allow of this account of Cybi) had any peculiar feats before .the eretftion
of Bangor and St, Afaph into diocefan fees ; fo neither can we find that
the clergy in general, during this interval, had any diftindt cures or
parifhes 10 refide in, but lived together with their bifhops on the cmo*
iument of the church in collegiate bodies r as thofe feven partitions or
communities mentioned by Bede at the great convent at Bangor, in all
likelihood, were to attend to reading and praying ; and in obedience to
their bifhops, to go to fuch diftri&s as were allotted to them, to per-
form the offices of their fundtion* as occafion required. And as to what
is there faid by Bede, of their living in that monaftry by the labour of

* To remove our author's fear it may be obferved, that we have a tradition even to this day,
about this Cybi — that he ufed to meet St. Seiriol weekly at a place called Cloracb r near Llannch-
medd, where there are ftill two wells bearing their names ; and becanfe of Cybfs being continually
with his face to the fun going and coming, and the other the contrary, they gave them the fir-
names of Seiriol <wyn a Cybi felyn. Mr. Rowlands places Stinol in the year 630 : And the great •
grandfon of him that lived A. D. 550, might alfo live in the year 630. So that this tradition and
our ancient genealogies agree exaclly.

t By our Britifh writers he is called Elian Ceimtad. He was the fon of Alldud Rtdegawg^
\. e. the Swifts

6 their


MQNA AlfTlQUA B^E^TAURATA. r 45

iheir hands, it may havt reference only to their lay-brethren:, of whom
thejf had great numbers; and if they h*d not, it does not yet argue
that they wei» odt .^rgymeij, bat rather (hews that at the firft infti-
tutioli of that houftt their pfder wa^j #> generally in all thofe houfes
tfcat wete- etefted in times of perfect ti$p, fo to do* howbvqr, after-
wards when- (he chwch flouriftied, they might become" better pro-
vided for, «id live plentifully, without much labour, on the income
ofit. ^

: And a"a!it doe? not appear that-t^ clergy had any fettled* cUftjinft pa-
rities in this Ifleof Mona within the time of, or indeed in any part of
the kingdbrh, till many y**rs after; this- period ; fd w? do not find that
they had many chuithes, but here and there perhaps a few cloiftersand
Oratories to affemble in, wbertthe mtn*ft$r of the allotted di drift at
fet times came, as the cuftt>m vyas, to read and preach the word of
God* and to adminifter the fatra»ients*. Qt perhaps the tenants and
vaffals in many townships (for at that tipie there was. no fuch thing as
in dependant freeholds) were obliged to repair and affemble at the ma-
nor-houfes and manfions of their refpedive lords and mailers, who in
all likelihood had their chapels for that facred ufe and ferviee. For by
jvhat rcibains to us of the records of thefe times, we find that moil of
the churches and chapels we have, were dedicated to, and called by,
the names of fuch patron-faints, as were not born till after this period,
excepting fuch of thofe churches as took on them fcripture-names, as
St. Mary, St.- Peter, St. Michael, and the like. And if there were any
public churches here within this period, it is very probable thpy were
thefe mentioned. For we find the firft Chriftian Bqfilicce or facred
ftru&ures in other countries commonly dedicated to fcripture-faintfiL
But I leave this as doubtful a#d uncertain. All we can pofitively aflert
of this period is, that, as the Romans found us a place of wealth, and
in full pofleffion of the Druidical, fo they left as in the free enjoyment
of the Chriftian religion.

The SECOND' PERIOD.

THE Second Period begins with the fad and mighty confufions that
happened among the Britons upon the recefs and difiblution of
the Roman government in Great-Britain, which was about the year
390, when Maximus of Brjtifh race, to obtain the imperial purple, had

U exhaufled


146 MORA ANTIGUA ft £ S 'f A»U ft A T AV

exhaufted and brought 1 along with hiiri into Gallia, the very flower of
its native forces;- arid thereby left the ifle of Britain a prey to the luft
and rapine of every fcf ambler. The Pidts, who were the remains of the
anciently difpofieffed Britons,' with the aid of their neighbours the Scots
and Irifih, thought they had good right to re-enter their loft poffeffions,
which they foon did, and with their old pretentions to the whole land
(looking on the fouthern Britons as a degenerate race, more than half
Romans) they continued to make repeated inroads with lamentable de-
flations, into the very bowels of it, to try their title, and if poffible
to regain it.

In this conteft, which Gildas defcribes with very moanful accents,
there flood up to oppofe thefe Pidts and Scots, and to reftrain their ir-
ruptions (for now walls and turrets with which we formerly fecured
ourfelves, without Roman arms to defend them, were but a jeft to thefe
warlike tygers, greedy of changing their mountainous deqs for more
pleafant fruitful habitations) I fay, there flood up two eminent fami-
lies, who lay claim upon the abdication of the Romans, to the Britifh
fceptre. The one was defcended from Coil Godbebog, and confequently
nearly related to Conjlantine the Great, who was grandfon of that Coil:
The other family was headed by OSlavius, grandfon of Afclepiodotus,
duke of Cornwal, who had been before chofen king of Britain, and {lain
by the faid Coil Godbebog. Of the former mentioned family were the
fon6 of Cynetha Weledig a northern prince, whofe mother Gwawl was
lifter to Helen, Conjlantine's mother. The Cornwal family tome time
after, under the usurpation of Vortigern one of that lineage, who in-
vited over the Saxons to their aid, had great ftruggles with thofe very
Saxons, who would fain have appropriated all to themfelves. And af-
ter him, the fame ftruggles went on under the fucceflive reigns of Au-
nlius Ambrojius, liter Pendragon, Arthur and Conjlantine, all of th^t
family;, till at length the faid Conjianttne yielded the (takes, and retired
to fecure himfelf and the harrafled Britons that ftuck to him, in his
dutchy of Cornwal. In the mean time, the fons of Cynetha, on the
other fide, having driven away the Pitts and Scots, who had invaded
the Ifle of Mona and the maritime parts of Wales, made head alio again ft
the encroaching Saxons. Thefe fons of Cynetha, at that time, having
Jeft Cumberland and fome neighbouring countries where they ruled, to
the government of one of their family, retired into North- Wales, their
grandmother's country, and feated themfelves in the feveraJ divifions
of it, as their names left on thofe places do to this day teftify*.

Ta


M6NA AftTIQjtA RESTAtfRATA. 147

To thefe, thus fettled, the poor Loegrian Britons *, cfpecially their
clergy, retreat for fafety of their lives, from the rage and cruelty of the
barbarous Saxons ; where the driven Britons, together with the ancient
inhabitants of the place, under the conduct of the princes of the Cyne-
tbian family, made for a long time a noble ftand againft the encroach-
ing attempts of the victorious Saxons, and fecured all the ancient Bri-
tannic Secunda, now called Wales, together with Cumberland, and a
great part of Cheshire, from the violences of thefe ravenous invaders.

The eldeft of thefe princes, called Eneon Urdd, or the Honourable,
fent His eldeft fon Cafwallon law-bir to the Ifle of Mona, to fight and
drive away the Irifli Pifts, who a little before had forced the ifland, and
near a ftrong fort called Din Dryfal, had (lain many of its inhabitants
at a place called to this day, from the fought battle, Cerrig y Gwyddyl.
At that inftaht Cafwallon came feafonably with his forces to the ifland,
fought and routed them ; and at a place which the Irifh had built, called
Llany Gwyddel, now Holy-Head, and where their fleet lay, killed Sirigi
their captain with his own hands ; then fortified the place, and fo cleared
the ifland of thefe piratical rovers, who by their frequent incurfions had
fo long infefted it. This Cafwallon law blr being the eldeft branch of
the family, chofe his feat in this ifland, the ruins of whofe court or
palace are to this day to be feen near Llan Elian* callSd Llys Cafwallon.
And I have by me a copy of a charter of lands, franchifes and immu-
nities granted by this Cafwallon to St. Elian and his fucceflbrs ; which
has been confirmed to the tenants or freeholders of thofe lands by fome
of the kings of England.

The eldeft fon of this Cafwallon was the famous Maelgwn Gwynedd,
Infularis or Infularum Draco, as Gildas calls him, on account probably
of his being born in this ifland. But others think he called him fo, be-
caufe he conquered the ifle of Man and the Hebrides. He behaved
himfelf gallantly in many battles, and was a terror to the Saxons. His
court or ufual abode was in Caernarvonfliire, at a place in Creuddyn
called now Bryn Euryn or Llys Maelgwn Gwynedd^f, where or near which,
many years after, Ednyfed Fycban a nobleman of Wales and defcended
from him, had his chief manfion-houfe. This Maelgwn ere&edthe
fee of Bangor about the year 550, where a little before, Daniel, the fon
of Dionotbus or Dynawd, abbot of Bangor-is-coed 9 had built a college

* Ckrici & Sactrdtits muenmbm undiqm mcantibut atJUmmit 9 tmntsfimul in ixtermmum ftlhmtuf.
Mattb. Wtfim. ad Annum 586.

f There is a place called Cafltll Maelg<wn not far from Llan Elian

U2 for


x 4 * .f&P^jA Af^IAUA- KEST^URATA-
for the North- Wales clergy, and became the firft bUhop of it : Into
which prince Maelgwn bad once fome thoughts of entering himfelf a
monk, and to take on him the profeflion of religion. But the charms
and pleafures of the world, to which, as Gildas writes, he was too much
addidted, foon choaked that good resolution in him \ and he became, in
the latter part of his life, a great libertine— for which he could not ef-
cape Gildas's pen, and from receiving thereby, for his proud lafcivious
living, very fevere laflhes— though in his public conduit he appeared to
have been a brave man, and a noble, magnanimous prince.

In the interim, the Welfh, as I muft now begin to call them, having
>fomtf refpite given them by the conquering Saxons, their fury towards
them being fomewhat abated, and exhaufling itfelf againft one another
for dominions and fovereignties ; the Welfh, I fay, began to fortify and
make the "beft they could — having loft their more rich and pleafant pof-
feffions — of thefe mountainous countries they were left matters of. And
indeed in this deplorable cafe of theirs, the more mountainous any coun-
try was, the more acceptable and the better liked by them ; where every
rock' was a caftle, every hill a fort, every wood, bog and river, a de-
finable defence and fecurity ; and above all, the .defolgte barrtnnefs of
the place gave little temptation to {hefe now glutted Saxons, to expofc
their lives too far, and pay too dear for the purchafe of It.

Among, thefe natural advantages, which a people wrongfully dif-
poffefled of their country were glad to meet with, the fight andpefition
of the Ifle of Anglefey, as I (hall now call it, food -gavfc it preference
to all other places of this Weftern part of the land, fo as to have the ca-
pital feat of what remained of the Britifh r<gal foverejgnty placed in.it,
or on the borders of it. For I have fdready , (hewed th^t prince Cafwalkn
.had his feat in the ifland, who being the elded branch of the Cynetbian
family, and confequently an this fide, dBief foyereign of the Britons in
the regal line, to whom the other little princes* commonly called kings
in their own territories, paid homage and (ubmifiion. gut his fon
Maelgwn GwyneJJ, an4 his grandfon Khun ap Maelgwn, being prefifed
upon by the Saxons, took up their abode on the borders of it, in Caer-
narvonftnre, for better fecuring the'pafles of .the mountains which fecure
the Ifle: the one at Crevddyn, having, a flropg cattle *X Digwrwy i aod
the other at Caer Rbun, whofe name it bears.

And here we may oblerve, that as the ridge of mountains called
Snow den, is a moft ftrong and natural rattopire, running in a fomewhat
bent line from fea to fea, with two rivers fpr a paoat on the back of

, 2 it.


it, diibharging thcmfdves to the fea at Traetb Mawr and Conway, ag
if nature, defigning this. Ifle of Anglefey to be the feat of fovcreignty,
Jiad ftretcbed this arm of mountains, fecured behind by thefe waters,
Jto covjer that neck of land where the Ifle is fituated, and confequently
to be a wall and bulwark to it ; fo we find that yery-ufe to have beep
ona^e of all the defiles and openings that give paflage through thai ridge
x*f mountains, which a$ fo many gates and avenues to come thro 9 then}
to this ifland, have been all ftrongly fortified with caftles, towers an4
jfort$ : As JD/g<wwy-caftle at the great ppening at Conway \ Caer Rbuff
,ar the pafs of Bwlcb y ddaufaen, with a fort below at Aber ; Dolyfelen
caftle, and a watch-tower at Nant Ffrankon ; Dol Badarn-czftlc at Nant
Peris; Cedom-ca&le or fort at Nant taly llyn. And in the other brojid
pafs from Merionyddfliire at Traetb Mawr, they had two ftrong ca-
bles, viz. HarUecb on the one fide of the bay, and Criccietb on the
other, with a watch-tower at Cajile Gyfarcb, and a fort at Dolbenmaen^
AU which are demon ftrations that the Ifle of Anglefey and part of Caer*
jiarvonftnre, for the fafety of which, all thefe" pafles were fo ftrongly
guarded, was on the firft retreat of the Britons into Wales, chofp to be
.the prime refuge in cafe of diftrefs, and the chief feat of their monarchy. .
JFor we find Cadfan the grandfon of Rburi (his foh Belt ap Rbun dying
young) to have refided at Caer Segont, now Caernarvon; where alfo
farfwal/o, Cadfan 1 s fon, who was fo great a fcourge to the Saxons, and -
iiis ion Cadwaladr, the laft of the Britifh monarchs, fuccefiively re-;
jided. The great fafety and fecurity of the place, and the plenty of pro-
vjfions which it afforded (the other parts of Wales being then frequently
the feats of war, and therefore poor and uncultivated) induced thefe war-
like princes to fettle bere their courts and families,, while they themfelves
pxtrfued their wars ; either annoying their enemies, as * Cadfan and
CadwflUo frequently did with great (laughter, or defending their own
.territories. And the reafon that the latter of thefe princes removed the
JBritiJh cpurt from Anglefey, where Cafwalkn law-hir had firft fixed it,
to Caernarvonshire, was, I confefs, becaufe the Irifh and Pi&ifti rovers
were then very troublefome to the coafts, againft whom the ifland was
jkfs defenfibie than the borders of Caernarvon (hire. But afterwards the
jpoyal feat was reftored to the ifland, and continued in it at Aberffraw
during, all the time of ,the British princes.

Now in relation to church affairs within this period ; as wc have left
this Ifle at the latter end of the laft period in the free and full enjoy-
ment of. the Chriftian faithi under its own N bifhop, if we will'believc

the


i 5 o MONA AN T.I QUA RESTAURATA.

the recited account' of Cebius and St. Hilary of Poitftierj ; or at leaft,
as part of the North-Wales diocefe, under one of the feven bifliops of
the Cambrian province, wherever his feat, if he had arty endowed, was
placed ; fo by all the accounts that appear, the faith and doctrine here
profefled and taught, continued pure and apoftolical for a great part
of this fecond period ; when at length the Romifli dregs, brought over
by Auftin the monk, crept here, and in a great mcafure corrupted the
primitive foundnefs and integrity of it ; but never to fuch a degree as
in the other parts of the nation. For many of the Romifli errors, then
and after introduced into the Britifli church and nation by the fubtilty
of Rome, were never embraced by the people and clergy of North -
Wales, as appears not only by their rejecting that grand iryun&ion of
an unmarried priefthood— their clergy, as well regular as fecular, be-
ing commonly married all along, and thought expedient to be connived
at, and reckoned pro vitio Gentss, as a peculiar fault of this people ; but
alfo by their cjuick and unanimous embracing the dodtrines of their an-
cient faith, of which they retained many remains amongft them, when
the reformation reftored them to the liberty of re-afluming and clofing
with their primitive principles, of which they have given remarkable
fpecimens, in their loyalty to their kings, and in their adherence to
their bifliops, againft all oppofition, even to this day.

This infra&ion by monk Auftin and his confederates on th6 do&nn^,
rights and privileges of our Britifli church, which happened near the
middle of this period, was rcfolutely withftood by all our Britifli clergy;
who till then generally refided together in conventual fraternities, un-
der their heads and bifliops ; perhaps after the example the Druidifli
priefts had left them ; heathen politics, founded upon reafon and vir-
tue, not unbecoming Chriftian practice: And' which way of living
contributed not a little, to the good fuccefs they had, by their united
counfcls and labours, againft the then growing encroachments of their
adverfaries. The Britifli nobles here, however fpotted in thei& lives
and morals, as angry Gildas unmercifully upbraids them, -yet as men,
of principles (hewed zeal and vigour in the caufe. Nay their very bards
employed their talent that way, as we find Talie/in, Maelgwn's Poet
Laureat *, even at Auftin's firft coming (for he could not be alive much
longer) denouncing woe on fuch of the clergy as were remifs in their
iduty, and negle&ed any part of it, in fo perilous a time ; when, with

* Of this we have no proof.
* ' • their


MTQN.A ANiTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 151

their temporal, their fpiritual rights were in danger of being made a
prey to the avarice and rapine of unjuft irivadets.

Gwae'r offeiriad byd> nis angbreifftia gwyd
Ac nis Pregetba.

Gwae ni cbeidw ei Gail, ac efynfugail

Ac nis areilia :

Gwae ni cbeidw ei ddefaid 9 . rhag Bleiddie Rbifeuniaid
Aiffon gnwppa.

(i.e.)

* Woe be to the prieft that's born,
Who will not duly weed his com,
And root away the tares ;

Woe to the (hepherd that's remifs
In watching of his flock, and is
. Unfaithful in his cares ;.

Woe be to him that doth hot keep,
With's crooked ftaff, his harmlefs (heep
From Romifli wolves and fnares.

All this they performed with good fuccefs while they continued to-
gether in united focieties ; but after that fatal blow at Bangor ifcoed,
where the flower of our clergy were killed on thejppt, . and ihp remain-
der of them difperfed up and down the countries; the poor church in-?
deed for fome time ftruggled,, but like a confumptive body, whofe vitals
were impaired* it ftaggered at laft, and was forced to give way to cor-
ruption, and ruin ;. under which (like the woman in the wildernefs)
fhe groaned,, but yet was fed and kept alive for fome hundreds of years.
Their brethren likewife in Cornwal refifted the Romifh . ufurpation
mych longer than the reft of the Britons, till about the year of our Lord
905, when king Edward the Elder, with the pope's confent, fettled a
bifliop's fee among them at St. Ger mains, and placed one jEdulphus to »
be their firft biftiop; who with his fuccefTors, by. the pope's power then .
greatly prevailing, in a fliort time reduced them, much againft their.

* This triplet is wrong. The original literally means,
Woe to the worldly prieft,
Who neither checks vice, .
Nor preaches.

will* •


i$t M6NA AtftffQUA KESTAURATA.

wiH, to fubmit their ancient faith 16 this conduft' of papal 1 difcipiine, **
mod of the Britons wert before forced to do.

At the time of this maSTacre, which happened in the year 603, we
may date the firft beginning of the downfall of our British churches,
and of the eredting thereon our long bondage and Slavery under the
ufurpation of Rome, with all- the errors and innbvationsr that ufurped
dominion then opened a way to, or brought aldng With it ; though a
noble ft and was. made for a considerable time by the rehiains of the
British clergy, under the zealous encouragement of thtfir own, and the
propitious favour and countenance alfo of fome of the Saxon princes (fo
forcible is truth as even to make fometimes our enemies befriend us),
till at laSt the ancient orthodox apoftolical churches in Britain (their
clergy being now fepar&ted, and their princes becoming divided in their
interests) by an unaccountable diSpofal of Providcrice, were' all fwal-
lowed up in the RomiSH gulph ; and, forely agairrft their wills, were
forced to fubmit to lordly Auftin and his train of foreign metropolitans;
who, as they had diffeized us of our rights and privileges, fo they
warped and corrupted our faith foon after, with all the innovations and
errors they thought fit to impofe upon us.

At this difperfion of the BritiSh clergy alfo, began the erection and es-
tablishing of Parochial Cures, and the building of our country churches.

This distribution of dipcefes into parishes or diStindt ministerial cures
in England, is attributed to archbifhop Hbnorius, who lived indeed
about the fame time that this distribution happened with us. But in
•the BritiSh churches at that time his injunctions could be of no force ;
and therefore we muSt afcribe this procedure rather to a hard fate, and
the ntfceSIity of the times which required in the clergy a greater vigi-
lance, and that a more near attendance to their flocks when fuch wolves
were gaping far them ; or laflly and moSt immediately, it may be af-
■cribed to their having at that time their general rendezvous or college
at Bangor ifeped* broke up' and ruined by the barbarous Saxons, on the
instigation of monk Auftin t as it is too much to be fufpedted.

But however that was, of which we have only probable circumstances
to guefs by ; we are fare that greater numbers of the diSfipated clergy,
juSt after that inhuman butchery, reforted to -the Ifle of Anglefey, than
did to any other part of Wales of twice its dimensions. For if we
reckon the number of prieSls that then flocked into it, by the number
of churches and parishes, which Were then or a little while after ereded
and established in this ifland', we ihall find them to exceed by much,

what


TtfONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. i 53

whit came "to any other country in North-Wales, For by that eftimate
we may obferve in Anglefey feventy-four parishes, which we have rea-
fon to believe, are as *old as that time:* and therefore we may reckon
as many of thofe priefts "to hare come and refidcd in it; whereas Caer-
oiarvonihire, which is almoft twice as larger has but fixty-eight; Mont-
gomeryfliire almofl thrice as large, has but forty-feven ; Denbighshire
more than twice as large, has but fifty-fcven ; Flintfhire only twenty*
veight ; and Merionyddfhirc thirty- fevcn parishes 5 and confequently but
4b many priefts that came and fettled in them. Which ferves to fliew
•that the fecurity and fertility of the place invited then many more of the
clergy to make their abodes in this ifland, than in any part of North-
Wales. And yet we may further obferve from this reckoning, that the
whole number of the retreated clergy, if counted by parifh^s, was but three
hundred and eleven. And if half the number of them that lived in that
convent were, clergymen* it well may be prefumed that not only all
Wales, Abut alfo a good part of England, might have their congrega-
tions ferved by mi rafters out of this monaftry. But it is very probable
that many of them were lay-monks, giving themfelves to prayers and
abftincnce, and young ftudents with officers and fervants that took care
-of ferving the houfe, and of collecting and managing the church's reve-
nue, their -whole number being about two thoufand.

Indeed a little before this Parochial diftribution happened, we find
a college at Bangor in Caernarvon (hire, probably in imitation of that
at Ifcoed* erected by Daniel the fon of Diomthus* abbot of the former:
-And anQther a little after that, by Beuno, at a place called Clynnoc, in
*he fame county. That, at Bangor, was made a bifhopric by prince
Maelgwn, and the faid Daniel coafecrated bifhop- thereof by Dubricius,
archbishop of Caerleon. But the other at Cfynnoc, having no bi(hop,
«but a Preefe&us Monachorum or abbot prelxding over it, contained only
a place of education and, literature, as many other places in Wales in
thofe days were \ where religion was profeffed after the manner of the
Eaft, and young men trained up to the bifliop's hands to fill up the va-
cancies of the Parochial clergy, as I may now call them.

Now as to the building of thefe Parochial churches ; it was then the
cuftom of fome of the moft eminent of the clergy, bifhops, abbots and
the like, to travel, accompanied with fome of their Preflbyters, to the
lords and great ones of the land, making fmall prefents to them (as
Beuno did to king Cadfan at Cacr Scgont of a little golden Sceptre) for
their affiftance and encouragement to build thofe cells or cloifters, which

X • are


i 5 4 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

are now our churches ; arid when that was done, to place one of their
priefts or difciples to refide theie r and to perform in the diftridt the du-
ties requifite to his place and function. Thus bifhop Aidan, Ffinnan
and Beuno did in this ifland ;. whofe names are borne on forne of our
churches, as well as in other places, to- this day.

But for a more particular account of fome of our churches in the
Ifle of Anglefey, and o£ the patrons or firft builders of them, by what
records we have yet remaining, after our ecclefiaftical hiftories written
by Dubr ictus, Ty/Uio and Twrog were all loft, be pleafed to take what .
foiloweth.

Beuno was the ion. of Bovagius or Beugi, who wa6 grancHbnof Cadell •'
Deyrnlfyg, a noted peribn in his time, and prince mPowys-^Land. He
built two cells or churches in. this ifland *,the-one at Aberjfhaw, the oth«
at Trefdraetb i And had ieveraHands and townfliips in thiSviHand given-,
by feveral perfons to his houfe or monaftry at Clynnocu.

Aidan, or JEdan, was the fon of Gabranus or Gwrnyw* t whto was ,
grandfon of Vrien Reged, prince of Regcdia in the North. But whether -
Aidan the king (who was this I mention) dt Aidan the bifhop,called Aidan i
Foeddog of Columcil and bifhop of Landisfern* gave the name to the r
church of Llan JEdan, is not certain ; but probably the latter : Becaufe •
Ffinnan, whofe name is on a church in.the neighbourhood of the others „
was the latter Aidaris difciple,. and fucceeded him in his bifhopric ; and :
to accompany the good work; of his mafter Aidan, he might ; have the -
other church built in his owa name, called Llanjfinan^

Daniel, who had a church near thatof L/an JEdan, was fori of Da~
niel firft bifhop of Bangor* and therefore, the church is commonly .called,
Llandderiiel fab. *

Peirio, Gallgo, Egruad 9 Maelog, Caffoi were fon* ofone»C2wcv common*
ly called Caw O Frydain, and have their churches in this ifland. And
their fitter Cuillog, a daughter of the- faid Ca<w+ built her a cloifter here,
which became afterwards one of our churches, called Llangwillog*

Ceidio, Ane and Aiddan Foeddog before-mentioned* were the fons of
another Caw, called Caw Cowllog ; and had their churches at Rbodwydd
Ceidio and Coed Ane, and the laft, as I gueffed before, at L/an JEdan.

Cmdifael and Ffiewin were the fons of Itbel Hael, a nobleman of Ar*
morica or Little-Britain j. they had their cells or churches at Penmyhydd
and Llaoffiewin.

Peulan was the fon of Palken of % the Ifle of Man, which fince the time
of Maelgwyn Gwynedd, was in the pofleflion of the Venedotian Britons.

And


> - /


2>lak72ir.


Ta ? e W,


.. .& : 1M<C&4'JMhUvJ. Rg.56lttVJ : CV . .W0VLL

N— V *B: M Oc : gC$ : G*vPPv(: MP.GVttLVM:

JP^Vi 1 * : !N:QBLMCCOaM:lSSMM: iMMcveCM; P: S*k
vfc : ft : XVIMRVH^


JFia:**


On the Etye of the Stone above the Head of the Effiqif in Zarae Leiters.

Y\ ) (XJMaaC GWfiZVGMPGWlL ISM

ThenonaHrcular label onyour tflBandofthelbad .

TA^t o* aGrcular label on the other side .
^/? another label .

STB


wjvm.


And some broken Zetters on the Crook .


**& 3-


'X


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 155

And Gtvtqfaen, the daughter of the faid Patten, had her cloifter at
Rh&fcolkk* which after became a parifh church called Llan Gwenfaen,
as her brother's cloifter was called Llan Beulan.

Kynfarwy was the fon of Awy ap Llebenog 9 a lord of Cocnwal, whofe
xrhurch was at Liecb Gynfarwy.

Ty/ilio was one of the fons of the famous Brycbfael Yfcythrog* who
fought the Saxons when the maflacre was committed by them on our
♦clergymen near Bangor is-coed. He is faid to have written an ecclefiafti-
<cal Britifh "hiftory, whereof fome fragments have been lately feen, but
-are now loft ,; his cloifter or church was at Llandyjilio.

Engbenel was grandfon of the faid Brycbfael Yfcythrog ; his church
at Llan Engbenel.

Criftiohis was the fon of Onven*ap Yner % a nobleman of Armorica or
Little-Britain ; his church Was at Llangriftiolus.

Dona was another grandfon of Brycbfael Yfcythrog ; his churth at
Llanddona.

Cyngar, leftin^ and die before-mentioned Caw Cvwllog, father of
: Ceidio, Ane 9 and Aiddan Foeddawg, were the fons of Gerinnius or Geraint,
who was grandfon of Confiantme duke of Cornwal, the fucceffor of king
Arthur. Tkis+Geraint -being admiral of the Britifh fleet, and having
thereby occafion of -harbouring fometimes in this ifland, it is probable he
caufed theschurch of Pentraethto be built, called Llanfair Bet tws Geraint i
Cypgar and Iejlin had their churches at Llangefni and Llanieflin.

This Cyngar had, befides the place to build his church upon, a town-
ship beftowed upon him and his cloifter for ever, whole freeholds are
4o this day held de Sanfto Cyngaro. And they pretend to (hew the grave
of Ie/tin, at his church in Llaniejtin, with an odd intricate fort of an
. inferjption 4ipon his tomb-ftone. See plate VIII. fig. i.

Note, In reading this infeription, the letter M mull be taken for A.
nvhich is the greateft difficulty. R is both J and R. Rejlinus is
Rex Jejtinus.
Which I read thus *, Hie jacet Sanflus Rex Jefinus, cui Wenllian
— _. — F _— . ap Madocy & Gryffytb ap Gwilim obtulerunt in ob-
lationem iflam imaginem pro jalute beata Animarum fuarum.

* * This infeription Is a mere fiction ; neither the letters on the flate, nor the words here read be-
ing to be found on the ftone at Llanicjlin \ though it is plain by the words Gryffut ap Gwtlym and
Animarum /. the fame ftone is meant. The truth of t"he matter is this. The tomb-ftone at Llan-
iejlin is a curious piece of workmanftiip. It is the effigy of a man in a facerdotal habit, whence we
-may conclude,* that it is the tomb of fome abbot. The true infeription is inferted under the fal.'e
one in plate VUL fig. a. The church is dedicated to St. Catharine, whofc j^uic is elegantly painted
on theglafsef the Eaft window.

X 2 tr The


j 5 6 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

& The ilone has the portraiture of a man in a iacerdotal habit, abbot
Which the infeription is cut ; by the Utter it appears that the tomb-
ftone and the portraiture were. fet. there fome ages after the inter-
ment.

Setriol and Memcm, the fons of Owen Danvyn,. the fon of Eneon*
Vrdd ap Cynedda Weledig and brothers of Rneon\Brmhin, had their cells,,
the one at Penmon and Priejibolm Ifle* and the other at Llan Feirion.
Their elder brother, Eneon the prince, chofe the feat of his cioiftcr.ini
Llyn f at a place called to this day Llan Eneon Frenbin; an inscription on <
the fteeple of which church nientions their father by the name off
AIVINl ODi/V/* and that Eneon built it.

Which infeription is thus to be rpad t Lux totoi [i. e< *Eoti Genti] Ai~ •
vini Qdinu mihi* irm Ecclejia Uth, Jefus ejl ; Ut cameant [ i # . e. can
veant]fuivivereadjedicen.[i. e. Judicem\aternum: JJlam [i. e. £&•- .
clefiam] Eneanus, Rex JVallia fabricavit. See plate IX. fig. i .

Note, That the letters in this infcription^ftjerii fo old as the itjventh ore
eighth century *. The Latin of it. favours of the corrupt vulgar ^
Latin which the Romans had a little, before left among us. It was .
very ufual for one letter to bear, a part in the formation Of the;
other* next adjoining, in thefe old infbriptions-

Patricius or Patrick, a Stradciuid~Briton y being fentby Oasieftine bU
fliop of Rome, to couvejt the Irifli ; and on his way to Ireland, viiiting .;
St. Elian in Anglefey, caiffed a church to be built on the water-fide,.,
where he took fhippiijg, called Llanbadrif. .

Cybi the (on of Sefyf or Solomon,, fon of the before-mentioned Gerainty^
and Nephew to Cynghr and Ie/lin, built the church of Holy-Heads, and •:
as fome write was appointed bifhop of Anglefey : But.the time that this *
Cybi lived m does not favour that opitiion. *

Elian Qannaid, our Britifh Hilary, was die fon of AHtyd Rbedegawg, .
who was grandfon of Cadrod Cajchfynydd earl of Dunftable ; he built
his cloifter at Elan Elian, to whom Cafwallan r law-bir gave many lands-
and franchifes about that church, which are held in his name, by the
freeholders of them to this day.

Mecbell or Macutus, as in the Roman kalepdar, was the fon of one
Ecbwyd, the fon of Gwyn, who was grandfon of Gloyw gwlad lydan,
lord of Gloucester, in the time of the Saxon maflacre at Slonehenge.
He was made bi&op of St. Makes in Little-Britain* His church or

• The true characters of this infeription are reprefented in plate IX. fig. 2.

3 cloifler


Lvssioroi

RI> WM1LIE


Fy:3.


^Arcvq €<:c€ti


O Pi/VA^iT^ wvYflvv Ay r »uv^Tt3^ uv

-/%M i ■ . . , • — i


J%if ^ *Lf true IhscriptieTV .


M'ONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 157

eloifter was called from his name Llanfecbell. He died it feems in the
Ifle of Anglefey* and was buried not at his own church, but at a neigh*
homing church called Penrbas Lligwy, in whofe church-yard there is
an old fafhioned grave-ftone with an infeription, which by the form of
the letters feems. to be genuine. See plate IX. fig. 3.

iegfan was grindfon of Cadrod Qdcbfynydd* and uncle of Elian.
His cell ort church was at Llandegjan. Here one Tydecbo alfo had his
oloifter, which ftill remains ^ and he is by fome reckoned the patron
feint of the placet

Rbuddlad, a daughter- of a king of Leinfier in Ireland (the religious
devotees of Wales and Ireland having then much communication) came *
<teer here and built her a cloifter ntLJan Rbuddlad ; a* alfo did Rbwydrys, ,
the fan of Rbwydrim or Rbodrem king of Gmnaugbt 9 „*t the fame time, ,
and built his cloifter at Llan Rbwydrys ; .both. .which sbecame afterwards
. parish churches;.

King. Gadwaladr, the laft Brkifh crowned head, ordered a church to
bfe built here, which was called Llan GadwalaJr. There is over the
South door a large flat ftone, not unlike a grave-ftone* ,with .the in-t -
fcription in. plate IX. fig. 4. .

Which infeription is thus to be read,.,
CUtamantn RexfapmtiJ^usopimatiJ/imus omnium Regums

The faid Cat am anus or Cadfan r who was grandfather of king Ca&*'-
loaladr* is faid to be buried in the ifle of Bardfey; where a great cloi-
fter of religious men at that time flourished, and where many of the
Britifh princes and nobles were interred. But by tljis infeription it may ,
feem probable that the faid Cadfan was buried in this place ; where his
grandfon built this church, and endowed it. as. one of the fandtuaries off
this ifland.

Tyfrydogvrns the fon of Arwyfik Glojf\ who was fon of Owen Dahwyn, ,
foh of Rneon Vrddy fon of Cynedda Weledig. He built his church at
Llandyfrydogi which church Giraldus Cambrenfis makes mention of, .
and of a memorable accident that happened in it in his time*

Ltxvynwen and Ceinwen were daughters of one Brycbanus or Brycban, ,
who had many fons and daughters that were ^devoted to religion ; Quibus
pajjim.per Cambro-Britanniam (fays, the mentioned Giraldus Cambrenfis
of the children of this Brycban) Templa Divorum ac Divarum Nomine
inferibuntur. j of whom thefetwo had their cloifters in this iflaad, which

came


ij8 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAU'RATA.

carne afterwards to be the churches of Llanddwyn and Llan Gtinwen,
and their brother Dyfnan had his church in Llatiddyfnan*

Pabo, frequently called Poji Prydain, i. e. the Support of Britain, for
his great valour again ft the Pids and Scots, retired here, and built his
church at Llan Babo*. He was the fon of Artbrwys, ion of Mor, fon
of Cenau, fon of Coil Godbebog, or hawk -faced, grandfather of Confiantine
' the Great. This Pabo of all the patron faints of this ifland, feems to
have been die high eft in time, and next him St. Elian.

Edwen Santes or Edwen the Holy is fuppofed to have been of 9axon
extraction, either daughter or niece of Edwin king of Northumberland,
who had his education at Cadfan's court in Caer Segont ; if fo, then a
near kinfwoman or fifter of the famous Hilda, who managed the dif-

• pute. with bilhop Wilfrid about the feaft of Eafter. She had her rloifter
^XrLlan Edwen, which became afterwards atparifh-church.

Many other churches there arc in the Ifle of Anglefey, of whofc

'founders or patron^names I can give *io account. And many others

we find dedicated to fcripture-names, St. Peter, the Blefled Virgin, and

-*o St. Michael the archangel, which -probably were long before built by

laymen, and ufed by the firft Chriftians. ;Some alfo of thefe churches

retained the appellations, of thcplaces they were fituated in, as Llangefni,

Tregaian> Atnlwtb, Cerrig Ceinwen, &c. But the far greater number

bear on/them the names .of fuch priefls, as were themfelves founders

of them, or at ieaft of fueh priefts as were placed in them by thofe

holy men and women vfho were founders, and had probably lived in

thenv before, as thele priefts might "live in them forifome ^hile after,

as in habitations of feledl .privacy and retirement. "For," according to

the ufage of thofe days, as well the .perfons dwelling, as the placesthey

. Jived in, were equally conGgned and dedicated to God. And indeed

by what remains now to be ieen of ourmoft^ancient buildings, it feems

the form of our very houfes at thofe times and that of our churches

was much the fame ; the fronts of them being always to the South-Eaft #

having great windows in them opening that way, v juft as our churches

"have ; which may, render it»prdbable that our churches here were ori-

. ginally dwelling-houfes, but by being dedicated to God and religion

became facred cells and elbifters ; wherein nothing hindred but that

Jioly devout men might as well live as officiate, for fome time. And

* His tomb-ftone was discovered injthe church-yard, about the time of Charles the Second, by

• the fexton in digging a grave. It is aTbft ftone of the nature of a flate— not of the produce of An-
^glefey . It lay. about tut feet under ground— and the characters are in bafs relievo. See plate X.

we


jv&iX.


1


Pi


P^


iS


K)


<o


^


o


P-,


-a
id
h


PC
o

&.

O
U

Q

PC
Ph

O

P-,


o

Ph


H

U


3:


^60 MONAANTIQTJA RESTAUR AT A.

good and devout patriots to eftablifh themfelves in particular abodes, te
perform the duties of their function, their right to the fame mainte-
nance, which was before in common, became now to be particularly
claimed. And to fix and eftablilh that, no more was now required,
when thefe cells were built, and priefts refided in them, than for (6
many neighbouring inhabitants as fubmitted themfelves to the fpirituai
care of one diftinft paftor then living with them, to pay to the faid paftor
in particular all their tithes and other ecckiiailical emoluments, and
obliging themfelves and posterity fa to do (the fmalier divisions of land
being before that time under diftimft bounds and limits) thefe divisions
of townShips, hamlets, and .parcels of Jand, which the then aiTociated
inhabitants poffeffed, became in an inftantfo many diftindt parishes, and
contiiHied fo (we blefs God for it) to this day.

But though they be now parishes, as at firft, yet -they continued not

to be residential cures; but for a Short time after. For as the piety and

devotion of people Slackened, their oblations confequently diminished,

and the tithes became too Small and inconfiderable to fupport a pried

in every parifti. So that they were reduced to a neceffity of conjoining

more or kfs of thefe pari£hes and their churches into one re fid en rial

< cure under one incumbent; and by that means the incumbents were

.made able ta obtain arj>urchale. glebes, and to build them houfes to

live in, to attend their cures 4 while the houfe of God, which before,

>it fe^ms, " afforded them habitation, was now wholly employed to be

what it Should have always been, viz. the houfe of. prayer.

The want of knowing or juftly weighing this affair, has betrayed
ithe well-meaning zeal of a late worthy * prelate into a miftake, in
rreckoning thefe annexed Parochial chapels in Anglefey to be So many
refidential cures j for without that they could not be non-refidences.
And indeed what they are* they have continued to be for feveral hun-
dreds of years ; and are like to do for. ever, unlefs the fame zeal and
piety which at firft made them a fort of refidences, rcinflate them again ;
♦and the fame benevolence and bounty return again to fupport and
-cheriSh the incumbents of them. The want of which we may be al-
lowed to lament and expostulate* but have very fmall hopes of ever
Jewing that day, when all our Parochial .chapels in Anglefey will be-
come but competently endowed benefices? which benefices* with their
chapels annexed, now for many ages have been what they called refi-
dential cures. •
,# Bilhop fonn's Catalogue of Norv-Rcfidcnccs.

One


MONA ANTICLtJA RESTAU41ATA. v 6i

One thing more I mu& here take notice of before I difmifs this par-
ticular— and that \* 9 the deplorable account another angry clergyman,
vij5. the Britifh Gildas, gives us of the ftate of the Britith church ; and
the difmaj character, he beftows (being himfelf . one) on many of the
clergy of it, in an age abounding with fo many faints, and fo full of
piety and devotion, as we may well prefume that age was, wherein fo
great and extraordinary ads both of piety and devotion were done, as
all that I have before-mentioned, amounted to. To which, becaufe it
may appear to give Tome handle of objection again ft what I have laid
down before, I fhall briefly reply,

Fikst, The charge of Giklas is not general :• he not only acquits,
but extols the virtues of fame of the pallors of the Britifh church in his
time with his higheft drains of rhetoric.

Secondly, Though the tranik&ions I mention happened about the
lame time that Giklas lived in and wrote his book j yet the one was
before the other. Gildas wrote that fatyr before Auftin's coming ; and
then our clergy, when abroad from their feminary,' generally rcfided in
princes* courts and in great mens' families, whence by their fuperiors'
directions they officiated in allotted diftrids. In this cajfe, f confefs,
they were under too great temptations to be all exemplarily good ; and
it is likely too many of them juftly deierved his lafh. But this cafe
foon after altered with them j God purged his floor, and a great Daugh-
ter waa made of them,, which undoubtedly muft needs purify the reft.
And the fame ftroke of Providence which ruined their plan of learning
and knowledge, amended their lives, by taking them out of the luxuries
of courts and families; and putting them to the aufterities of cells and
cloifters. And in this cafe only I apologize for them.

Thirdly, Gildas, though a perfon of veracity and honefty, yet fa-
crificed his prudence to his zeal, and thought to reclaim the vices of
the laity by expofing thofe of his brethren the clergy. But as it is too
apparent, that though he defigned well, he carried with him fome ten-
der point that had been one time or other too nearly touched by fome
of both parties ; fo an unaccountable temper in the condud of his re*
fentments marred his good defigns, and indeed dif-relifhed his work to
the tafte of future ages. For the blemifhes he is fond to expofe are only
perfonal, and no general chara&ers can be drawn from them ; at leaft
now when we confider the men he levels at not as a Conventual, as they
were when under his lafh, but as a Parochial clergy*

Y To


i«2 MONA ANT1QUA RESTAURATA*

To return from the ccclcfiaftical to the civil affairs of this ifland.
After king Cadwa/adrs death, who was the loft crowned king of Bri-
tain of th<? Britifh race, we remained fome time under a fort of arifto-
cracy* till king Cadwa/adrs children returned from Armorica, whither
they had retreated in the time of a great plague that raged here : Though
fome fay BJetricvs duk« of Cornwal governed here in their abfence % from
whofe (oris hands Rhodri Molwynog fon of Idwal Iwrcb, one of the fona
of king Cadwaladr, wrefled the government of the Cambrian Britons,
and left two foiw after him, via. Conan Tyndaetbwy, born or nurfed in
that part of Anglefey he took his name from, and Howel. From the
fLrft of whom, the line of the Wel(h princes, who governed Wales for
many generations after, took its origin. And therefore I (hall here fub-
join a Scheme of his defcent from Coel Godbebog* in whom centered
the united rights of many of the greateft Britifh monarch*. On which,
account the emperor Confiantius, to fecure himfelf on the Britifh throne*,
by partaking in thofe rights, took to wife his beautiful daughter tiboen*.
called by the Romans Helen. \ who was mother of his fon and fucceflbt^
Conjiantine the Great. And. his other daughter,. Gwawl or Julia, was
married to Edern the fon. of Pat emus, a prince of the Britons in the
northern, parts, who was father, by the laid Gwawl, of Cynedda JPledig*
or, the Illuftrious; from whofe eldeft fon the fovereign claim to tho
Britifh fceptre, after the failure here of the race of Helen, was con-
veyed, with what of theic country, they preferwd, to the fuccceding*

WetthprioQes.


Coel


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAUR AT A.


163


Cod Godhebog,
King of Britain.


Srradwen,
daughter of Cadfan apConar
ap* EudafF, prince of 'North
. Wales.


c


Gwawl, or Julia.


Edern ap Padarn.


nz


Cenau ap Coel.


Cynedda Wledig f


^iMi. ■ ■ li nil I


Einion Urdd


U Cafwallon law hir.


■ ia 111 m


$ Maelgwyn Gwynedd


f Rhun ap Maelgwyn.


Beli ap Rhun.


I


4. IagoapBeli.


^


Conftantius Chlorus,
emperor.


Helen, orTiboeir # .


1


f We have, among our old Britilh MSS.
one Elegy on this prince, called Maritmad
Cjmdd* Whdig.


\ Our Brltifh Genealdgies place here one
Caretic Jrghyydd Ctrtdigi$n 9 father of Einion
Urdd § and fon of Cjntdda WUXg.


Conftantine the Great. '


* Tibot* fercb Cotl Godbthg.
I Grid a gefoddj GrSg.


|| In an ancient Ode * or Cyujdd, upon St. Elian, to
this day preferred in memory in that pariAi, which Del
in the north part of Anglefey, thefe Is mention made of
prince Ce/watb*, and of his refidence in that neighbour-
hood! i. e.

Elian <unattb 1 rat %vj!o

Olid Mm eifmwcb a f i U

Ft wnsitbjm. ddall Gafwaik*

Arglwydd M4<wr at tgltdd Af€n.

$ There is, amongft the fame MSS. an Ode called
Cerdd 1 Fatlgwyn Gwjntdd. In the rime of this prince
there were two noted peribns in Anglefey, viz. Caw of
Tvar Ctfyn, and Eggri of Tafybolien, who had feveral ions*
from whom many families defcended in this ifland,

fl This prince, Rhun ap Matlguy*, made great and
long wars againil the Saxons of Northumberland. And
at his return home gave notable privileges to the inhabit- -
ants of Caernarvonshire, for having detained them fo
long with him from their wives and families in that,
northern expedition ; and thefe privileges are called Bret-
nit gyuyr Arfbw, He made alio feveral laws, which we
have, among other things, in a very old MS. called Cj*
fnitbii Khun ap Matlguj*.


+ Of prince Iag§ ap 2Wi"there is a BritifhOde, called
Mar<w»ad Iago ap Belt, Which giifes fbrrie account of him.
There is an ancient exfcript of donations preferred in


* Odi is an 0<wdl t not Cjnxydd.


Y *


itik


164 MONA ANTIO.UA RESTAURATA.


Cadfan, king.


T


•Cadwallo, king* ■


r


fCadwaladr, king.


Idwal Iwrch.


tfie archives of tie cathedral of Bangor, wnfch mentions this prince,.
via, //« Ay* <p Jtfr, rar, duanat* mb/hm 4u**u u t. " Prince /<{»
*} BA founded the deanry of Bangor,


* Of CdAvMlU of Cddfdn likewh? werlnrrrairOifexirHtgy, anronjf
our BritWt MSS. called Mmnmutf Cadwtlb *p Cmtfami and another
upon hhn among the Odes of Li&watcb tie*.

t We have, among the (aid $ritiuVMSSw a prophecy afcribod to king,
CatwaUJr, calkd Dtngm* Cmd<u*imdr. From the tane of his reign the
old BriiUfe books called £>»#/ frgfa. and Br*f j1jugfiium r begkidM*
accoant, commanded to be continued and pra&nrcd in monasteries, bjr,
prince Rhoderic the Great;


I


Rhodri Molwynog ;


Conan Tyndacthwy


I


Effyllt, heirefi.


Mcrfyn Prych,

king of the ffle of

Man.


Rhoderic the Great.


Kb&deric the Great was prince of all Wales, rnd. divided his dominions berween his threerelder
fens, Jwarawd, CadtU, and Metfj*..

By this Sebtine.it will appear one the one fide,, that the CynetUan fa-
mily (out of which our Britifh princes derive their defcent and right
©f fovereignty) defcended. from CoeL Godhebog king, of Britain, whofc.
fon Cenau, the right heir,, coirtemrog'himfelf with his father's patri-
mony in the North* gave up his right of fovereigpty, to his lifter Helen
or Tiboen* who was> as you fee before,, married to Qmjiantius Cblorus,
Dioclefiaris lieutenant, and afterwards emperor. So on the other fide,,
we find partly out of Roman, and: partly out of Britifh. hiftory, that
one AfclepiodottfS a Briton-, brought up in the Roman camp, and a
Praetorian Praefedt, but by. defcent duke of Cornwat, having flaift*
Alettusy and thereby merited and. obtained, the lieutenancy, of Britain,,
was afterwards a. revolter,, and chofen by the Britons, to. be: thei*
crowned king and emperor. But this Afclepiodotus, as the Romans
called him, and by the Britons; called. Bruit xfyUyr± being (lain in bat-

7 ' dc


MONA ANTIQLUA RESt AuJlATA. t6$

tie by Coet Godbebog* who was like wife chofen Jung by the Brit6fi9, G*-
r adorns the fori of jlfctepiodotus was obliged to retire to North -Wales!
with his court and family, where his father's filler * Bronwen died, and
was buried on the bank of the river Alaw in Anglefey, whofe monu-
ment I have lately feen, but is now defaced. Caradocus being dead,
his fon Eudda or Eutba; called by the Rotnahs t>&a*)ius> having rtiade
his abode for a confideraMe time with his father at Caer Segont, as 6ur
manufcripts mention* was at length recalled by Conjlarttine the Great,
and by him made gbvttrhor of Britain.

This 0&avius % by defcent duke of CornwaU being now put into that
great authority, when he had well strengthened himfelf in the potfer
committed to him, made bold, as others had done before, to* atiiime;
the fovereignty to himfelf; arid eonfequently wis crowndd by his coun-
trymen king of Britain; And being in that high ftate, after fome
bickerings with the Romans* and contefts* with bis nephew Conaft
Meriadog^hoin in North-Wales at a place of that name — for the right'
of fovereignty, or at leaf! for the poflcflion of it; the faid Oftavius
thought it advifoable in order to fecure the throne to his own ifluc, to*
match his daughter Hekit (born at Caer Segont^ whofe chapel is there
to this day) to Maximus* cou/in by the mother to Cottjlantini the
Great, that thereby he might put afide his nephew's claim. But fome-
tame after* Maxirittts (after great contefts With this Conan r his wifeV
confin,. for the Britifh croWn) Was by the Praetorian foldiers chofen em-
peror. On which advancement of him to the imperial purple, he took
iflto favour the faid Conan. Meriaddg r and gafce'him the province of Ar—
moriCa, wheae before was planted a v colony of Britons, and mad6 him*
king thereof. And after' the death of Maxinius y and of hir fon Fltfvius
ViStor by his wife fbitn (his other forc Pubhcius,. builder of Llam
Bebltc, having renounced the world and taken on him the habit of re-
ligion) the faid Conaft Meriadog \ becartne heir to his uncle Eutbaot
OSfavhir, and was corifequttrtly duke of CortiWal, whofe line I fhall ex-
hibit iti the* following Scheme;

But befbre I lay down that Schema, it is reqpifite here to advertife
the reader, that' the accounts I givfc of thefe two families are principally
owing tot>ut Britiih manufcripts* That of the Cynetbian family is ea-

•* Bid! Ptii&at a *v*&td t Primmxftnb Lljf *r fori Jfai4, acjnij tladivtji br, &c. See
Br, D*ri*s on t h* word Pttt&pl.

f The author mifapprehended a palfage in the TrraJtf, about Htkn and her brother Cm** ;»
aUd^hbrefote. i* nor here to be depended upon.


-i66 MONA jANTIQJJA RESTAURATA*
iity to be, made out from the pedigrees of the chiefeft houfes in North*
Wales ; and where thofe da agree, as generally they do in the account
I give,, they carry with them a great- degree of hiftorical certainty. As
to the Cornwal family, I muft confefs I have not the fame advantage ;
fo that I was forced to. take in there fonje conjectures and inferences,
which yfet I hope are well grounded. For inftance* that Afckpiodotus
Was duke of Cornwal and crowned king of Britain, the Britifh hiftory
is my evidence ; and that he was called by the Britons* Bran the fon
of Llyr, the genealogy of our Britifh faints .gives good teftimony. For
we find there that Helen, the wife of Macjen Wledig, who in hiftory
is commonly called Maximus the Tyrant, was daughter of Euda or
Eutba, the fon of Caradog* the fon of Bran ap Llyr. Now that this
Bran ap Lfyr, Eutba's grandfather, was a crowned king of Britain (for
the Britons called none by that title but fuch as had obtained their im-
perial crpwn) a very ancient Britifh manufcript, called Mabinagi, is my
warrant. For in the beginning of the fecond fe&ion of that old frag-
ment are thefe words, Bendigeid Fran Mab Llyr a oeddfrenhin Coronawg
yn yr ynys bon, i. e. iC Blefled Brennus, the fon of L{yr 9 was a crowned
king of thi6 Mland/' And jifekpiodotus being of the fame diftance of
time in hiilory* as was this Bran ap Llyr in genealogy, from Maximus
the emperor 5 and alfo being faid in that ancient remain to be a crowned
king, i. e. their chief monarch, I could do no lefs than conclude him to be
the fame perfon with the Briton's Bran ap Llyr, however he came to be
more generally known and called by the name of AJclepiodotus.

But more evident it is from thefe Britifh remains, that Euda men-
tioned in them was OStavius, who was alfo crowned kin^ of Britain*
and duke of Cornwah For where our printed chronicles fay that Maxi-
mus the emperor married the daughter of QStavius king of Britain %
agreeably with that (excepting in the name) our books of genealogy
fay, that Maximus or. Macjen as they call h\m, married the daughter of
Eudda or Eutba, whcV-as the very import of his Britifh name Eutha
or Wytb, exprefled in the Latin tongue O&avius, difcovers— could be
no other than this O&avius. And it is alfo there as evident that the
before-mentioned Conan Meriadog was Oflavius's brother's fon, becaufe
the Britifh hiftory not only calls him Otfavias's nephew, but mentions
alio the hard ftruggling there was between Conan Meriadog and both
Qftavius and Maximus for the Britifh fceptre ; by which it appears he
•was his elder brother's fon, and fo I have placed him in the Scheme t
£ttt of the other Barnes in this Scheme that come after Conan, both the

Romaa


MONA ANTIQJ/A RESTAURATA. 167-

Roman and Britifh hiftories of Great and Little-Britain give ample evi-
dence* And here fince I have endeavoured to clear this point of diffi-
culty in the account and feries of our own Britifh kings and princes, at
the decline of the Roman empire* upon the credit of our Britifh manu-
fcripts Hill remaining among us, efpecially of our books of pedigrees j,
and left the reader fhpuld have too mean an opinion of thofe obfeure au-
thorities I rely upon, I (hall add one word of apology for them, and
fay, that our books of pedigrees being in ancient times carefully pre-
ferved* as valuable treasures in our bed families, and the collections out
of which they were compofed, being the peculiar work of a fet of men
allotted for. that purpofe in all ages of the Briti(h government ; the ac-
counts contained in them agreeing together, ought to have, at leaft,
equal credit allowed them, with what now pa&~hy the name of hiftory ;
efpecially fiocc- the- beft foundation of our ancient hiftories was no other
than what was takei> and mads ufe of out of thofe collections ; and;
therefore they may well defcrvcto be looked into* and equally to be re-
lied upon in difquifitions of this nature 1 and cannot but give considera-
ble light, when warily and judicioufly ufed, in fome points that remain*
obfeure in our Btitifh hiftories* both civil and fcclefiaftical. The in-
fcriptions before obferved, giving concurrent atteftation and evidence
to the truth of fome of them, are a fair vindication of the credit of the
aft.


.THE


1 68


MONA AtfTIQtfA RESTAiTRAtA.


Tljc CORNEAL Family.


Aihlepiodotus.

alias Bran ap Llyr, dukcorCornwal, and

crowned jcing of jfrytaiq.


1

Caradocus, 4uke of Cornwal.

«*p*


m


? t / jt h J *? ' i.i ■ » f i^< ' i j i j j. .1 i 'n


I The brother of O&avius.

rr


Oftaviui, or Eudda, cluke dt
Cornwal and king pf Britain,


Consul M«n*4^>
jcin fP rA fP Pri f a,


Wledig, emperor.


GradtaHis, ; '
king of Armories


L


SWlotn.


ton,


king of Amprica.


x


Helen, or ElcA
Lueddog.


^aviusViabrKobiris^by thfe kritons

fc^ed Owenfutifiu), fan wifh his father

by Theodoiius the emperor.


Aldroneus,*

kine of Armorica.

^ ^ . * i


tyfltantine,

brother of Aldroneus, crowned king 6f

.Britain


J


» ■ i ■


Conftantius,

(Iain by Vortigern, his

coufin, who ufarped

his right.


■*-*■


I


■ » i * ■«■ w K *


n


Aurelius Arabrofius,

who killed Vortigern,

and beat the Saxons

in many battles.


Uther Pendragon, l *

whobeftowtd thedutchy of Cornwal upon
his coufin Cador, and was victorious
again ft the Saxons. .


r


King Arthur,
who dying without ifiue, preferred Con
ftantine, ion of the above-mentioned Ca
dor, before the fons of his nephew Mor-
dred, to the crown of Britain, which oc-
casioned bloody wars.


1


Anne,

eldeft daugh

ter of Uther.


I Lotbo # ,
jk. of thcPias.


1


Ada,

fecond daughter*


I


Coranus,

or Gabranus,

king of Scots,


Conftantine apCadwr,
nephew of kine Arthur, duke of Cornwal,
and crowned Icing of Britain, called by
the Britons, Cyftennyn Goronawg, the
laft crowned king of the Cornwal family,
His iflue continued dukes of Cornwal a
time.


Mordred,

who killed his uncle,

king Arthur.


A3din7 I

king of Scots, laid to be thej
patron of LlaiuEdan church!
in Anglefey . |


glefey.


* Our author fell into a miftake here by following the tranflafor of our Britifh hiftoiy, G*lfrMms
Montmutbtnfis\ who turned U*w op Qynftrcb into Loth, whereas it ought to have been Le$. L&tbi
king of the Pitts and Lbw op Cyn/arcb wen different perfcns. See Williams's notes on J9r. Cambr.


I have


\


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 169)

I have inferted here the Schemes of thefe two families, both to (hew
what regard the Britons in their greateft confufions had to the right line
of their royal anceftors, and to reconcile fome feeming differences which
occur in the accounts of Roman, Britifh andScottifh hiftories, inrelating
the affairs of thofe times, and the names/of the chief perfons therein con-
cerned. In which laft particular I take our genealogies, carefully pre-
ferved in many of the beft families*, where they agree together, to be the
bed light we have to trace out what is pofiible to be recovered of
the truth of thofe matters, wherein national hiftories feem fo much to
vary in their relations of names and things. And herein I mull own that
the Scotch hiftories in the times of Chriftianity* relating to our affairs,
have been better preferved than our own ; their libraries having not been
deftroyed, as ours were* by the Danes and Saxons; and therefore in
many things* may be more depended upon. The Roman hiftorians on
the other fide being bver partial in their accounts ; and an unlucky af-
fe&ation erf" our prime men in taking on them Roman names with their
own ; by the firft of which the Romans, and by the latter the Britons
mention them ; it is no wonder that many paffages in Roman and Britifh.
hiftories have appeared fo perplcxedand intricate..

It is here alio to be obferved, that althol fincc and perhaps long be-
fore the Roman conqueft, the Ifle. of Britain was governed by many
petty princes of fovereign authority in their territories;, yet all along,,
when occafion required it* they fubmitted their powers to the condudt
of one general fovereign or monarch,, whom they called King of all Bri-
tain ; and ever confined themfelves in their choice of fuch, to one im-
perial line, which, as an unalterable maxim- o£ ftate, continued from
Dunwallo Moelmutius to Heli or Belt Mawr as they called him, and
From him to the above-faid^ Coel Godbebog * : Of which line we find all
that were raifed to that dignity to have been. And whatever contefts
might happen for this pre-eminence between Coel Godbebog and the be-
fore-mentioned Afclepiodottis, who reigned with that title immediately
before him ; we have reafon to fuppofe they both had pretenfions to that
lineage; efpecially when we confider how Otfavius; grandfon of that
Afclcpiodotusy to make furc work agaihft his nephew, fent to Rome, as
the-Briti(h hiftory has it, for Maximus, Coals brother's grandfon, to-
marry his daughter, thereby to falve up that. difference. And alfo when.
Conjiantlnes line abdicated their claim, and that of Maximus was ex—

* The epithtt <UJkhg does not belong to this CW, but to another.

Z\ tinfr,,


i 7 o MONA ANTIQUA RE8TAURATA.

tin&, we find that royal line divided again, between the Cynetbian and
the Carnival families, out of which two only they chofe their kings.
And when that regal dignity ended in king Cadwaladr, his line conti-
nued notwithstanding in the fucceeding princes of Wales, though the
honour of kingfliip did not, to the time of Llewelyn their laid prince,
who was flain at Buallt.

That Cambria and Cortiwal, to which thefe two mentioned families
were intitled, were provinces of great antiquity among the Britons, long
before the Romans fubdued the fame, appears by a very old fragment
of the Moelmutian laws, made Come hundreds of years before the birth
of Chrift (if they be genuine) and (till extant among our Britifh ma-
nufcripts, wherein among other things is ena&ed, viz. Un Goron Ar-
bennig a Gynbelir yn yr ynys Am, mc yn Uundain Cadwr Goron: A thair
Talaitb a Gynbelir tani\ unyn GbymrH Benbaladr : arafl yn Nbin-Edin
yny Gogledd : or drydydd ynGbernyuK That is, *• One imperial crown
is eftabliflied in tljis ifland, and the crown kept in London j and three
princely coronets contained under it : One in Wales, of the chief line >
another at Edinborough, in the North 5 and the third in Cornwal." The
imperial crown was poflefled by the fupreme monarch of all Britain,
whom they ftiled, Brenbin Prydain oil, i. e. " King of all Britain/' And
fuch was commonly elected to that great dignity by the faffrage and con-
lent of theother kings and princes, and was univerfally obeyed on extra-
ordinary occasions. Of this fort were Lud, Cqffibeline, Cumbeline, Arutra-
gus, Lucius, C4el 9 and thole of thefe two families I mentioned by the title
of kings of Great-Britain, whereof Cadwaladr was the laft ; in whom
ended that royal dignity in the Britifh race, and together with it the pof-
feflion of the far greater part of the whole ifland ; which the Saxons very
foon after reduced under one monarchy, and was called England, and
their frhole nation, £ngli(hmen ; as the Ifle ef Mona, the capital of
the Cambrian province, being once conquered but foon loft by thefe
Engliflimcn, was by them called Anglefey, i. e. " The Englifhmens'
Ifle," as it is to this day. ,

Now to clofe up this fc&ion at the time and period wherein the Wel{h
biftory begins, that is, at the death of king Cadwaladr ; I (hall only
by way of fupplemerit out of that and other records trace the defcent
of the Cynetbian line a little further, viz. from Cadwaladr f the laft
British monarch, to Rboderic the Great; who eftabliflied his royal
/eat at Aberffraw in the Ifle of Anglefey : Adding a few other remarks
*hat may dcierve notice, relating to the faid ifland.

Here


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA- 171

Here I (hall hot pretend to decide the variance there is between Bri-
tish and Englifh authors, whether the laft Cadwaladr died at Rome,
or of the plague in Britain ; or whether the British hiftorian took the
Saxpn Ceadwalla for the British Cadwaladr *. But it is agreed on all
hands, that Cadwaladr left at his death a fon called IdwaJ, firnamed
Iwrch or the Roe. The Britjfh hiftory fays his father left him very
young under the care and tuition of his coufin Alan, then king of Ar-
jmorica j who affifted the young prince, when he came of age, with a.
powerful army to recover his father's dignity and* royal fceptre, or at
leaft his patrimonial right in the Cambrian province : Which laft, af-
ter great ftruggies, he obtained, and left his fon Rbodri Molwynog fole heir
and fucceflbr in the government of that province. Who in a (hort time
vanquished and chafed away the fons of Bletricus, prince of Cornwal,
that then ufurped the fovereignty of thofe countries, over which their
father Was left governor by Cadwatio and Cadwaladr, when they were:
chofen kings of all Britain; and then he fettled his feat, as his ances-
tors had done before, at Caer Segont on the river Menai.

Prince Rbodri dying left behind him two fons; viz. Conan lirnamed
Tyndaetbwy, probably as being born or nurfed in that part of Augiefey
called Ml by that name, and Howe/. Howel claimed the Ifle of An-
glefey and other lands for his (hare of his father's inheritance by gavel-
kind/; and Conan had the coronet and princely government; But as
priwe, Conan could not fuffer his brother to polTefs the capital of the
province, in which the royal feat was firft eftabliftied by his anceilor
Cafwalhn law-bir ; this feat of fovereignty occasioned bloody war* be-
tween the two brothers, profecuted with various fuccefs, till at length
Conan the prince vanquished his brother Howel, and forced him to make
his efcape to the Ifle of Man ; which was then part of this Britifh pro-
vince, under the government of one Merfyn Frycb. But Conan dying
foon after, and leaving behind him one daughter Darned EJJyUt ; Howel
perceiving the Wel£h difaffefted to him, found it his intereft to make
up a match between Merfyn and his niece Effyllt ; by which bargain
Howel was to have the Ifle of Man and other lands, which he enjoyed*
not long. For Howel foon after dying without iflue, they all returned
to the pofleflion of Merfyn.

This Merfyn Frycb had, beiides the Ifle of Man.,, very large poflef-
fions in Wales, efpecially in right.of his mother, who was daughter of

* Might not both Cpdwakdr and Ceadwalla go to Rome?

Z 2 Cadell


iyi MON'a ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

Cadcll fon of the yoangcr Bryibfael Yfcytbrog> from whom he enjoyed
and yvas lord of ail Powys-Land and earl of Chefter $ which* joined with
his wife's inheritance, made him ptince and proprietor of almoft all
Wales, and king of thd Ifle of Man. In his time Egbert the Weft-
Saxon invaded Wales, took the Ifle of Mona, and called it Anglefey,
where a bloody baftflc was fought at Uanfaes ftear Beaumares ; but was
loon after difpofleffed of it by Merjyn % who at length cleared his coun-
try of thofe invaders. And laftty, aflifting the Danes againft the Eng-
lish, he fo incenfed Etbelwolpb their king againft him, that a moft cruel
war enfucd, with fuch enormous outrages committed by the Englifli
againft his fubjedes, that in defence of his people and country, he at laft
fell and gave up his life a dear vifiim to his enemies 9 implacable fury r
-leaving his fovereignty and pofleflions to his fole heir and fucceflbr Ro-
deric ftrnamed the Great.

Roderic the fon of Merfyn and EJJyllt, to make the whole Cambrian
province his own, which before had been divided into many families,
takes to wife Angharad daughter and heir of Meyric ap Dyfnwal king
'of Cardigan and prince of South- Wales, by which marriage he became
fole prince and proprietor of all Wales.

Prince Roderic behaved himfelf with admirable conduft, but with
variable fortune againft both Danes and Englifli ; who in their turns
made ftrong and frequent attempts to feize the Ifle of Anglefey, «which
the Englifli called their own : And both Danes and Englifli with equal
appetite and endeavour coveted the pofleflion of it, as a place of firft
importance, in order to fubjed and conquer the whole province i which
made prince Roderic remove the royal feat from Caer Segont, where it
continued a long time, into the ifland. But why he chofe Aberffraw, an
un fenced open place, to fix his court at, I am not able to determine * >
unlefs that had been before a princely palace, and that he looked upon
the whole ifland, as the ftrongeft and fecureft fort he had; and then no
matter where in it his palace ftoocf, fo he had a fleet to fecure the coafts,
and a good army to defend the paflfes of the Snow don. But here he
fixed it i and here it continued all the time of his fuccefibrs, the Welfli

• Ther care many good reafons why Rubric and the other princes before him,* mould. pitch
-upon Ahirjfraw as the fitted place to fix their court. Firft, it is the richeft part of the ifland, and
the bed corn country, to this day. And, when the ifland was all woody, this muft have been the
-wholefomeft part of it; being expofed to the fouthern breezes from the fea and mountains. Se-
condly, it was the part of the ifland by nature beft fortified, and the leaft fubjeft to invaiiorf by
Tea ; fo that the prince might have fufficicnt time to prepare againft any power that might land in
any other part of the country. All the coaft near Abtrjfraw is fo dangerous for fhipping, that fea-
men never «are to come near it.

princes,


MONA ANTfQUA RESTAURATA, 173

jprinces, till prince Llewelyn, thefaft of that race, loft his life at Bnallt,
and with it furrendered his royal feat and dignity and the whole prin-
cipality, into the hands pf his conqueror, Edward the Firft, king of
England ; in whofe line, the rights and royalties thereof, and the titles
in their elded fons, continue to this day.

I muft not pafs by here the recital of fome of the noble qualification*
of this worthy prince Roderic the Great; a name and chafa&er he well
deferved, as being the eftablifher of the long continued government of
the Cambrian province, where the laft remains of the ancient Briton;,
enjoyed their lives, laws and liberty for fcveral centuries under the au-
fpicious valour and prote&ion of their own natural lords and mafters ;
and much longer might they have done, if they had followed the excel-
lent rules he hid down for their prefervation and fecurity.

First, He was a wife politic prince; he fliewed as much wifdom
in ordering the affairs af his ftate, and policy in regulating the govern-
ment of his province, as he had always done of valour and condufl: in
the wars he frequently waged againft two powerful enemies, the Danes
and Englifti ; who molefted him on every part of his territories. For
confidering that fo many provinces were united by marriages in him ;
and that the nobles and people of thofe provinces had been accuftomed
of a long time to ferve their own lords and princes, who lived among
them ; and that fome of them might be too prone to revolt to the enemy,
when he could not on a fudden yield them fuccours, as occafions would
fometimes require ; he therefore caufed a furvey to be made of all Wales,
and to obviate thofe forefeen inconveniencies and dangers ,that might
threaten his peace and tranquility, diftributed the whole province into
three principalities, each containing under it an affigned number of
Comots and Contrefs. The principalities were Gwynedd, Debeubartb
and Powys. And in each of thefe he built a royal court or palace, viz*
Aberffraw in North-Wales, Dinefawr in South-Wales, and Matbrafal
in Powys. Thefe three principalities, during his life, .he governed and
protected by fubftitutes and commanders under him ; but ordained that,
after his deceafe, his three elder fons (hould enjoy them-, to them and
their heirs for ever ; and fhould be from thenceforth reckoned the three
diademed princes, T 7*ri Tywyfog Taieitbictg. To Anarawd, the eldeft
foa, he gave the principality of North- Wales, whofe court he ordered
fhould be at Aberffraw in Anglefey ; giving him the title, at leaft among
his own fubjedts, of king of Aberffraw. To Cadel/, the fecond fbn, he
gave JSouth- Wales, whofe court he apppinted to be at Dinerfaw. And

to


i 7 4 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.
to Merfyn, his third fon, he gave the principality of Powyj f whole court
was to be kept at Matbrafal; as appears in the laws of his gratidfoa
Howe/ Dda, fon of the laid Cuddly prince of South- Wales.

Secondly, He was a juft prince $ although he divided his dominions
in this, manner between his three fons, yet he took care to give the
eldeft fon a diftinguifhing fuperiority over the other two, as undoubted
heir of the Cynetbian line, appointing him and his heirs and fuccefibra
only, to have the title of Brenbin Cymru off, viz. " King of all Wales."
And in acknowledgment of that fuperiority, the other two fans, their
heirs and fuccefTors, {hould pay to the kings of Aberffrai* a rated yearly
tribute called Maefged, in token of their homage and fealty. And alia
that the kings of Aberffraw (hould pay for all Wales the Teyrngedot an-
cient royal tribute to the imperial crown of London, at that time, by
conqueft, in the poiTeflion of the kings of England ; as by the consti-
tutions of Dunwatto Moelmutms the whole Cambrian province was ob-
liged to do.

Thirdly, He was a provident prince; he divided his dominions*
to enable every one of them apart by themfelves, by a clofer union to
make Wronger efforts againft the attempts of an encroaching enemy..
He forefaw that nothing lefs than a ftridt bond of confederacy between
thefe new made princes and their posterity could preferve the whole ia
fafety ; and that the relation of brotherhood (if that could keep up tho
bond un violated) was to be hut of a fhort duration. Therefore prince
Roderic, taking a paternal care of their welfare, prqjefts as much a*
he could to perpetuate that relation by enjoining his three fons, now
made diftinft princes, and their heirs and fucceflbrs after them, to main-
tain inviolable peace and concord between themfelves $ ordaining, that
when any one of them was oppreffcd or injured by the common enemy,
that the other two fhould totis viribus, afiift and fuccour him. And
well knowing that inteftine broils and animofities would inevitably ariie
between neighbouring princes of equal ftrength, he added that incom-
parable article (which yet I do not find was ever obferved) to this
Partition-Ordinance* viz. " That if any two of thefe princes fhould
happen to jar and quarrel about their particular interefts, that then the
third (hould intercede and finally determine the matter." Nay, he went
herein further than general terms ; he laid the cafe home to them in
order to obviate that fatal mifchief. For he exprefly ordained, " That
if any difference /hould arife between the prince of Aberffraw and the
prince of Dinefawr, the three princes fhould meet at a certain place

which


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. j 7s

which he named, and the prince of Powys (hould end the controversy.
And if the prince of Aberffraw and the prince of Powys fell at variance,
the three princes fliould like wife meet at a fecond place aligned by him,
and the priricc of South-Wales (hould compofe the difference. And
if a quarrel happened between the princes of South- Wales and Powys,
then the prince of Aberffraw, at a third place named by hirrt, (hould
meet and put an end to the matter/ 9

And» Lastly, As a prudent and religious prince, promoting the
honour and welfare of his nation and country, he ordained, €€ That all
(farong hold6, caftlcs, and citadels (hould be fortified and kept in repair ;
that all churches and religious houfes {hould be re-edified and adorned ;
and that in all ages the hiftory of Britain, being faithfully transcribed
and registered, and added unto as times required, (hould be carefully
looked after and preferred in the faid religious houfes, for the infor-
mation of pofterity, and to perpetuate the honour and glory of the Bri-
tish nation/'

Thus I have endeavoured to trace the affairs of this ftfcall ifland from
the time of its firft planting ; and to (hew that it was a place of fome
confequence for the greateft part of the time it was in the hands of the
Britons to the time of Roderic the Great* And what figure it made
from that time and what overtures happened in it (it being the capital
feat of the British princes to the difiblution of their government at the
death of Llewelyn the laft Britifli prince of Wales) the general hiftory
of the province, firft fct out by Dr. Powel, and lately revifed and pub-
lifhed by Mr. William Wynne, will eafe me of farther trouble to account
for, and will abundantly fattsfy any inquiiitive reader. Only this I
xnuft beg leave to obferve before I finifli this fe&ion, which is, that
though this ifland has not been fo happy as to havjj had the court or
2>alace of any of our Englifli princes in it ; yet we not only lived happy
under the influence of their mild and gracious government, where they
were; ' but alfo (which is not a little remarkable) we have by a ftrange
compenfatioa of Providence* the honour to fay, that her late majefty
queen Anne of glorious memory, as well as fome of her royal anceftors
before her, enjoyed the ancient kingdom of Scotland, the kingdom. of
England and the principality of Wales, by right of inheritance, from
perfons whofe defcent and origin were from the Ifle of Anglefey. For
(he had the name of her family, and the<:rown of Scotland, as defcended
from Walter Steward, who was born at Aberffraw ; the crown of Eng-
land, in right of the lady Margaret Tudur, paternally defcended from

7 Owen


I7 S MONA ANT I QUA R E S-T AITR A T A.

Owen 7*udur of Ptnmynydd in Anglefey \ and flic inherited the princi-
pality of Wales from Gwladus Ddu h only furviving daughter and heir of
.Llewelyn ap lorwertb prince of Wales, born and bred in Anglefey, who
was married to Sir Ralph Mortimer ; by which marriage the inheritance*
qf the principality of Wales in right of blood, came to the houfe and fa* v
tnily of York, and by them to the* crown, wherein it now happily reft*.

And further alfo, if a right to the pofleflion of undiscovered regions
belongs to the crown or fovereignty of thofe kingdoms or dates whofe
gativA-.fiibjeQs were the firft difcoverers of them, as the Spaniards af-
firm, and as the pope has confirmed, it does ; then we are well able to.
prove, as far as any credit of hi (lory and attefting circumstances go,
that his prefent majefty king George, in right of the imperial crown of
Great-Britain, is rightly intitled to all America, by the firftdifcovery and
premier feifin of that country by one * Madoc ap Owen Gwynedd, born
in. this ifland— who adventured and performed the difcovtry of the Weil-
Indies, returned and went again therewith a colony of Welfhmen abova
' three hundred years before Cbriftapbef Columbus and Americus Vefpufius,
made their difcovery of it, 01* which the Spaniards ground their title to
thofe rich and fpacious regions and iflands thereunto belonging.

Thefe are great things* I confefs, wherewith Providence was pleafeoL
to blefs and. fignalize this ifland above other places. And as it adds to*
the reputation of the place to have fuch perfons born in, and thereby
fuch great things owing to it; I am therefore in hopes that a native of
it will.be at leaft excufed for taking notice of them*, in order to. recom-
mend them to the efteem and value of pofterity.

The reader will, I hope, pardon my fubjoining one other remark of
God's lingular providence (for I can call it no other) in making this
ifland the only celebrated place of refuge to the diftreifed and perfecuted',.
in the greateft calamities that ever happened to this kingdom. I have
before (hewed how it was an afyjum to the harrafled Britons, when the
invading injurious Romans diftrefled them. And it was no lefs a fanftu-
ary to the retreating Britifh clergy from the rage and infults of the do-
mineering pagan Saxons, after the bloody maflacre at Bangor if-coed> as
I have already endeavoured to make appear. I (hall add a third inftance,,
in the, feafonable fuccour this ifland yielded to many of the loyal clergy
ajfp in (he rebellion againft king Charles the Firft : It then alone held,

* See the Hiftory of Wales* Wynne's Edition, p. 195, 196, Wr. and Sir Thomas Herbert's
Travels into Perfia, Second Edition, p. 355, where he proves at large the firft difcovery of the
W»ft-Indie$ by Mad* the fou of Qwm G<wyntdd y grince of Wales.

out


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. ij 7

out above five years after the breaking out of that rebellion ; at which
time no lefs than * five bi£hops with other fequeftered clergymen had
flieltered themfelves within it. Nay, afterwards, when the late king
James the Second had unfortunately brought a perfecution on the Pro-
teftant clergy and laity in Ireland, great numbers of them were driven,
and made their efcape hither. So that the ancient charafter, at lead
in the latter part of it, which the Roman + liiftorian many centuries
before had given it, was fignally verified of this ifland; namely, that
it was Incolis valida & ferfugarum receptaculum, viz. fo well ftrength-
ened by God and nature, as to have been a retreating defence and fe~
curity to the diftrefled and perfecuted, in many of pur greateft national
afflictions and calamities; which, without ingratitude to divine Pro-
vidence, we could not pafs by unnoticed, and without its due commemo-
ration and acknowledgement.

+ Litchfield and Coventoy, Bangor, St. Afiph, Gloucefter, Offoijv
f Tacitus, AnnaL lib. 14*


A a A BRIEF


178 MONA ANTIGUA RESTAURAf A. :

A

BRIEF CHRONOLOGY,

RELATING TO THE

EL E V E N T H S E C T 1 O N.;. :

j

la T v o Co l u -m >i s> viz*'

Civil and Eccle«ia*ti^al


a. d. Civil Affairs- '•

^6 /^iLaudius Caefar made a defcent
^^4 in pcrfon into the ifle of Bri-
tain, and fettled colonies and
Roman garrifons in it.

52 Car ailacus \ captain-general of the
Silures, is taken and carried cap-
tive to Rome.

61 The Ifle of Mona conquered by
Suetonius Paulinus*.

67 Nero died, and the Ifle of Mona
recovered its liberty for fome
time. f

73 The legion, Britannica Augufta^

placed by Julius Frontinus on
the river Wifk to awe the Silures
or the South- Wales men..

74 The legion, Vigefima ViSrix^ placed

on the river Dee to awe the Or-
dovices or the North- Wales men,
76 The Ifle of Mona re-taken by Ju-
lius Agricola, and made a part
of a Roman province.

108 Lucius, king of the Britons, em-
braced the Chriftian faith, which
was preached to him by Timo-
~ - - -thy, St. Paul's difciple, and £o»

* ' * * ol Claudia Ruffina, a Britilh Lidy.

3


A. D. *fecCL*ESIASTICAL AFFAIRS..

41 TAMES, the fon of Zebedee*
J with his mother Salome, is laid
to have come to the ifle of Bri-
tain to preach the gofpel in it.

47* Simon Zelotes came to Britain to.
preach the gofpel.

5.1 Ariftobulus was fent by St. Paul
and St. Barnabas into Britain, and
. after ordained bifhop thereof.

59 St. Paul the Apoftle came to Bri-
tain.

61 The Druids routed by the Romans
in the Ifle of Mona; and their
facred places all deftroyed.

70 The Druidifh priefts forfake the
Ifle of Mona, and betake them-
felves to the ifle of Man, Ireland
and Scotland,
no At this time, it is probable, the
do&rine of Chrift was embraced
in the Ifle of Mona.

182 The great college or rfionaftry of
Bangor is Coed, in Flintlhire, was
founded.

190 A great perfecution again ft the
Chriftians under Septimius Seve-
rus, emperor.

200 Conan


A. D*

200


MQN.A.4MTf : (£UA

Civil Affairs.


Corran ap Eujaffi grandfather of
Slrad&en the mother of our fa-
mous Helen *, was, under the
Romans; a great prince in North-
Wales.
260 At this time one Lyr was a great

prince or duke in Cornwal.
285 Caraufiusf, a Menapian born, ob-
tained the governmenjc of Bri-
tain, and was calkd Emperor.
192 Ak&us made emperor in Britain,

(lain by Afclepiodotu*.
294 Afclepiodotus, duke of Cornwal,

' crowned king of the Britons.
300 CodGudbtbog J kills Afclepiodo-
tus, and was crowned king of
• Britain.
304 Conftantius Chlorus was chofen

emperor.
316 Conftantine made king of Britain.
326 Conftantine the Great was fole em-
peror.
328 Qyncdda- JVUdig was a great prince ;

in (be northern parts.
330 Eudia % or O&avius was king of

Britain and duke of Cornwal.
370 Maximns, Helen's nephew, mar-
ries Helen daughter of Qttavlus,
king of Britain.
383 Maxinaus was chofen emperor.
3-89 EimenUrddxx tfoe Honourable, fon '.
of .Cymedda Wlcdig, reigned in
- Cumberland.
39a C*tkmA4et*adt>g wtezbc&Xttetiitt i
made king of Annorica.


RESTAUR AT A. i 79

a. d. Ecclesiastical Affairs.
A perfecution railed againft the


239


railed
Chriftians by the emperor Maxi-
/ minus.

251 Another perfecution againft the
Chriftians in the reign of the enj-
peror Dccius, calkd the eighth
perfecution.

256 A great perfecution raifcd by the
emperor Valerian.

286 The greateft and laft perfecution
railed by Dioclefian againft the
Chriftians in all the provinces of
the empire, but raged with great
feverity in all the parts of Britain.

313 Conftantine the Great, foxj of He-
len, commanded the Chriftian
faich to be embraced through all
the Roman empire. f

3J4 Conftantine, the emperor, fum-
moned a fynod of bilhops at
Aries in Gallia, to which three
BcitUh archbifhops repaired, vi^.
Ivor of York-, Reftitutus of
London, and Adelphius of Caer
Leon on fVi/k.

354 Pelagius (his Britifti name wasAfrr-
gan) a ftudpnt at Bangor'mona-
ftry in his youth, was author of
the Pelagian herefy. %

364 KebiusorCybi isfaid tobebi(bop
of Anglefey, *ncl to have hi*
feat at Holyhead,


* Thfc Is an intokraWe blunder, occafioned by xxmt author's Atlowmg the poete ; who^ roif-
-*akingC«f Godifog, * northern prince, for Cat oarl gf £W#w--rQlpucefter — afterwards king
of Britain, have made Htfa *p fee i&e daughter .of CW G*bfy.

f Hey\\nc&\k Km* nabfe Britaa, and pja*e* hip) aljout the yeaf 218. In the year 1728 a
.s^VIW *P¥ ° f hi ,*&$ fomd at C«4*" in the- parifh of llanfecMt in Anriefey. See plate VIII.
lig. 3. X TW S tytl >as,-$ari of Glbuperier, and not-Cotl GoJtkr.

• , $ 2*^inali bur*r,MS«, ' * <


Aa %


't HJE


180 MONA ANT I QUA RESTAURATA.
THE. SECOND PERIOD.


A.D.
400


Civil Apfairs.


GRadlonus, Copan's fon, reign-
ed in Armorica.

420 Solomon, the Ton of Gradlonus,
reigned in Armorica.

440 Cefwallon law-hir^ fon of Eiirion
Urdd, fixed his /cat in the I(le
of Anglefcy, and reigned there.

443 Conftantine the younger, fon of
Solomon king of Armorica, was
duke of Cornwal and crowned
king of Britain.

448 Vortigern flew Conftantius the eld-
eft fon ofColfftanrine,ufarped the
throne, and called in the Saxons.

464 Vortimer, the fon of Vortigern,
takes on him the government,
and foon after dies.

48 1 Aurelius Ambrofius, fecond fon of
Conftantine, flew Vortigern and
obtained the Britifli crown.

5C0 Uther Pendragon,.third fon of Con-
ftantine, reigned in Britain.

505 Howel, brother of Gildas,. was (lain
by young Arthur in the Ifle of
Anglefey — at Cerrig Howel.

510 Maelrwyn Gwyneddy fon of Cafwall-
onlaxo-bir, ruled in North- Wales.

517 Arthur, the fon of Uther Pendra-
gon, reigned in Britain.

520 The battle at Badon-hil], being the
year Gildas Badonicus was born. l

529 Mordred, king Arthur's nephew,
married* a daughter of one Gaw-
olan y which is not improbable
was the fame as *as commonly
called by the Britains, Caw O
Frudain ; for it appears by the

/ Scotch writers that this Gaiuolan

/ was a Britifli lord, and in great

favour with king Arthur. And
if the faid Caw was this Gawolan,
then he could not be the father
of Gildas Albanius,, as is gene


a. i>. Ecclesiastical Affairs..

455 /Hildas Albanius fet upa fchoot
\JT in Britain, and inftrufted
youths in arts and fciences.

477 About this time Mcrlinus Ambra-
fius flourifhed, and prophefied
of the future fate of Britain

481 (Vortigern was (lain, and Merlin
was then but young. Galf.)

525 About this time Daniel, Ion of
Dionothus, abbot of Bangor mo-
naftry, founded a college for the
inftru&ion of youth in Cearnar-
vonihire, and called it Bangor :
He was fome while after confe-
crated bifhop of that place by
" Dubricius archbifliop orCaerleon.

53 1 About this time Sampion, the fcho~
lar of Iltudus, was made abbot
of Uan Carmen, and ordained
bifhop, Jim titul^ by Dubricius
of CasrUon.

564 Gildas Badonicus retreating to Ar-
morica, wrote tfoeoce his (harp
epiftle to his brethren, the Bri-
tons, fomeof whom he reprcfents
therein worfe than heathens, and
treats the princes he falls upon
with very warm and unbecom-
ing language.

543 St. Kentigern came from Scotland,
and had leave of one Cadwallon
to build a college \i\ Flindhire,
called Uan^Elwy •, which be-
came afterward one of the bi~
(hoprics of North- Wales.

554 Daniel, bifhop of Bangor, died and
was buried in the ifle of Bardfey.

570 Gildas Badonicus died.

580 (According to Baker.)


:«%


A<D.


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. i8 f
Civil Affairs. a. d. Ecclesiastical Affairs.


rally believed, but rather of Gil-
das Badonicus, whofc brothers,
PeiriO) GailgOy Eugrud^ Csffo % and
whofe filler, Cuilhg y by this ac-
count, muft be ; for in our pe-
digrees they are always reckoned
brothers and fifter to one of the
Gildas's; the former Gildas be-
ing too old in time to be Gaw
olari% fon, it therefore muft be
the latter ; if, as I faid,. this
Gawolan in the Scottifh hiftory
be the fame with our Caw of Bri-
tain. And if that be the truth
of this obfeure matter, as in all
likelihood it may, therv thtfe
mentioned brothers and lifter of
Gildas might retreat to Anglefey
about the time of the difperfion
of the clergy, and build thofe
"cloyfters -, and thereby alio a
^reafon will appear* why the lat-
ter Gildas omitted the mention
of king Arthur, who difinherit-
ed Mordrcd's fons, and why he
fell fo foul on Conftantine, Ar-
thur's fucceflbr, for killing them,
when they were his own fitter's
children; occafion enough to
enflame his refentments, and to
vent the angry expreflions he
has in his epiftlc.

542 King Arthur and his nephew Mor-
dred loft their lives in the battle
of Camblane or Camlan.

542 Conftantine, duke of Cornwal, was
crowned king of Britain, called
by the Britains by the tide of
Cyjlemyn Goronor.

552 Maelgwyn GwyneM endowed the
bimopric of Bangor with lands
and franchifes.

560 Maelgwyn Gwynedd made king of
alt Wales.

560 Rbun, the fon of Maelgwyn Gwy*
ntddy reigned in North- Wales.

586 BcJij the fon of RJbun of Maelgwyn,
was prince there.


596 Auguftine the monk was fent by

pope Gregory the Great, to the
iQe of Britain, to convert the
Saxons to the Chriftian faith.

597 The archbilhops of London and

York were driven to Wales by
the Saxons - r and the Loegrian
Britons extremely perfecuted.

600 At this time Talieftn wrotp his de-
nunciatory ode, being then very
old, having flourifhed in Mael-
gwyn* s time, and been his poet-
laureat.

603 This year was committed that hor-
rid maflacre on the monks of
Bangor by Ethelfred king of
Northumberland.

613 According to Bede, &c. fo the
monaftry lafted about 42 1 years*


i82 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

Gcrlnnlus, or Geraint, the grandfon of king Conjlanthie or Cyjlennyn
Goronog, on the fald CortftantinSs renouncing all worldly affairs, took
on him the title of duke of Cornwal. This Gcrinnlus had a fleet at fea,
and was very ufeful to the Britons in defending the maritime parts of
'Wales, as well as his own country, from the infults of the Saxons ; and
is therefore celebrated in a particular ode, called Cywydd Geraint ap
Erbirij by Llywarch-Hcn. He was grandfather of St. Cybi according
to our Britifti genealogies.


a.t>\ Civil Affairs.

599 Llywarch Hen, the Britifh prince
and poet flouriftied.

£99 IdgoapBeli ruled in North -Wales,
the founder of Bangor deanry.

603 Cadfan, the fon of logo up Belt was
prince of North-Wales.-^-This

* Cadfan, together with four other

Britifh princes, routed the Saxons
who maffacrcd the monks at Ban-
gor; he killed 10,066 of them
upon the fpot.

613 Cad fan was chofen and crowned
king of the Britons.

<>35 Cadwallo, the fon of Cadfan, was
crowned king of the Britons.

676 Cadwaladr^ the fon of Cadwallo^
was crowned king, being the laft
crowned head of the Bririfli race.

689 King Cadwaladr goes over to re-
. fide with his coufin Alan king of
Armorica.

703 Idvoal Iwrcb, the fon of king Cad-
waladr, returns from Armorica.

720 RodriMolwynogytonofldwallwrcbi
reigned in North- Wales.

755 Conan Tyndaetbwy, fon of RodriMo-
Iwynog, reigned in North- Wales.

8 1 o Efylbt, fole daughter and heir of Co-
nan Tyndaetbtvy, was married to
ftferfyn Frycb, king of the iQe of
Man.

J43 Rodri the Great* fon of Merfyn and
EJylty y reigned over all Wales.


a. D. Ecclesiastical Affairs.

613 Monk Auguftine died.
616 Beuno built a college at Clynnog in
Caernarvonfhire.

In this century, and in the latter
end of the laft, we find moftof
our churches in Anglefey to have
been built: the times of • whofe
building I am hot wholly defti-
tute of a way to make fome near
guefs at — for I pretend to no
nicety and certainty in this mat-
ter. And the way I take is, from
a computation made out of the
genealogies of thofe patron-faints
or firft builders of our cells and
cloyfters, which afterwards came
to be our PARisa-Churches.
That is, by pitching on fome
noted perfon in every pedigree,
whofe time of living is known,
and by the meafutfe of time which
.To many defcents, as are from
thofe noted perfons to the j>er-
fons I enquire, ordinarily make ;
and by certain refpe&s and rela-
tions of things or other inform-
ing circumftanccs, it wiU credi-
bly appear*


That


MONA ANTIQJJA RES.TAURATA. it 3


Ecclesiastical Affairs; Gn*

# ** m%

That St. % Patrick being fent by Pope Celcftine to convert the

Irtfh, and being come to Anglefey, in his way to Ireland, built

tits church on the fea-ftiore, which was called Llan Badric, - 440*

That St. Elian, being contemporary with Cafwallon Law^btr,
•built Llan Elian, ----•-«_ 4^

That prince Palo, commonly called P6JI Prydain, for his be-
ing a great fupport to the Britons againft the Pidts and Scots,
nbout the time of Captation Law-Mr, built Lktn Babo, - - 460

That Llan Dig fan and Llan Dyfrydog were built, about - 45©

• Thai Llan tydogwel chapel was built, - - - - 530
That Llan Rbuddiad and Llan Rbwydrys were built, - - 570
That Llan Ddyfnan, Llan Geinwen and Llanddwyn were built* 590
That Llan Allgv, Llan Eugrad, Llanfaehg, Llan Gaffo, Rbos

-Peirio, and Llangnpilhg were built, - - - - • - 605

That Llan Grijtiolus and Llanddona were built, • - - - 610

That Aberffraw and 'frewdraeth were built, - - . •- 616

T-hat Llan Mdan and UanddenielFdb were built, - - . - ' 6j6-
'That Llan Engbtntl, Llanjlnan, Llanieflin and Han Gtfni

meH b*iilt, * . •■ • - - -p - -♦- 620.
That Llan Fflewyn, Llan Grcdfaal pr Penmynydd and £&*

'Ftebtll w« re built, - ~ - - . . - . ^ %Q*

• Tb*t X& * JMw , Rbofcotyn, Coed Ane, Ceppd CeiSio and
-Uceb Gynfarnvy were built, «• - ~ ;* 63a

That Ptnmon-vhqrch, Seirfol^chipcl in the ifland, ai*d Man
Ftirjpn;werG built,. ~ «- *■ • ^. r . . T fi^

That Tyfilioy the £bn of Brocbfael Tfcytbrog, built his church
at Llandyjilio, - - - - - -630*

That Edwen, ^niece' or daughter df kmg Edwin, Built her
church at L/*« Edweh, - - - - - 640

That king Cadwaladr, our laft British, as well, faint as mo-
narch, caufed his church of Llan Gadwaladr to be built, - - 650

Thefe churches, as well as all the reft throughout Wales, have their

wakes or feaft-days, in commemoration either of the death of the faicL

patron-faints, or of fome remarkable accident of their lives, or of the

peculiar 'dedication of the facred houfes built by them to the ufe andi

« • fervicer


x8 4 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

Ecclesiastical Affairs,

fcrvicc of religion : Which feafts the people yearly obferve jmd (Jele-
brate, commonly on the Lord's day next before or after the parochial
faint's day. And as the primitive Christians folemnized their Fafii or
anniverfary memorial-days* called by them, as well as the places they
were celebrated in, Mem&ria Sanflorum or Marty rum; fo we in a religious
imitation of them— folcmnize ours, and call them Gwyliau MyFr Sant,
corruptly called Mab-Sant—Myfyr or Mybyr being the true Britiih of
Memoria, or indeed the fame word varied in pronunciation by a differ*
cnt language* for * M% l/and B have been often ufed one for another
in the pronouncing of Roman words in the Britiih tongue, efpeciall/
when thefe kbials are in the middle of a word, of which I have pro-
duced many inftances in my Comparative Table of Languages — on which
account I conceive the ancients Memoria Sanftorum, came with us to be
Tendered MyS'r-Sant, and at laft Mab-Sant : fuch deviations from ori-
ginal founds in a long courfe of time being not uncommon ; which in-
duces me to lay this down as the beft reafon I can think of, to account
for the etymology of that very common but obfeure name. *f- Dr. Da-
vies indeed gives another reafon for it, viz. San&us in Cujus Paracia
quis Natus eft puer 9 i. e. that -every native of a parifh, by being reck-
oned its faint's fon, or Mdb y Sant> gives name, when affembled to
celebrate it, to this feiiival. But I can never be perfuaded that fuch -a
relative attribute in propriety of fpeaking, could give it that denomi-
nation ; for, befides the too remote congruity of that caufe, it is un-
precedented ; no Chriftian churches in any nation giving that reafon for
the name of their festivals ; but that of Commemoration they gene-
rally give.

• See Mr. Lfrapfs Comparative Etymology, Af&ff, & p. a*.
t Dr. Davit* on the word Mai-Sam.


SECt


MONA ANTIQJJA *E8TAURAT A. iftj

SECTION XII.
Ttbe etymology of the Comot ^Maenatt.

THAT the original of names* elpecially of places, is for die rooft
part very dark and uncertain, and not to<be traced but by guefles
and probabilities, is a truth by all men aflented to ; yet (hat this trad
or portion of land, called Cwmmwd Manau or the Comot of Mane 9 was
fo denominated from the Fretum or channel of that name on which it
borders, will be readily granted : But how that fret or channel came
to be fo named, will not be fo eafily accounted for.

Tacitus in his fhort notes and ftridlures on the affairs of Britain,
only mentions an arm of fea here ; but gives us no manner of ac-
count how it was then called. Neither doth Ptolomy, if his ports and
rivers be now rightly dated, give the leaft hint of it. And if Mot
Caingc be the true Britiih of Ptolomy's Moricambium *, of perhaps Mot
Cam, as it very well may, the channel bending and winding in its paf-
fage j yet I know not, with a juft regard to the congruity of the names
of other bordering places by him mentioned, how well to place it here.

It may therefore be more allowable to refer the ancient and prefent.
name of this Fretum of Mcenau to a primitive impofition, or a name at the
firft peopling of the land impofed upon it. And that feems the more
probable* becaufe its compofition imports, as original names ufually do,
the nature and propriety of the place, viz. Mainau, i. e. a narrow wa-
ter : Main being here retained for ftreight and narrow, and Eauov An
, in France for water, to this day. And that it fhould be pronounced
Mane or Menai contra&edly, is no unufual thing ; confidering that the
Romans have corrupted and altered many other names from their ori-
ginal founds : And it is not unlikely that they might call this water
Manx or Menei in the Genitive Ca/e $ L e. Aqua Mana, and fo it con-
tinued to be called to this day.

But if any feem inclined to objedl the improbability of this account*
andreafon of the name, by fuggefting that the French Eau or Au, figni-
fying water, is rather a derivative of Aqua, as'it is generally thought to
be, than that it (hould come from an ancient Gaulilh or Celtic found
of that fignification : To that, I fay, it may be reafonably replied, that
although it be granted that the French lifp hath fmothered fome letters

• Moricambium— Mir itmmb (m and b equal « w f) t. e. Mh *d*/-*-ihe tppermtffea*

Bb in


4*6 MONA ANTIQUA RE-STAURATA.

in their vulgar pronouncing of Latin words ; yet it does not feem very
likely that they fliould retain their tnoft common letter (q) almoft in
every other word that had it before-^nay very often ufe it where they

had it not and lofe it in this, where the pronunciation of it appears

to be.fo foft and eafy. And indeed we may as fairly invert the fup>-
pofition, and prefume the Latin Aqua to have been originally derived
from Au, that being a moft ancient appellative of water in the Gaulifli
or Britifli founds, whereof we have many inftances in ancient ety-
mologies.

And that this may not appear to be a bare and groundlefs fuppofition,
we may further obferve, that that found — Au — betokening water, feems
not only to have been very ancient among the Gauls and Britons ; but
one may alfo obferve fome remains of that found, either as initial or
terminative, to have been conveyed to us. in many ancient compound
. words relating to water : Which is no mean argument that Au, or fome
. found very near it, was fignificative of water* even at thofe very firft
times, in this weftern part of Europe.

For inftance i as initial, Auernus in Italy; Auignion in France; Aude
in Nathan. ; Aube\\\ Campania; Aa in Flanders.; Aar in the Aljps;
Avate in Tranfilvama ; Aw in Scotland ;. Avren in Britain ,• and Awyduff'
. or Black-Water in Ireland, do all of them carry fome remains of that
primitive found. ' Neither is. it unlikely that Aber (B and ITbeing pro-
mifcuoufly founded in ancient words) has fome relation to it. And
Avon a river, though the Latin. Amnis might afterwards take its fpring
from that found* may very well be a diminutive of it. Awyn or Ewyn
fpufiia vel aqua albicans, i. e. Aw-wyn ; Aweddwr, aqua limpida ; Auvwys
or Affwys, Abyjfus, do all feem to retain this (au) in their compofition,
as fignificative of water or of fome effential property of it, ia their firft
fyllables^

So alfo we may take notice of many compound words terminating in
au or aw, which make that element their main and principal Suppofi-
tum. Manaw, the Ifle of Man ; Llydaw, Armorica ; Geneau or Geneva,.
u e. the mouth of the lake ; Llyn Llwydaw, in Caernarvonshire ; A/aw
a river in Anglefey. ;. G.wlaw, rain ; all thefe being waters themfelves, 'or
having their principal idea and character from water, may well.juftify
their derivation from that origin. Neither is it unreafonable to fuppofe
that the Gaulifli. or Celtic or old Britifli word au or aw, fignifying wa-
ter, might fome time have an additional termination affixed to it, per-
haps to differ and fpecificate the import of the word; as when it

was


MONA ANTIQUA RE8TAURATA. ity

was made to mean particular brooks or rivers,, It might then be pro-
nounced Awy t as we find it in Ireland, Awyduff, black or deep water *
or more contradtedly Wy% as in Wales, where it terminates the compound
names of many rivers. Which conjecture of it, as none can deem it to
be unreafonable, fo it being granted probable on the inftances I have pro-
duced, it not only facilitates the probability of the thing. in queftion*
but feems alfo to account for the etymology of the names of many ri-
vers ; ' as Dowrdwy, EJivj, Medwy, Lligwy % Conwy* Gwy, and many
more fo terminating, which otherwife can fcarce be accounted for. And
indeed the Greek TlAzfjiou a river fm and u being anciently equivalent)
and the river Tame in England have fome affinity with it.

However the compofition of the name ftands, it is mod certain that
we have evident tokens that the compound name itfelf, Main-au or cor-
ruptly Mane, hath been anciently ufed and applied to fuch places, as
the word in the fenfe I have now explained it naturally imports.

For confirmation of which we may obferve, that the three jiarroweit*
{freights about the ifle of Great-Britain have in and about them fome re-
mains of the name Mane ; either extant in thofe very places to this day,
or were found there in former ages, and recorded by authors of good
credit. And thofe narroweft ftreights of all the Britjifr fe^s will, I iup-r
pofe, b$ allowed to be, viz. the firft in Kent, over-againft Normandy
in France ; the fecond in Pembrokeshire in Wales ; and the third at or
' near the Mul of Qalway in the kingdom of Scptland. Thefe two la't
being the (horteft cuts from the ifle of Great-Britain to the .kingdonj of
Ireland, as the firft is to the coaft of Normandy in France.

Now for the First of thefe in Kent, juft upon the edge of that
Fretum between us and the Gallic flipre, the Roman writers, as the
Itinerary of Anton ine (hews, place Port us Limanis, Limene, as in
Ptolomy. Shall I turn it into Briti(h, Port hladd Mane ? And near that on
the fame Fretum is old Romene, Rtos-M<ene perhaps, now^Ruoiney-niarlh,
It is not to be paffed by here, that the Britons called the port where
CaefarJanded, which was on this Fretum, Pwytb or Porth-Meinlas\ and
indeed the Greek At^yiv may very well be a compofition pf thofe two
monofyllables, Lie & Main, i. e. LJemain 9 Portb or ferry,

Secondly, On the fliore of that fhort cut or paflage from St. Da-»
yid's, in Pembrokeshire to the Weft of Ireland ; St. David's Point there
is called Menevia and Meniw to this day. And it is no lefs obfcrvable
that the inhabitants of the oppofite Irifli fide of that narrow fea are by
Ptolomy called Menapii, and their city (now Wexford) Menapia (with

Bb.2 n 9


i88 MONAANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

no great alteration of found, befides what is commonly incident to the
diverfe termination of different languages) from the British Mafnau or
Mane, i. e. a flreight or-narrow fea ; as it now is ; And it was fo rm e rly ,
if Giraldus Cambrenjis gueffed right, much narrower in that place. The
two abutting promontories on each fide being of one name, I take it to
be reafonably fuppofed, that th«y took that name from the fret or paf-
fage on which they bordered, I own that the Menapii in Ireland are
by authors reckoned as a colony of the Menapii of Gallia Belgica ; but
if we conlider that a narrow fea might have given them that name, as
I fuppofe it did to thofe in Ireland, it the more confirms the fuppofition j
iince they lived fo near the Belgic (heights that it may be well prefumed
they had that name from them.

Thirdly, In that fhort cut alfo from the Mul of Gal way to the
kingdom of Ireland, called by Ptolomy Novantum Promontorhim, we may
find jufl by a bay or EJiuaty, called by Ptolomy Mftuarimn Abraraaitiz
which one may eafily, and perhaps as truly, deduce from the British
Aber-Vene or Aber-Mene, as bordering on that narrow Fretum ; though
Mr, Camden, from whole judgment I would not willingly vary, gueffes
the name as well as the water of that river to come from a lake called
Lougb-Rian, fome miles diftant from that Efiumy.

But granting that Mr. Camden's Lougb-Rian may pretend to the
etymology of Abravanus, as if called Aber-Rjan, yet fince he gives no
other reafon for it but the fimilitude of names, which furely are not fo
near and very like in found, as to deferve to be fetched together from.
io great a diftance ; and Ahon > i. e. Aber-Avon comes nearer to it, but
that it is too undifiinguijhing a name; I am inclined to beKcve it was not
called from that Lough ; and that, becaufe Ptolomy calls it not Abrianus*
but Abravanus* as the beft copies have it. And efpecially fince we find
the two other fhortcft cuts over our narrow feas retain in them the
evident marks .of the name of M<ene y I cannot conclude this third alfo
to have been any other than Aber-Vene or Aber-Meme, V and M in the
old Britifh being but varying of cafes in one and the fame word : And
that more particularly, not only becaufe Abravanu* comes neareft the
Britifli Mane r both in matter of found and fignification, which may
of itfelf vindicate the derivation ; but alfo, which will add fbmewhat
to the probability of the conje&ure, becaufe I find many fmall Fretums
retaining ftill fomething of that name ; as the Fretum between Ramfey-
Ifle, and another between Cardigan-Ifland and the adjacent fhores, are
to this day called Mane\. Nay, Ramfay-Ifle itfelf was by^ geogra-
4 phers


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.. 189

phers called Ai/jlvos and Limenia probably on that acoonut. And I am
told there is another Fretum in the county of Buchanan in Scotland called
by the name of Mane. And laftly, on that ftrcight between Hantfhire
and the Ifle of Wight, there is a fmall town on the edge of that narrow
fea called * Ltmington or I'ref Le-Main ; and^ the ancient inhabitants
there were called Mean-Vari* not improbably from Main-Vor* a nar-
row fea ; and there are three Hundreds near adjoining, which are yet
called Mean's- Borough; E&H-Mean and Weft-Mean* bearing fome tokens
of that Britifh name.

Fronj thefe obfervations I am now induced to conclude this com-
pound word to have been- anciently the common appellative of fuch
narrownefles and ftreightnings of feas, as afford the fhorteft paflages
from one land to another. And therefore, that as this narrow Fretum
or arm of fea, which fevers the Ifle of Anglefey from the conti-
nent, being but a fliort cut over, was on that account by our firfl na-
taers of places called Main-au, or more contra&edly Mane; as it is
likely the other mentioned places- were ; fo alfo that traft of land bor-
dering on the Fretum, or on the out-let of it, came, as was very ufual,
to be denominated from it, and called Cwmmwd Mane ; which I take
to be fufficient to offer for the etymology of the name of that divifion ia
this Ifle of Anglefey.

• This was called limit* by the Saxons. See Dr. Hicks's Di(T. Epift. p. a 1 5*


The END of the FIRST ESSAY.


THE


THE


SECOND ESSAY:


CLEARING SOME


DIFFICULTIES


IN THE


PRECEDING ACCOUNTS;


Enlarging on fome Passages thereof,

AND

Anfivering fome Objections which have been

made thereto.


ADVERTISEMENT

T O. T H B.

R E AD E R.


IT is requifite to advertife the Reader, that though this Essay,
being a defence of fome paflages in the preceding one, takes
in the fame heads of argument in the main as the other had
done ; yet does it not aftum agere, as a mere repetition, but in or*
der to bring them to bear a new force, and to fet them off in a
better light. For fince teftimonies in that remotenefs of time can-
not be many, and the evidence arifing from them may not to all
perfons perhaps be fo prevalent and to the purpofe in one view as
in another, it is reafonable towards making the beft of them, to
examine and turn them on every fide and in every light. And
therefore the Reader will foon perceive, that every teftimony arid
every argument handled in the former Essay, when re-aflumed
in this, are improved in every part, an4 better difpofed to
evince the conclufion they are produced for ; which the author
hopes will fufficiently apologize for his bringing the fame argu-
ments twice on the ftage ; which is no more than in common
cafes to call the fame witnefles to be re-examined, in order to ob*
tain from them a greater evidence of truth and reality of fad: in
the matter fought for than could perhaps otherwife be done j and .
as that is every where juftifiable, fo I prefume in the cafe be-
fore us. And befides, fometimes from one {ingle affirmative tefti-
mony, if it confifts of a propofition, there may arife matters for
feveral proofs, of different fort* and tendencies ; and therefore
when fuch occur, that teftimony may, as often as occafion re-
quires, be juftly called for and repeated, and the doing of it be
reckoned very reafonable and warrantable*

Cc THE


j .' JL


■ . . ...... . T fl B «

S ECO N D E S SAiYt


CLEARING SOME


D IXl:fC:tJ LTIE S


I N T-H E


P R EC ED JruN G i A COO UN T S,


K '■' I - •


TH£ w*y i^fd method I undertook in the forgoing account {to~
which this, fecqnd partly jway ofjfupplempnt relates) ,to repre r
. fept what jl cpnseived ;not ?|j#getlier unworthyjpf obfenjatiofc .
in the antiquities of the Britifti nation in general, and of thelfleof An r
glcfey in particular, concerning the firft planting and inhabiting of them,
is,- I ipauft conjfljs,. for, themoft part meerly cpnje&ural ; .haviijg-in thofp
'remote d&atycgs pf. tiige only a.fp\y teftimonjes of facred fcriptures as
^fure and undqu^ted.prinpiples, and the affiftance$. qf ; natural and, moral
evidei^e, wbe/p thofe authorities fail u^, to build the heft of our guefles
and pro^ahyitie^in thffe matters- upon. Which % indeed in thofe ob-
scurities, of jtiiftej w^ajEeyer.we may pretend to little hi ftorical hints and*
jraditipBs,; are; ail yye have, and can rely upon,.. Befoife c the light of *
hijlory^gaa.tQ, cja^ajajid .illuftrate the >yQrld.' Apd,a$.it t cannot be
p/ejfumed. that {his. lignt made any progress in the discovery of human
affairs, apd^corxUng^f. them for the ufe of pofterity, till fome time
'after i^he fettji^g and civilizing of nations, and that top in the moft po-
Jite countries, s where fhe ufe of letters began, to prqqail; rfoin this cor-~
ner'of f the.WQ^ld, Faj enough from fhefe early advantages, we muft be
content to grope in the dark, till fome rays of that hiftorical light be 7
gin to appeac^and (}i)£$.Ottr enquiries after wly*V we may warmatably
rely upon as tf uth and certainty, . t t k < , /

'; * ' l ' cc 2 ■ r o.v-


fx r,


196 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

On this bottom of things, I muft confefs alfo, as I have little of cer-
tainty, fo as little of reafon to take up with the commonly received tra-
ditions of Samothes, Albion and Brutus j conceiving thofe relations ta
be ft bejf but frfigngcantjdjbubts, tfiifd ap)pfthen{infc it always * mueh
'greater abet more unexceptionable honour lor this people' and* nation,
a* firft fpread over Great-Britain and Ireland and the ifles adjoining, to
have been Aboriginal, thttrf* the *#ft pdfleffors, of the land (as indeed
the beft lights of hiftory give fuflicient grounds to acknowlegc us
to be) ^Jidin-whjichrwe may «€>re f warr*nta% acquiefce j~than that
we ihoQd t*<5ubl« oui^elvbsVitlvtonteTidiilg for*x>ur defeat ahtf origina-
tion from the ruins of any difgraced or beaten people, efpecially from
Troy, the mod unlikely part of the world -, whofe people the fabulous
Greeks, extremely magnified, to aggrandize their own conquefts and
valour •, and from whom their poetical wits took the firft fubjedte of
the^r tfraBajifcaf Me^<*s> s&lik3/ d/feri (fat bfdutl iYct that
one Brutus, of Trojan extradion, did, fome ages after its firft planting*
with a party of Greeks arrive in Britain, and by fome means obtain
the fovereignty, and gave it that name which it ever after enjoyed, i&
-<but what is dn miny accounts vferyproBabfe. f And fo'far I think the
•ftory'may^bfe allowed 1 to hate &rne''truih in- it 1 , hot considered as a plant-
ing and peoplih'g of the larrd'^but aV'Ibtae great revolution that hap-
j»ened long after.

But for all that, if ft appears and confequeVtfy will be allowed, that
the BrkHh people were the firft known pofleffors of the Britifli ifles,.
and indeetf the'feeft afcS deareft iaccounts we' have make that poflefliOffc
Wgihalj which is'ttiehigheft' reputation in refpeft of antiquity, and!
the ftrongeft title in point of -right, : that any nation can pretend to, it
•will then be highly reasonable, and but a juft prbce'dore in us to fix
there. And having In it fo eftabli&ed and well-attefted a foundation
<>f our origin, "adcnowleged by many, denied by few, it will fee fome
irtjuflideln us to Hsrcede from it in favour of any other more groqnd-
lefs furmifes and traditions, and a fort of ingratitude to Providence t&
feem fond of a more novel dxtfa&ion, Which when granted to be true,
would but lefien our efteem in point of antiquity, and weaken even
the beft and fureft of iitlts^Et Deus terrain dedit f His hominum— God.
himfejf, as it were, enfeoffing and giving livery and feifin to all origi-
nal planters, Pfal. cxv. 16. But to proceed.

As fof a vindicatibn dnd defence of a conjectural method within the
verge of hiftory, we may have this ta fay in geaeral, that although

hiftorical


T-*+mmmmmmim^mm—mm


MONA ANTIQJJA R E STA U it AT A. iyr

historical certainties and wcll-attefted evidences be what we may moft
fefely rely upon, and warrantably acquiefce in, in the accounts of time
and human tranfa&ions ; yet when we are gone beyond thofe periods*
and have launched into the deep obfeurities of time, we muft and
aught carefully to attend to, and examine every the leaft glimmering of
information, which we can lay hold on, either in the nature of things,
©r in allowed authentic traditions relating to them ; and from them*
and by comparing and adjufting one thing with another, adapting caufes
io effedts, and efFeds to caufes, as juftly and. as agreeably as is poffible*
rt ought to be allowed us to form fuch conclusions as will amount at
leaft to fome probability and appearance of truth y which is all that caii
be reafonably expe&ed in fuch cafes*

In order to this* it will not be amiis for the better conceiving of the
matter in hand* in the firft place, to take notice of two things very
fiieeflary to form and eftablifh a conjeftural difcourfe or a rational way
of enquiry. Firft, Principles or grounds of evidence well chofen*
cleared, ami afcertained. Secondly, Inferences and dedudions natu^
rally and juftly drawn and concluded from them. Now, thefe princi-
ples are in themfelves nothing elfe than either caufes or efFedts of things
well fixed and a/Terted ;, or teftimonies, divine and human, well grounded
and confirmed. And what fubje&s or matter foever fall more or lef$
under the difcovery of thefe lights and evidences, whether thofe fubjefts
be purely natural as phyfiology in general, or mixed, viz. partly natu-
ral and partly moral, under which is hiftory and chronology, they may
m a tolerable meafiire (more certain informations being wanting), be-
more or lefe accounted for, in a probable hypothetical way.

For, as for natural theories and phyfiology in general* the explica-
tion of them is granted by all to be conjedtural. And grant it we muft *
for no other knowlege can be attained of the frame and composition of
nature, of the motion, texture and constitution of her parts, and other
particulars of phyfiological fcience, but what is derived from, and merely
depending on, the light and evidence of thefe principles.

And this being ia general premifed, juft the fame plea we have in*
particular for our accounting for the affairs and tranfa&ions of many of
the firft ages of the pojt-dilumian world. They are now, with thofe-
mentioned difficulties in the Frame of Nature, equally obfeure and in-
tricate to us , and what we would attempt to unfold' and diftinguifh itk
the one and the other, muft be equally in the fame way and procedure ;
that is, by fixing and grounding our obfervations upon fuch lights and
7 certainties.


i 9 8 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA-

certainties as occur to us. And by making genuine and pertinent
applications of thofe certainties, proceeding therein juflly and regu-
larly from certain caufes to the mod probable effe&s, and from cer-
tain effedts to the mod: probable caufes, according a$ the lights and
evidences of them in thofe involved antiquities, are to be met with
and difcovered by us. *

Now, if this way of procedure be allowed in the hiftory of nature^
upon mcer pretence of its involvednefs and otherwife unfurmoun table
darknefs and intricacy, I fhould very gladly be informed the reafon why
the fame method (hould not be as juflly purfued, upon the fame fup-
pofal of obfeurity, in the hiftory of human tranfadtions $ feeing we may
meet there with as good, if not perhaps much better grounds to build
on our reafonable gueffes. And I doubt not but the reafon of it will
appear very manifeft and convincing, if we rightly confider the condi-
tion of thefe two fubjtdts we are to make our gueffes in, that is, nature
and human adtions. Many of the ends and defigns of nature, we are
\vt\\ aware, are utterly unknown to us$ and many more of her mo-
tions and particular ways of adtin j plainly furmount and baffle the mod
fcllicitous of our enquiries about them ; and yet it is well known, that
we are allowed to be as bufy as we will with her in our gueflings at
things, provided we can abftain from the difobliging fault of impoling
and dogmatizing,

And therefore at the fame time fhall it be thought ftrange and un-
billorical, that when wc wind up the fucceflive affairs of a nation, till
the clew of records be quite drawn out, and we are left to grope and
wander in the dark recefles of time ? Shall it, I fay, be thought flrange,
that in fuch cafes we pick up here and there fuch fcattered marks and
remnants of truth, as we meet with, and improve them into a few
probable conclufions of human adtions ? efpecially when thofe very
adtions we account for in that way are in thenifclves fo very agreeable
to our enquiries, the ends and motions of them are fo intelligible and
familiar to us, that upon a fuppofed adtcd principle of reafon we may
well conclude the fpecifications of many of them (fo confidered) to
have been no other than what we ourfelves would have. a£ted under the
like circumftances. And therefore fince we are on thi6 account better
judges of the probability of human than of natural adtions, we ought
not in reafon to be denied the liberty of making a few modeft gueffes,
when it comes in our way, in the obfeurities of jhe one, whe.i men arq

alo.ved,


4

t


^d


MONA ANT I QUA RESTAUR AT A. i 9 g

allowed, nay oft admired for their wild and extravagant conje&ures in
the intricacies of the other.

Now what is faid in this particular is not to juftify any extravagant
rambles and groundlefs conjedlures in the affairs of Antiquity ; but to
vindicate the allowablenefs of a conjedlural method in the accounts of
time, and in the antiquities of nations, provided no other means of dif-
covery are left unto us, and that the matter be not very important, by
fixing here and there, in thofe greateft obfcurities, on fome folic!
grounds and irrefragable certainties to build up what we mike our con-
clufions. And more particularly, by our fit and appofite bringing
forth the lights and evidences of one nation and people to illuftrate and
affift the obfcurities of the other ; which when it is duly performed
in proper circumftances, will, I prefumc, fall under the condemnation
of none, but fuch as will themfelves thereby incur the moft juft cenfure
of unequal judges.

To give fome inftance of this in our Britifh nation in particular y t
without this method, we can afcend no higher than the Roman con-
queft. And indeed a long time after that, what have we of the Britifh
affairs but inferences and conjedtures, on which we build the chiefeft-
accounts of our national tr3nfa£tions, qt thefe remote times ? And al-
though it muft be granted that by this procedure we cannot nicely de-
termine any matters of fatt, in the planting, improving and eftablifhing
of this or any other nation or people ; yet fome of the more general
adHons of thofe affairs, as they depend on obvious and familiar caufes,
may be, in fome meafure, and with fome reftriftion, explicated and
accounted for. For even in thofe remote perplexities and deepeft ob-
fcurities of time, there are fome glimmerings of light to be taken no-
tice and to be made ufe of to inform and diredt a regular enquiry. And
thefe are fome of them.

' First, We have. Scripture Light ; the divine teftimony aflures us, that"
our firft flock of people travelled hither from the coaft of Armenia and"
Babylon, and that they were of the race of Japheth, who planted the
Weftern Ifles, and confequently the ifles of Britain and Ireland.

Secondly, We have Moral Light ; that is, we are morally affuredj
that common reafon and natural prudence conducted the progreffion of
thefe people, from the place of their firft fpreading, through the faireft;
the ealieft, and leaft encumbered ways; where mighty rivers, dreadful
mountains, and other unpaffable bars and obftacles. gave leaft impede
meat to their motion and progrefs.

Thirdly,,


aoo MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

Thirdly, Wc have Geographical Light that plainly (hews qs, that
this fair, eafy, unobftacled way or paflage from the plains of Babel to
the Britilli ifles was through the vaft and winding plains of Afia, to
that corner of it now called Anatolia ; and thence fuch people as crofted
the iEgean Sea and entered Italy, their way of dilating themfelves and
enlarging their colonies was through the length of Italy, I^ombardy,
over the Hclvetick Alps, to the plains of Gallia j and there being
hemmed in on the one fide by the Pyrcnaean mountains and the ocean,
and on the other fide by the river Rhine, they moved diredtly to the
Gallic ftrcights and over to the Britifh ifles. Such a progrkffion of
the firft poft-diluvian planters, through the eafieft and faireft tradls of
land, where they met with lcaft rubs and impediments in their motion,
is as natural to conceive, and as reafonable to conclude, as that a, tor-
rent or flux of water will take its courfe through the eafieft and lcaft
obftrudted ways or paffages.

Fourthly, We have Arithmetical Light ; that is, a juftcohfidera-
tion of the longevity of the firft planters, and of the length and diffi-
culty of the way, together with a calculation of the encreafe of mankind
by doubling certain periods, according to the ingenious Sir William
Petty's rule, may<tfford us a pretty near guefs by what time after the
univerfal deluge the Ifle of Great-Britain might come to be thoroughly
planted and inhabited.

Fifthly, The names of certain places give us li£ht, not only td
guefs what language was fpoken by thefe firft people, but alfo by what
way they came and made their motion hither. * Tir ben and TPenwyn
i. e. Appenine in Italy : Uxelodunum f Alexia i. e. Ucbel Ddinas> and
jirlecb in France—the Romans often writing x for ^ — and many more
ancient names I could mention, are good and pregnant teftimonies of
that particular,

I fhall multiply no more inftances of this kind. It is fufficient to
obferve, that in the greateft obfcui.:ies and unrecorded paffages of .time
there are fome glimmerings of information here and there to be laid
hold on, and not to be altogether negledted \ which lights being well
compared and adjufted together, may be made ufe of, even in the higheft
origin of nations, to reprefent and fet forth, though not any particular
turns of a&ion, which indeed are only tranfmitted by records andtra.-
dition, yet fo much of the kind and quality of thofc adlions, as may

* Tir ben, old land. If Pimtyn, white head. Ucbcl Ddr'/ms, high city. Arfab, upon a'ftont
W rock. " *

ferve


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 20!
ferve to diftinguifh themfelvcs and the times they were aded in, and
thereby afFord fuch fatisfadion as can in that cafe be expeded by a rea-
fonable enquirer.

On thefe grounds therefore I have, in the accounts I have given of
the antiquities of this fmall ifland, been induced to proceed in the moft
plain, eafy and natural way ; viz, Firft, By pfefuming our Britifh ances-
tors to have been the firft planters and pofleflbrs of our land : Secondly,
By deriving their defcent and by tracing theirfootfieps, as early and alfo
as diredly as was poflible, from Armenia and Babel to this place : And,
Thirdly, By feleding and fixing on fuch undeniable certainties, and
recorded matters of fad, and circumftances of human adions, done and
pradifed at that time when mankind was but as one nation, before it
dwindled and feparated into varieties of people j and that being done,
by drawing from thofe evidences and recorded matters of fad, fuch
conclufions and confequences as could moft fairly be deduced from
them, and would, as I conceived, moft agreeably and intelligibly ac-
count for and explain the grounds and reafons of thofe rights, cuftoms,
and other antiquities of our Britifh nation in general, as well as what
particularly relates to this Ifle of Anglefey. Which is what I attempted
in the preceding Eflay ; and what in anfwer to fome objedions, and
for the better clearing of fome difficulties, I (hall here in this a little
further enlarge upon.

And therefore fince great objedions have been made to the ftrength
and validity of fome chief paffages in the foregoing accounts; and tho'
the opinions and conjedures I prefumed to offer muft perhaps yield at
laft to the weight of thofe objedions ; yet they feemed to me fo well
grounded, that I cannot quit my hold of them before I give them the
defence they deferve, and (hew the reafons which induced me to ef-
poufe and eftablifti them -, leaving the decifion to the judgments of thofe
who will take the pains to perufe and confider them. The objedions
are thefe :

Objection I.

First, It has been objeded that the notion I have offered of our
Cromkche, Karnedde, Meini Gwyr, &c. is too much drained, and too
remote and foreign to the circumftances of this nation. Namely, why
fhould the Hebrew tongue give names to our Cromleche and Karnedde 9
when our own language may fufficiently account for their etymology ?
Or how could Noah's ftatutes and the patriarchal pradice influence and

Dd dired


aoa MONA ANTIQUA RE S T AtTR AT A*

dircA our religious rites and eftablUhments in To remote a corner of the
world, fo widely diftant from the place and poffibilify of fuch inftroc-
tions ? Our ancient rites and cuftoms were grofly heathenitib and fuper*
ftitious, and therefore rather to be reckoned here, as in other countries*
the fruits and produ&ions of mankind's depraved and perverted moral**
than that fo foul a copy IBould be prefumed to have been taken front
Co fair an original*.

Objection II.

Secondly, It has been, objected* that the proofs I have offered for
the Druids chief refidence in the Jlle of Mona are no more conclusive
to that particular ifland than to any other part of the nation ; fincc
there are in many other places of England, Scotland* and Wales, more
. remarkable,, vaft, and ftupendous monuments— prefumed of Druidifm—
than any that can. be (hewed in the Ifle of Anglefcy. And that it is
much more reafonable to fuppo(e„ fincc the ancient Britons were di-
vided and can toned, into many governments; and fincc Csfar mentions
only that fupreme place in Gallia ; that then every province or petty go-
vernment in Britain had theifc ownfet of thofc religious priefta refuting,
and acting among diem;. and if they owed'fubjeftton to any. fupreme
head, it mud be to that one of Gallia, where we are fure by C*farV
authority there was a head Druid ; and not that in all the little govern-
ments of Britain,. the whole older of thefe men Ihoald compofe one-
hierarchy,, and for the moft part live and reiide together in one parti-
cular place, or territory; no ancients author, ever, mentioning; £ugh a .
rcfidence*.

o^jbctio* in;.

Thirdly, It has been obje&ed, that thefe ancient Dtmds cannot-
upon any good authority be entitled to fo confiderable a /hare of know-
ledge and learnings as is ufiially attributed to them ; ; fince. the nation?
in general at that time laboured under the greateft barbarifm, and the*
grofleft ignorance. tfcat can be imagined ; which cannot well be pre*
fumed they would have done under the fupetintendance of men of fuch i
general .virtue, fkUl and knowledge as. the JSrittth Druids are rqjprted '
to have been, matters of. .

Thefe are the main difficulties I am concerned to clear and anfwer
for : Which I {hall endeavour to do in the order they are fet down—
premifiog fixft under- each, hsada. few preliminary proposition* or al*

lowed,'


MONA ANTIQJJA &8 STAPH ATA. z6$
lowed poftulata, by the light and evidence of which, the ct>nje&ure$ {
have formed and offered will be the better underftood* *nd more Jirajlj
fettled and eftabliflwd.

As to the fifft olgt&iofb the main ftrefs of it is. levelled *t the $p T
counts which were given of the original eredtion, names and ufes of
our Crom/ccfo, Karttedde, and Mehri Gixyr, viz. that they were all of
them appurtenances and fome retained relics of the firft and raoft an-
cient religion, profefled and pra&ifed of old by the antediluvian patri-
archs ; and handed down by Noah and his fons* and by them propa-
gated among the new" race of mankind in the re-peopling the poft-dilu-
vian world j many of which original rites and cuftoips being (as I
aflerted) in all likelihood conveyed by the firft planters, or by fuch as
came next after them* in f rop*A of time came to be improved and cul-
tivated into * national febemt pf what was afterward called Druidical
religion and wof (hip, This is the fum of What is aiferte^ in that par*
ticular, and the grounds of that aflertion, I fhall endeavour to lay opeA
by the light and evidence of thefe propositions following*

Proposition I-

It is generally allowed, that the moft ancient primitive religion* hoth
before and for fome time after die univerfal deluge* cpflftfted moftly
of the instituted rites and performances of oblations and facriftpeg j a^d
that thefe alio neceflarily iuppofe confccratkms and altars, tfebat #A> places
, and things dedicated and fet apart for the worftiip and feryisg pf Qod.
Of this the Mofaical HiftoTy is undeniable Warrant, giving qs &p ac<?ptji>t
of Cain and Abel's oblations before the flood ; and immediately *fttr
it of Noah's building an altar, and offering Sacrifice unto th# tar4> Oca*
viiL ao*

?Rp?osifibti It.

It is alio allowed, that the firft language in which the pairiifchs'pri-
mhi^religion was exprefled and worded, and the rites and cuftoms,
the adjundks and appurtenances of it, denominated and diftinguifhed, at
leaftin the main parts arid fubftance of k, was what has been after
called die jfclebrew tongue j and alfo that the napies impeded by that
language were generally fuch ai betokened the nattite or ibmt eminent
properties of the tfeing* named, or. were compounded of fad* as did fo.
The firft part of this propofition is pregnantly attefted by almdft all the
ante-diluvian names' recorded in Scripture* particularly thofe of the pa-

D d 2 triarchs :


204 MONA ANTIQJLJA RESTAURATA.

triarchs : Which names— for inftance fake— in confort together exhibit
a concife and wonderful fcheme and prophecy, in that language, of the
reftitution of depraved mankind by a promifed Meffiah; as appears by
the explanation of the patriarchal names in the following table :

Adam, - Man,

Seth, - - fet or placed

Enosh* - - -in mifery

Kaina!*, - - - lamentable*.

I Mahaleel, - - bleffed God :

Jared, - fhall come down,

Henoch, ... teaching*

Methuschrla, - that his death will fend-

Lamech, - - to humbled fmitten man-

Noah, - confolation. .

which amounts to this, that when thefe names are written at lengths
the Hebrew purport of them is, " That man fet or placed in mifery
v?ry lamentable, God bleiTed for evermore, will in his due time come
down, teaching the world, that his death will bring toauferable man-,
reft, refre(hment, and confolation," Gen. v. 29* The Hebrew Lexi-
cons abundantly prove thisfignification of thefe names, deriving Kainan
from Run or Rotten* L'e. lamenting; which it may well admit of, and
is more pertinent and agreeable with the current fcnfe of this prophecy,
than from Kanna, to purchafe or poffefs, which our expofitors gene-
rally afcribe it to-- And the latter part of this propofftiorc is evident

•from the exa& fignificancy of many ante-diluvian word*, particularly
from Adam's calling his wife Ifcba, becaufe taken out of him who was
Ifcb in that tongue, viz. Man. And his firftrborn Kain, from the word
Kanna, importing to receive or poflefs; faying, Kanneti ifcb cetb Jebo-

• vajb, I have gottea.amaa. [from] the Lord, Gen. iv. j,.

Pr o p.o sition III. ^

That there wasa fcheme of this patriarchal theology preserved by
Noah, and by him preached and propagated to ppfterity; as certain ge-
Jteral rules. and precepts, called by the Jew$, " The * Statutes of the
Sons of Noah," becaufe delivered by, him, and prefcribed and inculcated

' • Mitzoth beae Noah, See Remarks, Prop. IIL .


MONA A -NT I QUA RESTAURATA. 295

by them to fucceeding pofterity; among which precepts, it is, certain
that facrifice was a principal one* and therefore nuift be fuppofcd to
comprehend particular rule? and * ordinances under it, dire&ing. thje
various ritep and ceremonies of that facred adtion. This has been- ^N
rtefted by an ancient Jewifli tradition, and has been acknowledged by
many in all Chriftian ages. And the latter part of this propofition is no
tother thap a juft and natural confequence of the former, ..

Proposition -IV. . .:

That on the difperfion of mankind at Babel, afid the' confirfiotf tif
that primitive tongue, the minds ,df thofe.' difp^rfed people under that
heavy fupernatural ftupor, then by divine vengeance inflidled on them for
their impious attempt, retained and preferved neverthelefs in that mife-
rable oblivion fome «f- faint fhadows of fuch words, and ibme obfeure
relics of fuch objedts, as had made before the ftrongeftj the deepefl,
and moft durable impreffions on their thoughts and imaginations. And
fuch mufl be chiefly and principally of thofe names arid things, which
either related to the vifible adts and performances of religion, or to
the more neceffary and important concerns of, life. TJ^e firft part is
confirmed by evident proofs from the eveqt of things ; it being plainly
to be obferved, that as the moft vifible anjd public afts pf religion,
namely, facrifice, have been retained, remembered and pradlifed by al-
moft all nations ; (b the moft important affedting words of that primi-
tive tongue have likewife crept with fqme little variations into moft of
the mother- toiigues.. And. the latter part qf this propofition is evinced
'from ajuft view and confideration of the affe&ions of human nature ;
where we plainly fee the.imprefllons of religion fb ftrong and unconquer-
able, that few or no means or accidents that occur are of fufficient force
to deface and obliterate them.

Proposition V..

That the Hebrew tongue (though ih itfelf of a narrow extent, yet
in the fcheme and ftrudture of it) abounds in a diverfity of words of one
and the fame fignification, more or lefs as the thing or adtion expreflcd
is of greater or feffer concern and impdrfance to human affairs ; and thofe
iynonyma:Cqually exprefling the thing- fignified, the evidence produced

• Sec Gen. xx?L 5. where Abraham is faid to harc obeyed precepts and commandments, and
to have kept ftatutes and laws, before God inftjtuted the Mofaick law. .

t See Remarks, Piop III.,.

from


*d6 %'O'N.A ANTIQTfA :RE ST ATJ R AT A.

from one word proves and concludes tthe fame thing of another word
which carries the fame purport, and hof the fame extent and fignifica-
tion. The former is evidenced by the grammarians of that language;
and the latter is the : natural refult of the conformity and agreement
between the fixed and determined meaning of all words or figns and
their juft and proper ideas, or things meant and fignified. Thefe arc
the grounds I lay down and infift upon ; and the applications I (hall
make in the clearing of thefe objeftions will be chiefly fupported by the
ftrength and evidence of them.

C R O M L E C H E.

, 'Of ihek Cromlecbe \ Firft, Their make and ftrudture % and, Secondly,
Their name, will be applied to account for their original ufe and
inftitution ; the fettling and determining the accounts of our dcfolate
monuments and Viftble remains of antiquity being of lingular ufe to efta-
blifh an allowed Archaeology of our country.

First, The make and ftru&ure of thefe monuments (which are-ge~
uerally large, rude, fiattifli (tones raifed on other pitched and upright
ones of the like irregularity and coarfenefs) feem to indicate that they
were originally created for altars. Now it is plain that altars fby Pro-
pofition I.] were an appurtenance of the religion of the patriarchal age :
And indeed the accounts we have in the facred records of thofe firft
altars will fhew that the conftru£tion and other circumftances of them
come very near to the make and figure of our Cromlecbe.

For it is there faid, that as foon as Noah and his family were come
out of the ark, they builded an altar unto the Lord, Gen. viii. 20*
Now to build— X\Y1 /Edificare in the original— conftantly imports the
creftion or raifing of ftones one upon another. And this notion of the
word is fomewhat exegetically amplified in another place, viz. Haggai
ii. ijj/ where fuch a conftru&ion is expretfed, intftyfaH * viz. ftone
laid on a ftone* And alfi> the Chaldee word fer an altar, y\% Madbecba f
froth Debacb, i. e. Struts Lapidum, as the word imports, that is, a
parcel of ftones orderly erefted* much confirms it* Such, it feems
were their altars then j and iuch are oar Cromlecbe *X tfeb day. And
as our Cromlecbe are made up of y*ry rutfe wid iiphewn ftones,
lb we may well fuppofe, the circumftances of many of thofe firft altars
after the ilaod could afford chrai io be a* ether j prticukrly Nodi's,

• EvtnalEvtn, that is, Br. MatmarTmn, to wfckb out Saviour £ems to refer, Mat xxrf. 2,

4 who


MONA ANTIQ^UA RE8TAITRATA- «> 7

who at his firft coming out of the ark could have but fuch natural,
eoarfe, unhewn flones as the mountain afforded, to ered his altar.
And further it is preemptive alfo, that they had then a ftrid precept
for fuch anere&ion, if that— Exod. xx. 25. <c Thou fhalt not build an
altar of hewn flows." — be (as a great part of the chapter is) a repeti-
tion of the old original law, which the patriarchs before that time
in all likelihood ftri&ly obferved, and other nations, probably af-
ter their example, as # ftridtly followed. Hence it will appear not
improbable, that our Cromlecbe .are but the remaining effedts of
that ancient law and cuftom of not Jtriting a tool upon the {tones
of their altars, but to build them up of the rudeft 6nes they could
meet with* Which law (to trace it by thofc effedts) we* may well con-
clude to have prevailed likewife in* thefe countries > and that thefe men-
tioned monuments of ours ace fome of the remains of that ancient in-
ftitution and cuftoaw

Secondly, The name alio, viz. Cromlechs, may feem to be no'
ether than a corrupt pronouncing of an original Hebrew name, viz.
TO 1 ? TE2 Cbenutr-tuacby a burning or facrificing ftone or table ; or per-
haps more' likely, as I before intimated,, from rtfz G3TI C bar em- luck
or luacbp lea consecrated or devoted Aone or altar f as we find the
word * Cixtrem applied to feveral devoted things. Both which names
fjo compounded, that is, as well Cbarem as Chamar-luacbr corruptly
Cromlech* do very well agree with the make and quality of thefe altars.
And though the word by which thofc altars are ufually exprefTed in
fcripture be Mijbab, from Se&ab, ta flay or facrifice v yet by Propoiition
V. it is no argument that other name* of it were not in ufe in thofc
ancient times,, efpecially fuch as theJfe I here inftance ;, which names £0
clofely correfponding with the nature and quality of tbofc altars, both
in form and fignification* might vexy well by Proportion IV. be re-
tained and conveyed with the ufes of them by our firft anceftors into
thefe countries.

It may be further obferved, that our language yet retains fbme other
words that have great refemblaoce in their fignification, as well as in
their found* with original words relating to facrifice 5 particularly with
rf?y Gmlotb % L e. burnt-offerings : Out of which word it is not im-
probable our Gotoytit a flice- of broiled flefh* as that of the Heathen fa-
cdfices was; Colycby to pray, and Golycbwyd a place of prayer, the

• L*it. xsrii. *& NomtbSfiii/14. JqAuyLiS*

Latin


208 MONA ANT I QUA RESTAUR ATA.

Latin Colo to worfhip, and probably alfo Coelio and Coelcoe/b, may by
Propofition IV. be originally derived. And indeed if it be granted that
thefe or fome of them be truly deduced from Gnolotb, I can fee no rea-
fbn but that Cromlech may be as truly deduced from Camar or Carem-
Inacb, as is here fuppofed. In ftiort, altars we are fure we had ; and
if thcfe Cromlcchebt not the* remains of them, it will be very difficult,
I think, to (hew any other.

Neither are certain places called Cremlyn, perhaps corruptly from
Ctemlwyn (there being no {landing water in thofe places by which they
might be Crem-lyri) to be altogether defpifed j but rather to be taken
as fome collateral evidences for this fignification of the names of thefe
monuments. For if our anceftors on the fore-mentioned account called
their devoted or facrificing ftones and altars Cromlecbe, they might very
well call theiT facrificing groves, whereof we are affured they had a
great many, by the name of Cremlwyn. The word Crem, a relic either
of Cbarem or Cbamar as I prefume, having by a new propriety of ac-
ceptation, as many tranfplanted words ufually do, aflumed unto it the
idea and notion of facrifice ; it is therefore on this account fomewhat
probable that Crymmy, i. e. " bowing and bending down the body,"
a pofture of worfhip, might be originally derived and metaphorically
ufed from thefe Cromlecbe, becaufe people generally bowed and wor-
fhipped at them; as words exprefling fome adtions, are not feldom
formed and qualified from the names and characters of their obje&s and
local circuniftances, of which there are not a few inftances. And if
this be fo, then the pretence that is made of deriving the word Crom-
lech from the Britifh Crom or Crwm, a bending crooked pofture, will
be of little ufe, 'except in this cafe only, when it is metaphorically taken
from the name of fuch places, and applied to peoples' bowing and wor-
fhippihg at them. And it is obfervable that the ftone monument, men-
tioned Levit. xx vi. r; by the naine of rVDWQ pH Even-Mafcbcitb, which
tKe vulgar tranflation calls Lapidem injignem, is by the Chaldee Para-
phraft called Lapis incurvaltonis, the ftone of bowing or worshipping ;
as if he had read it tTnttb p'K from nrVD Incurvare : Which may
ferve to (hew, that as the ancients exprefled adoration by the word
Incurvation or bowing, fo they wanted not their Cromlecbe, ftones or
altars, denominated from the quality of that facred a&ion.

It is true, that many perfons, and thofe not meanly converfant in an-
tiquities, take Cromlech to be derived from Crom or Crwm 9 as betoken-
ing properly the crooked bending pofture of thofe eredtions. And fince

that


M N A ANTIGUA RI S T A U'it A T A. 207

thJat is the only etymology I ever heard pretended to f on a mecr Britifl)
account ; I (hall here take the liberty to fcan a little the congruity and
coherence, which the propriety of the terms Crom and Llech<— -allow-
ing them to have no relation at all to Cbarem or Chamar % but to de-
fend on a pure Britifh etymon— have and bear in juft Signification to
the condition and quality of the thing exprefled. Now, Ifay, it is ufu-
ally thought that Cmmkcb does genuinely and fully exprefs the figure
and pofture of the (tone or monument which is fo called, which indeed
may be eafily (hewed it is far from doing.

For, if we confider the propriety and torn men acceptation of the
terms, we (hall find that the notion and idea of the word Crom or Crwm,
* as it is commonly taken, meant and noted in our Britifh Lexicon?, has
no agreement *t all witty the fhape and figure of any of thofe. (tones, that
I could obfejve. For Crom or Grivm always denotes 4 t th|pg.bent and
crookened in its own external fuperfi^ies 5 and is nev^F ggproQed. fr»t of
one individual fubjedt. As in lines the curve is ever quite €$ptr%ry tp
a right one, fo in furfaces, which are but ? complies tiQn of many
lines, the curve in the conftjtption of i{ is pppofite to the plane.
And the very fame notion, in fubftaoce, we may obfefv^ the vulgar to
have of the word Crom or Crium totally anfyprfag cyryf jn the compjeat
idea of it > as is evident not only from the term itfelf, .bfit frifo from the
vifible concretes and compounds we have of that word,, as Gtvar-Grwm,
Crymm/m, Crimmog, &c» in every one of which we may find it to be a
curve and bended pofture of one individual fubftance. .

' Now Crm being fuch in the common acceptation of it, how can it
t>e applied to bofh the eredt and incumbent fl# t ftqnes of thefe mora*-
ments, which are never crooked in themfelvcs, hut always of irregular
plane furfaces ? And to fay that they, one with another, lie jn an oh*
lique and bended pofture, mends not {he matter. ^Fof, as was before
obferved, .every crooked thing muft be fo in kfqlf, and in ;it$ own fur-
face ; for the inclinations, oblique po&ions^ and incident contacts of
diftindfc furfaces, are not properly a bending, but a joining and termi**
nating in angles. And this notion all people have of it ; no one faying,
a crooked table, a crooked cheft, &c. . So that by what has been faid»
it is, I fuppqfe, fomewhat manifeft, that Cromkfk cannot in any pro-
priety of (peaking be deduced from Crwm, as betokening any curve or
bended pofture, which the word Uecb reje&s as deftrudtive of its no-
tion and incompatible with it. And therefore the adjunct Crom muft
have (bme other fignification to give an intelligible idea of the thing

£ e meant


2jo MONA ANT1QJ7A RESTAUTIATA.

meant by the composition, which by the prefent Welfli we are not able
o account for ; unlefs it be taken metaphorically, as was before obs-
erved, from Crymmy, i. e. bowing and worfhipping at fuch places.
And if that be the reafon of the name, then the matter falls even with
my argument, and the conclufion tomes to the fame iffue,. via. that
both our Cromlech here, and that famous Hone idol Cromcruacb, in Ire-
land, defcribed by * Mr. Flaherty 9 are derived from the word Crymmy 9
to bow and worlhip ; and this Crymmy may be as fairly deduced from
Char em or Cbamar, as from any other etymon by Proposition I and IV.
which is all I (hall urge in (his matter.

K A R N E D D E.

Thefe are vaft Cumuli or heaps of ftones in many places extant in?
thefe as well as ki other parts of England, Scotland, ancHreland, and
perhaps in many other countries of : Europe, f have conjectured them
to be fomc remains of moft ancient patriarchal pradtice, retained and
put in ufe by our idolatrous anceftors^ afc a particular mode of worfhip,
exercifed and chiefly celebrated at fome great folemnities— principally
of covenants and federal fanftions, both public and private, and fome-
times of ordinary oblations and facrifice; to which opinion thwe are
two things that give a favourable inducement.

First, The congruity of name, and the eafy and' natural refolutioh
of it into the language of thofc patriarchs, that is, the Hebrew tongue,
in which thofe primitive rites and cuftoifts were : at firft instituted*;
+ ij-pp Keren-Nedb, i. e. a coped heap, being a Hebrew compound
expreffing the fliapc and figure of thefe Karnedde, will ftem by Propoff-
tion II. to have been impofed by none but fuch people as vernacularly
ufed that language ; and we cannot pretend to entitle the vernacular ufe
of it to our own or any Weftern nation fince our departure from Babel.
So that on this account it is not unreafonable to conclude, that a moft
ancient practice, as the heaping of ftones on fome folemn occasions
certainly was, carrying with it a primitive name (as one part of the
com po fit ion, namely, Keren undoubtedly is) and no other domeftic
etymology ^offering itfelf * it is, I fay, on this account; not unreafbnar
ble to conclude it to have- been a primitive rite and cuftom, con-

# °gy!P*» p. 196.

t T33 i* t. Caiedb, as a heap, Pfid. xxviii 7. Vide Buxt, Lexic. p, 4.5 £. Scbindler,
Lexic. p. 1085.

veyed


MONA ANT.IQJLFA RESTAURATA. an
Veyed and put in ufe here by our'firft anceftors ; and in time brought
to be a cdnfiderable! appurtenance of their religious fcheme and inftitu*
tion. And as to the other part of this compound name/ viz. Nedh i
although it mud be confefTed, that the partick edb be a very ufual ter-
mination of many Britiflx words, and confequently may be taken to be?
no other than fuch in this ; yet finding in this appellation that the two
components of the name* viz. Keren and Nedb f naturally agree to ex-
prefs (in compofito) the one with the other, both the matter and figure
of the thing fignified ; and obferving alfo, that in South-Wales they
call it not Karneddj but Kam, where the termination edd is as fre~
quently ufed as in any part of Wales, which we can fcarce believe they
would omit .in this, if that found were no more than a grammatical ter-
mination i hence I conclude that this is a compofition of two words,
containing two diftind ideas relating, to one and the. lame fubjedt > tho'
it is not improbable but that fomc dialedts of our tongue might ufe
only one of thefe words, curtailing the compofition, and calling them
Kam for Karnedb ; as many words are known to have been abridged
and ihortned, and yet made ufe of to exprefs the full extent of their de-
termined meaning.

Secondly, The fimilitude and agreeablenefs of circumstances, which
are obferved between thefe monuments and that of Jacob and Laban in
the land of Haran, described by Mofes, Gen. xxxi. 46. give, as I ob-
ferved before, a very iavourable countenance to this conjedure. Now
to go on with this inftance a little further than I did then 3 the fimili-
tude and refemblance between our Ksxnedd and Jacob and Laban's heap
(called by the one Gafeed, by the other Iegar SabadutbaJ not only in
their make and eredfion, but alfo in their attendant pillars, are plain
and undeniable ; and alfo evident to any one, who by comparing that
recorded paffage with the circumftances of our heaps and their pillars
{landing by them, will obferve their exadl conformity and refemblance.

This paffage of Jacob and Laban feems in the whole fcene of it, re-
cited Gen. xxxi. 44—55* to have been fo great and folemn a tranf-
adtion, confiding of fo many ads and ceremonies, of invocation ; of
fwearing by the name of their fathers ; eating of bread ; watching, and
particularly of facrifice, which was ever the highefl and mod eflcntial
adt of their religion — that it feems very manifeft, that it was no new
thing, and at that time firft made ufe of, and pradtifed by thofe two
parties ; but rather an ancient patriarchal ufage, always confented and
referred unto, and then by thefe perfons applied and pra&ifed. For?

E c 2 elfe


tit MONA ANTIQJLJA RESTAURATA,
elfe what means the calling of thefe heaps by thefe two perfons by two
feveral names importing one and the fame thing, but that they knew
them, and were ufed to call them fo before in their different idioms ?
And indeed the main of the ceremonies thereon ufed, via. calling upon
Cod, fwearing by the name of their fathers, and efpecially facrifice,.
feem plainly to intimate that it was at that time no novel but an an-
cient inftitution and practice : * And being fo, we as well as they, may
be well fuppofed to have carried with us, even into thefe countries^
fome imitations of that primitive pattern , and be thought to have de-
rived our cuftom of heaping ftones, as well as Jacob and Laban did
theirs, from one and the fame original, that is, the Noacbidum Statutist
the patriarchal rubric.

Now the two different names of thefe heaps in regions fo near ad-
joining, as Jacob's and Laban's were, come up feafonably to anfwer an
obje&ion that may ftart up here ; namely, that if it be true that thefe
Karmdde and that heap of Jacob and Laban did proceed from one ori-
gin, viz. the patriarchal pradice, then how is it, they had not both
retained the fame name ? But to this I fey, this inftance is a plain an-
fwer. For if the two next adjoining countries ufed two different names
to exprefs one and the fame thing of this heap, as we find chey did, the
one calling it Galeed, and the other legar Sabadutba, both names im*
plying one and the fame fignification, via. aheap of witnefTes; much
more then is it allowable for the more remote and weftern Celtse, our
anceftors* to call it by a third name, which they 4>ad, it feems, re*
tained of it, namely, Keren- Ntdb or Karneddy and which is as expreffive*
of the quality of the thing fignified as any other; And indeed by Pro-
portion V. it is the feme thing in effedt, among fynonymous appella-
tives, to ufe this or that word to exprefs the thing thereby fignified;
For if Gal, legar and Nedb be fynonyma or words equally importing
one and the fame thing in that primitive tongue, namely, a heap or
Cumulus, as it h certain they are * then by Propofition V. it is no mat-
ter which of the three Was retained, the thing was thereby naturally and
fully fignified ; the difference between our Keren-Nedb and their Galeed
and legar Sabadutba, being only ki point of circumftance.- - We all ex-
prefs the thing, but with the thing meant we exprefs the fhape and fi-
gure of it, calling it Karen-Nedb, a coped heap ; and they the ufe and
pra&ice, calling it Galeed and legar Sabadutba, i. e. a heap of witneflcs,
becaufe of the fcederal ufe and defignment of it. And therefore if thefe
two parties, viz. Jacob and Laban, who differed in the name, but

joined


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 213

joined and concurred in the performance of the a&ion, took their dif-
ferent names to exprefs and betoken thofe foederal heaps ; why then
fhould we who have a name of equal antiquity, and equally expreflive
in the primitive tongue of the quality of thofe heaps ; and who have
alfo a plentiful number of thofe heaps and their attendant pillars to this
day to (hew 5 I fay, why fhould we on fuch concurring evidences fcru-
ple to allow our Karnedde and that of Jacob and Laban in Chaldea, to
have been of one and the fame extraction— -namely, a derivative rite and
euftom conveyed' to us from the ancient patriarchal practice ?

That thefe monuments or ftony heaps are called Kairns or Kerns y >
without the addition of Nedb, in Scotland, Ireland, Cornwal, and Ar-
morica, I will not deny. But yet whoever confiders how much the an-
cient BritiQi tongue ha$ been in thofe countries altered and corrupted by
the incroachment of and mixture with other languages, thereby per-
haps occafioning that curt pronouncing of the word ; and alfo will re-
member that the North-Wales Welfh, which always calls it Karnedd,
is the pureft and leaft tainted with foreign mixtures of all the Britifh
diak&s, will not, I fuppofe, be far to feek for a reasonable an fwer to
this difficulty* It is well known to be very ufual for many words to
lofe fome part of their found— of which we have many inftances—
when a foreign language, tyrannically interpofing, changes and mixes
fyllables, and by a variety of cuftoms, humour or fancy alters idioms,
and con traits and lengthens the variable, tenor of accents and pro-
nunciation.

. One thing further deferves our notice, as to thefe Karnedde, which
is, that they appear to have been originally in their ereftion and figure
very round and conical ; which manifefts that what additions of ftones
from time to time thefe Karnedde have had upon them, mufthave been
00 the very tops and fummits of them, where the ftones being fuccef-
fively thrown, they muft have fallen and tumbled down equally on
every fide, and fo mechanically form the digger or whole Karnedd into
a fomewhat deprefled conical or parabolical figure, of which fhape our
Karnedde generally are.

Now what thofe additions of ftones on the very tops of them (for Co
the figure of the heaps (hews they were) might mean, unlefs there was,
as on that of Jacob and Laban, a facrifice performed there, I think is
unaccountable $ or at leaft very hard to determine. And if we fuppofe
them to be fepulchrai monuments, and the ftones to have been thrown
on the fides of them at all adventures by paflengers, then they would

not


ai* MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

ndt have been round, as they are, but rather of an oblate irregular area t
their fides in one place boding out, and in another deprefifed and funk
in, as fuch an accumulation would neceflarily produce. It is true, there
have been bones found intermixed with the ft ones in fome of thcfe heaps;
and urns and altars in others ; which may prove fome argument of their
having been ufed for immolations and fatrifices. But it is certain, the
holy text intimates as much as if the ^poftatizing Jews (no doubt in
imitation of the Heathens about them) ufed altars of this form. " They
facrificed" (fays the fcripture) " bullocks in Gilgal, yea their altars
aw, CtSjd Cagalim> i. e. 4ikc to thofe heaps we have in the furrows
ofrthe field," Hofea xti. 1 1. Judea being a ftony country,. they gathered
the ftones into heaps, as we do, in the furrows of their ground. And
then how near the figure of thofe little heaps, to which the prophet re-
fembles fome of their altars, comes to the fhape and fafliion of our
Karmdd I need not (land to urge.

'Whatever the firft inftituted original ufcs of thefe larger Cumuli were,
it is more than probable to me, that they came at length to be ufed
only for oblation and facrifice, and that of the worft fort of vi&ims,
viz. of rogues and profligates. S^ui funt in fur to > aut latrocinio, aut
aliqud noxa comprebenfi % gratiores Diis immortalibus ejfe arbitrantur, i. e.
fays Ceefar, w Such as are the greateft thieves, rogues and villains, are
•ever accounted the moft acceptable facrifice to the immortal gods/'

Now that fuch nefarious criminals were facrificed on a Karnedd, and
not on a Cromlech , where perhaps only the more innocent victims were
offered, I take the vulgar practice among the Britons, Scots, and Irifh,
of heaping, ftones and raifing little Cumuli on the graves of fuch wretches
(which they continue to do without knowing why, but that they found
it the cuftom of their elders) to be no i neon fide r able argument of the
probability of that conjecture. Neither can I here avoid inftancing the
known pra&ice of the Jews, in putting to death their vileft malefactors
with (toning or throwing and heaping of ftones upon them ; commanded
Deut. xvii. 5. and praftifed Jofhua vii. 26. Though that way of put-
ting people to death for certain crimes be in thefe texts of Mofes firft
mentioned and put in writing ; yet we have good grounds to prefume
that it was the determined punifliment of thofe very crimes in the ages
before ; and that we have to fuppofe more particularly, becaufe of the
moral end and purport of it, viz. the taking away of the evil from
among them, as it is there expreffed ; and confequently that removing
a:ad taking away of the evil being by an exprefs law to be performed

and


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 215

ancf effe&ed by every one's throwing his flone on the vi&im, in token
of his execration of the fa& committed, and for a general expiation of
the guilt thereof, as it is particularly fpecified in the law of Mofes, viz.
M the hand," i. e. " the ftone of every one fhall be upon him," Deut.
xvii. 7. On account therefore of this particular, it may not be at all
improbable that other nations likewife did retain that pra&ice $ it be-
ing a fymbolical expiation founded or a moral principle, and confer
qijently a didtate of natural religion, to remove the eyil before any good
can be expected ; fo thriftily did thefe prieftly judges, our Druids,, conr
vert legal punifhments into religious expiations and atonements.

However, this is- certain, that the other day people having occafion
to take away, fome lime-ftones from a Karnedd, which is in Plds Newydd
wood, formerly called Llwyn Moel,] in Anglefey, , they found near the
top of it, on one fide, about a yard, deep in the flones, the bones of
three perfons lying clofe to one another, not at length in a firaight but
oblique pofture, ftraglingly with. their heads downwards. They feemed
to be the laft that were flaughtered there, being fo near the top of the
Karneddt and not unlikely, at the Romans invafion and conqueft, when
people here were, driven to their greateft expiations and facrifices. In
fhort, . as thefe largpr Karnedde may well feem to have been the remains
of fome ancient rite of worfhip, fo there wants not. ground to affirm the
lefTer Cumuli to Ijc meerly the tombs and fepulchral monuments of an*
cient heroes.

M E I N I G W Y R.

Our vaft columns and uawrought pillar- ftones found ereded here and
there in feveral places as well of this as other countries, I have alio
conjedured to have been an . appurtenance or., relic of Tome inftituted
rite or cuftom of mankind's firft and mofl ancient religion. And on
that fuppofal I have reprefented the primary ufes of thefe pillars good
andJaiidable, as being (fome of them) peculiar appurtenances of inftl-
tuted religion. And othersof them the moft public and vifible records
of things in thofe firft inaccurate times. Of thefe latter forts are the
pillars of the fons of Seth, which Jofephus mentions Antiq. Jiid. Lib. u
Cap. 3. Of the former are thofe of Jacob in Bethel, Gen. xxviii. 18.

Now if this was the ufe of thefe rude unfhapely columns and pillar-

flones, viz. to have been fymbols of fpecial confecrations, and a fort of

temples in thofe firft ages of the world ; it is no wonder that their ufe

hath been retained and varioufly applied by almoft all nrations of people.

7 They


216 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

They were in fomc countries, when idolatry prevailed and religion grew
more gay and pompous, improved and advanced from their original
rudenefs into curioufly wrought and poli (bed columns of feveral names
and orders ; and at length into ftately and magnificent temples. In
other countries they were enormoufly raifed into pyramids and obeliflcs.
And in fome places alfo, particularly in thefe northern countries, and
in fome parts of Afia, they retained for many ages their firft natural
form and coarfenefs. All this happened as the nations who made ufe
of them more or lefs indulged novelties and pompous appearances, or
tenacioufly adhered to more ancient and primitive eftablifhments, though
ever fo rude and barbarous.

We have little rcafon to doubt, that in the firft ages of the world,
the venerable names and memory of the moft heroic worthies and be-
nefactors of mankind Were in many places continued to pofterity in
thg'fe unhewn columns and ere&ed pillar-ftones, * before the more po-
lite arts of fculpturc and imagery had room to be entertained among
the more curious fort of men. Thus Jacob, a zealous preferver of the
patriarchal rituals, fecured the name and memory of his beloved Ra-
chel in an tmpoliflred pillar-ftone ere&ed on her fcpulchre, Gen. xxxv.
20. And Abfalom in the midd of his days chofe fuch another to pre-
ferve and continue his name and renown to the generations that were
to come, 2 Sam. xviii. 18. And fuch was the monument of king Da-
vid, hinted at Ads ii. 29. and mentioned by St. Jerom in his epiftle to
Marcella.

Thefe being the two jnoft ancient lifes.that we read of in hiftory or
any records of thefe eredted pillar-ftones, viz. either fet up as local con-,
fecrations or fymbols of the Scbekinab or divine prefence, as thofe of
Bethel were ; or elfe of fepulchral monuments and memorials of name
and honour, as thofe of Rachel and Abfalom were ; we w9nt not rea-
fon to conclude them to have been the effe&s of a primitive order and
inftitution. And therefore by Propofition I. and IV. we may affirm, that
thefe rude columns and huge ere&ed pillar-ftones, now ftanding here
and there in thefe countries, have been anciently, where many of them
are together, local confecrations and temples ; and where difperfedly and-
fingly eredled, memorials and fepulchral monuments.

We find indeed that God himfelf fometimes commanded the erection
of fuch pillar-ftones, and that very confiderable adfcs of religion and wor-

* Antiquum atcurtti tonrtutur Imagxmm btbitm, Vttms Column** trigmta, m ctktamt tamps*
hatuau Clem. Alex* Strom, lib. u

7 fl)ip


MONA ANTIQJJA ItESTAURATA. 317

Clip by God's own appointing were celebrated at them 1; as parties
larly at Gilgal, where God commands Joftiua to take up twelve {tones*
a (tone for every tribe, and to pitch them up for a memorial of their
pafiage over Jordan ; and thefe twelve {tones (fays the * text) which
they took out of Jordan, did Jolhua pitch in Gilgal. • And as we find
that thefe erected pillar-ftones and columns in the earlieft ages of the
world made up their Profeucba gt oratories; fo thofe places, being
planted about and furrounded with groves of oak, compleated with them
the notion of temples and fandtuaries. This is very, evident of thofe
fandtuaries and pillar-temples in Syria and Paleftine, which are com-
monly defcribed in the holy fcripture by groves and pillars, as I have
before (hewed.

It is as evident from the facred fcriptures, that thefe pillar-ere6Hons»
when the true, religion began to, fail, became the idolatrous objedts of
divine worfhip. And hence it is that we find God, even in the days of
Mofes, giving ftri& warning to the Jews, that they (hould not adore
thofe pillar-ftones, which it feems they were then wont to do. " Ye
{hall make you no idols," (faith God) " nor graven image," (which in
the original is " Even Mafckitb" i. e. " a (tone of bowing*" as I have
before noted out of the Chaldee paraphraft) " neither rear ye Matzebab,"
i. e. " a (landing pillar, to bow unto them, or' worihip them," (Levit.
xxvL 1.) And. on the account of the idolatrous abufe of thefe pillar-
{tones and of the groves about them, it may feem, it was, that God at
laft abfolutely forhade the ufe of them. " Thou fhalt not plant a grove
of any trees," (fays God) u near unto the altar of thy God which thou
{halt make thee, neither {halt thou fet up a pillar which the Lord thy
God hateth." . ' -

In all thefe places, the word Matzcbab, a derivative of Jatzab to fet
tip or ere£t, is to be taken for a rude uneffigiated cretied pillar-ftonc
;— no other than juft fuch as our Meini Gvoyr are— becaufe the propriety
of the word, and the circumftances of the texts mentioning them, de-
inonftrate them to have been of that fort. And indeed, the better fort
of expositors take them to be fuch, though our tranflations, following
the Seventy in that particular, generally render them images*
- But that thefe rude unwrought pillar-ftones (hould be honoured with
divine worftiip, is a thing very (trange to imagine ; yet that they? were

fo honoured and worfhipped in ancient times, is a t«nth paft all dif-

- , /. » *

• Jdh.fr. 20. ',-..- i ..; . i ... i

r FS pute.


*t* MONA A»T1QU,A RE^TAUKAT*

putt. And their being worshipped is feme argument that they' were
originally fepulchral monuments and ereftions»efie£ted by depraved roair-
kind* partly in imitation of the before-mentioned patriarchal practice*
but moft chiefly and generally out of an over-weening defire of im T ,
mortalizing the otherwife perilling names and memory of men, by
thefe vifible, more lading monuments. And this will appear very ac-
countable from the reafons that may be given of the original of idol- -
worlhip, viz.

First* The great and famous heroes and worthies of thofe times
dying and leaving their mighty name and fenawEt recorded and trans-
mitted to fucceeding ages in thefe lafting monuments j admiring pofie-
rity, out of exceffive veneration to their transcendent worth and vir-
tues, became very prone to reckon their departed fouls among the gods,,
efteeming them a middle fort of divine powers, and calling them A^ ffm
or AaifjLQYia., viz.. mediators or agents between the cceleftkl gods and:
mortal men.

Secondly, When men thus efteemed the fouls of thofe deceafed
heroes as deities, and accounted them worthy of divine honours ^
they thought of no fitter place to afford them this adoration than at their
fepulchres and monuments : efteeming thofe places as certain fixed and
peculiar rcfidences and habitations of thofe deities. And thefe monu-
ments there ere&ed (perhaps called by the names of the men departed,
which by the way may fomewhat account for our Memi Gneyr* i. e. our
men-pillars) they accounted Statuas animatat, fcnju & $iritu plenas* as
Trifmegiftus calls them ; or 'hyuKfutk. Si/as t**W*«* eWrrAw, as jam-
blichus words it. i. e. iL Idols £lled with divine influence, and ani-
mated ftatues furnifhed with fomething within them that hath life and:
perception.*

On thefe accounts I conceive thefe ere&ed ftatues and columns e*me
at firft to have been worfhipped, and to have had divine honours paid
to them by the idolatrous Gentiles. And as the genius of the nation
or people who ere&ed them varied, & they, either avoiding novelty and
innovations, as the Gaulish Druids did, paid to them their adorations
in their rude natural forms ; or elfe as other nations who aSeded no* '
velttes dad, they infcolped on them human fhapes or other figures as
they pfeafed to fancy, and adorned and flourished diem, railing over
them magnificent ftruftures and. temples.

And this indeed I find to have been the very notion which antiquity
had of the original of idol-temples % and which the primitive fathers,

• • taking


M9NA AN TtQJJA RES T ATMtAtA; 4i$

taking advantage of* ufed to upbraid the iiipcrftitious Gentile* with.
Speciofo quidem Nomini $ fays Qeta. Alex^ in Protrtpt. . Tepfpla did* fuiji
autem Sepukbra, i» e. t Stytdcbra ififs-wcatejuiffe V*mpta* And Arnobiuf
contra. Gent. lib* 6, tells them to the like porpqfe, $>uid quod multa ex
its Templa* qtye Tbolis fvrtt mreis & Ju6timiAtis eJata fafiigus % Au£toru*t
ConfcrifitoniSut cortprebatur conttgere cmerts atgue off** & Jm&orum effh
torforum Sepulture i. t. " They are called indeed temples, but they .
are only the graves of dead meat and it is evident by ancient writers
that thefe auguft temples, however adorned and venerated, are but the
<afcs and qonfervatories of doad meos' bone* and a&es, over which, and
for whofe fake, they were Arfl: ■cre^cL"

- And truly, as to, our ereded monuments and itone~pi11ars, the few
inferiptions that have been found upon them teftify -them to have been
the burying-placcs of noted perfons > or at fcaft that fuck whofe n*meS
they bear have been buried near, or not Far from them. And thefe
were all of middle or latter times. But of very ancient inferiptions,
fuch as may be prefumed to be from the times of Druidifm, 1 think
I may pofitively fay, there are not any among us. Which if fo, may
ferve for an argument that either that ancient fedt totally abftained from
the ufe of letters i or they took it to be an unpardonable crime to in-*
fcribe them on holy things j or elfe they clofely adhered to that ancient
Jaw, " Not to ftrike a tool upon their facred things *" which, I think;
was never obfefved to have been done* Thofe monuments that now
remain are exaltfy after the pattern commanded by Mofes, as you may
fee, Jofti. viti. 3 1 . viz* t€ Monuments of whole ftones, over which no
man hath lifted up any iron ;" being indeed of the rudeft ftones, whe-
ther they be flandmg pillars, or ere&ed altars or Cremkcbe. Neither
can I fee any reafon but that the names and characters which many
of thefe pillar-ftones now £hew i^pon them might have been ham*
mered there •many ages after their, erection, as people took fancy
to be interred near them. And the very little art that is generally
to be obferved in their way of cutting their letters, and the ufual
difproportionate largenefe of thofe letters they have, may be thought
to caufe them to write at length, fometimes upwards, fometimes
downwards, on thefe ftones in their ere& and ftanding pofture. I ex-
cept always fiich ftones as are cut and modelled ;— croftes, beacons,
and the like— which are known, in companion of the others, to be but
of late ere&ion.

Ff z Now


220 MONA ANTIQJJA RE8TAURATA.

Npw that thefe flone^monumcnts already mentioned, whofe remains
a re ftill among us, made up a confiderabie part of our ancient confecra-
tions, and were indeed our Profeucha and temples, the evidence of my
fourth Propofition may be good warrant to affirm. For when iacretf* •
records allure us that one branch of mankind's national divifions, in the-
re-peopling of the world, ufed fuch open places for the exercife of their
facred performances, namely, the ancient Hebtews; and wherrthofcr.
very records defcribeand diftinguifli thofe places to us by the folemir.
eredtions of heaps, pillars,, and altars; and particuhrfy aflert that thofe
three famous one* of Mifpch, Bethel and Gifgal were no other thair
ftone-monuments ; it is therefore butjuft to conclude, that other na-*
tiofis, particularly our own, ufed and pra&ifed alfo the like cuftoms of "
forming and making up their places o£ worfhip with fueh eredtions an<f i
monuments : And that in a more particular manner we roay.reafbnably
infer, becaufe the former (I mean thofe which are intimated 'to us irr \
fcripture) were effedts of moft ancient primitive order and inftitution ; ^
and that of the latter there are fo many remains, exadlly parallelling;;
the circumftances of the other, to. this. day vifible in- many places, afr^
well of thefe countries as of all Europe, that we cannotxhufe but af- -
cribe them to one and the fame origin, and inftitution.

Thus it feems to me that God in thofe ancient times, before he de- .-
termined his Scbekinab and. divine prefence to the Mofaick tabernacle
and the Jewiih temple, had his facred places in feveral parts of thefe
countries, where devout :men prefented themfelves- before Kim.- Arid*;
feldom any of thefe occur in fcripture, without the mention of fome
(tones ereded in fuch places. And fome .places have* their names and
characters from thofe very eredtions ;: as at Bethel, where we have a fort
of a confecrating Formula; " And this ftone (faith Jacob) which I have
fet up for a pillar, (hall be God's Houfe ; and he called the name of
the place Bethel," i. e. God's Houfe, Gen. xxviii. 19. art£ where alfo
we have fome part of the ancient rites and ceremonies celebrated on
thofe (tones fet forth and typified to us in Jacob's adtion of pouring-wine
and oil on the (tone-pillar at Bethel, Gen. xxv. 14. And I have heard
of fome (tones, obferved by the learned Mr. Edward Lhwyd of Oxford
in fome part of Wales, which had a little cavity a'top, and a groove
or chanfcel running down the fide of them, as if thofe ancient llbamina
were alfo retained and made ufe of among our Briti(h anceftors* And
indeed we need not much wonder that devout men in the patriarchal
#gc> and others in imitation of them, paid that veneration to, and placed

fuch


MDNA ANTIQJ7A RESTAURATA. 221
£icti facrednefs on, the religious ufe of thefe erections ; when we con-
fide r, befides what other warrant thefe might have for it, that it is plain
ia the fcriptures, -that- God continued to appear to men in no one form
linger and oftner than in the " form of a .* pillar/* Exod. xiii. 21. 22.
Iibrbearto bring. the adorable humanity of Jefus Chrift into the com*
parifon* asjin exception in this cafe* for it is above it; the body of
Ohrift being hypoftatically united to the Godhead, which the cloudy
pillar was net, though the divine prefence for fome time manifefted itfelf
in it^ Such. creations feem to have had- fome myfteriou* reafon for them',
now unknown, which induced- the ufage of them. •

. Thef& moil ancient pillar-temples, if I may fo call them*, and places
of adoration,* had* alio groves of oak generally planted about them ; from
which graves the very places of worship furrounded by them were forae-
times named and characterized. . As -\ Alloun Morcb, % Alloun Matzab;
%AUoun Baccutbr i. -e.' The Grove aofMoreh ; The Grove of the Pil-
lar ; and, The Grove of Weeping, And hence I have conjedtufed our '
anceftors alfo, retaining fome. part of that primitive- found Affoun, to
have called their facred places— always furrounded with thefe groves— .
Uyuyn QZ,Llau*. And our*Chrifliaft churches have been* generally built
at or near thofe ancient fanftuaries, as appears by their having to this
day (oMUiy of them) fome remains and monuments of ancient worihip
{landing neac them. An£ probably, people's minds were fooner drawn
tot make their firft Chriftian meetingsrattheir anciently accuftomed places
of aflembling^ . I /ay, our Chriftian churches feem on this account to
have taken their name Llan from that of Llwyn ; with the addition of
fome Chriftian name* that had been fignalized in that place, inftead of
their former heathenhh characters and terminations. And indeed by
weighing this matter, a little we may find, that although the words Llan,
Santius, Hofyj do now betoken- divine, and facred y yet it is fure that the 1
ideas reprefented by thefe words in ancient times intimated no more than
|l Enclofing, ** Eftablijhing t \ and 4- Planfing+~4\\ thefe being notions ref-
lating to .thefe fuperannuated groves, j as Td-lan, Corpblan,- Perllan;
Gwinllan, and inJrifh> Drviz/an fotzfanSluary, explain the firffc; and'
the commfcn notion of Sancio to this day is to confirm and efiabUjh J and
bojy, in the plcL Saxon .% feems to betoken originally nor more than bolt

• Gen^xii. 6. + Judg. ix. 6. % Gen. xxxv. 8.
$ Signified autem Coin/ana; Dsi uon pojffi effiugi imaginvn Clem. Alex. Strom* lib. I. •
' \ Lbwpt-LUm r •• 9*iui*, Sandus, + ft/'/ Holy,
f It is remarkable, that Heatz in the Saxon is a name .or word that exprefles both grope and :
temple. See.fir. Hicks, Gram. Anglo Sax. p. 5.

Of


222 MONA ANTIQJJA RES TAUU AT A.

or grove — until every one of thefe words in tourfe of time came to be
metaphorically ufed to elcprefs ndt the nature of the things formerly
meant by fuch words, but the action therein performed, which was di-
<oine zs\$ facred, as they are now taken. '

Lastly, The congruity of the ufe and application of our ancient
facred places with that of the Jewifh Profcucb* and fan&uaries, is n*
mean argument of their being both derived from one pattern, viz. the
moll ancient patriarchal practice. Thofe fet places in Judea and Syria*
we are warrantably affured, were their great Forums, i. c. their places
of judicature, a& well as their Fanums, i* e. places of religion and wor-
ihip. For we read, that all Ifrael were often called to convene at Mi£-
peh : And in like manner at Bethel and Gilgal they had frequent con*
yentions*. Nay, we read that Samuel went from year to year in circuit
to Bethel and Gilgal and MUpeh, and judged Ifrael an all thofe places*
i Sam. vii. 16. How agreeably therefore is this with what Julius
Caefar affirms of our Druidical 'temple in Gallia f It certo Anni tempore
tonjidunt in hco confecrato ; hue omnes undique qui controversial babenU
conveniunt; eorumque judiciis deer etifque parent l , i.e. " They meet toge-
ther, viz. the Druidiih priefts, in a certain confecrated pla&e, every
year, and judge all the people."

Thefe : places in Jewry, though when the temple was built they loft
that prerogative, yet we are told were continued by the Jews as pecu-
liar places of prayers and public aflemblies, on occafion, even to the
*ime of our Blefled Saviour. And how cxaftly fome of them refembled
^>ur mentioned cirque or theatre at Bryngwyn, I leave it to any one to
f judge, who will but confider and compare what I ha*e faid of that with
the defcriptron which *f Epiphanius, who was born and lived in thofe
.countries, gives in his trad againft the Meflalian heretics, of one of
thofe facred places. Eft & Sicimis qua hodie Neapolis dscitur, Projeuck*
locus, extra urbem, Tbeatro Jimiiis, fecundo ab urbe lapide fofitus, quern
it a aperto calo & are A fubdkdi extruxerunt Samarita, Jtidttorum in
omnibus imitator es: €€ We have at Sichem an ancient Profeucha in the
open air, raifed up like a cirque or theatre by the Samaritans, in
imitation of the Jews." Now whether this be arty remains of the
ancient fanduary at Sichem, mentioned Jofhua xxiv. 26, I leave to be
xonfidered.

• Videfis Medum in Jofii. xxvi. f Rpiph, torn. 2. lib. 3. Cap. So.

.3 ' Ob*


IffOtfA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 223
Objection II. •

The Second Obje&ion is, That the proofs which are offered for the
Druids' chief refidence and metropolitical prefiding in the Ifle of Mona,
efpecially fuch as are drawn from the monuments and remains of
Druidifm there,, are not abfolutely conclufive with regard to that place ;
fince other places of the Britifh territories, by that argument, are more
juftly intitled to it: And alfo that it does not historically appear, that
thefe men did prefide and govern in the affairs of religion over the whole
ifle of Great-Britain, as afferted.

This is an* objection which- the- particulars I afferted are liable to;
and therefore to remove the force and charge of it I (hall, be obliged,
as in the lad, to eftablifha few preliminary propofitions, by theftrength
and evidence of which I (hall be better able to fet things in their true
Mght, and more eafily and intelligibly unfold the grounds and rftafons
of what was afferted. in thefe particulars. And therefore I premife that,

Proposition- VI.

It is an allowed maxim in hiftory, that general characters and inti-
mation8 of anions or perfons are fometimes pregnant and produdive of
equipollent fpecifical determinations. Thus Platina faying that the pope,,
and Suetonius affirming that, an emperor made at times the chiefeft .
figure in Rome, is juft the fame as if thefe authors had exprefly (aid tha^
Rome was once the emperor's, and once the pope's city.

Eropo&ition VIL

Ih concatenated and neceffarily depending adions,. fuch are the
fchemes of religious polities and the like, that the pofition of fome ef-
fcnfial particulars in a place or fociety of people neceffarily infers tfi$
exiftence of the whole.. Thus fome particular ncceffary cpifcopal a&ions
in fome cities in the apoftles time and immediately after, are good -evi-
dences of epiicopacy's being planted there at thofe times.

Proposition VIII..

That* the evidence of tradition, where there is no fuipicioir of frauds
or foul play in the firft fetting on, is always very considerable : And
when it is backed with unexceptionable records and authorities, it is (till
«*he greater. But when confirmed alfo with the concurrent teftimonics
««4>f ancient names and monuments, it is the greateft of moral certainties.
•Thus when tradition tells us, that fuch a town in Britain or Gallia
' i . was


224 MONA .ANTI-QJTA Tt ETST AITRAT*.

was a legionary ftation, we give it fome credit ; when good authors «-
teft the.famt, we believe it; and when coins and altars and other
remains of antiquity confirm the fame, we. then have undeniable cer-
L.tamty.aad-ilTurancc of it.

'Proposition IX.

' That among the feparate and different itates arid conditions of pto-
r pie in every polity, fuch as the governors and the governed, it is not
. always a true and juft corifequence, Mien the qualities, especially the
moral and intelledtual ones, .of the one, party are inferred and concluded
from thofe of the other* Tor it is- evident that (he grofs ftupidity and
barbaroufnefs of fome nations and focieties of people are owing pcin-
* cipally to the fkill, craft, arid more extraordinary fubtilty and know-
ledge of their guides arid. governors; their ends and interefh i& thofp
matters. being founded on quite different bottoms.

JP-ROPOSITION X.

.That the principal and mod important characters in the reports, of
i,confiderable adtions are ftridtly to' be obferved, and therefore juftly to
be expected, in good hiftoriansj and where thofe characters are want-
ing in fuch authors, the negation and abfence of fuch particulars, in
fuch places, tfrhere they ihould have been mentioned, is as juftly con-
cluded. 'Thus* the hiftorians of Europe at this day, not mentioning a
•word, of the Turks or of their religion in any of our Christian ftates and
\ kingdoms, but in thofe of Turky and- their other conquefts, will be one
day a very, good argument, that jhofe Turks really were not, where they
were not mentioned j and that their refidence was where their appearance
.was mentioned to be, that is, only in the Turkifh dominions.

Thefe being axioms of allowable credit in the affairs of hiftory, we
may the more firmly depend on their light and authority, and apply
their evidence as occafions offer to clear fome difficulties that will oc-
,cur in this point of hiftory we are now upon. Which tho' I confefs
it to be of no great moment whether they refided here or no ; yet as
lit adds fomethirrg to the character of the place I am accounting for— «
.and that as trivial matters as itfelf have been warmly con tefted, when
] the. truth of hiftory comes to be concerned in it— especially finoc ihe
; greateft Roman authors have not difdained to enlarge on the fubje&—
s fo I take it no unbecoming endeavour to make good the reaibnablencjj^
N of the conjectures I have advanced upon the befoce-mentioned authori-
ties.


MONA ANTIQjLTA RfcSTAURATA- 225

ties, in relation to this matter, by all the fair ways I can : Which, as
a reply to fuch as may incline tb infift on the ftrefs of this objection, I
fhall attempt to do, by fuggefting in defence of the opinion thefe fol-
lowing confederations.

First, Let it be ctmfidertd, that by refidence and metropolitical in
this aflertion, is meant no more than that the grand fociety and whole
order of thefe Druids, i. e; their phyfiologers, priefts, and lawyers had
their firft admiffions, were initiated and prpfecuted their ftudies, under-
went their functions, and made the chiefeft part of their abode and liv-
ing in this particular place $ not that it (hould be conceived that there
was a metropolis here which had a (landing authority and jurifdi&ion
over the other parts of Britain. It is only meant, that wherefoever the
whole order of this religious fedt refided, there was fupreme authority
in matters relating to religion and difcipline ; that authority refulting
from fun&ion and office, by way of perfonal prerogative, and not of
local privilege and pre-eminence. Of this plain defcription of Druidi-
cal authority, the chara&er given them by antiquity is a full j unification.
So alfo that their refidence was a fort of conventual afibciation or abid-
ing together in one place, is difcoverable from the quality of their learn-
ing and difcipline, which was all communicated by oral tradition, i. e.
by word of mouth from one perfon to another 5 for they ever abftained
both in their teaching and learning from the ufe of books and letters.
This way of difcipline, attefted to our hands by good authorities, ne-
cellarily required, and as neceflarily concludes their living and aflbciat-
ing together for the moft part in one place, by Propofition VI.

Secondly, I offer it to bt considered, that if the Druidical hierarchy
was metropolitical in Gallia, as by Propofition VI. if we believe Caefar
who plainly affirms it (bis praefi UnusJ we cannot at all deny ; then
it will follow, that when thefe unexceptionable authors, viz. Caefar
and Tacitus affirm the fame religion and the fame difcipline as were
in Gallia to have been in Britain alfo, from whence at firft they had
them ; it follows, I fay, that that hierarchy in Britain was alfo metro-
political, and that the affairs of Druidifm, in the full extent of it, were
directed here, 3s well as there, by one fupreme head and governor. And
it will alfo appear by Propofition VII. that what is conclufive of Gallia
from what Caefar affirms of the head Druid and his confecrated feat or
ftation there, — Carnutum Regio*— the fame is applicable in Britain to fuch
place or perfon s as feem moft juftly entitled to the fame qualification
and character j identity of rules and difcipline ever fiippofing a <:on-

Gg • formity


226 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

formity of rites and ceremonies in places remote and diftanc. And
- therefore it is but juft to conclude, if the people in the many cities of
Gallia, and the feveral governments thereof, reforted to that one place,,
as Csfar aflures us they did, and there fubmitted to the Druids' decrees
and judgments ; that the people in the feveral ftates and principalities
of Britain aifo might do the like : nay it is next to evident that they did
fo. For Caefar exprefly fays, as I intimated before, that the Gaulifli
difcipline came from Britain ; which is an argument of no fmali weight,
that what was done in Gallia in obfervance of that difcipline was more
accurately and ftridly performed by the different interefts and govern-
ments within the ifle of Britain j and confequently that their difcipline
was here metropolitical in the fenfe I have explained it.

Thirdly, It is to be confidered alfo, that fince Caefar, giving a cha-
racter of the Druidifh difcipline in Gallia, plainly intimates that the
fame fort of difcipline obtained in Britain ; and fince Cornelius Tacitus,
fome time after Caefar, does as plainly affirm that the Britons ufed the
fame religious rites and fuperftitions as the Gauls did ; we have thence
good warrant to conclude, that as in Gallia (b in Britain (for to fup-
pofe one over Gallia and Britain is, on many reafons that I need not
mention, moft improbable) they had one head Druid — §uifummam inter
eos babuit auttoritatem — as Caefar accounts of their chief one in Gallia

" who had fupreme authority among them ;" and one place Vbi certs

Anni tempore confidebant in Loco confecrato — as Caefar delivers it, where at
a certain feafon of the year the Drt>idi£h priefts came from all the cities
and places, where they had their difperfed ftations and employments,
and attended their chief and pritriate in his fupreme confiftory—
Vbi omnes undique qui Controverfias babuere, convenerunt, eorumque Ju-
diciis Dccretifque paruerunt — viz. " where all perfons from all parts of
the country, who had any fuits or contefts in law, made their appear-
ance, and were finally determined by their decrees and judgments ;"
Et ubi magnus Adolefcentum Humerus Difciplina caufd concurrebat, &

eorum nonnulli Annos vicenos in Difciplind permanferunt " And where

great numbers of youths reforted to be trained up in the Druidifh learn-
ing, continuing their colloquial ftudies fometimes twenty years toge-
ther in that place *" while many of them, no doubt, were difpatched
abroad to the feveral provinces and cities to officiate in the affairs of
religion and judicature. All this we muft prefume to be true of the
ifle of Great-Britain as well a.s of Gallia, elfe we fall unavoidably
into this dilemma ; tha^t is, either we muft deny the plain teftimonies

of


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 227

% of both Caefar and Tacitus, againft the fixth Propofition, the former
afferting the whole difcipline of the Gaulifh Druids to have come from
Britain, and therefore proves it to be there ; and the latter as plainly
faying, that it was there, by his faying that the Britons rites and ce-
remonies of religion were the fame with thofe of the Gauls ; or elfe we
muft allow but one head Druid over Gallia and Britain, making of both'
but one hierarchy, and confequently that the Britons were obliged from
all parts to refort to the middle of Gallia for redrefs of juftice, againft
all»prdbability. And though it be true that fome of the Gaulifh Druids
did come over feas to Britain for more exadt knowledge in the Druidical
difcipline; yet that rather proves, th%t the whole difcipline, viz. fu-
preme authority, inferior orders, and a fixed feat and refldence was in
Britain itfelf, independent of any other place ; and therefore having all
that at home, they can be fuppofed to lie under no engagements to have
recourfe to fuch remote and foreign jurifdi&ions.

Fourthly, I offer it alfo to be confidered, that fince it is now fome-
wharapparent that Great-Britain hath had its own academy of Druids,
and that fome of the Gauls in Csefar's time frequented it, as a place of
more regular difcipline than that they had at home, whether there may
not be fome evidences, or (what will amount to fuch, colle&ed from
tradition) fpecial circumftances of fa£t, names of places, agreeablenefs
of fituation, and peculiar monuments and remains of antiquity, which
may bid fair to point out th^very place to us, though no authentic re-
cords do pofitively affirm it. And if that be granted, whether alfo the
proofs I have offered for the Ifle of Anglefey, which were agreeablenefs
of feat, tradition, fpecial circumftances of fadt, and ancient betokening
names and monuments, may not deferve fome weight to be allowed
them, till either better proofs are produced for another place, or it be*
made appear to be utterly impoflible to aflign any that may afford a rea-
ibnable fatisfadtion. And therefore I (hall now, under this confidera-
tion, beg leave a little further to enlarge on the particulars following.

FIRST, Agreeablenefs of Seat and Commodioufnefs of

Situation.

AS to what hath been faid in the former EfTay of the agreeablenefs
of feat and fitnefs of habitation for thefe Druids in the Ifle of
Mona,. above any other place of the Britifh territories, it was only made
ufe of there in reference to their choice of fuch a place for fettling

Gg2 their


125 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA,

their then new-formed institution and eSlablifhment. Yet it may not be
unufefully aSTumed too, as an argument a priori, viz. that on thofc men-
tioned advantages they did actually chufe fuch a place for their abode,
and cohabitation $ fince by that way of arguing, which is not to be neg-
lected when it falls in with other evidences, we can have this to fay,,
that what before and above other places feems moft likely to have de-
termined their choice to fix and fettle in it their principal feat and re->
fidence, may be well prefumed to have done fo. And befides, upon
a full view and consideration of thofe advantages we may farter
urge, how convenient, nay, how neceffary it was for thofe focieties of
people, who were to give ftridt uiibiaffed judgments in all countries, to
have a place feparate and removed from all, and dependent on none, as
this ifland was. And when we obferve that few or no other places in
all Britain were fo agreeably and advantageoufly Situated for all thofe.
ends and purpofcs, as I have endeavoured to make appear this Ifle of
Mona-to have been, we Shall perhaps be on thofe grounds alone, were
there nothing elfe to be urged in the matter, not very unwilling to al-
low the determined feat and residence of thefe ancient Druids to have
been in no other place of Britain, but in the Ifle of Anglefey and its de-
pendent territories, including the Ifle of Man and other adjacent iflands.

SECONDLY, Tradition.

I Need not fay much to eStabliSh the validity of traditional evidences.
They are ever accounted of prevailing weight, when the tradition
carries with it thefe marks, viz. is grounded on notorious and well-
known matter of fad: ; and when its conveyance down is free from all
" fufpicron of fraud and falShood ; and laSlly, uninterrupted. And in this
cafiftEe tradition I urge rtiay beobferved to carry with it all thefe notes.
For, with refpeft to the FirSt, viz. notoriety of fa<ft, what can be
more notable and memorable than what religion and folemnity imprint
on the minds of men ? And fuch, no doubt, was thfc notion of this
island's being the chief feat and feminary of this religious fraternity*
Secondly, There could be no fraud or falfity in the handing down of
this relation, becaufe owned by all the neighbouring countries to be
true ; who if that relation had not brought its aSTurance and credibility
jvith it in all ages would be inclinable enough (We may be fure) to op-
pofe and gainfay, and in cafe it added to the place any repute and va-
lue, to detract and invidiate. And, Thirdly, An interruption in the

3 con-


MONA ANTJQUA RESTAtfRATA. 229

conveyance of that account or tradition cannot be alledged ; becAufe it
was conveyed down and continued to us, in the fucceffive generations
of one and the fame people, from that time to this day.

Now if all aflertory traditions are but continued affirmations of fome
formerly well-known, evident* and notorious matter of fa6t, and con-
fequently if the continuation of this tradition of the Ifle of Mona's be-
ing the prime feat of the Druids, be not, or was not fo much as fuf-
peded to have been, unfincere and corrupted, there can appear, I think,
no reafcnable grounds to rejedt or deny what is afferted by it. We can-
not but expert that an eminent overture jmd tranfa&ion of a place, fuch
as being the prime feat and refidence of fo noted a fociety of men as
that of thefe religious Druid* at that time certainly was, muft have been
talked of and remembered for. many ages after the diflblution of their
Society. And though the intermediate times- and perfans through which
this tradition made its conveyance to our hands, were confefledly very
grofs and barbaroufly ignorant, and- alfo productive of monftrous
fictions ; yet this matter handed down by them, being very brief and
important, and having alfo crept perhaps into the vulgar charadter of
the place, (for it is probable enough that antiquity meant more by that
faying— *M6n Mam Gymru — than is ufually taken) they cannot be fup-
pofed to have quite, forgotten it>

But fiqce they forgot it not, neither in Scotland nor amongft us, as>
I have made appear in that part of the proof I have before offered ; and
in Scotland they pretend to ancient annals, at lead to ungainfayed tra-
dition for it; why^then fhould we fcruple to yield fome credit to an-
tiquity in what is very plain and intelligible, and wherein there appears
no aflignable caufe or reafbn that tradition (hould impofe upon and de-
ceive us in the accounts of this particular ? Indeed, fame is fometimes
very profufe in her rodomontades, and lavifli in her fidtions as to things
and places; namely, when intereft, humour, or fome vulgar vanities
warp and fophifticate her informations. But when a general confent,
feconded by circumftantial evidences and probabilities of the thing,
others the report, we muft furely be very fceptical to mlftruft her ac-
counts and rejed her informations*


THIRDLY,


230 MONA ANTiaUA.R,ESTAURATA.

i

THIRDLY, Authorities. and Special Circum-

STAN C ES Of F ACT.

WE arc indeed wholly deftitute of any exprefs pofitive evidence
from any authentic writer to confirm this conjecture about the
Ifle of Anglefey's being the chief feat and academy of the Britifli Druids.
Yet by Proportion VI. from fome fpecial circumftances of faCt, ob-
ferved in Cornelius .Tacitus's relation of the conqueft of the Ifle of
Mona, we may be enabled to draw fome confequences, which duly
weighed may give flrength to that conjecture, at leaft in concurrence
with other arguments.

Although it be true, that Tacitus was never himfelf in Britain to be
an eye-witnefs of the Roman adions performed here j yet we may well
prefume he had his information from thofe that had been, who could
give him as complete and punctual accounts of the moil material and
. confidcrable turns of aCtion, as if he had been himfelf upon the place.
And we have no room to doubt the characters he gives of places, things,
and perfons, where he touches on them, but that they are the juft,
complete, and well-proportioned images of thofe truths of fad, which
the keened eye-witnefling judgments of eminent friends, in their fe-
veral ports, had carefully obferved and reprefented to him : And there-
fore we may, I think, not unjuftly conclude by Propofition X. thefe
two confequences from that author.

First, Since this exaCt author mentions not in any part of Britain
fo much as the name of a Druid, but only in the Ifle of Mona ; that it
is highly probable there was no appearance of fuch a remarkable place
of Druidical refidence to be taken notice of in any of the conquered
provinces of Britain, but what he obferved and characterized of this
place.

Secondly, When he mentions in this Ifle of Mona fuch amazing
appearances of this fort of men, fo many parts and appurtenances of
their worfhip — fuch a deal of their ceremonies and incantations — fuch
fpeCtacles of horrid facrifices— fuch rites of arufpicy and divination-
all thefe being confefled particulars of their religion and worfhip, and
fetting forth the whole aCtion rather as a grand religious ceremony than
a battle ; I fay, all this being confidered, it is by Propofition VI. and VII.
an intimation equivalent to his exprefly faying in other terms, that the Ifle
of Mona was the capital feat or head-quarters of thefe religious Druids.

For


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 231

For it is all one to exprefs a thing by an- enumeration of its parts in
a feparate disjunctive order, as by putting up the parts into one idea,
and fo call the things by one general word importing the whole j both
which ways are naturally expreflive of the thing intended. And here
indeed we have this other reafon to add to the confirmation of this par-
ticular j namely, if Corn. Tacitus did not by that paffage of his intend
to give us an intimation of this ifland's being fuch a place, we muft ei->
ther conceive, that the Druids and their chief feat and refidence made
no confiderable figure in his eye, and fo the mention of them might be
well omitted -, or if they did, we muft think that he kept not up to the
laws of hiftory, to omit their character upon the mention of any cir-
cumftance relating to them. But neither of thefe can be prefumed to
be true j that author being by approved confent allowed to have been
an exa& accomplished hiftorian. And indeed thefe Druids, where they
were really found to refide in any confiderable numbers, were foorv
taken notice of, arid had a very fuitable becoming character given them
by him in his way of writing j who if they had been found, as they
were in the Ifle of Mona, in any other places of Britain, we may pre-
fume would- have met in him. with a mention fuitable to their appear-
ance in fuch places*

But fince we find no fuch character, no mention* of fuch a place, or
of what may be prefumed to have been fuch, by this author in any
part of Britain but only in the Ifle of Mona j and fince there too he is
not fhort, confidering his ftyle, in the defcription of their perfons, ar-
ray and carriage, of their ceremonies and imprecations, of their groves,
altars, and inhuman facrifices and barbarities ; and is' indeed wanting in
nothing but in telling us iiv downright terms that it was the Druids!
chief feat and refidence, at leaft at that time ,* I fay, confidering all this,
I could do no lefs than conclude this ifland to have been that place of
refidence j efpecially fince in many parts of it not a few ancient names
and monuments and other circumftances may afford fufficient grounds
to any who are unprejudiced to reft in that conclufion.

And if it be yet further objected, that though it be granted that this*
Ifle of Mona was then found full of Druids, and it be true. that the chief
conduct of affairs lay then in their, hands j yet it does not follow that
it was always their chief manfion and peculiar place of refidence,: for
being- an ifland and place of retreat and fafety,. thefe prieftly Druids
may be fuppofed to fly into it from the reach of the Roman ftorm, and
endeavpur, to take flielter in it to. avoid death and Jflayecy. To this.it

may


*ja MONA ANTIQJLJA HESTAURATA.

$nay be replied^ that it is very unlikely they Should be here only on that
account. For if only fear and regard of fafety made this fuperftitious
herd at that time flock to this ifland, it betrays a greater ignorance in
that fort of men than can be well fuppofed th?y could be guilty of, viz.
to fly for (helter and refuge to an untenable .place * f where they might
be fure to be catched as in a pound on the firft attack of the enemy *
whereas they had much better have kept themfelves in the mountains,
or fly to the North of Scotland or Ireland, where they might be very
fafe and out of danger.

But above all, the confideration of the many ancient names and mo-
numents of Druidifm to this day extant in many places; df this ifland,
will make it appear that they had a more fixed abode and a longer efta-
bliftiment of their fociety and order in this country, than what wifl
cOnfift with but a bare appearance -of them here for their defence and
Safeguard, and that in a tranfient flight and hurry. And if it be far-
ther urged, that thofe names and monuments, granting them to have
been Druidical, may yet be fuppofed to have been the effefls of a very
(hort ft ay of thefe men in this ifland; though we (hould allow that foinc
of thefe pillar-ftQnes, heaps and altars might be raifed in a very (hort
time, it is not yet to be imagined to what end men in that cafe and
circomftance (hould of a fudden ereft fuch and fo many of them. And
though it be pofliblc they might fo ere<ft them to fome ends now un*
known ; yet it defervesto be confidered, that thofe facred groves which
the hiftorian particularly mentions could not be fet up all of a fudden,
but muft be at that time of long and ancient (landing. And if we re-
eled* on the ancient ufage of erefting altars firft, and then of planting
groves about them, of which cuftom we have particular intimation, Deut.
xvi. 21. where God himfelf fays, " Thou (halt not plant a grove of any
trees near" (or about) " the altar"— (hewing thereby that the primitive
ufage of the Heathens' was firft to build altars, and after to plant groves
about them ; and our pradfcice here being before (hewed to be a tran*
•fcript of one* of thofe heatheniftj cuftoms; we may then very well con-
clude, that our altart, pillars, and other eredtions, were as ancient as>
if not before our groves ; and confequently were no effedts of fo (hort
a (lay, but muft be of more remote continuance in this ifland ; that is>
(if the largenefs of fome of their Karnedde may afford us any guefs, by
the gradual encreafe and heaping of them yearly) they might be extant
here a long time, perhaps many ages before the Roman conqueft.
* Sec p. 59, where 'fee affignsthe fafety of 4his ifland, as a reafon why the Druids chofe to fix here.

, v FOURTHLY,


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. * 33

FOURTHLY, Ancient Names and Monuments.

IT is already intimated that" thefe religious heathens had groves and
altars for their facrifices and other appurtenances of their religion in
this Ifle of Mona > and that thefe rauft have been here long befpre the
Romans conquered the ifland. Yet I am far from concluding the rqfi-
dence of thefe men in this place from the evidence of thefe monuments
only, and exclufiw of tradition, circumftances of fad, and other pro*-
babilities already produced. But yet even fingly and from th^t evidence
alone, I think, I may appeal to any who will judge impartially of thq
matter, if our monuments in this ifland, and together with them thq
particular apartments and places of abode of thefe Druids, by theis
names to this day extant betokening the diflindt orders, offices, peculiar
works and employments of that fed, do not bid fairer for fuch a claim
of primacy and foperiority of feat and refidence in this ifland, than in
any other place of the Britifh territories, where fome of the like monu-
ments are, though much larger than ours, yet altogether deftitute of
jfuch ancient betokening names and characters, or indeed of any the leaft
marks and evidences of Druidifm* except only their bare fite and po-
fition. For indeed, magnitude and immenfity of ftrmfture, which many
of them in other countries have, cannot be allowed to be fo good argu-
ments, as the Druidical names and characters are, of this particular.

It muft be confefled, that there are fome of thefe monuments in Scot-
land and in tjje ides adjoining, which by the traditional account of peoi-
pie, as Hetftor Boetius affirms, are faid to have been the ancient temples
of their gods; fome of which, are larger than thofe I have defcribed in
the Ifle of Anglefey. And I find that the fame has been attefted by Dr*
Gordon, a -learned antiquary of that kingdom now living, who avers
that there is an ancient tradition among the people, that thefe circular
ere<fted monuments belonged of old to the Drownicb> as they call them,
whom he interprets the Oruid*. And fince the firft writing of this
Effay, I find another author, viz. Mr. Martin, in his Hiftory of the
Weftern Iffes of Scotland, confirming the fame by cxprefs and parti-
cular inftances. - Sp alfo in many * places of England and Wales there

• It is not improbable bjit that the Head-Druid, with his collegues, (Jid hold general affize*
or courts of equity in thefe places in the fcveral provinces, for the conveniency of peoples* refort-
ing unto tbem, and that in time of peace they frequently made their circuits in thefe places to judge
the people.

H h are


a 3 4 MONA ANTIQTJA RESTAURATA,
arc fome very ftupendous (lone-monuments, and many of lcfler fize, to
be taken notice of, which for bulk and fome fort of regularity feem to
furpafs thofe of the Iflc of Anglefey : Some of them confifting of. a
great mmiber of eretted pillar-ftoncs with incumbent crofs ones* in a
triplicate, duplicate, or fingle order; fome of them with tOft-Fben ; .
fome with Cromkcbe in the center of their area ; and fome with .mounts
made of earth and ftones near them; and fome alfo with rampiers and,
entrenchments about them ; all of them generally— when many of thefe
ftones are ranged together — of a circular or elliptical figure in their
plots and area. The difcovery and accounts of many of which we owe-
to the indefatigable diligence of the late Mr. John Aubrey-, and we-are irt
expectation from the learned labours of our exquifite antiquary, Mr. £</- _
ward Ltrwyd of Oxford *, of a more accurate account of our Rritifli an-
tiquities, in reference to local and etymological observations, than his .,
been yet publifhed.

Now thefe mentioned monuments, though much more auguft and *
fpeciou?, many of them, than any we find in the place I account for;
and though granted to be Druidifh, yet in themfelves, % without other
concurrent evidences, are no concluding arguments againft anQther
place's being the chief feat and refidence of this ancient order i no more
than are fome more fplendid and magnificent churches at this time (if
I may ufe the comparifon) againft another's being fupreme and metro-
political, which is far lefs elegant and ftately, as many ftich are known
to be. The vaft inartificial grandeur of many of thefe laft mentioned
monuments argue rather the power and riches, the pomp and magni-
ficence of fuch people and countries, who went to the expence of
raifing thofe prodigious ere&ions, than any fuperibrity of jurifdiftion in
fuch places.

We find not in any of thefe places, where the mentioned Mr. Aubrey
and the learned Mr. Edward Lhwyd have difcovered to us many, and
thofe undoubted monuments of Druidifm^ any names, tradition,
or any wife attefted circumftances of fa&, at or relating to any of thofe
monuments; nor any of them bearing the leaft refemblance of fuch
a name, except -f- &tenton-Drew, that fhould induce us to believe them
to have had that prerogative of feat and refidence, as we find in the Iflfe
of Anglefey.

It is true, that in the Ifle of Anglefey, where three main parts of
the evidence we have in this particular (i. e. advantage of fite, tradi-
• This eflay was writ before Mr. Ibwyd died. f Su*t-Tvwn-Drt<w.

tion


JVIONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 235

•tion and recorded circumftances of fad) offer themfelves above any other
place in the Britifti territories, there are not now to be feen any monu-
ments of that infane ftrudure and magnitude, as Mr. Camden very fitly
terms it, as Stone-Henge> Roll-rich and A*wbury> and fome other erec-
tions feen in other countries ; yet moft certain it is, that there are in it
a greater number of thofe monuments of all forts, than can be ftiewed
in any one place of thrice its dimenfions in all the Ifle of Britain.
Many of which I have defcribed and accounted for ; and they feem to
bid as fair as any for that primacy of feat and refidence, except only in
the wildnefs and immenfity of their make and ftrudure ; the people of
thofe ages (it feems) affeding above all things a ftupendous vaftnefs, to-
gether with a natural inconcinnity and rudenefs in the compilement of
their facred eredions.

But in the Ifle of Anglefey, befides the appearance of greater plenty
of Druidifli monuments, fuch as I have endeavoured to prove our Crom-
lecbe, Karnedde, and Meini Gwyr to have been ; I have (hewed likewife
no lefs than four town (hips, viz. *trer Dtyw, Hrer Betrdd, Bod-owyr 9
and Bod-drudaiiy to bear in their found and fignification evident tokens
of that ancient religious order. And all thefe four places or townftiips,
fituate and lying together upon one flang of ground in the moft amaene
and delightful part of the country ; and having more alfo of thefe mo-
numents to this day vifible within the verge, or on the confines of them,
than fome whole countries can {hew j therefore by Proportion X. I
lake it to be plain, that the designation made of this placs by fo many
concurring evidences — the like not to be found in any other country —
may very well amount to an hiftorical demonftration that the ancient
Druids' fupreme and principal refidence, which Qefar, Tacitus, and
the very nature of their difcipline avouch they had in fome one place,
was in the Ifle of Anglefey, at leaft for fome confiderable time before
the Roman conqueft.

And as to the names of thefe townftiips ; if it be objeded, that they
do not clearly difcover and denote any fpecial charaders of Druidifm,
becaufe the etymology of fome of thofe names may proceed and be ac-
counted for from fome other more late caufes ; I (hall then in reply offer
it to be confidered, that if it appears, that the reafons and grounds of
the compofition of thefe names of places and townftiips now mentioned
be, with the moft manifeft probability and congruity of circumftances,
to be deduced from fome fpecial notes and charaders of Druidifm,
fometime peculiar to that place ; that then it will alfo appear to be no

H h 2 good


236 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

good reafoning to oppofc to thofc manifeft probabilities an only ban*
portability of their being accountable for on other grounds — efpecially
if it be confidered withal, that we are not likely to meet with any fuch
grounds or caufes, natural or accidental, that may fa conveniently lay
claim to the propriety of all four, as that of Dr-uidifm fairly does. For
though fingly feme of thefe names may perhaps be liable to be urged
beyojid a bare portability upon other etymons,- as that this or that may
be the reafon of their being fo -called -, yet in conjun&ion the one with,
the other, when the one may be taken to explain the other, and when,
the agreement and congruity of their cincumftances refolve themfelves.
on a Druid ical bafis, it is therefore a manifeft probability that thefe
townihips got their names meerly on that account.

Here let us take along with us what has been already hinted out of
Tacitus, namely, that the Druids in the Ifle of Mona had groves and
altars confecrated of old, and dedicated to the inhuman barbarities of
their religion ; and out of Strabo and others, that the profeflbrs of that
religion were clafted and diftinguiflied into three diilinft orders, viz. of
Druids, Ovates or Evates, and Bards-, or rather into three feveral.
fun&ions or offices performed by perfons particularly titled by fuch
names ; and that the Druidical order was alfo divided into two parties,,
one whereof was the fupreme head or chief Druid, and the other the
inferior fubordinate Druids ; which are all four diftinft orders and titles.

Now as there is in that mentioned place of the ifl&nd a particular pre*
cind bearing the particular refpedtive names of all thefe orders, viz.
Strer Dryw, of the head- Druid * Bod-drudau,. of the inferior ones ;
Bod-owyr, of the Ovates ; and Tre'r Beirdd % of the Bards ; and as thefe
four orders or titles made up their whole hierarchy ; fo thofe four pre-
cinds denominated from thefe orders, and Situated together, minifter no
fmall probability of thefe orders cohabitation and chief refidence in that
place or territory.

Of Tre'r Dryw and Bod-drudau.

IT is not to be doubted, but that the names ufed by Greek ai*d Latin
authors to exprefs thefe religious perfons, were taken up from Gauiifh
and Britifh founds, fuch as they heard them call themfelves by ; and be*
ing fo taken up, were pronounced and .written by thofe authors, a little va-
ried and inflefted into their own idioms of Greek and Latin terminations.
For fo wc find them expreffing plurally, Druid-a> Druid-es, £««>-«<,

v the


MONA ANTIQJJA R E S T A U R'ArTA. 237

fhe a-es-ett, being their terminatiye additions ; and the found they took
them from was moft likely Druivydd; and that being in all probability
of a plural figni fixation, implying many; and -ydd being the plural of
many BritUh words* as Nentydd, Corjydd, Coedydd ; it feems therefore
that the British fingukr of that nlame was Druw or Dryw 9 the unvaried,
appellative of one perfon of them;, as c lrer Dryiv, Maen y Dryw,
St en ton Drtiv in Somerfetfhire, LlyJJieu'r Dryw f and the little Regulus or
wren, called Dryw 9 the conftant inhabitant of groves and bu(hes, and 1
probably emblematical of them, do feem to confirm and prove that the
head - Druid*— propter €Xtttfentiam*—w&s ailed Dryw, and fo his chief
villa or manfion muft be called *£rer Dryw,, as was before intimated.

Now Druw. or Dryiv being the word exprefling one fingle Drywid*
or rather the head one, K*?^<^*y> it-is probable (the Gauliih and Bri-
tish tongue confifting of variety of idioms and dialects) that the plural
of it was uarioufly terminated in various places, . as they had feverai*
Ododes of expreffing. and terminating on€ and the fame word ; and there-
fore —ydd, ~-au+, -~o* being u&al .terminations of the Britifli tongue in<
the plural number*, they might in fome places pronounce the word plu*
isaliy Druwyddg . in other places Drudau* in fome Drudion or Drudon,*
and .mothers Derwyddon^ by which, diverfity of conftru&ion of the
fame word^in. diverfe places, whereof we have many examples in many.'
words to this day,, it might very well come to pafs > that the foremen-
tioned towtifhip called Bod-drudau, and the other place called Cerrigy
Drudion in Denbighshire,. do* each of them really bear the n^me of thefe
Druid^ but in- fome what different- terminations. And therefore we
may not accept of that argument which fome are willing to urge, namely, *
that the examples which Dr. Davies produced out of fome manufcripts
of their being. called Derwyddon, muft infer that they were called only
fo and no otherwife ; and confequently, becaufe he found them only
called fo in two or three late.Britifh manufcripts, though in his Botano-
logy he allows them to be called * D'rudon f the other terminations of
the word muft be quite excluded, and ., the names fo terminating, tho*
approving themfelves by good circumftances to be Druidical, muft be
discarded from the action and left to feek for other etymologies.

Agpio* if Druw or Dryw was the true B.riufh or Gaulish found or
word exprefling a fingle Druid, we are yet to feek from what moft
likely etymons that word was originally compounded; It is generally

4

faid,


238 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

faid, that it was derived from Derw ; and if fo, probably the word
might be Derw-ryw, corruptly DWyw — quaji Genus bominum §>uernam Re-
ligionem vel fub £>uercubus colentum — i. e. " A focicty of men celebrat-
ing the Oak ;" t>r perhaps I (hould not be much out, if I offered the
etymology of it from Dir-ryw, i. e. Genus bominum maxim? necejfarium^
" A fociety 6f men moft ufeful and neceffary." Thefe laft being two
British radicals very ancient, and as likely as any (notwithftanding the
common fentiments which are not always infallible) to give compo-
sition to this venerable name. But whether from Derw-ryw, or D/r-
ryw, or perhaps from fome other etymons not yet thought -on, -this
word is undoubtedly compofed, I will not prefume to fay ; neither is
it very material of which it is ; for they both bid fairly .towards it. But
thitf I will add and prefume to offer towards the folution of this par-
ticular, that if ancient names and things, and the original reafons of
them may be unravelled by certain remaining prints and footfteps of
them in the fcheme of language *, we may then obfervemany words in
pur Britifh tongue, and thole very ancient too, and which are particu-
larly referrible to Druidifm, that have Dir for the firft and principal
part of their compofition, and not fo eafy to be accounted for on any
other foundation ; as,

Dirnad.] i. e. Dir-ynad, To judge.

Dirmygu.]. Dir-mygu, To ftand out or contemn. To defpife.

.Dirprwyo.] Dir-prwyo* To fubAitute or fupply one's place.

Dirper.J Dir-per, To merit or deferve.

Drogan.] Dir-ogan or D'rogan, To foretel and divine.

Dirdra.] Dir-dra or Dir-draha $ The greateft oppreffion.

Dirchafu.] Dir-ucbafu or Dircbqfu, To mount aloft or afcend.

Dirgelu.] Dir-gelu, To conceal or keep fecret.

Dirweftu.] Dir~weftu, To faft, or be abftemious.

Dirwyo.] Dtr-wyo, To punifh or amerce.

Dirfawr.J Dir-fawr> Very great and excellent.

Which are all words very ancient, and all betokening fome peculiar
quality and propriety of . things and a&ions properly relating to that
fe&, and being built on the fame etymological foundation with the
fuppofed Dir-ryw, may feem in fome meafure to pretend to and conci-
liate that and no other to be the true etymology of it ; which yet con-
sidering the uncertainties of etymological niceties, can lay no fuch pre-
sence to it, as to deferve a contending for.

Of


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 239

Of the Bardi and Ovates, and of the town/hips of Tre'r Beirdc} and

Bod-owyr.

THE townffiip called by the name of Tre'r Beirdd, i. e. HabitacU*
lum Bnrdorum, the feat and habitation of the Bards (where there
are three or four Cromlecbe to be yet feen, but caft down and demo-
lifhed many ages ago) I have taken in confort with the other townfhips
to bear unconteftedly the name of that fociety or order of Bards, as they
were then called : And to afcribe it to the later poets called fometimes
by that name, who- never lived together in any formed fociety, there ap-
pears no warrant of antiquity for it.

But 3 townfhip called by the colfe&ive name of the whole fociety* .
as this is, imports no lefs than that a conventual feat or habitation of
that fociety was once there, where that name was left. Now the later
Beirdd or Prydyddion % though diftrnguiflied into certain clafles or orders
((hadowing .perhaps fomething of their ancient inftitutions) as Prif-
feirddf Poji-feirdd 'and Arwyddfeirdd, and the like; yet having the
whole condudt and management of their fkill and employments par-
ticularly governed^ and diredted by the -laws of the Tafaith or province
they belonged toy and never living together in one fociety, but dif*
pcrfedly here and there, as they happened to be gifted with that talent,
they cannot therefore be fuppofed to denominate this- precindfc And .
then it may feem that the name of this place muft be ^referred to fome .
pther more ancient fed: and order, who did live together in a con- -
ventual collegiate body; and this place bearing their name, as aflbciated ;
together in one community, muft be concluded to have had an undoubted
relation to that order or fociety.

But of the. townfhip of Bbfd-owyr, wherein are alfo many remains
of Druidical monuments, it is not, I confefs* at this time fo intelligibly
to be accounted for, as the other, three ; . the name of- that order to
which I have prefpmed to refer it being . now. quite loft and forgotten ;
in our language. Yet we may well conceive, as - before obferved, that
the forementioned authors, defcribirig the tripartite order of thefe Druids,
took the names of thofe orders from Gaulifh or Britifli founds or words
exprefliog thofe orders in that language. And thence it will feem that
the Gauliih and Britifh names of thofe orders were in fubftance the •
fame with what the Greek and Roman authors- in their Syntax expreffed »
of them*

An<L i


240 MOTJA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

And therefore it is not unreasonable to conclude, that as their Bardi
and Druidx undeniably exprefled our Beirdd and Drywydd , fo likewifc
their Ovates, mentioned by Strabo and Ammiafcus Marcellinus, muft
by the fame confequence exprefs fome name belonging at that time to
one of their orders, founding like Qvydd or Qjfydd f-ydd being feroe*.
time a Angular mafculine termination, as GweJbydd* Difinydd, JPJbi/tfb-
pbyddj which fignified their priefts and phyfiologers, as *bofe au-
thors relate. But what will mod rationally confirm this conjecture
is the agreeablenefs of the cotnpofition of the word with the nature of
the thing : Off or Offer mod plainly denoting res Sacras— facred and
holy things ; as Offrymmu, Offeren, Offeiriad % Duofryd, i. e. Dv-off-
rodd—Deo facra donatio— do evidently teftify. And Eydd or Tddion

* being equipollent with -wyr % they might be Offeydd, Offyddion or Offwyr
in the plural termination ; and confequently Offwr or Ojfydd, in pro-
priety of fpeaking, is no more than Perjkna Sacra or Saccrdos with the
Latins, which is the very fame with what Strabo explains of one of their

• orders, which he calls'OyaV^, priefts and phyfiologers.

On this account, obferving that Offwyr, ihe fame with Offeydd in
the Britifh plural, not only in found, but in Ggnifieation alfo, exactly
anfwers the w4)rd«Ou<xW which that author exprefly tell? us was the
name of one of their orders; and finding, even in thofe townflbips
•which fo evidenjly bear the names and charaders of the other two or-
ders, one place or.precin<£i called Bodovyr or Bodoffwyr, I could do no
;lefs than take it, 'in comportron with the reft, to have been an apart-
ment of that order called. OuaV^ ■*• e » ;priefts and phyfiologers.

It may be here objected, that Offrymmu, Qfferen, Offeiriad, &c. are
•words which the Romans left, -not found here among us, derived from
Ob and Few, two Latin radicals ; and that Ovates being a name which
ihe Britons had before the. Romans had any thing to do in thefe coun-
tries, that therefore the now Britifti words Qffrymmu, Qfferen, Offeiriad
*can be of no ufe to prove Off and Offer to betoken res Sacras — facred
things ; nor confequently to give Ovates and Offwyr an etymology on
the foundation I have now intimated. To this I anfwer, that although
limilitude of founds does not always prove that words of the fame figni-
fication and .found, in different languages, are the products and. deri-
vatives of one another ; yet all I urge in this cafe is that O^'and Offer
are moft ancient Britifli or Gaulish founds, and do carry with them the
.notion of facred things. Whether they be derived from Offero, or
lOffero from them, it matters not; fince both of them furely (as

3 all


MONA ANTIQJJ.A RESTAURATA. 24*

all words relating to religion) are raoft ancient, fcunds. And Ojjrail
a facrifice, and Juraim or Ijjraim to offer in Irifli, where the 'Latin O/-
ftro cpuld have no great influence (the Romans having never con-
quered that country) is a confirmation o£ it. And it is well known
that the ancient Gaulish, or Celtic tongue was fpoke in Liguria* Loxx\T t
bardy, and othpr parts of Italy, as is obferved by P. Diaconus, Servius.
and othexs ; and confequendy might well communicate with the Aa-
Ionian and Hetrufcan tongues, out of which, the Lotion or Latin wa*
moftly compofed.

And on this account we may rather fuppofe that many Latin words
which agree with the Gaulifk or Britifh, as Terra, Hir t Aurum, Aur * r
Mare,. Mor ; Ignis, Engyl ; Avon, Amnis ; Aer, Awyr ; Fit rum, Gwydr;
pons, FJynnon ; Mori, Marw ^ Murus r Mur -, Triius, Tref-, and many
more, were words borrowed from the ancient Celte, our anceftors.
And hence it is not unlikely that the Latin. Offero might like wife be de-
rived from our Off, Offer t Qffrail, Offrymmu; qr at leaft, that thofo
firft. people, though differing in language, might agree together in the
found of fome very Qbvious, and important words, as we fee now that
Temple* Altar, Catholic Faith, and other principal words of religion,.
have their founds, without much variation,, common in almoft all the
tongues of Europe. And we may add to this, that the Latin Offero re-
folving itfelf to Qh and Fero* will not much relieve the objection ; be-
caufe it is well known that the letter b, of which Ob ia made, had in
ancient times, in many words, a. much fofter pronunciation than it
now generally obtains. And it is as well known that the grammatical re-
duction of the Latin tongue into exa£t rules of art and politure (which
probably firft ftarted the compofition of Qffera from Qh and FeroJ was,
not very ancient ; no elder than, about the middle time of the Roman
confular empire, as Quintilian obferves— lib. 1. c 5.— who tells us,
that before thole times the Latin tongue was very barbarous and rude
in its expreffion, having in it many wordsof other languages, but efpe-
cially (faith he) plurima Gallica, very many Gaulic words. So that on
the whole matter we have room enough to conclude, that the Latin
Offero, and the Gaulifli and Britifh Off' or* Offer were both of them verv
ancient words, however derived; and might very probably giva tne
jxime of Offwyr to that order of Druids, which Strabo mentions by the
name of Ovates; and whence the prefent words, Offrwm, Offrymmu, O/7
feiriad might proceed; and confequently entitle this peculiar place or pre-
cind by the name ofBod-Offwyr ozBod-Qwyr, as it is called to this day.

Ii Now


24* MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

Now having traced the names and chara&ers of this religious fedt
and order of men fo far as they fall under the confideration of my pre-
fent fubjedt, I will here ftop a while and take a view of their whole
hierarchy and difcipline, from the hints and minutes we have delivered
to us by Caefar and others of their management and condudt. We can-
not fuppofe, as is hinted in the laft words of the fecond Objedtion, tho'
the civil policy in Britain was cantoned and parcelled into many petty
ilates arid governments, that the Druidical hierarchy was in like man-
ner dwindled into little diftributions and independent confiftories ; that
is, that every ftate and people had their peculiar fet of Druids within
their own feparate territories to manage the affairs of equity and reli-
gion. For it will appear on a due confideration of the matter fuppofed,
that fuch a diftribution totally overthrows the very nature of their dif-
cipline already defcribed, and contradifts the very fcheme which Csefar,
who beft knew them, gives of their inftitution and management iir
Gallia ; where the civil rule and government was as much divided into
different in t ere (Is and principalities, as it was in Britain. And yet he
pofitively affirms, that that difcipline (he means their rule and admini-
ftration) was in its higheft exa&nefs and # accuracy learned in Britain ;
and confequently, as I faid before, proves it to be here then in its
greateft uniformity and perfection. Et nunc qui diligentius earn rem
(meaning their difcipline) cognofcere volunt, plerumque illuc (meaning
Britain) difcendicaufaprofcifcuntur. So that their difcipline in Gallia,
which Caefar proves was learned in Britain, being rigidly arcbite&onicaf
under one fovereign Head or Chief, and their inferior orders from alf
parts folemnly convening in one place, as a feparate and diftindt body
of men, before this Head, whofe authority extended over all their little
flates and regalities in Gallia ; we have then very good reafon, as I be-
fore fhewed, to conclude the fame of them in Britain : For that in
Gallia was but what was learned here. And their hierarchy and fcheme
of government being of that dependent fubordinate kind, as all de-
fcribe it, we have no grounds left to imagine that it was divided in
Britain into as many confiftories or particular religions as there were-
feparate ftates and governments in it. And if that * place of Tacitus;,
where Caradtacus's men — Gentili Religione fefh objiringelant — i. e. fwore
and bound themfelves by vows after the religion of their countries, be
urged for a diverfity of religion in feveral countries; I anfwer, it caa

* Annal. lib, 12. cap. 8.

prove:


MONA ANTIQUA RBSTAURATA. 243
prove no more than that they might have, in the different provinces of
Britain, different ufages and rites of objuration and folemn vowing. It
being ufual, as Caefar tells us, Quiprceliis periculifque verjautur, aut pro
vi£limis homines immolabant* autfe immolaturos vovent, viz. to make thofe
folemn vows to keep them warm and fteady in wars and dangers.

Nay further, that this ancient order of men was a diftind fociety
by themfelves, fcarce at any time mingling with the reft of the people,
but when called to their tribunals and altars, is fomewhat plain out
of Caefar ; for in time of war and public diftradions they were all gone
±—Druides a bello abejfe confueverunU — fays he ; and where could they fo
readily withdraw themfelves as to their own Palladium or place of ha*
bitation ? Hence probably it Was that the Romans faw them not, until
they beat up their quarters in this Ifle of Mona y and then indeed a very
frantic army of them (fo Tacitus defcribes them) appeared and pre-
fented themfelves before them.

And when thefe men of religion fojoufned and lay abroad dif-
perfed among the laity, performing their peculiar offices and fundions,
they were not, in any province they came into, either concerned
in any warlike affairs, or fubjed to any government fave their
own. Neque tributa cum reliquis pendunt, militia Vacationem, omniumque
rerum habent immunitatem, fays Caefar of them : By which it appears*
Firft, That their adminiftration of religion and equity among the peo-
ple, was only in time of repofe and public tranquility j which may be
one reafon why Roman authors make fo flender mention of > them, or
of their appearance in any public ad ion. And, Secondly, Though
they did actually refide in times of peace and fafety on their feveral
diftrids throughout the nation where they were employed ; yet they
being, as we find, no fubjeds of the feveral petty governments wherein
they fojourned and aded, but being free and at liberty in all things
*— omnium rerum habent es immunitatem*— they might retreat and with*
draw to their common fanduary or place of refuge and fafety . when
they would. And the great power and refped they had with the peo-
ple in all countries, may be conceived to have been a fufficient fafe
condud to them either in coming from all places of the land to thi*
their head-quarters or habitation ; or in repairing, when fumrtoned,
to their great and folemn conventions and affemblies, which they fre*
quently did : And which alfo ferves to (hew, that, the many and differ-
ent dates and governments in the nation were no impediment to their
fefort to that one place; and confequentlycan be no juft exception againft

I i 2 their


144 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA;

their Wing had fomewherc one principal feat and habitation to fcfart
unto, when calkd and fummoned to make their appearance in it.

Objection III.

The third Objection is, that thefe Druids cannot juftly be entitled
to fo eminent and extraordinary knowledge and learning as is ufually
attributed to them, fince the Britifh nation in general, before the Ro«*
mans invaded us, laboured under very great barbarifm and ignorance;
which cannot well be prefumed they would have done, if they had fuch
men of fkill and knowledge, as thefe Druids are commonly reputed to
have been, for their guides and inftru&ors.

The main of this obje&ion is to abate of the moral and inulleBual
qualifications, which are ufually, and by fome of the bed lights of an-
tiquity, attributed to this Druidical fed. But any one taking a view
of the grounds on which the objection is founded will eafily perceive,
that it is built on a very fallacious fcheme of reafoning ; there being
no neceflary connexion between the compared and adjufted parts of it.
For it is not to be fuppofed, by Proportion IX, that a polite and well
qualified magiftracy makes always a knowing and civil populace and
vulgar. It may be very often the intereft of fuperiors to deprefs and
darken the inteflc&uals, to corrupt and deprave the morals of the com-
mon people, in order to difpofe and model their minda, and to mould
and figure their paflions, to what form and pofture they pleafe ; which
probably was in fome meafure the cafe of the vulgar Britons under the
conduct and management of theie cunning Druids. And therefore it
is not unlikely to be true, that thefe Druids might well be fuch men as
I have reprefented them, although the Brkifh vulgar were immerfed,
which is yet far from being proved, in the groffeft baxbariim and ig-
norance.

For feme mitigation of this charge it is yet farther to be confidered j
thai as fo morals, the decorum and plaufiblenefs of the addrefs and
condud of people have by manifeft experience been found, in all times
and places, to vary and to depend in a great meafure upon humour and
fancy. And what was efteemed barbarifm in one age or place, may
have beea reckoned civility and decency in another. For in moral
actions we are to reckon much on ends and caufes peculiar to cer-
tain times and places. And then indeed we have fomething to apolo-
gize for many adtions, wherein our anceftors, the Britons, by our
preieflt eftimate of things as now confidered, fcem to have been

2 very


MONA ANTIQJJA REBTAURAtA. 445

very rude and barbarous, which probably were not £o accounted in
thofc days.

The instances that are produced of the Britons' barbarity and igno-
rance are of feveral forts ; no one of which is yet liable to take away
the reputation and merit, as to (kill and knowledge, of their guides and
inftrutftors ; nor indeed of their own, further than what unavoidable
neceflity and the then circumftances of affairs put them on the prac-
tice of.

Many of the inland people, faith Oefar, fpeaking of the Britons,
low no corn* but live on milk and flefh. I anfwer, perhaps the great
woods in feme countries, and rocks and mountains in others, forced
them to it. And we may well think fo, becaufe we are allured by Ca&-
far, Tacitus, and Pliny, that they had in m&ny places of the land good
ftore of corn, bread and ale.

There are fome things falfly charged on them — as that they knew
not the ufe of cloaths, as Herodian affirms ; and that they lived only
on prey and hunting, and dwelt in tents, naked and without (hoes, as
Dio reports of them* AH which cannot be underftood of them but
with reftri&ion to fome particular places and circumftances. For C«-
far positively affirms of them, that they wore flans of beafts ; which
probably explains what Tacitus meant by vejteferali, in the Expedition
of Anglefey. Nay, Diodorus Siculus takes upon him to defcribe cer- -
tain garments of theirs called Bracba* Brycb-<wijb perhaps ; fuch as the
party-coloured trowfes which the Scotch Highlanders are known to wear
to this day, of the Braccan of the Irifh. Strabo and Martial men-
tion other Britifh habits ; but Pliny feems to put the matter out of
doubt, faying, that the Britons at fome facrifices ufed to go naked;
which plainly intimates, that at other times they went not fo.

And if their great woods at that time made the air warmer ; and
if the frequent wars and depredations, hindering the breeding of (beep
and cultivating of hemp and flajr, neceflitated the people to put on lighter
cloathing ; it was no effedt of choice, and therefore no token of volun-
tary barbarifm in them, fuch as might have been amended by more
ikilful inftru&ors, but rather the fate and mifery of the times which
put them on fuch grofs* unfeemly cuftoms. It is not indeed unlikely
but that men in the firft ages of the world went very thinly clad, if
not many of them naked ; and that the cuftom of wearing cloaths grew,
as people grew more polite and civil ; others continuing to this day to
retain their ancient limpiicity and nakednefs, and that too in fome

places


246 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

places under as cold climates as our own is. Which is* an argument,
that if people in the firft ages of the world had gone warmly cloathed
as they now do, whole nations would fcarce be induced to throw off
that cuftom of wearing cloaths and go all naked. And therefore it is
probable the ruder nations generally went half naked, till they came to
be more civilized and enured to a more decent courfe df life.

But here with us, if in fome places men went naked, as the author
mentioned fays they did ; it is not unlikely but that the paint and var-
nifh which they are faid to have ufed on their bodies—*;//™ corpora in*
fe#i 9 >iL$ Pomponius Mela has it— might and did fo conftringe thfeir
pores, and fo glaze and harden their external cutis, that the injuries of
air and weather did not much affe<5t them. And as for the fcarifying
of their bodies into the exad refemblances of birds and beafts, which
fomething favours that opinion, as Solinus reprefents them ; all that
may be no more than a warlike flourish, or a fort of heroic bravery in
them; for to expofe their effigiated breads and arms in that naked
manner, when fighting with their enemies, favours more of art and ac-
curacy, than of any barbaroufhefs and ftupidity in thofe refolute war-
like people.

But for the unclean and unnatural cohabitation, and the mixing to-
gether of parents with their children, and of nearcft relations one with
another, as Casfar, who furely (hould have a true account of them, tells
us they frequently did : It looks indeed like a heavy charge, and may
pafs for the grofleft inftance of barbarity they could be taxed with, if
they were guilty of it. But it is probable it was a character given them
by their enemies, who from the fmallnefs of their houfes (being little
huts without partitions or apartments, as Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, and
the very remains of them to this day, teftify) concluded perhaps, as
we often do of the Wild Irifli, that they lay together there without di-
ftindtion of age, fex, or kindred ; which probably was but a miftake
and the like mifreprefentation of them. For the old Britifh houfes
were little round cabins— Cronglwyd — of fmall capacity, as the * ruins
of them ft ill (hew ; yet they were generally in clufters, three or four of
them together, which it feems ferved them for rooms and feparate
lodgments. And fometimes many were included together, within the
compafs of one fquare or court ; which, I fuppofe, were their more fa-
(hionable houfes. \

• Now called Cjttifr Gwyddthd*

u


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 247

If this be not the reafori of that account given of them, it is, I con-
fefs, too difficult to excufe thofe profeft moralifts under whofe cogni-
2ance and fuperintendance they were ; unlefe we may give ourfelves
room to think that natural confcicnce, and what we now call humanity,
was defe&ive in their guides and inflxu&ors in that one particular ; or
at leaft that their religion, too much intoxicated by the lpirit of delu-
iion and warped by politic ends, relaxed and indulged to them that
beaftiality. However it was, it is no proof of the general ignorance
and barbarity of their guides and teachers, if they apprehended nature
too favourably in that one thing; and therefore might politicly over-
look that turpitude, and take it no crime to allow or lay no reflraints on
the unbridled lufts and appetites of the impure and heady vulgar, pro-
vided they paid them due fubmiffioir and obedience, in* what they com-
manded to be done and obferved by them in other particulars. But as
it is not likely the fad: was true ; fo there is little need to ufe any en-
deavours to obviate the inferences that may be drawn from it.

There needs no more to be added ; it is fufficient to evince that thefe
Druids might be men of general morality and knowledge after the
mode of that time, though the vulgar crew were deeply tainted with
grofs ilupidity and ignorance ; which is yet far from being proved by
the inftances produced, efpecially of their laity in general j who by
what appears of their adtions and behaviour to the Romans, and alfo
by what we have of their fayings, addrefs and condud, regiftered in
authors of account and credit, feem to have been men of good fenti-
ments, moderation and' temper ; and not meanly acquainted with the
principles of humanity and nature $ all which we muft fuppofe they im-
bibed from their Druidical education.

If any fcruple this, let thofe admirable fpeeches of Galgacus and Ca-
radtacus, and thofe pathetic debates and dying refolutions of our famous
* Boadicea, recorded by Tacitus, be undeniable fpecimens and lafting*

marks

* When Tacitus had g'ven an account of the conqueft of the Ifle of Mona, by Suetonius Pauli-
nu% he fays, that that general was fuddenly recalled from finifhing his enterprize, to repel the
violent attacks and hoftilities of our famous Boadicea, who had raifed a very numerous army in
the Southern Province againft the Roman garrifons, which (he had almoft totally deftroyed: He
thus relates the words of that illuftrious heroine. Tacit. Annal. Lib. XIV.

" Boadicea, fays Tacitus, having placed her daughters in her chariot before her, as (he came to
" addrefs herfelf to every feveral nation in the army, declared, that (he came there, not as a lady
•* defcended from fo noble progenitors, to make a kingdom or riches the matter of the difpute*
44 but as one of the common people, to avenge their lofs of liberty in general, and in particular,
M the monftrous villanies perpetrated in her family, and the vile ufages done "to her own perlbn,
u hairing had her body whipped and fcourged by them, and her daughters' chaft'tXes barbaroufly

7 violated.


a + 8 MONA ANTIGUA RE&TAURATA.

marks of fenfe, honour, and accorapliihed nohlcneft of thought and
temper, eminently confpicuous in thefe British diftrefled fouls ; and ar-
guments alfo of the Like qualifications, in others of their more fashion-
able laity, whole chara&ers the haftening pen of our hiftorian had no
time to tranfmit to pofterity, as. he had done, perhaps no lefs truly than
elegaptly of thefe noble ajid memorable, perfonages.

It is worth while to repeat here that gallant fpeech of Galgacus,
the Caledonian ; in which we fee how the Britifli genius was furniflied
with clear and fprightly notions of humanity, and well informed in the
juft rules of nature and intereft. For the fpeaking and delivering that
pathetic fpeech to the whole multitude, in that drain, and with that
admirable turn of thought and expreflion, fuppofes them in general to
whom he fpakc, to have been of a well taught and regulated capacity
both to apprehend and to be moved by it ; from which indeed we may
take much truer aqd furcr eftimates of the knowledge and accomplish-
. ments of their guides and teachers, than from a few inftanced immoral^
ties and grofs ufages of the more inferior fordid, vulgar.

The SPEECH of GALGACUS*

WH E N I confider the caufe of this war, fays Galgacus to his re-
folute army, and our prefent neceflity, I have great reaibn to
prefume that this day, with this unanimous, refolutioa of yours, will
give a happy beginning to the freedom of the whole ifland. We have
lived thus long in the full enjoyment of our liberty : and now there is
no country beyond us, nor indeed fea, to fecure us, while the Roman

" violated. [Six addtd^\ The outrages of the Romans were grown fo enormous, that the bodies
u of none among the poor Britons, of what quality foever, were exempted from the fcourge and
" the whip, and their luft fo impetuous and extravagant, that neither the aged nor the young
" could efcape their pollutions j yet as fbme comfort to us [/ays that magnanimpus laJj] the gods
" feem to be for us, and to favour our juft revenge ; for the legion that durft come and hazard
" a battle, was cut in pieces by us, and the reft, what do they do, but fculk in their camp, or
" feek means to efcape us by flight ; fo that they will never be able to abide the great clamour on
" the firft onfet of our men, and the rattling of our troops and chariots, much.kfs the power and
4 * force of our fighting, when we come to clofe with them: If therefore [/aid fie] they would
*• weigh witb her the number and power of her forces, and withal the motives of the war on her
• « fide, xefolve they Ihould, either to vanquifh or to die, in that battle : For the men \fiud Jbt\
" then, if the day be loft, may live, if they like it, and can efcape, and fupport that life, with
•« the bitter fruits of thraldom and flavery ; for her own part, her firm refolution was, to die that
44 day, or be vi&orious."

The day was loft, and ihe ended her life by poifon, and with her fell eighty thoufand Britons
in that battle

* • Tacit in Vita Iulii Agricolae*

navy


jht.>.xr.


Jtys 24*


*S/jorzacceay ^cue€^i/ dr fines tScewi .


MONA _ AttTKHJA R'BSTAU-RATA. 249

navy can thus toover on our coifls ; fo thstt arms and fighting, *s honour
will recommend to men of valour, fo will fclf-prcfcrvation to the worft
and moil cowardly of us.

The battles heretofore whicii Witfh various fucceft have been fougiflt
againft the Romans, have ilways relied on our bravery, and expe&ed *a
turn from it : For * we are the very flower of the Britons, and there-
fore fcated in them ofUnwWd part of the country, out of the fight of other
nations enflaveci by the enefoy 2 3d that our eyes are yet unpolluted and
free from the contagion of foreign tyranny. There is no country farther
on this fide of it, nor liberty on that: This corner which hath pre-
served us, hath hitherto been unknown to fame j now the remotcft
part of Britain lies open to them, and people think every tiling great
and magnificent that is ftrange and unknown. Beyond 11s there is no
country, nothing but waves and rocks 1 The land inward is all under
the Roman vaflalage already : It is in vain to curry favour with them by
addrefs or fubmiflion : Their pride and haughtmefs is not to be thus
laid, who r^nfack the univerfe, and when they have plundered all lands*
and want more, they fet fail and rummage the ocean, to find more.

Where the enemy is rich, there the prize is wealth) where poor*
it is ambition 2 Neither the Eaft nor the Weft have fufficed them : Thefe
and only thefe covet and gape after the wealth and poverty of the whole
world* with equal appetite and pleafure. Spoil, murder and pillage
pafs with them under the name of government 1 and where they make
folitude, there they think they have made peace* Children and rela-
tions are dear to every one, yet they prefs them ; They bereave us of
them, to make them flaves in foreign countries* Our wives and fitters*
if they efcape ravifliing in a violent hoftile manner, yet under the name
of guefts and friend(hip they are certainly debauched by them. Our
goods and fortunes become theirs by the name of tribute, and our com,
by that of provifion. Our bodies and hands are put by them to the
drudgeries of paving bogs and woods* with a thousand ftripes and indig-
nities to boot.

Thofe who are naturally bofn fkves, are but once fold, and then
maintained at the owners coils* But the ifle of Britain daily purchafes,
daily feeds and maintains its own bondage, at its own charge : And as
in a, private family* the laft comer is always the moft fcouted at -by his
felloWHfcrvantsj fo in this old bondage of the world, we who fhall

• By this it appears that Scotland was then inhabited by Britons.

Kk . ' be


a 5 o . MONA ANTIQUA R E ^T AU & A T A,

be the vileft flavcs in the univerfe, are now tc^be deftroyed if they can
do it ; For we have no. fields to cultivate, neither mines nor" havens, to
be employed in : And therefore to what purpofe fhould they let us live ;
befides, tlje courage and refolution of the conquered is never grateful
to the conqueror : And this diftance and privacy, itfelf, as it makes us
fafe, fo.it will make us the more fufpe6ted. ."

Thusieeing ws have nothing to rely upon* let us' put on. refolution,
as well thofe who tender their own iiafety,' as they who value honour
and glory. The Trinobantes, under the conduct of a woman, .extir-
pated one of the colonies* and forced their caftfes : Nay, if £uccejTs had
not flackejied their diligence, they mjght bay? entirely rid themfclves
of.tfie Roman yoke, .We are as yet whoje and untouched.? .^e were
born free; let us fhew them in the firft onfet the hravery' of the'jhen
they will meet on this fide- Caledonia. Do you imagine the courage of
the Romans in war, to be, every jot as .great as their debauchery in
peace f Their glory is. all owing to our diflertfions ; the faults of their
energies have been, made ufip of to raife the, reputation of their" army.
As nothing but fuccefs could have helcl that medley-army of theirs,
picked ont of fo many- nations, together ; fo they would foon diffblve
upon a mifcarriage, unlefs we can fuppofe that the Gauls andQermans,
_ nay,, to our.fhame be it fpoken, many of our own countrymen, will
, lend .them their lives to.eftablifli a- foreign power, whp have yejt' been
longer enemies than flaves to them, and go oh with a true. zeal^and af-
fection to.this quarrel,.. No* this js nothing but the effett of fear ?nd
terror,- which are no great motives of endearments; thefe removed,
their hatred will break out, as their fear goes caufeleCs. ;

We have all the motives that excite yidtony on " bur fide ; the R6-
mans have no wives to encourage them to (land to it; hq parents to up-
braid them* if they run away : They have either no country at all,
many of them, or at leaft not her?, to animate them : Their number
is fo fmallj that they, ftand in fear, gazing at the haven, the fea', the
woods, and every thing that is ftrange about them, that they feem pent
here and delivered to. our hands by Providence.

Let us not be daunted by the fhew they make, by the glare and
fhining of their gold and filver, which will neither defend them*, nor
hurt us. We (hall find thofe of our fide, in the very body of the enemy.
The Britons know very. well it is their own game and intere'ft ; :".The
Gauls are ftill mindful of their loft liberty ; and the Germans will d'e-
fcrt them, as the Ufipians but lately *Jid.

Befide


MPNA.ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. z$i

Befidc this, there is nothing can put a flop to us : The caftles. are
emptied : 'Tfhp colonies confiftrbtjt of old men ; and the cities are in dis-
content and faftions, while they unwillingly obey thofe that unjuftly
gqycrn thenj : Ye fee* tlje Raman general and army here before * you r
There are the tributes, mines, ^and all the plagues and punifliments that
attend llavery : It is to be tried by this dayV engagement, whether or
no we are to endure them from this moment for ever, or be immediately
rcvaeng&Loii'ithem : And therefore Qnce we are now to difpute this with
them,; let us thitik bbth on our anceftors and our pofterity.

> . , * . • . . * : i ■ : ■ . i \

.This is the fpeech of the valiant Galgacus — Gwallawcap Lluenawc in
the Briti&' r tongttfr— to his Caledonian army. And though the ele-
gthcesfanB rhetorical fiourlfties of it rrtay in a great meafure be owing
td the eloquent pen of the relator; yet the matter and fubftance (be-
ing peradvttnture taken up, byifome one who underftood both languages,
related to Agricola, and fo * to the hiftorian) might be the very fame
that was fpoken by that noble Briton,. But whatever fome may think
of .this fpdeelv that other incoihparable one of Car act ac us— Cariadoc
with us-T*befbre Claudius and' the whole fenate of Rome, can have no
fufpicion of being by the hiftorian put upon him. For what that noble
captive fpokc and delivered -then before that auguft affembly was fo
much taken notice of and admired, and made that impreffion on the'
peoples of Rome,' that lb is not to be fuppofed that any hiftorian,
within fo fhort a time as Tacitus wrote his hiftory after it, could con-
veniently fcignr it. » .

* Some Imagine, and indeed not unreasonably, that Tacitus was himfelf about- this time, *
vqUh blsfather-fp-Iaw,. J, Agricola, in Britain ; beingjtaduced to think fo, by the very minute and
lively defcription he, gives of many things, and the circumftances of them, therein a&ed ; particu-
larly from a paflage' m liis book of the Life of Agricola, cap. 24. where mentioning an Iriih prince,
who ^ ad. fled to Agricola for fuccours againft his rebellious fiibjefts that had expelled him ; Tacitus
thereupon immediately adds, S*pi tx to audi<vi t (i. e ) "he many times told me (being no doubt
aflifted by an interpreter, if he meant that Irifhman) howeafy it was for the Romans, with a few '
forces, to mafter all Ireland. SeePhilof. Tranf. Numb. 356. p. 783.

However, .it is, pretty plain that Agricola (if from him the hiftorian often heard it) took carerto
furnifti Tacitus with an exacT account of many particulars in that Britifti expedition, and not un- f
liklly gave torn ihertrpe pirport of this- Speech of Galgacui, fcr often relating infers fo much. ' »


Kk2 \ THE


25a MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA,

The SPEECH of CARACTACU-&

Wbenx Caractacus, with a great train of bis- countrymen and family,
was brought in chains before the emperor , he Jpate, Jays Tacitus * $ to
this purpofe, as be food before Cafar's tribunal.

IF the moderation of my mind in profpcrity had been anfwcrable to
my quality and fortune, I might have come a friend rather than a.
captive into this city ; and you without dishonour might have entered
into league with me, royally defcended* and then at the bead of many
nations. As my flate at prefent is difgraceful 5 fo yours is honourable
and glorious, I had horfes, men, arms; and riches ; why then ia it
ftrange I fhould be loath to part with; them ? .Butfince your power and
empire thud be univerfal, we of courfe among all others muft be fub-
jedh If I. had immediately yielded, neither my fortune nor your glory
had been fo eminent in' the world. My. grave would have buried the
memory of it, as well as me : Whereas if you fuffer me, to live now,
your clemency will live in, me for ever as. an example to after ages.

Now, what fo brief, and altogether fo full and tranfeendently fur-
prifing, as the words of this brave heroic perfon, probably fpoken in
his own British tongue, and interpreted: to the noble audience ? His
addrefs and: comportment, his ftrong fenfe and courage, what are they
but fo many advocates for our country's reputation, fo many witnefTes*
that fuch an accomplifhed and magnanimous foul was not bred up in
barbarifm and. ignorance? And that it muft be confefled, that the
fchool and difcipline which formed thofe- minds, and inftilled into them
thefe fright and. noble fejitiments, muft be furnifhed with a confidera-
. blc fliare of virtue and knowledge, which here could be no other than
that of the Druids.

Having produced thefe noble effedts of Druidical education in the ad-f
drefs and behaviour of the. perfqns they had brought up; I (hall here,
fubjoin a fmall fpecimen of their ethics, or the form the Bards made
ufe of in compofing and reciting to their pupils the documents of hu-
manity ; which they were obliged to learn by heart ; every third verfe
concluding with a moral maxim, after this manner.

• Annal. Lib. xii.

fBy


MONA ANT I QUA RE$TAURATA. zs$

+ By the three firft, they feem -f Marchwiail Bedw briglas,
to invocate their groves, and to A dynfy nbroed oWanas :
fct out the great, privileges of the Nac addef dy * rin i Was.
priefts of thofe groves or profeffed

Druids, in being made free by Marchwiail Derw mwynllwyn*
their profeffion from all reftraints A dyn Jy nbroed o Gadwyn :
and exa&ions, as C*far records Nac addef dy rin i Forwyn*
of them, De Bell. <3al. lib, 6,

Marchwiail Derw deiliar,
A dynjy nbroed o Garcbar.\
Nac addef dy rin i % Lavar.

•f* By the other three, they feem -f ty*y ^ynydd % Hydd e/cud p
to invocate the mountain Eyryri, Odidamdidawr o'r byd.
-as the Greeks did Parnafius, and* Rbybydd i drweb niweryd*
the Cretans mount Ida;, for Gil-
das exprefly tells us that they Eyry mynydd 9 fyfc yn rbyd,
worshipped mountains and rivera; Cyrcbyt Carw culgrwm cwm elude
and then concluded every triam* Hiraetb am Farw ni weryL
bick with a moral, dodrine ; and

out of fuch verfts as. thefe, I doubt Eyry mynydd, gwynt ae tawl t

not, all our Britifli adages were Llydan lloergan, glas tafaholz

collected*. Qdid dyndiried dihawl.

A&old.GornHhJBnglynof the fame fort, found by Mr. Lbwyd^

An lafar ktitb yw lafar gwir,
Bedd dorn rifer* dbon tafaz ri bfr $

Mez den beb dafaz a gollaz idir.

i

That thefe were fome of thofe very verfes by which the Druids ufed
to inftrud their fcholars, though from the purport of them one may
haye grounds to believe they were, I will not affirm* Yet we are fure
they are very ancient, as being collected by Lhowarcb Hin> a prince
bf Cumberland, who lived Anno 590, and amongft his Epicedia or
Englynion prefer ved to this day. That thefe I recited (though among
his wprks) were not his own, is evident by the language of them, be-
ing purely Venedotian or the North-Wales Britifh ; whereas his rhimes

• CjfrtMOcbp or a ferret f Djn SiaraJut, or a talkatiyc man, || Arcb*ol Brit. p. aj t ,.

1 are


a 5 4 MONA ANtlQJJA RE ST AU RATA.
arc in the Cumbrian or Pi&ifti, * dialed^ by us now fcarcely to
be underftood. And none can doubt but at that time many relics of
the Druidical learning, efpecially the moral part of it, were preferred-
either in books or memory. For though the Druids writ nothing, it
is probable the ancient Chriftians who fucceeded them did, and were
careful of preferving what was good and laudable. After this manner
we fuppofe they^ handled other fciences, which working wholly on the
memory, whereby they got the maxims, rules and canons of them by
heart, reafon on any emergence was foon enlightened by them, and
rendered the men great proficients in what they undertook, as authors
relate of them. As to what I fay here of thefe Druidical vcrfes, or at
lead very ancient ones in imitation of them, my late learned friend,
■f Mr. Edward Lbwyd of Oxford, was firmly of the fame opinion with
me therein; and has delivered it to the publick in the end of his Cor—
nifh Grammar, where the reader may find more of this particular.

This therefore being fo far confirmed by evidence a'rifing from^the
nature of the thing, and feconded by fome fpecial circumftances of fad,
I (hall not need here to repeat the feveral kinds and fpecies of krtow-'
ledge the .Bfkifh and Gaulifh Druids excelled in, and the many aufthcf* •
rities produced for them, which you have in the former Effay. But I
fhall rather conclude the reply to the Jail obje&ion^ with a fhort hint
of the ilate and progrefs of knowledge in the firft ages of the world i
gnd refolve the whole into a demonstration of. the feafiblenefs and* fa-'
cility of conveying down a great deal of that original ante-diluvian know-
ledge to this Druidical fedt or order of. men in thefe weftern parts -of
Europe ; which fhall be my laft Propofition.

• The Cumbrian and Stradclwyd Britons, by vicinity of place, having much communication
with the Pi&ifli nation, which for a long time had ruled in the Raft- parts of Scotland, might and
probably did borrow and incorporate a great many words of the Pi&ifli tongue with their own ; ,of
which words not a few might be interfperfed in the faid RpUtaia ; for Irim they -are not. And tho*
I am well aware that authors of good note have affirmed, that that nation and that, language have
been quite abolifhed and loft ; yet, I think, it cannot with any good reafon be made to appear,
that a language once flourirtring in a kingdom, as this did, without utter extirpation of the peo-
ple that ufcd it, can totally ceafe and peiilh, which I take to be naturally impofilblej languages
in one and the fame country, not ending, but degenerating and dwiadling into alterations and
variety of dialefte and ways of fpeaking. Neither is it unlikely that thefe noted lines found by Mr.
Lb<wyd on the margins of the Cambridge Jwewcus, by him mentioned, might be of the fame ft amp,
viz. another Specimen of the Pifto-Cumbrian Dialed. See Arcbaal Brit. p. zt r.

t The Reader is to understand, that a great part of this book was compofed before the death
of the faid Mr. LbwyJ, but this after ; which will reconcile what I fay of him when Jiving,, and .
what when dead ; and Dr. Gordon comes alfo under this remark, who was alive when I men-
tioned him.

Prop-


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA* 255

Proposition XI.

Ir is generally allowed that before the flood, what by original infu-
fion into Adam, Stronger temperament of body, more ferene and vi-
gorous faculties of foul, the unfpeakable advantages of many hundreds
of years perfonal experience, &c. knowledge in all the parts and cir-
cumftauees of it muft have arrived to a mod eminent degree of polituije
and perfection. And knowledge once fet up and digefted into pofi-
' tions .and theorems is eafily communicable to any age or people that
come after.

First, This is amply attcfted and improved into the force of a pro-
pofition, by many excellent authors, both ancient and modern ; that is,
that Adam was created with a very great perfedion of knowledge, and
a profound infight and penetration into the nature of things : Not only,
I fay, the moft learned of the Jews give great and ample teftimonies,
viz. Plafmavit Deus Adam (fay& the Paraphraft upon' the Samaritan
Pentateuch) replevitque eum cumfpiritu Sapient ite £? Scientia> ut inde ad
pojieros omnes Artes ac Scientia. tamquam ex primo fonte promanarent —
and in this ftrain they generally comment on Adam's creation ; but alfo
the text of Mofes feems to prove it, Gen. ii. 20. where Adam is brought
to give names to. things : Which names fo given, being adapted to the
peculiar properties and natures of the things named, it follows that he
mud have a previous infight and knowledge of the properties and af-
fedions of things to give them fucjh agreeable appellations and cha-
racters. v .

Seconply, There were many particulars of the fublimeft arcana of
nature difcovered in thofe early ages of the world ; which prove, either
that Adam was fupernaturally inftrudled in the fecret knowledge of
nature," and that the ideas he fo received were preferved by him and
communicated; or that fuch instrumental helps for the advancing the
reach of human perception, as nature could be capable of fupplying,
were not then wanting. For how, without either of thefe means, viz.
a tranfcendent natural or artificial perfe&ion of human faculties, could
the Pythagorean fyftem of the world, and therein the motion of the
earth be fo anciently eftabliShed ? Without this fuppofitfon, it is, I
. think, impoflible to account for the ancients' difcovering the medicinal
operations and properties of animals, vegetables and minerals — to give
a reafon for the establishing (if there be any truth and certainty in it)
of what we call judicial aftrology, which is known °.Ifo to have been

7 very


a$6 MONA ANTIQJJA RfeSTAURATA.

very ancient $ and fcvcral other ufeful arts and fciences, that feem to
owe their origin to either of thefe two mentioned principles ; viz. either
to Adam's fupcrnatural knowledge communicated, or to ante-diluvians'
more advanced and elevated, fcr inftrumentally afiifted faculties and per-
ceptions. To the former of which, viz. Adam's knowledge commu-
nicated, the moft diligent enquirer rnto the origin of arts and fciences,
viz. Athanafius Kircher, in his ^Egyptian Oedipus, refolves the point.
Plerorumque doStorum Jententia eft, primum ~bwnani generis parent em
Adafnum, infum t mdperfeSHone h Deo conditum, e& rerum, quam dtvinarum,
quhm bumanarum notitid excelluijfe, utjicuti nullus ex bumano genere cujus
princeps erat, & a puris bominibus h Deo majori perfe&ione conditus, it a
nullum quoque majoribus animi corporifque donis imbitum fuijfe credendum
ejl. Et tit infujd Jibi rerum omnium fcientid divinities inftrutlus fuijfe
legitur ; ita infignem quoque medicarum facultatum lapidibus, plant is, ani-
malibus, in/it arum notitiam babuijfe ccrtijjimum eji*, fapienti igitur Dei
conjilio fattum eji, ut Adamus Jcientiam rerum naturalium Jibi communis
catam, pofteris Juis traderet.

To Kircher our countryman Bale, in the tenth century of our Britifli
writers, fully aflents ; and delivers it as the fentiment of the generality
of authors on that point. Ex Adamo (faith he) tanquam exfonte omnes
jrtes bona Gf omnis fcientia bumana prvfluxit. Hie primus ccelejlium
corporum mot us, plantarum, animantium, & omnium creaturarum naturas,
rationem ecclejiajlica, politics? Q? oeconomica gubernationis primam pub-
licavit ; ex cujus fcbqld quicquid eji bumanarum artium & fapientia, in
tot urn genus bumanum, per patres eji pojiea propagdtum ; Jiquidem quid
AJtronomice, Geometria, & alia artes in Je continent, totum fcivit. I
could recite more inftances corroborating this particular; but this may
fuffice, fince it is a thing generally allowed and confented to.

But however this ancient profound and moft exquifite knowledge of
the nature of things was firft tlifcovered j we may be fure it quickly
improved itfelf by the fore-mentioned advantages of the long lives,
llrong intelle&s, and vigorous conftitutions of the ante-diluvian patri-
archs, into various fchemes and fyftems of fciences ; divine and human,
natural and moral, and into innumerable mechanic arts and inventions,
ferving the neceflity, profit and pleafure of human life j and that alfb
in the way and manner of communicating this knowledge, the choiceft
fecrets and arcana of it, both divine and natural, were carefully locked
up from vulgar fight in a religious Cabala, and by it orally communi-
cated from one perfon to another. As for example; from Adam to

Seth,


MONA ANTIQJLJA RESTAURATA. 257

Seth, from Seth to Enoch, from Enoch to Methufelah, from Me-
thufelah to Noah, and fo to the poft-diluvian world ; whereof we have
the univerfal corifent of ancients and moderns avouching it to 1 us. So
that if Adam had ever a true knowledge and cottiprehenfion of the
occult nature, compofition, frame, texture and fyftems of things s
of their principles and operations, of their motions and habitudes,
and other fpecifical afFe&ions, upon which all arts and fciences were
grounded — all which, either by infufion or external communication
he might well have— it is thence eafily demonftrable, that at length a
great part of that knowledge might come to, and be poflefled by fome
of the Goryphaloi our weftern Celta ; and might fome time after, come
alfo by their means to kindle and difFufe itfelf into the oral 'theorems
and placits of the fore-mentioned Britifti Druids.

For to make this more eafily conceivable, let us fuppofe (whick
is in itfelf very fuppofable) that but bnfe man, having taken into his
bread a found draught of Cabaliftical knowledge, and having credit
enough to back his affirmations, is fufficiently able to fet up a general
learning in any nation, where the genius and temper of people are 'not
very morofe and ftupid -, and let us withal remember, that though we
date and fix the original of Druidifm about the time of Abraham, tho*
in all likelihood it exifted fooner ; yet we are Aire that Shem was then
alive, who might fee, converfe with, and Ifave his knowledge from
Methufelah, who alfo might fee, converfe with, and have his knowledge
from Adam ; in whom, as we have now fuppofed, the knowledge of
God and nature, in all the branches of it, eminently, flourifhed.

And it is very plain and undeniable by the Mofaic accounts, that
Adam lived to the. time of Methufelah, and Methufelah to the time
of Shem, who lived five hundred years after the Univerfal Deluge ;
within the limits of which time, we have grounds to conclude that
the ifle of Britain was confiderably peopled, and the Druidical prin-
ciples formed and eftabliftied in it. So that we may ceafe to wonder
at the finding fo many rich veins of ancient knowledge laid open and
difcovered fo early in the Celtic nation 1 which yet by this manner of
demonftrating, appears to have been, in the ordinary way of informa-
tion, but three or four removes at fartheft from Adam's great univerfal
knowledge; And therefore where Greek and Roman authors afcribe
to thefe Druids, or our ancient weftern philofophers, eminent fkill in
aflronomy, phyfiology, medicine/ magic, morality, and other parts of
choicer learning, together \Vith' fome other umbrages of revealed know-

Ll ledge,


258 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.
ledge, as the prae-exiftence and immortality of human fouls, eternal
beatitudes, the propitiation of facrifices, and other documents tranfeend-
ing the reach of metr human fagacity ; we mrty this way wind them
up to their firft bottom, and give the world a fatisfadtion in that par-
ticular, which no arguments taken from remotenefs of place, vulgar
ignorance, want of letters, and the like pretences can at all (hock, or
be of force to impair the grounds and evidence of it.

To conclude ; this is what led me to, and what I offer in defence
of, my conjeftures in this matter. I would obtrude and impofe no-
thing. Others may think as they will ; and where they guefs righter,
they have my ready aflent. Only in what I have done, my wifh is,
that arguments, without prejudice to perfons or parties, may be fairly
weighed and confidered : And if truth, or any obfeure features of it,
appear in any of thofe I have here laid down, that they may be looked
upon and treated as they deferve, though the hand be ever fo rude and
unikilful that brings them into view, and fubmits them to the judg-
ment of the candid and impartial «


APPENDIX


A N


APPENDIX;


CONTAINING A


COMPARATIVE TABLE


O F


LANGUAGES:


W I T K


SOME LETTERS ADDED.


J


A


* \
■ w


A


kJ


f r


:> ^


? ■» / <r


,'t


T A B L E


RELATING TO THE


Sixth Sedbn of the Firft Eflay.


•\" '*• SHEWING,

^hc Affinity and near Refemblance, both in Sound and Sig*
unification, of many Words of the Antient Languages of

''v&irope- with the Original Hebrew Tongue •> which, it is.
1 prefumed, they retained as Relics of it, after the Confufioa
* x ii Babel > with fome Remarks upon it.


I^O k the better underftatiding of the parallels of this follow-
1 ing Table, it is to be obferved* that letters of one and the-
fame organ arp .of common ufe in the pronunciation of wordfr
of different languages— as for example, M, B 9 V, F, P, are labials *
T, D% $% are dentals:. G, Ch 9 H, K, C, are gutturals — and there-
fore if the iJebrew word or found begins with, or is made of, any
one of the labial?, any of the refl of the fame organ will anfwer it in
the derivative languages* The fame is to.be obfcrved in ufing the
dental and the guttural letters. For in tracing out the origin of words,.
we are more to regard the found of them than their literal form and
compofition ; whersin we find words very often, by the humours and
fancy of people, tranfpofed and altered from their native founds, and
yet io their fignification they very well fit their original patterns. I
4 (hall


262 M'ONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

(hall only exemplify in the letters M, B, and F, which are of one or-
gan, that is, are formed by one inftrument, the Yip; and therefore
are promifcuoufly ufed the one for the other in pronouncing words of
-o$c language in another. The Hebrew B is generally pronounced as
a ^confonant. And the Irifh aifo, moft commonly .in the middle of
a word, pronounce M as a*V '; as we find the antient Britons to have
made ufe of V 9 or rather <F, which they pronounce as V> for M and B
in many Latin words ; -is;


Latin,


, iBlUTlStl. j


Latin. ,


British,


Animal -*


— • Anifail \ Numerus


Nifer


fTurma


Tyrfa ' Columna


' Cotofn


Terminus


Ter/yn


Gemelli


Gefeili


Calamus


Calaf


Romp


Rbufain


Primus


. - Prif


Scribo


r&crifenu


Amnis


A/on ■


Liber - •


Ltfr


Arma


Arfau


Remus —


Mwyf


Firmus


FJrf


Do mo


- - Dojl


Monutnentutii


Monfent


RebeUo *-


Rbtftla


Firmamentum


Ffurfafen


JPluma


Jf/uf


Lamentor


Llefain


Catamanus ~.


Caifan


Elementum


Elf en


Dime t a


- '*>Xf*


Memorare


Myfyrio


Lima


Ltf


Hyems y .-


Gafiaf


Lamina ,- ■


-» . Lkftty &c.


Glapnare,


Llafaru


Wc are not to wonder at this analogy of founds in the primitive"
diftinftion of languages. For before the ufe of writing, which has
cftabjilhed the correct form of words, people were only guided by the
ear in taking. the found of words, and they pronounced and uttered
them again as the organs of their ;Voice were beft fitted for it %
and it happening that the aptitude and difpofition of thofe organs,
peculiar to fome people and countries, werp various (as we find to
this day fome nations .cannot fhape their voice to expreii all the
Jounds of anoth?r!s tongue), .it ^accordingly affe&ed and inclined
ibme parties of people to /peak the fame confonants harder or fofter,
to utter the fame vowels broader or narrower, longer or fhorter, as
they found themfelves beft difpofed to do. And thereupon cuftom

prevailing


MONA ANTIQJJA RfcSTAURATA. <l6$

prevailing with particular fets of people to continue the ufe of
fuch different pronunciation as they affedled, the words Co varied
came at length. to take on them different forms, and to be efteemed
and taken as parts of different languages, though in their origin they
were one and the fame *.

• lib commonly obferved, that different climates, airs and aliment?, do very much diversify
the tone of the parts and mufcles of human bodies ; on fame of which the modulation of the
voice much depends. The peculiar motfture of one country, the drought of another (other caufes
ffQin food, &c. concurring) extend or contract, {Well or attenuate, the organs of the voice, that
the found made thereby is rendered either ihrill or hoarfe, (oft or hard, plain or lifping, in pro-
portion to that contraction, or extenfion. And hence it is, that the Chinefe and Tartars have
fome founds in their language, that Europeans can fcarce imitate : And it is well known in Eu-
rope itfelf, that an Enghfhman is not able agreeably to converfe with a ftranger, even in one and
Ac fame Latin ; nay, even in England, it is noted by Mr. Camden and Dr. Fuller, that the na-
tives of Carlit*n-C*rl*w in Leiceflerfhire, by a certain peculiarity of the place, have the turn of
their voice very different from thofe of the neighbouring villages.


A U A C H


»6 4 - MONA ANTIQJ7A RE8TAURATA.


HEBREW.

AUACH
Even
Again or Leagam
Ivah
Auor
Ano
' Achei
Aedenei
Calal
Domcn
Gehel
Sal
Kadal
Aggan
Alaph
Batna
Hag

Hadar

Hia
Goph

.Deraich

Dad

Ager

Elah

Angil

Daplh

Hen

Phar

Harabon

Phalat

Pathah

Gab

Dur

Lailh

Deka

liphach

Path

Denafi

Hiflah

Cala
Cld


DERIVATIVES.


Awch

Maen .

Lagam

Deis— yfii

Awyr

Yno

Acbau

Gwadnau

Cyllell

Tomen

Sil

Gadael
Angeion
'Alph.
Ramos
*Agios
c Cadair
JKatha
Yhi
Corph
c Braich
I Raich
Diden
Aegero
-Illi, ills
Axilla
Daps

En ! ecce !
Pher*
Arrhabon
Phulacr«,
Peithfii
Gibbus
Duro
Lis
Dek*
Ophis
Deddf
Dyna
c Ys taw

Claf
Ck-j


Brit.

Corn.
Br.


Irijb

Br.

Lat.


Greek


Br.


Irijb


ENGLISH.

The edge or point of a (Word, & c .
A (tone

A pool or (landing water, a lake

To defire

Lightned air

Then, in that place, or at that time'

Brethren, or kindred

The foles of the feet

To wound or pierce

Muck or dung.

Coal

Vile or of no account

To forfake or defift from

A veflel or earthen pot

To find r

An altar

Holy

Honour or reverence

She, or any thing feminine
A body

An arm

The dug, breaft, or udder

To heap together

They, mafc. fcf f em .

The arm-pit

Cheer or dainties

Lo! behold!

To bear or carry

A pawn or pledge

To keep or defend

To perfuade

Bent or crooked

To remain and endure

A lion

To bite

A Terpen t

A-lavv

This, or that, or there it is

Be filent

To be lick

Jewels and ornaments

Devar


MONA ANTIQUA R E.STA 17 R AT A. . «5$


Hebrew;


Derivatives.


English*


Dcvar


Deveirim


Irijb.


To fpeak


Ein


Ynys
rAman


Br.
Armor.


Ifland-


Hatna


< Ymenyn
Urn


Br.
Jrijh


Butter


Ivo


Nava


-_


His enemy


Beala


Mealam


—


To be watted, or eonfumed


Vock


f Vacuus
cGwac


Lot.
Br.


Empty


Aita


Ydyw


_


Is, or are


Bar


Bar


Irijb


Son


i


Bareh


Bara


Br.


Meat, or victuals


Beram


Verfim


Lot.


But, neverthelcfs


Beth


Bwth


Br.


A houfe, or cottage


Sc


She -


Irijb


He or him


Gaha


Iachau


Br.


To heal, or cure


Gad


ad


— .


An army


Botcn •


Potten


—


The belly


-


Gever


Gwr


—


A man


Hada


"Ed*


Grtek


> To chetifli and make much gf


Boa


Ba«


.. . ,,


To come


Aniah


Ania


■■ , ,


Sadneis


Charath


CharatU


To infculp or engrave


Maas


Mife*


■ ■


I hate


Semain


Semain*


—


I fhew and demonftrate


Aaz


'Aix


- ■ ■■


A goat


Aleth


Alaeth


Br.


A curie, Or misfortune


Elil


Ellylly


—


Idol, or hobgoblin


Allun


Llwyn


—


A grove of oaks


Amunath


Amynedd


*—


Conftancy, or patience


Ap


Wep


—


Face, or countenance


Itho


Idda


_


With him ■ ;•


Atun


Odya


_


A furnace, or a kiln :> . 4 . '


Atha


Aeth -


_


Went, or came \


lithe


Yffu


•_


To burn ,


Emaeth


Ymaith


mmmm


From him


Barach


Parch


_


To efteem, or blefs


Gobah


Coppa
Cetn


—


The top or fummit of a thiHgl %


Geveh


. —


A ridge, or back


Gedad


Gwiwdod


Excellency .!;..: : I


Gataph


Cau


•


To (hut, or inclofe


Evil-


■


■ ■■


Evil >


Beafch


■ '


,


Bafe r ' . .


Babel


■ ■


■


To babble :


Baroth


•


—


Broth »


Gaah


• ' '


— — .


Gay


t •


Dum


9 ■


■


.Dumb... .


;!.V.:..:...li


Mm


Dufch


-


A


a66 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.
Hebrew. | Derivatives. English.


Dufch

.Hebifch

Hua

Haras

Chittah

Mcfurah

Sahap

Charach

Saar

Aanna

Phaser

Phcret

Phaerek

Erctz

Sad

Spor

Kinneh

Kera

Shekel

Rechus

Krc

Pafa

Halal

Catat

Ragez ,

Ragal

Maguur

Madhevi

Doroth

Dal
Havah
Mahalac
Hilo

Tor

Siu
Acljata*

Machaneh

Chorau
Chorefli

Nodah

Jadha
Hathorath


• Magwyr •
Myddfai

Toreth

Tal
Y<b

Mafc
£failo
fT&ar

ITcrfyn

Syw

Athles

iMachno
*nd
ftfechain
Crau
Cors
Nbdi •
cAdctef
rOida J
Athraiwiaeih


Irijb
Br.


Grttk
Br.


To dafli, or tread under feet

To abaft

He, mafc. gend. +

Tohar*fs,ordeftroy

Wheat

A meafure

Tofwcep

To write

Aftiower

To annoy

Fair

A part, or portion

Fierce

Earth .

Side

A fparrow

A cane

Tociy

Skill

Riches

A crow ,

Topafs 1

A hole

To cut

To rage

To rail, or ddtrad

Habitation, or a walled dwelling

Diftempefs aad difcafes

Generations, «encreafe, or the fruits

of the womb
Tall and high
Was, or has been
A pathway, or a balk to tread on
Shining. Jpotto> Sol

A boundary, or limit

Refpleodent

Defence, or prote&ion

Places «rf defence of old xn tke

eooftty of Montgomery* Pen-

machno
Holes, fach as the needle-eye
A place 4t*H of fmall wood or reeds
To -make known, or note

To know, or acknowledge

Difcipfinc

JcK


Hbbrbwv

Jch

Jared

Cha

Jain

Toledouth

Lus

Caolath

Hounil

Jefter

Jadadh

Cafodoth

Cis

Bar

Shcvah

Dakar

Hinnek

Shelct

Hcvcr

Shibbar

Jiled

Choebcl

Parak

Gannaf

Coll

Hannah

Eth

San

Nabal

Mot

Bath

Eden

Kolah

Sas

Phac

Skopac

Jounce

Hamohad

Parad

Keren

Kefel

Me-Ab -

Luung

Temutha


Derivatives.


fifch
Iwarttf
Ckml
G«rlft

Tylwydi
Ltofcr :
Coifed
YmiU
Yftyr
Gwahodd
Cyfoeth
Oft
Star
IBat*


\


J&r.


English,

Yoftf*;w yquf own

Defccndp4

You _

Wine

Generations or families

Togo away &t avoid

A loisr

Gain x .

Conildejfttian

To invito

Honours, of health

Acheft


&bf


hat
Br.


JEtos
liEtas

Ccena

Nebulo

Motus

Batos

Edone

Klei«

Ses

Phake

Scop*

Jevangc

Ammod

Pared

Cora

Cefail

Mab

Llyngcu

Difetfaa


Greek


Br.


- n


Bread-corn

Seven .

A dagger -

To hang

A ftiieW

Over, or gbove

To fluver, or quake

A # chitt

A cable

To break

A knave, or a thief *

All.

To annoy, or hurt

A year, or age

A fupper

A churl

Motion

A thorn

Pleafure

To prqife

A moth

Lentil

To fpeculate

A fuckling

Covenant, or appointment

A partition, or reparation

A horn

The arm-pit

Son, or from a father

To fwaUoWj or devour

Deftru&ion


JiU Tit*, thou art my foa, Pfel. » f 7.
M m 2


Ceremluach


*6< M 6 N A Atf T I QJJ A


Hebrew


- Derivative


S. .:.


Ceremluach


Citomleth' - r


Br.


Hamulp


Ami


_


Mah?


Mae?


—


Magal


Maglu


_


Makel


Magi


—


Mcria


Mer


_


Mout


Mudo


_


Mcth


Methu


_


Mar


Maer


_


Marad


Brad


_


Nafc


Nef


_


Taphilu


Taflu


—


Hancs


Hanes


—


Nevath


Neuadd


w


Jiffal


Ifel or Ifelu


—


Naoaph


Nwyf


—


Nadu


Nadu


—


Scthar


Sathru


_


Hcbcr


Aber


_


Nuccha


Nychu


—


Nuu


Nhwy
Nodded


...


Naodhad


—


Gadah


Gadaw


—


Niucd


Niweid


—


Goloth


Golwyth


—


Mohal


Moel


_


Galas


Glwys


—


Hafcm


Afen


_


Garevath


Gwarth


—


Taphug


Diffyg


—


Phorcth


Ffrwyth


—


Pach


Bach


_


Pinnouth


Pennaeth


— .


Phinnah


Ffynnu


—


Path


Peth


_


Philegefh


Ffiloges


—


Caton


Cwttyn


_


Cir


Caer


—


Keith


Rhfth


• —


Tireneh


Trin


—


Ragah
Ralah


Rhwygo


*—


Ras and Rhad


—


Semen


Saim


—


Saraph


Sarph
Sach


—


Sac 1


—


• MtreJutb is the fame \


with MaraJ, zBritiih


name.


ancient tongues.


RESTAUR A TA.

English.-

A facrificing ftone

Plenty, or ftofe

What? where? how?

To betray

Affcff

Fat, or marrotv

To remove

To die, or fail

A lord

• Rebellion

Joyful

To caft, or throw

To fignify, or account

Habitation, or hall

To throw down

Incontinency, or lufl:

They moan and lament

To throw under feet

A ford, or paflagc

Being fmittcn or affli&ed

They, or thofe

To efcape and take refuge

To pals by

To fpoil

Burnt-offerings

Top of a hill

Pleafant

A rib, or bone

Shame

Want, or defeft

Fruit or effeft

A crooked ftick

Chief, or uppermoft

To profper

A part or portion

A concubine

Short and little

A walled town

Appearance

To feed and look after

To tear, or rend

Grace, or good will

Fatj or oil

A lerpent

A f. lack

f It has this found in moft of the

Phuk


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 269
Hebrew. Derivatives. I English.


Phuk

Phseraek

Pinnah

Pigger*

Naca

Ad

Nut

Darag

Bala

Hannak

Naar

Agab

Pacha

Parafli

Kol

Maflial

Shareka

Bckarim

Ahel

Carpas

MQi

Gibar

Parah

Ki

Olam

Golem

Atnam

Coaphar

Cala

Sarch

Goliath

Pathchen

Burgad

Tcrag

Dafgar

Shiovang

Anas

Tarn

Phcrch

Tetuva

Leatnor

Cafas

Cark

Kam

Caffa


cFfig
c Fucus


Br.
Lat.


Difguife,*/ii Deceit


Ferocia


Fiercenefs


Pinna


-


Battlement


Piger fuit


_


Lazy, and untoward


Neco


_


To flay


Ad


r


Unto


Nuto


_


To nod, or beckon unto


Trech*


Creek


To run to, or come at


Palai


.■ ■ -


Some time ago


5 , Agch«
}Tagu


Br.


To ftrangle


Nearos


Greek


New or htely r nearotical


*Agapa«


■


To love, or to be much affetfed


Pcge


A fountain


Phraf«


■


To declare


Kale^Cr. Galw,5r.


To call


Bafileu*


Creek


To reign


Syrinx


A fyringe


Pccora


Lat.


Cattle


Aula


-


A hall


Carbafus


— —


Fine linen or lawn


<fl5ftus,£*/.Tes,J?r.


Heat, or hot weather


Gubcrno


Lat.


To govern

To look green and flourifhing


Vireo


—


Quia

Oilm


^—


Wherefore, or becaufe


__


Of old


Glomus


._


A clew of thread


Ymam


_


Mother


Gwobr


....


Reward, or fatisfa&ion


Caula


Lat.


A fheep-fold
Luftful


Serch


Br.


Glwth


—


A bed, or bed-chamber


Puttain


_


A whore -


Bwrgais


—


A burgefs


Drwg


— -


Bad or evil


Dyfgl


—


Adifh


Siongc


—


Honourable, well to pafif


Annos


i


To inftigate, or incite


Dim


_


Nothing


Yfcrch


—


A tender branch, a daughter


Edifar


— —


Penitent,


Ar lafar


- —


Saying


Ccifio


— —


To fearch or feek


Carchar


—


To bind,, or imprifon


Cammu


_


To bend,, or make crooked


Cyff


mmm .


A beam, or a joift

Cevel


a 7 o MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.
Hebrew. | Derivatives. \ English.


Ccvcl

Dumga

Tor and Sor

Turna

Manos

Malas

Paiac

Banc

Malal

Marak

Cadif

Tohum

Cclar

Corontha

Berck

Bagad

Arach

Nagalh

Ciliah

Gevr

Kcc

Kun

Natfar

Finnah

Mahalal

Hedel

Halal

Gavel

Lalhadd

Gerem

Mafac

Gana

Celimmah

Nctz

Ptfel

Shufhan

Shecan

Kalal

Taffi

Tfelem

Hobcri

Aen-adon


Ar gyfyl Br.

Dam meg —

Tarw —

Tcyrn —

Mynydd —

Mclys —

Plygu —

Maine —

Malu —

Marc —

Gwadu —

Dyfn —

Coler —

Coron * —

Breg _

Bagad —

Arogli —

Yn agos —

Ceilliau « —

Cawr —

Ceg —

Cwyno —

Dinyftr —

Pinagl —
Mawl or Moli —

Hocdl —

Haul _

Gafael —

Glafaidd —
Gryra, grymmus —

Cym-myfcu —

Canu —


Calumnia

"Nifus

Pfile*

Soufon

Scent* ,

Gwael

Diffoddi

Delw

Obry

Anudon


Ijjtt.
Greek


Br.


Near, or in prefence of

A Gmile, or a proverb

A bull

A prince, or potentate

A mountain

Sweet, or to fweeten

To fold, or lap up

A bench

To grind

A note or character

To tell a lie, or deny

Depth

A neck-band

A crown, or diadem

A breach, or fciflure

A great many

To fmcll

To approach, or draw nigh

Stones or tefticles

A giant

A mouth, or throat

To lament

Deftru&ion, or ruin

A top of a thing, or pinnacle

To praife, or glorify

Life, age

Sun, or to fhine

Tenure, or lands bounded

Blueifh

Bony or ftrong

To mingle

To fing

Reproach and calumny

Endeavour . •

To make bare, or uncover

Lilly

To dwell in tabernacles

Vile, or of no account

To extinguish

Men over againft,ormenontheother
Difclaiming God, or perjury


The Colleaion of many of the Hebrew-Britifh words in this Table
I owe to the induftiy of Mr. Ch. Edwards, author of The Brief
Hiftory of the Chriftian Religion/ published in the Welfh tongue*

REMARKS


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. n %


REMARKS on this TABLE.


THE great analogy and unaffe&ed refemblance between the primir
tive and derivative words in this catalogue (abating the different
ways of pronouncing in different languages) is a plain and ample evi-
dence, that the feveral wards of the languages therein mentioned owe
their origin to, and derivation from, the firft and moft ancient language
of mankind, generally called the Hebrew tongue. And our Britifh,
even in the ftate it is at prefent (for I meddle not with any, or very
few of its old obfolete words)- having more founds ia it, agreeing with
that primitive tongue, than all the reft put together, is alfo an argu-
ment that this Britifh tongue was in its firft ftructure and origin one of
the primary ifTues of it; and that if we give way to criticifm and ety-
mology, it rnuft be from that original language that we are to derive and
account for many words and names in our Britifh tongue, which other-
wife would be unaccountable.

But now to be more perfe&Iy fatisfied what this original Hebrew
tongue was * and whether we brought what we had and have dill of
it here, "with our fifft planters and others of the fame flock and lan-
guage with tfaem, from Babel ; or had it afterward tranfportcd here
from Phoenicia by the tin-traders, which feems to be the opinion of
fome of late, but fo ill-grounded that I take it not worth confuting ; I
{hall beg the reader's leave to remark and examine a little further than
I have done before into thofe points of difficulty that appear in the two
former particulars, viz. what this original Hebrew tongue was,, and
whether we brought what we have ftill of it 6ere, with our firft planters
and others of the fame ftock and language with them, from Babel. *

In order to which I (hall here lay down thefe three Propofitions,
from which I fhall endeavour to draw fuch corollaries as (hall be of force
to infers Conclufion that I hope will evince the truth, of the matter be-
fore us.

First, That there was one, and but one language in the "world*
from the time of Adam to the building of Babel.

Secondly, That at the building of the tower of Babel, there hap-
pened among thofe who were concerned in that daring wicked attempt
a ceffation, for fome time at leaft, and confufion of that language.

i Thirdly*


272 MONA ANT I QUA* RESTAUR AT A.

Thirdly, That upon the extraordinary ceflation or confufion of
the firft language, the men who were engaged in that grand overture,
were fain to remove their quarters and K> diiperfe themfelves in fepa-
rate families to plant and inhabit the face of the earth., And in that
removal and difperfion, every feparate tribe or family, retaining in a
•due tenor their faculties of under/landing, and the organical difpofition
of their voice j and by what they could rccolledt and recover of their
diflipated ancient language, were neccflitated to improve that little ftock
of words fo recovered, and where they found themfelves at a lofs, to
frame new ones into a way or mode of fpeaking, different from the
improvements, forms and ways of fpeaking at the fame time made ufe
of in other families ; which in the different prognefs of thofe improve-
ments came at length to be what we call different languages.

Proposition I.

The Firft Proportion, That there was but one language. from the

time of Adam or the beginning of the world to the difperfion at Babel,

-at leaft from the Univerfal Deluge to that time, is readily granted by

all who acknowledge the authority of the facred fcriptures ; for it js

there exprefly affirmed, that then, viz. before that difperfion, the whole

earth wag Unius Labii, of one language and of one fpeech, Gen. xi. 1.

Now from this general Propofition, three queftions will naturally
arifc. Firft, Whether it was one language that was fpoken by men from
the creation to the time of that difperfion ? Secondly, What that lan-
guage was ? and, Thirdly, At what time the confufion of that language
.happened — and if Noah was then alive ?

First* As to the famenefs and identity of that language from Adam
to the deluge (for thence to the difperfion no one queftions it) the ac-
count that Mofes gives in the place referred to, is not exprefs, I own,
further than the words — whole tar.tk — will bear it ; which yet one would
think v/ould be to little purpofe for him to have faid (the whole ge-
neration of men being then, viz. at the.difperfion but one family under
one Pater-Familias, that is, Noah, and who cannot be prefumed to
have more than one language among them) if the facred penman had
one thereby meant all the preceding generations thence to the creation.

And this meaning of his, J hope, will appear to be very reafonable,
when we confider this matter a little further, and take in thefe follow-
ing particulars. Firft, The nature of that language. Secondly, The
.condition of the men jthat propagated apd made ufe of it. And,

Thirdly,


M&WA; AWV1QJS A H13TAUHATA. t 7i

Thirdly, The remains, as to names and things, which we have in
fcripture of it.

First, The nature of that firft language we are to examine two
'ways. Firft, In relation to God. Secondly, To man. In relation to
God, we are to believe that God ma4e nothing imperfect j and having
created man in his own likenefs, hte not only gave him powers and fa-
culties foitahle to his intended felicity on earth, but fuch a perfedion
of them as hie nature was capable of* Now lhall we think that God
created Adam with that perfection of faculties his nature was capable
of, and his focial happirxefs required, and yet left him, like a child
new-born, dumb and without fpeech ? It is not to be imagined. The
firft a& we fipd of him is fpeaking ; and fpeaking too in fuch perfedion*
that he could readily give names fuitable to the natures and properties
of thofe his feliow-creaturcs, which were brought unto him % which
is a plain argument, that God gave him adtaal fpeech with his other per-
fediona. And if this fpeech of Adam was of God's own making, and
infnftd into him with his other perfections^ I (hall make no fcruple to
affirm the perfedion of it to hav£ been (6 great, that no alteration at
that time could, or perhaps durft be made in it.

Next, in relation to man; we have feed that .Adam Was created in
-fuch perfedion in the faculties of his find and in the organs of his body*
ithat as that part of his happinefs which confided in his dominion over
ins fellowrcreaturcs required the immediate ufe of the ibrmer, fo his
neceflary converfe with thofe of his own fpecies, as we find it adually
did, as immediately required the pradice of the latter. By this it will
appear, that Adam's language being one of his created perfections^ we
cannot but reckon it to have been fb accomplished, even to grammati-
cal niceties, that there r was no need to change or alter it, 'till God
was pleafcd, in as extraordinary a way as it was infufed* to put a pe-
riod to it.

But to what has been above faid, I muft needs add thefe obferv^-
fionsv Firft, That taking- the firft chapter of Genefis in the literal
ienfe> ( it will fccm fufikiently plain from thence, that God hirnfclf was the
fifftaushariofianguage j for we find God ufing there a (theme of words
(wfiich is language) to e*prefs the ideas of the divine mind, in the
works of the creation, before Adam had a being; and foon after we
find the Serpent alfo, to our forrow, too /kilful in it, who furely learned
it not of Adam. Secondly, In that which we may call the language of
God, as to the quality and vfip of it, we may obfetve him to make ufe

Nn of


274 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.
of general terms to cxprefs abftradt ideas, together with what they caff
mixed modes and nominal efTcnccs, even before Adam ■ was created,
which yet * fome would fain make to be the meer creatures of human
underftanding; which, flridtly taken, cannot be true, Gnce God ufed them
before man was created. Thirdly, We may obferve that it will hence
follow, that Adam learned this language of God, or wliat is the fame
thing, was infpired with it at the inftant of his creation, or at leaft
with a general idea of it and the way of ufing it. Fourthly, Obferving
how the perfection of language con fi ft a chiefly in applying constantly and
invariably the fame words to the fame ideas, as bcft ferving the real
ends of truth and knowledge, we may hence conclude, that. Adam, as
prince of mankind, had authority enough toeftabliih the precifc figni-
fication of words, and to command the ftridt obfervance of that rule of
fpeaking to aH his pofterity ; which mud needs preferve the language
he tr^nfmitted to them entire and unaltered, till it met with that fatal
change and confufion at Babel. Fifthly and Laftly, We may obferve,
that it is no more difficult to conceive how Adam was infpired with that
one language, which Imay call facred, becaufe coming from God, than
it is that the apoftles were enabled, in an inftant. to fpeak fo effectually
in ftrange ones, whereof they knew not before perhaps one fyllablc, . till
their minds were divinely warmed and fafhioned in a furprifing mant-
ner to the ufe and practice of them. In Ihort, as God accommodated
thefe holy men With ready fignificaht words to exprefs their. thoughts,
as occafion required, in untaught languages; fo it is as probable that
Adam was fupernaturally affifted by the like divine energy to form new
words, and give them their fteady peculiar fignifications^ as he grew
more acquainted with things, and as a greater variety of ohjedts in the
courfe of his life- made themfelws. prefent to his understanding ;. for .the
holy fc rip hire is pofitive for the one, though filent in the other.

Secondly, If we confider the condition of the men that propagated
and made ufe of this firft language, we find them of very long, lives ;.
and though they might encreafe to a vaft number on the face of the
earth, yet, were there no other rcafon fer.it, men living fo long, that
three or four ages made up the whole interval or ipace of time from
the creation to the confufion of this original: tongue, may be weJl pre-
fumed to have prefexved it entire,, and. to have (ecured.it from any cor-
ruption or failure.

• Lock's Eflajv Book III. Chap. 4,. jj and 6,.

Thlrjuy*


IT047& ANtiQUA RfefitAURATA. i 7 $

. : Thikdly,: The words and names of that ante-diluvian language,
what remain of them upon rec6fd, (hew that from the time of Adam
it was one and the fame language with that which was broken and dif-
lipated at Babel : of which having * before given fome account, I fhall
bow on this head forbear to fay any thing further.

The fecond queftion arifing' from the firft proposition is, What that
firft language was, which I have endeavoured to prove was preferved
entire, until it came to be confounded and diverfified at Babel ? The
critics upon this queftion are fufficiently divided in their opinions.
Grotius, and fome other authors, have pretended that this firft language
was. quite loft in the confufion ; and would fain make it out, that
Mofes had changed the ancient names, the etymology of which is fet
down in Hebrew ones, in his book of Genefis. But the grounds thefe
gentlemen go upon, have fo very little foundation in hiftory or cri-
ticifm, that they deferve not to be infifted upon.

The Jews affirm their own language, the Hebrew, to have been
the firft tongue in the world, and are not wanting in giving good
rca/bns for it.- The Syrians give this prerogative to the Chaldee or
Syriac tongue ; ahd they pretend to prove it, becaufe their tongue
feems not only to be the molt natural of all tongues, but alfo becaufe
Abraham, the father of the Jews, was a Chaldean ; and that Laban
in Genefis fpake Chaldee or Syriac On the other hand, the Arabians
pretend the Arabic was before all other languages ; and the Cophthes,
the -/Ethiopians* and the Armenians difputc for their languages. Nay,
Gpropius Becaaus would have it to be the Almain or Dutch ; becaufe
he found tbe •etymology of fome fcripture names and words account-
able for in his language. So uncertain it is in hiftory, which language,
after the confufion, it was, that was one and the fame with the ante-
diluvian tongue.

It is indeed the general opinion that the houfe and family of Heber,
being not joined m the curfed attempt at Babel, efcaped the ma-
lediction, and preferved their language $ and that from his name, to
diftinguifti.it from others that were then every where ftarting up out of
the ruins of the old one, the tongue he ufed was tailed Hebrew, But
whether his language efcaped fo free from the taint of that confufion,
-as to have preferved ltfelf entire, arid to have fufFered nothing by it, is
very hard to determine.

* 6ee fccond Effay, Propofition 2.

Nn2 There


M


z 7 6 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAUJIATA.

There is ahothcr opiniorij tad that too favoured bjr the Scptuaglnt,.
that the language of the Jews Was celled Hebrew; from a wotd m
the tongue, Hoberi, Which fignifics men on tie *tberjiit % that is, froni
the other fide of Euphrates, as if the word dtnoted only thdfe who had
pafled this river. But, irt my opiriion, Father Stolon, of the oratory at
Paris, has fufticiehtly detected the vanity of that furmife, by fhewing
by right grammatical conAru&iori, that if the natoc had accrued to the
Jews and their language on that account, they Jhould have been called
Hobri, and their language, Hebrew. Grammatical analogy will ra-
ther have the word Hebrew to come from * Heber* as the raoft an-
cient and generally entertained opinion atftong the Jews makes it to have
been ; efpedially finfce Heber's family was fo very confiderable at the
time of the confufion, and remarkable for having abftained from con-
curring with the reft in that wicked enterprife, that his name was more
likely to denominate the purer remains of that original language, than
this pretended fituation of a place and the neighbourhood of a river*

But however thefe things were, we find this Hebrew language, even
juft after the confufion, to have been the common fpeech of all Syria:
and Paleftinc, and other countries from Babylon to the Mediterranean*
fea ; and even taken up by the posterity of Ham in all thofe coun-
tries : Who having loft it in the confufion, might probably by their
intercourfe with the family of Heber, refutnc it again and make it their
own, with fuch alterations as gav4 rife to the ChaJdee* Syriac, Arabic^
and other ancient tongues, in thofe countries, which, differ very litde
from it. So that it is moft probable the posterity both of Ham and J*~
pheth, who continued in thofe near and bordering regions, made ufe
of that language that afterward went generally under the name of He*
brew. For in the prophecy of Ifaiah, the Hebrew tongue, as Mr;
Brerewood obferves, is called the \ Language of Canaan ; and the Sep*-
tuagint tranflate thefe words [£ the kings of Canaan] the kings of
Phoenicia or Paleftlne, which were the countries of die posterity of
Ham and Japheth. And it is observed alio by Bochart* a man very
well fkilled in thofe languages, th*t the Hebrew tongue, in which
the holy fcriptures are written, is much the fame with the old Phoenician:
And on this reafon I took up feme Chaldee, Syriac and Arabic words m
this Comparative Table under die title of Hebrew, when I found the den*-
vatives to come up with them to anearcongruity in found aodfignifi&tion*

• Abraham, the fixth from Heber, is called the Hebrew, Gen. xiv. 13.
f IfeialL xix. iS, J Joftm* v, I.

The


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. iyy

The third queftion under this Proportion is, At what time this con*
fufion of the firft language happened, and if Noah was then alive ? To
give fome folution to this difficulty j as to the firft part of the queftion,
wherein the fentiments of chronologers and hiitorians extremely vary,
We are, Firft:, In order to fix this time, to take what circumftantial
evidence the exprefs words of fcripture (for no pofitive certainty
therein appears) afford, to guide us in determining this particular.
Secondly, We are to allow the approved teftimonies of the moil an-
cient historiographers feconding the faid determination; And, Thirdly,,
We mail take in alfo the confederation of the ftate and condition, of na-
ture, requifite thereunto, as the material caufe and fubje& of this efFedL.

First, As to the evidence of fcripture; it does not nicely deter-
mine the time, as to year,, month* or day, as. it does in other great:
events, but only limits it to the days of Peleg. Foe Mofes exprefly
{ays, " that in Peleg's days the earth was divided/' Gen. x. 25; Now
fboie authors, particularly * Mr. Sheringham would have this divifion*
4>f the earth, which happened in the days of Peleg* to have been long;
before the difperfion at Babel ; and that that difperfion was after Noah's
death. Ego verb (faith he) Mdificium Babylonicum nm nij poji obitum-
Jtfoacbi extrui captum arbitror. But this is gratis di£ltwi; rather faid, than
fufficiently proved ; there being not on* lyllable in fcripture* nor any
good warrant from the nature of the thing,, to favour this pofition*

For as to fcripture, it plainly avouches the contrary.. For juft" on
«he commencement of this coftfufion, to which the difperfion of the
people and the divifion of the earth were confeqpents,, it is mentioned
that God faid, " Behold, the people is one and the language one,"
Gen. xi. 6. Which fufficiently proves^ that the people being one, were
sot then divided, neither after their tongues> after their families, nor
in their nations > although this- divifion or difperfion be proleptically
mentioned by Mofes in the foregoing chapter; Neither will this opi-
jyonj viz. that the divifion taken notice of in the tenth of Genefis, was
long before the difperfion at Babel, mentioned in the following chapter,,
find any better patronage from reafon and the nature of the thing ; tho'
a great deal that way is pretended to. For how could Noah, to whom
jhis aft of dividing the earth is attributed,, or indeed any other perfon
at that time, when they kept together as one people and as one family,.
be reasonably fuppofed capable of affigning and determining fuch audi

•* &k d$ uriptu Gtnth A*i?*M$h J* 4 J$»

fuchi


* 7 8 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURAtA.

fuch parts and portions of the earth to be poflfeflcd and inhabited by fuch
and fuch people, before they had knowledge of thofe parts and regions,
fome of them exprefly and by name, {6 diftant from them as, for in-
ftance, the ifles of the Gentiles were ? And if it be urged herein, that
Noah or his ions might have preferved a plan, or retained an idea in
their head, of the geography of the ante-diluvian earth \ yet it ought
to be confidered that the great devaftation the untverfal bulk of water
at the deluge had wrought on the face of the earth, which they were
then to re-people, and the great changes and alterations of fea and land,
which in many places are now found, and probably found by them then,
to have been the effects and confequenccs of that devaftation, muft
have been a bar (naturally fpeaking) to fuch a procedure, and conti-
nue fo, until the difperfion at Babel neceffitated them to feek new re-
gions. And then indeed from new difcoveries the authority of Noah,
their fole monarch, might well exert itfelf in dividing the earth, and
afiigning to thefe families, mentioned in the tenth of Genefis, their feve-
ral portions of land, to be poffefled and cultivated by them, according
to their tongues, according to their kindred, and in their nations.

Secondly, The joint confent of ancient hiftoriographers and chro-
nologers gives authority to affirm Nimrod, the grandfon of Ham, to
have been the founder of Babel, purfuant to the exprefs words of Mofes,
" that the beginning of Nimrod's kingdom was Babel," Gen. x. 10.
So that his name implying rebellion againft the ordinance of God, and
his chara6ter of a mighty hunter before the Lord denoting alfo ufurping
tyranny over men, we may from thence fafely conclude him the au-
thor or chief promoter of that wicked attempt againft heaven; which
provoked God to quafti the enterprize, and to punifti it with the con-
fufion of the firft language ; and thereby with the difperfion of that in-
fatuated mis-led people he had drawn together, and encouraged to
(hare with him in that proud, profane, rebellious undertaking. " Let
us build us a city and a tower, whofe top may reach unto heaven ; aj£
let us make us a name, that we be not fcattered abroad upon the face
of the earth." Gen. xi. 4.

It feems that generation of mankind had an intimation given
them, either by Noah or by God himfelf, to divide and feparate in or-
der to inhabit the whole earth ; which this rebellious * Nimrod, the
prime leader of refiflance, and the great hunter after empire, ftrenuoufly.

• Vide Jofeph. Hift. Jud. lib. i. c. 4*

withstood;


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 279

wlthftood ; and on the enfnaring maxims of felf-prefervation and public
fafety, prevailed with the greateft part of mankind to take that perni-
cious courfe, which yet, by the over-ruling wifdom of Providence, di-
re&ly led them to what, by their own wretched forecaft, they thought
to avoid. They had heard the next deftrudtion threatened was to be
by fire ; and therefore a prodigious mok of brick- work was defigned
(as fire-proof) to fecure their fafety, or at leaft to give them a name :
the latter indeed it did, for the whole ended In con fu (ion, and the name
it had was Babel; and therefore the holy penman, accounting for this
Nimrod, very appofitely fays r " and the beginning of his kingdom
was Babel."

Now whether this Nimrod in* fcripture ba the feme with Belus*
whom the ancient writers of hiftory mention to have been the founder
of the Babylonian monarchy, is not fo eafily determined y though many
take thefe two names to import one and the fame perfon, and that Be*
Jus or Baal was only a title or attribute fignifying lord or tyrant. Yet
if the pretended epitaph on Ninus's tomb, mentioned by Xenophon*
deferves any credit, they were two perfons, father and fon ; but the
chronology related to> be ki that infcription being egregioufly falfe, the
whole is juftly rejedted as counterfeit.

However that wa9, the fcripture is exprcfs, that the divifion of the
earth was in the days of Peleg, and the difperfion of people and their
feparation began at Babel during the reign or tyranny of Nimrod, for
that is faid to have been the beginning of his kingdom. Now Nimrod
being the third in defcent from Ham ; and Peleg, according to the
Hebrew text, the fourth (or if we take Cainan in, according to Sk
Luke and the Seventy's computation, then he is) the fifth in defcent
from Seaa. Whence it appears, that the confufion happened under
the reign of Nimrod,' and that the adual difperfion was in the days of
Peleg, the younger of the two ii* defcent, and probably in age, tho'
by reafon of their long lives they were contemporary ;. it will confe.-
quently follow, that this difperfion of people preceded, or at leaft was
much about the fame time with, the aftual divifion of the. earth,, namely,
at Babel.

Some of the fathers- of the Chriftian church* I confefs, afcribe the
confufion and -divifion here accounted for, to the beginning of Peleg's
days, or to the time of his birth, which- was- Anno 10 1„ pod diluvium,
alluding to the import of his name, as if given him in memory of that
a£L But that* as Khali presently ftiew,. could, not conveniently be;;

, fbir


*8o MONA ANTIQUA RE8TAURATA.

for it is not faid, " at the birth," or " in the beginning of/ f bvt " in th»
days of Peleg, the earth was divided 5" whereby we have a greater lati-
tude left us to fix the date of the division.

Nimrod, by confent of all ancient chronologcrs, began his reign
abput the year 170 after the flood, arrived to the height of his tyranny
at about fourteen years after, viz. Anno 184, port diluvium, and died
Anno 249, pod diluv. So likewifc Peleg, by the fcripture account,
being born Anno 10 1, poft diluv. his days continued by the fame ac-
count to Anno 340, poft diluv. So that here by thefe accounts, the
reign of Nimrod and the days of Peleg being marks or ftandards given
us to fix and determine the date of this grand affair, we muft take them
together to adjuft this matter ; and thereby it will with the greateft
probability appear, that it happened about the year 240, after die
flood y when Nimrod was at the height of his tyranny, about nine years
before his death ; and when Peleg was about the hundred and thirty*
ninth of his age. So that both the fads of confufion and divifion come
up with great agreement to what the fcripture cxprefly fays of the one,
viz. " that the beginning of his kingdom was Babel;" and of the other,
" that the divifion was in the days of Peleg," which is an intimation not
to be negle&ed, and comes pretty nicely to determine this point.

Thirdly, The consideration alfo of the ftate and condition of na-
ture, that is, at what time the increafe and multiplication of mankind
was capable of this divifion of people into fo many principalities and
nations, as are recorded in the tenth chapter of Genefis, will greatly
conduce to a right determination of this matter. Here the opinion of
thofe who aflign the time of this divifion (if they mean a&ual divifion,
i. e. when they were really and actually divided) to the birth of. Peleg,
which was Anno 101, poft diluv. feems to be quite overthrown by the
very Mofaic accounts. For we are to obferve, that Mofes reckons in
that divifion of families no lefs than feventy-two princes or heads of
people ; and furely we muft allow them at leaft an equal number of fe-
males for wives, and a few children alio before they could be families ;
which muft amount to a greater number of fouls than the propagation
of mankind out of * three pairs could afford in the fpace of an hundred
and one years. For if we grant every male and female, in^thc firft
poft»diluvian century, to beget eight children (one with another) by
the time they arrived to the age of forty years ; we ihall find hy the

* Noah cannot be fuppofed to have begot any children after the flood, for his wife was then too
old ; and it is not to be imagined that, after h&r deceale, he married any of Us own offspring.

1 rule


MONA 'AN^IQUA RESTAURATA. 281
rule of arithmetical progreflion, that allowing the firil ten years of
that century for Shem, Ham, and Japheth (and of them the whole
earth was overfpread, Gen. ix. 19.) to beget twenty-four children or
twelve pairs of* people ; and forty years more, for thefe twelve pairs,
to beget ninety-fix children or forty-Qight pairs; and forty years more*
for thefe forty-eight pairs, fo beget three hundred and eighty -four chil-
dren, male and female ; which is juft ninety years after the deluge ;
it follows that the whole number of fouls (fuppofing the number of
males and females equal, and none to have died) at the year 10 1, when
Peleg was born, could amount to no more than five hundred and twelve
perfons, with children under eleven years old — furely too inconfidera-
ble a number for fo great an affair, as the dividing of the whole earth,
erecting a kingdom, building a tower, whofe top was to reach heaven*
with all the pompous enumeration of fo many tongues, families, and
nations, as appear in the tenth of Genefis, was to have been ; far fur-
paffing the capacity of fo fmall a number.

But let us proceed with this calculation of an eight-fold encreafe of
mankind at every forty years period, and we (hall find that at the year
240, after the flood, the encreafe of mankind fwelled to a number fuf-
ficiently proportionable to that work; the fum whereof, collcdtively
taken, amounted to upwards of thirty-two thoufand eight hundred and*
thirty*two fouls. And when withal, we take into confideration, the
fpontaneous fcecundity of the earth at that time in producing fuftenance>
to man without much toil and labour, the vigorous healthy con flit ution
of men, their long lives, the long continued fruitfulnefs and teeming
condition of their women, the allowance of polygamy (their great and
"moft neceflary work at that time, as well as the command of God
unto them, being to encreafe and multiply :) All this confidered, it
may be well fuppofed that in their Iaft hundred and forty years, they'
encreafed in much greater proportion ; for when their ftock of people
was grown numerous, the* multiplication went on fafter, on account
of their longevity and their allowed polygamy ; and the cognation and
proximity of blood (which at firft was fome obftacle in the courfe of
generation) being then grown wider and remoter, .therefore I think on
the faid fuppofition, it will be eafily granted that their real number, at
the year 240, was much greater than I have reckoned; efpecially if
the number of females exceeded the males, which as a reafonable fur-
plufage may come in, not only to fupply the number of thofe that died
from thp deluge to that time, bpt alfo to enhance by fome thoufands

Oo more


28a MONA ANTIQUA REfrTAURATA.

more the eftimate I have here made of them at the difperfion 6f Babel.
So to conclude this Propofition, we find that the reign of Nimrod and
the days of Peleg are the beft marks we have to determine this queftion j
which induced me to eftablifli the date of this affair in or about Anno
240, pofi diluv* a little before the death of the one, and about the
middle of the days of the other* At which time mankind was fuffici-
ently numerous to become capable of being the fubjpft of that great
work ; after which time, viz. 240, the holy fcripture is pofitive (to
prove the latter part of this queftion) that Noah lived a hundred and
ten years. And if this computation (hould be looked upon as not fa-
tisfaflory ; I /hall only add, that it is allowed by ajl on very good
grounds, that Abraham was born afcer this difperfion ; and being born,
as the exprefs chronology of Mofes has it, in the feventieth year of the
age of Terah, which by that chronology was the two hundred and
ninety-fecond year after the deluge ; (for as to the fixty years more that
are by fouie added to the age of Terah before Abraham was born, there
is no fufficient warrant .in fcripture for it, and what is produced for it
from A&s vii. 4. is otherwife to be accounted for) I (hall therefore con-
clude, that Noah living three hundred and fifty years after the flood, Gen-
ix. 28. mult be contemporary with Abraham for the fpace of fifty-eight
years, and confequently Airvive the difperfioa at Babel, a great num-
ber of years, which is all I aim at and contend for in this particular..

Proposition H.

Having hitherto (hewed that the firft way of fpeaking was one efl^
tire language to the confufion ; and that that was what we call the
Hebrew tongue : My fecond propofition is, That at the building of the,
tower of Babel, there happened among thole who were concerned in
that daring enterprize a ccflation, for fome time at leafl, and confufion
of that firft language.

This mufbalfo be allowed by all who own. the authority of the holy,
fcriptures ; for Mofes there exprefly fays, that God confounded their
language, that men could not understand one another's* talk, as you will
find, Gen. xi. 6, 9.

Under this propofition, I (hall confider, Firft, What this cefla-
tion or confufion of the firft language was. Secondly, What influ-
ence it had upon, and how far it cffc&ed the feparation and difperfion
of people over the face of the whole earth; for that fcems to. have
been the chief end and defign of it, " Let us confound their language' 1
■ ' • • (fays


MOfcA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. *8 3

. (fays God) 4€ that they may not underfland one another j" £o the Lord
{battered them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

First, What this confulion was ? It feems it was a punifhment
that the fins of thofe people were then ripe for. Unity of language, if
joined With the fincerc worfhip of God, and with mutual benevolence
and charity amongft men, is a great bleffing> ; but when it is ufed to
affront and pervert thofe ends, as it feems it then was, it becomes a
curfe ; and therefore God inflicted it upon thefe men, by dividing their
communication, and fending them away, one party from another, to
the end that fome at lead might be good, if the greater part of them
Would continue wicked and rebellious.

There is fome diverfity of opinion about the aft and manner of con-
founding this firft language at Babel ; but what is alledged on that par-
ticular may be forted under thefe two heads :

First, Some take the word V73 Balal, by which this confufion is
there exprefled, to fignify, among thofe builders, a mixing and chang-
ing the known fenfe and meaning of fome founds into the fenfe and
import of other founds, and thofe into others again, and fo through :
As when fome called for brick, others underflood thereby and brought
mortar ; when they called for mortar, others again underflood thereby
and brought them gravel ; and in this manner they conceive,- that fuch
of thofe people, as underflood and had one and the fame meaning of
every found or word they heard, became in an inftant men of one and
the fame language *. *

Thus they account for this confufion, and how thereupon the feve-
ral -f* mother-tongues were made or framed by God in the miijds of
thofe divided parties. But fince it appears that one end of this con-
founding of their tongues was to deter them from a further profecution
of that work, methinks, this was not the way to put a ftop to it. For
in this cafe we muft conceive, that either God infpired a new language
into every individual man, as he deprived him of the old one; or elfe
gave this new-formed language to fcparate parties or families of men.
If the firft, then indeed there was grown up a goodly ftock of tongues,
far better adapted for foliloquics, than for converfation and fociety. If
the fccond be true, then it will follow that the end that God defigned

• Confounding and mingling have very different ideas ; in mingling, the form and properties
of the things mingled are preferved, but in confounding are all deftroyed.

f Thefe mother-tongues fonle authors reckon to have been feventy-tvro in number, becauic fo
many perfons or heads of families are mentioned in the tenth of Genefis ; of which mother-iongucs,
Scaliger reckons eleven (four principal and ieven le& principal) to have come to Europe.

Oo 2 tp


284 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

to have been effected by it, that is, the putting a flop to that audacious
attempt, might haye been frustrated and defeated. Fpr if God, in
that grand extirpation of the old, immediately framed new languages
in the mouths of fo many parties of men ; it was. eafy to forefee, that
by the combining and confederating together of thefe new-gifted par-
ties, who well underftood one another, and might thereby well manage
their defign, the work in hand might profper and go on as before ; and
nothing that way could hinder it, but another confufion, and perhaps
another after that, and fo on infinitely. Which procedure muft needs
be reckoned very abfurd, and therefore not likely to be the true matter
of fadh And yet as incongruous, as when examined into, it feems to
be, it is to this day the moll generally entertained opinion, that God
sniraculoufly framed and put into the minds of men, at the confufion,
thofe diversified modes of ipeaking, which are called by the name of
mother- tongues ; and which afterwards multiplied and improved them-
'elves into abundance of dialeds, apd thofe at length, into all the lan-
guages the world hath been acquainted with ; though the holy fcripture
mentions not (which is very flrange if it had been true) one wgrd of
fo great a miracle.

Secondly, Some others finding the grounds of (his lad opinion not
liable enough, conceive otherwife of the matter. They allow a deletion
(if not a total one, yet one in fuch a meafure as was enough to obftrudt
the work) of the firft language : They look upon that aft of punish-
ment which confounded it, to have been a fort of extraordinary ilupor
or delirium, which God in his juft indignation threw among that brain-
fick race of men, who impioufly imagined, that with their mole-
hill, in comparifon, they were able to defy and oppofe heaven and all
its menaces ; when in an inftant, the divine nemefis fo fpread that flu-
pifying evil among the multitude, that they were fo far from being able
to effeft what they vainly undertook, that they had fcarce a word to
fay or anfwer to one another. The memory, it feems, being by that
flupor quite fubverted, communication immediately ceafed; the mul-
titude diffolved and diffipated (that bond of communication which knit
them together being broke) and the work was inftantly laid afide and
abandoned.

This account of the matter, I confefs, is very agreeable to God's
defign, and comes fully home to the end and purpofe of if j and is the
lecond thing I defign to treat of under this Propofition : Therefore,

Secondly*


MONA ANTIGUA R E SVA'V RATA: 2 8j

/ Secondly, As for the influence and -force' this punishment was to
have in diffipating and difperfing thefe people; it ought here to be taker*
for granted (and indeed it is a maxim of undoubted truth) that an end
propofed, efpecially by an all-wife and infinite agent, requires and wilt
always infer that the means made ufe of to bring it to pafs be adequately
fui table and effectual to it. And now in this oafe, fince we find the
means aflerted by the patrons of the firft opinion, on feveral* accounts
incompetent to that end and exceptionable, in being many ways liable
to evade and defeat it, we cannot therefore -allow it to be a true repre-
fentation of that affair, though the opinion- that hands it to us be ever
fo general. Neither indeed can we look upon it as properly a puhifh-
ment, if in that aft, God only changed their old language for a num-
ber of new ones. And if it be by feme rather thought he did fo, fuch
as think fo fhould confider, whether it be any way agreeable to the di-
vine wifdom, who works every thing perfe&ly, to be the author of
fuch rude, mean, imperfeft gibberishes, as the firft languages after the
difperfion are known to have been * and alfo, if the mother* tongues at
their firft coming abroad had been tolerably accurate and expreffive, as
furely they would have been, had they (as is pretended) come imme-
diately from the hands of God, what need would there have been bf
borrowing and begging one of another, and of all the labour that has
been afterwards fpent in improving, augmenting ami polithmg them,
to make them ufeful ?

But on the other fide, if we look upon this overture as a great and
fignal vengeance infli&ed on the impiety of thofe men, and on their
language which was instrumental to it, God as it were with one blow
dafhing their whole entecprize x by ftriking every man of them dumb,
and probably for fome time deaf alfo, as the word yaw in the text feems
to intimate, viz. And God confounded theirjanguage that they beard
not one another; for that is the propriety of the word; confideririg
this, I fay, we have great reafon to apprehend; that the amazement
and terror accompanying that a£t, next to ftriking them dead upon the
fpot, muft carry the greateft and moft irrefiftable influence with it, upon
the fears and paffions of thofe men, difpofing them to defift from fo
dangerous and mifchrevous an attempt. And when they found their
memory, as to words and their former habits of fpeaking, quite
gone, defaced and ruined, nature itfelf, with the help of what rea-
' fon and judgment remained in them, befides the eflfe&s of that fright
and confternatkm,, muft be acknowledged alfo to, t$ of ibmc force

1 ' to


aW MONA ANTIQJJA UESTAURATA.

to make them withdraw and divide themfelves into feparate bands
.and companies.

For when this infli&ed damp and terror was 6ver, and their retained
reafon began to clear up and difplay itfelf, we may well imagine their
inward thoughts, wanting their accuftomed former vents, began to glow
and burn within them* pufhing thein to form new founds, and to tack
and fatten them to fuch ideas as every minute called for and wanted
their affiftance ; ' which tacking of founds to ideas, and ideas to things,
is properly the ground- work of all languages.

This work was of great confequence, and muft be fpeedily attempted)
«nd they could not but by a few trials find it as feafible as it was ne-
cefiary, having their faculties and organs prompt and ready for it. But
for all that it was not to be done in a multitude, where a few fettled
founds would be foon loft, before any current (lamp could be fixed
upon them* Hence will appear by this latter opinion, vyhich the
former indeed is wide of, how the divine terror of this ad, and
alfo the diredt and natural refult of it became a cauie to make that vaft
innumerable concourfe of people break up, and oblige them to retire and
divide into little communities $ where, and in which circumftance only,
they could be in a way to reptfir their lofs, and to refit themfelves for fu-
ture converfe : Which people could fcarce, if at all, bring topafs in great
affemblics and extended multitudes ; it being the work of that art which
never admits of too many heads or hands, but of united /kill, induflry and
diligence to lay down the ground- work of a new-formed language.

Thus I take it almighty Providence moil benignly adapted the pu-
flifliment of this people to their future advantage ; and mod wifely
contrived, by taking away their firft language, to make that a means of
dividing themfelves into great numbers of communities and govern-
ments ; and that of forming new languages j and that too of cementing
them together into nations, io order to difpeife them over the face of
the earth. And if God had not taken away the old, or when he had
done fo, had himfclf framed and infpired new languages into them, as
many are of opinion he did ; I much doubt whether that difperfion
could have been fo readily and conveniently effe&ed (naturally fpcak~
- ing) as in the method herein explained we prefume it was.

Proposition III.

Having fliewed under the foregoing Proposition, that the confufion

-of the firft language, therein briefly accounted fog bad in its effefta*

i ' as


MOKA ANTIQUA RESTAtf RATA. 287

**> well* natural as a moral efficacy to break up that impious afrembly,
and divide thfem into many aflbciktcd bands and companies, in order
to difperfe them far and wide to colonize the face of the earth j it ap-
pears from thence that God feemed to look upon that one firft language
to be a grfcat impediment to it, and therefore confounded it; and made
men, by the confequences of that confufion, retire and withdraw*
themfelves to recover their loft fpeech. And thefe men having fo fe-
parated and * divided themfelves, it was alfo natural for them to feck'
out new habitations ; which is what I take to be meant by difperfion,.
and comes here to be made ufe of under the force of a. Proposition .; be-
caufe the fcripture, whofe teftimony amounts to the higheft force of
evidence, exprefly affirms (event alfo viiibly feconding it) that God<
came down, confounded their language,, and (battered them abroad upon*
the face of the earth, Gen. xi. 7, & Upon which Pro'pofition. I (halli
proceed very briefly with thefe following particulars*

First, Before we come to the detail of this Propofirion',* we may ini
general conceive that thefe people who were thus* divided,, confede-
rated themfeltes, to the end mentioned, in kindreds and families ; and:
of thefe fome immediately removed and took their progrcft, as they en-
ereafed and multiplied, into far countries,. India, China,, Tartary, &c.-
and in their way thither propagated many nations and languages ; and*
fome others fixed their abodes in regions near adjoining to the place of
their difperfion.

Thefe latter, in that firft and mod important work of compofing;
and framing words to utter their mrnds> and to convey their concep-
tions to one another, wc may well prefume, were very much relieved^
and affifted by their neighbours, the houfe and family of Heberj-at'
whofe (hining lamp thefe unhappy men might by their permiffion and?
favour foon rekindle their extingui(hed torches, and by recolledting;
alfo what their broken and. harrafied memory would afford, recover
many words of their loft language, artd perhaps by that means come
to raife and model their new forms of fpeech* upon the recovered ruins-
of it.

And this I take to be the only or chief reafon of thc % appearing of fo>
many Hebrew words in the tongues of thofe people who defcended out
of fuch as had made their firft fetttements in thofe adjoining coun-
tries about Syria and Babylon;, which was the cafe with many of
the nations of Europe, and particularly our own. And upon this ac-

Gov x. 32.

sOOtttttt


a«8 MONA AN T I QJJA RE S T AU RA T A.

count I hppe it will appear, that it was with good reafon and upon
warrantable grounds, that I endeavoured and undertook in thele Eflays
to trace the origin, and deduce the ancient names and characters of
many of our fuperannuated rites and performances of religion in the
weftern part of Europe, from the language and cuftoms of that age and
people ; efpecially fince even to this day we have fo many plain un-
forced words of that primitive tongue among us, as the preceding table
difcovers, that it cannot with any /hew of reafon be doubted, but that
the ancient language (what name foever we give it) out of which the
Gaulilh or British tongue was derived, was one of thole I now men-
tioned, which took their rife from, and built their ftru&ures upon, the
remains of that mod ancient Hebrew tongue.

Secondly, It being now (hewed that many of the Afian tongues,
viz. the Armenian, Chaldec, Syriac, Arabic, &c. borrowed or derived
fo much of this ancient Hebrew, that in their primitive words and ra-
dicals they are almoft the fame with it ; we are next to confider that
among thofe languages which, by the favour of Heber and his family,
took into them fo great variety of Hebrew founds, the languages of the
fons of Japheth, at lead thofe of Gomer and Javan, which gave rife
to the old Celtic that was the mother of moft of the ancient tongues of
Europe, have participated in a great meafure of that advantage of bor-
rowing from the language of Heber : Which confideration may fuper-
fede the wonder we ufually are at, to find even to this day fo great a
number of genuine Hebrew words in the Greek, Latin, Teutonic, and
Britifh tongues ; and thofe (fome of them) the very fame ; and others
fo very little difguifed and altered, abating what is ufual in pronounc-
ing the words of one language in another, that I flatter myfelf into a
belief that no impartial man will ever doubt of it, or fufpedl their com-
ing from any other origin.

"Nay more; their being the fame, as many of them are, with the
known Hebrew words that are of one fignification with them, (except
what is already excepted) is to me an irrefragable proof, that they did,
and could not indeed but, come from that origin ; it being next to im-
poflible that fo many words as the foregoing table prefents to our view,
could ever by chance meet in one and the fame found and fignification*
And no other caufe of fuch coincidence offering itfelf, it is therefore
an apparent evidence that thefe languages I account for muft on the rea-
fon I mention proceed and be derived from one and the fame fountain-
head, the ancient Hebrew tongue.

Now


MONA ANTIQJJA RE ST AUR AT A:.

Now in order to give the reafon of this procedure a little more weight,
the reader will pardon me here a fmall digreffion. To that end, he
will pleafe to confider that as Noah was at the time of this difperfion
the father of all mankind, excepting, his own and his fons' wives, if
then living ;— for we are pretty well aflured that Noah and his fon Shem
livfed then and many years after it — fo he was their chief monarch to
direft them in the way of polity and government; and their chief
prieft and prophet to inftrudt them in the true worftiip of God, and in
the way of religion. And indeed, as to both thefe capacities and his
adtings in them, there are fome remains of antiquity that inform us*
.that Noah laid down rules, as eftabliflied laws, to his pofterity, which
go under the name of Mitzotb bene Nodcb, viz. u The ftatutes of the
Jons of Noah ;" becaufe delivered to them for moral, political and the-
ological rules to conform themfelves unto, and to be made ufe of by
their pofterity, as certain ftandards of juftice and piety j on which ac-

- count I take it, it was that St. Peter calls him a Preacher of Righteouf-
nefs, 2 Pet. ii. v. that is, a propounder of good and righteous laws
among his pofterity.

Thefe laws in all probability were the fum or an abftradt of thofe
that were given by God to Adam at the creation ; and which conti-
nued after in the church of God to the time of Abraham. For furely

. fome laws they had which were promulged to them (for where there is
no law there can be no fin) during the time of the patriarchal oeconomy ;
which was at an end in the time of Abraham, when circumcifion and
other new laws were added and had a new force and fanfition fealed
upon them. And indeed to thefe, or fuch as thefe, God himfelf feems
to have reference, when he blefled Abraham : And for a reafon of that
bleffing, God fays, " Becaufe Abraham obeyed my voice/' which un-
doubtedly referred to his willingnefs to offer his fon Ifaac ; then adds,
" And kept my charge, my commandments, my ftatutes, and my
laws/ 9 Gen. xxvi. 5. Now what thefe commandments, ftatutes and
laws, which God here calls his own, were, we muft be far to feek, if
they be not thefe I now mention ; the heads whereof you have in the
margin of the following page.


Pp They


*90 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

I have been the more particular
They were feven in number. . in this account of Noah's being in

.,-... .* the public capacities of father,

,. De cavenddldo/o^trta. incc> icft and prophct> in «.

2. De maledtatoneNumtnis. ^^ tQ d , manfcind a| the timc

3 Defangutnts Effufione. of this dif fion> that the readcf

4. D, M « rmfor* /«r/>//*///*. thcreb fcc what a fair

5. D, ^/>/«* Gf *ar/*. upon a fuppofa , of a tQtal de ,^

6. Dejudtctis. _ tJon of thc firft i anguage> vcc t _

7. Z>, «*»&* ^iim&i wi «m ing in thc houfe and family r of
comedendo. Wzhtx, was opened under thefe

Thefe patriarchal laws I have had peculiar circumftances to many
frequent occafion to mention in neighbouring families to recover
the foregoing Eflays. by their intercourse with this what

they had loft in their own.
For, Firft, I have before (hewed how it is generally prefumed that '
Heber and all his family preferved their language ; Secondly, Noah be-
ing then alive muft be fuppofed to be one, nay the head, of that family *
and, Thirdly, If fo, we may well prefume that many of that difperfing
multitude, out of filial piety reforted to Noah to bewail their misfor-
tune, and to receive his commands and inftru&ions. And how could
this be done but in his own language ? And how could they be the
better for his fatherly inftru&ions and documents, which undoubtedly
he took care to inculcate upon them, but by their learning that lan-
guage by their frequent refort to that family in which he refided ? This
is to me a plain cafe, that a great deal of the firft language was foon
again recovered, at leaft by Heber's neareft neighbours. And of that
number fome of the fons of Japhcth, particularly Gomer and Javan,
might very probably be : And on that account may be reckoned, not
only to have carried with them a vaftly greater ftock of Hebrew words
than 1 have (hewed in this table, (great allowance being to be made for
what was fince loft in the multiplying of dialedts) but alfo more efpe-
cially that they carried with them the fchemes and forms of worfhip,
pra&ifed in thofe days ; and with thefe, the original names and cha-
racters of many of them. Which confideration alone will, I hope,
fufficiently anfwer for my deducing our ancient Druidical rites of wor-
ship and other appurtenances of religion (we being proved to be the .
defendants of Gomer) from the very rites and ufages the faid Gomer

then


MONA ANTIQJLJA RESTAURATA/ 7 9 i

then received and pradtifed; and fo were by him carefully configned
over and delivered to his pofterity.

Thirdly, To come now to particulars : This afl: of difperfion now
beginning to exert itfelf, we find the united tribes and families, having
got them new ways of fpeaking, and thereby eftablifhing to themfelves
forms and plans of government, betook themfelves into various parts
and quarters of the world, under feveral heads and rulers, whom they
then or foon after called kings and princes. The particulars whereof
you will find recorded by way of anticipation, as many of the Mofaic
accounts are, in the tenth chapter of Genefis; where the divifions of
the firft poft diluvian families are noted and dillinguiihed, every one ac-
cording to their tongues, according to their families, and in their na-
tions. And there too, to come to the fubjedt of my enquiry, we find
the fons of Japheth to have taken to their allotments the ifles of the
Gentiles, which are reckoned by all authors to be Europe and the ma-
ritime parts of Afia.

Now among the fons of Japheth, it is generally allowed (and there
are great authorities for it) that Gomer was the founder of that nation
out of whom the Gauls and Britons defcended. But to trace the pro-'
greftion of that people, whom authors call Gomarita and their tongue
Gornariarty to thefc. parts of Europe, has been a taflc that puzzled all
antiquity, till the great learning, indefatigable labour, and extraordi-
nary, judgment of the late ever celebrated perfon, Monfieur Pezron,
D. D. abbot of La Charmoye in France, difcovercd fuch tracks and:
footfteps of it, even through the remoteft times, that to me his accounts
feem liable to fo few exceptions, that I fee not how any one can but
acquiefce in them ; abating one error, as I take it, or rather omifiion,
that runs through the whole file of his difquifitions — and that is, his
making no diftin&ion between the firft * planting age, wherein peo-
ple were only bent on procreation (polygamy for that end being al-
lowed) and were chiefly employed in clearing and cultivating the face
of the earth, and fending colonies far and wide to poflefs and inhabit it ;
and the buftling warlike age, if I may fo call it, that fucceeded than
firft one, wherein ambition and defire of fovereignty and empire had
room and opportunity from the then great increafe of mankind to exert
and difpky itfelf; people in their firft peragrations being bufied and
wholly taken up with toil and induftry, the earth and richeft countries

• jEtaj Jnrea % afud Antique.

Pp 2 » Of


29* MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

of it by that time being an overgrown wildernefs, and nothing in their
palling onwards to be contefted with but rivers, mountains, woods,
and wild beafts. Thus I conceived, and this I have fet down in the
preceding Effays* that the progeny of Japheth, viz, fome of thefe
Gomarians at the firft difperfion began to move weftward ; and the firft
fwarms of them, the Heneti (the mod ancient colonies or firft planters,
as the word Hen imports, and which gives fome hint of their language)
might arrive in Europe, and fo come to Germany, Gaul and Britain,
even before the ruffling age began, wherein the learned Pezron placet
the sera and firft date of his. accounts, &c. And indeed he owns as
much, by his reprefenting moft of his Titan expeditions, rather as
conquering than colonizing and planting. Nay, the very ftate and con-
dition of nature at that time (peak as much ; and thefe circumftances
of the ftate of nature and condition of things, in computing the pro*
grefllon of mankind, are to be confulted, as well as, if not more than
the fhort hints which the uncertain tradition of the next tumultuous
age delivered over to the records of future times, which all know to
have been very fabulous and erroneous. Yet for all this, an universal
confent and tradition among a people, (hewing out of what ftock they
defcended, may be well depended on, though hiftory may fail in ac-
counting for the way and manner of that progrefiion.

This learned Briton, in his lately publiihed book of the Antiquities
of Nations, obferves from the earlieft hints of hiftory that thofe men-
tioned Gomarians (bated themfelves in the provinces between Media
and the Cafpian fea, that is, in Hircania, Margiana, and Badriana*
and that they were the anceftors of the Gauls ; and by reafon of their
difpofleffing the former inhabitants, the Medes, they have had by thofe
expelled people the name of Sac* given them, that is, pillagers and
robbers ; and thefe, in compenfation for that, gave the Medes or the
men they drove out the name of Parthums, from the Celtic word Partbu,
viz. to divide and feparate. Here the Gomarians take the name of
Sacse or Sac's, and their language from this time came for a while to
he called Sacick; and a branch of thefe, mixing with the Teutons, came
in procefs of time to be called Saxons ; which is the reafon that (b
many Englifh words in this table do favour of the original tongue,
(which I have (hewed before had a great deal of it in the Gomarian fa-
mily) and have their place in the faid table.

The author further {hews, how a great colony of thefe Sac's made

an irruption under one Achmon their prince into Cappadocia, and other

• ' parts


MOKA ANTIQJJTA RESTADRATA. 295
parts of Lower Afia, bordering on the Euxine fea ; and after that ano-
ther colony of them made incurfions to the North part of Afia, and over
to Europe by the Palus Msotidis, who took on them the name of
Cirabrians or Cimmerians, and their language from Tuifco their leader
came to be called Teutonic. Hence the agreement of many Teutonic*
words with the ancient Celtic. But that great colony that overfpread
a great part of Lower Afia, went under the name of Titans, from a
Gaulilh compound, tud earth, and tan or tana* fpreading, viz. an over*
fpreading people ; and from their invincible prowcfs they had, by way
of chara&er, the attribute of Celtse or Galli, from Gallu or power,
given to them* and thence their language was called Celtic or
Gallic, as it has ever fince continued to be, in the main branch of
this people : For our calling it here Britifli, is but by way of national
diftin&ion ; it being one and the fame, even to the time of Julius Caefar,
in Gaul and Britain, abating the diverfity of idioms and diale&s.

This great and warlike nation, now called Titans, having fpread
themfelves over all the Lower Alia, even to the Mediterranean fea, be-
gan there to lay down the foundation of their vaft empire, which by
their fucceeding princes, Achmon, Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury,
Mars, Dis, Hercules, &c. they extended over the greateft part of Eu*
rope ; and thefe names being all Celtic, as you may fee in the feventh
fedion of the firft Effay *, fufficiently prov* their being of the fame
language with us. And when Uranus had paged the fea into Greece
•and Italy, in order to enlarge his conqueft over thefe weftern parts o£~
JSurope* Dr. Pezron exprefly fays, " That all that could not be done
without tranfporting colonies thither to manure the ground, and to keep
the ancient inhabitants under fubjedion ;" which evidently implies, as
indeed the name of conqueft 'will, which he frequently makes ufc of
in his account of this Titan expedition, that the countries they fubdued
had been long before -f inhabited. And fo we fee that hiftory, on which
he only relies, is defe&ive in the point of our firft planting j and beyond
hiftory what can we have but conjectures ?

I cannot omit here one obfervation in relation to the firft planting of
Greece and Italy. We find on this fide of the Mediterranean, in the very
firft ages hiftory can inform us of, great variety of tongues and dialefts $
whereas on the Afian fide, there appear to have been but few in num-
ber, but thefe largely extended. No other caufe, I think, can be af-

• See note p. \t> 43. t Vide Pezr. Antkj. p. iox. & p. 129.

figned


29+ .MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

figned for this, but the abundance of ifles in that Tea, between Anatolia
and Europe ; whereunto thofe religious vagrants being got, fettled in
them for fbme time ; and thereby having but little commerce at firft
with one another, their common language might, by the different im-
provements they made in augmenting and polilhing their way of fpeak-
ing, in every ifle by itfelf, be diverfified into numerous dialefts ; and they^
or colonies from them, cntring firft into Greece and Italy, did likewife
leaye in thofe countries lading marks of that diverfity in the feveral
idioms of them.

In the ifle of Creta, now Candia, one of the largeft of them, we find
they had a large colony, and feemed to have dedicated it, as they after
did the Ifle of Mona with us, as a facred place to the ufe of religion.
Here their priefts and foothfayers redded ; whom (as we called ours
Druids, probably from Dir-<wyr % i. e. moji necejfary men, fo) they called
K&rki, Curetes, as probably from Gvyr-rbaid-, both coming under one
and the fame fignification, that is, men of moft necefary ufe and import-
ance, as priefts and religionifts in all ages were accounted to be. Thefe
Curetes took care of what belonged to the rites of facrifice, and the
worfliip of the gods. To thefe the care of the education of princes
was entrufted ; Jupiter being in his youth committed to their charge.
They were in great refpedt with the Aborigines of Italy, where they
were called Saltans. They recorded, as the Bards with us, the heroic
anions of princes in rhythmical compofitions i which in Italy they
called Carmina Saliaria or Verfus Saturnii, as Varro and Feftus write.
Whatever related to war, laws and religion, was moftly contained in
thofe fohgs ; which generally were of great difficulty to be underftood
by the Latins, hecaufe, as Pezron obferves, they contained in them
many Celtic words. This being a place of learning in the earlieft
ages of the world, they called here their oldeft inhabitants, Eteo-
Cretans, who muft be the firft planters of the ifland before thefe Titans
ever came into it.

Having brought this Gomarjan, Sacic and Celtic tongue within
the confines of Europe • we (hall now fhew what advances it made,
and what mixtures it underwent, during the reign of thele Titans
and after the diifolution of their government.

First, We may obferve that thefe Titans lorded it over Europe,
for a confiderable time, during the reigns of five or fix princes ; and
extended their empire to the furtheft bounds of it, North and Weft.
And if other tongues which were not the offsprings of the old Goma-

rian


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 295

rian were then in any parts of it, we may well fuppofe the prevailing
Celtic, in that docile age, to have had potent influence on them to
mould them in a great meafure to its own forms and idioms, having fo
long a time to work them into it.

Secondly, After the breaking up of the Titan government, which,
being one in itfelf, united the various Gomarian dialedts under one
common name of Celtic ; this Celtic, upon the eredtion of new king-
doms and governments in all the provinces of that fallen empire, took
likewife on it new names, after the denominations of the feveral fets.
of people then combining together under feveral polities and eftablifh-
ments. In the northern parts of Europe the Ceko-Scythians ; in Greece,
before the time of Deucalion and his fon Hellenus, the Ionians, the Do-
jian*, the TEolians, (the Achaians in ThefTaly) the Spartans, the La-
conians, the Argians, the Arcadians and the Meffenians ;. each of thefe
took up new names to their dialeds, which afterwards were in Greece
comprifed under thefe four, viz. the Attic, Ionic, Doric, ^Eolic. In
Italy, the Aufonians, the Umbrians, the Oenotrians, the Hetrufcans*.
the Ofci, the Sabines, the Ligurians, and the Latians or Latins, who
in the end fwallowed all, gave each of them their names to their proper
diale&s. In Spain it continued to be called Celtiberian for fome time ;-
and then came to be called Can tab pJ an, with fome diale&s under it;
And in Gaul it was generally called Gallic, as in Britain, Britifh ; for
in thefe countries the former and the latter Celts, as to the main body
of them, had fixed their ftation. Ireland indeed in ancient times was
icarce taken notice of; but we find its language to be a mixture of Britifh,
Cantabrian and Teuton : Its firft tongue we prefiime was Britifh; but
by reafpn of great colonies fent thither from Spain and Belgium, it
coalefced with thofe tongues, and came to be what we now call, the
Jrifh or old Scottifb. To conclude,

As we, the remains of the Britifh nation, who have fole intercft in.
the honour of this ancient Celtic tongue, are for ever obliged to that
gFeat light of our Britifh antiquities, the learned Pezron, for his extra*
ordinary pains and induftpy in tracing out from the beft hiflorical evi*
dences the age could afford the fir ft rife and progrefs of our nation and lan<-
guage, andfor his confummate fkill and judgment, in giving us atrue light
and an agreeable view of our origin in that excellent book of his lately
publifhed in French and now ttan dated into Englifh, which afluredly welL
deferves the perufal of every one that knows how to value the antiquir
ties of his nation and language $ fo we ought, to be no leis grateful to

the;


*9* "MON'AINTIQUA RESTAURATA.

.the memory of the: late exquifitely learned and Judicious Mr. Edward
Lbwyd t keeper of the Mufaum AJhmolaanum at Oxford, for his indefa-
tigable labour in colle&ing and digefting the fcattered remnants of this
ancient celebrated. language; but more efpeciaHy for the greateil piece
.of fervice ia that particular, (for ought I know) that has been yet
done to the lettered world ; I mean that excellent work, his Compara-
tive Etymology. In which he not only refcues etymology, or that part
of learning which is fo neceffary to the tracing of the origin of nations
and languages, from the too common contempt that was thrown upon
it, as being hut trifling and frivolous, which fome inconfiderate authors
by trifling with it had made it feem to be j but alfo lays down there
.fuch undeniable rules, feconded and exemplified by multitudes of pa-
rallel inftances, for the more eafy folding out the affinity of founds,
which are obferved in the various tongues. of Europe, though by dif*
ferent pronunciation in different countries a little difguifed and altered ;
and by fo reconciling that difference, has made it appear, from what
we in our Britifh tongue have retained of the ancient Celtic, that they
are but dialeds of that one once common language; though by their
various mixtures with one another, by adding and fubftra&ing fyllables
to refine and polifh, and other accidental occurrences, we find diem fo
difguifed and altered, as to appear widely eftranged, and to be accounted,
by fuch as confider not the rules of etymology, and thereby the way of
.reconciling them, very different languages, when indeed they are but
.the iffues of one common origin.

Thefe two now mentioned gentlemen, having by different methods
opened a. way of refolving diverfe tongues in Europe to one mother-
language, which language indeed Mr. Lbwyd leaves modeftly unde-
cided, but by Monfieur Pezron is determined to be the Celtic ; I hoped
.my pains would not be ill fpent, if I endeavoured by the demonftration
-of this table to mount it one ftep higher ; that is, to refolve that (our
firft diftinguiflied Gomarian) into the very original and fountain-head
of allj the mod ancient patriarchal Hebrew tongue. For to evince
that, here are no lefs in this table than three hundred words of that
, patriarchal language, to which, our derivatives, in the tongues I account
ior, carry in their found an eafy unconstrained congruity and coherence.
And of thefe three hundred Hebrew words, more than half that num-
ber anfwex our prefent Britifh founds, as near as can be expedted at
fo remote a distance both of time and place. And indeed had I allowed
*nyfelf the latitude which Mr. Lbwyd in his Comparative Etymology

2 gives,


L


gives, and he juftifies and confirms it by many examples, I think I
might!, as to the Britifh, have doubled the number ; for I meddled not
with founds tranfpofed, reverfed, or mutilated, of which there are good
•*|SIenty^ b\it of fuch only as arifwered fully, and came to an eafy cm-
ghiity (allowing only, as I premife in the foregoing rule, the organical *
perrhutation of letters) with thefe Hebrew founds. So that on the
whole matter, if the Hebrew tongue was the language of Noah and his
• fons before the confufion, and confequently of Heber; and if Gomer
- and Javan after that confufion incorporated a great deal of it into the
particular languages of their families, or rather recovered and built the
ftrudture of their fpeech upon it, and. then called it Gomarian and
Jaohian, as very good authorities avouch they did ; and if the Goma-
rian and Jaonian or Jonic were the original of the Celtic as Monfieur
Pezton'very well proves they were $ and if that ancient Celtic was the
mother of the Greek, Latin, Englifh, Gaulifh, and Britifh, as he like-
wife makes out beyond reafonable denial ; then the refult of my propo-
fitionS fairly determines in this iffue, viz. that the Britifli tongue, having
more of that original language in it than all the reft together, may
merit the efteem of being reckoned the moft ancient and leaft corrupted
language in this weftern part of the world ; which is what deferves our
notice, and what I think fufficient to fay on this head.


Concerning our Saviour's Medal.

HAVING only mentioned this piece of antiquity in the ninth
fedtion of the firft Eflay, as being found among the rubbifh of an
x>ld circular, entrenchment, called Bryn-Gwyn> in the middle of the
townfhip of freY Dryw, and there made ufe of it to confirm my con-
jecture of that place's being the Forum or tribunal of the ancient Druids,
I fliall here add fome further account of it.

I had caufed fome figures of it to be delineated in rundles on paper,
ahd writ the IJebrew infeription on the reverfes of them with my in-
terpretatioii of it ; and having fent one of them to my late worthy
friend, Mr. Edward L&wpd, then at Oxford, defiring him to confult
fome friends there who were verfed in the antiquities of that language
about it, he returned me the anfwer he had from Dr. Croflthwait of
Qucen^ college, .which was thus :

Qq SIR,


298 MO-NA ANTIQU.A RESTAURATA.
SIR, '

AS to the brafs Medal, bearing our Saviour's image, with a Hebrew
infcription ; I have this to fay,
• First, That I take this to be the infcription, viz. Jefcbuab gibbor
Mefchiab bavab v 9 Adam joked i that is, " Jesus is and was the mighty
and great Meffias, or Man-Mediator or Reconciler." That which I read
7Javab 9 the gentleman reads Hazab ; it is true, there is fuch a word as
ffazab, which fignifies Stertit, Quievit, which fignification can have no
place here ; and therefore there mud be a miftake, either in the infcrip-
tion itfelf, or in the tranfcribing it ; the Zain ihould have been a Van.

We have two learned orientalifts, Hottinger and Waferus ; the firft
has writ, De Nummis Orientaliumi the fecond, De Nummis Hebrao-
rum. The firft fays, p. 148, Nummi certe quo t quo t, indubik Hebraicos
agnofcimus 9 Urnam & Virgam ofiendunt : funt infuper Nummi quireferunt
Arc em Zionis : He fays alfo, p. 149, Habentur etiam bine inde aurei
& argentei Nummi, cum inferiptione ex una parte W 1 Jtfu, ex altera verb,
&c. ^0 TVttJO, that is, Meffias Rex venit in pace, vel Deus bomofaBus eft.

The Syrians always called our Saviour Jtfu, cutting off the letter y
Ain 9 becaufe of the difficulty of pronouncing it ; and the Greeks imi-
tating them, adding only an s to it, called him h<r5$. And therefore
I cannot believe that any ancient infcription has yefebuab or Jejcbuang,
tho* it be a Biblical word ; it is probable that the infcription would run
in the Syrian language, which is Jefu ; and this makes me fufpedt the
infcription to be of later date. •

The fecond, viz. Waferus, De Nummis Hebraorum 9 p. 62, has thefe
words, His Uteris Samaritanis aneos aliquot Nummos, Julii fecundi &
Leonis decimi pohtificum temporibus Romceje vidiffe Tbefeus Ambroftus tefta-
tur 9 in introdulfcione in hinguam Cbaldaicam ; which Samaritan characters
he expreffes by Hebrew letters ; and it is the fame, infcription with that
of Hottinger, which I have mentioned above,, p. 149.
, Waferus adds this further, fol. 63, Neque hoc flentio tranfmitti debet,
viz. Imaginem Domini qua nummo illo noftro exprimitur 9 ad earn dejerip*
tionem effe defignatum, quam Lentulus civis Romanus & Judaorum olim
prafes 9 ad imperatorem Tiberium mijijfe vulgb perbibetur 9 quam. ait vultu
placido 9 venu/lo & fubrubicundo fuijfe 9 capillos babuiffe colori ben& matura
nucis avellanafttmles f pianos ©*< integros ad aures ujque 9 inde crifpos non-
nihil ad bumeros ufque : vertice verb dhifos Nazarenarum ritu ; fronte
futjfe plana 6? falgida* occulis glaUcis & micantibus 9 nafo & ore decoro &
prorjus dfjLVfjLO), barbd capillis ftmili, baud prolixd, icbtfidatd. ' . 4 ,

Thefius


MOfJA ANTIQtfARESTA'URATA. 299

r Thefeu$ Ambrofius fays he faw a brafs Medal of our Saviour with the •
infcription mentioned above in the time of Julius II. and Lea X. that
is about the years 1.503,. and 1.5.13. " .. ». st

- This is the firft time that I met with; a brafs Medal of our Saviour.
But whaf was the face, of our Saviour* or of St.. Paul, or of the Virgin
Mary, no man knows, if you will believe St. Auftin, Lib. De Trinit.
8. c. 4. where he fays, Ipjius Dominica carnis fades iqnnmerabilum cogi-
tationum diyerfitaie varietur, & c. 5 . utrum ilia fades Maria fuerit qua -
occurrit animO) cum ijia loquimur, nee qmimfs onwinb y nee credimus > Sf
qua facte fuerit San£ius Paulus penitus ignoramus. From Dr. Crofsth wait.

This was returned in anfwer to if.
S I R, -
\ S to the brafs Medal, a figure of which I have formerly fen t you/
jLjL the account which Dr. Crofsth wait gives (and which you fent
me) of it, I muft beg leave to diffent from in fome particulars,
* First,. He miflakes my reading the fourth word of the infcription.
I read it not Hazab, z$ a verb, but Zab, i. e. IUeor Ipfe, as a pronoun
cum ba Empb'atico, that is, Mefcbiab bazeb, velipje MeJJiasefi, as the Doc*
t&r may find it in feveral places; particularly in Ifaiah, chapter the eighth,
and -the fixth verfe, and in chapter the twenty-ninth, and thirteenth
verfe, where Haam, Hazab, i. e. Populus Ule % is twice repeated. Be-,
ing fo taken, J prefume there will be no need ofreading.it Havab, i. e.
fmt\ the' very infdriptibn, in which there appears < no caufe to lb(pe&
a miftake, having the letter Zain in thsft> wbtfd, the plaineil of all the
letters, as you will find when the coin, which I (hall (hortly fend,
comes to you.

Secondly, He, feems diffident of the antiquity of i ivbecaufe; the
fetter y'^W'ia retained- in the word Jejchuab i which letter* the Syrians
(fays he) always cut off from the* word Jtfcbuang pt Jefcbuab for the
difficulty of pronouncing it, and pronounced it Jefu.

It is indeed obferved by Schindler and others, that the Jews in thofe
countries, not all the Syrians, as the Dodtor fays, did ufually cut off
the letter Ain, ob difficult at em pronunciations* But pronouncing and
writing are quite different things; aijdwh^tis y?ry difficultly prooounced,
may be eafily written, as upon this Medal. But withal, thqie authors obn
ferve a much greater reafon inclining , the Jews, ta do fo, viz. becaufo
Jefcbuang was a word derived frpp* !J^/^Kj!^wik^'^ the J$w£
by no means allowing him to be a Saviowy-wouki not bA\< hinvyutf*

r Qjj2 Jef-


3 oo MONA AtfTfQtf A KSifA'tfRAfiL"
Sfe/cbuang 9 but np Jefu 9 a name they ignominioufly fitted upon Mm, ntot
from Jefcbuang neither, which they utterly ^ejefted, but by their rule M
of Rafe Tebot 9 from certain words in their* language importing, Pereat
nomen ejus & memoria, the firft letters of which three words- in Hebrew
make up WT Jefcbu, by which name, and in which fenfe, they fo
called him.

Now, I fay, if the Jews cut off the letter y, and curtailed his name
becaufe derived from JTOT Jajcbang, Ja/vare, we may therefore Well cx-
pedt that the Chriftians in thofc countries, who did acknowledge him
a Saviour, did not, for that very reafon, cut it off, but retained it ; es-
pecially if we con fider their obligation thereunto, the angel," Matth. i.
21. exprefly commanding it, Vocabis nomen ejus yittP, as the Syriac verfion
itfelf, which is very remarkable, renders it. And that verfion being
the proper dialed of the Syrian Chriftians, and expr effing his narhe
with the Ain $ I take it to be no mean argument of the Chriftians' re-
taining it. And I find fome of the. more moderate Jews, as Abragaftel
upon the fifty- fecond of Ifaiah, Auftor Zemach and others* exprefs him
yW Jefcbuang* and the Arab6 call him JPD 1 Ja/bng f tvith the Airi in it ;
nay, San&us Pagninus obferves in his Trad of Hebrew. Nwnes* that
on the piece of the title of thej crofo to this day kept at Rdme (Rom*
Jiqua fides) as a facred relic, our Saviour's name thereon is fouiid written
y\W Jefcbuang % as it is on this Medal.

If thefe things I produce be of any weight, and it being fo* that this
Medal of our blefled Saviour bears not a Jewi(h but a Chriftian inscrip-
tion upon it, I then hutftbly conceive if rfiay be of very ancient date, if
not from the time of his being on earth ; and that the letter p Am the
Do&or excepts againft, can be no juft exception to the antiquity of it
That of St. Auftin is nothing to the purpofe, fpeakirig only there of ideas
and mental conceptions, arid riot of any images of Chrift, St. Paul, or
the Virgin Mary in picture or fculpture.

SIR,

Your humble Servant,

Henry Rowlands.

This medal was accordingly fent to Oxford, but by the careleflhefs of the bearer it was loft on
(he way. fit fterot to hate been of the fame fort with that exhibited by Morinus de Liwg. prikurv.
e. ix. p. 305- ft. xn\ and by Wagcnleil in S$ta ap. Surenhus, Tom. iii. p. 239. And if fo, tye*
true reading \%*-Jrjkwab Nazri Mejbimb, J*vob in Adam jacbad, i. e. Jt/ut Naxtrnuu Mtffias, Demi
it bc^fimul. And ttien it tmtft be acknowledged to havt been of much later date than our au-
thor fopperies 1 and of little pr.no account. .

AN


M'0-N'A : ANTIQJJA RESTAUHATA. 301

A K

• ■•!': ■ •

E f V mo looy of British Nam e s,


AN S WE B I N C


A Quere about the Derivation of ibme, of them.

• ' )

SIR, > Feb. 5,170a.

IN order to return you what anfvver at prefent occurs, as to thofe
Britifh- names you particularized in your laft (for as for fome other
names you hinted before, they are perhaps now inexplicable) I (hall
obferve,

First, That out British anceftors, in imitation of other nations, or
rather by the u&al practice of thofe warlike times, generally affe&ed:
names, which noted ibme fpecial characters of eminency and heroic vir-
tue; as for example, of principality and conduct, of fortitude and cou-
rage? of hardinefs and resolution, of fuccefs and victory; and fometimes
of the quality of their armour and way o£ fighting. This it feems they
made choice of, to animate men to anfvver thofe characters, and to
make good what their names imported * and the women generally had
theirs froih fothe excelling characters of colour, comelintffs, or beauty.
. Secondly, That, their way of exprefling thofe warlike virtue? was
frequently by the names of fuch things, wherein thofe Virtues were
moft eminently vifible, as lion, bear, wolf, &c. or were performed by,
as head, hand, horfe, chariot, fteel, iron, &c.

CynJ] Hence I take it that Cyn, properly Head— metaphorically,
Firft, Chief, or Prince—hath been ufed as initial and terminative of
many Britifh names.

Mael.] That Math properly fteel ; metaphorically, hardnefs, armour :

Orcb.] That Qrcb or Oruch, eminent or fupreme :

Haiarn.] That Hatarn, metaphorically, ftrength :*

Cdd.] ThztCdd, i. e. army:

GwgJ\ That Gwg 9 metaphorically, fiercenefs, anger :

Dewr.] That Dewr, valiant :

Car


r. Cyn, - -


i


>i


>:-.(


302. ; MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA;^

Car and Rbod.] That Car and Rbod, i. c. fighting-chariots, have
been frequently by the ancient Britons taken up into the names of men.
As thus,

Cyn-Fael 9 backwards Maef-Gyn, armourer, or wearer

of armour. Lat. VutcanuL
Cyn-Fe/yn, yellow-head.
Cyn-Frig, taller by -the head.
Cyn-Edda: Cyn-Illin.
Cyn-Ddelw: Cyn-Uyw.
^Cyn-An 9 &c.

Artb-Fael> backwards Mael-Artb.

Dyg-Fael or Du-wg-Fael, backward Maelwg ovMaelog.

Llanfaelog.
Mael-Dewr* backward Dewr-Fael or Derfail.
Maei-Hirov Meilir*

Bretcb-Fael or Brycb-Fael, i. e. Clypeatus.
Vyd-Fael or Tyd~Dttr $ i.e. Hvrquatus.
:2. MaeU - - \ Cad-Fael or Cad-Fael-Hyder, i. e. Cadwahdr.
Hy-Fael or Howe/, i. e. boldly armed.
Teg-Fael, fairly armed.

Jli-ofn-Fael m DyfnwaL •

Dunwallo Moelmutius $ and Carreg Ddyfnwtl in Anglefey-
€aran~Fae/ $ a charioteer, or armed for that way of

fighting.
\JFfer-Mael, fenced with iron and fteel armour. :

Note, that what we called Mael was exprefled by other nations
Hard or Hardy : hence,
Hardmannusy
Hardicnute,
Wolf tardus,
Leonbardus,
Bearnbardus,
Borcbardusy
Everbardus,
Gebhardus,
Reinbardus,
WiribarduS)
Sigebardusy
>Richardus>
Edobardusy &£.J And


See more of the names of this compofi-
tion in WolfgangiusLazius and Jor-
nandes's hiftories.


MOfKA ANTIQJ/A RESTAURATA. 303

And probably the Latin Miles may come from the Celtic MaeUwr
. or Milwr, no other etymology anfwering fo properly to it.

3. Llew, - - LlewrEulyn, lion-like, i. c. Llewelyn.

4. Bhidd, - Blaidd-Ddyn, . wolf-like, i. e. Bleddyn..

ILlyw-Orcb, from Llywydd and Orcb, i. e. Lfywarcb,
chief-governor : hence probably the Latin Hercules
or Orucb-Hyll, now Ercbylh horrid.
Rbod-Orcb, fromRbod and Onr£, i. e; Rbydderch chief—
, charioteer.

Hence perhaps many Gallic words have their terminations in Onx,
which we know was ever pronounced by the natives Oricb, as
Dumnorix, Ombiorix, . Orgetorix, Cyngetorix.

{Taro^Haiarn or Trabaiarn, i.e. iron-ftrpkeor iron-arm.
Gwytbe&rHawrn or Gwetbeirn* i. e* iron- line wed or
valiant.. . -,•

Rh A d - VAnaf-Rod, Cad-Rod; Med-Rdd, &t.~ common Britifhii
^* '* " £ names of old..

CCyn-Gar, captain of * a. traiii of chariots. .
s ^, 1 Car-Onwy % Gronwy.

*'" J Car-Addog, i.e. Careiddog: Plaujlrarius. .

[^ Car- Fan 9 Llan-Garfdn.

If it be.objedied,, that the woid Af*«/, as betokening fteel or armour/,
may be thought . incongruous to the Britifli nation, becaufe authors
generally account of them as a. naked fort of people, caring little for
guarding their bodies with armour j it may to that be. replied, that,
though the generality of them had not armouc, yet fome had. And
befides, by claffing the Britifli namps into certain periods of time, we
find that moft of thofc n^mes retaining the word Mae/ in their compo~
fition were ufed fince the Roman conqueft j in which times the Bri-~
tons wore armour, which probably they called Afael} from whence the .
Saxons might, as they did feveral other things, borrow the word Mael
or Coat of Mail. And Mael is undoubtedly the ancient Britifli word for .

fteeL


50 4 TOONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

iteel or iron, of which Dr. Davies gives fomc inftandes. And the Me-
tonymy of it, in that fcnfe, is frequently nfed in other languages.

I find alfo Mae/, Maelio> ufed for gain, profit, and poflibly for con-
queft, in our tongue. And our extent* book makes mention of Gwyr- '
Mae/, belonging to our Welfti princes in their feveral Manors and Can-
trtjs. But becaufe I find that moft part of the Britifii names which
begin or end in Maef, are only . applicable to the word in that fenfe, I
was willing to apply it to fteel or armour. Yet I will not contend!
.for the certainty of it, but take it only for probable, as I do of the
other names I have accounted for, till a better etymology of them be
offered.

Indeed, names owe their etymons to fo many languages, that it is
not poflible to account for them from any one tongue, though ever fo
ancient. Tacitus mentions one Catvalda, a prince of the Suevi, in the
reign of Tiberius, whom Wolfgangius Lazius calls Cadwalder in the
language, he fays, of that country ; and yet we take the name to be
wholly Britifh. But perhaps you'll fay the Sutvi were neighbours to
the Rhstian and Norican Gauls, and thereby might borrow that name
from the Gauls, and confequently the Gauls and the Britpns being ori-
ginally one nation, the name might become common among them ;
which, I confefs, is very probable.

The fame reafon may be given for Catamelus, a petty prince of the
Carni, and Hymelus, of the Marcomani or the ancient Danes ; both
which names may feem, by that rule of promifcuoufly ufing letters of
one organ, to anfwer our names of Cad-Fad and Hy-Fael, that is,
Howeli which Ihewsthat one tongue can never anfwer in itfelf for. all
the names of it.

Befides, it is to be obferved, that in the original variation of lan-
guages, words betokening 1 things of general concernment, have retained
much of their primitive found in the divided tongues or dialedte ; of
which there are abundance of inftances. But here I ihall be particular
only in one or two. Firft, too Mare, lord or potentate ; and fuch the
Gauls call Mawr, and (bine of the German dialeds call Mayr. Hence
it is that many proper names among the Gauls terminate in Marus,
viz. Vadomarus t Cbondomarus, Suemarus, &c. And in Myrus among
the Northern nations, as Widimyrus, Balamyrus, Tbeodomyrus> &c.
Hence very probably the Latin Mavars or Mars, one of the Titari
potentates.

2 To


•M*>'tf-A f 'ANTIQJJ A : - ; k'ES TAURATA. '305*
\ To the fame purpofe, 'fecondly/ the He&rew word *ym * Rac6at> §
i.e. great and powerful, was perhaps retained* in the Celtic, and ap-
plied in naming their great ones by the Gauls anc^ Britons with the
(band Qrcb or Orucb* is : Bcfore inftancetl; arid by the Tcutbrts or ;Geif-
mans with Rick br Rich, AWdridb, Kertfidb, Huririch or ' Hehrictr, and
Hymelrich; the former exprefling by it Eminency and Greatriefs; and thte
latter Wealth and Power.

By this way we may give a reafon of the agreement of names in fe-
veral languages, when fbme part of their compofition are original .found*
without engrofling all to 4 any one of them; and the iVant of this confH
deration hath inclined fome people to reckon too much on their own
language, and perplexed antiquity with very grofs miftakes;

. I ftll^c'l *■.'•..•-.■

S I R, : • *

•...•■ ■ ' Yours, &c.

The Answer to the foregoing Letter, * - " ' :

\\ SIR, :

I Return you mpft humble thanks for yours of Feb. 5. I am fo'rauch
fatisfied with your obfervatious about our Brixilh names, that I
have no objections to. offer; but recommend the fame; to your farther
improvement, at ypur leifure, in. other examples, which our -old. pedi-
grees may abundantly fupply you with.. Apd I am fo much the more
bold herein g becaufe I deiign to conOder.that fubjed in the firft beok
of the Arch^Qlogi*.*— ?I thank you for your note about Catv.alda,
prince of the Suevi, and Cat am tl us ami Hymelus. Not only the JLa-
tin bi|t ^lfo thp Northern M w*as, we. may iafely conclude, equivalent
to our F 9 ¥™ W* And we, as the Irifli do ftiil, ufed either M or B
where we now vfe F, &c. till about the time of thfc Norman conqtoefh
4 Th^t th$ Teutonic M.and our (modern) F are the lame, appears from
divers words. . Thus their Jummer (which I know would flartle fome
philologers) is Undoubtedly the fame word with our baf; 'for in joiri
Jrifh parchments, I find it wHtten Samb 9 and their modern word is

. t} ... . .: . ' ! -.< '...; • ' •• •

• Hence probably the Greek i*yj* 3fd fyx™ fy chief and principal^ and thc v Iiifli Atacb for
faertgth andpowtr, hadalfiTthe.r derivation/
,-' ij ,. • R. r SutHh*


^06 ^ftN.A./HTtftyA, ^ESTAU^AT'A.
#mbrf4l>\ As f*y our Wing jhf # ia th^egUwwng *[ ffccfc VQf( fc M
the -Teutonic language^ and the Latin begin with aa £, we agroe
.t^eipin with thq Greeks* ajid Spaniards, I know not whether any ci>
lie hap offered anjr rq*fon for this, diwrfity in Reference to the Gnecfc
uyid Latin Ifmgiwges, wh<^eia. ift is. vulgarly known, **w,Jhni; U W
i/S$f > far*, fih &c. Bui foot the Irifli language wc may plaialy ft*,
how we and the Spaniards came by that pronunciation j viz. from oar
ancient cuflom of varying the initial letters. For the Jri(b do not only
vary thofe, initial fetters th^t.we do, but alfo change their initial F> S
jpAtfintp H r D, into G; apd G roto G& Tim? Satbadb ia tfeeliife
word for thrqfting ; ^ batbadb,fc* be did thruft. Sflfodb x tot defile; &
haluidb tu, thou, haft defiled. Sarruadb* to opprefs; ni hai/tocha tu>
thou (halt not opprefs. So, ,/?**» old j fiabboe, a hawk * //&£, a wil-
low-tree ujiol* feed * jfc£tf* fait ; Jiitb % a fwarro, &c. muft, as the fyn-
tax requires, be pronounced fometimes bean* beavok, bilog, bil 9 ba/en,
and btitb. And as the Teutonic Jummer is the fame with our baf 9 fo]
it their Saxon breompfa or wild garlick (now ramfons) the fame with*,
our craf. For we are to. note, that the old Teutons pronouncing the
ipitialC very gutturally, as we of North- Wales and the Arraoric-Bri- -
tons do flill, d»d by degrees foften it to an H 9 as the South-Wales men
now do, who fay, bwain % b ( wftre % bmlio % bwtrtbin % &c. for cbwain,
cbware, &c. When I fpeak of barbarous nations altering their let-
ters, i mean only fuch potentates as we now afcribe to thofei letters ; fyr,
I am fatiafied that all fuch-like variations came by the ear of the mul-
titude, and not from writing, which very few, if any ^t all; under*
Aood. Thi* variation of C into H, feems to me mafcifeft from tbefe
following *wid fiich-like examples: Sax. baenep (now hemp) cannabis:
Sax. brafodj (now bead) caput. Horn, cornu ; hart, cerous% heart, cor;
hoftyCawdi hrnid, cants ; hus or houfe, called- by the Italians cafa\
hwa, (now wboj quii what* quid: Sax^ btwegol, a cycle* a hundred (by
the Canfcabrians or old Spaniards, ebunj centum, &c* Prom theft and
other fuch-like obfervations it appears to me, that all our neighbour-
ing tongues might he demooftrated to be of oneorigin* as for theScla<-
wnian and others more- remote, I have, no knowledge of them* and fa
can fay nothing..

, rl am not averfe to publiflx in thisfirft book of Afchaologii Rritanr
nica, fucb a collation of the principal words ofi the feveral Bmifh
dialers, as you recommend ; but the Irifh would fall much ihort of
the reft. And I know hot whether the lafgc lt\Q\ aAfl ths Gornifh vo*

i cahulary.


M/O tf A 'k-W'tT I^QJLJ A 41 Eff IT A 4J R A fr A, * 3*7 ,

cabulary, I tiave made fotftfifttdme, tbgethdr wkh grammatical- ob-
fcrvations about* their agrecrtient^wich oaf BritiA, maytio! in great mea-
fifrfc anfwer the end* you pfopofe. In your t^ext be pteafed to iiWert
your rtotipn of the ufe of ibch aft index, Jhore at large, that f - fniy far* '
theromfider <tf it?, f *• •>> * . .i .• . ' ...i . ,-.,''

I fiippofe your friend that paralleled the British words with the lri<h
wtf'M'f. E.*F, Vho hafs ^een fo kind as Wi»part to me alfo an alpha- r
betktfl catalogue of » fufch words, before ever Ihad any thoughts of the*
defignl am itovP engaged ib.r Iftippoft hehasnisde large improvements •
fihte. Atod klde^d it fe^nisiw me that the Irifh have irt a groat «$aftt«v
kept tip *wo languages; the' old Britifli, and the Scottish vrtuch'fliey f
bh>ughr\vith thdrft fh>lh r S|>aihr^Pot HdtwtthftamKng their hiftdrfctf '{m 1 -
thofe of the. prigfe of o&ct nations) be involved in 'fables j »that *thfe , re v *
came a Spanifh colony into Ireland, is very manifeft ffchn-tftotitp&ittin*
o£the Itffh tongue partly With -the fcibd&ii S^antft, but efpedially with
the Cantabrian or 9aft}ue. Afcd this fhould invite us to have fotoething : .
of mere- rfcgard than we ufually havfc to fuch fabulous hiftoriefr. They /
have ^lib, I think, a greater allay of the Teutonic than we : zsjheacbt> *
fymi*il#ibtifa (orWwj/ hollow y jfr''*ittP4ur*;J
br^flk ^iid^aJef , «roi &ol : >J •' * * « '• , «• *' ' .; •' "•«

I have as vet had but little time for'tfce perufcl of youf Antiquitiefc 6f*
Arigtafcy* 1 OitalH' ever remain ienfibteof-my obligations forgot* tbrn^
i*HMita**n£ a piece which feetts^vjarth -all I have hkfcefrto &#t With* -Vf


.> i '


"- r < *' . i >i " i .j « f : ^' ' \ ?C if* B 'f • • ! :'H ' ^


j . .-<;," .. :84!R,. 'f


>. ■:; j .->••;,—' . . :£,ij: «. 'f : ;; : ,:tt


« T


Yours entirely*


:> ; .- ; ' r [ : ' .> < f vv • .;•;,: : ) «: •: • .J Edward lii^ryd t

* :rL I i : . ^!: *. ': 2 .*!.!.:' .u r:r .•♦;.:): , , .: : ; .*.:[:«. » .. t

AiWtbqr Latt.b*, jcpacgroiog. the ztfy finding out the Is.ia
■ of Anglesey by the Ancient -GacEfcs.

N anfwer to. youfe ■ ■ . > ■ *■ * r t have this to (ay, that Neither the*


I


Jfland of Mona, nor many other of the Britifh ifles,, were utterly
unknown to Jthe inquifitive Greeks in very early, timts. And that will
appear .if we confider thefe particulars. 4 ' '

% : Rri First,


3 e$; M<W.A; AJS f TI.QUA. R.ESTAURATA;,:

First; That the Titan, empire, of whifch Greece was b menifeci**
and the capital reftdence of- their princes x>n this fide of the Mediterra-
nean, pnade quick and large cofHjujsfts of many countries an4 iflandft tp ;
the/iveftwajrd, as X>r, Pcsron, you. know, has very JeafnedJy .proved *
who therefore, no doubt, made life of and encouraged nayig4fJ0ftr*B$ii;
(hipping (the uie whefeof is. 4s ancient as Noah's ark) to find ;ogt
unconquered places. < And hence it is, that they tell us^of- their. Neptdne*.
Tritons, and Argonauts, who undoubtedly were their fea'COtwnaftderfr, :
in thofe expeditions j and though fufficienfly fabulized by their fUb&r
qijent poets, yet the very names of them,* as I. have intimMfsd W pneof |
my late letters* being Celtic, and by the moil accountably etymology,
implying f*a- faring men, do difcover fome foundation of trqth in thofe '
relations, though in their way of delivering thettj tfeey appear $vec t fo. ;
wild and romantic* . / , , ! >. • \ f • 4 . , * • ">•::-'.

Secondly, TheJr.way.of foiling *> the vroftefn British ificfl w*»vt}rjr
plain and eafy ; fesr if you Jodk on the map of Europe, you- will finds
that the .Str eights mouth bears npar.dQe Weft to the coaftsef Greece.,
And when they fail ten or twenty leagi^es ftraight ta the opeajv, beyond |
the ccafts of Spa^n, their failing thence on a runab cKrp#ly Negri} v$ r >
avoidably brings them to thecoaft of Ireland and, to > the Jriih (jbagnel*!
wherein this Me of Motia is feattd* " t • : *. ' r - . ,

-Qive me leave to expatiate here on the w^y of foiling ufed by the ancientf •
We muA opt think that, because , they wanted the ooiappfs* they durft
sot launch out of the fight of land ; it is a vulgar error/ Altho 9 that
noble invention was but lately difcoverod>l yet we are fure many expert
feamen of old made great and fpecefsful voyages. If they had not the
north-pointing needle, they had the north-pole ftar (far more fteady
and invariable) to guide tbem. And not only that, but they had all
the other ftars in this hemifphere, and together with them the arch of
the fun in the day-time, to give them dire&ion. I ever thought that
fea-voyages gave the firft rife to the obfervation of the ftars, on which
aftronomy was founded ; becapfe in that cafe men had moft need of tak-
ing notice of them, and to diftinguiih them for their particular ufe; as
we find thefe Titans to have done, either giving them the names of their
princes, via. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, or of fpn|e ljoted
achievements of theirs, as of Arg5, Pegafus, Andromeda, &c. under
which names, and twenty more, the ftars and coqftellations were farni**
liarly "known to them. And as to the matter in hand, I will appeal to
any knowing feaman, if the Greeks failing along the Mediterranean

direftly


dire&ly Weft to the Streights mouth, and fome way farther, and from *
thence turning their courfe diredly North; whether their way on thofe
two points, and by thefe helps only; 1 w& not very fafe and eafy, - to ar-
rive git the Britifti and Irifc channel ^ And if X^y* we qwy conclude, it
was w>ne fo. -«>r we ane^iure that Aie Phoenicians, who were a branch
pf thefe Titans, frequently voyaged here for tin and other commodities, ,
fome ages before the Roman/ conqueft; and:by.that means might bring
the Ifle of Mona, which they could not mifs by coafting the Weft of Bri-
t»iiv Jawl: to^F thfrigs f efatfog-jp it*, to jthojfctiojyjedgs of the ' Greets, *
who would not fail, if things appeared Angularly defirable in it, to im-
prove their talent of feigning Hcfperiatr Gardens and Elyfian Fields to-
be part of the characters of it*.

ItaipaLY, I (hall ajiplp : thefe ton fide f a tiotifi:. it a clear the -way ten a
right notion of Plutarc^s : ftonies, .whjcji l.jbe^Qf^liinted to you, and-
particularly of that other in * Diodorus SicAlusJ which muft belong ;
to one of thefe Britiih , ides : for there was no ifle of that bignefs to «
the' North of Gfeece which they could communicate With; And' when
tjapir, pta«»o*r«* wli* .prflttfMjj fro*gl|fe ,tfoe«r t^^cquqtfoffvit, jroM-
thupQl tttWr* yyperbwiWiV,or jwlbewiQz&fy \t L y^f(^ x »Qtiu rc£pe&
to .iQffeeeti battp tbbffaUthtystegWto tuF^ t^b^.pourXe ?t, and; to Xait
northerly . And 4* to that parr, pf the, relation* which fays that they,
coqld .difpoyer njQuptaia* ia-tbe t mqon $ it w»s a very antient opinio^.
WP. n B^W*W»apk. > Nfijtar is it.jjnflipb^e^.b^,^,^ ^c^n^V
Ojigh* kww-th<miiycrf M^

eafy hvijfeif ) iby jh<; help : ftf whiclvvtJifitpiKijpipqnonus . ^y^UcfKCfa^
We ; jaiid if; tb^y h*! it> it is; . a* eafy to imagine . that • thejr kept^t ia *
their Cabala among. <*heri*eprets, and fa might : bp loft ^ jtil} later pgqa
foundit-out^gaiq,, *ed by $£ varip|^aj^pUcfQofi ; Qjg iL£qpqbJ£A thpfe -
f<:iencp5^a< depend PffMftwMM^ie^
U*raedM*WprofejQt i ag^ftr^m^le?s o£ fc ;i: . .,,', ,o;V) Jty} ., ^ ni ;/ :r/


I .... »r '


;n y.li ; V. \:?U-'. • '!i ."■:•:.:..*:.! >:q ?:oJhr :*rll J'.:!j h?<jj # c£j^
.!• ' : * ''- '«' • -•:"! ^>"' j*: i:i - -j:oii 1...1J0 frrNjl L ;.-:r-J I


3%^ H'owuwnnjrA'Mi VAu^Afu;


J ;c :.f.


3. O M & .


'WfllCtf PASSED BET WES*

The Author and the late Mr- Edwaju> Lmhvyi> *

(Keeper of the Aflimole Mufeum in Oxford)

Coaching fame Things treated of in thefe Es$a»»> iiliot
: , .imprQpetto fcfe added here. \ ' ; : 'V :

t>EAR S MU Oxford, Nov. i f jjot. K

I WAS tHts J fomnier, for^bodt three or foor Uraksr, at Cambridge j
beinginvtted thithci* by a falfe tkiebf a manofcrfjit* in their late-
printdd Catalogue, vtrhk& prttthHed me amtyJtff IMteiA afrd Ireknd : bv
Giraldas Cambfenfis-j though the bobk, wheft <c6nfaktd, afforded no-
tiling but the out-Khes of two iflandS, with the word Britannia in the
tAi&fcdf ^fre'of them, andHibernia in tht^other, arid' the Orchadw
placid WitWixt bothj tnftead of the Hebrides* , I h^d f6verrf other ra£»
riufetfpts to confblt j but ftcfeivedrio great ihftraAlon. 'Hdwevier; be-
ing there, I copied Giraldus's£piftles$ and lingered out my time bet wiW
:fhe public library, that of Berinet-'ColWge > fend TVinity.

In the pubRc library I' happened to'ifteet' With a very ancient -man u-
fcTipt'df Juvenctrti 1 a&panilh prfelVWho'twrnid the gofpel into fcerdit?
verfe in the ti toe of Conftantine- It Ws' W?kfe»' upon very *hk}k parch-i
ment, in that charadter we call the Irifh, but was indeed anciently the
Brittfh, whence both they and the Saxons received it. Turning the
leaves over, I obferved here anil there fome words glofled or interpreted
by other morei familiar Latin words, and fometimes by Britiih; whereby
I Jearped that the Britons pronounced the letter M in the midft and at
the end of words as we now pronounce V confonant j which accounts
for the name of Cadyan being /written Catamanut at Lban Gadwaladr.
I learfted feveral other notes as to their orthography, with the fignifica-
4toa of fome few words j but I am at a lofs to know the British of what

country


,Ml<yNlAJ MCKnBIAipJLi JJUTOTA If Jl AT A. :$n

. Wlnlfyj*.WJ&r£ forfitfiwm*foriilta ftatid rather

iufpe&it feifherfor tbeiatigujigeof flhe PHd^ or that of thaSfnuichayJ

Jfrittfisi a$ .perhaps you will own: upon, reading 1 the three following

.JEfigtpvi Jftfckh I. found, at the top^axgin of three fucceffive pages in
the midft of the jboftk* . .{^gfeJSff^J&rie bath printed in the letter, which

Ae'fwnitlktm written m* and itiayl&efte*, &itb bit reading vf fbenhin his

- I ha*ve filit it tor one Mi. >*******, a Shropfhire Wclflimao, and a
J&bcn^wUngttift and, critic^ but her returned me fuch an interpretation as
\9tti& rtfifc iwwM»ul>k Jtouiwhhal./ . *\\ -.- ,) !

, ..■§«* iVhftJg* .tQltfanfo flbs .'lftttor/.cnd-rf i^wrg-to ; begin w prfnt my
Archaeologta; what information you can contribute in the. interim' (par^- -
<icukrly as <a ancient cuftoms, Ike.) will be-very, acceptable to;

> «••■•,"

- . *-...-•->."•. Worthy Sift? .• * • »-:..-.. : ; ^

' Your iBO&oyigod huiable Servint, r .

Edward Lhwyd.


DfeAR SlR*. Orford, Dec. lo, 170J.

I Received your obliging letter of th£ feventh. ' I am well fati&fied
much of your reading is true ; but that of Mr. ******** will, I
believe, furprize you, as well as it did me, when you fee it.— As to
the letter Z. 9 it; was till of late the only letter the Armoricans and Cor-
nkh ufed both for dk and tb\ and a pried of Quempetf diocfcfe fa Bre-
tagoe taught me to read Brezomc >\lirtgud Armoricand) Bretbona^;\
Yrhereafr thofe of the diocefe of St. Paul de Leon, # who pretend to be
tKe refiners of the British, haddire&ed-me to read, a* we (hbulc) in Eng:-
]*nd,J(}rezauc%},bn*jp\i{rnja& know that almpfbalLforejgfierf j&roocjtHice
thje Z «ts /!/./ In an. old Cornifli manufcript I have on parchment, the
word, for Jhther is written toys;, and fo I foupd it always* but they pro*
nounce theit^Saa wedQ^^J ara afraid w« (hall hear no more of the
THebrew coin, it is now.fo.long firace it wars lofL I (hall long, heartily
to read your AroH^plogicai Observations, apd\ 3m v$qyigl&4 to * f?«d you
have confid^red .that fubjedk. It is the happieft terpiper a martoan< be
ftt&fter of, not .to-be jpatenacioufrtof- hisconje&ures j and X tapM am

not


3*2 MlO-JNTAJ 2AWZKLQJJ AT RIETCT/A UR'ATA.

^notef fcbcm: iiimberTObarfre^tentlyrecj^meiwiuhis dodrlrie,'ahd yet

'.are very indulgent to their bv^n fancies; of which difeafei know none

<morc.{ick than Dr. **#**** r ^h© makes his hypothetic a demonftratioa

of -what Mofes (fays Mr. Harries) hinted at;: and is very much difpleafed

i at every one who dues^ot .believe it as much as gofpel; .': t

\ . Amoiigftyour othorVArchseologiotl Obfervatibns, lihoidd bfc glad of

your thoughts of the fignification of Britifh proper namtsof men and

iwbmen, ex. gr. what the word Mae/, fo common with them, knight

imply; which was of frequent ufc;with them' both in the. former and

later part. of names, as Maelgwn, Cynfaebi Maeldren&i <DerfAtl\ v Artb~

fael, Maekrtb; Brycbjutl, CaSfael, Garanfael, Byfitvoah Tegfae/} Tydfael,

fjermoeh &c. • ' ?

I find divers places, whofe names are now obfeure* named in ancient
times from mens proper names ; asT Glwyfig, in Denbighshire, from
Eli/eg i Coed Marcban near Rutbyn, find Cejen Farcban in Caermartben-
Jhire % from Marcben ; Pant y Pol-lion, in the fame county, from Pauli-
nus. For I have found monuments of thefe perfons at each of them,
the lateft whereof, viz. Elifeg, was great-grandfather to Cyngen ap Ca*
dell, prince of Towys, who died about thereat 840.

SIR,

Your real Friend, and humble Servant,

Edward LhwycL

!: J. .

Worthy Sir, ago, March u,. 1699-700.

IT HAD not been fo long filent, but for a reafon I have mentioned
JL this poft to Mr. Bulkeley ; for I was loth to trouble my friends till
I had fomething to fay that might feem worth communicating; and in-
deed one half of my time, fince I left you, has been; fpent in places
quite remote from all correfpondence, amongft the Hebrides arid other
highlands of Scotland, with whom their neighbours feem to have left
commerce than they have with either of the Indies. They are nothing
*fo barbarous as the Lowlanders and Englifh commonly reprefent them ;
but are, for what I could find, a very hofpitable and civil people. And
the main reafons of their contrary character I take to be their adhering
-too much to their ancient. cuftoms, habit and language; whereby they

diftinguifh


M6NA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA, 313

iHftinguifh thettofefreS frofti all their neighbours j and diftinftions always
create rtiuttral reflexions. I hkve filled about three fleets of paper with
their ttrftoms (any or all \frhereof you may command at your leifure) and
have ttanflated Mr, Ray's DiSttonariblum Trilingue into their language,
which in two thirds, ot thereabouts, agrees with ours. They have alfo
the fame fort of monuments we have, viz- Caer y Cdrn, Cromlech, and
ftones pitched on end circularly ; agreeing fometimes exa&ly with ours,
atid fometimes a little Varying from them. But as to the names of places,-
I know not whether the Lowlands of Scotland may hot agree more with
the Britifh than the Highlands : as to inftance in forrie names of their
rivets.


Airw


- s


r Arw, Mcmmouthfhire


Toy


-


Tawy, Glamorganshire


Avin


-


Afon


Leven


a-


Lbefeni


Yeviot
Ywede


-


u


*Tywod


Ail


- 3 (


Elwy


w


c


Wyjk


Klide


-


S


Clwyd


Irwin


•


v
^


Hirwen


Tovi


-


tr>


*eifi


Nid


-


Nedb, Glamorganfhire


Douglas


* •*


l Dulas


ftttt indeed, moft nattieS of plates throughout the kingdoms of Ireland
and Scotland relifh much of a Brififli origin ; though I fufped that upon
a diligent comparifon of the languages and cuftoms, we (hall find that
the antient Scots of Ireland were diftindt from the Britons of the fame-
kingdom ; but as yet I have not put my notes together, fo as to be fatif-
fied herein.

We colleded a tonfiderable number of inferiptions in Scotland, and
fome in this kingdom, both Latin and Irifh. But I could meet with no
antiquary, hitherto of either country, that could interpret thofe in the
Irifh. One monument I met with, within four miles of Edinburgh, dif-
ferent from all I had ken elfewhefre, and never obferved by their anti-
quaries. I take it to be the tomb of fome Pidtifh king y though fituate
by a river-fide, remote enough from any church. It is an area of about:
feven yards diameter, raifed a-little above the reft of the ground, and en-

S £ compared!


3t4 MONA ANTIQJtfA RESTAURATA.
compafled with large (tones ; all which flones are laid lengthwife, ex-
cepting one larger than ordinary, which is pitched on end, and contains
this infcription in the barbarous chara&ers of the fourth and fifth centu-
ries, In oc tumulojacit Vetta F. ViSti. This the common people call the
Cdt-Stene, whence I fufpedt the perfon's name was Getus, of which name
I find three Pidtifli kings ; for the names pronounced by the Britons with
G were written in Latin with V 9 as we find by Gwyrtbeyrn, Gwyrtbe-
fyr and Gwytbelyn, which were written in Latin Vortigernus, Vortime-
rus and Vitelinus. I alfo met with one monument in this kingdom
very Angular. It (lands at a place called New-Grange near Drogheda;
and is a mount or barrow of very confiderable height, encompaflcd with
vaft (tones pitched on end round the bottom of it ; and having another
leflcr (landing on the top. This mount is all the work of hands, and
♦confifts almoft wholly of (lones ; but is covered with gravel and green
fwerd, and has within it a remarkable cave. The entry into this cave
is at bottom, and before it we found a great flat (lone, like a large tomb-
(lone, placed edgewife, having on the outfide certain barbarous carvings,
like fnakes encircled, but without heads. The entry was guarded all
along on each fide with fuch rude (lones, pitched on end, fome of them
having the fame carving, and other vaft ones laid a-crofs thefe at top.
The out-pillars were fo clofc preffed by the weight of the mount, that
they admitted but jufl creeping in, but by degrees the paffage grew wider
and higher till we came to the cave, which was about five or fix yards
high. The cave confifls of three cells or apartments, one on each hand,
and the third (Iraight forward, and may be about feven yards over each
way. In the right-hand cell (lands a great bafon of an irregular oval
figure of one entire flone, having its brim oddly finuated or elbowed in
and out ; and that bafon in another of much the fame form. Within
this bafon was fome very clear water which dropped from the cave above,
which made me imagine the ufe of this bafon was for receiving fuch
water, and that the ufe of the lower was to receive the water of the up-
per bafon when full, for fome facred ufe, and therefore not to be fpilled.
In the left apartment there was fuch another bafon, but (ingle, neither
was there any water in it. In the apartment (Iraight forward there was
no bafon at all. Many of the pillars about- the right-hand bafon were
carved as the (lones above-mentioned; but under feet there was nothing
but loofe (tones of any fi?e in confufion ; and amongft them a great many
bones of beads and fome pieces of decrs horns. Near the top of this mount
they found a gold coin of the emperor Valcntinian ; but notwithftanding

this,


MONA ANTIQJLJA RESTAURATA. 5 r 5

this, the rude carving above-mentioned makes me conclude this monu-
ment was never Roman, not to mention that we want hiftory to prove that
ever the Romans were at all in Ireland, The druid dbdtrine about the
Glain Neidr obtains very much throughout all Scotland, as well the Low-
lands as Highlands; but there is never a word of it in this kingdom,
where it feems, in regard there were no fnakes, they could not propagate
it. Befides the fnake-ftones (whereof I procured fome variety in Scot-
land) the Highlanders have the fnail-jlones, paddoc-Jlones, mole-Jiones,
hedge- hog-Jlones, kock-knee-Jlones, elf -arrows 9 duel-Jiones % &c to all which,
they attribute their feveral virtues, and carry them about them as amu-
lets.. The Irifh have many more ancient manufcripts than we ire
Wales j but fince the late revolutions they are much leflened. I now and
then pick up. fome very old parchment manufcripts * but they are hard
to come by, and they that do any thing underffand th^m, value them as
their lives. This province of Connaught abounds with figured foffilsr
but they are much the fame with thofe in Wales, though feveral among
them new. Wc have alfo met with fome Alpine plants here that Bri-
tain no-where affords. At your leifure a few lines directed to be left
with Mr. Richard Bulkeiey, at the Blind-Key in Dublin* will be ex-
ceeding acceptable to*

Your mofl obliged humble Servant,

Edward Lhwydl


D£AR SlR,. Oxford, March io, 1701.

I WAS heartily glad to hear by the bearer of your good health, and
thought it high time to beg your pardon for my long filence $ and'
to aflure you that being now returned hither and fettled, I (hall for the
future be more mindful of my duty to my befl friends. T came home
but this week out of Bretagne in France, which I was forced to quit
much fooner than I intended. For I had fcarce been there three weeks
when the intendant (des marines) of Breft, fent a provd three and thirty/
miles (viz. to St. Paul de Leon) to bring me before him. The mef-
fenger found me bufy in adding, the Armoric words to Rfr. Ray's J)/V-
tionariolum lri/mgue, with a great many letters and fmall manufcripts
about the table, which he immediately fecured, and then proceeded to*
fearch our pockets for more. All thefe papers he tied up in a napkin,,
aad requiring me to put three feals thereon, added three more of his

S f 2. own*.


3 x6 MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA..

own. I told him I had brought letters of recommendation to the theo-
logal of the city, who is the third perfon in the dioCefc ; upon which
he went with me to him. The gentleman owned it, and delivered him
the letter, adding another in our behalf tp his matter, the intendant,
and a third to a captain of a man of war at Bred. Having fecured our
papers, he granted us the favour of going to Breft before them, a-part,
that the country might not take notice of our being prifoners. Upon
our appearance before the intendant, he never troubled us with examina-
tion, but ordered us forthwith to the caftle : arid next day the jailor
brought us word from him, that we muft find for ourfeives, for that we
ibould not have the benefit of the ufual allowance for the king's prifoners,
which was a livre (or one (hilling and eight-pence) a-day. Upon this,
we replied, we had no money, but only letters of credit upon merchants
in fomc towns we defigned to travel through; and fo quarrelled with our
jailor, refuting to take any meat or wine from him on fuch terms : \yhich
we did, becaufe we found we did not lie much under mercy, having a
ground room and the qonveniency of receiving through a window any
thing that was neceflary; which fome Irifli foldiers in the caftle would
bring us for our money. Next day he brought us word, we were al-
lowed fifteen-pence a-day; and that allowance we had, together with
tolerable good white wine for three-pence a-quart, during our confine-
ment, which was juft eighteen days. When we had been there a week,
we thought it high time to draw up a petition, that we might be exa-
mined, &c. But this being writ in Latin, the captain above-mentioned,
to whom I fent it in order to be prefented, defired to be excufed, in re-
gard the intendant w^s not converfant in that language. However, next
day he f<?nt for us out, and then fhpwed us our mail of papers and the
fcals entire ; and opening it, they required me to mark each particul^
paper and bopk, andalfo write my name on them all. After this they
were delivered to an interpreter, who kept them about nine days, and
though many of them were writ ia Welfli and fonje in Cornifh, yet he
rightly concluded from the nature, of the reft, they contained nothing of
treafpn, and bearing the chara&er of an interpreter, he was loth to own
himfelf p.uzzled; fo tpld them in general, without any exception, none
of my papers related to ftate-majters, upon which we were difmiffed,
and had all our papers reftored, but denied a pafs to Paris., and ordered
to depart the kingdom ; the prov$ telling us, the war was already de-
clared againft the emperor, the Dutch and the Englifh. About a fort-
night before they feized us, they had fecurecj, two other Enelifti gentle-
t r men,


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 3 i 7
men, both Londoners, one Mr. Taylor, a merchant, and one Keek, for-
merly a lieutenant in a man of war under his prefent majefty, who told
me he was well acquainted with Mr. Maurice Owen of Holy-Head, &c*
Thefe gentlemen (tho* the provo acknowledged to me they had nothing
againft them) fared much worfe than we did ; being committed to the
common town-jail, confined double the time, and yet not one farthing/
allowed them. So much for our coarfe welcome in France, which pre-
vented almoft all the enquiries I defigned, into the language, cuftoms and
monuments of thai province. For all we could do was but to pick up
about twenty fmali printed books in their language, which are all, as.
well as ours, hooks of devotion, with two folios publiftied in French;
the one containing the hiftory of Bretagne, the other the lives of the
Armoric faints* I had been before in Cornwal during the fpace of three
or four months; and coming hither found that the Armorican and Cor-
nifli differed lefs than the prefent Engliih of the vulgar in the north from
thofe of the weft of England; but inrefpe&of us the difference is.
greater. The Corniflx is much more corruptly fpoken than the Armori-
can, as being confined to half a fcore parilhes towards the Land's-End;
whereas the other is the common language of a country almoft a$ largo
as Wales. I had taken directions about ancient Britifh manufcripts ia
fome of their convents, and fome perfons noted for their {kill in the lan-
guage and antiquities of their country, but wa$ not allowed time to <ron~
fitft either men or books, or to view any of their old gioiwjments, fo that:
I (hall be able to fay little of th^t country* befides what relates to their
language. Dr. Lifter in his Journey to Paris mentions one Pessroik abbot
of Charpiqife, as a great critic i#* the American language and antiqui-
ties, adding he had fettled a correspondence between him and me ; but
I could never yet, though I writ twice or thrice according to the dosftor>
diredions, obtain one line from him. I have procured tranferipts of the
only three manuscripts extant in the Cornifh. The oldeft is a poem of
the paflion of our Saviour, written on parchment about two hundred years
fence j the others contain feveral operas or plays, all out of the Scripture.
Their language comes neareft that dialed of the Briti(h called in Dr. Da-
vies Gwenbwyjeg, or the language of Monmouth and Glamorgan.

I difeovered* there fome old inferiptions not obferved before, probably
aboutsuhoufand years ftanding, viz. the tomb-ftonea of Ciris ap Cynfor,
Rbiwalbfran ap Cynwa/, Cenadbaf ap Tcbdinw, and Cnegwy ap Ennian :
three whereof have places near thefe monuments denominated from them,
though (becaufe they could not read them) none fufpe&ed it before, or

believed


3 i8 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

believed my reading. The places are called Pol (i.e. Pwlbj Ciris, Gon-
falCburcb* and Man (i.e. Macn) Cneg. The modern Cornifli feem to»
me a colony of the Armoricans from their language and habit ; which is.
alfo agreeable with our Britifli hiftory. . For one may obferve from the
names of places that another people once poffefled that country, as one
may from the names of places in fome parts of Wales gather that the
Iriih nation once inhabited there, particularly in Brecknockfhire and
Caermarthenfhire, where the lakes are called Lbycba* and the high moun-
tains Banna \ as they commonly are throughout the Highlands of Scot-
land and Ireland. I had no opportunity (though had I been aware of
what happened I could have made better ufe of my time) of obferving
any remains of Druidifm amongft the Bretons ; but the Cornifli retain
variety of charms, and have dill towards the Land's-End the amulets of
Maen Magal and Glain Neidr, which latter they call a Melpref or Milpref %
and have a charm for the fnake to make it, when they have found one
afleep, and ftuck a hazle-wand in the centre of her fpirce, &c.

Cornwal affords (lore of thofe barbarous monuments we have iir
Wales : fome whereof are alfo, I prefume, in all our neighbouring coun-
tries of Europe, viz. Meini Gwyr (or ftones pitched circularly) CrcmleicB,
Cryg or Gorfed/b, Caer, Cam, &c. Of thefe in our fmall progrefs in
Bretagne, we met with only the Cryg and Caer, but were informed alfo
of the circular ftones. I have in Cornwal obferved of thofe Britifh-
towns you (hewed me in your neighbourhood, and we have draughts of
them as of all things elfe that occurred. I have no mind to take hand
from paper, but time not permitting me to trouble you farther, I only add
my moft humble and dutiful refpedls to Mr. B****** and Mr. L*****
and that nothing can be more welcome here than a few lines directed at
your leifure to,

SIR,

Your much obliged Friend and Servant,,

Edward Lhwyd.

The reader, I hope, will pardon the digreffivc part of this letter, fot
that it introduces the latter and more inftruftive part ; and with fome
readers the whole perhaps will not be unentertaining j it is therefore
wholly inferted.


Of


Wi -wfr \f<, /fi


*i


A'i: **"" '


i 1


;*' '


(I


v.


JPtoAJOT. Plan of the Bridi


» Stones


Jfy'.HO


1


I


i


1


L


A


A a 7 A Feet


JlW:" £


A


JL


At


The Entr uuc


■111111


% ;


I d


1


1 j


<->


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 319

Of the Bride Stones.


TO thefe Letters it may not be improper to. add the following,
which contains the defcription of an ancient Druidical monu-
ment, called the Bride Stones ; and was communicated to us by the Rev.
Mr. Thomas Malbon, redtor of Congleton in Cheshire. It is not only
curious in itfelf j but is nearly allied to the fubjett of this book, and
ferves to confirm fome remarks which our author has made in the fore-
going Eflays.

The Bride Stones are in the parifti of Biddulph in the county of Staf-
ford j and (land on a rifing ground in the break or opening between
the Cloud and Woof-Lowe — which are two of the chain of hills that
run through Staffordfliire, Che(hire, Derbyfhire, and Yorkfhire, into
Scotland.

A A, &c. * are fix upright, free (tones, from three to fix feet broad, of
various heights and (hapes, fixed about fix feet from each other in a
femicircular form, and two within, where the earth is very black, mixed
with afhes and oak-charcoal. It is apprehended the circle was originally
complete, and twenty-feveh feet in diameter ; for there is the appear-
ance of holes where (tones have been, and alfo of two fingle (tones, one
(landing Ea(t of the circle, at about five or fix yards diftance, and the
other at the fame diftance from that.

B B are rough, fquare, tapering (tones, four feet three inches broad,
and two feet thick. One on the North fide is broken off, as is part of
the other.

C C is the pavement of a kind of artificial cave. It is compofed of
broken pieces of (tones about two inches and a half thick, and laid on
pounded white (tones about fix inches deep ; two inches of the upper
part of which are tinged with black, fuppofed from the a(hes falling
through the pavement, which was covered with them and oak-charcoal^
about two inches thick. Several bits of bones were alfo found, but fo
fmall that it could not be difcovered whether they were human or not.

The fides of this cave, if I may fo call it, were originally compofed
of two unhewn free (tones, about eighteen feet in length, fix in height,
and fourteen inches thick at a medium. Each of them is now broken
into two.

♦ See plate XIII.

D is


3 20 MONA ANTIQJLTA RESTAURATA.

I> is a partition (lone (landing acrofs the place, about five feet and a
half high, and fix inches thick. A circular hole is Cut through this
ftone, about nineteen inches and a half in diameter.

The whole was covered with long, unhewn, large, flat free ftones,
fince taken away. The height of the cave from the pafecbeiit to the
covering is five feet and ten inches.

The entrance was filled up with free ftones and earth, fuppoftd to be
duft blown by the wind from year to year in dry weather. •

There remains another place of the fame conftruftiOtt, but fmaller,
and without any inward partition, about fifty- five yards diftant from thi9.
It is two yards and a half long, two feet and a half broad, and three feet
two inches high. There is alfo a part of another*

There was a large heap of ftones that covered the whole, an hundred
and twenty yards long, and twelve yards broad. Thefe floned have been
taken away from time to time by mafons and other people, for various
purpofes. And in the year 1764, feveral hundred loads were carried
away for making a turnpike-road about fixty yards from this place, whicb
laid it open for examination.

This ancient facred place was probably covered, fays Mr* Malbon*
with this great heap of ftones to conceal and preferve it it the time the
Druids were on the decline, But we rather think, as thefe Carnedde or
heaps of ftongs were a general appurtenance of Druidical wOrfhip, that
this* though of a different figure from thefe coiftmobly known* made »
real part of the original ftru&ure.


A C A T A-


MONA ANTIQJJA RBSTAtfRATA. 321

C A T A L O O U fe

O* THE

Reprefentatives in Parliament

ton Trti
COUNTY ot A N G LE'S B Y,

> r o m t h fe
Thirty-Third Year of King Henry VIII. to this Time

Anglesey. &EAuviAftE$j

H E N R V VM. . '

An keg.

33- A ^ Weftminfter, — — I T} Ichard ap Rhydderch of My.
A torn off the file | XV fyrion, Efq.

EDWARD Vi.


I. Weftminfter, » 1 ,

torn off the file
6. Weftminfter, Lewis Owen ap

Meurick of Frondeg, Efq.


John ap Robert Lloyd, Efq.

Maurice Gryfiyth of Plas Newydd,
Efq.


• It is faid, that the three firft burgeffes were returned for Newborbugh,
and not for Beaumares;

% Ti MARIA


Anglesey. Beaumares.


A.R.


M A K I M.


j, Weftminfter,- William Lewis 4 Rowlaad Bulkeky of P«rthameJi


of Prefaddfed, Efq.
i. Oxford, Sir Rich.Bulkeley,K*.


Efq.
Rowland Bulkeley, Efq.


.... ,PWIL,.& ,XA*J"*V-


1.2. Weftminfter, Sir RicH.Bulkc-

ley, Kt. . 1:

2. 3. Weftminfter, William Lewis

«of Prefaddfed, fifq» •
^Weftminfter, Rowland Mere-
dydd of Bodowyr, Efq.


-, Merchant


_o i


frugh Goodman, Merchant
William Prees ap Howel


E L I Z A B E T HJE.

1 /Weftminfter, Rowland Merc-


dydd, Efq.
^ Weftminfter* Rich. Bulkeley,.
Efq,

13. ■ , Sir Richard Bulkclcy,

Ku

14. Weftminfter, Lewis Owen ap

Meyrick, Efq.
27. Weftminfter, Owen Holland of

Rerw, Efq.
a8. Weftminfter, Sir Henry Bag-

nal of Plas Newydd, Kt.
3 1 . Weftminfter, Thomas Bulkeley

of Llangefni, Efy
35. Weftminfter, WiHIaii* Glyn,

Gentleman
39. Weftminfter, Htigh Hughes of

Plas Coch, Efq.
43 • Weftminfter, Thomas Holland

of Bcrw, fefq.


torn off the file


William ap Jtces, Gentleman

William Bulkeley, Gentleman

Rowland Kenrick, Gentleman. He

was town-clerk of Beaumares
Thomas Bu]k$ley> .Gentleman

Thomas Bulkeley, juftior, 4 Eftj.

Thomas Bulkeley, Efq.

Thomas Bulkeley, £/q. ^

WilKain Jones of Caftellmarch,

Efq.
William Maurice of Clenenoey,

Efq. '

JACOJI


A.R.


i. WeftminAtf, Sir Ricfr. BtiEfee* |j\ftHiam jUcs of CaiBelhaarcfc,
ley, Kt. J E%

is. Weftminfter, , ■ ■ , loft off the file


loft off the fib' I
1 8.. Weftminfter, Richard Williams

of LlylHufas; Gentleman
21. Weftminfter, John Moftyn of

Trtgarnedd; Efq,


Sara pfon, Evans, .Efq.

Charles Jones of Cafteltmarch,


Charles Jon,es, Efq.
Oleics, Jonesv $f<fr.
Cbades Joncsv 9ft^


G A R d L I I.

i. Weftminfter. Sir Sackvil Tje r

for, Kt.
i. Weftminfter* Sir Rich. B«lke-

ley, Kt.
3 ? Weftminftetv Richard BuJka-,

ley, Efq.
1 5,. Weftminfter JohttBoiwel^E% J! Charles Jones; Efq..
16. Weftminfter, John BodweljEfq. Ij JobnGrj^^fenior^.pf Cefn Am-

. ^ •!',:...:

The worthy collector of thefe names tools no notice of the long par-
liament, nor of any other convention, till the parliament of the
twelfth year of king Charles the Second.

' CA Bt 01 LI H. :


1 2. Weftmtnfter*.rig^t honourable
Robert Vifcount Bulkeley

J3. Weftminfter,. Nicholas Bagnal
ofPlasNewydd,Efq.

30. Weftminfter, Henry Bulkeley*

Efq,. . .

31. Weftminfter, Henry Bulkeley,

Efq.

32. Oxford, Richard Bulkeley ,Efq.


Gryffyth Bodwrda, ETq.

Col. William Robinfon of Manach-
ty;-Sir Hcneage Finch quitting it
Richard Bulkeley, Efq.

Richard Bulkeley, Efq.

Henry Bulkeley, Efq.

Tt 2 JACOBI


*H


A.*.


MQNA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

Anglesey, Bbauiiares.

J AC OBI II.


j. Weftminfter, right honourable I Henry Bulkeley, Efir.
, Robert Vifcount Bulkclcy I . .

WILL. & . M A R I jE.


j. Weftminfter, honourable Tho-
mas Bulkeley, Efq.


Richard Vifcount Bulkeley


Sir William Williams of Llanfor-
da, Kt. and Bart.


2. Weftminfter, right honourable Hon. Tho. Bulkeley, Efq. Sir Wil-


liam Williams of Faenol dying,
who was firft chofen


WILLIAM III.
7. Weftmiuftef, right honourable 1 Sir William Williams of Llanfor-


Richard Vifcount Bulkeley
10. Weftminftet, right honourable

Richard Vifcount Bulkeley
iz. Weftminfter, right honourable

Richard Vifcount Bulkeley
13. Weftminfter, right honourable

Richard Vifcount Bulkeley


da, Kt and Bart.
Owen Hughes of fieaumarcs, Efq.

Conningfby Williams of Marian,

Efq.
Honourable Robert Bulkeley, Efq;


A N N M.


1. Weftminfter, right honourable
Richard Vifcount Bulkeley

4. Weftminfter> right honourable
Richard Vifcount Bulkeley,
his father dying, who had
been returned

9. Weftminfter, right honourable
Richard Vifcount Bulkeley
ij>. Weftminfter, right honourable
Richard Vifcount Bulkeley


Honourable Robert Bulkeley, Efq.

He dying, Conningfby Williams,

Efq. was returned
Honourable Henry Bertie, Efq.

brother to Lady Bulkeley


Honourable Henry Bertie, Efq.
Honourable Henry Bertie, Efq.

GEORGE


:^


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

Anglesey. Beaumares.

GEORGE I.

i. Weftminfter, Owen Mcyrick

9 fef Bocjorgan, Eiq.
8. Weftminfter, right honourable
Richard Vifcount Bulkeley


3*5


Honourable Henry Bertie, Efq.
Honourable Henry Bertie, Efq,


GEORGE II.

i . Weftminfter, Hugh Williams
. ' of Chefter, Efq.
8. Weftminfter, Sir Nicholas Bayly

of Plas Newydd, Bart.
15. Weftminfter, John Owen of

Prefaddfed, Efq.
22. Weftminfter, Sir Nicholas Bay-
ly, Bart.
28. Weftminfter, the fame


Sir Watkin Williams Wynne of

. Wynftay,, Bart.

Right honourable Richard Vifcount

Bulkeley
Right honourable James Vifcount

Bulkeley
The fame


Richard Price of Faenor, Efq.


GEORGE III.

1. Weftminfter, Owen Meyrick 1 The fame
of Bodorgan, Efq, J


A C A-


)i« MORA *WTiqrU* t*$TAV*AVK,


C A T A L O G U E

Of THI

SHERIFFS op ANGLESEY,

. F<ft « Y H » .

Time they were firft appointed 1 hy Aft o£ P&rtewnent.

Anno Rcgni. A. D.
Hcnrici T) 1 C E ap Llewelyn ap HWIkyn of Bodychen,
VIII- IV during life

32 Rowland Griffith of Bias Newydd* Efq.. 1541

33 Sir Richard Bulkeley, Kt. 1^42 '

34 John ap Rccs ap Llewelyn ap Hwlkyn, Efq. 1543

35 William Bulkeley of Porthamel, Efq. 1544

36 Rhydderch ap David of Myfyrian, Efq. 1545

37 Richard Hampton of Henllys, Efq. % 1546
Edvardi 1 Sir Richard Bulkeley of Baronhill, Kt. 1547

VI. 2 Rowland Griffith of Plas Newydd, Efq. 1548

3 William Lewis of Prefaddfed, Efq. 1549

4 David ap Rees ap David ap Gwilym of Llwydiart 1550

5 Hugh Peake of Caernarfon, Efq. 1551

6 Sir Richard Bulkeley, Kt* 1552

7 Rowland Griffith dits % Rees Thomas, Efq. 1 S53-
Maris* i Thomas Moftyn of Moftyn, Efq; 1554

2 John ap Rees ap Llewelyn ap Hwlkyn of Bodychen,

Efq. j 55S

3 Thomas ap William of Faenol, Efif. 15^6

I- Robert


MONA ANrTKJJJA RES TA-UHAT A.r 3*7

AnaoRegni. A* I?*

4 Robert Bulkeley of Grojtaat, Efij, J557

5 William Lewis of Prefaddfed, E%. 155*
Elizabethan 1 Lewis ap Owen ap Mcurick of Frondeg, -Elq. . 1559

2 Sir Nicholas Ba^jnal of Ireland, Kt* 1560-

3 Sir Richard Pulkeley of Baronhill, Kl. 1561
. , 4 Maurice Griffith of Pla* Newydd, Efq. 1 562

5 Owen ap HiUgh <rf Bodeoa, Efq. 1563 .;

6 Rice Thomas of Abcr, Bfq. 1 564

7 Richard Owen of Penmynydd, Efq. 1565

8 John Lewis, of Prefaddfed, Efq f 1566

9 David ap Rpep ap David ap Gwilym, Efq. 1567

10 Richard White of Monachlog, Efq. 1568

1 1 Rowland Bulkeley of Porthamel, Efij. 1 569

12 Sir Richard Bulkeley of Baraniull, Kt. l S7°

13 Lewis Owen ap Meurick of Frondeg, Efq. l S7 l

14 William Lewis of Prefaddfed, Efq. 1572

15 Richard Owen of Penmynydd, E£|. 1573

16 John Wynne apjenkinap John of Hirdrcfraig, Efq. 1574

17 Thomas Moftyn of Moftyn, Efq. i S y^

1 8 Edward Conway of Bodtryddan, Efq. 1 $j& ,

19 Owen Wood of Rhofmor, Efq. j 577

20 Dr. Ellis Price of Plas Jolyn j^s
31 William Thomas of Aber, Efq. i^7 9

22 Owen ap Hugh of Bodeon, Efq. i^

23 Hugh Hughes of Plas Coch, Efq. x ^8i

24 John Griffith ■■ ■ . , Efq. 1582;

25 Richard White of Monachlog, Efq. 1583

26 Thomas Glynn of GJynllifon, Efq. 1584

27 Maurice Kyffin of Maincn, Efq. 1 5%5

28 Dr. Ellis Price i 5 86

29 John Griffith of Trefarthin, Eiq. 2587

30 Thomas Moftyn of Moftyn, Efq. 1588

31 Richard White of Monachlog, Eiq. 1589

32 Roger Moftyn of Moftyn, Efq. *59<>'

33 Owen Holland of Berw r Efij. 1 59*

34 Hugh Hughes of ¥h& CoCh, Efq. 1592

35 John Griffith, Eiq. 1593

Richard


3*8 MOtfA ANTIQJUA RESTAURAfA.

AnnoRegni. ^ ft,

. 36 Richard White bf Monachlog, Efq. 1^94

' 37 Pierce Lloyd of Gwaredog, Efq. f *g*

38 Arthur Bulkeley of Coyden, Efq. ' j ™$

39 William Glynn of Glynllifon, Efq. 1^7

40 Richard Bulkcley of Porthamel, Efq* j r«8

41 Owen Holland of Berw, Efq. 1S99

42 Hugh Hughes of Plas Coch, Efq* 1600

43 Thomas Glynn of Glynllifon, Efq. 1601

44 Richard Bulkeley of Perthamel, Efq. 1602
Jacobi L 1 Pierce Lloyd, fenior, of Lligwy, Efq, 1603

2 William Lewis of Chwaen, Efq. 1604

3 William Griffith of Trefarthin, Efq* 1605

4 John Lewis of Prefaddfed, Efq. jfofi

5 Richard Glynn of Glynllifon, Efq* 1607

6 Sir Hugh Owen of Bodeon, Kt. i£ g

7 Thomas Holland of Berw, Efq. j6 q

8 William Owen of Bodeon> Efq. j<j io

9 John Bodfell of Bodfell, Efq. ,$,,

10 Pierce Lloyd, junior, of Lligwy, Efq. 16 it

1 1 John Wynne Edward of Bodewryd, Efq. j6i 3

12 Owen Wood of Llangwyfan, Efq. 1614

13 Richard Meyrick of Bodorgan, Efq. |g I?

14 Hugh Lewis ap Howel of Llachylched, Efq. 16 16

15 Richard Williams of Llyfdulas* Efq^ 1617

16 John Lewis of Prefaddfed, Efq. 2 5 f g

17 Sir William Glynn of Glynllifon, Kt. 16 19

18 Henry Lloyd of Bodwiney, Efq. ,6 20

19 Hugh Wynne of Moflbglan, Efq* jfoi

20 Sir Thomas Holland of Berw, Kt* ifaz

21 Richard Owen of Penmynydd, Efq, itz%

22 John Bodychen, junior, of Bodychen, Efq* 1624

23 William Thomas of Cwyrt,' Efq. ifat
fiaroli I. 1 William Griffith of Trefarthin, Efq, - 1626

2 Hugh Morgan of Beaumares, Efq. 1627

3 Edward Wynne of Bodewryd, Efq. 1628

4 Richard Wynne of Rydcrocs> Efq* 1629

5 Thomas Glynn Llifon, Efq. t 1630

William


MONA AttTtQLtJA RESTAUR ATA. 329

JlafcoRcgni. A. Eh

f 6 William Robinfon of Monachdy, Efq. 1631

7 Thomas Chedle of Uetniog, Efq. 163a

8 Wfllfaro Q**n of Frotu&g. Efq. 1633

9 Hugh Owen of Bodowen, Efq. 1634

10 Edward Wynne of Bodewryd, Efq. 1635

1 1 Robert Wynne of Tre'r Gof, Efq. 1636

12 William Bulkdey of Coydcn, Efq. 1637
, 13 Pierce Lloyd of Lligwy, Efq. 1638

14 Richard Bulkelcy of Porthamel, Efq, 1639

1 5 Owen Wood of Rhofhior, Efq. 1 640

16 Richard Meyrick of Bodorgan, Efq. 1641
\j Thomas Bulkeley of Cleifiog, Efq, * V644
j 8 Thomas Chedlp of Lleiniog, Efq, 1643

19 William; Bold of TrcVDddl, Efq. 1644

20 Robert Jones of Ddreimog, Efq. 1645

21 Robert Jones of Ddrciniog, Bfq. 1^46

22 Richard Meyrick of Bodorgan* Efq* 1647

23 Richard Meyrick of. Bodorgan, Efq* 1648
CamliH. 1 WilUam.BoldpfTre'rDdAU Efq; . 1649

2 Owen Wood lof-Jthofinor,, Efq. 1650

3 Pierce Woyd of Wigwy, Bfq. 1651

4 Henry Owen of Moflbglao, Efq. 1652

5 Rowland BalkeJey Of PorrfnmcJ, Efq. 1653

6 Hugh Owen of Bodeoa* Efq. 1654

7 William Bold of Tre'r Ddol, Efq. 1655

8 Richard Wpod of RhojGnor, Efq. 1656

9 Richard Owen of Penmynydd, Efq* 1657

10 Robert lord vifcount BttLkelcy 1658

1 1 Henry Lloyd of Bodwinoy, Efq. 1659

12 The fswfcerHcory- Lloyd: . 1660

13 Thomas Wood of Rhoftnor, Efq* 166 1

14 William Bulkcky trf Coyden, Efq- 1662

15 John Lloyd of Llandegfan, Efq. 1663
*6 Richard Wynne of Penheikin* Efq. 1664
1 j John Otfen of Maethfey, Efq. 1665

18 Rowland BulMey otoit, Howel Lewis, &q. 1666

19 John Owcp df Pcnrhos* Efq, 16.67
.* Uu John


33° MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

. Anno Regni. .£ ^y

20 John , Glynn of Glynllifon, Efq. 1668:

21 Rowland White of Monachlog, Efq. 1669

22 Conningfby Williams of Penmynydd, Efq. 1670.

23 Edward Price of Bodowyr, Ef^. 1671

24 Richard itotkdey of Porthamel, Efq. 1672.

25 Owen Williams of Groesfechan, Efq. 1673

26 Hugh Williams of Whaen, Efq„ ^74.

27 William Meyrick of Bodorgan, E£p J675

28 Thomas Wynne of Rydcfoes, Efq. 1676.

29 Thomas Michael of Maen y Dryw, E% ' 1677

30 Hugh Wynne of Cromlech, Efq. 1.678-

31 David Lloyd of Llwydiart, Efq. 1.679

32 Thomas Wynne, of Glafcoed, Efq* 1680-

33 Rowland Wynne of Porthamel, Efqv 1681

34 Robert Parry of Amlwch, Efq*. 1682.

35 Owen Hughes of Beaumares, Efq-. \h%\,

36 Owen Bold of Tre'r Dddl, Efq. ,$8^
Jacob! II. 1 Roger Hughes of Plas- Coch, Efq-. jjflg -

2 Maurice Lewis of Tryfglwyn, Efqv - r6$<}

3 William Bulkeley. of Coyden, Efq* ifftj

4 Sir Hugh Owen of Bodowcn, Kt and 7 Barf.. 1688.

5 Henry Sparrow of Beaumares, Efq. \t%o
Gulielmi » John Griffith of Garreglwyd, Efq. ,$ 00 .

& 2 Samuel Hanfon of Bodfel, Efq. j6 0i

Maria?. 3 David Williams of Glanalaw, Efoj. ^92

4 Owen Williams of Carrog, Efq< 1&91.

5 William Jones of Pentraeth, Efq; ^94

6 John Thomas of Aber, Efq. 1&9S-

7 Henry White of Fryaw, Efqi jg^
Gulielmi 8 Hugh Wynne of Tre Iorwerth, Efq. r 6 97

III. 9 William Griffith of Garreglwyd, Efij. ^98

10 Pierce Lloyd of Llanidan, Efq. ^99

1 1 Francis Edwards of Penhefkin, Efq. J700

12 John Williams of Chwaen Ifaf, Efq. 1701
Anna. ' J ohn Wvnne °* Chwaen Wen, E%. 1702

2 Robert Owen of Penrhos, Efq. 1703

3 William Owen of Cremlyn, Efq. 1704

Hugh


M-OWA*ANTI(£UA XESTAURATA. 331

MinoRegni. A, IX

4 Hugh Wynne fcf Crotftlech, Efq, 1705

5 Owen Meyrick.of Bodorgan,.Efq. 1706

6 Owen Robert* of Beau mares, Efq, 1707

7 John Sparrow of Beau mares, Efq. ) 708

8 John Griffith of Llanddyfnan, Efq, 1709

9 William Lewis of Try(glwyn, Efq* 1710

10 John Morris of ©cHLleiniog, Efq. 1711

11 William Roberts of Caerau, Efq*. 171 2

1 2 Thomas Roberts of Bodiar, Efq- 1 7 1 3

13 William Lewis of Llyfdulas, Efq-. 17 14
Georgii l William Bulkeley of Brynddu, Efq, 171 5

l m 2 Maurice Williams of H&fodgarregog, Ef<|# 1716

3 Edward Bayly .of Plas Newydd, E<<|. - 1717

4 William BodyeJ of Madriu; Bfq* • , 171 8

5 Hugh Hughes of -Plas Coch, Efq. , s 1719

6 Rice Thomas of Coedalen, Efq, . 1720

7 Thomas Lloyd of Llanidan, Efij**. > :.;. v ' i - 1721
. 8 Richard Hampton of Henltys, E6j»^ -* ■>.{ > 1722

9 William Owen of Penchos, Efq. ,; I \_ ^ v 1723

10 John Griffith of Garreg Lrwyd,. Efq^ ...*.. ^724/

11 John Owerit)f PrefaddfedL, Efq, jyt$
_/ 12 Thomas Rowlands of Caerau, £fq t: . . ■. ;• , ■ 1726

Georcii 1 ** cnr y Morgan of Henbjas, Eiq. • . 1727

. jj # 2 John Morris of Celleiniog, Efq. -, ] . . ,j , > 1728

■' 3 John Williams of Tmarddur, Efq; M j 1729

4 Henry Williams of Trbs y Marian, fefq* * 1 730

5 Henry Powell of Llangefni, Efq. 1731

6 Robert Hampton of Henllys, Efq. 1733
,7 William Evans of Trefeilir, Efq* l 7H
•8 Robert Bulkeley of Gronant, Efq. 17^4
•9 Richard Lloyd of Rhoibeirio, Efq. l 725

ix> Richard Roberts of Bodfuran, Efq. 1736

1 1 Edmund Meyrick of Trefriw, Efq. 1737

12 William Roberts of Bodiar, Efq. 1738

13 Robert Williams of Pertmynydd, Efq. J739

14 Robert Owen of Pencraig, Efq. 1740'

15 Rice Williams of Cwyrt, Efq. 174!

U u 2 Hugh


33a MONA AN TIQJJA RESTAUR ATA*

Aim* Regnl. A*D.

16 Hugh Jones of Cymunod, E4q» 174ft

j 7 Hugh Williams of Bryngwyn, Efq. 1743

1 8 Richard Hughes of Trc'r J3ryw, Efq. 1744

j 9 John Nangle of Llwydiarth, E%* 1745

20 Henry Williams of Tros y Marian, Efq* 1746

21 William Thomas of Glafcoed, Efq. ' 1747

22 William Lewis of Llanddyfhan, Efq. 1748

23 Owen Wynn of Pcnhelkin* Efq. 1749

24 Charles Allanfoh of Ddreiniog, Bfij* - 1750

25 John Lloyd of Hirdrefraig, Eftj. 1751

26 Charles Evans* of Trefcilir, Efq. ; 1752

27 Bodychea Sparrow of Bodychcn, Bfrb. *7S$

28 Richard Hughes of Bodwyn, Efq. : ' * 1754

29 Hugh Davies of Brynhyrddini E(q. 1755;

30 Charles Allanfoaof Ddrciniog, Efij. ! 75^

31 John Rowlands of Pot thllongdy, Efq- 1 1757

32 Edward Owen of Pcnrhos* Efq. 1758.

33 Robert Owen of Pencfaig, Efq. ' 1759

34 Robert Lloyd of Tregaian, "Efij, 176a
Gtorgii 1 Francis Lloyd of Monachdy, Efq. 1761

ltL 2 . Hugh Barlow of Pemhos* Efq. 1 762.

3 Felix Feaft of BotHcwv Efq. • * 1763

4 John Lewis of Lknfihangel^ Efqv *7^4

5 Herbert Jones df Llynon, Efq. 1765

6 Hugh Williams of Ty Fty/ Efq. 1766.


• <


>


:•. y\


A C A-


MO.NA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 33$

. ■ . -' A • • • '

C A T A L O G U E

OF THE

Beneficed Clergy of the Ifle of Anglesey,,

T R OM T H K

Time of King Henry VIII ; with an Account of the Value im
the King's &ooks, Patronage, &c. of the feveral Livings.

ABERFF R A W.
A Redtory— St. BeuAbwthe Prefcetatioft thereof in the THavc ofWale*

Tnifitutieir.

156a TV^R- Richard Muricn
Auguft 7, 1573 1VA Henry Williams, Clerk, ^*r mortem R. Muricn
June 29,. 1604 John Thomas, M. A. per mortem H. W. He was bro-
ther to Sir William Thomas of Aber* Kt.
March 29, 1643 Thomas Hughes, B. A. per mortem J. T.

1660 Richard Rowlands, Clerk, per mortem T. H.
Sept. 29,, 1694 John Jones, B. A. per mortem R.R. He was aMerion-
yddfliire man
O&ob. 28, 1709 Hugh Wynne, M. A. per mortem J. J.
Odob. 8, 1715 Owen Hughes. M. A. and B; L. L. He was chancel-
lor of Bangor
1740 Thomas Owen, M. A. per mortem O. H*
Feb. 15, 1754 Hugh Williams* Me A. per mortem T..GL *


5|4 MO.NA. ANTIt^JJA RESTAUKATA.

LLANBA.DRIG.
A Vicarage in the - Prince's Gifu


InAHution.


Valued, tempore, \^J^ L


£. s. I
7 8 i
7 9 2£


1546 y TUgh Powel, Clerk


John Hanton, Clerk
June 27, 16 14 William Hughes, M. A. per mortem J. H.

Michael Roberts, M. A; after D» D. and feme tim%

principal of Jefus-College in Oxford
Thomas Williams, M. A,
O<ftobcri6,i663 David Lloyd, M. A. per mortem T. W.
" July 5, 1 69 1 William Wynne, B. A, per mortem D. LI.
j 71 2 Owen Davies, Clerk, per teJfion.VJ . W.
David Jones, Clerk, per deprvo. O. D.
Jan. 17,1729-30 Owen Davies, Clerk, per thortem D. J;
April 7, 1743 Robert Pugh, A. B..per mortem O. D.
March 30, 1749 Hugh Parry, per mortem R. Pi


MONA ANTIQJJA RE8TAURATA. 335

L LA NBEU LAN.

A Refiory, in the Bifliop's Gift, hath five Chapels under it 5 viz.
Uanfaefog, Llacbykbed, Ceircbiog, Uanercbmedd, and Taly Llyn.

♦ • £. s. J.

vi a. <r * (Henry VIII. 23 6 8
Valued* tempore, faj^ z \ + 6 _

Xhftitution.


MOrgan Hughes, Clerk


Jan, 23, 1542 XV JL John Powell, Clerk, per mortem M.H.*
Auguft 6, 1 54.8 Humphrey ap Richard ap John,, Clerk, per mortem J.P-
June 29, 1587 Hugh Edwards, M. A.
March 19, 1609 Edmund Griffith,, JVL A, per mortem prior, incumb.
' May i.6„ 1617 William Hill, D. D. per mortem E. G*
Evan Lloyd; M. A.
Thomas Caefar*. D. D. fori of Sir Julius Caefar, tiiafrter

of the rolls
John Kenrick, M. A.
• April 22,. 1635 John Griffith, M. A. per mortem J. K.-— He was bro-
ther of Dr. William Griffith of Garreglwyd, chan-
cellor of Bangor and St. Afaph
July 4» 1635 The faid John Griffith was re-inftituted, Reg. prefent^
Michael Evans, B. D;
Dec. 31, 1676. Evan Hughes* M. A*
June 3 # 1682. Henry Williams, M. A. r

Bifhop Evans,, in commendam
July 9, 171 3 Jenkin Evans, Clerk, per cejfion. epifc.
Dec. 1, 174.6 Hiigh Hughes,. M. A. afterwards D. D, and dean of
Bangor, per mortem J. E.
Dec* 22, 1753 TJiomas Lloyd, M. A. afterwards D..D. and dean of
Bangor, per mortem H. H.


33* MONA ANTIQUA RESTAORATA.

L L A NDEO F A N;

A Ro&ory, in the .Lord Bulkeky't Gift, bath one Chapel under it,

vie. Beatmuret Church.

Valued, 7V^^jS! n *yy fc m - 2 ° ° J
' r (Elizabeth 19 11 8

fciftUuttaA.

ARthur Bulkelty,' D-D, afterwards bifhop of Bangor
John Bulkeley, D. D. per cejjfon A. B.
' June 14, 1545 John Lewis, alias Vaughan, per mortem]. B.

July 2, 1555 Lewis ap John, Clerk, per mortem J. V. inftituted pet
dean and chapter
March 25> 1573 Rowland Bulkeley, deacon, per mortettf L. J. prcfented

by Sir Richard Bulkeley
" July 12, 159ft The faid Rowland Bulkeley infthuted again
March 4, 1593 Launcelot Bulkeley, M.A. afterwards archbifhop of
Dublin '

-March 15, 16x9 John Lloyd, M. A. 0& the promotion of L.B. to tht

archbUhopric of Dublin
July io> i6e6 Rowland Chedk, M. A. per mtrtem J. LI.

William Williams, M. A. p. Denbighfhire gentleman,

of Pont y Gwyddei
Peter Wytine, JA. A. a Fiiivt&ire gentleman, of Gop
Dec 5, 1683 John Jones, M, A. afterwards D.D. and dean of Bangor
June 27, 1700 Kenrick Eyton, M. A. a Merionyddfhire gentleman,

per ceflton.].]. D.D.
April 2, 1720 Thomas Bean, B. A. p& mortem K. R*
March 30, 1733 Ri c ^ ar( l Ingram, Clferk, per mortem T. B.
-March 11, 1737 John Lewis, A.M. per oejjion R. 1.

1743 John Hughes, A. B. per xtortemj. L.
Nov. 16, 1754 John Hughes, A. B. per mortem]. H*

1762 William Griffith, A. M. per mortem J. H.— *-Nevct
inftituted
Dec. 3, 1762 Thomas Owen, M. A. per mortem J. H.
April 20, 1763 Richard Williams, B. A. per mortem T* O.


A 1


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA, 337

L L A N D D fe tf 8 A N T.

A (te&ory, In the Bifhop's Gift, hath two Chapels under it; viz.
Llan Babo and Hmfairyngtornwy.

\t 1 j *f ,. ~ f Henry VIII. 20 16 a
Valued, Tempore, | wJ^ 2<y ty 6

Inftitution.

Rthur Bulkelcy, D. D. afterwards bifliop of

Bangor
O&ober 16,1543 Thomas Bulkeley, LL. B. per ceffion epifc. Bulkeley
October 17,1570 William Griffith, Clerk, per mortem T. B.
March 22, 1587 Robert Morgans, M. A. m per re/ign. W. G.
January 3, 1591 Richard Brickdaie, Clerk, per deprvo. R. M*

Bifliop Bayly, in commendam
October 9, 1626 Richard Hughes, M. A. per ceffion. epifc:

Michael Evans, M- A.
Odfcobcr 13,1670 John Edwards, M. A-
Auguft 23, 1687 Richard Hughes, Clerk
January 10,1693 William Hughes, M. A. per mortem R. H*
July 4, 1707 William Price, B. A. per mortem W. H.
June 16, 171 3 Owen Lloyd, M. A. per ceffion. W. P.
Feb. 25, 1731-2 William Morgan, A. B. per ceffion. O.LL
July 9 1742 Robert Foulkes, per mortem W. M.
Dec. 29, 1746 Stephen Williams, A. B. per ceffion. R. F*
Auguft 6, 1762 Bulkeley Hughes, A. B. per mortem S. W.


Xt


:JJ 8 MON'AANTI QJJ A RESTAURATA.

ILANDYFRYDOG.

A. Ridftory, in the Biflwp's Gift, hath one Chapel under it; viz.

Llanfihangel Tre'r Bardd.

Inftitution.

JObn Robins, Cleric
Reynald ap Griffith, Clerk, fer refign. J. R*
July 12,- 1569 Rowland Thomas, LL. D. per mortem R. G*
Nov. 13,-1 570 John Rowlands* CleFk> far refign. r K. Th.
Nov. 1 1, 1 577 Robert Morgan,- A. M. per mortem J* R..
March 22, 1387. William Griffith, Clerk, perrefign\ IV- M- 7~ ..
May 23, 1609 Robert Prichard, M. A. pe? mortem W. Gl ' '
1623 Robert Marfli, Clerk
— — — Jones, Clerk
Humphrey Vaughan, Clerk
July 1 5, 1 670 Rowland Morgan, M. A.

. i6y8 Nicholas Stodart, fclerk
May 19, 1691 Owea.Davies, M. A. pertejfion* N. $.
July 17, 1708 Owen Lloyd, LL. B. per mortem O. p. .
January 2, 1,715 Francis Griffith* M. A. per mortem Q..L1..
Feb. 20, 1722-3 Lewis Davies, B. A. per mertemF* G.
Feb. 19, 1 749-50 Nicholas Owen, M. A* .per mortemXj.Xi.. '


MWSTAJ ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.


L L. A N D DY F N A N.


339


A Re&ory, idMKfe Bifhop's Gift, hath three Chapels under it; viz!
Llanfair Maibafarn Eitbaf, Llanbtdr and Pentraetb.

Inititution,


TTTIliiam Hughes, B.LL.


Sept. 26, 1565 VV Richard Brigdal, Clerk, per mortem W.H*
Feb. 28, 1 591 Rowland Bulkeley, Clerk
Nov. 13, 1593 Lancelot Bulkeley* M* A. per mortem R, B.
Dec. 1 8, 161 9 John Bayly, M. A. on the cefiion of L. B. being made

. • archbifhop of Dublin
Sept. 5* 1620 Rowland Chedle, B* A. per rqfign.]. B.
April 8, 1622 Hugh Griffith, B.LL.
January 13, 1636 Thomas Bulkeley, B. A. per refign. H. G.
May 20, 1642 Thomas Meredith, M. A. per mortem T* B.
Nov. 19, Robert Morgan, D. D. afterwards bifhop of Bangor,

per rejign. TiM.
Nov. 4, 1672 Edward Wynne * M. A^

John Ellis, D. D. of Yftymllyn in Caefnarvonfhire
Bifhop Humphreys, in commendam
Nov. 6, 1 70 1 Robert Morgan, Clerk* per ce£ion.epifc>
Bifhop Evans, in commendam
171 5 Bifhop Hoadley, in commendam
1 72 1 Bifhop Reynolds, in commendam
1723 Bifhop Baker, in commendam
1 1728 Bifhop Sherlock, in commendam
1734 Bifhop Cecil, in commendam
1737 bifhop Herring, in commendam
1743 Bifhop Hutton, in commendam
ijqj Bifhop Pearce, in commendam
1756 Bifhop Egerton, in commendam


XX2


34© MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.


LL. AN ELIAN.

A Re&ory, in the Biihop's Gift, hath three Chapels under it; viz.
CoeJone, Rbofpeirio and Bodewryd.

v*ued.r^,{H S vm. f, J 8

Inftitution.

1560 TTUgh ap Rhecs, Clerk
June 13, 1573 JlJL Humphrey David Lloyd, Clerk, per mortem

H. ap R.

May 29, 1577 Hugh Burches, M. A. per mortem H. Lk

May 15, 1602 Morgan Davies, Clerk, per refign. H. B.

May 13, 1603 John Llewelin, Clerk, per refign. M. D.

Auguft 29, 1612 Robert Prichard, M. A, per mortem J. LI N

John Lloyd, M. A,
March 15, 1619 William Lloyd, M. A. pfr refign. J. LL
Rowland Lloyd, M. A*
Owen Williams, Clerk,
May 2, 1 6$7 Thomas Vaughao, M t A.
June 15, 1699 Richard Jones, Clerk, per cefjion. T. V.
Nov. 11, 1704 John Owen, B. A. per mortem R. J.
July 25, 1707 William Lloyd, B. A. per mortem]. O.*
July ?4, 1739 Robert Jones, B; A\ per mortem W. LI.
Auguft 14, 1762 John Jones, B. A% per refign. R. J.

June 8, 1765^ Thomas Vincent, A, M* per ceffion^]^ ^


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA. 341

LLAN E U G.R.A D.

A^Re&ory, in the Bifhop's Gift, hath under it one Chapel; viz.

Lknallgo. .

Inftitutton*


TTTIlliam Nant, Clerk


Atiguft 2, 1550 VV Richard ap Evan* Cterk, per mortem W. N.

William Griffith, Clerk, per deprivat. R. ap E. conjugati
Auguft 9, 1574 The faid William Griffith, per mortem R. ap E.
Dec. 16,. 1 592 Richard Pulefton* ,M. A. per mortem W. G..
Sept. 1, 1592 David. Rowlands, Clerk, per rejign. R. P. He was

brother. .of bifhop Rowlands
Dec. 4, 16 10 Hugh Griffith, , Clerk, per mortem D. R.
Ttfov. 5, 16 j 7 Robert. Griffith, M. A± per rejign, H.'C

"' Payn, Ckrk

Hugh Humphreys, M; A;
June 8, ;668 Owen Wood, Clerk, fon of Arnold Wood of Holy-

head > l .Oendema»
Feb. 17, 1668 Edward Wynne* Clerk, per mortem O. W. He was

fon of John Wynne of Bodewryd, Efq. .
Nov. 5, 1670 Richard Hughes, Clerk, percejfion. E. W.
October %\, 1 6*7.. Maurice Jones*- M. A* a Denbighfhire man, per cejjiom
R.H.
May 29, 1697 Francis Pricfrard, M* A. per ctjjion M. J.. He was a
Merionyddftiire man, and had been fchoolmafter of
Beaumares fchool "
June 30, j 704 Rowland Griffith,. Clerk, per ceJJion.Y. P.
Nov. 8, 171 2 .William Wynne, B. A. per mortem R. G.
March 17, 1717 Hugh Jones, "M. A. per mortem W. W.
October 1, 1735 Robert Jones, B. A. per cejjion. H. J.
July 24, 1739 Lewis Owen, Clerk, per cefjion* R. J.


iit MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA.

LLAN G A DWALADR.

A Re&oty, in the Lord-Chancelfor's Gift, hath one Chapel under it 7

viz. Llattfeirion.


R


Tftftitutiefi.

Owl and Meyrick, conjugate & deprrvat. He was
afterwards bifliop of Bangor
June 9, 1554 Thomas Jones, Clerk, per deprivat. R* M. conjugate
March 14, 1572 Richard Williams, Clerk, per mortem T. J.

April 7, 1 60 1 Owen Glynne, D. D. per mortem R. W*
March 28, 161 5 John Arthur, M. A. per mortem O. G.
April 7, 1627 Robert Marfh, M. A.

Francis Meyrick, M. A. of Bodorgan
Sept. ix, 1668 Lewis Coytmor, M. A- of Llanfairfechan
Hugh Wynne, M. A. of Menechtyd
Peter Wynne, M, A* of Gop
February 6, 1683 Owen Davies, M. A*
May 19, 1 69 1 Nicholas Stodart, Clerk
Nov. 22. 1722 John Ellis, M. A* of Bodlew
March 10, 1723 William Williams, a South-Wales man, permortem J.E;

Nov. 29, 1725 Morgan Lewis, B* A. per mortem W. W,
Mar. 1 1, 1 730- 1 Rowland Hughes, per mortem M. L.
February 8*1762 Owen Parry, LL. B. per mortem R. H.


M-ONA ANTIQJJA R.ESTAURATA. $43

LLANGEFNI.

A Reftory, in the. Bifhop's Gift, tpth one Chapel under it; viz.

'Tre Gaian~


H'


rnftitutioD.

'Ugh Clement, Clerk
Thomas Bulkeley, LL. B.
\ Nov. 4, 1570 George Smith, LL. B. per mortem ' T. J5..
Sept. 14, 1668 "William Hughes, M- A. per mortem G. S,.
©&ober2o, 1614 Robert Griffith, Clerk, per re/igv.W.Jl,-
Odtober 4, 1619 Owen Jones, M. A. per cejjwn. R. G.
1660 Owen Hughes, Clerk
Sept.. 18, 1669 Rowland LloyH, M. A.
Sept. 23, 1689 Robert Owen, Clerk, per .mortem R.Xl-
July 17, 1707 Roger Morgan, M. A. per mortem R. O.
May 28, 1723 Rowland Johnfon, per mortem R. M.
Jan. 17, 1729-30 William Evans, M. A. percejion. R. J.
Feb. 28, 1731-2 Owen Lloyd, M. A. per cejjion. W. E.
Mar. 21, 1 740- 1 Andrew Edwards, A. M. per cejjiori* O. LL
July 10, 1753 John Lewis, B. A. per cejfion. A. E.


344 MONA ANTIQJTA RESTAU'RATft.

L L A N G E IN W E N.

A Re€tory> in the Eafl of Pembroke's Gift, bath one Chapel uncleY it;

viz. X/o» Gaftb.

Inftitution.


HEnry t5ymtaonds> Clerk*


June 5, 1564 XjL Humphrey Brigdale, Clerk, per mortem H. S.
. Auguft 1 1, 1573 Owen Owens, M. A- per rejign. H. B.
May 4, 1593 Owen Jones, Clerk, per mortem' Q.O.
March 6, 1603 Robert White, B. A. afterwards D. D.
Edward Wynne, D. D.
Owen Davies, M. A.
Auguft 2, 1708 Thomas Holland of Berw, Clerk, per mortem O. D,
1747 Edward Jones, A. M. per mortem T. H.


M.QNA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 345

HEN EGLWYS.

A.Re$brjr, in (he BVhcv's Gift, hath one Chapel udder it; vi*«

, Trefwqlcbtrtoi.

Valued. ft**».{g£22 IL } » 3 4


Inftitution.


TOhn ap William, Clerk


Feb, 13, 155 1 «J William Glynn, D.D. per morttm J. apW. (after-
wards bifhop)
May 17, 1558 John Rowland, Clerk, per ceffion eptfc*
January 2, 1578 Thomas Price, Cterk, per mortem]. R.
Sept. 25, 1583 William Owen, Clerk, per ceffion. T. P*
Odtober 17,1605 Hugh Thomas, Clerk, per ctf/hn. W. O.
June 22, 1632 William Langford, M. A. per mortem H. T.
March 5, 1632 William Stodart, Clerk of Treganwy, per rejign. W. L.
Thomas Jones, Clerk - #

July 12, 1662 Hugh Hughes, Clerk of Bodffordd

William Williams, M. A. changed it with John Row-
lands, brother of Richard Rowlands of Aberffraw
May 4, 1668 John Rowlands, B. A.

Humphrey Humphreys, M. A. afterwards bifhop of

Bangor
Rowland Williams, M. A. Vicar of Caernarvon
May 14, 1684 Hugh Johnfon, Clerk, per mortem R- W.
O&ober 24,1 691 William Hughes, M. A. per ceffion. H. J.
January 10,1693 John Jones, B. A. per ceffion. W. H.
Odober 1, 1694 Hugh Griffith, M. A, per ceffion. J. J.
Odtober 2, 171 2 Henry Thomas, B. A. per mortem H. G.
Feb* 1 1, 1745-6 Robert Evans, A. B. per mortem H. T.


Vy


34$ MONA ANTIQUA RESTAUKATA.

LLANIPAN.

A Vicarage, In Lord Bofton's Gilt, batK three CJupefe under it; vii.
JL/<?» Edwen, Llanddankl P4b, and L/anfatr y Cwmmwd.

C '• d.

Inftitution.

DAvid ap Rees, Clerk of Bodowyr : he was an-
ceftor by the mother of the Johnibns of Llanidaa
Gregory ap Llewelyn, Clerk
June i, 1554 Lewis ap Bran ap Robert, Clerk, per prfoat. G. LL
conjugat.
January 1 1, 1579 Jafper Price, A. M. of Bodowyr, per mortem L. E.
Feb. 1 3, 1 58 1 The laid Jafper Price, rc-infthuted on the queen's pre-
fentation
1626 Lewis WilKams, A.M. per mortem].'?.
1 666 Henry Williams, A. M. per mortem L. W. He was fott
of Thomas Williams, Clerk, redor of Llanfadwra
Decern. 3, 1683 John Daries, M. A. perceJpon.H.W.
Odtober 2, 1696 Henry Rowlands, Clerk, per mortem]. D.
1723 Hugh Wynne, LL. B. per mortem H. R.
Jan. 14, -1730- 1 Lewis Hughes, Clerk, per cejjkn. H. W. LL. D*
Feb. 5, 1732-3 Robert Lewis, A. M. per mortem L. H.
Mar. 16, 1747-8 Robert Hughes, A. B. per cejfion. R. L.
Nov. 2, 1756 Henry Rowlands, A. M. per mortem R. H,


MGNA ANTIQjJA &BITAURATA. ^7

NEW »0|;0V Q.H.
A-Redory*. in the Lord-Chancellor's Gift.


Inititutioiu


T TUfth ip Robert, Clark


June 9, 7554 JLX Robert ap Hugh, Clerk, per prhat* H. R. *w»-

jugati
May 29, 1596 Edmund Griffith, M. A> ^ flW/d* R. H.
June 26, 1 610 Robert White, M. A. after D* D. /«r cs^fe* E» O.

John Davies* M* A.
Sept. n> 1695 Hugh Griffith, M. A* permMemJ*. D.

Robert Humphreys, M. A. a Marionyddwire man
June i4> 1705 Evan Jones, M. A. per cegum. R. H.

1722. William William*, M. A. per mertem E» J,
June 13, 1746 Edward Jonet* A.M. per mortem W.W*
Jan. 9, 1746-7 Owen Jones, JB» A. per tefitn. £» J.


1*


Yyz


3 4« MONA ANTIQUA RBSTAURATA^

P E N Y M Y N Y D D;
A Prebend of the Cathedral Church of Bangor, is in the Btthop's Gift.

Valued temhore i Hcnr 7 VIIL 8 ! 3 *
V8lued ' Ttt ^ w ' iElizabcth 8 5 7 i


InftitutioiK


T T TItliam Powel, Clerk


Henry Rowlands, bifhopi.of Bangor, m com-
mendam
Robert White, D. D.
Simon Lloyd, Clerk

Gethin, Clerk

Owen Dairies, M. A.
John Williams, M. A.
Robert Wynne, M.A. .
Nov. 12, 1720 Owen Hughes, chancellor of Bangor
Feb. 18, 1 740- v Owen Lloyd, chancellor of Bangor
March 29, 1743 -Hugh Hughes* A. AS. .

May 10, 1750 Peter Maurice, A. M. afterwards D. D. and dean of
Bangor
1759 Egerton Leigh, M. A. per mortem P. M.


MONA ANTIftUA RESTAURATA. 349

RHOSCOLYN.

A Re&ory, in the BMhop's Gift* hath two Chapels under it; via.
Uanfair yn Neubwll and Llanfibangel y Traetb.

£. s. d,

vi a *> + (Henry VIII. 10 6 8
Valued, rmpore, | n > ^


Inftitutioir.


\\ TIHiam Glynn, D. D. made afterwards bifliop


May 18, 1558 V V Hugh Powel, Clerk, per cejfion. epifc*
July 13, 1583 Richard Williams, Clerk, per mortem H. P.
Auguft 21, 1 60 1 Henry Parry, B, D. per mortem R. W.
January 7, 1606 Owen Hughes, M. A. and B. LL. per rejign. H. P.
February 1,1613 Owen Glynn, D. D* per mortem O. H.
April 26, 1,615 Evan Lloyd, M. A. per mortem O. G, a Denbighshire

man
April 29, 1663 Edmund Griffith Lloyd, Clerk

Lewis Williams, M. A. of Glan y Gors
July 4, .1671 John Gunnis, Clerk, a Caernarvon fhke man
June 3, 1672 John Jones, A.M. afterwards I>. D. and dean of
Bangor ,

Richard Hughes* Clerk
Sept. 15, 1708 Hugh Wynne, M. A. per mortem R. H.
January 6, 1709 Simon Langford, M.A. a Denbighshire man, percej^

Jion H. W.
Feb. 22, 1736-7 Thomas Owen, M. A, per mortem S. L,
Sept. 2a, 1753 William Griffith, B. A, per mortem T. O*


?5» MOHA ANTIQJJA H^STAURAf A.

LLANRHUDDLAD.

A fte&wy, in the BKhop's Gift, hath two Chapels under it; vtt.

LlanjfUwyn and Llattrbwydnu.

Inftitution. _ '

' r, | ^Homas Bulkeley, Clerk
May 19, 1 J70 X Hugh Morgan, LL. B. per mortem T. B.
Auguft 1 6, 1 574 John Price, Deacon, per mortem H. M.
May 27, 1616 Griffith Hughes, M. A. per mortem]. P.
May 5, 1627 Thomas Csfar, M* A. per ceffion. epifc* He was foil
of Sir Julius Caefar, mafter of the rolls
April 15, 1633 Hugh Williams, B.D. per mortem T.C. D.D.
OaoberS, 1670 Edward Price, M.A. per mortem H.W. D.D. H«

was of Llanllugan in Montgomeryshire
January 8, 1671 Thomas Davies* M. A*
1689 David Lloyd, Clerk
June 21, 1699 Henry Jones, Clerk, per mortem D. LI.
June 30, 1704 Francis Prichard, M. A. per mortem H. Ji
Dec. 22, 1704 Ambrofe Lewis, Clerk, per mortem F. P.
January 1, 1729 David Doulben, M. A. per mortem A. Li

Feb, 7, 1730 Edward Bennet, per ctjjion. D. D.
March 17, 1755 John Hughes, Clerk, per mortem E. B.


MONA ANTIQUA KESTAURATA. 351


LLANSADWRN.
A Rettery, in the Bifhop's Gift.


Inftitutton.


"¥ T THliam ap David ap Thomas, Clerk


9 6 S
7 18 6


June 5, 1582 V V John Richards, M. A. per mortem W. D. T»
January 8, 1588 John ap Llewelyn, Clerk, per re/ign.J. R.
May 13, 1601 Robert Sherman, Clerk, per rejign. J. LI.
Sept. 30, 1609 Hugh Lloyd, M. A. per mortem R. S.
Auguft 19, 1609 Hugh Griffith, Deacon, per eeffion. H. LL
May. 28, 161 1 Robert Griffith, M. A. per eeffion. H. G.
Nov. 5, 1617 Hugh Griffith, Clerk, per rejign. R. G.
January tf, 1635 Thomas Williams* M. A. per rejign. H. G. LL. D.
John Rowlands, Clerk, changed with
May 4, 1668 William Williams, M. A. He was fchoolmafter of
Beaumares fchool, a younger fon of ■ ■ Williams
of Pont y Gwyddel in Dcnbighfhire
Henry Williams, M. A.
Robert Humphreys, M. A.
O&ober 28, 1 691 Robert Owen, Clerk, per eeffion. R. H.
July 5, 1707 Owen Lloyd, A. M. per mortem R. O.
Mar. 1, 1 74 1 -2 Robert Lewis, A.M. per mortem O. LL
Nov. 3, 1747 Nicholas Owen, A. M. per eeffion. R. L.
Feb. 20,1749-50 John Ellis, LL. B. per eeffion. N. O.
April 20, 1750 Edward Foulkes, A. B. per eeffion. J. E.
April 4, 1754 Henry Parry, A. B. per eeffion. E. F.
July 20, 1764 Henry Williams, A. B. per mortem H. P.


$ 5 a MONA ANTIQLUA-RfeSTAURATA,


f REFDRAETE


A Re<£tory> in the Bifliop's Gift, hath one Chapel under it; viz*

Llangwyfen.


Inftttutiom


IT Ewis ap Gwrgene, Clerk


£. s. d.
8 10


9 f r


Dec. ii, 1546 1 J David Owen, Clerk, per mortem L* G.
June 26, 1 56 1 Hugh Morgan, LL. B. per mortem D. O.
Auguft 7, 1564 David Lloyd ap Meredydd, Clerk

Henry Rowlands, birtiop of Bangor, in-commendam
Dec. 30, 1606 Henry Parry, B. D. per cejjion. epifc.
Auguft 18, 161 8 John Meredydd, M. A. per cejjion. Lud. Bayly epifc. *
William Hill, D. D. He married bifhop Bayly's

daughter
Bifhop Bayly* in commendam, again
Sept. 30, 1626 Griffith Williams* D.D. per cejjion. epifc. He was after
dean of Bangor, and bifhop of Oflbry in Ireland
David Lloyd, D. LL.
July 16, 1642 Robert Morgan, B. D. per reJign.T). LL

William Lloyd, M. A.
May 5, 1668 Hugh Humphreys, M. A.

Lewis Lloyd, M. A. a Caernarvonshire gentleman
Sept. 10, 1702 Hugh Wynne, M. A» per mortemL. LL
Sept. 30, 171 5 Owen Hughes* B. LL. and M. A. per mortem H. W.
Feb. 18, 1740 Hugh Hughes, A.M. per mortem O. H.
Nov. 16, 1744 William Hughes, A. B. per cejjion. H. H.
Nov. 2, 1747 Robert Lewis, A. M. afterwards chancellor of Bangof*

per mortem W. H.
April 5, 1766 Thomas Bowles* D. D. per mortem R. L.


MP^I*lfl > ?ftjr*|LJ^rftV&'AFA/. 353

LLANTRI8ANT.

A Redory, in the Bfthop's Gift, hath four Chapels under it; viz.
Uecbcynfarwy, Radio, Gweredag, and Llanllibio.


y^A.tmtm.^2^ % %


£. s. i.

o b

25 10 o


Inititution.


"O Obcrt Plggot, Clerk


Stpt. 24, 1556 JTV Thomas Yale, D. LL. per refign. R. P*
March 18, 1577 John Price, M. A. per mortem T. Y.
January 20, 1578 Francis Broughton, M. A* per refign. ]. P.
March 15, 1594 Richard Gwynd, M. A. per refign. F. B,
March 15, 161 3 William Prytherch, M. A. per refign. R.G.
Sept. 30, 1620 John Bayly, M. A. per mortem W. P. He was fon o¥
biftiop Bayly
Griffith Hughes, Clerk
May 8, 1626 "Hugh Williams, M. A. (after D.D.) per mortem G. H.
Odober 7, 1670 Edward Wynne, M. A. of Bodcvrryd, per mortem H.W.
D.D.
Robert Wynne, M. A.
Nov. 10, 1720 William Hughes, B. A. per mortem R. W.
Dec. 28, 1744 John Owen, LL. B. perceJimJVi. H. afterwards chan-
cellor of Bangor
Novem. 8, 1755 John Ellis, LL. B. per mortem J. O. archdeacon of
Merioneth


2*


354 MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAURATA.

LLANFACHRETH.

A Reftory, in the BHhop's Gift, hath two Chapeb under it j viz.

Llarungbenedl zadUan/igsL

£> '. d.

\t i j a- ^ (Henry VIII. 1600
Valued, %.«, j^ i4u o


fnftitution.


TV yTOrgari Hughes, Clerk


January 23,1 542 JlVJL William ap Robert, Clerk; per mortem M^H.
June 18, 1566 Richard Bulkeley, deacon of Gronant, permortemW.K*

Henry Rowlands, bifliop of Bangor, in cammendam
Dec. 30, 1606 Owen Hughes, M. A. and LL. B. per cejfion. epifc.
March 5, ±613 Henry Parry, B. D. per mortem. O* H. He was de-
* ' fcended from one of the foms of Richard Owen Tudor

of Penmynydd, a learned mant and grandfather to
the late eminent divine Dr. Maurice, chaplain to his
grace archbiihop Sancroft
William, Owen, Clerk. He married Mr. Parry's widow*;
was fon of David Owen of Penmynydd, Efq.
June 14, 1645: Robert Lloyd r Clerk, a Denbighshire man, per mor-
tern W. O.
William Williams, Clerk

Rice Williams, Clerk, afterwards re&or of Llandwrog
May l, 1668 Thomas Hughes,. M. A. per cejjwn. R«. W..

Lancelot Bulkeley, B. D. per cejfion. T. H. He was*
fon of William Bulkeley of Coyden, Efq.
Nov. 3, 1690 Pierce Lewis, M. A. per cejfibn. L. B.
Nov. 3, 1693 JohaAnwyl, B. A- per ceJfion.V.lj.
June 1 5,. 1 699 Evan Griffith, M. A. per mortem J. A.
April 8, 1703, William Wynne, M. A. per cejfion. E. G.
Feb* .13^ 1705 Jen kin Evans, B. A. i South- Wales man, permort.Vf.W~
©dlober 1 4, 1 7 1 3 Th Vincent, A. M. a Meriony ddfhire man, per cef. J. E-

June 1-5, 1738 Richard Williams, B. A. per mortem T. V.
Jan, 10, 1749-50 Henry Maurice, B. A. per mortem R. W.
July 29, 1763 James Vincent, M. A. per mortemH..M^


MONA ANTIQUA RESTAURATA. 355

1

LLANEAETHLU.

A Redtory, in the Biihbp's Gift, hath one Chapel under it; viz.

Uanftorog.


Inftitution*


TOhn Hughes, Clerk


May 30, 1 544 %M WilKam Griffith, Clerk, per mortem J. H.
July 13, 1554 Richard apEvan, Clerk, per privat. W. G, conjugate
May 13, 1558 Richard ap Evan, aforefaid, Clerk

William Griffith, Clerk *

Dec. 30, 1587 Richard Glynn, M. A. per mortemVI. G.

fiifhop Bayly, in commendam
Septt 18, 1 6 19 Thomas Davies, M. A. per cej/ion. epifc.
John Griffith, M. A.
•Rowland Chedle, D. D. a Chefliire man
Owen Lewis, Clerk, of Gwercdog
William Lewis, Clerk
July 1 1, 1671 Edward Price, M. A. a Montgomeryshire man

Robert Foulks, M. A. a Denbighshire man, an eminent
phyfician
June 7, 1683 Henry Williams, M. A.
Nov. 7, 1704 Hugh Griffith, M. A. per mortem H. W.
Nov. 27, 17 1 2 Jenkin Evans, B. A. per mortem H. G.
July 9, 1713 Henry Williams, M. A. per cejjion. J. E.
July 15, 1741 Humphrey Jones, A. M. per mortem H. W.


ZZ2


35 6 M 6 K A A k 1 1 (JjJ A fc E « ¥ A l/fftfti A.


LLANFECHEUU


A Reftory, in die BiflwpV Cift, hath one Cb^rel uivJtr it) vfe.
Uanddygwel, fallen to *ukfi many years fince.


H


Inftitution,

P Ugh dement, Ckrfc
William Prythercb, Clerk
Dec. 14, 1 56 1 Hugh WilHams, alias Coydaae, Clcrl^ /ar mortem
W. P. _

February 8, 1 58 1 William Meyrick, LL. B. per mortem B. C.
William Prytherth, M. A*
1623 Rowland Chedle, D. D.
January 6, 1639 Ed mun d Price, M. A. per refign. R. C. D. D.
January 1 1,1643 Robert Lloyd, B A. per mortem E. P*
March 20, 1645 Henry Evans, M, A, perc$fo*.&. LI.
David Lloyd, M,A.
June 25, 1 69 1 Robert Humphreys, M. A. per mortem D. LL
March 27, 16x0 Thomas Jones, 6. A. permortemK.H.
January 8, 1730 Richard Bulkeley, B. A. per mortem T. J.
April 4, 1757 John Evans, A. B. per mortemR. B.


MONA ANTIQJJA RESTAU.RATA. 357


- LL AN FAIR PWLL GWYNGYLL.

A Redtory, in the BUhop's Gift, hath one Chapel under it; viz.

LlandiJMo.

£. s. d.
768
6 15 o


Valued, Tempore, {j^^"'


Inftitution.


1428 /^ Riffith ap Eneon ap Gwilim, Clerk*
1542 vJ Thomas Kenrick, Clerk
Auguft 14, 1543 David Moythe, Clerk, per mortem T. K.
January 15^1583 David Morgan, Clerk, per mortem D. M.
Odiober 20,1602 Robert Parry, M. A. per mortem D. M.
O&ober 1 8, 1 606 Humphrey Roberts, alias Humphreys, M. A. and LL. B.
per cejjion. R. P.
Sept. 20, 1 6 17 William Thomas, Clerk, per cejjion. H. R.

John Cadwalader, Clerk -
Sept. 25, 1624 William Lloyd, Clerk, per cejjion*] '. C.
1664 Roger Williams, M. A.
1666 Evan Hughes, M. A.
April 30, 1672 Hugh Griffith, Clerk
Auguft 17, 1682 Henry Rowlands, Clerk, per mortem H. G.
January 25, 1723 Edward Price, B. A. per mortem H. R.
May 13, 1740 Robert Williams, A. B. per cejjion. E. P.
April 24, 1758 Francis Wynne, Clerk, per cejjion. R. W.


N I S,


The Reader is defired to corre& the following

ERRATA.

Page Line
34 5, 6 read relics

24 read whence it is

47 28 rcadnftoTI

48 8 read later
52 15 md matter
65 2 read Dryw

84 5 read Tref, &c. where v is put for /, as it is in many other place*

100 10 read feet '

126 ult. reed ridged

130 ult. read well as

172 note read there are

173 ult. read Dinefawr
234 fl*/t read written

249 7 read /£* »w/? - /

271 34 for ^w read w/


Books Printed for and Sold by John Knox.


T^Oftlethw&ite's Dictionary of Trade and Commerce, 2 vols, folio.

Boyer's Royal Dictionary, French and Englifh, 4to.

Ditto, abridged 8vo,

Southwell's Medical Obfervations, 4 vole. 8vo.

Don Quixote, tranflatcd by Smollett, 4 vols. 12 mo.

The Adventures of Roderick Random, 2 vols.

Barrow** Colle&ion of Voyages and Difcoveries, with charts and other
plates, 3 vols. 12010.

Cruden's Concordance to the Bible, 410.
Occafional Sermons on Important Subjects, 8vo.

Harris's Hiftory and Antiquities of the City of PubEn, wifh copper-
plates, 8vo.

A Complete Hiftory of the late War, 2 vols. 8ve*

Matrimony, a Novel, 2 vols. i2mo.

A Vjew of Paris, and its Environs, French and Englifh, by the Abbot
Antonini, 2 vols, fmall 121110.


N. B. Money for any Parcel of Books.


v


-■i> DEC 2 11914
