Translation of Several Principal Books, Passages, and Texts of the Veds
Rammohun Roy (1832)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The 1832 second edition of Rammohun Roy's Translation of Several Principal Books, Passages, and Texts of the Veds (London). Public domain.

========================================================================

TRANSLATION


Ol' SliVlillAL


I'KINCirAL BOOKS, PASSA(iE8, AND  TKXTS


THE  VEDS.


^


TRANSLATION


OF SEVERAL


PRINCIPAL  BOOKS, PASSAGES,  AND  TEXTS


THE  VEDS,


SOME  CONTROVERSIAL  WORKS


BRAHMUNICAL  THEOLOGY.


BY

RAJAH  RAMMOHUN  ROY.


SECOND  EDITION.


LONDON:
r  A  U  n  U  R  Y,  ALLEN,  &  C  O.,

LKAUKNHALL STKEET.
1832.


I,0  N  n  ()  N:

•'riiUfil  by  .1.  1,.  (OX  ami  Sr)N,  CtcM  t.'ucpii  Stlcel,

LiiKoln'sInu  I'iolih.


CONTENTS.


Translation  of  an  Abridgment  of  the  Vedant,  or  Rosolntion
of  all  the  Vods  ;  tho  most  celebrated  and  revered  Work  of
Brivliminical  Tlic(>lof>y;  cstablisbin^  the  Unity  of  the  Su-
preme Beinff,  :md  lliat  lie  alone  is  the  object  of  Propi-
tiation and  Worship ..  •.  ..  -.  ••  •• 1


Translation of the  Mooaduk-Oopunishud  of  the Uthurvu-
Ved 23


Translation  of  the  Cona  Upanishad,  one  of  the  Chapters  of
the  Sania  V^da  41


Translation  of  the  Kut'li-Oopunishud  of  the  Ujoor-Ved .. 55


Translation  of  the  ishopunishud,  one  of  the  Chapters  of  the
Yajur  Veda ..  ..  •.  ..  ..  -•  ..HI


A  Translation  into  Enfjlish  of  a  Sungskrit  Tract,  inculcating
the  Divine  Worsliip;  esteemed  by  those  who  believe  in  the
Revelation  of  tlio  Vt-ds,  as  most  appropriate  to  the  Nature
of  the  Supreme  Bcinp^  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..107


A  Defence  f)f  lliiuloo  TIu'Imii,  in  rv-plv  to  the  Attack  of  an
Advocate  for  Idolatry,  ;it  Madras ..  ll!»


vi  CONTENTS.

Page
A  Second  Dcfonco  of  iho  Monothoistioal  System  of  the  Vods  ;
in  reply  to  an  Apology  for  the  present  State  of  Hindoo
Worship  ..  ••  •-  -•  ••  ••  ..153


An  Apology  for  the  Pursuit  of  Final  Beatitude,  independently
of  Bralununieal  Observances  •-  ••  ••  .- IJl


Translation  of  a  Conference  between  an  Advocate  for,  and
an  Opponent  of,  the  practice  of  Burning  Widows  Alive;
from  the  original  Bnngla ..  ..  .-  ••  •• 15)7


A  Second  Conference  between  an  Advocate  for,  and  an  Oppo-
nent of,  the  practice  of  Bm-ning  Widows  Alive  ..  215


Abstract  of  the  Arguments  regarding  the  Burning  of  Widows,
considered  as  a  Religious  Rito  .  •  •  •  •  •  •  • 257


Brief  Remarks  regarding  Modern  Encroachments  on  the
Ancient  Rights  of  Females,  according  to  the  Hindoo  Law
of  Inheritance  ••  •• ••  •• ••  ••  2^7


INTRODUCTION.


Several  of  my  friends  having  expressed  a
wish  to  be  possessed  of  copies  of  my  Transla-
tion of  the  Veds,  and  Controversies  with  those
Brahmuns  who  are  advocates  for  idolatry,  1
have  collected  for  republication  such  of  those
tracts  as  I  could  find,  either  among  my  own
papers  or  those  of  my  friends  who  happened
to  have  brought  them  from  India,  and  now
otfer  them  to  the  public  in  their  original  form.

I  feel  induced  to  set  forth  here,  briefly,  tlie
substance  of  these  writings,  to  facilitate  the
comprehension  of  their  purport,  as  being  foreign
to  the  generality  of  European  readers.  Tiie
Veds  (or  properly  speaking,  the  spiritual  parts
of  them)  uniformly  declare,  that  man  is  prone
by  nature,  or  by  habit,  to  reduce  the  object  or
objects  of  his  veneration  and  worship  (though
admitted  to  be  unknown)  to  tangible  forms,  as-
cribing to  such  objects  attributes,  supposed
excellent  according  to  his  own  notions;  whence
idolatry,  gross  or  refined,  takes  its  origin,  and
perverts the true course  of  intellect to vain


Vlll  INTRODUCTrON.

fixncies,  Tliesc  authorities,  therefore,  hold  out
precautions  against  framing  a  deity  after  human
imagination,  and  recommend  mankind  to  direct
all  researches  towards  the  surrounding  objects,
viewed  either  collectively  or  individually,  bear-
ing in  mind  their  regular,  wise,  and  wonderful
combinations  and  arrangements ;  since  such  re-
searches cannot  fail,  they  afhrm,  to  lead  an
unbiassed  mind  to  a  notion  of  a  Supreme  Exis-
tence, who  so  sublimely  designs  and  disposes
of  them,  as  is  every  where  traced  through  the
universe.  The  same  Veds  represent  rites  and
external  worship  addressed  to  the  planets  and
elementary  objects,  or  personified  abstract  no-
tions, as  well  as  to  deified  heroes,  as  intended
for  persons  of  mean  capacity;  but  enjoin  spiritual
devotion,  as  already  described,  benevolence,  and
self-control,  as  the  only  means  of  securing  bliss.

IIAMMOHUN  ROY.

London,  July  23,  1832.

P.S.  In  all  the  fbllovviiig  Tianslation.s,  except  the  Cena
Upanishad,  tlie  nioile  of  spcUiiii;  Sanscrit  \v(»rcls  in  English,
adopted  by  Dr.  J.  Ji.  Gilchrist,  has  been  observed.


TRANSLATION

OP AN

ABRIDGMENT

OF

THE V  E  D  A  N  T,

OR

RESOLUTION OF ALL THE VEDS;

THi:
MOST  CELEBRATED  AND  UEVERED  WOUK  OF  *

li>rafjmmical  ^fjrologi);

F.sTABMsm\(i  riir,  i'mty  oi'  Tiir.  sii'ukmk  mkinc;;  and  that
HE ALONE

IS  TIIK niMKCT or I'HOIMTIATION AND \Vf)l!SlII  I'.


CALCUTTA
IS16.


TO

THE  BELIEVERS  OF  THE  ONLY  TRUE  GOD.


The  greater  part  of  Brahmins,  as  well  as  of  other
sects  of  Hindoos,  are  quite  incapable  of  justifying  that
idolatry  which  they  continue  to  practise.  Wiien  ques-
tioned on  tlie  subject,  in  place  of  adducing  reasonable
arguments  in  support  of  their  conduct,  they  conceive  it
fully  sufficient  to  quote  their  ancestors  as  positive
authorities !  And  some  of  them  are  become  very  ill-
disposed  towards  me,  because  I  have  forsaken  idolatry
for  the  worship  of  the  true  and  eternal  God  !  In  order,
therefore,  to  vindicate  my  own  faith  and  that  of  our
early  forefathers,  I  have  been  endeavouring,  for  some
time  past,  to  convince  my  countrymen  of  the  true
meaning  of  our  sacred  books;  and  to  prove,  that  my
aberration  deserves  not  the  opprobrium  which  some
unreflecting  persons  have  been  so  ready  to  throw  upon
me.

The  whole  body  of  the  Hindoo  Theology,  Law,  and
Literature,  is  contained  in  the  Veds,  wiiich  are  affirmed
to  be  coeval  with  the  creation  !  These  works  are
extremely  voluminous;  and  being  written  in  the  most
elevated  and  metaphorical  style,  are,  as  may  be  well
supposed,  in  many  passages  seemingly  confused  and
contradictory. Upwards  of  two ihousantl  years  ago,

b2


INTRODUCTION.


the  great  Byas,  reflecting  on  the  perpetual  difficulty
arising  from  these  sources,  composed  with  great  dis-
crimination a  complete  and  compendious  abstract  of
the  whole ;  and  also  reconciled  those  texts  which
appeared  to  stand  at  variance.  This  work  he  termed
The  Feclant,  which,  compounded  of  two  Sungscrit
words,  signifies  The  Besolution  of  all  the  Veds.  It  has
continued  to  be  most  highly  revered  by  all  the  Hindoos ;
and  in  place  of  the  more  diffuse  arguments  of  the  Veds,
is  always  referred  to  as  equal  authority.  But  from  its
being  concealed  within  the  dark  curtain  of  the  Sungscrit
language,  and  the  Brahmins  permitting  themselves  alone
to  interpret,  or  even  to  touch  any  book  of  the  kind,  the
Vedant,  although  perpetually  quoted,  is  little  known
to  the  public  :  and  the  practice  of  few  Hindoos  indeed
bears  the  least  accordance  with  its  precepts  !

In  pursuance  of  my  vindication,  I  have  to  the  best  of
my  abilities  translated  this  hitherto  unknown  vvoi'k,  as
well  as  an  abridgment  thereof,  into  the  Hindoostanee
and  Bengalee  languages;  and  distributed  them,  free  of
cost,  among  my  own  countrymen,  as  widel}^  as  circum-
stances have  possibly  allowed.  The  present  is  an
endeavour  to  render  an  abridgment  of  the  same  into
English,  by  which  I  expect  to  prove  to  my  European
friends,  that  the  superstitious  practices  which  deform
the  Hindoo  religion  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  pure
spirit  of  its  dictates  !

I  have  observed,  that  both  in  their  writings  and  con-
versation, many  Europeans  feel  a  wish  to  palliate  and
soften  the  features  of  Hindoo  idolatry  ;  and  are  inclined
to  inculcate,  that  all  objects  of  worship  are  considered
by  their  votaries  as  emblematical  representations  of  the


INTilOnUCTKIN.


ISiipreine  Divitiity  ! — If  this  were  indeed  the  case,  I
might  perhaps  be  led  into  some  examination  of  the
subject :  but  the  truth  is,  the  Hindoos  of  the  present
day  have  no  sucli  views  of  the  subject ;  but  (irmly
believe  in  the  real  existence  of  innumerable  gods  and
goddesses,  who  possess,  in  their  own  departments,  full
and  independent  power;  and  to  propitiate  them,  and
not  the  true  God,  are  temples  erected  and  ceremonies
performed.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  and  it  is
my  w  hole  design  to  prove,  that  every  rite  has  its  deriva-
tion from  the  allegorical  adoration  of  the  true  Deity  ;
but  at  the  present  day  all  this  is  forgotten,  and  among
many  it  is  even  heresy  to  mention  it !

I  hope  it  will  not  be  presumed  that  I  intend  to
establish  the  preference  of  my  faith  over  that  of  other
men.  The  result  of  controversy  on  such  a  subject,
however  multiplied,  must  be  ever  unsatisfixctory ;  for  the
reasoning  faculty  which  leads  men  to  certainty  in  things
within  its  reach,  produces  no  elfect  on  questions  beyond
its  comprehension.  I  do  no  more  than  assert,  that,  if
correct  reasoning,  and  the  dictates  of  common  sense,
induce  thcbelief  of  a  wise,  uncreated  Being,  who  is  the
supporter  and  ruler  of  the  boundless  universe,  we
should  also  consider  him  the  most  powerful  and  supreme
existence  ; — far  surpassing  our  powers  of  comprehen-
sion or  description  ! — And,  although  men  of  nncnlti-
ra^erf  minds,  and  even  some /m/vifr/ individuals,  (but  in
this  one  point  blinded  by  prejudice,)  readily  choose,  as
the  object  of  their  adoration,  any  thing  which  they  can
always  see,  and  which  they  pretend  lo/cel ;  the  absur-
dity of  such  conduct  is  not  thereby  in  the  least  degree
diminished.


INTRODUCTKm.


My  constant  reflections  on  the  inconvenient,  or  rather
injurious  rites,  introduced  by  tlie  peculiar  practice  of
Hindoo  idolatry,  which,  more  than  any  other  Pagan
worship,  destroys  the  texture  of  society,  together  with
compassion  for  my  countrymen,  have  compelled  me  to
use  every  possible  effort  to  awaken  them  from  their
dream  of  error:  and  by  making  them  acquainted  with
their  scriptures,  enable  them  to  contemplate  with  true
devotion  the  unity  and  omnipresence  of  Nature's  God.

By  taking  the  path  which  conscience  and  sincerity
direct,  T,  born  a  Brahmun,  have  exposed  myself  to  the
complainings  and  reproaches,  even  of  some  of  my
relations,  whose  prejudices  are  strong,  and  whose  tem-
poral advantage  depends  upon  the  present  system.
But  these,  however  accumulated,  I  can  tranquilly  bear ;
trusting  that  a  day  will  arrive  when  my  humble  endea-
vours will  be  viewed  with  justice — perhaps  acknow-
ledged with  gratitude.  At  any  rate,  whatever  men
may  say,  I  cannot  be  deprived  of  this  consolation:  my
motives  are  acceptable  to  that  Being  who  beholds  in
secret  and  compensates  openly  !


ABRIDGMENT


THE VEDANT


The  illustrious  Byas,*  in  his  celebrated  work,  the
Vedant,  insinuates  in  the  first  text,  that  it  is  absolutely
necessary  for  mankind  to  acquire  knowledge  respecting
the  Supreme  Being,  who  is  the  subject  of  discourse  in
all  die  Veds,  and  the  Vedant,  as  well  as  in  the  other
Systems  of  Theology.  But  he  found,  from  the  follow-
ing passages  of  the  Veds,  that  this  inquiry  is  limited  to
very  narrow  bounds,  viz.  "  The  Supreme  ]3eiug  is  not
"  comprehensible  by  vision,  or  by  any  other  of  the  or-
"  gans  of  sense ;  nor  can  he  be  conceived  by  means  of
"  devotion,  or  virtuous  practices  !"  i'  "  He  sees  every
"  thing,  though  never  seen ;  hears  every  thing,  though
"  never  directly  heard  of!  He  is  neither  short,  nor  is
"he  long  ;t  inaccessible  to  the  reasoning  faculty;  not
"  to  be  compassed  by  description;  beyond  the  limits  of
"  the  explanation  of  the  Ved,  or  of  human  conception  !"§
Byas,  also,  from  die  result  of  various  arguments  coin-

♦  The  greatest  of  tlie  Indian  thcologists,  pliilosophors,  and  poets,
was  begotten  by  the  celebrated  Purasur  and  Sutyubutoo.  Byas
collected  and  divided  the  Veds  into  certain  books  and  chapters,
he  is  therefore  commonly  called  Vedu  Byas.  'I'he  word  Byas  is
composed  of  the  preposition  hi  and  the  verb  nss  to  divide.

t  Munduc.  J  IJrih'darunnuf.  k  Cutbubnlli.


8  AlMUOGiMENT  OF

ciding  with  the  Xcd,  found  that  the  accurate  and  posi-
tive knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Being  is  not  within  the
boundary  of  comprehension ;  i.  e.  that  ivhat,  and  hoiv,
the  Supreme  Being  is,  cannot  be  definitely  ascertained.
He  has  therefore,  in  the  second  text,  explained  the  Su-
preme Being  by  his  effects  and  works,  without  attempt-
ing to  define  his  essence;  in  like  manner  as  we,  not
knowing  the  real  nature  of  the  sun,  explain  him  to  be
the  cause  of  the  succession  of  days  and  epochs.  "  He
"  by  whom  the  birth,  existence,  and  annihilation  of  the
*'  world  is  regulated,  is  the  Supreme  Being !"  We  see
the  multifarious,  wonderful  universe,  as  well  as  the  birth,
existence,  and  annihilation,  of  its  different  parts;  hence,
we  naturally  infer  the  existence  of  a  being  who  regulates
the  whole,  and  call  him  the  Supreme  :  in  the  same  man-
ner as  from  the  sight  of  a  pot,  we  conclude  the  existence
of  its  artificer.  The  Ved,  in  like  manner,  declares  the
Supreme  Being  thus :  "  He  from  whom  the  universal
"  world  proceeds,  who  is  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  and
"  whose  work  is  the  universe,  is  the  Supreme  Being  !"  *

The  Ved  is  not  supposed  to  be  an  eternal  Being,
though  sometimes  dignified  with  such  an  epithet;  be-
cause its  being  created  by  the  Supreme  Being  is  de-
clared in  the  same  Ved  thus :  "  All  the  texts  and  parts
"  of  the  Ved  were  created :"  and  also  in  the  third  text
of  the  Vedant,  God  is  declared  to  be  the  cause  of  all  the
Veds.

The  void  Space  is  not  conceived  to  be  the  independent
cause  of  the  world,  notwithstanding  the  following  de-
claration of  the  Ved,  "  The  world  proceeds  from  the
"  void  space  ;"f  for  the  Ved  again  declares,  "  By  the
*  'J'uitturccu.  +  CIiluDulogiiu.


THE VEDA  NT.  »

*'  Sii))reme  Being  the  voitl  spiice  was  procluced."  And
the  Vedanl*  says:  "  As  the  JSiiprcnie  jjciiig  is  evi-
*'  deiitly  declared  in  the  \'ed  to  he  the  cause  of  the
*'  void  Space,  Air,  and  Fire,  neither  of  them  can  be
"  supposed  to  be  the  independent  cause  of  tlie  uni-
"  verse."

Neither  is  Air  allowed  to  be  the  Lord  of  tlie  Uni-
verse, althougii  the  Ved  says  in  one  instance,  "  In  Air
"every  existing  creature  is  absorbed;"  for  the  Ved
again  affirms,  that  "  Breath,  the  intellectual  power,  all
"  the  internal  and  external  senses,  the  void  Space,  Air,
"  Light,  Water,  and  the  extensive  Earth,  proceeded
"  from  the  Supreme  Being  !"  The  Vedantf  also  says:
"  God  is  meant  by  the  following  text  of  the  Ved,  as
"  a  Being  more  extensive  than  all  the  extension  of
"  Space;"  viz.  "  That  breath  is  greater  than  the  exten-
"  sion  of  Space  in  all  directions,"  as  it  occurs  in  the
Ved,  after  the  discourse  concerning  common  breath  is
concluded.

Light,  of  whatever  description,  is  not  inferred  to  be
the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  from  the  following  assertion
of  the  Ved :  "  The  pure  Light  of  all  Lights  is  the  Lord
"  of  all  creatures;"  for  the  Ved  again  declares,;}:  that
"  The  sun  and  all  others  imitate  God,  and  borrow  their
"  light  from  him;"  and  the  same  declaration  is  found
in  the  Vedant.§

Neither  can  Nature  be  construed  by  the  following
texts  of  the  Ved,  to  be  the  independent  cause  of  the
world:  viz.  "  Man  having  known  that  Nature  which  is
"  an  eternal  being, without  a  beginning  or  an  end, is

*  Fourteenth  text,  4th  sec.  l.^t  <-li;i|).  +  Sih,  3(1,  1st.

:  .Moonduc.  §  J_'(l,  :{(1,  Ibt.


10  ABniDGMF.NT  OF

"  delivered  from  the  j^rasp  of  death  !"  and,  "  Nature
"  operates  lierself !"  because  the  Vcd  affirms  that  "  No
"  bein£T  is  superior  or  equal  to  God  !"*  and  the  Ved
commands,  "  Know  God  alone  !"f  and  the  Vedantf
thus  declares :  "  Nature  is  not  the  Creator  of  the  world,
"  not  being  represented  so  by  the  Ved,"  for  it  expressly
says,  "  God  has  by  his  sight  created  the  Universe."
Nature  is  an  insensible  Being,  she  is,  therefore,  void  of
sight  or  intention,  and  consequently  unable  to  create
the  regular  world.  §

Atoms  are  not  supposed  to  be  the  cause  of  the  world,
notwithstanding  the  following  declaration  :  "  This
"  (Creator)  is  the  most  minute  Being."  Because  an  atom
is  an  insensible  particle,  and  from  the  above  authority
it  is  proved,  that  no  Being  void  of  understanding  can
be  the  author  of  a  system  so  skilfully  arranged.

The  Soul  cannot  be  inferred  from  the  following  texts,  to
be  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  nor  the  independent  Ruler
of  the  intellectual  powers;  viz.  "The  Soul  being  joined
"  to  the  resplendent  Being,  enjoys  by  itself,"  "  God  and
"  the  Soul  enter  the  small  void  space  of  the  heart ;"  be-
cause the  Ved  declares  that  "He  (God)  resides  in  the  Soul
as  its  Ruler,"  and  that  "  The  Soul  being  joined  to  the
"  gracious  Being,  enjoys  happiness."  ||  The  Vedant  also
says,  "  The  sentient  soul  is  not  understood  to  reside  as
"  ruler  in  the  Earth,  because  in  both  texts  of  the  Ved
"  it  is  differently  declared  from  that  Being  who  rules  the
"  Earth:"  viz.  "  He  (God)  resides  in  the  faculty  of  the
"  understanding,"  and  "  He,  who  resides  in  the  Soul,
"  &c."

*  Cuthu.  t  Mooiuluc.  X  5th,  1st,  1st.

§  Culhu.  II  2(lth,  2(1,  1st.


THE VEDANT.  11

No  God  or  Goddess  of  the  Earth  c:in  be  meant  by
the  tbllowing  text,  as  the  ruler  of  the  Earth,  viz.  *  "  He
"  who  resides  in  the  Earth,  and  is  distinct  from  the  Earth,
"  and  whom  the  Earth  does  not  know,"  &c. :  because
the  Ved  affirms  that,  "This  (God  alone)  is  the  ruler  of
"  internal  sense,  and  is  the  eternal  Being;"  and  the  same
is  asserted  in  the  Vedant.f

By  the  textAvhich  begins  with  the  following  sentence:
viz.  "  This  is  the  Sun,"  and  by  several  other  texts  testi-
fying the  dignity  of  the  sun,  he  is  not  supposed  to  be
the  original  cause  of  the  universe,  because  the  Ved  de-
clares, thatj  "  He  who  resides  in  the  Sun  (as  his  Lord)
"  is  distinct  from  the  Sun,"  and  the  Vedant  declares
the  same.§

In  like  manner  none  of  the  celestial  Gods  can  be  in-
ferred from  the  various  assertions  of  the  Ved,  respect-
ing their  deities  respectively,  to  be  the  independent  cause
of  the  Universe ;  because  the  Ved  repeatedly  affirms,
that  "  All  the  Veds  prove  nothing  but  the  unity  of  the
"  Supreme  Being."  By  allowing  the  Divinity  more
than  one  Being,  the  following  positive  affirmations  of  the
Ved,  relative  to  the  unity  of  God,  become  false  and
absurd:  "God  is  indeed  one  and  has  no  second. "||
"  There  is  none  but  the  Supreme  Being  possessed  of
**  imiversal  knowledge."  U  "  He  who  is  without  any
*'  figure,  and  beyond  the  limit  of  description,  is  the
"  Supreme  Being." '^  *  "  Appellations  and  figures  of  all
"  kinds  are  innovations."  And  from  the  authority  of
many  other  texts  it  is  evident  that  any  being  that  bears

•  Brih'daruiinuo.  t l^^tli,  lM,  1st.  ♦ IJiiliManumuc.

§  2l8t,  1st,  1st.  II  Cuthu.  H Biiirdanuiiiuc.

**  Chhandoggu.


12  ABRIDGMENT OF

figure, and  is subject  to description, cannot be the
eternal  independent  cause  of  the  universe.

The  Veds  not  only  cull  the  celestial  representations
Deities,  but  also  in  many  instances  give  the  divine
epithet  to  the  mind,  diet,  void  space,  quadruped  animal,
slaves,  and  flymen  :  as,  "  The  Supreme  JBeing  is  a  qua-
"  druped  animal  in  one  place,  and  in  another  he  is  full
"  of  glory.  The  mind  is  the  Supreme  Being,  it  is  to
''  be  worshipped,"  "  God  is  the  letter  ku  as  well  as
"  khu,"  and  "  God  is  in  the  shape  of  slaves  and  that
"  of  flymen."  The  Ved  has  allegorically  represented
God  in  the  figure  of  the  Universe,  viz.  "  Fire  is  his
"  head,  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  his  two  eyes,"*  &c.
And  also  the  Ved  calls  God  the  void  space  of  the  heart,
and  declares  him  to  be  smaller  than  the  grain  of  paddy
and  barley  :  but  from  the  foregoing  quotations  neither
any  of  the  celestial  Gods,  nor  any  existing  creature,
should  be  considered  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  because
the  "I*  third  chapter  of  the  Vedant  explains  the  reason
for  these  secondary  assertions  thi  s  :  "  By  these  appella-
"  tions  of  the  Ved  which  denote  the  diffusive  spirit  of
"  the  Supreme  Being  equally  over  all  creatures  by
"  means  of  extension,  his  omnipresence  is  established  :''
so  the  Ved  says,  "  All  that  exists  is  indeed  God,"J  i.  e.
nothing  bears  true  existence  excepting  God,  "  and
"  whatever  we  smell  or  tfaste  is  the  Supreme  Being,"
i.  e.  the  existence  of  whatever  thing  that  appears  to  us
relies  on  the  existence  of  God.  It  is  indisputably
evident  that  none  of  these  metaphorical  representations,
which  arise  from  the  elevated  style  in  which  all  the
Veds  are  written,  were  designed to  be  viewed  in  any

• Mondiic.  +  3Sth  text,  2cl  see.  \ f'hliaiKldoj^^ii.


;


THE VEDANT.  I.i

Oilier  li<rlit  llian  mere  allegory.  Should  iiidivicluals  be
acknowledired  to  be  separate  deities,  there  would  be  a
necessity  for  ackuowledginir  many  independent  creators
of  the  world,  which  is  directly  contrary  to  common
sense,  and  to  the  repeated  authority  of  the  Ved.  The
Vedant*  also  declares,  "  That  Being  which  is  distinct
"  from  matter,  and  from  those  which  are  contained  in
"  matter,  is  not  various,  because  he  is  declared  by  all  the
"  Veds  to  be  one  beyond  description  ;"  and  it  is  again
stated  that  "  The  Ved  has  declared  the  Supreme  Being
"  to  be  mere  understanding  ;"-f-  also  in  the  third  chapter
is  found  that,  '•  The  Ved  having  at  first  explained  the
"  Supreme  Being  by  different  epithets,  begins  with  the
"  word  Uthu,  or  now,"  and  declares  that  "  All  descrip-
"  tions  which  I  have  used  to  describe  the  Supreme
"  Being  are  incorrect,"  because  he  by  no  means  can  be
described  ;  and  so  is  it  stated  in  the  sacred  commen-
taries of  the  Ved.

The  fourteenth  text  of  the  second  sect,  of  the  third
chapter  of  the  Vedant  declares,  "  It  being  directly  re-
"  presented  by  the  Ved,  that  the  Supreme  Being  bears
"  no  figure  nor  form  :"  and  the  following  texts  of  the
Ved  assert  the  same,  viz.  "  That  true  Being  was  before
"  all."f  "  The  Supreme  Being  has  no  feet,  but  extends
"  every  were  ;  has  no  hands,  yet  holds  every  thino- ;  has
"  no  eyes,  yet  sees  all  that  is ;  has  no  ears,  yet  hears
"  every  thing  that  passes."  "  His  existence  had  no
"  cause."  "  He  is  the  smallest  of  the  small,  and  the
"  greatest  of  the  great :  and  yet  is,  in  fact,  neither
"  small  nor  great !"

•  11th  2(1,  .1(1.  t  ItUli,  iM,  ;w.  t  riihaiulofTfru.


14  ABRIDGMENT OF

In  answer  to  the  following  questions,  viz.  How  can
the  Supreme  Being  be  supposed  to  be  distinct  from,  and
above  all  existing  creatures,  and  at  the  same  time  omni-
present ?  How  is  it  possible  that  he  should  be  described
by  properties  inconceivable  by  reason,  as  seeing  with-
out eye,  and  hearing  without  ear  ?  To  these  questions
the  Vedant,  in  chapter  second,  replies,  "  In  God  are  all
"  sorts  of  power  and  splendour."  And  the  following
passages  of  the  Ved  also  declare  the  same  :  "God  is  all-
"  powerful;"*  and  "  It  is  by  his  supremacy  that  he  is  in
"  possession  of  all  powers;"  i.  e.  what  may  be  impossible
for  us  is  not  impossible  for  God,  who  is  the  Almighty,
and  the  sole  regulator  of  the  Universe.

Some  celestial  Gods  have,  in  different  instances,  de-
clared themselves  to  be  independent  deities,  and  also  the
object  of  worship ;  but  these  declarations  were  owing
to  their  thoughts  being  abstracted  from  themselves
and  their  being  entirely  absorbed  in  divine  reflection.-f
The  Vedant  declares:  "  This  exhortation  of  Indru  (or
"  the  god  of  atmosphere)  respecting  his  divinity,  to  be
"  indeed  agreeable  to  the  authorities  of  the  Ved;"  that
is,  "  Every  one,  on  having  lost  all  self-consideration
"  in  consequence  of  being  united  with  divine  reflection,
"  may  speak  as  assuming  to  be  the  Supreme  Being ;
"  like  Bamdev  (a  celebrated  Brahmun)  who,  in  conse-
"  quence  of  such  self-forgetfulness,  declared  himself  to
"  have  created  the  Sun,  and  Munoo  the  next  person  to
"  Brahma."  It  is  therefore  optional  with  every  one  of
the  celestial  Gods,  as  well  as  with  every  individual,  to
consider  himself  as  God,  under  this  state  of  self-forget-

* ShyotasliyiiUir.  +  .3Utli, 1st, 1st.


THE VEDANT.  16

fulness  and  unity  with  ilio  divine  reflection,  as  the  Ved
says,  "  you  are  that  true  Being"  (when  you  lose  all  self-
consideration),  and  "  O  God  I  am  nothing  but  you."
The  sacred  commentators  have  made  the  same  observa-
tion, viz.  "  I  am  nothing  but  true  Being,  and  am  pure
"  Understanding,  full  of  eternal  happiness,  and  am
"  by  nature  free  from  worldly  effects."  But  in  con-
sequence of  this  reflection,  none  of  them  can  be
acknowledged  to  be  the  cause  of  the  universe  or  the
object  of  adoration.

God  is  the  efficient  cause  of  the  universe,  as  a  potter
is  of  earthen  pots ;  and  he  is  also  the  material  cause  of
it,  the  same  as  the  earth  is  the  material  cause  of  the
different  earthen  pots,  or  as  a  rope,  at  an  inadvertent
view  taken  for  a  snake,  is  the  material  cause  of  the
conceived  existence  of  the  Snake,  which  appears  to  be
true  by  the  support  of  the  real  existence  of  the  rope.
So  says  the  Vedant,*  "  God  is  the  efficient  cause  of  the
"  Universe,  as  well  as  the  material  cause  thereof  (as  a
"  spider  of  its  web),  as  the  Ved  has  positively  declared,
"  That  from  a  knowledge  of  God  alone,  a  knowledge
"  of  every  existing  thing  proceeds."  Also  the  Ved
compares  the  knowledge  respecting  the  Supreme  Being
to  a  knowledge  of  the  earth,  and  the  knowledge  respect-
ing the  different  species  existing  in  the  universe,  to  the
knowledge  of  earthen  j)ots,  which  declaration  and  com-
])arison  prove  the  unity  between  the  Supreme  Being
and  the  universe;  and  by  the  following  declarations  of
the  Ved,  viz.  "  The  Supreme  Being  has  by  his  sole
"  intention  created  the  Universe, '  it  is  evident  that
God  is  the  wilful  agent  of  all  that  can  have  existence.
•  23(1,  6ih,  Ibi.


IT)  AimiDGMKNT OF

As  the  Ved  says  that  the  Supreme  Being  intended
(at  the  time  of  creation)  to  extend  liimself,  it  is  evident
that  the  Supreme  Being  is  the  origin  of  all  matter,  and
its  various  appearances ;  as  the  reflection  of  the  sun's
meridian  rays  on  sandy  plains  is  the  cause  of  the  re-
semblance of  an  extended  sea.  The  Ved  says,  "  That
"  all  figures  and  their  appellations  are  mere  inventions,
"  and  that  the  Supreme  Being  alone  is  real  existence,"
consequently  things  that  bear  figure  and  appellation
cannot  be  supposed  the  cause  of  the  universe.

The  following  texts  of  theVed,  ?;iz."  Crishnu  (the  god
"  of  preservation)  is  greater  than  all  the  celestial  gods,
"  to  whom  the  mind  should  be  applied."  "  We  all
"  worship  Muhadev  (the  god  of  destruction)."  "  We
"  adore  the  sun."  "  I  worship  the  most  revered  Buron
"  (the  god  of  the  sea)."  "  Dost  thou  worship  me,  says
"  Air,  who  am  the  eternal  and  universal  life."  "  Intel-
"  lectual  power  is  God,  which  should  be  adored;"
"  and  Oodgueet  (or  a  certain  part  of  theVed)  should  be
"  worshipped."  These,  as  well  as  several  other  texts  of
the  same  nature,  are  not  real  commands  to  worship  the
persons  and  things  above-mentioned,  but  only  direct
those  who  are  unfortunately  incapable  of  adoring  the
invisible  Supreme  Being,  to  apply  their  minds  to  any
visible  thing,  rather  than  allow  them  to  remain  idle.
The  Vedant  also  states,  that  "  The  declaration  of  the
"  Ved,"*  "that  those  who  worship  the  celestial  gods  are
"  the  food  of  such  gods,"  is  an  allegorical  expression,
and  only  means  that  they  are  comforts  to  the  celestial
gods,  as  food  is  to  mankind;  for  he  who  has  no  faith  in

*■  7tii,  i-^t,  ;m.


THE VEUANT.  17

the  Supreme  Being  is  rendered  subject  to  these  gods.
The  Ved  affirms  the  same  :  viz.  "  lie  wlio  worships
"  '"^"y  n^^^  excepting  the  Supreme  Being,  and  thinks
"  tiiat  he  is  distinct  and  inferior  to  that  god,  knows
"  nothing,  and  is  considered  as  a  domestic  beast  of
"  these  gods."  And  the  Vedant  also  asserts ;  viz.
"  The  worship  authorized  by  all  the  Veds  is  of  one
"  nature,  as  the  directions  for  the  worship  of  the  only
"  Supreme  Being  is  invariably  found  in  every  part
"of  the  Ved;  and  the  epithets  the  Supi'eme  and
"the  Omnipresent  Being,  &c.  commonly  imply  God
"  alone."*

The  following  passages  of  the  Ved  affirm  that  God
is  the  sole  object  of  worship,  viz.-f  "  adore  God  alone."
"  Know  God  alone  ;  give  up  all  other  discourse."  And
the  Vedant  says,  that  "  It  is  found  in  the  Veds,  J  '  That
'  none  but  the  Supreme  Being  is  to  be  worshipped,
'  nothing  excepting  him  should  be  adored  by  a  wise
'  man.'  "

Moreover,  the  Vedant  declares  that  "  Byas  is  of
"  opinion  that  the  adoration  of  the  Supreme  Being  is
"  required  of  mankind  as  well  of  the  celestial  gods ;
"  because  the  possibility  of  self-resignation  to  God  is
"  equally  observed  in  both  mankind  and  the  celestial
"  deities."^  The  Ved  also  states, ||  that  "Of  the  celestial
"  gods,  of  the  pious  Brahmuns,  and  of  men  in  general,
"  that  person  who  understands  and  believes  the  Al-
"  mighty  Being,  will  be  absorbed  in  iiim."  It  is  there-
fore concluded  that  the  celestial  gods  and  mankind  have
an  equal duty in divine worship;  and besides it is

• Isf,  .{(1,  3d.  t  Brrhdanmnuc.  I  (iTtli,  3(1,  3d.

§  26th,  3d,  Ut.  II lirehdaninrmc.

C


18  ABRIDGMENT OF

proved  from  the  following  authority  of  the  Ved,  that
any  man  who  adores  the  Supreme  Being  is  adored  by
idl  the  celestial  gods,  viz.  "  All  the  celestial  gods  wor-
"  ship  him  who  applies  his  mind  to  the  Supreme
"  Being."*

The  Ved  now  illustrates  the  mode  in  which  we  should
worship  the  Supreme  Being,  viz.  "  To  God  we  should
"  approach,  of  him  we  should  hear,  of  him  we  should
"  think,  and  to  bim  we  should  attempt  to  approxi-
"  mate."t  The  Vedant  also  elucidates  the  subject  thus:
"  The  three  latter  directions  in  the  above  quoted  text,
"  are  conducive  to  the  first,  viz.  '  Approaching  to
"  God.'  "  These  three  are  in  reality  included  in  the
first  (as  the  direction  for  collecting  fire  in  the  worship
of  fire),  for  we  cannot  approach  to  God  without  hearing
and  thinking  of  him,  nor  without  attempting  to  make
our  approximation  ;  and  the  last,  viz.  attempting  to
approximate  to  God,  is  required  until  we  have  ap-
proached him.  By  hearing  of  God  is  meant  hearing
his  declarations,  which  establi§h  his  unity ;  and  by
thinking  of  him  is  meant  thinking  of  the  contents  of
his  law ;  and  by  attempting  to  approximate  to  him  is
meant  attempting  to  apply  our  minds  to  that  true  Being
on  which  the  diffusive  existence  of  the  universe  relies,
in  order  that  by  means  of  the  constant  practice  of  this
attempt  we  may  approach  to  him.  The  Vedant  states,^
that  "  Constant  practice  of  devotion  is  necessary,  it
"  being  represented  so  by  the  Ved  ;"  and  also  adds
that  *'  We  should  adore  God  till  we  approach  to  him,
*'  and  even  then  not  forsake  his  adoration,  such
"  authority  being  found  in  the  Ved."

*  t;iiiiaii(i()0£>ii.  t  iTtii,  itb,  :w.  J  1st,  1st,  4tli.


THE VF.DANT.  19

The  Vetlanl  shews  that  moral  piinciple  is  a  part  of
the  adoration  of  God,  viz.  "  A  command  over  our
*'  passions  and  over  the  external  senses  of  the  body
*'  and  good  acts,  are  declared  by  the  Ved  lo  be  indis-
*'  pensable  in  the  mind's  approximation  to  God,  they
"  should  therefore  be  strictly  taken  care  of,  and  attended
*'  to,  both  previously  and  subsequently  to  such  approxi-
"  mation  to  the  Supreme  Being;"*  i.e.  we  should  not
indulge  our  evil  propensities,  but  should  endeavour  to
have  entire  control  over  them.  Reliance  on,  and  self-
resignation  to,  the  only  true  Being,  with  an  aversion  to
worldly  considerations,  are  included  in  the  good  acts
above  alluded  to.  The  adoration  of  the  Supreme
Being  produces  eternal  beatitude,  as  well  as  all  desired
advantages ;  as  the  Vedant  declares :  "  It  is  the  firm
*'  opinion  of  Byas  that  from  devotion  to  God  all  the
"  desired  consequences  proceed  ;"f  and  it  is  thus  often
represented  by  the  Ved,  "  He  who  is  desirous  of  pros-
"  parity  should  worship  the  Supreme  Being. "|  "  He
"  who  knows  God  thoroughly  adheres  unto  God."
"  The  souls  of  the  deceased  forefathers  of  liim  who
*'  adores  the  true  Being  alone,  enjoy  freedom  by  his
"  mere  wish."§  "  All  the  celestial  gods  worsliip  him
*'  who  applies  his  mind  to  the  Supreme  Being;"  and
"  He,  who  sincerely  adores  the  Supreme  Being,  is
"  exempted  from  further  transmigration."

A  pious  householder  is  entitled  to  the  adoration  of
God equally  with an Uti:|| The  Vedant  says,  that

•  27tli,  4th,;3<l. t 1st,  4th,  3d. t iMondue. §  Clihandoggu.

II  The  highest  among  the  four  sects  of  Brahrauns,  who,  accord-
ing to  the  religious  order,  are  bound  to  forsake  all  worldly  con-
siderations, and  to  spend  their  time  in  the  sole  adoration  of  Hod.

c2


20  ABRIDCxMENT OF

"  A  householder  may  be  allowed  the  performance  of  all
'<  the  ceremonies  attached  to  the  (Brahminical)  religion,
"  and  also  the  fulfilling  of  the  devotion  of  God  :  the
"  fore-mentioned  mode  of  worsliipping  the  Supreme
"  Being,  therefore,  is  required  of  a  householder  pos-
"  sessed  of  moral  principles."^  And  the  Ved  declares,
"That  the  celestial  gods,  and  householders  of  strong
"  faith,  and  professional  uttis,  are  alike."

It  is  optional  to  those  who  have  faith  in  God  alone,
to  observe  and  attend  to  the  rules  and  rites  prescribed
by  the  Ved,  applicable  to  the  different  classes  of  Hin-
doos, and  to  their  different  religious  orders  respectively.
But  in  case  of  the  true  believers  neglecting  those  rites,
they  are  not  liable  to  any  blame  whatever;  as  the
Vedant  says,  "  Before  acquiring  the  true  knowledge  of
"  God,  it  is  proper  for  man  to  attend  to  the  laws  and
"  rules  laid  down  by  the  Ved  for  different  classes,
"  according  to  their  different  professions ;  because  the
'*  Ved  declares  the  performance  of  these  rules  to  be  the
"  cause  of  the  mind's  purification,  and  its  faith  in
**  God,  and  compares  it  with  a  saddle-horse,  which
•'  helps  a  man  to  arrive  at  the  wished-for  goal."f  And
the  Vedant  also  says,  tliat  "  Man  may  acquire  the  true
"  knowledge  of  God  even  without  observing  the  rules
"  and  rites  prescribed  by  the  Ved  for  each  class  of  Hin-
"  doos,  as  it  is  found  in  the  Ved  that  many  persons
*'  who  had  neglected  the  performance  of  the  Brahmini-
"  cal  rites  and  ceremonies,  owing  to  their  perpetual
"  attention  to  the  adoration  of  the  Supreme  Being,  ac-
"  quired the true  knowledge respecting  the  Deity'J

#  i'8tli,  -Itli,  ;{(!. t  3<itli,  4tli,  3(1. I  36th,  4th,  3d.


THE  vi;n.v\T.  21

The  Vcdant  again  more  clearly  states  that,  "  It  is
"  equally  found  in  the  Ved  tiiat  some  people,  though
'•  they  had  their  entire  faith  in  God  alone,  yet  per-
"  formed  both  the  worship  of  God  and  the  ceremonies
"  prescribed  by  the  Ved;  and  that  some  others  neg-
"  lected  them,  and  merely  worshipped  God."*  The
following  texts  of  the  Ved  fully  explain  the  subject,
viz.  "  Junuku  (one  of  the  noted  devotees)  had  per-
"  formed  Yugnyu  (or  the  adoration  of  the  celestial
"•  gods  through  fire)  with  the  gift  of  a  considerable
"  sum  of  money,  as  a  fee  to  the  holy  Brahmuns,"  and
*'  many  learned  true  believers  never  worshipped  fire,
"  nor  any  celestial  god  through  fire."

Notwithstanding  it  is  optional  with  those  who  have
their  faith  in  the  only  God,  to  attend  to  the  prescribed
ceremonies  or  to  neglect  them  entirely,  the  Vcdant  pre-
fers the  former  to  the  latter,  because  the  Ved  says  that
attendance  to  the  religious  ceremonies  conduces  to  the
attainment  of  the  Supreme  Being.

Although  the  Ved  says,  "  That  he  who  has  true  faith
*'  in  the  omnipresent  Supreme  Being  may  eat  all  that
"  exists," f  i.  e.  is  not  bound  to  enquire  what  is  his  food,
or  who  prepares  it,  nevertheless  the  Vedant  limits  that
authority  thus  :  "  The  above-mentioned  authority  of  the
"  Ved  for  eating  all  sorts  of  food  should  only  be  ob-
"  served  at  the  time  of  distress,  because  it  is  found  in
"  the  Ved,  that  Chacraunu  (a  celebrated  Brahmun)  ate
"  the  meat  cooked  by  the  elephant-keepers  during  a
"  famine."^  It  is  concluded,  that  he  acted  according
to  the  above  stated  authority  of  the  Ved,  only  at  the
time  of  distress.

Devotion  to  the  Supreme  Being  is  not  limited  to  any
•  9th,  4th,  M.  +  ChhandoiTfru.  t  2Bth.  4th.  -Id.


22  ABlllDGMKNT  OF  THE VEDANT.

holy  place  or  sacred  country,  as  ihe  Vedant  says,  "  lu
"  any  place  wherein  the  mind  feels  itself  undisturbed,
"  men  should  worship  God  ;  because  no  specific  au-
"  thority  for  the  choice  of  any  particular  place  ofwor-
"  ship  is  found  in  the  Ved,"*  which  declares,  "  In
"  any  place  which  renders  the  mind  easy,  man  should
"  adore  God."

It  is  of  no  consequence  to  those  who  have  true  belief
in  God,  whether  they  die  while  the  sun  is  in  the  north
<  r  south  of  the  equator,  as  the  Vedant  declares,
"  That  any  one  who  has  faith  in  the  only  God,  dying
"  even  when  the  sun  may  be  south  of  the  equator,  f  his
"  soul  shall  proceed  from  the  body,  through  Soo  khumna
"  (a  vein  which,  as  the  Brahmuns  suppose,  passes  through
"  the  navel  up  to  the  brain),  and  approaches  to  the  Su-
"  preme  Bei-ng.;]:"  The  Ved  also  positively  asserts  "  That
"  he,  who  in  life  was  devoted  to  the  Supreme  Being,
"  shall  (after  death)  be  absorbed  in  him,  and  again  be
"  neither  liable  to  birth  nor  death,  reduction  nor  aug-
"  mentation."

The  Ved  begins  and  concludes  with  the  three  pecu-
liar and  mysterious  epithets  of  God,  viz.  first,  ONG;
second,  TUT;  third,  SUT.  The  first  of  these  signifies
"  That  Being,  which  preserves,  destroys,  and  creates !"
The  second  implies  "  That  only  being,  which  is  neither
"  male  nor  female  !"  The  third  announces  "  T/ie  true
being!"  These  collective  terms  simply  affirm,  that
ONE,  UNKNOWN,  TRUE  BEING,  IS  THE
CREATOR,  PRESERVER,  AND  DESTROYER
OF  THE  UNIVERSE!!!

•  lltli,  1st,  4th.

t  It  is  believed  by  tiie  Bralimuns,  that  any  one  who  dies  while
♦  he  sun  is  south  of  iho  equator,  cannot  enjoy  eternal  beatitude.
:  2l»lli,  Jd,  llh.


TRANSLATION


M  O  O  N  D  U  K  -  O  P  U  N  I  S  II  U  D


UTHURVU-VED,


ACCORDING TO THE GLOSS OF THE CELEBRATEH


SHUNKUIIA-CHARYU.


CALCUTTA ;

1819.


INTRODUCTION.


During  tlic  intervals  between  my  controversial  en-
gagements with  idolators  as  well  as  with  advocates  for
idolatry,  I  translated  several  of  the  ten  Oopunishuds,
of  which  the  Vedantii  or  principal  part  of  the  Veds
consists,  and  of  which  the  Shareeruk-Meemangsa,
commonly  called  the  Vedant-Durshun,  composed  by
the  celebrated  Vyas,  is  explanatory ;  I  have  now  taken
the  opportunity  of  further  leisure  to  publish  a  transla-
tion of  the  Moonduk-Opunishud.  An  attentive  pe-
rusal of  this,  as  well  as  of  the  remaining  books  of  the
Vedantu,  will,  I  trust,  convince  every  unprejudiced
mind,  that  they,  with  great  consistency,  inculcate  the
unity  of  God;  instructing  men,  at  the  same  time,  in
the  pure  mode  of  adoring  him  in  spirit.  It  will  also
appear  evident  that  the  Veds,  although  they  tolerate
idolatry  as  the  last  provision  for  those  who  are  totally
incapable  of  raising  their  minds  to  the  contemplation
of  the  invisible  God  of  nature,  yet  repeatedly  urge  the
relinquishment  of  the  rites  of  idol  worship,  and  the
adoption  of  a  purer  system  of  religion,  on  the  express
oTounds,  that  the  observance  of  idolatrous  rites  can
never  be  productive  of  eternal  beatitude.  These  are
left  to  be  practised  by  such  persons  only  as,  notwith-
standing  the  constant teaching  of  spiritual  guides,


26  JNTUODUCTION.

cannot  be  l)ix)u<jlit  to  see  perspicuously  the  majesty  of
Ciod  through  llie  works  of  nature.

The  public  will,  I  hope,  be  assured  that  nothing
but  the  natural  inclination  of  the  ignorant  towards  the
worship  of  objects  resembling  their  own  nature,  and
to  the  external  forms  of  rites  palpable  to  their  grosser
senses,  joined  to  the  self-interested  motives  of  their
pretended  guides,  has  rendered  the  generality  of  the
Hindoo  community  (in  defiance  of  their  sacred  books)
devoted  to  idol  worship; — the  source  of  prejudice  and
superstition,  and  of  the  total  destruction  of  moral
principle,  as  countenancing  criminal  intercourse,*
suicide, t  female  murder,^  and  human  sacrifice.  Should
my  labeurs  prove  in  any  degree  the  means  of  dimi-
nishing the  extent  of  those  evils,  I  shall  ever  deem
myself  most  amply  rewarded.

•  Vide  Defence  of  Hindoo  Theism.

■\-  Vide  Introduction  to  the  Cena-Upanishad.

I V^ide  Treatise  on  Widow-burning^.


THE


MOONDUK-OPUNISHUD


UTHURVU-VED.


Bruhma,  the  greatest  of  celestial  deities,  and  execu-
tive creator  and  preserver  of  the  vi^orld,  came  into  form;
he  instructed  Uthurvu,  his  eldest  son,  in  the  knowledge
respecting  the  Supreme  Being,  on  which all  sciences
rest. Uthurvu  communicated  formerly  to  Ungir  what
Bruhma  taught  him : Ungir  imparted  the  same  know-
ledge to  one  of  the  descendants  of  Bhurudwaju,  called
Sutyuvahu, who conveyed the doctrine so handed
down  to  Ungir  us. Shounuku,  a  wealthy  householder,
having  in  the  prescribed  manner  approached  Ungirus,
asked,  "  Is  there  any  being  by  whose  knowledge  alone
the  whole  universe  may  be  immediately  known  ? He
( Ungirus)  then  replied  : "  Those  who  have  a  thorough
knowledge  of  the  Veds,  say  that  it  should  be  under-
stood that  there  are  two  sorts  of  knowledge ;  one  supe-
rior, and  the  other inferior :  There  are  the Ilig-ved,
Ujoor-ved,  Samu-ved,  and  Uthurvu-ved;  and  also^AeiV
subordinate  parts^  consisting  o/'Shiksha,  or  a  treatise  on
pronunciation ;  Kulpu,  or  the  science  that  teaches  the
details  of  rites  according  to  the  different  branches  of


28  MOONDUK-OPUNISHUD OF THE

the  Veds;  Vyi'ikurnu,or  grammar;  Nirookti,  or  explana-
tion of  the  peculiar  terms  of  the  Veds;  Ch,hundus,  or
prosody;  and  Jyotish,  or  astronomy:  which  all  belong  to
the  inferior  kind  of  knowledge.  Now  the  superior  kind
is  conveyed  by  the  Oopunishuds  and  is  that  through  which
absorption  into  the  eternal  Supreme  Being  may  be
obtained.  That  Supreme  Being  who  is  the  subject  o/ihe
superior  learning,  is  beyond  the  apprehension  of  the
senses,  and  out  of  the  reach  of  the  corporeal  organs  of
action,  and  is  without  origin,  colour,  or  magnitude;  and
has  neither  eye  nor  ear,  nor  has  he  hand  or  foot.  He
is  everlasting,  all-pervading,  omnipresent,  absolutely  in-
corporeal, unchangeable,  and  it  is  he  whom  wise  men
consider  as  the  origin  of  the  universe; — In  the  same  way
as  the  cobweb  is  created  and  absorbed  by  the  spider
independently  of  exterior  origi7i,  as  vegetables  proceed
from  the  earth,  and  hair  and  nails  from  animate
creatures,  so  the  Universe  is  produced  by  the  eternal
Supreme  Being.

From  his  omniscience  the  Supreme  Being  resolves  to
create  the  Universe; — Then  nature,  the  apparent cav^e
of  the  world,  is  produced  by  him  ; — From  her  the  prior
operating  sensitive  particle  of  the  world,  styled  Bruh-
ma,  the  source  of  the  faculties,  proceeds.  From  the
faculties  the  five  elements  are  produced ;  thence  spring
the  seven  divisions  of  the  world,  whereon  ceremonial
rites,  with  their  consequences,  are  brought  forth.  By
him  who  knows  all  things,  collectively  and  distinctly,
whose  knowledge  and  will  are  the  only  means  of  all  his
actions,  Bruhma,  name,  and  form,  and  all  that  vege-
tates are  produced.

Fnd  (f  the  first  Section  of  the  \st  Moondukum.


LTHURVU-VED.  29

Those  rites,*  the  prescription  of  which  wise  men,
such  as  Vushisthu,  and  others  found  in  the  Veils,  are
truly  the  mea.ns  of  producing  good  consequences.  They
have  heen  performed  in  various  manners  by  three  sects
among  Brahmuns,  namely^  Udhurrjoo,  or  those  ivho  are
ivell  versed  in  the  Ujoor  ved;  Oodgata,  or  the  sect  who  know
thoroughly  the  Sanm-ved;  and  Hota,  those  Bruhmuns  that
have  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  liig-ved.  You  all  con-
tinue to  perform  them,  as  long  as  you  feel  a  desire  to
enjoy  gratifications  attainable  from  them.  This  prac-
tice of  performing  rites  is  the  way  which  leads  you  to
the  benefits  you  expect  to  derive  from  your  works.

Fire  being  augmented  when  its  flame  waves,  the  obser-
ver of  rites  sha\\  offer  oblations  to  deities  in  the  middle
of  the  waving  flame.

If  observance  of  the  sacred  fire  be  not  attended  with
the  rites  required  to  be  performed  on  the  days  of  new
and  full  moon,  and  during  the  four  months  of  the  rains,
and  in  the  autumn  and  spring ;  and  be  also  not  at-
tended with  hospitality  and  due  regard  to  time  or  the
worship  of  Vushyudevu,  and  be  fulfilled  without  re-
gard to  prescribed  forms,  it  will  deprive  the  worshipper
of  the  enjoyments  which  he  might  otherwise  expect  in
his  seven  future  mansions.

Kalee,  Kuralee,  Munojuva,  Soolo-hitii,  Soodho-om-
ruvurn;'),  Sphoolinginee,  Veshwuroochee,  are  the  seven
names  of  the  seven  waving  points  of  the  flame.

He  who  offers  oblations  at  the  prescribed  time  in

•  In  the  bop^innincf  of  this  section,  tho  author  treats  of  the  sub-
ject of  the  inferior  knowledfjfe;  and  in  the  conchision  ho  introduces
that  of  the  superior  doetrine,  which  he  continues  throufjhout  the
whole  Oopunishud.


30  MOONDUK-OPUNISIIUD  OF  THE

those  illuminating  and  waving  points  of  fire,  is  carrieil
by  the  oblations  so  offered  through  the  rays  of  the  Sun
to  the  Heaven  where  Indru,  prince  of  the  celestial
gods,  reigns.  The  illuminating  oblations,  while  carry-
ing the  observer  of  rites  through  the  rays  of  the  Sun,
invite  hint  to  heaven,  saying,  "  Come  in  !  come  in  !"  and
entertaining  him  with  pleasing  conversation,  and  treat-
ing him  with  veneration,  say  to  him,  "■  This  is  the  sum-
"  mit  of  the  heavens,  the  fruit  of  your  good  works."

The  eighteen  members  of  rites  and  sacrifices,  void  of
the  true  knowledge,  are  infirm  and  perishable:  Those
io-noi-ant  persons  who  consider  them  as  the  source  of
real  bliss,  shall,  after  the  enjoyment  of  future  gratifica-
tion, undergo  transmigations.  Those  fools  who,  im-
mersed in  ignorance,  that  is,  the  foolish  practice  of  rites,
consider  themselves  to  be  wise  and  learned,  wander
about,  repeatedly  subjecting  themselves  to  birth,  disease,
death,  and  other  pains,  like  blind  men  when  guided  by  a
blind  man.

Engaged  in  various  manners  of  rites  and  sacrifices,
the  io-norant  are  sure  of  obtaining  their  objects:  but  as
the  observers  of  such  rites,  from  their  excessive  desire  of
fruition,  remain  destitute  of  a  knowledge  of  God,  they,
afflicted  with  sorrows,  descend  to  this  world  after  the
time  of  their  celestial  gratification  is  expired.  Those
complete  fools  believe,  that  the  rites  prescribed  by  the
Veds  in  performing  sacrifices,  and  those  laid  down  by
the  Smrities  at  the  digging  of  wells  and  other  pious
liberal  actions,  are  the  most  beneficial,  and  have  no  idea
that  a  knowledge  of,  and  faith  in  God,  are  the  only  true
sources  of  bliss:  They  after  death,  having  enjoyed  the
consequence  of  such rites  on  the  summit  of  heaven,


UTHURVU-VED.  31

transmigrate  in  the  human  form,  or  in  that  of  inferior
animals,  or  of  plants.

Mendicants  and  hermitSf  who  residing  in  forests,  live
upon  alms,  as  well  as  householders  possessed  of  a  por-
tion of  wisdom,  practising  religious  austerities,  the  wor-
ship of  IJrahma  and  others,  and  exercising  a  control
over  the  senses,  freed  from  sins,  ascend  through  the
northern  path*  to  the  highest  part  of  heaven,  where
the  hnmortal  Brahma,  who  is  coeval  with  the  world,
assumes  his  supremacy.

Having  taken  into  serious  consideration  the  perish-
able nature  of  all  objects  within  the  icorld,  which  are
acquirable  from  human  works,  a  Brahmun  shall  cease
to  desire  them ;  reflecting  within  himself,  that  nothing
which  is  obtained  through  perishable  means  can  be  ex-
pected to  be  eternal :  hence  what  use  of  rites  ?  He
then,  with  a  view  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  superior
learning,  shall  proceed,  with  a  load  of  wood  in  his
hand,  to  a  spiritual  teacher  who  is  versed  in  the  doc-
trines of  the  Veds,  and  has  firm  faith  in  God.  The  wise
teacher  shall  properly  instruct  his  pupil  so  devoted  to
him,  freed  from  the  importunities  of  external  senses,
and  possessed  of  tranquillity  of  mind,  in  the  knowledge
through  which  he  may  know  the  eternal  Supreme
Being.

End  of  thejirst  Moondukum.

•  Accordinp;-  to  Hindoo  tlieologians,  there  are  two  roads  that
lead  to  distinct  heavens,  one  northern,  the  other  southern.  The
former  is  the  path  to  the  habitation  of  Bruhma  and  the  superior
g^ods,  and  the  latter  to  the  heaven  of  Indrn  and  the  other  inferior
deities.


32  iMOONDUK-OPUNISHUD OF THE

He,  the  subject  of  the  superior  k7ioivl€dge,  alone  is  true.
As  from  a  blazing  fire  thousands  of  sparks  of  the  same
nature  proceed,  so  from  the  eternal  Supreme  Being  (O
beloved  pupil)  various  souls  come  forth,  and  again  they
return  into  him. — He  is  immortal,  and  without  form  or
figure,  omnipresent,  pervading  external  and  internal
objects,  unborn,  without  breath  or  individual  mind,
pure  and  superior  to  eminently  exalted  nature.

From  him  the  first  sensitive  particle,  or  the  seed  of
the  universe,  individual  intellect,  all  the  senses  and
their  objects,  also  vacuum,  air,  light,  water,  and  the
earth  which  contains  all  things,  proceed.

Heaven  is  his  head,  and  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  his
eyes;  space  is  his  ears,  the  celebrated  Veds  are  his
speech;  air  is  his  breath,  the  world  is  his  intellect,  and
the  earth  is  his  feet ;  Jbr  he  is  the  soul  of  the  whole
universe.

By  him  the  sky,  which  is  illuminated  by  the  Sun,  is
produced;  clouds,  which  have  their  origin  from  the
effects  of  the  Moon,  accumulating  them  in  the  sky^  bring
forth  vegetables  in  the  earth ;  Man  imparts  the  essence
drawn  from  these  vegetables,  to  Woman ;  then  through
the  cotnbination  of  such  physical  causes,  numerous  off-
spring come  forth  from  the  omnipresent  Supreme
Being.

From  him  all  the  texts  of  the  Veds,  consisting  of
verses,  musical  compositions,  and  prose,  proceed  ;  in
like  manner  by  him  are  produced  Deeksha,  or  certain
preliminary  ceremonies,  and  sacrifices,  without  sacri-
ficial posts  or  with  them  ;  fees  lastly,  offered  in  sacri-
fices, time,  and  the  principal  person  who  institutes  the
performance  of  sacrifices  and  defrays  their  expences;


UTllURVU-VED.  33

as  well  as  future  mansions,  where  the  Moon  effects  pu-
rification juul  where  the  Sun  shines. — By  him  Gods  of
several  descriptions,  all  celestial  beings  subordinate  to
those  Gods,  mankind,  animals,  birds,  both  breath  and
peditum,  wheat  and  barley,  austerity,  conviction,
truth,  duties  of  ascetics,  and  rides  for  conducting  hu-
man life,  were  created. — From  him  seven  individual
senses  within  the  head  proceed,  as  well  as  their  seven
respective  inclinations  towards  their  objects,  their  seven
objects,  and  ideas  acquired  through  them,  and  their
seven  organs  ftwo  eyes,  two  ears,  the  two  passages  of
nose  and  mouth),  in  which  those  senses  are  situated  in
every  living  creature,  and  which  never  cease  to  act  ex-
cept at  the  time  of  sleep.

From  him,  oceans  and  all  mountains  proceed,  and
various  rivers  flow:  all  vegetables,  tastes,  ( consisting  of
sweet,  salt,  pungent,  hitter,  sour,  and  astringent)  united
with  which  the  visible  elementary  substance  encloses
the  corpuscle  situate  in  the  heart." — The  Supreme
existence  is  himself  all — rites  as  well  as  their  rewards:
He  therefore  is  the  Supreme  and  Immortal:  He  who
knows  him  (O  beloved  Pupilj  as  residing  in  the  hearts
of  (dl  animate  Beings,  disentangles  the  knot  of  igno-
rance in  this  world.

End  of  the  first  section  of  the  second  Moondukum.

•  This  corpuscle  is  supposed  to  be  constituted  of  all  the  various
elements  that  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  animal  frame.
Within  it  the  soul  has  its  residence,  and  acting  upon  it,  operates
through  its  medium  in  the  whole  system.  To  this  corpuscle  the
soul  remains  attached  through  all  changes  of  being,  until  finally
absorbed  into  the  supreme  intelligence.


34  MOONDUK-OPUNISHUD OF THE

God,  as  being  resplendent  and  most  proximate  to  all
creatures^  is  styled the  operator  in the  heart; he  is
o'reat and  all-sustainin<T ; for on him  rest  all  exist-
ences, such as those that move, those  that  breathe,
those that  twinkle,  and  those that  do  not. Such  is
God. You  all  contemplate  him  as  the  support of  all
objects,  visible  and  invisible,  the  chief  end  of  human
pursuit. He  surpasses  all  human  understanding,  and
is  the  most  pre-eminent. He,  who  irradiates  the  Sun
and  other  bodies,  who  is  smaller  than  an  atom,  larger
than  the  world,  and  in  whom  is  the  abode  of  all  the
divisions  of  the  imiverse,  and  of  all  their  inhabitants,
is  the  eternal  God ;  the  origin  of  breath,  speech,  and
intellect,  as  well  as of  all  the  senses. He,  the  origin
of  all  the  senses,  the  true  and  unchangeable  Supreme
Being, should  be  meditated  upon; and do thou  (O
beloved pupil) apply  constantly thy mind to him.
Seizing the bow found in the Oopunishuds, the
strongest  of  weapons,  man  shall  draw  the  arrow fqf
the  soul), sharpened by  the constant  application of
mind  to God. Do  thou  (O  pupil),  being  in  the  same
practice, withdrawing  all  the  senses  from worldly  ob-
jects,  through  the  mind  directed  towards  the  Supreme
Being,  hit  the  mark  which  is  the  eternal  God. The
word  Om,  signifying  God,  is  represented  as  the  bow,
the  Soul  as  the  ari'ow,  and  the  Supreme  Being  as  its
aim,  which  a  man  of  steady  mind  should  hit : he  then
shall  be  united  to  God  as  the arrow  to  its  mark. In
God,  heaven,  earth,  and  space  reside,  and  also  intel-
lect, with  breath  and  all  the  senses. Do  you  strive  to
know  solely the  ONE  Supreme  Being,  and  forsake  all
other  discourse; because  this  (a  true  knowledge  respect-


UTHURVU-VED.  35

ing  God)  is  the  only  way  to  eternal  beatitude.  Tlie
veins  of  the  body  are  inserted  into  the  heart,  like  the
radius  of  a  wlieel  into  its  nave.  There  the  Supreme
Being,  as  the  origin  of  the  notion  of  individuality,
and  of  its  various  circumstances,  resides  ;  Him  through
the  help  of  Om,  you  all  contemplate.  Blessed  be  ye
in  crossing  over  the  ocean  of  dark  ignorance  to  absorp-
tion into  God.  He  who  knows  the  universe  collec-
tively and  distinctively,  whose  majesty  is  fully  evident
in  the  world,  operates  within  the  space  of  the  heart,
his  luminous  abode.

He  is  perceptible  only  by  intellect ;  and  removes
the  breath  and  corpuscle,  in  trhich  the  soul  resides,  from
one  substance  to  another;  supporting  intellectual  facul-
ties, he  is  seated  in  the  heart:  Wise  men  acquire  a
knowledge  of  him,  who  shines  eternal,  and  the  source
of  all  happiness,  through  the  pure  knowledge  coiivey-
ed  to  them  by  the  Veds  and  by  spiritual  fathers. — God,
who  is  all  in  all,  being  known  to  man  as  the  origin  of
intellect  and  self- consciousness,  every  desire  of  the
mind  ceases,  all  doubts  are  removed,  and  effects  of  the
good  or  evil  actions  committed,  now  or  in  preceding
shapes,  are  totally  annihilated.  The  Supreme  Being,
free  from  stain,  devoid  of  figure  or  form,  and  entirely
pure,  the  light  of  all  lights,  resides  in  the  heart,  his
resplendently  excellent  seat  :  those  discriminating  men,
who  know  him  as  the  oriyin  of  intellect  and  of  self  con-
sciousness, are  possessed  of  the  real  notion  of  God.
Neither  the  sun  nor  the  moon,  nor  yet  the  stars,  can
throw  light  on  God  :  even  the  illuminating  lightning
cannot  throw  light  upon  him,  much  less  can  limited
fire  give him  light : but  they all  iinitalf  him,  and  all

D  2


36  MOONDUK-OPUNISHUD OF THE

borrow  their  light  from  him. —  God  alone  is  immortal:
he  extends  before,  behind,  to  the  right,  to  the  left,
beneath  and  above. He  is  the  Supreme,  and  all  in  alf.

End  of  the  2d  Moondukum.


Two  birds  (meaning  God  and  the  soul).,  cohabitant
and  co-essential,  reside  unitedly  in  one  tree,  which  is  the
body.  One  of  them  (the  soul)  consumes  the  variously
tasted  fruits  of  its  actions;  but  the  other  (God),
without  partaking  of  them,  witnesses  all  events.

The  soul  so  pressed  down  in  the  body,  being  de-
luded with  ignorance,  grieves  at  its  own  insufficiency ;
but  when  it  perceives  its  cohabitant,  the  adorable  Lord
of  the  universe,'^  the  origin  of  itself,  and  his  gloiy,  it
feels  relieved  from  grief  and  infatuation.  When  a
wise  man  perceives  the  resplendent  God,  the  Creator
and  Lord  of  the  universe,  and  the  omnipresent  prime
cause,  he  then,  abandoning  the  consequences  of  good  and
evil  works,  becomes  perfect,  and  obtains  entire  absorp-
tion. A  wise  man  knowing  God  as  perspicuously  residing
in  all  creatures,  forsakes  all  idea  of  duality;  being  con-
vinced that  there  is  only  one  real  existence,  which  is  God.
He  then  directs  all  his  senses  towards  God  alone,  the
origin  of  self-consciousness,  and  on  him  exclusively  he
places  his  love,  abstracting  at  the  same  time  his  mind

*  The  difference  between  God,  the  intellectual  principle,  and
the  Soul,  the  individual  intellect,  subsists  as  long;  as  the  idea  of
self-individuality  is  retained ;  like  the  distinction  betAveen  finite
and  infinite  space,  which  ceases  as  soon  as  the  idea  of  particular
figure  is  done  away.


UTHURVU-VED.  37

(i-oni  nil  worldly  objects  Ly  constancy  applying  it  to
Clod  :  llic  person  so  devoted  is  reckoned  the  most  per-
fect among  the  votaries  of  the  Deity. — Through  strict
veracity,  the  uniform  direction  of  mind  and  senses,  and
through  notions  acquired  from  spiritual  teachers,  as
well  as  by  abstinence  from  sexual  indulgence,  Man
should  approach  God,  who,  full  of  splendour  and  per-
fection, works  in  the  heart ;  and  to  whom  only  the
votaries  freed  from  passion  and  desire  can  approxi-
mate.

He  who  practises  veracity  prospers,  and  not  he  who
speaks  untruths  :  the  way  to  eternal  beatitude  is  open
to  him  who  without  omission  speaketh  truth.  This  is
that  way  through  which  the  saints,  extricated  from  all
desires,  proceetl  to  the  supreme  existence,  the  conse-
(pience  of  the  observance  of  truth.  He  is  great  and
incomprehensible  by  the  senses,  and  consequently  his
nature  is  beyond  human  conception.  He,  though
more  subtle  than  vacuum  itself,  shines  in  various  ways
— From  those  who  do  not  knoiv  hiin,  he  is  at  a  greater
distance  than  the  limits  of  space,  and  to  those  who  acquire
a  knowledge  of  him,  he  is  most  proximate ;  and  while
residing  in  animate  creatures  he  is  perceived  obscurely
by  those  icho  apply  their  th  vyhts  to  him.  He  is  not
perceptible  by  vision,  nor  is  he  describable  by  means
of  speech  :  neither  can  he  be  the  object  of  any  of  the
other  organs  of  sense;  nor  can  he  be  conceived
by  the  help  of  austerities  or  religious  rites :  but
a  person  whose  mind  is  purified  by  the  light  of  true
knowledge,  through  incessant  contemplation,  perceives
him  the  most  pure  God.  Such  is  the  invisible  Su-
preme  Jieing: he should be  observed in  the heart,


38  MOONDUK-OPUNISHED OF THE

wlierein  breath,  consisting  of  five  species,  rests.  The
mind  being  perfectly  freed  from  impurity,  God  who
spreads  over  the  mind  and  all  the  senses,  imparts  a
knowledge  of  himself  to  the  heart.

A  pious  votary  of  God  obtains  whatever  division  of
the  world,  and  whatever  desirable  object  he  may  wish
to  acquire  for  himself  or  for  another :  therefore  any
one,  who  is  desirous  of  honour  and  advantage,  should
revere  him.

End  of  the  1st  Section  of  the  3d  Moondukhum.


Those  wise  men  who,  abandoning  all  desires,  revere
the  devotee  who  has  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the
supreme  exaltation  of  God,  on  whom  the  whole  universe
rests,  and  who  is  perfect  and  illuminates  every  where,
will  never  be  subjected  to  further  birth.

He  who,  contemplating  the  various  effects  of  objects
visible  or  invisible,  feels  a  desire  to  obtain  them,  shall
be  born  again  with  those  feelings  :  but  the  man  satisfied
with  a  knowledge  of  and  faith  in  God,  blessed  by  a
total  destruction  of  ignorance,  forsakes  all  such  desires
even  during  his  life.

A  knowledge  of  God,  the  prime  object,  is  not  acquira-
ble from  study  of  the  Veds,  nor  through  retentive
memory,  nor  yet  by  continual  hearing  of  spiritual
instruction :  but  he  who  seeks  to  obtain  a  hnoivledge  of
God  is  gifted  with  it,  God  rendering  himself  conspi-
cuous to  him.

No  man  deficient  in  faith  or  discretion  can  obtain  a
knowledge  of  God ;  nor  can  even  he  who  possesses
wisdom  mingled  with  the  desire  of  fruition,  gain  it :  but


UTHURVU VEl).  39

the  soul  ol"  ;i  wise  man  who,  llirouf;h  linn  belief,  pru-
dence, and  pure  understanding,  not  biassed  by  worldly
desire,  seeks  for  knowledge,  will  be  absorbed  into  God.

The  saints  who,  wise  and  firm,  were  satisfied  solely
with  a  knowledge  of  God,  assnretl  of  the  soul's  divine
origin,  exempt  from  passion,  and  possessed  of  tranquil-
lity of  mind,  having  found  God  the  omnipresent  every
where,  have  after  death  been  absorbed  into  him  ;  even
an  limited  extension  within  ajar  is  by  its  destruction  united
to  universal  space.  All  the  votaries  who  repose  on  God
alone  their  firm  belief,  originating  from  a  knowledge
of  the  Vedant,  and  who,  by  forsaking  religious  rites,
obtain  purification  of  mind,  being  continually  occupied
in  divine  reflections  during  life,  are  at  the  time  of  death
entirely  freed  from  ignorance  and  absorbed  into  God.
On  the  approach  of  death,  the  elementary  parts  of  their
body,  being  fifteen  in  number,  unite  with  their  respec-
tive origins :  their  corporeal  faculties,  such  as  vision  and
feeling,  S^c.  return  into  their  original  sources,  the  sun
and  air,  t^T.  The  consequences  of  their  works,  together
with  their  souls,  are  absorbed  into  the  supreme  and
eternal  spirit,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  reflection  of  the
sun  in  water  returns  to  him  on  the  removal  of  the  wafer.
As  all  rivers  flowing  into  the  ocean  disappear  antl  lose
their  respective  appellations  and  forms,  so  the  person
who  has  acquired  a  knowledge  of  and  faith  in  God,
freeing  himself  from  the  subjugation  of  figure  ami
appellation,  is  absorbed  into  the  supreme  immaterial
and  omnipresent  existence.

He  who  acquires  a  knowledge  of  the  Su})rcme  Being
according  to  the  forcgoi?if/  doctrine,  shall  inevitably  be
absorbed  into  him,  surmounting  all  the  obstacles  that  he


40  MOONDUK-OPUNISHUD, &C.

may  have  to  encounter.  None  of  his  progeny  will  be
destitute  of  a  true  knowledge  of  God.  He  escapes
from  mental  distress  and  from  evil  propensities ;  he  is
also  relieved  from  the  ignorance  which  occasions  the
idea  of  duality.  This  is  the  true  doctrine  inculcated
throughout  the  foregoing  texts,  and  which  a  man
should  impart  to  those  who  are  accustomed  to  perform
good  works,  conversant  in  the  Veds,  and  inclined
toward  the  acquisition  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  and
who  themselves,  with  due  regard,  offer  oblations  to
sacred  fire;  and  also  to  those  who  have  continually
practised  Shirobrutu,  a  certain  observance  of  the  sacred
fire.  This  is  the  true  divine  doctrine,  in  which  Ungirus
instructed  his  pupil  Shounuku,  which  a  person  not
accustomed  to  devotion  should  not  study.

Salutation  to  the  knowers  of  God  !


TRANSLATION

OK TUB

CENA UPANISHAD,

One  of  the  Chaplers  of  tlie

SAMA VEDA;

ACCOKDING TO  THE  GLOSS  OF  THE  CELEBIIATKD

SHANCARACHARYA :

ESTARLISHIN'r: THE

UNITY  AND  THE  SOLE  OMNIPOTENCE  O  I' THE  SUI'KEME  BEING

AND THAT

HE ALONE

IS  THE  OBJECT  OF  WORSHIP.


CALCUTTA
1823.


INTRODUCTION.


Since  my  publication  of  the  abridgment  of  the
Vedunta,  containing  an  exposition  of  all  the  Veds  as
given  by  the  great  Vyas,  I  have,  for  the  purpose  of
illustratin'r  and  confirming  the  view  that  he  has  taken
of  them,  translated  into  Bengalee  the  principal  chap-
ters of  the  Veds,  as  being  of  unquestionable  authority
amongst  all  Hindoos.  This  work  will,  I  trust,  by  ex-
plaining to  my  countrymen  the  real  spirit  of  the  Hin-
doo Scriptures,  which  is  but  the  declaration  of  the
unity  of  God,  tend  in  a  great  degree  to  correct  the
erroneous  conceptions,  which  have  prevailed  with  re-
gard to  the  doctrines  they  inculcate.  It  will  also,  I
hope,  tend  to  discriminate  those  parts  of  the  Veds
which  are  to  be  interpreted  in  an  allegorical  sense,  and
consequently  to  correct  those  exceptionable  practices,
which  not  only  deprive  Hindoos  in  general  of  the
common  comforts*  of  society,  but  also  lead  them  fre-

•  A  Hindoo  of  cast  can  only  eat  once  between  sunrise  and  sun-
set— cannot  eat  dressed  victuals  in  n  boat  or  ship — nor  clothed —
nor  in  a  tavern — nor  any  food  that  has  been  touched  by  a  person
of  a  different  cast — nor  if  interrupted  while  oatinj;,  can  he  resume
his  meal.


44  INTRODUCTION.

quently  to  self-destruction,*  or  to  the  sacrificef  of  the
lives  of  their  friends  and  relations.

It  is  with  no  ordinary  feeling  of  satisfaction  that  I
have  already  seen  many  respectable  persons  of  my
countrymen,  to  the  great  disappointment  of  their  in-
terested spiritual  guides,  rise  superior  to  their  original
prejudices,  and  enquire  into  the  truths  of  i-eiigion.  As
many  European  gentlemen,  especially  those  who  in-
terest themselves  in  the  improvement  of  their  fellow-
creatures,  may  be  gratified  with  a  view  of  the  doctrines
of  the  original  work,  it  appeared  to  me  that  I  might
best  contribute  to  that  gratification,  by  translating  a
few  chapters  of  the  Ved  into  the  English  language,
which  I  have  accordingly  done,  and  now  submit  them
to  their  candid  judgment.  Such  benevolent  people
will,  perhaps,  rise  from  a  perusal  of  them  with  the  con-
viction, that  in  the  most  ancient  times  the  inhabitants
of  this  part  of  the  globe  (at  least  the  more  intelligent
class)  were  not  unacquainted  with  metaphysical  sub-
jects ;  that  allegorical  language  or  description  was  very
frequently  employed  to  represent  the  attributes  of  the
Creator,  which  were  sometimes  designated  as  indepen-
dent existences ;  and  that,  however  suitable  this  method
might  be  to  the  refined  understandings  of  men  of
learning,  it  had  the  most  mischievous  effect  when  lite-

*  As  at  Prayaga,  Giinga  Sagar,  and  under  the  wheels  of  the
car  of  Jagannath.

t  As,  for  instance,  persons  whose  recovery  from  sickness  is  sup.
posed  to  be  doubtful,  are  carried  to  die  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges.
This  is  practised  by  the  Hindoos  of  Bengal  only,  the  cruelty  of
which  affects  even  Hindoos  of  Behar,  Ilahabad,  and  all  the  upper
provinces.


INTRODUCTION.  45

rature  and  philosophy  decayetl,  producing  all  those
absurdities  and  idolatrous  notions  which  have  checked,
or  rather  destroyed,  every  mark  of  reason, and  darkened
every  beam  of  understanding.

The  Ved  from  which  all  Hindoo  literature  is  de-
rived is,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Hindoos,  an  inspired
work,  coeval  with  the  existence  of  the  world.  It  is  di-
vided into  four  parts,  viz.  Rig,  Yajur,  Sam,  and
At'harva;  these  are  again  divided  into  several  branches,
and  these  last  are  subdivided  into  chapters.  It  is  the
general  chai'acteristic  of  each  Vcd,  that  the  primary
chapters  of  each  branch  treat  of  astronomy,  medicine,
arms,  and  other  arts  and  sciences.  They  also  exhibit
allegorical  representations  of  the  attributes*  of  the  Su-
preme Being,  by  means  of  earthly  objects,  animate  or
inanimate,  whose  shapes  or  properties  are  analogous  to
thenatureof  those  attributes,  and  pointing  outthe  modes
of  their  worship,  immediately,  or  through  the  medium
of  fire.  In  the  subsequent  chnj)ters  the  unity  of  the
Supreme  Being  as  the  sole  ruler  of  the  universe,  is
plainly  inculcated,  and  the  mode  of  worshipping  him
particularly  directed.  The  doctrine  of  a  plurality  of
gods  and  goddesses  laid  down  in  the  preceding  chapters
is  not  only  controverted,  but  reasons  assigned  for  its
introduction  ;  for  instance,  that  the  worship  of  the
Sun  and  Fire,  together  with  the  whole  allegorical
system,  were  only  inculcated  for  the  sake  of  those
whose  limited  understandings  rendered  them  incapable

♦  It  is  m\  intention  to  f^ive,  with  the  lilcssing  of  God,  in  my
next  piil)lic;iti()n,  an  account  of  the  relation  betwixt  those  attri-
butes and  tiie  allegorical  representations  used  to  denote  thoni.


46  INTRODUCTION.

of  comprehending  and  adoring  the  invisible  Supreme
Being ;  so  that  such  persons  might  not  remain  in  a
brutified  state,  destitute  of  all  religious  principles.
Should  this  explanation  given  by  the  Ved  itself,  as
well  as  by  its  celebrated  commentator  Vyas,  not  be
allowed  to  reconcile  those  passages  which  are  seem-
ingly at  variance  with  each  other,  as  those  that
declare  the  unity  of  the  invisible  Supreme  Being,
with  others  which  describe  a  plurality  of  independent
visible  Gods,  the  whole  work  must,  I  am  afraid,  not
only  be  stripped  of  its  authority,  but  be  looked  upon  as
altogether  unintelligible.

I  have  often  lamented  that,  in  our  general  researches
into  theological  truth,  we  are  subjected  to  the  conflict
of  many  obstacles.  When  we  look  to  the  traditions  of
ancient  nations,  we  often  find  them  at  variance  with
each  other ;  and  when,  discouraged  by  this  circumstance,
we  appeal  to  reason  as  a  surer  guide,  we  soon  find  how
incompetent  it  is,  alone,  to  conduct  us  to  the  object  of
our  pursuit.  We  often  find  that,  instead  of  facilitating
our  endeavours  or  clearing  up  our  perplexities,  it  only
serves  to  generate  an  universal  doubt,  incompatible
with  principles  on  which  our  comfort  and  happiness
mainly  depend.  The  best  method  perhaps,  is,  neither
to  give  ourselves  up  exclusively  to  the  guidance  of  the
one  or  the  other;  but  by  a  proper  use  of  the  lights
furnished  by  both,  endeavour  to  improve  our  intellec-
tual and  moral  faculties,  relying  on  the  goodness  of
the  Almighty  Power,  which  alone  enables  us  to  attain
that  which  we  earnestly  and  diligently  seek  for.


THE


CENA UPANISHAD


S  A  M  A VEDA.


1st.  Who  is  he  [asks  a  pupil  of  his  spiritual  Jaf her]
under  whose  sole  will  the  intellectual  power  makes  its
approach  fo  different  objects  ?  Who  is  he  under  whose
authority  breath,  the  primitive /?o?rer  in  the  body,  makes
its  operation  ?  Who  is  he  by  whose  direction  language
is  regularly  pronounced  ?  And  who  is  that  immaterial
being  that  applies  vision  and  hearing  to  their  respective
objects  ?

2d.  He,  [answers  the  spiritual  parent,]  who  is  the
sense  of  the  sense  of  hearing;  the  intellect  of  the  in-
tellect ;  the  essential  cause  of  language ;  the  breath
of  breath  ;  the  sense  of  the  sense  of  vision ; — this  is
the  being  concerning  whotnymt  woiddeuqu'we.  Learned
men  having  relinquished  the  7iotion  of  self-indepen/lencp .
and  selj-coiisideration.  from  knowing  the  Supreme  under-
standing to  be  the  sole  source  of  sense,  enjoy  everlasting
beatitude  after  their  departure  from  this  world.

3d.  Hence  no  vision  can  approach  him,  no  language
can  describe  him,  no  intellectual  power  can  compass
or  determine  him.  We  know  nothing  of  how  the
Supreme  Being  should  be  explained  :  he  is  beyond  all
that  is  within  the  reach  of  comjirehension,  and also


48  CENA UPANISIIAI) OF

beyond nature, wliicli is above conception. Our
ancient  spiritual  parents  have  thus  explained  him  to  us.

4th.  He  alone  who  has  never  been  described  by
language,  and  who  directs  language  to  its  meaning,  is
the  Supreme  Being,  and  not  any  specified  thing  which
men  worship:  know  thou  this.

5th.  He  alone  whom  understanding  cannot  compre-
liend,  and  who,  as  said  hy  learned  men,  knows  the  real
nature  of  understanding,  is  the  Supreme  Being,  and
not  any  specified  thing  which  men  worship :  know  thou
this.

6th.  He  alone  whom  no  one  can  conceive  by  vision,
and  by  whose  superintendence  every  one  perceives  the
objects  of  vision,  is  the  Supreme  Being,  and  not  any
specified  thing  which  men  worship  :  know  thou  this.

7th.  He  alone  whom  no  one  can  hear  through  the
sense  of  hearing,  and  who  knows  the  real  nature  of
the  sense  of  hearing,  is  the  Supreme  Being,  and  not
any  specified  thing  which  men  worship  :  know  thou
this.

8th.  He  alone  whom  no  one  can  perceive  through
the  sense  of  smelling,  and  who  applies  the  sense  of
smelling  to  its  objects,  is  the  Supreme  Being,  and  not
any  specified  thing  which  men  worship :  know  thou
this.

9th.  If  you  Icontimies  the  spiritual  parenf],  from
what  I  have  stated,  suppose  aiid  say  that  "  I  know  the
Supreme  Being  thoroughly,"  you  in  truth  know  very
little  of  the  Omnipresent  Being  ;  and  any  conception
of  that  Being,  which  you  limit  to  your  powers  of
sense,  is  not  only  deficient,  but  also  his  description
which  you  extend  to  the  bodies  of  the  celestial  gods


THE SAM  A VEDA.  49

is  also  imperfect;*  you  consequently  should  enquire
into  tlie  true  knowledge  of  llie  Supreme  Being.  To
this  the  pupil  replies  :  "  I  perceive  that  at  this  moment
1  begin  to  know  God."

10th.  "  Not  tJKit  I  suppose,"  confimies  he,  "  that  T
"  know  God  thoroughly,  nor  do  I  suppose  that  I  do
"  not  know  him  at  all ;  as,  among  us,  he  who  knows  the
"  meaning  of  the  above-stated  assertion  is  possessed
"  of  the  knowledge  respecting  God;  viz.  ihat  I
"  neither  know  him  thoroughly,  nor  am  entirely  igno-
"  rant  of  him."

11th.  iThe  Spiritual  Father  again  resumes:']  He
who  believes  that  he  cannot  comprehend  God  does
know  him;  and  he  who  believes  that  he  can  compre-
hend God  does  not  know  him  :  as  men  of  perfect  un-
derstanding acknowledge  him  to  be  beyond  compre-
hension ;  and  men  of  imperfect  understanding  suppose
him  to  be  within  the  reach  of  their  simplest  per-
ception.

12th.  The  notion  of  the  .sensibility  of  bodily  organs,
which  arc  composed  of  insensih/e  particles,  leads  to  the
notion  of  God  ;  which  notion  alone  is  accurate,  and
tends  to  everlasting  happiness.  Man  gains,  by  self  ex-
ertion, the  power  of  acquiring  knowledge  respecting
God,  and  through  the  same  acquisition  he  acquires
eternal  beatitude.

13th.  Whatever  person  has,  according  to  the  above
slated  doctrine,  known  God,  is  really  happy,  and  whoever

Tlie  Slim  of  the  notion  fonccrninp  tlie  Supreme  Bciii"  <,riven
in  the  Vcdant.is,  that  he  is  "the  soul  of  the  universe;"  and  hears
the  snnio  rehitimi  f.)  nil  material  exten.sinii  that  ;i  Iiumiiim  m.uI  does
to  the  indivitiiial  liody  with  which  it  is  comicch'd.

E


50  CENA UPANTSHAD OF

has  not  known  him  is  subjected  to  great  misery.
Learned  men,  having  reflected  on  the  Spirit  of  God
extending  over  all  moveable  as  well  as  immoveable
creatures,  after  their  departure  from  this  world  are
absorbed  into  the  Supreme  Being.

In  a  battle  betiveen  the  celestial*  gods  and  the  demons^
God  obtained  victory  over  the  latter,  in  favour  of  the
former  {or  properly  speaking^  God  enabled  the  former  to
defeat  the  latter);  but,  upon  this  victory  being  gained,
the  celestial  gods  acquired  their  respective  dignities,
and  supposed  that  this  victory  and  glory  were  entirely
owing  to  themselves.  The  Omnipresent  Being,  having
known  their  boast,  appeared  to  them  ivith  an  appear-
ance beyond  description.

They  could  not  know  what  adorable  appearance  it
was  :  they,  consequently^  said  to  fire,  or  properly  speaking
the  god  of  fire :  "  Discover  thou,  O  god  of  fire,  what
adorable  appearance  this  is."  His  reply  was,  "  I  shall."
He  proceeded  fast  to  that  adorable  appearance,  which
asked  him,  "  Who  art  thou  ?"  He  then  answered,  "  I
"  am  fire,  and  I  am  the  origin  of  the  Ved;"  that  is,  lam
a  well-known  personage.  The  Supreme  Omnipotence,
upon  being  thus  replied  to,  asked  him  agaiii,  "  What
"  power  is  in  so  celebrated  a  person  as  thou  art  ?"  He
replied,  "  I  can  burn  to  ashes  all  that  exists  in  the
"  world." The Supreme Being  then  having  laid  a

*  In  the  Ukhaika  it  is  said  that  those  powers  of  the  Divinity,
which  produce  agreeahle  effects  and  conduce  to  moral  order  and
happiness,  are  represented  under  the  figure  of  celestial  Gods,  and
those  attributes,  from  which  pain  and  misery  flow,  are  called
Demons  and  step-brothers  of  the  former,  with  whom  they  are  in  a
state  of  perpetual  hostility.


TIIF. SAAfA VEDA.  51

Straw  before  him,  said to  him,  "  Canst  thou  burn  this
"  straw?" The  god  of  fire  approached  the  straw,  but
could  not  burn it, lliough  he  exerted  all  his  power:
He  then  unsuccessfully  retired  and  told  the  others, "  I
"  have  been  unable  to  discover  what  adorable  appear-
"  ance  this  is." Now  they  all  said  to  wind  [or  properly
to  the  god  of  ivind), "  Discover thou,  O  god  of  wind,
"  what  adorable  appearance this is." His  reply  was,
"  I  shall." He  proceeded  fast  to  that  adorable  appear-
ance, which  asked him, "  Who  art  thou  ?" He  then
answered, "  I am wind, and  I pervade unlimited
*'  space  ;"  that  is,  I  am  a  well-knoum  personage. The
Supreme  Being  i/pon  being  thus  replied  to, asked  him
again, "  What  power  is  in  so  celebrated  a  person  as
"  thou  art  ?"  He  replied,  "  I  can  uphold  all  that  exists
"  in  the  world." The Supreme Being  then having
laid  a  straw  before  him,  said  to  him,  "  Canst  thou  up-
"  hold  this  straw  ?" The  god  of  wind  approached  the
straw,  but could not hold  it  up,  though  he  exerted
all  his  power. He  then  unsuccessfully  retired  and  told
the  others,  "  I  have  been  unable  to  discover  what  ador-
"  able  appearance this  is." Now  they  all  said to  the
god  of  atmosphere,  "  Discover  thou,  O  revered  god  of
"  atmosphere,  what  adorable  appearance  this  is." His
reply  was,  "  I  shall." He  proceeded  fast  to  that  ador-
able appearance, which  vanished  from his  view. He
met  at  the  same  spot  a  woman,  the  goddess  of  instruc-
tion, arrayed  in  golden  robes  in  the  shape  of  the  most
beautiful  Uma.*  He  asked, "  \N  hat  was  that  adorable
"  appearance?"  She  replied, "  It was the Supreme

# I'lip  wifp  of  Siva.
E 2


52  CENA UPANISHAD OF

"  Being  owing  to  whose  victory  you  are  all  advanced
"  to  exaltation."  The  god  of  atmosphere,  from  her  in-
struction, knew  that  it  was  the  Supreme  Being  that
had  appeared  to  them.  He  at  first  communicated  that  in-
formation to  the  gods  of  fire  and  of  wind.  As  the  gods  of
fire,  wind,  and  atmosphere  had  approached  to  the  ador-
able appearance,  and  had  perceived  it,  and  also  as  they
had  known,  prior  to  the  others,  that  it  was  indeed  God
that  appeared  to  them,  they  seemed  to  be  superior  to
the  other  gods.  As  the  god  of  atmosphere  had
approached  to  the  adorable  appearance,  and  perceived
it,  and  also  as  he  knew,  prior  to  every  one  of  them,  that
it  was  God  that  appeared  to  them,  he  seemed  not  only
superior  to  every  other  god,  but  also,  for  that  reason,
exalted  above  the  gods  of  fire  and  wind.

The  foregoing  is  a  divine  figurative  representation  of
the  Supreme  Being ;  meaning  that  in  one  instant  he
shines  at  once  over  all  the  universe  like  the  illumination
of  lightning ;  and  in  another,  that  he  disappears  as
quick  as  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  Again  it  is  repre-
sented of  the  Supreme  Being,  that  pu?'e  mind  conceives
that  it  approaches  to  him  as  nearly  as  possible :
Through  the  same  pure  mind  the  pious  man  thinks  of
him,  and  consequentlj'  application  of  the  mind  to  him
is  repeatedly  used.  That  God,  trho  alojie  in  realitg
has  no  resemblance,  and  to  whom  the  mind  cannot  ap-
proach, is  adorable  by  all  living  creatures;  he  is  there-
fore called  "  adorable  ;"  he  should,  according  to  the
prescribed  manner,  be  worshipped.  All  creatures  revere
the  person  who  knows  God  in  the  manner  thus
described.  The  pupil  note  says,  "  Tell  me,  O  Spiritual
"  Father,  the  Upanishad,  or  the  principal  part  of  the


THE SAMA VEDA.  53

"  Ved."  The  Spiritual  Father  makes  this  answer^  "  I
"  have  told  you  the  principal  part  of  the  Ved,  which
*'  relates  to  God  alone,  and,  indeed  told  you  the  Upani-
"  shad,  of  wliich,  austere  devotion,  control  over  the
"  senses,  performance  of  religious  rites,  and  the  remain-
"  ing  parts  of  the  Ved,  as  well  as  those  sciences  that
*'  are  derived  from  the  Veds,  are  only  the  feet;  and
"  whose  altar  and  support  is  truth."  He,  who  under-
stands it  as  thus  described,  having  relieved  himself  from
sin,  acquires  eternal  and  unchangeable  beatitude.


TRANSLATION

or THE

KUT'H-OPUNISHUD

OF  THE

UJOOR-VED,

ACCORDINO  TO  THE  GLOSS  OF  THE  CELEBRATED

SUNKURACHARYU.


PREFACE.


I.\  pursuance  of  my  alteinjn  to  render  a  translation
of  the  complete  Vedant,  or  tiie  principal  parts  of  the
Veds,  into  the  current  lanf^uages  of  this  country,  I  had
some  lime  ago  the  satisfaction  of  publibhing  a  transla-
tion of  the  Kut'h-opunishud  of  the  Ujoor-ved  into  Ben-
galee; and  of  distributing  copies  of  it  as  widely  as  my
circumstances  would  allow,  for  the  purpose  of  diffusing
Hindoo  Scriptural  knowledge  among  the  adherents  of
that  religion.  The  present  publication  is  intended  to
assist  the  European  community  in  forming  their
opinion  respecting  Hindoo  Theology,  rather  from  the
matter  found  in  their  doctrinal  scriptures,  than  from
the  Poorans,  moral  tales,  or  any  other  modern  works,
or  from  the  superstitious  rites  and  habits  daily  encou-
raged and  fostered  by  their  self-interested  leaders.

This  work  not  only  treats  polytheism  with  contempt
and  disdain,  but  inculcates  invariably  the  unity  of  God
as  the  intellectual  principle,  the  sole  origin  of  indivi-
ilual  intellect,  entirely  distinct  from  matter  and  its
affections  ;  and  teaches  also  the  mode  of  directing  the
mind  to  him.

A  great  body  of  my  countrymen,  possessed  of  good
understandings,  and  not  much  fettered  with  prejudices,
being  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  truth  of  the  doctrines
contained  in  this  and  in  other  works,  already  laid  by  me
before  them,  and  of  the  gross  errors  of  the  peurile  sys-


58  T'KElACi:.

tern  ot  idol  worsliip  which  they  were  led  to  follow,  have
altered  their  religious  conduct  in  a  maimer  becoming
the  dignity  of  human  beings;  while  the  advocates  of
idolatry  and  their  misguided  followers,  over  whose
opinions  prejudice  and  obstinacy  prevail  more  than
good  sense  and  judgment,  prefer  custom  and  fashion  to
the  authorities  of  their  scriptures,  and  therefore  con-
tinue, under  the  form  of  religious  devotion,  to  practise
a  system  which  destroys,  to  the  utmost  degree,  the
natural  texture  of  society,  and  prescribes  crimes  of  the
most  heinous  nature  which  even  the  most  savage  nations
would  blush  to  commit,  unless  compelled  by  the  most
urgent  necessity.*  I  am,  however,  not  without  a  san-
guine hope  that,  through  Divine  Providence  and
human  exertions,  they  will  sooner  or  later  avail  them-
selves of  that  true  system  of  religion  which  leads  its
observers  to  a  knowledge  and  love  of  God,  and  to  a
friendly  inclination  towards  their  fellow-creatures,  im-
pressing their  hearts  at  the  same  time  with  humility
and  charity,  accompanied  by  independence  of  mind
and  pure  sincerity.  Contrary  to  the  code  of  idolatry,
this  system  defines  sins  as  evil  thoughts  proceeding
from  the  heart,  quite  unconnected  with  observances  as
to  diet  and  other  matters  of  form.  At  any  rate,  it  seems
to  me  that  I  cannot  better  employ  my  time  than  in  an
endeavour  to  illustrate  and  maintain  truth,  and  to  ren-
der service  to  my  fellow-labourers,  confiding  in  the
mercy  of  that  Being  to  whom  the  motives  of  our  actions
and  secrets  of  our  hearts  are  well  known.

•  Vide  the  latter  end  of  the  IiUroduction  to  the  INloonduk  Opu-
nishud.


KUTH-OPUNISHUD.


Desiuous  of  future  fruition^  \i,x]\xs\\v\xh\xs\x  performed
the  sacrifice  Vuhivigit,  at  which  he  distributed  all  his
property-  He  had  a  son  named  Nuchiketa.  Old  and
infirm  coics  being  brought  by  the  father  as  fees  to  be
given  to  attending  priests,  the  youth  was  seized  with
compassion,  reflecting  within  himself,  "  He  who  gives
*'  to  attendiuy  priests  such  cows  as  are  no  longer  able
"  to  drink  water  or  to  eat  grass,  and  are  incapable  of
"  giving  further  milk  or  of  producing  young,  is  carried
"  to  that  mansion  where  there  is  no  felicity  whatever."

Ue  then  said  to  his  father,  "  To  whom,  O  father,
"  wilt  thou  consign  me  over  m  lieu  of  these  cows  ?"  and
repeated  the  same  question  a  second  and  a  third  time.

Enraged  with  his  presumption,  the  father  replied  to
him,  "  I  shall  give  thee  to  Yumu"  f  the  god  of  death  J.
7 he  youth  then  said  to  himself  "In  the  discharge  of  my
"  duties  as  a  son,  I  hold  a  foremost  place  among  many
"  sons  or  pupils  of  the  first  class,  and  I  am  not  inferior
"  to  any  of  the  sons  or  pupils  of  the  second  class:
"  whether  my  father  had  a  previous  engagement  with
*'  Yumu,  which  he  will  now  perform  by  surrendering
"  me  to  him  J  or  made  use  of  such  an  expression  through
"  anger,  I  know  nut."  The  youth  finding  his  fatJier
afflicted  with  sorrow^  said,  "  Remember  the  meritorious


GO  kl't'h-opunishud  of

"  conduct  of  our  ancient  forefathers, and  observe  the
"  virtuous  acts  of  cotemporary  good  men. Life  is  too
"  short  to  gain  advantages  hy  means  of  falsehood  or  breach
^^  of  promise  ;  as  man  like  a  plant  is  easily  destroyed,
"  and  again  like  it  puts  forth  its  form. Do  you  there-
'■^  fore  surrender  me  to Yumu  according  to  your  promise.^*
77ie  youth  Nuchiketa,  by  permission  of  his  father,  went
to  the  habitation  of  Yiwiu. After  he  had  remained  there
for  three  days  ivithoutfood  or  refreshment,  Yumu  returned
to  his  dwelling,  and  icas  thus  addressed by  his  family  :
"  A  Brahmun  entering  a  house  as  a  guest  is  like  fire;
"  good  householders,  therefore,  extinguish  his anger  by
"  offering  him  water,  a seat,  and  food. Do  thou,  O
"  Yumu  ! present  him  with  water. A  man  deficient
"  in  wisdom  suffers  his  hopes, his  sangnine  expecta-
*'  tions  of  success,  his  improvement  from associating
"  with  good  men, the  benefit  which he  might  derive
"  from  his  affable  conversation,  and  the  fruits  produced
"  by  performance  of  prescribed  sacrifices,  and  also  by
"  digging  of  wells  and  other  pious  liberal  actions,  as
"  well  as  all  his  sons  and  cattle,  to  be  destroyed,  should
"  a  Brahmun  happen to  remain  in  his  house  without
"  food."

Yumu  being  thus  admonished  by  his  family,  approached
Nuchiketa  and  said  to  him ;  "  As  thou,  O  Brahmun  !
"  hast  lived  in  my  house,  a  revered  guest,  for  the  space
"  of  three  days  and  nights  without  food,  I  offer  thee
"  reverence  in  atonement,  so  that  bliss  may  attend  me ;
"  and  do  thou  ask  three  favours  of  me  as  a  recompense
"  for  what  thou  hast  suffered  while  dwelling  in  my  house
"  during  these  three  days  past."  Nuchiketa  then  made
this  as  his  first  request,  sarjing,  "  Let, O  Yumu  !  my


THE  rjoon  ved,  G\

"  father  Gotum's  apprehension  o/fny  drafh  he  removed,
"  his  tranquiUity  ofniind  he  restored,  his  anger  against
"  me  extinguished,  and  let  him  recognise  me  on  my  re-
"  turn,  after  having  been  set  free  by  thee.  This  is  the
"  first  of  three  favours  which  I  ask  of  thee."  Ywnu
then  replied  :

"  77ij/  father^  styled  Ouddaluki  and  Arooni,  shall
"  iiave  the  same  regard  for  you  as  before;  so  that,  being
"  assured  of  thy  existence,  he  shall,  through  my
"  power,  repose  tlie  remaining  nights  of  his  life  free
*'  from  sorrow,  after  having  seen  thee  released  from
"  the  grasp  of  death."  Nuchiketa  then  made  his
second  request.  "  In  heaven,  where  there  is  no  fear
"  whatsoever,  and  where  even  thou,  O  Yumu  !  canst
"  not  always  exercise  thy  authority,  and  where,  there-
"  fore,  none  dread  thy  power,  so  much  as  weak  mortals
"  of  the  earth,  the  soul,  unafTlicted  either  by  thirst
"  or  hunger,  and  unmolested  by  sorrow,  enjoys  gra-
"  tification.  As  thou,  O  Yumu  !  dost  possess  know-
"  ledge  respecting  fire  which  is  the  means  of  attain-
*'  ing  heaven,  do  thou  instruct  me,  who  am  full  of
"  faith,  in  that  knowledge ;  for,  those  who  enjoy
"  heaven,  owing  to  their  observance  of  sacred  fire,
"  are  endowed  with  the  nature  of  celestial  deities.
"  This  I  ask  of  thee,  as  the  second  favour  which
"  thou  hast  offered."  Yumu  replied :  "  Being  pos_
"  sessed  of  a  knowledge  of  fire,  the  means  that  lead  to
"  the  enjoyment  of  heavenly  gratifications,  I  impart  it
"  to  thee;  which  do  thou  attentively  observe.  Know
"  thou  fire,  as  means  to  obtain  various  mansions  in
"  heaven,  as  the  support  of  the  world,  and  as  residing
"  ill  the  body."


62  kut'h-opunistiud  of

Yiimu  explained  to  Nuchiketa  the  nature  of  fire,  as
being  prior  to  all  creatures,  and  also  the  particulars  of
the  bricks  and  their  number,  which  are  requisite  in
forming  the  sacred  fire,  as  well  as  the  mode  of  preserv-
ing it.  The  youth  repeated  to  Yumu  these  instruc-
tions exactly  as  imparted  to  him  ;  at  which  Yumu  being
pleased,  again  spoke.

The  liberal-minded  Yumu,  satisfied  widi  Nuchi-
keta, thus  says :  "  I  shall  bestow  on  thee  another
"  favour,  ichich  is,  that  this  sacred  fire  shall  be  styled
"  after  thy  name ;  and  accept  thou  this  valuable  and
"  various-coloured  necklace.  Receiving  instructions
"  from  parents  and  spiritual  fathers,  a  person  Avho  has
"  thrice  collected  fire,  as  prescribed  in  the  Ved,  and
"  also  has  been  in  habits  of  performing  sacrifices,
"  studying  the  Veds,  and  giving  alms,  is  not  liable
"  to  repeated  birth  and  death  :  he,  having  known  and
"  contemplated  fire  as  originating  from  Bruhma,  pos-
"  sessing  superior  understanding,  full  of  splendour,
"  and  worthy  of  praise,  enjoys  the  highest  fruition.  A
"  wise  worshipper  of  sacred  fire,  who,  understanding
"  the  three  things  prescribed,  has  offered  oblation
"  to  fire,  surmounting  all  afflictions  during  life,  and
"  extricated  from  sorrow,  will  enjoy  gratifications  in
"  heaven.

"  This,  O  Nuchiketa  !  is  that  knowledge  of  sacred
"  fire,  the  means  of  obtaining  heaven,  which  thou
"  didst  require  of  me  as  the  second  favour  ;  men  shall
"  call  it  after  thy  name.  Make,  O  Nuchiketa  !  thy
"  third  request."

Nuchiketa  then  said :  "  Some  are  of  opinion  that
"  after man's  demise  existence  continues,  and  others


THE UJOOR VED.  G3

"  say  it  ceases.  Hence  a  doubt  has  arisen  respecting
"  the  nature  of  the  soul ;  I  therefore  wish  to  be  in-
"  structed  by  thee  in  this  matter.  This  is  the  last
"  of  the  favours  thou  hast  ofl'eretl."  Ywmi  replied  :
"  Even  gods  have  doubted  and  disputed  on  this  sub-
"  ject ;  which  being  obscure,  never  can  be  thorough-
"  ly  comprehended :  Ask,  O  Nuchiketa !  another
"  favour  instead  of  this.  Do  not  thou  take  advan-
"  tage  of  my  promise,  but  give  up  this  request."
Nuchiketa  replied :  "  /  am  positively  informed  that
"  Gods  entertained  doubts  on  this  subject;  and  even
"  thou,  O  Yumu  !  callest  it  difficult  of  comprehen-
"  sion.  But  no  instructor  on  this  point  equal  to
"  thee  can  be  found,  and  no  other  object  is  so  desir-
"  able  as  this."  Yumu  said  :  "  Do  thou  rather  request
"  of  me  to  give  tliee  sons  and  grandsons,  each  to
"  attain  the  age  of  an  hundred  years;  numbers  of
"  cattle,  elephants,  gold,  and  horses ;  also  extensive
"  empire  on  eartii,  where  thou  shalt  live  as  many
*'  years  as  thou  wishest.

"  If  thou  knowest  another  object  equally  desirable
"  with  these,  ask  it ;  together  with  wealth  and  long
"  life.  Thou  mayest  reign,  O  Nuchiketa !  over  a
"  great  kingdom :  I  will  enable  thee  to  enjoy  all
"  wished-for  objects.

"  Ask  according  to  thy  desire  all  objects  that  are
"  difficult  of  acquisition  in  the  mortal  world.  Ask
"  these  beautiful  women,  with  elegant  equipages  and
"  musical  instruments,  as  no  man  can  acquire  any
"  thing  like  them  withoid  our  gift.  Enjoy  thou
"  the  attendance  of  these  women,  whom  I  may
"  bestow on  thee ; but do  not  put to me, O  Nu-


04  kut'ii-opunisiiud  of

"  chiketa ! the question respecting existence after
«  death."

Nuchiketa  then  replied.  "  The  acquisition  of  the
"  enjoyments  thou  hast  offered,  O  Yumu  !  is  in  the
'■^  first  place  doubtful;  and  should  they  be  obtained,
"  they  destroy  the  strength  of  all  the  senses;  and  even
"  the  life  of  Bruhmu  is,  indeed,  comparatively  short.
*'  Thei'efore  let  thy  equipages,  and  thy  dancing  and
"  music,  remain  with  thee.

"  No  man  can  be  satisfied  with  riches ;  and  as  we
"  havefoi'timately  beheld  thee,  we  may  acquire  wealth,
"  should  we  feel  desirous  of  it;  and  we  also  may  live
"  as  long  as  thou  exercisest  the  authority  of  the  god
"  of  death ;  but  the  only  object  I  desire  is  what  I  have
"  already  begged  of  thee.

"  A  mortal  being,  whose  habitation  is  the  low  man-
"  sion  of  earth,  and  who  is  liable  to  sudden  reduction,
*'  approaching  the  gods  exempted  from  death  and
"  debility,  and  understanding  from  them  that  there  is  a
"  knowledge  of  futurity,  should  not  ash  of  them  any  infe-
"  rior  favour — and  knowing  the  fleeting  nature  of
"  music,  sexual  gratification,  and  sensual  pleasures,
"  who  can  take  delight  in  a  long^  life  on  earth  ?  Do
"  thou  instruct  us  in  that  knowledge  which  removes
"  doubts  respecting  existence  after  death,  and  is  of
*'  great  im])ortance  with  a  view  to  futurity,  and  which
"  is  obscure  and  acquirable  with  difficulty.  I,  Niichi-
"  keta,  cannot  ask  any  other  favour  but  this."
End  of  the  first  Section  of  the  first  Chapter.


Yumu  noiv,  after  a  sufficient  trial  of  Nuchiketa' s  reso-
lution, answers  the  third  question,  saying,  "  Knowledge


THE UJOOR VED.  fi5

**  of  God  whicli  leads  lo  absorption,  is  one  thing  ;  and
"  rites,  which  have  fruition  for  their  object,  another:
"  each  of  tliese  producing  different  consequences,  holds
"  out  to  man  inducements  to  follow  it.  The  man,
'*  who  of  these  two  chooses  knowledge,  is  blessed  ;  and
"  he  who,  for  the  mke  of  reward,  practises  rites,  is
"  excluded  from  the  enjoyment  of  eternal  beatitude.
"  Knowledge  and  rites  both  offer  themselves  to  man  ;
"  but  he  who  is  possessed  of  wisdom,  taking  their
"  respective  natures  into  serious  consideration,  dis-
"  tinguishes  one  from  the  other,  and  chooses  faith,
"  despising  fruition  ;  and  a  fool,  for  the  sake  of  ad-
"  vantage  and  enjoyment,  accepts  the  offer  of  rites.

"  Thou,  O  Nuchiketa  !  knowing  the  perishable  na-
"  ture  of  the  desirable  and  gratifying  objects  offered
"  by  me,  hast  rejected  them,  and  refused  the  adoption
"  of  that  contemptible  practice,  which  leads  to  frui-
*'  tion  and  to  riches,  and  to  which  men  in  general  are
"  attached.  Wise  men  are  sensible  that  a  knowledsre
"  of  God,  ivhich  procures  absorption,  and  the  perform -
"  ance  of  rites  that  produces  fruition,  are  entirely  oppo-
"  site  to  each  other,  and  yield  different  consequences.
"  I  conceive  thee,  Nuchiketa,  to  be  desirous  of  a
"  knowledge  of  God;  for  the  numerous  estimable  ob-
"  jects  offered  by  me  cannot  tempt  thee.  Surrounded
"  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  fools  consider  them-
"  selves  wise  and  learned,  and  wander  about  in  va-
"  rious  directions,  like  blind  men  when  guided  by  a
"  blind  man."

To  an  indiscreet  man  who  lives  carelessly,  and  is
immersed  in  the  desire  of  wealth,  the  means  of  crainin"-
heavenly  beatitude  are  not  manifest. He  thinks  that

F


66  kut'h-opunisiiud  of

this  visible  world  alone  exists,  and  that  there  is  nothing-
licreatter;  consequently  he  is  repeatedly  subjected  to
my  control.  The  soul  is  that  of  whose  real  nature
many  persons  have  never  heard;  and  several  though
they  have  heard,  have  not  comprehended.  A  man  who
is  capable  of  giving  instruction  on  this  subject  is  rare:
One  who  listens  to  it  attentively,  must  be  intelligent:
and  that  one  who,  being  taught  by  a  wise  teacher,  un-
derstands it,  is  uncommon.

If  a  man  of  inferior  abilities  describe  the  nature  of
the  soul,  no  one  will  thoroughly  understand  it ;  for
various  opinions  are  held  bi/ contending  parties.  When
the  subject  is  explained  by  a  person  who  believes  the
soul  to  emanate  from  God,  doubt,  in  regard  to  its
eternity,  ceases ;  but  otherwise  it  is  inexplicable  and
not  capable  of  demonstration.

The  knowledge  respecting  the  soul  which  thou
wilt  gain  by  me,  cannot  be  acquired  by  means  of
reason  alone ;  but  it  should  be  obtained  from  him
who  is  versed  in  the  sacred  authorities.  Oh,  beloved
pupil,  Nuchiketa  !  may  we  have  enquirers  like  thee,
who  art  full  of  resolution.  I  know  that  fruition,  ac-
quirable by  means  of  rites,  is  perishable;  for  nothing
eternal  can  be  obtained  through  perishable  means.
Notwithstcmdinff  my  convictioti  of  the  destructible  nature
of  fruition,  I  performed  the  worship  of  the  sacred  fire,
wliereby  I  became  possessed  of  this  sovereignty  of  long
duration.

Thou,  Oh  wise  Nuchiketa  !  hast  through  firmness
refused,  though  offered  to  thee,  the  state  of  Bruhmji;
which  satisfies  every  desire,  and  which  is  the  support
of  the  world — the  best  consequence  of  the  performance


THE UJOOR VF.I).  07

of  riles wiilioiU limit or tear — praiseworthy — full  of
superluiman  power — extensive  ami  stable.

The  soul  is  that  which  is  difficult  to  be  compre-
hended— most  obscure — veiled  by  the  ideas  acquired
through  the  senses,  and  which  resides  in  faculties —
does  not  depart  even  in  great  danger,  and  exists  un-
changeable. A  wise  man  knowing  the  resplendent
soul,  through  a  mind  abstracted  from  worldly  objects,
and  constantly  applied  to  it,  neither  rejoices  nor  does
he  grieve.

A  mortal  who,  having  heard  the  pure  doctrines
relative  to  the  soul  and  retained  them  in  his  me_
mor}',  knowing  the  invisible  soul  to  be  distinct  from
the  bodj/,  feels  rejoiced  at  his  acquisition.  I  think
the  abode  of  the  knowledge  of  God  is  open  to
thee.

Nucliiketa  then  asked,  "  If  thou  knowest  any  Being
"  who  exists  distinctly  from  rites,  their  consequences
"  and  their  observers,  and  also  from  evil,  and  who
"  is  different  from  effects  and  their  respective  causes,
"  and  is  above  past,  future,  and  present  time,  do
"  thou  inform  me."

Yunm  replies  .-  "  I  will  explain  to  thee  briefly  that
"  Being  whom  all  the  Veds  treat  of,  either  directly  or
"  indirectly,  to  whom  all  austerities  are  directed,  and
"  who  is  the  main  object  of  those  who  perform  the
"  duties  of  an  ascetic.  He,  to  wit,  whom  the  word
"  Om  implies,  is  the  Supreme  Being."

That  Om  is  the  title  of  Bruhma  and  also  of  the  Su-
pi'eme  Being,  through  means  of  which  man  may  gain
what  he  wishes ;  (that  is,  if  he  worship  Bruhma  hy  means
of  Om, lie  shall  he  received  into his mansion ;  or  if

f2


68  kut'h-oi'UMstil'd  of

through  it  he  elevate  his  mind  to  God,  he  shall  obtain  ab-
sorption.)

Oni  is  the  best  of  all  means  calculated  to  direct  the
mintl  towards  God;  and  it  is  instrumental  either  in  the
acquisition  of  the  knowledge  of  God  or  of  the  dignity  of
Bruhma  :  man  therefore  having  recourse  to  this  word,
shall  either  be  absorbed  in  God,  or  revered  like
Bruhma.

The  soul  is  not  liable  to  birth  nor  to  death  :  it  is  mere
understanding  :  neither  does  it  take  its  origin  from  any
other  or  from  itself:  hence  it  is  unborn,  eternal  without
reduction  and  unchangeable ;  therefore  the  soul  is  not
injured  by  the  hurt  which  the  body  may  receive.  If
any  one  ready  to  kill  another  imagine  that  he  can  des-
troy his  soul,  and  the  other  think  that  his  soul  shall
suffer  destruction,  they  both  know  nothing ;  for  neither
does  it  kill  nor  is  it  killed  by  another.

The  soul  is  the  smallest  of  the  small,  and  greatest
of  the  great.  It  resides  in  the  hearts  of  all  living  crea-
tures. A  man  who  knows  it  and  its  pure  state,  through
the  steadiness  of  the  external  and  internal  senses,  ac-
quired from  the  abandoning  of  worldly  desires,  over-
comes sorrow  and  perplexity.

The  soul,  although  without  motion,  seems  to  go  to
furthest  space ',  and  though  it  resides  in  the  body  at
rest,  yet  seems  to  move  every  where.  Who  can  per-
ceive besides  myself,  that  splendid  soul,  the  support  of
the  sensations  of  happiness  and  pain?

The  soul,  although  it  is  immaterial,  yet  resides
closely  attached  to  perishable  material  objects  :  know-
ino-  it  as  great  and  extensive,  a  wise  man  never  grieves
for  it. A knowledge  of  the  soul  is not acquirable


THE UJUOR VED.  69

from  the  study  of  the  Veils,  nor  througli  retentive
memory,  nor  yet  by  constant  hearing  of  spiritual  in-
struction :  but  lie  who  seeks  to  obtain  a  knowledge  of
it,  is  gifted  with  it;  the  soul  rendering  itself  conspicuous
to  him.

No  man  can  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  soul  witliout
abstaining  froui  evil  acts;  without  having  control  over
the  senses  and  the  mind;  nor  can  lie  gain  it  with  a
mind,  tliough  firm,  yet  filled  with  the  desire  of  frui-
tion ;  but  man  may  obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  soul
through  his  knowledge  of  God.

No  ignorant  man  can,  in  a  perfect  manner,  know  the
state  of  the  existence  of  that  God  whose  food  is  all
t/iinr/.f,  even  the  Brahmun  and  the  Kshutri;  (that  is,
who  destroys  every  object  bearing  figure  and  appellation  J  ;
and  who  consumes  death  itself  even  as  butter.

The  end  of  the  second  section  of  the  first  chapter.


God  and  the  soul  entering  into  the  heart,  the  excel-
lent divine  abode,  consume,  while  residing  in  the  body,
the  necessary  consequences  of  its  actions ;  that  is,  the
latter  is  rewarded  or  punished  according  to  its  good  or
evil  actions,  and  the  former  witnesses  all  those  events.
Those  who  have  a  knowledge  of  God,  consider  the
former  as  light  and  the  latter  as  shade:  the  observers  of
external  rites  also,  as  well  as  those  who  have  collected
fire  three  times  for  worship,  believe  the  same.

We  can  know  and  collect  fire,  which  is  a  bridge  to  the
observers  of  rites;  and  can  know  the  eternal  and  fearless
God,  who  is  the  conveyer  of  those  who  wish  to  cross  the
ocean  of  ignorance. Consider  the  soul  as  a  rider, the


70  kut'h-opunishud  of

body  as  ii  car,  the  intellect  its  driver,  the  mind  as  its
rein:  the  external  senses  are  called  the  horses,  restrained
by  the  mind ;  external  objects  are  the  roads:  so  wise
men  believe  the  soul  united  with  the  body,  the  senses
and  the  mind,  to  be  the  partaker  of  the  consequences  of
good  or  evil  acts.

If  that  intellect,  luhich  is  represented  as  the  driver,  be
indiscreet,  and  the  rein  of  the  mind  loose,  all  the  senses
under  the  authority  of  the  intellectual  poicer  become  un-
manageable ;  like  wicked  horses  under  the  control  of
an  unfit  driver.

If  the  intellect  be  discreet  and  the  rein  of  the  mind
firm,  all  the  senses  prove  steady  and  manageable ;  like
good  horses  under  an  excellent  driver.

He,  who  has  not  a  prudent  intellect  and  steady  mind,
and  who  consequently  lives  always  impure,  cannot  ar-
rive at  the  divine  glory,  but  descends  to  the  world.

He  who  has  a  prudent  intellect  and  steady  mind,
and  consequently  lives  always  pure,  attains  that  glory
from  whence  he  never  will  descend.

Man  who  has  intellect  as  his  prudent  driver,  and  a
steady  mind  as  his  rein,  passing  over  the  paths  of  mor-
tality, arrives  at  the  high  glory  of  the  omnipresent  God.

The  origin  of  the  senses  is  more  refined  than  the
senses;  the  essence  of  the  mind  is  yet  more  refined  than
that  origin  :  the  source  of  intellect  is  again  more  ex-
alted than  that  of  the  mind;  the  prime  sensitive  par-
ticle is  superior  to  the  source  of  intellect;  nature,  the
apparent  cause  of  the  universe,  is  again  superior  to
that  particle,  to  which  the  omnipresent  God  is  still  su-
perior :  nothing  is  more  exalted  than  God  :  he  is  there-
fore superior  to  all  existences,  and  is  the  Supreme  ob-


THE UJOOll VED.  71

jectofall.  God  exists  obscurely  throughout  the  uni-
verse, consequent! u  is  not  perceived ;  but  he  is  known
through  the  acute  intellect  constantly  directed  towards
him  by  wise  men  of  penetrating  understandings.  A
wise  man  shall  transfer  the  power  of  speech  and  that
of  the  senses  to  the  mind,  and  the  mind  to  the  intel-
lect, and  the  intellect  to  the  jmrijied  soul,  and  the  soul
to  the  unchangeable  Supreme  Being.

Rise  up  and  awoke  from  the  sleep  of  ignorance ;  and
having  approached  able  teachers,  acquire  knowled'>e
of  God,  the  origin  of  the  soul:  for  the  way  to  the  know-
ledge of  God  is  considered  by  wise  men  difficidt  as  the
passage  over  the  sharp  edge  of  a  razor.  The  Supreme
Being  is  not  organised  with  the  faculties  of  hearing,
feeling,  vision,  taste  or  smell.  He  is  unchangeable  and
eternal ;  without  beginning  or  end  ;  and  is  beyond  that
particle  which  is  the  origin  of  the  intellect :  man  know-
ing him  thus,  is  relieved  from  the  grasp  of  death.

A  wise  man  reading  to  Brahmuns,  or  hearing/>om  a
teacher,  this  ancient  doctrine  imparted  to  Nuchiketa  by
Yumu,  is  absorbed  into  God.

He  who  reads  this  most  secret  doctrine  before  an
assemblage  of  Brahmuns,  or  at  the  time  of  offering  ob-
lations to  his  forefathers,  enjoys  innumerable  good  con-
sequences.

The  end  of  the  third  Bidlee.


God  has  created  the  senses  to  be  directed  towards
external  objects;  they  consequently  are  apt  to  perceive
outward  things  only,  and  not  the  eternal  spirit.  But  a
wise  man  being  desirous  of  eternal  life,  withdrawing  his


72  kut'h-opunishud  of

senses  from  their  natural  course,  apprehends  the  omni-
present Supreme  Being.

The  ignorant  seek  external  and  desirable  objects
only;  consequently  they  are  subjected  to  the  chain  of
all-seizing  death.  Hence  the  wise,  knowing  that  God
alone  is  immortal  and  eternal  in  this  perishable  world,
do  not  cherish  a  w'l^h  fur  those  objects.

To  him,  owing  to  whose  presence  alone  the  animate
beings,  composed  of  insensible  particles,  perceive  objects
through  vision,  the  power  of  taste,  of  feeling,  and  of
hearing,  and  also  the  pleasure  derivable  from  sexual
intercourse,  nothing  can  be  unknown  :  he  is  that  ex-
istence which  thou  desiredst  to  know.

A  wise  man  after  having  known  that  the  soul,  owing
to  whose  pi'esence  living  creatures  perceive  objects,
whether  they  dream  or  wake,  is  great  and  extensive,
never  grieves.

He  who  believes  that  the  soul,  which  enjoys  the  fruits
of  good  or  evil  actions,  intimately  connected  with  the
body,  originates  from  and  is  united  with  God,  the  Lord
of  past  and  future  events,  will  not  conceal  its  nature :
he  is  that  existence  which  thou  desiredst  to  know.  He
who  knows  that  the  prime  sensitive  particle,  which  pro-
ceeded from  God  prior  to  the  creation  of  water  and  the
other  elements,  having  entered  into  the  heart,  exists
united  with  material  objects,  knows  the  Supreme  Being.
He  is  that  existence  which  thou  desiredst  to  know.

That  sensitive  particle  which  perceives  objects,  and
includes  all  the  celestial  deities,  and  which  was  created
with  all  the  elements,  exists,  entering  into  the  space  of
the  heart,  and  there  resides.  It  is  that  existence  which
thou  desiredst  to  know.


THE LJOOU VKl).  73

Tlie  sacred  fire,  the  receiver  of  oblations,  after  the
wood  has  been  kindled  below  and  above,  is  preserved
by  its  observers  with  the  same  care  as  pre<^nant  women
take  of  their  fix?tus:  it  is  praised  daily  by  prndent  ob-
servers, and  men  habituated  to  constant  devotion.  That
atmosphere  from  whence  the  sun  ascends,  and  in  which
he  goes  down,  on  which  all  the  world,  including Jire,
speech^  and  other  things,  rests,  and  independently  of
which  nothing  exists,  is  that  existence  which  thou  de-
siredst  to  know.  Whatever  individual  intellect  there  is
connected  with  the  body,  is  that  intellectual  principle,
which  is  pure  and  immaterial  existence,  and  the  intel-
lectual overspreading  principle  is  the  individual  intel-
lect ;  but  he  who  thinks  here  that  they  are  difl'erent  in
nature,  is  subject  to  repeated  transmigrations.

Through  the  mind,  purified  hy  spiritual  instructions,
the  knowledge  that  the  soul  is  of  divine  origin,  and  by
no  means  is  dilferent//o;w  its  source,  shall  be  acquired,
whereby  the  idea  of  duality  entirely  ceases.  He  who
thinks  there  is  variety  of  intellectual  principle,  under-
goes transmigration.

The  omnipresent  spirit,  extending  over  the  space  of
the  heart,  which  is  the  size  of  a  finger,  resides  within
the  body ;  and  persons  knowing  him  the  Lord  of  past
and  future  events,  will  not  again  attempt  to  conceal  his
nature:  He  is  that  existence  which  thou  desircdst  to
know.

The  omnipresent  spirit  which  extends  over  the  space
of  the  heart,  the  size  of  a  finger,  is  the  most  pure  light.
He  is  the  Lord  of  past  and  future  events;  He  alone
pervades  the  universe  now  and  ever ;  He  is  that  existence
which  thou  desircdst  to  know. In  the  same  way  as


74?  kut'h-opunishud  of

water  falling  on  uneven  ground  disperses  throughout
the  hollow  places,  and  is  lost,  so  a  man  who  thinks  that
the  souls  of  different  bodies  are  distinct  in  nature  from
each  other,  shall  be  placed  in  various  forms  by  trans-
migration.

As  water  falling  on  even  grounds  remains  un-
changed, so  the  soul  of  a  wise  man  of  steady  mind  is
always  pure,  freed  from  the  idea  of  duality.

End  of  the  fourth  Bullee.


The  body  is  a  dwelling  with  eleven  gates,  belonging
to  the  unborn  and  unchangeable  spirit,  through  whose
constant  contemplation  man  escapes  from  grief,  and
acquiring  absorption,  is  exempted  from  transmigration.
He  is  that  existence  which  thou  desiredst  to  know.

That  spiritual  Being  acts  always  and  moves  in  hea-
ven ;  preserves  all  material  existence  as  depending  on
him ;  moves  in  space ;  resides  in  fire ;  walks  on  the
earth ;  enters  like  a  guest  into  sacrificial  vessels ;  dwells
in  man,  in  gods,  in  sacrifices;  moves  throughout  the
sky ;  seems  to  be  born  in  water,  as  fshes,  Sfc. ;  pro-
duced on  earth,  as  vegetables,  on  the  tops  of  mountains,
as  rivers,  and  also  as  members  of  sacrifices  :  yet  is  he
truly  pure  and  great.  He  who  causes  breath  to  ascend
above  the  heart  and  peditum  to  descend,  resides  in  the
heart :  He  is  adorable  ;  and  to  him  all  the  senses  offer
oblation  of  the  objects  which  they  perceive.

When  the  soul,  which  is  connected  with  the  body,
leaves  it,  nothing  then  remains  in  the  body  which  may
preserve  the  system :  It  is  that  existence  which  thou
desiredst  to  know.


THE UJOOll VED.  75

Neither  by  the  help  of  breath,  nor  from  the  presence
of  other  powers,  can  a  mortal  exist:  but  they  all  exist
ovvinjr  to  that  other  existence  on  Avhich  both  breath  and
the  senses  rest.

I  will  now  disclose  to  you  the  secret  doctrine  of  the
eternal  CJod  ;  and  also  how  man,  void  of  that  knowledge,
O  Goutum  ! transmigrates  after  death.

Some  of  those  ivho  are  ignorant  of  this  doctrine  enter
after  death  the  womb  of  females  to  appear  in  the  ani-
mal shape,  while  others  assume  the  form  of  trees,  ac-
cording to  their  conduct  and  knowledge  during  their
lives.

The  Being  who  continues  to  operate  even  at  that
time  of  sleep,  when  all  the  senses  cease  to  act,  and  then
creates  desirable  objects  of  various  descriptions,  is  pure
and  the  greatest  of  all ;  and  he  alone  is  called  eternal,
on  whom  all  the  world  rests,  and  independently  of
whom  nothing  can  exist:  He  is  that  existence  which
thou  desiredst  to  know.  As  fire,  although  one  in  es-
sence, on  becoming  visible  in  the  world,  appears  in
various  forms  and  shapes,  according  to  its  different
locations,  so  God,  the  soul  of  the  universe,  though  one,
appears  in  various  modes,  according  as  he  connects
himself  with  different  material  objects,  and,  like  space,
extends  over  all.

As  air,  although  one  in  essence,  in  becoming  opera-
tive in  the  body  appears  in  various  natures,  as  breath
and  other  vital  airs,  so  God,  the  soul  of  the  universe,
though  one,  appears  in  different  modes,  according  as
he  connects  himself  with  various  material  objects,  and,
like  space,  extends  over  all.

As  the  sun,  though  he  serves  as  the  eye  of  all  living


•76  kut'h-oi'unisiiud  of

creatures,  yet  is  not  polluted  externally  or  internally  hy
being  connected  with  visible  vile  objects,  so  God,  the
soul  of  the  universe,  although  one  and  omnipresent,  is
not  affected  by  the  sensations  of  individual  pain,  for  he
is  beyond  its  action.

God  is  but  one;  and  he  has  the  whole  world  under
his  control,  for  he  is  the  operating  soul  in  all  objects:
He,  through  his  cmniscience,  makes  his  sole  existence
appear  in  the  form  of  the  universe.  To  those  wise
men  who  acquire  a  knowledge  of  him  who  is  operative
on  the  human  faculties,  is  eternal  beatitude  allotted,
and  not  to  those  who  are  void  of  that  knowledge.

God  is  eternal  amidst  the  perishable  universe ;  and  is
the  soui'ce  of  sensation  among  all  animate  existences;
and  he  alone  assigns  to  so  many  objects  their  respective
purposes :  To  those  wise  men  who  know  him  the  ruler
of  the  intellectual  power,  everlasting  beatitude  is  allot-
ted ;  but  not  to  those  who  are  void  of  that  knowledge.

How  can  I  acquire  that  most  gratifying  divine  know-
ledge, which,  though  beyond  comprehension,  wise  men,
by  constant  application  of  mind,  alone  obtain,  as  if  it  were
present?  Does  it  shine  conspicuously? — and  does  it
appear  to  the  human  faculties?

Neither  the  sun,  nor  the  moon,  nor  yet  the  stars  can
throw  light  on  God:  Even  the  illuminating  lightning
cannot  throw  light  upon  him ;  much  less  can  limited
fire  give  him  light:  But  they  all  imitate  him,  and  all
borrow  their  light  from  him— that  is,  nothing  can  injlii-
ence  God  and  render  him  perspicuous  .•  But  God  himself
imparts  his  knowledge  to  the  heart  freed Jrom  passion  and
desire.

End  of  theffth  Bidlee.


THE UJOOR VED.  Tf

The  world  is  a  fig-tree  of  long  duration,  whose  origin
is  above,  and  the  branches  of  which,  as  different  species^
are  below.  The  origin  alone  is  pure  and  supreme;  and
he  alone  is  eternal  on  whom  all  the  world  rests,  and
independently  of  whom  nothing  can  exist. — He  is  that
existence  which  tiiou  desiredst  to  know.

God  being  eternal  existence,  the  universe,  whatsoever
it  is,  exists  and  proceeds  from  him.  He  is  the  great
dread  of  all  heavenly  bodies,  as  if  he  were  prepared
to  strike  them  with  thunderbolts;  so  that  none  of  them
can  deviate  from  their  respective  courses  established  by  him.
Those  who  know  him  as  the  eternal  power  acquire
absorption.

Through  his  fear  fire  supplies  M5  with  heat;  and  the
sun,  through  his  fear,  shines  regularly ;  and  also  Indru,
and  air,  and  fifthly,  death,  are  through  his  fear  con-
stantly in  motion.

If  man  can  acquire  a  knowledge  of  God  in  this
world,  before  the  fall  of  his  body,  he  becomes  happy  for
ever :  Otherwise  he  assumes  new  forms  in  different  man-
sions. A  knowledge  of  God  shines  on  the  purified  intel-
lect in  this  world,  as  clearly  as  an  object  is  seen  by
reflection  in  a  polished  mirror:  In  the  region  of  the
deified  Progenitors  of  mankind  it  is  viewed  as  obscurely
as  objects  perceived  in  the  state  of  dreaming;  and  in
the  mansion  of  Gundhurvus,  in  the  same  degree  as  the
reflection  of  an  object  on  water;  but  in  the  mansion  of
Bruhma  it  appears  as  distinctly  as  the  difference
between  light  and  darkness.

A  wise  man,  knowing  the  soul  to  be  distinct  from  the
senses,  which  proceed  from  different  origins,  and  also
from  the  state  of  waking  and  of  sleep,  never  again
ffrieves.


78  kut'h-opunishud  of

The  mind  is  more  refined  than  the  external  senses  ;
and  the  intellect  is  again  more  exalted  than  the  mind.
The  prime  sensitive  particle  is  superior  to  the  intellect;
— nature,  the  apparent  cause  of  the  universe,  is  again
superior  to  that  particle  unaffected  by  matter  :  Superior
to  nature  is  God,  who  is  omnipresent  and  without
material  effects  :  by  acquisition  of  whose  knowledge  man
becomes  extricated  from  ignorance  and  distress,  and  is
absorbed  into  Him  of ter  death.  His  substance  does  not
come  within  the  reach  of  vision ;  no  one  can  apprehend
him  through  the  senses:  By  constant  direction  of  the
intellect,  free  from  doubts,  he  perspicuously  appears ;
and  those  who  know  him  in  the  prescribed  manner,
enjoy  eternal  life.

That  part  of  life  wherein  the  power  of  the  five
external  senses  and  the  mind  are  directed  towards  the
Supreme  Spirit,  and  the  intellectual  power  ceases  its
action,  is  said  to  be  most  sacred;  and  this  steady  control
of  the  senses  and  mind  is  considered  to  be  Yog  (or
withdratuing  the  senses  and  the  mind  from  icorldly  objects):
Man  should  be  vigilant  in  the  acquisition  of  that  state  ;
for  such  control  proceeds  from  constant  exercise,  and
ceases  by  neglect.

Neither  through  speech,  nor  through  intellectual
power,  nor  yet  through  vision,  can  man  acquire  a
knowledge  of  God ;  but,  save  him  who  believes  in  the
existence  of  God  as  the  cause  of  the  U7iii'erse,  no  one  can
liave  a  notion  of  that  Being.  A  man  should  acquire,
first,  a  belief  in  the  existence  of  God,  the  origin  of  the
universe;  and  next,  a  real  knowledge  of  him ;  to  wit,
that  he  is  incomprehensible;  for  the  means  which  lead
men  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  his  existence^  graciously


THE UJOOR  VED.  79

conduct  tliem  to  the  belief  of  his  incomprehensibility.
When  all  the  desires  settled  in  the  lieart  leave  man,
the  mortal  then  become  immortal,  and  acquire  absorp-
tion even  in  this  life.  When  the  deep  ignorance  which
occasions  duality  is  entirely  destroyed,  the  mortal
become  immortal  :  This  is  the  only  doctrine  which  the
J'edant  inculcates.

There  are  one  hundred  and  one  tubes  connected
with  the  heart,  one  of^  which,  called Sookhumna,  proceeds
to  the  head  :  The  soul  of  a  devotee  proceeding  through
the  hundred  and  first,  is  carried  to  the  mansion  of  the
immortal  Bruhma  ;  and  those  of  others,  which  ascend
by  other  tubes,  assume  dilTerent  bodies,  according  to  the
evil  or  <jood  acts  ichich  they  perform.

The  omnipresent  eternal  spirit  resides  always  within
that  space  of  the  human  heart  which  is  as  large  as  a
finger  :  Man  should,  by  firmness  of  mind,  separate  that
spirit  from  the  body,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  pith  is
removed  from  the  plant  Moonju  :  that  is,  the  spirit
should  be  considered  totally  distinct  from  matter  and  the
effects  of  matter — and  man  should  know  that  separated
spirit  to  be  pure  and  eternal.

Having  thus  acquired  this  divine  doctrine,  imparted
by  the  God  of  death,  with  every  thing  belonging  to  it,
Nuchiketa,  freed  from  the  consequences  of  good  or  evil
acts,  and  from  mortality,  was  absorbed  into  God :  and
whatever  person  also  can  acquire  that  knowledge,  shall
obtain  absorption.

End  of  the  Kut'h-opunishud.


TRANSLATION

OF THK

ISHOPANISHAD,

One  of  the  chapters  of  the

Y  A  J  U  R VEDA:

ACCOIlDlNf; TO THK COMMKNTAHY OK THK CELEBRATED

SIIANKAR  -  ACHARYA  :

ESTABLrSHTNG THE UNITY AND INCOMPREHENSIBILITY OF
THE  SUPREME  BEING;

AND THAT

HIS WORSHIP ALONE

CAN  LEAD  TO  ETERNAL  BEATITUDE.


CALCUTTA:
1816.


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.


The  most  learned  Vyasa  shows,  in  his  work  of  the
Vedant,  that  all  the  texts  of  the  Ved,  with  one  consent,
prove  but  the  Divinity  of  that  Being,  who  is  out  of
the  reach  of  comprehension  and  beyond  all  description.
For  the  use  of  the  public,  I  have  made  a  concise  trans-
lation of  that  celebrated  work  into  Bengalee,  and  the
present  is  an  endeavour  to  translate*  the  principal
Chapters  of  the  Ved,  in  conformity  to  the  Comments
of  the  great  Shankar-Acharya.  The  translation  of  the
Ishopanishad  belonging  to  the  Yajur,  the  second  divi-
sion of  the  Vedas,  being  already  completed,  I  have
put  it  into  the  press; I'  and  the  others  will  succes-
sively be  printed,  as  soon  as  their  translation  is  com-
pleted. It  is  evident,  from  those  authorities,  that  the
sole  regulator  of  the  Universe  is  but  one,  who  is  omni-
present, far  surpassing  our  powers  of  comprehension  ;
above  external  sense ;  and  whose  worship  is  the  chief
duty  of  uiankind  and  the  sole  cause  of  eternal  beatitude  ;
and  that  all  that  bear  figure  and  appellation  are  invcn-

•  I  must  confess  how  inucli  1  led  indebted  to  Doctor  II.  11.
Wilson,  in  my  translations  from  Sanskrit  into  English,  for  the  use
of  his  Sunskrit  and  En<;^lisli  Dictionary.

t  Wherever  any  comment,  upon  w  liich  llic  sense  of  tlie  ori-
\r\\YA\  depends,  is  added  to  the  oriy:inal,  it  will  he  found  vviitten  in
Italics.

G  2


84-  PllEFACE.

lions.  Should  it  be  asked,  wliether  the  assertions
found  in  the  Puranas*  and  Tantras,  &c.  respecting  the
worship  of  the  several  gods  and  goddesses,  are  false,
or  whether  Puranas  and  Tantras  are  not  included  in
the  Shastra,  the  answer  is  this : — The  Purana  and
Tantra,-|*  &c.  are  of  course  to  be  considered  as  Shastra'
for  they  repeatedly  declare  God  to  be  one  and  above
the  apprehension  of  external  and  internal  senses ;  they
indeed  expressly  declare  the  divinity  of  many  gods
and  goddesses,  and  the  modes  of  their  worship ;  but
they  reconcile  those  contradictory  assertions  by  affirm-
ing frequently,  that  the  directions  to  worship  any
figured  beings  are  only  applicable  to  those,  who  are  in-
capable of  elevating  their  minds  to  the  idea  of  an  in-
visible Supreme  Being,  in  order  that  such  persons,  by
fixing  their  attention  on  those  invented  figures,  may  be
able  to  restrain  themselves  from  vicious  temptations,
and  that  those  that  are  competent  for  the  worship  of
the  invisible  God,  should  disregard  the  worship  of
Idols.  I  repeat  a  few  of  these  declarations  as  fol-
lows. The  authority  of  Jamadagni  is  thus  quoted  by
the  great  Raghunandan:  "  For  the  benefit  of  those
"  who  are  inclined  to  worship,  figures  are  invented  to
<'  serve  as  representations  of  God,  who  is  merely  un-
"  derstanding,  and  has  no  second,  no  parts  nor  figure;
<'  consequently,  to  these  representatives,  either  male  or
"  female  forms  and  other  circumstances  are  fictitiously
"  assio-ned."  In  the  second  Chapter  of  the  first  part
of  the  Vishnu  Purana  it  is  said;  "  God  is  without
"  figure, epithet, definition or description. He is

•  Said  to  have  been  written  by  Vyas.

t  Suppfised  to  have  been  composed  by  Shiva.


PIIKFACE.  85

'•  without  dcfecl,  not  liable  to  anniliilalion,  change,
"  pain  or  birth ;  we  can  only  say.  That  he,  who  is  the
"  eternal  being,  is  God." — *'  The  vulgar  look  for  their
"  gods  in  water ;  men  of  more  extended  knowledge
"  in  celestial  bodies ;  the  ignorant  in  woodj  bricks,
"and  stones;  but  learned  men  in  the  universal  soul."
— In  the  84th  Chapter  of  the  tenth  division  of  the  Sri
Bhagavat,  Crishna  says  to  Vyas  and  others:  "It  is
"  impossible  for  those  who  consider  pilgrimage  as
"  devotion,  and  believe  that  the  divine  nature  exists
"  in  the  image,  to  look  up  to,  communicate  with,  to
"  petition  and  to  revere  true  believers  in  God.  He  who
"  views  as  the  soul  this  body  formed  of  phlegm,  wind  and
"  bile,  or  regards  only  wife,  children,  and  relations  as
"  himself  (that  is,  he  who  neglects  to  contemplate  the
"  nature  of  the  soul),  he  who  attributes  a  divine  nature
"  to  earthern  images,  and  believes  in  the  holiness  of
"  water,  yet  pays  not  such  respect  to  those  who  are
"  endowed  with  a  knowledge  of  God,  is  as  an  ass  amongst
"  cows."

In  the  9th  Chapter  of  the  Cularnava  it  is  written  :
"  A  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Being,  who  is  beyond
"  the  power  of  expression  and  unchangeable,  being
"  acquired,  all  gods  and  goddesses,  and  their  texts
"  which  represent  them,  shall  become  slaves." — "  After
"  a  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Being  has  been  attained,
"  there  is  no  need  to  attend  to  ceremonies  prescribed
"  by  Shastras — no  want  of  a  fan  should  be  felt,  when
"  a  soft  southern  wind  is  found  to  refresh." — The
Mahanirvana  says,  "  Thus  corresponding  to  the  na-
"  tures  of  different  powers  or  qualities,  numerous
"  figures  have  been  invented  for  the benefit  of  those


i^t»  PREFACE.

"  who  are  not  possessed  of  sufficient  understandino-."

From  the  foregoing  quotations  it  is  evident,  that  though
the  Veds,  Puranas,  and  Tantras,  frequently  assert  the
existence  of  the  plurahty  of  gods  and  goddesses,  and
prescribe  the  modes  of  their  worship  for  men  of  insuffi-
cient understanding,  yet  they  have  also  declared  in  a
hundred  other  places,  that  these  passages  are  to  be
taken  merely  in  a  figurative  sense.

It  cannot  be  alleged  in  support  of  Idolatry,  that
"  although  a  knowledge  of  God  is  certainly  above  all
"  things,  still  as  it  is  impossible  to  acquire  that  know-
"  ledge,  men  should  of  course  worship  figured  Gods  ;"
for,  had  it  been  impossible  to  attain  a  knowledge  of  the
Supreme  Being,  the  Veds  and  Purans,  as  well  as  Tan-
tras, would  not  have  instructed  mankind  to  aim  at
such  attainment;  as  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  direc-
tions to  acquiz-e  what  is  obviously  unattainable  could
be  given  by  the  Shastra,  or  even  by  a  man  o?  common
sense.  Should  the  Idolater  say,  "  that  the  acquisition
"  of  a  knowledge  of  God,  although  it  is  not  impossible,
"  is  most  difficult  of  comprehension,"  I  will  ao-ree
with  him  in  that  point ;  but  infer  from  it,  that  we  ou^ht,
therefore,  the  more  to  exert -ourselves  to  acquire  that
knowledge  ;  but  I  highly  lament  to  observe,  that  so  far
from  endeavouring  to  make  such  an  acquisition,  the
very  proposal  frequently  excites  his  anger  antl  dis-
pleasure.

Neither  can  it  be  alleged  that  the  Veds,  Puranas,
^c.  teach  both  the  adoration  of  the  Supreme  Being  and
that  of  celestial  gods  and  goddesses,  but  that  the
former  is  intended  for  Yatis,  or  those  that  are  bound
by  their  profession  to  forsake  all  worldly  considerations.


PREFACE.  87

and  the  latter  for  Laymen ;  for,  it  is  evident  from  the
4.8th  Text  of  the  3d  Chapter  of  the  Vedunt,  that  a
householder  also  is  required  to  perform  the  worship  of
the  Supreme  Being.

Menu,  also,  the  chief  of  Hindoo  lawgivers,  after  hav-
ing prescribed  all  the  varieties  of  rites  and  ceremonies,
in  Chapter  12th,  Text  92,  says,  "  Thus  must  the  chief
"  of  the  twice-born,  though  he  neglect  the  ceremonial
"  rites  mentioned  in  the  Shastras,  be  diligent  in  attain-
"  ing  a  knowledge  of  God,  in  controlling  his  organs  of
"  sense,  and  in  repeating  the  Ved."

Again  in  the  4th  Chapter,  in  describing  the  duties  of
Laymen,  the  same  author  says,  "  Some,  who  well  know
"  the  ordinances  for  the  oblations,  do  not  perform  ex-
"  ternally  the  five  great  sacraments,  but  continually
"  make  offerings  in  their  own  organs  of  sensation  and
"  intellect:'

'•  Some  constantly  sacrifice  their  breath  in  their
"  speech,  when  they  instruct  others  of  God  aloud,  and
"  their  speech  in  their  breath,  when  they  meditate  in
"  silence,  perceiving  in  their  speech  and  breatli  thus
"  employed  the  imperishable  fruit  of  a  sacrificial  offer-

"  ing."

"  Other  Brahmins  incessantly  perform  those  sacri-
"  fices  only,  seeing  with  the  eye  of  divine  learning,  that
"  the  scriptural  knowledge  is  the  root  of  every  ceremo-
"  nial  observance."

IN THE YAGNYAVALCA rr IS WRITTEN.

"  Even  a  householder,  who  acquires  a  livelihood
"  honestly,  has  faith  in  the  Supreme  Being,  shows  hos-
"  pitality  to  his  guests,  performs  sacramental  rites  to
"  his  forefathers,  and  is  in  the  practice  of  telling  truth,


PREFACF.


"  shall  be  absorbed  into  the  supreme  essence."  Should
it  be  said,  "  It  still  remains  unaccountable,  that  not-
"  withstanding  the  Veds  and  Purans  repeatedly  declare
'•  the  unity  of  the  Supreme  Being,  and  direct  mankind
"  to  adore  him  alone,  yet  the  generality  of  Hindoos
"  have  a  contrary  faith,  and  continue  to  practise  idola-
"  try,"  I  would  in  answer  request  attention  to  the  foun-
dation on  which  the  practical  part  of  the  Hindoo  re-
ligion is  built.  Many  learned  Brahmins  are  perfectly
aware  of  the  absurdity  of  idolatry,  and  are  well  in-
formed of  the  nature  of  the  purer  mode  of  divine  wor-
ship. But  as  in  the  rites,  ceremonies,  and  festivals  of
idolatry,  they  find  the  source  of  their  comforts  and
fortune,  they  not  only  never  fail  to  protect  idol  wor-
ship from  all  attacks,  but  even  advance  and  encourage
it  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,  by  keeping  the  know-
ledge of  their  scriptures  concealed  from  the  rest  of  the
people.  Their  followers  too,  confiding  in  these  leaders,
feel  gratification  in  the  idea  of  the  Divine  Nature  re-
siding in  a  being  resembling  themselves  in  birth,  shape,
and  propensities;  and  are  naturally  delighted  with  a
mode  of  worship  agreeable  to  the  senses,  though  de-
structive of  moral  principles,  and  the  fruitful  parent
of  prejudice  and  superstition.

Some  Europeans,  indued  with  high  principles  of  libe-
rality, but  unacquainted  with  the  ritual  part  of  Hindoo
idolatry,  are  disposed  to  paUiate  it  by  an  interpretation
which,  though  plausible,  is  by  no  means  well  founded.
They  are  willing  to  imagine,  that  the  idols  which  the
Hindoos  Avorship,  are  not  viewed  by  them  in  the  light
of  gods  or  as  real  personifications  of  the  divine  attri-
butes, but  merely  as  instruments  for  raising  their  minds


ruKi-ACK.  89

lo  the  contemplation  of  those  attributes,  which  are  re-
spectively represented  by  different  figures.  I  have  fre-
quently had  occasion  to  remark,  that  many  Hindoos
also  who  are  conversant  with  the  English  language,
finding  this  interpretation  a  more  plausible  apology  for
idolatry  than  any  with  which  they  are  furnished  by
their  own  guides,  do  not  fail  to  avail  themselves  of  it,
though  in  repugnance  both  to  their  faith  and  to  their
practice.  The  declarations  of  this  description  of  Hin-
doos naturally  tend  to  confirm  the  original  idea  of
such  Europeans,  who  from  the  extreme  absurdity  of
pure  unqualified  idolatry,  deduce  an  argument  against
its  existence.  It  appears  to  them  impossible  for  men,
even  in  the  very  last  degree  of  intellectual  darkness,  to
be  so  far  misled  as  to  consider  a  mere  image  of  wood  or
of  stone  as  a  human  being,  much  less  as  a  divine  exis-
tence. With  a  view,  therefore,  to  do  away  any  miscon-
ception of  this  nature  which  may  have  prevailed,  I  beg
leave  to  submit  the  following  considerations.

Hindoos  of  the  present  age,  with  a  very  few  excep-
tions, have  not  the  least  idea  that  it  is  to  the  attributes
of  the  Supreme  Being,  as  figuratively  represented  by
shapes  corresponding  to  the  nature  of  those  attributes,
they  offcn-  adoration  and  worship  under  the  denomi-
nation of  gods  and  goddesses.  On  the  contrary,  the
slightest  investigation  will  clearly  satisfy  every  inquirer,
that  it  makes  a  material  part  of  their  system  to  hold  as
articles  of  faith  all  those  particular  circumstances,  which
are  essential  to  a  belief  in  the  independent  existence  of
the  objects  of  their  idolatry  as  deities  clothed  with
divine  power.

Locality  of  habitation  and  a  mode  of  existence  ana-


90  PREFACE.

logous  to  their  own  views  of  earthly  things,  are  uni-
formly ascribed  to  each  particular  god.  Thus  the
devotees  of  Siva,  misconceiving  the  real  spirit  of  the
Scriptures,  not  only  place  an  implicit  credence  in  the
separate  existence  of  Siva,  but  even  regard  him  as  an
omnipotent  being,  the  greatest  of  all  the  divinities,  who,
as  they  say,  inhabit  the  northern  mountain  of  Cailas  ;
and  that  he  is  accompanied  by  two  wives  and  several
children,  and  surrounded  with  numerous  attendants.
In  like  manner  the  followers  of  Vishnu,  mistaking  the
allegorical  representations  of  the  Sastras  for  relations
of  real  facts,  believe  him  to  be  chief  over  all  other
gods,  and  that  he  resides  with  his  wife  and  attendants
on  the  summit  of  heaven.  Similar  opinions  are  also
held  by  the  worshippers  of  Cali,  in  respect  to  that
goddess.  And  in  fact,  the  same  observations  are  equally
applicable  to  every  class  of  Hindoo  devotees  in  regard
to  their  respective  gods  and  goddesses.  And  so  tena-
cious are  those  devotees  in  respect  to  the  honour  due
to  their  chosen  divinities,  that  when  they  meet  in  such
holy  places  as  Haridwar,  Pryag,  Siva-Canchi,  or  Vishnu-
Canchi  in  the  Dekhin,  the  adjustment  of  the  point  of
precedence  not  only  occasions  the  warmest  verbal
altercations,  but  sometimes  even  blows  and  violence.
Neither  do  they  regard  the  images  of  those  gods  merely
in  the  light  of  instruments  for  elevating  the  mind  to
the  conception  of  those  supposed  beings ;  they  are  sim-
ply in  themselves  made  objects  of  worship.  For  what-
ever Hindoo  purchases  an  idol  in  the  market,  or  con-
structs one  with  his  own  hands,  or  has  one  made  up
under  his  own  superintendence,  it  is  his  invariable
practice  to perform certain  ceremonies,  called  Pran


PREFACE.  91

Pratislit'ha,  or  the  endowment  ot  animation  ;  by  which
he  believes  that  its  nature  is  changed  from  tliat  of  the
mere  materials  of  which  it  is  formed,  and  that  it  ac-
quires not  only  life  but  supernatural  powers.  Shortly
afterwards,  if  the  idol  be  of  the  masculine  gender,  he
marries  it  to  a  feminine  one,  with  no  less  pomp  and
magnificence  than  he  celebrates  the  nuptials  of  his  own
children.  The  mysterious  process  is  now  complete,
and  the  god  and  goddess  are  esteemed  the  arbiters  of
his  destiny,  and  continually  receive  his  most  ardent
adoration.

At  the  same  time,  the  worshipper  of  images  ascribes
to  them  at  once  the  opposite  natures  of  human  and
of  super-human  beings.  Inattention  to  their  supposed
wants  as  living  beings,  he  is  seen  feeding,  or  pretending
to  feed  them  every  morning  and  evening;  and  as  in
the  hot  season  he  is  careful  to  fan  them,  so  in  the  cold
he  is  equally  regardful  of  their  comfort,  covering  them
by  day  with  warm  clothing,  and  placing  them  at  night
in  a  snug  bed.  But  superstition  does  not  find  a  limit
here :  the  acts  and  speeches  of  the  idols,  and  their  as-
sumption of  various  shapes  and  colours,  are  gravely
related  by  the  Brahmins,  and  with  all  the  marks  of
veneration  are  firmly  believed  by  their  deluded  fol-
lowers. Other  practices  they  have  with  regard  to  those
idols  which  decency  forbids  me  to  ex])lain.  In  thus
endeavouring  to  remove  a  mistake,  into  which  I  have
reason  to  believe  many  European  gentlemen  have  been
led  by  a  benevolent  wish  to  find  an  excuse  for  the  errors
of  my  countrymen,  it  is  a  considerable  gratification  to
me  to  find  that  the  latter  have  begun  to  be  so  far  sen-
sible of  the  absurdity  of  their  real  belief  and  practices.


92  I'llKFACE.

as  to  find  it  convenient  to  shelter  tliem  under  such  a
cloak,  however  flimsy  and  borrowed.  The  adoption  of
such  a  subterfuge  encourages  me  greatly  to  hope,  that
they  will  in  time  abandon  what  they  are  sensible  cannot
be  defended;  and  that,  forsaking  the  superstition  of
idolatry,  they  will  embrace  the  rational  worship  of  the
God  of  Nature,  as  enjoined  by  the  Veds,  and  confirmed
by  the  dictates  of  common  sense.

The  argument  which  is  frequently  alleged  in  sup-
port of  idolatry  is,  that "  those  who  believe  God  to
"  be  omnipresent,  as  declared  by  the  doctrines  of  the
"  Vedant,  are  required  by the  tenets  of  such belief
"  to  look  upon  all  existing  creatures  as  God,  and  to
"  shew  divine  respect  to  birds,  beasts,  men,  women,  ve-
"  getables, and  all  other  existences ;  and  as  practical
"  conformity  to  such  doctrines  is  almost  impossible,  the
"  worship  of  figured  gods  should  be  admitted." This
misrepresentation, I am sorry to observe, entirely
serves  the  purpose  intended,  by  frightening  Hindoos
in  general  from  attending  to  the  pure  worship  of  the
Supreme  Regulator  of  the  universe. But  I  am  confi-
dent that  the  least  reflection  on  the  subject  will  clear
up  this  point  beyond  all  doubt ;  for  the  Vedant  is  well
known  as  a  work  which inculcates  only the unity  of
God  ;  but  if  every  existing  creature  should  be  taken  for
a  god  by  the  followers  of  the  Vedant,  the  doctrines  of
that  work  must  be  admitted  to  be  much  more  at  vari-
ance with  that  idea  than  those  of  the  advocates  of  ido-
latry, as  the  latter  are  contented  with  the  recognition
of  only  a  few  millions  of  gods  and  goddesses,  but  the
Vedant  in  that  case  must  be  supposed  to admit  the
divinity  of  every  living  creature  in  nature. The  fact


PREFACE.  93

is,  that  the  Ve(hint,  by  (.leclaring  that  "  God  is  every
"  where,  and  every  tiling  is  in  God,"  means  that  no-
thing is  absent  from  God,  and  nothing  bears  real  exis-
tence except  by  the  voHtion  of  God,  whose  existence  is
the  sole  support  of  the  conceived  existence  of  the  uni-
verse, which  is  acted  upon  by  him  in  the  same  manner
as  a  human  body  is  by  a  soul.  But  God  is  at  the  same
time  quite  different  from  what  we  see  or  feel.

The  following  texts  of  the  Vedant  are  to  this  effect
(llth  text  of  the  2d  section  of  the  3d  chapter  of  the
Vedant) :  "  That  being,  which  is  distinct  from  matter,
*'  and  from  those  which  are  contained  in  matter,  is  not
•'  various,  because  he  is  declared  by  all  the  Veds  to  be
"  one  beyond  description  ;"  and  again,  "  The  Ved  has
"  declared  the  Supreme  Being  to  be  mere  understand-
"  ing."  Moreover,  if  we  look  at  the  conduct  of  the
ancient  true  believers  in  God,  as  Janaca,  the  celebrated
prince  of  Mithila,  Vasisht'ha,  Sanaca,  Vyasa,  Sancara-
charyu,  and  others  whose  characters  as  believers  in  one
God  are  well  known  to  the  public  by  their  doctrines
and  works,  which  are  still  in  circulation,  we  shall  find
that  these  teachers,  although  they  declared  their  faith
in  the  omnipresent  God  according  to  the  doctrines  of
the  Vedant,  assigned  to  every  creature  the  particular
character  and  respect  he  was  entitled  to.  It  is,  however,
extremely  remarkable,  that  the  very  argument  which
they  employ  to  shew  the  impossibihty  of  practical  con-
formity to  faith  in  the  omnipresence  of  God,  may  be
alleged  against  every  system  of  their  own  idolatry  ;  for
the  believers  in  the  godhead  of  Crishna,  and  the  de-
votees of  Cali,  as  well  as  the  followers  of  Siva,  believe


94  PREFACK.

firmly  in  the  omnipresence  of  Crishna,*  Cali,|  and
Siva,:j:  respectively.  The  authorities,  then,  for  the  wor-
ship of  those  gods,  in  declaring  their  omnipresence,
would  according  to  their  own  argument,  enjoin  the
worship  of  every  creature  as  much  as  of  those  supposed
divinities.  Omnipresence,  however,  is  an  attribute  much
more  consonant  with  the  idea  of  a  Supreme  Being  than
with  that  of  any  fictitious  figure  to  which  they  pay
divine  honours  !  Another  argument  is,  that  "  No  man
*'  can  have,  as  it  is  said  by  the  Sastra,  a  desire  of
*'  knowledge  respecting  the  Supreme  Being,  unless  his
"  mind  be  purified ;  and  as  idol  worship  purifies  men's
"  minds,  it  should  be  therefore  attended  to."  I  admit
the  truth  of  the  first  part  of  this  argument,  as  a  desire
of  the  acquisition  of  a  knowledge  of  God  is  an  indi-
cation of  an  improved  mind ;  consequently  whenever
we  see  a  person  possessed  of  that  desire,  we  should  at-
tribute it  to  some  degree  of  purification;  but  I  must
affirm  with  the  Ved,  that  purity  of  mind  is  the  conse-
quence of  divine  worship,  and  not  of  any  supei'stitious
practices.

The  Vrihadaranyaca  says,  "Adore  God  alone."
Again,  "  Nothing  excepting  the  Supreme  Being  should
"  be  adored  by  wise  men." — "  God  alone  rules  the
*'  mind,  and  relieves  it  from  impurity."

The  last  of  the  principal  arguments  which  are  al-
leged in  favour  of  idolatry  is,  that  it  is  established  by
custom. "  Let  the  authors  of  the  Veds,  Poorans,  and

•  Vide  10th  chapter  of  the  Geta.

+  Vide  23d  text  of  the  chap.  11th  of  the  Debl-mahatniva.

+ Vide  Rudra  mahatmva  in  the  Dandharina.


PREFACE.  95

"  Tantras,"  it  is  said,  "  assert  what  they  may  in  favour
""  of  devotion  to  the  Supreme  Being,  but  idol  worship
"  has  been  practised  for  so  many  centuries  that  custom
"  renders  it  proper  to  continue  that  worship."  It  is
however  evident  to  every  one  possessed  of  common
sense,  that  custom  or  fashion  is  quite  different  from
divine  faith  ;  the  latter  proceeding  from  spiritual  au-
thorities and  correct  reasoning,  and  the  former  being
merely  the  fruit  of  vulgar  caprice.

What  can  justify  a  man,  who  believes  in  the  inspi-
ration of  his  religious  books,  in  neglecting  the  direct
authorities  of  the  same  works,  and  subjecting  himself
entirely  to  custom  and  fashion,  which  are  liable  to  per-
petual changes  and  depend  upon  popular  whim  ?  But
it  cannot  be  passed  unnoticed  that  those  who  practise
idolatry  and  defend  it  under  the  shield  of  custom,  have
been  violating  their  customs  almost  every  twenty  years,
for  the  sake  of  a  little  convenience,  or  to  promote  their
worldly  advantage :  a  few  instances  which  are  most
commonly  and  publicly  practised,  I  beg  leave  to  state
here.

1st.  The  whole  community  in  Bengal,  with  very  few
exceptions,  have,  since  the  middle  of  last  century,  for-
saken their  ancient  modes  of  the  performance  of  cere-
monial rites  of  religion,  and  followed  the  precepts  of
the  late  Raghunandan,  and  consequently  differ  in  the
most  essential  points  of  ceremonies  from  the  natives  of
Behar,  Tirhoot,  and  Benares.  2d.  The  system  of  their
subdivisions  in  each  cast,  with  the  modes  of  marriage
and  intermarriage,  is  also  a  modern  introduction  alto-
gether contrary  to  their  law  and  ancient  customs.  3d.
The  profession  of  instructing  European  gentlemen  in


96  PREFACE.

the  Veds,  Sinirit  and  Purans,  is  a  violation  of  their
long  established  custom;  and,  4th.  The  supplying  their
European  guests  with  wine  and  victuals  in  presence  of
their  gods  and  goddesses  is  also  a  direct  breach  of
custom  and  law.  I  may  conclude  this  subject  with  an
appeal  to  the  good  sense  of  my  countrymen,  by  asking
them,  "  whose  advice  appears  the  most  disinterested
"  and  most  rational — ^that  of  those  who,  concealing
"  your  scriptures  from  you,  continually  teach  you  thus,"

*  Believe  whatever  we  may  say — don't  examine  or  even

*  touch  your  scriptures,  neglect  entirely  your  reasoning

*  faculties — do  not  only  consider  us,  whatever  may  be

*  our  principles,  as  gods  on  earth,  but  humbly  adore

*  and  propitiate  us  by  sacrificing  to  us  the  greater  part

*  (if  not  the  whole)  of  your  property  :'  "  or  that  of  the
"  man  who  lays  your  scriptures  and  their  comments  as
"  well  as  their  translations  before  you,  and  solicits  you
"  to  examine  their  purport,  without  neglecting  the
"  proper  and  moderate  use  of  reason ;  and  to  attend
"  strictly  to  their  directions,  by  the  rational  perform-
"  ance  of  your  duty  to  your  sole  Creatoi*,  and  to  your
"  fellow  creatures,  and  also  to  pay  true  respect  to  those
"  who  think  and  act  righteously."  I  hope  no  one  can
be  so  prejudiced  as  to  be  unable  to  discern  which
advice  is  most  calculated  to  lead  him  to  the  best  road
to  both  temporal  and  eternal  happiness.


INTRODUCTION.


The  physical  powers  of  man  are  limited,  and  when
viewed  comparatively,  sink  into  insignificance;  while
in  the  same  ratio,  his  moral  faculties  I'ise  in  our  esti-
mation, as  embracing  a  wide  sphere  of  action,  and  pos-
sessing a  capability  of  almost  boundless  improvement.
If  the  short  duration  of  human  life  be  contrasted  with
the  great  age  of  the  universe,  and  the  limited  extent  of
bodily  strength  with  the  many  objects  to  which  there  is
a  necessity  of  applying  it,  we  must  necessarily  be  dis-
posed to  entertain  but  a  very  humble  opinion  of  our
own  nature;  and  nothing  perhaps  is  so  well  calculated
to  restore  our  self-complacency  as  the  contemplation
of  our  more  extensive  moral  powers,  together  with  the
highly  beneficial  objects  which  the  appropriate  exercise
of  them  may  produce.

On  the  other  hand,  sorrow  antl  remorse  can  scarcely
fail,  sooner  or  later,  to  be  the  portion  of  him  who  is
conscious  of  having  neglected  opportunities  of  render-
ing benefit  to  his  fellow-creatures.  From  considera-
tions like  these  it  has  been  that  I  (although  born  a
Brahmin,  and  instructed  in  my  youth  in  all  the  prin-
ciples of  that  sect),  being  thoroughly  convinced  of  the

H


98  INTllODUCTION.

lamentable  errors  of  my  countrymen,  have  been  stimu-
lated to  employ  every  means  in  my  power  to  improve
their  minds,  and  lead  them  to  the  knowledge  of  a
purer  system  of  moi'ality.  Living  constantly  amongst
Hindoos  of  different  sects  and  professions,  I  have  had
ample  opportunity  of  observing  the  superstitious  pueri-
lities into  which  they  have  been  thrown  by  their  self-
interested  guides,  who,  in  defiance  of  the  law  as  well  as
of  common  sense,  have  succeeded  but  too  well  in  con-
ducting them  to  the  temple  of  idolatry ;  and  while  they
hid  from  their  view  the  true  substance  of  morality,
have  infused  into  their  simple  hearts  a  weak  attachment
for  its  mere  shadow.

For  the  chief  part  of  the  theory  and  practice  of
Hindooism,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  is  made  to  consist  in  the
adoption  of  a  peculiar  mode  of  diet ;  the  least  aberra-
tion from  which  (even  though  the  conduct  of  the
offender  may  in  other  respects  be  pure  and  blameless)
is  not  only  visited  with  the  severest  censure,  but  ac-
tually punished  by  exclusion  from  the  society  of  his
family  and  friends.  In  a  word,  he  is  doomed  to  un-
dergo what  is  commonly  called  loss  of  cast.

On  the  contrary,  the  rigid  observance  of  this  grand
article  of  Hindoo  faith  is  considered  in  so  high  a
light  as  to  compensate  for  every  moral  defect.
Even  tlie  most  atrocious  crimes  weigh  little  or  no-
thing in  the  balance  against  the  supposed  guilt  of  its
violation.

Murder,  theft,  or  perjury,  though  brought  home  to
the  party  by  a  judicial  sentence,  so  far  from  inducing
loss  of  cast,  is  visited  in  their  society  with  no  peculiar
mark  of  infamy  or  disgiace.


INTRODUCTION.  99

A  trifling  present  to  tlic  Brahmin,  commonly  called
Prayaschit,  with  the  performance  of  a  few  idle  cere-
monies, are  held  us  a  sufficient  atonement  for  all  those
crimes;  and  the  delinquent  is  at  once  freed  from  all
temporal  inconvenience,  as  well  as  all  dreatl  of  future
retribution.

My  reflections  upon these  solemn  truths  have  been
most  painful  for  many  years. I  have  never  ceased  to
contemplate  with  the  strongest  feelings  of  regret,  the
obstinate  adherence  of  my  countrymen  to their  fatal
system  of  idolatry,  inducing,  for  the  sake  of  propitiating
their  supposed  Deities,  the  violation  of  every  humane
and  social  feeling. And  this  in  various  instances ;  but
more  especially  in  the  dreadful  acts  of  self-destruction
and  the  immolation  of  the  nearest  relations,  under  the
delusion of conforming to  sacred religious  rites. I
have  never  ceased,  I  repeat,  to  contemplate  these  prac-
tices with  the  strongest  feelings  of  regret,  and  to  view
in  them  the  moral  debasement  of  a  race  who,  I  cannot
help thinking, are capable of  better things; whose
susceptibility,  patience,  and  mildness  of  character,  ren-
der them  worthy  of  a  better  destiny. Under  these  im-
pressions, therefore,  I  have  been  impelled  to  lay  before
them  genuine  translations  of  parts  of  their  scripture,
which  inculcates  not  only  'the  enlightened  worship  of
one  God, but the purest princi|)les  of  morality,  ac-
ct)nij)anied  with such notices  as  I  deemed  requisite  to
oppose  the  arguments  employed  by  the  Brahmins  in
defence  of  their  beloved  system. Most  earnestly  do  I
pray  that  the  whole  may,  sooner  or  later,  prove  efficient
in  producing  on the minds  of  Hindoos  in  general,  a
conviction of  the  rationality  of  believing  in  and  ador-

Ji  2


100  INTRODUCTION.

ing  the  Supreme  Being  only ;  together  with  a  complete
perception  and  practice  of  that  grand  and  comprehen-
sive moral  principle — Do  unto  others  as  ye  would  be
done  by.


UPANISHAD


THE Vi5da.


1st.  All  the  material  extension  in  this  world,  what-
soever it  may  be,  should  be  considered  as  clothed  with
the  existence  of  the  Supreme  regulating  spirit :  by  thus
abstracting  thy  mind  from  worldly  thoughts,  preserve
ihyseX^ from  self-sufficiency,  and  entertain  not  a  covetous
regard  for  property  belonging  to  any  individual.

2d.  Let  man  desire  to  live  a  whole  century,  prac-
tising, in  this  world,  during  that  time,  religious  rites  ;
because  for  such  a  selfish  mind  as  thine,  besides  the
observance  of  these  rites,  there  is  no  other  mode  the
practice  of  which  would  not  subject  thee  to  evils.

3d.  Those  that  neglect  the  contemplation  of
THE  Supreme  Spirit,  either  by  devoting  themselves  solely
to  the  performance  of  the  ceremonies  of  religion,  or  by
living  destitute  of  religious  ideas,  shall,  after  death,  as-
sume the  state  of  demons,  such  as  that  of  the  celestial
gods,  and  of  other  created  beings,  which  are  sur-
rounded WITH  the  darkness  OF  IGNORANCE.

4th.  The  Supreme  Spirit  is  one  and  unchangeable :
he  proceeds  more  rapidly  than  the  comprehending
power  of  the  mind  :  Him  no  external  sense  can  appre-
hend, for  a  knowledge  of  him  outruns  even  the  internal


102  UPANISHAD OF THE VKDA.

sense :  He,  tlioiigh  free  from  motion,  seems  to  advance,
leaving  behind  human  intellect,  which  strives  to  attain
a  knowledge  respecting  him :  He  being  the  eternal
ruler,  the  atmosphere  regulates  under  him  the  whole
system  of  the  world.

5th.  He,  the  Supreme  Being,  seems  to  move  every
where,  although  he  in  reality  has  no  motion;  he  seems
to  be  distant  from  those  who  have  no  wish  to  attain  a
knowledge  respecting  him,  and  he  seems  to  be  near  to
those  who  feel  a  ivish  to  know  him  :  but,  in  fact,  He  per-
vades the  internal  and  external  parts  of  this  whole
universe.

6th.  He,  who  perceives  the  whole  universe  in  the
Supreme  Being  {that  is,  he  who  perceives  that  the  mate-
rial existence  is  merely  dependent  upon  the  existence  of  the
Supreme  Spirit) ;  and  who  also  perceives  the  Supreme
Being  in  the  whole  universe  [that  is,  he  who  perceives  that
the  Supreme  Spirit  extends  over  all  material  extension) ;
does  not  feel  contempt  towards  any  creature  whatsoever.

Tth.  When  a  person  possessed  of  true  knowledge
conceives  that  God  extends  over  the  whole  universe
{that  is,  that  God  furnishes  every  particle  of  the  universe
with  the  light  of  his  existence),  how  can  he,  as  an  observer
of  the  real  unity  of  the  pervading  Supreme  existence,
be  aifected  with  infatuation  or  grievance?

8th.  He  overspreads  all  creatures  :  is  merely  spirit,
without  the  form  either  of  any  minute  body,  or  of  an
extended  one,  which  is  liable  to  impression  or  organi-
zation :  He^  is  pure,  perfect,  omniscient,  the  ruler  of
the  intellect,  omnipresent,  and  the  self-existent :  He  has
from  eternity  been  assigning  to  all  creatures  their  re-
spective purposes.


UPANISHAD OF THE VKDA.  103

9tli.  Tliose  observers  oi"  religious  rites  that  perform
only  the  worship  of  ilie  sacred  fire,  and  oblations  to
sages,  to  ancestors,  to  men,  and  to  other  creatures,
without  regarding  the  worship  of  celestial  gods,  shall
enter  into  the  dark  regions  :  and  those  practisers  of  re-
ligious ceremonies  who  habitually  worship  the  celestial
gods  only,  disregarding  the  worship  of  the  sacred  fire,
and  oblations  to  sages,  to  ancestors,  to  men,  and  to
other  creatures,  shall  enter  into  a  region  still  darker
than  the  former.

10th.  It  is  said  that  adoration  of  the  celestial  gods
produces  one  consequence  ;  and  that  the  performance
of  the  worship  of  sacred  fire,  and  oblations  to  sages,  to
ancestors,  to  men,  and  to  other  creatures,  produce
another:  thus  have  we  heard  from  learned  men  who
have  distinctly  explained  the  subject  to  us.

11th.  Of  those  observers  of  ceremonies  whosoever,
knowing  that  adoration  of  celestial  gods,  as  well  as  the
worship  of  the  sacred  fire,  and  oblation  to  sages,  to
ancestors,  to  men,  and  to  other  creatures,  should  be
observed  alike  by  the  same  individual,  perfoz'ins  them
both,  will,  by  means  of  the  latter,  surmount  the  ob-
stacles presented  by  natural  temptations,  and  will  attain
the  state  of  the  celestial  gods  through  the  practice  of
the  former.

12th.  Those  observers  of  religious  rites  who  worship
Prakriti*  alone,  shall  enter  into  the  dark  region :  and
those  practisers  of  religious  cei'emonics  that  are  devoted
to  worship  solely  the  prior  operating  sensitive  particle,

•  Prakriti  (or  nature)  who,  though  insonsihlc,  influenced  by  tlie
Supreme  Spirit,  operates  tliroughout  the  universe.


104  UPANISHAD OF THE VKDA.

allegorically  called  Brahm;1,  sliall  enter  into  a  region
much  more  dark  than  the  former.

13th.  It  is  said  that  one  consequence  may  be  attained
by  the  worship  of  Brahma,  and  another  by  the  ado-
ration of  Prakriti.  Thus  have  we  heard  from  learned
men,  who  have  distinctly  explained  the  subject  to  us,

14th.  Of  those  observers  of  ceremonies,  whatever
person,  knowing  that  the  adoration  of  Prakriti  and
that  of  Brahma  should  be  together  observed  by  the
same  individual,  performs  them  both,  will  by  means  of
the  latter  overcome  indigence,  and  will  attain  the  state
of  Prakriti,  through  the  practice  of  the  former.

15.  "  Thou  hast,  O  sun,"  {says  to  the  sicn  a  person
agitated  on  the  approach  of  death,  who  during  his  life
attended  to  the  performance  of  religious  rites,  neglecting
the  attainment  of  a  knowledge  of  God,)  "  thou  hast,  O
"  Sun,  concealed  by  thy  illuminating  body  the  way  to
*'  the  true  Being,  who  rules  in  thee.  Take  off  that
"  veil  for  the  guidance  of  me  thy  true  devotee."

16th.  "  O  thou"  (continues  he),  "  who  nourishest
*'  the  world,  movest  singly,  and  who  dost  regulate  the
"  whole  mundane  system — O  sun,  son  of  Cushyup,  dis-
"  perse  thy  rays  for  my  passage,  and  withdraw  thy
"  violent  light,  so  that  I  may  by  thy  grace  behold  thy
"  most  prosperous  aspect." — "  Why  shoidd  I"  (says  he,
again  retracting  himself  on  reflecting  upon  the  true  di-
"  vine  nature),  why  should  I  entreat  the  sun,  as  i  am  what
"  HE  IS,"  that  is,  "  the  Being  who  rules  in  the  sun  rules
"  also  in  me."

17th.  "  Let  my  breath,"  resumes  he,  "  be  absorbed
*'  after  death  into  the  wide  atmosphere;  and  let  this
"  my  body  be  burnt  to  ashes. O  my  intellect,  think


UPANISHAl) OF THE VKDA.  105

"  now  on  what  may  be  beneficial  to  me. O  fire,  remeni-
"  bcr  what  relii^ious  rites  I  have  hitherto  performed."

18th.  "  O  illuminating  fire,"  continues  he,  "observ-
"  ing  all  our  religious  practices,  carry  us  by  the  right
"  path  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  consequence  of  our
"deeds,  and  put  an  end  to  our  sins;  we  being  now
"  unable  to  perform  thy  various  rites,  offer  to  thee  our
"  last  salutation." '■■

•  This  example  from  the  Veds,  of  the  unhappy  af^itation  and
waverings  of  an  idolater  on  the  approach  of  death,  ought  to  make
men  reflect  seriously  on  the  miserable  consequence  of  fixing
their  mind  on  any  other  object  of  adoration  but  the  one  Supreme
Bcin<r.


A

TRANSLATION INTO ENGLISH

OF  A

SUNGSKRIT  TRACT,

INCULCATING

THE DIVINE WORSHIP;

ESTEEMED

BV THOSE WHO BELIEVE IN THE REVELATION OF THE VEDS AS MOST
APrUOl'KIATE TO THE NATURE OF

THE SUPREME BEING.


CALCUTTA

1827.


PRESCRIPT

FOB

OFFERING SUPREME WORSHIP

BY MEANS OF

THE  GAYUTREE,

THE  MOST  SACRED  TEXT  OF  THE  VEUS.

Thus  says  the  illustrious  Munoo :  "  The  three  great
"  immutable  words  (Bhooh,  Bhoovuh,  Swuh,  or  earth,
"space, heaven),  preceded by the  letter Om;*  and

•  Oiii,  when  considered  as  one  letter  uttered  by  tl>e  help  of  one
articulation, is  the  symbol  of  the  Supreme  Spirit. It  is  derived
from  the  radical  ^  ^ to  preserve,  with  the  affix  M^  . "  One
"  letter  (Om)  is  the  emblem  of  the  Most  Uighy—Mioioo,  II.  83.
•'  This  one  letter,  Om,  is  the  emblem  of  the  Supreme  Being." —
Bhuguvudgeeta. It  is  true  that  this  emblem  conveys  two  sounds,
that  of  0  and  of  to,  nevertheless  it  is  held  to  be  one  letter  in  the
above  sense  ;  and  we  meet  with  instances  even  in  the  ancient  and
modern  languages  of  Europe  that  can  justify  such  privileges  ;  such
as  s  and  Y,  reckoned  single letters  in  Greek,  and  Q,  W,  X,  in
English  and  others. But  when  considered  as a  triliteral  word
consisting  of  3f "5 ^ Om  implies  the  three  Veds,  the  three
states of human nature, the  three divisions of the universe,
and the three deities, Bruhma, Vishnu and Shivu, agents
in the creation, preservation, and destruction of this world;
or,  properly  speaking,  the  three principal  attributes  of  the Su-
preme Being  personified  as  Bruhma,  Vishnu,  and  Shivu, In  this
sense  it  implies,  in fact,  the  universe  controlled by  the  Supreme
Spirit.


110  DIVINE WOIlSHIl' IJY .MEANS OF

"  also  the  Gayutree,  consisting  of  three  measured
"  lines,  must  be  considered  as  the  entrance  to  divine
«  bliss."*

"  Whoever  shall  repeat  them  day  by  day,  for  three
*'  years,  without  negligence,  shall  approach  the  most
"  High  God,  become  free  as  air,  and  acquire  after  death
"  an  ethereal  essence."

*'  From  the  three  Veds  the  most  exalted  Bruhma
"  successively  milked  out  the  three  lines  of  this  sacred
"  text,  beginning  with  the  ivord  Tut  and  entitled  Savi-
"  tree  or  Gayutree."

Yogee  Yajnuvulkyu  also  declares,  "  By  means  of
"Om;  Bhooh,  Bhoovuh,  and  Swuh ;  and  the  Gayu-
"  tree,  collectively  or  each  of  the  three  singly,  the  most
"  High  God,  the  source  of  intellect,  should  be  wor-
"  shipped."

"  So Bruhma himself formerly defined Bhooh,

In  all  the  Hindoo  treatises  of  philosophy  (the  Poorans  or
didactic  parables  excepted),  the  methodical  collection  or  expansion
of  matter  is  understood  by  the  term  creation,  the  gradual  or  sudden
perversion  of  order  is  intended  by  destruction,  and  the  power
which  Avards  off  the  latter  from  the  former  is  meant  by  preser-
vation.

The  reason  the  authors  offer  for  this  interpretation  is,  that  they,
in  connnon  with  others,  are  able  to  acquire  a  notion  of  a  Super-
intending Power,  though  unfelt  and  invisil)le,  solely  through  their
observation  of  material  phenomena;  aud  that  should  they  reject
this  medium  of  conviction,  and  fcu'ce  upon  themselves  a  belief  of
the  production  of  matter  from  nothing;,  and  of  its  liability  to  entire
annihilation,  then  nothing  would  remain  in  the  ordinary  course  of
reasoning  to  justify  their  maintaining  any  longer  a  notion  of  that
unknown  Supreme  Superintending  Power.

•  The  last  clause  admits  of  another  interpretation,  viz.  "  must
"  be  considered  as  the  nioutii,  or  priiiciixil  part  of  the  Veds."


THK GAYUTHKF..  Ill

"  Blioovuh,  Swiili,  (Earth,  Space,  Heaven)  as  the
"  body  of  the  Supreme  Intelligence;  hence  these  three
"  words  are  called  the  Defined."

[Those  that  maintain  the  doctrine  of  the  universe
being  the  body  of  the  Supreme  Spirit,  found  their
opinion  upon  the  following  considerations  :

1st.  Tliat  tliere  are  innumerable  millions  of  bodies,
properly  speaking  worlds,  in  the  infinity  of  space.

•idly,  'i'hat  they  move,  mutually  preserving  their
regular  intervals  between  each  other,  and  that  they
maintain  each  other  by  producing  effects  primary  or
secondary,  as  the  members  of  the  body  support  each
other.

3dly.  That  those  bodies,  when  viewed  collectively,
are  considered  one;  in  the  same  way  as  the  members
of  an  animal  body  or  of  a  machine,  taken  together,
constitute  one  whole.

4thly.  Any  material  body  whose  members  move
methodically,  and  afford  support  to  each  other  in  a
manner  sufficient  for  their  preservation,  must  be  ac-
tuated either  by  an  internal  guiding  power  named  the
soul,  or  by  an  external  one  as  impulse.

5thly.  It  is  maintained  that  body  is  as  infinite  as
space,  because  body  is  found  to  exist  in  space  as  far  as
our  perceptions,  with  the  naked  eye  or  by  the  aid  ol"
instruments,  enable  us  to  penetrate.

Gthly.  If  body  be  infinite  as  space,  the  power  that
guides  its  members  must  be  internal,  and  therefore
styled  the  Soul,  and  not  external,  since  there  can  be  no
existence,  even  in  thought,  without  the  idea  of  location.

Hence  this  sect  suppose  that  the  Supreme  all-per-
vading [)o\ver  is  the  soul  of  tlie  univeise, both  existin"-


112  DIVINE WonSHII' BV ."MEANK OF

from  eternity  to  eternity ;  and  that  the  former  has
somewhat  the  same  influence  over  the  universe  as  the
individual  soul  has  over  tlie  individual  body.

They  argue  further,  that  in  proportion  as  the  inter-
nally impelled  body  is  excellent  in  its  construction,  the
directing  soul  must  be  considered  excellent.  There-
fore, inasmuch  as  the  universe  is  infinite  in  extent,  and
is  arranged  with  infinite  skill,  the  soul  by  which  it  is
animated  must  be  infinite  in  every  perfection.]

He  (Yajnuvulkyu)  again  expounds  the  meaning  of
the  Gayutree  in  three  passages  :

"  We,  say  the  adorers  of  the  Most  High,  meditate
"  on  the  Supreme  and  omnipresent  internal  spirit  of
*'  this  splendid  Sun.  We  meditate  on  the  same
"  Supreme  spirit,  earnestly  sought  for  by  such  as  dread
"  further  mortal  birth  ;  who,  residing  in  every  body  as
"  the  all-pervading  soul  and  controller  of  the  mind,
"  constantly  directs  our  intellect  and  intellectual  ope-
*''  rations  io'^ardiS  the  acquisition  of  virtue,  wealth,  phy-
"  sical  enjoyment,  and  final  beatitude."

So,  at  the  end  of  the  Gayutree,  the  utterance  of
the  letter  Om  is  commanded  by  the  sacred  passage
cited  by  Goonu-Vishnoo :  "  A  Brahmun  shall  in
"  every  instance  pronounce  Om,  at  the  beginning  and
"at  the  end;  for  unless  the  letter  Om  precede,  the
"  desirable  consequence  will  fail ;  and  unless  it  follow,  it
"  will  not  be  long  retained."

That  the  letter  Om,  which  is  pronounced  at  the
beginning  and  at  the  end  of  the  Gayutree,  expressly  sig-
nifies the  Most  High,  is  testified  by  the  Ved  :  viz.
*'  Thus  through  the  help  of  Om,  you  contemplate  the
"  Supreme  Spirit." {Moonduk  Oojmnishud.)


TIIC GAYUTREE.  113

Munoo  also  calls  to  niiiul  the  purpoi't  of  the  same
passage :  "  All  rites  ordained  in  the  Ved,  such  as  ob-
"  hition  to  fire  and  solemn  offerings,  pass  away;  but
"  the  letter  Om  is  considered  that  which  passes  not
"  away;  since  it  is  a  symbol  of  the  most  High  the  Lord
"  of  created  beings."

"  By  the  sole  repetition  of  Om  and  the  Gayutree,
"  a  Brahmun  may  indubitably  attain  beatitude.  Let
"  him  perform  or  not  perform  any  other  religious  rites,
"  he  being  a  friend  to  all  creatures  is  styled  a  knower  of
«  God.'

So  Yogee  Yajnuvulkyu  says :  "  God  is  declared  to
"  be  the  object  signified,  and  Om  to  be  the  term  sig-
"  nif\'ing:  By  means  of  a  knowledge  even  of  the  letter
"  Om,  the  symbol,  God  becomes  propitious."

In  the  Bhuguvudgeeta :  "  Om*  (the  cause),  Tut  t
"  (that),  Sut|  (existing),  these  are  considered  three
"  kinds  of  description  of  the  supreme  Being."

•  "  Om"  implies  the  Being  on  whom  all  objects,  either  visible  or
invisible,  depend  in  their  formation,  continuance,  and  change.

t  "  Tut"  implies  the  being  that  can  be  described  only  by  the  de-
monstrative pronoun  "  that,"  and  not  by  any  particular  defination.

X  "  Sut"  implies  what  "  truly  exists"  in  one  condition  inde-
pendent of  others.  These  three  terms  collectively  imply,  that  the
object  contemplated  through  "  Om"  can  be  described  only  as
"  that"  which  "  is  existing."

The  first  term  "  Om"  bears  a  striking  similarity,  both  in
sound  and  application,  to  the  participle  "  a/v"  of  the  verb  "i/^i**"  to
he,  in  Greek  ;  and  it  is  therefore  not  very  improbable  that  one
might  have  had  its  origin  from  the  other.  As  to  the  similarity  in
sound,  it  is  too  obvious  to  require  illustration  ;  and  a  reference  to
the  Septuagint  will  shew  that  um  like  "  Om"  is  applied  to  Jehova
the  ever  existing  (Jod. E.\odu8, iii.  14. "  Ey«  «/^/  o  fiir." '•  o  n*

I


114  mviNF.  woiisHiP  r,Y  means  or

In  the  concluding  part  of  the  commentary  on  the
Gayutree  by  the  ancient  Bhuttu  Goonu-Vishnoo,  the
meaning  of  the  passage  is  briefly  given  by  the  same
author.

"  He,  the  spirit  who  is  thus  described,  guides  us.
"  He,  as  the  soul  of  the  three  mansions  {viz.  earth,
"  space,  and  heaven),  of  water,  light,  moisture,  and
"  the  individual  soul,  of  all  moving  and  fixed  objectsj
*'  and  of  Bruhma,  Vishnoo,  Shivu,  the  Sun,  and  other
"  gods  of  various  descriptions,  the  Most  High  God,
"  illuminating,  like  a  brilliant  lamp,  the  seven  man-
"  sions,  having  carried  my  individual  soul,  as  spirit,  to
"  the  seventh  heaven,  the  mansion  of  the  worshippers
"  of  God  called  the  True  mansion,  the  residence  of
"  Bruhma,  absorbs  it  (my  soul),  through  his  divine
"  spirit,  into  his  own  divine  essence.  The  worshipper,
"  thus  contemplating,  shall  repeat  the  Gayutree."

Thus  it  is  said  by  Rughoonundun  Bhuttacharyu,  a
modern  expounder  of  law  in  the  country  of  Gourr,
when  interpreting  the  passage  beginning  with  "  Pru-
nuvu  Vyahritibhyam :" — "  By  means  of  pronouncing
"  Om  and  Bhooh,  Bhoovuh,  Swuh,  and  the  Gayutree,
"  all  signifying  the  Most  High,  and  reflecting  on  their
"  meaning,  the  worship  of  God  shall  be  performed,  and
"  his  grace  enjoyed."

And  also  in  the  Muha  Nirvan  Tuntru :  "  In  like
"  manner,  among  all  texts  the  Gayutree  is  declared  to
"  be  the  most  excellent:  the  worshipper  shall  repeat  it
"  when  inwardly  pure,  reflecting  on  the  meaning  of  it.
"  If  the  Gayutree  be  repeated  with  Om  and  the  Vyah-
"  riti  {viz.  Bhooh,  Bhoovuh,  Swuh),  it  excels  all  other
"  theistical  knowledge,  in  producing  immediate  bliss.


THE  OAYUTREE.  115

*'  Whosoever  repeats  it  in  ihc  morning  or  evening  or
"  {lining  the  night,  while  meditating  on  the  Supreme
"  Being,  being  freed  from  all  past  sins,  shall  not  be
*'  inclined  to  act  unrighteously.  The  worshipper  shall
*'  first  pronounce  Om,  then  the  three  Vyahritis,  and
*'  afterwards  the  Gayutree  of  three  lines,  and  shall
*'  finish  it  with  the  term  Om.  We  meditate  on  liim
'•  from  whom  proceed  the  continuance,  perishing,  and
*'  production  of  all  things  ;  who  spreads  over  the  three
'*  mansions ;  that  eternal  Spirit,  who  inwardly  rules  the
*•  sun  and  all  living  creatures;  most  desirable  and  all-
"  pervading ;  and  who,  residing  in  intellect,  directs  the
"  operations  of  the  intellectual  power  of  all  of  us  mate-
*'  rial  beings.  The  worshipper,  by  repeating  every  day
"  these  three  texts  expressing  the  above  meaning,
**  attains  all  desirable  objects,  without  any  other  reli-
"  gious  observance  or  austerity.  '  One  only  without  a
*'  '  second'  is  the  doctrine  maintained  by  all  the  Oopuni-
"  shuds:  that  imperishable  and  incomprehensible  Being
"  is  understood  by  these  three  texts.  Wlioever  repeats
"  them  once,  or  ten,  or  a  hundred  times,  either  alone  or
"  with  many  others,  attains  bliss  in  a  proportionate
"  degree.  After  he  has  completed  the  repetition,  he
"  shall  again  meditate  on  Ilim  who  is  one  only  without
*' a  second,  and  all-pervading:  thereby  all  religious
*'  observances,  though  not  performed,  shall  have  been
"  virtually  performed.  Any  one,  whether  a  house-
*'  holder  or  not,  whether  a  Brahmun  or  not,  all  have'
*'  equal  right  to  the  use  of  these  texts  as  found  in  the
*'  Tuntru."

Here  On,  in  the  first  instance,  signifies  that  Supreme
Being  who  is  the  sole  cause  of  the  continuance,  perish-

i2


116  niVINE WORSHIP BY MEANS OF

ill!.',  and  jn'odiiction  of  all  worltls,  "  lie  from  whom
"  these  creatures  are  produced,  by  whom  those  that  are
"  produced  exist,  and  to  whom  after  death  they  return,
"  is  the  Supreme  Being,  whom  thou  dost  seek  to  know."
— The  text  of  the  Ved  quoted  by  the  revered  Shunkur
Acharyu  in  the  Commentary  on  the  first  text  of  the
Vedant  Durshun.

The  doubt  whether  or  not  that  cause  signified  by
"  Om"  exists  separately  from  these  effects,  having
arisen,  the  second  text,  Bhoor  Bhoovuh  Swuh,  is  next
read,  explaining  that  God,  ilie  sole  cause,  eternally
exists  pervading  the  universe,  "  Glorious,  invisible,
"  perfect,  unbegotten,  pervading  all,  internally  and
"  externally  is  He  the  Supreme  spirit." — Moonduk  Oopu-
nishud.

It  being  still  doubted  whether  or  not  livinfj  creatures
large  and  small  in  the  world  act  independently  of  that
sole  cause,  the  Gayutree,  as  the  third  in  order,  is  read.
"  Tut  Suvitoor  vurenyum,  Bhurgo  devusyu  dheemuhi,
"  dhiyo  yo  nuh  pruchoduyat."  We  meditate  on  that
indescribable  spirit  inwardly  ruling  the  splendid  Sun,
the  express  object  of  woi'ship.  He  does  not  only  in-
wardly rule  the  sun,  but  he,  the  spirit,  residing  in  and
inwardly  ruling  all  us  material  beings,  directs  mental
operations  towards  their  objects.  "  He  who  inwardly
"  rules  the  sun  is  the  same  immortal  spirit  who  inwardly
"  rules  thee."  {Chhandoggu  Oopunishud.) — "  God  resides
"  in  the  heart  of  all  creatures. ' — Bhugiivudgeeta.

The  object  signified  by  the  three  texts  being  one,
their  repetition  collectively  is  enjoined.  The  following
is  their  meaning  in  brief.

"  We  meditate  on  the  cause  of  all,  pervading  all,  and


Tin: GAYUTilEE.  117

"  internally  lulini;  all  material  ol)jeels,  tioiii  the  sun
"  down  to  ns  and  others."

[The  rollo\vin<j;  is  a  literal  translation  of  the  Gayutree
according  to  the  Enrjlish  idiom:  "We  meditate  on
"  that  Supreme  Spirit  of  the  splendid  sun  who  directs
"  our  understandings."

The  passage,  however,  may  be  rendered  somewhat
difl'erently  by  transferring  the  demonstrative  "  that"
from  the  words  "  Supreme  Spirit"  to  the  words
*'  splendid  sun."  But  this  does  not  appear  fully  to
correspond  with  the  above  interpretation  of  Yajnu-
vulkyu.]


While  translating  this  essay  on  the  Gayutree,  1
deemed  it  proper  to  refer  to  the  meaning  of  the  text
as  given  by  Sir  William  Jones  ;  whose  talents,  acqui-
sitions, virtuous  life,  and  impartial  research,  have  ren-
dered his  memory  an  object  of  love  and  veneration  to
all.  I  feel  so  much  delighted  by  the  excellence  of  the
translation,  or  rather  the  paraphrase  given  by  that  il-
lustrious character,  that  with  a  view  to  connect  his
name  and  his  explanation  of  the  passage  with  this  hum-
ble treatise,  I  take  the  liberty  of  quoting  it  here.

The  interpretation  in  question  is  as  follows :

"  THE GAYATIU, OK HOLIEST VERSE OF THE  VEDAS."

"  Let  US  adore the  supremacy  of  that  divine  sun,*
**  the  godheadf-  wiio  illuminates  all,  who  recreates  all,

*  Opposed  to  tlio  \isil)lc  Iiiiiiiii;irv.

+ lifia/yis,  a  word  coiisistiiifj  <>(  tlino  toiisonants,  dfii\od  (Vom
li/iii,  to  sliinc;  mm,  to  deli^^lit;  </'iiii,  to  inovf.


118  DIVINE WOnSHIP,  &c.

"  from  whom  all  proceetl,  to  whom  all  must  return,
"  whom  we  invoke  to  direct  our  understandings  aright
"  in  our  progress  toward  his  holy  seat.

■X-  -K-  »  ir  *  «-

"  What  the  sun  and  light  are  to  this  visible  world,
**  that  are  the  Supreme  good  and  truth  to  the  intel-
"  lectual  and  invisible  universe ;  and,  as  our  corporeal
"  eyes  have  a  distinct  perception  of  objects  enlightened
**  by  the  sun,  thus  our  souls  acquire  certain  knowledge,
"  by  meditating  on  the  light  of  truth,  which  emanates
*'  from  the  Being  of  beings :  that  is  the  light  by  which
"  alone  our  minds  can  be  directed  in  the  path  to  bea-
«  titude/'


A  DEFENCE

or

HINDOO THEISM,

ly ui:i>LY TO  Tin-:

AITACK  OF  AN  ADVOCATE FOR  IDOJ.ATRV
AT  MADRAS.


CALCUTTA

1827.


PREFACE


The  following  sheets  contain  some  remarks  in  reply
to  a  publication  which  appeared  in  the  "  Madras
Courier"  of  November  last,  under  the  signature  of  San-
kara  Sastri,  in  answer  to  my  abridgment  of  the  Vedant
and  my  Preface  to  the  translation  of  the  Ishopanishad,  as
well  as  to  my  Introduction  to  the  Cenopanishad.  The
length  to  which  the  arguments  of  the  controvertist  ex-
tended having  precluded  their  appearance  in  the  Cal-
cutta prints,  I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  reprinting  them
along  with  my  own  observations  on  them,  in  order  that
the  discussion  may  be  brought  fully  before  the  public,
to  whose  decision  the  merits  of  the  question  must  now
be  left.


Ti)  THE

EDITOR  OF  THE  MADRAS  COURIER.


Sir,

On  reading  your  paper,  dated  19th  November  1816,
I  found  a  publication  in  it  taken  from  a  Calcutta  paper,
respecting  the  theological  doctrines  of  Ram  Mohun
Roy,  on  which  I  shall  proceed  to  make  a  few  obser-
vations.

In  the  first  part  of  this  publication  it  is  stated :  "  this
"  eminently  learned  and  indefatigable  reformer  is  pro-
**  ceeding,  with  unremitting  exertions,  in  the  laudable
"  work  of  enlightening  his  countrymen,  and  reclaiming
"  them  from  their  debasing  system  of  idolatry.  Having,
"  for  the  instruction  of  the  Hindu  population  of  these
"  provinces,  translated  into  Bengalese  the  principal
"  chapters  of  the  Veds,  he  has  now  done  a  few  of  them
"  into  English,  for  the  gratification  of  such  European
"  gentlemen  as  interest  themselves  in  the  improvement
"  of  their  fellow-creatures."

In  a  former  paper,  also,  it  was  stated  that  tlie  learned
person  here  mentioned,  had  "  discovered"  that  the
doctrine  of  the  Unity  of  the  Godhead  was  taught  in
the  Puranas  and  Tantras  as  well  as  the  Vedas.

Tiie  worship  of  llic  All-pervading  and  Supreme
Beinij  is  the  oriy;inal  doctrine  lounded  on  I  he  V^edai^,


124-  A DEFENCE OF

Purnas,  Sec,  and  is  known  in  general  in  this,  as  well  as
in  the  othei'  parts  of  the  Peninsula  : — this  faith  is  known
by  the  name  of  Adwaitam,  which  being  derived  from
dwita  duality,  by  affixing  the  privative  a  is  the  opposite
of  dwiatam,  the  term  usually  applied  to  the  belief  that
admits  of  more  than  one  first  cause :  it  is  impossible  to
say  when  it  was  first  revealed,  yet,  among  various  con-
jectures, the  probability  is,  that  the  revelation  of  this
faith  is  to  be  ascribed  to  Brahma,  the  ci-eating  power
alone,  and  that  it  is  as  ancient,  therefore,  as  the  exist-
ence of  the  world.

People  of  limited  understanding,  not  being  able  to
comprehend  the  system  of  worshipping  the  Invisible
Being,  have  adopted  doctrines,  and  by  that  means  con-
founded weak  minds  in  remote  times  ;  but  due  punish-
ment was  inflicted  on  those  heretics,  and  religion  was
very  well  established  throughout  India  by  the  Reverend
Senkaracharyam  and  his  disciples,  who,  however,  did
not  pretend  to  reform  or  discover  them,  or  assume  the
title  of  a  reformer  or  discoverer.

There  are  an  immense  number  of  books,  namely,
Vedas,  Sastras,  Puranas  Agams,  Tan tr as- Sutras,  and
Itihas,  besides  numerous  commentaries  compiled  by
many  famous  theologians,  both  of  ancient  and  modern
times,  respecting  the  doctrine  of  the  worship  of  the
Invisible  Being.  They  are  not  only  written  in  Sanscrit,
but  rendered  into  Pracruta,  Tenugu,  Tamil,  Guzerat,
Hindoostani,  Mai'atta,  Canari,  &c.  languages,  and  im-
memorially  studied  by  a  great  part  of  the  Hindu  nation
attached  to  the  Adwaitam  faith,  and  so  our  ancestors
left  no  room  to  any  person  to  make  "  discoveries  "  on
the  subject,  or  "  io  proceed  with  unremitting  exertion  in


HINDOO THEISM.  125

"  the  laudable  work  of  enlightening  his  countrymen^  and
"  redaimimj  them  from  their  debasing  system  of  idolatry:*

From  my  stating  these  doctrines  to  have  been  an-
ciently translated,  I  beg  it  may  not  be  construed  that
those  translations  are  universally  admitted.  On  the
contrary,  they  are  rejected  by  some  and  admitted  by
others,  for  reason  recited  as  follows  : —

First.— If  the  reader  of  them  doubts  the  truth  of  the
principles  explained  in  the  translation,  the  divine  know-
ledge he  ac(piired  by  them  becomes  a  doubtful  fliith,
and  that  doubt  cannot  be  removed  unless  he  compare
them  with  the  original  work  ;  in  that  case  the  know-
ledge he  lastly  actpiired  becomes  superior,  and  his  study
in  the  first  instance  becomes  useless,  and  the  cause  of
repeating  the  same  work.

Second.- Reading  the  Scriptures  in  the  vulgar  lan-
guages is  prohibited  by  the  Puranas,

Third. — These  translations  are  omitted  by  others  as
useful  and  interesting  in  general,  and  particularly  to
those  who  have  not  sufficient  knowledge  in  Sanscrit.

Not  wishing  to  trouble  my  readers  with  the  obser-
vations necessary  to  reconcile  these  three  controversial
points,  I  think  it  proper  to  leave  it  to  them  to  judf^e
which  of  them  is  admissible.

The  Sutra  13hashyam,  or  the  Commentary  on  the
Theological  Sutrams  of  Veda  Vyasa,  and  those  on  the
Uponishets,  &c.  are  in  this  part  of  India  constantly
read  and  taught  by  the  Brahmins  all  over  the  country.
Lectures  and  themes  are  delivered  in  the  various  au-
diences frequently  and  purposely  held  by  the  Rajahs,
Pundits,  and  other  respectable  men  in  the  country.
The  ascribing  of  the  "discovery"  of  a  religious  tenet


T26  A DEFF.NCE OF

SO  well  known  and  celebrated,  to  a  learned  native,
cannot  therefore  be  here  admitted  by  a  Hindu,  and  he
will  not  be  more  astonished  at  it  than  he  would  at
hearing  that  a  man  had  one  head  and  two  eyes.

Previously  to  my  proceeding  to  make  any  observa-
tions respecting  idolatrous  worship,  I  think  it  proper
to  state  how  the  Supreme  Being  is  defined.

The  Vedas,  Purans,  Sec.  say  that  this  Being  is  infinite,
eternal,  self-intelligent,  indivisible,  inconsumable,  per-
vading, universal,  inconceivable,  invisible,  unalterable,
and  almighty.  It  is  not  subject  either  to  the  mind  or
senses.  The  translation  of  the  following  Sanscrit  slo-
kanis  will  serve  to  form  an  idea  of  its  nature.

"  He  is  eternal,  he  is  the  splendour  of  splendour.
"  He  is  supreme  and  glorious.

"  The  sun  shines  not  with  respect  to  him,  nor  the
"  moon  nor  fire."

"  Thou  hearest  without  ears,
"  Thou  smellest  without  a  nose,
"  Thou  walkest  without  legs,
"  Thou  seest  without  eyes,
"  Thou  tastest  without  a  tongue.
"  Thou  hast  no  gotram,  nor  birth,  nor  name,  nor
"  shape,  nor  state,  nor  place.

"  Though  thou  art  thus,  yet  thou  art  the  Lord  of
"  the  earth  and  the  heaven.

"  In  the  same  manner  as  the  illusive  appearance  of
"  water,  produced  by  the  reflection  of  the  rays  in  the
"  mirage  :

*'  So  the  universe  shines  in  theC;  the  real  and  intel-
"  ligent  spirit."


HINDOO THEISM.  127

"  Thou  canst  not  be  known  cither  b}'  the  organs  or
"  by  the  mind,  as  tlioii  art  self-resplendent  and  distinct
"  from  elemental  being.

"  If  ignorance  be  annihilated  by  knowledge,  as  dark-
"  ness  by  the  dawn,  thy  light  will  shine  like  the  sun."


"  The  whole  had  its  birth  in  thee,
"  The  whole  rests  in  thee.

"  The  whole  obtains  its  destruction  in  thee,  like
"  bubbles  in  water."

The  difficulty  of  attaining  the  knowledge  of  this  in-
visible and  Almighty  Spirit,  is  evident  from  the  preced-
ing verses,  and  all  the  Scriptures  and  other  authorities
affirm  that  the  soul,  propelled  by  Maya  towards  ex-
ternal objects,  and  obscured  by  the  ignorance  of  indi-
viduality, cannot  obtain  mocaham  (salvation)  unless  it
is  freed  from  every  impression  either  of  vice  and  vir-
tue, the  illusions  of  Maya;  and  until  that  time,  it  will
continue  to  undergo  various  transmigrations,  and  par-
take of  misery  and  happiness,  the  result  of  its  vices  and
virtues,  in  the  terrestrial,  celestial,  and  infernal  worlds.

The  eating  food,  slumbering,  fear,  love,  and  other
animal  functions  and  propensities,  are  common  and
natural  both  to  the  human  and  brute  creation ;  they
both  seek  for  food  and  are  subject  to  slumber.  Out  of
the  fear  of  death,  Sec.  they  either  attack  or  fly  when
opposed  by  an  enemy;  but  though  the  intellectual
powers  of  both  races  are  the  same  in  general,  and  en-
tirely directed  towards  external  objects,  yet  one  human
race  is  endowed  with  the  powers  of  reason  and  deter-
mination. These,  if  applied,  serve  to  reason — who  is


128  A DEFENCE OF

himself?  from  whence  he  is  come?  what  is  the  con-
nexion between  him  and  the  Supreme  Being  ?  how  the
spirit  in  him  is  illusively  inspired,  and  illusively  beheld,
and  illusively  divided  from  the  pervading  spirit.

The  mental  powers  of  every  corporeal  being  are,
from  the  time  of  its  birth,  attracted  by  external  ob-
jects, and  they  cannot  be  inverted  towards  the  indivi-
dual spirit,  or  the  object  meant  by  the  word  "  I,"
without  great  labour,  practice,  mental  exercise,  puri-
fication, and  the  divine  assistance,  or  favouring  grace,
of  the  Deity,  without  which  a  complete  knowledge  of
his  atmd  or  spirit  cannot  be  obtained.

It  is  said  in  the  Scripture,  that  the  person  void  of
this  knowledge  does  not  only  remain  self-ignorant,  but
it  is  decreed  by  the  authorities  that  he  is  a  self-deceiver,
and  his  ignorance  finally  proves  fatal  to  himself.

In  order  to  save  the  human  race  from  the  utter  de-
struction occasioned  by  self-ignorance,  Brahamii  de-
livered the  divine  precepts  in  the  Vedas,  both  for  the
use  of  men  of  enlightened  and  limited  understanding.
These  precepts  are  divided  into  two  parts,  namely,
Carmocandam,  Or  works,  and  Gnanacandam,  or  know-
ledge, or  faith,  as  European  writers  express  it ;  these
words  I  understand  to  mean  essentially  the  same  thing,
for  what  is  faith  without  adequacy  of  knowledge  ?

The  first  prescribes  the  mode  of  performing  Yagam
or  Sacrifice,  bestowing  Danam  or  Alms,  treats  of  pe-
nance, fasting,  and  of  worshipping  the  Incarnations,  in
which  the  Supreme  Deity  has  appeared  on  the  eartli
for  divine  purposes.  The  ceremonies  performed  ac-
cording to  these  modes,  forsaking  their  fruits,  are
affirmed  by  the  Vcdas  to  be  mental  exercises  and  men-


HINDOO THEISM.  129

tal  purifications,  necessary  to  obtain the  knowledge  of
the  divine  nature.

Tile  latter  part  treats  on  Tiieology  and  Metaphysics,
on  the  nature  of  spirit,  of  mental  abstraction,  the  sub-
jugation of  the  passions,  &c.,  the  meaning  of  which  the
student  must  attain  by  reasoning,  and  must  impress  it
well  on  the  understanding  by  reflection  ;  he  must  be-
hold the  Supreme  Spirit  alike  in  all  things ;  he  must
constantly  contemplate  the  union  of  his  own  atmd^  or
soul,  with  the  Universal  Supreme  Spirit,  which  he
must  consider  unconnected  though  in  all  connections,
and  inactive  in  all  things  in  action,  and  must  compre-
hend the  whole  universe  in  him  alone.  The  Gnani,  or
the  man  that  has  attained  divine  knowledge  in  this
manner,  should  be  unaffected  in  all  his  actions ;  the
same  in  praise  and  insult,  in  friendship  and  in  enmity,
in  honour  and  dishonour,  in  pleasure  and  pain,  in  cold
and  heat;  all  his  passions  should  be  subdued,  and  his
mind  constantly  'fixed  and  united  with  the  universal
Spirit.

I  must  here  introduce  another  extract  from  the  pub-
lication to  which  I  have  referred.  "  We  understand  that
"  on  all  the  great  Hindoo  festivals  the  Friendly  Society,
"  established  by  him,  holds  meetings,  not  only  with  the
"  view  that  its  members  may  keep  aloof  from  the  idola-
"  trous  ceremonies  of  their  countrymen,  but  also  to
"  renew  and  strengthen  their  own  faith  in  the  purer
"  doctrines  which  they  affirm  to  be  establi^iied  in  the
"  Veds.  At  these  meetings  they  have  music  and  danc-
'  ing,  as  well  as  their  more  superstitious  bretliren ;
"  but  the  songs  are  all  expressive  of  the  peculiar  tenets
"  of  the  Monotheists."


130  A DEFENCE OF

It  is  evident  from  wliat  is  said  above  of  the  precepts
in  the  Vedam,  that  divine  knowledge  cannot  be  ob-
tained without  purifying  the  soul,  and  such  purification
cannot  take  place  without  performing  Yagams,  bestow-
ing Danams,  by  penance,  worship,  reading  theology,
and  comprehending  and  reasoning  on  its  meaning;  but
the  holding  of  meetings,  j)laying  music,  singing  songs  and
dancing^  which  are  ranked  among  carnal  pleasures,  are
not  ordained  by  scripture  as  mental  purification.

It  may  be  asked  why  purification  cannot  be  attained
by  these  songs,  music,  &c.  since  they  are  all  intended
to  be  expressive  of  the  tenets  of  Monotheism  ?  I  an-
swer, that  the  completion  of  every  undertaking  in  the
world  must  take  place  by  its  respective  means:  for
example,  the  thirst  must  be  quenched  by  water,  milk,
and  such  like,  but  not  with  sand.  These,  the  aforesaid
means  for  quenching  thirst,  are  known  by  human  ex-
perience and  usage :  but  the  means  to  purify  the  un-
known and  invisible  powers  of  the  intellect  cannot  be
ascertained  by  human  understanding,  but  by  the  pre-
cepts revealed  by  divine  wisdom.  Therefore,  the  set-
ting aside  the  proper  means,  such  as  Yagam,  penance,
worship,  &c.,  and  substituting  dancing,  music,  and
songs,  appear  in  no  way  preferable  by  any  doctrine.

What  has  hitherto  been  said,  applies  only  to  the  ob-
servations of  the  writer  in  the  Calcutta  Paper,  for
which  Ram  Mohun  Roy  cannot  be  answerable;  1
must,  however,  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  "  Inti'o-
"  duction,"  as  it  is  stated  to  be,  to  his  "  translation  of
"  one  of  the  chapters  of  the  Sama  Veda."  The  author
states  that  it  is  "  a  general  characteristic  of  each  Ved,
"  that  the  primary  chapters  of  each  branch  treat of


inxnOO THEISM.  lol

"  astronomy,  medicine,  arms,  and  other  arts  and
"  sciences."  All  the  Brahmans  in  tiiis  part  of  the
Peninsula  are  stndyin<r  the  same  \x'dams  as  are  read
in  tile  otiier  part  of  the  country,  but  I  do  not  recollect
to  have  read  or  heard  of  one  treating  on  astronomy,
medicine,  or  arms :  the  first  is  indeed  an  Angan  of  the
Vedam,  but  the  two  latter  are  taught  in  separate
iSastras.

The  author  continues — "  they  also  exhibit  allegori-
"  cal  representation  of  the  attributes  of  the  Supreme
"  Being  by  means  of  earthly  objects,"  (kc;  he  then  pro-
ceeds to  state  that  the  worship  of  these,  as  explained  in
the  Veds,  was  "  inculcated  only  for  the  sake  of  those
"  whose  limited  understandings  rendered  them  inca-
"  pable  of  comprehending  and  adoring  the  invisible
"  Supreme  Being."  lie  does  not  appear  satisfied,  how-
ever, with  this  explanation  ;  he  seems  to  think  it  may
not  be  thought  sufficient  to  reconcile  the  doctrines  of
the  two  portions  of  the  Veds,  and  he  admits,  that,  if  it
is  not,  "  the  whole  work  must  not  only  be  stripped
"  of  its  authority,  but  looked  upon  as  altogether  un-
"  intelligible."  To  say  the  least  of  this  passage,  Ram
MoHUN  Roy  appears  quite  as  willing  to  abandon  as  to
defend  the  Scripture  of  his  religion:  but  let  us  examine
if  it  be  necessary  to  abandon  them  so  readily.

The  attributes  in  the  preceding  extract  are  affirmed
by  the  Vedas  to  be  the  creating,  protecting,  ck-stroying,
and  the  like  powers  or  incarnations  of  the  Supreme
Being.  Their  worship,  under  various  representations,
by  means  of  consecrated  objects,  is  prescribed  by  the
scripture  to  the  human  race  by  way  of  mental  exercise,
who,  owin<r  to  the  wavinu'  nature  of  their  minds,  cannot

K 2


132


A nr.FENCE OF


without  assistance,  fix  their  thouglits  on  the  incom-
prehensible and  Ahiiighty  Being.  Though  the  repre-
sentations of  the  attributes  are  allegorical,  yet  the  per-
vading nature  of  the  Supreme  Being  in  the  attributes,
in  their  representations,  and  in  the  objects  dedicated  to
them,  is  not  allegorical,  and  I  regard  the  same  as  an
ether  diffused  throughout  ten  thousand  objects.  If
this  reasoning  be  admitted,  why  cannot  the  prayer
offered  to  the  All-pervading  Spirit  in  the  dedicated
object  be  considered  as  prayer  to  the  universal  and
Almighty  God? — If  one  part  of  the  ocean  be  adored,
the  whole  ocean  is  adored.

If  a  person  be  desirous  to  visit  an  earthly  prince,  he
ought  to  be  introduced,  in  the  first  instance,  by  his
ministers,  but  not  of  himself  to  rush  in  upon  him  at
once,  regardless  of  offending  him ;  should  a  man  wish
to  ascend  a  flight  of  stairs,  he  ought  to  proceed  step  by
step,  and  not  to  leap  up  several  at  a  time,  so  as  to  en-
danger the  wounding  of  his  legs.  In  like  manner  tlie
grace  of  God  ought  to  be  obtained  by  degrees,  through
the  worship  of  his  attributes.

I  have  further  to  observe,  by  way  of  example,  that
although  the  milk  pervades  the  whole  body  of  a  cow,
yet  it  is  to  be  drawn  only  from  the  teats  ;  so  though  the
Supreme  Being  pervades  all,  yet  his  mercy  is  obtained
through  the  worship  of  his  attributes,  to  which  a  special
energy  is  ascribed  by  the  Scripture.  The  worshippers
are  assured  by  the  Vedas  that  the  particular  energy  in-
herent in  the  attributes  will  crown  their  wishes,  pro-
vided their  zeal  and  their  faith  be  unaltered  and
steady.

The  objections  to  worshipping  the  attributes  are  not


HINDOO THEISM.  133

satisfactorily  stated  by  the  author,  but  it  seems  that  it
is  his  general  idea  that  it  is  not  a  worship  directly  to
the  Supreme  Being,  and  that  it  is  not  prescribed  in  the
Scriptures  of  certain  nations.  As  to  the  last  objection
it  is  clear,  however,  that  the  worship  of  the  attributes
is  not  merely  not  rejected,  but  prescribed  by  the  Scrip-
tures of  our  religion  ;  here  is  the  diU'erence,  and  as
the  deliverers  of  the  Scripture,  of  any  religion,  are  not
of  a  nature  to  be  seen  or  spoken  to  for  tiie  purpose  of
proving  their  validity,  the  truth  of  either  opinion  can
only  be  established  by  analogy,  inference,  and  other
modes  of  logic.

If  the  worship  of  the  attributes  be  rejected,  what
means  can  be  substituted  to  inculcate  the  truth  and  to
enlighten  the  understanding  of  an  indolent  man,  who
on  being  told  that  the  God  is  all-pervading  and  in-
visible, thinks  him  to  be  like  the  air,  or  die  sky ;  or
hearing  that,  by  a  figure  of  speech,  he  is  called  the
splendour  of  splendour,  believes  that  he  is  of  a  lumi-
nous nature?  If  these  helps  be  denied  him,  will  he
not  at  last  become  ignorant  of  the  true  fiith,  or  be  in-
duced to  follow  atheistical  doctrines,  rather  than  to
trouble  his  head  to  attain  the  difficult  knowledge  of  the
divine  nature*

I  have  lastly  to  observe  that,  according  to  the  Chris-
tian doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  or  the  three  persons  in
the  Godhead,  though  one  and  united  yet  are  person-
ally, or  occasionally,  distinguished,  and  prayers  offered
to  the  Godhead  are  concluded  by  the  words  "  through
"  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour."  I  believe,  though  I  may
be  mistaken,  that  the  Saviour  should  be  considered  a
personification  of  the  mercy  and  kindness  of  God  (I


134  A DEFKNCE OF

mean  actual,  not  allegorical  personification;  pure
allegory  I  leave  to  Ram  Mohun  Hoy) — if  this  be  so,
is  not  mercy  an  attribute  of  God  ?  Is  not  the  prayer
offered  to  him,  through  his  attribute,  of  the  same
nature  as  the  worship  of  the  Hindus?  Do  not  the
votaries  of  the  Christian  religion,  like  the  Hindus,  ac-
knowledge him  to  be  essentially  united  to  the  Godhead,
though  occasionally  separate,  and  do  they  not  believe
that  they  are  certain  of  obtaining  salvation  in  this
faith  ?

For  these  reasons,  why  cannot  the  Hindu  worship  of
the  attributes,  which  are  affirmed  to  be  essentially
united,  but  occasionally  separate  from  the  Godhead,
be  admitted,  and  why  may  not  this  be  the  means  of
obtaining  moscham  or  salvation?  It  seems  upon  the
whole  that  technical  terms,  modes  of  worship,  and  ex-
ternal rights,  respectively  observed,  constitute  an  ap-
parent difference  between  the  religions  of  the  earth,
though  in  truth  there  be  none.

I  am,  Sir,
Your  most  obedient  humble  servant,
B.  Senkara  Sastri,
Head  English  Master  in  the
College  of  Fort  St.  George.
Madras,  26th  December  1816.


HINDOO  viii:i.s.M.  135

Before  1  allcnipt  tu  reply  to  ihc  observations  that
the  learned  ujentleman,  who  signs  himself  Senkara
Sastri,  has  offered  in  his  letter  of  the  20th  December
last,  addressed  to  the  Editor  of  the  Madras  Courier,
on  the  subject  of  an  article  published  in  the  Calcutta
Gazette,  and  on  my  translation  of  an  abridgment  of
the  Vedanta  and  of  the  two  chapters  of  the  Vedas;
I  beg  to  be  allowed  to  express  the  disappointment  I
have  felt,  in  receiving  from  a  learneil  Brahman  con-
troversial remarks  on  Hindoo  Theology,  written  in  a
foreign  language  ;  as  it  is  the  invariable  practice  of
the  natives  of  all  provinces  of  Hindoostan  to  hold
their  discussions  on  such  subjects  in  Sangscrit,  which
is  the  learned  language  common  to  all  of  them,  and  in
which  they  may  naturally  be  expected  to  convey  their
ideas  with  perfect  correctness,  and  greater  facility
than  in  any  foreign  tongue:  nor  need  it  be  alleged
that,  by  adopting  this  established  channel  of  contro-
versy, the  opportunity  of  appealing  to  public  opinion
on  the  subject  must  be  lost;  as  a  subsequent  transla-
tion from  the  Sungscrit  into  English  may  sufficiently
serve  that  purpose.  The  irregularity  of  this  mode  of
proceeding,  however,  gives  me  room  to  suspect  that
the  letter  in  question  is  the  production  of  the  pen  of
an  English  gentleman,  whose  liberality,  /  suppose^
has  induced  him  to  attempt  an  apology,  even  for  the
absurd  idolatry  of  his  fellow-creatures.  If  this  in-
ference be  correct,  while  I  congratulate  that  gentle-
man on  his  progress  in  a  knowledge  ot  the  sublime
doctrines  of  the  Vedanta,  I  must,  at  the  same  time,
take  the  liberty  of  entreating  that  he  will,  for  the
future,  prefer consulting the original works  written


136  A DEFENCE OF

upon  those  doctrines,  to  relying  on  the  second-hand
information  on  the  subject,  that  may  be  oifered  him
by  any  person  whatsoever.

The  learned  gentleman  commences  by  objecting  to
the  terms  discoverer  and  reformer,  in  which  the  Editor
of  the  Calcutta  Gazette  was  pleased  to  make  mention
of  me.  He  states,  "that  people  of  limited  under-
"  standing,  not  being  able  to  comprehend  the  system
"  of  worshipping  the  invisible  Being,  have  adopted
"  false  doctrines,  and  by  that  means  confounded  weak
"minds  in  remote  times;  but  due  punishment  was
'■  inflicted  on  those  heretics,  and  religion  was  very  well
"  established  throughout  Ind'a  by  the  Reverend  San-
"  karacharya  and  his  disciples ;  who,  however,  did  not
"  pretend  to  reform  or  discover  them,  or  assume  the
"  title  of  a  reformer  or  discoverer"  In  none  of  my
writings,  nor  in  any  verbal  discussion,  have  I  ever
pretended  to  reform  or  to  discover  the  doctrines  of
the  unity  of  God,  nor  have  I  ever  assumed  the  title  of
reformer  or  discoverer  :  so  far  from  such  an  assump-
tion, I  have  urged  in  every  work  that  I  have  hitherto
published,  that  the  doctrines  of  the  unity  of.  God  are
real  Hindooism,  as  that  religion  was  practised  by  our
ancestors,  and  as  it  is  well  known  even  at  the  present
age  to  many  learned  Brahmins:  J  beg  to  repeat  a  few
of  the  passages  to  which  I  allude.

In  the  introduction  to  the  abridgment  of  the  Vedanta
I  have  said :  "  In  order,  therefore,  to  vindicate  my
"  own  faith  and  that  of  our  forefathers,  I  have  been
"  endeavouring,  for  some  time  past,  to  convince  my
"  countrymen  of  the  true  meaning  of  our  sacred  books  ;
"  and  prove  that  my  aberration  deserves  not  the  oppro-


HINDOO THEISM.  137

"  briunij  which some  unreflecting  persons  have been
"  so  ready  to  throw  upon me." In  another phice  of
the  same  introduction  :  "  The  present  is  an  endeavour
"  to  render  an  abridgment  of  the  same (the  Vcd;'inta)
"  into English  ;  by which  I expect  to  prove  to  my
"  European friends, that tlie superstitious  practices
"  which  deform  the  Hindoo  religion,  have  nothing  to
"  do  with  the  pure  spirit  of  its  dictates." In  the  intro-
duction of  the  Cenopanishad :  "  This  work  will,  I  trust,
"  by  explaining  to  my  countrymen  the  real  spirit  of  the
"  Hindoo  scriptures,  ivhich  is  but  the  declaration  of  the
^^  unity  of  God,  tend  in  a  great  degree  to  correct  the
"  erroneous  conceptions  which have prevailed with
"  regard  to  the  doctrines  thej^  inculcate ;"  and  in  the
Preface  of  the  Ishopanished  : ^^niany  learned  Brahmins
"  are  perfectly  aware  of  the  absurdity  of  idol  worship,
"  and  are  well  informed  of  the  nature  of  the  pure  mode  of
"  divine  worship.'* A  reconsideration  of  these  passages
will, I  hope,  convince  the  learned  gentleman,  that  I
never advanced any claim to  the title either  of  a
reformer,  or  of  a  discoverer  of  the  doctrines  of  the  unity
of  the  Godhead. It  is  not  at  all  impossible  that  from
the  perusal  of  the  translations  above  alluded  to,  the
Editor  of  the  Calcutta  Gazette,  finding  the  system  of
idolatry  into  which  Hindoos  are  now  comjjletely  sunk,
quite  inconsistent  with  the  real  spirit  of  their  scriptures,
may  have  imagined that their contents  had become
entirely  forgotten  and  unknown ;  and  that I was  the
first  to  point  out  the  absurdity  of  idol  worship,  and  to
inculcate  the propriety of  the  pure divine  wor.-hip,
ordained  by  their  Vedas,  their  Smrits,and  their  Poorans.
From  this  idea,  and from  finding  in his intercourse


138  A DEFENCE OF

with  Other  Hindoos,  that  I  was  stigmatized  by  many,
however  unjustly,  as  an  imiovafor,  he  may  have  been,
not  unnaturally,  misled  to  apply  to  me  the  epithets  of
discoverer  and  reformer.

Sdly. The learned  gentleman  states  : "  There  are
"  an  immense  number  of  books,  namely,  J'edas,  Sastras,
"  Poorans,  Agams,  Tantras,  Sutras,  and  Itihas.  besides
"  numerous  commentaries  compiled by  many  famous
"  theologians, both of ancient and modern times,
"  respecting  the  doctrines  of  the  worship  of  the  invisible
"  Being. They are  not only  written in Sangscrit,
"  but  rendered into the Pracreta, Tenuga, Tamol,
"  Gujrate, Hindoostani, Marhutta,  and Canari lan-
"  guages,  and  immemorially  studied  by  a  great  part  of
"  the  Hindu  nation, attached  to  the adwaitum  faith,
"  &c." This  statement  of  the  learned  gentleman,  as
far  as  it  is  correct, corroborates  indeed  my assertion
with  respect  to  the doctrines  of  the  worship of  the
invisible  Supreme  Spirit  being  unanimously  inculcated
by  all  the  Hindoo  Sastras,  and  naturally  leads  to  severe
reflections  on  the  selfishness  which  must  actuate  those
Braminical  teachers  who,  notwithstanding  the  unani-
mous authority  of  the  Sastras  for  the  adoption  of  pure
worship,  yet,  with  the  view  of  maintaining  the  title  of
God,  which  they  arrogate  to  themselves,  and  of  deriving
pecuniary  and other advantages  from  the  numerous
rites  and  festivals  of  idol  worship,  constantly  advance
and  encourage  idolatry  to  the  utmost  of  their  power. 1
must  remark,  however,  that  there  is  no  translation  of
the  Vedas  into  any of  the  modern  languages  of  Hin-
doostan  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  and  it  is  for  that
reason  that  1  have  translated  into  Bengali  the  Vedanta,


HINDOO THEISM.  139

the  Cenopanisliad  of  the  Sama  Veda,  Ishopanishad  of
tlie  Yojiir  ^V'(hl,  &c.,  with  the  contents  of  which  none
but  the  leariieil  among  my  countrymen  were  at  all
acquainted.

3dly.  The  learned  gentleman  states  that  the  transla-
tions of  the  scripture  into  the  vulgar  language  are  reject-
ed by  some  people  ;  and  he  assigns  as  reasons  for  their
so  doing,  that  "  if  the  reader  of  them  doubts  the  truth  of
"  the  principles  explained  in  the  translation,  the  divine
"  knowledge  he  acquired  by  them  becomes  a  doubtful
"  faith,  and  that  doubt  cannot  be  removed  unless  he
"compare  them  with  the  original  work:  in  that  case,
"  the  knowledge  he  lastly  acquired  becomes  superior,
"  and  his  study,  in  the  first  instance,  becomes  useless,
"  and  the  cause  of  repeating  the  same  work."  When
a  translation  of  a  work  written  in  a  foreign  tongue  is
made  by  a  person  at  all  acquainted  with  that  language
into  his  native  tongue,  and  the  same  translation  is
sanctioned  and  approved  of  by  many  natives  of  the
same  country,  who  are  perfectly  conversant  with  that
foreign  language,  the  translation,  I  presume,  may  be
received  with  confidence,  as  a  satisfactory  interpretation
of  the  original  work,  both  by  the  vulgar  and  by  men  of
literature.

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  I  am  inclined
to  assert  that  there  is  not  the  least  room  to  doubt  the
accuracy  of  such  a  translation  ;  because  the  meaning  of
authors,  even  in  the  original  works,  is  very  frequently
dubious,  especially  in  a  language  like  Sungscrit,  every
sentence  of  which,  almost,  admits  of  being  explained
in  diflercnt  senses.  But  should  the  |)ossibility  of  errors
in  every  translation be admittetl as reason for  with-


MO  A DEFENCE OF

holdinjj  all  confidence  in  their  contents,  such  a  rule
would  shake  our  belief,  not  only  in  the  principles  ex-
plained in  the  translation  of  the  Vedant  into  the  cur-
rent language,  but  also  in  all  information  respecting
foreign  history  and  theology  obtained  by  means  of
translations :  in  that  case,  we  must  either  learn  all  the
languages  that  are  spoken  by  the  different  nations  in
the  world,  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  their  histories
and  religions,  or  be  content  to  know  nothing  of  any
country  besides  our  own.  The  second  reason  which
the  learned  gentleman  assigns  for  their  objection  to  the
translation  is,  that  "  Reading  the  scripture  in  the
"  vulgar  languages  is  prohibited  by  the  Poorans."  I
have  not  yet  met  with  any  texts  of  any  Poorans  which
prohibit  the  explanation  of  the  scriptures  in  the  vulgar
tongue;  on  the  contrary,  the  Poorans  allow  that
practice  very  frequently.  I  repeat  one  of  these  decla-
rations from  the  Shiva  Dhurma,  quoted  by  the  great
Bughnund.  "  He  who  can  interpret,  according  to
"  the  ratio  of  the  understanding  of  his  pupils,  through
"  Sunscrit,  or  through  the  vulgar  languages,  or  by
"  means  of  the  current  language  of  the  country,  is
"  entitled,  spiritual  father."  Moreover,  in  every  part
of  Hindoostan  all  professors  of  the  Sungscrit  language
instructing  beginners  in  the  Veds,  Poorans,  and  in
other  sastras,  interpret  them  in  the  vulgar  languages  ;
especially  spiritual  fathers  in  exposition  of  those  parts
of  the  veds  and  Poorans,  which  allegorically  introduce
a  plurality  of  gods  and  idol-worship;  doctrines  which
tend  so  much  to  their  own  worldly  advantage.

The learned  gentleman states,  that  "  The first  of
"  the  Veda  prescribes  the  mode  of  performing  y again


HINDOO THEISM.  Ill

"  or sacrifice, bestowing datieeni or  alms; treats  of

"  penance, fasting,  and of  worshipping the  incarna-

"  tions, in  which the  Supreme  Deity  has  appeared  on

"  the  eartii  for  divine  purposes. The  ceremonies  per-

"  formed according to  these  modes, forsaking their

*'  fruits,  are  affirmed  by  the  Vedas  to  be  mental  exercises

"  and  mental  purifications  necessary  to  obtain  the  know-

"  led<re  of  the  divine  nature." I, in  common  with  the

Vedas  and  the  Vedant,  and  Munoo  (the  first  and  best  of

Hindoo  lawgivers)  as  w^ell  as  with  the  most  celebrated

Sancharacharya,  deny  these  ceremonies  being  necessary

to  obtain  the  knowledge  of  the  divine  nature ;  as  the

Vedant positively declares, in text  36, sec.  4th,

chap.  3d : "  Man may acquire  the true knowledge

"  of  God,  even  without  observing the  rules  and  rites

"  prescribed  by the  Ved  for  each  class ;  as  it  is  found

"  in  the  Ved  that  many  persons who neglected  the

"  performance  of  the  rites  and  ceremonies,  owing  to

"  their perpetual attention to the  adoration of  tiie

"  Supreme Being,  acquired the true knowledge  re-

"  specting the Supreme Spirit." The Ved says :

"  Many  learned  true  believers  never  worshipped  fire,

"  or  any  celestial  gods  through  fire." And  also  the

Vedant  asserts, in the 1st text of 3d  sec. of  the

3d  chap. :  "  The  worship  authorized  by  all  the  Veds  is

"  one, as  the  directions  for  the  worsliip of  the  only

"  Supreme  Being  are  invariably  found  in  the  Ved, and

"  the  epithets  of  the  Supreme  and  Omnipresent  Being,

"  S:c. commonly imply God  alone." Munoo, as  I

have elsewhere  quoted, thus declares on the  same

point,  chap. 12th,  text  92d  : " 'J'hus must the chief

"  of  the  twice  born,  though  he  neglect  the  ceremonial


112  A DEFENCE OF

"  rites  mentioned  in  the  Sastra,  be  diliirent  in  attaining
"  a  knowledge  of"  God,  in  controling  his  organs  of
"  sense,  and  in  repeating  the  Ved."  Again,  chapter
4th,  text  23d  :  "  Some  constantly  sacrifice  their
"  breath  in  their  speech,  ivlien  tlieij  instruct  others
"  ofGodaluud,  and  their  speech  in  their  breath,  wJceu
"  they  meditate  in  silence  ;  perceiving  in  their  speech
"  and  breath  thus  employed  the  imperishable  fruit  of
"  a  sacrificial  offering."  2'lth :  "  Other  Brahmans  in-
"  cessantly  perform  those  sacrifices  only;  seeing  with
"  the  eye  of  divine  learning,  that  the  scriptural  know-
"  ledge  is  the  root  of  every  ceremonial  observance."
And  also  the  same  author  declares  in  the  chap.  2d,
text  84 :  "  All  rites  ordained  in  the  Veda,  oblations  to
"  fire  and  solemn  sacrifices,  pass  away ;  but  that  which
"  passes  not  away  is  declared  to  be  the  syllable  Om,
"  thence  called  Acshora;  since  it  is  a  symbol  of  God,
"  the  Lord  of  created  beings."

5thly.  The  learned  gentleman  states,  that  "  the
"  difficulty  of  attaining  a  knowledge  of  the  Invisible
"  and  Almighty  Spirit  is  evident  from  the  preceding
"verses."  I  agree  with  him  in  that  point;  that  the
attainment  of  perfect  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the
Godhead  is  certainly  difficult,  or  rather  impossible  ;
but  to  read  the  existence  of  the  Almighty  Being  in  his
works  of  nature,  is  not,  I  will  dare  to  say,  so  difficult
to  the  mind  of  a  man  possessed  of  common  sense,  and
unfettered  by  prejudice,  as  to  conceive  artificial  images
to  be  possessed,  at  once,  of  the  opposite  natures  of
human  and  divine  beings,  which  idolaters  constantly
ascribe  to  their  idols ; — strangely  believing  that  things
so  constructed  can  be  converted  by  ceremonies  into
constructors  of  the  universe.


HINDOO THFISM.


143


Gthly.  The  learned  gentleman  objects  to  our  intro-
ducing songs,  although  expressing  only  the  peculiar
tenets  of  monotheism,  and  says  :

"  But  the  holding  of  meetings,  playing  music,  singing
"  songs,  and  dancing,  which  are  ranked  among  car-
"  nal  pleasures,  are  not  ordained  by  scripture  as
"  mental  purification."  The  ])ractice  of  dancing  in
divine  worship,  I  agree,  is  not  ordained  by  the  scrip-
ture, and  accordingly  never  was  introduced  in  our
worship;  any  mention  of  dancing  in  the  Calcutta
Gazette  must,  therefore,  have  proceeded  from  mis-
information of  the  Editor.  But  res})ecting  the  pro-
priety of  introducing  monotheistical  songs  in  the  divine
worship,  I  beg  leave  to  refer  the  gentleman  to  the
text  111th  and  115th  of  the  3d  chapter  of  Yagnya-
valca,  who  authorizes  not  only  scriptural  music  in
divine  contemplation,  but  also  the  songs  that  are
composed  by  the  vulgar.  It  is  also  evident  that
any  interesting  idea  is  calculated  to  make  more  im-
pression upon  the  mind,  when  conveyed  in  musical
verses,  than  when  delivered  in  the  form  of  common
conversation.

7thly  The  learned  gentleman  says  :  "  All  the  Brah-
"  mins  in  this  peninsula  are  studying  the  same
"  vedom  as  are  read  in  the  other  parts  of  the  country  ;
"  but  I  do  not  recollect  to  have  read  or  heard  of  one
"  treatinn"  on  astronomy,  medicine,  or  arms :  the  first
"  is  indeed  an  ongam  of  the  \'cdam,  but  the  two  latter
"  are  taught  in  separate  Sastras."  In  answer  to  which
I  beg  to  be  allowed  to  refer  the  gentleman  to  the  fol-
lowing text  of  the  Nervan  :  "  The  Vcds,  while  talking
"of  planets,  botany,  austere  duties,  arms,  rites,  natu-


144  A DEFENCE OF

"  ral  consequences,  and  several  otliei*  subjects,  are  pu-
"  rified  by  the  inculcation  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Su-
"  preme  Spirit."  And  also  to  the  latter  end  of  the
Mahanervana  af^am.

From  the  perusal  of  these  texts,  I  trust,  he  will  be
convinced  that  Vedas  not  only  treat  of  astronomy,  me-
dicine, and  arms,  but  also  of  morality  and  natural
philosophy,  and  that  all  arts  and  sciences  that  are
treated  of  in  other  Sastras,  were  originally  introduced
by  the  Veds  :  see  also  Munoo,  chapter  12,  verses  97
and  98.  I  cannot  of  course  be  expected  to  be  answer-
able for  Bruhmans  neglecting  entirely  the  study  of  the
scientific  parts  of  the  Ved,  and  putting  in  practice,
and  promulgating  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,  that
part  of  them  which,  treating  of  rites  and  festivals,  is
justly  considered  as  the  source  of  their  wordly  advan-
tages and  support  of  their  alleged  divinity.

8thly.  I  observe,  that  on  the  following  statement  in
my  Introduction  to  the  Cenopunished,  viz.,  "  should
"  this  explanation  given  by  the  Ved  itself,  as  well  as
"  by  its  celebrated  commentators  Vyas,  not  be  allowed
"  to  reconcile  these  passages  which  are  seemingly  at
"  variance  with  each  other,  as  those  that  declare  the
"  unity  of  the  invisible  Supreme  Being,  with  others
"  which  describe  a  plurality  of  independent  visible
"  gods,  the  whole  work  must,  I  am  afraid,  not  only  be
"  stripped  of  its  authorit}^  but  looked  upon  as  altoge-
"  ther  unintelligible,"  the  learned  gentleman  has  re-
marked that  "  To  say  the  least  of  this  passage,  Ram
"  MoHUN  Roy  appears  quite  as  willing  to  abandon  as
"  to  defend  the  Scripture  of  his  Religion."

In  the  foregoing  paragraph,  however,  I  did  no  more


HINDOO TIIEISAI.  11.5

tliaii  logically  coniiiie  llic  case  to  two  points,  viz.^  tluit
the  explanation  of  the  Veil  anil  of  its  commentatoiij
must  either  be  ailinitteil  as  sufficiently  reconciling  the
apparent  contrailictions  between  clillerent  passages  of
the  \'t'il,  or  must  not  be  admitted.  \n  the  latter
case,  the  Ved  must  necessarily  be  supposed  to  be  incon-
sistent with  itself,  and  therefore  altogether  unintelligi-
ble, which  is  directly  contrary  to  the  faith  of  Hindoos
of  every  description ;  consequently  they  must  admit
that  those  explanations  do  sufficiently  reconcile  the
seeming  contradictions  between  the  chapters  of  the
Vedas.

9thly.  The  learned  gentleman  says  that  "  Their  (the
"  attributes  and  incarnations)  worship  under  various
"  representations,  by  means  of  consecrated  objects,  is
"  prescribed  by  the  scripture  to  the  human  race,  by
"  way  of  mental  exercises,"  &c.  1  cannot  admit  that
the  worship  of  these  attributes  under  various  repre-
sentations, by  means  of  consecrated  objects,  has  been
prescribed  by  the  Veil  to  the  human  race;  as  this
kind  of  worship  of  consecrated  objects  is  enjoined  by
the  Sastra  to  those  only  who  are  incapable  of  raising
their  minds  to  the  notion  of  an  invisible  Supreme
Being.  I  have  quoted  several  authorities  for  this
assertion  in  my  Preface  to  the  Ishopanishad,  and  beg
to  repeat  here  one  or  two  of  them  :  "  The  vulgar  look
"  for  their  God  in  water ;  men  of  more  extended
"  knowledge  in  celestial  bodies ;  the  ignorant  in  wood,
"  bricks,  and  stones ;  but  learned  men  in  the  universal
"  soul."  "  Thus  corresponding  to  the  nature  of
"  different  powers  or  qualities,  numerous  figures  have
"  been invented for the benefit of  those who are

1m


146  A DEFENCE  OF

"  not  possessed  of  sufficient  understanding."  Permit  me
in  tliis  instance  to  ask,  whether  every  Mussuhiian  in
Turkey  and  Arabia,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,
every  Protestant  Christian  at  least  of  Europe,  and
many  followers  of  Cabeer  and  Nanuck,  do  worship
God  without  the  assistance  of  consecrated  objects  ?
If  so,  how  can  we  suppose  that  the  human  race  is
not  capable  of  adoring  the  Supreme  Being  without
the  puerile  practice  of  having  recourse  to  visible
objects?

lOthly.  The  learned  gentleman  is  of  opinion  that
the  attributes  of  God  exist  distinctly  from  God ;  and
he  compares  the  relation  between  God  and  these  attri-
butes to  that  of  a  king  to  his  ministers,  as  he  says:
"  If  a  person  be  desirous  to  visit  an  earthly  prince,
"  he  ought  to  be  introduced  in  the  first  instance  by
"  his  ministers,"  Sec;  and  "in  like  manner  the  Grace
"  of  God  ought  to  be  obtained  by  the  grace  through
"  the  worship  of  his  attributes."  This  opinion,  I  am
extremely  sorry  to  find,  is  directly  contrary  to  all  the
Vediint  doctrines  interpreted  to  us  by  the  most  revered
Sankaracharjya,  which  are  real  adwaita  or  non-duality;
the}^  affirm  that  God  has  no  second  that  may  be  possessed
of  eternal  existence,  either  of  the  same  nature  with
himself,  or  of  a  different  nature  from  him,  nor  any
second  of  that  nature  that  might  be  called  either  his
part  or  his  quality.  The  16th  text  of  the  2d  sectit  n
of3dchap. :  "  Tlie  Ved  has  declared  the  Supreme
"  Being  to  be  mere  understanding."  The  Ved  says  :
"  God  is  real  existence,  wisdom  and  eternity."  The
Ved  very  often  calls  the  Supreme  Existence  by  the
epithets  of  Existent,  Wise,  and Eternal ;  and  assigns


HINDOO THEISM.  147

as  tlie  reason  lor  adopting;  such  epitliets,  that  tlie  Veil
in  the  lirst  instance  sjeaks  of  God  according  to  human
idea, whicli views  quality  separately  from person,  in
order  to  facilitate  our  comprehension  of  objects. In
case  these  attributes  should  be  supposed,  as  the  learned
gentleman  asserts, to  be  separate  existences,  it  neces-
sarily follows,  that  they  must  be  either  eternal  or  non-
eternal. The former case, I'iz. the existence  of  a
plurality  of  beings  imbued like  God himself  with  the
property  of  eternal duration,  strikes  immediately at
the  root  of  all  the  doctrines  relative  to  the  unity  of  the
Supreme Being  contained  in the  Vedunt. By  the
latter  sentiment,  namely, that the power and  attri-
butes of  God  are  not  eternal,  we  are  led at  once  into
the belief  that  the  nature of  God  is susceptible of
change,  and  consequently  that  He  is  not  eternal,  which
makes no inconsiderable  step  towards  atheism itself.
These  are the obvious  and  dangerous  consequences,
resulting  from  the  learned  gentleman's  doctrine, that
the  attributes  of  the  Supreme  Being  are  distinct ex-
istences. I  am  quite at a  loss  to  know how  these
attributes  of  the  pure  and  perfect Supi'eme  Being  (as
the  learned  gentleman  declares them  to  exist  really
and  separately,  and  not  fictitiously  and  allegorically,)
can be so sensual and destitute  of  morality,  as  the
creating  attribute  or  Brahma is  said to be,  by  the
Poorans; which represent him in one instance  as
attempting  to  commit  a  rape  upon  his  own  daughter.
The  protecting attribute, or Vishnu, is  in another
place  affirmed to  have  fraudulently  violated  the  chas-
tity of  Brinda,  in  order to  kill  her  husband. Shiva,
the  destroying  attribute,  is  said  to  liave  had  a  criminal
l2


148  A DEFENCE OF

attachment  to  Moheni,  disregarding  all  ideas  of  de-
cency. And  a  thousand  similar  examples  must  be
familiar  to  every  reader  of  the  Poorans.  I  should  be
obliged  by  the  learned  gentleman's  shewing  how  the
contemplation  of  such  circumstances,  which  are  con-
stantly related  by  the  worshippers  of  these  attributes,
even  in  their  sermons,  can  be  instrumental  towards
the  purification  of  the  mind,  conducive  to  morality,
and  productive  of  eternal  beatitude.  Besides,  though
the  learned  gentleman  in  this  instance  considers  these
attributes  to  be  separate  existences,  yet  in  another
place  he  seems  to  view  them  as  parts  of  the  Supreme
Being,  as  he  says :  "If  one  part  of  the  ocean  be
"  adored,  the  ocean  is  adored."  I  am  somewhat  at  a
loss  to  understand  how  the  learned  gentleman  pro-
poses to  reconcile  this  apparent  contradiction.  I  must
observe,  however,  in  tliis  place,  that  the  comparison
drawn  between  the  relation  of  God  and  those  attri-
butes, and  that  of  a  king  and  his  ministers,  is  totally
inconsistent  with  the  faith  entertained  by  Hindoos  of
the  present  day ;  who,  so  far  from  considering  these
objects  of  worship  as  mere  instruments  by  which  they
may  arrive  at  the  power  of  contemplating  the  God  of
Nature,  regard  them  in  the  light  of  independent  gods,
to  each  of  whom,  however  absurdly,  they  attribute
almighty  power,  and  a  claim  to  worship,  solely  on  his
own  account.

llthly.  The  learned  gentleman  is  dissatisfied  with
the  objection  mentioned  in  my  translation  to  wor-
shipping these  fictitious  representations,  and  remarks,
that  "  the  objections  to  worshipping  the  attributes  are
"  not  satisfactorily stated  by the  author." I  conse-


IIJNDOO THElbM.  HiJ

qiifiitly  repeat  the  tollowiii<r  authorities,  which  I  hope
may  aubwer  my  purpose.  The  following  are  the  de-
clarations of  the  Ved:  "He,  who  worships  any  god
"  excepting  the  Supreme  Being,  and  thinks  that  he
"  himself  is  distinct  and  inferior  to  that  God,  knows
"  nothinir,  and  is  considered  as  a  domestic  beast  of
"  these  gods."  "  A  state  even  so  high  as  that  of
"  Brahma  does  not  aiFord  real  bliss."  "  Adore  God
"  alone."  "  None  but  the  Supreme  Being  is  to  be
"  worshipped;  nothing  excepting  him  should  be
"  adored  by  a  wise  man."  I  repeat  also  the  following
texts  of  the  Vedclnt:  "  The  declaration  of  the  Ved,
"  that  those  that  worship  the  celestial  goils  are  the  food
"  of  such  gods,  is  an  allegorical  expression,  and  only
"  means,  that  they  are  comforts  to  the  celestial  gods  as
"food  to  mankind;  for  he  who  has  no  fiiith  in  the
"  Su|)reme  Being  is  rendered  subject  to  these  gods.
"  The  Ved  affirms  the  same."

And  the  revered  Sankaracharjya  has  frequently  de-
clared the  state  of  celestial  gods  to  be  that  of  demons*
in  the  Bliasya  of  the  Ishopanishad  and  of  others.

To  these  authorities  a  thousand  others  might  be
added.  But  should  the  learned  gentleman  require
some  practical  grounils  ibr  objecting  to  the  idolatrous
worship  of  the  Ilindoo.s,  I  can  be  at  no  loss  to  give  him
numberless  instances,  where  the  ceremonies  that  have
been  instituted  under  the  pretext  of  honouring  the  all-
perfect  Author  of  Nature,  ai'e  of  a  tendency  utterly
subversive  of  every  moral  principle.

I  begin  with  Krishna  as  the  most  adored  of  all  the
incarnations,  the  number  of  whose  ilevotees  is  exceed-
ingly great. Jlis  worship  is  made  to  consist  in  the  in


150  A DEFENCE OF

stitution  of  his  image  or  picture,  accompanied  by  one
or  more  females,  and  in  the  contemplation  of  his  his-
tory and  behaviour,  such  as  his  perpetration  of  murder
upon  a  female  of  the  name  of  Pootna ;  his  compelling
great  number  of  married  and  unmarried  women  to
stand  before  him  denuded ;  his  debauching  them  and
several  others,  to  the  mortal  affliction  of  their  husbands
and  relations  ;  his  annoying  them,  by  violating  the  laws
of  cleanliness  and  other  facts  of  the  same  nature.  Thfe
grossness  of  his  worship  does  not  find  a  limit  here.  His
devotees  very  often  personify  (in  the  same  manner  as
European  actors  upon  stages  do)  him  and  his  female
companions,  dancing  with  indecent  gestures,  and  singing
songs  relative  to  his  love  and  debaucheries.  It  is  im-
possible to  explain  in  language  fit  to  meet  the  public
eye,  the  mode  in  which  Muhadeva,  or  the  destroying
attribute,  is  worshipped  by  the  generality  of  the  Hin-
doos :  suffice  it  to  say,  that  it  is  altogether  congenial
with  the  indecent  nature  of  the  image,  under  whose
form  he  is  most  commonly  adored.

The  stories  respecting  him,  which  are  read  by  his
devotees  in  the  Tuntras,  are  of  a  nature  that,  if  told
of  any  man,  would  be  offensive  to  the  ears  of  the  most
abandoned  of  either  sex.  In  the  worship  of  Kali,
human  sacrifices,  the  use  of  wine,  criminal  intercourse,
and  licentious  songs,  are  included :  the  first  of  these
practices  has  become  generally  extinct ;  but  it  is  be-
lieved that  there  are  parts  of  the  country  where  human
victims  are  still  offered.

Debauchery,  however,  universally  forms  the  pi*in-
cipal  part  of  the  worship  of  her  followers.  Nigam  and
other  Tanlras  may  satisfy  every  reader  of  the  horrible


HINDOO THEISM.  151

tenets  ot"  the  worshippers  ol"  the  two  latter  deities. The
modes  of  worship  of  almost  all  the  inferior  deities  are
pretty  much  the  same. Having  so  far  explained  the
nature  of  worship  adopted  by  Hindoos  in  <5eneral,  for
the  propitiation  of  their  allegorical  attributes,  in  direct
opposition  to  the  mode  of  pure  divine  worship  incul-
cated by the  Vedas,  I  cannot  but  entertain  a  strong
hope  that  the  learned  gentleman,  who  ranks  even  mo-
notheistical  songs  among  carnal  pleasures,  and  conse-
quently  rejects  their  admittance  in  worship,  will no
longer  stand  forward as  an  advocate  for  the  worship
of  separate and hidependeiit attributes and incar-
nations.

12thly.  The  learned  gentleman  says, "  that  the  Sa-
"  viour," meaning Christ, "  should be considered a
"  personification  of  the  mercy  and kindness  of  God  (I
"  mean  actual  not  allegorical  personification)." From
the little  knowledge  I  had  acquired  of  the  tenets  of
Christians and those of anti- Christians, I thought
there  were  only  three  prevailing  opinions  respecting
the  nature  of  Christ ;  viz.  that  he  was  considered  by
some  as  the  expounder  of  the  laws  of  God,  and the
mediator  between  God  and  man ;  by  many  to  be  one  of
the  three  mysterious  persons  of  the  Godhead ;  whilst
others,  such  as the  Jews,  say  that  he  was  a  mere  man.
But  to consider Christ as a personification  of  the
mercy  of  God  is,  if  1  mistake  not,  a  new  doctrine  in
Christianity,  the  discussion  of  which,  however,  has  no
connexion  with  the  present  subject. I  however  must
observe  that  this  opinion  which  the  learned  gentleman
has  formed  of  Christ  being  a personification of  the
mercy  of  God,  is  similar  to  that  entertained  by  Mus-


152  A DEFENCE OV HINDOO TlIEIS>f.

sulmans,  for  a  period  of  upwards  of  a  thousand  years,
respecting  Mohummud,  whom  they  call  mercy  of  God
upon  all  his  creatures.  The  learned  gentleman  in  the
conclusion  of  his  observations  has  left,  as  he  says,  the
doctrines  of  pure  allegory  to  me.  It  would  have  been
more  consistent  with  justice  had  he  left  pure  alle-
gory also  to  the  Veds,  which  declare,  ''appellations
"  and  figures  of  all  kinds  are  innovations,"  and  which
have  allegorically  represented  God  in  the  figure  of  the
universe  :  "  Fire  is  his  head,  the  sun  and  the  moon  are
"  his  two  eyes,"  8cc. ;  and  which  have  also  represented
all  human  internal  qualities  by  different  earthly  objects  ;
and  also  to  Vyas,  who  has  strictly  followed  the  Veds  in
these  figurative  representations,  and  to  Sankaracharjya,
who  also  adopted  the  mode  of  allegory,  in  his  Bhashya
of  the  Vedant  and  of  the  Upanishadas.


SECOND  DEFENCE


■J'llE  MOiNOTIIEISTICAL  SVSTKM


THE VED8;


IN REPLY TO


AN  APOLOCIY  FOR  THE  PRESENT  STATE


HINDOO WORSHIP.


CALCUTTA
1817.


ADVERTISEMENT.


Two  publications  only  have  yet  appeared  witii  the
professed  object  of  defending  Hindoo  idolatry  against
the  arguments  which  I  have  adduced  from  the  Vedanta,
and  other  sacred  authorities,  in  proof  of  the  erroneous-
ness  of  that  system.  To  the  first,  which  appeared  in  a
Madras  Journal,  my  reply  has  been  for  some  time  be-
fore the  public.  The  second,  which  is  the  object  of
the  present  answer,  and  is  supposed  to  be  the  produc-
tion of  a  learned  Brahmun  now  residing  in  Calcutta,
was  printed  both  in  Bengallee  and  in  English  ;  and  I
have  therefore  been  under  the  necessity  of  preparing  a
reply  in  both  of  those  languages.  That  which  was
intended  for  the  perusal  of  my  countrymen,  issued  from
the  press  a  few  weeks  ago.  For  my  European  readers
I  have  thought  it  advisable  to  make  some  additional
remarks  to  those  contained  in  the  Bengallee  publica-
tion, which  I  hope  will  tend  to  make  my  arguments
more  clear  and  intelligible  to  them  than  a  bare  trans-
lation would  do.


SECOND  DEFENCE,

<S.C.  S:c.


The  learned  Brahmun,in  his  defence  of  idolatry,  thus
begins :  "  Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  the  following
"  treatise  has  been  written  with  a  view  to  refute  the
"  doctrines  of  those  assuming  inventors  and  self-
"  interested  moderns,"  &c-  "  It  is  solely  with  the  inten-
"  tion  of  expressing  the  true  meaning  of  these  authori-
"  ties  that  this  brief  treatise  has  been  composed ;"  and
he  thus  concludes  :  "  The  Vedant  chundrica,  or  lunar
"  light  of  the  Vedant,  has  thus  been  made  appai-ent,
"  and  thus  the  glowworm's  light  has  been  eclipsed."
It  is  very  much  to  be  feared  that,  from  the  perusal  of
this  treatise,  called  the  lunar  light  of  the  Vedant,  but
filled  up  with*  satirical  fables,-f  abusive  expressions,
and  contradictory  assertions,  sometimes  admitting
monotheism,  but  at  the  same  time  blending  with  it  and
defending  polytheism,:}:  those  foreign  gentlemen,  as
well  as  those  natives  of  this  country  who  are  not  ac-

•  P.  1,  1.  ■2C>;  |).  2,  1.  17;  \k  ID  and  20,  luargin.

t  P.  1  ;  p.  3,  I. !) ;  p.  .S.  1.17;  ,,.  38,  I.  11  ;  p.  4S,  I.  19,  &c.  &c.

:  P.  13,1.  M.


158  SECOND  nEFENCE  OF  THE

qualnted  with  the  real  tenets  of  the  Vedant,  might  on
a  superficial  view  form  a  very  unfavourable  opinion  of
that  theology,  which,  however,  treats  with  perfect  con-
sistency of  the  unity  and  universality  of  the  Supreme
Being,  and  forbids,  positively,  treating  with  contempt
or  behaving  ill  towards  any  creature  whatsoever.

As  to  the  satire^  and  abuse,  neither  my  education
permits  any  return  by  means  of  similar  language,  nor
does  the  system  of  my  religion  admit  even  a  desire  of
unbecoming  retaliation :  situated  as  I  am,  I  must  hear
them  tranquilly.

Besides,  a  sect  of  people  who  are  apt  to  make  use
of  the  most  foul  language,  when  they  feel  angry  with
their  supposed  deities,f  cannot  of  course  be  expected,
when  irritated  with  contradiction,  to  pay  due  attention,
unless  checked  by  fear,  to  the  propriety  of  the  use  of
decent  expressions,  either  in  common  conversation  or
in  religious  controversy.

The  total  sum  of  the  arguments,  set  forth  as  far  as
page  13,  of  the  translation  of  this  treatise  (however  in-
consistent they  are  with  each  other),  seems  intended  to
prove  that  faith  in  the  Supreme  Being,  when  united
with  moral  works,  leads  men  to  eternal  happiness.

This  doctrine,  I  am  happy  to  observe,  strongly  cor-
roborates every  assertion  that  I  have  made  in  my  trans-

•  Vide  the  "  Apologfy,"  passim.

t  As  may  be  observed  when  at  the  annual  festival  of  Juggun-
nath,  the  car  in  which  he  is  conveyed  happens  to  be  impeded  in
its  progress  by  any  unseen  obstacle  In  this  case,  the  dithculty  is
supposed  to  be  occasioned  by  the  malicious  opposition  of  that  god,
on  whom  the  most  gross  abuse  is  liberally  bestowed  by  his  de-
votees.


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  159

lation ;  a  few  paragraphs  of  which  I  beg  leave  to  repeat
here  for  the  satisfaction  of  my  readers. In  the  abridg-
ment of  the  Vcdant,  page  11th:  "  The  Vedant  shews
"  that  moral  principle  is  a  part  of  the  adoration  of
"  God,  viz.  a  command over passions  and  over  the
"  external  senses  of  the  body,  and good  acts  are  de-
*'  clared  by  the  Ved  to  be  indispensable  in the  mind's
"  approximation to  God ; they  should therefore be
"  strictly  taken care  of,  and  attended  to,  both  pre-
"  viously  and  subsequently  to  such  approximation  to
"  the  Supreme  Being;  that  is  to  say,  we  shoulil  not  in-
"  dulge  our  evil  propensities,  but  should  endeavour  to
"  have  entire  control  over  them  :  reliance  on,  and  self-
"  resignation  to  the  only  true  Being,  with  an  aversion
"  to  worldly  considerations,  are  included  in  the  good
"  acts above  alluded  to." In the  introduction  to  the
Ishopanished (page  5)  : "  Under  these impressions,
"  therefore, I  have  been  impelled  to  lay  before  them
"  genuine  translations  of  parts  of  their  scriptures,  which
"  inculcate  not  only  the  enlightened  worship  of  One
"  God,  but the  purest  principles  of  morality." But
the  learned  Brahmin  asserts,  in two  instances,  among
arguments  above noticed, that  the  worship  of  a  fa-
voured deity  and  that  of  an  image  are  also  considered
to  be  acts  of  morality. The  absurdity  of  this  assertion
will  be  shown  afterwards,  in  considering  the  subjects  of
idol-worship. To  English  readers,  however,  it  may  be
proper  to  remark,  that  the  Sungscrit  word  which  sig-
nifies works,  is  not  to  be  understood  in  the  same  sense
as  that  which it  implies  in Christian theology,  when
works  are  opposed  to  faith. Christians  understand  by
works,  actions  of  moral  merit,  whereas  Hindoos  use  the


160  SFX'OND DEFENCE OF THE

term  in  their  theology  only  to  denote  religious  rites
and  ceremonies  prescribed  by  Hindoo  lawgivers,  which
are  often  irreconcilable  with  the  commonly  received
maxims  of  moral  duty;  as,  for  instance,  the  crime  of
suicide  prescribed  to  widows  by  Ungeera,  and  to  pil-
gz'ims  at  holy  places  by  the  Nursingh  and  Koorma
Poorans.  I  do  not,  therefore,  admit  that  works,  taken
in  the  latter  sense  (that  is,  the  different  religious  acts
prescribed  by  the  Sastra  to  the  different  classes  of
Hindoos  respectively)  are  necessary  to  attain  divine
faith,  or  that  they  are  indispensable  accompaniments
of  holy  knowledge  ;  for  the  Vedant  in  the  chapter  3d,
section  4,  text  37th,  positively  declares  that  the  true
knowledge  of  God  may  be  acquired  without  observing
the  rules  and  rites  prescribed  by  the  Sastra  to  each
class  of  Hindoos;  and  also,  examples  are  frequently
found  in  the  Ved,  of  persons,  who,  though  they
neglected  the  performance  of  religious  rites  and  cere-
monies, attained  divine  knowledge  and  absorption  by
control  over  their  passions  and  senses,  and  by  contem-
plation of  the  Ruler  of  the  universe.  Menu,  the  first
and  chief  of  all  Hindoo  lawgivers,  confirms  the  same
docti'ines  in  describing  the  duties  of  laymen,  in  the
texts  22d,  23d,  and  24th  of  the  4th  chapter  of  his
work;  and  in  the  Bhashya,  or  commentaries  on  the
Ishopanishad,  and  on  the  other  Upanishads  of  the
Veds,  the  illustrious  Sankaracharjya  declared  the  at-
tainment of  faiih  in  God,  and  the  adoration  of  the
Supreme  Being,  to  be  entirely  independent  of  Brah-
minical  ceremonies;  and  the  Ved  affirms  that  "  many
"  learned  true  believers  never  worshipped  fire,  nor  any
"  celestial  god  through  fire." The  learned  Brahmun,


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  161

although  he  has  ackiiowledgetl  himself,  in  p.  9th,
line  fith,  of  his  treatise,  that,  "  in  the  opinion  of  San-
"  karacharjya  the  attaimnent  of  absorption  does  not
"  depend  on  works  of  merit"  (or,  properly  speaking,
on  religious  rites),  yet  forgetting  the  obedience  he  has
expressed  to  be  due  to  the  instruction*  of  that  cele-
brated commentator,  has  inunediately  contradicted  his
opinion,  when  he  says  in  p.  9,  1.  9:  "  It  has  also  been
"  ascertained  that  acts  of  merit  (Brahminical  rites)
"  must  be  performed  previously  to  the  attainment  of
"  divine  knowledge;"  for,  if  divine  knowledge;  were  to
be  dependent  on  the  observance  of  Brahminical  rites,
and  absorption  dependent  on  divine  knowledge,  it
would  follow  necessarily  that  absorption  would  depend
on  Brahminical  rites,  which  is  directly  contrary  to  the
opinion  of  the  commentator  quoted  by  the  learned
Brahmun  himself.

Moreover,  the  learned  Brahmun  at  first  states
(p.  11,  1.  12)  that,  "  in  the  ancient  writers  we
*'  read  that  a  knowledge  of  Brahm,  or  holy  knowledge,
*'  is  independent  of  acts"  (religious  rites);  but  he
again  contradicts  this  statement,  and  endeavours  to
explain  it  away  (p.  11,  1.  24):  "Thus  when  the
"  Sastras  state  that  absorption  may  be  attained  even
"  though  the  sacrificial  fires  be  neglected,  the  praise  of
"  that  holy  knowledge  is  intended,  but  not  the  depre-
"  ciationof  meritorious  acts"  (Brahminical  rites).  Here
he  chooses  to  accuse  his  scripture,  and  ancient  hoi}'
writers,  of  exaggerated  and  extravagant  praise  of  holy
knowledge,  rather  than  that  the  least  shock  should  be

• 1'.  .i.  I.  14.


162  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

given  by  their  autliority  to  the  structure  of  paganism
and  idolatry.  From  this  instance,  the  public  may  per-
ceive how  zealous  the  learned  Brahmun  and  his
brethren  are,  in  respect  to  the  preservation  of  their
fertile  estate  of  idolatry,  when  tiiey  are  willing  to  sacri-
fice to  it  even  their  own  scriptural  authorities.

Upon  a  full  perusal  of  the  treatise,  it  appears  that
the  arguments  employed  by  the  learned  Brahmun  have
no  other  object  than  to  support  the  weak  system  of
idol-worship;  inasmuch  as  he  repeatedly  declares,  that
the  adoration  of  330,000,000  deities,  especially  the
principal  ones,  such  as  Siva,  Vishnu,  Kali,  Gunesh,
the  Sun  and  others,  through  their  several  images,  has
been  enjoined  by  the  Shastras,  and  sanctioned  by
custom.  I  am  not  a  little  suprised  to  observe,  that
after  having  perused  my  Preface  to  the  Ishopanishad  in
Bengali  (of  which  during  the  last  twelve  months  I
have  distributed  nearly  five  hundred  copies  amongst
all  descriptions  of  Hindoos),  the  learned  Brahmun  has
offered  no  objection  to  what  I  have  therein  asserted,
relative  to  the  reason  assigned  by  the  same  Shastras,  as
well  for  the  injunction  to  worship  these  figured  beings,
as  for  the  general  prevalence  of  idol-worship  in  this
country.

In  that  work,  I  admitted  that  the  worship  of  these
deities  was  directed  by  the  Shastra  ;  but,  at  the  same
time,  I  proved  by  their  own  authority,  that  this  was
merely  a  concession  made  to  the  limited  faculties  of  the
vulgar,  with  the  view  of  remedying,  in  some  degree,
the  misfortune  of  their  being  incapable  of  comprehend-
ing and  adopting  the  spiritual  worship  of  the  true  God.
Thus,  in  the  aforesaid  Preface,  I  remarked  : "  For  they


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  103

"  (the  Poorans,  Tuntras,  &c.)  repeatedly  declare
"  God  to  be  one,  and  above  the  apprehension  of  the
"  external  and  internal  senses.  They  indeed  expressly
"  declare  the  divinity  of  many  gods,  and  the  mode  of
"  their  worship  ;  but  they  reconcile  those  contradict-
"  ing  assertions  by  affirming  frequently,  that  the  dl-
"  rections  to  worship  any  celestial  beings  are  only
"  ajiplicable  to  those  who  are  incapable  of  elevating
"  their  minds  to  the  idea  of  an  invisible  being."  And,
with  the  view  to  remove  every  doubt  as  to  the  correct-
ness of  my  assertion,  I  at  the  same  time  quoted  the
most  unquestionable  authorities,  a  few  of  which  I  shall
here  repeat  "  Thus  corresponding  to  the  natures  of
"  different  powers  and  qualities,  numerous  figures  have
"  been  invented  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  not
"  possessed  of  sufficient  understanding."  "  The  vulgar
"  look  for  their  gods  in  water ;  men  of  more  extended
"  knowledge,  in  celestial  bodies  ;  the  ignorant,  in  wood,
"  bricks,  and  stones ;  but  learned  men  in  the  universal
"  soul.''  "  It  is  impossible  for  those  who  consider
"  pilgrimage  as  devotion,  and  believe  that  the  divine
"  nature  exists  in  the  image,  to  look  up  to,  communi-
"  cate  with,  to  petition,  and  to  serve  true  believers  in
«  God."

Such  indeed  is  the  prevalent  nature  of  truth,  that
when  to  dispute  it  is  impossible,  the  learned  Brahmun
has  not  been  always  successful  in  concealing  it,  even
when  the  admission  is  most  fatal  t*  his  own  argument.
In  p.  28,  1.  31,  he  says  :  "  But  to  those  it  is  enjoined
"  who,  from  a  defective  under  standing  ^  do  not  perceive
"  that  God  exists  in  every  thing,  that  they  should
"  worship  him  through  the  medium  of  some  created
M  2


164  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

"  object."  In  making  this  acknowledgment,  the  learn-
ed Brahmun  has  confirmed  the  correctness  of  all  my
assertions ;  though  the  evident  conclusion  is,  that  he
and  all  his  followers  must  either  immediately  give  up
all  pretensions  to  understanding,  or  forsake  idolatry.

In my  former  tract, I not  only  proved that  the
adoration of  the Supreme Being  in spirit  was  pre-
scribed by  the  Ved  to  men of  understanding, and the
worship  of  the celestial bodies and their  images  to
ijrnorant,  but  I also  asserted,  that the  Ved actually
prohibited  the  worship  of  any  kind  of  figured beings
by men of  intellect and education. A few of  the
passages quoted by me in my former publications,
on  which  this  assertion  rests,  I  also  beg  leave  to  repeat.
"  He  who  worships  any God  except  the Supreme
"  Being, and  thinks that he  himself  is distinct  and
"  inferior to  that  God,  knows  nothing,  and is con-
"  sidered  a  domestic  beast of  these  gods." "  A  state
"  even  so  high  as  that  of  Brahma,  does  not  afford  real
"  bliss." "  Adore  God  alone. None  but  the  Supreme
"  Being  is  to be worshipped; nothing  excepting  him
"  should  be  adored  by  a  wise  man." I  repeat  also  the
following  text  of  the  Vedant : "  The  declaration  of  the
"  Ved,  that  those  that  worship the celestial  gods  are
"  the  food  of  such  gods,  is  an  allegorical  expression,
"  and  only  means  that  they  are  comforts  to  the  celes-
"  tial  gods,  as  food to mankind ;  for  he  who  has  no
"  faith  in the  Supreme  Being,  is rendered  subject  to
"  these  ""ods  ;  the  Ved  affirms the same." No  reply
therefore  is,  I  presume, required  of  me to  the  argu-
ments adduced  by  the  learned  Brahmun  in  his  treatise
for  idol-worship; except that I should offer some


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF IHE VEDS.  165

additional  authorities,  confirming  exclusively  the  ra-
tional worship  of  the  true  God,  and  prohibiting  the
worship  of  the  celestial  figures  and  their  images.  I
beg  leave  accordingly  to  quote,  in  the  first  instance,
a  few  texts  of  the  Ved :  "  Men  may  acquire  eternal
"  beatitude,  by  obtaining  a  knowledge  of  the  Supreme
"  Being  alone;  there  is  no  other  way  to  salvation."*
— "  To  those  that  acquire  a  knowledge  of  Him,  the
"  Ruler  of  the  intellectual  power,  who  is  eternal
"  amidst  the  perishable  universe,  and  is  the  source
"  of  sensation  among  all  animate  existences,  and  who
"  alone- assigns  to  so  many  objects  their  respective
"  j)urposes,  everlasting  beatitude  is  allotted;  but  not
"  to  those  who  are  not  possessed  of  that  knowledge. ""f"
And  in  the  4th,  5th,  6th,  7th,  and  8th  texts  of  the
Cenopanishad,  the  Ved  has,  five  times  successively,
denied  the  divinity  of  any  specific  being  which  men  in
general  worship;  and  has  affirmed  the  divinity  of  that
Being  solely,  who  is  beyond  description  and  compre-
hension, and  out  of  the  reach  of  the  power  of  vision,
and  of  the  sense  of  hearing  or  of  smelling.  The  most
celebrated  Sankaracharjya,  in  his  commentary  upon
these  texts,  states  that,  lest  people  should  suppose
Vishnu,  Mahadeba,  Poven,  Indra,  or  any  other,  to
be  a  supreme  spirit,  the  Ved  in  this  passage  disavows
positively  the  divinity  of  all  of  them. — Again,  the  Ved
says  '.%  "  Those  that  neglect  the  contemplation  of  the
"  Supreme  Spirit,  either  by  devoting  themselves  solely  to
"  the  performance  of  the  ceremonies  of  religion,  or  by
"  living  destitute  of  religious  ideas,  shall, after  death,

• Saoctu.  t r'iitliii.  I I.shnp;iiiisli;i(l.


166  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

"  assume  the  state  of  demons,  such  as  that  of  the  celestial
"  it^ods,  and  of  other  created  beings,  which  are  sur-
"  rounded  with  the  darkness  of  ignorance."  It  will
not,  I  hope,  be  supposed  inconsistent  with  the  subject
in  question  to  mention  in  this  place  in  what  manner
the  Vedant  treats  of  these  celestial  gods,  and  how  the
Ved  classes  them  among  the  other  beings.  The  Vedant
(c.  1st,  s.  3d,  t.  26th)  has  the  following  passage :
"  Vyas  affirms  that  it  is  prescribed  also  to  a  celestial
"  gods  and  heavenly  beings  to  attain  a  knowledge  of
"  the  Supreme  Being,  because  a  desire  of  absorption
"  is  equally  possible  for  them."  And  the  Ved,  in  the
Moonduc  Upanishad,  thus  declares :  "  From  Him,
"  who  knows  all  things  generally  and  particularly,  and
"  who  only  by  his  omniscience  created,  the  universe,
"  Bruhma,  and  whatever  bears  appellation,  and  figure
"  as  well  as  food,  all  are  produced."  "  From  Him  (the
"  Supreme  Being)  celestial  gods*  of  many  descriptions,
"  Siddha,  or  beings  next  to  celestial  gods,  mankind,
"  beasts,  birds,  life,  wheat,  and  barley,  all  are  pro-
"  duced."  In  the  Debee  Mahatmya,  a  work  which
is  as  much  in  circulation  among  the  Hindoos  as
their  daily  prayer-book,-|-  (c.  1st,  t.  66th)  the  creation
of  Vishnu,  Brahma,  and  Mahadeva,  is  most  distinctly
affirmed.

Munoo, the best of  all  the commentators of  the

•  The  Ved,  having  in  the  first  instance  personified  all  the  attri-
butes and  powers  of  the  Deity,  and  also  the  celestial  bodies  and
natural  elements,  does,  in  conformity  to  this  idea  of  personification,
treat  of  them  in  the  subsequent  passages  as  if  they  were  real
beings,  ascribing  to  them  birth,  animation,  senses,  and  accidents,
as  well  as  liability  to  annihilation.  +  Pooja  Fatal,


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  167

Veds,  says  (chap.  12th,  text  85th):  "Of  all  those
"  duties,  answered  Bhrigoo,  the  principal  is  to  acquire
"//•ow  the  Upanishad  a  true  knowledge  of  the  one
"  Supreme  Spirit,  that  is,  the  most  exalted  of  all
"  sciences,  because  through  that  knowledge  eternal
"  beatitude  is  obtained."  And  tiie  same  author,  in
the  conclusion  of  his  work  on  rites  and  ceremonies,
thus  directs  (t.  92d,  c.  12th)  :  "  Thus  must  the
"  chief  of  the  twice-born,  though  he  neglect  the  cere-
"  monial  rites  mentioned  in  the  Shastras,  be  diligent
"in  attaining  a  knowledge  of  God,  in  controlling  his
"  organs  of  sense,  and  in  repeating  the  Ved."  In  the
Coolarnuva,  "  absorption  is  not  to  be  effected  by
"  the  studies  of  the  Veds  nor  by  the  reading  of  other
"  Shastras :  absorption  is  effected  by  a  true  knowledge
"  of  the  Supreme  Being,  O  !  Parbutee,  except  that
"  knowledge  there  is  no  other  way  to  absorption."
"  Cast  or  religious  order  belonging  to  each  sect,  is  not
"  calculated  to  be  the  cause  of  eternal  beatitude,  nor  is
"  the  study  of  Durshuns  or  any  other  Shastras,  suffi-
"  cient  to  produce  absorption  :  a  knowledge  of  the
"  Supreme  Spirit  is  alone  the  cause  of  eternal  beati-
"  tude."  Mahanervana  :  "  He  who  believes  that  from
"  the  highest  state  of  Brahmii  to  the  lowest  state  of  a
"  straw,  all  are  delusions,  and  that  the  one  Supreme  Spi-
"  rit  is  the  only  true  being,  attains  beatitude."  "  Those
"  who  believe  that  the  divine  nature  exists  in  an  image
"made  of  earth,  stone,  metal,  wood,  or  of  other  ma-
"  terials,  reap  only  distress  by  their  austerities  ;  but
"  they  cannot,  without  a  knowledge  of  the  Supreme
"  Spirit, acquire  absorption."

I  am  really  sorry  to  observe  that, notwithstanding


168  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

these  autliorities  and  a  thousand  others  of  a  similar
nature,  llie  learned  Brahmun  appears  altogether  unim-
pressed by  the  luminous  manner  in  which  they  incul-
cate the  sublime  simple  spiritual  belief  in,  and  worship
of,  one  God,  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  should  ma-
nifest so  much  zeal  in  leading  people  into  an  idolatrous
belief  in  the  divinity  of  created  and  perishable  beings.
Idolatr}',  as  now  practised  by  our  countrymen,  and
which  the  learned  Brahmun  so  zealously  supports  as
conducive  to  morality,  is  not  only  rejected  by  the
Shastras  universally,  but  must  also  be  looked  upon
with  great  horror  by  common  sense,  as  leading  directly
to  immorality  and  destructive  of  social  comforts.  For
every  Hindoo  who  devotes  himself  to  this  absurd  wor-
ship, constructs  for  that  purpose  a  couple  of  male  and
female  idols,  sometimes  indecent  in  form,  as  represen-
tatives of  his  favourite  deities ;  he  is  taught  and  en-
joined from  his  infancy  to  contemplate  and  repeat  the
history  of  these,  as  well  as  of  their  fellow  deities,
though  the  actions  ascribed  to  them  be  only  a  conti-
nued series  of  debaucher}',  sensuality,  falsehood,  ingra-
titude, breach  of  trust,  and  treacheiy  to  friends*  There
can  be  but  one  opinion  respecting  the  moral  conduct
to  be  expected  of  a  person,  who  has  been  brought  up
with  sentiments  of  reverence  to  such  beings,  who  re-
freshes his  memory  relative  to  them  almost  every  day,
and  who  has  been  persuaded  to  believe,  that  a  repe-
tition of  the  holy  name  of  one  of  these  deities,*  or  a
trifling  present  to  his  image  or  to  his  devotee,  is  suffi-
cient, not  only  to  purify  and  free  him  from  all  crimes
whatsoever,  but  to  procure  to  him  future  beatitude.
* Vide  Note  at  the  ciul.


MONOTHEISTICAT. SYSTI.M OF THE VEDS.  169

As  to  the  custom  or  practice  to  wliicli  the  learned
Brahmun  so  often  refers  in  defence  of  idolatry,  I  have
already,  I  presume,  explained  in  the  Preface  of  the
Ishopanishad,  the  accidental  circumstances  which  have
caused  idol-worship  to  flourish  ihrouiifhout  the  greater
part  of  India;  but,  as  the  learned  Brahmun  has  not
condescended  to  notice  any  of  my  remarks  on  this  sub-
ject, 1  beg  leave  to  repeat  here  a  part  of  them.

"  Many  learned  Brahmuns  are  jierfectly  aware  of  the
"  absurdity  of  idolatry,  and  are  well  informed  of  the
"  nature  of  the  pure  mode  of  divine  worship;  but  as  in
"  the  rites,  ceremonies,  and  festivals  of  idolatry  they  find
"  the  source  of  their  comforts  and  fortune,  they  not
"  only  never  fail  to  protect  idol-worship  from  all  at-
"  tacks,  but  even  advance  and  encourage  it  to  the
"  utmost  of  their  power,  by  keeping  the  knowledge  of
"  their  scriptures  concealed  from  the  rest  of  the  people."
And  again  :  "  It  is,  however,  evident  to  every  one  pos-
"  sessed  of  common  sense,  that  custom  or  fashion  is
"  quite  different  from  divine  faith  ;  the  latter  proceed-
"  ing  from  spiritual  authorities  and  correct  reasoning,
"  and  the  former  being  merely  the  fruit  of  vulgar  ca-
"  price.  What  can  justify  a  man,  who  believes  in  the
"  inspiration  of  his  religious  books,  in  neglecting  the
"  direct  authorities  of  the  same  works,  and  subjecting
"  himself  entirely  to  custom  and  fashion,  which  are
"  liable  to  perpetual  changes,  and  depend  upon  po-
"  pular  whim  ?  But  it  cannot  be  passed  unnoticed,
'•  that  those  who  practise  idolatry,  and  defend  it  under
"  the  shield  of  custom,  have  been  violating  their  eus-
"  toms  alnn>st  every  twenty  years, lor  the  sake  of  a


170  Sf:cONU DEFENCE OF THE

"  little  convenience,  or  to  promote  their  worldly  ad-
"  vanta2;es/'  Instances  of  this  sort  are  mentioned  in
the  preface  of  the  Ishopanishad,  and  to  those  I  beg
leave  to  recal  the  attention  of  the  learned  Brahmun.

Every  reader  may  observe,  that  the  learned  Brahmun
in  his  treatise,  written  (as  he  says)  on  the  doctrines  of
the  Vedant,  has  generally  neglected  to  quote  any  au-
thority for  his  assertions ;  and  when  he  cites  the  Ved
or  the  Vedant  (which  he  does  sometimes)  as  his  au-
thority, he  carefully  omits  to  mention  the  text  or  part
to  which  his  assertion  refers.  The  validity  of  theological
controversy  chiefly  depends  upon  Scriptural  authority,
but  when  no  authority  is  offered,  the  public  may  judge
how  far  its  credibility  should  extend.  I  shall,  however,
make  a  few  remarks  on  the  absurd  and  contradictory
assertions  with  which  the  treatise  abounds.

The  learned  Brahmun  observes :'"  "  But  if  the  divine
"  essence  itself,  and  not  the  energy  be  extolled,  it  will
«  be  adored  under  the  forms  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and
"  Indra,  and  other  male  deities."  And  in  other  places,
(p.  30,  1.  27) :  "  So  by  paying  adoration  to  any  material
"  object,  animate  or  inanimate,  the  Supreme  Being
"  himself  is  adored."  If  the  truth  of  the  latter  assertion
be  admitted  (namely,  that  God  himself  is  adored  by
the  adoration  of  any  thing  whatsoever),  no  mark  of  dis-
tinction between  the  adoration  of  any  visible  objects
and  male  deities  will  exist ;  and  the  former  assertion  re-
specting the  adoration  of  the  Supreme  Being  through
the  male  deities  only,  will  appear  an  absurd  restriction.

•  P.  14,1.  14.


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  171

The  learned  IJrahmun  states  (p.  19,  1.  31),  that,  "If
"  you  believe  on  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures,  that
"  there  is  a  Supreme  Being,  can  you  not  believe  that
"  he  is  united  to  matter  ?"  A  belief  in  God  is  by  no
means  connected  with  a  belief  of  his  being  united  to
matter:  for  those  that  have  faith  in  the  existence  of
the  Almighty,  and  are  endued  with  common  sense,
scruple  not  to  confess  their  ignorance  as  to  his  nature
or  mode  of  existence,  in  regard  to  the  point  of  his  re-
lation to  matter,  or  to  the  properties  of  matter.  How,
therefore,  can  a  belief  in  God's  being  united  to  matter,
be  inferred  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  a  belief  in  his
existence  ?  The  learned  Brahmun  again  contradicts
himself  on  this  point,  saying  (p.  38,  1.  19) :  "  The  divine
"  essence  being  supernatural  and  immaterial,  a  knovv-
"  ledge  of  it  is  to  be  acquired  solely  from  revelations."

The  learned  Brahmun  (in  p.  18,  1.  4):  states  that,
"  A  quality  cannot  exist  independently  of  its  sub-
"  stance,  but  substance  may  exist  independently  of  any
"  quality."  Every  one  possessed  of  sensation  is  con-
vinced, that  a  substance  is  as  much  dependent  on  the
possession  of  some  quality  or  qualities  for  its  existence,
as  a  quality  on  some  substance.  It  is  impossible  even
to  imagine  a  substance  divested  of  qualities.  Despoil
it  as  much  as  you  please,  that  of  magnitude  must  still
remain.  I  therefore  trust  that  the  public  will  not  sup-
pose the  above  stated  doctrines  of  the  learned  Brahmun
to  have  been  derived  from  those  of  the  Vedant.

It  is  again  stated  (p.  21,  1.  4)  that,  "  In  point  of
"  fact,  if  you  admit  the  existence  of  matter,  as  far  as  it
"  regards  yourself,  with  its  twenty-four  accidents,  as
"  confirmed by  universal experience,  you can  easily


172  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

"  conceive  that  the  same  properties  belong  to  the  Su-
"  prenie  Being."  It  is  easy  enough  for  the  learned
Brahniun  to  conceive  that  the  twenty-four  properties
which  are  peculiar  to  animals,  and  among  which  all
sources  of  carnal  pleasures  are  included,  belong  to  his
supposed  deities;  but  it  is  difficult,  or  rather  impos-
sible, for  a  man  untainted  with  idolatrous  principles,  to
ascribe  to  God  all  such  properties  as  he  allows  to  exist
in  himself.

The  learned  Brahmun  has  drawn  an  analogy  between
the  operation  of  the  charms  of  the  Veds,  and  that  of
magic;  whereon  he  says  (p.  18,  1.  1):  "  Cannot  the
"  charms  of  the  Veds  operate  as  powerfully  as  th(  se
"  of  magic,  in  producing  effects  where  the  cause  is  not
"  present  ?"  If  the  foundation  of  the  Veds  is  held  not
to  be  stronger,  as  the  learned  Brahmun  seems  to  con-
sider it,  than  that  of  magic,  I  am  afraid  it  will  be  found
to  rest  on  so  slender  a  footing,  that  its  doctrines  will
hardly  be  worth  discussion.

In  p.  24,  1.  10,  the  learned  Brahmun  states  that
*'  The  Vedant  itself,  in  treating  of  the  several  deities,
"  declares  them  to  be  possessed  of  forms,  and  their
"  actions  and  enjoyments  are  all  dependent  on  their
"  corporeal  nature."  But  (p.  21,  1.  19)  he  says  :  "  Be-
"  cause  the  male  and  female  deities,  wliose  being  I
"  contend  for,  are  nothing  more  than  accidents  exist-
"  ing  in  the  Supreme  Being."

He  thus  at  one  time  considers  these  deities  as  }  os-
sessed  of  a  corporeal  nature,  and  at  another  declares
them  to  be  mere  accidents  in  God ;  which  are  quite  in-
consistent with  the  attribute  of  corporeality.  I  am
really  at  a  loss  to  understand,  how  the  learned  Brahmun


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS,  173

coiikl  admit  so  dark  a  contradiction  into  his  ^^  Lunar
"  liyht  of  the  Vedant."

The  learned  Brahmun  (in  p,  27,  1.  G)  thus  assimi-
lates the  worship  of  the  Supreme  Bein^  to  that  of  an
earthly  kinji;,  saying  "  Let  us  drop  the  discourse  con-
"  cerning  a  Supreme  and  Invisible  Being ;  take  an
"  earthly  king.  It  is  evident  that,  to  serve  him,  there
"  must  be  the  medium  of  materiality.  Can  service  to
"  him  be  accojnplished  otherwise  than  by  attendance
*'  on  his  person,  praising  his  qualities,  or  some  similar
"  method  ?"  Those  who  believe  God  to  be  an  almighty,
omniscient,  and  independent  existence,  which,  pervad-
ing the  nniverse,  is  deficient  in  nothing ;  and  also
know  the  feeble  and  dependent  nature  of  earthly  kings,
as  liable  to  sudden  ruin,  as  harassed  by  incessant  cares
and  wants,  ought  never,  I  presume,  to  assimilate  the
contemplation  of  the  Almighty  power  with  any  corpo-
real service  acceptable  to  an  earthly  king.  But  as  by
means  of  this  analogy,  the  learned  Brahmun  and  his
brethen  have  successfully  persuaded  their  followers  to
make,  in  imitation  of  presents  and  bribes  offered  to
princes,  pecuniary  vows  to  these  supposed  deities,  to
which  it  would  seem  none  but  the  learned  Brahmun
and  his  brethren  have  exclusive  claim, — and  as  such
analogy  has  thus  become  the  source  of  their  comforts
and  livelihood,  I  shall  say  no  more  upon  so  tender  a
subject.

He  further  observes  (in  p.  22,  1.  27) :  "  In  reverting
"  to  the  subject,  yon  affirm,  that  you  admit  the  exis-
"  tence  of  matter  in  human  beings,  because  it  is  evident
"  to  your  senses ;  but  deny  it  with  respect  to  God,  bc-
"  cause  it  is  not  evident  to  your  senses,"  &c.;  and,  "If


174-  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

"  this  be  your  method  of  reasoning,  it  would  appear
"  that  your  faith  is confined to those objects only
"  which are  evident  to  your  senses." As  far  as  my
recollection  goes  with respect  to  the  contents  of  my
publications,  both  in  the  native  language  and  in  Eng-
lish, I  believe  I  never  denied  the  materiality  of  God,
on  the  mere  ground  of  its  not  being  evident  to  our
senses. The  assertion  which  I  quoted,  or  made  use  of
in  my  former  treatises,  is,  that  the  nature  of  the  God-
head is beyond the comprehension of  external  and
internal  senses;*  which,  I  presume,  implies  neither  de-
nial of  the  materiality  of  God,  on  the  sole  ground  of
his being invisible, nor the limitation of  my  faith
merely  to  objects evident  to the  senses. For  many
things  that  far  surpass  the  limits  of  our  senses  to  per-
ceive, or  experience  to teach, may  yet  be rendered
credible, or  even  demonstrated  by  inferences drawn
from  our  experience. Such  as  the  mutual  gravitation
of  the  earth  and  moon  towards  each  other,  and  of  both
to  the  sun  ;  which  facts  cannot  be  perceived  by  any  of
our  senses,  but  may  be  clearly  demonstrated  by  reason-
ing drawn  from  our  experience. Hence  it  appears,
that  a  thing  is  justly  denied,  only,  when  found  contrary
to  sense  and  reason,  and  not  merely  because  it  is  not
perceptible  to  the  senses.

I  have  now  to  notice  the  friendly  advice  given  me  by
the  learned  Brahmun  (in  p.  23,  1.  16).  "  But  at  all  the
"  events,  divest  yourself  of  the  uneasy  sensations  you
"  profess  to  experience,  at  witnessing  the  worship  paid
"  to idols,  prepared at  the expense and labour of

•  The  Preface  to  the  Ishopanishad,  p.  2,  1.  9;  p.  3,  1.  2. The
Abridgment  of  the  Vedanf,  p.  ]  and  2.


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  175

"  another."  In  tlianking  liim  for  his  trouble  in  offering
me  this  counsel,  I  must,  however,  beg  the  learned
Brahmun  to  excuse  me,  while  I  acknowledge  myself
unable  to  follow  it ;  and  that  for  several  reasons.  1st.
A  feeling  for  the  misery  and  distress  of  his  fellow  crea-
tures is,  to  every  one  not  overpowered  by  selfish  mo-
tives, I  presume,  rather  natural  than  optional.  2dly.  I,
as  one  of  their  countrymen,  and  ranked  in  the  most
religious  sect,  of  course  participate  in  the  disgrace  and
ridicule  to  which  they  have  subjected  themselves,  in
defiance  of  their  scriptural  authority,  by  the  worship  of
idols,  very  often  under  the  most  shameful  forms,  ac-
companied with  the  foulest  language,  and  most  indecent
hymns  and  gestures.  3dly.  A  sense  of  the  duty  which
one  man  owes  to  another,  compels  me  to  exert  my  ut-
most endeavours  to  rescue  them  from  imposition  and
servitude,  and  promote  their  comfort  and  happiness.

He  farther  observes  (p.  30,  1.  19) :  "  In  the  like
"  manner,  the  King  of  Kings  is  served  equally  by  those
"  worshippers  who  are  acquainted  with  his  real  essence,
"  and  by  those  who  only  recognize  Him  under  the  forms
"  of  the  deities;  but  in  the  future  distribution  of  re-
"  wards  a  distinction  will  be  made."  As  the  learned
Brahmun  confesses,  that  the  same  reward  is  not  pro-
mised to  the  worshippers  of  figured  deities  as  to  the
adorers  of  the  Supreme  Being,  it  seems  strange  that  he
should  persist  in  alleging  that  God  is  truly  worshipped
in  the  adoration  of  figured  gods;  for  if  the  worship  be
in  both  cases  the  same,  the  reward  bestowed  by  a  just
God  must  be  the  same  to  both ;  but  the  rewards  are  not
the  same  to  both,  and  therefore  the  worship  of  figured
deities  cannot  be  considered  equal  to  the  adoration  of
God.


176  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

In  the  same  page  (1.  7),  he  compares  God  to  a
mighty  emperor;  saying,  "As  a  mighty  emperor
"  travels  through  his  kingdom  in  the  garb  of  a  peasant,
"  to  effect  the  welfare  of  his  subjects,  so  the  King  of
"  Kings  pervades  the  universe,  assuming  a  divine,  or
"  even  a  human  form,  for  the  same  benevolent  pur-
"  pose."  This  comparison  seems  extremely  objection-
able, and  the  inference  from  it  totally  inadmissible.
For  a  king  being  ignorant  of  things  out  of  the  reach  of
his  sight,  and  liable  to  be  deceived  respecting  the  se-
crets and  private  opinions  of  his  subjects,  may  some-
times be  obliged  to  travel  through  his  kingdom,  to
acquire  a  knowledge  of  their  condition,  and  to  promote
their  welfare  personally.  But  there  can  be  obviously
no  inducement  for  an  omnipotent  being,  in  whose
omniscience  also  the  learned  Brahmun,  I  dare  say,  be-
lieves, to  assume  a  form  in  order  either  to  acquaint
himself  with  the  affairs  of  men,  or  to  accomplish  any
benevolent  design  towards  his  creatures.

He  again  observes,  that  these  figures  and  idols  are
representations  of  the  true  God,  a  sight  of  which
serves,  as  he  alleges,  to  bring  that  Being  to  his  recol-
lection (p.  30,  1.  5) :  "  They  are  as  pictures,  which  recal
"  to  the  memory  a  dear  and  absent  friend,  or  like  the
"  worship  of  the  moon,  reflected  in  various  waters."

This  observation  of  the  learned  Brahmun,  induces
me  to  suppose  that  he  must  have  formed  a  notion  of
Godhead  quite  strange  and  contemptible:  for  it  is
almost  impossible  for  a  man,  who  has  a  becoming  idea
of  God's  superiority  to  all  creatures,  to  represent  Him,
as  the  Hindoos  very  often  do,  in  a  form  so  shameful,
that  a  description  of  it  is  prohibited  by  common de-


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  177

ceucy,  or  in  a  shape  so  ridiculous,  as  that  piebald  kite
called  Kshyeiiuinkuree,  and  that  of  another  bird  called
Neelkunth,  or  of  jackals,  &c.  And  it  is  equally  diffi-
cult to  believe  that  a  rational  being  can  make  use  of
such  objects  to  bring  the  All-perfect  Almighty  Power
to  his  recollection.

He  further  says  (p  31,  1.32):  "  If  any  one  assert
"  that  the  case  is  otherwise,  that  the  deities,  mankind,
"  the  heavens,  and  other  objects,  have  an  existence  in-
"  dependent  of  God,  that  faith  in  him  is  sufficient
"  without  worship,  that  they  (the  deities)  cannot  meet
"with  reverence,  how  can  that  person  affect  to  disbe-
"  lieve  the  doctrine  of  independent  existence,  or  assert
"  that  he  is  a  believer  in  universality,  or  a  follower  of
"the  V^edant?"  To  acquit  myself  from  such  gross
but  unfounded  accusation  as  that  of  my  believing  mate-
rial existence  to  be  independent  of  God,  I  repeat  a
few  passages  from  the  abridgment  of  the  Vedant.
(P.  6,  \.  ^•) :  "Nothing  bears  true  existence  ex-
"  cepting  God."  Again  in  1.  9,  "  The  existence  of
"  whatever  thing  that  appears  to  us,  relies  on  the  exis-
"  tence  of  God."  Besides,  there  is  not,  I  am  confi-
dent, a  single  assertion  in  the  whole  of  my  publication?,
from  which  the  learned  Brahmun  might  justly  infer
that  I  believed  in  the  independent  existence  of  deities,
mankind,  the  heavens,  or  other  objects.  The  public,
by  an  examination  of  these  works,  will  be  enabled  to
judge  how  far  the  learned  Brahmun  has  ventured  to
brave  public  opinion,  in  the  invention  of  arguments  for
the  defence  of  idolatry.

He  again  says  (p.  34,  1.  28):  "  If,  by  the  practice  of
"  the prescribed forms in a church, a  temple,  or  a

N


Its  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

"  mosque,  God  be  worshipped,  how  can  he  be  dis-
"  honoured  by  being  worshipped  under  the  form  of  an
"  imase,  however  manufactured  ?"  Those  who  con-
template  God  in  a  church  or  mosque,  or  elevate  their
minds  to  a  notion  of  the  Almighty  Power  in  any  other
appropriated  place,  for  the  sake  of  good  example,
never  pay  divine  homage  to  these  places ;  but  those
that  pretend  to  worship  God  under  the  form  of  an
image,  consider  it  to  be  possessed  of  divine  nature,
and  at  the  same  time,  most  inconsistently,  as  imbued
with  immoral  principles.  Moreover,  the  promoters  of
the  worship  of  images,  by  promulgating  anecdotes
illustrative  of  the  supposed  divine  power  of  particular
idols,  endeavour  to  excite  the  reverence  of  the  people,
and  specially  of  pilgrims ;  who,  under  these  superstitious
ideas,  are  persuaded  to  propitiate  them  with  large  sacri-
fices of  money,  and  sometimes  even  by  that  of  their
own  lives.  Having  so  far  entered  into  this  subject,  the
learned  Brahmun  will,  I  hope,  be  convinced  of  the  im-
propriety of  the  analogy  which  he  has  drawn  between
a  worship  within  a  certain  material  object  and  a  wor-
ship o/"  a  material  object.

As  to  his  question  (p.  34,  1.  32),  "  Is  the  sight  of
"  the  image  unpleasing  ?"  My  answer  must  be  affir-
mative. It  is  extremely  natural  that,  to  a  mind  whose
purity  is  not  corrupted  by  a  degrading  superstition,  the
siffht  of  images  which  are  often  of  the  most  hideous  or
indecent  description,  and  which  must  therefore  excite
diso-ust  in  the  minds  of  the  spectator,  should  be  un-
pleasing.  A  visit  to  Calighaut,*  or  Barahnagur,t  which

•  The  temple  of  Kali.

t  Where  there  are  twelve  temples  dedicated  to  Siva.


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  179

are  only  distant  four  miles  from  Calcutta,  will  suffi-
ciently convince  the  reader  of  the  unpleasant  nature  of
their  beloved  images.  He  again  asks  in  the  same  page,
(1.  33) :  "  Will  a  beloved  friend  be  treated  with  disre-
"  spect  by  being  seated  on  a  chair,  when  he  arrives  in
"  your  house,  or  by  being  presented  with  fragrant
"  flowers  and  other  offerings  ?"  To  which  1  shall  say
no ;  but  at  the  same  time  I  must  assert  that  a  friend
worthy  of  reverence  would  not,  we  may  be  sure,  be  at
all  pleased  at  being  exhibited  sometimes  in  a  form,*
the  bare  mention  of  which  would  be  considered  as  a
gross  insult  to  the  decorous  feelings  of  the  public;  and
sometimes  in  the  shape  of  a  monkey,i*  fish, J  hog,§  or
elephant,  II  or  at  being  represented  as  destitute  of  every
virtue,  and  altogether  abandoned.  Nor  would  he  be-
lieve his  host  to  be  possessed  of  common  sense,  who,
as  a  token  of  regard,  would  altogether  neglect  his
guest,  to  go  and  lay  fruits  and  flowers  before  his
picture.

It  is  said  (p.  39,  1.  23) :  "  In  the  accounts  of  ancient
"  Greece  we  meet  with  the  worship  of  idols,  and  the
"  practice  of  austerities;  but  these  acts  have  been
"  contemned  by  the  more  enlightened  moderns."  I  am
really  glad  to  observe  that  the  learned  Brahmun,  more
liberally  and  plainly  than  could  be  expected,  con-
fesses that  idolatry  will  be  totally  contemned  as  soon  as
the  understanding  is  improved.  I,  however,  beg  leave
to  remark  on  this  instance,  that  though  the  idolatry
practised  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans  was  certainly  just

•  Under  which  Siva  is  adored.  f llunoonian.

I  The  first  incarnation  of  \'^ishnii.
§  Tlip  tliird  incarnation  of  ditto.  ||  Giinesh.

N 2


180  SECOND DKFKNCi: OF I'UE

as  impure,  absurd,  and  puerile  as  that  of  the  present
Hindoos,  yet  tlie  former  was  by  no  means  so  destruc-
tive of  the  comforts  of  Hfe,  or  injurious  to  tlie  texture
of  society,  as  the  latter.  The  present  Hindoo  idolatry
being  made  to  consist  in  following  certain  modes  and
restraints  of  diet  (which  according  to  the  authorities
of  the  Mahabharut  and  other  histories  were  never  ob-
served by  their  forefathers),  has  subjected  its  unfortu-
nate votaries  to  entire  separation  from  the  rest  ot  the
world,  and  also  from  each  other,  and  to  constant  in-
conveniences and  distress.

A  Hindoo,  for  instance,  who  affects  particular
purity,  *  cannot  even  partake  of  food  dressed  by  his
own  brother,  when  invited  to  his  house;  and  if
touched  by  him  while  eating,  he  must  throw  away  the
remaining  part  of  his  meal.  In  fact,  owing  to  the
observance  of  such  peculiar  idolatry,  directly  contrary
to  the  authorities  of  their  scripture,  they  hardly  de-
serve the  name  of  social  beings.

The  learned  Brahmun  further  says  (p.  23,  1. 3) :
"  If  you  affirm  that  you  are  not  an  infidel,  but  that
"  your  arguments  are  in  conformity  with  those  of  the
"  philsophers  who  were  ignorant  of  the  Veds,"  &c.
A  remark  of  this  kind  cannot,  I  am  sure,  be  considered
as  at  all  applicable  to  a  person,  who  has  subjected  him-
self to  this  writer's  remarks  only  by  translating  and
publishing  the  principal  parts  of  the  Ved,  and  by  vin-
dicating the  Vedant  theology ;  and  who  never  ad-
vanced on  religious  controversy  any  argument  which
was  not  founded  upon  the  authorities  of  the  Veds  and

•  A  person  of  this  description  is  distinguished  by  the  nuiuc  of
S^-ayun^-  p:ik,  one  who  is  his  own  cook.


MONOTIIKISTKAI, SYS'IK.M OK llli; XEDH.  181

their celcl)r;itL'(l coimiicntators. Il  is, however, re-
markable that, although the  learned IJrahmuii  aiul
hi  >  brethren  rre(|uently  quote  the  name  of  the  Vcds  and
other  Shastras, both in  writing  and in  verbal diseus-
sion,  they  pay  little  or  no  attention  in  })raetice  to  their
precepts, even in the  points of the most  important
nature,  a  few  of  which  I  beg  leave  to  notice  here. 1st,
The  adoration of  the invisible Supreme Being,  al-
though exclusively prescribed  by  the  Upanishads, or
the  principal parts of  the  Veds,  and  also  by  the  Ve-
dant,  has  been  totally  neglected,  and even discounte-
nanced, by  the learned Brahmun and his  followers;
the  idol-worship, which  those  authorities permit  only
to  the  ignorant,  having  been  substituted  for  that  pure
worship, 2dly, Ungeera and Vishnu,  and  also the
modern Ilughonundun,  authorize  a widow to burn
herself  voluntarily  along with  the  corpse  of  her hus-
band: but  modern  Brahmuns,  in  direct  opposition  to
their  authority,  allow  her  relations  to  bind  the  mourn-
ful and  infatuated  widow  to  the  funeral  pile  with  ropes
and  bamboos, as  soon  as  she  has  expressed  a wish  to
perform the  dreadful funeral sacrifice, to  which the
Brahmuns lend a  ready  assistance. 3dly, Although
an  acceptance  of  money  or  of  a  present  in  the  marriage
contract  of  a  daughter is most strictly  prohibited  by
the  Veds  and  by  Munoo  (text  1)8  and  100  of  chap.  9),
yet  the  sale  of  female  children  under  pretence  of  mar-
riage is  practised  by  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  Brahinuns
of  Bengal and  Tirhoot,  as  well as by  their  followers
generally.

4thly.  Yagnyubulkya  has  authorized  the  second  mar-
riage of  a  man, while his  former wife  is  livinji  ;  but


182  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

only  under  certain  circumstances  of  misconduct  or
misfortune  in  the  latter,  such  as  the  vice  of  drinking
wine,  of  deception,  of  extravagance,  of  using  disagree-
able language,  or  shewing  manifest  dislike  towards  her
husband ;  long  protracted  and  incurable  illness,  barren-
ness, or  producing  only  female  offspring.  In  defiance,
however,  of  this  restraint,  some  of  them  marry  thirty
or  forty  women,  either  for  the  sake  of  money  got  with
them  at  mai'riage,  or  to  gratify  brutal  inclinations.
Madhosingh,  the  late  Rajah  of  Tirhoot,  through  com-
passion towards  that  helpless  sex,  limited,  I  am  told,
within  these  thirty  or  forty  years,  the  Brahmuns  of  that
district  to  four  wives  only.  This  regulation,  although
falling  short  both  of  the  written  law  and  of  that  of
reason,  tends  to  alleviate  in  some  measure  the  misery
to  which  women  were  before  exposed,  as  well  as  to  dimi-
nish in  some  degree  domestic  strife  and  disturbance.

5thly.  According  to  the  authority  of  Munoo  (text
155,  chap.  2d),  respect  and  distinction  are  due  to  a
Brahmun,  merely  in  proportion  to  his  knowledge;  but
on  the  contrary  amongst  modern  Hindoos,  honour  is
paid  exclusively  to  certain  families  of  Brahmuns,  such
as  the  Koolins,  &c.,  however  void  of  knowledge  and  prin-
ciple they  may  be.  This  departure  from  law  and  justice
was  made  by  the  authority  of  a  native  prince  of  Bengal,
named  Bullalsen,  within  the  last  three  or  four  hundred
years.  And  this  innovation  may  perhaps  be  considered
as  the  chief  source  of  that  decay  of  learning  and  virtue,
which,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  may  be  at  present  observed.
For  wherever  respectability  is  confined  to  birth  only,
acquisition  of  knowledge,  and  the  practice  of  morality,
in  that  country,  must  rapidly  decline.


MONOTHEIS'I'ICAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  183

The  learned  Brahmun  objects  to  the  term  indescri-
bable, :iltht)Ui(h  universally  assi<^iiecl  to  the  Supreme
Being  by  the  Ved,  and  by  the  \'edant  theology,  say-
ing (p.  37,  1.  20),  "  it  is  a  wonderful  interpretation  of
"  the  Vedant  to  say  that  God  is  indescribable,  although
"  existing,  unless  indeed  he  be  looked  upon  as  the
"  production  of  magic ;  as  existing  in  one  sense,  and
"  non-existent  in  another."  And  again  (1.  14),  "  he,
"  therefore,  who  asserts  that  the  Supreme  Being  is
"  indescribable  and  at  the  same  time  existing,  must
"  conceive  that  He,  like  the  world,  is  mutable,"  &c.  In
answer  to  which  I  beg  to  refer  the  learned  Brahmun  to
the  11th  text  of  the  3d  Brahmun  of  the  4th  chapter  of
the  Brehdarunyuc,  the  principal  part  of  the  Ujoor
Ved,  as  commented  upon  by  the  celebrated  Sunkara-
charjya  :  "  The  Ved  having  so  far  described  God,  by
''various  absolute*  and  relative  epithets,  f  was  con-
"  vinced  of  its  incapability  of  giving  a  real  description
"  of  the  nature  of  the  Godhead  :  language  ca)i  convey
"  a  notion  of  things  only  either  by  the  appellations  by
*'  which  they  are  already  known,  or  by  describing
"  their  figure,  accidents,  genus,  and  properties ;  but
"  God  has  none  of  these  physical  circumstances:  the
"  Ved  therefore  attempted  to  explain  him  in  negative
"  terms;"  (that  is,  by  declaring  that  whatever  thing-
may  be  perceived  by  the  mental  faculties,  or  the  exter-
nal senses,  is  not  God.)  "  The  Ved's  ascribing  to  God
"  attributes  of  eternitv,  wisdom,  truth.  J^c,  shews  that
"  it  can  explain  him  only  by  ascribing  tliose  attributes,
"  and  applying  those  epithets, that are held by  man

• As  ctciiiiti,  true,  and  intolliociil.

t As  creator,  preserver,  and  (le>ti'iiver.


184  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

"  in  the  highest  estimation,  without  intending  to
"  assert  the  adequac}'  of  such  description.  He  is  the
"only  true  existence  amidst  all  dependent  existences,
"  and  the  true  source  of  our  senses."  Also  in  the
text  3d  of  the  Cenopanishad  :  "  Hence  no  vision  can
"  approach  him  ;  no  language  can  describe  him ;  no  in-
"  tellectual  power  can  compass  or  determine  him.  We
"  know  nothing  of  how  the  Supreme  Being  should  be
"  explained  :  He  is  beyond  nature,  which  is  above  com-
"  prehension :  our  ancient  spiritual  parents  have  thus
"  explained  Him  to  us."  It  cannot,  however,  be  in-
ferred, from  our  acknowledged  ignorance  of  the  nature
and  attributes  of  the  Supreme  13eing,  that  we  are
equally  ignorant  as  to  His  existence.  The  wonderful
structure  and  growth  of  even  so  trifling  an  object  as  a
leaf  of  a  tree,  affords  proof  of  an  Almighty  Super-
intendent of  the  universe ;  and  even  the  physical
world  affords  numerous  instances  of  things  whose  exist-
ence is  quite  evident  to  our  senses,  but  of  whose  nature
we  can  form  no  conception  ;  such  as  the  causes  of  the
sensations  of  heat  and  vision.

The  learned  Brahmun  attempts  to  prove  the  impossi-
bility of  an  adoration  of  the  Deity,  saying  (p.  33,  1.  15):
"  That  which  cannot  be  conceived,  cannot  be  wor-
"  shipped."  Should  the  learned  Brahmun  consider  a
full  conception  of  the  nature,  essence,  or  qualities  of
the  Supreme  Being,  or  a  physical  picture  truly  repre-
senting the  Almighty  power,  with  offerings  of  flowers,
leaves,  and  viands,  as  essential  to  adoration,  I  agree
with  the  learned  Brahmun  with  respect  to  the  impos-
sibility of  the  worship  of  God  But,  should  adoration
imply  only  the  elevation  of  the  mind  to  the  conviction


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTF.M OF THE VEDS.  185

of  the  existence  of  the  Omnipresent  Deity,  as  testified
by  His  wise  and  wonderful  works,  and  continual  con-
templation of  His  power  as  so  displayed;  together  with
a  constant  sense  of  the  gratitude  which  we  naturally
owe  Him,  for  our  existence,  sensation,  and  comfort, — I
never  will  hesitate  to  assert,  that  His  adoration  is  not
only  possible,  and  practicable,  but  even  incumbent  upon
every  rational  creature.  For  further  explanation,  I  refer
th.e  learned  Brahmun  to  the  text  47,  sect.  4,  chap.  3,  of
the  Vedant.

To  his  question,*  "  what  are  you  yourselves  ?"  I  sup-
pose I  may  safely  reply  for  myself,  that  I  am  a
poor  dependent  creature; — subject,  in  common  with
others,  to  momentary  changes,  and  liable  to  sudden  de-
struction.

At  p.  45,  1.30,  the  learned  Brahmun,  if  I  rightly
understand  his  object,  means  to  insinuate,  that  I  have
adopted  the  doctrines  of  those  who  deny  the  responsi-
bility of  man  as  a  moral  agent.  I  am  quite  at  a  loss  to
conceive  from  what  part  of  my  writings  this  inference
has  been  drawn,  as  I  have  not  only  never  entertained
such  opinions  myself,  but  have  taken  pains  to  exj)lain
the  passage  in  the  Ved  on  which  this  false  doctrine  is
founded.  In  page  93  of  the  Preface  to  the  Ishopani-
shad,  I  have  said  that,  "  the  Vedant  by  declaring  that
"  God  is  every  where,  and  every  thing  is  in  God,  means
"  that  nothing  is  absent  from  God,  and  that  nothing
"  bears  real  existence  except  by  the  volition  of  God."
And  again,  in  the  same  page  I  quoted  the  example  of  the
most  revered  teachers  of  the  Vedant  doctrine,  who,

•  P.  47,  1.  4


186  SECOND DEFENCE OF THE

"  although  they  declared  their  faith  in  the  Omnipresent
"  God,  according  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Vedant,  as-
"  signed  to  every  creature  the  particular  character  and
"  respect  he  was  entitled  to."

I  omitted  to  notice  the  strange  mode  of  argument
which  the  learned  Brahmun  (at  p.  29)  has  adopted
in  defence  of  idolatry.  After  acknowledging  that  the
least  deficiency  in  judgment  renders  man  incapable
of  looking  vip  to  an  Omnipresent  Supreme  Being,
whereby  he  mistakes  a  created  object  for  the  great
Creator,  he  insinuates  that  an  erroneous  notion  in
this  respect  is  as  likely  to  lead  to  eternal  happiness,  as
a  knowledge  of  truth.  At  1.  5,  he  says  :  "  And  although
*'  a  person  through  deficiency  in  judgment,  should  be
"  unable  to  discover  the  real  nature  of  a  thing,  does
"  it  follow,  that  his  error  will  prevent  the  natural  effect
"  from  appearing  ?  When  a  man  in  a  dream  sees  a
"  tiger,  is  he  not  in  as  much  alarm  as  if  he  saw  it  in
"  reality?"

This  mode  of  claiming  for  idol-worship  a  value  equal
to  that  of  pure  religion,  which  it  can  never  be  admitted
to  possess,  may  have  succeeded  in  retaining  some  of
his  followers  in  the  delusive  dream,  from  which  he  is
so  anxious  that  they  should  not  be  awoke.  But  some
of  them  have.  I  know,  begun  to  inquii'e  into  the  truth
of  those  notions  in  which  they  have  been  instructed ;
and  these  are  not  likely  to  mistake  for  true,  the  false
analogy  that  is  in  the  above  passage  attempted  to  be
drawn  ;  nor  will  they  believe  that,  however  powerful
may  be  the  influence  of  imagination,  even  under  false
impressions,  future  happiness,  which  depends  on  God
alone,  can  ever  be  ranked  amongst  its  effects. Such


MONOTHEISTICAL SYSTliM OF THE VEDS.  187

enquirers  will,  I  hope,  at  last  become  sensible  that  the
system  of  (/;eaw«'w^  recommended  by  the  learned  Brah-
muii,  however  essential  to  the  interests  of  himself  and
of  his  cast,  can  bring  to  them  no  advantage,  either
substantial  or  eternal.

As  instances  of  the  erroneous  confidence  which  is
placed  in  the  repetition  of  tiie  name  of  a  god  to  efiect
purification  from  sins,  noticed  by  me  in  p.  168,  I  may
quote  the  following  passages.

He  who  pronounces  "  Doorga"  (the  name  of  the
goddess),  though  he  constantly  practise  adultery,  plun-
der others  of  their  property,  or  commit  the  most  heinous
crimes,  is  freed  from  all  sins.-'

A  person  pronouncing  loudly,  "  reverence  to  Huri,"
even  involuntarily,  in  the  state  of  falling  down,  of  slip-
ping, of  labouring  under  illness,  or  of  sneezing,  purifies
himself  from  the  foulest  crimes.f

He  who  contemplates  the  Ganges,  while  walking,
sitting,  sleeping,  thinking  of  other  things,  awake,  eat-
ing, breathing,  and  conversing,  is  delivered  from  sins.if
The  circumstances  alluded  to  in  p.  168  of  this  trea-
tise, relative  to  the  wicked  conduct  of  their  supposed
deities,  are  perfectly  familiar  to  every  individual  Hindoo.
But  those  Europeans  who  are  not  acquainted  with  the
particulars  related  of  them,  may  perhaps  feel  a  wish  to
be  in  possession  of  them.  I  therefore,  with  a  view  to
gratify  their  curiosity  and  to  vindicate  my  assertion,
beg  to  be  allowed  to  mention  a  few  instiinces  in  point,
with  the  authorities  on  which  they  rest.  As  I  have
already  noticed  the  debauchery  of  Krishna,  and  his

• \  idc  Ooorfjct  nam  Mahatiuyu.
t Vide  Bhafjuvut.  J Vide  Mahabliarutli.


188  SECOND DF.FENCE OF THE

gross  sensuality,  and  that  of  liis  fellow  deities,  sucli  as
Siva  and  Bruhma,  in  the  14.7th,  148th,  and  150th  page
of  my  reply  to  the  observations  of  Sunkarasastri,  instead
of  repeating  them  here,  I  refer  my  readers  to  tliat  reply,
and  also  to  the  tenth  division  of  the  Bhaguvut,  to  the
Hurybungsu  or  last  division  of  the  Mahabharuth,  and
to  the  Neijnms,  as  well  as  to  the  several  Asums,  which
give  a  detailed  account  of  their  lewdness  and  de-
bauchery. As  to  falsehood,  their  favourite  deity  Krish-
na is  more  conspicuous  than  the  rest.  Jurra-Sundh,  a
powerful  prince  of  Behar,  having  heard  of  the  melan-
choly murder  of  his  son-in-law  perpetrated  by  Krishna,
harassed,  and  at  last  drove  him  out  of  the  place  of  his
nativity  (Muthoora)  by  frequent  military  expeditions.
Krishna,  in  revenge,  resolved  to  deprive  that  prince  of
his  life  by  fraud,  and  in  a  most  unjustifiable  manner.
To  accomplish  his  object,  he  and  his  two  cousins,
Bheema  and  Urjoona,  declared  themselves  to  be  Brah-
muns,  and  in  that  disguise  entered  his  palace;  where
finding  him  weakened  by  a  religious  fast,  and  sur-
rounded only  by  his  family  and  priests,  they  challenged
him  to  fight  a  duel.  He  accordingly  fought  Bheema,
the  strongest  of  the  three  ;  who  conquered  and  put
him  to  death. —  Vide  Subha  Purba  or  ,<eco7id  Rook  of  the
Maha-Bharidh.  Krishna  again  persuaded  Joodhisthir,
his  cousin,  to  give  false  evidence  in  order  to  accom-
plish the  murder  of  Dron  their  spiritual  father. —  llde
Dron  Purba,  or  seventh  Book  of  the  Maha-Bharuth.

Vishnu  and  others  combined  in  a  conspiracy  against
Bull,  a  mighty  emperor;  but  finding  his  power  irre-
sistible, that  deity  was  determined  to  ruin  him  by  stra-
tagem, and  for  that  purpose  appearetl  to  him  in  the


MONOTHEISTKAL SYSTEM OF THE VEDS.  189

shape  of  a  dwarf,  begging  alms.  Notwithstanding  Buli
was  warned  of  the  intention  of  Vishnu,  yet,  impressed
with  a  high  sense  of  generosity,  lie  could  not  refuse  a
boon  to  a  beggar  ;  that  grateful  deity  in  return  not
only  deprived  him  of  his  whole  empire,  which  he  j)ut
himself  in  possession  of  by  virtue  of  the  boon  of  Buli,
but  also  inflicted  on  him  the  disgrace  of  bondage  and
confinement  in  Fatal. — J'ide  latter  part  of  the  Ilurri
Bungs,  or  last  hook  of  the  Maha-Bhanith.

When  the  battle  of  Coorookshetru  was  decided  by
the  fatal  destruction  of  Doorjodhun,  the  remaining
part  of  the  army  of  his  rival  Yooddhisthir,  returned  to
the  cam]>  to  rest  during  the  night,  under  the  personal
care  and  protection  of  Mahadeva.  That  deity  having,
however,  been  cajoled  by  the  flattery  offered  him  by
Uswathama,  one  of  the  friends  of  the  unfortunate
Doorjodhun,  not  only  allowed  him  to  destroy  the  whole
army  that  was  asleep  under  the  confidence  of  his  pro-
tection, but  even  assisted  him  with  his  sword  to  accom-
plish his  bloody  purpose  —  ^iV/e  Sousuptik  Purb,  or
eleventh  hook  of  the  Maha-Bharuth.

When  the  Ussoors,  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean,  gave
the  pitcher  of  the  water  of  immortality  in  charge  to
Vishnu,  he  betrayed  his  trust  by  delivering  it  to  their
step-brothers  and  enemies,  the  celestial  gods. — Vide
first  hook,  or  ddi  Purb  of  the  Maha-Bharuth

Instances  like  these  might  be  multiplied  beyond
number :  and  crimes  of  a  much  deeper  dye  might
easily  be  added  to  the  list,  were  I  not  unwilling  to
stain  these  pages  by  making  them  the  vehicle  of  such
stories  of  immorality  and  vice.  May  God  speedily
purify  the  minds  of  my  countrymen  from  the  corrupt-


190  SECOND DEFENCE, &C.

ness  wliich  such  tales  are  too  apt  to  produce;  and  lead
their  hearts  to  that  pure  morality,  wiiich  is  inseparable
from  the  true  worship  of  Him  !


AN APOLOGY


PURSUIT OF FINAL BEATITUDE,


INUEl'ESDKNTI.Y OF


BRAHMUNICAL  OBSERVANCES.


CALCUTTA
1820.


AN  APOLOGY


PURSUIT  OF  FINAL  BEATITUDE.


SooBRAHMUNYU  Shastree,  a  diligent  observer  of
Brahmunical  tenets,  wishing  to  prove  that  those  Brah-
niuns  who  do  not  study  the  Veds  with  their  subordinate
sciences,  are  degraded  from  the  rank  of  Brahmunism,
prepared  and  offered  an  Essay  on  that  subject  to  the
Brahniuns  of  the  province  of  Bengal,  who  are  generally
deficient  in  those  studies.  In  this,  he  has  advanced
three  assertions :  which,  however,  have  no  tendency  to
establish  his  position.  He  alleges  1st,  that,  "  to  a
"  person  not  acquainted  with  the  Veds,  neither  tem-
"  porary  heavenly  enjoyments,  nor  eternal  beatitude,
"  can  be  allotted."  2dly,  that,  "  he  only  who  has
"  studied  the  Veds  is  authorized  to  seek  the  knowledire
"  of  God  ;"  and  3dly,  that  "  men  must  perform  with-
"  out  omission  all  the  rites  and  duties  prescribed  in
"  the  Veds  and  Smritis  before  acquiring  a  thorough
"  knowledge  of  God."  On  these  positions  he  at-
tempts to  establish,  that  the  performance  of  the  duties
and  rites  prescribed  by  the  Shastrus  for  each  class  ac-
cording to  their  religious  order,  such  as  the  studies  of
the  Veds  and  the  offering  of  sacrifices,  &c.,  is  absolutely
necessary towards the acquisition of  a  knowledge  of

o


194  AN APOLO(iV Foil THE

God.  We  consequently  take  upon  ourselves  to  offer
in  our  own  defence  the  following  remarks,  in  answer  to
those  assertions.

We  admit  that  it  is  proper in  men  to  observe  the
dutes  and  rites  prescribed  by  the  Shastru  for  each  class
according  to  their religious  order,  in  acquiring  know-
ledge respecting  God,  such observance being  condu-
cive to  that  acquisition ; an  admission  which is not
inconsistent  with  the  authorities  of  the  Veds  and  other
Shastrus. But  we  can  by  no  means  admit  the  necessity
of  observing  those  duties  and  rites  as  indispensable  steps
towards  attaining  divine  knowledge,  which  the  learned
Shastree  pronounces  them  to  be ;  for  the  great  Vyas,
in  his  work  of  the Vedant  Durshun, or  the  explana-
tion of  the  spiritual  parts  of  the  Veds,  justifies  the  at-
tainment of  the  knowledge  of  God,  even  by  those  who
never  practise  the  prescribed  duties  and  rites,  as  ap-
pears from  the  following  two  passages  of  Vyas  in  the
same Durshun. "  Unturachapitoo tuddrishteh," —
"  Upichu shmuryute." The celebrated Shunkur
Acharyu thus  comments  upon those  two  texts : "As
"  to  the  question. Whether  such  men  as  have  not  the
"  sacred  fire,  or  are  afflicted  with  poverty,  who  profess
*'  no  religious  order  whatsoever,  and  who  do  not  belong
"  to  any  cast,  are  authorized  to  seek  divine  knowledge
*'  or  not? On  a  superficial  view,  it  appears,  that  they
"  are  not  permitted  to  make  such  attainments,  as  the
"  duties  prescribed  for  each  class  are  declared  to  lead
*'  to  divine  knowledge, and to  those duties  they are
"  altogether  strangers. Such  doubt  having  arisen,  the
"  great  Vyas thus  decides  :  Even  a  person  who  pro-
"  fesses  no  religious  order,  is  permitted  to  acquire  a


PURSUIT OF FINAL BEATITUDK.  195

'*  knowled'^e  of  God ;  for  it  is  found  in  the  Veds  that
"  Riiekyu,  Baclniknuvee,  and  others,  who,  like  them,
"  did  not  belong  to  any  class,  obtained  divine  know-
"  lodge.  It  is  also  mentioned  in  the  sacred  tradition,
"  that  Sumvurtu  and  others,  living  naked  and  totally
"  independent  of  the  world,  who  practised  no  pre-
"  scribed  duties,  assumed  the  rank  of  the  highest
"  devotees."  Besides  the  texts  of  the  Ved,  such  as
"  Tuyorhu  Miietreyee  Bruhmubadinee,"  &c.  and
*•  Atma  va  Ure,"  &c.  show  that  Miietreyee  and  others,
who,  being  women,  had  not  the  option  of  studying  the
Ved,  were,  notwithstanding,  qualified  to  acquire  divine
knowledge ;  and  in  the  Sniriti  as  well  as  in  the  Com-
mentary of  tlie  celebrated  ShunkurAcharyu,  Soolubha
and  other  women  are  styled  knowers  of  the  Supreme
I3eing.  Also  Bidoor,  Dhurmubyadhu,  and  others  of
the  fourth  class,  attained  the  knowledge  of  God  with-
out having  an  opportunity  of  studying  the  Veds.  All
this  we  find  in  the  sacred  traditions:  hence  those  who
have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  Veds  and  Smriti,
can  pay  no  deference  to  the  opinion  maintained  by  the
learned  Shastree,  that  those  only  who  have  studied  the
Veds  are  qualified  to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  God.
Moreover,  to  remove  all  doubt  as  to  Soodrus  and  others
being  capable  of  attaining  Divine  knowledge  without
the  assistance  of  the  \  eds,  the  celebrated  Commentator,
in  illustrating  the  text  "  Sruvunadhyun,"  &c.,  asserts,
that  "  the  authority  of  the  Smriti,  stating  that  '  to  all
"  '  the  four  classes  preaching  should  be  offered,'  &c.
"  shews  that  to  the  sacred  traditions,  and  to  the  Poo-
"  rans,  and  also  to  the  Agunis,  all  the  four  classes  have
"  equally  access."  Thus  establishin  that  the  sacred
o  2


196  AN  APOLOGY,  &C.

traditions,  Poorans,  and  Agum  without  distinction,  can
impart  divine  knowledge  to  mankind  at  large. From
the  decided  opinion  of  Vyas,  and  from  the  precedents
ffiven  l)v  the  Veds  and  sacred  traditions,  and  also  from
tlie  conclusive  verdict  of  the  most  revered Commenta-
tor, those  who  entertain  respect  for  those  authorities,
will  not  admit  the  studies  of  the  Veds  and  other  duties
required  of  each  class  to  be  the  onl}^  means  of  acquir-
ing knowledo;e  of  God. Hence the  sacred  tradition,
stating  that  a  person,  by  studying  the  Geeta  alone,  had
acquired final beatitude,  stands unshaken ;  and also
the  positive  declaration  of  the  great  Muhadevu  with
regard  to  the  authentic  and  well-accepted  Agum  Shas-
trus,  as  being  the  means  of  imparting  divine  knowledge
to  those  who  study  them,  will  not  be  treated  as  incon-
sequential. If  the spiritual parts of  the Veds can
enable  men  to  acquire  salvation  by  teaching  them  the
true  and  eternal  existence  of  God,  and  the  false  and
perishable  being  of  the  universe,  and  inducing  them  to
hear  and  constantly  reflect  on  those  doctrines,  it  is  con-
sistent  with reason to admit, that the Smriti, and
Agum,  and  other  works,  inculcating  the  same  doctrines,
afford  means  of  attaining  final  beatitude. What  should
we  say  more  ?


TRANSLATION


CONFERENCE


AN  ADVOCATE  FOR,  AND  AN  OPPONENT  OF,


THE PRACTICE OF


BURNING  WIDOWS  ALIVE:


ORIGINAL  BUNGLA,


ADVERTISEMENT.


The  little  tract,  of  which  the  following  is  a  literal
translation,  originally  written  in  Bungla,  has  been  for
several  weeks  past  in  extensive  circulation  in  those
parts  of  the  country  where  the  practice  of  Widows
burning  themselves  on  the  pile  of  their  Husbands  is
most  prevalent.  An  idea  that  the  arguments  it  con-
tains might  tend  to  alter  the  notions  that  some  Euro-
pean Gentlemen  entertain  on  this  subject,  has  induced
the  Writer  to  lay  it  before  the  British  Public  also  in
its  present  dress.

Nov.  30,  1818.


CONFERENCE

BETWEEN

AN  ADVOCATE  FOR,  AND  AN  OPPONENT  OF,

THE PRACTICE Of

BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.


Advocate. — I  am  surprised  that  you  endeavour  to
oppose  the  practice  of  Concremation  and  Postci'ema-
tion  of  Widows,*  as  long  observed  in  this  country.

Opponent. — Those  who  have  no  rehance  on  the
Shastru,  and  those  who  take  delight  in  the  self-destruc-
tion of  women,  may  well  wonder  that  we  should  oppose
that  suicide  which  is  forbidden  by  all  the  Shastrus,  and
by  every  race  of  men.

Advocate. — You  have  made  an  improper  assertion,
in  alleging  that  Concremation  and  Postcremation  are
forbidden  by  the  Shastrus.  Hear  what  Unggira  and
other  saints  have  said  on  this  subject :

"  That  woman  who,  on  the  death  of  her  husband,
*'  ascends  the  burning  pile  with  him,  is  exalted  to  hea-
"  ven,  as  equal  to  Uroondhooti.

"  She  who  follows  her husband to another  world,

•  When  a  widow  is  absent  fntni  her  husband  at  tlie  time  of
his  death,  she  may  in  certain  cases  burn  herself  alon^  with  some
relick  representing  the  deceased.  Tliis  practice  is  called  Unoo-
murun  or  Postcremation,


202  CONFEUENCK ON THE I'HACTICE

"  shall  dwell  in  a  region  of  joy  for  so  many  years  as
"  there  are  hairs  in  the  human  body,  or  thirty- five
"  millions.

"  As  a  serpent-catcher  forcibly  draws  a  snake  from
"  his  hole,  thus  raising  her  husband  by  her  power,  she
"  enjoys  delight  along  with  him.

"  The  woman  who  follows  her  husband  expiates  the
"  sins  of  three  races;  her  father's  line,  her  mother's  line,
"  and  the  family  of  him  to  whom  she  was  given  a  virgin.

"  There  possessing  her  husband  as  her  chiefest  good,
"  herself  the  best  of  women,  enjoying  the  highest  de-
"  lii;hts,  she  partakes  of  bliss  with  her  husband  as  long
"  as  fourteen  Indrus  reign.

"  Even  though  the  man  had  slain  a  Brahmun,  or  re-
"  turned  evil  for  good,  or  killed  an  intimate  friend,  the
"  woman  expiates  those  crimes.

*'  There  is  no  other  way  known  for  a  virtuous  woman
"  except  ascending  the  pile  of  her  husband.  It  should
"  be  understood  that  there  is  no  other  duty  whatever
"  after  the  death  of  her  husband."

Hear  also  what  Vyas  has  written  in  the  parable  of
the  pigeon :

"  A  pigeon  devoted  to  her  husband,  after  his  death
"  entered  the  flames,  and  ascending  to  heaven,  she
"  there  found  her  liusband."

And  hear  Hareet's  words  :

"  As  long  as  a  woman  shall  not  burn  herself  after  her
"  liusband's  death,  she  shall  be  subject  to  transmigra-
"  tion  in  a  female  form."

Hear  too  what  Vishnoo  the  saint  says  :

"  After  the  death  of  her  husband  a  wife  must  live  as
"  an  ascetic,  or  ascend  his  pile."


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  203

Now  hear  the  words  of  the  Bruhinu  Pooran  on  the
subject  of  Postcremation  :

"  If  her  lord  die  in  another  country,  let  the  faithful
"  wife  place  his  sandals  on  her  breast,  and  pure  enter
"  the  fire."

The  faithful  widow  is  declared  no  suicide  by  this
text  of  the  Rig  Ved  :  "  When  three  days  of  impurity
"  are  gone  she  obtains  obsequies." Gotum  says  :

"  To  a  Brahmunee  after  the  death  of  her  husband,
"  Postcremation  is  not  permitted.  But  to  women  of  the
"  other  classes  it  is  esteemed  a  chief  duty."

"  Living  let  her  benefit  her  husband ;  dying  she
"  commits  suicide."

"  The  woman  of  the  Brahmun  tribe  that  follows  her
"  dead  husband  cannot,  on  account  of  her  self-de-
"  struction,  convey  either  herself  or  her  husband  to
"  heaven."

Concremation  and  Postcremation  being  thus  esta-
blished by  the  words  of  many  sacred  lawgivers,  how  can
you  say  they  are  forbidden  by  the  Shastrus,  and  desire
to  prevent  their  practice  ?

Opponent. — All  those  passages  you  have  quoted  are
indeed  sacred  law ;  and  it  is  clear  from  those  authori-
ties, that  if  women  perform  Concremation  or  Post-
cremation,  they  will  enjoy  heaven  for  a  considerable
time.  But  attend  to  what  Munoo  and  others  say
respecting  the  duty  of  widows  :  "  Let  her  emaciate  her
"  body,  by  living  voluntarily  on  pure  flowers,  roots,
"  and  fruits,  but  let  her  not,  when  her  lord  is  deceased,
**  even  pronounce  the  name  of  another  man  "

"  Let  her  continue  till  death  forgiving  all  injuries,
"  performing  harsh  duties,  avoiding  every  sensual  plea-


201.  CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

"  sure,  and  cheerfully  practising  the  incomparable  rules
"  of  virtue  which  have  been  followed  by  such  women  as
"  were  devoted  to  one  only  husband."

Here  Munoo  directs,  that  after  the  death  of  her
husband,  the  widow  should  pass  her  whole  life  as  an
ascetic.  Therefore,  the  laws  given  by  Unggira  and  the
others  whom  you  have  quoted,  being  contrary  to  the
law  of  Munoo,  cannot  be  accepted ;  because  the  Ved
declares,  "  whatever  Munoo  has  said  is  wholesome ;"
and  Virhusputi,  "  whatever  law  is  contrary  to  the  law
"  of  Munoo  is  not  commendable."  The  Ved  especial-
ly declares,  "  by  living  in  the  practice  of  regular  and
"  occasional  duties  the  mind  may  be  purified.  There-
"  after  by  hearing,  reflecting,  and  constantly  meditat-
"  ing  on  the  Supreme  Being,  absorption  in  Bruhmu
"  may  be  attained.  Therefore  from  a  desire  during
"  life  of  future  fruition,  life  ought  not  to  be  destroyed."
Munoo,  Yagnyuvulkyu,  and  others,  have  then,  in  their
respective  codes  of  laws,  prescribed  to  widows  the  duties
of  ascetics  only.  By  this  passage  of  the  Ved,  therefore,
and  the  authority  of  Munoo  and  others,  the  words  you
have  quoted  from  Unggira  and  the  rest  are  set  aside ;
for  by  the  express  declaration  of  the  former,  widows
after  the  death  of  their  husbands  may,  by  living  as
ascetics,  obtain  absorption.

Advocate. — What  you  have  said  respecting  the  laws
of  Unggira  and  others,  that  recommended  the  practice
of  Concremation  and  Postcremation,  we  do  not  admit :
because,  though  a  practice  has  not  been  recommended
by  Munoo,  yet,  if  directed  by  other  lawgivers,  it  should
not  on  that  account  be  considered  as  contrary  to  the
law  of  Munoo. For  instance, Munoo  directs  the  per-


OF IJURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  205

fonnance  of  Sundhya,  but  says  nothing  of  calling  aloud
on  the  name  of  Huri ;  yet  Vyas  prescribes  calling  on
the  name  of  Huri.  The  words  of  Vyas  do  not  contra-
dict those  of  Munoo.  The  same  shonld  be  understood
in  the  present  instance.  Munoo  has  commended  wi-
dows to  live  as  ascetics ;  Vishnoo  and  other  saints  di-
rect that  they  should  either  live  as  ascetics  or  follow
their  husbands.  Therefore  the  law  of  Munoo  may  be
considered  to  be  applicable  as  an  alternative.

Opponent. — The  analogy  you  have  drawn  betwixt  the
practice  of  Sundhya  and  invoking  Huri,  and  that  of
Concremation  and  Postcremation,  does  not  hold. For,
in  the  course  of  the  day  the  performance  of  Sundhya,
at  the  prescribed  time,  does  not  prevent one  from  in-
voking Huri at another  period ; and, on the  other
hand,  the  invocation of  Huri need  not  interfere  with
the  performance  of  Sundh^'a. In  this  case,  the  direc-
tion of  one  practice  is  not  inconsistent  with  that  of  the
other. But in the case  of  living as  an ascetic or
undergoing Concremation, the performance  of  the
one is incompatible with the observance of the
other. Scil. Spending  one's  whole  life  as  an ascetic
after  the  death  of  a  husband,  is  incompatible  with  imme-
diate Concremation  as  directed  by  Unggiraand  others;
and,  yece  v<7*5a,  Concremation,  as  directed  by  Unggira
and  others,  is  inconsistent  with  living  as  an  ascetic, in
order  to  attain  absorption. Therefore  those  two  autho-
rities are  obviously  contradictory  of  each  other. More
especially  as  Unggira,  by  declaring  that  "  there  is  no
"  other way known for a virtuous woman except
'•  ascending  the  pile  of  her  husband,"  has  made  Con-
cremation an indispensable duty. And  Hareet  also,
in  his  code, by denouncing ivil conseq\iences, in  his


2()()  CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICl-

declaration,  that  "  as  long  as  a  woman  shall  not  burn
"  herself  after  the  death  of  her  husband,  she  shall  be
"  subject  to  transmigration  in  a  female  form,"  has
made  this  duty  absolute.  Therefore  all  those  passages
are  in  every  respect  contradictory  to  the  law  of  Mu-
noo  and  others.

Advocate. — When  Unggira  says  that  there  is  no
other  way  for  a  widow  except  Concremation,  and  when
Hareet  says  that  the  omission  of  it  is  a  fault,  we  reconcile
their  words  with  those  of  Munoo,  by  considering  them
as  used  merely  for  the  purpose  of  exalting  the  merit  of
Concremation,  but  not  as  prescribing  this  as  an  indis-
pensable duty.  All  these  expressions,  moreover,  con-
vey a  promise  of  reward  for  Concremation,  and  thence
it  appears  that  Concremation  is  only  optional.

Opponent. — If,  in  order  to  reconcile  them  with  the
text  of  Munoo,  you  set  down  the  words  of  Unggira  and
Hareet,  that  make  the  duty  incumbent,  as  meant  only
to  convey  an  exaggerated  praise  of  Concremation,  why
do  you  not  also  reconcile  the  rest  of  the  words  of  Ung-
gira, Hareet,  and  others,  with  those  in  which  Munoo
prescribes  to  the  widow  the  practice  of  living  as  an  ascetic
as  her  absolute  duty  ?  And  why  do  you  not  keep  aloof
from  witnessing  the  destruction  of  females,  instead  of
tempting  them  with  the  inducement  of  future  fruition?
Moreover,  in  the  text  already  quoted,  self-destruction
with the  view  of  reward  is  expressly  prohibited.

Advocate, — What  you  have  quoted  from  Munoo  and
Yagnyavulkyu  and  the  text  of  the  Ved  is  admitted.
But  how  can  you  set  aside  the  following  text  of  tlie
Rig  Ved  on  the  subjectof  Concremation  ?  "  O  fire !  let
"  these  women,  with  bodies  anointed  with  clarified
"  butter, eyes coloured with collyrium,  and void  of


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  207

"  tears,  enter  thee,  the  parent  cjf  water,  that  they  may
"  not  be  separated  from  their  husbands,  but  may  be,  in
"  unison  with  excellent  husbands,  themselves  sinless
"  and  jewels  amongst  women."

Opponent. — This  text  of  the  Ved,  and  the  former
passages  from  Hareet  and  the  rest  whom  you  have
quoted,  all  praise  the  practice  of  Concremation  as
leading  to  fruition,  and  are  addressed  to  those  who  are
occupied  by  sensual  desires;  and  you  cannot  but  admit
that  to  follow  these  practices  is  only  optional.  In
repeating  the  Sunkulpyu  of  Concremation,  the  desire
of  future  fruition  is  declared  as  the  object.  The  text
therefore  of  the  Ved  which  we  have  quoted,  offering  no
gratifications,  supersedes,  in  every  respect,  that  which
you  have  adduced,  as  well  as  all  the  words  of  Unggira
and  the  rest.  In  proof  we  quote  the  text  of  the  Kutho-
punishut:  ''  Faith  in  God  which  leads  to  absorption
"  is  one  thing  ;  and  rites  which  have  future  fruition  for
"  their  object,  another.  Each  of  these,  producing  dif-
"  ferent  consequences,  holds  out  to  man  inducements
"  to  follow  it.  The  man,  who  of  these  two  chooses
"  faith,  is  blessed ;  and  he,  who  for  the  sake  of  reward
"  practises  rites,  is  dashed  away  from  the  enjoyment  of
"  eternal  beatitude."  Also  the  Moonduk  Opunishut:
"  Rites,  of  which  there  are  eighteen  members,  are  all
"  perishable :  he  who  considers  them  as  the  source  of
"  blessing  shall  undergo  repeated  transmigrations;
"  and  all  those  fools  who,  immersed  in  the  foolish
"  practice  of  rites,  consider  themselves  to  be  wise  and
"  learned,  are  repeatedly  subjected  to  birth,  disease,
"  death,  and  other  pains.  When  one  blind  man  is
"  guided  by  another,  both  subject  themselves  on  their
"  way  to  all  kinds  of  distress."


208  CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

It  is  asserted  in  the  Bhugvut  Geeta,  the  essence  of
all  the  Smritis,  Poorans,  and  Itihases,  that,  "  all  those
"  ignorant  persons  who  attach  themselves  to  the  words
"  of  the  Veds  that  convey  promises  of  fruition,  consider
"  those  falsely  alluring  passages  as  leading  to  real  hap-
"  piness ;  and  say,  that  besides  them  there  is  no  other
"  reality.  Agitated  in  their  minds  by  these  desires,
"  they  believe  the  abodes  of  the  celestial  gods  to  be
*'  the  chief  object;  and  they  devote  themselves  to  those
"  texts  which  treat  ox"  ceremonies  and  their  fruits,  and
"  entice  by  promises  of  enjoyment.  Such  people  can
"  have  no  real  confidence  in  the  Supreme  Being."
Thus  also  do  the  Moonduk  Opunishut  and  the  Geeta
state  that,  "  the  science  by  which  a  knowledge  of  God
"  is  attained  is  superior  to  all  other  knowledge."  There-
fore it  is  clear,  from  those  passages  of  the  Ved  and  of
the  Geeta,  that  the  words  of  the  Ved  which  promise
fruition,  are  set  aside  by  the  texts  of  a  contrary  import.
Moreover,  the  ancient  saints  and  holy  teachers,  and
their  commentators,  and  yourselves,  as  well  as  we  and
all  others,  agree  that  Munoo  is  better  acquainted  than
any  other  lawgiver  with  the  spirit  of  the  Veds.  And
he,  understanding  the  meaning  of  those  different  texts,
admitting  the  inferiority  of  that  which  promised  fruition,
and  following  that  which  conveyed  no  promise  of  grati-
fication, has  directed  widows  to  spend  their  lives  as
ascetics.  He  has  also  defined  in  his  12th  chapter,
what  acts  are  observed  merely  for  the  sake  of  gratifi-
cations, and  what  are  not.  "  Whatever  act  is  performed
"  for  the  sake  of  gratifications  in  this  world  or  the  next
"  is  called  Pruburttuk,  and  those  which  are  performed
"  according to the knowledge respecting God, are


OF BURNING WIDOWS AI.IVE.  209

"  called  Niburttuk.  All  those  who  perform  acts  to
"  procure  gratifications,  may  enjoy  heaven  like  the
"gods;  and  he  who  peiTorms  acts  free  from  desires,
"  procures  release  from  the  live  elements  of  this  body ;
"  that  is,  obtains  absorption."

Advocate. — What  you  have  said  is  indeed  consistent
with  the  Veds,  with  Munoo,  and  with  the  Bhuguvut
Geeta.  But  from  this  I  fear,  that  the  passages  of  the
Veds  and  other  Shastrus,  that  prescribe  Concremation
and  Postcremation  as  the  means  of  attaining  heavenly
enjoyments,  must  be  considered  as  only  meant  to  de-
ceive.

Opponent. — There  is  no  deception.  The  object  of
those  passages  is  declared.  As  men  have  various  dis-
positions, those  whose  minds  are  envelopetl  in  desire,
passion,  and  cupidity,  have  no  inclination  for  the  dis-
interested worship  of  the  Supreme  Being.  If  they  had
no  Shastrus  of  rewards,  they  would  at  once  throw  aside
all  Shastrus,  and  would  follow  (heir  several  inclinations,
like  elephants  unguided  by  the  hook.  In  order  to  re-
strain such  persons  from  being  led  only  by  their  incli-
nations, the  Shastru  prescribes  various  ceremonies;  as
Shuenjag,  for  one  desirous  of  the  destruction  of  the
enemy  ;  Pootreshti  for  one  desiring  a  son  ;  and  Justish-
tom  for  one  desiring  gratifications  in  heaven,  8cc. ;  but
again  reprobates  such  as  are  actuated  by  those  desires,
and  at  the  same  moment  expresses  contempt  for  such
gratifications.  Had  the  Shastru  not  repeatedly  repro-
bated both  those  actuated  by  desire  and  the  fruits  de-
sired by  them,  all  those  texts  might  be  considered  as
deceitful  In  proof  of  what  I  have  advanced  I  cite  the
following text  of  the Opunishut: "Knowledge and

r


210  CONFEllENCE ON THE I'RACTICE

"  rites  together  offer  themselves  to  every  man.  The
*'  wise  man  considers  which  of  these  two  is  the  better
"  and  which  the  worse.  By  reflection,  he  becomes  con-
"  vinced  of  the  superiority  of  the  former,  despises  rites,
"  and  takes  refuge  in  knowledge.  And  the  unlearned,
"  for  the  sake  of  bodily  gratification,  has  recourse  to
"  the  performance  of  rites."  The  Bhuguvut  Geeta  :
"  The  Veds  that  treat  of  rites  are  for  the  sake  of  those
"  who  are  possessed  of  desire ;  therefore,  O  Urjoon  !
"  do  thou  abstain  from  desires."

Hear  also  the  text  of  the  Ved  reprobating  the  fruits
of  rites :  "  As  in  this  world  the  fruits  obtained  from
cultivation  and  labour  perish,  so  in  the  next  world
"  fruits  derived  from  rites  are  perishable."  Also  the
Bhuguvut  Geeta  :  "  All  those  who  observe  the  rites
"  prescribed  by  the  three  Veds,  and  through  those
"  ceremonies  worship  me  and  seek  for  heaven,  having
"  become  sinless  from  eating  the  remains  of  offerings,
"  ascending  to  heaven,  and  enjoying  the  pleasures  of
"  the  gods,  after  the  completion  of  their  rewards,  again
"  return  to  earth.  Therefore,  the  observers  of  rites  for
"  the  sake  of  rewards,  repeatedly  ascend  to  heaven,  and
"  return  to  the  world,  and  cannot  obtain  absorption."

Advocate. — Though  what  you  have  advanced  from
the  Ved  and  sacred  codes  against  the  practice  of  Con-
cremation  and  Postcremation,  is  not  to  be  set  aside,
yet  we  have  had  the  practice  prescribed  by  Hareet  and
others  handed  down  to  us.

Opponent. — Such  an  argument  is  highly  inconsistent
with  justice.  It  is  every  way  improper  to  persuade  to
self-destruction,  by  citing  passages  of  inadmissible
authority. In the second place, it is evident from


OK BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  211

your  own  authorities,  and  the  Sunkulpu  recited  in  con-
formity with  them,  that  the  widow  should  voluntarily
quit  life,  ascending  the  flaming  pile  of  her  husband.
But,  on  the  contrary,  you  first  bind  down  the  widow
along  with  the  corpse  of  her  husband,  and  then  heap
over  her  such  a  quantity  of  wood  that  she  cannot  rise.
At  the  time  too  of  setting  fire  to  the  pile,  you  press  her
down  with  large  bamboos.  In  what  passage  of  Hareet
or  the  rest  do  you  find  authority  for  thus  binding  the
woman  according  to  your  practice  ?  This  then  is,  in
fact,  deliberate  female  murder.

Advocate. — Though  Hareet  and  the  rest  do  not  in-
deed authorize  this  practice  of  binding,  &c.,  yet  were  a
woman  after  having  recited  the  Sunkulpu  not  to  per-
form Concremation,  it  would  be  sinful,  and  considered
disgraceful  by  others.  It  is  on  this  account  that  we
have  adopted  the  custom.

Opponent. — Respecting  the  sinfulness  of  such  an  act,
that  is  mere  talk  :  for  in  the  same  codes  it  is  laid
down,  that  the  performance  of  a  penance  will  oblite-
rate the  sin  of  quitting  the  pile.  Or  in  case  of  inabi-
lity to  undergo  the  regular  penance,  absolution  may  be
obtained  by  bestowing  the  value  of  a  cow,  or  three
kahuns  of  kowries.  Therefore  the  sin  is  no  cause  of
alarm.  The  disgrace  in  the  opinion  of  others  is  also
nothing :  for  good  men  regard  not  the  blame  or  re-
proach of  persons  who  can  reprobate  those  who  ai)-
stain  from  the  sinful  murder  of  women.  And  do  you  not
consider  how  great  is  the  sin  to  kill  a  woman ;  therein
forsaking  the  fear  of  God,  the  fear  of  conscience,  and
the  fear  of  the  Shastrus,  merely  from  a  dread  of  the
reproach  of  those  who  delight  in  female  murder?

V  2


212  CONFKItENCE ON THF. PRACTICE

Advocate. — Tliough  t3ing  down  in  this  manner  be
not  authorized  by  the  Shastriis,  yet  we  practise  it  as
being  a  custom  that  has  been  observed  throughout
Hindoosthan.

Opponent. — It  never  was  the  case  that  the  practice
of  fastening  down  widows  on  the  pile  was  prevalent
throughout  Hindoosthan:  for  it  is  but  of  late  years
that  this  mode  has  been  followed,  and  that  only  in  Ben-
gal, which  is  but  a  small  part  of  Hindoosthan.  No  one
besides  who  has  the  fear  of  God  and  man  before  him,  will
assert  that  male  or  female  murder,  theft,  &c.,  from  having
been  long  practised,  cease  to  be  vices.  If,  according  to
your  argument,  custom  ought  to  set  aside  the  precepts
of  the  Shastrus,  the  inhabitants  of  the  forests  and
mountains  who  have  been  in  the  habits  of  plunder,
must  be  considered  as  guiltless  of  sin,  and  it  would  be
improper  to  endeavour  to  restrain  their  habits.  The
Shastrus,  and  the  reasonings  connected  with  them,
enable  us  to  discriminate  right  and  wrong.  In  those
Shastrus  such  female  murder  is  altogether  forbidden.
And  reason  also  declares,  that  to  bind  down  a  woman
for  her  destruction,  holding  out  to  her  the  inducement
of  heavenly  rewards,  is  a  most  sinful  act.

Advocate. — This  practice  may  be  sinful  or  any  thing
else,  but  we  will  not  refrain  from  observing  it.  Should  it
cease,  people  would  generally  apprehend  that  if  wo-
men did  not  perform  Concremation  on  the  death  of
their  husbands,  they  might  go  astray;  but  if  they
burn  themselves  this  fear  is  done  away.  Their  family
and  relations  are  freed  from  apprehension.  And  if
the  husband  could  be  assured  during  his  life  that  his
wife  would  follow  him  on  the  pile,  his  mind  would  be
at  ease  from  apprehensions  of  her  misconduct.


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  213

Opjionent. —  What  can  be  done,  if,  merely  to  avoid
the  possible  daiigei"  of  disgrace,  you  are  unmercifully
resolved  to  commit  the  sin  of  female  murder.  But  is
there  not  also  a  danger  of  a  woman's  going  astray  during
the  life-time  of  her  husband,  particularly  when  he  re-
sides for  a  long  time  in  a  distant  country  ?  What  re-
medy then  liave  you  got  against  this  cause  of  alarm  ?

Advocate. — There  is  a  great  difference  betwixt  the
case  of  the  husband's  being  alive,  and  of  his  death  ;  for
while  a  husband  is  alive,  whether  he  resides  near  her
or  at  a  distance,  a  wife  is  under  his  control;  she  must
stand  in  awe  of  him.  But  after  his  death  that  autho-
rity ceases,  and  she  of  course  is  divested  of  fear.

Opponent. — The  Shastrus  which  command  that  a
wife  should  live  under  the  control  of  her  husband  during
his  life,  direct  that  on  his  death  she  shall  live  under  the
authority  of  her  husband's  family,  or  else  under  that
of  her  parental  relations  ;  and  the  Shastrus  have
authorized  the  ruler  of  the  country  to  maintain  the
observance  of  this  law.  Therefore,  the  possibility  of  a
woman's  going  astray  cannot  be  more  guarded  against
durinff  the  husband's  life  than  it  is  after  his  death.
For  you  daily  see,  that  even  while  the  husband  is
alive,  he  gives  up  his  authority,  and  the  wife  separates
from  him.  Control  alone  cannot  restrain  from  evil
thoughts,  words,  and  actions  ;  but  the  suggestions  of
wisdom  and  the  fear  of  God  may  cause  both  man  and
woman  to  abstain  from  sin.  Both  the  Shastrus  and
experience  show  this.

Advocate. — You  have  repeatedly  asserted,  that  from
want  of  feeling  we  promote  female  destruction.  This
is  incorrect,  for  it  is  declared  in  our  \'ed  and  codes  of


214  CONFERENCE ON TIIi: PRACTICK,  &C.

law,  that  mercy  is  the  root  of  virtue,  and  from  our
practice  of  hospitality,  &c.  our  compassionate  dispo-
sitions are  well  known.

Opponent. — That,  in  other  cases  you  shew  charitable
dispositions  is  acknowledged.  But  by  witnessing  from
your  youth  the  voluntary  burning  of  women  amongst
your  elder  relatives,  your  neighbours,  and  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  surrounding  villages,  and  by  observing  the
indifference  manifested  at  the  time  when  the  women  are
writhing  under  the  torture  of  the  flames,  habits  of  in-
sensibility are  produced.  For  the  same  reason,  when
men  or  women  are  suffering  the  pains  of  death,  you
feel  for  them  no  sense  of  compassion.  Like  the  woi-
shippers  of  the  female  deities,  who,  witnessing  from
their  infancy  the  slaughter  of  kids  and  buffaloes,  feel  no
compassion  for  them  in  the  time  of  their  suffering  death;
while  followers  of  Vishnoo  are  touched  with  strong  feel-
ings of  pity.

Adi'ocate. — What  you  have  said  I  shall  carefully  con-
sider.

Opponent. — It  is  to  me  a  source  of  great  satisfaction,
that  yo  I  are  now  ready  to  take  this  matter  into  your
consideration.  By  forsaking  prejudice  and  reflecting
on  the  Shastru,  what  is  really  conformable  to  its  pre-
cepts may  be  perceived,  and  the  evils  and  disgrace
brought  on  this  country  by  the  crime  of  female  murder
will  cease.


SECOND  CONFERENCE


AN  ADVOCATE  FOR,  AND  AN  OPPONENT  OF,


THE PRACTICE OF


BURNING  WIDOWS  ALIVE.


CALCUTTA;
1820.


TO

THE  MOST  NOBLE
THE  MARCHIONESS  OF  HASTINGS,

COUNTESS  OF  LOUDOUN,  &f.  &c.

The  following  tract,  being  a  translation  of  a  Ben-
galee Essay,  published  some  time  ago,  as  an  appeal  to
reason  in  behalf  of  humanity,  I  take  the  liberty  to
dedicate  to  Your  Ladyship;  for  to  whose  protection
can  any  attempt  to  promote  a  benevolent  purpose  be
with  so  much  propriety  committed?

I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  with  the  greatest  respect,

Your  Ladyship's

Most  obedient  servant,

THE  AUTHOR.
February  26,  1820.


ON  CONCREMATION;

A SECOND CONFERENCE BETWEEN AN ADVOCATE AND
AN OPPONENT OF THAT PRACTICE.


Advocate. — Under  the  title  of  Vidhayuk,  or  Pre-
ceptor, I  have  offered  an  answer  to  your  former  argu-
ments. That,  no  doubt,  you  have  attentively  perused.
I  now  expect  your  reply.

Opponent. — I  have  well  considered  the  answer  that,
after  the  lapse  of  nearly  twelve  months,  you  have
offered.  Such  parts  of  your  answer  as  consist  merely
of  a  repetition  of  passages  already  quoted  by  us,  require
no  further  observations  now.  But  as  to  what  you  have
advanced  in  opposition  to  our  arguments  and  to  the
Shastrus,  you  will  be  pleased  to  attend  to  my  reply.
In  the  first  place,  at  the  bottom  of  your  4th  page  you
have  given  a  particular  interpretation  to  the  following
words  of  Vishnoo,  the  lawgiver :  "  After  the  death  of
her  husband  a  woman  shall  become  an  ascetic,  or  as-
cend the  funeral  pile,"  implying  that  either  alternative
is  optional.  To  this,  you  say,  eight  objections  are
found  in  the  Shastrus,  therefore  one  of  the  alternatives
must  be  preferred :  that  is  to  say,  the  woman  who  is
unable  to  ascend  the  flaming  pile  shall  live  as  an  ascetic.
This  you  maintain  is  the  true  interpretation  ;  and  in
proof  you  have  cited  the  words  of  the  Skundu  Pooran
and  of  Ungira. I  answer  :  In  every  country  all  persons


220  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE I'HACTICE

observe  this  rule,  that  meanings  are  to  be  inferred  from
the  words  used.  In  this  instance  the  text  of  Vishnoo
is  comprised  in  five  words :  1st,  Mrite,  "  on  death,"
2d,  bhurturi,  "  of  a  husband;"  3d,  bruhmuchuryum,
"  asceticism  ;"  4th,  tudunwarohunum,  "  ascending  his
"  pile  ;"  5th,  va,  "  or."  That  is,  "  on  the  death  of  a
"  husband,  his  ividow  should  become  an  ascetic,  or
"  ascend  his  pile."  It  appears,  therefore,  from  asceti-
cism being  mentioned  first  in  order,  that  this  is  the
most  pious  conduct  for  a  widow  to  follow.  But  your
interpretation,  that  this  alternative  is  only  left  for
widows  who  are  unable  to  ascend  the  flaming  pile,  can
by  no  means  be  deduced  from  the  words  of  the  text ;
nor  have  any  of  the  expounders  of  the  Shastrus  so  ex-
pressed themselves.

For  instance,  the  author  of  the  Metakshura,  whose
authority  is  always  to  be  revered,  and  whose  words  you
have  yourself  quoted  as  authority  in  p.  27,  has  thus  de-
cided on  the  subject  of  Concremation  :  "  The  widow
"  who  is  not  desirous  of  final  beatitude,  but  who  wishes
"  only  for  a  limited  term  of  a  small  degree  of  future
"  fruition,  is  authorized  to  accompany  her  husband."

The  Smartu  Bhuttacharjyu  (Rhughoo  Nundun,  the
modern  law  commentator  of  Bengal)  limited  the  words
of  Ungira,  that  "  besides  Concremation  there  is  no
"  other  pious  course  for  a  widow,"  by  the  authority  Of
the  foregoing  text  of  Vishnoo ;  and  authorized  the
alternative  of  a  widow  living  as  an  ascetic,  or  dying
with  her  husband ;  explaining  the  words  of  Tngira  as
conveying  merely  the  exaggerated  praise  of  Concre-
mation.

Secondly. From the time  that Shastrus  have  been


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  221

written  in  Sungskrit,  no  author  or  man  of  learning  has
ever  asserted,  as  you  have  clone,  that  the  person  who,
desirous  of  the  enjoyments  of  heaven,  is  unable  to  per-
form the  rites  leading  to  fruition,  may  devote  himself  to
the  attainment  of  final  beatitude.  On  the  contrary,  the
Shasirus  uniformly  declare  that  those  who  are  unable
to  pursue  final  beatitude,  may  perform  rites,  but  with-
out desire;  and  persons  of  the  basest  minds,  who  do
not  desire  eternal  beatitude,  may  even  perform  rites  for
the  sake  of  their  fruits.

As  Vusishthu  declares :  "  The  person  who  does  not
"  exert  himself  to  acquire  that  knowledge  of  God
"  which  leads  to  final  absorption,  may  perform  ceremo-
"  nies  without  expectation  of  reward."

"  To  encourage  and  improve  those  ignorant  persons,
"  who,  looking  only  to  pleasure,  cannot  distinguish  be-
"  twixt  what  is  God  and  not  God,  the  Srooti  has  pro-
"  mised  rewards."

Bhuguvud  Geeta.

"  If  you  are  unable  to  acquire  by  degrees  divine
*'  knowledge,  be  diligent  in  performing  works  with  a
"  view  to  please  me,  that  by  such  works  you  may  ac-
"  quire  a  better  state.  If  you  are  unable  even  to  per-
"  form  rites  solely  for  my  sake,  then,  controlling  your
"  senses,  endeavour  to  perform  rites  without  the  desire
"  of  fruition."

Therefore,  to  give  the  preference  to  self-inunolation,
or  to  the  destruction  of  others,  for  the  sake  of  future
reward,  over  asceticism,  which  gives  a  prospect  of
eternal  beatitude,  is  to  treat  with  contempt  the  autho-
rities of  the  Veds,  the  Vedant,  and  other  Durshuns,  as
well  as  of  the  Bhuguvud  Geeta  and  many  others. As


222  SliCOND CONFERENCE ON THE I'UACTICE

tlie  Ved  says  :  "  Knowledge  and  rites  both  offer  them-
"  selves  to  man  ;  but  he  who  is  possessed  of  wisdom,
t'  taking  their  respective  natures  into  serious  conside-
"  ration,  distinguishes  one  from  the  other,  and  chooses
t'  faith,  despising  fruition  ;  while  a  fool,  for  the  sake  of
"  advantage  and  enjoyment,  accepts  the  offer  of  rites."

Without  entirely  rejecting  the  authority  of  the
Geeta,  the  essence  of  all  Shastrus,  no  one  can  praise
rites  performed  for  the  sake  of  fruition,  nor  recommend
them  to  others;  for  nearly  half  of  the  Bhuguvud
Geeta  is  filled  with  the  dispraise  of  such  works,  and
with  the  praise  of  works  performed  without  desire  of
fruition.  A  few  of  those  passages  have  been  quoted  in
the  former  conference,  and  a  few  others  are  here  given.

"  Works  performed,  except  for  the  sake  of  God,
"  only  entangle  the  soul.  Therefore,  O  Urjoon,  for-
*'  saking  desire,  perform  works  with  the  view  to  please
"  God."

"  'J'he  person  who  performs  works  without  desire  of
"  fruition,  directing  his  mind  to  God,  obtains  eternal
"  rest.  And  the  person  who  is  devoted  to  fruition,
"  and  performs  works  with  desire,  he  is  indeed  inex-
"  tricably  involved."

"  Oh,  Urjoon,  rites  performed  for  the  sake  of  frui-
"  tion  are  degraded  far  below  works  done  without
"  desire,  which  lead  to  the  acquisition  of  the  know-
"  ledge  of  God.  Therefore  perform  thou  works  with-
'*  out  desire  of  fruition,  with  the  view  of  acquiring
"  divine  knowledge.  Those  who  perform  works  for  the
"  sake  of  fruition  are  most  debased."

"  It  is  my  firm  opinion,  that  works  are  to  be  per-
"  formed,  forsaking  their  consequences,  and  the  pros-
"  pect  of  their  fruits."


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  223

The  Geeta  is  not  a  rare  work,  and  you  are  not  unac-
quainted with  it.  Why  then  do  you  constantly  mislead
women,  unacquainted  with  the  Shastrus,  to  follow  a
debased  path,  by  holding  out  to  them  as  temptations
the  pleasures  of  futurity,  in  defiance  of  all  the  Shas-
trus, and  merely  to  please  the  ignorant?

You  have  said,  that  eight  objections  are  to  be  found
in  the  Shastrus  to  the  optional  alternative  deduced  from
the  works  of  Visiinoo.  To  this  I  reply,  First.  To  re-
move an  imaginary  difficulty,  a  violation  of  the  obvious
interpretation  of  words,  whose  meaning  is  direct  and
consistent,  is  altogether  inadmissible.  Secondly.  Former
commentators,  finding  no  such  objection  to  the  inter-
pretation given  to  the  words  of  Vishnoo,  as  allowing
the  optional  alternative  of  asceticism  or  concremation,
have  given  the  preference  to  asceticism.  The  author
of  the  Metakshura,  quoting  this  text  of  Vishnoo  in
treating  of  Concremation,  makes  no  allusion  to  such  an
objection,  but  finally  declares  ia  favour  of  asceticism.

Thirdl3\  Even  allowing  an  optional  alternative  to
be  liable  to  the  eight  objections,  former  authors  have
on  many  occasions  admitted  such  an  alternative.  For
example : —

Srooti.  "  Oblations  are  to  be  made  of  wheat  or  of
"  barley."  But  the  meaning  of  this  is  not,  according
to  your  mode  of  interpretation,  "  That  if  it  cannot  be
*'  made  of  barley,  an  offering  is  to  be  made  of  wheat."

"  Burnt  offering  is  to  be  made  at  sunrise  or  before
*'  sunrise."  In  this  iiistauce  your  mode  of  explanation
may  be  applied;  but  no  authors  have  ever  given  such
an  interpretation,  but  all  have  admitted  the  alternative
to  be  optional.


224  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE TRACTICE

Here  also,  according  to  your  opinion,  the  meaning
would  be,  that  if  you  cannot  worship  Shivu  you  should
worship  Vishnoo.  But  no  authors  have  ever  given
such  an  interpretation  to  those  words,  and  to  give  more
or  less  worship  to  Shivu  than  to  Vishnoo  is  quite  con-
trary to  the  decision  of  all  the  Shastrus.

Fourthly. — The  following  text  has  also  been  quoted
by  you  in  opposition  to  the  optional  alternative  in
question,  taken  as  you  assert  from  theSkundu  Pooran: —

"  On  the  death  of  her  husband,  if  by  chance  a  woman
"  is  unable  to  perform  Concremation,  nevertheless  she
"  should  preserve  the  virtue  required  of  widows.  If  she
*'  cannot  preserve  that  virtue,  she  must  descend  to
"  hell."  To  confirm  this  text  you  have  quoted  the
words  of  Ungira :

"  There  is  no  other  pious  course  for  a  widow  besides
*'  Concremation ;"  which  you  have  interpreted,  that
"  for  a  widow  there  is  no  other  course  so  pious."

I  answer,  the  words  of  Ungira  are  express,  that  there
is  no  other  pious  course  for  a  widow  than  Concremation.
And  the  Smartu  commentator,  having  thus  interpreted
the  text,  in  reconciling  it  with  the  words  of  Vishnoo
already  quoted,  declares,  that  it  conveys  merely  exag-
gerated praise  of  Concremation.

But  you,  in  opposition  to  the  true  meaning  of  the
expression  and  to  the  interpretation  given  by  the
Smartu  commentator,  have  explained  those  words  to
suit  your  own  argument,  that  there  is  no  other  course
more  pious  than  that  of  Concremation.  Perverting
thus  the  meaning  of  the  Shastrus,  what  benefit  do  you
propose  by  promoting  the  destruction  of  feeble  woman,
by  holding  up  the  temptation  of  enjoyments  in  a  future
state  .'* This  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand.


oi'  liuuNiNc;  wiuou's  Ai.ivi:.  225

If  the  passage  you  have  quoted  from  the  Skunihi
Pooian  really  exist,  the  mode  in  which  the  Smartu
commentator  has  explained  the  words  of  Ungira  ("  there
"  is  no  other  virtuous  course,")  must  be  applied  to  those
of  the  Skundu  Pooran,  viz.  that  the  text  of  the  Skundu
Pooran  which  contradicts  Munoo,  Vishnu,  and  others,
IS  to  be  understood  as  merely  conveying  exaggerated
praise;  because,  to  exalt  Concremation,  which  leads
to  future  enjoyments  that  are  treated  as  despicable  by
the  Opunisluuls  of  the  Veds  and  Smriti,  and  by  the
Bhuguvud  Geeta,  above  asceticism,  in  which  the  mind
may  be  purified  by  the  performance  of  works,  without
desire  that  may  lead  to  eternal  beatitude,  is  every  way
inadmissible,  and  in  direct  opposition  to  the  opinions
maintained  by  ancient  authors  and  commentators.


Section  II.

In  the  latter  end  of  the  7th  page  you  have  ad-
mitted, that  the  sayings  of  Ungira,  Vishnoo.  and  Ha-
reet,  on  the  subject  of  Concremation,  are  certainly  at
variance  with  those  of  Munoo  ;  but  assert,  that  any
law  given  by  Munoo,  when  contradicted  by  several
other  lawgivers,  is  to  be  considered  annulled :— there-
fore, his  authority  in  treating  of  the  duties  of  widows
is  not  admissible,  on  account  of  the  discord  existing
between  it  and  passages  of  Hareet,  and  Vishnoo,  and
others.  With  a  view  to  establish  this  position  you
have  advanced  three  arguments— the  first  of  them  is,
that  Vrihusputi  says, "  whatever  law  is  contrary  to  the

8


226  SECOND CX)NFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

"  law  of  Munoo,  is  not  commendable ;"  in  which  the
nominative  case,  "  whatever  law,"  as  being  used  in  the
singular  number,  signifies,  that  in  case  laws,  given  by  a
single  person,  stand  in  opposition  to  those  of  Munoo,
they  are  not  worthy  of  reverence  ;  but  if  several  persons
differ  from  Munoo  in  any  certain  point,  his  authority
must  be  set  aside. I  reply,  it  has  been  the  invariable
practice  of  ancient  and  modern  authors,  to  explain  all
texts  of  law  so  as  to  make  them  coincide  with  the  law
of  Munoo; they  in no  instance  declare  that  the  au-
thority of  Munoo  is  to  be  set  aside,  in  order  to  admit
that  of  any  other  lawgiver. But  you  have,  on  the  con-
trary, set  aside  the  authority  of  Munoo,  on  the  ground
of  inconsistence  with  the  words  of  two  or  three  other
authors. In  this  you  not  only  act  contrary  to  the  prac-
tice of  all  commentators,  but  moreover,  in  direct  oppo-
sition to  the  authority  of  the  Ved :  for  the  Ved  declares,
*•  whatever  Munoo  lays  down,  that  is  commendable ;"
which text  you  have  yourself  quoted  in p.  7. And
as  to  what  you  have  said  respecting  the  words  of  Vri-
husputi  as  being  in  the  singular  number,  and  therefore
only  applicable  to  a  case  in  which Munoo  is  opposed
by only one lawgiver, it  is obvious that the word
"  whatever,"  being  a  general  term,  includes  every  par-
ticular case  falling  under  it;  and  therefore  his  law  must
be  followed,  whatever  number  of  authors  there  may  be
who  lay  down  a  different  direction. And  the  reason  of
this  is  expressed  in  the  former  part  of  the  verse  of  Vri-
husputi, that  "  Munoo  has  in  his  work  collected  the
"  meaning  of  the  Veds  " From this  it  follows,  that
whatever  law  is  inconsistent  with the  code  of  Munoo,
which  is  the  substance  of  the  Ved,  is  really  inconsistent


OF BURNING WIDOWS AT.IVE.  227

with  the  Ved  itself,  and  tlierefore  inadmissible  Adniit-
tinfjj  the  justice  of  your  explanation  of  Vriliusputi's
text,  that  the  authority  of  any  individual  lawniver,  who
is  inconsistent  with  Munoo,  must  be  set  aside  ;  but  that
when  several  authorities  coincide  in  laving;  down  any
rule  inconsistent  with  his  law,  they  are  to  be  followed  ;
one  might  on  the  same  principle  give  a  new  explanation
to  the  following  text:  —

"  The  person  who  attempts  to  strike  a  Brahmun
"  goes  to  the  hell  called  Sutnuyat,  or  of  a  hundred
"  punishments;  and  he  who  actually  strikes  a  Brahmun,
"  goes  to  the  hell  of  Suhusruyat,  or  a  thousand  punish-
"  ments."

Here,  also,  the  noun  in  the  nominative  case,  and  that
in  the  accusative  case  also,  are  both  in  the  singular
number;  therefore,  according  to  your  exposition,  where
two  or  three  persons  concur  in  beating  a  Brahmun,  or
where  a  man  beats  two  or  three  Brahmuns,  there  is  no
crime  committed.  There  are  many  similar  instances  of
laws,  the  force  of  which  would  be  entirely  frustrated
by  your  mode  of  interpretation.

You  have  argued  in  the  second  place,  that  the  prac-
tice of  Concremation  is  authorized  by  a  text  of  the  Rig
Ved,  and  consequently  the  authority  of  Munoo  is  su-
perseded by  a  higher  authority.  I  reply:  in  the  12th
line  of  the  9th  page  of  your  tract,  you  have  quoted  and
interpreted  a  text  of  the  Veds,  expressing  that  "  the
"  mind  may  be  purified  so  as  to  seek  a  knowledge  of
"  God  from  which  absorption  may  accrue,  by  the  per-
"  formance  of  the  daily  and  occasional  ceremonies,
"without  the  desire  of  fruition;  therefore,  while  life
"  may  be preserved; it  ought not  to  be  destroyed."

Q2


228  SF.COND CONFEUENCi; ON THE PRACTICE

With  tliis  then  and  all  similar  texts,  there  is  the  most
evident  concord  with  the  words  of  Munoo.  Notwith-
standiniT  your  admission  to  this  effect,  you  assert  that
the  authority  of  the  Veds  contradicts  the  declaration  of
Munoo.  From  the  text  already  quoted,  "  that  what-
"  ever  Munoo  Ikis  declared  is  to  be  accepted,"  it  fol-
lows that  there  can  be  no  discrepancy  between  Munoo
and  the  Ved.  But  there  is  certainly  an  apparent  in-
consistency between  the  text  quoted  from  the  ceremo-
nial part  of  the  Rig  Ved  authorizing  Concremation,  and
that  above  quoted  from  the  spiritual  parts  of  the  Ved,
to  which  the  celebrated  Munoo  has  given  the  prefe-
rence;  well  aware  that  such  parts  of  the  Ved  are  of
more  authority  than  the  passages  relating  to  debased
ceremonies.  He  has  accordingly  directed  widows  to
live,  practising  austerities.  The  text  of  the  Rig  Ved,
of  course,  remains  of  force  to  those  ignorant  wretches
who  are  fettered  with  the  desire  of  fruition,  which  de-
bars them  from  the  hope  of  final  beatitude.  This  too
has  been  acknowledged  by  yourself,  in  p.  11,  1.  17,
and  was  also  fully  considered  in  the  first  Conference,
p.  13,  line  18.  You  cannot  but  be  aware  too,  that  when
there  is  a  doubt  respecting  the  meaning  of  any  text  of
the  Ved,  that  interpretation  which  has  been  adopted  by
Munoo,  is  followed  by  both  ancient  and  modern  au-
thors. In  the  Bhuvishyu  Pooran,  Muhadev  gave  in-
structions for  the  performance  of  a  penance  for  wilfully
slaying  a  Brahnuni ;  but  observing  that  this  was  at  va-
riance with  the  words  of  Munoo,  which  declare  that
there  is  no  expiation  for  wilfully  killing  a  Brahmun,
he  does  not  set  aside  the  text  of  Munoo  founded  on
the  Veds  by  his  own  autiiority,  but  explains  the  sense


OF BUllN'ING WIDOWS ALIVE.  229

in  which  it  is  to  be  accepted.  "  The  object  of  the  de-
"  duration  of  jNIunoo,  that  there  is  no  exj)ialion  for  tlie
"  wilful  murder  of  a  Brahniun,  was  the  more  absolute
"  prohibition  of  the  crime;  or  it  may  be  considered  as
"  applicable  to  K^hutrees,  and  the  other  tribes."  The
great  Muhadev,  then,  did  not  venture  to  set  aside  the
words  of  Munoo,  but  you  liave  proposed  to  set  up  the
texts  of  llarcet  and  Ungira  as  of  superior  authority.

Tiiirdly. — You  have  quoted,  with  the  view  of  doing
away  with  the  authority  of  Munoo,  the  text  of  Juemini,
signifying  that  if  there  be  a  difference  of  opinion  re-
specting a  subject,  tlien  the  decision  of  the  greater
number  must  be  adopted  ;  and  therefore,  as  the  autho-
rity of  Munoo,  in  the  present  instance,  is  at  variance
with  several  writers,  it  must  yield  to  theirs.  I  reply;
it  is  apparent  that  this  text,  as  well  as  connnon  sense,
only  dictates,  that  where  those  who  differ  in  opinion
are  equal  in  point  of  authority,  the  majority  ought  to
be  followed  ;  but  if  otherwise,  this  text  is  not  applicable
to  the  case.  Thus  the  authority  of  the  Ved,  though
single,  cannot  be  set  aside  by  the  concurrent  autho-
rities of  a  hundred  lawgivers;  and  in  like  manner  the
authority  of  Munoo,  which  is  derived  immediately
from  tiie  Ved,  cannot  be  set  aside  by  the  contradicting
authorities  of  the  others  either  singly  or  collectivelv.
Moreover,  if  Ungira,  Hareet,  Vishnoo,  and  Vyas,  au-
thorized widows  to  choose  the  alternative  of  Concre-
niation,  or  of  living  as  ascetics;  on  the  other  hand,  be-
sides Munoo,  Yugnyuvulkyu,  Vusishthu,  and  several
other  lawgivers  have  prescribed  asceticism  only.  M'hy,
therefore,  despising  the  authorities  of  Munoo  and
others,  do  you  persist  in  encouragitig  weak  women  to


230  SKCONU CONFEUENCE Ol' THE PRACTICE

submit  to  murder,  by  holding  out  to  them  the  temp-
tations of  luture  pleasures  in  heaven?


Section  III.

The  quotations  from  the  Moonduk  Opunishud  and
the  Bhuguvud  Geeta,  which  we  quoted  in  our  first
conference,  to  shew  the  light  in  which  rites  should  be
held,  you  have  repeated ;  and  have  also  quoted  some
texts  of  the  Veds  directing  the  performance  of  certain
rites,  such  as,

"  He  who  desires  heavenly  fruition  shall  perform  the
"sacrifice  of  a  horse."— In  page  17  you  have  given
your  final  conclusion  on  the  subject  to  this  effect :
"  That  rites  are  not  prohibited,  but  that  pious  works
"  performed  without  desire  are  preferable  to  works
"  performed  for  the  sake  of  fruition  ;  and  he  also  who
"  performs  those  works  without  desire,  is  superior  to
"  him  who  performs  works  for  the  sake  of  fruition." —
If  then  works  without  desire  are  acknowledged  by  you
to  be  superior  to  works  with  desire  of  fruition,  why
do  you  persuade  widows  to  perform  works  for  the  sake
of  fruition,  and  do  not  recommend  to  them  rather  to
follow  asceticism,  by  which  they  may  acquire  eternal
beatitude  ?  And  with  respect  to  your  assertion,  that
"  rites  are  not  prohibited,"  this  is  inconsistent  with  the
Siiastrus ;  for  if  all  the  texts  of  the  Veds  and  lawgivers,
prohibiting  I'ites,  were  to  be  quoted,  they  would  fill  a
large  volume  :  (of  these  a  few  have  been  already  quoted
by  me  in  pp.  5  and  6.) — There  are  indeed  Shastrus
directing the performance  of  rites for the sake  of


or  uuKNiN(; wiuou-s  alive.  231

tVuitioii,  but  these  are  acknowledf^ed  to  be  of  less
authority  tluiu  those  which  prohibit  such  rites;  as  is
proved  by  the  following  text  from  the  Moonduk
Opunishud  :  "  iShastrus  are  of  two  sorts,  superior
"  and  inferior;  of  these  the  superior  are  those  by
"  which  the Paternal  God is approached."

In  tiie  Bhuguvud  Geeta  Krishnu  says  :  "  Amongst
"  Shastrus, I  am  those  which  treat  of  God."

In  the  Sree  Bhaguvut  is  the  following  text  :  ''  111-
"  minded  persons,  not  perceiving  that  the  object  of
"  the  Ved  is  to  direct  us  to  absorption,  call  the
"  superficially  tempting  promises  of  rewards  their  prin-
"  cipal  fruit;  but  such  as  know  the  Veds  thoroughly
"  do  not  hold  this  opinion."

The  passages  directing  works  for  the  sake  of  frui-
tion are  therefore  adapted  only  for  the  most  ignorant.
Learned  men  should  endeavour  to  withdraw  all  those
ignorant  persons  from  works  performed  with  desire,
but  should  never,  for  the  sake  of  profit,  attempt
to  drown  them  in  the  abyss  of  passion.  llughoo
Nundun  quotes  and  adopts  the  following  words :
"  Learned  men  should  not  persuade  the  ignorant  to
"  perform  rites  for  the  sake  of  fruition  ;  for  it  is  written
"  in  the  Pooran,  that  he  who  knows  the  path  to
"  eternal  happiness  will  not  direct  the  ignorant  to
"  perform  works  with  desire,  as  the  good  physician
"  refuses  to  yield  to  the  appetite  of  his  patient  for
"  injurious  food."


232  SKCOND CONFERENCE ON THE I'RACTICE

Section  IV.
In  p.  17,  1.  13,  of  your  treatise,  you  have  said, that
tlie Shastru  does  not  admit  that  widows, in  giving  up
the  use  of  oil,  and  betel, and sexual pleasures,  &c.
as  ascetics,  perform  works  without  desire, and  acquire
absorption. And for this  you advance  two proofs:
the  first, that it appears that Munoo  directs  that  a
widow  should  continue  till  death as an  ascetic,  aiming
to  practise the  incomparable  rules  of  virtue  that  have
been  followed  by  such  women as  were  devoted  to  only
one  husband. From  the  word  aiming, it  follows, that
the  duties  of  an  ascetic,  to  be  practised  by  widow^s,  are
of  the  nature  of  those  performed  with  desire. Secondly*
From  the  subsequent  words  of  Munoo  it  appeal's, that
those  widows  who  live  austere  lives ascend  to  heaven
like ascetics  from their youth ; therefore, from the
words  ascending  to  heaven,  it  is  obvious  that  the  aus-
terities that  may  be  performed  by  them  are  for  reward.
1  reply  ;  I  am  surprised  at  your  assertion,  that  austeri-
ties practised  by  widows  cannot  be  considered  as  per-
formed without  desire, and  leading  to  absorption; for
whether  austerities  or  any  other  kind  of  act  be  performed
with  desire  orwithout  desire,  must  depend  on  the  mind  of
the  agent.  Some  may  follow  asceticism  or  other  practices
for  the  sake  of  heavenly  enjoyments,  while  others,  forsak-
ing desire  of  fruition,  may  perform  them,  and  at  length
acquire  final  beatitude. Therefore, if  a  widow  prac-
tise austerities  without  the desire  of  fruition,  and  yet
lier  acts  are  asserted  to  be  with  desire  of  fruition,  this
amounts  to  a  setting  at  defiance  both  experience  and
the Shastrus, in a manner unworthy of  a man of


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  233

learning  like  yourseU".  As  to  what  you  have  observed
respecting  the  word  aiming  m  the  text  of  Munoo,  it
never  can  be  inferred  from  the  use  of  that  word,  that
the  asceticism  of  widows  must  necessarily  be  with  de-
sire; for  with  the  object  of  final  beatitude,  we  prac-
tise the  acquisition  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  which  no
Shastru  nor  any  of  the  learned  has  ever  classed  amongst
works  performed  with  desire  of  fruition.  For  no  man
possessed  of  understanding  performs  any  movement  of
mind  or  body-  without  an  object :  it  is  those  works
only,  therefore,  that  are  performed  for  the  sake  of
corporeal  enjoyments,  either  in  the  present  or  in  a
future  state  of  existence,  that  are  said  to  be  with
desire,  and  that  are,  as  such,  prohibited,  as  Munoo
defines :  "  Whatever  act  is  performed  for  the  sake
"  of  gratifications  in  this  world  or  the  next  is  called
"  Pruberttuk;  and  those  which  are  performed  ac-
**  cording  to  the  knowledge  of  God  are  called  Ni-
"  burttuk."

As  to  your  second  argument,  that  widows  leading  an
ascetic  life  are  rewarded  by  a  mansion  in  heaven,  I
reply ;  that  from  these  words  it  does  not  appear  that
austerities  should  necessarily  be  reckoned  amongst
works  performed  for  reward  ;  for  a  mansion  in  heaven
is  not  granted  to  those  alone  who  perform  works  with
desire,  but  also  to  those  who  endeavour  to  acquire  a
knowledge  of  God,  but  come  short  of  attaining  it  in
this  life.  They  must  after  death  remain  for  a  long
time  in  the  heaven  called  the  Brumhulok,  and  again
assume  a  human  form,  until  they  have,  by  perfecting
themselves  in  divine  knowledge,  at  length  obtained
absorption. The  Bhuguvud  Geeta  says  distinctly  :


33I'  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE PUACTICE

"  A  man  whose  devotions  have  been  broken  off'  by
"  dealli,  having  enjoyed  for  an  immensity  of  years  the
"  i-ewards  of  his  virtues  in  the  regions  above,  at  length  is
"  born  again  in  some  holy  and  respectable  family."  Koo-
look  Bhuttu,  the  commentator  on  Munoo,  says  expressly,
in  his  observations  on  the  text  of  his  author,  that  those
ascetic  widows  ascend  to  heaven  like  Sunuk  Balukhilyu
and  other  devotees  from  tlieir  youth.  By  this,  it  is
clearly  shewn,  that  those  widows  ascend  to  heaven  in
the  same  way  as  those  pious  devotees  who  have  already
acquired  final  beatitude,  which  can  only  be  attained  by
works  performed  without  desire.  And  hence  the  aus-
terities of  widows  must  be  reckoned  amongst  works
without  desire.


Section  V.
In  page  18,  you  have  asserted  that  a  widow  who
undergoes  Concremation  has  a  higher  reward  than  she
who  lives  as  a  devotee ;  for  the  husband  of  the  woman
who  performs  Concremation,  though  guilty  of  the  mur-
der of  a  Brahmun,  or  of  ingratitude  or  treachery  towards
a  friend,  has  his  sins,  by  her  act,  expiated,  and  is  saved
from  hell,  and  her  husband's,  her  father's,  and  her
mother's  progenitors,  are  all  beatified,  and  she  herself
is  delivered  from  female  form. —I  reply,  you  have
stated,  in  page  27,  commencing  at  the  3d  line,  that
works  without  desire  are  preferable  to  those  performed
for  the  sake  of  fruition  ;  while  here  again  you  say,  that
Concremation  is  preferable  to  asceticism.  You  have,
however,  assigned  as  a  reason  for  your  new  doctrine,
that Concremation saves progenitors  as well as  the


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  235

Iiusbaiul.  I  have  already  sliewn,  that  such  promises  of
reward  are  merely  held  out  to  the  most  ifrnorant,  in
order  to  induce  them  to  follow  some  kind  of  religious
observance,  and  to  withdraw  from  evil  conduct.  There-
fore, to  prefer  works  performed  with  a  desire  of  frui-
tion, to  works  without  desire,  merely  on  the  ground
of  such  exaggerated  promises,  is  contrary  to  all  the
Shastrus.  If,  in  defiance  of  all  the  Shastrus,  you  main-
tain that  such  promises  of  reward  are  to  be  understood
literally,  and  not  merely  as  incitements,  still  there  can
be  no  occasion  for  so  harsh  a  sacrifice,  so  painful  to
mind  and  body,  as  burning  a  person  to  death  in  order
to  save  their  lines  of  progenitors ;  for,  by  making  an
offering  of  one  ripe  plantain  to  Shivu,  or  a  single
flower  of  Kurubeer,  either  to  Shivu  or  to  Vishnoo,
thirty  millions  of  lines  of  progenitors  may  be  saved.

"  He,  who  maketh  an  oblation  of  a  single  ripeplan-
"  tain  to  Shivu,  shall  with  thirty  millions  of  races  of
"  progenitors  ascend  to  the  heaven  of  Shivu."

"  By  presenting  a  single  Kurubeer,  white  or  not
"  white,  to  Vishnoo  or  Shivu,  thirty  millions  of  races  of
*'  progenitors  are  exalted  to  heaven."

Nor  is  there  any  want  of  promise  of  reward  to  those
who  perform  works  without  desire.  In  fact,  rather
more  abundant  rewards  are  held  out  for  such  works
than  those  you  can  quote  for  the  opposite  pra  nice.
"  Those  who  have  acquired  knowledge  in  the  pre-
"  scribed  mode  can,  by  mere  volition,  save  any  number
*'  of  progenitors ;  and  all  the  gods  offer  worship  to  the
"  devotees  of  the  Supreme  Being."  A  volume  filled
with  texts  of  this  kind  might  be  easily  written.  More-
over, should  even  the  least  part  of  any  ceremony  per-


236  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

formed  for  reward  be  omitted  or  mistaken,  the  fruits
are  destroyed,  and  evil  is  produced.  But  there  is  no
bad  consequence  from  a  failure  in  works  performed
without  desire,  for  the  completion  of  these,  even  in
part,  is  advantageous.  In  proof  I  quote  the  Bhuguvud
Geeta :  "  Works  without  desire,  if  only  commenced,
"  are  never  without  advantage  ;  and  if  any  member  be
"  defective,  evil  consequences  do  not  ensue,  as  in  works
"  performed  with  desire.  And  the  performance  of  even
"  a  small  portion  of  a  work  without  desire  brings
"  safety."

There  is  evidently  a  possibility  of  a  failure  in
some  portion  of  the  rites  of  Concremation  or  Post-
cremation,  particularly  in  the  mode  in  which  you  per-
form the  ceremony  contrary  to  the  directions  of  the
Shastrus.  What  connection  is  there  betwixt  that  mode
and  the  enjoyment  of  temporary  heavenly  gratifications
— a  mode  which  only  subjects  the  widow  to  the  conse-
quences of  a  violent  death  !


Section  VI.

Again  in  p.  17,  1.  3,  you  admit  it  to  be  more  com-
mendable for  a  widow  to  attend  to  the  acquisition  of
knowledge  than  to  die  by  Concremation ;  but  after-
wards, in  order  to  persuade  them  to  the  practice  of
Concremation,  and  to  prevent  them  from  pursuing  the
acquisition  of  knowledge,  you  observe,  that  women  are
naturally  prone  to  pleasure,  are  extremely  devoted  to
works  productive  of  fruits,  and  are  always  subject  to
tiicir  passions. To  persuade  such  persons  to  forsake


or  m'ltxiNc;  widows  ai.ive.  237

Concremalion,  in  order  lo  attempt  the  acquisition  of
knowledge,  is  to  destroy  tlieir  hopes  in  both  ways.  In
support  of  your  opinion  you  have  quoted  tiie  Gceta:
"  Those  ignorant  persons  who  are  devoted  to  works
"  ought  not  to  be  dissuaded  from  performing  them."
I  reply;  your  object  in  persuading  women  to  burn
themselves  may  now  be  distinctly  perceived ;  you  con-
sider women,  even  of  respectable  classes,  as  prone  to
pleasure,  and  always  subject  to  their  passions;  and
therefore  you  are  apprehensive  lest  they  should  lose
both  prospects  of  hope,  by  giving  up  Concremation,
and  attempting  to  acquire  knowledge.  For  this  reason
you  lead  them  to  the  destruction  of  their  lives,  by  hold-
ing out  to  them  the  temptation  of  future  reward.  It  is
very  certain  tliat  all  mankind,  whether  male  or  female,
are  endowed  with  a  mixture  of  passions;  but  by  study
of  the  Shastrus,  and  frequenting  the  society  of  respect-
able persons,  those  passions  may  be  gradually  subdued,
and  the  capability  of  enjoying  an  exalted  state  may  be
attained.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  endeavour  to  with-
draw both  men  and  women  from  debased  sensual  plea-
sures, and  not  to  persuade  them  to  die  with  the  hope
of  thcrehv  obtaining  sensual  enjoyments,  by  which,
after  a  certain  period  of  gratification,  they  are  again
immersed  in  the  pollutions  of  the  womb,  and  subjected
to  affliction.  The  Shastrus  have  directed  those  men
or  women,  who  seek  after  a  knowledge  of  God,  to  hear
and  reflect  upon  his  doctrine,  that  they  may  escape
from  the  grievous  pain  of  this  world;  and  they  have
also  prescribed  daily  and  occasional  riles  to  be  per-
formed without  the  hope  of  reward  by  those  who  do
not  seek  after  divine  knowledge,  in  order  that  their


288  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

minds  may  be  purified,  and  prepared  to  receive  that
knowledge.  We,  therefore,  in  conformity  with  the
Shastru,  make  it  our  endeavour  to  dissuade  widows
from  desiring  future  base  and  fleeting  enjoyments,  and
encourage  them  to  the  acquisition  of  that  divine  know-
ledge which  leads  to  final  beatitude.  Widows,  there-
fore, by  leading  an  ascetic  life  in  the  performance  of
duties  without  desire,  may  purify  their  minds  and  ac-
quire divine  knowledge,  which  may  procure  for  them
final  beatitude.  And  consequently  there  is  no  reason
why  they  should  lose  both  objects  of  future  hope  by
forsaking  Concremation.

"  Oh, Urjoon, by placing their  reliance  on me,
"  women  and  those  of  the lower  classes  of  Vueishyu
"  and Soodru may obtain the highest exaltation."
You, however, considering  women devoted  to  their
passions, and consequently incapable of acquiring
divine  knowledge,  direct  them  to  perform  Concrema-
tion ;  and  maintain  that, if  any  amongst  them  should
not  burn  with  their  husbands,  according  to  your  final
decision  from  the  Shastrus,  they  must lose  the  hopes
that  belong to both practices;  because,  according  to
your  opinion,  they  are  entirely  incapable  of  acquiring
divine  knowledge,  and  by  not  adopting  Concremation,
they  give  up  the  prospect  of  future  gratifications. As
to  your  quotation  from  the  Geeta,  to  show  that  persons
devoted  to  works  ought  not  to  be  dissuaded  from  the
performance  of  them,  it  may  be  observed  that  this  text
applies  only  to  riles  offered without  desire  of  reward,
though  applied  by  you  to  works  performed  for  the  sake
of  future  enjoyment,  in  direct  inconsistency  with  the
authority  of  the  Geeta. The  object  of  this,  as  well  as


OF HURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  239

of  all  texts  of  the  Geeta,  is  to  dissuade  men  from  works
performed  with  desire.  The  Geeta  and  its  Commen-
taries are  both  accessible  to  all.  Let  the  learned  de-
cide the  point.

You  have  quoted  the  followinj^  text  of  Vusishthu  :
"  He  who,  being  devoted  to  worldly  pleasures,  boasts,
"  saying,  '  I  am  a  knower  of  God,'  can  neither  obtain
"  the  consequences  procurable  from  works,  nor  attain
"  final beatitude, the  fruit  of  divine  knowledge."

I  admit  the  force  of  this  text.  For  whether  a  man  be
devoted  to  worldly  pleasures  or  not,  if  he  be  a  boaster,
either  of  divine  knowledge  or  of  any  other  acquire-
ment, he  is  indeed  most  despicable;  but  I  am  unable
to  see  how  this  text,  which  forbids  vain-glory,  is  appli-
cable to  the  question  before  us,  which  relates  to  the
Concrcmation  of  widows.


Section  VII.

In  your  20th  page,  you  have  stated  for  us,  that  we
do  not  object  to  the  practice  of  Concrcmation,  but  to  the
tying  down  of  the  widow  to  the  pile  before  setting  it  on
fire.  I  reply ;  this  is  very  incorrect,  for  it  is  a  gross
misrepresentation  of  our  argument;  because  Concrc-
mation or  Postcremation  is  a  work  performed  for  the
sake  of  future  reward,  which  the  Opunishud  and  the
Geeta,  and  other  Shastrus,  have  declared  to  be  most
contemptible.  Consequently,  relying  on  tiiose  Shas-
trus, it  has  been  always  our  object  to  dissuade  widows
from  the  act  of  Concrematiou  or  Postcremation,  that
they  might  not,  for  the  sake  of  the  debased  enjoyment


240  SKCOND CONFERENCE ON THE PllACTICE

of  corporeal  pleasures,  renounce  the  attainment  of
divine  knowledge.  As  to  the  mode  in  which  you
murder  widows  by  tying  them  to  the  pile,  we  do  exert
ourselves  to  prevent  such  deeds,  for  those  who  are  wit-
nesses to  an  act  of  murder,  and  neglect  to  do  any  thing
towards  its  prevention,  are  accomplices  in  the  crime.

In  justification  of  the  crime  of  burning  widows  by
force,  you  liave  stated,  towards  the  foot  of  the  same
page,  that  in  those  countries  where  it  is  the  custom  for
widows  to  ascend  the  flaming  pile,  there  cannot  be  any
dispute  as  to  the  propriety  of  following  that  mode  :  but
where  that  is  not  the  mode  followed,  and  it  is  the
practice  for  those  that  burn  the  corpse  to  place  a  por-
tion of  fire  contiguous  to  the  pile,  so  that  it  may  gra-
dually make  its  way  to  the  pile,  and  at  that  time  the
widow,  according  to  the  prescribed  form,  ascends  the
pile ;  in  this  mode  also  there  is  nothing  contrary  to
the  Shastrus.  You  have  at  the  same  time  quoted  two
or  three  authorities  to  shew,  that  rites  should  be  per-
formed according  to  the  custom  of  the  counti'y.  I
reply  ;  female  murder,  murder  of  a  Brahmun,  parri-
cide, and  similar  heinous  crimes,  cannot  be  reckoned
amongst  pious  acts  by  alleging  the  custom  of  a  coun-
try in  their  behalf;  by  such  customs  rather  the  country
in  which  they  exist  is  itself  condemned.  I  shall  write
more  at  large  to  this  purpose  in  the  conclusion.  The
practice,  therefore,  of  forcibly  tying  down  women  to  the
pile,  and  burning  them  to  death,  is  inconsistent  with
the  Shastrus,  and  highly  sinful.  It  is  of  no  conse-
quence to  affirm,  that  this  is  customary  in  any  particu-
lar country — if  it  were  universally  practised,  the  mur-
ders would  still  be  criminal. The  pretence  that  many


OF HURNINd WIDOWS ALIVE.  241

are  united  in  the  commission  of  such  murder  will  not
secure  tliem  from  divine  vengeance.  The  customs  of
a  country  or  of  a  race  may  be  followed  in  matters
where  no  particular  rules  are  prescribed  in  the  Shas-
trus;  but  the  wilful  murder  of  widows,  prohibited  by
all  Shastrus,  is  not  to  be  justified  by  the  practice  of  a
few.  From  the  Skundu  Pooran  :  "  In  those  matters
"  in  which  neither  the  V'eds  nor  lawgivers  give  either
"  direct  sanction  or  prohibition,  the  customs  of  a
*'  country  or  of  a  race  may  be  observed."  If  you  insist
that  the  practice  of  a  country  or  of  a  race,  though
directly  contrary  to  the  directions  of  the  Shastrus,  is
still  proper  to  be  observed,  and  to  be  reckoned  amongst
lawful  acts,  I  reply,  that  in  Shivukanchee  and  Vish-
nookanchee  it  is  the  custom  for  the  people  of  all
classes  of  one  of  those  places,  whether  learned  or  igno-
rant, mutually  to  revile  the  god  peculiarly  worshipped
by  the  people  of  the  other — those  of  Vishnookanchee
despising  Shivu,  and  of  Shivukanchee  in  the  same
manner  holding  Vishnoo  in  contempt.  Are  the  inha-
bitants of  those  places,  whose  custom  it  is  thus  to  revile
Shivu  and  Vishnoo,  not  guilty  of  sin  ?  For  each  of
those  tribes  may  assert,  in  their  own  defence,  that  it  is
the  practice  of  their  country  and  race  to  revile  the  god
of  the  other.  But  no  learned  Hindoo  will  pretend  to
say,  that  this  excuse  saves  them  from  sin.  The  Raj-
poots, also,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Dooab,  are
accustomed  to  destroy  their  infant  daughters;  they
also  must  not  be  considered  guilty  of  the  crime  of  child-
murder,  as  they  act  according  to  the  custom  of  their
country  and  race.  There  are  many  instances  of  the
same  kind.  No  Pundits,  then,  would  consider  a  heinous

B


242  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

crime,  directly  contrary  to  the  Shastrus,  as  righteous,
by  whatever  length  of  practice  it  may  appear  to  be
sanctioned.

You  have  at  first  alleged,  that  to  burn  a  widow  after
tying  her  down  on  the  pile,  is  one  of  the  acts  of  piety,
and  have  then  quoted  our  argument  for  the  opposite
opinion,  that  "  the  inhabitants  of  forests  and  moun-
"  tains  are  accustomed  to  robbery  and  murder :  but
"  must  these  be  considered  as  faultless,  because  they
"  follow  only  the  custom  of  their  country  ?"  To  this
you  have  again  replied,  that  respectable  people  are  not
to  be  guided  by  the  example  of  mountaineers  and
foresters.  But  the  custom  of  burning  widows,  you  say,
"  has  been  sanctioned  by  the  most  exemplary  Pundits
"  for  a  length  of  time.  It  is  the  custom,  then,  of  re-
"  spectable  people  that  is  to  be  followed,  and  not  that
"  of  men  of  no  principles."  I  answer ;  respectability,
and  want  of  respectability,  depend  upon  the  acts  of
men.  If  the  people  of  this  province,  who  have  been
constantly  guilty  of  the  wilful  murder  of  women  by
tying  them  to  the  pile  in  which  they  are  burnt,  are  to
be  reckoned  amongst  the  respectable,  then  why  should
not  the  inhabitants  of  mountains  and  forests  be  also
reckoned  good,  who  perpetrate  murder  for  the  sake  of
their  livelihood,  or  to  propitiate  their  cruel  deities?
To  shew  that  the  custom  of  a  country  should  be  fol-
lowed, you  have  quoted  a  text  of  the  Ved,  signifying
that  the  example  of  Brahmuns  well  versed  in  the
Shastrus,  of  good  understanding,  and  whose  practice  is
in  conformity  with  reason  and  the  Shastrus,  not  subject
to  passion,  and  accustomed  to  perform  good  works,
should  be  followed. And  you  have  also  quoted  the


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  243

words  of  Vyas,  signifying  that  the  authorities  of  tlic
Veds  and  Shastrus,  as  well  as  of  reason,  being  various,
the  practice  pointed  out  by  illustrious  men  should  be
adopted.  I  reply ;  you  have  shewn  that  the  example  of
men  versed  in  the  Shastrus,  and  who  act  in  conformity
with  reason  and  the  Shastrus,  should  be  followed;  but  can
you  call  those  who,  in  defiance  of  the  Shastrus,  wilfully
put  women  to  death  by  tying  them  down  to  the  pile  on
which  they  are  burned,  illustrious,  acquainted  with  the
Veds,  and  devoted  to  acts  prescribed  by  the  Shastrus
and  by  reason  ?  If  not,  their  example  is  to  be  disre-
garded. If  you  can  call  those,  who  wilfully  tie  down
women  to  put  them  to  death,  righteous  and  illustrious,
then  there  is  no  instance  of  unrighteousness  and  depra-
vity. I  have  already  said,  that  when  any  act  is  neither
directly  authorized  nor  prohibited  by  the  Shastrus,  the
custom  of  the  country,  or  of  the  race,  should  be  the
rule  of  conduct;  but  in  the  present  case,  the  words  are
express  in  prescribing  that  the  widow  shall  enter  the
flaming  pile.  But  those  who,  in  direct  defiance  of  the
authority  of  the  Shastrus,  act  the  part  of  woman-mur-
derers, in  tying  down  the  widow  to  the  pile,  and,  sub-
sequently applying  the  flame,  burn  her  to  death,  can
never  exculpate  themselves  from  the  sin  of  woman-
murder.  As  to  the  words  you  have  quoted  from  the
Skundu  Pooran,  signifying  that  the  arguments  of  one
who  has  no  faith  in  Shivu  and  Vishnoo  can  have  no
weight  in  the  discussion  of  the  legality  of  facts,  I  reply,
this  text  is  applicable  to  those  who  worship  images.
Those  who  worship  forms  under  any  name,  and  have  no
faith  in  Shivu  and  Vishnoo,  their  worship  is  vain,  and
their  words  to be  disregarded. In the  same  way  the

K 2


244  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

words  of  the  Koolarnuv  :  "  He. whose  mouth  does  not
"  give  out  the  smell  of  wine  and  flesh,  should  perform
"  a  penance  and  be  avoided,  and  is  as  an  inferior  ani-
"  mal.  This  is  undoubted."  These  words  are  appli-
cable only  to  those  who  follow  the  Tuntrus  ;  and  if  all
such  texts  are  considered  otherwise  applicable  than  in
relation  to  the  sects  to  whom  they  are  directed,  there  is
no  possibility  of  reconciling  the  variances  betwixt  the
different  Shastrus.  The  Shastru,  treating  of  God,  con-
tains the  following  words :  "  Acts  and  rites  that  origi-
"  nate  in  movements  of  the  hands,  and  other  members
"  of  the  body,  being  perishable,  cannot  effect  beatitude
"  that  is  eternal."

"  Those  that  worship  forms  under  appellations,  con-
"  tinue  subject  to  form  and  appellation  ;  for  no  perish-
"  able  means  can  effect  the  acquisition  of  an  imperish-
"  able  end."

"  That  man  who  considers  the  Being  that  is  infinite,
"  incomprehensible,  pure,  extending  as  far  as  space,
"  and  time,  and  vacuity,  to  be  finite,  perceptible  by
"  the  senses,  limited  by  time  and  place,  subject  to  pas-
"  sion  and  anger,  what  crime  is  such  a  robber  of  Divine
"  Majesty  not  guilty  of?"  That  is,  he  is  guilty  of  those
sins  which  are  considered  as  the  most  heinous,  as  well
as  of  those  that  are  considered  ordinary  sins.  There-
fore the  words  of  so  sinful  a  person  can  have  no  weight
in  the  discussion  of  the  legality  of  rites.


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  245

Section  VIII.

You  have  stated  in  p.  2,  that  in  the  same  manner  as
when  part  of  a  viUage  or  of  a  piece  of  cloth  has  been
burnt,  the  village  or  piece  of  cloth  is  said  to  be  burnt,
so  if  a  |)ortion  of  the  pile  is  inflamed,  the  whole  pile
may  be  said  to  be  flaming.  Therefore,  it  may  with  pro-
priety be  affirmed,  that  widows  do  in  this  country
ascend  the  flaming  pile.

I  reply ;  you  may  afford  gratification  to  those  who
take  delight  in  woman-murder  by  such  a  quibble,  but
how  can  you  avoid  divine  punishment  by  thus  playing
upon  words  ? — for  we  find  in  the  text  of  Hareet  and  of
Vishnoo,  the  phrase  "  pruvivesh  hootasunum,"  which
means  entering  into  flames,  and  the  term  "  Sumarohed-
"  dhootasunum,"  signifying  ascending  the  flames.  You
have  interpreted  these  directions  in  this  way  ; — that,  at  a
considerable  distance  from  the  pile,  fire  may  be  placed,
and  a  piece  of  grass  or  rope  may  connect  the  fire  with
the  pile ;  and  that  thus,  by  ascending  the  pile,  which
has  not  been  in  the  smallest  degree  affected  by  the  fire,
the  widow  may  fulfil  the  direction  of  ascending  and  en-
tering the  flaming  pile.  But  I  beg  to  remark,  that
both  in  the  vulgar  dialect  and  in  Sungskrit,  the  word
"  Pruvesh"  expresses  only  the  introgression  of  one  sub-
stance into  another ;  as  for  example,  "  Grihu  pruvesh
"  koriachhilam,"  I  entered  the  Jiouse  :  the  word  entered
cannot  be  used  unless  I  actually  passed  into  the  house.
If  a  long  bamboo  be  attached  to  the  house  and  a  rope
be  fastened  to  that  bamboo,  no  one  can  in  any  lan-
guage say,  that  in  merely  touching  that  roj)e  or  bamboo
he  has  entered  that  house. If  a  single  billet  of  wood


246  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

belonging  to  the  pile  were  indeed  inflamed,  then  you
might  say,  according  to  your  quibble  regarding  the
burning  of  the  cloth  and  of  the  village,  that  the  pile
was  inflamed,  and  the  flaming  pile  entered ;  but  even
this  is  by  no  means  the  case,  in  the  mode  in  which  your
pile  is  used.  Unless,  however,  the  pile  is  so  completely
in  fire  that  the  flames  may  surround  the  whole  of  her
body,  the  woman  cannot  be  said  to  enter  into  flame.
You  must  then,  before  you  can  justify  your  murder  of
helpless  women,  prepare  a  new  dictionary ;  but  there
is  no  great  probability  of  its  interpretations  being
adopted  by  men  of  knowledge.

Towards  the  end  of  the  28th  page  you  assert,  that
those  who  tie  down  the  woman  to  the  pile  according  to
the  custom  of  the  country,  are  not  guilty  of  violation
of  the  Shastrus :  for  it  is  to  be  understood  from  the
words  of  Hareet  before  quoted,  that  until  her  body  be
burnt,  the  widow  cannot  be  delivered  from  female  form,
which  implies  that  her  body  ought  to  be  completely
consumed  ;  and  that  it  is  on  this  account  that  those
who  burn  her  make  her  fast  to  the  pile,  lest  by  accident
any  part  of  the  dead  body  should  fall  out  of  the  pile,
and  fail  of  being  consumed,  and  in  that  case  the  burn-
ing be  incomplete.  This  practice  of  tying  down,  there-
fore, is  also  conformable  to  the  Shastru ;  and  those  who,
in  burning  the  woman,  make  her  fast  to  the  pile,  are
not  therein  guilty  of  any  sin,  but  rather  perform  a
pious  act.  In  support  of  this  assertion  you  have  quoted
the  words  of  Apustumbu,  signifying  that  he  who  per-
forms an  act  prescribed  by  the  Shastrus,  or  he  who
persuades  or  permits  another  to  perform  a  prescribed
act,  ascends  to  heaven  ;  and  he  who  commits  an  act


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  247

forbidden  by  the  Sliastru,  or  who  persuades  or  permits
another  to  perform  a  prohibited  action,  sinks  to  hell.

I  reply ;  you  mean  to  say,  that  it  is  not  in  order  to
avoid  the  danger  of  the  widow's  flying  from  the  pile
from  fear  of  the  flames,  or  from  pain,  that  she  is  made
fast — but  merely,  lest  any  fragments  of  the  body  should
fall  from  the  pile  unburnt,  that  she  is  tied  down  to  the
pile  while  alive.  I  ask,  is  it  with  an  iron  chain  that
the  woman  is  made  fast,  or  with  a  common  rope  ?  For
by  securing  the  body  by  means  of  iron,  the  danger  of
portions  of  it  being  scattered  from  the  pile  may  un-
doubtedly be  avoided.  But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  body
is  bound  with  a  common  rope,  the  rope  will  be  con-
sumed before  life  has  altogether  quitted  the  body,  and
the  rope,  when  so  burned,  can  be  of  no  use  in  retaining
within  the  pile  the  members  of  the  body.  So  far  have
Pundits  been  infatuated,  in  attempting  to  give  the  ap-
pearance of  propriety  to  improper  actions,  that  they
have  even  attempted  to  make  people  believe,  that  a
rope  may  remain  unconsumed  amidst  a  flaming  fire,
and  prevent  the  members  of  a  body  from  being  dis-
persed from  the  pile.  Men  of  sense  may  now  judge  of
the  truth  of  the  reason  to  which  you  ascribe  the  practice
of  tying  down  widows.  All  people  in  the  world  are  not
blind,  and  those  who  will  go  and  behold  the  mode  in
which  you  tie  down  women  to  the  pile,  will  readily  per-
ceive the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  motives  you  assign
for  the  practice.  A  little  reflection  ought  to  have  con-
vinced you  of  the  light  in  which  such  an  argument
must  be  viewed,  even  by  those  of  your  friends  who  have
the  smallest  regard  for  truth.  As  for  the  text  you  have
quoted  from  Apustumbu,  it  might  have,  with  more  pro-


248  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

priety,  been  cited  by  us,  because  it  is  established  by
that  passage,  that  those  who  commit,  persuade  to,  or
permit  an  improper  action,  descend  to  hell ;  for  those
that  are  guilty  of  wilful  woman-murder,  by  tying  women
down  with  ropes,  and  burning  them  to  death,  a  practice
unauthorized  by  the  Shastrus,  and  considered  as  most
heinous,  and  those  who  persuade  or  permit  others  to
do  so,  are  certainly  obnoxious  to  the  denunciation  of
Apustumbu.  The  pretext  of  custom  of  the  country,  or
of  the  object  of  preventing  portions  of  the  body  from
being  scattered,  will  not  exculpate  them.

You  have  written,  in  page  29,  that  those  who,  by  the
permission  of  the  widow,  increase  the  flames  by  throw-
ing wood  or  straw  on  the  pile,  are  meritorious :  for  he
who  without  reward  assists  another  in  a  pious  act,  is  to
be  esteemed  most  meritorious.  In  confirmation,  you
have  quoted  an  anecdote  of  the  Mutshyu  Pooran,  that
a  goldsmith,  by  affording  his  gratuitous  assistance  in  a
pious  act,  obtained  a  great  reward.  To  this  I  have
already  replied :  for  if  those  who  voluntarily  commit
woman-murder,  by  tying  down  a  widow  to  the  pile,
and  holding  her  down  with  bamboos  to  be  burnt  to
death,  are  to  be  reckoned  as  performers  of  a  pious  act,
those  who  assist  them  in  so  doing  must  be  esteemed
meritorious  :  but  if  this  be  a  most  heinous  and  debased
crime,  the  promoters  of  it  must  certainly  reap  the  fruits
of  woman-murder.

In  your  concluding  paragraph  you  have  quoted  three
texts,  to  prove  the  continual  observance  of  this  practice
during  all  ages.  The  first  recounting,  that  a  dove  en-
tered into  the  flaming  pile  of  her  deceased  husband.
The  second,  that  when  Dhriturashtru  was  burning  in


OF HURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  249

the  flames  of  l)is  hermitage,  his  wile,  Gaiulharee,  threw
herself  into  the  fire.  Tlie  wives  of  Busoodev  (the  father
of  Krishnu),  of  Buluram,  of  Priulyoomnii,  and  of  others,
entered  the  flaming  piles  of  their  respective  husbands.
These  three  instances  occurred,  as  narrated  by  the
Pooran  writers,  within  intervals  of  a  few  years  towards
the  close  of  the  Dwapur  Yoog.  You  ought  then  to
have  quoted  other  instances,  to  shew  the  continual  ob-
servance of  this  practice  throughout  all  ages.  Let  that
be  as  it  may,  you  yourself  cannot  fail  to  know,  that  in
former  ages  there  were,  as  in  later  times,  some  who
devoted  themselves  to  the  attainment  of  final  beatitude,
and  others  to  the  acquisition  of  future  pleasure.  Some
too  were  virtuous,  and  some  sinful ;  some  believers,
some  sceptics.  Amongst  those,  both  men  and  women,
who  performed  rites  for  reward,  after  enjoying  plea-
sures in  heaven,  have  again  fallen  to  earth.  Those
Shastrus  themselves  declare  this  fact ;  but  in  the  Shas-
trus  that  teach  the  path  to  final  beatitude,  the  per-
formance of  rites  for  the  sake  of  reward  is  positively
forbidden.  According  to  these  Shastrus,  numberless
women,  in  all  ages,  who  were  desirous  of  final  beatitude,
by  living  as  ascetics,  attained  their  object.  Evidence
of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  Muhabharut  and  other
works :  "  The  widows  of  the  heroic  Kooroos,  who  fell  va-
"  liantly  with  their  faces  to  the  foe,  and  were  translated
"  to  the  heaven  of  Bruhmji,  performed  only  the  pre-
"  scribed  ceremonies  with  water,"  and  did  not  burn
themselves  on  the  piles  of  their  husbands.  I  have
moreover  to  request  your  attention  to  the  fact,  that  in
the  three  instances  you  have  quoted,  the  very  words
"  entered  into  fire"  are  used. In  those three cases.


250  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

then,  it  appears  that  the  widows  actually  entered  the
flames,  and  therefore,  whatever  widow  in  the  present
time  does  not  enter  the  fire,  but  is  burnt  to  death  by
others  tying  her  down  to  the  pile,  lias  not  performed
the  ceremony  according  to  the  ancient  practice  you
have  instanced  ;  and  from  rites  so  performed  she  cannot
even  be  entitled  to  the  temporary  enjoyment  of  hea-
venly pleasures ;  and  those  who  tie  her  down,  and,
pressing  on  her  with  bamboos,  kill  her,  must,  according
to  all  Shastrus,  be  considered  guilty  of  the  heinous
crime  of  woman-murder.


Section  IX.

Advocate. — I  alluded,  in  p.  18,  1.  18,  to  the  real
reason  for  our  anxiety  to  persuade  widows  to  follow
their  husbands,  and  for  our  endeavours  to  burn  them,
pressed  down  with  ropes :  viz.  that  women  are  by
nature  of  infei'ior  understanding,  without  resolution,
unworthy  of  trust,  subject  to  passions,  and  void  of  vir-
tuous knowledge;  they,  according  to  the  precepts  of
the  Shastru,  are  not  allowed  to  marry  again  after  the
demise  of  their  husbands,  and  consequently  despair  at
once  of  all  worldly  pleasure :  hence  it  is  evident,  that
death  to  these  unfortunate  widows  is  preferable  to  ex-
istence ;  for  the  great  difficulty  which  a  widow  may  ex-
perience by  living  a  purely  ascetic  life,  as  prescribed  by
the  Shastrus,  is  obvious ;  therefore,  if  she  do  not  per-
form Concremation,  it  is  probable  that  she  may  be
guilty  of  such  acts  as  may  bring  disgrace  upon  her


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  251

paternal  and  maternal  relations,  and  those  that  may  be
connected  with  her  husband.  Under  these  circum-
stances, we  instruct  them  from  their  early  life  in  the
idea  of  Concremation,  holding  out  to  them  heavenly
enjoyments  in  company  with  their  husbands,  as  well  as
the  beatitude  of  their  relations,  both  by  birth  and  mar-
riage, and  tiieir  reputation  in  this  world.  From  this
many  of  them,  on  the  death  of  their  husbands,  become
desirous  of  accompanying  them ;  but  to  remove  every
chance  of  their  trying  to  escape  from  the  blazing  fire,
in  burning  them  we  first  tie  them  down  to  the  pile.

Opponeiit. — The  reason  you  have  now  assigned  for
burning  widows  alive  is  indeed  your  true  motive,  as  we
are  well  aware;  but  the  faults  which  you  have  im-
puted to  women  are  not  planted  in  their  constitution
by  nature;  it  would  be,  therefore,  grossly  criminal  to
condemn  that  sex  to  death  merely  from  precaution.
By  ascribing  to  them  all  sorts  of  improper  conduct,  you
have  indeed  successfully  persuaded  the  Hindoo  com-
munity to  look  down  upon  them  as  contemptible  and
mischievous  creatures,  whence  they  have  been  sub-
jected to  constant  miseries.  I  have,  therefore,  to  offer  a
few  remarks on this head.

Women  are  in  general  inferior  to  men  in  bodily
strength  and  energy;  consequently  the  male  part  of  the
connnunity,  taking  advantage  of  their  corporeal  weak-
ness, have  denied  to  them  those  excellent  merits  that  they
are  entitled  to  by  nature,  and  afterwards  they  are  apt  to
say  that  women  are  naturally  incapable  of  acquirin<>"
those  merits.  But  if  we  give  the  subject  consideration,
we  may  easily  ascertain  whether  or  not  your  accusation
against  tiiem  is  consistent  with justice. As  to  their  in-


252  SECOND CONFERENCE ON THE PRACTICE

ferioiity  in  point  of  understanding,  when  did  you  ever
afford  them  a  fair  opportunity  of  exhibiting  their  natural
capacity?  How  then  can  you  accuse  them  of  want  of
understanding?  If,  after  instruction  in  knowledge  and
wisdom,  a  person  cannot  comprehend  or  retain  what  has
been  taught  him,  we  may  consider  him  as  deficient;  but
as  you  keep  women  generally  void  of  education  and  ac-
quirements, you  cannot,  therefore,  injustice  pronounce
on  their  inferiority.  On  the  contrary,  Leelavutee,  Bha-
noomutee  (the  wife  of  the  prince  of  Kurnat),  and  that
ofKalidas,  are  celebrated  for  their  thorough  know-
ledge of  all  the  Shastrus :  moreover  in  the  Vrihudar-
unyuk  Opunishud  of  the  Ujoor  Ved  it  is  clearly
stated,  that  Yagnuvulkyu  imparted  divine  knowledge
of  the  most  difficult  nature  to  his  wife  Muitreyee,  who
was  able  to  follow  and  completely  attain  it !

Secondly.  You  charge  them  with  want  of  resolution,
at  which  I  feel  exceedingly  surprised  :  for  we  con-
stantly perceive,  in  a  country  where  the  name  of  death
makes  the  male  shudder,  that  the  female,  from  her  firm-
ness of  mind,  offers  to  burn  with  the  corpse  of  her  de-
ceased husband  ;  and  yet  you  accuse  those  women  of
deficiency  in  point  of  resolution.

Thirdly.  With  regard  to  their  trustworthiness,  let  us
look  minutely  into  the  conduct  of  both  sexes,  and  we
may  be  enabled  to  ascertain  which  of  them  is  the  most
frequently  guilty  of  betraying  friends  If  we  enume-
rate such  women  in  each  village  or  town  as  have  been
deceived  by  men,  and  such  men  as  have  been  betrayed
by  women,  I  presume  that  the  number  of  the  deceived
women  would  be  found  ten  times  greater  than  that  of
the  betrayed  men. Men  are, in  general, able  to  read


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  253

and  write,  and  manage  public  affairs,  by  which  means
they  easily  promulgate  such  faults  as  women  occa-
sionally commit,  but  never  consider  as  criminal  the
misconduct  of  men  towards  women.  One  fault  they
have,  it  must  be  acknowledged ;  which  is,  by  con-
sidering others  equally  void  of  duplicity  as  them-
selves, to  give  their  confidence  too  readily,  from  which
they  suffer  much  misery,  even  so  far  that  some  of
them  are  misled  to  suffer  themselves  to  be  burnt  to
death.

In  the  fourth  place,  with  respect  to  their  subjection  to
the  passions,  this  may  be  judged  of  by  the  custom  of
marriage  as  to  the  respective  sexes;  for  one  man  may
marry  two  or  three,  sometimes  even  ten  wives  and  up-
wards ;  while  a  woman,  who  marries  but  one  husband,
desires  at  his  death  to  follow  him,  forsaking  all  worldly
enjoyments,  or  to  remain  leading  the  austere  life  of  an
ascetic.

Fifthly.  The  accusation  of  their  want  of  virtuous
knowledge  is  an  injustice.  Observe  what  pain,  what
slighting,  what  contempt,  and  what  afflictions  their  virtue
enables  them  to  support !  How  many  Kooleen  Brah-
mins are  there  who  marry  ten  or  fifteen  wives  for  the
sake  of  money,  that  never  see  the  greater  number  of  them
after  the  day  of  marriage,  and  visit  others  only  three
or  four  limes  in  the  course  of  their  life.  Still  amongst
those  women,  most,  even  without  seeing  or  receiving
any  support  from  their  husbands,  living  dependent  on
their  fathers  or  brothers,  and  suffering  much  distress,
continue  to  preserve  their  virtue ;  and  when  Brah-
mans,  or  those  of  other  tribes,  bring  their  wives  to  live
with  them,  what  misery  do  the  women  not  suffer  ? At


254  SECOND CONFERENCF. ON THE PRACTICE

marriasfe  the  wife  is  recognized  as  half  of  her  husband,
but  in  after-conduct  they  are  treated  worse  than  inferior
animals.  For  the  woman  is  employed  to  do  the  work
of  a  slave  in  the  house,  such  as,  in  her  turn,  to  clean  the
place  very  early  in  the  morning,  whether  cold  or  wet,
to  scour  the  dishes,  to  wash  the  floor,  to  cook  night  and
day,  to  prepare  and  serve  food  for  her  husband,  father
and  mother-in-law,  sisters-in-law,  brothers-in  law,  and
friends  and  connections !  (for  amongst  Hindoos  more
than  in  other  tribes  relations  long  reside  together,
and  on  this  account  quarrels  are  more  common
amongst  brothers  respecting  their  worldly  affairs.)  If  in
the  preparation  or  serving  up  of  the  victuals  they  commit
the  smallest  fault,  what  insult  do  they  not  receive  from
their  husband,  their  mother-in-law,  and  the  younger
brothers  of  their  husband  !  After  all  the  male  part  of
the  family  have  satisfied  themselves,  the  women  con-
tent themselves  with  what  may  be  left,  whether  sufficient
in  quantity  or  not.  Where  Brahmuns  or  Kayustus  are
not  wealthy,  their  women  are  obliged  to  attend  to  their
cows,  and  to  prepare  the  cow-dung  for  firing.  In  the
afternoon  they  fetch  water  from  the  river  or  tank ;  and
at  night  perform  the  office  of  menial  servants  in  making
the  beds.  In  case  of  any  fault  or  omission  in  the
performance  of  those  labours,  they  receive  injurious
treatment.  Should  the  husband  acquire  wealth,  he
indulges  in  criminal  amours  to  her  perfect  knowledge,
and  almost  under  her  eyes,  and  does  not  see  her  per-
haps once  a  month.  As  long  as  the  husband  is  poor,
she  suffers  every  kind  of  trouble,  and  when  he  becomes
rich  she  is  altogether  heart-broken.  All  this  pain  and
affliction  their  virtue  alone  enables  them  to  support.


OF BURNING WIDOWS ALIVE.  255

Where  a  husband  takes  two  or  three  wives  to  live  with
him,  they  are  subjected  to  mental  miseries  and  constant
quarrels.  Even  this  distressed  situation  they  virtuously
endure.  Sometimes  it  happens  that  the  husband,  from
a  preference  for  one  of  his  wives,  behaves  cruelly  to
another.  Amongst  the  lower  classes,  and  those  even  of
the  better  class  who  have  not  associated  with  good  com-
pany, the  wife,  on  the  slightest  fault,  or  even  on  bare
suspicion  of  her  misconduct,  is  chastised  as  a  thief.
Respect  to  virtue  and  their  reputation  generally  makes
them  forgive  even  this  treatment.  If,  unable  to  bear  such
cruel  usage,  a  wife  leaves  her  husband's  house  to  live
separately  from  him,  then  the  influence  of  the  husband
with  the  magisterial  authority  is  generally  sufficient  to
place  her  again  in  his  hands  ;  when,  in  revenge  for  her
quitting  him,  he  seizes  every  pretext  to  torment  her
in  various  ways,  and  sometimes  even  puts  her  privately
to  death.  These  are  facts  occurring  every  day,  and
not  to  be  denied.  What  I  lament  is,  that,  seeing  the
women  thus  dependent  and  exposed  to  every  misery,
you  feel  for  them  no  compassion,  that  might  exempt
them  from  beine:  tied  down  and  burnt  to  death.


ABSTRACT


ARGUMENTS


RF.CARDIKG


THE BURNING OF WIDOWS,


CONSIDERED AS A RELIGIOUS RITK.


CALCUTTA
1830.


ABSTRACT


THE  ARGUMENTS,  &c.


Several  Essays,  Tracts,  and  Letters,  written  in  de-
fence of  or  against  the  practice  of  burning  Hindoo
widows  alive,  have  for  some  years  past  attracted  the
attention  of  the  pubHc.  The  arguments  therein  ad-
duced by  the  parties  being  necessarily  scattered,  a  com-
plete view  of  the  question  cannot  be  easily  attained  by
such  readers  as  are  precluded  by  their  immediate  avo-
cations from  bestowing  much  labour  in  acquiring  in-
formation on  the  subject.  Although  the  practice  itself
has  now  happily  ceased  to  exist  under  the  Government
of  Bengal, "  nevertheless,  it  seems  still  desirable  that
the  substance  of  those  ]^nblications  should  be  condensed
in  a  concise  but  comprehensive  manner,  so  that  en-
quirers may,  with  little  difficulty,  be  able  to  form  a  just
conclusion,  as  to  the  true  light  in  which  this  practice  is
viewed  in  the  religion  of  Hindoos.  I  have,  therefore,
made  an  attempt  to  accomplish  this  object,  hoping  that
the  plan  pursued  may  be  found  to  answer  this  end.

Thn  administration  to  wliicli  this  distinguislicd  merit  is  due,
consisted  of  Lord  W.  C.  Bontinck,  f^overnor  {rencral ;  Viscount
Combermere,  conininnder  in  t-liicf ;  W.  B.  Baylev,  Esq.,  and  Sir
C.  T.  Metcalie,  nienibors  of  cownril.

s2


260  ABSTRACT OF ARGUMENTS

The  first  point  to  be  ascertained  is,  wliether  or  not
the  practice  of  burning  widows  alive  on  the  pile  and
with  the  corpse  of  their  husbands,  is  imperatively  en-
joined by  the  Hindoo  religion.  To  this  question,  even
the  staunch  advocates  for  Concremation  must  reluc-
tantly give  a  negative  reply,  and  unavoidably  concede
the  practice  to  the  option  of  widows.  This  admission
on  their  part  is  owing  to  two  principal  considerations,
which  it  is  now  too  late  for  them  to  feijjn  to  overlook.
First,  because  Munoo  in  plain  terms  enjoins  a  widow
to  '■'■  cGntinue  till  death  forgiving  all  injuries,  performing
"  austere  duties,  avoiding  every  sensual  pleasure,  and
"  cheerfully  practising  the  incomparable  rules  of  virtue
"  vvhich  have  been  followed  by  such  women  as  were
"  devoted  to  one  only  husband;"  (ch.  v.  ver.  158.)  So
Yagnuvulkyu  inculcates  the  same  doctrine:  "  A  widow
"  shall  live  under  care  of  her  father,  mother,  son,  bro-
"  ther,  mother-in-law,  father-in-law,  or  uncle;  since,
"  on  the  contrary,  she  shall  be  liable  to  reproach."
(Vide  Mitakshura,  ch.  i.)  Secondly,  because  an  attempt
on  the  part  of  the  advocates  for  Concremation  to  hold
out  the  act  as  an  incumbent  duty  on  widows,  would  ne-
cessarily bring  a  stigma  upon  the  character  of  the
living  widows,  who  have  preferred  a  virtuous  life  to
Concremation,  as  charging  them  with  a  violation  of  the
duty  said  to  be  indispensable.  These  advocates,  there-
fore, feel  deteri'ed  from  giving  undue  praise  to  a  few
widows  choosing  death  on  the  pile,  to  the  disgrace  of
a  vast  majority  of  that  class  preferring  a  virtuous  life.
And  in  consideration  of  these  obvious  circumstances,
the  celebrated  Smarttu  Rughoonundun,  the  latest  com-
mentator on  Hindoo  law  in  Bengal,  found  himself  com-


iu:(;Ai{niN(;  hurninc.  or  widows.  201

pelled  to  expouiul  the  following  passage  of  Unggira  :
"  there  is  no  other  course  for  a  widow  beside  Concre-
"  mation  ;"  as  "  conveying  exaggerated  praise  of  the
"  adoption  of  that  course."

The  second  point  is,  that  in  case  the  alternative  be
admitted,  that  a  widow  may  either  live  a  virtuous  life,
or  burn  herself  on  the  pile  of  her  iiusband ;  it  should
next  be  determined,  whether  both  practices  are  esteemed
equally  meritorious,  or  one  be  declared  preferable  to
the  other.  To  satisfy  ourselves  on  this  question,  we
should  first  refer  to  the  Veds,  whose  authority  is  con-
sidered paramount ;  and  we  find  in  them  a  passage
most  pointed  and  decisive  against  Concremation,  de-
claring that  "  from  a  desire  during  life,  of  future  frui-
"  tion,  life  ougiit  not  to  be  destroyed."  (Vide  Mitak-
shura,  ch.  i)  While  the  advocates  of  Concremation
quote  a  passage  from  the  Veds,  of  a  very  abstruse
nature,  in  support  of  their  position,  which  is  as  follows :
"  O  fire,  let  these  women,  with  bodies  anointed  with
"  clarified  butter,  eyes  coloured  with  collyrium  and
"  void  of  tears,  enter  thee,  the  parent  of  water,*  that
"  they  may  not  be  separated  from  their  husbands,
"  themselves  sinless,  and  jewels  amongst  women."  This
passage  (if  genuine)  does  not,  in  the  first  place,  enjoin
widows  to  offer  themselves  as  sacrifices.  Secondly,  no
allusion  whatever  is  made  in  it  to  voluntary  death  by  a
widow  icith  the  corpse  of  her  husband.  Thirdly,  the
phrase  "these  women*"  in  the  passage,  literally  implies
women  then  present.  Fourthly.  Some  commentators
consider  the  passage  as  conveying  an  allegorical  aliu-

• In  Suiij^bkrit  writings,  wiilor  is  n'piesunted  a.^ oi  iijinatin}; in
lire.


262  AIJSTRACT OF ARGUMENTS

sion  to  the  constellations  of  the  moon's  path,  which  are
invariably  spoken  of  in  Sungskrit  in  the  feminine
gentler :— butter  implying  the  milky  path;  collyrium
meaning  unoccupied  space  between  one  star  and  an-
other ;  husbands  signifying  the  more  splendid  of  the
heavenly  bodies ;  and  entering  the  fire,  or,  properly
speaking,  ascending  it,  indicating  the  rise  of  the  con-
stellations through  the  south-east  horizon,  considered
as  the  abode  of  fire.  Whatever  may  be  the  real  purport
of  this  passage,  no  one  ever  ventured  to  give  it  an  in-
terpretation as  commanding  widows  to  burn  themselves
on  the  pile  and  with  the  corpse  of  their  husbands.

We  next  direct  attention to  the  Smrittee,  as  next
in  authority  to the  Veds. Munoo, whose authority
supersedes  that  of  other  lawgivers,  enjoins  widows  to
live  a  virtuous life, as  already  quoted. Yagnuvulkyu
and  some  others  have  adopted  the  same  mode  of  ex-
hortation. On  the  other  hand, Unggira  recommends
the  practice  of  Concremation,  saying  :  "  That  a  woman
"  who,  on  the  death  of  her  husband,  ascends  the  burning
^^  pile  with  him,  is  exalted  to  heaven  as  equal  to  Uroon-
"  dhooti." So  Vyas  says,  "  a  pigeon  devoted  to  her
"  husband,  after  his  death,  entered  the  flames,  and,  as-
"  cending  to  heaven,  she  there  found  her  husband."
"  She  who  follows  her  husband  to  another  world,  shall
"  dwell  in  a  region  of  glory  for  so  many  years  as  there
"  are  hairs  in  the  human  body,  or  thiity-five  millions."
Vishnoo, the  saint, lays  down  this  rule :  "  After  the
"  death  of  her  husband,  a  wife  should  live  as  an  ascetic
"  or  ascend  his  pile." Hareet  and  others  have  followed
Unggira  in  recommending  Concremation.

The  above  quoted  passages  from  Unggira  and  others,


REGARDING BURNINd OF WIDOWS.  263

recommend  Concremation  on  the  part  of  widows,  as
means  to  obtain  future  carnal  fruition;  and,  accord-
ingly, previous  to  their  ascent  on  the  pile,  all  widows
invariably  and  solemnly  declare  future  fruition  as  their
object  in  Concremation.  But  the  Blnigvudgeeta,  whose
authority  is  considered  the  most  sacred  by  Hindoos  of
all  persuasions,  repeatedly  condemns  rites  performed
for  fruition.  I  here  quote  a  few  passages  of  that  book.
"  All  those  ignorant  persons  who  attach  themselves  to
"  the  words  of  the  Shastrus  that  convey  promises  of
"  fruition,  consider  those  extravagant  and  alluring
"  passages,  as  leading  to  real  happiness ;  and  say,  be-
"  sides  them  there  is  no  other  reality.  Agitated  in
"  their  minds  by  these  desires,  they  believe  the  abodes
"  of  the  celestial  gods  to  be  the  chief  object,  and  they
"  devote  themselves  to  those  texts  which  treat  of  cere-
"  monies  and  their  fruits,  and  entice  by  promises  of
"  enjoyment.  Such  people  can  have  no  real  confidence
"  in  the  Supreme  Being."  "  Observers  of  rites,  after
"  the  completion  of  their  rewards,  return  to  earth.
"  Therefore  they,  for  the  sake  of  rewards,  repeatedly
"  ascend  to  heaven  and  return  to  the  world,  and  cannot
"  obtain  eternal  bliss."

Munoo  repeats  the  same :  "  Whatever  act  is  per-
"  formed  for  the  sake  of  gratification  in  this  world  or
"  the  next,  is  called  Pruvurtuk,  as  leading  to  the  tem-
"  porary  enjoyment  of  the  mansions  of  gods  ;  and  those
"  which  are  performed  according  to  the  knowledge
"  respecting  God  are  called  Nivurtuk,  as  means  to  pro-
"  cure  release  from  the  five  elements  of  this  body  ;  that
"  is,  they  obtain  eternal  bliss."

The  author  of  the  Milakshura, a  work  which  is  con-


264  ABSTRACT OF ARGUMENTS

sidered  as  a  standard  of  Hindoo  Law  throughout
Hindoostan,  referring  on  one  hand  to  the  authority  of
Munoo,  Yagnuvulkyu,  the  Bhugvudgeeta,  and  simihir
sacred  writings,  and  to  the  passages  of  Unggira,  Hareet,
and  Vyas  on  the  other  hand,  and  after  having  weighed
both  sides  of  the  question,  declares  that  "  the  widow
"  who  is  not  desirous  of  eternal  beatitude,  but  who
"  wishes  only  for  a  perishable  and  small  degree  of
"  future  fruition,  is  authorized  to  accompany  her  hus-
"  band."  So  that  the  Smartu  Rughoonundun,  the
modern  expounder  of  law  in  Bengal,  classes  Concre-
mation  among  the  rites  holding  out  promises  of  frui-
tion ;  and  this  author  thus  inculcates  :  "  Learned  men
"  should  not  endeavour  to  persuade  the  ignorant  to
"  perform  rites  holding  out  promises  of  fruition."
Hence  Concremation,  in  their  opinion,  is  the  least
virtuous  act  that  a  widow  can  perform.*

•  Hindoos  are  persuaded  to  believe  tliat  Vvas,  considered  as  an
inspired  writer  among  the  ancients,  composed  and  left  behind  him
numerous  and  voluminous  works  under  different  titles,  as  Muha
Poorans,  Itihashes,  Sunghitas,  Smriti,  &c.  &c.,  to  an  extent  that
no  man,  during  the  ordinary  course  of  life,  could  prepare.  These,
however,  with  a  few  exceptions,  exist  merely  in  name,  and  those
that  are  genuine  bear  the  commentaries  of  celebrated  authors.
So  the  Tuntrus,  or  works  ascribed  to  Shivu  as  their  author,  are
esteemed  as  consisting  of  innumerable  millions  of  volumes,  though
only  a  very  few,  comparatively,  are  to  be  found.  Debased  cha-
racters among  this  unhappy  people,  taking  advantage  of  this  cir-
cumstance, have  secretly  composed  forged  works  and  passages,
and  published  them  as  if  they  were  genuine,  with  the  view  of  in-
troducing new  doctrines,  new  rites,  or  new  prescripts  of  secular
law.  Although  they  have  frequently  succeeded  by  these  means  in
working  on  the  minds  of  the  ignorant,  yet  the  learned  have  never
admitted  the  authority  of  any  passage  or  work  alleged  to  be  sacred,

unless


IlEOAllDING HURNINC; OF WIDOWS.  265

The  third  and  tlie  last  point  to  be  ascertained  is,
whether  or  not  the  mode  of  Concremation  prescribed
by  Hareet  and  others  was  ever  duly  observed  ?  The
passages  recommending  Concremation,  as  quoted  by
these  expounders  of  law,  require  that  a  widow,  resolv-
ing to  die  after  the  demise  of  her  husband,  should
voluntarily  ascend*  and  enter  the  flames  I"  to  destroy  her
existence ;  allowing  her,  at  the  same  time,  an  oppor-
tunity of  retracting  her  resolution,  should  her  courage
fail  from  the  alarming  sight  or  effect  of  the  flames,  and
of  returning  to  her  relatives,  performing  a  penance  for
abandoning  the  sacrifice,  or  bestowing  the  value  of  a
cow  on  a  Brahmun.  Hence,  as  voluntarily  ascending
upon  and  entering  into  the  flames,  are  described  as  in-
dispensably necessary  for  a  widow  in  the  performance
of  this rite,  the  violation of  one of  these  provisions

unless  it  has  been  quoted  or  expounded  by  one  of  the  acknow-
ledged and  authoritative  commentators.  It  is  now  unhappily
reported,  that  some  advocates  for  the  destruction  of  widows,  find-
iivr  their  cause  unsupported  by  the  passages  cited  by  the  author  of
the  IMitakshura,  by  the  Smarttu  Rughoonundun,  or  by  other  ex-
pounders of  Hindoo  law,  liave  disgracefully  adopted  the  trick  of
coining  passages  in  the  name  of  the  Poorans  orTuntrus;  con-
veying doctrines  not  only  directly  opposed  to  the  decisive  expo-
sitions of  these  celebrated  teachers  of  law,  but  also  evidently  at
variance  with  the  purport  of  the  genuine  sacred  passao-es  which
they  have  cpjoted.  The  passages  thus  forged  are  said  to  be  cal-
culated to  give  a  preference  to  Concremation  over  virtuous  life.
1  regret  to  understand  that  some  persons  belonging  to  the  party
opposing  this  practice,  are  reported  to  have  had  recourse  to  the
same  unworthy  artifice,  under  the  erroneous  plea  that  stratagem
justifies  stratagem.

• Unggira.  t  Vyas.


266  ABSTRACT OF ARGUMENTS,  &C.

renders  the  act  mere  suicide,  and  implicates,  in  the  guilt
of  female  murder,  those  that  assist  in  its  perpetration,
even  according  to  the  above  quoted  authorities,  which
are  themselves  of  an  inferior  order.  But  no  one  will
venture  to  assert,  that  the  provisions,  prescribed  in  the
passages  adduced,  have  ever  been  observed ;  that  is,  no
widow  ever  voluntarily  ascended  on  and  entered  into  the
flames  in  the  fulfilment  of  this  rite.  The  advocates  for
Concremation  have  been  consequently  driven  to  the
necessity  of  taking  refuge  in  usage,  as  justifying  both
suicide  and  female  murder,  the  most  heinous  of  crimes.
We  should  not  omit  the  present  opportunity  of
offering  up  thanks  to  Heaven,  whose  protecting  arm
has  rescued  our  weaker  sex  from  cruel  murder,  under
the  cloak  of  religion ;  and  our  character,  as  a  people,
from  the  contempt  and  pity  with  which  it  has  been  re-
garded, on  account  of  this  custom,  by  all  civilized
nations  on  the  surface  of  the  globe.


BRIEF  REMARKS


KEGAUUING


MODERN ENCROACHMENTS


ANCIENT  RIGHTS  OF  FEMALES,


accohding  to


THE HINDOO LAW OF INHERFrANCE.


CALCUTTA
1822.


BRIEF  REMARKS,

S:C. &C. &C.


With  a  view  to  enable  the  public  to  form  an  idea  of
tlie  state  of  civilization  throngliout  the  greater  part  of
the empire  of  Ilindoostan in ancient  days,*  and  of

•  At  an  early  staple  of  civilization,  when  the  division  into  casts
was  first  introduced  among-  the  inhabitants  of  India,  the  second
tribe,  who  were  appointed  to  defend  and  rule  the  country,  having-
adopted  arbitrary  and  despotic  practices,  the  others  revolted
against  them  ;  and  under  the  personal  command  of  the  celebrated
Purusooram,  defeated  the  royalists  in  several  battles,  and  put
cruelly  to  death  almost  all  the  males  of  that  tribe.  It  was  at  last
resolved  that  the  legislative  authority  slioiild  be  confined  to  the
first  class  who  could  have  no  share  in  the  actual  government  of  the
state,  or  in  managing  the  revenue  of  the  country  under  any  pre-
tence ;  while  the  second  tribe  should  exercise  the  executive  autho-
rity. The  consequence  was,  that  India  enjoyed  peace  and  har-
mony for  a  great  many  centuries.  The  Brahmuns  having-  no
expecrtation  of  holding  an  office,  or  of  partaking  of  any  kind  of
political  promotion,  devoted  tiieir  time  to  scientific  pursuits  and
religious  austerity,  and  lived  in  poverty.  Freely  associating  with
all  the  other  tribes,  they  were  thus  able  to  know  their  sentiments
and  t((  ajjpreciate  the  justness  of  their  complaints,  and  thereby  to
lay  (low  n  such  rules  as  were  required,  which  often  induced  them
to  rectify  the  abuses  that  were  practised  by  the  second  tribe.  But
after  the  expiration  of  more  than  two  thousand  years,  an  ab.solute
form  of  government  came  gradually  again  to  prevail. The  first

class


270  BRIEF REMARKS REGARDING

the  subsequent  gradual  degradation  introduced  into  its
social  and  political  constitution  by  arbitrary  authori-
ties, I  am  induced  to  give  as  an  instance  the  interest
and  care  which  our  ancient  legislators  took  in  the  pro-
motion of  the  comfort  of  the  female  part  of  the  commu-
nity, and  to  compare  the  laws  of  female  inheritance
which  they  enacted,  and  which  afforded  that  sex  the
opportunity  of  enjoyment  of  life,  with  that  which
moderns  and  our  cotemporaries  have  gradually  in-
troduced and  established,  to  their  complete  privation,
directly  or  indirectly,  of  most  of  those  objects  that  ren-
der life  agreeable-
All  the  ancient  lawgivers  unanimously  award  to  a
mother  an  equal  share  with  her  son  in  the  property  left
by  her  deceased  husband,  in  order  that  she  may  spend

class  having"  been  induced  to  accept  employments  in  political
departments,  became  entirely  dependent  on  the  second  tribe,  and
so  unimportant  in  themselves,  that  they  were  obliged  to  explain
away  the  laws  enacted  by  their  forefathei-s,  and  to  institute  new
rules  according  to  the  dictates  of  their  cotemporary  princes.  They
were  considered  as  merely  nominal  legislators,  and  the  whole
power,  whether  legislative  or  executive,  was  in  fact  exercised  by
the  Rajpoots.  This  tribe  exercised  tyranny  and  oppression  for  a
period  of  about  a  thousand  years,  when  Moosulmans  from  Ghuznee
and  Ghore,  invaded  the  country,  and  finding  it  divided  among
hundreds  of  petty  princes,  detested  by  their  respective  subjects,
conquered  them  all  successively,  and  introduced  their  own  tyran-
nical system  of  government,  destroying  temples,  universities,  and
all  other  sacred  and  literary  establishments.  At  present  the  whole
empire  (with  the  exception  of  a  few  provinces)  has  been  placed
under  the  British  power ;  and  some  advantages  have  alreadv  been
derived  from  the  prudent  management  of  its  rules,  from  whose
general  character  a  hope  of  future  quiet  and  happiness  is  justly
entertained.  The  succeeding  generation  will  however  be  more
adequate  to  pronounce  on  the  real  advantages  of  this  government.


THE ANCIENT RITES OF FEMALES.  271

her  remaining  days  independently  of  her  children  ;  as
is  evident  from  the  following  passages:

Yagnuvul  Kyu.  "  After  the  death  of  a  father,  let  a
"  mother  also  inherit  an  equal  share  with  her  sons  in
"  the  division  of  the  property  left  by  their  father"

Kotyayumi.  "  The  flither  being  dead,  the  mother
"  should  inherit  an  equal  share  with  the  son."

Narudu.  "  After  the  death  of  a  husband,  a  mother
"  should  receive  a  share  equal  to  that  of  each  of  his
«  sons."

Vihmoo  the  legislator.  "  Mothers  should  be  re-
"  ceivers  of  shares  according  to  the  portion  allowed  to
"  the  sons."

Vrihusputi.  "  After  his  (the  father's)  death,  a  mo-
"  ther,  the  parent  of  his  sons,  should  be  entitled  to  an
"  equal  share  with  his  sons;  their  step-mothers  also  to
"  equal  shares;  but  daughters  to  a  fourth  part  of  the
"  shares  of  the  sons."

Vyasu.  "  The  wives  of  a  father  by  whom  he  has  no
"  male  issue,  are  considered  as  entitled  to  equal  shares
"  with  his  son.s,  and  all  the  grand-mothers  {including  the
"  mothers  and  step-mothers  of  the  father),  are  said  to  be
"  entitled  as  mothers."

This  Mooni  seems  to  have  made  this  express  decla-
ration of  the  rights  of  step-mothers,  omitting  those  of
mothers,  under  the  idea  that  the  latter  were  already
sufficiently  established  by  the  direct  authority  of  pre-
ceding lawgivers.

We  come  to  the  moderns.

The  author  of  the  Dayubhagu  and  the  writer  of  the
Dayututwu,  the modern expounders of Hindu law


272  BRIEF RF.MAUKS HEciARDING

r

(wliose  opinions  are  considered  by  tlie  natives  of  Bengal
as  standard  authority  in  the  division  of  property  among
heirs)  have  thus  limited  the  rights  allowed  to  widows
by  the  above  ancient  legislators.  When  a  person  is
willing  to  divide  his  property  among  his  heirs  during
his  life-time,  he  should  entitle  only  those  wives  by
whom  he  has  no  issue  to  an  equal  share  with  his  sons;
but  if  he  omit  such  a  division,  those  wives  can  have  no
claim  to  the  property  he  leaves.  These  two  modern
expounders  lay  stress  upon  a  passage  of  Yagnuvulkyu,
which  requires  a  father  to  allot  equal  shares  to  his
wives,  in  case  he  divides  his  property  during  his  life ;
whereby  they  connect  the  term  "of  a  father,"  in  the
above  quoted  passage  of  Vyas,  viz.,  "the  wives  of  a
"  father,  &c."  with  the  term  "  division"  understood  ;
that  is,  the  wives  by  whom  he  has  no  son,  are  con-
sidered in  the  division  made  by  a  father,  as  entitled  to
equal  shares  with  his  sons ;  and  that  when  sons  may
divide  property  among  themselves  after  the  demise  of
their  father,  they  should  give  an  equal  share  to  their
mother  only,  neglecting  step-mothers  in  the  division.
Here  the  expounders  did  not  take  into  their  considera-
tion any  proper  provision  for  step-mothers,  who  have
naturally  less  hope  of  support  from  their  step-sons  than
mothers  can  expect  from  their  own  children.

In  the  opinion  of  these  expounders,  even  a  mother  of
a  single  son  should  not  be  entitled  to  any  share.  The
whole  property  should,  in  that  case,  devolve  on  the
son  ;  and  in  case  that  son  should  die  after  his  succes-
sion to  the  property,  his  son  or  wife  should  inherit  it.
The  mother  in  that  case,  should  be  left  totally  depen-


THE ANCIENT RIGHTS OF FEMALES.  273

dent  on  her  son  or  on  her  son's  wife.  Besides,  accortl-
in<5  to  the  ojiinion  of  these  exponiulcrs,  if  more  than
one  son  should  survive,  they  can  deprive  their  mother
of  her  title,  by  continuing  to  live  as  a  joint  family  (which
has  been  often  the  case),  as  the  right  of  a  mother
depends,  as  they  say,  on  division,  which  depends  on  the
will  of  the  sons.

Some  of  ourcotemporaries  (vvhoseopinion  is  received
as  a  verdict  by  Judicial  Courts)  have  still  further  re-
duced the  right  of  a  motiier  to  almost  nothing  ;  declar-
ing, as  I  understand,  that  if  a  person  die  leaving  a
widow  and  a  son  or  sons,  and  also  one  or  more  grand-
sons, whose  father  is  not  alive,  the  property  so  left  is  to
be  divided  among  his  sons  and  his  grandsons ;  his
widow  in  this  case  being  entitled  to  no  share  in  the
property  ;  though  she  might  have  claimed  an  equal
share,  had  a  division  taken  place  among  those  surviving
sons  and  die  father  of  the  grandson  while  he  was  alive.*
They  are  said  to  have  founded  their  opinion  on  the
above  passage,  entitling  a  widow  to  a  share  when  pro-
perty is  to  be  divided  among  sons.

In  short,  a  widow,  according  to  the  expositions  of  the
law,  can  receive  nothing  when  her  husband  has  no
issue  by  her ;  and  in  a  case  he  dies  leaving  only  one
son  by  his  wife,  or  having  had  more  sons,  one  of  whom
happened  to  die  leaving  issue,  she  shall,  in  these  cases,

•  This  exposition  has  been  (I  am  told)  set  aside  by  the  Supreme
Court,  in  consequence  of  the  judges  having  prudently  applied  for
the  opinions  of  other  Pundits,  which  turned  out  to  be  at  variance
with  those  of  the  majority  of  the  regular  advisers  of  the  court  in
points  of  Hindoo  law.

T


274-  151!IF.F UKMAItKfi UEdARDING

also  have  no  claim  to  the  property ;  and  again,  should
any  one  leave  more  than  one  surviving  son,  and  they,
being  unwilling  to  allow  a  share  to  the  widow,  keep
the  property  undivided,  the  mother  can  claim  nothing
in  this  instance  also.  But  when  a  person  dies  leaving
two  or  more  sons,  and  all  of  them  survive  and  be  in-
clined to  allot  a  share  to  their  mother,  her  right  is  in
this  case  only  valid.  Under  these  expositions,  and  with
such  limitations,  both  step-mothers  and  mothers  have,
in  reality,  been  left  destitute  in  the  division  of  their
husband's  property,  and  the  right  of  a  widow  exists  in
theory  only  among  the  learned,  but  unknown  to  the
populace.

The  consequence  is,  that  a  woman  who  is  looked  up
to  as  the  sole  mistress  by  the  rest  of  a  family  one  day,
on  the  next  becomes  dependent  on  her  sons,  and  sub-
ject to  the  slights  of  her  daughters-in-law.  She  is  not
authorized  to  expend  the  most  trifling  sum,  or  dispose
of  an  article  of  the  least  value,  without  the  consent  of
her  son  or  daughter-in-law,  who  were  all  subject  to  her
authority  but  the  day  before.  Cruel  sons  often  wound
the  feelings  of  their  dependent  mothers,  deciding  in
favour  of  their  own  wives,  when  family  disputes  take
place  between  their  mothers  and  wives.  Step-mothers,
who  often  are  numerous  on  account  of  polygamy  beino-
allowed  in  these  countries,  are  still  more  shamefully
neglected,  in  general,  by  their  step-sons,  and  sometimes
dreadfully  treated  by  their  sisters-in-law  who  have  for-
tunately a  son  or  sons  by  their  husband.

It  is  not  from  religious  prejudices  and  early  impres-
sions only,  that  Hindoo  widows  burn  themselves  on  the


THE ANCIENT RIGHTS OF FEMALES.  275

piles  of  their  deceased  husbands,  but  also  from  their
witnessing  the  distress  in  which  widows  of  the  same
rank  in  life  are  involved,  and  the  insults  and  slights  to
which  they  are  daily  subjected,  that  they  become  in  a
great  measure  regardless  of  existence  after  the  death  of
their  husbands :  and  this  indifference,  accompanied
with  the  hope  of  future  reward  held  out  to  them,  leads
them  to  the  horrible  act  of  suicide.  These  restraints
on  female  inheritance  encourage,  in  a  great  degree,
polygamy,  a  frequent  source  of  the  greatest  misery  in
native  families;  a  grand  object  of  Hindoos  being  to
secure  a  provision  for  their  male  offspring,  the  law,
which  relieves  them  from  the  necessity  of  giving  an
equal  portion  to  their  wives,  removes  a  principal  re-
straint on  the  indulgence  of  their  inclinations  in  respect
to  the  number  they  marry.  Some  of  them,  especially
Brahmuns  of  higher  birth,  marry  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty
women,  "^  either  for  some  small  consideration,  or  merely
to  gratify  their  brutal  inclinations,  leaving  a  great  many
of  them,  both  during  their  life-time  and  after  death,  to
the  mercy  of  their  own  paternal  relations.  The  evil
consequences  arising  from  such  polygamy,  the  public
may  easily  guess,  from  the  nature  of  the  fact  itself,
without  my  being  reduced  to  the  mortification  of  parti-
cularizing those  which  ai-e  known  by  the  native  public
to  be  of  daily  occurrence.

•  Tlic  lioiTor  of  this  practice  is  so  painful  to  the  natural  feel-
ings of  man,  that  even  Madhuv  Singh,  the  late  Rajah  of  Tirhoot
(though  a  Brahmun  himself),  through  compassion  took  upon  him-
self (I  am  told)  within  the  last  half  century,  to  limit  Brahnians  of
liis  estate  to  four  wives  only.


276  BRIEF REMARKS REGARDING

To  these  women  there  are  left  only  three  modes  of
conduct  to  pursue  after  the  death  of  their  husbands.
1st.  To  live  a  miserable  life  as  entire  slaves  to  others,
without  indulging  any  hope  of  support  from  another
liusband.  2dly.  To  walk  in  the  paths  of  unrighteous-
ness for  their  maintenance  and  independence.  3dly.
To  die  on  the  funeral  pile  of  their  husbands,  loaded
with  the  applause  and  honour  of  their  neighbours.  It
cannot  pass  unnoticed  by  those  who  are  acquainted
with  the  state  of  society  in  India,  that  the  number  of
female  suicides  in  the  single  province  of  Bengal,  when
compared  with  those  of  any  other  British  provinces,  is
almost  ten  to  one  :  we  may  safely  attribute  this  dispro-
portion chiefly  to  the  greater  frequency  of  a  plurality  of
wives  among  the  natives  of  Bengal,  and  to  their  total  neg-
lect in  providing  for  the  maintenance  of  their  females.

This  horrible  polygamy  among  Brahmuns  is  directly
contrary  to  the  law  given  by  ancient  authors ;  for  Yag-
nuvulkyu  authorizes  second  marriages,  while  the  first
wife  is  alive,  only  under  eight  circumstances:  — 1st.  The
vice  of  drinking  spirituous  liquors.  2dly.  Incurable
sickness.  3dly.  Deception.  4thly.  Barrenness.  5thly.
Exti'avagance.  6thly.  The  frequent  use  of  offensive
language.  7thly.  Producing  only  female  offspring.
Or,  8thly.  Manifestation  of  hatred  towards  her  hus-
band. Munoo,  chap.  9,  v.  80.  "  A  wife  who  drinks
"  any  spirituous  liquors,  who  acts  immorally,  who
"  shows  hatred  to  her  lord,  who  is  incurably  diseased,
"  who  is  mischievous,  who  wastes  his  property,  may  at
"  all  times  be  superseded  by  another  wife."  8lst.  "  A
"  barren  wife  may be  superseded  by  another  in  the


THE ANCIENT RIGHTS OF FEMALES.  277

"  eighth  year;  she,  whose  cliilchen  are  all  dead,  in  the
*'  tenth ;  she,  who  brings  forth  vnly  daughters,  in  the
"  eleventh ;  she,  who  is  accustomed  to  speak  unkindly,
"  without  delay."  82d.  "  But  she,  who,  though  afflicted
"  with  illness,  is  beloved  and  virtuous,  must  never  be
"  disgraced,  though  she  may  be  superseded  by  another
*'  wife  with  her  own  consent."

Had  a  magistrate  or  other  public  officer  been  autho-
rized by  the  rulers  of  the  empire  to  receive  applica-
tions for  his  sanction  to  a  second  marriage  during  the
life  of  a  first  wife,  and  to  grant  his  consent,  only  on
such  accusations  as  the  foregoing  being  substantiated,
the  above  law  might  have  been  rendered  effectual,  and
the  distress  of  the  female  sex  in  Bengal,  and  the  num-
ber of  suicides,  would  have  been  necessarily  very  much
reduced.

According  to  the  following  ancient  authorities,  a
daughter  is  entitled  to  one-fourth  part  of  the  portion
which  a  son  can  inherit.

Vrihusputi. — "  The  daughters  should  have  the  fourth
"  part  of  the  portion  to  which  the  sons  are  entitled."

Vishnoo. — "  The  rights  of  unmarried  daughters  shall
"  be  proportioned  according  to  the  shares  allotted  to
"  the  sons."

Munoo,  ch.  ix.  ver.  118. — "  To  the  unmarried  daugh-
"  ters  let  their  brothers  give  portions  out  of  their  own
"  allotments  respectively.  Let  each  give  a  fourth  part
"  of  his  own  distinct  share,  and  they  who  feel  disin-
"  clined  to  give  this  shall  be  condemned."

Yagnuvulkyu. — "  Let  such  brothers  as  are  already
"  purified  by  the  essential  rites  of  life, purify,  by  the


278  BRIEF REMARKS REGARDING

"  performance  of  those  rites,  the  brothers  that  are  left
"  hy  their  late  father  unpurified  ;  let  them  also  purify
"  the  sisters  by  giving  them  a  fourth  part  of  their  own
"  portion."

Katyayunu. — "  A  fourth  part  is  declared  to  be  tlie
"  share  of  unmarried  daughters,  and  three-fourths  of
"  the  sons ;  if  the  fourth  part  of  the  property  is  so  small
"  as  to  he  inadequate  to  defray  the  expenses  attending  their
"  marriage,  the  sons  have  an  exclusive  right  to  the  pro-
"  perty,  but  shall  defray  the  marriage  ceremony  of  the
"  sisters."  But  the  commentator  on  the  Dayubhagu
sets  aside  the  right  of  the  daughters,  declaring  that
they  are  not  entitled  to  any  share  in  the  property  left
by  their  fathers,  but  that  the  expenses  attending  their
marriage  should  be  defrayed  by  the  brothers.  He
founds  his  opinion  on  the  foregoing  passage  of  Munoo,
and  that  of  Yagnuvulkyu,  which,  as  he  thinks,  imply
mere  donation  on  the  part  of  the  brothers  from  their
own  portions,  for  the  discharge  of  the  expenses  of
marriage.

In  the  practice  of  our  cotemporaries,  a  daughter  or
a  sister  is  often  a  source  of  emolument  to  the  Brah-
muns  of  less  respectable  cast  (who  are  most  numerous
in  Bengal),  and  to  the  Kayusths  of  high  cast:  these,
so  far  from  spending  money  on  the  marriage  of  their
daughters  or  sisters,  receive  frequently  considerable
svims,  and  generally  bestow  them  in  marriage  on  those
who  can  pay  most.* Such  Brahmuns  and  Kayusths,  I

•  Rajali  Krissenchundru,  the  great-ji^randfcither  of  the  present
ex-rajah  of  Nudia,  prevented  this  crue^  practice  of  the  sale  of
daughters  and  sisters  throughout  his  estate.


THE ANCIENT RIGHTS OF FEMALES.  279

regret  to  say,  frequently  marry  tlieir  female  relations
to  men  having  natural  defects,  or  worn  out  bv  old  age
or  disease,  merely  from  pecuniary  ctmsiderations;
whereby  they  either  bring  widowhood  upon  tiiem  soon
after  marriage,  or  render  their  lives  miserable.  They
not  only  degrade  themselves  by  such  cruel  and  unmanly
conduct,  but  violate  entirely  express  authorities  of
Munoo  and  all  other  ancient  lawgivers ;  a  few  of  which
I  here  quote,

Munoo,  ch.  3d,  v.  51.  "  Let  no  father,  who  knows
"  the  law,  receive  a  gratuity,  however  small,  for  giving
"his  daughter  in  marriage;  since  the  man  who,
"  through  avarice,  takes  a  gmiu'ity  Jbr  that  purpose^  is  a
"  seller  of  his  offspring."

Ch.  9th,  V.  98.  "  But  even  a  man  of  the  servile
"  class  ought  not  to  receive  a  gratuity  when  he  gives
*'  hisdaugiiter  in  marriage;  since  a  father  who  takes  a
"  fee  071  that  occasion,  tacitly  sells  his  daughter."

V.  100.  "  Nor,  even  in  former  births,  have  we  heard
"  the  virtuous  approve  the  tacit  sale  of  a  daughter  for  a
"  price,  under  the  name  of  nuptial  gratuity."

Kashyiipu.  "  Those  who,  infatuated  by  avarice,
"  give  their  own  daughters  in  marriage  for  the  sake
"  of  a  gratuity,  are  the  sellers  of  their  daughters,
"  the  images  of  sin,  and  the  perpetrators  of  a  heinous
"  iniquity."

Both  common  sense  and  the  law  of  the  land,
designate  such  a  practice  as  an  actual  sale  of  females;
and  the  humane  and  liberal  among  Hindoos  lament
its  existence,  as  well  as  the  annihilation  of  female
rights  in  respect  of  inheritance  introduced  by  modern


280  BRIEF REMARKS REGARDING

expounders.  They,  howevei*,  trust  that  the  hu-
mane attention  of  Government  will  be  directed  to
tljose  evils  which  are  chief  sources  of  vice  and  misery,
and  even  of  suicide  among  women  :  and  to  this  they
are  encouraged  to  look  forward  by  what  has  already
been  done  in  modifying,  in  criminal  cases,  some  parts
of  the  law  enacted  by  Mohummudan  legislators,  to
the  happy  prevention  of  many  cruel  practices  formerly
established.

How  distressing  it  must  be  to  the  female  community,
and  to  those  who  interest  themselves  in  their  behalf,  to
observe  daily  that  several  daughters  in  a  rich  family
can  prefer  no  claim  to  any  portion  of  the  property,
whether  real  or  personal,  left  by  their  deceased  father,
if  a  single  brother  be  alive;  while  they  (if  belonging
to  a  Kooleen  family  or  Brahmun  of  higher  rank)  are
exposed  to  be  given  in  marriage  to  individuals  who
have  already  several  wives  and  have  no  means  of  main-
taining them.

Should  a  widow  or  a  daughter  wish  to  secure  her
right  of  maintenance,  however  limited,  by  having
recourse  to  law,  the  learned  Brahmuns,  whether  hold-
ing public  situations  in  the  courts  or  not,  generally
divide  into  two  parties,  one  advocating  the  cause  of
those  females,  and  the  other  that  of  their  adversaries.
Sometimes,  in  these  or  other  matters  respecting  the
law,  if  the  object  contended  for  be  important,  the  whole
community  seems  to  be  agitated  by  the  exertions  of
the  parties  and  of  their  respective  friends,  in  claiming
the  verdict  of  the  law  against  each  other.  In  genera],
however,  a  consideration  of  difficulties  attending  a  law-


THE ANCIENT RIGHTS OF FEMALES.  281

suit,  which  a  native  woman,  particularly  a  widow,  is
hardly  caj)able  of  surmounting,  induces  her  to  forego
her  right;  and  if  she  continue  virtuous,  she  is  obliged
to  live  in  a  miserable  state  of  dependence,  destitute  of
all  the  comforts  of  life ;  it  too  often  happens,  however,
that  she  is  driven  by  constant  unhappiness  to  seek
refuge  in  vice.

At  the  time  of  the  decennial  settlement  in  the  year
1793,  there  were,  among  European  gentlemen,  so  very
few  acquainted  with  Sungscrit  and  Hindoo  law,  that  it
would  have  been  hardly  possible  to  have  formed  a
committee  of  European  oriental  scholar's  and  learned
Brahmuns,  capable  of  deciding  on  points  of  Hindoo
law.  It  was,  therefore,  highly  judicious  in  Government,
to  appoint  Pundits  in  the  different  Zillah  Courts  and
Courts  of  Appeal,  to  facilitate  the  proceedings  of
Judges  in  regard  to  such  subjects ;  but  as  we  can  now
fortunately  find  many  European  gentlemen,  capable  of
investigating  legal  questions,  with  but  little  assistance
from  learned  natives,  how  happy  would  it  be  for  the
Hindoo  community,  both  male  and  female,  were  they
to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  the  opinion  of  such  gentlemen,
when  disputes  arise,  particularly  on  matters  of  inhe-
ritance.

Lest  any  one  should  infer  from  what  I  have  stated,
that  I  mean  to  impeach,  universally,  the  character  of
the  great  body  of  learned  Hindoos,  I  declare,  posi-
tively, that  this  is  far  from  my  intention:  I  only  main-
tain, that  the  native  community  place  greater  confi-
dence in  the  honest  judgment  of  the  generality  of
European  gentlemen,  than  in  that  of  their  own  coun-


282  BRIEF REMARKS,  &C.

trymen.  But,  should  the  natives  receive  the  same  ad-
vantages of  education  that  Europeans  generally  enjoy,
and  be  brought  up  in  the  same  notions  of  honour,  they
will  I  trust  be  found,  equally  with  Europeans,  worthy
of  the  confidence  of  their  countrymen,  and  the  respect
of  all  men.


THE END.


LONDON

I'linted  by  J.  L.  COX  and  SON,  Great  Queen  Street,
Lincoln's-Inn  Fields.


7, LtadenhtiU  Street.
NEW  AND  STANDARD
WORKS RELATING TO INDIA,

PUBLISH  1-.U ]!Y

PARBURY,  ALLEN,  &  CO.


1.

The  MYTHOLOGY  of  the  HINDUS,  withNoticcs  of  various  Moun-
tain and  Island  Tribes  \\lu»  inhabit  tiie  two  Peninsnlas  ot  India  and  tht-  ru'ight)onrin^  V
Islands.  In  three  I'arts  :  the  first  part  contaiinnir  the  Hindu  iNIytlujlogy  ;  tiie  seeond,  ''
Notices  of  Various  Tribes  ;  and  tiio  third,  a  Dictionary  of  the  Mytholoijical  and
Religious  Terms  of  the  Hindus.  Compiled  from  tiie  best  .Authorities,  witli  Plates
illustrative  of  the  principal  Hindu  Deities.  By  CHARLES  COLEMAN,  Esq.  In
1  vol.  Uo. Price  £2.  2s.  cl.  bds.

2.
OBSERVATIONS made during  a  Twelve  Years' Residence in a

Mussulmaun's  Family  in  India;  descriptive  of  the  Manners,  Customs,  and  Habits  of
the  Mussnlmaun  Peo])le  of  Ilindoostaun  in  Domestic  Life,  and  embracing  their  Belief
and  Oi)inions.  By  Mrs.  MEEll  HASSAN  ALL  In  two  volumes  octavo,  price
£1.  Is.  boards.

3.
MINUTES  of  EVIDENCE  and  REPORT,  taken  before  the  SE-
LECT COMMITTEES  OF  BOTH  HOUSES  OF  PARLIAME.XT,  ap-
pointed to  in((iiire  into  the  present  state  of  the  AH'airs  of  the  East-India  Company,  and
into  ihe  Trade  l)etween  Great  Britain  and  the  East-Indies  and  China.  In  2  vuls.  8vo.
bds.  price  £2.  2s.

4.
MEMOIR  of  CENTRAL  INDIA,  including  MALWA  and  adjoin- .

ing  Province,  witli  the  History  and  Copious  Illustrations  of  the  past and  present  Con-  yy
<lition  of  that Country. By Major-General Sir  JOHN I\I  ALCOLM,  (i.C.B.,  and
K.L.S. Third  Edition,  illustrated  with  an  Original Map,  Tables  of  lluvi'nue, Poini-
lation,  &c. In  2  vols.  Xvo. — nearly  ready.

5.

OBSERVATIONS  on  the  LAW  and  CONSTITUTION  and  present

GOVERN  .lENT  of  India;  on  the  Nature  of  Landed  Tenures,  and  Financial  Re-
sources, as  recognised  by  the  iMoohunnniidan  Law  and  Moghul  Government;  with
an  Iiujuiry  into  the  .Adniinihtraiion  of  Justice,  Uevenue,  and  Police  at  present  existing
in  Bengal,  liy  Lieut. -Col.  Galloway,  of  the  Hon.  East-Lidia  Company's  Service. —
Second  edition,  with  additions. 8vo.  boards.  I'Js.

G.
ASIATIC  JOURNAL,  and  MONTHLY  REGISTER  for  British

India  and  its  Dejiendencies, |)id)lished  on  the  first  day  of  every  Month. Price  .'is.  fid.

*,*  Sets  of  this  work,  from  its  cominenceinent  in  January  181G,  or  any  single  num-
l)er,  may  be  had.

7.
GENERAL  EAST-INDIA  GUIDE  and  VADE-MECl^AI,  for  the

Public  Functionarv,  Government  OHicer,  Private  Agent,  Trader,  or  Foreign  .Sojourner
in  British  India. Bv  J.  B.  GILCHRIST,  LL.D. In  1  vol.  8vo. Price  l«s.  boards.


y


BOOKS  PUBLISIIKD BY  PARBUHY,  ALLEN,  &  CO.
8.

MILBURN'S ORIENTAL COMMERCE  ; or, the East-India

Trader's  Complete  Guide  ;  containing  a  Geographical  and  Naiitifal  Description  of  the
Maritime  Parts  of  India,  Cliina,  &c.  &c.  Abridged,  improved,  and  brought  down  to
the  present  Time,  by  T.  THORNTON,  M.R.A.S.  In  one  large  vol.  8vo.,  illus-
trated with  Maps. Price  jCX.  16s.  bds.

9.
BRITISH  RELATIONS  with  the  CHINESE  EMPIRE  in  1832:

COMPARATIVE  STATEMENT  of  the  ENGLISH  and  AMERICAN
TRADE  with INDIA  and  CANTON. Svo.  stitched.  L's.  6d.

10.
The PAST  and PRESENT STATE of  the TEA TRADE of

ENGLAND,  and  of  the  CONTINENTS  of  EUROPE  and  AMERICA;  and  a
Comparison  between  the  Consumption,  Price  of,  and  Revenue  derived  from,  Tea,
Coffee,  Sugar,  Wine,  Tobacco,  Spiiits,  &c.  By  R.  MONTGOMERY  MARTIN,
late  of  H.M.  Ships  "  Leven  "  and  "  Barracouta,"and  Member  of  the  Asiatic  Society
of  Bengal,  &c. Svo.  sewed.  5s.

11.

OPINIONS  of  the  Hon.  MOUNTSTUART  ELPHINSTONE  upon

some  of  the  leading  Questions  connected  with  the  Government  of  British  India,  exa-
mined and  compared  with  those  of  the  late  Sir  THOMAS  MUNRO  and  Sir  JOHN
MALCOLM,  as  taken  from  their  Evidence  before  Parliament.  By  a  Civil  Servant
of  the  Honourable  East-India  Company. Svo.  2s.

12.

By  the  same  Author;

An  INQUIRY  into  the  Causes  of  the  long-continued  STATIONARY

y  CONDITION  of  INDIA  and  its  Inhabitants  :  with  a  brief  Examination  of  the  lead-
ing Principles  of  two  of  the  most  approved  Revenue  Systems  of  BRITISH  INDIA.
Svo.  4s.

An  INQUIRY  into  the  ALLEGED  PRONENESS  to  LITIGA-

TION  of  tjje  Natives  of  India;  with  Suggestions  for  amending  some  part  of  the
Judicial  System  of  British  India. Svo.  2s.

13.
. TRAVELS  from  INDIA  to  ENGLAND,  comprehending  a  Visit  to

<<^'  the  Burman  Empire,  and  a  Journey  through  Persia,  Asia  INIinor,  European  Turkey,
&c.  in  the  years  1825-26.  Illustrated  with  Maps  and  Coloured  Lithographic  Prints.
By  J.  E.  ALEXANDER,  Esq.,  H.P.,  iate  13th  Light  Dragoons.  In  1  vol.  4to.
Price  £,\.  lis.  fid.  boards.

14.
ZOOLOGICAL RESEARCHES in  JAVA  and  the  neighbouring

Islands,  by  THOMAS  HORSFIELD,  M.D.  F.L.S.  &c. ;  with  coloured  Plates  re-
presenting Native  Quadrupeds  and  Birds. In  1  large  vol.  royal  4to. Price  i.^8.  8s.  bds.

15.
GULISTAN,  or  ROSE  GARDEN,  of  Musle-Huddeen  Shaik  Sady

of  Sheeraz;  translated  from  the  Original  Persian.  By  FRANCIS  GLADWIN,
Esq. A  new  Edition,  in  1  vol.  Svo. Price  IDs.  6d.  boards.

Also,  in  8vo.,  a  new  and  correct  Edition  of  the  above  Work,  in  the  Original  Persian.
Price  I6s.  boards.

16.
INDIA DIRECTORY  ;  or  Directions  for  Saihng  to  and  from  the

East-Indies,  China,  New  Holland,  Cajjc  of  Good  Hope,  Brazil,  and  the  interjacent
Ports.  By  JAMES  HORSBURGII,  F.R.S.,  Hydrographer  to  the  Honourable
East-India  Company. In  2  parts  Ito. Price  £^4.  6s.  boards.


London,  April  1832.
VALUABLE  WORKS

rUBLISlIED BY

JAMES DUNCAN,

37,  PATERNOSTER  ROW.


I. HISTORY PHILOSOPHICALLY ILLUSTRATED,/

from  tlie  Fall  of  t^ie  Roman  Empire  to  tlio  Frencli  Revolution.  By
(Jeoiioe  MiLT.En,  D.D.  M.R.I. A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,
Dublin. In  Four  Vols,  iivo,  price  2/.  25.  boards.

"The  goneral  style  of  these  volumes  is  honourable  to  the  author's  scholarship:  it  is
remarkably  distinct,  vigorous,  and  free  from  superfluous  ornament ;  but  in  parts  where  the
subject  adniitte<l  of  the  change,  it  becomes  rich  and  eloijuent.  The  brief  sketch  of  Orattan's
oratory,  towards  the  close  of  the  fourth  volume,  is  one  of  tlie  happiest  and  most  graphic
descriptions  that  we  have  ever  seen  of  that  singularly  powerful  speaker.  (Jn  the  whole,  we
entirely  congratulate  the  author  an<l  the  public  <m  the  completion  of  this  performance.
What  Montesquieu  accomplished  for  the  laws  of  Europe,  Dr.  Miller  has  done  for  its  history.
\Ve  know  of  no  tcxt-lx)ok  which  would  be  more  essential  to  the  college  lecturer,  no  general
view  of  facts  which  is  likely  to  be  more  valuable  to  the  student,  and  no  elucidation  of  the
mvsterious  ways  of  Providence  which  ought  to  1^  more  gladly  welcomed  by  the  Christian." —
hiteiiiry  Outctte,  March  24,  1032.


II.  AN  ESSAY  UPON  NATIONAL  CHARACTER;  being
an  Inquiry  into  some  of  the  principal  Causes  wliich  contribute  to  form  and
modify  the  Character  of  Nations  in  the  state  of  Civilization.  By  RiciiAnn
CiiENEvix,  Esq.  F.R.S.L.  and  E.3I.R.I.A.  &c.  In  Two  Vols.  {Jvo,
price  28^'.  boards.

"  What  a  noble  legacy  for  a  man  to  leave  behind  him  !  In  these  volumes  are  garnered
the  lal)ours  ofa  life  —  a  life  of  profound  investigation  and  of  immense  knowledge,  digested
by  a  singularly  clear  and  contemplative  mind.  It  is  a  work  put  forth  too  in  the  noblest  spirit
of  literature— that  which  looks  to  the  future,  and  builds  up,  not  a  palace  for  self  to  dwell  in,
but  a  noble  and  enduring  monument  for  the  instruction  of  ages  yet  to  come."  — Litcmiy
Gazette,  January  14,  lii32.

"  We  have  not  spoken  of  the  author's  style,  which  constitutes  no  small  part  of  the
attraction  and  charm  of  the  work.  Uniformly  perspicuous,  correct,  and  unaffected,  it
sometimes  rises  into  eloquence.  As  the  author's  pride  and  vanity  are  now  alike  buried  in  the
dust,  our  approbation  or  censure  cannot  afT'ect  him;  but  we  have  been  not  the  less  anxious
to  do  justice  to  a  work  upon  which  have  been  bestowed  the  meditations  of  a  life,  and  the
best  ellbrts  of  a  mind  of  no  ordinary  endowments."— iSt/ec'ic  Review,  April  1832.

III.  PRACTICAL  THEOLOGY;  comprishvjc  Discourses  on

tlie  Liturgy  and  Principles  of  the  United  Clhurch  of  ICngland  and  Ireland;
critical  atul  other  Tracts  ;  and  a  Speech  delivered  in  the  House  of  Peers  in

ishop  of  liimerick,  Ardfert,  and
boards.

"  No  work  which  has  recently  fallen  into  our  hands  more  amply  fulfils  the  promise  of  its
title  thou  that  now  before  us." — (^uarterli/  Tluiuhg.  Hevietv.

IV.  PASTORAL  INSTRUCTIONS  on  the  CHARACTER
and  PRINCIPLES  of  tlie  CUCKCII  of  ENGLAND,  selected  from  his
former  A\'ritin{(s.  IJy  JoiiK  .lEnn,  D.D.  I'.R.S.  Bishop  of  Limerick,
AnUVrt,  and  Aghadoe. In  One  Volume,  price  "Js.  boards.


/


1824. By  John  .Ieuh,  D.D.  F.R.S.,  Bisl
Aghadoe. In  Two  ^^)ls.  8vo,  price  24.t.  boa


V.  PIETY  without  ASCETICISM,  or  PROTESTANT

KI']MPIS;  a  iManual  of  Christian  Faitli  and  Practice,  selected  from  the
A\'ritings  of  Scimgal,  Charles  Ilow,  and  Ciulworth  ;  with  Corrections  and
occasional  Notes.  By  John  Jf.iiii,  D.D.  F.K.S.  Bishop  nf  LinuM-icl:,
Ardfert,  and  Aghadoe. In  One  Vol.  Ovo,  price  124-.  bojinls.


y


2  Valuable  Works

VI,  SACRED  LITERATURE;  comprising  a  Review  of  the

Principles  of  Composition  laiil  down  by  tlie  late  Rqhert  Lowtii,  D.D.
Lord  Bishop  of  London,  in  bis  Prelections,  and  Isaiah ;  and  an  application
of  the  Principles  so  reviewed  to  the  Illustration  of  the  New  Testament ;  in
a  Series  of  Critical  Ot)servations  on  the  Style  and  Structure  of  that  Sacred
Volume.  By  John  Jeru,  D.D.  F.R.S.  Bishop  of  Limerick,  Ardfert,  and
Agbadoe. In  One  Vol.  8vo. New  Edition,  price  \2s.  boards.

VIL  MAHOMETANISM  UNVEILED  ;  an  Inquiry  in  which
that  Arch-Heresy,  its  Diffusion  and  Continuance,  are  examined  on  a  new
principle,  tending  to  confirm  the  Evidences,  and  aid  the  Propagation  of  the
Christian  Faith.  By  the  Rev.  Charles  Forster,  B.D.,  Chancellor  of
Ardfert,  and  Examining  Chaplain  to  the  Lord  Bishop  of  I^imei-ick.  In
Two  Vols.  8vo,  2-is.  boards.

"  The  reader  will  find  the  subject  of  the  Ishmaelitish  descent  of  the  Arabian  treated  in  a
clear  and  convincing  manner  by  Mr.  Forster,  in  his  learned  and  valuable  work,  Mahomet-
inism  Unveiled." — Qudi-terly  Review,  No.  83.

"  From  the  novelty  of  the  view  which  is  thus  given  of  Mahometanism,  and  the  ability
disnlaved  bv  the  author,  we  shall  be  greatly  mistaken  if  a  serious  discussion  of  the  whole
subject  be  not  revived  among  the  learned  men  of  the  country."— Monfft/y  Revietv,  Aug.  1829.


VIII.  PRACTICAL  DISCOURSES  ;  a  Selection  from  the
unpublished  Manuscripts  of  the  late  venerable  Thomas  Townson,  D.D.,
Archdeacon  of  Richmond,  one  of  the  Rectors  of  IMalpus,  Cheshire,  and  some
time  Fellow  of  St.  Mary  Magdalen  College,  Oxford.  Edited,  and  with  a
Biographical  Blemoir,  by  John,  Lord  Bishop  of  Limerick.  In  One  Vol.
8vo,  price  10s.  6d.  boards.

"  They  strike  us  to  be  nearly  such  Sermons  as  Addison  would  have  composed  had  he
been  a  cleTgyman."— Theological  Review.

yf  IX.  SIX  SERMONS  on  the  STUDY  of  the  HOLY  SCRIP-
//  TURES,  their  Nature,  Interpretation,  and  some  of  their  most  important
Doctrines,  preached  before  the  University  of  Cambridge  in  the  years  1827-8.
To  which  are  annexed  Two  Dissertations ;  the  first  on  the  Reasonableness  of
the  Orthodox  Views  of  Christianity  as  opposed  to  the  Rationalism  of  Germany;
the  second  on  the  Interpretation  of  Prophecy  generally,  with  an  original  Ex-
position  of  the  Book  of  Revelation,  shewing  that  the  whole  of  that  remark,
able  prophecy  has  long  ago  been  fulfilled.  By  the  Rev.  S.  Lee,  B.D.,  D.D.
of  the  University  of  Halle ;  Honorary  Member  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Paris ;
Prebendary  of  Bristol ;  Vicar  of  Banwell ;  and  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew
in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  &c.  &c. In  One  Vol.  8vo,  price  14s.  bds.


/


X.  A  SECOND  COURSE  of  SERMONS  for  the  YEAR;

containing  Two  for  each  Sunday,  and  one  for  each  Holyday  ;  abridged  from
the  most  eminent  Divines  of  the  Established  Church,  and  adapted  to  tlie
Service  of  the  Day  :  intended  for  the  Use  of  Families  and  Schools.  Dedi.
caied,  by  permission,  to  the  Lord  Bishop  of  London.  By  the  Mev.  J.  R.
Pitman,  A.  I\I.,  alternate  Blorning  Preacher  of  Belgrave  and  Berkeley
Chapels, In  Two  Vols.  8vo,  price  2 Is.  boards.

"  There  is  no  question  which  the  Clergy  are  more  frequently  asked,  and  to  which  they
find  it  more  difficult  to  give  a  satisfactory  reply  than  this—What  Sermons  would  they  recowi-
mend  for  the  use  of  a  private  family  ?  There  are  so  many  circumstances  which  render  the
greater  part  of  modem  discourses  totally  unfit  for  the  purposes  of  domestic  instruction,  and
the  old  standards,  uumodernised,  are  so  little  intelligible  to  common  ears,  that  it  is  no  easy
matter  to  point  out  anv  set  of  discourses  embracing  a  sufficient  variety  to  excite  attention,
at  the  same  time  forcibly  inculcating  the  pure  doctrines  and  practical  precepts  of  ChriSianity,
which  is  adapted  in  all  respects  to  the  reader,  and  the  usual  circle  of  listeners  met  on  the
Sabbath  evening  for  praver  and  edification.  We  really  think  that  Mr.  Pitman's  work  bids
fair  to  supply  the  deficiency  which  has  been  so  much  xegr:etl(xl."—Quarterl!/  Theolug.  Rawiu.

*^*  A  Tliird  Edition,  reviaeil  throughout,  of  the  FIRST  COURSE  is
just  ptiblished,  same  size  and  price  as  above.


Published  Jt/  J  a  m  e  s  D  u  n  c  a  x .  3

XI.  THE  WHOLE  WORKS  of  tho  Most  Reverend  Father
in  God,  RoBEiiT  Lkuiiitok,  D.D.,  Archliisliop  of  Glasgow.  To  wliich  is
prefixed  .in  entire  new  Life  of  the  Autlior,  l)y  tho  Rev.  .7.  N.  Pearsox,
M.  A.,  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and  Chajjlain  to  the  iMost  Nolde  the
Marcniess  Wellesley. In  Four  Vols,  fivo,  with  a  Portrait,  price  .3<ja\  board's.

"  We  have  placed  a  new  edition  of  Archbisliop  Lcighton's  Works  at  the  head  of  this
article;  and  as  Mr.  C<)lerid(;e  has  neftlcctetl  to  furnish  tlic  bioL'raiihical  notice  he  had  pro-
mised, we  shall  endeavour  to  supply  its  place  by  a  few  particulars  of  his  life  and  writings,
principally  extracted  from  a  spirited  and  eloquent  Memoir  prefixed  to  the  new  edition,  by
the  Hev.  Norman  I'carsou.  It  is  a  reproach  to  the  present  age,  that  his  valuable  writings,
breathing  as  they  do  the  sublimest  and  purest  sjjirit  of  piety,  rich  in  beautiful  images  and
classical  learning,  throughout  abounding  in  practical  reflections,  and  all  expressed  with  the
sweetest  and  simplest  eloquence,  should  have  been  neglected  among  us." — liritUh  Oitic,
October  1»2(;.

",*  The  above  may  be  had,  printed  in  a  small  but  neat  tj^pe,  and  com-
pressed  into  Two  Volumes,  price  21a'.  boards.

XII.  A  PRACTICAL  COMMENTARY  upon  the  FIRST
EPISTLE  of  ST.  PETER,  and  other  Expository  Works.  By  Robert
Leic.iiton,  D.D.,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow.  To  which  is  profixeil  an  entii'e
new  Life  of  the  Author,  by  the  Rev.  J.  S\  Pearsov,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,
Cambridge,  &c. In  Two  Volumes  8vo.,  with  Portrait,  price  I85.  boards.

•^*  Compressed  into  One  Volume,  price  10s.  Qd.  boards.

XIII.  The  WHOLE  WORKS  of  the  Ricrht  Rev.  JEREMY
TAYLOR,  D.D.,  I/ord  Bishop  of  Down,  Connor,  and  Dromore,  with  a
Life  of  the  Author,  and  a  Critical  Examination  of  liis  Writings.  By  the
Right  Rev.  REGINALD  IIEBER,  D.D.,  late  Lord  Bishop  of  Calcutta.
In  15  Volumes  fivo,  new  edition,  price  9/.  hoards.

Also  may  he  had  separate,  ly  the  same  Author,

1.  HOLY  LIVING  and  DYING. 8vo.  price  12*.  board?.  /

2.  A  COURSE  of  SERMONS  for  all  the  SUNDAYS  of  the  YEAR.
Two  Vols,  fivo,  price  24»'.  boards.

3.  The  LIFE  of  the  Right  Rev.  JEREMY  TAYLOR.  In  One  Vol.
8vo,  with  a  Portrait,  price  IO5.  Gd.  boards.


XIV.  The  WORKS  of  the  Right  Rev.  WILLIAM  BEVE-
RIDGE,  D.D.,  Lord  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  now  first  collected:  with  a
IVIemoir  of  the  Author,  and  a  Critical  Examination  of  his  AVritings,  by
the  Rev.  Thomas  IIartwell  Horxe,  B.D.,  of  St.  John's  College,
Cambridge ;  Author  of  the  "  Introduction  to  the  Holy  Scriptures."  In
Nine  Vols,  fivo,  with  a  Portrait,  uniform  with  the  Works  of  Bishop  Taylor,
price  5/.  Qs.  boards.

Also  may  Ic  had,  by  the  same  Author,
THESAURUS  THEOLOGICUS  ; or,  a  Complete  System
of  Divinity. In  Two  Vols,  fivo,  price  24s.  boards.

XV.  The  PRACTICAL  WORKS  of  the  REV.  RICHARD

BAXTER,  with  a  Life  of  the  Author,  and  a  Critical  Examination  of  his
Writings.  By  the  Rev.  "Wu.i.iam  Orme.  In  Twenty-three  Vols,  fivo,
with  finely  engraved  Portrait,  price  12/.  12.<.  boards.

Subscril)crj  are  requested  to  complete  their  sets  as  early  as  possible,  to  prevent  disap-
pointment.

Also  may  be  had  separate.

The  LIFE  and  TI3IES  of  RICHARD  BAXTER,  with  a  Critical
Examination  of  his  Writings.  By  the  Rev.  William  OhmE.  In  Two
A'ols.  fivo,  with  finely  engraved  Portrait,  price  1/.  1*.  boards.


^/


4  Valuable  Works

XVI.  An INQUIRY  into  the MODERN PREVAILING

NOTIONS  respcctinp:  that  FREEDOM  of  AFILL  wliu'h  is  siipposod  to
l)e  Essential  to  IMoral  Agenc)^,  Virtue  and  Vice,  Reward  and  Punislinient,
Praise  and  Blame.  By  Joxatiian  Edwards,  A.M.  AVith  an  Intro,
ductory  Essay  by  the  Author  of  '•'■Natural  IHatory  of  Enthusiasm.'"  In
One  Vol.  Hvo,  price  12*.;  or  in  One  Vol.  12mo,  price  lis.  Gd.  boards.

"  Tlie  author  of  Xadiyal  Histnt;/  (if  Knthu.sinsm  has  already  taken  his  station  among
tlio  most  influential,  as  well  as  the  most  truly  philosophical  writers  of  the  day ;  and  his  '
jivesent  performance,  whatever  attention  it  may  meet  with,  we  cannot  but  regard  as  tlie
most  valuable  service  whicli  he  has  yet  rendered  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  Scriptural  piety."
—Edectii;  Hci'iew,  October  1031.

"  And  now,  having  brought  to  a  close  our  review  of  this  very  beautiful  Essay,  we  cor-
dially and  confidently  recommend  it  to  our  philosophical  readers  as  an  uncommonly  able
and  eloquent  performance." — Presbyterian  Review ,  September  1831.

XVII.  CHRISTIAN  RECORDS  ;  or,  a  Short  and  Plain
History  of  the  CHURCH  of  CHRIST  :  containing  the  Lives  of  the
Apostles;  an  Account  of  the  Sufferings  of  Blartyrs  ;  the  Rise  of  tlie
Reformation,  and  the  present  State  of  the  Christian  Church.  By  the  Rev.
Tuo^tAS  Sims,  M.A.  Third  Edition.  In  One  Volume,  ISnio,  with  a
beautiful  Frontispiece,  price  3s.  Gd.  hoards.

"  Every  Protestant  child  and  young  person  should  be  generally  acquainted  with  the  outline
of  the  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  for  this  purpose  we  caiinot  recommend  a  better
manual  than' that  before  us." — Chi-istian  Observer,  January  1830.

*jj*  This  little  \'olume  has  been  in  part  translated  into  the  modern  Greek
and  Chinese  languages,  by  the  Rev.  ]\Ir.  Jowett  and  Dr.  Mii.xE.


)i


XVIII.  A  SHORT  HISTORY  ofthe  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH,

from  its  Erection  at  Jerusalem  down  to  the  Present  Time.  Designed  for  the
Use  of  Schools,  Families,  &c.  By  the  Rev.  John  Yry,  B.A.,  Rector  of
Desford,  in  Leicestershire,  Author  of  "  A  New  Translation  and  Exposition
of  the  very  ancient  Book  of  Job,"  ••'  Lectures  on  the  Epistle  of  St.  Paul  to
the  Romans,"  "  Present  for  the  Convalescent,"  &c.  &c.  In  One  "N^ol.  8vo,
12.*.  boards.

"  His  matter  is  unquestionably  selected  with  judgment,  and  luminously  arranged;  Iiis
language  is  clear  and  concise,  and  not  deficient  in  elegance;  and  we  rise  from  the  perus«l
of  his  work  with  very  favourable  impressions  of  his  character,  with  which  otherwise  we
are  imacquainted." — 'Thcohi!,'icul  Review.

"  Mr.  Fry's  Compendium  of  Church  History  is  an  instructive  and  interesting  survey  of
the  various  chaiiges  in  the  Christian  profession,  in  its  direct  relations  to  tlie  Christian  doc-
trine, and  as  influenced  by  tlie  secular  associations  with  which  it  has  but  too  extensively
been  allied.  To  such  readers  as  wish  for  an  Ecclesiastical  History,  written  on  the  model  of
Milner's,  and  animated  by  the  same  spirit,  Mr.  F.'s  work  will  be  highly  accept.ible,  parti-
cularly as  It  is  complete,  and  comprised  within  a  single  voUune." — Kclectic  Review.

By  the  same  Author,

1.  A  NEW  TRANSLATION  and  EXPOSITION  of  tlie  very  An-
cient  BOOK  OF  JOB ;  with  Notes,  explanatory  and  philological.  In
One  Vol.  8vo,  price  I2s.  boards.

2.  LECTURES,  Explanatory  and  Practical,  on  the  EPISTLE  of
ST.  PAUL  to  the  ROIMANS.  Second  Edition,  in  One  Vol.  8vo,  price
12a-.  boards.

3.  CANTICLES ;  or,  SONG  OF  SOIiOMON  :  a  new  Translation,
with  Notes,  and  an  Attempt  to  Interpret  the  SACRED  ALLEGORIES
contained  in  that  Book  ;  to  which  is  added,  an  Essay  on  tlu'  Naute  and
Character  ofthe  REDEEIMER.  In  One  Vol.  Jivo.  Second  Edition,  price
(i.v.  boards.

4.  A  PRESENT  for  the  CONVALESCENT,  or  for  those  to  whom
it  is  hoped  some  Recent  Afllictiou  has  Iieeu  attended  with  a  Divine
Blessing,  and  for  Now  Converts  to  Religion  in  general.  In  One  Yol.  I2ino,
price  Is.  boards,


Publislied  by  Jamf.s  Duncan.  5

XTX.  SERMONS  on  the  most  INTERESTING  DOC-
TRINES of  the  GOSPEL.  By  I\Iautik  Lutheu.  In  One  Vol.  IJvo,
j)iice  l)a-.  boards.

By  the  same  Author,

A  CO^I.-MENTARY  on  SAINT  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  to  the  GALA-
TIANS. In  One  Vol.  livo,  price  Uh.  (id.  boards.

XX.  MEMOIRS  of  EMINENTLY  PIOUS  WOMEN. By

Tno:NrAS  (Jiniiov,  D.D.,  embellislicd  with  Eifrhteen  fine  Portraits;  cor-
rected  and  enlart^ed,  witli  the  Addition  of  New  Lives,  iiytlie  Rev.  Samiki.
liL'unr.R,  M.A.,  Antlior  of  "  Oriental  Customs,"  f^v.  In  Three  A'ols.
12nio,  u  New  Edition,  jirice  •24a'.  boards.

"  The  Nfemoirs  wlii.h  now  appear  for  the  first  lime  in  this  work,  or  have  been  expressly
written  for  this  Kdition,  are  those  of  Mrs.  Lucy  Hutchinson,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  Mrs.  Savage,
Mrs.  Hulton,  the  Viscountess  (ilcnorchy,  I-ady  Maxwell,  Mrs.  Berry,  Miss  Sinclair,  Mrs.
Fletcher,  and  Mrs.  Graham.  These  extensive  additions,  it  is  presumtnl,  are  of  a  character
to  Rive  an  enhanced  value  to  the  i>uhlication,  which  has  long  been  a  favourite  with  a  large
class  of  the  Religious  Public  — The  work  in  its  present  state  forms  the  most  interesting
collection  of  Female  Biography  cv-ianW—Eclectii;  Hvcicw.


XXI.  PRAYERS  for  the  USE  of  FAMILIES.  By  the
Rev.  Charles  "WATsoy,  INIinister  of  Burntisland.  Second  Edition.  In
One  A'ol.  12mo,  price  os.  Gd.  boards.

"  The  volume  now  lx;fore  us  is  in  its  strain  decidedly,  and  tliiouphout,  evangelical.  In
its  diction  we  have  the  elegance  of  the  man  of  literature  united  with  the  plainness  and
simplicity  of  the  Bible  Christian.  We  recommend  the  volume  most  earnestly  to  all  who
stand  in  need  of  such  auxiliaries."— £rft/i6Mfi''»  C/i/htian  Jnalructor,  October  lUyc


XXII.  A  MANUAL  of  RELIGIOUS  INSTRUCTION  for  .
the  YOUNG.  By  the  Rev.  Rohert  Simson,  I\I.A.  Master  of  Colebrooke  /
Ilonse  Academy,  Islington. In  One  Vol.  KJmo,  price  Us.  boards.

"  In  presenting  to  the  notice  of  our  re.aders  this  interesting  volume,  our  limits  will
scarcely  allow  us  to  do  more  than  briefly  to  hint  at  the  contents  of  this  beautitul  and
valuable  \o\umc."—Ciinfoegatio)ial  ilngazine.

"  This  is  a  very  comprehensive  and  useful  little  work."— Kra>i,;'e«cn?  ^[at(azinc.

"  Were  all  our  British  youth  armed  with  as  much  religious  knowledge  as  is  contained  in
this  lxx)k,  infidelity  could  no  longer  stalk  about  our  streets,  or  rear  its  liideous  head  in  our
\md."—Sumlatf  Schant  Tmchcr's  Magazine.

XXIII.  The  LIFE  and  TIMES  of  his  late  MAJESTY,
GEORGE  THE  I'OURTII,  with  Anecdotes  of  Distinguished  Persons
of  llie  last  Fifty  Years.  By  the  Rev.  Geouge  Cuoly,  LL.D.  In
One  \'ol.  Cvo,  with Portrait,  price  los.  boards.

XXIV.  A  HISTORY  of  BRITISH  ANIMALS,  exhibiting

the  descriptive  Ciianicters  and  systematical  Arrangement  of  the  Genera
and  .Species  of  Quadrupeds,  Birds^  Reptiles,  Fishes,  iMollusca,  and  Radiata,
of  llie  United  Kingdom  ;  including  the  Indigenous,  Extirpated,  and  Extinct
Kinds;  together  with  Periodical  and  Occasional  Visitants.  By  Joiiv
Fi.EMiN'G,  D.I).,  F.R.S.E.,  .M.W.S.,  &c.,  and  Author  of  tlie  "  Philosophy
of  Zo(dogy." In  One  Vol.  Jtvo,  jirice  1)!»-.  boards.

•'  This  very  important  work,  which  has  just  appeared,  we  consider  as  infinitely  superior  to
any  Natural'llistory  of  British  Animals  hitherto  published.  It  will  become  the  sUindarU
boiik  on  British  Animals." — JainiciDn'.^  Joiiniol  «/ Sfiiinr,  April.

Sec  also  Jii-ewtter's  Juuiiml  of  Science  for  April.

XXV.  ELEMENTS  of  CONCHOLOGY,  according-  lo  the

Linnsean  Svstem;  illustrated  liv  Twentv-eight  Plates,  drawn  from  Natiiie.
By  the  Rev.  E.  I.  Briinow,  A...AI.,  &c.'  Third  Edition.  In  ilvo,  juice  K.V.
board*  ;  or  beautifully  coloured  by  Sowerby,  price  1/.  11*'.  (id.  l)oards.


DEDICATED,  DY  PEIIMISSION,  TO  HIS  MAJESTY.

In  Thirty  Volumes  lOwio,  tcilh  numerous  Maps  and  Engravings.^
price  HI.  5s.  Ms.

THE  MODERN  TRAVELLER;

CONTAINING

A  Description,  Geographical,  Historical,  and  Topographical,  of  tlie  Various

Countries  of  the  Globe,  compiled  from  the  latest  and  best  Authorities.

EDITED  BY  JOSIAH  CONDER.

•^"  The  various  Coimtries  may  he  had  separate,  price  r)s.  Gd.  per  Vol.,  Ids.

Vol.  I PALESTINE,  or,  THE  HOLY  LAND.

IL  and  III SYRIA  and  ASIA  MINOR.

IV ARABIA.

V.  and  VI EGYPT,  NUBIA,  and  ABYSSINIA.

VII.  VIIL  IX.  and  X.  INDIA.

XI BIRMAH,  SIAM,  and  ANAN.

XIL  and  XIII PERSIA  and  CHINA.

XIV TURKEY.

XV.  and  XVI GREECE.

XVII RUSSIA.

XVIIL  and  XIX SPAIN  and  PORTUGAL.

XX.  XXI.  and  XXII.  AFRICA,

XXIIL  and  XXIV UNITED STATES of AMERICA and

CANADA.

XXV.  and  XXVI MEXICO  and  GUATIMALA.

XXVII COLUMBIA.

XXVIII PERU.

XXIX.  and  XXX BRAZIL  and  BUENOS  AYRES.

"  We  sjieak  within  the  most  cautious  bounds  when  we  say,  that  in  any  Volume  of  this
work  the  traveller  will  fiml  more  of  the  actual  material  of  which  he  stands  in  need  — the  real
distinct  matter-of-fact  information — than  in  any  ten  voyages  and  travels  to  the  same  region.
No  work  can  be  found  in  our  language,  or  any  other,  equal  to  supply  the  place  of  the
Modern  TraveUer." ~-Liteiari/  Gazette.

In  Three  Volumes  l8mo,  embellished  ivith  numerous  Plates  and  Alaps,
price  \8s.  bds.

ITALY.

By  JosiAii  CoNDER,  Author  of  "  The  Modern  Traveller."

"  Conder's  Italy  will  in  future  be  the  travelling  companion  of  every  man  bent  upon  a
thorough  investigation  of  that  interesting  land.  He  is  the  best  compiler  of  the  day ;
and  this  is  no  small  praise.  Such  compilation  as  Mr.  Conder's  requires  industry  of  a
laborious  nature,  considerable  knowledge,  a  methodical  head,  judgment,  taste,— are  these
qualities  to  be  met  with  every  where?  Look  at  the  manner  in  which  compilations  are
usually  performed,  and  the  question  is  answered.  Mr.  Conder  is  the  compiler  of  the
Modern  Traveller,  the  best  and  completest  geographical  and  descriptiAe  work  in  any
language.  In  the  course  of  that  work,  the  author,  commencing  anonymously,  worked  his
way  up  to  distinction ;  and  we  pride  ourselves  on  having  taken  every  opportunity,  public
and  private,  of  pointing  out  the  merits  — modest,  unpretending,  but  sterling  merits  — of  the
book  and  the  book-maker.  Italy  is  on  the  plan,  and,  as  we  should  conceive,  a  portion,  of  the
Modern  Traveller  detached,  probably  to  attract  the  attention  of  persons  who  are  solely
interested  in  that  country.  It  contains  the  pith  and  marrow  of  all  preceding  travellers;
and  Mr.  Conder  has  shewn,  that  by  staying  at  home,  one  may  learn  a  great  deal  more  about
a  country  than  by  running  through  it,— just  as  Mr.  Mill  has  said,  in  his  preface  to  the
British  India,  there  was  an  advantage,  in  writing  the  history  of  a  country,  never  to  have
seen  it.  Three  small  volumes  now  contain  the  Italian  traveller's  library  :  with  this  work,
and  a  book  of  posts  or  roads,  and  a  good  map,  the  curious  inquirer  is  completely  set  up :
lie  may  throw  Eustace  overboard,  surrender  Lady  Morgan  to  the  Austrian  douaniers,  turn
Inn  back  on  the  Invalid,  and  cut  the  caustic  Mr.  Forsyth." — Spectator,  April  23,  1831.

"  We  sincerely  congratulate  the  public  upon  the  appearance  of  a  work  which  really  is  an
accurate  and  complete  account  of  Modern  Italy." — ytstatie  Journal,  May  1831.

"  Conder'.<  Modern  Traveller  is  worth  all  the  Libraries  taken  together."— Fraser'^  Mag.
August  1(!31.

LONDON  :  —  J.  MOVES,  28,  CA3TI,E  STJIEET,  tBlCBSTim  SfiLARE.
