The Hope of the Great Community (Josiah Royce, 1916)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/hopeofgreatcommu0000josi_s8x2). Wartime addresses on the hope of a world community beyond nationalism.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Ch Sian Sa so eae eae


aa


_ With the compliments of Mrs. Royce


Mp


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2026


https://archive.org/details/nopeofgreatcommu0000josi_s8x2


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT
COMMUNITY


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY


NEW YORK - BOSTON - CHICAGO + DALLAS
ATLANTA * SAN FRANCISCO


MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED


LONDON + BOMBAY - CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE


THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Lr,
TORONTO


Pet ee,


Be


THE HOPE OF THE
GREAT COMMUNITY


BY


JOSIAH ROYCE


LATE ALFORD PROFESSOR OF NATURAL RELIGION
MORAL PHILOSOPHY AND CIVIL POLITY
AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY


Neto Work
THE,» MACMILLAN COMPANY
1916


All rights reserved


CoPYRIGHT, 1916,


By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.


Set up and electrotyped. Published November, 1916.


Norwood Press
J. 8. Cushing Co. — Berwick & Smith Co.
Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.


PREFATORY NOTE


N September fourteenth 1916 Josiah
Royce died, in his sixty-first year. The
essays composing the present volume were
written during the last year of his life and,
thus representing his latest phases of thought,
and being in the press at the time of his death,
they become, in some sort, a memorial vol-
ume. The very title seems almost prophetic.
Some of Professor Royce’s friends have
thought that no more fitting tribute to his
memory could be found than the memorial
verses of Miss Laura Simmons already pub-
lished in the Boston Herald and the New York
Times. Miss Simmons graciously permits

their repetition here.

KATHARINE ROYCE.


JOSIAH ROYCE
1855-1916


Lord, grant him still some task for heart and brain —
A man’s rich day of usefulness again!

Eager, yet all unhurried — poised to meet

All Fate holds forth of triumph or defeat.


O God most Wise — who deftly takes away

The tools and playthings of our little day,

Take Youth, and hope, and dreams surpassing fair,
But not the work we love!


Somehow, somewhere,
The master-mind moves toward the goal it sought!
Spare him his splendid quest — his crystal thought —
His vision sure, that was our all-delight
Till dusk enwrapped him, and the long, long night.


The scene — where shifted? Where at Thy behest
That hoard of priceless lore made manifest ?

What service for the restless hand and heart,

So lavish of the wealth they could impart?

Surely Thy blessed vineyard cannot spare

Such craftsman, but must hold him dear and rare!


Some day, in Thy good time, shall we once more

About him press, and marvel as before ?

Shall we of lesser mold behold him still

On Thy high tasks intent — dauntless of will,

And in his work the old-time matchless skill ?
LAURA SIMMONS.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER


I.


VI.


Tue DUTIES or AMERICANS IN THE PREs-
ENT WAR

Tue DESTRUCTION OF THE LUSITANIA

Tue HOPE or THE GREAT COMMUNITY

Tue POSSIBILITY OF INTERNATIONAL In-
SURANCE . ; :

Tue First ANNIVERSARY OF THE SINKING
OF THE LUSITANIA, May 7TH, 1916

Worps or Prorressor ROYCE AT THE
Watton HoTEL AT PHILADELPHIA,
DECEMBER 29, 1915 . r 3 3


PAGE


25


71


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT
COMMUNITY


CHAPTER I


THE DUTIES OF AMERICANS IN THE
PRESENT WAR


if FULLY agree with those who believe
that men can reasonably define their
rights only in terms of their duties. I have
moral rights only in so far as I also have
duties. I have a right to my life because
it gives me my sole opportunity to do my
duty. I have a right to happiness solely
because a certain measure of happiness is
needed to adapt me to do the work of a man.
I have a right to possess some opportunity
to fulfil the office of a man; that is, I have
a right to get some chance to do my duty.
This is, in fact, my sole inalienable right.
This doctrine that rights and duties are
correlative is an old teaching. It is also a
B 1


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


dry and somewhat abstractly worded bit of
wisdom, unwelcome to our more flippant as
well as to our more vehement moods, and of
late unpopular. I am not here to expound
it. I mention it only because I rejoice that
we are here to-day to consider what we have
deliberately chosen to name the duties of
Americans in the present war. I doubt not
that we Americans have also our rights in
the world crisis through which we are pass-
ing. I was glad and eager to sign the recent
memorial, addressed to the President of the
United States, and issued by the ‘Com-
mittee on American Rights.” But I signed
that memorial with enthusiasm just because
I believe not only that the American rights
in question are genuine, but that they cor-
respond with our duties as Americans, and
with the duty which our country now owes
to mankind. It is of our duties that I now
rejoice to speak to you.

Two things have made clear to many of
us Americans since the outset of the present
war — and to some of us with a constantly


Q


ad


DUTIES OF AMERICANS


increasing definiteness of vision — what our
duty is. First the fact that, in this war,
there is constantly before our eyes the pain-
fully tragic and sublime vision of one nation
that, through all its undeserved and seem-
ingly overwhelming agonies, has remained un-
mistakably true to its duty — that is, to its
international duty, to its honor, to its treaties,
to the cause, to the freedom, and to the future
union of mankind. That nation is Belgium.
In the heart of every true American this
consciousness ought therefore to be kept
awake (and, in many of our minds this con-
sciousness is glowingly and radiantly active
and wakeful), — the desire, the longing, the
resolution: “Let us, let our dear republic,
do our duty as Belgium and the Belgian
people have done theirs. Let us, with all
our might, with whatever moral influence
we possess, with our own honor, with our
lives if necessary, be ready, if ever and when-
ever the call comes to our people, to sacrifice
for mankind as Belgium has sacrificed; to
hazard all, as Belgium has hazarded all, for


3


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


the truer union of mankind and for the
future of human brotherhood.” That vi-
sion of Belgium's noble and unsparing self-
sacrifice for international honor is one of
the two things that to-day constantly remind
us of what international duty is, and so
what our own American duty is.

The second thing which constantly keeps
wide awake, in the minds of many of us
here in America, the knowledge of what our
duty is, is the moral attitude which has
been deliberately and openly assumed by
Germany since the outset of the war. This
attitude gives us what will remain until the
end of human history, one great classic
example of the rejection, by a great and
highly intelligent nation, of the first prin-
ciples of international morality, — the re
jection of international duty, the assertion
that for its own subjects, the State is the
supreme moral authority, and that there is
no moral authority on earth which ranks
superior to the will of the State.

The assertion has often been made that

+


DUTIES OF AMERICANS


we Americans have believed the lies of Ger-
many’s enemies, and have thus been igno-
rantly and wofully deceived. Countless
German attempts have been made to tell
us through books, pictures, newspapers, —
sometimes through other documents, —
what Germany’s real motives are. I am
sure that I speak the minds of many of you,
my countrymen and fellow citizens, when I
say that, next to the vision of bleeding and
devoted Belgium, — that suffering servant
of the great community of mankind, — no
picture more convincingly instructs us re-
garding our duty, than the picture that comes
before our minds whenever we remember
Germany’s summons at the gates of Liége, or
recall yon Jagow’s answer to one of President
Wilson’s early Lusitania notes, or when, more
recently, we read the first Austrian note in
answer to President Wilson’s peremptory
demand about the case of the Ancona.

No, not Germany’s enemies, but Germany
herself, her prince, her ministers, her sub-
marine commanders, have given us our prin-

5


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


cipal picture of what the militant Germany
of the moment is, and of what Germany
means for the future of international morality.
This picture constitutes the second of the
two great sources of our instruction about
what our American duty in this war is.

We are all accustomed to “look on this
picture, and then on this.” The first of the
two pictures is now familiar, — inexpressibly
sad and dear to us. Belgians are amongst
us as friends or as colleagues; Belgian re-
lief is one of the principal good causes of
American charity. Belgian wrongs— but
also Belgian heroism and Belgian unswerving
dutifulness — are before our eyes as inspir-
ing admonitions of what is the duty of
Americans in the present war. That con-
stitutes the one picture. The other, — well,
Germany has chosen to set before us this
second picture. That, in its turn, has now
become too familiar. But since our memory
for diplomatic notes easily and early begins
to fail, that second picture often tends to fade
out amongst us. And since we all long for

6


DUTIES OF AMERICANS


peace to come, and since some faint hearts
forget that it is as immoral to make light of
grave wrongs, and merely to condone them,
as it is irrationally to cry out with lust of
vengeance, — since these things are so, there
are Americans who forget the second pic-
ture, and forget that Germany has done as
much as Belgium to set before us what our
international duty, as individuals and as a
= nation, really is.

What that second picture means, what
spirit it expresses, what view of the nature
of each nation’s obligations to mankind it
sets before us, we have not been left to learn
from the enemies of Germany. The chief
ally of Germany, whose submarine policy
was “made in Germany,” and whose will in
this matter is the will of Germany, lately
explained the matter to us in unmistakable
terms. I refer to the Ancona case. Presi-
dent Wilson accepting, not any so-called
“‘lies’’ of the enemies of Germany, but the
official statement of the submarine com-
mander who sank the Ancona after that

7


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


vessel had ceased to make her effort to escape,
and while her passengers were still in danger
of drowning in case their vessel was sunk, —
President Wilson addressed to Austria a note
in which he plainly and accurately said that
the officially reported act of the submarine
commander was in principle barbarous and
abhorrent to all civilized nations. Austria
in its reply very courteously, ironically, and
cynically thanked our Government for the


c)


“esteemed favor” of its communication, and
expressed its entire ignorance of what law,
of what principle of international morality,
there might be which the submarine com-
mander was supposed, by the American
Government, to have violated.

Now this Austrian reply, — widely praised
by the inspired German press as a master-
piece of diplomatic skill, and received with
“quiet joy” by the official lovers and defend-
ers of the German submarine policy, — was
precisely in the spirit of Cain’s reply when he
was challenged from overhead regarding the
results of his late unpleasantness with his

8


DUTIES OF AMERICANS


brother Abel. For Cain, while his brother’s
blood was crying from the ground, received
a somewhat stern diplomatic communica-
tion from a moral power, demanding: ‘‘ Where
is thy brother?’ And Cain in substance
begged to acknowledge the esteemed favor
of this communication from on high, and
seems at first to have taken a certain stilles
Vergniigen in begging to represent first that,
so far as he knew, he was not his brother’s
keeper; while, for the rest, he desired most
respectfully, and in the friendliest spirit,
to inquire what law of God or man he was
supposed to have broken.

Now this is the spirit of international im-
morality, — this is the sort of enmity to man-
kind, — which the German submarine policy,
its official allies and defenders, have expressed
and justified. Upon this second picture,
then, with its lurid contrast to the picture
of Belgium, we have to look when we think
of our duty as Americans. For deliberate
national deeds cannot be undone, nor can
their official justifications be lightly con-

9


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


doned by reason of later diplomatic trifling,
and by reason of speciously well-written notes
of apology and withdrawal. The deed stays.
Its official justification reveals motives, and
confesses a national spirit, whose moral mean-
ing is as irrevocable as death. We Ameri-
cans know what the Lusitania outrage meant,
and to what spirit it gave expression. That
spirit has the “primal eldest curse upon it,
—a brothers murder.” For the young
men, the women, the babies, who went
down with the Lusitania were our dead. At
least I know — some of whose pupils were
amongst the victims of the Lusitania — that
they were my dead. And the mark of Cain
lasts while Cain lives.

Such facts determine the duty of Ameri-
cans in this war. Our duty is to be and to
remain the outspoken moral opponents of
the present German policy, and of the Ger-
man state, so long as it holds this present
policy, and carries on its present war. In
the service of mankind, we owe an unswerv-
ing sympathy not to one or another, but to

10


DUTIES OF AMERICANS


all of the present allied enemies of Germany.
We owe to those allies whatever moral sup-
port and whatever financial assistance it is
in the power of this nation to give. As to
munitions of war: it is not merely a so-called
American right that our munition-makers
should be free to sell their wares to the ene-
mies of Germany. It is our duty to en-
courage them to do so, since we are not at the
moment in a position to serve mankind by
more direct and effective means. For the
violation of Belgium, and the submarine
policy of Germany and of her ally — a policy
deliberately and boastfully avowed as long
as the central powers deemed such avowal
advantageous — this violation and this pol-
icy together suffice to keep clearly before
our eyes the fact that Germany, as at present
disposed, is the wilful and deliberate enemy
of the human race. It is open to any man
to. be a pro-German who shares this en-
mity. But with these two pictures before
our eyes, it is as impossible for any rea-
sonable man to be in his heart and mind
11


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


neutral, as it was for the good cherubs in
heaven to remain neutral when they first
looked out from their rosy glowing clouds,
and saw the angels fall. Neutral, in heart
or in mind, the dutiful American, when once
he has carefully looked upon this picture,
and then on this, will not and cannot be.
He must take sides. And if he takes sides
as I do, he will say :

“Let us do all that we as Americans can do,
to express our hearty, and, so far as we can,
our effective sympathy with the united friends
of Belgium, who are the foes of those German
enemies of mankind. Whenever the war is
over, if it ends in the defeat and consequent
moral reform of Germany, then in due time
let Charity have its perfect work. For we in
America have long loved and studied German
civilization, and would be loving it still but for
its recent crimes. But now, while the war
lasts, and Belgium bleeds, and mankind
mourns, let us aid the allied enemies of Ger-
many with sympathy, since the cause of the
allied enemies of Germany is the cause of man-


12


DUTIES OF AMERICANS


kind; let us enthusiastically approve of sup-
plying the enemies of Germany with financial
aid and with munitions of war, let us resist
with all our moral strength and influence
those who would place an embargo upon
munitions, let us bear patiently and un-
complainingly the transient restrictions of
our commerce which the war entails, let us
be ashamed of ourselves .that we cannot
even now stand beside Belgium, and suffer
with her for our duty and for mankind, and
while we wait for peace let us do what we
can to lift up the hearts that the Germany
of to-day has wantonly chosen to wound, to
betray, and to make desolate. Let us do
what we can to bring about at least a rup-
ture of all diplomatic relations between our
own republic and those foes of mankind, and
let us fearlessly await whatever dangers this
our duty as Americans may entail upon us,
upon our land and upon our posterity. We
shall not thus escape suffering. But we shall
begin to endure, as Belgium to-day endures,
for honor, for duty, for mankind.”
13


CHAPTER II
THE DESTRUCTION OF THE LUSITANIA!


N my last letter I believe that I laid some
stress to you upon the necessity, both patri-
otic and academic, of my trying to preserve
a formally strict neutrality of expression,
not merely because the community of man-
kind as a total community is my highest
- interest, as it is yours, but because our Presi-
dent’s advice to the nation, and our mani-
fold relations to foreigners, both in academic
life and in the world at large, limit our right,
or have limited our right, to express ourselves
regarding matters of the war and of current
controversy. It is now a relief to be able to


say with heartiness, that one result at least


1 The text of this chapter consists of extracts from a letter written
by Professor Royce to Professor L. P. Jacks, and published by the
latter in the Hibbert Journal for October 1915. -With the exception


of two passages, the extracts were published in the London Morn-
ing Post of July 5, 1915.


14


TRE DESTRUCTION OF THE LUSITANIA


of the Lusitania atrocity has been and will
be to make it both necessary and advisable
to speak out plainly many things which an
American professor in my position has long
felt a desire to say upon occasions when he
still supposed it to be his duty not to say
them. Thus, for instance, immediately after
the Lusitania incident, and before Wilson’s
first letter addressed to Berlin, I quite delib-
erately told my own principal class in meta-
physics that, and why, I should no longer
endeavor to assume a neutral attitude about
the moral questions which the Lusitania
incident brought to the minds of all of us.
That friends of mine, and that former pupils
of mine, near to me as the students whom I
was addressing are near to me, were on the
Lusitania — this, as I said to my class, makes
it right for me to say, “Among these dead of
the Lusitania are my own dead.” And so,
I went on to say, “‘I cannot longer leave you
to suppose it possible that I have any agree-
ment with the views which a German col-
league of mine, a teacher at Harvard, recently
15


ri
/


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY
maintained, when he predicted what/ he
called ‘the spiritual triumph of Germany.’
It makes very little difference to anybody else
what I happen to think, but to you, as my
pupils, it is my duty to say that henceforth,
whatever the fortunes of war may be, ‘the
spiritual triumph of Germany’ 3s quite im-
possible, so far as this conflict 1s concerned.
I freely admit that Germany may triumph in
the visible conflict, although my judgment
about such matters is quite worthless. But
to my German friends and colleagues, if they
chance to want to know what I think, I
can and do henceforth only say this: “You
may triumph in the visible world, but at the
banquet where you celebrate your triumph
there will be present the ghosts of my dead
slain on the Lusitania. ”

I insisted to my class that just now the
especially significant side of this matter is
contained simply in the deliberately chosen
facts which the enemy of mankind has chosen
to bring into being in these newest expressions
of the infamies of Prussian warfare. I should

16


THE DESTRUCTION OF THE LUSITANIA


be a poor professor of philosophy, and in
particular of moral philosophy, if I left my
class in the least doubt as to how to view
such things. And that, then, was my imme-
diate reaction on the Lusitania situation.

Of course, one still has to live with his
German colleagues in the midst of this situa-
tion. I am glad to know at least one such
German colleague, and, I believe, a thor-
oughly good patriot — who views the Lusi-
tania atrocity precisely as any honest and
humane man must view it, unless wholly
blinded by the present personal and social
atmosphere of ferocity and confusion in
which so many Germans live. I do not en-
deavor to have unnecessary controversy —
with these colleagues, or with anybody else,
and have spoken of the matter both to col-
leagues and to students precisely as much
and as little as the situation seemed to me to
permit and require. But it might interest
you to know that, in my opinion, the Lusi-
tania incident has affected and will affect
our national sentiment — and what has been

c 17


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


our desire for a genuine neutrality —in a
very profound and practical way.

Of the political consequences of the incident
up to this date, you will have, I hope, a suff-
ciently definite ground for judgment. For-
tune is fickle; and war is a sadly chaotic
series of changes. But this I warmly hope:
henceforth, may the genuine consciousness
of brotherhood between your people and
mine become more and more clearly warm,
and conscious, and practically effective upon
the course of events. The Lusitania affair
makes us here, all of us, clearer. A deeply
unified and national indignation, coupled
with a strong sense of our duty towards all
humanity, has already resulted from this
new experiment upon human nature, which


2


has been “made in Germany” and then ap-
plied to the task of testing what American
sentiment really is. I do not know how often
the changing fortunes of war, or the difficul-
_ ties about neutral commerce, will bring to
light causes of friction or of tension between
our two peoples. But I cordially hope that
18


THE DESTRUCTION OF THE LUSITANIA


we shall find ourselves, henceforth, nearer and
nearer together in conscious sentiment, and
in the sort of sympathy which can find effec-
tive expression. It is a great thing to feel
that Wilson, in his last two notes to Ger-
many, has been speaking the word both for
his nation and for all humanity. I am


sure that he has spoken the word for a new ~ «


sort of unification of our own national con-
sciousness. Unless Germany substantially
meets these demands, I am sure that she
will find all our foreign populations more
united than ever through their common
resentment in the presence of international
outrages, and through their common con-
sciousness that our unity and active co-oper-
ation must have an important bearing upon
the future of all that makes human life pre-
cious to any of us. In so far as our German-
American fellow-citizens fail to appreciate
the call of humanity in respect of such mat-
ters as this, they have further lessons to learn
which America will teach them, — peace-
ably if we can, but authoritatively if we must,
19


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


whenever an effort is made to carry dissen-
sions into our national life for the sake of any
German purpose. As a fact, I believe that
unless Germany meets the essential demands
of President Wilson, our German-American
population will be wholly united with us,
as never before, in the interests of humanity
and of freedom. In brief, the Lusitania
affair, and its consequences, give one further
tiny example of that utter ignorance of hu-
man nature and of its workings which the
German propaganda, the German diplomacy,
and the German policy have shown from the
outset of the War. Submarines these people
may understand, certainly not souls.

I do not love the words of hate, even now,
or even when uttered over the bodies of those
who were slain on the Lusitania. It is not
hate, but longing and sorrow for stricken
humanity, which is with me, as I am sure it
is with you, the ruling sentiment. I have
no fondness for useless publicity. Never-
theless, it is fair to say that the words which
I have just written down may not only have

20


THE DESTRUCTION OF THE LUSITANIA


a little friendly interest to you as expressing
a certain change in my own Attitude towards
those problems about neutrality which I
mentioned to you before, but may conceiv-
ably suggest to you some way in which a
more public expression of mine might be of
real service to some cause which you, or which
other of my English friends, hold dear. The
controversial literature of the war is, as you
know, and as you yourself have said, a cup
which seems to be over full. Yet I now no
longer feel that any duty or desire makes
me hesitant concerning the expression of
whatever plain speech and worthily strong
sentiment might be able to contribute to a
good cause. You will see from the way in
which I spoke to my class, after long dutifully
preserving a deliberate reticence in the class-
room regarding the war, — you will see that
my mouth is now open enough, if only any
words that could be of use for the cause
of true peace, or against the deeds and the
motives of the declared enemies of mankind,
could be uttered by me. It is a relief to have


21


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


in such matters not only a free soul, but |
perfectly free right of speech, so long as one’
speech promises to contribute anything, how-
ever little, to the cause of mankind which
such bitter and cruel enemies are now assail-
ing in the sight of us all.

So do with this letter, or with any part of
it, precisely as you think best, — not indeed
making it seem as if I were at all fond of
notoriety, but merely using the right which I
give you as my friend to let anybody know
where [ stand. I am no longer neutral, even
in form. The German Prince is now the de-
clared and proclaimed enemy of mankind,
declared to be such not by any “lies” of his


22


enemies, or by any “envious” comments of
other people, but by his own quite deliberate
choice to carry on war by the merciless destruc-
tion of innocent, non-combatant passengers.
The single deed is indeed only a comparatively
petty event when compared with the stu-
pendous crimes which fill this war. But
the sinking of the Lusitania has the advan-
tage of being a deed which not only cannot be
22


THE DESTRUCTION OF THE LUSITANIA


denied, but which has been proudly pro-
claimed as expressing the appeal that Ger-
many now makes to all humanity. About
that appeal I am not neutral. I know that
that appeal expresses utter contempt for
everything which makes the common life of »
humanity tolerable or possible. I know that
if the principle of that appeal is accepted,
whatever makes home or country or family
or friends, or any form of loyalty, worthily
dear, is made an object of a perfectly de-
liberate and merciless assault. About such
policies and their principles, about such
appeals, and about the Prince who makes
them, and about his underlings who serve
him, I have no longer any neutrality to keep.
And without the faintest authority in any
political matter, without the faintest wish
for any sort of notoriety, I am perfectly will-
ing to let this utterance receive any sort of
publicity that, in its utter unworthiness to
express adequately or effectively the nature
of the crimes and of the infamy which it at-
- tempts to characterize, it may by chance get,
23


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


should you or anybody else wish to make use
of it. Of course, I need not tell you that a
Harvard professor speaks only for himself,
and commits none of his colleagues to any-
thing that chances to be in his mind or on his


tongue.


24


CHAPTER III
THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


HESE words are written at a moment
when the issues of the great war are still
undecided. They are founded upon no fore-
sight of the course which the world’s political
and military fortunes are to follow. They
therefore refer wholly to ideals, to duties,
to hopes, and to the interests of humanity.
There are moments when the lover of man-
kind, in these days, seems to catch a glimpse
of a wonderful dawn light. If this dawn
soon gives place to the coming day, an era of
inspiring promise for the best hopes of all
human ages will begin. If the clouds per-
sistently gather again, as at some moments
they do; if the night returns, as, for all that the
present writer can know, it may return, —then
the world must wait again for centuries, and
25


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


must wait in sorrow, for that which the wise
and the faithful of many generations have
longingly expected.

“More than they that watch for the morn-
ing,” the true lovers of mankind now watch
to see whether the seeming promise of the
< dawn is to be, in any genuine sense, fulfilled.
More than the spoilers of mankind ever be-
fore scoffed at the hope of humanity, power-
ful enemies of the good now confidently look
for the triumph of Satan. The outcome of
the present struggle between good and ill
remains still a mystery.

All that one can hope to do at such a mo-
ment, is to try to clarify his ideas about
what ought to be — wholly powerless as the
lover of the ideal is to determine, through
any skilfully devised engines of destruc-
tion, or through any efficiency of the general
staff of any national army, what shall be. Al
that one can now utter must be called at
best “A Song before Sunrise.” We do not
know whether the sun for which the genuine
lovers of mankind and of the ideal long, will

26


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


ever rise in any future which we human be-
ings can foresee for our own race.

Every idealist believes himself to have
rational grounds for the faith that somewhere,
and in some world, and at some time, the ideal
will triumph, so that a survey, a divine synop-
sis of all time, somehow reveals the lesson
of all sorrow, the meaning of all tragedy, the
triumph of the spirit. But it is not ours to
say, in the world in which we at present have ,
to live from one day to another, and to fol-
low the fortunes of man from one newspaper
to another, — when and how the true reve-
lation of the world’s meaning is faced and
found. We often do our best when we fix
our mind on the thought which Kant ex-
pressed in the words: “If justice meets utter
wreck, then there is no worth whatever in
the continued existence of human life in this
world.” That word, at least, relieves us
from the requirement of trying to prove
that justice in mortal affairs will escape total
wreck.

Perhaps the time will come when, indeed,

27


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


there will be no further worth in the con-
tinued existence of men on this planet. If
the purposes and deeds which some of the
powerful enemies of mankind now boastfully
attempt to make successful ever become
permanently triumphant, then in truth there
will be no further worth in the continued
existence of human beings. As a matter of
fact, this planet has seen its “Age of Reptiles.”
The sabre-toothed tiger has also had its day.
Perhaps the ideals of those who defend and
praise the destruction of mothers and of their


>


babes on the “Lusitania” represent the sort
of humanity that is henceforth, for an in-
definite time, to win possession of the powers
which are to control the fortunes of human
civilization. About such matters a genuine
idealist has no philosophical right, just as he
has no scientific right, to make any particu-
lar prediction. His business is with the jus-
tice whose nature is such that if here on
earth it is permanently wrecked, then the
life of man becomes utterly worthless. There
are to-day boastful powers, as hopeful of their
28


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


own success as Milton’s fallen angels were


when
Satan exalted sat,


By merit raised to that bad eminence,


on his throne before them, and made prepa-
rations for a sort of submarine campaign
against the salvation of man. The lover
of ideals has no more right to make predic-
tions about the hopes of these boastful powers,
than Milton’s good angels would have had to
make predictions about the results of Satan’s
subsequent search for this little earth, and
about what his visits to the Garden of Eden
would accomplish.

In Milton’s tale these visits accomplished
the Fallof Man. The good and the bad angels
have been struggling for the final possession
of man ever since. The struggle continues
to-day. And there can be no doubt that the
evil powers are prodigiously efficient, and
that the servants of ill are devotedly loyal
to their diabolical cause. As for humanity,
man, like the sabre-toothed tiger, may ere
long have had his day and may have ceased

29


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


to be. The lover of ideals can make no
predictions as to such results. He can only
“watch for the morning” until, for him and
' for some of his human fellows, the darkness
has indeed settled down. It remains, how-
ever, still worth while to tell what hopes


>


one’s “Song before Sunrise” would express
if one were permitted not merely to watch
and sometimes to hope for the morning, but
to tell what the sun would show us if it had
already risen for humanity, or will show us
whenever for humanity it does rise, if indeed


on this planet it ever is to rise.


I


In order rightly to estimate the ideal issues
which are at stake in the present crisis of
humanity, it is first necessary to make clear
a matter concerning which there is a good
deal of confusion in recent discussion. Some
of this confusion is benevolent and well-
meaning; some of it is due to wilful disre-
gard of certain ethical issues which ought
to be as obvious as they are deep. The mat-

30


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


ter to which I refer can best be brought nearer
to clearness by contrasting two views of the
world’s present moral situation which fre-
quently appear in recent expressions concern-
ing the morals of the war. According to one
of these views, the present war is essentially
a conflict between nations and between na-
tional ideals. The essence of this doctrine is,
that just as the conflicting powers are nations,
so the main moral concern ought to be ex-
pressed in hopes that this or that nation will
obtain a deserved success.

Opposed to this view is a second and very
different view of the moral situation of the
world and of the meaning of the war. Ac-
cording to this view, the present war is a
conflict more conscious, more explicit, and
for that very reason more dangerous than any
we have ever had before, a conflict between
the community of mankind and the particu-
lar interests of individual nations. Conse-
quently, no nation engaged in this war is, or
can be, right in its cause, except in so far as
it is explicitly aiming towards the triumph

31


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


of the community of mankind. As a. fact,
the various warring nations are at present
acting with a decidedly various degree of
clearness about their relation to the unified
interests of humanity; that is, to what I call
the cause of the community of mankind.
Hence the various nations differ in the degree
to which, at any stage of the conflict, their
cause is just. In certain respects and with
regard to certain of their enterprises, they
may be, and are, explicitly aware that they
intend to serve the community of man-
kind; while in other respects, or in re-
gard to other matters, they may act with a
more or less explicitly deliberate hostility to
the cause of the community of mankind.
Their moral position may, therefore, vary
accordingly. But owing to the vastness and
to the definiteness of many of the special
international passions and issues concerned
in the present conflict, the outcome of the
war promises to be either a victory or a defeat,
not for any one of the warring nations nearly
so much as for humanity in its wholeness,
32


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


and hence for what I shall venture also to
call the church universal. It is important,
therefore, to indicate as clearly as possible
what in this discussion I mean by the com-
munity of mankind, and what by the church
universal. |

Ancient Israel somewhat early reached a


religious ideal which it expressed in the doc-


trine of some of its Prophets, that the re- x %


deemed and transformed Jerusalem of the
future was to be the centre of a redeemed
humanity, the spiritual ruler of a kingdom
which should have no end. In reaching this
ideal, the religion of the Prophets did not
look forward merely to a political conquest
of the rest of the world by the future people
of Israel. The ideal of the transformed hu-
manity of the future had, indeed, in case of
the religion of the Prophets, its political meta-
phors and inevitably its political coloring.
The subsequent results when the ideal reli-
gion of the Prophets degenerated into the
formalities of later Judaism, were in many
ways disastrous both for the morals and for
D 33


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


the religion of Judaism. But the ideal city
of Zion, the centre of a new heaven and earth,
passed over as an ideal into the possession
of the early Christian church. The Apostle
Paul gave to its inner life the character which
he called “charity,” and which he expounded
to the Corinthians in one of the greatest
documents of Christian literature.

The often misunderstood heart and essence
of the Pauline vision of charity is that it is
a virtue belonging to a community, a com-
munity which Paul conceives as finding its
future home in a heaven where the Divine
Spirit both informs it and fulfils its life and
its desire. Charity does not mean mere love
of individuals for individuals; since if, ac-
cording to Paul, I gave all my goods to feed
the poor, and my body to be burned, I might
still be without charity, and then be as a
sounding brass or as a tinkling cymbal. Char-
ity, for Paul, is not a merely mystical power
to prophesy, nor does it consist in any other
form of merely individual efficiency or profi-
ciency. It is a virtue which Paul recom-

34


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


mends to his Corinthians as to an united
community who, in the bonds of the spirit,
are one body despite the multitude of the
members. Charity never faileth, and out-
lasts all earthly vicissitudes in its own heav-
enly world, because there we know even as
we are known, and our mutual relations are
those of a perfected spiritual community.

Paul viewed the salvation of humanity
as consisting in the triumph of the Christian
church. This triumph was for him something
miraculous, catastrophic, and future; and
his expectations regarding the triumph and
end of humanity were obviously quite mythi-
eal. But this triumph of humanity, this
hope of all the faithful, this salvation of a
community through an universally significant
human transformation, without which no
salvation of an individual man would be
possible, this idea, in terms of which the
Apostle Paul universalized the ideal Jeru-
salem of the early Prophets, this became the
most essential and characteristic idea of the
Christian church.

35


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


The historical church has never been true
to it and has seldom understood it. Most
Christians suppose that the salvation of
men is an affair involving the distinct, and
in many ways the isolated, spiritual for-
tunes of individual men. Such Christians,
however, have not understood what the
vision of the New Jerusalem was in which
the seer of the Apocalypse gloried. What the
tree of life bears for the healing of the nations,
such Christians have never rightly com-
prehended. What the farewell address of
the Logos of the Fourth Gospel meant, when
the departing Lord prayed to the Father,
“That those whom Thou hast given me may
be One as We are One,” such individualistic
Christianity (which has been only too popu-
lar in the various Protestant sects) has neg-
lected, if not forgotten. But however ill-
comprehended, the “sign” in which and by
which Christianity conquered the world was
the sign of an ideal community of all the
faithful, which was to become the commu-
nity of all mankind, and which was to become

36


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


some day the possessor of all the earth, the
exponent of true charity, at once the spirit
and the ruler of the humanity of the future.
Such is a bare suggestion of that ideal of
the community of mankind which it was the
historical mission of Christianity to introduce
into the world, to keep alive through cen-
turies of human crimes, oppressions, rebel-
lions, and hatreds, and to hold before the
world for the healing of the nations. The
present situation of humanity depends upon
the fact that for good reasons, which have to
do not merely with the sentimental and ro-
mantic aspirations of humanity, but also
with the most serious business in which men
are engaged, the idea of the community of
mankind has become more concrete, more
closely related to the affairs of daily life,
has become more practicable than ever before.
At this very moment the material aspect of
civilization favors, as never before, the natu-
ral conditions upon which the community
of mankind, if it were reasonably successful,
would depend for its prosperity. The growth
37


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


of the natural sciences as well as of the techni-
cal industries of mankind also makes possible
and comprehensive forms and grades of coöp-
eration which men have never before known.
Some motives which tend to render the gen-
uine Pauline charity, the genuine love of the
unity of the great community to which all
civilized men may, when enlightened, con-
sciously belong, — such motives, I say, have
been furthered by the arts, the industries, ‘the
sciences, and the social developments of the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, as thou-
sands of years of previous human activity
have never furthered them. The brilliant
coloring, the luxuriant images with which the
fancy of the seer of the Apocalypse adorned
his New Jerusalem, readily suggest themselves
to the imagination of the lover of human
kind, who dwells on some of the more benign
aspects of our recent civilization, and who
considers how far-reaching the abundant
powers of human life are tending to become
under the influence of those humane arts and
sciences which of late have so successfully
38


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


combated disease, and have brought together
nations and races of men who once could not
in the least feel their brotherhood, or mutually
` understand the tongues which they spoke.

These benevolent and benign influences
do not, indeed, of themselves constitute the
true Pauline charity; but within the last
two centuries we have for the first time seen
glimpses of how, under perfectly human
conditions, they could become a basis for a
charity which might transform our society
in many of its most significant features into
a social order worthy both of a new heaven
and of a new earth. In brief, the last two
centuries have given us a right to hope for the
unity of mankind, a right of which we had
only mythical glimpses and mystical visions
before. This right we gained through the
recent development both of our natural
sciences and of our modern humanities. The
idea of the human community has tended
of late to win a certain clearness which it
never could possess until now:

Paul could believe in his vision of the re-

39


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


deemed humanity of the future, because he
had his own perfectly concrete and human,
if to him unsatisfactory, experiences of the
apparently miraculous life which was present
in his enthusiastic little churches. When
he talked of the redeemed humanity in heaven,
and had his vision of the charity that never
faileth, he could say to his brethren: “‘Thus
the Spirit manifests itself amongst you.”
When, in an unquestionably more fantastic
manner and language, the author of the
Fourth Gospel made the speaker of the fare-
well addresses characterize the present life
and the future life of his little company of
disciples, whom “‘having loved them, he loved
them to the end,” the writer of this Gospel
could use his concrete, although historically
idealized, portrait of the last meeting be-
tween the Lord and his disciples as the basis
and background of this vision of the salva-
tion of mankind.

In our day this vision of the salvation of
mankind, while indeed far enough away from
us to cause constant and grave concern,

40


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


and to demand endless labor, has been for
a long time becoming clearer than ever, while
both science and industry have tended to
bring men together in new fashions of codpera-
tion, In new opportunities and exercises that
involve an expressed charity in its true form,
as a devotion not merely to individuals but
to the united life of the community. The
belief that mankind can be and in the end shall
be one, has thus for a long time had an in-
creased concreteness, definiteness, practical
applicability, and despite all the vast evils
of our modern social order, a genuine hope-
fulness. What has to be borne in mind is,
that in former centuries, and above all in
ancient times, the community of mankind
was hindered from becoming an object either
of experience or of reasonable hope by the
confusions of men’s tongues, by the mutual
hostilities of nations, of religions, and of
sects, and by the absence of means whereby
men might learn to work together. Since
the beginning of the modern world, not only
have the sciences and the arts helped us to
41


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


work together in a material way and to un-
derstand one another regarding our various
ideas, but very many of our modern intellec-
tual and practical modes of progress have
possessed a significance not only material,
but deeply spiritual and, what is more to the
point in our present discussion, wisely inter-
national. The modern world has become in
many ways more and more an international
world. And this, I insist, has been true not
merely as to its technical and material ties,
but as to its spiritual union.

It has been this vision upon which a recent
international crime has so violently intruded.
The hope of the community lies in trying to
keep before us a vision of what the community
of mankind may yet become despite this tragic
calamity.

II

In speaking at such a moment of the com-
munity of mankind viewed simply as an ideal
of the future, there are two matters which,
as I believe, we ought to bear in mind. First,
its members will not be merely individual

42


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


human beings, nor yet mere collections or
masses of human beings, however vast, but
communities of some sort, communities such
as, at any stage of civilization in which the
great community is to be raised to some
higher level of organization, already exist.
Kthical individualism has been, in the
past, one great foe of the great community.
Ethical individualism, whether it takes the
form of democracy or of the irresponsible
search on the part of individuals for private
happiness or for any other merely individual
good, will never save mankind. Equally
useless, however, for the attainment of hu-
manity’s great end would be any form of mere
ethical collectivism, that is, any view which
regarded the good of mankind as something
which masses or crowds or disorganized col-
lections of men should win.

For this reason Bentham’s utilitarianism,
in the form which he gave to it, and which
the English political Liberals of the middle
of the nineteenth century emphasized, does
not express what the community of mankind ~

43


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


needs for its existence and for its general
welfare. That is why mere philanthropy,
merely seeking for the ‘greatest happiness
for the greatest number, merely endeavor-
ing to alleviate the pains of individual men or
of collections of men, will never bring about
the end for which mankind has always been
seeking, and for the sake of which our individ-
ual life is worth living. That, too, is the
reason why at the present time many humane
people, despite their former horror of war,
in view of its sorrows and of the misery which
it causes, find to their surprise that, as Mr.
Robert Herrick has said in a recent number
of “The New Republic,” war seems to them
now no longer as great an evil as it used to
seem; for in each of the warring peoples the
war has brought about a new consciousness
of unity, a new willingness to surrender pri-
vate good to the welfare of the community,
a new sense of the sacredness of duty, a new
readiness to sacrifice.

Such converts to the doctrine that war is
good ascribe their sudden conversion to the

44


f


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


wonder and reverence which have been
aroused in them by the sight of France re-
generated through the very dangers which
the invader has brought with him, awakened
to a new sense that the value of life lies not
in what individuals get out of it, but in what
the exertions and the perils of war call out
and illustrate, namely, the supreme and
super-individual value of loyalty. Loyalty,
the devotion of the self to the interests of the
community, is indeed the form which the
highest life of humanity must take, whether
in a political unity, such as in a nation, or in
the church universal, such as Paul foresaw.
Without loyalty, there is no salvation.
Therefore loyalty can never completely ex-
press itself in the search for individual happi-
ness, whether the happiness that is in ques-
tion be that of the individual who teaches,
or that of the mere collections of masses of
individuals for whom some philanthropist
seeks happiness.

Therefore it is indeed true that, if the only
alternative for mankind were either to con-

45


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


tinue the arts of war or to lose its vision of
high attainment in the form of a mere search
for happiness, then it would be better that
war should rage, with all its horrors, SO long
as humanity lasts, rather than that what
Emerson called “hearts in sloth and ease”
should live in an endlessly dissatisfied search
for pleasures which deceive and which fade
in the enjoyment, and for a happiness which
no human individual can possibly attain,
unless indeed he is viewed as a member of the
community. `

The detached individual is an essentially
lost being. That ethical truth lies at the
basis of the Pauline doctrine of original sin.
It lies also at the basis of the pessimism with
which the ancient southern Buddhism of the
original founder of that faith, Gotama Bud-
dha, viewed the life of man. The essence of
the life of the detached individual is, as
Gotama Buddha said, an unquenchable desire
for bliss, a desire which “hastens to enjoy-
ment, and in enjoyment pines to feel desire.”
Train such a detached individual by some form

46


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


of highly civilized cultivation, and you merely
show him what Paul called “the law.” The
law thus shown he hereupon finds to be in
opposition to his self-will. Sin, as the Pauline
phrase has it, “revives.”

The individual, brought by his very cul-
tivation to a clearer consciousness of the con-
flict between his self-will and the social laws
which tradition inflicts upon him, finds a war
going on in his own members. His life
hereupon becomes only a sort of destruction
of what is dearest to him. For as a social
being, he has to recognize both the might of
his social order and the dignity of its de-
mands. But as a detached individual, he
naturally hates restraint; that is, as Paul
says, he hates the law. However correct
his outward conduct may be, he inwardly
says: “Oh, wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death ?”’

Such is the picture of the essentially dis-
astrous life of the detached individual which
you find in the much misunderstood, and in
our day comparatively unpopular seventh

AT


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. In
the following chapter, Paul characterizes the
only mode of salvation which can be offered -
with any hope to such a detached individual.
Gotama Buddha sought the salvation of the
detached individual through an act of resig-
nation whereby all desires are finally. aban-
doned. Paul describes what is essentially
salvation through loyalty, salvation through
the willing service of a community, the sal-
vation of those whom he characterizes by the
words: “They are in Christ Jesus, and walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit.” But
for Paul the being whom he called Christ
Jesus was in essence the spirit of the universal
community.

The lesson with regard to which both Bud-
dhism and Christianity agree, is the lesson —
that for the detached individual there is no
salvation. Since, therefore, you can never `
make the detached individual securely and
steadily happy, it is useless to try to save him,
or any mere crowd or collection of detached
individuals, by mere philanthropy. Since

48


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


the detached individual is essentially a lost
being, you cannot save masses of lost individ-
uals through the’ triumph of mere democracy.
Masses of lost individuals do not become
genuine freemen merely because they all have x
votes. The suffrage can show the way of
salvation only to those who are already
loyal, who already, according to their lights,
live in the spirit, and are directed not by a
mere disposition to give good things to every-
body, or to give all their goods to feed the
poor, or to give their body to be burned, but
by a genuinely Pauline charity.

Since, then, it is only the consciously united
community — that which is in essence a
Pauline church — which can offer salvation
to distracted humanity and can calm the
otherwise insatiable greed and longing of the
natural individual man, the salvation of the
world will be found, if at all, through uniting
the already existing communities of man-
kind into higher communities, and not through
merely freeing the peoples from their oppres-
sors, or through giving them a more popular

so 49


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


government, unless popular government al-
ways takes the form of government by the
united community, through the united com-
munity, and for the united community.
Therefore, while the great community of
the future will unquestionably be interna-
tional by virtue of the ties which will bind its
various nationalities together, it will find no
place for that sort of internationalism which
despises the individual variety of nations,
and which tries to substitute for the vices
of those who at present seek merely to con-
quer mankind, the equally worthless desire
of those who hope to see us in future as “men
without a country.” Whatever that form
of loyalty which is now patriotism expresses,
must be in spirit preserved by the great com-
munity of the future. That unity within
the national growth which the observers
of the war watch with such fascination, when
they see how each people is better knit and
more serious, more conscious of the sacredness
of its national life than it was before the
great peril, that unity will not, and must not,
50


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


be lost when the new international life comes
into existence. There can be no true inter-
national life unless the nations remain to
possess it. There can never be a spiritual
body unless that body, like the ideal Pauline
church, has its many members. The citi-
zens of the world of the future will not lose
their distinct countries. What will pass away
will be that insistent mutual hostility which
gives to the nations of to-day, even in times of
peace, so many of the hateful and distracting
characters of a’ detached individual man.
In case of human individuals, the sort of in-
dividualism which is opposed to the spirit
of loyalty, is what I have already called the
individualism of the detached individual, the
individualism of the man who belongs to no
community which he loves and to which he
can devote himself with all his heart, and his
soul, and his mind, and his strength. In so
far as liberty and democracy, and independ-
ence of soul, mean that sort of individualism,
they never have saved men and never can
save men. For mere detachment, mere self-
51


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


will, can never be satisfied with itself, can
never win its goal. What saves us on any
level of human social life is union. And
when Webster said, in his familiar reply
to Hayne, that what alone could save
this country must be described as “Liberty
and Union, now and forever, one and


22.


inseparable! ” — Webster expressed in fine
phrase, and with special reference to this
country, the true doctrine of the church
universal.

Liberty alone never saves us. Democracy
alone never saves us. Our political freedom
is but vanity unless it is a means through
which we come to realize and practise charity,
in the Pauline sense of that word. Hence
the community of mankind will be inter-
national in the sense that it will ignore no
rational and genuinely self-conscious nation.
It will find the way to respect the liberty of
the individual nations without destroying
their genuine spiritual freedom. Its liberty
and union, when attained, will be “now and
forever, one and inseparable.”

52


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


HMI


I have now mentioned one character which,
as I believe, must belong to the interna-
tional community of the future. Hereupon I
must turn to a second character, which seems
to me of equal importance with the first, al-
though reformers and the creators of Utopias
have almost uniformly neglected, or mis-
understood this second character.

The distinct national unities must remain
intact, each with its own internal motives
for loyalty and with its modes of expression
whereby the loyalty of its individual citizens
will be won and sustained in the community
of mankind, which the ideal future must con-
tain if humanity is to be really saved. In
the far-off future, as in the past, humanity
will include amongst its number nations
whose citizens belong not merely to various
national types but to distinct races. No
dream of universal conquest, if it were carried
out, could ever lead to anything but to a
more or less universal community of hate,

53


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


to a social world essentially distracted, much
as the world of the Gentiles, depicted by Paul
at the outset of the Epistle to the Romans,
was distracted. In and for such a community,
no man, still less a nation, could deeply feel
or long retain any genuine loyalty. Neither
the pan-Germanists nor the pan-Slavists,
neither the partisans of the white race nor
those who hope for the supremacy of the yel-
low race, have any true conception of what the
community of mankind is intended to be or
of what the spirit of loyalty demands that it
shall be. Both the nations and the races
are needed for the future of mankind. The
problem of humanity is to see that their
liberty and their union shall remain “‘for-
ever one and inseparable.”

But what the lovers of national rivalries,
who look forward to an endless strife of
peoples, as well as the makers of the Utopias
of universal peace, have equally failed to see
is that amongst the many social functions of
a nation or, for that matter, of any human
community, the political functions of such

54


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


a community, at any rate, as they have been
conceived and carried out up to the present
time, are ethically amongst the least impor-
tant.

Greece never attained political unity. To-
day it rules the world, as Germany will never
rule it, though its inventions and its efficiency
should continue and grow for a thousand years.
Greece rules a spiritual world, and rules it
spiritually. No modern nation that has won
political power has ever expressed its best
contribution to humanity through this polit-
ical power, or has ever made a contribution
to the community of mankind which is nearly
equal to the contribution made by Greece,
and made by a nation which proved wholly
incapable of political unity. The greatest
rival which Greece has ever possessed as a
contributor to the cause of the community of
mankind is the nation Israel — by which I
mean, not the Israel whose history was re-
written from the point of view of later Juda-
ism and was so misrepresented in what we
call the Old Testament. The Israel of which

55


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


I speak is the Irsael of the great formative
period of the prophetic religion, the Israel
whose religious beginnings are sketched for
us in that brief and impressive fragment of
poetry called the Song of Deborah — the
Israel whose maturer consciousness found
its voice in Amos and Isaiah, and in the records
of the prophetic literature. Even after its
formative period was past, and after Judaism
had nearly quenched the spiritual fire which
had burned in the religion of the Prophets,
Israel still gave us the Psalms, still expressed,
in the great speeches which an unknown mas-
ter put into the mouth of Job, ideas and
problems which are with us to-day, and which
will record some of the great problems of
human. destiny for all coming ages of man-
kind, just as the great Greek tragedians of
the formative period of the Hellenic mind
have spoken for all time. But Israel, like
Greece, never won, and from the nature of the
case could not win, a lasting political unity.

When we remember how all the highest
products of the German mind have so far

56


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


been the products of times when the national
unity in a political sense was not yet attained,
while the mightiest accomplishment of Prus-
sian domination has thus far been that, like
the base Indian of Othello’s last words, this
Prussian domination, in dealing with the
magnificent ideal legacy of the Germanic
mind, has simply “thrown a pearl away,
richer than all his tribe”; and when we
remember how an analogous rule holds in
case of several other European nations, we
are reminded that, on the whole, there seems
to be some opposition between the political
power of a nation and its power to contribute
to the ideal goods of the community of man-
kind.

The political contributions of nations either
to the unity or to the life of the great com-
munity are by no means their only or, on the
whole, their principal contributions. For that
very reason it is not wise to hope that when
the Holy City of the community of mankind
descends from heaven to earth, it will come
in political form. According to a well-known

57


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


tradition, the Master said: ‘‘My kingdom
is not of this world, else would my servants
fight.” I do not think that this reported
word of the Master represents what the ideal
course of human progress ought to be. The
ideal community of mankind, whenever it
really descends from heaven to earth, will
indeed appear in a definitely worldly fashion.
If the ideal is approximately realized, the
kingdom will be in this world, yet its servants
will not fight, simply because they will be
loyally engrossed in much better business
than fighting. That upon which I here in-
sist is, that in learning such business they
will not principally be guided by political arts
and motives.
IV

But if the great community is not to win
its loyal consciousness through inventing
new political forms and through depending
upon political institutions for its principal
advances, must it then be confined to “the
empire of the air”? Must it always be de-
pendent upon its poets and ,its prophets?

58 "


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY:


or upon their brethren, the great scientific
discoverers, the genuinely inventive leaders
of thought? Must its kingdom be a wholly
ideal kingdom? Must its fortunes be those
which, in a somewhat disheartening sequence
of faiths and of practices, have so far con-
stituted the history of religion ?

I do not believe this. I believe that the
future will invent, and will in due time begin
very actively and productively to practise,
forms of international activity which will be
at once ideal in their significance and busi-
ness-like in their methods, so that we shall
no longer be dependent upon the extremely
rare and precious beings called prophets
or poets, to show us the way towards
the united life of the great community. I
have recently ventured to point out certain
ways in which international business is already
approaching a stage wherein, if the spoilers
do not indeed too seriously wreck or too
deeply impair our progress, we may actively
begin to further international unity, without
in the least interfering with the free internal

59


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


development of the social orders of individual
nations. It is not at all necessary to look
towards the triumph of Socialism or of any
other equally revolutionary social tendency,
whether political or non-political, in order to
foresee possible modes of international uni-
fication, which, if they were once tried, if a
fair beginning of some such international
activity were made, would almost certainly
prove to be self-sustaining as well as condu-
cive to a mutual understanding amongst the
nations.

There is, for instance, a type of business
which has been invented only within a little
more than a century. In origin it is due to
no poet and to no prophet. It has already
transformed the civilization of the principal
nations of Europe. The transformation in
question is nowhere, except by accident,
very closely bound up with political changes.
The social transformations which it has al-
ready wrought within the communities of
single nations, are not due to the spread of
socialistic doctrines‘or to any notable political

60


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


tensions or strifes within the communities


which have thus been influenced.


The form of business which I have in mind "="


is the form known as insurance. Within the 7


life of a single civilized people, it is capable
of accomplishing an immense variety of types
of social service. The internal organization
of Germany itself has been prodigiously fur-
thered, the social unity and the impressive
efficiency of the German people have been in
recent decades very vastly furthered by the
use which Bismarck and those who followed
him were led to make of various forms of
“state insurance” and of “social insurance,”
largely as means of meeting the demands
which the socialistic movement was already
making upon the state in general. What
has been proved is that the type of business
called insurance is so plastic and has such
vast direct as well as indirect effects, that,
within a single nation, if the purpose is to give
a community such unity and such organiza-
tion as naturally hold the attention and win
the practical loyalty of the members of the
61


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


community, the insurance type of organiza-
tion is the best type invented for the pur-
pose in question. This is no place to speak
of the details of recent social insurance which
Germany has so largely and so successfully
used. It is enough to say that the business
of insurance depends upon devices which are,
so to speak, essentially unifying, essentially
reconciling, essentially such as to exemplify
a type of social community to which in a re-
cent book of my own I have ventured to give
a name, not, as I hope, too technical.

An insuring financial organization, whether
it be an ordinary corporation or, as in Ger-
many’s case, a state or a government, has
what I may call a mediating, a reconciling,
a unifying function. If you regard the in-
surer as an individual man — and such in
special cases he may be, — he mediates be-
tween the interests of two persons whose con-
cerns, apart from the work of the insurer,
are subject to an often painful conflict. These
two persons may be called “the adventurer ”
and “the beneficiary.” The adventurer is

62


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


somebody who takes a risk, a practically
significant risk. Like all risks, this one does
not affect the fortunes of the adventurer
alone. For the adventurer has, or at some
time in the future will have, heirs or suc-
cessors, or a family or other co-adventurers,
who may, or who under certain conditions
will benefit by the adventurer’s undertakings
if they succeed, but who will otherwise get
quite the reverse of benefit out of the ad-
venturer’s failure. Thus the interests of the
adventurer and of his possible beneficiaries,
who may or will win if he wins, or who may
or will lose if he loses, stand in a relation in-
volving a certain rivalry, a tension, a source
of possible conflict of the most varied kind.
In other words, the adventurer and the pos-
sible beneficiary constitute what, in my “War
and Insurance,” I have called “a dangerous
pair” of human beings. That is, their con-
flicting interests may lead to misunderstand-
ings, to mutual wrongs, and to personal and
social unrest of the most varied sorts.

Into this “dangerous pair” the insurer,

63


,


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


in case his insurance enterprise is well founded
and successful, introduces a reconciling ele-
ment. It is the nature of his business to guar-
antee the beneficiary against the losses with
which in the course of his fortunes the ad-
venturer may meet. In consequence the
dangerous pair becomes a genuine community,
whose type is triadic and whose form is that
of all the communities which I call ““commu-
nities of interpretation.” These are groups
whose members comprise within themselves
either individuals or communities. But in
each of these communities, one of the mem-
bers has the essentially spiritual function
or task of representing or interpreting the
plans, or purposes, or ideas, of one of his
two fellows to the other of these two in
such wise that the member of the community


ç


whom [I call the “interpreter” works to the
end that these three shall coöperate as if they
were one, shall be so linked that they shall
become members one of another, and that
the community of the whole shall prosper
and be preserved.


64


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


In “War and Insurance” I have defended
the thesis that, if the principle of insurance
were introduced into international affairs,
even in a very small degree, it would involve,
first the creation of an entirely new sort of
international body — namely, an “‘interna-
tional board of trustees.” The functions of
this board would not be those of a court of
arbitration. They would not be diplomatic
functions. The board would have no polit-
ical powers or duties whatever. Hence its
functions would constitute an entire novelty
in human history. How such a board would
be possible, how its funds might be protected
from predatory assaults and kept free from
the danger of being risked in international
quarrels, my book has in a general way ex-
plained.

Since any reader of this book who may have
time in the distractions of the present conflict
to give it even the least careful attention,
very naturally asks at once what common
interests of the nations there are to insure,
it is possibly worth while to say that in an

i 65


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


article in The New York Times for July
25, 1915, I have pointed out certain inter-
national interests which, in fact, are greatly
intensified by some of the conditions of the
present conflict, and which are so definitely
related to existing forms of the insurance
business, that were a few nations at the
close ‘of the present war to appoint an inter-
national board of trustees to take practical
charge of just these perfectly definable inter-
ests, and to treat them so as to meet the con-
ditions which the nations concerned could
readily agree upon without departing from
fields of insurance that already exist and that
have already acquired international impor-
tance, then a beginning in international in-
surance could actually be made at once upon
the conclusion of the present war.

Were such an international board of trus-
tees once appointed, were some such essen-
tially simple and familiar type of insurance
enterprise once undertaken, under perfectly
reasonable and business-like conditions, a
beginning would be made in a process that

66


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


would, from the very first, tend to make the
unity of the various nations of mankind
something practical and obvious, as well as
certain to possess, as time went on, more and
more significance for all concerned in such a
process. For, as a fact, there are certain forms
of insurance which, as I have just said, are
already international in their scope. At the
close of the present war, some of these forms
of insurance will be in need of new interna-
tional devices to render them useful and pros-
perous under the new financial conditions that
will inevitably succeed the conflict.

Nobody has as yet attempted to devise an
international board of trustees fitted to take
charge of such international social interests.
But in the article *to which I have referred,
I have endeavored not merely to show how
the still very distant ideal of an interna-
tional insurance against risks directly con-
nected with war would be valuable if we could
secure such a form of international insurance,
but also to show that a special type of inter-
national insurance would be perfectly prac-

67


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


ticable and business-like at the close of the
present war, if a few nations were to agree
upon a plan for appointing an international
board of trustees and for intrusting to it
the new enterprise. This new enterprise
would involve no essentially new type of in-
surance. It would be based upon interna-
tional needs which are already recognized,
which have already created certain very suc-
cessful corporations, which actually do an
international business. To make these al-
ready existing types of insurance interna-
tional in my present sense, only the explicit
recognition of a suitable international organ
is necessary.

This new international organ would not be
political in its nature, would not attempt to
do the work of “a league of peace,” while of
course it would have no sort of opposition to
the formation of any league of peace which
proves in the future to be practicable. The
new type of international organ would be
founded upon no international treaty such
as would need or invite arbitration. The

68


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


nations that entered into the new enterprise
would merely intrust certain funds to the
new international board of trustees, and
would remain perfectly free to retire from all
relations to the enterprise at any moment,
by the device which any ordinary holder of an
insurance policy can use at present, namely,
by surrendering the policy to the board of
trustees.

The effects of the new enterprise would be
in the main indirect. That is, the new en-
terprise would meet an actual need, and if it
were reasonably devised, would meet that
need at once, and would in so far do good.
But if successful, it would lead to new enter-
prises of the type. The principle of insurance
would, however, be definitely introduced into
international affairs. Once introduced, and
once made in the least effective, that princi-
ple might, I believe, safely be left to vindicate
itself and its power to bring to consciousness
the great community of the future. The
realm of peace may, indeed, be far enough
away from our distracted human nature.

69


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


But the way towards peace, the way towards
the winning of self-consciousness for the
great community, the way towards a gen-
uine and practically effective coöperation
of the nations, at once in the spirit of sound
and business-like devotion, and in its primi-
tive true Pauline charity, — that way al-
ready lies open.


70


CHAPTER IV


THE POSSIBILITY OF INTERNATIONAL
INSURANCE
IN EAR the beginning of the present war
I wrote a little book entitled “War and
Insurance,” in which I stated and defended
the thesis that the cause of the world’s peace
would be aided if in future the principle
of insurance were gradually and progressively
introduced into international business.
Insurance has already proved to be, in
the modern life of individual nations, a
cause of no little growth in social organi-
zation, in human solidarity, in reasonable-
ness, and in peace. The best workings of
the insurance principle have been, on the
whole, its indirect workings. It has ‘not
only taught men, in manifold ways, both the
best means and the wisdom of “bearing
one another’s burdens”; but it has also
71


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


established many indirect, and for that very
reason all the more potent, types of social
linkage, which the individual policy-holder
or underwriter very seldom clearly and con-
sciously estimates at their true value.

These indirect and less frequently no-
ticed types of linkage have already trans-
formed our civilization, so that ours is al-
ready an age and a civilization of insurance.
Thus the greatest service of insurance has
been done, so to speak, beneath the surface
of our social life; and the most significant
changes of our modern world through the
indirect influence of insurance have grown
up as if in the dark, becoming manifest only
after they have been long developing their
effectiveness. This fact furnishes a reason
for looking forward most hopefully to great
and good indirect results when once insur-
ance assumes a definite international form.

Thus, for instance, one of the most signifi-
cant indirect results of the development of
fire insurance in the social life of our own
nation has been the fact that fire insurance

72


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE


has made possible, and has systematized,
a method of business whereby great numbers
of people who would otherwise have no way
of acquiring homes of their own, are now able,
through thrift and patience, to become in
time the owners of dwelling houses.

The method of business in question consists
simply in this, that the home-seeker at the
outset induces some one to advance the
money whereby the house can be built, while
the man for whom the new house is built
makes the one who has advanced this money
not only his mortgagee, but also the holder
of an insurance policy whereby the advance
made on the new house is rendered secure.
Without fire insurance this security, in great
numbers of cases, could not be furnished.

In analogous ways, fidelity insurance,
working in more or less indirect fashion,
enables countless young men to begin life in
positions of trust, and thus to find their
places as people worthy of confidence in a
world where they might otherwise be doomed
to live only as temporary employes.

73


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


Life insurance may be used by the other-
wise needy man to capitalize his own future,
and thus to win his way through a period of
struggle. And in all such cases social link-
ages are formed which depend upon the use
of insurance and which tend to bind men in
far-reaching unions such as without insurance
would be impossible. Such social linkages
are peace breeding, and are profoundly civil-
izing.


6


It is therefore not merely the “mutual”
aspect of insurance wherein its most benefi-
cent influence is manifested. Its greatest
social power depends upon the fact that a
man does not in general purchase an insur-
ance policy merely for the transient creature
of to-day called “himself.” A man pur-
chases insurance for his “beneficiary.” His
beneficiaries may include people or corpora-
tions of whose very existence he, the individ-
ual, is little aware. But his linkages with
such beneficiaries may join him to the whole
social order.

It is because the men of to-day are thus

74


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE


united through insurance in groups of greater
complexity, stability, and value than any
other sort of business or institution makes
possible that we owe as much as we do to the
indirect influences which the relations of in-
surers, adventurers, and beneficiaries make
possible and effective.

Were any group of nations to begin in
a businesslike and practicable way to do what
the individual fellow members of a social
order have now the means of doing, namely
to insure against risks of some insurable sort,
we should have a good reason to expect that
analogous and beneficent indirect workings
would ere long follow from even a modest be-
ginning in the art of international insurance.

The vast and unexpected transformations
which, as the experience of the nineteenth
century showed, insurance has introduced
into the social order of individual peoples are
of a type so much needed in the mutual rela-
tions of various nations that no opportunity
should be neglected to make such a beginning
in this new art of international insurance.

75


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


And since the present war seemed to me,
and still seems, to furnish a great, although
so tragic an opportunity to make such a be-
ginning, I could not forego the chance which
the moment offered to indicate, as I tried to
do in my book, the general nature of this op-
portunity as I then saw it. First sketches
of novel plans are very generally crude. The.
details of my own first statement of a mode
of beginning international insurance were, as I
myself said, wholly tentative, and were meant
to be subject to a thorough revision. For
such revision there has still been no sufficient
time. But I already see aspects of the subject
which need, as I believe, some recognition.

And I still believe that if insurance ‘“‘of
the nations, for the nations, and by the


>


nations” once appeared in a practicable
form, it would thenceforward not “vanish
from the earth,” but would tend, more than
any international influence has yet tended,
to “make the community of mankind visible,”
and so to further, gradually, perhaps slowly,
but powerfully, the cause of peace.
76


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE


Among the critics of my book there are,
(despite all the objections to my plan which
have been urged, and despite all the difficulties
that lie in the way of introducing into inter-
national relations the principle of insurance,)
some friendly counselors, who have said:
“If we could but see, or devise, some definite
procedure whereby a beginning could be
made in the insurance of any risks that
are common to several nations, then, were
this procedure such as, if proposed and under-
taken, would involve a feasible and prac-
ticable business of international insurance,
however modest this beginning, we should
be even now quite willing to look with favor
upon the discussion of the enterprise.”

In fact, for such critics, it is precisely the
way of beginning international insurance, on
however limited a scale, that they most want
to have explained. It is for such readers
and critics of my plan that the present
article is written.

Since the present war began, I have met
with a good many expressions which have

77


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


come from authoritative sources, and which
have related to the ways in which so destruc-
tive and widespread a conflict, especially if
it continues long, is likely to affect the future
conduct of the various forms of insurance
which already exist. Said, in effect, in a
letter to me, a man prominent in his own part
of the insurance world: “By its very nature
war tends to impair, and in the long run to
destroy, all sorts of interests which, apart
from war, have constituted or have deter-
mined insurable risks.”

Such comments seem to be obvious enough.
They are just now, as I believe, frequent.
But they so far leave unanswered the ques-
tion: “What shall be done, or can be done,
to protect, after the close of this war, those
vast common interests which the insurance
organizations now have in charge, but which
wars, and, above all, great wars, tend plainly
and dangerously to assail?” It is pre-
cisely this question to which my present dis-
cussion offers at least a partial answer.

The experts in each special branch of in-

78


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE `


surance must discover for themselves and
must define in their own way the relations
which war in general, and this war in particu-
lar, may be expected to have to the interests
which they represent. But there is one type
of problems, common to a number of distinct
forms of insurance, to which I may next direct
attention.

The problems to which I refer are those
presented by the sort of insurance business
which is called reinsurance. These problems
are certain to be very considerably affected
by the results of the present war. Some of
them are already much affected. This, as
I learn, upon inquiry from experts, is espe-
cially the case in some regions of the fire in-
surance field. But problems of reinsurance
also play their part in life insurance and in
marine insurance.

And at or after the close of the present war,
large alterations and readjustments will be
needed to adapt the future conduct of rein-
surance to the new conditions that will result
from the vast and widespread destruction

79


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


which the war has already produced, and will
continue to produce until it ends, and per-
haps long after it has ended.

Without trespassing upon the special field
of any expert in insurance, it seems reason-
able for a layman to venture a mere hint
regarding some of the ways in which this ef-
fect of the war upon the future conduct
of reinsurance may be expected to show itself.

At any time, whether in peace or in war,
an underwriter who has already undertaken
to carry a given risk, and who regards this
risk as altered in its probable value by events -
that have happened since he made his con-
tract, may, like anyone else who has to face
a problem which involves his own risks and
fortunes, seek to make a new contract with
a second insurer, who, for a consideration,
based upon a new estimate of the risk as it
appears in the light of the new facts, shall
undertake to carry and to fulfil an agreed
portion of the obligations which the first
underwriter insured.

Such reinsurance may take place in ex-

80


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE


ceptional ways, and may be confined to some
one case or to some few individual cases.
Reinsurance contracts of this sort are com-
paratively familiar in marine insurance, and
often come to be mentioned in the newspapers
of the day when some vessel is long overdue,
and when those underwriters who first insured
her now go into the market to reinsure their
risks. Such reinsurance contracts, when thus
confined to individual cases and made sub-
ject to no general prior agreements among
the various underwriters concerned, may
more or less closely approach the character
of mere wagers.

Reinsurance contracts possess, however,
the character and the social and financial
value of typical insurance transactions when
they are made systematically, not merely
because an underwriter desires not to carry
longer a risk previously assumed, but in ac-
cordance with general agreements whereby
various underwriters combine to carry in
union some class that includes several, some-
times many, different insurance undertakings.

a 81


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


This is the case if underwriters A and B
agree in advance that A may at pleasure,
or subject to certain rules, reisure with
B such and such of the risks that A under-
takes to carry; or, again, if A and B agree
that of some class of risks which A assumes
B shall be bound in advance to carry, for a
suitable consideration, such and such a pro-
portion. There are companies — some of
them especially prominent in the fire-insur-
ance field — which devote themselves mainly
to various types of reinsurance.

It will be noticed, on the basis of such facts,
that reinsurance has already become, in a
perfectly natural way, and quite apart from
any philosopher’s speculations, a business
which has a wide international extent and
importance; although, as yet, no group of
nations has taken part in the conduct of re-
insurance.

But as soon as we give a little attention
to this side of our problem, we stand face to
face with the fact that a perfectly definite
form of genuinely international insurance

82


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE


has already come, through the course of evo-
lution, very near, not only to general practi-
cability, but to actual existence. The na-
tions therefore already have at hand an
opportunity whose preciousness, as I believe,
can hardly be overrated. Let us briefly con-
sider what this opportunity is and implies.

That the State may, under certain condi-
tions, undertake to insure its subjects or some
class of its subjects, against various sorts of
risks, is already a principle well recognized ;
although, of course, the expediency of state
insurance in this or in that special form is a
topic that involves many matters of contro-
versy. Most of the forms of modern social
insurance involve a greater or less approach
to using the State as an insurer of its own
subjects. At the beginning of this war our
national Government undertook to carry for
our shippers some of the special risks to which
the war has subjected our commerce. To
speak of state insurance, then, is not to men-
tion a wholly strange idea.

If, however, there exist, as has been for

83


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


years the case, forms and plans of reinsurance
which involve interests that are already
international in their scope and extent, and
in the variety of the problems and interests
concerned; and if, at the conclusion of the
present war, the whole business of reinsur-
ance, in adjusting itself to the needs and de-
mands of the future, will have to solve prob-
lems that will deeply concern the under-
writers of many nations; why should not
these international problems of the future
of reinsurance, involving, as they necessarily
will do, the future conduct and agreements
of insurance corporations belonging to many
peoples, be put at once under the care of a
suitable international organ ?

That is, why should not we make, and
promptly make, a beginning at the inter-
national conduct of the business of rein-
surance? I refer especially to so much of
this business of reinsurance as will in fact,
at the end of the present war, demand, of
and for the underwriters of different nations,
readjustments, new contracts, new agree-

84


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE


ments among existing corporations belonging
to various peoples; while these new problems
and contracts will be too complex and
too difficult to be readily and adequately
and advantageously met by individual agree-
ments among the many widely distributed
private corporations that have to deal with
the now rapidly changing situation of the
whole insurance world, and that will have to
deal with this situation in the future.

What sort of international organ would
be suited to deal with these problems of
reinsurance? The answer is furnished, I
believe, by the International Board of Trus-
tees, which in my book I have defined and
proposed as the general organ for conducting
this sort of insurance.

The choice and formation of this Board
of Trustees would involve no new and strife-
breeding treaties among the various na-
tions. The board, when once constituted,
would have no political powers or functions
whatever. Its conduct of the trust funds
committed to its care would need no super-

85


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


vision from any arbitration tribunal. No
diplomatists would have any voice in its
doings. Its funds themselves could be pro-
tected, and the longer it existed the more
varied and effective this perfectly peaceful
self-protection would become, if the board
were at the outset constituted as, with reason-
able probability, it could be constituted.

Its business would consist, in general,
in selling various sorts of policies to the na-
tions which, for any reason, chose to have
dealings with the International Insurance
Trustees. Nations that made trust agree-
ments with the board could withdraw from .
them at pleasure, in a perfectly peaceful
way, by the expedient of surrendering, upon
terms determined by previous agreements,
the policies that they had come to possess.
The Board of Trustees would have a strong
interest in so planning its policies and in so
administering its international business as to
retain and increase its reputation as an in-
surance corporation deserving of patronage, ,
and able to offer policies which the insuring

86


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE


nations would find advantageous to them-
selves.

In my book I have in general defined the
nature, constitution, and possible functions
of this International Board of Insurance
Trustees. My critics have doubted whether
I could name a set of insurable risks, common
to various nations, and sufficiently attractive
to induce a group of nations to do a prac-
ticable business with the board when once
it had been formed.

My present article points out that, from
the end of the present war, there will be a
constant increase and variety of reinsurance
plans and contracts needed by the private
insurance companies of various nations. If
the conduct of this new reinsurance business
is not put under the care of an International
Board of Trustees, the business, of course,
will in one way or another come in time to
be done.

But, apart from international co-opera-
tion, directed to this end, such business
will depend upon special agreements made

87


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


amongst individual corporations belonging
to different nations, and will be subject to
complications and to competitive hindrances
such as must rapidly increase under the new
conditions. New and large investments of
private capital will be called for, and, for
some time, will be harder to obtain, to organ-
ize, and to adjust to current requirements
than was the case in the conduct of these
larger undertakings of the insurance world
before the war.

At this point, if only these new problems
of reinsurance receive the attention due to
the international scope, and to the vast im-
portance of the commercial interests involved,
it becomes possible to bring into existence a
corporation whose functions, at the very
beginning of its life, would be those of a
“treaty company” undertaking reinsurance.

Its first contracts might be made, on
the one hand, with those already existing pri-
vate corporations which in any nation desired
to reinsure some of their existing or future
risks, or which needed to find a systematic

88


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE


way of readjusting their business to the new
conditions.

On the other hand, the contracts of this
new treaty company from the very outset
might in part be made with those nations
which, for the sake of aiding their own under-
writers in dealing with the manifold and com-
plex problems of the new era, decided to
undertake, in whatever way they found suited
to the new conditions, the reinsurance of risks
which their own insurance corporations had
already undertaken to carry, or which these
insurance corporations desired in future to
undertake and to reinsure.

Such a business, or part thereof, may
actually come to constitute the task of some
new private corporation which will be formed
in the near future, after the present war.
There will no doubt be new “treaty com-
panies.” Some of them will do an interna-
tional business. They will be needed. They
will also need large new investments of capi-
tal in order to carry on their reinsurance busi-


ness.
89


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


What I propose is that this possible new
reinsurance corporation should actually be-
gin its life as the international board of in-
surance trustees which, in my book, I have
in outline described, and have proposed.
At the outset, although not for any very long
period, I propose that the functions of the
Board of Trustees be provisionally limited to
this perfectly practicable activity of rein-
surance.

The reasons why such a reinsurance board
of trustees would have ample reinsurance
business with which to begin its task have
now been indicated. The motives which
would at first tend to make such international
reinsurance attractive to the individual na-
tions have also been sketched.

The individual nation would at first be
induced to take out policies with the interna-
tional board by the desire, or by the actual
need, of aiding its own underwriters to adjust
their business to the complications of the
new life after this war, or at any rate in some
near future time. The board itself would

90


INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE


be an entirely new sort of international organ.
It would have as its most important task
that of finding and of making practicable
still other forms of international insurance.
Its indirect influence would from the very
beginning far outrank in importance its direct
accomplishment. Its mode of development
would be guided by experience.

At no point in the growth of its work
would any fundamental transformation of
human nature be needed as a condition prior
to its possessing a genuine, a peace-making,
and a potent influence. Once having been
constituted, with international reinsurance
for its first enterprise, it would gradually dis-
cover new enterprises, and would increase
both its direct workings and its indirect fur-
thering of the cause of humanity by each of
its new enterprises.

It would stand in opposition to none of
the other peace-making influences which may +
come to take part in international affairs.
It might well tend, in the long run, to trans-
form international relations as, in our recent

91


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


history, insurance has transformed the social
life of individual nations. I submit that the
time is ripe for the beginning, in this form,
of international insurance; and that the pros-
pect is impressive.

After forming this general plan I sub-
mitted it to my colleagues, Mr. W. B. Medli-
cott and Mr. H. B. Dow, Lecturers on Fire
and Life Insurance respectively in the Grad-
uate School of Business Administration at
Harvard. I have to thank both of them for
valuable suggestions with regard to rein-
surance, and for encouragement regarding
the general ideas involved. Mr. Medlicott,
in particular, is my authority for laying stress
upon the international importance which
reinsurance has already acquired in his own
field, and for the high organization which
the business in question already possesses.
While I thank my colleagues for their guid-
ance as to special facts, and for their general
approval of the spirit of my idea, I alone
am responsible for the principal proposals
contained in this paper.

92


CHAPTER V


THE FIRST ANNIVERSARY OF THE SINKING’
OF THE LUSITANIA. May 7ta, 1916.


NE of the simplest and most familiar

expressions of the innermost spirit of
the cult of the dead is contained in the great
word: “They rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them.” Upon this
word faith has spoken, and still speaks its
long and deep message; but science here
joins with faith, passionate sorrow with the
calmest of wise thoughtfulness, memory with
imagination, reason with fantasy, to keep the
meaning of this great word constantly new
in our minds. Science depends upon the
memory of what human experience, accu-
mulating from age to age, has taught man-
kind. Man’s civilization is the heir that has
inherited the treasures and the wisdom which
our fathers toiled to win. .The works of our
beloved dead do indeed follow them, because

93


t


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


our memory and our piety will not let go
our hold upon what is best and dearest in
the past; and for this reason each com-
memoration of those whom we reverence
is a momentous deed in our present lives.
When. we thus commemorate we are not
idle. We do not thus let go our hold upon
the life that is, or lose the present in a
mere dream about what is lost and gone.
No — commemoration is itself creation. A
wise communion with the dead renews
our own life, and restores to us their very
presence in a form that may be deeper,
truer, and more potent than the literal
human companionships of the old days ever
could have shown to beings who, like our-
selves, understand our present human friend-
ships so little, and so ill.

Our science as well as our arts, our loyalty
as well as our power to invent, our lawful-
ness and our new ways of living, our reason
as well as our imagination, depend upon
our power to remember, and to remember
with piety, what we inherit from the past

94


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


and so from the dead. The cult of the dead
is not only indeed one of the oldest and new-
est of human cults; it stands at the very
centre of the spiritual life of beings who,
like us, must live in time, and learn time’s
lessons through memories whose meaning
never becomes clear to us until death has
transformed the flying present into the irrevo-
cable past.

To-day we join in one more ceremony of
this oldest and newest of cults. We com-


memorate the dead of the Lusitania.


I


Let me begin this commemoration by
accepting a challenge suggested by the great
word in which the innermost spirit of the
cult of the dead finds its ancient expression.
“They rest from their labors, and their
works do follow them.” The challenge has
often been forced upon our attention since
the 7th of May, 1915, by the many enemies
who, — wagging their heads as they passed
by, watching the catastrophe from the peri-

95


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


scope of their submarine as the Lusitania
went down, scornfully jesting when they
heard in the streets of some of our own cities
that the Lusitania had gone down, rejoicing
in Germany to celebrate their glorious victory
over the women and children who sank with
her, proclaiming, as our German-American
fellow citizens have repeatedly proclaimed,
in our marketplaces, that those who went
down with the Lusitania met a fate properly
suited to their folly in taking passage on her
despite the warning of a merciless and hostile
foreign prince — answer our words of mourn-
ing for the victims of the Lusitania by saying
scornfully, and with their own airs of superior
insight and cultivation: ‘Those who sank
with the Lusitania left no works that could
follow them. For what had they done?
Why were they there? What made them
passengers on that ship? They were seek-
ing some private gain of their own, they were
looking for adventure. Perhaps this was
their wedding journey. Perhaps they had
some unworthy desire to meet personal friends
96


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


of theirs who happened to live amongst the
enemies of Germany. Perhaps, indirectly,
some commercial enterprise in which they
were engaged might tend, as Von Jagow said
‘in the most inhuman and insulting of his
official replies to President Wilson, ‘to kill
some of our brave soldiers.’

“Such and such alone were the works of
those who took passage on the Lusitania.
Germany warned them by means of adver-
tisements printed in American newspapers.
They neglected the warning. They went
down. ‘They proved the efficiency of German
civilization. They left no other memorial,
except indeed in fond hearts, in broken fami-
lies, and in desolated lives.” Superior minds,
possessed of the true German detachment of
spirit, have looked with contempt, ever since
the 7th of May, 1915, upon the fate of these
victims of folly. The only memorial that
the cultivated German mind would suggest
for them would be some sort of a settlement
of accounts with the Cunard company, with
the various allied powers, and perhaps with

H 97


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


other enemies of Germany, at home here in
America and elsewhere. Whatever stands
in the way of the interests of Germany is self-
evidently unworthy. Whoever dies while do-
ing what the German prince has warned him
through the newspapers not to do is un-
worthy of consideration. Let him be for-
gotten.

These enemies of our country and of man-
kind who have viewed the Lusitania disaster
in this light live, some of them, in Germany,
and some of them in our own country.
Since, at the close of last January, I had the
honor to say something before this company
regarding the rights and duties of Americans
in the present war, and since I then mentioned
the destruction of the Lusitania, I have
had the privilege of hearing in a new form
from the enemies of my country and of man-
kind expressions of the challenge which I
have just outlined. I repeat the challenge.
What did the victims of the Lusitania ac-
complish? What were their works that their
works should follow them? What remains

98


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


of the great tragedy of the Lusitania, but the
Weeping eyes of the mourners, the heart-
break, the desolation, the scorn and contempt
of the German prince and people, of the un-
derlings who do his work, and of those cul-
tivated minds amongst our German fellow
citizens who have always rejoiced in the Lusi-
tania disaster, have regarded it as due to the
skill and prowess of a superior civilization,
and have despised us for viewing the destruc-
tion of the Lusitania as: Americans and as


lovers of mankind ought to view it?


I have stated the challenge. I accept it.
It is a privilege to do so. Von Jagow, one
of these scorners who despise us for honoring
our beloved dead of the Lusitania, spoke
the official word on behalf of his own country.
The effective public opinion of his own coun-
trymen has thus far agreed with him. Others
amongst these same scorners write upon oc-
casion for some of our own newspapers in this
country. Some of them are still colleagues
of my own in various academic institutions.

99


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


But when a German prince, or statesman, or
diplomat, or fellow citizen, whether he was
formerly my friend or not, shows by his words
that he views with scorn our commemora-
` tion of the dead of the Lusitania, he thereby
decides that he is, so long as he remains of
this mind, one whom I shall treat, “as a
heathen and a publican.” Clear lines must
be drawn somewhere. I draw them at this
point, and I shall now tell you why. We
honor our dead of the Lusitania because we
know that their works do follow them, and
we honor these works. Whoever, knowing
the facts, scorns this our reverence, declares
himself cut off in spirit from the community
of mankind, and can be restored to that com-
munity only after he changes his mind and
mends his manners. Until then, I rejoice
whenever he expresses his scorn by writing
to me a so-called open letter, or a private
letter of objection, or perhaps of something
which he supposes to be abuse that I shall
find painful. I shall rejoice if, according
to his present German lights, he despitefully
100


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


uses me. He has his guides. I am glad to
be privileged to follow in my own stumbling
way my own conscience. He believes himself
to have his own superior judgment, perhaps
German, perhaps hyphenated, certainly not
humane in its outcome. I am providentially
limited to my own discretion, and I rejoice
in the fact. If I seem to borrow some of the
language of personal sentiment, that is þe-
cause we who mourn have only our own eyes
to weep with, and to see with, our own memo-
ries with which to sanctify our own deeds of
commemoration, our own reverence where-


with to express our loyalty.


II


“Their works do follow them.” Of what
works done by the victims of the Lusitania
disaster do I speak when I repeat these
ancient words?

The other day, in order to see the mat-
ter through some other eyes than mine, I
turned to a friend to whom this occasion
has an especial meaning. “What,” I asked,

101


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


“is the most important fact, from your point
of view as a relative of one lost on the Lusi-
tania, about the significance of this disaster ?”’
I found my friend’s reply obviously true, but
so stated as to put the matter in a novel
light, as when in the spring the morning sun-
shine finds on the familiar wall of your room
some spot, some picture, some pattern of wall
paper which has been in the same place all
winter, and for years past, though now the
new sunlight gives it in just this May morning
a new significance.


>


“Among the young men,” said my friend,
“who went down with the Lusitania, there
were some who were there because they were
of a type which our country most needs —
men who, when their profession gives them a
definite call, are ready to go, if need be, to
the ends of the earth, in order to meet that
call, even if a foreign prince suddenly threatens
them with his wrath, and orders them not to
go on their quest, but to behave as if they
were subjects of his own. The American
youth who first binds himself by a solemn
102


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


professional promise to meet a call which
has to do with his life’s business, and then
refuses to fulfil that call, merely because
some unexpected act of princes or of peo-
ples makes the call appear dangerous, is
not acting as we want our young men to
act. All great callings are dangerous, al-
though each has its own dangers. Some
of these are dangers of travel. Such dangers
may be suddenly created by the arbitrary
decree of a foreign prince or people. A na-
tion of cowards would be sure that its young
men would adjust their professional under-
takings to their timidity, and consequently,
on occasion, to the caprices of a foreign ruler
who chose to advertise his threats in our
newspapers. Do we want our nation to con-
sist of such cowards? Would a nation made
up of such cowards fulfil the purpose for which
our fathers toiled and died? Is that the
sort of professional courage and loyalty that
we want to have the young men of the
future exemplify? If so, then why talk
henceforth about encouraging our nation
103


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


to be prepared in a military sense for pos-
sible emergencies? If our young men are
to have no preparedness for the serious
and sudden risks of life, why prate of na-
tional preparedness, or extol the military
virtues? Enough — Whatever other passen-
gers of the Lusitania were doing, these
men” (and here my friend mentioned the
names of several who died on the Lusi-
tania) “had accepted professional tasks no
one of which had anything whatever to do
with the war. These men were going to
meet their engagements.”

The word which my friend thus gave to
me in answer to my question is by good
fortune identical in spirit with the word
of Benjamin Franklin which has been used
on the cards of announcement as one of
the mottoes of this meeting. Franklin
says, “They that can give up essential lib-
erty to obtain a little temporary safety, de-
serve neither liberty nor safety.” My friend,
intuitively enlightened by sorrow, said some-
thing deeper than the words of Franklin.

104


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


Our liberties are dear to us and ought to be
so. Our young professional men should be
trained to be prepared for dangerous under-
takings and dutifully to keep their promises
when once these are made. Ralph Waldo
Emerson said the well-known word about
the conditions under which ‘‘’Tis man’s perdi-
tion to be safe.” Such conditions are realized
when men make professional engagements.
Some of the young men who went down on
the Lusitania were in this position. They
met the requirements defined by Franklin’s
word and by Emerson’s line about the safety
that is perdition. We can speak of them
as vindicating American rights, and reverence
them for their part in doing American duties.
They are the men whom we want. Since
they met death in such a task, we honor their
memory not merely as a matter of personal
grief, but as an act of reverence and piety.
Blessed are they : Their works do follow them.
Those who scorn us for thus honoring their
memory are our enemies as well as enemies
of all that makes the common life of humanity
105


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


a possible ideal. Any such scorner of our
dead should be to each of us, in the name
of humanity, “a heathen and a publican”
so long as this is his deliberate mind, as
these are his intended words, as these are
his manners, as such is his view of a man’s
business.
Il

To say this is not to speak lightly,
harshly, or uncharitably. It is to state the
_ simple and universal moral fact. And this
is my reply to the challenge which I have
defined. This is why we commemorate the
dead of the Lusitania. Some of them at
least were viewing life and duty as Frank-
lin, as Emerson, and as all the wisest of
our guides want us to view life. The Ger-
mans know this truth as a general truth
when they talk of the loyalty and courage
of their own citizens. It is their contempt
for our piety in case of our own dead that
constitutes, in this instance of the Lusi-
tania, their own sin against the Holy Ghost,
a sin officially committed by their Gov-

106


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


ernment from the moment when the sub-
marine policy was authorized, a sin which
as President Wilson quite truthfully pointed
out to us in his recent message, has been
steadily and officially committed in the deal-
ings of the German Government with our
own during the whole of the past year.

There is another and less austerely worded
version of the moral position of the passengers
on the Lusitania which I may quote from the
admirable account of Mr. Charles Lauriat,
in his little volume, “The Lusitania’s Last
Voyage.”

“Naturally I saw the warning issued by
the Imperial German embassy, and pub-
lished in all the New York papers of May
1. This notice appeared in some of the
New York papers beside the advertisement
of the proposed sailings of the Cunard line.
Like many other passengers I gave the notice
no serious thought. No idea of cancelling
my trip occurred to me. I did not sail with
a feeling of defiance towards the embassy,
either for the notice or for any action that

107


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


might follow. But I admit that I did not
think any human being with a drop of red
blood in his veins could issue an order to sink
a passenger steamer without at least giving
the women and children a chance to get away.
True, it was a ship of a belligerent nation and
carried citizens of countries with which Ger-
many was at war. But I could not believe
their policy of ‘frightfulness’ would be carried
to such an extent as events afterwards proved.
The steamer did have in her cargo some am-
munition, but taking all things into consider-
ation I did not believe an order would be
given to torpedo this boat without warning
and without an opportunity being given to
passengers to take to the boats. The order
is now a proven fact in history.”

In these words Mr. Lauriat has very nat-
urally laid stress upon the very motive
which Franklin’s motto emphasizes. It is
a just motive. My present interest is to
emphasize the fact that the other motive,
the motive that my friend in speaking of
her own relative has recently emphasized to

108


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


me, is also a just and a genuine motive,
and names a work that follows the lives
and the memories of the victims of the Lu-
sttania. They were not only asserting their
rights, they were not only vindicating their
liberties, they were not only trusting to
the dignity and to the privileges of human-
ity which Germany has deliberately betrayed,
and which our enemies have through all this
year been scorning. They were doing their
duty. And that is why we reverence their
memory. They were, I say, doing their duty.

And now I may speak not merely of the
professional men, and not merely of the
business men whose obligations at that
time took them abroad, but of the mothers
who went down with the Lusitania, of their
babes whom the will of Germany wantonly
sacrificed, and whose fate the heathen and
the publicans aforesaid desire us to remember
with scorn, if we remember them at all. I
may speak also of the young bride, well re-
membered here in Boston, who could not know
beforehand, when she was wedded amongst

109


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


her friends in this city, that Germany intended
to murder her as an act of reprisal against
England. The young bride also is choosing
both her privilege and her duty. If she
dies for her devotion, her works do follow
her, however lightly the scorners scoff at
the desolation which their efficiency wrought.
Upon the pathetic aspect of this tragedy it is
not fitting nor clarifying to speak too pas-
sionately. But the works of innocent victims
do follow them. The deep damnation of
their taking off remains a lasting stain upon
those who slew them, and upon the heathen
and the publicans who still make sport of their
doom.

Among these great sorrows we may for
the moment fix our attention in order that
once more, through the peephole of the
passing experience, we may survey the
desolation that Germany has wrought since
the summer of 1914. The incident is but
one. Its meaning is universal.

A Scotch mother took her babes with
her on the Lusitania. When mothers go

110


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


with their babies to their old home, they
are presumably doing their duty, as well
as asserting the rights of humanity. They
are entitled to the protection of all civilized
‘mankind. This woman was travelling on
a peaceful passenger steamer. The fate
of her babies was determined by a deliber-
ate official order.

A friend of mine, not long after the sink-
ing of the Lusitania, read the following in-
cident, and was moved almost automatically,
and without any reflection, to express the
reported facts in the form of the verses that
I shall venture to read to you. The incident,
as the paper contained it, I will first read
to you; then the verses of my friend shall
express how the matter very naturally re-
states itself to a kindly imagination.

A survivor, so said the newspaper, told
the pathetic tale of a young Scotch mother
who had clung to her two babies until they
were picked up by a boat, only to find that
they had already perished in her arms. On
being told that all the space was needed for

111


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


those who could be saved, she said to the
sailors, who wanted to bury the babies at
sea, “Give me my bonnie bairns. God
gave them to me to keep and they are mine
to bury.” She then laid them back in the
water with her own hands. My friend’s?
imagination made of this newspaper word the
following verses called,


A Youne Scotco Woman’s LAMENT


Oh, where do my bonnie bairns lie
That God gave me to keep —
And what is their lullaby ?
Only the dirge of the deep,
Only the winds and the waves
That moan where my little ones sleep,
Oh, cold and deep are their graves —
Ah me for the hearts that weep. |


I held them close to my heart
In the bitter wash of the sea,
And nothing could tear us apart,
For God gave them to me.
But when I thought them saved

God set their spirits free.
Their place a mother craved —
I laid them back in the sea.


1“The friend” is Katharine Royce, my wife, who wrote these
verses about May 15, 1915.


112


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


I gave them back to God —
To God who called them home,
But I longed for the fresh, green sod
Instead of the salt sea foam,
Yet I bless that mother and child
Saved in my babies’ room.
My bairns are undefiled
And God has called them home.


“Their works do follow them.” It has
always been the characteristic faith of Chris-
tianity that the salvation of mankind results
from the consequences that follow the death
of an innocent man. Therefore, while from
the Apostle Paul onward Christianity has
always included within it a militant motive,
and has never been merely a religion of non-
resistance, but has counselled the faithful
to put on the whole armor of righteousness
and to enter into warfare with principalities
and powers of evil, the central Christian
motive, for the church militant, as well as
for its Lord, has been a triumph won
through contemplating the sufferings and
death of its innocent founder rather than a
desire to avenge even the bitterest of his

I 113


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


wrongs. The treason of Judas was, for early
Christianity, a fact, and a fact without which
the salvation of mankind could not have been
accomplished. “Needs be that offences
come, but woe to him by whom they come.”
Yet the atonement accomplished by the tri-
umph of the risen Lord was conceived as
something attained through the precious-
ness of his work, and not merely through
the fact that when he arose the wrongs
which Satan had done to mankind were
avenged, or became certain to be avenged
at the last day. Christianity is a religion
of love rather than of vengeance, not be-
cause it is a religion of non-resistance, for,
since the Apostle Paul, it never has been
a religion of non-resistance, but because it
has conceived that the positive value of the
atoning work attributed to Christ is greater
than the worst that even the power of hell
can accomplish. The Christian Church had
believed itself saved through the charity and
the unity of spirit which results from the
work of Christ, and not merely by the fact
114


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


that Judas very properly went and hanged
himself, or even that Satan at the last day is
to be cast into the pit and the sufferings of
man thus avenged.

When we lament the innocent dead, their
best memorial resembles what the Chris-
tian church has always regarded as the
memorial left in consequence of the death
of its Lord. The death of Christ accord-
ing to the teachings of the religious: imagi-
nation of Christianity saves because, through
the memory of his death all those whom, in
the great words of the Fourth Gospel, the
Father has given him are, or will become
“One even as we” (namely the Father and
the Son) “are One.” So the best memorial
of our dead consists in the fact that through
what they have suffered those who inherit
their work are brought together, are loyally
united, are inspired to brotherhood and unity.
When we remember this fact it may still be
the case that we must resolutely fight against
the spirit to which such crimes are due. Still
we best see and feel how their works do fol-

115


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


low them when we consider some facts about
the Lusitania disaster and its consequences,
which I now may best bring before you in
words not my own.

A French lady, formerly a successful
teacher and an honored scholar in this
country, wrote soon after the sinking of
the Lusitania a letter of condolence to the
friend whom I have already mentioned,
whose young relative died on the Lusi-
tania while on his way to meet a profes-
sional duty. The writer of the letter is her-
self a woman of beautiful character and of
deep though very sorrowful experience. After
speaking of the young professional man whom
I have already mentioned, she added some
comments which I am permitted to read to
you. Though written nearly a year ago,
they stand for a truth which the subsequent
vicissitudes of warfare have only served
to render more obvious and more inspir-
ing. The writer, herself familiar with English
through a long residence in this country,
but then and ever since deeply involved in

116


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


the cares at home in her country, wrote
thus :

“We feel here that the Lusitania’s vic-
tims are heroes: in boarding the ship, in
spite of Germany’s mean warnings, they
proclaimed the right of humanity; they are
martyrs of a great cause. Their death has
not been useless either; it has made the
way clearer for huge throngs who were
still puzzled, it has unveiled the face of
Germany’s sin—the sin of Cain. We all
know better what we are fighting for, and
as all noble deaths are productive of energy,
these deaths have strengthened our soldiers’
purpose and doubled their efficiency.

“Tt is a strange thing to live during such
a war. There ts no doubt about the purify-
ing quality of sorrow, for nations as well
as for individuals. Here, we see every day
where our national faults were leading us;
we learn a new lesson almost every hour.
We are very willing to be taught, too. We
try hard to amend. May we try hard
enough to deserve pardon! One of many

117


é


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


reasons for believing in the success of the
Allies is the cocksure attitude of Germany
— she does not seem to begin to see her
faults, which means that she is doomed.
But how hard is the struggle! In Paris
the population are quite adapted to the
few material changes brought by the war;
it is even surprising how quickly they
adapted themselves; if we are to be re-
proached with too quick a temper in every-
day life, when serious things come we are
a very unhysterical, placid people indeed!
You remember, this could be noticed al-
ready a few years ago during the floods.
The real hardship is the moral strain; one
lives under a gray cloud with perpetual
anxiety that should the cloud tear open
some horrible sight will be seen. I mean
here the people at home, for our soldiers,
strange to say, do not suffer from that ten-
sion; they remain cheerful, not to say joyous,
ready for a fight and ready for a joke, grim
in the fight and childlike in between actions.
Yesterday, at one of the stations, I saw crowds
118


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


of “permissionaires’ that is, trenchmen given
a four days’ leave, their first leave since last
August. Such a bunch of college boys, al-
though some were around forty. All were
hale, sturdy, supple; surely the hard life in
the trenches had not impaired their health!
I believe that this war will teach our middle
classes more about sport, hygiene and out
of doors life than loads of books would!
It teaches our country people too; the women
learn to get over old prejudices, they asso-
ciate to buy, or rent agricultural machinery ;
they are better neighbors — they are really
wonderful, for the work gets done as if the
men were there. I think they are very
brave, too, they do not cry. And what a
solace to think of nature’s serenity. Yes,
‘she meets with smiles our bitter grief.’ I
love to think of her eternal youth and beauty,
dear nature, while human beings can be so


horrible.”


I can hardly better close this, my me-
morial word regarding the victims of the
119


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


Lusitania, than by this beautiful expression
of the mind of one of our allies. The com-
munity of mankind has gained and is gain-
ing a new unity through the memory of
these innocent victims of a cruel outrage.
The outrage was planned in order that the
spoiler should triumph. It was planned by
those who have sought both to distract
and degrade our own country in the inter-
est of a foreign prince, and of a people who
have lost touch, for the time, with their
own spiritual dignity. But the outrage has
unified the allies who are opposed to Ger-
many as the most ingenious enemy of Ger-
many could never before have hoped to
unify them. To us in America the outrage
has taught a lesson which we much needed,
and which Germany has been teaching us,
with unwearied persistence, ever since the
submarine policy was initiated. When, last
January, I ventured to express the hope
that we should soon be able to stand mor-
ally and clearly in opposition to the ene-
mies of mankind, some who heard me
120


LUSITANIA ADDRESS


thought my form of expression extreme.
President Wilson’s last message to Con-
gress has now fully justified in its own spirit
the position which I had the honor to de-
fend before you. To-day we are nearer than
ever, not merely to the clear knowledge,
but to the official national expression of
what our duty as Americans is in this crisis.
This clearness we owe, this inspiring glimpse
of the unity of mankind we also owe, to the
memory and to the lesson of the Lusitania
disaster. Their works do follow them. It
is our present duty to do our best that this
lesson shall not be forgotten, and that these
works shall still follow those who died on
the Lusitania.


121


CHAPTER VI


WORDS OF PROFESSOR ROYCE AT THE
WALTON HOTEL AT PHILADELPHIA,
DECEMBER 29, 1915!


WAS born in 1855 in California. My

native town was a mining town in the
Sierra Nevada, —a place five or six years
older than myself. My earliest recollections
include a very frequent wonder as to what
my elders meant when they said that this
was a new community. I frequently looked
at the vestiges left by the former diggings of
miners, saw that many pine logs were rotten,
and that a miner’s grave was to be found in
a lonely place not far from my own house.
Plainly men had lived and died thereabouts.


t After the dinner at the Walton Hotel, Professor Royce, in
acknowledgment of the kindness of his friends, made a brief state-
ment, largely autobiographical in its character. The following is
a summary of this statement, and is founded upon some notes which
friends present amongst the guests have kindly supplied, to aid the
speaker to remind his friends of the spirit of what he tried to express.


122


AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH


I dimly reflected that this sort of life had
apparently been going on ever since men
dwelt in that land. The logs and the grave
looked old. The sunsets were beautiful. The
wide prospects when one looked across the
Sacramento Valley were impressive, and had
long interested the people of whose love for
my country I heard much. What was there
then in this place that ought to be called new,
or for that matter, crude? I “wondered,
and gradually came to feel that part of my
life’s business was to find out what all this
wonder meant. My earliest teachers in phi-
losophy were my mother, whose private school,
held for some years in our own house, [ at-
tended, and my sisters, who were all older
than myself, and one of whom taught me to
read. In my home I heard the Bible very
frequently read, and very greatly enjoyed
my mother’s reading of Bible stories, al-
though, so far as I remember, I was very gen-
erally dissatisfied with the requirements of
observance of Sundays, which stand out some-
what prominently in my memory. Our home
123


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


training in these respects was not, as I now
think, at all excessively strict. But without
being aware of the fact, I was a born non-
conformist. The Bible stories fascinated me.
The observance of Sunday aroused from an
early time a certain more or less passive re-
sistance, which was stubborn, although sel-
dom, I think, openly rebellious.

The earliest connected story that I inde-
pendently read was the Apocalypse, from a
large print New Testament, which I found
on the table in our living room. The Apoc-
alypse did not tend to teach me early to
acquire very clear ideas. On the other hand,
I did early receive a great deal of training in
dialectics, from the sister nearest to me in
age. She was three years my senior. She
was very patiently persistent in showing me
the truth. I was nearly as persistent in
maintaining my own views. Since she was
patient, I believe that we seldom quarrelled
in any violent way. But on occasion, as I
remember, our dear mother used, when the
wrangling grew too philosophical, to. set me

124


AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH


the task of keeping still for an hour. The
training was needed, but it was never wholly
effective in suppressing for any great length of -
time the dialectical insistence.

I was not a very active boy. I had no
physical skill or agility. I was timid and
ineffective, but seem to have been, on the
whole, prevailingly cheerful, and not extremely
irritable, although I was certainly more or
less given to petty mischief, in so far as my
sisters did not succeed in keeping me under
their kindly watch.

Since I grew during the time of the civil
war, heard a good deal about it from people
near me, but saw nothing of the consequences
of the war through any closer inspection, I
remained as vague about this matter as about
most other life problems, — vague but often
enthusiastic. My earliest great patriotic ex-
perience came at the end of the civil war,
when the news of the assassination of Lin-
coln reached us. Thenceforth, as I believe,
I had a country as well as a religious interest.
Both of these were ineffective interests, ex-

125


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


cept in so far as they were attached to the
already mentioned enthusiasms, and were
clarified and directed by the influence of my
mother and sisters. Of boys outside the
household I so far knew comparatively little,
but had a considerable tendency, as I remem-
ber, to preach down to what I supposed to
be the level of these other boys, — a predis-
position which did not prepare me for social
success in the place in which I was destined
to pass the next stage of my development,
namely San Francisco.

When we went to live in San Francisco, I
for the first time saw, first San Francisco
Bay, and then the Ocean itself, which fasci-
nated me, but which for a long time taught
me little.

About June, 1866, I began to attend a large
Grammar School in San Francisco. I was
one of about a thousand boys. The ways
of training were new to me. My comrades
very generally found me disagreeably strik-
ing in my appearance, by reason of the fact
that I was redheaded, freckled, countrified,

126


AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH


quaint, and unable to play boys’ games. The
boys in question gave me my first introduc-
tion to the “majesty of the community.”
The introduction was impressively disciplin-
ary and persistent. On the whole it seemed
to me “not joyous but grievous.” In the
end it probably proved to be for my good.
Many years later, in a lecture contained in
the first volume of my Problem of Christian-
ity, I summarized what I remember of the
lesson of the training which my schoolmates
very frequently gave me, in what I there have
to say about the meaning which lies behind
the Pauline doctrine of original sin, as set
forth in the seventh chapter of the Epistle
to the Romans.

Yet my mates were not wholly unkind,
and I remember lifelong friendships which
I formed in that Grammar School, and which
I still can enjoy whenever I meet certain
of my dear California friends.

In the year 1871, I began to attend the
University of California, where I received


my first degree in 1875.
127


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


The principal philosophical influences of
my undergraduate years were: 1. The really
very great and deep effect produced upon me
by the teaching of Professor Joseph LeConte,
— himself a former pupil of Agassiz, a geolo-
gist, a comparatively early defender and ex-
- ponent of the Darwinian theory, and a great
light in the firmament of the University of
California of those days;. 2. The personal
influence of Edward Rowland Sill, who was
my teacher in English, during the last two
years of my undergraduate life; 3. The
literary influence of John Stuart Mill and of
Herbert Spencer, both of whom I read during
those years. There was, at that time, no
regular undergraduate course in philosophy
at the University of California.

After graduation I studied in Germany,
and later at the Johns Hopkins University,
still later returning a while to the University
of California from 1878 to 1882. Since 1882
I have been working at Harvard. In Ger-
many I heard Lotze at Göttingen, and was
for a while strongly under his influence.

128


AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH


The reading of Schopenhauer was another
strong influence during my life as a student
in Germany. I long paid a great deal of at-
tention to the philosophy of Kant. But
during the years before 1890, I never sup-
posed myself to be very strongly under the *
influence of Hegel, nor yet of Green, nor of |
either of the Cairds. I should confess to the
charge of having been, during my German
period of study, a good deal under the influ-
ence of the Romantic School, whose philoso-
phy of poetry I read and expounded with a
good deal of diligence. But I early cherished
a strong interest in logic, and long desired to
get a fair knowledge of mathematics.

When I review this whole process, I strongly
feel that my deepest motives and problems
have centred about the Idea of the Com-
munity, although this idea has only come
gradually to my clear consciousness. This
was what I was intensely feeling, in the days
when my sisters and I looked across the
Sacramento Valley, and wondered about the X
great world beyond our mountains. This

K 129


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


was what I failed to understand when my
mates taught me those instructive lessons
in San Francisco. This was that which I
tried to understand when I went to Germany.
I have been unpractical, — always socially
ineffective as regards genuine “team play,”
ignorant of politics, an ineffective member
of committees, and a poor helper of concrete
social enterprises. Meanwhile I have always
been, as in my childhood, a good deal of a
nonconformist, and disposed to a certain
rebellion. An English cousin of mine not
long since told me that, according to a family ©
tradition current in his community, a com-
mon ancestor of ours was one of the guards
who stood about the scaffold of Charles the
First. I can easily mention the Monarch in
modern Europe, in the guard about whose
scaffold I should most cheerfully stand, if
he had any scaffold. So much of the spirit
that opposes the community I have and have
always had in me, simply, elementally, deeply.
Over against this natural ineffectiveness in
serving the community, and over against this
130


AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH


rebellion, there has always stood the interest
which has taught me what I nowadays try y x
to express by teaching that we are saved
through the community.

The resulting doctrine of life and of the
nature of truth and of reality which I have
tried to work out, to connect with logical
and metaphysical issues, and to teach to my
classes, now seems to me not so much roman-
ticism, as a fondness for defining, for articu-
lating, and for expounding the perfectly real, 4
concrete, and literal life of what we idealists
call the ‘‘ spirit,” in a sense which is indeed
Pauline, but not merely mystical, super-
individual; not merely romantic, difficult
to understand, but perfectly capable of exact v
and logical statement.

The best concrete instance of the life of a
community with which I have had the privi-
lege to become well acquainted has been
furnished to me by my own Seminary, one
whose meetings you have so kindly and gra-
ciously permitted me to attend as leader, on *
this to me so precious occasion.

131


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


. . . But why should you give so kind an
attention to me at a moment when the deepest,
the most vital, and the most practical inter-
est of the whole community of mankind are
indeed imperilled, when the spirit of man-
kind is overwhelmed with a cruel and un-~
deserved sorrow, when the enemies of mankind
often seem as if they were about to triumph ?

Let me simply say in closing, how deeply
the crisis of this moment impresses me, and
how keenly I feel the bitterness of being un-
able to do anything for the Great Community
except to thank you for your great kindness,
and to hope that we and the Community
shall see better times together. Certainly
unless the enemies of mankind are duly re-
buked by the results of this war, I, for one,
do not wish to survive the crisis. Let me then
venture, as I close, to quote to you certain
words of the poet Swinburne. You will
find them in his Songs before Sunrise. Let
the poet and prophet speak. He voices the
spirit of that for which, in my poor way, I
have always in my weakness been working. _

132


AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH


A WATCH IN THE NIGHT
By A. C. SWINBURNE


Watchman, what of the night ? —
Storm and thunder and rain,
Lights that waver and wane,
Leaving the watchfires unlit.
Only the balefires are bright,
And the flash of the lamps now and then
From a palace where spoilers sit,
Trampling the children of men.


Prophet, what of the night ? —
I stand by the verge of the sea,
Banished, uncomforted, free,
Hearing the noise of the waves
And sudden flashes that smite
Some man’s tyrannous head,
Thundering, heard among graves
That hide the hosts of his dead.


Mourners, what of the night ? —
All night through without sleep
We weep, and we weep, and we weep.
Who shall give us our sons?
Beaks of raven and kite,
Mouths of wolf and of hound,
Give us them back whom the guns
Shot for you dead on the ground.


Dead men, what of the night ? —
Cannon and scaffold and sword,


133


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


Horror of gibbet and cord,
Mowed us as sheaves for the grave,
Mowed us down for the right.

We do not grudge or repent.
Freely to freedom we gave

Pledges, till life should be spent.


Statesman, what of the night ? —
The night will last me my time.
The gold on a crown or a crime

Looks well enough yet by the lamps.

Have we not fingers to write,

Lips to swear at a need?

Then, when danger decamps,

Bury the word with the deed.


Exile, what of the night ? —
The tides and the hours run out,
The seasons of death and of doubt,
The night-watches bitter and sore.
In the quicksands leftward and right
My feet sink down under me;
But I know the scents of the shore
And the broad blown breaths of the sea.


Captives, what of the night ? —
It rains outside overhead
Always, a rain that is red,
And our faces are soiled with the rain.
Here in the season’s despite
Day-time and night-time are one,
Till the curse of the kings and the chain
Break, and their toils be undone.


134


AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH


Princes, what of the night ? —
Night with pestilent breath
Feeds us, children of death,

Clothes us close with her gloom.

Rapine and famine and fright
Crouch at our feet and are fed.

Earth where we pass is a tomb,
Life where we triumph is dead.


Martyrs, what of the night ? —
Nay, is it night with you yet?
We, for our part, we forget

What night was, if it were.

The loud red mouths of the fight
Are silent and shut where we are.

In our eyes the tempestuous air
Shines as the face of a star.


Europe, what of the night ? —
Ask of heaven, and the sea,
And my babes on the bosom of me,
Nations of mine, but ungrown.
There is one who shall surely requite
All that endure or that err:
She can answer alone:
Ask not of me, but of her.


Liberty, what of the night ? —

I feel not the red rains fall,
Hear not the tempest at all,
Nor thunder in heaven any more.

All the distance is white


135


THE HOPE OF THE GREAT COMMUNITY


With the soundless feet of the sun.
Night, with the woes that it wore,
Night is over and done.


May the light soon dawn. May the word
of the poet and prophet soon come true. This
is my closing greeting to you.


Printed in the United States of America,


136


HE following pages contain advertisements of


Macmillan books by the same author.


The Problem of Christianity


IN TWO VOLUMES


By Josian Royce, LL.D., Litt. D.


Professor of the History of Philosophy, Harvard University; Author of “ Out<
lines of Psychology,” “The Philosophy of Loyalty,” “ William James,” etc.


Vol. I. The Christian Doctrine of Life.
Vol. Ii. The Real World and the Christian Ideas.


Cloth, r2mo, Set, $3.50


A work of great importance to all students of religion and philosophy
and to the general reader who keeps abreast with progress in these fields
is Dr. Josiah Royce’s “The Problem of Christianity,” in two volumes,
the first, “The Christian Doctrine of Life,” and, the second, “The Real
World and the Christian Ideas.”

Volume I is a study of the human and empirical aspects of some of the
leading ideas of Christianity; Volume IL deals with the technically
metaphysical problems to which these ideas give rise. The two volumes
are contrasted in their methods, the first discussing religious experience,
the second dealing with its metaphysical foundations. They are, how-
ever, closely connected in their purposes, and at the end the relations
between the metaphysical and the empirical aspects of the whole under-
taking are reviewed.

The “Christian Ideas” which Dr. Royce treats as “leading and es-
sential” are, first, the Idea of the ‘‘ Community,” historically represented y
by the Church; second; the Idea of the “Lost State of the Natural Man,”
and the third, the Idea of “Atonement,” together with the somewhat
more general Idea of “Saving Grace.”

“These three,” Dr. Royce says, “have a close relation to a doctrine
of life which, duly generalized, can be, at least in part, studied as a purely
human ‘philosophy of loyalty’ and can be estimated in empirical terms
apart from any use of technical dogmas and apart from any metaphysical
opinion. . . . Nevertheless no purely empirical study of the Christian
doctrine of life can, by itself, suffice to answer our main questions. It is
indeed necessary to consider the basis in human nature which the religion
of loyalty possesses and to portray the relation of this religion to the
social experience of mankind. To this task the first part of these lectures
is confined, but such a preliminary study sends us beyond itself.

The second part of these lectures considers the neglected philosophical
problem of the sense in which the community and its Spirit are realities.”


PUBLISHED BY


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York


BY THE SAME AUTHOR
“THE GOSPEL OF IDEALS”


William James and Other Essays
On the Philosophy of Life


Cloth, 12mo, $1.50


“ The Essays are full of interest and sympathy.” — The Continent.


“For students this volume will have abounding interest, and serious
readers, even if not technically trained, will follow the discussions with
profit. Professor Royce has, with Professor James, the rare gift of translat-
ing the thinking of the scholar into the language of the plain people.” —
Chicago Record-Herald.


“ All of the Essays are keen, eloquent, and suggestive.” — Boston Herald.


“A BOOK FOR EVERY PARENT AND THINKER”
Outlines of Psychology


AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE WITH
SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS


Cloth, 12mo, 379 pages, $1.00


“Obviously a treatise upon psychology that deals with the subject with
this broad, free, strong handling is suggestive and constructive; helps us
to organize our ideas; throws out new light; cannot be disregarded by the
students of the mind. The treatise, however, has a special value in practical
applications. These are not ‘helps to the teacher,’ they are criticisms upon
life and society and are helps to the thinker who is a teacher.” — W. E.
CHANCELLOR in the Journal of Pedagogy.


“The reader of this book, who, wishing to make an elementary study
of the inner mind of the world, takes Professor Royce for his guide, will
find himself increasingly in serious companionship with a winsome as well
as a knowing leader.” — Chicago Tribune,


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York


Race Questions, Provincialism, and Other
American Problems


By JOSIAH ROYCE


Professor of the History of Philosophy, Harvard University; ‘author
of “The Philosophy of Loyalty,” etc.


Cloth, 12mo, $1.25


“This volume makes a plain and important appeal to any
intelligent man or woman, and should be read by many.” — The
Nation.


“ The point of view and discussion are original and refreshing.”
— Chicago Record-Herald.


“A book of original thought.” — Argonaut.


“These essays are fearless and profound studies of our Ameri-
can civilization.” — Philadelphia Public Ledger.


“Tt should appeal to any person who has the least bit of inter-
est in his country, as it reveals a wider field of vision than many
enjoy, every page opening a vista of life.” — Boston Globe.


OTHER WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR


The World and the Individual. Two volumes


Gifford Lectures delivered before the University at Aberdeen


First Series: The Four Historical Conceptions of Being $3.00
Second Series: Nature, Man, and the Moral Order $2.25


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York


“A POWER IN THE BUSINESS OF LIVING,” says the New York Tribune of


The Philosophy of Loyalty


By JOSIAH ROYCE, Ph.D., LL.D.


Professor of the History of Philosophy, Harvard University; author of
“Outlines of Psychology,” “The Conception of God,”
“The World and the Individual,” etc.


Cloth, r2mo, $7.50


“The ethical value of loyalty needed discussion, especially as so much
so-called loyalty is mere self-delusion. To be loyal in mere words, or nega-
tively, to the shell of an outworn convention is not to be loyal at all, or
wise. Moreover, true loyalty must express itself practically, in the way of a
man’s life, in his deeds, Cherished without reasoning, and to no really
practical purpose, it avails nothing. The drift of circumstances that may
make a man of high and strong personal qualities a power for lasting good
in a community, or develop him as a harmful influence to society, does not
escape Professor Royce’s attention. The present significance of his book,
therefore, is evident... .. The author disclaims the idea of making a text-
book or an elaborately technical work of philosophical research. The
appeal of the book is to all readers.” — Mew York Times.


BY THE SAME AUTHOR


War and Insurance


Cloth, 12mo, $1.00


Starting with some of the conclusions which he reached in his “ Philosophy
of Loyalty,” Dr. Royce develops a plan for insuring peace. The book is
not philosophical in character, but simple, untechnical and of very present
significance. The program which is deduced from metaphysical principles
is very workable, and while philosophers will find in it much to interest
them, it is intended primarily for the average man who is looking for prac-
tical suggestions as to means by which war may be prevented.


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York
