The Problem of Christianity, Vol. II (Josiah Royce, 1913)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/problemchristia05roycgoog). Vol. II: the historical and doctrinal lectures completing Royce's Christian philosophy.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at http : //books . google . com/|


Digitized by


Google


HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


/.


Digitized by


Google


zii-\zr


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY


Digitized by


Google


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

mw YORK • BOSTON • CHICAGO • DALLAS
ATLANTA • SAN FRANCISCO

MACMILLAN & CO., Limitto

LONDON • BOMBAY • CALCUTTA
MBLBOURNB

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltd.

TORONTO


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY


LECTURES DELIVERED AT THE LOWELL
INSTITUTE IN BOSTON, AND AT MAN-
CHESTER COLLEQE, OXFORD


BY

JOSIAH ROYCE

D.So. (Uniyeraity of Oxford)

FXOFB880R OF THB HI8TOBT OF PHILOSOPHY
IN HABYABD UNIYBBSITT


VOLUME n
THE REAL WORLD AND THE CHRISTIAN IDEAS


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
1913


Digitized by


Google


VVv^'S5<\ -1.0.0


''^^^-rj. .. :',


OOPTBIOHT, 1918,

By the MACMILLAN COMPANY.
Set np and dectrotyped. Published May, 1913.


J. 8. Onshing Co. ~ Berwick & Smith Co.
Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.


Digitized by


Google


TABLE OF CONTENTS
VOLUME II

THE REAL WORLD AND THE CHRISTIAN
IDEAS

LECTURE IX

PAGll

The CoMMtTNITY AND THE TdIE-PrOCESS. . 1

LECTURE X
The Bobt and the Mebibers 65

LECTURE XI

Perception, Conception, and Interpretation . 107

LECTURE Xn
The Will to Interpret 165

LECTURE Xm

The World op Interpretation .... 223

LECTURE XIV

The Doctrine op Signs 277

V


Digitized by


Google


TABLE OF CONTENTS
LECTURE XV

PAGll

The Hibtobical and the Essential • . . 827
LECTURE XVI

SXTMMABT AND CONCLUSION 881


Digitized by


Google


IX

THE COMMUNITY AND THE TIME-PBOCESS


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


LECTURE IX

THfi COMMUNITY AND THE TIME-PROCESS

THE present situation of the Philosophy
of Religion is dominated by motives
and tendencies which are at once inspiring
and confusing. It is the task of a student
of this branch of philosophy to do whatever
he can towards clarifying our outlook. Some
of our recent leaders of opinion have turned
our attention to new aspects of human expe-
rience, and have enriched philosophy with a
wealth of fascinating intuitions. These con-
tributions to the philosophy of our time have
obvious bearings upon the interests of reli-
gion. If religion depended solely upon intui-
tion and upon novelty, our age would already
have proved its right to be regarded as a
period of great advances in religious insight.

In fact, however, religion is concerned, not
merely with our experience, but also with
our will. The true lover of religion needs a
conscience, as well as a joy in living — a

3


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

coherent plan of action as well as a vital im-
pulse. Now, in the present phase of the
philosophy of religion, the religious aspect of
the conscience is, as I believe, too seldom
made a central object of inquiry. The in-
terests of a coherent plan of life are too much
neglected. I believe that both our ethical
and our distinctly religious concerns tend to
suflFer in consequence of these tendencies of
recent thought to which I thus allude. I
believe that much can be done to profit by
the novelties and by the intuitions of our day,
without losing ourselves in the wilderness of
caprices into which recent discussion hais
invited us to make the future home of our
philosophy.


Because I view the problems of the phi-
losophy of religion in this general way, I have
undertaken, in the foregoing lectures, a study
of the problem of Christianity which has
been intended to accomplish three distinct,
but closely connected tasks : —

4


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

First, in a fashion that has shown, as I
hope, some genuine sympathy with the ten-
dencies now prevalent, both in the whole
field of philosophy, and, in particular, in the
study of religion, I have tried to interpret
some of the more obviously human and
practical aspects of the religious beliefs of
our fathers. In other words, I have ap-
proached the problem of Christianity from
the side, not of metaphysics and of traditional
dogmas, but of religious life and of human
experience.

Secondly, even in using this mode of ap-
proach, I have laid stress upon the fact that
Christianity — viewed as a doctrine of life
— is not merely a religion of experience and
of sentiment, but also a religion whose main
stress is laid upon the imity and the coherence
of the common experience of the faithful, and
upon the judgment which a calm and far-
seeing conscience passes upon the values of
life. The freedom of spirit to which Chris-
tianity, in the course of its centuries of teach-
ing, has trained the civilizations which it

5


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

has influenced, has been the freedom which
loves both a wide outlook and a well-knit plan
of action. In brief, I have insisted that
Christianity, whatever its metaphysical basis
may be, and however rich may be the wealth
of intuitions which it has opened to its fol-
lowers, has all the seriousness of purpose, and
all the strenuousness of will, which make it
indeed a religion of loyalty.

Thirdly, I have, from the outset, said that
our view of the mission and the truth of the
Christian doctrine of life would not be com-
plete without a study of the metaphysical
basis of the Christian ideas.

In the last two lectures we have considered
how the modern mind stands related to the
human interests which the Christian doctrine
of life expresses. Our fathei:s, however, held
Christianity to be, not merely a plan for the
salvation of man, but a revelation concern-
ing the origin and fate of the whole cosmos.
From this point onwards, in our study, we
must face anew the problem which the old
faith regarded as solved. We, too, must take

6


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

account of the universe. We must consider
what is the consistent position for the modern
mind to accept when the inquiry arises:
Has the Christian doctrine of life a more than
human meaning and foundation ? Does this
doctrine express a truth, not only about man,
but about the whole world, and about God ?

n

The modern man has long since learned not
to confine himself to a geocentric view of
the universe, nor to an anthropocentric view
of the aflFairs of this planet of ours. For
minds trained as ours now are, it has become
inevitable to imagine how human concerns
would seem to us if we heard of them from
afar, as dwellers in other solar or stellar
systems might be supposed to hear of them.
We have been taught to remember that at
some time, — a time not nearly so distant
from us in the future as the Miocene division
of the Tertiary period is now distant from us
in the past, man will probably be as extinct
as is now the sabre-toothed tiger. But such

7


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

considerations as these arouse further queries
about Christian doctrine — queries which no
modern mind can wholly ignore. Let all be
admitted which we urged at the last time
regarding the close relation of the Christian
doctrine of life to the deepest needs of human-
ity. Then this will indeed show that Chris-
tianity, viewed simply as such a doctrine of
life, need not fear social changes, so long as
civihzed man endures; and will remain as a
spiritual guide of future generations, however
vast the revolutions to which they may be
subject, so long as the future generations
view life largely and seriously.

But such considerations will not meet all
the legitimate questions of a philosophy of
religion. For religion, although it need not
depend for its appeal to the human heart upon
solving the problems of the cosmos, inevi-
tably leads to a constantly renewed interest
in those problems. Let it be granted that the
salvation of mankind indeed requires some
form of religion whose essential ideas are in
harmony with the Christian ideas which we

8


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

have examined ; still, that fact will not quite
supply an answer to our natural inquiries, if
indeed mankind is destined simply to fail, —
as the sabre-toothed tiger failed. And if man-
kind, in the vast cosmos, is as much alone
amongst the beings that people the universe
as the earth seems to be alone amongst the
countless worlds, — what shall it profit us
if we seem to be saving our own souls for a
time, but actually remain, after all, what we
were before, — utterly insignificant incidents
in a world-process that neither needs men nor
heeds them ?

Traditional theology could long ignore such
considerations, because it could centre all the
universe about the earth and man. But the
modem man must think of his kind as thus
really related to an immeasurably vast cos-
mic process, at whose cejitre our planet does
not stand, and in whose ages our brief human
lives play a part as transient, relatively speak-
ing, as is, for our own eyes, the flickeriiig of
the northern lights.

The task to which we must now devote
9


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

ourselves is thus determined, for our age, and
for the modern man, by the enlarged per-
spective in which we have to view human
history. Our doctrine of life is not so readily
to be connected with our picture of the uni-
verse as would be the case if we still hved
under the heavenly spheres of an ancient
cosmology. Yet we shall find that the differ-
ence which is here in question will not prove
to be so great in its meaning as the quanti-
tative differences between the ancient and
modern world seem, at first, to imply. Our
fathers also faced the problem of the infinity
of the universe, much as they often tried
to ignore or to minimize that problem. And,
in the spiritual world, mere quantity, how-
ever vast, is not the hardest of obstacles to
overcome.

m

In any case, however, the part of our under-
taking upon which we thus enter, corresponds
to those chapters of traditional theology which
dealt with the existence and nature of God,

10


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

and with God's relation to the world, and
with the origin and destiny of the human
individual. Our own attempt to study these
well-worn problems begins with one, and per-
• haps with only one, advantage over the best-
known traditional modes of expounding a
philosophical theology. We, namely, set out
under the guidance of our foregoing study of
the Christian ideas. Central among these
ideas is that of the Universal Community.
For us, then, theology, if we are to define
any theology at all, must depend upon the
metaphysical interpretation and foundation
of the community. If that ideal of one be-
loved and united community of all mankind
whose religious value we have defended, has
a basis, not merely in the transient interests
of us mortals, but also in whatever is largest
and most lasting in the universe, then indeed
the doctrine of the community will prove to
be a doctrine about the being and nature and
manifestation of God; and our estimate of
the relation of the modern mind to the spirit
of a Christian creed will be altered and com-

11


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

pleted accordingly. This one doctrine will
indeed not suffice to make us literal followers
of tradition ; but it will bring us into a sym-
pathy with some of the most essential features
of the Christian view of the divine being.

IV

What interests are at stake when this as-
pect of the problems of theology is emphasized,
I can best remind you by recalling the fact
which we mentioned in comparing Buddhism
and Christianity in a former lecture. The
most characteristic feature by which the
Christian doctrine of life stands contrasted
with its greatest religious rival, we found to
be the one summarized in the words of the
creed: "I believe in the Holy Ghost, the
Holy Catholic Church, the communion of
saints." In our former lecture, when we com-
mented upon these words, we laid no stress
upon the special traditions of the historical
Church. We considered only the universally
human significance of the ideal which has
always constituted the vital principle of the

12


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

historical Church, — far away as the ade-
quate embodiment of that ideal in any visible
human institution still seems to be. At the
present stage of our inquiry, — since we are,
of necessity, entering for the time the world
of metaphysical abstractions, we have also to
abstract from still another aspect of the
meaning which the words of the creed in-
tend to convey. For neither the historical
Church, nor the distinctively human ideal
which it expresses, shall be, in these meta-
physical lectures, at the centre of our attention.
We are here to ask : For what truth, if any,
regarding the whole nature of things, does
that article of the creed stand ? Our answer
must be found, if at all, in some metaphysical
theory of the community and of its relation,
if such relation it possesses, to the divine
being. In other words, the central problem
in our present attempt at a theology must
be that problem which traditional Chri^fian
theology has so strangely neglected, — the
problem of what the religious consciousness
has called the Holy Spirit.

13


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY


The philosophy of religion, in dealing with
the problem of Christianity, has often elabo-
rately expounded and criticised the arguments
for the existence of God. Such philosophical
arguments have in general to do with the con-
cept of the Deity viewed quite apart from the
Christian doctrine of the Trinity. In other
cases, and for obvious historical reasons, the
philosophy of religion has had much to say
about the doctrine of the Logos. This doc-
trine, when treated as a part of Christian
theology, is usually taken to be the theory of
the second person of the Trinity. But the
traditional doctrine of the Holy Spirit, neg-
lected by the early theologians of the Church,
even when the creeds were still in the forma-
tive period of their existence, has remained
until this day in the background of inquiry,
both for the theologians and for the philoso-
phers. A favorite target for hostile, although
often inarticulate, criticism on the part of the
opponents of tradition, and a frequent object

14


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

of reverential, but confessedly problematic
and often very vague, exposition on the part
of the defenders of the faith, — the arti-
cle of the creed regarding the Holy Spirit
is, I believe, the one matter about which
most who discuss the problem of Christian-
ity have least to say in the way of definite
theory.

Yet, if I am right, — this is, in many re-
spects, the really distinctive and therefore the
capital article of the Christian creed, so far
as that creed suggests a theory of the divine
nature.* This article, then, should be un-
derstood, if the spirit of Christianity, in its
most human and vital of features, is to be
understood at all. And this article should
be philosophically expounded and defended,
if any distinctively Christian article of the
creed is to find a foundation in a rationally
defensible metaphysical theory of the uni-
verse.

Apart from the doctrine of the ideal com-
munity, and of the divine Spirit as consti-
tuting the unity and the hf e of this community,

16


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

Theism can be, as for many centuries it has
been, defined and defended. But such theism,
which "knows not so much as whether there
is any Holy Ghost,"' is not distinctively Chris-
tian in its meaning. And the Logos-doctrine,
except when viewed in unity with the doctrine
of the Spirit, is indeed what some of its re-
cent hostile critics (such as Harnack) have
taken it to be, — a thesis of Greek philoso-
phy, and not a characteristically Christian
opinion. The Logos-doctriae of the Fourth
Gospel, as we earlier saw, is indeed no mere
following of Greek metaphysics; for the
Fourth Gospel identifies the Logos with the
spirit of the community. Here, then, in this
doctrine of the spirit, lies the really cen-
tral idea of any distinctively Christian meta-
physic.

To approach the problems of the philosophy
of religion from the side of the metaphysical
basis of the idea of the community is there-
fore, I believe, to undertake a task as momen-
tous as it is neglected.


16


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

VI

Moreover, as we shall soon find, this mode
of beginning the metaphysical part of our
task promises to reUeve us, for the time, from
the need of using some terms and of repeating
some discussions, which recent controversy
may well have made wearisome to many of
us. The altogether too abstractly stated
contrast between Monism and Pluralism —
a contrast which fills so large a place in the
polemical metaphysical writings of the day,
does not force itself to the front, in our minds
and in our words, when we set out to inquire
into the real basis of the idea of the commu-
nity. For a community immediately presents
itself to our minds both as one and as many ;
and unless it is both one and many, it is no
community at all. This fact does not, by
itself, solve the problem of the One and the
Many. But it serves to remind us how im-
true to hfe is the way in which that problem
is frequently stated.

In fact, as I believe, the idea of the com-

voL. n — c 17


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

munity, suggested to us by the problems of
human social Ufe, but easily capable of a
generahzation which possesses universal im-
portance, gives us one of our very best indica-
tions of the way in which the problem of the
One and the Many is to be solved, and of the
level of mental life upon which the solution
is actually accomplished.
[ So much may serve as a general indication
of the nature of our undertaking. Let jne
next attempt to define the problem of the com-
munity more precisely.

VII

Motives which are as familiar as they are
hard to analyze have convinced us all, before
we begin to philosophize, that our human
world contains a variety of individually dis-
tinct minds or selves, and that some, for us
decisively authoritative, principle of individua-
tion, keeps these selves apart, and forbids
us to regard their various lives merely as in-
cidents, or as undivided phases of a common
life. This conviction — the stubborn plural-

18


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

ism of our present and highly cultivated social
consciousness — tends indeed, under criticism,
to be subject to various doubts and modifica-
tions, — the more so as, in case we are once
challenged to explain who we are, none of us
find it easy to define the precise boimdaries
of the individual self, or to tell wherein it
diflFers from the rest of the world, and, in
particular, from the selves of other men.

But to all such doubts our social common
sense replies by insisting upon three groups
of facts. These facts combine to show that
the individual human selves are sundered
from one another by gaps which, as it would
seem, are in some sense impassable.

First, in this connection, our common sense
insists upon the empirical sundering of the
feehngs, — that is, of the immediate expe-
riences of various human individuals. One
man does not feel, and, speaking in terms of
direct experience, cannot feel, the physical
pains of another man. Sympathy may try
its best to bridge the gulf thus estabUshed by
nature. Love may counsel me to view the

19


Diqitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

pangs of my fellow as if they were my own.
But, as a fact, my sensory nerves do not end
in my fellow's skin, but in mine. And the
physical sundering of the organisms corre-
sponds to a persistent sundering of our streams
of immediate feeUng. Even the most im-
mediate and impressive forms of sympathy
with the physical pangs of another human
being only serve the more to illustrate how
our various conscious Uves are thus kept
apart by gulfs which we cannot cross. When
a pitiful man shrinks, or feels faint, or is
otherwise overcome with emotion, at what is
called "the sight" of another's suffering, —
how imhke are the sufferings of the shrinking
or terrified or overwhelmed spectator, and the
pangs of the one with whom he is said to
sympathize. As a fact, the sympathizer does
not feel the sufferer's pain. What he feels is
his own emotional reverberation at the sight of
its symptoms. That is, in general, something
very different, both in quaUty and in intensity,
from what the injured man feels.

We appear, then, to be individuated by the
20


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PEOCESS

diversity and the separateness of our streams
of immediate feeling. My toothache cannot
directly become an item in my neighbor's mind.
Facts of this sort form the first group of evi-
dences upon which common sense depends for
its pluralistic view of the world of human selves.

The facts of the second group are closely
allied to the former, but lie upon another
level of individual life, — namely, upon the
level of our more organized ideas.

"One man," so says our social conmion
sense, "can only indirectly discover the inten-
tions, the thoughts, the ideas, of another
man." Direct telepathy, if it ever occurs at
all, is a rare and, in most of our practical re-
lations, a wholly negligible fact. By nature,
every man's plans, intents, opinions, and
range of personal experience are secrets, ex-
cept in so far as his physical organism in-
directly reveals them. His fellows can learn
these secrets only through his expressive
movements. Control your expression, keep
silence, avoid the imguarded look and the
telltale gesture; and then nobody can dis-

21


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

cover what is in your mind. No man can
directly read the hearts of his fellows. This
seems, for our common sense, to be one of the
deepest-seated laws of our social experience.
It is often expressed as if it were not merely
an empirical law, but a logical necessity.
How could I possibly possess or share or be-
come conscious of the thoughts and purposes
of another mind, imless I were myself identical
with that mind ? So says our ordinary com-
mon sense. The very supposition that I
could be conscious of a thought or of an in-
tent which was all the while actually present
to the consciousness of another individual
man, is often regarded as a supposition not
only contrary to fact, but also contrary to
reason. Such a supposition, it is often said,
would involve a direct self-contradiction.

Otherwise expressed, the facts of this second
group, and the principles which they exemplify,
are summed up by asserting, as our social
common sense actually asserts : We are in-
dividuated by the law that our trains of con-
scious thought and purpose are mutually

22


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

inaccessible through any mode of direct in-
tuition. Each of us lives within the charmed
circle of his own conscious will and meaning,
— each of us is more or less clearly the object
of his own inspection, but is hopelessly beyond
the direct observation of his fellows.

Of separate streams of feeling, — of mu-
tually inaccessible and essentially secret trains
of ideas, — we men are thus constituted. By
such forms and by such structure of mental
life, by such divisions which no human power
can bring into one imity of insight, individual
human minds are forced to exist together upon
terms which make them, in so far, appear to
resemble Leibnizian monads. Their only win-
dows appear to be those which their physical
organisms supply.

The third group of facts here in question is
the group upon which our cultivated social
common sense most insists whenever ethical
problems are in question ; and therefore it is
precisely this third group of facts which has
most interest in its bearings upon the idea of
the commimity.

23


y


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

"We are all members one of another/' So
says the doctrine of the community. "On
the contrary," so our social common sense
insists : "We are beings, each of whom has a
soul of his own, a destiny of his own, rights
of his own, worth of his own, ideals of his
own, and an individual life in which this
soul, this destiny, these rights, these ideals,
get their expression. No other man can
do my deed for me. When I choose, my
choice coalesces with the voluntary decision
of no other individual." Such, I say, is the
characteristic assertion to which this third
group of facts leads our ordinary social plu-
ralism.

In brief : We thus seem to be individuated
by our deeds. The will whereby I choose my
own deed, is not my neighbor's will. My act
is my own. Another man can perform an
act which repeats the type of my act, or which
helps or hinders my act. But if the question
arises concerning any one act: Who hath
done this ? — such a question admits of only
one true answer. Deeds and their doers stand

24


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

in one-one correspondence. Such is the opin-
ion of our cultivated modem ethical common
sense.

Upon this individuation of the selves by
their deeds appear to rest all the other just
mentioned ethical aspects of our modem social
pluralism. As we mentioned in an earlier
lecture, primitive man is not an individualist.
The clear consciousness of individual rights,
dignity, worth, and responsibility seems to
be a product of that moral cultivation of
which we have now frequently spoken. Ac-
cording to the primitive law of blood revenge,
it is the commimity and not the individual
that suflFers for a deed. The consciousness
that my deed is peculiarly my own also forms
the basis for that cultivated idea of sin of
which we foimd Paul making use. At all
events, this ethical aspect of individual self-
consciousness is frequently used by common
sense as one of the most impressive grounds for
doubting any philosophy which appears to
make light of the distinctness of the social
individuals.

25


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

VIII

Nevertheless, all these varieties of individual
experience, these chasms which at any one
present moment seem to sunder mind and
mind, and these ethical considerations which
have taught us to think of one man as morally
independent of another, do not tell us the
whole truth about the actual constitution of
the social realm. There are facts that seem
to show that these many are also one. These,
then, are facts which force upon us the prob-
lem of the community.

As we have now repeatedly seen, social
cooperation unquestionably brings into exist-
ence languages, customs, religions. These,
as Wundt declares, are indeed psychological
creations. Yet a language, a custom, or a
religion is not a collection of discrete psycho-
logical phenomena, each of which corresponds
to some separate individual mind to which
that one mental fact belongs, or is due. Thus,
the English language is a mental product, —
and a product possessing intelligent unity.

26


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

Its creator must be regarded as also, in some
sense, a single intelligence. But the creator
of the English language was no mere collec-
tion of Englishmen, each of whom added his
word or phrase or accent, or other linguistic
fact. The creator of English speech is the
English people. Hence the English people
is itself some sort of mental imit with a mind
of its own.

The countless phenomena which Wundt in
his VOlkerpsychologie brings to our attention,
constitute a philosophical problem which
ought to be only the more carefully studied
in case one regards the facts upon which our
ordinary social pluralism rests as both un-
questionable and momentous.

For if indeed men are sundered in their
individual lives by the chasms which our
social common sense seems to make so ob-
vious; if they live in mutually inaccessible
realms of conscious solitude ; how comes it to
pass that, nevertheless, in their social life,
large and small bodies of men can come to act
as if one conunon intelligence and one common

27


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

will were using the individuals as its almost
helpless instruments ? Here is indeed a great
problem. The theories of Wundt's type have
the advantage of emphasizing and defining
that problem.

Our ordinary social pluralism leads us to
conceive the individual streams of conscious-
ness as if they were unable to share eyen a
single pang of pain. No one of them, we have
said, can directly read the secret of a single
idea that floats in another stream. Each
conscious river of individual life is close shut
between its own banks, like the Oregon of
Bryant's youthful poem that rolls, "and hears
no sound but his own waves.''

But in our actual social life, — in the mar-
ket-place, or at the political gathering, or
when mobs rage and imagine a vain thing, in
the streets of a modem city, the close shut-in
streams of consciousness now appear as if
they had lost their banks altogether. They
seem to flow together like rivers that are lost
in the ocean, and to surge into tumultuous
unity, as if they were universal tides.

28


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

Or, again, our ordinary social pluralism
makes us view the individual selves as if they
were Leibnizian monads that had no windows.
The social phenomena of the lives of communi-
ties, on the contrary, make these monads ap-
pear as if they had no walls, or as if they
became mere drops that coalesce. Our ethi-
cal pluralism makes us proudly declare, each
for himself, "My deed is my own.'' But
our collective life often seems to advise us to
say, not, "I act thus ;" but, "Thus the com-
munity acts in and through me." Or again,
our cultivated indei>endence declares, "I think
thus and thus.'' But, when the ethnol-
ogist Bastian uses the formula, "Ich denke
nicht; sondem es denkt in mir," the social
facts, especially of primitive human thought,
go far to give this formula a meaning. In
Europe the discovery of individual thinking
began in some sense with the early Greek
philosophers. Before them, tribes and com-
mimities did the thinking.

Now such considerations are emphasized by
the theories of the type which Wimdt favors.

29


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

Such theories, without being able to tell
us all that we should like to know regarding
what constitutes the unity of a community,
have in common the tendency to insist that
in many cases a community behaves as
an imit, and therefore must be an imit,
however its inner coherence may be con-
stituted. If, however, we admit the facts
which Wundt emphasizes, it is natural to
seek for some further and perhaps more con-
crete way of conceiving what the mental life
of a community may be, and how its imity is
constituted. Wimdt himself has hardly done
all, I think, that we could desire in this direc-
tion, and it is natural to supplement his views
by others.

Such a further approach towards an insight
into the problem of the commimity is sug-
gested by William James's discussion of what,
in his lectures here at Oxford on "The Plural-
istic Universe," he called the "compoimding
of consciousness.''

The main interests which guided James in
the lectures to which I refer were indeed not

30


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

the interests which I have emphasized in the
early part of this course. James was not
dealing with the problems which Christianity
presents ; nor was he interested in the idea of
the commimity, in the form in which I am
approaching that problem. But he was con-
cerned with general religious and metaphysi-
cal issues; and questions relating to plural-
ism were explicitly in the foreground of his
inquiry. He was also led to take accoimt of
manifold motives which tend to show that our
mental world does not merely consist of sun-
dered fields or streams of consciousness with
barriers that part them.

Those who hear me will well remember how
James emphasized, in the course of his argu-
ment, the diflSculties which, as he explained,
had so long held him back from any form of
philosophy which should involve believing
that a "compoimding of consciousness'' oc-
curs, or is real. How should any one con-
scious mind be inclusive of another, or such
that it was compounded with that other?
This question, as James declared, had long

31


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

seemed to him incapable of any answer in
terms which should involve admitting the
possibility of such "co-consciousness," if in-
deed our philosophy were to be permitted to
remain rational at all. But James actually
reached at length a point in his own reflections
where, as he said, this compounding of con-
sciousness, this Bergsonian interpenetration of
the various selves, came to appear to him in
certain cases an empirically verifiable fact, —
or, at all events, an irresistible hypothesis.
When this point was reached, James felt that,
for him, a philosophical crisis had come.

James faced and passed this crisis. He did
so upon the basis of his own well-known anti-
intellectualism. The mental world, he said,
must not be interpreted in rational terms.
If the compounding of consciousness occurs,
it is irrational, although real. James was
rejoiced, however, to feel that, in this matter,
he stood in alliance with Bergson. And so,
henceforth, for James, the many selves inter-
penetrated, or, at all events, might do so. It
was merely the sterile intellect (so he now

32


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

affirmed) which was responsible for the con-
ceptual abstractions that had seemed to sunder
various minds, not only empirically, but ab-
solutely, and to make the compounding of
consciousness impossible. It still remained
for James true that we are indeed many. But
this assertion no longer implied : We are
sundered from one another by divisions that
are absolutely impassable. We may be many
selves ; and yet, from these many selves, a
larger self may be compounded, — a self such
as one of Fechner's planetary consciousnesses
was, or such as some still vaster cosmical form
of mental life may be. This larger self may
from above, as it were, bridge what is for
us an impassable chasm. Interpenetration,
which for us seems impossible, may come to
pass for some higher sort of intuition.

With this treatment of the problem of the
one and the many in the form in which social
psychology presents it to our attention, James's
account of the great cosmological questions
and of their religious bearings came to an end,
— just at the point where we all most needed

VOL. II — D 33


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

to know what his next step in philosophy
would be.

In substance, this outcome of a long series
of efforts to deal with the problems of the one
and the many in the world of the mental beings
was based, in the case of James, partly upon
empirical phenomena, of the type reported in
his " Varieties of Religious Experience," and
partly upon hypothetical extensions of these
empirical phenomena. These hypothetical
extensions themselves were again suggested
to him, partly by Fechner's speculations on
the cosmical enlargements of consciousness;
partly by the general volimtaristic tendencies
which so long characterized James's religious
thought ; and partly by Bergson's use of the
new category of "interpenetration" as the one
especially suited to aid us in the perception of
the mental worid. The results brought James,
at the very close of his career, into new relations
with the idealistic tradition in philosophy, —
a relation which I ought not here to attempt
to characterize at all extensively.

But in any case, the sort of compoimding of
34


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

consciousness which James favored differed in
many respects from what I have in mind when
I speak of the idea of the community. When
the minds of James's world began to inter-
penetrate in earnest, as they did in this last
phase of his religious speculation, they behaved
much like drops of mercury that, falling, may
form a pool, until, moved by one impulse or
another, they break away from their union
again, and flow and glitter imtil the next
blending occur. Paul's conception of the
spirit in the Church never appealed, I think,
to James's mind.

But, in any case, James's final opinions,
although only indirectly bearing upon our own
main problem, tended to show, better than
would otherwise have been possible, where
the true problem lies.

IX

We may be aided in making a more decisive
advance towards understanding what a com-
munity is by emphasizing at this point a
motive which we have not before mentioned,

35


Diqitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

and which no doubt plays a great part in the
psychology of the social consciousness.

Any notable case wherein we find a social
organization which we can call, in the psycho-
logical sense, either a highly developed com-
munity or the creation or product of such a
community, is a case where some process
of the nature of a history — that is, of co-
herent social evolution — has gone on, and
has gone on for a long time, and is more or less
remembered by the community in question.
If, ignoring history, you merely take a cross-
section of the social order at any one moment ;
and if you thus deal with social groups that
have little or no history, and confine your
attention to social processes which occur dur-
ing a short period of time, — for example,
during an hour, or a day, or a year, — what
then is likely to come to your notice takes
either the predominantly pluralistic form of
the various relatively independent doings of
detached individuals, or else the social form
of the confused activities of a crowd. A
crowd, whether it be a dangerous mob, or

36


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

an amiably joyous gathering at a picnic, is
not a community. It has a mind, but no
institutions, no organization, no coherent
unity, no history, no traditions. It may be
an unit, but is then of the type which suggests
James's mere blending of various conscious-
nesses, — a sort of mystical loss of personality
on the part of its members. Op the other
hand, a group of independent buyers at mar-
ket, or of the passers-by in a city street, is
not a community. And it also does not sug-
gest to the onlooker any blending of many
selves in one. Each purchaser seeks his own
affairs. There may be gossip, but gossip is
not a function which establishes the life of a
community. For gossip has a short memory.
But a true community is essentially a product
of a time-process. A community has a past
and will have a future. Its more or less con-
scious history, real or ideal, is a part of its
very essence. A community requires for its
existence a history and is greatly aided in
its consciousness by a memory.
If you object that a Pauline church, such as
37


Diqitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

I have so often used as an ideal instance of a
community, was an institution that had been
but very recently founded when the apostle
wrote his epistles, then I reply at once that a
Pauline church was instructed by the apostle
to regard its life as a phase in the historical
process of the salvation of mankind. This
process, as conceived by Paul and his churches,
had gone on from Adam unto Moses, from
Moses unto Christ; and the very life of the
community was bound up with its philosophy
of history. That the memory of this com-
munity was in part legendary is beside the
point. Its memory was essential to its life,
and was busy with the fate of all mankind
and with the course of all time.

The psychological unity of many selves in
one community is bound up, then, with the
consciousness of some lengthy social process
which has occurred, or is at least supposed
to have occurred. And the wealthier the
memory of a community is, and the vaster the
historical processes which it regards as belong-
ing to its life, the richer — other things being

38


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

equal — is its consciousness that it is a com-
munity, that its members are somehow made
one in and through and with its own life.
The Japanese are fond of telling us that
their imperial family, and their national life,
are coeval with heaven and earth. The boast
is cheerfully extravagant ; but its relation to a
highly developed form of the consciousness
of a community is obvious. Here, then, is a
consideration belonging to social psychology,
but highly important for our understanding of
the sense in which a community is or can be
possessed of one mental life.


K we ask for the reason why such a real or
fancied history, possessing in general a con-
siderable length and importance, is psycholog-
ically needed in case a group consisting of
many individual human beings is to regard
itself as an united community, our attention
is at once called to a consideration which I
regard as indeed decisive for the whole theory
of the reality of the community. Obvious

39


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

as it is, however, this consideration needs to be
explicitly mentioned, because the complexity
of the facts often makes us neglect them.
The rule that time is needed for the forma-
tion of a conscious community is a rule which
finds its extremely familiar analogy within the
life of every individual human self. Each
one of us knows that he just now, at this in-
stant, cannot find more than a mere fragment
of himself present. The self comes down to
us from its own past. It needs and is a his-
tory. Each of us can see that his own idea
of himself as this person is inseparably bound
up with his view of his own former life, of the
plans that he formed, of the fortunes that
fashioned him, and of the accomplishments
which in turn he has fashioned for himself.
A self is, by its very essence, a being with a
past. One must look lengthwise backwards in
the stream of time in order to see the self, or
its shadow, now moving with the stream, now
eddying in the currents from bank to bank of
its channel, and now strenuously straining on-
wards in the pursuit of its own chosen good.

40


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

At this present moment I am indeed here,
as this creature of the moment, — sundered
from the other selves. But nevertheless, if
considered simply in this passing moment of
my life, I am hardly a self at all. I am just
a flash of consciousness, — the mere gesticula-
tion of a self, — not a coherent personality.
Yet memory Knks me with my own past, —
and not, in the same way, with the past of
any one else. This joining of the present to the
past reveals a more or less steady tendency, —
a sense about the whole process of my remem-
bered life. And this tendency and sense of
my individual life agree, on the whole, with
the sense and the tendencies that belong to
the entire flow of the time-stream, so far as it
has sense at all. My individual life, my
own more or less well-sundered stream of
tendency, not only is shut oflF at each present
moment by various barriers from the lives of
other selves, — but also constitutes an in-
telligible sequence in itself, so that, as I look
back, I can say : "'What I yesterday intended
to pursue, that I am to-day still pursuing.'*

41


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

"My present carries farther the plan of my
past/' Thus, then, I am one more or less
coherent plan expressed in a life. "The
child is father to the man/' My days are
"bound each to each by mutual piety/'

Since I am this self, not only by reason of
what now sunders me from the inner lives of
other selves, but by reason of what links me,
in significant, fashion, to the remembered ex-
periences, deeds, plans, and interests of my
former conscious life, I need a somewhat ex-
tended and remembered past to furnish the
opportunity for my self to find, when it looks
back, a long process that possesses sense and
coherence. In brief, my idea of myself is an
interpretation of my past, — linked also with
an interpretation of my hopes and intentions
as to my future.

Precisely as I thus define myself with ref-
erence to my own past, so my fellows also
interpret the sense, the value, the qualifica-
tions, and the possessions of my present self
by virtue of what are sometimes called my
antecedents. In the eyes of his fellow-men,

42


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

the child is less of a self than is the mature
man; and he is so not merely because the
child just now possesses a less wealthy and
eflBcient conscious life than a mature man
possesses, but because the antecedents of his
present self are fewer than are the antecedents
of the present self of the mature man. The
child has little past. He has accomplished
httle. The mature man bears the credit
and the burden of his long Ufe of deeds. His
former works qualify his present deeds. He
not only possesses, but in great part is, for
his fellow-men, a record.

These facts about our individual self-con-
sciousness are indeed well known. But they
remind us that our idea of the individual self
is no mere present datum, or collection of
data, but is based upon an interpretation of
the sense, of the tendency, of the coherence,
and of the value of a hf e to which belongs the
memory of its own past. And therefore these
same facts will help us to see how the idea of
the community is also an idea which is im-
pressed upon us whenever we make a sufB-

43


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

ciently successful and fruitful eflFort to interpret
the sense, the coherent interest, and the value
of the relations in which a great number of
diflferent selves stand to the past.

XI

Can many diflferent selves, all belonging
to the present time, possess identically the
same past as their own personally interesting
past life ? This question, if asked about the
recent past, cannot be answered in the affirma-
tive, unless one proposes either to ignore or
in some way to set aside the motives which,
in our present consciousness, emphasize, as
we have seen, the pluralism of the social
selves. Quite diflferent, however, bcicomes
the possible answer to this question if, with-
out in the least ignoring our present varieties
and sunderings, one asks the question con-
cerning some past time that belongs to pre-
vious generations of men. For then each
of two or more men may regard the same fact
of past life as, in the same sense, a part of his
own personal life. Two men of the present

44


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

time may, for instance, have any number of
ancestors in common. To say this is not to
ignore the pluralistic view of the selves, but
only to make mention of familiar facts of de-
scent. But now if these men take great
interest in their ancestors, and have a genuine
or legendary tradition concerning the an-
cestors, each of the two men of the present
time may regard the lives, the deeds, the
glory, and perhaps the spiritual powers or
the immortal lives of certain ancestors, now
dwelling in the spirit- world, as a part of his
own self. Thus, when the individual Maori,
in New Zealand, in case he still follows the
old ways, speaks of the legendary canoes in
which the ancestors of old came over from the
home land called Hawaiki to New Zealand, he
says, choosing the name of the canoe accord-
ing to his own tribe and tradition, "/ came
over in the canoe Tai-Nui.'' Now any two
members of a tribe whose legendary ancestors
came over in Tai-Nui, possess, from their
own point of view, identically the same past,
in just this respect. Each of the two men in

45


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

qViestion has the same reason, good or bad, for
extending himself into the past, and for saying,
"I came over in that canoe." Now the belief
in this identity of the past self of the ancestor
of the canoe, belonging to each of the two
New Zealanders, does not in the least depend
upon ignoring, or upon minimizing, the present
diflference between these two selves. The
present consciousnesses do not in the least
tend to interpenetrate. Neither of the two
New Zealanders in question need suppose
that there is now any compounding of con-
sciousness. Each may keep aloof from the
other. They may be enemies. But each
has a reason, and an obvious reason, for ex-
tending himself into the ancestral past.

My individual self extends backwards, and
is identified with my remembered self of
yesterday, or of former years. This is an
interpretation of my life which in general
turns upon the coherence of deeds, plans, in-
terests, hopes, and spiritual possessions in
terms of which I learn to define myself. Now
my remembered past is in general easily to be

46


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

distinguished from the past of any other self.
But if I am so interested in the life or in the
deeds of former generations that I thus ex-
tend, as the Maori extends, my own self into
the ancestral past, the self thus extended finds
that the same identical canoe or ancestor is
part of my own life, and also part of the
ideally extended life of some fellow-tribesman
who is now so diflferent a being, and so sharply
sundered from my present self.

Now, in such a case, how shall I best de-
scribe the unity that, according to this inter-
pretation of our common past, links my fellow-
tribesmen and myself? A New Zealander
says, "'We are of the same canoe/' And a
more general expression of such relations would
be to say, in all similar cases, "'We are of the
same community/'

In this case, then, the real or supposed
identity of certain interesting features in a
past which each one of two or of many men
regards as belonging to his own historically
extended former self, is a ground for saying
that all these many, although now just as

47


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

various and as sundered as they are, con-
stitute, with reference to this common past, a
community. When defined in such terms,
the concept of the community loses its mys-
tical seeming. It depends indeed upon an
interpretation of the significance of facts, and
does not confine itself to mere report of par-
ticulars; but it does not ignore the present
varieties of experience. It depends also upon
an interpretation which does not merely say,
"These events happened," but adds, ''These
events belong to the life of this self or of this
other self.'' Such an interpretation we all
daily make in speaking of the past of our own
familiar individual selves. The process which
I am now using as an illustration, — the pro-
cess whereby the New Zealander says, "I
came over in that canoe,'' — extends the
quasi-personal memory of each man into an
historical past that may be indefinitely long
and vast. But such an extension has motives
which are not necessarily either mystical or
monistic. We all share those motives, and
use them, in our own way, and according. to

48


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

our ideals, whenever we consider the history
of our country, or of mankind, or of whatever
else seems to us to possess a history that is

significantly linked with our personal history.

•A

XII

Just as each one of many present selves,
despite the psychological or ethical barriers
which now keep all of these selves sundered,
may accept the same past fact or event as a
part of himself, and say, "That belonged to my
life,'' even so, each one of many present
selves, despite these same barriers and sun-
derings, may accept the same future event,
which all of them hope or expect, as part of
his own personal future. Thus, during a war,
all of the patriots of one of the contending
nations may regard the termination of the
war, and the desired victory of their country,
so that each one says: "I shall rejoice in
the expected surrender of that stronghold
of the enemy. That surrender will be my
triumph/'

Now when many contemporary and dis-

VOL. II — E 49


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

tinct individual selves so interpret, each his
own personal life, that each says of an individ-
ual past or of a determinate future event or
deed: "That belongs to my life;'' "That
occurred, or will occur, to me,'' then these
many selves may be defined as hereby con-
stituting, in a perfectly definite and objective,
but also in a highly significant, sense, a com-
munity. They may be said to constitute a
community with reference to that particular
past or future event, or group of events, which
each of them accepts or interprets as belonging
to his own personal past or to his own individ-
ual future. A community constituted by the
fact that each of its members accepts as part
of his own individual Uf e and self the same
Tpast events that each of his fellow-members
accepts, may be called a community of Toemory.
Such is any group of persons who individually
either remember or commemorate the same
dead, — each one finding, because of personal
aflfection or of reverence for the dead, that
those whom he commemorates form for him
a part of his own past existence.

50


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

A community constituted by the fact that
each of its members accepts, as part of his
own individual life and self, the same expected
Jviure events that each of his fellows accepts,
may be called a community of expectation^ or
upon occasion, a community of hope.

A community, whether of memory or of
hope, exists relatively to the past or future
facts to which its several members stand in
the common relation just defined. The con-
cept of the community depends upon the in-
terpretation which each individual member
gives to his own self, — to his own past, —
and to his own future. Every one of us does,
for various reasons, extend his interpretation
of his own individual self so that from his
own point of view, his life includes many far-
away temporal happenings. The complex
motives of such interpretations need not now
be further examined. Enough, — these mo-
tives may vary from self to self with all the
wealth of life. Yet when these interests of
each self lead it to accept any part or item of
the same past or the same future which an-

51


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

other self accepts as its own, — then pluralism
of the selves is perfectly consistent with their
forming a community, either of memory or
of hope. How rich this community is in
meaning, in value, in membership, in signifi-
cant organization, will depend upon the selves
that enter into the community, and upon the
ideals in terms of which they define themselves,
their past, and their future.

With this definition in mind, we see why
long histories are needed in order to define
the life of great communities. We also see
that, if great new undertakings enter into the
lives of many men, a new community of hope,
unified by the common relations of its individ-
ual members to the same future events, may
be, upon occasion, very rapidly constituted,
even in the midst of great revolutions.

The concept of the community, as thus
analyzed, stands in the closest relation to the
whole nature of the time-process, and also
involves recognizing to the full both the exist-
ence and the significance of individual selves.
In what sense the individual selves constitute

52


Digitized by


Google


COMMUNITY AND TIME-PROCESS

the community we can in general see, while
we are prepared to find that, for the individual
selves, it may well prove to be the case that a
real community of memory or of hope is neces-
sary in order to secure their significance.
Our own definition of a community can be
illustrated by countless types of poUtical, re-
ligious, and other significant communities
which you will readily be able to select for
yourselves. Without ignoring our ordinary
social plurahsm, this definition shows how and
why many selves may be viewed as actually
brought together in an historical community.
Without presupposing any one metaphysical
interpretation of experience, or of time, our
definition shows where, in our experience and
in our interpretation of the time-process, we
are to look for a solution of the problem of the
community. Without going beyond the facts
of human Ufe, of human memory, and of hu-
man interpretation of the self and of its past,
our definition clears the way for a study of the
constitution of the* real world of the spirit.


53


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


X

THE BODY AND THE MEMBEEIS


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


LECTURE X

THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

HENCEFORTH, in these lectures, I
shall restrict the application of the term
"community'' to those social groups which
conform to the definition stated at the close
of our last lecture. Not every social group
which behaves so that, to an observer, it
seems to be a single unit, meets all the condi-
tions of our definition. Our new use of the
term " community *' will therefore be more
precise and restricted than was our earlier
employment of the word. But our definition
will clear the way for further generalizations.
It will enable us to express our reasons for
much that, in our study of the Christian doc-
trine of life, had to be stated dogmatically,
and illustrated rather than intimately ex-
amined.

We have repeatedly spoken of two levels of
human life, the level of the individual and the
level of the community. We have now in our

57


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

hands the means for giving a more precise
sense to this expression, and for furnishing
a further verification of what we asserted
about these two levels of hfe. We have also
repeatedly emphasized the ethical and reli-
gious significance of loyalty; but our defini-
tion will help us to throw clearer light upon
the sources of this worth. And by thus
sharpening the outlines of our picture of what a
real community is, we shall be made ready to
consider whether the concept of the com-
mimity possesses a more than human signifi-
cance. Let us recall our new definition to
mind, and then apply it to our main problems.


Our definition presupposes that there exist
many individual selves. Suppose these selves
to vary in their present experiences and pur-
poses as widely as you will. Imagine them
to be sundered from one another by such
chasms of mutual mystery and independence
as, in our natural social life, often seem hope-
lessly to divide and secrete the inner world

58


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

of each of us from the direct knowledge and
estimate of his fellows. But let these selves
be able to look beyond their present chaos of
fleeting ideas and of warring desires, far away
into the past whence they came, and into the
future whither their hopes lead them. As
they thus look, let each one of them ideally
enlarge his own individual Ufe, extending
himself into the past and future, so as to say
of some far-off event, belonging, perhaps, to
other generations of men, "I view that event
as a part of my own life.'' "That former
happening or achievement so predetermined
the sense and the destiny which are now mine,
that I am moved to regard it as belonging
to my own past.'' Or again: "For that
coming event I wait and hope as an event of
my own future."

And further, let the various ideal extensions,
forwards and backwards, include at least one
common event, so that each of these selves
regards that event as a part of his own life.

Then, vrith reference to the ideal common past
and future in question^ I say that these selves

59


^


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

constitute a community. This is henceforth
' to be our definition of a community. The
present variety of the selves who are the mem-
bers of the spiritual body so defined, is not
hereby either annulled or slighted. The mo-
tives which determine each of them thus
ideally to extend his own life, may vary from
self to self in the most manifold fashion.

Our definition will enable us, despite all
these varieties of the members, to understand
in what ^ense any such community as we have
defined exists, and is one.

Into this form, which, when thus summarily
described, seems so abstract and empty, life
can and does pour the rich contents and
ideals which make the communities of our
human world so full of dramatic variety and
significance.

n

The^r^^ condition upon which the existence
of a community, in our sense of the word, de-
pends, is the power of an individual self to
extend his Ufe, in ideal fashion, so as to regard

60


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

it as including past and future events which
Ke far away in time, and which he does not now
personally remember. That this power exists,
and that man has a self which is thus ideally
extensible in time without any definable limit,
we all know.

This power itself rests upon the principle
that, however a man may come by his idea
of himself, the self is no mere datum, but is in
its essence a life which is interpreted, and
which interprets itself, and which, apart from
some sort of ideal interpretation, is a mere
flight of ideas, or a meaningless flow of feelings,
or a vision that sees nothing, or else a barren
abstract conception. How deep the process
of interpretation goes in determining the real
nature of the self, we shall only later be able to
estimate.

There is no doubt that what we usually
call our personal memory does indeed give us
assurances regarding our own past, so far as
memory extends and is trustworthy. But
our trust in our memories is itself an interpre-
tation of their data. All of us regard as be-

61


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

longing, even to our recent past Kfe, much
that we cannot just now remember. And
the future self shrinks and expands with our
hopes and our energies. No one can merely,
from without, set for us the Umits of the life
of the self, and say to us : "Thus far and no
farther.''

In my ideal extensions of the Kfe of the self,
I am indeed subject to some sort of control, —
to what control we need not here attempt to
formulate. I must be able to give myself
some sort of reason, personal, or social, or
moral, or rehgious, or metaphysical, for taking
on or throwing off the burden, the joy, the
grief, the guilt, the hope, the glory of past and
of future deeds and experiences ; but I must
also myself personally share in this task of
determining how much of the past and the
future shall ideally enter into my Uf e, and shall
contribute to the value of that Kfe.

And if I choose to say, "There is a sense
in which all the tragedy and the attainment
of an endless past and future of deeds and of
fortunes enter into my own life/' I say only

62


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

what saints and sages of the most various
creeds and experiences have found their several
reasons for saying. The fact and the impor-
tance of such ideal extensions of the self must
therefore be recognized. Here is the first
basis for every clear idea of what constitutes
a community.

The ideal extensions of the self may also
include, as is well known, not only past and
future events and deeds, but also physical
things, whether now existent or not, and many
other sorts of objects which are neither events
nor deeds. The knight or the samurai re-
garded his sword as a part of himself. One's
treasures and one's home, one's tools, and the
things that one's hands have made, frequently
come to be interpreted as part of the self.
And any object in heaven or earth may be
thus ideally appropriated by a given self.
The ideal self of the Stoic or of the Mystic
may, in various fashions, identify its will,
or its very essence, with the whole universe.
The Hindoo seer seeks to realize the words:
"I am Brahm;" "That art thou."

63


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

In case such ideal extensions of the self are
consciously bound up with deeds, or with
other events, such as belong to the past or
future Kfe which the self regards as its own,
our definition of the community warrants us
in saying that many selves form one com-
munity when all are ideally extended so as to
include the same object. But unless the ideal
extensions of the self thus consciously involve
past and future deeds and events that have
to do with the objects in question, we shall
not use these extensions to help us to define
communities. ^

For our purposes, the community is a being
that attempts to accomplish something in
time and through the deeds of its members.
These deeds belong to the life which each
member regards as, in ideal, his own. It is
in this way that both the real and the ideal
Church are intended by the members to be com-
munities in our sense. An analogous truth
holds for such other communities as we shall
need to consider. The concept of the com-
munity is thus, for our purposes, a practical

64


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

conception. It involves the idea of deeds
done, and ends sought or attained. Hence I
shall define it in terms of members who them-
selves not only Uve in time, but conceive their
own ideally extended personalities in terms of
a time-process. In so far as these personalities
possess a life that is for each of them his own,
while it is, in some of its events, common to
them all, they form a community.

Nothing important is lost, for our concep-
tion of the community, by this formal re-
striction, whereby common objects belong to
a conmaunity only when these objects are
bound up with the deeds of the community.
For, when the warrior regards his sword as a
part of himself, he does so because his sword is
the instrument of his will, and because what
he does with his sword belongs to his Uteral or
ideal life. Even the mystic accompUshes his
identification of the self and the world only
through acts of renunciation or of inward
triumph. And these acts are the goal of his
life. Until he attains to them, they form
part of his ideal future self. Whenever he

VOL. JI — F 65


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

fully accomplishes these crowning acts of
identification, the separate self no longer
exists. When knights or mystics form a
community, in our sense, they therefore do so
because they conceive of deeds done, in com-
mon, with their swords, or of mystical attain-
ments that all of them win together.

Thus then, while no authoritative limit can
be placed upon the ideal extensions of the self
in time, those extensions of the self which
need be considered for the purposes of our
theory of the community are indeed extensions
in time, past or future; or at all events in-
volve such extensions in time.

Memory and hope constantly incite us to
the extensions of the self which play so large a
part in our daily life. Social motives of end-
lessly diverse sort move us to consider "far
and forgot '^ as if to us it were near, when we
view ourselves in the vaster perspectives of
time. It is, in fact, the ideally extended self,
and not, in general, the momentary self, whose
life is worth living, whose sense outlasts our
fleeting days, and whose destiny may be

66


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

worthy of the interest of beings who are above
the level of human individuals. The present
self, the fleeting individual of to-day, is a
mere gesticulation of a self. The genuine
person lives in the far-off past and future as
well as in the present. It is, then, the ideally
extended self that is worthy to belong to a
significant community.

Ill

The second condition upon which the exist-
ence of a community depends is the fact that
there are in the social world a number of dis-
tinct selves capable of social communication,
and, in general, engaged in communication.

The distinctness of the selves we have illus-
trated at length in our previous discussion.
We need not here dwell upon the matter fur-
ther, except to say, expressly, that a com-
munity does not become one, in the sense of
my definition, by virtue of any reduction or
melting of these various selves into a single
merely present self, or into a mass of passing
experience. That mystical phenomena may

67


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

indeed form part of the life of a community,
just as they may also form part of the life
of an individual human being, I fully recognize.

About such mystical or quasi-mystical phe-
nomena, occurring in their own community,
the Corinthians consulted Paul. And Paul,
whose implied theory of the community is
one which my own definition closely follows,
assured them in his reply that mystical phe-
nomena are not essential to the existence of
the community; and that it is on the whole
better for the life of such a community as he
was addressing, if the individual member,
instead of losing himself "in a mystery,'"
kept his own individuaUty, in order to con-
tribute his own edifying gift to the common
life. Wherein this common life consists we
have yet further to see in what follows.

The third of the conditions for the existence
of the community which my definition em-
phasizes consists in the fact that the ideally
extended past and future selves of the mem-
bers include at least some events which are,
for all these selves, identical. This third con-

68


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

dition is the One which furnishes both the
most exact, the most widely variable, and the
most important of the motives which warrant
us in calUng a community a real unit. The
Pauline metaphor of the body and the mem-
bers finds, in this third condition, its most
significant basis, — a basis capable of exact
description.

IV

In addition to the instance which I cited at
the last time, when I mentioned the New
Zealanders and their legendary canoes, other
and much more important illustrations may
here serve to remind us how a single common
past or future event may be the central means
of uniting many selves in one spiritual com-
munity. For the Pauline churches the ideal
memory of their Lord's death and resurrec-
tion, defined in terms of the faith which the
missionary apostle delivered to them in his
teaching, was, for each beUever, an acknowl-
edged occurrence in his own past. For each
one was taught the faith, "In that one


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

event my individual salvation was accom-
plished."

This faith has informed ever since the ideal
memory upon which Christian tradition has
most of all depended for the establishment and
the preservation of its own community. If
we speak in terms of social psychology, we
are obliged, I think, to regard this belief as
the product of the life of the earUest Christian
community itself. But once established, and
then transmitted from generation to genera-
tion, this same belief has been ceaselessly
recreative of the communities of each suc-
ceeding age. And the various forms of the
Christian Church, — its hierarchical institu-
tions, its schisms, its reformations, its sects,
its heresies, have been varied, differentiated,
or divided, or otherwise transformed, accord-
ing as the individual believers who made up
any group of followers of Christian tradition
have conceived, each his own personal life
as including and as determined by that one
ideal event thus remembered, namely, his
Lord's death and resurrection.

70


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

Since the early Church was aware of this
dependence of its community upon its memory,
it instinctively resisted every effort to deprive
that memory of definiteness, to explain it
away as the Gnostic heresies did, or to trans-
form it from a memory into any sort of con-
scious allegory. The idealized memory, the
backward looking faith of an individual
believer, must relate to ^events that seem to
him living and concrete. Hence the early
Church insisted upon the words, "Suffered
under Pontius Pilate/' The religious instinct
which thus insisted was true to its own needs.
A very definite event must be viewed by each
believer as part of the history of his own
personal salvation. Otherwise the com-
munity would lose its coherence.

Paul himself, despite his determination to
know Christ, not "after the flesh," but "after
the Spirit,"" was unhesitating and uncom-
promising with regard to so much of the ideal
Christian memory as he himself desired each
believer to carry clearly in mind. Only by
such common memories could the community

71


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

be constituted. To be sure, the Apostle's
Christology, on its more metaphysical side,
cared little for such more precise technical
formulations as later became historically im-
portant for the Church that formulated its
creeds. But the events which Paul regarded
as essential to salvation must be, as he held,
plainly set down.

Since human memory is naturally sustained
by commemorative acts, Paul laid the greatest
possible stress upon the Lord's Supper, and
made the proper ordering thereof an essential
part of his ideal as a teacher. In this act of
commemoration, wherein each member re-
called the origin of his own salvation, the
community maintained its united life.


The early Church was, moreover, not only
a community of memory, but a community
of hope. Since, if the community was to
exist, and to be vigorously alive, each believer
must keep definite his own personal hope, while
the event for which all hoped must be, for

72


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

all, an identical event, something more was
needed, in Paul's account of the coming end
of the world, than the more dimly conceived
common judgment had hitherto been in the
minds of the Corinthians to whom Paul
wrote. And therefore the grfeat chapter on
'the resurrection emphasizes equally the com-
mon resurrection of all, and the very explic-
itly individual immortality of each man.
Paul use4 both the resurrection of Christ,
and the doctrine of the spiritual body, to give
the sharpest possible outlines to a picture
which has ever since dominated not only the*
traditional Christian religious imagination, but
the ideal of the united Church triumphant.

Nowhere better than in this very chapter
can one find an example of the precise way in
which the fully developed consciousness of a
community solves its own problem of the one
and the many, by clearly conceiving both the
diversity of the members and the unity of
the body in terms of the common hope for
the same event.

The Apostle had to deal with the doctrine
73


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

of the immortality of the individual man,
and also with the corporate relations of
humanity and of the Church to death and to
the end of all things. The most pathetic
private concerns and superstitions of men,
the most conflicting ideas of matter, of spirit,
and of human solidarity, had combined, in
those days, to confuse the religious ideas
which entered into the life of the early Church,
when the words "death and resurrection"
were in question. The Apostle himself was
heir to a seemingly hopeless tangle of ancient
and more or less primitive opinions regarding
the human self and the cosmos, regarding the
soul and the future.

A mystery-religion of PauFs own time might,
and often did, assure the individual initiate
of his own immortality. The older Messianic
hope, of its successor in the early Christian
consciousness, might be expressed, and was
often expressed, in a picture wherein all
mankind were together called before the
judgment seat at the end. But minds whose
ideas upon such topics came from various

74


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

and bewildering sources, — minds such as
those of Paul's Corinthians, might, and did,
inquire: "What will personally happen to
me ? What will happen to all mankind ? ''
The very contrast between these two ques-
tions was, at that time, novel. The growing
sense of the significance of the individual
self was struggling against various more or
less mystical identifications of all mankind
with Adam, or with some one divine or
demonic power or spirit. Such a struggle
still goes on to-day.

But Paul's task it was, in writing this
chapter, to clarify his own religious con-
sciousness, and to guide his readers through the
mazes of human hope and fear to some pre-
cise view, both of human solidarity and
individual destiny. His method consisted
in a definition of his whole problem in terms
of the relation between the individual, the
community, and the divine being whom he
conceived as the very life of this community.
He undertook to emphasize the individual
self, and yet to insist upon the unity of the

75


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

Church and of its Lord. He made perfectly
clear in each believer's mind the idea: "I
myself, and not another, am to witness and
to take part in this last great change/' To
this end Paul made use of the conception of
the individual spiritual body of each man.
But Paul also dwelt with equal decisiveness
upon the thought, "This last event of the
present world is to be, for all of us, one event ;
for we shall all together arise/'

These two main thoughts of the great
chapter are in the exposition clearly con-
trasted and united; and against this well-
marked background Paul can then place state-
ments about humanity viewgd-as one cor-
porate entity, — monistic formujationisr^o to
speak, — and can do this without fe^r of
being misunderstood: "The first man Adam
became a living soul. The Jast Adam be-
came a quickening spirit. The first man is
of the earth, earthy; the second man is the
Lord from heaven." What these more mo-
nistic statements about mankind as one cor-
porate entity are to mean, is made clear simply

76


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

by teaching each believer to say, "I shall
myself arise, with my own transformed and
incorruptible body;" and also to say, "This
event of the resurrection is one for all of us,
for we shall arise together/'

In such expressions Paul uses traditions
whose sources were indeed obscure and whose
meaning was, as one might have supposed,
hopelessly ambiguous. The interpretations
of these traditions on Paul's part might have
been such as to lose sight of the destiny of
the individual human being through a more or
less mystical blending of the whole race.
That would have been natural for a mind
trained to think of Adam and of mankind as
Paul was trained. Or, again, the interpre-
tation might have taken the form of assuring
the individual believer that he could win his
own immortality, while leaving him no further
ground for special interest in the community.
Paul's religious genius aims straight at the
central problem of clearing away this ambi-
guity, and of defining the immortal life, both
of the individual and of the community.

77


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY"

In the expected resurrection, as Paul pictures
it, the individual finds his own life, and the
community its common triumph over all
the world-old powers of death. And the hope
is referred back again to the memory. Was
not Christ raised ? By this synthesis Paul
solves his religious problem, and defines
sharply the relation of the individual and the
community.

And therefore, whenever, upon the familiar
solemn occasions, this chapter is read, not
only is individual sorrow bidden to transform
itself into an unearthly hope ; but even upon
earth the living and conscious community of
the faithful celebrates the present oneness of
spirit in which it triumphs. And the death
over which it triumphs is the death of the
lonely individual, whom faith beholds raised
to the imperishable life in the spirit. This
life in the spirit is also the life of the com-
munity. For the individual is saved, accord-
ing to Paul, only in and through and with
the community and its Lord.


78


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY^ND THE MEMBERS

VI

Our present interest in these classic reli-
gious illustrations of the idea of the com-
munity is not directly due to their historical
importance as pftrts of Christian tradition;
but depends upon the help which they give us
in seeing how a community, whether it be
Christian or not, can really constitute a single
entity, despite the multiplicity of its members.
Our illustrations have brought before us the
fact that hope and memory constitute, in com-
munities, a basis for an unquestionable con-
sciousness of unity, and that this conunon life
in time does not annul the variety of the in-
dividual members at any one present moment.

We have still to see, however, the degree
to which this consciousness of unity can find
expression in an effectively united common
life which not only contains common events,
but also possesses common deeds and can
arouse a common love — a love which passes
the love wherewith individuals can love one
another.

79


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

And here we reach that aspect of the con-
ception of the community which is the most
important, and also the most difficult aspect.

VII

A great and essentially dramatic event,
such as the imagined resurrection of the
bodies of all men, — an event which interests
all, and which fixes the attention by its mirac-
ulous apparition, — is well adapted to illustrate
the union of the one and the many in the
process of time. When Paul's genius seized
upon this picture, — when, to use the well-
known later scholastic phraseology, the spirits
of men were thus "individuated by their
bodies," even while the event of the resurrec-
tion fixed the eye of faith upon one final
crisis through which all were to pass "in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye," — when
the Apostle thus instructed the faithful, a
great lesson was also taught regarding the
means whereby the ideal of a community and
the harmonious union of the one and the
many can be rendered brilliantly clear to the

80


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

imagination, and decisively fascinating to the
will.

But the lives of communities cannot consist
of miraculous crises. A community, like an
individual self, must learn to keep the con-
sciousness of its xmity through the vicissitudes
of an endlessly shifting and often dreary
fortune. The monotony of insignificant
events, the chaos of lesser conflicts, the fric-
tion and the bickerings of the members,
the individual failures and the mutual mis-
understandings which make the members of
a community forget the common past and
futiwe, — all these things work against the
conscious unity of the life of a community.
Memory and hope are alike clouded by multi-
tudes of such passing events. The individual
members cannot always recall the sense in
which they identify their own lives and selves
with what has been, or with what is yet to
come.

And — hardest task of all — the members,
if they are to conceive clearly of the common
life, must somehow learn to bear in mind not

VOL. 11 — G 81


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

merely those grandly simple events which,
like great victories, or ancestral feats, or
divine interferences, enter into the life of the
community from without, and thus make
their impression all at once.

No, the true common life of the community
consists of deeds which are essentially of the
nature of processes of cooperation. That is,
the common life consists of deeds which many
members perform together, as when the work-
men in a factory labor side by side.

Now we all know that cooperation constantly
occurs, and is necessary to every form and
grade of society. We also know that com-
merce and industry and art and custom and
language consist of vast complexes of cooper-
ations. And in all such cases many men
manage in combination to accomplish what
no one man, and no multitude of men working
separately, could conceivably bring to pass.
But what we now need to see is the way in
which such cooperations can become part,
not only of the life, but of the consciousness
of a community.

82


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

VIII

Every instance of a process of cooperation
is an event, or a sequence of events. And
our definition of a community requires that,
if such cooperative activities are to be re-
garded as the deeds of a community, there
must be individuals, each one of whom says :
^^That cooperation, in which many distinct
individuals take part, and in which I also
take part, is, or was, or will be, an event in
my life." And many coSperating individuals
must agree in saying this of the same process
in which they all cooperate.

And all must extend such identifications of
the self with these social activities far into
the past, or into the future*

But it is notoriously hard — especially in
our modem days of the dreary complexity
of mechanical labor — for any individual man
so to survey, and so to take interest in a vast
cooperative activity that he says: "In my
own ideally extended past and future that
activity, its history, its future, its significance

83


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

as an event or sequence of events, all have
their ideally significant part. That activity,
as the cooperation of many in one work, is
also my life." To say such things and to
think such thoughts grow daily harder for
most of the coworkers of a modern social
order.

Hence, as is now clear, the existence of a
highly organized social life is by no means
identical with the existence of what is, in our
present and restricted sense, the life of a true
community. On the contrary, and for the
most obvious reasons, there is a strong mutual
opposition between the social tendencies which
secure cooperation on a vast scale, and the
very conditions which so interest the indi-
vidual in the conunon life of his community
that it forms part of his own ideally extended
life. We met with that opposition between
the more or less mechanically cooperative
social life, — the life of the social will on the
one side, and the life of the true conmiunity
on the other side, — when we were consider-
ing the Pauline doctrine of. the law in an

84


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

earlier lecture. In fact, it is the original sin
of any highly developed civilization that it
breeds cooperation at the expense of a loss
of interest in the community.

The failure to see the reason why this
opposition between the tendency to co5pera-
tion and the spirit of the community exists;
the failure to sound to the depths the origi-
nal sin of man the social animal, and of the
natural social order which he creates; —
such failure, I repeat, lies at the basis of
countless misinterpretations, both of our mod-
em social problems, and of the nature of a
true commimity, and of the conditions which
make possible any wider philosophical gen-
eralizations of the idea of the commimity.

IX

Men do not form a community, in our
present restricted sense of that word, merely
in so far as the men co5perate. They form
a conununity, in our present limited sense,
when they not only cooperate, but accompany
this coSperation with that ideal extension of

85


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

the lives of individuals whereby each cooperat-
ing member says: "This activity, which we
perform together, this work of ours, its past,
its future, its sequence, its order, its sense, —
all these enter into my life, and are the
life of my own self writ large/'

Now cooperation results from conditions
which a social psychology such as that of
Wundt or of Tarde may analyze. Imitation
and rivalry, greed and ingenuity, business
and pleasure, war and industry, may all
combine to make men so coOperate that very
large groups of them behave, to an external
observer, as if they were units. In the
broader sense of the term " commimity,*' all
social groups that behave as if they were
units are regarded as communities. And we
ourselves called all such groups commimities
in our earlier lectures before we came to our
new definition.

But we have now been led to a narrower
application of the term "community.'' It is
an application to which we have restricted
the term simply because of our special pur-
se


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

pose in this inquiry. Using this restricted
definition of the term "community," we see
that groups which coSperate may be very
far from constituting communities in our
narrower sense. We also see how, in general,
a group whose cooperative activities are
very highly complex will require a corre-
spondingly long period of time to acquire that
sort of tradition and of common expectation
which is needed to constitute a community
in our sense, — that is, a community conscious
of its own life.

Owing to the psychological conditions upon
which social cooperation depends, such co-
operation can very far outstrip, in the com-
plexity of its processes, the power of any
individual man's wit to understand its in-
tricacies. In modern times, when social co-
operation both uses and is so largely dominated
by the industrial arts, the physical conditions
of cooperative social life have combined with
the psychological conditions to make any
thorough understanding of the cooperative
processes upon which we all depend simply

87


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

hopeless for the individual, except within
some narrow range. Experts become well
acquainted with aspects of these forms of
cooperation which their own callings involve.
Less expert workers understand a less range
of the cooperative processes in which they
take part. Most individuals, in most of
their work, have to cooperate as the cogs
cooperate in the wheels of a mechanism.
They work together; but few or none of
them know how they cooperate, or what
they must do.

But the true community, in our present
restricted sense of the word, depends for its
genuine common life upon such cooperative
activities that ^ the individuals who partici-
pate in these common activities understand
enough to be able, first, to direct their own
deeds of cooperation; secondly, to observe
the deeds of their individual fellow workers,
and thirdly to know that, without just this
combination, this order, this interaction of
the coworking selves, just this deed could not
be accomplished by the conmaunity* So, for

88


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

instance, ia chorus or an orchestra carries on
its cooperative activities. In these cases
cooperation is a conscious art. If hereupon
these cooperative deeds, thus understood by
the individual coworker, are viewed by him
as linked, through an extended history with
past and future deeds of the community, and
if he then identifies his own life with this
common life, and if his fellow members agree
in this identification, then indeed the com-
mimity both has a common life, and is aware
of the fact. For then the individual co-
worker not only says: "This past and
future fortune of the community belongs to
my life;" but also declares : "This past and
future deed of cooperation belongs to my
life." "This, which none of us could have
done alone, — this, which all of us together
could not have accomplished unless we were
ordered and linked in precisely this way, —
this we together accomplished, or shall yet
accomplish ; and this deed of all of us belongs
to my life."
A community thus constituted is essentially

89


Digitized by


Google


TfiE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

a community of those who are artists in some
form of cooperation, and whose art consti-
tutes, for each artist, his own ideally extended
life. But the life of an artist depends upon
his love for his art.

The community is made possible by the
fact that each member includes in his own
ideally extended life the deeds of cooperation
which the members accomplish. When these
deeds are hopelessly complex, how shall the
individual member be able to regard them
as genuinely belonging to his own ideally
extended life ? He can no longer understand
them in any detail. He takes part in them,
willingly or unwillingly. He does so because
he is social, and because he must. He works
in his factory, or has his share, whether
greedily or honestly, in the world's commercial
activities. And his cooperations may be
skilful; and this fact also he may know.
But his skill is largely due to external training,
not to inner expansion of the ideals of the
self. And the more complex the social order
grows, the more all this cooperation must

90


Digitized by


Google J


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

tend to appear to the individual as a mere

process of nature, and not as his own work, —

*
as a mechanism and not as an ideal extension

of himself, — unless indeed love supplies what

individual wit can no longer accomplish.

X

If a social order, however complex it may
be, actually wins and keeps the love of its
members ; so that, — however little they
are able to understand the details of their
present cooperative activities, — they still
— with all their whole hearts and their minds
and their souls, and their strength — desire,
each for himself, that such cooperations should
go on ; and if each member, looking back to
the past, rejoices in the ancestors and the
heroes who have made the present life of
this social group possible; and if he sees in
these deeds of former generations the source
and support of his present love ; and if each
member also looks forward with equal love
to the future, — then indeed love furnishes
that basis for the consciousness of the com-

91


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

munity which intelligence, without love, in a
highly complex social realm, can no longer
furnish. Such love — such loyalty — de-
pends not upon losing sight of the variety of
the callings of individuals, but upon seeing
in the successful cooperation of all the mem-
bers precisely that event which the individual
member most eagerly loves as his own fulfil-
ment.

When love of the community, nourished by
common memories, and common hope, both
exists and expresses itself in devoted individual
lives, it can constantly tend, despite the
complexity of the present social order, to keep
the consciousness of the community alive.
And when this takes place, the identification
of the loyal individual self with the life of the
community will tend, both in ideal and in
feeling, to identify each self not only with the
distant past and future of the community,
but with the present activities of the whole
social body.

Thus, for instance, when the complexities
of business life, and the dreariness of the

92


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

factory, have, to our minds, deprived our
present social cooperations of all or of most of
their common significance, the great communal
or national festivity, bringing to memory the
great events of past and future, not only
makes us, for tKe moment, feel and think as
a community with reference to those great
past and futiu'e events, but in its turn, as a
present event, reacts upon next day's ordi-
nary labors. The festivity says to us:
"We are one because of our common past and
future, because of the national heroes and
victories and hopes, and because we love
all these common memories and hopes/'
Our next day's mood, consequent upon the
festivity, bids us say: "Since we are thus
possessed of this beloved common past and
future, let this consciousness lead each of us
even to-day to extend his ideal self so as
to include the daily work of all his fellows,
and to view his fellow members' life as his
own."

Thus memory and hope tend to react upon
the present self, which finds the brotherhood

93


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

of present labor more significant, and the
ideal identification of the present self with the
self of the neighbor easier, because the ideal
extension of the self into past and future
has preceded.

And so, first, each of us* learns to say:
"This beloved past and future life, by virtue
of the ideal extension, is my own Ufe." Then,
finding that our fellows have and love this
past and future in common with us, we learn
further to say: "In this respect we are all
one loving and beloved community." Then
we take a further step and say: "Since we
are all members of this community, there-
fore, despite our differences, and our mu-
tual sunderings of inner life, each of us can,
and will, ideally extend his present self so as
to include the present Ufe and deeds of his
fellow."

So it is that, in the ideal church, each
member not only looks backwards to the same
history of salvation as does his fellow, but is
even thereby led to an ideal identification of
his present self with that of his fellow member

94


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

that would not otherwise be possible. Thus,
then, common memory and common hope, the
central possessions of the community, tend,
when enUvened by love, to mould the con-
sciousness of the present, and to Unk each
member to his community by ideal ties which
belong to the moment as well as to the stream
of past and future life.

XI

Love, when it exists and triumphs over the
complexities which obscure and confuse the
common Ufe, thus completes the conscious-
ness of the community, in the forms which
that consciousness can assume under human
conditions. Such love, however, must be
one that has the common deeds of the com-
munity as its primary object. No one under-
stands either the nature of the loyal life, or
the place of love in the constitution of the
life of a real community, who conceives such
love as merely a longing for the mystical
blending of the selves or for their mutual
interpenetration, and for that only. Love

95


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

says to the individual: "So extend your-
self, in ideal, that you aim, with all your
heart and your soul and your mind and your
strength, at that life of perfectly definite deeds
which never can come to pass unless all the
members, despite their variety and their
natural narrowness, are in perfect cooperation.
Let this hfe be your art and also the art of
all your fellow members. Let your com-
munity be as a chorus, and not as a company
who forget themselves in a common trance.^'
Nevertheless, as Paul showed in the great
chapter, such love of the self for the com-
munity can be and will be not without its
own mystical element. For since we human
beings are as narrow in our individual con-
sciousness as we are, we cannot ideally extend
ourselves through clearly understanding the
comphcated social activities in which the
community is to take part. Therefore our
ideal extensions of the self, when we love the
community, and long to reahze its hfe with
intimacy, must needs take the form of
acting as if we could survey ^ in some single

96


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

unity of insight, that wealth and variety and
connection which, as a fact, we cannot make
present to our momentary view. Since true
love is an emotion, and since emotions are
present aflFections of the self, love, in longing
for its own increase, and for its own fulfil-
ment, inevitably longs to find what it loves as
a fact of experience, and to be in the imme-
diate presence of its beloved. Therefore,
the love of a community (a love which,
as we now see, is devoted to desiring the
realization of an overwhelmingly vast variety
and unity of cooperations), is, as an emotiqp,
discontent with all the present sundering of
the selves, and with all the present problems
and mysteries of the social order. Such love,
then, restless with the narrowness of our
momentary view of our common life, desires
this common life to be an immediate presence
for all of us. Such an immediate presence
of all the community to all the members
would be indeed, if it could wholly and simply
take place, a mere blending of the selves, —
an interpenetration in which the individuals

VOL. II — H 97


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

vanished, and in which, for that very reason,
the real community would also be lost.

Love, — the love of PauFs great chapter,
— the loyalty which stands at the centre of
the Christian consciousness, — is, as an emo-
/ tion, a longing for such a mystical blending

of the selves. This longing is present in
Paul's account. It is in so far not the whole
of charity. It is simply the mystical aspect
of the love for the community.

But the PauKne charity is not merely an
emotion. It is an interpretation. The ideal
extension of the self gets a full and concrete
meaning only by being actively expressed in
the new deeds of each individual life. Unless
each man knows how distinct he is from the
whole community and from every member of
it, he cannot render to the community what
love demands, — namely, the devoted work.
Love may be mystical, and work should be
directed by clearly outlined intelligence; but
the loyal spirit depends upon this union of a
longing for unity with a will which needs its
own expression in works of loyal art.


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

xn

jThe doctrine of the two levels of human
existence; the nature of a real community;
the sense in which there can be, in individual
human beings, despite their narrowness, their
variety, and their sundered present lives, a
genuine consciousness of the life of a com-
munity whereof they are members: — these
matters we have now, within our limits,
interpreted. The time-process, and the ideal
extensions of the self in this time-process, lie
at the basis of the whole theory of the com-
munity. The union and the contrast of the
one and the many in the community, and the
relation of the mystical element in our con-
sciousness of the community to the active in-
terpretation of the loyal life, these things have
also been reviewed. Incidentally, so to speak,
we have suggested further reasons why loyalty,
whether in its distinctively Christian forms,
or in any others, is a saving principle whenever
it appears in an individual human life. For
in the love of a community the individual ob-

99


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

tains, for his ideally extended self, precisely the
unity, the wealth, and the harmony of plan
which his sundered natural existence never
supplies.

Yet it must be not merely admitted, but em-
phasized, that all such analyses of the sort of life
and of interpretation upon which communities
and the loyalty of their members depend, does
not and cannot explain the origin of loyalty, the
true sources of grace, and the way in which
communities of high level come into existence.

On the contrary, all the foregoing account
of what a community is shows how the true
spirit of loyalty, and the highest level of the
consciousness of a human community, is at
once so precious, and so difficult to create.

The individual man naturally, but capri-
ciously, loves both himself and his fellow-man,
according as passion,, pity, memory, and hope
move him. Social training tends to sharpen
the contrasts between the self and the fellow-
man; and higher cultivation, under these
conditions of complicated social cooperation
which we have just pointed out, indeed makes

100


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

a man highly conscious that he depends upon
his community, but also renders him equally
conscious that, as an individual, he is much
beset by the complexities of the social will,
and does not always love his commimity,
or any community. Neither the origin nor
the essence of loyalty is explained by man's
tendencies to love his individual fellow-man.

It is true that, within the limits of his power
to understand his social order, the conditions
which mate a man conscious of his community
also imply that the man should in some re-
spects identify his life with that. But I may
well know that the history, the future, the
whole meaning of my community are bound
up with my own life ; and yet it is not neces-
sary that on that account I should whole-
heartedly love my own life. I may be a pessi-
mist. Or I may be simply discontented. I
may desire to escape from the life that I have.
And I may be aware that my fellows, for the
most part, also long to escape.

That the community is above my own in-
dividual level I shall readily recognize, since

101


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

the community is indeed vastly more skilful
and incomparably more powerful than I can
ever become. But what is thus above me I
need not on that account be ready wholly to
love. To be sure, that man is indeed a sad
victim of a misunderstood life who is himself
able to be clearly aware of his community, to
identify its history and its future, at least in
part, with his own ideally extended life, and
who is yet wholly unable ever to love the life
which is thus linked with his own. Yet there
remains the fate which Paul so emphasized,
and which has determined the whole history
of the Christian consciousness : Knowledge of
the community is not love of the community.
Love, when it comes, comes as from above.

Especially is this true of the love of the
ideal community of all mankind. I can be
genuinely in love with the community only
in case I have somehow fallen in love with the
universe. The problem of love is human.
The solution of the problem, if it comes at all,
will be, in its meaning, superhuman, and
divine, if there be anything divine.

102


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

What our definition of the community ena-
bles us to add to our former views of the mean-
ing of loyalty is simply this : If the universe
proves to be, in any sense, of the nature of a
community, then love for this community,
and for God, will not mean merely love for
losing the self, or for losing the many selves,
in any interpenetration of selves. If one
can find that all humanity, in the sense of our
definition, constitutes a real community, or
that the world itself is, in any genuine way,
of the nature of a community such as we have
defined ; and if hereupon we can come to love
this real community, — then the one and the
many, the body and the members, our beloved
and ourselves, will be joined in a life in which
we shall be both preserved as individuals, and
yet united to that which we love.

XIII

Plainly a metaphysical study of the question
whether the universe is a community will be
as powerless as the foregoing analysis of the
real nature of human communities to explain

103


. Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

the origin of love, or to make any one fall in
love with the universe. Yet something has
been gained by our analysis of the problem
which, from this point onwards, determines
our metaphysical inquiry. If our results are
in any way positive, they may enable us to
view the problem of Christianity, that is,
the problem of the religion of loyalty, in a
larger perspective than that which human
history, when considered alone, determines.
The favorite methods of approaching the
metaphysical problems of theology end by
leaving the individual alone with God, in a
realm which seems, to many minds, a realm of
merely concepts, of intellectual abstractions,
of barren theories. The ways which are just
now in favor in the philosophy of religion
seem to end in leaving the individual equally
alone with his intuitions, his lurid experiences
of sudden conversion, or his ineflFable mysteries
of saintly peace.

May we not hope to gain by a method
which follows the plan now outlined ? This
method, first, encourages a man to interpret

104


Digitized by


Google


THE BODY AND THE MEMBERS

his own individual self in terms of the largest
ideal extension of that self in time which his
reasonable will can acknowledge as worthy
of the aims of his life. Secondly, this method
bids a man consider what right he has to in-
terpret the life from which he springs, in the
midst of which he now lives, as a life that in
any imiversal sense cooperates with his own
and ideally expresses its own meaning so as
to meet with his own, and to have a history
identical with his own. Thirdly, this method
directs us to inquire how far, in the social
order to which we imquestionably belong,
there are features such as warrant us in hoping
that, in the world's community, our highest
love may yet find its warrant and its fulfilment.
Whatever the fortimes of the quest may be,
we have now defined its plan, and have shown
its perfectly definite relation to the historical
problem of Christianity.


105


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


XI

PERCEPTION, CONCEPTION, AND
INTERPRETATION


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


LECTURE XI

PERCEPTION, CONCEPTION, AND
INTERPRETATION

IN defining what constitutes a community
I have repeatedly mentioned processes of
Interpretation. The word "interpretation''
is well known ; and students of the humanities
have special reasons for using it frequently.
When one calls an opinion about the self an
interpretation, one is not employing language
that is familiar only to philosophers. When a
stranger in a foreign land desires the services
of an interpreter, when a philologist oflFers
his rendering of a text, when a judge con-
strues a statute, some kind of interpretation
is in question. And the process of interpre-
tation, whatever it is, is intended to meet
human needs which are as well known as
they are vital. Such needs determine, as we
shall see, whatever is humane and articu-
late in the whole conduct and texture of our
lives.

109


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY


Yet if we ask. What is an interpretation ?
— the answer is not easy. Nor is it made
much easier by stating the question in the form :
What does one desire who seeks for an inter-
pretation ? What does one gain, or create, or
acknowledge who accepts an interpretation ?

Our investigation has reached the point
where it is necessary to face these questions,
as well as some others closely related to them.
For, as a fact, to inquire what the process of
interpretation is, takes us at once to the very
heart of philosophy, throws a light both on
the oldest and on the latest issues of meta-
physical thought, and has an especially close
connection with the special topics to which
this coiu-se is devoted.

II

First, then, let me briefly recall the ways in
which we have already been brought into con-
tact with questions involving the natiu^e of
interpretation.

110


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

Our whole undertaking is an efiFort to inter-
pret vital features of Christianity. Each of
the three ideas which I have viewed as essen-
tial to the Christian doctrine of life had to be
interpreted first for itself, and then in its con-
nection with the others. You might have
supposed that, when we turned to our meta-
physical problems, we should henceforth have
to do with questions of fact, and not with
interpretations. But we have found that we
could not decide how the Christian doctrine
of life is related to the real world without
defining what we mean by a community. A
community, as we have seen, depends for
its very constitution upon the way in which
each of its members interprets himself and his
life. For the rest, nobody's self is either a
mere datum or an abstract conception. A
self is a life whose unity and connectedness
depend upon some sort of interpretation of
plans, of naemories, of hopes, and of deeds. If,
then, there are communities, there are many
selves who, despite their variety, so interpret
their lives that all these lives, taken together,

111


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

get the type of unity which our last lecture
characterized. Were there, then, no inter-
pretations in the world, there would be neither
selves nor communities. Thus our effort to
study matters of fact led us back to problems
of interpretation. These latter problems ob-
viously dominate every serious inquiry into
our problem of Christianity.

What, however, is any philosophy but an
interpretation either of life, or of the universe,
or of both? Does there exist, then, any
student of universally interesting issues who
is not concerned with an answer to the ques-
tion. What is an interpretation ?

Possibly these illustrations of our topic,
few as they are, seem already so various in
their characters as to suggest that the term
" interpretation "' may be too vague in its appli-
cations to admit, of precise definition. A ren-
dering of a text written in a foreign tongue;
a judge's construction of a statute; a man's
interpretation of himself and of his own life;
our own philosophical interpretation of this
or of that religious idea; and the practical

112


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

interpretation of our destiny, or of God,
which a great historical religion itself seems
to have taught to the faithful; or, finally,
a metaphysical interpretation of the universe,
— what — so you may ask — have all these
things in common ? What value can there be
in attempting to fix by a definition such fluent
and uncontrollable interests as inspire what
various people may call by the conmion name
interpretation ?

in

I reply that, beneath all this variety in the
special motives which lead men to interpret
objects, there exists a very definable unity of
purpose. Look more closely, and you shall see
that to mterpret, or to attempt an interpreta-
tion, is to assume an attitude of mind which
difiFers, in a notable way, from the other at-
titudes present in the intelligent activities of
men; while this attitude remains essentially
the same amidst very great varieties, both in
the individual interpreters and in the inter-
pretations which they seek, or undertake, or

VOL. n — I 113


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

accept. Interpretation, viewed as a mental
process, or as a type of knowledge, difiFers from
other mental processes and types of knowledge
in the objects to which it is properly applied,
in the relations in which it stands to these
objects, and in the ends which it serves.

In order to show you that this is the case, I
must summarize in my own way some still
neglected opinions which were first set forth,
in outline, more than forty years ago by our
American logician, Mr. Charles Peirce, in
papers which have been little read, but which,
to my mind, remain of very high value as
guides of inquiry, both in Logic and in the
Theory of Knowledge.^

^Of the early papers of Mr. Charles Peiroe to whic^ reference is
here made, the most unportant are : —

1. In the Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences, a paper : "On a New List of Categories,'* May 14, 1867.

2. In the Journal of Specidative Philosophy, Vol. II (1868-1869) :
"Questions concerning Certain Faculties claimed for Man.**

3. Id.: "Some Consequences of Four Incapacities.**

4. Id.: "Grounds of the Validity of the Laws of Logic; Further
Consequences of Four Incapacities.**

In addition to these early papers we may mention : —

5. Article "Sign" in Baldwin's "Dictionary of Philosophy and
Psychology," — a brief statement regarding an important point of
Peirce's theory.

114


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

Mr. Charles Peirce has become best known
to the general public by the part which Will-
iam James assigned to him as the inventor of
the term " Pragmatism/' and as, in some sense,
the founder of the form of Pragmatism which
James first made his own, and then developed
so independently and so significantly. But
by a small and grateful company of philosophi-
cal students, Mr. Peirce is prized, not solely,
and not, I think, mainly for his part in the
early history of Pragmatism, but for his con-
tributions to Logic, and for those remarkable
cosmological speculations which James also,
in his lectures on the Pluralistic Universe (as
some of you will remember), heartily acknowl-
edged.

Those ideas of Charles Peirce about Inter-
pretation to which I shall here refer, never,
so far as I know, attracted William James's
personal attention at any time. I may add
that, until recently, I myself never appreciated
their significance. In acknowledging here my
present indebtedness to these ideas, I have
to add that, in this place, there is no room

115


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

to expound them at length. The context in
which these views appear, both in the earliest
of the pubKshed logical papers of Peirce (about
1868), and in many of his later discussions,
is always very technical, and is such that no
adequate discussion of the issues involved
could be presented in a brief statement.
Moreover, it is proper to say that Charies
Peirce cannot be held responsible for the use
that I shall here make of his opinions, or for
any of the conclusions that I base upon them.
There is one additional matter which should
be emphasized at the outset. Peirce's opinions
as to the nature of interpretation were in no
wise influenced by Hegel, or by the tradition
of German ideaUsm. He formed them on the
basis of his own early scientific studies, and
of his extensive, although always very inde-
pendent, interest in the history of scholastic
logic. With recent idealism this "father of
Pragmatism "" has always felt only a very
quaUfied sympathy, and has frequently ex-
pressed no Uttle dissatisfaction. Some twelve
years ago, just after I had printed a book on

116


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

general philosophy, Mr. Charles Peirce wrote
to me, in a letter of kindly acknowledgment,
the words : "But, when I read you, I do wish
that you would study logic. You need it so
much.'"

Abandoning, then, any effort to state
Peirce's case as he stated it, let me next call
attention to matters which I should never
have viewed as I now view them without his
direct or indirect aid.

IV

The contrast between the cognitive pro-
cesses called, respectively, perception and
conception, dominates a great part of the
history of philosophy. This contrast is
usually so defined as to involve a dual classi-
fication of our cognitive processes. When one
asks which of the two processes, perception
or conception, gives us the more significant
guidance, or is the original from which the
other is derived, or is the ideal process whereof
the other is the degenerate fellow, such a dual
classification is in possession of the field.

117


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

This classic dual opposition was expressed,
in characteristically finished fashion, at the
outset of the lectures which Professor Bergson
read, in May of last year, at the invitation
of the University of Oxford. You all remem-
ber his words: "If our power of external
and internal perception were unUmited, we
should never make use of our power to con-
ceive, or of our power to reason. To con-
ceive is a makeshift in the cases where one
cannot perceive; and one reasons only in so
far as one needs to fill gaps in our outer or
inner perception, or to extend the range of
perception.'"

Here, as is obvious, there is no recognition
of the possible or actual existence of a third
type of cognitive process, which is neither
perception nor conception. The assertion
that conception is our makeshift when per-
ception is Kmited, and that unlimited per-
ception, by rendering conception superfluous,
would supply us with that grade of intuition
which we, in ideal, attribute to a divine being,
involves the postulate that we face the alter-

118


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

native: Either perception, or else concep-
tion.

But if one were to oppose the thesis just
cited by declaring in favor of conception as
against perception; if one were to assert that
perception deceives us with vain show, and
that conception alone can bring us face to
face with reaUty; if, in short, one were to
prefer Plato to Bergson, — one would not
thereby necessarily be led to abandon, — one
might, on the contrary, all the more emphasize
this dual classification of the possible cog-
nitive processes. In such a predominantly
dualistic view of . the classification of knowl-
edge, both rationalism and empiricism have,
on the whole, agreed, throughout the history
of thought. Kant and James, Bergson and
Mr. Bertrand Russell, are, in this respect, at
one.

To be sure, in addition to perception and
conception, reason and the reasoning process
have been very frequently recognized as
having some sort of existence for themselves,
over and above the processes of simple per-

119


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

ception and conception. Yet when Bergson
speaks of reasoning, in the passage just cited
from his Oxford lecture, reasoning, for him,
means a special form or grade of the concep-
tual process itself, and is therefore no third
type of cognition. When Kant made his
well-known triadic distinctions of sense, under-
standing, and reason, assigning to sense the
power of perceiving, to understanding the
power to form and to use concepts, and to
reason a third function which Kant did not
always define in the same way, — he did not
really succeed in escaping from the classical
duaUsm with regard to the processes of cogni-
tion. For Kant's account of reason assigns
to it, in general, a high grade of conceptual
functions, as opposed to perceptual functions ;
and thus still depends upon the dual contrast
between perception and conception. Kant
is nearest to defining a third type of cognitive
process in many of his accounts of what he
calles the Urtheilskraft. But he never con-
sistently maintains a triadic classification of
the cognitive processes.

120


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION


Despite this prevalence of the dual classi-
fication of our cognitive processes, most of
us will readily acknowledge that, in our real
life, we human beings are never possessed
either of pure perception or of pure concep-
tion. In ideal, we can define an intuitive type
of knowledge, which should merely see, and
which should never think. In an equally ideal
fashion, we can imagine the possibiKty of a
pure thought, which should be wholly absorbed
in conceptions, which should have as its sole
real object a realm of universals, and which
should ignore all sensible data. But we mor-
tals live the inteUigent part of our Uves through
some sort of more or less imperfect union or
synthesis of conception and perception.

In recent discussion it has become almost a
commonplace to recognize this union as con-
stantly exemplified in human experience. In
this one respect, to-day, empiricists and
rationaUsts, pragmatists and intellectuaKsts,
are accustomed to agree, although great dif-

121


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

ferences arise with regard to what union of
perception and conception constitutes such
knowledge as we human beings can hopefully
pursue or actually possess.

Kant, assuring us that conceptions with-
out perceptions are "empty/" and that per-
ceptions without conceptions are "blind/' sets
forth, in his theory of knowledge, the well-
known account of how the "spontaneity" of
the intellect actively combines the perceptual
data, and brings the so-called "manifold of
sense" to "unity of conception/'

Recent pragmatism, laying stress upon the
"practical" character of every human. cogni-
tive process, depicts the life of knowledge as
a dramatic pursuit of perceptions, — a pur-
suit guided by the "leadings" which our con-
ceptions determine, and which, in some sense,
simply constitute our conceptions, in so far as
these have genuine life.

When, a number of years ago, I began a
general metaphysical inquiry by defining an
idea as a "plan of action," and thereupon de-
veloped a theory of knowledge and of reality,

122


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

upon bases which this definition helped me
to formulate, I was making my own use of
thoughts which, in their outUnes, are at the
present day common property. The outcome
of my own individual use of this definition was
a sort of absolute pragmatism, which has
never been pleasing either to rationalists or to
empiricists, either to pragmatists or to the
ruling type of absolutists. But in so far tis I
simply insisted upon the active meaning of
ideas, my statement had something in com-
mon with many forms of current opinion which
agree with one another in hardly any other re-
spect. Only the more uncompromising of the
mystics still seek for knowledge in a silent land
of absolute intuition, where the intellect finally
lays down its conceptual tools, and rests from
its pragmatic labors, while its works do not
follow it, but are simply forgotten, and are as if
they never had been. Those of us who are not
such uncompromising mystics, view accessible
human knowledge neither as pure perception
nor as pure conception, but always as depend-
ing upon the marriage of the two processes.

123


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

VI

Yet such a recognition of an active synthe-
sis of perception and conception does not by
itself enable us to define a genuinely triadic
classification of the types of knowing pro-
cesses. Let me illustrate this fact by another
quotation from Bergson. In a passage in the
first of his two Oxford lectures, our author
says: "I do not deny the usefulness of ab-
stract and general ideas, — any more than I
question the value of bank-notes. But just
as the note is only a promise to pay cash,
so a conception has value only by virtue of
the eventual perceptions for which it stands.''

In these words, as you see, the antithesis,
*' conception," "perception," corresponds to
the antithesis, "bank-note" and "cash,"
and the other antithesis, "credit- value,"
"cash- value." All these corresponding antith-
eses involve or depend upon dual classifica-
tions. Now it is true, and is expressly pointed
out by Bergson, that the members of each of
these pairs, — the credit- value, and the cash-

124


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

value, — as well as the bank-note and its
equivalent in gold, — are brought into a cer-
tain synthesis by the existence of a process
of promising, and of redeeming the promise.
A promise, however, involves a species of
activity. In case of the bank-note, this
activity may express whatever makes some
vast commercial system solvent, or may be
based upon the whole power of a great modern
state.

In very much the same way, many philoso-
phers of otherwise widely diflFerent opinions rec-
ognize that conception and perception are, in
Kve cognitive processes, brought into synthesis
by some sort of activity, — the activity of the
mind whose cognitions are in question. This
activity may be one of attention. Or it may
consist of a series of voluntary deeds.

But in each of these cases, the members of
a pair, "bank-note and cash," or "concep-
tion and perception," are first antithetically
opposed to each other; and then a third or
active element, a promise, a voKtion, or what
you will, is mentioned as that which brings

125


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

the members of the pair into synthesis. But
this third or synthetic factor is not thus co-
ordinated with the two opposed members of
the pair.

If action, or activity, is the name given to
whatever brings perceptions and conceptions
into synthesis, then this third factor is not
hereby set side by side, both with perception
and with conception as a third form of cog-
nitive activity. For action may be viewed
as a non-cognitive function, — and classified
as "conation.'' Or, on the contrary, action
may be viewed as that grade of cognition
1^ which, being neither conception alone, nor
perception alone, but the synthesis of the
two, is the only mature and successfully
completed cognitive process. Both of these
views have been asserted. We need not dis-
cuss them here. But, in any case, "action"
or "activity'' is not itself hereby defined as a
third type of cognition; any more than the
activity of promising to pay, in Bergson's
illustration, is defined as a third sort of cur-
rency which is neither gold nor bank-notes.

126


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OP INTERPRETATION

Thus far, then, the classification of the cog-
nitive processes as being either perceptions or
else conceptions remains triumphant, and is
not superseded by regarding genuine knowl-
edge as a synthesis of these two. For the
dual contrast between perception and con-
ception dominates all such opinions.

VII

Yet cognition may be considered from a
slightly diflferent point of view.

It is natural to classify cognitive processes
by their characteristic objects. The object
of a perception is a datum of some sort, a
thingy or perhaps, as Bergson insists, a change,
or whatever else we may be able immediately
to apprehend. The object of a conception is
an universal of some sort, a general or a6-
stract character y a type^ a quality , or some com-
plex object based upon such universals. Now
do all objects of cognition belong to one of
these two classes ? If so, in which of these
classes will you place your neighbor's mind,
or any of the conscious acts of that mijid?

127


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

Is your neighbor's mind a datum that you
could, were your perception ''unlimited/'
simply find present to you, as red or as a
" change '' can be present ? Is your neighbor's
mind, on the contrary, an abstraction, a
mere sort of being, an universal which you
merely conceive? If a conception resembles
a bank-note in being a promise to pay, which
needs to be redeemed in the gold of percep-
tion, — then what immediate perception of
your own could ever render to you the "cash-
value" of your idea of your neighbor's mind ?
On the other hand, your present and personal
idea of your neighbor's mind is certainly not
itself such a perceptual "cash- value" for
you. Your neighbor's mind is no mere datum
to your sense at any time.

If, then, there be any cognitive process
whose proper object is your neighbor's mind,
this process is neither a mere conception nor
yet a mere perception. Is it, then, some
synthesis or combination of perceptions and
conceptions? Or is it, finally, some third
form of cognitive process, which is neither

128


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

perception nor conception, and which cannot
be completely describable in terms of combined
perceptions and conceptions ? Now it appears
that the word '* interpretation" is a conven-
ient name for a process which at least aims
to be cognitive. And the proper object of
an interpretation, as we usually employ the
name, is either something of the nature of a
mind, or else is a process which goes on in a
mind, or, finally, is a sign or expression where-
by some mind manifests its existence and its
processes. Let us consider, then, more closely,
whether the process of interpretation, in so
far as its proper object is a mind, or is the
sign of a mind, can be reduced to a pure per-
ception, or to pure conception, or to any syn-
thesis which merely involves these two.

VIII

We shall here be aided by a very familiar
instance, suggested by the very illustration
which Bergson uses in pointing out the con-
trast between perception and conception, and
in emphasizing the secondary and purely in-
voj^. II— K 129


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

strumental character of the process of con-
ception. Gold coin, as Bergson reminds' us,
corresponds, in its value for the ordinary busi-
ness of buying and selling, to perceptions as
they appear in our experience. Bank-notes
correspond, in an analogous fashion, to con-
ceptions. The notes are promises to pay
cash. The conceptions are useful guides to
possible perceptions. THe link between the
note and its cash-value is the link which the
activity of making and keeping the promises
of a solvent bank provides. The link between
the conception and its corresponding per-
ception is the Knk which some active syn-
thesis, such as voluntary seeking, or creative
action, or habitual conduct, or intention,
supplies. The illustration is clear. In a
special way perceptions do indeed correspond
to cash-values, and conceptions to credit-
values. But in the world of commercial trans-
actions there are other values than simple
cash-values and credit-values. Perhaps, there-
fore, in the realm of cognitive processes there
may be analogous varieties.

130


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

Recall the familiar case wherein a traveller
crosses the boundary of a foreign country.
To the boundary he comes provided, let us
say, with the gold and with bank-notes of
his own country, but without any letter of
credit. This side of the boundary his bank-
notes are good because of their credit-value.
His gold is good because, being the coinage
of the realm, it possesses cash-value and is
legal tender. But beyond the boundary, in
the land to which he goes, the coin which he
carries is no longer legal tender, and possibly
will not pass at all in ordinary transactions.
His bank-notes may be, for the moment,
valueless, not because the promise stamped
upon their face is irredeemable, but because
the gold coin itself into which they could be
converted upon presentation at the bank in
question, would not be legal tender beyond
the boundary.

Consequently, at the boundary, a new pro-
cess may be convenient, if not, for the travel-
ler's purpose, indispensable. It is the pro-
cess of exchanging coin of the realm which

131


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

he leaves for that of the foreign land which he
enters. The process may be easy or diflS-
cult, may be governed by strict rules or else
may be capricious, according to the condi-
tions which prevail at the boundary. But it
is a third process, which consists neither in
the presentation of cash-values nor in the
offering or accepting of credit-values. It is
a process of interpreting the cash-values
which are recognized by the laws and customs
of one realm in terms of the cash- values which
are legal tender in another country. It is
also a process of proceeding to act upon the
basis of this interpretation. We are not con-
cerned with the principles which make this
interpretation possible, or which guide the
conduct either of the traveller or of the money-
changer at the boundary. What interests us
here is simply the fact that a new type of
transaction is now in question. It is a pro-
cess of money-changing, — a special form of
exchange of values, but a form not simply
analogous to the type of the activities whereby
conceptions are provided with their corre-

133


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

spending perceptions. And this form is not
reducible to that of the simple contrast be-
tween credit-values and cash-values.

IX

Each of us, in every new eflfort to com-
municate with our fellow-men, stands, like the
traveller crossing the boundary of a new
country, in the presence of a largely strange
world of perceptions and of conceptions. Our
neighbor's perceptions, in their immediate
presence, we never quite certainly share.
Our neighbor's conceptions, for various reasons
which I need not here enumerate, are so
largely communicable that they can often be
regarded, with a high degree of probability,
as identical, in certain aspects of their mean-
ing, with our own. But the active syntheses,
the practical processes of seeking and of con-
struction, the volitions, the promises, whereby
we pass from our own concepts to our own
percepts, are often in a high degree individ-
ual. In that case it may be very diflScult
to compare them to the corresponding pro-

133


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

cesses of our neighbors; and then a mutual
understanding, in respect of our activities and
their values, is frequently as hard to obtain
as is a direct view of one another's sensory-
perceptions. "I never loved you,'' so says
Hamlet to Ophelia. "My lord, you made me
believe so." Here is a classic instance of a
problem of mutual interpretation. Who of
us can solve this problem for Hamlet and
Ophelia ?

Therefore, in our efforts to view the world
as other men view it, our undertaking is
very generally analogous to the traveller's
financial transactions when he crosses the
boundary. We try to solve the problem of
learning how to exchange the values of our
own lives into the terms which can hope to
pass current in the new or foreign spiritual
realms whereto, when we take counsel to-
gether, we are constantly attempting to pass.
Both the credit- values and the cash- values are
not always easily exchanged.

I have no hope of showing, in the present
discussion, how and how far we can make sure

134


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

that, in a given case of human social inter-
course, we actually succeed in fairly exchang-
ing the coinage of our perceptions and the
bank-notes of our conceptions into the values
which pass current in the realm beyond the
boundary. What measure of truth our indi-
vidual interpretations possess, and by what
tests we verify that truth, I have not now to
estimate. But I am strongly interested in the
fact that, just as the process of obtaining cash
for our bank-notes is not the same as the
process of exchanging our coins for foreign
coins when we pass the border, precisely so
the process of verifying our concepts through
obtaining the corresponding percepts is not
the same as the process of interpreting our
neighbors' minds.

A philosophy which, like that of Bergson,
defines the whole problem of knowledge in
terms of the classic opposition between con-
ception and perception, and which then de-
clares that, if our powers of perception were
unlimited, the goal of knowledge would be
reached, simply misses the principal problem,

135


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

both of our daily human existence and of all
our higher spiritual life, as well as of the
universe. And in bidding us seek the solu-
tion of our problems in terms of perception,
such a doctrine simply forbids us to pass any
of the great boundaries of the spiritual world,
or to explore the many realms wherein the
wealth of the spirit is poured out. For
neither perception nor conception, nor any
combination of the two, nor yet their synthe-
sis in our practical activities, constitutes the
whole of any interpretation. Interpretation,
however, is what we seek in all our social
and spiritual relations; and without some
process of interpretation, we obtain no ful-
ness of life.

X

It would be wrong to suppose, however,
that interpretation is needed and is used only
in our literal social relations with other indi-
vidual human beings. For it is important
to notice that one of the principal problems
in the life of each of us is the problem of

136


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

interpreting himself. The bare mention of
Hamlet's words reminds us of this fact.
Ophelia does not understand Hamlet. But
does he understand himself?

In our inner life it not infrequently happens
that we have — like the traveller, or like
Hamlet in the ghost-scene, or like Macbeth
when there comes the knocking on the gate
— to pass a boundary, to cross into some new
realm, not merely of experience, but of desire,
of hope, or of resolve. It is then our fortune
not merely that our former ideas, as the
pragmatists say, no longer "work,'' and that
our bank-notes can no longer be cashed in
terms of the familiar inner perceptions which
we have been accustomed to seek. Our
situation is rather this: that hoih our ideas
and our experiences, both our plans and our
powers to realize plans, both our ideas with
their "leadings" and our intuitions, are in
process of dramatic transformation. At such
times we need to know, like Pharaoh, botl^
our dream and the interpretation thereof.

Such critical passing of a boundary in

137


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

one's own inner world is a well-known event

in youth, when what Goethe called: —

Neue Liebe, neues Leben,
Neue Hoffnung, neues Sehnen,

makes one say to one's heart : —

Ich erkenne dich nicht mehr.

Yet, not only youth, but personal calamity,
or other "moving accident," or, in a more
inspiring way, the call of some new construc-
tive task, or, in the extreme case, a religious
conversion, may at any time force one or an-
other of us to cross a boundary in a fashion
similar to those just illustrated.

At such times we are impressed with the
fact that there is no royal road to self-knowl-
edge, Charles Peirce, in the earliest of the
essays to which I am calling your attention,
maintained (quite rightly, I think) that there
is no direct intuition or perception of the self.
Reflection, as Peirce there pointed out, in-
volves what is, in its essence, an interior con-
versation, in which one discovers one's own
mind through a process of inference analo-
gous to the very modes of inference which

138


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OP INTERPRETATION

guide us in a social effort to interpret our
neighbors' minds. Such social inference is
surely no merely conceptual process. But it
cannot be reduced to the sort of perception
which Bergson invited you, in his Oxford
lectures, to share. Although you are indeed
placed in the "interior" of yourself, you can
never so far retire into your own inmost re-
cesses of intuition as merely to find the true
self presented to an inner sense.

XI

So far I have merely sketched, with my own
illustrations, a few notable features of Peirce's
early opinions about interpretation. We are
now ready for his central thesis, which, with
many variations in detail, he has retained in
all his later discussions of the processes in
question. I beg you not to be discouraged by
the fact that, since Peirce has always been,
first of all, a logician, he states this central
thesis in a decidedly formal fashion, which I
here somewhat freely imitate. We shall soon
see the usefulness of this formal procedure.

139


Digitized by


Google


h


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

Interpretation always involves a relation
of three terms. In the technical phrase, in-
terpretation is a triadic relation. That is,
you cannot express any complete process of
interpreting by merely naming two terms, —
persons, or other objects, — and by then tell-
ing what dyadic relation exists between one
of these two and the other.

Let me illustrate: Suppose that an Egyp-
tologist translates an inscription. So far two
beings are indeed in question: the trans-
lator and his text. But a genuine transla-
tion cannot be merely a translation in the
abstract. There must be some language into
which the inscription is translated. Let this
translation be, in a given instance, an Eng-
lish translation. Then the translator inter-
prets something ; but he interprets it only to
one who can read English. And if a reader
knows no English, the translation is for such
a reader no interpretation at all. That is, a
triad of beings — the Egyptian text, the Egyp-
tologist who translates, and the possible
English reader — are equally necessary in or-

140


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

der that such an English interpretation of an
Egyptian writing should exist. Whenever
anybody translates a text, the situation re-
mains, however you vary texts or languages
or translators, essentially the same. There
must exist some one, or some class of beings,
to whose use this translation is adapted;
while the translator is somebody who ex-
presses himself by mediating between two
expressions of meanings, or between two lan-
guages, or between two speakers or two
writers. The mediator or translator, or in-
terpreter, must, in cases of this sort, himself
know both languages, and thus be intelligible
to both the persons whom his translation
serves. The triadic relation in question is,
in its essence, non-symmetrical, — that is,
unevenly arranged with respect to all three
terms. Thus somebody (let us say A) —
the translator or interpreter — interprets
somebody (let us say B) to somebody (let
us say C). If you transpose the order of the
terms, — A, B, C, — an account of the hap-
pening which constitutes an interpretation

141


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

must be altered, or otherwise may become
either false or meaningless.

Thus an interpretation is a relation which
not only involves three terms, but brings
them into a determinate order. One of the
three terms is the interpreter; a second
term is the object — the person or the mean-
ing or the text — which is interpreted; the
third is the person to whom the interpretation
is addressed.

This may, at first, seem to be a mere for-
mality. But nothing in the world is more
momentous than the difference between a
pair and a triad of terms may become, if the
terms and the relations involved are them-
selves sufficiently full of meaning.

You may observe that, when a man per-
ceives a thing, the relation is dyadic. A
perceives B. A pair of members is needed,
and suffices, to make the relation possible.
But when A interprets B to C, a triad of mem-
bers (whereof, as in case of other relations,
two or all three members may be wholly,
or in part, identical) must exist in order to

142


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

make the interpretation possible. Let illus-
trations show us how important this formal
condition of interpretation may become.
• When a process of conscious reflection goes
on, a man may be said to interpret himself
to himself. In this case, although but one
personality, in the usual sense of the term, is
in question, the relation is still really a triadic
relation. And, in general, in such a case, the
man who is said to be reflecting remembers
some former promise or resolve of his own, or
perhaps reads an old letter that he once wrote,
or an entry in a diary. He then, at some
present time, interprets this expression of his
past self.

But, usually, he interprets this bit of his
past self to his future self. "This,'' he says,
"is what I meant when I made that promise.''
"This is what I wrote or recorded or prom-
ised." "Therefore," he continues, address-
ing his future self, "I am now committed to
doing thus," "planning thus," and so on.

The interpretation in question still con-
stitutes, therefore, a triadic relation. And

143


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

there are three men present in and taking
p^rt in the interior conversation : the man of
the past whose promises, notes, records, old
letters, are interpreted; the present self
who interprets them; and the future self
to whom the interpretation is addressed.
Through the present self the past is so in-
terpreted that its counsel is conveyed to the
future self.

xn

The illustration just chosen has been taken
from the supposed experience of an individual
man. But the relations involved are capable
of a far-reaching metaphysical generalization.
For this generalization I cannot cite the
authority of Peirce. I must deal with just
this aspect of the matter in my own way.

The relations exemplified by the man who,
at a given present moment, interprets his
own past to his own future, are precisely
analogous to the relations which exist when
any past state of the world is, at any present
moment, so linked, through a definite his-

144


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

torical process, with the coming state of the
world, that an intelligent observer who hap-
pened to be in possession of the facts could,
were he present, interpret to a possible future
observer the meaning of the past. Such
interpretation might or might not involve
definite predictions of future events. His-
tory or biography, physical or mental pro-
cesses, might be in question ; fate or free will,
determinism or chance, might rule the region
of the world which was under consideration.
The most general distinctions of past, present,
and future appear in a new light when con-
sidered with reference to the process of in-
terpretation.

In fact, what our own inner reflection
exemplifies is outwardly embodied in the
whole world's history. For what we all mean
by past time is a realm of events whose his-
torical sense, whose records, whose lessons, we
may now interpret, in so far as our memory
and the documents furnish us the evidences
for such interpretation. We may also ob-
serve that what we mean by future time is a

VOL. II — L 145


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

realm of events which we view as more or less
under the control of the present will of volun-
tary agents, so that it is worth while to give
to ourselves, or to our fellows, counsel re-
garding this future. And so, wherever the
world's processes are recorded, wherever the
records are preserved, and wherever they in-
fluence in any way the future course of events,
we may say that (at least in these parts of
the world) the present potentially interprets
the past to the future, and continues so to do
ad infinitum.

Such, for instance, is the case when one
studies the crust of a planet. The erosions
and the deposits of a present geological period
lay down the traces which, if read by a geolo-
gist, would interpret the past history of the
planet's crust to the observers of future geo-
logical periods.

Thus the Colorado Caflon, in its present
condition, is a geological section produced by
a recent stream. Its walls record, in their
stratification, a vast series of long-past
changes. The geologist of the present may

146


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

read these traces, and may intei^pret them for
future geologists of our own age. But the
present state of the Colorado Cafion, which
will ere long pass away as the walls crumble,
and as the continents rise or sink, will leave
traces that may be used at some future time
to interpret these now present conditions of
the earth's crust to some still more advanced
future, which will come to exist after yet
other geological periods have passed away.

In sum, if we view the world as everywhere
and always recording its own history, by pro-
cesses of aging and weathering, or of evolu-
tion, or of stellar and nebular clusterings and
streamings, we can simply define the time
order, and its three regions, — past, present,
future, — as an order of possible interpreta-
tion. That is, we can define the present as,
potentially,' the interpretation of the past to
the future. The triadic structure of our in-
terpretations is strictly analogous, both to the
psychological and to the metaphysical struc-
ture of the world of time. And each of these
structures can be stated in terms of the other.

147


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

This analogy between the relational struc-
ture of the whole time-process and the rela-
tions which are characteristic of any system
of acts of interpretation seems to me to be
worthy of careful consideration.

XIII

The observation of Peirce that interpreta-
tion is a process involving, from its very es-
sence, a triadic relation, is thus, in any case,
no mere logical formalism.

Psychologically speaking, the mental pro-
cess which thus involves three members dif-
fers from perception and conception in three
respects. First, interpretation is a conversa-
tion, and not a lonely enterprise. There is
some one, in the realm of psychological hap-
penings, who addresses some one. The one
who addresses interprets some object to the
one addressed. In the second place, the
interpreted object is itself something which
has the nature of a mental expression. Peirce
uses the term "sign" to name this mental ob-
ject which is interpreted. Thirdly, since the

148


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OP INTERPRETATION

interpretation is a mental act, and is an act
which is expressed, the interpretation itself
is, in its turn, a Sign. This new sign calls for
further interpretation. For the interpreta-
tion is addressed to somebody. And so, — at
least in ideal, — the social process involved
is endless. Thus wealthy, then, in its psy-
chological consequences, is the formal char-
acter of a situation wherein any interpreta-
tion takes place.

Perception has its natural terminus in some
object perceived; and therewith the process,
as would seem, might end, were there nothing
else in the world to perceive. Conception is
contented, so to speak, with defining the
universal type, or ideal form which chances
to become an object of somebody's thought.
In order to define a new universal, one needs
a new act of thought whose occurrence seems,
in so far, an arbitrary additional cognitive
function. Thus both perception and con-
ception are, so to speak, self-limiting pro-
cesses. The wealth of their facts comes to
them from without, arbitrarily.

149


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

But interpretation both requires as its
basis the sign or mental expression which is
to be interpreted, and calls for a further in-
terpretation of its own act, just because it
addresses itself to some third being. Thus
interpretation is not only an essentially social
process, but also a process which, when once
initiated, can be terminated only by an ex-
ternal and arbitrary interruption, such as
death or social separation. By itself, the
process of interpretation calls, in ideal, for
an infinite sequence of interpretations. For
every interpretation, being addressed to
somebody, demands interpretation from the
one to whom it is addressed.

Thus the formal difference between inter-
pretation on the one hand, and perception
and conception on the other hand, is a differ-
ence involving endlessly wealthy possible
psychological consequences.

Perception is indeed supported by the
wealth of our sensory processes; and is
therefore rightly said to possess an endless
fecundity.

150


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

But interpretation lives in a world which
is endlessly richer than the realm of percep-
tion. For its discoveries are constantly re-
newed by the inexhaustible resources of our
social relations, while its ideals essentially
demand, at every point, an infinite series of
mutual interpretations in order to express
what even the very least conversational
eflFort, the least attempt to find our way in
the life that we would interpret, involves.

Conception is often denounced, in our
day, as "sterile." But perception, taken by
itself, is intolerably lonesome. And every
philosophy whose sole principle is perception
invites us to dwell in a desolate wilderness
where neither God nor man exists. For where
either God or man is in question, interpreta-
tion is demanded. And interpretation, — even
the simplest, even the most halting and trivial
interpretation of our daily life, — seeks what
eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard,
and what it hath not entered into the heart
of man to conceive, — namely, the successful
interpretation of somebody to somebody.
. 151


r


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

Interpretation seeks an object which is
essentially spiritual. The abyss of abstract
conception says of this object: It is not in
me. The heaven of glittering immediacies
which perception furnishes answers the quest
by saying: It is not in me. Interpretation
says : It is nigh thee, — even in thine heart ;
but shows us, through manifesting the very
nature of the object to be sought, what
general conditions must be met if any one is
to interpret a genuine Sign to an understand-
ing mind. And withal, interpretation seeks
a city out of sight, the homeland where, per-
chance, we learn to understand one another.

XIV

Our first glimpse of Charles Peirce's neg-
lected doctrine of the logic of signs and of
interpretations necessarily gives us extremely
inadequate impressions. But in pointing out
the parallelism between the relational char-
acters of the time-process and those of the
process of interpretation, I have already shown
that the questions at issue are neither merely

152


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

intellectual, nor purely conceptual, and con-
cern many matters which are confined neither
to logic nor to descriptive psychology. As a
fact, to conceive the cognitive process in
terms of such a threefold division, and also
in terms of such a triadic relation, as the
division and the relation which Peirce brings
to our attention, — to view cognition thus
throws light, I believe, upon all the principal
issues which are now before us.

Recent pragmatism, both in the form em-
phasized by James and (so far as I know) in
all its othet now prominent forms, depends
upon conceiving two types of cognitive pro-
cesses, perception and conception, as mutually
opposed, and as in such wise opposed that con-
ception merely defines the bank-notes, while
only perception can supply the needed cash.
In consequence of this dualistic view of the
cognitive process, and in view of other con-
siderations recently emphasized, the essential
doctrine of pragmatism has come to include
the two well-known theses : That truth is
mutable; and that the sole criterion of the

153


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

present state of the truth is to be found in the
contents of particular perceptions.

Corresponding to this form of epistemology
we have, in the metaphysic of Bergson, a
doctrine of reality based upon the same dual
classification of the cognitive processes, and
upon the same preference for perception as
against its supposed sole rival.

But if we review the facts in the new light
which Peirce's views about interpretation
enable us, I think, to use, we shall reach re-
sults, that, as I close, I may yet barely hint.

XV

Reahty, so Bergson tells us, — Reality,
which must be perceived just as artists per-
ceive its passing data, and thereby teach us
to perceive what we never saw before, —
Reality is essentially change, flow, movement.
In perceptual time, if you abstract from the
material limitations which the present bond-
age of our intellect forces upon us, both
present and past interpenetrate, and all
is one ever present duration, consisting of

154


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

endless qualitatively various but coalescing
changes.

But a recognition of the existence, and a
due understanding of the character of the
process of interpretation, will show us, I
believe, that the time-order, in its sense and
interconnection, is known to us through
interpretation, and is neither a conceptual
nor yet a perceptual order. We learn about
it through what is, in a sense, the conversa-
tion which the present, in the name of the
remembered or presupposed past, addresses
to the expected future, whenever we are
interested in directing our own course of
voluntary action, or in taking counsel with
one another. Life may be a colloquy, or a
prayer; but the life of a reasonable being is
never a mere perception; nor a conception;
nor a mere sequence of thoughtless deeds;
nor yet an active process, however synthetic,
wherein interpretation plays no part. Life
is essentially, in its ideal, social. Hence
interpretation is a necessary element of every-
thing that, in life, has ideal value.

155


Digitized by


Googk


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

But when the time-process Is viewed as an
interpretation of the past to the future by
means of our present acts of choice, then the
divisions and the successions which are found
in the temporal order are not, as Bergson
supposes, due to a false translation of the
perceived temporal flow into a spatial order.
For every present deed interprets my future ;
and therefore divides my life into the region
of what I have already done, and the region
of what I have yet to accomplish. This
division is due, not to the geometrical degen-
eration which Bergson refers to our intellect,
but to one of the most significant features
of the spiritual world, — namely, to the fact
that we interpret all past time as irrevocable.
So to interpret our past is the very founda-
tion of all deliberate choice. But the irrev-
ocable past changes no more. And the
stupendous spiritual significance which this
interpretation introduces into our view of
our hves, of history, of nature, and of God,
we have already had occasion to consider in
the first part of this course. The philosophy

156


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

of change, the perception of an universe where
all is fluent, can be interpreted only through
recognizing that the past returns not; that
the deed once done is never to be recalled;
that what has been done is at once the world's
safest treasure, and its heaviest burden.

Whoever insists upon the mutability of
truth, speaks in terms of the dual classifica-
tion of cognitive processes. But let one learn
to know that our very conception of our tem-
poral experience, as of all happenings, is
neither a conception nor a perception, but
an interpretation. Let one note that every
present judgment bearing upon future ex-
perience is indeed, as the pragmatists tell us,
a practical activity. But let one also see
that, for this very reason, every judgment,
whose meaning is concrete and practical, so
interprets past experience as to counsel a
future deed. Let one consider that when
my present judgment, addressing my future
self, counsels: "Do this," this counsel, if
followed, leads to an individual deed, which
henceforth irrevocably stands on the score

157


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

of my life, and can never be removed there-
from.

Hence, just as what is done cannot be un-
done, just so what is truly or falsely counselled
by any concrete and practical judgment re-
mains permanently true or false. For the
deed which a judgment counsels remains for-
ever done, when once it has been done.

XVI

Let me summarize the main results of this
lecture : —

1. In addition to the world of conception
a-nd to the world of perception, we have to
take account of a world of interpretation.

2. The features that distinguish from one
another the three processes — perception,
conception, and interpretation — have to do
with their logical and formal characteristics,
with their psychological motives and accom-
paniments, and with the objects to which
they are directed.

3. Logically and formally considered, in-
terpretation differs from perception and from

158


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

conception by the fact that it involves re-
lations which are essentially triadic.

4. Psychologically, interpretation diflfers
from perception and from conception by the
fact that it is, in its intent, an essentially
social process. It accompanies every intel-
ligent conversation. It is used whenever we
acknowledge the being and the inner life of
our fellow-men. It transforms our own inner
life into a conscious interior conversation,
wherein we interpret ourselves. Both of our-
selves and of our neighbors we have no merely
intuitive knowledge, no complete perception,
and no adequate conception. Reflection is
an eflfort at self-interpretation.

5. Both logically and psychologically, in-
terpretation differs from perception and from
conception in that each of these latter pro-
cesses derives the wealth of its facts from a
world which, at least in seeming, is external
to itself. Were there but one object to per-
ceive, and one universal to conceive, one act
of perception and one of conception would
be, in the abstract, possible and required.

159


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

The need for new acts of perception and of
conception seems to be, in so far, arbitrarily
determined by the presence of new facts
which are to be perceived or conceived. But
interpretation, while always stimulated to
fresh efforts by the inexhaustible wealth of
the novel facts of the social world, demands,
by virtue of its own nature, and even in the
simplest conceivable case, an endless wealth
of new interpretations. For every interpre-
tation, as an expression of mental activity,
addresses itself to a possible interpreter, and
demands that it shall be, in its turn, inter-
preted. Therefore it is not the continuance,
but the interruption, of the process of inter-
pretation which appears to be arbitrary ; and
which seems to be due to sources and motives
foreign to the act of interpretation.

6. Metaphysically considered, the world of
interpretation is the world in which, if indeed
we are able to interpret at all, we learn to
acknowledge the being and the Inner hfe of our
fellow-men; and to understand the constitu-
tion of temporal experience, with its endlessly

160


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION '

accumulating sequence of significant deeds.
In this world of interpretation, of whose
most general structure we have now obtained
a glimpse, selves and communities may exist,
past and future can be defined, and the realms
of the spirit may find a place which neither
barren conception nor the chaotic flow of
interpenetrating perceptions could ever ren-
der significant.

7. Bergson has eloquently referred us to
the artists, as the men whose office it is to
teach us how to perceive. Let the philoso-
phers, he tells us, learn from the methods of
the artists. In reply we can only insist, in
this place, that the sole office of the artists
has always been to interpret. They address
us, so as to interpret to us their own percep-
tions, and thereby their own lives and deeds.
In turn, they call upon us to renew the endless
hfe of the community of the spirits who in-
terpret. The artists do not do their work for
"nothing," nor yet for "pleasure." They do
their work because they love the unity of
spirit which, through their work, is brought

VOL. II — M 161


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

into the life of mankind. The artists are in
this respect not alone.

The prophets, the founders of religions, the
leaders of mankind: they do not merely
see; nor do they merely think; i:ior yet are
they mere pragmatists hovering between ab-
stract conceptions which they dislike, and
particular experiences which they indeed de-
sire, but so view that therein they find only
the particular. Those for whom the sole
contrast in the world of cognitions is that
between conception and perception, stand in
Faust's position. Their conceptions are in-
deed mere bank-notes. But alas ! their per-
ceptions are, at best, mere cash. So in desire
they hasten to enjoyment, and in enjoyment
pine to feel desire.

Such find indeed their "cash'" of experience
in plenty. But they never find what has
created all the great religions, and all the
deathless loyalties, and all the genuinely true
insights of the human world, — namely, that
interpretation of Ufe which sends us across
the borders both of our conceptual and of our

162


Digitized by


Google


NATURE OF INTERPRETATION

perceptual life, to lay up treasures in other
worlds, to interpret the meaning of the pro-
cesses of time, to read the meaning of art and
of Ufe.

8. Do you ask what this process is which
thus transcends both perception and con-
ception, I answer that it is the process in
which you engage whenever you take counsel
with a friend, or look in the eyes of one be-
loved, or serve the cause of your life. This
process it is which touches the heart of reality.
Let the philosophers, then, endeavor to avoid
"sterile" conceptions. Let them equally
avoid those wanton revels in mere perception
which are at present the bane of our art, of
our literature, of our social ideals, and of
our religion. Let the philosophers learn from
those who teach us, as the true artists do, the
art of interpretation.

A few fragmentary indications of the prin-
ciples of this art we may hope, at the next
time, to set forth upon the bases which Charles
Peirce's theory has suggested.


163


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


xn

THE WILL TO INTERPRET


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


LECTURE XII

THE WILL TO INTERPRET

WE have seen some of the contrasts
whereby the three cognitive processes :
Perception, Conception, and Interpretation,
are distinguished from one another. Our next
task is to become better acquainted with the
work and the value of Interpretation.


In this undertaking we shall be guided by
the special problems to which our lectures are
devoted. The metaphysical inquiry con-
cerning the nature and the reality of the com-
mimity is still our leading topic. To this
topic whatever we shall have to say about
interpretation is everywhere subordinate.
But, since, if I am right, interpretation is
indeed a fundamental cognitive process, we
shall need still further to illustrate its nature
and its principal forms. Every apparent
digression from our main path will quickly

167


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

lead us back to our central issues. Inter-
pretation is, once for all, the main business of
philosophy.

The present lecture will include two stages
of movement towards our goal. First, we
shall study the elementary psychology of the
process of interpretation. Secondly, we shall
portray the ideal that guides a truth-loving
interpreter. The first of these inquiries will
concern topics which are both familiar and
neglected. The second part of oiu* lecture
will throw light upon the ethical problems
with which our study of the Christian ideas
has made us acquainted. At the close of the
lecture our preparation for an outline of the
metaphysics of interpretation will be com-
pleted.

n

I have called interpretation an essentially
social cognitive process ; and such, in fact, it
is. Man is an animal that interprets; and
therefore man lives in communities, and de-
pends upon them for insight and for salvation.

168


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

But the elementary psychological forms in
which interpretation appears find a place in
our lives whether or no we are in company;
just as a child can sing when alone, although
singing is, on the whole, a social activity.
We shall need to consider how an interpreter
conducts his mental processes, even when he
is taking no explicit account of other minds
than his own.

In looking for the psychological foundations
of interpretation, we shall be directed by
Charles Peirce's formal definition of the men-
tal functions which are involved. Wherever
an interpretation takes place, however little
it seems to be an explicitly social undertaking,
a triadic cognitive process can be observed.
Let us look, then, for elementary instances of
such triadic processes.

In the earliest of the logical essays to which,
at the last time, I referred, Charles Peirce
pointed out that every instance of conscious
and explicit Comparison involves an elemen-
tary form of interpretation. This observation
of Peirce's enables us to study interpretation

169


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

in some of its simplest shapes, relieved of the
complications which our social eflforts to com-
municate with other minds usually involve.
Yet, even in this rudimentary form, inter-
pretation involves the motives which, upon
higher levels, make its work so wealthy in
results, and so significant in its contrasts with
perception and conception.

in

The most familiar instances of the mental
process known as Comparison seem, at first
. sight, to consist of a consciousness of certain
familiar dyadic relations, — relations of simi-
larity and diflference. Red contrasts with
green; sound breaks in upon silence; one
sensory quality collides, as it were, with an-
other. The "shock of diflference" awakens
our attention. In other cases, an unexpected
similarity of colors and tones attracts our
interest. Or perhaps the odors of two flowers,
or the flavors of two fruits, resemble one the
other. Pairs of perceived objects are, in all
these cases, in question. We express our

170


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

observations in such judgments as: "A
resembles B ; " "D is unlike E.''

Now Peirce's view of the nature of com-
parison depends upon noticing that, familiar
as such observations of similarity and dis-
similarity may be, no one of them constitutes
the whole of any complete act of comparison.
Comparison, in the fuller sense of the word,
takes place when one asks or answers the
question: What constitutes the difference
between A and B?" ^'Wherein does A re-
semble B?" ''Wherein consists their dis-
tinction?" Let me first illustrate such a
question in a case wherein the answer is easy.

If you write a word with your own hand, and
hold it up before a mirror, your own hand-
writing becomes more or less unintelligible to
you, unless you are already accustomed to read
or to write mirror-script. Suppose, however,
that instead of writing words yourself, you
let some one else show you words already
written. And suppose, further, that two
words have been, written side by side on the
same sheet of paper, neither of them by your

171


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

own hand. Suppose one of them to have
been written upright, while the other is the
counterpart of the first, except that it is the
first turned upside down, or else is the first
in mirror-script. If, without knowing how
these words have been produced, you look
at them, you can directly observe that
the two written words differ in appearance,
and that they also have a close resemblance.
But, unless you were already familiar with
the results of inverting a handwriting or of
observing it in a mirror, you could not thus
directly observe wherein consist the similar-
ities and the differences of the two words
which lie before you on the paper.

Since you are actually familiar with mirror-
script, and with the results of turning a sheet
of paper upside down, you will indeed no
doubt be able to name the difference of the
two supposed words. But in order to com-
pare the two words thus presented side by
side on the same sheet of paper, and to tell
wherein they are similar and wherein they
differ, you need what Peirce calls a medi-

172


Digitized by


Googk


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

ating idea, or what he also calls "a third/*
which, as he phrases the matter, shall '* rep-
resent" or "interpret" one of the two written
words to, or in terms of, the other. You use
such a "third" idea when you say, "This word
is the mirror-script representative of that
word." For now the difference is interpreted.

Thus a complete act of comparison involves
such a "third," such a "mediating" image or
idea, — such an "interpreter." By means of
this "third" you so compare a "first" object
with a "second" as to make clear to yourself
wherein consists the similarity and the diflFer-
ence between the second and the first. Com-
parison must be triadic in order to be both ex-
plicit and complete. Likenesses and differ-
ences are the signs that a comparison is needed.
But these signs are not their own interpretation.

Let us observe another instance of the
same general type. One may be long ac-
quainted with the difference between his own
right and left hands before one learns to in-
terpret this difference, and so to complete
one's comparison, in terms of the third idea

173


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

that the one hand is a more or lei^s imperfect
mirror-image of the other hand, the imper-
fections being due to the lack of symmetry in
our bodily structure.

Still another familiar instance of comparison
will show how needful it is to choose the right
"third'' in order to complete one's view of the
matter. One may long have observed that a
friend's face, when seen in a mirror, contrasts
with the same face if seen apart from the
mirror. Yet it may be very hard for a given
person to tell why this diflFerence exists, or
wherein it consists. I have asked the ques-
tion of various intelligent and observant peo-
ple, who could only reply : "It is true that in
general a man's face, as I see it before me,
does not perfectly resemble that man's face
as it appears when I look at it in a mirror.
But I cannot define the reason for this diflFer-
ence, or tell wherein the diflFerence consists."
The answer to the question is that, since the
features of a human face are usually, in their
finer details, more or less unsymmetrically
disposed with reference to the vertical axis
' .174


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

of the body, the mirror picture, even of a
fairly regular countenance, must be altered
to suit these vertical asymmetries. The idea
of the vertical asymmetries is here the needed
"third'' which interprets the difference be-
tween the man's face when seen in the mirror
and when seen out of the mirror.

A lady who had passed part of her life in
Australia, and part in England, once told me
that, for years, she had never been able to
imderstand the diflFerence which, to her eyes,
existed between the full moon as seen in Eng-
land and as observed by her during her years
in Australia. At last she found the right
mediating idea, when she came to notice how
Orion also gradually became partially inverted
during her journeys from English latitudes to
those of the far southern seas. For the full
moon, as she thus came to know, must
be subject to similar apparent inversions;
and this was the reason why the "man in
the moon" had therefore been undiscoverable
when she had heretofore looked for him in
Australian skies.

175


Digitized by


Google


\


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

IV

When processes of comparison grow com-
plicated, new "' third" terms or ^^ me diators'"
may be needed at each stage of one's under-
taking. So it is when a literary parallel
between two poets or two statesmen is in
question. Now one aiid now another trait
or event or fcH-tune or deed may stand out
as the mediating idea. But always, in such
parallels, it is by means of the use of a "third"
that each act of comparison is made possible,
— whether the case in question be simple or
complex. And the mediator plays each time
the part which Peirce first formally defined.

Let there arise the problem of drawing a
literary parallel between Shakespeare and
Dante. The task appears hopelessly complex
and indeterniinate until, perhaps, the place
which the sonnet occupied in the creative
activity of each poet comes to our minds.
Then indeed, although the undertaking is still
vastly complicated, it is no longer quite so
hopeless. If "with this key Shakespeare

176


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

unlocked his heart/' yet held fast its deepest
mysteries ; while Dante accompanied each of
the sonnets of the Vita Nuova with a comment
and an explanation, yet left unspoken what
most fascinates us in the supernatural figure
of his beloved, — then "the sonnet," viewed
as an idea of a poetical form, mediates between
our ideas of the two poets, and represents or
interprets each of these ideas to the other.

This last example suggests an endless wealth
of complexities. And the interpretation in
question is also endlessly inadequate to our
demands. But on its highest levels, as in its
simplest instances, the process of explicit
comparison is thus triadic, and to notice this
fact is, for the purpose of our study of com-
parison, illuminating.

For when we merely set pairs of objects
before us, and watch their resemblances and
diflFerences, we soon lose ourselves in mazes.
Yet even when the mazes are indeed not to be
penetrated by any skill, still a triadic compari-
son is much more readily guided towards the
Ught. "How does A differ from C?" If you

VOL. n — N 177


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

can reply to this question by saying that, by
means of B, A can be altogether transformed
into C, or can, at least, be brought into a close
resemblance to C, then the comparison of A
to C is made definite.

Let me choose still one more illustration
of such a comparison. This time the illus-
tration shall not come from the literary
realm; yet it shall be more complex than is
the instance of the comparison between a
written word and its image in the mirror.

If you cut a strip of paper, — perhaps an
inch wide and ten inches long, — you can
bring the two ends together and fasten them
with glue. The result will be a ring-strip of
paper, whose form is of a type very familiar in
case of belts, finger-rings, and countless other
objects. But this form can be varied in an
interesting way. Before bringing the ends
of the strip together, let one end of the paper
be turned 180°. Holding the twisted end of
the strip fast, glue it to the other. There
now results an endless strip of paper having in
it a single twist. Lay side by side an ordinary

178


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

ring-strip that has no twist, and a ring-strip
of paper that has been made in the way just
indicated. The latter strip has a single
twist in it. Hereupon ask a person who has
not seen you make the two ring-strips, to
compare them, and to tell you wherein they
agree and wherein they diflFer.

To your question an ordinary observer, to
whom this new form of ring-strip is unfamiliar,
will readily answer that they obviously diflFer
because one of them has no twist in it, while
the other certainly has some kind of twist be-
longing to its structure. So far the one whom
you question indeed makes use of a "third'"
idea. But this idea probably remains, so
far, vague in his mind, and it will take your
uninformed observer some time to make his
comparison at all complete and exphcit.

In order to aid him in his task, you may
hereupon call his attention to the further fact
that the ring-strip which contains the single
twist has two extraordinary properties. It
has, namely, but one side ; and it also has but
one edge. The mention of this fact will at

179


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

first perplex the uninitiated observer. But
when he has taken the trouble to study the
new form, he will find that the idea of a "one-
sided strip of paper'" enables him to compare
the new and the old form, and to interpret
his idea of the new ring-form to his old idea
of an ordinary ring such as has no twist, and
possesses two sides.


In all the cases of explicit comparison which
we have just considered, what takes place has,
despite the endless varieties of circumstance,
an uniform character.

Whoever compares has before him what we
have called two distinct ideas ; perhaps his
ideas of these two printed or written words;
or again, his ideas of these two ring-strips of
paper; or, in another instance, his ideas of
Dante and of Shakespeare.

And the term " idea '' is used, in the present
discussion, in the sense which James and other
representative pragmatists have made famil-
iar in current discussion. Let us then hold

180


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

clearly in mind this definition of the term
" idea.'^ For we shall even thereby be led to
note facts which will lead us beyond what
this definition emphasizes.

An idea, in this sense, is a more or less
practical and active process, a "leading,"
as James calls it, whereby some set of con-
ceptions and perceptions tend to be brought
into desirable connections. An idea may
consist mainly of some eflFort to characterize
the data of perception through the use of
fitting conceptions. Or, again, an idea may
be a prediction of future perceptions. Or, an
idea may be an active seeking for a way to
translate conceptual "bank-notes" into per-
ceptual cash. In any one idea, either the
perceptual or the conceptual elements may,
at any one moment, predominate. If the
conceptual element is too marked for our
purposes, the idea stands in need of perceptual
fulfilment. If the perceptual element is too
rich for our momentary interests, the idea
needs further conceptual clarification. In any
case, however, according to this view, the

181


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

which are to be compared. This third idea,
when once found, interprets one of the ideas
which are the objects of the comparison, and
interprets it to the other, or in the Kght of the
other. What such interpretation means, the
instances already considered have in part
made clear. But the complexity and the sig-
nificance of the processes involved require a
further study. And this further study may
here be centred about the question : What is
gained by the sort of comparison which Peirce
thus characterizes ? And, since we have said
that all such comparison involves an activity
of interpreting one idea in the Kght of another,
we may otherwise state our question thus:
What, in these cases of comparison, is the
innermost aim of the Will to Interpret which
all these processes of comparison manifest ?

VI

The rhythm of the Hegelian dialectic,
wherein thesis, antithesis, and higher synthesis
play their familiar parts, will here come to
the minds of some who follow my words;

184


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

and you may ask wherein Peirce's processes
of comparison and interpretation diflFer from
those dialectical movements through division
into synthesis, which Hegel long since used as
the basis of his philosophy. I reply at once
that Peirce's theory of comparison, and of the
mediating idea or '"third" which interprets,
is, historically speaking, a theory not derived
from Hegel, by whom at the tiixie when he
wrote these early logical papers, Peirce had
been in no notable way influenced. I reply,
further, that Peirce's concept of interpreta-
tion defines an extremely general process, of
which the Hegelian dialectical triadic pro-
cess is a very special case. Hegel's elemen-
tary illustrations of his own processes are
ethical and historical. Peirce's theory of
comparison is quite as well illustrated by
purely mathematical as by expKcitly social
instances. There is no essential inconsistency
between the logical and psychological mo-
tives which he at the basis of Peirce's theory
of the triad of interpretation, and the Hegelian
interest in the play of thesis, antithesis, and

185


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

higher synthesis. But Peirce's theory, with
its expKcitly empirical origin and its very
exact logical working out, promises new light
upon matters which Hegel left profoundly
problematic.

Returning, however, to those illustrations
of Peirce^s theory of comparison which I have
already placed before you, let us further con-
sider the motives which make a comparison
of distinct and contrasting ideas significant
for the one who compares.

An idea, as I have said, is, in Jameses sense,
a practical "leading." An idea, if, in James's
sense, successful, and if successfully employed,
leads through concepts to the desirable or to
the corresponding percepts. But a compari-
son of ideas — that, too, is no doubt an active
process. To what does it lead ? It leads, as
we have seen, to a new, to a third, to an in-
terpreting idea. And what is this new idea ?
Is it "cash," or has it only " credit- value " .'^
What does it present to our view? What
does it bring to our treasury ?

One must for the first answer this question

186


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

in a very old-fashioned way. The new, the
third, the interpreting idea, in these elemen-
tary cases of comparison, shows us, as far as it
goes, ourselves, and also creates in us a new
grade of clearness regarding what we are and
what we mean. First, I repeat, the new or
third idea shows us ourselves, as we are.
Next, it also enriches our world of self-con-
sciousness. It at once broadens our outlook
and gives our mental realm definiteness and
self-control. It teaches one of our ideas what
another of our ideas means. It tells us how
to know our right hand from the left; how
to connect what comes to us in fragments;
how to live as if Kfe had some coherent aim.
All this is indeed, thus far, very elementary
information about what one gains by being
able to hold three ideas at once in mind.
But, in our own day, such information is im-
portant information. For our age, supposing
that the contrast between perception and
conception exhausts the possible types of
cognitive processes, is accustomed to listen
to those who teach us that self-knowledge also

187


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

must be either intuitive (and, in that ease,
merely fluent and transient) or else conceptual
(and, in that case, abstract and sterile).

But a dual antithesis between perceptual
and conceptual knowledge is once for all in-
adequate to the wealth of the facts of life.
When you accomplish an act of comparison,
the knowledge which you attain is neither
merely conceptual, nor merely perceptual, nor
yet merely a practically active synthesis of per-
ception and conception. It is a third type of
knowledge. It interprets. It surveys from
above. It is an attainment of a larger unity
of consciousness. It is a conspectus. As the
tragic artist looks down upon the many varying
lives of his characters, and sees their various
motives not interpenetrating, but cooperating,
in the dramatic action which constitutes his
creation, — so any one who compares distinct
ideas, and discovers the third or mediating
idea which interprets the meaning of one in
the light of the other, thereby discovers, or
invents, a realm of conscious unity which co;i-
stitutes the very essence of the life of reason.

188


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

Bergson, in his well-known portrayal, has
glorified instinct in its contrast with the in-
tellect. The intellect, as he holds, is a mere
user of tools. Its tools are concepts. It ui?es
them in its practical daily work to win useful
percepts. It loves to be guided in its daily
industries by rigid law. It is therefore most
at home in the realm of mechanism and of
death. Life escapes its devices. Its concepts
are essentially inadequate. Instinct, on the
contrary, so far as man stiH preserves that
filmy cloud of luminous instinct and of in-
tuition which, in Bergson's opinion, constitutes
the most precious resource of genius, per-
ceives, and sympathizes, and so comes in
touch with reality.

That this account of the cognitive process
is inadequate, both the artist and the proph-
ets combine with the scientific observers of
nature, with the mathematicians, and with the
great constructive statesmen, to show us.
Comparison is the instrument of what one
may call, according to one's pleasure, either
the observant reason, or the rational intuition

189


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

whereby the world's leading minds have always
been guided. And it is comparison, it is
interpretation, which teaches us how to deal
with the living, with the significant, and with
the genuinely real.

Darwin, for instance, as a naturalist, saw,
compared, and mediated. We all know how
the leading ideas of Malthus furnished the
mediating principle, the third, whereby Dar-
win first came to conceive how the contrasting
ideas with which his hypotheses had to deal
could be brought into unity. And that such
comparison is peculiarly adapted to deal with
the phenomena of life, let not only the genesis
of Darwin's ideas, but the place of the pro-
cess of comparison in the development of all
the organic sciences, show.

If we turn to the other extreme of the world
of human achievement, in order to learn what
is the sovereign cognitive process, we shall
find the same answer. For let us ask, — By
means of what insight did Amos the prophet
meet the religious problems of his own people
and of his own day? He faced tragic con-

190


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

trasts, moral, religious, and political. War-
ring ideas were before him, — ideas, each of
which sought its own percepts, through its
own concepts of God, of worship, and of suc-
cess. But Amos introduced into the con-
troversies of his time the still tragic, but in-
spiring and mediating, idea of the God who, as
he declared, delights not in sacrifices but in
righteousness. And by this one stroke of re-
ligious genius the prophet directed the re-
ligious growth of the centuries that were to
follow.

Think over the burial psalm, or the Pauline
chapters on Charity and the Resurrection, if
you would know what part comparison and
mediation play in the greatest expressions of
the religious consciousness. Remember Lear
or the Iliad, if you wish to recall the functions
of contrast and of mediation in poetry. Let
the Sistine Madonna or Beethoven's Fifth
Symphony illustrate the same process in
other forms of the artistic consciousness.

If once you have considered a few such
instances, then, summing up their familiar

191


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

lessons, you may note that in hone of these
cases is it conception, in none of them is it
bare perception, least of all is it inarticulate
intuition, which has won for us the greatest
discoveries, the incomparable treasures in
science, in art, or in religion.

The really creative insight has come from*
those who first compared and then mediated,
who could first see two great ideas at once,
and then find the new third idea which medi-
ated between them, and illumined.

We often use the word "vision'' for this in-
sight which looks down upon ideas as from
above, and discovers the "third,'' thereby
uniting what was formerly estranged. If by
the word "intuition" one chooses to mean
this grade of insight, then one may indeed
say that creative mental prowess depends,
in general, upon such intuition. But such in-
tuition is no mere perception. It is certainly
not conception. And the highest order of
genius depends upon reaching the stage of
Peirce's "third" type of ideas. Comparison,
leading to the discovery of that which mediates

192


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

and solves, and to the vision of unity, is the
psychological basis of poetry, as Shakespeare
wrote, and of such prophecy as Paul praised
when he estimated the spiritual gifts. Com-
parison, then, and interpretation constitute
the cognitive function whereby we deal with
life. Instinct and bare perception, left to
themSelves, can never reach this level.

VII

When we consider the inner life of the in-
dividual man, the Will to Interpret appears,
then, as the will to be self-possessed. One
who compares his own ideas, views them as
from above. He aims to pass from blind
" leadings'' to coherent insight and to resolute
self-guidance. What one wins as the special
object of one's insight depends, in such cases,
upon countless varying psychological condi-
tions, and upon one's success in finding or in
inventing suitable mediators for the inter-
pretation of one idea in the light of another.
It may therefore appear as if in this realm
of interior comparisons, where the objects
VOL. u — o 193


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

compared are pairs of ideas, and where re-
sults of comparison consist in the invention
of a third, there could be no question of at-
taining fixed or absolute truth. If anywhere
pragmatism could be decisively victorious;
if anywhere the purely relative and transient
would seem in possesssion of the field, — one
might suppose that comparison would con-
stantly furnish us with instances of relative,
shifting, alid fluent truth.

As a fact, however, this is not the case.
Comparison, which is so powerful an instru-
ment in dealing with life, and with the fluent
and the personal, is also perfectly capable of
bringing us into the presence of the exact and
of the necessary. All depends upon what
ideas are compared, and upon the purpose for
which they are compared, and upon the skill
with which the vision of unity is attained.

Let the comparison of the two ring-strips of
paper show what I here have in mind. The
difference between a ring-strip which con-
tains a single twist, and another which is
constructed in the usual way, seems at first

194


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

sight to be both insignificant and inexact. A
closer study shows that the geometry of sur-
faces that possess but a single side can be
developed into as exact a branch of pure math-
ematics as you can mention. The develop-
ment in question would depend upon assuming,
quite hypothetically, a few simple principles
which are suggested, although not indeed
capable of being proved, by experience of
the type which recent pragmatism has well
analyzed. The branch of pure mathematics
in question would consist of deductions
from these few simple principles. The
deductions would interpret these principles,
viewed in some sort of unity and compared
together.

But recent pragmatism has not well an-
alyzed the process whereby, in pure mathe-
matics, the consequences which follow from a
set of exactly stated hypotheses are deter-
mined. This process, the genuine process of
deduction, depends upon a series of ideal
experiments. These experiments are per-
formed by means of putting together ideas,

196

Digitized by VjOOQ IC


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

two and two, by comparing the ideas that are
thus brought together, by discovering medi-
ators, and by reading the results of the
combination. This process may lead to
perfectly exact results which are absolutely
true.

I know of no writer who has better or more
exactly analyzed the way in which such ideal
experiments can lead to novel and precise
results than Peirce has done. His analysis
of the deductive process was first made
a good while since, and anticipated re-
sults which Mr. Bertrand Russell and others
have since reached by other modes of pro-
cedure.

Peirce has shown that, when you interpret
your combinations of ideas through ideal
experiments, using, for instance, diagrams
and symbols as aids, the outcome may be a
truth as exact as the ideas -compared are
themselves exact. It may also be in your
own experience as novel a result as your
ideal experiment is novel. It may also be an
absolute and immutable truth.

196


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

What you discover, in a case of deduction,
is not that certain conclusions are, in them-
selves, considered true, but that they follow
from, that they are implied by, certain hypo-
thetically assumed premises. But a discovery
that certain premises imply a certain con-
clusion, is the discovery of a fact. This fact
may be foimd, not by perception, nor by con-
ception, but by interpretation. None the
less, it is a fact and it may be momentous.

It is customary to imagine that such a
deductive process can get out of given prem-
ises nothing novel, but only (as people often
say) — only what was already present in the
premises. This customary view of deduction
is incorrect. As Peirce repeatedly pointed
out (long before any other writer had explic-
itly dealt with the matter), you can write out
upon a very few sheets of paper all the prin-
ciples which are actually used as the funda-
mental hypotheses that lie at the basis of those
branches of pure mathematics which have
thus far been developed. Yet the logical
consequences which follow from these few

197


Digitized by


Google


THE PftOBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

mathematical hypotheses are so numerous
that every year a large octavo volume in fine
print is needed to contain merely the titles,
and very brief abstracts, of the technical
papers containing novel results which have
been, during that year, published as researches
in pure mathematics.

The niathematical papers in question em-
body, in general, consequences already im-
plied by the few fundamental hypotheses
which I have just mentioned. An infinite
wealth of still unknown consequences of the
same principles remains yet to be explored
and stated. All of these consequences can
be won, in pure mathematics, by a purely de-
ductive procedure.

Thus endlessly wealthy, thus possessed of
an inexhaustible fecundity/ is the genuine
deductive process. Peirce long ago showed
why. And while the mathematical procedure
which is in question cannot here be further
discussed, it is enough for our present purpose
to indicate why this fecundity of deduction
exists.

198


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

VIII

Deduction, in the real life of the exact
sciences, is a process that recent pragmatism
has no means of describing, simply because
recent pragmatism is the prey of the dual
classification of the cognitive processes, and
views what it calls the "workings'' of ideas
merely in terms of the relations between con-
ceptions and perceptions, — between "credit-
values'' and "cash- values."

Pragmatism, as James defined it, regards
an idea as a "leading," whereby one pursues
or seeks particulars ; and whereby one some-
times obtains, and sometimes fails to obtain,
the "cash- values" which one aims to get.
Such a doctrine has no place for the imder-
standing of what happens when, looking down
as it were from above, one compares two ideas,
and looks for a mediating idea. But just
this is what happens in all cases of explicit
comparison.

Now in the individual case, an interpreta-
tion, a mediating idea, may come to mind

199


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

through almost any play of association, or
as the result of almost any degree of skill in
invention, or as the outcome either of serious
or of playful combinations. In consequence,
an interpretation may prove to be, in the single
case, of purely relative and momentary truth
and value.

But this, on the other hand, need not be
the fortime of interpretation. The results of
a comparison may express absolute truths, —
truths which once seen can never be reversed.
This absoluteness itself may be due to either
one of two reasons.

In pure mathematics, a deduction, if cor-
rect at all, leads to an absolutely correct and
irrevocably true discovery of a relation of
implication between exactly stated premises
and some conclusion. Deduction does this
because deduction results from a comparison,
and because the ideas compared may be, and
in pure mathematics are, exact enough to sug-
gest, at some moment, to the observant rea-
soner, an interpretation which, if it applies
at all, applies universally to every pair of

200


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

ideas identical in meaning with the pair of
ideas here compared.

The act of comparison may be momentary,
and may even be as an event, an accident.
The inventive watcher of his own ideas may
have been led to his deduction by whatever
motive you please. But the interpretation,
once discovered, may nevertheless represent
a truth which is absolute precisely because it is
hypothetical. For the assertion : "P implies
Q,'' or "If P, then Q,'' is an assertion about
a matter of fact. And this assertion, if true
at all, is always and irrevocably true about
the same pair of ideas or propositions : P and

Q.

Or again, the result of an interpretation
may be absolutely true, because, for whatever
reason, the interpretation in question counsels
the one who makes the interpretation to do
some determinate and individual deed. This
deed may be such as to accomplish, at the
moment when it is done, some ideally valuable
result. But deeds once done are irrevocable.
If, by interpreting your ideas in a certain way,

201


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

IX

Our lengthy study of comparison and inter-
pretation, as they are present in the inner life
of the individual man, has prepared us for a
new view of the social meaning of the Will
to Interpret. Here I must once more take a
temporary leave of Peirce's guidance, and trust
to my own resources.

One who compares a pair of his own ideas
may attain, if he is successful, that vision of
unity, that grade of self-possession, which we
have now illustrated. But one who under-
takes to interpret his neighbor's ideas is in a
different position.

In general, as we have seen, an interpreter,
in his social relations with other men, deals
with two different minds, neither of which he
identifies with his own. His interpretation is
a "third'' or mediating idea. This "third"
is aroused in the interpreter's mind through
signs which come to him from the mind that
he interprets. He addresses this "third"
to the mind to which he interprets the first.

204


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

The psychology of the process of social in-
terpretation, so far as that process goes on in
the interpreter's individual mind, is identical
with that psychology of comparison which
we have now outlined. Nobody can interpret,
unless the idea which he interprets has become
more or less clearly and explicitly one of his
own ideas, and unless he compares it with
another idea which is, in some sense, his own.

But, from the point of view of the interpre-
ter, the essential difference between the case
where he is interpreting the mind of one of his
neighbors to the mind of another neighbor,
and the case wherein he is comparing two ideas
of his own, is a difference in the clearness
of vision which is, under human conditions,
attainable.

When I compare two ideas of my own, the
luminous self-possession which then, for a time,
may come to be mine, forms for me an ideal
of success in interpretation. This ideal I can
attain only at moments. But these mo-
ments set a model for all my interpretations
to follow.

205


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

When I endeavor to interpret my neigh-
bor's mind, my interpretation has to remain
remote from its goal. The luminous vision of
the results of comparison comes to me, at
best, only partially and with uncertainty. My
neighbor's ideas I indeed in a measure grasp,
and compare with other ideas, and interpret ;
but, as I do this, I see through a glass darkly.
Only those ideas whose comparisons with
other ideas, and whose resulting triadic in-
terpretations I can view face to face, can ap-
pear to me to have become in a more intimp,te
and complete sense my own individual ideas.
When I possess certain ideas sufficiently to
enable me to seek for their interpretation,
but so that, try as I will, I can never clearly
survey, as from above, the success ojf any of
my attempted interpretations, — then these
ideas remain, from my own point of view,
ideas that never become wholly my own.
Therefore these relatively ahen ideas can be
interpreted at all only by using the familiar
hypothesis that they belong to the self of some
one else. Under ordinary social conditions

206


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

this other mind is viewed as the mind of my
neighbor. Neither of my neighbor nor of my-
self have I any direct intuition. But of my
own ideas I can hope to win the knowledge
which the most successful comparisons ex-
emplify. Of my neighbor's ideas I can never
win, under human conditions, any interpreta-
tion but one which remains hypothetical,
and which is never observed, under these
human conditions, as face to face with its
own object, or with the idea of the other
neighbors to whom the interpretation is
addressed.

The Will to Interpret is, in our social re-
lations, guided by a purpose which we are
now ready to bring into close relations with
the most significant of all the ethical ideals
which, in our foregoing lectures, we have por-
trayed.

The interpreter, the mind to which he ad-
dresses his interpretation, the mind which
he imdertakes to interpret, — all these ap-
pear, in our explicitly human and social world,
as three distinct selves, — simdered by chasms

207


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

which, under human conditions, we never
cross, and contrasting in their inner hves in
whatever way the motives of men at any
moment chance to contrast.

The Will to Interpret undertakes to make
of these three selves a Community. In
every case of ideally serious and loyal effort
truly to interpret this is the simplest, but, in
its deepest jnotives, the most purely spiritual
of possible communities. Let us view that
simple and ideal community as the interpreter
himself views it, precisely in so far as he is
sincere and truth-loving in his purpose as
interpreter.


I, the interpreter, regard you, my neighbor,
as a realm of ideas, of "leadings,'' of mean-
ings, of pursuits, of purposes. This realm
is not wholly strange and incomprehensible
to me. For at any moment, in my life as
interpreter, I am dependent upon the results
of countless previous efforts to interpret.
The whole past history of civilization has

208


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

resulted in that form and degree of inter-
pretation of you and of my other JFellow-men
which 1 already possess, at any instant when
I begin afresh the task of interpreting your
life or your ideas. You are to me, then, a
realm of ideas which lie outside of the centre
which my will to interpret can momentarily
illumine with the clearest grade of vision.
But I am discontent with my narrowness
and with your estrangement. I seek unity
with you. And since the same will to inter-
pret you is also expressive of my analogous
interests in all my other neighbors, what I
here and now specifically aim to do is this :
I mean to interpret you to somebody else, to
some other neighbor, who is neither yourself
nor myself. Three of us, then, I seek to bring
into the desired unity of interpretation.

Now if I could succeed in interpreting you
to another man as fully as, in my clearest
moments, I interpret one of my ideas to
another, my process of interpretation would
simply reduce to a conscious comparison of
ideas. I should then attain, as I succeeded

VOL. II — p 209


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

in my interpretation, a luminous vision of
your ideas, of my own, and of the ideas of
the one to whom I interpret you. This vi-
sion would look down, as it were, from above.
In the light of it, we, the selves now sundered
by the chasms of the social world, should
indeed not interpenetrate. For our func-
tions as the mind interpreted, the mind to
whom the other is interpreted, and the inter-
preter, would remain as distinct as now they
are. There would be no melting together, no
blending, no mystic blur, and no lapse into
mere intuition. But for me the vision of the
successful interpretation would simply be the
attainment of my own goal as interpreter.
This attainment would as little confound our
persons as it would divide our substance.
We should remain, for me, many, even when
viewed in this unity.

Yet this vision, if I could win it, would
constitute an event wherein your will to be
interpreted would also be fulfilled. For if
you are indeed ready to accept my service as
interpreter, you even now possess this will

210


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

to be interpreted. And if there exists the
one to whom I can interpret you, that other
also wills that you should be interpreted to
him, and that I should be the interpreter.

If, then, I am worthy to be an interpreter i
at all, we three, — you, my neighbor, whose
mind I would fain interpret, — you, my
kindly listener, to whom I am to address my
interpretation, — we three constitute a Com- /
munity. Let us give to this sort of com-
munity a technical name. Let us call it a
Community of Interpretation.
• The form of such a community is deter-
minate.

One goal lies before us all, one event towards
which we all direct our efforts when we take
part in this interpretation. This ideal event is
a goal, unattainable under human social condi-
tions, but definable, as an ideal, in terms of
the perfectly familiar experience which every
successful comparison of ideas involves. It
is a goal towards which we all may work to-
gether: you, when you give me the signs
that I am to interpret ; our neighbor, when he

211


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

listens to my interpretation ; I, when I devote
myself to the task.

This goal: — Our individual experience of
our successful comparisons of our own ideas
shows us wherein it consists, and that it is no
goal which an abstract conception can define in
terms of cre4it-values, and that it is also no
goal which a possible perception can render to
me in the cash of any set of sensory data. Yet
it is a goal which each of us can accept as his
own. I can at present aim to approach that
goal through plans, through hypotheses regard-
ing you which can be inductively tested. I can.
view that goal as a common future event.
We can agree upon that goal. And herewith
I interpret not only you as the being whom
I am to interpret, but also myself as in ideal
the interpreter who aims to approach the vi-
sion of the unity of precisely this community.
And you, and my other neighbor to whom I
address my interpretation, can also interpret
yourselves accordingly.

The conditions of the definition of our com-
mimity will thus be perfectly satisfied. We

212


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

shall be many selves with a common ideal
future event at which we aim. Without es-
sentially altering the nature of our community,
our respective oflSces can be, at our pleasure,
interchanged. You, or my other neighbor, can
at any moment assume the function of inter-
preter ; while I can pass to a new position in
the new community. And yet, we three shall
constitute as clearly as before a Community'of
Interpretation. The new community will be
in a perfectly definite relation to the former
one; and may grow out of it by a process
as definite as is every form of consciou3
interpretation.

Thus there can arise, in our community,
no problem regarding the one and the many,
the quest and the goal, the individual who
approaches the goal by one path or by another,
— no question to which the definition of the
community of interpretation will not at once
furnish a perfectly precise answer.

Such an answer will be based upon the
perfectly fundamental triadic relation which
is essential to every process of interpretation,

213


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

whether such process takes place within the
inner life of an individual human being, or
goes on in the world of ordinary social inter-
course.

XI

Thus, then, if I assume for the moment the
r61e of an interpreter, I can define my oflSce,
my Community of Interpretation, and my
place in that community.

It will be observed that the sort of truth
which, as interpreter, I seek, cannot be stated
in terms as simple as those with which the
current pragmatism is satisfied. My inter-
pretation, if I offer to our common neighbor
any interpretation of your mind, will of course
be an idea of my own, — namely, precisely
that "third" idea which I contribute to our
community as my interpretation of you. And
i^o doubt I shall desire to make as sure as I
can that this idea of mine " works." But no
data of my individual perception can ever
present to me the "workings" which I seek.

For I want my interpretation of you to

214


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

our neighbor to be such as you would accept
and also such as our neighbor would compre-
hend, were each of us already in the position
of the ideal observer from above, whose vision
of the luminous unity of my interpretation
and its goal I am trying to imitate whenever
I try to interpret your mind.

Thus, from the outset, the idea which I
offer as my interpretation of your mind, is
offered not for the sake of, or in the pursuit
of, any individual or private perception of my
own, either present or expected or possible.
I am not looking for workings that could con-
ceivably be rendered in my perceptual terms.
I am ideally aiming at an ideal event, — the
spiritual unity of our community. I can de-
fine that unity in perfectly empirical terms;
because I have compared pairs of ideas which
were my own, and have discovered their
mediating third idea. But I do not expect
to perceive that unity as any occurrence in
my own individual life, or as any working of
one of my own personal ideas. In brief, I
have to define the truth of my interpretation

215


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

of you in terms of what the ideal observer of
all of us would view as the unity which he
observed. This truth cannot be defined in
merely pragmatic terms.

In a community thus defined, the interpreter
obviously assumes, in a highly significant
sense, the chief place. For the community
is one of interpretation. Its goal is the ideal
unity of insight which the interpreter would
possess were these who are now his neighbors
transformed into ideas of his own which he
compared; that is, were they ideas between
which his own interpretation successfully
mediated. The interpreter appears, then, as
the one of the three who is most of all the
spirit of the community, dominating the ideal
relations of all three members.

But the one who is, in ideal, this chief, is
so because he is first of all servant. His oflSce
it is to conform to the mind which he inter-
prets, and to the comprehension of the mind
to which he addresses his interpretation.
And his own ideas can "work'' only if his
self-surrender, and his conformity to ideas

216


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

which are not his own, is actually a successful
copformity ; and only if his approach to a
goal which, as member of a human community
of interpretation, he can never reach, is a real
approach.

XII

Such are the relationships which constitute
a Community of Interpretation. I beg you
to observe, as we close, the ethical and reli-
gious significance which the structure of such
a community makes possible. In case our
interpretations actually approach success, a
community of interpretation possesses such
ethical and religious significance, with increas-
ing definiteness and beauty as the evolution
of such a community passes from simpler to
higher stages.

Upon interpretation, as we have already
seen, every ideal good that we mortals win
together, under our human social conditions,
depends. Whatever else men need, they need
their communities of interpretation.

It is indeed true that such communities

217


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

can exist, at any time, in the most various
grades of development, of self-consciousness,
and of ideality. The communities of inter-
pretation which exist in the market-places of
the present social world, or that he at the
basis of the diplomatic intercourse of modern
nations, are communities whose ideal goal is
seldom present to the minds of their mem-
bers ; and it is not love which often seems to
be their consciously ruling motive.

Yet, on the whole, it is not perception, and
it is not conception; while it certainly is
interpretation which is the great humanizing
factor in our cognitive processes and which
makes the purest forms of love for conmiuni-
ties possible. Loyalty to a community of
interpretation enters into all the other forms
of true loyalty. No one who loves mankind
can find a worthier and more significant way
to express his love than by increasing and ex-
pressing among men the Will to Interpret.
This will inspires every student of the humani-
ties; and is present wherever charity enters
into life. ^ When Christianity teaches us to

218


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

hope for the community of all mankind, we
can readily see that the Beloved Community,
whatever else it is, will be, when it comes, a
Community of Interpretation. When we con-
sider the ideal form and the goal of such a
community, we see that in no other form, and
with no other ideal, can we better express the
constitution of the ideal Church, be that con-
ceived as the Church on earth, or as the
Church triumphant in some ideal realm of
superhuman and all seeing insight, where I
shall know even as I am known.

And, if, in ideal, we aim to conceive the
divine nature, how better can we conceive
it than in the form of the Community of
Interpretation, and above all in the form of
the Interpreter, who interprets all to all, and
each individual to the world, and the world of
spirits to each individual.

In such an interpreter, and in his commimity ,
the problem of the One and the Many would
find its ideally complete expression and solu-
tion. The abstract conceptions and the mys-
tical intuitions would be at once transcended,

219


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

and illumined, and yet retained and kept
clear and distinct, in and through the life of
one who, as interpreter, was at once servant
to all and chief among all, expressing his will
through all, yet, in his interpretations, regard-
ing and loving the will of the least of these
his brethren. In him the Community, the In-
dividual, and the Absolute would be completely
expressed, reconciled, and distinguished.

This, to be sure, is, at this point of our
discussion, still merely the expression of an
ideal, and not the assertion of a metaphysical
proposition. But in the Will to Interpret,
the divine and the human seem to be in
closest touch with each other.

The mere form of interpretation may be
indeed momentarily misused for whatever
purpose of passing human folly you will.
But if the ideal of interpretation is first
grasped; and if then the Community of
Interpretation is conceived as inclusive of all
individuals; and as unified by the common
hope of the far-off event of complete mutual
understanding; and, finally, if love for this

220


Digitized by


Google


THE WILL TO INTERPRET

community is awakened, — then indeed this
love is able to grasp, in ideal, the meaning of
the Church Universal, of the Communion of
Saints, and of God the Interpreter.
- ^Merely to define such ideals is not to solve
the problems of metaphysics. But it is to
remove many obstacles from the path that
leads towards insight.

These ideals, however, are grasped and
loved whenever one first learns fully to com-
prehend what Paul meant when he said:
"Wherefore let him that speaketh with
tongues pray that he may interpret." This
word is but a small part of Paul's advice.
But in germ it contains the whole meaning
of the office, both of philosophy and of reli-
gion.


221


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


xra

THE WORLD OP INTERPRETATION


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


LECTURE XIII

THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

IN the closing lecture of a course delivered
a few years since, on the "Problem of
Age, Growth, and Death,'' Professor Charles
S. Minot, of Harvard University, in summa-
rizing the results of his studies, used these
words : "I do not wish to close without a few
words of warning explanation. For the views
which I have presented before you in this
series of lectures, I personally am chiefly re-
sponsible. Science consists in the discoveries
made by individuals, afterwards confirmed
and correlated by others, so that they lose
their personal character. You ought to know
that the interpretations which I have offered
you are still largely in the personal stage.
Whether my colleagues will think that the
body of conceptions which I have presented
are fully justified or not, I cannot venture to
say.*'
This was the word of a distinguished leader

VOL. II — Q 225


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

of research in Comparative Anatomy. It
expressed, in passing, a view about the general
character of scientific method which the
same author, not very long afterwards, set
forth at much greater length in a lecture
before his own section at a meeting of the
American Association for the Advancement
of Science. In that lecture "On the Method
of Science"' Professor Minot carefully ex-
pounded, and very extensively illustrated, the
thesis that, while natural science is dependent
upon the experiences of individuals for every
one of its advances in the knowledge of the
facts of nature, no experience of any individual
man can count as a scientific discovery until
it has been sufficiently confirmed by other
and by independent observers. Professor
Minot speaks of this confirmation by fellow
workers as constituting a sort of "depersonal-
izing" of the discoveries of each individual
observer.

The thesis here in question is familiar. I
cite Professor Minot's words, not as if he him-
self thought them at all novel, but merely in

226


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

order to bring at the moment as directly as
possible to your minds what we all know to
be an essential feature of the methods of
natural science.


For my own part, I should not say, as Dr.
Minot does, that the discoveries of the in-
dividual worker in a natural science "lose their
personal character'' by receiving the confirma-
tion which makes them possessions of science.
I think that I understand what my colleague
means by calling this process a "depersonaliz-
ing'* of the individual's contributions to scien-
tific work. But I should myself prefer to
express this well-known maxim of method by
saying that the individual observer's dis-
coveries have first to be interpreted to the
scientific community, and then substantiated
by the further experience of that community,
before they belong to the science. In still
other words, the work of science is what, in
the athletic phrase, is called team-work. The
spirit of science is one of loyalty to a Com-

227


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

munity of Interpretation. The term Com-
munity of Interpretation I here use in the
technical sense defined in the foregoing lecture.

But however you choose to formulate the
rule, the lesson of which it reminds us is one
which concerns philosophers quite as much as
it does the students of nature. Let us attempt
to read this lesson, and to generaUze it. We
shall find it to be a lesson in metaphysics.

Our knowledge of nature depends upon
experience. An experience, in order to be
useful for the purposes of physical science,
must involve the testing, or at all events the
present success, of an idea. In this expe-
rience percepts and concepts must be brought
into synthesis. Some idea about nature, as
the pragmatists tell us, must be found to
"work,'' at least in the one case which is first
in question when a new natural fact is found.
A scientific discovery consists in the obser-
vation of such a "working.'' And so far all
who have learned how the study of the phys-
ical world is carried on, will agree regarding
the bases of scientific knowledge.

228


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

n

Discoveries, however, are made by indi-
viduals. The individual discoverer, then, must
be the one who first finds that, at a certain
moment, and for him personally, concepts
and percepts meet thus and thus. Some
question of his is answered, and, in general,
some hypothesis of his is for the moment
verified. The individual observer finds that
"cash"" is rendered to correspond to certain
^'credit- values" which he has previously
possessed only in conceptual form. Some
interest of his in the search for percepts is,
at least momentarily, fulfilled. Unless at
least so much takes place in the life of some-
body, science is not enriched by a new dis-
coveiy.

Such, then, are the necessary conditions
which must be met if a scientific advance is
to take place. But are these conditions
suflScient ? Does every case wherein the in-
dividual finds novel ''cash payment'* rendered
for some of his own "credit-values,'* and new

229


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

perceptual answers given to his conceptual
questions, and "workings'* crowning with at
least momentary success an idea of his own
about nature, — an idea which has heretofore
"worked" for no other man, — does every
such case involve a genuine scientific dis-
covery? Can the individual simply turn
over to his science the "cash" which his
percepts have now rendered ? Can he ad-
dress all who are concerned thus ? — "Lo, I
have indeed found a new scientific fact.
Scientific facts are facts of experience. I
have had an experience. True ideas are
ideas which *work.' Here is an idea of mine;
and this time it * works,' for I have seen its
* working.' You want in science, not mere
concepts, but percepts. I have a percept.
You want, not mere credit, but cash. I have
the cash ; and here it is."

Is this the sole way in which the individual
wins access to new scientific facts ? And is
this the spirit in which the trained scientific
observer — for instance, the colleague whom
I have just cited — reports his discoveries ?

230


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

No, these conditions of a scientific dis-
covery are necessary, but not suflScient.
The individual has made his discovery; but
it is a scientific discovery only in case it can
become, through further confirmation, the
property and the experience of the community
of scientific observers. The process whereby
the transition is made from the individual
observation to the needed confirmation is
one whose technical details, as they appear
in the hfe of any one special science, interest
us here not at all. But what does interest
us, first of all, is the fact that this confirma-
tion always involves a typical instance, or a
series of instances, of Peirce's cognitive pro-
cess called interpretation. What further con-
cerns us is that this interpretation is guided by
principles which are, in their bearings, both
very general and highly metaphysical. One
needs no other principles than these for dealing
with all the central problems of philosophy.

I am far from accusing my colleague. Pro-
fessor Minot, of any conscious intention to
express an opinion about a problem of meta-

231


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

physics when he uttered his loyal word of warn-
ing regarding his own scientific discoveries.
But none the less, this appeal to the scientific
community implies a belief that there is such
a community. This beUef is due not to per-
ception or to conception alone. This belief in
the reality of the scientific community is itself
no beUef in a fact which is open to the scientific
observations of any individual. No observer
of nature has ever discovered, by the methods
used in his or in any natural science, that there
exists any such community. The existence of
the community of scientific observers is known
through interpretation. This interpretation
expresses essentially social motives, as well as
profoundly ethical motives. And this inter-
pretation is also of a type which we are obUged
to use in dealing with the whole universe.

Ill

Let me illustrate the thesis which I have
just expressed. Let us first consider why the
individual observer must await the confirma-
tion of others before his discovery can get its

232


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

place as a contribution to a physical science.
Let us use our foregoing study of the cog-
nitive process of interpretation as a further
aid towards the understanding of the relations
between an individual scientific man and the
work of the natural science to which he may
contribute.

There is a well-known maxim of common
sense which tells us that no man should be
judge in his own case. The patient does ill
who attempts to be his own physician. The
htigant, even if he happens to be a lawyer,
needs somebody besides himself as his counsel.
The judge on the bench may not undertake
to try a suit in which he is plaintiff or defend-
ant. Even a great statesman needs aid
when his own fitness for oflSce is in question.
The artist, however original, may be an un-
trustworthy critic of his own genius.

This maxim of common sense, at least in its
application to patients, to litigants, to oflSce-
seekers, or to artists, seems to be somewhat
remote from the maxim of scientific naethod
which Professor Minot formulated. And yet,

233


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

in both maxims, essentially the same prin-
ciple is in question. Why is a man in so
many cases so poor a judge of his own case ?
Why ought not the most expert of judges to
undertake to decide a case in which he is
plaintiff or defendant ? Why is it, in general,
true, as they say, that the man who is his
own lawyer has a fool for a chent ? Why is
every one of us disqualified from self -estimate
in respect of some of the matters which per-
sonally concern us most of all ?

IV

The general answers to these questions are
easy. A man's own case is usually not merely
his own. It also concerns some social order
to which he belongs. The litigant stands in
presence, not merely of his own rights and
wrongs, but of the whole social will. The
decision of his case will affect many besides
himself, and sometimes might save or wreck
a nation. The patient's illness is not merely
a medical phenomenon, and not merely an
individual misfortune, but also is an event

234


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

of social moment. His family, and perhaps
his country, may be affected by what is done
with this single case. Napoleon's state of
health, during the later years of his power,
probably influenced the course of all future
European history. And the obscurest vic-
tim of the plague may prove to be a centre of
infection for a whole continent. Hence, when
anybody is ill, his case is not merely his own.

When a man's affairs deeply concern other
people besides himself, the only way to deal
justly with the case is to interpret this man's
own individual views and interests to some
fitting representative of the social will, in
order that the matter may be arbitrated, or
in order that the wills of all concerned may
be, as far as possible, both harmonized and
expressed. A Community of Interpretation
must exist or must be formed.

The sufferer who is ill, or the man who is
haled into court, needs, then, not only to be
an object of perception or of conception.
It is not enough to wait in order to see whether
his ideas "work" or not. What is needed is

235


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

the triadic process of mediating between his
mind and some other mind, between his
ideas and other men's ideas.

And no interpreter who merely blended
with the mind and the ideas of the one whom
he is to interpret, or with the interests of
those whom he is to address, could do the
work. The distinction of the persons, or of
the personal functions involved, is as essential
to a Community of Interpretation as is the
common task in which these three persons
engage, or in which these three distinct ideas
or personal functions cooperate.

Now it is indeed perfectly possible for a
man to undertake the task of interpreting his
own case. There are instances in which we
all of us wisely attempt some form of self-
interpretation. There are callings, such as
those of the trained administrators and of
the sea-captains, in which it becomes a regular
part of a man's duty, even at moments when
great and novel emergencies arise, to interpret
his own duty to himself.

In a previous lecture, we have seen how

236


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

such enterprises of self-interpretation are
actually carried out. At some present mo-
ment, a man may interpret his past plans,
his habits, his resolutions, his ideals, his
obhgations, to his future self, and thereupon
may give commands to himself.

The psychology of such processes is simply
that of comparison, when comparison is
taken in Peirce's sense, as a triadic mode of
cognition. In such instances a man dis-
covers a third or mediating idea, whereby
two of his own distinct ideas are, within the
limits of his individual consciousness, woven
into a threefold unity. Now that this can
sometimes be accomplished with success, the
sea-captain — who, while on the bridge, faces
a great emergency and consults no other man,
yet gives fitting orders and succeeds — well
illustrates. The captain's task, of course, con-
cerns the interests of a social order. But his
training has prepared him to unite in his own
person certain functions of a community.

From one essential feature of his self-
imposed task, however, the man who acts

237


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

as his own adviser in any socially significant
situation, cannot be relieved. He attempts,
at such a moment, to do the work of three
men at once. The three personal functions
which must be brought into unity if the work
is to be successfully done, remain distinct.
They must not blend. If they actually blend,
the whole affair becomes a blind product of
instinct or of routine, and not any genuine
self-direction whatever. As a fact, there are
some callings which train a man for such a
threefold task. There are some situations
in Ufe wherein any mature man who knows
his own business has to act as his own ad-
viser. But the task has its diflSculty deter-
mined by its form. An individual has, in
all such instances, to do the work of a com-
munity.

Now in case of illness, of legal peril, or of
the personal estimate to which the artist or
the statesman is subjected by the social will,
experience shows that a man is seldom, and,
in sufficiently great emergencies, is never able
to act with success as his own adviser. The

238


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

reasons for this sort of defect are two:
First, the question at issue concerns the in-
terests of at least two distinct individuals;
and hence, whether the patient or the liti-
gant, or other man in question endeavors to
be his own director or not, the task is essen-
tially such that it can be accomplished only
by the aid of an interpreter. For just be-
cause more than one individual must be rightly
treated, there exists some social boundary
which must be crossed. Therefore neither the
"cash-values** nor the "credit-values" of in-
dividual ideas are mainly in question. The
"exchange-values'* of two distinct forms of
ideal coinage are to be considered. And so the
adjustment required has to be triadic in its in-
most form. But secondly, while this process of
interpretation, this crossing of our ideal boun-
dary, can indeed be undertaken within the
Umits of an individual man*s consciousness, as
it is undertaken whenever we compare two
distinct ideas of our own, — experience shows
that the effort to fill at once the functions of
three distinct persons does not succeed with

239


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

the patients and with the Ktigants, although
analogous threefold functions may succeed
in case of the sea-captains and the great ad-
ministrators.


Let us return to the case of the scientific
observer, — not because the maxim defined
by my colleague is either obscure or doubtful,
but because the underlying principle needs
to be brought clearly to our consciousness.

Common sense regards the physical world as
a realm whose objects can be experienced in
common by many observers. We have not
here to inquire into the origin of this special
belief. But the belief can be readily illus-
trated by the way in which two men who
row in the same boat regard the boat and the
oars which they see and touch, and the water
over which they fly.

Each man views the boat and the oars and
the water as objects which he experiences for
himself. At the same time, each of the two
men believes that both of them are expe-

240


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

riencing, while they row together, the same
external facts, — the same boat, the sam£ oars,
the same water.

It is important for our purposes to notice
that, while each individual, as he pulls his
oar, verifies some of his own ideas, and finds
them " working *' in his own individual ex-
perience, neither of them individually verifies
the '^workings'' of the other man's ideas.
Consequently, when each man believes that
the boat in which he observes himself to be
rowing is the same boat as the one which the
other man also finds as an object in his own
experience, — this beKef , as each of the men
possesses it, is not a perception, and is not veri-
fied by the individual "workings'" of the ideas
of either of the men.

I This beUef in the common object is, for
each of the men, an interpretation, which he
may address to the other man, or may regard
the other as in turn addressing to him. ■

The cognitive process involved is through
and through triadic.

The boat which each man finds, sees,

VOL. II — R 241


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

touches, and feels himself pull, appears to
him as verifying his own ideas. The com-
mon boat, the boat which each man regards
as an object not only for his own, but also for
his neighbor's experience, is essentially an
object of interpretation.

The real boat may indeed actually be what
each of the two men takes it to be; and it
may be the same boat as that boat which
each man verifies in his own experience* But
if this is the case, and if the boat is really a
common object of experience for both the
oarsmen, then the community of interpreta-
tion into which the two men enter whenever
they talk about their boat or about their
rowing, is a community which even now views
both itself and its boat as it would view both
of them in case its goal were actually attained,
and in case the interpretation had been trans-
formed into a perfectly clear vision of a com-
parison of ideas.

In any case, however, it is useless to attempt
to express the community of experience which
the two oarsmen possess in terms of the

242


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

separate "workings" of the ideas of either
of them or of both, taken as mutually de-
tached individuals.

Each rower verifies his own idea of the boat.
Neither of them, as an individual, verifies the
other's idea of this boat. Each of them, as
interpreter, either of himself or of the other
man, believes that their two individual ex-
periences have a common object. Neither
can (merely as this individual) verify this
idea. Neither could, as an individual, ever
verify his belief in the interpretation, even
although they two should row in the same
boat together until doomsday.

If the common interpretation is true, then
the two oarsmen actually form a community
of interpretation, and are even now believing
what would be seen to be true if, and only if,
this community of interpretation were actually
to reach its goal.

Pragmatism, whose ideas, like those of the
bewitched Galatians, are fain to be saved solely
by their own "works,** is, as I believe, quite
unable to define in its own dyadic terms, the

243


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

essentially spiritual sense in which any in-
terpretation can be true, and the sense in
which any community of interpretation could
reach its goal. Nothing, however, is better
known to us, or is more simply empirical,
than is the reaching of such a Umited but
determinate goal of interpretation, when-
ever we ourselves compare two distinct ideas
of our own, and survey with clearness the
union of the mediating or third idea with
those whose contrasts it interprets. The oars-
men who not only row in the same boat, but
who are able to talk over together their boat
and their rowing, interpret their imited life
and work as such a real community of inter-
pretation.

They constantly interpret themselves as
the members, and their boat as the empirical
object of such a community. And they con-
stantly define what could be actually verified
only iV the goal of the community were
reached. By merely rowing they will indeed
never reach it. But does the real world any-
where or anyhow contain the actual winning

244


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

of the goal by the community ? If not, then
the ideas of the interpreters are actually and
always quite unverifiable. Yet their com-
munity, by hypothesis, is real. But if the
real world contains the actual winning of the
goal by the community, then the verifying
experience is not definable in the terms which
pragmatism uses.

For such a goal is essentially the experience
of a community; and the success, — the
salvation, — the final truth of each idea, or
of each individual person, that enters into
this community, is due (when the goal is
reached) neither to its "works'* nor to its
workings, but to its essentially spiritual unity
in and with the community.

VI

The case of the two men rowing together
in the same boat is a case in which common
sense raises no question regarding the physical
reality of the boat. Such a question is, for
common sense, unnecessary, simply because
the interpretation of the boat as the common

245


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

object of the experience of both the rowers is
already made obvious by the essentially social
nature and training of all of us. Our social
consciousness is, psychologically speaking, the
most deeply rooted foundation of our whole
view of ourselves and of the world; and we
therefore tend from the outset to make inter-
pretation, rather than perception or concep-
tion, our ruling cognitive process whenever
explicitly social relations are concerned. And
so, for common sense, the physical objects,
especially when they appear to us in the field
of our experience of sight and of touch, are
regarded as essentially common objects, —
the same for all men. For do we not appear
to see men dealing together with these conmion
objects ?

This is an interpretation ; but it is an early
and a natural interpretation. So long as we
are untrained to reflection, we remain indeed
unaware of the principles which lie at the
basis of such common-sense opinions about
natural facts.

These principles come to a clearer conscious-

246


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

ness only when scientific methods, or similarly
critical undertakings, have made us sceptical
in our scrutiny of experience.

Professor Minot's maxim expresses one
result of such criticism. This maxim simply
generalizes the view which the two men row-
ing in the boat naturally take.

vn

If physical objects are especially to be
viewed as objects which are or which can
become common objects of experience for
various men, then whoever says, ""I have
discovered a physical fact,'" is not merely
reporting the workings of his own individual
ideas. He is interpreting. He is therefore
appealing to a community of interpretation.

If he has found a really not-el object in his
own individual experience, then this object
has not already won its place, as the boat
and the oars and the water have long since
done, among the recognized objects of com-
mon experience. If hereupon the discoverer
persists, as an individual, in interpreting his

247


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

own experience; if he says, with direct con-
fidence, "Since my ideas here work in this
novel way, I have found a new physical
fact,'" — then the discoverer is attempting
to be judge in his own cause. His perils are,
therefore, quite analogous to those which the
patient faces who attempts to be his own
physician, or to the dangers which the man
encounters who enters court as his own
counsel.

The source and the limitations of these
perils we now know. The observer of a new
fact may justly be, at least for the time, his
own interpreter, in case his training has
rightly prepared him for the scientific emer-
gency of a notable discovery made by him
while he is working alone. For in such a case
the discoverer has already become expert in
the arts of his community. Yet always the
scientific discoverer is, in principle, subject
to Professor Minot's maxim. Isolated ob-
servations of individuals, even when these
individuals are of the highest grade of expert-
ness, are always unsatisfactory. And the

248


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

acknowledged facts of a natural science are
the possessions of the community.

That the scientific community itself exists,
is therefore one of the most important prin-
ciples used in the natural sciences. Often
this principle is more or less subconscious.
It is seldom adequately analyzed.

vin

Our previous study has prepared us to
imderstand the constitution of the scientific
community of interpretation more precisely
than would be possible without such a basis
as we now possess. The scientific community
consists, at the least, of the original discoverer,
of his interpreter, and of the critical worker
who tests or controls the discoverer's observa-
tions by means of new experiences devised
for that purpose.

Usually, of course, in case the discovery has
attracted much attention, the critic whose con-
trol is in question is no one individual man.
For then the work of testing the discovery
is done by a large body of individual workers.

249


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

In many cases, in the routine work of the
highly developed sciences, the interpreter's
task takes, in large part, the form of sim-
ply reporting and recording the discoverer's
observations.

But Professor Minot calls attention to
another and a very important part of the
office of mediating between the discoverer
and his community. Professor Minot speaks
of the way in which scientific discoveries are
"correlated" by others than those who made
them. This process of correlation, involves,
upon its higher levels, elaborate comparisons.
How complex and how significant, for the
advance of science, this aspect of the pro-
cess of interpretation may be, the historical
instance of Clerk Maxwell's theoretical in-
terpretation of Faraday's discoveries in Elec-
tricity and Magnetism will suggest sufficiently
for our present purpose.

As for the work of criticism and of control
to which the interpretation leads, it is not
only capable of infinite complexity, but in-
volves various reversals in the direction of

250


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

the process of interpretation. Criticism and
control often come from those who, as in the
typical case of the discoveries of Darwin,
address the discoverer, and arouse him to
make new discoveries.

But however complex the processes which
arise in the course of such undertakings, the
essential structure of the community of scien-
tific interpretation remains definitely the
same. The existence of this community is
presupposed as a basis of every scientific in-
quiry into natural facts. And the type of
truth which is sought by scientific investi-
gators is one which indeed includes, but which
simply cannot be reduced to, the dyadic type
to which pragmatism devotes its exclusive
attention. For everybody concerned, while
he indeed aims to have his own ideas **work,''
is also concerned with the truth of his inter-
pretations, and of those which are addressed
to him. And such truth can be fully tested,
under our human conditions, only in the cases
wherein, for the interpretation of another
human individual's mind, the comparison of

251


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

distinct ideas is substituted, while these ideas
fall within the range of our individual in-
sight.

f In all other cases, just as in our ordinary
social dealings with one another, we aim tow-
ards the goal of the community of inter-
pretation. Our will is the ''will to interpret."
We do not reach the goal in any one moment,
so long as we are dealing with other human
beings. Yet we interpret the goal. For the
goal of the community is always precisely that
luminous knowledge which we do, in a limited
but in a perfectly definite form, possess,
within the range of our own individual life
whenever our comparisons of distinct ideas
are made with clearness.
? We define the facts of the common social
experience in terms of this perfectly concrete
and empirical goal of the scientific community
of interpretation. This goal is a certain
type of spiritual unity. All scientific re-
search depends upon loyalty to the cause
of the scientific community of interpreta-
tion.

252


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

IX

But how — so one may still insist —
should we know that any community of in-
terpretation exists ?

This question brings us indeed to the very
centre of metaphysics. From this point out-
wards we can survey all the principal prob-
lems about reality. The will to interpret,
in all of its forms, scientific or philosophical
or religious, presupposes that somehow, at
some time, in some fitting embodiment, a
community of interpretation exists, and is
in process of aiming towards its goal. Any
conversation with other men, any process of
that inner conversation whereof, as we have
seen, our individual self-consciousness con-
sists, any scientific investigation, is carried
on under the influence of the generally sub-
conscious belief that we all are members of
a community of interpretation. When such
enterprises are at once serious and reasonable
and truth-loving, the general form of any such
community, as we have already observed, is

253


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

that of the ideal Pauline Church. For there
is the member whose office it is to edify.
There is the brother who is to be edified.
And there is the spirit of the community,
who is in one aspect the interpreter, and in
another aspect the being who is interpreted.
Now what is the warrant for believing in the
reality of such a community ?
I For a general answer to this question let
us hereupon consult the philosophers. The
philosophers differ sadly amongst themselves.
They do not at present form a literal human
community of mutual enlightenment and of
growth in knowledge, to any such extent as
do the workers in the field of any one of the
natural sciences. The philosophers are thus
far individuals rather than consciously mem-
bers one of another. The charity of mutual
interpretation is ill developed amongst them.
They frequently speak with tongues and do
not edify. And they are especially disposed
to contend regarding their spiritual gifts.
We cannot expect them, then, at present to
agree regarding any one philosophical opinion.

254


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

Nevertheless, if we consider them in a his-
torical way, there is one feature about their
work to which, at this point, I need to call
especial attention.

I have already more than once asserted
that the principal task of the philosopher
is one, not of perception, not of conception,
but of interpretation. This remark refers
in the first place to the office which the philoso-
phers have filled in the history of culture.


Common opinion classes philosophy among
the humanities. It ought so to be classed.
Philosophers have actually devoted themselves,
in the main, neither to perceiving the world,
nor to spinning webs of conceptual theory,
but to interpreting the meaning of the civili-
zations which they have represented, and to
attempting the interpretation of whatever
minds in the universe, human or divine, they
believed to be real. That the philosophers
are neither the only interpreters, nor the
chiefs among those who interpret, we now well

255


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

know. The artists, the leaders of men, and
all the students of the humanities, make
interpretation their business ; and the triadic
cognitive function, as the last lecture showed,
has its applications in all the realms of knowl-
edge. But in any case the philosopher's
ideals are those of an interpreter. He ad-
dresses one mind and interprets another.
The unity which he seeks is that which is
characteristic of a community of interpre-
tation.

The historical proofs of this thesis are mani-
fold. A correct summary of their meaning
appears in the common opinion which classes
philosophy amongst the humanities. This
classification is a perfectly just one. The
humanities are busied with interpretations.
Individual illustrations of the historical oflSce
of philosophy could be furnished by consider-
ing with especial care precisely those his-
torical instances which the philosophers fur-
mish who, like Plato or like Bergson, have
most of all devoted their efforts to empha-
sizing as much as possible one of the other

256


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

cognitive processes, instead of interpretation.
For the more exclusively such a philosopher
lays stress upon perception alone, or con-
ception alone, the better does he illustrate
our historical thesis.

Plato lays stress upon conception as fur-
nishing our principal access to reality. Berg-
son has eloquently maintained the thesis
that pure perception brings, us in contact with
the real. Yet each of these philosophers ac-
tually offers us an interpretation of the uni-
verse. That is, each of them begins by taking
account of certain mental processes which
play a part in human life. Each asks us
to win some sort of touch with a higher type
of consciousness than belongs to our natural
human existence. Each declares that, through
such a transformation of our ordinary con-
sciousness, either through a flight from the
vain show of sense into the realm of pure
thought, or else through an abandonment of
the merely practical labors of that user of
tools, the intellect, we shall find the pathway
to reality. Each in his own way interprets
VOL. n — s 257


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

our natural mode of dealing with reality to
some nobler form of insight which he believes
to be corrective of our natural errors, or else,
in turn, interprets the supposed counsels of
a more divine type of knowledge to the blind-
ness or to the barrenness or to the merely
practical narrowness of our ordinary exist-
ence.

Each of these -philosophers mediates, in
his own way, between the spiritual existence
of those who sit in the darkness of the cave of
sense, or who, on the other hand, wander in
the wilderness of evolutionary processes and
of intellectual theories ; — he mediates, I say,
between these victims of error on the one
hand, and that better, that richer, spiritual
life and the truer insight, on the other hand,
of those who, in this philosopher's opinion,
find the homeland — be that land the Pla-
tonic realm of the eternal forms of being, or
the dwelling-place which Bergson loves, —
where the artists see their beautiful visions of
endless change.

In brief, there is no philosophy of pure con-

258


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

ception, and there is no philosophy of pure
perception. Plato was a leader of the souls
of those men to whom he showed the way out
of the cave, and in whom he inspired the love
of the eternal. Bergson winningly devotes
himself to saying, as any artist says, "Come
and intuitively see what I have intuitively
seen."

Such speech, however, is the speech neither
of the one who trusts to mere conception,
nor of one who finds the real merely in per-
ception. It is the speech of an interpreter,
who, addressing himself to one form of per-
sonaUty or of Kfe, interprets what he takes
to be the meaning of some other form of Ufe.

This thesis, that the philosopher is an in-
terpreter, simply directs our attention to the
way in which he is required to define his
problems. And the universality of these
problems makes this purely elementary task
of their proper definition at once momentous
and diflScult, We shall not lose by any con-
sideration which rightly fixes our attention
upon an essential aspect of the process of

259


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

knowledge which the philosopher seeks to con-
trol. For the philosopher is attempting to
deal with the world as a whole, with reaUty
in general.

Why is it that the philosopher has to be an
interpreter even when, Uke Bergson or like
Plato, he tries to subordinate interpretation
either to conception alone or to perception
alone? Why is it that when, in his loftiest
speculative flights, he attempts to seize upon
some intuition of reason, or upon some form
of direct perception, which shall reveal to him
the inmost essence of reality, he nevertheless
acts as interpreter ?

The answer to this question is simple.

XI

If, as a fact, we could, at least in ideal, and
as a sort of speculative experiment, weld all
our various ideas, our practical ideas as well
as our theoretical ideas, together into some
single idea, whose "leading'' we could follow
wherever it led, from concept to percept, or
from percept to concept; and if we could

260


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

reduce our problem of reality simply to the
question, Is this one idea expressive of t^e
nature of reality? — then indeed some such
philosophy as that of Bergson, or as that of
Plato, might be formulated in terms either of
pure perception or of pure conception. Then
the philosopher who thus welded his ideas
into one idea, and who then assured himself
of the success of that one idea, would no
longer be an interpreter.

Thus, let us imagine that we could, with
Spinoza, weld together into the one idea of
Substance, the totality of ideas, that is of prag-
matic leadings, which all men, at all times,
are endeavoring to follow through their ex-
perience, or to express through their will.
Suppose that this one idea could be shown to
be successful. Then our philosophy could
assume the well-known form which Spinoza
gav-e to his own : —

By substance, Spinoza means that which
is "in itself and which needs no other to sus-
tain or in any ideal fashion to contain it.
Hereupon the philosopher finds it easy to

261


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

assert that whatever is in any sense real must
indeed be either "in itself*' or "in another/'
No other idea need be used in estimating
reahties except the idea thus defined. The
only question as to any object is: Is this a
substance or not ? A very brief and simple
process of conceptual development, then,
brings us to Spinoza's result that whatever
is "in another" is not in the highest sense real
at all. Therefore there remains in our world
only that which is real "in itself." The one
idea can be realized only in a world which is,
once for all, the Substance. The tracks of all
finite creatures that are observed near the
edge of the cave of this Substance lead (as
was long ago said of Spinoza's substance)
only inwards. The world is defined in terms
of the single idea, all other human ideas or
possible ideas being but special cases of the
one idea. The real world is purely con-
ceptual, and is also monistic.

Suppose, on the other hand, that we indeed
recognize with Bergson, and with the pragma-
tists, an endless and empirical wealth of ideas

262


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

which, in practical Ufe, lead or do not lead
from concepts to percepts, as experience may
determine. Suppose, however, that, with
Bergson, we first notice that all these ideal
leadings of the intellect constitute, at best,
but an endlessly varied using of tools. Sup-
pose that hereupon, with Bergson and with
the mystics, we come to regard all this Ufe
of the varied ideas, this mechanical using of
mere tools, this mere pragmatism, as an essen-
tially poorer sort of Ufe from which nature has
long since deUvered the nobler of the insects,
from which the artists can and do escape,
and from which it is the loftiest ideal of phi-
losophy to Uberate those who are indeed to
''know reaUty.

Then indeed, though not at all in Spinoza's
way, all the ideal leadings which the philosopher
has henceforth to regard as essentially illu-
minating, will simply blend into a single idea.
This idea will be the one idea of winning a
pure intuition. We shaU define reaUty in
terms of this pure intuition. And hereupon
a purely perceptual view of reaUty will result.

263


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

If, then, all the ideas of men, if all ideas of
reaUty, could collapse or could blend or could
otherwise be ideally welded into a single
idea, then this idea could be used to define
reaKty, just as pragmatism has come to define
all the endless variety of forms of "truth'' in
terms of the single idea which gets the name
"success" or "working'* or "expediency" or
"cash-value," according to the taste of the
individual pragmatist.

xn

As a fact, however, the genuine problem,
whether of reahty, or of truth, cannot be
faced by means of any such blending of all
ideal leadings into a single ideal leading.

We all of us beUeve that there is any real
world at all, simply because we find ourselves
in a situation in which, because of the frag-
mentary and dissatisfying conflicts, antitheses,
and problems of our present ideas, an inter-
pretation of this situation is needed, but is not
now known to us. By the ''real world'' we
mean simply the " true interpretation " of this

264


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION,

our problematic situation. No other reason
can be given than this for beheving that there
is any real world at all. From this one con-
sideration, vast consequences follow. Let us
next sketch some of these consequences.

Whoever stands in presence of the problem
of reaUty has, at the very least, to compare
two essential ideas. These ideas are, re-
spectively, the idea of present experience and
the idea of the goal of experience. The con-
trast in question has countless and infinitely
various forms. In its ethical form the con-
trast appears as that between our actual life
and our ideal Ufe. It also appears as the Pau-
line contrast between the flesh and the spirit ;
or as the Stoic contrast between the life of the
wise and the life of fools. It is also known to
common sense as the contrast between our
youthful hopes and our mature sense of our
Umitations. The contrast between our future
Ufe, which we propose to control, and our
irrevocable past life which we can never recall,
presents the same general antithesis. In the
future, as we hopefully view it, the goal is

265


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

naturally supposed to lie. But the past,
dead as it is often said to be, determines our
present need, and sets for us our ideal task.

In the world of theory the same contrast
appears as that between our ignorance and
our possible enUghtenment, between our end-
lessly numerous problems and their solutions,
between our innumerable uncertainties and
those attainments of certainty at which our
sciences and our arts aim. For our reUgious
consciousness the contrasts between nature
and grace, between good and evil, between our
present state and our salvation, between God
and the world, merely illustrate the antithesis.

One can also state this antithesis as that
between our Will (which, as Schopenhauer and
the Buddhists said, is endlessly longing) and
the Fulfilment of our will. Plato, on the one
hand, and the mystics on the other, attempt
to conceive or to perceive some such fulfilment,
according as Plato, or as some mystic, em-
phasizes one or the other of the two cognitive
processes to which the philosophers have
usually confined their attention.

266


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

This antithesis between two fundamental
ideas presents to each of us the problem of
the universe, and dominates that problem.
For by the '' real world "' we mean the true
interpretation of the problematic situation
which this antithesis presents to us in so far
as we compare what is our ideal with what is
so far given to us. Whatever the real world
is, its nature has to be expressed in terms of
this antithesis of ideas.

Two such ideas, then, stand in contrast
when we face our problem of reaUty. They
stand as do plaintiff and defendant in court,
or as do the ideas of the suffering patient and
his hopes of recovery, or as do the wrongs
which the Utigant feels and the rights or the
doom which the law allows him. The em-
pirical shapes which the antithesis takes are
simply endless in their wealth. They fur-
nish to us the special topics which science and
common sense study. But the general prob-
lem which the antithesis presents is the
world-problem. The question about what the
real world is, is simply the question as to what

267


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

this contrast is and means. Neither of the two
ideas can solve its own problem or be judge in
its own case. Each needs a counsel, a medi-
ator, an interpreter, to represent its cause to
the other idea.

In the well-known metaphysical expression,
this contrast may be called that between ap-
pearance and reality. The antithesis itself
is in one sense the appearance, the phe-
nomenon, the world-problem. The question
about the real world is that furnished to us by
our experience of this appearance. When we
ask what the real world is, we simply ask what
this appearance, this antithesis, this problem
of the two contrasting ideas both is and means.
So to ask, is to ask for the solution of the probr
lem which the antithesis presents. That is,
we ask: "What is the interpretation of this
problem, of this antithesis ? '' The real world
is that solution. Every special definition of
reaUty takes the form of offering such a solu-
tion. Whether a philosopher calls himself
realist or idealist, monist or pluralist, theist
or materiaUst, empiricist or rationalist, his

268


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

philosophy, wherever he states it, takes the
form of saying: "The true, the genuine in-
terpretation of the antithesis is such and
such/'

If you say that perhaps there is no solution
of the problem, that hypothesis, if true, could
be verified only by an experience that in itself
would constitute a full insight into the mean-
ing of the real contrast, and so would in fact
furnish a solution. In any case, the real
world is precisely that whose nature is ex-
pressed by whatever mediating idea is such
that, when viewed in unity with the two
antithetical ideas, it fully compares them,
and makes clear the meaning of the contrast.
But an interpretation is real only if the appro-
jyriate community is realy and is true only if that
community reaches its goal.

In brief, then, the real world is the Com-
munity of Interpretation which is constituted
by the two antithetic ideas, and their media-
tor or interpreter, whatever or whoever that
interpreter may be. If the interpretation is
a reahty, and if it truly interprets the whole


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

of reality, then the community reaches its
goal, and the real world includes its own in-
terpreter. Unless both the interpreter and the
community are real, there is no real world.

xm

After the foregoing discussion of the nature
and the processes oi interpretation, we are
now secure from any accusation that, from
this point of view, the real world is anything
merely static, or is a mere idea within the mind
of a finite self, or is an Absolute that is di-
vorced from its appearances, or is any merely
conceptual reaUty, or is "out of time,'' or is a
"block universe,'' or is an object of a merely
mystical intuition.

Interpretation, as we have seen in our general
discussion of the cognitive process in question,
demands that at least an infinite series of
distinct individual acts of interpretation shall
take place, imless the interpretation which is
in question is arbitrarily interrupted. If,
then, the real world contains the Community
of Interpretation just characterized, this com-

270


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

munity of interpretation expresses its life in
an infinite series of individual interpretation,
each of which occupies its own place in a
perfectly real order of time.

If, however, this community of interpreta-
tion reaches its goal, this whole time-process
is in some fashion spanned by one insight
which surveys the unity of its meaning.
Such a viewing of the whole time-process by a
single synopsis will certainly not be anything
"timeless.'' It will not occur, on the other
hand, at any one moment of time. But its
nature is the one empirically known to us at
any one moment when we clearly contrast
two of our own ideas and find their mediator.

XIV

Nothing is more concretely known to us
than are the nature, the value, and the goal of
a community of interpretation. The most
ideal as well as the most scientifically exact
interests of mankind are boimd up with the
existence, with the purposes, with the fortunes,
and with the unity of such communities.

271


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

The metaphysical doctrine just set forth in
outline can be summed up thus : The prob-
lem of reality is furnished to us by a certain
universal antithesis of two Ideas, or, if one
prefers the word, by the antithesis of two
Selves. The first thesis of this doctrine is that
Reality — the solution of this problem — is the
interpretation of this antithesis, the process of
mediating between these two selves and of in-
terpreting each of them to the other. Such a
process of interpretation involves, of necessity,
an infinite sequence of acts of interpretation.
It also admits of an endless variety within all
the selves which are thus mutually interpreted.
These selves, in all their variety, constitute the
life of a single Community of Interpretation,
whose central member is that spirit of the
commimity whose essential function we now
know. In the concrete, then, the universe
is a community of interpretation whose life
comprises and imifies all the social varieties
and all the social communities which, for any
reason, we know to be real in the empirical
world which our social and our historical

272


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

sciences study. The history of the universe,
the whole order of time, is the history and the
order and the expression of this Universal
Community.

XV

The method by which this doctrine has
been reached may also be summarily stated
thus : We began with a sketch of the essen-
tially social character which belongs to our
human knowledge of the physical world.
Here one of our guides was the way in which
common sense interprets the being of material
objects. Our other guide was the maxim
of scientific method which Professor Minot,
wholly without any technically metaphysical
purpose, has stated. The result of regarding
our human experience of nature from these
two points of view was that we foimd our
belief in the reality of the physical world to
be inseparable from our belief in the reality
of a community of interpretation. The rest
of our discussion has been a metaphysical gen-
eralization of this first result.
VOL. n — T 273


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

Turning from these special instances to the
general philosophical problem of reality, we
next noticed the historical fact that phi-
losophers have never been able to define a
theory of the universe in purely conceptual
terms, and have been equally imable to state
their doctrines about the world in purely per-
ceptual terms. The philosophers have always
been interpreters, in our technical sense of
that term.

Is this limitation of the philosophers (if
you call it a limitation) due to the fact that
they have been, themselves, human beings,
busied with interpreting life to their fellow-
men, and imable therefore to dwell exclusively
either upon perception or upon conception ?

To this question we have answered that the
philosopher's oflSce as interpreter is not forced
upon him merely by the fact that he is ap-
pealing, as man, to other men. The source
of his task as interpreter lies deeper. Real-
ity cannot be expressed exclusively either in
perceptual or in conceptual form. Nor can
its nature be described in terms of the "lead-

274


Digitized by


Google


THE WORLD OF INTERPRETATION

ings'' which any one idea can express. How-
ever you attempt to weld all ideas into one
idea (such as Spinoza's idea of substance),
and then to hold that reality is the expression
of this one idea, you stand in presence of a
contrast, an antithesis of at least two ideas,
"Appearance and Reality,'' "Actual and
Possible," "Real and Ideal," or some other
such pair. If you succeed in reducing this
antithesis to its simplest statement, the world-
problem then becomes the problem of defining
the mediating idea in terms of which this con-
trast or antithesis can be and is interpreted.
If you define, however tentatively, such a
mediating idea, and then offer the resulting
interpretation as an account of what the real
world is, your philosophy becomes an assertion
that the universe itself has the form and the
real character of a community of interpreta-
tion. You have no reason for beUeving that
there is any world whatever, except a reason
which implies that some interpretation of the
antithesis both exists and is true. A real and
a true interpretation occur only in case the cor-

275


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

responding community exists and wins its
goal.

In irief , if any single idea endeavors to de-
fine in terms of its own "leadings" the whole
nature of things, that idea is in the position
of the man who undertakes to be judge of his
own cause. For it belongs to the nature of
things to involve an interpretation of its own
contrasts, and a mediation of its own an-
titheses. To the world, then, belongs an In-
terpreter of its own life. In this sense, then,
the world is the process and the life of the
Spirit and of the Community.


276


Digitized by


Google


XIV

THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


LECTURE XIV

THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

THE Christian doctrine of life is domi-
nated by the ideal of the Universal
Community. Such was the thesis defended
in the first part of this series of lectures.
The real world itself is, in its wholeness, a
Community. This was the metaphysical re-
sult in which our study of the World of
Interpretation, at the last time, culminated.


Herewith the two assertions to which our
study of the Problem of Christianity leads,
are before you. Our concluding lectures must
make explicit the relations between these two
assertions. Hereby each of them will be
interpreted in the light of the other.

Metaphysical theory and religious experi-
ence are always contrasting realms of inquiry
and of insight. Therefore the task of our three
concluding lectures constitutes a typical exer-

279


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

cise in the process of interpretation. We have
to compare results which have been reached
by widely diflFerent methods. We have to
mediate between them. The method of inter-
pretation is always the comparative method.
To compare and to interpret are two names
for the same fundamental cognitive process.

The fitting order for such an enterprise is
determined by the subject-matter. Since the
metaphysical thesis with which our last lecture
closed is very general, it will prove to be, in-
deed, a worthless abstraction, unless we illus-
trate its application to various special problems
of life as well as of philosophy. What I can
hope, within the limits of our brief remaining
time, to make clearer, is what I may call the
ground plan of the World of Interpretation.

The universe, if my thesis is right, is a
realm which is through and through domi-
nated by social categories. Time, for instance,
expresses a system of esaentially social rela-
tions. The present interprets the past to the
future. At each moment of time the results of
the whole world's history up to that moment

280


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

I

are, so to speak, summed up and passed over
to the future for its new deeds of creation and
of interpretation. I state this principle here
in a simply dogmatic form, and merely as an ex-
ample of what I have in mind when I say that
the system of metaphysics which is needed to
define the constitution of this world of inter-
pretation must be the generalized theory of an
ideal society. Not the Self, not the Logos, not
the One, and not the Many, but the Community
will be the ruling category of such a philosophy.
I must attempt, then, within our brief re-
maining time, to make this general metaphys-
ical theory less abstract and more articulate. I
must contrast our theory with others. I must
make more explicit its relation to the Christian
ideas. And then I must, in conclusion, survey
what we have won, and summarize the outcome.

II

Let me begin by a few purely technical
formulations. Charles Peirce, in the dis-
cussions which we have now so freely used,
introduced into logic the term "Sign." He

281


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRI9«?IANITY

used that term as the name for an object to
which somebody gives or should give an in-
terpretation. I have not here to deal, at any
length, with Peirce's development of his the-
ory of Signs. His doctrine was, as you will
recall, not at first stated as the basis for a
metaphysical system, but simply as a part of
a logical theory of the categories. My own
metaphysical use of Pierce's doctrine of signs,
in my account of the World of Interpretation
at the last time, is largely independent of
Peirce's philosophy. For the moment it is
enough to say that, according to Peirce, just
as percepts have, for their appropriate objects,
individually existent Things ; and just as con-
cepts possess, for their sole objects, Universals,
— so interpretations have, as the objects which
they interpret. Signs. In its most abstract
definition, therefore, a Sign, according to
Peirce, is something that determines an in-
terpretation. A sign may also be called an
expression of a mind; and, in our ordinary
social intercourse, it actually is such an ex-
pression. Or again, one may say that a sign

282


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

is, in its essence, either a mind or a quasi-
mind, — an object that fulfils the functions
of a mind.

Thus, a word, a clock-face, a weather-vane,

or a gesture, is a sign. Our reason for calling

«

it such is twofold. It expresses a mind, and it
calls for an interpretation through some other
mind, which shall act as mediator between
the sign, or between the maker of the sign,
and some one to whom the sign is to be read.

Since an interpretation of a sign is, in its
turn, the expression of the interpreter's mind,
it constitutes a new sign, which again calls
for interpretation; and so on without end;
unless the process is arbitrarily interrupted.
So much can be asserted as a purely logical
thesis, quite apart from metaphysics. A sign,
then, is an object whose being consists in the
fact that the sign calls for an interpretation.

The process of interpretation, as it occurs in
our ordinary social life, sufficiently illustrates
the meaning of Peirce's new term. Peirce
insists that the signs, viewed simply from a
logical point of view, constitute a new and

283


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

fundamentally important category. He sets
this category as a "third/' side by side with
the classic categories of the "uniVersals''
which form the "first'' category, and the
"individuals," which, in Peirce's logic, form
the "second" category.

Peirce, as I have said, is not responsible for
the metaphysical theory about the world of in-
terpretation with which our last lecture closed.
But his terminology enables us to summarize
that theory by stating our own metaphysical
thesis thus: "The universe consists of real
Signs and of their interpretation."

In the order of real time the events of the
world are signs. They are followed by in-
terpreters, or by acts of interpretation which
our own experience constantly exemplifies.
For we live, as selves, by interpreting the
events and the meaning of our experience.
History consists of such interpretations.

These acts of interpretation are, in their
turn, expressed, in the order of time, by new
signs. The sequence of these signs and in-
terpretations constitutes the history of the

284


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

universe. Whatever our experience exem-
plifies, our metaphysical doctrine of signs
generalizes, and applies to the world at large.

The world's experience is> from this point
of view, not merely a flux. For, as Bergson
rightly asserts, the world of any present
moment of time is a summary of the results of
all past experience. This view of Bergson's,
however, is no mere intuition, but is itself an
interpretation. Our own metaphysical thesis
states in terms of interpretation what Bergson
states as if it were a result of simple intuition.

Since any idea, and especially any antithesis
or contrast of ideas, is, according to our meta-
physical thesis, a sign which in the world
finds its real interpretation, our metaphysical
theory may be called a "doctrine of signs.'*

The title which I have given to this lecture
serves to direct attention, through the use
of a purely technical term, to the main issue.
This issue is the one presented by the thesis
that the very being of the universe consists
in a process whereby the world is interpreted,
— not indeed in its wholeness, at any one

285


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

moment of time, but in and through an in-
finite series of acts of interpretation. This
infinite series constitutes the temporal order
of the worid with all its complexities. The
temporal order is an order of purposes and of
deeds, simply because it is of the essence of
every rational deed to be an effort to interpret
a past Kfe to a future life ; while every act of
interpretation aims to introduce unity into
life, by mediating between mutually contrast-
ing or estranged ideas, minds, and purposes.
If we consider the temporal world in its whole-
ness, it constitutes in itself an infinitely com-
plex Sign. This sign is, as a whole, inter-
preted to an experience which itself includes a
synoptic survey of the whole of time. Such is
a mere sketch of our doctrine of the world of
interpretation.

m

I may aid towards a further understanding
of our metaphysical thesis by using, at this
point, an illustration.

When you observe, at a crossing of roads,

286


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OP SIGNS

a sign-post, you will never discover what
the real sign-post is, either by continuing to
perceive it, or by merely conceiving its struc-
ture or its relations to any perceived objects,
or to any merely abstract laws in heaven or
in earth. Nor can you learn what the sign-
post is by any process of watching in the
course of your individual experience the
"workings" of any ideas that it suggests to
you as this individual man. You can under-
stand what the sign-post is only if you learn to
read it. For its very being as a sign-post
consists in its nature as a guide, needing in-
terpretation, and pointing the way. To know
the real sign-post, you must then learn to
interpret it to a possible hearer to whom you
address your interpretation. This being to
whom you address your interpretation must be
a self distinct from your individual self. If,
then, the sign-post is a sign-post at all, there are
beings in the world that are neither individual
objects of perception nor yet beings such that
they are mere universals, — the proper ob-
jects for conception.

287


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

If the sign-post is a real sign-post, there is
in the world a community constituted of at
least three distinct minds. There is, first,
the mind whose intention to point out the
way is expressed in the construction of this
sign-post. There is the mind to which the
sign-post actually points out the way. But
the sign-post does not eflFectively point out
the way to anybody unless, either by the aid
of his own individual memory, or of somebody
who helps him to read the sign, he learns
what the sign means. There must then be a
third mind which interprets the sign-post to
the inquiring wayfarer. The wayfarer, if he
knows how to read, may be his own interpreter.
But there remain the three distinct mental func-
tions. There is the function of the mind whose
purpose the sign expresses ; there is the mind
which is guided by the interpretation of the
sign; and there is the function of the interpre-
ter to whom the reading of the sign is due.
All these minds or functions must be real and
distinct and must form one real community,
if indeed the sign-post is a real sign-post at all.

288


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

This illustration may help us to grasp what
the first thesis of our metaphysical doctrine
means. Our experience, as it comes to us,
is a realm of Signs. That is, the facts of
experience resemble sign-posts. You can never
exhaustively find out what they are by re-
sorting either to perception or to conception.
Nor can you define experience merely in terms
of the sort of knowledge which pragmatism
emphasizes. No "working'' of any single
idea can show what a real fact of experience
is. For a fact of experience, as you actually
view that fact, is first an event belonging to
an order of time, — an event preceded by
an infinite series of facts whose meaning it
summarizes, and leading to an infinite series
of coming events, into whose meaning it is
yet to enter. But the past and future of our
real experience are objects neither of pure
perception nor of pure conception. Nor can
you, at any present moment, verify any pres-
ent idea of yours about any past event. Nor
can you define past and future in terms of
the present workings of any ideas. Past
VOL. II —17 289


Digitized by


Google


THE. PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

time and future time are known solely through
interpretations. Past time we regard as real,
because we view our memories as signs which
need and possess their interpretations. Our
expectations are interpreted to our future
selves by our present deeds. Therefore we
regard our expectations as signs of a future.

Therefore, to a being who merely perceived
and conceived, or who Uved wholly in the pres-
ent workings of his ideas, past time and future
time would be as meaningless as the sign-post
would be to the wayfarer who could not read,
and who found nobody to interpret to him
its meaning. If the past and future are
reaUlies, then they constitute a Ufe which
belongs to some real community, whose ideas
of past and of future are really interpreted.

Now our doctrine of the world of interpre-
tation extends to all reality the presupposi-
tions which we use in all our deahngs with
past and future time. Our memories are
signs of the past; our expectations are signs
of the future. Past and future are real in so
far as these signs have their real interpretation.

290


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

Our metaphysical thesis generahzes the rules
which constantly guide our daily interpre-
tations of life. All contrasts of ideas, all
Varieties of experience, all the problems which
finite experience possesses, are signs. The
real world contains (so our thesis asserts) the
interpreter of these signs, and the very being
of the world consists in the truth of the inter-
pretation which, in the whole realm of experi-
ence, these signs obtain.

Let us turn back from these technical for-
mulations and from these illustrations, and
come again closer to the real life for which they
are intended to stand.

IV

Despite my frequent mention of differ-
ences, there is one respect in which I am in
full agreement with the spirit of pragmatism,
as James defined it. Any metaphysical thesis,
if it has a meaning at all, is the expression of
an attitude of the will of the one who asserts
this thesis.

In a remarkable recent book, entitled:

291


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

"Die Philosophic des Als Ob," Vaihinger has
given his own formulation to a view which
he originally reached independently of the
influence of pragmatism. It is the view that a
philosophy is, in its essence, a resolution to
treat the real world as if that world possessed
certain characters, and as if our experience
enabled us to verify these characters. This
resolution is, in its essence, an active attitude
of the will. Therefore Voluntarism must form
an essential part of every philosophy which
justly interprets our metaphysical interests.
For our metaphysical interests are indeed
interests in directing our will, in defining our
attitude towards the universe, in making
articulate and practical our ideals and our
resolutions. So far, I say, Vaihinger and the
pragmatists are right.

I do not beUeve, however, that our volun-
tarism must remain a mere pragmatism. I
have long defended a philosophy, both of
human Ufe and of the universe, which I have
preferred to call an "Absolute Voluntarism.''
I developed such a philosophy, partly under

292


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

the influence of James, but long before recent
pragmatism was in question. In its most
general form, this philosophy to which I
myself adhere, asserts that, while every meta-
physical theory is the expression of an attitude
of the will, there is one, and but one, general
and decisive attitude of the will which is the
right attitude, when we stand in presence of
the universe, and when we undertake to choose
how we propose to bear ourselves towards
the world. Any philosophy is inevitably a
doctrine which counsels us to bear ourselves
towards our world as if our experience were
such and such. But I do not beUeve that the
"Philosophy of the 'As if' is, as Vaihinger
asserts, merely a system of more or less con-
venient fictions. For if there are absolute
standards for the will (and, in my own opin-
ion, there are such standards), then the world
of the will is no world of fictions. If there is
one, and but one, right attitude of the will
towards the universe, this attitude, when once
assumed, is essentially creative of its own
realm of deeds. Its so-called fictions are,

293


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

therefore, not mere fictions, for they constitute
a real Ufe. Its so-called successes are no
merely transient successes. For if there is
any true success at all, every such success,
however petty it seems, has a world-wide
meaning. The realm of true success is not
merely a world of change. For deeds once
done are irrevocable; and every deed echoes
throughout the universe. The past is un-
changing. The expression of the will con-
stitutes itself an actual Ufe. The creative
activity of the will is therefore no mere play
with figments. It has the reality of a realm
of deeds. And every deed has a value that
extends throughout the world of the will.
Each act is to be judged in the Ught of the
principle: "Inasmuch as ye have done it
unto the least of these.''

I do not wish here to dwell upon the general
features which I have repeatedly ascribed to
this world of the will, where every fact is the
expression of an individual decision, and is
therefore an absolute fact. I do not intend to
repeat even the outKnes of my former state-

294


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

ments, both of this absolute voluntarism and
of my own type of idealism. I have too often
told that tale. So far as possible, I wish, in
the present exposition, to speak as if all my
former words were unspoken.

As a fact, I still hold by all the essential
features of these former attempts to state
the case for idealism. But at present I am
deahng with the World of Interpretation, and
with the metaphysics of the Community.
This I believe to be simply a new mode of
approach to the very problems which I have
formerly discussed. •

My present interest lies in applying the
spirit of my absolute voluntarism to the new
problems which our empirical study of the
Christian ideas, and our metaphysical theory of
interpretation, have presented for our scrutiny.

With this, then, as the end now in view, let
me try to tell you what attitude of will, what
practical bearing towards the universe, what
resolution, what plan of life, should charac-
terize, in my opinion, any one who undertakes
to view the world in the light of that doctrine

295


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

concerning the nature and the business of
interpretation, which, at the last time, I
sketched.

This essentially social universe, this com-
munity which we have now declared to be
real, and to be, in fact, the sole and supreme
reality, — i;he Absolute, — what does it call
upon a reasonable being to do ? What kind
of salvation does it offer to him ? What in-
terest does it possess for his will ? If he ac-
cepts such a view of things, how should he
bear himself towards the problem of life ? To
what ideas of his own does such a view offer
success ? How can he bring such a view into
closer relations with ordinary human expe-
rience ?


James declared that the typical pragmatist
is a man of an essentially dramatic temper of
mind. I now have to point out that the be-
liever in our world of interpretation also
centres his interests about a genuinely dra-
matic undertaking.

296


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

I have already said that the world of in-
terpretation includes an infinite series of acts
of interpretation. I have shown, in an earlier
lecture, that every act of interpretation in-
volves novelty. The believer in this doctrine
of signs, the one to whom every problem, every
antithesis, every expression of mind, every
tragedy of life, is a sign calhng for interpreta-
tion, and in whose belief the world contains
its own interpreter, both contemplates and
shares in a world drama. But the attitude
of will which befits one who holds this doc-
trine of signs can only be rightly understood
in case we first distinguish three very general
attitudes of the will with which, in certain of
their special forms, we have now become well
.acquainted. Our will is always dramatic in
its expressions. It passes from deed to deed.
Its world is a world of sequences and of enter-
prises. But when it surveys this world, and
when it summarizes the spirit of its under-
takings, the will may assume any one of three
distinct modes of appreciating both itself and
its realm of actual or of possible deeds.

297


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

VI

The first of these modes, the first of the
attitudes of the will to which I here direct
your attention, is that to which Schopenhauer
gave the name, "The Affirmation of the
Will to Uve/' This phrase of Schopenhauer
is intended by its author to be extremely
general, and to apply to active dispositions
which are exemplified by all sorts and con-
ditions of men. Whatever the natural man
seeks, he intends, says Schopenhauer, to live
if he can. And when the natural man affirms
this will to live, he may have in mind any
one of countless different, or even conflict-
ing, motives and purposes.

He may be seeking pleasure, wealth, power,,
praise, material possessions, or manifold spir-
itual goods. He may call it righteousness or
food, that he desires. It may be the de-
struction of his enemies or the prosperity of
his friends that he has in mind when hie sets
out towards his goal. He may be of any
calling that you please. He may be a world-

298


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

ling or a recluse; a beggar or a king; an
outcast or the centre of an admiring company.
In brief, his special purposes may vary as you
will. The ideas, the "leadings,'' which, in the
pragmatic sense, he desires to have succeed,
may vary from man to man and from life to
life, throughout the whole range of our social
and individual objects of desire.

But, in any case, if, in Schopenhauer's
sense, such a man aflSrms the will to live, he
essentially desires to be himself, whoever he
may be, and to win his aims, whatever the
special aims be to which he commits himself.
This desire for self-assertion, then, is present
in all the Protean shapes of the aflSrmation of
the will to live, and vivifies them.

While one aflSrms the will to live, he there-
fore gives himself over to the great game of
life. As an individual man he has his friends
and his enemies; his triumphs and defeats;
his joys and his sorrows of pain and grief.
But what happens to him does not, in so far,
touch the heart and core of his will. He may
shout with triumph, or cry aloud in his woe ;

299


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

he may pray to his gods for help, or may curse
his fate in what he calls his despair; but
withal, he means to continue his pursuit of
the objects of desire. He may repent of his
sins; but not of being himself. He may, in
his hatred of ill-fortune, resort even to sui-
cide. But such suicide is merely a revolt
against disaster. It only aflSrms in its own
passionate way the longing for some life which
is not indeed the present life of the rebel
who seeks suicide, but which, in all his con-
demnation of his own deeds or of his own
misadventures, he still longs to live, if only
death and the universe will yet permit him
to express himself.

VII

Schopenhauer usually emphasizes the es-
sentially selfish nature of this will to live, as
it inspires the individual man. Yet Schopen-
hauer fully recognizes that we are all social
beings, and that the will to live can keep us
eagerly busy in and with the world of our
fellows. Only, as Schopenhauer rightly in-

300


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

terprets this aflSrmation of the will to live,
the recognition of his fellow-men which the
victim of this will to live constantly makes,
is b^Csed, so to speak, upon the natural solip-
sism of the individual will.

And here we come to the very root, the
inmost meaning, of this first of the three
attitudes of the will which we are here
considering.

, One who thus, in Schopenhauer's sense,
afllrms the will to live, may cheerfully and
sincerely acknowledge that other men exist,
and he may be a good member of society.
But he tends to found this acknowledgment
of his fellow-man, and of the social will, upon
what most philosophers regard as an argu-
ment from analogy. A man may, by reason
of such analogy, extend the realm to which his
will to live applies its interests. The early
and purely natural forms of family loyalty
and of clan loyalty depend upon such prac-
tical expansions of the self. But, as we saw
when we studied the Pauline doctrine of
original sin, the will to live constantly meets

301


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

its opponent in the wills of other individuals.
And then its primal solipsism revives; and
it hates its fellows. And even when such a
will recognizes that an organized social* will
is in some sense a reality, it finds this social
will either as a foreign fact, or as a mystery.
; In brief, all the social facts seem to a man
in whom Schopenhauer's will to live finds its
natural affirmation, external and in general
problematic, — known only through analogy
and doubtfully. I will my own life; and
observe my own life. My dealings with you
seem, from this point of view, to be due to
motives external to this will of mine.

"Why,'' says Professor James, addressing
a supposed fellow-man in one of his essays on.
Radical Empiricism, "Why do I postulate
yoiu* mind ? Because I see your body acting
in a certain way. Its gestures, facial move-
ments, words, and conducit generally are
'expressive/ so I deem it actuated, as my own
is, by an inner life like mine. This argu-
ment from analogy is my reason^ whether an
instinctive belief rims before it or not. But

302


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

what is 'your body' here but a percept in
my field ? It is only as animating that ob-
ject, my object, that I have any occasion to
think of you at all/'

In the form of this familiar argument
from analogy, — an argument which many
philosophers indeed regard as expressing our
principal reason for believing that our neigh-
bors' minds are realities, — James also puts
into words an equally familiar aspect of the
metaphysical view which naturally accom-
panies this aflSrmation of the will to live. I
perceive my own inner life, or, at all events,
my own facts of perception. By analogy I
extend the world thus primarily known to
me. Other men are, in this way, hypothetical
extensions of myself. For the rest, I believe
in them because, unless I take due account of
them, they snub or thwart my own will to
live. My ideas are my own, and it is of the
essence t>f my life as this individual that I
want my own ideas to "work." Upon this
aflSrmation of my will to live depends all the
truth that I shall ever come to know.

303


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

Pragmatism, in its recent forms, is indeed
one of the most eflfective philosophical ex-
pressions which Schopenhauer's "Will to live''
has ever received. Pragmatism is fond of
insisting upon its cordial and unquestionably
sincere recognition both of the social world and
of the real existence of many selves, and of
countless distinct ideas.

\ But as a fact, this recognition of the many
selves, of the real world, and of the infinite
variety of ways in which different ideas obtain
now one and now another "working,'' — this
entire view of truth and of reality, — when
pragmatism deals with such matters, is
founded upon the view that (as James loved
to say) all "workings" are "particular."
Each idea aims at accomplishing the event
which, if reached, then and there constitutes
the truth of that particular idea. Each idea
therefore expresses and, as far as it can,
aflSrms its own will to live. Each idea aims at
its own success. Ideas, like all the other
facts of James's world, hang together, as
James was accustomed to say, "by the edges,"

304


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

if indeed they hang together at all. Their
unities are temporary, accidental, and non-
essential. The world of truth is thus indeed
a dramatic world where each idea asserts it-
self while it can.

The life of truth is a drama wherein each
pragmatic "leading,'' each individual expres-
sion of the will to succeed, "struts and frets
its hour upon the stage, and then is heard no
more.''

Such is the philosophy wherein Schopen-
hauer's aflSrmation of the will to live finds its
most recent, and, on the whole, as I suppose,
its most efifective expression.

VIII

In strong contrast to the affirmation of
the will to live, Schopenhauer placed that
attitude which he defined as the resignation,
— the denial of the will to live. Here we
have to deal with a tendency too well known
to all students of the history of the spiritual
life to need, in this place, extended portrayal,
and too simple in its fascinating contrast

VOL. II — X 305


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

with our natural life to require minute analy-
sis. This is the attitude of the will which
Southern Buddhism taught as the sole and
suflScient way of salvation. In the form of
saintly resignation the same ideal has re-
ceived countless Christian expressions. Re-
peatedly this form of self-denial has been
supposed to constitute the essence of Christian-
ity. Repeatedly the expounders and defend-
ers of the Christian doctrine of life have
been obliged to insist that the Christian form
of salvation does not consist in this simple
abandonment of the will to live. I will not
here repeat the tale which the greatest work
of Christianity throughout the ages has so
freely illustrated. Resignation alone does not
save. To abandon his will to live does not
by itself enable the individual to win the true
goal of life. Let us, for the moment, simply
accept this fact.

But since we are here interested in the
metaphysical relations of these attitudes of
the will, let us mention, in passing, that the
resignation of the will to live is an attitude

306


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

to which there correspond appropriate forms
of metaphysical opinion. Here, again, the
connections are well known, and need not
here be dwelt upon. It is enough to say that
whoever abandons the will to live, ceases, of
course, to be interested in those "workings"
of ideas which pragmatism regards as bring-
ing us into empirical and momentary touch
with the real. To such a resigned will, there
remain only the cognitive processes of pure
conception and of pure perception to consider.
On the whole, in the history of thought those
for whom salvation consists in the denial of
the will to live have resorted to the metaphysics
of pure perception, and have been mystics.

As has now been repeatedly pointed out by
his critics, Bergson's philosophy consists of
two parts, — a pragmatism which he regards
as always incomplete and imsatisfactory, and
a mysticism which, as he more fully expresses
himself, he tends to make more prominent.
The corresponding attitudes of the will also
play their part, both in Bergson's cosmology
and in his metaphysics. On the whole, Berg-

307


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

son thus far emphasizes the joyous aspect of
his own philosophy of life. But plainly, in
his view, the evolutionary process has been
dominated by the will to live. And the in-
evitable outcome of such a domination, so
long as the will to live takes the form which
Schopenhauer and Bergson ascribe to it, is
the discovery that such a realm of mere vital
impulse is vanity, and vexation of spirit.
Whenever the mysticism of Bergson is fully
developed, by himself or by his followers, there
will come to be expressed the corresponding
attitude of the will. The vital impulse will
be transformed into resignation; as Berg-
son's insistence upon free activity has already
been subordinated to his counsel that we
should give ourselves over to mere perception.
When he tells us that the true artist per-
ceives "for the sake of nothing, for the mere
pleasure of perceiving,'' we remember
Schopenhauer's saint, for whom " This our so
real world, with all its suns and its milky ways,"
became " Nothing." Such, in fact, is the end
of the mystic.

308


Digitized by


Google


THE DofcTRINE OF SIGNS

IX

But there is indeed a third attitude of the
will. It is not Schopenhauer's attitude of
the affirmation of the will to live. It is also
not the other attitude which Schopenhauer
believed to be the sole and sufficient salva-
tion of the will. And this third attitude of
the will possesses its appropriate metaphysics.

As for what this attitude of the will is, —
when we consider, not its doctrine of the
universe, but its doctrine of life, — we are
already well acquainted with it, because our
entire discussion of the Christian ideas was
devoted to making us familiar with its moral
and its religious meaning. In returning, at
this point, to the mention of this attitude of
the will, I do so because we now are ready to
imderstand the relation between this type of
will, and the metaphysical doctrine of which
I believe it to be the fitting accompaniment.
Whoever has learned to understand the mean-
ing of this third way in which the will can
bear itself towards its world, will therefore

309


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

be better prepared to grasp the foundations
upon which the metaphysics of interpretation
rests. The human value of this practical
attitude does not by itself fully reveal the
grounds of the technical theory which is here
in question. But the intimate relations be-
tween theory and life are nowhere more pro-
nounced than in this case, where reason and
sentiment, action and expression, throw light,
each upon the other, as is hardly anywhere
else the case.

The attitude of the will whicli Paul found
to be saving in its power, just as, to his mind,
it was also divine in its origin, was the atti-
tude of Loyalty. Now loyalty, when con-
sidered from within, and with respect to its
deepest spirit, is not the affirmation of the
will to live of which Schopenhauer spoke.
And loyalty is also not the denial of the will
to live. It is a positive devotion of the Self
to its cause, — a devotion as vigorous, as
self-asserting, as articulate, as strenuous, as
Paul's life and counsels always remained.
The apostle himself was no resigned person.

310


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

His sacrifices for his cause were constant, and
were eloquently portrayed in his own burning
words. They included the giving of what-
ever he possessed. But they never included
the negation of the will, the plucking out of
the root of all desire, in which Gotama Buddha
found salvation. Paul died at his conver-
sion; but only in order that henceforth the
life of the spirit should live in him and through
him.


Now this third attitude of the will, as we
found in dealing with the whole Christian
doctrine of life, has in any case its disposition
to imagine, and also practically to acknowl-
edge as real, a spiritual realm, — an universal
and divine community. Christian theology,
in its traditional forms, was a natural outcome
of the effort to define the world wherein the
loyal will can find both its expression and its
opportunity. We have not now to consider
the religious aspect of this third attitude of
the will. But we are now fully prepared to

311


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

state its relation to the metaphysical prob-
lems. All the threads are in our hands. We
have only to weave them into a single knot.

As a reasonable being, when once I have
come to realize the meaning of my dealings
both with life and with the world, the first
practical principle, as well as the first theo-
retical presupposition of my philosophy must
be this: Whatever my purposes or my
ideas, — whatever will to live incites me to
create and to believe, whatever reverses of
fortune drive me back upon my own poor
powers, whatever problems baffle me, through
their complexity and my ignorance, one
truth stands out clear: Practically I cannot
be saved alone ; theoretically speaking, I can-
not find or even define the truth in terms
of my individual experience, without taking
account of my relation to the community of
those who know. This community, then, is
real whatever is real. And in that com-
munity my life is interpreted. When viewed
as if I were alone, I, the individual, am not
only doomed to failure, but I am lost in folly.

312


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

The "workings" of my ideas are events whose
significance I cannot even remotely estimate
in terms of their momentary existence, or
in terms of my individual successes. My life
means nothing, either theoretically or practi-
cally, unless I am a member of a community.
I win no success worth having, unless it is
also the success of the community to which
I essentially and by virtue of my real relations
to the whole universe, belong. My deeds are
not done at all, unless they are indeed done
for all time, and are irrevocable. The par-
ticular fortunes upon which James lays so
much stress are not even particular, unless
they consist of individual events which either
occur or do not occur. Each of these real
events has therefore a being which lasts to
the end of time, and a value which concerns
the whole universe.

Such, I say, is the principle, at once theo-
retical and practical, upon which my philos-
ophy must depend. This principle does not
itself depend upon the momentary success of
any individual idea. For it is a principle in

313


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

terms of which we are able to define what-
ever real Ufe there is, while, unless this prin-
ciple itself holds true, there is no real Kfe or
real world in which we can find success.

XI

Now this principle is one which, with vari-
ous dialectical explanations, I have, in other
essays of my own, repeatedly defended. And,
as I have said, I have no wish whatever to re-
peat, in this context, my own previous discus-
sions. The relation of this essentially social
attitude of the decisive will to the doctrine of
the community, leads me to show what this
general and underlying attitude of the social
will is, by mentioning, as I pass, and by way
of illustration, that most famiUar and most
profoundly metaphysical of the problems of
common sense, the problem : What reason can
any one of us give for holding that the mind of
his neighbor is real at all ? For the attitude
of will, the postulate, the resolution which any
one of us takes when he says to his fellow,
"You are a real being," is precisely that atti-

314


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

tude which our metaphysical thesis advises us
to take towards the whole world when it tells
us to say to the world : "I know that you are
real, because my life needs and finds its in-
terpreter. You, O World, are the interpreta-
tion of my existence/*

At all events, the case of the bases of our
ordinary social knowledge is a test case de-
ciding the whole attitude towards Kfe and
towards truth and towards the universe.

xn

For James, as you have already seen, my
only and, to his mind, my suflBcient ground
for beUeving in my fellow's existence, for
^^postulating your mind," is an argument
from analogy, — an extension of the inner
Kfe of my already known self, with its feehngs,
with its will, and with the workings of its
ideas, into the perceived body of my neighbor,
whose movements and expressions resemble
mine.

Now, as a fact, the most important part
of my knowledge about myself is based upon

315


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

knowledge that I have derived from the com-
munity to which I belong. In particular,
my knowledge about the socially expressive
movements of my own organism is largely
derived from what I learn through the testi-
mony of my fellow-men. Therefore I cannot
use the analogy of our externally expressive
movements as my principal reason for be-
Keving in the reaUty of the inner life of my
fellow-man, because I am very largely imable
to perceive my own expressive movements in
as direct a way as is that in which I perceive
the organism and the movements of my
fellow-man.

For instance, the appearance of my fellow's
countenance is to' me a sign of his mind. And
signs of this type stand in the front rank of
those facts of perception upon which my
customary interpretation of his mind depends
whenever he and I are in each other's presence.

But is my main argument for the thesis
that my fellow's face expresses his mind, —
and that his facial expressions are evidences
of the existence of his mind, — an argimient

316


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

from analogy ? Do I reason thus : " When my
face looks thus, I feel so and so; therefore,
since my neighbor's face looks thus, it is fair
to reason by analogy that he feels so and so ? ''
How utterly foreign to our social common
sense would be this particular argument from
analogy !

For, as a fact, I know very httle about my
own facial expressions, except what I learn,
if indeed I learn it at all, through accepting as
true certain reports of my neighbors regard-
ing these facial expressions. I can indeed
indirectly perceive my own face by looking
in the mirror. But I thus learn hardly any-
thing of importance to me about what my
own changes of facial expression are. I have
spent years of my life interpreting the signs
which I read as I look at the countenances of
other men. But when have I said to my
neighbor: "Come, let us look in the glass
together, so that, observing how my facial
expression varies with my state of mind, I can
learn to judge by the analogy of my own coun-
tenance what your changes of countenance

317


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

probably mean ? '' To "postulate your mind "
upon such a basis would be a form of solemn
fooling.

The case is trivial, but typical for the way
in which we interpret the usual signs of his
mind which our neighbor gives to us. In
large part, since I never normally view my
own organism in a perspective which is closely
analogous to the perspective in which I con-
stantly perceive the body and the movements
of my, fellow-man. My most important knowl-
edge about my own expressive movements
comes to me at second hand. I learn how my
own movements appear through the report
of others.

I Thus, then, I first believe that my fellow
has a mind. As part or as consequence of
this belief, I accept his testimony about how
the movements of my organism seem when
they are perceived by another man. As a
result, I learn indirectly, and by the cir-
cuitous route that, so to speak, passes through
my neighbor's mind, precisely the most sig-
nificant of the analogies between my neigh-

318


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

bor's expressive movements and my own.
Yet these analogies are supposed, by James,
and by the prevalent theory, to constitute
my main evidence that my neighbor has a
mind at all !

It would be hard to mention an instance of
a more artificial doctrine than this prevail-
ing opinion of philosophers regarding the
bases of our social consciousness. Yet this
is the very doctrine which James advances
as a typical illustration of his own radical
empiricism. What I, as an individual, never
experience at all, — namely, precisely those
analogies between my own doings and my
neighbor's outward behavior which are socially
most important, are named by James as
furnishing my sole reason for ** postulating
your mind.''

xni

Why, then, do I indeed postulate your
mind?

I postulate your mind, first, because, when
you address me, by word or by gesture, you

319


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

arouse in me ideas which, by virtue of their
contrast with my ideas, and by virtue of
their novelty and their unexpectedness, I
know to be not any ideas of my own.

Hereupon I first try, however I can, to
interpret these ideas which are not mine.
In case you are in fact the source of these
new ideas of mine, I fail to find any success
in my efforts to interpret these ideas as past
ideas of my own which I had forgotten, or
as inventions of my own, or as otherwise
belonging to the internal realm which I have
already learned to interpret as the realm of
the self.

Hereupon I make one hypothesis. It is,
in its substance, the fundamental hypothesis
of all our social life. It is the hypothesis that
these new ideas which your words and deeds
have suggested to me actually possess an
interpretation. They have an interpreter.
They are interpreted. This hypothesis simply
means that there exists some idea or train of
ideas, which, if it were now present within
my own train of consciousness, would inter-

320


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

pret what I now cannot interpret. This in-
terpreter would mediate between the new ideas
which your deeds have suggested to me, and
the trains of ideas which I already call my
own. That is, this interpreter, if he fully did
his work, would compare all these ideas, and
would both observe and express wherein lay
their contrast and its meaning. My hypoth-
esis is that such aii interpreter of the novel
ideas which your expressive acts have aroused
in me, actually exists.

"^ Now such an interpreter, mediating be-
tween two contrasting ideas or sets of ideas,
and making clear their contrasts, their mean-
ing, and their mutual relations, would be, by
hypothesis, a mind. It would not be my own
present mind ; for by myself alone I actually
fail to interpret the ideas which your deeds
have aroused in me. And these ideas which
your doings have aroused in me are simply
not my own. Now this hypothetical in-
terpreter is what I mean by your self, precisely
in so far as I suppose you to be now communi-
cating your own ideas to me. You are the

VOL. II — Y 321


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

real interpreter of the ideas which your deeds
suggest to me. That is what I mean by your
existence as an " eject."

The reason, then, for "postulating your
mind" is that the ideas which your words and
movements have aroused within me are not
my own ideas, and cannot be interpreted in
terms of my own ideas, while I actually hold,
as the fundamental hypothesis of my social
consciousness, that all contrasts of ideas have
a real interpretation and are interpreted.

XIV

i Our illustration has carried us at once
into the mazes of our problematic social life
together. But the case is a typical case.
We have but to view it in its principle, and
it shows what attitude of the will is the only
decisive one in deahng with the interpretation
of experience.

You are not a mere extension by analogy
of my own will to Kve. I do not, for the sake
merely of such analogy, vivify your perceived
organism. You are an example of the jyrinciple

322


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

whose active recognition lies at the basis of my
only reasonable view of the universe. As I treat
you, so ought I to deal toith the universe. As I
interpret the universe, so, too, in principle, should
I interpret you.

We have no ground whatever for beheving
that there is any real world except the ground
furnished by our experience, and by the fact
that, in addition to our perceptions and our
conceptions, we have problems upon our
hands which need interpretation. Our funda-
mental postulate is : The world is the interpre-
tation of the problems which it presents. If you
deny this principle, you do so only by present-
ing, as Bergson does, some other interpretation
as the true one. But thus you simply reaffirm
the principle that the world has an interpreter.

Using this principle, in your ordinary social
life, you postulate your fellow-man as the in-
terpreter of the ideas which he awakens in
your mind, and which are not your own ideas.
The same principle, applied to oiu* social ex-
perience of the physical world, determines our
ordinary interpretations of nature and guides

323


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

our natural science. For, as we have seen, the
physical world is an object known to the com-
munity, and through interpretation. The
same principle, applied to our memories and
to our expectations, gives us our view of the
world of time, with all its infinite wealth of
successive acts of interpretation.

In all these special instances, the apphca-
tion of this principle defines for us some form
or grade of community, and teaches us wherein
Kes the true nature, the form, the real unity,
and the essential Ufe of this community.

Our Doctrine of Signs extends to the whole
world the same fundamental principle. The
World is the Commimity . The world contains
its own interpreter. Its processes are infinite
in their temporal varieties. But their in-
terpreter, the spirit of this universal com-
munity, — never absorbing varieties or per-
mitting them to blend, — compares and,
through a real Kfe, interprets them all.

The attitude of will which this principle
expresses, is neither that of the aflBrmation
nor that of the denial of what Schopenhauer

324


Digitized by


Google


THE DOCTRINE OF SIGNS

meant by the will to live. It is the atti-
tude which first expresses itself by saying
*' Alone I am lost, and am worse than nothing.
I need a counsellor, I need my community.
Interpret me. Let me join in this interpre-
tation. Let there be the community. This
alone is Ufe. This alone is salvation. This
alone is real.^^ This is at once an attitude of
the will and an assertion whose denial refutes
itself. For if there is no interpreter, there is
no interpretation. And if there is no inter-
pretation, there is no world whatever.

In its daily form as the principle of our
social common sense, this attitude of the will
inspires whatever is reasonable about our
worldly business and our scientific inquiry.
For all such business and inquiry are in and
for and of the community, or else are vanity.

In its highest form, this attitude of the will
was the one which Paul knew as Charity, and
as the Ufe in and through the spirit of the
Community.

Such, then, is the relation of the Christian
will to the real world.

325


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


XV

THE HISTOBICAL AND THE ESSENTIAL


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


1


LECTURE XV

THE HISTORICAL AND THE ESSENTIAL
N the fourth lecture of his book on


Christologies, Ancient and Modern/'
Professor Sanday says, of the development
which was introduced into theology by Ritschl :
"'There is a great deal that is very wholesome
in the movement out of which this development
has sprung. It arose from, and has been sus-
tained by, a great desire to look at the reaUty of
things, to put aside conventions and to get into
close and living contact with things as they are.
It came to be seen that ... as a complete phi-
losophy of reUgion HegeUanism was too purely
intellectual. It did not correspond to the true
nature of religion, in which the emotions and the
will are involved quite as much as the intellect.''


The criticism of the religious philosophy of
Hegel which these words summarily indicate,
is further expressed by what Professor Sanday

329


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

says about the famous words in which David
Frederic Strauss stated his own version of
the Hegelian position regarding the person
and work of Christ.

Strauss, as you remember, said: "As con-
ceived of in an individual, a God-man, the
attributes and functions which the Church
doctrine ascribes to Christ contradict each
other; in the idea of the Race they agree
together. Humanity is the union of the two
natures, God become man, the Infinite Spirit
externalized as finite, and the finite spirit
remembering its infinitude.^'

Professor Sanday makes the conmient:
"Strauss was driven to this substitution of
the idea for the Person by his assumption
that the idea never reaches its full expression
in the individual, but only in the race. It is,
however, not at all surprising that, after re-
ducing Christianity to this shadowy semblance
of itself, he should end by throwing it over
altogether."

The criticism of HegeFs version of Chris-
tianity which Professor H. R. Mackintosh,

330


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

of Edinburgh, expreisses in the course of the
historical section of his recent book on "The
Doctrine of the Person of Jesus Christ/' is
longer and is also more expUcitly hostile to
HegeFs whole reUgious philosophy than are
the few words which I have just cited from
Professor Sanday. Professor Sanday — I
ought to add — does not intend his own re-
mark as any complete characterization of the
position either of Hegel or of Strauss.

Professor Mackintosh says, concerning
the HegeUan view: "Christianity receives"
(according to Hegel) "absolute rank, but at
the cost of its tie with history. -For only the
world-process as a whole, and no single point
or person in it, can be the true manifestation
of the Absolute.'' . . . "Thus, when Hegel
has waved his wand, and uttered his dialectical
and all-decisive formula, a change comes over
the spirit of the believer's dream ; everything
appears to be as Christian as before, yet
instinctively we are aware that nothing spe-
cifically Christian is left." . . . "When once
the Gospel has been severed from a historic

331


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

person, and identified with a complex of
metaphysical ideas, what it ought to be called
is scarcely worth discussion; that it is no
longer Christianity, is clear." . . . "Sooner
or later, then, some one was bound to speak
out, and expose the hollow and precarious
alliance which had been proclaimed between
the Christian faith and dialectic pantheism.
The word which broke the spell came from
Strauss.'*

Professor Mackintosh hereupon quotes from
Strauss the further statement: "The Idea
loves not to pour all its fulness into one ex-
ample, in jealousy towards all the rest. Only
the race answers to the Idea''; and adds, in a
foot-note, "This formula has made a pro-
found impression." And Professor Mackin-
tosh continues : "It ought to be clear, by this
time, that the proposed identification of the
Christian faith with the ontological theory
that God and man are one, — God the essence
of man, man the actuality of God, — is an
utterly hopeless enterprise, which the scien-
tific historian cannot take seriously. . . ."

332


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

"The truth is that the very idea of religion as
consisting in personal fellowship with God,
had faded from Strauss's mind, and with its
disappearance went also in large measure the
power to sympathize with, or appreciate,
essential Christian piety as it existed from
the first. . . /' "In general, it may be con-
cluded that Hegelianism tended to commit a
grave oflFence against history by construing
Christianity as a system of ideas which is
intelligible and eflFective apart from Jesus
Christ."

n

I have quoted these two expressions of
opinion, the one from Professor Sanday, and
the other from Professor Mackintosh, in
order to introduce the issue which in this lec-
ture I have yet to face. I shall try to meet
that issue as directly as I can.

We have not, in this discussion, first ap-
proached our problem of Christianity from the
side of speculation, and then attempted to
find a way of identifying a group of abstract

333


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

ontological conceptions with those religious
convictions which have been most prominent
in the history of the Christian religion. On
the contrary, my sketch- of the Christian doc-
trine of life, and of the ideas which seem to me
to be essential to that doctrine, made use of
facts which belong to our common ethical and
religious experience. We began with these
facts. The metaphysical problems were kept
in reserve until this more empirical part of
the work was completed.

My hearer, if he kindly takes any interest
in the present account of our problem, may
indeed question whether those Christian ideas
which I selected for discussion were rightly
chosen. He may well insist that, in emphasiz-
ing certain aspects of Christianity, I have
either ignored or slighted other aspects to
which tradition has assigned the highest
prominence. Such a criticism is, in part,
obviously warranted. I have deliberately
ignored much that tradition regards as the
head of the comer. My hearer has a right
to ask how my estimate of the essence of

334


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

Christianity stands related to the historical
faith ; and he may think, if that seems to him
just, that my views have involved "an utterly
hopeless enterprise, which the scientific his-
torian cannot take seriously/' I cheerfully
accept the risk of siich a judgment upon my
study of our problem of Christianity.

But I do not believe that the foregoing
lectures can justly be accused of attempting
to "identify the Gospel" with any Tnere
"complex of metaphysical ideas/'

Such Christian ideas as I have tried to
interpret, I certainly did not invent. They
found me. I did not devise them. They
have led us, indeed, into the presence of the
most intricate metaphysical problems; but
no metaphysician ever discovered them. Nor
are they merely a "complex of metaphys-
ical ideas." They come to us from human
life, from the life both of the Christian Church
itself, and of those communities, secular or
religous, which the noblest forms of loyalty
have informed, and have redeemed, precisely
in so far as men have yet learned to live the

335


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

life of the universal brotherhood. For us
the metaphysical meaning of these ideas has
occupied, in our discussion, the second place.
Now I am indeed far from supposing that my
fragmentary arguments and illustrations have
exhausted the meaning of those Christian ideas
which I have selected for discussion. I have
been trying to tell what I see, and no more.
Whoever finds in the Christian gospel meanings
which tradition has emphasized, and which I
have ignored, is welcome to put me in my place
by whatever authority or reason he is able to
employ. And since I am neither apologist, nor
assailant, but am only, with the aid of my
"broken light,'' an interpreter, I can feel no
disappointment with my critic, and can find no
painful defeat in the exposure of my inadequacy
as an expounder of historical Christianity.

m

Scholarly opinion has, in recent decades,
undergone many disappointing changes re-
lating to the history of Christian origins.
The goal of scientific agreement, both regard-

336


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

ing the founder of Christianity, and regarding
the life and history of the Christian Church
in the apostolic age, is very remote. And I
have no right to an opinion about problems
of historical criticism.

Hence I have constantly tried, in these
discussions, to avoid hazarding any personal
impressions of mine about what actmally
took place on earth at the moment when the
Christian religion originated. That there were
the visions of the risen Lord, we know. I
have no theory regarding how they originated.
I do not know to what they were due. We
are sure that what was called the presence
of the Spirit in the Church displayed itself in
the ways which Paul describes ; for the writer
of the greatest of the words in the Pauline
epistles spoke to those to whom these experi-
ences were present facts. The picture of the
typical Pauline Church, and its faith, as the
epistles present this picture, bears witness to
its own essential human meaning. Further-
more, we possess that body of sayings and of
parables which early tradition attributed to

VOL. II — z 337


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

the founder. I am disposed to read these say-
ings as simple-mindedly as I can. They do not
appear to me to constitute an expression of the
whole Christian doctrine of life. They seem
not to be intended as such a complete expres-
sion. I have tried to indicate some few ways
in which these teachings, attributed to the
founder, are most obviously related to the subse-
quent development of the main Christian ideas.
The founder's life I must leave those to portray
who have a right to judge the documents.

It will be remembered that I in no wise
imagine, and have nowhere suggested, that
Paul, in any just sense, was the real founder
of Christianity. The Christian community
into which Paul entered, and whose life he, as
convert, so vastly furthered, this — I have
said — this, together with its spirit, is the
true founder of Christianity.

Such is the meagre foundation of historical
fact by means of which I have ventured to
justify the view regarding the Christian ideas
which I have now laid before you. It is only
my comment upon these ideas which has

338


Digitized by


Google


HI.STORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

brought us into the region where, as a student
of philosophy, I have some right to form and
to express an opinion. In stating this opin-
ion, I have of course been obliged to inter-
pret some of those larger historical connections
which even the layman in all matters of his-
torical scholarship has a right, I believe, to
regard as topics of general knowledge.

The thesis that the religious experience of
the earliest Christian community, and in
particular of the Pauline churches, lies, as a
deeper motive, at the basis of the whole de-
velopment and dogmatic formulation of the
doctrine of the person jof Christ, is not a
new thesis. But in the form in which I have
stated it, this assertion gets its most impor-
tant meaning, in my own mind, through an
interpretation of the nature of communities.
This interpretation, as you now know, has an
aspect which I have formulated in terms of
human experience. It has also its technically
metaphysical aspect. To insist upon this
view of the nature of the community, and to
develop the consequences that follow upon

339


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHEISTIA^ITY

such a view, these enterprises have constituted
the novelty, if there be any novelty, in my
study of the essence of Christianity. These
matters, as I believe, have not always been
seen in the right perspective. I have done
what I could to make them plain.

Now that my case has been stated, any one
who holds opinions analogous to those of
Professor H. R. Mackintosh might still urge
upon me this question: "Is the fragment
of traditional Christian doctrine which, in
your own way, you interpret and defend,
worthy to be called a religion at all? And
if it is a religion, is Jthis religion Christian ? ''

A plain question needs a plain answer. I
feel a great indifference to the use of names in
such regions. I am anxious to see the rela-
tions of the things that are named. So long
as only technical theological formulas are in
question, I do not in the least care whether
this or that theologian calls me a Christian or
not. But let me attempt one more mode of
making clear the historical rights of my whole
account of the essence of Christianity.

340


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

IV

One of the best ways of understanding our
own religious ideas is to compare them, when
we can, with those of some representative and
highly trained Oriental mind. When inti-
mate and practical religious interests are in
question, such comparison is most effectively
made through conversation with an Oriental
friend, face to face. For a man speaks better
than a book. Many of us will recall opportu-
nities for personal meetings with men trained
in civilizations remote from our own, as
amongst the most instructive of our glimpses
of what our own religion means to our-
selves. [The faith of our childhood, the reli- ><
gion of our social order^ becomes for the first
time clear to our consciousness when we try,
at a moment of chance intimacy, to convey
its deeper import to a mind that has been a
total stranger to our own.

Now just as mutual remoteness of our
present lives, when we are contemporaries one
of another, sometimes helps an Oriental com-

341


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

panion and myself to understand each his own
faith better when we take counsel together, —
even so the attainment of a new understand-
ing of my faith might be accomplished for me,
as one may imagine, if I were permitted to
converse with fellow-men belonging, not only
to a distant civilization, but also to a distant
century. How precious for our appreciation,
not only of antiquity but of ourselves, it would
be if, escaping from the flood of time, we could
talk over the essence of Christianity with an
earnest and thoughtful Christian of the apos-
tolic age, — not with an apostle, but simply
with a convert whose personal experience was
deep and genuine.

t For my present purpose, the fiction — the
arbitrary fancy, that such converse across
the centuries might take place — has one
very special and limited interest.

I have stated a thesis concerning the essence
of Christianity. I should understand that
thesis, no doubt, better, if indeed I were able
to converse, in some fictitious realm, with a
Pauline Christian, — a member of one of the

342


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

apostolic churches. Let me try, in a few
words, to make such a fiction momentarily
intelligible to you.

It is easy to do this, I think, without tres-
passing upon any of the sacred places or mem-
ories of early Christian history. My sole in-
tent is to furnish a test of the degree to which
the account of the Christian ideas upon which
I have insisted does furnish a just view of the
essence of Christianity.

We have to compare what I take to be
essential with what was, at all events in the
Pauline churches and, for a time, historical
Christianity. It would be useless, even were
it possible, for me to make this comparison
by means of any analysis of the Pauline
Christology. And I could gain nothing by
any poor effort of mine to amplify the picture
which the best known of the epistles have
left in the minds of all of us. Besides, I desire
to bring the essential and the historical to-
gether in our minds, at this point, only for the
sake of indicating a few very general relations
of both of them to our modern problems.

343


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

My fiction must therefore illustrate large
and abstract principles. It must also sug-
gest the significance of certain very concrete
religious experiences. Yet it must do this
without leading us into any maze of historical
details. And it must aid me to state my own
case, and to show you what I suppose to be
the situation which* the modern mind has to
face when we estimate the Christian ideas,
not only in the light of human nature and of
history, but also in their relation to the most
abstruse problems of metaphysics. You will
permit me the freedom of construction which
is needed for just such a purpose.


Let us suppose, then, that some highly
trained Greek, — as learned in philosophy as
an extended sojourn in Athens, and as the
training of any of the schools of his time,
could make him, had been converted by Paul,
had then for some years been a member of
whatever Pauline church you please. I have
in mind no man whose name the Acts, or the

344


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

Epistles, or the legends of later days, have pre-
served to us. I am thinking of no famous
saint, and of no one whose earlier life as a
philosopher, or whose later devotion as a
Christian, became a matter of record. As I
now shall feign, my Greek of the first century
was one to whom the ancient cultivation had
made the highest appeal which it could make
to the deeply religious mind of an ingenious
child of his age.

Later, at the time of his conversion, my
hero heard the message that Paul brought to
the Galatians, to the Corinthians, — to the
other best-known Pauline churches. There-
after, quickened, made a new (creature, our
convert entered into the life of his own Chris-
tian community with all the fervor, the love,
the patience, and the hope which the apostle
had taught him to know. With the saints
that were of his company, he rejoiced in the
gifts of the spirit ; he awaited longingly the
last great change, and the return of the
heavenly man whose death had saved him.
Our hero treasured up and pondered long the

345


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

apostle's words as various epistles, eagerly
copied and transmitted from hand to hand
and from church to church, brought them to
his knowledge. And all this faith of the
Church he interpreted with the clearness that
his previous philosophical training had made
possible.

And then, after years enough had passed to
fill his soul completely with the full vision of
the salvation of the whole world, — suddenly,
in the fulness of grace, at the height of his
own powers of mind, in the midst of his life
of service, — he fell asleep, — whether at
some moment of local persecution and of mar-
tyrdom, in blessed fulfilment of his dearest
earthly desires, I know not.

So much my fiction first in outline sketches.
But hereupon I shall imagine a great change.
This is not the change which Christian hope,
in the mind of a member of a Pauline church,
contemplated. The fictitious change shall
be this : From centuries of dreamless slumber,
our Pauline Christian awakes in this modern
world of ours. He retains, or soon again re-

346


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

sumes, a perfect memory of all his fonner life,
with its hopes, its religion, its faith, and its
opinions regarding things on earth and in
heaven. He awakes with the full conscious-
ness of a mature and earnest Pauline Christian,
but with no faintest ray of knowledge, at the
moment when he returns to life, concerning
the entire intervening history of mankind.
He awakes, moreover, with the full intel-
lectual equipment, with the ingenuity, and the
thoughtfulness which his early training as a
Greek philosopher had bred in him before his
conversion.

And the task which some higher power sets
him in our own day is the task of entering
our world under conditions which are first to
train him in the lore of our modern, of our
secular, of our scientific, of our political, life,
before his new education shall be allowed to
bring him into contact with any form, or
opinion, or tradition of the modern Christian
Church.

He is to learn about what Christianity now
means only after he has first been permitted,

347


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

and stimulated, to become a highly trained
product of the worldly cultivation of our age.
In ancient times, before Paul's message told
him of the power of grace, he was a philosopher.
And even so, in the modern world, he has every
opportunity which scientific study and which
all forms of secular learning can furnish to
him, within the time allowed for his new career.
The result is to reawaken and train his phi-
losophical interest; and to prepare him to
master our problems, — except for one great
limitation. Namely, until this new course
of preliminary training has been duly com-
pleted by the powers who have his new life
in their contitol, he is allowed to learn nothing
of our problem of Christianity, nothing of
what dogmas the Councils of the Church ever
defined, nothing of the past relations between
Christianity and th^ philosophers, — in brief,
nothing that lets him know what any form of
Christianity has been, except the one Christian
faith under whose spell he Uved of old, be-
fore the long sleep overtook him.

We are feigning indeed an artificial course

348


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

for the new education to which our reawak-
ened Christian is to be subject. Yet, if you
choose to aid my halting imagination a little, I
believe that you can even picture, yes, if
you choose, can name, the places in our modern
world where the ingenious and potent teachers,
to whom charge over our hero has been com-
mitted, are able to keep their scholar long
secluded from all knowledge of the Christian
religion as it now exists, and of Christian
history as it has run its course since the first
century passed away. And yet, in such
places (I leave you to name them), — these
guides of our returned Greek, through due
censorship of what he is permitted to read,
and through a control of the things and of the
people that he is permitted to see, allow him
to gratify a vast range of modern curiosity;
yet keep him, during his period of preparation,
unaware of the very existence of a post-
Pauline Christianity, and of our present re-
ligious situation. He studies long and deeply
in the various realms of our science and of
our art. When he meets in the course of these

349.


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

studies with allusions to religion, nobody,
for a long time, tells him what they mean.
He becomes absorbed in many of the problems
of our social order. Nobody explains to him
that this is a Christian social order. For in
our day, as we all know, secular learning and
religious lore live so much apart that he long
fails to observe that they have any connections.

But I care riot further to elaborate my
fiction. Its purpose appears when I add that,
by the will of the higher powers concerned,
all this preliminary training of our hero is
intended to lead to the moment when, still
clear in his memory both of the Greco-Roman
world as it was, and of Christianity as the
apostolic churches had experienced its mean-
ing, but now brought into close touch with
the spirit of our own age, and acquainted with
important results of our own science and art,
our visitor from a former world is ready for the
great issue. One more change comes.

At last, then, he is led face to face with
Christianity as it is; and he is acquainted
with the outHnes of its history from his day

350


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

to our own. Hereupon, indeed, his problem
of Christianity and our problem stand to-
gether before him.

What has he now to say? And, — since
I am here venturing to feign all this only as a
means for making clearer my own case, —
what, in reply to his imagined words, should I,
if I were permitted to speak to him, have to
ofifer to him as an answer to his problem ?

VI

Our stranger from the past finds that many
of the religious ideas which once were to him,
as a Pauline Christian, very dear and — as
he had supposed — quite essential, now are
tragically at variance with what he has learned
since he was awakened. The ascertained
results of our science, the course of history,
yes, some of the very ideas which he now
finds to be most emphasized by the official
traditions of the existing historical Church, —
all these seem to be at war ^ith the spirit
which of old promised to guide the faithful
into all truth. Our hero has awakened to a

4 351


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

sad new world. If I have ventured thus
tragically to disturb his slumbers, my only
justification for the seemingly wanton in-
trusion upon his peace lies in the fact that his
imaginary case is an allegorical picture of our
own real case. As he wonders over the
strange vicissitudes of faith, so ought we to
wonder. Let us learn some of the lessons
which he has to learn about the contrast
between what is historical and what is es-
sential in Christian faith.

Before any of his other instruction came to
him, our guest from the apostolic age began
his new life by finding, with deep disappoint-
ment, that the hope of which all the apostles,
as far as he knew the apostles, made so much,
has never been fulfilled. The end has never
come. The Lord has not returned. The
saints have not triumphed. The bride waits
in vain for the bridegroom. When Paul said,
"Behold, brethren, I show you a mystery;
we shall not all sleep; but we shall all be
changed," the words seemed to our Pauline
Christian an expression of an essential part

352


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

of the faith. Both the resurrection of the
dead and its early occurrence ; both the mean-
ing of the resurrection of Christ, and the cer-
tainty of the nearness of the Lord's return;
both the hope of immortahty and the assur-
ance that the Kingdom must quickly come, —
these matters together had seemed, to the
apostoHc converts, equally of the very es-
sence of the faith. Paul had not divided these
various teachings one from another. If some
one of old had said to the behevers : "The
return of Christ is not near. The world is to
undergo centuries of torment and of division ;
the Church itself is to be corrupted with power
and distracted with earthly cares; the gifts of
the spirit are to be for ages withdrawn ; and no
sign of heavenly salvation is for all those years
to appear in the clouds'' ; — then the faithful
of the former time would have answered such
a scoffer according to his faithlessness. They
would have said of his words what Professor
Mackintosh says of Hegel's waving of the
dialectical wand; namely, that what the
scoffer taught was possibly not worthy of any

VOL. II— 2 a 353


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

religious name; but was very certainly not
Christianity.

Yet the very first discovery of our Greek,
upon awakening, has been that every dearest
hope of the eariy Church concerning the near
deKverance of the suffering worid was a
delusion; and that certain of the apostle
Paul's most burning and seemingly inspired
words were a statement of literally and his-
torically false predictions.

Since he became aware of what the Chris-
tian Church has become since the apostoUc
age, our Greek has had many reasons to re-
flect that if he, at least, is to remain a modem
Christian, he must remember that he is a
philosopher, and must begin in a new form the
ancient task of distinguishing between symbol
and truth, between figure and Kterally accu-
rate statement, between parable and interpre-
tation. So far as the end of the world is
concerned, he has now learned that the Church
itself, not long after the apostolic age, began
a course in which all but certain transient and
enthusiastic sects have persisted until this

354


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

day. The Church learned, namely, to de-
fend what it viewed as the essential faith of
the at)ostles concerning the end of the world,
only by declaring henceforth that the apostles
either were not permitted truthfully to grasp
this essential faith concerning last things, or
else did not mean what they said, but used
figures of speech.

•This has constituted the first lesson concern-
ing the relations between the historical and.the
essential which our early Christian saint, now
transformed into a latter-day philosopher, has
been forced to learn.

vn

Unquestionably, certain teachings about
the person and work of Christ seemed of old,
and still seem, to our reawakened Pauhne
Christian essential to the reUgion which
Paul taught to him.

I will not attempt to restate what consti-
tutes so much of the essence of Christianity :
"I make known unto you, brethren, the gospel
which I preached unto you, which also ye

355


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

received, wherein also ye stand, by which
also ye are saved, • . • in what words I
preached unto you, if ye hold it fast, except
ye believed in vain/' This gospel, our Pau-
Kne Christian fully remembers. The cross,
the death, the resurrection, the appearance of
the risen Lord to the brethren, — these he
knew to be matters which of old he fully
accepted, so far as he then understood them.
Those he beUeved to be both essential and
historical truths. His present problem is:
How far, and in what form, is this heart of
the Pauhne doctrine something which for
him to-day, in the Kght of what the modern
world has learned, and in view of what it has
forgotten, he can still hold to be both true,
and imchangeable, and adequate ? When he
reviews the transformations which time has
wrought, is he still able to say, "Christianity
is to remain for me what Paul said that it
was"? "In this I stand; by this I am
saved'': — can he persist in using these
words ?

When he tries to answer this question, our

356


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

guest has to remember that this modem
world differs from the world in whose per-
spective Paul saw this picture of salvation;
and differs too in many other respects besides
those which now make PauFs language about
the early return of the Lord appear to be a
figure of speech whereby the early saints were
actually misled.

In all those features which used most to
appeal to his imagination, in the days of his
apostoHc discipleship, our returned Greek
knows that the Pauhne world has been, both
for Christian behevers in particular and for
all typical modern men in general, simply
transformed. Its heavens have passed away.
Its very earth has become almost unrecog-
nizable. All the most vividly interesting of
those orders of spiritual beings whom Paul
imagined as the background of his picture of
salvation, have changed, or have entirely lost
their meaning, for most of us. The Pauhne
angels were by no means similar even to those
incorporeal spiritual beings of whom a later
orthodox theology discoursed ; and whom the

357


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

scholastic angelology made a topic of learned
speculation. Whatever non-human spiritual
beings there are, nobody, whether orthodox
mediaeval Christian or modern man of science,
conceives them as Paul imagined his angels.
The PauUne demonology, too, has no mean-
ing at all closely resembhng its apostohc form,
when even the most conservative scholastic
theologian deals to-day with the beings still
called by the same name.

PauFs whole picture of nature is remote
from ours. Our reawakened Greek knows
that all the references to warfare with princi-
pahties and powers, that all the words of
Paul regarding the mystery cults as involving
a partaking of the cup of demons, must be
interpreted in a profoundly symbohc fashion
before they can now be understood or ac-
cepted. In fact, whatever the apostle told
the churches of old can be retained only in
case a large use of symbols is made.

When our PauHne Christian turns to the
dogmas which the later Church has defined,
and looks to them as his guides for interpret-

358


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

ing the gospel wherein he once stood, and by
which he was to be saved, he finds, in these
later formulations, very much that seems to
him almost as strange as Paul himself would
have seemed if the apostle had been present
to take part in a scholastic disputation during
the Middle Ages,

And as to the central doctrine of the person
of Christ, it was inseparable, in the mind of
the PauUne Christian, from the doctrine of
the living divine spirit present in the Church.
And that, after all, was what the whole
story of the Ufe, the death, and the exaltation
of Christ most meant to the Pauline behever.
Moreover, as such a behever, our guest had
known very httle about the person of the
historical Jesus, except what the story of the
Divine death, of the resurrection, of the reap-
pearance, of the exaltation, and of the in-
dwelUng of Christ, both in the Church, and
in the behever's heart, had made for our
guest himself, and for his brethren, in the old
days, a matter of oommon social religious ex-
perience, and not of mere narrative. If the

859


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

Pauline doctrine of the person of Christ was,
then, indeed essential to the Pauline faith,
this, its very essence, consisted in its charac-
ter as a doctrine of the nature and hf e of the
Church. For the exalted and divine Christ
was exphcitly known and interpreted by Paul
as the very hfe of the Church itself. And
his appearance on earth had its redemptive
meaning through its power as the work of the
founder of the beloved community.

Our returned saint stands, then, in pres-
ence of a great problem. If all this old faith
is to mean anything to him to-day, soine vast
range of Pauline religious ideas must be re-
garded henceforth as symbols, as parables,
as shadows cast by the things of some higher
world, when they pass between the entrance
of our cave and the realm of unapproachable
hght beyond. Our Pauhne Christian of the
twentieth century may well remember the
vision of the divine which once was his. He
may fully believe still in its essential truth.
He may beheve that thisrf:ruth had its his-
torical basis. But now that he has returned

360

Digitized by VjOOQ IC


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

to our world, he must no longer trust indis-
criminately all the shadowy appearances. He
must distinguish between those which reveal
the things of the spiritual world as they are,
and those which essentially belong to the eyes
of us who dwell in the cave. Our guest can
remain, in spirit, a Pauhne Christian, only in
case he also learns, while jujstly recognizing
the known world of to-day, how not to confer
henceforth with flesh and blood, and how to
discern spiritually the things of the spirit,
despite the complexities of our modern realm.
What way will he find to escape from his
problems, — to be just to the countless novel-
ties of our present century, and yet not to lose
the essence of the gospel which Paul preached
unto him, which he also received, wherein
also he stood, by which also he was to be
saved ?

VIII

I have no right to mention any one answer
which our guest must necessarily give to all
the questions thus forced upon him. He

361


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

matter what he has already learned or here-
after learns to sacrifice, both of legend and of
miracle; both of narrative and of abstractly
formulated dogma ; both of the literally inter-
preted words of the apostle concerning angels
and concerning demons and concerning the
coming end of the world; and no matter
what, in due time, he has to sacrifice of the
literally interpreted records of the gospel
history, — through all this he will remain
true, — not necessarily to all that, as Pauline
Christian, he once held, or even thus far holds,
to be essential. He will, however, remain
true to what, as a fact, was the very heart of
all the hearts of the faithful, both in the
Pauline churches and in all the subsequent
ages of Christian development.

The one condition of such holding fast by
the deepest spirit of all the Christian ages
is, I repeat, that he should still be able to say :
The redeeming divine spirit that saves man
dwells in the Church. So much our guest
said when he was a saint of old. His problem
of Christianity is now simply the problem

363


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

whether he can say this to-day. His prob-
lem for the future is the problem whether he
can continue to say this.

If, in order to be able to say this, he has to
learn now, or in the future, to view as symbol,
as legend, as myth, any accepted narrative
that you may mention concerning the person
of Christ, he will be in genuine touch both
with the perfectly historical Christianity of
Paul, and with the deepest meaning of the
whole of Christian history, so long as he is
still able to say. The divine spirit dwells
in the Church, and thereby redeems mankind.
So long as, for him, the Christ whom Paul
preached is known, as he was to Paul, not
mainly after the flesh, but after the Spirit,
our returned Pauline Christian will deal with
literal truth, precisely in so far as the divine
spirit does dwell in the Church. And our
guest will never lose touch with genuine his-
torical Christianity, precisely so long as he,
who learned this teaching, as Paul learned it,
from the Church itself, holds it as the doctrine
wherein is expressed whatever is most vital

364


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

in Christianity, and whatever has always
been most at the heart of the influence of
Christianity upon civilization,

IX

Hereupon you may ask : "But what church
shall our Pauline Christian accept as the
true Christian Church?'' The answer is
simple. I have indicated that answer in the
first part of our lectures.

Our guest will certainly not take a very
profound interest in whatever has divided
the later Christian world into great or into
little mutually exclusive partitions. The
oflScial aspects of the post-Pauline church will
not attract his most eager interest. Still
less will he feel much concerned with the
endless ebb and flow of the more petty secta-
rian strifes. His church, then, will be neither
the oflScial church nor the sect. Those efforts
which ignore the larger human hopes and
the universal mission of the apostolic Church,
— those efforts which exhaust themselves in
barren imitations of the enthusiastic accidents

365


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

divine spirit dwelling in the living Church
redeems mankind. Therefore, his test of the
Church will simply be this, that, in so far as
it is indeed the Church, it actually unifies all
mankind and makes them one in the divine
spirit. All else in Paul's teaching our guest
may come to regard as symbol, or as legend.
This he must hold to be literally true, or else
he must lose the essence of his faith. The
Church, however, must mean the company of
all mankind, in so far as mankind actually win
the genuine and redeeming life in brotherhood,
in loyalty, and in the beloved community.

Our guest from the far-off first century has
learned that the very power of the early Church
was inseparable from its erroneous belief
that the world was about to end. For only
through this belief was it able to become sure
that, through God's power, its intimate little
companies, when they loved so well their
life of the spirit, were witnessing, or were
about to witness, the salvation of all mankind.

Now just as the Pauline churches were
able to win truth even through the heart of

367


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

their error, -^ even so, for our Pauline Chris-
tian, whatever errors have still to be aban-
doned, and whatever symbols have to be
translated into new speech, the tf ue Church is
represented on earth by whatever body of
men are most faithful, according to their
lights, to the cause of the imity of all man-
kind. Therefore no sect, no detached indi-
vidual, and no official organization can con-
stitute the true Church, except in so far as
such body or individual shall be found full of
the spirit and actually furthering the advent
of the imiversal community. Yet, for our
Pauline Christian, if he can indeed hold fast
his early faith, the Church will be a reality, just
as, to his mind, it was already real in the little
Pauline communities, and just as it is now real
wherever two or three are gathered together
in the name of the genuinely divine spirit.
[ All this, I say, our Pauline Christian can
regard as in essence the faith of the apostles.
If despite all changes he still can hold that so
much of their faith was literally true, then
nobody need dictate to him what he shall

368


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

further hold regarding the person or regarding
the work of Christ. Christ was for Paul the
indwelling Spirit of the community, whose
personal history was, for him, an historical
reality, spiritually interpreted, just as the
coming judgment was a near future historical
event, and was also to be historically inter-
preted. Our reawakened Pauline Christian
will remain true to his original faith so long
as he can retain its spiritual interpretation.
He will also remain true to a genuinely his-
torical Christianity, so long as he holds fast
by his Pauline faith. And this essential faith
in the divine presence of the spirit in the
Church he can retain, whatever be his view as
to the literal correctness of the reports of the
coming judgment, and whatever he comes to
hold, as to the correctness of this or of that
accoimt of the person of Christ.

X

Herewith I come to the one word which I
should wish to offer to our guest were I per-
mitted to present to him the doctrine of the

VOL. II — 2 b 369


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

community which, in this second portion of
our discussion, I have attempted in outline
to expound and to defend.

The final task of interpretation which I
thus assume is determined, for me, both by
the general plan of our whole inquiry, and by
the feigned situation of our Pauline Christian.
His case, as I have stated it, is a dream of
my own. But in truth his fancied case is
our real case. He is our genuine modern
man. He is the child of the whole historical
process of humanity. His is the education
of the human race. Modern civiKzation,
with all its problems and its tragedies, is, in
the very loftiest of its hopes, in the most
precious .of its spiritual possessions, in the
heart of its deepest faith, a product, — yes,
if you will, despite its endless crimes, — a
disciple and a convert of the divine spirit
that for a while manifested itself in the Pauline
churches.

I say this in no partisan spirit, and not in
the defence or in the praise of any sect, or of
any one Christian church, nor even for the

370


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

sake of extolKng the work which the whole
Christian labor of the centuries has accom-
pKshed. The Christian churches and nations
of mankind have done as yet but the very
least fragment of what it was their task to
accompKsh; namely, to bring the Beloved
Community into existence, or to bring the
Kingdom of Heaven to earth. But, in all
their weakness, their blindness, their strifes,
the Christian churches and nations have had
this to their spiritual profit; namely, that to
them has been committed the greatest task
of the ages ; and they have been more or less
clearly aware of the fact. So far as they have
been thus aware, they have gradually grown
in the practice and in the love of the art of
brotherhood. They have also tended towards
the organization, still so remote, in which the
ideal of the Church is yet to find its expression,
if indeed humanity ever succeeds in its task
at any time. Hence, indeed, our Christian
civiKzation, precisely in so far as it has thus
succeeded, has expressed the power of pre-
cisely that spirit which manifested itself

371


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

of things. Is the whole real world the expres-
sion of one divine process ? And is this pro-
cess the process of the Spirit ?

XI

Our guest is a philosopher. As such I
address him. In his case there is no fear lest
I should arouse false hopes of merely verbal
agreements. He has been too much and too
often disillusioned to be likely to mistake my
own use of symbols for a careless or an unjust
desire to arouse false hopes. He knows that
I have no legends to defend from critical
attacks. He knows that the world of which
I speak is one to which only one perfectly
determinate portion of the PauKne phrase-
ology applies. I have already said what that
portion is. I now have only to summarize
that word.

Addressing our guest, I should sum up the
result of our metaphysical inquiry thus:
The world is the process of the spirit. An
endless time-sequence of events is controlled,
according to this account, by motives which,

373


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

endless in their whole course, interpret the
past to the future. These motives express
themselves in an evolution wherein to every
problem corresponds, in the course of the end-
less ages, its solution, to every antithesis its
resolution, to every estrangement its recon-
ciliation, to every tragedy the atoning triumph
which interprets its evil. That this, on the
whole, is the character of the world-process, our
argument has insisted. But how this reconcil-
iation takes place, we have not attempted to
know. t-Conceming the details of the world of
^ time, we can learn only by historical experience.^
But, this, — such is my thesis, — this is
the world of interpretation whose outlines, in
the foregoing, I have been attempting, very
dimly, to portray. \^This world is throughout
essentially social, as is also our own human
world. It is essentially historical, as is any
^ world involving a time-process. It is essen-
tially teleological, as is every world wherein we
can speak, as, according to our philosophy of
interpretation, we can justly speak, of a process
involving true development.^


374


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

Now of this world as a whole, our sketch has
indeed attempted to suggest only the barest
outlines. The principal feature which, in
these lectures, I have been able to portray,
is that this world has the structure of a com-
munity.

But hereupon there remains one further
and centrally important feature upon which to
insist. This endless order of time stands in
contrast to an ideal goal, which the world
endlessly pursues with its sequence of events,
but never reaches at any one moment of the
time sequence. The pursuit, the search for
the goal, the new interpretation which every
new event requires, — this endless sequence of
new acts of interpretation, — this constitutes
the world. This is the order of time. This
pursuit of the goal, this bondage of the whole
creation to the pursuit of that which it never
reaches, — this naturally tragic estrange-
ment of this world from its goal, — this con-
stitutes the problem of the universe.

"Such," so I should say, addressing our
guest: "Such was your Pauline world. Lost

375


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

as the deeds which accomplish what is pos-
sible towards making the world seem to us a
divine process, are deeds of charity and of
atonement. These can exist in their true
form only in the community. In the human
world you of the Pauline churches knew them
as the deeds through which the divine spirit
was manifested. These deeds, as you asserted,
not the power of flesh and blood, but the
spirit who founded the Church, and who dwelt
in it, accomplished.

^^ Our doctrine of the world as a community,
of the social life of the universe endlessly re-
vealing the divine, — never wholly at any one
time, but in the world's process, expresses in
the form of the metaphysics of the community
what you grasped through an intuition of
faith.

"But the salvation of the whole world, the
consciousness that in its wholeness the world
is and expresses and fulfils the divine plan, and
is wholly interpreted and reconciled, — this is
something which is never completed at any
point of time. Yet this unity of the spirit,

377


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


HISTORICAL AND ESSENTIAL

munity, the true interpretation, the divine
interpreter, the plan of salvation, — these are
expressed/'

"This,'' I should say to our guest, "is indeed
not religion, but metaphysics. You as philoso-
pher, and as Pauline Christian, well know the
distinction. But you at least know what
is vital in Christianity. You know your own
problem and ours. You then can judge, you
who are the true heir of all the ages, — the
true modern man, — whether we have, in all
this, duly distinguished between the essential
and the historical, and shown their unity."

"At all events," so I should finally say,
"we know that whether the modern man
calls himself a Christian or not, is a matter
of names. We know, however, what it is to
believe in the presence of the spirit in the
Church. We know that whoever can see his
way to define and to justify such a behef , may
indeed not be called a Christian, but has
solved what is indeed essential about the prob-
lem of Christianity."


379


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


XVI

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


LECTURE XVr

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

TN beginning these lectures I said that I
should undertake the task neither of the
apologist nor of the hostile critic of Chris-
tianity.

I

Some of my hearers may have thought
this statement to be modelled after the word
of "jesting Pilate/' who asked, "What is
truth?'' but "stayed not for an answer/^
When I added, at the same time, that I should
also avoid the position, not only of the hos-
tile, but of the indiflferent critic of Christian-
ity, the paradox of this initial definition of
our undertaking may have appeared to be-
come hopeless. "What?" — so my hearer
may have inwardly exclaimed, — "neither
apologist, nor hostile critic, nor yet indif-
ferent? What manner of philosophy of the
Christian religion can such a student pro-
pound ? A Pilate, — but a Pilate who adds

383


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

now that we come to summarize its results,
are we not prepared to return to our initial
statement, and to see why, despite its para-
dox, it was justified, and has not proved
fruitless? Nothing is farther from my wish
than to magnify unduly the extremely modest
office of the philosophical inquirer. But
when I now ask, not: "What havfe I, in all
my weakness as a student of philosophy,
accomplished in the course of these few lec-
tures?'' but "What word would an ideally
trustworthy teacher, if such were accessible
to us, address to the modern man concerning
the problem of Christianity?'' I have to
remember that not merely Pontius Pilate,
but quite another man, is reported to have said
something that bears upon this very prob-
lem. Let my words, so far as they are mine,
be forgotten. ,But let us remember that
John the Baptist, according to the gospel
story, was no apologist for the teaching of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and was still less
its hostile critic, and was least of all an in-
different critic. What the burden of his

VOL. II — 2 c 385


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

preaching was, we all know: "The axe is
laid at the root of the tree. The Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand/' John did not create
a new sect. He did not preach a new creed.
He did not himself undertake to found a new
religion. He did not defend; he did not
assail the Kingdom of Heaven. He an-
nounced that a religion, long needed, was yet
to come. His references to the early end
of all things, and to the imminence of the
final transformation of human affairs, may
well have been, like all other Apocalyptic
announcements of those days, only symbols.
But the deeper meaning that lay beneath his
teaching was none the less true. I hold
that this deeper meaning is still true. The
Kingdom of Heaven is still at hand in pre-
cisely the sense in which every temporal
happening is, in its own way, and, according
to its special significance, a prophecy of the
triumph of the spirit, and a revelation of the
everlasting nearness of the insight which
interprets, and of the victory which over-
comes the world.


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

n

I^The essential message of Christianity has
been the word that the sense of life, the
very being of the time process itself, consists /^
in the progressive realization of the Univer-
sal Commmiity in and through the longings,
the vicissitudes, the tragedies, and the tri-
umphs of this process of the temporal worid. ^
Now this message has been historically ex-
pressed through the symbols, through the tra-
ditions, and through the concrete life of what-
ever human communities have most fully
embodied the essential spirit of Christianity.
We know not in what non-human forms the
spiritual life may now or hereafter find its
temporal embodiment. Our metaphysical
doctrine, dealing, as it does, with universal
issues, is quite unable to extend our vision to
any heavenly realm of angelic powers. We
have undertaken merely to defend a thesis
regarding the form in which the life of the
community, whether human or non-human,
finds its conscious expression.

387


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

ideal, and can exhaust the meaning of the
process of the spirit, no one event constitutes
"the coming of the end," and the true church
never yet has become visible to men. And
that is true simply because the meaning of
the whole of time can never become ade-
quately visible at any one moment of time.
Whoever preaches the Kingdom must accept
this limitation of every finite and temporal
being. He must not say : Lo here ! and Lo
there ! Signs and wonders will not be vouch-
safed to him, or to his hearers, as sufficient
to present any immediate vision of the divine
presence. The truth of the word: "Lo, I
am with you alway, even unto the end of
the world," will never be merely perceived;
just as this same truth will never be expres-
sible in terms of the abstract conceptions
which James found to be so "sterile." This
truth is simply the truth of an interpretation.
What it means is that, for every estrangement
that appears in the order of time, there some-
where is to be found, and will be found, the
reconciling spiritual event; that for every


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

wrong there will somewhere appear the cor-
responding remedy; and that for every
tragedy and distraction of individual exist-
ence the universal community will find the
way — how and when we know not — to
provide the corresponding unity, the appro-
priate triumph. We are saved through and
in the community. There is the victory
which overcomes the world. There is the
interpretation which reconciles. There is the
doctrine which we teach. This, so far as we
have had time, in these brief lectures, to
state our case, is our philosophy, and this
doctrine, as we assert, is in agreement with
what is vital in Christianity.

The apologists for Christian tradition gen-
erally fail to express such a doctrine, because
they misread the symbols which tradition
has so richly furnished. The assailants of
Christianity are generally ignorant of the
meaning of the ideal of the universal and
beloved community. Those who are indif-
ferent to Christianity are generally unaware
of what salvation through loyalty signifies.

390


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND.CONCLUSION

Hence it has been necessary for us to refuse
to take part with any of the parties to the
traditional controversies. Hereby we have
been able to interpret, however, what the
apologists and the critics of Christianity
equally need to recognize. Therefore I sub-
mit that our quest has not been fruitless.

IV

Our last words must include two final
attempts to set our case before you for your
judgment. The first of these attempts will
be an effort to furnish one more illustration
of our philosophy. The second attempt will
endeavor to point out a practical applica-
tion of our foregoing teaching.

Let me briefly indicate what each of these
closing considerations will be. First, let me
speak of the illustration of our philosophy
which I here propose to offer.

I have already said that we cannot, like
the founders of new religious faiths, point
to any sign or wonder as the evidence that

391


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

we have rightly interpreted the divine pro-
cess of which the worid is the expression.
Yet, as I leave our argument, in its incomplete
statement, to produce, if possible, some effect
upon your future thoughts about these mat-
ters, I wish to call your attention, — not to a
further technical proof of our philosophy of
interpretation, but to a closing exemplifica-
tion of its main doctrine. This example
may serve to bring our philosophy, which
many of you will have found too recondite
and too speculative, into closer touch with
certain thoughtful interests which not only
our own age, but many future ages of humati
inquiry, are certain to cherish.

I wish, namely, to indicate that our main
thesis concerning the World of Interpretation
is not only in harmony with the spirit which
guides the researches of the empirical natural
sciences, but is, in a very striking way, sug-
gested to us afresh when we ponder the
meaning which the very existence and the
successes of the empirical sciences seem to
imply. In other words, I wish to show you

392


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

that our theory of the World of Interpreta-
tion, and our doctrine that the whole process
of the temporal order is the progressive ex-
pression of a single spiritual meaning, is —
not indeed proved — but lighted up, when we
reconsider for a moment the question : "What
manner of natural world is this in which the
actual successes of our inductive sciences are
possible?''

You will understand that what I say in
this connection is a mere hint, and is not
intended as a demonstrative argument. Our
philosophy of interpretation teaches that
the. whole of time is a manifestation of a
world-order which contains its own inter-
preter. But the illustration to which I shall
call your attention shows us a connection
between philosophical idealism and natural
science such as few have ever recognized.
Once more I have here to express my indebt-
edness to Charles Peirce. For it is he who
has repeatedly pointed out that this matter
to which I shall call your attention has a
deep meaning, and tends to make probable

393


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OF CHRISTIANITY

a thesis about the nature of things which we
shall find to be in close harmony with our
doctrine of the world as a progressively real-
ized Community of Interpretation.

So much for a hint of the first of the two
matters which these closing words will call
to your notice. The second matter will
concern the practical outcome of our quest.
I have no new faith to preach, and no ambi-
tion to found either a sect or a party. But it
is fair to ask yet one question as the last
issue which we have time to face. If our
account of the Problem of Christianity is
true, what ought we to do for the furtherance
of our common religious interests? With a
summary formulation of that question, and
with a very little counsel regarding its answer,
my lecture, and this course, will end.


Next, then, let me sketch my closing
illustration of our philosophy of interpreta-
tion. Let me show you that there is a har-

394


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

mony, unexpected and interesting, between
the view of the universe which the general
philosophy of these lectures defends, and the
result to which we are led when we ponder,
as Charles Peirce has taught us to ponder,
upon the conditions which make the actual
successes of our natural sciences possible.*

Every one knows that the natural sciences
depend, for their existence, upon inductive
inquiries. And all of us are aware, in a
general way, of what is meant by induction.
When one collects facts of experience and then
infers, with greater or less probability, that
some proposition relating to facts not yet
observed, or relating to the laws of nature,
is a true proposition, the thinking process
which one uses is called inductive reasoning.
The conditions which make a process of rea-
soning inductive are thus twofold. First,
inductive reasoning is based upon an experi-

^ Charles Peirce has repeatedly given expression to the thoughts
about the nature and conditions of the inductive sciences to which
I here, in passing, shall refer. A notable expression of opinion
upon the subject occurs in a brief passage contained in his extremely
interesting e£l!say entitled "A Neglected Argument for the Being of
God," published in the Hihbert Journal during 1908.

395


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

ence of particular facts. That is, inductions
depend upon observations or experiments.
Secondly, what one concludes or infers, from
the observations or experiments in ques-
tion, follows from these facts not necessarily,
but with some more or less precisely estimable
degree of probability. The terms " inductive
inference'* and "probable inference*' are
almost precisely equivalent terms.^ If you
draw from given premises or presuppositions a
conclusion such that, in case the premise is
true, the conclusion must be true, the process
of reasoning which is in question is called
"necessary inference** or "deductive infer-
ence** (these two terms being, for our
present purposes, equivalent). But if , upon
assuming certain premises to be true, you
find that they merely make a given conclu-
sion probable^ the inference which guides you
to the conclusion is an inductive inference.

^Objections to an assertion of the precise equivalence of the
terms "inductive inference" and "probable inference" exist, but
need not be discussed in the present connection, since they are
irrelevant to the matter which Charles Peirce*s comment here calls
to our notice.

396


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Examples of such inference may easily
be mentioned. Thus a life insurance com-
pany, in assuming new risks, and in comput-
ing premiums, is guided by mortality tables.
Such tables summarize, in a statistical fash-
ion, facts which previous experience has
furnished regarding the ages at which men
have died* The insurance actuaries com-
pute, upon the basis of the tables, the mor-
talities of men who are yet to be insured.
The results of the tables and of the com-
putations are probable inferences to the effect
that of a certain number of men, who are
now in normal condition and who are of a
given age, a certain proportion will die within
a year, or within ten years, or within some
other chosen interval of time. Such probable
inferences are used, by the insurance company,
in determining the rate at which it is safe
to insure a given applicant who appears to
be, upon examination, a "good risk'' for his
age. Nobody can know when any one indi-
vidual man will die ; and the insurance com-
pany draws as few infei»ences as possible

397


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

when applied to large numbers of insured
persons, are highly probable. They are never
certain.

What the insurance companies do when
they reason / about taking new risks is an
example of a method widely used in the
natural sciences. A collection of facts of
observation, a statistical study of these facts,
and a probable inference based upon such
statistics, — these, in many cases, make up
a great part of the work of an inductive
science.

VI

But the statistical methods used by the
insurance companies are not the only methods
known to natural science. Another sort of
probable inference is also known, and is, in
many cases, of much more importance for
natural science than is the more directly
statistical method which the insurance com-
panies use. This other method is known to
you all. It is the method of forming hy-
potheses and of testing these hypotheses

399


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

marize thus: "If the Homeric story of the
Trojan war was historically well founded,
and if the ancient traditions about the site
of the real Troy were also true, and if nothing
has since occurred to render unrecognizable
the ruins which were left when Troy was
burned, — then, in case I dig in just that
mound, yonder, I shall find the ruins of a
large city, which once contained palaces
and treasures, and which will show signs of
having been burned/'

Now this hypothesis of Schliemann about
Troy was, when he formed or reformed his
conjectures upon the topic, a seemingly very
unlikely hypothesis. But Schliemann dug,
and the now well-known ruins came to light.

Hereupon you will all agree that, from the
facts of experience which were thus pre-
sented for further judgment, no important
conclusion could be said to follow deductively
and as a necessary condition. And as a fact
Schliemann is known to have overestimated
both the probability and the importance of
the conclusions which he himself drew from

VOL. u — 2d 401


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

antecedently unlikely success as that of
Schliemann, unless the idea which guided
Schliemann's excavations had some basis in
fact ? Nothing was demonstrated by Schlie-
mann's first discoveries. But a new probability
had henceforth to be assigned to the hypothesis
which had led to Schliemann's predictions
and discoveries, — namely, that some his-
torical foundation existed for the story of the
Trojan war.

VII

Schliemann's triumph, such as it was, is
familiar. It furnishes a typical instance of
the second of the two leading processes of
inductive reasoning. This second method is
that of hypothesis and test. Suppose that
we make some hypothesis A. Hereupon sup-
pose that we are able to reason, in advance
of further experience, that if A is true, some
fact, let us say E, will be observed, in case we
meet certain conditions of observation or of
experiment. Then, the more unlikely it is,
in the light of previous knowledge, that the

403


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

cess of deductive reasoning, that, if the hy*
pothesis A is true, some determinate fact of
experience E will be found under certain
conditions. The investigator hereupon looks
for this predicted fact E. If he fails to find
it, his hypothesis is refuted, and he must
look for another. But if he finds E where his
hypothesis had bidden him to look for E,
then the hypothesis A begins to be rendered
probable. And the more frequently A is
verified, and the more unexpected and ante-
cedently improbable are these verifications,
the more probable does the hypothesis A
become.

The most important and exact results of
the inductive sciences are reached by methods
in which the verification of hypotheses plays
a very large part. Galileo used hypotheses,
computed what the results would be in case
the hypotheses were true, and then by fur-
ther experience verified the hypotheses. So
did Newton ; so in a very different age, and
in a very different field, did Darwin. Upon
the process of inventing hypotheses, of com-

405


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

puting their consequences, and of then appeal-
ing to experience to confirm or refute the
hypotheses, the greatest single advances in
physical science rest.

And the principle used in this branch of
induction may be stated thus: —

When without any antecedent knowledge
that the consequences of a given hypothesis
are true, we find, upon a fair examination of
the facts, that these consequences are un-
expectedly verified, then the hypothesis in
question becomes, not certainly true, but
more and more probable.

VIII

These general remarks about the inductive
methods used in science may seem to some of
you to be mere commonplaces. But they
have been needed to bring us to the point
where Charles Peirce's remark about the sig-
nificance of the actual successes of scientific
method can at length be appreciated.

If the only methods followed by the natural

406


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

sciences were the statistical methods of the
insurance companies; if all the work of
scientific induction were done, first by making
collections of facts, such as mortality tables
^exemplify, and secondly by making probable
predictions about the future based mainly
upon the already observed facts, as the insur-
ance companies issue new policies on the
fbasis of the already existing tables, then
indeed the work of the inductive sciences
would be progressive, but it would not be
nearly as creative as it actually is.

In fact, however, the inductive sciences
owe their greatest advances to their greatest
inventors of hypotheses, — to men such as
Galileo or as Darwin. To be sure, when the
inventors of scientific hypotheses are in ques-
tion, these inventors must also be not only
inventors, but also verifiers, and must be
willing readily to abandon any hypothesis
whose consequences conflict with experience.
But since it is the actually successful, while
far-reaching, hypothesis which adds the most
new probabilities to science, the art of mak-

407


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

antecedently probable? If he does this, he
condemns himself to relative infertility. For
the antecedently probable hypothesis is pre-
cisely the hypothesis which lacks any very
notable novelty. Even if such an hypothesis
bears the test of experience, it therefore adds
little to knowledge. Worthless for the pur-
poses of any more exact natural science until
it has been duly verified, the hypothesis
which is to win, in the advancement of science,
a really great place, must often be, at the
moment of its first invention, an apparently
unlikely hypothesis, — a poetical creation,
warranted as yet by none of the facts thus
far known, and subject to all the risks which
attend great human enterprises in any field.
In such a position was Darwin's hypothesis
regarding the origin of species through natural
selection, when first he began to seek for its
verification.

This, however, is not all. A highly signif-
icant scientific hypothesis must not only be
a sort of poetic creation. There is another
consideration to be borne in mind. The

409


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

As a fact, however, the progress of natural
science, since Galileo began his work, and
since the new inductive methods were first
applied,, has been (so Charles Peirce asserts)
prodigiously faster than it could have been
had mere chance guided the inventive pro-
cesses of the greater scientific thinkers. In
view of these facts, Charles Peirce reasons
that the actual progress of science, from the
sixteenth century until now, could not have
been what it is, had not the human mind been,
as he says, in some deep way attuned to the
nature of things. The mind of man must be
peculiarly fitted to invent new hypotheses
such that, when tested by experience, they
bear the test, and turn out to be probably
true. The question hereupon arises, "To
what is this aptness of the human mind for
the invention of important and successful
scientific hypotheses due?'*


This question is not easy to answer. Were
new hypotheses in science framed simply by

411


Digitized by


Google


THE PROBLEM OP CHRISTIANITY

processes analogous to those which the insur-
ance companies employ when they take new
risks, the matter would be different. For
the insurance companies adapt the existing
tables of mortahty to their new undertakings,
or else obtain modified tables gradually, by
a mere process of collection and arrangement.
And all the statistical sciences make use of
this method; and there is, of course, no doubt
that this method of gradual advance, through
patient collection of facts, is one of the two
great sources of scientific progress.

But the other method, the method of
inventing new hypotheses which go beyond
all results thus far obtained, — the method
which first proposes and then tests these hy-
potheses, — involves at every stage a venture
into an unknown sea. Unless some deep-
lying motive guides the inventor, he will go
uselessly astray, and will waste his efforts
upon inventions which prove to be failures.

In many branches of science such fortunes
have in fact long barred the way. Consider,
for instance, the fortunes of modern patho-

412


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

logical research, up to the present moment,
in dealing with the problem furnished by the
existence of cancer. The most patient devo-
tion to details, the most skilful invention of
hypotheses, has so far led only to defeat
regarding some of the most central problems
of the pathology of cancer. These problems
may be solved at any moment in the near
future. But up to this time it seems —
according to what the leading pathologists
tell us — as if the human mind had not been
attuned to the invention of fitting hypothe-
ses regarding the most fundamental problems
of the "cancer-research.''
[ How different, on the other hand, were the
fortunes of mechanics from Galileo's time to
that of Newton. What wonderful scientific
inventiveness guided the early stages of
electrical science. How rapidly some por-
tions of pathological research have advanced.
And, according to Charles Peirce, in all these
most successful instances it is the happy
instinct for inventing the hypotheses which
has shortened a task that, if left to chance

413


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

XI

Now one cannot explain the existence of
such an aptitude for inventing good hypothe-
ses by pointing out that the processes of sci-
ence are simply a further development of that
gradual adaptation of man to his environment
which has enabled our race to survive, and
which has moulded us to our natural con-
formity to the order of nature. For the apti-
tude to invent scientific hypotheses is not like
our power to find our way in the woods, or
to get our food, or even to create and to
perpetuate our ordinary social orders. Each
new scientific hypothesis of high rank is a^
new creation which is no mere readapting
of habits slowly acquired. The conditions
which enable the creator of the hypothesis
to invent it never existed before his time.
Human beings could have continued to exist
indefinitely had Galileo never appeared.
Science gets what may be called its "survival
value" only after its hypotheses have been
invented and tested. Without science, the

415


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

rapidly progressive in its invention of suc-
cessful hypotheses to permit us to regard
this aptitude as the work of chance. Man's
gradual adjustment to his natural environ-
ment may well explain his skill as artisan,
or as mere collector and arranger of natural
facts, but cannot explain the origin of his
power to invent, as often and as wonder-
fully as he has invented, scientific hypotheses
about nature which bear the test of ex-
perience.

XII

If, then, you seek for a sign that the uni-
verse contains its own interpreter, let the very
existence of the sciences, let the existence
of the happy inventive power which has
made their progress possible, furnish you such
a sign. A being whom nature seems to have
intended, in the first place, simply to be
more crafty than the other animals, more
skilful in war and in hunting, and in the
arts of living in tribal unities, turns out
to be so attuned to the whole of nature that,
VOL. II — 2b 417


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
XIII

The older forms of teleology, often used
by the theologians of the past, frequently
missed the place where the empirical illustra-
tions of the workings of intelligence, in the
universe, and where the signs of the life of the
divine spirit are most to be sought. The
teleology of the future will look for illustrations
of the divine, and of design, neither in miracles
nor in the workings of any continuously striv-
ing "will" or "vital impulse" which from mo-
ment to moment moulds things so as to meet
present needs, or to guide present evolution.

Man, as we have seen, has an aptitude to
invent hypotheses that, when once duly tested,
throw light on things as remote in space as
are the nebulae, as distant in time as is the
origin of our whole stellar system. This ap-
titude lies deep in human nature. Its exist-
• ence is indeed no miraculous event of to-day.
Man's power to interpret his world has some-
how evolved with man. The whole natural
world of the past has been needed to produce

419


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

XIV

I have spent most of our brief time, in our
closing lecture, in illustrations of our meta-

ronment, " wherein he pomts out that however we may interpret the
facts, there exists, in the natural world, an instance of apparent
adaptation which has never before been clearly apprehended and
described. This instance, viewed by itself, furnishes no proof of our
present philosophy, and no proof of any other philosophy; but it
furnishes an illustration of the sort of evidence for teleology which,
as I believe, the teleologically disposed philosophers of the future
will ponder, and will interpret.

What Professor Henderson points out is* that the physico-chemical
constitution of the whole natural world, so far as that world is acces-
sible to scientific study, is "preadapted," is "fitted" to be an environ-
ment for living beings. This "fitness" is of a nature which cannot
have resulted from the processes whereby life has been evolved.
The same fitness involves an imion of many different physico-chem-
ical properties of the environment of living beings, — an imion so
complicated that one cannot suppose it due to chance. And finally
the origin of this fitness must have preceded by countless ages any
physical event of which we now have any probable knowledge. If
life itself ever had an origin, the physical world was thus, in a manner
which is new to us, inexplicably preadapted to the coming life for an
indefinitely vast period before the life appeared. If life had (as
Arrhenius has supposed) no origin whatever, the fitness of the envi-
ronment which is here in question, being due neither to life nor to
chance, remains a problem requiring scientific study, but at present
promising no scientific solution.

As Professor Henderson points out, the "fitness of the environ-
ment" which he has thus discovered is so vast and pervasive, and so
incapable of explanation in "vitalistic" terms as to render all forms
of vitalism (including that of Bergson) superfluous as explanations
of the true mutual fitness of organism and environment. In a natural
world which is once for all, as Professor Henderson points out,

421


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

all must relate to the practical consequences
which follow for us, and for our present age,
if our view of the historical mission of Chris-
tianity is true, and if the form of idealism, which
we have here expounded, rightly states the
relation of the Christian ideas to the real
world. Let me sum up these practical con-
sequences as briefly as I can. In sum, they
amount to two maxims.

In the past, the teaching of Christian
doctrine has generally depended upon some
form of Christology. In recent times the
traditional problems of Christology have be-
come, in the light of our whole view of the
world, of mankind, and of history, increas-
ingly diflScult and perplexing. Whoever
asserts that, at one moment of human his-
tory, and only at that one moment, an unique
being, at once an individual man, and at the
same time also God, appeared, and performed
the work which saved mankind, — whoever,
I say, asserts this traditional thesis, involves
himself in historical, in metaphysical, in
technically theological, and in elementally

423


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

And yet, if our previous account of the
Christian ideas has been sound, the Chris-
tology of the past has been due to motives
which are perfectly verifiable in human reli-
gious experience, and which can be inter-
preted in terms of a rationally defensible
philosophy both of life and of the universe.
As a fact, whatever Christology Paul, or any
later leader of Christian faith, has taught,
and whatever religious experience has been
used by the historical church, or by any of
its sects or of its visible forms, as giving
warrant for the Christological opinions, the
literal and historical fact has always been this^
that in some fashion and degree those who have
thus believed in the being whom they called
Christy were united in a community of the
faithful, were in love with that community ,
were hopefully and practically devoted to the
cause of the still invisible, but perfectly real and
divine Universal Community, and were saved
by the faith and by the life which they thu^
expressed.

Now in general, whatever else they held

425


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

ing that in this faith lies the genuine meaning
which has lain beneath all the various and
perplexing Christologies of the past is, other-
wise, expressed thus : It is unwise to try to
express this genuinely catholic .faith of all
the loyal by attempting to form one more
new sect. I do not wish to see any such new
sect, or to hear of one. It is needless to ex-
pect that those whom tradition now satisfies
will at present first abandon tradition in or-
der to learn the truth which, in their heart of
hearts, they know that tradition has always
symbolized. If men are loyal, but are in
doubt as to traditional theology, it is a waste
of time to endeavor to prove the usual theses
of dogmatic Christology by any collection of
accessible historical evidences. Such histori-
cal evidences are once for all insuflScient.
The existing documents are too fragmentary.
The historical hypotheses are too shifting and
evanescent. And if it is faith that is to be,
in Christological matters, the real substance of
things hoped for and the evidence of things
not seen, what faith has ever been more Chris-

427


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

be found in the sayings of the founder, nor
yet in the traditions of Christology. The
core of the faith is the Spirit, the Beloved
Community, the work of grace, the atoning
deed, and the saving power of the loyal life.
There is nothing else under heaven whereby
men have been saved or can be saved. To
say this is to found no new faith, but to send
you to the heart of all true faith.

This is no vague humanitarianism, is no
worship of the mere natural being called
humanity, and is no private mystic experience.
This is a creed at once human, divine, and
practical, and religious, and universal. Assim-
ilate and apply this creed, and you have
grasped the principle of Christian institutional
life iii the past, and the principle which will
develop countless new religious institutions
in the future, and which will survive them.

The first of my practical concluding maxims
may be stated thus: Interpret Christianity
and all the problems of its Christology in
this spirit, and you will aid towards the one
crowning oflSce of all human religion. You

429


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

versed community. If you have a church,
judge your own church by this standard;
and if your church does not yet fully meet
this standard, aid towards reforming your
church accordingly. If, like myself, you hold
the true church to be invisible, require all
whom you can influence to help to render it
visible. To do that, however, does not mean
that you shall either conform to the church
as it is, or found new sects. If the spirit of
scientific investigation, or of learned research,
shows signs — as it already does — of becom-
ing one of the best of all forms of unifying
mankind in free loyalty, then regard science
not merely as in possible harmony with reli-
gion, but as itself already one of the principal
organs of religion. Aid toward the coming
of the universal community by helping to make
the work of religion not only as catholic as is
already the true spirit of loyalty, but as in-
ventive of new social arts, as progressive as
is now natural science. So shall you help
in making, not merely happy individuals (for
no power can render detached individuals

431


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


INDEX


Agitator, modem, illustrating
strife between individualism
. and collectivism, I 154 f.

Altruism, misunderstood as Chris-
tian love, I 79 ; insufficient to
check influence of cultivation,
188.

Amos, II 190.

Apocalyptic vision of the true
church, I 58 ; II 386.

Apologist, attitude of, towards
Christianity, I 6 ff., 9, 10 f.,
403 ff., 413 ; the three central
Christian ideas misunderstood
by, 44 f . ; II 390.

Aristotle, on communities, I 61 ;
his ideal of beatitude, 190 f .

Arnold, Matthew, his *'St. Paul
and Protestantism " quoted,

I 217 ff. ; his modern view of
sin, 221 ff. ; this view criticised,
224 ff . ; this view applied to
moral treason, 257 ff. ; the
hjrpothetical traitor's answer to,
259 ff.; 362.

Atonement, I Lecture VI ; limita-
tions of the problem, 272; ap-
plication to the " traitor," 279
ff.; Christian idea of, 283 ff.;
as *' penal satisfaction," 284 f. ;
"moral theories" of, 288 f. ; not
a problem of "forgiveness,"
297, 301 ; a human problem,
304 ff. ; real essence of, 311 ff.,
illustrated by the story of
Joseph and his brethren, 365 ff.;
relation between the human
and the Christian form of,
318 ff. ; human form of, ex-
pressed in a postulate, 322 ; re-
lation of community to, 361 tf . ;

II 378.


Bach's Passion Music, applied to
the moral tragedy of the traitor,
I 274 ff.

Bastian, ethnologist, II 29.

Beethoven, his Fifth Symphony,
illustrating process of interpre-
tation; II 191.

"Beloved Community, The,"
loyalty to, I 172; contrasted
with loyalty to individuals, 173;
contrasted with natural social
groups, 183 ; as ideal Kingdom
of Heaven, 352, 357; as Com-
munity of Interpretation, II
219, 428. [See Community.]

Bergson, I 418 ; II 32, 34 ; stating
opposition between conception
and perception, 118 f., 124,
126 ff., 135, 139; his view of
reality as change, 154 f., 159 ; his
glorification of instinct, 189 ; il-
lustrating office of interpreta-
tion, 256 ff., 261 ff.. 285; his
pragmatism and mysticism, 307
f., 323, 421.

Brooding, over sin, I 208 ff., 245,
362 f.

Bryant, II 28.

Buddhism, its escape from the
"moral burden," I 189, 407;
Nirvana, contrasted with
Pauline Charity, 190 f. ; com-
pared with Christianity, 332 ff.,
362, contrasted, 339 ff. ; salva-
tion through loyalty not taught
by, 345, 363; II 12, 266; self-
denial of, 306.

Burden, moral, of the Individual,
I Lecture III ; in relation to the
Apostle Paul, 117 ff. ; produced
by conflict between social will
and self-will, 140 ff. ; as burden


2f


433


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


INDEX


with natural social groups,
183 fif . ; contrasted with Nirvana,
190 f. ; psychology of the
dogmas in relation to, 203 ff. ;
as portrayed in the Fourth
Gospel, 211 ff. ; treachery to,
295 ff. ; triumph of, over treason,
309 £f. ; expressed in a postulate,
322; loyalty to, not taught by
Buddhism, 344; central in
Christian salvation, 345, 374 f . ;
all the Christian maxims im-
plied in the notion of, 349 ff . ;
spirit of, illustrated by the
parable of the Prodigal Son,
353 f. ; relation of Atonement
to, 361 ff., illustrated by the
story of Joseph and his brethren,
365 ff. ; conceived as divine,
408 f . ; relation of the problem
of Jesus* divinity to, 415 ff. ;
conceived as human founder of
Christianity, 416; II 338 ff.;
and the Time-Process, II
Lecture IX ; spirit of, identical
with Logos-principle, 16; idea
of, illustrating problem of the
One and the Many, 17 f., 28 ff. ;
past and memory of, 44 ff.;
restricted definition of, 52 ff.,
59 f . ; first condition of the
existence of, in the restricted
sense, 60 ff., second condition,
67 f., third condition, 68 f.;
as single entity, 79; union of
one and the many in, 80 ff. ;
individual as, 81 ; coSperative
life of, 82 ff.; still further re-
striction of, 86 f. ; as distin-
guished, from other coSperative
groups, 87 ff . ; love as conscious-
ness of, 91 ff. ; definition and
analysis of a Community of
Interpretation, 208 ff. ; as
scientific, 227, 232 ff.; meta-
physical implications of, 240 ff . ;
existence of, presupposed in
the "Will to Interpret," 253 ff. ;
real universe as, 264 ff . ; mean-
ing of individual understood
only in terms of, 312 ff. ; meta-


physics of, illustrated by in-
ductive sciences, 394 ff.

Comparison, process of, as a
form of interpretation, II
169 ff. ; instances of, 170 ff., 193 ;
further analysis of, 194 ff. ; in
relation to Deduction, 196 ff.;
absolute truth resulting from,
200 ff. ; applied to other minds,
206 ff. ; metaphysical impli-
cations of, 264 ff.

Conception, cognitive process,
contrasted with perception, II
117 ff. ; as stated by Bergson,
118, 124; synthesis of percep-
tion and, 121 ff . ; object of, as
universal, 127 f. ; contrasted
with interpretation, 149 ff.,
188 ff.; illustrated by Plato,
256 ff. ; no philosophy of pure,
258 f.

Confucius, I 413.

Consciousness, comi)ounding of,

11 31 ; Fechner's planetary, 33.
Contrast, element of, in self-con-
sciousness, I 134 ff.; II 319 ff.;
as producing social tension,
I 138 ff. ; as constituting the
problem of reality, II 265 ff.

Cooperation, as life of the com-
munity, analysis of, II 82 ff. ;
psychology of, 86 ff.

Corinthians, epistle to the, I 96,
101, 190, 327; II 68, 73, 75, 345.

Creed, in relation to the "modem
man," I 15 ff. ; ethical and re-
ligious value of the, 348 ; meta-
physical problem of the, II

12 f.

Dante, comparison of Shake-
speare with, illustrating nature
of interpretation, II 176 f., 180.

Darwin, illustrating nature of
interpretation, II 190, 251, 404,
410, 414.

Death, in relation to wilful sin,
I 223, 238.

Deduction, process of, analyzed,
195 ff.

"Depersonalization," process of.


435


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


INDEX


pothesis, 400 ff.; teleological
aspect of, 411 ff.

Instincts, character of, in rela-
tion to the "moral burden,'' I
122 ff.

Interpretation, Pauline Charity
as, II 98 ; problem of the nature
of, 110; problem of Christian-
ity involving. 111 ; philosophy
and life depending upon, 112;
as a special process, 114 ff. ;
as a fundamental cognitive
process, 129; illustrations of,
130 ff., 140 ff. ; knowledge of
self involving, 137; Peirce's
central thesis of, 139 ff. ; a
triadic relation, 140 ff. ; applied
to the time-process, 144 ff ., 271 ;
not a logical formalism, 148;
psychology of, 148 ff., 166 ff.,
169 ff. ; Peirce's "sign," object
of, 148 f . ; contrasted with per-
ception and conception, 149 ff.,
187 ff. ; process of Comparison
involving, 169 ff. ; instances of
comparison, 170 ff. ; Peirce's
theory of, not derived from
Hegel, 186 f. ; deeper meaning
of, 187 ff . ; in relation to Deduc-
tion, 196 ff. ; to truth, 200 ff. ;
applied to neighbor's mind,
204 ff. ; to the Community,
208 ff . ; definition and analysis
of a Community of Interpre-
tation, 211 ff. ; loyalty to it,
essence of scientific spirit, 227 f .,
262; place of, in scientific
work and discovery, 231 ff.,
illustrations, 232 ff. ; meta-
physical implications of, 240 ff . ;
office of, illustrated by the
philosophers, 266 ff., 274, by
Plato and Bergson, 266 ff. ;
real world as "community of
interpretation," analyzed and
defended, 264 ff. ; not static,
270; in relation to Pragma-
tism, 297 ff. ; in relation to
postulating other minds, 319 ff . ;
of essence of Christianity, as
illustrated by fictitious mem-


ber of the Pauline Church,
344 ff . ; harmony between Com-
munity of, and inductive
sciences, 394 ff. ; inductive
sciences illustrating metaphys-
ics of, 417 ff.

Intuition, II 193, 263.

Israel, prophets of, in relation to
Community, I 100, 104.

James, William, I 312; on "com-
pounding of consciousness," II
30 ; on the problem of the One
and the Many, 31 ff., 115. 119,
163 ; his definition of idea as a
"leading," 180 f., 186, 199,
291, 293, 296; acknowledg-
ment of other selves, 302 f.,
313, 315, 319, 389.

Japanese, the, on loyalty, I 68;
Buddhism of, 346 f.; II 39.

Jesus, in relation to Christianity
as a personal religion, I 24;
contrast between, and inter-
pretation of his mission, 26 ff . ;
and the kingdom of Heaven,
31 f., 37 ff., 50, 197 ff., 364 ff. ;
problematic original teaching
of, 32 f . ; his doctrine of love,
76 ff. ; its practical indefinite-
ness, 86 ff . ; synthesis of loyalty
with the doctrine of love of,
114; his teaching concerning
wilful sin, 227 ff. ; problem of
the divinity of, 412 ff.

John the Baptist, truth of his
teaching, II 386 f., 388.

Joseph and his brethren, story of,
illustrating essence of Atone-
ment, I 366 ff.

Judaism, individualism in, I
146 f . ; conception of wilful sin
in, 232 f .

Kant, in reference to concep-
tion and perception, II 119 i.,
122.

Kingdom of Heaven, problematic
meaning of, 1 31 ff . ; as developed
by Christian community, 36 ff . ;
as characterized in the Sermon


437


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


INDEX


15 fif. ; as fictitious being, 16 ff. ;
as postulate embodying "Edu-
cation of the human race,"
17 ff . ; in relation to Christianity,
19 ff., 28 ff. ; in relation to sin
and hell, 236 ff. ; geocentric
view of, II 7 ; analogy between,
and fictitious Pauline Christian,
370 ff.

Modern Mind, and the Christian
Idects, I Lecture VIII; three
historical vreligious lessons for
the, 385 ff. ; lessons of the
present day, 393 f . ; mysticism
and, 398 ff. ; orthodoxy and,
402 f. ; real choice for, 404 ff. ;
in relation to the problem of
the divinity of Jesus, 412 ff.

"Mystery," Paul's use of, I 92 ff.

Mysticism, conceived as solution
of the problem of Christianity,
1 398 ff. ; Bergson's, II 307 f .

Napoleon, II 235.

New Jerusalem, I 58, 106.

Newton, II 413.

New Zealand ers* njemory of the

Community, II 45 ff., 69.
Nietzsche, I 155.
Nirvana, contrasted with Pauline

Charity, I 190 f., 336.

Omar Khajryam, quoted, I 261.

One and the Many, The, problem
of, illustrated by idea of Com-
munity, II 17 f. ; the one as
many, 19 ff. ; the many as one,
26 ff. ; Wundt's psychology of,
26 ff.; James's, 30 ff . ; union
of, in the Community, 80 ff.,
in love, 103; solution of the
l^oblem of, in the Community
of Interpretation, 213, 219 ff.

Opponent, attitude of, towards
Christianity, I 8 f .

Oriental view of Christianity, I
8 ; fatalism, 261.

Paul, Apostle, as "modem man"
of his time, I 18 f. ; as critic
of the individual, 41 f. ; in con-


trast to Jesus' Kingdom of
Heaven, 74 f . ; his contribution
to the doctrine of love, 78, 91 ;
his use of "Mystery," 92 ff. ;
his conception of love as loyalty,
98 ff., 114; in relation to the
"moral burden," 117 ff. ; his
notion of "the law," 133; his
opinion about Gentiles, 136,
153 ; his analysis of sin in the
seventh chapter of the epistle
to the Romans, 148 ff., 176 ff. ;
his escape from the "moral
burden," through loyalty,
167 ff., 178 ; his conception of
loyalty as Christian, 170 ff. ;
his * * Beloved Community ' '
contrasted with other social
groups, 182 ff. ; his new type of
loyalty, analyzed, 185 ff. ; his
"beatific vision," 190 ff. ; as
conceived by Matthew Arnold,
217 ff. ; his view of "dying to
sin," 250 ff. ; in relation to
Atonement, 285 ff., 363 f.;
his fulfilment of the parables,
355; as mystic, 400; and the
memory of the Pauline Church,
II 69 ff. ; his synthesis of the
memory and the hope of the
Church, 76 ff. ; his love as emo-
tion and interpretation, 96 ff. ;
in relation to the processes of
Comparison and Interpretation,
191, 221; his attitude of the
will as loyalty, 310 ff., 325;
his community as human
founder of Christianity, 338 f . ;
essence of Christianity illus-
trated by a fictitious member
of his Church, 344 ff.

Pauline Church. [See Church,
Community, and Paul.]

Peirce, Charles, II 114; as in-
ventor of Pragmatism, 115;
direct perception of the self
denied by, 138; his central
thesis of Interpretation, 139 ff. ;
triadic nature of Comparison,
theory of, 169 ff. ; his idea of
"a third," 173 ff.; his theory


439


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


INDEX


270 f. ; not expressible in ex-
dusivdy perceptual or con-
ceptual terms, 274.

Revelation, I 410.

Ritschl, II 329.

Romans, epistle to the, I 117,
122, 124 ff., seventh chapter
ofi analyzed, 147 ff., 217.

Russell, Bertrand, II 119, 196.

Sabatier, his "moral theory" of
Atonement, I 288 f .

Salvation, in relation to the King-
dom of Heaven, I 49 ; through
loyalty, 158 f., 181, 186 ff.,
376 ; through destruction of the
natural self, 344 ; as Atonement,
364.

Samaritan, the Good, parable of,
194.

Sanday , quoted from his ' ' Christol-
ogies. Ancient and Modem,"
II 329 ; his criticism of Hegel's
philosophy of rehgion, 330.

SchiUer, F. C. S., I 190.

Schliemann, his hypothesis il-
lustrating harmony of inter-
pretation and induction, II
400 ff.

Schopenhauer, II 266 ; his analy-
sis of the WiU, 298 ff., 324.

Self, time^rocess in relation to,
II 40 ff. ; no mere datum, 61 f . ;
ideal extension of, 63 ff., 96 ff. ;
as Community, 81 ; accept-
ance of other selves, 302 ff.;
in terms of social consciousness,
312 ff.

Sense, historical, in relation to
the understanding of Chris-
tianity, I 59.

Sermon on the Mount, character-
izing Kingdom of Heaven, 1 49 ;
religion and ethics illustrated
by, 327.

Shakespeare, comparison of Dante
with, illustrating nature of in-
terpretation, II 176, 180, 193.

Signs, Doctrine of. The, II Lec-
ture XIV; "Sign," Peirce*s
object of Interpretation, 148,


152; definition and analysis
of the term, 281 ff., illustra-
tions, 286 ff. ; metaphysical
thesis stated in terms of, 284;
in relation to Pragmatism and
Radical Empiricism, 297 ff. ;
other selves interpreted in
terms of, 316 ff. ; extension of,
324 f.

Sin, original, in relation to the
"moral burden," I 122; sense
of, analyzed by Matthew Ar-
nold, 217 ff. ; Arnold's view of,
criticised, 221 ff. ; original and
voluntary, 224 f . ; teaching of
Jesus concerning wilful, 227;
attitude of "modem man" tow-
ards, 236 f. ; the unpardon-
able, analyzed, 243 ff. ; dying
to, 250; equation of the un-
pardonable with conscious be-
trayal, 253 f. ; Arnold's view
of, applied to the "traitor,"
257 ff.; the "hell of the ir-
revocable" applied to, 263 ff. ;
in relation to Atonement,
361 ff.

Sistine Madonna, illustrating na-
ture of Interpretation, II 191.

Social aspect, of self-conscious-
ness, I 132 ff. ; in conflict with
the individual, 140 ff. ; and in-
dividual contrasted in Paul's
epistle to the Romans, 148 ff. ;
the growth of the, intensifying
individualism, 152, 176 ff. ; psy-
chology of [see Psychology].

Socrates, I 413.

Spinoza, quoted, I 109 ; his idea
of Substance, analyzed, II
261 ff., 275.

Spirit, problem of the Holy, of
central importance, II 13 ff.

Strauss, David Frederic, quoted,
II 330, 332 f .

Substance, Spinoza's, analyzed, II
261 ff., 275.


Tarde, his social psychology, II 86.

Teleology, in the natural world,

illustrated by inductive sciences.


441


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


npHE following pages contain advertisements
of Macmillan books by the same author


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


"THE GOSPEL OF IDEALS"

WILLIAM JAMES

and Other Essays on the

PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE

By JOSIAH ROYCE, LL.D., Litt.D.

Professor of the History of Philosophy at Harvard University.

Cloth, i2mo, $i-SO net; by mail, $i.6o

In his previous works the author set forth and defended a form
of philosophical Idealism. The essays collected in the present
volume contain further illustrations and applications of this doc-
trine. Each essay contains an interpretation of some problem
that is of vital interest for any one who wants to form sound
ideals for the conduct of life. The discourse upon William James
deals with some of his ideals and incidentally with some of the
author's own. The address upon recent discussions of the prob-
lems of truth explains the author's attitude in relation to some of
the positions of recent pragmatism, and why the frequent identi-
fication of the idealistic theory of truth with " barren intellectual-
ism " appears erroneous.

The book is not a systematic treatise, and is to be considered
solely in the light of its decidedly practical purpose — to interpret
some problems of vital interest for those who wish to form sound
ideals for the conduct of life.

" The Essays are full of interest and sympathy." — The Continent,

"For students this volume will have abounding interest, and serious
readers, even if not technically trained, will follow the discussions with
profit. Professor Royce has, with Professor James, the rare gift of translat-
ing the thinking of the scholar into the language of the plain people." —
Chicago Record-Herald.

" All of the Essays are keen, eloquent, and suggestive." — Boston Herald,


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

PuUiflhers 64-66 Tifth AvMine New Tork


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


*'A book for e*vety piotni ga\d thinker"

Outlines of Psychology

AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE WITH
SOME PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS

By JOSIAH ROYCE, Ph.D., LL.D.

Professor of the History of Philosophy in
Harvard University ^

Cloth, i2fno, j^g pages, $1,25 net

More and more the practice is growing of defining a good many of
the problems of practical life in psychological terms so far as they are
able to do so ; and to those who share this tendency, Dr. Royce's book
will be particularly interesting.

He presupposes a serious reader, one who really " wants to know,"
but not one trained either in experimental methods or in philosophical
inquiries. He tries to tell such a reader a few things that seem to him
important, about the most fundamental and general processes, laws,
and conditions of mental life.

"It is not a 'pedagogical psychology,' but a scientific psychology,
written in such a way as to make readily accessible to teachers a deep
and true knowledge of the natures which they seek to influence.** —
Western Journal of Education,

"Obviously a treatise upon psychology that deals with the subject
with this broad, free, strong handling is suggestive and constructive;
helps us to organize our ideas; throws out new light; cannot be dis-
regarded by the students of the mind. The treatise, however, has a
special value in practical applications. These are not 'helps to the
teacher,* they are criticisms upon life and society and are helps to the
thinker who is a teacher." — W. E. Chancellor in the Journal of
Pedagogy,

"The reader of this book, who, wishing to make an elementary
study of the inner mind of the world, takes Professor Royce for his
guide, will find himself increasingly in serious companionship with a
winsome as well as a knowing leader." — Chicago Tribune,


PUBLISHED BY

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

64-66 FIFTH AVENTJE, KEW TOBK


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


Diqitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


3 2044 019 558 873


i


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google
