The World and the Individual, Vol. 1 (Josiah Royce, 1899)
==========================================================
American idealism's system: the Absolute as the community of interpretation. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (worldindividualg0001unse).

22> 


a 


KEIRA. 


os 


0 


ata 


Gates 
ey 


a 


are 
* 


Fes 
Si3 


i 
ia 


a 
Mi 
oy 


> 
rcs 
a 


Te} 
aS 


SPs 


ree 


S 


an, 
Py ete) 
Mea: 


EXIST 
WE eh a Did Be A 


TEEDEP 


4 


BSS Sere She 
RAR 


> 


> 


wi 
rye 


5 


per 


te 
mS 


es 
ie 
Forney 
oe 
cppreseess) 


as 


& 


> 
Se 


Byryeisseet 
sere 

2S 

Sp 
Lae 


Rae 
Sas 
<3 


esas 


a 
iaceteacs 
zx 
Poincoxprossces 
iS 
sibabeese 
6 


Sei, 
Ree 
te 
as 


325 
Sete 


re 
seas 
ieteds 
2S 
geteere 


Senne 
PyPStae 
> he 

SESE 

BERG 

BRST 

> 


#3 
\ 


23° 
ns 
S 


Se 
casas 
a 


Staese 
sg 
eaS4 


vie 

We enye.) 

ON RS 
a, 
oe 


yeas 


v7 
i 


ee 
de te ti td 


tnt be BOP 
ie 
aN 

Pare eee 
aes 


CA hy 
Pais 


MOI te KD 


“ 1s 


i A bbe 
ah 


OR OR 
nD ey 


setae 


cS 
ont 
¥ 


- 


reine eee 


4% 


sO) 
pharys 


Dep aoers' 


MD 


Pr 
Wea ae 


aus 
ee Anas 
Sao 


my Pies 

Ra, 

Pere tra 
as WC 


eae A 


ea 4% ry ‘si x 


Ceres 
Ew 
Percy 


AAPM AS, 
Cx Ak 


pete) 
MAti, 


rer a 


NY: 
RK 


vs 


PRET 


Pe AA 


ae 


re 


yO Ah 
Rahs SOL 


rs 
orcs 


* 


iN 


‘AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


en 


2335- 
S438b 


DATE DUE 


No. 12U-3 


H 


THE WORLD AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


GIFFORD LECTURES 


THE WORLD AND THE 
INDIVIDUAL 


Gifford Lectures 
Belibered before the Anibversity of Aberdeen 


FIRST SERIES 


THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS 
OF BEING 


BY 


JOSIAH ROYCE, Pu.D. 


PROFESSOR OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY 
IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY 


New Bork 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


LONDON: MAOMILLAN & OO., Lp. 
1916 


All rights reserved 


Fol 
El 3 
1) = 
J / 
, ) t) 
Co. 
- 5 
~~} fy 
1” 
) 
i _+ ~ 
a eT ¢ 


Copyricut, 1899, 


By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY. 


Set up and electrotyped November, 1899. Reprinted July, 1901; 
November, 1904 ; August, 1908 ; September, 1912; January, 1916. 


SiSae 


Norwood JBress 
J. 8. Cushing & Co. — Berwick & Smith 
Norwood Mass. U.S.A. 


5 Ru Co i ee 78 
: BK Me 
‘es eet oe 
BEY wa 2 
4 pas 
a . 
cs 
ee 


TO 
Charles and Nortense Head 


I DEDICATE THIS BOOK 


AS A TOKEN OF BROTHERLY AFFECTION 


ws ff 
ae re 
\ H| 
* yt “i 


PREFACE 


Tue Lectures upon which this volume is based were 
delivered before the University of Aberdeen between 
January 11 and February 1, 1899. They appear in a 
decidedly more extended form than that in which they 
were delivered; and they have been subject to some 
revision. Lecture VII, in particular, has been much 
lengthened in the final preparation for publication. 
These differences between the lectures as read and the 
printed volume have seemed to me necessary, in order 
to complete my statement of the problems at issue, and 
of the solution that I offer. 

The plan of the whole course is explained more at 
length in the opening lecture. Lord Gifford’s Will calls 
upon his lecturers for a serious treatment of some aspect 
of the problems of Natural Religion. These problems 
themselves are of the most fundamental sort; and in 
this first Series I have not seen my way clear to attempt- 
ing anything less than a philosophical inquiry into first 
principles. The second Series, especially in its later 
lectures, will contain the more detailed application of 
these first principles to problems. that directly concern 
religion. But the reader of the present lectures will not 
fail to discover how I define, in general terms, God, the 


» © Rh RE vii 
P yt rary KT 4 a | 5 


viii PREFACE 


World, the finite Individual, and the most fundamental 
relations that link them together. But these, as I sup- 
pose, are the essential problems of the Philosophy of 
Religion. 

The philosophy here set forth is the result of a good 
many years of reflection. As to the most essential argu- 
ment regarding the true relations between our finite ideas 
and the ultimate nature of things, I have never varied, in 
spirit, from the view maintained in Chapter XI of my 
first book, The Religious Aspect of Philosophy.1 That 
chapter was entitled The Possibility of Error, and was 
intended to show that the very conditions which make 
finite error possible concerning objective truth, can be 
consistently expressed only by means of an idealistic 
theory of the Absolute, —a theory whose outlines I 
there sketched. The argument in question has since 
been restated, and set into relations with other matters, 
without fundamental alteration of its character, and in 
several forms ;? once in my Spirit of Modern Philosophy 
(Gn a shape intended for a popular audience, but with an 
extended discussion of the historic background of this 
argument); again, in the book called The Conception of 
God, where my own statement of the argument has the 

1 Published in 1885 at Boston, Mass., by Houghton, Mifflin & Co. 

2 I may here set down the titles of the other books that I have printed, 
dealing with philosophical problems: The Spirit of Modern Philosophy 
(Boston, Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1892); The Conception of God (a 
discussion in which three colleagues, Professor Howison, Professor 
LeConte, and Professor Mezes, took part with me, while I was kindly 
allowed, by the indulgence of my friends, by far the most of the time 
and the space ; New York, The Macmillan Co., 1897) ; Studies of Good 


and Evil (a collection of essays upon various applications of idealistic 
doctrine and upon related topics ; New York, Appleton & Co., 1898). 


PREFACE ix 


further advantages of Professor Howison’s kindly expo- 
sition and keen criticism; and still again, in the paper 
called The Implications of Self-consciousness, published in 
the Studies of Good and Evil. In the present lectures 
this argument assumes a decidedly new form, not because 
I am in the least disposed to abandon the validity of the 
former statements, but because, in the present setting, 
the whole matter appears in new relations to other philo- 
sophical problems, and becomes, as I hope, deepened in 
its significance by these relations. The new statement, 
indicated already in the opening Lecture, is especially 
developed in Lecture VII, and is defended against objec- 
tions in Lecture VIII. 

While this central matter regarding the definition of 
Truth, and of our relation to truth, has not essentially 
changed its place in my mind, I have been doing what 
I could, since my first book was written, to come to clear- 
- ness as to the relations of Idealism to the special problems 
of human life and destiny. In my first book the concep- 
tion of the Absolute was defined in such wise as led me 
then to prefer, quite deliberately, the use of the term 
Thought as the best name for the final unity of the 
Absolute. While this term was there so defined as to 
make Thought inclusive of Will and of Experience, these 
latter terms were not emphasized prominently enough, 
and the aspects of the Absolute Life which they denote 
have since become more central in my own interests. 
The present is a deliberate effort to bring into synthesis, 
more fully than I have ever done before, the relations of 
Knowledge and of Will in our conception of God. The 
centre of the present discussion is, for this very reason, 


x PREFACE 


the true meaning and place of the concept of Individu- 
ality, in regard to which the present discussion carries 
out a little more fully considerations which appear, in a 
very different form of statement, in the Supplementary 
Essay, published at the close of The Conception of God. 
As for the term Thought, I now agree that the inclusive 
use which I gave to it in my first book is not wholly 
convenient ; and in these lectures I use this term Thought 
as a name for the process by which we define or describe 
objects viewed as beyond or as other than the process 
whereby they are defined or described, while, in my 
Religious Aspect of Philosophy, the term, as applied to the 
Absolute, referred not only to finite processes of thinking, 
but also, and expressly, to the inclusive Whole of Insight, 
in which both truth and value are attained, not as objects 
beyond Thought’s ideas, but as appreciated and immanent 
fulfilment or expression of all the purposes of finite 
Thought. This usage seems to be less effective for pur- 
poses of exposition than that which I have tried to em- 
ploy in this book. Besides, I now more emphasize the 
distinctions there already implied, while I surrender in 
no whit my assurance of the unity of God and the 
World. 

As for the present discussion, it is useless to defend 
its methods to people who by nature or by training are 
opposed to all thoroughgoing philosophical inquiry. Such 
are nowadays accustomed to say that they are already 
well aware of the limits of human thinking, and that they 
confine themselves wholly to “the realm of experience.” 
It is useless to tell them that this book also is an inquiry 
regarding just this realm of experience. For such critics, 


PREFACE aA 


after a fashion not unknown amongst people who think 
themselves to be “ pure” empiricists, will of course know, 
quite @ priort and absolutely, that there is nothing abso- 
lute to be known. Not for such critics, who may be left 
where God has placed them, but for still open-hearted 
inquirers, I may as well say, however, that, to my mind, 
the only demonstrable truths of an ultimate philosophy 
relate to the constitution of the actual realm of Experi- 
ence, and to so much only about the constitution of this 
realm as cannot be denied without self-contradiction. 
Whenever, in dealing with Experience, we try to find out 
what, on the whole, it is and means, we philosophize. 
Our goai is reached, so far as the demonstrable truth is 
concerned, whenever we have found a series of proposi- 
tions relating to the constitution of the realm of expe- 
rience, and such that, as soon as you try to deny these 
propositions, you implicitly reaffirm them by your very 
attempt at denial. After you have found these propo- 
sitions, you have, of course, a right to use them, more or 
less effectively, as a partial basis for special applications 
and results which will indeed remain, like all our human 
knowledge of particulars, more or less hypothetical. But 
your hypotheses about particular problems must be 
judged by themselves. Your body of central truth is 
subject only to the test just mentioned. And you call 
this truth “absolute” merely because you conceive that 
it bears this test. Whether it does so is a question of 
fact, not of authority. And every man must, in such a 
matter, look for himself before judging about what is 
offered to him. 

As to the principal special features of this discussion, 


xii PREFACE 


they are: (1) The definition and comparison of what 
I have called the Four Historical Concepts of Being. I 
believe this aspect of these lectures to be, in many re- 
spects, a novelty in discussion. (2) The form here given 
to the criticism of Realism in the Third Lecture. (3) The 
use made of the parallelism between the realistic and the 
mystical concepts of Being in the Fourth and Fifth Lec- 
tures. (4) The transition, in the Sixth and Seventh 
Lectures, from the concept of the Real as the Valid to 
that concrete conception of Being which, to my mind, 
constitutes Idealism. (5) The statement of the finite 
contrast and the final unity of the External and Internal 
Meaning of Ideas. (6) The concept of Individuality 
which is expounded in the Seventh and in the later 
lectures, and the reconciliation of the One and the Many 
proposed here and in my Supplementary Essay. 

This Supplementary Essay itself, which my publisher 
has very self-sacrificingly allowed me to add to the pres- 
ent volume, contains my defence against the objections 
which Mr. Bradley’s Appearance and Reality seems to 
render so serious as obstacles in the way of any such 
account as mine of our concrete relations to the Absolute. 
My defence is itself but a very poor expression of the 
very deep and positive obligations which I owe to Mr. 
Bradley’s book, — a book without which much of what 
appears in my Lectures themselves could never have 
received anything like the present form. As a part of 
this defence, I have been led into a discussion of the 
concept of the quantitative Infinite; and in this portion 
of my investigation my obligations are indeed numerous, 
and are, in part, recognized in the notes to the Supple- 


PREFACE xiii 


mentary Essay. In particular, however, I have now to 
mention what there can only appear in a very inadequate — 
fashion, viz. my special obligation to Mr. Charles Peirce, 
_hot only for the stimulus gained from his various pub- 
lished comments and discussions bearing upon the concept 
of the Infinite, but for the guidance and the suggestions 
due to some unpublished lectures of his which I had the 
good fortune to hear. I need not say that I do not 
intend, by this acknowledgment, to make him appear 
responsible for my particular opinions. My own present 
study of the concept of the Infinite may be justified by 
its effort to bring into connection a number of appar- 
ently unrelated tendencies of recent discussion, and to 
review the whole issue in the light of my own concep- 
tion of what constitutes an Individual. The result, as I 
hope, may serve to justify some of the essential bases of 
my thesis as to the relations of God and Man. 

I regret that Professor Ladd’s Theory of Reality ap- 
peared too late for me to take account of this important 
contribution to the problems of the present volume. 

My thanks are due to my colleague, Professor Charles 
R. Lanman, for his translations of the passages from the 
Upanishads which appear in the lecture on Mysticism. I 
have also to thank my other colleagues, Professor Maxime 
Bécher and Professor William F. Osgood, for kind sug- 
gestions as to the remarks concerning specifically mathe- 
matical topics in the Supplementary Essay and in the 
lectures on Validity. And my especial thanks also are 
owed to my wife, for invaluable aid in preparing my 
lectures for publication. That, after all, quite apart 
from the problematic issues discussed, plain errors doubt- 


X1V PREFACE 


less remain visible in text and in matters of fact, is some- 
thing for which I alone am responsible. An index to 
both series of lectures is intended to accompany the 
Second Series, which will probably appear within a 
year. 


CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS, 
October 30, 1899. 


CONTENTS 


LECTURE I 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS AND THE THEORY 
oF BEING 


LECTURE II 


REALISM AND MysTICISM IN THE HisToRyY oF THOUGHT 


LECTURE II 


Tue INDEPENDENT Berines: A CriTICAL EXAMINATION OF 


REALISM 


LECTURE IV 


Tue Unity or BEING, AND THE MysTIcAL INTERPRETATION 


LECTURE V 


THE OvTCOME oF Mysticism, AND THE WORLD oF MODERN 
CriticaL RATIONALISM 


LECTURE VI 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 


LECTURE VII 


Tur INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 


LECTURE VIII 


Tuer FourtH CoNcEPTION OF BEING 
XV 


PAGE 


47 


91 


141 


185 


225 


265 


345 


Xvi CONTENTS 


LECTURE IX 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 


LECTURE X 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM . 


SUPPLEMENTARY Essay: THE ONz, THE MANY, AND THE 
INFINITE 


Section I. Mr. Bradley’s Problem 


Section Il. The One and the Many within the Realm of 
Thought or of Internal Meanings 


Section III. Theory of the Sources and Consequences of Any 
Recurrent Operation of Thought . 


Section IV. Infinity, Determinateness, and Individuality 


PAGI 


38% 


43] 


47] 
473 


489 


50] 
554 


LECTURE I 


a et — ie @o 
. r < £4 
A OY 
2 
, 
; 
h} ir 
“age 
¥ 
- 
+ i 
f 
J ! 
Bey 
¥ 
t 
. 
% 
« 
‘ 
d "7 ‘ 
: 
_ 
: 


Ag) oY 
sa a | 


ie 


THE WORLD AND THE INDIVIDUAL | 


FIRST SERIES: THE FOUR HISTORICAL CON- 
CEPTIONS OF BEING 


LECTURE I 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS AND THE 
THEORY OF BEING 


In the literature of Natural Religion at least three 
different conceptions of the subject are represented. The 
first of these conceptions regards Natural Religion as a 
search for what a well-known phrase has called “the way 
through Nature to God.” If we accept this conception, . 
we begin by recognizing both the existence of the 
physical world and the validity of the ordinary methods 
and conceptions of the special sciences of nature. We 
undertake to investigate what light, if any, the broader 
generalizations of natural science, when once accepted 
as statements about external reality, throw upon the 
problems of religion. It belongs, for instance, to this 
sort of inquiry to ask: What countenance does the 
present state of science give to the traditional argument 
from Design ? 

The second of our three conceptions views Religion 
less as a doctrine to be proved or disproved through a 
study of the external world than as a kind of conscious- 
ness whose justification lies in its rank amongst the 

3 


4 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


* yarious inner manifestations of our human nature. Man, 
so this conception holds, is essentially a religious being. 
He has religion because his own inmost nature craves it. 
If you wish, then, to justify religion, or even to compre- 
hend it, you must view it, not as a theory to be proved 
or disproved by an appeal to external reality, but rather 

, Asa faith to be estimated through reference to the inner 

“ consciousness of those who need, who create, and who 
enjoy religion. From this point of view the study of 
Natural Religion concerns itself less with proof than with 
confession, with a taxing of interior values, and with a 
description of the religious experience of mankind. A 
somewhat extended interpretation of this point of view 
treats the purely historical study of the various religions 
of mankind as a contribution to our comprehension of 
Natural Religion. 

But a third conception of the study of Natural Relig- 
ion remains. This third view identifies the doctrine 
in question with the fundamental Philosophy of Relig- 
ion. It is the Nature of Things, viewed in the light 
of the most critical examination of our reason, that 
is now the object of an inquiry into Natural Religion. 
The problems at issue are, for this view, those of Aris- 
totle’s Metaphysics, of Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre, of 
Hegel’s Logik, —of all the undertakings that, in the 
history of thought, have most directly attempted the 
contemplation of Being as Being. For our first concep- 
tion the student of Natural Religion, having accepted 
the natural knowledge of his time as valid, and not 
having attempted to delve beneath the foundations of 
that knowledge, seeks to interpret external nature in 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 5 


the light of religious interests. For our second concep- 
tion Natural Religion is viewed simply as the voice of 
human nature itself, whose faith is to be expressed, whose 
ideals are to be recorded, whose will and whose needs are 
to be, above all, consulted and portrayed, since, for this 
view, the consciousness of those who believe in religious 
truth is, when once made articulate, its own apology. 
But, for our third conception, the office of the student of 
Natural Religion is to deal with the most fundamental 
metaphysical problems. He is for this view a thorough- 
going critic of the foundations of our faith, and of the 
means of our insight into the true nature of Reality. 

All these three conceptions, however much they may 
differ, have in common what makes it proper enough to 
view them as conceptions of the study of Natural Relig- 
ion. For they are all three concerned with religion; 
they can all alike be pursued without explicit dependence 
upon any creed as to a revealed religion; and finally, 
they are busied about some relation between the natural 
order of truth and the contents of religious doctrine. 
They differ in the sort of natural truth that forms their 
starting-point, or that limits the scope of the investiga- 
tion which they propose. I suppose that no one of these 
various lines of inquiry will ever come to be wholly 
neglected. But their office is distinct. And I mention 
them here in order all the more clearly to say, at the 
outset, that our own business, in these lectures, is with 
the most neglected and arduous of the methods of 
studying the relations between religion and the ultimate 
problems of the Theory of Being. From the first, to be 
sure, we shall be concerned, in one sense, with human 


/ 


6 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


, nature, as every philosophy has to be concerned. And in 


~ 


the latter half of this course the Philosophy of Nature 
will play a part in our investigation. But the central 
problem of our discussion will be the question: What is 
Reality ? 


I 


In thus stating, in the opening words, the plan of these 
lectures, I do so with a full sense of the shadow that such 
a programme may, at the first glimpse, seem to cast upon 
the prospects of our whole undertaking. It is true that, 
in calling the fundamental problems of the Metaphysic of 
Religion relatively neglected, I do not fail to recognize 
that they are both ancient and celebrated, and that some 
of us may think them even hackneyed. It is certainly 
not uncommon to call them antiquated. But what I 
have meant by the phrase “relatively neglected” is that, 
compared with the more easily accessible fashions of deal- 
ing with Natural Religion, the strictly metaphysical 
treatment less frequently involves that sort of ardent 
hand-to-hand struggle with the genuine issues themselves 
that goes on when men are hopefully interested in a study 
for its own sake. It is one thing to expound, or even to 
assail, the theology of Hegel or of St. Thomas, or to re- 
port any of those various quaint opinions of philosophers 
in which even the popular mind often delights. It is 
another thing to grapple with the issues of life for one’s 
self. The wiser religions have always told us that we 
cannot be saved through the piety of our neighbors, but 
have to work out our own salvation with fear and trem- 
bling. Well, just so the theoretical student of Natural 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS i 


Religion has to learn that he cannot comprehend ultimate 
philosophical truth merely by reading the reports of other 
people’s reasonings, but must do his thinking for himself, 
not indeed without due instruction, but certainly without 
depending wholly upon his text-books. And if this be 
true, then the final issues of religious philosophy may be 
said to be relatively neglected, so long as students are not 
constantly afresh grappling with the ancient problems, 
and giving them renderings due to direct personal contact 
with their intricacies. It is not a question of any needed 
originality of opinion, but it is rather a matter of our 
individual intimacy with these issues. 

And now, in recognizing the fact of the comparative 
neglect of the Theory of Being in the discussions of 
Natural Religion, I recognize also the motives that tend 
to make such an inquiry seem, at the first glimpse, un- 
promising. These motives may be expressed in the forms 
of three objections, namely, first, that such undertakings 
are pretentious, by reason of the dignity and the mystery 
of the topic; secondly, that they are dreary, by reason of 
the subtle distinctions and the airy abstractions involved 
in every such research; and thirdly, that they are op- 
posed, in spirit, to the sort of study for which in our day 
the sciences of experience have given the only worthy 
model. 

Such objections are as inevitable as they are, to lovers _ 
of philosophy, harmless. Philosophy necessarily involves’ 
a good deal of courage; but so does life in general. It is 
pretentious to wrestle with angels; but there are some 
blessings that you cannot win in any other way. Philos- 
ophy is an old affair in human history; but that does 


8 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


not make the effort at individuality in one’s fashion of 
thinking a less worthy ideal for every new mind. As to 
the dreariness of metaphysics, it is always the case, both 
in religion, and in thinking about religion, that, just as 
the letter killeth, and the spirit giveth life, so the mere 
report of tradition is dreary, but the inward life of think- 
ing for one’s self the meaning within or behind the tradi- 
tion constitutes the very coming of the Spirit of Truth 
himself into our own spirits; and that coming of the 
Spirit, in so far as it occurs at all, never seems to any of 
us dreary. As for the fine-drawn distinctions and airy 
abstractions, no distinction is ever too subtle for you, at 
the moment when it occurs to you to make that distinc- 
tion for yourself, and not merely to hear that somebody 
else has made it. And no abstraction seems to you too 
airy in the hour when you rise upon your own wings to 
the region where just that abstraction happens to be an 
element in the concrete fulness of your thoughtful life. 
Now it chances to be a truth of metaphysics, as it is an 
experience of religion, that just when you are most indi- 
vidual, most alone, as it were, in your personal thinking, 
about ultimate and divine matters, you are most com- 
letely one with that universal Spirit of Truth of which 
we just spoke. It is then your personal process of think- 
ing that both gives interest to the subject and secures 
your relation to the Reality. Hence not the universality 
nor yet the ultimate character of the principles of which 
we think, but rather our own sluggishness in thinking, is 
responsible for the supposed dreariness of the Theory of 
Being. As Aristotle observed, that Theory itself is what 
all men most desire. You may in these regions either 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 9 


think or not think the truth; but you cannot think the 
truth without loving it; and the dreariness which men 
often impute to Metaphysics, is merely the dreariness of 
not understanding the subject, —a sort of dreariness for 
which indeed there is no help except learning to under- 
stand. In fact, nobody can ever regret seeing ultimate 
truth. That we shall hereafter find to be, so to speak, 
one of the immediate implications of our very definition 
of Being. When people complain of philosophy as a 
dreary enterprise, they are then merely complaining of 
their own lack of philosophical insight. The lover of 
philosophy can only offer them his sincerest agreement, 
and sympathy, so far as concerns the ground of their own 
complaint. He too shares their complaint, for he is 
human, and finds his own unwisdom dreary. But he is at 
least looking lovingly toward yonder shining light, while 
they walk wearily with their backs to the Celestial City. 
As to the supposed opposition between the methods 
of philosophy and those of the special sciences of experi- 
ence, —it exists, but it does not mean any real oppo- 
‘sition of spirit. Here are two ways of getting insight, 
not two opposed creeds. The very wealth and the 
-growth of modern empirical research furnish especially 
strong reasons for supposing that the time is near 
when the central problems of the Theory of Being shall 
be ready for restatement. Our life does not grow long 
and healthily in one region, without being ready for 
new growth in other regions. The indirect influence 
of special science upon philosophy is sure, but does not 
always mean a logical dependence of philosophy upon 
the empirical results of science. Just so, pure mathe- 


10 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


matical science has no logical dependence upon physics. 
Yet we have all heard how largely physical science has 
influenced the lines of investigation followed by the 
modern mathematicians. Within the mathematical realm 
itself, pure Algebra, when once abstractly defined, is not 
logically dependent upon Geometry for its principles or 
for its theories, yet some theories of modern Algebra 
have actually developed largely under the spell, as it 
were, of ideas of an unquestionable geometrical origin. 
Now a similar relation, I think, will in future find the 
development of pure Philosophy, and in particular of 
Rational Theology, to the progress of the special sci- 
ences, both mathematical and empirical. JI do not 
think it right to regard philosophy merely as a com- 
pendium of the results of special science. Philosophy 
has its own field. But on the other hand, to reflect 
upon the meaning of life and of science (and in such 
thorough-going Reflection philosophy consists), is a pro- 
cess whose seriousness and wealth must grow as our 
human life and science progress. And hence every 
great new advance of science demands a fresh consid- 
eration of philosophic issues, and will insure in the 
end a power to grasp, more critically and more deeply, 
the central problem of Being itself. Hence the more 
we possess of special science, the more hope we ought 
to have for pure Philosophy. 
- 


II 


So much then for the most general definition and 
justification of the proposed scope of these lectures. 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 11 


I cannot forbear to point out the easily recognizable 
fact that, in thus defining the plan before us, I have 
merely tried to adhere, so far as I can, to the pro- 
gramme explicitly laid down by Lord Gifford. A study 
of religion is required of your lecturer, and Lord Gif- 
ford, as appears from the words of his Will, would 
himself have thought, above all, of studying religion 
not only as a matter of purely natural and rational 
knowledge, but primarily as a body of Ontological 
problems and opinions, in other words as, in its theory, 
a branch of the Theory of Being. It is of “God, the 
only Substance,” that your lecturer, if his Ontology so 
far agrees with Lord Gifford’s, will principally speak. 
Well then, I can best work in the spirit of Lord Gif- 
ford’s requirements if I explicitly devote our principal 
attention to the ultimate problems of Ontology, laying 
due stress upon their relations to Religion. 

And now let me venture to sketch, in outline, the 
particular discussions by which I propose to contribute 
my fragment towards a study of the inexhaustible prob- 
lems propounded by Lord Gifford’s Will. Programmes 
in philosophy, as Hegel used to say, mean far less 
than in other enterprises. But even here some sort of 
programme is needed to fix in advance our attention. 

My precise undertaking then, in the following lec- 
tures, is to show what we mean by Being in general, 
and by the special sorts of Reality that we attribute to 
God, to the World, and to the Human Individual. 
These I regard as the problems of the ontology of relig- 
ion. In every step of this undertaking I shall actu- 
ally be, in a psychological and in an historical sense, 


12 ‘THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


dependent, both for my ideas and for their organiza- 
tion, upon this or that philosophical or theological tra- 
dition (well known to every student of philosophy); 
and therefore I must early introduce into my work 
a sketch of certain philosophical traditions in which we 
are to be especially interested. Here, of course, you 
might expect to find, as such an historical introduction 
to our later critical enterprises, either a summary of 
the history of the principal religious ideas, or some 
account of the technical history of the Philosophy of 
Religion itself. Yet for neither of these two very 
natural enterprises shall I have time. My very frag- 
mentary historical discussions will be limited to an 
attempt to depict some of the principal conceptions 
concerning the ultimate nature of Being, in other 
words to sketch the history of what one might call 
the ontological predicate of the expression to be, or to 
be real, used as a means of asserting that something 
exists. I shall dwell upon the nature of Being, because 
to assert that God is, or that the World is, or even, with 
Descartes, that I am, implies that one knows what it 
is to be, or in other words, what the so-called existen- 
tial predicate itself involves. Now it is true that the 
existential predicate, the word zs used to assert the 
real Being of any object, is often viewed as something 
of an absolutely simple, ultimate, and indescribable 
meaning. Yet even if this view were sound, the ulti- 
mate and the simple are, in philosophy, as truly and 
as much topics for reflective study as are the most 
complex and derived ideas of our minds. Moreover, a 
great deal of popular religion seems to involve the 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 13 


notion that it is both easier and more important to know 
that God is, than to know, with any sort of articula- 
tion, What God is, so that if you express even a total 
ignorance of the Divine nature and attribute, there are 
some very traditionally minded people who will hardly 
dare to disagree with you, while if you express the 
least doubt of the assertion that God is, the same peo- 
ple will at once view you with horror as an atheist. 


a Ge 


Now this preference in much popular religious think- 
ing for the ontological predicate in its purity is not an 
altogether rational preference. Yet we shall find that 
it is based upon very deep and even very worthy, if 
vague, instincts. It is true that if I pretend to know 
no attributes whatever, characterizing a given object X, 
I seem to have won very little by believing that X 
nevertheless exists. Yet the fondness for the Unknowable 
in theology has been to some extent supported by the 
dim feeling that even in asserting the bare existence of 
a being, and especially of God, I am already committed 
to extremely important attributes, whose definition, even 
if not yet overt, is already, however darkly, implied in 
my abstract statement. It is interesting, therefore, to 
study historically what men have supposed themselves 
to mean by the ontological predicate. 

The basis having been thus laid in the history of the 
subject, our lectures, at various points in the historical 
summary, will have at some length to undertake a critical 
comparison and analysis of the various meanings of the 
ontological predicate. Such an analysis will constantly 
show us unexpected connections of these meanings with 
the concrete interests of religion. We shall find it with 


— 


14 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


ontology, as it certainly is with ethics. People often re- 
gard moral philosophy as a topic very abstract and dry. 
And yet wherever two or three are gathered together in- 
dulging in gossip about the doings of their neighbors, 
their speech, even if it involves out-and-out scandal, is 
devoted to a more or less critical discussion, to an illus- 
tration, and even to a sort of analysis of what are really 
very deep ethical problems,— problems about what men 
ought to do, and about the intricate relations between law 
and passion in human life. Well, as even the most frivo- 
lous or scandalous gossip really manifests an intense, if 
rude concern, for the primal questions of moral philoso- 
phy, so our children and all our most simple and devout 
souls constantly talk ontology, discourse of being, face 
the central issues of reality, but know it not. Yet once 
face the true connection of abstract theory and daily life, 
and then one easily sees that life means theory,-and that 
you deal constantly, and decisively, with the problems of 
the Theory of Being whenever you utter a serious word. 
This then is the reason why our ontological studies will 
bear directly upon the daily concerns of religion. 

Our discussion of the general meaning and of the rela- 
tive value of the various ontological predicates will, more- 
over, throw light, as we go, upon some of the best known 
of the special issues of the history of theology. We shall 
see, for instance, what has been the real motive that has 
made the doctrine of the speculative Mystics so important 
a factor in the life of the more complex religious faiths. 
We shall see too, in the great historical conflicts between 
the Realistic and the Mystical conceptions of the nature 
of Reality, the source of some of the most important con- 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 15 


troversies concerning the being and attributes of God, 
the existence of the physical world, and the nature of 
human individuality. Thus we shall gradually approach 
a position where we shall learn the inevitableness of a cer- 
tain final conception of the meaning of our ontological 
predicates ; and the result of our critical study will be a 
light that we may not wholly have anticipated, both upon 
the conception of God, and upon our notion of the re- 


lations between God, the World, and the Human Indi- PY 


vidual. With the development of these fundamental 
conceptions, the first of my two series of lectures will 
close. We shall herewith have stated the bases of 
religion. 

The second series I intend first to devote to the appli- 
cation of our fundamental conceptions to the more special 
problems of the nature of the human Ego, the meaning of 
the finite realm called the Physical World, and the inter- 
pretation of Evolution. The vast extent of the discussions 
thus suggested will be limited, in our own case, by the 
very fact that we shall here be attempting merely the 
application of a single very general ontological idea to a 
few problems which we shall view rather as illustrations 
of our central thesis concerning Reality, than as matters 
to be exhaustively considered for their own sake. Hav- 
ing thus sketched our Cosmology, if I may call it such, 
we shall then conclude the whole undertaking by a sum- 
mary discussion of the problems of Good and Evil, of 
Freedom, of Immortality, and of the destiny of the Indi- 
vidual, still reviewing our problems in the light of our 
general conception of Being. The title that I shall have 
given to the whole course of lectures, “ The World and 


ed 


16 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


the Individual ” will thus, I hope, prove to be justified by 
the scope of our discussion in the two divisions of this 
course. 


III 


The plan of the proposed investigation has now been 
set before you in outline. May I next undertake to indi- 
cate a little more precisely not merely what problems we 
are to attempt, but the sort of positive argument that we 
are to use, and the kind of result that we may hope to 
reach? A philosophy must indeed be judged not by its 
theses, but by its methods; and not upon the basis of 
mere summaries, but after a consideration of the details 
of its argument. Yet it helps to make clearer the way 
through an intricate realm of inquiry if one first surveys, 
as it were, from above, the country through which, in 
such an enterprise, the road is to pass. I propase then, to 
indicate at once, and in the rest of this lecture, where the 

‘ central problem of the Theory of Being lies, and by what 
method I think that this problem is, in a general sense, to 
be solved. To state the proposed solution, however, even 
in the most abstract and necessarily unconvincing fashion, 
is to arouse comments as to the meaning of this thesis, as 
to its consequences, and, above all, in a discussion like the 
present, as to its bearing upon the more practical interests 
of religion. I think that we may be helped to an under- 
standing hereafter, if I attempt at once to call out, and, 
by anticipation, to answer, a few such comments. 

I am one of those who hold that when you ask the 
question : What is an Idea? and: How can Ideas stand 

in any true relation to Reality? you attack the world: 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 17 


knot in the way that promises most for the untying of its 
meshes. This way is, of course, very ancient. It is the 
way of Plato, and, in a sense, already the way of his Mas- 
ter. It is, in a different sense, the way of Kant. If you 
view philosophy in this fashion, you subordinate the study 


of the World as Fact to a reflection upon the World as” 


Idea. Begin by accepting, upon faith and tradition, the 
mere brute Reality of the World as Fact, and there you 
are, sunk deep in an ocean of mysteries. The further you 
then proceed in the study of that world, the longer seems 
the way to God or to clearness, unless you from the start 
carry with you some sort of faith, perhaps a very blind 
and immediate faith, that God reigns, or that the facts in 
themselves are somehow clear. The World as Fact sur- 
prises you with all sorts of strange contrasts. Now it 
reveals to you, in the mechanics and physics of the stars 
or in the processes of living beings, vast realms of marvel- 
lous reasonableness ; now it bewilders you, in the endless 
diversities of natural facts, by a chaos of unintelligible 
fragments and of scattered events ; now it lifts up your 
heart with wondrous glimpses of ineffable goodness ; and 
now it arouses your wrath by frightful signs of cruelty 
and baseness. Conceive-it as a realm for pure scientific 
theory ; and, so far as your knowledge reaches, it is full 
at once of the show of a noble order, and of hints of a 
vain chance. On the other hand, conceive it as a realm 
of values, attempt to estimate its worth, and it baftles you 
with caprices, like a charming and yet hopelessly way- 
ward child, or like a bad fairy. That is the world of 
brute natural fact as you, with your present form of con- 
sciousness, are forced to observe it, if you try to get any 
c 


ms 


18 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


total impression of its behavior. And so, this World of 
Fact daily announces itself to you as a defiant mystery — 

$ a mystery such as Job faced, and such as the latest agnos- 
tic summary of empirical results, in their bearing upon 
our largest human interests, or such as even the latest 
pessimistic novel will no doubt any day present afresh to 
you, in all the ancient unkindliness that belongs to human 
fortune. 

The World as Fact is, then, for all of us, persistently 
baffling, unless we find somewhere else the key to it. 
The philosophers of the Platonic type have, however, long 
ago told us that this defect of our world of fact is due, at 
bottom, simply to the fault of our human type of con- 
sciousness. And hence a whole realm of philosophical 
inquiry has been devoted, in the best ages of speculative 

_ thinking, to a criticism of this human type of conscious- 
ness itself. Upon such a criticism, Plato founded his 
conception of the Ideal World. By such criticism, Ploti- 
nus sought to find the way upwards, through Soul to the 
realm of the Intellect, and beyond the Intellect to his 
Absolute “One.” Through a similar criticism, Scholastic 
doctrine attempted to purify our human type of con- 
sciousness, until it should reach the realm of genuine 
spirituality, and attain an insight but a little lower than 
that of the conceived angelic type of intelligence. For 
all such thinkers, the raising of our type of consciousness 
to some higher level meant not only the winning of in- 
sight into Reality, but also the attainment of an inner and 
distinctly religious ideal. To a later and less technically 
pious form of thinking, one sees the transition in Spinoza, 
who was at once, as we now know, a child of Scholasti- 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 19 


cism, and a student of the more modern physical concep- 
tions of his day,—at once a mystic, a realist, and a partisan 
of nature. For Spinoza too, it is our type of finite con- 
sciousness that makes our daily world of fact, or, as he 
prefers to say, of imagination, seem chaotic ; and the way 
to truth still is to be found through an inner and reflect- 
ive purification of experience. A widely different inter- 
pretation is given to the same fundamental conception, by 
Kant. But in Kant’s case also, remote from his interests 
asis anything savoring of mysticism, the end of philosoph- 
ical insight is again the vindication of a higher form of 
consciousness. For Kant, however, this is the conscious- 
ness of the Moral Reason, which recognizes no facts as 
worthy of its form of assurance, except the facts implied 
by the Good Will, and by the Law of the good will. All 
these ways then of asserting the primacy of the World as 
Idea over the World as Fact, agree in dealing with the 
problem of Reality from the side of the means through 
which we are supposed to be able to attain reality, that is, 
from the side of the Ideas. 
Re 


IV 


But if this is to be the general nature of our own 
inquiry also, then everything for us will depend upon 
the fundamental questions, already stated, viz. first : 
What is an Idea? and second: How can an Idea be 
related to Reality? In the treatment of both these 
questions, however, various methods and theories at 
once come into sight. And, to begin with one of the 
favorite issues, namely the fundamental definition of the 


20 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


word “idea” itself, there is a well-known tendency in a 
good deal of philosophy, both ancient and modern, 
either to define an idea, as an Image, destined to pic- 
ture facts external to the idea, or else, in some other 
way, to lay stress upon the eaternally cognitive or 
“representative” value of an idea as its immediately 
obvious and its most essential aspect.) From this 
point of view, men have conceived that the power of 
ideas to know a Reality external to themselves, was 
indeed either something too obvious to excite inquiry, 
or else an ultimate and inexplicable power. “Ideas 
fexist,” says this view, “and they exist as knowing facts 
\external to themselves. And this is their funda- 
mental character.” Now I myself shall, in these lectures, 
regard this power of ideas to cognize facts external to 
themselves not as a primal fact of existence but as 
an aspect of ideas which decidedly needs reflective con- 
sideration, and a very critical restatement. Hence I 
cannot here begin by saying: “Ideas are states of mind 
that image facts external to themselves.” That would | 
be useful enough as a definition of ideas in a Psy- 
chology of Cognition. For such a Psychology would 
presuppose what we are here critically to consider, 
namely, the very possibility of a cognition of Being. 
But, for the purpose of our present theory, the defini- 
tion of the term “idea” must be made in such wise as 
not formally to presuppose the power of ideas to have 
cognitive relations to outer objects. 

Moreover, in attempting a definition of the general 
term “idea,” while I shall not be attempting a psychology 
of cognition, I shall myself be guided by certain psy- 


YORK COLLEGE 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 21 
Library No.2 3/4 


Sanne 2m wm 


chological analyses of the mere contents of our con- 
sciousness,— analyses which have become prominent 
in recent discussion. What is often called the active 
and sometimes also the motor aspect of our mental 
life, has been much dwelt upon of late. This is no 
place, and at present we have no need, for a psycho- 
logical theory of the origin or of the causes of what 
is called activity, but as a fact, you have in your men- 
tal life a sort of consciousness accompanying the pro- 
cesses by which, as the psychologists are accustomed to 
say, you adjust your organism to its environment; and 
this sort of consciousness differs, in some notable fea- 
tures, from what takes place in your mind in so far as 
the mere excitation of your sense organs by the outer 
world is regarded apart from the experiences that you 
have when you are said to react upon your impres- 
sions. The difference between merely seeing your 
friend, or hearing his voice, and consciously or actively 
regarding him as your friend, and behaving towards 
him in a friendly way, is a difference obvious to con- 
sciousness, whatever your theory of the sources of men- 
tal activity. Now this difference between outer sense 
impressions, or images derived from such impressions, 
and active responses to sense impressions, or ideas 
founded upon such responses, is not merely a difference 
between what is sometimes called the intellect, and 
what is called the will. For, as a fact, the intellectual 
life is as much bound up with our consciousness of our 
acts as is the will. There is no purely intellectual life, 
just as there is no purely voluntary life. The differ- 
ence between knowledge and will, so far as it has a 


. 


22 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


metaphysical meaning, will concern us much later. For 
the present, it is enough to note that your intelligent 
ideas of things never consist of mere images of the 
things, but always involve a consciousness of how you 
propose to act towards the things of which you have 


-ideas. A sword is an object that you would propose 


to use, or to regard in one way, while a pen is to be 
used in another; your idea of the object involves the 
memory of the appropriate act. Your idea of your 
friend differs from your idea of your enemy by virtue 
of your consciousness of your different attitude and 


‘\\ intended behaviour towards these objects. Complex 
“scientific ideas, viewed as to their conscious signifi- 


cance, are, as Professor Stout! has well said, plans of 
action, ways of constructing the objects of your scieu- 
tific consciousness. ‘Intelligent ideas then, belong, so 
to speak, to the motor side of your life rather than to 
the merely sensory.’ This was what Kant meant by the 
spontaneity of the understanding. To be sure, a true 
scientific idea is a mental construction supposed to cor- 
respond with an outer object, or to imitate that object. 
But when we try to define the idea in itself, as a con- 
scious fact, our best means is to lay stress upon the sort 
of will, or active meaning, which any idea involves for 
the mind that forms the idea. 

By the word “ Idea,” then, as we shall use it when, after 
having criticised opposing theories, we come to state, in 
these lectures, our own thesis, I shall mean in the end any 
state of consciousness, whether simple or complex, which, 
when present, is then and there viewed as at least the par- 


1 Stout, Analytic Psychology, Vol. II, Chap. VIII, especially pp. 114, 124. 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 23 


tial expression or embodiment of a single conscious pur- 
pose. I shall indeed say nothing for the present as to what. 
causes an idea. (But I shall assert that an idea appears in 
consciousness as having the significance of an act of will 


I shall also dwell upon the inner purpose, and not upon.; 


the external relations, as the primary and essential feature 


of an idea. (For instance, you sing to yourself a melody, - 


you are then and there conscious that the melody as you 


hear yourself singing it, partially fulfils and embodies a * 


purpose. \Well, in this sense, your melody, at the mo- 


ment when you sing it, or even when you silently listen ©» 
to its imagined presence, constitutes a musica} idea, and is *. 


often so called. You may so regard the melody without 


3 Ay “ny 
‘ ; 


SS: 


yet explicitly dwelling upon the externally cognitive™ : 


value of the musical idea, as the representative of a melody 


sung or composed by somebody else. You may even sup- 
pose the melody original with yourself, unique, and sung 
now for the first time. Even so, it would remain just as 
truly a musical idea, however partial or fragmentary ; for 
it would then and there, when sung, or even when in- 
wardly heard, partly embody your own conscious purpose. 
In the same sense, any conscious act, at the moment when 
you perform it, not merely expresses, but is, in my present 
sense, an idea. To count ten is thus also an idea, if the 
counting fulfils and embodies, in however incomplete and 
fragmentary a way, your conscious purpose, and that 
quite apart from the fact that counting ten also may 
enable you to cognize the numerical character of facts ex- 
ternal to the conscious idea of ten itself. (In brief, an 
idea, in my present definition may, and, as a fact always 
does, if you please, appear to be representative of a fact 


24 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


existent beyond itself. ; But the primary character, which 
makes it an idea, is not this its representative character, 
is not its vicarious assumption of the responsibility of 
standing for a being beyond itself, but is its inner charac- 
ter as relatively fulfilling the purpose (that is, as present- 
ing the partial fulfilment of the purpose), which is in the 
consciousness of the moment wherein the idea takes place. 
It is in this sense that we speak of any artistic idea, as 
present in the creative mind of the artist. I propose, in 
stating my own view hereafter, to use the word “idea” in 
this general sense. _/ 

Well, this definition of the primary character of an 
idea, enables me at once to deal with a conception which 
will play no small part in our later discussions. I refer 
to the very conception of the Meaning of an idea. One 
very fair way to define an idea, had we chosen to use that 
way, might have been to say: (An Idea is any state of 
mind that has a conscious meaning. ) Thus, according to 
my present usage of the word “ idea,” a color, when merely 
seen, is in so far, for consciousness, no idea. A brute 
noise, merely heard, is no idea. But a melody, when 
sung, a picture, when in its wholeness actively appreci- 
ated, or the inner memory of your friend now in your 
mind, is an idea. For each of these latter states means 
something to you at the instant when you get it present 
to consciousness. But now, what is this meaning of any 
| idea? What does one mean by a meaning? To this 
question, I give, for the instant, an intentionally partial 
answer. I have just said that an idea is any state of 
mind, or complex of states, that, when present, is con- 
sciously viewed as the relatively completed embodiment, 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS) 25 


and therefore already as the partial fulfilment of a pur- 
pose. Now this purpose, just in so far as it gets a pres- 
ent conscious embodiment in the contents and in the form 
of the complex state called the idea, constitutes what I 
shall hereafter call the Internal Meaning of the Idea. Or, 
to repeat, the state or complex of states called the idea, 
presents to consciousness the expressed although in gen- 
eral the incomplete fulfilment of a purpose. In presence 
of this fulfilment, one could, as it were, consciously say: 
“ That is what I want, and just in so far I have it. The 
purpose of singing or of imagining the melody is what 
I want fulfilled; and, in this musical idea, I have it 
at least partially fulfilled.” | Well, this purpose, when 
viewed as fulfilled through the state called the idea, is 
the internal meaning of the idea. Or yet once more,—to 
distinguish our terms a little more sharply, + in advance 
of the presence of the idea in consciousness, one could ab- 
stractly speak of the purpose as somewhat not yet fulfilled./ 
Hereupon let there come the idea as the complex of con- 
scious states, the so-called act wherein this purpose gets, 
as it were, embodied, and relatively speaking, accom- 
plished. Then, finally, we shall have the internal meaning 
of the idea, and this internal meaning of the completed idea 
is the purpose viewed as so far embodied in the idea, 
the soul, as it were, which the idea gives body. Any 
idea then, viewed as a collection of states, must have its 
internal meaning, since, being an idea, it does in some de- 
gree embody its purpose. And our two terms, “ purpose 
embodied in the idea,” and “internal meaning of the idea,” 
represent the same subject-matter viewed in two aspects. 
The_purpose which the idea, when it comes, is to fulfil, 


26 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


may first be viewed apart from the fulfilment. Then it 
remains, so far, mere purpose. Or it may be viewed as 
expressed and so far partially accomplished by means of 
the complex state called the idea, and then it is termed 
“the present internal meaning of this state.” 


V 


So now we have defined what we mean by an idea, and 
what we mean by the internal meaning of an idea. But 
ideas often seem to have a meaning, yes, as one must add, 
finite ideas always undertake or appear to have a mean- 
ing, that is not exhausted by this conscious internal 
meaning presented and relatively fulfilled at the moment 
when the idea is there for our finite view. The melody 
sung, the artist’s idea, the thought of your absent friend 
—a thought on which you love to dwell: all these not 
merely have their obvious internal meaning, as meeting a 
conscious purpose by their very presence, but also they at 
least appear to have that other sort of meaning, that ref- 
erence beyond themselves to objects, that cognitive rela- 
tion to outer facts, that attempted correspondence with 
outer facts, which many accounts of our ideas regard as 
their primary, inexplicable, and ultimate character. I 
call this second, and, for me, still problematic and derived 
aspect of the nature of ideas, their apparently External 
Meaning. In this sense it is that I say, “The melody 
sung by me not only is an idea internally meaning the 
embodiment of my purpose at the instant when I sing 
it, but also is an idea that means, and that in this sense 
externally means, the object called, say, a certain theme 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 27 


which Beethoven composed.” In this same sense, your 
idea of your absent friend, is, for my definition, an idea 
primarily, because you now fulfil some of your love for 
dwelling upon your inner affection for your friend by 
. getting the idea present to mind. But you also regard it 
as an idea which, in the external sense, is:said to mean 
the real being called your friend, in so far as the idea is 
said to refer to that real friend, and to resemble him. 
This external meaning, I say, appears to be very different 
from the internal meaning, and wholly to transcend the 
latter. LA 

By thus first distinguishing sharply between the con- 
scious internal meaning of an idea and its apparently 
external meaning, we get before us an important way of 
stating the problem of knowledge or, in other words, the 
problem of the whole relation between Idea and Being. 
We shall find this not only a very general, but a very 
fundamental, and, as I believe, despite numerous philo- 
sophical discussions, still a comparatively neglected way. 
And in problems of this kind so much turns upon the 
statement of the issue, that I must be excused for thus 
dwelling at length, at this early stage, upon the precise 
sense in which we are to employ our terms. 

Plainly, then, whoever studies either a special science, 
or a problem of general metaphysics, is indeed concerned 
with what he then and there views as the external mean- 
ing of certain ideas. And an idea, when thus viewed, ap- 
pears as if it were essentially a sort of imitation or image 
of a being, and this being, the external object of our 
thoughtful imitation, appears to be, in so far, quite separate 
from these our ideas that imitate its characters or that 


28 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


attempt to correspond to them. From such a point of 
view, our ideas seemed destined to perform a task which is 
externally set for them by the real world. I count, but 
I count, in ordinary life, what I take to be real objects, 
existent quite apart from my counting. Suppose that I 
count ships seen from the shore. ‘There, says common 
sense, are the ships, sailing by themselves, and quite indif- 
ferent to whether anybody counts them or not. In ad- 
vance of the counting, the ships, in so far as they are a 
real collection, have their number. This common sense 
also presupposes. / Let there be seen, yonder, on the sea, 
nine ships or ten; this number of the real ships is in 
itself determinate. It does not result from my counting, 
but is the standard for the latter to follow. / The numer- 
ical ideas of anybody who counts the ships must either 
repeat the preéxistent facts, or else fail to report those 
facts accurately. That alternative seems absolute and 
final. The question how anybody ever comes to count 
ships at all, is a question for psychology. But there 
remains for the seeker after metaphysical truth, just as 
much as for the man of common sense, the apparently 
sharp alternative: Either actual ships, whose multitude 
is just what it happens to be, whose number preéxists, in 
advance of any counting, are correctly represented by the 
ideas of one who happens to be able to count, or else these 
ships are incorrectly counted. In the latter case we seem 
to be forced to say that the counting process misses its 
external aim. In the former case we say that the ideas 
expressed by the one who counts are true. But in both 
cases alike the ideas in question thus appear to be true or 
false by virtue of their external meaning, by virtue of the 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 29 


fact that they either correspond or do not correspond to 
facts which are themselves no part of the ideas. This 
simple instance of the ships and of the ideas of a man 
who sits watching and counting the ships, is obviously 
typical of all instances of the familiar relation of ideas to 
Being, as the metaphysic of common sense views Being, or 
of the relation of ideas to what we have here called the 
objects of their external meaning. That ideas have such 
external meanings, that they do refer to facts existent 
wholly apart from themselves, that their relation to these 
facts is one of successful correspondence or of error-pro- 
ducing non-correspondence, that the ideas in so far aim, 
not merely to embody, like the musical ideas just exem- 
plified, an internal purpose, but also to imitate, in the 
form of their conscious structure and in the relationship 
of their own elements, the structure and relationship of a 
world of independent facts, — what could possibly seem, 
from such a common-sense point of view, more obvious 
than all this? And if common sense presupposes that 
ideas have such external meanings, how much more does 
not natural science appear to involve the recognition of 
this essentially imitative function of ideas ? 
In any special natural science, a scientific desorinien 
appears as an adjustment, express, conscious, exact, of the 
internal structure of a system of ideas to the external 
structure of a world of preéxistent facts; and the busi- 
ness of science has been repeatedly defined, of late years, 
as simply and wholly taken up with theexact description 
of the facts of nature.) Now the world of Being, when 
viewed in this light, appears to mean simply the same as 
the fact world, the external object of our ideas, the object 


30 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


that ideas must imitate, whatever their internal purpose, 
unless they want to be false. But for this very reason, 
no study of the inner structure of ideas, of their conscious 
conformity to their internal purpose, can so far promise 
to throw any direct light upon their success in fulfilling 
their external purpose. Or, as people usually say, you 
cannot make out the truth about facts by studying your 
“mere ideas.” And so, as people constantly insist, no de- 
votion to the elaboration of the internal meaning of your 
own ideas can get you in presence of the truth about 
Being. The world of Being is whatever it happens to be, 
as the collection of ships is what it is, before you count. 
Internal purposes cannot predetermine external con- 
formity to truth. You cannot evolve facts out of your 
inner consciousness. Ideas about Being are not to be 
justified like melodies, by their internal conformity to 
the purpose of the moment when they consciously live. 
They must submit to standards that they themselves in 
no sense create. Such is the burden of common sense, 
and of special science, when they tell us about this aspect 
of the meaning of our ideas. 

I state thus explicitly a very familiar view as to the 
whole externally cognitive function and value of ideas. 
I mean thus to emphasize the primary appearance of 
hopeless contrast between the internal purpose and the 
external validity of ideas. In fact, nothing could seem 
sharper than the contrast thus indicated between the 
melody on the one hand, the musical idea, as it comes to 
mind and is enjoyed for its beauty while it passes before 
consciousness, and the counting of the ships, on the other 
hand, —a process whose whole success depends upon its 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 31 


conformity to what seem to be absolutely indifferent and 
independent outer facts. In the one case we have the 
embodiment of a conscious inner purpose, —a purpose 
which is won through the very act of the moment, and by 
virtue of the mere presence of a certain series of mental 
contents. In the other case we have a conformity to 
outer truth, + a conformity that no inner clearness, no 
well-wrought network of cunning ideal contrivance, can 
secure, unless the idea first submits to the authority of 
external existence! ; 

And yet, sharp as is this apparent contrast, every stu- 
dent of philosophy knows how profound are also the 
motives that have led some philosophers to doubt whether 
such contrast can really be as ultimate as it seems. After 
all, the counting of the ships is valid or invalid not alone 
because of the supposed independent being of the ships, 
but also because of the conscious act whereby just this 
collection of ships was first consciously selected for count- 
ing. After all, then, no idea is true or is false except with 
reference to the object that this very idea first means to 
select as its own object. Apart from what the idea itself 
thus somehow assigns as its own task, even that indepen- 
dent being yonder, if you assume such being, cannot de- 
termine the success or failure of the idea. It is the idea 
then that first says: “I mean this or that object. That 
is for my object. Of that I am thinking. To that I 
want to conform.” And apart from such conscious se- 
lection, apart from such ideal predetermination of the 
object on the part of the idea, apart from such free volun- 
tary submission of the idea to its self-imposed task, the 
object itself, the fact world, in its independence, can do 


° 


382 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


nothing either to confirm or refute the idea. Now in 
this extremely elementary consideration, namely, in the 
consideration that unless ideas first voluntarily bind 
themselves to a given task, and so, by their internal pur- 
pose, already commit themselves to a certain selection of 
its object, they are neither true nor false, — in this con- 
sideration, I say, there may be hidden consequences that 
we shall later find momentous for the whole theory of 
Being and of truth. This consideration, that despite the 
seemingly hopeless contrast between internal and ex- 
ternal meaning, ideas really possess truth or falsity only 
by virtue of their own selection of their task as ideas, is 
essentially the same as the consideration that led Kant to 
regard the understanding as the creator of the phenome- 
nal nature over which science gradually wins conscious 
control, and that led Hegel to call the world the embodied 
Idea. This consideration, then, is not novel, but I believe 
it to be fundamental and of inexhaustible importance. I 
believe also that some of its aspects are still far too much 
neglected. And I propose to devote these lectures to its 
elaboration, and to a study of its relations to the various 
conceptions of Reality which have determined the scien- 
tific and religious life of humanity. 

In any case I say, then, at the outset, that the whole 
problem of the nature of Being will for us, in the end, 
reduce to the question: How is the internal meaning 
of ideas consistent with their apparently external mean- 
ing? Or again: How is it possible that an idea, which is 
an idea essentially and primarily because of the inner 
purpose that it consciously fulfils by its presence, also 
possesses a meaning that in any sense appears to go beyond 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 383 


this internal purpose? We shall, in dealing with this 
problem, first find, by a development of the consideration 
just barely indicated, that the external meaning must 
itself be interpreted, not primarily in the sense of mere 
dependence upon the brute facts, but in terms of the 
inner purpose of the idea itself. We shall, perhaps to 
our surprise, reach the seemingly paradoxical and essen- 
tially idealistic thesis that no being in heaven or in earth, 
or in the waters under the earth, has power to give to an 
idea any purpose unless, the idea itself, as idea, as a frag- 
ment of life, as a conscious thrill, so to speak, of inner 
meaning, first somehow truly learns so to develope its 
internal meaning as to assign to itself just that specific 
purpose. In other words, we shall find that while, for 
our purposes, we, the critics, must first sharply distin- 
guish the apparently external purpose that, as it were, 
from without, we assign to the idea, from the internal 
meaning of the idea, as present to a passing conscious 
instant, still, this our assignment of the external purpose, 
this our assertion that the idea knows or resembles, or 
imitates, or corresponds to, fact wholly beyond itself, 
must in the end be justified, if at all, by appeal to the 
truth, z.e. to the adequate expression and development of 
the internal meaning of the idea itself. In other words, 
we shall find either that the external meaning is genu- 
inely continuous with the internal meaning, and is in- 
wardly involved in the latter, or else that the idea has no 
external meaning at all./ In brief, our abstract sundering 
of the apparently external from the consciously internal 
meaning of the idea must be first made very sharp, as we 
have just deliberately made it, only in order that later, 


D 


attain el 


34 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


when we learn the true relations, we may come to see the 
genuine and final unity of internal and external meaning. 
Our first definition of the idea seems to make, yes, in its 
abstract statement deliberately tries to make, as you see, 
the external meaning something sharply contrasted with 
the internal meaning. Our final result will simply reab- 
sorb the secondary aspect, the external meaning, into the 
completed primary aspect, —the completely embodied in- 
ternal meaning of the idea. We shall assert, in the end, 
that the final meaning of every complete idea, when fully 
developed, must be viewed as wholly an internal mean- 
ing, and that all apparently external meanings become 
consistent with internal meanings only by virtue of thus 
coming to be viewed as aspects of the true internal 
meaning. 

(To illustrate this thesis by the cases already used: The 
melody sung or internally but voluntarily heard, in the 
moment of memory, is, for the singer’s or hearer’s con- 
sciousness, a musical idea. It has so far its internal 
meaning. /And to say so much first means simply that to 
the singer, as he sings, or to the silent memory of a musi- 
cal imagination, the present melody imperfectly and 
partially fulfils a conscious purpose, the purpose of the 
flying moment. On the other hand, the melody may be 
viewed by a critic as an idea corresponding to external 
facts. The singer or hearer too may himself say as he 
sings or remembers: “This is the song my beloved 
sang,” or “ This is the theme that Beethoven composed in 
his Fidelio.” In such a case, the idea is said to have its 
apparently external meaning, and this, its reference to 
facts not now and here given, is the idea’s general rela- 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 35 


tion to what we call true Being. And such reference not 
only seems at first very sharply different from the inter- 
nal meaning, but must, for our purposes, at first be sun- 
dered by definition from that internal meaning even more 
sharply than common sense distinguishes the two. For 
abstract sundering is, in us mortals, the necessary prelim- 
inary to grasping the unity of truth. The internal mean- 
ing is a purpose present in the passing moment, but here 
imperfectly embodied. Common sense calls it, as such, 
an expression of transient living intent, an affair of Will. 
Psychology explains the presence and the partial present 
efficacy of this purpose by the laws of motor processes, of 
Habit, or of what is often called association Ethical 
doctrine finds in such winning of inner purposes the 
region where Conscience itself, and the pure moral Inten- 
tion, are most concerned. On the other hand, the appar- 
ently external meaning of the idea is at first said to be an 
affair of the externally cognitive intellect, and of the hard 
facts of an independently real world. Not purpose, but 
the unchangeable laws of the Reality, not the inner life, 
but the Universe, thus at first seems from without to as- 
sign to the idea whatever external meaning it is to obtain. 
Subject and Object are here supposed to meet, — to meet 
in this fact that ideas have their external meaning, — but 
to meet as foreign powers. 

Now we are first to recognize, even more clearly, I 
say, than common sense, the sharpness of this apparent 
antithesis between the conscious internal and the seem- 
ingly external meaning. Here, as I have said, is indeed 
the world-knot. We are to recognize the problem, but 
we are, nevertheless, to answer it in the end (when we 


36 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


get behind the appearances, and supplement the abstrac. 
tions), by the thesis that at bottom, the external mean- 
ing is only apparently external, and, in very truth, is 
but an aspect of the completely developed internal mean- 
ing. We are to assert that just what the internal 
meaning already imperfectly but consciously is, namely, 
purpose relatively fulfilled, just that, and nothing else, 
the apparently external meaning when truly compre- 
hended also proves to be, namely, the entire expression 
of the very Will that is fragmentarily embodied in the 
life of the flying conscious idea, —the fulfilment of the 
very aim that is hinted in the instant. Or, in other 
words, we are to assert that, in the case mentioned, the 
artist who composed, the beloved who sang the melody, 
are in verity present, as truly implied aspects of meaning, 
and as fulfilling a purpose, in the completely developed 
internal meaning of the very idea that now, in its fini- 
tude, seems to view them merely as absent. I deliber- 
ately choose, in this way, a paradoxical illustration. The 
argument must hereafter justify the thesis. I can here 
only indicate what we hereafter propose to develope as 
our theory of the true relation of Idea and Being. It 
will also be a theory, as you see, of the unity of the 
whole very World Life itself. 

In brief, by considerations of this type, we propose to 
answer the question: What is to be? by the assertion 
that: To be means simply to express, to embody the 
complete internal meaning of a certain absolute system 
of ideas, —a system, moreover, which is genuinely im- 
plied in the true internal meaning or purpose of every 
finite idea, however fragmentary. j 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 87 


VI 


You may observe already, even in this wholly pre- 
liminary sketch of the particular form of Idealism to 
be developed in these lectures, two principal features. 
First, Our account of the nature of Being, and of the 
relation between Idea and Being, is to be founded 
explicitly upon a theory of the way in which ideas 
possess their own meaning. Secondly, Our theory of 
the nature of Meaning is to be founded upon a defini- 
tion in terms of Will and Purpose. We do not indeed 
say, Our will causes our ideas. \But we do say, Our 
ideas now imperfectly embody our will. And the real 
world is just our whole will embodied. / 

I may add, at once, two further remarks concerning 
the more technical aspects of the argument by which we 
shall develope our thesis. The first remark is, that the 
process by which we shall pass from a study of the first 
or fragmentary internal meaning of finite ideas to that 
conception of their completed internal meaning in terms 
of which our theory of Being is to be defined, is a 
process analogous to that by which modern mathematical 
speculation has undertaken to deal with its own concepts 
of the type called by the Germans Grenzbegriffe, or 
Limiting Concepts, or better, Concepts ‘of Limits. \As a 
fact, one of the first things to be noted about our con- 
ception of Being is that, as a matter of Logic, it is the 


concept..of a limit, namely \of that limit to which the 
internal meaning or purpose of an idea tends as it grows 


consciously determinate. \Our Being resembles the con- 
cept of the so-called irrational numbers. Somewhat 


38 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


as they are related to the various so-called “funda- 
mental series” of rational numbers, somewhat in that 
way is Being related to the various thinking processes 
that approach it, as it were, from without, and under- 
take to define it as at once their external meaning, and 
their unattainable goal. That which is, is for thought, 
at once the fulfilment and the limit of the thinking 
process. /The thinking process itself is a process 
whereby at once meanings tend to become determinate, 
and external objects tend to become internal mean- 
ings. Let my process of determining my own internal 
meaning simply proceed to its own limit, and then I 
shall face Being. I shall not only imitate my object as 
another, and correspond to it from without tal shall 
become one with it, and so internally possess it. \ This 
is a very technical statement of our present thesis, and 
of our form of Idealism,—a statement which only our 
later study can justify. But in making that statement 
here, I merely call attention to the fact that the process 
of defining limits is one which mathematical science 
has not only developed, but in large measure, at the 
present time, prepared for philosophical adaptation, so 
that to view the concept of Being in this light is to 
approach it with an interest for which recent research 
has decidedly smoothed the way. We shall meet both 
with false ways of defining the limit, and with true 
ways. 

My second remark is closely related to the first, but 
is somewhat less technical, and involves a return to the 
practical aspects of our intended theory. I have just 
said that the development of the conception of an idea 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS — 8y 


whose internal meaning is fully completed, and whose 
relation to Being is even thereby defined, will involve 
a discussion of the way in which our internal, our frag- 
mentary finite meanings, as they appear in our flying 
moments, are to attain a determined character or are to 
become, as Hegel would say,bestimmt, so as to pass from 
vagueness to precision. Our theory, as you already see, 
will identify finite ignorance of Reality with finite vague- 
ness of meaning, will assert that the very Absolute, in 
all its fulness of life, is even now the object that you 
really mean by your fragmentary passing ideas, and that 
the defect of your present human form of momentary 
consciousness lies in the fact. that you just now do not 
know precisely what you mean. Increase of knowledge, 
therefore, would really involve increase of determination 
in your present meaning. The universe you have always 
with you, as your true internal meaning. Only this, 
your meaning, you now, in view of the defect of your 
momentary form of consciousness, realize vaguely, 
abstractly, without determination. And, as we have 
further asserted, this indetermination of your ideas also 
involves a hesitant indeterminateness of your momentary 
will, a vagueness of conscious ideal as well as of idea, 
a failure not only to possess, but wholly to know what 
you want. To pass to your real and completed meaning, 
to the meaning implied in this very moment’s vagueness, 
would be a passage to absolute determinateness. So to 
pass would therefore be to know with full determination 
truths of an often desired type, truths such as: What 
you yourself are; and, who you are, as this individual ; 
what this individual physical fact now before you is. 


ress. 


40 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Yes, it would be to know what the whole individual 
Being called the World is; and who the Individual of 
Individuals, namely the Absolute, or God himself, is. 
Just such final determinateness, just such precision, 
definiteness, finality of meaning, constitutes that limit 
of your own internal meaning which our theory will 
hereafter seek to characterize. And so my present re- 
mark hereupon is that, in following our enterprise of 
defining Being, we shall not be looking for mere abstract 
principles, but we shall be seeking for the most concrete 
objects in the world, namely for Individual Beings, 
and for the system that links them in one Indi- 
vidual Whole,—for Individuals viewed as the limits 
towards which all ideas of universal meanings tend, and 
for the Absolute as himself simply the highest fulfilment 
of the very category of Individuality, the Individual of 
Individuals. 

Will, meaning, individuality, these will prove to be 
the constant accompaniments and the outcome of our 
whole theory of ideas, of thought, and of being. ) And 
in the light of these remarks we may now be able to 
anticipate more precisely the form of doctrine to which 
these lectures are to be devoted. 

Idealism in some sense is indeed familiar in modern 
doctrine. And familiar also to readers of idealistic 
literature is some such assertion, as that the whole of 
Reality is the expression of a single system of thought, the 
fulfilment of a single conscious Purpose, or the realm of 
one internally harmonized Experience. But what the 
interested learners ask of idealistic teachers to-day is, as 
you are all aware, a more explicit statement as to just 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 41 


how Thought and Purpose, Idea and Will, and above all 
finite thought and will, and absolute thought and will, 
are, by any idealist, to be conceived as related to each 
other. My definitions in the foregoing have been 
deliberately intended to prepare the way for our later 
direct dealing with just these issues. An idea, in the 
present discussion, is first of all to be defined in terms 
of the internal purpose, or, if you choose, in terms of the 
Will, that it expresses consciously, if imperfectly, at the 
instant when it comes to mind. Its external meaning, 
its externally cognitive function as a knower of outer 
Reality, is thus in these lectures to be treated as ex- 
plicitly secondary to this its internal value, this its 
character as meaning the conscious fulfilment of an end, 
the conscious expression of an interest, of a desire, Ola 
volition. To be sure, thus to define, as we shall see, is not 
to separate knowing from willing, but it is rather to 
lay stress, from the outset, upon the unity of knowledge 
and will, first in our finite consciousness, and later, as we 
shall see, in the Absolute. Our present statement of our 
doctrine is therefore not to be accused, at any point, of 
neglecting the aspect of value, the teleological, the voli- 
tional aspect, which consciousness everywhere possesses. 
We shall reach indeed in the end the conception of an 
Absolute Thought, but this conception will be in explicit 
unity with the conception of an Absolute Purpose. 
Furthermore, as we have just asserted, we shall find that 
the defect of our momentary internal purposes, as they 
come to our passing consciousness, is that they imply an 
individuality, both in ourselves and in our facts of 
experience, which we do not wholly get presented to our- 


42 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


selves at any one instant. Or in other words, we finite 
beings live in. the search for individuality, of life, of 
will, of experience, in brief, of-meaning. \The whole 
meaning, which is the world, the Reality, will prove to 
be, for this very reason, not a barren Absolute, which 
devours individuals, not a wilderness such as Meister 
Eckhart found in God, a Stille Wiiste, da Mieman 
heime ist, a place where there is no definite life, nor yet 
a whole that absorbs definition, but a whole that is just to 
the finite aspect of every flying moment, and of every 
transient or permanent form of finite selfhood, — a whole 
that is an individual system of rationally linked and de- 
terminate, but for that very reason not externally deter- 
mined, ethically free individuals, who are nevertheless One 
inGod. It is just because all meanings, in the end, will 
prove to be internal meanings, that this which the inter- 
nal meaning most loves, namely the presence of concrete 
fulfilment, of life, of pulsating and originative will, of 
freedom, and of individuality, will prove, for our view, 
to be of the very essence of the Absolute Meaning of 
the world. This, I say, will prove to be the sense of our 
central thesis; and here will be a contrast between our 
form of Idealism and some other forms. 

And thus, in this wholly preliminary statement, I have 
outlined our task, have indicated its relation to the prob- 
lems of religion, have suggested its historical affiliations, 
and have, in a measure, predicted its course. I have de- 
fined in general the problem of the relation of the World 
as Idea to the World as Fact, and have stated our issue 
as precisely this relation between Ideas and Reality. In 
order to assist in clarifying our undertaking, I have also 


INTRODUCTION: THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS 48 


given a general definition of what an idea is, and have 
stated the logical contrast between the consciously inter- 
nal and the apparently external meaning of any finite idea. 
And finally I have asserted that, in dealing with the prob- 
lem as to how internal and external meaning can be 
reduced to a consistent whole, we shall be especially 
guided to fruitful reflection upon the final relation of the 
World and the Individual. This, then, is our programme. 
The rest must be the actual task. 

I am not unaware how valueless, in philosophy, are 
mere promises. All, in this field, must turn upon the 
method of work. The question in philosophy is not about 
the interest or the hopefulness of your creed, but about 
your rational grounds for holding your convictions. I 
accept the decidedly strict limitations imposed by this 
consideration, and shall try, when we come to the heart of 
our critical and constructive task, to be as explicit as the 
allotted time permits, both in expounding the precise sense 
of the doctrine now loosely and dogmatically sketched in 
the foregoing statement, and in explaining the grounds 
that lead me to prefer it, as a solution both of logical and 
of empirical problems, to its rivals. But the way of detailed 
argument is long, and the outlook of the whole enterprise 
may often seem, as we proceed with our difficulties, dark 
and perplexing. Introductions also have their rights ; 
and I have meant in these opening words merely to re- 
count the dream of which what follows must furnish both 
the interpretation and, in a measure, the justification. 


LECTURE II 


LECTURE II 
REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THE HISTORY OF THOUGHT 


In our opening lecture the general plan of these discus- 
sions was sketched. Of this former lecture we now need 
recall but a single feature. We are to found our view 
of the Philosophy of Religion upon a treatment of the 
most fundamental problems of the Theory of Being. 
Without a further apology for our plan, and without fur- 
ther preliminary statement of its prospects and methods, 
we now proceed directly to our task itself. 


I 


We express in language, by means of verbs, adjectives, 
and equivalent expressions, what, as to their qualities, 
things are, what they do, and in what relation they stand. 
But in addition to such expressions, by which we qualify, 
describe, compare, and distinguish the various objects that 
we observe and think about, we have certain other expres- 
sions by means of which we assert that given objects are, 
or are real, rather than are not, or are unreal. Now, in 
technical phrase, we shall hereafter call the expressions 
of the latter type the ontological vocabulary of our lan- 
guage. Hard as it is to grasp or to render articulate the 
conception of Being, the vocabulary used, at least in the 
language of the Indo-European family, for the purpose 
of asserting that a thing is, is so rich, so living, so flexible 

47 


48 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


a vocabulary, as to remind us at every turn how familiar | 
in the concrete is the idea of Real Being even to the most 
unlearned mind. Let us forthwith exemplify. It is for | 
common sense one thing to have, as they say, an idea “in 
your head,” and quite another thing to believe steadfastly 
that this idea corresponds to a “real outer fact.” It is 
one thing to read a “rumor” in a current newspaper. It 
is quite another thing to be sure that, in truth, as they 
say, the rumor is “so.” Now, in all these cases, the con- 
trast between any plan and its actual fulfilment, between 
the so-called “mere idea” and the same conceived object 
when believed in as a “real outer fact,” between the 
newspaper “rumor” and the same story if viewed as that 
which is “so,” — this contrast, I say, is precisely the con- 
trast between what zs not and what zs. The contrast in 
question, as I insist, is thus extremely familiar, and of the | 
utmost practical importance. You may observe of course / 
at once that this contrast is closely related to the one made 
at the last time between the internal meaning of ideas, 
plans, and the like, and their external meaning, or their 
relation to that which fulfils or realizes them. In the 
grasping of just this contrast, and upon fidelity to this 
distinction, the whole of the everyday virtue of truthful- 
ness appears, in the world of common sense, to depend. 
The liar is a man who deliberately misplaces his onto- 
logical predicates. He says the thing that is not. His 
internal meaning is one affair; his external expression 
of his meaning is another, and contradicts the internal 
meaning. Upon a similarly clear sense of this same con- 
trast, the life of all our external volition seems to depend. 
A plan involves an idea of what some possible object may 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 49 


sometime be. The execution of the plan, the voluntary 
act of one charged with the fulfilment of the idea, involves 
a process whereby one can come truthfully to say: “The 
fact is accomplished: the plan is no longer a mere plan: 
that which was the object of the plan once was not, but 
now itis. The ‘mere idea’ has turned into reality.” 

All these are familiar distinctions of common sense. 
Our language is thus indeed full of expressions founded 
upon the contrast between what is and what is not. Our 
task is to make a beginning at grasping the precise sense 
of this contrast. And here you may already permit me 
a brief excursion into the realm of more technical 
language. 

For the next remark which our study of even our 
popular vocabulary here suggests has already been implied 
in the foregoing words. Whatever the contrast between 
being and non-being ultimately involves, we all observe 
that we express the existence or reality of an object by 
saying that it is, while when we tell merely what a given 
object is, we do not, in so far, appear to throw any light 
upon the truth of the assertion that the object in question 
is real. Thus I can tell you what a fairy is; but in so 
far I do not yet tell you whether a fairy is in any given 
sense real or unreal. Now the distinction thus expressed 


is very naturally stated, in a familiar technical phrase, © 


by calling it, as many metaphysicians do, the difference 


between the that and the what, or between the existence 
and the essence of a fairy. In this phraseology of the 
philosophers, the that refers to the assertion of the onto- 
logical predicate itself. The what, also sometimes called 
the essence, refers to the ideal description of the object 


50 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


of which we may later assert, or learn, whether it is ot 
is not. Kant, who much insisted upon this abstraction 
of the what from the that, maintained the view that the 
predicate 7s, or is real, or exists, never, properly, makes any 
difference to the what of the object in question, or adds 
anything to the essence of this object. For a fairy, once 
fully conceived as a possible live creature, would change 
in no whit the what, the characterizing predicates which 
now belong to fairies, if such a fairy came, by a creative 
act, or by an evolutionary process, into real existence. 
Just so too, the what, to use Aristotle’s favorite example, 
is common to the planned house, and to the real house 
later built in conformity to the plan. The that of the 
house is what the builder’s work effects. 

I give this most elementary of the metaphysical abstrac- 
tions its place here at the outset of our discussions merely 
to remark, at once, first that, as said, the contrast in ques- 
tion corresponds to the contrast between the internal and 
external meaning of ideas,/and then that we are not 
bound to suppose this abstraction final. As a fact, my 
own view of Being will in the end turn upon supplement- 
ing and transforming the abstraction, which is itself a 
mere stage on the way to insight. But for the first we 
borrow its phraseology from language, as the philosophers 
since Aristotle have done, and we make its true meaning 
our problem. » The ontological predicate thus appears to 
us as, in Kant’s phrase, no true predicate at all, since the 
ontological predicate shall make no difference whatever 
to the conceivable characters of the object to which it is 
applied. \ And, to add Kant’s own famous example, a 
hundred real dollars, according to Kant, differ in no 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT ol 


nameable essential or logical characters from a hundred 
ideal or possible dollars.) It is my actual wealth that 
differs according as I do or do not own the real dollars.| 
Yet, on the other hand, this so abstract ontological 
predicate, otherwise viewed, does indeed also appear as if 
it were the most momentous of all predicates, since pre- 
cisely the zs and the zs not somehow are to express all the 
difference between the true story and the false rumor, 
between the sound witness and the liar, between waking 
life and dream, between history and myth, — yes, be- 
tween the whole world and nothing at all.} 


1 Human thought must first sunder, in order perhaps later to reunite. 
One historical result of the present mode of abstractly contrasting the 
ontological predicate with all the other predicates of objects, was that 
first, Aristotle, and later the scholastic text-books, sometimes attempted 
a sort of external union, under one abstractly common name, of the very 
aspects thus first so carefully divided. In consequence the term ‘ Being”? 
often gets a usage that in passing I have merely to mention. The scho- 
lastic text-books, namely, as for instance the Disputations of Suarez, em- 
ploy our terms much asfollows. Being (ens), taken quite in the abstract, 
such writers said, is a word that shall equally apply both to the what and 
to the that. Thus if I speak of the being of a man, I may, according to 
this usage, mean either the ideal nature of a man, apart from man’s 
existence, or the existence of a man. The term ‘“‘ Being”’ is so far in- 
different to both of the sharply sundered senses. In this sense Being 
may be viewed as of two sorts. As the what it means the Essence of 
things, or the Esse Essentie. In this sense, by the Being of a man, you 
mean simply the definition of what a man as an idea means. As the 
that, Being means the Existent Being, or Esse Existentia. The Esse 
Existentie of a man, or its existent being, would be what it would possess 
only if it existed. And so the scholastic writers in question always have 
to point out whether by the term Ens, or Being, they in any particular 
passage are referring to the what or to the that, to the Esse Essentie 
or to the Esse Existentiw. On occasion, Scholastic usage also distin- 
guishes Reality from Existence, by saying that the essence of a not yet 
existing, but genuine future fact can be called in some sense Real, apart 


52 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


This fragmentary technical digression as to our terms 
thus ended, we return for a moment to popular speech. 

Language, as commonly used, does not leave us alto- 
gether to the mercy of the perplexing separation of the 
ontological predicate from all the other, from what Kant 
called the true predicates of objects. The abstraction of 
the what and the that grew up slowly in men’s minds: it is 
seldom even now consciously completed in the minds of any 
but technical thinkers. As a fact, very many words and 
phrases which have an obvious reference to the what have 
gradually come to be used, in the popular ontological 
vocabulary, as means of indicating that an object is real. 
Of these many popular ways of expressing reality, three 
classes, just here, especially interest us, because they are 
preliminary hints, so to speak, of our various more techni- 
cal conceptions of Being. 

And first, then, in various tongues, we find used for 


from Existence, and that in general one can distinguish Real Essences 
from mere figments. 

But I have to mention this technical usage only to say at once that 
we ourselves shall be little troubled by it. In these lectures I shall 
always mean by Being the Real Being of things, the that. Nor shall I 
try to make any systematic difference in usage between Reality and 
Existence, or the adjectives real and existent. So long as the what 
and the that remain abstractly sundered in our investigation we shall 
call the what the essence, or again, the idea taken abstractly in its in- 
ternal meaning. By contrast, the that, the Real Being of things, will 
at this stage appear to us as corresponding to what we at the last time 
called the External Meaning of our ideas. But by and by we shall indeed 
learn that this whole sundering of the what and the that isa false abstrac- 
tion, —a mere necessary stage on the way to insight. We shall also find 
that objects can be Real in various degrees; but we shall not try, as 
many writers do, to speak only of certain grades of Reality as Existent. 
We shall use the latter terms interchangeably. 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 53 


declaring the reality of objects certain forms of speech 
whose notable feature lies in their telling us that their 
object is to be seen, or is at hand, or can be found, or is 
marked, or is plain, or stands out, or is there, or, as the 
Germans also say,-is_vorhanden ; while the unreal has no 
standing, or is not at hand, or is not to be found, or is not 
there. ‘These expressions bring the real being of an object 
into close relations with the sharpness, nearness, clearness, 
or mere presence, of our experience of this object. They 
accordingly often imply that the object seems more or less 
accidental. It haps, it chances, —these are phrases thus 
frequently employed as the means of telling that an object 
is. ‘ You may think that there is no hereafter, but there 
happens to be one,” — so a preacher may say to a scoffer. 
The common feature of these popular expressions is thatj 
they lay stress upon what the philosophers call the 
immediacy of real facts, as the most marked sign of their 
reality. For the immediate, such as light or sound or 
pain, just happens to be found, or is given as a fact. 

A second class of expressions, however, in very strong 
contrast to the first class, declares that an object is real, not 
by virtue of its mere presence or obviousness, but in so far 
as it is deeper than what is visible, or in so far as it has 
foundation, solidity, permanence, interior constitution, pro- 
fundity of meaning. Much of the language here in 
question takes the form of metaphors. What merely 
seems is a rind_or husk; what is real_is the core or kernel 
of things. ‘These but seem,” says Hamlet, ‘for these 
are tokens that a man might feign, but I have that within 
which passeth show.” Other metaphors, in ancient 
tongues of our Indo-European family, indentify to be with 


54 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


to breathe or to dwell. The real also in general lves; 
for it is internally self-sustaining, as, to a more primitive 
mind, natural life may seem to be. And breathing is a 
well-known token of life. So to_breathe is to be. The 
unreal again is like a wanderer or a stranger. But the 
real abides in its own house. So to be real is to dwell. 
Or again the real is the result of principles, it is what 
has grown. It is the outcome and goal of processes. It 
is both necessary and abiding. All such notions are 
easy to illustrate by the ontological phraseology of 
various tongues. 

A third type of popular expressions gives us still an- 
other view of what it is to be. According to this por- 
tion, as it were, of the mere folk-lore of being, to be 
real means above all to be genuine_or to be true. One 
sees this meaning, by contrast, in the very many popular 
names for objects whose unreality and illusoriness has 
once been detected. Such an unreal object may be called, 
if it is better than the objects believed to be real, an 
Ideal; but most of the numerous appellatives for the 
unreal objects are terms of reproach: such an unreality 
is an appearance, a delusion, a sham, a myth, a fraud, 
a phantasm, an imitation, a lie. By contrast the real is 
what you can depend upon. It is genuine, no mere 
imitation. It is true. 


II 


And thus we have indicated, although by no means 
exhausted, the scope of the ontological speech of the 
people. To be immediate, or, on the other hand, to be 
well founded in what is not immediate, and, thirdly, to b 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 55 


genuine and true,—these seem to be the three principal 
conceptions of what it is to be real in the popular on- 
tology. Technical metaphysic, like all other learned 
enterprises, has its foundations in just such linguistic 
folk-lore, so to speak, as the foregoing; and one easily 
misapprehends the philosophers if one fails to observe 
whence they got their vocabulary. As Teichmiiller, in 
the introduction to his own essay on metaphysics well 
says, the Aristotelian theory of Being is founded in part 
upon a series of grammatical and lexicographical com- 
ments upon the forms of speech used in Greek language. 
All the more philosophical conceptions of being are due, 
in part, to an attempt to take note of the same aspects of 
human experience which the three classes of popular 
ontological predicates have from an early stage recog- 
nized. And, as a fact, the ontological concepts are 
limited in their range of variation by a situation in which 
we all find ourselves, and of which the foregoing vari- 
ations of the popular vocabulary have already reminded 
us. It is necessary, as we pass to the more technical 
realm, to sketch, in outline, what this familiar situation 
is. For the problem about Being is, like all other human 
problems, first. of all a problem of experience, and of 
distinctly practical needs. 

We all of us, from moment to moment, have ex- 
perience. This experience comes to us, in part, as brute 
fact : light and shade, sound and silence, pain and grief 
and joy, —all these, in part, ¢.e. in one of their universal 
aspects, are just data of sense, of emotion, of inner life in 
general.) These given facts flow by ; and, were they all, 
our world would be too much of a blind problem for us 


56 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


even to be puzzled by its meaningless presence. Now, 
in so far, we have what is called merely immediate ex- 
perience, that is, experience just present, apart from 
definition, articulation, and in general from any insight 
into its relationships. But that is not all. In addition, 
we all, when awake and thoughtful, find present what one 
might call more or less richly idealized experience, ex- 
perience that, in addition to its mere presence, possesses 
Meaning. On this side of our lives we are aware of the 
series of mental processes called Ideas. These ideas have 
the character of presenting, in a more or less incomplete 
but never perfect way, what, at the last time, we called 
the fulfilment of purpose, the embodied inner meaning 
present to us at any instant. In so far as these ideas fill 
our moments, the life within is thus lighted up with 
meaning. But now, in any one of these our flying _pres- 
ent moments, such meaning is never fully possessed. 
Whatever our business or our doctrine, we all endlessly 
war against the essential narrowness of our conscious 
field. We live looking for the whole of ourmeaning. 
And this looking constitutes the process called_thinking. 

In general, this process_is involved in a curious conflict 
with these_brute facts which constitute the mere im- 
mediacy-aforesaid. These facts themselves, in so far as 
they remain merely immediate, are an obstacle to the 
idealizing process. We say that they confuse or puzzle 
us. On the other hand, these very facts, on occasion, 
may arise in consciousness only to fuse at once or very 
quickly with our ideas. This is, for instance, the case 
whenever we accomplish a voluntary act, and at the same 
time approvingly perceive, through our senses, the outer 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 57 


results of our act. It is also the case wherever we look 
for an expected object, and looking find the object. In 
such instances the realm of the ideal appears to_us_con- 
stantly to extend. We then say either that we_ control 
facts by our will, or else that we confirm our intellectual 
expectations as we go. Or again, we may succeed in 
recognizing and interpreting the immediate data in terms 
of our ideas. In such cases we feel at home in our world. 
But when the data, as so often happens, remain obdurate, 
decline to be recognized, disappoint expectations, or refuse 
our voluntary control, then, whatever our theory of the 
universe, and whatever our practical business may be, we 
have on our hands some instance of the endless finite con- 
. flict of mere experience and mere idea. ‘These two as- 
pects of our lives, the immediate aspect and the ideal 
aspect, then show themselves in sharp contrast., Ideal 
meditation and brute immediacy stand in opposition to 
each other. We then know our finitude, and we are 
inwardly disquieted thereby. Such disquietude is our 
almost normal experience as finite wanderers. (The situa- 
tion may be one of private toil or of public controversy, 
of practical struggle or of theoretical uncertainty; but 
in any such case, amid the endless variety of our lives, 
the conflict retains essentially and profoundly similar 
features, — purpose at war with fortune, idea with datum, 
meaning with chaos,—such is the life of our narrow 
flickering moments, and in so far as we are indeed 
finite,in so far as our will wins not yet its whole bat- 
tle, our intellect grasps not the truth that it seeks. 
Practically, this conflict has other names; but viewing 
it theoretically, namely, with reference to the contents 


58 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


and relationships involved, we call this conflict the effort 
‘of Thought. to comprehend Being. By Thought we here 
mean the sum total of the ideas, this whole life of inner 
meanings, in so far as it is precisely the effort to compre- 
hend and interpret the data, the brute facts of immediacy, 
in terms of the ideas themselves —the effort to win over 
facts to ideas, or to adjust ideas to facts. (Were the facts 
wholly interpreted, they would fuse with the ideas 3 and 
the conflict of Thought and Being would cease.” But 
now, — Thought it is which attempts to recognize the 
given facts. Thought it is which goes on when, our 
present ideas failing to light up sufficiently the chaos 
of immediacy, we look for other ideas, in terms of which 
to interpret our problems. Thought it is which we may 
regard as possessing the countless ideal weapons, the 
storehouse of what we call memories of our past, the 
arsenal of what we call general principles for the inter- 
pretation of fact, the vast collection of traditional ideas 
with which our whole education has supplied us. 
‘Thought possesses, — nay, thought rather is, this whole 
collection of ideas taken as in contrast with facts. The 
ideas are our resources in the warfare with immediacy, 
just as from moment to moment they come to mind. 
So much then, at this stage, for Thought. But what 
do we mean by Being? The effort to give answer to 
this question brings to light several possible alter- 
natives. ‘These we are even now trying to define more 
exactly. Yet all the alternatives involve a common char- 
acter. Being, in this warfare, that which is real, as_op- 
posed and contrasted to that which just now is merely 
suggested to us by our momentary ideas as they fly, and 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 59 


which is not yet confirmed by facts, — Being, I say, al- 
ways appears in pape conflict and - the incompleteness 
real in Mead vanes of 1 more s special definition, in so far as we 
call it Other than our merely transient and finite thinking 
of the moment. Our_situation, as finite thinkers, is, as 
we just said, disquieting. We want some other situation 
in place of this one. Our ideas, while partial embodi- 
ments of meaning, are never complete embodiments. We 
are never quite at home with our world. The Other, 
then, which we seek, would involve, if completely found, 
a situation where thought and fact were no longer at war, 
as now they are, and where thought had finished its ideal 
task as now it is not finished. To define in advance this 
situation, we must then form some more or less precise 
notion as to the question: (Wherein lies the defect of our 
present thoughts, both in themselves, and in their rela- 
tion to facts ? 

It follows that, in defining this defect of our present 
situation, in predicting the character of the Other that 
we seek, of the needed supplement, whose presence, once 
observed, would end the now insistent conflict, —in thus 
defining and predicting, I say, we are limited, as to our 
choice of alternatives, by the exigencies of the finite con- 
scious situation herewith summed up. . We can define 
the Other, the true Being, as that which, if present to 
us in this moment, would end our conflict. In so far it 
seems something desirable and desired,—an object of 
longing. On the other hand, we may, and often do, 
regard Being as that in terms of which our ideas are to 
be controlled, set right, or, if necessary, wholly set aside as 


60 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


useless. In so far Being appears as.a.sort of fate, or per- 
haps as a supreme authority, which judges our ideas and 
which may thwart them. On this side, what is, is often 
the undesired, and may seem the hopelessly evil. Mean- 
while, there remain many ways in which we can define 
Being either more in terms of Immediacy or else more 
in terms of Ideas. But Fact and Idea, Immediacy and 
Thought, these are the factors whose contrast and whose 
conflict must determine what notion we can form of what 
it is to be. Some conceived union of elements furnished 
by these two factors that enter into our finite conflict 
constitutes, for any theory, the notion of reality. 

And now at last we are ready, having summarized the 
vaguer popular views, and having seen what situation 
determines the whole effort to define Being,—we are 
ready, I say, to pass directly to the alternative concep- 
tions of what it is to be real which have appeared in the 
course of the history of philosophy. 

I say, these fundamental conceptions, as they gradually 
become differentiated in the course of the history of 
thought, are four in number. In this lecture I shall at 
some length define two of them. The others I shall not 
expound until later lectures, after a critical study of the 
first two has prepared the way. 

But first let me name all the four. The mere list will 
not be very enlightening, but it will serve to furnish 
titles for our immediately subsequent inquiries. The 
first conception I shall call the technically Realistic defi- 
nition of what it is to be. The second I shall call the 
‘Mystical conception. The third I cannot so easily name. 
I shall sometimes call it the typical view of modern Criti- 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 61 


cal Rationalism. Just now I prefer to name it by its 


formulation, the conception of the real as the Truth, or, 


in the present day, usually, as the Empirically verifiable 
Truth. The fourth I shall call the Synthetic, or the con- 


structively Idealistic conception of what it is to be. For 


the first conception, that is real which is simply Indepen- 


dent of the mere ideas that relate or that may relate to it. 


For this view, what is, is not only external to our ideas 
of it, but absolutely and independently decides as to the 
validity of such ideas. It controls or determines the 
worth of ideas, and that wholly apart from their or our 
desire or will. What we “merely think” makes “no 
difference” to fact. For the second conception, that is 
real which is absolutely and finally Jmmediate, so that 
when it is found, z.e. felt, it altogether ends any effort 
at ideal definition, and in this sense satisfies ideas as 
well as constitutes the fact. For this view, therefore, 
Being is the longed-for goal of our desire. For the 
third conception, that is real which is purely and simply 
Valid or True. Above all, according to the modern 
form of this view, that is real which Experience, in 
verifying our ideas, shows to be valid about these ideas. 
Or the real is the valid “ Possibility of Experience.” 


But for the fourth conception, that is real which finally 


presents in a completed experience the whole meaning 
of a System of Ideas. 


a 
a 


I proceed at once to a statement of the first two concep- .__ 


tions. These two are the polar opposite each of the other. 


Their warfare is very ancient. The history of Theology 
has been, above all, determined by their conflict. 


Ns 


62 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


III 


The first of the four is the best known of all. Accord. 
ing to this conception, I repeat, to be real means to be 
independent of an idea or experience through which the 
real being is, from without, felt, or thought, or known. 
And this, I say, is the view best known as metaphysical 
Realism, the view which, recognizing independent beings 
as real, lays explicit stress upon their independence as the 
very essence of their reality. 

To comprehend what this conception of Reality implies, 
I must first point out that, of all our four views, this first 
one most sharply and abstractly undertakes to distinguish 
the what from the that, in case of every real object, and to 
hold the two aspects asunder. What objects are in this 
sense real, the realistic definition does not undertake in 
the least to predetermine. But by virtue of the defini- 
tion, you are to know, as far as that is knowable at all, 
wherein consists the determining feature that distin- 
guishes real from unreal objects. Unreal objects, cen- 
taurs, or other fictions, ideals, delusions, may be what 
they please. Real objects may in their turn possess any 
what that experience or demonstration proves to belong 
to them. But the difference between real and unreal 
objects is an unique difference, and is not properly to be 
called a difference as to the what of the real and unreal 
objects themselves. This difference, relating wholly to 
the that, is a difference expressible by saying that ficti- 
tious objects are dependent wholly upon ideas, the hopes, 
dreams, and fancies, which conceive them 3 while real- 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 63 


objects are wholly independent of any ideas which may have 
them as oljects, just in so far as these ideas are different 
From their objects. 

To countless and to endlessly various objects this first 
form of the ontological predicate has accordingly been 
applied by the thinkers who have used it. Both matter 
and mind have equally been called real in this first sense. 
Realism has, of course, no necessary tendency towards 
Materialism, although the materialists are realists. Since 
all here turns upon the ontological predicate, and not 
upon the what of the subject to which a given realistic 
philosopher applies this ontological predicate, you never 
know in advance but that a realist’s world may prove to 
be full of minds. By way of illustration of the varieties 
of Realism, I may refer at once to typical entities of 
realistic type which have appeared in the course of the 
history of philosophy. The Eleatic One, and the Many / 


of Empedocles or of Democritus; the Platonic Ideas, in / ., 


the form in which Plato defines them in his most typi- 
cal accounts of their supreme and absolute dignity as 
real beings; and the Aristotelian individual beings of 
all grades, from God to matter; the Stoic Nature and 
the Epicurean ‘atoms; the whole world of created en- 
tities in the Scholastic theology, whenever viewed apart 
from its dependence upon God; the Substance of Spinoza ; 
the Monads of Leibniz; the Things in Themselves of 
Kant; the Reals of Herbart; The Mind Stuff of Clif- 
ford ; the Unknowable of Mr. Spencer; and even the 
moral agents of most modern ethical systems of meta- 
physics : —all these endlessly varied types of conceived 
objects, differing in value and in description almost 


64 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


without limit, have been declared real in what their 
authors have more or less clearly identified with this 
our first sense of the word real. All these thinkers were 
in so far realists. 

Plainly, therefore, this idea of what it is to be real 
is not identical with any of the foregoing simpler and 
popular definitions of reality. The atoms, as we have 
/ now learned to define them, are invisible; the Eleatic 
/ One is only to be known by thinking; the Platonic 
Ideas are above all, incorporeal. On the other hand, 
a portion (although by no means all) of the ordinary 
realistic metaphysics which one meets with in many 
text-books of special science, deals with visible and 
tangible objects. The Monads of Leibniz are Souls. 
Kant’s Things in Themselves and Herbart’s Reals, are 
as unknowable as the Power of which Mr. Spencer 
tells us. Yet to all these different sorts of objects, 
our first form of the ontological predicate has been 
applied by thinkers who have had it more or less 
clearly in mind.. Hence neither visibility, nor any 
other of the forms in which the popular metaphysic 
conceives immediacy, is adequate to express the present 
conception. (Yet it is true that real Being implies, for 
this our first notion, that what is real is in a certain 
sense given, and is so far a brute fact. Much nearer to 
the present notion is that second popular view, accord- 
ing to which to be real means to be the deeper basis, 
that furnishes the ground for what is given, or that 
is somehow beneath the surface of immediate presenta- 
tion. In some measure, moreover, our present form of 
technical doctrine is a development out of the third 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 65 


of the foregoing popular conceptions, according to 
which whatever is real thereby renders ideas about 
itself either true or false. In brief, then, the present 
ontological definition is a Synthesis of the three popu- 
lar conceptions, with stress laid upon the second, that 
is, upon the idea that the real, as such, is behind or 
beyond the merely immediate facts of our experience. 
As to its relation to that warfare of thought and 
immediacy in our passing finite moments of conscious- 
ness, to that disquieting conflict of which I before 
spoke, — our present form of the ontological predicate 
defines the Other precisely as a realm wholly other 
than the inner states whereby we know it. What is, 
is thus independent of our inner conflict, just because 
this realm of true Being is wholly sundered from the 
defects of our imperfect apprehension. ( The Real is 
that which you would know if you should wholly 
escape from the limits imposed upon you by the merely 
inner life of your consciousness. } As monks forsake the 
world to win an abstract peace, so Realism bids you 
forsake what depends upon your mere finite inner 
apprehension, if you want to get at the independent 
truth. As to the way of escape, as to how to forsake 
the inner conflict, and to find the independent reality, 
—that, indeed, is another matter. We are here con- 
cerned only with the realistic definition of the Real, 
not with the realistic Theory of Knowledge. A realist 
may or may not believe that he can thus escape. 
What interests us here is that he believes that he 
ought to escape if he is ever to know the final truth. 
But I must still explain a little the sort of indepen- 


F 


66 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


dence to which the realistic view refers. You have an 
idea or an experience, —say a perception. You declare 
that this experience or idea is cognitive, and that hereby 
you know something real. Now the first of our four 
conceptions of what it is to be real, essentially declares 
that if you thus know a real object, and if thereupon 
your knowledge vanishes from the world, that vanish- 
ing of your knowledge makes no difference, except by 
accident, or indirectly, to the real object that you 
know. . For example, you look at a real mountain. 
You see it. That is a case of knowing something real. 
Now look away. Your seeing ceases; but the moun- 
tain, according to this view, remains just as real, and 
real in the very sense in which it before was real. 
This, I say, is what any genuinely realistic view pre- 
supposes. Now our first conception of reality asserts 
that just this independence of your knowing processes, 
and of all such knowing processes, as is your seeing, 7.e. 
of all actual or possible external knowing processes 
whatever, is not only a universal character of real 
objects, but also constitutes the very definition of the 
reality of the known object itself, so that to be, is to 
be such that an external knower’s knowledge, whether | 
it occurs or does not occur, can make no difference, as 
mere knowledge, to the inner reality of the known 
object. 

A real object, in this view, may then be a known or 
an unknown object, or it may be sometimes known, and 
sometimes unknown, or, above all, it may be known now 
by one person and again by another, the two knowing 
it simultaneously or separately. All that makes no sort 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 67 


of difference to the object, if, in this first sense, it 
is real. To use this supposed independence as a means 
of defining reality, is the essence of our first concep- 
tion of being. 

Let us look back for an instant at our three popular 
ontological predicates, and see for ourselves afresh how 
they are related to this new predicate. And first, Is 
the real, in this new sense, a given or immediate fact? 
The realistic philosopher answers that in a sense it is 
given, although he often answers that the way in 
which it is given may go far beyond anything that can 
be merely felt. The real, he says, is in one sense 
given, or immediate, just because no knowing process, 


in us who know the object, creates, affects, or other- 
wise mediates the known real object. There it is, the 
real. You may “struggle as you like.” It is a datum. 
In this sense of being mediated by nobody’s knowing, 
the Platonic Ideas were given as real, although they 
could not be felt. Hence, they are so far as much 
realistic beings as were Herbart’s Reals. Yet Realism 
often makes little of this given character of being, 
although some forms of realism dwell more upon it, 
especially when in controversy with sceptics and mys- 
tics. But secondly, Is the real, in our present sense, 
also deeper than what is merely immediate? Yes, in 
a sense it is, if you mean by the given, merely the 
felt, or the observed, facts of sense, or of other ex- 
perience. The real, as the independent, is as careless 
of your immediate feelings as it is of the mediation of 
your thinking processes. It is beyond what you see, 
feel, touch. For seeing, feeling, touch, vanish; but 


68 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


reality remains when unseen, unfelt, untouched by any 
external observer. Now realists usually lay great stress 
upon the substantiality of the real, and the classic doc- 
trine of substance was developed upon the basis of 
this notion of the independently real. And thirdly, 
Does the real make ideas true or false? Yes, answers 
the realist, because ideas, in trying to be true, in try- 
ing to shun falsity, seek to express what is_indepen- 
dent of themselves, in other words seek to escape from 
the bondage of their own processes. 

So, then, Realism is, as we said, a synthesis of the three 
popular ontological predicates, although, as history shows, 
with a preference for the second predicate. ‘Realism is 
fond of substances, of “inner” or of “deeper” funda- 
mental facts, and of inaccessible universes. ) Yet some- 
times it loves an ostentatious, although never a very 
thoroughgoing empiricism. As to many other matters, 
however, Realism, as an ontological doctrine about what 
it is to be, is neutral. Almost any content you please 
might belong, as we have already said, to an object real 
in this first sense. Real in this sense might be, for in- 
stance, even a state of feeling, or even the very act of 
knowledge itself, if only one asserted that this state of 
feeling, or this act of knowledge, could be anyhow exter- 
nally known, as an object, by another knowing process. 
For even an act of knowing would then be independent 
of the external knowing that knew this act. In this 
sense, most psychologists prefer, in their usual discus- 
sions, realistic views as to the Being of mental processes. 
These processes are then viewed as knowable, but are 
also viewed as independent of the knowledge that is sup- 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 69 


posed to be able to know them, so that it makes no direct 
difference to them whether they are known from without 
or not. Hence the objects of realistic ontology are ob- 
jects not necessarily outside of any knowledge whatever, 
but only independent of any knowing that is external to 
themselves. A world of conscious monads might be, in 
this sense, independently real. Nevertheless, any real- 
istic world must contain some objects that are outside 
of any knowing process whatever, since the relations — 
between the various knowing processes and their objects, 
even in a world of conscious minds, would have to be 
external relations, in order to save the realistic type of 
independence. Hence no realistic world can be through 
and through a conscious world. It must have some 
aspects lying outside of any possible knowledge. ~ *< 
As to the relation which Realism assumes between 
knowledge and its real object, this is a curious relation, 
—a relation whose obviously practical import at once 
tends to throw light on the meaning of the whole situa- 
tion. It is a relation that shall make “no difference” 
whatever to one of the related terms, namely, to the real 
object, which is totally indifferent to being known or not 
known; although this same relation, while inevitably leay- 
ing the other term of the relation, namely, the knowing 
consciousness, itself a fact independently existing, makes 
all the difference possible to the value of this other term, 
namely, to the truth or accuracy of the knowing con- 
sciousness, since a knowledge without a real object, inde- 
pendent of it, is supposed by the hypothesis to be utterly 
vain. The real object, in its independence, is not even 
related to the truth or value of the poor knowing process, 


70 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


as is the sedate big dog to the little dog when the latter 
barks. F or the big dog at least presumably hears the 
barking. The realistic relation of the knowing being to 
its object is more like the relation of a horse to a hitch- 
ing post, only that even here the horse can strain at the 
post when he pulls, while realistic knowing is absolutely 
naught to its object.) By doctrines about the Will, to be 
sure, the more ethical amongst the realists generally try 
to correct the externality of the relation between knower 
and object. Knowledge, they say, moves will, or sets it 
moving itself, and hereupon will often alters indepen- 
dent object. But these volitional relations are another 
story, although, as I may add, they are fatal to the con- 
sistency of the realistic conception. 


IV 


And now for some hint of the historical fortunes of 
Realism. I have pointed out how wide-spread is this 
realistic conception of Being in the history of philosophy. 
I may now add that I think that this conception has 
never been held wholly alone, and apart from other con- 
ceptions of reality, by any first-rate thinker. The general 
rule is that any great system of philosophy has some 
objects in it which are earnestly insisted upon as real, 
but which are yet obviously, even explicitly, not real in 
the realistic sense, or which have a reality only in part 
definable in a realistic sense. Thus Aristotle’s God, as 
viewed from the side of the world, looks at first like an- 
other real object, whose reality is wholly of the indepen- 
dent type. Yet if you examine closer the self-centred 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT ere! 


purity of Being that Aristotle’s lonely God possesses, 
you find that, although in regard to formal truth omni- 
scient, and thus fully knowing what reality is, the God 
of Aristotle cannot regard his own reality as of any 
independent type. For if he did so regard himself, he 
would then have to observe that his reality is indepen- 
dent of our knowledge of him; and in that case he would 
be taking account of us, and would view our world as 
another than himself. But such views, according to 
Aristotle, would be unworthy of God. So God, who is 
formally omniscient, still knows of no reality that is 
independent of the knowledge which refers to this 
reality. For God, as Aristotle says, knows only himself. 
Just so Plato’s Ideas, although for us now independent 
realities, were once, in our previous state of being, accord- 
ing to a half true myth, immediately and fully known by 
a direct intuition. And this character of the ideal world, 
if consistently developed at the expense of the other 
characters, transforms the reality of the Ideas of Plato 
into the form which the doctrine later assumed in 
Plotinus ; but that is in part a mystical form. Nor 
are there lacking other tendencies, in Plato, to ascribe to 
the Ideas a Being that is not of the realistic type. Kant 
was a realist; but he invented, in the world of Mégliche 
Erfahrung, a new realm of objects which he regards as 
real, and yet as not at all possessed of the independent 
type of reality. Spinoza’s Substance is not only an 
independent reality, but is also a mystical Absolute. 
Notoriously, it keeps two sets of accounts, or even an 
infinite number. And hence it is like a defaulting 
cashier. You never quite know with what sort of reality 


72 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


you are dealing when you consult its books. Herbart’s 
world has in it, in addition to its independent Reals, 
“ Zufdllige Ansichten” and forms of “ Zusammen” without 
number. These are for our knowledge “wirklich,” but 
they have no realistic, that is, for Herbart, no ultimate, 
no simply independent being. I regard this series of 
episodes in the history of Realism as profoundly instruc- 
tive. Any realistic world, if well thought out, contains 
objects that either are not real in the realist’s sense, or 
else are real, not only in that sense, but also in quite 
another sense. This is what a student easily overlooks. 
But it is a fact extremely ominous for Realism. 

As to the historical and practical significance of 
realistic metaphysics in the history of life and of religion, 
one must say at once that, like all human conceptions, 
these various fundamental metaphysical conceptions also 
are, in one aspect, distinctly active and practical attitudes 
towards that Other which finite thought seeks. For 
Realism, the true meaning of our ideas is to be wholly 
external. Yet the internal meaning of the ideas stubbornly 
remains. The realist actually believes his doctrine be- 
cause he finds it simple, or rational, or otherwise content- 
ing to his inner interests. We never think without also 
acting, or tending to act. When we think we will. 
We have then internal meanings. So far as we have 
ideas really present to us, they embody purposes. <Ac- 
cordingly we shall find that all of our four various 
definitions of the ontological predicate are expressions of 
distinctly universal and human interests in life and the 
universe. Man confesses his practical ideals when he 
defines his philosophical notions. 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT (6 


And s0, in particular, Realism, in addition to being an 
effort to meet the general problem of Being, is also the 
product and expression of essentially Social motives and 
interests. It is socially convenient, for purely practical 
reasons, to regard my fellow as a being whose mind shall 
be wholly independent, as to its inner being, of my own 
knowledge about my fellow. This view of the social 
relation is indeed suggested by well-known experiences, 
but in its ideally extreme forms, it is warranted by no 
experience, and is actually contradicted by every case of 
the communication of mind with mind. But we also 
find it socially convenient to view the common objects of 
our human and social knowledge as independent both of 
my fellow and myself, even while we still view these 
objects as the same for both of us, and for all other actual 
and possible human observers. And so, in the end, we 
conceive these common objects, abstractly, as independent 
of all knowing processes whatever. When, to these social 
motives, we add that interest in escape from our private 
and finite disquietude of incomplete insight of which we 
before spoke, the special motives for the more abstract 
forms of Realism are in substance stated. It is true 
that there is a deeper and a very general motive at the 
heart of Realism,—a motive which we shall only later 
learn to appreciate. This is the interest in viewing the 
Real as the absolutely and finally Determinate or Indi- 
vidual fact. But this motive is present for Realism in 
a very abstract and problematic form. And even this 
motive, as we shall later see, is a practical one. We 
believe in the determinate individuality of things be- 
cause we need and love individuality. We can justify 


74 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


this belief, in the end, only upon other than realistic 
grounds. 

In consequence we may say that Realism is, in its 
special contrast with other views, an interpretation of 
the folk-lore of being in the interests of a social con- 
seryatism. Accordingly, in the history of thought, Real- 
ism is the metaphysic of the party of good order, 
when good order is viewed merely as something to be 
preserved. Hence the typical conservatives, the extreme 
Right wing of any elaborate social order, will gener- 
ally be realistic in their metaphysics. So too are the 
conservative theologians, so long as they teach the people. 
Amongst themselves, these conservatives, if deeply reli- 
gious souls, may use quite other, namely, mystical speech. 
Realistic, too, are those plain men, whose only metaphysic 
is the blind belief in “established facts.” Realistic also 
are the tyrants. Realism has lighted the fires for the 
martyrs, and has set up the scaffolds for the reformers. 
As to its most familiar cases of real objects, Realism is fond 
of socially important objects. Property in general, tech- 
nical objects, money, mechanism, instruments, whatever 
can be passed from hand to hand, the solid earth on which 
we all alike appear to walk,—these are the typical and 
exemplary instances of realistic metaphysics. If you ques- 
tion Realism, the realist asks you whether you do not 
believe in these objects, as facts independent of your ideas. 
With these instances, then, the realist is ready to confute 
the objector. The realist is fond of insisting upon the 
“sanity” of his views. By sanity he means social conven- 
ience. Now reflective thinking is often socially incon- 
venient. When it is, the realist loves to talk of “ whole- 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 75 


some ” belief in reality, and to hurl pathological epithets 
at opponents. It is thus often amusing to find the same 
thinker who declares that reality is quite independent 
of all merely human or mental interests, in the next 
breath offering as proof of his thesis the practical and 
interesting “wholesomeness” of this very conviction. 

But you will ask, Have no realists then been reformers, 
liberals, atheists? Yes, I answer, the pure materialists 
have been realists. But these more unorthodox realists 
are still what Kant called Dogmatists, partisans of a tradi- 
tion preached as authoritative, — conservatives as to cer- 
tain conceptions of a distinctly social, even if unorthodox 
origin. 

Yet Realism, if indeed strictly sane, as sanity goes 
amongst us men, is a view as falsely abstract as it is 
convenient. This sundering of external and internal 
meaning is precisely what our later study will show to be 
impossible. As a shorthand statement of the situation of 
the finite being, Realism, laying stress as it does upon our 
vast and disquieting inadequacy to win union with the 
Other that we seek, is a good beginning of metaphysics. 
As an effort to define determinateness and finality, it 
is a stage on the way to a true conception of Indi- 
viduality and of Individual Beings. As a summary in- 
dication of the nature of our social consciousness, and 
of our social world, Realism is indecd the bulwark of 
good order. For good order, in us men, practically 
depends, from moment to moment, upon abstractions, 
since we have at any one instant to think narrowly in 
order to act vigorously. But viewed as an ultimate and 
complete metaphysical doctrine, and not as a convenient 


76 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


half-truth, Realism, as we shall find hereafter, upon a 
closer examination, needs indeed no external opposition. 
It rends its own world to pieces even as it creates it. It 
contradicts its own conceptions in uttering them. It 
,asserts the mutual dependence of knowing and of Being 
in the very act of declaring Being independent. In brief, 
‘realism never opens its mouth without expounding an 
antinomy. 

Its central technical difficulty, as we shall later more 
particularly see, and as Aristotle’s Metaphysics already 
laboriously shows you, is that wondrous problem of the 
nature of individuality and as to the meaning of uni- 
versals. The independent realities must be individuals, 
for they are fixed data, finished and unique in advance 
of any knowing. And in a realistic world, as we shall 
find, there must be at least two individuals, independent 
of each other. But there cannot be such individuals; 
for the individuals of a realistic world are essentially 
Noumena, objects defined, even for the realist, by a think- 
ing process. And mere thinking, when taken as in oppo- 
sition to facts, merely abstract thinking, as Plato well and 
irrefutably observed,—can define only universals, and 
only linked systems of fact. Herein lies the doom of 
Realism. Its laws, as universals, contradict its facts, 
which have to be independent individuals. Whatever is 
said to be true of its reals is a conceived, and hence an 
universal truth, linking many in one. But its reals are 
not universal, and are not to be linked. Their essence 
excludes universality, and demands mutual independence. 
Hence, in the end, nothing whatever proves to be true 
of them. History shows many examples of this conse: 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT WL 


quence. The troubled darkness of the Herbartian realm 
of the Reals is one such historical example. In Herbart’s 
world, in an uncanny and impossible way, these Reals, 
which can have nothing to do with one another, still, 
according to the philosopher come “ Zusammen”,; and 
while nothing can happen to them, they preserve them- 
selves changeless amidst unreal disturbances, by crawling, 
as it were, like worms, and so producing a “ wirkliches 
Geschehen.”1 Well, this strange metaphysical scene, in 
the distracted globe of Herbart’s system, is only one 
instance of the sort of thing that has to be found in any 
realistic world, if one confesses the truth, as Herbart nobly 
confessed it. 


Vv 


But we must leave this great problem of the Realistic 
Ontology for a later and more detailed study. I must 
proceed, as I close the present lecture, to a sketch of the 
second of our four forms of the ontological predicate. 
Realism, despite its prevalence, has long had a very an- 
cient historical foe. This foe was originally not Idealism, 
in its modern form, but something very different, namely, 
Mysticism. And so the second conception of what it is 
to be real is characteristic of that most remarkable group 
of teachers, the philosophical Mystics. Mysticism as a 
mere doctrine for edification, is indeed no philosophy. 
Yet a philosophy has been based upon it. 

While this second conception appears to me to have 
been very generally misunderstood by most of the critics 


1See Mr. Bradley’s observation in Appearance and Reality, p. 30. 


78 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


of philosophical Mysticism, its historical significance, as 
I must insist, is of the very greatest. Again and again 
it appears, as marking a transition stage in human civili- 
zation. It has had an enormous influence on literature. 
It has been responsible for a very large share in the de- 
velopment of all the great religions. You cannot under- 
stand the history of religion, without appreciating the 
mystical definition of Being. 

As to the history of Mysticism, it began in India, with 
the Upanishads and the Vedanta. It early passed to 
Europe, and perhaps was independently rediscovered 
there. Even Plato’s dialogues contain some hints of its 
spirit. Even Aristotle’s account of God’s inner life has 
relation to its motives. In a marvellous combination with 
realistic and even with more concretely idealistic con- 
ceptions, it forms an element in the doctrine of Plotinus. 
Through the Neo-Platonic school it passed over into 
Christian theology. Throughout the Middle Ages it 
formed a motive in the speculations of the philosophers 
of the School. St. Thomas Aquinas sought to deal justly 
with its merits, without endangering the interests of 
orthodoxy. Meister Eckhart, who was by training a 
follower of St. Thomas, but who gradually grew more 
independent of the master as he taught, helped to intro- 
duce mystic conceptions into German thinking. The 
German mystics deeply influenced later Protestant theol- 
ogy. The favorite devotional books of all the churches, 
and some of the best known of the religious poets and 
hymns, have continued to extend the mystical influence 
amongst the laity even until to-day. The unorthodox 
forms of Mysticism are almost countless. Schopenhauer 


aia 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT (63 


is a marked modern instance in a part of his doctrine, of 
one result of mystical influence. 

Any fair-minded student ought, therefore, to want to 
comprehend what philosophical Mysticism has meant to 
those who have held it, and especially how it stands op- 
posed to Realism. But the mystical conception of Being 
is one peculiarly liable to be misunderstood. It is usually 
not rightly distinguished from the realistic view of 
Being. A student often, after a brief study of this or 
that mystical treatise, accordingly comes away displeased. 
“ Mere sentimentality,” such a student often says. “ This 
mystical view seems to hold that the only real object is 
some voiceless and incomprehensible Absolute, and further, 
that when you feel uncommonly entranced or enraptured, 
you get some strange revelation as to the nature of the 
real, and so become one with the Absolute. Now it is 
plain,” he continues, “that such views have nothing to 
do with common sense, or with the physical world, or 
with matter, cr with the facts of daily life. For can one 
say that this wall, and yonder stars, and my neighbors, 
and even my own daily self, are the Atman of the Hin- 
doos, or are the Mystic Absolute, or are anything else 
that you feel when you are in a trance? Now these ob- 
jects yonder are well known to be real. \ Reality means for 
everybody a character that they possess.) Hence the mystic 
needs no further notice. He substitutes his feelings for the 
solid facts. He is simply a man who prefers not to think 
about reality, but merely to revel in his own feelings.” / 

This criticism is obvious, but it is the external view of 
a realistic metaphysic. It leaves the matter uncompre- 
hended. And nobody, I must hold, can understand a large 


80 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


part of human nature without understanding Mysticism. 
| The true historical importance of Mysticism lies not in the 
subject to which it applied the predicate real, but in the 
view it holds of the fundamental meaning of that very 
ontological predicate itself.) No matter what subject the 
mystic seems to call real. ( That might be from your point 
of view any subject you please ; yourself, or God, or the 
wall. /The interest of Mysticism lies wholly in the predi- 
cate. Mysticism consists in asserting that to be means, 
simply and wholly, to be immediate, as what we call 
t pure color, pure sound, pure emotion, are already in us 
partly and imperfectly immediate. Mysticism asserts that 
this aspect of Being, which common sense already, as we 
have seen, recognizes and names in the popular ontolog- 
ical vocabulary, must be kept quite pure, must be wholly 
and abstractly isolated from all other aspects, must be ex- 
clusively emphasized. And the mystic further holds that 
your eternal salvation depends on just such an abstract 
purifying of your ontological predicate... Purer than color 
or than music or the purest love must the absolute imme- 
diate be.) Now why the mystic says this, is a matter for 
further study. But this is what he says. He certainly 
does not assert, if you are an ordinary realist, that his 
Absolute is real in your sense, say real as money is real. 
The true issue for him is whether the fundamental onto- 
logical predicate, reality, ought not itself to be altered, 
altered namely by a certain purification, so as to be another 
predicate than what ordinary metaphysic confusedly takes 
it to be. That the mystic is dealing with experience, and 
trying to get experience quite pure and then to make it 
the means of defining the real, is what we need to observe. 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 81 


That meanwhile the mystic is a very abstract sort of per- 
son, I welladmit. But he is usually a keen thinker! Only 
he uses his thinking sceptically, to make naught of other 
thinkers. He gets his reality not by thinking, but by con- 
sulting the data of experience. He is not stupid. And he 
is trying, very skilfully, to be a pure empiricist. Indeed, 
I should maintain that the mystics are the only thorough- 
going empiricists in the history of philosophy. ) 

In its origin, and in its greatest representatives, Mysti- 
cism appears in history as the conception of men whose 
piety has been won after long conflict, whose thoughts 
have been dissected by a very keen inner scepticism, whose 
single-minded devotion to an abstraction has resulted from 
a vast experience of the painful complications of life, and 
whose utter empiricism is the outcome of a severe disci- 
pline, whereby they have learned to distrust ideas. The 
technical philosophical mystics are the men who, in gen- 
eral, began by being realists. They learned to doubt. 
They have doubted through and through. Whenever 
they choose to appear as discursive thinkers, they are 
keen and merciless dialecticians. Their thinking as such 
is negative. What they discover is that Realism is in- 
fected, so to speak, by profound contradictions. Hereby 
they are led to a new view of what it is to be.{ This 
view asserts, first, that of course the real is what 
makes ideas true or false.“ But, as the mystic con- 
tinues, owing to certain essential defects of the pro- 
cess of ideation, experience shows that explicit ideas, 
of human, perhaps of any type, are always profoundly 
false, just in so far as they are always partial, fleet- 
ing, contradictory, dialectical, disunited. The thinking 

@ 


82 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


process, just because it looks to another as its guide, is 
always a dissatisfied process, —like the finite search for 
happiness. And now, secondly, the mystics admit that 
true Being is something deeper than what usually is seen 
or felt or thought by men. But they add that this is just 
because ordinary thinking, like Realism, like money get- 
ting, like pleasure seeking, like mortal love making, al- 
ways looks beyond the truly complete immediate, looks 
to false ideas, to fleeting states that die as they pass, and 
so indeed looks to what the mystic regards as the contra- 
dictory and consequently superficial aspect of experience. 
“Look deeper,” he says, “but not deeper into illusory 
ideas. Look deeper into the interior of experience itself. 
There, if you only look deeper than all ordinary and par- 
tial immediacy, deeper than colors and sounds, and deeper 
than mortal love, then when once rightly prepared, you 
shall find a fact, an immediate and ineffable fact, such 
that it wholly satisfies every longing, answers every in- 
quiry, and fulfils the aim of every thought. And this it 
will do for you just because it will be at last the pure 
immediate, with no beyond to be sought. You talk of 
reality as fact. Well,” insists the mystic, “here shall be 
your fact, your datum, an absolutely pure datum. As pure 
it will fulfil the purpose of thinking, which always desires 
its own Other, or in other words always really desires just 
the cessation of all its strife in peace. / Only in the imme- 
diate that has no beyond, is such peace.» Now that is the 
Reality, that is the Soul. Or, to repeat the Hindoo 
phrase: That art thou. That is the World. That is the 
Absolute. That, as Meister Eckhart loved to say, is the 
“ stille Wiiste der Grottheit.” 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 83 


Now the essence of this view of the mystic is that to 
be real means to be felt as the absolute goal and conse- 
quent quietus of all thinking, and so of all striving. \Or 
in other words, Reality is that which you immediately 
feel when, thought satisfied, you cease to think.) The 
mystic is, as I said before, the only thoroughgoing 
empiricist. We owe to him an illustration of what an 
absolutely pure empiricism, devoid of conventions, and 
alone with immediacy, would mean. Ordinary empiri- | 
cism only half loves the facts of experience, as facts; ,/ 
for it no sooner gets them than it gets outside of them, 
makes endless hypotheses about them, restlessly tries 
to explain them by ideal constructions, and, if realistic, 
forsakes them altogether to talk of independent beings. 
The mystic_loves the simple fact, just so far as it is 
simple and unmediated, the absolute datum, with no 
questions to be asked. That alone, for him, is worthy 
of the name real. If it takes a trance to find such a 
fact, that is the fault of our human ignorance and base- 
ness. The fact in question is always in you, is under 
your eyes. The ineffably immediate is always present. 
Only, in your blindness, you refuse to look at it, and 
prefer to think instead of illusions. The ineffably imme- 
diate is also, if you like, far above knowledge, but that 
is because knowledge ordinarily means contamination 
with ideas. 

So much for the mystic’s conceptions of what it is to 
be. If you ask what to think of this conception, in com- 
parison with the first, I answer at once that, as a more 
detailed study will show us, it is precisely as much and 
precisely as little a logically defensible conception as the 


84 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


former conception, that of Realism. Both are abstrac- 
tions; both, if analyzed, go to pieces upon their own 
inner contradictions; both have had a long history; both 
express a fragment of the whole truth about Being; 
both stand for perfectly human and common-sense ten- 
dencies, merely pushed to technical extremes. Both can 
only be judged by means of their dialectic. No Theory 
of Knowledge can prove either of them sound or unsound 
except by undertaking directly an ontological analysis 
and criticism of what each one of them means. Our 
present purpose, however, is simply to understand their 
general drift and their historical importance. 

The realistic predicate, independence of any external 
knowing process, could be applied to very various con- 
ceived objects, to souls, to matter, to God, etc. On the 
contrary, the mystic meaning of what it is to be implies 
the absolute and immediate inner finality and simplicity 
of the object to which the predicate real can be directly 
given. Yet, on the other hand, this reality of the mystic, 
if viewed from without and taken as a subject, to which 
this predicate is given (in other words, if viewed in a 
way that the mystic himself calls a false way) —this 
reality appears to you, while you look on, to be only 
this or that state of the mystic’s mind, his sensations 
when he fasts or takes ether, his feelings in a trance, or 
the feelings that he usually has towards God, or towards 
life. Hence, as you, from without, view the mystics, 
and their faiths and feelings, they seem diverse enough. 
And what the mystics talk about as the Absolute, the 
subjects to which they apply their predicate real, will 
appear to you, thus seen from without, as very various 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 85 


facts, named in many tongues. Hence the mystics may 
be of any human creed. Their doctrine passes “ Like 
night from land to land” and “has strange power of 
speech.” It says, like the Ancient Mariner : — 


“The moment that his face I see, 
I know the man that must hear me: 
To him my tale I teach.” 


And the mystic always thus appeals, in the ordinary 
world, to the individual man. Hence, in history, the 
mystics have been great awakeners of the very spirit 
that they have most condemned, namely of individuality. 
The great and stormy individuals, like St. Augustine, 
or like Luther, have loved them, and have learned from 
them, although in a sense that indeed soon transformed 
the mystic conception of Being, for such men, into quite 
another. Mysticism has been the ferment of the faiths, 
the forerunner of spiritual liberty, the inaccessible refuge 
of the nobler heretics, the inspirer, through poetry, of 
countless youth who know no metaphysics, the teacher, 
through the devotional books, of the despairing, the 
comforter of those who are weary of finitude. It has 
determined, directly or indirectly, more than half of the 
technical theology of the Church. The scholastic phi- 
losophy endeavored in vain to give it a subordinate place. 
In the doctrine of St. Thomas, the faithful, in this life, 
are permitted only a moderate though respectful use of 
mystical notions. Yet it is plain that the God of St. 
Thomas’s theology is himself a mystic, and even a pan- 
theistic mystic, since the Being of the world, although 
for us real in the formal or realistic sense, makes abso- 


86 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


lutely no real difference to God, who was just as com- 
plete before he created it as afterwards. And God’s 
perfection is, for himself, a perfectly immediate fact. 

So much, then, for a preliminary glance at the meaning 
of the mystical conception of reality. 

And thus, after a discussion, at the outset of the present 
lecture, of the general nature of the ontological predicate, 
we have proceeded, first, to sketch three different meanings 
that the popular use of language seems to have especially 
had in mind in asserting that any object is real. We have 
seen, of course, that these three meanings were fragmen- 
tary, and more or less conflicting. We have turned from 
popular usage to study the more elaborate efforts of the 
philosophers to purify or to harmonize the ontological con- 
cepts. Of the four resulting forms of the ontological 
predicate which, as we asserted, are prominent in the 
history of philosophy, we have now briefly outlined two. 
As a result, we have before us definitions of Being which 
are the polar opposites of each other. These are the real- 
istic and the mystical definitions. { Realism defines Real 
Being as a total Independence of any idea whose external 
object any given Being is. Mysticism defines Real Being 
as wholly within Immediate Feeling. »These two con-. 
cepts, both of them, as I must hold, false abstractions, are 
still both of them fragmentary views, as I also hold, of the 
truth, — hints towards a final definition of the Other, of 
that fulfilment which our finite thinking restlessly seeks. 
But any fair criticism of either of the two conceptions so 
far before us, demands a separate lecture; and the third 
and fourth conceptions of Real Being will be considered 
only after these two have first been examined. 


REALISM AND MYSTICISM IN THOUGHT 87 


In the present discussion I have tried, then, merely to 
open the way towards the point where we shall for the 
first time rightly see how profoundly a definition of Being 
must influence, and in fact predetermine, the issues of 
life, and, in particular, of Religion. 


PAS Odt lO ISO sae age al tage } 

MP De en, ee if vole aD Eee CAVE oa iit 

ses i Viti ChE ae Tule ifr tie Pid oie wits oil 
a 


Baw il ie, pore iy) he ee 1 rg a 


Welpest Sis cote tah GS oat Pte. boat igy 


LECTURE III 


LECTURE III 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS: A CRITICAL EXAMINATION 
OF REALISM 


In the foregoing lecture, after naming four historical 
conceptions of Being, we undertook an exposition and 
comparison of two of these four conceptions. We indi- 
cated the general attitude towards life and towards the 
universe which is assumed on the one hand by Realism, 
on the other hand by Mysticism. Before proceeding with 
our list of the historical conceptions of what it is to be 
real, we may well pause to examine still further these two; 
both as to their inner consistency, and as to their adequacy 
to their task of expressing the problems which beset our 
finite thought. 

The present lecture I shall devote to a critical study of 
the realistic conception of what it is to be. The next 
lecture will similarly be concerned with a study of Mys- 
ticism. Then only shall we be prepared to go still further 
in the effort to define true Being. 


I 


The realistic conception of Being is, as we saw, ex- 
tremely familiar in metaphysical doctrine. It has won no 
small favor in popular discussion. It is the typical notion 
of socially respectable conservatism, whenever such con- 


servatism begins to use the speech of technical philosophy. 
91 


92 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


But the task of critically analyzing Realism, to get at the 
essential meaning, is austere and intricate. Realism easily 
assumes its vast metaphysical responsibilities; yet an 
examination of the true state of its accounts with the 
truth proves to be ‘a very baffling enterprise. The prepa- 
ration of a balance sheet of these accounts, the definite 
presentation of the assets and the liabilities of Realism, 
has been repeatedly attempted by philosophers ever since 
Plato, and even before his-time. Of the difficulty of 
the work let the proverbial obscurity of metaphysical 
treatises bear witness; for very much of that obscurity 
is due to just this problem. As a fact, all here depends 
upon finally simplifying the issue, upon leaving out count- 
less non-essential problems, which have been discussed by 
this or that realistic system of doctrine, and upon reduc- 
ing the central question of every realistic view of the uni- 
verse to its lowest terms. Once thus separated from its 
historical setting, the mere intricacy of this problem 
indeed vanishes; and you find yourself at last in presence 
of a very precise issue. But then your difficulty only 
changes its shape; for hereupon the issue brought to light 
by Realism proves to be highly abstract; and the auster- 
ity of which I just spoke comes to be felt all the more as 
the crisis of the enterprise approaches. Nowhere in these 
lectures shall we have to undertake, in fact, a more 
abstract investigation than the one here immediately 
before us. May the magnitude of the interests at stake 
justify the inevitable hardships of just this day of our 
voyage ! 

Realism asserts, as I have said, that to be real means to 
be independent of ideas which, while other than a given 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 93 


real being, still relate to that being. If you suppose a 
realist to be addressing yourself, what he asserts may 
then be put into very much the following words: “The 
world of Fact,” he tells you, “is independent of your 
knowledge of that world. This independence, and the 
very reality itself of the world of Fact, are one. Wereall 
knowledge of facts to cease, the only direct and logically 
necessary change thereby produced in the real world, 
would consist in the consequence that the particular real 
fact known as the existence of knowledge, would, by hypo- 
thesis, have vanished. Since we men are not only knowers, 
but voluntary agents as well, it is true that the vanishing 
of our own knowledge would indirectly alter the fact- 
world in a negative and perhaps in a very important way, 
since all the real results that our will, in view of our 
knowledge, might have brought to pass, would be pre- 
vented from taking place. But this is a secondary matter. 
Primarily, the vanishing of our knowledge would make no 
difference in the being of the independent facts that now 
we know.” 

In brief, to sum up this whole view in a phrase, Realism 
asserts that the mere knowledge of any Being by any one 
who is not himself the Being known, “ makes no differ- 
ence whatever ” to that known Being. 

Otherwise stated, Realism involves, as its consequence, 
a characteristic mental attitude towards the truth, —an 
attitude celebrated in one of the best-known stanzas of 
Fitzgerald’s Omar Khayydm. Realism, at least in so far 
as it considers knowledge and does not add a special 
hypothesis to explain the active deeds of voluntary agents, 
submits. It accepts its realities as facts to which its own 


94 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


’ 


knowledge makes “no difference,” and so any group of 
so-called “merely knowing” beings, or of “pure ideas,” 
can say to one another, concerning the whole world of 
facts beyond themselves, viewed precisely in its whole- 
ness : — 
“When you and I behind the Veil are past, 

Oh, but the long, long while the World shall last, 

Which of our Coming and Departure heeds, 

As the seven seas should heed a pebble cast.” 


To be sure, as I have indicated, any individual realist 
may chance to deny altogether that in all this he himself 
means to be at all practically fatalistic. But in that case 
he needs a special hypothesis to explain how voluntary 
agents, according to his system, can use their knowledge 
to alter the independent facts. Primarily, knowledge 
shall make precisely what the characteristic phrase of 
Realism describes as “no difference” to fact. And so the 
realm of realistic Being that is real beyond your ideas or 
mine, is, in its wholeness, indeed like a sea, into which 
any of our ideas about its waves fall like pebbles. Wave 
and pebble are primarily to be viewed as mutually foreign 
facts. If the pebble itself creates new waves, that is at 
first sight something wholly non-essential. The sea is the 
sea, and Being is indifferent to our mere ideas. 

This statement of the general realistic definition of what 
it is to be real may be set in a clearer light by a com- 
parison with other more or less frequent efforts to state 
the same historical view. Sometimes Realism is defined 
as the doctrine that reality is “extra-mental” or is “ out- 
side of the mind.” But this mode of definition involves 
a space-metaphor, and arouses the question as to what the 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 95 


world “outside” is here literally to mean. Space, too, in 
its wholeness, may be viewed by a realist as ‘“extra- 
mental.” But space.as a whole is obviously not in any 
literal and spatial sense “ outside” of anything whatever ; 
so that to call space “ extra-mental” is to use a phrase that 
tpso facto needs further interpretation. Accordingly, 
“extra-mental” is often interpreted as meaning merely 
* other than” the knowing mind. From this point of 
view Realism would mean only that an object known is 
other than the idea, or thought, or person, that knows the 
object. But in this very general sense, any and every 
effort to get at truth involves the admission that what one 
seeks is in some way more or less other than one’s ideas 
while one is seeking; and herewith no difference would 
be established between Realism and any opposing meta- 
physical view. ~ Idealism, and even the extremest philo- 


sophical Scepticism, both recognize in some form, that. our’, , 


goal in knowledge is other than our effort. to reach the 
the goal. Still, then, the realistic meaning of the phrase 
“outside of the knowing mind” would need an explana- 
tion. 

But if this phrase is next taken to mean “different 
from or apart from the contents of any or of all minds,” 
the phrase is inadequate to express what Realism has 
historically meant by the reality of the world. It is 
indeed true that in any realistic system there must be at 
least some real facts that find no place amongst the con- 
tents of any mind whatever. ‘This is true, for any realistic 
view, at least, with regard to those supposed facts called 
the real relations between knowing beings and the “ outc-.... 

side ” objects which they know. For those real relations, 


96 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


in any realistic system, are directly present to no con- 
sciousness whatever, and are thus absolutely different 
from the contents of any mind. But, on the other hand, 
it is not true that Realism need regard only such uncon- 
scious facts or beings as real in its sense of the word 
real. You, for instance, as a conscious mind, might be 
viewed by a realist as a being that he would call real in 
his sense. That assertion, if made by a typical realist, 
would simply mean that the contents of your mind, 
» although present within your own consciousness, are real 
/ without regard to whether anybody else knows of your 
existence or not. It is true that some realists, namely, 
the extreme materialists, have in their systems declared 
only matter to be real. It is also true that such a realist 
as Herbart, who was no materialist, still defined the real 
‘beings as in themselves absolutely simple, and therefore 
not conscious beings. But, on the other hand, many 
realistic systems have regarded conscious beings as in the 
realistic sense real; and it is historically possible for a 
realist to maintain that his world consists wholly of con- 
scious beings, or even of mere states of mind, when taken 
together with the unconsciously real relationships existent 
amongst these beings.’ Whether such a theory can be 
consistently worked out, with a purely realistic sense of 
what it is to be real, is indeed another question. But one 
could be a realist in his definition of Being, and still insist 
that all Being is in its nature entirely psychological. 

All these various interpretations of the phrase “outside 
of the mind,” prove, then, inadequate to express the mean- 
ing of the realist. There remains as the one essential 
idea conveyed by the phrase “outside of the mind” and 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 97 


as the one mark of the realistic type of Being, the in- 
difference of any real being to what you may, as knower, 
think about it, so long as you yourself are not the 
being that is known. The being, known by you, may 
be in itself a mere state of consciousness in the mental 
life of your neighbor. But it is a realistic being so long 
as it is supposed to be quite independent of your knowl- 
edge, and so undetermined by your knowledge. If 
you think the truth, so much the better for your 
knowledge. But if you or any other knower chance to 
think error, or chance even to vanish from the universe, 
the realistic realm is thereby modified only in respect of 
so much of its reality as you intelligent beings carry 
away with you when you blunder or vanish. To say 
just that, is to be realistic. This then is a general state- 
ment of the Realism which I mean in the present lecture 
to examine. This definition still needs, however, some 
further historical exemplification, to make sure that we 
have stated it not unfairly. 


II 


Historically speaking, this general realistic conception 
of what it is to be has been held with various degrees 
of consciousness and definiteness of conception. The 
early Greek thinkers soon learn to make a sharp dis- 
tinction between what existed, as they said, “by nature,” 
and what was merely believed from the point of view 
of human and of false “opinion.” These two realms, 
the real and the false, they erelong not only distin- 
guished, but sundered. It was this sundering that 


H 


98 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


made them realists, and not the particular sort of 
nature which they regarded as real. The changeless, 
although sensuous and materialistic Being of the Elea 
tics, is only one case of such sharp sundering of the 
real from the seeming. That true Being is, in some 
essential way, independent of false opinion, thus comes 
early to be regarded as a sort of obvious maxim. 
When Protagoras attacks this maxim, his extreme form 
of expression is a natural reaction from another extreme. 
Plato’s theory of the incorporeal Ideas, in its more extreme 
form, rests upon the presupposition, that unless knowledge 
is founded upon the absolutely independent reality, noth- 
ing is known.! Aristotle, in his Metaphysics, spends a long 
time in trying to define what makes any real object, or 
substance, just ztsel/f,—a being logically independent of 
other beings. That the definition of this essence or of any 
being also implies that a real substance is independent 
of the accident that it is known by another is, for Aris- 
totle, rather a tacitly assumed and self-evident matter 
than a topic of frequent overt argument. But when, in 


1 Any summary statement of the significance of the Platonic Ideas has 
to be, in a measure, unjust. I here follow what is, on the whole, Zeller’s 
interpretation ; and I lay stress upon the extremer form of the Platonic 
theory. Plato himself sometimes saw much deeper. Independence, in 
the abstract sense hereafter to be defined, seems indeed certainly to be 
implied in the famous expression (Sympos. p. 211, A and B): atrd xaé? 
avrTd ued’ avTod uovoedés det dy, taken in its context as the climax of an 
effort to define the complete indifference of the Ideas to all beyond. But 
that the Plato of the Philebus and the Sophist recognizes other aspects of 
the situation is true. The argument (Sophist, p. 248) that our knowledge 
of Being is one of the proofs that the Real is both active and passive, and 
enters into relations, is identical in spirit with the criticism of Realism 
here to be given. 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 99 


the fourth book of the Metaphysics, he has to deal with 
Protagorean scepticism, Aristotle uses, as one reductio ad 
absurdum, the consideration that, were this Protagorean 
doctrine true, “There would exist nothing in case beings 
with souls vanished from the world. For then,” he says, 
“sense-perceptions would cease.” ‘That,’ he contin- 
ues, “perceivable objects and sense-percepts would then 
vanish, is perhaps true, for all this latter existence (¢.e. 
as we should say, the existence of color, odors, etc.) is 
a state of a sentient being; but that the substrata upon 
which sense is based, should not persist, even were there 
no sense-perception, is impossible. ‘For sense-perception 
is not a perception of itself, but there is some other over 
and above perception; and this other must necessarily be 
prior to perception.) For what moves, is prior in nature 
to what is moved. “ And if one says that these two prin- 
ciples (subject and object, moved and mover) are related 
to each other, the same result still holds true.” That 
in all this Aristotle admits interrelation, and recognizes 
no independence as absolute, is true, but here is one of 
the central difficulties of Aristotle’s system. 

Later Realism only makes this sundering of knowledge 
and object more express, as scepticism has to be faced, 
and as the idea of the individual Self gets more sharply 
contrasted with all ideas of outer things. The Cartesian 
dualism of extended and of thinking substance derives 
its extreme character from considerations with which the 
problem of knowledge has not a little to do. Occasion- 
alism is an instance of the translation of a logical inde- 
pendence of essence into the assertion of a real causal 
independence. 


33336 


100 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


\Locke states the realistic definition briefly when he 
says, of his primary qualities: “The particular bulk, 
number, etc., of the parts of fire, or snow, are really in 
them, whether any one’s senses perceive them or no; and 
therefore they may be called real qualities, because they 
really exist in those bodies.” As to the secondary quali- 
ties, as he goes on to say: “Take away the sensation of 
them . . . and all colors, tastes, odors, and sounds, as they 
are such particular ideas, vanish and cease.” Here then 
is the realistic touchstone, the test of reality. Does the 
object stay when the knowledge vanishes? The converse 
of this test, however, also holds true for any realism. 
For erroneous ideas are possible. Hence, whether the 
object is or is not, any given idea may be held by any- 
body that you please. The idea might then persist when 
the object vanishes, or remain changeless when the object 
changes. ! 

It is of service to compare these familiar expressions of 
the classical realistic view with the speech used by an 
ancient Hindoo system of philosophy, the Sankhya. The 
Sankhya was a realistic doctrine, and very sharply dual- 
istic. Its world consisted of matter and of soul, each of 
these sorts of realities being, in ultimate nature, totally 
different from the other. In fact, the salvation of the 
wise man depends, for the Sankhya, upon his absolutely 
distinguishing himself as soul from all material objects, 


1 Kant, in his criticism of the Ontological Proof for God’s existence, 
emphasizes this expression of the realistic test of being. The being of 
fact, he says, never follows from any mere idea. The that never follows 
from the what. In other words, whether or no any object exists, your 
ideas about that supposed being may be whatever they happen to be. 


~7y AT. 
UY INO, 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS OE 


states, and possessions. In a Sankhya treatise translated 
by Garbe (a commentary upon the text called the 
Karika), I find a statement of the realistic definition of 
Being, in a form abstract enough, but illustrated in 
characteristic Hindoo fashion! I may first quote the 
statement of the commented Sankhya text in question 
concerning the two types of Being of which this extreme 
dualism makes the world consist. On the one side, as 
this text tells us, there is the material world. On the 
other side, however, there is the soul, which the SAankhya 
doctrine makes absolutely immaterial. Now both the 
matter and the soul are real beings. The text here de- 
scribes them as to their essential metaphysical characters 
very briefly, and side by side. “The formed matter,” it 
says, —1.e., the matter of the physical world, “is com- 
posed of three constituents, —is object, is common _ object 
for all knowers, is of non-mental character, and is pro- 
ductive. The materia prima also possesses these same 
characters. The soul is opposed to both; yet (being real) 
it has certain features in common with them.” 

The commentator explains this text at some length. 
“The word ‘object,’” he says, “is used in opposition to 
those who say (as the Buddhistic metaphysicians had 
asserted) that there are only states of mind, such as joy, 
sorrow, confusion, tones, and the like. An object,” he 
continues, “is that which is known as outside one’s ideas. 
Therefore is the term ‘common object’ also used. For 
this term implies that material objects, such as pottery, for 


1See Der Mondschein der Sankhya-Wahrheit, in deutscher Ueberset- 
zung von Richard Garbe, Abhandl. der Bayer. Akad. der Wiss. I. Cl., 
Bd. XIX, Abdth. TI, p. 567. 


102 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


instance, are known independently by many different 
souls. But if the objects were only the soul’s state of 
mind, then, since states of mind are affections of one in- 
dividual only, the objects would be similarly limited, 
precisely as one man cannot observe another man’s ideas, 
since the interior organ is invisible. That is what the 
text means. And so,” continues the commentator, “it 
becomes comprehensible how very many men can bethink 
themselves of a single (7.e. of the same) coquettish glance 
of a dancing girl, while that otherwise (namely, upon the 
basis of subjective idealism) would not be possible.” So 
much then for independent beings of the material sort. 
You see, Their independence implies that these beings are 
out of all mind, and yet can become common objects for 
many minds at once. 

The commentator then indicates, what he elsewhere 
developes more at length, namely, the features that the 
souls, as real beings, have in common even with their 
extreme opposite, matter. They too, he points out, are 
eternal; they are independent; and they are not the 
product of anything else. To be sure, unlike matter, 
they are not perceivable from without through sense. 
But they are utterly separate in being from matter, and, 
as thus separate, they are independent individuals. As we 
just saw, salvation, for the Sankhya philosophy, depends 
upon coming to know precisely this utter independence 
of the true soul and the material world. In fact the soul 
is not only separated by a chasm from matter; it is 
even really unaffected by matter. What seem to be 
affections of the soul are, according to the Sankhya 
psycho-physical theory, material states, which merely 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 103 


appear to be in the soul, as, according to a favorite 
Sankhya similitude, the red Hibiscus flower is reflected 
in a crystal that all the while remains inwardly unaltered 
by the presence of the flower. The result is a theory 
of a sort of psycho-physical parallelism, founded, to be 
sure, according to the Sankhya, upon an illusion. 

While the commentary just cited belongs, according 
to Garbe, to the twelfth century of our era, and the 
commented text of the Kariké itself is known to have 
existed not much before the fifth century, the meta- 
physical views here in question are no doubt of a very 
ancient date, and may well be quite independent of any 
but Hindoo origins. In any case the passage just quoted 
serves to give us, from a remote source, two or three 
very characteristic and universal features of realistic 
doctrines, — features whose meaning becomes all the 
clearer for our attention by reason of their foreign dress. 
The whole may be summed up in a phrase: (This real- 
istic world is a world of Independent Beings.) 

Any real being, as you see, has to be essentially, and 
if possible absolutely, independent. The nature of the 
gulf that divides the independent beings from one another 
is peculiarly indicated, and in fact is typically exempli- 
fied, by a certain separation that is discoverable between 
knowledge and its material objects. What is known,.if 
it isa physical thing, is outside of the knower. To this 
sundering of knower and physical object common sense 
bears witness. Moreover, a certain proof of the fact of 
the sundering, and at all events an explanation of what 
the sundering means, is furnished by the further fact 
that many knowers, while notoriously isolated from one 


104 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


another, as our failure to read the ideas of our neighbors 
proves, can still know the same outer object. The same- 
ness of the physical fact for all souls, is only explicable, 
in view of the mutual isolation of the souls, by the sup- 
position of an equal isolation of the physical fact from the 
inner life of all who know it. Finally, if the material 
objects are independently real, the souls that know are 
also independently real. All is now independence and 
isolation. This is a world of chasms. The independence 
meant is intended to be a mutual relation. : 

So much for our SAankhya authors. They bring again 
to mind what I earlier mentioned about the social motives 
of realism. Our acceptance of our physical objects as 
topics of common knowledge for all men, stands side by 
side with an equally social assurance on our part that 
any man’s knowledge is primarily a secret from all his 
neighbors. The mutual independence of the knowers 
requires their common separation from all their common 
objects. The independence of the objects makes possible 
their community for all the independent knowers. These 
social presuppositions have a great deal to do with the 
development of the whole realistic world,—a world 
where an abstract reduction of the reality to a mysterious 
unity, such as the Eleatic One, has alternated with a 
tendency to create numerous gaps and separations. In 
this world, thought, as you see, first declares certain 
barriers absolute; and then proceeds, by immediate 
assurance, or by elaborate devices of reasoning, to tran- 
scend in knowledge these barriers, and to join in insight 
what Being is first said to have put forever asunder. 
The result is a struggle in which the unity sometimes 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 105 


completely triumphs; but then the One becomes a 
mystery, or the many survive, and then where are the 
links? 

Two features, frequent, but by no means universal, 
in realistic systems, I have in this whole summary de- 
liberately kept in the background. Reality has often 
been regarded, by the realists who are of a more or less 
Eleatic type, as implying, essentially, the permanence and 
unchangeableness of the reals. So it was with Plato’s 
Ideas; so it was with Herbart’s Reals; and Spinoza’s 
Substance was eternal. A similar eternity the Sankhya 
knew, although that doctrine also recognized a realm of 
real changes. Reality has also often been made, by these 
or by other Realists, to imply essentially the causal efficacy, 
the active potency, of the real entities. These two 
views, of course, cannot easily be harmonized. But 
regarding both these features of many realistic systems, 
I can here only observe that they are, to my mind, 
secondary features. 

Historically, they are indeed not unimportant in the de- 
velopment of Realism. Permanence, in the first place, has 
always been regarded, — and especially by the older forms 
of Realism, —as a peculiarly strong evidence of indepen- 
dence; and often it has been conceived as, in the second 
place, a necessary condition of such independence. So it 
was, for instance, for Herbart. What lasts forever, wholly 
unchanged by anything, must of course be unchanged by 
the coming and going of knowledge. Hence the concept 
of the real as the absolutely Abiding, has played a great 
part, not only in the Eleatic doctrine, in Plato, and in 
Atomism, but also in modern, scientifically colored, specu- 


106 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


lations. And just so, too, Power, Efficacy, Activity, seem 
to be evidences of independence. Plato associates them 
in the Sophist, with Reality. Yet, I insist, none of these 
predicates are essential to Realism. 

Realism especially tends to sunder the what from the 
that, the essence from its existence. But permanence 
properly belongs to the what and not to the that of 
any being in a realistic world. And the same is true 
of activity, potency, effectiveness. One can define a 
mythical being, say Achilles, conceiving him as yellow- 
haired. To be yellow-haired belongs to the what of 
Achilles; to his essence, not to his existence. One can 
so conceive him while not asserting that he is, but while 
defining him as a myth. But just as easily one can 
conceive him as active, as pursuing Hector; and still 
one need not conceive him as anything but a myth. 
Activity and realistic existence are then certainly dif- 
ferent ideas, just as much as yellow-haired and existence. 
Just so it is with permanence. Not all realists have 
asserted that permanence holds true of the Real. A 
world of events could be independently real for any 
Heraclitean thinker. The flashes of moonlight upon 
water may as well stand for independent realities as 
any other facts of experience. With the arguments 
used in special realistic systems, for the permanence of 
the reals, we have here nothing to do. Our concern is 
with the definition. 

So there remains one more as the one essential his- 
torical mark of the realistic type of Being, its onto- 
logical independence of knowledge that refers to it from 
without. 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 107 


Ill 


I have thus defined the realistic view (and have tried 
by historical examples both to elucidate and to justify 
the definition given at the outset) and above all I have 
tried to separate the one essential feature that lies at 
the basis of every realistic system from the countless 
accidental features, and from the more or less contro- 
versial consequences that, in this realistic system, or in 
that, distract our attention from the most fundamental 
issue. This issue is simply: the problem whether any 
realistic definition whatever can be self-consistent, or 
can be adequate to what we seek when we look for true 
Being. Our problem, you see, is not here whether the 
real world contains one or another special type of beings, 
—whether only states of consciousness and their real 
relations really exist, or whether only atoms have being, 
whether colors are real, or whether space has genuine 
being, or whether souls or angels are to be found in 
the outer universe. Our only present problem relates to 
the sense in which anything whatever can be called real 
at all. We wish to know whether this abstract sunder- 
ing of the what and the that can be consistently carried 
out. 

But when the issue is thus simplified, the realistic 
definition stands before you as something that is on the 
one hand very plausible and familiar, and on the other 
hand very baffling and mysterious. As for its plausi- 
bility and familiarity, we hardly need here further dwell 
upon them. Is it not perfectly obvious that the very 
life of ordinary, socially colored common sense depends 


108 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


upon tacitly admitting, or on occasion vigorously assert. 
ing that “whether or no” this or that observer, or this 
or that pupil at school, or a given doubter in faith, or a 
particular philosophical thinker, knows certain facts, those 
facts, whether physical or mental, whether God, or mat- 
ter, or moonbeams, are what they are? This “ whether 
or no” of ordinary common sense seems to be simply 
crystallized in a technically abstract expression in the 
fundamental definition of systematic realism as so far 
stated. On the other hand, so soon as one undertakes 
to formulate an exact account of the way in which Being 
is independent of knowledge, one discovers that nothing 
seems harder to carry out to its ultimate logical conse- 
quences than the definition of precisely that type of 
independence which is here in mind. Common sense 
knows, in the ordinary world of experience, very various 
grades and instances of relative independence amongst 
objects; but common sense also knows that often em- 
pirical objects which have been called mutually and 
even totally independent turn out to be, in other aspects, 
very closely linked. Yet the independence which Real- 
ism has in mind as characterizing the ultimate Being 
of things, must be something of a very fundamental and 
exact meaning and consequence. For it defines just 
what gives to things their whole Reality. Nevertheless 
realistic systems usually find it very much easier to 
assert or tacitly to assume the general definition of inde- 
pendent being just stated, than to give any precise 
account of the logical consequences to which the defini- 
tion leads. As soon, however, as these consequences 
themselves are directly faced, they often become fairly 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 109 


startling in their strangeness. And in what sense this 
last observation is true, a very moderate knowledge of 
the history of Realism will show. For the paradox of 
this history is that while the realistic metaphysic begins 
as the very voice of common sense, the more developed 
and thoroughgoing realistic systems show a character 
which has made realism, from the Sankhya to Herbart, 
or to Herbert Spencer, the breeding place of a wholly 
marvellous race of metaphysical paradoxes. The Atoms 
and the Monads, the Ideas of Plato, the isolated Souls 
of the Sankhya, the unknowable Things in Themselves 
of Kant, the transcendent Reals of Herbart, the Eleatic 
One, the Substance of Spinoza, and the Unknowable of 
Spencer, are beings far more remote from our ordinary 
experience and from common sense than are many views 
such as Realism vigorously opposes. Yet all these types 
of hypothetical realistic beings were invented in the very 
effort to make a realistic definition of what it is to be, 
consistent with itself, and adequate to the demands of 
life and of experience. 

A definition whose union with common sense is at 
first so close, but whose consequences are subject to 
such remarkable and rapid transformations, is not indeed 
thereby discredited, but is at all events properly subject to 
a close scrutiny, to see whether we may not find out the 
reason of this tendency towards unexpected interpreta- 
tions of Being. But if we indeed look yet more narrowly 
at the history of Realism, we find obvious motives run- 
ning through the whole which make it seem in still other 
ways paradoxical. For upon such closer scrutiny we find 
that Realism has, as it were, vibrated between two histori- 


va 
a 


110 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


cal extremes, extremes suggested by the well-known ques- 
tion whether the real world contains One independently 
real Being, or Many such beings, all equally independent 
of any knowledge that, not belonging to their own nature, 
refers to them from without. It is just the problem of 
the One and the Many which, when it arises in a world 
defined in the realistic way, is the deeper source of those 
marvellous metaphysical hypotheses of which we just 
spoke. And it is when we consider this aspect of the 
history of Realism that we become at length fully awake 
to the gravity of the problems in hand. 

Realistic systems have frequently, like the Sankhya, 
taught that many different beings are real. The histori- 
cal fate of such pluralistic forms of Realism is well 
known, and has already been mentioned. Again and 
again, with an uniformity that seems characteristic, such 
types of Realism, in order to assure the true multiplicity 
of their real beings, have defined these beings as in ulti- 
mate nature quite independent of one another, as essen- 
tially out of all mutual relations, as isolated. The result 


jone sees in the Monads of Leibniz, or in the Reals of 


Herbart, or in the souls of the Sankhya itself. Then, 
necessarily, there has arisen the question why, despite 
the isolation of the real Beings, this, our own world of 
experience, seems so full of interrelationships, of mutual 


connections, of laws that bind soul to soul, and sun to 


planet, and all things to space, to time, or to God. To 
meet such demands, Realism has in just such pluralistic 
systems resorted to various paradoxical secondary expla- 
nations. Preéstablished harmonies, illusory forms of un- 
real linkage, or assumptions of intermediating principles, 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS - 2 


--- assumptions such as lead the philosopher into a hope- 
less, because unreasonable, complexity,—such are the | 


devices whereby Realism has in such cases sought to | 
join again the sundered fragments of its disintegrated/ 
universe, like a careless child tearfully trying to mend a 
shattered crystal. 

Or, on the other hand, some historical systems of 
Realism have been simply monistic, as the Eleatic doc- 
trine was, or as, upon the realistic side of his ambiguous 
system, Spinoza’s teaching appears. (But in such cases, 
not only has common sense often revolted at the thought 
of making all the independently real beings into a single 
Being,)but the realist’s own logic has been easily turned 
against him. For, as an objector may then briefly sum 
up the case, addressing the merely monistic realists: 
“Our so-called false opinions, when we believe that the 
realities of the world are many, and are not One Being, 
—are not these opinions themselves, viewed merely as 
opinions, still also psychical facts, as real in the mental 
world as is your One Being in its world. For you can- 
not even say that the opinions are false without admit- 
ting that, even as mere psychical facts, the opinions are 
in existence. But our false opinions, as you yourself 
also say, are many. Hence. there is a real manifoldness 
in the world, and your simple One cannot be the whole / 
truth.” And this statement is, of course, conclusive as 
against any absolutely simple oneness about the inde- 
pendent reality. 

Paradox has faced the realist, therefore, whenever he 
has attempted, during the history of thought, seriously 
to apply that idea of the fundamental definition of Being 


| 


i 
rj 


j 
\ 
} 


f 


112 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


which lies at the basis of his whole doctrine, to the 
development of a positive conception of a world that 
shall contain either One Being or Many Realities. Either 
all Unity, or else no linkages: such has been his historical 
alternative. Now is this fate of Realism a mere accident, 
due to the defects of individual realistic thinkers? Or 
is it somehow founded in the very nature of the realistic 
definition of what it is to be? 

This question deserves to be considered more carefully, 
and upon its own merits. We have perhaps exhausted 
the aid that a merely historical survey can just at present 
give us. We must turn back to our realistic definition 
itself, and must directly consider, first, how best to state 
its exact logical force, and then how to test it by apply- 
ing it to that famous problem as to whether the universe 
contains One real Being or Many real Beings. For, as I 
must insist, it is precisely the problem of the One and 
the Many which will prove to be the great test problem 
of realistic metaphysics. 


IV 


And so we turn from the perplexing and varied his- 
tory of the fortunes of realistic doctrine, to the even 
more forbidding task of reflecting upon the first prin- 
ciples of Realism. We lay aside for the time all thought 
of whether God, or the souls, or permanent matter, or 
the flashes of moonlight upon water, or the coquettish 
glances of our Sankhya commentator’s world of Oriental 
courts and splendors, are to be regarded as real beings. 
We ask only as to the most general theory of the consti- 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 113 


tution of any realistic world. And here we shall restate 
the precise sense of the realistic definition, and next shall 
develope, in a series of formal propositions, its inevitable 
consequences, until we see to what end they lead, both 
the realist himself, and all whose faith, whether in the 
world of science or in the realm of religion, depends 
upon realistic philosophical formulas. 

As to the meaning of the realistic definition, we must 
take our realist seriously. He declares that whenever 
you know any being not yourself, your object is prima- 
rily and logically quite independent of your knowledge, 
so that whether your knowledge comes or goes, is true 
or is false, your object so far may remain whatever it was. 
He asserts, also, that in knowing the rest of the universe, 
you do, on the whole, know a being that is not your 
knowledge, and that is consequently independent of your 
knowledge. He asserts that this independence is the 
very means of defining the Being of any real object, when 
viewed in relation to any knowledge of this real object 
that is not itself a part of the object known. Now this 
definition turns upon the conception of independence. 
In just what sense is the reality to be independent of 
the knowing process ? 

In the Mathematical Theory of Probabilities, the con- 
ception of events that are said to be mutually indepen- 
dent is familiar. Two chance throws of dice, two draw- 
ings of a lottery, are such independent events. But the 
definition of such independence in the theory in question 
is always relative, and is limited to special aspects of the 
objects in question. One sometimes means, in such cases, 
that while both events, say both throws of the dice, are 


114 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


indeed supposed to be connected in the general causal 
order of the universe, and so are not wholly independent, 
we happen not to know what this causal connection is. 
Or again, even if one talks of pure chance, and ignores 
causal linkage, one has indeed to observe that any two 
physical events are viewed as occurring in the same space, 
and in the same time, or perhaps in the case of the same 
dice. One has also to admit that all parts of space, and 
all moments of time, are, in a sense, conceptually inter- 
dependent. For you cannot conceive a cubic foot of space 
destroyed, without abstracting from all space; nor can 
you suppose this hour to vanish wholly from the time 
stream without abolishing alltime. But if space and time 
are thus Wholes of conceptually linked and mathemati- 
cally interdependent parts, of course one has to admit 
that, in a sense, no two objects, no two events, in space 
and in time, can be defined as through and through logi- 
cally or essentially independent of each other; since in 
defining each as to its time and space relations, one has to 
take account of facts which can be recognized only as 
mathematically linked with the space and time aspects of 
the other object or event. Yet, nevertheless, in the theory 
of probabilities, one still calls two events that occur in the 
same space and time, or even in the repeated throwing of 
the same dice, independent events. Plainly then, one 
merely means that while these events are not wholly inde- 
pendent, there is an aspect in which they may be called 
independent, either because one does not know what the 
interdependence is, or because knowing, one ignores some 
aspect of the interdependence as insignificant. 

Now Realism usually also admits, even while it speaks 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 115 


of the object as independent of the knowledge, that 
various causal connections, nevertheless, bind this or 
that object to this or that state of knowledge. On the 
other hand, the independence here in question seems to 
mean something much more nearly absolute than the 
independence which the Theory of Probabilities has in 
mind when it speaks of the two throws of the dice as 
independent events. For the “whether or no” of cus- 
tomary realistic phraseology means to sunder knowledge 
and object, taken in their deepest truth, more completely 
than any adjacent physical events, or even than any two 
merely physical facts can be sundered. For it is the 
very that of the object which is to be essentially and 
wholly sundered from the what of the object, in so far 
as the latter is expressed in any idea. 

The only way to deal with a possibly ambiguous con- 
ception like this, is to view it first in its most extreme 
form, and to observe its consequences. Then later, if the 
conception is proposed in some modified form, the possi- 
bility of such modification may be considered. In this 
lecture, then, I shall henceforth take the realistic type of 
independence literally, and as a total independence. How 
alone a modified Realism can be stated, we shall see in 
connection with our Third Conception of Being. For the 
time, our realist shall be supposed to say, as many do, 
“ Knowledge makes no difference to its real outer Object.” 
What follows? 

In brief, then, this realistic definition seems to imply 
two assertions: First, that even if your knowledge and 
its object are facts which when examined, say by a psy- 
chologist, appear to him to be causally connected, or 


116 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


which, when externally observed, seem to agree, still any 
‘such linkage, where it exists, is no part of the essential 
‘nature, i.e. of the mere definition, either of your object 
in so far as it is real, or of your knowledge in so far as 
it consists of mere ideas. If your knowledge is true, is 
sound, is valid, it is indeed such as somehow to agree 
with the object. In other words, ideas depend for their 
truth upon objects. But then false opinion is just as 
. possible in a realistic world as is truth. You cannot tell 
by examining a “mere idea” as an idea in a realistic 
world, whether its real object is or is not, any more than 
you can tell by merely considering an object, whether 
any particular idea external to that object does or does 
not rightly represent it. That is why a realist has to 
reject with Kant the well-known ontological proof for 
God’s existence. God’s existence cannot be proved from 
any mere idea about God. No “mere idea” is, as such, 
essentially linked to its independent object. The that 
‘in a realistic world never follows from the mere what. 
Nothing has real being merely by virtue of the fact that 
it is conceived by any knower. Conversely, nothing is con- 
ceived in idea merely by virtue of the mere fact that it 
is real. If, then, idea and object are linked, by ties of 
causation, or by the mere fact that the idea happens to 
be true, then such linkage, for a realist, is another fact, 
namely, just the fact that the causal connection itself 
exists, or that the idea, by good fortune, is true of its 
object./ A cat may look at a king; and hereupon both 
cat and king may be viewed by a student of psychology 
or physics as facts in the interdependent world of space 
and time, But the cat’s looking, viewed as knowledge, 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 117 


jmakes “no difference” to the king; it is no part of the 
faciinition of the king’s real being that he should be 
\known or observed by a cat. On the other hand, the 
‘eat? s idea of the king may be as false as you please. The 
“mere idea” in the cat’s mind in no wise essentially 
determines the existence of the king. Just so, Realism 
asserts that existent causal or other linkage between any 
knower and what he knows is no part of the definition 
of the object known, or of its real being, or of the essence 
of the knowing idea if viewed in itself alone as a “mere 
idea.” 

In the second place, however, Realism, taken in its un- 
modified form, asserts that the independence here in ques- 
tion, namely, the logical or essential independence of ob- 
ject over against knowledge, is, indeed, in its own realm, 
absolute. For it is the whole Being of the object, spatial, 
temporal, inner, and outer, and all that is really true of 
it, that is independent of the fact that anybody knows this 
truth. 

This view of Being may, for the sake of precision, re- 
ceive still a little further development, and we may now 
afresh state the matter in the most general terms thus : — 

Let there first be conceived any possible object, let us 
call it 0. We want to know what would happen if this 
possible object o were real. To this end let there be 
conceived a second object, other than the first; and let 
this second object be called somebody’s knowledge or 
idea or opinion, true or false, about the first object o. 
For brevity, let us simply name this second member of 
our pair “the idea of o.” We shall first view it merely 
as a knowing process. We care in no whit whose idea 


118 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


this is, or how good or poor a representative of the first 
object it seems to be. 

Next let us define the relation of the idea of o to its 
object 0, the other member of the pair,—the relation, 
namely, which unmodified Realism regards as essential. 
The definition in question is now, as a mere abstract state- 
ment, easy. Simply suppose the idea of o to change, 
in any way, becoming a good idea where it was formerly 
bad, or dim where it formerly was clear, or altering in 
the reverse of these ways, or in any other way. Let 
the idea of o be first one man’s idea, and then another 
man’s idea of o, or finally, let the idea of o, for the 
time, vanish altogether from the scene. Having tried 
all such changes in the idea of o, then arbitrarily 
define o as such an object that, as far as the nature of 
o and that of the idea of o are alone considered, there 
is no logical necessity that any change in 9, or in the 
whole Being of o so far as o is real, need correspond 
to or follow from any of these variations of the idea 
of o. In other words, if o is later to be viewed as 
causally linked to the idea, some third and wholly ex- 
ternal power, say somebody’s will, must be also real, 
and must be supposed, if that be still possible, to co- 
operate with the idea and to induce such changes in 
the knowing object. This definition of o as such an 
object that by the definition of o itself no change in 0 
logically need correspond to any variation in the idea 
of o, or even to the total vanishing of that idea, — 
this definition, I say, will hereupon be the more fully 
developed statement of the proposition that the object 
9 is independent of the idea or opinion of knowledge 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 119 


which refers to it, or that essence and existence are 
mutually independent. Any causal or other linkage 
between o and the idea will have to be later added as 
a third fact, involved neither in the mere essence of 0 
nor in that of the idea, in case any such linkage is to 
be found. 

Moreover, the essential independence of object and 
“mere idea,” in so far as each is first viewed by itself 
alone, will have to be a mutual independence. The 
idea will have to be, in its own separate essence, inde- 
pendent of the object. Otherwise, by merely examining 
the idea, taken by itself, you could prove something 
about the existence of its object. But, if so, then the 
that would follow from the what, and the independent 
existence of a thing from the presence of some mere 
idea of the thing. That, however, is forbidden by the 
whole spirit of realism. For that anything is, is a mere 
fact, to be wholly sundered from what anybody thinks 
it to be. So we can accordingly add that the object o 
also, when viewed in itself, might be supposed to change 
or to vanish without any change occurring in the idea 
of o. Of course 7f the idea is to remain true, it will 
indeed change when o changes, and so will be in that 
way dependent upon o. But then an idea might be 
false. That any given idea is true, or agrees with 
its object, is itself a further fact in a realistic world, 
a tertium quid. But this fact, like any other, may either 
be or not be. Mention to me a mere idea, define it as 
you will, and in a realistic world I have to say that 
this idea might be all that it now is whether or no 
any corresponding object exists in the real world. 


120 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


And now suppose that o stands for any real object 
that you please, whether an angel, or a worm, or a 
Spencerian Unknowable; and that o is, precisely thus, 
independent of any idea that you please, so long as 
this idea is not itself a part of 0. Suppose, too, that 
the object o is consequently also independent even of 
the very ideas by which we just now declared it to be 
independent. Suppose just so that the ideas are, as 
mere ideas, definable independently of their objects. 
Then, finally, we have before us the unmodified realistic 
definition of the sense in which the object o is real. 
For Realism asserts simply that the real being of o is 
adequately defined by the supposed law that no change 
in either o or the mere idea of o primarily or essentially 
corresponds to any change or variation or vanishing of 
the other member of this pair, so long as that idea is 
not itself a part of 0, and that any causal connection, 
or truthful agreement, or other such mutual dependence 
of o and the idea, if it ever came to exist, would be a 
third fact, external both to the primary nature of o and 
to that of the idea. 

This abstract development of the sense of that 
“whether or no” which common sense so lightly utters 
when it speaks of an object as real “whether or no” 
you are aware of the fact,—this development, I say, 
already serves to bring more clearly before us the ex- 
treme subtlety of the considerations upon which the 
realistic view depends. But the definition is now com- 
plete. Let us at once set it to work. It has defined 
a world. Let us enter that world, and see what is 
there. 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 121 


V 


And so next I ask the formal question: In the 
realistic world whose Being is thus defined, could there 
exist Many different beings? And if they existed, in 
what relation to one another would they stand? Or 
again, could a realistic world contain only One sole 
Being, to the exclusion of many beings? 

These questions at once raise another question, viz., 
What are we now to mean by the term “One real Being,” 
and what by the term “Many real Beings”? Some real- 
istic systems have answered this question by saying at 
once that by calling a real Being One, we mean that this 
being is perfectly simple, having no parts or passions, no 
internal variety of nature, no complexity about it. This 
is what Herbart declares about each one of the many real 
beings of which his world is composed. A realist of 
Herbart’s type would insist that wherever there is real 
variety, there must be many real beings, so that to assert 
that there is only one reality in the world, would be to 
assert that all variety is illusory. Since Herbart holds 
that variety is real, he has to say that the world consists 
of many different beings, while each separate being for 
him is absolutely simple. 

The arguments used for such views by realists like 
Herbart need not here concern us. In this general exam- 
ination of Realism we may avoid altogether that issue, 
and may leave it a wholly open question, by arbitrarily 
defining the sort of difference between two beings which, 
if it were certainly known to be present, would be great 
enough to suffice to assure us that these beings were 


122 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


really two, and were not mere parts or aspects of any 
single being. This characteristic difference which would 
“suffice to assure us that two beings were different reali- 
ties, may be defined without in the least attempting to 
pass upon the question whether any variety could after- 
wards be found, in a realistic world, within the bounds 
of a single being. 

Accordingly, I shall here not at all either assert or 
deny that a single realistic being, if found, would be a 
simple being. For all that I now know, a single realistic 
entity may be as simple as Herbart wished, or as complex 
as the whole arch of the heavens. I shall only say that 
if, in the realistic world, we were to find two objects 
that were as independent of each other as, in our defini- 
tion of the general realistic conception of what it is 
to be, the object of knowledge was independent of any 
knowledge of that object, then, and then only, we should 
call those objects two real beings, really different from 
each other. If, however, on the other hand, we should 
find that, within the realistic world, all the real objects 
there present were in any way linked together, so as 
not to be mutually independent, we should so far have, 
according to just the present definition, to regard them as 
parts or aspects of One real being. 

This way of stating our present meaning for the terms 
“One” and “ Many,” as applied to the realistic world, is 
of course, if you please, an arbitrary way. But it has the 
advantage of leaving open all the questions as to whether 
any single being would also, upon examination, prove to 
be a simple being; and this definition of unity and mul- 
tiplicity has also the advantage of exhaustively stating 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 123 


a perfectly definite alternative. Let me restate then, in 
exact form, just this definition of the One and the Many. 

Suppose then that, in the realistic world, we should 
find two real objects, a and 6. Suppose that they were 
found to be such that if either of them changed in any 
way whatever, or vanished, the other of them might still 
consistently be conceived as undergoing no change what- 
ever. That is, suppose that the presence or the absence, 
or any alteration of either of them, logically speaking, 
need make “no difference” to the other, in precisely the 
same sense in which Realism says that it now makes 
“no difference” to your object whether you know it or 
not. Suppose, in brief, the universal law that, so far as 
the nature of @ and 6 is alone considered, no change in 
either a or 6 need correspond to any change in the other 
member of this pair. Then, by my present definition, 
a and 6 would be two different real beings; while if any 
less mutual independence than this existed, my present 
definition would regard a and 6 as parts of one complete 
Being. Upon this basis we could once more ask the 
realist: “Does your world contain in just this sense Many 
different, that is mutually independent beings, or does it 
contain only One real being, whose inner structure, per- 
haps simple, perhaps infinitely complex, still permits of no 
mutual independence of parts. 

Two answers are, logically speaking, now open to the 
realist. He can decide for the One; he can decide for the 
Many. For the argument’s sake, I suppose him first to 
decide for the Many. His world shall now contain various 
mutually independent beings — beings such that, as they 
at first are defined, the existence and the nature of any 


124 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


one of them is essentially indifferent to the presence, or 
absence, or alteration of any of the others. So far as the 
primary definition of any one of them goes, no change in 
that one need correspond to any change in the others. 
This is my realist’s present hypothesis. I ask at once, 
what further consequences follow from this hypothesis? 
And in particular I want to know whether, when once 
the realist has defined his many beings as logically inde- 
pendent and as all in his sense real, he can ever after- 
wards define any way in which they can come to be linked, 
say by causation or space or time? In brief, I want to see 
him mend the broken crystal of the world of the Many, 
and make one world of it. In answer, I suppose that 
the realist may here at once counsel me to consult experi- 
ence. What is more familiar than the existence of really 
independent beings? Yonder in the ocean there are drops 
of water. Here on the land is my desk. Both are real. 
Does any change in one of these beings just now need to 
correspond to any change in the other. If either were sup- 
posed to vanish, would the other thereby be changed? 
The unseen meteors in interplanetary spaces, are they not 
beings that are real, and that yet just now make no differ- 
ence to your being or to mine? If we change or die, do 
they not move on unheeding? If their swarms disintegrate, 
do we therefore suffer? What then is more familiar than 
the empirical fact that the real world contains many 
mutually independent beings? In fact there are men in 
China or in Lapland who are beings utterly independent 
of me. They know me not, nor I them; and our lives 
make “no difference” to one another. Is this not the 
verdict of experience ? 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 125 


But as to the consequences of such independence, why 
is not experience also again our guide? Beings, thus pri- 
marily independent, may later come to be linked by actual 
ties. These ties are then new facts in the world. But 
they are possible. The drop of water in the ocean, evapo- 
rated, may enter into the atmospheric circulation, may be 
carried, as moisture, to my desk, and may there help to 
warp the wood. The meteors, reaching the earth’s neigh- 
borhood, may be seen and perhaps heard as they explode. 
The men in China or in Lapland may become my business 
correspondents, my enemies, or my neighbors. So then 
independence, first real, may later change to mutual depen- 
dence, and what were strangers may become linked. Is 
not all this obvious? 

But if one thus urges upon me such considerations, I 
reply at once that all this is simply not obvious as any 
case of true independence or of its possible consequences. 
I have just abstractly defined an absolute type of mutual 
independence supposed to exist amongst many real beings. 
This independence, I suppose a realist hypothetically 
to assert as the truth about this world. I ask for the 
consequences of this hypothesis. But now I distinctly 
decline to admit that, in our concrete human experience, 
you can ever show me any two physically real objects 
which are so independent of each other that no change in 
one of them need correspond to any change of the other. 
On the contrary, the very cases mentioned are cases of 
objects such that certain changes of one do very really 
correspond to very precise changes in the other, and the 
very beings of each can only be defined by admitting 
the possibility of just such a change. ‘The water, once 


126 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


absorbed by the wood of the desk, changes the desk. 
But the absorption itself is due to certain changes 
occurring in the temperature, movement, density of the 
water or of its vapor. The man in China who may 
become my enemy or my neighbor is already such that 
certain changes in him, if they occurred, would not be 
indifferent to me. This possibility already makes part 
of his being. Furthermore, in our ordinary world of 
experience, beings like meteors and planets, water and 
wood, men and other men, viz. beings that on occasion 
may come into a very obvious connection, are already, 
even before their so-called actual linkage, truly related, 
yes, linked to one another, by space, by time, by physical 
and moral ties. What happens when we say that they 
pass from mutual independence to linkage, is really that 
we find them, in our experience, passing from relations 
whose importance is merely to us less obvious, into 
relations of more obvious human interest. But now the 
relations of an object in ordinary experience make parts 
of the object itself. A change in these relations would 
result from the change of other objects. Hence these 
empirical objects are never known as independent. If 
I am already related to the drops of water now in the 
ocean, to the meteors that might become visible to me, to 
men whom I might come to know, then you can never 
say that experience proves me to be independent of the 
existence of those as yet unobserved relations. What 
experience can show is only that a certain mutual 
dependence of objects may long remain unobserved by 
us men, until this or that meteor-flash in the heavens, 
or consequence of the damp weather, or meeting with a 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 127 


man from far lands, shows us how important even the 
remotest and heretofore least obvious empirical relation 
may at any moment become. 

Our human experience, then, never shows us how 
beings would behave if they were mutually independent, 
in the ideal sense of our exact definition. Unhampered, 
therefore, by empirical guidance, we turn back to the 
chill realm of the hypothetical many beings of our 
realist’s hypothesis. These many beings are so far the 
creatures of an exact definition, whose consequences, 
purely hypothetical so far, we want to predetermine. 
We must do so solely upon the basis of our realist’s 
supposed present assumption. And hereupon, assuming 
the real world now before us to contain many mutually 
independent beings, I will prove at once two theses: 
(1) The many different real beings once thus defined 
can never come to acquire or later to be conceived as 
possessing any possible real linkages or connections, 
binding these different beings together; and so these 
beings will remain forever wholly sundered, as if in 
different worlds. (2) The many real beings thus defined 
‘ean have no common characters; they are wholly 
different from one another. Only nominally can any 
common characters be asserted of them. 

As to the first thesis: If I am defining mere ideas, 
apart from reality, I can of course first define two 
objects as independent, and can later add a definition 
of something that then comes to link them together. 
But if first I define two objects as so far quite inde- 
pendent of one another in essence, and if I next define 
each of them severally as real, apart from and inde- 


128 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


pendently of all ideas, I have, once for all, in my real 
world of objects, two beings, each so far quite separate 
from the other, and each, by hypothesis, a complete 
instance of a reality, so far as concerns its independence 
of the other. If hereupon there is later to appear in 
my real world any so-called link or tie between the 
two, — any so-called causal linkage, or spatial connection, 
or temporal relation, then this so-called linkage will be 
a new fact, not logically involved in the definition of 
either of these real beings, in so far as they were first 
declared to be real. For, by hypothesis, neither of the 
two, as first defined and as then declared to be indepen- 
dently real, possessed, as far as the definition yet went, 
any character already involving a tie with the other. 
For each, consistently with its definite nature, might 
so far remain unchanged if the other wholly vanished. 
But then at once it follows, that the new real being, 
the so-called link, when it comes to light, is as truly 
and as much another being as the two beings were 
originally diverse from each other. For if before the 
link came to light the completely defined beings were 
real but not yet defined as linked together, the link, 
when it comes, will be another new being. Furthermore, 
the link will be a fact, logically independent of both 
of the original beings. For as another being, a new 
fact, it will be, by the very definition of what constitutes 
another being, as independent of them, as each of them 
is essentially independent of the other. It follows that 
the so-called link is no link except in name, and can 
never come to be one; it is simply a third being, inde- 
pendent of both of them, and not yet linked to either 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 129 


of the two. This analysis holds of every possible link 
that is secondarily to bind together any two of the many 
beings that were declared to be primarily independent. 
Thus the many cannot be linked as even the most widely 
sundered empirical objects are always found to be linked, 
even at the very moment when you first observe their 
relations. The realist’s many beings, as defined, are 
defined as wholly disconnected; and they must remain 
so. You cannot first say of them, for instance, that they 
are logically independent, and then truly add that never- 
theless they are really and causally linked. (No two of 
them are in the same space; for space would be a link. 
And just so, no two are in the same time; no two are 
in any physical connection; no two are parts of any 
really same whole. The mutual independence, if once 
real, and real as defined, cannot later be changed to any 
form of mutual dependence. / 

And now for the second thesis. In our ordinary experi- 
ence we often, as a fact, observe that two objects have 
some character, as we say, ‘in common.” We call this 
the “same” character, quality or feature, present in both 
of them. Thus in experience, what is called the same 
redness can appear in two cherries. The old controversy 
about universals has made familiar the question whether 
that which is truly the same can ever really form part of 
two different beings. How this question is to be answered 
when it concerns the structure of that organic whole, 
that realm of mutual interdependence called our con- 
crete experience, we shall latersee. For the moment we 
have only to consider such a question as applying solely 
to the independent beings which the realist has defined. 


K 


130 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Take any two such independent beings. Then, as IT observe, 
these two beings can have no real quality or feature what- 
ever that is actually common to both of them, or that is, 
apart from name and from seeming, the same in both of 
them, beyond the mere fact that each exists. 

For suppose that they are first said to possess in com- 
mon a quality. Suppose, namely, that, to an onlooker, they 
both seem red, or round, like two cherries, but that as a fact 
they are independent beings. Call this apparently common 
quality Y. Then let one of the two beings be destroyed. 
By hypothesis, no change whatever need occur in the other 
being. And this means, as we now know, that no character 
or relation, visible or invisible, which is in any wise essen- 
tial to the first definition of the being that is supposed to 
remain, is in the least altered when its fellow vanishes. 
Q, then, the quality supposed to be the same in both beings, 
survives unchanged in the being that does not vanish. 

But now, if one man survived a shipwreck in which 
another was drowned, could you then call the survivor the 
same as the drowned man? But by hypothesis, the qual- 
ity Q, together with all relationships essential into its real- 
ity, survives unchanged in the being that remains, while 
what is called the same quality in the other being has 
passed away. 

But our realist, unwilling to concede this last conse- 
quence, may hereupon say that what he meant was that 
the quality @ in the two beings was partly the same, and 
partly not the same. This way of escape I meet, how- 
ever, with the simple challenge: Leave aside that which 
is in part. Come to the ultimate fact. If something is 
only partly the same in your two independent beings, 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 1381 


then some part of the part, some aspect of the aspect, 
must be really and ultimately quite the same. Name me 
any feature whatever in one of these two beings, — any 
character sensuous or supersensuous of which you will 
say: It is a common feature, really the same in these two 
beings. Then in my turn I will show you that just that 
feature is not the same, for I will suppose one of the two 
objects destroyed, as by hypothesis I have a right to do. 
I will then find the other in all its features quite un- 
changed, as by hypothesis I can do. And so I will show 
that what was destroyed in the one object cannot be the 
same as what survives unchanged in the other, precisely 
as the survivors of a shipwreck cannot be the same as 
the drowned. All this, you must remember, I assert upon 
the one basis of the realistic hypothesis about the many 
independent beings as stated above. 

It follows that, as was to be proved, the many entities 
of this realistic world have no features in common. If 
they appear to have, this is seeming, is “‘ mere name and 
form,” as the Hindoo philosophers would say. In brief, 
such sameness is not at all real. The appearance called 
“similarity ” has no real basis except when we are dealing 
with the aspects or functions that may exist within what our 
present arbitrary definition would call a single real being. 

I sum up the results of these two inquiries concerning 
the world of the many independent reals by asserting 
simply: The real beings, if in the present sense many, 
namely, if real beings thus logically independent of one 
another, have no common features, no ties, no true rela- 
tions; they are sundered from one another by absolutely 
impassable chasms; they can never come to get either ties 


1382 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


or community of nature; they are not in the same space, 
nor in the same time, nor in the same natural or spiritual 
order. 


VI 


The doctrine of the Many, upon a basis of the arbitrarily 
assumed definition of many, thus becomes, in seeming, 
paradoxical enough. Historically, Realism has more than 
once assumed, however, almost this uncanny form; and 
the mere seeming of paradox is in itself no refutation of 
a philosophical doctrine. Yet before we press this very 
paradox to its final extreme, we must first see whether 
the realist is in any way forced to persist in defining his 
real Beings as in this sense many at all. Have we not 
ourselves admitted the possibility that, in one real Being, 
unity and multiplicity, for all that yet we see, can be 
reconciled? The Many, if once irrevocably defined as 
real, and as essentially independent, can never again be 
linked by external ties. They indeed thenceforth remain 
strangers. “But surely,” one may say, “the realist is 
not forced to remain in so scattered a world. He can 
still pass over to the other hypothesis. He can say: ‘My 
world is One Being, a single, real, but perhaps an inter- 
nally complex, yes an infinitely wealthy Being, whose 
various aspects and functions are not logically indepen- 
dent, but are linked in a system, so that fully to define 
one part or region would be to define something of the 
essence of all, and so that no portion can indefinitely 
alter or wholly vanish without some implied change, how- 
ever minute, in all the other parts. Diversity there is 
in my world, but no sundering of entities.” Why may 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 133 


not a realist take refuge in this modified monism, — not in 
the Eleatic Being, or even in, the Substance of Spinoza, 
but in the assurance that the All, however manifold and 
full of contrast, is still an interrelated whole?” 

Why not, indeed? Ah,—but just as we are about to 
enter, with the realist, to explore this harbor of refuge, we 
suddenly observe that the realist has long since care- 
fully closed the channel of entrance with a wholly im- 
passable blockade. For let us remember that, as we 
observed before, there are already at least Two genuinely 
and absolutely independent real Beings in the realistic 
world. 

For now comes a single proposition to which I have 
already made reference. Consider that “idea of 0,” of 
which any object 0 was to be independent. Let that idea 
be the realist’s own idea, when he talks of any indepen- 
dent object. I ask the realist: “Is not your own idea 
itself a real being, or at least a part of one? Come let us 
reason together. If you, the realist, are a being indepen- 
dent of my idea of you, then are not your own ideas a 
part of your own independent being? Are not your ideas 
then real? If, therefore, your object 0 yonder is inde- 
pendent of your ideas, are not your ideas, in so far as they 
also are parts of an entity and so have being, independent 
of o itself? If o vanished, could not your idea consis- 
tently be conceived as remaining, as a psychical fact, just 
what it now is? Yes, ideas, even the most false ones, 
are facts in the mental world. The realist must call them 
real in his sense, or abandon his system. And by the 
very first hypothesis of the system, since independence is 
a mutual relation, the idea and its object o are mutually 


134 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


and typically a pair of independent beings. Now the 
thesis that, if reality means independence, the ideas too, 
of anybody you please, are themselves existent entities, 
or are parts of an entity existent and independent, con- 
stitutes what I may call the Forgotten Thesis of most 
realistic systems. The whole present argument depends 
upon simply declining to countenance that forgetfulness. 
An idea has Real Being if anything has Being. And 
whatever existence means, that an idea also possesses. 

A knowing process and its independent object, con- 
stitute then the irreducible minimum of the realistic 
world. But herewith I propose a perfectly simple and 
final procedure. I propose to treat this pair of entities 
precisely as we have just treated any two independently 
real beings in general. For this pair are not only the 
so-called idea and object; they are also a pair of 
mutually independent entities. We must not forget 
this aspect. The two theses just proved are now merely 
to be applied to them. The crisis of the realist’s destiny 
is reached. The doom of his world is at hand. 

Object and idea, viewed as entities, are twain. Real- 
ism began by saying so. So much is nominated in the 
bond. The realist shall have his pound of flesh, although 
we can grant him indeed not one drop of blood for all 
his world. By the original hypothesis either any indi- 
vidual idea, or 0, the object of that idea, could without 
contradiction be conceived as changing, or as vanish- 
ing, without any logically necessary change in the other 
member of the pair. Therefore, according to what we 
have now shown to be the case with any two independent 
realities, the idea of o and 0, as real beings, not only 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 135 


have, as first defined, no connection with each other, 
but they can never get any possible linkage or relation. 
All their connections are nominal. As idea, the idea 
was said to have o for its object. But the idea is an 
entity. It can have nothing to do with the other entity 
o. These two are not in the same space, nor in the 
same time, nor in the same natural order, nor in the 
same spiritual order. They have nothing in common, 
neither quality nor worth, neither form nor content, 
neither truth or meaning. No causality links them. If 
you say so, you again use mere names. ‘No will genu- 
inely can relate them. That they appear to have con- 
nections is simply a matter of false seeming. Our origi- 
nal definition called the one of them an idea relating to 
the object 0. We now know that such an expression 
was a mere name. The idea has assumed as idea an 
obligation that as independent entity it cannot pay. It 
has no true relation with o, and o has no community 
with the idea. To speak of any being not o itself as 
if it were really an idea of 0, is as if you spoke of the 
square root of an odor, or of the logarithm of an angel. 
For idea and object are two real beings. Their irrev- 
ocable sundering no new definition of their essence 
can now join again. For reality, in this doctrine, is 
independent of all definitions that could be made after 
the fact. Relations that could link the two entities 
would merely prove to be new independent beings other 
than either of them. 

Nor is this all. The idea here in question is any. 
idea or opinion. o is any object. Now a realist’s own 
theory is an idea or opinion. And the world was to be 


186 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


his object. Our perfectly general result, true of all 
ideas, applies of course to the group of ideas called the 
realistic theory. As an entity, the realist is an indepen- 
dent being. His ideas, as part of his being, can have 
nothing to do with any object that exists independently 
of himself or themselves. The realistic theory, then, 
as we now know, by its own explicit consequences, 
and just because its real objects are totally independent 
of its ideas, has nothing to do with any independently real 
object, and has no relation to the independent external 
world that its own account defines. Nor can it ever come 
to get such a relation. No realist, as he himself now must 
consistently maintain, either knows any independent 
being, or has ever, in idea, found himself related to one, 
or has ever made any reference to such a being, or has 
ever formed or expressed an opinion regarding one, or, 
in his own sense of the word “real,” really believes that 
there is one. 


Vil 


And thus, suddenly at one stroke, the entire realistic 
fabric, with all those “suns and milky ways” to which 
Schopenhauer, in a famous passage, so prettily referred, 
vanishes, — leaving not a wrack, not even a single 
lonely Unknowable, behind. For an Unknowable, too, 
would be an independent real object. Our present idea 
of it would have to refer to this object, if it were real; 
and no idea, as we know, can refer to any independent 
reality, since in order for such reference to be itself real, 
two irrevocably sundered beings would have to destroy 


THE INDEPENDENT BEINGS 137 


the chasm whose presence is determined by their own 
very essence. 

In brief, the realm of a consistent Realism is not the 
realm of One nor yet the realm of Many, it is the realm 
of absolutely Nothing. This judgment is not due to us. 
The consistent realist merely happens to remember that 
his ideas too are, by his own hypothesis, existences; that 
also, by his own hypothesis, the objects of his ideas are 
other existences independent of his ideas; that this in- 
dependence is a mutual relation; and finally, that two 
beings once defined, in his way, as independent, are 
wholly without inner links, and can never afterwards 
be linked by any external ties. The consistent realist 
remembers all this. And then he at once observes that 
if this be true, his own theory, being an idea, and at 
the same time an independent entity, has no relation to 
any other entity, and so no relation to any real world 
of the sort that the theory itself defines. He observes 
then that his whole theory has defined precisely a realm 
of absolute void. Nothing can be real merely in his 
sense. 

But what then is left us, if the realistic definition 
of Being simply and rigidly applied, destroys its own 
entire realm, denies its own presuppositions, and shows 
us as its one unquestionable domain the meaningless 
wilderness of absolute Nothingness. Where, then, is our 
real world? 

There is left us, I reply, just this world of our daily 
experience, with precisely its stars and milky ways, with 
its human life and its linkages—this world, only given 
already a deeper meaning by this very study. For now 


138 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


we already begin to see, as from afar, the realm of truth 
that is not independent of, but the very heart and life 
of this fragmentary finite experience of ours. We begin 
to see what later we shall view nearer by,—the realm 
of truth where indeed nothing, not the least idea, not 
the most transient event, is absolutely independent of 
the knowledge that relates to it, or of any other fact 
in the entire universe. In this realm it does, then, in 
the long run, make a difference to all objects, divine or 
material, whether they are known or not, by any being. 
That a relative independence, and that both individu- 
ality and freedom have their concrete meaning in this 
truer realm, we shall indeed in due season learn. But 
what we now learn is that any definition of absolutely 
independent beings, beings that could change or vanish 
without any result whatever for their fellows, is, in all 
regions of the universe, natural or spiritual, a hopeless 
contradiction. There are no such mutually indifferent 
beings. But this other realm, where no fact, however 
slight, transient, fleeting, is absolutely independent of 
any of its fellow facts, this is the realm where when 
one member suffers others suffer also, where no sparrow 
falls to the ground without the insight of One who 
knows, and where the vine and the branches eternally 
flourish in a sacred unity. That is the city which hath 
foundations, and thither our argument already, amidst 
these very storms of negation, is carrying us over the 
waves of doubt. 


LECTURE IV 


LECTURE IV 


THE UNITY OF BEING, AND THE MYSTICAL INTER- 
PRETATION 


OF the four historical conceptions of Being we have 
now expounded in a general way, and with reference to 
their history, two conceptions, that of Realism, and that of 
Mysticism; and of these two we have critically examined 
one, namely, the realistic conception. If any one remarks 
that the sole result of our foregoing discussion was a mere 
negation, a mere rejection of an extreme form of realistic 
dualism, and that such a result is not yet positively 
enlightening, then I myself so far agree with the observa- 
tion. It is true that we ended the last lecture with an 
assertion of the unity of Being. But if it be here further 
objected that the mere fact of unity is of small importance 
unless one comes to learn of what nature the unity is, and 
how it bears itself towards the varieties of our wealthy life, 
towards the vast phenomenal diversities of physical facts, 
towards the contrasts and tragedies of existence, towards 
that relative independence of moral individuals upon 
whose recognition all modern civilization depends, — then 
I fully admit the force of this objection. In fact, the 
explicit outcome of our examination of Realism, at the 
last time, merely so far opposed one abstraction by 
another, and we ended, for the moment, in a denial of 
dualism, with a hint added of a coming theory of the 

141 


142 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


genuine unity of Being. Before we proceed, however, 
to a closer study of the first historical rival of Realism, 
namely, to the Mystical definition of the ontological predi- 
cate, something is still needed by way of a reminder of our 
precise present position. 


I 


The genuine essence of Realism consists, as we saw, in 
defining any being as real precisely in so far as in essence 
it is wholly independent of ideas that, while other than 
itself, refer to it. We insisted, at the last time, that this 
thesis implies an absolute dualism within the world of real 
being, since an idea also is an existent fact, and is as 
independently real as is the supposed independent object. 
No realist can consistently reduce the world to one inde- 
pendently real Being, however complex and wealthy in 
inner structure this One Being might be permitted to 
become. At least two mutually independent Beings, such 
that either of them, by its changing or by its vanishing, 
would imply no correspondent change in the other, 
remain in the realist’s world. Moreover, these two beings, 
once defined and real, would forbid us to speak afterwards 
of their having any real tie, or real fashion of codperation, 
unless this so-called tie is really a new fact, independent 
of both the beings that are to be linked. Such a tie, how- 
ever, is a tie only in name. If beings are, like the objects 
of our ordinary experience, already interdependent, they 
can indeed consistently assume new ties, as young people 
who are already members of the same social order or of 
the same human family can marry. But in the supposed, 
and distinctly not empirical realm, to which the consistent 


THE UNITY OF BEING 143 


realist finds himself driven, the two independent beings of 
which his world, if reduced to its lowest terms, consists, 
have no ties, and can never get any. For a similar reason, 
they have no common characters, and can never get any. 
The inevitable result is that the very presupposition of 
the entire doctrine is contradicted by its outcome. For if 
idea and object have no ties and no common characters 
whatever, they simply cannot be related as idea and object. 
The consequence is that both the realistic definition, and 
the totally independent beings, prove to be contradictory, 
and vanish together, leaving us, as our result so far, the 
thesis that, if the Other which our finite thinking, in its 
disquietude, seeks to attain, is to be defined at all, it can- 
not be totally independent of the thought which defines it, 
or remain unchanged if that thought essentially alters or 
vanishes. The ultimate dualism of the realistic view is 
false and must be abandoned. This, so far, is all that we 
have definitely made out concerning the conditions of a 
consistent definition of real Being. 

But hereupon we are brought face to face with that 
ancient rival of the realistic definition. And this is Mys- 
ticism. If the dualism is to be abandoned, must we in- 
stead define Being as an absolute and simple unity? 
Must we say, the phrase “to be real” means something that 
cannot be asserted of any object whatever, so long as this 
object is defined through ideas that refer to it, or so long 
as the ideas themselves, with their endless search for the 
Other, trouble our consciousness, emphasize differences, 
and by their very striving after something beyond, keep 
our knowledge from its true goal? Must we insist that 
only such an object as quenches thought through the 


144 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


presence of a single and absolutely immediate truth is an 
object whereof we can say: Jt is? 


II 


Just such a view is of the essence of philosophical, or 
of the truly significant historical Mysticism. By this 
term I now mean, as you know from our second lecture, 
not a vaguely applied name for superstition in general, or 
for beliefs in spirits, in special revelations, and in magic, 
but a perfectly recognizable speculative tendency, observ- 
able in very various ages and nations, and essentially 
characterized by the meaning that it gives to the ontolog- 
ical predicate. 

For the mystic, according to the genuinely historical 
definition of what constitutes speculative Mysticism, to be — 
real means to be in such wise Immediate that, in the 
presence of this immediacy, all thought and all ideas, 
absolutely satisfied, are quenched, so that the finite search 
ceases, and the Other is no longer another, but is abso- 
lutely found. The object which fulfils this definition, 
and which is therefore worthy to be called real, is of 
necessity in itself One and only One; since variety, when 
consciously faced, calls forth thought, and arouses 
demands for characterization and explanation. In count- 
less ways, however, this One real object of the mystic’s 
quest may be approached, by those finite thinkers who, 
in their ignorance, still seek their Other, —in countless 
ways, whose only common character is that, the nearer 
you come to the goal, the less the varieties and opposi- 
tions of the world of ordinary thinking distract you, and 
the more you are in possession of something that is present, 


THE UNITY OF BEING 145 


given, satisfying, peaceful. If a realist, viewing your 
progress from without, observes hereupon that you are 
simply ignoring the manifold realities of the finite world, 
you reply that those so-called realities, just because they 
are many, and because they pretend to be independent 
beings, are illusory, and that in forsaking such a world, 
you simply spare yourself errors. As, in the world of the 


supposed independent beings, nothing is real, you care _ 


nothing for that world. If the realist, hearing that you seek 
something called Unity, reminds you that realists also 
may undertake to be monistic in their view of reality, you 
reply that, for reasons now sufficiently set forth in our 
own discussion, what is\ One can never be independent of 
the insight that knows it, and that therefore the only, 
place to look for unity is within, at the heart of experience, 
not without and beyond where the realist looks for Being. 
If a worldly critic, wondering at your pretensions, asks 
you how you dare to assert that just you, in your loneli- 
ness, can ever win an immediate relation to the final truth 
of all the universe, can ever find God within your poor 


self, you reply that just in so far as you have approached 


the goal most nearly, you, the supposed finite thinker, the 
private individual, have simply ceased to be known, even 
to yourself, so that not your private self, but the Absolute, 
alone, will remain when the goal is reached. For your 
very discovery of that which is, would involve the forget- 
ting of your finite personality as an illusion, an error, an 
evil dream. 

If now a Protagorean sceptic, asserting that Man is the 
measure of all things, hereupon observes that indeed Real- 
ism was false, and that nothing zs, except what is felt, at the 

L 


146 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


moment when it is felt; and if such a sceptic, also talking ot 
the real as the present, now insists that, for this very reason, 
your own search for the Mystic One is idle, since what em- 
pirically is felt, — now here and now there, — is not one, but 
many, and since, as such a Protagorean sceptic will assert, 
whoever feels anything whatever, has merely his own little 
share or case of immediate Being present to himself, — then 
even this apparently dangerous foe of the mystical faith 
meets with an easy answer, if once you have won the gen- 
uinely mystical spirit. For you in reply ask this critic 
whence he gets the assurance of the being of his various men, 
of his diverse experiences, of his many human feelings and 
points of view. Has he himself experienced immediately, 
or felt at any one moment what the supposed other real 
men and women feel? Has he himself ever felt anything 
purely immediate that involved two or more separate 
points of view? Is his direct experience that of many 
men? If he replies that common sense knows the many 
men with many minds, the countless feelings and points 
of view, to be real facts; then he has forsaken his own 
form of scepticism, even by his very appeal to commonly 
accepted truth. He returns to his illusions; you let him 
alone. If he declares that the many points of view are 
independently real facts of being, he is a realist, and is 
now already refuted. If hc merely says that he is a scep- 
tic because he feels that his feeling, although present, is 
not absolute, and that it is to him just now as if there were 
other points of view than his own, you reply, as a Mystic, 
that in thus confessing his scepticism to be identical with 
his dissatisfaction regarding his own present state, he con- 
fesses also that he is not lost in the presence of a satisfying 


THE UNITY OF BEING i ee ir 


immediate fact. But a fact not satisfying, is not a pure 
fact. For, as you will here maintain, a fact not wholly 
immediate, — by reason of the very dissatisfaction mingled 
with it, — sends you elsewhere for a presentation that you 
do not possess, and thus declares itself not yet the real. 
In none of these ways, then, will you allow yourself to be 
distracted from your goal by the objectors. 

And finally, if your critic asks, why then, since you 
believe in no variety of experiences or points of view as 
genuinely real, you still argue with your critics as if they 
were real, disagree with other points of view as if they 
existed, thoughtfully maintain your own case as if thoughts 
were valuable aids, and confess your own experiences as if 
you, too, the private finite self, were a fact in a genuine 
world, then for this objection also you are prepared. For 
you will now insist that while you know what true Being 
in general is, you have not yet won the presence of it, so 
that, like any other imperfect finite thinker, you are strug- 
gling with illusions. You yourself, as finite person, your 
critic as another, your ideas and glimpses as various seem- 
ing facts, — these are all alike illusions. You confess this. 
You lament it. You could be bounded in a nutshell and 
count yourself king of infinite space, were it not that you 
have just these bad dreams of ordinary error and finitude. 
Of the true seer, who should go home to the Immediate 
Presence, one could say, with Shelley : — 


“Peace, peace, he is not dead, he doth not sleep. 
He hath awakened from the dream of life. 
’Tis we, who lost in stormy visions keep 
With phantoms an unprofitable strife, 
And in mad trance strike with our spirit’s knife 
Invulnerable nothings.” 


148 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Only, as mystic, you will add that your strife is made 
as little unprofitable as possible if steadfastly you so 
war with the invulnerable nothings that their inner 
illusoriness is dwelt upon, their contradictions are ex- 
‘posed, and their voices are thus gradually made to cease, 
until at last the lonely stillness of the Absolute alone 
shall be left. It is true that had you reached this per- 
fect peace, we should no longer hear from you. For 
the mystic abode of Being is the silent land. They 
‘come not back who wander thither. For they, as mere 
finite thinkers, as seekers, are not at all, when once 
they have awakened to the truth. How should they 
return? ‘Believe not those prattlers,”’ says one often- 
quoted mystical word, “who boast that they know God. 
Who knows him —is silent.” 


Ill 


For us, who are here concerned with the mystic’s 
predicate, and not yet with the subject to which it 
could be applied, the mystic’s mere admission that he 
has not yet reached his goal, need of course so far arouse 
no objections against this definition. One can define 
what it is to be without asserting that he has yet 
faced the object which fulfils the definition. No real- 
ist supposes himself to have an exhaustive knowledge 
of the independent reality, just as no mathematician 
hopes, in any finite time, to see his science completed. 
Being is once for all, to a finite thinker, at least in 
part, the Other that he seeks. The case of the mystic 
must not stand or fall with his personal perfection, or 
with his winning of the Other, but with the inner con- 


THE UNITY OF BEING 149 


sistency of his definition, and its adequacy to express 
the constitution of our search for truth. 

In a general statement, this definition is now once 
more before you. Viewed as to its logical relations 
with its rival, the position of Mysticism should prove, 
from this starting point, readily comprehensible. You 
may remember our former sketch of the finite situation 
that sends us all alike looking for true Being. Data 
of experience, present facts, are on our hands,—colors, 
sounds, pains, passions. These are so far relatively im- 
mediate; in psychology we call them masses of sensa- 
tion or of feeling; they are in general not wholly sat- 
isfactory, usually perplexing, often very tragic. The 
mystic would insist that for this very reason they are 
not wholly immediate. In our more clearly conscious 
moments they constantly stimulate us to think and to 
act. On the other hand, we have our ideas. These too 
are, in one aspect, masses of relatively immediate data; 
for they are present; the psychologists would find their 
mere contents, in general, to be of an obviously sen- 
sory type; they come and go in their own way. But 
then, the ideas too are explicitly and obviously facts 
that are not merely immediate. They are contents of 
thought as well as masses of feeling; and the peculiar 
way in which they are more than immediate is what 
makes them worthy to be called ideas. And as con- 
tents of thought, as ideas, they already present to us, 
however incompletely, that relative fulfilment of pur- 
pose, that partial embodiment of meaning, which sets 
them in contrast to those brute facts of the lower forms 
of immediacy, those meaningless accidents of sensation, 


150 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


which, in our case, always accompany them. The ideas 
thus constitute the relatively significant aspect, the un- 
comprehended brute facts present the relatively mean- 
ingless aspect, of our ordinary and momentary con- 
scious life. In two ways, however, is the resulting 
form of finite consciousness unsatisfactory: first, in so 
far as its finite meanings, even where as nearly present 
as we ever get them, are viewed by ourselves as incom- 
pletely present; and, secondly, in so far as the seem- 
ingly accidental sensations of the instant are relatively 
opposed to even so much of our meaning as is now in 
sight, so that our sensations tend, as we say, to confuse 
or to puzzle us. This doubly unsatisfactory form of 
our finite consciousness is an universal character with 
us men as we are. Never do all the current sensory 
experiences completely fuse with our ideas, so as sim- 
ply to aid in developing the meaning of our inner life. 
Never do our passing meanings get at any instant pre- 
sented to us, in their own adequate wholeness, even as 
so-called “mere” ideas. We mean more than we find. 
We find also data foreign to those that we mean. 

The advantage of this way of stating the universal 
form of our finite human consciousness lies in the fact 
that this, our fashion of statement, here presupposes no 
abstract sundering of the Intellect from the Will, but 
that it shows the actual unity of theoretical and prac- 
tical processes, and is as valid for the consciousness of 
a wanderer struggling to reach a mountain top, or to 
find his way home, as it is for the conscious life of a 
mathematician seeking to solve an equation, of a chemist 
waiting for the results of the experiment which he all 


THE UNITY OF BEING 151 


the while controls, of a soldier in battle, of a lover com- 
posing his woful sonnet, of a statesman planning his 
nation’s destiny, of an anchorite in the desert waiting 
patiently for God. The endless varieties of the finite 
situation depend partly upon the immediate contents 
presented; partly upon the particular contrast between 
current data and current ideas; partly upon the degree 
to which fulfilment, never here consciously attained, is 
approximated at any instant; and finally, upon the direc- 
tion in which the special search is tending. Browning’s 
lover, in the Last Ride Together, when he has his uni- 
versal vision of finitude, sees, in essence, precisely the 
situation that we have been defining, precisely this 
aspect of all our present form of conscious life when 
he says: — 

“Fail I alone, in words and deeds? 

Why, all men strive, and who succeeds? 

We rode; it seemed my spirit flew, 

Saw other regions, cities new, 

As the world rushed by on either side. 

I thought, — All labor, yet no less 

Bear up beneath their unsuccess. 

Look at the end of work, contrast 

The petty done, the undone vast, 

This present of theirs with the hopeful past; 

I hoped she would love me; here we ride. 


“What hand and brain went ever paired? 
What heart alike conceived and dared? 
What act proved all its thought had been? 
What will but felt the fleshly screen ? 

We ride, and I see her bosom heave. 
There’s many a crown for who can reach, 
Ten lines, a statesman’s life in each ! 
The flag stuck on a heap of bones, 


152 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


A soldier’s doing! What atones? 
They scratch his name on the Abbey-stones. 
My riding is better by their leave.” 


As statesman, soldier, poet, sculptor, musician thus in 
succession pass before the lover’s contemplation, he sees 
the common problem of their labors, whether their task 
be heroic or studious; and he sees this problem as iden- 
tical with his own. It is the absolutely universal prob- 
lem of being consciously finite. And the lover states 
the case with an almost technical exactness, when he 
asks: ‘“ What act proved all its thought had been?” 
“What will but felt the fleshly screen?” 

Thoughts, ideas, inner contents as far as they come 
with a presented meaning, are, as you know from modern 
psychology, already nascent deeds. To conceive clearly, 
is to construct an object that is already, at the instant of 
its construction, more or less fully present to your inner 
observation as an embodiment of your meaning. But 
this embodiment is so far partial. Hence what we call 
outer acts, deeds that involve what the outer eyes can 
see, and what, as you accomplish such deeds, warms 
your muscles with the immediate glow of partially suc- 
cessful effort,—such outer deeds are, for your con- 
sciousness, at the instant, only more vivid thoughts, 
more brilliantly clear ideal expressions of your longing, 
so that in them, as they arise, you find what you also 
comprehend, as well as win what you seek. Herein 
lies the true unity of our thinking and our willing. 
That all our thoughts are not at once thus presented 
to our consciousness with the vividness of our external 
deeds, this defect is due in part to the triviality of our 


THE UNITY OF BEING 153 


present materials for action, which often decline to fur- 
nish to us any data whatever that are at once vivid 
with the clearness of our sense perceptions, and ade- 
quate to our inner aim. But the same frequent divorce 
of inner aim and observable outward expression is also 
in part due to the confusedness of our inward purposes 
themselves, or to the fragmentariness with which we hold 
to these purposes,—in brief, to our powerlessness to 
retain before us the inner vision itself. And conse- 
quently we are accustomed to regard thought which 
conceives, and will which executes, as two sundered 
functions of our conscious life;(because sometimes we 
have relatively clear masses of ideas, to which we still 
cannot give the vivid clothing of outer sense, and some- 
times the defect seems to be that while outer sense is 
plastic, ideas are halting, and we know not what to un- 
dertake. Yet all such diversity is so far only one of 
the aspects. All our thinking is itself a process of will- 
ing; all our_conscious_ _deeds_are merely immediately 
visible. and tangible ideas. And the truer contrast be- 
tween the idea and its Other is the one upon which 
Browning’s lover has fixed his attention. This contrast 
is between the inadequacy of all the expressions, whether 
inner or outer, which we just now find ourselves able to 
give to our finite purposes,— between this inadequacy 
of expression, and just these purposes themselves. The 
act never proves, for us, all that its thought had been. 
And by the “fleshly screen” that hinders the will, our 
lover in the poem means the same that we here more 
technically mean by whatever proves to be uncontrollable 
about the immediacy of our present conscious life. 


4 


154 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


IV 


This universal, this actually commonplace character of 
our human form of consciousness, first appears, if you 
will, as just an arbitrary fact of life. But it gives rise, 
we have said, to the whole problem of Being, as we men 
face that problem, and to the various definitions of the 
ontological predicate. What for us is real, is viewed as 
an Other that, if in its wholeness completely present, 
would consciously end at least so much of the finite 
search as could by any possibility be ended. It is true 
that, in ordinary life, we learn to make a very sharp 
distinction between the wished for and the real. And 
this distinction is, indeed, in the world of common sense, 
a very unconguerable one. It is also true, that realism, 
in its abstract sundering of facts from desire, would seem 
often to have abandoned entirely any effort to win for 
our consciousness any final satisfaction in the presence 
of reality. (But it is also true that such separation of 
what is real from what is desirable, is a secondary result, 
in the consciousness of every one of us.) Primarily, in 
seeking Being, we seek what is to end our disquietude. 
But secondarily we do, indeed, usually learn by experi- 
ence that, since not all finite desires can be satisfied, 
more is won, for our finite striving, by making the desire 
to know what we ordinarily call facts a primal motive 
in the more rational life of common sense; while our 
desire merely to gratify this or that momentary impulse 
becomes a secondary matter, which we learn to oppose 
to the general desire to know. In time we thus come to 
hold, in the world of finite common sense, that much is 


THE UNITY OF BEING 155 


real and inevitable, that thwarts our desires. Yet it still 
remains true that what we usually call reason, namely, 
the search for the truth as such, gets placed at the head, 
in our wiser daily life, and gets even opposed to the 
search for ordinary satisfaction, just because there is, in 
the long run, more true satisfaction in being rational, 
7.€., in our recognition of the facts of common sense, than 
there is in striving irrationally. And the real, although 
common sense thus often opposes it to the merely desira- 
ble, remains to the end that which, if present, would, as 
we say, satisfy reason, and thereby give us the greatest 
fulfilment possible to our type of consciousness. 

We need not wonder, then, to find a view like Mysti- 
cism breaking altogether with ordinary thought, passing 
as it were to the limit, cutting the knot of the ultimate 
problems, casting down the usual distinctions, and insist- 
ing that the primal purpose of all our finite striving can 
be accomplished in presence of a form of Being which 
is at once the Real and the Good; the final Fact and 
the absolute Perfection. For the mystic, the common 
sense antitheses on the one hand, between the immedi- 
ate and the ideal, and on the other hand, between the 
real and the desirable, are deliberately and consciously 
rejected, as something to be overcome. One overcomes 
them not, indeed, through an indulging of our fickle, 
momentary impulses, but through a transformation of \ 
these impulses. One wins the truth not through a culti- 
vation of what we ordinarily call Reason, but through | 
a quenching of Reason in the very presence of the abso- | 
lute goal of all finite thought. And, finally, peace is 
attained not through a lapse into the ordinary, but 


156 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


always imperfect immediacy of the brute data of sense, 
but through a finding of a final and ideally perfect 
Immediate Fact. 

Historically, as I have said, Mysticism first appears 
in India. Its early history is recorded in the Upani- 
shads. But this early history contains already essen- 
tially the whole story of the Mystic faith. These half 
philosophical, half dogmatic treatises, compounded in a 
singular fashion of folk-lore, of legend, of edifying 
homily, and of reflective speculation, have for a num- 
ber of years been best known to English readers through 
Professor Max Miller’s Sacred Books of the East. 
They have lately been made more accessible than _be- 
fore, to the philosophical student, by the translations 
and comments of Professor Deussen, of Kiel, himself a 
learned representative of a modern philosophical Mysti- 
cism of the Schopenhauerian type. I venture upon no 
independent opinion as to the composition and chro- 
nology of these early Hindoo works. I take as simply 
as possible what upon their face they seem to contain. 
I read as well as I can Deussen’s systematic interpreta- 
tion of their general sense; and then, as I try to restate 
this sense in my own way, I find, amidst all the numer- 
ous doctrinal varieties of these various Hindoo Scriptures, 
this main thought concerning the ultimate definition of 
Being. 

Vv 

What is, is at all events somehow One. This thought 
came early to the Hindoo religious mind. For the sake 
of its illustration and defence, the thinkers of the 
Upanishads seize, at first, upon every legend, upon 


THE UNITY OF BEING | 157 


every popular interpretation of nature, which may serve 
to make the sense of this unity living in the reader’s 
or hearer’s mind. For the writers of the greater Upani- 
shads, this unity of Being is not so much a matter of 
argument as it is an object of intuition. You first 
look out upon the whole circle of the heavens, and 
upon the multitudes of living forms, and you say of 
the whole: It is One, because at first you merely feel 
this to be true. Especially is the life of the body, or 
the life of any animate creature, felt to be one. But. 
the Hindoo is animistic. His world is all alive. Hence 
he easily feels all this life to be one. 

But, as we saw at the last time, a metaphysical 
realist also can attempt, however inconsistently, to call 
all Being One. In this case there would result such 
a doctrine as that of the Eleatic school. But to what 
obvious objection any Eleatic doctrine is open, we also 
saw. For if the Real is the Independent Being, exist- 
ent wholly apart from your ideas about it, there is no 
way of escape from the assertion that our false opinions 
are themselves real in the same sense in which the One 
is real. The realist is essentially a dualist. The Hin- 
doo was early aware of this danger threatening every 
monistic interpretation of the Real. He undertook to 
escape the danger by a device which in the Upanishads 
appears so constantly, and with such directness of ex- 
pression, as to constitute a sort of axiom, to which the 
thinker constantly appeals. The Hindoo seer of the 
period of the Upanishads is keenly and reflectively self- 
conscious. His own thinking process is constantly be- 
fore him. He cannot view any reality as merely 


158 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


independent of the idea that knows it, because he has 
a strong sense that he himself is feeling, beholding, 
thinking, this reality, which he therefore views as an 
object meant by himself, and so as having no meaning 
apart from his point of view. The axiom which our 
European idealists often state in the form: Wo olyect 
without a subject, is therefore always, in one shape or 
another, upon the Hindoo’s lips. He states it less tech- 
nically, but he holds it all the more intuitively. The 
world is One—why? Because I feel it as one. What 
/then is its oneness? My own oneness? And who am I? 
I am Brahman; I myself, in my inmost heart, in my 
| Soul, am the world-principle, the All. In this form 
the Hindoo’s Monism becomes at once a_ subjective 
Idealism; and this subjective Idealism often appears 
almost in the epistemological form in which that doc- 
trine has so often been discussed, of late, amongst our- 
selves. But the further process of the Hindoo’s monistic 
philosophy leads beyond this mere beginning, and results 
in an elaborate series of reflections upon the mystery of 
the Self. The final product of these reflections trans- 
forms the merely epistemological Idealism, which, if 
abstractly stated, has with us often led to a rather 
trivial scepticism, into something very different from 
mere scepticism, namely into a doctrine not merely 
epistemological, but metaphysical. Let us follow a few 
steps of the process. 
“1. Verily the universe is Brahm. Let him whose soul 
is at: peace, worship it, as that which he would fain know. 


1The following passage, from the Chandogya Upanishad, III, 14, 
has been translated for me by my colleague, Professor C. R. Lanman. 


THE UNITY OF BEING 159 


“Of knowledge, verily, is man constituted. As is his 
knowledge in this world, so, when he hath gone hence, 
doth he become. After knowledge then let him strive. 

“2. Whose substance is spirit, whose body is life, whose 
form is light, whose purpose is truth, whose essence is 
infinity, —the all-working, all-wishing, all-smelling, all- 
tasting one, that embraceth the universe, that is silent, 
untroubled, — 

“3. That is my spirit within my heart, smaller than 
a grain of rice or a barley-corn, or a grain of mustard- 
seed; smaller than a grain of millet, or even than a 
husked grain of millet. 

“This my spirit within my heart is greater than the 
earth, greater than the sky, greater than the heavens, 
greater than all the worlds. 

“4, The all-working, all-wishing, all-smelling, all-tast- 
ing one, that embraceth the universe, that is silent, un- 
troubled, —that is my spirit within my heart; that is 
Brahm. Thereunto, when I go hence, shall I attain. 
Who knoweth this, he in sooth hath no more doubts. 

“ Thus spake Shandilya — spake Shandilya.” 

In such passages, which are very frequent in the 
Upanishads, an immediate sense of the unity of all 
things runs parallel with an equally strong sense that, 
this unity is wholly in myself who know the truth, — 
in my heart, just because what for me is, is precisely, 
what I know. 

The famous and often quoted instruction given to the 
young disciple, called Shvetaketu, by his father Uddalaka, 
deserves closer analysis in this connection. This instruc- 
tion begins with a statement of the general monistic 


160 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


view of Being, uses arguments at first partly identical 
with those of the Eleatic school, illustrates unity by 
various observations of nature; but then, in the very 
midst of what at first seems a merely realistic doctrine, 
suddenly, and with a dramatic swiftness of transforma- 
tion, identifies the world principle with the inmost soul 
of the disciple himself, and with him, in so far as he is 
the knower of the Unity. 

The beginning of the argument, I repeat, appears, from 
one side, realistic. The world, says Uddalaka, is, and 
is one. The disciple is to note this fact and to bring 
it home to himself by frequent empirical illustrations 
taken from outer nature. Then he is to observe that 
he, too, in so far as he is at all real, is for this very 
reason one with the world principle. The teaching 
seems at this state still a realism, only now a realism 
that has become reflective, recognizing the observer of 
the reality as also a real being, and therefore asserting 
of him, as knower, whatever one also asserts of the 
Being that he knows. But suddenly, even as one speaks, 
one becomes aware that, through this very identification 
of the essence of the knower and of the object known, 
the inmost reality of the world has itself become trans- 
formed. It is no longer a world independent of knowl- 
edge. One never really has observed it as an external 
(world at all. It has no independent Being. It is a 
} world identical with the knower. It is a vision of his 

soul. Its life is his life. It is in so far as he creates 
‘it. Whatever he is as knower, that is his world.! 


1 I quote again from the Chandogya VI, 2-15, and again owe the trans- 
lation to Professor Lanman. 


THE UNITY OF BEING 161 


“Being only, O gentle youth,” says Uddalaka to his 
son, “was this [universe] in the beginning, one only, 
without a second. 

“Now some indeed say, ‘Non-being only was this [uni- 
verse] in the beginning, one only, without a second. From 
this non-being, Being was born.’ 

“But how, O gentle youth, might it be so?— thus 
spake [his father]. How from non-being might Being be 
born ? 

“Rather, Being only, O gentle youth, was this [uni- 
verse] in the beginning, one only, without a second.” 

And this One Being, so Uddalaka hereupon continues, 
somehow mysteriously resolved to become many. And 
immediately there follows in the text at some length, a 
cosmology, in which the various principles appear in an 
order obviously determined by tradition. This tradition, 
however, at first seems upon its face thoroughly real- 
istic. But erelong this mere cosmology gives place to 
deeper inquiries. It is one thing to teach the tradition 
about how, in Nature, the Many came from the One. It 
is another thing to ask how the Many, now that they 
appear, are related to the One. As Uddalaka dwells 
upon this mysterious relation, he soon is led to explain 
that the Many are essentially illusory, and that not the 
false consciousness which seems to display to us their 
diversity, but rather even the unconsciousness of deep 
sleep itself must express the true relation of the false 
finite to the true absolute. 

“As, O gentle youth, the honey-makers, when they 
make honey, gather the juices of manifold trees, and bring 
the [resulting] juice to unity [one-ness, eka-tam], — 


162 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


“As those [juices] therein [in that unity] retain no 
distinction [so that one could say], ‘I am the juice of 
such-and-such a tree’ [and another], ‘I am the juice of 
such-and-such a tree,’ — 

“Just so, O gentle youth, have all these creatures, 
when [in sleep] they merge in the [one] Being, no con- 
sciousness that they are merged in the [one] Being; 

“They, whatsoever in the world they be, be it tiger 
or lion or wolf or boar or worm or moth or gadfly or 
midge, — that [on emerging] become they once more.” 

So far you see, the result is still like the Eleatic doc- 
trine. In vain does any mere cosmology endeavor to 
explain how the Many came out of the One. Asa fact, 
Uddalaka, in his cosmological speculations, has by this 
time exhausted the motives of the traditional lore. 
Through the experiences of a long fast, the disciple has 
been taught to observe how the psychical principle can 
be made to fade away, like a dying coal, until only a 
spark remains, and how, when food is again taken, the 
\psychical principle flames once more like the spark that 
finds fuel. What is thus hinted is that the psychical 
principle is the one central coal of the world-fire. In 
a similar spirit the sequence of the physiological process 
has been discussed; the relations of body and soul to 
the universal world life have been illustrated, the mean- 
ing of growth and decay in nature has been brought into 
relation to the doctrine of the absolute One; but still 
the theory has not made clear in what sense the One 
can have decreed to itself: “I will be Many.” 

What way remains? Does it not become plain that 
the many must be indeed altogether illusory? And 


THE UNITY OF BEING 163 


that is why one has now turned to the figure of the 
honey and the plant juices, and to the reflection that in 
sleep all the fierce hostilities of the jungle lapse, and the 
countless living beings are as one, even while their life- 
principle survives in all its central might. It is the 
process of the many that is then the falsity. The One 
really never resolved to be many at all. “How could it 
thus resolve? / In truth, the illusory universe sleeps in 
one central soul. / 

An Eleatic doctrine would at this point remain fast 
bound, dimly suggesting perhaps, as Parmenides did, 
that Being and Thought are somehow one, but not 
making anything definite of the suggestion, and mean- 
ing it, as no doubt Parmenides also did, in the purely 
realistic sense, aS an assertion that thought knows Be- 
ing, even while Being is independent of thought. But 
the Hindoo goes further. He, at just this stage, turns 
from the world directly to the disciple himself. This 
mystery, he says, this oneness of all Being, in this you 
too at all events share. In whatever sense the world is 
real, you are real. Is the world but One Being, then 
you, so far as you are real, are identical with that 
One. 

Still the assertion, if understood in a realistic sense, 
appears only to make the self of the disciple one of the 
many—juices—that.are really lost in thehoney,-one of 
the countless living creatures that roam the jungle in 
illusory mutual hatred, and that enter again into the 
truth only when they sleep. And still the mystery of 
the nature of the One Being has not been lighted up. 
But Uddalaka means his teaching to be taken, from this 


164 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


point on, in quite another sense. The variety is illu- 
sory. But whose illusion is it? The One Being exists. 
But how? As known Being, and also as One with the 
Knower. The very reflection that knowledge is real, — 
that reflection which Realism finds it so hard and so 
fatal to make, is now to furnish the solving word. The 
reality cannot be independent. Its life is the Knower’s 
life and his alone. Its multiplicity is his illusion, and his 
only. The disciple has been taught by nature symbols. 
They were, in a way, to mediate the higher insight. But 
still their interpretation was itself intuitive and in so 
far unmediated, just because only unmediated intuition 
was from the outset really present. There was and is 
only the Knower. The disciple was the Knower. It 
was he who blindly resolved, “Let me become many.” 
He shall now, in a final intuition, grasp the immediate 
fact that he is, and eternally was, but One,) The para- 
ble of the honey and the juices is at once to be inter- 
preted in this form. Another parable may assist : — 

- “These rivers, O gentle youth, flow eastward towards 
the sunrise, and westward towards the sunset. From ocean 
to ocean they flow, and become (again) mere ocean. 

“And as they there know not that they are this or 
that river, so verily, O gentle youth, all these creatures 
know not when they issue from the One Being, that 
they issue from the One. 

“ What that hidden thing is, of whose essence is all the 
world, that is the Reality, that is the Soul, that art 
thou, O Shvetaketu.” And now the nature allegories re- 
cur. But henceforth they have quite a new sense: — 

“¢Bring me a fruit from that Nyagrodha tree.’ ‘Here 


THE UNITY OF BEING 165 


it is, venerable Sir.’ ‘Cut it open.’ ‘It is cut open, ven- 
erable Sir.’ ‘ What seest thou in it?’ ‘ Very small seeds, 
venerable Sir.’ ‘Cut open one of them.’ ‘It is cut open, 
venerable Sir.’ ‘What seest thou in it?’ ‘N othing, ven- 
erable Sir.’ 

“Then spake he: ‘ That hidden thing, which thou seest 
not, O gentle youth, from that hidden thing verily has 
this mighty Nyagrodha tree grown.’ 
re “Believe, O gentle youth, what that hidden thing is, of 
‘whose essence _is all the world,—that is the Reality, 
\that is the Soul, that art thou, O Shvetaketu. 

“About a dying man sit his relatives, and ask: ‘Dost 
thou know me? Dost thou know me?’ So long as his 
speech does not merge in his mind, his mind in his 
life, his life in that central glimmer, and this in the 
highest divinity, so long he knows them. 

“But when this has taken place, then he knows 
them no more. 

“What this fine thing is, of whose essence is all the 
world, that is the Reality, that is the Soul, that art 
thou, O Shvetaketu.” 


VI 


Our own difficulties in comprehending such passages 
as this teaching of Shvetaketu come from a failure to 
see easily at what point and why the allegorical and 
essentially exoteric cosmology passes over into that sub- 
jective idealism upon which the whole doctrine finally 
depends. Clearer becomes the nature of this doctrine 
when we compare such a scripture as the teaching 
of Shvetaketu with those passages, elsewhere in the 


166 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Upanishads, in which the teacher starts with an explicit 
idealism. In such passages the topic of inquiry is di 
rectly the problem: What is the Self? It is here assumed 
that the Self is the universe. But even here the Self 
appears in a twofold way. It is first one’s life prin- 
ciple, typified by the breath, by the desire, or by the 
mere physical sense of being, which any one feels within 
him at any moment. As thus typified the Self or At- 
man seems finite, changes, grows old, longs, is disap- 
pointed, dies, transmigrates, is subject to fate. On the 
other hand, the Self is the Knower. As such it is the 
topic of an ingenious..reflective process, which these 
Hindoo thinkers pursue through an endless dialectic, 
recorded in legendary dialogues and discourses of seers 
with learners. The purpose of the dialectic is always 
to make naught of every dualistic account, either of 
the relation between the Self and the universe, or of the 
inner structure and meaning of the Self. All the finite 
process of thinking and of desiring is now to be treated 
as a process of seeking the Self. Could the true Self 
be found, it would be found as the fulfilment of desire, 
as the perfection, as the finality, and as nothing but 
this. The contrast between the real and the desirable 
is itself a dualism. It must be cast off, together with 
the false realism that regards any truth as independently 
real. The finite world is simply the process of striving 
after self-knowledge. And in this process the seeker 
pursues only himself. But if he found himself, if all 
desires were fulfilled, if knowledge were complete — 
what would remain? Or rather, since this use of if and 


of would is itself a mere expression of finite illusion, 


THE UNITY OF BEING 167 


since in very truth there is only the Self, since the 
finite process of striving after the Self is wholly illu- 
sory, and the Self in its perfection is alone real, what 
now remains as the Absolute? Well, in the first place 
the true Self does not strive. It has no idea of any 
other. It has no positive will. Object and Subject are 
in it no longer even different. It has no character. 
There is the murderer no longer murderer, nor the slave 
a slave, nor the traitor a traitor. Differences are illu- 
sory. The Self merely is. But now is in what sense? 
Not as the independent Other, not as the object of a 
thought, not as describable in terms of an idea, not as 
expressible in any way, and still less as mere nothing. 
For it is the All, the only Being. There remains to 
hint what the being of the Self is only what we now 
call the immediacy of present experience. Only hence- 
forth we must regard the absolute immediacy not as 
the raw material of meaning, but as the restful goal of 
all meaning, —as beyond ideas, even because it is sim- 
pler than they are. It is at once nothing independent of 
knowledge and nothing that admits of diversity within 
knowledge. The Self is precisely the very Knower, not 
as a thing that first is real and then knows, but as the 
very act of seeing, hearing, thinking, in so far as the 
mediating presence of some Other, of some object that 
is known, seen, heard, thought, is simply removed, and 
in so far as the very diversity of the acts of knowing, 
seeing, hearing, thinking, is also removed. 

Most obvious about the Self, from our finite point of 
view, is its perfection as a fulfilment of our striving. 
For us to win oneness with the Self means to attain a 


168 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


state of perfect finality, simplicity, peace. Upon this 
fulfilment of desire the Upanishads constantly insist. 
We therefore have to express the nature of the Self 
in terms of feeling, of states of mind. And the Hindoo 
expressly declines to go outside of the knowing Subject 
for the definition of the Reality. That art thou, is the 
whole story. But within the mind what comes nearest 
to simplicity and peace? Plainly, the most satisfying 
and ineffable experience, just in so far as it involves no 
diversity, and sends us in no wise abroad either for other 
experience, or for any ideal characterization of the what 
of this experience itself. The Self then is some final 
and wholly immediate fact within the very circle of what 
we now call consciousness, but apart from the restless- 
ness from which consciousness suffers. 


VII 


But now comes indeed the hardest problem of Mysti- 
cism. Absolute Immediacy, perfect peace, fulfilment of 
meaning by a simple and final presence, — when do we 
finite beings come nearest to that? On the borderlands 
of unconsciousness, when we are closest to dreamless 
slumber. The Absolute, then, although the Knower, 
must be in truth Unconscious. Into Being all the fierce 
creatures, all the swarms of the jungle, enter, as we 
have seen, when they sleep. The dreamless sleeper is, 
for the Upanishads, the frequent type of the soul gone 
home to peace. It is so too with the dead, so far as 
they are really dead, although not so far as they return 
from death, to the bad dream of finite life, through the 
wretched fate of transmigration. But if this is so, 


THE UNITY OF BEING 169 


wherein does the Absolute Being differ from pure Noth- 
ing? 

The seers of the Upanishads are fully alive to this 
problem. It is a mistake to imagine that they ignore 
it. More than once they discuss it with the keenest 
dialectic. In one legend Indra, the god, learns from 
Prajapati, the highest god, the lore about the true Self, 
in the form of a series of parables. He first learns that 
the Self is not the material self, the mere “Me” (as 
some of our modern psychologists would call it), but 
that the Self is rather the Knower. A man dreaming 
is therefore a better type of the true Self, since the 
dream is the dreamer’s own creation. But even the 
subjective idealism of the dreamer’s world is an insuf- 
ficient illustration of the truth, since to the dreamer 
wt still is as tf facts beyond himself were real. But 
the true Self does not dream. He knows the truth. 
And that truth is only himself. Of what beyond him 
should he therefore dream? That is what Aristotle 
himself says of God. But for the Hindoo this means 
that the dreamless sleeper must be a still better type 
of the Self. But, as Indra hereupon objects to this 
teacher: Has not the dreamless sleeper gone to mere 
nothingness? Is he real at all? 

In a similar fashion, in another legend, the sage Yaj- 
navalkya teaches his wife Maitreyi, first that nothing 
in the universe is real or is desirable except the Abso- 
lute Self. But then the Self, he goes on to say, is 
in its immortality unconscious. For all consciousness 
involves partially dissatisfied ideas of a Beyond, and 
includes desires that seek. another than what is now 


170 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


wholly present. But in the true Self all is attained, 
and therefore all is One; there is no Beyond, there is 
no Other. There are then, in the true Self, no ideas, 
no desires, just because he is the final attainment of 
all that ideas and desires seek. 

Yet Maitreyi objects. “The doctrine confuses me,” 
she says. How, in fact, should the immortal One be 
unconscious? Yajnavalkya, in reply, can only give, as 
reductio ad absurdum of every objection, the argument 
that all dualism, involving the reality of objects out- 
side the Knower, is illusory, while all consciousness im- 
plies just such dualism. 

/~ Absolute Immediacy is to be something better, you 
J. see, than the only partially immediate sensations which, 
in our present finite state, merely serve to set us think- 
ing. It is also to be above ideas, —as the peace that 
passeth understanding. But all our relative immediacy 
actually does set us thinking. All our relative satis- 
/Xactions take the form of finite ideas. The Absolute 
[ must then be ineffable, indescribable, and yet not out- 
| side of the circle within which we at present are con- 
\ scious. It is no other than we are; consciousness 
\\ contains it just in so far as consciousness is a knowing. 
Yet, when we speak of the Absolute, all our words 
must be: “Neti, Neti,” “It is not thus; it is not thus.” 
So the sage Yajnavalkya himself, more than once in 
these legends, teaches: To us, ¢¢ ¢s as if the Absolute, 
in its immediacy, were identical with Nothing. But 
once more: —Is the Absolute verily a mere nothing? 

The Hindoo’s answer to this last question is in one 

sense precise enough. “The Absolute is the very Oppo- 


r 


THE UNITY OF BEING Lyf 


site of a mere Nothing. For it is fulfilment, attain-\ 
ment, peace, the goal of life, the object of desire, the \ 
end of knowledge.} Why then does it stubbornly ap- | 
pear as indistinguishable from mere nothing? The 
answer is: That is a part of our very illusion ttself. 
The light above the light is, to our deluded vision, | 
darkness. It is our finite realm that is the falsity, the’ 
mere nothing. The Absolute is All Truth. 

One sees, at last then, this mystic Absolute gets, for 
the Hindoo, its very perfection from a Contrast-Effect. 
Here is the really solving word as to the whole matter. 
It is by contrast with our finite seeking that the goal 
which quenches desires and ideas at once appears as 
all truth and all life. But to attribute to the goal a 
concrete life and a definite ideal content would be, for 
this view, to ruin this very contrast. For concreteness 
means variety and finitude, and consequently ignorance 
and imperfection. The Absolute home appears empty, 
just because, wherever definite content is to be found, 
the Hindoo feels not at home, but finite, striving, and 
deluded into a search for something beyond. 

Yet just this very contrast-effect, whereby what is 
defined as having no definite characters, is even thereby 
conceived as the most perfect, — we all know this same 
feature well in our own religious literature. The medi- 
zval poem of Bernard of Cluny concerning the Golden 
Jerusalem,—the poem called De Contemptu Mundi, — 
what is it, apart from its sensuous, and so far con- 
sciously false imagery, but a crowding of antitheses and 
of negations, to the end that by merely denying our 
illusions, and forsaking our world, we may contemplate 


172 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


an ineffable glory whose true names are all only negative. 
Addressing the Eternal, the poet says : — 


“Tu sine littore. 
Tu sine tempore.” 


Shoreless and timeless is the depth of true Being. Con- 
trasting the present life with the perfect life, one has 
the wholly negative antithesis : — 


“ Hic breve vivitur 
Hic breve plangitur 
Hic breve fletur ; 
Non breve vivere 
Non breve plangere 
Retribuetur.” 


To be sure, Bernard’s hymn is a very treasure-house of 
brilliant sensuous characterizations of the joys of the 
home of peace; but just these characterizations, as we 
but now observed, are metaphorical, and are as such in- 
tended to be false. They hint at some final immediacy ; 
and this justifies their use of sensuous language. They 
mean the ineffable, but their intended truth lies, above 
all, in the antitheses and in the negations that they 
merely illustrate :— 
“ Nescio, nescio 


Quae jubilatio 
Lux tibi qualis.” 


The Wescio, nescio of Bernard, is identical in meaning 
with the Neti, Neti; it is not so; it is not so, of the sage 
Yajnavalkya. In the very contrast of the finite with the 
ineffable this mysticism lives, whether it be Hindoo or 
Christian Mysticism : — 


THE UNITY OF BEING 173 


“ Urbs Sion unica 

Mansio mystica 

Condita Caelo, — 

Nunc tibi gaudeo 

Nune mihi lugeo 

Tristor, anhelo.” 
And in view of this fact, that these infinite contrasts are 
the only expressible aspect of the whole situation, the 
Hindoo metaphor of the dreamless sleeper is, indeed, as 
apt to suggest the perfect glory of the home of peace, 
as are many of the metaphors of Bernard; as are, for 
instance, the joys and delights, the sweet sounds and the 
gay colors, with which his vision falsely fills the depths, 
where, truly, as the poet himself believes, eye hath not 
seen and ear hath not heard. 

But if you ask why the Hindoo philosophical mystics 
feel so sure that, despite this wholly negative expression 
of the nature of their Absolute, they are still teaching a 
truth that is not only indubitable, but positively signifi- 
cant and even portentous, then the answer for them 
always lies in the reductio ad absurdum of opposing 
efforts either to win final truth or to satisfy the practical 
needs of life. For our conscious finitude, they insist, 
means at once dissatisfaction, and the admission that the 
truth is not present to us. Common-sense Realism, ob- 
serving this very fact, makes the truth an independent 
Being, that is beyond our striving, in the sense of being 
wholly apart from every knowledge which refers to it. 
But, in reply, the Hindoo in his own way observes, and 
insists upon, that essentially contradictory character of 
all ordinary Realism, — that very character which we at 
the last time set forth, in our own way, in detail. What 


174. THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


_the Hindoo finds, then, positively sure, is that Nothing can 


be real that is independent of the Knower. Here is in- 
deed the centre, the moving principle, of this entire dia- 


~lectical process which the sages of the Upanishads 


remorselessly pursue. The only alternative to their own 
view of Being that is known to them is simply Realism. 
But simple Realism they see to be self-contradictory, and 
so absurd. |The truth cannot then be independent of the 
Knower. ) But if not independent of the Knower, and 
yet if not given to him by his finite experience and 
thought, what can the truth be except what one ap- 
proaches, within one’s own very heart, when one grad- 


ually casts off finitude, and wins unity and peace.) 


The process of accomplishing this end proves to con- 
sist of a series of stages whose terms lose finite defini- 
tion and expressible qualities the farther you proceed in 
the series. The limit of this series of stages of purifica- 
tion and of simplification of life appears to the restless 
finite creature as zero. But, as the Hindoo now with 
assurance insists, this zero must be also the Absolute, the 
One sole Being, and must be so precisely because, even 
as the limit of the series, it is also the goal of the 
process, the wished for home of the soul, the expected 
object of perfect knowledge, —in brief, the Attainment. 
Now this contrast-effect, and this alone, gives the zero, 
that is the limit of the finite process, its value, its truth, 
its absoluteness. And if you waver at the gate of this 
heaven, half minded to turn back to error and to trans- 
migration, wondering whether there be any true glory 
within, the Hindoo, reminding you of the hopelessness 
of every realistic definition of truth, and of the failure 


THE UNITY OF .BEING 175 


of every finite effort to express the reality, can now only 
ask you: For what else but this Absolute within the 
gate, within the knowing heart, smaller than the mustard 
seed, yet vaster than the heavens,— for what else can 
you seek? He simply defies you to find other defini- 
tion of Being than this. And herewith you have his 
whole case presented. 


Vill 


I have dwelt so long upon the Upanishads, because, 
as I have said, they contain already the entire story of 
the mystic faith, so far as it had a philosophical basis. 
The rest of its story is not any part of philosophy. End- 
lessly repeated in history, perhaps often independently 
rediscovered elsewhere, the dialectic of Mysticism has 
nowhere any essentially different tale to tell, nor any 
other outcome to record. How in Europe Plotinus com- 
bined the mystical theory of the One with realistic, and 
in some respects with still deeper and often more con- 
structively idealistic, conceptions of the constitution of 
the world from the Nous downward; how the Christian 
faith took to its heart the stranger doctrine whose origi- 
nal home was in India, until the faith of the Middle 
Ages became half a Mysticism; how the heretics used 
the mysterious light of the same teaching to guide them 
into forbidden paths; how the devotional books and the 
poets have taught to the laity many of the formulas 
that one first finds in the Upanishads —all this I have 
already very vaguely sketched in a former lecture. But 
to narrate the tale of the mere historical fortunes of 
Mysticism would require volumes, but would introduce 


bs 


ge 


176 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


no novelties except those involved in the profoundly in- 
teresting personal temperaments of individual mystics. 
Our concern lies here in observing that the philo- 
sophical Mystic, whatever his personal type, and what- 
ever his nation or tongue, always uses the same general 
metaphysical and dialectical devices. His theoretical 
weapon is some reductio ad absurdum of Realism. His 
polemic is against the sharp outlines of the world of 
Independent Beings, against the fallacies of all finite ideas, 
and against the possibility of worldly satisfaction. With 
the author of the Imitation of Christ, he reminds you 
that if you could see all created things together, it 
would be but a vain show, and hence he bids you for- 
sake every creature. With Spinoza, he tells you that 
only in the Eternal is there joy alone, and that all else, 
being but imagination, perishes. With Eckhart he ex- 
plains that the very creed of the Church, as ordinarily 
understood, is but allegory, and that even the Trinity 
is only, as it were, a superficial emanation from the 
Godhead, while the true Godhead, the Deitas, never 
“looked upon deed,” never dreamed of diversity, but is 
a “simple stillness” that you can find within your 
heart whenever you have won the ultimate virtue, and 
have forsaken all things for the wilderness of Being. 
/ An general, the mystic knows only Internal Meanings, 
/ precisely as the realist considers only External Mean- 
\ ings. But the mystic, nevertheless, condemns all finite 
ideas, just because they have no absolute internal mean- 
ing. He bids you look within; but he desires first 
wholly to transform your inner nature. He compares 
your heart to the Bethlehem, where God may at any 


Oe a a! 


rary No. 


THE UNITY OF BEING Weer 


instant be born. Nor in all this is the mystic, if he be 
a thinker, devoid of reasons. His thought is eager to 
dwell: — 

“On doubts that drive the coward back, 


And keen through wordy snares to track 
Suggestion to her inmost cell.” 


His doubts are exposures of the fallacies of all ordinary 
opinion. He thinks, to the very end that he may de- 
stroy the vanity of mere thinking. An Eckhart is 
amongst the most learned of trained scholastic dis- 
putants. A Spinoza is the most merciless foe of the 
illusions of common sense. With ideas the mystic wars 
against all mere ideas. With the abstract weapons of 
Realism he refutes Realism. At last he believes him- 
self to have won the right, by virtue of the very 
breadth of his vision of finitude, to condemn, like 
Browning’s lover in the Last Ride Together, the whole 
of finitude. 

Nor, after all, is the mystic’s result so unlike, in its 
logic, the result reached by Browning’s lover himself. 
I have said, more than once, that the essence of Mys- 
ticism lies not in the definition of the subject to 
which you attribute Being, but in the predicate Being 
itself. This predicate in case of Mysticism is such that, 
as soon as you apply it, the subject indeed loses all 
finite outlines, lapses into pure immediacy, quenches 
thought, becomes ineffable, satisfies even by turning into 
what ordinary Realism would call a mere naught. 
Now you may call this subject by any name you please: 
The Self of our Hindoo, or the Holy Grail, or Spinoza’s 

5 


asia 


178 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Eternal, or Eckhart’s Stille Wiiste, or the One of 
Plotinus, or the “ Aonian music” of Tennyson’s 
famous vision in the Jn Memoriam, or the unspeak- 
able happiness which Browning’s lover has vainly 
mourned. In any case, both your process and your re- 
sult, if you are a Mystic, will be the same. First you 
look for the object in a realistic world. It is so far an 
Independent Being. In theory you define it. In life 
you try to win it. Then you become reflective. You 


' observe that such a Being, just in so far as it is inde- 


pendent, is unknowable, inaccessible, indefinable, in fact, 
self-contradictory. You observe then that your Realistic 
definition was false. Moreover, you also see that the 
whole meaning of the search lies within yourself; that 
your theory of Being never had any but a practical 
sense; that the whole question is one of the search for 
a certain limiting state of your finite variable, for a state 
called Attainment. And hereupon you are prepared to 
come on that which is and to catch “the deep pulsations 
of the world.’ Your ideas, keenly observing all the 
paradoxes and failures of finitude, finally, through their 
dialectic, destroy one another and themselves as well. 
And the goal of the process is at least momentarily 
reached when you come to the conclusion of Browning’s 
lover. For he, after his vision of the vanity of all finite 
striving, abandons at last the hope for the so-called lady, 
the Independent Being who rides so proudly beside him 
in the illusory world of ordinary life, —abandons that 
hope, only to take refuge in the ineffable immediacy of 
an experience that he takes for the instant to be the 
ultimate reality. 


THE UNITY OF BEING 179 


“And yet, she has not spoke so long! 
What if heaven be that, fair and strong 
At life’s best, with our eyes upturned 
Whither life’s flower is first discerned, 
We fixed so, ever should so abide? 
What if we still ride on, we two, 
With life forever old yet new, 
Changed not in kind but in degree, 
The instant made eternity, 

And heaven just prove that I and she 
Ride, ride together, forever ride.” 


The language is here not that of the medieval or of 
the Hindoo mystics. But the ontology is in essence 
one with theirs. 

In fine, mysticism is, as a conception of Being, the 
logically precise and symmetrical correspondent of real- 
ism. In its innermost conceptual constitution it is the 
mirror picture, so to speak, of its opponent. Each doc- 
trine seeks an Absolute finality, —a limit which is con- 
ceived solely by virtue of its contrast with the process 
whereby our ideas tend towards that limit. Realism seeks 
this limiting object, this true Being, as somewhat Inde- 
pendent of Ideas. Mysticism, declaring that independent 
Being is self-contradictory and so impossible, seeks Being 
within the very life of the knowing process. Each doc- 
trine is a conscious abstraction. Neither can tell what 
it means by its goal. Each is sure that its goal 2s. 
Practically, the two doctrines are related as are positive 
and negative quantities in mathematics. “Submit to the 
facts,” says Realism. “ They are without. You can do 
nothing to make them different by merely knowing them.” 
“ Know,” says Mysticism. “ The truth is nigh thee, even 


180 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


in thy heart. Purify thyself. In thee is all truth. How 
shall it be except as known and as one with the Knower?” 
Yet each doctrine, pursued to the end, culminates in a 
passive abandonment of all our actual finite ideas about 
Being as vain. Realism is often unwilling to observe 
that, if it is true, ideas are also Beings; Mysticism un- 
dertakes explicitly to deny that ordinary ideas are at all 
real. But both end in a reductio ad absurdum of every 
definite finite idea of the Real. | 
In their logical outcome these two theories, polar oppo- 
sites of each other as they are, must, nevertheless, in 
consequence of this parallelism of their structures, pre- 
cisely agree. Each in the end defines Nothing what- 
ever. Only the realist does not intend this result, while 
the mystic often seems to glory in it. He thus glories, 
as we have seen, because in fact he is defining a very 
fascinating and a highly conscious contrast-effect, —a 
contrast-effect that, far from being itself anything abso- 
lute, or actually unknown and ineffable, is a constantly 
present character of our human type of finite conscious- 
ness. As a fact, our thinking is a search for a goal that 
is conceived at once as rationally satisfying and as theo- 
retically true. And this goal we conceive as real pre- 
cisely in so far as we consciously pursue it, and mean 
something by the pursuit. But now this goal, since it 
is not yet present to us, in our finite form of conscious- 
ness, is first conceived by contrast with the process of 
the pursuit. So far indeed we conceive it negatively. 
In this sense we can say of the goal, Nescio, Nescio, or 
Weti, Neti, just as Bernard of Cluny, or as the Hindoo 
sages, said. But the meaning of these very negatives 


THE UNITY OF BEING 181 


lies in the positive contrast-effect that they even now 
actually present to us. Finite as we are, lost though we 
seem to be in the woods, or in the “wide air’s wilder- 
nesses,” in this world of time and of chance, we have 
still, like the strayed animals or like the migrating birds, 
our homing instinct. It is this homing instinct that we 
for the first merely articulate when we talk of true Being. 
Being means something for us, however, because of the 
positive presence, in finite consciousness, of this inner 
meaning of even our poorest ideas. We seek. That is 
a fact. We seek a city still out of sight. In the con- 
trast with this goal, we live. But if this be so, then 
already we actually possess something of Being even in 
our finite seeking. For the readiness to seek is already 
something of an attainment, even if a poor one. But 
when the Mystic, defining his goal wholly in negative 
terms, lays stress upon the contrast as simply absolute, 
he finds that so far his Absolute is defined as nothing 
but the absence of finitude, and so as apparently equiva- 
lent to nothing at all, since all definite contents are for 
us so far finite, and since the absence of finitude is for 
us the absence of contents. If hereupon the mystic 
skilfully points out that this apparent zero is still, by 
virtue of the contrast, defined as our goal, as our com- 
ing attainment, as our peace, our hope, our heaven, our 
God, —then one rightly replies to the mystic that what 
makes his Absolute appear thus glorious is precisely its 
presented contrast with our imperfection. But a zero 
that is contrasted with nothing at all, has so far not 
even any contrasting character, and remains thus a genu- 
ine and absolute nothing. Hence, if the Absolute of the 


182 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Mystic is really different from nothing, it is so by virtue 
of the fact that it stands in real contrast with our own 
real but imperfect Being. We too then are. If our 
life behind the veil is, as the mystic says, our goal, if 
already, even as we are, we are one with the Knower, 
then the absolute meaning does not ignore, but so far 
recognizes as real, even by virtue of the contrast, our 
present imperfect meaning. 

It follows that if Mysticism is to escape from its own 
finitude, and really is to mean by its absolute Being 
anything but a Mere Nothing, its account of Being must 
be so amended as to involve the assertion that. our finite 
life is not mere illusion, that our ideas are not merely 
false, and that we are already, even as finite, in touch 
with Reality. 


LECTURE V 


LECTURE V 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM, AND THE WORLD OF MODERN 
CRITICAL RATIONALISM 


MystTIcIsM, which our last lecture discussed, has one 
great advantage over Realism. The realist, namely, gives 
you a conception of Being which pretends to be au- 
thoritative; but this authority appears, like the realistic 
type of Being itself, something merely external and 
therefore opaque. The realist demands, as a matter of 
common sense, that you first accept as real his Inde- 
pendent Beings. Hence, if you are to comprehend the 
realist’s position, you must make your own reflections; 
you must do your own critical thinking. Realism is 
essentially dogmatic, and gives you no aid in your at- 
tempt to sound the inner meaning of the realistic doc- 
trine. But Mysticism, on the contrary, is from the 
outset in a way reflective; it is founded upon an ex- 
plicit appeal to your own experience. It points out to 
you first that if any object is real for you, it is you 
alone who can find, within yourself, the determining 
motive that leads you to call this object real. Hence 
Mysticism depends upon making you considerate of these, 
your metaphysical motives, aware of your meaning. You 
ascribe to this or that object reality. Mysticism is a 
practical doctrine. It observes at once that you merely 
express your own need as knower when you thus regard 


the object as existent. Mysticism asks you hereupon 
185 


186 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


to define your needs in an absolutely general way. What 
do you want when you want Being? Mysticism replies 
to this question, as the sage Yajnavalkya replies, in the 

panishads, to the questions of his wife Maitrey?: 
You want yourself,—the Self in its completeness, in 
its fulfilment, in its final expression. In brief, when you 
talk of reality, you talk of self-possession, of perfection, 
and of peace. And that is, therefore, all that you mean 
by the Being of the world or of any type of facts. 
Being therefore is nothing beyond yourself. You even 
now hold it within you, in your heart of hearts. Being 
therefore is just the purely immediate. Zo be means to 
quench thought in the presence of a final immediacy 
which completely satisfies all ideas. And by this simple 
reflection, the mystic undertakes to define the Absolute. 


I 


The advantage of this mystical method of dealing 
with the problem of Reality lies in the fact that Mys- 
ticism, because it is essentially a self-conscious and re- 
flective doctrine, explicitly states its own defects, and 
points beyond its own abstractions. Realism actually 
asserts hopeless contradiction, and then stubbornly de- 
clines to take note of the fact that it does so. But 
philosophical Mysticism always expounds its own para- 
doxes, and actually glories in them. The process of 
getting beyond Realism therefore involves a hostile and 
paradoxical dialectic, whereby one exposes the realistic 
paradoxes. The realist himself takes as little part in 
this process as possible, and opposes to his critics merely 
the authority of sane common sense. Everybody knows, 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 187 


he insists, that the world is independently real. But 
to ask what independent reality means is, he remarks, 
mere morbid curiosity. To doubt the independence, 
would be to doubt the value of sanity. ‘When Bishop 
Berkeley said there was no matter, and proved it, ’twas 
no matter what he said.” Such is the spirit of any 
typically realistic reply to Berkeley. Hence to be 
realistic is essentially to ignore every fundamental criti- 
cism of the ontological predicate. Even Herbart, that 
most honest and critical of realists, could see no sense 
in trying to get behind the ultimate fact of what he 
called the Absolute Position of the real itself. If there 
is show or seeming, said Herbart, there is what points 
towards or hints at the real. But the real itself is the 
finally posited, that hints at nothing beyond itself, and 
that therefore is independent of the show. That, for 
such a realism, is the whole story of the ontological 
predicate, and to inquire further is vain. The rest, even 
for a man of Herbart’s minuteness and caution, consists 
in inquiring what subjects, what Wesen, are worthy to 
receive this predicate. 

The only way to deal with Realism is therefore to 
insist, with equal obstinacy, that a realist shall explain, 
not what objects he takes to be real,.but what he 
means by their independence. Such obstinacy is hos- 
tile. No realist willingly codperates in the undertak- 
ing. The critical task is accordingly ungracious and 
abstract. For Realism depends upon not knowing what 
it does; and to point out to it what it is doing seems 
to it and to any mere bystander like a carping and 
unkindly assault. 


188 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


But the mystic, on the contrary, is in a much larger 
measure his own critic. He is essentially dialectical. 
And his dialectic process is very much that of Elaine in 
the song of Love and Death that Tennyson puts into her 
mouth. Like Elaine, the mystic is reflecting upon the 
final goal of his life-journey. That goal for him is the 
‘Reality, the Soul, the Self. It is as such infinitely 
precious to him. But what is this absolute goal, just in 
so far as it is Real at all? Is it a live Being, or after 
dreamless sleep, with that “rapture of repose” on the 
face of the dead that Byron’s well-known lines describe. 
Or, to use Elaine’s speech, is it Love or Death that 
‘the mystic defines as his Absolute? Like Elaine, the 
mystic equally defines both Love and Death, both the 
Perfect, and the Nothing; or if you like, he leaves both 
of them, and the whole difference between them, con- 
sciously and deliberately undefined, while his entire 
doctrine consists in saying, exactly as the adorable 
Elaine says, “I know not which is sweeter, No, not I.” 
That, as we in effect saw at the last time, is the precise 
technical sense of the 

“ Nescio, nescio 

Quae jubilatio, 

Lux tibi qualis.” 
of Bernard’s hymn concerning the Urbs Sion unica, 
mansio mystica. That is the sense of YA&ajnavalkya’s 
Neti, Neti. And Mysticism, curiously enough, has in- 
spired whole nations and generations of mankind by 
saying essentially nothing whatever but what, in her 
despair, Tennyson’s Elaine so pathetically sings. 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 189 


Now so easy is it, from a merely external point of 
view, to see the formal defect of the outcome of this 
train of thinking, that the great difficulty in expound- 
ing the mystic position, is, not to destroy its illusions, 
but rather first dramatically to create them in the 
hearer’s mind, to the end that he may at least histori- 
cally appreciate the meaning of the mystical definition 
of Being. But remember, in any case, that if it is thus 
easy from without to make naught of the mystic’s re- 
sult, it is also fair to add that this refutation is itself 
made easy through the mystic’s own explicit confession. 
His doctrine has the honesty of reflective thought about 
it. He tells you where his own paradoxes are to be 
found. And the value of dealing with him lies not in 
refuting him, for in effect he already himself provides 
the whole refutation; but in comprehending both why 
he has inspired mankind, and why he creates the illu, 
sion that his empty, swept, and garnished dwelling is’ 
the very house of God. And yet after our foregoing | 
account, it should not now be hard to see wherein the 
illusion and the truth of Mysticism are to be found. 

The mystic asserts that the real cannot be wholly 
independent of knowledge. Herein he is right. He 
asserts that the reality of which you think and speak 
is first of all a reality meant by you. This is profoundly 
true. He declares that within yourself lies the sole 
motive that leads you to distinguish truth from error, 
reality from unreality, the world from the instant’s pass- 
ing contents. And in all this the mystic, whether 
Hindoo or Christian, is a representative of the simple 
facts about Being, — facts which everybody concerned 


190 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


with the subject ought to know merely as a matter of 
general education. 

And the mystic further observes that, despite all this, 
you have not now won, as finite thinker, the true pres- 
ence of the very Being which you seek and which you 
still contain within your very meaning. He points out 
that, in your present poor form of self-consciousness, 
just now, you find within you what’ you do not wholly 
mean, and mean, as if it were beyond you, a truth that, 
although it is nigh you, even in your heart, you do not 
at present find. He insists that your finite disquietude 
is due to your restlessness in this essentially intolerable 
situation. He advises you that, in looking for Being, 
you are attempting to end this disquietude. Now in all 
this the mystic is distinctly an empiricist, a reporter of the 
facts, as you can at any moment see them for yourself 
if you will. Moreover, he is a decidedly practical thinker. 

But as a religious teacher he is inspiring, first of all, 
just because he appeals to your own individuality. He 
breathes the common spirit of all the higher religions 
when he conceives your goal as an inner salvation, and 
your search for truth as essentially a practical effort to 
win personal perfection. It is no wonder then that the 
mystics have been the spiritual counsellors of humanity. 
Where the realist falsely sunders the what and the that, the 
outer world and the individual soul, the theoretical and 
the practical interests, the mystic sees the unity of life’s 
business, identifies the needful and the true, unites the 
moral Ought with the theoretical Ideal, teaches that 
the absolutely Real, by virtue of its very function as the 
Real, must also be the absolutely Good, gives life a 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 191 


genuine coherence of meaning, and defines the whole 
duty of man as simple fidelity to that meaning. To the 
mystics, then, has been historically committed the feed- 
ing of the flock of the faithful, the gathering of the 
heavenly manna, the saving of humanity from the abyss 
into which the mere respectability of dogmatic Realism, 
if left to itself, would have infallibly plunged all the 
deeper interests of the Spirit. 

So much for the obvious positive efficacy of the mys- 
tical undertaking. But the undertaking itself takes the 
form, as we said, of a search for a certain limiting state 
of that finite variable which is called your knowledge, 
or your experience, or your insight, and for a defini- 
tion of what happens when that state is reached. The 
mystic also attempts to define how this state is related 
to consciousness, and he tries to treat this limiting 
state very much as (if he were a mathematician) he might 
attempt to define, in a purely quantitative world, the 
limit of an infinite series of terms, and to consider how 
one series of values can be a function of another. The 
mystic ignores the sum of the series. He cares only for 
the final term itself, viewed as the limit which the other 
terms approach. And he attempts to define this limit- 
ing state of the finite variable by a process which is, as 
a fact, fallacious. His position is that since, in us mor- 
tals, consciousness means ignorance, and since, the less 
we observe our ignorance, the nearer we are to uncon- 
sciousness, therefore, at the limit, to be possessed of abso- 
lute knowledge is to be unconscious. 

If you persist in asking how the mystic can thus con- 
ceive the zero of consciousness as also the goal of knowl- 


192 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


edge, then he replies with his endlessly repeated reductio 
ad absurdum. If, he says, you stopped anywhere short 
of unconsciousness in the series of states of finite con- 
sciousness, you would find yourself thinking of some- 
thing beyond you, desiring another, less troubled, state, — 
confessing your imperfection. You would, therefore, be 
confessedly not in presence of Being. If you are to get 
into the presence of Being, and know what the Knower 
finally knows, you must then finally pass to the limit 
itself1 But so to pass is to leave no variety, no ex- 
ternal object, no passing moment’s ideas, no conscious 
content in the field of knowledge. Wt is, in short, to 
leave nothing present but the~Knower alone, and the 
Knower as finally immediate datum, too completely im- 
mediate to be conscious at all. 

If one hereupon replies that this paradox of the mys- 
tic, the passing to the limit, and undertaking to define 
it in terms of the vanishing series, deprives the Abso- 
lute of any value.as a Being, by making the whole truth 
a mere zero,then the mystic assures you that just this 
zero has infinite value, because it is the goal of the series 
of states of finite consciousness. Do you not want peace ? 
he says. Can anything be of more worth to you than 
attainment? If attainment involves what for finite con- 
sciousness means the quenching of desire, of thought, and 
of consciousness, does that deprive the search for attain- 
ment of meaning? For now that you are finite, all your 
passion is for attainment and for peace. 


1 Nevertheless, as one must in any case point out, even this process 
might, at the limit, prove discontinuous. The Knower might possess 
some new type of consciousness. As a fact, he does. 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 193 


But hereby the final sense of Mysticism, and the final 
reply to the mystic, once more clearly enough comes to 
sight. Overlooking the merely formal defect of the ar- 
gument as to the limiting state of knowledge one can 
say: It is true, in arithmetic, that zero is a very impor- 
tant member of the number series. But it gets its whole 
importance by its contrasts and its definite quantitative 
relations with the other numbers. Just so here, if the 
Absolute is not only zero, but also real, also the goal, 
also the valuable, it is so by contrast with the finite 
search for that goal. But to suppose, as the mystic 
does, that the finite search has of itself no Being at all, 
is illusory, is Maya, is itself nothing, this is also to de- 
prive the Absolute of even its poor value as a con- 
trasting goal. For a nothing that is merely other than 
another nothing, a goal that is a goal of no real process, 
a zero that merely differs from another zero, has as little 
value as it has content, as little Being as it has finitude. 
What the mystic has positively defined, then, is the law 
that our consciousness of Being depends upon a contrast 
whereby we set all our finite experience over against some 
other that we seek but do not yet possess. As a fact, how- 
ever, it is not only the goal, but the whole series of 
stages on the way to this goal that is the Reality. It 
is the sum, then, or some other function of the terms of 
the series, that has Being. And, as a fact, Being must 
be attributed to both the principal members of the rela- 
tion of contrast, both to the seeking and to the attain- 
ment. Else is the attainment the fulfilment of nothing. 
The finite then also is, even if imperfect. Its imperfec- 
tion is not the same as any mere failure to be real in 


oO 


194 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


any degree. It is real in its own way, if the Absolute 
is real. And unless the imperfect has Reality, the Abso- 
lute has none. We must then abandon the mystic’s mere 
series of gradually vanishing terms for some view that 
unites these terms into a more connected whole. What 
is, is not then merely immediate, is not merely the limit 
of the finite series, is not merely the zero of conscious- 
ness. The result therefore is that Immediacy is but one 
aspect of Being. We must afresh begin our effort to 
define the ontological predicate, by taking account both 
of finite ideas, and of the sense in which they can be 
true. 

Our result, in case of the mystic, is accordingly very 
simple. To the realist we formerly said: Your ideas 
are Independent Beings as surely as their objects are 
such. Hence your world is rent in twain, and you can- 
not put it together again. To the mystic we now say: 
Your Absolute is defined merely as the goal of the 
finite search. That it is such a goal, this alone, accord- 
ing to your own hypothesis, distinguishes it from mere 
nothing, for to save the unity of Being, you have de- 
prived it of all other characters than this. Therefore, 
since your Absolute is only a goal, an attainment, and 
is naught else, its sole meaning is due to your process 
of search, in other words to your restless ideas that 
seek it. Annihilation is something to me only so long 
as I seek annihilation. Death is a positive ideal only 
so long as I strive for death. Pure immediacy has a 
content only so long as it fulfils ideas. In brief, by 
contrast with and by other relation to finite facts, your 
zero has its meaning. If, then, your conscious ideas 


a 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 195 


are naught, your Absolute is naught in precisely the 
same sense, and in precisely the same degree as the 
ideas and as the finite facts are naught. On the other 
hand, if your Absolute is real, then, unless it has a 
distinguishing positive content of its own, unless it is 
more than mere finality and peace, the finite world of 
conscious strivings after it, is precisely as real as itself, 
since your Absolute borrows all its Being from its 
contrast with those strivings. Precisely, then, as we 
dealt with the realist by pointing out that his ideas are 
at least as real as their supposed independent objects, 
so now we bring the mystic’s case to its close, by 
pointing out that his Absolute, in its abstraction, is 
precisely as much, and in exactly the same sense of the 
terms a Nothing, as, by his hypothesis, his own con- 
sciousness is. 

And herewith we indeed abandon the abstractions of 
both Realism and Mysticism. What we have learned 
from those abstractions is that our finite consciousness 
indeed seeks a meaning that it does not now find pre- 
sented. We have learned too that this meaning is 
neither a merely independent Being, nor a merely im- 
mediate Datum. What else can it be? 


II 


Our answer to this question depends upon an effort 
to amend the extreme statement of Realism. I suppose 
that no realist, when once confronted with the conse- 


quences of the absolute mutual independence of the 


Real and of the Idea that from without refers to it, 
will be disposed to admit that he ever really meant 


— ae 


196 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


such total independence. The Real, he will now admit, 
is not logically or in its true essence wholly indiffer- 
ent to whether anybody knows it or not. It is only 
practically, or relatively, independent. If you still 
speak of it then as the relatively independent member 
of the relation, you must indeed, now and henceforth, 
say that the Real is essentially such that, wnder condt- 
tions, it would become knowable and known. This, the 
essential preparedness of Reality for knowledge, does, 
therefore, result from the foregoing criticism of Real- 
ism. In the light, then, of this consequence, we must 
proceed. This essential relation of Reality to knowl- 
edge already constitutes a part or an aspect of any 
real Being, even before it becomes known. Even the 
meteors, wandering there in interplanetary space, un- 
seen, are already such that, if they were to become 
incandescent by entering our atmosphere, they would 
become visible to an eye that chanced to look their 
way. And knowledge comes to pass when things that 
possess reality apart from knowledge come to influence, 
as a consequence of the general laws governing interac- 
tion, the conscious states of knowing Beings. So at least 
a Realism, revised in the light of the foregoing, will next 
be led to maintain. 

Such Realism may proceed as follows: “ Perception, 
as a kind of knowledge, results when a real object, 
in accordance of course with its previous nature, causes 
impressions in a percipient. But of course no object 
is wholly indifferent to the effects that it causes. The 
incandescent meteor changes its physical and chemi- 
cal properties, even at the moment when it becomes 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 197 


visible. And this change is due to the previous physi 
cal and chemical constitution of the meteor, which 
thereby was always prepared, in one way, to become 
known to a Being with a power of vision. And this 
case is a type of the way in which Being and Idea 
are related. Upon this basis must our metaphysic rest.” 

I thus merely indicate a general and a well-known 
popular view as to the relatively independent reality of 
things —a view which usually passes, in the ordinary 
speech of common sense, for Realism; although, histori- 
cally speaking, the most thoroughgoing realists have 
avoided such concessions to popular opinion, just  be- 
cause they really ruin the independence of the Real. 
Neither the Sankhya, nor Herbart, regards the inde- 
pendent reality as in truth the genuinely physical cause 
of knowledge, and, as a fact, one who offers such popu- 
lar compromises, familiar though they are to us all, must 
be prepared to go much further, on the way towards 
Idealism, than he at first imagines. Such a compromise 
is, in fact, an entire surrender of the realistic thesis. 

I will not pause to develope, at any length, the various 
well-known theories that have been held by modified 
Realism as to the causation of perception, or as to the 
evolution of knowledge and of knowing beings, or as to 
the rest of the natural history, both of ideas and of rela- 
tions of ideas and “real external things.” We are all 
familiar with such views. They have their important 
place in psychology and in cosmology. But they are 
here, in their details, simply not relevant. Our only 
interest, at present, in such theories, is an interest in 
seeing what manner of Reality can be ascribed to objects 


- 


198 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


which you call real “apart from” or “externally to” or 
“in relative independence of” the experience of any par- 
ticular observer, but which you, meanwhile, regard as, 
by nature, “sources” or “causes” or “possible causes” 
of knowledge. When you say, with such a consciously 
modified Realism, “‘The Real is not ever wholly inde- 
pendent of whether it is known or not; it is only rela- 
tively independent; and it is, in nature, such as to be 
knowable, or such as, under conditions, to become a cause 
or source of knowledge,’”— when you modify Realism 
in this way, what is the true consequence for your fun- 
damental Theory of Being? 

The consequence, I insist, is deeper than you might at 
first suppose. For it is natural to imagine that you can 
still keep the convenient part of Realism,—the practi- 
cally unapproachable indifference, dignity, and compelling 
authority, of the Independent Beings, while sacrificing so 
much of the abstractions of pure Realism as it proves to 
be logically inconvenient to retain. “The world,” you 
perhaps now say, “is there, of course, whether or no 
this or that man knows it. And a man has practically 
to submit his knowledge to the Real, just as if it were 
wholly independent of him in every way. Of course no 
independence is ever really absolute. That has to be 
admitted. All things are always interrelated. But, prac- 
tically speaking, the meteors are what they are, whether 
or no we men see them. And Neptune, when discovered, 
was not created by the astronomer’s computations nor by 
his telescope nor by his brain. Now this practical inde- 
pendence of any particular knowledge is what we mean 
by the Being of things. Before, after, and apart from 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 199 


anybody’s knowledge, things remain, on the whole, what- 
ever they are. To be and to be known, to be knowable 
and to be actual, — these are of course ultimately related 
characters in any being. Yet they are characters that, 
on the whole, fall apart, in the nature of things as they 
are. Knowledge is, therefore, relatively speaking, an ac- 
cident in the world. And its business is to conform to 
the facts, not to create them. Upon so much we still 
insist, despite the fate of an extreme and abstract, and 
of course in so far absurd, Realism.” 

Yet one must now, in reply, insist upon yet a fresh 
criticism of the bases even of this modified Realism. 
And the criticism first takes a very simple form. It 
asks: Can we, then, divide the Being of things into 
two parts, as the primary and the secondary qualities 
of matter have been divided? Can we, then, say of 
one of these parts of Reality, “ That is wholly indepen- 
dent of knowledge; that is entirely indifferent to whether 
anybody knows it or not?” And can we, then, say of 
the rest of the Being of things (namely, let us suppose, 
of the secondary qualities of matter), ‘ That part is not 
indifferent to knowledge, but alters according to the 
nature of the particular being who happens to know it?” 

The question is momentous for the fate of any mod- 
ified Realism. It is usually supposed that such a divi- 
sion is easily possible, even if not verifiable in detail. 
What the meteor is, in so far as it either now flashes 
or is at least capable of visible incandescence, — that, 
one may suppose, is an aspect or part of the reality of 
the meteor which indeed would exist apart from this 
or that knowledge, but which cannot be expressed ex- 


200 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


cept by taking account of the actual or possible rela- 
tion to knowledge. But that the meteor is external 
matter, and has mass, extension, or other primary qual- 
ities, —this aspect of the meteor would remain real if 
there never were any knowledge in the world; and this 
aspect is not altered in its character by taking account 
of our ideas about it. Some such division of the real 
into two parts, one closely and explicitly related to 
knowledge, and one independent of knowledge, is very 
commonly attempted. One supposes that one is able 
to say what the world would still be if knowledge van- 
ished. The rest of the world, the phenomenal aspect 
of things, the part of Being that has explicit relation 
to knowledge, one supposes to be also capable of defi- 
nition more or less by itself. Thus Being has two 
parts, an independent part, and a dependent part. 

But our former analysis of pure Realism, by virtue 
of the very abstractness and one-sidedness that made 
it at the time so austere, gives us, as it were, a 
“razor” wherewith to cut away just the ‘“indepen- 
dent” part of this now divided realistic universe. If 
the Real were wholly independent of knowledge, it 
would be self-contradictory. Well, just so, if any part 


jof the Reality, if any division of it, if any group of 


substances or characters in it, were real in entire in- 
dependence of knowledge, or were the same whether 
known by anybody or not, all of our former analysis 
would apply to just that portion of the real universe. 
Thus it would be vain to say that the Real is inde- 
pendent of knowledge when or in so far as it causes 
no knowledge of itself to exist, or is not a possible 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 201 


cause of knowledge; and that only when it is an actual 
or possible cause of knowledge it is in essential relation 
to the latter. Any such view would be destroyed by 
our former attack upon the Independent Beings. If no 
Reality can have entirely independent Being, no part 
of reality can win such Being. And this consideration 
ends at once every effort to divide off one section of 
Being as the independent part. 

When we say, then, that the real is in any sense 
practically or partially independent of knowledge, we 
do not mean that it has two parts, one in essence in- 
dependent of whether it is known or not, the other 
essentially linked to ideas. No, the Real must be 
through and through, to its very last quality, to its 
very inmost core, such as to be fitted to be known. Its 
nature is through and through thus tainted, if you 
please so to say, by adaptation to ideal purposes. 

If, then, Being is to keep its practical independence 
of any particular knowledge, our modified Realism must 
indeed be not only modified, but transformed. Yet how? 

In answer, one has merely to state afresh and more 
carefully the situation now reached. The Real, for our 
modified Realism, is to be somehow “outside of any 
particular knowledge.” It is to be “authoritative” over 
against our “mere ideas.” They must “conform” to it. 
On the other hand, it is such that, under conditions, 
they may “correspond” to it. If they do so “corre- 
spond,” they will be true. Independently of this essential 
relation to knowledge, Being is indefinable. It is there 
as that which, if known, is found giving to ideas their 
validity, as that to which ideas ought to correspond, and as 


202 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


that whose essential relation to ideas is that it is their 
model, and is adapted to their nature as such model. 
Now independently, I repeat, of this relation, the Real is 
for us henceforth simply indefinable. Nor can any part, 
or aspect, or quality of it be defined in logical indepen- 
dence of this relation. 

But this new type of Being really involves a new 
fundamental conception of what it is to be real. To be 
real now means, primarily, to be valid, to be true, to be 
in essence the standard for ideas. Our transformed theory 
is now that our ideas have a standard external to them- 
selves, to which they must correspond. If we retain 
Being in this sense, we still view it as Other than ideas 
that relate to it, and as outside of our present knowledge. 
But we do not, in this case, view the real as conceiy- 
able, either in whole or in part, in an entire abstraction 
from knowledge. It may be somehow real when knowl- 
edge is not. That we shall have to see. But in essence 
it is always related to the purpose of knowledge, and 
is altered when these relations alter. 

And now let us proceed to define more specifically 
this new conception of Being. Let us take it first in 
one of its most recent forms. 


Ii 


Is it not indeed plain that, as we ourselves have often 
heretofore said, when we talk of Being, we are indeed 
seeking for what, if present, would satisfy or tend to 
satisfy our conscious needs and meanings? Let us take 
this very character as the sole basis of our definition of 
what it is to be. Let us first say that whenever we talk 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 203 


my 


of Being we mean a definitely Possible Fact of experi- 


ence, viewed just as something possible for us. Or, again, 
let us say that by Being in general we mean precisely 


what Kant called Mégliche Erfahrung. For is it not also y 


plain that we are trying to find out, in all our search 
for Being, precisely what experience we may hope to 
get under given conditions, and what experience we 
may not expect to get?) Can we not then reduce to 
just these terms the whole inquiry after Being in the 
province of common sense, in the world of science, and 
even in the more mysterious realms of religion? If, 
hearing strange sounds in the street, I look out of the 
window, am I not trying to define or to confirm some idea 
of a possible experience? If an astronomer searches a 
star-cluster for variables, or a stellar spectrum for familiar 
lines, is he not verifying assertions as to possible con- 
tents of experience? If the devout man prays, and 
expects an answer, or hopes for immortality, is he not 
looking for possible empirical data? What is, is then 
for me what, under certain definable conditions, I should 
experience. To be is precisely to fulfil or to give war- 
rant to ideas by making possible the experience that 
the ideas define. | 

Well, let us next generalize this notion a little, let us 
state it more impersonally, and then let us see what we 
get. I have ideas; present experience does not present 
to me all that they mean. I look to see how they are 
related to Being. What then, apart from my private 
and momentary point of view, is Being in. general? Is 
it not what renders my ideas Valid or Invalid? When 
I say, There is a real world, what do I mean except that 


\ 


204 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


some of my ideas are already, and apart from my pri- 
vate experience, valid, true, well-grounded? When the 
mystic himself defined his Absolute, what was he defin- 
ing but the supposed possible goal of a process of finite 
purification of ideas and of experiences? When the 
realist spoke of the Independent Beings, what did he 
himself mean except that certain of our ideas are true 
or false despite our own desires, or even quite against 
our wishes? And to set aside as we have done either 
Mysticism or Realism, what was it but to point out that 
certain ideal definitions, being contradictory, are neces- 
sarily invalid? What is Being then but the Validity of 
Ideas ? 

Is not here, then, the true definition of Being? As 
you may remember, this was, in fact, the third on our 
list of the historical conceptions of Being. And to con- 
sider in detail this Third Conception, which identifies 
Reality with Validity, the Being of the world with the 
truth of certain ideas, is our next task. 

This new conception of Being, as we shall at once be 
able to see, is one that, just at the present time, is of 
exceeding importance in connection with the contempo- 
rary discussion of all ultimate problems. 


IV 


True metaphysical Realism, in all its abstractness, still 
survives amongst us, and will no doubt, as an opinion, 
last as long as our race. For man might be defined as 
an animal who ought to reflect, but who very generally 
cannot. But you all know a class of persons whom I 
may as well call, at once, the Critical Rationalists of our 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 205 


own time. These thinkers are not mere empiricists. 
They are students of science, sometimes too of ethics, 
and frequently also of religion. They are doubtful, not 
infrequently quite negative, in their attitude towards 
Realism. They condemn the notion of things in them- 
selves, and insist either that man’s limited insight can 
never reach the truth about any realistically conceived 
independent world, or else that there is no such world 
at all. On the other hand, they are hostile to construc- 
tive Idealism, regard the whole recent constructively 
idealistic movement as a mere dream, and often repeat 
that, in our philosophy, we must be guided solely by the 
spirit of Modern Science. In theology they condemn 
theoretical construction, and if they are positively dis- 
posed, prefer a reasonable and chastened moral faith. 
But the one thing to which they remain steadfastly 
loyal, is the Validity of some region of decidedly imper- 
sonal Truth. As such a realm of impersonal truth they 
conceive perhaps the moral law, perhaps the realm of 
natural law revealed to us by science, perhaps the law- 
ful structure of that social order which is now so favor- 
ite a topic of study. Their spiritual father is Kant, 
although they often ignore their parentage. Their philo- 
sophical creations are a collection of impersonal princi- 
ples in whose independent or realistic Being no one 
altogether believes, but whose value as giving reason- 
able unity to the realm of phenomena, justifies, to the 
present age, their validity. These principles are such as 
Energy; or in the modern sense of the term, Evolution, 
viewed as the name for a universal tendency in nature; 
or the Unconscious, taken as a principle for explaining 


206 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


mental life; or yet other of the frequently great crea- 
tions of Nineteenth Century thought. These are names 
for abstractions, but for abstractions based in some cases 
upon a vast experience, and in these cases justified pre- 
cisely as empirically valid conceptions. The world of 
these principles is neither independently real nor yet 
illusory, nor yet precisely a spiritual reality. It is said 
to be true for us men. In that world the older faiths 
-may indeed seem endangered. God is, from such a point 
of view, no longer a person, not yet is he the mystical 
Absolute. The impersonal conception of a Righteous 
Order of the universe remains. Theology, one holds, 
must reconstruct its notions accordingly. What remain 
to us to-day are Virtual Entities, so to speak, -— Laws 
and Orders of truth, — objects that are to us as if they 
were finally real. This as 2f, or as tt were, becomes to 
some thinkers, a sort of ultimate category. One no 
longer proves that God exists, but only that, Jt 7s as if 
he were. God too, like a logarithm, or like a treaty 
of peace between two nations, is to be, to such minds, 
a virtual entity or else nothing. 

Thinkers of this general type, I say, you all know. 
Their spirit, as you read modern books, you have con- 
stantly before you. Their characteristic metaphysical 
conceptions are founded upon this, our third view of 
the ontological predicate. In future this Third Concep- 
tion may therefore come to be remembered as the typical 
ontological idea current in the Nineteenth Century, —in 
this age of critical rationalism, and of a cool respect for 


truths which do everything but take on the form of 
individual life. 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 207 


A close study of this notion of what it is to be real 
seems therefore justified by our situation. And go next, 
during the remainder of the present lecture, I shall illus- 
trate by various cases how objects recognized in one way 
or another by our thought may suggest this form of the 
ontological predicate. Then, at the next lecture, I shall 
follow very briefly some of the earlier stages of the dif- 
ferentiation of this view from Realism in technical phi- 
losophy, shall deal very summarily with the history of 
the conception since Kant (because only since Kant it 
has come to be fully differentiated from Realism), and 
finally, I shall show how this conception leads us inevi- 
tably beyond itself to a fourth and final view of Being. 


V 


As one of the purely popular meanings of the onto- 
logical predicate we found, in our second lecture, the 
notion that to be real is to give warrant to ideas, to be 
genuine. By contrast we found popular speech calling 
an object whose unreality has been detected, an appear- 
ance, a myth, or even a lie. The unreal object thus 
often gets, by a certain transfer, names which first seem 
naturally to belong rather to the false opinion, to the 
idea itself, that has misled the too credulous mind, On 
the other hand, the real can be depended upon. It does 
not deceive. In a word, it is true, and its Being ig, 
somehow or other, more or less the same as its truth/ 

Such usage is so far only popular. It implies no con- 
scious final definition of Being. But this popular speech 
has undoubtedly been influenced by a philosophical tra- 
dition that dates, in our European thought, back to Plato, 


« 


208 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


and that has been influenced both by theology and by 
mathematical science. The scholastic theory of Being 
gave expression to all of these influences together, when, 
developing a discussion of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, it ex- 
pounded the well-known thesis: Omne Ens est Verum, 
or in another form: “Hns and Verwm are convertible 
terms.” 

It is, however, still the case that one who asserts this 
thesis, or its various popular equivalents, so far does 
not commit himself to any particular one of our four 
technical conceptions of what real Being itself funda- 
mentally means. For the scholastics the epithet verwm 
was only one of the so-called transcendental predicates 
of Being, which mentioned an universal character, rather 
than a defining mark, of Reality. We are now, how- 
ever, to sketch a theory for which the truth belonging 
to any real object is to be viewed as the one essential 
mark in terms of which Reality may be defined. And 
this truth itself is defined in the main as something, 
external to a mere idea, to which that idea ought to 
correspond. 

We are to begin, before following this theory into its 
technical philosophical forms, by naming some examples 
of objects which we ordinarily seem to call real mainly 
because we first call them true. As a fact, you cannot 
converse for a quarter of an hour upon topics of com- 
mon human interest, without speaking of many things 
that all the company present will tacitly view as in 
some objective sense real objects, as not “mere ideas” 
of anybody, as in other words facts, while at the same 
time, if you look closer, you will find that these ob- 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 209 


jects are not viewed by anybody present as real in the 
same sense in which physical bodies, or the atoms of 
Democritus, or the Monads of Leibniz, or Mr. Spen- 
cer’s Unknowable, have usually been regarded as real 
by the realistic metaphysicians who have believed in the 
latter entities. Those other objects of common human 
interest are viewed, by common sense, namely, not as 
Independent Beings, which would retain their reality 
unaltered even if nobody ever were able to think of 
them, but rather as objects such that, while people can, 
and often do think of them, their own sole Being con- 
sists in their character as rendering such thoughts about 
themselves objectively valid for everybody concerned. 
Their whole esse then consists in their value as giving 
warrant and validity to the thoughts that refer to 
them. They are external to any particular ideas, yet 
they cannot be defined independently of all ideas. 

Do you ask me to name such objects of ordinary 
conversation? I answer at once by asking whether 
the credit of a commercial house, the debts that a 
man owes, the present price of a given stock in the 
stock market, yes, the market price current of any 
given commodity; or, again, whether the rank of a 
given official, the social status of any member of the 
community, the marks received by a student at any 
examination; or, to pass to another field, whether this 
or that commercial partnership, or international treaty, 
or still once more, whether the British Constitution, — 
whether, I say, any or all of the objects thus named, 
will not be regarded, in ordinary conversation, as in 
some sense real beings, facts possessed of a genuinely 

P 


| 
\ 


210 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


ontological character? One surely says: The debt exists; 
the credit is a fact; the constitution has objective Be- 
ing. Yet none of these facts, prices, credits, debts, 
ranks, standings, marks, partnerships, Constitutions, are 
viewed as real independently of any and of all possible 
ideas that shall refer to them. The objects now under 
our notice have, moreover, like physical things, very 
various grades of supposed endurance and of recog- 
nized significance. Some vanish hourly. Others may 
outlast centuries. The prices vary from day to day; 
the credits may not survive the next panic; the Con- 
stitution may very slowly evolve for ages. None of 
these objects, moreover, can be called mere ideas inside 


of any man’s head. None of them are arbitrary crea- 


tions of definition. The individual may find them as 
stubborn facts as are material objects. The prices in 
the stock market may behave like irresistible physical 
forces. And yet none of these objects would continue 
to exist, as they are now supposed to exist, unless 
somebody frequently thought of them, recognized them, 
and agreed with his fellows about them. Their fashion 
of supposed Being is thus ordinarily conceived as at 


once ideal and extra-ideal. They are not “things in 


themselves,” and they are not mere facts of private 
consciousness. You have to count upon them as ob- 


‘jective. But if ideas vanished from the world, they 


would vanish also. They then are the objects of the 
relatively external meanings of ideas. Yet they are 
not wholly separable from internal meanings. 

Well, all of these facts are examples of beings of 
which it seems easiest to say that they are real mainly 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 211 


in so far as they serve to give truth or validity to a 
certain group of assertions about each one of them. 

I next turn to another region of examples. I have 
already more than once referred to the sort of Being 
that, in many minds, attaches to the moral law. What 
kind of Reality then, in the universe, has justice, or 
charity, or in general the good? Here indeed we are 
once more upon ground that the Platonic dialogues 
have rendered very familiar,—a ground too that the 
controversies of later forms of Realism and Idealism 
have caused to appear, to many minds, too much tram- 
pled over to be any longer fruitful. I venture only 
at the moment to insist that in this case familiarity 
has simply not meant clearness, and that it is far easier 
to talk of certain questions as hopelessly antiquated, 
than to give them any precise answer. 

Of course it is possible to undertake to regard the 
moral law, or such objects as justice, in the same light 
in which we have just been viewing the facts that re- 
sult from social law and from convention. Every stu- 
dent of Ethics knows, however, the arguments in favor 
of giving the ethical truths a more permanent type of 
validity than we assign to prices and to social conven- 
tions. In any case, however, the mention of this 
familiar Platonic group of instances carries us at once 
over to a form of reality whose formally eternal valid- 
ity is, to the once awakened metaphysical sense, some: 
thing both marvellous and unquestionable. 


212 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


VI 


In what way, then, in the next place, is the value 
of a, that is, the ratio of diameter and circumference 
in the circle, a real fact in the universe? Physically, 
one can never verify the existence of any perfect cir 
cle in the natural world; empirically, one can never, 
by actual measurement, discover in experience the pres- 
ence of two lengths thus related. But, geometrically and 
analytically, one can prove what is often called the 
“Existence,” as well as certain of what are often called 
the real properties of the ratio or quantity 7. The 
late Professor Cayley, in a noted passage of his Presi- 
dential address before the British Association, asserted, 
@S you may remember, that the mathematical objects, 
such as the true circles, are, if anything, more real 
than the physical imitations of circles that we can 
make, since, as he said, it is only by comparison with 

e true circle that the imperfections of the physical 
imitation of a circle can be defined. The Platonic 
spirit of this assertion is easily recognizable, and at 
all events it reminds us that a distinctly modern and 
scientific experience can lead a man to assert, without 
(as I suppose) any professionally metaphysical bias, 
that the most real objects are the ones of which it is 
hard to affirm any character except that they have an 

‘Eternal Truth. This case of the geometrical figures 
is of old a favorite one in philosophy. In recalling it 
here, I may also properly point out that the very latest 
discussions about what has been called the reality of 
Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces, have given a wholly 


<< 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 213 


new life to this old story; and the realm of that which 
undertakes to be real only in so far as it is true, is a 
realm of very distinctly present interest for the philoso- 
phy of recent natural science. 

As for the purely mathematical instances, in general, 
however, they are not at all limited to the geometrical 
ones. Modern Analysis, and the Theory of Functions, 
contain very many propositions of the class that are 
sometimes called “Existence-Theorems.” That there 
exists a root for any algebraic equation of the nth 
degree; that there exists a differential coefficient for 
a given function; that, on the other hand, there exist 
functions continuous throughout given intervals which 
still have within those intervals no differential coefii- 
cients; that the limits of this or that variable quantity 
(for instance, of convergent infinite series), exist: — 
such are examples that may be more or less familiar 
even to students who have, like myself, to confine 
themselves to decidedly elementary mathematics. Avoid- 
ing, however, the mathematical form of expression, one 
may here try to make clear the metaphysically impor- 
tant nature of theorems of this sort very much as follows: 
In pure mathematics, the student deals with certain ob- 
jects that, upon their face, are the products of purely 
arbitrary definitions. The mathematician builds up these 
his objects, as, for instance, the objects of pure Analysis, 
very much as he pleases. His ideas are in so far hig 
facts. So far one would suppose, then, that no qués- 
tions about existence would trouble the mathematician. 
But when one looks closer, one sees that when the 
mathematician has once built up such a notion of some 


214 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


realm of ideal objects, there may then arise the further 
question whether, within that realm, an object that meets 
certain new requirements, the special requirements, let 
us say, of a given problem, can be found or not. And 
this question is one whose answer, for the mathemati- 
cian, is indeed hereupon not at all a matter of his 
arbitrary choice. (He has, to be sure, created his world 
of mathematical ‘objects. This world is there, as it 
were, by his decree, or is real, as ordinary realists 
would say, only in his head.J It is so far like a 
child’s fairyland. But once created, this world, in its 
own eternal and dignified way, is as stubborn as the 
rebellious spirits that a magician might have called out 
of the deep) 

/ Even the poets have told us how their heroes, once 
created, have often become, as it were, alive after their 
‘own fashion, so that the poet could no longer volun- 
‘tarily control how they should behave. Much more, 
and for a far more exact reason, are the mathemati- 
cian’s objects, when once created, independent of his 
private will. Thus then there may indeed arise the 
question whether, as one may now express the matter, 
there exists any object, within a given mathematical 
realm, possessed of certain properties. The what of 
this now sought object is defined, in advance, in terms 
of these mentioned properties, — properties which, as 
just said, usually result from the conditions of a spe- 
cial problem. The that of the object, its presence as 
a member of the ideal realm which the mathematician 
has before defined, is a problem such as may cause 
almost endless trouble before it is solved. The pro- 


t 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 215 


cesses involved in such ontological or existential so- 
lutions are, however, very instructive as to the nature 
of the ideal world; and every student of metaphysics 
ought to have at least an elementary acquaintance with 
a few concrete instances of just such investigations in 
mathematics. 

If one hears children disputing over a fairyland of 
their own invention, and if the question arises whether 
or no there exists in that fairyland a particular being, 
say a fairy with six wings, a listener to the dispute 
easily grows impatient. “Why talk of reality or of 
unreality?” he says. “The six-winged fairy exists in 
your fairyland if you make him, and this is true because 
you are not talking of any real being at all, but only 
of make believe.” Yet in the mathematical realm it is 
not altogether so. Within limits, you create as you 
will, but the limits once found, are absolute. Unsub- 
stantial, in one way, as fairyland, the creations of the 
pure mathematician’s ideality still may require of their 
maker as rigid, and often as baffling a search for a given 
kind or case of mathematical existence, as if he were an 
astronomer testing the existence of the fifth satellite of 
Jupiter, or of the variables of a telescopic star-cluster. 
* An equation of the nth degree, for instance, is such an 
ideal mathematical creation. I remember a teacher of 
mathematics in a far western American town, who used 
to scoff at the troubles of his historically more famous 
colleagues regarding the noted theorem as to the exist- 
ence of a root of such an equation. The equation, as 
my friend in substance said, was a mathematician’s arbi- 
trary creation. There was no use in calling it an equa- 


216 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


tion unless it had a root. And since the mathematician 
made the equation, and called it such, it had a root if 
the mathematician said that it had. To discuss the 
question was thus as useless as to discuss the existence 
of the six-winged fairy in the fairyland of your own 

—~.creation. My friend would only admit the significance 
of inquiring what the value of any of the n roots actu- 
ally in question might be. 

And, as a fact, of course, my friend’s argument, de- 
spite its quarrel with the labors of Gauss and the other 
algebraists, had its own relative force. A theory of 
algebraic quantities is conceivable which should arbi- 
trarily begin one of its sections by defining certain sym- 
bols as the roots of algebraic equations, and which 
should then proceed to demonstrate the properties of 
these symbols, as well as of the equations in terms of 
the symbols. Such a method of procedure has indeed 
been proposed as a formal device in the course of the 
more recent history of the theory of equations. But as 
an historical fact, the mathematicians, in the first place, 
actually proceeded otherwise, defined, apart from the 
general theory of equations, their realm of algebraic 
quantities, both of those called “real” and of those 
called “complex,” defined also their general equations, 
and then, indeed, had upon their hands the problem of 
proving that within that realm of the algebraic quanti- 
ties, as thus previously defined, there could be found 
such as would furnish their general equation with 
roots. Hereupon, indeed, the resulting problem was one 
whose solution was no longer, like the creation of the 
six-winged fairy, a matter of arbitrary choice. The 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 217 


ingenuity of a Gauss was taxed to furnish some of the 
known solutions. The problem has proved fundamental 
for algebraic theory. And so my Western friend was 
wrong. 

Of course this is but a single instance. Very many 
other mathematical cases can be found where problems 
as to real Being, of the type here at issue, have been 
the topic not only of inquiry, but of serious and some- 
times pretty persistent error on the part of even noted 
mathematicians themselves. Such was the fortune of the 
older Theory of Functions with regard to the existence 
of the differéntial coefficients of continuous functions. 
This case cannot be fully explained in non-mathematical 
language. It is enough here to say that the mathe- 
matical world contains countless ideal entities of the 
type called Functions, and these are beings which have 
values corresponding to the values of certain quantities 
called “independent variables.” The values of the “func- 
tions” therefore, in general, vary when the “ independent 
variables” vary. If the functions vary continuously, 
whenever the variables vary continuously, the variation 
of the functions may correspond to such a physical pro- 
cess aS a movement, or to such a process as the descrip- 
tion of a curve, on a surface, by a continuous motion. 
Now such an ideally definable process generally has prop- 
erties corresponding to the rate of the physical motion, 
or to the instantaneous direction of movement of a point 
on the curve. And these properties of the functions in 
question may be investigated by constructing certain 
other ideal entities, related to the original functions, 
and derived by a well-known process from them. The 


218 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


new ideal entities are called Derived Functions, or 
Differential Coefficients, and for a long time it was 
assumed as almost an axiom that every function con- 
tinuous within given intervals must have, within those 
intervals, a derived function, or differential coefficient. 
This seemed as axiomatic as the assertion that every 
movement must take place at a given, even if con- 
stantly altering speed, or that a point moving on a 
curve must at every instant be moving in a given 
instantaneous direction. For the derived function, or 
differential coefficient, was an ideal entity correspond- 
ing to such facts as momentary velocity, or instantane- 
ous direction of movement. This assumption, namely 
the existence of objects called the differential coefficients 
in question, persisted in the text-books until instances, 
first few, and then many, were produced, where beings 
of the type in question, namely continuous functions, 
were discovered, which had no differential coefficients 
whatever. How this was possible, I cannot pause to de- 
fine, but I mention this now noted example of a pretty 
persistent mathematical error, because it exemplifies 
how, in the world of pure mathematical creations, you 
can have problems about existence which for a while 
seem as baffling as similar problems in physics and in 
natural history. Even mathematical science, then, has 
had, within the eternal shadowland of its creations, to 
deal, as it has grown, with sharp contrasts between myth 
and fact, between false report and real existence,— with 
contrasts, I once more insist, as striking as those known 
in the realm of astronomy or of history. The difference 
between the one science and the others lies in the fact 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 219 


that the mathematician, because of his far more con- 
trollable subject-matter, is generally surer of finding his 
way erelong past these contrasts to the truth that he 
seeks, while in the physical sciences the ontological 
errors may persist longer. 

As to the method of work used by mathematicians in 
such cases, where the existence of an object is in ques- 
tion, I again speak quite as a layman in this field; but, 
so far as Ihave observed, the mathematicians, in proving 
the sort of existence of which they speak, proceed very 
much like students of other types of real Being. To 
prove the existence of an object whose what is already 
stated, but whose that is in question, the mathematician 
may simply produce, as it were, before your eyes, an 
object of the desired type, and may then let you observe 
that it meets the requirement. In such cases he works 
somewhat as a naturalist might do. He shows you the 
object and says: “See, it exists.” Or again, he may be 
unable to do this; but instead he may try a sort of ex- 
periment with his already accessible ideal objects, and the 
result of this experiment may give you an indirect but 
infallible sign that a being of the precise sort here in 
question must exist, even if it cannot be directly pro- 
duced. This more indirect method of showing that a 
being of a given type exists, may roughly be compared to 
the devices by which the spectroscope reveals the exist- 
ence of an element in a star, by showing the characteristic 
lines of the element. 

In brief, then, in talking of this his shadowland of ideal 
beings, the pure mathematician illustrates, in ways often 
very remarkable, how manifold may be the meanings that 


220 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


can attach to the word fact, and how ill those appreciate 
truth who suppose an object disposed of by relegating it 
to the world of “pure ideas.” An important elementary 
lesson in metaphysics comes when we liberalize somewhat 
our notions of what it is to be, not only by examining the 
various senses in which the word has been used, but by 
following these senses into the various sorts of examples 
which make their variety first really appreciated. 

Nor are the foregoing the only marks of an ontological, 
or, so to speak, substantial character about the world of 
mathematical fact. A very extended, but recently very 
rapidly growing, series of developments in this mathe- 
matical realm tends constantly afresh to show the mar- 
vellous character of the world of validity by revealing 
unexpected unities and connections amongst those of its 
facts and laws which have been the result of seemingly 
quite independent definition, and which have been reached 
in the course of researches that originally had no con- 
nection whatever. 


VII 


By this long series of instances of our third type of 
real beings, I have meant to show that there are reasons 
why a philosophical conception, specially planned to meet 
such cases, should be attempted as a conception of the 
meaning of the ontological predicate. The obvious con- 
trast between beings of this type and the beings of tech- 
nical realism proper, in our former sense of that word, is 
that the entities of the metaphysical realist are supposed 
to be what they are quite independently of any knowl- 
edge, actual, or even possible, which may be supposed, 


THE OUTCOME OF MYSTICISM 221 


from without, to refer to them, so that if such knowledge 
vanished from the universe, or if no external knowledge 
of them had ever come to be, the real beings would 
remain just what they are. On the other hand, how- 
ever, the realities of the present type exist explicitly as 
Objects of Possible Knowledge. Their whole defined 
Being is exhausted by their validity when regarded from 
the point of view of such possible knowledge. If nobody 
had ever recognized the British Constitution, or the 
prices, credits, debts, marks, and ranks aforesaid, these 
objects could not be said to be able to retain any being, 
although now that they are recognized, such objects 
appear to have a genuine being, and to be relatively 
independent of this or that individual judgment. 

The case of the eternal truths, such as the ethical, or 
still more obviously the mathematical truths, is more like 
the case of the atoms or monads of a thoroughgoing real- 
ism, since the eternal verities are said to have been valid 
before any human mathematician or moralist conceived 
them, and to remain true even if men forget them, or, as 
in case of the value of 7, are physically unable to verify 
them in concrete circles. Yet, on the other hand, their 
case has its own peculiar puzzle, in that, when the mathe- 
matician himself first conceives of his equations and of 
his functions, he seems, as we have said, to be engaged in 
an act of perfectly free construction, as if he were build- 
ing in fairyland. Yet the familiar miracle of this mathe- 
matical realm is that, after one has built, he discovers 
that the form of his edifice is somehow eternal, and that 
there are existences which this form has preéstablished, 
so that he himself looks with wonder to find whether this 


222 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


or that object exists in his new world at all. And mean- 
while, despite this eternity and this relative independence 
of private ideas which characterize the mathematical 
objects, and give the world of Forms unity, the objects 
and the forms exist, if at all, not as the atoms and 
monads of realism exist, nor as the things in themselves 
of Kant. For nobody, according to Realism, is able to 
discover the things in themselves, the supposed entities 
of Realism, by any process of consciously free ideal con- 
struction, such as in fact produces the mathematician’s 
ideas. On the other hand, the mathematical beings 
undertake to be real just as objects of possible thought, 
as valid truths, and not as independent of all thinking 
processes, whether actual or possible. 

These contrasts and problems may weary. But it is 
necessary to face them. The world of validity is in- 
deed, in its ultimate constitution, the eternal world. It 
seems to us so far a very impersonal world and a very 
cold and unemotional realm,—the very opposite of that 
of the mystic. Before we are done with it we shall 
find it in fact the most personal and living of worlds. 
Just now it appears to us a realm of bodiless universal 
meanings. Erelong we shall discover that it is a realm 
of individuals, whose unity is in One Individual, and 
that theory means, in this eternal world, not mere 
theory, but Will and Life. 


ECTURE VI 


L 


\ 


LECTURE VI 
VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 


AFTER having abandoned the abstractions of pure 
Realism and pure Mysticism, we went on, at the last 
time, to the study of a Third Conception of Being. We 
saw at all events how vain it is for any one to assume 
that, if you doubt metaphysical Realism, if you ques- 
tion whether the world can be real independently of 
knowledge, of ideas, and of definition, you must neces- 
sarily be a mere sceptic, and believe in no authority 
whatever, and in no world at all. On the contrary, as 
we saw, even ordinary conversation is full of assertions 
that objects have genuine Being which are explicitly 
not objects independent of experience, or of definition, 
or of ideas. Such supposed genuine beings, which are 
still not realistic entities, we found exemplified by the 
prices, debts, and credits of the commercial world, by 
analogous facts in the world of valid social estimates, 
and by the moral law. And then, passing from com- 
mon sense to science, we pointed out the still more 
marvellous types of existence that people the eternal 
fairyland of mathematical construction. We saw how 
the mathematical entities appear to have all the variety, 
the stubbornness, and the frequently unexpected char- 
acters which, in the ordinary world, are said to belong 
to real beings. The mathematician’s realm is in one 

Q 225 


226 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


sense his free creation. In another sense it is a world 
where that comes to light which he, in his private 
capacity, had neither intended nor anticipated. In that 
world he can long go astray, can hold false views as to 
his own creations, and, just as if he were working in a 
laboratory, can have these views set right by the out- 
come of further carefully planned experience, whose 
instruction he submissively awaits as if he were in no 
sense the creator of any object present. Like any 
other student of Real Being, he observes and experi- 
ments. The nature with which he deals is at once 
ideal and eternal, at once rigid and free. The most 
surprising analogies are often discovered linking to- 
gether its most widely sundered and seemingly inde- 
pendent regions. The mathematician too has his news 
of the day, his unexpected events, his fortune, so to 
speak, even in the realm of a Being that explicitly is 
only in so far as it is conceived. 

Plainly, then, the realm of Validity has a good 
many persuasively ontological characters. When we 
enter it, we need not come as sceptics or as mere 
victims of fantasy. What we there learn is that con- 
structive imagination has its own rigid and objective 
constitution, precisely in so far as its processes unite 
freedom with clear consciousness. 

And so, as we saw, it is possible, at least by way of 
trial, to undertake to define Being wholly in terms of 
validity, to conceive that whoever says, of any object, 
Jt is, means only that a certain idea, — perhaps an idea 
suggested by passing experience, perhaps the thought 
of an empirically discovered law in a natural science, 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 227 


perhaps a free construction of an ideal object in mathe- 
matics,— but in any case an idea, 7s valid, has truth, 
defines an experience that, at least as a mathematical 
ideal, and perhaps as an empirical event, is determinately 
possible. The truth, validity, or determinate possibility 
of the experience in question, may be, so far as yet 
appears, either transient or eternal, either relative or 
absolute, either something valid for a limited group of 
people, or something valid for all possible rational 
beings. But in any case, this third definition of Being 
attempts to identify the validity of the idea with the 
true Being of the fact defined by the idea. 


I 


Our Third Conception of Being has been thus stated 
and illustrated. It remains here next to follow in the 
briefest outline its history as an ontological conception, 
before trying to estimate its final value. 

As now repeatedly recognized in these lectures, our 
Third Conception of Being is, in European thought, 
partly an indirect result of Plato’s doctrine But it is 
also probably the historical fact, as we saw in our dis- 
cussion of Realism, that Plato himself did not, on the 
whole, conceive his own Ideas in this way. The origi- 
nal Platonic argument about the Ideas amounts in 
general to saying, on the one hand, that only what 


1 That what I here call the Third Conception of Being was in essence 
Plato’s concept, was the thesis, as is well known, of Lotze—a thesis 
which has often been discussed. Teichmiiller and Zeller agree in reject- 
ing Lotze’s interpretation of Plato; and, in the main, I here follow their’ 
authority. 


998 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Plato calls the Ideas are of such nature as to be truly 
and eternally independent realities, and on the other 
hand, that the Ideas, while thus independently real, are 
to be so defined as to explain the universality of knowl- 
edge, and the eternal validity of truth. The Platonic 
Ideas were therefore realistic entities, in the sense of 
our first conception of what it is to be. They constituted 
an incorporeal world of independent realities. But the 
arguments used for their reality, and the relations which 
they bore to ethical and to other permanent truths, as 
well as the fact that they corresponded, not to our in- 
dividual but to our universal conceptions, gave them 
characters which inevitably led them, in the later Pla- 
tonic tradition, to assume forms more and more similar, 
either to beings of the type now in question, or to the 
sort of Being yet to be defined by our Fourth Concep- 
tion of Reality, and hereafter to be treated. The Neo- 
Platonic doctrine identified the Platonic Ideas with the 
™ thoughts of the divine Intelligence. St. Augustine, in 
a proof of God’s existence, identified God with Veritas. 
.- St. Thomas, in explaining the relation of the Ideas to 
God, was led to an interesting form of our present or 
Third Conception of Being; and post-Kantian idealism 
~ has remodelled the Platonic Ideas, on the whole, after 
the plan first suggested by the Neo-Platonic doctrine. 
In brief, then, Plato’s concept of Being, while techni- 
\eally realistic, contains tendencies that inevitably lead 
to the differentiation of other ontological conceptions. 
And so our present or Third Conception of Being is, in 
large part, indirectly due to Plato. 
Nearer to our present form of the ontological predi- 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 229 


cate comes, however, Aristotle’s conception of Possible _ 


Being, a conception which plays a great part in the\, 


whole Aristotelian theory of Nature. The ens in poten- | 
tia of the Aristotelian system occupies a place in a | 


5 


realistic doctrine. Aristotle insists that possibilities are | 
in one sense real beings. Is not an architect a house- ; 


builder even when he is not building houses? Is not/ 
the sleeper potentially awake? Is not every natur 
process the realization of possibility ? 

But the doctrine of course has its obscurities. Where, 
in the independently real world, which Aristotle all the 
while assumes, are the mere possibilities when they are 
not yet realized? If one fairly faces this question, one 
finds that the possibilities appear to be in some sense 
ideal. They suggest even to Aristotle his theory of 
Nature as desiring or willing the yet unfulfilled possibil- 
ities, —a theory to which he nowhere gives a perfectly 
rounded expression. C And it often seems as if the 
Possible Being of this Aristotelian doctrine would have 
to be expressed in terms of validity rather than in 
terms of the mere realistic entities themselves. It is 
true that the architect can build, the sleeper wake. 
These truths are valid. They are, for Aristotle, valid 
about independently real beings; and his doctrine is 
that there is also an independent or realistic type of 
Being corresponding to their validity; but this sort of 
Being, this ens in potentia, tends on the whole to assume 
the essentially ideal form of our present conception of 
what it is to be. Aristotle, in any case, never really 
solved the problem of the relation of these two types 
of being. 


— 


230 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


A good while later, in the history of thought, the 
Scholastic Theory of Being, as I a moment since ob- 
served, met with still a new instance of our present 
sort of reality. This instance brings us directly on to 
theological ground. 

St. Augustine, who stands historically on the boun- 
dary line between the earlier and later philosophy of the 
church, proved God’s existence by this noted argument: 
—There must be a Veritas, a Truth. For if you deny 


_ that there is a truth, you assert that it is true that 
_ there is no truth; and then you contradict yourself. 
| The sum total of truth, conceived as a unity, is, how- 


= 


ever, the very essence of God. This argument, in one 
direction, looks backwards towards Neo-Platonic doc- 
trine. St. Augustine’s world of Veritas is the Nous of 
Plotinus. In another direction, the Augustinian proof 
of God’s existence leads on to St. Anselm’s Ontological 
Proof. The representative philosophy of the greater 
Scholastic period abandoned both St. Augustine’s and 
St. Anselm’s proof as invalid, but retained the concep- 
tion of Veritas as part of the definition of the divine 
nature. 

The result is the form of our Third Conception, to 
which we next mean to call attention. In the classic 
doctrine of St. Thomas Aquinas, the theory of the na- 
ture of God, to which we referred in our second lec- 
ture, is a very skilful synthesis of mystical, Platonic, 
and Aristotelian elements, influenced, of course, by still 
other traditional motives. According to this doctrine, 
the divine Essence, the Godhead as it is in itself, is 


\above all, like the Hindoo Atman, simply one and per- 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 231 


fect; and when we assert a mere plurality of attributes 
in God, the variety of these attributes is, as variety, due 
to the point of view, and to our imperfect comprehen- 
sion of the divine unity. One very remarkable apparent 
plurality, however, which our understanding finds in God, 
is brought to light by the theory of the Divine Knowl- 
edge, when viewed in relation to the Creative Will of 
God. (God as Knower, not only knows all truth, but 
he somehow knew in advance of creation, both all things 
to be created, and all the possible beings that he has 
left or will leave uncreated.) This knowledge of many 
facts, viewed as a plurality, constitutes for St. Thomas 
the realm of the divine Ideas. As the divine ideas, in 
the created world, receive discrete and individual em- 
bodiments, it seems at first natural to say that God, by 
various acts of knowledge, comprehends, and, by various 
acts of will, realizes, or leaves unrealized, the beings 
whom his wisdom, in advance of creation, conceives. 
But this way of stating the case not only would en- 
danger the absolute unity of the divine essence, but 
also would seem to give the various ideas of the pos- 
sible created beings a certain independence of one an- 
other, and of the divine essence itself; so that it would 
seem as if God were, so to speak, forced to know the 
essences or natures of the finite facts, and as if these 
finite entities, even in advance of creation, had their 
own stubborn ideal independence over against God’s 
unity. Hence arose the scholastic problem whether the 
essences of created things, in advance of creation, con- 
stituted a true term, or, as it were, an eternal limitation 


of the divine knowledge. 


fo —\ 


232 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


St. Thomas’s way of escaping this consequence in- 
volves a theory of Possible Being, as it is in God, in 
advance of creation. The theory is to preserve the unity 
of the divine essence, is to explain the variety of finite 
beings, and is to show the relation of the created beings 
to God, in such wise as to avoid the apparent eternity 
and relative independence of the essences of finite beings. 

In advance of creation, any possible being is known to 
God,— but how? God primarily and perfectly knows 
himself, and so knows his own absolute fulness of being. 
But this nature of God is One and Simple. In knowing 
this his own nature, even in its unity, God however views 
this nature, by virtue of its very fulness of Being, as 
Imitable now in this, now in that aspect,—as imitable 
in countless fashions and degrees, and thereby as imita- 
ble by various orders of possible beings that God could 
create. The divine knowledge of these finite beings 
not yet created primarily has, then, God’s own nature as 
its immediate object. God first knows just himself. But, 
secondarily, indeed, this nature can be viewed, not only 
as one, and as immediately present to God’s insight, but 
also, so to speak, as rendering valid countless true possi- 
ble assertions about possible imperfect imitations of the 
Divine nature. The validity of these countless views of 
the one divine nature is implied, just as a type of genu- 
ine possibility, in the divine perfection, and is accord- 
ingly said to be, as it were, known to the divine insight 
in one act with the simple self-knowledge of God. And 
in this sense are the created beings viewed as possible in 
advance of creation. God knows not these beings as 
mere data of his knowledge, but as truths valid only 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 233 


through his own perfection. After creation, these same 
beings assume, with reference to finite knowledge, just 
the independent type of reality characteristic of Realism, 
and so the Thomistic conception of Real Being employs, 
it would seem, all the three types of reality so far in 
question in our discussion. £ God’s reality as directly 
viewed by himself is of the mystical type. The created 
world is of the realistic type. The divine Ideas are, from 
our point of view, of the third type. J need not say 
that St. Thomas himself is not to be made responsible for 
our definition of these types. 

But now at length I pass to the point in the history 
of philosophy where this our Third Conception of Real 
Being assumes at last its most explicit form. I refer to 
a doctrine remote enough from that of St. Thomas, and 
of direct interest for all modern discussions about the 
philosophy either of religion or of science. This is the 
doctrine of Kant. 


II 


To speak of Kant’s theory of what he called the realm 
of Possible Experience, of Mégliche Erfahrung, is to come 
at once into the full light of the present, that is, into 
the midst of the doctrines that we have inherited from 
Kant, and which are current to-day. Whoever wearies 
of Platonic or of Scholastic subtleties, must recognize, if 
he knows how to read the meaning of current science, 
that the notion of Possible Being, or of Being whose 
reality lies in its valididy, or in its value as making asser- 
tions about it true, is, as I said at the last time, the 
favorite type of reality in the writings of a great number 


‘ ~ 


__—— 234 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


of the recent philosophical expositors of the meaning of 
natural science. Such writers may or may not recognize 
their Kantian affiliations; but their position is one whose 
ontology is almost altogether Kantian, whatever may be 
their Psychology or their Theory of Knowledge. And 
such theories are so important for the whole position of 
religious thought, especially in its relations to scientific 
thought, that our future fortunes in this research largely 
depend upon seeing how we are related to this charac- 
teristic modern opinion. 

Kant was, by early training, a realist. God, nature, 
the soul, are all in his early works, realities whose inde- 
pendence of even the truest and most certain external 
thoughts about them is for him obvious. As Kant grew 
critical, he long pondered over the problems of Time 
and of Space, and, in 1769, largely in consequence of the 
discovery of what he took to be fundamentally contradic- 
tory characters in space and in time, he came to deny 
that these so-called forms of our experience can be valid 
for “ Objects as they are in themselves.” Later Kant be- 
came still more critical, and questioned how, if the Nou- 
mena, or objects as they are in themselves, are so remote 


as his new theory now maintained from our empirical 
world of time and space phenomena, those real things, 
independent as they are of our understandings, can be 
known to us at all. The consequence of this new doubt, 
and of an interest in nevertheless maintaining the genu- 
ine validity of the mathematical and empirical sciences, 
was the theory expounded in the Critique of Pure Reason, 
in 1781. 

In this theory, Kant comes definitely not only to recog- 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 235 


nize, as every one interested in philosophy knows, a two- 
one side, and of ‘“‘ phenomena” on the other; but also to 
define a very important distinction between two sorts of 
what he still regarded as genuinely objective reality. For 
it is very noteworthy that, for Kant, both regions of his 
twofold world are real. (That is, both the things in them- 
selvés, and the phenomenal facts, are explicitly called by 
him objective. Neither is a matter of your private view 
or of mine. , Neither, so Kant directly says, is subjective. 
It is wrong to suppose that Kant viewed his phenomenal 
world as a merely inner experience of any one man. The 
question whether or no there are inhabitants in the moon 
is, for the Kant of the critical philosophy, as much a 
question about objective facts as it is for any ordinary 
scientific observer of the moon. Yet this question is, in 
his opinion, no longer a question about things in them- 
selves; for the moon is a _phenomenon in space; and the 
unknowable things in themselves have no spatial charac- | 
ters. Precisely so the Newtonian theory of gravitation, 
or a problem about the innermost constitution of matter, — 
is, for the critical Kant, a discussion about real facts, but 
not about the things in themselves. 

In brief, the former realist, Kant, has now come, not to 
resign his Realism, but to add thereto the definition of 
another sort of reality. Besides his independent reals, 
which he never abandons as unreal, but which he now 
regards as wholly unknowable, he asserts as critical phi- 
losopher the objective character of beings that are of a 
wholly different type from the absolutely independent 
realities. 


236 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


And what are these new objects? Kant tells us in a 
very explicit way. They are the objects of Mégliche 
Erfahrung, of Possible Experience. The natural sciences 
are busy with these objects. The latter do not depend 
upon our will. They are plainly independent of our 
private individuality. But they are dependent upon the 
constitution of our experience. 

For our experience,—that is, Kant’s supposed dis- 
covery, — has, quite apart from any things in themselves, 
its own universal and fixed constitution. It is like a 
well bounded island in the ocean of mystery. The simile 
is Kant’s. It is like a well ordered state, whose con- 
stitution and laws predetermine those facts, such as debts 
and credits, or such as ranks and social status, — those 
facts of which we earlier made mention in this discussion. 
Were it not for this universal constitution of our expe- 
rience, our momentary opinions would wander like the 
nomads to whom Kant compares the sceptics in philoso- 
phy. As it is, the understanding gives law to nature. 
Universal assertions are valid. Science is possible. 

We have no concern here with the manner in which 
Kant undertook to define how experience won this, its 
constitution. Enough, the universality is for him there. 
And as a result, if you ask whether there are inhabitants 
in the moon, Kant holds that you are not rightly inquir- 
ing about any sort of absolutely independent real beings, 
for in science you have no business with realistic beings 
of any sort. The things in themselves exist, but you can 
never win any sort of idea about them. On the other 
hand, in thus questioning, you are indeed asking a per- 
fectly fair scientific question, and one in no wise relating 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 237 


to mere states of your own private mind. You are ask- 
ing, as Kant expresses it, just this, viz., whether, “In the 
progress of possible experience, you would come to per- 
ceive the presence of such inhabitants?” An answer to 
that question is even now true or false. And the objects 
of the one boundless realm of possible experience, —a 
realm which the sciences of nature study, are real, pre- 
cisely in so far as all such propositions, quite apart from 
your present empirical observation or mine, but: not 
independently of the predetermined constitution of all 
experience, are even now true or false. 

A quotation from Kant’s discussion of the second of 
his so-called Postulates of Empirical Thought (Ar. d. r. 
V. 2d edit., p. 273) will help to bring his thought before 
you in his own way. “Perception,” says Kant, “which 
gives to a concept its material embodiment, is the only 
test of actuality. But one can, nevertheless, in advance 
of the perception of an object, and consequently in a 
relatively a priori fashion, know the existence of this 
object, in case the thing in question is connected with 
any of our perceptions according to the principles of the 
empirical synthesis of phenomena (z.e. according to the 
law of Causality, one of the other fundamental princi- 
ples). For then the existence of the things is linked 
with our percepts in a possible experience, and by virtue 
of our general principles we can pass from our actual 
perception to the thing in question by a series of possible 
experiences. Thus we may recognize the existence of a 
magnetic substance pervading all matter, by virtue of our 
perception of the magnetic attraction of iron, although an 
immediate perception of the magnetic matter is impossible 


238 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


to us in consequence of the constitution of our sense 
organs. For in consequence of the laws of sensation, 
and of the context of our perceptions, we should come 
directly to observe the magnetic matter, were our organs 
fine enough. But the form of our possible experience has 
no dependence upon the mere coarseness of our actual 
sense organs. And thus, just so far as perception and its 
supplementation by virtue of empirical laws together 
suffice, so far extends our knowledge of the existence of 
things. But unless we begin with actual experience, and 
unless we proceed according to the laws of the empirical 
connection in experience, we vainly seek to guess or to 
investigate the existence of anything.” 

So much, then, in general, for Kant’s statement of 
our present conception of the real. The novelty of 
Kant’s account, as against previous approaches to the 
same philosophical idea, les in the fact that earlier 
metaphysic, in trying to define the realm of truth as 
truth, the realm of the Possible Being of Aristotle or 
of the Scholastic Theology, had almost always made 
this conception a mere incident in the account of a 
world defined either in realistic or in mystical terms, 
while Kant’s region of possible experience is sharply 
sundered from the realistic universe, and is quite as 
clearly distinguished from anything resembling that 
mystical limbo whose Schwdérmeret Kant himself so 
much dreaded. 

Subtle and difficult as Kant’s new ontological concep- 
tion has been, it has simply dominated the most popu- 
larly influential treatments of the philosophy of science 
ever since. Men who have spoken lightly of Kant have 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 239 


in this respect followed his footsteps. Mr. Spencer’s Un- 
knowable is, on the whole, a realistic conception, although 
sometimes spoken of in mystical terms. But Mr. Spen- 
cer’s world of the Knowable has a reality of the Kantian 
type. It is a world of valid empirical truth. John 
Stuart Mill elaborated our Third Conception in his 
famous chapter on the ‘“ Psychological Theory of Our 
Belief in an External World,’ in his Review of Str 
William Hamilton’s Philosophy. His definition of mat- 
ter as a permanent possibility of sensation is altogether 
of our present type. Several of the writers most promi- 
nent in the recent logical movement have used what 
is essentially this view of the nature of scientific truth. 
So, notably, Wundt, in his discussions of the fundamen- 
tal ideas of the physical sciences, for example, the ideas 
of Substance and of Cause. In a very different spirit, 
Avenarius, while rejecting absolute validity, reaches a 
view of the real which is much of our present sort. 


Ill 


The conception now in question, as you see, is indeed 
technical in its character; but it has so many bonds of 
connection with popular thinking and with exact science, 
that, when once defined, as our century has learned to 
define it, it is sure to have a great practical potency in 
affairs. In earlier lectures I called the typical realists 
the partisans of strict conservatism, the philosophical 
defenders of the extreme Right of any social order. 

1The Reine Erfahrung of Avenarius constantly strives to become 


something merely Immediate, but in vain, just because Avenarius is no 
mystic. 


240 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


The disciples of the new definition I have already 
called, as they appear at the present day, Critical 
Rationalists. As a fact, they are critical rather than 
dogmatic, but they are rather seldom of the extreme 
Left. Very often they belong to what one might ven- 
ture to call the left centre of the parliament of thought, 
—to the moderate Liberals of doctrinal discussion, al- 
though the converse of this proposition does not hold 
true. For there are moderate liberals who are either 
mystics or constructive idealists. 

The characteristics of the ontology of our critical 
rationalists can now easily be summed up. The Real 
for the metaphysical Realist, in case he attempts to be 
thoroughgoing, has to be, if anything, the Independent 
Individual, for, since it is beyond all our ideal determina- 
tions, it has to be in itself absolutely determinate. That 
the controversy of Aristotle with Plato proved. The Pla- 
tonic Ideas, as universals, early perished from among 
the entities of the realistic world, to transmigrate, as it 
were, to this new realm, or also to reappear, with their 
own immortal vitality, in that realm of genuine Idealism 
which we shall later explore. The One Being of the 
mystic is as One, an Individual, although, as the in- 
feffable goal of all desire, it enjoys all the advantages 
{ of a Universal, and is indifferent to all our distinctions. 
But the present, the Third Conception of Being, has 
amongst all the four conceptions the unique character 
that it alone, so far as it has more fully come to 
understand itself, consciously attempts to define the 
Real as explicitly and only the Universal. 

Those who have imagined that the controversy about the 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 241 


reality corresponding to our general ideas and about the 
universal and the individual (the controversy of Nominal- 
ist and of the unhappily so-called Realist), is a wholly 
antiquated medieval absurdity, have curiously failed to 
observe the signs of our own times, and the trend of 
this characteristic ontology of our present century and 
of current science. What are Mill’s Permanent Possi- 
bilities of Sensation, if you view them as objectively 
valid at all, and not as mere private expectations of 
our present feeling,— what are they, I ask, but ex- 
plicit universals? What sort of an individual fact or 
being is a mere “possibility”? Kant’s empirical objects, 
or Gegensténde der Méglichen Erfahrung,—his  sub- 
stances, causes, and the rest, what are they but prod- 
ucts of the categorizing Understanding, empirically 
valid general truths? If one passes from the more 
abstract formulas to the concrete cases, glance, if you 
please, at that most potent conception, the modern 
notion of Energy. I ask not here as to its empirical 
basis nor as to its outcome, but solely as to its ontologi- 
cal character as a mere conception. Energy, one may 
say, is indeed phenomenally real. Professor Tait’s re- 
markable words as to the objective reality implied by 
the permanence of Energy have often been quoted. 
But nobody of any authority, I suppose, is yet pre- 
pared to maintain in any decisive way that the energy 
of the physical world consists of a collection of ulti- 
mate individual units or bits of energy, which retain 
their individual identity, and as individuals transfer 
themselves from one part of matter to another. The 
idea has been suggested, but so far not vindicated. In 
R 


242 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


whatever sense energy is real, in that same sense an 
unindividuated entity, whose very essence is universal, 
is real. In vain then does one merely scoff at the early 
medieval fashion of speaking of universal principles as 
if they were real. In a new sense, to be sure, and for 
new reasons, the ontology of the moment, in the con- 
crete form of the sciences, is constantly recognizing, as 
in one sense real, objects which, as they are defined, 
are universals, and which cannot be individuals with- 
out altering their definition. 

The grounds of this modern recognition of the new 
universals cannot indeed be judged upon the older scho- 
lastic bases. One cannot be fair to these newer concepts 
without recognizing the changed situation that has re- 
sulted from Kant’s labors, and from the prominence now 
given in thought to the conception of Validity as a basis 
for the interpretation of our Experience. I mention the 
issue only to show, by a comparison of various problems, 
in what world we ourselves, at this stage of our study, 
are moving. 

The Real in this sense is furthermore, as we have all 
along seen, identical with the determinately Possible only 
in so far as by that term you mean not indeed the fan- 
tastically or provisionally possible, such as a golden 
mountain, but that which would be observed or verified 
under exactly stateable, even if physically inaccessible, 
conditions. At the outset of an inquiry, you to be sure 
define as possible much that you later find to be unreal. 
Yet so far you have only the provisionally possible. But, 
for instance, the liquid or solid state of the interior of 
the earth, or the liquefaction of air, or the melting of 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 243 


snow, is a possible experience, when you have once proved ‘ 
that possibility in no provisional sense. For such possi- 
bilities, once recognized, are viewed as really valid and 
objective physical characters of air or of snow or of the 
earth. And now, finally, you may once more see what 
we summarized at the outset, namely, how this concep- 
tion must on the whole stand related to theology ‘and to 
religion. 

The partisans of our third notion of the real have, in- 
deed, as we have observed, a stately tradition behind them. 
They can well assert that they are not mere sceptics or 
destroyers of faith. Yet a theology that has been deeply 
influenced by this conception will no longer share the 
realist’s absolute dogmatic assurance, whether positive 
or negative, nor yet the mystic’s inexpressible commun- 
ion with his ineffable and immediate truth. Our critical 
rationalist lives in a world where nothing in the realistic 
sense is real, but where zt is as if there were independent 5 
realities, which, when more closely examined, prove to 
be merely more or less valid and permanent ideas. The 
truth, whether transient or eternal, always arouses in 
such a world a twofold response or reaction in us who 
observe it. It imposes its presence upon us as if it were 
an independent reality; and hereupon we submit. But 
then it alters its countenance as we consider it critically, 
and becomes more and more like a mere product of our 
point of view, a mere creation of our experience and our 
thought. And hereupon we wonder. This truth seems 
to be at first an individual fact. But it transforms itself 
as we watch it into an universal principle. After we 
have watched such changes awhile, we begin to ques- 


244 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


tion whether this whole conception is at all capable of 
finality. The truth is, indeed, valid; but is it only valid? 
The forms are eternal; but are they only forms? The 
universal principles are true; but are they only uni- 
versal? The moral order of the world seems genuine; 
but is it only an order? Is God identical with the world 
of Forms? 

These questions arise in all sorts of ways in our age. 
They remind us that our problem is here once more a 
problem about the meaning and the place of individuality 
in the system of Being, and about the relation of indi- 
vidual and universal in our conceptions. 


IV 


And now, upon what basis shall we judge the concep- 
tion at present before us? In one sense it appears to be 
peculiarly fortified against attack. ( Unlike Realism, it is 
from the beginning an essentially reflective and critical 
conception of Being.) It attributes reality to objects only 
at the very moment of recognizing, as in some sense real, 
the ideas that relate to these objects. And, unlike Mysti- 
cism, it recognizes that to lose sight of the value and 
positive meaning of finite ideas, is to render naught the 
very objects which the ideas seek. It observes that when 
you declare any object to be real, you are in possession 
of an idea, however exact, or however inexact, however 
transient and relative, or however universal and eternal, 
—an idea to which you attribute an essentially teleo- 
logical significance; since you assert that this idea is 
true, is valid, or in other words, is adapted to its ideal 
end. Our present conception regards this adaptation of 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 245 


the idea to its own end as the primary topic of any onto- 
logical assertion, and as the object which any one who 
asserts Being first of all inevitably means. And in mak- 
ing this comment upon our universal human relation to 
truth, the present conception of Being is indeed insist- 
ing upon perfectly obvious and empirical facts. 

When the realist says, “The world is first of all inde- 
pendently real, whether or no ideas refer to it, and it only 
becomes secondarily and per accidens the object of ideas,” 
the realist, in his whole view of the nature of Being, begins 
by abandoning the realm of experience. He can there- 
fore never empirically verify for you his independent 
Beings. He can only presuppose them. You ask him to 
show you an Independent Being. He points at the table 
or at the stars. But those, for you, and for him alike, 
are empirical objects, bound up in the context of experi- 
ence. Nor could any possible enlargement of experience 
ever show anybody a Being wholly independent. The 
only way to judge Realism, since experience is thus aban- 
doned by the realist, is to examine the inner consistency 
or inconsistency of realistic doctrine. And we have seen 
that Realism is wholly inconsistent. But our present 
conception begins by observing that an experience of 
facts which send you beyond themselves, and to further 
possible experience, for their interpretation, is the only 
conscious basis for any assertion of a Being that is be- 
yond the flying contents of this very instant. The Third 
Conception of Being refuses to ignore this conscious, this 
empirical element, present wherever the assertion of 
Being is made; for the only possible warrant for any on- 
tological assertion must be found in this element. What 


246 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


is, fulfils the meaning of the empirically present idea that 
‘refers to the Being in question, and except as fulfilling 

such a meaning, Being can be neither conceived, nor as- 

serted, nor verified. In recognizing this fact of experi- 
_ ence, lies the strength of the Third Conception. 

In consequence of this reflective considerateness so 
characteristic of our Third Conception, it frequently ap- 
pears, in its history, as the immediate outcome of a 
polemic against Realism. Thus, the negative arguments 
of Berkeley derive their force from a well-known series 
of comments upon the nature of the experiences by 
which we become acquainted with Being. The primary 
and secondary qualities attributed by many realists to 
matter, Berkeley analyzes into mere complexes of imme- 
diate data and of ideal construction. He then asks the 
realist the question: —‘ What do you mean, then, by 
your independently existing world?” { And Berkeley 
thereupon shows how, primarily, all that Realism con- 
sistently means by matter has to be expressed in the 
form of an assertion that certain empirical ideas of ours 
re valid, and that their validity is a matter of possible 
jexperience. The distant church-tower, for instance, is a 
hint to the sense of vision of a long series of possible 
experiences. The assertion that these experiences, of 
approach to the church, of touch, of entrance to the 
church, are conditionally possible for any human being, 
this assertion is valid. And herein lies, for Berkeley, the 
primary reality of the material world. In order to ex- 
plain still more exhaustively the validity in question, 
Berkeley is indeed led to his well-known hypotheses as 
to the souls, and as to the direct influence of the Divine 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 247 


Will; and these hypotheses, as Berkeley states them, are 
once more essentially realistic in their type, since the 
God of Berkeley appears, in his relation to our valid 
experience of the natural order, as an independently real 
creative power, and since the souls, also, in Berkeley’s 
account, get a distinctly realistic sort of Being. But 
his realistic type of theology is the halting and incon- 
sequent side of Berkeley’s doctrine. His critical study 
of the conception of matter is a contribution to the 
historical development of our Third Conception of what 
it is to be. In a similar way, our Third Conception ap- 
pears in Kant himself, as the result of an attack upon 
every realistic interpretation of the world of common 
sense and of physical science, and as a development of 
the thesis: Mur in der Erfahrung ist Wahrheit ; only 
Experience furnishes the ground for truth. 

And in fact, if viewed merely as a negative criticism 
of the realistic conception, the argument for the Third 
Conception has often been stated, in the history of re- 
cent philosophy, in an unanswerable form. How, in fact, 
shall you maintain that Reality is independent of ideas 
which refer to it, while at the same time these ideas 
are other than itself,—how shall you maintain this, 
when the least reflection shows you that you are using 
ideas at every step of your discussion of reality, and 
that whatever you assert of the reality, you can give 
warrant to the assertion only by first showing reason 
for regarding your ideas as valid? Suppose, for instance, 
that you say, as realists have often said: “Some in- 
dependent cause for ideas must be assumed. This inde- 
pendent cause has Being. And its being is therefore 


248 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


the same as its independence as a cause.” What is this 
assertion except an insistence that a certain more or 
less well-known empirical relation, already regarded as 
valid within your realm of experience, namely the rela- 
tion called causality, has validity beyond your present 
range of experience? And what is this again but 
merely saying that if your senses were improved, if 
your horizon were widened, you would then directly 
observe how the so-called external facts, which would 
then be merely contents of your enlarged experience, 
would appear as empirical causes of what you had 
formerly called your ideas. Thus restated, however, 
your Realism turns at once into what Kant called a 
judgment about the texture of Mégliche Erfahrung. 
Whatever, then, you may attempt to assert, all that your 
Realism will ever succeed in articulating, is your belief 
that experience as a whole, that realm of truth of which 
you regard your present experience as a case and as a 
fragment, has a certain valid constitution. What Kant 
says remains then so far the whole outcome of the criti- 
cal study of Being. You speak of objects, indeed, and 
these are not the objects of this instant’s experience. 
But they are also not objects merely independent of 
the ideas that refer to them. For your assertion 
that the world is, involves a judgment that your pres- 
ent experience is interwoven in the whole context of 
the realm of valid or of possible experience. This con- 
text, however, is not independent of its own fragments. 
Your ideas are recognized by the whole that they with 
validity define. 

And if you attempt to assert the Being of things in 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 249 


any more independent sense than this, you struggle in 
vain to articulate your meaning. You can then only 
take refuge in the dogmatism of the typical realist. 
You can, to be sure, call your Realism a “fundamen- 
tal conviction,’ or a ‘wholesome faith,” or a “truth 
that no man in his sane senses can doubt.” But the 
strange consequence which then besets your very dog- 
matism lies in the fact that even in repeating these 
confident speeches, you have merely asserted that, in 
your opinion, certain ideas now present to you are 
valid ideas. You have employed, then, and have ad- 
mitted as the ultimate standard, your opponent’s con- 
ception of Being, even in the very act of refuting his 
view. You have appealed to the enemy’s theory as 
your sole warrant for asserting your own. Or perhaps 
you may choose, as in an earlier lecture we found 
Realism doing,— you may choose to call your oppo- 
nent’s view mere “insanity,” and to hurl pathological 
epithets at all who doubt Realism. The device is easy. 
But this procedure once more is an express appeal to 


») 


your adversary’s own conception of Being as the stand- 
ard by which you are to be judged. For the very con- 
ception of insanity is an empirical conception, and all 
that your assertion means, comes to an expression of 
opinion that metaphysical views, other than realistic 
ones, when seriously entertained, psychologically tend 
to the possible experiences now called insanity. What 
you have said is then still nothing but that, in your 
opinion, the realm of Mégliche Erfahrung has for men 
a certain constitution, and that your idea of this con- 
stitution appears to you valid. In vain is all your 


250 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Realism. Your very speech is in your adversary’s 
tongue. You come to curse his views. Your words 
are blessings. You are among your opponent’s proph- 
ets. For you appeal to his standards as your own. 

An awakened realist, then, can readily see, if he 
chooses, that his Realism can get no coherent expres- 
sion without becoming at once transformed into the 
very formulas of this our present and Third Conception 
of Being. In the third lecture of this course, to be 
sure, I made no attempt to express in this present 
form the criticism there undertaken of the conception 
of the Independent Beings. I deliberately refrained 
from that course in that place, because, as I ventured 
to say, Realism needs no such external refutation. 
Merely left to itself, it rends its own world to frag- 
ments in the very act of creating that world. I there- 
fore preferred to let Realism first judge itself. We 
explored its empire under its own guidance, and found 
absolutely Nothing there. But the reason why the In- 
dependent Beings proved to be nothing whatever, now 
at last explicitly appears. It was because Realism, in 
defining Being, was actually only defining either Kant’s 
realm of Mégliche Erfahrung, or else indeed Nothing 
at all. As the realm of the Third Conception was not 
yet in sight, the realist had only the latter alternative. 
The Being of the third type is however distinctly not 
an Independent Being. It is objective, but not iso- 
lated from the realm of ideas. 

Thus well fortified against attack is our Third Con, 
ception of Being. In fact, how could one attack it 
except by undertaking to show that it is invalid? And 


FI 
P| 
} 
4 
4 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 251 


how could one undertake that task except by first ad- 
mitting that Being essentially implies the validity of 
ideas? This reflection is conclusive indeed against a 
realist, whose Independent Being was first to be real 
whether or no any ideas were to be found in the uni- 
verse, and consequently whether or no validity, which 
is essentially bound up with the Being of ideas, united 
reality and idea in one context. But this reflection 
still leaves open one line of possible criticism which 
may be applied to our Third Conception. Validity or 
truth may be, as the Scholastic philosophy also would 
have said, an essential aspect of true Being, without 
on that account furnishing the final definition of what 
constitutes the whole Being of things. And here is it 
indeed a fair matter for question. That the Third Con- 
ception, as far as it goes, has some degree of validity, 
is indeed obvious enough. But is it adequate and 
final? Can the realm of validity remain merely a realm 
of validity? Here is indeed the place where we begin 
the final stage of our journey towards an adequate view 
of the meaning of the ontological predicate. 

We have now several times insisted upon the empiri- 
cal basis which the Third Conception of Being, as we 
have said, inevitably presupposes. But one may here 
object to our account that, although in many cases our 


/ Third Conception rests its assertion that a given idea is 


valid upon an obviously empirical foundation, this is 


\ not always, nor even ever altogether the case. For the 


\ 


\mathematician, as we ourselves saw, deals with a world 
far transcending our actual physical powers of empiri- 
eal verification. And it is not uncommon to suppose 


252 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


that the very bases of mathematical science are certain 
ultimate necessities of thought, for which no empirical 
warrant can be given. The world of validity also often 
appears as a world containing an essentially eternal 
truth. But, as it may now be asked, does our experi- 
ence, as such, ever compass eternity? Moreover, one 
who asserts the objective validity of an idea, even in 
a merely temporal sense, transcends by his very asser- 
tion the circle of his present experience. In brief, 
every form of Critical Rationalism involves a confi- 
dence in a reasoning process. But is reasoning iden- 
tical with experience ? 

These considerations may serve to introduce a still 
further reflection upon the deeper meaning of our Third 
Conception. As a fact, it is far too easy to talk of 
validity without analyzing its foundation. But if you 
thus analyze, you are led to a view of the nature of 
ideas, and of the reasoning process, which indeed shows 
that our very conception of validity needs a further 
supplement before it can be accepted as at once con- 
sistent, and adequate to its own undertaking. 

The theory of reasoning has received, in recent logi- 
cal and scientific thought, an extensive reéxamination, 
which students of metaphysics can no longer ignore. 
Nowhere has this theory been more carefully revised 
than in the history of modern elementary mathematics. 
A frequent experience of inconsistencies and of apparent 
paradoxes, due to extremely subtle errors in exact 
method, has led mathematicians, within the past fifty 
. years, to a thoroughgoing attempt at a review of the 
,- very bases of Arithmetic, of Geometry, and of Analysis. 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 258 


The modern study of the Algebra of Logic, founded by 
Boole, and continued by Jevons, by Mr. Venn, and by 
still others in Great Britain, by Mr. Charles Peirce in 
America, and by Schroeder in Germany, has also con- 
tributed to set the whole theory of exact reasoning in 
a light at once clearer than that of old, and of a nature 
to reveal new problems. No longer can you venture, 
in the exact sciences, to make your appeal to dogmati- 
cally asserted “ultimate necessities” of reason. The 
mathematician is no longer fond of mere axioms. And 
despite what we have just said about the way in which 
the mathematician seems to transcend our present form 

_ of experience, a closer study shows that it is still our 

! very experience itself that is the mathematician’s only 
guide to concrete results. Experience is made better 
by no mean, but experience makes that mean. For in 
modern mathematical study, even when you deal with 
irrational numbers, like 7, and estimate their properties 
with an exactness that no physical experience of ours 
can hope to follow,—yes, even if you take the wings 
of the Calculus, or of the Theory of Functions, and fly 
unto the uttermost parts of the realm of the quantita- 
tive infinite, even there, in an unexpected, but not the 
less compelling sense, actual experience guides you, pre- 
sented facts sustain you. 

For, strangely enough, the logical outcome of this 
whole recent review of the bases of mathematical science 
can be expressed by saying that the modern mathemati- 
cian rightly doubts every attempt to prove any proposi- 
tion in his science unless, in trying to prove, you can 

rst empirically show him, in a fashion that he can ac- 


254 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


cept, the actual process of construction belonging to, or 
creative of, the ideal object of which your proposition 
undertakes to give an account. Construction actually 
shown is, then, the test. This actual construction must 
be also not only shown, but carefully surveyed in pres- 
ent experience, before your proof can be estimated. 
The object of which you speak may be, like =, or like 
the total collection of all possible rational numbers, or 
like the quantitative infinite in any form, an object that 
nobody amongst us men directly observes. But, never- 
theless, the fashion of its construction, the type to which 
it conforms, the law of its nature, the receipt for manu- 
facturing this object, must be capable of adequate pres- 
entation in the inner experience of the mathematician, 
if any exact result is to be obtained. And as thus pre- 
sented, the basis of the mathematician’s reasoning be- 
comes so far the study of inner experience. The object 
with which he directly deals is a thing present, seen, 
given, tested. As our American logician, Mr. Charles 
[Peirce has well said, exact reasoning is a process of ex- 
‘periment performed upon an artificial object, an object 
made indeed by the mathematician, but observed by 
him just as truly as a star or as a physiological process 
is observed by the student of another science, experi- 
;mented upon just as truly as one experiments in a 
/ laboratory! But the marvel is that the present experi- 
ence of the mathematician with his ideal object some- 
how warrants him in making assertions about an infinity 


1 A similar view of the nature of the reasoning process is illustrated in 
the remarkable discussions that fill part of Mr. Bradley’s Principles of 
Logic. 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 255 


of equally ideal objects which are not present to him, 
and which never will be present to any human being. 
To illustrate,—suppose that a mathematician wants 
to prove something about the value of 7, or about the 
universal laws of Arithmetic, or about the properties of 
a continuous function, or about the sum of an infinite 
series, or about the mathematical relationships of two 
infinite collections of ideal objects. What he is con- 
cerned to demonstrate, lies in the realm of the infinite, 
and of the eternally valid. And our direct experience 
gives us only the passing data and the fragmentary 
ideas of the moment. Does the mathematician then, 
like the rationalistic metaphysician of old, hereupon 
merely appeal to so-called first and fundamental prin- 
ciples? Does he write down axioms, and merely defy 
you to deny them? Does he assert a priort that this 
or that cannot or shall not be questioned? No, the 
modern mathematician has no dogmas. He waits for’ 
his facts. He asks you to construct, and then to ob- 
serve these facts with him. What he does is to build 
up before your eyes something, as Mr. Peirce well says, 
that either is a diagram or else resembles one, —a col- 
lection of observable symbols, or of figures in space, 
arranged in a certain deliberately planned way. In brief,| _ 
he shows you empirically present inner constructions. 
He builds up these artificial objects before your eyes, and 
then he experiments upon them, and asks you to watch 
the result of the experiment. This result he first reads off, 
with as much the sense that he is recording present facts 
of observation, as one would have who should observe, on 
the street, that yonder horse is in front of yonder cart. if 


256 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


The difference so far is merely that the mathe- 
matician makes his empirical objects, and does not 
wait to see if ordinary natural processes will furnish 
them to him. His world, therefore, seems at first quite 
plastic. It is, as we have said, his fairyland. He 
plays with it. Yet none the less, as he plays, he ob- 
serves the empirical results of his play. And while he 
does this, he is as much a student of given facts as is 
a chemist or a business man. The results of this ob- 
servation are often unexpected. And once seen (just 
here lies the mystery of the realm of validity), — once 
seen, they are also seen to stand for unalterable truth. 
How this can be, is precisely our present problem. The 
mathematician, in his own exact way, is thus ike Brown- 
ing’s lover. His instant is an eternity. He sees in a 
transient moment. Every one of his glimpses of fact 
Ke like the flash of the moonlight on the water. Yet 
what he sees outlasts the ages of ages. But nothing 
/in all this eternal validity of his outcome makes him 
less empirical in his actual scrutiny. The validity is 
to be eternal. But his form of his experience is pre- 
cisely that of any other human creature of the instant’s 
flight. In examining his diagram, he is as faithful a 
watcher as the astronomer alone with his star. / The 
mathematician has made his diagram, but he cannot 
, wilfully alter its consequences. And they must first 
/ be seen. Then alone can they be believed. Here is 
\ the strange antithesis between the empirical form and 
\the eternal content of the realm of mathematical validity. 
' The valid, then, even the eternally valid, enters our 
human consciousness through the narrow portals of the 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 257 


instant’s experience. Reasoning is an empirical process, 
whatever else it also is. One who observes the nature 
of a realm of abstractly possible experience, does so by 
reading off the structure of a presented experience. 
Necessity comes home to us men through the medium 
of a given fact. This is the general result of modern 
exact Logic. This is the outcome of the recent study 
of the bases of mathematical science. 

And now, in a precisely similar way, the discovery 
of the more contingent, or, on occasion, of the more 
transient validity of the non-mathematical truths of the 
world of possible experience, has the same puzzling and 
twofold character. You examine, in the field or in the 
laboratory, a law of the physical world; you assure 
yourself that yonder ship observed out at sea is a 
reality; you find out the price of a commodity; you 
verify the credit of a business man. In any such case, 
what do you accomplish? What sort of Being do you 
assert, examine, establish? The answer is, — What you 
do is to test the validity of an idea about possible ex- 
perience. You first predict that if you act so or so, 
if you watch the ship longer, if you make the scien- 
tific experiment under given conditions, if you offer the 
market price for the article, or if you attempt to nego- 
tiate the commercial paper, certain empirical results will 
follow, certain consequences will be experienced by you. 
This prediction is, for you, merely an assertion about 
possible perceptions, feelings, ideas. You will, under 
given conditions, see certain sights, hear certain words, 
touch certain tangible objects,—in brief, get the pres- 
ence of certain empirical facts. This is all that you 


8 


258 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


can find involved in very many of your statements about 
the Being of social and of physical realities. Having 
defined such ideas of possible experience, you then test 
them. If the result conforms to the expectation, you 
are so far content. You have then communed with | 
Being. The Other that was sought appears to have 
been found. 

But no, it is not wholly right to view the matter 
merely thus. For there are countless possible experi- 
ences that you never test, and that you still view as be- 
longing to the realm of physical and of social validity. 
In fact, just when you express your own contentment 
with your tests, you transcend what you have actually 
succeeded in getting present to your experience. The 
ship has for you, even as a merely valid object in the con- 
text of Kant’s Mégliche Erfahrung, more Being than you 
have ever directly verified. If it had not, you would in- 
deed call it a figment of imagination. The prices and 
credits of the commercial world involve far more numer- 
ous types of valid possible experience than any prudent 
merchant cares to test; for, if these facts are valid as 
they are conceived, their very Being includes possibili- 
ties of unwise investment and of bankruptcy, which the 
yprudent business man recognizes only to avoid. In fact, 

‘since our whole voluntary life is selective, we all the 
time recognize possibilities of experience only to shun the 
testing of them. 

And so, in sum, the ordinary world of possible experi- 
ence has this twofold character. We prove that it is 
there by testing empirically, from moment to moment, the 
validity of our ideas about it; but our very belief in its 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 259 


Being means that we recognize its possession of far more 
validity than, in our private capacity, we shall ever test. 
It is thus with common sense, much as it was with 
mathematics. The mathematician finds his way in the 
eternal world by means of experiments upon the tran- 
sient facts of his inner and ideal experience of this in- 
stant’s contents. The student of science or the plain 
man of everyday life believes himself to be dealing with 
a realm of validity far transcending his personal experi- 
ence. But his only means of testing any concrete asser- 
tion about that world comes to him through the very 
fragmentary observation of what happens in his inner life 
from instant to instant. 

To generalize, then, the problem so far furnished 
us by our Third Conception of Reality, we find this as 
our situation. Ask me how I discover, in a concrete 
case, the validity of my idea, how I make it out for 
certain that a given experience is possible; and then 
I have to answer, “ By actual experience alone.” When 
I say then, “ A given idea is certainly valid,” I primarily 
mean merely, “A given idea is fulfilled in actual present 
experience.” But if you ask me what I regard as the 
range of the realm of validity, and what I think to be 
the extent of possible experience, and of the truth of 
ideas, then I can only say that the range of valid pos- 
sible experience is viewed by me as infinitely more ex- 
tended than my actual human experience. From the 
mathematical point of view the realm of truth is in 
fact explicitly infinite. From the point of view of 
natural science and of common sense, the world of 
valid possible experience is not only far wider than 


260 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


our concrete human experience, but is interesting to 
us precisely because we can select from its wealth 
of possibilities those that we wish, as we say, to real- 
ize. Now what our Third Conception so far fails to 


explain to us is precisely the difference between the 


‘reality that is to be attributed to the valid truths that 


we do not get concretely verified in our own experience, 
and the reality observed by us when we do verify ideas. 
In brief, What is a valid or a determinately possible ea- 


perience at the moment when it is supposed to be only 


possible? What is a valid truth at the moment when 
nobody verifies its validity? When we ourselves find 
the possible experience, it is something living, definite, 


\. —yes, individual. When we ourselves verify a valid as- 


sertion, it is again something that plays a part in our 
individual process of living and observing. But when 
we speak of such truths as barely valid, as merely pos- 
sible objects of experience, they appear once more as 


~ mere universals. Can these universals, not yet verified, 


consistently be regarded as possessing wholeness of 
Being? 

Or again, we formerly criticised Realism and Mys- 
ticism alike because neither of them sufficiently took 
account of the fact that our ideas of Being and the 
Being of which we have ideas, must occupy essentially 
the same ontological position. If, as Realism had said, 
Being is real independently of ideas, we saw that then 
ideas are themselves realities independent of Being. 
And if, as Mysticism had said, ideas are unreal, we saw 
that the Absolute, which Mysticism undertook to seek, 
must be unreal in the same sense in which the ideas 


VALIDITY AND EXPERIENCE 261 


about it are unreal. Now the former criticism of Real- 
ism and of Mysticism must once more be applied to 
test the adequacy of our present conception. We must 
see whether validity means the same in our experience 
as it means when asserted of Being in general. Validity, 
so far as it has yet appeared in our account, is an am- 
biguous term. As applied to the ideas that we actually 
test, it means that they are concretely expressed in 
experience whenever we test them. As applied to the 
whole realm of valid truth in general, to the world of 
nature as not yet observed by us, or of mathematical 
truth not now present to us, it means that this realm 
somehow has a character that we still do not test, and 
that never gets exhaustively presented in our human 
experience. But what is this character? 

Or, once more, in our concrete experience, the validity 
of an idea; once seen, tested, presented, gets what we 
then regard as an individual life and meaning, since it 
appears in our individual experience. But in the realm 
of Being in general this same validity appears univer- 
sal, formal,—a mere general law. Now can this view 
be final? Can there be two sorts of Being, both known 
to us as valid, but the one individual, the other univer- 
sal, the one empirical, the other merely ideal, the one 
present, the other barely possible, the one a concrete 
life, the other a pure form? Is not the world real in 
the same general sense in which our life in the world 
is real? Can Critical Rationalism escape the test already 
applied to its rivals? And if the test is applied, must 
not all Being prove to be pulsating with the same life 
of concrete experience? 


262 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


We shall see. History shows that the rigid world of » 
the Platonic Ideas, when viewed by later speculation, 
began erelong to glow, like sunset clouds, with the 
light of the Divine presence; and Neo-Platonism already 
called the Ideas the thoughts of God. Shall there be 
possible experience in the realm of validity, and the Lord 
hath not known its meaning? 

This is at present a mere query. Upon the rational 
answer to this query depends our whole religious 
philosophy. 


LECTURE VII 
THE INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 


Wirs the former lecture our inquiry into the concep- 
tions of Being reached a crisis whose lesson we have now 
merely to record and to estimate. That task, to be sure, 
is itself no light matter. 


I 


Experience and Thought are upon our hands; and 
together they determine for us the problems regarding 
Being) Realism offered to us the first solution of this: 
problem by attempting to define the Reality of the world 
as something wholly independent of our ideas. We 
rejected that solution on the ground that with an Inde- 
pendent Being our ideas could simply have nothing to do. 

is Or, if you please so to interpret our discussion of Realism, 
we pointed out that our ideas, too, are realities; and that 
if Realism is true, they are therefore in their whole Being 
as independent of their supposed realistic objects as the 
latter are of the ideas.) If, then, it makes no difference 
to the supposed external beings whether the ideas are or 
are not, it can make no difference to the ideas whether the 
independent external Beings are or are not. The sup- 
posed dependence of knowledge for its success upon its 
so-called independent object, proves, therefore, to be con- 
tradicted by the ontological independence inevitably 
possessed by the knowing idea, in case Realism is once 
265 


266 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


accepted. For the realistic sort of independence is an 
essentially mutual relation. The idea can then say to the 
independent object, in a realistic world: “ What care I for 
you? You are independent of me, but so am I of you. 
No purpose of mine would be unfulfilled if you simply 
vanished, so longas I then still remained whatIam. And 
I could, by definition, remain in my whole Being unal- 
tered by your disappearance. Accordingly, since my truth 
means merely the fulfilment of my own purpose, I should 
lose no truth if you vanished. In short, I not only do not 
need you, but observe, upon second thought, that I never 
meant you at all, never referred to you, never conceived 
you, and, in truth, am even now not cpaaaies you. In 
short, you are Nothing.” — ¥ 7, grant LALA Vitara 

With such reflections, we ee mae the realigtié 
‘dream, and knew that whatever Being is, it is not 
“independent of the ideas that refer to it. 

After our later experience with the fascinating para- 
doxes of Mysticism had equally shown us that Being 


~ capag be defined as the ineffable immediate fact that 


a quenches ideas, and that makes them all alike illusory, 
we passed, in the two foregoing lectures, to the realm of 
Validity, to the ontological conceptions of Critical 
Rationalism. What is, gives warrant to ideas, makes 
them true, and enables us to define determinate, or valid, 
possible experiences. That was the view that we illus- 
trated as our Third Conception of Being. We dwelt 
upon it so lengthily because, if it is not the final truth, 
it is, unquestionably, as far as it goes, true. 

What we found with regard to this definition of Real- 
ity may be summed up briefly thus: In the first place, 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 267 


the conception has an obvious foundation in the popular 
consciousness. Not only does the ontological vocabulary 
of ordinary speech illustrate this third conception in 
several ways; but, amongst the beings known to common 
sense, there are many that are regarded as real beings, 
but that are still explicitly defined only in terms of 
validity. Such beings are the prices and credits of the 
commercial world, the social standing of individuals, 
the constitutions of Empires, and the moral law. 

In the second place, in science, mathematics deals 
exclusively with entities that are explicitly conceived by 
the science in question as of this third type, and of this 
type only. In the next place, as we found, the Being 
usually ascribed to the laws and to the objects of physical 
science, is capable, at least in very large part, of being 
interpreted in terms of this third conception. Such con-. 
ceived entities as Energy are typical instances of beings 
of this sort. And, finally, all the entities of even a meta- 
physical Realism proved to be such that when one tries 
not to leave them unintelligibly independent, but to tell 
what they are, there is no means to define their character 
which does not first of all declare that their reality in- 
volves the validity of certain of our ideas, and the truth 
of the assertion that, under definable conditions, particu- 
lar experiences would be possible. What else the Being 
of such entities would mean, remained for us so far 
undefinable. 

On the other hand, as we concluded our former discus- 
sion, considerations crowded upon us, which forced us 
to observe that in some way this Third Conception of 
Being, despite all the foregoing, is inadequate. 


268 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Valid in its own measure it is, —to say that is to utter 
the deep commonplace of St. Augustine’s form of the 
ontological proof of the existence of God. For it must 
indeed be true that there is a Veritas. Yet mere Veritas, 
mere validity, still remains to us a conception as unin- 
telligible as it is insistently present to our thought. 
And our difficulty at the last time came thus to light: 
In mathematics, you define and prove valid assertions, 
and deal with entities, such as roots of equations, and 
properties of functions, whose Being seems to mean only 
their validity. But how do you prove these propositions 
about validity? How do you test the existence of your 
mathematical objects? Merely by experimenting upon 
your present ideas. What is there before you as you 
thus experiment? At each step of your procedure, one 
moment’s narrow contents extend to the very horizon of 
your present finite mathematical experience. Yet if your 
procedure is, indeed, as it pretends to be, valid, the truth 
that you define embraces eternity, and predetermines the 
structure and the valid existence of an infinity of objects 
that you regard as external to the thought which defines 
them. Your world of objects then is here boundless; 
your human grasp of these objects is even pitiably limited. 
Validity thus imples, in the world of the mathematical 
entities, a twofold character. As presented, as seen by 
you, as here realized, the observed validity is apparently 
given in experience, indeed, but as a mere internal mean- 
ing, —the creature of the instant. But as objective, as 
genuine, the validity is a part of the endless realm of 
mathematical truth, a realm that is, to use Aristotle’s 
term, the Unmoved Mover of all your finite struggle for 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 269 
A 

insight in this region.( How can the one form of Being 
be thus ambiguous, unless, in constitution, it is alse 
much wealthier in nature than the mere abstraction ex- 
pressed in our Third Conception makes it seem. Or, to 
put the case otherwise, the Third Conception of Being, 
in defining possibilities of experience, tells you only of 
mere abstract universals. But a mere universal is so far 
a bare what. One wants to make more explicit the that, 
to find something individual. 

And, if you pass from mathematics to the physical 
instances of the third conception, and to the world of 
moral and social validity, it is of course true that 
every Being in heaven or in earth exists for you as 
determining a valid possibility of experience. But 
countless of these valid possibilities exist for you pre- 
cisely as possibilities not yet tested by you, and there- 
fore never to be tested. Herein lies the very essence 
of prudence, of generalizing science, and of moral 
choice, viz., in the fact that you recognize much experi- . 
ence as possible only to avoid it, and to refrain from 
verifying in your own person the valid possibility. But 
what is a mere possibility when not tested? Is it a mere 
internal meaning? Then where is its Truth? Is it 
external? Then what is its Being? 

These were, in sum, our difficulties in regard to the 
Third Conception of Being. Their solution, logically 
speaking, lies now very near. But for us the road must 
still prove long. Meanwhile, the formulation of all these 
difficulties may be condensed into the single question, 
the famous problem of Pontius Pilate, What is Truth? 
For the Third Conception of Being has reduced Being to 


270 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Truth, or Validity. But now we need to make out what 
constitutes the very essence of Truth itself. It is this 
which at the last time we left still in obscurity. It is 
this which lies so near us, and which still, because of 
manifold misunderstandings, we must long seek as if it 
were far away. 


II 


Our course in approaching our final definition of Truth 
will divide itself into two stages. Truth is very fre- 
quently defined, in terms of external meaning, as that 
about which we judge. Now, so far, we have had much 
to say about Ideas, but we have avoided dwelling upon 
the nature and forms of Judgment. We must here, 
despite the technical dreariness of all topics of Formal 
Logic, say something concerning this so far neglected 
aspect of Truth, and of our relation to Truth. In the 
second place, Truth has been defined as the Correspondence 
between our Ideas and their Objects. We shall have, also, 
to dwell upon this second definition of Truth. Only at 
the close of both stages of the journey shall we be able to 
see, and then, I hope, at one glance, whither through the 
wilderness of this world our steps have been guided. 
The result will reward the toil. 

When we undertake to express the objective validity 
of any truth, we use Judgments. These judgments, if 
subjectively regarded, —that is, if viewed merely as 
processes of our own present thinking, whose objects are 
external to themselves, — involve, in all their more com- 
plex forms, combinations of ideas, — devices whereby we 
weave already present ideas into more manifold struc- 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 27] 


tures, thereby enriching our internal meanings. But 
the act of judgment has always its other —its objective 
aspect. The ideas, when we judge, are also to possess 
external meanings. If we try to sunder the external 
meaning from the internal, as we have so far done, we 
find then that weaving the ideas into new structures is 
a mere incident of the process whereby we regard them 
as standing for the valid Reality, as characterizing what 
their object is. It is true, as Mr. Bradley has well said, 
Ahat the intended subject of every judgment is Reality 
itself. The ideas that we combine when we judge about 
external meanings are to have value for us as truth only 
in so far as they not only possess internal meaning, but 
also imitate, by their structure, what is at once Other 
than themselves, and, in significance, something above 
themselves. That, at least, is the natural view of our 
consciousness, just in so far as, in judging, we conceive 
our thought as essentially other than its external object, 
and as destined merely to correspond thereto. } Now we 
have by this time come to feel how hard it is to define 
the Reality to which our ideas are thus to conform, and 
about which our judgments are said to be made, so long 
as we thus sunder external and internal meanings. 

Yet, for the instant, we must still continue to do so. 
We must, so to speak, “absent us from felicity awhile,” 
and in this world of merely internal and disappointed 
meanings, whose true objects are still far beyond, and 
whose only overt law is so far the law of correspondence 
to those objects —in this “harsh world,” I say, we must 
“draw our breath in pain,” until the real truth shall 
become manifest, and take the place of these forms which 


272 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


now merely represent it. The Truth that we pursue is 
no longer, indeed, the Independent Being of Realism; but 
it still remains something defined as not our ideas, and 
as that to which they ought to correspond, so that their 
internal meanings, interesting as these may seem, appear 
the mere by-play, so to speak, of the business of truth- 
seeking. And that business seems to be the task of 
submitting our thought to what is not our own mere 
thought. Well, for the time, we must still accept this 
situation. And, while we do so, let us examine briefly 
our processes of judgment, in so far as these consciously 
refer to external Objects; and let us endeavor to observe 
how our judgments, as they occur in actual thinking, or 
are confirmed or refuted by our ordinary experience, seem 
to view their own relation to Reality. To turn in this 
direction is to seek help, if you please, from Formal 
Logic. For Formal Logic is the doctrine that treats of 
our judgments and of their ordinary meanings as we make 
and combine them. 

Ordinary judgments, all of them, as we have just said, 
make some sort of reference to Reality. Never do you 
judge at all, unless you suppose yourself to be asserting 
something about a real world. You can express doubt as 
to whether a certain ideal object has its place in Reality. 
You can deny that some class of ideal objects is real. 
You can affirm the Being of this or of that object. But 
never can you judge without some sort of conscious inten- 
tion to be in significant relation to the Real. The what 
and the that are, indeed, easily distinguished, so long as 
you take the distinction abstractly enough. But never, 
when you seriously judge in actual thinking, do you 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 273 


avoid reference both to the what and to the that of the 
universe. 

Now, this observation may itself seem questionable. 
You may object: “Can I not make judgments about 
fairies and centaurs without asserting whether they are 
or are not? And if I distinguish between ideas and facts 
at all, cannot I do so in my judgments also, and make 
judgments about ideal objects merely as ideal objects, 
without referring to the Reality in any way?” The 
answer to all these questions is simply, No. To judge 
is to judge about the Real. It is to consider internal 
meanings with reference to external meanings. It is to 
bring the what into relation with the that. And if you 
have sundered the external and internal meanings, every 
attempt to judge, even while it recognizes this sundering 
as sharpest, is an effort to link afresh what it all the 
time, also, seems to keep apart. To illustrate the truth 
of this principle, look over the list of forms of judgment 
as they appear in the ordinary text-books of Logic. The 
list in question is, indeed, in many ways, imperfect; but 
it will serve for our present purpose. 

Judgments may be, as the logical tradition says, “Cate- 
gorical,” or “ Hypothetical,” or “ Disjunctive.” That is, 
they may assert, for example, that A is B; or they may 
affirm that If A is B, then C is D; or they may declare 
that Hither A is B, or else Cis D. This ancient classifi- 
cation is no very deep one; but it may aid us to survey 
how our various sorts of judgment view Reality. 

Let us begin with the “hypothetical” judgment, the 
judgment of the bare “if.” This sort of judgment seems, 
of course, to be capable of becoming as remote as pos- 

T 


274 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


sible from any assertion about Being, and as completely 
as possible a judgment about “mere ideas.” “If wishes 
were horses, beggars might ride.” “If the bowl had 
been stronger, my tale had been longer.” “If a body 
were left undisturbed by any external cause, it would 
continue its state of rest, or of uniform motion, in a 
straight line unchanged.” Are not all these judgments 
about purely ideal objects, and not about Being, or about 
any real world? Where are wishes horses? When do 
beggars ride on their own steeds? When were the wise 
men of Gotham in the bowl? What real body moves 
undisturbed ? 

And yet, I answer, these are all of them judgments 
that, if they are true, do not indeed directly tell us what 
the world of valid Being actually and concretely con- 
tains, but do tell us what that real world does not 
contain. Indirectly, by lmiting the range of valid 
possibilities, they thus throw light upon what the world 
does contain. Thus the First Law of Motion, as stated, 
tells us that there are no bodies which, although undis- 
turbed by external causes, still move in lines not straight, 
and with velocities that vary. Hence, since the physi- 
cal bodies observed by us turn out to be in motion, in 
various curves, and with varying velocities, we are 
directed to look for the causes hereof in the disturbances 
to which these bodies are subjected. So it is, also, in 
the other cases mentioned, in so far as these statements 
are true at all. In general, the judgment, “Jf A is B, 
C is D,” can be interpreted as meaning that there are, in 
the world of valid objects, no real cases where, at once, 
A is B, while at the same time C is nevertheless not D. 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 275 


A good instance is furnished by any sincere promise, such 
as a promise to a child, in the form: “Jf you do that I 


:) 


will reward you.” The promise relates to the valid Being 
of the future. It asserts that this future, when it comes 
to be present, shall not contain the event of the child’s 
doing that work wnrewarded by the giver of the promise. 
So, then, hypothetical judgments tell us that some ideally 
defined object, often of very complex structure, finds no 
place in Being. Even the fantastic examples of the 
wishes and the bowl involve the same sort of assertion, 
true or false, as to a real world. 

The judgments of simple assertion, the categorical 
judgments, are of the two general classes, the “ Uni- 
versal” and the “Particular” judgments, namely those, 
respectively, that speak oasis of-a-class and those 
that only tell about so7 
would seem, at first, as if an universal judgment might 


things. But here, again, it 


concern itself wholly with ideal objects. When a con- 
tract is made, universal judgments are, in general, used. 
“All the property” of a given sort, if ever it comes to 
exist, is by the terms of the contract “to be delivered,” 
perhaps, to such and such a person. “All payments” 
under the contract “are to be made,” thus and thus. 
But, perhaps, if ever the contract comes later to be adju- 
dicated, it may be found that no property of the sort in 
question has ever come into existence, or has ever been 
delivered at all; and then it may be decided that, by the 
very terms of the contract, and just by virtue of its legal 
validity, no obligation exists to make any of the men- 
tioned payments. So all contracts concerning future 
work, delivery, or compensation are, on their face, about 


276 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


ideal objects, which may never come to be in valid Being 
at all. In fact, genuinely universal judgments, as Her- 
bart and a good many more recent Logicians have taught, 
are essentially hypothetical in their true nature. But 
for that very reason, like the’ hypothetical judgments, the 
universal judgments, taken in their strictest sense, apart 
from special provisos, are judgments that undertake to 
exclude from the valid Reality certain classes of objects. 
To say that All A is B, is, in fact, merely to assert that 
the real world contains no objects that are A’s, but that 
fail to be of the class B. To say that Vo A zs B is to 
assert that the real world contains no objects that are at 
once A and B. Neither judgment, strictly interpreted, 
tells you that A exists, but only that 2f it exists, it is B. 
Now those mathematical judgments, of whose endless 
wealth and eternal validity we have heretofore spoken, 
are very frequently, although by no means always, of the 
universal type. They refer to Being, —a Being of the 
third type, —and, when universal, they assert, about a 
realm of definite or relatively determinate, although still 
universal validity, or possibility, something that proves 
to be primarily negative, so far as its relation to its ex- 
ternal object is concerned. They accomplish their asser- 
tions by means of the very fact that they undertake to 
exclude from the realm of externally valid Being, certain 
ideal combinations that, in the first place, would have 
seemed abstractly possible, if one had not scrutinized 
one’s ideas more closely. Thus, to know that universally 
Fee? = = 4, is to know that there nowhere exists, in all the 
realm of external validity, a two and a two that, when 
added, fail to give, as the result, four. In advance of 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 277 


such knowledge, the opposite would seem abstractly pos- 
sible. But it proves to be only verbally or apparently 
possible. Determinately viewed, only the “actual sum” 
is possible. 

In general, when we judge in universal ways, we 
begin, before we attain an insight into the truth of our 
judgment, by stating, as abstractly possible, more ideal 
alternatives than in the end will prove to be determi- 
nately possible, or to be valid possibilities. In the exact 
sciences, or, again, in case of those practically important 
realms of Being which we view as subject to our choice, 
— whenever we win control over a system of ideas, and 


assert a truth, or decide upon a course of action, and 


whenever we do this upon the basis of general principles, 
—our insight is always destructive of merely abstract pos- 
sibilities, and, where our knowledge takes the form of 
universal judgments, they are always primarily such 
destructive judgments, so far as they relate to external , 
objects. They tell us, indirectly, what zs, in the realm) 
of external meanings, but only by first telling us what id 
not. | 
The consequence is that universal categorical judg- 
ments, being always primarily negative in force, en- 
lighten us regarding that realm of the external meanings 
which is still for us, at this stage, the realm of Being, 
only by virtue of the junction, overt or implied, of the 
universal categorical judgments with disjunctive judg- 
ments, 7.e. with judgments of the either, or type. One 
who inquires into a matter upon which he believes him- 
self able to decide in universal terms, e.g. in mathe- 
matics, has present to his mind, at the outset, questions 


ae 


278 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


such as admit of alternative answers. “A,” he declares, 
“in case it exists at all, is either Bor C.” Further research 
shows universally, perhaps, that Wo A is B. Hereupon 
the abstract possibilities are in so far reduced, and the 
world of Being, taken still as a realm of external mean- 
ings, is limited to a realm where “Jf A exists at all, at 
can only be C.” The purpose of our universal judgments 
is thus that, by the aid of disjunctive judgments, they 
enable us to determine the world of Being by cutting off 
some apparent possibilities as really impossible, and by 
then taking the remaining alternatives, not in general, 
as any entirely determinate account of what is, but as a 
less indeterminate account of Reality than is the one with 
which we started. (To think in universal terms is thus 
to attempt, as it were, to exhaust the abstractly possible 
alternatives, and to define what exists in yonder external 
world as what survives the various stages of ideal de- 
struction through which one passes as one judges. )So 
long as thus, separating ideas from their external mean- 
ings, you struggle through universal judgments towards 
the far-off truth, your principle is the one that Spinoza 
stated, Omnis Determinatio est Negatio. The universal 
truth is the slayer of what seemingly might have been, 
but also of what, as a fact, proves to be not possible. 

As for your disjunctive judgments themselves, even 
they, too, affirm about external Being only by first deny- 
ing. “A is either B or C; there is no third possibility open,” 
—such must be one’s assertion when a disjunction is 
announced. The type of an ideally perfect and evident 
disjunction is the assertion, “A is either B or not-B,” 
where B and not-B are the alternative members of a 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 279 


“dichotomy,” i.e. of an exhaustive and twofold division 
of the Universe of your Discourse, as at any time you 
conceive its Reality to be opened to your ideal inspec- 
tion. 

This general situation of our thought in all those 
branches of inquiry where, as very often in mathematics, 
we deal with universal truth, and reason out results 
about Being, while still viewing Reality as Another than 
thought, is a situation that stimulates us to manifold 
inquiries. In the first place, as you at once see, the limi- 
tations of all our merely abstract and universal reason- 
ing about the world, when taken as a world of external 
meanings, are, at a stroke, laid bare by virtue of these 
very considerations. For by mere reasoning, in these 
universal terms, we never directly and determinately 
characterize the Being of things as it finally is. We at 
best, and even if we are quite sure of our universal truths, 
tell what external Reality is not, and add that, of the re- 
maining abstractly possible and definable alternatives, it 
is doubtless determinately some one, and no other. 
But, apart from any scepticism, justified or not, regard- 
ing the validity of our universal judgments themselves, 
they at best carry us a certain way only in an undertak- 
ing that seems essentially endless, and, in fact, worse 
than endless. And that is the undertaking of exhausting 
all the possible alternatives, and so of making the finally 
valid possibility, that can alone remain, into something 
absolutely determinate. And where the sole principle is 
that Omnis Determinatio est Negatio, this task is indeed 
not only endless, but hopeless. 

This, in fact, is why mathematical science, especially 


280 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


in so far as it deals merely with universal truths, can 
never hope, by any conceivable skill in construction, 
to replace the more empirical sciences, and merely to 
define the world in terms of its own sort of universal 
validity. For every step of the process is a cutting- 
off indeed of false possibilities, and an assertion of 
what therefore seems the more precisely and determi- 
nately limited range of the valid possibilities. But at 
every step, also, the range beyond is simply inexhaust- 
ible, so far as you take your object as merely external. 
Unless some other principle than that of mere nega- 
tion determines the realm of valid Being, then it has 
no final determination at all. Looking beyond, to that 
realm of external meanings, we say: A is never B. 
Well then, comes the retort, What is it? So far, the 
answer is, Whatever else is still possible. Is it C then? 
A further reasoning process perhaps excludes this, or 
some other, possibility also. Have we found out the 
positive contents of Being? No, we have only again 
excluded. And so we continue indefinitely, not only 
with an infinite process upon our hands, but with no 
definite prospect as to positive consequences to be won 
by exhausting even this infinity. This is the essential 
defect of “merely reasoning,” in abstractly universal 
terms, about the external nature of things. 

But all this has, indeed, another aspect. This nega- 
tive character of the universal judgments holds true of 
them, as we have said, just in so far as you sunder the 
external and the internal meanings, and just in so far as 
you view the Real as the Beyond, and as merely the 
Beyond. If you turn your attention once more to the 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 281 


realm of the ideas viewed as internal meanings, you see, 
indeed, that they are constantly becoming enriched, in 
their inner life, by all this process. Take your thinking 
merely as that which is to correspond to an external 
Other, and then, indeed, your universal judgments tell 
you only what this Other is not, and leave, as what it 
is, merely some of the possibilities still wndestroyed. 
But view the internal meaning of thought as a life for 
itself, and revel in the beautiful complexities of a mathe- 
matical, or other rationally constructed realm of inner 
expressions of your thoughtful purposes; and then, 
indeed, you seem to have found a positive constitution 
of an universe that, alas! is, after all, as contrasted 
with those “external facts,” 
shadowland. “Is it really so yonder?” you say. Is 


to be regarded only &s a 


namely the positive aspect of all this construction present 
in that world? Your universal judgments cannot tell. 
To take, again, the simplest case: To know, by inner 
demonstration, that 2+ 2= 4, and that this is necessarily 
so, is not yet to know that the so-called “external world,” 
taken merely as the Beyond, contains any true or finally 
valid variety of objects at all, —any two or four objects 
that can be counted. That you must learn otherwise, 
namely, of course, by what is usually called “external 
experience ” of that outer world. On the other hand, so 
far as your internal meaning goes, to have seen for your- 
self, to have experienced within, that which makes you 
call this judgment necessary, is, indeed, to have observed 
a character about your own ideas which rightly seems to 
‘you very positive. So, then, universal judgments and 
reasonings appear to be of positive interest in the realm 


— 


A 


282 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


of internal meanings, but only of negative worth as to 
the other objects. ye 

All this, however, only brings afresh to light ‘ites para- 
doxical character of all this sundering of external and 
internal meanings. For at this point arises the ancient 
question, How can you know at all that your judgment 
is universally valid, even in this ideal and negative way, 
about that external realm of validity, in so far as it is 
external, and is merely your Other,—the Beyond? 
Must you not just dogmatically say that that world must 
agree with your negations? This judgment is indeed 
positive. But how do you prove it? The only answer 
has to be in terms which already suggest how vain is the 
very sundering in question. If you can predetermine, 
even if but thus negatively, what cannot exist in the 
object, the object then cannot be merely foreign to you. 
It must be somewhat predetermined by your Meaning. 
But of this matter we shall soon hear more in another 
connection. The result is so far baffling enough. Yet 
in this situation most of our ordinary thinking about the 
world is done. 

Let us pass to the “particular affirmative” judgments. 
As has been repeatedly pointed out in the discussions on 
recent Logic,! the particular judgments, — whose form is 
Some A is B, or Some A is not-B, —are the typical judg- 
ments that positively assert Being in the object viewed 
as external. This fact constitutes their essential con- 
trast with the universal judgments. They undertake to 
cross the chasm that is said to sunder internal and exter- 


1 Amongst others by Mr. Charles Peirce, by Schroeder, by Mr. Venn, 
and, quite independently, by Brentano, in his Psychologie. 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 283 


nal meanings; and the means by which they do so is 


always what is called “external experience.” 


No “pure 
thinking” can ever really prove a particular judgment 
about external objects. You have to appeal to outer 
experience. On the other hand, all empirical judgments 
about objects of external meaning, viewed merely as 
such, are, or should be, in this form of the particular 
judgments. It is a form at once positive and very unsat- 
isfactorily indeterminate. It expresses the fact that 
there has been found some case where an A that is a B 
not only may exist, in yonder object with which we are 
to correspond, but does exist. The defect of these judg- 
ments is that they never tell us, by themselves, precisely 
what object this existent instance of an A that is B really 
is. In other words, they are particular, but are not indi- 
vidual judgments. Yet, as we shall hereafter more fully 
see, and have already in a measure observed, what we 
want our knowledge to show us about the Being of 
things, is what Reality, taken as an individual whole, 
or, again, as this individual, finally is. Hence, the par- 
ticular judgments, — those of external experience viewed 
as external, — are especially instructive as to the nature 
that our ordinary thinking attributes to Being, and as to 
what we demand of our Other.! 


1 The assertion that purely ideal reasoning processes, viewed as mere 
internal meanings, never result in particular propositions about their 
external objects, is one extensively discussed by Schroeder and by many 
others. See Schroeder, Algebra der Logik, Bd. II, p. 86, sqgq. The de- 
fence of the assertion in detail, as a matter of formal Logic, would here 
take us too far afield. Speaking briefly, one can remind the reader, by 
the use of a familiar example: (1) That wnless wisdom is conceived neces- 
sarily to follow from the nature of man, you cannot, by ‘‘ mere reason- 


284 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Our situation, then, is, in substance, this: We have 
our internal meanings. We develop them in inner expe- 
rience. There they get presented as something of uni- 
versal value, but always in fragments. They, therefore, 
so far dissatisfy. We conceive of the Other wherein these 
meanings shall get some sort of final fulfilment. We 
view our ideas as shadows or imitations of this Other; 
and we make judgments as to how well they represent it. 
When we study the universally expressible aspects of 
Reality, we get the sense, —no matter at present how, — 
that, in such cases as those of the judgment 2+ 2= 4, 
we can, in idea, predetermine the constitution of the 
external object. But if we look closer, we see that no 


ing,’’ find out whether or no any man is wise, so long as man is taken to 
be an external object. You have to turn to ‘‘external experience.’’ If, 
in experience, you then find somebody say Socrates to be a wise man, the 
matter is empirically settled in favor of the judgment: Some man is wise. 
But, (2) on the other hand, even in case wisdom followed, as an ideally 
necessary result, from the mere nature of man, then you would know 
indeed, by mere reasoning, that if any man exists at all, that man is wise. 
But apart from the ‘‘ external experience”? itself, you would still fail to 
know, through the ‘‘ pure ideas,’’ whether there exists indeed any man at 
all. And you still could not assert, despite your reasoning, the truth of 
the proposition that some man is wise, until you had jirst found that man 
exists in the realm of the external meanings. All this is an inevitable 
consequence of the sundering between the internal and the external 
meanings; and holds true so long as the sundering is insisted upon. The 
traditional Logic of the text-books, when it reasons from universals to 
their subalternate particulars, or derives particular conclusions from uni- 
versal premises, does so by tacitly and, in general, by unjustifiably as- 
suming the external existence of the objects reasoned about, while all the 
time still sundering external and internal. Reasoning itself is, to be 
sure, experience, but is, by hypothesis, experience of internal meanings, 
not of the external meanings which are taken, by this sort of thinking, 
to be the Reality. 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 285 


such predeterminations involve more than the assertion 
that Being, as thus predetermined, excludes and forbids 
certain of the ideal constructions that, at first, seem pos- 
sible. But what Being, in so far as it is merely Other 
and external, positively contains, we cannot thus dis- 
cover. 

How else shall we attempt to discover this desired ful- 
filment of our purpose? The ordinary answer is, By ezter- 
nal experience. Now this so-called external experience is 
never what you might call “ Pure Experience.” For only 
the mystic looks for Pure Experience wholly apart from 
ideas. And we already know what he finds. He is the 
only thoroughgoing Empiricist; and he has his reward. 
What is usually called “Experience,” by common sense 
or by science, is not purely immediate content, and it is not 
whatever happens to come to hand. It is carefully and 
attentively selected experience. It is experience lighted 
up by ideas. They, as our internal meanings, are incom- 
plete, and they therefore take the form of asking ques- 
tions. They formulate ideal schemes, and then they 
inquire, Have these schemes any correspondent facts, 
yonder, in that externally valid object? The very ques- 
- tion is full of ideal presuppositions, which one in vain 
endeavors to renounce by calling himself a pure empiricist. 
Unless he is a mystic he is no such pure empiricist. And 
if he is a mystic, he abhors ideas and frames no hypothe- 
ses, except for the sake of merely teaching his doctrine in 
exoteric fashion. Buta scientific empiricist has hypothe- 
ses, — internal meanings, ideal constructions, —and he 
deliberately chooses to submit these to the control of what 
he views as external experience. If you ask why he does 


286 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


so, he answers, very rightly, that he has no other road 
open to the grasping of yonder “external object.” But 
this answer means more than an empiricist of this type 
usually observes. Wholly inconsistent with any abstract 
Realism (which is always metempirical in its actual as- 
sumptions), the wish of the ordinary empiricist, however 
highly trained his scientific judgment, and however 
steadfast his assurance that the idea and its valid object 
are somehow sundered aspects of Being, is always simply 
to enrich his internal meanings by giving them a selec- 
tive control which, of their own moving, they cannot find. 

fOr, in the ordinary phraseology, Man thinks in order to 

\ get control of his world, and thereby of himself. What 
the bare internal meanings, in their poverty, leave as an 
open question, the external experience shall decide. If 
you ask, again, What experience? the answer always is, 
Not any experience that you please, but a sort of experi- 
ence determined by the question asked, viz., whatever 
experience is apt to decide between conflicting ideas, and 
to determine them to precise meaning. 

It is customary to dwell upon the “crushing character,” 
the “overwhelming power” of “stubborn empirical facts.” 
The character in question is, of course, a valid one. Yet 
this crushing force of experience is never a barely imme- 
diate fact; it is something relative to the particular ideas 
in question. For, as I must repeat, our so-called external 
experience, that is, our experience taken as other than 
our meanings, and viewed as what confirms or refutes 
them here or there, never does more, in any question con- 
cerning the truth, than to decide our ideal issues, and to 
decide them in particular instances, whose character and 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 287 


meaning for us are determined solely by what ideas of 
our Own are in question. Or, again, empirical judgments, 
as such, are always particular. Hence, they never by 
themselves absolutely confirm, or refute, alJ that our 
ideas mean. And what they confirm, or refute, depends 
upon what questions have been asked from the side of 
our internal meanings. 

The empirical facts can, indeed, refute, and they very 
often do refute, abstractly stated universal judgments, by 
showing particular cases that contradict these judgments. 
But they can never show, by themselves, that the ideas 
externally valid world, but only that in some case just 
these ideas fail. Hence, unless I have ideally chosen 
to stake my all upon a single throw of the dice of 
“external experience,” I am not logically “crushed” by 
the particular experience that this time disappoints me. 
If my internal meaning takes, for instance, the form of 
a plan of external action, I can, if this time defeated, 
“try again”; and the human will has in all ages shown 
its power not to be crushed by any particular experience, 
unless its ideas determine that it ought to accept the 
defeat. Ideas can be quite as stubborn as any particular 
facts, can outlast them, and often, in the end, abolish 
them. Even if the internal meaning is a merely imita- 
tive conception, that, like a scientific hypothesis, was 
solely intended to portray the nature of the external 
fact, then the empirical failure of the hypothesis, in a 
given instance, shows, indeed, that it is not universally 
valid as regards yonder external world of finally valid 
fact, but does not show that it is universally imvalid. 


288 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Experience, taken as external and particular, can never 
_ prove any absolute negation. 

On the other hand, but for the very same reason, our 
experience, when taken as in contrast to our internal 
meanings, can never, in any finite time, completely con- 
firm or demonstrate any universal judgment, such as, 
upon the basis of our internal meanings, we may have 
asserted. Some Ais B. That is all that your experience, 
when viewed as other than your ideas, and as that to which 
you appeal for the sake of defining your external object, 
can ever by itself reveal. Herein lies the well-known 
limitation of the merely “inductive” processes of science. 
That we all believe universal propositions about yonder 
external world of valid objects, is due to the fact that we 
are none of us mere empiricists, even in this modified 
sense. / All of us view some of our ideas as predetermin- 
ing the-nature of things, so that we conceive the reality as 
the fulfilment of distinctly internal meanings, — with 
what right we have yet to see. \ 

All of these considerations arise in a realm where inter- 
nal and external meanings, without ever being viewed as 
abstractly independent of one another, are still taken as 
actually and rightly sundered. And this, as we have 
now seen, is the case throughout the world of our Third 
Conception. All who use this conception, that is, all 
who once learn rationally to modify their Realism, while 
still regarding the antithesis of internal and of external 
as finally valid, employ the two main types of judgment 
which we have now examined. When the mathemati- 
cians use the existential judgments, of which we before 
have spoken, they, too, employ the particular judgments 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 289 


and appeal to what, for their current ideas, constitutes a 
relatively external realm of experience. When, believ- 
ing that their own science, too, has become exact, the 
students of nature, in their turn, use universal judgments; 
they just as truly appeal, for their sole warrant, to in- 
ternal meanings, as do the mathematicians when the latter 
think about universal truth. 

As to these two types of judgment, the universal and 
the particular, they both, as we have seen, make use of 
experience. The one type, the universal judgments, 
arise in the realm where experience and idea have already 
fused into one whole; and this is precisely the realm of 
internal meanings. Here one constructs, and observes 
the consequences of one’s construction. But the con- 
struction is at once an experience of fact, and an idea; 
at once an expression of a purpose, and an observation of 
what happens. Upon the basis of such ideal constructions, 
one makes universal judgments. These, in a fashion 
still to us, at this stage, mysterious, undertake to be valid 
of that other world, —the world of external meanings, 
the realm that is said to be the Reality of which these 
ideas are the shadow and imitation. But every assertion 
of this sort implies that in verity the external and the 
internal meanings are not sundered, but have some deeper 
unity, which, in this realm of mere validity, you can 
never make manifest. Meanwhile, this control of idea 
over fact is, indeed, here viewed as limited. The ideal 
necessities only determine what the facts are not, and not 
what the facts are. 

On the other hand, since this realm of internal mean- 
ings is, in us men, limited and fragmentary, one indeed 


U 


290 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


seeks to enlarge its realm. And in doing so one appeals 
to what is called the external experience; and hereupon 
one makes those particular judgments which are the typi- 
cal expression of our human sort of external experience. 
But this is experience so far as it has not yet fused 
with the internal meanings; but so far as, nevertheless, 
through selection and through patient effort, it can 
gradually be brought to the point where it decides 
ideal issues. As other than the ideas, this experience 
is said to be the evidence and the expression of the 
external objects themselves. Yet these objects, for the 
awakened reason, are no longer “things in themselves.” 
Their contrast with the world of “mere ideas ”’ is, indeed, 
here insisted upon; but we have plainly, so far, no final 
account of what the contrast is. 


III 


Yet there remains one further aspect of this whole sit- 
uation of our judging thought, —an aspect upon which 
sufficient stress has not been laid. We have said, as 
against this Third Conception of Being, that at best it 
leaves Reality too much a bare abstract universal, and 
does not assert the individuality of Being. We have 
still to express this objection in a more formal way. As 
we have seen, all our universal and particular judgments 
leave Reality, in a measure, indeterminate. Can we 
tolerate this view of Reality as final? 

Ideas, as such, take, we have said, the abstractly uni- 
versal form. External experience, as such, in this realm 
where we find it sundered from the internal meanings, 
confirms or refutes ideas in particular cases. But do 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 291 


ideas, in so far as they merely imitate or seek their exter- 
nal Other, ever express what common sense often means 
by calling that external object an Individual? Or, on 
the other hand, does the external experience ever, as 
such, present to us individuals, and show them to us as 
individuals ?1 

If this question is put simply as an appeal to common 
sense, the answer will be unhesitating. Who does not 
know that our knowledge “begins with individual 
facts?” The child “knows its nurse or its mother or 
its own playthings first. Only later does it learn the 
universal characters of things.” The individual, then, 
is the well known, the familiar, the ue in Knowledge 
and in Being. 

This theory, as usually stated, is simply full of incon- 
sequences and inaccuracies that I cannot here undertake 
to follow out. Of course, what a child first knows are 
objects that we, with our common-sense metaphysic, call 
individual things; but there is every evidence that he 
knows them by virtue of their characters, their qualities, 
their recognizable, and, for that very reason, abstractly 
universal features. All animals adjust themselves to the 
what of their world, and pursue or shun objects because 
of their odor, taste, color, form, touch-qualities, fashion 
of movement, —in brief, because of features that are com- 
mon to many objects and experiences and that, in so far 
as we can empirically make out, are not, except by acci- 
dent, confined to an individual being or experience. A 


1] have discussed this point at length in the ‘‘ Supplementary Essay ’’ 
of the book called The Conception of God. See Part III of that Essay, 
pp. 217-271. 


292 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


child’s early vagueness in applying names, his “calling of 
all men and women fathers and mothers,’! as Aristotle 
already observed, shows that our primary consciousness is 
of the vaguely universal. 

And now, not only is this true as to the genesis of our 
knowledge, but, to the end, it remains true of us mortals 
that, Neither do our internal meanings ever present to us, 
nor yet do our external experiences ever produce before us, 
for our inspection, an object whose individuality we ever 
really know as such. Neither internal meanings nor exter- 
nal meanings, in their isolation, are in the least adequate 
to embody individuality. 

For an individual is unique. There is no other of its 
individual kind. If Socrates is an individual, then there 
is only one Socrates in the universe. If you are an indi- 
vidual, then in Reality there is no other precisely capable 
of taking your place. If God is an individual, then, as 
ethical monotheism began by saying, There is no Other. 

Now, by taking note in thought of this supposed unique- 
ness, you can, of course, in general, define, as a sort of 
problem to be solved by real Beings, the ideal and abstract 
nature of individuality itself. But then, you do not, in 
that case, tell what constitutes any one individual such as 
he is. But now change the statement of the problem. 
Try to define, in idea, some one individual, real or fic- 
titious, e.g. Achilles, or Socrates, or the universe. At 
once, when you define, your idea, as an internal meaning, 
presents to you a combination of characters such as, ac- 
cording to your definition, some Other, i.e. some object 
external to the idea, might embody. In consequence, 

1 Aristotle, Phys., Bk. I, 1. 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 293 


however, the possibility of characterizing, or portraying, 
the features that are to make yonder external individual 
unique, has been surrendered in the very act of trying to 
define what constitutes him an individual. For your 
object is another, and you here, by hypothesis, know it 
merely through ideally imitating it and “corresponding” 
to it. But as individual, the unique Being is to be pre- 
cisely something that has no likeness. Hence, just so far 
as you define it, you define of it everything but its indi- 
viduality. Socrates defined, is no longer the unique 
external meaning, —the individual Being as such. He 
has now become a mere conceived typeof man. That this 
type has but one real expression, you may, from the side 
of your internal meanings, dogmatically assert or inevi- 
tably presuppose. But you can never tell what, about 
that kind of man called Socrates, forbids him to get 
repeated expression in the universe, unless you have 
expressed the secret of Being in terms different from 
those involved in this sundering of the external and the 
internal meanings. The same is true if you try thus 
abstractly to define what makes either God or the world 
One Individual, that has no likeness. 

But if ideas, as internal meanings opposed to external 
objects, cannot express the nature of the individuality of 
the world or of any one Being in it, whence, then, do we 
ever get this belief that Being is, in fact, individual? 
Does perhaps our external experience present to us indi- 
viduals? The answer is again simply, Wo. If, when 
you define Socrates in inner idea, you define a type of 
man, and not an unique Being without any likeness, it 
is equally true that, if ever you had an experience which 


294. THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


made you say, Here is Socrates, you would have present 
to yourself but, once more, a type of empirically observed 
man, —a kind of experience. When you daily meet your 
family and friends, you constantly confirm your internal 
meanings by external experiences; but the confirmation, 
read accurately, is always a confirmation of ideal types 
by particular cases, never by really individual Beings 
directly known as present and yet as unique. You pre- 
suppose that your family and friends are individual 
Beings. The presupposition may be, yes, to my mind is, 
justifiable in the light of a genuine metaphysic. But it 
is an essentially metaphysical presupposition, never veri- 
- fiable by your external experience. In this presupposi- 
tion lies the very mystery of Being. The what is 
abstractly universal. The that is individual. You 
have an idea of your friend. You go to meet him; and 
lo, the idea is verified. Yes; but what is verified? I 
answer, this, that you have met a certain type of empiri- 
cal object. “But my friend is unique. ‘There is no 
other who has his voice, manner, behavior.” ‘Yes; but 
how should your personal experience verify that? Have 
you seen all beings in heaven and earth?”, Perhaps you 
reply, “Yes; but human experience in general shows 
that every man is an individual, unique, and without 
any absolute likeness.” If such is your reply, you are 
_ appealing to general inductive methods. I admit their 
significance. But I deny that they rest solely upon ex- 
ternal experience, as such, for their warrant. They 
presuppose a metaphysic. They do not prove one. 
Besides, you are now talking of general principles, and 
not of any one verified individual. 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 295 


In fact, how should any one individual Being present 
himself, in this external experience of yours, or of all 
men taken together, in such wise as to show not only 
that he is of this or this aspect, but that no other is like 
him in the whole realm of Being. It is this no-Other- 
character that persistently baffles both the merely internal 
meaning, and the merely external experience, so long as 
they are human and are sundered. 

And, now, just this difficulty gives one further reason 


why our Third Conception of Being, in conflict with |~ ' 


common sense, does, indeed, abandon the concept that 
Being is individual, and confines itself to forming in- 
ternal meanings, and to confirming them by external 
experience. It tries to rest content with abstract univer- 
sals, more or less determined by particular observations. 
Yet, in doing thus, can this conception satisfy even the 
fragmentary internal meanings that we so far sunder from 
their external objects, and that we then seek to confirm 
or to refute by external experience? No; for if we can 
neither abstractly define within, nor yet empirically find 
without, the individuals that we seek, there can be no 
doubt that our whole interest in Being, is an interest in 
individuality. For the Other that we seek is that 
which, if found, would determine our ideas to their final 
truth. Now, only what is finally determinate can, in its 
turn, determine. As a fact, while we never abstractly 
define individuals as such, we certainly love individu- 
als, believe in individuals, and regard the truth with 
which we are to correspond as determinate. So much is 
this the case, that whoever should try, as, in fact, our 
Third Conception of Being seems to try, to define the 


296 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


world of Being in terms exclusive of individuality, seems 
forced to say, “The final fact is that there is no indi- 
vidual fact, or, in other words, that there is no unique 
Being at all, but only a type; so that the Being with 
which our thoughts are to correspond does not determine 
the ‘mere ideas’ to any single and unique correspondence 
with itself, but leaves them finally indeterminate.” But 
is the Veritas that is thus left us any Veritas at all? Is 
not the very expression used self-contradictory? Can 
the absence of finality be the only final fact? 

Our general survey of the world of judgments and of 
reasoning processes, as well as of the accompanying rela- 
tions between Thought and Experience, is on one side 
completed. What have we learned? Our survey has 
not yet solved the problem as to the whole nature of 
Truth, but has shown us very important features that 
must, indeed, belong to the inmost essence of the Other 
that we seek. For one thing, we have found that every 
step towards Truth is a step away from vague possibilities, 
‘ and towards determinateness of idea and of experience. Our 
very ideas themselves, even when expressed as hypothe- 
ses, oras universal definitions, or as a priort mathematical 
constructions, or as judgments of hypothetical or of uni- 
versal type, are from the outset destructive of vague pos- 
sibilities, and involve Determination by Negation. That is 
what every step of our survey has shown. Being, then, 
/viewed as Truth, is to be in any case something deter- 
_ minate, that excludes as well as includes. 

"As to the vastly important relation of Thought to ex- 
ternal Experience, we have seen that our thought, indeed, 
looks to this external experience to decide whether our 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 297 


hypotheses about fact can be confirmed. But, on the 
other hand, while external experience, in confirming 
ideas, furnishes a positive content which our human 
internal meanings never can construct for themselves, 
still the service of our external experience, in revealing 
what is Real, has perfectly obvious limitations. It can 
confirm our hypotheses, but never adequately; for it 
shows us only particular instances that agree with such 
of our hypotheses as succeed. It can refute our hasty 
ideal generalizations, but only when they are stated as 
universal propositions. It can never by itself prove a 
determinate negative by excluding from Reality the whole 
of what our hypotheses have defined. Hence, our, will 
has its limitless opportunity to “try again”; and exter- 
nal experience never finally disposes of ideas unless the 
ideas themselves make, for reasons defensible upon the 
ground of internal meaning only, their own “reasonable” 
surrender. /And, finally, our experience, whether inter- 
nal or external, never shows us what we, above all, regard 
as the Real, namely, the Individual fact. Hence, in 
consulting experience, we are simply seeking aid in the 
undertaking to give our ideas a certain positive deter- 
mination, to this content and no other,/ But never, in our 
human process of experience, do we reach that determina- 
Xion) It is for us the object of love and of hope, of desire 
and of will, of faith and of work, but never of present 
finding. ‘ 

This Individual Determination itself remains, so far, 
the principal character of the Real; and is, as an ideal, 
the Limit towards which we endlessly aim. Now, a 
Limit, in mathematics, may have either one or both of 


aa tem 


3 
‘I 
rx 


“ t 

£ ye” 
Wy 

¥ Be i 


298 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


two characters.! It may be that which a given process so 
approaches that we ourselves are able to get and to remain 
near at will to, —that is, less than any predesignated dis- 
tance from, —the limit, although the process in question, 
by itself, never reaches the limit. So we can get as near 
as we choose to 2, by adding terms of the series 1+ 4+ 4, 
etc. Or, again, in the second place, the limit may be 
defined as that which, never attained by the process in 
question, is demonstrably a finality that occupies, in 
order, the first place immediately beyond the whole series 
of incomplete stages which the endless process in question 
defines. Thus, 2 is the least number that lies beyond, or 
that is greater than all possible fractions, of the form 
1+4, 14444, 14+4+44+4, etc. Usually, in mathe- 
matics, both senses of limit are combined (as they are in 
the example just used). But not so in the case here 
before us. Being is not an object that we men come 


GA at will to finally observing, so that while we never 


|e it, wholly present in our internal meanings, we can 
/come,as-near as we like to telling all that itis. But the 


ey | Raat, as our judgments and empirical investigations seek 
yeit, is that determinate object which all our ideas and 


experiences try to decide upon, and to bring within the 


Ba ‘Tk range of our internal meanings; while, by the very nature 
of our fragmentary hypotheses and of our particular expe- 
\ riences, it always lies Beyond. 


Yet if we could reach that limit of determination which 


1 See Georg Cantor, in the Zeitschrift f. Philosophie und Philosophische 
Kritik, Bd. 91, p. 110. The finite limit of a ‘“‘convergent series’’ has 
both characters. But the ‘‘ determinate infinite,’? viewed as the limit of 
the whole-number-series, has only the latter of the two characters. 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 299 


is all the while our goal, if our universal judgments were 
confirmed by an adequate experience, not of some object 
(still indeterminate), but of the individual object, or of 
all the individual objects, so that no other empirical expres- 
sion of our ideas remained possible, then, indeed, we 
should stand in the immediate presence of the Real. 
The Real, then, is, from. this point of view, that which 
is ummediately beyond the whole of our series of possi- 
ble efforts to to bring, by any process of finite experience 
and of merely general conception, our own internal 
meaning to a complete determination. 

Abstract as this result is, it is already of great signifi- 
cance. It shows us what the Third Conception lacks, 
namely, a view of the Real as the finally determinate that 
permits no other. It also shows that the mere sundering 
of external and internal meanings is somehow, faulty. 
Their linkage is the deepest fact about the universe. 

And thus the first of the two closing stages of our jour- 
ney is done. We have learned how the internal meaning 
is related to its own Limit, in so far as that is just a 
limit. But thus to view Being is still not to take account 
of what seems to common sense the most important of all 
our relations to the Real. And that is the relation of 
Correspondence, —several times heretofore mentioned, 
but not yet fathomed. “We must not only seek Being 
as our goal, but we must correspond to its real constitu- 
tion if we are to get the truth. And somehow it has that 
constitution. We have to submit. The Real may not 
be wholly independent of our thinking, but it is at least 
authoritative.” So common sense states the case. But 
that aspect of the matter, as I repeat, we have not yet 


300 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


fathomed. To complete our definition of Reality, we 
must undertake to do so. And here, at last, the sunder- 
ing of external from internal meaning receives its final 
test. Must not that to which our thought has to con- 
form, whether it will or no, remain wholly external to 
thought itself? We shall see. And when we see this, 
our goal will at last be attained. 


IV 


A time-honored definition of Truth declares it to mean 
the Correspondence between any Idea and its Object. The 
mystery that everybody feels to lie hidden behind this 
definition depends upon the fact that two relations, both 
of a very intangible sort, are implied by this definition, 
and that the combination of these two relations is required 
to constitute truth. If an idea is true, it must, in the 
first place, have an object. But what constitutes the 
relation called having an object? When is an object 
the object of a given idea? And, secondly, the idea must 
correspond with its object. But what is the relation 
called correspondence? Until recently, the whole theory 
of the nature of correspondence remained an extremely 
undeveloped, although an obviously fundamental con- 
ception of Logic. And still more neglected has been the 
conception of the relation that constitutes any supposed 
object the genuine object of an idea, whether the idea be 
true or false. As to the problem about correspondence, 
how much must an idea resemble its object in order to be 
true? A photograph resembles the man whom it pictures. 
Must a true idea be even so a sort of photograph of its 
object? Or, perhaps, may an idea be very unlike an ob- 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 301 


ject, and still so correspond therewith as to be a true idea? 
Are not the items in a ledger very unlike the commer- 
cial transactions that they ideally depict? And yet may 
not the items in the ledger be true? The nature, then, 
and the degree of that correspondence between idea and 
object which is meant when one talks of the truth of an 
idea, is a doubtful matter, and we shall have to consider 
it more closely. As to the other one of these two prob- 
lems about idea and object, it seems plain, and in fact 
seems to be implied in the very definition of truth, that 
an idea can have an object without rightly corresponding 
to its object. For how otherwise should falsity and error 
be possible? To have an object and to correspond to it 
are therefore different relations. What, then, is the 
nature of the relation that makes a given idea such as to 
have a given object, whether or no the idea truly repre- 
sents the object? These two problems are, then, the 
two aspects of the general question, What is Truth? 
regarded now from the side of the correspondence 
between internal and external. 

Let us next attack the first of these two questions. If 
an idea is to be correspondent to an object, our first 
impression is that the idea must always possess some one 
predestined sort or degree of likeness or similarity to 
its object. Is this necessary? Is it once for all prede- 
termined that its object, as a finished fact, required the 
idea to be like it? The relation of correspondence, in 
general, apart from the special problem about ideas and 
objects, has been most elaborately studied in mathematics, 
where correspondence is, in the most various forms, a 
constant topic of exact inquiry. If you have before you 


802 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


two objects, say two curves, or two variable quantities, 
or two collections of objects, —one of them a collection 
of symbols, the other a collection of objects to be symbol- 
ized, —a relation of correspondence can be established, 
or assumed, between these two objects, or collections, in 
the most manifold and, in one sense, in the most arbi- 
trary fashion. Necessary to the relations of correspond- 
ence is only this, that you shall be able to view the two 
corresponding objects together, in a one-to-one relation, 
or in some other definite way, and, with some single 
purpose in mind, shall then be able in some one perhaps 
very limited aspect to affirm of one of them the same 
that you, at the same time and in the same limited sense, 
affirm of the other. In consequence, with reference to 
this one affirmation, you could in some specified wise 
substitute one of them for the other, whole for whole, 
part for part, element for element. Thus, if you have 
before you a collection of counters, and a collection of 
other objects, you can make these collections correspond, 
if you are able to arrange both sets of objects in a definite 
order, and then to say, that the first of your counters agrees 
with the first of your other objects precisely, and perhaps 
solely, in being the first of its series; while the second 
counter agrees with the second of the objects precisely in 
being the second of the series, and so on. The result 
will then be that by counting the counters, you can after- 
wards, perhaps more conveniently, enumerate the objects 
to be counted. Ordinary counting depends, in fact, upon 
making the members of a number series, one, two, three, 
four, etc., arbitrarily correspond to the distinguishable 
objects of the collection that you number. The result is, 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 803 


then, that by adding, subtracting, or otherwise operating 
upon the numbers, you can reach results that will be valid 
regarding the objects that were to be counted. Again, a 
given plane curve can be made to correspond, point for 
point, with its own shadow, or with some other system- 
atic projection of the curve as made upon a given surface. 
In this case, a great number of relationships between the 
points of the curve will remain true of the corresponding 
points of the projected curve. In the very familiar case 
of a map, the parts of the map correspond to the parts of 
the object represented, in a manner determined by a par- 
ticular system of projection or of transformation of object 
into map. 

But in consequence of the very general nature of 
this relation of correspondence, two complicated objects, 
or two collections of objects, may be made to correspond 
to one another, part for part, member for member, in 
wholly different ways. When you count objects, for 
instance, it makes no difference in what order you count 
them, or, in other words, in what order you make them 
correspond, object for object, to your number series. 
When you draw maps, you may use either Mercator’s 
projection, or some other plan of map-making. In any 
case, you can still get a definite correspondence of map 
and object, part for part, although, by varying the plan 
of projection followed, you may vary the way in which 
the correspondence used in any one case will prove use- 
ful in measuring distances, or in plotting courses on the 
map once drawn. Any sort of correspondence thus 
always fulfils one definite purpose, such as the purpose of 
counting, of map-drawing upon some special plan, or of 


304. THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


constructing projections of curves, or of otherwise sys- 
tematically transforming one set of relationships into 
another set. But if this special purpose is fulfilled, the 
correspondence in question is accomplished, and is said 
to hold true. But in any case, as you now see, corre- 
spondence does not necessarily imply, just as it does not 
exclude, any such common characters in the two corre- 
sponding objects, as makes you say that one of the two 
objects resembles the other in mere external appearance. 
A photograph looks like the man; a map may look, in 
outline, like the land mapped. But numbers and the 
symbols of an algebra no longer seem to our senses at all 
like the objects defined by these symbolic devices for 
establishing correspondence; and the accounts in the 
ledger, while very systematically corresponding, item for 
item, to the commercial transactions, are very unlike 
them in immediate interest and in sensible appearance. 
There is, then, no degree of unlikeness in appearance 
between two objects which excludes a correspondence — 
and even the most exact and instructive sort of corre- 
spondence — between one object and the other. What is 
involved in correspondence is the possession, on the part 
of the corresponding objects, of some system of ideally 
definable characters that is common to both of them, that 
is, for the purposes of our thought, the same in both of 
them, and that is such as to meet the systematic purpose 
for which the particular correspondence is established. 

So much, then, for the relation of correspondence, 
viewed by itself. If we apply this consideration to the 
case of the definition of truth, we see that, for the first, 
a true idea, in corresponding to its object, need not in the 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 805 


least be confined to any particular sort or degree of gen- 
eral similarity to its object. The similarity may be as 
close or as remote, as sensuously interesting or as ab- 
stractly formal as you please. A scientific idea about 
colors need not be itself a color, nor yet an image involy- 
ing colors. Or, to state the case in a very crude instance, 


a true idea of a dog need not itself bark in order to be * 


true. On the contrary, photographs, and wax images, 
and toy dogs that bark, may correspond to the imitated 
objects in fashions that are of very little use in fram- 
ing such ideas as are at once of scientific grade and 
of a given desired type of correspondence to their ob- 
jects. The photographs, to be sure, help one to form 
scientifically valuable ideas far more frequently than does 
a wax image. But you cannot photograph the solar sys- 
tem, nor yet the constitution of a molecule. Yet you 
may have symbolically expressed ideas that correspond 
much more exactly to certain special truths about the 
solar system and the molecule than any ordinary photo- 
graphs ever correspond to even the most important visible 
features of certain of their objects. The modern X-ray 
photographs very crudely reveal the internal structure of 
certain solid objects; but a trained student of anatomy 


of the brain has largely symbolic ideas of its structure 
/ which far exceed, in value of their correspondence to 
their object, all that can ever be hoped for from the X-ray 
photographs of a brain. In general, the photograph gives 


us at its best very one-sided ideas of visible objects. It 

is the aim of science to win ideas that intimately corre- 

spond, in however symbolic a fashion, to certain desired 

aspects of the structure of their objects; and without sys- 
x 


J 


306 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


tems of such more symbolic ideas to aid in our interpreta- 
tion of what we at any time merely see, such sensible 
ideas as photographs suggest remain, in general, very 
imperfect beginnings of a scientific insight into objects. 
But what, then, is the test of the truthful correspond- 
ence of an idea to its object, if object and idea can differ 
‘so widely? The only answer is in terms of Purpose. 
The idea is true if it possesses the sort of correspondence 
to its object that the idea itself wants to possess. Unless 
that kind of identity in inner structure between idea and 
object can be found which the specific purpose embodied 
in a given idea demands, the idea is false. On the other 
hand, if this particular sort of identity is to be found, the 
idea is just in so far true. The identity that suffices to 
establish a sufficient correspondence must, then, be, like 
the identity found in two correspondent curves (as, for 
instance, in a given curve and in its projection), or like 
the identity discoverable when you compare the map with 
the region to which the map corresponds, —it must be, 
I say, an identity serving some conscious end, fulfilling 
an intent, possessing a value for your will. Such iden- 
tity is, in the more abstract sciences, often confined to an 
agreement in certain very general relationships. It is, 
then, usually the sort of identity that the scholastics 
often called analogy, ¢.e. equivalence merely as to the com- 
mon possession of certain relationships which permit the 
idea, for a specific purpose, as in a computation, a calcu- 
lus, or in any system of ideal constructive processes, to 
act as a substitute, to take the place of its object. But 
the identity desired may, indeed, also be of a more sen- 
suous type. If so, then, indeed, the idea must sensucusly 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 807 


resemble its object. The desired identity may, as in a 
case of a photograph, involve visible similarities. So 
the visual image of your absent friend may, indeed, 
resemble him in seeming, and the desired identity may, 
as in the ideas that accompany the actions of people who 
sing or who play in concert, involve musically interesting 
agreements and harmonies. Or, again, your idea may be 
one that, like the sympathetic ideas with which two 
friends accompany each other’s sentiments, intends to 
involve an identity in emotional attitudes. But however 
the intention varies, always the test of truth is the same. 
Is the correspondence reached between idea and object 
the precise correspondence that the idea itself intended? 
If it is, the idea is true. If it is not, the idea is in so 
far false. ( Thus it is not mere agreement, but intended 
agreement, that constitutes truth. \ 

Do you want the image to look’like its object? If so, 
your mental image is a true idea when, like the photo- 
graph, it looks like its object; and it is a false represent- 
ative of its object if, like a poor visual image, it is dim, 
blurred, and, for its representative purpose, consequently 
deceitful. But do you want your idea, like a series of 
numbers, or like a statistical diagram, or like a certain 
mathematical transformation of given curves and surfaces, 
not to look like its object, but to have a wholly different 
sort of correspondence, member for member, part for part, 
point for point, relation for relation, to its object? Then, 
not similarity of sensible seeming, but precisely the ful- 
filment of whatever intent was in mind, is the test of the 
truth of the idea. And, then, the idea would be false in 
case it did look too much like its object. Do you intend 


308 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


to sing in tune? Then your musical ideas are false if - 
they lead you to strike what are, then, called false notes. 
But do you want to study acoustics? Then your ideas 
of sound are false unless they involve correct inner con- 
structions of the physical relations of sound waves, and 
that, too, however fine your musical skill, and however 
vivid and accurate your musical imagination may be. 
In that case mere accurate images of tones would be false 
acoustical ideas. 

In vain, then, does one stand apart from the internal 
meaning, from the conscious inner purpose embodied in a 
given idea, and still attempt to estimate whether or no 
that idea corresponds with its object. There is no purely 
external criterion of truth. You cannot merely look from 
without upon an ideal construction and say whether or 
no it corresponds to its object. Every finite idea has 
to be judged by its own specific purpose. \Ideas are like 
tools. They are there for an end: They are true, as the 
tools are good, precisely by reason of their adjustment to 
this end. To ask me which of two ideas is the more 
nearly true, is like asking me which of two tools is the 
better tool. The question isa sensible one if the purpose 
in mind is specific, but not otherwise. One razor can 
be superior to another. But let a man ask, Is a razor a 
better or worse tool than a hammer? Is a steam-engine 
a better mechanism than a loom? Such questions are 
obviously vain, just because they suggest that there is 
some one purely abstract test of the value of any and all 
tools, or some one ideal tool that, if you had it, would 
be good apart from any specific use. Yet there are 
philosophers who ask, and even suppose themselves to 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 809 


answer, questions about the truth of ideas that are just 
as vain as this. 

When Mr. Spencer, according to the tradition of the 
long series of thinkers whom he in this respect follows, 
speaks, in a well-known passage, of “symbolic” ideas as 
essentially inferior in the conscious definiteness of their 
truth to ideas whose relation to their objects we can 
directly picture, he applies a criterion to the testing of 
ideas which is as crude as if one should argue that a razor 
is not as good a tool as a hammer, because, forsooth, the 
test of a tool shall be its weight, or the amount of noise 
that you can make when you use it. Many admirable 
ideas are, indeed, of the type of mental pictures. That 
is not only obvious, but worth remembering. There is 
no reason why such images should not be both valid and 
important. Sensuous experience may show you many 
sorts of truth that we cannot at present otherwise ex- 
press. A man who sees a photograph sees truth, if he is 
intelligent enough to observe it. A man who sings a 
tune sings truth, if he is thoughtful enough to know 
what he is doing. And imageless abstractions, or alge- 
braic symbols, are, indeed, not true by reason of their 
mere poverty of sensuous life. But, on the other hand, 
algebraic symbols are, for precisely the purposes of alge- 


gee 


bra, actually superior, as representations of objects, to any 


pictures of these objects. And this is not because by any 
chance we cannot picture the objects, but because, for this 
end, the symbols are truer than the pictures. The con- 
structions of mathematics are oftener like razors, ideal 
tools that are all the better for their lack of bulk and 
grossness, and for the almost invisible fineness of their 


310 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


edge. When you count, it is symbols that you want, 
not pictures. Hence, the numbers are for your purpose 
superior to photographs; and the entries in the ledger 
give a better record of their own aspect of the commer- 
cial transactions than a legion of phonographs and kineto- 
scopes, set up in a shop to record transactions, could, by 
any perfection of literal reproductions, retain. Symbols, 
then, are not in the least less definitely and, on occasion, 
less obviously, consciously, empirically true, or corre- 
spondent to their objects, than are, for their own purpose, 
the most vivid of mental pictures. An idea, again, is 
true, as a chess player is skilful, or as an artist is power- 
ful, or as a practical’-man is effective. The question 
always is, Can the player win his chosen game, the artist 
succeed in his own selected art, the practical man accom- 
plish his own task, and not the task of some other man? 
And precisely so the question is, Does the idea win in its 
own deliberately chosen game of correspondence to its 
object ? 

And so we conclude that the object does not, as a fin- 
ished fact, predetermine the sort of likeness that the idea 
must possess in order to be true. It is the idea that so 
far decides its own meaning. And I may once more 
point out that in all this you may see afresh why, from 
the opening lecture of this course, I have laid such 
stress upon the essentially teleological inner structure of 
conscious ideas, and why I defined ideas as I did in our 
opening lecture, namely, as cases where conscious states 
more or less completely present the embodiment, the rela- 
tive fulfilment of a present purpose. Whatever else our 
ideas are, and however much or little they may be, at any 


‘ISTEZNAL AWD EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 311 


moment, expressed in rich, sensuous imagery. it is cer- 
tain thet they are ideas not because they are masses or 
series Of images, lout because they embody present con- 
scious parpses. Every idea is as much a volitional 
process 26 % is an intellectual process. It may well or 
ill represent or correspond to something not itself, but it 
moust, im amy case, make more or less clearly articulate 
its own present purpose. The constructive character of 
all mathematical ideas. the sense of current control which 
tary purposes more or less imperfectly fulfilled whenever 
We comecive anything, — these are evidences of what is 
essential to processes of ideztion. Volition is as mani- 
fest im counting cbjecis as in singing tunes, in coneciv- 
ing physical laws as in directing the destinies of nations, 
in Iaboratory experiments as im artistic productions, in 
contemplating 26 in fighting. The embodied purpose, 
the internal meaning. of the insiant’s act, is thus a con-_ 
tities sir qua som for all external meaning and for all 
truth What we are now inquiring is simply how an 
internal meaning can be linked to an external meaning, 
how 2 volition can also possess truth, how the purpose of 
the instant cam express the nature of an object other than 
the instant’s purpose. 
v 

Se much, then, for the relation of correspondence 
between idea and object. But, now, when has an idea 


an Object at ali? This question, as I before observed, 


cussions about truth than has the question as to the 


312 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


nature of the desired correspondence to the object. That 
which makes an object the object of a given idea has too 
frequently been considered from the side of an accepted 
and uncriticised ontological, or, possibly, psychological 
theory as to the causation and origin of ideas. The object 
of any idea is, for many of the older theories of knowl- 
edge, that which arouses, awakens, brings to pass, the 
idea in question. The old Aristotelian metaphor of the 
seal impressing its form upon the wax is here the familiar 
means of exemplifying how an object becomes such by 
impressing its nature upon the ideas that it arouses. 
~The sun shines, a light enters a man’s eyes, and the man, 
looking up, sees the sun. Thereupon the sun becomes 
the object of his ideas. One touches and handles objects ; 
they impress upon him their solidity and their tangible 

“form. Thereupon they furnish the basis for further ideas. 
Or, again, a distant object is dimly seen. It comes 
nearer and nearer, and is found to be some particular 
object. When it was distant it was already the object of 
ideas, because, affecting one’s sense of sight, it roused 
curiosity. As it approaches, these ideas are confirmed 
or refuted by further observation, and, according to the 
sort of correspondence with their object that they under- 
took to have, they then turn out to be true or false. 

In all such accounts of the relation of idea and object, the 
existence of the object is presupposed as something well 
understood. And not only is this presupposition made, 
but the whole existence of the so-called external world, 
the existence, too, of the relation called the relation of 
causality between the object and the perceiving subject, 
yes, the very Being of the subject itself, as an entity that 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 813 


is supposed to be by nature apt to perceive objects when 
it is awakened through their presence, —all these very 
important ontological conceptions are assumed in order 
to define the special conditions under which a given 
object becomes the object of the ideas of a given person. 
Now, of course, we are not concerned here either to 
accept or to refute these presuppositions of so many 
theories of knowledge. We have only in passing to 
observe that these theories cannot help us in our present 
inquiry. We are now asking what is, by the Being of 
anything whatever, by the very Reality that one attrib- 
utes to world or to soul, to causality or to sense organs. 
In pursuing this inquiry we have been led to a point 
where the reality of things means for us some condition or 
ground, whatever it be, —whether conscious or extra- 
conscious we know not yet, — some genuine basis or guar- 
antee which gives to our ideas their truth. We have thus 
been led to ask directly, What is Truth? Into this ques- 
tion our question, What is Being? has transformed itself. 
The word “Truth,” however, appears, in traditional 
language, as a name for something called the correspond- 
ence of an idea with an object. And thus it is that we 
have been brought to face the problem, When has an idea 
an object? Our effort at present is to see whether we 
cannot define the Being of things by first defining their 
relation, as objects, to ideas. We cannot, then, hope to 
define, for our present purpose, the character of our objects, 
viewed as objects of ideas, by first presupposing their 
Being, and the Being of the whole physical world. No 
doubt there is this world, — but in what sense it is, that 
is precisely our problem. 


314 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Moreover, the view that in order to be object of a given 
idea, the object must be cause of the—idea, or that ideas 
have to look to their own causes as their objects, is re- 
futed, as a general definition, by a glance at the nature of 
all those temporal objects of which we have ideas, but 
which are not now present in time. Is anything in the 
future, say my own death, or an eclipse due next year, or 
futurity in general, the cause of my present ideas, true or 

\false, that refer to any such object. When I form a plan, 
or sign a contract, the hypothetical future event defined 
by the plan or contemplated in the contract is said, in 
the familiar Aristotelian phraseology, to be the final 
cause of the present act, but it certainly is not a cause 
impressing itself upon knowledge as the seal imprints its 
form upon the wax. Yet Aristotle, to whom final causa- 
tion meant at bottom everything, also loves far too much 
the trivial seal and wax metaphor as his customary 
means for defining the general relations of object and 
idea; so much deeper was Aristotle’s thought than his 
phraseology! Even the Nous of Aristotle knows through 
some sort of so-called touching of its intelligible objects. 

But if one attempts to escape from these just-men- 
tioned considerations about the future objects of present 
ideas, by declaring that the future has as yet no real 
Being at all, and that it therefereis_no real, but only an 
imagined, object of present ideas, I should, indeed, not 
in the least accept the objection as valid, but I should for 
the moment only ask the objector what he thinks about 
the whole realm of-past Being. The most noticeable fea- 
ture of the past is that it isirrevocable. This character 
of the past, viz., that it is gone beyond recall, is regarded 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 3815 


by us all as objectively valid ; and so it is the object of 
present ideas. But now I ask, in all seriousness, what is 
the irrevocable past now doing to our ideas that the fact 
of its irrevocable absence should, as cause, now be viewed 
as moulding our ideas? By means of what stamping pro- 
cess is the seal of the past impressing its form upon the 
wax of the present ideas? The irrevocable character of 
the past is a fact that can become object of an idea only 
by not being any present cause of ideas at all, since to be 
irrevocable means to be temporally over and done with 
altogether. If one says, “But past events were the 
causes that have led to present events, and that is why 
we now have ideas of the past,” then I should reply: 
“You miss the point altogether; not in so far as they 
occurred, and were causes that led up to present events, 
not in so far as they were real causes at all, but in so far 
as they can never occur again, are those past events now 
viewed as irrevocable.” Yet to say, “ Those past events 
can never occur again,” is to utter an objective truth, un- 
less indeed all our human view of time is false. But how 
can the mere truth that an event can never occur again 
be a cause at all? Still more, how can it cause me to 
have ideas of itself? What, once more, does the irrevo- 
cableness of the past do to me when I think of it? Or 
do you say, “Our idea of the irrevocable character of 
the past is in truth only a sort of generalization from our 
many experiences of physically irrevocable happenings, 
such as the breaking of china, the spilling of milk, the 
flight of youth, and all the other proverbial instances of 
the past that return not”? Then I answer: If our idea 
that the past is wholly irrevocable were the result of such 


316 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


empirical instances, — if, I say, this explanation, which I 
hold to be false, were correct, all the more would it be 
plain that what causes an idea is not, as such, the object 
of the idea, for it is not of broken china, nor of spilled 
milk, nor even of lost youth that one thinks in announc- 
ing the view that the past is irrevocable, — but of what 
one supposes to be an universal law of all time, which one 
applies as well to the repeated sequence of the monoto- 
nous beats of the pendulum, or to the waves that break 
over and over upon the beach, as to youth, or even to 
death. For even of the monotonously repeated series of 
events, one asserts that each individual case of the repeti- 
tion is irrevocable when past. Even if one’s view as to 
this matter were false, one’s object would here be a char- 
acter of the whole of time, and a character which is cer- 
tainly no cause of present ideas. 

It is hopeless, then, to persist in the hypothesis that the 
object of an idea is as such the cause of the idea. Were one 
to persist in such a view, what would he say about all the 
mathematical objects? Does the binomial theorem act 
as a seal, or any other sort of cause, impressing its image 
on the wax of a mathematician’s mind? Do the proper- 
ties of equations do anything to the mathematician when 
he thinks of them? Is not all the fresh creative activity 
in this case his own ? 


VI bof 


Nearer to our desired definition we may come if we 
next observe the reason for the plausibility of the usual 
appeal to the objects of vision and touch as the typical 
cases of objects of ideas. For, in fact, nobody can doubt 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 3817 


that the pen in my hand, or the sun in the heavens, or the 
sail on the horizon, may be genuine objects of ideas; and 
why do these instances seem so typical of the whole rela- 
tion of idea and object? I answer, because, in case of 
these objects, a very typical feature of the relation of 
idea and object is indeed manifest enough. That an idea 
has an object depends at least in part upon this, that the 
idea selects its object. And selection is manifested in 
consciousness by what is usually called attention, while 
attention to objects of sense is something very obvious 
and easy to estimate. Into the intricacies of the psycho- 
logical theory of attention, we have not here to go. 
Enough, one who attends, whatever the causal explana- 
tion of his process, is, as to the nature and trend of his 
meaning, selective. And the ideas of an attentive con- 
sciousness are the embodiments of such selection. What- 
ever type or correspondence is involved in the purpose of 
a given idea, it is then not enough, in case you wish to 
confirm or to refute the idea, that you should point out 
how the desired correspondence is to be found, or fails to 
be found, anywhere that you please or anywhere at random 
in the world. For the idea must be confirmed or refuted 
by comparison with the object that the idea itself means, 
selects, views with attentive expectation, determines as its 
own object. And while this selection is not merely a 
subjective matter, left to the mere caprice of the idea it- 
self, certain it is, that in order to find out what the truth 
of a man’s ideas is, you must take account not merely of 
the sort of correspondence that he intends to attain in the 
presence of his object, but of the selection that he himself _ 
has made of the object by which he wishes his idea to be 


318 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


judged. Now this selection involves what we have called 
the inner meaning of the idea-—Just as truly as the sort 
of correspondence by which an idea is to be judged is pre- 
determined by the internal meaning of the idea, just so 
truly is the internal meaning of the idea also to be con- 
sulted regarding the intended selection of the object. If 
I have meant to make an assertion about Cezar, you must 
not call me to account because my statement does not 
correspond, in the intended way, with the object called 
Napoleon. If I have meant to say that space has three 
dimensions, you cannot refute me by pointing ont that 
time has only one. And nowhere, without a due exam- 
ination of the internal meaning of my ideas, can you learn 
whether it was the object Cesar or the object Napoleon, 
whether it was space or time, that I meant. 

Our preference, however, for the objects of sense, for 
the pen, and the sun, as typical instances of objects of 
ideas, arises from the fact that in case of just these ob- 
jects, it is especially easy, by observing, from without, the 
acts of the person who has these ideas, to form confident 
and, for common-sense purposes, relatively exact notions 
of the selection to which the internal meaning of the 
ideas has bound the maker of any given judgment about 
objects. Moreover, it is easy for us ourselves to follow 
our sense-ideas and their objects with continuous scrutiny 
and to observe their relations. For sense-objects are 
vivid, and combine relative permanence with the sort of 
plasticity that enables us to get what we call nearer or, 
in general, novel views of them 3 So that in passing back 
and forth from idea to object, we seem assured of some 
definite relation between them. And our acts in dealing 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 819 


with the objects of sense are correspondingly definite, so 
that observers easily judge what object we mean. 

Yet precisely what this relation of object and idea is, 
we are still called upon to explain, even in case of the 
most obvious object of sense, and still more in case of 
objects of a more subtle character, such as past events, 
valid laws, and mathematical constructions. 

Plain, so far, are two considerations: First, the object 
of an idea is in somewise predetermined, is selected from 
all other objects, through the sort of attentive interest in 
just that object which the internal meaning of the idea 
involves. Unless the idea is thus selective, it can never 
come to be either true or false. For if it means to be 
true, it intends a sort of correspondence with an object. 
What correspondence it intends is determined, as we saw, 
solely by the purpose which the idea embodies, z.e. by the 
internal meaning of the idea. Furthermore, the idea 
intends to attain this correspondence to some particular 
object, — not to any object you please, not to whatever 
happens to correspond to the ideal construction in ques- 
tion, but to a determined object. The determination of 
what_object_is meant, is, therefore, certainly again due, 
in one aspect, to the internal meaning of the idea. No- 
body else can determine for me what object I mean by 
my idea. 

But hereupon we seem to face, indeed, a fatal difficulty, 
For the second of the two considerations just mentioned 
remains. And this is that, if the idea predetermines 
what object it selects as the one that it means, just as it 
predetermines what sort of correspondence it intends to 
have to this object, the idea, nevertheless, does not prede- 


320 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


termine whether its object is such that the idea, if finite, 
shall succeed in attaining entire agreement with the 
object. Otherwise truth would be mere tautology, error 
would be excluded in advance, and it would be useless 
even to talk of an object external in any sense to the 
idea. 


VII 


Here, then, is the central dilemma as to the nature of 
truth. I may state it once more, but now in the form of 
an antinomy; that is, in the familiar shape of the Kan- 
tian Antinomies, with thesis and antithesis. To be sure, 
the antinomy will be imperfect. On one side will stand 
a stubborn, but no doubt somehow incompletely stated, 
apparent truth. On the other side will stand an obvious 
and demonstrable certainty. We shall have to reconcile 
an opposition that can be but apparent. 

The thesis of our antinomy is as follows: There 
seems to be, in the object of an idea, just in so far as it 
is the object of that specific idea, no essential character 
which is not predetermined by the purpose, the internal 
meaning, the conscious intent, of that idea itself. 

For consider: An object, as we have seen, has two 
relations to an idea. The one is the relation that con- 
stitutes it the object meant by that idea. The other 
is the sort of correspondence that is to obtain between 
object and idea. As to the first of these two: An 
object is not the object of a given idea merely because 
the object causes the idea, or impresses itself upon 
the idea as the seal impresses the wax. For there 
are objects of ideas that are not causes of the ideas 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 821 


which refer to these objects, just as there are countless 
cases where my ideas are supposed to have causes, say 
physiological or psychological causes, of which I myself 
never become conscious at all, as my objects. Nor is the 
object the object of a given idea merely because, from the 
point of view of an external observer, who looks from 
without upon idea and object, and compares them, the 
idea resembles the object. For the sort of correspond- 
ence to be demanded of the idea is determined by itself, 
and this correspondence cannot be judged merely from 
without. Again, my idea of my own past experiences 
may resemble your past experiences, in case you have felt 
as I have felt, or have acted in any way as I have acted. 
Yet when my ideas, in a moment of reminiscence, refer 
to my own past, and have that for their object, they do 
not refer to your past, nor to your deeds and sorrows, 
however like my own these experiences of yours may 
have been. One who, merely comparing my ideas and 
your experiences, said that because of the mere likeness 
I must be thinking of your past as my object, would, 
therefore, err, if it was my own past of which I was 
thinking. Neither such a relation as causal connection 
nor such a relation as mere similarity is, then, sufficient 
to identify an object as the object of a given idea. 

Nor yet can any other relation, so far as it is merely 
supposed to be seen from without, by an external ob- 
server, suffice to identify any object as the object of a 
given idea. For suppose that any such relation, merely 
observed from without, were regarded as finally sufficient 
to constitute an object the object of a given idea. I care 
not what this relation may be. Call it what you will. 


XY 


322 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


As soon as you define such a relation from without, and 
declare that the idea has an object by virtue of that rela- 
tion to this object, I shall merely ask: Did the idea it- 
self intend and select that relation as the relation in 
which its purposed object was to stand to the idea? If 
you answer “ No,” then I take my stand beside the idea, 
and shall persist in demanding by what right you thus 
impose the relation in question upon the idea as the rela- 
tion rightly characterizing its object. For the idea, in 
seeking for truth, does not seek for your aims, so far as 
you are a merely external observer. The idea is selec- 
tive. It seeks its own. It attends as itself has chosen. 
It desires in its own way. If you, having somehow first 
finished and established your own definition of Being, 
choose to regard the idea and its object as entities in 
your own supposed world, then, indeed, you can talk, 
from your own point of view, of the various real rela- 
tions of these entities, precisely as a psychologist does 
when he discusses the origin or the results of ideas. But 
just now we are not first presupposing that we know 
what the Being of the object is apart from the idea, and 
what the Being of the idea is apart from the object. We 
are trying, in advance of a finished conception of the 
Being of the object, to define the essential relation that 
makes an object the object of that particular idea. And 
as the idea, precisely so far as it intends truth at all, is 
through and through a selection, a choosing of an object, 
I ask what reason you can have to say that the object is 
the object of the idea, unless you observe somehow that 
the idea chooses for itself this object. 

But now if you reply, “ Yes, the relation of object to 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 828 


idea, here in question, is the one chosen by the idea,” 
then you admit the essential point. The relation to the 
object is so far predetermined by the idea. Hence, as 
we have now seen, the object of the idea is predetermined, 
both as to what object it is, and as to how it is to corre- 
spond to the idea, through the choice made by the idea 
itself. The object, precisely in so far as it is object of 
that idea, seems thus to be altogether predetermined. In 
brief, the object and the idea of that object appear to be 
related as Hamlet in the play is related to the intent of 
Shakespeare, or as creation and creative purpose in gen- 
eral are related. Hamlet is what Shakespeare’s idea 
intends him to be. The object is what it is because the 
idea means it to be the object of just this idea. And so 
much may suffice for our thesis. 

But the antithesis runs: No finite idea predetermines, 
in its object, exactly the character which, when present 
in the object, gives the idea the desired truth. For 
observe, first, that the object of a true finite idea, such 
as our idea of the world or of space, is in any case some- 
thing other than the mere idea itself. And the truth of 
the idea depends upon a confirmation of the idea through 
the presence and the characters of this other, — the object. 
Now error is certainly possible in finite ideas. For some 
finite ideas are false. And that this last assertion itself 
is true, is not only a matter of common opinion, but can 
be proved by the very counterpart of the Augustinian 
argument about Veritas. For if there could be no error, 
then the customary assertion that ideas can err, t.e. our 
well-known common-sense conviction that error is possible, 
would be itself an error, and this result would involve a 


324 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


self-contradiction. Or again, were no error possible, 
there would be no truth, since then the assertion that 
there is no truth would itself be no error, or would itself 
be true. This, again, would be a contradiction. Or 
finally, if error were impossible, any and every account of 
Being or truth, of ideas and of objects, of the world or of 
nothing at all, would be equally true, or in other words, 
no truth would ever be defined. For truth we define by 
its contrast with the error that it excludes. So some 
ideas certainly can and do err in as far as they undertake 
“to be ideas of objects. Ideas can then fail of their desired 
correspondence with their intended objects, just because 
these objects are indeed other than themselves. But the 
error of an idea is always a failure to win the intended 
aim of the idea, precisely in so far as the idea sought 
truth. (Hence, as no purpose can simply and directly 
consist: in willing or intending its own defeat, it is plain 
that an idea, precisely in so far as it can turn out to be an 
erroneous idea, can intend what its object forbids it to 
carry out, and can mean what its object excludes } while 
in so far as the object thus refutes the idea, the object 
contains what the idea did not purpose,jand was unable 
to predetermine. In brief, the very Possibility of Error, 
the absolutely certain truth that some ideas give false 
accounts of their own objects, shows that some objects 
contain what is opposed to the intent of the very ideas 
that refer to these objects. And so the antithesis is 
proved. 7 
Vill fa 


In view of this apparent antinomy, how is the idea 
related to its object? How is error possible? What is 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 3825 


truth? The answer to these questions, — the solution to 
all our previous difficulties, is in one respect so simple, 
that I almost fear, after this so elaborate preparation, to 
state it, lest by its very simplicity it may disappoint. 
Yet I must first state it, abstractly, and perhaps uncon- 
vincingly, and then illustrate it as I close the present 
discussion, leaving to a later lecture its fuller develope- 
ment. The idea, I have said, seeks its own. It can be\ 
judged by nothing but what tt intends. Whether I think} 
of God or of yesterday’s events, of my own death, or of 
the destiny of mankind, of mathematical truth, or of 
physical facts, of affairs of business, or of Being itself, it 
is first of all what I mean, and not what somebody merely 
external to myself might desire me to mean, that both 
gives me an object, and determines for me the standard 
of correspondence to the object whereby I must be judged. 
Moreover, my idea is a cognitive process only in so far as 
it is, at the same time, a voluntary process, an act, the 
partial fulfilment, so far as the idea consciously extends, 
of a purpose. The object meant by the idea is the object 
because it is willed to be such, and the will in question is 
the will that the idea embodies. And that is why Realism 
proved to be impossible ; that is why the Independent 
Beings were self-contradictory concepts ; that, too, is 
why the resignation of all definite purpose which Mysti- 
cism required of our ideas was impossible without a 
failure to define Being as any but a mere Nothing. And 
every definition of truth or of Being must depend upon a 
prior recognition of precisely this aspect of the nature of 
ideas. 

Whoever says, “I am passive; I merely accept the 


326 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


world as my object ; I recognize the superior force of this 
object, and I have no part in willing that it is my object,” 
any such submissive observer is invited merely to state 
what object he means, and what idea he has of it. He 
will at once find his idea arising before him as a conscious 
construction, and he will regard this idea as intelligible 
because he follows its construction with his own unity of 
purpose. The vaster the world that he then defines as 
the overwhelming fate of his intelligence, the larger will 
be the part that his own consciously constructive will has 
taken in the definition of the idea. And by his will, I 
mean here not any abstract psychological power or prin- 
ciple so to be named. I speak here of will not as of any 
causally efficacious entity whatever. I refer only to the 
mere fact of any one’s consciousness, insisted upon in 
these discussions from the start, namely, the fact that the 
contents of an idea are present to mind as the actual 
embodiment and relative fulfilment of a present purpose, 
such as for instance you find embodied when you count 
or sing. Space, time, past, future, things, minds, laws, — 
all these constituents of the world, our supposed passive 
_ spectator of universe indeed recognizes as objects other 
than the ideal products of his will; but his ideas of these 
objects come to him precisely as constructive processes, 
present to his consciousness as his own act, and under- 
stood by him so far as they are his own meaning. More- 
over, the objects, too, to which these ideas relate, can be 
understood as objects only when the ideas embody the 
will to mean them as such objects. 

But now, in order that we may also take account of our 
former problem about the determinateness and individu- 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 3827 


ality attributed to Being, let us add yet one further con- 
sideration: Whenever an idea of any grade aims at truth, 
it regards its object as other than itself, and that the 
object shall be thus other than itself is even a part of 
what the idea means and consciously intends. But as a 
will seeking its own fulfilment, the idea so selects the 
object, that, if the idea has a perfectly definite meaning 
and truth at all, this object is to be a precisely determi- 
nate object, such that no other object could take its place as 
the object of this idea. And in spite of the fact that the 
object is such solely by the will of the idea, the idea under- 
takes submissively to be either true or false when com-_« 
pared with that object. 

Now the obvious way of stating the whole sense of 
these facts is to point out that what the idea always aims 
to find in its object is nothing whatever but the idea’s own 
conscious purpose or will, embodied in some more determ- 
nate form than the idea by itself alone at this instant con- 
sciously possesses. When I have an idea of the world, 
my idea is a will, and the world of my idea is simply my 
own will itself determinately embodied. 

And what this way of stating our problem implies 
may first be illustrated by any case where, in doing what 
we often call “making up our minds,” we pass from a 
vague to a definite state of will and of resolution. In 
such cases we begin with perhaps a very indefinite sort 
of restlessness, which arouses the question, ‘“ What is it 
that I want? What do I desire ? What is my real pur- 
pose?” To answer this question may take a long time 
and much care; and may involve many errors by the 
way, errors, namely, in understanding our own purpose. 


328 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Such search for one’s own will often occupies, in the 
practical life of youth, some very anxious years. Idle- 
ness, defective modes of conduct, self-defeating struggles 
without number, fickle loves/that soon die out, may long 
accompany what the youth himself all the while regards 
as the search for his own will, for the very soul of his 
own inner and conscious purposes. In such cases one may 
surely err as to one’s intent. The false or fickle love is 
a sort of transient dream of the coming true love itself. 
The transient choice is a shadow of the coming true 
choice. But how does one’s own real intent, the object 
at such times of one’s search, stand related to one’s pres- 
ent and ill-defined vague restlessness, or imperfectly con- 
scious longing. I answer, one’s true will, one’s genuine 
purpose, one’s object here sought for, can be nothing 
whatever but one’s present imperfect conscious will in 


... some more determinate form. What one has, at such 


times, is the will of the passing moment, — an internal 
meaning, consciously present as far as it goes. And now 
it is this will and no other that one seeks to bring to 
clearer consciousness. But what other, what external 
meaning, what fact beyond, yes, what object, is the goal 
of this quest? I answer, nothing whatever in heaven or 
in earth but this present imperfect internal meaning ren- 
dered more determinate, less ambiguous in its form, less 
a general longing, more a precisely united and determi- 
nate life. And this, once rendered perfectly determi- 
nate, would be what the man in question calls “ My life 
_ according to my conscious will.” 

Well, this case of the vague purpose that one seeks, 
not to abandon, but to get present to the moment’s con- 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 3829 


sciousness in another, that is a more explicit and precise, 
form, and if possible, in what would finally prove to be 
an absolutely determinate form,— this case, I insist, is 
typical of every case where an idea seeks its object. In 
seeking its object, any idea whatever seeks absolutely nothing 
but tts own explicit, and, in the end, complete, determination 
as this conscious purpose, embodied in this one way. The 
complete content of the idea’s own purpose is the only object 
of which the idea can ever take note. This alone is the 
Other that is sought. That such a search as this is a 
genuine search for an object, that while sought appears as 
another and as a beyond, the experience of the mathemati- 
cal sciences will at once illustrate. As we saw, in a pre- 
vious discussion, the mathematician deals with a world 
which his own present ideas, as far as they go, explicitly 
attempt to predetermine ; yet what these ideas do not at 
present completely and consciously predetermine for the 
mathematician’s private judgment, in advance of proof, 
is precisely that further determination of their own mean- 
ing which they imply and seek. This further determi- 
nation the mathematician wins through his process of 
inquiry. His result is, then, actually willed from the 
start, in so far as his definitions, which are themselves 
acts of will, determine in advance the outcome of the 
proofs and computations of which they are already the 
initial step. But at the instant when the definitions and 
considerations of his problem alone are present to the 
mathematician’s passing consciousness, the outcome, the 
fully developed meaning, is an Other, an Object, which 
the mathematician seeks. At any moment, in his further 
research, he may attempt to define this Other by a con- 


330 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


jectural or hypothetical construction, a tentative idea, 
which may to a large extent prove not to correspond with 
the fully developed purpose which the result of the in- 
quiry, when reached, presents to consciousness in as 
determinate form as is humanly possible. So far as our 
narrow human consciousness does permit this result of 
mathematical inquiry ever to appear to us in its com- 
plete expression, it is finally observed, however, as a fact 
of experience, or complex of facts of experience, as a 
series of properties and relations, embodied in diagrams, 
symbols, and systems of symbols. This expression, as 
far as it goes, fulfils the purpose defined from the start, 
the very outset of the mathematical inquiry. In this 
case one says, “ Yes, I see this to be true, and I see that 
this is what the initial definitions meant.” Such a result 
of mathematical inquiry, just in so far as it is satisfactory, 
is a result that sends us no farther, or that defines no 
object lying yet beyond itself. This then is the answer 
to the mathematician’s initial query. 

In just as.far as we pause satisfied, we observe that 
there “is no other” mathematical fact to be sought in 
the direction of the particular inquiry in hand. Satis- 
faction of purpose by means of presented fact, and such 
determinate satisfaction as sends us to no other experi- 
ence for further light and fulfilment, precisely this out- 
come is itself the Other that is sought when we begin our 
inquiry. This Other, this outcome, is at once uniquely 
determined by the true meaning already imperfectly 
present at the outset, and it is also not consciously pres- 
ent in the narrow instant’s experience with which we 
begin. A vaguely indeterminate act of will thus begins 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 381 


a process; the object sought is simply the precise de- 
termination of this very will itself to unique and unam- 
biguous expression. And in such a.case the thesis and 
antithesis of our antinomy are reconciled. For the object 
is a true Other, and yet it is object only as the meaning 
of this idea. 

But how is it when facts of experience are sought, — 
when the astronomer, having computed the planet’s place, 
looks to see whether the determination conforms to the 
apparently wholly “external empirical object,” when the 
chemist awaits the result of the experiment in the labora- 
tory, when the speculator watches the waverings of the 
market, or when the vigilant friend by the bedside longs 
for the favorable turn of the beloved patient’s disease? I 
answer, in all these cases the apparently conflicting 
objects and ideas in question are indeed far more numer- 
ous and complex in their relations than the mathemati- 
cian’s world. And we shall hereafter consider precisely 
such complications more in detail. But here we are con- 
cerned with the most universal aspects of our problem as 
to idea and object; and so here I can only respond, What- 
ever the object, it ts still the object for a given idea solely be- 
cause that idea wills it to be such. If it is experience, of a 
given type, and won under determinate conditions, that 
you seek, then in just that region of inquiry your inquir- 
ing interest, your imperfectly determined initial will, 
seeks its own more precise determination. But this self- 
determination is even here the only object that the idea 
seeks. No idea is confirmed or refuted by any experi- 
ence except by that more determinate type, or instance, 
of experience which the less determinate and vaguer 


332 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


will of the inquiring idea has first sought as its ideal 
goal, as its chosen authority, as its accepted standard, 
and so as its own object. If I will to watch for stars, 
or to measure places of heavenly bodies, or to be 
guided in the determination of my will by the appear- 
ance of certain chemical precipitates in test-tubes, or 
to stake my fortune in the stock-market, or to be 
determined in my acts by the empirical outcome of this 
patient’s disease, — well, in all such cases, it is an experi- 
ence that I first am to accept as the determination of my 
purpose. By that choice my development of my ideas is 
guided. But for that very reason the awaited experience 
is, in advance, my object precisely, because it is, just by 
virtue of my own purpose, the desired determiner of my 
purpose. The same rule holds here also as in the former 

wwacases. The idea is a will seeking its own determination. 
It is nothing else. And herein lies the explanation of the 
process which we studied, earlier in this lecture, in our 
account of the relations between judgment and experi- 
ence. Judgments, taken as universal, already involve a 
negative determination of the world of internal meanings 
through an exclusion of bare possibilities. The judg- 
ments of experience, the particular judgments, express a 
positive, but still imperfect, determination of internal 
meaning through external experience. The limit or goal 
of this process would be an individual judgment, wherein 
the will expressed its own final determination. 

But if one here retorts, “Ay, but in the empirical 
world I have no choice, since facts are facts, and the 
world is once for all there;” then I reply: I do not 
now question that the world is there. I am asking in 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 833 


what sense it is there. It is, but what Being has it? We 
have long since seen that the whole world is real as the 
object that gives validity to ideas. We have inquired 
as to the sense in which anything can be called object. 
We have found the sense in which the idea chooses its 
Object. We have found also that the object is nothing but 
the will of the idea itself in some determinate expression. 
But now one points out that in giving our ideas of em- 
pirical objects determinate expression, there is a sense in 
which, once having committed ourselves to given ideas, 
we have no more choice as to how the ideas shall turn out 
to be determined. Well, is not this an obvious enough 
result even of our own view? The idea in seeking for 
its object is seeking for the determination of its own just 
now consciously indeterminate will. This is, so to speak, 
the game that the idea undertakes to play. But consist- 
ently with itself the idea cannot choose to change capri- 
ciously its own choice, to alter the rules of its own game, 
even while it plays. If its will is to be determined only 
by experience that it awaits, then just this experience is 
the determiner of the will. In this sense the mathemati- 
cian, too, has no choice. He, too, awaits the outcome of 
his own sort of experience as he computes, as he observes 
his diagrams and symbols. For his world also is in its 
own way an empirical world, and he experiments in that 
world, and wills to accept the result. In this same sense, 
too, the youth has no choice as to what he shall find his 
own will to be, since so long as he wills in his own way, 
his struggles for self-comprehension are in essence pre- 
determined by his accepted, if not yet momentarily con- 
scious selection, of a life plan. The idea having opened 


384 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


the game of its life, cannot withdraw its own moves with- 
out failing of its own determination. 

Well, precisely so it is with all the facts of experience 
in their relation to specific ideas. All finite ideas, even 
the vaguest, are already in one aspect contents of experi- 
ence, imperfectly fulfilling purpose. Im all cases every 
idea, whether mathematical, practical, or scientific, seeks 
its own further determination. In every case it is true 
that such further determination is also to be given only 
in terms of experience. Sometimes it is a definite group 
of sense-experiences that we mean in advance; then we 
are said to be observant of the physical world; and then 
in physical nature only do we find the desired determina- 
tion of our will. Sometimes, as in the mathematician’s 
world, we deal with objects that appear more directly 
under our control than do physical objects. But there 
are no ideas that have not an aspect in which they are 
masses of experience, and masses of experience are never 
objective facts except in so far as they present the answers 
to specific questions about fact. And the answer to a 
question is merely the more precise determination of the 
will that asks the question. 

Of course, my private will, when viewed as a mere 
force in nature, does not create the rest of nature. But 
my conscious will as expressed in my ideas does logically 
determine what objects are my objects. 

But one may say: “How if the facts of experience alto- 
gether refuse to fulfil given ideas in any sense whatever ? 
Have not such ideas an object that they seek and never 
find at all? Is not the object of a defeated purpose, 
or of an error, still an object, but a purely ideal one? Yet 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 8385 


here the object remains precisely object of an unfulfilled 
idea.” I answer: An error is an error about a specific 
object, only in case the purpose imperfectly defined by the 
vague idea at the instant when the error is made, is better 
defined, is, in fact, better fulfilled, by an object whose 
determinate character in some wise, although never 
absolutely, opposes the fragmentary efforts first made to 
define them. As for failure, or practical defeat of our 
plans: The practical object that we have not yet won 
remains for us a Beyond, or Other than our search, pre- 
cisely so long as we still seek it; and no merely external 
buffetting of so-called hard facts ever proves to the reso- 
lute will that its practical objects are unattainable, or have 
no existence, until we see an inner reason why just these 
objects are really excluded by a fuller understanding of 
our own ideal purposes themselves. I do not will just 
now to fly, because my purpose in conceiving nature is 
now relatively fulfilled in a system of ideas which excludes 
my possession of the power to fly. But were I an in- 
ventor trying to perfect flying-machines, I should continue 
the effort to find the determination of my will present in a 
flying-machine, until I became convinced that my purpose 
as defined stood somehow in conflict with itself, or with 
the whole idea of nature of which it is a portion. 


IX 


And now as to what results from all this concerning the 
essential nature of the object of any idea, and as to 
that determinateness and individuality of Being which 
has so perplexed us. 


336 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Ideas as they come to us, in their finite imperfec- 
tions, are at first indeterminate, and for that very reason 
vague, general, or, as technical language often expresses 
it, abstractly universal. That is precisely why they at 
once seek and attempt to define another than them- 
selves, and do so in the form of Universal Judgments. 
For an universal, in the. abstract sense of the term, is, 
as we have fully illustrated, known to us merely as that 
of which there might be another instance. Whoever seeks 
his meaning in another complex of facts than the one 
present to him, thereby makes explicit that what he 
possesses in his idea is merely a kind of fulfilment of 
his purpose, and not a whole fulfilment. Whoever thinks 
merely of man, of triangle, of life, has a general idea. 
So far as he imperfectly defines a purpose that essen- 
tially seeks other expression than the present. Who- 
ever longs, loves, hopes, struggles, aspires; whoever 
experiments, watches for facts, makes hypotheses, — 
whoever is finite, possesses in his passing idea a gen- 
eral type of relative fulfilment, but seeks precisely to 
specify, to render more determinate, precisely this gen- 
eral idea. He first looks for specification in further 
experience. Finding is a more determinate experience 
of the very contents of one’s ideas themselves than is 
seeking. As more determinate, it takes the form of 
Particular Judgments. 

Well, if every idea is as such a general type of em- 
pirical and fragmentary fulfilment of purpose, if in seek- 
ing its object, its Other, the idea seeks only its own 
greater determination, then, at the desired limit of 
determination, the idea, as already pointed out, would 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 837 


face a present content which would imply, seek, and in 
fact permit, no other than itself to take for this ideal 
purpose its place. Now an object, such as Socrates, or 
this world, or as yourself, is called an individual, as we 
before said, when one conceives that for a particular 
and determinate purpose no other object could be sub- 
stituted for this one. It follows that the finally deter- 
minate form of the object of any finite idea is that 
form which the idea itself would assume whenever it 
became individuated, or in other words, became a com- 
pletely determined idea, an idea or will fulfilled by a 
wholly adequate empirical content, for which no other con- 
tent need be substituted or, from the point of view of the 
satisfied idea, could be substituted. 

Now, if this be the result of our analysis, we can at 
length define truth and Being at one stroke. You 
have an idea present at this moment. It is a general 
idea. Why? For no reason, I answer, except this, 
viz.: that this idea, being but a partial embodiment 
of your present purpose, could get and desires to get 
some other embodiment than the present one. This 
possibility of other embodiment means for you just 
now simply the incompleteness, or partial non-fulfil- 
ment of your present purpose. Mere generality always 
means practical defect. You think of your own life. 
Your idea is general, just because your life could be 
and will be embodied in other moments than this one. 
The idea of your own life finds, then, just at this 
instant, an imperfect expression. Your idea of your 
own whole life is just now vague. This vagueness 
means for you the possibility of other embodiments. 

Z 


388 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Or perhaps you think of numbers, and accordingly 
count one, two, three. Your idea of these numbers is 
abstract, a mere generality. Why? Because there 
could be other cases of counting, and other numbers 
counted than the present counting process shows you. 
And why so? Because your purpose in counting is 
not wholly fulfilled by the numbers now counted. In- 
completeness here goes with universality. There could 
be other instances of the idea, just because what is 
needed to fulfil the purpose in question is not all here. 
And this you know in the form both of present imper- 
fect satisfaction, and in the form of the idea of other 
numbers, and of other counting processes than are here 
present to you. 

Well, if in all such cases of your present and imper- 
fect passing ideas, other cases of your idea were also 
fully present to your consciousness just now, what 
would you experience? I answer, You would experience 
at once a greater fulfilment of your purpose, and a more 
determinate idea. But were not only some, but all pos- 
sible, instances that could illustrate your idea, or that 
could give it embodiment, now present, even at this 
very instant, and to your clear consciousness, what 
would you experience? I answer, first, the complete ful- 
jilment of your internal meaning, the final satisfaction of 
the will embodied in the idea; but secondly, also, that 
absolute determination of the embodiment of your idea as 
this embodiment would then be present,—that absolute 
determination of your purpose, which would constitute an 
individual realization of the idea. For an individual 
fact is one for which no other can be substituted with- 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 839 


out some loss of determination, or some vagueness. 
You seek another so long as your present purpose is 
unfulfilled. The fulfilment of the internal meaning of 
the present idea would leave no other object defined by 
this idea as an object yet to be sought. And where 
no other was to be sought, the individual life of the 
whole idea, as a process at once of experience and of 
purpose, would be present fact. 

Now this final embodiment is the ultimate object, and 
the only genuine object, that any present idea seeks as 
its Other. But if this be so, when is the idea true? It 
is true — this instant’s idea —if, in its own measure, and 
on its own plan, it corresponds, even in its vagueness, 
to its own final and completely individual expression. 
Its expression would be the very life of fulfilment of 
purpose which this present idea already fragmentarily 
begins, as it were, to express. It is with a finite idea 
as it is with any form of will. Any of its transient 
expressions may be at any instant more or less abortive. 
But no finite idea is wholly out of correspondence to 
its object, as no will is wholly false to itself. 

We have thus defined the object and the truth of 
an idea. But observe that thus we stand upon the 
threshold of a new definition of Being. Being, as our 
Third Conception declared, is what gives true ideas their 
truth ; lor in other words, to be real is to be the object 
of atrue idea. We are ready, now that we have defined 
both object and truth, to assert, as our Fourth and final 
Conception of Being, this, that What is, or what is real, 
ts as such the complete embodiment, in individual form and 
in final fulfilment, of the internal meaning of finite ideas. 


340 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


To later lectures must be left both the fuller devel- 
opment and the further defence of this conception of 
Being. But our argument in its favor is, in its foun- 
dation, already before you. (Being is something Other 
than themselves which finite ideas seek. ) They seek 
Being as that which, if at present known, would end their 
doubts. Now Being is not something independent of 
finite ideas, nor yet a merely immediate fact that 
quenches them. These were our results when we 
abandoned Realism and Mysticism. Being involves the 
validity of ideas. That we learned from critical Ra- 
tionalism. Yet mere validity, mere truth of ideas, can- 
not be conceived as a bare universal fact. We wanted 
to find its concreter content, its finally determinate form. 
We have carefully studied this form. No finite idea 
can have or conform to any object, save what its own 
meaning determines, or seek any meaning or truth but 
its own meaning and truth. Furthermore, a finite idea 
is as much an instance of will as it is a knowing process. 
In seeking its own meaning, it seeks then simply the 
fuller expression of its own will. Its only Other is an 
Other that would more completely express it. Its ob- 
ject proves therefore to be, as proximate finite object, 
any fuller determination whatever of its own will and 
meaning. But as final object, the idea can have only 
its final embodiment in a complete and individual form. 
This final form of the idea, this final object sought 
when we seek Being, is (1) a complete expression of 
the internal meaning of the finite idea with which, in 
any case, we start our quest; (2) a complete fulfilment 
of the will or purpose partially embodied in this idea; 


INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MEANING OF IDEAS 341 


(8) an individual life for which no other can be sub- 
stituted. 
Now in defining this complete life, in which alone the 
finite idea, as a passing thrill of conscious meaning, can 
find the genuine object that it means fully embodied, we 
have so far still used many expressions derived from the 
conception of mere validity. We have spoken of what 
this life would be if zt were completely present. But, 
having used these forms of expression as mere scaffolding, 
at the close we must indeed observe afresh that all valid- 
ity, as an incomplete universal conception, needs another, 
to give it final meaning. If there is validity, there is then 
an object more than merely valid which gives the very 
conception of validity its own meaning. All that we 
learned before. It was that very defect of the third con- 
ception which sent us looking for the sense in which there 
can be an object of any idea. 

We have now defined what this object is. It is an 
individual life, present as a whole, totwm stmul, as the 
scholastics would have said. This life is at once a system 
of facts, and the fulfilment of whatever purpose any finite 
idea, in so far as it is true to its own meaning, already 
fragmentarily embodies. This life is the completed will, 
as well as the completed experience, corresponding to the 
will and experience of any one finite idea. In its whole- 
ness the world of Being is the world of individually 
expressed meanings, — an individual life, consisting of the 
individual embodiments of the wills represented by all 
finite ideas. Now to be, in the final sense, means to be 
just such a life, complete, present to experience, and con- 
clusive of the search for perfection which every finite idea 


eee 


SSA OOOO ag 


ad 


342 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


in its own measure undertakes whenever it seeks for any 
object. We may therefore lay aside altogether our 7fs 
and thens, our validity and our other such terms, when 
we speak of this final concept of Being. What is, is for 
us no longer a mere Form, but a Life; and in our world 
of what was before mere truth the light of individuality 
and of will have finally begun to shine. The sun of true 
Being has arisen before our eyes. 

In finding this world have we not been already led to 
the very definition of the divine Life? Yet must we leave 
to the later lectures some portrayal of what objects this 
world contains, — enough, the way is now open, and we 
shall enter at last the homeland. 


LECTURE VIII 


LECTURE VIII 
THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 


Any doctrine concerning fundamental questions is likely 
to meet with two different sorts of objections. The ob- 
jections of the first sort maintain that the theory in ques- 
tion is tog abstruse and obscure to be comprehended. The 
objections of the second sort point out that this same theory 
is too simple to be true. Every teacher of philosophy 
becomes accustomed not only to hear both kinds of objec- 
tions from his more thoughtful pupils, but to urge them, 
for himself, upon his own notice. No one, in fact, is 
a philosopher, who has not first profoundly doubted his 
own system. And it is in presence of objections that 
philosophical theses best show their merits, if they have 
merits. 

Upon the present occasion I have more fully to devel- 
ope the conception of Being to which we were led at the 
close of the last discussion. While I shall do so, in the 
first place, independently, I shall come before Iam done 
into intimate connection with some of the principal objec- 
tions that may be urged against our theses regarding the 
definition of what it is to be. For the objections will 
help us to make clearer our position. 


I 


But let us first restate our thesis as to the nature of 
Being. There is an ancient doctrine that whatever is, is 
345 


346 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


ultimately something Individual. Realism early came to 
that view ; and only Critical Rationalism has ever explic- 
itly maintained that the ultimate realities are universals, 
namely, valid possibilities of experience, or mere truths 
as such. Now at the close of the last lecture, after ana- 
lyzing the whole basis of Critical Rationalism, the entire 
conception of the Real as merely valid, we reinstated the 
Individual as the only ultimate form of Being. In so far 
we returned to a view that, in the history of thought, 
Realism already asserted. But we gave a new reason of 
our own for this view. Our reason was that the very 
defect of our finite ideas which sends us seeking for 
Being lies in the fact that whether we long for practical 
satisfaction, or think of purely theoretical problems, we, 
as we now are, are always seeking another object than 
what is yet present to our ideas. Now any ultimate real- 
ity, for us while as finite thinkers we seek it, is always 
such another fact. Yet this other object is always an 
object for our thought only in so far as our thought 
already means it, defines it, and wills it to be our object. 
But what is for us this other? In its essence it is already 
defined even before we undertake to knowit. For this 
other is precisely the fulfilment of our purpose, the satis- 
faction of the will now imperfectly embodied in our ideas, 
the completion of what we already partially possess in our 
finite insight. This completion is for us another, solely 
because our ideas, in their present momentary forms, come 
to us as general ideas, —ideas of what is now merely a 
kind of relative fulfilment and not an entire fulfilment. 
Other fulfilment of the same general kind is needed before 
we can face the whole Being that we seek. This kind of 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 347 


fulfilment we want to bring, however, to some integral 
expression, to its own finality, to its completeness as a 
whole fact. And this want of ours, so I asserted, not 
only sets us looking for Being, but gives us our only 
ground and means for defining Being. 

Being itself we should directly face in our own experi- 
ence only in case we experienced finality, z.e. full expres- 
sion of what our finite ideas both mean and seek. Such 
expression, however, would be given to us in the form of 
a life that neither sought nor permitted another to take 
its own place as the expression of its own purpose. Where 
no other was yet to be sought, there alone would our ideas 
define no other, no Being, of the type in question, lying 
yet beyond themselves, in the direction of their own type 
of fulfilment. The other would be found, and so would 
be present. And there alone should we consequently 
stand in the presence of what is real. Conversely, who- 
ever grasps only the nature of a general concept, whoever 
merely thinks of light or colors, or gravitation, or of man, 
whoever lacks, longs, or in any way seeks another, has not 
in his experience the full expression of his own meaning. 
Hence it is that he has to seek his object elsewhere. And 
so he has not yet faced any ultimate Being. He has upon 
his hands mere fragments, mere aspects of Being. Thus 
an entire instance of Being must be precisely that which 
permits your ideas to seek no other than what is present. 
Such a being is an Individual. Only, for our present 
conception of Being, an individual being is not a fact inde- 
pendent of any experience, nor yet a merely valid truth, 
nor yet a merely immediate datum that quenches ideas. 
For all these alternatives we have already faced and re- 


348 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


jected. On the contrary an individual being is a Life of 
Experience fulfilling Ideas, in an absolutely final form. 
And this we said is the essential nature of Being. The 
essence of the Real is to be Individual, or to permit no 
other of its own kind, and this character it possesses only 
as the unique fulfilment of purpose. 

Or, once more, as Mysticism asserted, so we too assert 
of your world, That art thou. Only the Self which is 
your world is your completely integrated Self, the total- 
ity of the life that at this instant you fragmentarily 
grasp. Your present defect is a matter of the mere form 
of your consciousness at this instant. Were your eyes 
~ at this instant open to your own meaning, your life asa 
whole would be spread before you as a single and unique 
life, for which no other could be substituted without a 
less determinate expression of just your individual will. 
Now this complete life of yours, is. Only such com- 
pletion can be. Being can possess no other nature than 
this. And this, in outline, is our Fourth Conception of 
Being. 


II 


Now I cannot myself conceive any one lightly accept- 
ing such a definition as this, —a definition so paradoxical 
in seeming, so remote from the limits which common 
sense usually sets to speculation, and so opposed to many 
dignified historical traditions ; and indeed I wish nobody 
to accept it lightly. The whole matter is one for the 
closest scrutiny. The only ground for this definition 
of Being lies in the fact that every other conception of 
reality proves, upon analysis, to be self-contradictory, 


LHE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 349 


precisely in so far as it does not in essence agree with 
this one; while every effort directly to deny the truth 
of this conception proves, upon analysis, to involve the 
covert affirmation of this very conception itself. Upon 
these assertions of the absolute logical necessity of our 
conception of Being, our whole case in this argument 
rests. And in order to make this fact clearer, I must 
briefly review the former argument. 

Our argument in the last lecture was based upon the 
consideration that Being has, at all events, to be that 
object which makes ideas true or false. The more special 
features of our analysis of the relation of idea and object 
were as follows : — 

An idea and its real object, in case the idea has any 
real object, must indeed plainly possess some characters 
in common. There must thus be general, or abstractly 
universal, features, belonging to them both. Upon that 
point all theories of Being to some extent agree. Even 
the Mystic, at the moment when he calls all ideas vain, 
identifies your true Self —yes, the very Self that now 
has your poor ideas—with the Absolute, and says of 
your object, viz. of the true Being, “That art thou.” 
Even the Realist, despite the independence of his Beings, 
holds that the ideas either truly represent the nature of 
these beings, or else, at all events, have in common with 
even the unknowable object some features whereby the 
object embodies in reality the same fact which the idea 
aims to express when it seeks for the reality. The 
failure of Realism we found to be due to the logical 
impossibility of reconciling the independent Being of 
the object of our ideas with this inevitably assumed 


850 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


sameness of nature, which must be possessed, in how- 
ever slight a measure, by both the knowing idea and 
the object that it knows. In the world of the Third 
Conception of Being, that of Validity, the ideas express 
with more or less precision, and in their own way, pre- 
cisely that truth which is to be valid beyond them. And, 
in fact, as we just saw, the most general conditions which 
determine for us the problem of Being, demand that the 
purpose which every idea has in seeking its Other, must 
have some element in common with that which fulfils this 
very purpose. 

Idea and Reality must, then, possess elements that are 
common to both of them. On the other hand, as we saw, 
this mere community is wholly inadequate to the tasks 
of defining what makes the object belong, as object, to 
a given idea. For, if you view any idea and its supposed 
object, merely as one might be imagined viewing them 
from without, it is wholly impossible to determine what 
degree of correspondence between them is required either 
to make the reality that precise object sought by the 
idea, or to render the idea the true representative of the 
object to which it is said to refer. A true idea, as Spi- 
noza said, must indeed resemble its ideate. But on the 
other hand, a mere resemblance of idea and ideate is not 
enough. Nor does the absence of any specific degree of 
resemblance necessarily involve an error. It is intended 
resemblance which counts in estimating the truth of 
ideas. If in fact you suppose, as an ideal case, two 
human beings, say twins, absolutely to resemble each 
other, not only in body, but in experience and in thought, 
so that every idea which one of these beings at any mo- 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 351 


ment had was precisely duplicated by a thought which 
at the same instant, and in the same fashion, arose in 
the other being’s life, —if, I say, you suppose this perfect 
resemblance in the twin minds, you could still, without 
inconsistency, suppose these twins separated from infancy, 
living apart, although of course under perfectly similar 
physical conditions, and in our human sense what we 
men call absolute strangers to each other, so that neither 
of them, viewed merely as this human being, ever con- 
sciously thought of the other, or conceived of the other’s 
existence. In that case, the mere resemblance would not 
so far constitute the one of these twin minds the object 
of which the other mind thought, or the being concern- 
ing whom the ideas of the other were true. 

The resemblance of idea and object, viewed as a mere 
fact for an external observer, is, therefore, never by itself 
enough to constitute the truth of the idea. Nor is the 
absence of any externally predetermined resemblances, 
such as you from without may choose to demand of the 
idea, enough to constitute any specific sort of error. 
Moreover, when you merely assert that in the world of 
| Being there is to be found an object which resembles 
your idea, you have so far only mentioned two beings, 
namely, your idea and its object, and have asserted their 
resemblance. But you have not yet in the least defined 
wherein the Being of either of these objects consists. 
This, then, is the outcome so long as you view idea and 
object as sundered facts agreeing or disagreeing with 
each other. Neither truth nor Being is thus to be 
defined. The result so far is conclusive as against 
the adequacy, not only of Realism, and of Mysticism, 


352 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


but also, as we saw, of even the Third Conception of 
Being. 

For if one asserts, as his account of the nature of Be- 
ing, that certain ideas of possibilities of experience are 
valid, he is so far left with a world of objects upon his 
hands whose only character, so far as he yet defines the 
Being of these objects, is that these objects are in agree- 
ment with his ideas. Such a definition of Being consti- 
tuted the whole outcome of the Third Conception. The — 
mathematician’s ideas, as present to himself, take the 
form of observed symbols and diagrams. These, so far 
as they are observed, are contents of experience fulfill- 
ing purpose. They so far conform to our definition of 
what constitutes an idea, for they have internal mean- 
ing. But the existent objects concerning which the 
mathematician endeavors to teach us, are, by hypothesis, 
not the symbols, and not the diagrams, but valid truths 
to which these diagrams and symbols—these mathe- 
matician’s ideas—correspond. The existences of the 
mathematician’s realm are other than his mere finite 
ideas. Now that such objects have their place in real- 
ity, I myself thoroughly believe. But I point out that 
their reality, the true Being of these objects, is in no 
wise defined when you merely speak of the ideas as 
nothing but valid, because the assertion of validity is so 
far merely the assertion of a correspondence between a 
presupposed idea and its assumed object, without any 
account as yet either of the object, or of the truth of the 
idea. And bare correspondence, the mere possession of 
common characters in idea and in object not only fails to 
define, but, as we now see, can never lead us to define, 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 353 


the Being of either idea or object, and in no sense shows 
or explains to us the relation whereby the idea means, se- 
lects, and is in just this way true of just this one object. 

The relation of correspondence between idea and ob- 
ject is, therefore, wholly subordinate to another and far 
deeper relation; and so to say, “My idea has reference 
to a real Being,” is to say, “ My idea imperfectly ex- 
presses, in my present consciousness, an intention, a 
meaning, a purpose; and just this specific meaning is 
carried out, is fulfilled, is expressed, by my object.” 
For correspondence to its object, and intentional ‘selec- 
tion of both the object and the sort of correspondence, 
constitute the two possible relations of idea and object. 
If the bare correspondence determines neither Being nor 

g truth, the intention must determine both Being and 

\truth. In other words, the Being to which any idea 
refers is simply the will of the idea more determinately, 
and also more completely, expressed. Once admit this 
definition of the nature of Being, and you will accom- 
plish the end which all the various prior definitions of 
Being actually sought. 

For, first, with the realist, you will now assert that 
the object is not only Other than the finite idea, but is 
something that is authoritative over against the finite 
idea. The realist gave an abstract expression to this 
authority of the object when he said that the object is 
independent of the idea. The abstraction was false; but 
it was already a suggestion of the true meaning. The 
finite idea does seek its own Other. It consciously 
means this Other. And it can seek only what it con- 
sciously means to seek. But it consciously means to 

2a 


354 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


seek precisely that determination of its own will to 
singleness and finality of expression which shall leave it 
no Other yet beyond, and still to seek. To its own plan, 
to its own not here fully determined purpose, the idea 
at this instant must needs submit. Its very present con- 
scious will is its submission. Yet the idea submits to 
no external meaning that is not the development of its 
own internal meaning. Moreover, the finite idea is a 
merely general idea. But what it means, its object, is 
an Individual. So you will all agree with the realist 
that whether or no the idea just now embodies its own 
object of search as nearly with present truth as the nar- 
row limits of our consciousness permit, it must still seek 
other fulfilment than is now present, and must submis- 
sively accept this fulfilment as its own authoritative 
truth. But you will reject the realistic isolation of the 
idea from the object, and of the object from the idea. 

If one attempts in some way to modify his Realism by 
declaring the object not wholly, but only partially, inde- 
pendent of the ideas which refer to it, still such a modi- 
fied realist would only the more have to face, as we 
ourselves have been trying to face, the problem as to how 
the idea and its object are positively related. And if 
idea and object are left in the end in any way as two 
separate existent facts, isolated from each other, then one 
can find no further relation between the isolated idea and 
object except the relation of greater or less correspondence, 
and by this relation of mere external correspondence, 
taken alone, one would be able to define neither the 
Being of any object, nor the truth of any idea. Or, in 
other words, a world where ideas and objects merely corre- 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 355 


spond, as isolated facts, and where no other and deeper 
relation links knowledge and Being, is a world where 
there is so far neither any knowledge nor any Being at 
all. 

But secondly, if you accept our Fourth Conception, you 
will also agree with Mysticism in so far as, identifying 
Being with fulfilment of purpose, the mystic says, of the 
object of any of your ideas: That art thou. For the 
mystic means this assertion not of the imperfect self of 
the merely finite idea. He does not mean that this pass- 
ing thrill of longing is already fully identical with the 
Other that this very longing seeks. For the mystic, as 
for the realist, Being is indeed something Other than our 
mere search for Being. The mystical identification of 
the world and the Self is meant to be true of the com- 
pleted, of the fulfilled and final, or Absolute Self. Now, 
starting with any idea, we shall henceforth say to this 
idea, regarding its own object, precisely what the mystic 
says of the Self and the World: That art thou. Namely, 
the object is for us simply the completely embodied will 
of the idea. It is nothing else. But we shall hence- 
forth differ from the mystic precisely at the point where 
the mystic takes refuge in mere negations. We, too, of 
course, shall also confess our finite ignorance. But the 
Neti, Neti of Yajnavalkya, the nescio, nescio of the 
medieval mystic, will express for us, not the essential 
nature of true Being, as the mystic declared, but merely 
the present inadequacy of your passing idea to its own 
present and conscious purpose,—a purpose known pre- 
cisely so far as it is embodied at this instant. We shall 
say if we follow to its conclusion this our Fourth Con- 


4 


356 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


ception, “ We know in part, and we prophesy in part; 
but when the object meant, namely, precisely when that 
which is perfect is truly said to be, it fulfils, and in so far 
by supplementing but not otherwise, it takes away that 
which is in part.” Our final object, the urbs Sion unica, 
mansio mystica, is for us, as for the mystic, the unique 
Being wherein this our finite will is fulfilled. But this 
one object meant, this fulfilment of our will, is not merely 
“founded in heaven.” Its will is done on earth, not yet 
in this temporal instant wholly as it is in heaven, but is 
still really done, in these ideas that already consciously 
attain a fragment of their own meaning. They are ideas 
precisely because they do this. The sadness of the mys- 
tical longing is now for us lighted by glimpses of the 
genuine and eternally present truth of the one real world. 
It is not merely in the mystic trance, but in every ra- 
tional idea, in so far as it is already a partially embodied 
purpose, that we now shall in our own way and measure 
come upon that which is, and catch the deep pulsations of 
the world. Our instant is not yet the whole of eternity ; 
but the eternal light, the lua eterna, shineth in our every 
reasonable moment, and lighteth every idea that cometh 
into the world. 

And, thirdly, if you follow our Fourth Conception, you 
will now agree with the critical rationalist when he asserts 
that Being essentially involves what gives the validity to 
ideas. But you will have discovered what conditions are 
necessary to constitute validity. The valid finite idea 
is first, for whoever possess it, an observed and empirical 
fulfilment of purpose. But this fulfilment is also ob- 
served in this instant as something incomplete. There 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 857 


fore it is that a finite idea seeks beyond itself for its 
own validity. And it is perfectly true to say that if 
the idea is valid, certain further experience of the ful- 
filment of the idea is possible. Leave this further expe- 
rience, however, as something merely possible, and your 
definition of Being would so far remain fast bound in 
its own fatal circle. Is the idea valid or not? If it is 
valid, then, by hypothesis, further experience that would 
confirm the idea is possible. This further experience, 
like any object existent in the mathematician’s realm, 
is both known to be something Other than the idea that 
refers to it, and is also viewed as a fact precisely cor- 
responding to what the idea means to define. Now so 
long as you call this Other, this possible experience, 
merely such a bare possibility, you define, as we have 
said, only those characters of this object which the ob- 
ject has in common with your merely present idea of 
the object. The object is so far defined as an experi- 
ence, and as having this or that type or form. That 
is what you say when you talk of any being in Kant’s 
realm of Mégliche Erfahrung, or of any mathematical 
fact. All that is thus defined about the object is its 
mere what, the characters that it shares with your pres- 
ent ideas and experiences at the moment when you 
define it. What therefore you have not thus defined is 
precisely the Being of the object as Other than the 
very finite idea which is to regard it as an Other. If 
you have once observed this defect of any assertion of 
a bare possibility of experience, you will have seen why 
the mere definition of universal types can never reach 
the expression of the whole nature of real Beings, and 


358 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


why, for that very reason, the realm of Validity is 
nothing unless it is more than merely valid, nothing 
too unless it takes an individual form as an unique fulfil- 
ment of purpose in a completed life. 

But all the three former conceptions are now to be 
brought into synthesis in this Fourth Conception. What 
is, is authoritative over against finite ideas, as Realism 
asserted, is one with the true meaning of the idea, as 
- Mysticism insisted, and is valid as Critical Rationalism 
“ demanded. { What is, presents the fulfilment of the 
whole purpose of the very idea that now seeks this 
‘Being. ) And when I announce this as our Fourth Con- 
ception of Being, I do not mean to be understood as 
asserting a mere validity, but as reporting facts. I do 
not any longer merely say, as we said at the outset of 
our discussion, Being is that which, if present, would 
end your finite search, would answer your doubts, would 
fulfil your purpose. All that was the language of va- 
lidity. It was a mere preliminary. Since validity 
has no meaning unless its general types of truth take 
on individual form, and unless the what turns into the 
that, I now say, without any reserve, What is does 
in itself fulfil your meaning, does express, in the com- 
pletest logically possible measure, the accomplishment 
and embodiment of the very will now fragmentarily 
embodied in your finite ideas. And I say, that this 
embodiment means in itself precisely what your present 
embodiment of purpose in your rational experience 
means, just in so far as your purposes are not mere 
fragments, but are also, even in their transiency, re- 
sults known as, relatively speaking, won, as possessed, as 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING ~~ 359 


accomplished. The accomplishment of your purpose 
now means that your experience is viewed by you as 
the present and conscious expression of a plan. Well, 
what is, precisely in so far as it is, is in the same way 
a whole experience finally expressing and consciously 
fulfilling a plan. And the Being of the real object of 
which you now think means a life that expresses the 
fulfilment of just your present plan, in the greatest 
measure in which your plan itself is logically capable of 
fulfilment. 

Into this categorical assertion of a concrete experience 
embodying a plan, our whole series of hypothetically 
valid assertions of the realm of Critical Rationalism 
have now resolved themselves. A will concretely em- 
bodied in a life,—and these meanings identical with 
the very purposes that our poor fleeting finite ideas are 
even now so fragmentarily seeking, amidst all their 
flickerings and their conflicts, to express, — this, I say, 
is the reality. This alone is.. All else is either 
shadow, or else is partial embodiment, i.e. is a striving 
after that ideal which needs for its own expression this 
very striving. This alone is real,—this complete life 
of divine fulfilment of whatever finite ideas seek. It is 
because the finite idea essentially seeks its Other, so 
long as it remains indeterminate, that the quest can be 
attained only when the will of the idea is so embodied 
that no other embodiment is to be sought. It is be- 
cause no quest can be defined as a quest without defin- 
ing valid possible experiences such as would fulfil or 
defeat this quest, and it is because no such valid possi- 
ble experiences can be defined without presupposing 


360 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


that something more than mere validity is real, —it is 
because of all these considerations that we define the 
fulfilment of the finite quests embodied in our present 
and partial ideas as the essential nature of Being. 


Il 


So far, then, we have restated and developed our Fourth 
Conception of Being as the only one capable of defining 
how an idea can correspond to an object which is other 
than the idea, but which is still the very object con- 
sciously meant by the idea. 

But now are there not perfectly natural objections to 
this conception? There are. They appear in both the 
before mentioned forms, — as assertions that our concep- 
tion is too complex and abstruse for the plain-minded man, 
and as assertions that our definition is too simple for the 
complexities of the actual universe. Both sorts of objec- 
tions, however, will prove to be welcome aids to the very 
comprehension of our conception of Being itself. Let me 
here begin with a very familiar form that an empirical 
objection to our theory may take. 

“ After all,” one may say, “you in vain endeavor, 
through your analysis of this or that conception of 
Being, to escape the conclusion of enlightened common 
sense that experience, and experience alone, determines 
what is and what is not. The whole question as to 
Being comes in the end to this: A man can frame ideas 
as he will, and as you say, ideas are indeed wilful enough 
constructions of merely conceived possibilities. But the 
question about Being always is, Does experience con- 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 361 


firm the ideas? That idea expresses Being which is 
found to be confirmed by experience. Upon this view 
of Being all sane science is founded. But this view 
excludes all a priori constructions, and all efforts to 
pierce the mysteries of the Absolute. Constructions of 
ideas about possibilities of experience are often allow- 
able enough in science, as mere hypotheses, or as asser- 
tions about what is probable. But the test is the 
concrete, present, immediate experience of this or that 
observer. / /What has been seen, felt, or otherwise empiri- 
cally encountered by some body, is in so far real. Noth- 
ing else is for us men knowable about the constitution of 
Being. Now when you talk about Being as a final fulfil- 
ment of ideas, and of human experience as a mere frag- 
ment of such a final fulfilment, you transcend human 
experience. Your view is too abstruse and artificial for 
plain men. .We no longer seek, in these days, for any 
absolute or final Being. We believe what we find. 
Nothing final is experienced by men. The realm of the 
empirical is always, as you say, fragmentary. But then 
this is the only realm known to men. This alone is for 
us real. Ideas furnish us the what. Concrete experi- 
ence alone can supply the that. I conceive in idea a 
horse. In experience I thereupon see, touch, drive, or 
buy and sell horses. Other men do the same. Hence 
horses are real. But I conceive of a fairy. My idea is 
perhaps vivid. But still I never see fairies, and I find 
that none but children and ignorant people fancy that 
they have seen fairies. So fairies remain unobserved, 
and so far appear to be unreal. The same rule holds 
in science. Neptune was first ideally conceived, but 


862 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


this idea was verified by astronomical observation; for 
the predicted planet was later observed. So Neptune 
is a reality. But the heavenly spheres of an older as- 
tronomy proved to be mere ideas, since advancing ex- 
perience proved to be inconsistent with the ideas in 
question. So in science and in life, it is experience 
which decides that any supposed Being, whose what an 
idea defines, exists. Away, then, with your hope of 
finality. Experience is fragmentary, growing, and finite. 
And Being is only known through experience.” 

So far the objector. I reply, in a way already indicated 
at the last lecture. I myself doubt not in the least that 
the realm of experience is, and is decisive of truth. I 
doubt not this, simply because our Fourth Conception de- 
clares that what is real is an experience presenting the 
fulfilment of the whole purpose of ideas. 

Nur in der Erfahrung ist Wahrheit, said Kant. I not 
only accept this thesis, but insist upon it. I know of no 
truth that is not an empirical truth, whatever further 
character it also possesses. An idea, according to our 
original definition, is already a fragment of experience 
although partially fulfilling a purpose. The fulfilment of 
an idea could not possibly take any form that was not 
also empirical. Neither God nor man faces any fact that 
has not about it something of the immediacy of a sense 
datum. That is for my conception a logical necessity. 
For what finite ideas seek is expression, embodiment, 
life, presence. Experience then is real. Ay, but what 
experience? And above all, in what sense is experience 
real? What kind of Being has experience? This ques- 
tion must be answered by any one who glibly asserts that 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 363 


experience is. Now it seems strange to find that while 
many a man laughs to hear how some of the earlier 
scholastics supposed that not dogs and lions and men, but 
the canine nature, and leoninity in general, and humanity 
in the abstract are real, — still this same man will appeal 
to an ideal authority called Experience in general, —a 
mere universal idea so far, —as decisive of what is real, 
or as itself the reality. As a fact, only individual experi- 
ence is real, be that the experience of man or God. And 
whoever asserts: “The reality is experience,” has pre- 
cisely those alternatives to face about the sense in which 
experience is real which have been discussed in the fore- 
going general account of the problem of Being. 

There are in the world the experiences of men. 
Granted. But are these experiences facts whose Being 
is wholly independent of the ideas whereby we now as- 
sert that these experiences are real? If we assert this, 
then, our empiricism becomes simply one form of Realism. 
It now defines the what of our world as experience ; but 
the that it defines, not at all merely in empirical terms, 
but rather in realistic terms, namely as a form of Being 
independent of our ideas, in so far as these ideas refer to 
the reality of this experience. A realistic empiricist, 
therefore, if you look closer, explicitly transcends the 
very finite experience that he declares to be the only test 
of truth. 

For consider : Suppose that you say that the experience 
of mankind is a real fact, and is what it is, whatever the 
metaphysical dreamers say about it. Now as a finite 
being, confined to this instant, you do not experience my 
experience, nor in the same finite sense do I now and 


3864 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


here experience your experience. If you assert that my 
experience is real, you in fact mean to transcend what 
your present finite experience presents to you. And 
neither your present fragment of experience can be 
directly used to verify the fact that my experience ex- 
ists, nor can my fragment of momentary experience itself 
be used to verify the fact that you are thinking of me at 
all, or are referring to me, or are even meaning to assert 
my existence. And, in the same way, it is not a present 
fact of any man’s momentary finite experience that the 
body of fact called the combined experience of humanity, 
or of science, or of any group of men, great or small, 
exists. Whoever asserts, then, that human experience 
exists, as a body consisting of the many experiences of 
various human observers, asserts what no finite human 
observer ever has, at any moment, experienced. For I 
insist, no man ever yet at any instant himself observed 
that mankind as a body, or that any man but himself, 
was observing facts. 

Yet more, no man, at any one of our temporal human 
instants, ever then and there empirically verifies the 
existence even of his own past experiences. For, by 
definition, his past experiences are over, and are irrey- 
ocably no longer present, at any present empirical 
moment. No man, then, has ever observed the empiri- 
cal fact that he himself has in the past observed facts, 
or has acquired by experience this which he now views 
as his own personally possessed body and outcome of 
experience. 

Therefore, let no one who says, in a realistic sense, 
“Human experience, the experience of many men, exists,” 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 365 


venture to add that he himself, or that any other man 
has, merely as man, empirically verified this assertion. 
It is false, then, to say that for such an assertion ideas 
furnish the what, and our human experience itself, in the 
form in which any man gets that experience, ever verifies 
the that. The assertion that a body of human experience 
exists, gets its that from some source not to be found in 
any one man’s experience at any time. Our realistic 
empiricist is, therefore, so far precisely like other realists. 
He transcends every man’s personal experience. He 
asserts the existence of independent Beings. He tran- 
scends all that any man ever has directly verified, or, as 
mere man, will at any instant ever verify. He is as 
transcendently metaphysical in his thesis as a Leibnitz or 
as a Herbart ever was in talking of Monads or of Reals. 
He can be decisively judged, however, only by the con- 
sistency of his ontological predicate. And we already 
know, in so far as he is a thoroughgoing realist, his fate. 

For human experience, in so far as it is existent apart 
from our ideas which refer to it, is either something con- 
sciously meant by these ideas, or it is something not 
meant by them. If it is meant by them, it is either their 
whole real fulfilment in the form defined by our Fourth 
Conception; or else it is a part of just such a real final 
fulfilment. But, on the other hand, if it is something 
wholly independent in its existence of whether our 
private and momentary ideas refer to it or not; in other 
words, if it is a realm of facts whose type of Being is the 
realistic type, then in vain do you call it experience. 
Like any realistic Being, it is one whose existence cannot 
be referred to at all without the inconsistencies before 


366 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


observed. And in the end, like any other realistic Being, 
it is nothing at all. 

Our empiricist may then take his choice. He is with 
us, or against us. If he is the latter, we have already 
dealt with him. For just so, if the experience to which 
our empiricist refers is the realm of the valid possibilities 
of experience, we already know its meaning and outcome. 
Conceive the realm of possible experience consistently, 
and it becomes the realm of our own conception of Being. 
But if one means only the sort of pure experience, the 
bare immediacy, to which the mystic referred, that sort 
of experience, as we found, is again explicitly nothing 
at all. 

But if this empirical realm in question is the genuine 
realm of experience to which our ideas refer when, talk- 
ing of experience with rational definiteness, we mean to 
see clearly, to observe closely, to know richly, and to live 
wisely, this is indeed an empirical world, and it is real. 
But it is real in the sense of our Fourth Conception. It 
is a life expressing in fulness what every transient 
moment of human consciousness fragmentarily embodies, 
and ideally seeks. 

And as to finality, what constitution shall that realm 
of actual experience possess at all unless this constitu- 
tion, in its wholeness, is indeed final, and final precisely 
in the scnse of our Fourth Conception? For finality 
means, for us, the individual constitution of the realm 
of fact, interpreted in the only possible consistent way. 
You say, “Experience is.” If you are an empiricist 
you also say, “All that is, is, in at least one aspect, 
experienced fact.” Now, so far, all that is precisely 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 367 


what our Fourth Conception says. So far we agree 
with any empiricist. But if you reject our Fourth Con- 
ception, you then add, “ This experience which is, is, even 
when taken in its totality, a fragmentary experience, — 
a mere collection of whatever happens to be; — and this 
world of experience possesses no finality.” But do you 
mean hereby that of two contradictory propositions made 
about the existence of a supposed individual fact in this 
whole realm of the real experience, both or neither may 
now be true? Do you mean that if I say: “There is life 
after death,” or, “There was the siege of Troy,” or, 
‘¢ There is the observable planet Neptune,” or, “ There 
is happiness in yonder child’s heart as he sings,” I can 
thus assert a proposition that is neither true nor false, or 
that is both true and false at once, and in the same sense? 
If this were what you asserted, the assertion would indeed 
mean nothing. But otherwise, if the world of experience, 
as a real world, has even now, while we speak, an actual 
constitution, then any definite proposition about the 
world is either true or false when it is made. But if 
so, any proposition with a definite internal meaning 
involves ideas that, when the proposition is made, con- 
sciously mean to refer to the existent facts of that world 
of real experience. But such reference to objects does 
not consist, as we have now sufficiently seen, in mere 
correspondence between idea and object. The only 
reference that can constitute the meaning of an idea is 
one which involves the complete expression of the will 
of the idea. But if every issue which ideas can join, 
with regard to the constitution of the empirical world, if 
every contradictory opposition which the ideas can ex- 


868 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


press, has its correspondent decision, yes or no, in the facts 
of the truly real empirical world, then the fulfilment of 
the ideas about experience in the facts of experience to 
which they refer, is once for all a wholly determinate 
fulfilment. And in this case, whatever constitution the 
world of experience in its entirety possesses, is as such an 
individual and final constitution. 

And so, we say, the empirical world is a whole, a life 
fulfilling the purposes of our ideas. It is that or it is 
nothing. You labor in vain. The net of truth enmeshes 
your doubts. 

“And yet,” as you may now interpose, “we have but 
just seen that no man experiences, for himself, at any 
moment, this final constitution of our realm of experi- 
_ ence.” Of course no man experiences that constitution. 
| Now we see through a glass darkly. It is not yet re- 
: vealed what we shall be. It is not yet known to us what 
our own whole experience itself in its details contains. 
‘But we know that it is. And we observe the constitu- 
tion of that realm. It is through and through a consti- 
tution that answers our questions, embodies our meanings, 
integrates our purposes. It is then in essence a realm of 
fact fulfilling purpose, of life embodying idea, of meaning 
won by means of the experience of its own content. The 
now present but passing form of our human consciousness 
is fragmentary. We wait, wonder, pass from fact to fact, 
from fragment to fragment. What a study of the con- 
cept of Being reveals to us is precisely that the whole 
has a meaning, and is real only as a Meaning Embodied. 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 369 


IV 


“But,” our objector next retorts, “your view is still 
too abstruse for a plain man, —for how can you thus dare 
to transcend the limits of human consciousness? It is 
true that when a man thinks, he just then consciously 
aims only at a meaning which is present to himself at the 
instant. But you talk now about the constitution of a 
realm of Being that is to lie beyond the limits of any 
merely human experience. For you admit that no man 
has yet seen at any one instant this which you call the 
whole of his meaning empirically expressed. Now, how 
can you have any assurance as to such a realm of tran- 
scendent and superhuman finality of experience? Per- 
haps there is experience beyond our own, perhaps not. 
At all events, any man actually knows only his own con- 
tents of experience, and with more or less probability he 
guesses at the existence of other contents than his own 
in other men. But nobody can assert, with real or posi- 
tive assurance, any Being that transcends his own present 
experience. Yet you talk of final Being, and of its 
constitution. Perhaps there is no final Being. Perhaps 
there is only the present fragment of empirical life. 
Even my own past and future, as you say, are not present 
to me. How should I myself at this instant know that 
there exists more than what is now present tome? Why, 
then, cannot we be mere sceptics, doubting all reality not 
now and here given ?” 

I reply at once: State your doubt in a more precise 
form. ‘Tell what it means. What hypothesis, if any, do 
you oppose to our own thesis as to this complete and in- 

2B 


370 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


dividual, this teleological constitution of the realm of 
Being, which we have asserted as our Fourth Conception. 
What is it that you doubt? And what alternative 
would be true if your doubt were well founded? Hesi- 
tate not to give your doubt all possible precision. Phi- 
losophy lives upon the comprehension of the meaning of 
its own doubts. 

Let one then say, by way of a mere trial at scepticism. 
“ Beyond a given circle of experience, supposed to be at 
present known to you and to me, or to me alone, there 
may be Nothing at all. Let us then suppose, for argu- 
ment’s sake, that there 7s nothing at all beyond what you 
or I may just now feel to be present, as our empirical 
facts, as our passing conscious ideas, desires, hopes, as 
our so-called memories, and as the problems of the in- 
stant. Let that be the realm of Being. Let there be 
_ supposed to be naught in the universe but just this. Now 
this little realm of given fact has no consciously experi- 
enced finality about it, no wholeness, no satisfying con- 
stitution, no absoluteness. Yet this little realm of passing 
consciousness somehow exists. How then shall this 
Fourth Conception of Being refute the purely sceptical 
hypothesis thus made? And unless such a sceptical hy- 
pothesis is refuted, how can any assertions which tran- 
scend the instantaneous limits of our human form of 
consciousness be made in any wise certain?” 

So far the doubter’s hypothesis. I reply: This doubt, 
once stated as a possible account of a realm of Being, 
has all the responsibilities of any ontology. It hypotheti- 
cally defines as real, a supposed, or given, finite circle of 
empirical facts, called this instant’s contents. It sup- 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 371 


poses this circle to be conceived, for the moment, as the 
whole of Being, as all that there is. Well, what does 
this hypothetical assertion mean? Stripped of its acces- 
sories, it means simply: A certain finite momentary 
collection of empirical facts, ideas, desires, etc., merely 
called the present moment, is the universe. Now, to 
simplify the matter, name this finite conscious instant of 
experience, of thought and of will, A. One supposes 
that A is all, or that nothing but A exists. Well, this 
assertion, like any other metaphysical one, involves a 
what and a that. Moreover, it asserts the non-being of 
anything but A. Now an assertion of non-being is sub- 
ject to the same general conditions as an assertion of 
Being. Whatever one means by Being, the meaning of 
the negative of Being, or of the assertion that something 
does not exist, is determined by the sense given to the 
predicate by which one affirms Being. Premising this, 
then, let one estimate the consistency of the hypothesis 
now in question. 

If one asserts; A zs all or, There is naught but A, the 
assertion involves ideas, and if it means anything these 
ideas possess some object. Now by hypothesis, the pres- 
ent moment, or A, does not itself contain the direct ex- 
perience of the fact that it includes the whole universe 
of Being. For if A were certainly aware that nothing 
besides itself could exist, it would consciously have pres- 
ent what exhausted, even in the very present conscious- 
ness of A, the whole possible meaning of the idea of 
Being. But A would itself then be a completely em- 
bodied meaning, an absolutely self-possessed Whole of 
experience, fulfilling its own purpose. Or in other words, 


i 


372 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


our own Fourth Conception of Being would directly ap- 
ply to it. And our doubter would then be no mere 
sceptic; for his positive account would be ours. But 
since, by hypothesis, A is a passing moment, a dissatis- 
fied instant of finite human experience, the fact that it 
comprises all that is real is not itself present to the ex- 
perience of A. And the non-being of all except A, the 
exclusion from Being of all not present in A, is supposed 
to be a fact, but a fact whose that, whose very existence 
as a real fact, must consequently be sought elsewhere than 
in the conscious experience present to A alone. This 
already contradicts the hypothesis here in question, as we 
first stated it. For the fact that A is all Being cannot 
itself be part of the experience of a consciously frag- 
mentary, or dissatisfied A. Yet A was, by hypothesis, 
to contain all Being. Our sceptic, then, if you suppose 
him a mere partisan of experience as the only reality, has 
begun by contradicting himself. 

But this is not all. This supposed fact, that A és all 
Being, or that Naught but A ewists, may indeed next be 
made formally consistent with itself by an amendment. 
Let the hypothesis now run, as amended, thus: “A con- 
tains all experience, or all conscious fact, but besides this 
conscious fact there does exist the unconscious fact, the mere 
brute reality, unknown to anybody, and present to nobody's 
experience, the mere fact that A is, not indeed all Being, but 


\all Experience.” The sceptical hypothesis thus amended 


leads, however, at once, to precisely our foregoing alter- 
natives as to the sense in which this supposed fact of the 
loneliness of A can be asserted as a real fact. That there 
zs no experience in the universe except A, is now supposed 


~/ 
I 
| 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 373 


to be itself a fact, but a fact whose reality nobody experi- 
ences. But what kind of Being has this fact? It is, by 
hypothesis, the object to which the sceptical assertion 
relates. As such object, other than the sceptic’s asser- 
tion, but really meant by him as a truth, it is in the posi- 
tion that we have now exhaustively discussed. It cannot 
be a fact whose Being is wholly independent of the scep- 
tic’s own assertion, nor yet a being of the mystical type, 
nor a merely universal valid truth, of the type of our 
Third Conception of Being. For all these types of Being 
have been found logically wanting. Nor can it be in any 
sense an object merely agreeing with our sceptic’s assertion, 
and externally correspondent thereto. For external agree- 
ment with an idea that asserts Being, when such agree- 
ment is taken alone, constitutes neither the Being of any 
object, nor the truth of any idea. That A is the only ex- 
istent experience must, therefore, be a fact which, as an 
individual fact, fulfils the will embodied in the sceptic’s 
hypothesis, both in so far as this will refers to that fact, 
and in so far as the sceptic himself inevitably, even in 
still supposing the non-being of all but A, talks of Being 
in general and of the universe in its wholeness. The 
only possible result is that, in asserting that A is all ex- 
perience, the sceptic’s hypothesis, if consistent with itself, 
asserts that A itself consciously contains, presents, and 
fulfils the whole meaning involved in the idea of Being ; 
or in other words that A is not a mere passing thrill of 
human experience, but is an absolute experience, self- 
determined, self-contained, individual, whole, and there- 
fore final. 

The sceptic’s hypothesis, therefore, so soon as it is made 


374 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


explicit, wholly agrees with our own. Nothing can be 
but such a whole experience. 


V 


But our empirical objector may finally turn upon us 
with another version of his parable. “Who,” he may 
say, “could for a day attempt to hold your Fourth Concep- 
tion of Being, and still face a single one of the most char- 
acteristic facts of human experience, a single practical 
failure, a single case where dear hopes have to be re- 
signed, an hour of darkness and private despair, a public 
calamity, or even a sleepless night,— who I say could 
face such commonplace facts and not have the observa- 
tion thrust, as it were, upon him by the seemingly 
irresistible powers of this world, — the well-known ob- 
servation: ‘ You reason in vain: these hard facts are 
against you.’ Your view is too simple for this our com- 
plex real world. What is, does not in any essential way 
fulfil ideas. What is real, is once more whatever experi- 
ence shows to exist. And experience contains all sorts 
of non-fulfilments and irrationalities. Chaos or order, 
joy or defeat, tears of despair and shouts of victory, 
mysteries, storms, north winds, wars, the wreck of hearts, 
the might of evil, the meteors that wander in interplanet- 
ary darkness, the suns that waste their radiant energy 
in the chill depths of lifeless space, — these all are facts, 
— these are Beings. Why talk of Being? What Being in 
itself is, may well remain unknowable. But what is con- 
sistent with the existence of facts, you experience when- 
ever you observe just such wretchedly irrational facts as 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 3875 


these. Whatever they mean, they involve not fulfilment, 
but defeat, of purpose. And that is what you yourself 
experience whenever you lose what is dear, and face the 
insoluble mysteries of experience.” 

The practical weight of such objections can escape no 
one. ‘They constitute in one aspect the well-known prob- 
lem of evil. With the positive solution of this problem 
for its own sake we are not yet directly concerned. That 
belongs later in these discussions. Our concern at the 
moment is less with the pathetic than with the purely 
logical aspect of such objections. What they point out 
is that, empirically, there are countless, if essentially 
fragmentary, empirical facts to be recognized, which do 
not at present come to us human beings as the embodi- 
ment of certain specified purposes. These facts appear 
as involving the temporal defeat of these very purposes 
in just these passing instants of wavering search for 
Being wherein we now are. We call these facts, —such 
facts as storms, as war, as defeat and despair, as north 
winds and sleepless nights, — facts belonging somehow to 
the realm of Being. Yet they are facts that, when 
spoken of as ills, are so far defined with reference to the 
ideas which they just now temporally defeat. How do 
they stand with reference to our definition of Being ? 

I reply, for the first, by distinguishing two aspects of 
any unwelcome facts, such as the empirical observer of 
human destiny may find to be present in the world. 
These two aspects are indeed not to be sundered, and are 
here distinguished only for the sake of present conven- 
ience. Yet we shall profit by taking care not blindly to 
confuse them. Any unwelcome empirical fact has, namely, 


3876 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


its own positive characters, as a fact that in our human 
experience appears at a point of time, in certain relations 
in space, and with numerous other positively definable 
features, all of which the thought of any historian or any 
student of science who describes the fact, may define as 
the object of his own ideas. In addition to these, its own 
relatively internal and positive features, the unwelcome 
fact also appears as involving the present temporal defeat 
of a purpose which, but for this fact, might here have 
been won. Now these two aspects of the unwelcome fact 
were long ago distinguished by the ancient as well as by the 
medieval students of the problem of evil. ‘Every evil,” 
said such students, “has, as a positive fact in the world 
of Being, its own internal perfections. Its evil character 
is due to its relations to other facts that coexist with it 
_in the same world. Even Satan,” said such views, ‘is an 
angel; and even as a fallen angel he has extraordinary 
perfections of nature, which so far constitute a good. 
His diabolical quality is due to the misuse of precisely 
these perfections. The best in wrong setting becomes 
the worst.” Upon such bases these older accounts of evil 
undertook to make the presence of evil in the world con- 
sistent with the well known thesis, Omne Ens est bonwm, 
—a thesis whose historical relation to our own conception 
of Being I am far from attempting to deny. 

Now I indeed have no doubt that these ancient and 
medieval students of the problem of evil often made their 
own task far too light. Nor am I here concerned to 
accept their special solutions of the problem as to the 
place of ill in a divinely ordered world. But it does con- 
cern us here to point out that an unwelcome fact of human 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 377 


experience has in general these two sorts of characters, 
namely, the characters which make it a positively defina- 
ble temporal and spatial fact,—so far like any other fact 
of experience, and the characters which make us say, 
that it defeats this or that human purpose. 

Thus physical death appears in our experience as an 
occurrence resulting from a series of physiological pro- 
cesses. As a natural phenomenon its very prevalence is 
of a deep rational interest. Meanwhile, it involves 
chemical and physical changes which are not essentially 
different from countless other changes going on in the 
organic world. For science it therefore has the same sort 
of importance that any other event in the biological realm 
may come to have. On this side, one can say that death 
is definable as an objective fact rendering relatively true, 
in their own fragmentary degree, our ideas about death. 
And this one can say in the same sense as that in which 
one can make this assertion about any natural fact what- 
ever. If our theory of Being assigns to every objective 
fact a character as a relative fulfilment of the ideas which 
refer to it, death also, in so far as it fulfils ideas about 
death, is to just this extent no instance against our theory. 
Or, in case you will to know the facts about death, would 
your will be fulfilled if you remained ignorant of death ? 
Or, once more, as facts now are, for us human beings, 
would you prefer to remain as innocent of any knowledge 
of death as much lower animals than ourselves may be 
ignorant? If you ask a question about death, is your will 
yet fulfilled in case experience refuses the answer? Would 
not many amongst us prefer to know much more than we 
now do as to when and how we ourselves are to die? Is 


378 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


not the very uncertainty of the time of death one of its 
ills for every prudent man? So much then for one aspect 
of the empirical ill called death. So far, to know its 
Being is relatively and imperfectly to fulfil ideas. And 
our theory defines its Being in terms of this fulfilment. 

But death —and, above all, not our own death nearly 
so much as the death of our friends — is an evil in so far 
as it appears in our experience as a temporal defeat of the 
purposes of human love, and of the need of the human 
world for its good men. Well, this is the other, and, for 
our own theory, indeed, the more problematic aspect of 
death. For here the passing fragment of fact is that a 
given human purpose is so far defeated. And this frag- 
ment of fact, as we admit, is obviously somehow a part of 
the real,—a fact of finite Being. And yet our theory 
asserts that what is, as such, fulfils purposes, and fulfils 
too the very purposes of our ideas. 

I have emphasized death as merely one instance, and by 
no means of course the worst instance, of that inestimably 
pathetic story of human defeat and misfortune to which 
our previous examples a moment ago made reference. 
Now of course I accept to the full the responsibility of 
our theory to account in the end, not for the mere fact 
that some finite purposes are defeated, but for the fact 
that, in human experience, the very purposes which 
refer, as ideal strivings, to certain objects as their ends, 
appear, so far as our more direct mortal ken extends, 
to be for the instant defeated in presence of the very 
objects to which they have made reference. It is I who 
fear my friend’s death, and hope for his survival. Yet 
he dies. I have thought beforehand of my object, 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 379 


namely, of my friend’s coming destiny. But my object 
has so far, at least in a measure, entered into my ex- 
perience, and has overwhelmed me, whose idea defined 
the object, with the despair of non-fulfilment. Here is 
a Being in apparently direct conflict with its own idea, 
and an idea apparently at war with its own object. How 
is our theory to explain this? 

I answer, in the first place, precisely as the mystic 
would have done in a similar case: By our own defini- 
tion of Being, you have not empirically found your 
whole final object, the entire and individual fact of 
Being that you seek, so long as you seek still for an 
( Other. It is precisely as the Other that Being is not 


yet empirically present. Loneliness and despair, just 
because they are dissatisfied, look beyond themselves 
for Being. ) And in presence of death you do thus seek 
for the Other, namely, for the meaning of this fact, for 
the solution of this mystery, for the beloved object that 
is gone, for the lost life, for something not here, for 
the unseen, — yes, for the Eternal. And in this your 
search for the eternal lies for you the very meaning of 
death and of finite despair. 

As Mary passionately cried, “They have taken away 
my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him,” 
go every mourner knows precisely this, — that true Being 
is not finally here where death is, but is elsewhere. The 
true object, then, the actual Being that you seek, is not 
found, but merely seems to be lost, at the moment of 
death. Where, then, is that object? Mot here, Not 
here, cries despair. Aye, Elsewhere, answers our teach- 
ing, Elsewhere is precisely the true Being that you seek. 


380 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Look, then, elsewhere. Seek not the living among the 
dead. 

But you will reply: Have we not just admitted that 
death itself is, like any other amongst our countless 
human disasters, a fact of experience? Is not a fact an 
object? Is not an object real? Have we not ourselves 
called it so? Aye, but we have not said that death is 
by itself a Whole object. Death, as far as it comes into 
our experience, is indeed a glimpse of fact, but in the 
moral world it is the most fragmentary of such glimpses 
of reality. Whoever faces it faces nothing that he finds 
as an individual and present reality. What he observes 
is the absence of precisely what he himself defines as 
the Whole of Being that he seeks,— the very longing of 
an unfulfilled idea, which defines the Other, and looks 
elsewhere for the reality. 

Now our theory merely consists in asserting that in 
every such case the reality sought is a life, and a con- 
crete life of fulfilment, and that this reality is, and is in 
its wholeness, elsewhere than at this fragmentary instant 
of human experience. Human experience offers, so far 
as it goes, only a confirmation of this our view. For we 
have said that true Being is essentially a Whole Indi- 


vidual Fact, that does not send you beyond itself, and 
_ that is, therefore, in its wholeness, deathless. Where 


“death is, Being in its wholeness—is not. 


“But,” so one insists, “but my grief, my defeat, my 
despair; are they not real? And are they real as deter- 
mined facts?” I reply: Our theory is indeed responsible 
for an account of how the temporal and empirical defeat 
of a specific, although always fragmentary, human pur- 


THE FOURTH CONCEPTION OF BEING 3881 


pose can be an incident in a deathless life which in its 
wholeness involves the fulfilment of a purpose, and of a 
purpose which includes the very fragmentary purpose 
now temporally defeated. That account, in its more 
complete statement, belongs elsewhere, as the explicit 
discussion of the problem of evil. It is enough at pres- 
ent to point out what all the strongest of human souls 
have observed and reported as a fact of experience; 
namely, that through the endurance and the conquest 
over its own internal ills the spirit wins its best con- 
scious fulfilment. What if this moment of despair be 
but the beginning, or the fragment, of your whole life 
as this winning of the object that you now seek? Our 
theory maintains that, in fact, this is the case. That 
the fulfilment of the whole of a purpose may involve 
the defeat of a part of this very purpose, every experi- 
ence of the beauty of tragedy, of the glory of courage, 
of the nobility of endurance, of the triumph over our 
own selves, empirically illustrates. 

For tragedy wins our interest by making us suffer, 
and yet consent to endure, not the tragic hero’s suffer- 
ing, but our own, for the sake of the spiritual beauty that 
we thereby learn to contemplate. Courage is glorious, 
because it involves a conquest over our own conscious 
shrinking in the presence of danger. Who fears not 
knows not conscious courage. Endurance is noble, be- 
cause it includes a voluntary defeat of our own unwill- 
ingness to endure. And, in general, every form of more 
complex rational life means a triumph over ourselves 
whereby alone we win ourselves. Whoever has not faced 
problems as problems, mysteries as mysteries, defeats as 


3882 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


defeats, knows not what that completer possession of his 
own life means which is the outcome and also the present 
experience of triumph in the midst of finitude and dis- 
aster. For in the victorious warfare with finitude con- 
sists the perfection of the spirit. 


LECTURE IX 


LECTURE IX 
UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 


THE concept of Being often passes for the most ab- 
stract of human ideas. If the first outcome of our quest, 
as presented in the two foregoing discussions, is sound, 
the true concept of Being is the most concrete and living 
of all our ideas. 


I 


We began these lectures indeed with an abstraction, 
with the contrast between telling what an ideal object is, 
and asserting that this object exists. We called this the 
contrast between the internal and the external meaning of 
ideas. This abstraction Realism carried to the extreme, 
asserting that the idea finds the external object merely 
as its indifferent fate. All relations between the two are, 
for Realism, additional facts, existent over and above the 
primary indifference. Hereupon, however, the inner self- 
destruction of Realism, which we found to be the logical 
result of these assumptions, drove us, as we sought for 
truth, into the mystic’s realm. There we first learned 
something of the deeper meaning of the ancient thesis: 
Omne Ens est bonum,—a thesis which indeed appears in 
Aristotle’s doctrine, but which can never be justified on 
a realistic basis. Zo be appeared in this world of the 
mystic to mean the same as to fulfil the inner purpose 

2c 385 


386 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


of ideas. What is, is as such the perfect, the absolute, 
the finality, and in this respect we have indeed found the 
mystic to be right. But the mystic sought the highest 
good of his always consciously imperfect ideas in their 
own simple extinction. And this void proved to be 
meaningless. Here then was, so far, no positive reality. 
We therefore abandoned this region for the more con- 
crete world of modern Critical Rationalism. Here the 
ideas were indeed different from their objects, and cor- 
responded to them. But our difficulty in this realm was 
to define, after all, how our objects were other than our 
ideas, while still remaining authorities to which we made 
valid reference. And so we were still discontent in this 
world of Critical Rationalism. We waited until it should 
be transformed into another. 

The Fourth Conception of Being has now undertaken 
to bring into harmony the motives of all the three 
other conceptions. What is, is other than the mere 
idea, yet not because it externally corresponds thereto, 
but because it completely expresses, in a form that is 
ultimately individual, the very meaning that the finite 
idea consciously, but partially and abstractly, embodies 
in its own general form. The idea wills its own com- 
plete expression. What is, fulfils the whole intent of 
the idea. What is, is therefore at once empirical, for 
it embodies the idea; significant, for it expresses a 
meaning; an individual, for it gives the idea such an 
expression as seeks no other beyond. Whatever is less 
than such a completed life as this, is a fragment of 
Being, a finite idea still consciously in search of its 
own wholeness, a mere kind of relative fulfilment such 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 387 


as needs, implies, and looks to another to complete its 
own purpose. 

On the other hand, every such duality of idea and 
object, or of fragment and whole, is secondary to and 
subservient to the one will or purpose which the idea 
partially, and the completed individual life of the ob- 
ject wholly, embodies, and embodies even by including 
the fragmentary will of every idea. If you want to 
express the truth in its wholeness, you must not merely 
say first, There is an tdea, and secondly, There is also 
an object, and thirdly, These two correspond. For when 
you speak thus, you deal in abstractions; you your- , 
self so far seek as your own Other the very mean- 
ing and sense of these abstractions: and merely to 
speak thus is to define neither truth nor Being. You 
must rather say: There is an embodied life, a ful- 
filled meaning, an empirically expressed intent, an in- 
dividual whole, that attains its own end. This is what 
we mean when we talk of what is real. To be such 
a whole life, this alone is to be real. Now of this life 
my idea, when I speak of an object, is a fragment, as 
well as, in its relatively present fulfilment, a general 
type. As a fragment, my idea looks elsewhere for the 
rest of itself. As a type of imperfect fulfilment, it 
aims at the complete experience of the whole of this 
type. But as really one with its object, my idea in 
thus seeking its Other, seeks only the expression of its 
own will in an empirical and conscious life. But this 
life is. For that any idea, true or relatively erroneous, 
has an object at all, implies such fulfilment. 

The that thus comes into unity with the what. What 


888 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


my object is, my idea at this instant not only imper- 
fectly defines, but fragmentarily presents in its own 
transient way. That my object is, is true in so far as 
the whole what of my object is empirically expressed in 
an individual life, which is my real world. 

Thus, although Realism assured us that the what could 
never predetermine the that, the essence never prove 
the existence, and although this has become a mere 
commonplace of popular metaphysic, we now have found 
how the that, the very existence of the world, prede- 
termines the what, or the essence of things, and the 
fact of Being has become for us the richest of concrete 
facts. 

For despite the relative failures and errors of our 
finitude, the real world cannot fail to express the whole 
genuine intent of our ideas, their completely understood 
internal meaning. Ideas, in other words, in so far as 
they are consistent with their own completed ideal 
purpose, cannot remain unexpressed in a concrete life 
of individual experience. For if they remained unex- 
pressed, their final meaning could only take the form 
of hypotheses whose verbal statement would begin with 
an if. The final truth would be that ¢f certain empiri- 
cal expressions took place, certain ideal results would 
follow. But as we have seen, what is merely valid, is 
not even valid. For the Third Conception of Being 
failed to express how even itself could be true, just 
because it left us with a mere general what, and never 
reached the that. 

Suppose, in fact, that what we have with equal pro- 
priety called the meaning and the will of our finite 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 389 


ideas now partially embodied in this flying instant, is 
to remain in the end unexpressed, so that_only an f- 
proposition, valid, but disembodied, contains the truth 
of the world when viewed with reference to ideas. 
Then still you do not escape from the facts. For the 
fact of this non-expression of our ideas, has, by this 
very hypothesis, its own real Being. But what form of 
Being shall this fact of the non-expression of the mean- 
ing of our ideas, this refusal of the universe concretely 
to fulfil our purposes, actually possess? Shall this brute 
fact that our ideas are not expressed possess the reality 
of an object independent of all ideas? But such a 
reality, as we now know, is a logical impossibility. 
Moreover, an object independent of all ideas, even if 
such an object were otherwise possible, could defeat, or 
could refuse real expression to no idea whatever. For 
what my idea seeks, and what therefore could conceiv- 
ably be refused to it, by another, is simply its own ex- 
pression in just that reality which it means and intends 
to possess as its own object. The reality, therefore, 
which shall positively refuse it expression, is ¢pso facto 
the reality to which the idea itself appeals, and is not 
independent of this appeal. For you are not put in the 
wrong by a reality to which you have made no refer- 
ence; and error is possible only concerning objects that 
we actually mean as our own objects. The object that 
is to defeat my partial and fragmentary will is then zpso 
facto my whole will, my final purpose, my total mean-_ 
ing determinately and definitively expressed. Hypothe- 
ses never verified, 7f-propositions to which no concrete 
expression corresponds, have part in existence of course, 


390 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


but only as fragments of ideas. They exist only as 
errors take place. I can be in partial error, but only 
because at this instant I may imperfectly grasp my own 
whole meaning as I refer to my object. My will, as it 
is now transiently embodied, can fail in any partial 
way of realization, but only because I now fail to be 
wholly aware of my own will. Therefore hypothetical 
propositions counter to fact are possible only as frag- 
ments. But however far I wander in the wildernesses 
of my temporal experience, the eternal fulfilment of 
my own life encompasses me. I escape not from the 
meshes of the net of my own will. I fail at this in- 
stant to observe this fact, merely because of the imper- 
fection of my momentary form of human consciousness. 
I interpret my facts hypothetically and often falsely, in 
so far as I fail to grasp just now my own whole 
purpose. 

Schopenhauer defines my world as my own will. If by 
my will he meant the individual embodiment and expres- 
sion of the whole meaning of my ideas, he would thus be | 
right. But then he would indeed be no pessimist. For 
the longing and the misery of finitude that in my present 
form of human consciousness now so frequently bound 
the horizon of my darkened instants of fragmentary expe- 
rience — this longing and misery, when they beset me, I 
say, involve that very search for Another, that very dis- 
satisfaction with the abstractness and dreary generality of 
my present ideas, which I express in my own way when- 
ever, out of the depths, I cry after Reality. People often 
object to Schopenhauer’s view of the world as the will, 
that that doctrine, as Schopenhauer frequently expresses 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 391 


it, is a mere Animism. We know, they say, that the 
world is real; but how should we know that its inner 
Being, so foreign to ours, resembles our own will? But 
our own Fourth Conception of Being is not in the older 
sense animistic. For it does not first say, The world is 
known to be real, and then add, And we conjecture that this 
reality resembles that of our own will. What our view 
asserts is that the world is and can be real only as the 
object expressing in final, in individual form, the whole 
meaning which our finite will, imperfectly embodied in 
fleeting instants, seeks and attempts to define as its own 
Other, and also as precisely its own ultimate expression. 
In other words, the world, from our point of view, be- 
comes real only as such an ultimate expression of our 
ideas. But when the sceptic here retorts, But perhaps then 
no world is real at all, we reply with the now several times 
repeated observation that the non-being of any specific 
object is subject to the same conditions as the Being of 
all things. What is not, is not, merely because our 
complete object, the complete expression of our whole 
meaning, when, in this transient moment, we speak of the 
thing that is not, excludes its presence. The very possi- 
bility of our ignorance and error implies the presence of 
the whole self-conscious truth. 


II 


Results in philosophy must needs lead to new problems. 
With this definition in mind of what it is to be, how shall 
we next undertake to describe that more special constitu- 
tion of the world which our concept of Being involves ? 

The general title of our course called attention to a 


\ 


392 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


certain well-known problem for which we are now at 
length fully prepared. The World and the Individual, — 
these are now upon our hands. Their Being we have 
defined, not only in general, but with an explicit refer- 
ence to both of them. But what we have so far, for the 
greater part of our discussion, deliberately ignored, is an 
attempt to describe in any detail their precise mutual re- 
lations. It is just to these relations that we shall hence- 
forth devote ourselves, both in the brief remaining space 
of this first half of our series, and in all that is to con- 
stitute the second half of these lectures. What is, as 


~ we have already asserted, is the World. We have also 


asserted that it is the Individual. Both terms appear 
equivocal. The world is real,—ay, but what world ? 
The world, so our Fourth Conception has answered, — the 
world that any idea views as its own wholly expressed 
meaning and object. “Yes,” you may say, “but are not 
our ideas many and various? Is it not one thing to 
think of mathematical truth, and quite another to think 
of physical truth? Is not the world of the mathemati- 
cian a different object from the world of the moralist ? 
Are these not then various worlds adapted to express vari- 
ous meanings? Do these worlds constitute one realm, — 
a single universe? And if so, how?” But we have also 
said that the individual is real. Here still more naturally 
you may ask, “ What individual?” Our answer has 
been: The whole individual life that expresses and pre- 
sents the meaning of any single idea. But you will still 
properly be dissatisfied. You will say: “ Are not the in- 
dividuals as various as are all our various ideas? And 
how are these individuals of which you have so far spoken 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 393 


to be related to what we mean when we talk of individual 
men, of souls, of moral personalities, or of one man as dif- 
ferent from any other man?” 

Now these are precisely the central questions of re- 
ligion. ‘These, therefore, are the problems most signifi- 
cant for our whole quest. These two are issues which no 
one who attacks the central concepts of metaphysical doc- 
trine ought to ignore. The unity of the world, the tri- 
umph of the divine plan, the supremacy of good in the 
universe, these are the interests which religion expresses 
by asserting that God reigns as a rational, self-conscious, 
world-possessing, and single Being. The freedom of indi- 
viduals, the deathless meaning of the life of each person, 
the opportunity for moral action, these are the interests 
of every form of ethical religion. I have been forced, 
before approaching these issues, to dwell so elaborately 
and so long upon the concept of Being, because that con- 
cept is no abstraction, but is precisely the richest and 
most inclusive of all conceptions, and because, until we 
had grasped its meaning, any speech as to the various 
beings that may be found in the world, and as to their 
relations to the whole and to one another, would have 
altogether lacked metaphysical foundation. But our task 
having been so far accomplished, we are prepared to pass 
from the doctrine of what it is to be real, to the conse- 
quent theory regarding what are the existent realities. 
Hereupon, however, we enter upon the true task of a 
religious theory. 

The problems just stated, if one views them in advance, 
appear to admit of two opposed solutions. Of these the 
one would lay the emphasis upon the unity of the whole 


394 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


world, while the other would insist both upon the variety, 
and, in some modified way, upon the relative indepen- 
dence of the individual lives. The one thesis could be 
briefly summarized thus: This Fourth Conception of 
Being asserts that what is, expresses, in a complete life of 
concrete experience, the whole meaning of the ideas that 
. refer to any object. / Now, when any one of us rationally 
speaks of the universe, of the whole of Being, he has an _ 
idea, and this idea means precisely the entire world itself. 

Whatever life pulsates anywhere, whatever meaning is at ji 
any time fragmentarily seen embodied in flying moments, 

—all such lives and meanings form the object of our 

metaphysical inquiry. Now our very power to make the 

whole of Being our problem, already implies that the - 
object of our inquiry, whatever it proves to contain, has 
as the fulfilment of one idea, the constitution of a single 
life of concrete fulfilment. All varieties of individual 
expression are thus subordinate to the unity of the whole. 
All differences amongst various ideas result from and are 
secondary to the very presence of one univorsal type of 
ideal meaning in all the realm of life. All appecrance of 
isolation in finite beings, all the fragmentariness of their 
finitude, these are indeed but aspects of the whole truth. 


~~ The One is in all, and all are in the One. All meanings, 


if completely developed, unite in one meaning, and this 
it is which the real world expresses. Every idea, if fully 
developed, is of universal application. Since this one 
world of expression is a life of: experience fulfilling ideas, 
it possesses precisely the attributes which the ages have 
most associated with the name of God. For God is the 
Absolute Being, and the perfect fulness of life. Only 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 395 


God, when thus viewed, is indeed not other than his 
world, but is the very life of the world taken in its 
wholeness as a single conscious and self-possessed life. 
In God we live and move and have our Being, 

The other thesis, at first sight apparently opposed to the 
foregoing, may be stated as follows: This Fourth Con- 
ception of Being appeals, when rightly understood, to the 
self of each individual thinker. And it appeals to indi- 
vidual thinkers only, whether human or divine. We have 
often spoken in the foregoing of any idea as if, taken 
apart from other ideas, it possessed, so to speak, a selfhood 
of its own, the selfhood imperfectly exemplified, tran- 
siently embodied, in your consciousness at this instant 
while you think and purpose. Now this manner of speech 
might indeed be said to lay too much stress upon mere 
fragments. A momentary human idea is indeed not by 
itself alone a self, although it does fragmentarily contain 
the partial will of a self. But the meaning that it con- 
tains belongs in truth to some individual thinker, to 
this soul, to this man, to you or to me. Now, however 
mysterious may be the difference between you and me, we 
are in such wise different beings, that the unity of Being 
must find room for our variety. Above all, our ethical 
freedom, our practical, even if limited, moral independence 
of one another, must be preserved. The world then is a 
realm of individuality. Hence it must be a realm of 
individuals, self-possessed, morally free, and sufficiently 
independent of one another to make their freedom of 
action possible and finally significant. 

These are the two possible interpretations of our Fourth 
Conception. It will be our attempt in what immediately 


396 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


follows, in this and in the next lecture, to develope and to 
reconcile both interpretations. We shall maintain that 
the unity of the divine life, and the universality of the 
divine plan, define one aspect, and a most essential aspect 
of the world of our Fourth Conception. We shall also 
maintain and try to make in general explicit, how this 
unity is not only consistent with the ethical meaning of 
finite individuality, but is also the sole and sufficient 
basis thereof. 


Ill 


The unity of the whole world, and the unversality of 
the idea of Being, first demand our attention. We have 
asserted that our Fourth Conception involves the absolute 
unity of the final knowing process. In precisely what 
sense and for what reason do we make this assertion ? 

Our concept of Being implies that whatever is, is con- 
sciously known as the fulfilment of some idea, and is so 
known either by ourselves at this moment, or by a con- 
sciousness inclusive of our own. If we address the finite 
thinker, and consider the implications of his knowledge, 
we point out to him that what he now experiences is but 
a fragment of the object that he means. But the object 
that he means, so we tell him, can have. no form of Being 
that is independent of his meaning. Nor can he be said 
to have any meaning not now wholly fulfilled in his pres- 
ent experience, unless that very meaning is present to an 
insight that includes and completes his own conscious 
insight according to his own real intent. This essentially 
idealistic account of what it is to be, we have now elabo- 
rately justified by an analysis of the very concept of mean- 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 397 


ing, or of the relation of idea and object. If any fact, not 
at any instant consciously present to the finite thinker, is 
really meant by him, then there is something true, about 
his consciousness, which his momentary consciousness of 
his own meaning at once implies, and nevertheless in its 
internal meaning does not directly and wholly exhaust 
for him, here and now. (And this relatively external 
truth which is intended by the finite consciousness, and 
which is inclusive of all that at any instant this finite 
consciousness finds present to itself, is a truth whose Be- 
ing can be neither of the realistic type, nor of the mystical 
type, nor of the merely valid type of Being, nor of any 
form except a conscious form,—a form whose existence 
includes and completes what the finite thinker at any 
moment undertakes to know. It follows of necessity 
that in the world as we define it, there can exist no fact 
except as a known fact, as a fact present to some con- 
sciousness, namely, precisely to the consciousness that 
fulfils the whole meaning of whoever asserts that this 
fact is real. 

In view of this essential feature of our finite situation 
as thinkers, it follows at once that the whole world of 
truth and being must exist only as present, in all its 
variety, its wealth, its relationships, its entire constitu- 
tion, to the unity of a single consciousness, which includes 
both our own and all finite conscious meanings in one 
final eternally present insight. This complete insight is 
indeed not merely one, but is observant of all the real 
finite varieties, of experience, of meaning, and of life. 
Nor is the external insight merely timeless; but it is 
possessed of an inclusive view of the whole of time, and 


6) 


398 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


of whatever, when taken in its wholeness, this our time- 
process means. This final view, for which the realm of 
Being possesses the unity of a single conscious whole, 
indeed ignores no fragment of finite consciousness; but 
it sees all at once, as the realm of truth in its entirety. 

This, I say, is the unquestionable and inevitable out- 
come of our Fourth Conception of Being. And the proof 
of this outcome is very brief. 

For whatever is has its being, once more, only as a 
fact observed, and exists as the fulfilment of a conscious 
meaning. That is our definition of Being. But now let 
one say, There are many facts, ideas, and meanings in the 
world. Each of these exists only as the object that fulfils 
the whole meaning of a knowing process. So far, then, 
there exist many knowing processes, each with its own 
meaning fulfilled. The world so far contains many 
knowers, many ideas, or many Selves, if you are pleased 
to use that word. But our Fourth Conception hereupon 
continues: Are these many knowers mutually related or 
not? Answer as you will. Let them be or not be in 
any specific sort of mutual relation. Then this, the fact 
about their relations, exists, but exists only as a known 
fact. For our theory asserts universally that all which 
has Being exists only as known object. The fact about 
the true relations of the various knowing beings and 
processes is, however, a fact unintelligible except as ex- 
pressing and including their own very existence; and 
by hypothesis this inclusive fact is a consciously known 
fact. That the various knowers are, then, and that they 
are in given relationship or in given relative indepen- 
dence of one another,—all this is a consciously known 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 399 


fact. There is, in consequence, a conscious act or pro- 
cess for which the existence and the relations of all the 
various knowing processes constitute a present and con- 
sciously observed truth. But this assertion, the inevi- 
table consequence of our doctrine, implies that one final 
knower knows all knowing processes in one inclusive act. 

Moreover, let the world of fact, taken in its whole- 
ness, possess any constitution that you please. Assert 
that any degree of multiplicity, of mutual isolation, of 
temporal succession, of variety in individual existence, 
or of other dividing principle, variegates the universe, 
or keeps finite acts, meanings, and interests asunder. 
Then, by hypothesis, all this variety and mutual isola- 
tion is fact, and by our Fourth Conception of Being it 
all exists only as a consciously known fact. If the 
sundered finite forms of consciousness are by hypothesis 
not mutually inclusive, their very sundering, according 
to our conception of Being, implies their common pres- 
ence as facts to a knower who consciously observes their 
sundering as the fulfilment of his own single meaning. 

For otherwise the sundering would exist without 
being fully and consciously present to anybody; since, 
in so far as a is sundered from 8, there is, neither in a 
alone nor in 6 alone, a consciousness of all that the sun- 
dering implies for both. 

And, finally, the knower of the universe in its whole- 
ness can possess, by our definition, no Being that is 
unknown to himself. For whatever is, is consciously 
known. And if the being of a is unknown to a, but is 
known only to another, namely, to 8, there so far exists 
a fact, namely, the relation of a and 6, whose presence 


400 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


to knowledge has not yet been defined. But if what- 
ever exists, exists only as known, the existence of 
knowledge itself must be a known existence, and can 
finally be known only to the final knower himself, who, 
like Aristotle’s God, is so far defined in terms of abso- 
lute self-knowledge.’ 

Herewith the purely abstract statement of the conse- 
quences of our Fourth Conception, so far as it concerns 
the unity of the world, has been made, in the only form 
consistent with our conception. What is, is present to 
the insight of a single Self-conscious Knower, whose life 
includes all that he knows, whose meaning is wholly 
fulfilled in his facts, and whose self-consciousness is 
complete. And our reason for asserting this as the 
Reality lies in the now thoroughly expounded doctrine 
that no other conception of Being than this one can be 
expressed without absolute self-contradiction. Whoever 
denies this conception covertly, so we affirm, asserts it 
whenever, expressly or by implication, he talks of Being 
at all. ( For to talk of Being is to speak of fact that is 
either present to a consciousness or else is nothing. And 
from that one aspect of our definition which is involved 
in the thesis that whatever is, is consciously known, all 
the foregoing view of the unity of Being inevitably follows. 

Such an abstract general statement of the results of our 
definition of what it is to be, may well be illustrated, 
however, through an approach to the whole matter of the 
unity of Being from another side, namely, from the more 
empirical side. For in conceiving of all that is as a 
single whole, as the life, the meaning, and the conscious- 
ness of a single Self, we are not limited to merely uni- 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 401 


versal considerations. Human thought has long been 
conscious of some aspects of the unity of Being. The 
world of ordinary experience, of common. sense, and of 
science, has already its provisional unity, which our own 
idealism must view as a genuine, if fragmentary, hint of 
the final unity. Let us then next briefly study this rela- 
tive unity of the empirical world. It will help to free 
from barren abstractions our own insight. 

Our Fourth Conception of Being is through and 
through, in one of its aspects, an empirical conception. 
We derive the very idea of fulfilment and of purpose from 
the relative and transient fulfilment of purpose that any 
one of our more thoughtful conscious moments presents 
tous. And despite the foregoing use of abstractions, it 
is no part of our idealistic plan to undertake to deduce 
a priort any of the special facts that may exist anywhere 
in the universe. For our view of the that predetermines 
indeed the general constitution of the what, but not our 
power to predict, apart from experience, what nature and 
finite mind, what space and time, are to contain. Accord- 
ingly in reviewing the empirical world with reference to 
the special nature of its unity, we must once more be sub- 
ject to the control of the facts of the universe as known 
to common sense and to science. We must frankly recog- 
nize the seeming varieties of these facts. We must look 
for unity only in the midst of their empirical diversity. 
We must see in what sense just this empirical world is to 
be interpreted in terms of our Fourth Conception. And, 
in fact, when we thus turn back to experience as our 
guide, the knowable universe appears a refractory object 
to which to apply our theory of the unity of Being. 

2D 


402 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


IV 


For, apart from the definition of the ontological predi- 
cate, the subjects of which we usually assert Being belong 
to certain well-known but sharply contrasted types. In 
the first place, we ordinarily ascribe Being to nature, to 
the physical world so far as it is contemporaneous with 
ourselves. We say this whole present physical world 
now is. We regard this world as a peculiarly concrete 
instance of what it is to be. And in particular Realism 
often prefers present natural objects as its instances of 
Being. This natural realm is spread out before us in 
space, and appears to be of an infinitely wealthy variety 
of constitution. In the second place, we ascribe Being 
to our fellow-men, and, in ‘particular, to their conscious 
inner lives as beings that possess or that are minds. ‘This 
social realm is also one that we may call a second region 
of concrete fact. In the third place, and in a very 
notable way, we also attribute reality to the whole world 
of past events. We may say indeed that the past zs not 
now, or that it no longer is. But we may say with equal 
assurance that the past has a genuine and irrevocable 
constitution, and that assertions now made about the past 
are at present true or false. In fact, true and false wit- 
ness in most practical matters relates in general to the 
past. We moreover make the past a region for historical 
research ; or, as in the case of geology, we regard past 
events as the topics of a strictly inductive and very 
elaborate natural science whose work is done in the 
present. So the past is for us a very genuine being. 
Our knowledge and interpretation of the present world, 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 403 


whether human or physical, is furthermore based upon 
our views as to the nature of these past events. For the 
present world consists for us of observed or assumed facts, 
defined and interpreted in the light of presupposed hap- 
penings. Any given present object, for instance, is seen 
to be this or this object, because we recognize it as identi- 
cal in character with a fact supposed to have been known 
in the past. | In the main, present Being is thus for us, so 
to speak, past Being warmed over. There is nothing that 
we regard as now real unless by virtue of the express or 
implied judgment that, since in the past this or that 
has existed, this or that present existence may in conse- 
quence be assumed or accepted as a continuation or as an 
outcome of the realm of past Being. Leave out the realm 
of the past from our conception of the real world, and our 
empirical universe at this instant would shrivel, for us, 
into a mere collection of almost uninterpreted sensations. 
The world as it is just now has for us Being as a supple- 
ment to the world that has been. We shall still further 
see, in a moment, how manifold are the illustrations of 
this truth. 

In the next place, however, we ascribe, although with a 
decidedly different emphasis, a form of Being to the fu- 
ture, and to all that is therein to happen. The future, we 
indeed say, 7s not yet. But present assertions about the 
future are, even now, and despite a well-known remark of 
Aristotle’s, either true or false, and that quite apart from 
any theory as to fate, or chance, or freedom. A coming 
eclipse in any given year is regarded by an astronomer as 
reality, when he adjusts himself to its Being by preparing 
an expedition to observe that eclipse. Again, it is now 


404 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


true either that I shall be alive a year from now or that I 
shall not be alive. Life insurance is a provision made to 
meet future facts that are regarded as realities, and that 
are respected accordingly. Future Being is thus the fa- 
miliar object of hope and fear, of common sense prudence, 
‘as well as of predictive science. Omit the future from 
your scheme of Being, and your world loses all its prac- 
tical human interest. To be sure, the future, unlike the 
past, is not regarded as irrevocable, and a believer in free- 
dom thinks the future partly contingent. But even the 
contingent future event has its Being. Wait, namely, 
and you shall find out what that Being is, while even now 
the principle of contradiction applies to assertions about 
it. Suppose a judge endowed with free will, and delib- 
erating as to the fate of a prisoner left to his judicial dis- 
cretion. While the prisoner awaits the judge’s decision, 
the fact awaited is supposed by this hypothesis to be a 
contingent fact. But is not the prisoner anxiously ex- 
pecting his own discovery of the Being of that very fact ? 
And while he waits, is he dealing with a mere fancy or 
dream, or a baseless unreality? “No, the dreaded decision, 
although future, and by this hypothesis contingent, is a 
fact, and has Being; and that is why one awaits its 
announcement with such concern. 

Present Being of two sorts, namely in nature and in 
minds, Past and Future Being, these four types of reality 
we have now enumerated as types recognized by com- 
mon sense and natural science. Our study of the Third 
Conception of Being, some time since, made us familiar 
with the still different sort of reality ordinarily attributed 
to the realm of moral and of mathematical truth. This 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 405 


realm of eternal validity common sense as well as science 
recognizes ; and as we further saw, when we dealt with 
our Third Conception, the more transient world of prices, 
of credits, of social standing, and of institutional exist- 
ence, is likewise for common sense a realm of true Being, 
yet a realm neither identical with nature, nor capable of 
being reduced to the contents present within any number 
of individual human minds. We have abandoned the 
Third Conception. But our new conception’ must find | 
room for the typical instances of Being of the third type, | 
namely, for the mathematical objects, for the socially and 
morally valid beings. And now, finally, after surveying 
all these so various types of beings, we have to recall the 
comment often already made in these lectures, and to as- 
sert that not only these different kinds of realities, but 
also the concrete experiences whereby we come to observe, 
and the ideas whereby we ourselves define, describe, and 
in general undertake to know these very objects, are them- 
selves also in their own measure real, and are as truly 
real as are the various finite objects of common sense 
that we know. 

Now our Fourth Conception of Being, if it is to be ade- 
quate to the demands of common sense, must be adjusted 
to at least all of these varied types of beings. Nature, 
and the minds of our fellows, together with the contents 
of these minds, the past and the future beings and events, 
the eternally and transiently valid truths, and our own 
experiences and ideas which have all these different sorts 
of Being for their objects,—all these apparent facts 
either must be alike comprehended within our final defi- 
nition of what it is to be, or else must be deliberately 


406 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


explained away as illusory instances, as mere appearances 
that have no true Being. But whether accepted or ex- 
plained away, these sorts of beings must at all events be 
taken into account in attempting to define reality. 


Vv 


If, looking over the broad field suggested by the fore- 
going list of the sorts of beings recognized by ordinary 
human belief, we thereupon attempt to reduce to unity the 
characters possessed by these supposed. objects in so far as 
they are said to be real, our next impression may be once 
more that, despite our Fourth Conception, the Being which 
the various classes of facts have in common can only be 
something extremely abstract and barren. If the past, 
say yesterday, or the Silurian period, has Being in some 
irrevocable sense, despite the fact that we also say, It no 
longer is, what has such a past in common with the pres- 
ent, except that each belongs to time? And have both 
past and present Being any less abstract character than 
this in common with the future, say with the coming 
history of Europe five centuries hence? Of that coming 
history we say, Jt is not yet. If in a sense it still has 
Being, because it also is even now the object of possible 
true or false assertions, has this type of Being still any- 
thing but the name in common with the past or with the 
present? Or again, if one compares the existence which 
the mathematician attributes to the roots of an equation 
of the nth degree, or to the irrational numbers and dif- 
ferential coefficients, with the existence that you now 
ascribe to your friend’s mind, when you converse with 
him, —in what but the name do these types of Being 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 407 


resemble each other or the foregoing types. And finally, 
when you say, both of your own warm present inner ex- 
perience, and of to-day’s price of wheat in Chicago or 
London, that these two have alike real Being, or when 
you add that the British Constitution is also a reality, 
is the ontological predicate applied to these different ob- 
jects in anything like the same sense? And so does it 
not seem that, as the scholastics would have said, or as 
Aristotle himself remarked, Being, despite our Fourth 
Conception, persists in remaining an essentially equivocal 
word? Only, to us, at the present point reached in these 
lectures ——to us who are no longer realists and who no 
longer love barren abstractions, the equivocation seems 
so great as to be altogether hopeless? We were to find 
unity. But are not the facts once more against us? 

So much then merely for an impression as regards the 
hopelessness of any one final and still empirical unifica- 
tion of Being. But, on the other hand, if you look 
closer, does it not soon become afresh evident that all 
these various forms are indeed but mere variations of a 
single theme, mere differentiations of one idea, whose 
unity and universality remain indivisible amidst all its 
vicissitudes ? 

For, consider: What did we just observe about past 
and present? Attempt to abstract from any reference to 
past Being, and what becomes of any concrete notion of 
present Being? Where are you now? In this city, in 
this room, aware of yourself as this person? But if I 
ask you not merely how you know all this to be really so, 
but what you mean by these various expressions, you at 
once refer me to the past, not merely for your warrant, 


408 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


but even for your very meaning. This city exists for 
you only as the recognized city, that is familiar to you 
because it has long been here. In itself, apart from just 
your private recognition, it is what it has become. | It is 
the outcome of former stages of its existence. This 
University is the living presence, in newly developed and 
growing form, of its own historic past. That is what the 
present University means. Its present is inseparable 
from its past. You too are yourself because at this in- 
stant you relate yourself to your own past. The mean- 
ing of the past is a necessity, if you are to give to your 
present any rational meaning. Nor is this true alone of 
your knowledge about yourself. It is true of the very 
Being that you attribute to your present facts. How- 
ever rapidly any Being grows, its very growth means 
relation to its own earlier Being. And no recondite dis- 
cussion of the supposed permanence of substance is in 
the least needed to remind you, even if you wholly ab- 
stract from the traditional doctrines of substance, that 
whatever novelties the present may contain, these “very 
novelties get their character, both for you, and for any 
one to whom they are real at all, by virtue of their rela- 
tion to past beings and events, so that if, per impossibile, 
the whole past of temporal Being were absolutely stricken 
out, the present, which would then involve no historical 
relations to the foregoing, no entrance of novelty into the 
old order, no growth, no decay, no endurance, and no con- 
tinuance of a former process in new forms, would simply 
lose every element that now gives it rational coherence. 
Far then from being merely contrasted with present 
Reality, past Reality, viewed in general, is a correlated 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 409 


region of that very whole of temporal existence in which 
alone the present itself has any comprehensible place or 
even any conceivable Being. Nor can any fact of nature, 
however remote from us it now seems, be viewed by us 
as real without being caught in the net of this universal 
time-order. 

But just so the future, not, indeed, when viewed 
as to its unknown details, but when conceived as the 
region into which the present is passing away, when 
regarded as containing the goal of all our hopes, and the 
decision of all our cherished interests and destinies, —is 
not this future so bound up in one world of Being with 
the present, that, if we could indeed abstract from future 
Being, present Being would again lose not only all of its 
practical interest, but also a large part of its theoretical 
meaning? Observe any object that you please, in a 
world of time and change, and the question, What is it? 
is in fact logically and inseparably bound up with the 
two questions, What was it? and Whither is it tending? 
Consider so abstract an object as the position of a mate- 
rial particle in space, as studied in dynamics. That 
position so studied becomes at once a place in a path, 
meaningless except as viewed with reference to the past 
and future positions of the particle under the system of 
forces acting upon it. For the theory of heat, the pres- 
ent temperature of a cooling body, is a state in a series 
of past and future states, determined by the laws of the 
conduction of heat. . And in human affairs, just as pres- 
ent history is an outcome of former ages, precisely so it 
is a prelude to a future. And when we say that a youth, 
or a nation, has a future, has a destiny, we refer to an 


410 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


aspect of the being in question that we regard as a very 
real aspect. The assertion, The soul is immortal, is again 
' an assertion about the supposed real Being of the soul. 
It has a reference to the present Being of this soul, yet it 
is ipso facto an assertion about the future. And common 
sense asks the question, Do you believe that there is a 
future life? Plainly all such expressions regard future 
Being as a reality, and inseparable from the present. 

Yesterday, to-day, and to-morrow, the past, the pres- 
ent, the future, and all the ages, thus enter the realm of 
conceived temporal Being together. So surely as time 
is, they all alike are. Their sequence is the actuality 
of the temporal order. Ignorant as you are of the de- 
tailed facts of any of them, you still have to say that 
temporal Being, in its wholeness, has to be conceived as 
logically coherent, and is not without all of them alike. 
If the future is for you uncertain, much of what you 
regard as the present is uncertain also, and the same is 
true of the past. These three sorts of Being, then, are 
not to be sundered. They are merely distinguishable 
aspects of one conception. The illusion that they are 
separable arises only when you neglect both their con- 
tinuity, and that coherence of meaning which forces you 
constantly to see in the lines of your friend’s face his 
past reflected, in your own memories your very self 
expressed, and in your future the continuation and ex- 
pression of the present Being of your will. And once 
more this temporal unity applies to the whole of nature. 
In one time all events are conceived as occurring. 

As to possible, or valid, Being,— we already saw, in 
our former discussion, how impossible it is to separate 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 411 


that type of Being from the concrete present experience 
in terms of which you define it, or from the past experi- 
ence, whose laws you expect to find repeated when you 
define physical possibilities. If you write down an equa- 
tion, and prove its properties, or demonstrate that it has 
roots, you actually deal with presented symbols and dia- 
grams, with calculations whose outcome you now ob- 
serve; in brief, with data of experience here and now. 
If you somehow extend into infinity the valid meaning 
of these present experiences, your right to do this in- 
volves the unity of your present mathematical experience 
with the whole realm of reality to which you refer. And 
if you define a physical possibility, such as the possible 
freezing of a given body of water, or the possible observa- 
tions of a coming eclipse, you presuppose that certain 
laws of past experience and of past Being will hold 
valid in the future; and by virtue of this relation only 
can you undertake to say of the possible physical expe- 
rience, Jt zs valid. 

Validity then, if one rightly affirms it at all, is a type 
of Being absolutely bound up with the Being of present, 
of past, and of future experience. Its Being is even for 
common sense one with their Being. 

Despite all the contrasts of even the world of common 
sense, we deal so far then with one conceived infinitely 
complex whole, whose Being is of one inclusive type, 
though differentiated into various types. 

The kind of Being that we ascribe to the minds of our 
human fellows remains to be here very briefly considered. 
As a fact, and as we shall later see more in detail, when 
we come to the problems of the second half of the present 


412 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


course of lectures, the Being of my fellow, in general, is, 
for me, inseparable from my idea of my own Being. As 
an essentially social creature, I have no rational and self- 
conscious life for myself, except by virtue of literal and 
ideal contrasts, and other social relationships, with men 
whom I conceive as my fellows. I can indeed change or 
spare very many present relations to other men without 
losing myself. I can live in the memory of past social 
intercourse. I can enjoy rational communion with ideal, 
or at all events with unseen, comrades, as children, as 
poets, and as many wise souls do; but if you suppose me 
even in memory and in fancy as well as in fact absolutely 
solitary, I should lose my-very consciousness of my own 
meaning as this person living in this world. My whole 
Being then is bound up with my ideas of my real and 
ideal and unseen fellows, —of their esteem or rivalry, of 
the tasks that they set me to do, of my office as their 
comrade, opponent, rival, enemy, friend, or servant, —in 
brief, — of their relations to me. 

It follows that their Being also is inseparably bound 
up, for me, with my notion, not only of my present self, 
| but of the past, present, future, and possible world that I 
regard as real. 

And now, if, with this whole series of considerations in 
mind, we survey once more the types of objects to which 
we ascribe Being, we find that the very conception of the 
various types of Being which we first distinguished, de- 
mands, even upon purely empirical grounds, their reunion 
in one whole conception of what it is to be real. For 
what we have discovered is not merely that various ob- 
jects are in physical or in moral ways connected in the 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 413 


real world, although this is universally true, but that the 
fundamental fashions of Being themselves which we as- 
cribe to objects, such fashions as are exemplified by past, 
present, future, determinately possible, or mentally real 
Being, are, just as ways of possessing reality, logically in- 
separable, so that we cannot abandon one of these fashions 
of Being as illusory, without at once abandoning them all, 
and surrendering, like the mystic, all of our finite distinc- 
tions as mere dreams. Thus our world, however many 
and various its objects, possesses what we may call Onto- 
logical Unity, in so far as all its types of Being, concrete 
and abstract, appear as various aspects of one type of 
Being. Nor can you sunder any single idea of an iso- 
lated real object from the network established by ideas of 
reality in general. The whole of this world stands or 
falls together. 

Considerations of this sort are by no means stated in 
ultimate form, for they have been based upon a provi- 
sional acceptance of the world of common sense, with all 
of its classes of facts. Yet only by such provisional ac- 
ceptance can we get before us the facts of the empirical 
world ready for criticism. What we now see is that all 
our human ideas of real Beings form portions of a single 
system. All varieties of individuals and of individual 
ideas must be subordinate to the unity of this system. 


VI 


Our criticism of the constitution of this system, as we 
men conceive it can be made, for present purposes, very 
summary. We have no right to limit the constitution 
of universal life by the categories of human experience 


414 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


taken merely as human experience. The very meaning 
of our own ideas regarding the interpretation of nature 
will be found, in our later cosmological discussions, to 
involve the thesis that the realm called our own finite 
experience is only, so to speak, a very special case of an 
universal type. When the modern doctrine of evolution 
regards man as a product and outcome of nature, our own 
view of the universe will in the end have to accept the 
extremely subordinate place that this empirical doctrine 
assigns to the finite being called man amongst the beings 
that people nature. Our cosmology must not be anthro- 
pocentric in any special sense. ‘There is, indeed, a sense, 
in which, according to our view, any rational idea in the 
whole universe seeks and in its complete development 
finds, as the expression of its ultimate meaning, the whole 
of the universe. But we have no right whatever to re- 
gard man as the only finite being whose ideas are rational. 
On the contrary, as we shall see in the second half of the 
present course, there is no possibility of giving any unity 
to the inner meaning of human existence without regard- 
ing man as a single group only in a vast society of finite 
beings, whose relationships, although very faintly hinted 
to us in our experience of natural phenomena, are as con- 
crete and significant as any rational relationships can be. 
It is precisely in the history of the process called evolu- 
tion that we have some indication of the type of these 
extra-human relationships amongst the finite beings who 
are present in the world in the same sense in which we 
are present. 

In consequence of such aspects of the natural order, I 
should accordingly reject as inadequate the fashion of 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 415 


dealing with nature, and with the universal categories 
of finite experience, which was most characteristic of the 
forms of Idealism prevalent in Germany in the early part 
of this century. Our historical indebtedness to those 
forms of Idealism for our Fourth Conception of Being has 
been obvious all along, and needs here have no explicit 
confession. On the other hand, the application of this 
conception to the theory of nature, both by Schelling and 
by Hegel, seems to me to have been as far astray as a 
larger minded modern philosophical doctrine can be. It 
is not so much that this earlier idealistic philosophy of 
nature was founded upon a priort methods, and disre- 
garded the special sciences ; for as a fact the Naturphiloso- 
plue both of the Schellingian and of the Hégelian schools 
derived many, perhaps most of its special principles, from 
the text-books of science then current; and its use of ex- 
perience, if capricious and fragmentary, was in general 
intended to be serious. But the essential principles of 
the application of idealistic conceptions of the unity of 
Being to the interpretation of nature were, in those sys- 
tems, false, because a disposition to arrange the sciences 
in an arbitrarily defined hierarchy, to divide nature into 
sharply contrasted regions, celestial and terrestrial, inor- 
ganic and organic, extra-human and human, predeter- 
mined all the speculative interpretations attempted. We 
now know that the special sciences form no mere hierar- 
chy; that organic and inorganic nature, however divided 
they may be, are also very profoundly linked. We know 
that the ancient contrasts between terrestial and celestial 
physical processes and substances appear, the farther we 
go in the study of nature, the less significant. Woe know 


416 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


that the unity which the evolutionary processes indicate 
is one that no simple scheme of the formal classification 
of natural processes into mechanical, chemical, and or- 
ganic, or even into those of living and non-living nature, 
can any longer attempt at all exhaustively to characterize. 

So much the more must an idealist to-day be un 
willing to talk of nature as coming for the first time to 
self-consciousness in man, or to limit the categories in 
terms of which nature is to be interpreted, to those which 
are found directly serviceable in the human process of 
cataloguing and describing the natural phenomena which 
come within our finite ken. The older philosophy of 
nature was not merely too much disposed to anticipate 
scientific results in an a priori way; it was also too 
crudely and anthropocentrically empirical in its classifica- 
tions of natural fact, and in its attempts to unify natural 
fact. Our doctrine, indeed, invites man to be at home in 
his universe, but does not make man, in so far as you first 
separate him from nature, the one finite end that nature 
seeks. 

For us to-day, as I may as well forthwith assert, the 
conceptions which, from our idealistic point of view, 
promise to admit of the most plastic adaptation to the 
varieties of empirical fact, and consequently of the most 
universal application to the interpretation of the inner 
life of nature, are our social conceptions. These at once 
are intensely human, and capable, as Kant’s ethical doc- 
trine already showed, of a vast extra-human generaliza- 
tion, in so far as we take account of other possible moral 
agents. In the form of finite social intercourse, amongst 
human beings, we find exemplified a type of unity in 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 417 


variety, and of variety recalling us always to the recog- 
nition of unity,—a type, I say, which permits us, as I 
believe, to go further in our hypotheses for the interpre- 
tation of the vast finite realm called nature, than we can 
go by the use of any other types of conception. The 
social life finds room for the most various sorts of mutual 
estrangement, conflict, and misunderstanding amongst 
finite beings; while, on the other hand, every form of 
social intercourse implies an ultimate unity of meaning, 
a real connectedness of inner life, which is precisely of 
the type that you can best hope to explain in terms of 
our Fourth Conception of Being. When I tell you then, 
in advance, that in the second series of these lectures I 
shall try to explain our relations to nature as essentially 
social, and therefore in their deepest essence ethical rela- 
tionships ; when I predict that, without transcending our 
legitimate rights as interpreters of the empirical results, 
we shall undertake to show that nature, in a fashion 
whose details are still only faintly hinted to us men, 
constitutes a vast society, in whose transactions finite 
processes of evolution when viewed, not with reference 
to the eternal meaning of the whole, but with reference 
to the temporal series of facts, are presumably mere 
passing incidents, — when I say this, I indicate in some 
measure how our Idealism will undertake to explain the 
unity of the world, without becoming, upon that account, 
merely anthropocentric in its accounts of nature. 

There is a sense, as I have said, in which all the world 
may be viewed as centred about the fully expressed inner 
meaning of any finite rational idea. But then human 
ideas, as in fact is implied in their very conscious sense of 

25 


418 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


their own meaning, are not the only ideas of which this can 
be asserted. It is not until man views himself as a mem- 
ber of an universal society, whose temporal estrangements 
are merely incidental to their final unity of meaning, that 
man rationally appreciates the actual sense of the con- 
scious ideas that express his longing for oneness with an 
absolute life. We are related to God through our con- 
sciousness of our fellows. And our fellows, in the end, 
prove to be far more various than the mere men. It is 
one office of philosophy to cultivate this deeper sense of 
companionship with the world. And precisely in this 
sense of deeper comradeship with nature will lie the 
future reconciliation of religion and science. 


VII 


And so, when we speak of the final unity of the world- 
life, we have no right to define that unity merely in terms 
of the special categories of the distinctively human type 
of consciousness. Our foregoing sketch of the manner in 
which, for us men, present, past, future, physical, mental, 
mathematical, and moral reality seem to be linked in a 
single system, is not therefore by itself a sufficient basis 
for stating the way in which the whole meaning of real- 
ity gets presented to the single unity of the consciousness 
that we have already called divine. 

On the other hand, the very essence of our Idealism lies 
in asserting that just in so far as you have become con- 
scious, not of a merely abstract form of possible unity, but 
of a sense in which your experience already unites many 
in one, you have become acquainted with a fact which the 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 419 


ultimate nature of the divine plan may, and in general 
does, vastly transcend, but simply cannot ignore. Your 
truth from the absolute point of view will appear, indeed, 
as a partial truth, but not upon that account as untrue. 
The interesting doctrine of the “Degrees of Truth and 
Reality ” which Mr. Bradley has lately developed afresh, 
‘although, as I think, Mr. Bradley has given this doctrine 
too negative a form, remains upon its positive side, the 
common property of all the synthetic forms of post- 
Kantian Idealism. Recognizing, as of course I distinctly 
do, the close historical relation of what I am saying to the 
whole tradition of recent Idealism, I can only point out 
here that our human interpretation of the unity of Being, 
however much it may be supplemented, in however dif- 
ferent a light it may appear from some higher point of 
view, remains, in its own relative degree, true, just in so 
far as it is at once an assertion of unity, and a concrete 
illustration of that unity by facts found somewhere within 
the realm of man’s actual experience. An abstractly im- 
mediate experience of unity, such as the mystic sought, 
may remain either barren, or a mere prophecy of some 
more philosophical doctrine. A hasty account of the unity 
of nature, such as Aristotle’s system founded upon the 
optical illusion of the rotation of the outermost heaven 
about the earth, is already more concrete in its unification 
of many natural phenomena in a single scheme. It has 
been superseded, but only by a science whose natural phe- 
nomena are seen to be in still more significant and deeper 
relations. Our own present largest generalization, which 
unites the things and processes of nature and mind in one 
in the way just indicated, may need very real correction 


420 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


from an absolute point of view. Yet this preliminary 
unification has its truth. 

In particular, however, as to the special features of 
our view of nature, our human experience of space- 
relations is obviously so special in its type that this 
our view of the space-world may be frankly regarded, 
I think, as something of decidedly limited: truth. It 
is fairly inconceivable that from the point of view of 
experience in general, our space-form should remain as 
more than a fragmentary perspective effect, so to speak, 
‘ or in other words, as more than what one might call a 
relatively valid finite point of view. The facts which 
we view as related to one another in space must in- 
deed be viewed by a larger experience than ours, as 
present and as linked. But our way of interpreting the 
linkage is obviously human, and is probably only a very 
special case of the experience of the various aspects of 
coexistent meaning in the world of the final experience. 

In another way, while time as the form of ethically sig- 
nificant process has doubtless a far deeper truth, temporal 
succession is subject to a perfectly arbitrary limitation of 
what one may call the time-span of our human conscious- 
ness. What we regard as a present instant is neither a 
truly instantaneous mere Now, having no finite length, nor 
a duration long enough to enable us to survey at a glance 
anywhere nearly as considerable a whole of successively 
realized meaning as we desire for any one of our more 
rational human purposes, whether thoughtful, or artistic, 
or practical. Our human time-consciousness is essentially 
ill adapted for observing the whole of any one of even 
our most familiar meanings. In other words, for us men, 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 421 


“the present instant,” so-called, has at once temporal suc- 
cession, the earlier and the later, included within it, and 
it has a decidedly, and, in fact, a very inconveniently and 
arbitrarily, limited length. What happens so rapidly or 
so slowly that we fail to accommodate to the events our 
ability to take note of the succession as a present and 
given fact, all such too rapid or too slow series of occur- 
rences, we fail directly to note as matters of clear con- 
sciousness. Hence, we constantly lose sight even of our 
own trains of thought and action, even in instances where 
we most want to survey them. Our brief, but still by 
no means indefinitely small time-span of consciousness, 
determines in this way our whole human form of expe- 
rience, and of course limits the ethical meaning of our 
conduct. Yet how long a temporal period, how much 
duration, shall constitute the finite interval viewed by a 
given form of consciousness as a now, is a wholly arbitrary 
matter, so long as now means not the ideal mathematical 
now, —the negation of all duration, the mere point be- 
tween present and future, but rather a period, a succession 
of events, a finite duration. In our consciousness, how- 
ever, the now of experience does mean just such an actual, 
brief, but still finite, interval or period of time, within 
which and during which events succeed one after another. 
Now nobody can for an instant defend the rationality of 
supposing that every possible form of consciousness must 
have the precise human limitation of time-span. Yet a 
notable alteration of time-span, quite apart from any alter- 
ation of the contents that succeed one after another in 
the minds in question, would constitute a variation of a 
given type of consciousness whose vast possible meaning, 


422 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


both psychological and ethical, it is almost impossible to 
estimate. A consciousness for which events that hap- 
pened within a millionth of a second constituted a definite 
and observable serial succession of present facts, or, on 
the other hand, a consciousness for which the events oc- 
curring during a thousand years were as much present 
at once, to a single glance at temporal succession, as are 
now, to us, the successions that, while not too rapid, occur 
within a time-span of two seconds, —either one of these 
types of consciousness would have a profoundly different 
basis for estimating the significance of any given empiri- 
cal facts of succession. The acts of moral agents whose 
consciousness thus differed from ours would have a vastly 
different meaning from our own. 

Our idea of what it is to be conscious is therefore, 
logically speaking, an extremely variable idea. But 
for that very reason, our Fourth Conception of Being, 
while it certainly cannot be applied to the effort to 
conceive the empirical world in unity, without a full 
recognition of possible variations of the form of con- 
sciousnesss, has all the more freedom in undertaking 
the general task of viewing, as fragmentary aspects of 
one whole meaning, the varieties of nature and: of finite 
individuality. For it is precisely the wholeness, and 
not the mere fragmentariness, the presence, and not 
the mere absence of unity in our consciousness, the: 
relative attainment, and not the mere postponement of 
our meanings, which, from this point of view, guides us 
towards a positive view of how the unity of Being is, 
in the midst of all the varieties, attained. How in 
detail the final unity is won, what categories precisely 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 423 


determine the relations of its various contents, what 
contents supplement our own and provide for the final 
enrichment of the Absolute Life, —all this we of course 
cannot predetermine. Yet what our conception main- 
tains is simply this : — 

Survey our life, consider our experience. Look at 
nature as we men find it. Take account of our tem- 
poral and spatial universe. Review the results of our 
science. In all this you will discover manifold mean- 
ings relatively obtained, manifold interrelationships bind- 
ing together facts that at first sight appear sundered, 
universality predetermining what had seemed accidental, 
and a vast fundamental ontological unity linking in its 
deathless embrace past, present, future, and what for 
us seem to be the merely possible forms of Being. Man 
you shall find dependent for his moral personality upon 
his fellows, upon nature as a whole for his evolution, 
and upon his own ideas, poor and finite and fleeting 
although they are, for his very consciousness of his rela- 
tion to the universe. 

Well, now, in addition to all these glimpses of unity, 
you shall see, too, countless signs of fragmentariness, 
countless seemingly chaotic varieties. We know the 
formula for dealing with all these in the light of our 
conception. These are precisely the facts whose frag- 
‘mentariness sends us to Another for the explanation, 
yes, for our very idea of any one of them. But just 
such cases show themselves hereby as instances of uni- 
versal principles, whose concrete meaning is not yet 
empirically present to us at this instant. Wherever we 
question, we have ideas, but not yet an experience of 


424 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


their objects. Wherever experience contains the fulfil- 
ment of a meaning, the answer to a question, the attain- 
ment of an empirical unity, there we have so far present 
an objective content, a plan relatively fulfilled; and 
precisely such unities, however much they may be sup- 
plemented, cannot be ignored in the final unity of the 
whole of experience. 

.. And’g0, recognizing as we do the limitations of our 
~ consciousness, we now see what can guide us towards 
a concrete definition of the absolute form of conscious- 
ness. Here our general concept of Being gives us our 
test of truth, but our experience shows us special ways 
in which facts not only can be unified, but are unified. 
These ways, as far as they go, are for us valid guides. 
Thus, then, our general and relatively a priort proof of 
the unity of Being, in the early part of this lecture, 
has itself been brought into unity with the empirical 
view of our real world. We see then how the world 
of our Fourth Conception must be One. We catch also 
a glimpse of how it is One. 


VII 


In sum, then, as to the most general form of the abso- 
lute unity, our guide is inevitably the type of empirical 
unity present in our own passing consciousness, pre- 
cisely in so far as it has relative wholeness, and is 
rational. If one asks, “ How should the many be one, 
and how should the whole take on the form of variety?” 
I answer, “Look within. You may grasp many facts at 
once; and when you have even the most fragmentary 
idea, your one purpose is here and now partially em- 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 425 


bodied in a presented succession of empirical facts.” 
If you ask, ‘“‘ But how can many different ideal processes 
be united in the unity of a single idea?” I answer, 
“That is precisely what in your own way you can 
observe whenever you think, however fragmentarily, of 
the various, and often highly contrasting, ideas that 
occur to your mind when you grasp the meaning of 
any hypothetical or complex proposition, —such as the 
present one.” If you ask, “ But how can what we men 
call present and future Being be unified in a single 
present unity of consciousness?” I reply, “In idea 
you unify them all, whenever you yourself assert propo- 
sitions as now true of past, present, and future. In 
concrete experience, you find a past, a present, a future, 
unified even in your own passing moments of conscious- 
ness, despite their brief span. As you listen to my 
words, several words come to consciousness at once, 
and yet as a succession. The first of three words is 
past when the second sounds, the third is yet to come 
when the second sounds, yet all are at once for you. 
Now this totwm simul is precisely the character that, 
within your brief time-span of human consciousness, 
you can and do now verify./ An eternal consciousness 
is definable as one for which all the facts of the whole 
time-stream, just so far as time is a final form of con- 


sciousness, have the same type of unity that your present ~~ 


momentary consciousness, even now within its little span, 
surveys.) But if for the divine mind, some still more 
inclusive form takes up our time-stream into a yet 
larger unity of experience, all the more is what we 
mean by temporal succession present together for the 


426 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Absolute Experience. Nor does this mean that at this, 
your present human and temporal instant, at this hour 
of the clock, the divine and final moment of conscious- 
ness has just now the future and the past before it at 
a glance. For your own grasp of the contents of your 
passing instant of consciousness faces at once a series of 
successive events, but also does not therefore bring before 
your insight all the successive contents of any present 
moment at any one temporal point within that present 
moment. What your own passing consciousness is to 
grasp at once, within the range of its own time-span, con- 
sists of facts which are successive one to another. Now 
| our assertion is that precisely such a grasp of successive 
| facts in one unity of consciousness is characteristic of the 
_ Absolute Consciousness in its relation to the whole of time, 
precisely in so far as the temporal form of realization is 
valid at all. And that this temporal form has its place 
in the final unity we know, just because time is for us 
the conditio sine qua non of all ethical significance. 

The case of temporal unity is typical of every instance 
of the application of our Fourth Conception. In so far as 
your ideas now possess internal meaning, you grasp Many 
in One. You do not therefore lose the many in the unity, 
any more than you lose the notes in the melody. Ethi- 
cal meanings do not involve the mere blending of details 
in a single whole. Rational insight wins unity only 
through variety. 

And now what our Fourth Conception asserts is that 
God’s life, for God’s life we must now call this absolute 
fulfilment which our Fourth Conception defines, sees the 
one plan fulfilled through all the manifold lives, the single 


UNIVERSALITY AND UNITY 427 


consciousness winning its purpose by virtue of all the 
ideas, of all the individual selves, and of all the lives. No 
finite view is wholly illusory. Every finite intent taken 
precisely in its wholeness is fulfilled in the Absolute. 
The least life is not neglected, the most fleeting act isa 
recognized part of the world’s meaning. You are for the 
divine view all that you now know yourself at this instant 
to be. But you are also infinitely more. The precious- 
ness of your present purposes to yourself is only a hint of 
that preciousness which in the end links their meaning to 
the entire realm of. Being. 

And despite the vastness, the variety, the thrilling 
complexity of the life of the finite world, the ultimate 
unity is not far from any one of us. All variety of idea 
and object is subject, as we have seen, to the unity of the 
purpose wherein we alone live. Even at this moment, 
yes, even if we transiently forget the fact, we mean the 
Absolute. We win the presence of God when most we 
flee. We have no other dwelling-place but the single 
unity of the divine consciousness. In the light of the 
eternal we are manifest, and even this very passing in- 
stant pulsates with a life that all the worlds are needed to 
express. In vain would we wander in the darkness; we 
are eternally at home in God. 


LECTURE X 


LECTURE X 
INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 


Ir we have been right in our foregoing discussions, the 
first principles of religious doctrine have a foundation as 
‘simple as the meaning of those principles is inexhaustible. 
So long as you first assume that the world of fact is 
merely given, independent of ideas, is found by us as. 
such an independent reality, then indeed every effort to 
interpret the world quickly loses its way in the labyrinth 
of our experience. But remember, before you are thus 
lost, that the world is real only as the object of true ideas, 
and then your fundamental problem at once becomes that 
of the essential relation of idea and object. This relation 
is then the world-knot. Nor does that knot prove in- 
soluble. At any moment, despite the mysteries of expe- 
rience, you have in your hands the essential solution. For 
the relation of idea and object is essentially the relation 
of a partial meaning to a totally expressed rational mean- 
ing. And, as we have already seen, and in the present 
lecture shall further illustrate, the relation of partial and 
total meaning is, at the same time, the relation of any 
finite will to the expression of the complete intent of that 
same will. Without contradiction, therefore, you are un- 
able to assert the real Being of any world, unless you 


conceive that world as the expressed will whose partial 
431 


432 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


momentary embodiment you even now observe, whenever 
you get any rational idea before your mind. 

This view of the nature of Being, as we have asserted, 
is no arbitrary hypothesis, but is what a close examina- 
tion discovers to be involved in the very presuppositions 
of common sense. In some respects, in fact, the essence 
of this view may be brought home to our ordinary con- 
sciousness, if we remember how the forms of space and of 
time are from moment to moment conceived by everybody 
as limitless and as universal, and as predetermining the 
constitution of the whole natural universe, while this 
whole infinity of both space and time is viewed as homo- 
geneous with the space and time present at the instant to 
our own consciousness. The well-known case of the prin- 
ciple of contradiction again illustrates how the conscious- 
ness of the moment regards itself as warranted in prede- 
' termining the essential constitution of all possible beings. 
Our study of the conception of Being has been intended 
simply to render explicit and definite what kind of rela- 
tionship it is which thus links the instant of human con- 
sciousness to the eternal constitution of the whole. We 
have seen indeed that our fourth definition of Reality 
gives us no right capriciously to predetermine any of the 
empirical contents of the world not now present to our- 
selves. But, on the other hand, we have undertaken to 
assert that the general constitution of this universe is 
known to us not merely in so far as the principle of con- 
tradiction, or as the forms of time and space, give warrant 
for universal assertions about reality or about some portion 
of it; but also in so far as the fundamental structure of 
the universe is essentially both teleological and conscious. 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 433 


We have also endeavored to state, in concrete form, of 
what nature this teleological structure of Reality proves 
to be. 


I 


In the foregoing lecture the unity of the idealistic 
world engaged our attention. In the present lecture, we 
are to consider the other aspect, —the Individuality, the 
Variety of finite beings, and the relative Freedom of 
finite acts. 

No accusation is more frequent than that an Idealism 
which has once learned to view the world as a rational 
whole, present in its actuality to the unity of a single con- 
sciousness, has then no room either for finite individu- 
ality, or for freedom of ethical action. It was for the 
sake of preparing the way for a fair treatment of this 
very problem that we from the beginning defined the na- 
ture of ideas in terms at once of experience and of will. 
As we later passed to the assertion of the unity of the 
world from the final point of view, we have never lost 
sight of the fact that this is the unity of a divine Will, or, 
if you please, of a divine Act, at the same time as it is the 
unity of the divine Insight. The word “ Meaning” has for 
us, from the outset, itself possessed a twofold implication, 
— not because we preferred ambiguity, but because, once 
for all, the facts of consciousness warrant, and in fact de- 
mand, this twofold interpretation. Whoever is possessed 
of any meaning, whoever faces truth, whoever rationally 
knows, has before his consciousness at once, that which 
possesses the unity of a knowing process, and that which 
fulfils a purpose, or in other words, that which constitutes 

2¥ 


434 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


what we have from the outset called an act of will as well 
as an act of knowledge. It is essential to our entire 
understanding of our Fourth Conception of Being, that 
we should remember the truth in both of these aspects, 
not dividing the aspects themselves, nor confounding their 
significance. 

A few words of purely psychological analysis may then 
be, at this point, useful, to clarify the precise relations be- 
tween intellectual and voluntary processes in our ordinary 
consciousness. 

Popular psychology long since far too sharply sundered 
the Intellect and the Will in the empirical processes of the 
finite human mind. Viewing the intellect as a passive 
reception of the truth, defining the will as the power to 
alter facts, the popular psychology was forced, almost 
from the outset, to make an effort to reunite the powers 
that it had thus falsely separated. For a very little con- 
sideration shows not only that we can will to know, but 
also that we are in general guided, in our intellectual 
processes, by the very interests which popular pyschology 
refers to the will.) On the other hand, our voluntary 
processes, if they are conscious, are themselves matters of 
knowledge. For our conscious volition implies that we 
know what we will. In consequence of these obvious con- 
siderations, a more modern psychology has been led to its 
well-known doctrine that all such psychological divisions 
are rather distinctions between different aspects of the 
same process, than means for telling us of naturally sun- 
dered or even of separable processes. If we regard the 
human subject, in the ordinary psychological way, as a 
being whose conscious life runs parallel with the highest 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 435 


physical processes of his organism, we get a view of the 
relation between the intellect and the will which is far 
more just, at once to the natural history of the mind, and 
to the deeper meaning of the inner life of our conscious- 
ness. View man as a natural being, and you find him ad- 
justing himself to his environment, acting, as they say, in 
response to stimuli. The world influences his senses, only 
to awaken him to such functions as express his interest in 
this world. Now the whole life of the organism is pre- 
cisely the life of adjustment. The physical activities ac- 
companying consciousness so take place that the organism 
preserves itself, and expresses its natural bearing towards 
its world. And the whole life of consciousness, accom- 
panying these adjustments, constitutes a more or less 
accurate knowledge of what the adjustments are. The life 
of our consciousness is therefore a life of watching our 
deeds, of estimating our deeds, of predicting our deeds, 
and of interpreting our whole world in terms of deeds. 
We observe no outer facts without at the same time 
more or less clearly observing our attitude towards those 
facts, our estimate of their value, our response to their 
presence, our intentions with respect to our future re- 
lations with these facts. 

But, within the circle of this general unity of our con- 
sciousness, various distinctions indeed arise. Sometimes 
the outer fact, viewed more or less in abstraction from its 
value to ourselves, more completely fills the field of our 
consciousness, and then we are likely to talk of a state of 
relatively pure Knowledge. If our state is one in which 
an idea explicitly appears as attempting to correspond 
to the presupposed object of its own External Meaning, 


436 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


or to its own Other, we call the process one of Thought 
about External Reality. Sometimes, however, our acts 
themselves, viewed as efforts to alter the outside facts, 
come more clearly before us either for deliberate estimate, 
or for impulsive decision; and in such cases we find the 
narrow field of our consciousness more clearly taken 
up by what we call Will. But facts are never known 
except with reference to some value that they possess 
for our present or intended activities. And on the 
other hand, our voluntary activities are never known 
to us except as referring to facts to which we attribute 
in one way or another an intellectually significant 
Being, —a reality other than what is present to us at 
the moment. 

It follows that when, for general purposes, we study, not 
the psychology, but, as at present, the total significance 
of our conscious life, we are much less interested in the 
separation between knowledge and will than in that unity 
which psychology already recognizes, and which philos- 
ophy finds of still more organic importance. Conse- 
quently, when, at the outset of these discussions, we 
pointed out the element of will in the constitution of 
ideas, we were dwelling upon precisely what for the psy- 
chologist appears as the intimate connection between the 
knowing process of the mind and the motor responses of 
the organism to its environment. When we know, we 
have in the first place present to our minds certain con- 
tents, certain data, certain facts, it may be of the outer 
senses, it may be of the memory and the imagination. 
But if rational knowledge takes place, these data are 
not merely present, but they also take on forms; they 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 437 


constitute ideal structures; they fulfil our own purposes. 
These purposes consciously correspond either to what an 
ordinary observer would call our visible responses to our 
environment, or to what a psychologist, who looks closer 
than an ordinary observer, would find also to involve 
memories, or hints, or fragments, of former adjustments. 
The result is, so far, that, when we know, the facts both 
of sense and of imagination unite in our minds, into the 
expression of a Plan of Action. And thus the knowing 
process is a process partially embodying our own will. 
Upon such an analysis of the nature of ideas all the fore- 
going discussion has been founded; and now we delib- 
erately repeat and emphasize this interpretation in order 
to make way for a final statement of the place of the will 
in our doctrine of being. 

From this point of view, then, the contrast between 
knowledge and will, within our own conscious field, is 
so far this; viz., that we speak of our conscious process 
as a Knowing, in so far as all the data are woven into 
one unity of consciousness; while we speak of this same 
process as Will, in so far as this unity of conscious- 
ness involves a fulfilment or embodiment of a purpose. 
The word “Meaning” very properly lays stress upon 
both of these aspects at once. For what we call a 
Meaning is at once something observed with clearness 
as an unity of many facts, and something also intended 
as the result which fulfils a purpose. But when we 
take account of Hzternal Meanings, we speak of Thought 
in so far as we seek correspondence to our presupposed 
Other, and of Will in so far as we seek to produce the 
Other that shall correspond to the Internal Meaning. 


438 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


Yet here the distinction, as we have already seen, is 
wholly relative to the point of view. 

But now it next becomes us to take special note of 
this latter aspect of the will,—an aspect upon which 
the popular consciousness lays great stress. For the will 
is usually regarded as primarily the Cause of something 
which but for the will would not come into existence. 
We have already spoken of acts of will; and the popular 
view declares that we are conscious of an activity which 
causes states of consciousness to exist within ourselves, and 
acts to come into existence outside of ourselves, and which 
is therefore responsible for the actual production of new 
Being in the universe. But if, with reference to the 
scientific. value of this popular view, we turn to psy- 
chology for advice, we find at the present time, in that 
science, decidedly opposed interpretations of the sense 
in which the human will can be regarded as a cause. 
According to one of these interpretations the word “act” 
is properly to be applied merely to the physical process 
by which our organism gets adjusted to its environment. 
The causes of precisely such physical acts are, from this 
psychological point of view, themselves physical causes. 
Our consciousness, according to this same view, is not 
itself a cause, either of the physical act whereby we ex- 
press our will, or of the states of mind themselves which 
constitute our inner intent. Our will merely accom- 
panies our adjustment to the environment, and consti- 
tutes our own consciousness of the meaning of a certain 
portion of this adjustment. Our will is not itself one 
of the forces or powers of nature. 

On the other hand, a traditional doctrine, which has 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 439 


won for itself no small hearing in psychology, regards 
the volitional, or active, side of our consciousness, not 
merely as a fact in itself, but as a cause of other facts, 
both physical and mental. From this point of view, the 
distinction between intellect and will acquires a fresh 
importance, and declines to be reduced to that mere 
distinction of aspects. which we have emphasized in the 
foregoing account. or, as is often said, man, in so far 
as he is a mere knower, accomplishes nothing; he merely 
observes. But as doer, as voluntary agent, he is the 
source of new being; he is an originator. ) Will, for 
this view, is nothing if not efficacious. A process that 
merely accompanies and reflects, without affecting, the 
adjustments of my organism to its environment, would 
be no true will. A sort of consciousness which merely 
observes that from moment to moment my inner life, for 
me, seems to have meaning, would, as this view asserts, 
in the end deprive my life of its most important meaning. 
For above all, as they say, what I mean to be is an origi- 
nator of facts, and of facts that but for me would not 
exist. The true problem regarding the place of the will 
in the universe arises, according to this view, precisely 
at the point where one asks, Is the will the cause of any 
existence other than itself? 

The two views about the will as cause thus brought 
into opposition have justly played a great part, both in 
the psychological and the metaphysical controversies of 
all periods, ever since the meaning of life began seriously 
to be considered. And the relation of this whole contro- 
versy to the deepest interest of metaphysics is as unques- 
tionable as it is easy to misinterpret. For the word 


440 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


“cause” is a term of very various meaning. So ambigu- 
ous and obscure, in fact, is the idea of cause as customarily 
used, that I have deliberately preferred to avoid even 
defining the issue about the causality of the will until 
our concept of Being had first assumed in general a 
definite form. Moreover, even at the present stage of our 
inquiry, although we must indeed deal with one aspect 
of the issue upon its own substantial merits, we shall 
do best to avoid, on the present occasion, any thorough- 
going discussion of the varieties of meaning of the word 
“cause.” We shall do best merely to state the sense in 
which we ourselves regard the Being of facts as due to 
the will, be that will human or divine. We shall then 
postpone, until our second course of lectures, a more 
precise distinction of the various forms of causation, 
which we shall learn to recognize as present in nature 
andin mind. For the concept of cause, properly regarded, 
is rather a cosmological than a fundamentally metaphysi- 
cal conception. ; 

To metaphysics in general belongs, above all, the 
question that we have been considering,—the question 
what it is to be. To metaphysics also belongs the 
problem, What fundamentally different kinds of Being 
are there? And in this connection the relation between 
God and the individual is indeed of essential impor- 
tance. From the metaphysician you may also expect 
the answer to the question, To what principles is the 
actual constitution of the world of conscious volition, 
and of ethically significant life, due? But it is within 
the realm of what we call Nature, — namely, within the 
realm of finite experience, with its various phenomenal 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 441 


distinctions of organic and inorganic, of apparently liy- 
ing and apparently lifeless beings, —it is, I say, in case 
of Nature, that the diversified processes, present to our 
ordinary experience, arouse questions as to the special 
kinds of causal linkage that, in any particular case, bind 
one fact to another. It is in this world, — the phenomenal 
or natural, the essentially fragmentary world, the realm 
which cannot contain its whole truth within itself, — it 
is in this realm, I say, that the special problems concern- 
ing physical and mental causation, concerning active 
and inactive beings, concerning the relation of physical 
organism and mental phenomena, most properly arise. 
And we shall do well to keep separate the study of the 
whole constitution of the universe (conceived in accord- 
ance with the general principles of our theory of Being), 
from a study of the special problems of the phenomenal 
world. It is not my present purpose, then, to exhaust 
the theory of the sense in which will is, and is not, an 
active cause in the natural world. What can at present 
be asked from us is a general statement of the sense 
in which what exists expresses, on the one hand, the will 
of God; and, on the other hand, that individual will 
which you find at any moment present in a fragmentary 
way in your own finite consciousness. I shall maintain 
that both God’s will and our own finite will get con- 
sciously expressed in the world, and that no contradic- 
tion results from this statement. 


II 


At any moment your ideas, in so far as they are ra- 
tional, embody a purpose. That we have asserted from 


442 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


the outset. Our original example, that of the melody 
sung, for the sake of the mere delight in singing, remains 
for us typical of the entire life of what one may call 
consciously free and internally unrestricted finite ideas. 
Now what we in the first place have asserted in regard to 
such ideas, is that, precisely in so far as they are whole 
ideas, they stand before our consciousness as present ful- 
filments of purpose. 

_ Any mere purpose, so far as it is still relatively frag- 
mentary, or is, so to speak, disembodied, or is a mere 
striving, begins, in any such empirical case, the little 
drama that is acted within the momentary limits of a 
finite consciousness. In saying that this, at first disem- 
bodied purpose, becomes expressed, whenever any con- 
sciousness of such an act passes from its earlier to its 
later temporal stages, —I merely report what happens. I 
make as yet simply no assertion with regard to any psy- 
chological or physical causation. I assert as yet, in sucha 
case, no effective force. I mention nothing of the nature 
of a physical or psychical tendency such that, by the mere 
necessity of its nature, it must work itself out. What my 
consciousness finds when I sing or speak is that a certain 
meaning actually gets expressed. My act of singing takes 
place. At once, then, there are data present, there are 
facts of consciousness, and there is this significance which 
these facts embody. Whether the facts could have come 
into existence in this way unless a given nervous organ- 
ism or a given psychical entity, endowed with specific 
powers, subject to general laws, were already in exist- 
ence, of all that my finite consciousness in the present 
moment tells me nothing. To assert any such thing is 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 443 


so far to assert a mere psychological or cosmological 
theory. The basis of such an assertion, if it has any 
basis, must be sought outside of any one moment’s ex- 
perience. On the other hand, in vain would any psy- 
chologist, in vain would any realistic metaphysician, 
attempt to rob my finite consciousness of the significance 
which this my own moment of singing or speaking has, 
for me, embodied. This significance is a matter of my 
experience. Whatever your system of metaphysics, the 
singer can say: Here at least the world has meaning, for 
lo! TZ sing. 

Now, as a metaphysical theory, our idealistic doctrine 
with regard to Being in its wholeness has simply main- 
tained that, without any regard to a doctrine of causa- 
tion, without regard in the least to any specific view as to 
the psychology of mental process, the whole universe, pre- 
cisely in so far as it is, is the expression of a meaning, ts the 
conscious fulfilment of significance in life, precisely as the 
melody present at a given moment to the singer is for his 
consciousness the momentary expression of a meaning. 
And so our theory of Being is not founded upon any 
prior doctrine of causation. \.Cause and effect, laws me- 
chanical or laws psychological, fate or freedom, in so far 
as any of these have Being, are from our point of view 
subject to the prior conditions of the very concept of 
Being itself. )If nothing can be except what embodies a. 
meaning, we are not first required to explain how any- 
thing whatever comes into Being, or how anything what- 
_ever is caused. For the cause of Being would itself have 
‘Being, and could itself exist, if our analysis is correct, 
only as the actual expression of a meaning. 


444 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


The unhappy slavery of the metaphysics of the past to 
the conception of causation has been responsible for some 
of the most fatal of the misfortunes of religion and of 
humanity. That the existence of God was to be proved 
only by the means of the concept of causation, was one of 
the most characteristic of the presuppositions of an earlier 
theology, and was often supposed to be maintained on 
the basis of the authority of Aristotle. As a fact, this 
method of dealing with the theory of Being was false to 
the deepest spirit of Aristotle himself. For Aristotle’s 
God is primarily the All-perfect Being, and is only sec- 
ondarily the subject of which causation could be predi- 
cated in any form whatever. But however that may be, 
the theology which conceives the relation between God 
and the world, and between the world and the individ- 
ual, as primarily a causal relation, subordinates the uni- 
versal to the particular in theory, and the significant to 
the relatively insignificant in practical doctrine. The 
inevitable results of any such inversion of the rational 
order is a world where either fate reigns, or absolute mys- 
teries are the final facts; or where both these unhappy 
results are combined. That just because the universe is 
through and through transparently significant, it may 
later prove to be worth while to regard my will as in this 
or that respect a cause of certain special results, is intelli- 
gible enough. But the genuine significance of my volun- 
tary process is always an affair of my own consciousness 
regarding the present meaning of my life. You will in 
vain endeavor to deduce that meaning from the distinctly 
lower category of causal efficacy. That lower category of 
causation always implies a comment which somebody else, 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 445 


viewing my act in a relatively external way, may pass 
upon me from without. 

It is indeed metaphysically just to assert that in certain 
aspects of my life I must needs be regarded as a cause, 
because I am already known to possess conscious signifi- 
cance, and because some aspects of this significance turn 
out to be causal. But you can never, on the other hand, 
discover wherein consists my significance by merely 
asserting that I am somehow or other a powerful cause. 
And precisely so it is in the case of God. You can 
indeed say that this or that fact in the world must be 
viewed as a result of laws whose source lies in the divine 
nature. But in asserting this you merely lay stress upon 
a result of that conscious significance which first of all 
attaches to the Being of all things, and to the life of God 
in its wholeness. 

I cannot, then, too strenuously insist upon the thought 
that our own theory of Being places the very significance, 
both of the whole world and of the individual life, in 
the actual conscious fulfilment of meaning. Such fulfil- 
ment, from our own point of view, is the only reality. 

{We therefore do not explain the existence of meaning 
‘in the world by looking, in the end, beyond any meaning 
for the cause which has brought the significant world to 
pass.’ To view the matter in that way would be of the 
very essence of Realism, and would involve all the contra- 
dictions which have already led us to reject the realistic 
interpretation of Being. Causation will find its place in 
our world, but as a mere result, —a partial aspect,—a 
mere item of the very significance of that world itself. 
For causal connections have a place only as expressing 


446 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


their own aspect of the meaning of things. On the 
other hand, the mere part, causation, will never appear 
in our account as the source of the whole; nor will this 
causation, which is but a very special form of Being, or 
a name for various special forms of Being, ever appear 
as that to which either the Being, or the wholeness of 
the meaning of the world, is due. And so much, then, 
for the mere causal efficacy, either of God or of man. 

In consequence of these considerations, our primary 
question in regard to the finite human individual, in his 
relation to the divine life, is merely the question, In what 
sense does the finite Being retain, despite the unity of the 
whole divine life, any individual significance of his own, 
and what is the relation of this finite significance to the 
meaning and plan of the whole? But for the answer to 
this, our really important question, we may now be pre- 
pared, if we next lay new stress upon certain aspects of 
the Fourth Conception of Being, to which we have made 
repeated reference. 


III 


We have said that a meaning gets wholeness and indi- 
viduality of expression precisely in so far as it gets, at the 
same time, conscious determination. An imperfect idea 
is vague. It is general. But it is so, in our own finite 
consciousness, in two senses. (1) Any finite idea, as we 
have seen, sends us to some other experience to furnish 
us yet further instances that are needed for its whole 
expression. This reference to another for the remainder 
of itself is characteristic of even the clearest and most 
precise of our finite ideas, just in so far as they are gen- 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 447 


eral. Thus, in counting, the single numbers refer us, 
further on in the number-series, for the rest of what the 
counting process implies. If one merely counts the first 
ten numbers, there are still other numbers to count. A 
complete consciousness of the whole meaning of the num- 
ber-series would complete this process of seeking Another 
by presenting the whole individual meaning of the num- 
ber concept in a finished form. We have, so far, alto- 
gether postponed the discussion of those difficulties about — 
the quantitative Infinite which tie conception of a com- 
pleted knowledge of numbers seems to involve.! We 
have asserted only that the arithmetical or mathemati- 
cal Being of the number-series cannot be consistently 
expressed, either in realistic form or in the form of mere 
valid possibilities of experience. We have consequently 
asserted that even the realm of mathematical Being 
involves facts which only our Fourth Conception can 
adequately express. In what way the whole experience 
in question gets realized, we have pointed out only in the 
general fashion indicated in the foregoing lecture. The 
whole Being in question, as we have said, must be present 
to the final consciousness in its complete form, or in such 
wise that no other, beyond, remains to be sought. So 
much, then, for the first inadequacy of our finite general 


ideas. 
(2) But our finite passing consciousness is incomplete 


or inadequate to its own purposes not merely by lack 
of contents adequate to express its wholeness, but by 
reason of vagueness with regard to its own momenta- 
rily conscious purposes. The principal source of actual 


1 See the Supplementary Essay to the present volume. 


448 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


error, in finite consciousness, we have already found to 
be the indetermination of our purposes at any stage in 
their realization. Now the presupposition of our whole 
view is that the final expression of purpose is not 
merely complete as to its contents, but absolutely deter- 
minate as to what meaning these contents fulfil. Now 
the finite process, whereby our own consciousness passes 
from an indeterminate to a relatively determinate state 
of purpose, of intention, of seeking for contents, is 
known to us in its psychological manifestations as a 
process of Selective Attention, growing more and more 
definite as it proceeds. Precisely in so far as we are 
conscious of a definite meaning at any instant, we are 
conscious of contents selected, as it were, from the back- 
ground of our own finite consciousness, selected as the 
contents which are such that no other contents would 
definitely tend to express our will. Now it is the law 
of conscious growth in ourselves, that greater determi- 
nation of purpose, and greater wealth of presented con- 
tents, are the correlative aspects of any gradual fulfilment 
of meaning. The more we know and the more richly 
we find our will fulfilled, the more exclusive and deter- 
minate becomes our purpose. The vague purpose is so 
far not at the instant clear as to \whether this or that 
would better fulfil its meaning. The precise purpose 
selects this instead of that/ Precise decision is exclu- 
sive as well as inclusive. And when I speak of this 
fact, I refer once more directly to our consciousness as 
my warrant. I presuppose nothing as to the causal 
basis, or as to the psychological or physical origin, of 
attention. I say that one who rationally finds a mean- 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 449 


ing fulfilled, discovers at once a wealth of contents, and 
a very sharply specific exclusiveness of interest fulfilled 
by these contents. 

A satisfied will, a fully expressed meaning, would 
involve, then, the twofold consciousness that we may 
express by the two phrases, (1) I have all that I seek, 
and need no other; (2) I need precisely these contents, 
and so select them as to permit no other to take here 
and for this purpose their place. As a matter of fact, 
then, a will satisfied, a precisely determinate meaning 
expressed in facts, is as selective and exclusive on the 
one hand, as, on the other hand, it is possessed of an 
exhaustive wealth of contents which meet its selection. 

Now it is this selective character of every rational 
conscious process, a character as manifest to conscious- 
ness as it is ultimately significant for the constitution of 
all Being, —it is this character, I say, which to my mind 
is responsible above all for the Individuality which we 
have already characterized as belonging to the whole of 
Being, and which we shall now find as equally charac- 
istic of every region of finite Being. Strange as it may 
at first seem, a closer examination of the nature of truth 
makes easily manifest that what is, quite apart from any 
causal theory, must be viewed by the consciousness that 
faces Being as a selection from abstractly possible con- 
/tents. The nature of these contents in general is recog- 
/ nized, and is so far present, at the very moment when the 
' realization of this nature in the single shape selected 
\ from amongst all possible shapes is, at the same time, 
experienced. | . 

This general view, that what is, is a selection from © w\ \ 

2e@ 


450 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


possibilities, is in another form as characteristic of Real- 
ism, and even in a sense of Mysticism, as it is of our own 
view of Being. / 

The discovery that the affirmation of reality is logically 
based upon the exclusion of the barely possible, is con- 
stantly made by common sense, is constantly illustrated 
by daily experience, and is popularly exemplified by that 
well-known destruction of possibilities which character- 
izes the passing of youth, the course of history, the re- 
production of every species through relatively chance 
union of the members of that species, and by countless 
other instances. The Darwinian theory of the genesis 
of species by natural selection, is only a single instance 
of the application of this general concept that the real is 
a selection from amongst possibilities. 

In elementary logic, as we earlier showed, it becomes 
manifest that all universal judgments are at once, as they 
say, negatively existential, and involve a destruction of 
logically possible classes of objects. Thus, let there be 
what the logicians call an Universe of Discourse, that is, 
a world of possible beings of which you are discoursing. 
Into that world let two classes of objects, A and B, be 
introduced. ‘Then in your universe of discourse it be- 
comes logically possible that there should be four sub- 
classes of beings, namely, the things which are both A 
and B, the things which are A but not B, the things 
which are not A but which are B, and finally the things 
which are neither A nor B. Thus, for example, if your 
universe of discourse is to contain righteous men and 
happy men, there are possible the four sub-classes of 
men who are righteous and happy, who are righteous 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 451 


and unhappy, who are unrighteous but happy, and who 
are neither righteous nor happy. Now begin to make 
universal assertions about the relations amongst these 
classes. Assert that all the righteous are happy. At 
once, aS we saw in our seventh lecture, this assertion 
appears as a negative existential assertion, and as the 
destruction of a possibility. For you can express it by say- 
ing that in your universe the sub-class, otherwise possible, 
of righteous men who are unhappy, has vanished from 
existence. Your universe has now reduced its realized 
possibilities to the existence of three sub-classes. The 
example is trivial. It is but one of a countless number. 
To know facts is to destroy mere possibilities. To know 
that there is even a single righteous man in your uni- 
verse of discourse, is to destroy so far the abstractly pos- 
sible alternative that that individual man is unrighteous. 
This result so far holds with absolute generality, and 
without regard to your special definition of the concept 
of Being. Accordingly every realist regards the real as 
the selection from the possible. And in this we too 
agree with him. 

Spinoza, in his curious compromise between realistic 
and mystical motives, undertook indeed to deny this 
selective function of reality ; and asserted that from the 
divine point of view all that is possible is real. In vain, 
however, would one attempt to carry out this doctrine, 
except by expressly substituting for all other concep- 
tions of being the Third Conception, viz., that of the real 
as the valid. But even this conception itself is obliged 
to distinguish between the relatively determinate genu- 
ine possibilities of experience, and the absolutely unre- 


452 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


stricted products of any passing fancy. For one who 
developes even his most general ideas so that they have 
any relative wholeness of meaning, some possibilities 
seem to be at once excluded. Thus we already saw that 
in the mathematician’s realm numerous abstract possibil- 
ities are excluded whenever a specific theorem is demon- 
strated. Our rejection, however, of the Third Conception 
of Being as inadequate was due in the end to a recogni- 
tion of the fact that, so long as you define mere universals, 
mere general natures of things, you define neither the 
Being of objects nor the truth of ideas. 

But now, as a fact, our whole experience with the con- 
cept of Being has shown us that this exclusion of bare 
or abstract possibilities by the presence of determinate 
facts does not tend to impoverish, but rather to enrich, 
our consciousness of what is real; for it is by exclusion 
of vain possibilities that we become able at once to define 
a conscious purpose and to get it fulfilled in a pre- 
cise way. The life in which anything whatever can 
consistently happen, and in which any purpose can be 
fulfilled in any way, has in so far no character as a life. 
So far the experience of such a life is the experience of 
nothing in particular, — of no meaning. \It is indeed true 
that an object which we regard as possible in the sense 
that it is still lacking, but is needed for a specific pur- 
pose, is precisely the object which our finite experience 
seeks, longs to possess, regards as beyond itself, calls 
therefore the desired Other. The absence of such an 
object is indeed a lack, a relative defeat of the finite 
purpose. And from our own point of view, the Fourth 
Conception of Being does indeed involve the thesis that 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 453 


there are no valid possibilities which are to remain in the 
end, and for God, merely possible and unfulfilled in this 
sense, namely in the sense that while they are needed for 
a specific purpose, they are still regarded as absent or as 
non-existent. But, on the other hand, we have also found 
that what a given finite purpose desires includes its own 
specific definition, as this one purpose rather than another, 
as this specific way of selecting facts. Now the more 
determinate the consciousness of such a purpose becomes, 
the more does such consciousness involve a selection of 
some facts rather than others, or an exclusion from Being 
of what is now regarded as merely and vainly or abstractly 
possible. 
/ If you ask what manner of partial Being, from the 
point of view of our Fourth Conception, such abstractly 


conceived but concretely excluded facts possess, I an-. ~ 


swer, precisely the fragmentary sort of Being which 
the consciousness of a specific purpose, that is the con- 
sciousness of a particular attentive selection, consciously 
assigns to them.)| They are known as the excluded facts. 
They are defined by consciousness only in relatively 
general terms. As mere kinds of experience, the facts 
which attention thus excludes are themselves part of the 
very consciousness which forbids them to have any richer 
and more concrete Being than this character of remain- 
ing mere aspects of the whole. In this sense, but in this 
only, are they facts whose nature is experienced. And 
once more, in saying this, I refer to consciousness and to 
nothing else as my warrant for the meaning that I intend 
to convey. When one attends, when one chooses, when 
one finds a meaning at once specific and fulfilled, one 


454 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


actually observes, as an aspect of one’s experience, that 
which one defines as the exclusion of a generally conceived 
possibility. One’s experience of the general nature of 
this possibility is itself a part of the contents of one’s 
whole present consciousness. The realization of the 
whole present meaning is known by virtue of this very 
consciousness that one is excluding from complete expres- 
sion facts whose general nature one still experiences. 

Now what I assert is that our Fourth Conception of 
Being, in conceiving the real as the present fulfilment of 
meaning, experienced as such fulfilment from the absolute 
point of view, still expressly recognizes that every such 
fulfilment involves conscious selection and exclusion. 
The facts which fulfil the meaning are at once such that 
no other beyond is still needed to supply a lack, while, 
on the other hand, no other facts could take their place 
without precisely a failure to-fulfil the purpose. And in 
this twofold sense is the world of the fulfilled meaning 
an individual world, a world whose place no other could 
take. / A consciousness which faced a collection of mere 
possibilities, without selection, would face neither whole- 
ness nor determination of life. The very perfection of 
experience involves then, as an element, the exclusion 
of another, whose general nature is indeed a part of the 
very experience in question. Just as formal logic and 
traditional Realism have already recognized that to be 
real involves the exclusion of bare possibilities, so our 
own conception also expressly recognizes that the life 
which is, in its wholeness, is exelusive as well as in- 
clusive ; and that in this sense, once more, the realm 
of Being has the character of the complete, but for 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 455 


this very reason of the determinate, Individual. So much 
then for Exclusion and Selection as aspects of will both 
in God and in man. We next pass on toward more 
special comparisons between Absolute and Finite Individ- 
uality. For Individuality, as we now begin to see, is, in 
“one aspect, the expression of Selective Interest. Yet for 
a moment we must still treat of Individuality in general. 


IV 


The concept of the logical Individual, viewed apart from 
the question as to the distinctions of the various grades of 
individuality, finite or infinite, is a problem that frequently 
has received far too indefinite a treatment in logical dis- 
cussions. What shall the word “individual” in general 
mean? As we have often already indicated, the technical 
answer to this question runs: “By an individual being, 
whatever one’s metaphysical doctrine, one means an 
unique being, that is, a being which is alone of its own 
type, or is such that no other of its class exists. Now, as 
we saw in an earlier lecture, our human knowledge begins 
with immediate data, and with vague ideas. But mere 
colors and sounds, as such, may indeed indicate individual 
beings; but they are not yet known as individuals; while 
our early ideas, in their twofold vagueness, both as ideas 
needing further determination in order to define their 
purpose, and as ideas needing further embodiment to com- 
plete their expression, are far from being consciously 
adequate ideas of individual entities. A very little ex- 
amination of our popular conceptions shows how very 
general all such conceptions are. A very little study of 
concrete science reveals how hard it is for any man to get 


456 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


a clear idea of what his science regards as the constitution 
of any of its individual objects. It is far easier to know 
something about the circulation of the blood, than to have 
any adequate knowledge of the medical aspects of the 
case of an individual man whose circulation is in any way 
yderanged by disease. It is precisely the individual case 

{ that constitutes the goal of the physician’s knowledge. 
“In general a real knowledge of individual facts is the 
ideal aim of science, rather than the beginning of any 
form of human insight ; and this one can observe to be 
true, quite apart from any metaphysical conception of 
what constitutes individuality. 

Yet it is indeed perfectly true that, long before we have 
any scientific approach to a knowledge of the individual 
facts of the natural world, we all of us somehow believe 
that the world contains individual beings. And the his- 
torical prominence of the thesis that whatever is, is 
individual, the prominence, I say, of this thesis in the 
metaphysics of all ages, is due to deep reasons which sel- 
dom come to the clear consciousness of those who are 
accustomed to talk glibly about individuality. Only our 
Fourth Conception of Being is able to make the conception 
at once rational and explicit. It is, so we have asserted, 
precisely as the final and satisfactory expression of the 
whole will of an idea that any object can be regarded as 
unique. But what makes the presupposition that objects 
are individual precisely in so far as they are real appear 
so early in human thought, and exercise such a control- 
ling influence over the development of science, is pre- 
cisely that demand of the finite idea for wholeness of 
expression, which we have just analyzed in both of its 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 457 


contrasted aspects. Long before we can ever say, with 
even a shadow of plausibility, that we ourselves have 
known and experienced the unique presence of any single 
fact, as such, our restless finite will itself has demanded 
that the real world wherein our will seeks, and logically 
speaking, ultimately finds, its fulfilment, shall be alto- 
gether determinate, both in so far as nothing further is 
needed to complete it, and in so far as nothing else would 
meet the needs which constitute finite ideas. 

But owing to our finitude, will, in our own case, far 
anticipates its own fulfilment. The individual, therefore, 
as a conceived object of inquiry, of desire, and of knowl- 
edge, appears in our finite human thought as something 
that we early define much more in terms of selective ex- 
clusion than of empirically observed completeness. We 
presuppose the individual in both the foregoing senses ; 
viz., as selected and as complete. But, if you look closely 
at that region of our consciousness where first we come 
nearest to facing what we take to be an experience of 
individuality, you find, I think, that it is our selective 
attention, especially as embodied in what one may call 
our exclusive affections, which first brings home to us 
what we mortals require an individual being to be. 
How in fact should a finite being, whose experience con- 
stantly passes from one partial fulfilment to another, from 
one vague general idea to another instance of the same 
generality, — how should such a being, I say, come to be 
so sure as most of us are that he has actually stood in the 
presence of individuals, and has faced beings that are 
unique? Yet every man supposes, to take perfectly ordi- 
nary instances, that his own father and mother are real 


458 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


individuals, and that other men, too, even where their indi- 
viduality has been far less closely scrutinized, are still in 
themselves somehow individuals. Every man also early 
believes that the world as a whole, whether he regards it 
as one or as many, is at all events an individual collection 
of individuals. Yet to make this assertion is in any case 
far to transcend any man’s actual experience, regarded 
merely as that experience comes to us. For what we find 
in our finite wanderings are always cases of types, in- 
stances of imperfectly fulfilled meanings. In observing 
my father, what I each time experience must necessarily 
be merely the presence to my mind of a certain kind of 
experience. That the object of this experience is unique, 
that in all the universe there is no other like it, how 
should I myself ever experience this fact? That this 
theorem about individuality is itself true, is precisely 
what our Fourth Conception of Being has now asserted. 
For whatever the relation between the finite idea and the 
whole world may be, this we already know from our 
Fourth Conception, namely that the world in its unity 
is an individual whole, such that no other could take its 
place as an expression of this one purpose. / 

Our idea of individuality comes to our finite conscious- 
ness, therefore, rather on the selective side of this con- 
sciousness than upon the side of its present fulfilment. It 
is not so much what I already know about an individual 
as what my affections determine to regard as unique in 
the value of my object, that first brings home to me, in 
the case of my father or my mother or my home or my 
personal possessions, or my own life, and later only in the 
case of indifferent beings, the uniqueness of the object in 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 459 


question. Affection first says in presence of an object, 
imperfectly presented in experience, not only that there 
shall be further experience completing and fulfilling this 
meaning, but also that there shall be in this further 
experience such unity as constitutes an unique object. 
Affection first declares that there shall be no other object 
capable of fulfilling this meaning, beyond the single object 
whose Being I now presuppose. It is thus, for instance, 
that the lover says, There shall be none like my beloved. 
It is thus, too, that the mother says, There shall be no 
child like my child. It is thus that the loyal friend says, 
There shall be no friend like my friend. It is thus that 
the finite Self says, No life shall have precisely the mean- 
ing that my life has. It is thus also that the ethical con- 
sciousness says, My duty shall be that which nobody but 
myself can conceivably do. In brief, in our finite life, the 
sense of the determinate selection of the single object 
that we shall regard as the fulfilment of our meaning, 
comes earlier to our consciousness than any specific hope 
that, in our finite capacity, we shall ever live to see this 
specific meaning wholly fulfilled. 

Now this disposition of our finite will, this tendency to 
a selection of our objects as unique, is precisely the char- 
acter which our Fourth Conception regards as also belong- 
ing to that Absolute Will which faces the final meaning 
and fulfilment of the world. For the world as a whole is, 
from our point of view, an individual fact, not merely by 
virtue of the completeness of the contents of the Absolute 
Experience, but by reason of the definiteness of the selec- 
tion of that object which shall be permitted to fulfil the 
final meaning. No significant purpose, no element of 


460 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


meaning that finite ideas demand as necessary for their 
own fulfilment, could indeed be, according to our thesis, 
wholly ignored from the absolute point of view. But, 
on the other hand, the very perfection of the fulfilment 
would logically require of the divine will the sort of 
determination of purpose of which we too are conscious 
when we deal with the objects of the exclusive affection. 


* It is will, then, in God and in man, that logically deter- 
\ mines the consciousness of individuality. The individual 
‘is, primarily, the object and expression of an exclusive 


interest, of a determinate selection. 
From this point of view, the world in its wholeness 
might indeed be regarded as, so to speak, an only begotten 


/ son of the central purpose,—an unique expression, — 
| unique not merely by reason of its wealth, but of its 
/ exclusiveness. And thus the category of individual- 


ity would be fulfilled in the whole precisely in the sense 
in which our finite affection presupposes its fulfilment in 
individual cases. 


V 


We have thus gradually prepared ourselves to define 
the relation between the Finite and the Absolute Will. We 
have studied as aspects of will, both selective attention 
and the nature of individuality. We have indicated, too, 
the sense in which, for our Fourth Conception, the world 
is the fulfilment of purpose.’ And now, to sum up so far, 
we do not say that any purpose, divine or human, first 
existing as a merely separate power, thereupon causes its 
own fulfilment. On the contrary, we say as to God, that 
from the absolute point of view, the genuine knowledge of 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 461 


the absolute purpose, as an empirical fact, is its own 
fulfilment. For, according to our central thesis, except 
as consciously fulfilling a purpose, nothing can, logically 
speaking, exist at all. In the second place we have also 
maintained that the fulfilment of the divine purpose is 
twofold, involving at once wealth of experience conform- 
ing to the one meaning, and selection both of the facts 
which express the meaning, and of the precise and indivi- 
dual determination of the meaning itself. The world that 
thus expresses meaning appears, from the absolute point 
of view, as an unique whole, but as also an unique selected 
whole, such that neither for the whole nor for any of the 
parts could any other fact be substituted, without failure 
in the realization of precisely this totality of determinate 
meaning. And consequently, quite apart from any causal 
theory, that selective aspect which common sense already 
regards as essential to the will does indeed appear in our 
account as a real and logically required character of the 
divine or absolute will. In the third place, however, we 
find a similarly selective character belonging to our own 
will, and an experience of such selection we find in that 
sort of exclusive interest whereby, even in advance of 
knowledge, we undertake to define the individuality which 
we presuppose in all the objects of our more exclusive 
affection. 

If you ask, from this point of view, in what sense the 
world is to be called rather the expression of the Divine 
Will, and in what sense it is rather the expression of the 
Divine Knowledge, I reply that while we have by no 
means separated these two aspects of the universe, we can 
now easily see the convenience from many points of view 


462 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


of distinguishing them. The Divine or Absolute Know- 
ledge this world expresses, by virtue of the unity of con- 
sciousness in which all its facts are linked, and by virtue 
too of that universality of meaning which joins all various 
ideas, in such wise that every finite idea, in so far as it 
merely refers to another, or has external reference, is 
general, while the whole expression of these ideas is 
unique and individual. |In this same sense we can also 
speak of the world, quite accurately, as the expression, or 
embodiment, or fulfilment, of the Divine Thought. Will, 
on the other hand, this world expresses, not as if the 
Divine Will were an external power causing the world, 
but in so far as the unity of the whole is teleological, is 
such as ideas intend; or again, in so far as the world 
attains wholeness, and needs no fact beyond it for its 
completion; and finally, in so far as this wholeness and 
uniqueness of the world is the expression of an ideal se- 
lection, whose nature is well exemplified by our own 
exclusive interests, and whose type of fulfilment we all 
observe whenever we win a rational ideal goal. 

Now all these considerations might seem once more to 
deprive any finite portion, or aspect, of this conscious 
universe, of any distinguishable private significance. On 
the contrary, however, precisely the opposite is the true 
result. For consider. If the whole world is at once the 
complete expression of a plan, and also the unique ex- 
pression of such plan, then every fact in it, precisely in 
so far as we distinguish that fact from other facts, and 
consider its internal meaning, is also inevitably unique, 
sharing in so far the uniqueness of the whole. For, to 
illustrate, if in the ordinary empirical world of space, this 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 463 


room is unique, so that by hypothesis there shall be no 
other room like it in the world, then any definable part of 
the unique room, by virtue of the very fact that it is dif- 
ferent from all the other parts of this same room, has its 
own unique individuality as opposed to any other fact in 
the universe. 

Or again, let A be any fact. First suppose A to be 
merely an abstract universal, a general type. Then sup- 
pose A to be an individual. If A is as a whole merely 
a case of a type, so that there are other cases like it, then 
any part of A is in so far also only a case of a type, and 
is not unique. But if A is an individual, unique and 
elsewhere unexampled, then every fragment of A has its 
part in the individuality of the whole, just as a play of 
Shakespeare, as this particular expression of the indivi- 
duality of the poet, has its own uniqueness by sharing in 
his. 

Now, by hypothesis, the world exists only as such an 
expression of the meaning of the divine system of ideas, 
that no other life than this of the present world could 
express precisely this system. But suppose that you lay 
stress upon the facts of any finite life. You have a right 
to do so, for these facts exist for the Absolute precisely 
as much as for you. Then’ you have, in the first place, 
facts that exist only as an expression of a meaning. If 
you ask of what meaning they are the expression, the 
answer is, of the meaning of the very ideas and of the 
very will, that, in the finite consciousness, accompany these 
very facts. . 

Take, for instance, one of your own acts. In part, it 
expresses one of your own purposes. Now our theory 


1 


464 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


does indeed unite both your act and the idea that your 
act expresses, along with all other acts and ideas, in the 
single unity of the absolute consciousness. But this 
single unity of the absolute consciousness, as we already 
saw at the last time, is nothing that merely absorbs your 
individuality, in such wise that you vanish from amongst 
the facts of the world. You remain from the absolute 
point of view precisely what you now know yourself to 
be, namely, the possessor of just this ideal purpose, whose 
internal meaning is embodied in just so much of conscious 
life as is yours. Our very theory insists that your inter- 
nal meanings, your ideas viewed as internally significant, 
your selections and expressions, are typical instances of 
facts, and of precisely the facts of whose unity the 
world consists. Now if the whole world is, as whole, 
the unique expression of the divine purpose, it follows 
that every finite purpose, precisely in so far as it is, is 
a partial expression and attainment of the divine will; 
and also that every finite fulfilment of purpose, precisely 
as we finite beings find it, is a partial fulfilment of the 
divine meaning. For from our point of view, while all 
finite ideas, in so far as concerns their external meaning, 
are indeed general, still no fact exists merely as a case 
of a type, or merely as an instance of an universal. The 
very simplest view of any finite fact already makes it a 
positive part of the unique divine experience, and there- 
fore, as this part, itself unique. A still deeper view 
recognizes any finite will, say your own present will, as a 
stage or case of the expression of the divine purpose at 
a given point of time; but this expression, too, is once 
more unique. And this expression is also in one aspect 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 465 


no other than what you find it to be, to wit, your own 
conscious will and meaning. 

Thus the individuality of the whole in such wise 
dwells in the parts, the individuality of the unique 
divine purpose is in such wise present in each finite 
purpose, that no finite purpose, viewed merely as an 
internal meaning, could have its place taken by another 
without a genuine alteration of the whole; while, on 
the other hand, it is equally true that the whole would 
not be what it is were not precisely this finite purpose 
left in its own uniqueness to speak precisely its own 
word —a word which no other purpose can speak in the 
language of the divine will. In brief, then, our view 
leaves all the unique meaning of your finite individual 
life just as rich as you find it to be. You are in God; 
but you are not lost in God. If every finite pulsation of 
life, despite its aspect of mere generality, its external 
meaning, has something unique about it, and if this 
unique aspect of the finite life expresses an internal 
meaning, then the meaning of every such fact itself is 
unique. Or to apply the matter once more to yourself: 
if every instance of your life expresses a will that is to be 
found expressed in precisely this way nowhere else in all 
the world, and if this will is the will of which you are 
now conscious, then we can say that the verdict of your 
own consciousness when it regards your life as the expres- 
sion of your individual will is in no wise refuted, but is 
only confirmed by our Fourth Conception of Being. 

Thus it is then that we deal, in case of the finite will 
and the divine will, with the problem of the One and the 
Many. A realistic union of the many different beings in 

24 


466 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


one being we long since found to be impossible. For our 
present point of view, however, the realistic difficulty of 
the Many and the One has been wholly set aside. It is 
not indeed for us a question of how the many things 
could become one thing. \ For us the unity of the world 
is the unity of consciousness.“ The variety of the world 
is the internal, but none the less wealthy and genuine, 
variety of the purposes and embodiments of purpose pres- 
ent within this unity of the one divine consciousness. 
Now with regard to the ultimate unity and consequent 
harmony of all this variety, our Fourth Conception has 
given us indeed a general formula. The Many must, 
despite their variety, win harmony and perfection by their 
codperation. But this principle, so far, gives us no limit 
either to the empirical variety of will, or of interest and 
of experience in the absolute, nor any limit to the rela- 
tive independence which the uniqueness of the individual 
elements makes possible. What we see, however, is that 
every distinguishable portion of the divine life, in addi- 
tion to all the universal ties which link it to the whole, 
expresses its own meaning. We see, too, that this mean- 
ing is unique, and that this meaning is precisely identical 
with what each one of us means by his own individual 
will, so far as that will is at any time determinate, uniquely 
selected, and empirically expressed. So much then for 
the general relations of Absolute and of Finite will. 


VI 
Two expressions, familiar to common sense in speak- 
ing of finite will, receive herewith their sufficient and, I 
believe, their only possible justification. Common sense 


' 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 467 


first asserts that, when my will gets expressed, I individu- 
ally am active. Common sense also, in the second place, 
asserts that when my will gets inwardly expressed in my 
choice, I individually am free. Now into the endless dis- 
cussions as to the causal relations of this or that aspect 
of the human will we have declined in this discussion to 
go. We have declined, because we have said that all 
causation, whatever it is, is but a special instance of 
Being, and never can explain any of the ultimate prob- 
lems about Being. But when we have asserted, as we 
have now done, that every moment of every finite con- 
sciousness has some unique character, and when we have 
asserted, as we have also done, that in our rational life 
our momentary will and its finite expression belong to 
this very unique aspect of our finite life, we have indeed 
found, in our finite will, an aspect which no causation 
could ever by any possibility explain.” For whatever else 
causation may be, it implies the explanation of facts by 
their general character, and by their connections with 
other facts. Whatever is unique, is as such not causally 
explicable. The individual as such is never the mere 
result of law. In consequence, the causal explanation of 
an object never defines its individual and unique charac- 
ters as such, but always its general characters. Conse- 
quently, if the will and the expression of that will ‘in any 
moment of our finite life possess characters, namely, pre- 
cisely these individual and uniquely significant characters 
which no causal explanation can predetermine, then such 
acts of will, as significant expressions of purpose in our 
life, constitute precisely what ethical common sense has 
always meant by free acts. If your finite purpose is now 


468 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


different from that of any other finite being, and if your 
finite purpose now in any sense uniquely expresses, how- 
ever inadequately, its own determinate meaning, in its 
own way, then, you can indeed assert: I alone, amongst 
all the different beings of the universe, will this act. 
That it is true that God here also wills in me, is 
\ indeed the unquestionable result of the unity of the 
divine consciousness. But it is equally true that this 
divine unity is here and now realized by me, and by me 
only, through my unique act. My act, too, is a part of 
the divine life that, however fragmentary, is not else- 
where repeated in the divine consciousness. When I 
thus consciously and uniquely will, it is I then who just 
_ here am God’s will, or who just here consciously act for 
the whole. I then am so far free. 

The other popular conception, in addition to the con- 
ception of freedom, which belongs in this connection, is 
that very conception of Activity which I have just em- 
ployed. By the term “activity” I regard our ethical com- 
mon sense as meaning precisely the very fact that our 
present will, as the will of an individual, is unique. By 
our activity, then, I mean just the unique significance of 
the present expression of our will. If a general law, — 
a merely universal type,—if our characters or tempera- 
ments, or some other such universal nature of things, are 
expressed in our present experience, then, in so far, we 
are indeed mere cases of types. In so far we do not act. 
But if this my present expression of my meaning is in 
such wise unique that, but for this meaning, this expres- 
sion would have no place in the whole realm of Being, 
then indeed I may call my present expression of meaning 


INDIVIDUALITY AND FREEDOM 469 


my act. As my act this my present will is as unique as 
is the whole divine life, as free as is the whole meaning 


of which the whole world is an expression. Wot by virgo 


tue then of any supposed causal efficacy is the divine will 
as a power the producer of the world. And just so, not 
by virtue of its potency as a physical agent is our human 
action a free cause. 

To our later series of lectures must be altogether left 
the discussion of any sort of causation in its real, but 
in its extremely subordinate, place in the constitution 
of reality. But what we at present say to the finite 
being is: You are at once an expression of the divine 
will, and by virtue of that very fact the expression here 
and now, in your life, of your own will, precisely in so 
far as you find yourself acting with a definite intent, 
and gaining through your act a definite empirical expres- 
sion. We do not say, Your individuality causes your act. 
We do not say, Your free will creates your life. For 
Being is everywhere deeper than causation. What you 
are is deeper than your mere power as a physical agent. 
Nothing whatever besides yourself determines either 
causally or otherwise just what constitutes your indi- 
viduality, for you are just this unique and elsewhere 
unexampled expression of the divine meaning. And 
here and now your individuality in your act zs your 
freedom. This your freedom is your unique possession. 
Nowhere’else in the universe is there what here expresses 
itself in your conscious being. And this is true of you, 
not in spite of the unity of the divine consciousness, but 
just because of the very uniqueness of the whole divine 
life. For all is divine, all expresses meaning. All 


470 THE FOUR HISTORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 


meaning is uniquely expressed. Nothing is vainly re- 
peated; you too, then, as individual are unique. And 
(here is the central fact) just in so far as you consciously 
will and choose, you then and there in so far know what 
this unique meaning of yours is. Therefore are you in 
action Free and Individual, just because the unity of the 
divine life, when taken together with the uniqueness of 
this life, implies in every finite being just such essential 
originality of meaning as that of which you are con- 
scious. Arise then, freeman, stand forth in thy world. 
It is God’s world. It is also thine. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


GIFFORD LECTURES 


FIRST SERIES 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


THE ONE, THE MANY, AND THE INFINITE 


Section I. Mr. Brapiey’s PropuEem 


THE closing lecture of the foregoing series has begun the 
statement of the doctrine of the Individual. The reality of 
Many within One, and the necessity of the union of the One 
and the Many, have been maintained, side by side with some 
account of the nature that, as I also maintain, ought to be 
attributed to the Individual, whether you consider the Abso- 
lute Individual, or the Individuals of our finite world, —the 
men whose wills are expressed in our life. Now I should be 
glad to allow the general theory to stand, for the present, 
simply as stated; and to postpone altogether, until the second 
series of these lectures, the further defence of the doctrine, — 
were it not that the most thorough, and in very many respects 
by far the most important contribution to pure Metaphysics 
which has of late years appeared in England, has made known 
a Theory of Being with which, in some of its most significant 
theses, I heartily agree, while, nevertheless, this very Theory 
of Being, as it has been stated by its author, undertakes to 
render wholly impossible, for our human minds, as now we 
are constituted, any explicit and detailed reconciliation of the 
One and the Many, or any positive theory of how Individuals 
find their real place in the Absolute. Defining and defending 
a conception of the Absolute as “one system,” whose contents 
are “experience,” Mr. Bradley, to whose well-known book, 

473 


474 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


Appearance and Reality, 1 am here referring, has, neverthe- 
less, maintained that we are wholly unable to “construe” to 
ourselves the way in which the realm of Appearance finds 
its unity in the Absolute. He rejects, in consequence, every 
more detailed effort to interpret our own life in its relations to 
the Absolute, such as, in the foregoing discussions I have begun, 
and, in the second series of these lectures, hope to continue. 
The reason for this rejection, in Mr. Bradley’s case, is of the 
most fundamental kind. It is founded upon the most central 
theses of his Theory of Being. The proper place to discuss it 
is in close connection, therefore, with the general theory in 
question. I have stated my own case; but I feel obliged to 
try to do justice to Mr. Bradley’s interpretation. For if he is 
right, there is little hope for our further undertaking. 

The task is no easy one. I myself owe a great debt to Mr. 
Bradley’s book, a debt manifest in my criticism of Realism in 
Lecture IJ, and in many other parts of my discussion. The 
book is itself a very elaborate argumentative structure. One 
ought not to make light of it by chance quotations. One can- 
not easily summarize its well-wrought reasonings in a few 
sentences. To discuss it carefully would have been wholly 
impossible in my general course of lectures. On the other 
hand, to sunder the discussion of it wholly from the present 
discourse, would have made such a critical enterprise as here 
follows, seem, for me, a thankless polemical task. For lengthy 
polemic regarding so serious a piece of work as Mr. Bradley’s 
is hardly to be tolerated apart from an attempt at construction. 
And so I have resolved to attempt the task in the form of an 
essay, supplementary to my own statement of a Theory of 
Being in these lectures, and preparatory to the discussion of 
Man and Nature in the next series. 

Even here, however, I must attempt to construct as well as 
to object. And the effort will lead at once to problems which 
I had no time to discuss in the general lectures. Mr. Bradley, 
for instance, has shown that every effort to bring to unity the 
manifoldness of our world involves us in what he himself often 
calls an “infinite process.” In other words, if, in telling 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 475 


about the Absolute you try to show how the One and the Many 
are brought into unity, and how the Many develope out of the 
One, you find that, in attempting to define the Many at all, 
you have defined an actually infinite number. But an actually 
infinite multitude, according to Mr. Bradley, is a self-contra- 
dictory conception. The problem thus stated is an ancient 
phase of the general problem as to unity and plurality. 

From the very outset of the philosophical study of the diver- 
sities of the universe, it has been noticed, that in many cases, 
where common sense is content to enumerate two, or three, or 
some other limited number of aspects or constituents of a sup- 
posed object, closer analysis shows that the variety contained 
in this object, if really existent at all, must be boundless, so 
that the dilemma: “Either no true variety of the supposed 
type is real, or else this variety involves an infinity of as- 
pects,” has often been used as a critical test, to discredit some 
commonly received view as to the unity and variety of the 
universe or of some supposed portion thereof. Mr. Bradley 
has not been wanting in his appeal to this type of critical 
argument. But to give this argument its due weight, when 
it comes as a device for discrediting all efforts to define the 
nature of Individuals, requires one to attack the whole ques- 
tion of the actual Infinite, a question that recent discussions 
of the Philosophy of Mathematics have set in a decidedly new 
light, but that these discussions have also made more techni- 
cal than ever. If Iam to be just to this matter, I must there- 
fore needs wander far afield. Nobody, I fear, except a 
decidedly technical reader, will care to follow. I have, there- 
fore, hesitated long before venturing seriously to entertain the 
plan of saying, either here or elsewhere, anything about what 
seems to me the true, and, as I believe, the highly positive 
implication, of Mr. Bradley’s apparently most destructive 
arguments concerning Individual Being and concerning the 
meaning of the world of Appearance. 

Yet the problem of the reality of infinite variety and multi- 
plicity, —a problem thus made so prominent by Mr. Bradley’s 
whole method of procedure, —is one that no metaphysician 


476 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


can permanently evade. The doctrine that the conception of 
the actually infinite multitude is a self-contradictory concep- 
tion is a familiar thesis ever since Aristotle. If this thesis is 
correct, as Mr. Bradley himself assumes, then Mr. Bradley’s 
results, as regards the limitations of our human knowledge of 
the Absolute, appear to be inevitable, and the effort of these 
present lectures to define the essential relations of the world 
and the individual must fail. On the other hand, however, if, 
as I believe, the very doctrine of the true nature of Individual 
Being, which these lectures defend, enables us, for the first 
time perhaps in the history of the discussion of the Infinite, 
to give a precise statement of the sense in which an Infinite 
Multitude can, without contradiction, be viewed as determi- 
nately real, — then a discussion of Mr. Bradley’s position, and 
of the whole problem of the One, the Many, and the Infinite, 
will prove an important supplement to our Theory of Being, 
and an essential basis for the vindication of our human 
knowledge of the general constitution of Reality. And so I 
must feel that, if the present task is extended and technical, 
the goal is nothing less than the defence of what I take to be 
a true theory of the whole meaning of life. 

And so I am now minded to undertake the task of vindicat- 
ing the concept of the actual Infinite against the charge of 
self-contradiction. Iam minded, also, to attempt the closely 
related task of defending the concept of the Self against a like 
charge. In the same connection JI shall undertake to show 
something of the true relations of the One and the Many in 
the real world. And in the course of this enterprise I shall 
found the positive discussion upon acriticism of Mr. Bradley’s 
position. 

But now, at this point, let any weary reader whom my 
lectures may have already disheartened, — but who neverthe- 
less may kindly have proceeded so far, —turn finally back. 
When you enter the realm of Mr. Bradley’s Absolute, it is 
much as it is at the close of Victor Hugo’s Toilers of the 
Sea, after the ship that carries away the lady has sunk below 
the horizon, and after the tide has just covered the rock where 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY ATT 


the desolate lover had been watching. “There was nothing,” 
says the poet, in his last words, “there was nothing now 
visible but the sea.” As for me, I love the sea, and am minded 
to find in it life, and individuality, and explicit law. And 1 
go upon that quest. Whoever is not weary, and is not yet 
disheartened, and is fond of metaphysical technicality, is wel- 
come to join the quest. But in the sea there are also, as Vic- 
tor Hugo explained to us, very strange monsters. And Mr. 
Bradley, too, in his book, has had much to say of the “mon- 
sters,” philosophic and psychological, that the realm of Ap- 
pearance contains, even in the immediate neighborhood of the 
Absolute. We shall meet some such reputed “monsters ” in 
the course of this discussion. Let him who fears such trouble 
also turn back. 

In this essay, I shall first try to state Mr. Bradley’s theses 
as to the problem of the One and the Many. Then I shall try 
to show how he himself seems to suggest a way by which, if 
we follow that way far enough, something may be done to solve 
what he leaves apparently hopeless. And, finally, I shall pro- 
ceed upon the way thus opened until we have found whither 
it leads. We shall find it inevitably leading to the concep- 
tion of the actually Infinite. We shall examine the known 
difficulties of that conception, and shall at last solve them by 
means of our own conception of the nature of determinateness 
and Individuality. 


I. Mr. Bradley’s First Illustrations of His Problem 


The general doctrine of the Absolute which Mr. Bradley 
maintains is the result of a critical analysis of a number of 
metaphysical conceptions which he opposes. Mr. Bradley’s 
work is divided into two books. The first book, entitled 
Appearance, has a mainly negative result. Beginning with 
the examination of the traditional distinction between primary 
and secondary qualities, Mr. Bradley shows that this distinc- 
tion is incapable of furnishing a consistent account of the rela- 
tion of the phenomenal to the real. The problem of inherence, 


478 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


attacked next in order, is declared to be, upon the basis of the 
ordinary conception of things and qualities, and of their rela- 
tionship, insoluble. The reason given in this case is typical 
of Mr. Bradley’s position throughout the book, and, despite 
the general familiarity of the argument to readers of the 
Hegelian and Herbartian discussions of the concept of the 
thing, deserves special mention at this point. 

A thing is somehow to be one, and “it has properties, ad- 
jectives which qualify it.1 We say that the thing is this or 
that, predicating of it the adjectives that express its qualities.” 
But it cannot be “all its properties if you take them each 
severally.” “Its reality lies somehow in its unity.” “But 
if, on the other hand, we inquire what there can be in the 
thing besides its several qualities, we are baffled once more. 
We can discover no real unity existing outside these qualities, 
or, again, existing within them.” To the hypothesis that the 
unity of the thing may be sufficiently expressed by asserting 
that “the qualities are, and are in relation,” Mr. Bradley 
replies that the meaning of is remains still doubtful when we 
say, “One quality, A is in relation with another quality, B” 
(p. 20). For still one does not, by here using is, intend to 
reduce A to simple identity with its relations to B, and so one 
is led to say, “The word to use, when we are pressed, should 
not be ts, but only has.” But the has seems metaphorical. 
“ And we seem unable to clear ourselves from the old dilemma, 
If you predicate what is different, you ascribe to the subject 
what it is not; and if you predicate what is not different you 
say nothing at all.” Nor does one better the case (p. 21) if 
one amends the phraseology here in question by asserting that 
the relation belongs equally to both A and B, instead of lim- 
iting the assertion in form to A alone. If the relation, how- 
ever, be no mere attribute of A or of B, or of both of them, 
but a “more or less independent” fact, namely, the fact that 
“There is a relation C in which A and B stand,” then the 
problem of the unity of the thing becomes the problem as to 


1 Page 19. I cite throughout from the second edition of Appearance 
and Reality. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 479 


the genuine tie that binds both A and B to their now rela- 
tively independent relation C. For C is now supposed to 
possess an existence which is not that of A or B, but some- 
thing apart from either. This tie which unites A and B, in 
the thing, to C, hereupon appears as a new fact of relation, 
D, viz., the fact that A and B are so related to C that C 
becomes their relation to each other. “But such a make- 
shift at once leads to the infinite process. The new relation 
D can be predicated in no way of C, or of A and B; and 
hence we must have recourse to a fresh relation, HZ, which 
comes between D and whatever we had before. But this 
must lead to another, 7’; and so on indefinitely.” The con- 
sequence is that we are not aided by letting the “ qualities and 
their relation fall entirely apart.” “There must be a whole 
embracing what is related, or there would be no differences, 
and no relation.” This remark applies not merely to things, 
and to the relations that are to bind into unity their qualities, 
but to space, and time, and to every case where varieties are 
in any way related. But although Mr. Bradley asserts thus 
early the general principle that variety must always find its 
basis in unity, he wholly denies that, in the present case, we 
have yet found or defined what the unity in question can be. 
He denies, namely, that the relational system offered to us so 
far by the qualities supposed to be inherent in the one thing, 
or to be related to one another, contains, or can be made to 
contain, any principle adequate to accomplish the required 
task, or to “justify the arrangement” that we try to make in 
conceiving the thing and its qualities as in relational unity. 


II. The General Problem of “ Relational Thought” 


The defect in all these accounts of the nature of the thing 
is not due, according to Mr. Bradley’s view, to any accidental 
faults of definition. The defect depends upon a dilemma that 
first fully comes to light when the problem about relations and 
qualities is considered for itself, and apart from the special 
issue about the thing. The task of expounding this dilemma 


480 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


Mr. Bradley undertakes in Chapter III of his first book. 
Here his thesis is (p. 25), that “The arrangement of given 
facts into relations and qualities may be necessary in practice, 
but it is theoretically unintelligible.” 

The true reason why the concept of the thing involved the 
foregoing paradoxes is now to become more obvious. It is set 
forth in three successive theses. First (p. 26): “Qualities 
are nothing without relations.” For qualities are different 
from one another. “Their plurality depends on relation, and 
without that relation they are not distinct” (p. 28). Even 
were qualities conceived as in themselves wholly separated 
from one another, and only for us related, still (p. 29) “ Any 
separateness implies separation, and so relation, and is there- 
fore, when made absolute, a self-discrepancy.” “If there is 
any difference, then that implies a relation.” Mr. Bradley 
enforces this assertion by a reference, made with characteristic 
skill, to the paradoxes of the Herbartian metaphysic of the 
einfache Qualitdten and the zufdllige Ansichten (p. 30). 

But if it is impossible to conceive qualities without rela- 
tions, it is equally unintelligible to take qualities together 
with relations. For the qualities cannot be resolved into the 
relations. And, if taken with the relations, they “must be, 
and must also be related” (p. 31). But now afresh arises the 
problem as to how, in this instance, the variety involved in 
the also is reducible to the unity which each quality must by 
itself possess. For a quality, A, is made what it is both by 
its relations (since, as we have seen, these are essential to its 
being as a quality), and by something else, namely, by its own 
inner character. A has thus two aspects, both of which can 
be predicated of it. Yet “without the use of a relation it is 
impossible to predicate this variety of A,” just as it was im- 
possible, except by the use of a relation, to predicate the vari- 
ous qualities of one thing. We have therefore to say that, 
within A, both its own inner character, as a quality, and its 
relatedness to other facts, are themselves, as varieties, facts; 
but such facts as constitute the being of A, so that they are 
united by a new relation, namely, by the very relation which 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 481 


makes them constitutive of A. Thus, however, “we are led 
by a principle of fission which conducts us to no end.” “The 
quality must exchange its unity for an internal relation.” 
This diversity “demands a new relation, and so on without 
limit.” 

For similar reasons, a relation without terms being “mere 
verbiage” (p. 32), it follows that since the terms imply quali- 
ties, relation without qualities is nothing. But, on the other 
hand, if the relation stands related to the qualities, if it is 
anything to them, “we shall now require a new connecting 
relation.” But hereupon an endless process of the same kind 
as before is set up (p. 33). “The links are united by a link, 
and this bond of union is a link which has also two ends; and, 
these require each a fresh link to connect them with the old.” 

The importance for Mr. Bradley of the negative result thus 
reached lies in the great generality of the conceptions here in 
question, and in the consequent range covered by these fun- 
damental considerations. “The conclusion,” says Mr. Brad- 
ley, “to which I am brought, is that a relational way of 
thought — any one that moves by the machinery of terms and 
relations — must give appearance and not truth. It isa make- 
shift, a device, a mere practical compromise, most necessary, 
but in the end most indefensible. We have to take reality as 
many, and to take it as one, and to avoid contradiction. We 
want to divide it, or to take it, when we please, as indivisible; 
to go as far as we desire in either of these directions, and to 


stop when that suitsus. . . . But when these inconsistencies 
are forced together . . . the result is an open and staring 
inconsistency.” 


In the subsequent chapters of Mr. Bradley’s first book, he 
himself sees, in a great measure, merely an application of the 
general principle just enunciated to such special problems as 
are exemplified by Space, by Time, by Causation, by Activity, 
and by the Self. For all these metaphysical conceptions are 
defined in terms of a “relational way ” of thinking, and involve 
the problem of the One and the Many. To be sure, the dis- 
eussion of the Self, in Chapters IX and X, brings the problem 

21 


482 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


into decidedly new and important forms, but does not, in Mr. 
Bradley’s opinion, furnish any acceptable ground for its posi- 
tive solution. “We have found,” he says, “puzzles in reality, 
besetting every way in which we have taken it.” The solu- 
tion of these puzzles, if ever discovered, must be “a view not 
obnoxious to these mortal attacks, and combining differences 
in one so as to turn the edge of criticism” (p. 114). The mere 
appeal, however, to the fact of self-consciousness, does not 
furnish this needed explicit harmony of unity and variety. 
The Self does, indeed, unite diversity and unity in a pro- 
foundly important way; but the mere fact that this is some- 
how done does not show us how it is done. 


III. The Problem of the One and the Many as Insoluble by 
Thought, yet solved by the Absolute 


Despite this elaborate exposition of the apparent hopeless- 
ness of the problem as to the One and the Many, Mr. Brad- 
ley’s own theory of the Absolute, proposed in his second book, 
turns upon asserting that in Reality unity and diversity are 
positively reconciled, and reconciled, moreover, not by a sim- 
ple abolition of either of the apparently opposed principles, 
but in a way that leaves to each its place. For first (p. 140), 
“Reality is one in this sense that it has a positive nature ex- 
clusive of discord. ... Its diversity can be diverse only 
so far as not to clash.” Yet, on the other hand, “ Appearance 
must belong to reality, and it must, therefore, be concordant 
and other than it seems. The bewildering mass of phenome- 
nal diversity must hence somehow be at unity and self-con- 
sistent; for it cannot be elsewhere than in reality, and reality 
excludes discord. Or, again, we may put it so: The real is 
individual. It is one in the sense that its positive character 
embraces all differences in an inclusive harmony.” Further, 
“To be real . . . must be to fall within sentience” (p. 144). 
Or, again, to be real (p. 146) is “to be something which comes 
as a feature and aspect within one whole of feeling, some- 
thing which, except as an integral element of such sentience, 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 483 


has no meaning at all.” In consequence, “The Absolute is 
one system,” and “its contents are . . . sentient experience.” 
“Tt will hence be a single and all-inclusive experience, which 
embraces every partial diversity in concord” (p. 147). It fol- 
lows that, in the Absolute, none of the diversities which are 
to us so perplexing, and which, as exemplified by the cases of 
thing, quality, relation, Self, and the rest of the appearances, 
are so contradictory in their seeming, are wholly lost. For 
the Absolute, on the contrary, these diversities are all pre- 
served; only they are “transmuted” into a whole, which is, in 
ways of which we have only a most imperfect knowledge, 
internally harmonious. As to the hints that we possess, 
regarding the nature of the Absolute, they are summarized 
as follows: “Immediate presentation” (p. 159) gives us the 
experience of a “whole” which “contains diversity,” but 
which is, nevertheless, “not parted by relations.” On the 
other hand, “relational form,” where known to us, points 
“everywhere to an unity,” —“a substantial totality, beyond 
relations and above them, a whole endeavoring without success 
to realize itself in their detail” (p. 160). Such facts, and con- 
siderations give us “not an experience, but an abstract idea” 
of a “unity which transcends and yet contains every mani- 
fold appearance.” “We can form the general idea of an abso- 
lute experience in which phenomenal distinctions are merged, 
a whole becomes immediate at a higher stage without losing 
any richness.” But meanwhile we have “a complete inability 
to understand this concrete unity in detail.” 

The ground of this, our inability, is the one already illus- 
trated, namely, the necessary incapacity of a “relational way 
of thinking” to give us anything definite except Appearance, 
or to harmonize the One and the Many in concrete fashion, or 
to free our explicit accounts of the unity from the contradic- 
tions and infinite processes heretofore illustrated. A more 
precise exposition of the general defects of thought in ques- 
tion, Bradley undertakes to furnish in his fifteenth chapter, 
under the title Thought and Reality. Here the nature of rela- 
tional thought, its inevitable sundering of the what and the 


484 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


that, and its inevitably infinite process in trying to unite them 
again, are two topics discussed, with the result, as Mr. Bradley 
states the case, that “Thought desires a consummation in 
which it is lost,” as “the river” runs “into the sea,” and “the 
self” loses itself “in love.” For every act of thought, in 
affirming its predicate of the subject, though all the while 
knowing that the quality or adjective is not the existent, ex- 
plicitly faces its own Other, namely, precisely its object, the 
existent of which it thinks, the subject to which it applies its 
predicates. This existent, by virtue of its “sensuous infini- 
tude,” or vaguely endless wealth of presented features, always 
defies our efforts exhaustively to define it in ideal terms 
(p. 176); and, by virtue of its “immediacy” (p. 177), pos- 
sesses “the character of a single self-subsistent being,” —a 
character apparently inconsistent with the “sensuous infini- 
tude.” Our thought, however, endeavoring to characterize 
this Other, seeks to make ideally explicit how, despite its 
endless wealth of presented features, it can be still a single 
individual, —a system of variety in unity. Attempting this 
task, thought is obliged to use the “relational form” in char- 
acterizing the subject; and this at once makes impossible the 
expression, in ideal terms, of either the self-dependence or the 
immediacy which the subject claims (p. 178). For, analyzing 
the subject, in order to define its wealth of content, thought, 
in the fashion before illustrated in the case of things, quali- 
ties, etc., is led to an infinite process, since every relation 
defined requires new relations to make it comprehensible. 
Both the internal and the external relations of the subject and 
of its contents, accordingly prove to be inexhaustible. Never, 
then, is thought’s ideal system of predicates adequate to the 
subject. The “sensuous infinitude” or undefined wealth that 
the subject at first presents, turns, while we think, into the 
explicitly infinite series of relational predicates. Moreover, 
even were thought’s system ever completed, “that system 
would not be the subject.” For if it were, “it would wholly 
lose the relational form.” 

The result is that thinking “ eee to possess,” as its end 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 485 


and goal, a character of “immediate, self-dependent, all-inclu- 
sive individuality” (p. 179), while “individuality cannot be 
gained while we are confined to relations.” Thought, however, 
although not possessing the features of reality here in ques- 
tion, can recognize them as its own Other, can “desire them” 
(p. 180) “because its content has them already in an incom- 
plete form. And in desire for the completion of what none 
has there is no contradiction.” “But, on the other hand 
(p. 181), such a completion would prove destructive; such an 
end would emphatically make an end of mere thought. It 
would bring the ideal content into a form which would be 
reality itself, and where mere truth and mere thought would 
certainly perish.” “It is this completion of thought beyond 
thought which remains forever an Other.” “Thought can 
understand that, to reach its goal, it must get beyond rela- 
tions. Yet in its nature it can find no other working means 
of progress.” 

Hence, “our Absolute,” once more, will include the differ- 
ences of thought and reality, of “what” and “that.” “The 
self-consciousness of the part, its consciousness of itself even 
in opposition to the whole, —all will be contained within the 
one absorbing experience. Jor this will embrace all self- 
consciousness harmonized, though, as such, transmuted and 
suppressed.” But Mr. Bradley still insists that “we cannot 
possibly construe such an experience to ourselves.” 


IV. Mr. Bradley’s Definition of “What would Satisfy the 
Intellect” as to the One and the Many 


Mr. Bradley’s critics have very commonly expressed their 
disapproval of the extremely delicate position in which, by 
this theory, our finite thinking is left. We are obliged to 
define the Real as a system wherein unity and diversity are 
harmonized. We are to conceive this reality as a “sentient 
experience.” And in the Absolute Experience, nothing of our 
finite variety is to be wholly lost, but all is to be “trans- 
muted.” Yet every instance, selected from our own human 


486 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


experience, where, through a process of thinking, or a type 
of mediated consciousness, we men seem to have won any sort 
of explicit synthesis and harmony of the One and the Many, 
is sternly rejected by Mr. Bradley, as furnishing no satisfac- 
tory guide to the final knowledge of the way in which, in the 
Absolute, unity and manifoldness are united. The critics 
have, accordingly, been sometimes disposed to accuse Mr. 
Bradley of seeking, in his Absolute, for bare identity without 
diversity; and sometimes tempted, on the other hand, to ask, 
complainingly, what sort of harmony would satisfy him, and 
why he supposes that any harmony of the One and the Many 
is attainable at all, even for the Absolute, when he himself 
rejects, as mere appearance, every proffered means, whereby 
harmony is to be defined. 

In answer, Mr. Bradley has been led, in his second edition, 
to discuss, in an appendix, the problem of “Contradiction and 
the Contrary,” with special reference to its bearing upon the 
matter here at issue. The relation of the theory of the con- 
trary to the problem of the relation of unity and diversity 
appears in the fundamental thesis of the discussion in ques- 
tion. This thesis is as follows (p. 562): “A thing cannot, 
without an internal distinction, be (or do) two different things; 
and differences cannot belong to the same thing, in the same 
point, unless in that point there is diversity. The appearance 
of such union may be fact, but is for thought a contradiction.” 
In expounding this statement of the principle of contradiction, 
Mr. Bradley first explains that the thesis “does not demand 
mere sameness,” which to thought “would be nothing.” A 
mere tautology “is not a truth in any way, in any sense, or 
at all.” The Law of Contradiction, then, does not forbid 
diversity. If it did, “it would forbid thinking altogether.” 
But the difficulty of the situation arises from the fact that, 
“Thought cannot do without differences; but, on the other 
hand, it cannot make them. And, as it cannot make them, so 
it cannot receive them from the outside, and ready-made.” 


1 Note A of the second edition, pp. 562, sgqg. —a paper reprinted from 
Mind with omission. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 487 


Thought demands a reason and ground for diversity. It can 
neither pass from A to B without a reason, nor accept as final 
the fact that, external to thought’s process, A and B are 
found conjoined. If thought finds a diversity, it demands that 
this be “brought to unity ” (p. 562). And so, if the mere fact 
of the conjunction of A and B appears, then thought must 
“either make or accept an arrangement which to it is wanton 
and without reason, — or, having no reason for anything else, 
attempt, against reason, to identify them simply” (p. 563). 
Nor can one meet this difficulty by merely asserting that there 
are certain ultimate complexes, given in experience, such that 
in them unity and variety are presented as obviously con- 
joined, while thought is to explain the “detail of the world” 
in terms of these fundamental complexes. No such “bare 
conjunction ” is or possibly can be given; for when we find any 
kind of unity in diversity, that is, when we find diversities 
conjoined, we always also find a “background” (p. 564) which 
is a “condition of the conjunction’s existence” so that “the 
conjunction is not bare, but dependent,” and is presented to 
the intellect as “a connection, the bond of which is at present 
unknown.” “The intellect, therefore, while rejecting what- 
ever is alien to itself, if offered as Absolute, can accept the 
inconsistent if taken as subject to conditions.” 

Meanwhile, the “mere conjunction,” if taken as such, is 
“for thought contradictory ” (p. 565). For as soon as thought 
makes the conjunction its object, thought must “hold in unity ” 
the elements of the conjunction. But finding these elements 
diverse, thought “can of itself supply no internal bond by 
which to hold them together, nor has it any internal diversity 
by which to maintain them apart.” If one replies that the 
elements are offered to thought “together and in conjunction,” 
Mr. Bradley retorts that the question is “how thought can 
think what is offered.” If thought were itself possessed of 
conjoining principles, of “a ‘together,’ a ‘between,’ and an 
‘all at once,’ ” as its own internal principle, it could use them 
to explain the conjunction offered. But, as a fact (p. 566), 
“Thought cannot accept tautology, and yet demands unity in 


488 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


diversity. But your offered conjunctions, on the other side, 
are for it no connections or ways of union. They are them- 
selves merely other external things to be connected.” It is, 
then, “idle from the outside to say to thought, ‘Well, unite, 
but do not identify.’ How can thought unite except so far as 
in itself it has a mode of union? ‘To unite without an inter- 
nal ground of connection and distinction, is to strive to bring 
together barely in the same point, and that is self-contradic- 
tion.” Things, then, “are not contradictory because they are 
diverse,” but “just in so far as they appear as bare conjunc- 
tions.” Therefore it is that a mere together, “in space or 
time, is for thought unsatisfactory and, in the erd, impossible.” 
But, on the other hand, every such untrue view must be tran- 
scended, and the Real is not self-contradictory, despite its 
diversities, since their real unity is, in the Absolute, present. 

If one now asks what then “would satisfy the intellect, 
supposing it could be got” (p. 568), Mr. Bradley points out 
that if the ground of unity is “external to the elements into 
which the conjunction must be analyzed,” then the ground 
“becomes for the intellect a fresh element, and in itself cally 
for synthesis in a fresh point of unity.” “But hereon,” he 
continues, “because in the intellect no intrinsic connections 
were found, ensues the infinite process.” This being the 
problem “The remedy might be here. If the diversities were 
complementary aspects of a process of connection and distinc- 
tion, the process not being external to the elements, or, again, 
a foreign compulsion of the intellect, but itself the intellect’s 
own proprius motus, the case would be altered. Each aspect 
would of itself be a transition to the other aspect, a transition 
intrinsic and natural at once to itself, and to the intellect. 
And the Whole would be a self-evident analysis and syn- 
thesis of the intellect itself by itself. Synthesis here has 
ceased to be mere synthesis, and has become self-completion; 
and analysis, no longer mere analysis, is self-explication. 
And the question how or why the many are one and the one 
is many here loses its meaning. There is no why or how 
beside the self-evident process, and towards its own differ- 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 489 


ences this whole is at once their how and their why, their 
being, substance, and system, their reason, ground, and prin- 
ciple of diversity and unity” (id). Here, Mr. Bradley insists, 
the Law of Contradiction “has nothing to condemn.” Such an 
union or “identity of opposites” would not conflict with the 
Law of Contradiction, but would rather fulfil the law. If 
“all that we find were in the end such a self-evident and com- 
plete whole,” the end of the intellect, and so of philosophy, 
would have been won. But Mr. Bradley is (p. 569) “unable 
to verify a solution of this kind.” Hence, as he says, 
“ Against my intellectual world the Law of Contradiction has 
claims nowhere satisfied in full.” Therefore “they are met 
in and by a whole beyond the mere intellect.” It is, however, 
no “abstract identity ” that thus satisfies the demands of the 
intellect. “On the other hand, I cannot say that to me any 
principle or principles of diversity in unity are self-evident.” 
In consequence, while “self-existence and self-identity are to 
be found,” they are to be looked for neither in “bare identity,” 
nor in a relapse into a “stage before thinking begins,” but in 
“a whole beyond thought, a whole to which thought points 
and in which it is included.” Diversities exist. Therefore 
(p. 570) “they must somehow be true and real.” “Hence, 
they must be true and real in such a way that from A or B 
the intellect can pass to its further qualification without an 
external denomination of either. But this means that A and 
Bare united, each from its own nature, in a whole which is 
the nature of both alike.” It is the failure of the intellect to 
define this whole positively and in detail, which is expressed 
in all the contradictions of the theory of appearance. 


Szction Il. Tue OnE AND THE MANY WITHIN THE REALM 
or THOUGHT oR oF INTERNAL MEANINGS 


So far, then, for a summary of Mr. Bradley’s general view 
regarding the mystery of unity in variety, and so much for 
the reasons which have led him, on the one hand, to maintain 
that real identity is never “simple,” or abstract, but involves 


490 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


real differences, and, on the other hand, to insist that the true 
ground of this union of identity and difference is always, to 
us, and to “thought,” something not manifest, but only pre- 
supposed as “beyond thought.” What are we to hold of this 
doctrine? 


I. Thought does Develope its own Varieties of Internal Meaning 


Our first comment must repeat what several of Mr. Bradley’s 
critics have noticed. This is, that within at least one, per- 
haps limited, but still in any case for us mortals important 
region, Mr. Bradley himself finds and reports the working of 
a very “self-evident” principle of “diversity in unity.” 

This is the region in which thought is itself the object 
whose process and movement, whose paradoxes and whose end- 
less series of internal distinctions, we observe, or experience, 
while we read Mr. Bradley’s book, or any similarly deep ex- 
amination of the realm of the “intellect.” In his Logic 
Mr. Bradley long since gave us a brilliant account of the 
movement of thought, —an account that he here lays at the 
basis of his discussion. The truth of a considerable portion 
of this earlier analysis of the thinking process, I should 
unhesitatingly accept. Now it may be indeed that the pro- 
cesses of thought, as Mr. Bradley examines them, constitute 
not only a relatively insignificant aspect of Reality, but also a 
portion to be labelled “ Appearance.” Yet the point here in 
question is not, for the moment, the dignity or the extent of 
the thinking process in the life of the universe, but solely the 
exemplary value of the thinking process as an instance of a 
“self-evident,” even if extremely abstract union of unity and 
variety, of identity and diversity of aspects, in an objective 
realm. For thought, too, is a kind of life, and belongs to the 
realm of Reality, even if only as other appearances belong. 

What we in general mean by this comment may first be very 
briefly developed. The special applications will indeed detain 
us longer. Mr. Bradley requires us to point out to him a case 
where diversities shall be “complementary aspects of a process 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 491 


of connection and distinction,” the process being no “foreign 
compulsion of the intellect, but itself the intellect’s own 
proprius motus . . . a self-evident analysis and synthesis of 
the intellect itself by itself.” He fails to find, as he looks 
through the World of Appearance, any case of the sort such 
as is sufficient to furnish any self-evident “principle or princi- 
ples of diversity in unity.” Now we here desire to make a 
beginning in meeting his demand. We ask whether he has 
wholly taken account of the case that lies nearest of all to him 
in his research. This case is directly furnished by the intel- 
lect. Now the intellect may indeed not be all Reality. 
Thought may indeed, in the end, have to look “beyond itself” 
for its own “Other.” Yet Reality owns the intellect, too, 
along with the other Appearances. By Mr. Bradley’s hy- 
pothesis, Appearance is der Gottheit lebendiges Kleid, if by 
Gottheit we mean, for the moment, his Absolute. We have 
a right to use any rag torn by our own imperfect knowledge 
from this garment, to give us, if so may be, a hint of the 
weaving of the whole. The hint may prove poor. But only 
the trial can tell. And so, why not see how it is that the in- 
tellect, powerless though it be to make explicit the union of 
unity and diversity in the cases where experience furnishes 
from without “conjunctions” and their “background,” still 
manages to unite unity and diversity in its own internal 
processes? Might not this throw some light upon even our 
ultimate problem? 

For the intellect, after all, has indeed its proprius motus. If 
it had not, how should we be thinking? And who has more 
often considered the proprius motus of the intellect, who has 
more frequently insisted that “thought involves analysis and 
synthesis,” than Mr. Bradley himself? Now the intellect, as 
Mr. Bradley observes, is discontent with its presented “ex- 
ternal” object, the “conjunction ” in space or in time, because 
of the uncomprehended unity in diversity of this presented 
object. The intellect seeks to define the ground of this unity, 
in case of the Thing, or of the world of Qualities and Rela- 
tions, or of Space, or of Time, or in case of any of the other 


492 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


Appearances that seem external to thought. The intellect 
fails. Why? “Because it cannot do without differences, but, 
on the other hand, it cannot make them” (p. 562). But can 
Mr. Bradley wholly mean this assertion that the intellect cannot 
make differences? In the chapters upon the Thing, and upon 
the other objects presented, as from without, to the intellect, 
we are indeed shown, when Mr. Bradley’s argument is once 
accepted, that thought does not make, and does decline to 
receive ready made, the differences offered as real by these 
external objects, so long as they are taken in their abstraction. 

But how is it possible for thought to discover the very fact 
that it cannot make, and that it declines to receive, certain 
differences, without itself making, of its own motion, certain 
other differences, whose internal unity it knows just in so far 
as it makes them? For when thought sets out to solve a 
problem, it has a purpose. This is its own purpose, and is, also, 
in so far an unity, not furnished as from without, but, in 
the course of the thinking process, developed as from within. 
When, after struggling to solve its problem, and to fulfil its 
purpose, thought finds itself in the presence of a puzzle thas 
is so far ultimate, what, according to Mr. Bradley, does it see 
as the essence of this puzzle? It sees that a given hypothesis 
as to the unity of A and B (where A and B are the supposed 
“external” diversities, but where the hypothesis itself has 
been reflectively developed into its consequences through the 
inner movement of thought), —that this hypothesis, I say, 
either leads to various consequences which directly contradict 
one another, or else, by an internal and logical necessity, leads 
to an “infinite process,”—in other words, to an infinite 
variety of consequences. In either case, in addition to what 
thought so far finds puzzling about A and B, thought further 
sees a diversity, and a diversity that is now not the presented 
“conjunction” of A and B, but a necessary diversity con- 
structively developed by thought’s own movement. Thought 
learns that its own purpose developes this variety. For the 
hypothesis about A and B (viz., that they are “in relation” or 
are “substantive and adjective,” or whatever else the hypothe- 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 493 


sis may be) has developed, within itself, as thought has re- 
flected upon it, a certain internal multiplicity of aspects. That 
the hypothesis developes these diversities, is a fact, — but a 
fact how discovered? The only answer is, by Reflection. 
Thought developes by its own processes the meaning, i.e. to 
use our own phraseology, the “internal meaning” of this 
hypothesis. The hypothesis perhaps leads to a self-contra- 
diction concerning the nature of A and B. In that case, the 
hypothesis, taken apart from A and B themselves, as an object 
for reflection, is seen to imply that some account of <A, or of 
B, or of A B, is both true and false. Now truth is diverse 
from falsity, and whoever observes that a given hypothesis 
implies, through the development of its “internal meaning,” 
the coéxistent truth and falsity of the same account of a sup- 
posed external fact, has observed a fact not now about A and 
B as such, but about this internal meaning of the hypothesis, 
taken by itself, —a fact lying within the circle of thought’s 
own movement. This fact is a diversity developed by 
thought’s proprius motus. 

Or, again, the hypothesis leads to the “infinite process.” 
An “endless fission” is sometimes said to “break out” in the 
world of conceived relations and qualities. This “principle 
of endless fission ” “conducts us to no end” (p. 31). “ Within 
the relation ” the plurality of the differences is said to “beget 
the infinite process” (p. 180). Now, when thought sees that 
all this must be, and is, the necessary outcome of “a relational 
way of thought” (p. 33), thought again sees a fact, but a fact 
now present in its own world of ideas, and as the “self-evi- 
dent ” outcome of its reflective effort to express its own pur- 
pose. But, as we insist, despite the diversity, thought’s 
purpose is, in each case of this type, consciously One. It is 
the purpose to find the ground for the conjunction of A and B. 
Reflection sees that this one purpose, left to its own develop- 
ment, becomes diverse, and expresses its own identity in a 
variety of aspects. When thought sees this result of its own 
efforts, and sees the result as necessary, as universal, as the 
consequence of a relational way of thinking, then I persist- 


494 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


ently ask, Does not thought here at least see in one instance, 
not only that identity and diversity are conjoined, but how 
they are this time connected, and how the one of them, here 
at least, expresses itself in the other? 

May we not, then, for the moment, overlook our failures as 
to the understanding of the world external to thought, and turn 
to the consideration of our success in discovering something of 
the internal movement of thought. For, in our ignorance, our 
first interest is in observing not how little we know (since our 
ignorance itself is, indeed, brought home to us at every 
instant of our finitude), but in making a beginning at consid- 
ering how much we can find out. We wanted to see how any 
unity could develope a plurality. We have already seen, if but 
dimly. Shall we not begin to use our insight? 

I conclude, then, so far, that, if the argument of Mr. Bradley 
is sound, in the very sense in which I myself most accept its 
soundness, a “principle of diversity in unity,” in the case of 
the internal meaning of our ideas, is already, in several con- 
crete cases, “self-evident.” Itremains for us to become better 
acquainted with this principle. I must explicitly note that 
this union of One and Many in thought has to be a fact in the 
universe if it is self-evident, and has to be self-evident if Mr. 
Bradley’s argument is sound. 


II. The Principle of Thought, which is responsible for the Infinite 
Processes. Definition of a Recurrent Operation of Thought 


The principle in question can be made more manifest by a 
further reflection. The most important instances in Mr. 
Bradley’s argument are those wherein the “endless fission ” 
appears; and what has led to this “endless fission” which so 
far forms our principal instance of the internal development 
of variety out of unity, appears, when reviewed, as in general, 
this: A certain “conjunction” was offered to us by sense. 
This “conjunction” thought undertook, by means of an hy- 
pothesis, to explain. The resulting process of “fission” 
had, however, wholly to do with the internal meaning of this 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 495 


hypothesis, and no longer with the original conjunction. It 
was a fact within the life of thought. The hypothesis ran 
thus: “The conjunction is to be explained as a relation, hold- 
ing its own terms in unity.” Hereupon thought undertook so 
to think this hypothesis as to find its whole meaning. Thought 
hereupon reflectively observed, “But our relation, as soon as 
defined, becomes also a term of a new relation.” More in par- 
ticular, the original question ran, “What is the unity of A 
and B?” The hypothesis said, “Their unity lies in their 
relation #; for the terms of a relationship are linked and uni- 
fied by that relationship.” ‘The reflective criticism runs, “ But 
in creating R, as the ideal link between A and B, regarded now 
not as they were externally conjoined, but ideally as terms of 
a relationship, we have only recreated, in the supposed complex 
& A, or & B, or A R B, the type of situation originally pre- 
sented. For A and Bwere to be objects of thought. They 
therefore needed a link. Therefore, as we said, they were to 
be viewed as terms linked by their relation. But the relation 
&, aS soon as it is made an object of thought, becomes a term 
for the same reason which made us regard A and B as terms. 
For our implied principle was that objects of thought, if vari- 
ous, and yet united, are to be viewed as terms of a relation- 
ship. Our thinking process must therefore proceed to note, 
that if A and B are terms to be linked, # also, by the same 
right, is a term to be linked to A or to B, or to both, and so 
on ad infinitum.” 

But the gist of this reflection may be better generalized thus: 
A thinking process of the type here in question recreates, 
although in a new instance, the very kind of ideal object that, 
by means of its process, it proposed to alter into some more 
acceptable form. The change of situation which it intended, 
leads, and must lead, to a reinstatement of essentially the 
same sort of situation as that which was to be changed. Or, 
again, The proposed solution reiterates the problem in a new 
shape. Therefore, the operation of thought here in question 
is what one may call, in the most general terms, an iterative, 
or, again, a recurrent, operation, — an operation whose result 


496 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


reinstates, in a new instance, the situation which gave rise to 
the operation, and to which the operation was applied. 

Now, quite apart from the special circumstances of the 
problem about A and B, the observation that reflection makes 
upon the general nature of any iterative or recurrent process of 
thinking, becomes at once of great interest for the comprehen- 
sion of the question about the One and the Many. We want 
to find some case of an unity which developes its own differ- 
ences out of itself. Well, what more simple and obvious 
instance could we hope for than is furnished by an operation 
of thought, such that, when applied to a given situation, this 
operation necessarily, and in a way that we can directly follow, 
reinstates, in a new case, the very kind of situation to which 
it was applied? For this operation is a fact in the world. It 
begins in unity. It developes diversity. Let us, then, wholly 
drop, for the time, the problem about A and B, in so far as 
they were taken as facts of sense or of externality. Their 
“conjunction,” presented “from without,” we may leave in its 
mystery, until we are ready to return to the matter later. We 
have found something more obvious, viz., an iterative opera- 
tion of thought, one which, when applied, is actually observed 
to develope out of one purpose many results, by recreating its 
own occasion for application. Now let us proceed with our 
generalization. Let there be found any such operation of 
thought, say C. C is to be one ideal operation of our thought 
just in so far as C expresses a single purpose. But let C be 
applied on occasion to some material, —no matter what. Let 
the material be M. MHereupon, as we reflect, let us be sup- 
posed to observe that the logical necessary result of applying 
C to M, the result of expressing the purpose in question in 
this material, or of ideally weaving the material M into har- 
mony with the purpose C, is the appearance of a new material 
for thought, viz., M'. Let us be supposed to observe, also, 
that M', taken as a content to be thought about, gives the same 
occasion for the application of C that M gave. Let the appli- 
cation of C to M' be next observed to lead to M", in such wise 
that in M" there lies once more the occasion for the applica 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 497 


tion of C. Let this series be observed to be endless, that is, 
to be such that, consistently with its nature, it can possess no 
last term. Then, as I assert, we shall see, in a special in- 
stance, how the endless series M, M', M"..., just as a series 
of many ideally constructed facts, is developed by the one 
purpose, C, when once applied to any suitable material, M; 
and is developed, moreover, by internal necessity, as the 
very meaning of the objects M, M', etc., and also as the 
meaning of the operation C itself, and not as a bare con- 
junction given from “without the intellect.” Now in such 
a case, I insist, we see how the One produces, out of itself, 
the Many. 

Nor let one, objecting, interpose that since an “operation ” 
is a case of activity, and since activity has been riddled by 
Mr. Bradley’s critical fire, the nature of every operation of 
thought must always remain mysterious. Let no one insist 
that since the supposed operation C is one fact, and its mate- 
rial M is another fact, in our world of ideal objects, the rela- 
tion of C to M is as opaque as any other relation, so that we 
do not understand how C operates at all, nor yet how it changes 
M into M', nor how the same operation C can persist, and be 
applied to M' after it had been applied to M@. Let no one 
further point out that since all the foregoing account of C, and 
of the endless series M, M', M", involves Time as a factor in 
the “operation,” and since Time has been shown by Mr. Brad- 
ley to be a mysterious conjunction of infinite complexity, and 
so to be mere Appearance, therefore all the foregoing remains 
mysterious. For to all such objections I shall reply that I so 
far pretend to find “self-evident ” about the iterative processes 
of thought, only so much as, in his own chosen instances, Mr, 
Bradley finds self-evident, namely, so much as constitutes the 
very meaning and ground of his condemnation of the mysteri- 
ous and baffling Appearances. That the endless process is 
implied in a certain way of thinking, namely, in a “relational 
way,” Mr. Bradley reflectively observes. I accept the observa- 
tion, so far as it goes, in the cases stated. ButI ask why this 
is true. The answer lies in seeing that the endlessness of the 

2k 


498 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


process is due to the recurrent character of the operation of 
thought here in question. This relational way of thinking 
so operates as to reinstate, in a new case, the very type of 
situation that the explanation desired — the goal of the opera- 
tion — was, in the former case, to reduce to some simple unity. 
The first complexity consequently survives the operation, 
unreduced to unity; while a new complexity, logically (not 
psychologically) due to the operation itself, appears as some- 
thing necessarily implied. The reapplication of the same 
operation, if supposed accomplished, can but reinstate afresh 
the former type of situation. Hence the endless process. 
Now this process I consider not in so far as it is a mere tem- 
poral series of events, but in so far as it is the development, 
in a given case, of what a certain thought means. I do not 
assert the obvious existence of an Activity, but the logical 
hecessity ofa certain series of implications. ‘The true mean- 
ing of the purpose C, expressed in the content MM, logically 
gives rise to M', which demands equally to be considered in the 
light of C, and thereupon implies M", and so on. ‘Thus our 
argument does not depend upon a theory about how thought, 
as an “activity,” is a possible part of the world at all. Ido 
not profess now to explain, say from a psychological point of 
view, the inmost nature of the operation in question, nor yet 
to find self-evident, in this place, the metaphysics of the time 
process. Mysteries still surround us; but we see what we see. 
And my point is that while we do not see all of what thought 
is, nor yet how it is able to weave its material into harmony 
with its purposes, nor yet what Time is, we do see that we 
think, and that this thought has, as it proceeds, its internal 
meaning, and that this meaning has, as its necessary and self- 
evident result, the reinstatement, in a new case, of the type 
of situation which the operation of the thought was intended 
to explain, or in some other wise to transform. When Mis 
so altered by the operation Cas to imply M', M", and so on, 
as the endless series of results of the iterative operation of 
thought, we see not only that this is so, but why this is so. 
And unless we see this, we see nothing whatever, whether in 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 499 


Appearance or in Reality. And here, then, the relation of 
Unity and Variety is clear to us. 

Our generalization, however, of the process upon which Mr. 
Bradley insists, enables us to make more fruitful and positive 
our result. There are recurrent operations of thought. When- 
ever they act, they imply, upon their face, endless processes. 
Do such processes inevitably lead us to results wholly vain 
and negative? Is the union of One and Many which they 
make explicit an insignificant union? Or, on the other hand, 
is this union typical of the general constitution of Reality? 

The first answer is that, at all events in the special science 
of mathematics, processes of this type are familiar, and lie at 
the basis of highly and very positively significant researches. 
If we merely name a few such instances of endless processes, 
we shall see that iterative thinking, if once made an ideal, — 
a method of procedure, —and not merely dreaded as a failure 
to reach finality, becomes a very important part of the life of 
the exact sciences, and developes results which have a very 
significant grade of Reality. 

The classic instance of the recurrent or iterative operations 
of thought is furnished, in elementary mathematics, by the 
Number Series. A recurrent operation first developes the 
terms of this series; and thereby makes the counting of ex- 
ternal objects, and all that, in our human science, follows 
therefrom, possible. A secondary recurrent operation, based 
upon the primary operation, appears in the laws governing the 
process called the “ Addition” of whole numbers. A tertiary 
and once more recurrent operation appears in the laws governing 
Multiplication.1 In consequence of this recurrent nature of 


1 The precise sense in which the Number Series itself is the outcome of 
a recurrent operation of thought will be explained, in general accord with 
Dedekind’s theory, further on. Addition and Multiplication, in any par- 
ticular instance, as in the adding or in the multiplying of 7 and 5, are of 
course operations terminated by the finding of the particular sum or 
product, and in so far they are finite and non-recurrent. But the laws 
of Addition and Multiplication (e.g., the Associative law), and the rela- 
tion of both these operations to one another and to the number system, 


500 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


the thinking processes concerned, the number series itself is 
endless; the results of addition and multiplication, the sums 
and products of the various numbers, are not only endless, 
but capable of endless combinations; and, in general, the 
properties of numbers are themselves infinitely infinite in 
number. But in this case the mathematician does not mourn 
over the “endless fission” to which the number concepts are 
indeed due, but he regards the numbers as a storehouse of 
positive and often very beautiful novelties, which his science 
studies for their intrinsic interest. 

If mathematical science thus begins, in the simplest con- 
struction, with the outcome of a recurrent process, it is no 
wonder that the later development of the science, as exempli- 
fied by the theories of negative and of fractional numbers, of 
irrational and of complex numbers, of infinite series and of 
infinite products, and of all that, in Analysis and in the Theory 
of Functions, depends upon these more elementary theories, 
is everywhere full of conceptions and methods that result from 
observing what happens when an operation of thought is recur- 
rent, or is such as to reinstate, in its expressions, the occasion 
for new expressions. Without such recurrence, and without 
such infinite processes, mathematical science would be reduced 
to a very minute fraction of its present range and importance. 

But we are here primarily concerned with the metaphysical 
aspect of the recurrent processes of thought. Important as are 
the countless mathematical instances of our type of operations, 
we must so deal with their general theory as to be able to 
identify the results of recurrent thinking whenever they occur, 
whether in mathematics or in other regions of our reflection. 

I propose here, then, first to illustrate, and then to discuss 
theoretically, the nature and ideal outcome of any recurrent 
operation of thought, and to develope, in this connection, what 
one may call the positive nature of the concept of Infinite 


are dependent, in part, upon the fact that the result of every addition or 
multiplication of whole numbers is itself a whole number, uniquely deter- 
mined, and, as a number, capable of entering into the formation of new 
sums and products, 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 501 


Multitude. We shall here see how there are cases, —and 
cases, too, of the most fundamental importance for the Theory 
of Being, where a single purpose, definable as One, demands 
for its realization a multitude of particulars which could not 
be a limited multitude without involving the direct defeat of 
the purpose itself. We shall in vain endeavor to escape from 
the consequences of this discovery by denouncing the purposes 
of the type in question as self-contradictory, or the Infinite in 
question as das Schlecht-Unendliche. On the contrary, we 
shall find these purposes to be the only ones in terms of which 
we can define any of the fundamental interests of man in the 
universe, and the only ones whose expression enables us to 
explain how unity and diversity are harmonized at all, or how 
Being gets its individuality and finality, or how anything 
whatever exists. Having made this clear, we shall endeavor 
to show, positively, that the concept of infinite variety in 
unity, to which these cases lead us, is consistent in itself, and 
is able to give our Theory of Being true definition. 


Section III]. THrory or THE SouRcES AND CONSEQUENCES 
OF ANY RECURRENT OPERATION OF THOUGHT. THE Na- 
TURE OF SELF-REPRESENTATIVE SYSTEMS 


I shall begin the present section with illustrations. I shall 
make no preliminary assumption as to how our illustrations 
are related to the ultimate nature of things. For all that we 
at first know, we may be dealing, each time, with deceptive 
Appearance. We merely wish to illustrate, however, how a 
single purpose may be so defined, for thought, as to demand, 
for its full expression, an infinite multitude of cases, so that 
the alternative is, “Either this purpose fails to get expression, 
or the system of idealized facts in which it is expressed con- 
tains an infinite variety.” Whether or no the concept of such 
infinite variety is itself self-contradictory, remains to be con- 
sidered later.? 


1 The discussion of the instances and conceptions of Multitude and 
Infinity, contained in what follows, is largely dependent upon various 


502 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


I. First Illustration of a Self-Representative System 


The basis for the first illustration of the development of an 
Infinite Multitude out of the expression of a Single Purpose, 


recent contributions to the literature of the subject. Prominent among 
the later authors who have dealt with our problem from the mathematical 
side, is George Cantor. For his now famous theory of the Mdchtigkeiten 
or grades of infinite multitude, and for his discussions of the purely 
mathematical aspects of his problem, one may consult his earlier papers, 
as collected in the Acta Mathematica, Vol. II. With this theory of the 
Machtigkeiten I shall have no space to deal in this paper, but it is of great 
importance for forming the conception of the determinate Infinite. Upon 
the more philosophical aspects of the same researches, Cantor wrote a 
brief series of difficult and fragmentary, but fascinating discussions in the 
Zeitschrift fiir Philosophie und Philosophische Kritik : Bd. 88, p. 224 ; Bd. 
91, p. 81; Bd. 92, p. 240. In recent years (1895-97) Cantor has begun a 
systematic restatement of his mathematical theories in the Mathematische 
Annalen: Bd. 48, p. 481; Bd. 49, p. 207. Some of Cantor’s results are 
now the common property of the later text-books, such as Dini’s Theory 
of Functions, and Weber’s Algebra. Upon Cantor’s investigations is also 
based the remarkable and too much neglected posthumous philosophical 
essay of Benno Kerry: System einer Theorie der Grenzbegriffe (Leipzig, 
1890) —a fragment, but full of ingenious observations. The general 
results of Cantor are summarized in a supplementary note to Couturat’s 
L’ Infiniti Mathematique (Paris, 1896), on pp. 602-655 of that work. Cou- 
turat’s is itself the most important recent general treatment of the philo- 
sophical problem of the Infinite; and the Third Book of his Second Part 
(p. 441, sqq.) ought to be carefully pondered by all who wish fairly to esti- 
mate the ‘‘ contradictions ’’ usually attributed to the concept of the Infinite 
Multitude. A further exposition of Cantor’s most definite results is given, 
in a highly attractive form, by Borel, Lecons sur la Théorie des Fonctions, 
Paris, 1898. Side by side with Cantor, in the analysis of the fundamental 
problem regarding number, and multitude, stands Dedekind, upon whose 
now famous essay, Was Sind und Was Sollen die Zahlen ? (2te Auflage, 
Braunschweig, 1893), some of the most important of the recent discussions 
of the nature of self-representative systems are founded. See also the 
valuable discussion of the iterative processes of thought by G. F. Lipps, in 
Wundt’s Studien (Bd. XIV, Hft. 2, for 1898) ; and the extremely signifi- 
cant remarks of Poincaré on the nature of mathematical reasoning in 
the Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale for 1894, p. 370. Other refer- 
ences are given later in this discussion. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 503 


which we shall here consider, may be taken, in a measure, 
from that world “external to thought” whose variety we still 
find a matter of “mere conjunction” and so opaque. For, 
despite the use of such a basis, our illustration will interest 
us not by reason of this aspect, but by reason of the opportu- 
nity thereby furnished for carrying out a certain recurrent 
process of thought, whose internal meaning we want to follow. 

We are familiar with maps, and with similar constructions, 
such as representative diagrams, in which the elements of 
which a certain artificial or ideal object is composed, are in- 
tended to correspond, one to one, to certain elements in an 
external object. A map is usually intended to resemble the 
contour of the region mapped in ways which seem convenient, 
and which have a decidedly manifold sensuous interest to the 
user of the map; but, in the nature of the case, there is no 
limit to the outward diversity of form which would be con- 
sistent with a perfectly exact and mathematically definable 
correspondence between map and region mapped. If our 
power to draw map contours were conceived as perfectly exact, 
the ideal map, made in accordance with a given system of 
projection, could be defined as involving absolutely the afore- 
said one to one correspondence, point for point, of the surface 
mapped and the representation. And even if one conceived 
space or matter as made up of indivisible parts, still an ideally 
perfect map upon some scale could be conceived, if one sup- 
posed it made up of ultimate space units, or of the ultimate 
material corpuscles, so arranged as to correspond, one by one, 
to the ultimate parts that a perfect observation would then 
distinguish in the surface mapped. In general, if A be the 
object mapped, and A’ be the map, the latter could be con- 
ceived as perfect if, while always possessing the desired degree 
of visible similarity of contours, it actually stood in such cor- 
respondence to A that for every elementary detail of A, 
namely, a, b, c, d (be these details conceived as points or 
merely as physically smallest parts; as relations amongst the 

1 Compare the general discussion of ‘‘ Correspondence’’ in the course 
of Lecture VII. 


504 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


parts of a continuwm, or as the relations amongst the units of 
a mere aggregate of particles), some corresponding detail, 
a', b', c', d', could be identified in A’, in accordance with the 
system of projection used. 

All this being understood, let us undertake to define a map 
that shall be in this sense perfect, but that shall be drawn 
subject to one special condition. It would seem as if, in case 
our map-drawing powers were perfect, we could draw our map 
wherever we chose to draw it. Let us, then, choose, for once, 
to draw it within and upon a part of the surface of the very region 
that is to be mapped. What would be the result of trying to 
carry out this one purpose? To fix our ideas, let us suppose, 
if you please, that a portion of the surface of England is very 
perfectly levelled and smoothed, and is then devoted to the 
production of our precise map of England. That in general, 
then, should be found upon the surface of England, map con- 
structions which more or less roughly represent the whole of 
England, —all this has nothing puzzling about it. Any ordi- 
nary map of England spread out upon English ground would 
illustrate, in a way, such possession, by a part of the surface of 
England, of a resemblance to the whole. But now suppose that 
this our resemblance is to be made absolutely exact, in the sense 
previously defined. A map of England, contained within Eng- 
land, is to represent, down to the minutest detail, every contour 
and marking, natural or artificial, that occurs upon the surface 
of England. At once our imaginary case involves a new prob- 
lem. This is now no longer the general problem of map mak- 
ing, but the nature of the internal meaning of our new purpose. 

Absolute exactness of the representation of one object by 
another, with respect to contour, this, indeed, involves, as Mr. 
Bradley would say to us, the problem of identity in diversity; 
but it involves that problem only in a general way. Our map 
of England, contained in a portion of the surface of England, 
involves, however, a peculiar and infinite development of a 
special type of diversity within our map. For the map, in 
order to be complete, according to the rule given, will have to 
contain, as a part of itself, a representation of its own contour 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 505 


and contents. In order that this representation should be con- 
structed, the representation itself will have to contain once 
more, as a part of itself, a representation of its own contour 
and contents; and this representation, in order to be exact, 
will have once more to contain an image of itself; and so on 
without limit. We should now, indeed, have to suppose the 
space occupied by our perfect map to be infinitely divisible, 
even if not a continuwm.} 

One who, with absolute exactness of perception, looked 
down upon the ideal map thus supposed to be constructed, 
would see lying upon the surface of England, and at a definite 
place thereon, a representation of England on as large or small 
a scale as you please. This representation would agree in 
contour with the real England, but at a place within this map 
of England, there would appear, upon a smaller scale, a new 
representation of the contour of England. This representa- 
tion, which would repeat in the outer portions the details of 
the former, but upon a smaller space, would be seen to contain 
yet another England, and this another, and so on without 
limit. 

That such an endless variety of maps within maps could not 
physically be constructed by men, and that ideally such a map, 
if viewed as a finished construction, would involve us in all 
the problems about the infinite divisibility of matter and of 
space, I freely recognize. What I point out is that if my sup- 
posed exact observer, looking down upon the map, saw any- 
where in the series of maps within maps, a last map, such 
that it contained within itself no further representation of the 
original object, he would know at once that the rule in ques- 
tion had not been carried out, that the resources of the map- 
maker had failed, and that the required map of England was 
imperfect. On the other hand, this endless variety of maps 
within maps, while its existence as a fact in the world might 


1 In the older discussions of continuity, this concept was very generally 
confounded with that of infinite divisibility. The confusion is no longer 
made by mathematicians. Continuity implies infinite divisibility. The 
converse does not hold true. 


506 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


be as mysterious as you please, would, in one respect, present 
to an observer who understood the one purpose of the whole 
series, no mystery at all. For one who understood the pur- 
pose of the making within England a map of England, and the 
purpose of making this map absolutely accurate, would see 
precisely why the map must be contained within the map, and 
why, in the series of maps within maps, there could be no end 
consistently with the original requirement. Mathematically 
regarded, the endless series of maps within maps, if made 
according to such a projection as we have indicated, would 
cluster about a limiting point whose position could be exactly 
determined. Logically speaking, their variety would be a 
’ mere expression of the single plan, “ Let us make within Eng- 
land, and upon the surface thereof, a precise map, with all the 
details of the contour of its surface.” Then the One and the 
Many would become, in one respect, clear as to their relations, 
even when all else was involved in mystery. We should see, 
namely, why the one purpose, if it could be carried out, would 
involve the endless series of maps. 

But so far we have dealt with our illustration as involving a 
certain progressive process of map making, occurring in stages. 
We have seen that this process never could be ended without a 
confession that the original purpose had failed. But now sup- 
pose that we change our manner of speech. Whatever our 
theory of the meaning of the verb to be, suppose that some one, 
depending upon any authority you please,—say upon the 
authority of a revelation, —assured us of this as a truth 
about existence, viz., “Upon and within the surface of Eng- 
land there exists somehow (no matter how or when made) an 
absolutely perfect map of the whole of England.” Suppose 
that, for an instance, we had accepted this assertion as true. 
Suppose that we then attempted to discover the meaning im- 
plied in this one assertion. We should at once observe that in 
this one assertion, “A part of England perfectly maps all Eng- 
land, on a smaller scale,” there would be implied the assertion, 
not now of a process of trying to draw maps, but of the con- 
temporaneous presence, in England, of an infinite number of 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 507 


maps, of the type just described. The whole infinite series, pos- 
sessing no last member, would be asserted as a fact of existence. 
I need not observe that Mr. Bradley would at once reject such 
an assertion as a self-contradiction. It would be a typical 
instance of the sort of endlessness of structure that makes him 
reject Space, Time, and the rest, as mere Appearance. But I 
am still interested in pointing out that whether we continued 
faithful to our supposed revelation, or, upon second thought, 
followed Mr. Bradley in rejecting it as impossible, our faith, 
or our doubt, would equally involve seeing that the one plan 
of mapping in question necessarily implies just this infinite 
variety of internal constitution. We should, moreover, see 
how and why the one and the infinitely many are here, at 
least within thought’s realm, conceptually linked. Our map 
and England, taken as mere physical existences, would indeed 
belong to that realm of “bare external conjunctions.” Yet the 
one thing not externally given, but internally self-evident, 
would be that the one plan or purpose in question, namely, the 
plan fulfilled by the perfect map of England, drawn within 
the limits of England, and upon a part of its surface, would, 
if really expressed, involve, in its necessary structure, the 
series of maps within maps such that no one of the maps was 
the last in the series. 

This way of viewing the case suggests that, as a mere matter 
of definition, we are not obliged to deal solely with processes 
of construction as successive, in order to define endless series. 
A recurrent operation of thought can be characterized as one 
that, if once finally expressed, would involve, in the region 
where it had received expression, an infinite variety of serially 
arranged facts, corresponding to the purpose in question. This 
consideration leads us back from our trivial illustration to the 
realm of general theory. 


II. Definition of a Type of Self- Representative Systems 


Let there be, then, any recurrent operation of thought, or 
any meaning in mind whose expression, if attempted, in- 
volves such a recurrent operation. That is, let there be 


508 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


any internal meaning such that, if you try to express it 
by means of a succession of acts, the ideal data which 
begin to express it demand, as a part of their own mean- 
ing, new data which, again, are new expressions of the 
same meaning, equally demanding further like expression. 
Then, if you endeavor to express this meaning in a series of 
successive acts, you get a series of results, M, M', M", etc., 
which can never be finished unless the further expression of 
the purpose is somewhere abandoned. But such a successive 
series of attempts quickly gets associated in our minds with 
a sense of disappointment and fruitlessness, and perhaps this 
sense more or less blinds us to the true significance of the re- 
current thinking processes.1 Let us try to avoid this mere 
feeling by dwelling upon the definition of the whole system 
of facts which, if present at once, would constitute the com- 
plete expression and embodiment of this one meaning. The 
general nature of the system in question is capable of a posi- 
tive definition. Instead of saying, “The system, if gradually 
constructed by successive stages, has no last member,” we can 
say, in terms now wholly positive, (1) The system is such 
that to every ideal element in it, M@, M', or, in general, M, 
there corresponds one and only one other element of the system, 


1 Leere Wiederholung is one of Hegel’s often repeated expressions in 
regard to such series. There is a certain question-begging involved in 
condemning a process because of one’s subjective sense of fatigue. Yet 
Bosanquet, in his Logic (Vol. I, p. 173), begins his subtle discussion of 
infinite number and series with an instance intended to illustrate the 
merely wearisome vanity of search that seems to be involved in a case of 
endless looking beyond for our goal. I wholly agree with Bosanquet when 
he demands that the ‘‘element of totality’? (p. 173) must be present in 
the work of our thought, —that is, as the ultimate test of its truth. 
Wholeness and finality our object must have, before we can properly rest 
in the contemplation of its real nature. But as we shall soon see, the 
question is whether a real and objective totality, —a full expression of 
meaning, — cannot, at the same time, be the explicit expression of such 
an internal meaning as can permit no last term in any series of successive 
operations whereby we may try to express this meaning. We tire soon 
of such ‘‘ tasks without end.’? But does the totum simul of Reality fail 
to express, in detail, the whole of what such processes mean ? 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 509 


which, taken in its order, is the next element of the system. 
This neat element may be viewed, if we choose, as derived 
from its predecessor by means of the recurrent process. But 
it may also be viewed as in a relation to its predecessor, 
which is the same as the relation of a map to an object 
mapped. We shall accordingly call it, henceforth, the Image 
or Representation of this former element. (2) These images 
are all distinct, so that various elements always have various 
representatives. For the recurrent process is such that, in 
the system which should finally express it, one and only one 
element would be derived from any given element, or would 
be the neat element in order after that given element. (3) At 
least one element, M, of the system, although imaged by 
another, is itself the image or representative of no other 
element, so that only a portion of the system is representa- 
tive. <A system thus defined we may call, for our present 
purposes, an instance of an internally Self-Representative 
System, or, more exactly, of a system precisely represented by 
a proper fraction or portion of itself. Of the whole system 
thus defined we can at once assert that if we take its elements 
in the order M, M', M", etc., there is indeed no last member in 
the resulting series. The system is, therefore, defined as end- 
less merely by being defined as thus self-representative. But 
since the self-representation of any system of facts is capable 
of definition, as a single internal purpose, in advance of the 
discovery that such purpose involves an endless series of con- 
stituents, we may, with Dedekind, use the generalized concep- 
tion of a self-representation of the type here in question as a 
means of positively defining what we mean by an infinite sys- 
tem or multitude of elements. In thus proceeding, we further 
generalize the idea which the perfect map of England has 
already illustrated. 

The positive definition of the concept of the Infinite thus 
resulting has no small speculative interest. Ordinarily one 
defines infinity merely by considering some indefinitely pro- 
longed series of successive facts, by observing that the series 
in question does not, or at least, so far as one sees, need not, 


510 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


end at any given point, and by then saying, “A series taken 
thus as without end, may be called infinite.” We ourselves, 
so far in this discussion, have defined our infinite processes 
on the whole in a negative way. But the new definition of 
the infinity of our system uses positive rather than negative 
terms. The conception of a representation or of an imaging 
of one object by another, is wholly positive. This conception, 
if applied to the elements of a system A, with the proviso 
that A', the image or the representation of A, shall form a 
constituent portion of A itself, remains still positive. But 
the system A, if defined as capable of this particular type of 
self-representation, proves, when examined, to contain, if it 
exists at all, an infinite number of elements. Whatever the 
metaphysical fate of the ideal object thus defined, the method 
of definition has a decided advantage over the older ones.? It 
may be well at once to quote Dedekind’s original statement 
and illustration of the conception in question, in the passage 
cited in the note: — 


“A System S is called ‘infinite’ when it is similar? to a 


1 More or less vaguely this positive property of infinite multitudes was 
observed as a paradox whenever the necessity of conceiving ‘‘ one infinite 
as greater than another,’’ or as containing another as a part of itself, was 
recognized. The paradox was in this sense felt already by Aristotle in the 
third Book of the Physics, ch. 5 (cf. Spinoza’s Ethics, Part I, Prop. XV. 
Scholium, where the well-known solution is that the true infinite is essen- 
tially indivisible, having no parts and no multitude). Explicitly the 
property of infinite multitudes here in question was insisted upon by 
Bolzano in his Paradoxien des Unendlichen (1851). Cantor, and, in 
America, Mr. Charles Peirce, have since made this aspect of the infinite 
multitudes prominent. Most explicitly, however, Dedekind has built up 
his entire theory of the number concept upon defining the infinite multi- 
tude or system simply in these positive terms, without previous definition 
of any numbers at all. See his op. cit., § 5, 64, p. 17. 

2In previous definitions, in Dedekind’s text, two systems have been 
defined as similar (Ghnlich), when one of them can be made to corre- 
spond, element for element, with the other, any two different elements 
having different representations. And a proper part (echter Theil), or 
constituent portion, of a system, has been defined as one produced by 
leaving out some elements of the whole. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 511 


constituent (or proper) part of itself; in the contrary case 
S is called a ‘finite’ system. 

“ Theorem. — There exist infinite systems.? 

“ Proof. — My own realm of thoughts (meine Gedankenwelt), 
z.e. the totality S, of all things that can be objects of my 
thought, is infinite. For if sis an element of S, it follows 
that the thought s', viz., the thought, That s can be object of my 
thought, is itself an element of S. If one views s!' as the image 
(or representative) of the element s, the representation S' of 
the system S, which is hereby defined, has the character that 
the representation S' is a constituent portion (echter Theil) of 
S, since there are elements in S (for example, my own Ego) (?) 
which are different from every such thought s’, and which are, 
therefore, not contained in S'. Finally, it is plain that if 
a and 6 are different elements of S, their images, a’ and bd! are 
also different, so that the representation of S is distinct 
(deutlich) and similar. It follows that S [by definition], is 
infinite.” 

Here, as we observe, the infinity of an ideal system is de- 
fined, and in a special case proved, without making any 
explicit reference to the number of its elements. That this 
number, negatively viewed, turns out to be no finite number, 
that is, to be that of a multitude with no last term, is 
for Dedekind a result to be later proved, —a secondary con- 
sequence of the infinity as first defined. The proof that my 
Gedankenwelt is infinite, is thus not my negative powerless- 
ness to find the last term, but my positive power to image 
each of my thoughts s, by a new and reflective thought s’. It 
is the finite, and not the infinite, that here appears as the ob- 
ject negatively definable. For a finite system is one that 
cannot be adequately represented through a one-to-one cor- 
respondence with one of its own constituent parts.? In any 


1 Hs giebt unendliche Systeme. Es giebt, is of course here used to 
express existence within the realm of consistent mathematical definitions. 
The conception of Being in question is the Third Conception of our own 


list. 
2 That the finite and infinite here quite change places is pointed out in 


512 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


case, the infinite multitude of the elements of S developes, for 
thought, out of the single positive purpose stated so sharply 
in Dedekind’s definition. 


Ill. Further Illustrations of Self-Representative Systems of the 
Type here Defined 


This conception of a system that can be exactly represented 
or imaged, element for element, by one of its own constitu- 
ent parts, has of course to meet the objection that such an idea 
appears, upon its face, paradoxical, even if it is not out and 
out self-contradictory. But before judging the conception, it 
is well to have in mind some illustrations of its range of ap- 
plication. A comparison of these will show that, if self-cor- 


an interesting way by Professor Franz Meyer, in his Antrittsrede at 
Tiibingen entitled Zur Lehre vom Unendlichen (Tibingen, 1889). The 
same observation is made by Kerry in his comments upon Dedekind (in 
Kerry’s before-cited Theorie der Grenzbegriffe, p. 49). Bolzano, who, in 
his Paradoxien des Unendlichen had much earlier reached a position in 
many ways near to that of Dedekind, proves the existence of the infinite 
in a closely similar, but less exact way. Schroeder, in his very elaborate 
essay in the Abhandlungen der Leopold. Carolinischen Akad. d. Natur- 
forscher for 1898, entitled Ueber Zwet Definitionem der Endlichkeitt, 
insists indeed that this whole distinction between positive and negative 
definitions is, from the point of view of formal Logic, vain, and that Mr. 
Charles Peirce’s definition of jinite systems, given in the American 
Journal of Mathematics, Vol. 7, p. 202, while it is the polar opposite of 
Dedekind’s definition of the Infinite, is, logically speaking, at once equiv- 
alent to Dedekind’s definition, and yet as positive as the latter, although 
Mr. Peirce, in the passage in question, starts from the finite, and not 
from the infinite. Schroeder seems to me quite right in regarding the 
distinction between essentially positive and essentially negative definitions 
as one for which a purely formal Logic has no place. But as a fact, the 
distinction in question, between what is positive and what is negative, has 
an import wholly metaphysical. Our interest in it here lies in the fact 
that if you begin, in Dedekind’s way, with the positive concept of the 
Infinite, you need not presuppose the ‘‘externally given’? Many, but 
may develope the multitude out of the internal meaning of a single purpose. 
Mr. Charles Peirce, in his parallel definition of finite systems, has first to 
presuppose them as given facts of experience. We, however, are seeking 
to develope the Many out of the One, 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 513 


respondent systems of the type here in question are mere 
Appearance, they are, at all events, Appearance worthy of 
study. A list of a few conceptions that are more or less 
obviously of the present type may make us pause before we 
lightly reject, as absurd, the offered definition. 

First, then, the series of whole Numbers, as conceived 
objects, forms such a self-representative system. The same is 
true of all the secondary number-systems of higher arithmetic 
(the negative numbers, the rational numbers, the irrational 
numbers, the totality of the real numbers, the complex num- 
bers). And all continuous and discrete mathematical systems 
of any infinite type are similarly self-representative. But the 
mathematical objects are by no means the most philosophically 
interesting of the instances of our concept. For, next, we 
have the Self, the concept so elaborately studied by Mr. Brad- 
ley, and condemned by him as Appearance. And, indeed, if 
the Self is anything final at all, it is certainly in its complete 
expression (although of course not in our own psychological 
life from instant to instant) a self-representative system; and 
its metaphysical fate stands or falls with the possibility of 
such systems. Dedekind’s really very profound use of meine 
Gedankenwelt as his typical instance of the infinite, also sug- 
gests the interesting relation between the concept of the Self 
and that of the mere mathematical form called the number- 
series, —a relation to which we shall soon return. Thirdly, 
the totality of Being, if conceived as in any way defined or 
characterized, or even as in any way even definable or charac- 
terizable, constitutes, in the present sense, a self-representative 
system. Obvious it is that our own Fourth Conception of 
Being defines the Absolute as a self-representative system. 
And, furthermore, despite his horror of the infinite, and de- 
spite his rejection of the Self as a final category, Mr. Bradley 
himself perforce has to describe his own Absolute as a self- 
representative system of our type, as we soon shall see. And 
if he attempted to view it otherwise, it would not be the Abso- 
lute or anything real at all. In brief, every system of which 
anybody can rationally assert anything is either a self-repre- 

2. 


514 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


sentative system, in the sense here in question, or else, being 
but a part of the real world, it is a more or less arbitrarily 
selected, or an empirically given portion or constituent of such 
a system, —a portion whose reality, apart from that of the 
whole system, is unintelligible. 

Far from lacking totality, then, in the way in which the 
infinite, or rather the indefinite, multitude of such accounts 
as Mr. Bosanquet’s is said to lack totality, those genuinely 
self-representative systems, whose images are portions of their 
own objects, are the only ones which can be said to possess 
any totality whatever. It is they alone that are wholly posi- 
tive in their definition. Finite systems are either capable only 
of negative definition, or, at all events, have positive charac- 
ters only by virtue of their relation to their inclusive infinite, 
or, in our present sense, self-representative systems.? Or, 
again, as we have already begun to see, only the processes of 
recurrent thought make explicit the true unity of the One and 
the Many. But these very processes express themselves in 
systems of the type now in question. 

To make these matters clearer, it will be necessary to con- 
sider each of the just-mentioned illustrations more in detail. 
First, then, as to the simple case of the number-system, whose 
logical genesis we for the moment leave out of consideration, 
and whose general constitution we assume as known. The 
whole numbers first form what Cantor calls a wohl-definirte 
Menge, — or exactly defined multitude. That is, you can pre- 
cisely distinguish between any conceived or presented object 
that is not a whole number (as, for example, one-half, or the 
moral law, or the odor of a rose), and an object that is a whole 
number, abstract or concrete (e.g. ten, or ten thousand, or the 


1 See Bosanquet’s Logic, loc. cit. et sq. 

2 Mr. Charles Peirce, as noted above, has indeed given a perfectly 
positive and exact definition of a finite system ; but in order to set that 
definition to work you have first to suppose your Many externally given, 
while, in order to define the Gedankenwelt, or the Self, or, as we shall 
later see, the Real World, you have only to presuppose a single, and un- 
avoidable, internal meaning. The infinity then follows of itself. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 515 


number of birds on yonder bough). Taking the whole num- 
bers as the abstract numbers, i.e. as the members of a certain 
ideal series, arithmetically defined, the mathematician can, 
therefore, view them all as given by means of their universal 
definition, and their consequent clear distinction from all 
other objects of thought. Taking them thus as given, the 
numbers become entities of the type contemplated by our 
Third Conception of Being; and as such entities we can admit 
them here for the moment, not now asking whether or no they 
have, or can win, a reality of our Fourth type. 

Now the numbers form, in infinitely numerous ways, a self- 
representative system of the type here in question. That is, 
as has repeatedly been remarked, by all the recent authors who 
have dealt with this aspect of the matter, the number-system, 
taken in its conceived totality, can be put in a one-to-one cor- 
respondence with one of its own constituent portions in any 
one of an endless number of ways. For the numbers, if once 
regarded as a given whole, form an endless ordered series, 
having a first term, a second term, and soon. But just so the 
even numbers, 2, 4, 6, etc., form an endless ordered series, 
having a first, second, third term, and so on. In the same way, 
too, the prime numbers form a demonstrably endless series, 
whereof there is a first member, a second member, and so forth. 
Or, again, the numbers that are perfect squares, those that 
are perfect cubes, and those, in general, that are of the form 
a”, where n is any one whole number, while a takes succes- 
sively the value of every whole number, —all such derived 
systems of whole numbers, form similarly ordered series, 
wherein each member of each system has its determined place 
as first, second, third, or later member of its own system, 
while the system forms a series without end. Take, then, any 


1 How they are to be defined is of course itself a significant logical 
problem, whereof we shall soon hear more. Cantor’s account of the well- 
defined multitude, Menge, or ensemble, is found in French translation in 
the Acta Mathematica, tom. II, p. 363. On the general sense in which 
any multitude can be viewed as given for purposes of mathematical dis- 
cussion, see Borel’s Legons (cited above), p. 2. 


516 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


whole number 7, however large. Then, in the ideal class ot 
objects called whole numbers, there is a determinate even 
number which occupies the rth place in the series of even 
numbers, when the latter are arranged according to their sizes, 
beginning with 2. There is equally a prime number, occupy- 
ing the rth place in a similarly ordered series of primes; and 
a square number occupying the rth place in a similarly ordered 
series of square numbers; and a cube occupying the 7th place 
in a like arrangement of cubes; and an 7th member in any 
particular series of numbers of the form a”, where n is any de- 
terminate whole number, and a is taken, in succession, as 1, 
2, 3, etc. As all these things hold true for any 7, however 
large, we can say, in general, that every whole number r has 
its correspondent rth member in any of the supposed series 
of systematically selected whole numbers, —even numbers, 
primes, square numbers, cubes, or what you will. But these 
various selected systems are such that each of them forms only 
a portion of the entire series of whole numbers. So that the 
whole series, taken as given, is in infinitely numerous ways 
capable of being put in a one-to-one relation to one of its own 
constituent parts. 

I doubt not that this very fact might appear, at first blush, 
to bring out a manifest “contradiction” in the very con- 
ception of the “totality” of the whole numbers taken as 
“given.” But closer examination will show, as Couturat, 
Cantor, and the other authors here concerned (since Bolzano) 
have repeatedly pointed out, that the “contradiction” in ques- 
tion is really a contradiction only of the well-known nature of 
any jinite collection. It was of such collections that the 
axiom, “The whole is greater than the part,” was first asserted. 
And of such collections alone is it with absolute generality true. 
Take any finite collection of whole numbers, however large; 
and then indeed the assertion of any of the foregoing one-to-one 
correspondences of the whole, with a mere part of itself, breaks 
down. But let us once see that taking any number 7, however 
large, we can find the corresponding 7th member in any of the 
ordered series of primes, squares, etc., and then we shall also 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 517 


see that the absolutely universal proposition, “Every whole 
has its single and separate correspondent member in any one 
of the various ordered series of selected whole numbers 
aforesaid,” is not only free from contradiction, but is 
easily demonstrable, and is a mere expression of the actual 
nature of the number-series, taken as an object of exact 
thought. 

Highly important it is, however, to observe, that the prop- 
erty of the number-series here in question is most sharply 
conceived, not when one wearily tries, as Mr. Bosanquet has 
it, to count “without having anything in particular to count,” } 
but when one rather tries to reflect, and then observes that the 
single feature about the number-system upon which all this 
conceivable complexity depends, is the simple and positive 
demand that is determined by the thought which conceives any 
order whatever. For order, as we shall soon more generally 
see, is comprehensible most of all in cases of self-representa- 
tive systems of the present type. The numbers are simply a 
formally ordered collection of ideal objects. Whoever any- 
where orders his own thoughts, either defines just such a self- 
representative system, or sets in order some empirically 
selected portion of a world that, in its totality, is such a sys- 
tem. And any system once self-representative, in this par- 
ticular way, is infinitely self-representative. And if you will 
count its elements, you shall, then, always find that you can 
never finish the task. 

Yet we are not yet done with showing, in this abstractly 
simple case of the numbers, what this type of self-representa- 
tion implies. The numbers, namely, form a system not only 
self-representative in infinitely numerous ways, but also self- 
representative according to each of these ways, in a manner 
that can be doubly brought under our notice. Take, namely, 
the collection of series thus represented : — 


1 Logic, Vol. I, p. 175. In the Theory of Numbers, the properties 
of the whole numbers are indeed interesting for themselves ‘‘ without any- 
thing in particular to count,’’ just because they form an ordered series, 
whose properties are the properties of all ordered systems. 


518 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


TR (824 Bs 26M aCe cee our: 
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20, etc. 
4 8 12 16 20 24 28 382 36 40, ete. 
8 16 24 82 40 48 56 64 72 80, ete. 


Each of these series, written in the horizontal rows, is 
ordered. Each is in such wise endless that to every number 
r, however large, there corresponds a determinate 7th member 
of that particular series. And so each series illustrates the 
first point, namely, that the whole number-series may be put 
in a one-to-one correspondence with a part of itself. But each 
series is formed from the immediately preceding series by 
writing down, in order, the second, fourth, sixth, eighth 
member of that series, and so forth, as respectively the first, 
second, third, fourth member of the new series, and by pro- 
ceeding, according to the same law, indefinitely. It is at once 
easy to illustrate a second principle regarding any such self- 
representative systems. To do this, let us observe that: — 

First, Each new series is contained in the previous series as 
one of its constituent parts, so that each horizontal series is 
self-representative; while every one is a part of all of its 
predecessors. 

Secondly, Each series is therefore to be derived from the 
former series in the same way in which the second series is 
derived from the first series. 

Thirdly, The later series, therefore, bear to the earlier series, 
a relation parallel to that which characterized the members of 
the series of maps in our first illustration of the present type 
of self-representative systems. 

For just as, in the former case, the one purpose to draw the 
exact map of England within England, gave rise to the end- 
less series of maps within maps, just so, the one purpose, To 
represent the whole number-series (as to the order of its con- 
stituents) by a specially selected series of whole numbers, 
arranged in order as first, second, etc, —just so, I say, this 
one purpose involves of necessity the result that this second 
or representative series shall contain, as part of itself, an end- 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 519 


less series of parts within parts. Each of these contained 
parts represents a preceding part precisely in the way in which . 
the first representative system represents the original system. 
The law of the process always is that in a self-representative 
system of the type here in question, if any part A’ can stand 
in a one-to-one relation to the elements of the whole system, 
A, then ipso facto there exists A" (a part of this part), such 
that A” is the image or representative in A’, of A’ as it was 
in A. A" stands, then, in the same relation to A’, as that in 
which A’ stands to A; and A” is alsoa part of A’. To derive 
A' from A, by any such process as the one just exemplified, is 
therefore at once to define, by recurrence, the derivation of _A"' 
from A’, or, if you please, the internal and representative 
presence of A’ within A’, of A'” within A", and so on without 
end. Nor can any A'be derived from A, in such wise as 
exactly to represent, while a part of A, the whole of A, with- 
out the consequent implied definition of the whole series, also 
endless, A, A’, A", A’’, wherein each term is a representative 
of the former term. So that not only is A self-representative 
and endless, but each of the derived series is self-representa- 
tive and endless, while the whole ordered system of series 
that one can write in the orderly sequence A, A’, A", A’ is 
again a self-representative sequence, and so on endlessly, — 
all this complexity resulting self-evidently from the expres- 
sions of a single purpose. 

One sees, —self-representation of the present type remains 
persistently true to its tendency to develope types of variety 
out of unity. Trivial these types may indeed seem; yet 
the simplicity and the exactness of the derivation here in 
question will soon prove of use to us in a wholly different field. 
But it is now time to suggest, briefly, a still more general view 
of these self-representative systems. 


IV. Remarks upon the Various Types of Self-Representative 
Systems 


We have so far spoken, repeatedly, of the “present type” 
of self-representative systems, meaning the type that, in this 


520 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


paper, will especially interest us. In this type a system is 
capable of standing in an exact one-to-one correspondence with 
one of its own constituent portions. We are to be interested 
throughout this paper in cases of self-representation, such as 
Self-consciousness, and the relation between thought and 
Reality, and all the problems of Reflection, bring to our 
notice. And in all these cases, as we shall see, the system 
before us will combine the characters of selfhood and internal 
unity of nature, with the character of being also internally 
manifold, self-dirempted, Other than Self, and that in most 
complex and highly antithetic fashion. The relational sys- 
tems of the type of the number-system especially exemplify 
—of course in a highly abstract fashion —the sort of unity 
in contrast, and of exact self-representation, which we are to 
learn to comprehend. Hence, the stress here to be laid upon 
one type of self-representative system. 

Yet, mathematically regarded, this is indeed only one of 
several possible types of self-representation. 

In the work by Dedekind already cited, the general name, 
Kette, is given to any self-representative system, whether of 
the present type or any other self-representative type. In the 
most general terms, a Kette is formed when a system is made 
to correspond, whether exactly, and element for element, or 
in any other way, either to the whole, or to a part of itself. 
The correspondence might be summary and inexact in type, if 
to many elements of the original system a single element of 
the representation or image were made to correspond, as, in a 
summary account or diagram, a single item or stroke can be 
made, at pleasure, to correspond to a whole series of facts in 
the original object which the account or the diagram repre- 
sents. In this way, for instance, the one word prime can be 
made to correspond, in a given discussion, to all the prime 
numbers. If, in case of a Kette, the correspondence of the 
whole to the part is of this inexact type, the Kette need not be 
endless, but may even consist of the original object, and a 
single one of its constituent parts. Then all the later mem- 
bers of the Keitte, the A", the A'", etc., of the previous account, 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY §21 


fuse together in this one part, A’. If the map of England, 
before discussed, be an inexact and summary map, such as we 
actually always make, it need contain no part that visibly, or 
exactly, presents the place or the form of the map itself, as a 
part of the surface of England. But the Kette is constructed 
in such wise that the part is in exact correspondence to the 
whole when, as in Dedekind’s definition of the Infinite, the 
correspondence is dhnlich, so that any different elements in 
the object have different elements corresponding to them in 
the image, while every element has its own uniquely deter- 
mined corresponding image. It will be observed that in case 
of inexact or dissimilar self-representation, we have a failure 
or external limitation of our self-representative purpose. 
Only exact self-representation is free from such external inter- 
ference. : 
Yet even an exact self-correspondence can be brought to 
pass, within a system, by making it correspond not to a true 
portion of itself, but, member for member, to the whole of itself. 
Thus the system abcd, consisting of the already distinguish- 
able elements a, b, etc., may be put in exact correspondence to 
itself by making 6 correspond to a, and so represent a, while, 
in similar fashion, ¢ corresponds to b, d toc, and, finally, a 
itself to d. In this case the system is, in a particular way, 
“transformed” into the image bcda, in such wise as to be 
exactly self-representative. But the system abcd might alse 
be represented, element for element, by the system cbda, where 
the order of the elements was again different, but where c now 
corresponded to the original a, 0 to itself, d to c, and a to d. 
Such “substitutions,” as they are called, give rise to self- 
representative systems of a type different from the one that we 
have heretofore had in mind. But in the general mathemati- 
cal theory of “transformations,” and of “ groups of operations,” 
self-representation of such types plays a great part. And in 
cases of such a type, to be sure, exact self-representation, and 
finitude of the system, are capable of perfect combination. 
Such self-representations need not be endless, and can be 
exact. There are many remarkable instances known to 


522 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


descriptive physical science, where the correspondence used 
for scientific purposes is of this type. Such are the instances 
which occur in crystallography, where the symmetry of a physi- 
cal object is studied by considering what group of rotations, or 
of internal reflections in one or in another plane, or of both 
combined, will bring any ideal crystal form to congruence with 
itself. All such operations as the rotations and reflections 
that leave the crystal form unaltered are, of course, opera- 
tions which bring to light an essentially self-representative 
character in the crystal form, since by any one such opera- 
tion the crystal form is made precisely to correspond with 
itself, while the operation can at once be followed by a new 
operation of the same type, which, again, leaves the form 
unaltered. 

While, however, self-representative systems of ideal or of 
physical objects belonging to the later types play a great part 
in exact physical and in mathematical science, their study 
does not throw light upon the primal way in which the One 
and the Many, in the processes directly open to thought’s 
own internal observation, are genetically combined. For 
physical systems which permit these transformations of a 
whole into an exact image of itself are given as external 
“conjunctions,” such as crystal forms. We do not see them 
made. We find them. ‘The ideal cases of the same type in 
pure mathematics have also a similar defect from the point 
of view of Bradley’s criticism. A system that is to be made 
self-representative through a “group of substitutions,” shows, 
therefore, the same diversities after we have operated upon 
it as before; and, furthermore, that congruence with itself 
which the system shows at the end of a self-representative 
operation of any type wherein all elements take the place of 
all, is not similar to what happens where, in our dealings with 
the universe, Thought and Reality, the Idea and its Other, 
Self and Not-Self, are brought into self-evident relations, and 
are at once contrasted with one another and unified in a single 
whole. Hence, we shall indeed continue to insist, in what 
follows, upon those self-representations wherein proper part 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 623 


and whole meet, and become in some wise precisely congruent, 
element for element.1_ We mention the other types of self- 
representation only to eliminate them from the present 
discourse. 

In case of these self-representative systems, of the type 
especially interesting to us, we have already illustrated how 
their particular kind of self-representation developes infinite 
variety out of unity in a peculiarly impressive way. The 
general law of the process in question may now be stated, in 
a still more precise and technical form. 

We may once more use the thoroughly typical case of the 
number-system. We have seen, in general, the positive 
nature of its endlessness. We want now to define, in decid- 
edly general terms, the infinite process whereby the numbers 
can be self-represented, in infinitely numerous ways, by a part 
of themselves, and to state, abstractly, the implications of any 
such process. Let, then, f(n) represent any “function” of a 
whole number, such that n is to take, successively, the value 
of any whole number from 1 onwards; while /f(n) itself is, in 
value, always a determinate whole number. The values of f(n) 
shall never be repeated. They shall follow in endless succes- 
sion, and, as we shall also here suppose, in the order of their 
magnitude from less to more. Not all the numbers shall ap- 
pear amongst the values of f(n). In consequence, f(n), by 
means of its first, second, third values, etc., shall ‘represent 
precisely the whole of the number-series, while forming only 
a part thereof. Otherwise let f(n) be an arbitrary function. 
Then it will always be true that f(n) will contain, as a part of it- 
self, a series f,(n), related to f(n) in precisely the same way in 
which £(n) is related to the original series of whole numbers. It 


1 Upon the various types of Ketten, finite and infinite, ‘‘ cyclical”? and 
‘‘open,’’ see the very minute analysis given by Bettazzi, in his papers 
entitled Sulla Catena di un Ente in un gruppo, and Gruppi finiti ed infiniti 
di Enti, in the Atti of the Turin Academy of Sciences (for 1895-96), 
Vol. 31, pp. 447 and 506. Bettazzi, in the second of these papers, 
expresses some dissatisfaction with Dedekind’s definition of the Infinite, 
but withdraws his objections in a later paper, Atti, Vol. 32, p. 358. 


524 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


will also be true that f(n) will contain a second series f,(n), 
similarly related to f,(n); and so on without end. 

We have illustrated this truth. We now need to devel- 
ope it for any and every series of f(n), however arbitrary. 
Consider, then, the values of f(n) as a part of the original 
number-series. hese values of f(n) form an image or repre- 
sentative of the whole number-series in such wise that if r be 
a whole number appropriately chosen, some one value of f(n), 
say the value that corresponds to the number p in the original 
series, or, in other words, the pth value of f(n), is 7. But 
since f(n) images the whole of the original number-series, it 
must contain, as a part of itself, a representation of its own 
self as it is in that number-series. In this representation, 
f,(n), there is again a first member, a second member, and so 
on. 

Now we can indeed speak of the series fi(n) as “derived 
from” f(n) by a second and relatively new operation. But, 
as a fact, the very operation which defines the series f(n) 
already predetermines f\(n), and no really second, or new 
operation is needed. For if every whole number has its cor- 
respondent, or “image,” in f(n), then, for that very reason, 
every separate “image,” being, by hypothesis, a whole num- 
ber, has again, in f(n), its own image; and this image again 
its own image, and so on without end. Merely to observe 
these images of images, already present in f(n), is to observe, 
in succession, the various members of the series f,(n). The 
law of the formation of f,(n) is already determined, then, 
when /(n) is written, no matter how arbitrary f(n) itself 
may be. 

In particular, let p be any whole number, and suppose that, 
according to the original self-representation of the numbers, 
JS(p) =r. Then r also will have its image in the series S(n). 
Let that image be called f(r). Then f(r) = f(f(p)), is at once 
defined as f,(p), that is, as that value which (nm) takes when 
n =p, or as the image of the image of p. It is easy to see 
that f{(p) is the pth value, in serial order, of the series f,(n). 
At the same time, since f{(p) = f(r), and since f(r) occupies, 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 525 


in the series of values of f(n) the rth place, while f(p), or 7, 
occupies the rth place in the original number-series, one can 
say, in general, that the successive values of f,(n) are num- 
bers which occupy in f(n) places precisely corresponding to 
the places which the successive values of f(n) themselves 
occupy in the original number-series. Thus the first member 
of f,(n) is that one amongst the members of the series of values 
of f(n) whose place in that series of values corresponds to the 
place in the original series of whole numbers which was occu- 
pied by f(Z). The second member of f,(n) is, even so, that 
one amongst the series of values of f(n) which occupies the 
place in that series of values which f(2) occupies in the origi- 
nal number-series. And, in general, if, to the whole number 
p, in the original number-series, there corresponded the num- 
ber r, as the image of that number in the series called j(n), 
then this pth member of the series called f(n) will have, as its 
image or representative in f,(n), the number f(r), i.e. the value 
of f(n) when n=r. This number f(r) will constitute, of 
course, the pth member of f,(n), and will occupy, in the series 
called f(n), the very same relative place which f(p) occupies 
in the original number-series. 

Precisely so, f,(n) contains, as a part of itself, its own image 
as it is in f(n) and also as it is in the original series. And 
this new image may be called f,(n); and so on without end.? 
Hence, one process of self-representation inevitably determines 
an endless Kette altogether parallel to our series of maps 
within maps of England. The general structure and develop- 
ment of any self-representative system of the present type 
have now been not only illustrated, but precisely defined and 
developed. Self-representation, of the type here in ques- 
tion, creates, at one stroke, an infinite chain of self-represen- 
tations within self-representations. 


10Qn the properties of a Kette, see further in addition to Dedekind, 
Schroeder, in the latter’s Algebra der Relative, in the 3d Vol. of his 
Logik, pp. 345-404. Compare Borel, op. cit., pp. 104-106. 


526 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


V. The Self and the Relational System of the Ordinal Num- 
bers. The Origin of Number; and the Meaning of Order 


Having considered self-representation so much in the ab- 
stract, we may now approach nearer to the other illustrations 
of self-representative relational systems. To be sure, in 
beginning to do so, we shall, for the first time in this discus- 
sion, be able to state the precise logical source of the good 
order of the number-system, whose self-representative charac- 
ter, now so wearisomely illustrated, is simply due to the fact 
that the number-series is a purely abstract image, a bare, dried 
skeleton, as it were, of the relational system that must char- 
acterize an ideally completed Self. This observation, in the 
- present form, cannot be said to be due to Hegel, although both 
his analysis and Fichte’s account of the Self, imply a theory 
that apparently needs to be developed into this more modern 
form. But the contempt of the older Idealism for the careful 
analysis of mathematical forms, — its characteristic unwilling- 
ness to dwell upon the dry detail of the seemingly lifeless 
realm of the mathematically pure abstractions, is responsible 
for much of the imperfect development and relative vagueness 
of the idealistic Absolute. It is so easy for the philosopher 
to put on superior airs when he draws near to the realm of the 
mathematician. And Hegel, despite his laborious study of 
the conceptions of the Calculus, in his Logik, generally does 
so. The mathematician, one observes, is a mere “computer.” 
His barren Calcul, — what can it do for the deeper comprehen- 
sion of truth? ‘Truth is concrete. As a fact, however, these 
superior airs are usually the expression of an unwillingness 
even to spend as much time as one ought to spend over mathe- 
matical reading. And Hegel seems not to have solved the 
problem of the logic of mathematics. The truth is indeed 
concrete. But if alle Theorie is, after all, grau, and griin des 
Lebens Goldener Baum, the philosopher, as himself a thinker, 
merely shares with his colleague, the mathematician, the fate 
of having to deal with dead leaves and sections torn or cut 
from the tree of life, in his toilsome effort to make out what 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 527 


the life is. The mathematician’s interests are not the philoso- 
pher’s. But neither of the two has a monopoly of the abstrac- 
tions; and in the end each of them — and certainly the 
philosopher — can learn from the other. The metaphysic of 
the future will take fresh account of mathematical research. 

The foregoing observation as to the parallelism between the 
structure of the number-series and the bare skeleton of the 
ideal Self, is due, then, in its present form, rather to Dede- 
kind than to the idealistic philosophers proper.! It shall be 
briefly expounded in the form in which he has suggested it to 
me, although his discussion seems to have been written wholly 
without regard to any general philosophical consequences. 
And the present is the first attempt, so far as I know, to 
bring Dedekind’s research into its proper relation to general 
metaphysical inquiry. 

The numbers have been so far taken as we find them. But 
how do we men come by our number-series? The usual answer 
is, by learning to count external objects. We see collections 
of objects, with distinguishable units, —the “bare conjunc- 
tions” of Mr. Bradley once more. Their mysterious unity in 
diversity arouses our curiosity. We form the habit, however, 


1 Hegel indeed defines the positive Infinite as das Fiirsichseiende, and 

sets it in opposition to the merely negative Infinitive, or das Schlecht- 
Unendliche. See the well-known discussion in the Logik, Werke, 2te 
Aujflage, Bd. III, p.148, sqq. Dr. W.T. Harris, in his Hegel (Chicago, 1890), 
and in other discussions, has ably defended and illustrated the’ Hegelian 
statements. They are applied to the problem of the quantitative Infinite 
by Hegel in the Logik, in the volume cited, p. 272 sqqg. But near as Hegel 
thus comes to the full definition of the Infinite, his statement of the 
matter remains rather a postulate that the self-representative system shall 
be found, than a demonstration and exact explanation of its reality. 
‘The well-known Hegelian assertions that the only true image of the 
Infinite is the closed cycle (Logik, loc. cit., p. 156), that the quantitative 
infinite is a return to quality (loc. cit., p. 271), and,that the rational frac- 
tion, taken as the equivalent of the endless decimal, is the one typical 
example of the completed quantitatively infinite process, — these, all 
of them valuable as emphasizing various aspects of the concept of the 
infinite, appear in the present day wholly inadequate to the complexity 
of our problem, and rather hinder than aid its final expression. 


528 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


of using certain familiar and easily observed collections (our 
fingers, for instance) as means for defining the nature of less 
familiar and more complex collections. The number-names, 
derived from these elementary processes of finger-counting, 
come to our aid in the further development of our thought 
about numbers. The decadic system makes possible, through 
a simple system of notation, the expression of numbers of any 
magnitude. And so the number-concept in its generality is 
born. 

This usual summary view of the origin of the numbers has 
its obvious measure of historical and psychological truth. It 
leaves wholly unanswered, however, the most interesting prob- 
lems as to the nature of the number-concept. For numbers 
have two characters. They are cardinal numbers, in so far as 
they give us an idea of how many constituents a given collec- 
tion of objects contains. But they have also an ordinal char- 
acter; for by using numbers, as the makers of watches, and 
bicycles, or as the printers of a series of banknotes, or of 
tickets, use them, we can give to any one object its place in a 
determinate series, as the first, the tenth, or the ten thou- 
sandth member of that series. Such ordinal use of numbers 
is a familiar device for identifying objects that, for any reason, 
we wish to view as individuals. Now, a very little considera- 
tion shows that the ordinal value of the numbers is of very 
fundamental importance for their use in giving us a notion of 
the cardinal numbers of multitudes of objects. For when we 
count objects by using either the fingers or the number-names, 
we always employ an already familiar ordered series of objects 
as the basis of our work. We put the members of this series 
in a “one-to-one ” relation to the members of the collection of 
objects which we wish to count. We deal out our numbers, 
so to speak, in serial order, to the various objects to be counted. 
We thereby label the various objects as they are numbered, 
just as the makers of the banknotes stamp an ordinal number 
on each note of a given issue. Only when this process is com- 
pleted do we recognize the cardinal number which tells us how 
many objects there are in the collection of the objects counted. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 529 


And we recognize this result of counting by the simple device 
of giving to the whole collection counted a cardinal number 
corresponding to the /ast member of the ordinal number-series 
that we have thus dealt out. If, for instance, the last object 
labelled is the tenth in the series of objects set in order by the 
ordinal process of labelling, then the counted collection is said 
to contain ten objects. 

Unless the numbers were, then, in our minds, already some- 
how a well-ordered series, they would help us no whit in 
counting objects. Nor does counting consist in the mere col- 
lection of acts of synthesis by which we each time add one 
more, in mind, to the collection of objects so far counted. 
For these acts of synthesis, however carefully performed, soon 
give us, if left to themselves, only the confused sense, “There 
is another object, —and another, —and another.” In such 
cases we soon “lose count.” We can “keep tally” of our 
objects only if we combine the successive series of acts of 
observing another, and yet another, object, in our collection 
of objects with the constant use of the already ordered 
series of number-names, whose value depends upon the fact 
that one of them comes first, another second, etc., and that we 
well know what this order means. 

The ordinal character of the number-series is therefore its 
most important and fundamental character. But upon what 
mental process does the conception of any well-ordered series 
depend? The account of the origin of the number-series by 
the mere use of fingers or of names, does not yet tell us what 
we mean by any ordered series at all. 

To this question, whose central significance, for the whole 
understanding of the number-concept, all the later discussions 
and the modern text-books recognize, various answers have 
been given.! The order of a series of objects, presented or 


1 Couturat, in the work cited, gives an admirable summary of the 
present phases of the discussion ; only that he fails, I think, to appreciate 
the importance and originality of Dedekind’s method of deducing the 
ordinal concept. The views of Helmholtz and Kronecker are discussed 
with especial care by Couturat. Veronese, in the introduction to his 


2M 


530 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


conceived, has been most frequently regarded, in the later dis- 
cussions, either as a datum of sensuous experience, or else as 
an inexplicable and fundamental character of our process of 
conception. In either case the problem of the One and the 
Many is left unanalyzed. For an ordered series is a collection 
taken not only as One, but as a very special sort of unity, 
namely, as just this Order. That many things can be taken 
by us as in an ordered series, —this is true, but is once more 
the “bare conjunction” of Mr. Bradley’s discussion. We 
want to find out what act first brings to our consciousness 
that Many elements constitute One Order. Nearest to the 
foundation of the matter Dedekind seems to me to have come, 
when, without previously defining any number-series at all, 
he sets out with that definition of an infinite system of 
ideal objects which we have already stated, and then proceeds, 
substantially as follows, to show how this system can come to 
be viewed Whole. 

Let there be a system W of objects, —a system defined 
as capable of the type of self-representation heretofore 
illustrated. That such a system is a valid object (of the 
type definable through our own Third Conception of Being), 
we have already seen by the one example of meine Ge- 
dankenwelt. For the ideally universal law of meine Gedan- 
kenwelt is that to every thought of mine, s, I can make 
correspond the thought, s’, viz., the thought, “This, s, is one 
of my thoughts.” Because of this single ideal law of the 
equally ideal Self here in question, the Gedankenwelt is 
already given as a conceptual system of many elements, —a 
system capable of exact representation by one of its own con- 


Principles of Geometry (known to me in the German translation, Grund- 
ziige der Geometrie, tibers v. Schepp, Leipzig, 1894) gives a very elaborate 
development of the number-concept upon the basis of the view that the 
order of a series of conceived objects is an ultimate fact or absolute datum 
for thought (op. cit., § 8, 14-28, 46-50). Amongst the recent text- 
books, Fine’s Number-System of Arithmetic and Algebra holds an 
important place. See also the opening chapter of Harkness and Morley’s 
Introduction to the Theory of Analytic Functions. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY Sal 


stituent portions. Now let us suppose our particular system 
NV to be a system such as a particular portion, itself infinite, 
of the Gedankenwelt, would constitute. Namely, let us sup- 
pose our system WN to be capable of a process of self-represen- 
tation that first selects a single one of the elements of WN (to 
be called One or element the first), and, that then represents 
the whole of by that portion of N which is formed of all the 
elements of N except One.1 The result of this mode of self- 
representation is that N becomes, in the sense before defined, 
a Kette, represented by a part of itself, V'. This part, WN’, 
by hypothesis, contains all of the N except the chosen jirst 
element named One. In consequence, and because of the very 
same sort of reasoning that we carried out in case of the map 
of England made within England, NW’ will again contain, by 
virtue of the one principle of its constitution, a further part, 
WN", which will be derived from N' by leaving out a single 
element of N', to be called Two, and defined as the second 
element of the system. Two will be, in fact, the name of that 
very element in W’ which, in the original mapping of W by 
N', was the element that was made to represent, or to image, 
element One. But the process of expressing the meaning thus 
involved is now recurrent. For the one plan of representing 
N by N', with the omission from WN’ of the single element 
called One, has involved the representing of N' by NV", with 
the omission from WN" of the single element now called Two, 
—an element which is merely the image in NV! of One in N. 
The same plan, however, not so much applied anew, as simply 
once fully expressed, implies that within NV” there is an NV", 
an WV, and so on without end; just as the one plan of map- 
ping England within England involved the endless series of 
maps. But each of the series of systems WN’, NV", N", etc., 
differs from the previous one simply by the omission of a 


1In order to accomplish this selection, the concept of an individual 
content, distinguished, within the system, as this and no other, must of 
course be presupposed as valid. Such a concept already implies an indi- 
viduating interest or Will which selects. But this will is here presupposed 
only in the abstract. 


532 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


single element present in its predecessor. And the series of 
these successively omitted elements has an order absolutely 
predetermined by the one original plan. That order consists 
simply in the fact that each element omitted, when any of the 
new representations, V", W'"’, etc., is considered, is, upon 
each occasion, itself the Bild, the image or map or representa- 
tive, of the very element that was previously omitted, when 
N", or N'", or other representation, was made. The endless 
series One, Two, Three, etc., is consequently the series of 
names of those objects whereof the jirst was omitted when the 
first representation or the mapping of NV was made; while the 
second element represented, in the first map, WV’, this first ele- 
ment of N. In the same way, in the second map, WN”, the 
element Three, the third element of the series, represented or 
pictured the second element, which latter, present in WV’, had 
been omitted in NV". 

Thus the one plan of mapping or representing WN by a part 
of itself, taken as a single act, accomplished at a stroke, logi- 
cally involves what one can then express as an endless series 
of maps or images of the portion or element of W that is 
omitted from the first of the maps. And this endless ordered 
series of images of the omitted element of N, can be so carried 
out as to constitute a derived system that contains, in its turn, 
any member of WV that you please, in a particular place, whose 
order in the series of successive images is absolutely predeter- 
mined by the one original plan. Hence, as Dedekind has it, 
“we say that the system WV is, by this mode of representation, 
set in order (geordnet).”! But, let us observe, this whole 
order, in all its infinite serial complexity, is logically accom- 
plished by means of one act. 

The series of images, or representations, of the element 
One, thus obtained, has of course, at first sight, a very arti- 
ficial seeming. But a glance at the concrete case of the 
Gedankenwelt will show the sense of the process more directly. 
Let my Gedankenwelt be viewed in its totality, as a system 
self-represented in the way first defined. Then the one plan 

1 Op. cit., § 6, 71, p. 20. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 533 


of representing any thought of mine, whether itself reflective 
or direct, by a reflective thought of the form, This is one of 
my thoughts, implies that about any primal thought of mine, 
say the thought, To-day is Tuesday, there ideally clusters an 
endless system, N, of thoughts whereof this thought, To-day 
is Tuesday, may be made the jirst member. These thoughts 
may follow one after another in time. But, logically, they 
are all determined at one stroke by the one purpose to 
reflect. The system NV consists of the original thought, and 
then of the series of reflective thoughts of the form, This is 
one of my thoughts ; — yes, and This last reflection is one of my 
thoughts; and This further reflection is one of my thoughts; and 
so on without end. Now the system N is known to be infi- 
nite, not by counting its members until you fail and give up 
the process in weariness, but by virtue of the universal plan 
that every one of its members shall have a corresponding reflec- 
tive thought that shall itself belong to the system. Hereby 
already V is defined as infinite, before you have counted at 
all. But this very plan determines a fixed order of sequence, 
whether temporal or logical, amongst the constituent elements 
of N; because each new element, to be taken into account 
when you follow the order, is defined as that element whereby 
the last element is to be imaged, or reflectively represented. 
But this recurrent, or iterative, character of the operation of 
thought whereby you follow the series of elements, is really 
only the result of the single plan of self-representation whereby 
once for all the system J is ordered according to its defined 
first member. For the whole system N, once conceived as 
mapped, or represented by that portion of itself which does 
not include the element called One, is even thereby at one 
stroke defined as an ordered series of representations within 
representations, like our series of maps of England. This 
system of representations within representations of the whole 
of N, is given as a valid truth, totum simul, by the definition 
of the undertaking. The series of temporally successive re- 
flective thoughts, however, is found to be ordered as a result 
of this constitution of the entire system; and therefore is its 


534 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


iterative meaning clear quite apart from any theory as to 
whether time and succession are appearance or reality. 

Now the system WN is, by definition, simply that system of 
thoughts which, if present at once, would express a complete 
self-consciousness as to the act of thinking that To-day is 
Tuesday. Were I just now not only to think this thought, 
but to think all that is directly implied in the mere fact that 
I think this thought, I should have present to me, at once, the 
whole system W as an ordered system of thoughts. Precisely 
so, the whole determined Gedankenwelt, if present at once, 
would be a Self, completely reflective regarding the fact that 
all of these thoughts were its own thoughts. But this com- 
plete reflection would, in all its portions, involve an ordered 
system of thoughts, whose purely abstract form, taken merely 
as an order, is everywhere precisely that of the number- 
system. 

Self-representation, then, in the sense now so fully exem- 
plified, is not merely, as it were, the property or accident of 
the number-system; but is, logically speaking, its genetic 
principle. When order is not a mere “external conjunction,” 
when we know not merely that facts seem in order, but what 
the order is, and how it is one order through all of its mani- 
fold expressions, we do so by virtue of comprehending the 
internal meaning of a plan whereby a system of conceived 
objects comes to be represented through a portion of itself. 
Dedekind has shown that this view is adequate to the logical 
development of the various properties of the number-system. 
What we here observe is that the consequent constitution of 
the number-system is explicitly defined as, of course in the 
barest and most abstract outline, the form of a completed Self. 
Here, then, the Intellect, “of its own movement,” “itself by 
itself,” defines what, in our temporal experience, whether 
sensuous or thoughtful, it of course nowhere finds given, 
namely, a self-representative system of objects, parallel in 
structure to what the structure of a Gedankenwelt would be if 
it were the Welt of a completely self-conscious Thought, none 
of whose acts failed to be its own intellectual objects. This 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 535 


concept comes to us as positive, and wholly in advance of 
counting. It involves, first, the general definition of a Kette, 
of the type here in question, whose properties, taken in their 
abstraction, are as exactly definable as those of a triangle. 
Not every such Kette is a Self, or a Gedankenwelt; for of 
course the general concept of a system possessing some sort of 
one-to-one correspondence, can be applied in any region, how- 
ever abstract; and a Hette may therefore be defined where the 
objects in question are taken to be either dead matter or else 
mere fiction. Consequently the mathematical world is simply 
full of Ketten of the present and of other types. But the 
notable facts are, first, that the present type of Kette becomes 
the very model of an ordered system, and, secondly, that it 
becomes this by virtue of the fact that in structure it is pre- 
cisely parallel to the structure of an ideal Self. Herein the 
intellect does indeed, of itself, comprehend its own work, 
even though this work be but an ideal creation. 

But all order in the world of space, of time, of quantity, or 
of morals, however rich its wealth of life, of meaning, or of 
beauty may be, is order because it presents to us systems of 
facts that may be viewed as having a first, a second, a third 
constituent, or some higher form of order; while the rank, 
dignity, worth, magnitude, proportion, structure, description, 
explanation, law, or other reasonableness of any of these ob- 
jects in our world depends, for us, upon our power to recognize 
in them what, for a given purpose, comes first, what second, 
and so on, amongst their elements or their higher constituents. 
The absolutely universal application of the concept of order 
wherever the intellect recognizes in any sense its own, in 
heaven or upon earth, shows us the interest of considering 
even these barest abstractions regarding simple order. The 
number-series is indeed the absolutely abstract, but also the 
absolutely universal and inclusive type of all order, — the one 
thing that every rational being, however much he may differ 
in constitution from us men, must, in some shape, possess, 
just in so far as he knows any complete order or system at all, 
divine or diabolical, moral or physical, esthetic or social, 


536 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


formal or concrete. For the deepest essence of the number- 
series lies not in its power to aid us in finding how many units 
there are in this or that collection, but in its expression of the 
notion that something is first, and something next, in any type 
of orderly connection that we may be capable of knowing. It 
is the relational system of the numbers, taken in their whole- 
ness as one act, which here interests us. Those degrade 
arithmetical truth who conceive it merely as the means for 
estimating the cardinal numbers of collections of objects. The 
science of arithmetic is rather the abstract science of ordered 
collections. But all collections, if they have any rational 
meaning, are ordered and orderly. Hence, it is indeed worth 
while to know where it is that we first clearly learn what 
order means. 

Now it is not very hard to see, and to say, that I first recog- 
nize order as a form of unity in multiplicity when I learn, of 
myself, to put something first, and something next, and self- 
consciously to know that Ido so. That counting my fingers, 
or learning the names of the numbers, first sets me upon the 
way to attain this degree of self-consciousness, is true enough. 
But our question is what the concept of order, as the one 
transparent form of unity in manifoldness, directly implies. 
In following the analysis of the number-concept, we have been 
led to the point where this becomes an answerable question. 
Given, as “bare conjunction,” is what you will. The intellect, 
however, as Mr. Bradley well says, accepts only what it can 
make for itself. The first object that it can make for itself, 
however, is seen, as Mr. Bradley also says, to involve the 
seeming of an endless process. ‘The single purpose of the 
intellect, in any effort at self-comprehension, proves to be re- 
current precisely when it is most obvious and necessary. The 
infinite task looms up before us; and, in impatient weariness, 
we talk of “endless fission” breaking out everywhere, and are 
fain to give up the task; failing, however, to observe that just 
hereby we have already seen how the One must express itself, 
by the very self-movement of the intellect, as the Many. If 
we reflect afresh, however, we observe that what we have seen 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 537 


is due to the fact that the only systems of ideal objects which 
the intellect can define without taking account of “bare ex- 
ternal conjunctions,” are systems such that to whatever object 
we have presupposed, another object, expressing the same 
intellectual purpose, must correspond, as the neat object in 
question. ‘This fact, however, is due to the simple necessity 
of the reflective process in which we are involved. 

Our thought seeks its own work as its object. That is of 
the very essence of this effort to let the intellect express its 
self-movement. But making its own work its object, observ- 
ing afresh what it has done, is merely reinstating, as a fact 
yet to be known, the very process whose first result is observed 
when the intellect contemplates its own just accomplished 
deed. Reflection, then, implies, to be sure, what, in time, must 
appear to us as an endless process. We are not interested, 
however, in the mere feeling of weariness which this endless 
process (in consequence of still another “bare conjunction,” 
of a psychological nature) involves to one of us mortals when 
he first observes its necessity. What interests us is the posi- 
tive structure of the whole intellectual world. We have found 
that structure. It is the structure of a self-representative 
system of the type that we now have in mind. We frankly 
define all such systems as endless, so far as concerns the 
variety of their elements. But hereupon we indeed observe 
that, as self-representative, they are, in a perfectly transpar- 
ent way, self-ordered. The trivial illustration of the map 
within the country mapped, has been followed by the more 
exact illustrations of the self-representative character of the 
complete number-system when once its traditional structure 
is accepted as something given and present in totality. 
With these examples of self-ordered unity in the midst of 
infinite diversity we have returned to the question of the 
logical genesis of the very conception of order of which the num- 
ber-system is the first example. We have found the answer 
to our question in the assertion that since a self-representative 
system, of the type here in question, once assumed as an ideal 
object, determines its own order, and assigns to its constitu- 


538 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


ents their place as first, next, and so’on, and since only such 
self-representative systems result from the undisturbed expres- 
sion of the intellect’s internal meanings, therefore, an order 
that shall be transparent to the intellect, or that shall appear 
to it as its own deed, must be of the type exemplified in Dede- 
kind’s analysis. 

And so, as far as we have gone, the circle of our investi- 
gation is provisionally completed. The intellect has been 
studying itself, and, as the abstract and merely formal expres- 
sion of the orderly aspect of its own ideally conceived complete 
Self, and of any ideal system that it is to view as its own deed, 
the intellect finds precisely the Number System, — not, indeed, 
primarily the cardinal numbers, but the ordinal numbers. 
Their formal order of first, second, and, in general, of neat, is 
an image of the life of sustained, or, in the last analysis, of 
complete Reflection. Therefore, this order is the natural ex- 
pression of any recurrent process of thinking, and, above all, 
is due to the essential nature of the Self when viewed as a 
totality. Here, then, although we are still merely in the 
world of forms, we know something about the One and the 
Many. 


VI. On the Realm of Reality as a Self-Representative System 


We must now proceed to apply our previous considerations 
to the question of the constitution of any realm of Being, or 
of any universe. 

Suppose, in the first place, for a moment, that one is to con- 
ceive the universe in realistic terms, as a realm whose existence 
is supposed to be independent of the mere accident that any 
one does or does not know or conceive it. Suppose such a 
world to be once for all there. Then it is possible to show 
that this supposed universe has the character of a self-repre- 
sentative system, and that, too, even if you try to define its 
ultimate constitution as unknowable. 

For, in the first place, at the moment when you suppose 
that any fact exists, independently of whether you know it or 
not, it is obvious that you must in reality be making, or at 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 539 


least, by hypothesis, trying to make, this supposition. For 
unless the supposition is really attempted, there is no concep- 
tion of Fin question at all. But if the supposition is itself a 
fact, then, at that instant, when the supposition is made, the 
world of Being contains at least two facts, namely, F, and your 
supposition about F. Call the supposition f; and symbolize 
the universe by U. Then the least possible universe that can 
exist, at the moment when your hypothesis is made, will be 
such that V=F'+ f/f. 

Having proceeded so far, however, we cannot stop. As we 
saw in analyzing the realistic concept, Realism hopelessly 
endeavors to assert that, although what we now call F and f 
are alike real, they have no essential relations to each other. 
For our present purpose, however, we need only note that 
whether or no the relations of F and fare in the least essen- 
tial to the being of either For f, taken in themselves, still, 
when F' and f are once together and related, the relations are 
at least as real as their terms. Or, even if we confine our- 
selves strictly to our symbols, it remains obviously true that 
in order merely to report the supposed facts, we had to write, 
as the actual constitution of our universe, at least #+/f,. 
Now this universe, as thus symbolized, has not merely a two- 
fold, but a threefold constitution. It consists of F, and of f, 
and of their +, i.e. of the relation, as real as both of them, 
which we try to regard as non-essential to the Being of either 
of them, but which, for that very reason, has to be something 
wholly other than themselves, just as they are supposed to be 
different from each other. A system such as Herbart’s de- 
pends, indeed, upon trying to reduce this + to a Zufallige 
Ansicht, which is supposed, for that reason, to be no part of 
the realm of the “reals.” But, in answer to any such effort, we 
must stubbornly insist (and here in entire agreement with Mr. 
Bradley) upon declaring that either this Zuftillige Ansicht 
stands for a real fact, for something which ‘s, or else the whole 
hypothesis falls to the ground. For the essence of the hy- 
pothesis is that f rightly supposes F to exist, or, in other words, 
that the relation between F and f is one of genuine reference, 


540 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


assertion, or truth on the part of f, and of actual expression of 
the truth of this assertion by the very existence of F. There- 
fore, the relation between F and f is supposed to be a real fact. 
Since, by hypothesis, it is independent of the mere existence 
of F' and of f, or since, if you please, F, by hypothesis, might 
have been real without f, and f, if false, might have existed, 
as a mere opinion, in the absence of any F, the relation which 
we have expressed by + has its own place in Being, and is a 
third and, by the realistic hypothesis, a separate fact; so that 
now U contains at least three facts, all different from one 
another. 

Hereupon, of course, Mr. Bradley’s now familiar form of 
argument enters with its full rights. Unquestionably a world 
with three facts in it, —facts such that, by definition, either 
f or F might have existed wholly alone, and apart from 
the third fact, is a world where legitimate questions can be 
raised about the ties that bind the third fact to the other two. 
These ties are themselves facts. The + is linked to fand to 
F, and the “endless fission” unquestionably “breaks out.” 
The relation itself is seen entering into what seem new rela- 
tions. The reason why this fission breaks out is now more 
obvious to us. It lies not in the impotence of our intellect, 
impotent as our poor human wits no doubt are, but in the self- 
representative character of any relational system. In our 
realistic world the system is such that, to any object, there 
corresponds, as another object (belonging to the same system), 
the relation between this first object and the rest of the 
universe. Or, in general, if in the world there is an object, 
F, then there is that relation, R, whereby Fis linked to the 
rest of the world. But to R, as itself an object, there there- 
fore corresponds, at the very least, R', its own relation to the 
rest of the world; and the whole system F#+ R+ R' is as 
self-representative, and therefore as endless, as the number- 
system, and for precisely the same reason: viz., because it 
images, and, by hypothesis, expresses, in the abstract form of 
a supposed “independent Being,” the very process of the Self 
which undertakes to say, “ F exists.” 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 541 


Now, it would be wholly useless for a realist to attempt to 
escape from this consequence by persistently talking, as some 
realists do, about the defective nature of our poor human 
thought, and about the Unknowability of the Real. For the 
question is not as to what we do not know, but merely as to 
what we do know, about the supposed Independent Beings. 
And what we do know is, that by definition they form a Kette 
of the type now in question. They cannot escape from this 
consequence of their own definition by declaring their true 
Being to be unknowable. For if they attempt thus to escape, 
we shall very simply point out that, as unknowable, and as 
thus different from our definition of their Being, they, the 
realities, have now merely a twofold form of Being, namely, 
their Unknowable and their Knowable form. For, after all, 
we are supposed to know that they are, and that they appear 
to us in the form of a Kette. The problem of the “two 
natures” in one being, is, then, upon the hands of any realist 
who, like Mr. Spencer, thus divides his world; and this rela- 
tion, whether knowable or unknowable, between the Knowable 
and the Unknowable aspects, or regions of Reality, will become 
something different from either of the two; and the new sys- 
tem will once more be a Kette, precisely like its predecessor, 
and for the same reason. 

But, finally, one may attempt to escape from the entire 
situation by declaring that F, in the foregoing account, is, by 
hypothesis, a fact that does not need f, since fis, by supposi- 
tion, a conscious process, —an idea, —and F' is F' whether 
or no anybody supposes it to exist, or knows it in any way. 
“Suppose now,” a realist may say, “that there were no knowl- 
edge or ideas at all, but only the facts independent of all 
minds, and totally separate from one another. Then the real- 
istic world would not be an endless Kette.” Therefore it only 
becomes one, per accidens, when known. 

In reply, I should point out, that if the world that contains 
F contains also any other facts, any diversity whatever, Mr. 
Bradley’s repeated analysis of the “endless fission” will at 
once apply, and the world will become a self-representative 


542 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


system in the former sense. But F, if supposed to be wholly 
alone, and to be the only Being, and absolutely simple, is 
still not exempt from the universal self-diremption. When 
you think of it, —now, for instance, it is not alone. It is, by 
hypothesis, just now in the same world with the thoughts that 
define it. “But it is such that it need not be together with 
the thoughts that think it. It could exist independently.” 
Yes, but to exist alone, and to exist in company with another, are 
not the same thing. FF, then, has two aspects, or potencies: 
the aspect that enables it to exist independently of jf, or of 
any thought, and its power to exist in relation to, and along 
with f, and with the rest of the Kette determined by the pres- 
ence of f. F, the same F, has these two states of being, — its 
existence alone, and what Herbart called its Zusammen. Now 
just as the Zusammen is, by hypothesis, a fact, which nobody 
gets rid of by calling it a Zufallige Ansicht, so to be in Zusam- 
men is to be in a state very different from the “Being, alone 
and without a Second,” which F has before f comes. Call F, 
when taken as alone, F,, and F, when taken as in company, 
F,. Then the problem, How are F, and F, related? gives 
rise to the same sort of Kette with which Mr. Bradley has 
made us so familiar. 

I agree, then, wholly with Mr. Bradley, that every form of 
realistic Being involves such endless or self-representative 
constitution. And I agree with him that, in particular, real- 
istic Being breaks down upon the contradictions resulting from 
this constitution. Ido not, however, accept the view that to 
be self-representative is, as such, to be self-contradictory. 
But I hold that any world of self-representative Being must 
be of such nature as to partake of the constitution of a Self, 
either because it is a Self, or because it is dependent for its 
form upon the Self whose work or image it is. But the real- 
istic world is not able to accept this constitution. In case of 
the realistic type of Being, then, the endless fission proves 
to be an endless corruption and destruction of whatever had 
appeared to be the fact. Why? For the reason pointed out, 
but without any mention of the mere infinity of the relational 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 543 


process, in our third lecture. You want from a realist the 
facts, and all the facts, which are essential to his scheme. He 
names you the facts. You point out that since he inevitably 
names you a variety of facts, he must also admit that the con- 
nections or relations of these facts are real. And then you 
rightly add that the system in question must be self-repre- 
sentative and endless. But hereupon first appears the con- 
tradiction of Realism, viz., when you see that none of these 
endlessly numerous connections actually connect, because they 
are to be connections amongst beings that, by definition, are 
independent of knowledge, and therefore, as we saw, of one 
another, in such wise that their ties and links, if ever these 
ties seem to exist at all, must, upon examination, be found to 
be other real beings, as independent of the facts that they were 
to link as these, in their first essence, were of one another. 
The endlessly many elements of this world turn out, then, to 
be endlessly sundered. The Kette of the realist is a chain of 
hopelessly parted links. It is this aspect of the matter which 
gives their true cogency to the arguments of Mr. Bradley’s 
first book. We do not see, then, how the real that is in any 
final sense independent of knowledge can be either One or 
Many or both One and Many. And we do not see this because 
we can see and define nothing but what is linked with knowl- 
edge. But within knowledge itself we do, indeed, still find 
the self-representative system. 

So much for the realistic conception of Being. But if we 
turn to another conception of the nature of reality, namely, 
to our Third Conception of Being, then we once more find that 
this conception, too, involves a self-representative system of 
the type here in question. For this result has been already 
illustrated by the number-system, by the Gedankenwelt of 
Dedekind, and by the other mathematical instances cited; since 
all of these objects, when mathematically defined, appear pri- 
marily as beings of the third type of our list. Whether they 
possess any deeper form of Being, we have yet to see. In gen- 
eral, however, it is interesting to note that, in the proof of the 
mathematical possibility or validity of infinite systems given 


544 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


by Bolzano, in the passage of his Paradowien des Unendlichen, 
already cited, the typical instance chosen to exemplify the 
infinite is that system of truth, or of wahre Sétze, whose va- 
lidity follows from any primary Satz, or from any collection of 
such Sdtze. If the proposition A is true, it follows, as Bolzano 
points out, that the proposition which asserts that “A is true,” 
is also true. Call this proposition A’. Then the proposition 
“A! is true,” is also true; and so on endlessly. While Bolzano 
has not Dedekind’s exact conception of the nature of a Kette, 
and does not expressly use Dedekind’s positive definition of 
the infinite, his example of the series of true propositions, 
A, A', A'', ete., —each of which is different from its predeces- 
sor, since it makes its predecessor the subject of which it as- 
serts the predicate true, —is an example chosen wholly in the 
spirit of Dedekind’s later selection of the Gedankenwelt, and is 
an extremely simple instance of a self-representative system.? 

Realism, and the Third Conception of Being in our list, 
share alike, then, whatever difficulties may cluster about the 
conception of an infinitely self-representative system. What 
conception of Being can escape from this fate? Our own 
Fourth Conception? 

No, as we must now expressly point out, our own conception 
of what it is to be makes the Real a Kette of the present type. 


1 The parallel Kette of knowledge was observed by Spinoza, Ethics, 
P. II, Prop. 48. In the tract, De Intell. Emendat., however, Spinoza tries 
to explain away the significance of the endlessness of the resulting series. 
In the Hthics he says that whoever knows, knows that he knows, so that 
to an adequate idea, an adequate idea of this idea is necessarily joined by 
God and man. But in the Tractatus he asserts that the idea of the idea 
is not a necessary accompaniment of the adequate idea, but merely may 
follow upon the adequate idea if we choose. The contrast of expression 
in the two passages is remarkable ; and the question is of the most critical 
importance for the whole system of Spinoza. For if the idea, when ade- 
quate, is actually self-representative, the form of parallelism between 
extension and thought, asserted by Spinoza, finally breaks down, since, to 
avoid the troubles about the infinite, Spinoza expressly makes extended 
substance indivisible, so as to avoid making it a self-representative system. 
Furthermore, in any case, no precisely parallel process to the idea of the 
idea is to be found in extended substance. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 545 


For from our point of view, to be, or to be real, means to ex- 
press, in final and determinate form, the whole meaning and 
purpose of a system of ideas. But the fact that a given 
experience anywhere fulfils a particular purpose, implies that 
this purpose itself is, in some wise, a fact, and has its place in 
reality. But if this purpose is real, it must, by our hypothesis, 
be real as a fulfilment of a purpose not absolutely and simply 
identical with itself. And so any particular purpose of the 
Absolute is itself such as it is, because it fulfils a particular 
purpose other than itself. Hence, for us, the Absolute must 
be a self-representative ordered system, or Kette, of purposes 
fulfilled; and the ordered system in question must be infinite. 
I accept this consequence. The Absolute must have the form 
of a Self. This I have repeatedly maintained in former 
discussions. Despite that horror of the infinite which Mr. 
Bradley’s counsel would tend to keep alive in me, I still insist 
upon the necessity of the consequence. But I also insist upon 
several important aspects of the Kette in terms of which the 
Absolute is for me defined. And these aspects enable me to 
conceive the Absolute not only as infinite, but also as deter- 
minate, and not only as a form, but as a life. 

First, the implied internal variety is subject to, and is 
merely expressive of, the perfectly precise and determinate 
unity of the single plan whereby, at one stroke, the Absolute 
is defined, or rather defines itself, as a self-representative sys- 
tem. Secondly, because of the now so wearisomely analyzed 
character of a Kette of the type here in question, the self-pos- 
session or self-consciousness of the Absolute does not imply 
any simple identity of subject and object in the absolute Self. 
The map of England (the subjective aspect in our original 
illustration) is not identical with the whole of England. Yet, 
in the supposed Kette of maps, once taken as real, the whole 
of England is mapped within itself. Order primarily implies 
a first that is represented by the second, third, and later mem- 
bers of the order, but that, as first, is itself representative of 
nothing else. The Absolute, in my conception, has this first 
aspect, which is essential at once to the immediacy of its 

2N 


546 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


experience, and to the individuality which, in my agreement 
with Mr. Bradley, I attribute to the whole. But this first 
aspect of Being must needs be represented, within itself, by 
the second, third, and other aspects. In other words, a full 
possession of the fulfilment of purpose, in final and deter- 
minate form, involves, as the first element in the conception 
of Absolute Being, the fact that purpose is fulfilled. But this 
fact is experienced, is known, is present, is seen. Otherwise 
it is no fact, and the world has no Being. But the fact that 
this first fact is known, or experienced, is itself a fact, a second 
fact. This, too, is known; and so on without end. 

Thirdly, as I conceive, this whole series without end—a 
series which can equally well be expressed in terms of knowl- 
edge and in terms of purpose —is for the final view, and in 
the Absolute, no series of sundered successive states of tem- 
poral experience, but a totwm simul, a single, endlessly wealthy 
experience. And, fourthly, by the very nature of the type of 
self-representation here in question, no one fashion of self- 
representation is required as the only one in such a realm 
of Being. As the England of our illustration could be self- 
mapped, if at all, then by countless series of various maps, not 
found in the same part of England and not in the least incon- 
sistent with one another; and as the number-series, — that 
abstract image of the bare form of every self-representative 
system of the type here in question, — can be self-represented 
in endlessly various ways, — so, too, the self-representation of 
the Absolute permitted by our view is confined to no one 
necessary case; but is capable of embodiment in as many and 
various cases of self-representation, in as many different 
forms of selfhood, each individual, as the nature of the abso- 
lute plan involves. So that our view of the Selfhood of the 
Absolute, if possible at all, leaves room for various forms of 
individuality within the one Absolute; and we have a new 
opening for a possible Many in One, — an opening whose value 
we shall have to test in another way in our second series of 
lectures. 

Our own view, then, also implies that the Absolute is a 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 547 


Kette of the type now in question. But if one insists that 
such a doctrine is inevitably self-contradictory and vain, — 
where shall one still look for escape from this fate which 
besets, so far, all of the views as to the Real? 

Shall one turn to Mysticism? Mysticism, viewed in its 
philosophical aspect, as we have viewed it in these lectures, 
knows of a One that is to be in no sense really Many. Every 
Kette must, then, for the mystic, prove an illusion. But, 
unfortunately for the mystic, the inevitableness of an infinite 
process is nowhere more manifest than in the movement of his 
own thought while, weary of finitude, this thought indulges 
endlessly its sad luxury of a troubled contemplation of its 
own defects. For this thought, as finite, is, by hypothesis, 
nothing real at all. Yet it reveals, in its own negative way, 
the road to absolute peace and truth. This road, however, isa 
path in the essentially pathless wilderness. This revelation is 
explicitly an absolute darkness. While you think, you have not 
won the truth; for thought is illusion. But if you merely 
cease to think, you have thereby won nothing at all. The 
Absolute is really known as such by contrast with your illusion. 
It is so far just the Other. You seek it in thought, and find 
it not. But perhaps the ineffable experience comes. Jch bin 
Gott geworden, says the Schwester Katrei of the tract usually 
(and, as the critics now tell us, wrongly) attributed to 
Meister Eckhart. This experience, whenever it comes, — 
why is it said to be an experience of Being? Viewed 
from without, it seems a mere transient state of feeling in 
somebody’s mind. But no; it shall be no mere feeling, for it 
reveals all that thought had ever sought. The peace that 
passeth understanding fulfils all the needs of understanding. 
Hence, in this peace thought finds itself satisfied, and ceases. 
Therefore is Being here attained. Yet if this be the mystical 
insight, —what has been gained? Thought the deceiver, 
thought the illusory, bears witness to its own refutation and 
to its own fulfilment in the peace of the Absolute; for only 
when this evidence is given of the final satisfaction of all 
thought’s demands is the truth known. And thus the sole 


548 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


testimony that Being is what the mystic declares it to be, is a 
witness borne by this self-detected and hopeless liar, thought, 
— whose words are the speech of one who exists not at all, but 
only falsely pretends to exist, and whose ideas are merely lis. 
This liar, at the moment of the mystical vision, declares that 
he rests content ; and therefore we know, forsooth, that we 
have come upon “that which is,” and have caught the “deep - 
pulsations of the world.” We accept, then, the last testimony 
of the wholly hardened and hopeless deceiver; and this dying 
word of false thought is our sole proof of the Absolute Truth. 

Can this be really the mystic’s ultimate wisdom? No; the 
unconscious silence in which he ought forever to dwell, once 
broken by his first utterance when he teaches his doctrine, 
leads him to endless speech, — but to speech all of the same 
infinitely self-denying kind. The ineffable is ineffable. 
Therefore it is indeed “hard to frame, in matter-moulded 
forms of speech,” the meaning of what has been won at the 
instant of the mystical vision. This difficult task is, in fact, 
a self-representative and infinite task. Jor it is the task of 
endless denial even of every previous act of denial. The only 
word as to the Absolute must be Neti, Neti, —It is not so, not 
so. But this only word needs endless repetition in new forms. 
The Absolute, if you will, was not well reported when we just 
gave, as the reason for the truth of the mystical insight, the 
fact that thought found itself at rest in the presence of God. 
For the thought really finds not itself, at all. It finds, as the 
truth, only its own Other. But in what way does it find its 
Other as the truth? Answer, By seeing, in the endless pro- 
cess of its own failure, the necessity of its own defeat, — the 
need of Another. So then—as we afresh observe — thought 
does know itself as a failure. It does represent to itself its 
own defeat. It does, then, learn, by a dialectic process, to 
comprehend its own lying nature. But herewith we return to 
our starting-point, and can only continue the same process 
without end. 

In brief, mysticism turns upon a recognition of the failure 
of all thinking to grasp Reality. But this recognition is itself 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 549 


thought’s own work. Thought is, so far, a system which 
represents to itself its own nature, —as a nature doomed to 
failure. If you try to express this recognition, however, not 
as thought’s work, but as a direct revelation, in a merely im- 
mediate experience, of a final fact, you at once rediscover that 
this fact is final only if it is known, as in contrast to the fail- 
ure of thought. The failure of thought must, therefore, once 
more be known to thought. But such self-knowledge on 
thought’s part can only be won through the ineffable experi- 
ence; and so you proceed back and forth without end. The 
reason for this particular endless chain is that mysticism turns 
upon a process whereby something, namely, thought, is to 
represent to itself its own negation and defeat. The conse- 
quence is a self-representative system of failure, in which 
every new attempt, based upon the failure of the former at- 
tempts to win the truth, itself involves the process of tran- 
scending the former failure by means of the very principle 
whose failure is to be observed. 

And now, at last, let us ask, Does Mr. Bradley’s Absolute 
escape the common fate of all of our conceptions of Being? 
Is Mr. Bradley’s Absolute alone exempt from being a self- 
representative system of the type here in question? 

I am obliged to answer this question in the negative. Mr. 
Bradley’s account of the Absolute often comes near to the use 
of mystical formulations, but Mr. Bradley is of course no 
mystic; and nobody knows better than he the self-contradictions 
inherent in the effort to view the real as a simple unity, with- 
out real internal multiplicity. As we have seen, Mr. Brad- 
ley’s Absolute is One, and yet does possess, as its own, all the 
manifoldness of the world of Appearance. The central diffi- 
culty of metaphysics, for Mr. Bradley, lies in the fact that we 
do not know how, in the Absolute, the One and the Many are 
reconciled. But that they both are in the Real is certain. 
Reality is explicitly called by Mr. Bradley a System. “We 
insist that all Reality must keep a certain character. The 
whole of its contents must be experience; they must come 
together into one system, and this unity itself must be expe. 


550 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


rience. It must include and must harmonize every possible 
fragment of appearance” (op. cit., p. 548). “Reality is one 
experience, self-pervading, and superior to mere relations” 
(p. 552). Now that Reality, while a “system,” is to be viewed 
as experience, this assertion is due to Mr. Bradley’s definition 
of what itis to be real. “I mean that to be real is to be indis- 
solubly one with sentience. It is to be something which 
comes as a feature and aspect within one whole of feeling, 
something which, except as an integral aspect of such sen- 
tience, has no meaning at all” (p. 146). “You cannot find 
fact unless in unity with sentience, and one cannot in the end 
be divided from the other, either actually or in idea.” 

Now this account of the Absolute must of course be taken 
literally. It is not a speech about an Unknowable. It is, 
indeed, not an effort to tell how the unity is accomplished in 
detail. But it is a general, and by hypothesis a true account, 
of what the final unity must accomplish. We have therefore 
a right to observe that Mr. Bradley’s Absolute, however much 
above our poor relational way of thinking its unity may be, 
really has two aspects that, although inseparable, are still 
distinguishable. The varieties of the world are somehow 
“absorbed,” or “rearranged,” in the unity of the Absolute 
Experience. This is oneaspect. But the other aspect is that, 
since this absorption itself is real, —is a fact, —and since to 
be real is to be one with sentience, the fact that the absorption 
occurs, that the One and the Many are harmonized, and that the 
Absolute is what it is, is also a fact presented within the sentient 
experience of the Absolute. It is not, then, that the rivers of 
Appearance merely flow into the silent sea of Reality, and are 
there lost. No; this sentient Absolute, by hypothesis, feels, 
experiences, is aware, that it thus absorbs its differences. In 
general, whatever the Absolute is, its experience must make 
manifest to itself. For either this is true, or else Mr. Brad- 
ley’s definition of| Reality is meaningless. Let A be any char- 
acter of the Absolute. Then the fact that A is a character of 
the Absolute, as such, and not of the mere appearances, is also 
a genuine fact. As such, it is a fact experienced. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 551 


The Absolute therefore must not merely be A, but experience 
itself, as possessing the character of A. It is, for instance, 
“above relations.” If this is a fact, and if this statement is 
true of the Absolute, then the Absolute must experience that it 
is above relations. For Mr. Bradley’s definition of Reality re- 
quires this consequence. The Absolute of Mr. Bradley must 
not, like the mystical Absolute, merely ignore the relations as 
illusion. It must experience their “transformation ” as a fact, 
—and as its own fact. Or, again, the Absolute is that in 
which thought has been “taken up” and “transformed,” so 
that it is no longer “mere thought.” Well, this too is to be 
a fact. In consequence of Mr. Bradley’s definition of what he 
means by the word “real,” this fact must take its place 
amongst the totality of fact that is in its wholeness experi- 
enced. The Absolute, then, experiences itself as the absorber 
and transmuter of thought. Or, yet again, the Absolute is so 
much above “personality” that Mr. Bradley (p. 532) finds 
“intellectually dishonest” “most of those” who insist upon 
regarding the Absolute as personal. Well, this transcendence 
of personality is a fact. But “Reality must be one experi- 
ence; and to doubt this conclusion is impossible.” “Show 
me your idea of an Other, not a part of experience, and I will 
show you at once that it is, throughout and wholly, nothing 
else at all.” Hence, the fact that the Absolute transcends 
personality is a fact that the Absolute itself experiences as its 
own fact, and is “nothing else at all” except such a fact. 

As we have before learned, the category of the Self is far too 
base, in Mr. Bradley’s opinion, to be Reality, and must be 
mere appearance. The Absolute, then, is above the Self, and 
above any form of mere selfhood. The fact that it is thus 
above selfhood is something “not other than experience”; but 
is wholly experience, and is the Absolute Experience itself. 
In fine, then, the Absolute, in Mr. Bradley’s view, knows 
itself so well, — experiences so fully its own nature, — that it 
sees itself to be no Self, but to be a self-absorber, “self-per- 
vading” to be sure (p. 552), and “self-existent,”? but aware 


1 ‘¢ Our standard is Reality in the form of self-existence”’ (p. 375). 


552 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


of itself, in the end, as something in which there is no real 
Self to be aware of. Or, in other words, the Absolute is 
really aware of itself as being not Reality, but Appearance, 
just in so far as it isa Self. Meanwhile, of course, this Abso- 
lute experiences, also, the fact that it is an “individual”; that 
it is a “system”; that it “holds all content in an individual 
experience”; that “no feeling or thought of any kind can fall 
outside its limits” (p. 147); that it “stands above and not 
below its internal distinctions” (p. 533); that “it is not the 
indifference, but the concrete identity of all extremes.” For 
all these statements are said by Mr. Bradley, in various places, 
to be accounts of what the Absolute really is. But if the 
Absolute is all these things, it can be so only in case it expe- 
riences itself as the possessor of these characters. Yet all the 
concrete self-possession of the Absolute remains something 
above Self; and apparently the Absolute thus knows itself to 
be, as a Self, quite out of its own sight! 

Now in vain does one endeavor to assert all this, and yet to 
add that we know not how, in detail, all this can be true of 
the Absolute. We know, at all events, that apart from what 
is flatly self-contradictory in the foregoing expressions, Mr. 
Bradley’s Absolute is a self-representative system, which 
views itself as the possessor of what, through all the unity, 
_ remains still in one aspect another than itself, namely, the 
whole world of Appearance. And we know, therefore, that 
the Absolute, despite all Mr. Bradley’s objections to the Self, 
escapes from selfhood and from all that selfhood implies, or even 
transcends selfhood, only by remaining to the end a Self. In 
other words, it really escapes from selfhood in no genuine 
fashion whatever. For it can escape from selfhood only by 
experiencing, as its own, this, its own escape. This conse- 
quence is clear. Whatever is in the Absolute is experienced 
doubly. Namely, what is there is experienced, and that this 
content is experienced by the Absolute itself, — this final fact 
is also experienced. Hence, the whole Absolute must be infi- 
nite in precisely Dedekind’s positive sense of the term. Mr. 
Bradley’s Absolute is a Kette in the same sense as every other 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 553 


fundamental metaphysical conception. For it is a self-expe- 
riencing and, therefore, self-representative system. 

I conclude, then, so far, that by no device can we avoid 
conceiving the realm of Being as infinite in precisely the posi- 
tive sense, now so fully illustrated. The Universe, as Sub- 
ject-Object, contains a complete and perfect image, or view of 
itself. Hence it is, in structure, at once One, as a single sys- 
tem, and also an endless Kette. Its form is that of a Self. 
To observe this fact is simply to reflect upon the most ele- 
mentary and fundamental implications of the concept of Being. 
The Logic of Being has, as a central theorem, the assertion, 
Whatever is, is a part of a self-imaged system, of the type herein 
discussed. This truth is common property for all, whether 
realists or idealists, whether sceptics or dogmatists. And 
hence our trivial illustration of the ideally perfect map of 
England within England, turns out to be, after all, a type and 
image of the universal constitution of things. Iam obliged to 
regard this result as of the greatest weight for any metaphysi- 
cal enterprise.’ No philosophy that wholly ignores this ele- 


1] was years ago much struck by the remarkable proof, in the first 
volume of Schroeder’s Algebra der Logik, of the purely formal proposition 
that no simply constituted Universe of Discourse could be defined, in 
terms of the Algebra of Logic, as the absolute whole of Being, without an 
immediately stateable self-contradiction, resulting from the mere definition 
of the symbols used in that Algebra. See Schroeder, Vol. I, p. 246. 
The metaphysical interest of this purely symbolic result is not mentioned 
by Schroeder himself. The proof given by him turns, however, upon 
showing that if you regard provisionally, as the ‘‘ whole of the universe,”’ 
or as ‘‘all that is,’? any simply defined universe of classes of objects, you 
are confronted by contradictions as soon as you reflect that the ‘‘ totality 
of what is’’ also contains a realm of secondary objects that you may 
define by reflecting upon the classes contained in the first universe, and 
by classifying these classes themselves from new points of view. ‘This 
realm of secondary objects, however, does not consistently belong to the 
primary universe that in a purely formal way you first defined. The true 
totality of Being can therefore only be defined by an endless process, or 
is an endless reflective system. This proof of Schroeder’s first brought 
home to me the fact that the necessity for defining reality in self-reflecting 
or endless terms is not dependent upon any one metaphysical interpreta: 


554 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


mentary fact can be called rational. And hereby we have 
indeed found a sense in which the “endless fission ” of Mr. 
Bradley’s analysis expresses not mere Appearance but Being. 
Here is a law not only of Thought but also of Reality. Here 
is the true union of the One and the Many. Here is a multi- 
plicity that is not “absorbed” or “transmuted,” but retained 
by the Absolute. And it is a multiplicity of Individual 
facts that are still One in the Absolute. 


Section IV. Inrinity, DETERMINATENESS, AND INDIVIDU- 
ALITY 


Despite all the foregoing considerations, however, we have 
still to face the objection that, even if these constructions be 
regarded as self-evident products of Thought, they, neverthe- 
less, simply cannot be genuinely true of the final nature of 
Reality and must somehow be fallacious. For, from Mr. 
Bradley’s side, it would be maintained that however inevitable 
the seeming of these endless processes, they become self-con- 
tradictory precisely when you take them to be real and yet 
endless. For who knows not the Aristotelian arguments, so 
often repeated in later thought, against the actual Infinite? 
Is not the complete Infinite the very type of a logical “ mon- 
ster?” Is not the very conception a self-contradiction? If 
thought, then, has to conceive Reality as infinite, so much the 
worse, one may say, for thought. The Real, whatever its ap- 
pearance, cannot in itself be endless. 


I. The Objections to the Actually Infinite 


It is necessary to consider such arguments by themselves, 
for the moment, and apart from the foregoing considerations. 
Let us, then, briefly develope some of these often repeated 
reasons on account.of which so many assert that Reality cannot 
be an infinite system at all. 


tion of the world, whether realistic or idealistic, but is the consequence 
of a purely abstract account of the formal Logic of the concept of Reality 
in any of its forms. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 555 


One may begin with the case as Aristotle first stated it, 
in the Third Book of the Physics, and elsewhere. There can, 
indeed, exist a Reality that permits us, if we choose to number 
its parts, to distinguish within it what we call elements, in 
such wise that we can never end the process of numbering 
them. So space is for us capable of infinite, that is, of indefi- 
nite division, if you choose to try to take it to pieces. But 
such divisibility is a mere possibility. Space, if real, is not 
endlessly divided. It is only in potentia divisible so far as you 
please to conceive its parts. The limitless exists, therefore, 
only in potentia; relrerar ov Suvdper civar TO dzetpov. For were 
space actually either made up of endless parts, or in such wise 
real as to be infinitely great, there would result the contradic- 
tion of an actually infinite number as the number of the parts 
of a real collection. But a number actually infinite is contra- 
dictory; for it then could not be counted; it would have no 
determinate size; it would possess no totality; and it would 
so be formless and meaningless. Again, were any one portion 
of the world’s material substance infinite, how could room be 
left for the other portions? Were the whole infinite, how 
could it be a whole at all? For any whole of reality is limited 
by its own form, and by the fact that, as an actual whole, it 
is perfectly determinate. The difficulty as to the infinite must 
be solved, then, by saying that what is real forms a definite 
and, for that reason, a finite totality; while within this totality 
there may be aspects which our thought discovers to be, in 
this or that respect, inexhaustible through any process of 
counting that follows some abstractly possible line of our own 
subjective distinctions or syntheses. We can say, of such 
aspects of the world, that you may go on as long as you please, © 
in counting their special type of conceived complexities, with- 
out ever reaching the end. But this endlessness is potential 
only, and never actual. 

These well-known Aristotelian considerations have formed 
the basis of every argument against the actual infinite in later 
thought. The special point of attack has, however, often 

shifted. In general, as the later arguments have repeatedly 


556 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


urged (quite in Aristotle’s spirit), the infinitely complex, if 
real, must be knowable only through some finished synthesis 
of knowledge. But a finished synthesis is inconsistent (so one 
affirms) with the endlessness of the series of facts to be syn- 
thesized; and hence an infinite collection, if it existed, would 
be unknowable. On the other hand, an infinite collection, if 
real apart from knowledge, could be conceived to be altered by 
depriving it of some, or of a considerable fraction, of its con- 
stituent elements. The collection thus reduced (so one has 
often argued) would be at once finite (since it would have lost 
some of its members) and infinite, since no finite number would 
be equal to exhausting the remaining portion. Hence the 
reduced collection and, therefore, the original collection must 
be of a contradictory nature, and so impossible. In a varia- 
tion of this argument often used, one employs, as an image, 
some such instance as an inextensible rod, one end of which 
shall be in my hands, while I shall be supposed to believe that 
the rod, which stretches out of my sight into the heavens, is 
infinitely long, as well as quite incapable of being anywhere 
stretched. Suppose the rod hereupon drawn, or, if you please, 
anyway mysteriously moved, a foot towards me at thisend. If 
I am to believe in the infinity and inextensibility of the rod, I 
shall believe that the whole of the rod, and every part thereof, 
is now a foot nearer to me than before. But in that case the 
furthest portion of the rod must also be a foot nearer than 
before, or must have been “drawn in out of the infinite,” as 
one writer has stated the case.* It can therefore no longer be 
an infinite rod. Hence, it was not actually infinite before the 
drawing in of this end. 

All such arguments insist, either upon the supposed fact 


1 Constantin Gutberlet, Zeitschrift fiir Philosophie (Ulrici-Falcken- 
berg), Bd. 92, Hft. II, p. 199. The wording of the example is a little 
different in the text cited. The force of the argument no longer exists for 
one who approaches the concept of the Infinite through that of the Kette. 
Cantor observes as much in his answer to Gutberlet in the same journal. 
The puzzle turns upon falsely identifying the properties of finite and 
infinite quantities. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 50T 


that our own conception of an infinite series is necessarily a 
conception of an indefinite and, therefore, of an essentially 
incomplete sequence, or else upon the assertion that an infinite 
collection, if viewed as real, would prove to be in itself of a 
quantitatively indefinite and changeable character. In the 
one case, the argument continues by showing that an indefinite 
and incomplete sequence is incapable of being taken to be a 
finished reality beyond our thought. In the other case, one 
insists that the quantitatively indefinite collection, if viewed 
as real, would stand in conflict with the very notion of reality, 
since the real is, as such, the determinate. ‘The essence of 
number,” says Mr. Bosanquet,! “is to construct a finite whole 
out of homogeneous units.” “An infinite number would be a 
number which is no particular number; for every particular 
number is finite.” “An infinite series? . . . is not anything 
which we can represent in the form of number, and therefore 
cannot be, gud infinite series, a fact in our world. ... Our 
constructive judgment requires parts and a whole to give it 
meaning. Parts unrelated to any whole cannot be judged real 
by our thought. Their significance is gone and they are parts 
of nothing.” 

More detailed, in the application of the general charge of 
indefiniteness thus made against the conception of the infinite 
collections, are the often used arguments such as exemplify 
how, if infinite collections are possible at all, one infinite must 
be greater than another, while yet, as infinite and determinate, 
all the boundless collections must (so one supposes) be equal. 
Or, again, in a similar spirit, one has pointed out that, by 
virtue of the properties which we have deliberately attrib- 
uted to the Ketten of the foregoing discussion, two infinite 
collections, if they existed, would be, in various senses of the 
term equal, at once equal and unequal to each other, or would 


1 Logic, I, p. 175. We have already seen how imperfect this view of 
the number-series is, since the number-series, as a product of thought, is 
primarily ordinal, and its essence is to express, very abstractly, the 
orderly development of a reflective purpose. 

2 Loc. cit., p. 177. 


558 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


contradict the axiom as to the whole and the part.! These 
arguments can be illustrated by an endless list of examples, 
drawn from the realm of discrete collections of objects, as well 
as from cases where limitless extended lines, surfaces, or 
volumes are in question, and from cases where limitless divisi- 
bility is to be exemplified. The variety of the examples, how- 
ever, need not confuse one as to the main issue. What is 
brought out, in every case, is that the infinite collections or 
multitudes, if real at all, must be in paradoxical contrast to 
all finite multitudes, and must also be in such contrast as to 
seem, at first sight, either quite indeterminate or else hope- 
lessly incomplete, and, in either case, incapable of reality. 
Upon a somewhat different basis rest a series of arguments 
which have more novelty, just because they are due to the ex- 
perience of the modern exact sciences. In the seventeenth cen- 
tury one of the greatest methodical advances ever made in the 
history of descriptive science occurred, when the so-called 
Infinitesimal Calculus was invented. The Newtonian name, 
Fluxions, used for the objects to whose calculation the new 
science was devoted, indicated better than much of the more 
recent terminology, that one principal purpose of this advance 
in method, was to enable mathematical exactness to be used in 
the description of continuously varying quantities. But the 
generalization which was made when the Calculus appeared had 
been the outcome of a long series of studies of quantity, both 
temporal and spatial. And the Calculus brought under one 
method of treatment, not only the problems about continuous 
processes of actual change, such as motions, or other continu- 
ous physical alterations, but also problems regarding the prop- 
erties, the relations, the lengths, and the areas of curves, and 


1 Couturat, in his dialectical discussion between the “ finitist’ and the 
‘* infinitist,” in L’Infini Mathematique, p. 443 sqq., gives full room to a 
statement of these arguments of his opponents. Our account of the 
Ketten has discounted them in advance. Dedekind’s Definition of the 
Infinite deliberately makes naught of them. If infinite multitudes cor- 
responding to his definition can be proved real, these paradoxes will be 
simply obvious properties of such multitudes. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 559 


regarding the corresponding features of geometrical surfaces 
and solids. For, in all these objects alike, either continuous 
alterations, or else characters that, although matters of spatial 
coexistence, may be ideally expressed in terms of such con- 
tinuous alterations, fell within the range of the methods of the 
Calculus. 

The new method, however, seemed to involve, at first, 
the conception both of “infinitely small” quantities, and 
of devices whereby an “infinite number” of such quantities 
could be summed together, or otherwise submitted to compu- 
tation. The science of the continuous, in the realm of geo- 
metrical forms, as well as in the realm of physical changes, 
thus seemed to depend upon the conception both of the infi- 
nitely small and of the infinitely great; and the successful 
application of the results of such science in the realm of 
physics, was sometimes used as a proof that nature contains 
actually infinite and actually infinitesimal collections or magni- 
tudes. But the early methods of the Infinitesimal Calculus 
were not free from inexactness, and led, upon occasion, to 
actually false conclusions. Hence, the paradoxes apparently 
involved in the logical bases of the science attracted more and 
more critical attention, as time went on; and, as a conse- 
quence, within the present century, the whole method of the 
Calculus has been repeatedly and carefully revised, — with 
the result, to be sure, that the conceptions of the actually 
infinite, in the sense here in question, and the actually infini- 
tesimal (in the older sense of the term), have been banished 
from the principal modern text-books of both the Differential 
and the Integral Calculus. The terms, “Infinite” and “ Infin- 
itesimal,” have been, indeed, very generally retained in such 
text-books for the sake of conciseness of expression; but with 
a definition that wholly avoids all the problems which our fore- 
going discussion has raised. ‘The infinite and the infinitesi- 
mal of the Calculus can, therefore, no longer be cited in favor 
of a theory of the “actually Infinite.” 

In the world of varying quantities, namely, it often hap- 
pens that, by the terms of definition of a given problem, 


560 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


you have upon your hands a varying quantity (call it X) 
which, consistently with these terms, you are able to make, 
or to assume, as large as you please. In such cases, if 
some one else is supposed to have predesignated, as the 
value of X, any definite magnitude that he pleases, say X,, 
then you are at liberty, under the conditions of the prob- 
lem, to assume the value of X as larger still, z.e. as greater 
than any such previously assigned definite value X,. Now, 
whenever the variable X has this character, in a given 
problem, then, according to the fashion of speech used in 
the Calculus, you may define X either simply as infinite, or 
as capable of being increased to infinity; and in the Calculus 
you are indeed often enough interested in learning what hap- 
pens to some quantity whose value depends upon X, when X 
thus increases without limit, or, as they briefly say, becomes 
infinite. But in all such cases the term infinite, as used in the 
modern text-books of the Calculus, is, by definition, simply 
an abbreviation for the whole conception just defined. The 
variable X need not even be, at any moment, actually at all 
large in order to be, in this sense, infinite. It only so varies 
that, consistently with the conditions of the problem, it can be 
made larger than a predesignated value, whatever that value 
may be. And the Calculus is simply often interested in com- 
puting the consequences of such a manner of variation on the 
part of X. 

Now, unquestionably a quantity that is called infinite in 
this sense is not the actually infinite against which Aristotle 
argued. It is merely the limitlessly increasing variable or 
the potentially infinite magnitude which he willingly admitted 
as a valid conception. A parallel definition of the infinitesi- 
mal is even more frequently employed in the modern text-books 
of the Calculus, just because the infinitesimal is mentioned 
more frequently than the infinite. In this sense, a variable 
magnitude is infinitesimal merely when it can be made and kept 
as small as we will, consistently with the conditions of the prob- 
lem in which it appears. Thus neither the infinite nor the 
infinitesimal of the modern treatment of the Calculus has any 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 561 


fixed character, as a finished or finally given quantity, nor any 
character which could be defined as a determinately real some- 
what, apart from our defining thought, and apart from the con- 
ditions of a given problem. ‘The Calculus is deeply interested 
in computing results of such variation without limit; but as a 
branch of mathematics, it is, in fact, not at all directly inter- 
ested in our present problem about the actually infinite.} 

Now, this result of the whole experience of the students of 
the Calculus with the logic of their own science, — this out- 
come of the modern critical restudy of the bases of the science 
of the continuously variable quantities, —tends of itself to 
indicate (as one may say, and as objectors to the actually In- 
finite have often said) that the conception of the actually 
Infinite, formerly confounded with the conceptions lying at 
the bases of the Calculus, is, as a fact, not only in this region, 
but everywhere, scientifically superfluous; while the concep- 
tion of the Infinite merely in potentia, originally defended by 
Aristotle, thus triumphs in the very realm where, for a time, 
its rival seemed to have found a firm foothold.? 

Yet it has indeed to be observed that, from the mathematical 
point of view, not the questions of the Calculus, but certain 
decidedly special problems of the Theory of Numbers, and 
of the modern Theory of Functions, have given the mathe- 
matical basis for these newer efforts towards an exact and 
positive definition of the Infinite. As a fact, in our fore- 
going statement of the merely prima facie case for the recent 
definition of the positively Infinite, we have deliberately re- 


1 All this is not only admitted, but insisted upon by Cantor himself, as 
a preliminary to his own discussion of das Higentlich- Unendliche, which 
he sharply distinguishes from such Uneigentlicher concept of the Infinite 
as has to be used in the Calculus. See his separately published Grund- 
ziige einer allgemeinen Mannigfaltigkeitslehre (Leipzig, 1883), p. 1, sqq. 
Compare the statement in Professor Franz Meyer’s lecture, before cited, 
to the same effect. 

2 This line of argument against the Infinite has often been used, — most 
recently perhaps by F. Evellin, in his two articles directed against the 
metaphysical use of Cantor’s theories, in the Revue Philosophique for 
February and November, 1898. 

20 


562 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


frained from making any mention of the special problems 
about continuity, or of the conceptions of the Calculus. And 
it has also been noted that Cantor, who has done so much to 
make specific the positive concept of das Higentlich-Unendliche, 
and who has also given us one of the very first of the exact 
definitions of continuous quantity ever discovered, — him- 
self rejects the actually infinitesimal quantities as quite 
impossible; and does so quite as vigorously as he accepts 
and defends the actually infinite quantities; so that he fully 
agrees that the infinitesimal must remain where the Calcu- 
lus leaves it, namely, simply the variable small at will.’ It 
must therefore be distinctly understood that, in the discus- 
sion of the reality of the infinite quantities and multitudes, 
appeal need no longer be made to the conceptions of quantity 
peculiar to the Calculus; while, in general, the majority of 
those concerned in this inquiry expressly admit that the logic 
of the Calculus is quite independent of the present issue, and 
that the infinite of the Calculus is simply the variable large at 
will, which therefore need not be at any moment, even notably 
large at all.? 

And now, finally, there is also urged against any concepticn 
of the actually Infinite the well-known consideration that the 
conception of such infinity involves an empty and worthless 
repetition of the same, over and over, — a mere “ counting when 
there is nothing to count,” or, in the realm of explicit reflec- 
tion, a vain observation that I am J, and that I am J, again, 
even in saying that J am J, —or an equally inane insistence 


1 See Cantor’s statement in the Zeitschr f. Philos., Bd. 88, p. 280; 
and in the same journal, Bd. 91, p. 112, in a passage there quoted from a 
letter addressed by Cantor to Weierstrass. I am unable to understand 
how Mr. Charles Peirce, in his paper in the Monist (1892, p. 537 of Vol. 
2) is led to attribute to Cantor his own opinion as to the infinitesimals. 

2 Mr. Charles Peirce, as I understand his statements in the Monist (loc. 
cit.), appears to stand almost alone amongst recent mathematical logicians 
outside of Italy, in still regarding the Calculus as properly to be founded 
upon the conception of the actually infinite and infinitesimal. In Italy, 


Veronese has used in his Geometry the concept of the actually infini- 
tesimal. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 563 


that I know, and know that I know, and so on. The non- 
mathematical often dislike numbers, especially the large ones, 
and therefore easily make light of a wisdom that seems only 
to count, in monotonous inefficacy. Even the more reflective 
thinkers often believe, with Spinoza, that knowing that I know 
can imply nothing essentially new, at all events after the 
reflection has been two or three times repeated. The Hindoo 
imagination, with its love for large numbers, often strikes the 
_ Western mind as childish. And in all such cases, since mere 
size, as such, rightly seems unworthy of the admiration that 
it has excited in untrained minds, it has appeared to many to 
be the more rational thing to say that wisdom involves rather 
Hegel’s Riickkehr aus der wnendlichen Flucht than any accept- 
ance of the notion that infinite magnitudes or multitudes can 
be real. 


II. The Infinite as One Aspect only of Being 


All the foregoing objections to the conception of the actually 
infinite rest, in large measure, upon a true and perfectly rele- 
vant principle. As a fact, what is real is ipso facto deter- 
minate and individual. It is this for the reasons pointed out 
in the closing lectures of the present series. It is this because 
it is such that No Other can take its place. The Real is the 
final, the determinate, the totality. And now, not only is this 
principle valid, but it is indeed supreme in every metaphysical 
inquiry. And therefore we shall, to be sure, find it true that 
in case, despite all the foregoing highly important objections, 
we succeed in reconciling infinity with determinateness, we 
shall still be unable to assert that the Reality is anything 
merely infinite. For infinity, as such, is at best a character, — 
a feature having the value of an universal. If the Absolute 
is in any sense an infinite system, it is certainly also an unique 
and individual system; and its uniqueness involves something 
very clearly distinguishable from its mere infinity. The Abso- 
lute is, in its determinate Reality, certainly exclusive of an 
infinity of mere possibilities. In this respect I shall here 
simply repeat the position taken in the discussion supple- 


564 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


mentary to the book called the Conception of God.’ It is, 
then, perfectly true, for me, as for the opponents of the actual 
Infinite, that much must be viewed as, in the abstract, “ pos- 
sible,” which is nowhere determinately presented in any final 
experience of the fulfilment of truth. The special illustration 
used, in my former book, to exemplify this fact, namely, the 
illustration of the points on the continuous line, — points 
which are “possible” in an infinitely infinite collection of 
ways, but which, however presented, cannot exhaustively con- 
stitute the determinate continuity of the line, — this, I say, is 
an illustration involving other problems besides those of the 
actual Infinite. The existence of the line, taken as a geometri- 
cal fact, contains more than the possible multitudes of multi- 
tudes of the points on the line can ever express. And this 
more includes, also, a something more determinate than the mul- 
titudes of the points can conceivably present. Hence, as I 
argued in my former book, and as I still deliberately maintain, 
the Absolute cannot experience the nature of the line by merely 
exhausting any infinitude of the points. But to this illustra- 
tion I can here devote no further space, since the discussion 
of continuity, and especially of the geometrical continuum, 
lies outside of the scope of this paper. It is quite consistent, 
however, to hold, as I do, that while the Absolute indeed, 
by reason of its determinateness, excludes and must exclude 
infinitely infinite “bare possibilities,” known to mere thought, 
from presentation in any individual way, except as ideas of 
excluded objects, the Absolute still finds present, in the indi- 
vidual whole of its Selfhood, an actually infinite, because self- 
representative, system of experienced fact. The points on the 
line, then, if my former illustration is indeed well chosen, are 
not exhaustively presented, as constituting the whole line, in 
any experience, whatever, Absolute or relative. But this, as 
we now have to see, is not because the actually Infinite is, to 
the Absolute, something unrepresented, but because the de- 
terminate geometrical continuity of the individual line is 
something more, and more determinate, than any infinitude of 
1 New York, 1897, p. 194, sqq. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 565 


points can express. And this individuality of the line I can 
and do express by saying that, even to a final view, the essence 
of the individual continuity of any one line involves the “bare 
possibility ” of systems of ideal points over and above any 
that are found present in this final experience of the line. 
Even if the Absolute, then, observes infinitely infinite collec- 
tions of points, it sees that the individual continuity of the 
line is more than they present. This I still assert. 

In general, as we shall see, by virtue of what here follows, 
a fair account of the completeness of the Absolute must be just 
to two aspects. They are the ultimate aspects of Reality. 
Their union constitutes, once more, the world-knot. And the 
reason of their union is the one made explicit in our seventh 
Lecture. The Real is determinate and individual; and the 
Real is expressive of all that universal ideas, taken in their 
wholeness, actually demand, or mean, as their absolutely satis- 
factory fulfilment. In this twofold thesis, as I understand, I 
am wholly in agreement with Mr. Bradley. But I differ from 
him by maintaining that we know more than he admits con- 
cerning how the Real combines these two aspects. I maintain, 
then, with a full consciousness of the paradoxes involved, that 
the Reality is indeed a Self, whatever else itis oris not. For 
the Absolute, as I insist, would have to be not apparently, but 
really a Self, even in order to be (as Mr. Bradley seems to 
imagine his Absolute) a sort of self-absorbing sponge, that 
endlessly sucked in, and “transformed,” its own selfhood, 
until nothing was left of itself but the mere empty spaces 
where the absorbent Self had been. For the category of Self 
is indeed immortal. Deny it, and, in denying, you affirm it. 
As a fact, however, the Absolute is no sponge. It is nota 
cryptic or self-ashamed, but an absolutely self-expressive self. 
And to see how it can be so without contradiction, is simply 
to see how the concept of the actually Infinite, despite all the 
foregoing objections, is not self-contradictory, is not indeter- 
minate, is not merely based upon wearisome reflections of the 
same; but is a positive and concrete conception, quite capable of 
individual embodiment. ‘This is what we shall see in what 


566 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


here follows. The concept of the actually Infinite once in 
general vindicated from the charge of self-contradiction, all 
objection to conceiving the Absolute as a Self will vanish; and 
the transparent union of the One and the Many, which reflec- 
tive thought has already shown us within its own realm, will 
become the universal law of Being. 

But, on the other hand, if the Absolute is a Self, and, as 
such, an Infinite, this does not mean that it is anything you 
please, or that it is at once all possible things, or that it views 
its realm of fact as having all possible characters at once, and 
hence as having no character in particular. This Self, and no 
Other, this world and no Other, this totality of experience, and 
nothing else, —such is what has to be presented when the Real 
is knownas the real. The Infinite will have to be also a deter- 
minate Infinite, a self-selected case of its type. For the world 
as merely thought, or as merely defined in idea, is the world 
viewed with an abstract or bare universality, and as that which 
still demands its Other, and which refers to that Other as valid 
and possible. The world of thought is, as such, an effort to 
characterize this Other, to imitate it, to correspond to it, and, 
of course, if so may be, to find it. Hence the world of mere 
thought has, as its very life, a principle of dissatisfaction; and 
when it conceives its object as the Truth, it defines, in the 
object, only the sense in which there is to be agreement or 
correspondence between the object and the thought. Conse- 
quently, an idea taken merely as an imitation of another, or 
taken as having an external meaning, expresses the Truth only 
as a barely universal validity. And one who merely takes 
thought as thought conceives the shadow land which shall, 
nevertheless, somehow have the value of a standard. In that 
realm, —the realm of mere validity, —all is mere character, 
and type, and possibility. And thought is the endlessly rest- 
less definition of another, and yet another. And this is true 
even when thought conceives an Infinite. Hence, infinity, as 
merely conceived, is indeed not yet Reality as Reality. 

Now, the opponents of the actual Infinite, ever since Aris- 
totle, have always seen, and rightly seen, that, as defined by 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 567 


mere thinking about external meanings, the world is not finally 
defined. The restlessly infinite, as such, they have condemned 
as in so far unreal. For whoever sees reality, sees that which 
has no Other like itself, which seeks no Other to define its 
being, which is itself no mere correspondence between one 
object and another, and, despite its unquestionable character 
as the fulfilment of thought, no mere agreement between a 
thought and a fact. The Real, then, has not the character 
which bare thought, as such, emphasizes, —the character of 
being essentially incomplete. It has wholeness. Its meaning 
is internal and not external. Therefore, it is indeed a finished 
fact. It cannot, then, be infinite if infinity implies incom- 
pleteness. 

But, once more, is the Real for that reason finite? Because 
it excludes the search for another beyond itself, does it there- 
fore contain no infinite wealth of presented content within 
itself? This is precisely the question. In emphasizing the 
exclusiveness of the Real we must be just to the fact that, 
whatever it excludes, it cannot, from our point of view, be 
poorer, less wealthy, less manifold in genuine meaning, than 
the false Other, which its reality reduces to a bare and un- 
realized possibility of thought. That the world is what it 
determinately is, means, from our point of view, that its being 
excludes an infinitely complex system of “barely possible” — 
other contents, which, just because they are excluded from 
Reality, are conceived by a thought such that not all of its 
“barely possible ” ideal objects could conceivably be actualized 
at once. In this sense, for us, just as for the partisans of the 
barely possible and unactualized infinite, there are indeed 
ideas of infinitely numerous facts which remain, from an 
Absolute point of view, hypotheses contrary to fact.1 We 
agree, moreover, with our opponents, that no process expresses 
reality in so far as this process merely seeks, without end, for 
another and another object or fact. Hence, for us, as for our 
opponents, the Infinite, when taken merely as an endless 


1See Conception of God, pp. 196, 198, 201, 213-214. See also the 
concluding lecture of the present series. 


568 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


process, is falsely taken. As merely that which you cannot 
exhaust by counting, the Infinite is, by the hypothesis, never 
found, presented or completed, so long as you simply count. 
Hence we wholly agree that the Infinite, just in so far as it is 
viewed as indeterminate, incomplete, or merely endless, is not 
rightly viewed; and that in so far it is indeed unreal. We 
also fully agree that Absolute knowledge unquestionably 
recognizes, as an object for its own relatively abstract thought, 
a distinctly unreal Infinite, namely, the Infinite of the excluded 
ideal “bare possibilities” aforesaid. In all this we quite 
agree with our opponents, and prize their insistence upon the 
determinateness of the final truth. 

Nevertheless, we shall perforce insist upon these theses: — 

(1) The true Infinite, both in multitude and in organization, 
although in one sense endless, and so incapable in that sense of 
being completely grasped, is in another and precise sense 
something perfectly determinate. Nor is it a mere monoto- 
nous repetition of the same, over and over. Each of its deter- 
minations has individuality, uniqueness, and novelty about its 
own nature. 

(2) This determinateness is a character which, indeed, in- 
cludes and involves the endlessness of an infinite series; but 
the mere endlessness of the series is not its primary character, 
being simply a negatively stated result of the self-representa- 
tive character of the whole system. 

(3) The endlessness of the series means that by no merely 
successive process of counting, in God or in man, is its whole- 
ness ever exhausted. 

(4) In consequence, the whole endless series, in so far as it 
is a reality, must be present, as a determinate order, but also 
all at once, to the Absolute Experience. It is the process of 
successive counting, as such, that remains, to the end, incom- 
plete, so as to imply that its own possibilities are not yet 
realized. Hence, the recurrent processes of thought reveal 
eternal truth about the infinite constitution of real Being, — 
their everlasting pursued Other; but themselves, —as mere 
processes in time, — they are not that Other. Their true Other 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 569 


is, therefore, that self-representative System of which they are 
at once portions, imitations, and expressions. 

(5) The Reality is such a self-represented and infinite sys- 
tem. And therein lies the basis of its very union, within 
itself of the One and the Many. For the one purpose of self- 
representation demands an infinite multiplicity to express it; 
while no multiplicity is reducible to unity except through 
processes involving self-representation. 

(6) And, nevertheless, the Real is exclusive as well as inclu- 
sive. On the side of its thought the Absolute does conceive 
a barely possible infinity, other than the real infinity, —a 
possible world, whose characters, as universal characters, are 
present to the Absolute, and are known by virtue of the fact 
that the Absolute also thinks. But these possibilities are ex- 
cluded by reason of their conflict with the Absolute Will. 

(7) Yet, in meaning, the infinite Reality, as present, is richer 
than the infinity of bare possibilities that are excluded. But 
for that very reason the Reality presented, in the final and 
determinate experience of the Absolute, cannot be less than 
infinitely wealthy, both in its content and in its order. Its 
unity in its wholeness, and its infinite variety in expression, 
are both of an individual character. The constituent indi- 
viduals are not “absorbed” or “transmuted” in the whole. 
The whole is One Self; but therefore is all its own constitu- 
tion equally necessary to its Selfhood. Hence it is an Indi- 
vidual of Individuals. 

With less of complexity and, if you please, with less of 
paradox, no theory of Being can be rendered coherent. Our 
present purpose is to bring these various aspects of the two- 
fold nature of Being, as Infinite Being and as Determinate 
Being, to light and to definition. 

We shall return, therefore, to the saat cette of the main 
points made by our objectors, and, as we meet them shall even 
thereby justify, without needing formally to repeat, our vari- 
ous theses. 


oT0 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


Ill. The Infinite as Determinate 


The principal one amongst all the traditional objections to 
the Infinite is, as we have seen, the thought that the Infinite, 
as such, is merely an endlessly sought or an endlessly incom- 
plete somewhat; while the real, as such, is very rightly to be 
viewed as the determinate. Hence, the actually Infinite, one 
insists, would be at once determinate and indeterminate, and 
so would be contradictory. 

Now, whatever may be said about the actually Infinite, we 
have already seen that the infinite of the merely conceptual 
but valid type, the infinite of the realm of mathematical possi- 
bilities, is certainly as determinate a conception as any merely 
universal idea can ever be, and, as thus determinate, involves 
no contradiction whatever. Cling to our Third Conception of 
Reality; and then, indeed, there can be no doubt whatever that 
the Infinite is real. For there is no contradiction, there is 
only a necessarily valid truth involved in saying that to any 
whole number 7, however large, there inevitably does corre- 
spond one number, and only one, which stands amongst all 
numbers as the vth member in the ordered series of whole 
numbers that are squares, or in the ordered series of the cubes, 
or in the ordered series, if you please, of numbers of the form 
of a™ or a’™, where the exponent is fixed, but where the 
number that is to be raised to the power indicated takes suc- 
cessively the series of values, 1, 2, 3,...7. The inevitable 
result is that to every whole number 7, without a possible ex- 
ception, there corresponds, in the realm of validity, and cor- 
responds uniquely, just that particular whole number which 
you get if you raise r to the second, third, or hundredth, or 
thousandth power. Moreover, this ideal ordering of all the 
whole numbers, without exception, in a one-to-one relation (let 
us say) to their own thousandth powers, is in such wise pre- 
determined by the very nature of number that, if you under- 
take to calculate the thousandth power (let us say) of the 
number 80,000,000, your result is in no wise left to you, asa 
bare possibility that your private will can capriciously decide. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 571 


The result is lawfully fixed beforehand by the very essence of 
mathematical validity, 7.e. by the very expression of your own 
final Will in its wholeness. Your calculation can only bring 
this result to light in your own private experience of numbers. 
It is an arithmetically true result quite apart from your instan- 
taneous observation. Its triviality, asa mere matter for com- 
putation, is not now in question. Its eternal validity, however, 
interests us. Every number, then, speaking in terms of mathe- 
matical validity, already has its own thousandth power, whether 
you chance to have observed or to have computed that thou- 
sandth power or not. Yet, in any finite collection of whole 
numbers, those which are the thousandth powers of the whole 
numbers constitute at most an incomparably minute part of 
the whole collection. But, on the other hand, viewed with 
reference to the logically valid truth about all the numbers, 
these powers, as a mere part of the whole series of whole num- 
bers, still occupy such a logically predetermined place that 
they are set, by their values, in a one-to-one relation to the 
members of the whole series; so that not a small portion, but 
absolutely ail of the whole numbers, have their correspondents 
among the thousandth powers. Now, all these are facts of 
thought, just as valid as any conceptual constructions, however 
simple, and just as true as that 2 +2=4. And by themselves 
these truths, trivial if you please, are, in all their wearisome- 
ness, not “monstrous” at all, but simply the necessary conse- 
quences of an exact conception of the nature of number. 

“Monstrous, however,” so one may reply, “would be the 
assertion that in any real world there could be determinate 
facts corresponding to all this merely ideal complexity.” On 
the contrary, as we might at once retort, it would be monstrous 
if all these truths were merely “valid,” in a purely formal way, 
without any correspondent facts whatever in the real world. 
Can mere validity hang in the void? Must it not possess a 
determinate basis? 

The issue, then, is at once the issue about the Third Con- 
ception of Being in our list. Either the truth, the world of 
mere forms, can indeed hang in the void, valid, but nowhere 


572 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


concrete, or else, just because the infinite is valid, it has its 
place, as fact, in the determinate experience of the Absolute. 
At all events, the Infinite, in such cases as have just been 
cited, is something quite as determinately valid as any barely 
universal conception can be. And unless it is true that two 
and two would make four in a world where no experience ever 
observed the fact, it is true that the infinitely numerous prop- 
erties of the numbers need some concrete representation. 

I grant, however, that these are but preliminary considera- 
tions. Every validity, as a bare universal, must be a reflec- 
tively abstract expression of a fact that ultimately exists in 
individual embodiment in the Absolute. Yet, on the other 
hand, you cannot predetermine the nature of this individual 
expression merely by pointing out that the possibilities in 
question appear to us endless. For the endlessness might be 
one of those matters of bare external conjunction of which Mr. 
Bradley so often speaks. Thus space appears to us endless. 
I fully grant that we are not warranted in making any one 
assertion about the Absolute view of the meaning of our spatial 
experience, by virtue of the mere fact that going on and on 
endlessly in space appears to us possible, and that, conse- 
quently, we can define propositions that would be valid if this 
possibility is endlessly realized by the Absolute. In passing 
from the Third to the Fourth Conception of Being, what we 
did was to see that nothing can be valid unless a determinate 
individual experience has present to it all that gives warrant 
for this validity. Because our fleeting experience never gives 
such final warrant, we are forced to seek for the ground and 
the basis of any valid truth once recognized by us, and to seek 
this basis in a realm that is Other than our own experience as 
it comes to us. This Other is, finally, the Absolute in its 
wholeness. But we do not assert that the Absolute realizes 
our validity merely as we happen to think it. 

When we regard any valid truth as implying a variety of valid 
assertions, all for us matters of conceived possible experience, 
we often take the Many, thus conceived by us, as a mere fact, 
an uncomprehended “conjunction.” I agree altogether with 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 573 


Mr. Bradley that such varieties might seem, to a higher experi- 
ence, artificial, and that, as such, they might be “transmuted ” 
even in coming to their unity in the higher view. For in such 
cases we never experience that these varieties are self-evidently 
what they seem to us. And our conception that they are many 
is associated with a confession of ignorance as to what they 
are. A good example of all this is furnished by our conception 
of what our own lives, or the course of human history, would 
have been, if certain critical events had never taken place.} 
What, in such instances, we have on our hands is an ignorance 
as to the whole ground and meaning of the critical events 
themselves. A fuller knowedge of what they meant might 
render much of our speech about the “possibilities” in ques- 
tion obviously vain. 

Determinate decisions of the will involve rendering in- 
valid countless possibilities that, but for this choice, might 
have been entertained as valid. In such cases the nature 
of the rejected possibilities is sufficiently expressed, in 
concrete form, by the will that decides, if only it knows itself 
as deciding, and is fully conscious of how and why it decides. 
That Absolute insight would mean absolute decision, and so a 
refusal to get presented in experience endlessly numerous con- 
tents that, but for the decision, would have been possible, — 
this I maintain as a necessary aspect of the whole conception 
of individuality. Whoever knows not decisions that exclude, 
knows not Being. For apart from such exclusion of possibili- 
ties, one would face barely abstract universals, and would, 
therefore, still seek for Another. Our whole conception of 
Being agrees, then, with Mr. Bradley’s in insisting that the 
bare what, the idea as a mere thought, still pursuing, and 
imitatively characterizing its Other, not only does not face 
Being as Being, but can never, of itself, decide what its own 
final expression shall be. Thought must win satisfaction not 
as mere Thought, but also as decisive Will, determining itself 
to final expression in a way that the abstract universals of 

1 On such possibilities, ‘‘ counter to fact,’ see again the discussion in 
the Conception of God, loc. cit., and in later passages of the same essay. 


574 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


mere thinking can characterize, but never exhaust. Thus, 
and thus only, can be found that which admits of no Other. 
So far, then, it is indeed true that nothing is proved real 
merely by proving its abstract consistency as a mere idea taken 
apart from the rest of the world. 

Or, again, the realm of validity is not exhausted by pre- 
sented fact in the way suggested by one of Amadeus Hoff- 
man’s most horrible fancies (I believe in the Eliaiere des 
Teufels), according to which a hero, persistently beset by a 
double, always finds that, whenever he, in his relative strength, 
resists a great temptation, and avoids a crime, this miserable 
double, whom he all the while vaguely takes to be in a way 
himself, appears, — pale, wretched, fate-driven, —and does, 
or at least attempts, in very fact, the deed that the hero had 
rejected. No; whoever knows Being, finds himself satisfied 
in the presence of a will fulfilled, and needs no fate-driven 
other Self, no outcast double, to realize for him the possibili- 
ties whose validity he rejects. For in rejecting, he wins. 
And Being is a destruction as well as an accomplishment of 
Experience. 

Upon all this I have elsewhere insisted. That the very 
essence of individuality is a Will that permits no Other to 
take the place of this fulfilment, —a Love that finds in this 
wholeness of life its own, —I have pointed out in an argument 
that the Tenth Lecture of the present course has merely sum- 
marized.1 And therefore I am perfectly prepared to admit 
that when we define as valid, in the realm of mathematical 
truth, an infinite wealth of ideal forms, we need not, on that 
account alone, and apart from other reasons, declare that the 
Absolute Life realizes these forms in their variety as defined 
by us. Their true meaning it must somehow get present to 
itself, — otherwise it would face Another of which it was essen- 
tially ignorant. But its realization of their meaning may well 
imply an exclusion of their variety, just in so far as that 
variety, when conceived by us, expresses our ignorance of 


1See the Conception of God, Supplementary Essay, Part III, espe- 
cially pp. 247-270. Compare Part IV, pp. 803-315. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 575 


what principle of multiplicity is here at work, of how the 
One and the Many here concerned are related, and of what 
decision of Will would give these forms a concrete meaning in 
the universal life. 

It remains, then, returning to the typical case of the num- 
bers, to see in what sense a determinate expression of their 
whole meaning can be found in the life of a Will that fulfils 
itself through exclusive decisions, but that does not ignore any 
genuinely significant aspect of the truth. For our Absolute 
is not in such wise exclusive of content as to impoverish its 
wealth of ideal characters; and, on the other hand, it is not in 
such wise inclusive of bare possibilities as to oppose to what- 
ever fact it chooses as its own, the fatal Other deed of Amadeus 
Hoffman’s double-willed and distracted hero. 

And here, of course, an opponent of the actual Infinite will be 
ready with the very common observation that the numbers are 
indeed, apart from the concrete objects numbered, of a trivial 
validity. “In a life,” he may say, “in a world of decisions 
and of concrete values, a barren contemplation of the proper- 
ties of the numbers can have but a narrow place. Hence, no 
fulfilment of the hopeless task of wandering from number to 
number need be expected as a part of the Absolute life.” 

Moreover, such an objector will insist that all these Ketten 
involve mere repetition of the same sort of experience over 
and over. “To carry such repetition to the infinite end, — 
what purpose,” he will say, “can such an ideal fulfil?” The 
individual fulfilment of the meaning of the number-series, in 
the final view, may well, then, take the form of knowing that 
there are indeed numbers, that they are made ina certain way, 
that the plan of their order has a particular type, and that 
this type is exemplified thus and thus by a comparatively few 
concretely presented ideas of whole numbers. Otherwise, 
the numbers may be left as unrealized as are those other 
excluded possibilities of the Will exemplified. 

But against this view one has next to point out that, ob- 
served a little more closely, even the numbers have characters 
not reducible to any limited collection of universal types. 


576 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


They do not prove to be a monotonous series of contents, 
involving mere repetition of the same ideas. On the contrary, 
to know them at all well, is to find in them properties involv- 
ing the most varied and novel features, as you pass from num- 
ber to number, or bring into synthesis various selected groups 
of numbers. Consider, for instance, the prime numbers. 
Distributed through the number-series in ways that are 
indeed capable of partial definition through general formulas, 
they still conform to no single known principle that enables 
us to determine, a priori, and in merely universal terms, 
exactly what and where each prime shall be. They have 
been discovered by an essentially empirical process which has 
now been extended, by the tabulators of the prime numbers, 
far into the millions. Yet the process much resembles any 
other empirical process. Its results are reported by the tabu- 
lators as the astronomers catalogue the stars. The primes 
have, as it were, relatively individual characters,’ which can- 
not be reduced to any barren repetition of the same thing 
over and over. One may call them uninteresting. But one 
must not judge the truth by one’s private dislike of mathe- 
matics, just as, of course, one must not exaggerate the im- 
portance of mere forms. Here, then, is one instance of endless 
novelty within the number-series. 

But the real question is, How shall the genuine meaning of 
all this series of truths be in any way grasped, unless the 
insight which grasps is adequate to the endless wealth of novel, 
and relatively individual truth that the various numbers pre- 
sent as one passes on in the series? For the will cannot con- 
sciously decide against the further realization of certain types 
of possibility, unless it clearly knows their value. And this 
it must know in exhaustive, even if ideal and abstractly uni- 
versal terms. Nobody can fairly tell what value in life 
numerical truth may possess, unless he first knows that truth. 
And the numbers whose ordered rationality is, for us men, 
the very basis of our exact science, show a wealth of truth 


1 Of course they are in no sense true individuals, but taken as members 
of their series, they have relatively unique features. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 577 


that we find more and more baffling the further we go. The 
“perfect numbers” form a series that may be as full of inter- 
est, for all that I know, as the primes. The properties of 
the “ Arithmetical Triangle” are linked in the most unex- 
pected fashion with the laws of our statistical science, and 
with the nature of certain orderly combinations of vast im- 
portance in other branches of mathematical inquiry. Count- 
less other combinations of numbers form topics, not only 
of numerous well-known plays and puzzles, but of scientific 
investigations whose character is actually adventurous, —so 
arduous is their course, and so full of unexpected bearings 
upon other branches of knowledge has been their outcome. 
Nobody amongst us can pretend to fathom the value for con- 
crete science, and for life, that has yet to be derived from 
advances in the Theory of Numbers. 

These, then, are mere hints of the inexhaustible properties 
of the number-series. I speak still as layman; but I am 
convinced that these significant properties are quite as inex- 
haustible as the number-series itself. Now, the value of such 
properties you can never tell until you see what they are. 
Their meaning in the life of reason can only be estimated 
when they are present. Hence, you can never wisely decide 
not to know them until you have first known them. But they 
are not to be known merely as the endless repetitions of the 
same over and over. Hence it is wholly vain to say, “ Num- 
bers come from counting, and counting is vain repetition of 
the same over and over.” Whoever views the numbers merely 
thus, knows not whereof he speaks. It is not “counting, 
with nothing to count”; it is finding what Order means, that 
is the task of a true Theory of Numbers. 

As a fact, then, the number-series in its wholeness seems 
to be a realm not only of inexhaustible truth, but of a truth 
that possesses an everywhere relatively individual type. And 
its validity has relations that we, at present, but imperfectly 
know, and a rational value that appears to be fundamental in 
every orderly inquiry. 

We can, then, neither assert that to all the varieties which 


2P 


578 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


our thought may chance to conceive as possible, there corre- 
spond just as many final facts for an Absolute Experience; nor 
yet can we, on the other hand, exclude from concrete presenta- 
tion, as final facts, such wholes as include an infinite series, 
merely because, for us, if we do not take due account of mathe- 
matical truth, the series seems to involve the empty repetition 
of “one more” and “one more.” For, as Poincaré has so 
finely pointed out, in the article before cited, it is precisely the 
“reasoning by recurrence” which is, in mathematics, the end- 
less source of new results. Hereby, in the combination of 
his previous results for the sake of new insight, the mathema- 
tician is preserved from mere “identities,” and gets novelties. 
The “reasoning by recurrence,” however, is that form of 
reasoning whereby one shows that if a given truth holds inn 
cases, it holds for the n + 1st case, and so forall cases. Such 
processes of passing to “one more” instance of a given type, 
are processes not of barren repetition, but of genuine progress 
to higher stages of knowledge. 

Precisely so it is, too, if one takes account of that other 
aspect of ordered series which it has been one principal pur- 
pose of this papertoemphasize. The numbers have interested 
us, not from any Pythagorean bias, but because their Order is 
the expression, not only of a profoundly significant aspect of 
all law in the world, but of the very essence of Selfhood, when 
formally viewed. Now reflective selfhood, taken merely as 
the abstract series, J know, and I know that I know, etc., ap- 
pears to be a vain repetition of the same over and over. But 
this it appears merely if you neglect the concrete content which 
every new reflection, when taken in synthesis with previous 
reflections, inevitably implies in case of every living subject- 
matter. A life that knows not itself differs from the same 
life conscious of itself, by lacking precisely the feature that 
distinguishes rational morality alike from innocence and from 
brutish naiveté. A knowledge that is self-possessed differs 
from an unreflective type of consciousness by having all the 
marks that separate insight from blind faith. 

“Thus we see,” says Spinoza, in a most critical passage of 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 579 


his Ethics,1 “that the infinite essence and the eternity of God 
are known toall. ... That men have not an equally clear 
cognition of God as they have of ordinary abstract ideas, is 
due to the fact that God cannot be imagined, as bodies are 
imagined, and that they have associated the name of God with 
the images of things that they are accustomed to see.” All 
the ignorance and unwisdom whose consequences Spinoza sets 
forth in the Third and Fourth Parts of his Ethics, are thus 
declared, in this passage, to be due to the failure of the ordi- 
nary human mind to reflect upon, and to observe, an idea of 
the truth, z.e. of God, which it still always possesses, and 
which not the least of minds can really be without. For God’s 
essence is “equally in the part and in the whole.” Thus vast, 
then, is the difference in our whole view of ourselves and of 
the universe which is to be the outcome of mere self-conscious- 
ness. Yet the same Spinoza, in a passage not long since cited 
in our notes, can assert that whoever has a true idea knows that 
he has it, and in a parallel passage can even make light of all 
reflective insight, as a useless addition to one’s true ideas. 
This really marvellous vacillation of Spinoza, as regards the 
central importance of self-consciousness in the whole life of 
man and of the universe, is full of lessons as to the fallacy of 
ignoring the positive meaning of reflective insight. This 
positive meaning once admitted, it is impossible to assert that 
any limited series of reflective acts can exhaust the self-repre- 
sentative significance of any concrete life. The properties of 
the number-series, the inexhaustible wealth of the concept of 
Order, and the fecundity of the mathematical “conclusion 
from nto n +1,” are mere hints of what a reflective series 
implies, and of the infinity of every genuine reflective series. 
For, on the one hand, we have now sufficiently seen that the 
fecundity in question is due to the essentially reflective char- 
acter of the process whereby the conclusion from n to n+1 
is justified! On the other hand, our argument as to the 


1 Part II, Prop. 47, Scholium. 
2 Dedekind, op. cit., p. 15, §§ 4, 59, has given a formal proof of the 
validity of the ‘‘conclusion from n to n+1.’”’ His proof, an extraordi- 


580 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


universal fecundity of reflective processes, as merely illus- 
trated by the wealth of the number-forms, is an argument a 
fortiori. 

It is easy, as we have seen, to make light of mere numbers 
because they are so formal, and beecause one wearies of mathe- 
matics. But our present case is simply this: Of course the 
numbers, taken in abstract divorce from life, are mere forms. 
But if in the bare skeleton of selfhood, if in the dry bones of 
that museum of mere orderliness, the arithmetical series, — if, 
even here, we find such an endless wealth of relatively unique 
results of each new act of reflection, in case that act is taken 
in synthesis with the foregoing acts, — what may not be, what 
must be, the wealth of meaning involved in a reflective series 
whose basis is a concrete life, whose reflections give this life at 
each stage new insight into itself, and whose syntheses with 
all foregoing acts of reflection are themselves, if temporally 
viewed, as it were, new acts in the drama of this life? If such 
a life is to be present totum simul to the Absolute, how shall 
not the results of endless acts of reflection, each of an indi- 
vidual meaning, but all given, at one stroke, as an expression 
of the single purpose to reflect and to be self-possessed, — 
how shall all these facts not appear as elements in the unity of 
the whole, elements neither “transmuted” nor “suppressed,” 
but comprehended in their organic unity ? 

Unless the Absolute is a Self, and that concretely and ex- 
plicitly, it is no Absolute at all. And unless it exhausts an 
infinity, in its presentations, it cannot be a Self. That even 
in thus exhausting it also excludes from itself the infinity 
that it wills to exclude, I equally insist. But I also maintain 
that this exclusion can only be based upon insight, and that, 
unless the positive infinity is present, as the self-represented 
whole that is accepted, the exclusion is blind, and our con- 
ception of Being lapses into mere Realism. But even Real- 


narily brilliant feat of logical analysis, has been exhaustively analyzed, by 
Schroeder, in the passage before cited. It involves a peculiarly subtle 
refiection upon what the process of self-representation implies, —a reflec- 
tion as easy to ignore as it is important to bring to clear light. 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 581 


ism, as we have seen, is equally committed to the actually 
infinite.? 


IV. The Infinite as a Totality 


And yet one will persistently retort, “Your idea of the 
complete exhaustion of what you all the while declare to be, 
as infinite, an inexhaustible series, is still a plain contra- 
diction.” 

Ireply that I am anxious to report the facts, as one finds them 
whenever one has to deal with any endless Kette. The facts are 
these: (1) This series, if real, is inexhaustible by any process 
of successive procedure, whereby one passes from one member 
to the next. It is then expressly a series with no last term. 
Try to go through it from first to last, and the process can 
never be completed. Now this negative character of the 
series, if it is real, is as true for the Absolute as for a boy at 
school. Jn this sense, namely, viewed as a succession, since the 
series has no last term, its last term cannot be found by God 
or man, and does not exist. In this sense, too, any effort to 


1 As for my reasons for speaking of an Absolute Will at all, despite Mr. 
Bradley’s repeated objections, I must insist that we have precisely the 
same reasons for attributing a generalized type of Will to the Absolute 
that we have for attributing to it Experience. And the grounds for this 
conclusion have been stated at length in Lecture VII of the foregoing 
series. My insistence means mere report of the facts, in the best acces- 
sible language. To say that the Absolute has or is Will, is simply to say 
that it knows its object, namely itself in its wholeness, as this and no 
other, despite the fact that the ‘‘mere’’ Thought, which it also possesses, 
consists, as abstract thought, in defining such an Other, and because of 
the fact that this and no other satisfies or fulfils the complete internal 
meaning of the Absolute itself. That Thought, Will, and Experience are 
not ‘transmuted’? but concretely present from the Absolute point of 
view, is a thesis merely equivalent to saying that the Absolute consciously 
views itself as the immediately given fulfilment of purpose in this and no 
other life. As immediately given fact, the life is Experience. In so far 
as the purpose is distinguished from its fulfilment, one has an Idea seek- 
ing its Other. And this is Thought. In so far as this and no other life 
fulfils purpose, we have Will. All these are concretely distinguished 
aspects of the fact, if the Absolute is a Self, and views itself as such. If 
this is not true, the Absolute is less than nothing. 


582 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


complete the series will fail. In this sense, therefore, the 
series indeed has no “totality,” because it needs none. In 
this sense, finally, it would indeed be contradictory to speak 
of it as a totality. And all this is admitted, and need not be 
further illustrated. 

(2) The sense in which the series is a totality is, however, 
if the series is real, not at all the sense in which it merely has 
no last member. ‘The series is not to be exhausted in the 
sense in which it is indeed inexhaustible. But you may and 
must take it otherwise. The sense in which it is a totality 
expressly depends upon that concept of totum simul which I 
have everywhere in this discussion emphasized. ‘To grasp this 
aspect of the case, you must view it in two stages. Take the 
series then first as a purely conceptual entity, as a mere idea, 
or “bare possibility.” The one purpose of the perfect internal 
self-representation of any system of elements in the fashion, 
and according to the type of self-representation, here in ques- 
tion, defines, for any Kette formed upon the basis of that 
purpose, all of the ideal objects that are to belong to the Kette. 
And this purpose defines them all at once, as we saw in dealing 
with f, (n), and the rest of those series that are involved in any 
Kette. Now this endless wealth of detail is defined at one stroke, 
so that it is henceforth eternally predetermined, as a valid 
truth, precisely what does and what does not belong to that 
Kette. And the various series and this Kette are here one and 
the same thing. To find whether this or that element belongs 
to the Kette, may or may not involve, for you, a long time. It 
will involve for you succession, processes of counting, and 
much more of the sort indefinitely. This, however, is due to 
your fortune as a human observer. But the definition of the 
series has predetermined at one stroke all the results that you 
thus, taking them in succession, can never exhaust, and has 
predetermined these results as a fixed Order, wherein every 
element has its precise place, next after a previous element, next 
before a subsequent one. As for the before and after, in this 
Order, they, too, are ideally predetermined, not as themselves 
successions, but as valid and simultaneous relations. That a 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 583 


come first, 6 second, etc., is determined by the definition, all at 
once. The definition of the Kette does not, however, like your 
acts in counting, first determine a and afterwards b. In the 
truly valid series it is the a and 6 that are simultaneously jirst 
and next. You must not confuse then the eternally valid and 
simultaneously predetermined aspects of this order with the 
temporal succession of your verifications of the order. 

So far, then, you have taken the series as a valid Order, 
whose ideal totality lies in the singleness of a plan that it is 
supposed to express. And now comes the second stage of the 
process of defining our Kette as real. Here is indeed the deci- 
sive step. All the members of the series are at once validly 
predetermined. That we have seen. Whatever can be pre- 
cisely defined, however, can be supposed immediately given. 
So now simply suppose that the members are all seen, experi- 
enced, presented, not as they follow one after another, in your 
successive apperception of a few of them, but precisely as the defi- 
nition predetermines them, namely, all at once. Hereupon you 
define the series as a fact, not merely valid, but presented. 
And so to define it is to define it as actually infinite. 

And now I challenge you: “ Where is the contradiction in 
this conception of the presented infinite totality?” Try to 
point out the precise place of the contradictory element in the 
system as defined. 

You may reply: “The contradiction lies here: That the 
series has no last term is admitted; yet if all its terms are 
present, the series must be completely presented. But a com- 
pleted and ordered series must have a last term. How other- 
wise should it be completed ? ” 

I rejoin: There is finality and finality, completion and com- 
pletion. The sort of finality possessed by the series is ex- 
pressly of one sort, and not of another. By hypothesis the 
series is not in such wise completely presented that its last 
term is seen. For it has indeed no last term. But it is, by 
hypothesis, so presented that all the terms, precisely as the 
single purpose of the definition demands them, are present. 
The definition was not self-contradictory in demanding them 


584 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


as its ideal fulfilment. How should the presentation be- 
come contradictory by merely showing what the consistent 
definition had called for? And now in no other sense is 
the series, as presented, complete, than in the one sense of 
showing, in the supposed experience, all of its own ideally 
defined members. It is not complete in having any closing 
term. 

Your reply to this statement will doubtless at last appeal to 
the decisive consideration regarding the nature of any indi- 
vidual fact of Being. You will say: “But the determinate 
presentation of a series of facts involves precisely that sort of 
completion of the series which makes it possess a last member. 
For the series, if given, is an Individual Whole, presented as 
such a complex individual in experience ; and as an individual, 
the series needs precise limits. As it has a first, so then, if 
completely individuated, it must be finished by a last member. 
Otherwise it would lack the determination necessary to dis- 
tinguish an Individual Being from a general idea.’’? 

If the objection be thus stated, it raises afresh the whole 
question: What is an individual fact of experience? What 
is an individual whole in experience? Now I have set forth 
in the foregoing lectures (see Lectures VII and X), and have 
still more minutely developed elsewhere,’ a thesis about in- 
dividuality whose relative novelty in the discussion of that 
topic, and whose special importance with regard to the issue 
about the determinateness of the Infinite, I must here insist 
upon. That every individual Being is determinate, I fully main- 
tain. But how and upon what basis does such determination 
rest? When, and upon what ground, could one say: I have 
seen an individual whole? Never, I must insist, upon the ground 
that one has seen a group of facts with a sharply marked 
boundary, or with a definite localization in space or in time, 


1 Here, as I believe, is the deepest ground for that Aristotelian objec- 
tion to the Infinite as ‘‘no totality,’ which we have now so often met. 
The whole question, then, is as to the true essence of Individuality. 

2 Conception of God, Part III of the Supplementary Essay of melas 
work. See also ibid, p. 381: ‘‘Chasms do not individuate.’? 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 585 


or with any temporal or spatial terminus.! A finished series 
of data simply does not constitute an individual whole merely 
by becoming finished. It is perfectly true that such a finished 
whole, with its boundary, its last term, or what limit you will, 
may be viewed and rightly viewed, as an individual; but only 
for reasons which lie far deeper than its mere possession of 
limits, and which, in their turn, might be present if such limits 
were quite undiscoverable. If you insist that only such limited 
wholes are ever viewed by us men as individual wholes, I 
retort that we men have never experienced the direct presence 
of any individual whole whatever. For us, individuals are 
primarily the objects presupposed, but never directly observed, 
by love and by its related passions, —in brief, by the exclusive 
affections which give life all its truest interests. As we asso- 
ciate these affections with those contents of experience whose 
empirical limits we also experience as essential to their form, 
the spatially or numerically boundless comes to seem (as it 
especially seemed to the Greek), the essentially formless, and 
hence unindividuated realm, where chaos reigns. 

But such mere prejudices of our ordinary apprehension 
vanish, if we look more closely at what individual wholeness 
means. Never presented in our human experience, individual- 
ity is the most characteristic feature of Being. Its true defini- 
tion, however, implies three features, no one of which has any 
necessary connection with last terms, or with ends, or with any 
other such accidents of ordinary sense perception, and of the 
temporal enumeration of details. These three features are as 
follows: First, an individual whole must conform to an ideal 
definition, which is precise, and free from ambiguity, so that if 
you know this individual type, you know in advance precisely 
what kind of fact belongs to the defined whole, and in what 
way. Secondly, the individual whole must embody this type in the 
form of immediate experience. And thirdly, the individual whole 
must so embody the type that no other embodiment would meet 
precisely the purpose, the Will, fulfilled by this embodiment. 


1 See, as against the theory of space and time as principles of individu- 
ation, the Conception of God, p. 250, sqq. 


586 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


It is the third of these features that is the really decisive one. 
The satisfied Will, as such, is the sole Principle of Individua- 
tion. This is our theory of individuality. Here it comes to 
our aid. 

For wherever in the universe these three conditions are 
together fulfilled, determinate individual wholeness gets pre- 
sented. In our human experience their union, as a fact, is 
only postulated, and never found present, in the objects which 
constitute our empirical world. Hence in vain do you choose 
empirical series such as have last terms, and say, “Lo! these 
are typical individual wholes. If the Absolute sees individual- 
ity, in any collection of facts, he sees it as of this determinate 
type.” On the contrary, as we men observe these things, they 
appear to us to be individuals, solely because we presuppose 
our own individuality as Selves, and then, in the light of this 
presupposition, regard these serial acts of ours as individual 
wholes, merely because in them we have found a relative satis- 
faction of a purpose. 

That finite series are individual wholes at all, is therefore 
itself a presupposition — never a datum. I take myself to be 
an individual Self, whose acts, as my own, are unique with the 
assumed uniqueness of my own purposes. Any one of the 
various series of my acts which attains, for the moment, its 
relative goal, is thereby the more marked as my own, and as 
one. But itis not directly experienced as any individual fact 
of Being at all, and that for the reason set forth in our seventh 
lecture. That we are individuals is true, and that our finite 
series of acts have their own place in Being is also true. But 
their finitude has only accidental relations to their individuality. 

But now, in case of such a Kette as we are supposing real, 
what is lacking to constitute it a determinate whole? It has 
ideal totality. For a single ideal purpose defines the type of 
all facts that shall belong to it, and distinguishes them from 
facts of all other types, and predetermines their order, assign- 
ing to every element its ideal place. We suppose now an 
experience embodying all these elements in such wise that 
immediacy and idea completely fuse, so that what is here 


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 587 


conceived is also given. We finally suppose this to be such 
an experience, for the Self whose Kette this is, that in possess- 
ing this series he views himself as this Being and no other. 
Now this last feature of itself constitutes determinateness. 
To demand that the series should have its end, temporal or 
spatial, is to mistake wholly the nature of individuality ; is 
to overlook the primacy of the decisive Will as the sole beget- 
ter of individuality ; and is to apply to the Absolute a char- 
acter derived from certain experiences of ours which we merely 
view as individual experiences in the light of a postulate, 
while, for this very postulate, only the Absolute itself can 
furnish the adequate warrant and realization. 

Our own definition of individuality then, by freeing us from 
bondage to mere temporal and spatial limits, leaves us free to 
regard as determinate and as real an experience that contains, 
and that does not merely “absorb” a wealth of detail which in 
itself is endless. In so far as this wealth is endless, it does 
indeed force every process of successive synthesis to remain 
unfinished; and therefore, in so far as you merely count the 
successive steps, you shall never find what makes the whole 
determinate. There is indeed no infinite number belonging to, 
or terminating, the series of whole numbers. All whole 
numbers are finite. It is the totality of the whole numbers 
that constitutes an infinite multitude. But the determinate- 
ness of this infinite whole is given, not when the last whole 
number is counted (for that indeed would be self-contradic- 
tory), but when the completely conscious Self knows itself as 
this Being, and no other. And this it knows not when it per- 
forms its last act, but when it views its whole wealth of life as 
the determinate satisfaction of its Will. 

And thus, having vindicated the conception of the really 
Infinite, we are free, upon the basis of the general argument of 
these lectures, to assert that the Absolute is no absorber and 
transmuter, but an explicit possessor and knower of an infinite 
wealth of organized individual facts,— the facts, namely, of 
the Absolute Life and Selfhood. How these facts are One and 
also Many, we now in general know, precisely in so far as we 


588 SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY 


reflectively grasp the true nature of Thought. For the Other 
which Thought restlessly seeks is simply itself in individual 
expression, — or, in other words, its own purpose in a deter- 
minate and conscious embodiment. Since this embodiment has 
to assume the form of Selfhood, its detail must be infinite. 
The world is an endless Kette, whatever else itis. Yet this 
infinite wealth of detail is not opposed to, but is the very 
expression of the internal meaning of the purpose to be and to 
comprehend the Self. The infinite wealth is determinate be- 
cause it fulfils a precisely definable purpose in an unique way, 
that permits no other to take its place as the embodiment of 
the Absolute Will. And the One and the Many are so recon- 
ciled, in this account, that the Absolute Self, even in order to 
be a Self at all, has to express itself in an endless series of 
individual acts, so that it is explicitly an Individual Whole 
of Individual Elements. And this is the result of consider- 
ing Individuality, and consequently Being, as above all an 
expression of Will, and of a Will in which both Thought and 
Experience reach determinateness of expression. 


Printed in the United States of America, 


"THE following pages contain advertisements 
“of Macmillan books on kindred subjects 


Naturalism and Agnosticism 


THE GIFFORD LECTURES DELIVERED BEFORE 
THE UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN IN 
THE YEARS 1896-1898 


BY 


TAMES WARD, Sc.D., Hon. LL.D. (Edin.) 


Professor of Mental Philosophy and Logic in 
the University of Cambridge 


2 Vols. 8vo. Cloth. $4.00, 


‘The lectures may be commended as stimulating and suggestive. 
Professor Ward is a learned thinker and a lucid writer; indeed, his 
style is captivating.” — Lvening Post, Chicago. 


“ These lectures, by their thorough handling of a many-sided question, 
take a front rank in the literature of the great debate.” — Outlook. 


*‘ These lectures cannot be skimmed, if the reader desires to follow 
out the author’s train of reasoning. They call for close study and 
attention, but the reward will be found in a masterly presentation of 
the question from the standpoint of the believer in a divine force in 
control of the universe. As a presentation of the shortcomings of the 
scientific method at the hands of a competent critic, these two volumes 
are especially worthy of attention and study.” — Brooklyn Eagle. 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 


The Gospel for an Age of Doubt 


BY 
REV. HENRY VAN DYKE, D.D., LL.D. 
Pastor of the Brick Church, New York City 


Cloth. 12mo. Price, $1.25 
A REVISED EDITION WITH A NEW PREFACE 


“Dr. Van Dyke’s ‘Gospel for an Age of Doubt,’ which is often called the finest 
apologetic of modern times, 1s constantly coming out in new editions. It is a book 
that ought to be in the hands—and heart —of every thoughtful Christian of the 
day.” — The Inter7or, Chicago. 


“‘Dr. Van Dyke’s lectures form one of the most eloquent defences of Christianity 
that we have yet met with.” — The Academy, London. 


“The most vital, suggestive, helpful book we know in the whole range of theo- 
logical writing at this period.””— The New York Times. 


‘The book can be heartily recommended as a sincere and thoughtful attempt to 
show the consistency of Christianity with truth.” — Te Pall Mall Gazette, London. 


The Gospel for a World of Sin 


BY 
REV. HENRY VAN DYKE, D.D., LL.D. 
Pastor of the Brick Church, New York City 


Cloth. 12mo. Price, $1.25 


“ His former volume, ‘ The Gospel for an Age of Doubt,’ was but a preparation 
for the discussion of this larger and more profoundly interesting subject... . Just 
the book we need.’? — Dr. S. B. Rossirer, V. Y. Observer. 


“A book for the times.” — Christzan Intelligencer. 
“* Sure to prove of immense value in leading the thought of the day.”” 
— Congregationalist. 
““The work is one to charm and satisfy.” — Plain Dealer, Cleveland. 
‘* One of the basic books of true Christian thought of to-day and of all times.” 
— Boston Courier. 
** Experimental, vital, real.” — The Outlook. 


‘© A book so thoughtful, earnest, and at the same time so interesting, should, and 
will, have many readers.” — Dr. George P. Fisher, Yale. 
“Quotable . . . full of pithy thought.” — Home Y¥ournal, New York. 
“T have read it with the keenest interest, and have been greatly helped by it.” 
— Rev. Fohn Balcolm Shaw. 
** Sure to be widely read.” — 77zbumne, Chicago. 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
64-66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 


oe LA bw 
AS Ap le 


mie ee. 
PENA PETE i 4 
ron 


f ; Al, 


ae 
Gem1s3760 4 


REMOTE B 945 .R63 W7 v. 1c. 2/ The world and the individual 


—_ 


27 The world and the individual 


